+++
title = "2"
+++

मामूल‍ 
कलामूलर 
लशा बौधायन श्रौतसूत्रम् कल 
त्र कलामूलशास्त्र कलामल 
THE 
BAUDHAYANA SRAUTASUTRA 
VOLUME-II 
लशास्त्र कलामलशास्त्र क त्र कलामूलशास्त्र कलामूल लामूलशास्त्र कलामूलशास्त्र लशास्त्र कलामूलशास्त्र कल त्र कलामूलशास्त्र कलामूल 
नामूलशास्त्र 
मूलशास्त्र 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS 
The Baudhayana Śrautasūtra together with an English translation is being presented here in four volumes. There will be other volumes also presenting Bhavasvamin's bhāṣya and the word-index of the sutra-text. The 
Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra belongs to the Kṛṣṇa Yajurveda Taittiriya recension. It represents the oral lectures delivered by the teacher Baudhāyana, hence is the oldest śrauta-text. The text is revised here in the light of the variant readings recorded by W. Caland in his first edition (Calcutta 1906), and is presented in a readable form. The mantras forming part of the sutras have been fully rendered into English. The translation is supplied with notes giving reference to the mantras and explanations of the ritual. The work is expected to serve as an advancement of Taittiriya ritualistic studies. 
बौधायन श्रौतसूत्रम् 
THE BAUDHAYANA ŚRAUTASŪTRA 
कलामूलशास्त्र-ग्रन्थमाला KALĀMŪLAŠĀSTRA SERIES 
इ.गा.रा.क.के.क.मू.शा - ३६ 
I.G.N.C.A. K.M.S. - 36 
बौधायन श्रौतसूत्रम् 
THE BAUDHAYANA ŚRAUTASŪTRA 
CRITICALLY EDITED AND TRANSLATED 
BY 
C.G. KASHIKAR 
VOLUME TWO 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS NEW DELHI AND 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD. 
DELHI. 
First Published: 2003 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 
All rights reserved. No part of the publication may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without written permission of the publishers. 
Published by 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS Central Vista Mess, Janpath, New Delhi-110001 
in association with 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
ISBN: 81-208-1854-7 (Vol. II) ISBN: 81-208-1852-0 (Set) Price: Rs. 4200.00 (Set) 
Typeset by Neographics K-2071 (1st Floor), Chittaranjan Park, New Delhi-110019 Printed in India 
at Shri Jainendra Press, 
A-45, Naraina Industrial Area, Phase-I, 
New Delhi-110 028 
CONTENTS 
TOPIC 
PRAŚNA 
PAGES 
AGNIṢTOMA 
VI-VIII 
276-473 
Morning Pressing 
VII.1-20 
350-413 
Midday Pressing 
VIII.1-8 
414-437 
Third Pressing 
VIII.9-22 
437-473 
PRAVARGYA 
IX.1-20 
474-543 
Pravargyavidhi 
IX.1-16 
474-525 
Gharmaprayaścittāni 
IX.17-18 
525-537 
Avāntaradīkṣā 
IX.19-20 
537-543 
AGNICAYANA 
X.1-59 
544-707 
VĀJAPEYA 
XI.1-13 
708-741 
RĀJASŪYA 
XII.1-20 
742-787 
ABBREVIATIONS 
App 
APSS ÁsvSS 
AV 
Apparently Apastamba Śrautasūtra Aśvalayana Śrautasūtra Atharvaveda Samhitā 
BaudhŚS 
Baudhayana Śrautasūtra 
BhārŚS 
DhS 
GS 
JAOS 
JBr 
JBRAS 
KausBr 
KathŚS 
Bharadvaja Śrautasūtra Dharma Sutra 
Grhya Sūtra 
Journal of American Oriental Society Jaiminiya Brāhmaṇa 
Journal of Bombay Royal Asiatic Society Kausitaki Brāhmaṇa 
Kathaka Śrautasūtra 
KatyŚS 
Kātyāyana Śrautasūtra 
KS 
Kāthaka Samhitā 
MānέS 
Mānava Śrautasūtra 
MS 
Maitrāyaṇi Samhitā 
MSS 
Manuscripts 
RV 
ŞadBr 
Śǎnkh GS 
ŚBr 
ŚS 
ŚuS 
TĀ 
TāndBr 
TBr 
TS 
Rgveda Samhitā Şaḍvimsa Brāhmaṇa 
Śānkhāyana Gṛhya Sutra 
Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa Śānkhāyana Sūtra Šulba Sūtra Taittiriya Aranyaka 
Tandya Brāhmaṇa Taittiriya Brāhmaṇa 
Taittiriya Samhitā 
VādhŚS 
Vādhūla Śrautasūtra 
VS 
VSK 
Vājasaneyi Samhita 
Vājasaneyi Samhitā Kāṇva

CHINTAMANI GANESH KASHIKAR, M.A., D.Litt., is a well-known authority on the Vedic literature, religion and culture whose contributions are internationally acknowledged. A score of books- critical editions, translations and general studies written in Sanskrit, English and Marathi languages are to his credit. A hundred research papers written by him are published in oriental journals of international repute. He attended several sessions of All India Oriental Conference as also International Sanskrit Conference and presented research papers which have been widely appreciated. He is the Chairman of the Regulating Council of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. He was closely associated for many years with the Vaidika Samsodhana Mandala, Pune, Centre for Advanced Study in Sanskrit, University of Pune and the Project of encyclopaedic Dictionary of Sanskrit on historical Principles, Deccan College Post-Graduate and Research Institute, Pune."