+++
title = "4"
+++

लामूलशास्त्र 
मूलशा बौधायन श्रौतसूत्रम् कल 
THE 
कला 
Baudhāyana SRAUTASUTRA 
मूलशास्त्र कलालशास्त्र कल त्र कलामूलशास्त्र कलामूल‍ लामूलशास्त्र कलामूलशास्त्र मूलशास्त्र कलामूलशास्त्र कल 
कलामलशास्त्र लामूलशास्त्रमलशास्त्र 
ए 
लणार कार कल 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS 
The Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra together with an English translation is being presented here in four volumes. There will be other volumes also presenting Bhavasvāmin's bhāṣya and the word-index of the sūtra-text. The 
Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra belongs to the Kṛṣṇa Yajurveda Taittirïya recension. It represents the oral lectures delivered by the teacher Baudhāyana, hence is the oldest śrauta-text. The text is revised here in the light of the variant readings recorded by W. Caland in his first edition (Calcutta 1906), and is presented in a readable form. The mantras forming part of the sutras have been fully rendered into English. The translation is supplied with notes giving reference to the mantras and explanations of the ritual. The work is expected to serve as an advancement of Taittiriya ritualistic studies. 
बौधायन श्रौतसूत्रम् 
THE Baudhāyana ŚRAUTASŪTRA 
कलामूलशास्त्र-ग्रन्थमाला KALĀMŪLAŠĀSTRA SERIES 
इ.गा.रा.क.के. क. मू.शा - ३८ 
I.G.N.C.A. K.M.S. - 38 
बौधायन श्रौतसूत्रम् 
THE Baudhāyana ŚRAUTASŪTRA 
CRITICALLY EDITED AND TRANSLATED 
BY 
C.G. KASHIKAR 
VOLUME FOUR 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS NEW DELHI AND 
MOTILAL BANArsiDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD. 
DELHI 
First Published: 2003 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 
All rights reserved. No part of the publication may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without written permission of the publishers. 
Published by 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS Central Vista Mess, Janpath, New Delhi-110001 
in association with 
MOTILAL BANArsiDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
ISBN: 81-208-1856-3 (Vol. IV) ISBN: 81-208-1852-0 (Set) Price: Rs. 4200.00 (Set) 
Typeset by Neographics K-2071 (1st Floor), Chittaranjan Park, New Delhi-110019 Printed in India 
at Shri Jainendra Press, 
A-45, Naraina Industrial Area, Phase-I, 
New Delhi-110 028 
CONTENTS 
TOPIC 
DVAIDHASÜTRAM 
PRAŚNA 
PAGES 
XX-XXIII 
1314-1533 
Drasa-pūrṇamāsau 
XX.1-15 
1314-1351 
Agnyādheyam 
XX.16-18 
1350-1359 
Punarādheyam 
XX.19 
1360-1363 
Agnihotram 
XX.20 
1362-1365 
Pindapitṛyajñaḥ 
XX.21 
1364-1367 
Āgrayanam 
XX.22 
1368-1369 
Agnyupasthanam 
XX.23-24 
1368-1375 
Paśubandhaḥ 
XX.25-31 
1374-1391 
Căturmāsyāni 
XXI.1-6 
1392-1405 
Agniṣṭomaḥ 
XXI.7-26 
1404-1449 
Agnikalpam 
XXII.1-12 
1450-1473 
Vājapeyaḥ 
XXII.13-15 
1472-1479 
Rājasūyaḥ 
XXII.16-21 
1478-1487 
Istikalpaḥ 
XXIII.1-4 
1488-1497 
Aupānuvākyam 
XXIII.5-8 
1498-1507 
Dvādaśāhaḥ 
XXII.9-11 
1506-1513 
Samvatsarika Sattra 
XXII.11 
1512-1513 
Ahīnāḥ 
XXIII.12-13 
1512-1519 
Atirātrah 
XXIII.13 
1516-1519 
Ekādašinī 
XXIII.14-15 
1518-1523 
Punaścitiḥ 
XXIII.14 
1520-1521 
Kauṇḍapāyinām Ayanam 
XXIII.14 
1520-1521 
Aharahaścitih 
XXIII.15 
1522-1523 
Rathacakracitiḥ 
XXIII.15 
1522-1523 
Sautrāmaṇī 
XXIII.16-17 
1522-1527 
Ayanāni 
XXIII.16 
1524-1525 
Ekāhāḥ 
XXIII.18 
1526-1529 
Sarvatomukham 
XXIII.19 
1530-1533 
KARMANTASŪTRAM 
XXIV-XXVI 
1534-1715 
Paribhāṣāḥ 
XXIV.1-11 
1534-1549 
Agnyādheyam 
XXIV.12-17 
1548-1557 
Punarādheyam 
XXIV.18-19 
1558-1561 
Darsa-Pūrņmāsau 
XXIV.20-29 
1560-1573 
Agnihotram 
XXIV.30-31 
1572-1577 
vi 
BAUDHAYANAŚRAUTASŪTRA 
TOPIC 
PRAŠNA 
PAGES 
Āgrayaṇam 
Pinḍapitryajñaḥ 
Agnyupasthānam 
Paśubandhah 
XXIV.32 
1576-1579 
XXIV.33 
1578-1581 
XXIV.33 
1580-1581 
XXIV.34-37 
1580-1587 
Kāmyāḥ Pašavaḥ 
XXIV.38-39 
1586-1591 
Caturmāsyāni 
XXV.1-3 
1592-1599 
Agniṣṭomaḥ 
XXV.4-26 
1598-1637 
Agnicayanam 
XXV.27-32 
1636-1649 
Vājapeyaḥ 
XXV.33-34 
1648-1653 
Rājasūyaḥ 
XXVI. 1-3 
1654-1659 
Istikalpaḥ 
XXVI.4-6 
1658-1667 
Aupānuvākyam 
XXVI.7-9 
1666-1671 
Aśvamedhaḥ 
XXVI. 10-11 
1670-1677 
Dvādasahaḥ 
XXVI.12-17 
1676-1685 
Ahīnāḥ 
XXVI.18-21 
1684-1691 
Atirātraḥ 
XXVI.22 
1690-1693 
Sautrāmaṇī 
XXVI.22 
1692-1693 
Ekādaśinī 
XXVI.23-24 
1692-1697 
Sarpāņām Ayanam 
XXVI.24 
1696-1697 
Viśvasrjām Ayanam 
XXVI.24 
1696-1697 
Kundapāyinām Ayanam etc. 
XXVI.25 
1696-1699 
Utsargiņām Ayanam 
XXVI.26 
1698-1701 
Tapaścitām Ayanam 
Aharahaścayanam 
XXVI.27 
1700-1703 
Uparisṭānmāsam 
Purastānmāsam 
Brahmano'yanam Kāmyāścitayaḥ Ekāhāh 
PRĀYAŚCITTASŪTRAM 
XXVI.28-29 
1702-1705 
XXVI.30-33 
1706-1715 
XXVII-XXIX 
1716-1807 
Istiprāyaścittāni 
XXVII.1-13 
1716-1741 
Hutanumantraṇāni 
XXVII.14 
1740-1743 
Mrgarestiḥ 
XXVIII.1 
1744-1747 
Pavitreştiḥ 
XXVIII.2 
1746-1755 
Nakṣatreṣṭayaḥ 
XXVIII.3-4 
1754-1761 
Agrayaṇestiprāyaścittam 
XXVIII.5 
1760-1761 
Paśuprāyaścittāni 
XXVIII.6-7 
1760-1765 
Caturmasyaprayaścittāni 
XXVIII.8 
1764-1767 
TOPIC 
Adhvaradikṣāprāyaścittāni Sarvayajñānām Prāyaścittāni Anugrahāḥ 
Somaprāyaścittāni 
CONTENTS 
PRAŠNA 
XXVIII.9 
vii 
PAGES 
1766-1769 
XXVIII.10-11 XXVIII.12-13 
1768-1771 
1772-1777 
XXIX. 1-2 
1778-1783 
Yajñakarmaņi Prāyaścittāni 
XXIX.3-6 
1782-1791 
Agnihotrasya Laukikavidhiḥ 
XXIX.7 
1790-1793 
Agnihotṛsamāsaḥ 
XXIX.8-11 
1792-1801 
Prayaścittasamuccayaḥ 
XXIX. 12-13 
1800-1807 
GLOSSARY 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1809-1837 
1839-1844 
ABBREVIATIONS 
App 
Apparently 
Apastamba Śrautasūtra 
ĀśvSS 
Aśvalayana Śrautasūtra 
AV 
Atharvaveda Samhita 
BaudhŚS 
Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra 
BhārŚS 
DhS 
GS 
Grhya sūtra 
JAOS 
JBr 
JBRAS 
KausBr 
Bharadvaja Śrautasūtra 
Dharma Sūtra 
Journal of American Oriental Society Jaiminiya Brāhmaṇa 
Journal of Bombay Royal Asiatic Society Kauṣītaki Brāhmaṇa 
Kāṭhaka Śrautasūtra Katyayana Śrautasūtra 
Kath$S KatyŚS 
KS 
Kathaka Samhită 
ManSS 
Mānava Śrautasūtra 
MS 
Maitrāyaṇī Samhitā 
MSS 
RV 
SadBr 
ŚānkhGS 
ŚBr 
SuS 
Manuscripts 
Rgveda Samhitā 
Şaḍvimsa Brāhmaṇa 
Sankhayana Gṛhya Sūtra 
Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa Śānkhāyana Sūtra Śulba Sūtra 
TÄ 
Taittiriya Aranyaka 
TāndBr 
TBr 
Tāndya Brāhmaṇa Taittiriya Brāhmaṇa 
TS 
Taittiriya Samhitā 
VādhŚS 
Vādhūla Śrautasútra 
VS 
VSK 
Vājasaneyi Samhitā 
Vājasaneyi Samhitā Kāṇva





Source: [TW](https://archive.org/details/shrauta-sUtra-sagrahaH/The_Baudhayana_Srauta-Sutra_Vol_IV/page/n503/mode/2up)


GLOSSARY 

अंशुः
m. (1) a shoot of the Soma plant. Shoots are pressed on a stone; the extracted juice is mixed with water or milk or curds or gruel, and is offered to a divinity in a Soma-sacrifice. <br>(2) a specific draught of Soma to be offered at the morning pressing in a Soma- sacrifice, whose offering is not attended by the chanting of a Stotra and the reciting of a Śastra.

अंस 
m. Southern shoulder as well as the northern shoulder of the altar (big or small) in a sacrifice. 

अक्ष
m. 1. an axle of a chariot or a cart.<br>2. The axle of a chariot as a measure, that is, 104 Angulas.<br>3. a seed of Terminalia bellerica used for gambling. <br>4. a die for gambling. 

अगार 
m.n. a quadrangular shed. 

अग्निचयन 
n. the piling up of a Fire-altar; a specific sacrificial rite.  

अग्निचिति 
f. a piled up construction or a layer piled up with burnt bricks. 

अग्निशाला 
f. a shed for preserving the set up fires. 

अग्निष्ठ 
adj. (a sacrificial post or any other thing) erected or standing in front of the Āhavanīya fire or to the rear of the Gārhapatya fire. 

अग्निहोत्र
n. milk or any other substance offered on the fire in the Agnihotra rite; the Agnihotra rite, one of the seven Havis-sacrifices. 

अग्निहोत्रहवणी 
f. the wooden ladle, one cubit long, made on the pattern of the Dhruva ladle, and being used for offering the Agnihotra. 
fm. one who has set up the fires and offers the Agnihotra in the evening and in the morning.  

अग्निहोत्रिन् 
f. the cow which is maintained by an Ahitagni and whose milk is used for the Agnihotra-offering.  

अग्नीध् 
m. = आग्नीध्र 

अग्न्यगार  
m. n. a shed for preserving a set up fire or fires. 

अङ्गुलि
f. a finger; used as measure, equal to the length of fourteen seeds of panicum millaceum. 

अच्छावाक
m. a priest belonging to the Hotr̥'s group, third in status who is required to recite certain Śastras in a Soma-sacrifice.  

अज 
m. a male goat, the main oblation in an Animal-sacrifice.  


अजा 
f. a female goat. 

अजाक्षीर
n. milk of a female goat. 

अणु 
m. a kind of grain, panicum millaceum; adj. thin.  

अदाभ्य
m. aspecific draught of Soma to be offered at the morning pressing in a Soma-sacrifice, whose offering is not attended by the chanting of a Stotra and the reciting of a Śastra. 

अधरणी 
f. the lower kindling wood made out of the wood of Ficus religiosa (Aśvattha tree) grown upon Prosopis spicigera (Śamī tree) on which a shallow ditch is made for churning out fire. 

अधिदेवन 
n. a gambling place adjoining the fire-hall of the sacrificer where he and his relatives or friends play the game of dice as a part of the ritual. 

अधिषवणचर्मन् 
n. a skin of a red bull spread over two planks of the Udumbara tree (Ficus glomerata) fixed upon four Uparava-holes in the Havirdhāna shed in a Soma-sacrifice. Soma-shoots are pressed upon a stone placed on this skin. 

अधिषवणफलक 
m. a plank of the wood of Ficus glomerata. Two such planks are fixed upon four Uparava-holes in the Havirdhāna shed in a Soma-sacrifice. 

अध्वर्यु 
m. one of the four chief priests officiating in a Soma-sacrifice. He belongs to the Yajurveda and makes offerings and carries out other executive functions on behalf of the sacrificer. He functions also in pre-Soma sacrifices.  

अनडुत्पर्शु 
m. a rib of an ox. 

अनड्वाह 
m. an ox yoked to a cart used in a sacrifice on various occasions. 

अनस् 
n. a bullock-cart used in a sacrifice on various occasions. 

अनिष्टुब्ध स्रुच्
f. a wooden ladle which is not carved out, with flat surface. 

अनुचर
m. a triad or Pragātha of R̥gvedic verses to be recited by the Hotṛ in his Śastra immediately following the Pratipad triad in a Soma-sacrifice. 

अनुरूप 
m. a triad or Pragātha of R̥gvedic verses, recited by the Hotraka (i.e. the Hotṛ's assistant) in his Śastra subsequent to the stotriya triad in a Soma-sacrifice. 

अनुवाक्या 
f.= पुरोनुवाक्या 


अनूबन्ध्या 
f. a barren cow (or a female goat) to be offered to Mitra-Varuṇa in the concluding part of a Soma-sacrifice.  

अनूयाज 
m. a type of offerings of clarified butter to be made in any type of sacrifice after the invocation of Iḍã and giving away the Anvāhārya cooked rice and other Dakṣiņās. Also written as अनुयाज. 

अन्त्यःपात्य 
m. the rear part (i.e. the passage) of the Mahāvedi. 

अन्तर्याम 
m. name of a specific Soma-draught to be offered in the morning pressing, whose offering is not attended by the chanting of a Stotra and the reciting of a Śastra. 

अन्वाहार्यचरु 
m. the rice cooked on the Anvāhāryapacana fire to be given as Dakṣiņā in the Full-moon and the New-moon and other sacrifices. 

अन्वाहार्यपचन 
m. name of a fire deposited in a fire-place lying to the south of the Gārhapatya fire. This fire is procured from outside or from the Gārhapatya. Offerings to the Pitr̥s and certain minor offerings are made on this fire. The Anvāhārya cooked rice to be given to the priests as Dakṣiņā is cooked on this fire. Also known as Dakṣināgni. 

अन्वाहार्यस्थाली 
f. an earthen vessel in which the Anvāhārya rice is cooked and given as Dakṣiņā to the priests in the Full-moon and the New-moon and other sacrifices. 

अभिघार 
m. pouring out of clarified butter over the portions of oblation taken into the ladle for offering to a divinity. 

अभिधानी 
f. a cord intended for tying up a calf or any other animal. 

अभिवान्यक्ता 
f. a cow whose calf is fed by another cow.  

अभिवान्या 
f. a cow feeding the calf of another cow.  

अभिव्यञ्जन 
n. butter used for applying to one's body. 

अभ्रि 
f. a hoe made of wood and used for digging earth. 

अम्भृण 
m. a jar used for storing water or any other liquid like Soma-juice.  

अरणी 
f. a pair of kindling woods made out of the wood of Asvattha tree (Ficus religiosa) grown upon a Sami tree (Prosopis spicigera). A piece of the upper kindling wood is fixed into the churning device; it is held into the shallow ditch of the lower kindling wood and moved around in both directions by means of a cord, and thus fire is generated. These kindling woods are handed over to the sacrificer at the setting up of fires. these are used whenever there is an occasion to generate fire in a ritual. 


अरत्नि 
m. the elbow; a cubit of the middle length, from the elbow to the tip of the middle finger; a measure equal to 24 Angulas (= two Prādeśas). 


अर्ध्या 
f. a variety of burnt bricks used for piling up a Fire-altar. 

अर्मकपाल 
n. a broken piece of a burnt earthen tile lying in a deserted place. 

अवका 
f. a water-plant named Blyxa octandra. 

अवान्तरेडा 
f. a portion taken out of the Iḍā. See इडा 

अवि 
m. a sheep, male as well as female. 

अशनिहत 
adj. (a tree or a branch) struck by lightning; a piece of its wood is put into a fire-place as one of the substances at the setting up of the fires. 

अश्वतर-री 
m.f. a mule sometimes yoked to a chariot; an article of Dakṣiņā. 

अश्वपर्शु 
m. a rib of a horse, used for cutting sacrificial grass. 

अश्ववाल 
m. a variety of grass, Saccharum spontaneum; sometimes used for tying up a Prastara.  

अषाढा 
f. a variety of burnt bricks used in the rite of piling up a Fire-altar. 

अष्टाश्रि 
adj. (a sacrificial post) having eight corners or edges.  

असिद 
m. a sickle of iron or bronze used for cutting grass. 

अहत वासस् 
n. a new, unwashed piece of cloth. Asacrificer is asked to wear such a piece of cloth on several occasions. 

आखुकरीष n. आखुकिरि m. आखूत्कर 
m. amole-hill, one of the substances to be put into the Āhavanīya fire-place at the setting up of fires. 

आग्नीध्र 
m. a priest assisting the Adhvaryu. In a Soma-sacrifice he belongs to the Brahman's group and is next to the Brāhmaṇācchaṁsin; as one of the seven Hotr̥s he recites the yājyā at the Hotraka-camasa offering and at the R̥tugraha offerings of Soma at the morning pressing. Also called अग्नीध् 

आघाटि
f. a cymbal played by the sacrificer's wives in the Mahāvrata sacrifice. 

आजि  
m. a chariot-race which takes place in the Vājapeya and in the Abhiṣecanīya Soma-sacrifice at the Rājasūya. The sacrificer and others particiapte in this race. 

आज्य
n. clarified butter prepared out of cow's milk; a substance very often offered in any sacrifice. 

आञ्जन 
n. collyrium to be put into the eyes by the sacrificer and his wife at the initiation in a Soma-sacrifice and on other occasions. 

आत्रेय 
m. a brāhmaṇa belonging to the Atri Gotra to whom Dakṣiņā (gold) is first given away in a Soma-sacrifice. 

आधवनीय
m. an earthen jar in which Soma-juice is collected before filtering in a Soma-sacrifice. 

आनडुहचर्मन् 
m. a skin of an ox used for spreading on various occasions, especially over the Soma-pressing boards for collecting Soma-juice in a Soma-sacrifice. 

आमिक्षा
f. coagulated milk or sour milk; when coagulated, the milk is transformed into solid portion and liquid portion; the solid portion is called āmikṣā. =पयस्या  

आवसथ 
m. living room. 

आवसथ्य 
m. the fire formally set up in the living room.  

आव्रश्चन  
m. the stump of a tree after a tree is cut for preparing a sacrificial post. 

आशिर् n. आशिर 
n. milk for mixing with Soma-juice in a Soma-sacrifice. 

आश्रावण 
n. the call ā3śrāvaya or o3śrāvaya or śrāvaya (“Do thou announce the offering to the relevant divinity") given by the Adhvaryu to the Āgnīdhrain any sacrifice.  

आसन्दी
f.a wooden stool woven with threads of darbha-grass used as a seat (for king Soma, sacrificer etc.) cf. राजासन्दी, सम्राडासन्दी  

आस्ताव
m. the space lying to the north of the Havirdhāna shed in a Soma-sacrifice. Certain priests and the sacrificer occupy this place while the Bahiṣpavamāna Stotra is chanted by the Sāman-chanters.  

आहवनीय 
m. the fire on which the principal offerings and also certain other offerings aren made from time to time by the Adhvaryu and other priests. In the usual fire- hall its place is towards the east. In the Cāturmāsya and the Animal-sacrifice it is deposited within a bigger altar prepared to the east of the normal Vihāra for the Full-moon and the New-moon sacrifices. In a Soma-sacrifice the Āhavanīya is carried forward on the Uttaravedi raised in the Mahāvedi on which the offerings of Soma and other oblations are offered.  

आहाव 
m. the utterance somsavom uttered by the Hotṛ or the Hotraka reciting the Śastra (= Maitrāvaruṇa, Brāhmaṇācchaṁsin or Acchāvāka) at the beginning and inbetween the recital at certain points. At the opening of the Śastra in the midday pressing he recites adhvaryo śomsāvom, and at the beginning of the Śastra in the third pressing he recites adhvarjo śośoṁsāvom.  

आहिताग्नि
m. one who has set up the fires ceremonially and has been worshipping those fires following the Vedic tradition. 

इक्षुशलाका 
f. a stem of sugarcane which is employed towards the stirring of the mixture of the flour of parched barley and milk of a cow feeding the calf of another cow at the Mahāpitṛyajña in the Sākamedhaparvan of the Cāturmāsyas. 

इडसून 
n. a wooden plank to be used for cutting portions of the cooked organs of an animal at an Animal-sacrifice.  

इडा 
f. sacrificial food, portions of all oblations offered to the divinities. These themselves are deemed as a divinity, and are invoked and prayed. They are finally partaken of by the priests concerned.  

इडापात्र 
n. an oblong wooden goblet for keeping the Iḍā. 

इण्ड्व
n. a circular wicker-work used as a support to a pitcher or jar.  

इध्म 
m. a faggot to be put on the fire. 

इध्मप्रव्रश्चन 
n. a cutting of faggot.  

इध्मसंनहन 
n. a cord made of darbha-blades for tying up the faggot.  

इष्टका 
f. a burnt brick of a specific pattern and size.  

इष्टि 
f. a sacrifice having the pattern of the Full-moon sacrifice or the New-moon sacrifice. 

ईषा 
f. a pole or shaft of a chariot or a cart; a measure of 188 Aṅgulas. 

उखा
f. a cauldron prepared out of earth and burnt. This is used for maintaining fire for a specific period in Agnicayana. 

उच्छिष्टखर 
m. an earthen mound prepared and located in the Pracinavaṁśa shed towards the east for washing the supporting ladle from which the remnants of Gharma were partaken of by the relevant priests in the Pravargya rite.  

उत्कर m. a rubbish-heap located in the fire-hall towards the north. 

उत्तरनाभि 
f. a square earthen platform measuring a span raised in the middle of the Uttaravedi in the Cāturmāsyas, an Animal-sacrifice or a Soma-sacrifice.  

उत्तरवेदि 
f. a square earthen mound of a specific size raised within the altar in the sacrificial place prepared for the performance of the Cāturmāsyas, the Animal-sacrifice or a Soma-sacrifice. In a Soma-sacrifice characterised by the Agnicayana a Fire-altar of a specific pattern (normally resembling a flying eagle) takes its place. 

उत्तरारणी 
f. a piece of wood fashioned out of the tree Ficus religiosa grown upon the tree Prosopis spicigera. A pin of the suitable size is cut out of this piece and is fixed into the device for churning. Fire is churned out by rotating this pin into the shallow ditch of the lower kindling wood (adharāraṇī). 

उदकुम्भ
m. an earthen pitcher full of water. 

उदचन
n. a wooden spoon withour a handle for taking up Soma-juice. 

उदपात्र 
n. a pot full of water. 

उद्गातृ
m. one of the four chief priests in a Soma-sacrifice. He is the head among the four priests belonging to the Samaveda. He chants his part of each chant in the Stotra in a Soma-sacrifice.  

उदवसानीय खर
m. an earthen mound laid down in the easten part of the Pracinavaṁŝa shed in a Soma-sacrifice. In the Pravargya rite after the Gharma is offered on the fire, the Mahāvīra vessel from which the Gharma was offered is disposed on this mound. 

उन्नेतृ 
m. an assistant to the Adhvaryu priest, the third in the order, who fills in with Soma the cups and goblets in a Soma-sacrifice.  

उपगातृ
m. a person assisting the Sāman-chanters in chanting at a Soma-sacrifice. 

उपबर्हण 
n. a pillow employed in the Pinḍapitr̥yajña rite and also as an article of Dakṣiņā to be given away in a sacrifice. 

उपभृत् 
f. a ladle made out of the wood of Ficus religiosa resembling the Juhū in pattern and serving as a feeder for the Juhū. 

उपयमनी 
n, f. a big wooden ladle held as a support to the normal ladle. The term also denotes the earth (in some container) held as a support (to the fire being carried forth).  

उपर 
m. the lowermost part of a sacrificial post which is not chiseled and which is buried underground. 

उपरव 
m. one of the four holes made into the ground to the west of the mound for Soma-cups, goblets and vessels in the Havirdhāna shed in a Soma-sacrifice. All the four holes are joined to each other at the bottom. 

उपला 
f. upper crushing stone to be used for crushing grains upon the lower crushing stone. 

उपवसथ 
m. the day preceding the principal offering day of any sacrifice, 

उपवेष 
m. a stick (of Butea frondosa) for stirring embers. 

उपशय 
adj. lying near, subsidiary (Mahāvīra vessel - BaudhŚS IX.2; a sacrificial post - BaudhŚS XV.15 etc.).  

उपस्तम्भन 
n. the support of the yoke of a bullock-cart used while the bullocks are unyoked. 

उपस्तरण 
n. spreading clarified butter into the ladle or any other pot before taking portion of the oblation.  

उलूखल 
n. a wooden mortar for pounding grains. 

उष्णीष 
n. a turban worn by the sacrificer when initiated for a Soma-sacrifice; put as a cover over the Soma plant after it is ceremonially purchased at a Soma-sacrifice.  

ऊर्णास्तुका
f. a tuft of wool of a sheep; white and black tufts of wool are employed at the purchase of Soma.  

ऊष 
m. saline soil, one of the substances put into the fire-place at the setting up of fires. 

ऊषपुट
n. saline soil folded in a leaf. The priests strike the sacrificer with such folds when in the Vājapeya sacrifice he climbs down the ladder after having reached the top.  

ऋजीष 
m. residue of Soma after it is pressed out. At the third pressing, Soma-juice is extracted out of the residue. The residue is finally disposed of in water at the Avabhṛtha rite together with the other implements contacted with Soma. 

एरका 
f. a bed prepared out of Darbha-blades, offered to the Pitr̥s in the Piṇḍapitr̥yajña.  

ओदन 
m. cooked rice of paddy or barley; one of the oblations. 

औदुम्बरी 
f. a two-pronged pole of Ficus glomerata to be erected in the southern half of the Sadas. The Sāman-chanters sit down around it and chant. 


औपासन 
m. the domestic fire also known as Smarta or Gṛhya. It is set up by a person belonging to one of the first three social orders at his marriage; it is maintained by him, and he makes offerings on it every evening and morning. He performs all his domestic rites with the help of this fire.  

कंस
m. a pot of bronze.  

कट
m. a mat of grass or bamboo. 

कठिन 
n. a specific basket made of bamboo and used in preparing Surā in the Sautrāmaṇī and Vājapeya sacrifices. 

कपाल 
n. a burnt earthen potsherd. A set of such potsherds is used in baking a cake (puroḍāśa).  

कमण्डलु 
m. a water-pot.  

कम्बुशूर्प 
n. a winnowing basket of a specific pattern. 

करम्भ 
m. an oblation prepared out of the flour of parched barley (or paddy) mixed with curds (or ghee). The oblation is offered in the Mahāpitṛyajña in the Sākamedhaparvan of the Cāturmāsyas and also as one of the five Savanīyapuroḍāśas in a Soma-sacrifice. Small pots prepared out of its are offered to Varuṇa in the Varuṇapraghāsaparvan of the Cāturmāsyas. 

कर्करीका 
f. a kind of lute played by the sacrificer's wife in the Mahāvrata sacrifice. 

कशिपु 
m. a bed offered to Pitṛs in the Mahāpitṛyajña at the Sākamedhaparvan of the Cāturmāsyas. 

कांस्यपात्र 
n. a pot of bronze, cf. कंस 

काण्टकी समिध् f. a thorny firestick. 

कारोतर 
n. a filter for filtering the Surā. 

काश 
m. a kind of grass sachcharum spontaneum. 

कार्ष्मय
m. the tree known as Gmelina arborea.  

कुटरु
m. a stone used for striking upon the lower and upper crushing stones.  

कुम्भ, कुम्भी 
m. f. a burnt earthen pitcher used for keeping liquids, water, Soma-juice etc. 

कुरुविन्द 
m. a wild variety of barley. 

कुलत्थ
m. a kind of pulse, Dolicos uniflorus.  

कुश
m. a kind of grass, Poa cynosuroides, commonly used for preparing strainers etc.  

कुशा 
f. a stick. These are arranged as required for counting the chants (stomas) of a Stotra by the Prastotṛ in a Soma-sacrifice.  

कूर्च 
m. a bunch of grass.  

कूर्म 
m. a tortoise, laid down at the bottom while piling up the Citi in Agnicayana.  

कृष्णतूष 
m. husk of black paddy (employed in the Kārīrīṣṭi and the Vrātyastoma).  

कृष्णल 
n. the black berry of the plant Abrum precatorium.  



कृष्णविषाणा
f. a horn of black antelope given to the sacrificer when initiated for a Soma-sacrifice.  


कृष्णाजिन 
n. a skin of black antelope.  

क्लीतका 
f. seed of the tree Pongamia glabra (used for polishing the Mahāvīra in the Pravargya rite). 

क्लीब 
m. a eunuch. Materials for preparing Sură are purchased from him in the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice.  

क्लोमन्
m. a lung, a part of the oblation in an Animal-sacrifice.  

क्वलसक्तु
m. the flour of this grain after it is parched was employed in accomplishing the oblation (Sura) in the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice.  

क्षतृ
m. a charioteer. 

क्षीरहोतृ
am. a priest who was employed to offer one's Agnihotra with milk as the fee.  


क्षुद्रचिति 
f. a fire-altar in which pebbles are piled up.  

क्षुद्रपद 
n. a measure less than a Pada, that is, ten aṅgulas.  

क्षुर
m. a razor for shaving the hair and beard of a sacrificer on fixed occasions.  

क्षौम
n. a piece of linen to be worn by a sacrificer at the sacrifices like Vājapeya and the Rājasūya.  

खदिर
m. a tree Acasia catechu; certain sacrificial implements are prepared out of its wood.  

खर
m. an earthen mound prepared for depositing cups, goblets and vessels for Soma in the Havirdhāna shed at a Soma-sacrifice; certain mounds are to be prepared in the Pravargya rite.  

खारी
f. a basket of grass or bamboo.  

गतश्री 
adj. a brāhmaṇa who has studied the Veda, or a Rājanya or a village-chief. A gataśrī enjoys certain special privileges in ritual-practice.  

गर्दभ 
m. an ass employed in carrying earth for preparing the cauldrons etc. in the Agnicayana.  

गर्मुत् 
f. a kind of wild bean; cooked grains of garmut are offered as oblation in certain optional sacrifices.  

गवीधुक 
m. a wild grain, Coix barbata, used for polishing the Mahāvīra in the Pravargya rite.  

गुद, गुदकाण्ड 
m. the anus (of an animal); a part of the boiled anus is offered as a part of the oblation; another part cut into eleven sections is offered by a priest on a procured fire in an Animal-sacrifice. 

गो 
f. m. a cow; a bull; offered in sacrifice; especially cows are given as Dakṣiņā; a cow to be given as one of the articles of price to be given in exchange for Soma; a bull yoked to a cart or a plough. 


गोधूम  
m. wheat; grains or dough used as a top on the tip of the sacrificial post in the Vājapeya sacrifice.  

गोमय 
n. cowdung, used for cleansing a fire-place etc.  

गोमृग 
m. the gayal.  

गोष्ठ 
m. cow-stall. 

ग्रह 
m. a draught of Soma.  

ग्रामणी 
m. a village-chief.  

ग्रावन् 
m. a stone (for Soma-pressing).  

ग्रावस्तुत् 
m. a priest belonging to the Ṛgveda who is asked to praise the pressing stones at the beginning of the midday-pressing in a Soma-sacrifice; he is the fourth and the last among the four priests belonging to the Hotṛ's group.  

घर्म 
m. the oblation being a mixture of boiled clarified butter and milk offered in the Pravargya rite; Pravargya-implements.  

घर्मदुह्
f. the cow whose mil is obtained for the Gharma.  

घृत 
n. melted clarified butter.  

चतुर्युज्
m. (a chariot) to which four horses have been yoked.  

चतुष्पथ 
m. a place where four roads meet.  

चतुःस्रक्ति 
adj. (a sacrificial post, a Soma-cup etc.) having four corners.  

चमस
m. an oblong wooden goblet with a short handle (for Soma-juice etc.).  

चमसाध्वर्यु 
m. an assistant to the Adhvaryu who offers on or shakes over the Āhavanīya fire the Soma-goblet assigned to a particular priest in a Soma-sacrifice.  

चयन 
n. the piling or the rite of piling bricks on a Fire-altar.  

चरु 
m. boiled rice of paddy or barley; the pot meant for boiling rice.  

चर्मकर्त 
m. a piece of leather. 

चषाल  
m. a wooden ring fixed upon the top of a sacrificial post.  

चात्वाल
m. the pit lying to the north-east of the altar in an Animal-sacrifice or a Soma- sacrifice, the earth out of which is used for raising the mound of the Uttaravedi in the middle of eastern part.  

चिति 
f. a construction resulting from the piling up of burnt bricks.  

छदिस् 
n. a roof (set over the Havirdhāna or Sadas shed in a Soma-sacrifice).  

छाग 
m. a goat offered to a divinity in an Animal-sacrifice or a Soma-sacrifice.  

जर्तिल 
m. wild sesamum.  

जाघनी 
f. the tail of an animal; it is boiled and its parts are offered as Patnīsamyāja offerings in an Animal-sacrifice.  

जानु 
n. the knee; a measure of 32 Angulas.  

जाल 
n. a hair-net worn by the sacrificer's wife over her head when she is initiated for a Soma-sacrifice.  

जुहू 
f. a wooden ladle made of the wood of Butea frondosa. It is as long as the hand, has a cavity to hold a liquid or solid oblation, has a beak and a long handle. The Adhvaryu (or any other priest) makes an offering on the fire by means of this ladle.  

तरी 
f. a grain of paddy which, after it is parched, remains intact. 

तार्प्य 
n. a piece of cloth woven out of the thread of the tṛpă plant.  

तिल 
m. sesamum. 

तिल्वक 
m. the tree known as Symplocos racemosa.  

तिसृधन्व 
n. a bow with three arrows.  

तीर्थ 
n. a bathing place with steps.  

तूपर 
m. a hornless (goat).  

तृतीयसवन 
n. the third pressing in a Soma-sacrifice.  

तेजनी 
f. a bunch of grass (used for filling the gap in a roof).  

तोक्म 
m. a shoot of paddy. 

दक्षिणाग्नि 
m. =अन्वाहार्यपचन  

दर्भ 
m. grass, usually Kusa, very often used in a ritual for spreading as a seat, within the altar, for preparing strainers, for strewing around the fire-place, etc. 

दर्वी 
f. a wooden ladle in general.  

दशापवित्र
n. a woollen filter for filtering Soma-juice together with a woollen fringe tied below in the centre for achieving a stream of the passing juice.  

दीक्षा
f. the vow adopted by the sacrificer and his wife at the initiation for Soma-sacrifice.  

दीक्षित 
adj. one who has adopted the vow at the initiation for a Soma-sacrifice. 

दुन्दुभि 
m. a drum. Drums are beaten at the chariot-race and on certain other occasions. 

दृति 
f. a leather-bag used for keeping a liquid.  

दृषद्
f. a lower crushing stone for crushing grains or for pressing Soma.  

देवयजन 
n. a place for performing a Soma-sacrifice.  

द्रोणकलश
m. a wooden trough for collecting the Soma-juice passing through the woollen filter.  

द्विदेवत्यपात्र 
n. a wooden cup used for offering Soma to twin-divinities.  

द्वियोग  
adj. (a chariot) to which two horses are yoked.  

धवित्र 
n. a fan made out of a piece of the skin of black antelope used in the Pravargya rite for fanning the fire on which the oblation of Gharma is prepared.  

धाना 
f. parched paddy; one of the five oblations forming the Savanīyapuroḍāśa.  

धाय्या 
f. a verse to be recited additionally in the Sāmidhenīs, or in a Śastra or in any other group of verses, to be recited by the Hot or a Hotraka.  

धिष्णिय
m. a small earthen mound raised in front of the seat of a priest sitting in the Sadas. These priests are: the Maitrāvaruṇa, the Hotṛ, the Brahmaṇācchamsin, the Acchāvāka, the Neṣṭr̥, the Potr and the Āgnīdhra. In the Agnicayana mounds are raised by piling bricks.  

धृष्टि
f. a fire-stirring stick.  

धेनु
f. a milch-cow. 

ध्रुवस्थाली
f. an earthen vessel filled with Soma while taking draughts in the morning pressing; it is preserved until the close of the third pressing when it is emptied into the Hotṛ's goblet.  

ध्रुवा 
f. a ladle made of the wood of Flacourtia sapida on the pattern of the the Juhů. It is placed within the altar along with the other ladles (Juhů and Upabhṛt). It is filled with clarified butter; oblation of clarified butter is taken up into the Juhū and the Upabhṛt out of the Dhruva ladle.  

नग्नहु 
m. shoot of the plant of beans; used for the preparation of surā (wine).  

नलदमाला 
f. a garland of the flowers of Nardostachys jatamansi (Indian spikenard) (worn round the neck of the dead).  

नवनीत
n. butter.  

नादेय
adj. (à creature) living in river-water.  

नाभि 
f. navel; the central earthen platform raised on the Uttaravedi in an Animal- sacrifice or a Soma-sacrifice. 

निदान
n. a cord with which the hinder legs of a cow (or goat) are tied while milking.  

निर्मन्थ्य 
m. the fire generated by churning.  

निविद्
f. a group of prose formulas forming part of a Śastra to be recited by the Hotṛ in a Soma-sacrifice.  

निविध्दानीय 
n. a hymn to which a Nivid is attached. The hymn forms part of a Śastra to be recited by the Hotṛ in a Soma-sacrifice.  

निषादस्थपति 
n. a chieftain of the Niṣādas who is entitled to set up the sacred fires.  

निष्क 
m. a gold-coin of a specific weight; a gold-ornament to be worn around the neck. 

निष्कास 
m. scrapings of cooked rice. 

नीवार 
m. a kind of wild grains. 

नेष्टृ
m. one of the assistants of the Adhvaryu at a Soma-sacrifice; the third out of the four.  

न्यग्रोध 
m. the tree Ficus Indica, one of the sacrificial trees.  

पक्षमध्या 
f. a kind of burnt brick to be piled up in the piling up of a Fire-altar.  

पक्षाग्र्या 
f. a kind of burnt brick to be piled up in the piling up of a Fire-altar.  

पक्ष्या
f. A kind of burnt brick to be piled up in the piling up of a Fire-altar.  

पत्नीशाला 
f. the shed intended for the sacrificer's wife adjoining to the Prācīnavaṁśa shed on the western side. 

पत्यगार  
n. पत्नीशाला 

पद 
n. a foot; a measure equal to fifteen angulas or twelve aṅgulas.  

पन्नेजनी
f. the earth (or water mixed with it) collected from the foot-print of the Soma-purchasing cow from the seventh foot-step while the cow is led for the purchase of Soma plant. 


पयस्या 
f.= आमिक्षा 

परिधि
m. an enclosing stick. Three enclosing sticks are laid around the Āhavanīya fire along the borders except the eastern one.  


परिप्लवा, परिप्लु 
f. A small wooden spoon with a short handle used for filling a cup or goblet with Soma juice.  

परिवाप 
m. Parched barley; one of the five constituents of Savanīyapuroḍāśa to be offered at each of the three Soma-pressings. 

पर्ण
f m. The tree Butea frondosa; one of the sacrificial trees. The Juhū ladle is made out of the wood of this tree. =पलाश  

पर्यग्निकरण 
n. Carrying a firebrand around one or more sacrificial objects. 

पर्शु
m. A rib of an animal; it is used for cutting sacrificial grass. 


पलाश 
n. = पर्ण : a leaf. 

पवित्र 
n. a strainer consisting of two (or one) Darbha-blades used for purifying sacrificial objects.  

पशु 
m. An animal to be offered in an Animal-sacrifice or to be given away as Dakṣiṇā (man, horse, cow, bull, male or female goat, male or female sheep). 

पशुपुरोडाश  
m. A cake to be offered subsequent to the offering of omentum in an Animal-sacrifice.  

पशुश्रपणी 
f. An earthen pitcher used for cooking the organs of an animal. 

पष्ठौही 
f. a four-year old heifer; given away as Dakṣiņā. 

पाजक
n. a wicker-work basket used in preparing surā (wine).  

पात्र
n. a vacant wooden cup or earthen vessel used for taking a draught of Soma in a Soma-sacrifice.  

पादेष्टका 
f. an earthen pan for keeping an oblation.  

पाद्या 
f. a quarter-brick (burnt) used in the piling up of a Fire-altar. 

पाद्या 
f. पादेष्टका 

पार्श्व 
n. thoracic walls on both sides of an animal; part of an oblation in an animal-sacrifice.  

पिञ्छोला 
f. a specific string-instrument.  

पिण्ड 
m. a ball; a ball of cooked rice.  

पिधानपात्र 
n. a lid used for covering a pitcher or any other pot full of milk or any other liquid.  

पिन्वन
n. a milking pot.  

पिष्टलेप 
m. a bit of dough used for preparing a cake or cakes.  

पिष्टसंवपनी
f. a wooden pan used for mixing flour with water.  

पुरीतत्
f. A specific part of the intestines; it is cooked and forms part of the oblation in an Animal-sacrifice. 

पुरीष 
n. earth, soil.  

पुरुष 
m. a man; a measure equal to the height of a man (= 5 Aratnis = 120 angulas).  

पुरोडाश 
m. a cake made of the flour of rice or barley and baked on a set of potsherds arranged on embers; an oblation.  


पुरोनुवाक्या 
f. averse to be recited by the Hotṛ or the Maitrāvaruṇa before the Ājyābhāga-formula or before the yajya-verse relating to the principal or Sviṣṭakr̥t offering =अनुवाक्या  

पुष्कर 
n. a blue lotus-flower; garlands of lotus-flowers are worn by the priests officiating in the Vājapeya-sacrifice; the bowl of a ladle.  

पुष्करपर्ण 
n. a lotus-leaf, it is laid down in the middle of the area fixed for piling up the Fire-altar.  

पूतभृत्
m. an earthen jar used for storing Soma-juice after it is passed through a woollen filter in a Soma-sacrifice.  

पूतीक
m. the plant Guilandina bonducor Basella cardifolia employed as a substitute for Soma plant.  

पुतुद्रु
m. the tree Pinas deodara.  

पूर्णद्रव्य 
m. crust and scrapings of rice cooked for the Gṛhamedhīyeṣṭi in the Sākamedhaparvan of the Cāturmāsyas, collected in the ladle and offered as an oblation in the Kraiḍineṣṭi of the same Parvan.  

पूर्णपात्र 
n. a goblet full of water; a wooden pot filled with paddy or barley measuring 128 handfuls (muṣṭis).  

पूर्णाहुति 
f. an offering of clarified butter filled in the ladle.  

पृश्नि 
f. a spotted cow or female goat.  

पृश्निपर्णी
f. the plant called Hemionitis cordifolia or Glycine debilis.  

पृशदाज्य
n. clarified butter mixed with curds.  

पृषदाज्यधानी 
f. the wooden vessel used for keeping Pr̥ṣadājya. 

पेत्व 
m. a ram; the fleece between the horns of a ram is used as one of the substances placed in the middle of the Uttaravedi for inflaming the fire to be deposited in an Animal-sacrifice and a Soma-sacrifice.  

पोतृ
m. The fourth priest in the group of the Brahman; in a Soma-sacrifice he occupies a place in the Sadas and has to recite the yājyās in the offerings of the goblets of the Hotrakas and at the R̥tu-offerings. 

प्रउग
n. the forepart of the poles of a chariot or cart; a triangle; a Fire-altar in the form of a triangle.  

प्रक्रम 
m. a foot-step; the measure of two padas or thirty angulas.  

प्रगाथ 
m. a unit of two verses; two verses are turned into three while chanting a Stotra and reciting a Śastra.  

प्रचरणी
f. a spare ladle used for offering an oblation, when the chief Juhū-ladle is engaged in some other offering.  

प्रणीता
f. water carried forth in a wooden goblet and kept to the north of the Āhavanīya fire-place for sacrificial purposes.  

प्रतिगर 
m. the oral response uttered by the Adhvaryu or the Pratiprasthātṛ standing in a bent position with his palms resting on his knees, in front of the reciter of the Śastra.  

प्रतिदुह्
n. fresh milk, used sometimes for mixing with the Soma-juice.  

प्रतिपद्
m. the first triad or Pragātha of a Śastra recited by the Hoty in a Soma-sacrifice; this is the very same triad on which the preceding Stotra is based.  

प्रतिप्रस्थातृ
m. an assistant to the Adhvaryu, next to him in status, officiating in an Animal-sacrifice and a Soma-sacrifice.  

प्रतिहर्तृ 
m. an assistant to the Udgātṛ, third in status; he chants the specific portion of each chant of a Stotra.  

प्रत्याश्रावण 
n. the response astu śrauşat 'let it be heard” uttered by the Āgnīdhra as against the call ā 3 śrāvaya “do thou announce" given to him by the Adhvaryu or the Pratiprasthātṛ.  

प्रयाज 
m. an offering of clarified butter made by the Adhvaryu on the Āhavanīya fire before the principal offering in an iṣți or Animal-sacrifice to the accompaniment of the mantra recited by the Hotṛ priest.  

प्रवर्ग्य 
m. a rite involving the offering of hot milk attached to a Soma-sacrifice, repeated for a number of times.  

प्रवर्त
m. a golden ear-ornament to be worn by the sacrificer.  

प्रवृञ्जनीय खर 
m. the circular earthen mound on which clarified butter filled in the Mahāvīra (earthen vessel) is boiled.  

प्रशास्तृ 
m. =मैत्रावरुण  

प्रष्टि 
m. the third horse yoked to a chariot either along the side or in front of the two horses.  

प्रष्टिवाहिन् 
m. (a chariot) with a third horse yoked to it.  


प्रसर्पक 
m. a learned visitor to the performance of a Soma-sacrifice.  

प्रस्तर 
m. a bundle formed by tying together a few bunches of Darbha-grass.  

प्रस्तार 
m. a layer of burnt bricks in the piling up of a Fire-altar.  

प्रस्तोतृ 
m. an assistant to the Udgātṛ, second in status among the four, who opens the chant of any Stotra, and in some cases chants a Sāman alone.  

प्राग्वंश  
m. प्राचीनवंश 

प्राचीनवंश 
m. a shed with its central beam pointing towards the east; the sacred fires of the sacrificer are deposited herein for the performance of a Soma-sacrifice. The sacrificer gets himself initiated for the sacrifice herein. = प्रागवंश 

प्राचीनावीत
n. the position of the sacred cord worn by the sacrificer in a rite intended for the Pitr̥s as being suspended over the right shoulder and under the left arm.  

प्राजहित 
m. the original Gārhapatya fire deposited in the Prācīnavaṁśa shed in a Soma-sacrifice, so called after the Āhavanīya fire in the same shed has attained the status of the Gārhapatya, the Āhavanīya now being carried forth in the 
Mahāvedi.  

प्रातरनुवाक 
m. the recital by the Hour of Rgvedic verses addressed to Agni, Ușas and the Aśvins in the early morning of the pressing day in a Soma-sacrifice.  

प्रातर्दोह 
m. milking the Agnihotra-cow in the morning; the milk milked in the morning in the New-moon sacrifice.  

प्रातःसवन 
n. the rite of offering in the morning a fixed set of Soma-draughts in a Soma- sacrifice; the morning Soma-pressing, the first among the three pressings in a Soma-sacrifice. 

प्रादेश 
m. a span between the thumb and the forefinger; a measure of the length of twelve angulas. 

प्रायशचित्त,-त्ति 
f. an expiation to be observed in the event of any ritual-deficiency.  

प्राशित्र 
n. a portion of the oblation to be given to the Brahman priest after the invocation of Iḍā in an Iṣți.  

प्राशित्रहरण 
n. a wooden pot intended for carrying the Prāśitra-portion towards the Brahman.  

प्रियङ्गुः 
m. a wild corn known as Panicum italicum.  

प्रैष 
m. a call given by the sacrificer or by a priest to a person. 

प्रोक्षणीधानी 
f.a wooden ladle meant for keeping the water to be used for sprinkling.  

प्लक्ष 
m. the tree known as Ficus infectoria.  

प्लीहन्
m. spleen; the boiled spleen is offered as a portion of the oblation in an animal-sacrifice.  

प्लेङ्ख 
m. a swing for sitting upon (by the Hotṛ priest in the Mahavrata sacrifice).  

फलीकरण 
n. chaff of grains obtained after pounding the paddy; an oblation in an Iṣṭi.  

फाल्गुन 
n. m. a specific plant used as a substitute for Soma; the name of a month.  

बदर 
n. fruit of zizyphus jujuba, the flour of parched Badara is used in the preparation of surā.  

बर्कर
m. a young goat.  

बर्हिस् 
f n. Kuśa grass used for spreading within the altar and for similar ritualistic purposes.  

बल्बज
m. the grass Eleusine Indica.  

बस्त 
m. a goat.  

बस्ताजिन
n. the skin of a goat.  

बहिष्पवमान 
n. the first Stotra to be chanted in the morning pressing by the Udgātṛ and his two assistants while sitting near the Cātvāla in a Soma-sacrifice.  

बाधक 
m. a specific tree whose wood is used in ritual for exorcistic purposes.  

बिल्व 
m. the tree Aegle marmelos.  

ब्रह्मन् 
m. one of the four chief priests, who supervises the entire ritual performance and offers expiation for deficiency if any.  

ब्रह्मौदन 
m. cooked rice which the four chief priests consume together at the setting up of fires and on other occasions. 

ब्राह्मणाच्छंसिन् 
m. a priest belonging to the Brahman's group, second in status, who is one of the Hotrakas sitting in the Sadas and reciting certain Śastras in a Soma-sacrifice.  

ब्राह्मौदनिक 
m. the fire on which the Brahmaudana is cooked.  

भयेडक 
m. a dreadful wild sheep.  

भूमिदुन्दुभि 
m. the drum formed by fixing a leather over the pit dug out into the ground; used in the Mahāvrata sacrifice.  

भ्राष्ट्र
n. m. parching pan, parcher's fire.  

मदन्ती 
f. hot water. 

मधुपर्क 
m. a formal reception offered to a priest or any other respectable person.  

मधूक 
m. the tree known as Bassia latifolia; its wood is used as fuel in the Rāṣṭrabhṛt offerings for one engaged in a battle.  

मन्थिन् 
m. a draught of Soma taken in a wooden cup which is mixed with the flour of parched barley.  

मयूख 
m. a wooden peg. 

महापितृयज्ञ 
m. an Iṣṭi performed in honour of the Pitr̥s and forming part of the Sākamedhaparvan of the Cāturmāsyas. 

महावीर 
m. an earthen vessel resembling a wooden Soma-cup, made by hand and baked; used for preparing the oblation gharma in the Pravargya rite. 

महावेदि 
f. a big altar measured and prepared for a Soma-sacrifice to the east of the Prācīnavaṁśa shed.  

महाहविस्
n. a specific Iṣṭi forming part of the Sākamedhaparvan of the Cāturmāsyas.  

माध्यन्दिन पवमान
n. the first Stotra in the midday pressing recited by the Udgātṛ and his two assistants, Prastotr̥ and Pratihartr̥ in a Soma-sacrifice.  

माध्यन्दिनसवन
n. the midday pressing, one of the three Soma-pressings in a Soma-sacrifice.  

मार्जालीय 
m. an earthen mound prepared for cleansing Soma-pots towards the south of the Mahāvedi in a Soma-sacrifice. 

मासर 
m. the mixture of soup of rice and the crushed meal from the parched rice; used in preparing wine (surā).  

मुञ्ज 
m. the grass Sachcharum Muñja.  

मुञ्जप्रलव 
m. a shoot of Muñja grass rising from its stump.  

मुष्टि 
m. a handful.  

मुसल 
n. a wooden pestle for pounding grains.  

मूत
m. a basket.  

मेक्षण  
n. a corn-stirring stick.  

मेखला 
f. a girdle (of Muñja grass) to be fastened around the waist; a band elevated around any pot or any other material object. 

मेथी 
f. a wooden peg or pin.  

मेदस्
n. fat; perinephric fat; a portion of the oblation in an Animal-sacrifice.  

मेष 
m. a male sheep, an animal to be offered in a sacrifice.  

मेषी 
f. a female sheep, an animal to be offered in a sacrifice.  

मैत्रावरुण 
m. a priest belonging to the Hotṛ's group, second in status; one of the Hotrakas sitting in the Sadas and reciting certain Śastras and giving certain calls in a Soma-sacrifice = प्रशास्तृ 

मैत्रावरुणपात्र 
n. the cup for the Soma-draught for Mitra and Varuṇa, one of the three Dvidevatya draughts.  

मौञ्जी
f. the girdle made of Muñja grass.  

यकन् 
n. the liver of an animal; a portion of the oblation in an Animal-sacrifice.  

यजमान
m. the sacrificer. 

यज्ञोपवीत 
n. the sacred cord suspended over the left shoulder and under the right arm.  

यव 
m. barley.  

यवागू
f. gruel, one of the oblations. 

यवौदन
m. cooked barley-grains.  

याज्या 
f. a verse or formula pertaining to the principal or other offering recited by the Hotr̥ or the Hotraka.  

यायावर 
m. a sacrificer who is always on a journey.  

युग 
n. the yoke of a chariot or a cart; a measure of 86 argulas. 

यूप 
m. a sacrificial post having a specific length and a particular number of edges (four or eight) fashioned out of a sacrificial tree to be erected in front of the Āhavanīya fire in an Animal - or Soma-sacrifice.  

यूपरशना 
f. the cord wound round the sacrificial post.  

यूपावट 
m. a hole made into the ground for erecting the sacrificial post.  

यूषन्
m. broth, a portion of the oblation in an Animal-sacrifice.  

योक्त्र
n. a girdle (made of Muñja grass) to be fastened round the waist.  


रजत (हिरण्य) 
n. silver.  

रथकार 
m.a chariot-maker; a sub-caste whose member was entitled to set up the fires. 

रथचक्रचित 
n. the Fire-altar having the form of a chariot-wheel.  

रराटी 
f. a frontlet (made of işīka grass) set upon the door of the Havirdhāna shed in a Soma-sacrifice. 

राजन्य 
m. a member of the ruling class.  

राजासन्दी 
f. a wooden stool used as a seat for king Soma.  

रास्ना 
f. a cord, a band, a strand. 

रुक्म 
m. a gold or silver sheet of a square or circular size.  


रौहिण पुरोडाश 
m. a cake of barley flour which is not baked.  

लाङ्गल 
m. a wooden plough used for ploughing the area of Fire-altar.  

लाज 
m. a parched paddy.  

वंश 
m. a bamboo.  

वक्षस् 
n. sternum, a portion of the oblation in an Animal-sacrifice.  

वङ्क्षण 
n. the thigh.  

वडबा 
f. a mare.  

वत्सतर, -री
m. f. a heifer, a weaned calf.  

वसतीवरी 
f. the water brought in pitcher from the neighbouring river on the Upavasatha day in the afternoon before sunset for the purpose of Soma-offerings.  

वसा 
f. oily substance of flesh, an oblation in an Animal-sacrifice.  

वसाहोम 
m. offering of the oily substance of flesh in an Animal-sacrifice.  

वसाहोमहवनी  
f. the ladle used for offering oily substance of flesh in an Animal-sacrifice.  

वसोर्धारा 
f. the continuous offering of a clarified butter on the Āhavanīya fire deposited on the Fire-altar through a specially prepared long wooden ladle; the group of formulas with which the offering is made.  

वाजिन 
n. scam of curdled milk; an oblation.  

वाण 
m. a string instrument having a hundred strings.  

वायव्य 
m. a wooden cup employed for offering Soma.  

वाल 
n. a woollen filter for filtering wine (surā).  

वासोभार 
m. a load of pieces of cloth. 


वास्त्व 
n. a wild grain; the plant yielding it.  

विकङ्कत 
m. the tree known as Flacourtia sapida; the Dhruva ladle is made out of its wood.  

वितस्ति 
f. a span between the thumb and the finger; a measure of the length of fifteen angulas. 

वितृण्णी 
f. a basket with holes.  

विधृती 
f. (du) two darbha-blades spread within the altar across so as to separate the Juhū ladle from the Upabhṛt-ladle.  

विप्नुष्
m. a drop (of milk, Soma etc.).  

विभीतक, -दक 
m. the tree Terminalia bellerica; its fruits were used for gambling; the wood of this tree was used as faggot in certain rituals. 

विमित 
n. a square shed.  

विशय 
m. the space between the Gārhapatya fire-place and the altar. 

विशाखादामन् 
n. the two-pronged cord tied around the neck of a cow.  

विशाखी 
f. a two-pronged pole.  

विषाण 
n. a horn (of black antelope).  

विष्टर 
m. a seat made of darbha-blades.  

विष्टुति 
f. the number of chants of each verse from a triad or a Pragātha.  

विहार 
m. the area covering the fire-places of the Gārhapatya, Āhavanīya and Anvähārypacana (i.e. Dakṣiņa fire) (and also the Sabhya and the Āvasathya).  

वीणागाथिन् 
m. one singing to the accompaniment of playing the lute.  

वृकलोमन् 
n. the hair of wolf (used in preparing the wine-surā).  

वृक्क 
m. Kidney of an animal; a portion of the oblation in an Animal-sacrifice.  

वृष्णि
m. a ram.  

वृष्णिवासस् 
n. a piece of cloth made of a ram's wool (used in the Mr̥tyusava sacrifice).   

वेणु 
m. a bamboo.  

वेणुयव 
m. bamboo-seed (as an oblation in the Āgrayaṇa sacrifice). 

वेतस 
m. a cane.  

वेद 
m. a brush of different patterns made of darbha-grass.  

वेदि
f. an altar prepared to the rear of the Āhavanīya fire-place in which oblations are placed and where the divinities of the sacrifice are supposed to have seated themselves.  

वेहत् 
f. a cow which has miscarried.  

वैतसकट 
m. a mat made of cane.  

व्याघ्रचर्मन्  
n. a skin of tiger.  

व्याघ्रलोमन् 
n. the hair of tiger (used in preparing wine - surā).  

व्याम 
m. extended arms; a measure equal to five Aratnis or 120 angulas. 

व्यायाम 
m. a measure equal to four Aratnis or 96 angulas.  

व्रीहि 
m. paddy, one of the principal oblation-materials.  

शंयुवाक 
m. a specific prose formula to be recited by the Hotr̥ subsequent to the Sūktavāka in an Iṣṭi and other sacrifices.  

शकट 
m. a bullock-cart. 

शकृत्पिण्ड
m. a ball of faeces (of a horse used for fumigating a Mahāvīra or a cauldron).  

शङ्कु 
m. a peg, a pin.  

शतमान  
n. (gold) weighing a hundred berries.  

शतरुद्रीय 
n. the chapter of formulas in praise of Rudra from the Yajurveda; employed towards the offering of goat's milk through a leaf of Arka tree over the north-western brick of the uppermost layer of the Citi. 

शतातृण्णा 
f. a basket with a hundred holes used for passing wine (surā) in the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice.  

शफौ 
m. (du) a pair of tongs.  

शमितृ 
m. one who immolates the animal, dissects it and boils its specific organs for offering in an Animal-sacrifice.  

शमीधान्य 
n. leguminous grains.  

शम्या 
f. the yoke-halter of a chariot or a cart; a measure normally equal to 36 angulas.  

शर 
m. the grass Sachcharum sara; crust of boiled rice.  

शराव 
m. an earthen pan, a measure of grains.  

शर्करा 
f. gravel, pebble. 

शलली 
f. a quill of porcupine. 

शलाका 
f. a stick.  

शल्क 
n. a chip of wood.  

शवाग्नि 
m. funeral fire. 

शस्त्र 
n. a group of verses (and formulas) to be recited by the Hotr̥, or the Maitrāvaruṇa, or the Brāhmaṇācchaṁsin or the Acchāvāka in connection with Soma-offering; an implement.  

शाखापवित्र 
f n. the strainer of darbha-blades set on a twig (of Butea frondosa). 

शामित्रशाला 
f. a shed to the north of the sacrificial place for keeping the fire for the use of the Śamitr̥.  

शामित्राग्नि 
m. the fire kept in the shed to be used by the person immolating the animal, dissecting it and boiling its organs.  

शार्दूलचर्मन् 
n. tiger's skin.  

शाला 
f. an oblong shed.  

शालामुखीय 
m. the Āhavanīya fire in the Prācinavamsa shed after a part of it is carried forth on the Uttaravedi of the Mahāvedi in a Soma-sacrifice and is designated as the Āhavanīya.  

शिक्य 
n. a sling (made of Muñja grass).  

शुक्र 
m. a specific draught of Soma offered in the morning and midday pressings.  

शुल्य 
n. a cord made of darbha-blades for tying or for measuring.  

शूर्प 
n. a winnowing basket.  

शूल 
m. a spike.  

शृत 
n. hot milk.  

शृतातङ्क्य 
n. curds obtained by curdling hot molk, mixed with Soma to form the Āditya draught to be offered in the third pressing of a Soma-sacrifice.  

श्यामाक 
m. a wild grain called Panicum frumentaceum; an oblation for the Śyāmākāgrayaṇa.  

श्येनचिति 
f. a pile of burnt bricks arranged in a form resembling an eagle. 

श्येनपत्र 
n. a feather of an eagle (used in the preparation of wine-surā).  

श्रिति 
f. a ladder (resting upon the sacrificial post and used by the sacrificer to ascend to the heaven in the Vājapeya sacrifice). 

श्रोणि 
f. a buttock; hinder comer (southern or northern) of the altar. 

षोडशिन् 
m. the Ṣoḍaśin sacrifice; the Soḍaśin draught of Soma.  

संस्राव 
m. remnant or drop of a liquid (mainly clarified butter) remaining in the ladle after the offering is made.  

सक्तु 
m. flour of parched rice or barley.  

संक्षालन 
n. wash-water.  

संगव 
m. the time next to the morning, when cattle flock together for going to the pasture.  

संग्रहीतृ
m. a charioteer or an accounts-officer.  

संचर 
m. route (for entering into or departing from the sacrificial place).  

सत 
m. an earthen pan.  

सदस् 
n. the shed forming the rear part of the Mahāvedi wherein the Hotṛ and Hotrakas, and the Udgätṛ and his assistants seat themselves during the procedure of Soma-offering.  

सनीहार 
m. a deputy sent by a Soma-sacrificer to procure gifts for performance of the Soma-sacrifice.  

संदंश 
m. pincers.  

सभ्य 
m. the fire set up in the hall.  

समवत्तधानी 
f. the wooden pan for depositing the cooked organs of an animal.  

समिध् 
f. a fire-stick collected from a sacrificial tree.  

संपात 
m. remnants of the liquid oblation in a ladle remaining after the offering.  

संप्रैष 
m. a combined call given to two or more persons.  

सम्भार
m. substance or material.  

संभेद 
m. the joint of two cuttings of an oblation. 

सम्राडासन्दी 
f. the wooden stool used for depositing Pravargya-implements.  

सर्पिर्धान
n. the earthen vessel for keeping melted clarified butter.  

सर्पिस्
n. melted clarified butter.  

सर्ववेदस 
n. entire wealth.  

सवन
n. pressing of Soma; one of the three sections of Soma-offering in a Soma-sacrifice.  

सवनीय पशु 
m. the animal to be offered on the Soma-pressing day. 

सवनीय पुरोडाश 
m. a group of five oblations-parched grains, flour of parched grains mixed with curds or honey, parched barley-grains, coagulated milk and a cake to be offered in each pressing in a Soma-sacrifice.  

सांनाय्य 
n. the oblation consisting of milk and curds.  

सामन् 
n. a song comprising a number of chants based on a triad or Pragatha or a single verse from the Sāmaveda chanted in parts by the Prastotr̥, the Udgātṛ and the Pratihart, or by the Prastotr̥ or the Udgatṛ alone in a Soma-sacrifice or at the setting up of fires.  

सामिधेनी 
f. verse recited by the Hotṛ while the Adhvaryų is putting firesticks on the Āhavanīya fire in an Iṣṭi or in any other sacrifice.  

सायंदोह 
m. the rite of milking the cows in the evening preceding the day of the New-moon sacrifice; the milk so milked.  

सालावृक 
m. a wolf having solitary habits.  

सिंहचर्मन् 
n. the skin of a lion.  

सिंहलोमन् 
n. the hair of a lion (used in preparing wine - surā in the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice).  

सिकता 
f. sand. 

सिध्रक 
m. a kind of tree; the pestle made out of its wood is used for killing a dog below the horse in the Aśvamedha sacrifice.  

सीता 
f. a furrow.  

सीर 
m. a plough.  

सीस 
n. lead, given as one of the things in exchange for the materials used in preparing wine (surā).  


सुगन्धितेजन 
n. fragrant grass. 

सुत्या 
f. the rite of offering Soma after pressing the Soma-plant and allied ritual; the day on which this rite takes place.  

सुपूर्वाह्ण 
m. early part of forenoon. 

सुब्रह्मण्य 
m. a priest belonging to the Udgātṛ's group, fourth and the last in status; chanting the Subrahmaṇya call for a number of times in a Soma-sacrifice.  

सुब्रह्मण्या 
f. a call given by the Subrahmaṇya priest to goddess Subrahmanyā and Indra for a number of times in a Soma-sacrifice.  

सुरा 
f. wine, an oblation in the Sautrāmaṇī and the Vājapeya sacrifices.


सुवर्ण (हिरण्य)  
n. Gold.  

सूक्तवाक 
m. the formula to be recited by the Hotṛ subsequent to Anūyājas in an Iṣṭi and other sacrifices.  

सूत 
m.a charioteer; one belonging to a particular subcaste.  

सूतवशा 
f. a cow (or a female goat) who has delivered only once.  

सूद 
m. dried earth from a pond.  

सूना 
f. a wooden plank (used for dissection in an Animal-sacrifice).  

सोम 
m. a plant belonging to the genius Ephedra used as the principal oblation in a Soma-sacrifice; Soma-juice mixed with water, milk, curds, gruel etc. to be offered as a draught to a divinity.  

सोमक्रयणी 
f. a cow to be given, among other things, in exchange for Soma-plant.  

स्तम्ब 
m. a cluster (of darbha-grass).  

स्तम्बयजुस् 
n. earth and pieces of a darbha-blade to be collected from the space for an altar and to be thrown away on the rubbish-heap in an Iṣṭi.  

स्तोत्र 
n. a song comprising one or more Sāmans each consisting of a number of chants based on a triad or a Pragātha from the Sāmaveda, each chant being shared by the Prastotr̥, Udgātṛ and Pratihartṛ.  

 स्तोत्रिय, स्तोत्रीय 
m. pertaining to a Stotra; a triad or Pragatha on which a Stotra is based and which marks the beginning of the Śastra recited by a Hotraka.  

स्तोभ 
m. a syllable or a word or sentence added to a chant of a Stotra.  

स्तोम m. a chant based on a verse; the number of such chants in a Stotra.  

स्तोमभाग  
m. the formula to be pronounced by the Brahman in connection with the permission to the Sāman-chanters to recite the specific stotra in a Soma- sacrifice. 

स्थण्डिल 
n. an earthen mound.  

स्थाली 
f. an earthen vessel used for various purposes, e.g. for keeping clarified butter or for cooking rice or for filling Soma-juice etc.  

स्थालीपाक 
m. rice cooked on the domestic fire, and offered on that fire on every full-mon day and new-moon day; the rite of offering that rice. 

स्थूरि 
m. a chariot to which only one horse is yoked.  

स्पन्द्या 
f. a cord, a string.  

स्फ्य 
m. a wooden sword having the length of one cubit. 

स्रक्ति 
f. an edge or a corner (of a sacrificial post).  

स्रुच् 
f. a ladle one cubit in length having a bowl, a beak and a handle made of the wood of a specific tree and used for making offerings in a sacrifice.  

स्रुव 
m. a wooden spoon with a bowl of the breadth of the phalanx of a finger made of the wood of acasia catechu, used for filling a liquid into the ladle.  

स्वधिति 
f. a knife with edges on both sides.  

स्वपराह्ण 
m. early part of the afternoon.  

स्वयमातृण्णा 
f. naturally perforated pebble or stone.  

स्वरु 
m. a chip of wood obtained while cutting a tree for a sacrificial post, and later fixed within the cord wound round the sacrificial post.  

हरितयव 
m. unripe barley.  

हविर्धान
n. the shed of a specific area forming part of the Mahāvedi for a Soma-sacrifice.  

हविर्धानशकट 
m. the cart (without bullocks) made to stand within the Havirdhāna shed-one towards the south loaded with Soma-plant, the other towards the north as the seat for the Pūtabhṛt and the Ādhavanīya jars.  

हारियोजन 
m. the Soma-juice taken from the Āgrayaṇa vessel into the Droṇakalaśa and mixed with parched grains.  

हिरण्यकशिपु 
m. a mattress decorated with gold.  

हिरण्यशल्क 
n. a piece of gold.  

हृदय 
n. heart (of the animal); the heart cooked on the Śāmitra fire as a portion of the oblation in an Animal-sacrifice.  

हृदयशूल 
m. the heart-spike used for pricking the heart when the organs are boiled with the heart kept over and above.  

होतृ 
m. one of the priests in a sacrifice who invokes and praises the divinity through the recitation of verses.  

होतृचमस 
m. the wooden goblet assigned to the Hotṛ priest.  


होत्रक 
m. a priest, subordinate to the Hour, who sits within the Sadas, and recites a Śastra or a yājyā pertaining to Soma-offering. The Hourakas are: the Maitrāvaruņa, the Brāhmaṇācchaṁsin, the Acchāvāka, the Neṣṭr̥, the Potr and the Āgnīdhra.  



BIBLIOGRAPHY 
SANSKRIT TEXTS 
Āpastamba Śrautasūtra edited by Richard Garbe, Vols. I-III, Calcutta 1882, 1885, 
1902 
Arseyakalpa edited by W. Caland, Leipzig 1908; edited by B.R. Sharma, together with 
Varadaraja's commentary, Hoshiarpur 1976 
Āśvalāyana Śrautasūtra together with Gargya Nārāyaṇa's commentary, Calcutta. 
1874; Pune 1917 
Atharvaveda with Sayanbhāṣya, edited by S.P. Pandit, Vols. I-V, Mumbai, 1895-98; 
second edition, Hoshiarpur 
Atharvaveda Parisistas edited by G.M. Bolling and J. von Negelein, Leizpig, 1909 Atharvaprayaścittāni, edited by J. von Negelein, New Haven, 1915 
Baudhāyana Dharmasutra edited by E. Hultzsch, 1884; revised edition 1992; edited by R. Samasastry, Mysore: Umeshchandra Pandya, Varanasi 1972 Baudhāyana Gṛhyaparibhāṣāsūtra, edited by L. Srinivasacharya, Baudhāyana 
Gṛhyasūtra, Mysore, 1920 
Baudhāyana Gṛhayśeṣasūtra edited by L. Srinivasacharya, Baudhāyana Gṛhvasūtra. 
Mysore, 1920 
Baudhāyana Gṛhyasūtra edited by L. Srinivasacharya, Mysore, 1920; 3rd edn. 1983 Baudhāyana Pitṛmedhasūtra Prašnas I-III, Mysore, 1920 
Baudhāyana Pravarapraśna edited by W. Caland, BaudhŠS III Calcutta, 1923 Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra vols. I-III, edited by W. Caland, Calcutta, 1904-1923, 
Reprint, New Delhi, 1982 
Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra Praśna I together with the bhäṣyas of Bhavasvāmin and 
Sāyaṇa, Bahalgadh, 1982 
Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra Praśna II together with the Commentary subodhini, 
Bahalgadh 1987 
Baudhāyana srautasutra Praśna I together with Sayaṇa-bhāṣya, Allahabad 
Baudhāyana Šulbasūtra together with Dvārakānāth Yajvan's commentary and Eng- 
lish translation by G. Thibaut, New Delhi, 1968 
Bhāradvāja Śrautasutra text and English translation, edited by C.G. Kashikar, Pune 
1964 
1840 
BAUDHĀYANAŠRAUTASŪTRA 
Drāhyāyaṇa Śrautasutra together with Dhanvin's commentary, edited by B.R. Sharma, 
Allahabad 1983; edited by Ramanatha Diksita Madras 1982 
Jaiminiya Śrautasutra edited by D. Gaastra Utrecht 1906 
Jaiminiya Śrautasūtra with the Vṛtti by Bhavatrāta edited by Premanidhi Sastri, New Delhi 1966; Agniṣṭomasutra with Bhavatrata's Vṛtti edited by Asko Parpola, Helsinki 1981 
Hautrika edited by C.G. Kashikar, Pune 1984 
Kāṇviya Satapatha Brāhmaṇa Kāṇḍas I-VII, edited by W. Caland, Lahore, 1926; 
reprint, Delhi, 1983; entire text edited by G.W. Pimplapure, Pune, 1994 
Kapişthala-katha Samhità edited by Raghu Vira, Lahore 1932 
Kaṭha Āraṇyaka edited with German translation by Michael Witzel, Nepal Research 
Publications No. 2, Kathmandu, 1979 
Kāṭhaka Gṛhyasūtra edited by W. Caland, Lahore, 1922 
Kāṭhaka Samhitā edited by L.V. Schröder, Leipzig, 1900-10 
Kathaka Samkalana edited by Suryakanta, Lahore, 1943; reprint, Delhi, 1983 Kātyāyana Śrauṭasutra with the commentaries by Karka and Devayājnika edited by 
A. Weber, Berlin, 1859; with Karka's bhāṣya Varanasi, 1903-06; with the commentary by Vidyadhara Gauda, Varanasi, 1930 
Kausikapaddhati by Keśava, edited by Acharya V.P. Limaye et al, Pune 1982 Kausikasūtra edited by M. Bloomfield JAOS Vol. XIV, 1889 
Kausikasūtra-dārilabhāṣya, Pune 1972 
Latyāyana Śrautasutra with Agnisvamin's bhāṣya edited by Ananda Chandra 
Vedantavagisa, Calcutta, 1872; reprint, Delhi, 1982 
Laugākṣi Gṛhyasutra edited by Madhusudana Kaul, Srinagar, 1928, 1934 Maitrāyaṇī Saṁhitä edited by L. von Schröder, Leipzig, 1881; edited by S.D. 
Satavalekar, Aundh, 1942 
Mänava Śrautasutra Parts I-V, edited by F. Knauer, St. Petersbourg, 1900-03; Part IV, by J.M. von Gelder, Leiden, 1921; entire textedited with English translation by J.M. van Gelder, Delhi 1961; reprint, Delhi, 1985 
Nidānasūtra edited by K.N. Bhatnagar, Delhi, 1971 
Pitṛmedhasūtrāṇi edited by W. Caland, Leipzig, 1896 
Rgveda Samhitä with Sāyaṇa's Bhāṣya, Vols. I-V, Pune 1933-51 
Śānkhāyana Śrautasutra with the bhāṣya by Varadattasuta Anartiya, edited by A. 
Hillebrandt; Calcutta, 1888 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1841 
Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa with Sāyaṇa's bhāṣya, Vols. I-IV edited by Shridharasastri Vare, 
Mumbai 1940 
Satyaṣāḍha Kalpasutra with commentaries, Pune, 1907-32 
Taittiriya Aranyaka with Sāyaṇa's bhāṣya, Parts I-II, Pune, 1897-98; reprint 1981 Taittiriya Brāhmaṇawith Sāyaṇa's bhāṣya, Parts I-III, Pune, 1898; reprint, 1979; with 
Bhatta Bhaskara's bhāṣya, Mysore 1908-13 
Taittiriya Samhita with Sāyaṇa's bhäsya, Parts 1-9, Pune 1900-08; with Bhauta 
Bhaskara's bhāṣya, Mysore, 1894-98 
Tāṇḍya Mahābrāhmaṇawith Sāyaṇa's bhāṣya, edited by Chinnaswami Sastri, Varanasi Vādhūla Śrautasutra edited by B.B. Chaube, Hoshiarpur, 1993 
Vādhūla Śrautasūtra Parts I and II, edited by Yasuke Ikari, Kyoto, 1995, 1996 
Vaikhānasa Śrautasutra edited by W. Caland, Calcutta, 1941 
Vaitāna Śrautasūtra edited by R. Garbe, 1872; German translation by R.Garbe. London, 1878; edited by W. Caland, Amsterdam, 1910; edited with com- mentary ākṣepānuvidhi, Hoshiarpur, 1967 
Vājasaneya Samhitā (Mādhyamdina) with the Commentary by Uvata and Mahidhara, 
Mumbai, 1912 
Vārāha Śrautasūtra edited by W. Caland and Raghu Vira, Lahore 1933; revised 
edition by C.G. Kashikar, Pune 1988 
GENERAL LITERATURE 
BOOKS 
Caland, W. Altindischer Ahnenkult, Leiden, 1893 
-Das Śrautasūtra des Āpastamba, Vol. I, Göttingen and Leipzig, 1921. Vol. II, Amsterdam 1924; Vol. III, Amsterdam, 1928 
-Pañcaviṁśa Brāhmaṇa English translation, Calcutta, 1981 
-Altindische Todten und Bestattungsgebräusche, Amsterdam, 1896 
-Über das Vādhūla Śrautasütra, Acta Orientalia, Vol. I (1923), II (1924), IV (1926), VI (1928), Lugduni Batavorum 
W. Caland & V. Henry L'Agniṣṭoma, Vols. I-II, Paris, 1906-07 
W. Caland & Lokesh Chandra Śānkhāyana Śrautasūtra English translation, Nagpur, 
1953 
1842 
BAUDHAYANAŚRAUTASŪTRA 
Dumont. P-E. Taittiriya Brāhmaṇa text and translation, Proceedings of the American 
Phiosophical Society, Philadelphia, Nos. 101-113, 1957-69 
Eggeling J. Satapatha Brāhmaṇa (Mädhymidina) English translation, Oxford 1892- 
1900; reprint, Delhi, 1963-66 
Gonda J. History of Indian Literature, Vol. I, Fasc. 1 (Samhitas and Brāhmaṇas) 
Wiesbaden, 1975; Fasc. 2 (Ritual Sūtras) Wiesbaden, 1977 
Kane, P. V. History of Dharmaśāstra, Pune, Vols. I-V 
Kashikar, C. G. A Survey of the Śrautasutras, Journal of University of Bombay, Sept. 1966, 
Vol. XXXV (New series), Part 2, Arts Number (No. 4) 1968 
-Identification of Soma, Pune 1990' 
-Šrauta dharmācī svarūpacikitsā (Marathi) Pune 1972 
Keith, A.B. Veda of the Black Yajus translated HOSVols 18, 19, 1914, reprint Delhi 
1967 
Kulkarni, R.P. Char sulbasutren (Marathi) Mumbai, 1978 
Raabe, C.H. Baudhāyana Pitṛmedhasūtra, Praśnas I-II, Leyden, 1911 
Renou, L. Les écoles védiques et la formation du Veda, Paris, 1947 
Śrautakosa Sanskrit Section, C.G. Kashikar, Vol. I, Pune, 1958, Vol. II, Part 1 Pune, 1970; part 2, Pune 1994; English section, R.N. Dandekar, Pune 1958, 1962, 1973, 1980, 1995 
ARTICLES 
Bhatta Subray Ganesh "Baudhayanasūtron me sadācāranirūpaṇa" Kalyan 52 (1), 
Gorakhpur, 1978 
Caland, W. Über das rituelle Sūtra des Baudhāyana, Abhandl. für die Kunde des 
Morgenländes, Band XII, No. 1, Leipzig, 1903 
-The sacrificial stakes of Īsāpur, Acta Orientalia III.92 
-Zur Exegese und Kritik der rituellen Sutras, ZDMG 15 LII.430 
-Zum Baudhāyana Pitṛmedhasūtra ZDMG 29 LIII. 698 
-Zum Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra ZDMG 37 LV.266 
Gorakh Prasad on the age of the Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra, JRAS 1936 
Iyer, Duraiswami, fivānandanam Intro. Madras 
Kashikar, C.G. "The text-problem of the Baudhāyana Adhanasütra", Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Vol. XXIX, parts I-IV, Pune 1948, pp. 107-117 
Kashikar, C.G. Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra - A fresh study, Journal of the Ganganath Jha Research Institute, Vol. XV, Parts 3-4, pp. 155-159, Allahabad, 1958 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1843 
-A criticial study of the ritualistic Sūtras: Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra : Prašnas I-V, XX, XXIII-XXIX, P.K. Gode Commemoration Volume, Pune, 1960 pp. 203- 210 
-Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa in relation to the Śrautasūtras, Pratidānam, F.B.J. Kuiper Felicitation Volume, The Hegue-Paris 1968, pp. 398-408 
-Pāpmano vinidhayaḥ : Some unknown and less known words, Indian Anti- quary (III series) III (1-4) Bombay 1969 
-The text of pāpmano vinidhayaḥ with commentaries, Journal of the U.P. Historical Society, Lucknow, 1970, pp. 39-60. 
-Bodhāyanīyabrahmakarmasamuccaya, Introduction (Sanskrit) pp. 1-14 
Gokarna 1971 
-A fresh study of Apastamba Śrautasūtra, XXIV, 11-14, Indo-Iranian Journal XIII (2), The Hague 1971 
-Apropos of the Pravargya", CASS Studies I, Pune, 1973 
-The obscure in the Vedic sacrificial rituals", Samskrta vimarśa, Vol. III (1 & 2), New Delhi, 1975; Altorientalische Vorschungen VI, Berlin, 1979 
The Aväntaradīkṣā of the Pravargya, Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute, Vol. XXXV (3-4), Pune 1976 
-The Tattiriya text- tradition : a study of verse- repetitions Proceedings of All India Oriental Conference XXVII. Dharvar 1976. 
-Baudhāyana Śyenaciti: A study in the piling up of bricks, Proceedings of the All- India Oriental Conference, XXIX, Pune, 1978 
-On the Adhimanthana śakala”, Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute, Vol. XXXVIII (1-4) Pune 1978-79 
-Agnicayana - the piling up of Svayamatṛṇṇa, Annals of the Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, Vol. LX, Pune 1979 
-Agnicayana : Extension of Vedic Aryan rituals", Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Vol. LX, Pune, 1979 
-The idea of ultimate reality and meaning according to the Kalpasūtras”, ultimate reality and meaning, Toronto, 1979 
-Antecedents of the Vedic Soma", Hamdard, Vol. XXIII (1-2) Karachi, 1980 -The concept of Mahāvīra in the Pravargya", Vaidika Samsodhana Maṇḍala 
Golden Jubilee Volume, Pune 1981 
Kashikar, C.G. On the verse äśrāvitam atyāśrāvitam" Bulletin of the Deccan College 
Research Institute, Vol. XL, Pune, 1981 
1844 
BAUDHAYANAŚRAUTASŪTRA 
-Meaning of gatasri", Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Vol. LXVII, Pune 1986 
-Soma-drink vis-a-vis the ruling class", Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute, Vol. LXVII, Pune 1986 
-A structural analysis of Agniṣṭoma”, Sacrifice in India : concept and evolution, Aligarh, 1987 
-on the Katha Aranyaka, Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 
Vol. LXVIII (R.G. Bhandarkar 150th Anniversary Volume) Pune, 1989 Mehendale, M.A. "madhye lagnam (BaudhŚS, IX.3)” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute, Vol. XLVIII-XLIX, Pune, 1968 
Nabhari, S.K. Baudhāyanaśrautasūtre pinḍapitryajñaprakaraṇam (BaudhŚS XXIV, 32) 
Summaries of Papers, AIOC, XXXIII, Calcutta, 1986 
Raghavan, V. Sahendravilasa, Intro. Thanjavur 
Raghu Vira, Kāṭhaka citations, Journal of Vedic studies, Vols. I-II, Lahore, 1933-34 Senagupta, P.C. "Time indications in the Baudhāyana Śrautasutra", Journal of Asiatic 
Society of Bengal (L) 7, 1941 
Vijaypal Baudhāyana Śrautasūtra I with Bhavasvāmin's bhäşya, Vedic texts: a revision, 
pp. 46-65, Delhi, 1990 
Witzel, Michael "Eine fünfte Mitteilung über das Vādhūlasūtra", Studien zur Indologie 
und Iranistik, Reinbek (Germany) 1976 
*** 
CHINTAMANI GANESH KASHIRAR. M.A.. D.Litt.. is a well-known authority on the Vedic literature. religion and culture whose contributions are internationally acknowledged. A score of books critical editions, translations and general studies written in Sanskrit, English and Marathi languages are to his credit. A hundred research papers written by him are published in oriental journals of international repute. He attended several sessions of All India Oriental Conference as also International Sanskrit Conference and presented research papers which have been widely appreciated. He is the Chairman of the Regulating Council of the Bhandarka Oriental Research Institute, Pune. He was closely associated for many years with the Vaidika Samsodhana Mandala, Pune, Centre for Advanced Study in Sanskrit, University of Pune and the Project of encyclopaedic Dictionary of Sanskrit historical Principles. Deccan College Post-Graduate and Research Institute. Pune."