+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Prajāpati's eye swelled; it fell out: thence the horse was produced; and inasmuch as it swelled (aśvayat), that is the origin and nature of the horse (aśva). By means of the Aśvamedha the gods restored it to its place; and verily he who performs the Aśvamedha makes Prajāpati complete, and he (himself) becomes complete; and this, indeed, is the atonement for everything, the remedy for everything. Thereby the gods redeem all sin, yea, even the slaying of a Brahman [^fn_835] they thereby redeem; and he who performs the Aśvamedha redeems all sin, he redeems the slaying of a Brahman.

[^fn_835]: 328:1 See XIII, 3, 5, 3 seq.

## 02
2. It was the left eye of Prajāpati that swelled: hence they cut off the (meat) portions from the left.

side of the horse, and from the right side of other victims.

## 03
3. There is a rattan mat, for the horse was produced from the womb of the waters, and the rattan springs from the water: he thus brings it in connection with its own (maternal) womb.

## 04
4. The Catushṭoma [^fn_836] is the form of chanting (on

[^fn_836]: 329:1 The term Katushṭoma originally apparently means a sacrificial performance, or succession of chants, in which four different Stomas, or hymn-forms, are used. Hence, in Tāṇḍya-Br. VI, 3, 16, the name is applied to the ordinary Agnishṭoma, for its twelve Stotras, or chants, require the first four normal Stomas (Trivr̥t, Pañcadaśa, Saptadaśa, Ekaviṁśa). The term has, however, assumed the special meaning of a hymnic performance, the different Stomas of which (begin with the four-versed one, and) successively increase by four verses (cf. XIII, 5, 1, 1). In this sense, two different forms of Catushṭoma are in use, one being applicable to an Agnishṭoma, the other to a Shoḍaśin, sacrifice. Whilst this latter form requires only four different Stomas (of 4, 8, 12, 16 verses resp.) and thus combines the original meaning of 'catushṭoma' with its special meaning, the Agnishṭoma form, used on the first of the three days of the Aśvamedha, requires six Stomas, ascending from the four-versed up to the twenty-four-versed one. In regard to this latter occasion, Sāyaṇa on Tāṇḍya-Br. XXI, 4, 1, curiously enough, seems to take 'katushṭoma' in its original senses, since he speaks of this first day of the Aśvamedha as an Agnishṭoma with four Stomas, beginning with Trivr̥t; whilst on ib. XIX, 5, 1 seq. he gives the correct explanation. As to the distribution of the six Stomas over the chants of the first day, see XIII, 5, 1, 1. The catushṭoma has, however, another peculiarity, which, in Lāṭy. S. VI, 8, 1 (or at least by the commentator Agnisvāmin thereon), is taken as that which has given its name to this form of chanting, viz. that each stotra performed in it is chanted in four, instead of the ordinary three, paryāyas or turns of verses (see part ii, p. 350 note). The Bahishpavamāna-stotra is to be performed on three anushṭubh verses (consisting each of four octosyllabic pādas) which, however, by taking each time three pādas to make up a verse, are transformed into four verses, constituting at the same time the four paryāyas of the Stotra. As regards the exact  text to be used there seems to be some doubt, Sāmav. S. II, 366-8 (pavasva vājasātaye) being mentioned by Sāyaṇa on Tāṇḍya-Br. XXI, 4, 5; whilst on XIX, 5, 2 he gives S. V. II, 168-70 (ayam pūshā rayir bhagaḥ) as the text to be used--but apparently only when the performance is that of an ekāha (one day's sacrifice) proper, instead of one of the days of an āhīna sacrifice, as is the case in the three days’ Aśvamedha. As regards the Ājya-stotras to be chanted on the eight-versed Stoma, the text of each of them consists of three gāyatrī-verses: these are to be chanted in four turns (paryāya) of two verses each, viz. either 1 and 2, 2 and 3, 1 and 2, 2 and 3;--or 1 and 1, 1 and 2, 2 and 2, 3 and 3;--(or 1 and 1, 1 and 1, 2 and 2, 3 and 3;--or 1 and 1, 2 and 2, 2 and 2, 3 and 3). By similar manipulations the subsequent Stomas are formed.

the first day); for a bee tore out [^fn_837] (a piece of) the horse's thigh, and by means of the Katushṭoma form of chanting the gods restored it: thus when there is the Katushṭoma mode of chanting, it is for the completeness of the horse. The last day is an Atirātra with all the Stomas [^fn_838]--with a view to his obtaining and securing everything, for an Atirātra with all the Stomas is everything, and the Aśvamedha is everything.

[^fn_837]: 330:1 Or, wounded, as Sāyaṇa takes 'ā br̥hat,' on Tāṇḍya-Br. XXI, 4, 4 (vraṇaṁ cakāra).

[^fn_838]: 330:2 The Atirātra sarvastoma is arranged in such a way that the six principal Stomas are used successively first in the ascending, and then again in the descending, or reversed, order as is explained in XIII, 5, 3, 10.

