+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Now this (Sacrificer), having- conquered by means of the supreme Stoma--the Katushṭoma, the Kr̥ta among dice [^egg_839],--on the next day establishes

[^egg_839]: 330:3 For this and the other names of the dice, see part iii, p. 106, note 1.

himself on the Ekaviṁśa [^egg_840], as a firm foundation: from the Ekaviṁśa, as a firm foundation, he subsequently ascends to the next day, the seasons; for the Pr̥shṭḥa (-stotras) are the seasons, and the seasons are the year: it is in the seasons, in the year, he establishes himself.

[^egg_840]: 331:1 Though applying in the first place to the second day of the Aśvamedha, as an Ukthya sacrifice which is at the same time an Ekaviṁśa day, i.e. one the stotras of which are all chanted in the twenty-one-versed hymn-form, Ekaviṁśa, the twenty-first or twenty-one-fold, as is clear from XIII, 3, 3, 3, here also refers to the sun, of which it is a common epithet (cf. part iii, p. 265, note 2, also XIII, 4, 4, 11). This solar name seems to be derived from the fact that the sun is also identified with the central day of the year, the Vishuvant day, which is considered the central day of a twenty-one days’ sacrificial performance--having one pr̥shṭḥya-shaḍaha, an Abhijit (or Viśvajit day resp.) and three svarasāman days before and after it;--see p. 139, note 1; and A. Hillebrandt, Die Sonnwendfeste in Alt-Indien, p. 6 seqq.

## 02
2. The Śakvarī [^egg_841] (verses) are the Pr̥shṭḥa (-stotra of the second day): there is a different metre for each (verse), for different kinds of animals, both domestic and wild ones, are immolated here on each (day). As to the Śakvarī (verses) being the Pr̥shṭḥa, it is for the completeness of the horse (sacrifice) [^egg_842]; and different kinds of animals are immolated on different (days), because different stomas are performed on the different (days of the Aśvamedha).

[^egg_841]: 331:2 That is to say, the so-called Mahānāmnī verses (Sām. V. ed. Bibl. Ind. II, p. 371), chanted on the śākvara-sāman (see part iii, of this transl., introd. p. xx, note 2), are to be used for the Hotr̥'s Pr̥shṭḥa-stotra. For this purpose the Rathantara-sāman is ordinarily used in the Agnishṭoma, and the Br̥hat-sāman in the Ukthya, form of sacrifice.

[^egg_842]: 331:3 The commentator takes this as an allusion to the 'potent' (śakvara = śakta) nature of the verses.

## 03
3. As to this they say, 'These--to wit, goats and sheep and the wild (beasts)--are not all animals [^egg_843]; but those--to wit, the bovine (victims)--are indeed all animals.' On the last day he immolates bovine (victims), for they--to wit, bovine (victims)--are all animals: he thus immolates all animals. They are sacred to the All-gods [^egg_844], for the completeness of the horse, for the horse is sacred to the All-gods. They are many-formed (or, many-coloured), whence animals are many-formed; and they are of distinct forms (or colours), whence animals are of distinct forms.

[^egg_843]: 332:1 That is to say, they do not fitly represent all kinds of animals, as the highest kind of animals, the bovine cattle, may be said to do. The argument as to the 'sarve paśavaḥ' is, of course, suggested by the 'aśvasya sarvatvāya' of the preceding paragraph; and to bring out the parallelism, one might translate,--these . . . . are not complete animals.

[^egg_844]: 332:2 See XIII, 5, 3, 11.

