+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Strengthful: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes strong.
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Plenteous: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes plentiful.
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Obtainment: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes obtained.
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Distinction: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes distinct [^egg_880].

[^egg_880]: 344:1 Svakarmasu bhāgena sthāpitam (? confined respectively to its own functions), comm.
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Severance: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes severed [^egg_881].

[^egg_881]: 344:2 Harisvāmin supplies 'akāryebhyaḥ'--is kept away from what it is forbidden to do, or from what is not one's business.
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Food-abounding: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes abounding in food.
</details>

##  07
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

7. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Sapful:

wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes rich in sap (or drink).
</details>

##  08
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

8. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Abounding in holiness: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, the Brāhmaṇa is born as one rich in holiness.
</details>

##  09
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

9. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Excelling in hitting: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, the Rājanya is born as one excelling in hitting (the mark).
</details>

##  10
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

10. Verily, this is the sacrifice called the Long (wide) one: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, a wide tract of forest-land will be provided [^egg_882].

[^egg_882]: 345:1 That is, as would seem, either as a protection from neighbouring countries, or as room for spreading, and as pasture-land. Cf., however, XIII, 2-4, 2, 4, where, as in Ait. Br. III, 44; VI, 23, such a belt of jungle is referred to as a source of danger to the inhabitants of a country.
</details>

##  11
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

11. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Fitness: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes fit and proper.
</details>

##  12
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

12. Verily, this is the sacrifice called Support (foundation): wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes supported (firmly established).
</details>