+++
title = "01"

+++
The opening pāda of this hymn shows the power of the ritual hic et nunc: the 2nd word, asmai, is unaccented, which indicates that the referent is something already in the discourse. This “something” is of course soma/Soma, both present on the ritual ground and the acknowledged dedicand of the hymn. There is no need for a prior mention. See also IX.11.1a and with asya IX.29.1a and IX.30.1a.

As noted in the publ. intro. (and see Ge’s n. 1), this vs. surely concerns the heavenly soma, whose real (satyā́m) milk mixture is produced for him in distant heaven. I do not think this necessarily requires the cows of pāda a to be the celestial rivers, as Lü predictably does (250); it may involve the interplay between earthly cows and heavenly milk.

The making of Soma’s garments was something of a preoccupation of the previous hymn, IX.69, esp. vss. 4-5, using some of the same phraseology, though the hymns are attributed to different poets from different lineages. Note esp. IX.69.5c divás pṛṣṭhám … nirṇíje kṛta “he has made the back of heaven for his raiment” and our 1c catvā́ri anyā́bhúvanāni nirṇíje, cā́rūṇi cakre “he made the four other dear worlds for his raiment” (in my tr.), both with ACC nirṇíje √kṛ. Both Ge and Lü (438, 566) take bhúvanāni here as “beings” (Wesen), while Re attenuates it to “essences,” but given the cosmic imagery of IX.69.5, I think that it more likely refers to Soma’s clothing himself in “worlds.” Furthermore, I am not at all sure that the substances that Ge (n. 1c, partially flg. Sāy.) considers the referent of bhúvanāni, namely (various) water(s) and milk, would be called bhúvana- in Vedic. Although German Wesen can cover ‘nature, essence’ in addition to ‘being’, I doubt that bhúvana- has the same semantic range. It does give me pause, however, that in the next vs. (2c) Soma wraps himself in the waters.

There is another problem in this little phrase - one of my own making. By my rules (“Vedic anyá- 'another, the other': Syntactic disambiguation,” in Sound Law and Analogy [Fs. Beekes], ed. A. Lubotsky, 1997: 111-18), 2nd position anyá-, the position anyā́takes here, should be definite. I have so translated it (“the four other … worlds”), though I cannot identify which four other worlds these would be. Neither five (1+4) or four is a standard number for cosmic divisions in the RV. The standard tr. take it as indefinite (e.g., Ge “vier andere schöne Wesen”), and I admit that an indefinite reading is less problematic (though scarcely unproblematic). Perhaps the presence of a numeral in first position may displace anyá- to the right, or perhaps it even performs a quasi-definitizing function. The quantifier víśva- always occurs with non-initial anyá-, though usually pāda-final (1997: 112, 114). In any case I would now favor an alternative tr. “He made four other dear worlds to be his raiment,” though in the absence of an understanding of what the “four” are—no good solutions have so far been suggested—a definite interpr. remains a possibility.

Though Ge renders ṛtaíḥ as “nach den Regeln,” Lü (438, 566) is surely right that ṛtá- here refers to hymns (Kultlieder), which are in some sense true speech. Re points out the presence of both satyá- (b) and ṛtá- (d) in the vs. ### 02
The phrase amṛ́tasya cā́ruṇaḥ recurs in the same position in vs. 4 and must have the same referent. (See also IX.108.4, 110.4.) What that referent is is disputed.

Unlikely is Lü’s interpr. (237), fld. by Re, that it refers to a celestial seat: Soma separates Heaven and Earth in order to make a place for himself, from which he can create the heavenly streams. Ge tr. “Göttertrank,” and (n. 2a) equates this with the heavenly Soma. In this I think he is correct, with amṛ́ta- here the nominalized neut.

‘(drink) of immortality’, hence the neut. form of the adj. cā́ruṇaḥ. (On supposed masc. cā́ruṇaḥ in VIII.5.14, see comm. ad loc.). The subject who seeks the share of the heavenly Soma is of course earthly Soma. He has the power to separate H+E because of his kā́vya- ‘poetic skill’; recall that earthly Soma was born as a kaví- in IX.68.5a, and it may be that what earthly Soma has going for him that heavenly Soma does not is his way with words and kinship with the human poet.

The lexeme used to express the separation, lit. the “loosening,” of Heaven and Earth is ví √śrath. The same root is used in IX.68 and IX.69 to characterize Soma’s sluffing off of his stems and twigs on his journey across the filter (IX.68.2b śratháyan, IX.69.3b śrathnīte). Although the action here is very different from that in those two passages, it is worth noting that the same root, a not particularly common one, is used.

The instr. maṃhánā is a bit difficult to fit into context. The stem ordinarily means ‘liberality, generosity’. Ge (Lü) tr. “bereitwillig,” following Gr’s gloss, Re “avec majesté.” If we stick with the base meaning ‘liberality’, I think it’s possible to extend it to ‘lavishly’ - as in “sprinkle liberally with salt,” etc. Here it would refer to the generous amount of Soma’s covering.

In d yádī must surely be decoupled into yád ī, as seems to be tacitly recognized by all the standard tr. “If” would not work in context.

I do not really understand the last pāda, in part because it is unclear who the subj. of vidúḥ is. Ge (n. 2d) tentatively suggests either the waters or the gods, Sāy. (fld. by Lü) the priests; Re’s tr. implies the waters, but he alternatively suggests priests in his n. Since no priests and no gods have been mentioned so far, and the waters are found in the main cl. to which this subordinate cl. is attached, the waters seem the most likely candidate. But what is the point? Does Soma get to appropriate the waters as his garment when they come near because they know he’s there (because of his fame) and recognize his seat? And which Soma are we talking about

- earthly (which I weakly favor, because the waters are likely to be the ritual waters)
or heavenly? The problem is compounded by the verb: the pf. véda is generally stative (‘know’), but my tr. (and those of others) implicitly assumes a dynamic change of state, ‘recognize’ vel sim.; see Ge’s “in Erfahrung bringen,” Re’s “elles eurent (re)connu (son) siège.” A more stative interpr. would be possible if yád is rendered ‘since’, not ‘when’. I confess to puzzlement.

