+++
title = "02"

+++
The accent of the two adjacent verbs pṛcyáte sicyáte suggests that the first clause is implicitly subordinate. The two subjects of vs. 1, the thought (matí-) and soma, are both found here (soma as ‘honey’ [mádhu]), but each as subj. of one of the verbs, rather than, as in vs. 1, as simultaneous subjects of verbs without overt subjects. Most tr. take úpa … pṛcyáte as ‘is fertilized, impregnated’ vel sim; see the full treatment in Kulikov 152 and n. 372. Because the actions of the two verbs in the pāda are presented as complementary, I prefer the more physically explicit ‘is engorged’: as the thought is filling up and swelling with eloquence, as if with liquid, the liquid soma is being disgorged, poured out.

With the Pp as well as most tr. (see inter alia Ge’s n. 2b), I take mandrā́janī as a karmadhāraya, mandra-ájanī-, rather than the equally possible bahuvrīhi mandráajanī. But its sense, as a metaphorical reference to the tongue, is best illuminated by the bahuvrīhi (obviously based on a karmadh) mandrá-jihva- ‘having a gladdening tongue’.

The stem saṃtaní- is found 3x in the RV (here, V.73.7, IX.97.14), always with regard to loud noise. It seems generally to be assumed that it’s derived from √tan ‘stretch’ (though Gr [s.v.] ascribes it to his 2 tan ‘thunder’ not 1 tan ‘stretch’, that seems to be a mistake: see his comment under 1tan + sám) - hence tr. like Re’s “concert.” It is true that the ppl. saṃtata- to √tan ‘stretch’ is a later (ŚS) tech. term describing “stretched and continuous recitation” (see Re’s Vocabulaire, Sen’s Dictionary of the Vedic Rituals, both s.v.), hence applied to sound, and ‘a stretching together’ for saṃtaní- could perhaps refer to strings sounded in unison. But a more likely root is ready to hand: √tan ‘thunder’, the s-less form of √stan ‘id.’, which can be used metaphorically of the sound of ritual speech, etc. (e.g., VI.38.2). I therefore render saṃtaní- as ‘thunder, thundering’ in all three occurrences. The preverb sam probably contributes its frequent intensifying sense ‘entirely’.

The sense of the simile praghnatā́m iva is not entirely clear. prá √han occurs only three times in the RV: here; in the enigmatic hymn, X.27.1, where, however, it has the fairly clear violent meaning ‘smite, smite off’, as it does in a number of passages in the AV; and in the negated root noun cmpd áprahan- (VI.44.4) also meaning ‘not smiting’. But here it must refer to the noise (“thundering,” saṃtaníḥ) produced by the action of prá √han, not the associated violence (pace Scar 689, who places it in the ‘zuschlagend, losschlagend, kämpfend’ realm). Perhaps prá √han here refers to the beating of drums, or perhaps it is an early reference to the practice of hunting with “beaters” driving the game in the direction of the shooters. On the whole, the former is more likely; we know essentially nothing about hunting practices in ancient India, and furthermore it’s not clear to me that the beaters themselves would make much noise, though the flushed game might, in combination with any dogs the beaters had with them.

