+++
title = "04"

+++
In the first pāda we are firmly in the realm of earthly ritual soma: the grooming by ten is a clear reference (clear to those familiar with soma rhetoric) to the fingers of the presser at their task.

The question is what is happening in pāda b, and determining this depends in part on the analysis of pramé. This is almost universally taken as a datival infinitive or quasi-infinitive to prá √mā ‘measure forth’. Cf., e.g., Ge “… (fliesst er), um unter den mittleren Müttern als Richtschnur zu dienen” and see, in addition to Old and Re, Lü (242-43), Scar (377-78), Keydana (Inf. 201). There are several problems with the dominant analysis: 1) the lexeme prá √mā ‘measure forth’ is not otherwise found in the RV, except in the late X.130.3, 7, where it has been generated to pratimā́-; 2) it is not at all clear what the pāda is supposed to mean or refer to. The standard view is that “the middle mothers” are the rains (e.g., Ge, Re; middle because they are in the midspace), but this doesn’t actually help with the sense - nor does Lü’s interpr. as (guess what!) die Himmelsflüsse. In fact plural “mothers” in IX, and mostly elsewhere, generally refers either to cows or to waters. None of those who favor ‘rains’ provides evidence for mothers=rains in the RV, and rain would be out of place in this context. Nor do I see what the “measuring” would consist of.

I suggest instead that pramé belongs to √mā ‘bellow’ (a possibility considered, but not favored, by Scar). Although prá does not appear with this root in the RV, it is attested with other verbs of roaring; cf. nearby IX.77.1 eṣá prá kóśe … acikradat “This one has cried out in the bucket.” Soma’s propensity for noisemaking is often highlighted, indeed in this very hymn; see in the next few vss. 6b nā́nadat ‘roaring again and again’, 7a ruváti ‘bellows’ (and by implication 5c śúṣmeṇa ‘with his blustering’). Under this analysis of pramé the pāda can make sense in the ritual context established by pāda a: the prá opening b invites a verb of motion to be supplied (“[goes] forth”), depicting the journey of Soma after his pressing, which was treated in pāda a. He bellows on this journey, as he passes first among the waters and then the cows [=milk]. The “midmost mothers” are, in my view, the waters with which he mixes before reaching the milk - “midmost” because of their position between filter and milk.

As for sácā, as disc. ad IV.31.5 sácā is generally a pleonastic marker of a loc. absol. Here though I do not interpr. madhyamā́su mātṛ́ṣu as an absol. construction, I would still consider sácā essentially functionless, just pleonastically accompanying the loc. phrase. If we want to assign lexical value to it, however, it could express Soma’s bellowing in company with the mothers: waters also frequently make noise.

In c the earthly soma is still at issue - here protecting the commandments (vratā́ni pānáḥ) of the heavenly Soma, once again designated amṛ́tasya cā́ruṇah as in 2a; see comm. ad loc. A similar relationship between the earthly soma and the commandments of the heavenly Soma is found in the previous hymn, IX.69.1d.

