+++
title = "12"

+++
This vs. consisting entirely of nominals is surprisingly hard to interpret, primarily because of the unclear grammatical identity of anarváṇaḥ and the lack of parallelism between the animates of ab and the neut. aneháḥ of c.

To deal with the first problem first, beside the -n-stem anarván- we must reckon with a thematized form anarváṇa- (so Gr, Lub), the latter of which is attested twice as apparent nom. sg. masculine anarváṇaḥ (V.51.11 [or pl?] and this passage) and once as apparent acc. sg. masculine anarváṇam (X.92.14). Unfortunately all three forms immediately follow feminine singulars (áditiḥ, arámatiḥ, áditim respectively). Despite this clear pattern, I was reluctant to interpr. the apparent masc.

forms as fem., esp. in the case of the nominative forms, and therefore contrived ad hoc fixes for those passages. Here the fix is not too difficult: the immediately following word (beginning the next pāda) is masc. víśvaḥ. I take this as referring to another entity who should come here, with anarváṇaḥ modifying it, rather than arámatiḥ. The referent is in fact open-ended: “every” or “any” one with the mind of a god. Note the evocation of the All Gods through the phrase víśvo devásya, though the words are in different cases.

Although this will (barely) work, on reexamining the evidence I am not at all sure that it is worth denying the apparent pattern of feminine reference with this stem, and I might substitute (with Ge) “Aramati, the unassailing one,” though in this passage that leaves masc. víśvaḥ orphaned. Both Old (ad V.51.11; see his careful disc.

there) and Re in their different ways take anarváṇaḥ here as a nom. pl., but the nom. pl. to the athem. stem is anarvā́ṇaḥ, and in this passage the immediately following sg.

víśvaḥ makes further trouble. It is worth noting that the bahuvrīhi anarván- and its derivatives have a troubled relationship with gender in general; see comm. ad I.37.2, 185.3, VI.48.15, II.40.6. In several instances, masc. forms are used to qualify neuters (I.37.2 and VI.48.15), and the supposed masc. nom. sg. of the -n-stem seems to have fem. reference in II.40.6 and VII.40.4. This may have led to a certain cavalier tendency to use masc. forms to cover all genders, even when not morphologically necessary.

As for aneháḥ, Ge and Re supply ‘protection’ (Ge “der unfelhbare (Schirm) der Ādityas”) on the basis of VIII.18.21, while Old (ad V.51.11) takes it as an adv.

(construing ādityā́nām with víśvaḥ), though in his comm. on this passage he rescinds this in favor of its depending on aneháḥ (without tr.). On the basis of I.185.3 anehó dātrám áditer anarvám “the faultless gift of Aditi, which is unassailable” I tentatively supply ‘gift’ (note the presence also of another apparently variant stem, anarvá-; see comm. there). However, the Ge/Re solution is quite possible.

