+++
title = "02"

+++
Pāda a is more literally “who, like Savitar, possesses realized thoughts,” but I have adjusted the English to avoid awkwardness.

In c most tr. take satyáḥ as the shared term in the simile amátir ná (Ge “wahr wie ein Bildnis”) or as modifying amátiḥ in the simile (WG “wie eine verwirklichte Erscheinung”). The latter is impossible because amáti- is feminine. The former does not convey much sense. The purport of the simile of course depends on the meaning of amáti-, which I consider to be more concrete and specific than the usual glosses ‘appearance, form, picture’. An amáti- can be golden (III.38.8), broad and wide (V.62.5, VII.38.2, 45.2); it is associated with lordship (V.69.1 amátiṃ kṣatríyasya), can be displayed on a chariot box (I.64.9), and is unloosed or unfurled (V.45.2, VII.45.3). All of this suggests that it is a pennant or ensign or other flag-like object.

On the basis of its association with lordship, I suggest that it can be a royal emblem and that that is the basis for the simile here. As discussed ad I.70.9 and in Jamison forthcoming, prá √śaṃs ‘proclaim, laud’ is a lexeme particularly appropriate to kings, and here Agni is lauded by many like the royal emblem, which is the symbol of the king. This interpretation leaves pāda-final satyáḥ somewhat stranded, and I read it with the following pāda. Perhaps it was stationed in the c pāda because of satyá(manmā) in almost the same position in the a pāda. Alternatively it can simply be another qualifier of Agni in b, independent of the simile: “lauded by many like a (royal) emblem, real …” Most tr. give a rather vague and general rendering of the morphologically elaborate desiderative gerundive didhiṣā́yyaḥ, “desirable to hold/win’. I think it has a more technical ritual sense, referring to the installation of the fire (so also in the other occurrence of this form in II.4.1). This would reflect the same sense of √dhā as the adjective puróhita-, of the fire ‘placed/installed in front/to the east’ and the later ritual complex the Agnyādheya ‘establishment of the fire(s)’. If my interpr. of 1d is correct, namely that the offering fire has been taken from west to east, then the next step would be its installation in the east.

