+++
title = "11"

+++
My interpr. of the first hemistich differs from the standard; I take it as consisting of two separate clauses, each identifying Indra in one of his most important mythic roles -- in the Vṛtra-slaying and in the freeing of the Vala cows -- along with his associates in those enterprises, the Maruts and the Aṅgirases respectively. It is important to note that this naming of Indra, in conjunction with the first appearance of his name in 4b (see comm. there and in the intro. remarks), frames the treatment of the Vala myth, and, by mentioning Vṛtra, it also sets the stage for the opening out of this hymn to treat other exploits of Indra.

Others take vṛtrahā́in pāda a simply as an auxiliary epithet of Indra in this account of the Vala myth, but I do not think that Vṛtrahan would be so promiment in a treatment of the Vala myth, and I also cannot otherwise account for the séd u in the middle of pāda a without assuming that a new clause begins there. (Lü [517] gets out of this difficulty by accepting Ludwig’s emendation to a bahuvrīhi svéduhavyaiḥ ‘having sweating oblations’ [=Aṅgirases], but though this is ingenious, esp. as sweat figures in the same myth in X.67.6-7 as Ge points out, it requires too much alteration for a sequence that can make sense on its own.) In the first brief clause, vṛtrahā́is the predicate, and jātébhiḥ refers to the Maruts, who are well known for being ‘born (together)’ (e.g., V.55.3 sākáṃ jātā́ḥ). Ge suggests, but rejects, an emendation here to sajātébhiḥ (for transmitted sá jātébhiḥ), an idea also of Alsdorf’s (see Schmidt 169); I would modify that by proposing haplology from sá *sajātébhiḥ. The rest of ab concerns the Vala myth, which has been the subject of the past seven vss. The myth is readily identifiable by the VP úd usríyā asṛjat “sent the ruddy (cows) surging up” and by the arkaíḥ, repeated from 9a. Since the chants in 9a clearly belonged to the Aṅgirases, there need not be any even oblique reference to the Aṅgirases here: the bare arkaíḥ will be enough.

