+++
title = "12"

+++
The first pāda contains two datives, pitré and the prn. asmai. Because of its lack of accent, asmai cannot be a demonst. adj. with pitré. Ge gets out of the difficulty by interpr. pitré as a simile, which allows asmai to be independently construed, but this depends on his frequent assumption that cid can be a simile marker, a role I do not think it can have. Instead I give the VP cakruḥ sádanam a double reading: acdg. to the first the Aṅgirases perform a Sattra for their father (see 9c), but in the 2nd they also prepare for him a literal seat. Because cakruḥ sádanam participates in two clauses, each can have an independent dative, though in my opinion the datives are coreferential.

It is unclear what the referent of the object in b is, described as máhi tvíṣīmat “great and turbulent.” Ge, flg. Sāy, takes it as a further reference to the seat, Re the all-purpose “quelque chose,” Schmidt the eye of the sun, WG sim. the sun-god. My own candidate is the pā́thaḥ of 6b, also described as máhi there. In vs. 6 the word is used to indicate the herd, which is contained in the fold (see comm. there); here I think it is the container, the fold or pen, itself -- representing the cosmic space and also the ritual ground. When they survey it they see that this space needs organizing, which they proceed to do -- by propping apart Heaven and Earth (a deed usually ascribed to Indra) and preparing and propping up a seat for Indra. They thus make the whole cosmos into Indra’s ritual ground, and in the next vs. (13ab) Earth herself serves as the emplacement allowing Indra to pierce Vṛtra.

The position of the hí is somewhat anomalous: since the whole b pāda forms a single clause, we would expect the hí in Wackernagel’s position. However, there is a general tendency when a preverb precedes its verb late in the clause for hí to intervene between them, as here: … ví hí khyan#. More specifically, 1) when there's a hí in a clause containing a verbal form of √khyā, it always immediately precedes the verb -- sometimes in normal Wack. pos. (e.g., I.81.9), sometimes not (as here and, e.g., VI.15.15). 2) With one exception, all injunc. forms of √khyā are preceded either by hí or by a preverb ending in -i, which prob. led to a sense that √khyā should be so preceded. Note also in this passage the phonetic echoes #máhi … vi hí khyan#, which also resonates with pāda d … ví minvan#. It is perhaps worth noting in this connection how many pādas in this hymn begin with máhi or mahī́: 3d, 4b, 6b, 12b, 13a, 14a, 14c, 15a (esp. clustered here); cf. also mahás 3b, mahā́n 3c, 18d. I assume that a pāda opening *máhi hí would be avoided; in any case there are none in the RV.

In d most tr. take the sun as the referent of the object. I instead supply the seat.

The root √mi often takes ‘seat’ as obj.: not our sádanam admittedly, but sádmanII.15.3 (with ví), X.20.5, I.173.3, IX.97.1, sā́dana- X.18.13. This is a fairly large percentage of the attested forms of the verb, and since ‘seat’ is already present in this vs., it is easily supplied here.

