+++
title = "+121"

+++
121
Indra or the All Gods
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
15 verses: triṣṭubh
Of all the challenging and maddening hymns in Kakṣīvant’s small but memorable  oeuvre, this hymn may present the biggest challenges and the most maddening set  of puzzles—though the immediately preceding one is at least in competition. It seems that antiquity had a similar reaction, as the Anukramaṇī is not even sure  whether the hymn is dedicated to Indra or to the All Gods. We will here sketch a  structure and suggest some themes, but we make no claims for the correctness of all  the choices made in our translation or commentary.
The predominant deity of the hymn must be Indra, though his name does  not appear until verse 11, and the governing myth of the hymn is that of the  opening of the Vala cave. But other mythic material is interspersed through  the hymn, and the present-day sacrificial situation is also treated—while,  conversely, the Vala myth is sometimes presented as if it were happening  at this moment. In fact, the first verse sets up this scenario, with questions  about Indra’s attendance at a sacrifice where the Aṅgirases, his helpers in the  Vala myth, are performing their hymns. The same prospective appearance  of Indra among the Aṅgirases is also described in verse 3, with the recital  of the Vala myth continued, in the past, in verse 4.  The intervening verse  (2) is also couched in the mythic past and begins (2ab) with Indra’s primal  cosmogonic deed, the separation of heaven and earth. The second half of  verse 2 contains one of the most discussed portions of the hymn, a set of  three memorably described female figures whose relationships to each other  and to the “buffalo” who is gazing upon at least one of them are unclear. In  our view, all three figures are different forms of Dawn, the subject of two  of Kakṣīvant’s other hymns (I.123–124), as she transforms herself from a  young girl choosing her husband (the Sun) to a wife (of the Sun in the form  of a horse) to a mother (of a cow: the light of Dawn is frequently compared  to cows). The buffalo is probably Indra, and the focus on Dawn is appropri ate to a hymn celebrating the opening of the Vala cave and the release of the  dawn-cows.
Verse 4 alluded to the impetus that drinking soma gave to Indra at the opening  of the Vala cave, and the following two verses (5–6) sketch the history of Indra’s  possession of soma and then turn to the soma currently being produced at today’s  dawn sacrifice. The following, quite puzzling verse (7) seems to identify Indra with  the sun and, by implication, with the shining soma of the previous verse, also com
pared to the sun. The poet seems further to suggest that, even in the absence of all  the sacrificial necessities, the presence of radiant Indra is tantamount to a properly  performed sacrifice, for the benefit of the poet and his family. (We suggest that  Kakṣīvant is alluding to himself here, on the basis of similar vocabulary used in  I.126.5.)
Verse 8 begins a series of mythological verses, with an intertwining of the Vala  myth (9ab, 10ab) and that of Indra’s slaying of Śuṣṇa with the aid of Uśanā Kāvya  (9cd, 10cd, 11d, 12) and the related myth of the halting of the Sun’s horses and  chariot (13), with incidental mentions of other deeds of Indra (the Vr̥tra battle,  11c) thrown in. The interpenetration of these mythic allusions keeps the audi
ence off balance, a queasy feeling much increased by the disjunctive and elliptical  syntax.

The final two verses (14–15), asking for protection and valuables, are by contrast  quite straightforward. Presumably on this subject Kakṣīvant did not want the god  to misunderstand.