+++
title = "12"

+++
12. Adoration to him who creates self-consciousness, who creates matter, who gives gifts, who destroys (sin), who performs penance, to Punarvasu, adoration. [^6] 


[^6]:  Sāmavidhāna I, 2, 5, where, however, only four Mantras are given instead of our thirteen. The epithets given to the deity in the Sāmavidhāna can all be referred to the Sun, provided he is identified with the universal soul, while in the above Sūtra, Rudra and Indra have been introduced. It cannot be doubtful that the Sāmavidhāna gives an older and more authentic form of the prayer. My translation of the epithets, which are found in the Sāmavidhāna also, follows Sāyaṇa's gloss. Haradatta does not explain them. About Sobhya in the twelfth Mantra, which possibly might mean, 'he who dwells in a mirage, i.e. the Saṃsāra,' I feel doubtful. My MSS. read somya, and the Sāmavidhāna has saumya in the second Mantra. But I am unwilling to alter the word, as Professor Stenzler's reading may have been derived from a South-Indian MS., where bhya and mya do not resemble each other so, much as in the Devanāgarī characters.

Adoration to him who is worthy of (offerings) 

consisting of Muñja grass, who is worth), of (offerings of) water, who conquers wealth, to him who conquers the universe, adoration.

Adoration to him who gives success, who gives full success, who gives great success, to him who carries (all undertakings) to a successful issue, adoration.

Adoration to Rudra, the lord of cattle, the great god, the triocular, solitary, supreme lord Hari, to dread Śarva, to Īśāna who carries the thunderbolt, to the fierce wearer of matted locks, adoration.

Adoration to the Sun, to Aditi's offspring, adoration.

Adoration to him. whose neck is blue, to him whose throat is dark-blue, adoration.

Adoration to the black one, to the brown one, adoration.

Adoration to Indra, the first-born, the best, the ancient, to chaste Harikeśa, adoration.

Adoration to the truthful purifier, to fire-coloured Kāma, who changes his form at pleasure, adoration.

Adoration to the brilliant one, to him whose form is brilliant, adoration.

Adoration to the fierce one, to him whose form is fierce, adoration.

Adoration to Sobhya, the beautiful, the great male, the middle male, the highest male, to the student of the Veda, adoration.

Adoration to him who wears the moon on his forehead, to him whose garment is a skin, adoration.
