+++
title = "03"

+++
As discussed in the publ. intro., I differ from the standard tr. (which consider Vāyu the subject of ab and the referent of the acc. pl. in pāda a to be the sacrificers) in considering this first hemistich a disguised reference to the soma offered to Vāyu. Although the Vāyu identification might seem the default -- and it indeed may be correct -- both the vocabulary and the ritual situation seem to point in another direction. The descriptor sumedhás- is never otherwise used of Vāyu, but it is applied 3x to Soma or his drop (IX.92.3, 93.3, 97.23); the only figure who receives this epithet more often is Agni. Similarly śvetá- is not used of Vāyu (for the supposed application in the immed. preceding hymn, VII.90.3, where I think it refers to Dawn, see comm. ad loc.), but does apply to a drop (drapsá-) in nearby VII.87.6, while Soma makes himself a śvetá- rūpá- in IX.74.7. The adj. is also used of horses (VII.77.3), and perhaps, in conjunction with niyútām abhiśrī́ḥ “the full glory of the teams,” Soma is configured here as the lead horse of the “teams” of offerings we will make to Vāyu. The beings (acc.) that the subject accompanies (siṣakti) are called pī́voanna- ‘whose food is fat’, a hapax. It seems an unlikely epithet of human sacrificers, as the standard interpr. requires. It might describe the ritual fires, but it is most clearly reminiscent of X.100.10 ū́rjam gāvo yávase pī́vo attana, ṛtásya yā́ḥ sádane kóśe aṅgdhvé “O cows, eat nourishment in the pasture, eat fat, you who are anointed in the cup, at the seat of truth,” addressed to the milk to be ritually mixed into the soma. The masc. gender of pī́vo-annān is something of a stumbling block to this interpr., but it might result from the variable gender of the underlying referent gó- ‘cow’ or reference a masc. term for milk or liquid in general. The other acc. pl.

in this pāda, rayivṛ́dhaḥ, is a hapax, though reminiscent of námasā … vṛdhā́saḥ in 1a.

Like the numerous other cmpds in -vṛ́dh- the root noun 2nd member could have either intransitive/passive value with the 1st member in an instr. relationship (‘strong/increased by wealth’) or transitive value with an acc. 1st member 114 (‘increasing wealth’) -- though most -vṛ́dh- cmpds conform to the former type. Ge interpr. it as transitive (“die … ihre Reichtümer mehrend”), Gr as intrans.; Old fails to comment, and Re takes refuge in vagueness (“ayant … une richesse abondante”), which seems to lean towards the intrans. Scar (521) allows both possibilities in his gloss, though his tr. of the passage follows the transitive path, “die ihren Reichtum mehren,” echoing Ge. For my larger interpr. of the passage, either would more or less work, but neither adds much or seems particularly apt.

To sum up, though I don’t reject the Vāyu / human ritualist interpr. of the nom. / acc. in ab out of hand, I think an identification of the nom. as Soma and the acc. as the cows(’ milk) with which soma is mixed works better in the passage. (I do have to admit that Indra and Vāyu drink clear, unmixed soma in the very next vs.) Alternatively we might consider the ritual fire (specifically the one that receives the offerings, later called the Āhavanīya) the subject and the libations themselves the acc. And, on the basis of VII.92.3 in the next hymn I also now wonder if the acc. referents in ab might be the teams of wealth we meet in that vs. Basically, no single interpr. of this vs. can account for all the elements of it.

My interpr. of c follows from that of ab. I take the pl. subj. to be the drops of soma, extending themselves as offering to Vāyu -- not the priestly sacrificers. Only in d do these sacrificers make their appearance (náraḥ).

