+++
title = "07"

+++
7. Now they quote also (the following Gāthā from the Veda): '(Having considered myself) formerly a father, I shall not now allow (any longer) my wives (to be approached by other men), since they have declared that a son belongs to the begetter in the world of Yama. The giver of the seed carries off the son after death in Yama's world; therefore they guard [^4]  their wives, fearing the seed of strangers. Carefully watch over (the procreation of) your children, lest stranger seed be sown on your soil. In the next world the son belongs to the begetter, an (imprudent) husband makes the (begetting of) children vain (for himself).'


[^4]:  According to Haradatta this Gāthā gives the sentiments of a husband who neglected to watch his wives, and who had heard from those learned in the law that the sons or his unfaithful wives would in the next world belong to their natural fathers, and that be would not derive any spiritual benefit from their oblations. He adds that this verse does not refer to or prevent the appointment of a eunuch's wife or of a childless widow to a relation. He also quotes a passage from the Śrauta-sūtra 1, 9, 7, in which the dvipitā, 'the son of two fathers,' is mentioned. But Haradatta's view cannot be reconciled with the statements made below, II, 10, 27, 2-7, p. 132 where the Niyoga, is plainly forbidden. Baudhāyana, who (II, 2, 3, 34) quotes the same Gāthā, reads in the first line the vocative 'janaka' instead of the nominative 'janakaḥ,' and in the fifth line 'pare bījāni' instead of 'parabījāni.' The commentator Govindasvāmin adds that the verses are addressed by the Ṛṣi Aupajaṅghani to king Janaka of Videha. The translation of the first line must therefore run thus: 'O Janaka, now I am jealous of my wives, (though I was) not so formerly,' &c. Baudhāyana's readings are probably the older ones, and Govindasvāmin's explanation the right one. See also Colebrooke, Digest, Book V, Text ccli.
