+++
title = "Praśna II, Adhyāya 5, Kaṇḍikā 9"

+++
## 01
1. 'I satiate the deities of the eastern gate, Agni, Prajāpati, Soma, Rudra, Aditi, Bṛhaspati, together with the lunar mansions, with the planets, with the days and nights, and with the Muhūrtas; Om, I also satiate the Vasus; [^1] 

## 02
2. 'Om, I satiate the deities of the southern gate, the Pitṛs, Yama, Bhaga, Savitṛ, Tvaṣṭṛ, Vāyu, Indrāgnī, together with the lunar mansions, with the planets, with the days and nights, and with the Muhūrtas; Om, I also satiate the Rudras.

## 03
3. 'Om, I satiate the deities of the western gate, Mitra, Indra, the Mahāpitṛs, the Waters, all the gods, Brahman, Viṣṇu, together with the lunar mansions, with the planets, with the days and nights, and with the Muhūrtas; Om, I also satiate the Ādityas.

## 04
4. 'Om, I satiate the deities of the northern gate, the Vasus, Varuṇa, Aja-ekapād, Ahibudhnya, Uṣas, the two Aśvins, Yama, together with . . . . . .

## 05
5. 'Om, I satiate all the gods; the Sādhyas; Brahman; Prajāpati; the four-faced god; Hiraṇyagarbha; Svayambhū; the male attendants of Brahman; Parameṣṭhin; the female attendants of Brahman; Agni; Vāyu; Varuṇa; Sūrya; the moon; the lunar mansions; Sadyojāta; Bhūḥ-puruṣa; Bhuvaḥ-puruṣa; Suvaḥ-puruṣa; Bhūḥ; Bhuvaḥ; Suvaḥ; Mahaḥ; Ganaḥ; Tapaḥ; Satya.

## 06
6. 'Om, I satiate the god Bhava; Sarva; Īśāna; Paśupati; Rudra; Ugra; Bhīmadeva; Mahādeva; the wife of the god Bhava; of the god Sarva; of the god Īśāna; of the god Paśupati; of the god Rudra; of the god Ugra; of Bhīmadeva; of Mahādeva; the son of Bhava; of Sarva; of Īśāna; of Paśupati; of Rudra; of Ugra; of Bhīmadeva; of Mahādeva; Om, I also satiate the Rudras, the attendants of Rudra.

## 07
7. 'Om, I satiate Vighna; Vināyaka; Vīra; Sthūla; Varada; Hastimukha; Vakratuṇḍa; Ekadanta; Lambodara; the male attendants of Vighna; the female attendants of Vighna.

## 08
8. 'Om, I satiate Sanatkumāra; Skanda; Indra; Shaṣṭhī; Shaṇmukha; Viśākha; Mahāsena; Subrahmaṇya; the male attendants of Skanda; the female attendants of Skanda.

## 09
9. 'Om, I satiate Āditya; Soma; Aṅgāraka; Budha; Bṛhaspati; Śukra; Śanaiścara; Rāhu; Ketu.

To. 'Om, I satiate Keśava; Nārāyaṇa; Mādhava; Govinda; Viṣṇu; Madhusūdana; Trivikrama; Vāmana; Śrīdhara; Hṛṣīkeśa; Padmanābha; Dāmodara; the goddess Śrī; the goddess Sarasvatī; Puṣṭi; Tuṣṭi; Viṣṇu; Garutmat; the male attendants of Viṣṇu; the female attendants of Viṣṇu.

## 11
11. 'Om, I satiate Yama; Yamarāja; Dharma; Dharmarāja; Kāla; Nīla; Mṛtyu; Mṛtyuñjaya; Vaivasvata; Citragupta; Audumbara; the male attendants of Vaivasvata; the female attendants of Vaivasvata.

## 12
12. 'Om, I satiate the gods of the earth; Kāśyapa; Antarikṣa; Vidyā; Dhanvaṇtari; the male attendants of Dhanvaṇtari; the female attendants of Dhanvaṇtari.'

## 13
13. Next, passing the sacrificial thread round the neck, (he offers the following libations):

## 14
14. 'Om, I satiate the Ṛṣis; the great Ṛṣis; the best Ṛṣis; the Brahmarshis; the divine Ṛṣis; the royal Ṛṣis; the Śrutarshis; the Seven Ṛṣis; the Ṛṣis of the Kāṇḍas (of the Yajur-veda); the Ṛṣikas; the wives of the Ṛṣis; the sons of the Ṛṣis; Kaṇva Baudhāyana; Āpastamba, the author of the Sūtra; Satyāṣāḍha Hiraṇyakeśin; Vājaśaneyin Yājñavalkya; Āśvalāyana Śaunaka; Vyāsa; the syllable Om; the Vyāhṛtis; the Sāvitrī; the Gāyatrī; the Khaṇḍas; the Rig-vela; the Yajur-veda; the Sāma-veda; the Atharvāṅgirasa; the Itihāsa and Purāṇa; all the Vedas; the servants of all gods; all beings.'

## 15
15. Then, passing the sacrificial string over the right shoulder, (he offers the following libations):



[^1]:  9. This and the next Caṇḍikās are given in full by K. only. M. gives the first and last words of both, the commentary the p. 253 beginning of 9 and the end of 10 only. The text of K. is probably interpolated, as it seems impossible that Baudhāyana could have mentioned his successors, Āpastamba and Satyāṣāḍha Hiraṇyakeśin, whose names occur below, II, 5, 9, 14. On the other hand, it is not doubtful that the number of Mantras must nevertheless have been very large, as the numeration in M. shows that they filled two entire Kaṇḍikās.