+++
title = "03"

+++
There are several syntactic problems in this verse. The easiest to deal with is the apparently misplaced ca in b. All the standard tr. as well as the publ. tr. take rudríyeṣu as a modifier of stómeṣu, with the whole loc. phrase #ukthéṣu …, stómeṣu … rudríyeṣu ca# then interpreted as “in the hymns and in the Rudriyan praises,” with the ca following the 2nd word of a bipartite NP and at a considerable distance from the 1st . (We would expect *stómeṣu ca (…) rudríyeṣu.) Klein (DGRV I.54) calls this “the most anomalous position of ca within adjective plus noun syntagms.” This difficulty disappears if we take rudríyeṣu not as an adjective with stómeṣu, but as a third term in the conjoined phrase: “in the hymns, in the praises, and in the Rudriyans.” The ca is then correctly positioned in an X Y Z ca construction (on which see Klein DGRV I.86-91). The Rudriyans in question are the Maruts. It is important to note that the adj. rudríya- is almost never used of anyone or anything but the Maruts, and in the plural never of anything but the Maruts. It is also never used of hymns or praises. It is true that my interpr. produces disharmony in semantic class: two types of verbal products and a group of gods, but Indra does indeed get pleasure and strengthening both from human praises and from the Maruts, who stood by him at the Vṛtra battle. And my interpr. solves the ca placement problem and also allows rudríya- to refer to its accustomed referent.

A more intractable problem is how to interpr. the loc. relative pronouns in a and c. The standard tr. seem to take them (it’s a little hard to tell) as embedded relatives with the loc. nouns (ukthéṣu, etc.) belonging to the main clause whose predicate takes shape in pāda d. The publ. tr. (JPB) takes ab as a separate sentence, supplying an impv. “delight!” as the main cl. verb, governing ukthéṣu … rudríyeṣu ca and generated from the injunctive pf. cākán of the rel. cl. This still leaves the yā́su cl. embedded, since the main clause in cd must include túbhyéd that begins c, parallel to vāyáve in d. Another wrinkle is the fact that the verbal predicate of this 2nd rel.

clause is not finite, but a predicated middle participle (whatever its exact derivational path) mandasānáḥ (on which see comm. ad IV.3.6). In favor of the JPB solution is the fact that the yā́su rel. prn. has a clear antecedent in the main clause of cd: nom. pl.

etā́(ḥ), but it is not clear whether masc. yéṣu does. If we take the nominal loc. pls.

ukthéṣu, etc., as belonging to the main clause, then it does. This seems to be the solution of the standard tr. (e.g., Re’s tenative “parmi (?) les hymnes en lesquels tu te complais et parmi (?) les corps-de-louange rudriens …” I do not know the answer, though I’m inclined to follow the standard tr., against the publ. tr., and take these masc. locatives as belonging to the main clause, with loc. relative clauses dependent on them, parallel to the fem. loc. in c. So, rather like Re, “Amidst the hymns, praises, and Rudriyans in which you take (have taken? injunc. pf.) delight, these (FEM. PL.), in which you are finding exhilaration, run forth to you …” As the just-produced tr. shows, yet another problem is the identity of the subject of the main clause and its verb sisrate. The subj. must be fem. because of the etā́(ḥ) and it is either qualified as śubhrā́ḥ ‘resplendent’ or compared to entities that are. The anomalous position of the simile particle ná is, uneasily, compatible with either: “resplendent like Xes” or “like resplendent Xes.” Various solutions for the identity of the subject have been suggested. The publ. tr. ‘waters’ seems the most likely, since 1) the verb means ‘run forth, flow’, 2) the subj. must be fem. pl., 3) śubhrá- elsewhere characterizes waters and rivers, and 4) the waters were prominent in the immediately preceding vs., though not named, and rivers appear in 1d.

Identifying the referent of śubhrā́ḥ is complicated by the fact that this stem is the signature word of the next vs. ### 04
The first two pādas contain two exx. of predicated pres. participles, vardháyantaḥ and dádhānāḥ, but unfortunately it’s not clear what they are predicated of. Ge, Re, and the publ. tr. supply “we,” which is a reasonable default, WG “diese Lobreden,” from 3a (which does not work because ukthá- is neut. and the participles are masc.). In any case, the referents of these participles are not directly reflected in the rest of the verse (save perhaps for asmé ‘for us / among us’ in c), and it seems best with the standard tr. to assume an abrupt syntactic division between ab and cd because the subject of ab must be plural, not sg., though the intrans./pass. part.

vāvṛdhānáḥ and the adj. śubhráḥ in c show lexical and thematic continuity with the first hemistich.

JPB takes c as an independent nominal clause. I’d be inclined, with the standard tr., to take it with d with the pf. part. vāvṛdhānáḥ expressing anteriority and notional dependence: “… having become strengthened, you should overwhelm …”

