+++
title = "05"

+++
Pāda c is oddly conceived. The problem is the double object of the pf. part.

tastabhvā́ṃsam, namely apó dyā́m “the waters (and) heaven.” The first, in a putative VP apó √stambh, is perfectly fine, and indeed perfectly fine as a description of Vṛtra.

Although √stambh ordinarily means ‘prop up, make fast’, in the latter sense it can come to mean ‘stay, block’, with rivers (bzw. waters) as obj. Cf. III.53.9 ástabhnāt síndhum arṇavám “he stayed the river in flood,” depicting Viśvāmitra’s feat in stopping the rivers to allow Sudās’s forces to cross, presented at length in the famous hymn III.33. Also, with √stambh in the passive, in VIII.96.18 tváṃ síndhūm̐asṛjas tastabhānā́n “you released the rivers, which had been blocked/stayed,” exactly of Indra’s freeing the waters after smiting Vṛtra, as here. But √stambh is far more common with dyā́m as object; this VP means “prop up heaven” and is regularly used of one of Indra’s signature cosmogonic deed - including in this sequence of Indra hymns. Cf. in the next (very famous) hymn, II.12.2 yó dyā́m ástabhnāt sá janāsa índraḥ “who propped up heaven, that, o peoples, is Indra”; II.15.2 dyā́m astabhāyad bṛhántam “he propped up lofty heaven”; II.17.5 ástabhnān māyáyā dyā́m avasrásaḥ “with his craft he propped up heaven (to keep it) from falling.” It is very strange to assign Indra’s deed and its formulaic expression to Vṛtra. To rescue the phrase, Ge suggests that “heaven” stands for “heaven’s light”; neither Old nor Re (whose tr. in EVP XVII of course lacks notes) comments, nor Klein (DGRV 335), who tr. “the one blocking the waters (and) heaven.” WG tr. “der dazu Wasser und Himmel befestigt hat,” with further glosses in the n.: “mehrdeutig: der Wasser und Himmel gespreizt / zur Festung gemacht / festgebunden / paralysiert hat” - none of which helps with the anomaly of dyā́m √stambh in this context. I find it difficult to imagine that the audience (more alert than us Western commentators), hearing dyā́ṃ tastabhvā́ṃsam, esp. in an Indra hymn, would not immediately associate it with the standard Indra formula and find the attribution of such a deed to Vṛtra (whom Indra will smash in the next pāda) disturbing—twisting the perfectly acceptable apáḥ √stambh phrase in a disconcerting direction. But I don’t quite know what to do with this. I would certainly not suggest that they then interpreted this participial phrase to refer to Indra - more that they were forced to rescue it by a semantic reconfiguration, perhaps like the one Ge suggests -- though nowhere else that I'm aware of is Vṛtra credited with blocking the light of heaven.

In any case, against the publ. tr., I would take the pf. part. as expressing anteriority - “having blocked / who had blocked the waters and heaven.”

