+++
title = "02"

+++
The verb ávāsṛjanta lacks an overt object. This may be because it is middle, in contrast to the generally transitive active to this stem; so most tr., incl. the publ. tr.

(“let go”). However, the -anta may be an -anta replacement of the usual type (see my 1979 IIJ article), and the verb form should be taken as a transitive equivalent to the active, with unexpressed obj. Indra. (This is how Kulikov [-ya-pres., p. 289] takes it, flg. a suggestion of Lubotsky’s -- though -anta replacement is not mentioned: “The gods abandoned [Indra], like the feeble ones.”) I am of two minds. The situation depicted is presumably the gods finking out on Indra when the Vṛtra battle looms; this might suggest that we should supply Indra as object: English “let Indra down” would be an almost exact match. But the simile jívrayo ná “like old/feeble (men)” does not fit this scenario as well; it implies that their powers simply failed them.

They “let go” -- the stuffing just went out of them, as it were.

The usual problem with bhúvaḥ -- injunctive (so apparently Ge, also the publ.

tr.) or subjunctive (so apparently WG). I assume that this verb refers to what happened after the event of pāda a: with the gods out of contention, Indra comes into his own as the universal monarch (samrā́j-) and takes his true and proper place (satyáyoni-). The use of -yoni- here is reminiscent of the passage in a nearby Indra hymn, IV.16.10, where Indra is urged to sit down on his own yóni- (své yónau) so that he can be recognized.

