+++
title = "05"

+++
Pāda a presents some interpretational difficulties that I think can be resolved by considering it an example of disharmony in a simile (see my 1982 IIJ article). I take the verb abhí prá dadruḥ as belonging to √dṝ ‘split, burst’ (see below for another possibility). In the simile jánayo ná gárbham it has transitive value, with the object expressing the contents that has been burst out (not the container), hence “as women (burst out) their embryo.” In the frame I take the mountains that ended the previous pāda (4d) as the subject and the verb as intransitive: “they burst.” (This is also Ge’s and WG’s interpr., as well as Kü’s [230].) Old suggests as another alternative that the verb can be transitive, with mountains as subject and rivers as object, but I would prefer to supply as little as possible. Old suggests yet another possibility, that the verb actually belongs to the root √drā ‘run’. Although this does not make sense for the simile (as Old notes), it could work for the frame -- though in that case ‘rivers’ might be a better subject. In that case we would have a pun separating the simile and frame (“[the rivers] ran [√drā], as women burst out [√dṝ] their embryo”), rather than a mismatch of usages of a single lexical item. I prefer the single-root solution.

The 2nd pāda also has a somewhat skewed expression. In this context we would expect the entities that “went/drove forth all at once” to be the released waters, who are certainly the topic of the 2nd hemistich. But instead it is ‘stones’ (ádrayaḥ).

Now this is probably, on the one hand, a particularly vivid image of the mountains suddenly bursting and sending forth an explosion of stones, a rockslide. But on the other hand, pāda-final ádrayaḥ produces a Jagatī cadence in a hymn that is otherwise entirely Triṣṭubh. Old suggests (without great enthusiasm, as far as I can see) an emendation to abl. *ádreḥ ‘from the stone’, which would fix both the meter and the image. I wonder if ádrayaḥ is a poetic trick: we expect the subject *ā́paḥ ‘waters’ -- which would provide both the standard Vṛtra-myth denouement and a good Triṣṭubh cadence -- and instead get a twist of both sense and meter.

