+++
title = "03"

+++
The first hemistich of this vs. presents some difficulties. One of the problems is that the acc. yántam in the first pāda most naturally invites Agni as referent, since the main verb of the clause, ánu gman, is the same as in 2cd, where Agni was definitely the acc. complement. But in pāda b Agni is represented by a loc. tvé and there is a different acc. rayím. One solution has been to construe rayím loosely (or not so loosely) with the pf. part. jāgṛvā́ṃsaḥ, leaving yántam in pāda a as the only acc. with ánu gman. This is the solution Old favors (ZDMG 55.271-72 = KlSch 730- 31: “bei dir Reichtum erwachend”), but √gṛ ‘be awake’ does not otherwise take an acc. Both Ge and Re supply a parenthetical non-finite verb more or less dependent on jāgṛvā́ṃsaḥ to govern ‘wealth’: “das sie bei dir Reichtum (erwartend) gewacht haben” and “… vigilants, (pour atteindre) en toi la richesse.” Since I prefer not to supply anything I don’t have to, I’ve tried another tack -- making yántam (with Agni as referent) and rayím conjoined goals of ánu gman. In other words, the wakeful men (presumably the priests alert at the sacrifice) pursue both Agni as he comes with goods and the goods themselves that are nearby him after he has deposited them on the ritual ground. I don’t, however, find this very satisfactory -- though I don’t find the other possibilities satisfying either (and I simply don’t understand Ludwig’s interpr., as reported by Old, 271-72 = 730-31). Somewhat in favor of my interpr. is Re’s comment that tvé rayím … ánu gman is a “variation inorganique” (whatever he means by that adj.) of tvā .. rāyé … ánu gman. I would rephrase it slightly to say that my “they follow you and wealth”(3ab) is a variant (inorganic or not) of “they follow you for wealth” (2cd).

In any case, the string of accusatives in cd all clearly refer to Agni, and we are back on firm ground.

