+++
title = "+001"

+++
1
Agni
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
9 verses: gāyatrī
As Oldenberg (1897) has noted, the first verse of this hymn was apparently the first  verse of the R̥gveda already at the time of the composition of X.20–26, a collection  that also begins agním īḷe. The two hymns that follow, I.2 and I.3, together invoke  the principal deities of the three soma-pressings in a day-long soma rite. This hymn  forms an appropriate opening for them, since the sacrifice is instituted first by the  placement of fire, although the sacrificial fire here is not just the fire of the soma  rite, since in verse 7 the poet speaks of revering the fire every day.

Here, as in other hymns to Agni, the poets praise him as the deified Fire of  the sacrifice, who moves between the divine and human realms. Agni is a god,  and yet he is also the visible fire, accessible to humans. As both god and element,  Agni is “placed to the fore” (vs. 1) because the principal fire of the sacrifice is  placed in the east of the sacrificial area and because the god Agni leads the  appearances of the other gods of the rite. He is a divine priest, who carries the  offerings and praises of the human priests to the gods and who brings the gifts of the gods to mortals. Saussure describes this hymn as a “versified paradigm of  Agni,” since it begins by mentioning the god’s name in various cases as the first  word in the first pāda of the first five verses: accusative, nominative, instrumen tal, dative, and again nominative (Elizarenkova 1995: 153). Displaying one of the  verbal tricks R̥gvedic poets delight in, this pattern is broken by modification at  the beginning of verse 6, which opens yád aṅgá, the latter word being a particle  that is also a scrambling of the god’s name. The same verse ends with an epithet  of Agni in the vocative, aṅgiraḥ, likewise a phonological scrambling of his name.  The vocative agne is also found in three of the last four verses (vs. 8 is the exception). This structure not only displays the artfulness of the poet, but perhaps also  suggests the various forms of the sacrificial Fire that are analogous to the many  grammatical forms of the word “fire.”