+++
title = "02"

+++
This vs. presents a number of minor problems. The first is the usage of the verb in pāda a, med. pf. prá vāvṛje. Ge and Re interpr. it as passive, e.g. “Das Barhis ist … gelegt,” as does Kü (461). Since this is the only med. form of the pf., against several act. transitive ones, this is possible, but it should be noted that med. forms of the present are generally transitive. Cf. very similar VII.18.4 prá vṛñjate … barhíḥ, where the 3rd pl. form of the verb precludes a passive reading. Moreover, the passive reading would require the adj. suprayā́(ḥ) to modify neut. barhíḥ; in my opinion (contra Gr and possibly Ge, Re; see also Old’s somewhat cryptic n. to II.3.5), this form belongs to the s-stem suprayás- and is a nom. sg. masc., but even if this grammatical analysis is incorrect, I do not see any way to get a properly inflected neut. sg. in -ā(ḥ) out of any possible stem. The difficulty disappears if we take vāvṛje as transitive, supplying Agni from vs. 1 as subject. Undoubted acc. forms of the sstem adj. (suprayásam) modify Agni 3 times out of the 4 clear occurrences of the stem (II.2.1, 4.1, VI.11.4). Although Agni in his physical form as fire is not a likely twister of barhis, of course, he has just been identified as a Hotar in 1d and in his priestly role could perform other priestly actions.

I take eṣām as gen. for dat., as often, and referring to the gods (so also Ge, Re).

As noted in the publ. intro., the hapax bī́riṭa (in sandhi; Pp. bī́riṭe) in b is completely opaque. See EWA s.v. The only thing that is clear is that it has aberrant, non-Indo-Aryan phonology, with plain b and unmotivated retroflex ṭ. It is not even evident what grammatical form it might be: standing next to dual viśpatī́, it might be expected to be a dual as well. Indeed a pragṛhya bī́riṭe would be better metrically, as Old points out. If the sandhi represented in the Saṃhitā text is correct, however, it could be a loc. in -e. Both Ge and Re take it as such, following in their tr. Yāska’s gloss gaṇa- (see also Kuiper, Aryans 31 and Kü 461), and both construe viśā́m in the next pāda with it (“in der Gefolgschaft ihre Clanleute” and “dans l’arroi des clans” respectively). A hemistich boundary between a locative and its dependent genitive seems highly unlikely to me, esp. when it is not a well-known standard expression. In the publ. tr. I take it as a loc., but decline to translate; I would now be inclined to take it as a nom. dual, but also decline to tr., hence “like two ? clan-lords.” Unlike many problematic hapaxes, this one does not seem to be phonologically generated.

With Ge and Re, I interpr. the verb in b, ā́… iyāte, as ‘hasten here’. Lub classifies it with √yā ‘beseech, beg’, and the morphology supports him: the form cannot belong with well-attested ī́yate ‘hastens’ both because of its short root syllable and because of its athematic ending, whereas it could easily belong to the medial root pres. of ‘beg’ (cf. part. iyāná-). But ‘beg’ does not fit the context, and esp. with Vāyu 63 forming one of the paired subjects and with the time specified as dawn and the occasion the Early Invocation, the common formulaic vā́yav ā́yāhi (I.2.1, etc.) and its variants, calling Vāyu to the first pressing, imposes itself here. I don’t understand the morphology, but a poet who could inflict bī́riṭe on us is capable of confecting a nonce verb form in the same pāda.

If viśā́m is not dependent on bī́riṭe, what is it doing? A survey of the occurrences of this gen. pl. reveals that it is often pāda-initial (as here) and dependent on viśpáti- (e.g., III.2.10, 13.5, V.4.3), páti- (e.g., I.127.8, VI.15.1), or a similar authority figure. I therefore loosely construe it with viśpatī in b, though I resupply that word in c. Alternatively, II.4.1 viśā́ m agním átithimṣ suprayásam “Agni, the guest of the clans, who receives very pleasurable offerings” is suggestive, since it contains a form of suprayás- modifying Agni. But ‘guest’ is missing in our passage, and in any case the suprayás- form is in a different clause.

As for the aktór uṣásaḥ phrase, Ge. (n. 2c) has convinced me that it's an abbreviated version of uṣáso yā́man aktóḥ “at the coming of dawn from night” (III.30.13, VI.38.4). Perhaps the loc. yā́man was gapped because of the presence of the loc. pūrváhūtau, although the latter is not part of the same phrase.

The epithet niyútvan- ‘possessing a team’ is primarily used of Vāyu, and therefore, although Pūṣan intervenes between vāyúḥ and niyútvān, it must modify Vāyu, with the name and the epithet polarized at the edges of the pāda.

Vāyu and Pūṣan do not generally appear together and do not form a natural pair; I don’t know the reason for their joint appearance here. As far as I know, Pūṣan has no part in the Morning Pressing.

