+++
title = "A Sanskrit into English: Problems and Solutions"

+++
As has been repeatedly emphasized above, the R̥gveda is a poetic text, structured  by intricate meters, driven by rhetorical principles based on this metrical structure, and crafted by skillful poets for a poetically aware audience. 

## Prose is used
Nonetheless, we  have chosen to translate the text into prose, not verse—for several reasons. 

- First and perhaps most important, we are not poets, and we would dishonor the highly  trained and highly inventive poets of the R̥gveda by translating their artful creations into bad English verse. 
- Moreover, the structures of the English language and  of English verse are entirely different from those of Vedic Sanskrit. Since English  lacks the elaborate morphology of Sanskrit, it is not as possible in English, with out awkwardness or, indeed, loss of sense, to use word order for rhetorical rather  than syntactic purposes. 
- The stress-counting principle that regulates English blank  verse and the end rhyme characteristic of much English poetry are alien to R̥gvedic  poetry. 

Thus the English poetry that resulted from a verse translation would not  replicate in any of its most salient features the structures of R̥gvedic poetry. We have, however, tried to retain the verse structure as much as possible. All the  translations reproduce the verse divisions found in the hymn, and within verses the  hemistich boundary is also always marked, with the second hemistich beginning  a new line. In fact, as noted above, it has almost always been possible to translate  hemistichs as units without breaching the boundary—an indication of how strong  a compositional element the hemistich was for the poets. 

## Literal meaning
Translators who are also poets might succeed in rendering the R̥gveda (or parts  thereof) into poetry that captures the spirit and flair of the original, but such rendering would perforce (or so we think) distort or reinvent the literal meaning of the  text. This is of course a perfectly acceptable translational strategy—some think it  is the only acceptable strategy: that a literal translation is a fundamental betrayal  of the original. But we have chosen to hew as close to what we consider the literal  meaning of the text and its constituent words as we can. The text is multivalent, and  over the millennia it has received multiple, often incompatible, interpretations. By  translating the text literally, we hope to leave the interpretive opportunities open for  the readers, inviting them to participate in the act of interpretation though providing as much guidance as we can.+++(5)+++ 

## Linguistic registers
As was also noted above, the everyday language of the R̥gvedic poets was almost  surely not identical to the language they used in their hymn compositions. They  may well have spoken a form of early Middle Indo-Aryan—judging from some  Middle Indic phonological features found in the hymns—or at the very least a more  stripped-down form of Sanskrit, with the limitations on morphological categories  and variant forms found in middle Vedic prose and in Epic and Classical Sanskrit.+++(5)+++  Since they were therefore composing in a deliberately archaic style, we have aimed  for a fairly formal and old-fashioned English style on both the lexical and the syntactic levels, with occasional whiffs of the archaic.+++(5)+++ (For example, one of us often  translates the morphologically opaque archaic frozen form śám with the equally  opaque English “weal,” to capture its linguistic isolation; the other of us prefers  “luck,” which does have the advantage of conveying more sense to the modern  English reader.) 

The poets were, however, quite aware of linguistic registers, and are capable of  making wrenching shifts from, for example, the high-register solemnity of most  of their production to slangy and sometimes obscene humorous banter. (See, for Introduction 77 example, Indrāṇī’s discourse in X.86, which lurches from shockingly explicit vulgarity [especially from a goddess] to the highest of high styles.) Such passages are  especially common in dānastutis. When we have been able to identify low-register  vernacular passages, we have attempted to render them into a similar English  register. 

One feature where we have deliberately avoided English archaism is in the trans lation of the 2nd-person pronouns, singular versus plural (and dual)—rendering all  of them with “you,” although it would occasionally have been useful to disambiguate between singular and plural. In part this is an English stylistic choice: a consistent distinction between “thou/thee” and “ye/you” quickly becomes wearisome for  the reader. But it would also produce a misleadingly archaic impression; the distinction between the singular and plural [/dual] 2nd-person pronouns remains a feature  in Sanskrit throughout its history, and, though the dual was lost, the singular-plural  distinction was also a feature of Middle Indo-Aryan.+++(4)+++ Therefore this same distinction in Vedic Sanskrit carried no stylistic weight at all; it’s simply an unremarkable  feature of the grammar, and the obsolete English “thou” would distort the effect  of the text. 

## Word placement
An area where the balancing act between R̥gvedic style and English intelligibility most tests the translator is in the placement of words. The R̥gvedic poet may set  a word at the beginning of a verse or hemistich to draw special attention to it, or  hold back words until the end of the verse to surprise his audience or cause them  to change their expectations about the meaning of the line.+++(5)+++ He may position identical or similar elements in the same place in a sequence of verses in order to build  larger rhetorical units or to emphasize the similarity of ideas in the verses, or may  scramble elements that underlyingly belong together in order to produce a mosaic  effect, whose contours only become clear over time. In short, the poet can use the  placement of words in order to unfold his ideas in a particular and deliberate way.  The freer word order that an inflected language and a shared poetic diction allow  gave the poets flexibility in arranging their verse. 

Our translation does not aspire to  be poetic, and our medium is the highly uninflected English language. Nonetheless,  we have been reluctant to surrender all attempts to follow the poets’ positioning of  elements, and have tried to follow the order of words and ideas as well as we can,  especially in cases where the verbal positioning seems to make a particular rhetorical or conceptual point. The result is an English that is not quite natural. 

Apart  from preserving the structure of the verse and the unfolding of ideas, there are  other advantages we see in adopting this style. It reminds readers that the R̥gveda  is elevated and solemn poetry, and it signals that even for the composers and their  audience the language of the R̥gveda was not everyday speech and the expression  of ideas in the text was not designed to be direct and pellucid.+++(5)+++ A translation into  a too fluent and colloquial English would produce a very misleading impression  of the original. We hope that this style of translation will slow readers enough to  allow them to sense the style of the original, while not rendering the English too  impenetrable.

## Lexical range
One of the features of almost all previous translations of the text, as well as the  scholarly paraphernalia, like dictionaries, that have supported these translations, is  that the lexical range in the translation language is very narrow and tends toward  the abstract, the general, and the overlapping. It’s a standing joke among Vedicists  that all verbs mean “shine,” “sing,” “speed,” or “give”; all adjectives, “bright” or  “swift”; all nouns, “praise.” This monotony contrasts sharply with the variety and  color of the R̥gveda’s Sanskrit. As we have already noted, Grassmann’s lexicon of  the R̥gveda is enormous compared to the size of the text (there must be somewhere  in the digital world a metric for evaluating lexical diversity per text size). The “sing/  speed/shine” translational style severely flattens this lexical richness.+++(5)+++ It is as if all the  verbal exuberance of Shakespeare were squeezed into the neo-classical spareness of  a French dramatist like Racine. This habit not only robs the translation of its verbal diversity but, perhaps more  important, of its metaphorical content. Translators are usually not semantically  wrong when they translate a verb as, say, “shine,” but they are often translating the  underlying sense of a metaphor rather than the more vivid, and often more jarring,  image evoked by a more precise word. To give a single example, there is a verbal  root √ribh that seems literally to mean “croak,” “creak,” “rasp,” “squawk”—used,  for example, of the sound of a creaky wagon, or of a crackling fire. It is also frequently used of poets and praise-singers, and a nominal derivative of it, rebhá, is  regularly applied to poets.+++(5)+++ But—no surprise—the standard rendering in current  translations and dictionaries is “singer”—German “Sänger”—and this certainly  correctly identifies the referent of the word. But the particular voice quality, perhaps “hoarse” or “husky,” is sacrificed to making a fluent and easily interpreted  translation—not scaring the horses, as it were, by suggesting that the singers were  anything but mellifluous. 

The twentieth century saw much progress in limiting and pinpointing the mean ing of many R̥gvedic words, and in appreciating their position in linguistic register  (e.g., solemn and hieratic vs. colloquial vs. technical vs. unmarked and general).  Incorporating these results makes for a much more vivid text, but also a “spikier” one, with unsettling or discordant images or juxapositions of concepts. To  return to the √ribh example just given, a translation like “hear the poet as he rasps”  (VIII.37.7) is more likely to take the reader aback than “hear the praise-singing  poet” (Geldner’s “den lobsingenden...”), but a simile in a passage also containing  this verb, IX.97.57 “the poets squawk like birds of prey,” supports the less easy  interpretation. In that passage Geldner’s attempt to rescue it so radically attenuates  the phrase that it becomes close to incomprehensible: “the seers become audible  like vultures” (“werden die Seher lautbar wie die Geier”). 

## Metaphors
In our translation we have aimed, again, for the literal, and sometimes discordant, sense of the word—even if the literal sense was a dead metaphor for contemporary speakers. We have, in fact, no way to determine whether a metaphor was  dead or alive at the time of composition, and in any case, even if at the time of com position it was dead, it had been previously a metaphor with real poetic heft. 

## Uniformity of translation
On the other hand, we have not been able entirely to follow the austere and chaste principle  of Bergaigne and Thieme—to translate a particular word always in the same way,  no matter what the context. Attempts to do so often produce unintelligible English,  whereas some adjustment to context aids the reader to grasp the sense. Thus our  translation has been a balancing act between the flattening effect of rendering the  underlying sense as opposed to the literal surface and a too principled adherence to  a single literal meaning for every word regardless of context. 

## Deliberate difficulty
In representing the spikier and more difficult style that we see in the R̥gveda,  in contrast to the translation tradition that has attempted to smooth out the difficulties, fill in the gaps, and aim for clarity above all, at the expense of the literal  meaning and obscure style of the original, we have been aided by the sheer chance  of the age we live in. As the discussion above has repeatedly suggested, newer ways  of looking at the text have the unintended result of making the text “harder.” The  images are more striking but also more obscure; the lexicon is more specific but the  combinations of words therefore less harmonious; the ritual underpinnings cannot  be glossed over, however bizarre and “unpoetic” the actions depicted may seem. We  think the result is truer to the spirit of the text than the easy flow of older translations and also truer to our age. It must have been difficult to appreciate the polished  obscurities of R̥gvedic verse before the twentieth century enshrined deliberate difficulty in poetry as a preeminent sign of serious verbal art. So Ezra Pound and  T. S. Eliot begat our poets Vasiṣṭha and Viśvāmitra, in a paradoxical reversal of the  paternal relationship that a R̥gvedic bard would relish. 

## Verbosity, ellipsis
Stylistically the R̥gveda is a dense and compact text. This results from at least  two factors. On the one hand, the elaborate morphology of Sanskrit allows a  parsimony of words, as opposed to the diffuse nature of a language like English.  To choose one example, this from the Atharvaveda (III.20.8):  the two-word  clause áditsantaṃ dāpayatu necessarily translates into at least eleven English  words:  “Let him cause the man not wishing to give to give.” There is no way  to reproduce the verbal spareness of Sanskrit in a language like English, which  needs a plethora of function words to render the less assertive moving parts of  Sanskrit morphology. 

But in addition to the purely linguistic aspect, we must reckon with the narrow  shared universe of discourse in the text. We have previously discussed the formulaic nature of R̥gvedic rhetoric. The shared deep-structure verbal formulae and the  shared knowledge of the nature of R̥gvedic gods, rituals, and religious principles  and beliefs allow the poets to refer to such knowledge with a kind of verbal short hand—truncated or twisted formulae, brief and recherché allusions, and so forth.  Deliberate ellipsis is an important stylistic feature of the text, with the audience  invited and expected to fill the ellipsis. 

These issues present the translators with at least two problems (in addition to  figuring out what is actually going on). 

- First, to try to reflect the density of the  text in a language that is not well adapted to this style—a balancing act through out the translation. 
- Second, to determine when to supply material not found in the particular context, and what to supply. 

Although we began the translation with  the determination to supply nothing not found in the passage itself, this principle  came to seem not only unworkable but also contrary to the practice of the poets,  since they often rely on shared knowledge to allow their contemporary audience  to “fill in the blanks” of allusive expressions. But we have tried to avoid the regrettable tendency of some translators to supply material without any methodological controls. Instead, supplied material in our translation is either generated from  material recoverable from the passage itself (e.g., verbs or nouns in the same or  adjacent verses) or from parallel phrases elsewhere in the text. Here the study of the  parallel passages adduced by Geldner in his notes has been absolutely crucial for  our interpretation, as well as other types of parallel phraseology, the discovery of  which has been much aided by Lubotsky’s R̥gvedic Word Concordance (1997). We  have thus attempted to allow the poets and the verbal connections they have forged  to determine what a passage needs for completion, rather than simply to follow our  own whims and a common-sense notion of what has been omitted, since “common  sense” is a culture-specific quality. 

Most of the material we have supplied has been placed in parentheses, in order  to indicate that it is the result of our extrapolation and is not found explicitly in the  text itself. Although parenthetical additions can sometimes be distracting, the possibility of misleading readers about what is actually there and what is not, in a text  where almost nothing can be taken for granted, seemed to us a sufficient danger to  require major additions to be overtly signaled. However, some supplied material  has been silently slipped into the text proper, especially necessary English function  words that lack obligatory Sanskrit counterparts. For example, 

- Sanskrit does not  obligatorily supply definite or indefinite articles (“the” vs. “a[n]”) and in fact does  not have either category as a separate grammatical marker. But English requires  them and we have supplied them; this often forces a choice on the translators as  to whether a noun is indefinite (“a horse”) or definite (“the horse”), but in most  such cases of ambiguity we have considered it a kindness to the reader not to indicate the uncertainty with parentheses. 
- Likewise for possessive pronouns: Sanskrit  regularly does not overtly mark pronominal possession (“his horse”) where English  does, and in cases where the possessor seems fairly clear we have often supplied the  possessive without parenthetical marking. 
- We also regularly supply pronouns for  repeated objects and the like, of the type “praise you and beseech you” rather than  “praise you and beseech (you),” unless the construction and meaning are unclear  or disputed. 
- And, since Sanskrit does not have mandatory surface subjects because  the verb encodes the person and number of its subject, while English requires  subjects to be expressed, we have had to supply pronominal subjects, which has  required us on occasion to choose the gender of the subject (“he” vs. “she” vs. “it”).  
- Occasionally too, while the elliptical style of the R̥gveda might not repeat a verb or  other crucial word in proximate clauses, good English often must do so. In these  cases we have repeated the crucial word without indicating the absence of this repetition in the Sanskrit text.

A rarely used sign in our translations is the asterisk (*), which indicates that  the translation rests on an emendation. Since we seldom resort to emendation, the  asterisk will be encountered only occasionally. 
