+++
title = "16"

+++
The question in this vs. is how to interpr. the simile in pāda b, diváś citráṃ ná tanyatúm. It has been variously rendered. Note first that in none of the available interpr.

(that I know of) is the simile particle ná positioned in the expected 2nd position, so that conforming to the usual structure of the simile cannot be used as a criterion to decide which interpr. is correct. We have had occasion to note this issue before in Maṇḍala IX; see disc.

ad IX.57.3. Re takes the whole of b as a simile, with the “thunder” matching “light” (c) in the frame; in addition he supplies a different subject for the simile: “Pavamāna a engendré la haute lumière propre à (Agni) Vaiśvānara, / comme (les dieux ont engendré) le tonnerre éclatante du ciel.” This is not impossible, of course, but introducing the gods seems unnecessary, and are they the usual creators of thunder anyway? Lü’s (266) interpr. is similar, though he allows Pavamāna as subj. of both the simile and the frame. I find Ge’s interpr. more appealing: he considers tanyatúm part of the frame, with the simile restricted to diváś citrám. “Sich läuternd hat er den Donner, grell wie den des Himmels, hervorgebracht.” The c pāda provides a parallel object, rather than constituting the frame as in the Re/Lü interpr. My tr. essentially follows Ge. The “thunder” that Soma engendered is the noise produced by the pressing, esp. by the pressing stones, which is constantly remarked on. It is comparable to the thunder of heaven. All interpr. must silently reckon with the synaesthesia introduced by the point of the comparison in the simile, citrá- ‘bright, brilliant, glittering, dazzling’, an adj. that ordinarily characterizes visual phenomena not auditory ones (though it’s a not uncommon transfer; cf. Engl. “brilliant tone,” etc., used of voices and musical instruments). For a similar ex. cf. VI.6.2 śvitānas tanyatúḥ “brightening thunder.” This synaesthetic comparison provides a lead-in to the second object, the “light belonging to all men.” Both Ge and Re take jyótir vaiśvānarám as referring to Agni Vaiśvānara specifically.

This is certainly possible, though it is not the soma pressing that ordinarily kindles the ritual fire. I prefer to take it more generally as shared light, perhaps localized as the sun, which would continue the heavenly theme of pāda b. Alternatively, this pāda, which is entirely in the neuter, may be nominative not accusative and refer to Soma himself. This interpr. may be favored by the matching pāda at the end of the tṛca, 18c jyótir víśvam svàr dṛśé “(as) light for everyone to see the sun,” where the soma sap—that is, soma itself—is identified as this light. I would therefore suggest an alternative tr. of pāda c here: “(he) the lofty light belonging to all men.”

