+++
title = "03"

+++
As Ge suggests, the imagery in the first hemistich seems to come from chariot racing. Pāda b is identical to V.31.11d (save for the ps. of the verb), a verse concerned with the chariot contest between Indra and the Sun. Putting smthg in front must simply refer to placing it in the lead, but in a ritual context like this one, there is interference between that sense and the ritual action of placing the offering fire to the east, also expressed by purás √dhā and regularly represented by the epithet of Agni puróhita-. But since Indra is never the agent of that ritual action and since it is the fire, not the sacrifice, that is put in front ritually, the chariot race interpr. must be primary here. In saying this, I find myself in disagreement with Bloomfield, who says “The repeated pāda fits well in 4.20.3, is dubious in 5.31.11,” without commenting on either the fit or the dubiousness.

The Engl. phrase “gain our intention” is somewhat awk. What saniṣyasi krátuṃ naḥ means, I think, is that Indra’s action of putting the sacrifice in front will cause him to win the race, which is what we want to happen. But objects of the root √san are usually concrete (vā́jam, etc., as in vā́jasātau in 2d; cf. also sanáye dhãnānām “to gain the stakes” in the next pāda) and also things that the grammatical subject desires to win, so my suggested indirect benefit is somewhat anomalous. So it is possible that “our krátu” that Indra will win is something he wants -- perhaps our intention or resolve to sacrifice to him, not to other gods.

