+++
title = "04"

+++
On this vs. see Thieme, Mitra and Aryaman, 83-85.

sambhújam in c is analysed by Gr as a 1st sg. subj. or injunc. (his “Co.”) to a thematic aorist and is so rendered by Ge (“von dem ich Nutzen haben möchte”), though he expresses doubts in his n. However, this aor. stem does not otherwise exist: the multiple bhujema forms, apparent optatives in mā́prohibitives, are convincingly explained by Hoffmann (Injunk. 95-97) as reanalysed from an expression with the infinitive bhujé followed by enclitic 1st ps. pronoun. Moreover, act. forms to this root should mean ‘give pleasure’, not ‘derive pleasure’ (cf. bhuñjatī́ I.48.5). Old (Noten) already disputed the verbal interpr. of sambhújam, and it is now generally taken as a nominal (so Thieme, Mitra and Aryaman, although in Fremdling [16 n. 2, 105] he takes it as a verb; Hoffmann, Injunk. 96 n. 197; Re; Scar 358), though WG tr. it as a verb, allowing for the nominal possibility in their n. Assuming that sambhújam is nominal, the problem is how to fill out the defective rel. cl. yásya sambhújam. Most supply a verb like “we eat” or “we expect,” e.g., Scar. “von dem ich Genuss (erwarte, o. ä).” The publ. tr. takes GEN sambhújam as a possessive expression: “whose common meal (it is)” à “who has a common meal,” further extended to “who offers a common meal.” I find this more satisfying syntactically than the invention of a verb, but it runs into morphological difficulty: by my tr. the meal should be nominative, and if sambhújam belongs to a root noun paradigm, it can only be a masc. acc. sg. This forces me into the unhappy position of assuming a root-accented neut. thematic stem -bhúja-, which may be unlikely enough morphologically to persuade me to supply a verb to govern the acc. 