+++
title = "Praśna II, Paṭala 9, Khaṇḍa 22"

+++
## 01
1. A dress of materials procured in the woods (skins or bark) is ordained for him. [^1] 

## 02
2. Then he shall wander about, sustaining his life by roots, fruits, leaves, and grass. [^2] 

## 03
3. In the end (he shall live on) what has become detached spontaneously.

## 04
4. Next he shall live on water, (then) on air, then on ether. [^3] 

## 05
5. Each following one of these modes of subsistence is distinguished by a (greater) reward.

## 06
6. Now some (teachers) enjoin for the hermit the successive performance (of the acts prescribed for the several orders). [^4] 

## 07
7. After having finished the. study of the Veda, having taken a wife and kindled the sacred fires, he shall begin the rites, which end with the Soma-sacrifices, (performing) as many as are prescribed in the revealed texts.

## 08
8. (Afterwards) he shall build a dwelling, and dwell outside the village with his wife, his children, and his fires, [^5] 

## 09
9. Or (he may live) alone.

## 10
10. He shall support himself by gleaning corn. [^6] 

## 11
11. And after that he shall not any longer take presents.

## 12
12. And he shall sacrifice (only) after having bathed (in the following manner):

## 13
13. He shall enter the water slowly, and bathe without beating it (with his hand), his face turned towards the sun.

## 14
14. This rule of bathing is valid for all (castes and orders).

## 15
15. Some enjoin (that he shall prepare) two sets of utensils for cooking and eating, (and) of choppers, hatchets, sickles, and mallets. [^7] 

## 16
16. He shall take one of each pair (of instruments), give the others (to his wife), and (then) go into the forest.

## 17
17. After that time (he shall perform) the burnt-oblations, (sustain) his life, (feed) his guests, and (prepare) his clothes with materials produced in the forest. [^8] 

## 18
18. Rice must be used for those sacrifices for which cakes mixed with meat (are employed by the householder).

## 19
19. And all (the Mantras), as well as the daily portion of the Veda, (must be recited) inaudibly.

## 20
20. He shall not make the inhabitants of the forest hear (his recitation). [^9] 

## 21
21. (He shall have) a house for his fire (only).

## 22
22. He himself (shall live) in the open air.

## 23
23. His couch and seat, must not be covered (with mats).

## 24
24. If he obtains fresh grain, he shall throw away the old (store). [^10] 



[^1]:  22. Manu VI, 6.

[^2]:  Manu VI, 5, 21; Yājñ. III, 46.

[^3]:  'Then he shall live on ether, i.e. eat nothing at all.'--Haradatta. Manu VI, 31; Yājñ. III, 55.

[^4]:  'The word atha, "now," introduces a different opinion. Above, it has been declared that the life in the woods (may be begun) after the studentship only. But some teachers enjoin just for that hermit a successive performance of the acts.

[^5]:  Manu VI, 3 seq.; Yājñ. III, 45.

[^6]:  Haradatta thinks that this rule refers both to the hermit who lives with his family and to him who lives alone. Others refer it to the latter only.

[^7]:  According to Haradatta, the word kāja appears to designate a 'mallet;' in the passage from the Rāmāyaṇa quoted in the Petersburg Dict. the commentator explains it by peṭaka, 'basket.'

[^8]:  Yājñ. III, 46.

[^9]:  This Sūtra explains the word upāṃśu, 'inaudibly.'

[^10]:  Manu VI, 15; Yājñ. III, 47.