+++
title = "03"

+++
The simile in the first pāda of this verse is quite problematic: not only is the image intended quite unclear, but the verbal stem śrāya- in participial śrāyanta(ḥ) (so Pp., Gr. rather śrāyante) is a near hapax (only here in the RV, other instances in MS I.8.2, TĀr. IV.2.5 = ĀpŚS XV.3.7). Most tr. take it as transitive ‘cooking’ (so Ge, e.g.); Old argues that sū́ryam should be the object: “like those cooking the sun, as it were,” while Ge takes bhakṣata as the governing verb (“As [people] cooking use [nutzen] the sun, they enjoy [geniessen] all [the goods] of Indra” - ‘nutzen’ and ‘geniessen’ must be his alternative tr. of abhakṣata depending on the object).

However, Narten (“Vedic śrīṇāti, gr. κρείων, κρέων,” KZ 100 [1987]: 270-96 = Kl Sch 340-66, cited after latter) points out (p. 342 n. 3) that the stem is elsewhere intrans. with the meaning ‘gar werden’ and tr. the hemistich “wie gar werdende (= sich erhitzende) Leute (Anteil) an der Sonne (haben), so haben sie Anteil an allen (Gütern) des Indra,” flg. a suggestion of Hoffmann’s. The TĀ=ĀpŚS passage explicitly connects “getting done/cooked” with the sun: sūryasya harasā śrāya “become cooked by the glow/heat of the sun.” The Narten-Hoffmann interpretation is followed here, though I am still somewhat puzzled both about the content of the simile and about its relevance to the frame. For the first, getting cooked does not usually require the mediation of the sun but rather of fire, so literally “having a share in the sun” at best ought to mean the “share” of the sun that is actually fire. This is not terribly satisfactory, so, with Narten we must therefore interpret “getting cooked” metaphorically (but not too metaphorically), as indicating heated or excited people whose state is likened to heating by the sun. But even with this interpretation of the simile, there seem far less tortuous ways to indicate that people share in Indra’s goods than to compare this to heated-up people sharing in the sun. However, the transitive interpretations do not improve the sense: Old’s cooking the sun would require quite a lot of metaphor to rescue it, and the same problem with Narten’s interpretation - that cooking doesn’t require the sun - affects Ge’s transitive version.

The only reason I can see for the sun to make this distinctly odd appearance in the simile of pāda a is to prepare us for its implicit appearance in the second hemistich. With Ge I assume that the subject of the loc. absol. in c is the sun, which is born every day, and whose “birth” at dawn sets the early morning ritual in motion, the rite at which the dakṣiṇās are distributed. Ge suggests that jāté jánamāne is metri causa for an āmreḍita jāté-jāte, but this seems unlikely. This is the only occurrence of the middle participle to jána- and indeed one of the only middle forms of this rare 1st class pres. stem (most of the others are -anta 3rd plurals that are re-marked actives; see Jamison "Voice Fluctuation in the Rig Veda: Medial 3rd plural -anta in Active Paradigms", IIJ 21 [1979] 146-69). I would hesitate to suppose that a Rigvedic poet would create a new participial stem simply to avoid a metrical problem. Instead I think he is making a temporal point: the sun has been born previous (jāté) and when he is being born again, that is, at the moment the ritual commences, we think about the goods that will come to us in the ritual.

Note that bhakṣata of the first hemistich is reprised by a nominal derivative of √bhaj, bhāgám, in the second, and that the “goods” that need to be supplied in ab are present as vásūni in c. This interdependence of the two half-verses supports the notion that the sū́ryam of a is a pretaste of the unexpressed sun of c. The next pragātha, vss. 5-6, may show the same covert interdependence; see disc. ad 5c.

