+++
title = "Praśna II, Paṭala 10, Khaṇḍa 26"

+++
## 01
1. A (king) who, without detriment to his servants, gives land and money to Brāhmaṇas according to their deserts gains endless worlds. [^1] 

## 02
2. They say (that) a king, who is slain in attempting to recover the property of Brāhmaṇas, (performs) a sacrifice where his body takes the place of the sacrificial post, and at which an unlimited fee is given. [^2] 

## 03
3. Hereby have been declared (the rewards of) other heroes, who fall fighting for a (worthy) cause. [^3] 

## 04
4. He shall appoint men of the first three castes, who are pure and truthful, over villages and towns for the protection of the people. [^4] 

## 05
5. Their servants shall possess the same qualities.

## 06
6. They must protect a town from thieves in every direction to the distance of one yojana. [^5] 

## 07
7. (They must protect the country to the distance of) one krośa from each village. [^6] 

## 08
8. They must be made to repay what is stolen within these (boundaries). [^7] 

## 09
9. The (king) shall make them collect the lawful taxes (śulka). [^8] 

## 10
10. A learned Brāhmaṇa is free from taxes, [^9] 

## 11
11. And the women of all castes, [^10] 

## 12
12. And male children before the marks (of puberty appear),

## 13
13. And those who live (with a teacher) in order to study,

## 14
14. And those who perform austerities, being intent on fulfilling the sacred law, [^11] 

## 15
15. And a Śūdra who lives by washing the feet,

## 16
16. Also blind, dumb, deaf, and diseased persons (as long as their infirmities last),

## 17
17. And those to whom the acquisition of property is forbidden (as Sannyāsins).

## 18
18. A young man who, decked with ornaments, enters unintentionally (a place where) a married woman or a (marriageable) damsel (sits), must be reprimanded. [^12] 

## 19
19. But he does it intentionally with a bad purpose, he must be fined. [^13] 

## 20
20. If he has actually committed adultery, his organ shall be cut off together with the testicles.

## 21
21. But (if he has had intercourse) with a (marriageable) girl, his property shall be confiscated and he shall be banished.

## 22
22. Afterwards the king must support (such women and damsels),

## 23
23. And protect them from defilement.

## 24
24. If they agree to undergo the (prescribed) penance, he shall make them over to their (lawful) guardians. [^14] 



[^1]:  26. Manu VII, 83, 84, 88; Yājñ. I, 314.

[^2]:  According to Haradatta the king's body represents the post (yūpa), his soul the sacrificial animal, the recovered property the reward for the priests or fee.

[^3]:  Manu VII, 89; Yājñ. I, 323, 324.

[^4]:  Manu VII, 115-124; Yājñ. I, 321.

[^5]:  Yājñ. II, 271-272. A yojana is a distance of 4 krośa, kos.

[^6]:  A krośa, kos, or gāu, literally 'the lowing of a cow,' is variously reckoned at 1½-4 miles.

[^7]:  Yājñ. I, 272. This law is, with certain modifications, still in force. See Bombay Regulations, XII, 27 par.

[^8]:  According to Haradatta, who quotes Gautama in his commentary, the śulka is the 1/20th part of a merchant's gains. On account of the Sūtras immediately following, it is, however, more probable that the term is here used as a synonym of 'kara,' and includes all taxes. 'Lawful' taxes are, of course, those sanctioned by custom and approved of by the Smṛtis.

[^9]:  Manu VII, 133.

[^10]:  Haradatta thinks that the rule applies to women of the Anuloma, the pure castes, only.

[^11]:  'Why does be say "intent on fulfilling the holy law?" Those shall not be free from taxes who perform austerities in order to make their magic charms efficacious.'--Haradatta.

[^12]:  The ornaments would indicate that he was bent on mischief. Compare above, I, 11, 32, 6.

[^13]:  'The punishment must be proportionate to his property and the greatness of his offence. The term "with a bad purpose" is added, because he who has been sent by his teacher (to such a place) should not be punished.'--Haradatta. Manu VIII, 354; Yājñ. II, 284.

[^14]:  'I.e. a married woman to her husband or father-in-law an unmarried damsel to her father or to her brother.'--Haradatta.