+++
title = "01"

+++
The usual ambiguity of jára- ‘awake’ or ‘sing’, with the usual possible double application in a context like this, though járamāṇasya in 4a speaks for ‘sing’.

In c usrā́ is taken as du. by Gr., flg. the Pp. However, it more likely represents usrā́ḥ in sandhi, a gen. sg. fem. See extensive disc. by Old ad II.39.2, as well as his brief acknowledgement of this underlying form in his comm. on this vs..; Ge’s tr. reflects this interpr. Inter alia, 3 (V.3.8, 45.8, VIII.46.21) of the 5 occurrences of vyúṣi are preceded by a fem. gen. sg. asyā́(ḥ), referring to Dawn, and the 4th (besides this one) has a voc. of Dawn uṣo vyúṣi (VII.81.2). On fem. gen. sg. usrā́ḥ see comm. ad VI.3.6 In his n. 1d Ge hesitates about the root affiliation of the desid. yúyūṣataḥ (√yu ‘join’ or √yu ‘separate’) and the function of pári (preverb or adposition). Although his tr. reflects a root affiliation to ‘join’ (“… zu umspannen suchen”), he offers an alternative tr. in the n. reflecting ‘separate’ (“… fortzurücken suchen”), an interpr.

followed by Heenen (Desid. 209). Such an interpr. would be conceptually possible: in the dim light of dawn and the morning mists, the Aśvins allow the boundaries of earth to be seen by “separating” them. However, I consider √yu ‘join’ more likely, in the sense, with pári, of ‘encompass’, referring to the usual round-the-world journey of the Aśvins. The constr. seems a conflation or crossing of the usual sadyáḥ [H+E] pári √i/yā [/VERB OF MOTION] expression “encircle heaven and earth in a single day,” as in I.115.3, 128.3, III.58.8, IV.45.7, etc., with the prior act of harnessing (√yu) the horses. For passages that incl. ántān (as here), see V.47.4, X.108.5: e.g., V.47.4 diváś caranti pári sadyó ántān “They circle around the ends of heaven in a single day.”

