+++
title = "03"

+++
This vs. presents a different type of grammatical disharmony, though it again concerns how to construe the first pāda. Once again it begins with du. tā́, but in this case that prn. can be the subj. of the 2nd dual pf. ūhathuḥ. (Though by my rules,= I would prefer not to have a 3rd ps. prn serving as subj. to a non-imperatival verb [see my “sa figé”], I do have to reckon with a fairly clear ex. in 6ab.) The problems lie in 1) vartíḥ ‘circuit’ and 2) yád. To begin with the 2nd, if yád is functioning as a subordinating conjunction and ab is a single clause, ūhathuḥ in b should be accented.

(It is not clear to me what Ge does with the yád; he seems just to ignore it.) Now yád is badly positioned for a clausal subordinator, and it is possible that rather than being a subordinating conjunction it’s functioning as a sort of izafe in the phrase tyád vartír yád áradhram, connecting the adj. áradhram to vartíḥ. I would be inclined to that interpr. if it weren’t for the problem of vartíḥ itself. This noun is always the complement of the verb √yā in the phrase “drive the/a/your circuit,” incl. in this same hymn, 10ab … vartíḥ … yātam, and in the next one, with phraseology similar to ours, VI.63.2 pári ha tyád vartír yāthaḥ … It would be very difficult to make it the obj. of ūhathuḥ, which already has an obj. of its own in any case. But the preceding pāda, 2d, has a form of √yā, and I suggest that we simply supply it in 3a as well, which is again pendant on the preceding vs. By this interpr., subordinating yád is still badly positioned, but it could have been displaced by the insistently fronted tā́in this section of the hymn. I take áradhram as a neut. adv., but it could also modify vártiḥ (“unslackening circuit”) without benefit of an izafe.

The lexeme pári √śi means lit. ‘lie around’ and is used, e.g., of Vṛtra surrounding the flood in IV.19.2, etc. Assuming that śayádhyai, pári here belongs to the same lexeme, it must have a developed sense: to surround and thus circumscribe, keep within bounds. Why a “pious mortal” would be pursuing a course that needs such control is not clear to me. I suppose it could just mean that, since the Aśvins circle around the earth (1cd), that circle marks the boundaries of where humans can wander.

Note the echo effect of vártiḥ (a) / vyáthiḥ (d).

