+++
title = "05"

+++
This verse presents some interlocking syntactic and lexical problems.

Unlike Ge, I take pādas b and c together. Splitting them requires him to supply a verb for b (“brachst”) again lacking support or necessity. Presumably again he is following the Pp, which analyzes śatatamā́viveṣīḥ as containing unaccented aviveṣīḥ.

I prefer to accent it and thus allow it to be the verb of the yád clause beginning in b.

In either case śatatamā́is a problem. Everyone wants it to be the 100th thing (probably púr- ‘fortification’) that Indra destroys (after the 99 in b). Gr suggests reading śatatamā́m, which would provide the desired feminine accusative (agreeing with púr-), but among other things would damage the meter (since, s.v. viṣ, he is still reading an augmented aviveṣīḥ). Ge suggests that it [what is unspecified, presumably the sandhi agglomeration] is to be dissolved (“aufzulösen”) into masc. śatatamám, and the 100th thing that Indra destroys is Śambara himself. He makes no mention of meter, though this dissolution would cause the same metrical problem. Old suggests 16 supplying neut. pl. cyautnā́ni (without translating), but I don’t see how an ordinal “hundredth” can qualify all hundred items in the plural. There is a much simpler solution: to take śatatamā́as a feminine instrumental with the old ending -ā.

Although Old claims (in arguing against Gr) that the fem. stem should be śatatamī́-, this is simply wrong. See AiG II.2 §457, which establishes -ā as the rule and -ī as the rare exception. Cf. for -tama-stems purutámā- of Uṣas and mātŕ̥tamā-, and for ordinals the well-attested feminine prathamā́-. Or, if Ge is correct that the reference is to Śambara himself, śatatamā́can be a masculine instr. sg. In either case the text can stand as it is, with no metrical or sandhi problems, and the syntax can be rescued.

Ge takes nivéśane in c as ‘at evening’. The word generally means ‘causing to settle down’ (the usual association of -ana-nominals with the transitive-causative áya-formations) or, as a noun, ‘settling down’, and is sometimes associated with Savitar’s bringing the world to rest in the evening (IV.53.6, I.35.1, VI.71.2), an association that must have led to Ge’s tr. But the word never otherwise means ‘evening’. I read it with its full lexical value, but with a sinister edge. “Bringing them to rest” is a euphemism like ásvāpayaḥ ‘you put to sleep’ in 4d. Old mentions the “going to rest” possibility, but opts instead for “in the dwelling place (of the enemy).” Again, there seems to me no reason for this attenuation of the meaning.

The root √viṣ means ‘work, work over’, or here ‘work to the end’, again used in a slightly euphemistic sense. Note the phonetic echo between nivéśane and (a)viveṣīr.

The d pāda is a perfect chiasmus, even to the positioning of a conjunction between verb and object: áhañ ca vṛtrám námucim utā́han. The mixture of ca and utá is curious. Klein (DGRV I.186-87) is not sure how to analyze it; he suggests either that it’s a “both … and” type of construction, with each conjunction appearing 2nd in its phrase (or so I interpr. his lapidary disc.), or that “ca is a sentential conjunction adjoining d to the rest of the stanza, and utá conjoins the clauses of d.” I prefer the former.

