+++
title = "07"

+++
My construction of the first hemistich differs from Ge’s, both with regard to the syntactic role of te and the sense of páriṣṭau and leads to a very different interpretation of the meaning. The latter word, literally ‘encirclement’, is generally taken as always negative, a tight spot or constriction (Ge’s “in dieser Klemme”), but I find this interpretation hard to reconcile with the hic-et-nunc deictic asyā́m, since the poet has given no indication that he is currently in distress. (Ge’s note suggests that this is a memory of the situation in VII.18, the Ten Kings battle, but this seems to me an ill-supported attempt to account for the deictic.) I therefore think the páriṣṭihere is positive - Indra’s encirclement (that is, protection) of us now - and te is to be construed with páriṣṭau: “in this enclosure (that is, protection) of yours.” Weak support for this may be provided by the first pāda of the next verse, 8a, where … te … abhíṣṭau# matches … te … páriṣṭau# here, with rhyming forms and identical morphology - and a parallel positive sense: “in your charge.” There is also a parallel in the next hymn, in roughly the same part of the hymn, with te asyā́m as here and a string of locatives: VII.20.8 … te asyā́m sumataú …várūthe … nṛ́pītau “in this benevolence of yours, in your defense, in your protection for men.” In our passage Ge (followed by Scar 207) instead takes te as the subject of the infinitive parādaí; in order to make this work he has recast the sentence from one with 1st person subject (mā́… bhūma “may we not be…”) to one with 2nd ps. subject: “Nicht sollst du uns … dem Bösen preisgaben.” Scar’s tr. maintains the syntactic structure of the original, but otherwise follows Ge’s interpretation. Better is Keydana’s (Infinitive im Ṛgveda 156, 203) interpretation of parādaí as a passive infinitive, as I take it - though he still takes te as the ultimate agent of the handing over. Again, I don’t see that the poet has expressed any fear that Indra will betray them; rather, he hopes that the protection Indra provides them will keep any such ill-fortune from befalling them, a hope that is repeated in the next pāda.

The poet’s penchant for case disharmony (see 1cd above) recurs in pāda d, where I read priyā́saḥ both with gen. táva and with loc. sūríṣu.

