+++
title = "06"

+++
This vs. is syntactically more complex and ritually more technical than the other two vss. in this tṛca.

The most noteworthy form is the loc. inf. upastṛṇīṣáni, a hapax, not surprisingly. In my opinion it is possible to account for the creation of this form from context, albeit indirectly. The first vs. of this tṛca contains the well-attested 1st sg.

gṛṇīṣé (4b), belonging to the tight class of -sé 1st sgs. in the ‘praise/sing’ semantic sphere. Beside gṛṇīṣé there exists a -ṣáni infinitive gṛṇīṣáṇi (2x, incl. once in this maṇḍala, VI.15.6). I think our poet built upastṛṇīṣáṇi on the model of this gṛṇīṣáṇi, as a partial echo of gṛṇīṣé in 4b, based on the existence of 9th class presents to both of these roots. Because it echoes that 1st sg. I interpr. the predicated inf. with 1st ps. ref.

(“it [is mine] to lay …”). Once again, as in 4, the vaḥ refers to the poet’s fellow officiants.

In the ritual the ‘underlayer’ is the layer of butter spread on the ladle underneath the principal offering. Here it is used in a doubly metaphorical sense: the underlayer for Indra could presumably be configured physically as the barhis on which he would sit, but at another metaphorical remove it could refer to the recitations that provide him with a figurative foundation.

The poet then, by a clever trick, mobilizes this underlayer of words to serve as a metaphor for the multiplication of Indra’s forms of help for us. This is accomplished by means of a simile: vípo ná … ūtáyaḥ “forms of help like inspired words,” thus implicitly equating the two. These vípaḥ ‘inspired words’ (not, with Ge, ‘fingers’) are ours, in fact the very ukthá- found in pāda a, dependent on barháṇā.

The connection between the two is suggested by the phrase barháṇā vipáḥ “by the power of inspired speech” in VIII.63.7 (vipáḥ there is gen. sg., as opposed to our nom. pl. vípaḥ, as the accent shows). In cd the poet asserts that like our hymns, which rise to Indra, spreading from their position as interconnected (sakṣítaḥ ‘dwelling together’) underlayer, his forms of help will similarly grow up and out. On this vs. see also Scar (97).


<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/043/04-06.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>