+++
title = "12"

+++
The morphological identity and syntactic function of maghónaḥ in d are unclear. See esp. Old’s disc. It can be either acc. pl. or gen.-abl. sg. (or an irregular nom. pl., a possibility that Old considers and dismisses). The problem is that in neither case would it form part of a standard construction with the verb ā́√dabh. Ge (n. 12d) thinks of a double acc.: “trick (our) benefactors out of you” -- that is, the non-giving ones might scare Indra off from our sacrifice or get their invitation to him first, thereby depriving our maghavans of Indra’s presence. This certainly conforms to a regular worry that sacrificers express, but the construction is unprecedented. Old opts for the abl. sg. The purport of his interpr. is essentially the same as Ge’s: that the non-givers not trick Indra away from (abl.) the maghavan, which he sees as our human patron. The publ. tr. follows Old, though it might be clearer if it were “… not trick you away from (our) benefactor.” Although this construction is also unprecedented, adding an oblique complement to a transitive construction seems less radical to me than investing it with a second acc. However, I now see another problem with the Old solution: the tṛca opens with a voc. maghavan addressed to Indra (10a), so it might be odd to have another sg. form of this stem referring to a human. And I don’t see how to construe an abl. maghónaḥ referring to Indra in the same construction that contains an acc. tvā with the same reference. Nevertheless, I still favor Old’s interpr. and simply allow for this shift of reference; such a shift from divine to human is also necessary if the form is taken as plural, with Ge. There is another possibility, raised and dismissed by Old, that maghónaḥ is in fact acc. pl., but the two acc. are conjoined: “mögen nicht die Nichtgeber dich betrügen (und) die Spender.” This is not outside the realm of possibility.
