+++
title = "21"

+++
Given the parallelism of the phrase vṛ́ṣā síndhūnāṃ vṛṣabhá stíyānām, it is clear that the gen. pl. stíyānām must be in semantic complementarity with síndhūnām ‘of the rivers’. Almost the same pair is found in VII.5.2, with a substitution for the first nom.: netā́síndhūnāṃ vṛṣabhá stíyānām. Gr glosses stíyā- ‘Schneefeld, Gletscher’, but, given the relative lack of attention to snow and the like in the RV once the Indo-Aryans had left the high mountains mostly behind, some other type of water contrasting with rivers seems more likely -- with Ge’s “der stehenden Gewässer” a likely alternative (cf. also Lüders, Varuṇa I.144). Re’s “eauxstagnantes” (EVP XIII.56 and 141), though expressing a similar contrast, is less appealing because of the negative implication of “stagnant waters”: would Indra really want to be their bull? The question then is what the form is derived from; EWA classifies it with the root √styā ‘be stiff’, of limited attestation in Skt. but found also in MIA, which seems reasonable. However, I am tempted to see a primary or secondary association with √sthā ‘stand’, since forms of this root (with the sense ‘stand still’) can be used of waters. Cf., e.g., the famous phrase describiing the rushing of the waters freed by Indra in the Vṛtra battle in I.32.10 átiṣṭḥantīnām “of those (waters) not standing still.” Re (EVP XIII.141) in a lapidary comment -- “fait comme díya-” -- seems to hint at a direct derivation (díya- to √dā, then stíya- to √sthā) without pursuing it, and Lub (System, 104) tentatively suggests that it belongs to an *-i-enlarged form of √*steh2, viz. *steh2-i-, but doesn’t further spell out the details. The trick of course is to keep the laryngeal from aspirating the t; if we start with Lub’s root, the zero-grade *sth2-i- would presumably metathesize to *stih2 (as with √pā(y) ‘drink’: pītá-), which would yield stiy- before a vowel. But I have no commitment to such an analysis. In any case it is impossible to tell whether the form belongs to a short or a long a/ā stem, since it only shows up in the gen. pl.


<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/043/19-21.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>