+++
title = "01"

+++
The injunc sarji would probably be better tr. “has been sent surging,” per IH.

In c ā́pac chlókam indriyám seems illuminated by X.94.1 (one of the pressing stone hymns) ślókaṃ ghóṣam bhárathéndrāya “you bear your signal-call, your cry to Indra.” The ślóka- ‘signal call’ is the audible sign to Indra that soma is being prepared for him; in our passage I assume that the noisy journey of the soma after the filtering produces this ślóka-, just as the noise of the pressing stones in X.94.1 serves that purpose.

The lexeme práti √juṣ sometimes seems to mean what the simplex does: ‘enjoy’ with an acc. of the substance enjoyed, as in I.101.10 uśán havyā́ni práti no juṣasva “(Indra,) being eager, take pleasure in our oblations” (cf. VII.34.21). But sometimes this idiom takes a personal object, with the subject giving enjoyment to the object - a reversal of the usual situation. See III.33.8, VII.54.1, 2. In the latter hymn, we find in vs. 1 the dyadic yát tvémahe práti tán no juṣasva “When we entreat you, favor us in return,” which suggests that práti √juṣ comes as a response to a request of some sort. In vs. 2 pitéva putrā́n práti no juṣasva “Like a father his sons, favor us in return,” the acc. putrā́n in the simile shows the case of the obj. of the verb, which the enclitic naḥ conceals. The personal acc. is also found in our passage: práti devā́m̐ajuṣata práyobhiḥ. As these tr. show, I have generally tr. this idiom ‘favor in return’, but ‘favor in response’ might be better. I confess, however, that neither ‘in return’ or ‘in response’ quite works in our passage.

