+++
title = "+018"

+++
18 (534)
Battle of the Ten Kings: Indra (1–21), Sudās
Paijavana’s Dānastuti (22–25)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
25 verses: triṣṭubh
This very famous hymn, the first in Vasiṣṭha’s Indra cycle, relates, if we can use so  positive a term, the so-called Battle of the Ten Kings, in which King Sudās and his  Bharata followers, with Indra on their side, defeat an alliance of ten kings, which includes their former allies, the Pūrus. The hymn has long been used as a major  source for the reconstruction of R̥gvedic history, perhaps somewhat too credu lously, as the description of the battle is anything but clear and is also clearly full  of puns, derisive word plays, phonological deformations of the names of oppo nents, and other poetic tricks, all couched in slangy language. Since the “historical”  dimension of the hymn has been fully treated elsewhere (see especially Schmidt  1980 and Witzel 1995a), we will not discuss it further here.
The hymn falls into three parts. Verses 1–4 recall the aid that Indra has given us  in the past and ask for his help and gifts now. The poet names himself at the very  end of verse 4, which forms a clever ring with verse 1: the description of Indra in  1d, ... vásu... vániṣṭhaḥ “best gainer of goods,” is condensed into the poet’s own  name in 4d, vás(u)(ván)iṣṭhaḥ → vásiṣṭhaḥ. The language and contents of these first  four verses are well-crafted but unremarkable.
The battle proper and its immediate aftermath occupy verses 5–21; the battle  itself takes place in and around the Paruṣṇī River (see esp. vss. 8–10), whose course  seems to have been diverted during the battle and in which a number of the com batants seem to have drowned. The account, especially the earlier verses, seems to  mirror the confusion and chaos of battle itself (reminiscent on a much smaller scale  of Tolstoy’s great accounts of the unintelligible disorder of battle in War and Peace,  or of Stephen Crane’s in The Red Badge of Courage). The confusion begins to sort  itself out as Indra’s role becomes more prominently featured. It is emphasized sev eral times that the forces of Sudās were outnumbered but that Indra was able to  marshal this overmastered force to defeat their foes (esp. vss. 14, 17). This section  ends with several verses celebrating the victory and Indra’s benevolence (20–21).
The final four verses (22–25) are a dānastuti, praising the extravagant gifts of  Sudās to the poet, ending (vs. 25) by commending Sudās to the protection of the  Maruts.