+++
title = "THE ANIMAL SACRIFICExa0[^egg_365]."

+++


## 01
1. He performs the animal sacrifice. Now the animal sacrifice means cattle: thus, when he performs the animal sacrifice (paśubandha, the binding of the animal), it is in order that he may be possessed of cattle. Let him perform it at his home, thinking, 'I will bind (attach) cattle to my home.' Let him perform it in the season of abundant fodder, thinking, 'I will bind to myself cattle in a season of abundant fodder. For, whilst he is offering [^egg_366], the Sacrificer's fires become worn out, and so does the Sacrificer, along with the worn-out fires, and along with the Sacrificer his house and cattle.

[^egg_366]: 118:2 Viz. the Agnihotra every morning and evening.

## 02
2. And when he performs the animal sacrifice, he renews his fires, and so, along with the renewal of his fires, does the Sacrificer (renew himself), and along with the Sacrificer his house and cattle. And beneficial to life, indeed, is that redemption of his

own self [^egg_367]; for whilst he is offering the Sacrificer's fires long for flesh; they set their minds on the Sacrificer and harbour designs on him. In other fires [^egg_368] people do indeed cook any kind of meat, but these (sacrificial fires) have no desire for any other flesh but this (sacrificial animal), and for him to whom they belong.

[^egg_367]: 119:1 That is, the ransoming of one's own life from the sacrificial fires, by offering an animal victim to them in lieu of his own self.

[^egg_368]: 119:2 That is, in ordinary, culinary fires.

## 03
3. Now, when he performs the animal offering. he thereby redeems himself--male by male, for the victim is a male, and the Sacrificer is a male. And this, indeed, to wit, flesh, is the best kind of food: he thus becomes an eater of the best kind of food. Let not a year pass by for him without his offering; for the year means life: it is thus immortal life he thereby confers upon himself.

