+++
title = "+097"

+++
97 (809)
Soma Pavamāna
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi 1–3, Indrapramati Vāsiṣṭha 4–6, Vrṣ̥ agaṇa Vāsiṣṭha 7–9, Manyu  Vāsiṣṭha 10–12, Upamanyu Vāsiṣṭha 13–15, Vyāghrapād Vāsiṣṭha 16–18, Śakti  Vāsiṣṭha 19–21, Karṇaśrut Vāsiṣṭha 22–24, Mrḷ̥īka Vāsiṣṭha 25–27, Vasukra Vāsiṣṭha  28–30, Parāśara Śāktya 31–44, Kutsa Āṅgirasa 45–58
58 verses: triṣṭubh, arranged in trcas ̥
This is the longest hymn in the R̥gveda, consisting of fifty-eight verses, arranged  in three-verse units. It is also the last IXth Maṇḍala hymn in triṣṭubh. Despite  its extraordinary length, it can be analyzed as consisting of a series of originally  independent tr̥cas combined into one, and it therefore conforms to the prevailing  principles of arrangement in the Saṃhitā. In the first half (vss. 1–30) each tr̥ca is  attributed to Vasiṣṭha or to a different Vasiṣṭhid; the second half is divided between  two, non-Vasiṣṭhid, poets. If we assume that the tr̥ca division continues in this sec
ond half (as most scholars do), the Anukramaṇī ascription does not conform to  the tr̥ca division, as the first two verses of the tr̥ca of verses 43–45 are credited to  Parāśara Śāktya and the last one to Kutsa Āṅgirasa. There is also an extra verse,  most probably the final one (58), which contains the Kutsa refrain of Maṇḍala  I  (I.94.16cd, etc.). Although according to the Anukramaṇī each of these poets  is responsible for fourteen verses, there is no more apparent unity in these larger  stretches than in the individual tr̥cas of the first half.
As is often the case in such long, composite hymns, the tr̥cas exhibit varying  degrees of cohesiveness, from the tight and emphatic verbal repetitions of verses  49–51 to the diffuseness of groupings like verses 7–9, 40–42. Some of the tr̥cas,  though not thematically or verbally unified, have a third verse that marks it as final;  for instance, the first two tr̥cas (vss. 1–3, 4–6) each end with the Vasiṣṭha clan refrain  as the last pāda, and the final verse of three tr̥cas begins with a summary evā́ “thus”  (vss. 13–15, 19–21, 25–27), a word characteristic of final verses.
As might be expected, the contents of this hymn are also extremely various,  but generally exhibit the standard tropes of soma hymns:  the mechanisms of

soma preparation, including the journey across the filter and the mixing with  waters and with milk; the power of soma to incite the gods, especially Indra,  and the power of the ritualists and, especially, the poets, to strengthen the soma  for this task; and the rewards the ritualists will receive from properly prepar
ing the soma. Nonetheless, the hymn contains a number of striking similes and  metaphors, and some passages of great difficulty, chief among which is the tr̥ca  of verses 52–54, which may (or may not) be a dānastuti and whose translation  here is provisional in places. Note also verse 38, which in our interpretation con
tains an archaic formula denoting an archaic figure, the “Placer of the Sun” (see  Jamison 2010).