+++
title = "05"

+++
The publ. tr. of this vs. differs in a number of respects from the standard interpr. In particular, in the first hemistich, flg. an interpr. of JPB’s, the two pairs anyád adyá kárvaraṃ anyád u sváḥ “one deed today and another tomorrow” and ásac ca sát “non-existent and existent” are taken as a chiastic square, with anyád adyá matching sát and anyád u sváḥ matching ásat. In other words the deed Indra does today is existent, while the one he will do tomorrow is (as yet) non-existent. The standard interpr. takes ásat ca sát as an expression of process: Indra makes each deed (the one today, the one tomorrow) that was as yet non-existent into an existent one (so Ge “... macht Indra das Unwirkliche alsbald wirklich”). This does seem a possible interpr., and I would suggest an alternative tr. “One deed today and another tomorrow -- Indra makes the not (yet) existent (deed) existent.” Klein (DGRV I.170, II.24) takes ásac ca sát as “the bad and the good,” which deviates from the usual sense esp. of the former and breaks the thematic connection with the first pāda: “(Performing) one deed today and another tomorrow, Indra turns hither immediately the bad and the good.” In the 2nd hemistich the standard interpr. takes Mitra, Varuṇa, and Pūṣan as the individualized seriatim singular subjects of paryetā́sti (=paryetā́asti), as in Ge’s “Mitra und Varuṇa und Pūṣan kommen uns dabei dem Wunsche des Nebenbuhlers zuvor.” (Tichy [-tar-stems, 188] follows Ge’s syntactic template, but with an aberrant interpr. of pári √i.) As Ge’s blithe disregard of the sg. verb shows, the triple subject is somewhat awkward given sg. asti (though singular verbs with a series of singular subjects are indeed found). But there are several other problematic aspects to this strain of interpr. On the syntactic level, it is surprising to find asti in a main clause if its function is simply copular (“M, V, and P is/are parietā́”); asti in main clauses is almost always existential. On the thematic level, these other gods are intrusive in the hymn -- the focus so far has been entirely on Indra -- and it seems odd suddenly to credit these gods with the power to effect a desirable thing for us, when Indra has been performing the heavy lifting all along. I therefore think that Thieme (Fremdling, 53) is correct in taking Indra as the unexpressed subject of parietā́asti, though he doesn’t discuss the passage or, rather disingenuously, even quote the preceding pāda with the other possible subjects. Given these factors, I think that asti is implicitly contrastive and emphatic: the other gods are there for us in some sense, but it’s Indra who … As for the sense of paryetā́and pári √i in general, the literal meaning is ‘go around’, hence ‘encompass’ and hence to contain and control, a sense that works very well here.

