+++
title = "06"

+++
By my analysis this vs. matches 4 in structure and in referents, forming with 4 a ring around the omphalos vs. 5. In the first pāda the unspecified pair (ubháyoḥ … ayóḥ “of both of these”) refers, in my view (as also, apparently, Ge), to the two krándasī (lit. ‘war-cries’, viz., opposing forces) of 4d; Indra has mastery over the manly power of both of them, as vs. 5 has already implied. The verb of 6b, hávante, doubles brávaite in 4d semantically; both refer to verbal appeals to Indra for help in battle. The two forces referred to in an oblique case in pāda a return as subject in pāda d, with yet another 3rd du. med. subjunctive, vitantasaíte. Pace Ge, who gives them different roles, the locc. in c are parallel and match those of 4c, expressing what is at stake in the battle. Although it might seem odd to name a vṛtrá- as a stake, I think the point is that the battle may be about confronting an obstacle or about acquiring a rich dwelling place. Klein’s tr. (DGRV II.159) “when they battle each other in the (struggle with the) obstacle or in (the struggle for) great dwelling space rich in heroes” reflects the same view. See Schaeffer (Intens. 126-27) for detailed disc. A similar use of vṛtréṣu is found in the next hymn (VI.26.2), where it is implicitly parallel to góṣu, an expression for the stakes.

I take the subordinator yádī in b as representing yád + ī (‘when’ + acc. particle) (as described pp. 305-9 in my 2002 article “Rigvedic sīm and īm), rather than conditional yádi ‘if’. All that needs to be done is to insert a notional word space between yád and ī. The pāda could use an overt acc. (ī ‘him’, as obj. of hávante), and ‘if’ does not make sense.

The publ. tr. implicitly reflects a similar analysis of yádi in d, but I now think that interpr. is probably incorrect. In favor of it is the parallelism with the matched vs. 4, which contains two parallel yád clauses. But several factors, both formal and functional, weigh against it: the final i of yádi is short and does not occur before a cons. cluster, which elsewhere facilitates the shortening of the particle ī. Moreover, an acc. referent is not necessary to the clause, since the verb is a reciprocal middle (though see I.131.3, also with med. ví √taṃs, ví tvā tatasre “They have tussled over you,” a passage that also contains a loc. of the stakes). The publ. tr. also renders the subjunctive vitantasaíte as an indicative. I now think that the conditional yádi and the subjunctive contribute to the same semantic effect. For a full revised tr. see below.

On the assumption that cd forms a single dependent clause (as it does in the publ. tr. and in Ge), the yádi is too deep in the clause, following not only the nom. du.

adj. vyácasvantā that opens pāda d but also the complex loc. phrase that occupies pāda c. This problem could be easily remedied by connecting c with b, rather than with d, leaving yádi in standard 2nd position in a clause now consisting only of d. The only obstacle to that reassignment is my interpr. of maháḥ, which in the publ. tr. I take as a sentential adverb and construe with vitantasaíte (“… keep tussling mightily”). However, that interpr. is quite fragile, esp. because of the position of maháḥ, and I am happy to abandon it, though I do not have a particularly good alternative suggestion. Schaeffer (Intens. 128) first suggests that it is an adverb, with adjectival aspirations (not her phrase), construed with the following phrase nṛváti kṣáye, in the manner of Old’s (ZDMG 55 [1901]: 270-71) interpr. of mahó rāyé “mächtiglich zu Reichtum” à “zu mächtigem Reichtum” -- in this instance “mächtiglich männerreiches Land” à “grosses männerreiches Land.” Alternatively she suggests it could be an acc. pl. with gapped devā́n as a goal or obj. of vitantasaíte (“sooft die zwei … (Völkerschaften) die Grossen (Götter) angehen …”). This second suggestion seems quite implausible, but the first one is possible, in the absence of anything better. In any event, it is essentially the interpr. given by Ge (“um einen grossen männerreichen Wohnsitz”), however he arrived at it. (Judging from his n.

6cd it rests on Sāy.’s high-handed glossing of maho with loc. mahati.) Klein’s tr. “great dwelling space rich in heroes” (see above) simply follows Ge and also shows a quasi-adj. interpr. of maháḥ.

Putting all this together, I offer the revised translation: “He is master of the manly power of both of these (armies) when the ritual adepts call on him in the clash, whether an obstacle or a dwelling place rich in men is at issue — if the two (armies) in their expansion will keep tussling mightily back and forth with one another.”



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/024/06-08.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>