+++
title = "09"

+++
Pāda c = I.177.5c and X.89.17c. Ge (fld. by Klein, DGRV I.458) construes vástoḥ with vidyā́ma (“Möchten wir Sänger … den neuen Tag erleben”), but wellattested vástoḥ is otherwise a temporal expression ‘at dawn, in the morning’. In both the other passages, the pāda in question is adjoined by a pāda that likewise begins vidyā́ma (following in I.177.5, preceding in X.89.17), and the obj. of that vidyā́ma can be assumed with the one in the repeated pāda. The d pāda of X.89.17 is almost identical to d here, with the substitution of a different poetic family: viśvā́mitrāḥ for our bharádvājāḥ.

The function and position of utá in d are unclear. The publ. tr. implicitly assumes that it loosely connects the 2nd hemistich with the 1st (“And with your help …”), but locating this clausal conjunction in 2nd position of the 2nd pāda of what it’s conjoining would be an irrational poetic strategy. I now think it likely that it conjoins the temporal expressions vástoḥ and nūnám, and I would alter the tr. to “With your help … might we Bharadvājas know (this), as we sing at dawn and also now” (or “might we know (this) at dawn and also now, as we sing”). The curiosity then is the position of te, which can only belong to something in the preceding pāda: either “with your help” (as I take it in the publ. tr.) or “as we sing to you.” I suppose that utá’s strong tendency to take 1st position makes it a natural host for enclitics even when it is not so located, but it really seems odd that it would sweep te up and away from the elements it should be limiting.