+++
title = "02"

+++
The derivation of the 2nd sg. verb dánaḥ is unclear. Most (see EWA s.v. DAMI ) associate it one way or another with √dam ‘tame, subdue’ -- beginning with Sāy.’s gloss adamayaḥ. Old and Ge suggest that there is a by-root dan beside dam; Re (GLV 81) concurs that it belongs to a “fausse racine,” probably generated from athematic forms where the root-final would have been followed by an ending beginning with a dental (type 2nd-3rd sg. ágan to √gam). Bloomfield (153) suggests it’s a nonce blending of √dam and √han. I wonder if it is not the detritus of the expected 9th cl. pres. *damnā́ti, which would be cognate with nasal presents elsewhere in Indo-European and is the stem underlying attested damāyá- (< *d(a)mn-H-yé/ó-) and damanya-. In our 2nd sg. injunc., expected *damnā́s, the interior nasal cluster could have been simplified and the whole remodeled as a thematic form (unfortunately requiring also accent retraction). In fact, *damnā́ti might not be the expected form; a reconstructed *dm-ne-H-ti without restoration of a full-grade root syllable should yield *danā́ti, which would have lost its obvious root connection with √dam and could without too much difficulty be remodeled to the thematic stem we appear to have. The 9th class ramṇā́ti would have pursued a different remodeling path.

In a n. WG suggest an unlikely deriv. from √dā ‘divide’, with an *-énonominal suffix, hence “Der ist Abtrenner des nachlässig redenden Stammes,” taking the nominals as gen. sg. rather than acc. pl. (as is grammatically possible). The only advantage I see to this is that it works better with the ostensible 3rd sg. dárt in b, but there are other ways to handle that form.

As was just noted, the verb of b, pāda-final dart (√dṛ), appears to be a 3rd sg., in an otherwise 2nd sg. vs. It also ends in a (more or less) illicit cluster (-rt, with nonradical -t). With Old I assume that the original form was *daḥ (< *dar <*dar-s). A final -t was falsely restored, possibly redactionally, on the basis of the identical pāda in VI.20.10c, where the 3rd sg. is appropriate and the sandhi situation favors the retention of the -t.

Note the phonetic play in #rṇ̥ ór ... árṇā(ḥ)#.

Purukutsa is chronologically out of place here. Elsewhere he is a semihistorical figure, the father of Trasadasyu and a contemporary of Sudās, so Vrtra ̥ should be out of his league and his time period. But he does figure in VI.20.10, immediately after the pāda identical to our b: VI.20.10d hán dā́sīḥ purukútsāya śikṣan “He [=Indra] smote the Dāsa (clans), doing his best for Purukutsa,” where the action described can be contemporary (or in the immediate past) and therefore chronologically possible. I think it likely that Purukutsa has been imported from VI.20.10 to anticipate the more properly mythological Kutsa in vs. 5. These two agreements with VI.20.10 support each other and are good evidence for the dependence of our vs. on that vs. ### 03
Ge suggests that the śū́ra- in śū́rapatnīḥ ‘whose lord is a champion’ is Indra himself, which seems correct.

Ge (/WG) takes vṛ́taḥ … dyā́ṃ ca as the conjoined obj. of ájā ‘drive’; the two objects are then picked up by yébhiḥ (Ge: “Führe die Heere … und den Himmel, mit denen …”). The problem (besides the question of whether it’s possible or desirable to drive heaven anywhere) is that vṛ́taḥ is fem. pl. and dyā́m is masc. sg., and yébhiḥ is neither one. I follow Old’s interpr., also adopted by Re, that sees an “X and which Y” constr. -- with the twist that the ca does not follow the rel. prn. (as in yé ca devā́ḥ in 1a), but precedes it, with another part of the rel. cl. fronted around it (dyā́ṃ ca yébhiḥ).

By either interpr. the rel. cl. lacks a verb. Old, Re, and I supply ‘gain, conquer’ with heaven as obj. (And in keeping with the constant theme of these Agastya hymns, I assume the referent of yébhiḥ is the Maruts; Old simply “die Leute”; Re doesn’t specify.) Ge [/WG] “verbündet bist,” which seems kind of lame.

Initial rákṣo in c is Pragṛhya in the Pp., presumably 2nd sg. impv. rákṣa + u.

The standard tr. take aśúṣaṃ tū́rvayānam as two PNs, but I see no reason to.

As noted in the comm. ad I.101.2, aśúṣa- is otherwise only used of the demon Śuṣṇa, but this strong association surely results from their phonetic similarity. Semantically it fits Agni quite well. As for tū́rvayāna- it is sometimes a PN (e.g., I.53.10), but its first member must be based on the verb stem tū́rvati ‘go in triumph’ vel sim., and the literal sense of the compound is appropriate for Agni. See the very similar analytic phrase VI.15.5 tū́rvan ná yā́man “like the one going in triumph on his course,” where Agni is the referent.

There is difference of opinion on how the simile works in d. Flg. Old, Re, and the line of least resistance, I resupply the verb rákṣa from c, maintaining Indra as subj., compared to a lion. Ge (/WG) take the subj. as Agni and then must supply another verb, not available in the context. This seems like too much machinery to me, since the pāda is readily interpretable on the syntactic pattern in c.

