+++
title = "08"

+++
There is much disagreement about the first hemistich because of the uncertain grammatical identity of several forms as well as a sandhi problem in pāda a and a hapax in b. Let us begin with the sandhi problem. The clear neut. pl. sánā tā́ “those old (things [=deeds?])” that opens the verse seems rhetorically paired with návyā ‘new’ towards the end of the pāda, but in its sandhi situation, before vowelinitial ā́guḥ, návyā should underlyingly end in -āḥ, a masc. nom. pl. or fem. nom./acc. pl. (so Pp). Most standard tr. try to reflect this sandhi one way or another: Ge takes the ref. to be nábhaḥ in b, which he takes as a fem. pl. root noun nábh-. But “These are your old (deeds). New (clouds) have come” is, with all due respect to Ge, absurd.

Old takes both sáhaḥ and nábhaḥ of b (with better semantics than ‘clouds’ -- viz., “neue Siege und Berstungen”) as the referent of návyā(ḥ), though he does show some sympathy with Gr’s suggestion that návyā is the neut. pl. we want, in hiatus. Re supplies “hymns” with návyā(ḥ) … nábhaḥ, which has no contextual support. Only WG, at least by implication, allow the neut. pl. interpr.: “Alt sind diese deine (Heldentaten), o Indra. Neue sind (gerade) (hinzu)gekommen.” I think this is the only sensible way to interpret the passage: rhetorical patterning outweighs sandhi. The same hiatus of návyā before a vowel is found in V.29.15 yā́… návyā ákarma, where two vss. before (V.29.13) yā́… návyā kṛṇávaḥ essentially guarantees the neut. pl.

interpr.

The fem. pl. interpr. of návyā(ḥ) is even less likely if sáhaḥ and/or nábhaḥ are not taken as fem. pl. root nouns. As already noted, Old does so take them, and Ge has the same analysis of nábhaḥ, but not sáhaḥ, which he appears to take as a 2nd sg. verb in imperatival usage. Re takes nábhaḥ as a fem. pl. adj. and sáhaḥ as the neut. sg. of the s-stem; for WG sáhaḥ is a nom. pl. fem. to a root noun and nábhaḥ a gen. sg., also to a root noun, dependent on áviraṇāya. The lack of agreement on basic grammatical identity almost reminds us of the interpretive chaos created by the Old Avestan Gāthas. For my part I take both sáhaḥ and nábhaḥ as 2nd sg. injunctives -- sáhas as the only act. finite form of the thematic stem sáha- (though cf. part. sáhant-), which is fairly well attested in the middle; nábhaḥ as the act. transitive corresponding to med. intransitive 3rd pl. impv. nábhantām “let them burst,” found esp. in the famous Nābhāka refrain (VIII.39-42). The fact that the next two pādas (8c, 8d) open with 2nd sg. injunctives (bhinát and nanámaḥ respectively) and that I.173 is characterized by pāda-initial 3rd sg. injunctives (see comm. above) supports the verbal interpr.

As for the rest of pāda b, I supply ‘strongholds’ (púraḥ) from pāda c with pūrvī́ḥ, as in, e.g., I.63.2, II.14.6. The hapax áviraṇa- I take as containing ráṇa- ‘joy’ / ‘battle’, with both meanings in play in the cmpd. The form contains both the privative a- and what I consider a pleonastic ví, both meaning ‘without’. Although these elements might be expected to cancel each other out (“not without joy/battle”), I think the ví is included to allow a buried pun on avī́ra-, suggesting “for their unmanning” in addition to “for lack of joy / for non-battle [=end of battle].” The godless are supplied from the 2nd hemistich.

After the travails of ab, the rest of the verse is fairly straightforward. I supply víśaḥ ‘clans’ with ádevīḥ on the basis of the occurrence of this expression elsewhere (e.g., VI.49.15) and take bhídaḥ (which, unlike the two -aḥ forms in b, I do interpr as the acc. pl. of a root noun) as a kind of proleptic cognate acc. with bhinát: “split … into smithereens.” I would in fact now substitute this more colorful expression for the publ. tr. “split into pieces.”

