+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. There is a cake on eight potsherds for Agni: this he places on the eastern part (of the Vedi). There is either a cake on eleven potsherds for Indra, or a rice-pap for Soma: this he places on the southern part. There is a pap for the Viśve Devāḥ (All-gods): this he places on the western part. There is a dish of curds for Mitra-Varuṇa: this he places on the north part. There is a pap for Br̥haspati: this he places in the middle. This is the five-holed pap [^egg_236];--what five sacrificial dishes (havis) there are, for them there are five holes: hence the name 'five-holed pap.'

[^egg_236]: 120:1 According to Sāyaṇa (MS. I. O. 657) the term 'Pañcabila' is derived from the circumstance that the vessel (pātrī) on which the five sacrificial dishes are placed when taken about to be 'deposited' on the vedi, contains five holes or openings for the dishes to be taken out. The Pañcabila oblations are to be performed during the light fortnight succeeding the performance of the Daśapeya,--that is to say, during the fortnight commencing with the new moon of Vaiśākha, or in the latter part of April. The Taittirīya ceremonial calls these oblations the 'Diśām aveshṭayaḥ,' i.e. 'Sacrifices performed for the appeasement of the regions.'
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. And as to why the performer of the Rājasūya should perform this offering: because he (the priest) makes him ascend the regions, the seasons, the hymns and metres, he now redeems him therefrom by this (offering). But were the performer of the Rājasūya not to perform this offering, then verily he would become intoxicated (with pride) [^egg_237] and would fall down headlong: that is why the performer of the Rājasūya performs this offering.

[^egg_237]: 120:2 Or, would become giddy (in flying through space), cf. Taitt. Br. I, 8, 3, 1.
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. And why he proceeds with the cake on eight

potsherds for Agni,--because he makes him ascend the eastern region, the seasons, the hymns and metres, he now redeems him therefrom by this (oblation). The remains of it he pours on the Br̥haspati pap.
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. And why he proceeds with the cake on eleven potsherds for Indra, or with the pap for Soma,--because he makes him ascend the southern region, the seasons, the hymns and metres, he now redeems him therefrom by this (oblation). The remains he pours on the Br̥haspati pap.
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. And why he proceeds with the pap to the All-gods,--because he makes him ascend the eastern region, the seasons, the hymns and metres, he now redeems him therefrom by this (oblation). The remains he pours on the Br̥haspati pap.
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. And why he proceeds with the dish of curds for Mitra-Varuṇa,--because he makes him ascend the northern region, the seasons, the hymns and metres, he now redeems him therefrom by this (oblation). The remains he pours on the Br̥haspati pap. And in that he pours those remains on the Br̥haspati pap, he thereby bestows food upon him [^egg_238] (the Sacrificer); and hence food is brought to the king from every quarter.

[^egg_238]: 121:1 Or, puts food into him.
</details>

##  07
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

7. And why he proceeds with the Br̥haspati pap,--because he makes him ascend the upper region, the seasons, the hymns and metres, he now redeems him therefrom by this (oblation).
</details>

##  08
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

8. And what cake on eight potsherds there is for Agni, the priest's fee for that is gold; for that offering is for Agni, and gold is Agni's seed: therefore

the fee is gold. He gives it to the Agnīdh; for he, the Āgnīdhra, is really the same as Agni: therefore he gives it to the Agnīdh.
</details>

##  09
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

9. And what cake on eleven potsherds there is for Indra, the fee for that is a bull, for the bull is Indra. And if there be a pap for Soma, then the fee for that is a brown ox, for the brown one is sacred to Soma. He gives it to the Brahman, for the Brahman guards the sacrifice from the south: therefore he gives it to the Brahman.
</details>

##  10
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

10. And what pap there is for the All-gods, the fee for that is a piebald bullock; for abundance of forms (marks) there is in such a piebald bullock, and the Viśve Devāḥ are the clans, and the clans mean abundance: therefore a piebald bullock is the fee. He gives it to the Hotr̥, for the Hotr̥ means abundance: therefore he gives it to the Hotr̥.
</details>

##  11
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

11. And what dish of curds there is for Mitra-Varuṇa, the fee for that is a sterile cow, for that one is sacred to Mitra-Varuṇa. If he cannot procure a sterile cow, any unimpregnated one will do; for every sterile cow is indeed unimpregnated. He gives it to the two Adhvaryus; for the Adhvaryus are the out-breathing and the in-breathing, and the out-breathing and in-breathing are Mitra-Varuṇa: therefore he gives it to the two Adhvaryus.
</details>

##  12
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

12. And what pap there is for Br̥haspati, the fee for that is a white-backed bullock; for to Br̥haspati belongs that upper region [^egg_239], and above that there is that path of Aryaman [^egg_240]: therefore a white-backed (bullock) is the fee for the Br̥haspati (pap). He gives it to the Brahman, for Br̥haspati is the

[^egg_239]: 122:1 Or rather, that upward direction.

[^egg_240]: 122:2 That is, the region of light, of the sun. See V, 3, 1, 2 with note.

 Brahman of the gods, and this one is his (the Sacrificer's) Brahman: therefore he gives it to the Brahman. Even a vishṭḥāvrājin [^egg_241] who is desirous of food may perform this offering: he (the priest) thereby bestows food upon him from all quarters, and verily he becomes an eater of food.

[^egg_241]: 123:1 The meaning of this compound is unknown. Sāyaṇa explains it as meaning 'one who does not move from one spot, one who always remains in one and the same place.' Hence the St. Petersburg dictionary conjectures: 'One whose herd (or cattle-pen, vraja, vrāja) is stationary.' Similarly, Prof. Weber, in Böhtlingk's Dictionary. See, however, the Kāṇva reading above, p. 50, note 1, according to which the word would seem to mean one afflicted with a certain malady (? cholera or dysentery). The 'Pañcabila' offering may be performed as a special ishṭi, independently of the Rājasūya.
</details>