+++
title = "01"

+++
Notice the alliteration in b: dáśa dhī́rasya dhītáyo dhánutrīḥ.

The stem dhánutar- occurs 3x in the RV, twice as a fem. pl. dhánutrīḥ (here and III.31.16), once as a masc. du. dhánutarau (IV.35.5). Although it is not strictly relevant to our occurrence here, the surprising short suffixal vowel in that strong form requires comment. The form occurs after an early caesura, thus producing a break of three light syllables. Such a break is by no means uncommon (see Arnold, p.

188), but a reading *dhánutārau would produce Arnold’s “normal” break (light light heavy). Old (Noten ad loc.) tentatively suggests that if the form is corrupt, it was altered because it was perceived as a comparative in -tara- or a cmpd with -tara- ‘crossing, overcoming’. Old’s suggestion is tentatively accepted by Wackernagel (AiG III.199), Gotō (1st cl., 179 n. 311). The misparsing of the form would of course be aided by the fact that it is built not to the root, like most agent nouns, but to an enlarged pres. stem *dhan-u-/-va-, which has spawned a secondary root √dhanv. See, e.g., EWA s.v. DHANI , Goto 178-80 with nn. By contrast, Tichy (-tar-stems, 58-59) adduces nearby IV.38.4 sánutaraḥ, which is not originally a -tar-stem, but which, like dhánutarau, modifies a horse. She suggests that since beside the comparative sánutara- (whatever its source: see my comm. ad loc.) there exists an (independent) fem. agent noun sánutrī- (I.123.2, X.7.4), dhánutarau was backformed to the parallel fem. agent dhánutrī-. The suggested string of causation here seems stretched too thin.

As for our fem. pl. form, both Ge and Re take dhánutrīḥ here as effectively transitive, with objective genitive dhī́rasya: “die den Weisen ablaufen lassen”; “animatrices du (soma) habile.” But neither of the other occurrences of this stem have such a sense; they simply mean ‘running’; Gotō (179 and n. 313) concurs with the intrans. reading I see here. The fact that an intrans. form of the pf. to √dhanv, dadhanve, is found in the next vs. (2b) supports this interpr. Another (weak) support is the case of the supposed obj., since root-accented tar-stems ordinarily take acc. However, there are enough counterexamples that this is not a clinching argument.

Ge takes dáśa with dhītáyaḥ “die zehn Gebete,” but, despite the pādaboundary, I think it goes with the sisters=fingers in pāda a, as usual. It has been drawn into b because of the alliteration.

Contra Old, Ge, Re, and Schindler (Rt. Nouns), I analyze jā́ḥ as a nom. sg.

(with Gr), not an acc. pl. (Ge allows for the nom. sg. alternative in n. 1c). In their interpretations, “the children of the sun” refers to the insightful thoughts of b. But this is a distinctly odd way to refer to thoughts, and no convincing parallels are given. Ge’s interpr. of the phrase “daughter of the sun” as a reference to hymns I have discussed (and dismissed) ad IX.1.6 and esp. IX.72.3. Moreover, pāda c describes Soma as dashing around these children, but in IX pári + VERB OF MOTION normally, perhaps exclusively, refers to Soma’s journey around the filter. I do not know what it would mean for him to “dash around” thoughts, much less “children of the sun.” As a nom. sg., jā́ḥ in the phrase “offspring of the sun” makes perfect sense as a description of Soma; Soma’s similarity to and often identification with the sun is well attested, and the use of kinship terms to model such similiarity/identification is also well known. If, nonetheless, we want to interpr. jā́ḥ as an acc. pl., I would take it as a reference to the milk; cf. comm. ad IX.72.3, where I explain “daughter of the sun” there as referring to the milk because of their shared gleaming color.

