+++
title = "05"

+++
The vs. shows a number of metrical disturbances; see Arnold p. 317, Old ad loc., HvN p. 649. Arnold suggests reading *māsvā in pāda a, which would fix the cadence. Pāda b has an opening of 3; note, however, that the apparently bad cadence viśváścandram with four heavy syllables is not in fact a problem, since all cmpds in - ścandra- are better read *-candra- (see comm. ad I.165.8), yielding the light antepenult required. On the metrical shape of vātā́pyam see immed. below and comm. ad I.121.8. Pāda c has 10 syllables. Pāda d, the Nodhas Gautama refrain (I.58.9, etc.), has an unusual break.

The adj. vātā́pyam presents problems of both form and meaning. There are three (or more) possible scansions of this stem—vāatā́pya- (or vaatā́pya-), vātaā́pya-, and vātā́pi ya—each of which has its champions. See comm. ad I.121.8.

The sense of the stem is likewise in doubt. It seems obviously related to the voc. vā́tāpe ‘o friend of the wind’ in I.187.8-10, and in I.121.8 Ge tr. “… den Windbefreundeten,” in X.26.2 “die mit dem Vāta befreundet (?) ist.” However, in our passage and in X.105.1 he suggests a different analysis entirely, since (acdg. to his n. 5b to our hymn) that sense “will hier nicht passen.” His alternative involves the ppl. vāta- to √vani ‘long for, crave’ (otherwise attested only as 2nd cmpd. member), with the sense “whose friendship is desired” (dessen Freundschaft begehrt ist). The question is somewhat hard to decide (if it needs to be decided: a pun is also possible, as displayed in the publ. tr.). On the one hand, giving up the connection with vātāpi- (whatever its underlying accent would have been: vā́tāpe has voc. accent) is unappealing. Moreover if the scansion should be vāata-, this would favor ‘wind’, which can be so scanned, whereas the root syll. of the ppl. should not be distracted.

(However, that scansion is declared by Old to be the least likely one.) Ge’s certainty that “wind-befriended” wouldn’t work here is also open to question. We are asking for wealth - and “wind-befriended” wealth could be wealth that comes quickly, on a powerful gust of air. All this favors the “wind” analysis. But there is another consideration: accent. The cmpd is clearly an adj.; just as clearly it has a neut. noun ā́pya- ‘friendship’ as 2nd member. Therefore it should be a bahuvrīhi “having X friendship’ / ‘having the friendship of X’. If the 1st member is the ppl. to √vani , it should be accented *vātá- (though it actually never appears accented elsewhere).

This would allow an analysis vātá-āpya- with expected first-member bahuvrīhi accent (of the sutá-soma- type). But ‘wind’ is accented vā́ta-, and so, if it contains ‘wind’, the cmpd. must be analyzed with 2nd member accent, vāta-ā́pya-, which is not standard bahuvrīhi accent. Nonetheless, weighing these contravening factors, I favor ‘wind-befriended’ as the 1st reading, with Ge’s ‘whose friendship is sought’ as a 2nd punning reading—though I cannot explain the accent.

Although pāda d is the Nodhas refrain and therefore tacked onto the hymn in some sense, note that dhiyā́responds to dhī́ra- dhītí- of 1b.