+++
title = "A Language and Compositional Technique"

+++
The R̥gveda was composed in an archaic form of Sanskrit that is richer in forms  and less grammatically fixed than Classical Sanskrit, but essentially identical in  structure. For further discussion of the language, see section VII below. The text was composed entirely orally and transmitted entirely orally for a very long time,  probably several millennia. But it was a type of oral composition very different  from what that designation now generally brings to mind in scholarly, especially  Homeric, circles. It was not an anonymous floating body of infinitely variable verbal material (re-)composed anew at every performance, generated in great part from  fixed formulae that formed the poet’s repertoire.+++(4)+++ In contrast to the vast sprawl of  epic, on which the usual model of oral-formulaic composition was formed and  tested, R̥gvedic oral composition was small-scale and verbally complex. Though  orally composed and making use of traditional verbal material, each hymn was  composed by a particular poet, who fixed the hymn at the time of composition and  who “owned” it, and it was transmitted in this fixed form thereafter. 

R̥gvedic verbal formulae work very differently from those in epic composition. Rather than deploying fairly sizable, metrically defined, and invariant  pieces—ready-made surface structures, in the felicitous phrase of Paul Kiparsky  (1976: 83)—our poets seem to operate with deep-structure formulae. Invariant repetition is fairly rare, and when it occurs, the repeated formulae tend to be short, gen erally shorter than the pāda (= verse line) and not necessarily metrically fixed. But  the poets often assume knowledge of an underlying formula, which seldom or never  surfaces as such, but which they ring changes on—by lexical or grammatical substitution, scrambling, semantic reversal, and the like, confounding the expectations of  their audience while drawing upon their shared knowledge of the underlying verbal  expression. These deep-structure formulae tend to be shared across bardic families,  and we can in fact sometimes identify cognate formulae in other Indo-European  poetic traditions, especially in the Old Avestan Gāthās. 
