+++
title = "D Western Scholarship on the R̥gveda and Major Resources"

+++
Because the transmission of the R̥gveda has preserved the text remarkably well, we  have a trustworthy and uniform text of the R̥gveda. The published editions of the  R̥gveda differ in their presentation of the text, not in the text itself. The landmark  edition of the R̥gveda was that of Max Müller (1849–74), who published both the  Saṃhitā and Padapāṭha text in devanāgarī script, together with Sāyaṇa’s commentary. Before the completion of Müller’s R̥gveda, in 1861–63 Theodor Aufrecht published the text in Roman transliteration, together with selected Padapāṭha analyses.  A  second edition, the standard edition of Aufrecht’s R̥gveda, appeared in 1877.  The R̥gveda and Sāyaṇa’s commentary were published again under the editorship  of N. S. Sontakke (1933–51), together with the Padapāṭha. Also noteworthy is the  aforementioned publication of the metrically restored version of the R̥gveda text by  Barend A. van Nooten and Gary B. Holland (1994).+++(4)+++ 

The uniformity and reliability of the text of the R̥gveda cannot be said of its  translations, which vary considerably. The standard scholarly translation remains  that of Karl Friedrich Geldner into German. This translation was published in full in 1951, but was complete in the 1920s and partially published in limited fashion  then. Although it remains a remarkable philological accomplishment, whose worth  we two translators have appreciated more and more over the years, it of course  could not take account of the advances in Vedic scholarship over the last eighty  years or so. Louis Renou (1955–69) was able to finish most of a French translation  of the R̥gveda, in a series of thematic publications, under the general title Études  védiques et pāṇinéennes, organized by the divinity addressed rather than the order  of the R̥gvedic text. But he left undone substantial parts, notably the Indra and  Aśvin hymns, and the later publications are rather sketchy. T.  Ya. Elizarenkova  (1989–99) completed a Russian translation of the text. Currently in preparation is a  new German translation of the R̥gveda under the direction of Michael Witzel and  Toshifumi Gotō. The first volume of the Witzel-Gotō translation (2007), which covers Maṇḍalas I and II, has appeared, with the second volume scheduled for 2013. 

Unfortunately, English has not been as well served as these other languages.  Aside from anthologies, the English version that is in general use is R. T. H. Griffith’s  translation, which was first published in four volumes between 1889 and 1892, then  in a revised edition in 1896, and then yet again in another revised edition, this time  by J. L. Shastri, in 1973. Griffith’s translation has been reprinted several times since  1973 and is available online (http://www.sacred- texts.com/hin/rigveda/index.htm).  Sadly, this translation really does not deserve as many rebirths as it has had. Its philology was already dated when it was published, and the English style of the translation is cloying and almost unreadable. Now, well over a century later, it should have  long since been superseded. There was at least one serious effort to do so. From the  late 1940s until the early 1960s, H. D. Velankar steadily published English translations of the R̥gveda, which were a decided improvement over Griffith’s work (for a  list of his translations, see the Bibliography). These were published as independent  volumes dedicated to books II, V, VII, and VIII of the R̥gveda and as collections  of hymns to different deities published in the Journal of the University of Bombay.  Partly because these translations are scattered, incomplete, and difficult of access,  they have received less attention than they might otherwise have done. In addition  to these complete or extensive translations of the R̥gveda, several anthologies of  R̥gvedic hymns have appeared. In English, the most notable are those of Wendy  Doniger O’Flaherty (1981) and Walter H. Maurer (1986). The principal problem  with any such anthology is that translators understandably choose hymns that they  think will be especially interesting for their readers and accessible to them. As a  result, they tend to create a distorted view of the R̥gveda that does not reflect the  liturgical functions and scope of the text.
 
Both the partial and the complete translations just mentioned were fundamental  for the present translation. In our introductions to individual hymns, we will often  make reference to them, especially when they suggest interpretations of the text we  deem particularly worthy of note. Rather than giving a fuller bibliographic reference, we will refer to them only by the last names of the translators. The exceptions  are Renou’s translations, for which we will give the relevant volume and page of his Études védiques et pāṇinéenes, and Velankar’s translations, where again we will cite  the specific source. 

In addition to these translations, there are a number of other essential resources  for translating and interpreting the R̥gveda. Among the older works of particular  significance are the Wörterbuch of Hermann Grassmann (1872–75), whose pre sentation of the lexicon of the R̥gveda is somewhat antique but still very useful.  Grassmann’s work has now been complemented and in some respects superseded  by Alexander Lubotsky’s concordance to the R̥gveda (1997), which provides the  verse-line context for R̥gvedic words. Among older works of significance, of par ticular note is Hermann Oldenberg’s Noten (1909, 1912) on the complete text of  the R̥gveda, whose insights remain remarkable even a century after they were pub lished. Maurice Bloomfield’s Rig-veda Repetitions (1916) is an invaluable resource  for the study of R̥gvedic formulaic language and its variations, though it predates  the discovery of oral-formulaic composition. 

In the last fifty years or so, R̥gvedic scholarship has blossomed with studies that  have significantly advanced our understanding of the language of the R̥gveda—its  lexicon, morphology, and syntax—of its compositional techniques, and of its con ceptual universe and ritual procedures and context. We cannot offer even a partial  list of such books, let alone articles, since we would omit too many. We will mention  only a few, those which were especially close at hand as we worked through the text  and whose insights we have often adopted. Particularly important was Manfred  Mayrhofer’s etymological dictionary of Old Indo-Aryan (EWA 1986–2001) and his  previous version (KEWA 1951–76), not completely superseded by the newer one.+++(5)+++  Other works include Salvatore Scarlata’s study of nominal compounds ending in  roots (1999) and Jared S. Klein’s studies of Vedic particles and discourse structure  (1985). One of the subjects in which there has been substantial progress just in the  last decades has been the Vedic verbal system. The flood of monographs on the verbal system probably began with Johanna Narten’s work on the s-aorist (1964), followed closely by Karl Hoffmann’s influential study of the injunctive (1967). Other  verbal subsystems treated more recently include the -áya-stems (Jamison 1983), the  first-class presents (Gotō 1987), the intensive (Schaefer 1994), the perfect (Kümmel  2000), the desiderative (Heenen 2006), and the ya-presents (Kulikov 2012). All of  these works, as well as many other and many shorter studies, have been of critical  importance as we have worked our way through the text.
 
Finally, we wish to note one last development not just in R̥gvedic but in Sanskrit  scholarship more generally. Among older scholars there was a tendency to deal  with difficulties in a text by emending it. By the beginning of the twentieth century,  however, scholars increasingly recognized that they could gain a much better understanding of the text by accepting the text as transmitted. This process is visible in  Oldenberg’s scholarship. Before the Noten, Oldenberg published translations of the  Agni hymns of the first five books of the R̥gveda (1897). There he was willing to  suggest text emendations to smooth rough spots in the hymns. By the time of the  Noten, however, he had become much more apt to accept the text as it stands and to explore ways of accounting for that transmitted text. We too are committed to  accepting the traditional text and more importantly to allowing the poetry of the  R̥gveda to remain complex, elusive, jagged, unsettled, and even unsettling. 