+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. Prajāpati was desirous of gaining these worlds. He saw this bird-like body, the Fire-altar: he

fashioned it, and thereby gained this (terrestrial) world. He saw a second bird-like body, the (chant of the) Great Rite [^egg_530]: he fashioned it, and thereby gained the air. He saw a third bird-like body, the Great Litany [^egg_530]: he fashioned it, and thereby gained the sky.

[^egg_530]: 286:1 The Mahāvrata-sāman and the Mahad uktham, as we have seen (p. 282, note 5; p. 111, note 1), are constructed so as to correspond to the different parts of the bird-like Agni-Prajāpati.
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. This built Fire-altar, doubtless, is this (terrestrial) world, the Great Rite the air, and the Great Litany the sky: all these, the Fire-altar, the Great Rite, and the Great Litany, one ought therefore to undertake together, for these worlds were created together; and as to why the Fire-altar is built first, it is because of these worlds this (terrestrial) one was created first. Thus with regard to the deity.
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. Now with regard to the body. The Fire-altar is the mind, the (chant of the) Great Rite the breath, and the Great Litany speech: all these one ought therefore to undertake together, for mind, breath, and speech belong together; as to why the Fire-altar is built first, it is because the mind is prior to the breathings.
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. The Fire-altar, indeed, is the body (trunk), the Great Rite the breath, and the Great Litany speech: all these one ought therefore to undertake together, for body, breath, and speech belong together; and as to why the Fire-altar is built first, it is because of him who is produced the trunk is produced first.
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. The Fire-altar, indeed, is the head, the Great Rite the breath, and the Great Litany the body:

one ought therefore to undertake all these together, for head, breath, and body belong together; and as to why the Fire-altar is built first, it is because of him who is born the head is born first; and hence, whenever all these are undertaken together the Great Litany, indeed, is accounted the highest (ātamām) [^egg_531], for the Great Litany is the body (or self, ātman).

[^egg_531]: 287:1 The combination 'ātamāṁ khyāyate' is, as it were, the superlative of 'ā-khyāyate;' cf. anutamāṁ gopāyati, X, 5, 2, 10; and Delbrück, Altind. Syntax, p. 194.
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. As to this they say, 'If all these are difficult to obtain together, what (means of) obtaining them is there?'--In the Jyotishṭoma (form of the) Agnishṭoma [^egg_532]: let him perform offering with the Jyotishṭoma Agnishṭoma.

[^egg_532]: 287:2 The Agnishṭoma may be performed in three different modes, according to the variation of stomas (or hymn-forms) employed for the stotras (or chants). In the Jyotishṭoma the order of stomas is that set forth in paragraph 7, viz.: a. Bahishpavamāna-stotra in the Trivr̥t (nine-versed); b. Ājya-stotras, and c. Mādhyandina-pavamāna-stotra, in the Pañcadaśa (fifteen-versed); d. Pr̥shṭḥa-stotras, and e. Ārbhava-pavamāna-stotra, in the Saptadaśa (seventeen-versed); and f. Agnishṭoma-sāman (Yajñāyajñiya) in the Ekaviṁśa (twenty-one-versed) stoma, or hymn-form. In the Goshṭoma, on the other hand, the succession of stomas is a. Pañcadaśa, b. Trivr̥t, c. d. Saptadaśa, e. f. Ekaviṁśa; and in the Āyushṭoma: a. Trivr̥t, b. Pañcadaśa, (c. d.) Saptadaśa, (e. f.) Ekaviṁśa. Cf. part ii, p. 402, note 4; for the scheme of Stotras (and Sastras), ib. p. 325, note 2. The Agnishṭoma is singled out here for the reason that the Mahāvrata-day takes the form of an Agnishṭoma sacrifice.
</details>

##  07
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

7. In this Jyotishṭoma Agnishṭoma the Bahishpavamāna (stotra) is (in) the Trivr̥t (stoma)--that is the head of the rite; the two other Pavamānas are (in) the Pañcadaśa and Saptadaśa (stomas)--they are the two wings; the Hotr̥'s

 Ājya (stotra) is (in) the Pañcadaśa, the Pr̥shṭḥa (stotra in) the Saptadaśa, and the Yajñāyajñiya (stotra in) the Ekaviṁśa (stoma)--they are the tail.
</details>

##  08
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

8. Now these two, the Pañcadaśa and Saptadaśa, have thirty-two hymn-verses: twenty-five of these are the twenty-five-fold body [^egg_533]; and the seven which remain over are the Parimād (sāmans), for these are the cattle (or animals), (for) cattle are sporting all around us (pari-mād [^egg_534])--thus much, then, is the

[^egg_533]: 288:1 See p. 168, note 3.

[^egg_534]: 288:2 Sāyaṇa takes 'parimād' here in the sense of 'a source of pleasure all around'--parito harshahetavaḥ.--The Parimādaḥ are thirteen Sāmans sung (not chanted, in the proper sense of the word) by the Udgātr̥, his two assistants joining merely in the Nidhanas or chorus-like passages. They are given, figured for chanting, in the Araṇyagāna of the Sāma-veda (Calc. ed., ii, p. 387 seq.). This performance takes place immediately after the Adhvaryu has given the sign for, and the Udgātr̥ 'yoked,' the Mahāvrata-stotra or sāman (i. e. the Hotr̥'s Pr̥shṭḥastotra of the Great Rite),--or, according to some authorities, before either the 'yoking,' or the Adhvaryu's summons,--and thus serves as an introduction to the central and chief element of the Great Rite, the Mahāvrata-sāman. According to the ritual symbolism, these preliminary sāmans are intended to supply the newly completed Prajāpati with hair (feathers) and nails; but the performance would rather seem to he a solemn mode of doing homage (upasthānam) to the different parts of the bird-like altar and the sacrificial ground; thus corresponding to a similar, though simpler, ceremony performed on the completion of the fire-altar in its simplest form, as described at IX, 1, 2, 35-43. On the present occasion the ceremony is performed in the following order: 1. near the head of the altar (the Āhavanīya fire) he sings the Prāṇa ('breath;' Sāma-v., vol. ii, p. 436); 2. near the tail the Apāna (downward-breathing, ii, p. 437); 3. 4. near the right and left wing the two Vratapakshau (ii, p. 438); 5. near the left armpit the Prajāpati-hr̥daya ('heart of Praj.,' ii, p. 499); 6. near the Cātvāla or pit, the Vasishṭḥasya Nihava (Sāma-v., vol. v, p. 602); 7. near the Āgnīdhra hearth the Satrasyarddhi ('success of the sacrificial session,' ii, p. 465); 8. 9. in front and behind the Havirdhāna carts, the Śloka and Anuśloka (i, pp. 887-9);  10. towards the Mārjālīya the Yāma (ii, p. 461); 11. 12. in front and behind the Sadas, the Āyus, and Navastobha (ii, pp. 450-51); 13. in front of the Gārhapatya the R̥śyasya sāman (ii, p. 324).

 Great Rite: thereby he obtains the Great Rite even in this (Agnishṭoma).
</details>

##  09
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

9. And the Hotr̥ recites seven metres--each subsequent one-versed (metre) increasing by four (syllables)--with the Virāj as an eighth: these (eight) consist of three eighties and forty-five syllables. Now by the eighties thereof the eighties (of the mahad uktham) [^egg_535] are obtained, for the Great Litany is counted (or recited) by eighties (of triplets); and of the forty-five (syllables which remain) twenty-five are this twenty-five-fold body [^egg_536]; and where the body is there, indeed, are (included) the head, and the wings and tail; and the twenty (syllables which remain) are the insertion [^egg_537];--thus much, then, is the Great Litany: thereby he obtains the Great Litany even in this (Agnishṭoma). All these (three) are indeed obtained in the Jyotishṭoma Agnishṭoma: let him, therefore, perform offering with the Jyotishṭoma Agnishṭoma.

[^egg_535]: 289:1 See p. 112, note 1.

[^egg_536]: 289:2 Viz. the body, as consisting of the ten fingers, the ten toes, the arms and legs, and the trunk.

[^egg_537]: 289:3 Towards the end of the Mahad Uktham, in the portion representing the thighs, nine trishṭubh verses (R̥g-veda III, 43, 1-8, and X, 55, 5) are inserted as an 'āvapanam..'
</details>