+++
title = "01"

+++
It is somewhat curious that the hymn begins with the expression “I have set loose my eloquence,” with the augmented aor. asṛkṣi. Such phrases are more usual in the final vss. of hymns, summing up the hymn that has just been produced. Perhaps here the poet means that he has set his eloquence in motion, in preparation for hymn composition. IH suggests it’s a performative “I (have) (hearby) set loose …” kuvíd ordinarily appears with accented verb. Gr allows an unaccented verb only when the particle and the verb are in different pāda -- but in other passages where kuvíd and the verb are not in the same pāda the verb can nonetheless be accented, e.g., VIII.91.4cd, VIII.103.9, IX.19.5. (In VII.91.1 the verb is accented though it is in a different pāda, but it may also be in a relative clause -- though see comm. ad loc.) It would be possible to take kuvíd here as construed only with āśuhémā “surely the Child of the Waters is one impelling swift (horses); he will make (the hymns) well-ornamented.” But this seems rather artificial. Perhaps karati lost the expected accent because the hí induced accent of jóṣisat was more syntactically prominent. In any case the unaccented verb vanate in V.3.10 (cited by Gr) is also difficult not to construe with the kuvíd in the previous pāda. Gr’s rule seems to be variable: in addition to the accented verbs in different clauses cited above, there is at least one example of an unaccented verb in the same clause -- V.36.3 kuvín nú stoṣat … (pace Gr’s accented stóṣan s.v. kuvíd; he gives correct stoṣat s.v. stu). For further on verbal accentuation with kuvíd see Hettrich, Hypotaxe 151-52.

As Ge (and Re) point out, ‘well-ornamented’ (supéśas-) of hymns means not only poetically skillful but also receiving adequate recompense from the gods; cf. vā́japeśas- ‘having prizes as its ornament’ in the preceding hymn (II.34.6), esp. in conjunction with vājayúḥ ‘seeking prizes’ in our pāda a.

