+++
title = "03"

+++
My rendering of nadásya kárṇaiḥ “with the ‘ears’ of the reed(-whip)” follows Pischel’s sugg. (Ved. Stud. I.191; see Ge’s n. 3bc and Old) that nadá- is here ‘reed’ (cf. I.32.8) (beside naḍá- ‘id.’) rather than ‘roarer’ and that it refers to a whip or riding crop of some sort. I suggest that the “ears” would be some part of the whip, perhaps knots on the whiplashes or the like. Pischel’s idea has been generally rejected (though Oberlies [Relig. II.247] seems to accept it); see esp. Old’s negative remarks. But the alternative notion, that the Maruts are directing their horses by the ears of a(nother? side?) horse makes no sense to me: how would such direction work? And although Old explicitly states that the number is not an issue, referring to plural (not dual) ears of a single horse (or even several horses, since pairs of body parts generally are referred to in the dual even when several individuals are in question) seems problematic to me.

In my interpr. the two instr. pls. kárṇaiḥ and āśúbhiḥ are separate. So also Old, Re, though they otherwise accept the lead-ear theory. But Ge (/WG) construe them together (“with swift ears”), which in my view makes a puzzling interpr. even more so.

The next question is how to interpr. the intensive part. dávidhvataḥ. Though the stem is usually transitive, Ge (/WG) take it absolutely (“schüttelnd”), while Re supplies an obj. seemingly at random (“qui secouez-puissamment (le monde)”). I extract ‘lips’ (śípra-) from the cmpd. híraṇyaśipra-, since du. śípre serves as object to just this participle in X.96.9.

The pṛkṣám of d should not be severed from pṛkṣé beginning 4a, though at least in Ge’s (/WG’s) tr. the connection is not signalled (Re’s rendering does connect them). In general thematic pṛkṣá- refers to a strengthening substance, esp.

nourishment. The corresponding root noun pṛ́kṣ- has the same basic sense (see Schindler, Rt Noun, s.v.), but here in the dat. is used infinitively (so also Schindler, as well as the standard tr.). The phrase pṛkṣáṃ yātha may well be a syntagm, judging from the PN pṛkṣá-yāma in I.122.7 (adduced by Old), and the acc. appears to be a goal, contra Ge’s (/WG) rendering of pṛkṣám as an adverb (“kräftig”).

