+++
title = "10-12"

+++
This, the Atri tṛca, shows very tight cohesion. To begin with, Pūṣan, under his name (vs. 10) or characteristic epithets (kapardín- vs. 11, ā́ghṛṇi- vs. 12), appears in every vs., in particular as the recipient of the pressed and purified soma in vss. 11-12. Since, as noted in the publ. intro., Pūṣan is rarely found in IX, devoting a tṛca to him here is striking, and the assumption that he wants soma is esp. anomalous, since in the hymn devoted to Indra and Pūṣan (VI.57) Indra’s desire for soma is explicitly contrasted with Pūṣan’s for porridge (VI.57.2).

More evidence for strong cohesion: the third pāda of each vs. is a refrain: ā́bhakṣat kanyā̀su naḥ “He [=Pūṣan] will give us a share in maidens.” The connection of this refrain with soma is, to say the least, not straightforward. Ge (n. 10-12) suggests that the idea is that Pūṣan, as a thank-you for the soma, will give maidens as compensation for the poet (Dichtersold) or as a guest-gift (Gastgeschenk). This is certainly possible, though the quid pro quo isn’t evident to me in the text; nonetheless it conforms to the dānastuti concept.

Ober refines this somewhat by identifying the maidens as brides (e.g., I.320), but at least in his vol. II he takes Soma as the subject of the refrain (“[D]er [Soma] gewähre uns Anteil an den Jungfrauen”; II.51 n. 240). Simply on the basis of rhetorical structure, this seems unlikely: in the vs. containing the first appearance of the refrain (10) there is not even indirect reference to Soma; the only possible subject is Pūṣan, and there is unlikely to be a switch in subject in the refrain in the following two vss. By contrast, Gr identifies the maidens here as daughters, presumbly implying that this expression is a twist on the “give us sons” wish so often expressed. Though I appreciate Gr’s attempt to save Pūṣan from being a pimp, I doubt that any Rigvedin would wish [at least out loud] for a passel of daughters The last two vss. of the tṛca are simple variants of each other. Both begin with ayám referring to soma; both contain a datival expression identifying Pūṣan as the recipient of the soma; their b pādas both begin ghṛtáṃ ná pavate, with a disyllable qualifiying ghṛtám following.

