+++
title = "22"

+++
The nominal rel. cl. yáḥ potā́seems to be another ex. of the embedded, pseudoizafe construction discussed elsewhere, though in this case there is a resumptive pronoun beginning the continuation of the main cl. The structure is: ab beg. of main cl. marked by sáḥ, no verb; c rel. cl. yáḥ potā́, followed by rest of main cl., with verb, but introduced by a repetition of sáḥ: sá punātu naḥ, or, more schematically: ab sá NOMINATIVE NP / C. yáḥ NOM. NP, sá VERB with the two sá hunks together forming the main cl. A sort of hybrid construction.

In the publ. tr. I take pavítreṇa in b with pávamānaḥ in a, unlike Ge and Re, who construe it with punātu in c (e.g., “qu’il nous clarifie avec le filtre”). Their interpr. is supported by the INSTR. punīhi naḥ constr. in 23-24, 26 (and variant in 25), and since I no longer consider yáḥ potā́an embedded rel. clause and therefore have no need to consider ab entirely separate from the resumptive sá phrase in c, there is no syntactic obstacle to this interpr. I’d be inclined, however, to read pavítreṇa with both: “The one who purifies himself through our filter (/purifier) today, the limitless one who is the purifier, with the filter (/purifier) let him purify us.” The agent noun potár- (also pótar-) as if to an aniṭ root is surprising, esp. in juxtaposition to the instrument noun pavítra- and, a few vss. later, the god savitár- to the parallel root √sū. We would of course expect *pavitár- -- a form we almost get in RVic pavītár- and do get in AV pavitár-. The problem is identical to that posed by the priestly title hótar-, derived from √hvā / hū ‘invoke’, so we expect *hávitar- -- although in that instance interference from the likewise ritual verb √hu ‘pour, libate’, whose agent noun should properly be hótar-, helps explain the discrepancy. AiG II.2. 672 explains pótar- by suggesting that it is an inherited word and no longer closely tied to the verb from which it was originally derived. This seems backwards to me - wouldn’t inherited and isolated words be more likely to maintain their expected phonological shape? And, judging from this passage, potár- (so accented) has not lost its connection with √pū. However, a few pp. later (AiG II.2.676) the much more plausible scenario is proposed, that potár- / pótar- has followed hótar-, which owes its shape to the interference just noted, and stotár- ‘praiser’.

Sim. EWA s.v. pótar-.

