+++
title = "30"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. is extremely puzzling and my tr. and interpr.

are at best speculative. Old’s comments are useful in clearing away the detritus of the more fanciful interpr., but neither he nor the other standard comm. have cracked the code: see Ge’s n. 30a with lit. The syntax and the sequence of events are quite straightforward: someone’s axe has disappeared (contra Gr, nanāśa must belong to ‘disappear’, not ‘reach’; the ‘disappear’ association is now generally agreed upon), and Soma is asked to bring it back through his purification (the common idiom ā́√pū). But whose axe? and why an axe in this context? and what does a rat have to do with it? To begin with the 1st question: most take alā́yyasya as a PN (“the axe of Alāyya”), which saves trouble but doesn’t help us in deciphering the verse. Gr derives it from √lī and tr. ‘sich nicht duckend’; Mayr (EWA s.v.) simply pronounces it “unklar.” I suggest that it belongs to √rā ‘come to / be at rest’, with an l-form like iláyati (see Narten, “Ved. iláyati …,” 1968; Jamison, -áya-, 48-49, EWA s.v. RĀ3 ). I would interpr. it as a gerundive like - pā́yya- (√pā both ‘drink’ and ‘protect’), as well as the more numerous extended stems of the type śravā́yya-, whose -ā- does not belong to the root. A parallel negated form (though again not to a ā-root) may be found in atasā́yya- ‘unshakeable’; see comm. ad I.63.6. I suggest that alā́yya- means ‘not able to be brought to rest, not to be stilled’.

This may not seem to advance us very far, but this word must be evaluated in conjunction with paraśúḥ, on which it depends. The paraśú- is frequently associated with Agni; cf., e.g., I.127.3, IV.6.8, and VI.3.4, in all of which Agni is compared to an axe. The other common word for axe, vā́śī-, is also characteristic of Agni: he carries it (VIII.19.23) and possesses it (vā́śīmant- X.20.6). Agni’s axe must be his flame, and of course fire is always in motion, never still. I therefore suggest that alā́yya- refers to Agni, the axe to his flame, and the pāda declares that his flame has disappeared or been lost. This may refer to the famous myth in which Agni runs away from his ritual duties and has to be coaxed back by offering him a better deal - or it may simply record a ritual disaster: the sacrificial fire has gone out. In any event Soma is taxed with bringing him back in pāda b.

If my interpr. of the first pāda is anywhere near correct, it pleases me to fancy that this is the first (very indirect) textual evidence to Paraśu Rāma.

The real puzzle in this vs. is pāda c, which presents ākhúm as an apparently parallel object to the paraśú- that Soma is supposed to bring back. Both Ge and Re find this relatively easy to deal with because they take it as a simile, marked with cid. But as I have noted in a number of places, there are no clear instances of cid as a simile marker, and here it is also not clear what similarity the poet might be trying to point to (that moles live hidden seems to be the best guess). My own suggestion is hardly better than this (if that). The ākhúis probably a ‘mole-like rat’ since there are no true moles in the subcontinent (see Katz, JAOS 122 [2002], “How the Mole and Mongoose Got Their Names,” esp. 301-2). The word is found only here in the RV, which complicates the interpr., but it has become fairly common by middle Vedic. In particular, the ākhú- is associated with Rudra; already in VS III.57, TS I.8.6.1 the ākhú- is Rudra’s victim / portion at the Tryambaka ritual. I therefore think it is possible (no more than that) that Soma is being asked also to bring Rudra back, in the form of his totem animal. Of the few hymns dedicated in full or in part to Rudra (there are only 3 dedicated to him alone), 2 (I.43, VI.47) are Soma-Rudra hymns, so there is some association between the two gods, whose rationale unfortunately escapes me.

Why this vs. ended up in this hymn I have no idea - except as a composite hymn it may have attracted various vss. that were floating around, and since it addresses Soma and uses a standard Somian verb (ā́√pū), the hymn may have seemed as good a place as any to stash this vs. It clearly has nothing to do with the two Soma vss. that preceded nor with the added summary vss. that follow. It also appears to be a younger vs., given the -l-form and the non-RVic word ā́khu-.
