+++
title = "01"

+++
Old is disturbed by aramṇāḥ ‘brought to peace / to a stop’, when we would expect Indra to releasing the waters to flow. I’m not sure this is a problem: since the floods were hard pressed (badbadhānā́n), Indra could be soothing and quieting the tormented waters. Cf. also in the previous hymn V.31.8 apáḥ … áramayaḥ “you brought the waters to rest,” the same sentiment with the same root. However, it could also be an example of alluding to a sub-surface word by the overt use of its opposite, like bodháya- for *svāpáya in I.103.7; see comm. ad loc. In other words, aramṇāḥ could be signaling ‘set in motion’ by opposition to its literal sense ‘bring to a stop’.

In any case the expected action is expressed later in the vs.: d sṛjó ví dhā́rā(h) “you set loose the streams,” in a species of poetic repair. See also comm. on vs. 2.

Note the stylistic quirk of post-verbal preverb in ásrjo ̥ [/sṛjó] ví OBJ (pādas a, d) versus ví … váḥ (c) and áva … han (d). The latter VP also contains a phonetic figure in áva dānavám.

In c the usual placement of the rel. pronoun after at most one constituent is precariously observed (if at all), and in any case the yád is descriptively found deep in its clause. However, its placement (almost) conforms to the letter of the law: the voc. indra is extraclausal for these purposes, and mahā́ntam … párvatam though heavy is a single constituent. It’s the ví that may tip the balance towards noncompliance. On the other hand, the configuration PREV yá- VERB is so standard that this may determine the position of yád here.

Technically speaking the opening clause of d may be part of the dependent clause in c (“when you pried apart … (and) set loose …”), with áva dānaváṃ han the sole main clause, but since in Vṛtra narratives there’s usually a cause-and-effect relationship between opening the mountain and letting the waters flow, I think the publ. tr. is the better choice.

