+++
title = "04"

+++
The major problem in this vs. is the identity and syntactic affiliation of the gen. pl. eṣām. The standard opinion, found in Ge, Scar (100), and WG, takes it as referring to the gods and construed with svadháyā. There are several arguments against this. First, the gods are never mentioned or even alluded to elsewhere in the hymn (though goddess(es) are found in 9c and 10a). Second, though svadháyā √mad is a remarkably common locution (I.64.4, 108.12, 154.4; III.4.7=7.8; VII.47.3; X.14.3, 7, 15.4, 124.8), svadháyā never has a dependent gen. in those passages. The standard opinion is also hard-pressed to make sense out of the phrase. Ge takes svadhā́- here as ‘Lebenselement’ and further glosses this as water, but even if “reveling in the Lebenselement/water of the gods” were a possible tr. of this phrase, it is a notion that seems foreign to the Vṛtra myth. Scar and WG have a more reasonable interpr. -- that Vṛtra is reveling in what actually belongs by nature to the gods, that is, as WG say in their n., “Der Dämon usurpiert die Natur der Götter.” But this still requires conjuring up the gods out of thin air and assuming that the audience could do so too, on the basis of an unemphatic, unaccented gen. pl. pronoun. And again the image produced is not a standard part of the Vṛtra myth.

My solution starts, appropriately, by seeking a referent in the context; dānavásya in the 2nd hemistich seems a reasonable choice. Although dānavá- never appears in the plural in the RV, this stem (related to dā́nu-, the name of Vṛtra’s mother, which I consider a backformation from the demonic ethnonym; see comm. ad I.32.9) names “eine Dämonen-Klasse,” as Mayrhofer remarks (EWA s.v. dā́nu-), and fluctuation between sg. and pl. can happen in such cases (as with the Maruts, plural, versus the Marut flock, singular). The pl. is found in the AV (AVŚ IV.24.2 [with vs. 1 referring to Indra as vṛtrahán-), X.6.10; AVP IV.39.3 [≅AVŚ IV.24.2], VII.12.8, XVI.43.2) and elsewhere in early Vedic as well as later (esp. epic) Skt.;, and the corresponding Avestan dānauua-, also the name of an inimical group, is found in the pl. in Yt. 5.73 and 13.37-38. In the latter it is associated with vǝrǝϑra- (vǝrǝϑrǝm dānunąm). It therefore seems likely that even in the RV dānavá- is not simply a designation of Vṛtra but of the class of beings to which he belongs, and the absence of the plural in the RV is either due to accident or a desire to concentrate on the arch-Dānava, Vṛtra. The gen. here may be construed either with t(i)yáṃ cid (“this one of theirs”) or be a free-floating indication of appurtenance, as the publ. tr. takes it.

Or indeed, because eṣām is in (modified) Wackernagel’s position, it could have originated with any of the descriptors of Vṛtra found later in the verse.

With svadháyā freed from its supposed genitive dependent, the phrase svadháyā mádantam now makes sense in a Vṛtra context. He is “drunk on his own power” on the basis of his faulty assessment of this power presented in 3c. The locution recalls a similar one in the great Indra-Vṛtra hymn I.32, where in 6a Vṛtra is described as ayoddhéva durmádaḥ “like a non-warrior badly drunk” (lit. ‘having bad intoxication’), foolishly challenging a far more powerful opponent. (I use ‘drunk’ in both instances, instead of our more usual ‘exhilarated’, because it better captures in English the state of mind of the one so affected.) The sense of vṛ́ṣa-prabharmā is secured by 5c prábhṛtā mádasya “at the proffering of the invigorating (soma)” -- hence, as Gr takes it (sim. WG, Scar, and me), “dem der kräftige (Soma) vorgesetzt ist.” This also makes sense in context -- Indra needs to receive the soma before smashing Vṛtra -- and is reinforced by the usual sense of the lexeme prá √bhṛ ‘bring forward, present’. However, Ge renders it “wie ein Bulle angreifend (?),” and I was tempted somewhat in this direction, to ‘having the bearing/deportment of a bull’; prá √bhṛ can, esp. in the middle, mean ‘display, present oneself’. I think both possibilities are latent in this word, and we can view the anchoring 5c prábhṛtā mádasya as another example of poetic repair -- or perhaps a poetic thumb on the scales, pressing the choice of one of the options over the other. It is then itself somewhat undercut by 7c vájrasya prábhṛtau “at the proffering of the mace.” In c note the echo … -prabharmā … bhā́maṃ.

The last word of this vs. is śúṣṇam. Generally, of course, this is the name of a different opponent of Indra’s, and a number of tr. take it so here. But I think it has its etymological sense ‘snorter’ (√śvas ‘snort’; cf. EWA s.v.). Our poet is once again toying with us: withholding the real name of the opponent in this hymn, Vṛtra, he is falsely offering a different possibility here.

