+++
title = "05-06"

+++
Vs. 5 is syntactically problematic, in that it has two subordinate clauses, one marked by yád in pāda a and one marked by yé in pāda c, but no obvious main clause. The rel. cl. beginning in c must extend through d, which contains the accented imperfect ávartanta, but the extent of the yád clause is unclear. It must go as far as the end of pāda a because of the accented subjunctive árcān, but the status of b is in question. Since the vs. otherwise lacks a main clause, Ge and WG make b the nominal main clause, e.g., Ge “…, da waren die Presssteine, die Aditi einverstanden.” This is possible, but seems conceptually weak, and both Ge and WG fail to render the subjunctive value of the verb in the yád clause -- Ge silently changing it into a preterite (“anstimmten”) and WG using a simple pres. (“singen”).

But I think the subjunctive should be taken seriously, esp. given its contrast with the impf. ávartanta in d. My solution is to assume the main clause is postponed till vs. 6, whose first pāda contains the familiar annunciatory pseudo-subjunctive prá … vocam “I shall proclaim.” Thus, vss. 5-6 depict a ritual situation in which the noise of the pressing stones is, as so often, configured as ritual speech (see, e.g., vs. 12c vádan grā́vā in this same hymn), to which the poet responds in vs. 6. I now think that vṛ́ṣaṇaḥ in pāda a is not a separate subject (“the bulls and the pressing stones” of the publ. tr.), but instead qualifies the stones (“the bullish pressing stones”; for pressing stones as bulls, see, e.g., III.42.6, VI.44.20), and I would change the tr. to “When for you the bull, o Indra, the bullish pressing stones will chant a chant …” Sāy., cited approvingly by Ge in n. 5a, identifies the bulls of pāda a as the Maruts, and WG also accept this identification, but again the subjunctive makes difficulties: the actions of the Maruts should not be prospective, but located in the mythic past (hence, presumably, Ge’s switch to the preterite).

So the skeleton of the sentence spread over two vss. is “When the pressing stones will chant a chant to you, I will proclaim your deeds.” A few loose ends remain in vs. 5. The presence of Aditi in b at first takes one aback, but as Ge points out (n. 5b), soma is said elsewhere to be prepared “in the lap of Aditi,” so her proximity to the pressing stones is a ritual given. I take áditiḥ sajóṣāḥ as a separate mini-constituent, with the nom. sg. of the -s-stem adjective serving for the fem. as well as the masc., as usual. The second hemistich detours into a conceit -- involving an unexpressed comparison of the pressing stones with deadly wheel rims that have crushed the enemy; cf. a similar passage in X.27.6 ádhy ū nv èṣu vavṛtyuḥ “The wheel rims should now roll over them.” In part the conceit responds to the chariot-focused theme of this hymn, esp. the chariot conflict depicted in vs. 11; in part it highlights the pressing stones’ demon-killing power, found, e.g., in X.76.4.

The subjunctive vibhárā(ḥ) in the yád clause is potentially troublesome for my interpr. of árcān in 5a, for it seems to refer to past, cosmogonic deed(s) of Indra’s -- the separation of the two world halves and the winning of water for mankind (two events not usually connected). This surprising usage of the subjunctive is noted by Delbrück (AiSyn 322: subjunctive where we expect the indicative of a narrative tense). Old is undisturbed by the subjunctive and points to 5a as similar, which is exactly what I would prefer to point away from; see my explanation of árcān above.

Hoffmann (244-45) classifies it as “Konjunktiv in präteritalem Sachverhalt” and suggests that the subjunctive in its prospective use can take on a timeless sense (“… einen ausserzeitlichen Sinn annehmen kann”). Ge simply translates it as a preterite (trenntest) without comment, but WG take the subjunctive seriously here (though not in 5a): “… dass du … trennen und … gewinnen willst,” without further comment. I do not have an entirely satisfactory answer, but I think the yád clause must be evaluated in the context of what precedes: 6ab announces that I will proclaim Indra’s previous deeds (pū́rvāṇi káraṇāni) and “the current ones which you have done” (nū́tanā … yā́cakártha). This latter expression, which is found identically in VII.98.5, seems temporally incoherent: if they are his current deeds, he should not have already done them; yā́cakártha should limit only the first phrase, pū́rvāṇi káraṇāni. A fuller expression of this proclamation announcement, with the time of action correctly sorted, is found in nearby V.29.13 vīryā̀… yā́cakártha / yā́co nú návyā kṛṇávaḥ “The heroic deeds that you have done and the new ones that you will do,” with the perfect cakártha qualifying the deeds already done and the subjunctive kṛṇávaḥ the new ones. Immediately afterwards it is said prá … tā́… bravāma “we shall proclaim these,” like our prá … vocam. I think we should interpret our 6cd in the light of V.29.13. The rel. clause yā́cakártha should, properly speaking, limit only the pū́rvāṇi, while the nū́tanā ‘current (deeds)’ are further specified by a single example (or perhaps two), expressed by the yád clause in cd using the subjunctive. A problem remains: as noted above, the separation of the two worlds is one of Indra’s standard cosmogonic deeds as is, in the Vṛtra myth, his winning of the waters. We should expect these to be classified among the pū́rvāṇi. But of course one of the reasons for celebrating older, mythic deeds is to persuade / compel the god to perform these deeds again in the present for our benefit, and we can interpret the yád

+ SUBJUNCTIVE clause here in that way. The separation of the two world halves is, on a smaller scale, accomplished every morning when dawn reveals the horizon where the darkness had kept earth and sky undifferentiated. And winning waters is something that needs to be repeated at least yearly. The subjunctive here indicates that our focus is on the re-creation of these older deeds, not simply on celebrating their original performance. In this context mánave ‘for Manu’ would have the extended sense ‘for mankind’.
