+++
title = "07"

+++
vádhar appears here in the same metrical position as in 3b. There the weapon was Vṛtra’s (which Indra struck away), while here it is Indra’s. Another example of vocab. first used of Vṛtra reassigned to Indra -- like ékaḥ … apratíḥ in 3a and the similar expression in 9a. Indeed, ápratītam appears here in b, characterizing Indra’s weapon, which is ‘might’ itself (sáhaḥ). The use of sáhaḥ as an appositive here supports my view of the same usage of this word in V.31.3 (contra Ge [/WG]). There it characterizes Indra himself. It is even possible that sáho ápratītam here is nominative and an appositive to índraḥ, rather than an acc. and appositive to vádhar, though the juxtaposition of the two terms in b makes that unlikely. In any case note the similarity in phrasing: 31.3a # úd yát sáhaḥ ... 32.7ab # úd yád ... sáhaḥ; the verbs in these clauses are also rhyming: 31.3 ájaniṣṭa, 32.7 yámiṣṭa.

As noted ad vs. 4, the poetic repair effected by prábhṛtā mádasya in 5c is somewhat muddied by 7c vájrasya prábhṛtau. What exactly this latter phrase means is not clear. I doubt that Ge’s “im Schlag mit der Keule” is correct, since ‘strike’ is not a standard sense of prá √bhṛ (the closest we get is ‘bear down on’). WG’s “beim Vorführen des Vajra” is similar to my “at the proffering of the mace” (‘proffer’ having been chosen to match the tr. of this lexeme in 4c and 5c). The English idiom “present arms” is a direct correspondent, though the action in the English phrase is a gesture of respect, not (as here) of intimidation. The point of both úd … vádhar yámiṣṭa “held up his weapon” and vájrasya prábhṛtau seems to be to show Vṛtra the unbeatable power of the vájra-. See also the mahatā́vadhéna in 8c.


<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/05/031/07-08.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>