+++
title = "02"
+++


The eponymous poet of Maṇḍala II, the first of the Family Books, is Gr̥tsamada,  who was the son of Śunahotra Āṅgirasa and the adopted son of Śunaka Bhārgava  according to Sāyaṇa and the Anukramaṇī. The hymns refer to the people of the poet  as Gr̥tsamadas four times, but also as Śunahotras three times. Of the forty-three  hymns in this maṇḍala, the Anukramaṇī ascribes all but seven to Gr̥tsamada himself. It attributes II.4–7 to Somāhuti Bhārgava, who would have thus belonged  to the lineage of Gr̥tsamada’s father by adoption, and II.27–29 either to Kūrma  Gārtsamada or to Gr̥tsamada. One of the characteristic features of the hymns of  this maṇḍala is that twenty-one of its hymns, almost half, end with the signature  refrain of the Gr̥tsamadas, “May we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.”

The maṇḍala has ten hymns in the Agni series, including one Āprī hymn  (II.3), and twelve in the Indra series (II.11–22). Among the latter is one of the  best-known Indra hymns, II.12, with its famous refrain, “he, o peoples, is Indra.”  Characteristically, Gr̥tsamada connects the heroic deeds of Indra to the acts of the  ritual, so that the ritual practice becomes the guarantee that Indra will again per
form his great deeds. Following the Indra series are four hymns to Brahmaṇaspati  or Br̥haspati, the “lord of the sacred formulation” (II.23–26). In the first of these,  Brahmaṇaspati or Br̥haspati appears as both a priestly companion of Indra and as  Indra himself in his role as a priest-king, and in the second, Br̥haspati is Indra. Both  refer to the Vala myth, in which Indra and his accompanying priests release the cat
tle by the power of the formulated truth. After two hymns, one to the Ādityas (II.27)  and one to Varuṇa, the foremost of the Ādityas (II.28), there are a series of hymns  to the All Gods (II.29, 31) or to various gods (II.30, 32). The last of these is a com posite hymn in two different meters, honoring minor deities, including four female  deities concerned with childbirth. Most of the remaining hymns of the maṇḍala  are single hymns to other deities. Noteworthy among them are II.33, one of only  three hymns in the R̥gveda to Rudra, II.35, the only hymn in the R̥gveda dedicated  to Apām Napāt, the “Child of the Waters,” and II.38, a hymn to Savitar that shows  his role as the god of the evening who brings the world to rest. The final two hymns,  II.42 and 43, are hymns to omen-birds, asking them to cry only auspicious cries and  comparing their auspicious cries to the words and chants of the poets.
400 II.1
II.1 (192) Agni
Gr̥tsamada Bhārgava Śaunaka, originally Āṅgirasa Śaunahotra
16 verses: jagatī
This hymn is structured as a series of identifications—of the god Agni with priests,  other gods, kin/social relations, qualities, body parts, and so on, with the identifica tion mediated by the quality held in common.
Although the equations may at first seem randomly ordered, in fact they fol low a logical progression. The first ones (vs. 2) identify Agni with human priests.  (Priestly identifications are also found extensively in II.5. And for the relationship  between particular priests and particular gods, see also the R̥tugraha hymns I.15,  II.36–37.) In the next five verses (3–7) the variety of functions Agni discharges  invite identification with a series of gods. Verses 8–9 then set Agni in the web of  human relationships, of varying degrees of close kinship. We return to the divine (or  semi-divine) world in verses 10–11, but the identifications here link him especially  to ritual activity (the R̥bhus in vs. 10, who are associated with the Third Pressing  and who achieved divinity by their ritual feats; the female divinities in vs. 11, who  are regularly mentioned in the Āprī hymns) and prepare for the last section of the  hymn (vss. 12–14). The R̥bhu verse (10) also contains an elaborate pun, while the  identification of Agni with three female divinities in verse 11 would surely provoke  attention in the audience. Agni’s own ritual service, especially to the gods, provides  the subject of verses 12–14. The last pāda of this last section (14d) provides a ring  with the first verse (1d): “you were born blazing” (jajñiṣe śúciḥ 14d), reprising “you  are born blazing” (jāyase śúciḥ 1d), in both cases with a mention of the plants as his  source. This neat ring, which closes the series of individual identifications, sets the  stage for the climactic verse 15 (before the refrain of 16), which proclaims Agni’s  complete superiority throughout heaven and earth.
The identifications are themselves structured by an extraordinary density of rhe torical repetition. Of the sixteen verses, the first fourteen begin with a form of the  2nd-person singular pronoun tvám “you,” followed by the vocative agne “o Agni.”  In fact fifty-four pādas out of fifty-six open with a 2nd-person singular pronoun,  in addition to other pronominal forms scattered in non-initial position. For exam ple, there are seven forms of tvám in the first verse alone. The fifteenth verse (and  the last before the refrain) begins, as usual, with tvám, but the vocative ágne is  postponed till the opening of the second pāda—distracting the formula. As often,  rhetorical patterns established earlier in a hymn are varied as the hymn comes to  a close, and the change of pattern here draws attention to the climactic contents  of verse 15 discussed just above. Though the rhetorical tool, repetition, is a blunt  instrument, its effects are powerful.
This rhetorical pattern is especially striking because so many of the pronominal  forms are nominatives and therefore unnecessary, since pronominal subjects need  not be expressed in Sanskrit. Though some of these nominatives occur in equational sentences (cf. tvám agníd r̥tāyatáḥ “you [are] the Agnidh of the one who follows  truth”) where a pronominal forms is often used in place of a copula, a surprising  number of these equational sentences also employ a 2nd-person singular copula (asi [e.g., 3a, 5d] or equivalent), rendering a pronominal subject unnecessary. For further
discussion see Jamison (2007: 59–60). Poetics, not grammar, is the driving factor. The effect of this incantatory repetition of “you, Agni,” taking place in front  of the sacrificial fire on the ritual ground, combined with the sweep of equations  identifying Agni with what comes to seem like everything on earth and in heaven,  is to concentrate all of the cosmos into this small space, the sacrifical ground, and  this single entity, the sacrificial fire—indeed making the sacrificial microcosm  the equivalent of the macrocosm. The ordering of the identifications—starting  and ending at the sacrifice, but in between ranging through both the divine and  human realms—models the centrality of the sacrifice and of its focus, the sacred  fire. It is a powerful beginning to the maṇḍala and to the Family Books in general.
1. You, Agni, (are born) throughout the days, you who are eager to blaze  here; you (are born) from the waters, you from the stone,
you from the trees, you from the plants, you, men-lord of men, are born  blazing.
2. Yours, Agni, is the office of Hotar; yours that of Potar in its turn; yours  that of Neṣṭar; you are the Agnidh [=Fire-Kindler] of the one who
follows truth.
Yours is the office of Praśāstar; you act as Adhvaryu; you are both the  Brahman-priest and the houselord in our home.
3. You, Agni, as bull of beings, are Indra; you, wide-going, worthy of  homage, are Viṣṇu.
You, o lord of the sacred formulation, finder of wealth, are the Brahman  [=Formulator]; you, o Apportioner, are accompanied by Plenitude.
4. You, Agni, whose commandments are steadfast, are King Varuṇa; you,  wondrous to be invoked, become Mitra.
You, as the lord of settlements who (offers) a common meal, are
Aryaman; you, apportioning at the ritual distribution, o god, are
Aṃśa [/Share].
5. You, Agni, (giving wealth) rich in heroes to the one who does honor, are  Tvaṣṭar—yours is kinship, o you accompanied by the Wives (of the  Gods) and possessing Mitra’s might—
You have given (wealth) rich in horses as the impeller of swift (horses)  [=Child of the Waters]. You of many goods are the troop of men
[=Maruts].
6. You, Agni, as lord of great heaven, are Rudra; you, as the troop of  Maruts, are master of strengthening nourishment [=rain].
You, as luck for livestock, drive with the ruddy winds (as horses); you, as  Pūṣan, protect the ones doing honor, in your own person.
402 II.1
7. You, Agni, are Wealth-Giver to the preparer (of the offering); you, as  the conferrer of treasure, are god Savitar.
You, lord of men, as Bhaga [/Fortune] are master of goods; you are a  protector in the house of him who has done you honor.
8. Toward you, Agni, as clanlord in the house do the clans stretch out  straight—toward you, the king, easy to find.
You, lovely-faced one, are lord over all; you are the counter(part) to  thousands, hundreds, tens.
9. To you, Agni, as father, (do) men (approach) with their desires—to you,  for brotherhood, (do they approach) with their (ritual) labor, you  who are bright in body.
You become the son of him who has done you honor; you as
affectionate comrade—protect (him) from assault.
10. You, Agni, as [R̥bhu/] the craftsman at hand, are to be rendered  homage; you are master of the cattle-rich prize [/Vāja], of wealth. You radiate widely [/(are) Vibhvan]: burn through to giving! You seek  to carve up and to stretch out the sacrifice.
11. You, god Agni, are Aditi for the pious; you, as Hotrā Bhāratī, are  strengthened by song.
You are Iḍā, bestowing a hundred winters in return for skill; you, o lord  of goods, as obstacle-smasher, are Sarasvatī.
12. You, Agni, when well kept, are highest vigor. In your coveted color  there are beauties in sight.
You are the prize, furthering and lofty; you are wealth, ample, broad on  all sides.
13. You, Agni, did the Ādityas make their mouth; you did the pure ones  make their tongue, o poet.
You do the Gift-Escorts escort in the ceremonies; in you do the gods  eat the poured oblation.
14. O Agni, through your mouth do all the undeceptive immortals, the  gods, eat the oblation poured into you.
With you the mortals sweeten their pressed drink. You, as embryo of  the plants, were born blazing.
15. You are both equal and a counter(part) to these by your might, and, o  Agni, well-born god, you surpass them,
since your strengthening nourishment here extends in its greatness  through heaven and earth, through both world-halves.
16. The patrons—those who dispatch to the praisers a gift tipped with cows  and ornamented with horses, o Agni—
lead both us and them forth to a better state. – May we speak loftily at  the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes. II.2 (193) Agni
Grtsamada ̥
13 verses: jagatī
The solar aspects of fire are emphasized, with a number of comparisons to and  identifications with the sun, some of which are obscure and enigmatic (e.g., vs.  4). The twin themes of the whole hymn are encapsulated in the first verse: Agni  installed in the ritual ground, performing the role of Hotar, and receiving oblations  and hymns; Agni as the earthly counterpart of the blazing sun.
The hymn falls into two nearly equal parts. The first five verses are primarily  descriptive, with Agni generally referred to in the 3rd person; verses 6–12 (13 is  repeated from II.1.16) consist primarily of requests, addressed to Agni in the 2nd  person. The first half establishes Agni’s cosmic role, mediating between and watch
ing over the heavenly and earthly realms and maintaining his position through the  regular temporal alternations (for the latter, see esp. vs. 2). With Agni’s cosmic dom inance thus affirmed, the second half seeks to utilize these wider powers of his to  enhance our own position in the cosmos. See, for example, verse 9, where the poet  describes his poetic vision (dhī́) taking its place among the immortals in heaven, and  verse 10, where he compares the brilliance of his own people with the sun, the same  sun with which Agni is identified earlier.
There is also an emphasis on Agni perceiving and being perceived, enhanced  by a pun in the Sanskrit on the verb citaya, which can mean both “appear, be per ceived” and “perceive,” sometimes simultaneously (vss. 4, 5, 10).
Stylistically the hymn seems designed deliberately to contrast with the preceding  one (II.1). In that hymn Agni is identified with various beings and elements, whereas  in this one, especially in the first half, Agni is compared to such third parties: the  simile is the dominant figure. It is striking that II.1, by contrast, contains not a  single simile.
1. With sacrifice increase Jātavedas; sacrifice to Agni with oblation, with  song at length
when he is kindled—(Agni) receiving pleasurable offerings, possessing  solar glory, the heaven-ruling Hotar, sitting at the chariot-pole in the  (ritual) enclosures.
2. Toward you have the nights and the dawns bellowed, o Agni, like  milk-cows in good pastures to their calf.
As the spoked wheel of heaven [=sun] (does) through the human (life-) spans, through the successive nights you shine, o you of many favors. 3. Him of wondrous power have the gods fitted down at the base of the airy  realm [=on earth], as their spoked wheel of heaven and earth—
Agni with his flaming flame—like a chariot worthy to be acquired, to be  proclaimed like an envoy (installed) among the settled peoples.404 II.2
4. Him, growing in the airy realm (as) in his own house, very bright like  gold, they have set on a meandering (course),
appearing (like) the flying (udder) of Pr̥śni [=cloud], observing with his  eyes along (the whole length of) both races [=gods and men], like the  protector of a path [?].
5. As Hotar let him encompass the whole ceremony. Toward him do the  sons of Manu stretch out, with oblations and with song.
Golden-lipped, growing on these (hearths), quivering, appearing like  heaven with its stars, he perceives along (the whole length of) the two  world-halves.
6. When you have been kindled, (shine) richly for our well-being; even  after you are entirely extinguished, shine wealth upon us.
Turn the two world-halves toward here, for our easy progress, o god  Agni, (for them) to seek out the oblations of Manu.
7. Give us, Agni, lofty (prizes), give (prizes) in thousands. Open up the  prize like a door, for (it) to be famed.
Turn heaven and earth eastward with a sacred formulation. Like the  blazing sun, you have made the dawns flash forth.
8. On being kindled through (all) the dawns and the nights, like the sun he  has shone with red radiance.
With the libations of Manu he conducts good ceremonies—the king of  the clans, the guest dear to Āyu.
9. In this way, o foremost Agni, (hymnic) vision swells for us among the  immortals dwelling in lofty heaven through the human (lifespans)— (a vision like) a cow giving milk to the bard in the (ritual) enclosures,  (bringing) by herself multiform (prizes) in hundreds at her
impulsion.
10. May we, o Agni, by our steed get in sight of (wealth) in good heroes, or  by our sacred formulation distinguish ourselves beyond (other) men. Let our brilliance blaze upward among the five peoples like the sun,  difficult to surpass.
11. O mighty one, become the one for us to proclaim—(as him) in whom  the well-born patrons find nourishment,
whom the prize-winners approach to sacrifice, o Agni, as you shine  amid (our) own offspring in (your) own house.
12. May we both, the praisers and the patrons, be in your protection, o  Agni Jātavedas.
Over goods and wealth—much glittering, very abundant, consisting of  offspring and good descendants—exert your control for us.
13. The patrons—those who dispatch to the praisers a gift tipped with cows  and ornamented with horses, o Agni—
lead both us and them forth to a better state. – May we speak loftily at  the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes. II.3 (194) Āprı̄
Grtsamada ̥
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 7
This is one of the ten so-called Āprī hymns in the R̥gveda, a litany recited at the  animal sacrifice: the subjects of the verses appear in a fixed order, each signaled by a  key word (italicized in the following translation), though the exact wording of each  differs from hymn to hymn. This type of flexible composition around a set of fixed  themes and terms in a fixed order may give us some insight into R̥gvedic compo
sitional techniques. This version is somewhat fuller and verbally richer than most,  encouraged by the relatively capacious measures of triṣṭubh meter. For a minimalist  version, see I.13.
1. Agni, kindled, deposited on the earth, has stood up facing all beings. The pure, very wise Hotar from olden days—let Agni the god sacrifice to  the gods, (himself) deserving (it).
2. Narāśaṃsa, who anoints, counter(part) to the foundations (of the  earth) and to the three heavens with his greatness, he of lovely
flames,
with his ghee-sprinkling mind wetting the oblation—at the head of the  sacrifice let him anoint the gods altogether.
3. Solemnly invoked by (our) mind, o Agni, deserving (it), sacrifice today to  the gods for us in front of the descendant of Manu.
Convey here the unstirrable troop of the Maruts. You men, sacrifice to  Indra who sits on the ritual grass.
4. O divine Ritual Grass—growing strong, affording good heroes, having a  lovely burden [=the gods], strewn on this altar here for wealth.
Good ones, sit here on it, which is anointed with ghee—all you gods,  Ādityas, worthy of the sacrifice.
5. Let them gape open widely—the Divine Doors, easy to approach—when  invoked with reverences.
Expansive, let the unaging ones spread forth, purifying their own “color”  [=people] (so that it is) glorious, rich in heroes.
6. Strengthened of old for us, Dawn and Night, like happy weavers on target  at their labors,
jointly interweaving the stretched thread, the ornament of the sacrifice— the good milk-cows rich in milk.
7. The first two Divine Hotars, more knowing, more wondrous, together  will sacrifice rightly with their chant.
Sacrificing to the gods according to the proper season, they jointly
anoint them on the navel of the earth, on the three backs (of the fires). 8. Sarasvatī, who sends our poetic thought to its target, divine Iḍā, Bhāratī outstripping all—
406 II.4
let the three goddesses, having sat down on this ritual grass here, with  their own power protect (its?) unbroken shelter.
9. Of tawny form, of good support [/easy to bear], conferring vigor, a  hero desirous of the gods is born because of (Tvastar’s?/the gods’?)
attentive listening—
let Tvaṣṭar unbind (our) navel and release the offspring to us. Then let  (the sacrificial victim) go into the pen of the gods.
10. The Lord of the Forest [=sacrificial post] stands by on releasing (the  victim). Agni will sweeten the oblation with his poetic thoughts.
Let him who knows (the way) lead the thrice-anointed one—(let) the  divine Butcher (lead) the oblation up to the gods.
11. Ghee is attached (to him); ghee is his womb. He is propped in ghee, and  ghee is his foundation.
In accord with your own power convey (the gods) hither; invigorate
yourself. O bull, you will convey the oblation, prepared with the
svāhā-call.
II.4 (195) Agni
Somāhuti Bhārgava
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn first concerns itself with the installation of the ritual fire (vss. 1–3). There  follows a naturalistic description, rich in metaphor and simile, of a fire first catching  and then flaming up (vss. 4–7). The hymn ends with two verses requesting benefits  for the Gr̥tsamada clan (8–9). Oblique references to the myth of the recovery of the  vanished fire in verses 2 and 9 provide the hymn with a larger ring-like structure.
1. I call for you upon the one of good brilliance, on Agni, the guest of the  clans, who receives well-twisted (hymns), who receives very pleasurable  offerings,
who, like an envoy, has become desirable to install as god among the  god-directed people, as Jātavedas.
2. This one here—having done honor (to him) in the seat of the waters— once again the Bhr̥gus have installed among the clans of Āyu.
Let him surmount all the worlds—Agni, the spoked wheel of the gods  whose horses are lively.
3. Agni have the gods installed among the clans stemming from Manu,  their own dear one, as those desiring to dwell peacefully (install)
an envoy.
He will shine toward the nights desirous (of him), he whose skill is to be  besought for the one rich in gifts in (his own) house. 4. His thriving, like one’s own, brings delight; delightful is his whole  appearance when he is being urged on, about to burn.
He who is flicking his tongue hither and yon among the plants, like a  steed at a chariot he keeps twitching his tail.
5. The formless mass [=smoke] of the wood-eater that they (first) marveled  at to me, (that) color he changed as if for the fire-priests:
he is (now) perceived in delight with his bright light, he who, having  grown old, in an instant has become young.
6. Who, (eating) wood like one athirst, shines here; like water along a path,  like chariot (wheels) he has sounded.
Having a black road, red-hot, he appears bringing delight, smiling like  heaven with its clouds [=his clouds of smoke].
7. He who has spread out, burning the broad (earth), like livestock without  a herdsman he goes seeking his own way.
Agni, enflamed, scorching the brushwood, with his black wayward
course, has “sweetened,” as it were, the ground.
8. Now, upon consideration of your previous help, a prayerful thought has  been proclaimed to you at the third rite:
o Agni, grant to us a prize of an array of heroes, a lofty cattle-rich one,  and wealth in good descendants.
9. So that with you, o Agni, the Gr̥tsamadas, gaining (the one deposited) in  secret [=Agni], might surmount those below,
(the Gr̥tsamadas) possessing good heroes and overcoming hostility—(so)  establish this vital energy for the singer along with his patrons.
II.5 (196) Agni
Somāhuti Bhārgava
8 verses: anuṣṭubh
As in II.1 we find an enumeration of various priestly functions/titles, but the identi fications are more strictly tied to the ritual than in the former hymn, and each priest  receives a verse of his own. Only in the last verse (8) does Agni appear as himself,
without a separate priestly identity, to ensure the entire success of the sacrifice. In verses 5–6 the references are somewhat obscure, but the ritual situation  depicted seems to be the offering of melted butter into the fire; the butter offerings  are identified as females, under the leadership of Agni as Neṣṭar, the priest who  leads the Sacrificer’s Wife in the later śrauta ritual. The referent of the “three” of  verse 5 is quite obscure, though it must be feminine in gender. It is perhaps the “three  watery maidens” associated with the sacrifice in III.56.5 and the three “women god desses,” also associated with water, who desire to provide food to Apām Napāt in  II.35.5: their watery nature may explain Agni’s preference for the buttery sisters.
408 II.6
Their number of three may allude to the trio of goddesses in the Āprī hymns (see,  e.g., II.3.8), Sarasvatī, Iḍā, and Bhāratī.
The hymn provides valuable evidence for the technical details and the personnel  and their duties of R̥gvedic ritual, which, though sharing much terminology and  many procedures, nonetheless differs from the later, very well-documented, classical  śrauta ritual of middle Vedic times.
1. As Hotar he has just been born, conspicuous, as a father to help his  fathers [=priests],
displaying noble goods. May we be able to control his prize-winning  (horses [=flames]).
2. He to whom the seven reins are stretched—to the leader of the
sacrifice—
he, like Manu, (sets in motion) the heavenly eighth one—as Potar he sets  in motion all this.
3. Or, when he has run after it, he will speak sacred formulations [bráhmāṇi]  and pursue this (office of Brahman-priest):
he has encompassed all poetic skills, like a felly a wheel.
4. Because simultaneously with his flame the flaming one has been born as  Praśāstar by virtue of his will,
the knowing one [=Agni] grows like (tree) branches, following his own  firm commandments.
5. The lively milk-cows [=butter offerings] follow the “color” [=flame] of  him (when he is) Neṣṭar.
Surely the sisters [=streams of ghee] who have come here are (more) to  his taste than the three ([watery] goddesses?)?
6. When the sister, bearing the ghee of the mother, has approached him, at the arrival of these, he, as Adhvaryu, is delighted, as grain is by rain. 7. Let him, as R̥tvij, make himself R̥tvij, to suckle himself.
Praise and sacrifice have we given. Then fittingly may we win (their
reward).
8. So that the knowing one [=Agni] will make (it) fitting for all those (gods)  worthy of the sacrifice,
this, o Agni, (should be) here in you—the sacrifice which we have
performed.
II.6 (197) Agni
Somāhuti Bhārgava
8 verses: gāyatrī
There is nothing particularly striking in this hymn, which treats the usual themes  of our ritual service to Agni and the rewards we expect in turn. But it is deftly done and economically expressed in the short gāyatrī meter, with patterned repetitions  perceptible even in translation (see, e.g., vss. 1, 3, 5). The final two verses present  the common image of Agni as envoy and messenger between the human and divine  worlds.
1. This kindling stick of mine here, o Agni, this reverence may you long for, and these songs—hear them well.
2. With this (song) we would do honor to you, o Agni, child of
nourishment, seeker of horses—
with this well-said (hymn), o well-born one.
3. You who have a longing for songs (we would serve) with songs; you  seeking chattels, o chattel-giver,
we would serve, ourselves seeking service.
4. Become our bounteous patron, o lord of goods who gives goods. Keep hatreds away from us.
5. Do you (give) us rain from heaven; do you (give) us an unassailable prize; do you (give) us refreshments in the thousands.
6. To the one reverently invoking, to the one seeking help, o youngest  messenger,
o Hotar most deserving the sacrifice, come here at our song.
7. For, o Agni, sage poet, as the one who knows, you speed between both  breeds [=human and divine]
as messenger—like one serving both his own people and their allies.
8. As the one who knows, you will please (the gods) here, and, o observant  one, you will sacrifice to them in due order,
and you will sit here on this ritual grass.
II.7 (198) Agni
Somāhuti Bhārgava
6 verses: gāyatrī
In this short hymn Agni is twice (vss. 1 and 5)  identified as a Bhārata, “son of  Bharata” or “belonging to the Bharata lineage,” a name and designation that  becomes very prominent in later times and, of course, furnishes the name of the  great epic, the Mahābhārata. The family is less prominent in the R̥gveda, but is  mentioned in telling passages in Maṇḍalas III, VI, and VII; the Bhārata fire is  mentioned in several other passages like the ones in this hymn. As Proferes argues  (2007:  36–37), Agni is often identified with the tribal king, and “the most com
monly mentioned tribal fire is that of the Bharata,” which is “specifically linked  to the military power of the tribe.” Although that theme is not insistent here, the  hostilities and hatreds mentioned in verses 2–3 against which Agni’s aid is besought  evoke this idea.
410 II.8
The hymn also illustrates, more clearly than usual, the poetic use of the meta phorical extension of ritual practices. In verse 4 the fire is “bepoured” (ā́hutaḥ) with  streams of melted butter, a standard ritual action, which therefore would arouse no  special interest in the audience; in verse 5 it is also “bepoured”—the same adjective  in the same position in the verse—but with entities considerably less liquid: vari ous bovines, expressed in technical stock-breeding language, which serve as animal  sacrifices in the later śrauta ritual. The audience would certainly take note of this  clash of concepts and metaphorically extend either the adjective (from “bepoured”  to “offered to”) or the offerings (not the cows, but their product, the ghee). What is  unusual in this hymn is that verse 4 explicitly provides the normal template against  which verse 5 must be interpreted. Ordinarily we encounter only the off-balance  expression, and must ourselves summon the normal one from the formulaic and  conceptual stock held in common by the audience.
1. Youngest Agni, belonging to the Bharatas, bear hither the best brilliant  wealth,
craved by many, o good one.
2. Let hostility of god and mortal not gain mastery over us.
Rescue us from it and from hatred.
3. And with you may we, as if across watery streams,
plunge across all hatreds.
4. O pure Agni, to be extolled, blazing you shine out loftily,
when you are bepoured with ghee(-stream)s.
5. You, o Agni belonging to the Bharatas, are “bepoured” [=offered to]  with our mated cows, with bulls,
with eight-footed [=pregnant] (cows).
6. His food is wood, his potion melted butter—the primordial Hotar  worthy to be chosen,
son of strength, infallible.
II.8 (199) Agni
Grtsamada ̥
6 verses: gāyatrī
A simple hymn in many ways, but with a small twist. The mention of the seer and  poet Atri in verse 5 is surprising: Atri is the poet of the Vth Maṇḍala and is oth erwise not found in II. However, in the immediately preceding verse the appar ently innocent simile “like the sun with its radiance” (svàr ṇá bhānúnā) encodes a  reference to a famous myth in which Atri rescues the sun from a supposed demon  Svarbhānu. As I have argued (Jamison 1991: 264–67), Svarbhānu is actually Agni,  and therefore this little hymn makes sly reference to the myth of the Sun, wounded  by Agni (because of the Sun’s incest with his own daughter) and healed by Atri. 1. As a prize-seeker (praises) his chariots, now praise the yoke(d teams)  of Agni,
the most glorious one, who grants rewards,
2. Who offers good guidance to the one doing pious work, himself unaging  but aging the other,
whose countenance is lovely when he is bepoured,
3. Who with his beauty is proclaimed in the houses at evening and at dawn, whose commandment is not confounded,
4. Who, like the sun with its radiance, shines forth bright with his flame, anointing himself with his own unaging (flames).
5. Atri and Agni, (each) according to his own sovereignty, have the solemn  pronouncements strengthened.
He has laid on himself all beauties.
6. May we be accompanied by the help of Agni, of Indra, of Soma, of (all)  the gods—
not suffering harm. May we surmount those who do battle.
II.9 (200) Agni
Grtsamada ̥
6 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins with a 3rd-person past-time reference to the installation of Agni,  and seems also to refer obliquely to the myth of Agni’s disappearance and recovery  by the gods. After verse 1 it switches to the 2nd person and present/future time, with  standard praise of Agni and prayers for benefits from him.
1. (As) Hotar, once found, he sat down in the Hotar’s seat, glittering,  shining, very skillful,
giving forethought to his unfalsifiable commandments, the best one  bringing a thousand (goods), flame-tongued Agni.
2. You are the messenger, and you are our protector afar; you, bull, are our  leader to a better (state).
O Agni, for the prolonging of our progeny and of our own selves,
become, as you shine, a herdsman who does not stay away.
3. We would do honor to you, Agni, in your highest birth; we would do  honor with praises in your seat below.
The womb from which you arose, I sacrifice to that. The oblations have  been poured forth into you, when kindled.
4. O Agni, perform sacrifice yourself with an oblation, as superior
sacrificer. With attentive hearing greet giving and generosity,
for you are the wealth-lord of wealth, you the minder of brilliant
speech.
412 II.10
5. As you are born day after day, wondrous one, your goods of both types  are not exhausted:
Agni, make the singer rich in cattle; make him lord of wealth in good  descendants.
6. With your visage here, (be) easy to find, the sacrificer to the gods who  best brings them to sacrifice with blessing.
Undeceivable herdsman and our protector afar, o Agni, brilliantly and  richly shine for us.
II.10 (201) Agni
Grtsamada ̥
6 verses: triṣṭubh
This last hymn in the brief Gr̥tsamada Agni cycle is defined by a ring: the first word  (johū́traḥ “invoked on every side”) is echoed by the last word (johavīmi “I constantly  invoke”), and there are a number of word plays throughout the hymn. The hymn’s  structure defines as an omphalos verse 3, especially the second half, which contains  the opaque hapax śíriṇāyām, here tentatively rendered as “(birth-)canal.” Verse 3,  the mysterious center of the poem, describes the creation of fire in terms of human  conception and birth and expresses the paradox that such a powerful force can  be invisibly confined in the inert wood. The last verse (6) contains a pun, “with  a tongue seeking speech,” applicable to both Agni and the poet: for Agni it is the  flame as tongue, seeking the poet’s praise hymn; for the poet, it is his own tongue,  seeking efficacious wording for the same hymn.
1. Agni is invoked first on every side like a father, when he is kindled by  Manu in the footprint of refreshment,
dressing himself in beauty, immortal and discriminating, frequently to be  groomed and worthy of fame: he is the prize-winning (steed).
2. May he please hear my call—Agni of bright radiance—along with all my  songs—he immortal and discriminating.
Two dark brown horses convey his chariot, or two red ones. And two  ruddy ones certainly he has made his (team), he who is dispersed in
many places.
3. In her with (legs) agape [=kindling sticks] they engendered him whose  birth is easy. Agni becomes the embryo in the (women) of many
ornaments [=logs].
In (the birth-)canal [?] also he dwells by night, (though) because of his  powers he cannot be confined, the discerning one.
4. I sprinkle Agni with an oblation, with ghee, as he abides peacefully  facing all the creatures, (and he then) takes on (this) appearance: broad across, lofty in his vigor,  most voluminous through his foods [=wood], overpowering.
5. Him who faces out in all directions do I sprinkle: with an undemonic  spirit may he enjoy it.
(Though) he has the beauty of a young blood and questing “color”  [=flame], Agni is not to be touched when he is quivering with
his body.
6. May you please recognize (your) share, (though you can) display your  might at will. With you as messenger may we speak like Manu.
Agni, without deficiency, mixing with honey, with (my/his) tongue
seeking speech, do I, winning prizes, continually invoke.
II.11 (202) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
21 verses: virāṭsthānā triṣṭubh, except triṣṭubh 21
Judging from its frequent references to the winds, this Indra hymn was composed  to accompany the day’s first soma-pressing, which anciently belonged especially to  Indra and Vāyu, the Wind. It is also a good example of the complexity of R̥gvedic  poetry. The poet uses ellipses and ambiguous reference to suggest the union of  the acts of the accompanying ritual and the action of the myth. In verse 3, for  example, the “resplendent” (śubhrá) ones who run to the wind are the Maruts, the  gods who so often accompany Indra. But the adjective “resplendent” is also used of  soma, and therefore the verse carries a second, suggested meaning that the offering  of soma goes to the Wind, who receives the soma along with Indra. Or again, in  verses 7–8, it appears at first as though the mountain described there is one of the  mountains settled by Indra when he made the world habitable. But this mountain is  described in odd ways: it does not falter; it bellows with its mothers; and it roars— descriptions that force a reconsideration of its identity. Elsewhere these epithets  characterize the fire, which is “settled” by priests on the sacrificial area. Thus, the  creative actions of the god and the ritual actions of the priests are placed in parallel  and made reflexes of one another. For a detailed analysis of this hymn, which seeks  to demonstrate its double reference to myth and ritual, see Brereton (1985).
1. Hear our summons, Indra! Intend us no harm! We would be those to be  given good things by you.
For these nourishments, like flowing rivers, strengthen you in their quest  for good things.
2. You let loose the great (waters), Indra, which you swelled—the many  (waters) surrounded by the serpent [=Vr̥tra], o champion.
You cut down the Dāsa [=Vr̥tra], even though he thought he was
immortal, when you became strong through the hymns.414 II.11
3. (Delight) now in just these hymns in which you delight, o champion,  and in Rudrian praise songs, Indra.
These (waters), in which you are finding exhilaration, run forth just to  you as the resplendent ones (run forth) to the Wind [=Vāyu].
4. Now (that we) are strengthening your resplendent explosiveness, are  placing in your arms your resplendent mace,
resplendent are you, Indra, as you have become strong among us.  Along with the sun, you should overcome the Dāsa clans.
5. The one placed in hiding, the hidden one hiding amid the waters, the  wily one dwelling under cover
and blocking the waters and the heaven—(that) serpent you smashed by  your heroic deed, o champion.
6. Now I shall praise your ancient, great deeds, Indra, and we shall praise  your present deeds.
I shall praise the eager mace in your arms. I shall praise your fallow  bays, twin beacons of the sun.
7. Now your two fallow bays, competing for the prize, Indra, have cried  out their cry, dripping with ghee.
The land has spread out equally in all directions. Even the mountain,  which was about to run, has come to rest.
8. The mountain, never faltering, has been set down. Bellowing with its  mothers, it roared.
Making their voice strong to the furthest distance, they [=priests  or Maruts?] spread out the vein [=the sap-rich soma stalk or a
watercourse?] that was impelled by Indra.
9. Indra kicked away wily Vr̥tra, lying upon the great river.
The two worlds trembled in fear before the mace of him, the bull  roaring and roaring again.
10. The mace of him, the bull, bellowed again and again when (Indra), the  ally of Manu, was about to grind down (Vr̥tra), the enemy of Manu. He brought low the wiles of the wily son of Dānu, when he had drunk  of the pressed soma.
11. Drink and drink the soma, o Indra, our champion! Let the exhilarating  soma-pressings exhilarate you.
As they fill your cheeks, let them strengthen you. When properly  pressed among the Paura, (the soma) has helped Indra.
12. We inspired poets have abided by you, Indra. Serving according to the  truth, we would gain insight.
Seeking your help, we would create for ourselves a proclamation of your  praise. On this very day, we would be those to be given wealth by you. 13. Indra, might we be those of yours who are accompanied by your help,  since, seeking your help, we make your nourishment strong.
Grant us the most explosive wealth in which we will delight, o god— that consisting of heroic men. 14. Grant us peaceful dwelling. Grant us alliance. Grant us a Marutian  warrior band, o Indra.
And they who jointly are finding exhilaration—(those) Winds drink the  first offering.
15. Now let just those (soma juices) pursue you—those among whom  (you) are becoming exhilarated. Steadfastly drink our soma to your  satisfaction, Indra.
(Be) near to us in battles, o surpassing one. You have strengthened
heaven through lofty chants.
16. Now just those lofty ones [=priests], who will try to win your favor, o  you surpassing one, either by their hymns
or in strewing the ritual grass that provides (you) a dwelling place, have  come to the prize, helped just by you, Indra.
17. Now, finding exhilaration among just these powerful (soma drops),  o champion, drink the soma among the Trikadrukas [=the
Maruts?], Indra,
again and again shaking out (the soma) in your beard, becoming
pleased. Travel to the soma-drinking with your two fallow bays.
18. Take to yourself the vast power, o champion, by which you cut down  Vr̥tra, the son of Dānu, that son of a spider!
You uncovered the light for the Ārya; the Dasyu has been set down to  the left, Indra.
19. We would win!—we who by your help are overcoming all rivals, the  Dasyus along with the Ārya.
That was for us: that you made Viśvarūpa, son of Tvaṣṭar, submit to  Trita, one of your circle of companions.
20. Having grown strong on this, Trita’s exhilarating (soma) that was being  pressed, he laid low Arbuda.
He rolled (Namuci’s head) like the sun its wheel. Together with the
Aṅgirases, Indra split the Vala cave.
21. Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as  its milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.
II.12 (203) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This is one of the better known and most widely anthologized hymns to Indra. Its  distinctive rhetorical mark is its refrain, “he, o peoples, is Indra.” The “peoples”
416 II.12
(jána) refer to the Vedic peoples, and the hymn repeatedly returns to Indra’s past  victories over non-Vedic beings with the promise of future victories.
The hymn portrays Indra as a successful warrior. It begins with his origin (vs.  1) and then refers to his great deeds through which the world was created and made  inhabitable (vss. 2–3). The poet then announces Indra’s victory over Dāsas, Dasyus,  and other enemies and his aid for his worshippers and allies (vss. 4–10). Toward the  end of the hymn, the poet mentions Indra’s famous victories over his demonized,  if not quite demonic, enemies (vss. 11–12). Then he returns to Indra’s rule over the  cosmos (vs. 13) and his help for those now making ritual offerings to him (vss. 14–15).
One verse that has attracted particular attention is verse 5, which says that there  are some who wonder where Indra is and who declare that Indra “does not exist.”  These appear to be Vedic people who question Indra’s power and who, in deny ing Indra and refusing to perform the rituals, approximate the Dāsas, whom Indra  defeats (vs. 4). The poet insists that they should be aware of Indra as the “terrify ing” (ghorá) one and trust in him. At the end, in 15b, after recounting his great  exploits, the poet himself confidently asserts that Indra is indeed real. The reality  of Indra may signify not only his existence as a powerful god, but more especially  his actual presence at the poet’s sacrifice.
1. Who, even when just born, was the foremost thinker, the god who by his  own will tended to the gods,
before whose explosiveness the world-halves trembled in fear because of  the greatness of his manliness – he, o peoples, is Indra.
2. Who made firm the wavering earth, who settled the quaking mountains, who gave the midspace wider measure, who propped up the heaven – he,  o peoples, is Indra.
3. Who, having smashed the serpent, let flow the seven rivers, who drove  away the cattle by uncovering Vala,
who produced the fire between two stones, gathering the winnings in  contests – he, o peoples, is Indra.
4. By whom all these exploits have been done: who has put the Dāsa tribe  below and hidden away,
who, has taken the riches of the stranger, as a winning gambling
champion does the wager – he, o peoples, is Indra.
5. The terrifying one about whom they always ask, “Where is he?”—and  they say of him, “He does not exist!”—
he diminishes the riches of the stranger like the stakes. Put trust in him!  – he, o peoples, is Indra.
6. Who is the invigorator of the enfeebled, who of the starving, who of the  formulator of hymns, of the weak one needing help,
who with fair lips is the helper of the one who has yoked the pressing  stones, of him with soma pressed – he, o peoples, is Indra.
7. Under whose direction are the horses, under whose the cows, under  whose the nomadic bands, and under whose all the chariots, who has given birth to the sun and who to the dawn, who is the guide  of the waters – he, o peoples, is Indra.
8. Whom the two war-cries, clashing together, call upon in rivalry—the  enemies on both sides, here and over there—
even the two who have mounted the same chariot [=the chariot-warrior  and charioteer] call on him separately – he, o peoples, is Indra.
9. Without whom peoples do not win, whom they call upon for help as  they fight,
who has become a match for everyone, who is the mover of the
immovable – he, o peoples, is Indra.
10. Who has struck with his arrow those constantly creating for themselves  great guilt, the unthinking ones,
who does not concede arrogance to the arrogant man, who is the
smasher of the Dasyu – he, o peoples, is Indra.
11. Who in the fortieth autumn discovered Śambara dwelling in the  mountains,
who smashed the serpent displaying its strength, the son of Dānu,
(thereby) lying (dead) – he, o peoples, is Indra.
12. The mighty seven-reined bull who let loose the seven rivers to flow, who, with his mace in his arms, kicked away the son of Rohiṇī as he  was ascending to heaven – he, o peoples, is Indra.
13. Even heaven and earth bow to him; even the mountains fear his  explosiveness.
The soma-drinker who is renowned as the one bearing the mace in
his arms, as the one bearing the mace in his hands – he, o peoples,
is Indra.
14. Who helps through his help the one pressing soma, the one cooking (an  offering), the one praising, the one laboring,
whose is the strengthening formulation, is the soma, is this gift – he, o  peoples, is Indra.
15. You who rip free the prize of victory for the one pressing, the one  cooking, even before a stubborn (foe)—you are certainly real!
We (will be) dear to you throughout all the days, Indra. Having good  heroes, we would announce the ritual distribution.
II.13 (204) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
13 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 13
The opening verses of this hymn leave the subject often unstated and often unclear  in part because, as in the preceding hymns, there is often a double reference to ritual  acts and either mythical or natural events. Thus, while details remain uncertain,
418 II.13
the first verses describe the soma sacrifice, seen as a creation of Indra. This ritual  context is established in verse 1, in which the subject is likely the soma or the soma  plant. The birth of the soma plant occurs in its proper time of year, and therefore its  mother is the r̥tú, its “season.” However, the soma is also born at the proper ritual  moment, and therefore its mother is also r̥tú, which can also refer to the “ritual  sequence.” Then in verse 2, again without naming him, the poet introduces Indra— or apparently does so—through associating Indra’s release of the waters with the  flowing, soma-bearing waters of the rite.
Verses 3–4 describe the acts of the ritual, although in 4b, the identity of several  of the actors is not certain. The one “who comes” could be soma or Indra or even  the fire (as Geldner suggests with a different interpretation of the ellipsis). The poet  turns to Indra’s heroic deeds in verse 5—although the waters which he released  connect these deeds to the ritual—and then in verse 6, to an explicit description of  Indra’s ritual acts. Verse 7 poses a number of interpretive difficulties, but in pāda a,  the “flowering and fruitful” might be plants generally or the soma plants; in pāda b,  the streams might be waters or specifically ritual waters; and in pāda d, the ūrvá, the  “containers,” might refer to the oceans as containers of water in a cosmic register  or the containers of soma in a ritual one.
Verses 8–12 mention other of Indra’s deeds. In verse 9 Geldner suggests that  Indra bound his enemies by a magically induced sleep and thus by that “which has  no ropes.” See also II.15.9, where Indra conquers his enemies by putting them to  sleep. Verse 12, returning to the conjunction of heroic and ritual deed and to the  theme of rivers and waters, may speak not (or not only) of Indra’s rescue of a per
son who was blind and lame, but of Indra’s role in producing the soma hidden in  the plant before it is pressed out (cf. II.15.7).
1. His mother is the season. From her, as soon as he was born, he [=soma]  entered among the waters, in whom he grows strong.
Then he became a voluptuous woman, swelling with milk. The plant’s  first beestings—that one is worthy of hymns.
2. Toward a single goal they [=the waters] come, bringing milk throughout.  They bring forth sustenance for him [=Indra?] who is all mother’s milk  (for us).
The downward sloping (watercourses) share the same road to flow along.  You, who did these things first, are worthy of hymns.
3. One [=the Hotar] accompanies what he gives with his speech. Another  [=the Adhvaryu] hastens at his work, changing the forms (of
the soma).
He [=soma] withstands all the blows of another [=the pressing stone].  You, the one who did these things first, are worthy of hymns.
4. They [=the priests] sit, apportioning prosperity to their children [=their  fires], apportioning, like wealth, the back (of the fire?) as it arches
forth to him [=the soma?] who comes. Insatiable, he [=the fire] eats the food of his father [=the priest] with his  teeth. You, the one who did these things first, are worthy of hymns.
5. Then you made the earth to see heaven—you, who cleared the paths of  the streams, o smasher of the serpent.
The gods gave birth to you, the god, by their praise songs, like a
winning horse by waters. You are worthy of hymns.
6. You, who distribute sustenance and increase, have milked the dry [=the  soma plant] together with its honey [=the soma] out of the wet
[=rain].
You have hidden a treasure [=soma] in Vivasvant [=the sun]. You alone  are the master of everything. You are worthy of hymns.
7. You, who established separately the flowering and fruitful (plants)  according to the foundation (of each) and the streams at their
division;
and you, who gave birth to the unequalled flashings of heaven; you, the  wide one surrounding the containers—you are worthy of hymns.
8. You, who, in order to strike down Pr̥kṣa and Dāsaveśa, conveyed the  son of Nr̥mara together with his goods
to the impregnable mouth of the Ūrjayantī (River) and who even today  (would do likewise); you, who do many deeds—you are worthy
of hymns.
9. Or when you helped him, the hard-driving one—at whose obedience  (to you), though he was alone, you bound his hundred times ten
(enemies) all at once—
you tied up the Dasyus for Dabhīti in what has no ropes, and you
belonged to him who ritually pursues you well. You are worthy
of hymns.
10. All things that obstruct have conceded that manliness is his. They have  set themselves as the stakes for the successful gambler.
You propped up the six far-flung (spaces), and you were on every
side of the five sights [=the visible directions] and beyond. You are
worthy of hymns.
11. Your heroism, o hero, is good to proclaim: that by your resolve alone  you take possession of goods.
The vigor (belonging to you, who are) born steadfast and possessing  strength, is preeminent. All the things that you have done—(for
these) you, Indra, are worthy of hymns.
12. You halted the course of the Sarapas (River) for Turvīti and Vayya  to cross.
You led him up who was sunk down and shunned, making famed the  blind one and the lame. You are worthy of hymns.
13. Make your aim to give that gift to us, o good one—your store of goods  is great—
420 II.14
the bright (gift), o Indra, through which you will seek fame throughout  the days. – May we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in
possession of good heroes.
II.14 (205) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
12 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is a surprisingly straightforward summons to the Adhvaryu priests  to offer the soma and a catalogue of the heroic deeds that have earned Indra the  offerings. Verse 7 is particularly interesting since Kutsa (or Purukutsa), Āyu, and  Atithigva Divodāsa are normally allies rather than enemies of Indra as they are  here. Elsewhere (I.53.10 and VI.18.13), however, Indra appears as an ally of the  little-known ruler named Tūrvayāṇa and helps him defeat these three.
1. Adhvaryus! Bring the soma to Indra. With the tankards, pour here the  exhilarating stalk,
because the hero is ever desirous of his drink. Offer to the bull: he wishes  just that.
2. Adhvaryus! Who struck, like a tree with a spear, Vr̥tra, who had enclosed  the waters,
to him bring this (soma) since he desires it. This Indra deserves to drink it. 3. Adhvaryus! Who struck Dr̥bhīka and who drove up the cattle—for he  had opened the cave—
to him (bring) this (soma), (rushing swiftly) like the wind within the  midspace. Cover Indra with the soma juices, as a fast horse (is
covered) with blankets (after a race).
4. Adhvaryus! Who smashed Uraṇa, who had stretched forth his nine and  ninety arms,
and who pressed Arbuda down to the depth—urge Indra onward at the  bringing of soma.
5. Adhvaryus! Who struck Aśna, who the voracious Śuṣṇa, who the cobra  [=Vr̥tra],
who Pipru and Namuci, who Rudhikrā—to Indra offer of the
soma plant.
6. Adhvaryus! Who split the hundred, the many fortresses of Śambara as  with a stone,
and who scattered afar the hundred, the thousand (warriors) of Varcin— to him bring soma.
7. Adhvaryus! Who, having struck them, scattered here the hundred, the  thousand on the lap of the earth, and slung down the heroes of Kutsa, Āyu, and Atithigva—to him
bring soma.
8. Adhvaryus! What you will desire, o men, you will attain that with Indra,  by bearing (offerings) in obedience.
Bring what is purified by your hand to the one who is famed. To Indra  offer soma, o you eager to sacrifice.
9. Adhvaryus! Act in obedience to him! Lead upward in the wood [=the  soma cup] what is purified downward in the wood [=the soma vat]!
Being pleased, he has bellowed toward your handiwork. To Indra offer  the exhilarating soma.
10. Adhvaryus! Like the udder of a cow with milk, fill Indra the Provider  with soma juices.
I know of him; this has been brought home to me: the one worthy of  the sacrifice takes notice of him who strives to give more.
11. Adhvaryus! Who is king of the heavenly good, who of the land’s  earthly good,
fill Indra with soma juices, like a granary with barley. Let that be
your labor.
12. Make your aim to give that gift to us, o good one—your store of goods  is great—
the bright (gift), o Indra, through which you will seek fame throughout  the days. – May we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in
possession of good heroes.
II.15 (206) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
10 verses: triṣṭubh
As the hymn announces at the beginning, this is a proclamation of Indra’s great  deeds, a fact that is underlined in the refrain, “Indra did these things.” With some  exceptions, the deeds are straightforwardly described. In verse 5, as Geldner  remarks, the reference is to the story of Turvaśa and Yadu and that of Turvīti  and Vayya, whom Indra rescued from the waters. They were “non-bathers”  because they could not swim through the roaring waters, but Indra held back the  strong currents so that they could cross. The story in verse 6a that Indra made  the síndhu, the Indus (or perhaps simply “the river”), flow backward is otherwise  unknown. The story that Indra fought and defeated Dawn in 6c is mentioned  elsewhere (cf. esp. IV.30.8–11), but it is unclear who the “unswift” males and  “swift” females in 6c might be and why they are described as “hewn apart.” In  verse 7, as in II.13.12, the verse may conceal Indra’s ritual act of bringing forth  the soma. In support of this interpretation are the echoes of ritual acts also in
422 II.15
preceding verses, such as the references to the ritual seats and possibly the laying  out of the ritual ground (in vs. 3) and bathing (in vs. 5). Or verse 7 may allude  to Indra’s cosmogonic acts. Verse 8 refers to the Vala story, in which Indra splits  the cave and freed the cattle for the Aṅgirases. In 9c, the description of an elderly  man (cf. VIII.45.20) or infirm man who finds riches despite his ailments may  simply underline Dabhīti’s unexpected success.
1. Now I shall proclaim the great deeds of him the great one, the real acts  of the real one.
He drank of the pressed soma among the Trikadrukas [=the Maruts?].  In its exhilaration Indra smashed the serpent.
2. He propped up lofty heaven on (the midspace) that has no pole. He filled  the two world-halves and the midspace.
He held the earth fast and spread it out. – In soma’s exhilaration Indra  did these things.
3. Like (ritual) seats, he fixed (the rivers) eastward with his measuring  rods: by his mace, he drilled out channels for the rivers;
by his choice, he released them along paths stretching far away. – In
soma’s exhilaration Indra did these things.
4. Having surrounded the raiders against Dabhīti, he burned their every  weapon in the kindled fire.
He brought him together with cows, horses, and chariots. – In soma’s  exhilaration Indra did these things.
5. He stopped the great, tumultuous (river) from going. He made the  non-bathers cross over safely.
Having risen from this bath, they set out toward wealth. – In soma’s  exhilaration Indra did these things.
6. By his greatness he made the Sindhu to flow northward, and with his  mace he completely crushed the ox cart of Dawn,
while hewing apart the unswift ones by the swift ones. – In soma’s
exhilaration Indra did these things.
7. Knowing the maidens’ concealment (of him but) becoming manifest, he  stood up—he who was shunned:
the lame one stood firm; the blind one looked afar. – In soma’s
exhilaration Indra did these things.
8. Being sung by the Aṅgirases, he split the cave. He broke apart the  fortifications of the mountain
and cleared their fashioned obstructions. – In soma’s exhilaration Indra  did these things.
9. Having scattered sleep on Cumuri and Dhuni, you smashed the Dasyu  and helped Dabhīti.
Though leaning on a staff, he found gold there. – In soma’s exhilaration  Indra did these things. 10. Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as  its milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.
II.16 (207) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 9
The hymn begins with an announcement of the sacrifice to Indra, whose greatness  and strength entitle him to it. The middle verses of this hymn (vss. 4–6) present  Indra as the bull of the sacrifice and indeed describe all the other principal constitu ents of the sacrifice also as bulls. The portrayal of Indra as a bull in these verses  contrasts with that in verse 8, in which Indra is compared to a cow. However, this  image of Indra as a cow sets up the final verse (9). In this verse, which is also the  final verse of II.15–20, the poet compares the dakṣiṇā, or priestly gift he hopes to  receive, to a generous cow.
1. I carry forward your good praise, like an oblation into a fire being  kindled, for him who is the most preeminent of beings:
we call upon Indra for help—himself unaging but causing to age, a
full-grown youth from of old.
2. Lofty Indra, without whom there is nothing, in him all facets of a hero  are gathered:
in his belly he carries the soma, in his body great strength, in his hand a  mace, and in his head resolve.
3. Your Indrian power cannot be encompassed by the twin battle cries  [=heaven and earth], nor can your chariot by the seas and the
mountains, o Indra.
No one is equal to your mace when with your swift (horses) you fly
through many leagues.
4. Since all carry their resolve to him, the one worthy of the sacrifice, the  daring one, to the bull following (that resolve),
(so), as a bull who knows more, perform the sacrifice for yourself with  the oblation: drink the soma, Indra, by means of the bull [=Agni], by  means of his radiance.
5. The vat of the bull [=soma], the wave of honey, purifies itself for the bull  [=Indra], whose food is the bull, to drink it.
The two Adhvaryus are bulls, and the pressing stones are bulls. They  press soma the bull for the bull.424 II.17
6. Your mace is a bull and your chariot is a bull. Your two fallow bays are  bulls, and your weapons are bulls.
O bull, you are the master of the bull that is the exhilarating drink.
Indra, take your fill of the bull soma.
7. Within the assembly, (I send) forth to you my eloquent (formulation),  like a boat, and through my poetic formulation I travel daringly
among the soma-pressings.
He will be aware of this speech of ours, will he not? We will draw upon  Indra as upon a wellspring for what is good.
8. Before distress (strikes), turn here toward us, like a cow, milk-swollen  from the pasture, toward her calf.
At once we would happily unite with your favors, o you of a hundred  resolves, like bulls with their wives.
9. Now should the generous priestly reward yield your boon for the singer  as its milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.
II.17 (208) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 8–9
This hymn encourages Indra to show the power that he showed at the beginning— both his beginning and the beginning of the world. There are several references to  Indra’s youth: the time when he received his mace from his father, Tvaṣṭar (vs. 6),  and when he obtained his first nurture (vs. 2). The first nurture may refer to the first  soma offering in the rite and also to the first soma Indra ever drank. His origins are  also the origins of the world, and the hymn catalogues his great, creative deeds: he  established heaven and earth and settled the mountains (vs. 5), he opened the cave  to release the cattle (vs. 1), he defeated Vr̥tra (vs. 6), and he sent the waters flow
ing (vss. 3, 5). The poet calls upon Indra to give sustenance to him just as he has  received sustenance (vss. 7, 8) and to give to him a measure of wealth just as Indra  showed the measure of his power in creating the world (vs. 7).
Striking is pāda 6b, which says that Tvaṣṭar made Indra’s mace “from every  race,” meaning from both gods and mortals, and “out of his knowledge,” per haps his knowledge of all creatures (cf. IV.42.3, cited by Geldner although to  make a different point) or alternatively, “out of their possessions.” That is to  say, the weapon by which Indra performs his great deeds draws on the totality  of humans and gods for its power. Oldenberg observed that the juxtaposition  of the words janúṣo védas (“race. . . knowledge [/possession]”) recalls the epithet Jātavedas, which describes Agni as the continuous presence throughout the sacri ficial day and the guarantor of the continuity of the human lineage. Perhaps this  constitutes an oblique reference to the totality of gods and mortals that becomes  Indra’s weapon.
1. As did the Aṅgirases, chant this new (chant) to him, so that his explosive  powers rise up as in ancient times
when, through his strength and in the exhilaration of soma, he razed all  the firmly fixed cow pens, enclosed on every side.
2. Let him (once again) become the one who, showing the measure of his  power, crossed beyond greatness to obtain the first nurture.
The champion, who girded his body in battles, fastened heaven in its  greatness on his head.
3. Then you did the first, great heroic deed, when, at its beginning, you  roused your explosive power through the poetic formulation.
Spurred by the chariot-rider with his fallow bay horses, the lively
(waters) flow forth separately toward the same goal.
4. Then he who grew strong over all the worlds by his greatness, acting as  their master, projecting his youthful vitality,
after that, (becoming a) draft-horse, he spanned the two world-halves  with light; upon sewing up the bilious shades of darkness, he wrapped  them all together.
5. Through his power, he fixed firmly the mountains sliding forward, and he  made the labor of the waters to be sliding downward.
He made fast the all-nurturing earth, and by his wiles he propped up the  heaven (to keep it) from falling.
6. That was fit for him, for his two arms—what his father made from every  race and out of his knowledge—
that mace by which he, with mighty roar, smashed the worm and twisted  it down to lie upon the earth.
7. Like a woman aging at home, remaining with her parents, from our  common ritual seat, I beg you to be our Fortune.
Make a visible sign, give us a measure, and bring it here. Give a portion  to me myself by which you will show your readiness to give.
8. We would call upon you, Indra, to be our sustainer. You are the giver,  Indra, of labors and of victory’s prizes.
Help us, Indra, with your shimmering help! Indra, you bull, make us  better!
9. Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as its  milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May we  speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
426 II.18
II.18 (209) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
9 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn centers on Indra’s chariot, which, the poet hopes, will carry Indra to his  sacrifice and not to the sacrifice of any of his rivals (vss. 3, 7). Indra’s chariot is also  the sacrifice itself. According to Sāyaṇa, its four yokes are the four soma-pressing  stones; the three whips are the three pitches used in recitation; the seven reins are  the seven meters; and—the least likely of Sāyaṇa’s identifications—the ten oars are  the ten planets “that rescue from evil beings” (etymologizing arítra “oar” as ari “enemy” + trā “rescue”) or the ten Camasādhvaryus. In a lengthy note Witzel and  Gotō suggest other possibilities for such numbers. With regard to the world, three  may be the three worlds or the three positions of the sun, four the four directions,  seven the seven rivers, and so on. In relation to the sacrifice, three might be the  three sacrificial fires or the three soma cups, four (or four times four) the number  of priests, seven the three (fires, cups) plus the four (priests) or the seven priests  mentioned in II.5.2, ten the seven (priests) plus the three (fires, cups) or ten fingers,  ten fires, ten soma vessels, et cetera. All that said, however, the specific identifica tions are less important than the possibility of finding many identifications and the  generally increasing numbers (4, 3, 7, 10). These project a picture of the chariot as  encompassing all aspects of the sacrifice and of the world.
Verse 2 begins with another enumeration. Here the first, second, and third might  be the three soma offerings of the sacrificial day or the three fires of the sacrificial  ground. The second half of verse 2 turns to a key moment in the sacrifice, the birth  of Agni out of the fire-kindling stick. The newly born Agni keeps company with  “the others,” but once again who or what these others are is unclear: they might be  the sacrificial fires, the sacrificial offerings, the gods, or even other priests. From  verse 3 the poet’s attention turns especially to Indra’s chariot-horses, whose number  progressively increases from two (vss. 3, 4)  to a hundred (vs. 6). This increasing  number suggests that these horses might correspond to an aspect of the sacrifice  that carries Indra to the sacrificial area. For the poet there are few greater attrac tions for Indra than the ritual recitations, and therefore these horses may be the  words of these recitations, which like these horses multiply as the hymn is recited.  Note that śaténa “with a hundred” is the hundredth word of the hymn. Once again,  however, the multiplication of horses is also an indication of the fluidity of this  hymn’s numerology and another signal that Indra’s chariot comprehends the whole  of the sacrifice and the world.
1. Early in the morning a new, victorious chariot is yoked up with four  yokes, three whips, and seven reins.
Having ten oars, the sun-winning (chariot) belonging to the sons of
Manu becomes swift through our wishes and thoughts. 2. He is fit for him [=Indra] for the first time, for the second, for the third— he the Hotar of Manu [=Agni].
Some [=priests] give birth (to him [=Agni]), the infant of another [=aráṇi fem., the fire-kindling stick], and he keeps company with the others— he the noble bull.
3. Now I shall yoke the two fallow bays to Indra’s chariot by a new,  well-spoken speech in order that he come.
Let other sacrificers—for inspired poets are many—not stop you
in this.
4. With your two fallow bays, Indra, journey here, with your four and with  your six, when you are summoned,
with your eight and your ten, to the soma-drinking. Here is the pressed  soma, generous one: do not disdain it.
5. Journey here, right nearby, with your twenty and your thirty, yoking up  with your forty fallow bays,
with your fifty pulling your good chariot, Indra, with your sixty and  your seventy, to the soma-drinking.
6. Journey here, right nearby, with your eighty and your ninety, being  conveyed by your hundred fallow bays,
for here is your soma among the Śunahotras, Indra, which has been  poured all around seeking you for your exhilaration.
7. Journey here to my poetic formulation, Indra. Put all the pairs of fallow  bays on the yoke-pole of the chariot,
for you have become the one to be competitively summoned in many  places. In this soma-pressing, you warrior, find your exhilaration.
8. No one will keep my companionship away from Indra. The priestly gift  should yield its milk to us.
In his preeminent protection and in his hand, we would be those having  victory in our every advance.
9. Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as its  milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.
II.19 (210) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn invokes Indra in his many roles as a warrior. It begins with Indra’s great est deed, the destruction of Vr̥tra (vss. 2–4). Although the Vr̥tra story concerns
428 II.19
principally the release of the waters, verses 4–5 connect it also with the release of  the sun, which takes place “in a single day.” This may be a reference to the ritual  day, since the Morning Pressing may be connected with the release of the dawns  and the Midday Pressing with the release of the waters, or it may reflect the ten
dency elsewhere to fold the release of light into the effects of the Indra’s victory  over Vr̥tra (cf. I.32.4). The poet then evokes Indra’s help for Kutsa and Divodāsa  (vs. 6) before announcing that the Gr̥tsamadas, in exchange for their offerings, also  deserve Indra’s support in overcoming their enemies.
The hymn is dominated by racing imagery that describes both divine and human  action. This imagery is reflected in Indra’s deeds: the waters “charge forth” after  Indra destroyed Vr̥tra (vs. 2), and Indra’s horse Etaśa won wealth like the prize in  a race (vs. 5). But it is reflected also in mortals’ efforts: men contend to win the sun  (vs. 4d), and the sacrificers strive to win as if in a race (vs. 7).
1. The drinking of this plant for exhilaration has begun, o men of inspired  thought, (the drinking) of the delightful soma-pressing,
at which Indra, having grown strong (thereby) from of old, has found a  home, as have the men creating the poetic formulations.
2. Becoming exhilarated from this honey, Indra with the mace in his hand  hewed apart the serpent blocking the flood,
so that the rivers’ pleasing offerings (of water) charged forth like birds  toward rich fields.
3. That great Indra, smasher of the serpent, roused the flood of waters  forth toward the sea.
He gave birth to the sun and found the cattle. He perfected the patterns  of the days through the night.
4. And he—(though) many and impregnable are (the obstacles) for Manu— serves his servant: he smashes Vr̥tra [/Obstacle]—
he who in a single day became the unshakeable one for the men
contending to win the sun.
5. Receiving praise, the god Indra ceded the sun to the soma-pressing  mortal,
when, doing service (to him), Etaśa bore him fault-concealing wealth like  a share (of a stake).
6. In a single day, he subdued the voracious, barley-destroying Śuṣṇa for the  charioteer Kutsa,
and Indra razed the ninety and nine fortifications of Śambara for Divodāsa. 7. So we have sent to you our recitation, Indra. Like those seeking fame,  racing by themselves for victory’s prize,
we would obtain the sevenfold (prize), panting after it. You will bend the  weapon of the godless reviler.
8. So the Gr̥tsamadas have fashioned their thought for you, o champion,  and the (ritual) patterns, like those seeking help. Those creating the formulations, Indra, would obtain anew refreshment  and nourishment, a good dwelling place, and your good favor.
9. Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as its  milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.
II.20 (211) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
9 verses: triṣṭubh, except virāḍrūpā 3
This hymn contains a number of metrical peculiarities: verses 2c, 8b, and possibly  6d are one syllable short. On the other hand, the name “Indra”—and the poet  draws attention to the name in verse 6—is clearly disyllabic only in the first and in  the final verse. Everywhere else, a trisyllabic pronunciation will restore the meter.  Again, the poet emphasizes this since in verses 2a, 3a, and 4a the vocative indra,  nominative índraḥ, and accusative índram, all in the same metrical position, can be  recited trisyllabically. There is also a double sandhi contraction in verse 2b, where  abhiṣṭipā́ḥ asi* > abhiṣṭipā́si. Verse 2b contains a śleṣa, in which the same word can  function in two different roles, since tvā́vataḥ “such as you” can be both a genitive  singular with “good favor” and an accusative plural modifying “men.” Verse 2a  has ūtī́ for ūtíbhiḥ. None of these forms is unprecedented in the R̥gveda, but the  persistent and deliberate use of such semi-irregularities suggests that the poet has a  particular purpose in employing them. Perhaps he wished to call special attention  to the inspired thinking and insight (vss. 1, 2), the praises and lauds (vss. 3, 4, 5,  7), and the poetic formulations (vss. 4, 5) of the poet by using words that would in  some way call attention to themselves. It is these words that Indra “makes power ful” (vss. 5, 7).
The hymn ends by contrasting the poets and their people, whom Indra helps,  to the Dāsas and Dasyus, whom he defeats. Again, there may be a suggestion that  what differentiates the fates of the poets and their enemies is precisely the mastery  that the former have over words.
The mythical references in 5cd are obscure, but they may have something to do  with the conquest of darkness by light. If so, then they anticipate Indra’s victory  over the Dāsa fortresses “with their dark wombs” (vs. 7).
1. We bring forward vitality for you, Indra—know of us!—as one seeking  victory’s prize (brings forward) a chariot,
as marveling we reflect through our inspired thinking and seek to obtain  (both) the good favor of one such as you and men (such as you).
430 II.21
2. You, Indra, with your help are by your dominance the protector of us,  the people devoted to you.
You are the forceful guardian of the pious man, who, possessed of right  insight, attains you.
3. Let that youth, Indra, who is invoked on every side, be for us a
benevolent companion and protector of our men—
he who with his help will lead forth the one reciting lauds, the one
laboring, the one cooking and singing praises.
4. I shall praise him—Indra—I shall sing to him, alongside whom long ago  they grew strong and exulted.
Being implored, he carries to success the desire for the good thing, (that  desire) of the present Āyu creating (these) poetic formulations.
5. Having found pleasure in the hymns of the Aṅgirases, Indra made their  formulations powerful, sending them along their way.
Robbing the dawns by means of the sun, receiving praise, he has pierced  the primordial (establishments) even of the Devourer.
6. The god famed as Indra by name, he the most wondrous, rose upright  for Manu.
The able, independent one carried away the Dāsa Arśasāna’s very
own head.
7. Smasher of Vr̥tra, splitter of fortresses, Indra razed the Dāsa (fortresses)  with their dark wombs.
He gave birth to the earth and the waters for Manu. In every way he  makes the sacrificer’s laud powerful.
8. In every way might was conceded by the gods to him, to Indra, at the  winning of the flood.
When they put his mace in his arms, after smashing the Dasyu he
trampled their metal fortresses.
9. Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as its  milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.
II.21 (212) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
6 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 6
In its first three verses the hymn announces the various offerings to Indra: the soma,  the homage, and the proclamation of Indra’s heroic deeds. The god merits these  because of his overwhelming power to defeat any who stand in his way and to win whatever he wishes. In verses 4–5, the poet recalls the Vala story, in which Indra and  his priestly allies obtained the cattle and the dawns through the hymns that both the  priests and Indra recite. He ends with an appeal that his people will find the intel lectual ability that will allow them both to continue to implore the gods successfully  and to gain the wealth and safety that will flow from that ability.
1. To him winning everything: winning the stakes, winning the sun; to him  winning in every way, winning men, winning fields;
to him winning horses, winning cattle, winning waters; to Indra, worthy  of the sacrifice, bring his beloved soma.
2. To him dominating, breaking, conquering, to the never-overpowered,  overpowering adept;
to him, the powerfully spirited draft-horse, impossible to surpass; to him  overpowering in every way—to Indra speak homage.
3. He, overpowering in every way, consuming the peoples, and
overpowering the peoples; he, the fighter rousing to action, grown
strong at his pleasure;
he, punishing opposition, overcoming, and acknowledged among the  clans—I shall proclaim Indra’s heroic deeds that he has done.
4. The bull who cannot be pushed aside, the deadly blow against those  raging; the deep and lofty one, whose verbal craft is unequalled;
spurring on the weak, piercing, firmly set and wide—Indra, whose
sacrifice is good, gives birth to the dawns and the sun.
5. By means of the sacrifice, the fire-priests of inspired thinking, crossing  the waters, found for themselves a way, sending forth their insights.
By their cry and assembly, seeking help (they obtained) cows; sending  forth (their insights) to Indra, they obtained goods.
6. Indra, grant to us the best goods, the perception that belongs to
(sacrificial) skill, and the possession of a good share,
as well as a prospering of our riches, freedom from harm for our bodies,  sweetness of our speech, and the blessing of good days for our days.
II.22 (213) Indra
Grtsamada ̥
4 verses: aṣṭi 1, atiśakvarī 2–3, atiśakvarī or aṣṭi 4
The theme of the hymn is the bond between Indra and the soma, which enables  Indra to perform “his great deed,” the destruction of the serpent, the “worm,”  Vr̥tra. The god Soma ever accompanies the god Indra, and the refrain running  through the first three verses emphasizes their connection by referring to Soma  as índu, “(soma-)drop,” echoing the name “Indra.” By describing both Soma and
432 II.23
Indra as “real” (satyá), the poet reminds his hearers that just as soma was real when  it was prepared by the gods for Indra before he destroyed Vr̥tra, so also it is real now  in the present sacrifice, as is Indra himself.
1. Among the Trikadrukas [=the Maruts?], the buffalo, snorting mightily, drank to his satisfaction the barley-mixed soma pressed by Viṣṇu, (as  much) as he wished.
It exhilarated the great and broad one to do his great deed.
– The god attends upon the god—the real Indu upon the real Indra.
2. Then through his power, the fiery one dominated the worm in battle. By his greatness, he filled the two world-halves and grew stronger.
He received the other in his belly, and there was more (soma) left over. – The god attends upon the god—the real Indu upon the real Indra.
3. Born at once with resolve, at once with power, you increased—
you, grown strong at once with heroic powers, overpowering the
scorners, and knowing no boundaries,
you, the giver of bounty to him who sings praises, (the giver of) the
desirable good.
– The god attends upon the god—the real Indu upon the real Indra.
4. This manly deed of yours, o dancing Indra, the foremost work done  by you, is to be proclaimed early in the day—
that by the power of a god you let life flow forward by letting the waters  flow.
He will overcome every godless one by his strength. He of a hundred  resolves will find nourishment; he will find refreshment.
II.23 (214) Br̥haspati
Grtsamada ̥
19 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 15, 19
The relation between the god Br̥haspati and Indra is fluid within the R̥gveda. As  Schmidt (1968) has demonstrated, bŕ̥haspáti and bráhmanas páti “lord of the sacred  formulation” are usually names of Indra in the context of the Vala myth. At times,  however, Br̥haspati emerges as an independent deity, though closely linked to Indra.  Here the poet once describes Br̥haspati as the “yokemate” of Indra (vs. 18), but  beyond this statement, there is otherwise little to distinguish Indra and Br̥haspati.
Framing the hymn’s description of Br̥haspati are overt references to the Vala  myth, in which Indra as Br̥haspati leads the Aṅgirases and, by the power of their  song, opens the cave that releases the cattle and dawns (vss. 2, 3, 18). The interme diate verses expand the theme of the power of the verbal formulation, of which  Br̥haspati is the master. It is by means of knowledge of the truth that Br̥haspati and the poet, who possesses mastery of the truth through Br̥haspati, are able to  overcome their enemies. They defeat scorners (vs. 8), slighters (vs. 13), chatterers  (vs. 14), and speakers of ill (vs. 10). They overcome those who hate the real for mulations of the truth (vs. 4), who lay snares (vs. 6), and who are deceitful (vss. 5,  16, 17). Perhaps because of his powerful speech, Br̥haspati’s mouth even “snaps  at” the poet’s enemies (vs. 9). At least in some instances, the rivals of the poet are  rival sacrificers. At best, however, these know the words to recite, but not the truth  that produces the songs or that lies behind them (vs. 16). Through the truth and the  truth formulations, the poet and his people are freed from distress (vs. 4), hostility  (vss. 5, 9), and injury (vss. 7, 8, 12) and instead prosper (vss. 10, 15).
1. We call upon you, the troop-lord of troops, the most famous poet  of poets,
the preeminent king of sacred formulations, o lord of the sacred
formulation. Hearing us, sit down upon your seat together with your help. 2. Even the prescient gods attained their sacrificial portion from you, lordly  Br̥haspati.
As the great sun is (the begetter) of ruddy dawn through its light, you are  the very begetter of all formulations.
3. Having pressed away evasive chatter and darkness, you mount truth’s  light-bearing chariot,
which terrifies, which vanquishes enemies, o Br̥haspati, and which
smashes demons, splits cowpens, and finds the sun.
4. You guide with good guidance, and you rescue the man who will do  (ritual) service for you. Distress will not reach him.
Confounding his fury, you are the scorcher of him who hates the sacred  formulation. Br̥haspati, great is that greatness of yours.
5. Neither distress nor difficulty from anywhere overcomes him, nor  hostilities nor the duplicitous ones.
You press away all that harms from him whom you protect as his good  herdsman, o lord of the sacred formulation.
6. You are our herdsman, creating paths and seeing afar. We are awake to  your command with our thoughts.
Br̥haspati, let grasping disaster, rightfully his, grind to pieces him who  sets a snare for us.
7. Or if a hostile mortal, a lone wolf, is about to injure us who are without  offense,
Br̥haspati, turn him away from our path. Make an easy way for this our  pursuit of the gods.
8. We call upon you as the rescuer of our bodies, as our defender who  inclines toward us, o deliverer.
Br̥haspati, lay low those who scorn the gods. Let evil-doers not gain  higher favor.434 II.23
9. Through you growing very strong, o lord of the sacred formulation,  we would receive the eagerly sought goods belonging to the sons  of Manu.
The hostilities that loom over us from afar or hard by—snap at these,  (now) profitless.
10. Through you, o Br̥haspati, we would receive the utmost vigor—you, our  providing, winning yokemate.
Let not the speaker of ill, trying to deceive, be master of us. As  speakers of good, we would advance through our thoughts.
11. You are a bull unable to be pushed aside, going toward a challenge,  scorcher of his rival and overwhelming in battles,
the real redeemer of debts, o lord of the sacred formulation, and the  tamer even of the powerful one, excited to tough resistance.
12. Who, through his godless thinking, intends harm and, thinking himself  powerful in his commands, tries to smash us—
o Br̥haspati, let his deadly weapon not reach us and let us thwart the  fury of the evil-doer who vaunts himself.
13. Who is to be invoked in raids and to be approached with reverence, who  goes among the prizes of victory and wins every stake,
Br̥haspati has ripped apart all the stranger’s slights that strive to  deceive, like (enemies’) chariots.
14. With your sharpest scorching, scorch the demons who have put you of  manifest heroism to scorn.
Reveal that of yours which will be worthy of a hymn. Shake evasive  chatter to pieces, Br̥haspati.
15. Br̥haspati! That which will be worth more than what belongs to the  stranger, (that which) will radiate among the peoples with brilliance  and purpose,
and that which will shine by means of your power, o you born through  the truth—set that shimmering possession among us.
16. (Give) us not to thieves, the cheats, lurking in the track of deceit, who  have become greedy for our supplies
and (who) declare the crushing power of the gods (but set it) aside  in their heart. Br̥haspati, they do not know (anything) beyond the  sāman-chant (itself).
17. Since the sage Tvaṣṭar gave birth to you from all beings and from each  sāman-chant,
so then (you), as the lord of the sacred formulation, are the collector  of debts and redeemer of debts, and the smasher of deceit in your  upholding of the great truth.
18. The mountain gaped open for (their) glory to be yours when, Aṅgiras,  you set loose the cowpen of cows.
With Indra as your yokemate, Br̥haspati, you forced out the flood of  waters, enclosed by darkness. 19. Lord of the sacred formulation, become the guide of this hymn and  give life to our lineage.
All that is fortunate which the gods aid. – May we speak loftily at the  ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
II.24 (215) Brhaspati ̥
Grtsamada ̥
16 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 12, 16
As Schmidt (1968: 230–37) points out in his translation and extensive analysis of this  hymn, the poet frames his hymn with references to the Vala myth in verses 2–7 and  14. The poet does expand the scope of the myth, however, since the cave contains  not only cattle (vss. 3, 14), but also the sun (vss. 3, 9) and honey and water (vs. 4). In  verses 3 and 14 the cows likely refer also to the dawns. Inside of this frame, the poet  describes the present, in which Br̥haspati inspires the sacrificial hymns and receives  the sacrificial offerings. These present events are partly blended with mythical ones.  In verse 8, for example, the present hymns created by Br̥haspati are his arrows, but  this description of words as arrows recalls the ancient heroic deeds of Br̥haspati and  Indra. More explicitly, in verse 9cd Br̥haspati’s victory causes the sun to blaze, which  echoes the release of the dawns in the Vala myth. And in verse 10 both gods and  humans receive nourishment through the ritual offerings and the goods won by him.
This blending of the mythic and the present may also occur in the opening verses  of the hymn. Where later verses refer to the present but echo the past, in verses 2–7  the overtly mythic events occasionally suggest present ritual acts. In verse 4 the cis tern “containing streams of honey,” which Br̥haspati opens and from which all living  beings drink, recalls the ritual cups with their soma-honey. Priests are the heroes of  the battle in verses 6 and 7, and again this recalls the present ritual action of priests.  Such double reference may contribute to the obscurity of the most difficult verse in  the hymn, verse 5. A number of interpreters, such as Witzel and Gotō, understand  pādas ab to mean that from ancient times “these beings,” either the waters or the  cattle, were destined to come forth, but for a long time the door was shut on them.  That is to say, the basic reference is to the Vala myth, as in its surrounding verses.  On one level, this interpretation is surely right: there likely is a reference to the Vala  myth. At the same time, the poet’s extraordinary obscurity suggests that he may have  more in mind, and indeed pāda a explicitly connects past and present. The verse may  suggest the idea that what has happened in the past happens again, and therefore the  action of Br̥haspati is again necessary to free the cattle or the waters.
1. Help this offering, since you are its master—with this new, great song we  would make the ritual distribution—
and, Br̥haspati, bring our thought to success, so that your companion  [=Indra], who grants rewards to us, will be praised.
436 II.24
2. Who bent down by his power the things that had to be bent and split  apart the things of Śambara by his fury,
the lord of the sacred formulation moved the immovable forward, and  he entered into and throughout the mountain filled with goods.
3. That had to be done by the foremost god of gods: what was firm  became loose, what was hard became pliant.
He drove up the cattle; he split the cave by the sacred formulation. He  hid the darkness and made the sun visible.
4. The cistern with its mouth of stone, containing streams of honey, which  the lord of the sacred formulation drilled out by his power—
from that all those who see the sun have drunk. Copiously and all at  once, they poured out the water-filled well.
5. All those beings of long ago, whoever they be, are to come to be  (again). Through months and years they [=hinderers] block the  doors for all of you.
The two [=the sun and moon], not lining up (next to each other), move  to one (pattern) or the other, to the patterns (of light and dark) that  the lord of the sacred formulation has made.
6. These knowing (poets), who, upon reaching (there), reached the Paṇis’  most distant treasury, hidden away,
after observing the (Paṇis’) untruths again, went up to enter there from  where they came.
7. The truth-possessing poets, after observing the (Paṇis’) untruths again,  from there mounted the great paths.
They (mounted) the fire, fanned by arms, within the stone. It [=the fire]  is not one foreign (to them), for they left it behind.
8. The lord of the sacred formulation with his swift bow whose string is  truth—where he wishes, there he reaches.
To him belong the straight-flying arrows [=the hymns] with which he  shoots—(arrows) to be seen, drawing the gaze of men, and whose  womb is the ear.
9. Placed to the fore, he who leads together and leads apart, he who is well  praised—he is the lord of the sacred formulation in battle.
When the penetrating one bears away the prize and the stakes through  his thinking, just then does the blazing sun blaze at will.
10. Far-going and fore-going is the first (gift) of him who gives  abundantly. The things easily found by Br̥haspati are to be realized. These are the things won by the intent seer, the prize-winner, through  whom both races [=gods and humans], their clans, find satisfaction. 11. Far-going everywhere within the lower settlement [=among humans],  you, who are great and joy-bringing, increase in power—
the god spreads out widely before the gods; the lord of the sacred  formulation encompasses all those things. 12. All that is real belongs just to you two, o generous ones. Even the waters  do not confound your commandment.
O Indra, o lord of the sacred formulation, do you two come here to our  offering, like two prize-winning yokemates to their food.
13. Also the swiftest draft-horses obey him. In the public hall the inspired  poet bears away the stakes through his thinking.
Hating the hard and collecting the debt according to his will is he, the  lord of the sacred formulation, the prizewinner in the contest.
14. The battle-fury of the lord of the sacred formulation, who will do the  great deed, became real according to his will:
He who drove the cattle up also distributed them to heaven. Like a
great stream, (the stream of cattle) ran in separate ways through
his power.
15. O lord of the sacred formulation, may we be the charioteers of easily  controlled, vigorous wealth throughout all our days.
Mix heroes among heroes for us, when, being the master through my  formulation, you pursue my call.
16. O lord of the sacred formulation, become the guide of this hymn and  give life to our lineage.
All that is fortunate which the gods aid. – May we speak loftily at the  ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
II.25 (216) Brahmaṇaspati
Grtsamada ̥
5 verses: jagatī
The focus of this hymn is identified in the refrain found in all five verses: the  mortal who is in the favor of Brahmaṇaspati, the lord of the sacred formula tion. The first three-quarters of each verse then specifies the ways in which this  mortal thrives, especially in winning battles and besting his enemies. The first  hemistich of the first verse makes it clear that the fortunate man in question  has won the favor of Brahmaṇaspati by ritual activity, and especially by mak ing his own sacred formulations (bráhman), though the ritual context is not  mentioned again.
1. Kindling the fire, he will win against those who seek to win. Just he by  whom the sacred formulations are made and by whom the oblations  are bestowed will swell with strength.
With his offspring he keeps extending himself beyond the offspring (of  others)—whomever the lord of the sacred formulation makes his own  yokemate.
438 II.26
2. With his heroes he will win against the heroes who seek to win. With his  cows he will expand his wealth. He (thus) attends to himself,
and his progeny and posterity increase—whomever the lord of the sacred  formulation makes his own yokemate.
3. Vehement like a river in its surge, with his might he asserts his will over  those who seek to act with balls, like a bull over castrated steers.
Like the onslaught of fire he is not to be obstructed—whomever the lord  of the sacred formulation makes his own yokemate.
4. The heavenly (waters), never drying up, stream to him. As the first, he  goes with his warriors to (the contests for) cows.
Having power that cannot be blunted, he strikes with might—whomever  the lord of the sacred formulation makes his own yokemate.
5. Just to him do all the rivers roar. They have provided many unbroken  shelters.
In the favor of the gods, having good fortune, he blazes forth—whomever  the lord of the sacred formulation makes his own yokemate.
II.26 (217) Brahmaṇaspati
Grtsamada ̥
4 verses: jagatī
The subject of this hymn is very similar to that of the preceding (II.25)—the ways  in which a mortal favored by Brahmaṇaspati will prosper—and the same phrase  “he will win against those who seek to win” (vanavad vanuṣyatáḥ) found in the first  pāda of each hymn signals their relationship. However, II.26 lacks the refrain found  in II.25, and it also varies the 3rd-person description of the favored mortal with a  2nd-person address to the same mortal in verse 2. The series of abrupt imperatives  in that verse enlivens the hymn.
Unlike II.25, where the importance of ritual activity is established in the first  half-verse but not mentioned again, this hymn constantly emphasizes the power  that the performance of the sacrifice gives to the sacrificer, in contrast to the impi ous man, who is weaker by nature, even if he is a good warrior.
1. Just he *whose laud is straight (on target) will win against those who  seek to win. Just he who is devoted to the gods will dominate the one  not devoted to the gods.
Just he who pursues (his ritual duties) well will win against the one
difficult to surpass in battles. As sacrificer, he will apportion out the  sustenance of the non-sacrificer.
2. Perform the sacrifice for yourself, hero. Pursue those who display their  zeal. Set your mind well on the overcoming of obstacles. Make offering so that you will have good fortune. We choose the help of  the lord of the sacred formulation.
3. Just he with his people, he with his clan, he with his race, he with his sons  bears away the prize of victory, the spoils, with his superior men,
who, with a mind of trust (in ritual hospitality), seeks to attract the  father of the gods, the lord of the sacred formulation, with his
oblation.
4. Whoever has done honor to him with ghee-drenched oblations, that one  does the lord of the sacred formulation lead to the fore.
He makes a wide place for him from narrow straits; he protects him from  harm—the unerring one who creates a wide place for him even from  narrow straits.
II.27 (218) Ādityas
Grtsamada or K ̥ ūrma Gārtsamada
17 verses: triṣṭubh
The first part of the hymn (vss. 1–7) calls on the Ādityas for protection against  all sorts of dangers encountered during journeys to settlements and between  settlements. They have the power to protect because they are gods who govern  the world and the heavens according to the truth, which defines the order and  nature of things as they are and ought to be (vss. 8–10). The poet then returns  once more to the theme of a journey protected by the Ādityas and looks forward  to his finding a place to settle, a place of good pasturage (vs. 13) and a place  that is open and secure (vs. 14). The poet insists that he is worthy of the Ādityas’  protection: like the gods themselves (vss. 2, 9), he is śúci “gleaming, pure” (vs.  13), free of any taint. And if he has committed any offense, he begs the Ādityas’  mercy (vs. 14)  and hopes that he would never fall to the punishments of the  Ādityas (vs. 16). The meaning of verse 15cd is not quite clear. The two dwelling  places mentioned there could be heaven and earth, to which pādas ab refer, or  possibly, as Geldner suggests, to opposing sides from whose conflict the poet  hopes to benefit.
1. These ghee-backed songs I pour out to the Ādityas, kings from of old,  with my tongue (as offering ladle).
Let each one hear us: Mitra, Aryaman, and Bhaga, mighty-born Varuṇa,  Dakṣa, and Aṃśa.
2. Today, they of common resolve—Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuṇa—will  enjoy this praise song of mine—
they, the gleaming Ādityas, pure as a stream (of soma) and free of
crookedness, disgrace, or injury.
440 II.27
3. These broad and deep Ādityas, undeceivable but ready to deceive (the  deceitful), having many eyes,
see within the crooked and the straight. Everything is in front of the  kings, even the farthest things.
4. The Ādityas sustain what moves and what stands still—(these) gods, the  herdsmen of the whole living world,
they of far-reaching care, guarding their lordship, possessing the truth,  and collecting debts.
5. Might I know this help of yours, o Ādityas, which even in time of fear is  joy, o Aryaman.
Under the leadership of you all, o Mitra and Varuṇa, might I avoid  difficulties like clefts in the earth.
6. Since easy is your path, o Aryaman, Mitra, and Varuṇa—harmless to  men and leading straight—
therefore speak in our defense, Ādityas. Offer us protection impossible  to smash on any side.
7. Let Aditi, whose sons are kings, and Aryaman help us cross beyond  hostilities by easy (paths).
We would draw near to the lofty protection of Mitra and Varuṇa, as  those with many heroes and free of injury.
8. They uphold the three earths and the three heavens. Three are their  commandments within the ritual distribution.
By truth is your greatness great, Ādityas. That is dear (to you), o  Aryaman, Mitra, and Varuṇa.
9. They uphold the three heavenly realms of light—(themselves) golden,  gleaming, and pure as a stream (of soma).
(They are) unsleeping, unwinking, undeceivable, and widely proclaimed  for the straightforward mortal.
10. You are the king of all, Varuṇa, both gods and mortals, o lord. Give us a hundred autumns to gaze far. We would reach the secure  lifetimes of former times.
11. I see far neither to the right nor to the left, neither forward nor behind,  Ādityas.
Be it in naïveté or in wisdom, you good ones, led by you, might I attain  the light free from fear.
12. Who has served the kings leading by truth [=the Ādityas] and whom  they—and his own prosperity—make strong,
he travels by chariot as the foremost man of wealth, proclaimed at the  ritual distributions as the giver of goods.
13. Gleaming and undeceivable, he dwells near waters that provide good  pasturage, with his own vigor strengthened and with his good heroes. Neither from near nor from afar do any strike down the man who  comes to be under the leadership of the Ādityas. 14. O Aditi, Mitra, and Varuṇa, have mercy if we have committed any  offense against you.
Might I reach the broad light that is free of fear, Indra. Let the long  darkness (of death) not reach us.
15. Both (heaven and earth) jointly make heaven’s rain swell for him: (he  is) Subhaga, the “Man of Good Fortune,” by name, the one who
thrives.
Conquering both dwelling places, he drives amid the battles. Both sides  are straightforward for him.
16. O Ādityas, worthy of the sacrifice, your wiles that are ready for the  deceitful one, your unbound fetters ready for the cheat—
like a horseman, might I travel in my chariot beyond these! Might we  never be harmed under your wide protection!
17. Let me not find the lack of a dear benefactor, of a friend with many  gifts, o Varuṇa.
Let me not stand down from wealth easy to control, o king. – May we  speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
II.28 (219) Varuṇa
Grtsamada or K ̥ ūrma Gārtsamada
11 verses: triṣṭubh
This is the only hymn to Varuṇa alone in Maṇḍala II, but it resembles the famous  Varuṇa hymns of book VII (86–89), especially in its confessional tone and its plea  to escape punishment from the god. The ellipses in the first verse point to Varuṇa’s  double role in this hymn. “This belonging to the Āditya sage poet” is in the first  instance the hymn itself that is being recited for the god. The poet hopes that  his hymn will dominate all things, or, perhaps better, be dominant over all other  hymns. At the same time, “this” is also the god’s own commandment, which the  poet describes in the hymn and which dominates everything in the world. Varuṇa’s  function as a speaker is underscored by the description of him as a kaví “sage poet”  since a kaví is one who knows and who speaks, and as mandrá “pleasing,” which  frequently characterizes the Hotar priest, who recites the hymns. Verse 2 carries for ward the argument, mentioning both the commandment of the god and the insights  of the poet. The poet calls upon Varuṇa to keep him safe from various threats (vss.  3, 6, 10), interspersing his petition with pleas not to fall victim to the punishment  from the god for his misdeeds (vss. 5, 7, 9). Toward the end of the hymn, the poet  once again calls attention both to his own speech and also to the commandment  spoken by the god (vs. 8), thus returning to the initial theme of the hymn.
1. Let this belonging to the Āditya sage poet, the independent king,  dominate all existing things in its greatness—
442 II.28
(this belonging to) the god who excels as the pleasing one for the  sacrifice. I beg good renown of abundant Varuṇa.
2. Might we be possessed of good fortune under your commandment,  since with great attention we have recited your praises, Varuṇa,
(now) at the approach of the cattle-rich dawns, since we are awakening  like fires throughout the days.
3. Might we be under the protection of you, who bring many heroes, who  receive wide praise, o Varuṇa, our leader.
O undeceivable sons of Aditi, indulge us to be yoked (with you), o gods. 4. As their distributor, the Āditya sent them gushing forth: the rivers move  to the truth of Varuṇa.
These do not weary, nor are they unharnessed. Like birds they have  flown swiftly on their earth-encircling course.
5. Loosen my offense from me like a halter. We would succeed in reaching  the wellspring of your truth, Varuṇa.
Let my thread not be cut as I weave my insight. Let not the full measure  of my work be broken before its season.
6. Unfasten fear from me, o Varuṇa! Hold me close, o truth-possessing,  universal king!
Like a rope from a calf, untie confining straits (from me), for I cannot  be away from you even for the blink of an eye.
7. (Strike) us not with your deadly weapons, o Varuṇa, which, in your  hunt (for him), injure the one who commits an offense, o lord!
Let us not go from light into foreign lands! Loosen our lapses for us  to live!
8. Before, Varuṇa, and also now, and in the future, we will speak our  homage to you, o you who are mighty-born,
for on you, as on a mountain, there rest immovable commandments, o  you who are difficult to deceive.
9. Send my debts far away and (other) things done by me. Let me not  suffer for what was done by another, o king.
Surely many more dawns have not yet dawned: direct us, Varuṇa, (in  order to be) alive at them.
10. If in a dream one who is yoked with me or who is my companion  speaks a frightening thing to me, who become fearful, o king,
or if a thief or a wolf tries to deceive us—protect us from (all) that,  Varuṇa.
11. Let me not find the lack of a dear benefactor, of a friend with many  gifts, o Varuṇa.
Let me not descend from wealth easy to control, o king. – May we  speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes. II.29 (220) All Gods
Grtsamada or K ̥ ūrma Gārtsamada
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet calls on various gods, especially the Ādityas, for protection from perils,  some vividly imagined, and for forgiveness for his previous offenses. The poet does  not seem entirely confident that his prayers will be answered.
1. You vigorous Ādityas of steadfast commandments, put at a distance from  me my offense, as a woman who gives birth in secret (does her baby). You who listen, Varuṇa, Mitra, (other) gods—knowing what is favorable,  I call to you for aid.
2. You, gods, are solicitude; you are strength; you—keep hatreds far away. As apportioners, be indulgent and be merciful to us, both today and for  the future.
3. What shall we do now with your future (friendship), what, good ones,  with your old friendship?
You—Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aditi, Indra and the Maruts—establish
well-being for us.
4. Hail, gods: only you are our friends. Be merciful to me who am in need. Let our chariot not come to be without you when it is travelling in the  middle (of battle/a journey?); let us not become weary while we have  friends like you.
5. I alone have perpetrated a great offense against you, for which you have  chastised me, like a father (his son, who is) a gambler.
In the distance (be) your fetters, in the distance evils, o gods; do not seize  me in my son, like a bird.
6. Become inclined our way today, you who are worthy of the sacrifice.  Being fearful, I would fasten onto your heart.
Rescue us, gods, from the “rubbing out” of the wolf; rescue us from  falling into the pit, you who are worthy of the sacrifice.
7. Let me not find the lack of a dear benefactor, of a friend with many gifts,  o Varuṇa.
Let me not stand down from wealth easy to control, o king. – May we  speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.444 II.30
II.30 (221) Indra (1–5, 7, 8cd, 10), Indra and Soma (6), Sarasvatı̄ (8ab), Brhaspati (9), Maruts (11) ̥
Grtsamada ̥
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 11
Despite the number and variety of divine dedicands in the Anukramaṇī ascrip tion reproduced above, this is essentially an All God hymn, dominated by Indra. It  appears between two All God hymns, although in its number of verses (eleven), it  is out of order, since both II.29 and II.31 have seven verses. There is no easy way to  adjust this discrepancy.
The first part of the hymn (vss. 1–3) presents, however obliquely, the story of  the Indra–Vr̥tra battle, but it leads up to the battle with a timeless or contemporary  image. It describes the current daily rushing of waters (waters implicitly identified,  as commonly, with the dawns), and then asks when the waters first began to surge.  The unexpressed answer is—only when they were released after Indra’s defeat of  Vr̥tra. Verse 2 has been interpreted in multiple ways, and many difficulties remain.  Interestingly, it contains the first and almost the only example of a conditional verb  in Vedic, and the isolation of this grammatical form makes the interpretation of the  verse more difficult. In the tentative interpretation given here, the verse concerns an  unidentified figure (possibly Sūrya, who is sometimes an opponent of Indra), who  was planning to give aid to Vr̥tra in the battle (pāda a), but (pāda b) his plan was  detected and announced by an unidentified female figure (possibly Earth, possibly  Indra’s mother) to yet another unidentified figure (possibly Indra), thus foiling the  plan. The verse pivots in pāda c, which can have reference both to the mythological  past—the free flowing of the waters after their release on the killing of Vr̥tra and  their creation of paths for Indra—and to the timeless daily round—the continual  (re-)creation of paths for the sun by the dawns, since the formula in 2c is also some times used exactly of this situation. Thus the second half of verse 2 returns us to the  timeless daily realm of verse 1 and the double interpretation of waters and dawns.  The third and last verse about the Vr̥tra battle (vs. 3) is much more straightforward,  and may have been designed to resolve for the audience what the topic of the first  two, obscurely phrased, verses was.
The rest of the hymn begs the gods, particularly Indra but, as the hymn pro gresses, other gods, to use the same powers that led to victory in the Vr̥tra battle to  combat the poet’s enemies. The importance of sacrifice in winning the gods’ favor  is emphasized in verses 6–7.
The hymn contains some striking expressions, for instance the “night” of the  waters in verse 1: the image evoked may be a naturalistic one, that waters in full  flow can appear dark, but with the identification waters = dawns the image can  also describe the progress from night/darkness to dawn. Note also that the phrase  “every day” defines the hymn as a ring composition, though it has different lexi
cal realizations in verse 1 (áhar-ahar) and as the last word of the last verse 11  (divé-dive). 1. For the god who creates truth, for Savitar, for Indra who smashes the  serpent, the waters do not stay still.
Day after day the “night” of the waters drives on. How long ago was  their first surging?
2. The one [=Sūrya?] who was going to carry the gear here for Vr̥tra—the  mother [Earth? Indra’s mother?] announced him to the knowing one  [=Indra?].
Excavating the paths for him [=Indra/Sūrya] at their pleasure, the
boisterous ones [=dawns as waters] go every day to their goal.
3. For he took his stand, erect, in the midspace. Then he bore his
murderous weapon down toward Vr̥tra.
Clothing himself in mist, he [=Vr̥tra] ran up to him. Having sharp
weapons Indra conquered his rival.
4. O Br̥haspati, with searing heat, as if with a stone, pierce the heroes of  the (rival) lord, with their wolfish gait.
Just as you also smote boldly before, so smite our rival, o Indra.
5. Hurl down from heaven the stone on high, with which you, exulting (in  soma), will rub out your rival.
After that go halves with us in the winning of progeny, of abundant  descendants, and of cattle, o Indra.
6. For you two rip away the resolve (of him) whom you combat, but you  are stimulators of (even) a feeble man who performs sacrifice.
You, Indra and Soma—help us. In this fearful place create wide space. 7. It will not tire nor weary me, and there will be no flagging. We will not  say, “Don’t press soma (for him [=Indra],)”
(Indra,) who will grant to me, who will give, who will be attentive, who  will approach me with cows, as I press it.
8. You, Sarasvatī—help us. As a bold one accompanied by the Maruts,  conquer the rivals.
Even this vaunting one, the bull of the Śaṇḍikas, displaying his power,  does Indra smash.
9. Whoever, distant or (near), wishes to harm us, on catching sight of him,  pierce him with a sharp (weapon).
Br̥haspati, with your weapons conquer the rivals. Deliver to deceit him  who does harm, o king.
10. With our warriors, our champions, o champion, do the manly deeds  that are yours to be done.
For a long time they have been “besmoked” [=befuddled]. Having
smashed them, bring their goods to us here.
11. Seeking favor, I address this Marutian troop for you with a hymn, with  reverence I address the divine folk,
so that we will attain wealth consisting of hale heroes, bringing
descendants in its train, worthy of fame from day to day.
446 II.31
II.31 (222) All Gods
Grtsamada ̥
7 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 7
The common identification of the sacrifice, and particularly the praise hymn at the  sacrifice, with a chariot in a race is the backgrounded theme of this hymn, which  becomes foregrounded in the final verse. The controlling chariot image in turn gives  rise to other comparisons, as when in verse 1 charioteers sitting on the wooden  chariot are compared with birds sitting in trees.
The word “those seeking fame” (śravasyávaḥ) defines the hymn as a ring compo sition, as it occurs in both the initial and final verses, and the middle verses, 3–5, all  open with utá syá [/tyá] “and this,” a cluster that marks a simple omphalos. Though  most of the hymn is relatively straightforward, the end of the final omphalos verse,  5d, is difficult and has elicited several different interpretations.
The designation “all gods” as the dedicand of the hymn is quite accurate: a wide  variety of gods and divinized powers are addressed in the hymn and begged for help.
1. Help the chariot belonging to us, o Mitra and Varuṇa, in partnership  with the Ādityas, Rudras, and Vasus,
when those seeking fame, excited, sitting on/in wood, fly forth like birds  from their dwelling.
2. Then help out our chariot, you gods of one accord, as it seeks prizes  among the clans,
when the swift ones, crossing through the airy realm with their strides,  keep trampling on the back of the earth with their forefeet.
3. And this Indra, belonging to all domains, of good resolve, with the  Marutian troop of heaven
will stand beside our chariot with help that keeps the wolf away, for great  gain, to win the prizes.
4. And this god, the conqueror of the world, Tvaṣṭar, in concert with the  Wives (of the Gods), will speed the chariot—
Iḍā, Bhaga, Br̥haddivā, and Rodasī; Pūṣan, Plenitude—and the Aśvins as  husbands.
5. And these two well-portioned goddesses of opposite appearance, Dawn  and Night, also speeders of moving creatures, (will speed the chariot), when, (o Heaven and) Earth, I will praise you two with a newer speech,  I possessing triple vigor to strew vigor as the underlayer for the still (world). 6. And we want a laud for you like that of the fire-priests. Ahi Budhnya,  Aja Ekapad, and
Trita, the Master of the R̥bhus, and Savitar take delight, also the Child of the  Waters who impels the swift (horses), through (our) thought and labor.
7. I want these (words) raised up for you, o you who are worthy of the  sacrifice. The Āyus fashioned (them) together into a newer (hymn). Seeking fame, desiring the prize, like a chariot span might they attain the  visionary thought.
II.32 (223) Various Gods
Grtsamada ̥
8 verses: jagatī 1–5, anuṣṭubh 6–8
This is a composite hymn, whose structure is not entirely clear. The first three verses  seem to belong together, addressing first Heaven and Earth (vs. 1)  and then an  unidentified male divinity (2–3), while the remaining five verses are addressed to  various female divinities who are especially concerned with childbirth. However,  the metrical structure does not accord with the conceptual structure, as the meter  divides the hymn into verses 1–5 and 6–8.
1. O Heaven and Earth, become the helpers of this speech for me, who am  acting according to truth and seeking to gain.
You two whose lifetime is extended do I, seeking goods, greatly install  here in front, when you are approached with praise.
2. Let secret swindles not deceive us on the day of Āyu [=offering day?]. Do  not make us subject to these misfortunes.
Do not keep us far away from your companionship. Know this
(speech?) of ours. With a mind seeking favor we beseech you for this. 3. With a mind without anger bring here your attentive hearing, a swelling  cow who gives milk, inexhaustible.
With steps [/(verses measured) in feet] and with speech I impel you, the  swift prize-winner, through all the days, o much invoked one.
4. Rākā who is good to invoke I invoke with good praise. Let her of good  portion hear us; let her attend (to us) in person.
Let her stitch her work with a needle that cannot be broken. Let her give  a hero with a hundred shares who is worthy of hymns.
5. O Rākā, your benevolent thoughts, well-ornamented, with which you  give goods to the pious one—
with those approach us today, benevolently, granting thousandfold
thriving, you of good portion.
6. O Sinīvalī with broad braids, you who are sister of the gods,
enjoy the oblation that is poured. Allot offspring to us, goddess.
7. She who has lovely arms, lovely fingers, bearing easily, bearing amply, to her, mistress of the clan, to Sinīvalī, pour an oblation.
8. Guṅgū, Sinīvalī, Rākā, Sarasvatī—
(on them and) on Indrāṇī I have called for help and on Varuṇānī for  well-being.
448 II.33
II.33 (224) Rudra
Grtsamada ̥
15 verses: triṣṭubh
Although under his transferred epithet Śiva (“kindly one”), Rudra has a grand  career ahead of him in post-Vedic Hinduism, his role in Vedic, especially early  Vedic, is relatively restrained. Only three complete R̥gvedic hymns are dedi cated to him (I.114 and VII.46, in addition to this one, as well as two hymns  conjointly dedicated to Rudra and Soma, I.43 and VI.74). He is known espe cially as the father of the Maruts, and he has a dual nature: on the one hand,  he is prone to anger and quick to dispatch his weapons, especially his arrows,  at those who enrage him; on the other, he is a provider of healing remedies and  of good luck.
The major part of this hymn is devoted to begging the god Rudra for his indul gence and his healing powers, but it also nervously expresses the hope that his venge ful assaults will be directed elsewhere. The dual nature of Rudra as both healer and  avenger is thus on display, and his parentage of the Maruts begins the hymn (vs.  1) and is mentioned several times in the course of it.
1. Let your favor come here, o father of the Maruts. Do not keep us away  from the sight of the sun.
The hero on horseback should be indulgent. Might we be further
propagated through our offspring, Rudra.
2. Through the remedies given by you that bring best luck, Rudra, might  I reach a hundred winters.
Banish hatred away from us, very far away, distress away, and afflictions  away, widely scattered.
3. In glory you are the most glorious of anyone born, Rudra, the most  powerful of the powerful, o you with the mace in your arms.
Take us across to the far shore of distress, to well-being. Keep away all  assaults of malady.
4. Let us not anger you, Rudra, through our acts of reverence, nor through  poor praise, nor through an invocation shared (with other gods),
o bull.
Set up our heroes with your remedies: I hear that you are the best healer  of healers.
5. Whoever invokes him with invocations and offerings, (thinking,) “With  my praises might I cut off Rudra as my own exclusive portion,”
to the zeal (of this person) let the red-brown one with powerful lips
[=Rudra] not subordinate us—(Rudra) being tender-hearted and easy  to invoke. 6. The bull, in the company of the Maruts, roused me up when I was in  need, with his more energetic vitality.
Free of malady, might I reach (this), like shade during the heat: might  I attract here the favor of Rudra.
7. Where, o Rudra, is that merciful hand of yours, which is a healing  remedy,
the bearer away of malady that comes from the gods? You should now  be indulgent toward me, o bull.
8. To the red-brown, bright-faced bull, I rouse forth greatly a great good  praise hymn.
I shall do reverence to the sparkling one with acts of reverence. We sing  the turbulent name of Rudra.
9. With sturdy limbs, the mighty red-brown one of many forms has  adorned himself with gleaming golden (ornaments).
From Rudra, who is master over the abundant living world, lordly
power will surely not be distant.
10. Worthily you bear the arrows and the bow and worthily the sacrificial  neck ornament of all forms.
Worthily you parcel out the whole formless void. Surely there exists  nothing more powerful than you, Rudra.
11. Praise the famed youth, sitting upon the high seat, the mighty one,  pouncing like a terrifying wild beast.
Being praised, have mercy on the singer, Rudra. Let your weapons cast  down another than us.
12. Even a little boy bows in response to his approving father as he  approaches, o Rudra.
I will hymn the giver of much, the master of settlements. Praised,
bestow on us your remedies.
13. Your gleaming remedies, o bullish Maruts, which bring best luck, which  are joy itself,
which our father Manu chose—those of Rudra’s do I want as luck and  lifetime.
14. Might Rudra’s lance avoid us. The hostile thought of the turbulent one,  though great, shall go around us.
Slacken the taut (bows) for our bounteous (patrons). Be merciful to our  progeny and posterity, o munificent one.
15. You red-brown bull, constantly visible—(let it be) so, that you do not  become angry, o god, and you do not smite.
Hearing our calls, be aware of us here, Rudra. – May we speak loftily at  the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
450 II.34
II.34 (225) Maruts
Grtsamada ̥
15 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 15
Following immediately on a hymn dedicated to the Maruts’ father Rudra, this hymn  describes the Maruts, with the extravagant and imaginative phraseology typically  used of them, as the thunderstorm, while urging them to come to the singer’s sac rifice. About midway through the hymn (starting in vss. 6–7), the focus shifts to the  benefits the Maruts can provide the singer, in inspiring his hymn, protecting him  against enemies, and offering gifts. The naturalistic description remains, however;  note, for example, the sequential imagery in verse 13, which proceeds from thunder,  through lightning and rain, to the post-storm clearing and rainbow.
The hymn also contains a reference (vs. 2) to the enigmatic and sometimes para doxical parentage and birth of the Maruts from Pr̥śni and Rudra. The motif of the  cow, especially the milk-cow with her swollen udder, runs through the hymn (e.g., vss.  1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12), with reference sequentially or simultaneously to dawns, clouds,  the sacrificer’s soma-pressings, and the Maruts’ gift to him. This multivalent image  helps to unify the hymn as it moves from naturalistic description to ritual entreaty.
1. Wooers of the gushing streams, the Maruts of audacious power, like wild  beasts fearsome through their forces, provided with chant,
blazing like fires, possessing the silvery drink, blowing a whirlwind—they  unclosed the cows.
2. Like the heavens with their stars they appeared with their spangles. They  flashed forth like the rains from the storm clouds,
when Rudra was begotten for you as the blazing bullish (semen [=rain?])  in the udder of Pr̥śni, o you Maruts with brilliants on your breasts.
3. They sprinkle their horses, like steeds at contests. With [=at the impetus  of] the “ears” of the reed(-whip) they speed with the swift ones.
You of the golden lips, Maruts, constantly setting (them [=lips])
aquiver—you drive to fortifying nourishment with your dappled
mares, o you of equal spirit.
4. The ones with lively drops have waxed strong, to fortify all the creatures  or for alliance (with them) always.
With their dappled horses, with their unreceding generosity, they sit at  the chariot-pole like the straight-flying (birds) on the traceries (of the  branches?).
5. (Come here) with your enflaming [?] milk-cows with teeming udders  [=clouds?], along unbesmirched paths, o you with glinting spears—
like geese to good pastures come here for the exhilaration of the honey,  you Maruts of equal spirit.
6. (Come) here to our sacred formulations, you Maruts of equal spirit;  like Narāśaṃsa [/him who receives men’s praise = Agni?] come to our  pressings. Make (them) swell like a mare, a milk-cow in her udder. Make for the  singer a visionary thought that has prizes as its ornament.
7. Give us, o Maruts, a prizewinner (attached) to a chariot, a sacred  formulation that attains its object, conspicuous day after day.
(Give) refreshment to the praisers; to the bard in the (ritual)
enclosures (give) as his gain wisdom and invulnerable might
difficult to surpass.
8. When the Maruts with brilliants on their breasts yoke their own horses  to the chariots for good fortune—they of good drops [/gifts]—
as a milk-cow in good pastures swells for her young, they (swell) great  refreshment for the person who has bestowed oblations.
9. The cheating mortal who set us among wolves— o Maruts, good ones,  protect (us) from his harm;
roll over him with your searing wheel. O Rudras, strike down the
murderous weapon of the one who lacks proper pronouncements.
10. This bright course of yours, Maruts, appears ever more brightly, when  the close friends have milked the udder of Pr̥śni,
or when (they have set) Trita [/the third (heaven)] to scorning (as does)  a roarer [=thunder], (set him) to aging (as do) those who age, you
undeceivable sons of Rudra.
11. Those great Maruts, travelling their ways, do we invoke for you at your  ritual offering for quick Viṣṇu.
With offering spoons extended, creating sacred formulations, we
implore the prominent ones of golden hue for generosity worthy to  be proclaimed.
12. The Daśagvas were the first to conduct the sacrifice. Let them rouse us  at the brightenings of dawn.
As Dawn with her ruddy (beams) uncloses the nights, (so did
they unclose the cows) with the greatly blazing light flooding
with cows.
13. With their cries [=thunder], with their ornaments like (Dawn’s) ruddy  (beams), the Rudras have grown strong in the seats of truth.
Pissing downward in a steed’s shape, they have assumed their much  gleaming, well-bedizened hue.
14. While one [=poet?] is imploring them for a great defense, for help, we  hymn them with this reverence right here—
they whom he [=poet?] will cause to roll down here with their wheel  for aid, as Trita [/the third one] (brought here) five Hotars for
dominance.
15. That with which you carry the feeble one across difficult straits, with  which you free your celebrant from scorn,
that is nearby—that help of yours, o Maruts. May your benevolence  come here like a bellowing (cow).
452 II.35
II.35 (226) Apām Napāt (Child of the Waters)
Grtsamada ̥
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This is the only R̥gvedic hymn devoted to the divinity Apām Napāt “Child of the  Waters,” though he is mentioned on a number of occasions elsewhere in the text.  This divine name is also found identically in Avestan, but in the R̥gveda it is in the  course of becoming an epithet of Agni. In this hymn we see aspects both of the  identification with and assimilation to Agni and of the original independent divinity.
After an opening (vss. 1–2) in which the poet in the 1st person offers his praise  to the divinity, the heart of the hymn (3–11) describes his birth, care, and feeding  by women, who at least in the early verses are the Waters, in sometimes enigmatic  phrasing.
The fiery aspect of Apām Napāt is introduced gradually in the hymn, first by the  use of vocabulary regularly but not exclusively used elsewhere of Agni, for exam ple the “shining” words (vss. 3–4); as the hymn continues, vocabulary and imagery  point more and more strongly to fire, for example the twigs and plants in verse 8,  the emphasis on golden color in verses 9–10. But it is not until the second half of  verse 11 that unambiguous reference to physical fire is found (the verb “kindle” as  well as the identification of ghee as his food—though ghee first made its appear ance in verse 4). It is doubtless no accident that the first half of verse 11 announces  Apām Napāt as his “secret name”: this explicit reference confirms that the poem  heretofore has been framed as a riddle or enigma, for which “Apām Napāt” is the  solution. (Verse 13 also codes the same distinction between the originally separate  identities of Apām Napāt and Agni, by connecting the name Apām Napāt with “the  body of another,” namely Agni.)
After the climactic verse 11, the hymn then takes a more ritual turn, and the  1st-person ritualist of verse 1 returns in verse 12. In this ritualistic section, the para dox of Apām Napāt being nurtured by the waters and his double, Agni, being nur tured by the fire-tenders is resolved (or the images are superimposed) by having the  waters bring ghee to him.
1. I, seeking prizes, have set loose my eloquence. The offspring of the rivers  should take delight in my hymns.
The Child of the Waters who impels swift (horses)—surely he will make  them well-ornamented? For he will savor (them).
2. This well-crafted spell we would speak to him from our heart. Surely he  will take cognizance of it?
The Child of the Waters, our compatriot, with the greatness of his lordly  power begat all beings.
3. Some come together; others go directly (to the sea): (but) it is the same  vessel that the rivers fill. The gleaming, shining Child of the Waters do the gleaming waters
surround.
4. The youth do the youthful waters, (though) unsmiling, circle around  while they groom him.
With his gleaming, dexterous (flames) he shines richly for us, (though)  without fuel, with his garment of ghee, in the waters.
5. To him, the unfaltering god, do the three women goddesses desire to  provide food.
For he keeps stretching himself out in the waters as if toward (just)
“made” [=deflowered] women. He sucks the beestings of those who  give birth for the first time.
6. Here is the birth of the horse and of this sun [=Agni?]. From deceit,  from harm—from the infusion (of them)—protect the patrons.
Neither hostilities nor untruths shall reach him in the “raw”
fortifications, him who is not to be forgotten (though) far away.
7. Whoever has a good-milking cow in his own house, he swells his own  power; he eats food of good essence.
The Child of the Waters, being nourished within the waters, radiates  widely to give goods to the one who honors him.
8. He who in the waters, truthful and inexhaustible, radiates far and wide  with his heavenly gleaming—
the other entities are propagated just as twigs of him, and the plants  propagate themselves through their progeny.
9. Because the Child of the Waters has mounted the lap of those who are  sloping, (himself) erect, clothing himself in the lightning flash,
as they carry his preeminent greatness, the golden-hued exuberant
maidens circle around him.
10. Golden-formed, he has a golden appearance—the Child of the
Waters—and he is also golden-hued,
(coming) out of a golden womb when he sits down (on the ritual
ground). The givers of gold give food to him.
11. This his face and his dear secret name grow strong—(the name) of the  Child of the Waters—
whom the youthful women together kindle just so: golden-hued ghee is  food for him.
12. To him, the closest comrade of many, we would do honor with
sacrifices, with reverence, with oblations.
I groom his back; I seek to provide (him) with wood-shavings. I provide  (him) with food; I extol (him) with verses.
13. As bull he begat the embryo in these (waters). As infant he sucks them;  they lick him.
The Child of the Waters, whose color never fades, has toiled here as if  with the body of another.454 II.36
14. Him standing in this highest footprint here, shining always along  unbesmirched (paths)—
the waters bringing ghee as food to the Child (of the Waters), the
exuberant maidens fly encircling (him) with themselves as his cloaks. 15. I have proffered a good dwelling-place to the people, o Agni, and I have  proffered a well-twisted (hymn) to the bounteous ones.
All that is fortunate which the gods aid. – May we speak loftily at the  ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
II.36 (227) Sequential Deities ( for the R̥tugrahas)
Grtsamada ̥
6 verses: jagatī
This hymn concerns a particular set of ritual offerings (R̥tugrahas “sequential  cups”) made to a prescribed set of gods in a fixed order, and, with the following  hymn, II.37, provides the complete set, which is also found in the single hymn I.15.  As was clearly seen already by Oldenberg (1888: 193), II.36–37 in fact themselves  form a single hymn, not only because of their shared ritual content but also because  at six verses apiece, they violate the rule of maṇḍala organization, whereby hymns  within a single group contain descending number of verses. II.36–37 fall between  a hymn of fifteen verses and one of eleven; when combined, their twelve verses fit  perfectly in the sequence.
Each verse identifies a different god (or groups of gods) and the priest whose  duty it is to make the offering. Several of the verses are structured as riddles, with  the name of the god either suppressed or postponed until near the end; the audi ence would have had no trouble solving these riddles, since the vocabulary and the  actions are stereotyped for each god. (Our solutions to such riddles are given at the  end of the verses in question.) Nonetheless, II.36–37 show rhetorical ambitions  almost entirely absent from the bare-bones and poetically inert I.15.
In this hymn Indra is honored twice (vss. 1 and 5) but by two different priests,  and in the second instance it is probably Indra in the guise of Br̥haspati. In both  these verses the exhilarating drink soma, Indra’s special potion, is also referred to in  a riddling fashion. For further discussion of the ritual and its litany, see I.15.
1. Being impelled for you, it has clothed itself in cows, in waters; the men  have milked it with the stones through the sheep(’s wool).
At “Hail!,” o Indra, drink from the Hotar’s cup the soma poured out  when the vaṣaṭ-cry is made—you who first have dominion over it.
2. Commingling with sacrifices, with your dappled (mares), with your  spears, resplendent on your journey and in your ornaments, and dear, having sat on the ritual grass, you sons of Bharata, drink soma from the  Potar’s cup, you men of heaven [=Maruts].
3. As if to home, come to us here, all you of easy call; then sit on the ritual  grass and take pleasure.
Then, o Tvaṣṭar, become exhilarated on the stalk, having delighted in the  call, flocking with the divine ones, (namely) the Wives (of the Gods). 4. Convey the gods hither, you inspired poet, and perform sacrifice.  Willingly, o Hotar, sit down in your three wombs.
Receive the somian honey that has been set forth. Drink from the
Agnīdh’s cup. Reach satiety from your portion. [=Agni]
5. This one here strengthens the manly powers of your body; as might, as  strength it was laid in your arms (already) on a distant day.
For you it is pressed, bounteous one, for you it is borne here—you, drink  it to satiety from the Brahman’s cup. [=Indra/Br̥haspati]
6. You two, enjoy the sacrifice; take heed of my call. The Hotar is seated,  following the ancient invitations [/nivids].
Homage goes to you two kings to turn (you) hither. From the Praśāstar’s  cup drink the somian honey. [=Mitra and Varuṇa]
II.37 (228) Sequential Deities ( for the R̥tugrahas)
Grtsamada ̥
6 verses: jagatī
See the remarks on the previous hymn, as well as I.15.7–10. In that latter hymn,  as in this one, four verses are devoted to the offerings to the shadowy figure of the  Wealth-Giver (Draviṇodā); these verses may be there merely to bring the number  of offerings to twelve, to correspond with the secondary interpretation of r̥tú as  season, and hence to match the number of offerings to the months of the year, as  discussed in the introduction to I.15.
1. Become exhilarated on the stalk, from the Hotar’s cup at your pleasure.  O Adhvaryu, he desires a full outpouring.
Bring this to him. Such is the desire of the giver. The soma from the  Hotar’s cup, o Wealth-Giver—drink it at your turns.
2. The one I invoked previously, him I invoke right now. Just he is to be  invoked, who owns the name “Giver.”
The somian honey has been set forth by the Adhvaryus. The soma from  the Potar’s cup, o Wealth-Giver—drink it at your turns.
3. Let your draft-animals become fat, with which you go speeding.
Allowing no harm to befall, make yourself firm, o lord of the forest  [=chariot].
456 II.38
Having drawn it to you, bold one, having greeted it: the soma from the  Neṣṭar’s cup, o Wealth-Giver—drink it at your turns.
4. He has drunk from the Hotar’s cup, and from the Potar’s he has become  exhilarated, and from the Neṣṭar’s he has enjoyed the pleasurable
offering set out.
The fourth cup, indestructible and immortal, let the Wealth-Giver,
descendant of the Wealth-Giver, drink.
5. You two, today yoke your coursing, man-conveying chariot in our  direction: here is your unhitching.
Mix the oblations with honey. Come hither! Then drink the soma, you  who possess prizewinning mares. [=Aśvins]
6. Enjoy the kindling, Agni; enjoy the oblation; enjoy the sacred
formulation stemming from your people; enjoy the lovely praise.
With all (the gods?), good one, eagerly make all the great gods eagerly  drink the oblation in their turn.
II.38 (229) Savitar
Grtsamada ̥
11 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is typically, and in our view rightly, identified as an evening hymn, in  which Savitar quiets the world for the night. The hymn is closely analyzed by Falk  (1988), who argues that the occasion of the hymn is the evening of the summer sol stice, which marked the beginning of the rainy season. According to Falk, in the sec ond millennium bce on this night the Milky Way rose from the horizon at dusk. The  arc of the Milky Way, he says, was pictured as the outstretched arms of Savitar. Be
that as it may, most of the images in the hymn are applicable to evening in general. The first six verses present a lovely series of images of the quiet and rest that  evening brings to the natural and the human world—almost ironically because the  daily round of busy movement ceases at the “impulsion” of the “Impeller” (the  literal meaning of Savitar). In the following two verses (7–8), Savitar’s ability to  bring each creature to its home place at night is extended: he also has assigned to  all categories of creatures their proper position in the natural world. The remainder  of the hymn celebrates the power of Savitar even over the gods (vs. 9) and asks for  his gifts (10–11). The latter verse makes reference to Savitar’s distribution of beings  to their separate realms by asking for gifts from heaven, the waters, and the earth.  Savitar’s apportioning of benefits in these last verses return us to the theme of the  first verse (1cd), which announced his gifts to gods and to the mortal sacrificer.
1. God Savitar has stood up to impel again as always—the draft-horse  whose work this is— for now he distributes treasure to the gods, and he has also given a
share in well-being to him whose oblations are worth pursuing.
2. Because the god, erect and with broad hands, extends his arms for all  to obey,
even the waters are submissive to his commandment and even this wind  here rests in its circling.
3. Even the one who drives with swift (horses) will now unhitch. He has  brought to rest even the wanderer from his travelling.
He has held in check the greed even of the snake-stickers [?]. Following  the commandment of Savitar, “Release” [=Evening] has come.
4. Once again the weaver has wrapped up what was stretched out; in the  middle of his work the mindful (worker) has set down his craft.
Having pulled himself together, he [=Savitar] has stood up. He has
always kept the seasons separate. As Proper Thinking, god Savitar
has come.
5. The domestic blaze of fire is dispersed prominently throughout the  houses, one for each, for (each one’s) whole lifetime.
The mother has set out the best portion for her son, according to his  intention, which has been aroused by Savitar.
6. (Whatever) was dispersed seeking gain has been gathered together.  Desire for home has arisen in all who roam.
Each and every one has come, abandoning unfinished work, following  the commandment of the divine Savitar.
7. The watery (race) has been placed by you among the waters; the wild  beasts have been dispersed throughout the wastelands, as their share; the forests are for birds. No one violates these commandments of god  Savitar.
8. As far as (Savitar’s) benefit extends, Varuṇa (has come) to his watery  womb, restlessly darting about at (every) blink (of the eye).
Every mortal creature, (every) domestic beast has come to its pen.
Savitar has distributed the races according to their stations.
9. Whose commandment neither Indra nor Varuṇa, neither Mitra nor  Aryaman, nor Rudra violates,
nor do hostile powers—for well-being I call him here with homage: god  Savitar.
10. As (we) arouse Fortune, Insight, and Plenitude—Praise of Men, the  husband of the Wives, should help us—
might we be dear to god Savitar at the approach of a desirable thing  and at the gathering of riches.
11. That desirable benefit given by you has come to us from heaven, from  the waters, from earth,
(a benefit) that will become weal for your praisers and your friend, the  singer whose recitations extend widely, o Savitar.
458 II.39
II.39 (230) Asvins ́
Grtsamada ̥
8 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet of this hymn takes quite an original approach in matching every descrip tion of the Aśvins with a simile. He avoids the monotony that might otherwise  result both by the cleverness of his similes and by the occasional pun, in which  a descriptive word fits the object in the simile in one meaning but the target, the  Aśvins, in another. In verse 2, for example, jáneṣu “in the presence of the people” or  “peoples” refers to witnesses at a wedding in the simile, but in the target phrase they  are the tribes who perceive the united resolve of the Aśvins. Or again, in verse 7a,  within the simile the word śaktí probably refers to a “spear,” but in the target it is the  “power” of the Aśvins. In 7b, the rájāṃsi are all the spaces gathered between heaven  and earth in the simile, but regions given by the Aśvins, through which the poet and  his people can wander, in the target phrase. In verse 1, jarethe, here translated “you  awaken,” could equally well mean “you sing,” especially since the pressing stones  elsewhere are said to “sing.”
Another feature of the hymn is that the poet often describes the Aśvins as vari ously beneficial for one’s tanū́, one’s “body” or simply “oneself.” Normally we might  take the word as a reflexive, but the poet compares the Aśvins to various limbs and  makes direct reference to bodies, so we have kept the stronger reference to the body  in the translation.
In verse 7—the last verse of the poem proper since verse 8 is a signature verse  standing outside it—there is a final simile. This is the only one in which the object is  not in the dual and not compared to the Aśvins. Rather the object, an axe, is in the  singular and compared to “these songs” chanted for the Aśvins. This twist at the  end thus breaks the pattern of the hymn and marks its conclusion.
1. Like pressing stones, you two awaken to just this purpose: like vultures  toward a tree, (you awaken to go) toward what provides hidden
treasures (of honey);
like formulators, you recite hymns at the ritual distribution; like messengers,  you, serving your people, are to be called upon in many places.
2. Journeying early in the morning like heroes in chariots, like twin goats  you follow what you choose;
(Beautifying your bodies) like exchange-wives beautifying their bodies,  like a married couple (in the presence of the people) you find (a
common) resolve in the presence of the peoples.
3. Like the horns (of a butting animal), come in front toward us, darting  like hooves endowed with staying power.
Like cakravāka-geese (reuniting) at every dawn, o you ruddy ones,
journey this way like chariot-drivers, o able ones. 4. Like boats, take us across—like yokes, like wheel naves, like a wheel’s  cross-pieces, like its outer-pieces, (take) us (across).
Allowing no injury to our bodies like dogs, like amulets [?] protect us  from collapse.
5. Never growing old like winds, (forming a single) current like rivers,  (endowed) with sight like eyes, journey here this way.
Becoming the best blessing for the body like hands, like feet, lead us  toward the better thing.
6. Speaking honey for the mouth like lips, swell like breasts in order that  we live.
Guardians of our body like noses, like ears be good hearers for us.
7. Like hands (clasping a spear), clasping power for us, herd together spaces  for us as heaven and earth (herd together the airy spaces).
Sharpen these songs that are seeking you, Aśvins, like an axe with a  whetstone.
8. The Gr̥tsamadas have made these that strengthen you, Aśvins—the holy  formulations and the praise song.
Having delighted in them, drive nearby, you two superior men. – May we  speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
II.40 (231) Soma and Pūsaṇ
Grtsamada ̥
6 verses: triṣṭubh
Soma and Pūṣan are addressed jointly in just this one hymn, and it is difficult to see  what brings them together here. The last three verses of this six-verse hymn contrast  their functions; in the first three they act jointly, but these actions are not particu larly characteristic of either of the two.
1. O Soma and Pūṣan, you, the two begetters of riches, begetters of heaven,  begetters of earth,
born as the herdsmen of every living thing, did the gods make as the  navel of the immortal.
2. These two gods here, as they were being born, did (the gods) enjoy. These  two hid the unenjoyable shades of darkness.
For these two, for Soma and Pūṣan, Indra begot the cooked [=milk]  within the raw, within the ruddy ones [=cows].
3. O Soma and Pūṣan, the chariot [=sacrifice?] with seven wheels and five  reins that measures out the airy realm but does not speed everyone,
rolling in various directions, being yoked with mind, that do you
quicken, you bulls.
460 II.41
4. The one made his seat in heaven high above; the other on earth and in  the midspace.
Let those two unleash for us thriving of wealth that brings many rewards  and many cattle; let them unloose the navel for us.
5. The one begat all living things; the other goes along watching over  everything.
Soma and Pūṣan, give help to my insight. With you two would we win all  battles.
6. Let Pūṣan quicken insight, he who speeds everyone. Let Soma, the  master of wealth, establish wealth.
Let the goddess Aditi, who is without assault, help us. – May we speak  loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
II.41 (232) Various Gods
Grtsamada ̥
21 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 16–17, and brhat ̥ ī 18, arranged in trcas ̥
This is a composite hymn:  its composite nature is clear from its position in the  maṇḍala, for with twenty-one verses it is far longer than the preceding hymn, which  contains six. The hymn has been assembled from the three-verse units known as  tr̥cas. It is also of mixed meter, though gāyatrī prevails for most of the hymn (vss.  1–15 and 19–21).
Nonetheless, with the exception of the final three verses (19–21), the hymn forms  a ritual unity, treating in order the gods addressed in a structured recitation form ing part of the Morning Pressing, which is found also in later Vedic śrauta ritual,  known as the Praügaśastra. Other instantiations of this recitation in the Ṛgveda are  found in I.2–3 (see remarks there) and I.23. The order of divinities is Vāyu (1–2),  Indra-Vāyu (3), Mitra-Varuṇa (4–6), Aśvins (7–9), Indra (10–12), the All Gods (13– 15), Sarasvatī (16–18). The last three verses (19–21) are, according to Oldenberg  (1888: 197 and n. 4), an independent tr̥ca, relating to the carts holding the oblation  (havirdhāna carts), that was mistakenly incorporated into the hymn. Even if this last  tr̥ca was a late addition, it is worth noting that the first and last verses of the hymn  end with the word sómapītaye “for soma-drinking,” forming at least a nominal ring.
1. O Vāyu, the chariots in thousands that are yours—with them come here, you with your teams, for soma-drinking.
2. You with your teams, Vāyu, come here. This clear (soma) has been held  out to you.
You are wont to come to the house of the presser.
3. Of the clear (soma) today and of the one mixed with milk, with its  teams, o Indra and Vāyu—
drive here and drink it, men! 4. Here is the soma pressed for you, o Mitra and Varuṇa, who are strong  through truth.
Heed just my call here.
5. The two kings without deceit—in the highest, steadfast seat
with its thousand pillars they sit.
6. These two sovereign kings, whose potion is ghee, Ādityas, the lords of  the drop,
accompany him who does not go astray.
7. Nāsatyas, Aśvins, drive (your circuit) bringing cows, bringing horses, your circuit protective of men, o Rudras,
8. So that no distant mortal nor one close by will dare against (you), you  of bullish goods—
(and no) defaming cheat.
9. Aśvins, convey to us here wealth of tawny aspect
that finds a wide realm, o holy ones.
10. Indra, certainly, will drive away great fear as it looms,
for he is steadfast, boundless.
11. And if Indra will have mercy on us, no evil will reach us from behind. There will be good for us in front.
12. Indra will make (us) without fear from all the regions round about. He is the one who conquers rivals—the boundless one.
13. All you gods, come here; hear this call of mine.
Sit down here on this ritual grass.
14. The sharp and the honeyed invigorating (soma) are here for you among  the Śunahotras.
Drink this desirable (drink).
15. Having Indra as chief, the Maruts as troop, and the gifts of Pūṣan,  o gods,
all of you, hear my call.
16. O best mother, best river, best goddess, Sarasvatī—
we are like ones unlauded: make a laud for us, mother.
17. In you, the goddess, are all lifetimes fixed, o Sarasvatī.
Become exhilarated among the Śunahotras. Allot offspring to us,
goddess.
18. Enjoy these sacred formulations here, o Sarasvatī rich in
prize-winning mares,
the thoughts dear to the gods that the Gr̥tsamadas pour for you,
truthful one.
19. Let the two advance who are beneficial to the sacrifice. Just you two we  choose here
and Agni, the conveyor of the oblation.
462 II.42–43
20. Let Heaven and Earth today hold fast this effective, heaven-touching sacrifice of ours among the gods.
21. Let the gods, deserving the sacrifice, sit in the lap of you two who are  without deceit,
here today for the soma-drinking.
II.42 (233) Omen-Bird
Grtsamada ̥
3 verses: triṣṭubh
The last two brief hymns in Maṇḍala II have a popular character and call on the  “omen bird” (śakúni / śakúnti) to produce only auspicious cries. The second of the  two (II.43) playfully compares the bird to various priests in the ritual and is thus  reminiscent of the famous “Frog Hymn” (VII.103), which identifies the behavior of  frogs in the monsoon with that of priests.
1. Ever screeching, announcing its kind [=species], it directs its speech like  an oarsman his boat.
And if you will be of good omen, bird, let no evil eye at all find you.
2. Let not the falcon tear you up, nor the eagle. Let not a hero with arrows,  an archer find you.
Ever screeching in the direction of the fathers, you of good omen,
speaking auspiciously, speak here.
3. Screech down to the right of the houses, as one of good omen, speaking  auspiciously, o bird.
Let not a thief gain mastery of us, nor an utterer of evil. – May we speak  loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
II.43 (234) Omen-Bird
Grtsamada ̥
3 verses: jagatī 1, 3, atiśakvarī or aṣṭi 2
See the remarks on II.42.
1. Turning toward the right the bards sing welcome—the birds speaking at  their proper season, the birds of omen.
It speaks both speeches like a sāman-singer: it regulates both gāyatrī and  triṣṭubh meters. 2. Like the Udgātar, o omen-bird, you sing the sāman. Like the Son of the  Sacred Formulation, you recite at the pressings.
Like a bullish prize-winner [=stallion] when he has approached (mares)  with young, speak auspiciously to us in every way, omen-bird—
speak pleasantly to us in all ways, omen-bird.
3. When you are speaking, omen-bird, speak auspiciously; when you are  sitting silently, take note of our good thought.
When, as you fly up, you speak like a lute... – May we speak loftily at the  ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.III
