+++
title = "04"

+++
What I don’t quite understand is why we have the rather exotic form, a causative future reflexive middle in 4c, vāsayiṣyáse (lit. ‘you will cause yourself to be clothed’), in contrast to the straightforward -iṣ-aor. middle vasiṣṭa (‘he has clothed himself’) that corresponds to it in 3c. The need or desire to use the future must have triggered the creation of this baroque form. In this connection it is worth noting that √vas ‘clothe’ lacks a standard future in Vedic and, acdg. to Wh Roots, has only one occurrence in ClSk. of a future vatsyati -- so perhaps the causative allowed a transparent future to be built more easily. This form (repeated in the identical pāda in IX.66.13) is also the only medial form of the caus. to √vas ‘clothe’ in the RV. The question then arises - why is the future so desirable in this context that such morphological shenanigans had to be performed? The clue to the usage may lie in part in the sequencing of the verbs: both b and c are repeated in IX.66.13 (likewise as bc), and so the two clauses form a larger unit and must be evaluated together.

The b pāda contains a pres. indic., ā́po arṣanti síndhavaḥ “The waters, the rivers rush,” while c contains the causative future under discussion. On the one hand, the future may be signaling that the second action (clothing in milk) will follow the first (clothing in waters); this is of course the normal ritual order. But we should also remember that the future, esp.

the finite future, is relatively rare in the RV, and, curiously, it tends to have a more volitional nuance than the subjunctive, with which it competes. A good ex. of this is found in the famous and well-trodden Agni hymn I.1, where in vs. 6 yád … dāśúṣe … bhadraṃ kariṣyási should be rendered “what good thing you will do for the pious man,” indicating Agni’s deliberate choice to favor that man. Here I would suggest that Soma is bound and determined to clothe himself with milk at this point in the ritual proceedings; it is not just the next event on the menu.

