+++
title = "04"

+++
The adj. ṛjipyá- = Aves. ərəzifiia- (and other Iranian forms). I favor the old notion that it contains a Caland form of ‘straight’ (ṛjú-, etc.) + *pt-ya-, with a zero-gr.

of √pat ‘fly’. See EWA s.v., though Mayrhofer considers the etym. “unsicher.” (The lack of -iya- readings, indicating that the root-final laryngeal was lost without leaving a trace, might be problematic, but -iya- and -ya- adjectives tend to become confused.) Scar. (318) suggests rather a derivation from √pā3 ‘go’, but the existence of such a root is in question.

If we accept the transmitted índrāvataḥ, it would most likely be an acc. pl. and refers to the companions of Indra who will ritually prepare the soma for him to drink.

This interpr. is reflected in the publ. tr. However, the form has been much discussed and much emended (see Old’s detailed disc. and Ge’s n. 4a [“eine alte Crux”]). I understand the urge to emend -- which for me stems less from any problems construing the transmitted form within the frame of the passage than with the illformed simile, ná bhujyúm, that ends the pāda. This clearly refers to the Aśvins’ rescue of the hapless Bhujyu, whom they pull out of the sea and bring home (e.g., I.116.5 yád aśvinā ūháthur bhujyúm ástam). As the simile is constructed in our vs., the simile particle ná precedes the only word in the simile, though ordinarily ná follows the first word of the simile. This is in fact less of a problem than I used to think: Ge (n. 4a) attributes this position to what he considers a common transposition of X ná to ná X at the end of a verse line, and he seems to be correct that the similemarking ná is blocked from pāda-final position. See comm. ad VIII.76.1, X.21.1, 111..

If we were to read du. *índravantā (note the short second vowel, found in this stem when the penultimate syllable is heavy), the adj. could identify the Aśvins (they are so called in I.116.21, the hymn just cited with Bhujyu), and we would have a fully formed simile: “as the two companions of Indra [=Aśvins] (did) Bhujyu.” Note that I.116 is a Kakṣīvant hymn, and the poet of these Soma-stealing hymns (IV.26- 27) lays claim to the Kakṣīvant mantle in the very first vs. of this sequence (IV.26.1 aháṃ kakṣī́vām̐ṛ́ṣir asmi vípraḥ). The Bhujyu saga figures prominently in the Kakṣīvant cycle (I.116.3-5, 117.14, 119.4). As Old discusses, this emendation has been suggested previously, both as is and via *índra(/ā)vantā+u. Besides sense and the structure of the simile, another strong factor favoring the emendation is meter: the transmitted text produces a highly irregular break ( - - ⏑), but reading *índravantā would yield a standard break - ⏑ -. I therefore am now inclined to alter the publ. tr. to “… brought him from the lofty back (of heaven), just as *the two companions of Indra (the Aśvins) (brought) Bhujyu” - although I remain somewhat uncertain because I don’t know how the corruption would have happened. I do not think it was by way of the addition of u to the dual ending -vantā, since this would be an odd position for u. Perhaps it was clumsily altered to match bṛható in the next pāda; Sāy. at least analyses the form as an abl. modifying bṛhatáḥ … snóḥ. It is also possible that it was modeled after parāvátaḥ in the corresponding vs. in IV.26, namely 6, which also treats the bringing of the soma from heaven to earth, begins ṛjīpī́śyenáḥ matching our ṛjipyáḥ … śyenaḥ, and contains a form of √bhṛ (bharat, like our jabhāra).

The expression patatrí … parṇám “winged feather” strikes me as odd -- it is generally birds that are winged, not their feathers. I therefore propose to read

*patatrí(y)asya ‘of the winged one’ rather than patatrí asya. (This actually requires
no change to the Saṃhitā text.) Grammatically this is not difficult: -(i)ya- adjectives are made regularly to -a-stems, including -trya- to -tra-, like mitríya/mítrya- to mitrá-, which also has mitrín- beside it. There's a pátatra- 'wing', beside patatrín-, so there's no reason why not to have a patatríya-. Gen. patatríyasya then modifies véḥ. It is worth noting that a number of occurrences of patatrín- modify ví-.

