+++
title = "001"

+++
Indra


## 01
In the publ. tr. I take ca in d as conjoining the two clauses found in c and d (so apparently also Ge and explicitly Klein, DGRV I.103, 105). However, given that the ca is somewhat wrongly positioned and that it reminds us of other ukthā́ca passages, I now consider it possible that ukthā́ca is part of a truncated conjoined NP.

See disc. ad VIII.82.4.


## 02
This verse, couched in the acc. sg. masc., is entirely dependent on the índram of 1c.

In b Ge (followed by, e.g., Scar 163) takes gā́m as a “(Kampf)stier” terrorizing the communities. Although it is of course sometimes necessary to interpret forms of gó- as masculine, the feminine “cow” predominates (esp. in contrast to the bull of 1c and 2a), and the Kampfstier seems to me an invention of contextual desperation. I interpret it instead as the first member of a decoupled compound *go-ṣáh (like go-jít-), parallel to carṣani- in carṣani-ṣáh-. A similar decoupling is found in the next pāda, and playing with analytic versus synthetic expressions is found elsewhere in the RV (see, e.g., VII.19.3-4, V.44.6, 52.15). A plural gā́s might have been desirable, but number is of course neutralized in 1st compound members, and when decoupled, the default might be the singular.

In the compound ubhayaṃkarám ‘making both’, the 1st compound member ubhaya- ‘both’ is further specified by two syntactically independent words vidvéṣaṇam and saṃvánanā - a play reminiscent of the one proposed for the preceding pāda. For the latter word, Old considers but seems to reject the possibility that it represents saṃvánanam with contraction of -a- with following u- over the -m.

It sees best to accept the text we have and interpret saṃvánanā as neut. pl., contrasting with the singular of vidvéṣaṇam. Perhaps Indra favors unions over divisions, and it would also be a clever reversal for ‘division’, which is inherently plural, to be presented in the singular, while ‘union’, which is inherently singular, is in the plural. It would also be possible to take saṃvánanā as an instr. singular of accompaniment: “division by hate along with union by love.”


## 03
I follow Klein (I.58-59) in taking the ca as connecting áhā víśvā with idám used in a temporal sense. We might have preferred the order *áhā ca víśvā in the 2nd constituent. but compare I.130.2, 9 áhā víśveva, where the phrase also behaves as an indissoluble unit before the particle iva.


## 04
Following Old I take both vipaścítaḥ and vípaḥ as nom. pl., rather than taking the latter as a genitive sg. (with Ge et al.). The thought is that the poets and their products that belong to and emanate from the competing sides - that of the stranger and that of our peoples - keep crossing each other in their efforts to reach and attract Indra. For a thorough discussion of the possibilities of this hemistich see Old, who calls it a “Musterbeispiel für Vieldeutigkeit.” The intensive ví tartūryante brilliantly captures the constant roiling motion of these competitive elements.

The abrupt imperative úpa kramasva seems to merit a slangy tr.

nédiṣṭham appears to be functioning proleptically: bring it here so that it will be nearby.


## 05
This verse contains one of the two examples of śulká- in the RV. The word later becomes specialized in the meaning ‘brideprice’, but clearly does not mean that here.

On the famous root aor. opt. (trisyllabic) deyām, see Jamison 1999, with discussion of some of the abundant sec. lit.


## 06
Pāda c contains a cute and tricky construction: a conjoined nominative subject of a 2nd ps. dual verb, with one of the subjects gapped. That is, underlying

*tvám mātā́ca “you and a mother” is reduced to mātā́ca, with the other subject only
detectable in the verb chadayathaḥ and implied by the ca. Similar gapping with the 1st dual is found, e.g., in VII.88.3 ā́yád ruhā́va váruṇaś ca nā́vam “When we two, (I) and Varuṇa, mounted the boat…,” VIII.69.7 úd yád … gṛhám índraś ca gánvahi “when we two, (I) and Indra, go up to his house….” Both constructions are somewhat reminiscent of the vā́yav índraś ca construction, though that does not involve gapping.

The sentiment of the verse is likewise a bit tricky. In ab the poet dismisses father and brother as providing no benefit, in contrast to Indra, who is “good for goods” (cd), but Indra is equated (positively) with a mother, who would in this society of course have little or no control over goods and giving (as opposed to the father and brother).


## 07
On iyatha (rather than iyetha) see Kü (100), following Hoffmann 1976: 553 n. 3.

The verse contains several unexpressed presuppositions. The anxious questions in pāda a are explained by the statement in b: we ask where Indra is because we know his mind is in many places. With Ge I take álarṣi in c also as a question, again explained by d: they have sung to you, so are you coming? Pāda c contains a heavy, accentless vocative phrase: yudhma khajakṛt puraṃdara, the last two of whose members contain object-governing compounds.

The long (12-syl.) third pāda of bṛhatī nicely accommodates such iterations.


## 08
The first hemistich reprises 7cd, with a close variant of 7d recast in the imperative (8a), and one of the vocatives of 7c made into a predicated nominative (8b). This compound (puraṃdaráḥ) is in turn transformed into an independent clause (with lexical variation) in 8d: bhinát púraḥ. This process is reminiscent of the play with synthetic and analytic means of expression in vs. 2.

The fem. pl. relative yā́bhiḥ has no possible antecedent anywhere in this verse or nearby verses. The only possible fem. pl. referent is the ‘fortresses’ implicit in puraṃdaráḥ, but this makes no sense. With Old and Ge I supply ‘songs’, suggested by pl. gāyatrā́in 7d, although not directly connected thereto, because gāyatrá- is neuter.

Hoffmann (1967: 237-38) takes bhinát as a parenthetical verse filler, with the injunctive expressing a characteristic of Indra, parallel to vajrī́. Although he is attempting to account for the fact that bhinát is injunctive and yā́sat is subjunctive (and perhaps for the fact that sitting on the barhis and splitting fortresses can’t be done at the same time), this explanation seems over-complex. bhinát is a rhyme form to yā́sat, and the expected subjunctive bhinádat would be a good candidate for haplology under these circumstances.


## 10
Most interpret gāyatrá-vepas- with a trans./caus. sense of vepas- (Gr ‘zu Gesängen anregend’, Ge ‘die die Sänger beredt macht’, Scar [69] sim.), but neither independently or in compounds does vépas- have this sense; it simply means ‘trembling excitation, excitement’. Moreover the usage of gāyatrá- nearby in this hymn (7d, 8a) indicates that Indra (who is the referent of gāyatrá-vepasam, though in the guise of a cow) is the recipient of the songs, not their inciter. Presumably his pleasure in them will induce him to be a “good milker” by giving largesse to the singers, but at least in this passage he does not seem to be giving inspiration to the singers in the form of songs.

Trisyllabic án i yām in c is problematic, distinguished from anyá- ‘other’ both by accent and by trisyllabic reading. Nonetheless Ge (reluctantly, see his n.) tr. it as if it belonged to that stem: “eine andere [zweite]…” Old by contrast derives it from á-ni-ya- ‘nicht niedergehend, nicht (in Unglück) hineingeratend’. (I assume that he meant the final portion to be analyzed as the root √i ‘go’, with thematic vowel, but he doesn’t specify.) Both Gr and Scar (69) extend this semantically to ‘nicht versiegend’ (not drying up), which pushes the limit in my view. Its only other occurrence is in VIII.27.11, in a less diagnostic context but one that is at least compatible with a bovine referent. My own analysis of this word is admittedly quite shaky. I take it as a back formation of sorts from ánīka-‘forefront’ and meaning "belonging to the forefront, lead(-cow)'. Dawn is regularly called ánīka- and the word is sometimes used of her cows (e.g., I.124.11 yuṅkté gávām aruṇā́nām ánīkam “She yokes the forefront of the ruddy cows”). A couple of not very strong models can be adduced: samanīká- ‘encounter’ / samanyà- ‘appropriate to the encounter’, dṛ́śīka- ‘appearance’/ dṛ́ś i ya- ‘to be seen’. However, I am aware of the weakness of this analysis, and only produce it because other analyses are equally weak; Old’s is certainly thinkable, though not with the explicit extension to ‘not running dry’ made by others.


## 11
Various semi-understood myths are alluded to here, with minimal (or no) identification of the subjects of the three parallel injunctives (tudát, váhat, and tsárat).

I am inclined to take the subject of all three as Indra (who is clearly the subject of the middle one), but see both Ge and Old for discussion of other possibilities.


## 12
As indicated in the publ. intro., this verse poses serious problems of interpretation. It is also found in the AV in a marriage hymn (AVŚ XIV.2.47), used as an expiation when something is broken during the sacrifice, or anything on the bridal car needs mending, or when a student’s staff is broken (see Whitney AV ad loc.). The verse is extensively and illuminatingly discussed by Old, who summarizes the first two pādas as indicating that (a) Indra heals without using any adhesive material to bring together the damaged parts, and b) he does so before the weapon (unmentioned but presumed by Old to be the cause of the damage) drills through to the collarbones, or rather the rib cartilage. This scenario seems plausible, although it rests on several assumptions not explicit in the text, and it is essentially followed by Ge, Tichy (1995: 327, 338), and Scar. I would only mildly dispute taking the root noun abhiśríṣ- in pāda a as a concrete noun, a sort of band-aid (ṛté cid abhiśríṣaḥ “auch ohne Verband” Ge, Tichy, Scar; see also EWA II.670), a piece of equipment that seems uncharacteristic of Indra. This ablative seems to me parallel to the ablative in b, purā́... ātṛ́daḥ “before drilling through,” and this parallelism invites an abstract verbal interpretation of ṛté … abhiśríṣaḥ “without clasping/taking hold.” The point would be that Indra can heal from afar, without even touching the afflicted, and can intervene before the damage is done. The root √śreṣ is primarily an Atharvan word and is found elsewhere in the RV only in the horse sacrifice hymn, I.162.11.

Most similar to our passage is AVŚ III.9.2 aśreṣmā́ṇo adhārayan "Without claspers they held fast."


## 13
Both this verse and the next seem to rest on the unexpressed presupposition that on our own we have a pretty poor impression of ourselves, but if Indra will pay attention to us, we'll feel good about ourselves again. (Early lessons in self-esteem!) It may be that the curious verse 12 that immediately precedes sets the stage for these verses by depicting Indra as one who can set everything to rights. See esp. the last pāda of 12.

On duróṣa- see EWA s.v. This rare and unclear word, appearing 3x in the RV (IV.21.6 and IX.101.3 as well as here), must be compared with similarly unclear Aves. dūraoša-, a standing epithet of Haoma in the Hom Yašt and also once in the Gāthās (Y 32.14). In the RV it modifies Soma only in IX.101.3; here it qualifies “us” and in IV.21.6 the Hotar, most likely Agni. The Avestan word has been variously interpr. - but no more convincingly than its RVic counterpart. The tr. adopted here, ‘difficult to burn’, makes a connection with the Aves. forms more difficult because dus- ‘bad, ill’ should not appear with -r in sandhi (see disc. in EWA), though Humbach et al. (n. ad Y 32.14) upholds this analysis. This rendering is not altogether a good fit in any of the RVic passages; nonetheless, the alternatives seem worse. In tr.

it so, I’m assuming a Vedic-internal folk etymology from an opaque inherited word; the tr. therefore has no implications for the meaning of the Avestan word or for IIr.

etymology. Sāy’s interpr. of the word in two of the three passages falls squarely in this realm: VIII.1.13 oṣitum anyair dagdham aśaktyā(ḥ), IX.101.3 … durdahaṃ durvadhaṃ vā

## 14-17
Note the concentration of nominal forms of the root √stu ‘praise’ in these verses: stómam 14d, 15a, sadhástutim 16a, úpastutiḥ 16c, suṣṭutím 16d. The appearance of sómam in 17a signals a sort of ring-composition by variant, echoing the two forms of stómam in successive pādas of 14 and 15.


## 14
Although the primary sense of d, “take delight in your praise,” is surely that the poets will enjoy praising Indra, in the context of these two verses it presumably also implies that they will take delight because their praise will put them (back?) into Indra’s good graces and thereby improve their own view of themselves and their chances of making good.


## 15
Again the uncertainty about whether Indra will pay attention to their praise gives a slightly nervous air to the beginning of this verse. In the 2nd pāda the full form of ‘our’ (asmā́kam) is fronted; a tr. better reflecting this emphasis and in harmony with the poets’ anxieties about Indra’s attention would be “let it be our (soma-)drops that invigorate Indra…” Cf. 3cd.


## 16
The phraseology of this verse echoes some previous ones: its opening ā́tv àdyá is identical to 10a, and vāvā́tar- ‘favorite’ occurs in the RV only here and in 8b (in the same position).


## 17
Because dhāvata in b is unaccented, it cannot be directly parallel with sótā in pāda a, as, e.g., Ge takes it, because the hí of pāda a should then have domain over b and induce accent on the verb. I take the hí clause as indicating the grounds or prior action needed for the next clause, as so often when hí appears with the imperative (see Brereton 2012). It is also possible that sótā is an injunctive, though clear impv.

sotā in 19b disfavors this interpretation.

On the īm enam doubling see Jamison 2002.

In c I take gavyā́as part of the frame, not the simile, because of the position of iva. Contra Ge, who takes gavyā́vástrā as the simile: “[g]leichsam in Milchgewänder…” dhukṣan should be an injunctive to the sa-aorist found in ádhukṣat, etc., the only reliably attested sigmatic aorist to √duh. It would be appealing to interpret it as a subjunctive to an athematic s-aorist (as the pub tr. “will milk”and Ge’s “wollen … herausmelken” suggest), but it should then have full-grade *dhokṣan.

On vakṣáṇā- ‘belly’ as a pl. tantum, see comm. ad X.27.16.


## 19
The second hemistich contains a slight reversal of expectations: śakrá- is a standard epithet of Indra, who must be the subject of pīpayat (unless we read loc. śakre, not nom. śakraḥ with Pp.). But we do not expect Indra to swell the soma drink

- if anything the reverse. (In fact, Gr suggests that śakrá- modifies soma in just this
instance.) I think we must take Indra as the indirect agent of the swelling of soma: by his presence at the sacrifice he causes the sacrificers to press and mix the soma with water and milk, thus swelling it. See Old on this verse.


## 20
gáldā- appears in the RV only here and its meaning and etymology are entirely unclear. See EWA s.v. as well as detailed discussion by Old. In his study of the word (AcOr 13 [1925], see ref. in EWA), Lüders suggests that it means ‘Strom, Gerausche’; although most do not accept Lüders’ interpretation, it makes contextual sense here, and a passage adduced by Old from MŚS I.7.2.18 ā mā viśantu indava ā galdā dhamanīnām, where it is parallel to indu ‘drop’ and is the galdā(ḥ) of pipes (dhamanīnām) also supports an interpretation in that general sphere. Note that the fact that the word begins and ends with plain voiced stops makes it phonotactically unlikely to be an inherited word, at least in the form we have it, and the -l- marks it as “popular.” The notion that “begging” by inferiors of superiors is a social requirement and also a potential source of annoyance to the superior is found elsewhere in Vedic. See Jamison 1996 (Narten Fs.): 191-99.


## 21
The first three pādas of this verse are couched in the acc. sg. masc. I take them as continuing the last pāda of the previous verse, as objects of yāciṣat (to be supplied from 20d). So also Tichy (195). By contrast, Ge, flg. Old, supplies “(Preiset),” which is certainly possible but not generated from context. The root √yāc takes a double acc.: “beg s.o. for s.th.” Here I assume that mádam of a is what is begged for and ugrám of b qualifies the one begged, namely Indra, as an appositive to ī́śānam ‘master’ in 20d. The referent of tarutā́ram ‘overcomer, triumphant one’ in c is most likely Indra, but it is worth noting that máda- is the referent of tarutár- in VIII.46.8-9.

Why we are begging for máda- ‘exhilaration’, which is a state of Indra’s, not ours, is made clear by pāda d: when Indra is exhilarated, he gives to us.


## 22
śévāra- ‘treasury’ is a hapax, derived from haplologized *śéva-vāra- ‘having dear valuables’, a derivation found already in Gr (though with vara- as suggested 2nd member; for reff. see KEWA s.v. śévaḥ). Note its juxtaposition with vā́ryā ‘desirable things’ here.

I take pāda a as a nominal sentence, and supply rāsate ‘will grant’ in b, from c, given their parallel datives. Ge takes ab as a single sentence and supplies “verwahrt” (keeps), again possible but not generated from context.


## 25
I supply ‘yoked’ with ráthe hiraṇyáye, on the basis of the same phrase in 24b with yuktā́(ḥ), but it would be possible to follow Ge and take it as merely a locational phrase: “[d]ich … im goldenen Wagen.”


## 27
abhí in b, in conjunction with ásti in a, invites us to read the lexeme abhí √as ‘be dominant’ in b.

The second half of the verse returns to the anxieties about whether Indra will come to our sacrifice found earlier in the hymn by a series of insistent assertions that he will come. Alternatively these could be read as questions: “Will he come?” etc.


## 28
In c I read the injunctive ánu caraḥ twice, once as preterite and once with future meaning, contrary to Ge, who only takes it as a modal: “Du mögest … nachgehen” (followed by Klein II.121). The peculiar position of the ádha and the presence of dvitā́suggest this double interpretation to me, though admittedly pādafinal ádha dvitā́does occur elsewhere without this syntactic effect (e.g., I.132.3, VI.16.4).


## 31
Some lexical and syntactic problems here. First, though the most obvious noun to construe with ā́… ruham ‘I mounted’ is the acc. áśvān ‘horses’, in fact horses never get mounted in the RV, only chariots (including in the loc., VIII.22.9). I therefore construe ráthe with the verb here and take the horses loosely with śraddháyā.

The next question is the meaning of the adjective modifying the horses, vánanvataḥ. Ge connects it with vána- ‘wood’ and tr. “die ans Holz gespannten Rosse,” but, although there are undoubted occurrences of the stem vánanvant- that do mean ‘wooden’, I doubt that this is one of them. Among other things in the occurrence in nearby VIII.6.34 modifying matí- ‘thought’, ‘wooden’ is effectively excluded. I instead connect it with √van ‘win’, whose various participles cross each other so much that a blend of this sort would not be surprising. For further disc. see VII.81.3.

The second hemistich opens with the conjunction utá, which is a problem for any interpretation of this verse, since it is ordinarily a coordinating conjunction but the first hemistich is a subordinate clause (note the final accented verb ruhám conditioned by yád in a) and the second a main clause (unaccented verb ciketati).

Klein (I.451) is puzzled by the passage but suggests that if the chariot of the subordinate clause is a gift and the valuable goods is another prospective gift, “utá is thereby explained.” But his tr. of the verse clearly divides it into subordinate and main clauses. I simply leave it unexplained.

Finally, what is the value of ciketati? Old, followed by Klein, suggests supplying the patron as subject: “(then) will (the liberal one) take note (to give me) also (some) of the desirable wealth, which is the herd of Yadu” (tr. Klein I.451), taking the verb in the I/T meaning ‘perceives’. But this requires inventing a patron (although it is true that one appears in the next verse) and, more problematic, supplying a further verbal complement, not only “take note” but “to give me,” which seems to me to be taking more liberties with the text that we should. I therefore prefer to follow Ge in taking ciketati in its less common intransitive value, meaning ‘appears, stands out’ (see Ge’s notes for parallel passages, which interestingly are also dānastutis), with the relative clause of pāda d as its subject.


## 34
Although Ge takes śáśvatī as a personal name, and indeed the name of the poet’s wife, in this dānastuti context it’s far more likely that the woman in question is part of the gift, and śáśvatī here can be seen as a semantic development of the literal meaning of the stem śáśvant- ‘each and every, one after the other, ever and always’ can develop to ‘constant, reliable, always available/ready.’ The woman is “ever ready” for sex, at least in the poet’s imagination. For a slightly different development of *śaś(-vant-), in the comparative śáśīyas-, also applied to a woman, see V.61.6.
