+++
title = "002"

+++
Indra


## 02
This is an orphan verse, which cannot be construed grammatically with either 1 or 3, though a mere yáḥ would allow it to be the rel. clause to 3, as the initial tám of 3a suggests.


## 03
I take góbhiḥ twice, with both the frame and the simile. In the frame it is to be construed with tám … śrīṇántaḥ “preparing it with cows’ milk,” but in the simile yávaṃ ná “like barley” I take it as a passive variant of the common figure “as cows enjoy a grainfield (yávasa-),” e.g., V.53.8 ráṇan gā́vo ná yávase.

In c Ge supplies “lade ich,” but I read akarma from b also in this pāda, in a different idiom “make X to be at/in.” The usual idiom is ā́√kṛ ‘bring here’; unfortunately there is no trace of ā́.


## 05
tṛprá- only here in the RV, though it appears later and may also be related to tṛpála- (RV 2x), also used of soma (see EWA s.v.); ‘sharp’ is only a guess, though shared with Ge, a characterization of soma usually expressed by tīvrá- (as in 10b).

In c ápa √spṛ is found only here in the RV; if it belongs to √spṛ ‘win’, it might mean ‘win away’. Ge. tr. “abstossen” (repel). EWA (s.v. SPAR) suggests that it belongs to a synchronically separate root ‘losmachen, befreien, in Sicherheit bringen’, in which case ‘keep away’ would work.


## 06
A quite opaque verse. The underlying point, in the context of the preceding verse, is that though our own preparations of soma may not be of the best, Indra will still come to our sacrifice (vs. 5), even if other sacrificers aggressively pursue him with (better-tasting) soma mixed with cows’ milk. The repetition of two words for cow (góbhiḥ opening the verse and dhenúbhiḥ closing it) draws attention to the notion and suggests that the other sacrificers have mixed their soma with milk (the most desirable way to serve soma), while our soma was characterized in vs. 5 as unmixed, badly mixed, or “sharp” (?).

Pāda b adds its own difficulties to the verse’s interpretation, esp. the rare and disputed word vrā́-. In Jamison 2003 [HPS Fs.] I discuss this word and its contexts at length, suggesting that it means ‘(female) chooser’ (that is, the bride at a svayaṃvara “self-choice” wedding) and is a reduced form of *varā́-. This passage gave me pause, however, and in that article I toyed with the possibility that it contains a different word vrā́- or else that its meaning had become attenuated because it was moribund. I now think that it is the same word vrā́- and that it does here compare the other sacrificers to women chasing husbands, perhaps hinting at the unseemly nature of this pursuit. I take mṛgám … mṛgáyante as a phrasal verb with a cognate accusative, so meaning simply “go hunting.” Note that the accent on abhitsáranti requires it to be part of the yád clause, leaving the verse without a main clause and making its dependence on vs. 5 clear.


## 07
The three soma drinks might refer to the unsatisfactory types in vs. 5 or to the soma at the three pressings, but most likely to the three types mentioned in vs. 9 (the final verse of the tṛca of which this is the first). We might think of this as a species of “ritual repair”: the poor versions of soma in vs. 5 are adjusted slightly to produce the properly prepared ones in this tṛca.

The referent of své in c is unclear. (Note in passing that if read as distracted suvé [with HvN], its first syllable matches sutā́saḥ of b and sutapā́vnaḥ. However, with Old I prefer to distract the final word to sutapā́vanaḥ; cf. somapā́van-, whose oblique forms require distraction although they are written with -vn-.) If we assume that své refers to the subject, then it must be soma’s dwelling, whatever that is (the ritual ground?). The only other personage mentioned in the verse is Indra, but it is unlikely to be his dwelling — pace Ge, who construes sutapā́vnaḥ with the loc. phrase (“im eigenen Hause des Somatrinkers”). I take it as referring to the unexpressed agent of sutā́saḥ santu “let them be pressed,” namely us.


## 09
There are successive gappings here: we need to supply asi with b, and asi + ā́śīrtaḥ in c. I take all three clauses as 2nd person, though Ge makes b and c both 3rd person.


## 11
It is a little odd to command Indra to undertake the sacrificial preparations that are really our job. Presumably once again (see VIII.1.19) Indra is conceived of as the indirect agent: by coming to our sacrifice he sets our preparations in motion, and our impetus for this preparation is the knowledge that he has riches to distribute.


## 12
A peculiar ending to a celebration of soma, presumably describing some of the potential side-effects of (over-)indulgence in soma.

With Ge (implicitly) I take ū́dhar as belonging not to ‘udder’, but to a homonymous stem ‘cold’, with Avestan cognate (OA, YA aodar-). See EWA s.v. ū́dhan-. The same ‘cold’ sense is found also in V.34.3 and as a pun in X.61.9. But compare Old, who finds a complex way to rescue ‘udder’, though not one sufficently plausible to me, anyway. See also disc. ad IX.107.20.


## 13
Given the parallelism with ab, we might expect to supply śrutáḥ in c.

However, prá makes some difficulties: no práśruta- is attested. However, prá śṛnve,

-ire has the meaning ‘is/are far-famed’.


## 14
As Ge (n.) points out, this is a subtle jab at Indra. If the god doesn’t provide cows (and other wealth) to his praiser, then no one will pay attention to either the praiser or, by implication, the praise he produces for the god.


## 15
Note the etymological and phonological figure śíkṣā śacīvaḥ śácībhiḥ. The desire to have a pāda consisting of only these related words may account for the absence of naḥ: śíkṣa- regularly takes a dative. Cf. the fuller expression in I.62.12 śíkṣā śacīvas táva naḥ śácībhiḥ. Of course naḥ can be easily supplied here from pāda a.


## 16
This verse is a minor but neat example of syntactic modulation. The first pāda is in the 1st plural, the third in the 3rd plural, while the middle one is ambiguous: the plurals here can refer to vayám ‘we’ in pāda a or (coreferential with káṇvāḥ in c) serve as subject of the 3rd plural jarante. So pāda b, by being without inherent reference to grammatical person, allows "modulation" from 1st to 3rd person. I have taken pāda a as a nominal sentence, and b as having third person ref. and belonging with pāda c. But in fact the whole verse could be one sentence (as the tvā in pāda a suggests, since it should be the obj./goal of jarante in Wackernagel's Law position) with a harsh clash between vayám and jarante (which, notice, are the absolute first and last words of the verse, so we can go along as an audience on the happy assumption that the whole verse is in the 1st plural until the rude awakening of jarante).

The bahuvrīhi tadídartha- is a nice example of phrasal univerbation, from tád íd ártham “just this (is the) aim.”


## 17
In b I follow a suggestion of Re’s (EVP 13.98, ad IV.6.4) in interpreting the hapax náviṣṭau as ná *viṣṭaú, with the only emendation the accenting of the second word. Cf. I.92.3 árcanti nā́rīr apáso ná viṣṭíbhiḥ “They chant like women busy with their labors.” Old explains it rather as a haplology of *návaviṣṭi- ‘new labor’ (also Re’s 1st suggestion), and he is followed by Ge “bei der Neuheit des Dichterwerkes,” taking apásaḥ as a gen. sg. But by its accent apásaḥ should mean ‘worker’, not ‘work’. Kü (p. 297) also follows Old, but, taking account of the accent, tr. “beim neuen Wirken des Künstlers.” In the publ. tr. “at their labor” should be preceded by an asterisk.


## 18
pramā́da- in c is a hapax, but clearly derived from √mad. I do not understand where Ge gets “… gehen sie auf Reisen.” Old, commenting on Ge’s same gloss in his Gloss., says “… glaube ich nicht.”


## 19
Hoffmann (1967: 87) notes of mā́hṛṇīthāḥ that the prohibitive contains a present injunctive, and he interprets it, plausibly, as “lass ab von deinen Groll…” rather than simply “don’t be angry.” However, recent work by IH (presented at AOS March 2017) has argued strenuously, and in my view successfully, against Hoffmann’s claim that mā́clauses with pres. injunc. are inhibitive, not prohibitive, showing that pres. injunc. verb are found in mā́clauses only when the default (root) aor. injunc. is not available. Note that √hṛ ‘be angry’ only makes pres. forms. The context then must determine whether the form is inhibitive or preventive -- in particular, the simile “like a great man with a young wife,” the interpretation of which will be severely affected by interference from our contemporary assumptions about such a situation and by our lack of knowledge about the corresponding assumptions in ancient India. If we assume on the basis of popular Western depictions that young wives have many ways of annoying their old husbands (profligate spending, flirting with younger men, etc.), but also have many wiles to win back their husbands’ favor, then an inhibitive would work.


## 20
The opening mó ṣú matches ó ṣú of 19a.

On first glance this verse appears to contain a mā́prohibitive with a subjunctive karat (so tr. Ge), which would be grammatically quite anomalous.

Hoffmann (1967: 92) claims that in the Sprachgefühl karat is an injunctive, but this seems extremely unlikely to me because the root aor. of √kr̥is one of the best attested of such formations, and though the stem kára- is well established, there is no evidence that it is not interpreted as a subjunctive. There's no augmented ákara- for example, and no thematic part. *kárant- or *káramāṇa-. I therefore take pāda a as an independent clause, with gapped prohibitive copula (“don’t be”) with mā́. Since the root √as doesn't form injunctives (or an aorist), there is in fact no way to make a prohibitive copular sentence in any other way.

As noted in the intro., I think this may be a reference to the instituting of the Third Pressing, which happens in the evening. The point may be that sacrificers who fail to have a Third Pressing risk losing the presence of a disgruntled Indra to those who do.

I do not entirely understand the social relations depicted in c. Ordinarily, in patrilocal marriage the son-in-law would be at a distance anyway; that is, the wife would be living with her husband’s family. Is this a reference to an in-comer, a husband who lives with his wife’s family because he's too poor and who then makes it worse by distancing himself — or to the return of a bride because the husband was too feckless? Or is this similar to the situation in the Gambler’s Lament (X.34), where the husband loses his wife because of his gambling or other economically ruinous activities? In d “down on his luck” translates aśrīrá-, which phonologically resembles the characteristic offering of the Third Pressing, the ā́śir- ‘milk-mixture’. It thus indirectly hints at the Third Pressing theme.


## 21
The referent of “the three” in c is not clear; perhaps again the three pressings.


## 23
What to supply with jyéṣṭhena ‘most superior’ is not clear. Ge “Schoppen”; on the basis of nearby VIII.4.4 jyéṣṭham … sáhaḥ I supply ‘might’.


## 28
nā́yám is a famous crux. See esp. Thieme (1949) and more recently Jamison 2013 (Fs. Hock), both with discussion of previous literature. After my recent reconsideration of the evidence I would now eliminate “to the landing site,” since I now think the underlying expression is *nā́ayám “(just) this man here,” which lost its transparency and came to mean “on one’s own” and could be used for any person, not just the 3rd.

## 29-30
Verse 29 consists of a relative clause (beginning stútaś ca yā́ḥ) conjoined with the relative clause of 30 (beginning with parallel gíraś ca yā́ḥ), but the rest of verse 30 causes some syntactic problems. The main clause appears to consist of the end of 30b: túbhyaṃ tā́ni, but pāda c contains an accented verb dadhiré, which appears to continue the interrupted relative clause beginning in pāda a. The result is what looks like an embedded main clause, a syntactic anomaly. I am not happy with this syntactic arrangement, but if we read dadhiré, there seems no way to escape it. As Ge points out in his n., the Indian Pp. and Max Müller’s 1877 edition read the verb without accent, but as Ge says, “dadhiré ist doch wohl die richtige Lesung.”


## 31
Following EWA (s.v.) I take tuvikūrmí- to √cari , not √kṛ as Gr, Ge do.

See disc. ad III.30.3.


## 33
Ge takes Indra as the referent of c with maghónaḥ acc. pl. referring to human benefactors (“Wenn er berauscht ist, so tut er es den freigebigen Herren gleich”). However, mandín- usually describes soma (although it does modify Indra in I.9.2, 101.1, and X.96.6), and the only occurrence of mándiṣṭha- in the RV is found in this hymn and also modifies soma: VIII.2.9 mándiṣṭhaḥ śū́rasya "most invigorating for the champion," with a dependent genitive, which is how I take maghónaḥ here. I therefore, somewhat reluctantly take the subject to be soma, who is accompanying (ánu) Indra, who already contains the multitudes listed in pāda a.

However, the appearance of pl. maghónām in the next verse (34c), where it refers to humans who receive Indra’s largesse, gives me pause, and it is quite possible that Ge’s interpretation is correct.


## 36
In the first pāda the grammatically unparallel vípro árvadbhiḥ express the two complementary areas in which Indra is the winner. So also Ge; see his extensive note.


## 37
On apparent impv. yájadhva see Old, though I don’t think the last word has been said about this form.


## 38
The formation of the hapax purutmā́nam is not entirely clear. With Gr, AIG III.267 (and implicitly Ge), it presumably contains the truncated (ā)tmán- stem in one way or another, but I am dubious about the meaning generally assigned to it (Gr ‘lebenreich’, Ge ‘langlebig’), since tmán- almost always means ‘self’ not ‘life, lifebreath’, and puru- ‘much, many’ doesn’t seem the most likely way to characterize length of life anyway. I think it possible that it was influenced by expressions like purú tmánā (I.142.10) ‘abundant in itself’, though it is not a straight univerbation. It is also worth noting the long vowel in -tmā́nam, given that the only acc. sg. to tmánis short-vowel tmánam (I.63.8), though I don’t know what to make of this.


## 39
Ge’s tr. with added “(fand)” (see also his n. and Hoffmann 1967:137) implies that this is a reference to the beginning of the Vala myth, in which the cows are stolen and leave no traces, so that Indra must find them before he gives them away. This interpretation makes sense of the otherwise opaque ṛté cid … padébhyaḥ, but it seems to require a lot of added machinery. I do not have an alternative interpretation, however.


## 40
This verse as it stands poses a number of problems, but some of them disappear if, following Ge’s earlier Komm., adopted also by Old, and reflected in Ge’s tr., the sequence yánn áyaḥ (per Pp.) is read yán náyaḥ, which requires no change in the Saṃhitā text. This produces a subordinating conjunction (yád out of sandhi), which in turn accounts for the accented verb (náyaḥ) and allows the whole verse to be read as a single dependent clause (in my interpretation: Ge supplies the verb “… hast du … erhört” for pādas ab, while Old suggests rather “du hast … gesegnet”). Although my interpretation has the yád uncomfortably late in its clause, after two heavy constituents (violating Hale’s old observation that only one constituent can precede the yá-form), it avoids supplying a verb out of nowhere for the first part of the verse, and I take the acc. phrase of ab as an almost extrasentential topicalized NP, so positioned to get the name and attributes of the poet up front.

With Old and Ge I take abhí with náyaḥ, but unlike them don’t supply ‘heaven’ as the goal (on the basis of AV XII.3.16, 17). In the RV the lexeme abhí √nī can take as goal vásu ‘goods’ (VI.53.2) or vásyaḥ ‘better state’ (VI.61.14, I.31.18), and since this verse inaugurates the dānastuti, goods would be at issue.

As noted in the intro., there are various tales or tale fragments in Vedic prose (see esp. JB III.233-35. also ŚB III.3.4.18) linking Indra as ram and Medhātithi, but to my mind they are later and not particularly successful rationalizations of this obscure verse.


## 41
As noted in the intro., one unfortunate consequence of taking all of vs. 40 as a single subordinate clause is that the 2nd ps. referent in the subordinate clause of 40 is Indra, while in the main clause here it is Vibhindu, the poet’s patron. As I suggested in the intro., this may be a ploy to superimpose Indra’s divine generosity on the human patron by implicitly identifying them. Vs. 21 in the next hymn (VIII.3), also in the dānastuti, supports this hypothesis, since there Indra and the Maruts and the human patron Pakasthāma Kaurayāṇa serve as undifferentiated subjects of the verb ‘gave’ (dúḥ).


## 42
Although Ge declines to tr. mākī́, the interpretation of this word as a -kasuffixed form of the 1st ps. possessive pronoun, accepted by Old (see also Scar 519), not only fits the context but would exemplify the tendency to use -ka-suffixed forms in slangy, low-register contexts such as dānastutis. For disc. see Jamison 2009, also 2008.
