+++
title = "003"

+++
Indra


## 02
I am not sure why the “future imperative” avatāt is used in pāda c. Its use implies that Indra should, first, not lay us low and, then, actually help us. This is possible but not compellingly required by the sense.


## 04
In pāda a note sahás(ram) … sáhas(kṛtaḥ).

In c “(When) realized” may push the English beyond the Sanskrit satyáḥ só, but the word order may weakly support this rendering. As often with satyá-, the meaning is ‘real, really present’.


## 06
Pāda-final śávaḥ here is often considered to stand for instr. śávasā (see Old for previous lit., Ge’s tr. and n., and most recently Hale [Fs. Melchert], who takes it as an archaic zero-grade s-stem instr., with loss of laryngeal in pause; see comm. ad VIII.39.2). However, as Old points out, an accusative reading is perfectly possible.

The presence of the same pāda-final nom.-acc. form nearby (4c, 8a, 10b) supports an accusative interpretation here.


## 07
The pūrvá- in pūrvápītaye ushers in a set of verses with pūrva- forms (7d, 8d, 9b, 11d).

## 09-10
Although Ge takes the second hemistich as dependent on the first, because of the parallel yénā clause opening vs. 10, I prefer to take 9cd and 10a as dependent on 10b, with the yénā’s of 9c, 9d, and 10a all referring to śávaḥ in 10b.

But this sequence can also be seen as a type of modulation: the hearer is invited to assume that the yénā’s of 9c and 9d have 9b bráhma as their antecedent, but the opening of the next verse can cause reanalysis and a refocusing on śávaḥ in 10b.

In 9c a verb needs to be supplied. Although the sentiment seems to be essentially identical to 9d (“you helped X”), the root √av ‘help’ does not take a dative recipient. I therefore supply a form of √as or √bhū with the meaning “be there for…” Ge rather “zu Hilfe kamst.”


## 10
For vṛ́ṣṇi and the phrase vṛ́ṣṇi te śávaḥ see disc. ad VIII.96.19.

Thieme (KZ 92: 46) rejects the usual interpr. of kṣonī́ḥ as nom. sg., on the grounds that the nom. sg. is attested as kṣoṇī́in I.180.5 and that kṣoṇī́ḥ is otherwise nom. or acc. pl. However, this requires him to interpr. it as an acc. pl. of Inhalts or result with a passive verb: “dem (d.h.: wenn ihm) Gebrüll (aufrüttelndes Kampfgechrei) hinterhergeschreien worden ist.” The syntactic complications of this interpr. seem to me to outweigh the drawbacks of assuming that the poorly attested stem kṣoṇī́- could generate a nom. sg. in -ī́s, esp. since its suffixal accent matches that of vṛkī́-type nouns.


## 11
Rather than construing vā́jāya directly with śagdhí, as Ge does (“Tu uns, was du kannst zum Siegerpreis…”), I interpret it as the object of the participle síṣāsate, attracted into the dative in the fashion of datival phrases like vṛtrā́ya hántave (e.g., III.37.5-6). For the VP see VIII.103.11 vā́jaṃ síṣāsataḥ. However, 12d śagdhí stómāya may support Ge’s interpretation.


## 12
Ge’s interpretation of ab (“Tu uns, was du kannst, für diesen, der [den Preis] der Dichtung gewinnen möchte, da du ja dem Paura beigestanden hast”) is syntactically quite troublesome, in that it not only involves an embedded relative (rare to non-existent in the RV) yád … ā́vitha, but one that splits up a close constituent asyá ... síṣāsataḥ. Old, by contrast, takes dhíyaḥ as object of ā́vitha parallel to paurám and cites abundant parallels for √av + dhíyam, -aḥ. This allows the yád clause to be normally positioned, although I still find the position of the asyá unusual. I also supply a presential form of √av to govern dhíyaḥ, since the aid to the striver’s insights seems to be a matter of current concern.

Unlike Ge I do not take svàrṇaram as a fourth client of Indra’s, but as an epithet of the final name in a classic Behagel’s Law construction. In the next hymn (VIII.4.2) mentioning Ruśama, Śyāvaka, and Kr̥pa there is no Svarṇara. I also take it as an epithet in VIII.12.2, but as a PN in VIII.6.39.


## 13
It is generally, and reasonably, accepted (e.g., Gr, Old, EWA s.v. atasī́-) that the hapax atasī́nām belongs with atasā́yya-, attested twice, so its meaning depends on our interpretation of the latter - generally held to mean ‘to be called/praised’. However, I take atasā́yya as a negated gerundive to √taṃs ‘shake’ (see I.63.6), and so atasī́- should mean ‘unshakeable, unshaking, firm’. In context here, I assume that it refers to the stable, fixed elements of the cosmic world and the standard subjects of poetry. This may implicitly contrast with návyaḥ ‘anew’, sketching the usual tension between the poet’s desire to produce a new song and the fact that his topics are preordained.

This category of possible atasī́poetic topics is then exemplified by the sun in pāda d — a subject that, despite its greatness, does not match the greatness of Indra.

This interpretation of cd follows Old; Ge switches the objects of participle and main verb, taking svàr with ānaśuḥ and mahimā́nam with gṛṇántaḥ: “Denn noch nicht haben die, welchen seine indrische Grösse besingen, die Sonne erreicht.” Although word order is hardly a reliable guide to RVic interpretation, the adjacency of pādainitial svàr gṛṇántaḥ weakly favors the Old interpretation, which also makes more sense.


## 17
Ge takes parāvátaḥ in b with the second hemistich (“aus der Ferne komme…”), but the idiom √yuj + ablative (“yoke out of X,” that is, hitch up your horses and come from…) is found elsewhere; cf. esp. I.48.7 eṣā́yukta parāvátaḥ, sū́ryasyodáyanād ádhi “This one has hitched herself up from out of the distance, from (the place of) the rising of the sun” (also I.115.4, V.87.4, VII.60.3, 75.4, X.94.12, etc.).

On hí with the imperative, marking that clause as the causal basis for the following imperative clause, see Brereton 2012.


## 18
Most assign vāvaśúḥ to √vaś ‘desire’ (e.g., Ge “diese deine Dichter … verlangen…”; so also Gr, Lub), but I take it to √vāś ‘bellow’. Kü (477-80) allows both possibilities, though he argues that the original affiliation of the pf. stem vāvaśwas to √vāś, though it may have become partially co-opted by √vaś by semantic overlap. I have opted for √vāś because this hymn contains a number of instances of noise-making by poets or their substitutes: 3d abhí … anūṣata, 7c sám asvaran, 16d asvaran, in addition to the usual verbs of singing and praising. Notice also the very parallel 5cd ... havāmahe ... dhánasya sātáye, with a verb of calling and X sātáye.

## 19-20
The preverb níḥ is the theme of this pragātha, with seven occurrences, six pāda-initial, in eight pādas, with a variety of different verbs.


## 21
On the mixture of divine and human subjects, see comm. on VIII.2.40-41.


## 23
The son of Tugra is Bhujyu, a client of the Aśvins, whom they rescue with birds or winged steeds - a tale alluded to especially in the Kakṣīvant hymns (e.g., I.116.3-5, 117.14).
