+++
title = "004"

+++
Indra


## 03
apā́is one of the few singular forms of the áp- ‘water’ stem.

On íriṇa- as ‘salt-pocket’, see EWA s.v., citing esp. Falk, Bruderschaft.

VIII contains two other occurrences of āpitvá-, both clearly derived from āpí- ‘friend’ and meaning ‘friendship’ (VIII.20.22, 21.13), but the presence of the temporal designation prapitvá- here suggests a similar temporal analysis, ā-pitvá-. It is surely a pun, as indicated in the publ. tr.


## 04
Pāda c refers to Indra’s stealing of his father Tvaṣṭar’s soma right after birth — the drinking of which made him immediately strong. See III.48.4, etc.


## 05
The image of warriors holding themselves down “like trees” belongs more to the Maruts’ rhetorical realm, where all natural phenomena bend before their storm (see nearby VIII.7.34). Vs. 10c below contains another image fully intelligible only in a Marut context.


## 06
The subject shifts without overt signaling from Indra to the man who ritually serves Indra. Indra himself features in the verse as the yavīyudh- ‘everbattling’ one, who is worth a thousand others.

prāvargá- is found in the RV only here, but cannot be separated from suprāvargám (which I tr. ‘well in advance’) in VIII.22.18 suprāvargáṃ suvī́ryam (cf.

our prāvargám … suvī́rye). There is also dāsá-pravarga- in I.92.8, which I tr. ‘with alien-slaves as its forelock’. The prā- … kṛṇute also reminds us of vs. 5a prá cakre ‘put forward’. It is difficult to arrive at a consensus translation for these forms; although all share the sense that the item in question is in front, it is difficult to assess the contribution of the -vargá- element (much less what connection it might or might not have with the Pravargya ritual). My “with a good twist” was an attempt to render the root value of √vṛj (cf. suvṛktí-), but I am not now sure that it was a happy choice.


## 07
The logical connection between pādas c and d can be variously interpreted (see Ge n.). In my view pāda c expresses the desire that Indra should in short order perform a great deed that we can witness, rather than the usual bland notion that we wish to celebrate his previous great deeds. Since Indra regularly aids Turvaśa and Yadu (e.g., I.54.6), we may desire to see them (pāda d) because under those circumstances we are likely to encounter Indra doing such deeds.


## 08
Pāda a contains one of the two occurrences of sphigī́- ‘hip’ in the RV (and in fact anywhere). The other is in III.32.11 in a thematically similar passage, yád anyáyā sphigyā̀kṣā́m ávasthāḥ “… when you wore the earth on the other hip.” (See comm. there.) It is difficult not to assume that the same situation is being depicted in this passage, and I therefore supply ‘earth’ here as well, esp. since a tr. without an object makes little sense (e.g., Ge’s “Der Bulle deckte seine linke Seite,” without further interpretation). In III.32.11 the image serves to give a comparison by which to measure Indra’s vast size (the preceding pāda says “Heaven did not come close to your greatness then”). Despite the truncated expression in our passage, I think the same comparative impulse applies: Indra is so big that the whole earth fits on one of his hips.

Pāda b is then thematically contrastive, though in a very indirect way. Even though he is so vast and, by implication, too important to concern himself with the likes of us, he gives freely and without feeling peevish towards the petty recipients of his largesse. This sets the stage for our invitation to him in cd, describing the soma mixed with milk (or rather, the reverse in this case: the milk mixed with the honey[ed soma]) and then urging him to come.


## 09
This verse returns to the theme of vs. 6, the prosperity of a man who has Indra on his side. The only difficult phrase is śvātrabhā́jā váyasā, which Ge takes as referring to a particular age in the life of a man: “Er steht jederzeit in dem Alter, in dem man die Vollkraft besitzt.” Although váyas- can refer to a vigorous time of life, it generally means simply ‘vigor’ itself, and I also find it hard to make sacate + INSTR mean “steht … in.” I think that it simply refers to the waxing prosperity and strength of the man in question.


## 10
As noted in the intro., this verse forms a ring with vss. 3-4: 3a/10a the buffalo at the waterhole, 4d/10d Indra’s assumption of power (… dadhiṣe sáhaḥ).

Pāda c with niméghamānaḥ ‘pissing down’ fits a Marut context better than an Indraic one, and the other occurrence of this form (II.34.13) does in fact refer to the Maruts and the rain they produce. See 5d above for another motif borrowed from a Marut context. In this passage the product is presumably metaphorically the gifts that Indra showers down.


## 12
The last pāda echoes 8d, with the same three abrupt imperatives in the same order: éhi (prá) dravā píba, but in 12d the initial tásya needs to be construed with the final imperative píba. On this as a quasi-serial-verb construction, see Yates 2014 [UCLA conf. vol.]. On the sandhi of tásya + éhi as tásyéhi (not *tásyaíhi), see Old ad loc. and ad I.9.1.


## 13
On the basis of bradhnásya viṣṭápam (VIII.69.7, IX.113.10) I supply viṣṭápam here as well. In these contexts bradhná- ‘coppery’ refers to soma (see Old).

For further disc. of the phrase see comm. ad VIII.69.7.


## 14
apásu is supposed to be the only RVic ex. of a loc. pl. to an s-stem in -asu < *as-su, corresp. to Aves. -ahu.


## 16
Pāda d is, one way or another, an improper relative, in that there is no referent for the yám in the main clause. Ge’s ‘wenn’ suggests that he takes yám as standing for yád. I am assuming the ellipsis of a ca, for a “X and which Y” construction.


## 17
See the intro. for speculation about the social situation here. Pajra Sāman produces his own dānastuti in VIII.6.47, and our poet seems to be both denying any interest in Pajra’s windfall and declaring Pajra’s duty to compose his own thanks for it. See also Old’s extensive note on this passage.

The sequence vémi … ṛñjáse is reminiscent of VI.15.1 b … ṛñjase … / c véti.

In that passage because of the lack of accent ṛñjase must be a -se 1st sg. (and therefore with a diff. subject from véti).On ṛñjase see comm. ad IV.8.1. In the passage here the publ. tr. follows Gr’s interpr. of the form as an s-stem dat. inf. (so also, e.g., Ge). However it is possible that it is also a -se 1st sg., but accented because it opens a new clause: “I pursue you, Pūṣan; I aim (towards you).” On the other hand, and probably decisively, the parallel pāda b vémi stótave also has a dat. inf. as complement of vémi and so the infinitive reading should stand.


## 18
Here the singer seems to be implicitly separating his own (newly acquired) cows from the alien ones of Pajra mentioned in 17 (nítyaṃ réknaḥ “our own legacy” 18b, áraṇaṃ hí tád “for that is alien” 17c) and driving them to a different pasture.

For the driving see vs. 20.


## 19
Here the desire expressed in 7d, to see Turvaśa (and Yadu), is realized in imagination: the largesse of the king is so extensive that the poet feels he himself is in company with the favored Turvaśa (and family). This returns us to the beginning of the hymn (vss. 1-2), where Indra comes to various sacrificers, including Turvaśa (1d).


## 20
There is no consensus on the meaning or etymology of the hapax nírmajām; see EWA s.v. nírmaj-, with various reff. to KEWA; also Old ad loc. Scar does not comment on it, though at least by shape (though not by accent) it appears to be a root noun (presumed gen. pl. to a stem nírmaj-, though EWA allows possibility of -majā, and AiG II.1.220 lists it as nírmajā without further comment). The tr.

‘flawless’ is adopted from Old. Though it may not be possible to determine what the word means or where it comes from, as often it is possible to suggest a motive for its presence in the passage: the phonological figure (nír-)majāmaje, nír.


## 21
The meaning of this verse is opaque to me. Perhaps the trees (and the rest of the landscape features) are enhanced by the presence of an abundance of cattle, indicating that the owner (or controller) of the land is prosperous. Kü (p. 413) tr.

essentially as I do, but (wisely) makes no comment.
