+++
title = "005"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
áśiśvitat is an isolated verbal form; the stem is otherwise not attested. Gr identifies it as the “Aor. des Caus.,” and formally this is possible (type atitrasat ‘made terrified’ √tras). However, there is no trans./caus *śvetáyati to which it could have been generated, and there is no possible direct object in this passage to justify a trans./caus. reading. It is more likely a nonce intrans. redupl. aor. (type apaptat ‘flew’ √pat) created to substitute for the s-aor. aśvait (or the root aor. *aśvet on which aśvait is built, acdg. to Narten), which would not fit the expected iambic cadence of dimeter verse. The i root vocalism of √śvit would account for the redupl. vowel, which would by chance coincide with the redupl. vowel expected for a causative aorist: short i before the initial cluster.


## 02
Ge and Re take nṛvát as standing for nṛvátā, on the basis of VI.62.10 nṛvátā ráthena, but there seems no reason to do so, since the adverbial neut. nṛvát is wellattested.


## 03
The Pp. analyses the sequence yáthohiṣe as yáthā ohiṣe, which would be, to say the least, unusual sandhi (though see tásyéhi in VIII.3.12). Nonetheless, the context favors a connection with the root √ūh ‘solemnly proclaim, etc.’ with pres.

óha- (in my opinion); cf. I.30.4 vácas tád ... ohase “I solemnly proclaim this speech,” with a 1st sg. -se form, as apparently also here. For this passage I assume a form ūhiṣe, built to the presential perf. ūhé. This is also Kü’s solution (488-89), though he assigns the form to √vāh ‘anerkennen’, which, acdg. to him, is at least synchronically separate from √oh. Re and Lub. assign the form instead to √vah ‘convey’. For further disc. cf. Old and Ge (n. 3c).

## 03-04
Both these vss., though not belonging to the same tṛca, most likely contain 1st sg. -se forms.


## 04
Note the three compounds beginning with puru- in ab.

I emend the accented nom. káṇvāsaḥ to accentless *kaṇvāsaḥ, thus avoiding the awk. “I shall praise (and also) the Kāṇvas (shall praise)” (so Re), or the necessity of taking stuṣé as an infinitive. Nearby VIII.7.32 has #káṇvāsaḥ ... /#stuṣé ..., with a pāda-init. accented voc. káṇvāsaḥ (cf. also VIII.2.38, and with nom. VIII.4.2, VIII.6.31), and the accent here may have been acquired redactionally on these models. By my interpr. “I” (the poet, who is himself a Kāṇva) announces to his fellow Kāṇvas that he is invoking the Aśvins “for our help” (na ūtáye); the 1st pl.

enclitic naḥ encompasses the poet himself and those addressed in the voc. 
## 05
Here and in the repeated pāda VIII.22.3d I think gántārā may, but need not, be interpr. as a periphrastic future. There are enough possible exx. in the RV that Macdonell’s statement (VGS, p. 177) that there are no certain examples in the Saṃhitās needs reexamination.


## 06
With Ge and Re I (reluctantly) supply imperative ‘give’ in ab. It is barely possibly (but I think unlikely) that ukṣatam in c is a pun, belonging to √ukṣ ‘sprinkle’ in c, but √vakṣ/ukṣ ‘increase’ in ab, with the meaning “increase good wisdom for the pious man.” (Kiehnle 1979: 152 takes it to ‘increase’ in the whole vs.) Unfortunately there are no certain exx. of the act. suffix-accented stem ukṣáti to √vakṣ ‘increase’ (though see med. part. ukṣámāṇa- and isolated root-accented part. úkṣant-), and even if so, we would probably expect them to be intrans., at least on the basis of pf.

vavákṣa, etc., and the just cited pres. forms.

The hapax ávitāriṇī- is clearly derived from ví √tṝ, but its meaning is variously rendered. Gr (Sāy) ‘enduring, lasting’, Ge “die nicht auf sich warten lässt” (doesn’t keep (s.o.) waiting), on the basis of X.34.6. However, I take that passage in the Gambler hymn to mean ‘run counter’ (adopting the tr. of Macdonell), or more pointedly ‘doublecross’, the tr. I use here, though something like ‘thwart’ would convey the sense of this idiom as well.


## 08
The acc. phrases tisráḥ parāvátaḥ, divó víśvāni rocanā́, and trī́m̐r aktū́n are all accusatives of extent and presented as if they were parallel; the specification ‘three’ in the first and last underlines this supposed parallelism. But the first two express extent of space and the third extent of time. A better tr. might be “you fly around the three far distances (and? see below) all the luminous realms of heaven for or during three nights. I do not know what “three nights” refers to: there is no parallel locution elsewhere and the standard tr. do not comment. It may simply reflect the common association of the Aśvins with triplets of various sorts. See esp.

I.34, which does have a roughly similar expression: I.34.7 tríḥ … divé-dive “Three times, day after day …” As for the first two accusative phrases, the rocanā́(ni) are regularly qualified as ‘three’, so “all the luminous realms” may be synonymous with immediately preceding “the three far distances” (a phrase also found in I.34.7 and VIII.32.22).


## 09
Re (explicitly) and Ge (implicitly) supply as the verb of ab voḷhám ‘convey’ from 10c. This is not impossible, and the duplication of some vocabulary (9a gómatīr íṣa(ḥ): 10 gómantam … rayím … áśvāvatir íṣaḥ) may favor it. But the two verses belong to different tṛcas, a fact that should disfavor such automatic filling in the blanks. I in fact think that ab can be construed with c. That pāda asks the gods to “unfasten” the paths (ví patháḥ … sitam), in other words, to make the way clear, for winning (sātáye). The dat. infinitive sātáye frequently takes an accusative of what is to be won (among many exx., cf., e.g., IX.88.2 purū́ṇi sātáye vásūni). I see no reason why the accusatives of ab cannot be the object of this infinitive; with the acc. in b, sātī́ḥ, we would have not only a cognate accusative construction, but one involving two forms of the same stem. Alternatively the accusatives in ab could serve as objects of ví … sitam, thus parallel to patháḥ. Cf. VIII.23.29, where both accusatives found here are the objects of ápā vṛdhi ‘uncover’, semantically similar to ví … sitam: VIII.23.29bc tváṃ no gómatīr íṣaḥ / mahó rāyáḥ sātím agne ápā vṛdhi “Uncover for us refreshments consisting of cows and the winning of great wealth, o Agni.” Hence in our passage “(Unfasten) refreshments and winnings; unfasten the paths for winning.” See further disc. ad vs. 21 below, which lends additional support to the 2nd alternative.

The epithet aharvíd- (4x, twice in this hymn) can contain either √vid ‘know’ or √vid ‘find’. Ge (and Gr) opt for the former, with Ge generalizing it to ‘Zeitkenner’.

Scar (480-81) considers either possible, though his tr. reflect the former. In I.2.2 and I.156.4 I choose ‘know’, because both passages seem to involve knowledge of the ritual day, but esp. in the latter I recognize the possibility of ‘find’. (See comm. thereon.) By contrast the publ. tr. of this hymn has ‘find’ for both occurrences. I do not feel strongly either way, but since this hymn begins with the Aśvins accompanying Dawn (vss. 1-2) and the immediately preceding vs. (8) has a mention of their traversing the nights, I mildly favor ‘find’, expressing the Aśvins’ advent in the early morning, bringing the daylight with them. Note also svarvidā ‘finders of the sun’ of the Aśvins in nearby VIII.8.7. This latter well-attested cmpd. seems universally to be analysed as containing ‘find’, not ‘know’; cf. Scar 491-92.


## 12
The voc. vājinīvasū recurs here from 3a; in both verses it is immediately preceded by a heavy dat. pronoun, the near-rhyming yuvā́bhyām and asmábhyam. Its other two occurrences in this hymn (vss. 19, 30) are not so structured.

“Shelter that cannot be cheated (/deceived)” (see also VIII.85.5) is a striking and somewhat opaque expression, since ádābhya- usually modifies animate beings (generally gods) who aren’t gullible. I assume that the intention is shelter that can’t be breached by trickery, vel sim., but the context of neither passage gives us any help.


## 13
The Pp. analyses yā́viṣṭam as yā́áviṣṭam, with the latter an injunc. -iṣ-aor.

to √av ‘help, favor’. Ge accepts this analysis and Re is sympathetic; however, Old dismisses it, taking yā́viṣṭam rather to √yu ‘unite’, as the verbal counterpart (with initial preverb ní) of the common noun niyút- ‘team’. This analysis is already found in Gr and is vigorously defended by Narten (Sig. Aor. 212). One argument against the Pp. interpr. is the fact that this would produce an unambiguous embedded relative clause, and these are rare to non-existent in the RV.


## 14
The partitive gen. with pibatam consists of the phrase asyá … mádasya cā́ruṇaḥ / mádhvo rātásya, rendered in the publ. tr. (sim. Ge) as “ of “this dear exhilarating drink, of the honey bestowed,” which faithfully represents the hemistich boundary. However, it also construes the adj. cā́ruṇaḥ with masc. mádasya, though u-stem sg. oblique forms with interposed -n- should of course only be neut. This is in fact the only certain ex. of such a masc. form given by Lanman (Noun inflec., 410).

There are several ways to avoid this undesirable morphological analysis. The least attractive is to take máda- here as adjectival, but this exceptionally well-attested stem is otherwise only a noun. The other two possibilities are better. On the one hand, the rest of the gen. phrase includes the neut. noun mádhvaḥ, and cā́ruṇaḥ can be construed with it: “of this exhilarating drink, of the dear honey …” The drawback is that this artificially splits the gen. in b and reads part of it across the hemistich boundary. Perhaps the best solution is suggested by the other four occurrences of cā́ruṇaḥ, which always modifies amṛ́tasya ‘(drink) of immortality’, with the nominalized amṛ́ta- neuter (IV.70.2, 4; 108.4; 100.4, always in the order amṛ́tasya cā́ruṇaḥ, pāda-final as here). I suggest we read cā́ruṇaḥ here as representing that phrase and tr. “of this exhilarating drink, of the dear (drink of immorality), of the honey …”


## 19
I don’t really understand why the skin-bag of honey is set in the chariotrut. One might think of the English expression “grease the skids,” except that the Aśvins are meant to drink out of it.


## 20
The referent of téna ‘with it’ is not clear. Although the verse sequence might suggest the skin-bag of vs. 19, the chariot makes more sense, and in 30a, where pāda a is repeated, it does seem to refer to the chariot or parts thereof.


## 21
This vs. is structured very like vs. 9, presenting some of the same syntactic problems, but in a somewhat clearer fashion. The first two pādas, utá no divyā́íṣa, utá síndhūm̐r aharvidā are identical to 9ab utá no gómatīr íṣa, utá sātī́r aharvidā, save for the adj. modifying íṣaḥ in a and the acc. pl. found in b. Recall that Ge and Re supply a verb (voḷhám) for ab, separating those pādas from c. Some support for their position might be found in the larger context of vs. 21: the immediately preceding pāda, 20c, contains váhatam with a variant íṣaḥ object (“fat,” not “heavenly”). So it could be possible to read 21ab as a continuation of the VP in 20c, giving support to Ge/Re, who supply a verb from the same root (√vah) to govern the identically structured 9ab. But Ge happily takes ab as the obj. of the verb in 21c, ápa … varṣathaḥ ‘you two will open up’ (s-aor. subjunctive to √vṛ ‘cover, obstruct’). As was noted ad vs. 9, ápa √vṛ ‘uncover, open up’ is semantically very like ví √sā ‘unfasten’, and if refreshments can be the object of the first, this should also be possible for the second.

varṣathaḥ is the only s-aor. form to √vṛ in all of Sanskrit. It is very possible that it was created for this passage because the resulting syllable varṣ evokes the root √vṛṣ ‘rain’, which would be appropriate for the liquids that are its objects in ab. Re also remarks on this word play.


## 22
The subjunctive pátāt seems to be used in an unusual past prospective sense in this mythological context. This may be an English problem, however. Since the verb of the main clause is injunc. vidhat, this context is not necessarily preterital, but “timeless,” and the subjunctive can therefore be expressing pure future modality.

The fact that the next verse is also mythological and contains an undoubted present tense form daśasyathaḥ shows that mythological tense is fluid here. Re remarks (ad vs. 23) that the indifference between present and preterite underlines the reflection of the current human situation in the legendary material.


## 24
suśastíbhiḥ in pāda b is taken by Ge (also Gr) as modifying ūtíbhiḥ in pāda a (“mit diesen löblichen Hilfen”; Ge takes návyasībhiḥ as adverbial “aufs neue”), but this requires suśastí- to be adjectival. However, almost all occurrences of this stem -- and all seven other instr. -- are nouns (‘good laud’)(and see nominal suṣṭutím ‘good praise’, identically formed and nearly synonymous, in 30c below). Although in Gāyatrī the b-pāda more regularly construes with the a-pāda, it is not out of the question for it to go with c instead. In this case the instr. phrase of b goes well with c, and it would only represent one constituent fronted before the subordinating yád.


## 28
This vs., like the almost identical IV.46.4, is syntactically somewhat ragged: the beginning of pāda c, ā́hí sthā́thaḥ, should ideally be the beginning of the clause, given the fronted preverb and the hí. But the object occupies all of ab (and the end of c).


## 29
The syntactic disorder continues here. The main clause corresponding to vs. 28 is vs. 30; this intermediate verse, the middle one of the tṛca, is an elaborate nominal sentence couched entirely in the nominative and functions as an extensive parenthesis further specifying the features of the chariot found in 28a (in the acc.).

On ubhā́cakrā́“both wheels,” with apparent neut. pl. for expected du cakré see comm. ad X.10.8.

## 31
The sense of this vs. is a little odd: it sounds as if the Aśvins on their journey are snacking on the comestibles they are bringing to us and we will only get the scraps. This is not the usual way to urge the gods to bring us things and makes the Aśvins sound mingy. Perhaps the point is rather that there are so many (pūrvī́ḥ) refreshments that there’s enough for everyone? Ge compares 19c, which does not seem similar to me.


## 33
The publ. tr. “feathered birds, frothing at the mouth” is, to say the least, inelegant and perhaps unintelligible. What I think is meant: the birds are compared to horses (or the horses to birds); pruṣitápsavaḥ ‘frothing at the mouth’ qualifies the underlying horses and indicates their speed. Cf. the overt horses in V.75.6 áśvāsaḥ pruṣitápsavaḥ, VIII.87.5 áśvebhiḥ pruṣitápsubhiḥ (both Aśvin hymns)(latter =VIII.13.11 [Indra]).


## 34
The hapax -gāyas- (a hapax) in ánugāyasam- is generally taken as a primary s-stem to the diphthongal root √gā i̯ ; see Whitney (Roots), AiG II.2.235, EWA s.v. √GĀ2 . The contextual question is what is following what. For Ge the song is sounding after/following the chariot (“Gesang schallt eurem Wagen nach”), but most ánu- compounds have the structure “following X,” where X is the 2nd member (e.g., ánu-patha- ‘following/along the path’; with diff. accent anu-kāmá- ‘following/according to desire’). I therefore think the chariot is following the song; in other words, it is making its way to the ritual ground, drawn to the song being sung there. Rather like the modern expression “follow the money.” Pāda b seems to be a clear embedded relative clause -- or else, at least as I have punctuated it, a parenthesis.

The point of c seems to be that the wheel doesn’t knock against the chariot no matter how fast it moves. Such knocking presumably would be a problem with wheels that were not securely fastened to their axle and well balanced, so the Aśvin’s chariot is, not surprisingly, well constructed.


## 36
With Sāy I take the wakeful wild beast to be soma. The obj. of √svad is regularly an oblation, and in IX.105.1 its object, soma, is compared to a śíśu-, the young of an animal or human.

vā in b cannot be the disjunctive ‘or’, as there is no disjunction possible. I take it as the short form of iva ‘like’ (with lengthening), as Ge also seems to (on the grounds of his “sozusagen”), marking the statement as an approximative. Old’s comment is not entirely intelligible, but he seems rather to imply that vā expresses a strong positive, and I therefore assume he thinks it’s a form of vaí, as do Re and Klein (DGRV II.201-2).


## 38
There is much disagreement on what to supply with híraṇyasaṃdṛśaḥ and indeed on whether it modifies rā́jñaḥ, interpreted as an acc. pl. (see Ge n. 38ab).

Since it seems unlikely that Kaśu gave the poet ten golden kings, even as figurines (pace Old), it seems best to take rā́jñaḥ as gen. sg. and supply another desirable golden item. Ge suggests garments, probably in part because of the hide-tanners? Hoffmann (Inj. 229 n. 227) points out that gold(-bedecked) horses are mentioned elsewhere in dānastutis, and I follow him in the publ. tr. However, given how prominently gold figures in the description of chariots in this hymn (vss. 28-29, 35; cf. also 11), ‘chariots’ might be a better choice.

The apparently contemptuous ‘hide-tanning’ (carmamnā́ḥ) must be a way of indicating that, in comparison with Kaśu, all men hereabouts are no better than tanners: ignoble, low, and engaged in dirty and polluting activity. But perhaps there’s just a whiff of a suggestion that Kaśu has enough cows to furnish work for many tanners -- and therefore he should be more generous with these cows to his poet.


## 39
Like many dānastutis, this one seems to have a bit of sting in its praise.

The poet seems at first to be saying that the Cedis are so lavish in their giving that no one else could follow them, but the 2nd half of the verse warns that all it would take for another man to receive more praise than Kaśu is to give more. Although the mā́ prohibitive of ab is technically applied to other men (“let no one go …”), it’s really an implicit challenge to Kaśu: he can only stop others from going on his path by always giving the most.
