+++
title = "006"

+++
Indra


## 01
Displaced iva in b; we might expect *parjánya iva vṛṣṭimā́n, which would also be metrically acceptable.


## 02
The publ. tr. takes pāda a as a nominal sentence with a predicated present participle (píprataḥ), a fairly rare but not unprecedented construction. This has two advantages: 1) it provides the verse with a main clause, 2) it avoids an anomalous position for yád. However, since yád is also badly positioned in 3a and 8b, the second observation may not be an argument. See remarks on 8 below.


## 07
The co-occurrence of a 1st pl. verb (abhí prá ṇonumaḥ) and nom. pl. imā́ḥ … dhītáyaḥ causes some interpretational difficulties. Ge takes initial imā́ḥ as an accusative plural object with the verb in pāda a (“Diese stimmen wir auf (dich) an”), separating it from dhītáyaḥ in b, and interprets pādas bc together as a nominal clause.

This would rescue the word order, but an accusative with √nu is almost always the goal of the roaring (and this exact phrase abhí prá nonumaḥ occurs a number of other times), not the contents of the roar, as an obj. imā́ḥ would require (but see comm. on I.6.6). I prefer to take the insights as identified with ourselves, both subjects of abhí prá √nu. Old also suggests this identification, which is also found in vs. 8.

With vipā́m ágreṣu compare IX.99.1 vipā́m ágre. There are 43 occurrences of sg. ágre and one of pl. ágreṣu; it seems unlikely that the number is significant here, but simply used to supply an extra syllable.

In c Ge sees two similes, “like the flame of fire, (like) missiles,” but I think the latter is not used as a comparison but an identification, just as in 3c the Kaṇvas praises are called their “familial weapon” (jāmí … ā́yudham).

The simile marker ná is again misplaced; we would expect *agnér ná śocíḥ.


## 08
See comments on 7ab. The identification of the Kaṇvas and their dhītí is quite clear here.

Another example of anomalously positioned yád, like 2b and 3a. In fact this verse is structured entirely parallel to vs. 2: participial phrase in pāda a, prá yád opening b followed by an injunctive in -anta and a nom. pl. subj -i-stem, c nom. pl.

referrring to poets followed by r̥tásya INSTR. phrase.

## 10-12
This tṛca is characterized by emphatic pronominals: initial ahám 10a, 10c, 11a; tvā́m 12a; máma 12c.


## 10
Ge explains the form of ajani as “attraction to the simile” (that is, 3rd ps.

instead of 1st ps.), but although obviously there is no 1st sg. passive aorist, if there were to be, this is what it would be. More problematic is the logical connection of ab with c. Ge thinks that the rebirth is “durch die Erleuchtung”; I assume he means that the acquisition of knowledge and the resulting illumination caused the poet to be reborn like the sun. But the sun is reborn every day, and the passing of knowledge from father to son presumably happens once or a few times at most -- although, if the father is the son’s teacher, it might be a daily event.


## 12
The 2 occurrences of tuṣṭuvúḥ are standardly interpr. as preterital (“… gepreisen haben”; see Ge and Kü [578], as well as the publ. tr.), but the context does not impose this value, and the existence of an augmented plupf. átuṣṭavam (III.53.12) with the same apparent meaning is disturbing. It is therefore possible that the verbs here should be rendered “… who do not praise you … who do praise you.” The existence of a pf. subj. in a nearby hymn, tuṣṭávat in VIII.8.16, also supports a presential interpr. of this pf.

Pāda c contains an ellipsis: we expect an instr. here, as in VIII.1.18 ayā́ vardhasva tanvā̀girā́máma. The appropriate word can either be extracted from the proleptic adj. súṣṭutaḥ “by my (praise) (so that you become) well praised” (as well as the two forms of tuṣṭuvúḥ in ab) or, less likely, pratnéna mánmanā in 11a.


## 13
The accented aírayat in c raises questions. It is natural to interpret c as the main clause, in which case we must assume a preverb ā́with an unaccented airayat (see Old ad I.157.5). This is possible semantically and syntactically, but the Pp. does not so analyze. Alternatively we could take all of vs. 13 as a subordinate clause (“when his battle-fury smoked … (and) he sent …”) dependent on the main clause in vs. 14, but this is not attractive, because it not only requires a switch from 3rd ps. to 2nd, but it also yokes together two otherwise independent myths.


## 16
Ge takes the footsteps or feet in c to be those of Indra’s horses, but on the basis of I.32.8 tā́sām áhiḥ patsutaḥśī́r babhūva “The serpent came to be lying at the feet of those (waters)” it should rather be the waters’ feet or footsteps. What these are conceptually is not clear - perhaps deeper pools in the riverbeds? - but the parallel is clear, and furthermore Indra’s horses take no part in the Vṛtra myth.


## 18
This verse is structured entirely parallel to vs. 12 and thus forms a small ring that does not conform to the tṛca structure. On tuṣṭuvúḥ see comm. on vs. 12.


## 19
enā́m in c would be the only accented form of the ordinarily enclitic pronominal stem ena-. See Old’s lengthy discussion of possibilities and previous suggestions, although he does not reach a definite conclusion. My interpretation is one that Old also seems to favor, that enā́m stands for the independent adverbial instrumental enā́‘thus, in this way’ (an idea in different form that goes back to Hopkins). As he points out, in the position before ṛ this would probably come out as enā́m̐with anunāsika (Proleg. 470), and the redactional conversion of this to a “real” m, esp. in a feminine context, would not be surprising. This adverb enā́is quite often, though not invariably, pāda-initial. See esp. semantically parallel III.33.4 enā́vayám páyasā pínvamānāḥ “So we (are) -- swelling with milk …” For pipyúṣī- construed with the genitive, see vs. 43b below, mádhor ghṛtásya pipyúṣīm.


## 20
The first problem in this verse is what to do with āsā́. Ge construes it with prasvàḥ “Die … durch den Mund gebärend…,” and it would also be possible to take it with ácakriran, as Old seems to imply, yielding “with their mouth they have made you their child.” In either case this would require that ‘mouth’ is equivalent to the products of mouth, namely noise, and that the bellowing of the cows, which stands for the poets’ insights, is the instrumental cause. This is not impossible; indeed āsā́ sometimes refers to poetic speech. But I suggest instead that āsā́gárbha- is an idiom, “infant-by-mouth,” that is, nursling, and that they are nurturing him directly.

Pāda c is puzzling, in part because it lacks both a verb and both parts of the frame that should match the simile dhármeva sū́ryam. The verb is the easiest: the preverb pári invites us to supply a form of √as ‘be’, in the standard idiom ‘surround, envelop’. Ge’s reconstruction of the frame also seems the most likely: the subject continues to be the cows/insights of vss. 19 and 20ab, the object ‘you’ [=Indra]. They surround/envelop him in a nurturing, maternal manner. But the image in the simile is very different: I do not know of other places in which the sun is surrounded or enveloped in this fashion or what “supports” could be involved. If they are in fact the “supports (of heaven),” as seems at least reasonable, it is possible to envision the sun operating within a space defined by these supports - though, again, this does not seem to be a RVic notion elsewhere. See Old for other, not particularly plausible, scenarios. As indicated in the publ. intro., the translation given is very uncertain.


## 22
The position of the utá is abnormal, as it most naturally connects the two nominatives práśastiḥ and yajñáḥ. See Klein DGRV I.434-45. The utá’s of 23b and 24a are correctly positioned.


## 25
The lexeme abhí √tan has the idiomatic meaning ‘stretch over’ and therefore ‘extend control, dominate’. The image found in the simile (vrajám ná) is found exactly in the parallel IX.108.6, where the vrajám is not in a simile. Elsewhere (I.160.5, V.54.15) in the active it seems to mean 'stretch over' (and therefore dominate), and in a TS passage adduced by HO (III.4.6.2) Keith transl 'overpower', which seems right in context.

Here the question is the referent of the object in the frame, sū́ra upākácakṣasam “whose eye is near to the sun.” Ge supplies “Schatz” and thinks it refers to gold, which is “near to the sun” in its color and also (hyperbolically) its value. This is quite possible, but Agni is also found in just these expressions, e.g., IV.11.1 upāká ā́rocate sū́ryasya, and of course Agni is often identified as the sun.

The “gold” interpretation is probably correct, however, since the idea would be that Indra controls goods and therefore can distribute them to us; what Indra’s control over Agni would amount to is less clear. Note the independent gen. sūráḥ dependent on the first member of the compound upāká-.

Because the verb of c is a subjunctive, which would clash with the preterital perfect of ab, I take c with the following verse, whose present tense verbs are more compatible with a subjunctive.

## 26-27
Vs. 26 (and if I am right, 25c) are both dependent on vs. 27 by my reading.

VIII.6.28-30: The translation of this tṛca is superficially easy, but its interpretation is difficult. Ge takes 28 as referring to soma, 29 to Indra (or 29ab to Indra and 29c to soma; it’s not entirely clear), while Old emphatically rejects Ge and takes Indra as the referent of both verses. Neither of them is entirely clear about the identity of the plural subjects of 30, though both think that the verse is a reference to the dawn and/or the dawn sacrifice.

I do not have a solution to these riddles, though I have some further suggestions. But before presenting them, I should first point out how different the style of this tṛca is from the rest of the hymn. There are no proper names in the verse, either divine or human; the reference is only 3rd person; there is no specific ritual vocabulary; the presentation is all descriptive, without even an implicit hint of the hortatory; there are no similes, though the imagery is strikingly poetic. The whole effect is almost allegorical, stripped of the busy specificity and the divine-human give-and-take that characterize the rest of the hymn and reappear emphatically in the next tṛca.

As often in the RV, I think some of the difficulties arise because two separate referents are present. On the one hand, the location of the birthplace of the poet in 28 suggests, as Ge says, that soma is the subject. Soma, esp. the celestial soma often encountered in Maṇḍala IX, could also be the subject of 29, looking down upon the sea of the earthly soma. But in both verses poetic inspiration could also be the subject, signaled by the two forms of √vip, vípraḥ in 28c, vipānáḥ in 29c, and by the emphasis on seeing in 29 and 30. The progression from birth with insight (28c) to quivering and stirring (29c) seems to describe first the germ of the poetic idea and then its development. In 30 in a different image “they” (poets/sacrificers?) see “the dawning light of the age-old semen” - a baffling phrase. The “milk of the age-old semen” (páyaḥ pratnásya rétasaḥ) is found in III.31.10 in a Vala context, where it may refer to the poetic products that help open the Vala cave. Here it may refer to the even further development of the poetic insight, now fitted to a ritual context and available to be “seen” by the ritualists who will make use of it. But all this is highly speculative.


## 34
“Wooden” seems excluded for vánanvatī here. See VIII.1.31.


## 36
Note the phonetic figure háribhyāṃ haryatā́bhyām. See also VIII.12.25-28.


## 38
The publ. tr. of a and c may be difficult to parse in English: “after you (roll)…” does not contain a temporal conjunction (“after”) followed by a subject + verb, but rather a prepositional phrase (“after you,” that is, “following you”) followed by a verb with postposed subject (“both worlds” / “the drops”).

The isolated verb form varti is, curiously, identified as an injunctive by Lub, despite the apparent primary ending. Gr considers it a development of *vart-ti, which is phonologically possible. I don’t have a firmly founded analysis of it, but I wonder, since outside of the perfect, intransitive forms of √vṛt are medial, if this is actually a “passive aorist,” which displays the expected strong form and -i ending, in which case Lub’s inj. label would be correct.

In c svānā́saḥ is a pun: it can either be the nom. pl. m. of the mediopassive participle of the root aorist to √su ‘press’ or nom. pl. m. to the thematic nominal svāná- ‘sounding, sound’. See VIII.7.14, 17.


## 39
I give śaryaṇā́vati its literal meaning, deriving ultimately from śará-, śárya- ‘reed, stick’, rather than taking it as a PN as Ge does, since in other places it seems to have literal content. On the analysis see Thieme Unters. p. 40 n. 2. But a PN, esp. in this context, is certainly possible.


## 41
On the sense of coṣkūyá- see Schaeffer (201); the action envisaged is poking or prodding a fire, extended to Indra’s poking more and more good things out to us.


## 44
vímahi- is a hapax, but presumably built to vímahas- (2x) and of fairly obvious meaning.
