+++
title = "007"

+++
Maruts As noted in the publ. intro., this hymn contains dense repetitions of vocabulary and numerous phonetic echoes within and across verses. I have noted some, but by no means all, below. Particularly common in the earlier part of the hymn is the root √yā ‘drive’, in both verbal and nominal forms (2b, 4c [2x], 5a, 7b, 8b; also 14b, 23a, 26b, 28c, 29c).


## 01
triṣṭúbham íṣam “Triṣṭubh refreshment” causes some interpretational difficulties. Although in RVic discourse there is no problem with an image that involves refreshment conceived as metrical poetry, this hymn containing the phrase in its opening phrase is in Gāyatrī meter, not Triṣṭubh. The same phrase recurs in


## 01
(Indra), a hymn that is also not in Triṣṭubh. Some remove the word here entirely from the poetic sphere, as in Macdonell’s “threefold Soma draught.” Ge believes that it can’t refer to the Triṣṭubh meter here, but that it must be a different technical term in recitation. I do not think that the fact that these two hymns are not in Triṣṭubh necessarily means that that meter can’t be referred to in this expression; there are, after all, plenty of hymns to both the Maruts and Indra in Triṣṭubh, and the verb governing the phrase is in the imperfect and therefore should refer to another occasion. But following Ge’s lead, I think it possible that ‘(having?) threefold rhythm’ could refer to the Gāyatrī meter in which this hymn is composed, since Gāyatrī consists of three pādas. Unfortunately this will not work for VIII.69, which is composed in a variety of meters (incl. Gāyatrī, but only vss. 4-6); the verse in which the phrase is found (VIII.69.1) is in Anuṣṭubh. I might emend the publ. tr. to “refreshment in threefold rhythm.” For further on the compound see Scar (641-42), who is somewhat indecisive about both the compound type and the sense.


## 02
ácidhvam in b (see also the identical pāda in 14b) should be read with distracted final syllable (ácidhu vam) in order to make up an 8-syllable pāda, but it also should ideally have a heavy root syllable in order to avoid four consecutive light syllables in the cadence. (Even though I do not believe that the cadences of dimeter verse are as regulated as those in trimeter, iambic cadences do prevail, and four shorts would be quite unusual.) Werba (183, flg. Seebold) suggests that the form represents *ácid-dhu vam to √cit, which seems very plausible (also for the identical distracted form in I.87.2; in V.55.7 it does not require distraction and is therefore not diagnostic). Gr assigns ácidhvam to √ci, which is nearly identical in meaning to √cit; Lubotsky, curiously, puts it with √ci ‘pile’. The same type of cluster reduction is found in the Marut hymn VIII.20.18 in vavṛdhu vam, which likewise requires distraction and a heavy root syllable and represents *vavṛd-dhu vam from √vṛt ‘turn’.


## 03
I take úd īrayanta here as a reflexive transitive. It thus contrast with intransitive úd … īrate in 7b.

See also comm. on vs. 10.

## 01-04
Note recycling of vocab. -- íṣam 1, 3; párvata- 1, 2, 4; yā́mam 2, 4; vip/vep 1, 4; vāyúbhiḥ 3, 4.


## 04
vápanti is also echoed by vepayanti in the next pāda, and the whole verse is marked by alliteration: v’s, p’s, and r’s in vápanti … prá vepayanti párvatān; m’s in marúto míham (both sets in ab), and y’s in c: yád yā́maṃ yā́nti vāyúbhiḥ.


## 05
The vs. consists only of a subordinate clause. I attach it to the preceding vs., since the yád clause of 4c seems parallel to the yád clause of 5 and yā́ma- recurs here.

However, there is a change from 3rd ps. ref. in 4 to 2nd ps. in 5.


## 06
Each pāda of this vs. begins yuṣmā́n, picking up śúṣmāya in 5c.


## 07
Both úd … īrate and vāśrá- echo vs. 3. There is an internal echo between aruṇápsavaḥ (a) and ṣṇúnā (c).


## 08
Exactly what atmospheric phenomenon is being described here is not clear.

Ge seems to think that it’s the Maruts who are traveling the path (pánthām … yā́tave “dass sie ihre Bahn laufe”), though his n. 8b seems closer to my interpr. I suggest that it is a post-storm image: the thunderclouds/Maruts part, releasing the sun’s ray and allowing the sun to travel its usual path across the sky. The parting of the clouds is expressed in c, the extending or spreading of the clouds that is accompanied by the beams of the sun. Thieme (Fremd. 112) instead sees the Maruts releasing a ray as the path for the sun to travel: the first ray of morning, which the sun follows. But the Maruts are not dawn gods.

Pāda c is repeated as the final pāda of the hymn (36c).


## 10
The stem pṛ́śni- in the plural otherwise refers to “dappled cows” and is marked (by pronouns and modifying adjectives) as feminine; see the immediate preceding hymn VIII.6.19, as well as VIII.69.3, I.84.11. Here, however, there are no diagnostically feminine forms syntactically associated with pṛ́śnayaḥ. This allows it to refer both to (fem.) dappled cows and to the (masc.) Maruts, whose mother is Pṛśni. Although the Maruts are regularly called “Rudras” after their father Rudra (e.g., 12b), this is the only place in the RV where they are called “Pṛśnis” after their mother. This verse reprises 3bc … pṛ́śnimātaraḥ / dhukṣánta pipyúśīm íṣam “They whose mother is Prś̥ ni have milked out swelling refreshment,” with the bahuvrīhi pṛ́śnimātaraḥ matched with pṛ́śnayaḥ here and dhukṣánta matching duduhré. The pṛ́śnimātaraḥ in 3b all but ensures that we will take pṛ́śnayaḥ here as a referent to the Maruts.

The referent of the three lakes they milk out as honey is the rain they produce.


## 12
Ge and Re (see his comm.) take sudānavo, rúdrā ṛbhukṣaṇaḥ as predicative vocatives with the copula expression yūyáṃ hí ṣṭhā́“for you are …” This seems unnecessary, since there is a fine nominative plural, prácetasaḥ, which can serve as predicate. I take the utá to be connecting not the supposed predicative vocc.

with prácetasaḥ, but the two locc. dáme and máde. The predicative vocative analysis is esp. unlikely because this is a repeated pāda (I.15.2, VI.51.15, VIII.83.9; there are also further exx. of yūyám hí ṣṭhā́… as a pāda-opening), and only in I.15.2 is a predicative voc. likely. (See Bloomfield, RR ad I.15.2; he considers it “plain mechanical borrowing” there.) The conjoined locc. “in our house and in exhilaration” may not seem to form a natural semantic class, but note that they are anagrams of each other: dáme / máde, and in a hymn so structured by phonetics, that would be enough.


## 13
I take madacyútam as having “active” meaning (‘arousing exhilaration’), rather than passive. Scar (126) allows either for this stem, and Re takes it as passive here. Since the passive form mádacyutam built with the past participle would fit the same metrical slot, I think that the active sense must be meant.


## 14
I supply loc. upahvaré(ṣu) in a because ádhi doesn’t take the genitive (so can’t be directly construed with girīṇā́m as Ge does), on the basis of the immediately preceding hymn VIII.6.28 upahvaré girīṇā́m and the Marut hymn I.87.2 upahvaréṣu yád ácidhvaṃ yayím, whose phraseology is very close to this.

I do not entirely understand what iva is doing here. Perhaps their wandering in the distant parts of the mountains is implicitly compared to their journey here.

As in VIII.6.38 (q.v) I take svāná- as a pun, both a passively used root aor.

mediopassive participle to √su ‘press’ (‘being pressed’), which is eminently appropriate for drops, and a thematic adj. to √svan ‘sound’. Although the latter may seem less characteristic of drops, see 16a drapsā́iva … dhámanti “like droplets they blow their blast,” as well as 17a, where svāná- seems to encapsulate the same pun.


## 15
The problem in this verse is the referent and syntactic construction of gen. sg. etā́vataḥ … ádābhyasya (assuming that the two are to be construed together).

Most take the phrase as obj., one way or another, of bhikṣeta. Ge takes it as a separate obj. of bhikṣeta, parallel to sumnám: “Um solche unfehlbare (Gabe), um ihre Gunst …” Old, by contrast, suggests that the poet started out with the gen. etā́vataḥ, meaning to continue with *sumnásya, but had to substitute the acc. sumnám for metrical reasons. He then takes ádābhyasya either as continuing the gen. phrase etā́vataḥ … *sumnásya or as having a separate referent, the Maruts considered as a unity. Re also considers sumná- to be the ultimate referent, but has the genitive phrase express a partitive sense: “Puisse le mortel avoir une part, (si) petite (soit-elle), à la bonne grace …” Sim. Bl (RR) ad loc. In favor of the Old/Re/Bl solution is the phrase etā́vataḥ … sumnásya in VIII.49.9 (Vālakh.), construed with īmahe ‘we beg’ (cf. 50.9); see also VIII.5.27 etā́vat... / ... sumnám īmahe. But I find Old’s metrical about-face very unlikely: RVic poets don’t have “whoops, that genitive won’t fit here” compositional moments, as far as I can tell, while Re’s semi-partitive construction seems rather weaselly. Moreover, √bhikṣ is almost always construed with the acc. as here (genitives probably in I.152.6 and VII.90.6). And, further, in the scenario where ádābhyasya is part of the phrase, “unfehlbar” (Ge), “unerring” (Bl) is not what ádābhya- means. My solution is not necessarily better, though it does arise in part from Old’s alternative suggestion for ádābhyasya. I take the gen. sg. phrase as doubling the gen. pl., eṣām, with both referring to the Maruts -- the plural to them individually, the singular to their collectivity (so Old’s “von den als Einheit gedachten Maruts”), i.e., the Marut flock (gaṇá-). This seems to be Gr’s view, also Macdonell’s. It should be noted that the Maruts (in pl.) are several times referred to as ádābhya- (II.34.10, III.26.4).

The publ. tr. reflects that analysis, but I am not entirely certain it is right. If I were to follow some version of the other view, I would render bhikṣeta in two different ways depending on the case of its complement: “might beg their benevolence, might seek a share of such undeceivable ...”


## 16
However odd the expression drapsā́ḥ … dhámanti “the droplets blow their blast” may seem, it is found twice elsewhere: the extremely enigmatic VIII.96.13 and the somewhat clearer IX.73.1. The latter is a noise-making context, as this may be.

## 16-17
16c útsaṃ duhántaḥ reprises 10bc duduhré … útsam, which in turn reminded us of dhukṣánta in 3c. Other elements in vs. 3 reappear in vs. 17: pṛ́śnimātaraḥ in 17c was the subj. of dhukṣánta in 3b, and 17ab úd u … īrate … úd u vāyúbhiḥ reminds us of 3a úd īrayanta vāyúbhiḥ (cf. also 7ab).

On svānébhiḥ in 17a see comm. on 14. Because vss. 16 and 17 are so closely tied, I connect the drapsá- of 16a with the svānébhiḥ in 17a and consider this a variant of svānaíḥ … índubhiḥ in 14c.


## 18
Note the extremely recessive 2nd pl. perfect āvá: 2nd pl. pfs. are rare and poorly marked as it is; with its initial swallowed by yéna, this one barely surfaces.

The referent of yéna and its correlative tásya is most likely ‘help’ (ávas-); so Ge. This assumption is supported by I.112.5 yā́bhiḥ káṇvam … ā́vatam “with which you two helped Kaṇva,” where the referent of yā́bhiḥ is the etymologically related ūtíbhiḥ and the same Kaṇva story as in 18b is referred to.

As for Turvaśa and Yadu -- though, as Ge points out, their helper is usually Indra, in this run of hymns the deed is assigned to several different gods: the Maruts (here), Indra (VIII.4.7), the Aśvins (VIII.9.14, 10.5).

The construction of c is unusual. With Ge (and Re), I take tásya as a partitive gen. with dhīmahi, though somewhat reluctantly. The dat. rāyé ‘for wealth’ is then an indication of our purpose once we receive some help from the Maruts; Ge’s fuller “um Reichtum (zu gewinnen)” makes the purpose clearer.


## 19
pipyúṣīr íṣaḥ echoes pipyúṣim íṣam in 3c.


## 21
Ge thinks that this verse is addressed to the other singers, but this requires that the voc. vrktabarhi ̥ ṣaḥ in 20 and 21 have two different referents (so explicitly Ge’s n. 3), which seems unlikely. I take the Maruts to be the addressees, as in vs. 20, and follow Macdonell (Hymns from the Rigveda, p. 60) as well as Lüders (Var. 426- 27) in taking the verse as contrasting the Maruts’ former friendly behavior to the poet and his fellow ritualists with their neglect now -- a neglect drawn attention to by the questions in the immediately preceding vs. 20. Acdg. to Delbrück (AiS 502), ha sma purā́+ PRESENT expresses what was accustomed to happen in the past. I also take stómebhiḥ not as the Maruts’ praise songs, but rather the ones produced by us, as an instrumental of price. Macdonell’s tr. “as once ye did for praise…” seems to reflect a similar interpr.

## 22-23
The insistently repeated sám in vs. 22 (4x in 3 pādas) is complemented by its opposite ví in 23, though ví needs only two occurrences to continue the pattern.


## 23
arājín- is a hapax. Though it is obviously derived from a root √rāj, it is not clear whether it belongs to ‘shine’ (so Gr ‘nicht glänzend’, Re ‘sans éclat’) or ‘rule’ (Ge ‘die herrenlosen Berge’; Old ‘königlos’) -- or both, as I suspect. Although neither root yields compelling sense as a negated quality of mountains, the phrase should be interpreted in light of 1c ví párvateṣu rājatha, where I see the same pun.

It is possible that ví √yā should be rendered ‘drive through’, not ‘drive apart’, although this produces a less happy contrast with sám in vs. 22. In that case I would tr. “they drove through Vṛtra, joint by joint, (drove) through the mountains …” On vṛ́ṣṇi see comm. ad VIII.96.19.


## 24
The pattern of repeated preverbs continues with ánu. The lexeme ánu √av is quite rare (but see X.113.1); presumably the poet was looking for a preverb to pattern with sám and ví in the previous vss. In X.113.1 I tr. ‘assist’, but ‘stand by’ here to provide a separable particle for the pattern.


## 25
I have punctuated pāda b as a parenthetical expression, a nominal locational clause, but in context it is the equivalent of a decompounded bahuvrīhi modifying the Maruts and parallel to vidyúddhastā(ḥ) ‘having lightning in their hands’ in pāda a (so approx. Re). A bahuvrīhi would have been difficult to construct with these elements. Including the modifier ‘golden’ would have produced a threemember compound, which would be unusual for the RV, and determining what form ‘head’ (śíras- / śīṛṣ-ṇ-) would have taken as the final member of a masc. pl.

bahuvrīhi may have defeated the poet. This analytic expression is given somewhat fuller form in V.54.11.


## 26
Like almost every verse involving Uśanā, this one is quite obscure. On the morphology of the name, see my art. in Fs. Jasanoff; for the mythological background and development of Uśanā, chap. 4 in my RV between Two Worlds. I take this verse as a disguised treatment of the Vala myth, with which Uśanā Kāvya is associated elsewhere. Pāda a is also found at I.130.9; there I take Uśanā as an acc. of goal (or perhaps a gen. with a gapped ‘house’), while here I take it as an instr. As discussed in the Fs. Jasanoff article, the word uśánā behaves essentially like an indeclinable in the RV.

In my analysis the curious expression ukṣṇó rándhram “the loins of the ox” (on randhrá- see Gotō 1985 [MSS 44] and EWA s.v.) is a reference to the Vala cave: the loins are a weak or vulnerable spot in animals, and MIA randha- ‘opening, cleft, weak spot’ shows how easily this can develop into a word that might qualify a cave.

A similar circumlocution for the Vala cave is náme góḥ “in the bend of the cow” (III.39.6). Ge takes the phrase instead as a personal name; as he points out Ukṣṇo Randhra is a PN in PB 13.9.19/JB III.150 and has the epithet kāvya-, apropos of the so-called Aukṣṇorandhra Sāman, but this is surely a secondary reinterpretation of this opaque vs. The roaring in c is the noise of the cows penned inside the cave.

Note the phonetic echo in the initial words of the first two pādas: #uśanā \#ukṣṇas.


## 28
práṣṭi- ‘side-horse’ is a rare word in the RV, occurring two other times in addition to a single instance of the deriv. práṣṭimant-. As often, the occurrence of a rare word can be attributed to phonological triggers; here prṣ̥́ atī ráthe / práṣṭir ...

róhitaḥ (with a nice scrambling of th à h...t in ráthe … róhitaḥ). Our pāda b is also found at I.39.6b, with rátheṣu pṛ́ṣatīr in the preceding pāda. (The other two occurrences are less phonologically driven.) The exact arrangement of the horses isn’t clear, and the sandhi form pṛ́ṣatī has accordingly received different grammatical analyses. I take it as representing underlying pṛ́ṣatīḥ, an acc. pl. fem., obj. of váhati (so also Gr, Bl). Ge (/Re) seems to take it rather as a nom. pl. implicitly conjoined with róhitaḥ, presumably with the verb agreeing with the latter. Hoffmann (Inj. 126) take the form as a dual nom., a parallel subj. to róhitaḥ.

Old suggests that riṇán(n) is a nom. sg. participle, modifying the subjects of yā́nti with incongruence of number. This seems unnecessary, since it can easily be a 3rd pl. injunctive, requiring no such grammatical adjustment.


## 29
Ge/Re take śaryaṇā́vati and ārjī́ke as place names, but see comm. ad 6.39 above for śaryaṇā́vati, depending on Thieme, Unters. p. 40 n. 2. There he also explains ārjī́ka- as a vṛddhi adj. ‘foamy’, derived from -rjīka- (found in various bahuvrīhis) ‘foam’ (< ‘of white appearance’).


## 31
On kadhapriyaḥ see comm. ad I.30.20. Note kád dha … kadha-.

The verse seems to allude to the Maruts’ supposed leaving Indra in the lurch at the Vṛtra battle, but this seems to be a slander: it is often said that they were the only gods who stayed with him (though Ge adduces ŚB IV.3.3.6, where they temporarily withdraw until Indra offers them a joint share of the sacrifice [7ff.].).

Certainly 24c expresses their help to Indra at that time.

## 32-33
Note opening 32a #saho ṣu / 33a #o ṣu. HvN mark o in 33a as disyllabic. The agreement across vss. would be an argument against such a reading, and Old has several alternative suggestions.


## 34
On párśāna- see comm. ad VII.104.5. Our passage here is the best support for the usual gloss ‘depth, deep place’.


## 35
I take the final word of the vs., váyaḥ, as a pun, both nom. pl. ‘birds’ and neut. acc. sg. ‘vital energy’, with the birds subject of vahanti in pāda a. Birds figure in several nearby hymns (VIII.3.23, 5.33), with the latter passage esp. close: ... vām ...

váyo vahantu parṇínaḥ “Let your feathered birds [=horses] convey you two [=Aśvins] here.” Ge instead takes the obj. of vahanti here to be the Maruts’ horses (supplied), with the Maruts themselves presumably the subj. Scar (415-16) has the Maruts as subj. and clouds as obj., but in the absence of any clouds in the context, it seems better not to invent them. The disadvantage to my proposal is that the ‘birds’ reading of váyaḥ has to leap backwards over a nominal clause (dhā́tāra stuvaté …) that clearly has the Maruts as its nominal referent. Nonetheless, I think this kind of syntactic manipulation is possible in punning: the audience reaches the end of the verse and realizes that ‘birds’ is the subject they were missing at the beginning, while also interpretating váyaḥ as the neut. object of dhā́tāraḥ.

I am tempted to take dhā́tāraḥ as a periphrastic future: “they will establish …”


## 36
Pāda b contains two ambiguous forms, whose variant interpretations have produced very different tr.: chándaḥ may be nom. sg. masc. to chánda- ‘pleasing’ (if that stem exists; the only other possible ex. in the RV is at I.92.6, q.v.) or nom./acc. sg. neut. to chándas- ‘meter’; sū́raḥ can be nom. sg. masc. sū́ra- 'sun' or gen. sg.

svàr- 'id.' The standard tr. opt for the former choice in both cases, e.g., Re “tel un charmeur est le soleil, de par (son) éclat.” I have chosen the latter in both cases. The verse is a reference to the ritual here-and-now, the kindling of the fire at dawn: the phrase sū́ro arcíṣā “with the ray of the sun” is an indicator of that time. I take chándaḥ as a metrical verse because the hymn opened with a similar metrical expression: triṣṭúbham íṣam (see comm. ad vs. 1). The Maruts are characterized as chandastúbh- ‘chanting in rhythm’ in V.52.12, a cmpd that unites the chandas- of our vs. 36 with the 2nd part of triṣṭúbh- in vs. 1. To be born “like a metrical verse” makes sense in a RVic context: the fire is kindled (born) as the verbal portion of the ritual begins to be spoken (born).
