+++
title = "008"

+++
Aśvins


## 04
The hapax voc. adhapriyā is clearly based on the slightly better attested kadhapriya-/-prī- (on which see comm. ad I.30.20), a form of which is found in the immediately preceding hymn VIII.7.31. The latter is a dismissive and slighting form of address (“when-friends?” -- that is, fair-weather friends) whereas adhapriyaseems to be the opposite: “now/here-friends,” that is, reliable friends.


## 05
I construe both svā́hā and stómasya with úpaśrutī, although they are in different pādas. (Ge takes svā́hā as an independent mini-clause and construes stómasya with voc. vardhanā.) Although várdhana- regularly does take the genitive, I am reluctant to take stómasya with it because we might expect the gen. to lose its accent in a vocative phrase (although this loss is of course not invariable, as Old points out). úpaśruti- also takes the gen. (see I.10.3), and since svā́hā is indeclinable, it can also be dependent on úpaśruti-, at least as I see it. Old also floats the possibility that stómasya goes with úpaśrutī, though he seems to favor a connection with várdhanā.

It is not clear whose dhītí- ‘insights’ are in question in c. Ge takes them as the Aśvins’, and the fact that kavī ‘poets’ qualifies them directly adjacent to dhītíbhiḥ would support this view. However, in 19cd the dhītíbhiḥ definitely belong to the (human) poet, and this also seems to be the case with suvṛktíbhiḥ in 3b (on the basis of 22ab), as well as dhībhíḥ and stómebhiḥ in 7cd. In general the unrelenting point of this hymn is that the Aśvins are supposed to come here at our producing various verbal products for their delectation. I take the instr. in these cases to be instrumentals of cause.

With prá in d I supply another verb of motion. Judging from his tr. Ge must take the verb to be supplied as prá √as ‘be outstanding’: “Ihr … (seid) an Gedanken … voraus.” This is not impossible, but this is a journey hymn and not much else happens, esp. in this section: we offer praise; they come.


## 06
yác cid dhí vām purā́… is very like (nahí ṣma) yád dha vaḥ purā́in the immediately preceding hymn (VIII.7.21), which, with a present tense verb, expresses habitual action in the past. Here we have instead the med. 3rd pl. perfect juhūre (found otherwise only in almost identical context in I.48.14; see Kü 606), also apparently expressing habitual past action. (Delbrück [AiS 501-3] does not comment on this usage.) In both cases (also I.48.14) that action is implicitly compared to what is happening in the present. Here my praise is contrasted with those of the seers of the past.

VIII.8.11, 14-15: The bahuvrīhi sahásranirṇij- ‘having thousandfold raiment’ is found only in this hymn and does not seem a particularly natural qualifier either of a chariot (vss. 11, 14) or of refreshment (15).


## 12
The stem manotár- is found only twice in the RV, in identical pādas (I.46.2=VIII.8.12), in the dual manotárā, with unexpected short vocalism in this strong form (expect *manotā́rā)—as opposed to manótar- (so accented), which occurs only in the nom. sg. In I.46.2 the form appears in a pāda after one containing likewise dual síndhumātarā, which has -tar- legitimately, and as Old says (ad I.46.2; see also AiG III.199), manotárā might have been shortened in this context, with the pāda then borrowed into VIII.8.12. But Old is not enthusiastic about this explanation, and Tichy (-tar-stems, 58) persuasively suggests that the -mātarā form probably provided the context for preserving the short vowel in manotárā, but was unlikely to have produced it. But her explanation (if that’s what it’s meant to be), that manotárā is “eine dichtersprachliche Reliktform” (58; cf. 41 n. 48, where she calls both manótā and manotárā “dichtersprachliche Einzelformen”) doesn’t explain its source: the - tar- vocalism should not be a relic if we assume that agent nouns derive from *-torstems, and blaming it on Dichtersprache is a non-account: poets don’t make up forms with no reason, at least in my view. The problem is similar to dhánutarā (on which see comm. ad IX.93.1), also dual, and though I have no good explanation for either of them, the fact that they are built not to roots, like standard agent nouns, but to pres.

stems may have weakened the perceived links to -tar-stem inflection and allowed them both to assimilate themselves to -tara-comparatives, whose duals would have had the same -tarā.


## 15
The first hemistich reprises 8cd, but in this vs. the poet asks for something in response to his strengthening hymns.

## 15-16
Another example of chained vocabulary: ghṛtaścút- ‘dripping with ghee’, which is reasonably appropriate both for ‘refreshment’ (íṣ-, 14) and ‘nourishment’ (ū́rj-, 16).


## 18
I supply “who listen” in d on the basis of V.61.15 śrótāro yā́mahūtiṣu.


## 19
mayobhúvā in pāda a repeats the same word in 9d, with śambhúvā in b generated as a variant to it.

Pāda d, gīrbhír vatsó ávīvṛdhat, is the third occurrence of this same pāda in this hymn (also 8d, 15b, except the verb in 8 lacks the accent). The instr. pl. dhītíbhiḥ at the end of c seems to double gīrbhíḥ, as śambhúvā does mayobhúvā in the first half-verse.


## 22
It may not be clear in the publ. tr. that “found in many places” is a voc. addressed to the Aśvins and does not qualify the songs and hymns. I take this form as a “vocativized adverb” in Re’s phrase, derived from purutrā́‘in many places’, against the standard opinion that it contains the root noun to √trā ‘protect’ and means ‘protecting many’ (so Sāy, Gr, Ge). Scar (194) considers both options and cannot decide. In fact I do not feel strongly about the analysis reflected in the publ. tr.

and could also accept ‘protecting many’. However, it might be worth noting that the adv. purutrā́frequently occupies pāda-initial position, as here, and that there are several occurrences of it in nearby hymns (VIII.1.7, 5.16, 11.8), one of which (VIII.5.16) is in an Aśvin hymn. The Aśvins are the subj. of a form of √trā only once (VII.71.2), but this is not a strong argument either way.


## 23
As noted in the publ. intro., the three footsteps (trī́ṇi padā́ni) attributed to the Aśvins must be meant to evoke the three celebrated padā́ni of Viṣṇu (cf. I.154.4).

Perhaps it is simply the Aśvins’ penchant for trios (not found in this hymn, however) that is the point of contact. One might note, however, that in the next hymn (VIII.9), also by Vatsa, vs. 2 asks the Aśvins to confer on us the power in the midspace, in heaven, and “through the five peoples of Manu” (i.e., on earth). Since Viṣṇu’s three steps cover the same three cosmic divisions, the Aśvins’ geographical reach may be alluded to here. Even more striking in the next hymn (VIII.9.12d), the Aśvins “stand in the strides of Viṣṇu” (víṣṇor vikrámaṇeṣu tíṣṭhathaḥ).

The purport of the paradoxical pāda b is also not clear; see speculations by Old, Ge, and Re. I think it must have something to do with the anxiety expressed throughout this hymn about exactly where the Aśvins are and our oft-expressed desire for them to leave wherever it is and come to us. So we are never sure whether they are visible or hidden.

The final pāda reflects our also stated desire that the Aśvins forsake other sacrificers to come to us (see esp. vs. 8).
