+++
title = "009"

+++
Aśvins


## 02
For the possible relevance of this verse to VIII.8.23, see comm. ad loc. 
## 03
pári √mṛś is a more vivid expression than Gr’s ‘geistig berühren’, Ge’s ‘befassen’ indicate: in X.34.4 it is the verb the Gambler uses in his tortured imagining of others fondling his wife: anyé jāyā́m pári mṛśanti asya. Something similar seems to be the point here. The Aśvins put their powers at the disposal of other poets; Vatsa sees this promiscuity in almost sexual terms and begs them for an exclusive relationship.


## 04
I take cíketathaḥ ‘attend to’ in a somewhat sinister sense here: with the help (/invigoration) of soma the Aśvins will turn their attention to Vṛtra/the obstacle and take care of the threat he/it poses. However, I am not entirely certain why the Aśvins are being implicated in the Vṛtra battle and assimilated, as it were, to Indra. The gharma of the 1st half-verse is more naturally their drink. But see 7cd below. Note also that in 12a they drive on the same chariot with Indra. On the basis of that hemistich, which also associates them with Vāyu (12b), we can assume that it is their joint appearance at the dawn sacrifice that brings them into conjunction.


## 05
The referent of the yád’s in ab is not overtly expressed. Ge supplies ‘Heilmittel’ on the basis of vs. 15 with bheṣajám. That verse does not seem to me particularly apposite. Nonetheless, I follow him, because the denom. bhaiṣajyá- is found in the next vs. (6b), because bheṣajá- is elsewhere found in the waters (cf. I.23.19), and because plants are generally associated with healing (see X.97).

kṛtám can be either a neut. sg. ppl., agreeing with yád, or a root aor. 2nd du. act.

injunc. Gr and Ge take it as the former; Old considers the latter, but rejects it on what seem to me slight grounds. I take it as the latter, in part because the immediately preceding hymn contains 2 of the 7 (per Lub; 8 if this is counted) examples of accented finite 2nd du. kṛtám (VIII.8.13, 17) and also because I think it more likely that the Aśvins would be portrayed as actively producing these remedies (see 6b) than that the remedies simply got made. However, the ppl. interpr. is far from excluded.


## 06
The rendering of ná vindhate in the publ. tr. is opaque. By “does not get enough” I meant something like “produces in superfluity” -- from Vatsa’s point of view, there can never be enough praises for the Aśvins.

The sense relation between the yád clauses of ab and the main clause in c is not clear. I think the idea is that even when the Aśvins are preoccupied with some other activity, Vatsa keeps praising them on the assumption that they will pay attention at some point.

I am also a bit unclear on how pāda d fits with the rest. I think that it reinforces pāda c; that is, Vatsa keeps producing hymns because he knows that the Aśvins ultimately come to someone who offers them sacrifice (here represented by the havís- ‘oblation’). But it could instead mean that Vatsa is wasting his time, because the Aśvins go for the oblation, not the praise. This seems less likely, esp.

since both praise and oblation are offered to the Aśvins in the next vs. ### 07
This new tṛca opens as the hymn does (1a): ā́nūnám, followed by a form of aśvín-. The 2nd vs. of the tṛca (8) also opens with ā́nūnám.

Ge (also Lü 362) supplies a form of ‘speech’ with vāmáyā, obviously as part of the seer’s ritual offering to the Aśvins. But vāmá- generally expresses the valuable thing that the ritualist receives from the god(s) in exchange for his ritual service, and I have taken it this way here, with (loosely) an instr. of price. I do not have an explanation for its fem. gender, however. There are no other occurrences of a fem. in

-ā́to this adjective; most forms are masc. or neut, and the other fem. forms are in -ī́.

The honeyed soma and hot milk of vs. 4 return here.

Ge (also Lü), flg. Ludwig, takes átharvaṇi rather bizarrely as a nominative, but there seems no reason not to interpr. it as the loc. it appears to be (so, e.g., Old).

Nor does there seem any reason not to take it as the name of a priest, as it is elsewhere (pace Sāy., Old). I take it as a loc. absol. without an overt participle marking it.

## 08-09
With Kü (181-82), I assign the curious paired reduplicated med. opt.

forms (ā́…) cucyavīrata (8) and ācucyuvīmáhi (9) to the caus. reduplicated aorist, which is otherwise only active. I have no explanation for the difference in the grade of the root syllable (-cyav- vs. -cyuv-); no morphological or metrical factors can explain the variation between these two almost adjacent forms. Possibly the 3rd pl.

has full grade in some kind of imitation of the full grade of act. 3rd pl. imperfects to redupl. presents (type ájuhavur vs. ájuhuma), but that is found only in the active voice and not in the optative, so it would be a bizarre and tenuous imitation indeed.


## 09
The last pāda of the verse (d) is identical with the last pāda of vs. 3 (c), but the point is very different. In vs. 3 the poet asks the Aśvins to pay attention only to him despite the activities of other poets; here it’s “we” who are moving the Aśvins, but the poet still asks for their exclusive attention. Given the constant interchange between 1st singular and plural in ritual situations, I find it difficult to think that the poet is trying to distance himself from his priestly comrades and get the Aśvins all to himself. But I don’t have a good explanation.


## 10
The final pāda here is a variant of 3c and 9d, but the circumstances differ from both. Here the poet doesn’t contrast himself with other rival poets (as in 3) or with the larger group of “us” (as in 9), but asks that the Aśvins pay attention as they did to previous seers -- though actually not so previous: Kakṣīvant and Dīrghatamas are of course famous poets represented in the collections of Maṇḍala I (I.116-26 and I.140-64 respectively); Kakṣīvant is also identified in the Anukramaṇī as Dīrghatamas’s son (or descendant). A son/descendant of Vyaśva, Viśvāmitra, is the poet of VIII.23-26, and X.148 is attributed to Pṛthu (not Pṛthī) Vainya. So our poet seems to be asking for the same attention as these famous seers received, but they are not seers of the distant past but at most of a few generations ago, possibly even roughly contemporary (though the perfect juhā́va puts the invocation in the past).

They are both models and, to a certain extent, rivals.

Pṛthi in the publ. tr. should be corrected to Pṛthī.


## 16
Ge tr. devyā́… vācā́(belonging to different pādas) as “mit der göttlichen Rede,” which is certainly possible. But since Dawn is explicitly the topic of the next two vss. (17-18) and since there’s a voc. devi (or possibly, against the Pp., a nom. devī́) in pāda c, it seems best to separate the two instrumentals and take devyā́as referring to Dawn. The poet has awoken with the advent of the goddess Dawn (the natural world) at the same time as the ritual speech directed to the Aśvins commences.

If nom. devī́is read here, vy ā̀var can be 3rd ps., not 2nd. But I see no reason to go against the Pp. in this case, since Dawn is addressed in the voc. (uṣaḥ) in both 17a and 18a, and the unambiguous voc. devi is found in 17b.


## 19
ā́pīta- is better derived from √pī ‘swell’ (so Ge, EWA s.v. PAYI ) than to √pā ‘drink’ (Lub, Re [though Re allows a double sense]).

Pāda d requires a verb to be supplied with prá. I follow Re in supplying ‘wake’, on the basis of vs. 17. Ge kṛnvata (on the basis of I.186.10), thus “… (lassen) … den Vorrang.” His model seems awfully distant, given that prá bodhaya appeared two vss. previously.
