+++
title = "010"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
Ge and Re take dīrgháprasadman- as a PN, but I follow Gr and Old in taking it as a fully lexical bahuvrīhi, ‘providing a long seat’. Both of the latter consider the word an epithet of the earth, and the parallel cited by both, V.87.7 dīrghám pṛthú paprathe sádma pā́rthivam, is quite suggestive. However, the other occurrence of this form in VIII.25.20 seems to narrow its application to the ritual ground, rather than the earth in general.

I do not know quite what an ā́kṛta- house is, and the past participle kṛtá- is not otherwise found with ā́. The publ. tr. ‘prepared, made ready’ follows Ge/Re.

However, since the lexeme ā́√kṛ generally means something like ‘bring here’, and since there is no second vā in pāda c, I am tempted to tr. “on the sea in a house directed here’, namely a boat, though this may be too whimsical.


## 02
Elsewhere héṣas(-vant)- means ‘weapon’, and I see no reason to ascribe a different sense to it in this compound. So Lü (Philol. Ind. 783), contra Ge’s ‘Rosstreiber’, Re’s ‘à l’incitation rapide’. I am somewhat disturbed by the accent, however.


## 03
Re points out the similarity of gṛbhé kṛtā́in 3 with ā́kṛte gṛhé in 1c.


## 04
Again Ge takes the presumed loc. asūré as a PN, explicitly rejecting Gr’s ‘sunless time’ in his n. 4b. But I do not see a good reason for this rejection, and given that the Aśvins are the “early-coming” gods and receive offerings before dawn, ‘sunless time’ makes sense ritually. As Old and Ge both point out, asūré is involved in word play with sūráyaḥ, which of course may account for the appearance of this hapax here, as so often.


## 05
The final clause of this vs. contains a misleading ambiguity: the second element in átha mā́gatam ‘so come to me” should be interpreted as mā ā́, but mā́ could also represent the prohibitive particle, with mā́gatam “don’t go” or even mā́ā́ gatam “don’t come.”
