+++
title = "011"

+++
Agni


## 04
The verb veṣi can be either a 2nd sg. indic. pres. or a si-impv. to √vī ‘pursue’. (See, e.g., the distribution as given by Lub 1330 and 1331; Lub takes this occurrences as an indic.) Ge tr. it as an indic., Re as an impv., and the publ. tr. takes it as an indicative present. Contextually I would (weakly) prefer the imperative, and the undoubted si-imperative sátsi found in 10b might support this interpr. But I am not certain that si-imperatives take ná as negative rather than mā́. Given their derivational status as haplologized s-aor. subjunctives, ná should be quite correct, but they have generally transferred functionally into the imperative domain and so might be expected to take mā́, however anomalously. I know of no diagnostic passages.

The voc. ‘o Jātavedas’ was carelessly omitted from the publ. tr.


## 10
The accent of sátsi is probably owing to its presence in a hí clause.

However, if one follows Ge and Re in seeing a suppressed “you have taken your seat” to be supplied with sanā́t ‘of old’ (e.g., Re “assieds-toi comme Oblateur nouvellement, (comme tu t'es assis) anciennement!”), the accent could come from the implicit contrast between the two verb forms.

The accent on pipráyasva is somewhat more difficult to account for, and, curiously, the standard tr. and comm. do not mention it (incl. Kü 323). I think it also arose by contrast with another verb form, namely ā́yajasva. The stem pipráya- to which this impv. belongs (see Kü and my 2018 “The Vedic Perfect Imperative and the Status of Modal Forms to Tense-Aspect Stems,” in Fs. Lubotsky), several times co-occurs with a form of √yaj and on several of these occasions is accented (e.g., VIII.39.9 yákṣac ca pipráyac ca naḥ, also VII.17.4; cf. also II.6.8 without accent, all cited by Kü 323).
