+++
title = "012"

+++
Indra

## 01-03
This tṛca is unified by a series of relative clauses (mostly introduced by yéna) whose antecedent in the main clause is the tám that opens the refrain. The presumed referent of all the relative pronouns (and the tám’s) is mádaḥ in 1b, although it could be any power or capacity of Indra’s that comes to mind.


## 01
Although it is Indra whom we expect to be the best soma-drinker, here the epithet is transposed to his máda- ‘exhilaration’.


## 02
Unlike Ge I take svàrṇara- here as an epithet of Adhrigu, rather than a PN (sim. VIII.3.12), though not on strong grounds, and VIII.6.39, where I do take it as a PN, undercuts this position.

Either Adhrigu or, if he is a personage, Svarṇara receives the qualifier vepáyant- ‘setting atremble’, without an object. Given how little we know about Adhrigu (or Svarṇara), it is not clear what such an object might be, though it might refer to poetic inspiration.


## 04
Ge supplies a verb (verhilf) to govern the accusative phrase in ab, but given the parallelism of vss. 4 and 5, it is better that this phrase is governed by the juṣasva in 5a.

## 05-06
The verbal form that constitutes the refrain, vavákṣitha ‘you have waxed strong’, is accented. Old plausibly attributes the accent to its position as a semiindependent refrain (Anhang), so that it is not necessary either to supply a subordinator or to take the verb as an independent clause. Ge, by contrast, supplies a subordinator, flg. Sāy (see Ge n.).


## 06
In c pratháyan is used differently in simile and frame. In the former it is straightforwardly transitive, with vṛṣṭím as object; in the latter it is intransitive or, at least, absolute, as in, e.g., IV.53.2.


## 07
Note the chaining between tṛcas, with the refrain of vss. 4-6 vavákṣitha, returning as the first word of the following verse, vavakṣúḥ, with person and number adjustment. Interestingly, it's this verse where the Anhang refrain doesn't precisely match the two following verses: ávardhayat versus prá vāvṛdhe, with the same root but different stem, and transitive versus intransitive. This is the only such deviation in this hymn.


## 08
I take yádi in pāda a as standing for *yád ī, with shortening before the cluster pr. See Jamison 2002. Hence ‘when’, not ‘if’. The *ī as usual functions as an accusative, anticipating the obj. sahásram mahiṣā́n.

The word play between the voc. pravṛddha in a and the refrain verb prá vāvṛdhe cannot be easily captured in English.


## 09
Ge takes the simile in c agnír váneva with ab: “Indra brennt … den Arśasāna nieder, wie Agni die Bäume,” with sāsahíḥ only construed with the refrain: “der Siegreiche ist erstarkt” (though see his n. on 9c). But this violates the structure of the rest of the hymn, where the c pāda hangs together. I therefore take the quality held in common between simile and frame to be sāsahíḥ. For √sah with this simile see VIII.40.1 yénā dṛḷhā́… sāhiṣīmahi / agnír váneva... “by which we might become victorious over the strongholds … as Agni (is victorious) over the woods,” and for the reduplicated -i-stem governing the accusative III.16.4 cákrir yó víśvā bhúvanābhí sāsahíḥ “Who creates and overwhelms all living beings…” On this nominal type and its syntactic behavior, see Grestenberger 2013 (JAOS 133).

Arśasāna is an enemy of Indra in the RV about whom little is known.

VIII.12.10, 12: The verb initiating the refrain, mímīte, is accented, and in these two verses the accent can be explained as a result of the status of the refrain; see above ad vss. 5-6. In 11 it starts a new clause and can owe its accent to that.


## 10
Encouraged by the insistent feminines, ṛtvíyāyatī here is a pun, referring both to Thought’s conformity to the ritual order and to her menstrual cycle. See 80.7 for the same word play involving dhī́ḥ, where the femininity of the subject is more emphasized than here. It is possible that the refrain here “she is (well- )measured indeed” can also refer to the menstrual cycle. Otherwise it probably refers to the metrical character of the thought and perhaps the fact that she measures up even to Indra’s great size. The refrain also has to be considered beside a phrase in the next hymn, VIII.13.30 mímīte yajñám ānuṣák "measures the sacrifice in proper order."


## 11
The subject of this verse is not made clear. Ge suggests either stóma- or dhītí-. The latter is more likely in my view, continued from vs. 10. There are no clashing non-feminines, since devayúḥ could serve either for masc. or fem., and in any case could be matching the gender of the gárbhaḥ. Another possibility is Agni, since he is regularly called an embryo in these circumstances, but the unity of the tṛca speaks against this. I would therefore change the “it”s in the publ. tr. (“its intention,” “it has grown,” “it is”) to feminine forms, to match vs. 10.

The VP krátum punīte of b is found in the next hymn, VIII.13.1b, where the subject is Indra, but that referent is not possible here.


## 12
Since sáni- is only a nom. actionis, not an agent, it must mean ‘winnings, gain’. What it must mean here is that Indra is what we win if we keep our part of the sacrificial bargain (mitrá-).

The subject of c must again be the dhītí-. So also Ge. But the point of the simile “like an axe” (vā́śīva) is somewhat unclear, though Ge’s explanation seems reasonable: just as the thought is measured out metrically (mímīta íd), so is an axe wielded in a regular rhythm (he compares VIII.19.23).

## 13-15
Lüders (Varuṇa 450) comments about the tṛca that it concerns only the songs sung to Indra; therefore in the refrain ṛtá- can only refer to “die Wahrheit des Liedes,” and the refrain ṛtásya yád is paraphrase for “das Lied.” I agree that the refrain refers to the verbal product offered to Indra, but prefer to supply ukthá- ‘(solemn) speech’, extracted from ukthá-vāhas- in 13a for 13c and 14c.


## 13
Ge interprets the verb abhipramandúḥ somewhat bizarrely as ‘go on a pilgrimage to’ (“Zu dem … die … Āyu’s … pilgerten”), presumably influenced by ukthávāhasaḥ ‘whose conveyance is solemn speech’. Kü (357) takes the same verb as intransitive, with the yám expressing the source of pleasure (“An dem die Erregten … sich (schon immer) erfreuen”). I see no reason why it is not a straight transitive “bring to exhilaration” like other forms of the act. pf. of √mad.

The question is what is the relationship between ab and c. Properly speaking, the yám should have a referent in the main clause (which is c: note the unaccented verb pipye), but there is no obvious candidate. Ge simply treats ab as an unresolved relative clause, without comment. I assume that Indra, the presumed referent of yám in pāda a, is covertly present in c: it is his mouth in which the speech/hymn swells - the speech having been homologized to soma already by the √mad form in b. See also 4ab where praise is compared to purified ghee, which may mediate the simile in our c, ghṛtám iva. Ge, however, seems to take the mouth as belonging to the Āyus (“… ihrem Mund”); this would make sense as the source of the speech offered to Indra. Perhaps the lack of an overt genitive limiting ‘mouth’ allows both interpretations some currency. I might therefore emend the publ. tr. to “it swells in his/their mouth.”


## 19
Ge tr. the infinitival gṛṇīṣáni as a modal “soll … loben.” Similarly Keydana, who takes it as a “matrix infinitive” with 2nd ps. subject but tr. modally (“… sollt ihr euch zu Hilfe besingen,” 174, 246). Because it is locative in form, I am somewhat dubious about assigning it this value, which is typical, and understandable, for dative infinitivals.

I have reordered the elements in c to make the sentence parsable. That the refrain vy ā̀naśuḥ should be construed with what precedes is shown by the parallel


## 27
vy ā̀naṭ turváṇe śámi "he came through to victory by his labor."


## 24
Note the slight variation on the refrain: abl. ójasaḥ, parallel to abl. ámāt in b, versus 22-23 dat. ójase.

Ge supplies “the world” (extracted from the dual of a) as subject of titviṣe in c.

I follow Old in taking Indra as subject, with the asya reflexive. As Old points out, in nearby VIII.6.5 it is Indra’s ójas- that is subject of the same verb; here the attribute has been deflected to an oblique case and the god himself is subject. Note also X.55.1, where Indra is modified by the participle titviṣānáḥ.


## 25
The opening verse of this tṛca echoes that of the last tṛca (22), with 22ab índram …, devā́so dadhire puráḥ matched by 25b devā́s tvā dadhiré puráḥ.

## 25-28
The phonetic figure noted in VIII.6.36 dominates the next four verses: haryatā́hárī.


## 27
That te in a is a dative of benefit, not a genitive with ójasā is shown by 52.3 yásmai víṣṇus trī́ṇi padā vicakramé.

## 28-30
The linkage of tṛcas is unusually close here, with the pāda-length refrain of vss. 25-27 recast as the first hemistich of vs. 28 and ā́d ít te, which opened the refrain of 25-27, retained as the opening of the refrain of 28-30.

For the only time in the hymn the Anhang is only three syllables, yemire, but this deviation is probably a word play. Old rejects Ge’s older suggestion that we should read ní yemire as the refrain on the basis of niyemiré in 28b, but although Old is probably correct that we should not change the text by accenting ní, I think he was too hasty in dismissing the idea out of hand. The refrain ā́d ít te víśvā bhúvanāni yemire temptingly juxtaposes the final syllable of the neut. pl. bhúvanāni and the verb yemire, and of course bhúvanā without its -ni would be a fine neut. plural as well. The audience is surely being invited to consider alternative segmentations.


## 29
The doubling of te … túbhyam is presumably pleonastic in ab, with the yadā́te simply repeated from 27a, 28a.

## 31-33
This tṛca is unified by the 4-syllable pāda prā́dhvaré. This pāda appears also in VIII.46.18 and IX.102.8, always as the final pāda of Uṣṇih (or the equivalent: in 46.18 Upariṣṭādbṛhatī). I interpr. it in the context of the fairly frequent fuller expression prayaty àdhvaré, a loc. absol. meaning “while the ceremony is proceeding,” which is esp. common in VIII: I.16.3 = VIII.3.5, V.28.6 = VIII.71.12, VIII.7.6, VIII.13.30, X.21.6; cf. also VI.10.1). I take prā́dhvaré as a truncated version of this loc. absol. and tr. it “while the ceremony is pro(ceeding).”


## 31
Pāda c presents some difficulties of interpretation, in particular how to distribute the three accusatives jāmím, padā́, and pípratīm. The last, a participle, takes padám as object in IX.10.7 (adduced by both Old and Ge): padám ékasya píprataḥ “guiding the track of the lone one safely across.” But it also takes personal objects, as in nearby VIII.6.2 prajā́m rtásya p ̥ íprataḥ “guiding the child of truth [=poem] safely across.” I therefore take it as a semantically mixed construction, with jāmím ‘kin’ (which in this case, as in VIII.6.2, would be a poem or hymn) in the frame and ‘footsteps’ in the simile. By contrast, Ge takes jāmím as the subject of the simile, parallel to suṣṭutím: “die wie eine Schwester deine Schritte geleitet.” His interpretation reads better, but ignores the position of iva and also the contrasting constructions of the participle píprat- elsewhere. By my interpretation the point is that the suṣṭutí- produced in ab takes the rest of the verbal portion of the sacrifice along with it to the god.

I take the refrain prā́dhvaré as a (quasi) locative absolute, as in VIII.46.18, rather than as integrated into what precedes.


## 32
Contrary to Ge, I take pāda c as part of the subordinate clause of ab, with vs. 33 the main clause. Ge. is forced to supply a verb (“geht”).

dohánā is the problem here. Gr suggests we read it as underlying dohánās as in I.144.2, despite the sandhi. This seems to be the basis of Ge’s interpretation (“die Melkung” as subject), but Old rejects this and takes it as an instrumental. I weakly follow Old, but neither of the interpretations is particularly compelling.
