+++
title = "013"

+++
Indra Although the intro. to the publ. tr. is somewhat dismissive of this hymn and dubious about any unifying factors, closer examination shows a subsurface thematic unity esp. in the mid and later parts of the hymn, roughly vss. 16-30. For discussion see below.


## 01
For b see VIII.12.11.


## 02
The word apsujít never occurs without an immediately preceding sám, whose function is not clear. See VIII.36.1-6, IX.106.3. Dissatsifaction with this expression goes back to Ludwig, and Scar (154-55) suggests that the phrase is a metrically more favorable version of *apsú sáṃjit “completely victorious in the waters.” This has some merit, but it’s also worth noting in this metrical context that there seems to be a feeling that a preverb is a good way to start the final four syllables of an Uṣṇih, and when in doubt sám is a safe one. See in the previous hymn VIII.12.16-18 sám índubhiḥ (though the sám is functional there), 22-24 sám ójase, - aḥ. In its other two occurrences (VIII.36.1-6, IX.106.3), sám apsujít is a separable 4- syllable pāda (as long as one accepts Old’s analysis of the meter of VIII.36; see comm. there).


## 03
“I call” in the publ. tr. is a careless error for “I have called,” tr. augmented ahve and should be changed.


## 06
In c the subject of sg. rohate ‘grows’ is apparently unexpressed. Ge supplies Indra, while supplying the songs as subject of the pl. juṣánta, which he seems to take as transitive ‘please’: “dann wächst er [n. Indra] wie Zweige nach, wenn sie [n. Lobreden] wohlgefallen,” though I have trouble interpreting his tr. But forms of juṣáte almost always mean ‘take pleasure’, not ‘give pleasure’ (see 29b for juṣánta in just this sense). To tackle the latter problem first, I take the subject of juṣánta to be the closest plural noun, namely ‘branches’. Although the notion of branches enjoying themselves seems odd, I suggest it may refer to their growth under favorable conditions, with good soil and the proper amounts of water and light.

(Modern gardening manuals often say that a plant “likes” this or that condition.) As for the subject of rohate, I take it as an imperfect pun: the form vayā́(ḥ) is, on the one hand, the nom. pl. of vayā́- ‘branch’; however, a *váya(ḥ), which would differ from the text only by accent and the length of the final vowel, could be the nom. sg. of the neut. -s-stem meaning ‘vitality’, and so I take it. Alternatively one could follow Bloomfield’s suggestion (made at the parallel passage II.5.4) that vayā́(ḥ) is the masc.

nom. sg. of an internally derived *vayás- ‘possessing vitality, vital one’ (=Indra). In fact I now prefer this solution and would change the publ. tr. accordingly, to “the vital one grows” (though in this case we might expect a 2nd sg. verb). (In II.5.4 this is unnecessary because Agni is easily and properly supplied as subject, and the tree branches work fine in the simile.)


## 14
Although Ge interprets the stretching of the thread as a metaphorical expression for the continuation of old relationships, it seems far more likely that it reflects the normal idiom “stretch the thread” for setting up and performing the sacrifice. See vs. 18b devā́so yajñám atnata. “The way that is known” means the standard procedure. That Indra is being urged to do this, rather than the sacrificers, might be a little odd, but see, in fact, 18b just cited, as well as 30c mímīte yajñám.


## 15
The next section of the hymn is introduced by the end of this verse (a)vitéd asi “Just you are (our) helper,” a phrase repeated in 26a índra tvám avitéd asi, signalling the subsurface thematics of the apparently disordered midsection of this hymn.

## 16-18
This tṛca begins and ends in the same way: 16a índraṃ vardhantu no gíraḥ and 18c tám íd vardhantu no gíraḥ … In between are several clauses with augmented verb forms (aor. arāniṣuḥ 16c, impf. avardhayan 17c, aor. atnata 18b). It is not immediately clear if these form a mythological or historical sequence or are unconnected observations about the mythological and/or historical past. The most specific statement is found in 18ab, with the gods stretching the sacrifice tríkadrukeṣu. This same verse is found in VIII.92.12, which, however, provides no contextual help. But, as Ge points out, in I.32.3 Indra drinks soma tríkadrukeṣu before the Vṛtra battle, and II.11.17 and II.22.1 suggest the same scenario. If 18ab is somehow concerned with a soma sacrifice connected to the Vṛtra battle, then 17 may belong to the same complex, with the “inspired poets” of 17ab perhaps being the Maruts, who in some version of the myth encouraged Indra before the Vṛtra battle, and, again perhaps, their battle cries also strengthening Indra in 17c. Note that JPB tentatively identifies the Trikadrukas in I.32.3 and II.11.7, 22.1 as the Maruts. The clause in 16c may also belong with these mythological references, if the clans (víśaḥ) are the same as or equatable with the marútvatīr víśaḥ in 28c.


## 17
I am puzzled as to what “downward coursing help(s)” (pravátvatībhir ūtíbhiḥ) might be. As Ge points out, vs. 25 shows that the instr. phrase should be construed with avardhayan and so it must be help that the poets are giving Indra rather than getting from him (though they themselves are also avasyávaḥ ‘seeking aid’). The stem pravátvant- is generally used of landscape/cosmic features that have a gentle, and by implication pleasant and easily traversed, slope; see esp. V.54.9, where heaven and earth, the paths, and the mountains all provide a pravát- for the Maruts’ journey. The help provided to Indra by the poets may be of the same quality, smoothing and easing his journey to the sacrifice and his participation in it. In our 8b we met waters at play going along a slope (pravátā). Again ‘downhill, sloping down’ implies the path of least resistance and the opposite of effortful activity. If the identification of the poets with the Maruts suggested above is correct, it might be worth noting that four of the seven forms of pravátvant- are found in a single verse in a Marut hymn (the aforementioned V.54.9).

We meet vayā́iva again, repeating the simile of 6c. As in 6 I think that the tree branches are compared with Indra (and hence are acc. here), rather than being compared to the battle cries. They make Indra grow as tree-branches grow.


## 18
See the discussion of the tṛca as a whole above.


## 19
It is noteworthy that the properly performing praiser acquires epithets esp. characteristic of Agni and Soma (śúci-, pāvaká-), the quintessential ritual gods.

Pāda c is an interesting twist on IX.24.6-7; see comm. there.


## 20
This verse is quite opaque and its grammar can be construed in a number of different ways, giving the lie to Ge’s breezy “Die Konstruktion ist klar.” See Old’s rather more despairing assessment (“Es ergeben sich mannigfache Möglichkeiten, zwischen denen sichere Entscheidung ausgeschlossen…”).

The first problem is the value of the verb cetati and, when that has been determined, the identity of its subject. Ge takes the verb as intransitive/reflexive “… zeichnet sich … aus,” but an I/T value (‘perceive’) is also possible for this active stem. I interpret it so (as does Old in one of his suggested tr.), and continue as its subject the stotā́of vs. 19.

The next issue is the reference and distribution of tád íd rudrásya … yahvám, which Ge takes as subject of cetati and I as object. I will not rehearse the various suggested possibilities (see Ge and Old), but simply add my own: rudrásya is generally used with 'son(s)' to refer to the Maruts, who can be called 'young' in that context (cf. V.42.15b rudrásya sūnū́m̐r yuvanyū́n...); and a neut. noun regularly used for the Maruts is śárdhas- ‘troop’, as in the nearby hymn VIII.15.9c śárdhaḥ … mā́rutam. In fact see mā́rutaṃ śárdhaḥ in the pāda immediately preceding V.42.15b, namely 15a, where the singular (15a) and plural (15b) expressions are coreferential.

So here I supply that noun with tád … yahvám.

Then what are the “ancient domains”? On the basis of IX.52.2 pratnébhir ádhvabhiḥ “along your age-old routes,” referring to the protocols of the soma sacrifice and the ritual journey of soma, I suggest that the ancient domains here are the age-old practices of the sacrifice. It is essentially equivalent to 14c tántuṃ tanuṣva pūrvyáṃ yáthā vidé “Stretch the ancient thread in the way that is known.” In c I take vícetasaḥ to refer again to the Maruts. For the switch between singular and plural see V.42.15 just cited. The Maruts are called vícetas- in V.54.13.

What the whole verse means and what function it fills in the hymn are not clear to me. If my interpretation of the various parts is correct (and I have no confidence that it is), the successful human praiser of vs. 19 perceives his divine model, the Maruts, whose praise inspired Indra in the Vṛtra battle, at his sacrifice, where they have placed the thought or mental power that he should himself follow.


## 21
I struggle to make the final verse of the tṛca fit with the speculative scenario sketched for the first two verses (19-20). (As far as I can tell, neither Ge nor Old makes the attempt, an omission with which I am in sympathy.) One thing to account for is the switch from 3rd ps. in 19-20 (though note te in 19a) to a 1st

-2nd
partnership in 21. I suggest that the stotā́in 19 (and 20, by my reading) is now the 1st ps. speaker of 21. He offers Indra companionship or partnership (sakhyám) modeled on that shared by Indra and the Maruts, of which he had a vision in vs. 20. The sign of Indra’s chosing his companionship will be his (=Indra’s) acceptance of the speaker’s offered soma.

On ā́váraḥ see comm. on I.143.6. It may be better to tr. it as ‘grant’, rather than ‘choose’. If so, I would change the sentence immediately above to “The sign of Indra’s granting his companionship …”


## 22
One piece of evidence for my interpretation of the preceding tṛca as having the praiser (stotár-) as its thematic center is his reappearance in this verse, in this anxious question. The verse expresses the reciprocity inherent in the ritual situation, with the praiser wishing to be “most wealful” for Indra, while also receiving his own benefits from the god. This reminds us of verse 17, where the poets (quite possibly the Maruts) were both seeking help and making Indra increase through the help they gave him.


## 24
Pāda b yahvám pratnā́bhir ūtíbhiḥ is a deliberate echo of 20a yahvám pratnéṣu dhā́masu, and the only indication that yahvám is neut. in 20b but masc. in 24b are the pronouns tád and tám respectively that open the a-pādas. The phrase pratnā́bhir ūtíbhiḥ also recalls pravátvatībhir ūtíbhiḥ in 17b. These patterns suggest there is some reality to the below-the-radar thematic unity I’ve sketched out for the three tṛcas, vss. 16-24.


## 25
This verse both parrots the preceding verse (24ab … puruṣṭutȧm, … ūtíbhiḥ / 25ab … puruṣṭuta, … ūtíbhiḥ) and concentrates into a single expression the reciprocal aid between god and praiser that has dominated the rhetoric of the last tṛcas. In the command vardhasva … ūtíbhiḥ “become increased … by forms of help,” the instr. should express the means by which Indra becomes strong, and that should be the help given him by others, as in vs. 17 tám íd víprāḥ … ūtíbhiḥ / … avardhayan… “The inspired poets increased him with helps.” But the forms of help in 25 are ṛ́ṣistutābhiḥ ‘praised by the seers’, which suggests that these are forms of help given by Indra to us, like those in 24b. The condensed expression in this verse sets up a closed circle, a never-ending loop, in which forms of help given and received are identical and have identical results. With that established, the poet then presses his advantage and in pāda c and in 26a puts Indra squarely in the role of helping us.


## 26
See remarks on the repetition in pāda a under vs. 15 above.


## 27
Although Ge gives up on the cmpd. pratádvasū, which modifies hárī, Old plausibly suggests that it’s a univerbation of the frequent collocation prá tád “forth to that” or perhaps prá tád vásu “forth to that good thing,” perhaps as the actual command Indra “cries out” to the horses. Rendering it in English is somewhat clumsy.


## 28
Note the chaining over tṛca boundary: 27c … abhí svara# / 28a #abhí svarantu.

Most interpreters (Ge, Old, Klein [I.383]) take sakṣata as the verb of the relative clause beginning yé táva, but it is unaccented. Old recognizes the problem but considers it unnatural to separate táva from śríyam and accounts for the lack of accent acdg to ZDMG 60, 737-38 [=Kl.Sch. 212-13], namely occasional lack of accent when the rel. pronoun and the verb are in different pādas (not, in my opinion, a compelling explanation in any of these cases). But yé táva functions fine as an independent rel. clause, and supplying ‘your’ again with śríyam is no problem in an independent clause.

Ge supplies “come” in c, but the verb in b can do duty here as well.

The Maruts, who were only latent in vs. 20 (and probably 17), appear here with Rudra, who was present in vs. 20. The Marut clans here may pick up the clans in 16c; see above.


## 29
As Ge says, the subject here probably remains the Maruts. The question is whether “which is in heaven” is a restrictive or non-restrictive relative clause - that is, are there various possible tracks and it’s the one in heaven that they like, or is there one track and it happens to be in heaven. My inclination is to take it as restrictive, and the track or footstep in which they take pleasure is the one called elsewhere the paramá- (I.22.20-21, 72.2, 4, 154.5, etc.), upamá- (V.3.3), or uttamá- (V.51.4) ‘highest’, as well as divás padá- (IX.10.9, 83.2). There seems to be an implicit contrast to this high and distant padá-, which they like, and “the navel of the sacrifice” (nā́bhā yajñásya), where they find themselves. But these locations may be more complementary than contrastive, since the “highest track/footstep” often seems to indicate a place where a heavenly form of the earthly sacrifice is conducted simultaneously. See, e.g., I.22.20-21 and remarks on I.21.6.


## 30
This verse uses some of the material found in the previous hymn, also in Uṣṇih: prā́ci prayaty àdhvaré is a heavy variant of prā́dhvaré (that is, prá adhvaré) of VIII.12.31-33; mímīte is identical to the refrain mímīta íd (12.10-12); ānuṣák occurs in 12.11.

Who is ayám? This near demonstrative should mean that the referent is actually present. It can only be Indra. In the first two verses of the tṛca the focus is on his companions, the Maruts (“who are yours [=Indra]” 28a), and now attention turns to their leader, the subject of the hymn as a whole, and in the finale to the hymn his longed-for epiphany is signalled by this dramatic ayám.

That Indra himself “measures the sacrifice” is consistent with his being urged to “stretch the thread” in 14c above.

Ge’s interpretation of ab is quite different from mine, and seems to envisage the sacrifice receding in the distance as the subject keeps gazing further out towards it. This doesn’t make much sense to me, and the similarity of the expression in b to the cliched prá adhvaré (see just above), which refers to the temporal progress of the ritual (and in this case, perhaps the carrying of the Āhavanīya fire eastward), makes his interpretation unlikely.

The only other occurrence of dīrghā́ya cákṣase is in I.7.3, where Indra puts the sun in the sky for this purpose. See remarks ad loc., where I point out that the expression can be either temporal or locational or both.


## 33
prátiṣṭuti- occurs only here. I assume that it is a praise-hymn made in response to whatever the god has done for us, though Ge suggests it is a praise that corresponds to Indra’s greatness.
