+++
title = "014"

+++
Indra


## 05
Note the phonetic figure in ab: ... avardhayad# / ... ávartayat#


## 08
The sense of c is a little unclear; I consider it a condensed expression for “he shoved (the contents of) Vala [=cows] in our direction.” The verb nunude was presumably chosen to constrast with parāṇúde in 9c.


## 10
Misplaced simile marker in pāda a.

Both verbs in this verse are nonce forms: ajirāyate and arājiṣuḥ. Note their mirror image phonology, ajirā / arāji, which may help account for the creation of both the hapax denominative and the nonce iṣ-aorist. The former is built to ajirá- ‘quick’; the latter could belong to either of the √rāj roots, ‘rule’ or ‘shine’. Ge seems to opt for the former, at least judging from his invocation of ví rājasi in the preceding and following hymns (VIII.13.4=15.5) in his n., but his “haben den Ausschlag gegeben” (decided the issue) is hard to derive from ‘rule over’ and also doesn’t make much sense to me. But his n. also cites ví rājati in IX.61.18, where it clearly means ‘shines forth’, and also cites Sāy’s gloss dīpyante. Narten discusses the issue and finally decides (weakly) for ‘shine’, an interpretation I share.


## 11
The two -várdhana- compounds express something of the same type of role reversal found in the last hymn, where the help given by Indra and received by Indra became conflated. Here we might expect Indra to be strengthened by the praises and recitations, rather than strengthening them. And in fact, contrary to grammar, both Gr and Ge so interpret the compounds (Gr ‘am Loblied sich erlabend’, Ge “Denn dir sind … die Lobgesänge, die Lobgedichte eine Stärkung”). But -ananominals have transitive-causative force and are associated with -áya- verb stems, and in compounds their first member serves as object. See other -várdhanacompounds such as nṛmṇa-várdhana- ‘strengthening manly powers’ (II.36.5), paśuvárdhana- ‘strengthening livestock’ (IX.94.1), as well as numerous other stems such as yajña-sā́dhana- ‘making the sacrifice succeed’ (2x). If we stay true to the grammar, the point is that Indra, by his presence at the sacrifice and his willingness to receive praise, strengthens the products of his praisers, and this in turn creates bhadrá- for them, as pāda c says.


## 12
The last two words of the verse are yajñám surā́dhasam “sacrifice, very generous,” which appear to belong together, but the latter must in fact modify índram, the first word of the verse, as it usually does. A textbook example of why word order is not a reliable guide to RVic interpretation.
