+++
title = "015"

+++
Indra


## 03
By the rules established in Jamison 1992 for sá with 2nd ps. reference, sá rājasi here is in violation. But notice that this line (sá rājasi puruṣṭutam̐, éko vṛtrā́ṇi jighnase) is twinned with 11ab satrā́tvám puruṣṭutam̐, éko vṛtrā́ṇi tośase, which begins with satrā́, phonologically like our sá rā ... Also note ví rājasi in 5c, which could invoke a *sáṃ rājasi here (which would change the meter, but not improperly).

For sám √rāj / ví √rāj, see I.188.5 virā́ṭ samrā́ṭ ... And note that samrā́jam is the second word of the next hymn (VIII.16.1).


## 06
In c jayā can be a 2nd sg. imperative with lengthened final (so Pp., Gr, Ge) or a subjunctive (jayāḥ out of sandhi). Although an undoubted form of the imperative is found in 12c (jaya), I weakly favor the subjunctive here, the idea being that the praisers keep praising the same deed, and so he will keep doing it.

## 07-10
Every half-verse in this tṛca but 7c and 10c opens with a form of the 2nd sg. pronoun.


## 09
Since kṣáya- otherwise means only ‘dwelling place’, the text as we have it means “Viṣṇu, the lofty dwelling place,” as in the publ. tr., not “der hohe Wohner” (my italics), as Ge would have it. Already BR (see Gr s.v. kṣáya-) suggested that we read instead a bahuvrīhi *bṛhát-kṣayaḥ ‘having a lofty dwelling place’. This of course makes better immediate sense, but I think we can keep the text as we have it and also avoid making kṣáya- into a nonce agent noun (per Ge). Given the flexibility of RVic diction, it is not difficult to identify a god with his most characteristic product —in this case, Viṣṇu’s three footsteps, particularly his highest one, which becomes an important locus in heaven (see, e.g., I.22.19-21) — and he elsewhere is said to create dwelling places: VII.100.4 ví cakrame pṛthivī́m eṣá etā́ṃ, kṣétrāya víṣṇur mā́nuṣe … / urukṣitím … cakāra “Quick Viṣṇu strode across this earth for a dwelling place for Manu … / He has made wide dwelling.” In the RVic conceptual realm it is just one step from creating a dwelling place to being a dwelling place. The identification of Soma with a dwelling place in vs. 13 below supports the literal reading here.


## 11
On this verse forming a ring with 3ab, see intro. and comments on vs. 3.


## 12
Note that nā́nā opening b picks up nā́nyá(ḥ) opening vs. 11.


## 13
The identity of the addressee in this verse is not overt. As Ge points out, Sāy suggests that the singer is addressing himself, though pādas ab make difficulties for that interpretation. Old argues for Soma, which seems likely even though, unusually for an Indra hymn, soma has not previously figured in this hymn. However, all three pādas have parallels in the soma maṇḍala: for pāda a see IX.109.3c mahé kṣáyāya; pāda b is repeated in IX.25.4a modifying soma; and IX.111.3e is identical to the first three words in pāda c, save for the grammatical identity of the verb form (3rd pl. injunctive in IX.111.3, 2nd sg. imperative here). That Soma is the addressee here and so the subject of the impv. harṣayā is also supported by vs. 4 in the next hymn (VIII.16), where the exhilarating drinks (of soma) are called harṣumánt-.

Again, as in vs. 9, Ge waters down the meaning of kṣáya- to fit the context (“dweller,” not “dwelling”), but in his n. suggests that the dwelling, namely heaven, stands as a metonym for its inhabitants, the gods. I prefer not to recast and paraphrase the literal sense as Ge does, especially since, as it stands, this half-verse expresses a small but neat paradox involving container/contained: Soma both enters everything (b) and provides a vessel in which everything (or "we" anyway) can dwell (a).

In c jaítrāya picks up jaítrā in 3c.
