+++
title = "016"

+++
Indra


## 02
The simile in c, apā́m ávo ná samudré, is hard to interpret. “The sea” corresponds to Indra in the frame and “the aid of the waters” should correspond to recitations and famous deeds, but what is the aid of the waters? Ge suggests in passing a possible connection with avániḥ ‘stream(bed)’, but this seems based only on superficial phonological similarity, and in the end he tr. “die Gunst der Gewässer” and hopes for the best. Old suggests an emendation to apā́m *ápaḥ ‘work of the waters’, but it is hard to see how a nice alliterative phrase like that would become corrupted, and so, like Ge, I stick to the text transmitted and the common word ávasthat it seems to contain. Perhaps the point is that, like recitations that find their joy in contributing to Indra's power, the waters take pleasure in submerging themselves in the sea, “aiding” the sea by making it bigger.


## 03
How to construe maháḥ in c is not clear. I tentatively take it as the gen. sg.

of máh- and supply ‘prize’ or “wealth’. Lub groups it with the adverbial maháḥ ‘greatly’, which is also possible. I do not understand how Ge takes it grammatically, given his tr. “der grosse Beute macht,” which must somehow be rendering mahó vājínam.


## 04
harṣumánt- occurs only here, but note the impv. harṣayā that ends the last hymn (VIII.15.13).


## 06
The rare verbal stem ā́rya- ‘recognize’ is probably a derivative of the aríword family (including ā́rya- ‘Ārya, that is, belonging to our group’) and means ‘recognize as an Ārya, treat as an Ārya’. See EWA s.v. ĀR, where some doubts are expressed, and recently Kulikov (522-23), who tr. “Him alone the races treat as an ārya through his activities …”


## 08
The content of ab is straightforward, but it is worth noting the phonological play. On the one hand the independent pronouns sá … sá of pāda a are picked up in b by sa(tyáḥ) sá(tvā́). On the other, the morphologically parallel forms stómi yaḥ ... hávi yaḥ in a are picked up by the morphologically different satyáḥ in b.

(This would be a neater figure if the first two words didn’t show distraction in the suffix, as opposed to satyá-.) Then the -tyáḥ of satyáḥ morphs into the -tvā́of satvā́, which then distracts into tuvi- in the following word.
