+++
title = "017"

+++
Indra


## 01
On the injunctive sadaḥ as functional imperative, see Hoffmann 1967: 263.


## 03
Old discusses who/what to supply with yujā́, suggesting first the bráhmanof 2c, but then opting with Gr (tr.) and Ge, for soma. See Ge “(mit Soma) im Bunde.” Old rejects the possibility that it is Indra, which is the solution I have adopted here. I do so because you=Indra is almost the default with yujā́throughout the RV. For exx.

in VIII see nearby VIII.21.11 tváyā … yujā́(where the referent of the 2nd ps. is Indra) and VIII.68.9 tvā́yujā́(ditto), etc., etc., and for the full noun I.23.9 índreṇa … yujā́, etc. I would in fact suggest that the poet is here making the enclitic tvā do double duty; it is the correct accusative goal with havāmahe, but it also evokes the accented older short instr. tvā́that as an independent word is limited to constructions with yujā́.


## 07
The consensus that soma is covered (sáṃvṛtaḥ) with milk is surely correct; this is simply a different way of expressing the mixing of the two substances that is such a common trope in the soma maṇḍala, where it is often said that soma is clothed in cows (/milk). But the simile presents difficulties. For both Old and Ge a coveredup person (presumably male) is going to women/wives (Ge “soll … wie ein Verhülter zu Frauen schleichen”). Neither of them makes any comment on this bizarre image. I prefer to follow Caland-Henry’s interpretation (cited and rejected by Old): “voilé comme des femmes [qui vont au rendez-vous].” There is evidence elsewhere in the RV of women going to trysts (e.g., X.40.2), and the abhisārikā, a woman going secretly to her lover, often depicted as veiled or disguised, is, of course, a standard figure in the later literary and visual arts traditions. (Perhaps the untethered abhí in this pāda refers to this idiom, although it must be admittted that neither √sṛ or √sṛp appears with abhí in the RV.) There are a few grammatical difficulties to address. First, sáṃvṛtaḥ is masculine and singular, whereas the corresponding women are feminine and plural, but sáṃvṛtaḥ refers to soma in the frame, and the later rules about grammatical agreement between elements in the frame and the simile simply do not hold in the RV. More serious is the fact that the nom. pl. of jáni- is normally jánayaḥ. However, the asigmatic nom. sg. jánī in IV.52.1 shows that a long ī-stem jánī- had been extracted from the ambiguous forms acc. pl. jánīs and gen. pl. jánīnām (cf. AIG III.144).


## 08
vapódara- is a hapax, but its general analysis is fairly clear: it’s a bahuvrīhi with udára- ‘belly’ as second member and some word for ‘fat’ or ‘bulging’ presumably as first member. Filliozat (Doctrine classique, 126, without comment) takes it to be vapā́‘omentum’. See EWA s.v. vapā́-.

## 12-13
Contains a number of PNs, whose exact identity eludes us. See Ge’s nn., Mayrhofer PN s.vv.


## 13
kuṇḍapā́yya- is a technical term in later śrauta ritual; see Old. I have given a literal tr. of the word and disclaim any knowledge of what this verse really refers to.

The verb dadhre is taken by Old as most likely a 1st sg.; Ge allows that possibility but tr. with a 3rd sg. I supply Indra as subject, both because he is the deity of the hymn and because he is the default consumer of soma. Kü (264) takes the verb as intransitive and presential with mánaḥ as subject: “darin bleibt das Denken fast.” He also notes the possibility that this is a 3rd plural to √dhā, rather than belonging to √dhṛ.


## 15
The PN should be Pṛdākusānu, with a second long ā. The publ. tr. should be corrected.

In c the unaccented form gṛbhā in the HvN edition is a mistake for gṛbhā́, with the Pp.
