+++
title = "018"

+++
Ādityas


## 01
Ge (see also Gr s.v. sávīman-) construes ādityā́nām with sávīmani, but this seems unlikely. sávīman- is otherwise only found with its etymological partner Savitar, who does indeed appear in the last verse of this tṛca (3a). It is hard to believe that any other divinities could lay claim to this word.


## 02
The cmpd. sugévṛdh- is a hapax; the locative 1st member suge ‘on an easy road’ was presumably suggested by the paths of the first half of the verse.


## 03
As pointed out by JPB, both Savitar and Bhaga are anticipated in this tṛca by the cognate forms bhikṣeta and sávīmani in vs. 1.


## 06
There may be phonetic play between dívā in a and ádvayāḥ in b, faciliated by the áditiḥ that opens each pāda.


## 07
The naḥ of pāda a was careless omitted in the publ. tr., which should be changed to “will come to us with her help.” The text of pāda a reads utá syā́no dívā matír, with matí- ‘thought’. Ge takes this pāda a as a separate clause: “Und dies ist unser Gedanke bei Tag.” But the context seems to enforce Aditi as referent for syā́: note the insistent repetition of nom. sg. áditiḥ in all 3 pādas of the previous vs., once also associated with dívā; the initial áditiḥ of our pāda b; the parallel opening of 8a utá tyā́, also with a divine referent. Re uses his trademark parentheses to manipulate the syntax, yielding “this celebrated Aditi, (the object of our) poetic thought” -- “cette-célébre Aditi, (objet de notre) pensée-poétique” -- which can’t be legitimately extracted from the text. The text as transmitted, with two fem. nominatives, should rather encourage an identification of Aditi with “thought,” a step I am reluctant to take. I suggest instead a slight alteration to the text, which could have read *dívāmátir, i.e., dívā + *amátir ‘banner’, contra the Pp. This requires only a change in the accent, which could have been redactional, arising because of durmatím in 10b (cf. also ámatim in 11b). In this reading Aditi is implicitly compared to a banner or ensign. Although this comparison is not found of Aditi otherwise, amáti- is associated elsewhere with the Ādityas: Mitra and Varuṇa (V.62.5, 69.1) and Savitar (VII.38.1, 2, 45.2, 3).

Although as a noun, we would expect śáṃtāti to be feminine, hence *śáṃtātim in context, I prefer to take it here as a nonce neuter noun, rather than as a nonce neuter adjective modifying máyaḥ, contra Ge’s “beglückende Freude.” Perhaps instead of a neuter, we might consider it an honorary indeclinable, matching its base śám ‘weal’, which opens 8b and all three pādas in vs. 9; our śáṃtāti … karat would be entirely parallel to 8b śám … karataḥ and 9a śám … karat.

Gr identifies a lexeme ápa √kṛ for just this passage, on the basis of the sequence … karad ápa srídhaḥ, but ápa srídhaḥ is the refrain of this tṛca and must therefore be independent of what precedes it.


## 19
Ge and Re take hīḷáḥ as a gen., construed with ántaraḥ interpreted as ‘between’; hence “the sacrifice comes between (us and) your anger.” But this poses several difficulties: antarā́and sometimes antár mean ‘between’, but ántaraordinarily means ‘nearer, dearer’; moreover, the other party to the ‘between’ reading, namely ‘us’, is not in the text. Old’s solution, which I follow, avoids both difficulties.

He takes hīḷáḥ as an ablative (also accepted by Schindler, Rt Nouns), construed with the comparative ántaraḥ. The idea must be that, given the choice between holding on to their anger and accepting a sacrifice, they will opt for the latter. This sentiment might be more straightforwardly expressed in English by “Sacrifice is closer to you than your anger,” rather than the publ. tr. “There is a sacrifice …” However, I am disturbed by ásti: a copular sentence like the one suggested does not need, and should not have, a surface copula. I therefore take it as an existential “there exists a sacrifice that is closer …” As for the accent, ásti may be accented because it follows a pādainitial voc. or because it is immediately followed by another verb and shows contrastive accent.
