+++
title = "019"

+++
Agni


## 03
On metrically bad vavṛmahe, see comm. ad Kü (459) and comm. ad VI.4.7.


## 04
In the second hemistich of the publ. tr. “in heaven” (diví) has been carelessly repeated; the second one should be deleted.


## 07
The verse contains a double 2nd ps. address: implicitly with oblique 2nd ps.

plural prn. vaḥ in pāda a, explicitly with the (singular) voc. phrases in b and the 2nd singular prn. tvám in c. The latter invoke Agni, of course, but the former are most likely, in my opinion, the assembled peoples bringing together their clan fires. (See publ. intro.) Ge suggests rather the “Opferveranstalter” (arrangers of the ritual), which would ordinarily be the default reading of vaḥ in this type of context, but given the political agenda of the hymn, I think it covers a greater number of mortals than simply the ritual officiants. In the publ. tr. I take the vocc. of pāda b with c, which allows the vocatives to be the correct grammatical number and addressed to the correct personage. Strictly speaking, however, this logical division is not syntactically possible, as the vocc. are unaccented and must therefore belong with the preceding clause, ending syā́ma. Nonetheless, the slight violation in the tr. seems justified by sense.


## 08
The standard tr./interpr. assign védyaḥ to √vid ‘know’: Ge ‘denkwürdig’, Re ‘reconnaissable’ (also Gr). But a connection to √vid ‘acquire’ makes more sense to me.


## 09
Assuming (see EWA s.v.) that addhā́is cognate with Old Aves. / OP azdā, as ppl. to PIIr √*adh, Skt. √ah ‘speak’, I take this adv. to mean originally ‘in the announced / stipulated / well-known way’, which can then be bleached to ‘truly’ vel sim. But this passage allows the more literal meaning.


## 10
I supply astu (“let him be”) with the two forms of sánitā in cd on the basis of 9c sá … astu sánitā. However, either a straight equational reading (“he is a winner …”) or a periphrastic future (“he will win …”) is also possible.

## 11-12
The VP cáno dadhīta “should take delight” takes complements in two different cases (both found independently elsewhere), acc. stómam (11b), havyā́ (11c) and loc. rātíṣu (12b), all connected by vā (11c, 12a). Another ex. of the poets’ enjoyment of syntactically licensed case disharmony.

Note the alliterative v’s of 11c havyā́vā véviṣad víṣah (immediately preceded by 11b … viśvávāryaḥ and immediately followed by 12a víprasya vā …) and of 12d váso vividúṣo vácaḥ.


## 12
Both Ge and Re take the hapax avódevam, modifying vácaḥ, as meaning ‘below / inferior to (that of) the gods’. This makes a nice contrast to upárimartyam ‘above (that of) mortals’. However, it otherwise seems an odd sentiment: it is surely a given that anything we mortals produce will be inferior to whatever comes from the gods, but this is a given that we don’t necessarily want to emphasize. In this ritual context the point of our speech is that it should be good enough (better than that of other mortals) to bring the gods to us. Hence something like Gr’s “die Götter herunterholend, sie herablockend” seems preferable (see also Kü 492). The compound itself is a version of, or manipulation of, the reasonably common expression avó divā́/ diváḥ (I.163.6, V.40.6, VIII.40.8, IX.74.6).


## 14
My semantic reasons for rendering áditim as ‘boundlessness’ here, rather than as the PN of the goddess (contra Ge/Re), are given in the publ. intro. I would add here that √dāś almost never otherwise takes an acc. of the recipient of the pious service (except V.41.16 and possibly VI.48.2), but does occasionally take an acc. of the offering (e.g., I.71.6, 93.3). It’s also the case that áditim makes an irregular cadence: it should have an initial heavy syllable, though I don’t know what to make of that or how to repair it. There is also some phonetic play between pāda-final áditim and the final of 13a (havy)ádātibhiḥ.

Ge, flg. Sāy, takes víśvā (< víśvéd, i.e., víśvā+íd) with jánān and explains its neut. pl. form as attraction to udnáḥ, “das trotz der maskulinen Form doch Neutr. ist”

-- a convoluted and quite dubious explanation. It seems best to take the neut. pl. form
seriously (with Re; see also Old) and supply another (underlyingly masc. pl. ) ‘all’ with jánān, by perserveration, as it were. (Old and Re do not go that far.) As for Ge’s supposed udnáḥ, the Saṃhitā text of d reads dyumnaír udná iva tāriṣat, and the Pp. analyses the 2nd word as udnáḥ. But, as the HvN restoration udná ‘va shows, the pāda has one too many syllables. Moreover, the second syllable of udná would be better heavy. I follow Gr in assuming an instr. udnā́here, despite Old’s curt dismissal. The underlying text may have been either udnéva or udnā́‘va. I find entirely baffling the Old/Ge preferred underlying form udnáḥ (presumably because they wish to follow the Pp.) and their analysis of it as acc. pl. masc. because the expected neut. pl. cannot be produced (“für den kaum herstellbaren neutralen,” so Old). Why would *udā́(ni) be blocked when áhā(ni) ‘days’, to an entirely parallel stem, is produced frequently and easily? Re prefers taking putative udnáḥ as a gen. sg., which has the merit of not arbitrarily changing the stem’s gender, but requires supplying an acc. (kṣódaḥ) for it to modify. Old’s objection to the instr. sg. is that it isn’t parallel to the accusatives over which the mortal is crossing. But instr. udnā́is the idiomatic expression for traversing water (cf. V.45.10 udnā́ná nā́vam anayanta), and we have already had another instance of case disharmony in parallel expressions (see comm. on vss. 11-12).


## 15
Note the near mirror-image dyumnám (a) and manyúm (c).


## 16
Ge and Re take cáṣṭe here as ‘appears’, but this sense is otherwise not found for this stem, and I see no reason why the gods are not seeing by means of the illumination (dyumná-) that Agni provides. (Ge allows for the possibility of ‘sieht’ in n. 16a.) It is the same illumination that we wish to acquire, in order to become the best path-finders (gātuvíttama-), presumably since it’s impossible to find one’s way in the dark. My interpr. of vidhemahi reflects this desire for acquistion and differs from the standard rendering ‘honor, do reverence to’ (so Ge/Re). My interpr. depends first on the analysis of √vidh as historically derived from ví √dhā ‘divide, ritually distribute’ (see EWA II.555-56) and further on the observation that our form is the only real medial form to this secondary root (vidhanta in III.3.1 is an -anta replacement).

While act. vidhéma, etc., means “may we distribute ritual shares (à do honor to),” the contrastive middle can mean “may we receive ritual shares” -- much like the functional distribution of bhájati / bhájate. It might be argued that we should not take the middle form seriously because vidhemahi has been artificially created to produce an iambic cadence out of a Triṣṭubh cadence, given that act. vidhema is most commonly final in Triṣṭubh pādas. But in I.36.2 and I.114.2 the enclitic te serves this purpose: … vidhema te #, a solution that would have been available here.

There is some phonetic play between the pāda-final (gātu-)víttamā(ḥ) and vidhemahi.


## 17
The first hemistich resembles VIII.43.30 té ghéd agne svādhyò, 'hā víśvā nrcák ̥ ṣasaḥ, but in my opinion has a very different meaning. Given vs. 16, in which Agni’s brilliance produces the light by which gods and men see, I take nṛcákṣashere as ‘providing sight for men’, as opposed to its usual senses ‘having (one’s) eyes on men’ or ‘having a manly gaze’.


## 18
Ge takes diví as ‘at day(break)’, but this loc. is almost always used of heaven (so also Re), save for a few expressions like pūrvyám diví “early in the day” (II.22.4, VIII.22.6) and diví pā́rye “on the decisive day” (VI.17.14, etc.) and the cmpd. diviyáj- (IX.97.26) ‘sacrificing in the day’. To make this locative work, I see the hemistich as containing two slightly different constructions, both involving cakrire. I supply that verb from b to govern the accusatives in pāda a, where it has the straightforward sense “made X.” But in pāda b, governing the acc. + loc., it means rather “make X (to be) in Y,” i.e., “put X in Y.” It is possible that the second acc. in a, ā́hutim, also participates in that construction (“make the poured oblation [to be] in heaven”), but it is unlikely that védim does: the altar is surely earthbound. And since Agni is said to be ‘bepoured’ (ā́hutaḥ) in the next vs. (19a, also 22d, 23a, 25c), the poured oblation may well stay on earth too.


## 19
Both Ge and Re take this verse as expressing a wish (Ge “Glück bringend (sei) uns Agni …”). This is possible, but there is no overt modal, and a straight equational reading is perfectly fine.


## 20
Ge takes sthirā́simply as ‘Kräfte’, but (with Re) on the basis of the bahuv. sthirá-dhanvan- ‘having sturdy bows’ and phrasal instantiations thereof (e.g., in the next hymn, VIII.20.12 sthirā́dhánvāni), I supply ‘bows’.


## 23
Ge takes pāda a as the dependent clause and b as the main clause, but this causes a difficulty: why is bhárate accented? I follow Re in taking ab as the dependent clause and c as the main clause. This accounts for the verbal accent. It also solves another problem: yádī is hard to render as ‘if’, but if analyzed as yád ī (for this phenomenon see Jamison 2002 [Fs. Cardona]), the ī can, as often, double the object, in this case vā́śīm. But if vā́śīm is not part of the dependent clause, ī has no obvious function.

The question then arises, what is pāda c doing? It consists of a nom. (ásuraḥ), a simile marker (iva), and an acc. (nirṇíjam). What binds them together? With Re, I supply *bharate as the verb, from bhárate in b. The verb is used in two different senses: in b it describes the up-and-down motion of Agni raising and lowering (“bearing”) his axe, i.e., his flames, when ghee is poured on the fire, but in c ‘bears’ means ‘wears’, of a garment. This is a standard idiom; cf. I.25.13 bíbhrad drāpiṃ hiraṇyáyaṃ váruṇo vasta nirṇíjam “Bearing [=wearing] a golden mantle, Varuṇa dons his cloak.” This is yet another example of the fondness the poet of this hymn has for parallel but disharmonious constructions.

Rather than trying to identify a particular divinity as the ásura- in this simile (Re: Varuṇa; Ge: “die Asura”), I concur with Hale (Asuras, 68-69) that this probably refers simply to a rich human lord who would be distinguished by his fine clothing.

In the frame the nirṇíj- would be the ghee with which Agni is bepoured. Cf. V.62.4 ghrtásya nirn ̥ íg; sim. VII.64.1, IX.82.2.


## 27
Ge and Re take this brief verse as a self-contained sentence, but this requires that masc. súbhṛtaḥ modify neut. havíḥ. Though the masc. can be explained as attraction to putráḥ in the simile, the sentence still doesn’t yield compelling sense.

In this vs., a brief pendant to the preceding pragātha, I prefer to take pāda a as completing, contrastively, the thought of 26cd. In the fantasy role reversal depicted in vss. 25-26, where “I” am the god and “my praiser” is Agni, my praiser would not be ill-established (dúrhitaḥ 26c), but well-kept (súbhṛtaḥ) in my house (27a). The two adjectives are complementary, and I therefore take the subject of 27a to be the praiser (not the oblation nor, as Ge also suggests [n. 27ab], Agni). (This is more or less Old’s view.) Pāda b is then an independent ritual instruction.


## 29
The three táva’s morph from subjective to objective genitives: the will (krátvā) is definitely exercised by Agni, hence subjective genitive, while the lauds (práśastibhiḥ) are those praising Agni, hence objective. The gifts (rātíbhiḥ) can be either those given by or given to Agni. This sequence is framed by two exx. of táva (…) ūtíbhiḥ “with your help(s)” (28a, 30a), with subjective genitive.


## 30
On āváraḥ see comm. on I.143.6. It may be better to tr. it as ‘grant’, rather than ‘choose’ -- hence “(the man) to whom you grant companionship.” The general sense is essentially unaffected either way: a man who is Agni’s companion thrives.


## 31
The voc. siṣṇo is a hapax. Flg. Gr (hesitatingly endorsed by EWA, s.v.), I take it as a nonce u-adj. to a reduplicated form of √sani ‘gain, win’. Although an analysis as a desiderative u-adjecive is morphologically impossible (there being no trace of a desid. suffix), I still wonder if that is the semantic nuance here -- as if it were an aniṭ variant of siṣāsú-. Ge tentatively follows Ludwig’s connection with √sā/si ‘bind’ (“du Fänger”); Re tr. it as a PN and considers it an imitation of viṣṇo. It might also be a deformation of *śiśo, the expected but unattested voc. to śíśu- ‘child’, a frequent epithet of Agni. The context does not strongly favor (or disfavor) any of these hypotheses, and none of them is particularly strong.

ā́dade is variously interpreted; even its root affiliation is disputed: to √dā ‘give’ (which with ā́in the middle means ‘take’) or √dā ‘bind’. I take it to the former and assume an idiomatic meaning ‘take’ of a fire just “catching hold,” starting to burn -- an idiom also present in English (at least my English). If it also has its standard meaning ‘take [goods, etc.]’, the kindled and spreading fire could be “taking” everything in its path, and the ‘desire to gain’ sense I imputed to siṣṇo might be weakly supported.

Gr, Ge, and Re take kṣapáḥ as gen. sg. dependent on vástuṣu (Ge: “beim Hellwerden der Nacht”), though Re raises, and rejects, the possibility that it is acc. pl.

-- the analysis I favor. The acc. pl. of kṣáp- is found elsewhere in extent-of-time
usage. Case disharmony (here between acc. and loc. pl.) is esp. common in temporal expressions, and, as we’ve seen, there are a number of other disharmonious phrases in this hymn.

## 34-35
These two vss. are so interrupted by heavy voc. phrases addressed to the Ādityas that it is difficult to follow the thread. The poet identifies a mortal who is especially favored by the Ādityas (34b) and who therefore holds power among men (35b) and then expresses the hope that “we” might be “they” (vayám té … syā́ma, 35cd), that is, the fortunate man just identified. The switch in numbers is somewhat disconcerting, but can presumably be ascribed to attraction to the 1st pl. pronoun: “might we be he/that one” doesn’t work well in either Sanskrit or English.


## 35
The triple voc. phrase váruṇa mítrā́ryaman is accented despite being internal in a pāda that begins with tonic elements. There is no obvious reason for this: although the vocc. follow the caesura and immediately follow an enclitic (vayám té vo, váruṇa mítrā́ryaman), neither of these factors ordinarily triggers voc. accentuation. See, e.g., I.122.7 stuṣé sā́vāṃ, varuṇa mitra rātíḥ, where both conditions are found. For discussion of a similar case, see comm. ad VII.59.1.


## 37
túgvan- is a hapax. Ge and EWA (hesitatingly) take it as ‘ford’, following one suggestion of Gr’s; Old and Hoffmann (Injunk. 234-35) as ‘Stromschnelle,” following another. Of the two, ‘ford’ would make better sense in context: all this giving would be better at a place where the animals aren't likely to be swept away by a rapidly flowing river. On the other hand, the likely root etymon, √tuj ‘thrust’, is not really conducive to ‘ford’. Re’s ‘source’, which I follow, solves both problems: a river at its source is generally a fairly placid affair, and √tuj is used esp. of the thrusting forth of progeny, a situation to which the arising of a river could be assimilated.
