+++
title = "020"

+++
Maruts


## 02
sudītíbhiḥ could also modify the chariots (so Ge), but Re suggests that it is a separate nominal when in the instr. pl., rendering it as “avec (vos) beaux éclats,” and I am inclined to agree on the basis of VI.48.3d sudītíbhiḥ sú dīdihi.

## 03-04
Pādas 3a, 3c, and 4a all begin with vi, with the last example doubled ví (d)vī. This sequence is anticipated by 2a vī.


## 04
The vs. describes the effects of the monsoon. The first hemistich contains three injunctives (pā́patan, tíṣṭhat, and yujanta) and the last pāda a present (éjatha), but pāda c contains the apparently augmented airata. Given this collection of verbs, it is difficult to produce a consistent temporal interpretation. The injunctives can harmonize either with the preterital airata or with the presential éjatha, but those two are incompatible. A way out of this dilemma was shown by Hoffmann (Injunc, 210), who suggests that the “cacophonous hiatus” dhánvāni *īrata was avoided by substituting the augmented form for the injunctive. (It would be good to have other exx. of such a hiatus-avoiding technique, however.) The whole verse can then be interpr. as presential or “general.” This temporal value continues in vs. 5, also describing the effects of the storm, with two present-tense verbs.

The second clause in pāda a, tíṣṭhad duchúnā, has been interpreted in two opposing senses. Ge supplies the ví of the first VP and tr. “das Unheil breitet sich aus.” But without the ví the verb would mean ‘stand (still)’ or ‘stop’ (so Re “stoppe le misère”). I favor this latter interpretation. Since the monsoon brings desired rain, which makes the plants grow and produces food and attendant well-being, it stops misery in its tracks, as it were. This stoppage contrasts with the movement of the features of the natural world in pādas a and c.


## 05
There are several ways to treat pāda a. The simplest (and to my mind the least satisfactory) is simply to take ácyutā as another subject of 3rd pl. nā́nadati (so, e.g., Schaeffer, Inten.). With Ge and Re, an intrans. ‘shake’ (vel sim.) can be supplied, on the basis of passages like VI.31.2b ácyutā cic cyāvayanta rájāṃsi, whose d-pāda ends ájman ā́te, very like this pāda. I favor a different solution: simply continuing yád éjatha “when you stir” from the preceding pāda (4d). Although the two verses do not belong to the same pragātha, the continuity of theme is clear.


## 06
Given that the Maruts are displaying their tvákṣāṃsi on their own bodies (tanū́ṣv ā́), I wonder if there is a little pun on tvác- ‘skin’.


## 07
I read ánu both with what precedes (svadhā́m) and what follows (śríyam) and do not, contra Ge, take the latter as obj. of váhante. Med. forms of váha- are several times used reflexively of the Maruts’ progress (V.58.1, V.60.7, V.61.11, X.77.6) without obj.

My tr. of vṛ́ṣa-psu- and áhruta-psu- (as well as vṛ́ṣa-psu- in 10a) are owing to Thieme. See reff. at comm. ad I.49.3.


## 08
Against most tr., I take pāda a as an independent nominal clause and construe b with c. The locc. in b refer to the chariot and its box, onto which the Maruts are mounting. The same phrase two hymns later, VIII.22.9 ā́hí ruhátam …, ráthe kóśe hiraṇyáye, with a verb of mounting, seems to clinch this interpr., though Ge (n. 8b) explicitly claims that the two nearby phrases, in hymns by the same poet, are used differently.

I think gó-bandhu- ‘having a cow/cows as kin’ is a pun, an interpr. not registered in the publ. tr. On the one hand it refers to the Maruts’ mother Pṛśni; on the other, on the basis of vā́ja-bandhu- ‘having prizes as kin’ (VIII.68.19) and the word play in the adjacent hymn, VIII.21.4 (see comm. there), it is also a clever way to say that the Maruts have cows at their disposal to give to us. These are the same cows with which the music is anointed in pāda a.

I do not see any way around supplying a verb of motion or mounting in bcd: the Maruts mount their chariot or come in order for us to enjoy the nourishment they bring (cf. 2c iṣā́nah … ā́gatā “come here to us with nourishment”) and to gain other desirable things, in two parallel infinitive phrases (iṣé bhujé … na spárase).

The root noun íṣ- is tr. two different ways in 2c (‘refreshment’) and 8c (‘nourishment’). These should have been harmonized.

## 09-10
The ‘bull’ stem (vṛ́ṣa(n)-) is dominant in these verses (9b, 9c, 10a [twice], 10b), with this sequence phonologically inaugurated in 9a with vṛṣad(-añji-) ‘raining unguents’, a synchronically distinct word.


## 12
Ge takes tanū́ṣu as attenuated to something close to a reflexive (“sind nicht auf sich selbst eifersüchitig”), but in vss. 6 and 26 it is lexically robust. I think the point here is to contrast the adornment of their bodies with that of other locations associated with them (their chariots and their faces).


## 13
That their name can be “broad/widespread like a flood” may at first seem odd, but the point is simply that it is widely known.

Pāda b expresses another common point about the Maruts: they do not have individual names (though see V.52.10-11), but “Marut” serves for each one of them.

I differ from Ge and Re in taking gen. pl. śáśvatām ‘of each and every one’ as referring to the Maruts, not to the mass of people; therefore in my view the subj. of the inf. bhujé is the Maruts, not these same unidentified people.

I do not know if pítrya- here refers specifically to the Maruts’ ancestors (esp., presumably, Rudra), as I have taken it, or whether this is a more general statement: “like ancestral life force” (so, more or less, Ge and Re).


## 14
As Old points out (and as is reflected in Ge’s and Re’s tr.), ná must stand for *ná ná, i.e., the simile marker followed by a negative. The same no-last-spoke image is found in V.58.5 with alternative realizations of both simile marker (iva) and negative (privative a-): arā́ivéd ácaramā(ḥ).

The pāda break between c and d goes counter to the syntactic parallelism: syntax: tád eṣām dānā́ meter: ... tád eṣām, mahnā́tád eṣām dānā́mahnā́tád eṣām This produces a syncopated effect, emphasized by the polarized positions of the parallel instr. dānā́and mahnā́in their nominal clauses.


## 15
In c the presence of both vā ‘or’ and utá ‘and’ is curious, as is the position of the latter. Klein (DGRV I.450) suggests that the placement of utá after nūnám means that it should be construed with that adv., and so vā and utá each retains its own force.


## 16
The yásya vā opening this verse, parallel to yó vā in 15c, shows that this clause is still dependent on the main clause in 15ab subhágaḥ sá “very fortunate he …” The main clause in 16c may refer only to the vājín- of ab or to the various subhága- folk of vss. 15-16.

The hapax gatha in b is an anomalous form, with a present 2nd pl. ending (- tha) on a root aorist stem. It is clearly a nonce form generated beside 2nd pl. impv.

gata in 10d. The pādas are otherwise almost identical: 10d havyā́no vītáye gata, 16b ā́havyā́vītáye gatha.


## 17
The identity and distribution of forms in pāda b are oddly unclear. Is diváḥ dependent on ásurasya, or are they coreferential, or are they independent of each other? In the first instance this produces “lord of heaven” (as I have it in the publ. tr; see also W. E. Hale [Asura, p. 75] “of the asura of the Sky”); in the 2nd “Lord Heaven” (so Ge: “Asura Himmel”); in the 3rd Re’s “(les hommes) du ciel, de l’Asura.” Do these genitives qualify Rudra (gen. rudrásya in a), as I take it, or vedhásaḥ (so Ge: “die … Meister des Asura Himmel,” sim. W. E. Hale), or, with Re, are they direct qualifiers of the Maruts? I opt for the first solution because vedhásdoes not usually govern anything and because Rudra is called ásuro mahó diváḥ in II.1.6, divó ásurāya in V.41.3, and probably diváh ... ásurasya in I.122.1 contra Ge.

And in fact is vedhásaḥ nom. pl., as it’s universally taken, or another gen. sg., perhaps qualifying Rudra? Parallels cut both ways. Rudra is in fact called vedhás- in VII.46.1, but the Maruts are so called in V.52.13, 54.6.


## 18
Syntactic problems continue in this verse. Contra most interpr., I take ab as a continuation of vs. 17, still couched in the 3rd ps., and cd as a new clause directly addressing the Maruts in the 2nd ps. The first hemistich consists of two parallel relative clauses, with the two forms of yé positioned at the extreme ends, opening and closing the half-verse. The clauses are connected by an inverse ca: #yé ca … yé#.

This inversion is phonologically motivated, producing a mirror image figure: #yé cā́rhanti … cáranti yé# (Saṃhitā text, but 1st verb metrically to be read ca árhanti).

There are further problems. árhanti has no expressed object -- unless marútaḥ is taken as acc., with the subj. being unexpressed human worshipers; see Old’s reff.

This seems a thoroughly bad idea, given the rhetorical structure of this pragātha. Ge supplies “zu heissen” (that is, “deserve [to be called]”), which seems a fairly radical addition; Re “notre hommage” (so also Klein, DGRV I.186), which is somewhat easier to justify semantically but for which there is no parallel. My “soma drink” is based on a number of passages where some expression containing pītím ‘drink’ (+/- ‘soma’) serves as obj. of √arh (I.134.6, II.14.2, IV.47.2, V.51.6); this is the most common expressed obj. to √arh.

In b mīḷhúṣaḥ is the problem. Technically speaking, this cannot be a nom. pl.

as I have rendered it. The correct form should be mīḷhvā́ṃsaḥ, which is found only once in the RV, though nearby (VIII.25.14, but not attributed to the same poet). Most take it here as the accusative pl. it appeas to be, referring to the generous (human) patrons whom the Maruts approach (e.g., Ge “und die zu den Lohnherrn insgesamt(?) kommen”). This is certainly possible, but, with Old, I nonetheless take it as a nominative, because the stem is often used of the Maruts, including in this very hymn (3c gen. pl. mīḷhúṣām). The misinterpretation could be aided by passages like VI.66.3 rudrásya yé mīḍhúṣaḥ sánti putrā́ḥ, where the adjective technically modifies gen. sg. Rudra, but could be interpr. as going with nom. pl. putrā́ḥ. Cf. also VII.58.5, which is entirely ambiguous. It is indeed barely possible that mīḷhúṣaḥ here actually is a gen. sg., picking up the rudrásya of 17a, but I think this unlikely. The morphologically weak nom. pl. here might also be favored by phonological motivations, in order to produce a form similar to marútaḥ in the previous pāda in the same metrical position (i.e., immediately preceding a four-syllable cadence).

yúvānaḥ here is a voc.; the identical form in 17c is most likely a nominative.

The acc. to the same stem, yū́naḥ, opens the next vs. (19a).

In d the Saṃhitā vavṛdhvam must be read *vavṛd-dhu vam with both distraction and a heavy root syllable (√vṛt ‘turn’). For a similar situation, see ácidhvam in VIII.7.2, which must be read *ácid-dhu vam (√cit).


## 19
As was pointed out in the publ. intro., pāda c contains a pun: the intens.

part. cárkṛṣat can belong straightforwardly to √kṛṣ ‘plough’, and in this reading the simile depicts a person engaged in ploughing singing or otherwise verbally encouraging his team, just as Sobhari sings to the Maruts. (In this case gā́ḥ would probably be better rendered “oxen.”) But it can also be secondarily associated with the root √kṝ ‘celebrate, praise’, which has a curiously formed 3rd sg. -se medial intensive cárkṛṣe (3x), beside act. carkar-/carkir-. For purposes of word play a nonce stem cárkṛṣ- could be extracted from the isolated cárkṛṣe. In this reading Sobhari is praising the Maruts like cows (see vs. 21); in other words this is a sort of reverse dānastuti. That the Maruts are called bulls in pāda b simply adds to the play.

Note also the phonological echo in gā́ya gā́(ḥ).


## 20
Ge plausibly explains the sg. hávyaḥ as attraction to the number in the simile (sg. muṣṭihā́). One might also add that hávya- is overwhelmingly nom. sg, and there are no masc. pl. forms attested. There seems no obvious reason for such a grammatical restriction, but it may have contributed to the somewhat anomalous form here.

All standard interpr. (including mine) take the simile in b to be vṛ́ṣṇaś candrā́n ná “like lustrous bulls,” despite the displaced simile marker -- in part presumably because “like lustrous/brilliant ones” doesn’t make much sense as a simile. I have no explanation for the placement of ná, nor do I understand why this needs to be a simile at all, since the Maruts are regularly called bulls without such marking (see nearby 19b, e.g., as well as 9-10, 12). Perhaps it indirectly continues the pun in the simile in 19c, which in turn is continued in vs. 21.


## 21
The cow imagery of vs. 19 (and implicitly 20) continues here. Ge and Re take this as a simile (“like cows”), but this requires interpr. cid as a simile marker, a function for cid that I do not believe in. It is even less likely because the next verse begins with a parallel structure (mártaś cid), where the cid is definitely not a simile marker. I do, however, think that the Maruts are identified with the cows here. There are several themes intertwined. The most obvious point of comparison between cows and Maruts is their common birth (sajātyèna … sábandhavaḥ) as a herd/flock and consequent lack of individual differentiation, a characteristic of the Maruts treated earlier, in vss. 13-14. But the Maruts also have a cow for a mother; this was asserted in 8c, and the phraseology there (góbandhavaḥ sujātā́saḥ “akin to a cow, well-born”) is echoed here (gā́vaḥ … sajātyèna … sábandhavaḥ), thus alluding to the Maruts’ kinship with cows. Hence sábandhu- here has two senses: both cows and Maruts have common birth within their own group (that is, cows with cows, Maruts with Maruts), but cows and Maruts have a common birth with each other (cows with Maruts, due to the Maruts’ bovine mother). This type of kinship is treated also in 22ab. I also identified a secondary meaning in 8c: being akin to cows is a way of saying that the Maruts have cows to give, and I think that is slightly hinted at here.

I don’t quite understand the relevance of “they lick each other’s humps.” Lü (Varuṇa 90) suggests that the vs. praises the unity (Eintract) of the Maruts, and, if somewhat sharpened, this may be the correct explanation. “Lick each other’s humps” may be the equivalent of English “watch each other’s backs”: individuals act reciprocally (mitháḥ here) and protectively for the common good of the group.

Note the echo of the final words in a and b: … samanyavaḥ# … sábandhavaḥ#. The opening gā́vaś cid ghā also faintly echoes gā́ya gā́opening 21a.


## 22
The theme of cross-species kinship in vs. 21 continues here, with the mortal seeking brotherhood (bhrātṛtvám) with the Maruts.

The verse as a whole, balancing brotherhood (bhrātṛtvám) and friendship (āptivám), should be evaluated in conjunction with vs. 13 of the next hymn (VIII.21, by the same poet) abhrātrvy̥ ó anā́tvám, ánāpir indra janúṣā sanā́d asi / yudhéd āpitvám ichase, where Indra is said to lack either. See comm. thereon.


## 23
bheṣajásya appears to be a partitive genitive.


## 24
Note the relatively elementary figure in c máyo (no) bhūta … mayobhuvaḥ.

The voc. asacadviṣaḥ has given rise to multiple competing analyses, well summarized by Scar in his detailed treatment of this hapax (246-48). Most start with dviṣ- ‘hatred, hater’ as 2nd member and some form of √sac ‘follow, accompany’ as its first, governing the second. The problem is what form of √sac? It cannot be a straighforward thematic verbal stem or participle/injunctive (saca- or sacat- [though

*asacad-dviṣaḥ is a phonologically possible underlying form]) because the Class I
pres. of √sac is resolutely middle. (Debrunner [Nachtr. AiG II.1.87] also disputes this analysis on the basis that the accent is wrong for a verbal governing cmpd of that sort, but since the form is a voc. and unaccented, this argument is inapplicable. [It does apply to the other form he mentions, jaradvíṣ-, but these forms do not have to be parallel.]) It is also possible to take it as a standard type of root noun cmpd with the root noun governing the 1st member (‘hating the asaca’ or ‘not hating the saca’; at some point I toyed with the idea of ‘hating the non-aligned’), but this still founders on the puzzle of asaca-. Scar’s own solution is to divide the cmpd differently, as asacad-víṣ-, with √viṣ ‘bring about’ as 2nd member and a form of √sac (2) ‘dry out’ as 1st member, hence ‘not bringing about drought’ or ‘bringing about non-drought’.

Unfortunately getting -sacat- from this root requires a lot of not too plausible machinery -- it is no more straightforward than deriving -saca(t)- from √sac (1) -- though I am sympathetic to his argument that the meaning would fit well with the Maruts’ character. My own ‘who do not partner hatred’ rests essentially on a loose interpr. of the verbal governing analysis presented first above, though I hold no particular brief for it. I would point out that if it does contain √sac ‘accompany’, it could pair contrastively with sakhāyaḥ in the preceding vs. (23c). A very weak argument for √sac (1) and √dviṣ could be constructed on the basis of VIII.22.2, a hymn to the Aśvins but also composed by Sobhari. There the Aśvins’ chariot is described as sacanā́vantam ‘provided with companions’ vel sim., the first word of pāda c, and as vídveṣasam ‘free of hatred’, the first word of pāda d, with the same two roots. But I would not make much of this.


## 26
The voc. marutaḥ in c was carelessly omitted in the publ. tr.
