+++
title = "021"

+++
Indra


## 02
dhṛṣát is ordinarily an adverb, originally probably the neut. of a VIth class present of which there are no finite forms - except, possibly, this one. The relative pronoun yáḥ invites dhṛṣát to be read as a 3rd sg. injunctive (and of course in a relative clause its accent would be correct). I would suggest that either the neut. part.

dhṛṣát has been misanalyzed and pressed into service as a finite form or that yáḥ is serving as a loose izafe connecting this adverbial qualifier with the subject.

On metrically bad vavṛmahe, see comm. ad Kü (459) and comm. ad VI.4.7.

Old suggests that the “youth” is King Citra, whose dānastuti ends the hymn.

This seems perfectly plausible but nonetheless unprovable.


## 04
The publ. tr. should have a close parens after “[horses, etc.].” I interpret this verse in the context of its pragātha. The question is who are the kin that Indra has and we do not. I suggest that Indra’s “kin” are the horses, cows, and so forth named in vs. 3. In VIII.68.19 the patrons are called vā́ja-bandhu- ‘having prizes as kin’, as a hint that they should give them to us. I think the same image is at work here: we lack kin, and you have these desirable kin (horses, etc.) that could become akin to us too.

In the second hemistich these kin become dhā́māni. The stem dhā́man- is of course a highly charged and multivalent word, but in this case I think it comes close to its literal sense: ‘deposits’, that is, things put or set down (√dhā), which Indra is to bring to deposit on the ritual ground.


## 05
A verse that makes less sense the more one thinks about it, since the bird simile does not seem to fit the context: birds don't normally sit either next to or in honey, nor do they normally roar. The simile must have as its third term “in a nest” or “in a tree” (cf. dru-ṣád(van) several times of birds) as the parallel to the loc. honey phrase.


## 06
In pāda a ca must have subordinating value because of the accent on vádāmasi. So also Klein (I.245), though he considers the ca originally to have signalled interstanzaic conjunction.


## 09
The 2nd pl. reference is to the poet’s fellow ritual celebrants.


## 10
The first pāda, in the accusative, continues 9c, hanging off índram there.

The second pāda may be attached to the first, as Ge takes it, or to cd, as I take it.

There are no strong arguments either way, but I assume the causal clause in b grounds the expectations we have in cd: because he has reached exhilaration with us (this last bit unexpressed), he will provide for us.


## 11
The image in this verse is of a contest for cattle, where a competitor challenges us (ancient trash talk) and we can successfully respond, thanks to having Indra as our ally. The word qualifying the competitor, śvasánt- ‘snorting’, calls to mind Indra’s enemy Śuṣṇa (on the etymological connection see EWA s.v. śúṣṇa-) and therefore makes our human competition sound more formidable.


## 12
Continues the thought of vs. 11, that with Indra on our side we can take on all challenges and challengers. I therefore tr. the 1st pl. optatives as potential “we could” rather than the voluntative “might we” (Ge “wir wollen”). The 2nd sg. verb aveḥ in d does not work well in this schema, at least in its ordinary interpretation as an optative to the 1st class pres. of √av ‘help’. Although “you should / might you help our visions” is possible, esp. given that dhī́- is not infrequently the object of √av (cf., e.g., I.117.23 víśvā dhíyaḥ … prā́vatam me), I have taken it instead as the imperfect of the root pres. of √vī ‘pursue’. Although ‘thought, vision’ is not a regular object of √vī, it does occur; cf. I.77.4 agnír gírò 'vasā vetu dhītím “let Agni with his help pursue our hymns, our visionary thought” (note the presence of ávasā ‘help’ as well).

This aveḥ would pick up the subjunctive vayati of 10c, also with Indra as subject, also performing this action in our service, and the visions he pursues here are those announced in 6d. I interpret the word dhī́- in both places as referring to our fantasies about what we want out of Indra and how we could be victorious. In 12 Indra seems to have fulfilled these fantasies. Against the interpretation of aveḥ as belonging to √av we might note that the optative to the extremely well-attested thematic present ávati is almost non-existent. If the form here is otherwise analysed, the only secure form is avet in VI.47.15; ávet in V.34.8 I also take to √vī. However, I do not consider the standard interpretation of áveḥ here as belonging to √av entirely excluded.


## 13
The use of bhrā́tṛvya-, lit. ‘nephew, cousin’, as ‘rival’ is exceedingly common in Vedic prose, but only really begins in the AV; this is the only such example in the RV. The passage here seems to be an expansion, with lexical renewal, of I.102.8 aśatrúr indra janúṣā sanād asi “You are without rival, Indra, by birth from of old,” but I would also suggest that the use of an explicit kinship term a-bhrātṛvyá (as opposed to the generic a-śatrú-) is deliberate, given the web of relationships the poet develops in this hymn (see publ. intro.) It is possible that -bhrātṛvya- here is meant to be taken in both the negative sense that is standard later (rival < rivalrous nephew/cousin) and in a positive one, simply naming a blood relation. Thus the hemistich could mean both “you have no nephew and no friend” and “you have no rival but no friend”). As a kinship term abhrātṛvyá- would contrast with the bándhumant- of 4a, where Indra is explicitly credited with having kin.


## 14
The motivation for some of these statements needs some explication. The first hemistich concerns two negative figures; the second one, in pāda b, the man who swells up on surā, the secular and disreputable drink -- in other words a drunk, a lush, or in Ge’s felicitous tr. “die Schnappshelden” -- is implicitly contrasted with a man who handles the much-honored drink soma in a ritual context. But why should a rich man (pāda a) be disfavored? Perhaps because he has what he needs and need not enter into partnership with Indra, whereas we, more needy, are willing to engage in the reciprocal activities involved in honoring Indra. I reluctantly abandoned my tr. of revántam- as ‘fat cat’, primarily because revánt- is not usually used in slangy contexts.

I’m afraid that I don’t understand the second hemistich at all, primarily because I don’t know whether the omitted object of sám ūhasi should be the negative figures of ab or positively or neutrally viewed humans in general. The sentiment of pāda d would support the latter idea: that when Indra enters into battle, he puts everyone together (under his protection), thereby behaving like a father. But the only other instance of sám √ūh (I.131.3), also with Indra as subject, has him shoving the two opposing sides into fighting each other, with a come-what-may attitude. This seems more likely here, in which case pāda d would express the opposing sides’ competing calls to Indra to help them.


## 15
Again the cultural content here is somewhat elusive and therefore the relation of the simile to the frame not entirely clear. The woman who grows old at home (amājúr-) must be a spinster (see II.17.7 for the clearest context of this word), but what aspect of her activity we wish to avoid isn’t defined. It may simply be that we should not sit still and inactive at the soma sacrifice when we should be busying ourselves serving Indra. (Although one wonders whether an ancient Indian spinster was allowed just to sit around, rather than being a virtual servant to her parents and the rest of the extended family. I would think she’d be busy enough.) Or perhaps there is a pun embedded in ní √sad; in later Sanskrit this lexeme can mean ‘sink down (mentally), be depressed’ and so perhaps it’s the spinster’s mental state that’s at issue. It is even possible, if we read this verse with its pragātha partner, vs. 16, to take “let us not miss out…” of 16a as a gloss on what aspect of the spinster’s life we wish to avoid in 15: she missed out on marriage, but we do not want to miss out on Indra’s gifts.


## 16
The connection between pādas a and b must be that were we to miss out on Indra’s gifts, we would be likely to complain about him.

On d see Scar 196. Ge’s “Gaben” cannot be right for dāmā́naḥ, which should be a personal designation; see Scar’s “die Geschenke machen / Geschenke bekommen.” Perhaps like somā́nam (I.18.1) it contains a Hoffmann suffix.


## 17
There is no overt question marker, but the verse works better with vs. 18 as a series of deliberative questions, to be answered by the emphatic declaration of Citra’s preeminence in 18.


## 18
The clustering of demotic ka-forms in dānastutis (see Jamison 2008, 2009) is nicely illustrated by rājakā́íd anyaké, yaké, with the suffix even attached to the relative pronoun.

tatánat must be a pun on the two roots √tan ‘thunder’ and ‘stretch’. See Old.

Parjanya of course thunders, but he also stretches through the midspace with his rain.

Citra will likewise both make a big noise and extend his largesse.
