+++
title = "022"

+++
Aśvins Esp. towards the end of the hymn, pāda-initial (C)ā becomes an insistent marker: ā́(8c, 9a), yā́(bhiḥ) (10a, b), tā́(bhiḥ) (10c, 12a), yā́(bhiḥ) (12d), tā́(u) (13a, b, c, 14a, b), mā́(14c), ā́(15a), prā(tā́) (15b), ā(rā́ttāc) (16c), ā́(17a). The most concentrated sequence is in vss. 13-14 with the repeated dual prn. tā́(u) ‘these two’, referring to the Aśvins.

## 01-02
This pragātha contains poetic self-address at a distance. Vs. 1 begins ā́ … have “I have called here …,” while 2c ends with the voc. sobhare. (On poetic selfaddress see Jamison [Fs. Skjaervø, 2009].)


## 02
The reading of the first word of this vs. is uncertain. The Saṃhitā text apparently reads pūrvāyúṣam but the Pp. pūrva-āpúṣam, accepted by Sāy as well as Old and edited in all the standard editions (MM, Aufr., HvN). This seems to be a genuine variant reading. For disc. see Old ad loc. and Scar 320-22. I generally follow the Old analysis for the 2nd member; the objection that with a 2nd member āyuṣ- the accent should be *pūrvā́yuṣam or *pūrvāyuṣám seems cogent to me. But I have not adopted Old’s suggestion that pūrva- stands for *puru- (hence ‘prospering many’, vel sim.), with the ū introduced under the influence of pū́rvyam at the end of the hemistich. This is not impossible, but since puru-spṛ́ham intervenes, it might have helped maintain an original *puru- in the initial word. Scar suggests several further analyses, which seem too fussy to me.

sacanā́vant- is construed with the instr. sumatíbhiḥ: “provided with favors as accompaniment.”


## 04
For īrmā́‘at rest, standing still’, contra Gr ‘rasch’, etc., Ge ‘zurück’, see Narten IIJ 10 (1967-68) and EWA s.v. iṣaṇyá- is ordinarily transitive, so I take vām as its obj. (so also Gr), contra Ge and Re. This must be a paradox: the motionless chariot wheel is the one that propels them, not the speedy one in pāda a. I do not have a vision of how this would work in practice, though.


## 06
On ploughing with a wolf, see the publ. intro.


## 11
Although ádhrigu- is simply a -u-stem, the negated form of Aves. drigu- ‘poor’ (see comm. ad I.61.1), in the nom. pl. it is treated as if it were a cmpd. with ‘cow’, with ádhrigāvaḥ (also I.64.3) instead of expected *ádhrigavaḥ (see AiG III.158). But things may be more complicated, for, as Gr notes, in I.61.1 the dat. ádhrigave would be better metrically as *ádhrigāve. In this case it does not match the ‘cow’ word, whose dative is gáve. However, Wackernagel (AiG III.149) considers an emendation to -gāve unnecessary and refers to Old (Prol. 90 and Noten ad loc.) for the meter. It’s also possible that I.61.1 just borrowed the length from I.64.3, both Nodhas products, because the stem was not entirely understood.


## 12
On viśvápsu- see comm. ad I.148.1.

Old explains 3rd pl. vāvṛdhúḥ as metri causa for du. *vāvṛdháthuḥ, and this is accepted by Ge. But the only other passage in which krívi- is found as a clear PN (though cf. V.44.4, VIII.51.8 [Vālakh.], IX.9.6 for more dubious exx.) is in a nearby Sobhari hymn, in which he is favored by the Maruts (VIII.20.24 yā́bhir daśasyathā krívim “with which you favor Krivi”). The yā́bhiḥ there has the same referent as here, namely ūtíbhiḥ ‘forms of help’ and vāvṛdhúḥ is a semantic variant of daśasyathā. I therefore think it very likely that the plural verb is correct and that this is an allusion to the Maruts’ aid to Krivi. Recall that in vs. 1c, at least by my interpr., the Aśvins also follow the Maruts’ lead, also and identically 14b, and they are addressed as Rudras (that is, Maruts) in 14c.


## 15
The vs. begins with an echo of the first vs., or rather the first pragātha, in which the poet called on the Aśvins’ chariot (1a ó tyám ahva ā́rátham), here reprised by ā́… súgmyam … / huvé “I call the easily moving (chariot).” But in pāda b the poet thinks better of it and addresses the Aśvins directly. This change of heart is signalled by vā ‘or’.

Ge, flg. Sāy, takes sakṣáṇī to √sac ‘accompany’, but as Re points out, all other forms of sakṣáṇi- (incl. those separated by Gr into a separate lemma derived from √sac) belong to √sah, and this etymon works fine here.

The echo of the first pragātha continues with the poet’s self-identification as sóbharī at the end of the verse, echoing his self-address with voc. sobhare at the end of 2c. sóbharī here is one of two occurrences of this PN that have apparently fem.

endings (the other is gen. sg. sóbharyāḥ in VIII.103.14). Ge questioning suggests that we might be dealing with a female poet, but this seems highly unlikely, esp. given the voc. sobhare in vs. 2 and elsewhere in this group of hymns (VIII.19.2, 20.19).

See AiG III.183 on masc. -ī-stem PN and their transfer to the i-inflection.


## 18
On suprāvargám see comm. ad VIII.4.6.
