+++
title = "023"

+++
Agni


## 01
The hymn begins with a hí clause. Flg. JPB, the hí signals that the action in this clause precedes and forms the basis of the action in b.

On pratīvyàm see Scar 500.


## 02
With Ge I take ab as a continuation of vs. 1, with c starting a new clause.

The vocc. in ab are the self-address of the poet, as in VIII.22.1-2. Here the poet first exhorts himself with 2nd ps. imperatives (1ab) and then switches to a pseudo-modal 1st ps. -se in c. The first voc. viśvacarṣaṇe (2a) is a bit of a red herring, since this stem is otherwise used of gods. But he addresses and thus identifies himself with his speaking name Viśvamanas in b, making it clear that he was simply appropriating the divine epithet for himself.

I supply váhnīn to govern ráthānām in c, on the basis of váhniḥ in 3c and váhnī ráthānām in VIII.94.1. I surmise that this is also Re’s thinking behind “(comme conducteurs) des chars,” though he makes no comment.


## 03
Ge (n. 3c) takes upavídā … vindate as simply equivalent to upavindate, which is esp. puzzling because úpa is not otherwise construed with √vid in the RV.

My ‘close’ in the tr. ‘close searching’ is meant to convey the intimate nuance of this preverb.

Note the v alliteration in c: upavídā váhnir vindate vásu.


## 05
I take abhikhyā́in the sense of ‘glance’ rather than ‘appearance’ (as Gr, Re, and Scar 99 do). The finite forms of abhí √khyā all have the meaning ‘look at’, as do the 2 occurrences of the gerund abhikhyā́ya (I.155.5, II.30.9). abhikhyā́occurs 3 times (here + I.148.5, X.112.10, all compatible with a meaning ‘glance’ [pace Gr]). It may either be the instr. sg. of a root noun or (with AiG II.2.782) a haplologized form of the gerund abhikhyā́ya. Both possibilities are considered by Scar (98-99).


## 06
Contra most interpr., I take Agni as driving to the gods to present them with our praises as well as our oblations, rather than coming here (e.g., Re “arrive avec les belles louanges”).

The impv. yāhí is accented because it follows an initial voc. 
## 09
Both Ge and Re explicitly identify the subj. of jujuṣuḥ in c as those seeking truth (voc. ṛtāyavaḥ), the human ritualists addressed in a. Although switch between 2nd and 3rd ps. even within a verse is not rare, I think the gods are the more likely subject, as they generally are to forms of √juṣ. This verse depicts the ritual model whereby Agni brings the gods to the ritual ground to receive oblations, with this location specified by námasas padé -- in contrast to vs. 6, where Agni conveys the oblations and praises to the gods (presumably in heaven), the other model of sacrificial interaction.


## 16
The point of this verse seems to be that Vyaśva (the poet's father) got the goods, either directly from Agni or via the patron Ukṣan, and we hope this will provide a pattern for us.

The grammatically disharmonious phrase mahó rāyé would better be tr.

“greatly for wealth.” See disc. ad IV.31.11.

## 18-19
Just as vs. 16 provides an ancestral pattern for the poet to gain goods from Agni and/or his patron, these vss. take the gods’ establishment of Agni as their messenger as the prototype for mortals’ doing the same.


## 21
On the apparent bad cadence produced by ávidhat, see remarks ad II.1.7, where Arnold’s suggestion to read a long augment is adopted.


## 24
The hapax sthūrayūpavát may be a pun. On the one hand, formations of this sort, with neut. -vát suffix, generally mean ‘like X’, ‘as X did’, with X a PN. The presence of an undoubted ex. in the same position in the immediately preceding vs., vyaśvavát ‘like Vyaśva’, strongly supports this interpr. The poet addressed by the impv. arca is being urged to chant ‘like Sthūrayūpa’. Gr and Re interpr. the form thus. But sthūrayūpa- also has lexical meaning, ‘(having?) sturdy posts’ (in the absence of accent we cannot tell whether the cmpd is a bahuvrīhi or a karmadhāraya).

The yūpa is both the post to which the animal to be sacrificed is tethered and a crucial post or beam in the construction of dwellings. In this lexical meaning the comparison could either be between the praise songs and sturdy posts or someone who possesses them, or between Agni and the post or post-possessor. Note that it is Agni dámya- (‘of the household’) who receives the chant. If the comparison is to the praise songs, they would be conceptualized as the uprights that help make the house solid. The parallel adduced by Ge, I.51.14 … stómo dúryo ná yū́paḥ “a praise-song like a door-post,” is particularly apt. This is the sense reflected in my tr. and also in Ge’s and assumes a karmadhāraya. If the comparison is to Agni, a bahuvrīhi would be better: “to Agni of the household, like one [=a house] having sturdy posts.” The kinship asserted between Agni and trees in the next verse may give some support to this last interpr.


## 26
The syntax of this vs. is very difficult; Re even suggests that it consists of fragments “non syntaxisés” -- a coinage I would like to introduce to English. The standard interpr. take the NP in pāda a as acc. pl., more (Old) or less (Ge) parallel to havyā́ni in b and then either supply a verb to govern them (Ge: “bring [X to Y]”) or cobble together a very implausible syntactic bond between the verb ní satsi in c and the accusatives in ab (e.g., Re “En direction de tous ... assieds toi”). I take a very different route, first by interpr. maháḥ … satáḥ not as acc. pl. but gen./abl. sg. This phrase seems to have some special status: cf. I.36.3 mahás te satáḥ “since you are great,” same phrase in VIII.101.11 “of you who are great.” I take the referent of the abl./gen. phrase to be Agni, and I also interpr. abhí ṣatáḥ in the usual idiomatic meaning of abhí √as ‘be superior to’, construed here with the acc. víśvān. In b I simply supply a different form of the root √as, namely santu, to be construed with the abhí in the same meaning. The point of the sentence is that since Agni, who is superior to everything, is our Hotar and the conduit of our offerings to the gods, our oblations cannot help being superior as well.


## 27
I am not happy with the partitive gen. with √van in cd, but I do not see any way out of it.


## 30
The abrupt introduction of Mitra and Varuṇa may look forward to the next hymn but one, VIII.25, devoted at least in its first part, to these two gods. The last pāda of the first verse of VIII.25 (ṛtā́vānā yajase putádakṣasā) is almost identical to the last pāda here (ṛtā́vānā samrā́jā putádakṣasā).
