+++
title = "024"

+++
Indra


## 01
Ge takes stuṣé here as an infinitive, but the nearby parallels he cites (VIII.21.9, 23.7) are unaccented and clearly 1st person. The switch between 1st pl. (ā́ śiṣāmahi) and 1st sg. (stuṣé) is not unusual in this kind of context, where the poet speaks in the 1st plural jointly for himself and his fellow ritual performers and in the 1st singular for himself alone, with a 2nd pl. address to those same comrades (vaḥ in b).


## 02
Two etymological figures: vṛtrahátyena vṛtrahā́(b) and maghaír maghónaḥ (c).

On the unusual construction of áti √dāś see comm. ad VI.16.20.


## 04
Another figure: dhṛṣatā́dhṛṣṇo.

This verse echoes vs. 3 in reverse order: 3a stávāno ā́bhara / 3c nirekám // 4a nirekám / 4c stávamāna ā́bhara. These echoes straddle a tṛca boundary.


## 05
“hindrances” (āmúraḥ) and “repulsions” (paribā́dhaḥ) are complementary notions, the equivalent of “thrust and parry” (or rather parry and thrust).

Unfortunately they do not go well into English, esp. in the plural. On āmúr- see Scar 391-92.


## 06
The matching instrumentals in frame and simile are phonological variants: góbhir (a) / gīrbhir (b).


## 07
The poet of this group of hymns (VIII.23-26) is Viśvamanas, but viśvámanasaḥ here can be read both literally and as the PN. Note also the cross-tṛca echo, 6c mánaḥ / 7a -manasaḥ, and the initial figure víśvāni viśvá-, which together make up the poet’s name.


## 08
The opening word of c, váso, is read as vásoḥ by the Pp., followed by Old and Ge - that is, with the loss of underlying final -s before the cluster sp- -- hence a gen. sg. belonging with the long gen. sg. noun phrase ending with rā́dhasaḥ. This is of course possible, but the presence of undoubted voc. vaso in 7c in a hymn that is over-partial to vocatives and given to repetitions across verses, supports a voc. interpretation here.


## 10
A verse full of figures: mahāmaha, mahé (ab), dṛḷháś cid dṛhya (c), maghavan magháttaye. There is also an inter-tṛca echo between voc. nṛto (9b) and voc. nṛtama (10b), with nṛto returning in 12a.


## 14
The expression dákṣam pṛñcántam is somewhat peculiar, and Ge takes the two words as separate qualifiers of Indra: “dem Verständigen, Spendenden.” However, I.141.1 bhágaṃ dákṣaṃ ná papr̥cāsi suggests that dákṣam should be the object of the pres. participle. By the tr. “engorging skill” I mean that Indra fills his latent quality (skill) with energy (perhaps derived from soma and praise) and makes it available to use.

Acdg. to the Anukramaṇī, our poet Viśvamanas has the patronymic Vaiyaśva (vs. 23), that is, son of Vyaśva (‘without horses’), and the poet mentions his family in vss. 22, 28-29 with the distracted stem vi yaśva-. But in this verse he refers to himself instead as aśvi yá-, also distracted, which, on the one hand, is simply an anagram of the family name with the first two syllables reversed, but, on the other, credits him with possession of (or at least relationship to) horses, whereas the unmetathesized version announces him as horse-less.


## 15
On the lexeme yújyāya √vṝ see comm. ad IX.88.1.

The expression naíváthā (that is, ná eváthā), placed between the two instrumentals, is opaque: eváthā is a hapax. Old helpfully adduces IV.30.1 nákir indra tvád úttaraḥ .. .nákir evā́yáthā tvám “There is no one higher than you, Indra … no one who is exactly as you are,” and our eváthā appears almost to be a blend of evā́ yáthā or some abbreviation thereof.


## 16
I supply siñcá from b as the verb also of a, and supply madíntaram of a as the object of b, with ándhasaḥ dependent on it as mádhvaḥ is in a. Ge by contrast (fld. by Klein DGRV II.183) supplies “bring” in a and takes ándhasaḥ as a partitive genitive in b. This is not impossible, but my interpretation requires less extraneous material.

Another cross-tṛca connection: evā́in c echoes eváthā in 15c. More cleverly, 16ab éd u m(ádhvo)… siñcá picks up 13a éndum … siñcata (note that édum and éndum are almost identical).


## 18
On áprāyu- see comm. ad V.80.3.


## 19
The a pāda is repeated twice elsewhere in VIII: 81.4, 95.7. The reason for the accent on stávāma, which does not begin the pāda and probably not its clause, is unclear, though it may well be connected with its relationship with the exhortative 2nd pl. impv. éta “come on!” It would, in fact, be possible to construe índram with éta nú and begin a new clause with stávāma (“Come now to Indra; let us praise the superior man…”), but this seems unnatural. It is curious that Old does not comment on the accent here or in the other passages.


## 22
Here as elsewhere (II.5.1, III.27.3, both with pl. vājínaḥ) yámam governs the accusative.


## 23
A very cute pun, with návam meaning, as often in a hymnal context, ‘anew’, but in conjunction with daśamám ‘tenth’ evoking náva ‘nine’.

caráṇi- is a hapax, but most likely derived from the root √car ‘wander’ (see EWA s.v. CARI , though AiG II.2.207 considers it of unclear meaning). It must have been created to contrast semantically with the very frequent near-rhyme form carṣaṇí- ‘settled/boundaried peoples’, whose gen. pl. carṣaṇīnā́m occurs 35x in the RV, always at the end of the pāda as here (including VIII.23.7 hótāram carṣaṇīnā́m, the adjacent hymn by the same poet). That the short initial syllable of caráṇīnām produces a bad cadence surely draws more attention to the word it was created in opposition to.


## 25
Elliptical and with some syntactic puzzles. See Old on the verse in general and the multiple solutions proposed in earlier lit.

In b I supply “be there” as the verb; Ge, to more or less the same effect, “beistandest.” In c I supply Śuṣṇa as the object of both verbs, since he is the demon Indra ordinarily slays for Kutsa. The problem here is that the verbs are not parallel: injunctive śiśnathaḥ followed by imperative ní codaya. Somewhat reluctantly I ascribe imperatival value to śiśnathaḥ (so also Ge without comment), possible because of the functional shape-shifting ability of injunctives. (See the same form in VIII.70.10.) However, I am not certain how often regular injunctives can show imperatival value, as opposed to lexicalized forms like dā́ḥ and dhā́ḥ. The root √cud does not otherwise appear with ní, a fact that makes its value here even less clear. Ge supplies “horses” as object, while Old suggests importing ávaḥ ‘help’ from a.


## 26
Again elliptical. In ab the semantic opposition between new and old is obviously the point, but what new thing are we begging Indra for? Ge supplies “deed” (“… eine (Tat), die auch dem Älteste neu ist”). In III.31.19 the same expression návyam … sányase refers to the making of a new hymn, but it makes no sense to beg Indra for a new hymn. I tentatively supply ā́yuḥ ‘life’, which occurs several times with návyam (I.10.11, III.53.16, VII.80.2). The other occurrence of návyaṃ sanyasé (VIII.67.18) is found immediately after a periphrastic causative “you make live” (VIII.67.17c dévāḥ kṛṇuthá jīváse), and a “new life” works reasonably well in that passage. But this is all circumstantial, and I do not know why such a wish would be expressed here, beyond the usual Vedic desire to live a full and vigorous lifetime.

The sá tvám in c does not conform to the rules for 2nd ps. sá reference developed in Jamison 1992. I would therefore prefer to supply an imperative “(be) victorious …,” which would, I think, also fit the context better. However, the offending sá might be explained by the 3rd ps. verb (mucát) in the following verse (27ab), whose relative clauses hang off 26c, in my view. In other words, the construction of the whole sentence fluctuates between 2nd and 3rd ps. subject.

## 27
As noted just above, I take the relative clauses in ab as hanging off 26c.

Both Ge and Old make 27bc into a single clause, but the verb in c (nīnamaḥ) is unaccented although b begins with a relative pronoun yáḥ. I therefore take ab as being two parallel relative clauses sharing a single verb mucát; cleverly the poet has exploited the fact that √muc participates in two different syntactic constructions with accusative and ablative: “release ROPE vel sim. [acc.] from VICTIM [abl.]” and “release VICTIM [acc.] from ROPE [abl.].” (Perhaps not surprisingly, English has the same two constructions.) In 27a we find the first, though without overt expression of the VICTIM (=us or perhaps the Ārya); cf., e.g., X.97.15 tā́no muñcantu áṃhasaḥ. In b we find the second, though without overt expression of the ROPE. Here I supply áṃhaḥ adapted from abl. áṃhasaḥ in pāda a. Cf. IV.12.6=X.126.8 evó ṣv àsmán [i.e., asmát] muñcata vy áṃhaḥ.


## 29
The adj. somínaḥ can of course be either abl.-gen. sg. or nom.-acc. pl. It shares a pāda with acc. vyàśvān, so proximity favors taking it with that noun - as in the publ. tr. (also Ge). However, Sāy. takes it with gen. nāryásya in the previous pāda, and he may be correct. Nārya appears to be the (or one) name of the patron of the sacrifice, the dispenser of the dakṣiṇā to the poets, and it would make sense to refer to him as possessing or providing soma. I would therefore entertain the alternative tr.

“ let the priestly gift of Nārya, provider of soma, come to the Vyaśvas.”


## 30
In contrast to the first two fairly straightforward verses of the dānastuti (28-29), this one bristles with slangy jokes and their attendant puzzles. It is also the only verse in the hymn not in Uṣṇih meter. The verse opens with the sacrificer (ījānáḥ, lit. the pf. mid. participle to √yaj) asking “you” an abrupt question kuhayā́ kuhayākṛte, consisting of an extended form of kúha ‘where’ (the extended form found only here) and an oddly formed, nonce vocative made up of the same adverbial interrogative plus (probably) -kṛti- (though -kṛtā- would also be possible). Judging from vs. 28, the beginning of the dānastuti, which contains a vocative addressed to Dawn, she is also the addressee here, though a reversion to the default Indra is certainly not excluded. So, literally, “where? you where-actor.” Ge takes ījānáḥ as the subject of the question (“where is the sacrificer?”), rather than the questioner. I follow Old: “Die Opferer fragt die Morgenröte …,” although Ge’s interpretation is by no means excluded. The question is whether Varosuṣāman is the sacrificer himself or his patron, and without a better knowledge of the distribution of roles in RVic sacrifice, we cannot know for sure.

It is generally assumed (I think correctly) that the second hemistich is the response of the addressee to the question in ab, and it is an extended pun. He calls the subject, about whose whereabouts the question was just asked, “Vala,” that is, the name of Indra’s opponent and the cave that contained the stolen cows. But Vala is also a phonological variant of Vara, the first part of the name of the patron Varosuṣāman. He is said to be “set apart” (ápaśritaḥ) along the Gomatī (River), but gómant- literally means ‘possessing cattle’ and can also qualify the Vala cave itself (see I.11.5 valásya gómataḥ). Thus this line appears to be a subtle reminder to Varosuṣāman not to withhold his cattle within himself, like his phonological multiform, but to be generous to his clients. The whole line reminds us of the dānastuti in V.61.19: eṣá kṣeti ráthavītir maghávā gómatīr ánu, párveteṣv ápaśritaḥ "This Rathavīti dwells in peace, a bounteous patron throughout the cow-rich (clans) [/along the Gomatī river], set back among the mountains," containing one of the only two other occurrences of ápaśrita. I do not know the significance of this.
