+++
title = "025"

+++
Mitra and Varuṇa


## 01
For the connection of the last pāda of this vs. with VIII.23.30, see comm. there.


## 02
The du. mitrā́is used in two different senses: on the one hand, in its appellative sense it refers to the two gods as allies; on the other mitrā́is a pregnant dual PN, meaning “Mitra (and Varuṇa),” with the “and Varuṇa” then pleonastically supplied in pāda b in an “X and which Y” construction (váruṇo yáś ca).

Most take tánā as another dual (to thematic tána-), but struggle to interpr. it. I take it as the instr. sg. of the root noun tán- and in this context as indicating the “(home) stretch” of a race course. The image is of two charioteers running neck and neck and therefore evenly matched.

tánayā of course echoes tánā, though it belongs to a different stem (whichever interpr. of tánā is followed). In this case I accept the general interpr. as du. to tánaya-.


## 03
Because the phrase asuryā̀ya prámahasā is found also in VII.66.2 (also of Mitra and Varuṇa), the two words must be construed together -- though in both instances Ge construes them separately (as do Re and W. E. Hale). Moreover Ge’s minimalist tr. of prámahas- (“Die … Erhabenen”) does not reflect its bahuvrīhi status: it should mean something like ‘having their greatness forth/in front’. In combination with the dat. asuryā̀ya, some forward motion seems indicated.


## 04
This is a particularly good passage to demonstrate that the unending rivalry between the two opposed groups Devas and Asuras so characteristic of middle Vedic literature cannot be backprojected into the core RV, since Mitra and Varuṇa are called simultaneously devā́v ásurā.

The phrase ‘grandson of strength’ (śávaso nápāt-) is used a number of times of the Ṛbhus (I.161.14, IV.34.6, 35.1, 8, 37.4) and only here of other divinities. It seems based on the more common śávasas páti- (I.131.4, IV.47.3, V.6.9, etc.), with (ná)pāt- echoing pát(i-). It also evokes semantically the phrase śávasaḥ sūnú- (IV.21.1, 37.4) / putrá- (VIII.90.2, 92.14), ‘son/child of strength’.

## 05-06
The usual problem with (-)dānu-: ‘gift’ or ‘drop’ or both? In this case the first cmpd member sṛpra- ‘fatty, luscious’, the dwelling “in the house of refreshment” (in vs. 5), and the refreshments and rains (in vs. 6) favor ‘drop’, though both Ge and Re opt for ‘gift’ (Ge with an outdated rendering of sṛprá- as ‘ausgedehnt’). On sṛprá- see comm. ad I.96.3.


## 07
“your herds” of the publ. tr. should rather be “their herds.”

## 08-09
Both these verses have a subject / VP construction that’s an etymological figure: 8c … kṣatríyā kṣatrám āśatuḥ, 9c … nicirā́ní cikyatuḥ. The latter is reinforced phonologically by the pāda-opening ní cin miṣántā. The unusual tmesis of preverb and participle, interrupted by the particle cid, may be (partly) accounted for by the desire to produce a ni ci- sequence matching the two that follow in that pāda.

## 10-12
This tṛca takes a break from Mitra and Varuṇa, introducing a somewhat random collection of other protective divinities. See also vs. 14.


## 11
The lexeme ní √sac is found only here in the RV and indeed, judging from MonWms, in all of Sanskrit. I consider the ní here intrusive, having crept in from passsages like VII.38.3 víśvebhiḥ pātu pāyúbhir ní sūrī́n. The lexeme ní √pā is fairly well attested, and so I think ní has, as it were, hitched a ride on pāyúbhiḥ, which is ordinarily found with a form of the cognate verb as in the just cited passage.

The insistent ní’s of 11c may also have played a part.


## 12
A verb needs to be supplied for ab to be a clause. On the basis of śrudhí in c, I supply ‘sing’, but any verb of service to a divinity that takes a dative would work. Ge “serve” (dienen), Re, somewhat more elaborately “apportons notre prière.” Ideally we would supply sacemahi on the basis of áriṣyantaḥ … sacemahi in 11c, but √sac doesn’t accommodate this case frame. (The few exx. with dat. given by Gr are to be explained otherwise.)


## 13
Alliteration in the etymological figure vā́ryaṃ vṛṇīmahe, váriṣṭham, anticipating váruṇaḥ in c.


## 14
In the publ. tr. I supply “let … grant,” flg. Ge, Re, Klein (DGRV I.403).

But I would now change that to “protect,” assuming that the tád + divinities in the nom. simply continues the rel. cl. in 13c mitró yát pā́nti …


## 15
The standard interpr. take bhū́rṇayaḥ with the frame (Ge “diese eifrigen Herren”), but its position at the end of the verse, far from its supposed NP, leads me to put it in the simile. (Sim. Re.) Passages like IX.17.1 … iva síndhavo, ghnánto vṛtrā́ṇi bhū́rṇayaḥ “like turbulent rivers … smashing obstacles” give support to this assignment. The simile then consists of a nom. + acc. matching those of the frame. It might be objected that rivers don’t strike against their own surge, but the image may be of fast water catching up with itself and overtopping a wave.


## 16
itthā́is not sufficiently represented in the publ. tr. I would now insert “just so” after “the many.” ánu … carāmasi could also be subjunctive (so Ge), “we shall proceed,” though the undoubted indicative ánu … saścima in the parallel phrase in 17ab supports an indicative interpr. here.


## 17
Flg. Kü I take the pf. of √sac as presential in value.

sāmrājyásya is in the same position as sā́mrājyāya ‘sovereign kingship’ in 8b but differently accented. The form here must be an adj. ‘related to sovereign kingship’. This makes sense: its referent, the Sun, is not a sovereign king himself, but associated, as their eye and spy, with Mitra and Varuṇa, who are.

The form of dīrghaśrút is problematic. It appears to be a nom. sg., but the subj.

of this sentence is plural (“we”). Gr takes it as a neut. pl. modifying vratā́, as do Ge (without comment) and Re; Scar identifies it as a neut. pl. but with a query. AiG III.65-66 suggests that it follows the model of short neut. plural forms that are identical to the neut. singular belonging to other stems (type nā́ma ‘name(s)’). I think we can sympathize with the plight of a poet who’s trying to figure out how to make a neut. pl. out of a root noun ending in -t: it’s simply impossible. In VII.16.8 we get śárma dīrghaśrút#. Since śárma there could technically be plural (and there were presumbly other such expressions with neut. n-stems, etc.), it’s not hard to see the poet assuming, rightly or wrongly, that -śrút can be a neut. pl. Old also adduces 61.2 vípro mánmāni dīrghaśrút, where the adj. modifies nom. sg. vípraḥ but could be interpr. as going with mánmāni.


## 18
I would now substitute ‘limits’ or ‘boundaries’ for ‘ends’ in tr. ántān.


## 20
On dīrgháprasadman-, see comm. ad VIII.10.1.

I don’t quite understand “non-poisonous food”: is this an understated way of referring to good food, or is it a real fear? In VI.39.5 we call upon the king (Indra or Soma) to give (√rā) non-poisonous plants. I also don’t understand the use of hí here, since c does not seem to be the cause or grounds for ab, but rather a parallel clause.


## 21
This is presumably the speech referred to in vs. 20 that controls good things.


## 23
This vs. is puzzling, in part because the identity of “these two” (tā́) is not clear nor is the sense of nitóśana- + GEN. The lexeme ní √tuś means ‘overflow with, spill down’ with an acc. of the largesse so spilled. See, e.g., IX.63.23 ní tośase rayím "You [=Soma] spill down wealth" (cf. IV.38.1, VIII.54.8). I take the genitives here as objective gens., corresponding to the acc. in the VP. Since both áśvyānām and hárīṇāṃ refer to horses, we might want the two that are overflowing with them to be the human (or possibly divine) givers. This is possible, if we take them as the two patrons who give horses in 22ab (and not the one who gives a chariot in 22c). Or it could be a reference to Mitra and Varuṇa (so Re). But du. nṛvā́hasā ‘carrying men’ in 23c and vājínāv árvantā “prize-winning chargers” in 24c must surely be horses (probably the silvery and silver horses of 22ab), and this suggests that the duals earlier in vs. 23 should have the same referent. This is Ge’s solution, and he considers this expression shorthand for saying that the two horses given are worth as much as a whole herd of horses. This may be correct, but it is a bit difficult to wring it from the text.

kṛ́tvya- ‘effective, getting results’ is several times used of horses (VI.2.8, IX.46.1, IX.101.2), and in this context that should be the default interpr. as well.


## 24
With Old I take víprā as instr. sg. fem. with matī́, contra Ge’s voc. pl. See I.82.2.
