+++
title = "026"

+++
Aśvins and Vāyu


## 02
mahé táne ‘for great extension’ presumably refers to his extending his lineage.


## 03
havāmahe havyébhiḥ “we call with oblations” is a word play between the the roots √hu ‘pour, libate’ and √hū/hvā ‘call’ and economically refers to the two complementary aspects of Vedic sacrifice, the verbal and the material. It is the mirror image of the trope “pour prayers.” iṣáyantau can belong either to trans. iṣáyati to √iṣ ‘send’ (so Gr, Lub) or intrans. iṣáyati ‘prosper’. I tentatively opt for the latter, with a cognate acc. of respect, iṣáḥ, hence “prosper, become refreshed with respect to refreshments.” It is not entirely clear to me which root affiliation is represented by Ge’s “spenden” (probably ‘send’?) or Re’s “sécrétant à titre de jouissance” (probably ‘prosper’?).

I suggest that áti kṣapáḥ “beyond the nights” refers to the Atirātra soma (“overnight soma”) offered to the Aśvins the morning after, as it were.


## 08
This vs. is somewhat curiously constructed. It contains, probably, a dual dvandva whose 2nd member is itself dual: índra-nāsatyā ‘o Indra and the two Nāsatyas’. Since the form is in the voc. it is actually impossible to determine if it is in fact a dual dvandva or two separate vocc., índra nāsatyā, sg. and du. Although in most dual dvandvas the first member also has dual inflection (type índrā-váruṇā), see indra-vāyū́, with stem form in the first member and a single 2nd member accent; its voc. is índra-vāyū, which would match the template found here. In any case, the verb is dual (gatam), and the rest of the verse (pāda c) is couched in the dual. This either means that Indra is being ignored (which is possible, since the hymn is dedicated to the Aśvins) or that the dual dvandva índra-nāsatyā is being treated as if it contained two entities, rather than one+two (which is also possible). For another number mismatch, see vs. 11.


## 09
vayám … ukṣaṇyánto vyaśvavát is a play on words. ukṣanyántaḥ is read doubly, in one sense in the frame (‘seeking bulls’) and another in the simile (‘seeking Ukṣan’). Unusually the simile is conveyed by -vát. On the poet Vyaśva seeking his patron Ukṣan, see VIII.23.16 vyàśvaḥ … ukṣaṇyúḥ, where ukṣanyúḥ can also be read as a pun.


## 11
Pāda c sajóṣasā váruṇo mitró aryamā́“the two of one accord (and) V, M, A” is reminiscent of the number disharmony in vs. 8. It can be seen as a syntactic blend of 8c devā́devébhiḥ … sacánastamā “the two gods joined with the gods” and a putative plural sajóṣasaḥ that includes the Aśvins with the other gods mentioned.


## 12
I take sūríbhiḥ as an instr. of accompaniment “for me along with my patrons,” but Ge’s view, that the patrons are the middlemen distributing the goods, is possible: “do your best for me by means of / through my patrons.”


## 13
I take the referent of ab to be Agni. Cf. III.3.5 táviṣībhir ā́vr̥tam ‘swathed with [=in] his powers”; given Agni’s ritual role it makes sense for him to be swathed in sacrifices. Making a god the referent avoids the role reversal Re notes in saparyántā, with (in his view) the gods serving humans rather than the usual situation -- though he then tr. śubhé cakrāte as reflexive or self-involved: “ils se sont fait (pour eux-mêmes une parure -- contrapartie de b),” rather than supplying a human object. But surely it is better (with Ge) to supply as obj. of śubhé cakrāte the being referred to in the relative clause of ab.


## 14
With Ge I take ab as a continuation of vs. 13, still with Agni as referent.

Agni is regularly called cikitvā́n, to the same stem as cíketati here. Clearly vartíḥ ‘circuit’ is to be supplied as object; it not only appears in pāda c but also in 15b, where it is modified by nṛpā́yyam as here.


## 15
viṣudrúheva (that is, -ā+iva) is quite problematic. Ge refuses to tr., as does Scar (245-46), though by classing it with -druh-compounds, he indicates a root affiliation. Acdg. to Re, it’s the equivalent of *druhó viśuvṛ́t “opposé au Mal” or “qui met le Mal en déroute”; somewhat sim. Kü 484 “Wie die nach verschiedenen Seiten Trügenden (?).” What all these suggestions have in common is the assumption that the 2nd member belong to √druh ‘deceive’. I suggest a different analysis, viṣud-rúh-, where the 2nd member is the root noun to √ruh ‘mount’, and the first (viṣud-) is a deformed version of the already deformed adverb viṣvadryàk ‘facing in different directions’, with the complex adverbial suffix found also in asmadryàk ‘facing towards us’. The empty -d- (/-t-) has been suffixed to the combining form viṣu- (/viṣū) underlying the adjective víṣvañc- ‘facing in different directions’. For the suggested phrase, cf. IX.75.1 ráthaṃ víṣvañcam aruhat “he mounted the chariot that faces in different directons” (with √ruh) and, with semantically related √yuj and horses not chariot, VI.59.5 víṣūco áśvān yuyujāná īyate; X.79.7 víṣūco áśvān yuyuje vanejā́ḥ.


## 16
The publ. tr. does not make sufficient clear that the messenger (dūtáḥ) is our praise song, not “you.”


## 17
The íd of c surely limits me, but has been displaced to the left into Wackernagel’s position; “just listen to me” is less likely.


## 18
I don’t understand what the Sindhu is doing here. Is it a third place (besides the two in 17ab) where the Aśvins might find exhilaration? Or is it a metaphor for the “good praise” and/or “bright insight” (both fem., as síndhu- is) in vs. 19? The agreements in vocabulary, śveta- and the -yāvan/r-ī- cmpds, speak for the latter, but the former makes more sense to me.


## 20
As often, hí + IMPV marks the action of the hí clause as the grounds for the subsequent clause (in this case c, as b is presumably parallel with a).


## 21
The voc. ṛtaspate, belonging to a hapax cmpd., has an unusual 1st member for a thematic stem. We should expect *ṛtapate. But to construct that form is to confront its problem, a sequence of light syllables (4 in stem form). Rather than seeing anything archaic in the form we have, I think it likely that the cmpd was shaped in analogy to the numerous gen. -as-páti- with athem. gen., esp. bṛ́has-pátiwith similar phonological shape. See also ráthas-páti-, which shows the same anomaly as ṛtaspate: comm. ad V.50.5. Unlike ráthas-páti-, the form here makes no metrical problems.


## 22
rāyá(ḥ) can be both gen. sg. and acc. pl., the former to be construed with ī́śānam, the latter with īmahe, between which it is positioned. So already Old. The identical pādas (VI.54.8, VIII.46.6, 53.1) are susceptible to the same interpr.


## 24
I do not think that Vāyu is being compared directly to the pressing stone, but rather than we call on Vāyu as we call on the pressing stone. Unfortunately this attenuates the force of the simile, but the various suggestions (Old, Ge, Re) as to why Vāyu is like a horse-backed stone are so convoluted that I find them difficult to accept. The stone may be called horse-backed for two reasons: first, since the stones are also called sóma-pṛṣtha- (VIII.63.2) and soma is commonly identified as a horse, the identification has been transferred. It may also be that it also means ‘having the back of a horse’, that is, bowed or made for carrying.


## 25
Ge takes apáḥ for ápaḥ ‘work’, but this seems arbitrary. I tr. it as the acc. pl. ‘waters’ it appears to be.
