+++
title = "027"

+++
All Gods


## 01
I take both ukthé and adhvaré as functional loc. absolutes. Cf. śasyámāna ukthé (VI.23.1, also IV.20.10, X.45.10), prayaty ádhvaré (I.16.3 [=VIII.3.5], V.28.6 [=VIII.71.12], etc.). The latter expression appears as a full phrase in 3a prá sú na etv adhvaráḥ.


## 02
uṣā́sā náktam is a curious variant of the dual dvandva uṣā́sā-náktā, occurring only here. Old suggests that it is an ex. of a singular 2nd member following a dual in the 1st (cf. AiG II.1.154), which seems a description not an explanation. I think two factors entered into its creation: on the one hand, all forms of uṣā́sā-náktā precede a consonant; here that form would be in hiatus with vowel-initial óṣadhīḥ.

(Acdg. to Old, BR think that the original form was in fact náktā, but it was altered to avoid hiatus.) But all forms of uṣā́sā-náktā are also initial in trimeter verse, where a heavy fifth syllable is fine. This is dimeter verse, and a heavy fifth syllable would produce a bad cadence; light -am V̄allows an iambic cadence.

Here and elsewhere through the hymn I render viśvávedas- as ‘affording all possessions’, not ‘possessing all knowledge’, because it is usually found in the context of the gods’ generosity.


## 06
The syntax of ab is oddly muddled for what seems on the surface a banal sentiment. The problem is the position of the relative and its relationship both to the priyā́earlier in the verse and accented verb prayāthána later. The key, I think, is neut.

pl. áśvyā ‘equine’. Contra Ge I don’t think that it should be construed with havyā́, with “equine oblations” as a reference to the Aśvamedha -- an interpr. that Re rightly calls “adventurous.” The stem áśvya-, esp. in the neut. pl., is generally used of gifts (rā́dhas-, maghá-) consisting of horses that gods (or patrons) give to mortals (e.g., VII.16.10 yé rā́dhāṃsi dádaty áśvyā maghā́), whereas havyā́are of course oblations given by mortals to gods. I think we therefore must reckon with two different constructions in this hemistich, which accounts for the fractured word order.

On the one hand I see a nominal clause (or rather a nominal clause whose subject is itself a relative clause): “which equine gifts are yours (i.e., come from you), (they) are dear (to us).” On the other, the same predicate priyā́has as subject a full rel.

clause whose verb is prayāthána: “which oblations you drive to, (they) are dear to you.” The vaḥ is used both as a genitive (in the first construction) and as a dative (in the second). Unfortunately it is wrongly placed in the relative clause for this second interpr., but I can only imagine that the poet allowed this small breach to avoid doubling the vaḥ, or rather that the dative could be integrated into the rel. cl.: “which oblations for you you drive to, they are dear.” Note that two different entities are dear to two different groups of beings. I have not yet solved the problem of abhí, however. Re’s interpr. requires prá √yā to be transitive and also intermingles the main and relative clauses in an illegitimate way and should be rejected: “Di(riger) vers (nos) oblations les chères troupes de chevaux que vous mettez en marche.” Ge takes turā́náraḥ as a qualifier of the immediately following Ādityas.

Although both turá- and nṛ́- can sometimes apply to the Ādityas, they are more frequently used of the Maruts, who are somewhat dominant in this part of the hymn (1c, 3d, 5c, 6a, 8a).


## 11
On áni yām see comm. ad VIII.1.10.


## 15
I assume that Aryaman is tacitly included with Mitra and Varuṇa in c, given the vaḥ in d (and a). In the phrase varuṇa mitra márti yam, trisyllabic márti yam is a sort of scrambling of Aryaman.

On the apparent bad cadence produced by ávidhat, see remarks ad II.1.7, where Arnold’s suggestion to read a long augment is adopted.


## 16
prá prajā́bhir jāyate is a nice figure in which prá doubles the first part of the cmpd. and jāyate the second.

dhármaṇas pári receives quite varied interpr. I take it as a spatial metaphor: the fortunate pious man is propagated through his progeny “from his foundation,” that is, starting from himself and spreading out by children and grandchildren (etc.).


## 18
The 2nd hemistich presents some niggling syntactic and lexical problems.

To start with the latter, by most interpr. ásredhantī is transitive (Ge “ohne Schaden anzurichten,” Re “sans causer de nuisance”). But the verb to which this negated participle belongs is consistently intransitive, meaning ‘fail’, not ‘cause to fail’, and though Gr glosses ásredhant- (and related stems) as transitive ‘nicht schädigend’, hence ‘heilsam’, all passages are compatible with intransitive ‘unfailing, unfaltering’.

Although in this particular case ‘not harming’ might be tempting, the point here must be that the missile should go to destruction without pause or deviation in its trajectory.

I am disturbed by the pleonastic pāda-final sā́, doubling initial eṣā́, as well as what looks like a self-contained clausette in which it is found: paró nú sā́. Neither Ge nor Re takes any notice of the oddly constructed c pāda; Ge takes c and d as independent clauses, while Re treats cd as a unified clause. My tr. tries to mirror the construction by taking asmāt … paró nú sā́as a parenthetical. I remain concerned about two things: 1) This is the only passage in which paráḥ seems to mean ‘far from’; other passages containing paráḥ + ABL. mean ‘beyond, other than’ (see also the 1st verse of the next hymn, VIII.28.1, with paráḥ ‘beyond’ without abl.). However, ‘far from X’ and ‘beyond X’ are close enough semantically to allay my concerns, and in fact a tr. “it is now beyond him” would work fine. 2) I do not like the position of asmāt, but I must assume that it was extracted from the paró nú sā́clausette in order to conform to the pattern set in pāda a: x x cid asmai matched by c: x x cid asmāt.

I have reluctantly rendered cid in c as ‘also’ (so also Ge), though it does not match the two cids in a and b (‘even’) because I cannot make ‘even’ work. (I suppose “even this missile …” is possible, but it is not favored.)


## 20
Most interpr. take mádhya ā́as indicating “in the midst (of the shelter)” (chárdiḥ, of pāda b). This is certainly possible, though I weakly prefer my own rendering.


## 21
The hapax ātúc- is difficult. See EWA s.v. Mostly for contextual reasons it is generally taken as referring to evening or night, and it has been connected to tvác- ‘skin’, with the sense of ‘covering over’. I have followed this interpr., though with full awareness of how fragile it is. For one thing ‘cover as if with skin’ (which must be the presumed semantic channel, one way or another) is not an altogether compelling way to get to ‘evening’. For another, tvác- ‘skin’ has no zero-grade forms.

Scar (182-83) discusses several possibilities. Besides the ‘covering’ hypothesis, he suggests, citing Schindler and Kü, that tvác- may belong with a root √*tuek̯ ‘sichtbar werden’ to which ātúc- could also belong, and that ātúc- might better be taken as an adj. with madhyáṃdine “when midday is clearly visible.” He is less disturbed than I am that this would leave the verse without a third temporal period; furthermore, given that midday is the most “clearly visible” of the three standard time periods, it seems unnecessary to mark it as such. Another problem with ātúc- is that one is reluctant to separate it from the dat. tucé ‘for progeny’ in 14c. However, it is difficult to connect them and still maintain sensible semantics in our verse. Scar makes a creative attempt: evening is the time when one goes back to one’s children, so ‘zu den Kindern hin’ becomes ‘Rückkehr nach Hause’. I admire the ingenuity but I think the unlikeliness speaks for itself.
