+++
title = "028"

+++
All Gods


## 01
Ge unaccountably takes injunctive vidán as modal: “Die sollen wirklich (etwas) vorfinden,” but asanan (flg. Pp.) as preterital. As Old points out, however, the latter need not be augmented (with Pp.) but represent dvitā́sanan with an injunctive, a reading favored by the apparent parallelism with vidán. I follow the injunctive reading, but take both vidán and sanan as preterital in function. I also don’t think that an object should be supplied with either of these verbs, contra Ge (“etwas,” which he further specifies in n. 1 as “die Opferspenden”) and Re (“un trésor pour l’Homme”). The absence of objects with two verbs that are standardly transitive must be deliberate. Note the absolute use of vindate in VIII.27.17.


## 02
The Gift Escorts (rāti-ṣā́c-) are rather shadowy divine figures. In II.1.13 they escort (saścire) Agni at the ceremonies, a situation that may be reflected here.

Otherwise they mostly show up in All God hymns (esp. a run of them in VII) as fairly uncharacterized minor divinities. For further disc. cf. comm. ad VII.38.5. See Scar 593.

In III.6.9 Agni is urged to bring the 33 gods (see our 1a) to the sacrifice along with their wives (pátnīvant- as here), a ritual situation that can link our vss. 1-2.


## 03
Ge hesitates between cardinal points and relative directions (“behind, above,” etc.), but cardinal points are most likely better because they provide totalizing protection, which is then summed up by sárvayā viśā́.


## 05
The phrase saptá ṛṣṭáyaḥ “seven spears” may be a sly pun on saptá ṛ́ṣayaḥ “seven seers” (IV.42.8, X.130.7; also saptaṛṣáyaḥ X.82.2, 109.4). Although this group is better known later and only occasionally referred to in the RV, it does have a foothold there.
