+++
title = "029"

+++
All Gods On the intricate structure of this hymn see publ. intro. and my Rigveda between Two Worlds (75-77).


## 01
The description given is apt for Soma. The soma twigs start out brown, but when they are pressed, the golden juice comes out and, as it were, anoints them.


## 02
This vs. depicts in fairly straightforward terms the installation of Agni on the ritual hearth.


## 03
Tvaṣṭar as referent of this verse is not so clear as some of the others, but in his capacity as “shaper” and with his secondary association with the root √takṣ ‘hew, carve, build’, it makes sense for him to have the axe as his emblem. The pairing with the next verse, clearly of Indra, may also make sense, since by many accounts Tvaṣṭar is Indra’s father. Oberlies (Relig. I.336) claims that this vs. has to do with battles over settling places, which must first be made habitable by felling and burning trees, but I think this reads too much into the passage.


## 05
On jálāṣa- see comm. ad I.43.4.

The 2nd pāda has 10 syllables rather than the expected 8. Unfortunately deleting the somewhat pleonastic jálāṣa will not work because of its syllable count. It would be possible to delete either of the first two adjectives -- śúcir ugráḥ -- but I see no justification for that. It could be noted, however, that the other occurrence of jálāṣabheṣaja- is found at the end of an 8-syllable pāda, preceded only by rudrám (I.43.4).


## 06
Ge tr. pīpāya as ‘bewacht’ and assigns it to √pā ‘protect’ (via a byform √pi), because he finds “swell the paths” semantically difficult. But ‘swell’ in the RV universe of discourse is associated with prosperity and abundance, and swelling the paths can simply refer to making them productive and full of the treasure mentioned in the 2nd pāda. Since Pūṣan, the referent of this verse, ensures that livestock find their way home, is associated with paths, and is called “lord of the path” (VI.53.1 pathas pate), the metaphorical expression “swell the paths” makes sense as a description of his activities.

What may have tipped the balance for Ge is the simile in this pāda, “like a thief,” for it hard to explain how a thief would “swell the paths” -- whereas keeping a close watch on the path (as a semantic extension of ‘protect, guard’) is something a thief, or highwayman, would naturally do. Old is forced to suggest that the thief makes the paths prosperous for himself in his own way, presumably by robbing people who are traveling on them (sim. Re). But there is a simple solution to the simile problem: take it with the 2nd pāda as I have done (sim. Macd., Maurer).

Although up to this point in the hymn, pāda boundaries coincide with syntactic boundaries, the poet is starting to shake up the structure, which has been quite static so far, and breaching the pāda break is his first step. Bolder moves follow in the next vss.


## 08
I do not understand the apparently tautological 2nd pāda, prá pravāséva vasataḥ, with the same type of double etymological figure as in VIII.27.16.

Renderings like Old’s “wie Reisende reisen sie” (sim. Ge, Re) are literally correct but give no hint as to what the simile is conveying. There must be some wordplay here, perhaps an astronomical reference? In later Skt. prá √vas can refer to exile or banishment, and already in RV III.7.3 the causative means ‘cause to live apart, banish’; in II.28.6 the poet expresses the hope that we won’t have to go to pravasathā́ni ‘foreign dwellings’ and in VIII.60.19 Agni is a house-lord áproṣivān ‘who doesn’t go abroad’ (or, I suppose, just out of the house). Assuming that this meaning is also operative in pravāsá- accounts for my “like exiles.”


## 10
On my solution to the identity of the éke ‘some’, that is, the human ritualists, see the publ. intro.

The pattern set in the rest of the hymn is also broken by placing a trisyllabic word initially before the numeral; vss. 1-9 all begin with a disyllable.

Note the phonological play between the opening verb árcanti and the final verb arocayan.
