+++
title = "031"

+++
Yajamāna and patnī, etc.


## 02
The word order of c is slightly skewed. All things being equal, forms of the sá/tám pronoun, esp. in correlative usage, tend to take 1st position in the pāda/clause. This expectation is reinforced here by 2nd position íd ‘just, only’, which really should limit tám (as my tr. reflects), but the verb pā́t seems to have displaced the pronoun to the right of íd.


## 05
As noted in the publ. intro., vss. 1-4 and 5-9 present loosely parallel treatments of the rewards of sacrifice, with 1-4 applying to the sacrificer alone and 5-9 to the sacrificer and his wife. In this vs. sunutáḥ (5b) reprises sunávat of 1b, and the structure of those two b pādas is roughly the same: sunávac ca pácāti ca and sunutá ā́ca dhā́vataḥ, with two ritual verbs conjoined by ca(s). The nítyāśirā ‘with its own proper milk-mixture’ referring to soma echoes sómam … āśíram in 2b.


## 06
prāśavyā̀n has been subject to various analyses. Sāy suggests ‘nourishment’, which is tentatively accepted by Re. Ge tr. “die für die Pünktlichen bestimmten (Belohnungen)” without comment, leaving it unclear (at least to me) even what root he assigns it to. With Old (also EWA s.v. ŚĀVI , Hoffmann apud Gotō 304 n. 723, Scar 539-40), I take it to the root √śū ‘swell’ and connect it to the root noun cmpd prāśū́- in the following hymn (though attributed to a different poet), VIII.32.16. (Contra Re explicitly.) In both passages the lexeme seems to have a negative connotation, ‘swollen (with pride), puffed up’. Here the sacrificing married couple successfully ‘go up against’ (práti √i), that is, compete with, these puffed-up rivals. The passage reminds us of the Agastya and Lopāmudrā hymn, I.179.3 … víśvā spṛ́dho abhy àśnavāva / … yát samyáñcā mithunā́v abhyájāva “Let us two take on all contenders … when as a united couple we will drive on,” depicting another sacrificing pair competing with rivals. Our vs. and I.179.3 contain the only two masc.

du. samyáñcā in the RV. The triumph over hostile rivals is also expressed in the parallel section of this hymn (vss. 1-4) in 3c víśvā vanvánn amitríyā “winning all (the things) of the enemy.”


## 07
vivāsataḥ ‘the two seek to win’ is matched in the parallel by 3c vanván ‘winning’.


## 08
putríṇā … kumāríṇā “possessing sons, possessing children” expands on prajā́vatī ‘possessing offspring’ in the parallel, 4a.


## 09
With Ge and Re, I take pāda c as referring to sex, though in a devotional context (Ge: “Kinderzeugung als verdienstliches Werk”). The point of the Agastya and Lopāmudrā hymn I.179, already cited ad vs. 6, is of course that ascetic practice must yield to sex as a duty even for the very devout.


## 10
Flg. Ge, I take svastí sarvadhā́tamaḥ as if containing a dvandva svastisarva-. Ge convincingly cites other svastí √dhā passages. It might be possible to take it instead as a (short) instr.: “best establishing wholeness along with well-being,” though the status of svastí as an instr. seems shaky to me. Scar (264) takes it as an acc., with sarva- in the cmpd functioning as a predicative acc. to it: “der am besten das Glück vollständig macht.”


## 12
This vs. consisting entirely of nominals is surprisingly hard to interpret, primarily because of the unclear grammatical identity of anarváṇaḥ and the lack of parallelism between the animates of ab and the neut. aneháḥ of c.

To deal with the first problem first, beside the -n-stem anarván- we must reckon with a thematized form anarváṇa- (so Gr, Lub), the latter of which is attested twice as apparent nom. sg. masculine anarváṇaḥ (V.51.11 [or pl?] and this passage) and once as apparent acc. sg. masculine anarváṇam (X.92.14). Unfortunately all three forms immediately follow feminine singulars (áditiḥ, arámatiḥ, áditim respectively). Despite this clear pattern, I was reluctant to interpr. the apparent masc.

forms as fem., esp. in the case of the nominative forms, and therefore contrived ad hoc fixes for those passages. Here the fix is not too difficult: the immediately following word (beginning the next pāda) is masc. víśvaḥ. I take this as referring to another entity who should come here, with anarváṇaḥ modifying it, rather than arámatiḥ. The referent is in fact open-ended: “every” or “any” one with the mind of a god. Note the evocation of the All Gods through the phrase víśvo devásya, though the words are in different cases.

Although this will (barely) work, on reexamining the evidence I am not at all sure that it is worth denying the apparent pattern of feminine reference with this stem, and I might substitute (with Ge) “Aramati, the unassailing one,” though in this passage that leaves masc. víśvaḥ orphaned. Both Old (ad V.51.11; see his careful disc.

there) and Re in their different ways take anarváṇaḥ here as a nom. pl., but the nom. pl. to the athem. stem is anarvā́ṇaḥ, and in this passage the immediately following sg.

víśvaḥ makes further trouble. It is worth noting that the bahuvrīhi anarván- and its derivatives have a troubled relationship with gender in general; see comm. ad I.37.2, 185.3, VI.48.15, II.40.6. In several instances, masc. forms are used to qualify neuters (I.37.2 and VI.48.15), and the supposed masc. nom. sg. of the -n-stem seems to have fem. reference in II.40.6 and VII.40.4. This may have led to a certain cavalier tendency to use masc. forms to cover all genders, even when not morphologically necessary.

As for aneháḥ, Ge and Re supply ‘protection’ (Ge “der unfelhbare (Schirm) der Ādityas”) on the basis of VIII.18.21, while Old (ad V.51.11) takes it as an adv.

(construing ādityā́nām with víśvaḥ), though in his comm. on this passage he rescinds this in favor of its depending on aneháḥ (without tr.). On the basis of I.185.3 anehó dātrám áditer anarvám “the faultless gift of Aditi, which is unassailable” I tentatively supply ‘gift’ (note the presence also of another apparently variant stem, anarvá-; see comm. there). However, the Ge/Re solution is quite possible.


## 14
The 1st sg. īḷe in b does not match the nom. pl. part. saparyántaḥ in c. I take the pl. as including the vaḥ, the fellow ritualists for whom the poet invoked the god. As Ge points out, V.21.3 has saparyántaḥ ... īḷate, with number congruence.


## 18
A nice etymological pun in āśv-áśvya-.
