+++
title = "032"

+++
Indra


## 02
Ge takes ánarśanim and ahīśúvam as PNs, in addition to sṛ́bindum and the familiar píprum. Mayrhofer (2003, Personennamen) is uncertain about ánarśani-.

Scar (538-39) tr. all as PNs as well, but discusses the possible interpretations of ahīśū́-. On the basis of the parallel he cites in IV.16.13 píprum mṛ́gayaṃ śūśuvā́ṃsam “Pipru Mrgaya, ̥ swollen with power,” with the pf. part. to √śū, I prefer to take ahīśū́- as a meaningful epithet. The question is then what the first member ahī- represents.

Although it would be easier to identify it with ahī́- ‘fertile cow’, which matches it exactly, I prefer to take it as a metrically lengthened version of áhi- ‘snake’, which makes more sense in the designation of a demon. See Scar (loc. cit.), also EWA s.v. ahī́-. All four occurrences of this stem would have four short syllables if the second weren’t long ī, but I do not otherwise have an explanation of the lengthening. But note prāśū́- below (16b) with the same lengthening before śū́-.

As for ánarśani- I would again prefer to give it full lexical value, relating it (as Gr does) to ánarśa-rāti- (VIII.99.4) ‘possessing non-harmful gifts’(?), arśasānádesignation of another demon. See EWA s.v. arśasāná-. However, the root etymology (supposed √arś/ṛś ‘harm’) is not strong, and the analysis remains uncertain. If it does mean ‘harmless’, the adjective is used proleptically, as is not uncommon.

The name of the first demon, Sṛbindu, displays non-Indo-Aryan phonology.

See Kuiper (Aryans 40-41).


## 03
I have nothing useful to say about the morphology of kṛṣé.


## 04
With Ge I supply both “bring” and “soma,” though I would prefer to have more formulaic or textual support for providing this extraneous material - however, cf. II.14.8 gábhistipūtam bharata śrutā́ya “Bring what is purified by your hand [=soma] to the one who is famed,” adduced by Ge. The preverb práti occurs with √bhṛ (see, e.g., VIII.20.9 práti … śárdhāya mā́rutāya bharadhvam / havyā́…), but is not common.

tū́rṇāśa- is a hapax without etymology (though Old’s literal gloss, “was dem Ueberschreitenden Verschwinden, Untergang bringt,” implies √tṝ and √naś, without attempting to explain the morphology). I follow the consensus, that the word refers to a watercourse of some sort, since that makes sense in context. As often, verbal play may have had a role in its appearance here: 4b #tū́rṇāśaṃ ná ... is partly echoed by 5c púraṃ ná śūra … (ūr/ur na am ś, though not in the same order in both).


## 06
An alternative syntactic analysis of ab would take everything through vā in b as part of the yádi clause with rāráṇaḥ as verb, and start the main clause with dádhase, accented because it’s clause-initial: “If you will take pleasure in my pressed (soma) or in my solemn speech, you will find delight.” There are no strong arguments either way.


## 08
I do not understand Ge’s tr. of saṃrarāṇáḥ as ‘mitteilsam’ (communicative, talkative) and as if it were an adjective modifying food (“bring us mitteilsam Speise…”). (I assume that the specialization of this German cmpd for [verbal] communication postdates Ge’s language acquisition stage and his usage reflects some sense of teilen ‘divide, share’.) Kü (421) suggests that this participle means “bereitwillig, spendefreudig,” implying that it is used absolutely and doesn’t take an object. This certainly is possible here, but doesn’t bring us to Ge’s rendering.

In any case, the form here (-rarāṇáḥ to √rā) echoes rāráṇaḥ (to √ran) in 6a.


## 10
bṛbáduktha- is a hapax and has aggressively non-Indo-Aryan phonology (not one, but two b’s). My rendering is adopted from Weber (1891, cited by EWA s.v. bṛbú-; see also s.v. bṛbáduktha-). The word must deliberately evoke the name and epithet bṛhád-uktha- but should not be emended thereto; see Old and Ge. If Weber’s suggestion is correct, this may be a little joke, implying that Indra is powerful but not very good with words.


## 11
A novel construction, at least as interpreted by Ge (fld. by Klein and accepted also by me). The word -kratu- ‘intention, resolve’ is extracted from Indra’s epithet śatá-kratu- and implicitly made object of kṛnóti, represented by the enclitic pronoun īm. See Ge’s “der … hundertfach Rat weiss und ihn ausführt.”


## 12
A similar type of construction as the immediately preceding verse, though the connection between epithet and its dynamic manifestation is clearer: the epithet śakráḥ ‘able’ is transformed into the verb śakat ‘he will be able’. For an almost identical construction see I.10.6 and discussion there.

In both 11 and 12 I take cid as marking the epithet to be transformed, though in 11a it is displaced to the left.

Ge interprets the hapax antarābhará- as “der zwischen den Kämpfen steht,” presuming an analysis antarā-bhará-, rejected by Old, who favors the Pp antaraābhará-. This fits the context better.


## 14
Ge takes máhi sthirám as the neut. obj. of āyantā́ram, supplying ‘bow’: “Der den grossen starken (Bogen) spannt.” There are several objections to this. First, it’s ā́√tan, not ā́√yam, that is the standard idiom for stretching or spanning the bow, including in the passages he cites as parallels. Moreover, suffix-accented -tár- stems (like ā́yantár- here) ordinarily govern the genitive not the accusative, and although this rule is often violated, the fact that niyantár- in the following verse (15), an agent noun to the same root, does take the genitive makes it less likely that this one would take an accusative. I therefore take sthirám as a modifier of Indra (as in the next hymn, VIII.33.9, and elsewhere) and máhi as adverbial. āyantár- here is best interpreted in the context of ā́yachantu in 23b below.


## 16
On prāśū́- see Scar (539-40) and vs. 2 above, as well as comm. ad VIII.31.6.

This verse is oddly couched as an impersonal. Ge’s interpretation of it is conventional: the humans have fulfilled their obligation (ṛṇám) to the god and he correspondingly fulfills his to them. But the curiously detached affect of the expression gives me pause, and the temporal relations between ab and c are backwards for this interpretation: nūnám ‘now’ situates the first two pādas temporally after the action of the third, whose verb is the perfect pape, and the perfect of √pā is generally preterital. I therefore interpret the verse quite differently from Ge. I take the debt to be Indra’s, what he owes to the human worshippers who praise and press soma for him. But he has preemptatively fulfilled it: his somadrinking is always accompanied by his gift. The reason for the indirect and impersonal expression is to avoid saying directly that Indra could owe a debt to humans. This interpretation requires taking the genitives in ab as quasi-datives, but this is quite common.

On apratā́see Old.


## 17
The loc. pánye as beneficiary/target of the verbs √gā ‘sing’ and √śaṃs ‘recite’ is peculiar: these verbs generally take the dative or, esp. with certain preverbs, the accusative. But loc. pánya in sandhi matches the nominative pánya in sandhi (that is, underlying pányaḥ) that begins the next verse (18a), and this match accounts for the unusual case usage. A small, but telling, example of how rhetorical motivations can override strictly grammatical issues.


## 18
The intensive (that is, iterative-frequentative) dardirat is appropriate to the multiple objects implied.


## 20
The curious term svádhainava- appears to mean ‘having its own milk/milk-cows’, with vṛddhi of dhenú- (see AiG II.2.114). It echoes svadhā́ánu in 19a, and, as often, this echo may help account for its deployment here. Its referent is presumably soma-pressings or soma-drinks.

The relation between pāda a and the relative clauses of bc is, at best, “improper.” That is, the two singular forms yáḥ in b and c must have as their (rough) antecedent the gen. plural of pāda a referring to the pressings/drinks.


## 22
I take áti only with b: Indra is not supposed to pass over the three realms, but through them on his way to us. It is only the (other) peoples he is to pass over.


## 23
Pāda a plays on the ambiguity of raśmí-, both ‘ray’ and ‘rein’.

Although the simile in c seems to match the frame in b in case (nom. gíraḥ / ā́paḥ, acc. tvā / nimnám), there is a functional mismatch: the waters are not guiding the deep as the songs are guiding Indra. It therefore seems best to take ā́paḥ as one of the occasional examples of nom. for acc. in this stem, corresponding to tvā in the frame, with nimnám a further specification of goal. Ge clearly recognizes the problem and supplies a verb for the simile in c, “wie die Gewässer … (fliessen),” but this violates the structure of the RVic simile, which always holds the verb in common with the frame.


## 24
The hí in the first imperative clause provides the logical basis for the second one. See Brereton 2012.


## 26
On ṛ́cīṣama- see I.61.1.

As in 2b ahīśúvam may be a PN, but I prefer to take it with lexical value. The same problem is encountered with aurṇavābhá-. Arbuda, however, is a known enemy of Indra, but this episode, with snow as the weapon, is otherwise unknown.

Note again the non-Indo-Āryan phonology.

The return of the theme of Indra’s smashing named enemies from vs. 2 suggests a ring, and the fact that the following verses (27-28) sketch a ring with vs. 1 strengthens this impression.


## 27
The “who lays low” of the publ. tr. might be better “who lays (enemies [vel sim.]) low,” to make clear that a transitive sense is required.

## 27-28
These two verses form a sort of ring with vs. 1. There gā́thayā / máde sómasya vocata “with a song proclaim … in the exhilaration of soma”; here bráhma gāyata // … sómasya máde “sing a formulation … in the exhilaration of soma.”
