+++
title = "033"

+++
Indra


## 01
This verse has at least one clear subject (vayám ‘we’ in a) and one clear verb (3rd pl. pári … āsate ‘sit around’ in d), but they do not match grammatically.

There are (at least) two solutions: either to supply a 1st ps verb with ab (or abc) (so Ge) or to assume a modulation from 1st ps to 3rd ps. because of the nom. pl. stotā́raḥ ‘praisers’ in d, which, by this interpretation, would be in apposition to vayám. (Ge acknowledges this possibility in his n.) Despite the awkwardness I prefer the second option, in part because there is no obvious verb to supply in the earlier part of the vs. -- though I admit that Ge’s “anbrausen” (√svar) is possible, given sváranti opening
vs. 2 and the parallels he cites in his n. for singers and waters as subjects of √svar.

The other problem is the application of the simile “like waters” in b. It is not immediately clear why we are like waters. I would like to connect the simile to the phrase pavítrasya prasrávaneṣu in c and suggest that the waters go in circles at this outpouring just as we take our seats in a circle. It is also possible that the waters are being compared to the pressings in the adjective sutā́vantaḥ “provided with pressings, (which are) like waters.” On both difficulties in this verse, see detailed discussion by Old.


## 03
Phonetic figure in ab dhrṣṇ̥ av ... dhr̥ṣád ... darṣi Ge supplies “gepreisen” with the instr. káṇvebhiḥ. He is probably correct that the Kaṇvas are not likely to be assisting Indra in his conquests, but I still resist supplying material without a clear basis.


## 04
“Drink!” is an imperative that the poet Medhyātithi should not be addressing to himself, as opposed to “sing!” I therefore take it as the content of his song, addressed to Indra.

In d Ge takes the last two words rátho hiraṇyáyaḥ as a separate nominal clause “golden is his chariot.” This is possible, but I think it is far more likely a phrase qualifying Indra, despite its slight oddness. Indra can be called a chariot because he comes with lots of goods, like a chariot (see, e.g., I.125.3 vásumatā ráthena), and also because he’s “linked” (sáṃmiślaḥ) to the two horses, as if he were the chariot they are yoked to and pull. Moreover, starting with 4c the rest of the tṛca (4c-6c) consists only of descriptions of Indra in the nominative, arranged in relative clauses. A nominal clause with a different subject would interrupt this structure.


## 05
I take the phrase suṣavyáḥ sudákṣiṇaḥ as referring to Indra’s two horses, since it follows immediately on a hemistich (4cd) concerning those horses and his chariot. But ‘sides’ or ‘hands’ are also possible. Ge simply fails to supply a referent (“Der eine gute Linke, eine gute Rechte hat”). I.82.5 yuktás te astu dákṣiṇa utá savyáḥ ... supports my interpretation as horses.


## 06
The expression śmáśruṣu śritáḥ “embedded within his beard” is striking. It seems to be a slightly jocular expression, meaning perhaps that Indra has such a big bushy beard that it's as if he's been embedded into it -- one sees it before one sees him.


## 07
The presupposition behind the questions of ab seems to be that Indra becomes so formidable when he drinks soma that he becomes unrecognizable.

Shape-shifting of heroes under such circumstances is widespread.


## 08
I think the idea behind the simile is that elephants establish a large territory in which they wander, and that Indra has established a similarly large territory by giving to sacrificers scattered all over the map. Ge’s “mit seinem Bruntsaft” (‘rutting liquid’) stems from an idea of Pischel’s (see Old, Kl. Sch 306) connecting this passage with the later (Epic+ dāna- meaning elephant’s rutting liquid [see EWA s.v. dāná-]). This seems unlikely and it is hard to see how simile and frame would work together.

I have toyed with another possibility that remains tantalizingly hard to realize: dānā́may indeed be a pun, but a different one: an instrumental both to dānā́, as it’s taken here, and also to dāmán- ‘rope’ (whose inst. is indeed regularly dānā́). In this second reading ná would be ‘not’, not ‘like’, and vāraṇáḥ would be some derivative of √vṛ ‘hold back, restrain’ in addition to ‘wild’. The meaning of the second reading would be “a beast not (to be) restrained by a rope,” in addition to “Like a wild elephant … by his giving.” The second reading would harmonize with 6a, 10b ávṛtaḥ ‘unobstructable’ and be paraphrased by the next pāda in its own verse, 8c nákiṣ ṭvā ní yamat “No one will restrain you.” However, I have been unable to find a way to make vāraṇá- a plausible form of √vṛ in the correct sense and so have not pursued this possibility further.


## 09
At first glance it is hard to find a concessive sense for the pres. part. sán in pāda a, despite its usual value. Indeed Ge takes ab as an independent nominal clause and begins a new sentence in c. However, the idea may be that although Indra is very tough and primed for battle, he’ll drop everything and come when we call him to the sacrifice.

The sense ‘perfected’ for sáṃskṛta- may be anachronistic; if so, ‘entirely readied’ or the like can substitute.


## 12
On ṛjīpin see comm. ad IV.26.6.

“In the waters” in the publ. tr. should be corrected to “in the rivers.” Ge and Kü (256) take dadhanve as transitive (Ge “… liess … laufen,” Kü “… hat laufenlassen…”), but the other examples of this medial perfect are intransitive (VIII.19.1, also taken by Kü as transitive, can be interpreted in the same way as this one), and the accusative can easily be a goal.


## 13
On nā́yám see VIII.2.28. After my reexamination of the evidence (Hock Fs., 2013) I would now rephrase the translation of the first three pādas as “Drive here, most powerful Indra, to the somian honey to drink it, as bounteous one, all on your own,” eliminating “to the landing site” and construing áchā with mádhu … somyám in the preceding pāda.

A new clause begins with śṛṇávat in the middle of c. Ge takes all of cd together, but the accentuation of śṛṇávat is unexplained in this interpretation.

Moreover áchā is not otherwise found with √śru but is common with √yā.

## 16-19
As discussed in the publ. intro., in my view this strange pendant to the hymn is an oblique attack on what I consider a late RVic ritual innovation, the introduction of the Patnī, Sacrificer’s Wife, as a required role in standard ritual. For both general discussion of this situation and some detailed consideration of passages throughout the RV, including this one, that fight this doctrinal battle, see Jamison 2011 “The Secret Lives of Texts” (Presidential Address, American Oriental Society 2010; JAOS 131: 1-7) and “‘Sacrificer's Wife’ in the Rig Veda: Ritual Innovation?” (Brereton and Proferes, eds., Creating the Veda, Living the Veda: Selected Papers from the 13th World Sanskrit Conference, 19-30). The division of speakers, again in my view, is that the poet, who opposes the new ritual model, speaks the first (16) and last (19) verses, while 17-18 are put in the mouth of Indra, who is a proponent.

These verses are extensively discussed by Old and Ge, with Old somewhat more in line with my own interpretation; I will not consistently signal my agreements and disagreements with them in what follows.


## 16
I take the disgruntled speaker to be the poet and the subject of ráṇyati to be a rival ritualist, who has accepted the new doctrine. The “you or me” of pāda a is rather like the English expression “the likes of you and me,” meaning “ordinary people.” I take the nahí … nó (= ná u) as having domain only over táva and máma, not the anyásya of pāda b. By my rules (Jamison 1997) anyá- in this position should be definite (not Ge’s indefinite “oder eines anderen…”), and I take its referent to be Indra. The referent of the yáḥ in the rel. clause in c I again take to be Indra (that is, anyásya), rather than the subject of ráṇyati, as Ge does. The designation vīrá- is of course regularly applied to Indra, and “led us here” can refer both to Indra’s leadership in the acquisition of new territory and to his role in introducing the ritual innovation. And Indra starts off the next verse.


## 17
Indra begins, cleverly, with concession: he admits that women’s mental powers are not as strong as they should be. I take this as Indra’s direct speech, even though pāda c is in the accusative (and pāda b could be), since I think such mixed constructions (X said “abc” / said that abc) are found elsewhere. However, little is lost if it is taken as indirect discourse.


## 18
In my interpretation Indra’s speech continues here, and having admitted the drawbacks to employing women in the ritual, he introduces the model of the yoked pair (that is, the married couple) drawing the chariot of sacrifice, a pair that must be more or less equally matched, but with the pole of the male somewhat higher than that of the female. (Some animals are more equal than others.) The image of the sacrifice as a chariot is of course a common one, and the word mithunā́ ‘complementary pair, sexual pair’ seems to me the tipoff that this is about the married couple. (Old is in general agreement.)


## 19
The poet returns in his own voice to mock the new model, by imitating in the first three pādas the speech of a mother to her little daughter, inculcating proper behavior. kaśaplakaú in c is a hapax, but its -ka- suffix suggests that it belongs to a low register (note also pādakaú in b) and the fact that it is in the dual limits its possible applications. Old suggests “weibl. Geschlechsteile” (though he moves on to breasts), and the fact that keeping one’s feet together keeps them from being seen makes the labia a good possibility.

The poet then unleashes a devastating insult on his addressee, a brahman - that he has turned into a woman. I take this unfortunate figure to be the ritualist favoring the new model, and our poet is suggesting that too much association with and sympathy for women, too much emphasis on equality, will unman a man.
