+++
title = "035"

+++
Aśvins See the publ. intro. for the pattern of repetitions in this very repetitious hymn.

The c pāda of every vs. save for the last three (22-24), “in concert with Dawn and the Sun” (sajóṣasā uṣásā sū́ryeṇa ca), of course refers to the Aśvins’ participation in the dawn sacrifice.

## 10-12
The first hemistichs of the three verses in this tṛca are excessively provided with ca’s, as well as 2nd du. act. impvs in -tam. Cf., e.g., 10ab píbataṃ ca tṛpṇutáṃ cā́ca gachatam, prajā́ṃ ca dhattám dráviṇaṃ ca dhattam.


## 11
The distribution of ca’s in pāda a is somewhat puzzling or, perhaps, syncopated, with the 2nd ca following preverb+verb (prá stutaṃ ca), though the other two preverb/verb combinations in this tṛca place the ca in the expected position after the preverb (ā́ca gachatam 10a and immediately following prá cāvatam 11a). This does not seem to be metri causa, or at least not in some obvious way.


## 13
Exactly what dhármavant- is conveying here is unclear, but it is highly unlikely to be, with Ge, “von Dharma [den Gesetz] … begleitet,” since ‘law’ is quite anachronistic for dhárma(n)-. I also do not think Re is correct in seeing it as a proper noun, despite its appearance in a -vant-stem parallel to those containing gods’ names.

Rather, the repetitive template of the tṛca imposes the -vant-stem here, on the abstract principle dhárman- generally associated with Mitra and Varuṇa -- here perhaps referring to their authority and its manifestation (their statute) by which they impose order on the world.


## 15
vā́javant- may mean -- instead of, or in addition to, ‘accompanied by prizes’ -- ‘accompanied by Vāja’ (name of one of the Ṛbhus) or ‘… the Vājas’ (as a designation of all the Ṛbhus). Certainly the juxtaposition with ṛbhumánt- is meant.

## 16-18
A verb needs to be supplied with the d pādas of this tṛca (sómaṃ sunvató aśvinā). On both general grounds and the d pādas of vss. 1-3 (sómam pibatam aśvinā)(see also 22b píbatam somyám mádhu), ‘drink’ makes the most sense, though ‘drive to’, which dominates the middle part of the hymn, is certainly possible.


## 23
On vivákṣaṇa- see comm. ad VIII.45.11. Contra Ge and Re, I take it with √vakṣ ‘strengthen’, not √vac.
