+++
title = "038"

+++
Indra and Agni

## 01-03
The referent of tásya in the refrain pāda is not specified. It must fall into the cultic sphere, but could be ‘sacrifice’ or ‘hymn’ or, perhaps best, since it’s explicit in a nearby hymn by the same poet, ‘call’: VIII.35.4 bódhataṃ hávasya me.


## 02
I adopt Brugmann’s suggestion (presented and generally endorsed by Old, also Scar 417-18) to read *tośā́*sarathayā́vānā for tośā́sā ratha… Scar assembles an impressive number of passages involving sarátham/saráthā and √yā, incl. I.108.1 dedicated to Indra and Agni. The suggestion has the merit of eliminating the supposed s-stem tośás- with its apparent anomalous uṣás-like inflection with lengthened grade in the strong form tośā́saḥ. The dual to the thematic tośá-, tośā́ exactly as here, is found in an Indra and Agni hymn III.12.4. The change does require going against the Pp. and also emending sā to sa. The publ. tr. should have an asterisk before “driving on the same chariot.” As for tośá-, Gotō discusses it at length (166-68), rejecting the old gloss as ‘drip’ in favor of ‘hasten’; his redefinition is accepted by Mayrhofer (EWA s.v. TOŚ, replacing KEWA’s ‘drip’). Because the anodyne ‘hasten’ can fit almost any verb in the RV (and in fact the old RVicist joke is that, judging from Ge et sim., all verbs in the RV mean ‘shine’, ‘hasten’, or ‘sing’), there is nothing in the usage of the forms of this root that imposes ‘hasten’ (or excludes it). That Gotō labels his reinterpretation “plausibler” than the older one shows once again a certain deafness to metaphor and a penchant for the semantic lowest common denominator. Moreover, that most of its subjects are liquids supports the old rendering ‘drip’. The only preverb with which it is found is ní ‘down’. Verbs of hastening (etc.) generally take a variety of directional preverbs, of which ní is one of the rarest and most specialized; dripping, on the other hand, goes in only one direction, down. Gotō’s ‘hasten’ gets little or no support from the Iranian evidence he adduces (168 n. 275), which is quite weak and questioned even by him. Although as ‘drip’ √tuś has no good etymology either (see KEWA s.v. tóśate), I see no reason to replace it with ‘hasten’ without better evidence. In our passage ‘streaming’ probably reflects the same metaphor in English for speed. Or, like nitóśana- in VIII.25.23, it could mean ‘overflowing’ (with goods) and refer to the anticipated generosity of the gods.


## 03
Pāda a can of course be in the acc. (not nom. as I take it) and form a single sentence with b (so Ge). There are no implications either way, but I prefer to take fronted forms of ayám as annunciatory (“here is …”) if at all possible. However, given initial imā́(5a) and imā́m (6a), which can’t be so tr., this is not a strong arg.


## 05
Pāda b is somewhat awkward because it states that both Indra and Agni carry oblations. Ge gets out of the difficulty by making the oblations an acc. of goal with an intransitive reading of ūháthuḥ (“… ihr zu den Opfergaben gefahren sind”), but Old convinces me (ad I.84.18, with a number of parallel passages) that we cannot sidestep the transitivity in these expressions (√vah + oblation(s)). In this particular case we can attribute the transitive phrase to a feature of Indra and Agni hymns noted in the publ. intro., that both gods get credited with actions or qualities appropriate to only one of them, and Agni is of course the conveyor of oblations par excellence.


## 06
Both Ge and Re take gāyatrá- as a technical reference to the Gāyatrī meter and poems composed in it (also vs. 10); this is possible, but the stem is often used just of a song.


## 07
On jenya- see comm. ad I.128.7.


## 08
I construe the Śyāvāśva genitive phrase directly with the verb, rather than supplying ‘call’ (hávam) with Ge, on the basis of VIII.36.7, 37.7. But either is of course possible.
