+++
title = "039"

+++
Agni


## 01
Ge tr. vidáthe as “den beiden gelehrten Stände,” commenting (n. 1de) that vidátha- “ist die Autorität in gelehrten Sachen.” Following Thieme (Unters. 37ff.; see also EWA s.v.), however, I take the stem as derived from ví √dhā ‘divide, distribute’. In most instances (esp. in the loc. vidáthe, identical to the form here) vidátha- refers to the ceremonial distribution of goods and, more loosely, to the ceremony itself, but it can also refer to cosmic divisions (for other passages see Thieme’s collection; one ex. is 9b below), and that is the referent here. The presence of ubhé helps mark the form as a neut. dual, as opposed to the otherwise ubiquitous loc. sg.


## 02
In c I read, with Old but contra Pp, árātīr árāva ṇām. This does not require emending the Saṃhitā text, but simply redividing the words.

With most interpr. I take vácaḥ synchronically as a truncated form of the instr.

vácasā to be construed with návyasā (also II.31.5, VI.48.11 in the same pāda-final position; versus medial … návyasā vácasā … VI.62.5). However, I do not regard it as an inherited instrumental showing deeply archaic morphology (with Hale, Fs.

Melchert, esp. 93-95), esp. since Hale sets out very persuasively the cost of assuming such a preserved archaism (87-88), thus undercutting his own view of vácaḥ in these passages. I am not entirely certain what gave rise to what in my view is a synchronic, poetically generated variant. On the one hand, the expected instr. sg.

vácasā would not fit the end of any cadence in Vedic meter; the form is almost invariably found in the break after an opening of either 4 or 5. The instr. pl. vácobhiḥ is, by contrast, quite common pāda final in Triṣṭubh (8 of 13 forms), and I wonder if our “instr.” vácaḥ did not originally start out from a truncation of the -bhiḥ ending to fit into an iambic cadence (Jagatī or dimeter vs.). This of course does not get us the instr. singular with návyasā, however. Another factor that may have contributed is contexts in which a nom./acc. vácaḥ would be grammatically possible, with návyasā an adverbial instr. ‘anew’. Ours is such a passage; vácaḥ here can be parallel to śáṃsam ‘laud’, hence “(set) down … anew a speech, a laud …” (also suggested by Scar 392 n. 544). Then analyzed as an abbreviated instr. because of its proximity to návyasā, the phrase could be used in passages in which a nom./acc. vácaḥ is excluded.

The tr. just suggested depends crucially on accepting my interpr. of pāda b, against that of Ge (see also Gr, Scar 392). The questions are the positive or negative value of śáṃsam and the referent of unaccented eṣām. Most take the latter as referring to the árāvṇām of the following pāda, but, strictly speaking, unaccented forms of ayám should refer to something already in the discourse. Although the proximity of the two forms might allow árāvṇām to “count” as already in the discourse, I would prefer to find a referent preceding eṣām, and devā́n in 1c is available. This also allows us to interpr. śáṃsa- in its more common positive usage ‘laud’, rather than the rare (though definitely attested) negative sense (see, e.g., III.18.2 śáṃsam áraruṣaḥ, with a gen. akin to our árāvṇām).

We thus have two parallel expressions, pādas ab and cd, each beginning with ní and lacking a verb. I supply √dhā for both, with slightly different senses: ‘set down (upon)’ for ab and ‘put down’ in the idiomatic sense also found in English (though without the English specialization to speech) for cd. For √dhā with tanū́ṣu, see, e.g., I.85.3, III.19.5, III.53.18; for śáṃsam √dhā + loc. of god, see X.42.6a yásmin vayáṁ dadhimā́śáṁsam índre “Indra, upon whom we have set our laud” (lit.

“upon which Indra we have set our laud”).


## 03
prá cikiddhi presents the usual problem of forms of √cit: does this fall in the intransitive ‘appear, be perceived’ range or I/T ‘perceive’? I have opted for the latter, since Agni is regularly called prácetas-, which I interpr. as ‘discerning, provident’. But Ge and Re go for the former, which is certainly not impossible and might be supported by ciketa in 5a.


## 04
Ge supplies a different subject (“singer”) for kṛpaṇyáti in the rel. clause than for dadhe in the preceding main clause: “so viel Kraft verlieht Agni wie immer (der Sänger) bedarf.” This is novel, but seems unnecessary and supported neither by context nor by parallels.

The Pp. analyzes ūrjā́hutiḥ as ūrjā́ā́hutiḥ, that is, probably with an instr. 1st member, but Old prefers to see the 1st member as a stem form, either ūrjā́- or ūrjá-.

The latter is marginally attested in cmpds and in the verb stem ūrjáya-, probably originally a denom. (see Jamison, -áya-, 50, 81). By Ge’s interpr. (which I follow), gen. pl. vásūnām limits the first member of this cmpd ūrjā́huti-. This is common in later Sanskrit, but somewhat rarer in the RV. Re (and Klein) render it backwards (Klein, DGRV I.205-6 “whose nourishment is the oblation of the gods”), but still with the gen. pl. limiting only one of the members. It may not be sufficiently clear in the publ. tr. that I take the cmpd as a bahuvrīhi.

Note that both -ā́huti- (√hu ‘pour’) and -hūti- (√hū ‘call’) appear in this vs. ### 05
The standard interpr. take pratīvyàm as the obj. of inóti (e.g., Ge “er befördert die Darbringung”), and this is certainly the simplest way. But inóti means ‘impel’, and práti √vī refers to the gods’ reception of mortals’ offerings, not the offerings themselves (see the root noun in quasi-infinitival usage in VIII.23.1, 26.8, and finite passages like VIII.101.10), so the simpler syntax requires attenuating the meanings of both words. I therefore complicate the surface syntax somewhat by supply an obj. to inóti extracted from dákṣiṇābhiḥ in pāda c and making pratīvyàm the goal. If the infinitival sense of pratīvyàm in its other two occurrences is maintained here, it could be tr. “impels (them) to be received.”


## 06
As pointed out in the publ. intro., pādas ab contain a pun -- which Ge fails to note and Re mentions in his n. but fails to render in his translation. Agni “knows the races” (jātā́… veda) of gods and men. Those two words in that order produce his common epithet Jātavedas. I take apīcyàm ‘hidden, secret’ at the end of b as a separate clause, alluding to this pun: “(this is his) secret (name).” (The publ. tr.

should have “name” in parentheses.) apīcyàm (-āni) almost always qualifies ‘name’, including two hymns later by the same poet (VIII.41.5 … apīcyā̀/ véda nā́māni gúhyā). Both Ge and Re instead take apīcyàm as a separate object of veda, construed with márt(i y)ānām, while jātā́is limited only by devā́nām (“knows the races of the gods and the secret [/Re ‘specificity’] of mortals”), though gods and mortals are frequently a merism. My view that apīcyàm is a separate clause is supported by the meter. Mahāpaṅkti consists only of 8-syllable pādas, and 6b should end after márt(i y)ānām. In fact, Old in his Prol. suggested deleting the following apīcyàm, but in the Noten thinks better of it, allowing a 4-syllable pendant to this line. This pendant is, in my interpr., syntactically independent and a sort of meta-comment.

In e Ge supplies ghee with návīyasā: “mit erneutem (Opferschmalz).” This of course is more semantically harmonious with svā̀hutaḥ ‘bepoured’, but betrays a sad lack of poetic sensibility. The stem návīyas- is regularly used of verbal products, and it narrowly echoes návyasā vácaḥ of 2a. Moreover, 3ab contains an example of the trope “pour prayers” (there explicitly compared to ghee: mánmāni … ghṛtáṃ ná juhve). This expression svā̀huto návīyasā economically combines the “newer speech” of 2 and the “pouring prayers” of 3, using both √hu (from 3) and náv(ī)yas- (from 2).

The poet could hardly have made his metaphorical intent clearer. (Re is only a bit less flat-footed than Ge; he gives návīyasā the correct referent [hymne], but still sneaks in a supplied beurre fondu to construe with svā̀hutaḥ.)


## 07
Gr derives sáṃvasu- from √vas ‘dwell’, and Ge’s “Hausgenosse” reflects this derivation (see also AiG II.1.75). But Old argues that it contains vásu- ‘good(s)’ and compares sahávasu-, vásubhiḥ sáha, an analysis accepted by Debrunner (AiG II.1 Nachtr. 24, AiG II.2.471), Re, and me.

With the standard tr., I take víśvam bhū́meva as a two-member simile, acc. + nom. A passage two hymns away in the same cycle, VIII.41.5 sá kavíḥ kā́vyā purú, rūpáṃ dyaúr iva puṣyati “he is a poet who fosters the many poetic arts, as heaven does its (concrete) form,” makes this analysis pretty much inescapable. But I am still somewhat concerned by the position of the iva (in both passages), following the 2nd element of the simile rather than the first, and víśvam bhū́ma ‘the whole earth’ would also be a possible NP.


## 08
“Seven” here is probably a loose indication of totality (so Oberlies, II.74) rather than a precise enumeration. The number may have been displaced from síndhuṣu: the rivers are generally seven.

VIII.39.8, 10: I do not understand the sudden prominence of the rivers/waters, esp.

the waters that in 10e are svásetu- ‘having/being their own bridges/dams’. Ge (n.

10de) thinks it alludes to the ritual sprinkling of the fireplaces with water, which may well be, but which does not explain the descriptor. In its other occurrence (X.61.16) svásetu- refers to a poet who crosses the waters (apáḥ … tarati) by having or making his own bridge. Are the waters providing Agni with a bridge for him to cross them? It may (or may not) be relevant that the waters/rivers are fairly prominent in the next hymn (VIII.40) to Indra and Agni.


## 09
On vidátha- as ‘cosmic division’ see comm. ad vs. 1 above.
