+++
title = "040"

+++
Indra and Agni


## 02
The hapax vavráyāmahe is somewhat puzzling. It appears to be a denom. to vavrá- ‘hole’, with accent retraction because it is transitive (so Jamison, -áya-, 88-89). This deriv. goes back to Bartholomae and is endorsed by Old, for want of anything better. But what is its point in context? Here Re seems to show the way, taking it as oppositional to the following pāda, which begins with the contrastive particle átha: “But we sacrifice just (/especially) to Indra.” The idea is that, though the hymn is dedicated to both Indra and Agni, we don’t put the two gods in the same undifferentiated category, “in the (same) hole,” as it were, but treat them individually.

As noted in the publ. intro., the two gods are treated with more independence than in most Indra and Agni hymns (which isn’t saying much).


## 03
The clauses ab and cde begin identically, with tā́. It is only with the last two words of the final pāda, aśnutaṃ narā, that it becomes clear that a change of person has been effected between 3rd (ab) and 2nd (cde). Unfortunately this change has to be signalled much earlier in the Engl.


## 04
I take cde as consisting of two relative clauses, both introduced by yáyoḥ in c. The first is only pāda c and is a statement of ownership (“whose is this whole moving world,” phrased in the publ. tr. as “to whom … belongs”); the second comprises de, with yáyoḥ construed with vásu and Heaven and Earth the subj. of the dual verb bibhṛtáḥ. (Re’s tr. is sim.) Ge’s tr. differs from mine in taking cde as a single relative cl., with “this whole moving world” as a parallel subj. to Heaven and Earth. He must assume that bibhṛtáḥ has been attracted into the dual by the nearer paired subject. I prefer to take the dual verb seriously, and I also wonder if the moving world (which usually refers to the animate beings therein) has a collective lap. For the lap of Heaven and Earth, see nearby VIII.42.2 pātáṁ no dyāvāprthiv ̥ ī upásthe (in the same hymn cycle).

Judging by word order, iyáṃ dyaúḥ should belong together and I have so tr.

them. But iyám has the wrong deixis: iyám expresses near deixis and, when indicating a cosmic division, ordinarily characterizes the earth (cf., e.g., X.60.9 iyám prthiv ̥ ī́mahī́). It also has the dispreferred gender: dyaúḥ is ordinarily masc., though occasionally fem. Since demonstratives are often separated from their nouns, I am tempted to take it with pṛthivī́here (“heaven and this great earth”). But a series of passages in which the feminine near deictic does seem to belong with ‘heaven’ (prthiv ̥ ī́ṃ dyā́m utémā́m III.32.8, 34.8, X.88.3, 9, 121.1) gives me pause, and IX.96.3 dyā́m utémā́m is even worse, because it is not conjoined with an ‘earth’ word. So I have honored the word order as well as accepting the gender switch.


## 05
What this is about is not entirely clear. Ge suggests Vala, while Lüders, fld.

by Re, thinks of the heavenly ocean (as usual).

That -bāra- ‘bank’ is a MIA development of pārá- ‘(far) shore’ (KEWA s.v. jihmáḥ, EWA s.v. pārá-) seems plausible.


## 06
Both vratáti- and guṣpitá- are found in the RV only here, but are attested later -- the latter already AV.

The meter of de is faulty, with two extra syllables. Which pāda is hypermetric depends on which one vásu is assigned to: Old (Prol.) and Lub put it final in d, HvN initial in e. In favor of the former is vásu’s general preference for pāda-final position and, in particular, the final of 4e, with a form of √bhṛ + vásu (bibhṛtó vásu). Old (Noten) explicitly counsels against omitting it as others have suggested. It would be possible to eliminate another disyllable, e.g., pleonastic vayám, but there is no strong reason to.


## 07
Ge and Re tr. indrāgnī́as voc., without commenting on accent. I assume this is simply a lapse on their parts.


## 08
Ge and Re take uccárātaḥ as the verb of all of ab, whose action unfolds “under heaven” (unterhalb des Himmels), but the contrast between aváḥ ‘down’ and úd ‘up’ invites an interpr. of cyclical complementary action -- the rising and setting of the two heavenly bodies. I therefore supply a verb of motion with pāda a.

I read pāda c with both ab and d.


## 09
In my interpr. the verse is structured by two complementary pairings of reciprocal gifts between “us” and Indra. Both involve Indra’s gifts (úpamātayaḥ a, āpṛ́caḥ d) and our praiseful thoughts (práśastayaḥ b, dhíyaḥ e).

úpamāti- is variously rendered, but I take it to úpa √mā ‘mete out’; cf., e.g., VII.26.5 sahasríṇa úpa no māhi vā́jān “mete out prizes to us in thousands.” Ge’s ‘Zuwendungen’ (‘contributions, donations’, but also ‘care’) could belong either to √mā or to √man, but I surmise he links it to the former. Both Gr and Re connect it to the realm of speech/thought (‘Anrede’ and ‘pensées-appliquées’ respectively) with Gr explicitly positing a root affiliation with √man. Re gives no disc. in his comm. ad loc. (EVP 14), but in EVP 16 (ad IV.43.4) he rejects a root affiliation with √mā. Cf. also his comments in EVP 13.155 (ad VIII.60.11). A root syllable mā cannot be derived from the aniṭ root √man in any straightforward fashion, though AiG II.2.630 derives both úpamāti- and abhímāti- from -mati- via metrical lengthening, citing Meillet. Metrical lengthening is, of course, a non-explanation except under very controlled conditions, and the fact that other compounds with -mati- (e.g., metrically identical ánumati-) maintain the short vowel make it even less likely in this case.

In both d and e I supply ‘many’, based on the parallelism with ab pūrvī́ḥ …, pūrvī́ḥ ... HvN’s loosing of the sandhi in d as vīrásya apṛ́caḥ is incorrect: the initial vowel is ā-, which is supported by the meter and so given by the Pp (see Scar 324).

Ge takes āpṛ́caḥ as adjectival modifying dhíyaḥ, but I follow Old’s interpr. (so also Scar 324-25) as a nom. act.; the vásvaḥ with it is an objective gen., the vīrásya a subjective gen. 
## 10
The “eggs” of Śuṣṇa are probably his progeny (so Old, Ge); see X.68.7, adduced by Ge, also X.22.11 śúṣṇasya ... jātáṃ víśvaṃ and X.61.13 śúṣṇasya … puruprajātásya. They can’t be testicles, given the number.

The standard interpr. takes jéṣat (e) as parallel to bhédati (d) and still part of the rel. clause beginning in c, whereas I take it as the verb of the main clause to which the rel. clause is attached. Either is grammatically possible because, if jéṣat is the verb of a main clause, its accent is owing to its initial position. The rel. cl. interpr.

requires that cde all hang off the tám of a, despite the utá. Klein (DGRV I.302) seems to suggest that the verse is structured as an “X and which Y construction” (tám … utá … yáḥ), but as far as I know, the X and Y in such constructions always have different referents.


## 11
This verse, dedicated to Agni, is constructed entirely parallel to vs. 10 to Indra; note, e.g., the end of the b pādas: 10 … sátvānam ṛgmíyam, 11 … sátvānam ṛtvíyam. It therefore seems important to construe the exactly parallel cde in the same way in both verses. The only differences between the two are ójasā (10c) / óhata [-e out of sandhi] (11c), the order of Śuṣṇa and his eggs in d, and the tense/mood of the verb in e (s-aor. subj. jéṣat in 10e, s-aor. indic. ájaiḥ in 11e). My tr. reflects this strict parallelism, but others do not. Ge, e.g., takes d as the main cl. to c and e as a second independent cl., whereas in 10 he takes cde as a single rel. clause (see above). Klein, DGRV I.302, calls 11 “an awkward attempt to create a vertical parisyllablic responsio to 10a-e.” My tr. is made possible by taking óhate as passive (‘is proclaimed as …’) (or possibly reflexive ‘vaunts himself as’; see V.42.11).
