+++
title = "041"

+++
Varuṇa


## 02
Given práśasti- in VIII.40.9, rendered ‘encomia’, the práśasti- here should probably be so tr. as well, rather than ‘panegyrics’.


## 03
I don’t understand the purport of this vs., esp. de. Ge and Re suggest various possible referents for the vénīḥ and for the three dawns, all possible and none particularly compelling.

I supply sasvaje with the pári in c, on the basis of pári ṣasvaje in a. Ge and Re construe the pāda without a verb (e.g., Ge: “er ist rings um die Welt sichtbar”). This is possible.


## 04
The hapax sáptya- is problematic. Most (though not Ge) take it as a derivative of saptá ‘7’ (e.g., Re ‘la septuplicité’, a fine coinage) and point to Varuṇa’s 7 sisters in 2e. His control over the 7 in 9e is perhaps more relevant. Ge tr.

“treue Freundschaft”; though he does not comment, he must derive it from sápti-, though the standard view of the meaning of the latter is now ‘team’ and those meanings seem quite distinct. If the word belongs with sápti-, which I think more likely than a connection with saptá (though 9e now gives me pause), it should mean something like ‘teamwork, cooperation’. The problem is that in this hymn Varuṇa is credited with doing everything on his own; his usual companions, Mitra and Aryaman, are absent. I therefore tentatively suggest that it is based on a syncopated form (sa-pti-) from a putative *sa-páti-, hence ‘joint leadership/lordship’ à ‘leadership, master-ship’. This is a very fragile suggestion, I realize.


## 05
On the displaced simile particle here, cf. comm. ad VIII.39.7.


## 06
The iva in the simile is also displaced to the right, as in the previous vs. The simile is also more complex than it first appears. The obvious way to render it is “In whom are fixed all poetic arts like the nave in a wheel,” with Varuṇa the wheel and the poetic arts the nave, but the more likely image is that the spokes are fit into the nave -- with Varuṇa the nave and the unexpressed spokes the poetic arts.

I have no idea what or who tritá- stands for.

The images in de are also somewhat skewed. Ge takes the two pādas separately, with d a nominal sentence with infinitival saṃyúje as predicate, despite the yoking vocabulary common to both pādas. He must do that because the gā́vaḥ in d must be nom., but corresponds logically to the acc. áśvān in e. Old suggests taking gā́vaḥ as acc. (as also possibly in IX.24.2, on which see comm. ad loc.). I take the two pādas together, classifying it as another example of case disharmony in a simile (Jamison 1982), enabled by the syntactic multifunctionality of the infinitival saṃyúje, yujé (with both act. and pass. readings). Scar’s attempt (431) to construe the two pādas together and also account for the cases shows the pitfalls, as it wanders off into fanciful territory.


## 07
The purport of this verse and the referents of the unidentified fem. pl. (āsu, pāda a) and masc./neut. pl. (eṣām, pāda b) are completely unclear to me, and multiple suggestions have been made about the identities of these entities and the ways they might fit together. I roughly follow Old’s interpr., but cannot carry it further.


## 08
With Ge (n. 8d) I take arcíṇā as instr. to arcí-, not arcín-; among other things, “with his flaming foot” (with arcín-) seems comic.
