+++
title = "043"

+++
Agni


## 01
With Old I take ástṛta-yajvan- as a karmadhāraya, not the bahuvrīhi of Ge and Re, who seem to ignore the evidence of the accent (on which see AiG II.1.80).


## 03
Ge takes ārokā́ḥ (only here in RV) as “Maschen” (mesh), and this does seem to be the meaning in late Vedic. This idiomatic sense presumably developed from ‘light flashing through openings’ to the ‘openings’ themselves. However, mesh or netting does not seem a particularly apt comparison here, and I prefer to take the word in a more literal, but still concrete, sense, esp. since rocate appears several times in the hymn (8c, 10b). By ‘brilliants’ I mean gems or gem-like objects (rhinestones, e.g., had they been invented then) that catch and flash light. A more abstract sense, like ‘flashes’ or ‘flares’, risks near identity with what it’s being compared with (tvíṣaḥ).

The force of the particle pile-up ghéd áha is not entirely clear to me, but this poet is partial to it. See ghéd … áhā in 30, as well as ghéd in 29, áha in 8. I have not found ghéd (…) áha elsewhere in the RV.

## 04-05
vṛ́thak is found only in these two vss. It is generally considered to be a formal cross of vṛ́thā ‘at will’ with pṛ́thak ‘separately’ (see EWA s.v., AiG III.231, Re ad loc.), a form of which appears in repeated pādas later in the hymn (18b=29b), and to maintain the semantics of the former (Ge ‘jäh’ [‘precipitously’ -- a rather extended sense], Re ‘à leur gré’). Sāy, however, simply glosses it as pṛthak. I am reluctantly sympathetic to Sāy’s opinion, as ‘at will’ does not fit the contexts well, esp. 5a. (Both Ge and Re tr. it with pāda b in 4, not in its proper place.) X.91.7 ā́te yatante rathyò yáthā pṛ́thak, adduced by Ge, echoes our 4c. The publ. tr. reflects the Sāy gloss. However, on returning to this passage, I find the Sāy solution too convenient and entirely unmotivated, but still remain unsatisfied with the connection with vṛ́thā and its suggested crossing with pṛ́thak. That the formation of both vṛ́thā and prthak ̥́ is murky does not help. I do not have anything resembling a solution, but I’m inclined to think that ví ‘apart’ is somehow implicated. Perhaps via an (unfortunately unattested) -añc-stem, *vi yañc- ‘facing separate directions’, whose neut. adv. *vi yak could have been assimilated to pṛ́thak given their similiarity of meaning. Cf. the similarly formed víṣvañc- ‘facing in separate directions’, whose neut. appears two hymns later in a suggestive collocation, VIII.45.8 … víṣvag yáthā.


## 08
On jañj see comm. ad I.168.7.


## 09
Assuming with the Pp., Macd. (VGS §48a), and Lub (s.v. sá) that saúṣadhīḥ represents sá(ḥ) óṣadhīḥ, this sandhi contravenes the standard treatment; cf. I.103.5, X.88.10 sá óṣadhīḥ. The sá with 2nd ps. reference also does not conform to my rules for this usage, as it is not in an imperatival clause. I do not have an answer, though poetic factors may have had some influence: note the preceding pāda (ap)sú ... sádhi(ṣ) …, which is a good match for the three syllables in saúṣadhī(r).

## 10
I prefer to maintain the older gloss ‘kiss’ for niṃs rather than flg. Gotō (200-201; cf. EWA s.v., Lub s.v. √nas) in the colorless substitution ‘approach’. Even if níṃsa- is in origin a redupl. pres. to √nas, passages like this, with múkhe ‘on the mouth’, support the richer semantics, which could have developed from an earlier ‘approach’, used metaphorically or euphemistically.


## 12
īmahe is formally ambiguous and could also mean ‘approach’; Ge’s “wir nahen dir bittend” seems to represent a blend of the two.

On the cmpd. váreṇya-kratu- see comm. ad IX.98.12.


## 14
agne has to be tr. “Fire,” rather than the usual “Agni,” because otherwise the verbal play is lost. The constant interplay in the RV between physical fire and the god Agni is hard to render in tr. because of the PN problem.


## 17
Despite the case disharmony between acc. tvā in a and the dat. phrase in b, I take them both as referring to Agni (so also Old). Ge takes the dat. in b as part of the simile in c, referring to a calf awaiting the cows coming to its stall. (Re’s tr.

seems to combine the two.) But vs. 2a ásmai te pratiháryate (and cf. VIII.44.2 práti … harya) establishes Agni as the primary referent here, though a secondary connection with a calf (via the bellowing) isn’t impossible. As for the case difference, vs. 2 provides a possible solution, since the verb there is jánāmi ‘I generate’, construed with the dat. of benefit. Hence my “(praises generated)” here.


## 30
víśvā(ḥ) was carelessly omitted in the publ. tr., which should read “may we all be …”


## 31
śīrá- occurs 4x in the RV in the same pāda, śīrám pāvakáśociṣam, and twice more in the compound śīráśociṣ- (also acc. -am). My tr. ‘sharp’ follows the current standard, but not strongly held view (see Ge, Re, KEWA, EWA) that sees a possible connection with √śā ‘sharpen’ (see EWA s.v. śīrá-).
