+++
title = "045"

+++
Indra


## 04
The bunda bow is the weapon Indra uses to kill the boar Emuṣa, in a rarely told myth. (See esp. VIII.77.1-2.) Its phonology sets a non-Indo-Aryan scene.

Ge renders ké ha śṛṇvire as “Wie heissen sie?” This is certainly possible, although I prefer my tr.


## 05
Śavasī is taken by many as the name of Indra’s mother, but there is no particular reason not to take it in its lexical sense, referring to the same woman.

The Pp. text divides the beginning of b into girā́v ápso, with the second word the s-stem ápsas- ‘breast’, a word otherwise used of Uṣas (I.124.7, V.80.6). But even in a proverbial expression such as this seems to be, where semantic latitude is to be expected, “like a/the breast/chest at a mountain” (or Ge “Wie mit der Brust gegen den Berg ...,” taking ápsaḥ as a truncated instr. *ápsasā) doesn’t make any sense. Old suggests a different word division: girā́vápso, with the latter being the word for ‘wasp’ found elsewhere in Indo-European, though not directly in Indo-Aryan (except, quite possibly, in I.181.8); see EWA s.v. vápsas-. This does allow sense to be made of the expression: the extraordinary size difference between a wasp and a mountain dooms the wasp, but wasps are notoriously belligerent and therefore willing to take on any opponent, however unlikely they are to defeat it. In the same way, anyone who is foolhardy enough to take on Indra will ensure certain defeat for himself.


## 06
The rest of Indra’s mother’s advice (if she is the speaker) implicitly contrasts the person who approaches Indra with requests (and, presumably, homage) and whom Indra may decide to favor with the pugnacious wasp of the previous verse that only wants to fight.


## 07
The publ. tr. may not make it clear that I think that Indra is also the “setter of contests” of the subordinate clause.

## 08
Assuming that the syntagm of the simile is víṣvag yáthā “as if víṣvak,” that is, “as if asunder,” I have slightly reconfigured the expression to conform to an English idiom. Ge seems to take the yáthā as expressing purpose, “dass sie zerschellen” (be smashed to pieces) but I do not understand how víṣvak can be configured as a verb.

Note the alliteration ví ṣú víśvā ... vájrin víṣvag … vṛha, esp. ví ṣú víśvā ...

víṣvag.


## 10
Ge takes b and c together as a single clause and has gómataḥ modify te (“zu deiner, des Kuhbesitzers, Schenkung”), but gómant- is not regularly used of gods (though it occasionally is) and is frequently found with vā́ja- ‘prize’, as in vs. 28 below. And áram is used elsewhere as predicate of a nominal clause.


## 11
There is no expressed referent in this verse, and Gr (s.v. áśvāvant-, etc.) indicates that it is “we” of vs. 10. However, Ge supplies “soma drops,” esp. on the strength of VIII.49.4 and the fact that vivákṣana- is always used of soma. This seems correct. The question is the meaning and root affiliation of vivákṣana-. Ge tr.

‘redselig machend’, connecting it thus with √vac, while I prefer to take it to √vakṣ ‘become / make strong’, as a transitive -ana-nominal, beside vákṣaṇa- also ‘strengthening’. The connection with √vakṣ is asserted by Old ad X.21.1 (fld. by AiG II.2.198). See also EWA s.v. VAKṢ, esp. p. 487; he does not decide.


## 14
Pāda c takes one aback, but the next verse explains.


## 18
The first two pādas contain two perfect optatives: śuśrūyā́ḥ and cakriyā́ḥ.

On the surprising dominance of perfect optatives in the RV, see Jamison 2009.


## 19
The logical relation between the subordinate clause (ab) and main clause (c) is somewhat indirect. The point seems to be that though we think that our behavior towards Indra has not been entirely straightforward and proper, we hope that he will continue to be generous to us despite our failings.


## 24
mahé was mistakenly omitted in the publ. tr. Substitute “to great generosity.” I follow Old in taking góparīṇasā as standing for -āḥ, nom. pl. to a thematic stem, rather than, with Ge (and Pp.), as -ā and instr. sg. of the s-stem. In the simplex both párīṇas- and parīṇasá- exist, though the latter occurs only once (IX.97.9), where it is indirectly associated with cows/milk. Old points out that soma is generally the subject of √mand (as in 14b mandantu … índavaḥ), and taking góparīṇasā(ḥ) here as modifying a plural form of soma drinks or drops would save having to supply another element in the instrumental. However, Ge’s interpretation does have in its favor that the more common simplex is párīṇas- and that it is regularly found in the instrumental. ### 25-27 The proclamation of Indra’s deeds called for in 25c is presumably contained in the following two verses.


## 26
Gr takes sahásrabāhve (with distraction, -bāhuve) as belonging to a ustem and as a poetic synonym for ‘battle’. I find this suggestion quite attractive, though this type of kenning is somewhat unusual for the RV. Ge and Old (see also EWA s.v. bāhú-; Mayrhofer PN) take it as a thematized -bāhva- in the locative as a PN (Ge: “bei Sahasrabāhva”). Though Gr’s interpretation gives the richer semantics, the problem is of course that the dative sg. should be -bāhave, not -bāh u ve. AiG III.139 also identifies it as a thematic locative, but allows a lexical meaning “in der tausendarmigen Schlacht,” flg. Sommer). I still think it may be a dative, with the alternative -ve ending (e.g., páśve beside paśáve), but a locative with lexical value is also possible.


## 27
Ge takes vídānaḥ as belonging to √vid ‘know’ and construes it with the preceding PNs: “Das ist wahr, bei Turvaśa und Yadu bekannt.” It is true that the participle vídāna- ordinarily belongs to √vid ‘know’, but it is usually passive and appears with a predicate, “known as X.” The idiom envisioned here, “known to,” I’m not at all sure is a Sanskrit expression, though it works well in German and English. I therefore take the participle as belonging to √vid ‘find’, whose middle generally means ‘acquire’, with the soma “not to be spurned” (ahnavāyyám) as object. Turvaśa and Yadu offer soma to the gods elsewhere; cf. VIII.9.14 imé sómāso ádhi turváśe yádau. Ge takes ahnavāyyám with vy ā̀naṭ (“hat er nicht Abzustreitendes erreicht”), which prevents him from construing that verb with turváṇe as it is in the parallel he himself cites (VIII.12.19 ádhā yajñā́ya turváṇe vyā̀naśuḥ). His rendering of the last two words of the pāda as purpose infinitival clause (“dass der fromme Dienst triumphiere”) involves what seems to me a dubious construal of śámi.


## 28
jánānām may go with taráṇim, as Ge takes it (“Den Durchhelfer der Menschen”); I construe it with b, because taráṇi- doesn’t otherwise take a genitive.


## 30
The lexeme nír √i ‘go out’ is specialized for birth contexts, to go out of the womb, so yonyá- as a descriptor of the mountain is particularly apt.


## 31
For the odd sentiments of this verse and what follows, see the intro. Both Ge and Old supply an object to the first verb (dadhiṣe), an object drawn from ritual (Ge “das Opfer,” Old “Lob u. degl., Somatränke”), but this seems unduly restrictive.

I think that the poet is apprehensive about the consequences of whatever Indra might undertake.

## 37-38
For my interpretation of this bit of dialogue, see the publ. intro.


## 37
On the basis both of the content of the verse and the use of the voc. maryāḥ, I consider this verse to be Indra’s address to the Maruts. The plural of maryá in all clear cases refers to the Maruts. And in VIII.96.7-8 the Maruts address Indra, reminding him that all the other gods but them deserted him, using the same √īṣ ‘shrink from’ as is found here.

Ge takes ámithitaḥ as “ohne Zank” (without a quarrel), but I think it refers instead to Indra’s potentially friendless state --‘unpaired’ - a fear expressed by the poet in the immediately preceding verse (36). The hypothetical speaker still has a comrade (sákhā sákhāyam), but, like one unpaired, threatens to say to this comrade “I’m leaving.” The form jahā́is taken by Ge (and others) as a 3rd sg. pf. to √hā and therefore, implicitly, a precious example of a 3rd sg. pf. to a long-ā root without -au ending.

However, Old very persuasively suggests that it is a 1st sg. subjunctive in the direct speech introduced by abravīt. Although to the reduplicated present of √hā we would expect accent on the reduplication (*jáhā), Old argues that the fluctuation of accent in IIIrd class presents makes the accent irrelevant. I would alternatively suggest that it could be a subjunctive to the perfect stem. See Old’s extensive discussion of the various previous proposals about this form.


## 38
I consider this verse the Maruts’ insulted response to Indra’s insults, couched in a very slangy register. The first sign of this speech level is the voc. are (to arí- ‘stranger’), a vocative not otherwise found in the RV, but remember the Pāli and Pkt. “interjections” are, ale, clearly derived from this voc. (Thieme, Fremdl. 3-4), as well as the famous shibboleth he ‘lavo of ŚB III.2.1.23, consisting of an l-form of the plural voc. of this word in MIA guise (see EWA, KEWA s.v.). Its use as a shibboleth and with an l-form suggests popular speech.

Note also the lengthened voc. vṛṣabhā (also in 22a). Lengthened vocatives are quite rare in the RV; AiG III.96-97 cites only these two forms, but remarks that pluti vocatives were surely a feature of living speech, found in the Brāhmaṇas and in Pāli and the Prākrits. The use of the well-known gambling term svaghnī́also marks the speech as low register. The substance of the Maruts’ counter-accusations is that Indra greedily drank up the soma offered to him below (that is, among men). I’ve used the expression “lower depths” to refer to the louche aspects of a gambling place (and also possibly to the depression in the ground where the dicing happens). Indra carried on arrogantly and without sharing the soma, but then, they say, when he got into a jam in the Vrtra ̥ battle he suddenly remembered he had pals and upbraided them for desertion.


## 39
Unfortunately this last verse of the tṛca does not seem to have any connection with the foregoing Indra-Marut dialogue. The "I" is presumably not a Marut, but the poet or other ritual officiant, and it’s difficult to know how his holding on to the horses will bring about Indra’s gifts. Is he holding them hostage, as it were, not allowing them to leave the ritual ground and return to heaven (recall the “Fallowbay-yoking libation” that ends I.61-63 and sends Indra and his horses back home at the end of the sacrifice) until Indra distributes the goods? Or is he helpfully holding them to leave Indra’s hands free? Given the aggressive tone of the previous two verses, I favor the former idea.


## 40
On pári bā́dhaḥ see comm. ad IX.105.6. Both there and here I suggest a haplology of the finite impv. bādhasva, in the putative sequence pári *bādhasva bā́dhaḥ -- rather than accepting the BR / Gr emendation to *paribā́dhaḥ, accepted by Old. If we accept that emendation and make *paribā́dhaḥ another acc. obj. of jahī́, parallel to mṛ́dhaḥ, the accent on jahī́is unexplained.


## 42
viśvámānuṣa- should, by accent, be a bahuvrīhi; it is also difficult to separate from viśvámanus- in the next hymn (VIII.46.17). However, most interpretors take it implicitly as a karmadhāraya: Gr ‘die ganze Menschenschar’, Ge ‘jedermann’, and Wackernagel (AiG II.1.266) explicitly identifies it as a tatpuruṣa with irregular accent (‘Gesamtheit der Menschen’). But this seems unnecessary: mā́nuṣa- regularly modifies jána- (so ‘human race’ / or ‘folk consisting of the descendants of Manu’), and here we can supply an underlying jána-, modified by the compound, hence ‘(races) consisting of all the people of Manu’. The publ. tr. seems to reflect the tatpuruṣa interpretation because the more literal tr. is simply too awkward.
