+++
title = "046"

+++
Indra


## 06
As in VI.54.8, 55.2 I take rāyáḥ as a morphological pun - both genitive sg.

depending on ī́śānaḥ and accusative pl. as object of īmahe.

## 08-09
A thematic and syntactic modulation. The yáḥ clauses of vs. 8 (which lacks a main clause) clearly refer to Indra’s máda- ‘exhilaration’, and the yáḥ which opens vs. 9 seems simply to continue this construction. But the 2nd hemistich is couched in the 2nd ps. and refers to Indra, and it is possible to assume that Indra is also the subject of ab (despite the 3rd ps. construction and the 2nd ps. vocative), because the qualifiers in 9ab are better suited to Indra than to his máda-. (As Old says, “Übergleiten von Indras máda zu I. selbst.”) In the end, though, it is better to assume a covert identification of Indra and his máda-, which allows a smooth transition from describing the latter to describing the former.


## 10
Despite appearances, gavyó is entirely parallel to aśvayā́and rathayā́ later in the verse, since it consists of gavyā́+ u.


## 14
Ge takes váco yáthā as a truncated clause: “soweit (es) die Rede (vermag),” but, although accented yáthā is seldom pāda-final, unaccented yathā, the simile marker, is almost always so placed. Therefore pāda-final yáthā here must also be a simile marker at least in my view, but see Old for contrary opinion.

## 15
Very condensed expression. The first two long pādas characterize Indra as a giver (dadí- 3x) of various desirable things. The third pāda, a mere four syllables, implicitly calls on Indra to actualize this identity by making the gifts.

The expression “legacy to/for the body/self” (rékṇas tanvè) probably stands for a son, as Ge points out in his n.

The short final pāda nūnám átha is curiously formed. There are no other examples of this word sequence, but nūnám has a tendency to be followed by a di- or trisyllable beginining with a- (though usually heavy syl), e.g., nūnám aśyāḥ, nūnám anyā́. Moreover, átha is almost always initial in pāda or clause, so its presence in this position must be signalling something special, which I take to be a peremptory command (English “now then!” corresponds nicely). Note that it echoes verse-final yáthā of 14 and that it again takes final position at the end of 16.


## 16
Following Old, I supply the verb “sing to” (abhí … gāya) from 14 to govern the accusatives here.

In the publ. tr. I also followed a suggestion of Old in taking kṛpayatáḥ as acc. pl. governed by áti, rather than gen. sg. dependent on várpasaḥ (Ge: “über diese Gestalt des Erbarmenden”). But the syntactic distribution of elements in this verse is very uncertain, due in part to the unclarity of the meter, where even pāda boundaries cannot be certainly determined. In coming to the version found in the publ tr. I reasoned that what confronts us here is a sort of syntactic śleṣa of irajyánt-, with the uncompounded participle as usual governing the genitive in pādas a and b (víśveṣām … vásūnām and asyá várpasaḥ), while with áti in pāda c it takes the accusative. Cf., with √rāj, a root with which irajyá- becomes entangled, III.10.7 ví rājasi áti srídhaḥ.

I am now not so certain: I think kṛpayatáḥ may in fact be a gen. as Ge takes it, but that it’s construed directly with irajyánt-, not dependent on várpasaḥ -- with the tr.

“(and has control) over the one who yearns (for him) in addition.” Under this interpr.

áti would be an adverbial additive ‘in addition’, adding another term to the items over which Indra has control.

What “this form” refers to is not clear to me. I assume that it is Indra’s form, quite possibly one of the multiforms that he takes on at will Since nūnám … átha reprises 15c, I find the interpolation of the áti puzzling, especially if it governs a previous nominal form. However, the poet (who seems to have little conscience about syntax) may have inserted áti here because áti[y]átha would echo the yáthā that ends vs. 14.


## 17
Another very disturbed verse. My interpretation follows Old in great degree, but with crucial deviations.

In the first pāda I read, with Gr, Old, and Scar (61), a compound áram-iṣe, rather than two separate words with Ge (also Pp.; cf. Lub. p. 321 s.v. iṣe), who is forced to take this as a parenthetical 1st ps. declaration (“ich beeile mich recht”). This compound qualifies Indra in the dative and matches araṃgamā́ya in b quite nicely. The accent on the verb stávāmahe can be accounted for (in a somewhat ad hoc fashion) as Old does, as a separate four-syllable pāda, following an eight-syllable opening.

In de (if this is the correct division), I take gen. pl. viśvámanuṣām with yajñébhir gīrbhíḥ “through the sacrifices and the hymns of all the peoples of Manu.” This has the somewhat awkward consequence of separating it from the immediately following gen. pl. marútām, though if the pāda break follows viśvámanuṣāṃ rather than gīrbhíḥ as Old takes it, the syntactic separation would be less problematic. (This would produce a pāda of 10 or 11 syllables [with distraction of -manuṣaām], followed by one of 8 syllables [also with distraction of gen. pl. -ām].) Ge takes the subject of iyakṣasi to be the poet addressing himself, while I think that it is Indra, who is the subject of the same verb in the immediately preceding hymn (VIII.45.31). The question then is what the object is. Ge supplies the pronoun “dies,” but the referent of this pronoun isn’t clear to me. I suggest rather sumnám ‘favor’: the stem íyakṣa- several times takes sumnám as object (I.153.2, II.20.1. X.50.3), and it appears here in the next verse (18d), where I supply this verb.

If this assumption is correct, we must then ask why Indra would seek to attain the favor of the Maruts. The key to that is probably the odd snatch of dialogue in the last hymn (VIII.45.37-38), in which Indra complains that the Maruts deserted him in his time of need; here he seeks their good will as support in the Vṛtra battle.


## 18
The referents of the plurals in this verse continue to be the Maruts of the previous verse, and I think that the same situation obtains: Indra is seeking the sacrifice and favor of the Maruts. I therefore supply iyakṣasi in this verse, again with sumnám as object. Thus one half of the VP is found in each verse: iyakṣasi in 17, sumnám in 18. (Ge also supplies the same verb stem, but in the 1st sg., referring to the poet.) The medial transitive-causative pātáyante I take as a reflexive: ‘cause themselves to fly, launch themselves in flight’.

On the pseudo-loc. absol. prā́dhvaré see comm. ad VIII.12.31-33.


## 19
For wealth as a ‘shatterer’ (prabhaṅgá-), see VI.68.3 where it is the implied subject of prá … bhanákti.


## 20
Note the full hemistich of vocatives, all accented because there is no inherently tonic word to follow.

As Old points out, all the accusatives of the second hemistich should be grouped with rayím in 19, and the verb of that verse ā́bhara continues to have domain over this one.


## 23
On ṛdhád-rī/i- see Thieme 1958 (Fs. Turner): 157, EWA 118 (s.v. ARDH). Thieme tr. ‘luckily reaching wealth’. The nearby passage VIII.48.2 śraúṣṭīva dhúram ánu rāyá rdhy ̥ āḥ seems to confirm a connection between -rī/i and rayí. I tr. 48.2 “like an obedient mare the chariot pole you should follow riches to fulfillment” and adopt that interpretation here.

Their tails are presumably straight because they are going so fast their tails are horizontal.

Ge takes mathrá- as a geographical designation: Mathra horses. But I see no reason not to connect it with √math ‘churn, agitate’, hence ‘skittish’. See also I.181.5.


## 24
The final pāda contains a pun on the patron’s name Pṛthuśravas. See Watkins 1995: 73-74.


## 25
I take táne and pā́jase as complementary concepts, vertical and horizontal - our descendants and our synchronic extension.


## 26
This verse gives the impression of being constructed from random constituents, although some cohesion can be wrested from it.

Following Old I take b as further specifying the horses in a (áśvebhiḥ), with the bare numeral saptá substituting for the non-existent instrumental *saptábhiḥ as elsewhere. It could also specify the number of soma drinks in c (sómebhiḥ), and the position of the phrase between those two instrumental expressions allows it to be construed with both. The gen. pl. saptatīnā́m of course simply depends on the numeral.

In c I supply a form of √mad/mand to be construed with the instr.; so also Ge (ermuntert).

In d I supply a form such as maṃhase ‘you are ready’, which is common with dānā́ya, although Ge’s solution, to have the infinitive depend only on the “ermuntert” is certainly possible and probably neater. See also Scar 313.


## 27
Another verse with unclear referents and no main clause. I take the subject to be the god Vāyu, who has inspired the human patron (imám in a) to give the poet a splendid dakṣiṇā. If Vāyu (deified wind) is the subject, tmánā lit. ‘by his breath’ is a nice touch.

In c Ge takes araṭvé ákṣe as a PN, and it is certainly tempting. But, although the second part of that pāda is a PN, interpreting all difficult phrases as names is a practice to be avoided, and Mayrhofer (EWA s.v. araṭvá-; also PN s.v.) rejects the name interpretation in favor of “aus dem Holz der araṭu-Baumes” (Wagenachse).

There is no way to be certain.


## 28
Another virtually impenetrable verse. Rather than discuss my deviations from others’ interpretations, I will just set out the considerations that produced my own translation.

I take the referent of the yáḥ in the relative clauses that dominate vss. 26-28 to be Vāyu in all cases. In this verse there’s the embarrassment of the voc. vāyo, but since there is no verb in 28 nothing prevents it from being couched in the 2nd sg. The utá in b I take as connecting ucathyè vápuṣi and ghr̥tasnā́ḥ, both used of the svarā́ṭ, despite their different cases.

I think cd represents a new clause, with implied “your”; the prā́jma is rather like prā́dhvaré in 18, with verb extruded from the prá. The last little bit, idám nú tát, is a separate clause (like nūnám [áty] átha in 15-16).


## 29
After the puzzling detour into Vāyu, this verse reunites us with the dānastuti of vss. 21-24 by means of asanam ‘I won’ in b, found also in 22a.

“Gelding” is supplied on the basis of vs. 20.


## 31
I supply ā́dade from 32b, though asanam from 29a would also be possible.
