+++
title = "047"

+++
Ādityas


## 01
Although only Mitra and Varuṇa are mentioned in the first hemistich, vo mahatā́m is gen. pl. and must refer to all the Ādityas, who are addressed in the next clause (pāda c).


## 05
The simile is slightly skewed, though, as in English, the case frame with ‘avoid’ works either way. It might be expected that “we” would be compared to the (presumably) nominative rathyàḥ ‘charioteers’, but grammatically “we” are parallel to the hard places (durgā́ṇi). Of course technically both durgā́ṇi and rathyàḥ can be either nom. or acc. pl., so that the skewing could be avoided: “Evils will avoid us, as hard places avoid charioteers.” But this produces an unintentionally comic picture, and I follow Ge and Re in the case distribution.


## 06
This verse is contrastively complementary to the preceding one. Both pári √vṛj and pári √hvṛ mean ‘swerve, turn aside, avoid’, but in vs. 5 pári … vṛṇajan is a beneficial action, whereas here parihvṛtā́(on accent see Old, Scar 708) refers to turning aside from the proper course, an action that causes a man to lose out on the Ādityas’ gift. How substantial this gift can be for someone whom the Ādityas favor is expressed in cd.


## 09
Ge and Re take revátaḥ with Aryaman, not Mitra. It is true that the adj. is positioned between the two names and could in principle modify either one or both, but it belongs to the same pāda as mitrásya, and the following pāda containing aryamṇáḥ is a repeated pāda (=I.136.2e), in a verse where revánt- is not found. Since, further, revánt- is not a standard epithet of Aryaman, it seems wise to take it with Mitra.


## 10
I have not rendered the four nominal yád clauses, the last three of which merely introduce further adjectival qualifiers of śárma. The configuration is perilously close to an izafe-type construction, though syntactially nominal clauses are perfectly workable.


## 15
The accent on kṛṇávate is somewhat puzzling. Re explains it as a reflection of the implicit subordination following on vss. 13 and 14, but perhaps better is the implicit contrast of the vā … vā constuction.
