+++
title = "048"

+++
Soma


## 01
I take svādóḥ as dependent on váyasaḥ, not qualifying it (contra, e.g., Ge’s “von dem süssen Krafttrunk”). Note that Soma is called vayodhā́ḥ in the final vs. (15a) and is therefore not váyaḥ himself.

s u vādhí yo opening pāda b echoes svādór opening a.


## 02
The first pāda is a paradox, in that confinement within leads to boundlessness. Following Ge et al., I take ca as a subordinator; the accentuation of prā́gā(ḥ) is ambiguous: the Pp. reads prá agāḥ, but pra-ágāḥ is equally possible (so Old).

How to resolve the sandhi in śraúṣṭīva is discussed by Old at some length; with him I take it as a fem. nom. sg. śraúṣṭī. The Pp. analyzes rāyá as rāyé, but rāyáḥ is also possible, either as gen. sg. or acc. pl. I take it as the latter. My tr. of this pāda is closest to Re’s.


## 04
Note the faint echo pītá … pité(va).


## 05
On anāha see Kü’s length and useful disc. (289). Flg. Old (accepted by Kü), I take it as a 3rd sg., not 2nd pl. with Ge, Re. The nom. pl. imé … pītā́yaśása uruṣyávaḥ of pāda a is (silently) resumed by sg. “soma.” In order to demonstrate the change in number of the subject, my tr. appears to treat pāda a as a separate clause, which of course it is not. Among other things, the mā in Wackernagel’s Position in a is the obj. of sám anāha in b.

Like 2a this hemistich is a paradox: the soma drops “seeking wide space” nonetheless tie the drinker together.


## 06
didīpaḥ must be a redupl. aor. corresponding to trans.-caus. dīpáyati, despite the light redupl. We expect *dīdīpaḥ or even *dīdipaḥ (which is found in B.E.

acdg. to Whitney’s Rts).

Pāda-final naḥ serves as object to both verbs in b.

All standard treatments take prá carā as 2nd sg. impv., but I think it works better as 1st sg. subjunctive. See also IX.82.4.


## 09
Because of its accent niṣasátthā(ḥ) must still be under the domain of hí in pāda a, contra Ge, who takes a as a nominal clause and b as independent.

## 10
The voc. haryaśva (always elsewhere of Indra) is presumably addressed to a previously absent Indra, who surfaces by name in d -- though it could also be referring to soma's color.


## 11
ánirā- is lit. ‘want of nourishment’. Since írā- sometimes seems specialized for liquid nourishment, I considered ‘thirsts’ here, and indeed in VIII.60.20, conjoined with kṣúdham ‘hunger’, ‘thirst’ works well. But in this passage such a translation sounds as if it refers to desires or cravings, and I think the passage refers to external threats rather than those generated within the person.


## 14
On īśata see comm. ad I.23.9.

Vālakhilya
