+++
title = "049"

+++
Indra This hymn is twinned with VIII.50. Parallel aspects of the two hymns will be treated in the comments on the latter.


## 03
mádā yé in b appears to be a pseudo-izafe construction, specifying índavaḥ, as Ge takes it.


## 04
On vivákṣaṇa- see VIII.45.11.

Ge takes pāda d as a separate clause and supplies a verb, while taking kṣudrā́ as “small animals”: “auf dass du … leibhaftig wie kleine Tiere (?) brav ver(mehrest)”

- an interpretation that seems to me both unnecessary and bizarre. The other RVic
example of kṣudrá- (I.129.6), which he claims also to refer to a small animal, I take to mean ‘speck’. It seems more sensible to take d as belonging with c, with the simile kṣudréva serving as object to kirā́si. The only evidence I can see against this is that √kṛ ‘scatter’ doesn't otherwise appear with prá in the RV, but that lexeme is common later. I take kṣudrá- here to refer to small particles of dust; see IV.38.7 kirate reṇúm.


## 05
Phonological figure svadhāvan svadáyanti.


## 06
The simile marking in pāda a seems unnecessary: why is Indra like a powerful hero, rather than, as usual, simply being one. Perhaps the tendency for many verses and half-verses in this hymn to begin with similes enforced that pattern here.

In c the double marking of the simile (udrī́va … avató ná siñcaté) also seems to serve no purpose.

kṣáranti … dhītáyaḥ is very close to kṣáranti dhītáyaḥ in the matching hymn VIII.50.4.

## 07
The reason for the three yád’s in ab isn’t clear. It may be that the duplications and unnecessary markings noted in this verse and the preceding one are signs of apprentice compositions.


## 08
Ge interprets the first relative clause as only consisting of yé te “die du hast,” but all things being equal, I try to avoid interpretations that require embedded relative clauses (though see the pseudo-izafe in 3b above), and in this case a relative clause that extends to the end of b is perfectly possible. That 50.8 has the same structure is an additional support for this interpretation.

The corresponding verse in the twinned hymn, VIII.50.8d, contains yébhiḥ svàḥ parī́yase. I therefore think that parī́yase in our c also has domain over d, also containing svàḥ. Ge, by contrast, supplies kṛṇóṣi, to produce a periphrastic causative “mit denen du die ganze Welt die Sonne schauen (lässest).”


## 09
Ge takes gómataḥ with te, not sumnásya as I do. This is possible but not necessary, especially since the adjective isn’t exclusively, or even generally, used of beings, and since neuter gómat is found in the following verse (probably modifying an unexpressed word for spoils or the like, though I suppose neut. sumnám might be possible).
