+++
title = "050"

+++
Indra


## 01
This verse is very close to 49.1 in structure and lexicon. Some items are identical and positioned identically: a: surā́dhasam, c: yáh, (-)vasu, d: sahásreṇeva.

Others are identical words but placed differently: ab: (abhí) prá ... arca. Then there are synonyms with the same function: c: jaritṛ́bhyaḥ / suvaté stuvaté. Root connections deployed differently: 49d śíkṣati / 50b śakrám; 49c maghávā 50d máṃhate. The only items that don't have any correspondents in the other hymn are 49a abhí, vaḥ; b: índram ... yáthā vidé; c: purū- / 50a sú śrutám; b: abhíṣtaye; c: kā́myam.


## 02
The two versions of this verse deviate slightly more than those of vs. 1: identical and identically positioned: a: śatānīkā (though difference in number concealed by sandhi), a/c: asya; more or less identical, but with inflectional difference: c: giréḥ / girír, pinvire / pinvate; root connections: 49d -bhójasah / 50c bhujmā́. Otherwise the verses are distinct, but notice that 50a śatā́nīkā hetáyaḥ allows the noun with śatā́nīkā in 49a to be supplied.


## 03
This verse deviates from its correspondent even more than the last.

Identical are sutā́sa índavo (a) and ā́po ná (c); root identity: 49b mádā yé / 50ab yád ...

ámandiṣuḥ. In addition the simile in 49.3, where waters fill a pond, allows the underdetermined simile in 50.3 to be interpreted: it seems more likely that the pressing has been deposited in Indra than that it has been set out for him. Ge follows the latter interpretation and is forced to supply a recipient in the simile that has no textual support: “… dargebracht wie Wasser (dem Durstigen).” See Ge’s n., which argues for his interpretation and explicitly for a different sense in the simile from that in 49.3.


## 04
The two verses differ from each other almost entirely, except that the openings of the first two pādas are identical: anehásam (a), mádhvaḥ (b). Still, reference to 49.4 aids in the interpretation of this verse: in 49.4 the referent of anehásam is clearly soma; here that is less immediately clear, but surely correct.

See Old for considerable discussion of this verse, though without reaching firm conclusions.


## 05
Yet another type of variation, whereby the poet plays on distinct but phonologically or semantically similar words. In 49a ā́na stómam / 50a ā́naḥ sóme the common play on sóma- and stóma- is found. In 49b (d)hyānó áśvo ná / 50b iyānó 'tyo ná the phrases are identical in sense and in morphology (medial athematic participle, a-stem nom. sg.) but use two different lexical realizations for both. In 49c yáṃ te svadhāvan svadáyanti / 50c yáṃ te svadāvan svádanti the clauses are identically constructed, the verbs are identical and have identical meanings, though one is a Class I stem, the other an -áya-transitive, and the vocatives are lexically distinct, though rhyming and identically formed. Finally, both d pādas contain a locative indicating the person(s) at whose sacrifice Indra is.


## 06
The two versions are closer together than the last few verses: 49a ugráṃ ná vīrám / 50a prá vīrám ugrám / b: víbhūtim / c: udrī́va vajrinn avató. In addition 49b has -vasum and 50c vasutvanā́, and 49d is almost identical to 50.4b.

I supply árcā on the basis of prá and vs. 1, but any verb of praising or the like will do.


## 07
The somewhat awkward tripling of yád in 49.7 is avoided here with a simple yád … yád vā, but the two versions still echo each other exactly: yád dha nūnám … (a) / yád vā prthivy ̥ ā́m … (b), as also in c mahemata. The d pādas are identically structured, but lexically distinct: nom. sg. + instr. pl. (to same stem) ā́ gahi.


## 08
The versions pattern closely together despite variant semantics: (aj)irā́so / (rath)irā́so hárayo yé te … (a); vā́tā… /...vā́tasya … (b); yébhir ... mánuṣaḥ (c); yébhiḥ (...) svàr … (d).

The poor transmission of the Vālakhilya is probably responsible for the faulty accent of nighóṣayaḥ (for *nighoṣáyaḥ)(so Old). There is also unnecessary doubling of the preverb ní (which does not affect the meter, however).


## 09
Read, with Gr and Old, *ávaso (that is, te ‘vaso), which also repairs the meter. The corresponding verses are structured identically, with etā́vataḥ opening the first hemistich and its rhetorical partner yáthā opening the two pādas of the second hemistich. In each verse we seek the same thing for ourselves that Indra provided to two clients, named in the second hemistich. There is also some matching phraseology: etā́vatas te (a), yáthā prā́vo (c), yáthā (d), as well as dháne in 49d and 50c.


## 10
Again the two versions are almost entirely parallel, with named examples of the beneficiaries of Indra’s bounty given in yáthā clauses, including some with very close similarities in wording: yáthā káṇve maghavan LOC LOC... (a) / yáthā góśarye √SAN … (C) / d: gómad dhíraṇya- (49d) / gotrám hari- (50d).

I differ from Ge in my interpretation of pāda b. He takes dīrghánīthe dámūnasi as another PN (so also Mayrhofer, PN, for the first but not the second), and I admit that parallelism with 49b, which contains a PN, is in his favor. However, here there is no yáthā marking the pāda as a different segment, and furthermore dámūnas- ‘domestic leader, master of the house’ is never otherwise used of mortals, but almost always characterizes Agni. Since dīrghánīti- is perfectly understandable in its literal meaning, I take this pāda as referring to Agni and as parallel to the locatives in pāda a indicating the sacrifice.
