+++
title = "051"

+++
Indra


## 01
As indicated in the intro., this verse replicates the structure of the final verses (10) of VIII.49 and 50.


## 02
It is difficult to understand what is going on in the first hemistich, which is filled with words apparently referring to positions of the body: sám asādayat ‘made to sit up’, śáyānam ‘lying down’, úddhitam ‘set upright’. I have tr. all of these literally. Ge. takes the first lexeme figuratively, with sám asādayat meaning ‘invited to a sattra (sacrifical session)’. I consider this to be a secondary sense in this verse, but because of the body-position language, I think something more literal is meant, quite possibly a revival or healing of Praskaṇva by ritual means. But without further context, it remains unclear.

Ge and Old suggest that Dasyave Vṛka is the same person as Pārṣadvāṇa and the sacrificial patron of Praskaṇva. (Dasyave Vṛka is celebrated in dānastutis in


## 01
and 56.1.) This seems reasonable but unprovable. In that case Praskaṇva is probably the ṛṣi of pāda c.


## 03
With Ge I read aviṣyántam, not áriṣyantam. See his n. on 3d. Old rejects the emendation, but since the áviṣyantam is found in the Khila collection and in “die gute ind. Ausgabe des Pp.,” I think the reading is justifiable, esp. given the poor transmission of the Vālakhilya. The publ. tr. should have an asterisk before “a man greedy for food.”

## 04
Although the first hemistich clearly describes ritual activity, its exact reference is unclear. Ge plausibly suggests that the chant is “seven-headed” (saptáśīrṣānam) because it issues from the mouths of seven priests. “Threefold” could refer to the three pressings of the soma sacrifice or perhaps the three fires, but neither of these interpretations imposes itself. As for the “highest footstep,” see discussion at I.21.6 and I.22.21. The highest footstep is usually Viṣṇu’s, and Viṣṇu does stride his three steps in the immediately following (and twinned) hymn, VIII.52.3. As elsewhere, the “highest footstep” seems to be the celestial counterpart of the ritual ground on earth, and the same types of ritual activities are performed there as on earth.

Ge suggests that the referent of sá in c is the chant, not Indra, but the yásmai … sá construction virtually demands that the referent of sá be the same as that of yásmai, which cannot be the arká-. Indra is the most likely referent of both (though Viṣṇu might be barely possible). Note that no god’s name appears in the verse, leaving the reference apparently deliberately undefined. However, paúṃsya- in d is almost always a characteristic of Indra’s, and both the preceding and following verses (3, 5) open with definitional relative clauses, like that of 4ab, where the relative pronoun is explicitly identified as Indra in the main clause (3c, 5b índraṃ tám), which imposes the same identification here.


## 06
After the three verses whose yá- … sá/tám constructions refer to Indra, the same construction now identifies Indra’s client.


## 07
Notice the over-the-top piling up of particles and similar items in c: úpaupa íd nú ... bhū́ya íd nú, with the actual topic postponed till the next pāda.

The lexeme úpa √pṛc generally has a sexual connotation (see disc. I.40.6), and given the barren cow and the going dry of ab, ‘becomes engorged’ better captures the contrast than Ge’s anodyne “nimmt … zu und zu” (increases).


## 08
The final pāda is identical to 4d, save for the final word, which serves as subject. The identity of pā́rthivaḥ here isn’t certain. It cannot be Indra, who is the subject of the preceding clauses and whose action in c grounds and precedes the birth of the ‘earth-dweller’ in d. The idea may be that Indra’s cosmogonic actions in c allow the creation of the humans on earth, which has just been separated from heaven.

This interpretation is supported by the following verse.


## 09
A syntactically problematic verse, which has produced multiple interpretations, not all of which can be treated here. It is further complicated by the fact that three different related stems to the highly charged arí- word are found in it: ā́rya- (a), arí- (b), and aryá- (c).

I take ab as an independent nominal possessive clause, with Indra the referent of yásya. The clause follows nicely on 8d: since Indra’s cosmogonic deeds led directly to the birth of the earth-dwelling people, it is said in 9ab that all of them, Ārya and Dāsa alike, belong to him. The expression tiráś cid aryé in c resembles a number of passages containing tiráś cid aryá-, including several in VIII: 33.14 tiráś cid aryám sávanāni ... and 66.12 tiráś cid aryáḥ sávanā. In such passages Indra is urged to pass over the pressings (and so forth) associated with the stranger and come to our sacrifice. I believe that the same thing is being urged here. This requires supplying a verb of motion and also assuming a word haplology of some sort, such as *(aryám/aryáḥ) aryé (so also Ge, though we differ on much of the rest of the interpretation).

Unlike all other interpretations known to me (including Thieme Fremdling 70-71 and two alternatives given by Scar, p. 308), I take d as a separate clause because tubhyét só seems very much a clause-initial sequence. Note that verse-final rayíḥ echoes the last word of b, aríḥ.


## 10
arkám ānṛcuḥ matches the same expression in 4a, where it had cosmogonic implications. Presumably the association adds luster to the more mundane efforts of the current poets.
