+++
title = "052"

+++
Indra


## 01
This verse is almost identical to 51.1 in its first half, save for Manu’s patronymic; the structure of the second halves is very similar, with locatives expressing the various sacrificers, past and present, where Indra has enjoyed or will enjoy the sacrifice.


## 02
The pattern of the first verse is continued here.


## 03
A series of relative clauses without a main clause. It cannot be connected with the next verse because the relative pronoun has a different referent there.


## 04
This verse is structurally a mess. It seems at first to have made the same shift of the referent of the relative pronoun from Indra (vs. 3) to Indra’s client (vs. 4) as was made in the preceding hymn in vs. 6: yásya stómeṣu “in whose praises” refers to the praiser. But the resumptive pronoun tám refers not to the praiser but to Indra, as the phrase táṃ tvā makes explicit, and the single praiser of 4a, implicitly in the 3rd person (though see Scar 225, who supplies “Zu mir”), corresponds to the 1st pl.

vayám in c.

Ge (followed by Scar 225) takes vā́je as part of the voc. phrase in b: “du im Kampf Sieghafter, Ratreicher.” This is possible, I suppose, and even favored by the pāda boundary, but I take it as one of those locative absolutes without expressed participle, like common dháne “when the stake (is set).”


## 05
On īśānakṛ́t see I.61.11. Here the point is that Indra does what masters are supposed to do: give. In c áyāman is universally taken (as far as I know) as ‘not on a journey’, but it makes much more sense as a derivative of √yā ‘beg’, indicating that even without prompting Indra should do the right thing by us.


## 06
Although this hymn does not at all correspond to its predecessor (VIII.51) to the same degree as VIII.49 and 50, this verse shows real responsion to 51.6: yásmai tváṃ vaso dānā́ya [2ND SG. VERB] (a) / sá rāyás póṣam [3RD SG. VERB] (b) / … havāmahe (d).


## 07
Though the verse starts like its counterpart, 51.7, with kadā́caná [2ND SG.], the verses go off in different directions.

The elements in the second hemistich can be variously distributed. Like most interpretors I take hávanam as the mortals’ call to the gods and the subject of ā́ tasthau, but I take indriyám as modifying it, meaning (unusually for this stem) ‘destined for / appropriate to Indra’ (so, approximately, Old), while Ge instead makes it the goal and supplies “name”: “… bis zu deinem indrischen unsterblichen (Namen) im Himmel…” This is not impossible, but I do not understand why our invocation would go to Indra’s name. I supply bhúvanam or similar with amṛ́tam.

The vocative “fourth Āditya” (túrīyāditya) is somewhat surprising, but as Old suggests it must identify Indra as fourth, after the standard trio Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman. Why Indra is called an Āditya in this particular context is not clear to me.


## 08
Another “improper” relative in ab, where the pious man who is the referent of yásmai is then implicitly identified with the emphatic fronted “us” (asmā́kam) in cd.


## 09
The verse deploys a number of words for verbal offerings: mánma (a), bráhma (b), and medhā́ḥ (d). In c a feminine term needs to be supplied in the phrase pūrvī́r ṛtásya bṛhatī́ḥ “the many lofty ___ of truth.” I have supplied gíraḥ ‘songs’ from vs. 8, as it also shows up with pūrvī́ḥ elsewhere (VI.34.1, VIII.96.10, IX.85.11, X.29.5) -- though oddly when we get pūrvī́ḥ ... br̥hatī́ḥ, it's with íṣaḥ ‘refreshments’ (VI.1.2, IX.87.9), which wouldn’t fit here because it is not a verbal product. But note gíro bṛhatī́ḥ with the same verb in III.51.1 índraṃ gíro br̥hatī́r abhy ànūṣata. Ge supplies ‘words’, which would also work semantically, though he doesn’t specify which feminine noun he thinks it is (vā́caḥ perhaps?).


## 10
I don’t really understand the idiom sám √dhū ‘shake together’. Its intent seems to be ‘produce, create’, but the semantic mechanism is unclear to me. It’s possible that sám occurs with √dhū here only because of the sám in the second hemistich. A straight ‘shake out’ or ‘shake loose’ could more easily develop to ‘produce, create’. Though cf. sám √dhū in I.10.8 (where I do tr. ‘shake loose’).

In pāda a rā́yo bṛhatī́ḥ seems to require rayí- to be fem., as occasionally elsewhere (but not so often as generally thought). I wonder, however, if the bṛhatī́ḥ has been borrowed from 9c: pūrvī́r ṛtásya bṛhatī́r anūṣata, which is structured in parallel to 10a sám índro rā́yo bṛhatī́r adhūnuta. It is even possible that bṛhatī́ḥ in 10a doesn’t modify rā́yaḥ but refers to the same object as found in 9c (“lofty songs” vel sim.). This might solve the just-discussed problem of sám √dhū: perhaps there are two objects of “shake together” -- something like “shook together riches and lofty (songs).”
