+++
title = "053"

+++
Indra


## 01
On rāyáḥ see VIII.46.6.


## 03
Ge takes víśveṣāṃ as referring to the soma drops (“… den Saft des Honigs all der Somasäfte”), and this interpretation has the advantage of providing a plural referent in the main clause for plural yé … índavaḥ in the relative clause.

Nonetheless, I take it instead as qualifying naḥ ‘us’, to indicate the totality of the Ārya sacrificial community, near and far, as described in cd (and also 4cd). As indicated in comments on the previous Vālakhilya hymns, improper relatives abound, with mismatch between number and person, and so the lack of a plural referent for yé … índavaḥ would not be problematic. However, Ge’s interpretation is certainly possible.


## 04
The “all” of b is undefined. I tentatively think it refers to us (that is, the entire Ārya community), but Old suggests it is the soma drops of 3cd. Ge doesn’t specify in the tr., but refers to the víśveṣām of 3 in his n.

I know nothing about the Śīṣṭas.


## 05
Ge tr. mitámedha- as “die die Gedanken aufrichten,” but I do not see how a transitive reading of mitá- would work in a compound so constructed.


## 06
I supply “lifetimes” (ā́yūṃṣi) in c, because ā́yus- is the standard object of prá √tṛ. Ge assumes that the object is the referent of the following relative clause (yé ta ukthínaḥ … (“Fördere fein … die, welche als deiner Lobsänger…”). This is possible, but ignores the usual idiom.

What it means to “purify (Indra’s) resolve” isn’t clear to me, but the phrase occurs elsewhere (cf. VIII.12.11, 13.1). In any case the father of the patron Dasyave Vṛka is Pūtakratu (see VIII.56.2, also 4), so this is a pun.


## 07
If read with what follows, the relative clause in pāda a is even more irregular than those we have already met in the Vālakhilya. However, there is a simple solution. The identical pāda occurs as V.35.1a, where it clearly modifies krátuḥ in b: yás te sā́dhiṣṭhó ‘vasa, índra krátuṣ ṭám ā́bhara “Your resolve to help that best brings success, Indra, bring that here.” Since krátum is found in the last pāda of the preceding verse, 6d, I take the relative clause of 7a as dependent on the krátum in 6d. Unfortunately this straddles a pragātha boundary, but I find it hard to believe that the krátu association played no role in the repetition of this pāda. It is even possible that the somewhat odd bháreṣu in 7b was influenced by bhara in V.35.1b (though see 8d).


## 08
Ge takes ājíṃ √yā as a phrasal verb (“mache ich … einen Wettlauf”) that can take an accusative (“einen Wettlauf um…”). I do not see any other way to construe bráhma, though I am a bit dubious about the construction.

The opening of c, tvā́m íd evá tám is an inflated version, with tonic 2nd ps.

pronoun, of tám tvā, which is found several times in this group of hymns (our 2c; also 51.6c, 52.4c). This inflation seems to have driven the preverb sám into postverbal position (áme sám).

Old and Ge accept the Kashmir reading *matīnā́m, but Narten (1960: 132 n.

34 = KlSch 22 n. 34) makes a convincing case that the transmitted mathīnā́m is correct and means ‘robbings/plunderings’. This works well with vājayúḥ, aśvayúḥ, and gavyúḥ in this verse, as well as bháreṣu in 7b.
