+++
title = "054"

+++
Indra


## 01
As Old points out, the accent on gṛṇánti is unnecessary. It may have been borrowed, with the pāda, from VIII.46.3, where the accent is correct because the pāda is part of a relative clause.


## 02
índram in pāda a, apparently 3rd ps., is co-referential with the 2nd sg.

subject of mándase in the relative clause of b, but this kind of slippage is common.


## 04
In pāda a it would also be possible to supply ‘hear’ from 3d (governing hávanam, as it did hávam in 3d), with ávantu the verb only of b.


## 06
I take pāda a as a nominal clause, with b separate, in order to account for the unaccented verb in b following hí in a. This requires taking ā́jipate nṛpate as predicated vocatives, a rare but still attested construction; see, e.g., I.15.2. This should also require naḥ at the end of pāda a to be construed with that clause, which the publ. tr. does not do. I would now add “for us” after “lord of men” and in the second clause make “us” parenthetical. Ge takes ab as a single sentence, which avoids the predicated vocative but has an unaccented verb in a hí clause. Old mentions the problem but decides that the lack of accent can be attributed to faulty transmission of the Vālakhilya. This is of course possible.

Both Old and Ge accept the Kashmir ā́bhakṣi for ā́vakṣi, though Old admits that the latter also works. I do not see the need to change the text.

Although VIII.54 has little in common with VIII.53, note 6cd … hótrābhir utá devávītibhiḥ, sasavā́ṃso … and 53.7c … hótrābhir utá deváhūtibhiḥ, sasavā́ṃso …


## 07
With Old, Ge, Thieme (Fremd. 26), I read aryáḥ against Pp. aryé.

In b índra can stand for either índraḥ or índre. Either will work; I have chosen (with Ge) the locative, but see Thieme’s “Indra ist das Leben der Leute.” ## 055 Dānastuti


## 03
Though this vs. continues the list of gifts begun in vs. 2, it is entirely in the accusative, while vs. 2 is in the nominative. There is no verb governing vs. 3, and I simply tr. as part of the list.

In the publ. tr. “ewes” should be in parens.

Ge. tr. áruṣīṇāṃ cátuḥśatam as “hundertundvier rötliche (Schafe)” (my italics), which makes one wonder about his barnyard experience. Wikipedia tells me that there does exist something called the Armenian red sheep (or Armenian mouflon, etc.), native to Iran and Armenia. But since the gifts celebrated in dānastutis are domestic animals, this information doesn’t seem helpful. There is also something called the California red sheep, but this hybrid was only developed in the 1970s and half a world away from Dasyave Vṛka. On the other hand, “black” sheep are often more brownish than black and in certain lights could appear reddish. There is also a (recent?) breed of Indian sheep known as Bannur or Mandya, some of which appear (on Google Images) reddish.


## 05
Ge takes sāptá- as “der treuen Freundschaft,” presumably as a derivative of sápti- ‘team’ (see his sim. derivation in VIII.41.4 and my comm. thereon). But it does not make sense to deny a numerical value for sāptá- here, since it is found in clearly numerical sense in nearby VIII.59.5 (Vālakh.) tríbhiḥ sāptébhiḥ.
