+++
title = "059"

+++
Indra and Varuṇa


## 01
I do not think it nec., with Ge, to supply a new verb with prá in b, since √sṛ regularly appears with prá.

I supply rā́dhase with mahé. This phrase is frequent, esp. in VIII (I.139.6, III.41.6, VIII.2.29, 24.10, 45.24, etc.), and rā́dhas- is a favorite word in the Vāl.


## 02
The Khila ābhyām should be read for āstām.

pāré can be read with both genitives, rájasaḥ and ádhvanaḥ, separately (so also Ge) and is positioned between them.

Despite the morphological peculiarity of sísratuḥ (on which see Old, Narten [see Kü’s ref.], Kü 553), I see no reason to substitute the Khila tasthátuḥ with Old, Ge. Both Narten and Kü endorse the nonce form sísratuḥ.


## 04
On the incomplete clause with dhattam see publ. intro.


## 06
The three gifts in ab seems to show a developmental sequence: they first have an inspired thought, which develops into thought (in the form) of speech, which is then heard.

With Ge (and Old) I read the Khila tā́ni chándhāṃsi for yā́ni sthā́nāni, which makes things considerably easier.

End of Vālakhilya

--- ## 060
Agni


## 03
Most take yákṣ i yaḥ as a deriv. of √yakṣ ‘appear, display’, yákṣa- ‘apparition’, hence Ge’s ‘wunderbar’. I am taken instead by Old’s suggestion (considered also by Re) that it incorporates the si-impv. yakṣi ‘sacrifice!’ regularly addressed to Agni, and my tr. reflects this. At the very least it is likely to play on √yaj, given its proximity to yájiṣṭha- (1d, 3c) and yajñéṣu (2d).


## 04
I take ádrogham adverbially with Gr and (apparently) Re, while Ge supplies an acc. of the 1st sg. pronoun to serve as goal for ā́vaha: “(Zu mir), der ohne Falsch ist, fahre …” The accent, against adj. adroghá-, may support an adverbial interpr.

hitáḥ is ambiguous: it can belong either to √dhā ‘place’ (see súdhitā in c) or √hi ‘impel’, and both may be meant. It also plays off immediately preceding dhītíbhiḥ, though it cannot belong to √dhī.


## 05
ṛtáḥ here is one of only two masc. forms of this extraordinarily common neut. stem, the other of which also qualifies kavíḥ (IX.62.30). (Gr’s three masc. acc. ṛtám are actually neut., and the apparent du. masc. ṛtā́appears in X.106, a hymn constructed of gibberish, in vs. 5, which I refused to tr.) In these two passages it must be a secondarily adjectivized application of ṛtá- ‘truth’, facilitated by its past participle shape (and origin). Hence the special-effect tr. ‘entruthed’. Its appearance here may also be motivated in part by the semi-palindromic trātar rtás ̥ . The form ṛtás is unusual also because of its irregular sandhi with following kavíḥ, on which see comm. ad VII.18.2. Curiously the other example of this phrase in IX.62.30 shows the standard sandhi ṛtáḥ kavíḥ.

The trio kaví-, vedhás-, and vípra- recurs from vs. 3. There Agni was both kaví- and vedhás- attended to by vípras; here his attendants are vípras and vedháses, while he remains a kaví-.


## 06
On the metrical shape of dīdihi see comm. ad IX.108.9.


## 09
I am a little uncertain why/how Agni protects us with hymn(s) (gír-), which are what we usually offer to him. Ge and Re soften the expression by tr.

‘word(s)’, but that is not what gír- means. Perhaps Agni’s “hymns” are the crackling noises of the fire, or else the instrumentals express cause: “protect us by reason of (our) hymns.” I prefer the former of these solutions. (See 18a below.) The various instrumentals cannot directly take up the pāyúbhiḥ of 8d, because pāyú- is masc. and all four number instrumentals (ékayā, etc.) are unambiguously feminine, as is gírwhen it finally shows up in c.


## 11
A verb like ‘bring’ needs to be supplied with the first hemistich based on the numerous passages containing ā́bhara governing no rayím (e.g., I.79.8 ā́no agne rayím bhara); cf. also 18cd below. On upamāte see VIII.40.9.

The publ. tr. “very glorious” is a careless error for “self-glorious,” misreading sváyaśastaram as *súyaśastaram. I am evidently not alone in this, as the SV reads this instead. If this were the correct reading the accent should probably have been

*suyáśastaram, given forms like suśrávas(-tama)-.


## 12
Ge and Re take vardha as intransitive/reflexive “wachse du,” “renforce toi,” but active forms of várdha- are about as reliably transitive as Vedic verbs get.


## 16
The sense of sutyájam is disputed. I ascribe to it the same metaphorical meaning as ‘abandon’ acquires in English, namely acting without constraint. This fits nicely with áhrayas- ‘unabashed, immoderate, unrestrained’. A fire blazing up out of control is presumably meant; in the next pāda it manages to split a rock -- a sudden glancing allusion to the Vala myth, in which Agni usually has no role.


## 18
In a hymn of rare clarity, this verse provides a sudden stumbling block.

Re’s comment, “Galamatias [gibberish] en dānastuti,” does not provoke optimism.

My interpr. is very far from the standard ones. The problems arise from the grammatical and semantic interpr. of suṣāmáṇi and of the hapax cikitvánā and the construal of sacate and of túbhyam.

The differently accented suṣā́man- is a PN, and both Ge and Re take suṣāmáni as such here (so also Mayr. PN) -- Ge as a nom. (“eine der rätselhaften Nominativeformen auf i”) and Re, more sensibly, as a loc. Because of the accent difference and because a PN does nothing for us, I prefer Gr’s suggestion that it has real lexical value (‘good melody’ or ‘having good melody’), though I confess I do not understand why it would have this particular accent. It modifies loc. śárman: a “shelter made of good melody” would either be the protective power of the sung portion of the rite or the protection given by the “singing” fire (see vs. 9 above, with Agni’s hymns).

As for cikitvánā, most interpr. take it as an instr. modifying kétena and derived in some way from √cit. Old takes it as a deformation of the instr. of the pf.

part. cikitúṣā, which is metrically impossible in the cadence; others set up a nonce stem cikitván-. By contrast I think cikitvánā should be divided into two words: cikit vánā. The first belongs to the stem cikít- ‘perceptive, observant’ (4x) found only otherwise in the nom. sg. (likewise cikít), twice of Agni (VIII.102.2, X.3.1). This would be its vocative, differing only in its lack of accent. What remains is vánā, which can be the neut. pl. of vána- ‘(piece of) wood’ (see 15a above), which is found here in a possessive constr. with dat. túbhyam. In external sandhi we should, of course, have expected *cikid vána, but I think the multiple exx. of cikitvā́n, cikitvas, etc., could have produced a redactional change, once voc. cikit was no longer clearly understood. (In the publ. tr. an asterisk should precede “O perceptive Agni” as well as “pieces of wood.”) Taking túbhyam as part of an independent clause solves another problem in the other interpr., for there is no good way to construe it with pāda a. Ge must take it as an honorary gen. with śárman (“in deiner Obhut”), but though the dative can express possession in predicative usage, I do not think this is possible in attributive usage. Re construes it instead with sacate, “(le poète) t'obéit,” positing what I consider an unprecedented case frame (dat. only) and meaning for sácate. (The parallel he adduces, V.43.15, is to be taken differently, and in fact Re does not tr. it in parallel fashion himself.) With túbhyam belonging to another clause, sacate is free to be construed with the instr., as it regularly is. The instr. in question is kéta- ‘will, intention’, which is regularly governed by ánu √i ‘follow’ (IV.26.2, etc.), semantically very close to ‘keep company with, be accompanied by’; cf. also keta-sáp- (V.38.3) ‘serving the will’.

Ge renders iṣaṇyáyā as ‘nach Wunsch’, hence presumably to √iṣ ‘desire’, but it seems arbitrary to separate it from the verb stem iṣaṇyá- ‘send, impel, drive’.


## 20
The voc. āghṛṇīvaso is taken lit. by Ge and Re (‘Glutreicher’ and ‘riche en ardeur-de-feu’ respectively). But ā́ghr̥ṇi- is an epithet exclusively of Pūṣan, and it is highly unlikely that it would be used only here, in this awkward compound, without that reference. So it must mean ‘who has the goods of Pūṣan’ -- presumably the cows and other domestic stuff that are appropriate to this last pragātha.
