+++
title = "061"

+++
Indra


## 01
The ca in pāda a is subordinating, as the accented verb (śṛṇávat) shows.

See Klein DGRV I.245-46.

Ge, flg. Sāy, suggests that the twofold speech (ubháyaṃ vácaḥ) is Gesang and Vortrag. This is certainly possible, though I wonder if it might be refined to words and melody - that is, not separate performances of songs and recitations, but words set to music - accounting for the grammatical singular.


## 04
On áprāmi-satya see Scar 388, inter alia. With him and others (see already Gr) I take the first member as derived from prá √mī, but in the common idiom ‘confound’. In my view the compound concerns a regularly expressed anxiety about Indra - does he exist? See, e.g., VIII.100.3 néndro astī́ti néma u tva āha “‘Indra does not exist,’ so says many a one.” Our compound addresses this by calling him one “whose reality cannot be confounded.” Ge’s “der sein Versprechen nie bricht” assumes a meaning ‘promise’ for satyá- that I don’t think is justified for the RV.

Scar’s “dessen Wahrheit unwandelbar ist” is closer to mine, but I don’t think his rendering of the first member is sufficiently pointed.


## 06
Although paurá- is generally a PN in the RV (see Mayrhofer, Die Personenname in der Ṛgveda-Saṃhitā s.v.), reflecting the patronymic it is morphologically, here it cannot be so meant. Among other things, Indra cannot be a descendent of Puru! In this passage it puns on purukṛ́t in the same pāda, as well as purūvaso in 3a, purū́in 8a. Ge’s tr. takes account of this word play (“Mehrer der Rossherde”), but I don’t think that it should be construed with a genitive as he takes it. I take both genitives (áśvasya … gávām) with purukṛ́t (so also Scar 76) and interpret paurá- as ‘stemming from / related to much(ness)’, that is, ‘muchness itself’; “multiplicity … multiplier” is an attempt to capture the pun in English without undue awkwardness.

In c Ge (also Old) takes dā́nam as subject: “bei dir bleibt die Gabe niemals aus,” but the verbal forms to √mṛdh are otherwise always transitive. Old cites VII.59.4 as parallel, but the parallelism is only apparent and the verb there is also transitive.


## 07
The two verbs in ab, éhi and vidā́, seem to conform to the quasi-serial-verb construction (on which see A. Yates 2014 [UCLA IE Conference proceedings]), but hí makes trouble for this assessment and trouble in general for the interpretation.

Since hí triggers verb accentuation, the first imperative should be accented ehí (that is, ā + ihí), not éhi (that is, ā́+ ihi), as Old points out. He suggest that éhi is parenthetical. This is possible, though ad hoc, but this still leaves the function of hí in question. It could be interpreted in the mode of Brereton 2012, as marking the first of two imperatives (in this case vidā́, if éhi is parenthetical) as the basis of the action of the second. Such an interpretation is barely possible here; however, it seems excessively complex, since it requires banishing the truly first imperative éhi from structural consideration. My own ad hoc suggestion is that hí is over-represented in this part of the hymn (2a, 2d, 3c, 5c, 6c) and has been inserted here without its usual function and without triggering verbal accent. But this is of course not a satisfying solution, though it does allow the QSV analysis to be maintained.

For impv. vidā́against Pp subj. vidā́ḥ, see comm. ad IX.19.6. Here the parallel impvs. éhi and vāvṛṣasva reinforce an impv. interpr.

For the hapax céru- see EWA s.v. An association with √ci ‘perceive’ seems possible. Ge is uncertain, tr. ‘seeking’, but in n. suggests ‘traveling’ (to √car).

Morphologically vāvṛṣasva is somewhat problematic: Lub takes it as the medial perfect imperative to a subjunctive stem, Kü (474) more cautiously as a “thematically built” imperative. (It is worth pointing out that a properly built pf. mid.

impv. would come out as *vāvṛkṣva and would be multiply ambiguous.

Thematicization would be a good strategy under these circumstances. For further disc. of this set of “thematic” perfect imperatives see my 2018 “The Vedic Perfect Imperative and the Status of Modal Forms to Tense-Aspect Stems” (Fs. Lubotsky) on the perfect imperative.) As is generally noted, this imperative cannot be separated from the medial participle vāvṛṣāná-, which in two of its three occurrences also appears with úd. Following Neisser (1893, also Gotō 1987), Kü (474-77) assigns these forms to a root √2 varṣ ‘sich ermannen, sich (tatendurstig) erheben’ (associated with the present varṣāyáte, which however appears to be a denominative, not a root formation) separate from √1 varṣ ‘regnen’ and translates our passage rather like Ge’s “Ermannen dich…” I think this separation is unnecessary and also ignores the ā́ vṛṣasva in 3a. I find the liquid semantics of √vṛṣ ‘rain’ not only possible in all the úd √vṛṣ passages but productive of a striking image: ‘bubble/boil up’, expressing Indra’s irrespressible excitement and energy.


## 09
Thematically and lexically connected with the preceding verse (8) despite straddling the pragātha boundary. In 8c we identify ourselves as vípravacas- ‘having inspired speech’, and in 9ab it is said that either a vípra or a non-vípra might offer his vácas- to Indra, with good results either way. Although this seems like a non-RVic sentiment (esp. after 8c), since ordinarily only good poets (like us) are meant to achieve success, perhaps the “inspired poet” is being implicitly contrasted with a non-inspired but still skillful poet. In the other occurrence of aviprá- in the RV (VI.45.2), Indra “places vitality even in the uninspired,” so perhaps, alternatively, here even the uninspired poet achieves success simply by dedicating his product to Indra and acquiring luster by this contact.

The accusative of the offering with √vidh is a bit unusual, but not unprecedented (see, e.g., I.189.1), and Ge’s rather deviant tr. “die Rede recht gemacht hat” and his alternative suggestion that vácaḥ represents vácasā at the end of the pāda are both unnecessary.

On the apparent bad cadence produced by ávidhat, see remarks ad II.1.7, where Arnold’s suggestion to read a long augment is adopted.

The apparent subj. mamandat certainly can work as a subjunctive in context and is so rendered in the publ. tr. However, note that it immediately precedes t u vāyā́, beg. with t-, and we might be dealing with an unetymological doubling from an underlying *mamanda tu vāyā́. The final syllable of the verb would then be light, but this doesn’t cause major metrical problems. Nonetheless, I’m inclined to stick with the subjunctive. On the other hand, on the basis of VII.18.21 and VII.33.1, I now think it is possible that prá mamanda(t) should be interpr. as transitive, with ‘you’ [=Indra] supplied as object, perhaps as haplology from *tvā tvāyā́as I suggest ad VII.18.21. For the motivations for this reinterpr., see disc. there. The altered tr.

would be “… will exhilarate / has exhilarated (you) in devotion to you.” On the other hand, the intrans. interpr. in the publ. tr. makes slightly more sense in this context -- and forms of √ma(n)d can be either trans. or intrans., so the current tr. could be maintained.

The voc. ahaṃsana is surely rightly explained (Old ad V.75.2, AiG II.1.327, III.437) as a univerbation of a VP aháṃ sanā “I shall win” (see V.75.2 for another instantiation of this phrase). (AiG II.1.327 suggests aháṃ saneyam, but the thematic subjunctive matches the compound better.)


## 10
Ge tr. yádi as ‘So’, which does not seem legitimate to me. It might be possible to read it as *yád ī, even without a following cluster (see Jamison 2002) “when he will hear my call,” but I don’t see that this appreciably improves sense.


## 11
Kulikov (339-40, flg. Gotō) does not allow a passive reading for medial forms of √man, but aside from Gotō’s dictum I see nothing against such an interpretation, which fits the passage better than a reflexive one. The hapax árāya- is plausibly taken as a negated form derived from the root √rā ‘give, bestow’ by Mayrhofer EWA s.v. rayí-.

jáḷhu- (i.e., jáḍhu-) is also a hapax with no agreed-upon etymology or meaning. Ge leaves it untr. and Old simply comments “dunkel.” See EWA s.v. for references to previous discussions and suggestions. I wonder if it is not related to jaṭhára- ‘belly’, with MIA voicing of intervocalic obstruent between vowels (cf. Pkt.

jaḍhara- ‘belly’ cited in EWA s.v. jaṭhára- [though not registered in Turner]), with “belly” as the designation of a greedy, voracious person.

The point of the verse seems to be that we don’t want to get a bad reputation for being selfish by grabbing Indra to be our exclusive companion.


## 12
The second member of the hapax compound ṛṇá-kāti- belongs with kā́makāti- ‘desiring desires’, and I therefore produce a more volition tr. than the usual ‘Schuld fordernd’.

The interpretation of the second hemistich depends on the interpretation of bhṛmám. Gr takes it as ‘error’, Ge as ‘impatience’ (Ungeduld), and see EWA s.v. for other suggestions. I consider it a derivative of √bhram ‘whirl’, and see it here as qualifying the vā́jin-, the prize-winning horse. The point is that a good charioteer recognizes a good horse even when it’s going so fast it becomes a whirling blur. And this fast horse is the one that the knowledgeable charioteer wants and will obtain.

Ge’s interpretation is very different: “Der Gewinner … versteht die Ungeduld, die den Sieggewohnten erfasst.” He takes bhṛmám as a noun, the object of védā, and the referent of the relative pronoun in d. Since he considers that rel. pronoun the subject of náśat, he must account for acc. yám by assuming attraction to vājínam from expected nom. *yáḥ. My interpretation avoids this unappealing change and also accounts better for the position of the particles íd ū, since vājínam belongs to the main clause not the relative clause, by my reading. Moreover, náśat should be a subjunctive, but his tr. fails to register that.


## 13
Pāda b would literally be “make lack of fear of that for us,” which is overly stilted.

Pāda c reprises 5ab.


## 14
Old takes rādhaspate as a predicated vocative, presumably with at least rā́dhaso máhaḥ and possibly kṣáyasya dependent on it. Ge (whom I follow) supplies a “lord” for those dependent genitives, which may amount to the same thing.


## 15
The sandhi form índra that opens pāda a can be either vocative or nominative. Because of the 3rd ps. verbs of cd, I take it as nominative.
