+++
title = "062"

+++
Indra


## 03
Gr, Ge take áhita- as ‘useless’ (untauglich), the negation of what I think of as a later specialized sense of hitá- as ‘useful, beneficial, friendly’, which is not, as far as I know, found in the RV. In his n. Ge allows the possibility of connection with √hi ‘spur on’ (which is Sāy’s view), and this seems the better choice. Parallel phraseology supports it: IV.7.11 hinvé árvā, V.36.2 árvato ná hinván, plus the numerous exx. of √hi + áśva-, átya-, and other words for horses. Ge’s cited parallel, VI.45.2 anāśúnā cid árvatā “even with a steed lacking speed,” also provides support.

I use the “be about to” sense, always possible for desideratives, to tr. siṣāsati, rather than ‘desires to win’. The question is not whether Indra wants to win - of course he does - but that he is about to win despite unfavorable circumstances. The ‘about to’ sense also works better with the future part. kariṣyatáḥ in d.


## 05
The interpretation of this verse rests on whose mind (mánas-) is at issue.

Ge. considers it to belong to the mortal worshiper and makes it the object of kṛṇóṣi: “Da du … selbst des Kühnen Sinn (noch) kühn(er) machst …,” which also entails interpreting plain dhṛṣát as a comparative. By contrast I consider the mind to be Indra’s and take pāda a as a separate nominal sentence. This has the advantage also of putting yád in b in a more acceptable syntactic position. In V.35.4 the dhṛṣán mánaḥ is unarguably Indra’s; the full expression in I.54.3 dhr̥ṣató dhrṣ̥ án mánaḥ “the bold mind of the bold one” also refers to Indra.

As for the rest of the verse, I take the gen. participles saparyatáḥ (c) and pratibhū́ṣataḥ (d) as genitives of benefit. This has the slight disadvantage of positing different referents for these two participles and for dhṛṣatáḥ in a, but it would hardly be the first time that a RVic verse contained genitives referring to different entities, and there is considerable distance between dhṛṣatáḥ and the others.


## 06
As Ge suggests, the object of Indra’s gazing should be the soma, parallel to the wells (avatā́n) of the simile. As he also suggests, the avatā́n can simultaneously refer to soma-springs (Somabrunnen), and so I have tr. the word twice, in simile and frame.

Ge construes the gen. phrase dákṣasya somínaḥ with the gerund juṣṭvī́. This is probably correct; my “make X [acc.] of Y [gen.]” goes suspiciously easily into English, but in Sanskrit the construction would probably involve a double accusative.

I would thus change the publ. tr. to “Finding pleasure in the skillful provider of soma, he makes (him) a partner …”


## 08
Ge takes the dat. devátātaye with cd: “dass du für die Götterschaft mit Übermacht den Vṛtra erschlägst.” This has some immediate appeal, but I am reluctant to adopt it because both the hemistich-break and the yád intervene.

Moreover, the use of present tense háṃsi suggests that the Vṛtra-smashing continues in the present day and is perhaps separate from the primal act performed for the benefit of the gods in mythological time.


## 09
There are various ways to configure the nominals in the first hemistich, sámaneva vapuṣyatáḥ … mā́nuṣā yugā́, and their relation to the verb kṛṇávat. Most interpretors assume (I think correctly) that kṛṇávat takes a double accusative here (“make X into Y”), but which is the X and which the Y? Ge takes mā́nuṣā yugā́as the first object and sámaneva vapuṣyatáḥ as the second: “Er soll die menschlichen Geschlechter gleichsam zu anstaunenden Versammlungen machen,” but does not explain how masc. vapuṣyatáḥ can modify neut. sámanā. Old discusses the passage at length, but in all four translations he suggests as possible he also takes mā́nuṣā yugā́as the first object. However, this phrase is almost always an accusative of extent of time “through the human generations” (I.144.4, II.2.2, V.52.4, VI.16.23, VIII.46.12). If we take it that way here and thus exclude it from one of the two accusative object slots with kṛṇávat, the remaining two nominals can each take one of the slots. The point then is that generation after generation people/gods marvel at Indra, and all these people oohing-and-aahing are like big festive parties.


## 11
The full specification of the subject of the 1st dual verb sáṃ yujyāva as aháṃ ca tváṃ ca is noteworthy, since generally the subject is reduced by gapping, as in VII.88.3 ā́yád ruhā́va váruṇaś ca nā́vam “When we two, (I) and Varuṇa, mounted the boat …” VIII.34.16 índraś ca dádvahe “We two, (I) and Indra, took …,”


## 07
úd yád … gṛhám índraś ca gánvahi “when we two, (I) and Indra , go up to his house….” (Of course all those examples involve 1st ps. exclusive, rather than inclusive as here.) The increasing emphasis in this hymn on partnership between god and human discussed in the publ. intro. accounts for the explicit “both I and you” here.


## 12
satyám íd vā́u is found as a unit at V.73.9, and I therefore think that táṃ vayám, índraṃ stavāma should be detached from both what precedes and what follows. See also expressions like satyáṃ tád (III.39.5, VIII.59.3), satyám ít tád (VI.30.4), introducing a separable statement of truth.
