+++
title = "063"

+++
Indra


## 01
The two parallel perfects ānaje and ānajé, each final in its hemistich, require two different functional interpretations, the first passive, the second transitive, with a double accusative. Kü (95-96) recognizes more or less the same two functions (patientiv and agentiv-reflexiv) for this perfect stem, but curiously claims that the perfect to this root is found only in Maṇḍalas I and X, though offering no alternative interpretation of these forms here.

Various referents have been suggested for the vená-: Indra (Old), Soma (Ge).

I favor Agni, for the following reasons. First, the actions of ab and cd, whose correspondence is signalled by the identical verbs, take place in the divine realm in ab and in the human one in cd, where Manu directs his action to the divine. This situation suggests a ritual scene, and the Vena, who is the target of both acts of smearing, should then be a middleman between the divine and human in the ritual.

This figure can only be Agni or Soma. As for the rest of the vocabulary, pūrvyá- can be used of Agni, Soma, and Indra, but is most regularly Agni. Likewise Agni is often the object of √añj; cf. esp. III.14.3 yát sīm añjánti pūrvyáṃ havírbhiḥ. And Agni several times opens doors (e.g., I.128.6, III.5.1, VIII.39.6). With Agni covertly mentioned in this verse and Soma overtly in vs. 2, the whole ritual scene is set.


## 02
The sense of mā́na- here is disputed. Ge takes it as “Melodie,” explained ad I.39.1 as via “Tonbemessen, Intonation”; Old “Himmelshaus.” Although my interpretation of mā́na- as ‘measure’ shares a root etymology with Ge’s (at least as he sees it, but cf. EWA s.vv. mā́na2 , mā́na3 ), namely √mā ‘measure’, I take it in a fairly literal sense — the measure of heaven is the distance to it — and as an acc. of goal. See also 7d.

As far as I can see, úd √sad occurs only here in the RV. Ge takes it as “make a pause,” but gives no grounds for this interpretation. Although already in the BYV Saṃhitās this lexeme can mean ‘go out, (tr.) put out [of fire]’, here a literal meaning ‘sit up’ fits the context very well. The pressing stones are raised up in preparation for pressing; note that the grā́van-, also ‘pressing stone’, are ūrdhvá- ‘erect’ in X.92.15, a situation also embodied in the compound ūrdhvá-grāvan-.


## 03
stuṣé could alternatively be 1st sg. ‘I shall praise’. I interpret it as an infinitive, with Ge, because there has been so far no personal reference to the poet.

But this is not a strong argument, esp. since “we” make an appearance in vs. 4.

The mention of the opening of the Vala cave may allude to the dawn, and therefore to the dawn happening at this sacrifice now.


## 04
vakṣáṇi- is derivationally ambiguous: Gr takes it to √vakṣ ‘grow, increase’, Ge to √vah ‘convey’, though not with entire confidence (“Wortführer (?)”), AiG II.2.207 allows both. Both are possible in the realm of RVic discourse. I opt for √vakṣ because the expression is parallel to kavivṛdháḥ ‘strengthener of poets’, but I certainly don’t rule out a derivation from √vah.

Another ambiguous word is hóman- in c; this stem can mean either ‘invocation’ (to √hū) or ‘pouring, oblation’ (to √hu). Gr takes it to the latter, Ge, apparently (‘Darbringung’) to the former. I agree with Ge: the trope of pouring out praise is common in the RV.


## 05
The syntactic association of várasya is disputed; see Old’s discussion for various possibilities. I follow Ge in taking it as dependent on krátum.

It also seems necessary to supply a verb with ab. I import anūṣata from cd, with svā́hā the cry that the sacrificers cry out; however, Ge’s ‘entsprechen’, utilizing the preverb ánu present in pāda a, is also possible, though he must take svā́hā as a syntactic absolute (“unter Svāhāruf”).

Ge takes śvātrám as the content of the call (“… haben … den Drang eingeschrieen”), but √nu ordinarily takes as object the being towards whom the cry is directed, and I therefore take śvātrám as referring to Indra. (This standard construction of √nu does make some trouble for my interpretation of svā́hā as construed with supplied √nu in ab, but perhaps the fact that svā́hā expresses the cry itself makes the difference. See comm. on I.6.6, however.) Note the phonological echoes: ā́(d ū) nú … ánu (a) / anūṣata (c).


## 06
I see no reason to attenuate the identification of Indra with the adhvaráthat the grammar seems to demand, by a contrivance like Ge’s “den die Preislieder als (Gegenstand) des Gottesdienstes kennen.” See I.178.4, where Indra is identified with “the laud of the sacrificer” (yájamānasya śáṃsaḥ), and the immediately following verse (63.7d), where he is identified with peaceful dwelling (kṣáyaḥ).


## 07
The second hemistich has been subject to various interpretations. See, inter alia, Old’s discussion, also Thieme (Fremdl. 42-43). The primary points of difference are the case/number of vipáḥ (gen. sg. or acc. pl.) and of aryáḥ (gen. sg. or acc. pl.), the sense of mā́na- (as also in vs. 2), and the syntactic structure of the final pāda. I opt for gen. sg. vipáḥ (as Old points out, the acc. pl. should be accented vípaḥ), acc. pl. aryáḥ, and the same sense for mā́na- as in vs. 2, namely ‘measure’ - in this case the measure, i.e., the sheer size, of Indra. I construe both genitives (vipáḥ and mā́nasya) with barháṇā, and take the last two words sá kṣáyaḥ as a separate clause, as the position of sá might suggest - contra all other intrepretations I am aware of. It makes sense that Indra should be identified as “peaceful dwelling,” because he has killed the strangers and thus brought peace to the Five Peoples.


## 08
As noted in the publ. intro., “the turning of the wheel” (cakrásya vartaním) recalls the later designation for a universal monarch cakra-vartin ‘turner of the wheel’. The association of cakráṃ with √vṛt ‘turn’ is found elsewhere in the RV (cakráṃ ná vrttám ̥ I.155.6 = IV.31.4 = V.36.3; and a number of VPs, e.g., I.164.11 várvarti cakrám, II.11.20 ávartayat sū́ryo ná cakrám), but this seems the passage most implicated in power and sovereignty.


## 09
Pāda a contains a textual problem: whether to read the transmitted vyódana (-e [so Pp.] or -aḥ, out of sandhi) ‘moistening/moistener’) or to emend to vy òdaná (i.e., -é) ‘rice-porridge’, the food associated with the Emuṣa myth that is treated virtually only in this part of VIII (the odanám in 69.14; 77.6, 10). See Ge and Old ad loc. I follow Ge in the emendation; it is very difficult to make sense of the ‘moisten’ interpretation, and the rarity of odanám might have lead it to be changed.

In the publ. tr. there should be an asterisk before “to the rice-porridge.”


## 10
Supplying ‘praise-hymn’ or the like as object of dádhānāḥ, which goes back to Sāy, is supported by VII.73.1 práti stómaṃ devayánto dádhānāḥ.

As Ge points out yuṣmā́bhiḥ may refer either to the gods or to the other singers. On the basis of 11, I think the latter is more likely (so also Ge), although note the gods in 12d.


## 11
Ge takes ṛtvíyāya dhā́mane as referring to the Maruts (as the “pünktlichen Geschlechten” [timely race], a phrase that doesn’t make a lot of sense to me) or Indra. On the basis of V.48.1 priyā́ya dhā́mne ... svákṣatrāya sváyavase “or the self-ruling, self-glorious one … for his own dear establishment,” I take this as referring to the establishment of Indra at the sacrifice, governed by the sacrificial order, which the singers are hoping for. This establishment is then stated as accomplished in 12c yáḥ … dhā́yi “who has been established …” ṛ́kvabhiḥ reminds us of the insistent arká of the 2nd tṛca (4c, 5c, 6c); the same verb √nu ‘cry out’ is repeated here, from 5c.


## 12
I have no idea what the mountains have to do with anything and why they and the Maruts should be in agreement. (Ge takes sajóṣāḥ only with the mountains, but this doesn’t help.) Since there is in fact no overt ‘and’, it is possible that the Maruts are being referred to as mountains (“… the Rudras, ‘mountains’ in their profusion, are of one accord…”).

The relativization in cd is somewhat shifty: the yáḥ should refer to Indra, who is the first member of the compound in the main clause índrajyeṣṭhāḥ ‘having Indra as chief’.
