+++
title = "065"

+++
Indra


## 05
The morphological identity of the forms gṛṇīṣé and stuṣé is disputed. Ge takes them as 2nd sg. passives (favored also by Old), though he mentions the possibility that they are 1st sg. -se forms in his n.; Lub identifies them as 1st singulars.

I take them as infinitives rather than 1st sgs, primarily because they are accented.

However, it is possible that a finite verb would bear the accent after the accented initial voc. índra, and that the second form would be accented contrastively, so 1st sg.

is certainly not excluded. Since the “you” of the publ. tr. (/ “dich” of Ge’s tr.) is not overtly expressed, either interpretation fits the text. ## 066 Indra


## 01
The nominative plural pres. part. gā́yantaḥ in c and the 1st singular huvé in d are grammatically incompatible but conceptually harmonious: this is the usual situation where the poet speaks both for himself and for the group of officiants he represents. Ge takes abc together and supplies a 1st plural verb (rufen wir), while I assume that the huvé of d has domain over the whole verse, with the plural participle in c a grammatical interruption.


## 02
My tr. of pāda b sounds in English like a loc. absol. or a relative clause, but is simply an attempt to keep the pāda together in tr. The acc. suśiprám of course simply picks up the rel. prn. yám that opens the verse.

Ge tr. ādṛ́tyā as “fürsorglich” and so must assign it to a separate root √dṛ ‘pay heed’. I instead take the form to √dṛ ‘burst, tear’ (a possibility Ge registers in his n.).

See EWA s.v. DARI for the likelihood that the later ā́√dṛ ‘pay heed’ forms developed as semantic specializations of ‘tear out’.


## 03
The first hemistich contains two hapaxes with which Indra is identified.

The meaning and etymology of neither of them can be certainly determined.

The first one, mṛkṣá-, is the easier, because a root etymology suggests itself (though without imposing itself) and because the adjective qualifying it, áśvya- ‘belong to a horse, equine’, narrows the semantic field. If the form belongs to the root √mṛj ‘wipe, groom’, a mṛkṣá- can be a curry comb (so Ge, EWA s.v. MARJ, both with uncertainty) or other tool for grooming a horse. (The supposed root √mrakṣ ‘comb’ to which Gr and AiG II.2.71 assign it does not exist.) Possibly connected is the hapax mrk̥ ṣínī- (X.98.6), where the word seems to describe the tracks on the earth made by a hard rain - possibly envisioned as the regularly spaced impressions left by a comb. Why calling Indra a curry comb would be flattering to the god is not clear. Perhaps it’s one of those cultural mysteries like (semi-)modern Engl. “you’re the cat’s pajamas.” Or perhaps, like the farm implement the harrow, which likewise has teeth and is pulled across land to break up clods, etc., and which has developed in English into a verb expressing the infliction of distress, the curry comb can be conceived of as a weapon.

The second hapax, kī́ja-, is harder, because there is no apparent root etymology, no similar forms attested in the RV, and, although it is also accompanied by an adjective, that particular adj. ‘golden’ (hiraṇyáya-) leaves the field very wide.

Note also that, properly speaking, the velar should have yielded a palatal before ī, but there are enough secondary ki/ī forms to keep this from being a useful diagnostic. Ge suggests, tentatively, “Sporn” (spur) (sim., and similarly tentative, EWA), but gives no support. I very hesitantly adduce the later (Ep+) kīcaka- ‘hollow bamboo’ and suggest that kī́ja might be a ‘stake’. Note the hiraṇyáyo vetasáḥ “golden reed” in IV.58.5. Being called a golden stake seems a bit better than being a horse’s curry comb.

## 04
Since váśat is a subjunctive, strictly speaking it should be tr. “as he will wish.”

## 04-05
Note the cross-pragātha lexical agreement: 4a purusambhrtám̥ , 5c sám bharāmasi.


## 07
The balance of opinion (Gr, Kü, Lub, etc.) takes apīpema to √pī ‘swell’, which morphologically makes sense. But Ge seems to take it rather as a redupl. aor.

to √pā ‘drink’ (“Wir haben ihn … hier getränkt…”), though without explicitly saying so. See also the very parallel passage VIII.99.1, with ápīpyan. Despite the difficulties (amply treated by Kü), I prefer to associate these two forms with √pā.

The transitive -áya-formation pāyáyati ‘makes drink’ is well attested in the RV. It is a little difficult to figure out what a corresponding reduplicated aorist should look like. Since √pā is not an orthodox long-ā root, it doesn’t make a p-causative (type sthāpayati) and therefore would not import the -p- into the redupl. aorist (type átiṣṭhipat). One might expect, based on its -áya-stem, to produce *ápīpayat if thematic (type dīdharat) and *ápīpet (type dīdhar[t]) if athematic, with the weak form to be expected *ápīpima. Whether the form belongs to pī or pā, the full-grade in the root syllable of this form must be secondary, and if it’s not a problem to extend the full grade to the weak form of pī, it should likewise be unproblematic with pā. It is true, however, that the ‘swell’ root is possible and that the forms of the perfect of √pī and the putative redupl. aor. of √pā would be hopelessly mixed up formally and not terribly separate semantically. For ápīpyan in VIII.99.1 see disc. there.


## 08
Ge takes the wolf of ab as a simile, compared with the unexpressed Indra: “Wie der wilde Wolf … wartet er auf seine Zeiten.” But this requires taking cid as a simile marker, which I am loath to do. I consider it a general statement about nature — wolves follow their own patterns, however much they appear to be acting randomly. Indra, though he is apparently uncontrollable, attends to our ritual patterns and will come when called (which is similar to what vs. 7 says -- same yesterday, same today). So, although the behavior of the wolf is a point of comparison for Indra’s behavior, it is not a simile in the narrow sense. A similar comparison but in a real simile is found in VIII.33.8 ... mr̥gó ná vāraṇáḥ, purutrā́caráthaṃ dadhe "Like a wild elephant he has established his wandering [= his territory] in many places," where Indra is compared to a wild beast and the territory is somewhat like the vayúna- here.

On ā́√bhūṣ with vayúna-, see I.182.1.

Ge takes d as a separate clause, apparently supplying a form of √cit ‘appear’ (“erscheine …”), presumably based on citráyā and to be construed with prá.

Although the position of prá is suggestive, I do not see that separating the pādas is necessary, since d fits easily with c.


## 09
Because asya is unaccented, it needs to be construed separately from índrasya. So also Ge.

## 10
My interpretation of pāda a is quite different from Ge’s and starts from the rhetorical structure of the four questions in vss. 9-10. Three of these (9ab, 9cd, 10b) are negative questions, in which the negative is part of the predicate: 9a ákr̥tam, 9c ná śuśruve, 10b ástrtam̥ . 10a also contains a negation, ádhṛṣtāḥ, but in Ge’s tr. it is not predicated: “Was sind seine grossen, unangreifbaren Kräfte?” Furthermore his tr.

implicitly equates neut. sg. kád with fem. pl. táviṣīḥ. These problems can be fixed by taking kád as a question marker, not an interrogative pronoun, and by assuming that the powers in question are not Indra’s (as Ge takes them), but those of Indra’s enemies. The implied answer to the rhetorical question is “no, there exist no powers that Indra can’t assail.” For táviṣī belonging to others, see, e.g., I.80.10 índro vṛtrásya táviṣīṃ nír ahan … The hapax bekanā́ṭa- is an almost textbook example of non-Indo-Aryan phonology (see Kuiper, Aryans), and it seems safest to take it as the name of a people, rather than in the traditional interpretation (going back to the Nirukta VI.26 bekanāṭāḥ khalu kusīdino bhavanti) as “Wucherer” (usurer, profiteer) as Ge does.

For disc. see KEWA and EWA s.v. ### 11
ápūrvyā [sic, not, as in Aufrecht and HvN, ápūrvya] and purūtámāsaḥ play off each other. We may be the latest of many, but our formulations have no predecessors - a variation on the usual theme of the “newest hymn.”


## 12
Ge and Old make heavier weather of ab than seems necessary, motivated in part by tvé rather than tvā in a and the positioning of the verb in b rather than a, near to ūtáyaḥ. Ge supplies a form of √dhā in a, “Zwar werden viele Hoffnungen auf dich (gesetzt),” and takes hávante as passive, “und werden deine Hilfen … angerufen.” But the stem háva- is overwhelmingly transitive. Old suggests taking ūtáyaḥ as accusative pl., which would do even more violence to the grammar. I take the subject of hávante to be āśásaḥ ‘hopes’. As for tvé: although √hū ordinarily takes the accusative, I can imagine a locatival tvé in a more distanced usage: they call towards you, but they do not actually succeed. (Alternatively the tvé could have been influenced by tvé in 13a, in the same metrical position, though metrically distracted.) I then take ūtáyaḥ as a separate existential clause.


## 14
citráyā dhiyā́occurs also in 8d, and the tr. should have been harmonized.

As in vs. 8, I take the dhī́- to be ours, rather than Indra’s, as Ge takes it.
