+++
title = "067"

+++
Ādityas


## 05
A predicative voc. in a question.


## 07
ádbhutainasaḥ is generally taken as a gen. sg., parallel to ánāgasaḥ in b.

But since the only other ex. of this stem modifies the Maruts in V.87.7, I think it likely that it is a nom. pl. modifying the Ādityas. Moreover there is no NOM + ásti construction in c as there are in a and b. There is perhaps too much machinery in the tr., to indicate that it is not the Ādityas’ offenses, but those of others, that cannot deceive or mislead them (=the gods), but given the Ādityas’ character, I think the internal structure of the cmpd would be clear to the audience.


## 08
What to supply with mahé is somewhat up in the air, but some equivalent of Ge’s “Glück” seems harmless enough.

I don’t understand Indra’s role here. Is the idea that Varuṇa & Co. should not be getting any ideas about tying us up, because only Indra gets to do such things? But this would run counter to Varuṇa’s role, at least in later Vedic, of binding offenders.

In any case the theme of binding recurs in this hymn; cf. vss. 14, 18.


## 09
In ab I supply a transitive form of √mṛc ‘harm’ to be construed with the cognate instr. root noun. The fact that the verb of pāda c, (abhí prá) mṛkṣata, though derived from √mṛś ‘touch’, could technically be an s-formation to √mṛc makes the generation of a verb from that root easier, and in fact we might consider mṛkṣata as representing both ‘harm’ and ‘seize’. Old notes the phonological play.

In its other two occurrences aviṣyú- has the negative sense ‘greedy’ and is clearly related to avasá- ‘food’, etc. (see EWA s.v. avasá-), but here it must be positive. I assume a portmanteau pun, combining ‘greedy’ with an association with √av ‘help’, resulting in ‘greedy[=eager] to help’.


## 12
Since anehás- is an adjective, a noun needs to be supplied with it (contra Ge, Re). I supply ‘shelter’ on the basis of VIII.18.21 (also a hymn to the Ādityas) containing aneháḥ … trivárūtham … chardíḥ, with the várūtha- and chardís- found in our vss. 3b, 6b.

## 12-13
The correlative of yé in 13 is té in 14, but this unremarkable pairing actually conceals a bit of trickery: yé has 3rd ps. reference, but té has 2nd ps. reference, with the impv. mumócata -- with a change in person in midstream that is not evident until the verb is reached at the end of pāda b.


## 15
The doubling of 1st pl. pronouns, naḥ … asmát can be interpr. in two different ways. On the one hand, naḥ can be just a Wackernagel-position placeholder, doubled by the more emphatic (and case-marked) asmát later in the vs. Of course enclitic naḥ is not technically supposed to represent an ablative, but I think that all bets are off with Wackernagel-position pronominal enclitics. Or the naḥ can actually be an accusative, construed with ájaghnuṣī.


## 18
On the phrase návyaṃ sányase see comm. ad VIII.24.26, with argument for supplying ‘life’ with návyam.

## 21
The preverb ví is excessively represented in this vs., with 5 occurrences (including víṣvak) and its usual contrastive partner sám in the middle. Note also the figure … aṃhatím# … sámhitam#.

aṃhatím also makes a faint ring with the same word in 2a.
