+++
title = "068"

+++
Indra


## 02
With Old (and implicitly Ge), read as a compound víśvayāmate; this requires no emendation to the Saṃhitā text, only the erasure of the word boundary in the Pp.


## 03
The hapax participle jmāyánt- is clearly built to the adverbial instr. jmā́ belonging to the ‘earth’ word (kṣám-, etc.). The pári preceding it can be read both with the verb īyatuḥ and with jmāyánt-. Cf. párijman- and EWA s.v. As for what it means for a mace to encircle the earth, it is probably a measure of its size, which then indicates that Indra’s hands are even larger because they encircle the mace.


## 04
Although the sense of this verse is fairly clear, the second half-verse displays some syntactic intricacies, namely, what I consider two conjoined NPs that interact with each other in various ways and for which there is only one overt conjunction, ca in somewhat anomalous position. I take the two pāda-initial instrumentals évaiḥ and ūtī́as forming one NP, with both indicating qualities of Indra’s (differently Ge, who takes évaiḥ with the verb: “rufe ich … mit Eifer”), and the two pāda-final genitives carṣaṇīnā́m and ráthānām as a second NP, dependent on either ūtī́alone or évaiḥ … ūtī́jointly. The single ca connects the two instrumentals in an X ca Y construction. This seems to me superior to Klein’s interpretation (DGRV I.172, 192-93) as a ca XY construction, with the ca conjoining the two genitives. For évaiḥ as the quality of a god, not an adverb, see, e.g., X.67.11.


## 07
The accusative phrase in c, pūrvyā́m ánuṣṭutim, makes syntactic trouble here. See disc. by Old, who lays out various possibilities. Ge takes the hemistich as containing a zeugma, with (as far as I can determine) ī́śe read differently with the two pādas -- taking an accusative in c and meaning “Anrecht haben,” while taking a genitive in d and meaning “herrschen über.” But among the numerous occurrences of ī́ś-, I know of none with the meaning or case frame proposed for c. (For further disc.

see comm. ad VII.32.18.) Old suggests either supplying another verb (acodat?) or taking the phrase as an Inhaltsakk. (though in what sense of that term I don’t understand). I take it either as a haplologized *ánu ánuṣṭutim or as an acc. of respect.

(Note that Old rejects Ludwig’s suggestion to read *ánu ṣṭutím, but this would be another possibility in my opinion. What perhaps speaks against that is the other occurrence of ánuṣṭuti- in nearby VIII.63.8.)

## 08
I add a parenthetical “other” in ab, because Indra’s fellowship is something we always aspire to (see vs. 11 below), and so to state baldly that no one has achieved it seems defeatist.


## 10
I take īmahe to √yā ‘beseech’, not ‘drive’ (contra Ge “… nahen wir…”).

There is a missing middle term between ab and c, namely what we are imploring Indra for - presumaby the same help that he gave to Purumāyya.


## 14
Ge supplies ‘horses’ with the numbers of pāda a, separating them from the men of b: “… sechs (Rosse), je zwei und zwei, (und) die Herren…,” because the next verse definitely has six horses. But Hoffmann’s (1967: 233) suggestion that there are six men, who are the leaders of the horses, makes the verse less jerky and avoids having to supply both a noun (horses) and a conjunction (and).

## 15-17
The donors of the various gifts are generally in the locative here and so would be properly translated “bei,” “chez,” “at (the hands of) …” or the like, but a series of locatival tr. is simply too heavy and awkward.

I have made no effort to sort out the internal relationships among the patrons

- a topic more than amply discussed in the sec. lit.


## 17
vadhúmant- means literally ‘having women, brides’, but Ge raises the question whether in this context it really refers to mares. I think this unlikely.

Dānastutis regularly lump horses and female humans together. Very parallel is I.126.3 śyāvāḥ ... vadhū́mantaḥ ... ráthāsaḥ, “dusky (horses) and chariots carrying brides.”


## 18
I take the ruddy female (áruṣī) as a reference to Dawn, with the bull accompanying her as the sun. This makes sense in a dakṣinā context, since the priestly gifts are distributed at the dawn sacrifice. Ge rather as a mare.
