+++
title = "069"

+++
Indra


## 01
It is necessary to supply a verb for ab; Ge “Traget” but I supply “chant” on the basis of the beginning of the second tṛca, 4ab abhí prá … arca, and the insistent repetition in vs. 8: árcata prā́rcata, … árcata# / árcantu … arcata#. Pāda a is essentially identical to VIII.7.1a prá yád vas triṣṭúbham íṣam, where the verb governing the acc. is ákṣarat ‘has let flow’ (pāda b), which is not possible here. The “Triṣṭubh refreshment” is obviously the praise hymn; interestingly neither this passage nor VIII.7 is in Triṣṭubh meter.

The second hemistich is somewhat obscure, in part because, as Ge points out, it is not clear who the subject is. Perhaps the “Triṣṭubh refreshment” (that is, the praise), or the drop (that is, the soma) to which it is chanted, or the poet. (I favor the praise hymn.) The pair dhī́- and púraṃdhī- appears elsewhere together (VIII.92.15, X.65.13-14). Ge takes them here as names of the goddesses of religious poetry and of the dakṣinā respectively. In VIII.92.15 I take them as qualities that Indra confers on us, but here at least the dhī́- is probably that of the poet(s). Perhaps they are a reciprocal, rather than parallel, pair: we receive plenty in exchange for insight (as in V.41.6). The interpretation is further complicated by the fact that ā́vivāsaeverywhere else takes an accusative, often in conjunction with an instr. of means: “seek to attract X with Y” (e.g., VIII.15.1 índraṃ gīrbhís taviṣám ā́vivāsata), but there is no accusative immediately available. (Though vaḥ could technically be an accusative, that interpretation seems unlikely here.) However, this is of course an Indra hymn, and in thinking about this verse again, I have concluded that Indra should be supplied here as the default object, and therefore for the publ. tr. I would substitute “With your visionary thought and with plenitude it [=hymn] is seeking to entice (Indra) here, in order to gain wisdom.” Cf. VIII.3.18 imé hí te kārávo vāvaśúr dhiyā́, víprāso medhásātaye “For these bards, inspired poets, have bellowed for you [=Indra] for the winning of wisdom with their insight,” with both dhiyā́and medhásātaye in a similar context, where poets seek Indra.


## 02
Another verse with unclear reference: neither the 2nd singular subject of iṣudhyasi nor the bull and cows are clearly identified, and it is complicated by the fact that there are also two occurrences of 2nd plural vaḥ in the verse. I take the subject to be the same as that of ā́vivāsati in 1d, namely the praise hymn, with the common switch of persons. That the praise hymn is in reality inanimate is not in RVic discourse an obstacle to addressing it. The 2nd pl. vaḥ is then the same group of poets / ritual officiants as in 1a and 1c. As for the bull (nadá-, a and b) and the páti- (c), I agree with Ge (n. 2) that it can be either Indra or soma. In the latter case, the referent is then the same as the índu- ‘drop’ that was the target of the hymn in 1ab; in the latter, the same as the unexpressed object of ā́vivāsati in 1cd. The cows are easier to account for if soma is the referent: they would then be the mixing milk as so often. If the bull is Indra, the cows may be the cows he brings us as largesse or praise hymns conceived of as cows (many words for hymn are feminine), and the sexual tinge of ab would be a nod to Indra’s hypersexuality. Probably both referents are meant.

On iṣudhyasi see comm. ad I.128.6 and my forthcoming article “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.” Since I analyze

*iṣudh- as a root noun cmpd ‘aim an arrow’, a metaphor for aiming praise towards a
divine target, the nadám … pátim must refer to the god receiving praise. Indra or Soma are both possible, of course.


## 03
The first two pādas seem rather briskly to clear up the uncertainties of the previous verse, or give at least one reading thereof: soma, the cows that give the milk to mix with soma, and Indra (though not by name) are all present, and their relationships are clear.

The connection of the last half of the verse to what precedes is not clear, as Ge also points out. The birth is likely to be that of soma, but why are we now concerned with “the clans of the gods”? I tentatively assume that the gods are awaiting their invitation to the soma-drinking in their usual abodes. Somewhat later in the hymn (11b) all the gods partake of the soma.

There is number discrepancy between pl. triṣú and sg. rocané, as also in the identical pāda in I.105.5b. On the basis of expressions like I.102.8 trī́ṇi rocanā́, V.69.1 trī́rocanā́, I.149.4 trī́rocanā́ni the two words must be construed together and a truncation of rocanéṣu must be assumed. I don’t quite know why, but Bloomfield (RR ad I.105.5) points out that rocané diváḥ is a frequent cadence, and it therefore may have imposed itself formulaically in this phrase. Also the alternation between trī́ and trī́ṇi and rocanā́and rocanā́ni in the formula may have made an alternative rocané to rocanéṣu seem acceptable. In fact loc. pl. rocanéṣu is only attested once.


## 04
Although this verse belongs to a different tṛca, it seems to provide an alternative resolution to the puzzle of vs. 2, somewhat different from that given in 3ab. Here Indra is definitively identified as a gópati- ‘lord of cows’, paraphrasing 2cd pátim … ághnyānāṃ dhenūnā́m.

Ge takes yáthā vidé as “wie er bekannt ist,” but this tag phrase regularly refers to the traditional way of producing poetry or performing ritual. See, e.g., I.132.2, VIII.13.14, IX.86.32.

satyásya sátpatim is probably a pseudo-pun, given that by many accounts (including ours) sát-pati- derives from sáts-pati-, with the first member a reduction of sádas- ‘seat, settlement’. See EWA s.v. If sát- belongs to √as (as some think), it is a real pun.


## 06
Pāda c is presumably a reference to the Vala cave, as Ge points out.


## 07
Another elliptical 1st dual construction; for disc. see VIII.62.11.

Ge and Hoffmann, inter alia, take bradhnásya viṣṭápam to refer to the height or top of the sun. The phrase occurs also in IX.113.10. bradhná- in VIII.4.13-14 seems to refer to soma. Since viṣṭáp- several times occurs with samudrásya (VIII.34.13, 97.5=IX.12.6, IX.107.14), something liquid makes sense, rather than wandering around on top of the sun. Furthermore, at least in IX.12.6 (and probably IX.107.14) the “sea” in this expression is clearly soma. I also think that it works better as acc. of extent, rather than as goal, since the goal is the grhám ̥ .

For the ceremonial aspects of the second hemistich see publ. intro. Note that sákhi- is an integral part of the “seventh step” mantra at the wedding ceremony: sakhā saptapadī bhava “Become a comrade of the seventh step” (ŚGS I.14.6, etc.; see Jamison 1996: 121). Contra Hoffmann (1967: 255) I separate tríḥ from saptá, and consider the former to refer to drinking soma at the three pressings (so also Ge). I also take the cardinal saptá as if it were the ordinal saptátha-. For the corresponding verse, see 16 below.


## 09
It is likely that all three of these obscure words, gárgara-, godhā́-, and píṅgā-, are musical instruments, but further specification is difficult. VIII.69.11-12: I do not understand why Varuṇa is mentioned specially. Perhaps because of the waters of 11d and the rivers of 12b?


## 12
I take sudevá- as a bahuvrīhi, as su-compounds with this metrical shape and accentuation generally are (contra Ge’s “ein guter Gott”). The gods mentioned in 11b may be part of Varuṇa’s retinue.


## 13
Interpretations of this verse vary, and cd is characterized as “dunkel” by both Ge and Old. I take the verse as a series of relative clauses referring to (unnamed) Indra, leading up to the proclamation of Indra in 14ab. The relative clauses are interrupted by an exclamatory tád íd vápuḥ “just this is the marvel!” in c.

Ge takes takváḥ as a PN (rejected by Mayr. PN; see also EWA s.v. TAK), but I see no reason to separate the stem from tákvan-, takva-vī́-, and takvavī́ya-, all of which seem to refer to the movements of birds of prey.

I take upamā́(so Pp., or upamā́ḥ) in the same way as in I.31.15, viz., as a root noun compound ‘measure’. See disc. there.


## 14
Ge takes ohate as reflexive, but I prefer a passive interpretation here.

The second half of the verse segues into the Emuṣa myth prominent in this part of VIII. For disc. see publ. intro.


## 15
Note the extreme diminutivization in arbhakó ná kumārakáḥ, signalled by the two -ká-suffixed forms. Presumably the point, in this account of Boyhood Deeds, is to emphasize how small and weak he was to accomplish such deeds.

Both Ge and Old are troubled by vibhukrátu- as a qualifier of the buffalo. Old goes so far as to suggest it should be nominative, but was attracted into the accusative by the preceding accusatives (which, note, are not even adjacent or in the same pāda). This seems unlikely (and unworthy of the usually punctilious Old). Ge also manoeuvres the adjective into referring not to the krátu- of the buffalo, but rather to that of the father and mother: “Er kochte das Büffeltier für Vater und Mutter, das ihrem Verlangen genügte.” I do not understand how he is interpreting the vibhu-, nor do I see any difficulty with assigning the quality named in the compound to the buffalo: that the buffalo is formidable makes the feat of a tiny boy cooking it (and presumably first catching it) all the greater.


## 16
The first hemistich seems addressed to the present-day Indra, recalling his boyhood deeds recounted in 15ab.

The second half matches vs. 7, with the same proposition that Indra and I (=poet, in my opinion; Ge rather Viṣṇu) should become comrades (both times with sacevahi). The referent of the multiple accusatives in cde is disputed. Old suggests the sun, in part because sahásrapād- is used of the sun already in AV VII.41.2. Ge also considers the sun the referent of the accusatives in cd, “den himmlischen, tausendstrahligen, rötlichen (Sūrya),” but separates those in e into a separate constituent (as far as I can tell), “den fehlerlosen, zum Heile führenden (Weg) folgen,” because pāda e is found in VI.51.16ab ápi pánthām aganmahi, svastigā́m anehásam qualifying ‘path’. I prefer to read all the accusatives together and take the path (of VI.51.16) as the referent. This also involves interpreting sahásrapādam as ‘having a thousand steps’, not ‘… a thousand feet’. This recalls vs. 7 “… become comrades at the seven(th) step…,” and I would suggest that the “thousand step” version plays off the previous one, indicating that our comradeship will last even longer. The path itself may be the soma (see disc. of 7) that facilitated the establishment of our comradeship; see 7c.

## 17-18
Note the responsion of 17b … āsate# and 18d … āśata#.
