+++
title = "070"

+++
Indra


## 02
Pādas b and c are difficult. The superficially most natural interpretation is to take the two together, as Ge does (“in dessen Hand … die gerngesehene Keule gelegt ward…”; so also Old), but the putative verb in this relative clause, dhāyi in c, is unaccented. If we take this lack of accent seriously, and I think we should, some other solution has to be found for the relative clause in pāda b, a task made all the more challenging by the disputed form vidhartári. This particular form appears twice (also IX.47.4) and formally belongs to the agent noun vidhartár- (voc. sg. 1x, nom. sg. 4x) ‘distributor, apportioner’. The -tári forms are nonetheless generally taken as infinitives. Tichy (1995: 59-61), by contrast, takes them as loc. sg. of a verbal abstract (here “in dessen Hand, wenn es ans Verteilen geht, ein weiteres Mal die sehenswerte Keule gelegt wird” [p. 60]), and others take it as nom. sg. neut. (See disc.

of these various possibilities with earlier lit. in Old and in Keydana [Infin. 196-99].) Keydana, at least for this verse, suggests that vidhartári is the (infinitival?) subject of the nominal relative clause, yásya its specifier, and dvitā́a predicate adverb: “Der Hand wurde die Keule dargereicht (pāda c), deren Austeilung ein weiteres Mal [erfolgt] (pāda b)” (199 n. 31). I consider the form to be a locative (like Tichy), but a locative not to an abstract but to the agent noun it appears to be and coreferential with Indra in pāda a. Alternatively it could refer to a third party, who is responsible for the return of Indra’s mace; this seems to be Old’s favored solution: “beim (Welt)ordner,” who is responsible for equipping Indra with the mace. In the absence of mythical context we cannot be certain. Though I have added the parenthetical “(in the hand of),” this tr. is an English makeshift for the German bei or French chez, which both render such locatives more efficiently. The statement in b, that the mace has been returned to Indra, is then restated in pāda c more clearly.

The datives hástāya and divé instead of the locatives that might be expected are curious.


## 03
The identity of “him” in “No one will catch up with him…” is not sufficiently signalled in the publ. tr. I take it to refer to the successful sacrificer (cf.

VIII.31.17), who ritually strengthens and thus “has created” Indra. However, the perfect cakā́ra could instead signal mythic time; both Ge and Old believe this refers to the original creator of Indra, as in IV.17.4. The reference to Indra’s birth in 4cd may support their position.


## 04
In my view this verse is structurally parallel to vs. 2: pāda a continues the previous verse; b is a nominal relative clause; and cd may or may not go with b, but have unaccented verbs. Ge (n. to 2b) and Old also consider the verses parallel, but in the case of both verses they think that bc belong together despite the unaccented verbs of c(d). In separating b and c here I must supply a noun with the fem.

adjectives mahī́r urujráyaḥ -- and choose ‘waters’, since pl. ā́pas, apás is common with mahī́ḥ; ‘rivers’ would also be possible, so Ge, who seems to take mahī́ḥ simply as a designation of rivers (“die breitströmenden Flüsse”) without comment.


## 05
The conjoined NPs in ab display a neat chiasmus: dyā́vaḥ … śatáṃ, śatám bhū́mīḥ. This may help account for the placement of the utá after the second term (indeed after the entire second term: śatám bhū́mīr utá). Although XY utá structures are by no means uncommon (see Klein DGRV I.344-53), they are considerably rarer than the standard X utá Y type.

In cd there are two parallel nominal subjects, pl. sahásraṃ sū́ryāḥ and du.

ródasī, and neither matches the sg. verb ánu … aṣṭa in number. Several solutions have been proposed. BR (see Old) and Gr take ródasī as singular, but all other examples of sg. ródasī (and more common rodasī́) refer to the goddess of that name; when ródasī refers to the world-halves, it is always dual. Old also cites Ge Komm for the view that the sg. verb was influenced by sahásram. I am inclined to assume that the sg. verb split the difference between the plural and dual subjects, and it is also possible that the construction was somehow syntactically calqued on the inherited neuter plural subject + singular verb construction (though neither of the subjects is neuter). It’s also worth noting that the root aor. 3rd du. middle of √(n)aś is not attested, and in fact, acdg. to Macdonell, Vedic Gr., the only 2nd or 3rd du. mid. root aor. attested is adhītām (X.4.6, √dhā) -- so the poet may have been a bit insecure about what the du. form ought to be (*aśātām? *aṣṭāṃ?), and the pl. sū́ryāḥ may have been too distant in the vs. to allow the 3rd pl. aśata to be used instead.


## 06
Ge takes the loc. gómati vrajé as a loc. absolute (“wenn es sich um rindergefüllte Hürde handelt”). By using the Engl. idiom “help someone to something” I may be stretching Sanskrit syntax further than is legitimate. Though see Gr, definition 4 s.v. av: “jemandem [A.] wozu [D., L.] verhelfen.” Unfortunately this is the only passage he places under that rubric with a loc.; the others have datives.

However, in Rivelex vol. I the Deep Case Frame for avi , subsection 1d / 1da, tags a number of other possible such passages with this structure (not all of which I would so interpret).


## 07
For étagva- as ‘winning dappled cows’, see Thieme, Studien 67-68 and EWA s.v. The second hemistich is unconnected to the first; its two rel. clauses attach to the next verse.


## 08
Though as just noted, 7cd should be construed with this verse, the main clause to which those rel. clauses should be attached is incomplete - having a referent tám for the yáḥ of 7c, but no main verb. Ge supplies “rufet,” which seems the simplest solution, extracted from the two forms of hávyaḥ in cd.

Gr, Ge take ā́raṇa- as ‘depths’, presumably as a contextual antonym to gā́dha- ‘ford’, putatively < *‘shallow’ (but see EWA s.v.). But there seems no good reason to separate ā́raṇa- from áraṇa- ‘alien, foreign’ and its relatives, esp. since a ford is a ‘shallow’ only indirectly. The other occurrence of ā́raṇa- (I.112.6) is not in an antonymic context; Ge renders it “in der Grube” (pit), but there is no external support for this tr.


## 09
The lexeme ud √mṛś is found only here in early Vedic, but like other combinations of √mṛś ‘touch’ + preverb, it seems to have a slightly slangy sense. Gr “jemand [A.] emporheben zu [D.],” but the sense of touch is lost. Ge “Streck fein (die Hand) für uns aus,” which fails to render both the root meaning and the preverb.

My “shape us up” attempts to render both, with the sense “make us ready/worthy to receive.” The insistent úd here, opening pādas a, c, and d, may be meant to contrast with ní in the following verse (pādas b, d).

Note the alliteration: ab … mahé, mṛśasva … and esp. cd … mahyaí maghavan magháttaye, … mahé# This is the culmination of a play on mah- and magha- forms in the central part of the hymn: 6a mahinā́, 6c maghavan, 8a mahó mahā́yyam.


## 10
The lexeme ní √tṛp occurs only here (in all of Sanskrit, as far as I can tell). I interpret the ní as reversing the meaning of the root verb, as sometimes elsewhere (see Jamison 1983: 86 for some other examples) - hence ‘be unsatisfied’ < √tṛp ‘be satisfied’. Scar also seems to interpret the verb in this fashion (“… bist du unzufrieden”), but does not comment on why. Gr ‘verzehren’ (consume), Old ‘sich sättigen’. Since tṛmpáti is ordinarily construed with a genitive, I take tvānídaḥ as a gen. sg., not acc. pl., as Gr and Ge take it. Scar allows either possibility, and Old favors the gen. My interpretation is thus rather distinct from Ge’s “du hast deine Schmäher satt” (have your fill of), though his also conveys a negative sense.

The girding motif of c must indicate some kind of preparation for battle, but what exactly the equipment and procedure were is not clear.

I have, reluctantly, interpreted the injunctive śiśnathaḥ in d as an imperative, as also in VIII.24.25. So also Ge in both passages. It would be possible here (less so in VIII.24.25) to interpret it modally “you will jab down…” or even as a timeless statement “you jab down…” Note the play of #t u vám…, #t u vanído … / … tuvinṛmna

## 11
Ge takes the sváḥ sákhā to refer to the enemy’s comrade, but given the dual dvandva voc. índrāparvatā (3x) “o Indra and Mountain,” it seems more likely to be Indra’s. In those passages I take “mountain” as a designation of Indra’s mace.


## 12
Indra’s generous handful of cows in this final verse before the sarcastic dānastuti implicitly contrasts with the stinginess of Śara, who gives only one calf (vs. 15).


## 15
See comment on 12. The thematic connection between the verses is underscored by the presence of the verb ‘grab’ in each, but note that vs. 15, part of the hymn proper, has the older form √grabh (sáṃ gṛbhāya), while the dānastuti, belonging to a more popular level of language, has the younger √grah (-gṛ́hya).
