+++
title = "072"

+++
Agni or Praise of Oblations See the publ. intro. for the general structure and manifold difficulties of this hymn. For disc. of the possible ritual details, see Old, Ge, Re, etc. For the most part I will not comment on such here.


## 02
asya could also refer to Manu’s companionship and be tr. “in his companionship,” but in IX the companionship of soma is mentioned (IX.61.29=66.14, 107.19; cf. also I.91.14, IV.28.1).


## 03
There are various ways to configure the places where “they seek.” I take antár in a pregnant sense, referring to the interior of the subject; the search expands to jáne, and finally to the place “beyond inspired thought” (paró manīṣayā). Since this phrase is also found in V.17.2, the two words must go together, whatever they are trying to convey.

## 04
atītape has been subject to a number of conflicting analyses (esp. passive or transitive with unexpressed subj.), but all seem to start with a 3rd sg. with anomalous ending -e. I see no reason why it cannot be a 1st sg., with the proper ending for a thematic medial reduplicated aorist. Although there are no other 1st singulars around, referents are ricocheting around everywhere in this hymn, and as indicated in the publ. intro., the vss. do not show close connections to each other.


## 06
Gr. assigns dāmā́to an otherwise unattested long-ā́stem and glosses it as ‘Seil’, but it could just as well be the nom. sg. masc. to an -n-stem *dāmán- ‘binder’ formed to neut. dā́man- ‘bond’ (like m. brahmán- to neut. bráhman-).


## 11
The hapax abhyā́ram is glossed by Gr “zur Hand, bereit,” and Ge and Re follow suit. Old suggests that it’s an absolutive, without specifying to what root or what it should mean. Still I think he has a better chance of being right than the others.

The -am gerund takes vṛddhi of the root and accent on the root syllable (see, e.g., Whitney Gr. §995, and AV abhyākrā́mam). This form could well belong to abhí √ṛ (as in fact Gr also suggest) and mean ‘going towards’.


## 12
The first pāda contains a lovely sound sequence: (g)ā́va (up)āva(t)āva(tam).

The hapax rapsúdā is difficult. Ge refuses to tr.; Old suggests a connection with the rare lapsudín- (TS, etc.) ‘having a beard’. Although the phonology would obviously work, the semantic connection is shaky, and lapsudín- has no etymology either. I favor a suggestion of Re’s, that the word here is connected with the secondary root √rapś, extracted from virapśá- ‘abundance’, which in turn derives from *vīra-p(a)śu-, by most lights (see comm. ad I.122.4). The first part of the word (rapsú-) can be seen as preserving the -u-, which the other forms don’t, but losing the ví (for which cf. rapśád-ūdhan- 'with teeming udders' [II.34.5, of dhenus]). The palatal sibilant cluster (-pś-) was also regularized to one containing the dental sibilant (for possible parallel ex. see rāspiná- I.122.4, with metathesis as well). The second part of the word would be the root noun to √dā ‘give’, in the nom. sg. fem., modified by mahī́, indicating a vessel (perhaps ukhā́?). Although we should expect a nom. sg. - dāḥ, the final may have been lost either because it was simply reanalyzed as a fem.

stem with suffixal -ā- or because it was lost in continuous recitation (before the pāda-initial vowel of pāda c) and not restored redactionally.


## 15
I take kṛnvaté as governing three different objects, dharúṇam, námaḥ, and svàḥ, each with a slightly different relationship with the verb.


## 17
ā́dade is ambiguous between 1st and 3rd sg. Ge. opts for 3rd, Re for 1st , and Old waffles. I have chosen “I” but with no strong preference either way.
