+++
title = "074"

+++
Agni


## 01
Nom. pl. part. vājayántaḥ (b) and 1st sg. stuṣé (d) represents the not unusual number mixture of a singular poet speaking for and with the other ritual officiants. Cf. VIII.66.1 for similar number mismatch.

Pāda-final vácaḥ I take (with Ge) as a truncated instr. standing for vácasā. For disc. see comm. ad VIII.39.2. However, in this context, since √stu can, though rarely, take an acc. of the praise, it is possible (with Old and Re [though Re seems to recant in his n.]) to take it as obj. of stuṣé in a construction different from the dominant agním … stuṣé. However, the acc. of the god praised continues in the next two verses, and I think it unlikely that this focus would be interrupted by “I speak a speech as praise.”


## 03
In … údyatā / havyā́ny aírayat diví the ppl. údyatā is essentially proleptic: “raised the oblations (so that they were) lifted up to heaven.” For a parallel phrase see X.8.2.


## 04
édhate is a pun. Though its general purport is ‘thrive’, it is still transparently related to √idh ‘kindle’, and the thriving is a result of flaring up, as of a flame.


## 09
The publ. tr. should read “Brilliant with its brilliance …” and “at the overcoming of obstacles.”


## 10
The vs. is structured as an acc. phrase referring to Agni, with no governing verb. It is probably best to take it as loosely anticipating the rel. clauses beginning with yám in the other two verses of the tṛca (yáṃ tvā 11a, 12a). That the accusatives in ab, d belong in a virtual rel. clause is signalled by pāda c with a rel.

clause in the gen. (yásya …).

My interpr. of pāda a differs from the standard, which takes -prā́- as ‘fill’ and construes áśvam … gā́m as a simile: “filling the chariot [with goods, vel sim.] (as) a horse (or) cow (does).” This conjures up an unintentionally comic picture in a physical sense, and even in the attenuated sense this interpr. presumably sketches, that a winning horse or productive cow generates goods that would fill a chariot (see Ge’s n. 10a), the structure and meaning of the phrase are muddy. I follow a suggestion of Re’s, given in his n. to the passage but not reflected in his tr., that the sequence is a reduction of *aśvaprā́m íd goprā́ṃ rathaprā́m and that prā́- belongs with forms like pūrdhí ‘give!’ (Mayrhofer’s PARI2 ).

The u-present tū́rvatha here is enclosed by two occurrences of related (vṛtra- )tū́rya- (9c, 12c) ‘overcoming of obstacles’, but though tū́rva- does on occasion take an acc. of what is overcome (cf. the same VP in VIII.99.6 vṛtrám … tū́rvasi), here “overcome (Agni’s) claims to fame” is excluded by sense, since the poets shouldn’t seek to outdo Agni, and it must mean something like “help to triumph.” In pāda d I supply *gṛṇánti as the verb with nom. kṛṣtáyaḥ on the basis of the next hymn VIII.75.10 grṇ̥ ánti deva kr̥ṣṭáyaḥ (see also girā́in the next vs. of this hymn, 11a). It is possible that this subj./verb complex governs the whole verse, save for pāda c with its 2nd pl. verb and gen. rel. cl. -- thus, “(whom) the separate peoples (hymn) as the one bestowing the chariot …”


## 11
The hapax cániṣthad, though fairly clearly a 3rd sg. act. injunctive, is not regularly formed. Whitney (Roots) calls it “plainly corrupt”; Old discusses it at some length and floats various possibilities. Whatever its source, it clearly patterns with the superlative cániṣṭhā in the same metrical position in 8b (so Old, Re). The standard solution, which comes in various guises, has been to posit a more regularly formed verb that has been re-formed (/corrupted) because of the proximity of the splv., either at the time of composition or redactionally. This is the tack Old chooses; of the various underlying possibilities he considers, he favors an -iṣ-aor. subjunctive

*cániṣat (cf. 2nd du. caniṣṭám). See also Hoffmann (MSS 2 [1952/1957] = Aufs. 367;
repeated by Narten, s-aor. 111), who considers the contamination a product of the poet.


## 13
Contra Gr, but with Ge and Re, I take huvānáḥ as passive.

I take mṛkṣā́to √mṛj ‘stroke’ and in the same slangy sense as úd √mṛj in I.126.4.


## 15
The intensive áva dediśam here seems to have real “intensive” force; a frequentative reading seems excluded or at least forced, as if the poet were constantly scolding the River (“I keep pointing out to you …”).
