+++
title = "075"

+++
Agni


## 01
Although it might at first seem odd that Agni’s horses best summon the gods, the horses are presumably the plumes of smoke, and as they ascend to heaven, they inform the gods of the sacrifice.

## 02
This is the only occurrence of śrád- outside the inherited univerbated idiom śrád √dhā ‘trust/put trust in’. As I have discussed elsewhere, ‘trust’ is often specifically trust in the efficacy of the sacrifice, and I think that’s the meaning being tapped here: realize our trust in the sacrifice’s success with tangible results.


## 03
The pleonastically suffixed yáviṣṭhi ya- beside the regular splv. yáviṣṭhaowes its suffix entirely to metrical considerations. All 15 occurrences of the stem are pāda-final in a Jagatī or dimeter line and thus provide a text-book iambic cadence.

The unextended yáviṣṭha- is not as rigidly placed, but is still often pāda-final in a Triṣṭubh cadence.


## 05
The standard tr. take tám as a ref. to Agni, who is then the equivalent in the frame of nemím in the simile; so “bend him here as craftsmen bend a felly.” In the publ. tr. I take the frame/simile relation to be an example of case disharmony, with ā́namasva intransitive/reflexive in the frame (“bend (yourself) here”) and transitive in the simile (“as craftsment bend a felly”). This is based in part on the fact that medial forms of √nam (outside the 1st ps.) are intransitive, and this interpr. also makes better sense of the voc. aṅgiraḥ: in the sg., áṅgiras- is used almost exclusively of Agni and never, as far as I know, of a human poet/priest as it would be here if a poet/priest is the subj. of ā́namasva. But I failed to remember that nemí- is said to be feminine, and therefore tám should not qualify it. I am still unwilling to give up my interpr., however, and would note first that at least in the RV there are no diagnostic passages where nemí- must be feminine, that is, no passages containing unambiguous feminine adjectives modifying it. And as a short -i-stem, it does not look feminine.

So I would claim either that it is being treated as a masc. in this passage or that redactionally initial *tā́ṃ was changed to tám; there are no metrical implications.


## 07
On ápāka- see comm. ad I.110.2.


## 08
Ge sees cows as the referent of the fem. bathers in b, which are, in his interpr., leaving their calves behind as they bathe. Although I do not know about the bathing habits of cows before modern animal husbandry (and Google is no help here), I doubt that they abandoned their calves to go splash in the river -- and I also doubt that Ge knew much about this topic either. Moreover, having bathing cows abandoning their calves in b and non-bathing cows doing the same in c seems poetically clumsy. Rather I follow Re in taking the rosy bathers of b to be the dawns (though he still sneaks in the cows in his tr. “vaches-aurores”). As he points out, Dawn arises from her bath in V.80.5, and usrá- in the fem. pl. is regularly used of dawns. I think there is a hint of coquetry and teasing here: a group of girls bathing in a river, surprised by some young men, with the girls flashing a bit of skin and then running off in fits of giggles. The girls-bathing motif is fairly widespread: the Gopis and Kṛṣṇa come to mind, as well as Nausicaa and her friends in the Odyssey, and nearer to home, the Apsarases engage in water play in X.95.7-9.

## 10
The standard tr. take námaḥ as obj. of gṛṇánti and ab as a single clause (“they hymn homage to …”). But √gṝ doesn’t otherwise take as object the content of the hymn; Gr must make up a special category (8) for this passage. And námaḥ + DAT is a well-represented construction.


## 11
The publ. tr. “…you will toil for wealth for us, for our quest for cattle” makes the two “for” phrases sound parallel, though they are not in Sanskrt (acc. rayím, dat. gáviṣṭaye). The intent is that Agni should work hard to obtain wealth for us, which we can use in our quest for cattle (that is, further wealth).

Pāda c is an almost comically economical etymological figure: úrukṛd urú naḥ kṛdhi.


## 12
This vs. relies on an untranslatable pun on the root √vṛj ‘twist’, in two different idioms: párā √vṛj ‘shun, avoid’ (< ‘twist around’) and sám √vṛj ‘twist together’ à ‘gather up’ of winnings at dice (hence my ‘takings’).


## 14
Technically speaking, the genitives yásya … namasvínaḥ … ádurmakhasya vā depend on śámīm, but it is almost impossible to render this in parsable English (“the labor of which homage-offerer or not stingy one Agni has enjoyed …”).
