+++
title = "076"

+++
Indra


## 01
The position and function of ná in c are somewhat troubling. If, as seems likely, it is the simile marker, its position should mark marútvantam as the simile “like one accompanied by the Maruts,” but this makes no sense, since Indra’s being accompanied by the Maruts for real is the insistent point of this hymn. It therefore must be construed with the following infinitival vṛñjáse and have an “as if” sense (so Ge), rather than participating in a strict simile structure. I attribute the flipping of the word order to the fact that simile-marking ná seems to be blocked from pāda-final position. See comm. ad X.21.1 and X.111.7. This phenomenon was already noted by Ge; see his n. 4a to IV.27.4. The only counterexample I have found is VII.68.8 It might also be possible to take vṛñjáse as a truncation of *párivṛñjase and the ná as the negative, “for (him) not to avoid (us),” but there is no model for this nor any reason to assume truncation.


## 12
The last pāda presents some difficulties: the function of the ablative índrāt, the syntactic affinity of pári (preverb with mame or postposition with índrāt?), and the sense of tanvàm. Ge takes índrāt as an ablative of comparison (“habe ich im Vergleich mit Indra zu klein bemessen”). His “zu klein” must render tanvàm, which I assume he takes, with Gr, as belonging to an adj. tanú- ‘thin’ in the fem., rather than to the fem. noun tanū́- ‘body, self’. But even if we were to accept this analysis of tanvàm, it would still be a positive, not a comparative. It would be possible to take pári as a postposition with índrāt in the meaning ‘from’, but despite the positioning I am inclined to take it with the verb mame because pári √mā is found in a very similar context in the riddle hymn, with numerology: I.164.45 catvā́ri vā́k párimitā padā́ni “Speech is measured in four feet (/quarters).” As for tanvàm I take it as referring to the “body” of the speech, perhaps the physical realization in sound measured out in time. Scar (667) takes the tanvàm as reflexive: “Die … Rede … habe ich von Indra ausgehend mir angemessen,” which seems to treat the form as a dative. In n. 948 he does recognize the possibility that the poet sees his hymn as “Corpus.” I take índrāt as abl. of cause, though it could be a simple starting point: “I measure the speech (starting from) Indra.”
