+++
title = "077"

+++
Indra


## 02
For this verse cf. VIII.32.2, 26-27. Gr takes niṣṭúraḥ as nom. pl., and Ge apparently follows this analysis, taking it as indicating the designated destroyers of Indra (“Diese sollen ... (deine) Niederstrecker sein”; sim. Scar 539, 642, though with more machinery). But I consider it rather a gen. sg. modifying a gapped gen. sg.

referring to Indra - quite possibly by haplology from té *te. The only other occurrence of the stem is in the dative and modifies Indra, in a verse immediately following an Emuṣa verse: … ugrā́ya niṣṭúre “… to the strong one who lays low.”


## 03
Note both the phonological figure khé … khédayā and the etymological figure akhidat … khédayā. The sense ‘hammered together’ attributed to sám … akhidat may seem strange, given that √khid means something like ‘tear (out/apart)’. I assume that the lexeme and sense here were generated acdg. to the common sám / ví opposition to ví √khid ‘tear out/apart’, attested in AVP XVI.73.5 and KS XVII.15 as well as Śāṅkh. Br. II.9.

## 04-06
The name índraḥ is identically positioned in all three verses of this tṛca, at the beginning of the final pāda.


## 04
The hapax pratidhā́- is connected by Gr to √dhā ‘suck(le)’, presumably because of the soma-drinking context. But I take it rather to √dhā ‘place’ (so also Scar, though with different semantics). The lexeme práti √dhā means ‘set (an arrow on a bow), aim’, and from ‘aim’ to ‘shot’ seems an easy semantic path. Consider also English ‘shot’ for a quickly downed drink. That a bow and arrows figure in the Emuṣa myth (see vss. 6-7) may support this derivation.

The other hapax in this verse, kāṇukā́is not so easily handled. All tr. and comm. (including MM, EWA, s.v.) essentially give up. Gr calls it a “Beiwort zu sáras-” (the ponds in pāda b) and takes it as an acc. pl. neut., which seems reasonable, though it could also in principle be an old instr. sg. of an -a- or -ā-stem (as pratidhā́ is). Unlike some other passages containing opaque hapaxes, there is no phonological motivation visible. It resembles the hapax participle kaṇūkayánt- in X.132.7, but that is of no help because that form is even more puzzling than this one. It also resembles kāṇá- ‘one-eyed (RV X.155.1, AV+), and Edgerton (1911, The -k-suffixes of Indo- Iranian, 13) suggests it is derived from that word and means 'jug' — a jug “with a small opening and a large bulging body,” though he's not happy about the -u-. I have also considered the possibility that it’s derived from a MIA form of kárṇa ‘ear’ and also refers to a vessel for liquids, this time because of its earred handle(s). The Eng.

tr. ‘hogshead’ is an attempt to replicate the possible derivation of a word for liquid measure from a word for a part of the head. A hogshead contains a prodigious amount of liquid. One contributor to the word’s appearing here might be a pun on the vṛddhi derivative kāṇvá- ‘descendant of Kaṇva’, which is several times read as kāṇu vá- (VIII.2.40, 4.20); the Anukramaṇī attributes this hymn to Kurusuti Kāṇva.

So, something like “(the vessels) of soma provided by the Kāṇvas.”


## 05
I have no idea who or what the Gandharva represents here. Ge suggests that it can be the Gandharva as Somabewacher or, alternatively, the sun, but the context gives no particular support to either identification. It would be desirable to connect this verse with the Emuṣa myth, but I do not see how to do that either. It should be noted, however, that the datival phrase brahmábhyaḥ … vṛdhé “to strengthen the composers of sacred formulations” is reminiscent of the datival phrase in vs. 8, an undoubted Emuṣa verse, stotṛ́bhyaḥ … nṛ́bhyo nā́ribhyo áttave “for the praisers, the superior men and their ladies, to eat.” Note in our phrase the “attraction” of the obj. brahmábhyaḥ into the dat. to match the inf. vṛdhé. Unless we wish to interpr. the phrase as passive, “for the composers … to be strengthened.” On the lexeme abhí √tṛd, see comm. ad IX.110.5. It is generally specialized for the drilling into the cave in the Vala myth, but that seems to give us no help here.

The one clear connection to the Emuṣa myth within the hymn is the adj.

abudhná- ‘bottomless’, which anticipates the name of the bow, bundá-, in the next vs. ### 06
Ge takes bundám in c as the object of nír āvidhyat ‘pierced’ that opens the verse. This requires assuming an aberrant meaning for the verb (‘abschiessen’ [shoot]), and I find it unlikely (so does Old, who also feels that the object should be the target of the verb). Instead, though it requires supplying a first object for the verb in a and a verb to govern the acc. in c, I take the three pādas as relatively syntactically independent and supply the boar as one object of nír āvidhyat, in addition to odanám in b. I take the first two pādas as shorthand for killed the boar, pierced the mountain, and got the porridge - the three signature actions in the Emuṣa story. Note that odanám is the object of bhinat ‘split’ in another condensed allusion to the Emuṣa myth in VIII.69.14. As for what verb to supply to govern bundám, I supply ‘took’ from yet another abbreviated version in VIII.45.4, the only other hymn in which bundá- is found: ā́bundám … dade. For a possible long-distance syntactic/formulaic relationship between 6a and 10d, see comments on vs. 10.

I take the phrase giríbhya ā́as expressing the freeing of the odanám from the mountains (pāda b), but it could also be read with pāda a with the sense of ā́+ abl.

“all the way to,” though in that sense the ablative usually follows (see Gr s.v. ā́), hence “He pierced the boar all the way to/through the mountains.” As noted ad vs. 5, bundá- is reminiscent of (a)budhná- in the immediately preceding mysterious Gandharva verse.


## 07
bradhná- is otherwise a color term (‘coppery, ruddy’) or a substance characterized by that color (soma, in nearby VIII.69.7), but in this hapax bahuvrīhi, śatá-bradhna- it must refer to something capable of being counted, hence my ‘ruddy glints’. Gr’s ‘hundert Metallspitzen habend’, Ge’s ‘mit hundert Spitzen’ seem to stray too far from the color term. The appearance of this word here may be owing to its phonological similarity to bundá-.


## 08
As indicated in the publ. intro., I take this verse as the speech of Indra’s mother, picking up from the dialogue in vss. 1-2 that began (1a) jajñānó nú “just born,” which is echoed here by sadyó jātáḥ (“just born right now”). In VIII.45.4 Indra took the Bunda bow just before his dialogue with his mother, and in VIII.69.14-15 he's a tiny child when he gets the porridge and cooks the buffalo for his mother and father.

I supply odanám ‘rice porridge’ as the object of ā́bhara (and áttave). Note that in the summary verse 10 various foodstuffs, including odanám, are objects of ā́bharat.

The inclusion of ‘ladies’ (nā́ribhyaḥ) alongside superior men (nṛ̥bhyaḥ) is quite rare in the RV. See I.43.6, where it seems to refer to humankind in general.

Here it seems to have a more restricted sense and could actually refer to the gods and their wives: nṛ́- is often used of divinities. For goddesses beside gods see nearby VIII.80.10, though it is attributed to a different poet.

The voc. ṛbhuṣṭhira is a little surprising. Both Gr and Ge take it as implicitly comparative: Gr ‘stark, tüchtig wie Ṛbhu’, Ge ‘… stark wie die Ṛbhu’s’. I take it rather as parallel to ṛbhukṣán- ‘master of the Ṛbhus’, which is regularly an epithet of Indra.

## 10-11
On these verses as possible explanatory additions to the Emuṣa version given earlier in the hymn, see publ. intro.


## 10
Old and Ge (see his n. 10d) read loc. índre contra the Pp. nom. índraḥ and interpret the verse as meaning that Viṣṇu brought Emuṣa to Indra, along with the food named in pāda c. But this seems unlikely: the central fact of the myth is that Indra pierced the boar. Cf. I.61.7d vídhyad varāháṃ tiró ádrim ástā “He pierced the boar through the stone, (Indra) the archer.” This last pāda contains both Indra and the boar and ends with the boar’s name as if as the solution of a riddle (remember that this is the only occurrence of the name in the RV), and it would seem rhetorically anticlimactic for the image merely to be one of Viṣṇu lugging the corpse of the boar, along with some food, to Indra. Instead it seems the encapsulation of the myth, and I would further argue that it finally closes the incomplete syntactic circle begun in verse 6. In 6a we find nír āvidhyad giríbhya ā́“(he) pierced from/to/through the mountains,” with the signature verb and the signature locale (see ádrim in I.61.7 just quoted), but neither subject nor object. But in 10d we have both subject (reading nom. índraḥ with the Pp.) and object, but no verb. This seems a clever variant on ring composition, where a structure begun at the beginning of a section is completed at the end. Even if, as I suggest in the intro., vs. 10 is a tacked-on addition to the original Viṣṇu-less version of the myth found in the rest of this hymn (and other mentions in VIII), the poet has cleverly made use of the underdefined treatment in 6a to attach vs. 10 more closely to vss. 6-9 by supplying the missing pieces in 10d.


## 11
sūmáya- is generally analyzed as having the adverbial prefix su- ‘good’, hence ‘aus gutem Stoff’ (Ge). However, AiG II.2.770 reports a suggestion of Thieme's (apparently only reported in AiG, not publ.) that it's ‘aus Eber(-zahn) verfertigt’, with an unextended root noun sū- ‘(wild) pig, boar’, which is the basis of sūkará- ‘boar’ (already RV VII.55.4) and which has numerous IE cognates.

Although Mayrhofer explicitly rejects this suggestion (KEWA, s.v. sūkará-; EWA, s.vv. MAY1 , sūkará-), context favors Thieme’s suggestion. The boar Emuṣa was clearly a formidable opponent of Indra’s, and the use of a weapon made from the same animal to defeat it makes good sense from the point of view of sympathetic magic. Consider also the association of boars with ritual of kingship, and note, in particular, that using parts of the boar for the armor and weaponry of warriors is found elsewhere (cf. Odysseus’s boar’s tusk helmet and the general disc. in Jamison 1999 [Penelope and the Pigs], ClAnt. 18: 258-70). The unextended root noun sūcould be preserved in this old myth, esp. since it could be assimilated to the prefix su-.

My interpretation of pāda d essentially follows Scar (301, 516); see also EWA, s.v. ARD.
