+++
title = "078"

+++
Indra


## 01
There seems no alternative to the problem posed by the ungoverned nouns in pāda a than Ge’s - to supply a verb, probably a form of √juṣ ‘take pleasure’ (perhaps mid. part. juṣāṇáḥ). This verb seems particularly suitable since it can take both acc. (puroḷā́śam) and gen. (ándhasaḥ). Ge, however, seems to be taking ándhasa as a dative (ándhase), contra Pp.: “(Koste) unseren Reiskuchen zum Somatrank.” The nominals in pāda a cannot be the object of ā́bhara because Indra doesn’t bring the cake or the stalk, but enjoys them and brings objects in return to those who provided them.


## 03
vaso is a predicated vocative; the tr. renders the predication rather than the vocative, since the combination doesn’t work in Engl.


## 04
The first pāda is somewhat puzzling, though I may have made more of the puzzles in the tr. than was necessary. The issue is the hapax vṛdhīká-. The standard tr.

and comm. take this, with the Pp., as nom. vṛdhīkáḥ and interpret it as an agent noun: Ge, AiG II.2.428, EWA (s.v. VARDH), Scar (211, 584) ‘Bereicherer’ (though cf. Gr ‘gewachsen’), parallel to the nominatives in b and c. But uncompounded -īká-stems are often neuters and sometimes used in the loc., which would be possible here (vṛdhīké), contra Pp. Cf. VIII.48.12 mṛḷīké asya sumataú syāma “May we be in his mercy and good grace.” I was also troubled by three other facts: 1) Taking the whole verse as a single clause, as Ge does, runs into the problem that te in pāda a is coreferential with tvát in c, and the two pronouns should, in my opinion, have two different functions. (Ge, n., says te is pleonastic.) 2) I would prefer that nákīm (a) and nā́nyáḥ (c) not simply be conflated, as Ge seems to do. 3) The next verse also begins with nákīm (the only two occurrences of this form in the RV), which is followed by a nominal in an oblique case, in that case a datival infinitive níkartave (and its parallel in b, páriśaktave), and I would prefer that 4a have a structure that at least also involves an oblique case. A similar impulse may account for Re’s apparent derivation of vṛdhīká- from the infinitive *vṛdhé, as reported in AiG II.2.418 (BSL 38: 80 n. 1 [“Infinitifs et dérivés nominaux dans le Ṛgveda”]). Putting all this together, I take vṛdhīka as loc. vṛdhīké, somewhat in the sense of mṛḷīké in the passage quoted above (“in the sphere of your increase,” that is, in the abundance of your giving), with te dependent on it. However, on re-examination of the passage I think I may have overthought it, and an interpretation more like Ge/Scar may be less fussy - though the reservations expressed above remain. I must also admit that my publ. tr. requires anyáḥ of c to be read also with a.


## 07
I consider the genitives in pāda b, turásya … vidhatáḥ to modify Indra, whereas Ge takes them with the ‘resolve’ (krátvaḥ), which he considers to be the soma, of pāda a. The problem, in his view, is that vidhánt- doesn’t easily qualify Indra (turá- regularly does), but since the root √vidh ‘honor’ is an old derivative of ví √dhā ‘apportion’, taking it in its etymological sense allows it to modify the god.
