+++
title = "079"

+++
Soma


## 01
Both kṛtnú- and udbhíd- appear to be gambling terms here. For kṛtnú- in a gambling context see I.92.10, for udbhíd- X.116.9. udbhíd- means literally ‘bursting/breaking out [/up]’. The semantic development may be something like “break out of the pack / burst to the finish.” viśvajít- ‘all-conquering’ can also fit the gambling scenario, as, arguably, can ágṛbhīta- ‘ungraspable’ -- that is, who is too far ahead to be caught or caught up to. The hymn is ascribed to Kṛtnu Bhārgava; Bhārgava is of course a fairly common patronymic, but Kṛtnu appears only here, clearly lifted from the hymn’s first pāda.

The final pāda consists entirely of the three most resonant words for poet/poetic activity: ṛ́ṣi- ‘seer’, vípra- ‘inspired poet’, kā́vya- (standing for kaví- ‘sage poet’). The juxtaposition of the gambling focus of the first two pādas with the poetic lexicon of the last is striking, but sets the tone for the rest of the hymn, which catalogues the variety of Soma’s skills.

## 02
In c īm seems functionless. Though technically it could serve as object to prá … khyat (“the blind man sees it/them”), it is much more likely that the verb is used in absolute function, to indicate the blind man’s recovery of his vision, not his sight of some particular (but unspecified) object(s). Vs. 6c also begins prém a-VOWEL, though there the īm could double the object ā́yuḥ. However, in both cases I think īm is simply introduced to avoid hiatus.


## 03
By my interpr. (and Ge’s), pādas ab contain a series of adjacent -bhyaḥ plural nominals, which by sense must be sorted into dative pl. tanūkṛ́dbhyaḥ (“for the body-makers”) and ablative pl. dvéṣobhyo anyákṛtebhyaḥ (“from hateful things done by others”). The pāda break assists in splitting up these formally identical forms. A different interpr., going back to the MS (see Ge’s n. 3a) and followed by Re, however, takes tanūkṛ́d- in passive sense ‘done by oneself’ and contrastively parallel to anyákṛta- ‘done by others’; in this case, tanūkṛ́dbhyaḥ is also ablative. The deliberate contrast between the root noun -kṛ́t- in the first compound and the past passive participle -kṛta- in the second and the usual active, transitive sense of -kṛ́t- in compounds (including the other occurrence of tanūkṛ́t-) make this interpr. unlikely.

See Old for disc.; he opts for the active sense, but considers the tanū- in question to belong to the doers/makers referred to by -kṛ́t-: “(den Frommen), die tätig sind sich die eigne tanū́zu schaffen.” (Scar weakly favors this.) This seems unnecessarily complex, though the usual polarity between tanū- ‘self’ and anyá- ‘other’ is an argument in its favor.


## 04
This vs. flips the syntactic roles found in the preceding vs. In 3 Soma produces a defense (acc.) from (abl.) hateful things (dvéṣobhyaḥ); here he keeps the hateful thing (dvéṣaḥ, acc.) from (abl.) the entities protected (heaven and earth). The producer of the hateful thing is in the gen. (aghásya), whereas in 3b he (/they) were the first member of a compound, anyá(-kṛta-).


## 05
The most difficult verse in the hymn by far and perhaps not accidently the middle verse. It is striking among other things for its use of indicative (yánti), subjunctive (gáchān), and optative (vavṛjyuḥ) in the same sentence, and for the juxtaposition of the two roots √i and √gam with the same subject in an if-then construction. For the latter, see Re’s disc.: he suggests persuasively that √i with acc. indicates the goal towards which one is proceeding, but √gam with acc. the attainment of the goal, though I am not at all sure this functional division holds throughout the uses of these presents in the RV.

I interpr. the verse within Ge’s general scheme: that the subject throughout is the soma priests and the thirsting man (tṛ́ṣyataḥ) of c is a competing priest -- or at least someone who covets the largesse of the giver (dadúṣaḥ) in b that rightly belongs to the hard-working priests named in a (arthínaḥ).

The sense of the pf. opt. vavṛjyuḥ in c is a bit difficult to grasp, primarily because the root √vṛj ‘twist’, etc., so seldom appears without a preverb. I think ‘deflect’ or ‘thwart’ is what is intended. As usual, I do not think that the fact that the optative is built to the perfect stem adds any particular “perfect” nuance, though I do have to admit in this case that there are optative forms built to another tense/aspect stem, namely the root aor. (vṛjyām 1x, vṛjyās 3x, vṛjyā́ma 1x), all in the idiom with pári.


## 07
With Gr I take avātá- as the negated ppl. of √vā ‘become extinguished’, in the sense ‘unextinguishable, unquenchable’, also in I.38.7, 52.4, and 62.10. It is separate from the homonymous avātá- ‘without wind, windless’ in VI.64.4 and X.129.2 and also from differently accented ávāta- (√van ‘win’) ‘unvanquished’. Ge takes the avātá- forms here and in I.38.7 as ‘windless’ (as well as those in VI.64.4 and X.129.2) and in I.52.4 and 62.10 as ‘unvanquishable’. Re takes this occurrence as ‘invincible’; see his disc. ad loc. My interpr. rests partly on semantic, partly on formal grounds. On the one hand, “windless Soma” (or, as Ge has it, “ohne Wind zu machen”) makes no sense to me; on the other, though ‘invincible’ does make sense, I prefer to respect the accent otherwise found with that form, noting also that occurrences of that stem almost always appear with the participle vanván belonging to the same root. As for the occurrences in Maṇḍala I, avātá- once modifies mist (míh- I.38.2), once ‘streams’ (avánīḥ I.62.10, with phonological play), and once Indra’s śúṣmāḥ (I.52.4, there tr. ‘gusts’). In all cases (even, or esp., the last) ‘windless’ does not work; the point in all three cases is, I think, that the entity does not “go out”

-- dissipate or disappear. Exactly how this applies to Soma here is less clear, but I
assume that the point is that Soma is reliably present and available.


## 09
Ge’s tr. is very different: he takes áva not as a preverb in tmesis but as the 2nd sg. impv. to √av ‘help’ and ī́kṣe as the 2nd sg. med. pres. to √īś ‘be master of’ rather than the 1st sg. to √īkṣ ‘see’, hence “Hilf … wenn du … vermagst.” His n. 9ab allows for the possibility of the other tr., however -- the interpr. favored by Old and found in Re and in the publ. tr.
