+++
title = "080"

+++
Indra


## 01
The particle báḍ seems to mean ‘in truth, for certain, yes indeed’ and, despite appearances, may have Avestan cognates. baḷā́here is clearly based on it.

Hoffmann (Aufs. II.355) takes the expression here as a kind of internal quotation: “nicht habe ich ja zu einem anderen gesagt: báḍ, du bist ein Erbarmer,” though the direct speech is only represented by the particle and then only indirectly. My tr. is an attempt to capture Hoffmann’s sense while sticking closer to the grammar.


## 02
Ge takes b in semi-independence of a: “… für die Lohngewinnung nicht gering zu schätzen.” This seems to be because of VII.67.5, which, however, doesn't seem to be parallel enough to require this interpretation here.

Note the phonological similarity of the value-heavy words marḍitā́ram (1b), mṛḷaya (1c, 2c), belonging to √mṛḍ ‘have mercy’, and ámṛdhraḥ ‘not shirking, not neglectful’.

## 03
Ge takes c as a statement “Gewiss wirst du, Indra, es für uns doch möglich machen,” while I think it continues the questions of ab. The status of kuvíd clauses is somewhat murky, in that kuvíd is clearly built to an interrogative stem, but it also generally conditions accent on the verb (as here, śákaḥ) giving it also the appearance of a subordinator. See Delbrück (AiS 550-51), Hettrich (Hypotaxe, 142-55), Etter (Fragesätze, 219-30). An interpretation, like Etter’s, that kuvíd marks an implicit indirect question such as “is it not the case that…?” seeks to capture these two somewhat contradictory features of the particle’s syntax, though a full rendering of this in tr. is often too heavy (as it would be here). For further on kuvíd and verbal accentuation see comm. ad II.35.1.


## 05
The emphatic interjection hánta is presumably originally the 2nd pl.

imperative to √han ‘smite’ (flg. Thieme, Fremdl. 2-3, though EWA s.v. expresses doubts) with full-grade root - hence my tr. ‘blast it!’ It occurs only 3x in the RV, the other two in X, in direct speech contexts and in hymns identified by Arnold (Ved.

Metre) as popular. Here it continues the slangy tone set by baḍā́(1) and the questions in 3.

Ge supplies a verb in c: “(uns bring) … Ruhm,” while I take the acc. neuter phrase there as a loose goal: “put … first for … fame.” Note that the vājayú qualifying śrávaḥ reappears in the next verse as a masc. modifying rátham.


## 06
The abrupt commands and almost insolent asides addressed to the great god continue the tone established in the earlier verses. Again the tr. is meant to capture this tone.


## 07
A clever image that modulates from b to c. In b a lucky female is going to an assignation with Indra, playing on Indra’s known character as a hyper-virile pursuer of women. But in c this female is identified as a dhī́- a visionary thought (embodied as a poem), a word that is of course feminine. The adj. ṛtvíyāvatī is suitable for both the woman in b (‘conforming to her menstrual cycle’) and the poem in c (‘comforming to the ritual sequence’). This adjective is also found at VIII.12.10 with the same double application (though with dhītí- rather than dhī́-).


## 08
The referent of sīm in pāda a is not made clear, and the fact that sīm can stand for all genders and numbers doesn’t help. Given the racing theme of b (and in my interpretation c), I assume that it is our chariot, about which we have been worrying previously (vss. 4-6), though it could possibly be the dhī́- of the immediately preceding verse.

The lexeme apa-ā́√vṛj is attested only here, and the interpretation of the pāda is made more difficult by the noun to which it is applied, aratní-, lit. ‘elbow’, but potentially also ‘corner’ or ‘barrier’ (Schranken, see Old and Ge n.) or a unit of measure (like Engl. ell). I take it to be the body part (as does Ge tr.) and interpret it as a driving posture, with elbows turned out, indicating that the chariot racers are ready to start. For other suggestions see Ge n. and Old.


## 09
For speculation about the meaning of the “names,” see publ. intro.
