+++
title = "081"

+++
Indra


## 01
The apparent etymological play between ‘handful’ and ‘hand’ is unfortunately only found in the English: ‘handful’ is grābhám, ‘hand’ is (mahā)hastī́.

The phraseology seems to belong to dicing; see Lüders (Würfelspiel, 49-50). though curiously Falk (Bruderschaft u. Würfelspiel) does not discuss this passage. See also IX.106.3.


## 02
Despite Ge’s appealing “an Gnaden Reichbemessenen” for tuvimātrám ávobhiḥ, tuvimātrá- is a bahuvrīhi built to mā́trā- ‘mass, size’, with accent shift to final syllable (see AiG II.1.297). Ge’s tr. also breaks the pattern of tuvi- compounds.


## 04
On the accent on stávāma see disc. ad VIII.29.14.


## 05
Ge suggests that the verbs in pāda a (prá stoṣat and úpa gāsiṣat respectively) show that Indra is acting as Prastotar (the first assistant to the Udgātar, responsible for chanting the prastāva) and Upagātar (subordinate chanter, at least four of whom sing "ho" continuously in a low tone), priestly titles not found in the ṚV, though their functions may be. Both roles would connect him with the Sāma Veda, as does his listening to the sāman in pāda b. Old thinks rather that the priest is the subject of pāda a, but this seems unlikely in this strong Indra context.


## 06
The verbs ā́√bhṛ and (abhí) prá √mṛś are also paired in VIII.21.16 drḍ̥ hā cid aryáḥ prá mrśḁ̄ bhy ā́bhara “Seize hold of even the firmly fixed (goods) of the stranger and bring them here.”


## 08
I make sánitvaḥ the predicate of a main clause (b) on which the relative clause (a) is dependent, because I am reluctant to take ásti as a mere auxiliary with the gerundive. This requires taking c as a separate sentence. Ge takes ab as a single dependent clause, with c as the main clause.


## 09
Ge, Mayr (PN), followed by Klein (DGRV I.104) and Scar (175), take váśaiḥ as a PN (“by the Vaśas”). This is possible but not necessary; as Ge (n.) reports, Sāy takes it in its usual sense, as I do.

The verb jarante is taken by Gotō (150) to ‘awaken’, an interpretation I follow. Although the notion of prizes “awakening” may seem strange, since the Dakṣiṇā is distributed at the dawn sacrifice, it makes ritual sense. Others (Ge, Klein, Scar) take it rather to ‘sing’, but this requires the form to be passive (Klein “and in the morning are sung of by the Vaśas”; Ge’s tr. is actually a “‘Kompromiss’- Übersetzung,” in Gotō’s phrase [150 n. 226] “… werden … wachgesungen,” incorporating both ‘wake’ and ‘sing’, but still as a passive). However, járate ‘sing’ is always active in value.

I take ca in c as inverse “X ca Y” connecting the two adverbials; Ge, Klein as connecting the two clauses, ab and c.
