+++
title = "084"

+++
Agni


## 01
I take védyam to √vid ‘find, acquire’ rather than √vid ‘know’, contra the standard view. I think it more likely that Vedic people (read, men) wanted to get a chariot rather than just know about it, and the renderings of the adj. show translators’ discomfort with the root assignment: Ge “wie ein Streitwagen denkwürdig,” Re “reconnaissable comme un char,” Klein (DGRV II.122) “conspicuous like a chariot.” None of these senses is really proper to √vid ‘know’. For the image, see II.2.3 and VIII.19.8.


## 02
According to Ge (probably correctly), this vs. refers to Agni’s flight and subsequent discovery and reinstallation by the gods.


## 04
This vs. lacks a verb to govern úpastutim. I supply a form of (prá) √bhṛ ‘present, bring’, which takes úpastutim as object elsewhere (+prá IV.56.5, VIII.62.1; simplex I.148.2). There is, unfortunately, no contextual support for it within the hymn, however. Ge supplies ‘make’, which is not impossible but has no contextual support, and the putative VP úpastutim √kṛ is not otherwise found. Re’s tr.

“(présenter)” seems to agree with mine, but in his n. he claims to be supplying vocaḥ on the basis of vs. 5 (where the form is actually, per Pp [and most tr., incl. Re] voce).

Although this contextual support would be good to have, oddly enough no verbs of speaking take úpastuti- as obj. (and, as just noted, Re’s tr. doesn’t reflect his statement in the n.).


## 07
The standard tr. take párīṇasaḥ as a partitive abl. (“from whose profusion do you quicken the thoughts”). My interpr. (“in profusion”) could support an adverbial ablative of this neut. noun, but I think it’s also possible that párīṇas- was reinterpr. as an adjective, on the basis of expressions like rāyā́párīṇasā (4x), originally appositives (“with wealth, with profusion”), but reanalyzable as noun-adj.

“with abundant wealth” by way of noun+instr. adv. “with wealth in profusion.” If párīṇasaḥ is an adjective, it can be an acc. pl. fem. agreeing with dhíyaḥ.

Contra the standard interpr., I do not take yásya te as coreferential, but interpret yásya as coreferential with kásya in the main clause and take te separately as either dat. or gen. My supplied “(presented)” is just there for ease of English parsing: pāda c is easily interpretable as a nominal clause, “(the man) whose hymns are for you at …” / “… whose hymns are yours …”


## 08
The small interpretive issue in this verse is who is the referent of svéṣu.

Ge/Re take it as Agni, while I think it’s the unidentified pl. subjects of marjayanta, presumably the priests (so also Scar 417). An argument for my position might be the fact that we might expect the reflexive adjective to be controlled by the syntactic subject, but it is my sense that this is not a hard and fast rulem in Rigvedic syntax.

More to the point, in my opinion, is that 6ab … káro, víśvā asmábhyaṃ sukṣitī́ḥ “… you will make all dwellings lovely for us” and 9a kṣéti kṣémebhiḥ “he [=the favored mortal] dwells peacefully in peaceful ways …” associate dwellings with the mortal worshipers.
