+++
title = "086"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
Following Kü (344) I take the pf. babhūváthuḥ as presential.

For the possible connection of the verb in the refrain, object-less mumócatam, with other appearances of Viśvaka and Viṣṇāpu in the RV, see the publ. intro.


## 02
The danger of imposing an after-the-fact narrative explanation onto a RVic hymn is shown by Ge’s tr. of vímanāḥ here as “Betrübte” (distressed, afflicted).

Although a negative reading of this compound is possible (“without a mind, with a mind [gone] away”), the only other occurrence of the word in the RV (X.82.2) is as a positive attribute of Viśvakarman, “vast in mind.” There is no reason that this sense cannot be found here as well; the next pāda states that the Aśvins gave him insight (dhíyam), and the question in our pāda -- how (kathā́) to praise the Aśvins -- need not be “how can someone with a disordered mind manage to praise them?” but rather “which of the many possible ways should someone with a capacious mind choose for praising them?” The questions in VIII.84.4-7, a hymn that belongs with ours though the Anukramaṇī attributes them to different poets (see remarks before VIII.81 in the publ. tr.), are similar.


## 03
The thematic connection between VIII.84 and our hymn suggested ad vs. 2 continues here: edhatú- ‘radiance’, only here in the RV, echoes edhate in VIII.84.9, which characterizes the successful devotee of Agni -- there tr. ‘thrives’, though ‘blazes brightly’ or sim. would be more vivid and literal.


## 04
Though Ge identifies the vīrá- ‘hero’ as Viṣṇāpu, as Re points out ṛjīṣín- ‘possessing the silvery drink’ is almost exclusively used of Indra (and never of humans), and we are more likely to call upon this god than upon a rather vaguely defined mortal.

## 05
What the truth is doing here insistently in this final verse isn’t clear to me.

As Re points out, though the rare verb śamāyá- is derived from the root √śam ‘labor’ (presumably as a deverbative from a 9th-class *śaṃnā́ti [see, perhaps, ścamnan I.104.2]), it participates in a secondary word play between śáma- ‘hornless’ (I.32.15, 33.15) and śṛ́ṅga- ‘horn’ -- hence the rather surprising appearance of the enigmatic “horn of truth” in b.
