+++
title = "088"

+++
Indra


## 03
Pāda c can be subordinate either to ab or to d; Ge chooses the former, I the latter, but there are no implications either way.


## 04
I construe asi in a with abhí in b and take yóddhā as part of the subject phrase, not predicated. Contra Ge, I also separate majmánā in b from the instrumentals in a, krátvā śávasotá daṃsánā, on the basis of both the pāda break and the position of utá. (Klein I.229 follows Ge by including majmánā in the conjoined NP, but three pages later [232] this NP is cited with only the first three members.) VIII.100.4b gives support to both of my decisions: víśvā jātā́ni abhy àsmi mahnā́, with the finite form of √as adjacent to the preverb and a single instr. construed with this verb. See also in the immediately following hymn VIII.89.6 tád víśvam abhibhū́r asi, yáj jātáṃ yác ca jántvam. ## 089 Indra As was noted in the publ. intro., every verse in this hymn, except the two anuṣṭubhs (5-6), has a form of bṛhánt- in it: 1a bṛhát, 2c bṛ́hadbhāno, 3a brhaté, ̥ 4b brhát ̥ , 7d brhát ̥ . The meters of these verses are bṛhatī or satobṛhatī. There is also some transformational phonological play based on this word: 2b bhavat, 2d -bhāno, 3b bráhma, 4a bhara.


## 01
A neuter word for a verbal product needs to be supplied with bṛhát in a; Ge suggests either bráhma (from 3b) or sā́ma (after Sāy). The latter is more likely, since sāmans are sung (cf. VIII.98.1 índrāya sā́ma gāyata, which is almost identical to our pāda), and since loc. sā́man is found in the last verse, 7c, it produces an implicit ring.


## 02
The tr. of pāda a is meant to capture the etymological figure abhíśastīr aśastihā́.

I take the verb ā́bhavat as the predicate, rather than as an auxiliary with predicated dyumnī́as Ge does (“Indra bleib der Glanzreiche”).


## 03
Note bṛhád índrāya of 1a has been transformed into … índrāya bṛhaté, with the adj. now qualifying Indra.

## 04-05
jā́yathā(ḥ) in 5a echoes jáyā(ḥ) in the immediately preceding pāda (4d), though they belong to entirely different roots.


## 04
Ge’s suggestion (n.) that this verse constitutes the Maruts’ direct speech to Indra is a persuasive one.


## 06
Ge takes háskṛti- as qualifying the ritual fire - again a good suggestion.

The fire’s crackling is the “laughter.” Unfortunately Ge bleaches the metaphor, tr.

“der helle Schein (des Opferfeuers),” which substitutes an unremarkable visual image for the striking auditory one.
