+++
title = "090"

+++
Indra


## 01
Ge takes the loc. phrase víśvāsu … samátsu with hávyaḥ and construes bhūṣatu in b with the accusatives in c. This is certainly possible and this disposition of the loc. may make better, or smoother, sense. However, because of the verse structure, I would prefer to keep bhūṣatu interpretationally in the first hemistich, and ā́√bhūṣ can take the loc. (cf. VIII.66.7d, 8b, X.160.5). I then also supply bhūṣatu with the second hemistich, to be taken with the preverb úpa and the accusatives, since úpa √bhūṣ does take the acc. (e.g., V.75.8, VI.62.4).


## 02
I tr. satyáḥ separately from īśānakṛ́t on the basis of 4a.

## 03
The common trope of hymns as horses, teamed to bring Indra to the sacrifice.


## 05
For the sense of this verse, see publ. intro. Both Ge and Old (ad I.165.9 n.

1) suggest, tentatively, that Varuṇa is the referent of carṣanīdhṛ̥́t-, and VII.85.3cd, in a hymn dedicated jointly to Indra and Varuṇa, supports this suggestion: kṛṣtī́r anyó dhārayati práviktā, vṛtrā́ṇy anyó apratī́ni hanti. Here in a balanced “the one … the other” construction, Indra’s characteristic deeds are described in d almost as in our passage, while Varuṇa’s activity in c, kṛṣṭī́ḥ … dhāráyati ‘sustains the peoples’, is expressed in a VP that is a variant of our compound.


## 06
The frame takes a double acc.: “beseech s.o. (tvā) for s.th. (rā́dhaḥ), and I take the simile as implicitly having both roles filled: bhāgám ‘portion’ fills the 2nd acc. slot, but also evokes the god from which it is derived, bhága-, to fill the 1st acc. However, Bhaga should properly be in parens. in the publ. tr.

Ge takes śaraṇā́as a fem. adj. with kṛ́ttiḥ “Du hast gleichsam ein … schützendes Fell [Schild],” but this leaves nothing for the hide to be compared to. I think rather that śaraṇā́, which is usually in the neut. sg., is a neut. pl., lacking semantic motivation (a not unusual situation), or, alternatively, that it has been attracted to the fem. sg. simile.
