+++
title = "091"

+++
Indra (/Apālā)


## 02
Narten (Yasna Haptaŋhaiti, 146 and n. 45) identifies vīraká- as a word belonging to women’s language (Frauensprache) and thinks it should be tr. “mein lieber Held” rather than “Männlein.” But I don't see why the diminutive of affection can't be an element here; Apālā is also trying to domesticate him and make him more approachable.

The substances Apālā offers to Indra to accompany the soma form a ritually defined group of offerings elsewhere (III.52.1), the Savanīya-puroḍāśa-. For disc. see Jamison 1991: 162-63, 172-73. Note that, judging from dhānā́vantam karambhínam / apūpávantam ukthínam “possessing grain, possessing gruel, possessing cakes, possessing hymns” with -vant- and -ín- suffixes respectively, it is difficult to maintain the often suggested semantic difference between -vant- and -ín-, with -ínmarking inherent possession and -vant- more contingent possession.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., the first hemistich contains pedagogical vocabulary, the contrastive “we wish to comprehend” (ā́… cikitsāma) and “we will not ‘recite’ you” (ádhi caná tvā némasi). The lexeme ádhi √i lit. ‘go over’ (which goes nicely into Engl. in its idiomatic sense); in later Vedic it means ‘study (a text)’, which is an oral culture means ‘recite aloud’, and this appears to be its meaning here (contra most tr., incl. Ge and Schmidt). Followed directly by cd, where Apālā insistently asks the soma to flow “softly” (śánaiḥ … śanakaíḥ), this hemistich indicates that Apālā wants to learn and understand Indra’s intentions, but she will not reveal his presence by announcing him aloud. (See disc. Jamison 1991: 164 and n.

43.)


## 04
The compound patidvíṣ- is usually tr. with passive sense (Ge: ‘vom Gatten gehasst’), but this has more to do with the scenario for the hymn constructed by the tr.

and comm. than with the structure of the compound. Grammatically speaking we would expect an active sense: passive value is fairly rare in root noun compounds, and, as Scar points out (249), though he does not abandon a possible passive value, the other -dviṣ- compounds are all active in sense. An interpretation guided by the compound structure would give ‘hating husbands’, a perhaps not unlikely sentiment in a pre-adolescent girl about to be married off in ancient India. The verse expresses the anxious excitement of a girl on the cusp of marriagability and adulthood (Jamison 1991: 170-71).

## 05-07
On the connection between hair growth and skin disease, see Jamison 1991: 146-70.
