+++
title = "092"

+++
Indra


## 01
I separate the predicates of pādas a and b because √gā ‘sing’ seems to be used in two different senses, with two different sets of preverbs: ā́in a, abhí prá in b

- the first “sing (s.o.) to (come to) X [acc.],” the second “sing to s.o.”
pā́ntam here belongs to the nominal stem pā́nta- ‘drink’, not the pres. part., but the coincidence of form may have led to some ambiguity.


## 03
The first two pādas contain a remarkable set of rhyming words: puruhūtám puruṣṭutám, … sánaśrutam.

## 02-03
2c begins índra í(ti), while 3a begins índra í(n no).


## 03
What posture abhijñú designates is not clear. Ge thinks it involves bending the knees and sinking down, Scar (345) that Indra crouches down because he is so large. I think rather that, as in I.37.10, it indicates a slightly crouching position, with knees bent, for driving a chariot (note I.37.10 abhijñú yā́tave “abhijñu to drive”), in this case to bring the prizes to us. The word nṛtúḥ ‘dancer’ at the end of b is suggestive, so that abhijñu might instead, or also, be a dancing posture.


## 04
The first pāda of this new tṛca matches that of the first tṛca (1a): √pā (pā́ntam (1a) / ápāt (4a) … ándhasaḥ#.

índor índro is an example of the word play, much beloved in IX, between índu- ‘drop’ and índra-, but this case is particularly nice because sandhi allows the two words to be identical, save for the reversal of the final two sounds (or ∼ ro).


## 05
abhí prá √ṛc picks up abhí prá √gā of 1b.

## 06
The two gods are, of course, Soma and Indra respectively.


## 07
I’m not entirely sure of the sense of ā́yatam in b. Ge tr. “auf alle Lobreden Gespannten” (intent on / excited about), which makes nice contextual sense, but which I find difficult to reconcile with the other occurrences of ā́√yam, including, in this hymn, ā́yamat in 3c and (abhí) … ā́yaman in 31b. Elsewhere ā́√yam means ‘to hold (reins, etc.), hold fast, guide’. Here the sense may be that Indra is held (that is, kept) at the sacrifice by our songs, and there is then a contrast between his (temporary) immobility and the rousing we hope to give him (c: ā́cyāvayasi).


## 08
This verse then showcases a different kind of immobility for Indra: ánapacyuta- ‘unbudgeable’; Indra here is not held, as it were, against his will, as perhaps in 7b, but because of his immense power he cannot be moved by lesser powers. Since in the immediately preceding verse (7c) the hope was to cause him to stir (√cyu [cyāvayasi]), it is striking that here it is asserted that he cannot be made to √cyu. (The relationship between these two forms should probably have been signaled in the Engl: perhaps “you rouse ... unrousable.”) On the cmpd avāryá-kratu- ‘possessing unobstructable resolve’, see comm. ad IX.98.12.


## 11
Old and Ge take áyāma as expletive “let’s go!” and construe the rest of the verse with jáyema in c (“might we conquer the poems of the poet …”). Although this is possible, it requires the poet (dhī́vant-) in question to be a rival poet (so explicitly Old), and I wonder if we would flatteringly refer to a rival poet as “visionary.” I think rather that we are appropriating the visionary thoughts of our own poet and configuring them as steeds for vicotry in battle. For dhī́- = árvant- cf. VI.45.12 dhībhír árvadbhiḥ ... jeṣma “With visionary thoughts as our steeds might we conquer …” Construing áyāma with acc. of goal is very similar to áganma … āśásaḥ “we have arrived at our hopes” in 13c.


## 12
Case disharmony between simile and frame, as discussed in Jamison 1982, faciliated by the syntactic ambivanence of raṇáya-, which has both causative and non-causative uses. Here the frame is causative, “we make you take pleasure in hymns” (vayám u tvā … ukthéṣu raṇayāmasi), while the simile is non-causative, “as cows (do) in grain” (gā́vo ná yávaseṣv ā́).


## 13
Ge takes anukāmā́as ‘in accord with our desires’, but it seems to me unlikely that we are claiming that everything goes as we want it; rather that man proposes, Indra disposes, and in this case he has disposed as we had hoped. This is supported by vs. 14 also, where the desirous ones turn to Indra (for him to fulfill their desires, presumably).


## 20
I follow Scar (574-75) in taking saṃsád- here as an agent noun.

## 23
Following Kü (503), I take the act. pf. of √vyac as a presential stative.

## 24-25
On kukṣí- as originally ‘cheek’, not ‘belly’, see Jamison 1987; also for the pun on dhā́man- ‘foundation’, hence ‘fundament’, that is, ‘buttocks, bottom’, in vs. 24, but, in vs. 25, ‘foundation, establishment’ in the sense of ‘bestowal’; also the jocular name Śrutakakṣa in 25.

## 24-27
The syntagm áram + DAT displays surprisingly complex semantics; there is generally a relationship of benefit between the subject and the dative, but which one receives the benefit is not fixed. We can see the shift in these vss., which contain a surprising number of such constructions: 2x in 24, 3x in 25, 2x in 26, 1x in 27. In 24 the beneficiary is expressed in the dative: the soma is beneficial to these parts of Indra, but in 27 the singer, who is the subject, by his action (singing) receives the benefits expressed in the three datives. The switch is esp. clever because in 24c the dative dhā́mabhyaḥ refers (by my interpr.) to a body part of Indra’s, which benefits from the soma drops, but the same dative (save for number), índrasya dhā́mane, in 25c refers more likely (again in my interpr.) to a benefit that Indra will bestow (though the reading of 24c is also simultaneously possible). This change in focus is made clear (“repaired) in 26c, áram … dāváne “fit(tingly) for (Indra’s) giving,” which makes explicit the implication of 25c áram … dhā́mane. Ge (also Bl RR) supplies “we” as implicit subj. of c: “(wir sind) bereit für deine Schenkung,” but the playful parallelism with 24c seems to me to exclude this interpretation. The heavy phrase in 29 … rātíḥ … dhāyi dhātṛ́bhiḥ “(Indra’s) giving has been ordained by the ordainers” also establishes the link between Indra’s giving and the root √dhā.

The final áram in 27c returns us to the situation found in 24, where the provider of benefit is the subject (“we”) and the beneficiary in the dative (“you”). I would now change the tr. to make that clearer: “We should go (to be) fit for you.” On the particular construction here, áram √gam DAT, see also comm. ad X.9.3.


## 28
Klein (318) takes utá as linking śū́raḥ and sthiráḥ “Certainly (thou art) heroic and firm,” but this assumes that śū́ra- can be adjectival, which, pace Gr, I don’t. Instead, despite its position, I take the utá as conjoining vīrayúḥ and śū́raḥ … sthiráḥ, a variant on the complementary pairing of vīrá- ‘hero’ and śū́ra- ‘champion’.

## 28-29
Ge tr. rā́dhya- as “leicht zu gewinnen,” but I take it rather as “to be realized, brought to success.” What the content of Indra’s thought is may be clarified by V.39.3 yát te ditsú prarā́dhyam mánaḥ ... “your thought ... which is eager to give, should be realized.” The giving theme is made explicit in the next verse. His intention (the mánas- of 28c) is to give, and this intention will be realized, because giving (rātí-, 29a) has been ordained as part of his nature. Then 29c reaffirms the ritual partnership of mutual giving between Indra and his worshipers. I consider Ge’s “und doch (bist du), Indra, bei mir” not sufficiently specific, esp. given the strong assertion of connection between us and Indra in the tvā́yujā́(31c), tváyéd … yujā́ (32c) “with you as yokemate” found in following verses, not to mention 32c tvám asmā́kaṃ táva smasi “You are ours; we are yours.”


## 31
A difficult hemistich, whose uncertainties include the function of abhí, the meaning of ā́yaman, and the grammatical identity and use of sū́raḥ. Contra Gr I do not take abhí as another preverb with ā́√yam. The only other example of abhí-ā́ √yam is in a gerundive in a curious idiom in an Aśvin hymn (I.34.1). Moreover, if it is a preverb, it has taken an odd position: we generally find preverbs in tmesis at the beginnings of pādas. I instead take it as governing naḥ. As for ā́yaman, it needs to be considered in connection with other ā́√yam forms in this hymn, particularly ā́yamat in 3c (also ā́yatam 7b). In 3c the lexeme means ‘guide’, and I take it so here as well, with naḥ (read twice) as its object. In this interpretation sū́raḥ is ablative of svàr, rather than gen. to this stem (Gr, Old, with the latter suggesting it might be a temporal gen.) or nom. sg. to sū́ra- (Ge).

In c the referent of tát is not specified. Ge thinks it’s the sun, which is certainly possible.
