+++
title = "093"

+++
Indra


## 02
Ge (flg. Gr) takes bāhvòjasā as an abstract tatpuruṣa (“mit Armes Stärke”), but it has bahuvrīhi accent and the other three occurrences are clearly bahuvrīhis. I follow Old in so interpreting it and supplying vájra- as the head noun.

The Pp. analyses vṛtrahā́vadhīt as containing an unaccented avadhīt. I prefer to read it with accented ávadhīt, which allows the ca to conjoin two parallel relative clauses. Since in this interpretation the verse consists entirely of relative clauses, it must be dependent on either the preceding or following verse. Either would work, but the presence of an apparently resumptive sá beginning 3a favors the latter.


## 03
Slight phonetic figure: sá … śiváḥ sákhā, áśvāvad …


## 04
The two vocatives addressed to Indra, vṛtrahan (a) and indra (c), flank that to the sun (sūrya, b), with the first embedded in a 2nd ps. clause with Sūrya as subject.

Only the unambiguous reference of vṛtrahan to Indra saves it from being applied to Sūrya, but the effect is still somewhat unsettling.

The verb udágāḥ reprises úd … eṣi expressing the same action in vs. 1. In fact 1a #ud ghéd abhí is echoed by 4b #udágā abhí with the actual verb agā́(ḥ) substituting for the intervening particles of the former.

## 04-06
I do not understand the force of the vā in 5a, since this verse does not seem to me a logical alternative to vs. 4. Nor do I understand the utá-u beginning 5c, which should not be conjoining the dependent clause of ab with the main clause of c.

However Klein’s discussion (I.450) of utá appears to be on the right track and probably can account not only for the utá but also for the vā, if the explanation is fleshed out a bit. It seems that the three verses in this tṛca, esp. the first two, are loosely parallel to each other, esp. in their third pādas. Vss. 4 and 5 begin with a twopāda yád clause (though the two yád-s are functionally different), with the third-pāda main clause resuming with a tád that is asserted to be in Indra’s domain: 4c sárvaṃ tád indra te váśe “all that is under your will” and 5c (utá) tát satyám ít táva “just that (comes) true for you” — with te matching táva and with sárvam and satyám, the referent and predicate respectively of the two tád-s, phonologically similar. Thus both the disjunctive vā and the conjunctive utá serve rhetorical purposes, marking parallel structures, even though those structures do not have parallel or contrastive content. The third verse (6) varies the structure a bit: instead of yád there are two yés in ab and instead of tád pāda c has tā́n; moreover, c is not a nominal sentence attributing all to Indra but requires Indra himself to make a move (gachasi ‘you go’).

But sárvāṃs tā́n indra … semi-duplicates 4c sárvaṃ tád indra …, and the same total control is implied.


## 08
Unusual syntactically, in having three non-initial sá's; what special effect is being aimed at is not entirely clear.


## 10
The contrastive dur-gá- … su-gá- effect is not easily captured in English because “easy going” is blocked by the English idiom.

In c ca in the sense ‘if’ conditions the accent on the verb váśaḥ. See Klein (DGRV I.238-56, esp. 250-51, on subordinating ca.


## 11
The implicitly conjoined nouns ādíś- (‘aim, intention’) and svarā́jya- (‘sovereignty, self-rule’) do not seem to me to form a natural class. It is possible that the rendering of the former should be adjusted, to harmonize with the finite verb in 15b. The Pp. analyzes that verb as simply adiṣṭa without preverb, but in its sandhi situation it could also reflect ā́-(a)diṣṭa, with the same lexeme as here. Even so, the middle voice of that verb would separate its semantics from the standard active idiom ā́√diś ‘point to, aim at’.

## 13-15
The connection among the verses in this tṛca eludes me, though the fact that they are all set in an apparent mythic past and are joined by logical and/or temporal connectors (14a ádha, 15a ā́d u) suggests that they should form a thematic unit.


## 14
The positioning ... yád ... ádha … is unusual, though Klein (II: 111) simply takes it as a variant of more common ádha yád …


## 15
Judging from Ge’s tr. of the first pāda, “Davor sei mir Bewahrung,” he takes ā́t as an ablative pronoun referring to ámaḥ in 14c (his “Panik,” my “onslaught”), but as far as I can tell, ā́t is elsewhere only adverbial, as opposed to the fuller pronominal form asmā́t. I also question his modal, indeed imperatival interpretation of bhuvat in this preterital context; thematic forms belonging originally to the root aorist stem (á)bhū- can be either subjunctive or a secondarily thematicized injunctive. See Hoffmann 1967 passim, esp. 214-15.


## 17
The verse is syntactically incomplete, consisting of an instrumental phrase (pāda a), a vocative phrase (pāda b), and a subordinate clause with a verb in the imperfect (ā́-abhavaḥ, so Pp.) or possibly injunctive (ā́bhavaḥ). In order to provide a main clause for the yád clause, Ge supplies “geschah es” (“it happened”). I prefer to borrow the verb of the preceding verse, ā́śuṣe, though transposed into a past tense.


## 18
The curious hapax bodhín-manas-, with, per Pp., 1st member bodhít-, may be built on the model of semantically similar cikitvít- / cikitvín-manas-; see AiG II.2.322.


## 19
This verse presents both a conceptual difficulty (in ab) and a syntactic one (in c). As for the first, Indra should not be reaching exhilaration though his help for us, but rather through our soma. Ge sidesteps the difficulty by simply reinterpreting the lexeme abhí prá √mand as meaning ‘draw near’ (“ziehst du her zu uns”) without comment, but this relatively common collocation elsewhere always has the meaning expected of √mad / mand, a meaning that abhī́… mandasānáḥ in 21ab would reinforce. In order to avoid the conceptually unlikely “by what help for us do you become exhilarated?” I have supplied “coming” with the kayā́… ūtyā́phrase - re-establishing the usual balance between what Indra bestows on his worshippers and the soma they offer him in return.

As for the syntactic problem, imperatives (here bhara) should not appear in interrogative sentences, and pāda c begins with interrogative káyā. Ge suggests that the 2nd ps. imperative here is used in analogy to the 1st ps.; in other words, since the subjunctive is perfectly at home in interrogative clauses and the 1st ps. subjunctive ultimately comes to serve as the 1st ps. imperative, its use in interrogative clauses could serve as a model for the introduction of 2nd ps. imperatives in such clauses. But I doubt that the 1st ps. subjunctive had been reinterpreted as an imperative at this era, since the full subjunctive paradigm in all three persons was still very much alive, and in fact Old comments that he does not know of other examples in the older language.

To avoid the syntactic clash I assume that káyā stotṛ́bhyaḥ, parallel to káyā … na ūtyā́in a, ends the sentence, and ā́bhara constitutes a new, abrupt imperatival clause.

Old cites a similar solution, though taking stotṛ́bhyaḥ with the imperative not the kayā́clause, found in Grassmann’s tr., also in Caland/Henry’s, which he dismisses as “künstliches Ueberspringen der Schwierigkeit.” This hardly seems fair, since it does in fact avoid the difficulty, and seems no more artificial than many interpretations of syntactically awkward passages. As for my division into clauses as opposed to that of Gr and Cal/Hen, although stotṛ́bhya ā́bhara is found several times elsewhere as a syntagm (V.6.1 [and reps.], nearby VIII.77.8), pāda-final ā́bhara is extraordinarily common and could easily be construed independently, especially since stotṛ́bhyaḥ would naturally pair with naḥ in these parallel expressions.

## 21
“Bring” can be supplied here on the basis of ā́bhara in 19c.


## 22
Though vītáye is translated as if it were a loc. (“in pursuit”), it is of course a dative, and “Indra” or “you” should probably be supplied as object of the infinitive. The “wives” of the pressed drinks are, acdg. to Sāy. and followed by Ge (and me), the waters; in this soma context cows, standing for cows’ milk, are also possible, though the occurrence of waters in c supports Sāy.’s suggestion.

Pāda c is difficult, primarily because of the uncertain nicumpunáḥ but also because of the genitive case of apā́m. To take the latter issue first, Ge assumes the referent of the nominative phrase is Indra, as “der … Besucher der Gewässer” (apā́ṃ jágmiḥ). Since jágmi- in the singular is ordinarily used of Indra, this identification makes sense, but jágmi-, like other nominals of the same formation, always takes verbal rection, and the goal is expressed in the acc. (ā́havam II.33.11, nṛṣādanam VII.20.1) or loc. (vidátheṣu I.89.7) - not the gen., as Ge’s tr. requires. For the baffling nicumpuṇá (and its mantra variants -cuṅkuná- and -caṅkuna) see EWA s.v. with lit. Mayrhofer cites there an etymological suggestion of Werba’s based on a proposed MIA form, meaning ‘always filling’. Though there is, of course, no certainty here, I have adopted this suggestion for want of anything better, though ‘gushing downward’ or Ge’s ‘sprudelnde (?)’ vel sim. would also work; consider also Old’s “vielleicht ein dem Wasser innewohnender lustrierender Genius.” In any case, meanings in this sphere do not fit Indra terribly well (as Ge’s “?” in part indicates), and, coupled with the problem of the case form of apā́m, this suggests that a different referent be sought for the nominatives in this pāda. I tentatively suggest supplying ūrmí- ‘wave’, regularly found with apā́m, esp. in soma contexts.


## 23
The first word of the verse, iṣṭā́ḥ, can belong either to √iṣ ‘desire’ (or the other √iṣ ‘send’) or √yaj ‘sacrifice, offer’ and should be read as a pun. With Ge the publ. tr. takes índram as governed by vṛdhā́saḥ (“strengthening Indra” / “den Indra … stärkend”). I took it so because asṛkṣata has a clear acc. goal in c and does not need another one. However, I am increasingly uncomfortable with this interpretation, since vṛdhá- otherwise takes the genitive (see nearby VIII.98.5 sunvató vṛdháḥ and 6 mánor vṛdháḥ), and I would now take índram as another goal with asṛkṣata, hence “… libations, strengthening at the ceremony, have surged to Indra, to his downstroke”).

The word avabhṛthá- in c is found only here in the RV. In classical śrauta ritual the avabhṛtha is the “final bath” taken by the sacrificer and his wife at the conclusion of the ritual, and it is interpreted thus here by Gr, and, although Ge doubts that it is the final bath, he still takes it as a “Reinungsbad.” I am dubious for a number of reasons, not least that no one should be bathing in libations (hótrāḥ) and that the participants in the final bath of later ritual are not gods (as Indra would be here) but mortals. Instead I think that the verbal lexeme áva √bhṛ, lit. ‘bear down’, provides the interpretational context for this noun. In the RV verbal forms of this lexeme sometimes take a weapon in the acc., depicting Indra’s bringing this weapon down on his opponent (e.g., I.32.9 índro asyā áva vádhar jabhāra “Indra brought his weapon down upon her”; also vájram X.113.5), or, with an accusative of the opponent or one of his body parts, of Indra bringing down his enemy (e.g., II.20.6 áva … śíro bharad dāsásaya “he brought down the head of the Dāsa”). Here I think it refers concretely to Indra’s “down-stroke,” which is strengthened by the soma offered to him.

## 25-27
The c pādas of all three verses in this tṛca have the same structure: dat. pl. stotṛ́bhyaḥ, a form of índra- (acc. 25-26, voc. 27), 2nd ps. imperative.


## 25
The verse begins with a 2nd ps. pronoun túbhyam, and the content of what follows, until the end of b, seems entirely consonant with Indra as the 2nd ps. referent.

However, the vocative closing b, vibhāvaso, otherwise used only of Agni, and the fact that Indra is the 3rd ps. object of the imperative ā́vaha in c, whose subject should be Agni, call the interpretation of the earlier part of the verse into question. Yet it is next to impossible, in my view, that the announcing of the soma drinks in a is made to anyone but Indra, and so we must reckon with a half verse that changed horses in midstream, as it were, without any poetic benefit accruing.


## 26
I do not understand Ge’s assertion (n. to 26a), that this verse only makes sense if Agni is the speaker, a view shared by Old. I certainly agree that Agni is the subject: I take 26ab as dependent on 25c, where Agni is the 2nd ps. addressee, and take the participle dádhat of b with the objects found in both a and b, with slightly different senses (‘diffuse’ in a, ‘distribute’ in b, both with preverb ví).

The VP “diffuse your skill” refers to Agni’s sending his light upward and outward; the “skill” in question is preumably his ritual skill, his ability to conduct the oblations to heaven.

The 2nd pl. impv. in c must be addressed to the whole set of ritual participants.

Ge. insists (n. to 26c) that stotṛ́bhyaḥ must be read with pāda b, parallel to dāśúṣe “die Kleinode verteile für den Opfernden, für die Sänger,” but the rigid parallelism of the c pādas in this tṛca suggests rather that it belongs with its pāda. Presumably the full set of participants are chanting on behalf of the subset of “praisers.”


## 27
Again I read the verb ā́… dadhāmi with both pādas, with slightly different senses with the two different objects and with te read as gen. with pāda a and dat. with pāda b.

## 28-30
A variant of the final pāda of the last tṛca (27c stotṛ́bhya indra mṛḷaya) becomes the refrain of this tṛca (yád indra mṛḷáyāsi naḥ).

## 31-33
As noted in the publ. intro., the first pāda of the first verse of this tṛca provides its refrain, a slightly odd effect. Only in 31 is the refrain syntactically integrated into the verse. There are also echoes of previous verses: śatakrato, which ends 27b and 28b, appears as nom. śatákratuḥ at the end of 32b. The voc. vṛtrahantama of 30a is echoed by nom. vṛtrahántamaḥ in 32a and voc. vṛtrahan in the same metrical position in 33a. The end of this hymn is very tightly constructed.


## 34
As noted in the publ. intro., this verse falls outside the tṛca structure and seems unconnected to the rest of the hymn. As Ge points out, it plays on two of the names of the Ṛbhus, ṛbhú- itself and vā́ja-. Note also the alliteration, esp. in pāda b: ṛbhukṣáṇam ṛbhúṃ rayím.
