+++
title = "094"

+++
Maruts

## 01-02
For the somewhat peculiar imagery of these vss., see the publ. intro.


## 02
Curiously, vratā́… dhāráyante seems to be the only full VP with vratá- as obj. of a verbal form of √dhṛ, despite the common (nearly 20x) bahuvrīhi dhṛtávrata- ‘whose commandments are upheld’.

There are several ways to construe the dual dvandva sū́ryāmā́sā of c. Ge takes it as a separate obj. of dhāráyante, Re. as an additional subj. of the same verb, while I take it as the subj. of the purpose inf. dṛśé.


## 03
The first pāda has been subjected to a dizzying number of different interpretations, primarily because of the uncertain sense of the resonant word aryáḥ in context, which is complicated by its ambiguous grammatical identity: it can be gen. or abl. sg. or nom. or acc. pl. of arí- or even nom. sg. of aryá-. In addition to the standard treatments, see also Oldenberg ZDMG 54 (=KlSch. p. 79), Bl RR ad VI.45.33, Thieme Fremdling 74ff. I won’t discuss the various suggested alternatives, but simply present my own. I take aryáḥ as abl. sg.; as for the immediately following ā́, I give it a double interpr. On the one hand it is a postposition with aryáḥ in the meaning ‘from’; the phrase aryá ā́is found elsewhere and always in this sense (VIII.34.10, IX.61.11, X.191.1, in addition to the repetition of our pāda in VI.45.33).

Any interpr. that requires aryáḥ to be some other case than abl. sg. needs to confront this formulaic evidence. But in my interpr. ā́is also a preverb with gṛṇanti. I take the lexeme ā́√gṛ to be built on the model of the common ā́√yaj ‘bring here by sacrifice’ and mean ‘bring here by song / sing here’. Our bards attract the Maruts away from the stranger (aryáḥ) to our soma-sacrifice.

“All the bards” (víśve … kārávaḥ) here contrasts with “all the gods” (devā́ḥ … víśve) in the preceding verse, both sets of beings operating in the same territory, the ritual ground.

The publ. tr. fails to tr. sádā ‘always’; it should read “… always sing them here …”


## 04
The opening of this vs. seems unnecessarily over-annunciatory, with both ásti and ayám, each equivalent to “here is.” One would have been enough.

There is some dissension about the referent of svarā́jaḥ, which cannot, of course, modify the (dual) Aśvins. Gr, flg. Ludwig, takes it as a gen. sg. referring to soma. The stem modifies the Maruts in V.58.1, and as a nom. pl. could match marútaḥ in b, except that the utá is then wrongly placed. Ge and Old are surely right that it refers to the Ādityas (as in VII.66.6), who appear individually in the next vs. and who are esp. associated with vratá’s, mentioned already in vs. 2. Klein (DGRV I.439), however, essentially rejects this solution for reasons that aren’t clear to me and calls the issue “unresolved.”


## 05
For the phrase tánā pūtásya, cf. I.3.4 tánā pūtā́saḥ, IX.16.8 tánā punānāḥ.

jā́vant- is a hapax and is surely a truncation of common prajā́vant-, likewise ‘possessing/granting offspring’, which occurs elsewhere in iambic cadences. In the IXth Maṇḍala Soma is asked on a number of occasions to bring or produce substances that are prajā́vant-, e.g. prajā́vad réta ā́bhara “bring here semen producing offspring.”


## 06
The “(drinks)” supplied in ab is not strictly necessary, since the genitives could be construed with matsati in c (so Ge/Re). I have supplied it because √pā ‘drink’ is the signature verb of this tṛca (píbanti 4b, 5a), but I am not wedded to it.

## 07-08
I take the initial kád in both verses as a question particle, introducing a rhetorical question. Ge, Re, and Etter (p. 236) take the kád in 8 as a neut. acc. interrogative adj. modifing ávaḥ (“which help?”), though they all take the kád in 7 as a question particle. I do not see the justification for violating the evident parallelism of the two verses, and I also wonder if we get a choice of the kind of help the gods are going to provide us.


## 09
With Ge and Old, I borrow huve ‘I call’ from 10 to govern pāda c. See also vs. 3 above with the same c pāda, there governed by (ā̇́) … gṛṇanti.
