+++
title = "095"

+++
Indra


## 01
Though Gr identifies rathī́ḥ here as a nom. plural, thus a devī-type form beside the correct vṛkī-type rathi yàḥ found elsewhere, there is no reason not to take it as the nom. singular it appears to be, since number agreement in similes is not so strictly carried through in RV as in Classical poetics. So also AiG III.179 (though taking it as nom. sg. used as nom. pl.).

The image itself is somewhat striking: the songs mounting Indra as their chariot. Indra is usually the active charioteer figure.


## 02
HvN restore the sandhi in a (asyā́ndhasa) as asya ándhasa, but asyá should surely be accented, with the Pp., because it modifies ándhasaḥ rather than being used pronominally.

I follow Ge in supplying vikṣú with the fem. víśvāsu in c, on the basis of 3d.

But other nouns are possible: just in nearby hymns víśvāsu is found with samátsu (‘battles’, VIII.90.2), gīṛṣú (‘hymns’, VIII.92.7), and kṛṣṭíṣu (‘communities’, VIII.92.18), and a semantic case could be made for each of these, even the first.


## 04
Tiraścī Āṅgirasa is the poet of VIII.95-103, according to the Anukramaṇī.


## 05
The verse consists entirely of a relative clause with no main clause, but the referent of the relative must be Tiraścī of 4a, despite the intervening matter in 4c, as the similar structures of 4b and 5a indicate: # índra yás tvā and # índra yás te respectively.

Note the interplay of návīyasam ‘newer’ and pratnā́m ‘age-old’, expressing the standard RVic poetic trope of making an old song new again. So also Ge (n. to 5cd).

## 07-09
See the intro. for the curious density in this tṛca of the ppl. śuddhá- ‘cleansed’, which is not normal soma vocabulary. I do not understand what ritual or conceptual feature is at issue. Ge cites Sāy’s story about the purification of Indra after his killing of Vṛtra. This may be relevant, but there is no reference to Indra’s deeds or activities in this tṛca, save for the final hemistich in vs. 9, where we find vṛtrā́ṇi jighnase “you keep smashing obstacles” - an allusion to Vṛtra but couched in present time and plural number.


## 07
Instead of HvN’s restoration nu índram (for nv índram), nú should of course be accented.

VIII.95.7-8: These two vss. contain successive occurrences of the pf. act. impv. built to √mad: 3rd sg. mamattu (7d), 2nd sg. mamaddhi (8d). Despite their apparently parallel formation, they have distinct transitivity values: the 3rd sg. is transitive, the 2nd sg. not. This difference is consistent in the usage of the two forms: the other instance of mamaddhí (X.96.13) is also intransitive, the 10 of the other 11 occurrences of mamáttu are transitive (save for late X.59.2) The difference may have arisen from the fact that, while mamáttu is a properly formed impv. to the pf. of √mad with expected full grade of the root syllable, in the 2nd sg. we should expect zero grade, hence *ma-md-dhí, which would probably simplify to *mandhí, with the superficially unredupl. weak perfect stem mand-, which is reinterpreted as a secondary root. Hence mamaddhí must be secondarily formed. I do not understand why this would affect its valency, though.
