+++
title = "096"

+++
Indra


## 01
I read ā́tiranta as preverb ā́plus injunctive tiranta (and so better transcribed as ā́tiranta), contra Pp. and Gr. This allows a presential, general reading for the injunctive, which will match the pf. tasthuḥ in c (usually presential, acdg. to Kü), and describes the general cosmic obedience to Indra, rather than a particular historical event. With Ge I take this verb as providing the framework for pāda b as well, though I consider náktam adverbial, rather than the object of the verb, as Ge and Old take it.


## 02
In d “deeds” needs to be supplied, to account for the number differential between tád (c) and yā́ni (d).


## 03
The Pp. reads śrútyai in d (so also Ge, Schmidt B+I), but I follow Gr in taking it as śrútyā́ḥ, agreeing with krátavaḥ in c. Ol considers both interpretations possible and does not make a determination.


## 04
Since yajñíyam is not a superlative, the “the most” of the publ. tr. should be in parentheses.


## 05
The verbal counterpart to 2nd sg. dhatsé in the relative cl. (ab) is augmented ánavanta in the main clause (cd). I would therefore prefer to take dhatsé as a medial, preterital perfect, rather than as a present. Gr and Lu identify it as present, Ge translates it as one, and Kü (p. 275) explicitly claims that -i-liaison forms belong to the perfect, while those without the -i- are presents. Nonetheless, I think we can interpret dhatsé, the only such 2nd sg., as a perfect, next to very common dadhiṣé, esp. as only this form would fit in a Triṣṭubh cadence.

The accent on main-clause ánavanta must result from its membership in the repeated prá subclauses.

I take the formulators in d as the Maruts; Ge suggests either Aṅgirases or Maruts. Since the next tṛca (vss. 7-9) clearly contains the 1st ps. speech of the Maruts, and the next verse (6) has 1st ps. speech that can reasonably attributed to the Maruts, their introduction here would not be surprising.


## 06
Ge (so also Gr) takes ávarāṇy asmāt as temporal: “die nach ihm kommen,” whereas I interpret it spatially. Though “later than him” is possible, it seems pleonastic, in that if Indra begat them, they would have to be later than him. The idea is rather that they exist here on earth, below him,, and also that he begot them as subordinates. Cf. vrjánem ̥ ā́varāṇi “these communities here below” (IX.96.7) and bándhūm̐r imā́m̐ávarān “these bonds here below” (IX.97.17), which both seem spatial, not temporal, also.


## 08
Although the med. pf. of √vṛdh is ordinarily intransitive or reflexive, vāvṛdhānā́ḥ is here best interpreted as transitive in the frame (“increasing you,” with tvā in a as obj.) but intransitive in the simile (“as ruddy throngs increase,” with the nominative NP usrā́iva rāśáyaḥ). See X.78.8 for a similar example of case disharmony.


## 09
However tempting it might be, the juxtaposed phrase ásurā adevā́ḥ is most likely not to be interpreted as an early instantiation of the Asura/Deva conflict of middle Vedic times. Instead it probably refers to human or semi-divine lords (for the former see W. E. Hale, 1986: 83) who do not have the gods on their side. Hale points out that adevá- is the only form in the RV so accented (contrasting with ádeva-), and it must be a bahuvrīhi meaning “not having gods, without gods.”


## 10
In d tanvè might be more comfortably rendered “for his own person” with Ge (“für seine Person”), but tanvì in the following verse seems to require a ‘body’ reading.

## 13-15
As indicated in the intro., the identity of the ‘droplet’ (drapsá-) and the purport of this tṛca are quite unclear. Ge takes both drapsá- and kṛṣṇá- (‘black’) as PNs and the tṛca as their “saga.” Since such a saga is otherwise unknown and both words have lexical meaning, such an approach does not seem to gain us much. Old’s discussion is, as usual, very sharp, but his own interpretation, that Indra is helping an embryonic version of Bṛhaspati, in the form of a drop of semen, to come to birth, also does not convince. Schmidt (1968: 112-13) rejects Old’s interpretation and suggests that it describes in mystical fashion the freeing of the soma-drop in the form of the sun, but declines to tr. the tṛca because of the many uncertainties. I am inclined to see it as a treatment of the ritual step of rinsing the soma in water, as I said in the publ. intro., though much remains murky.

## 16-18
These three vss. begin tváṃ ha tyád. As elsewhere with this configuration (2ND SG. PRN ha tyád), with a neut. tyád without a neut. referent, ha tyád seems to be strongly emphatic (see a similar sequence in I.63.4-7 and comm. ad loc. as well as ad VI.18.3). I would now be inclined to change the tr. of the three vss. here to “It was just you who …”


## 16
The identity of the “seven” is unclear; ordinarily that number refers to rivers or priestly offices, but neither makes sense here. However, Ge (n. to 16a) points to seven enemies destroyed by Indra in X.49.8, 120.6.

Ge takes vibhu-mánt- (only here) as ‘die in dir einen Gebieter hatten’; this might be plausible, because Indra is characterized as vibhū́in 11 and so creatures associated with him might possess him as vibhú-. But the problem is that vibhú-/ū́- is only adjectival, as far as I can tell, and does not have the ‘lord, master’ meaning presupposed here. Though possessive -vant-/-mant- stems should be built to nouns, Debrunner (AiG II.2.877-78) allows for pleonastic use of the suffix with adjectives in this and a number of other cases.


## 18
Noteworthy here is the variant on the expression of Indra’s standard deed, vṛtrám √han and esp. his epithet vṛtrahán- in the phrase ghanó vṛtrā́ṇām “the bane of obstacles,” with the nominal ghaná- from √han and a pl. of vṛtrá-.

On √stambh with the waters as obj. see comm. ad II.11.5.


## 19
As indicated in the publ. intro., I interpret this verse as containing a riddle (a-c) and its answer (d), an interpretation at odds with Ge (flg. Sāy), who takes all of the verse until its last word as part of a single description of Indra. His rendering of d, “der Vṛtratöter ist (jedem) anderen gewachsen, so sagen sie” is grammatically impossible because āhuḥ ought then to be accented; prátī́d anyám āhuḥ must be a separate clause (as Old also takes it, though with implausible semantics). In my interpretation the first three pādas present several different descriptions of Indra’s characteristics and activities. Although these descriptions are fairly transparent, they do not name Indra, whereas the first two words of pāda d, sá vṛtrahā́, names him by his standing epithet and serves as answer to the implicit riddle posed by the first three pādas. Although this interpretation is more complex than Ge’s, it allows us to account for the odd finale of d and especially for the anyám, which by my rules (Fs. Beekes, 1997) should have a definite reading, “the other.” I take this “other” to be the poser of the riddle, and the unidentified speakers of d triumphantly respond to him with the solution. That the first two words of the final two verses of the tṛca (and the hymn) repeat sá vṛtrahā́of 19d, followed by the actual name of the god, lends support to my interpretation of vs. 19.

I tr. loc. sutéṣu in a as if it were a genitive; “enjoyer at the pressings” would be possible, but just a little less parsable in English.

I am somewhat puzzled by the simile of b: yó áheva revā́n. Ge takes the áhā (so Pp.) as the comparandum with Indra and revā́n as the shared quality (“der wie die (neuen) Tage prangend ist”), but revánt- doesn’t mean ‘resplendent’; rather, as a derivative of rayí-‘ wealth’, it means ‘rich, wealthy’. Moreover, in similes, áhā, marked by iva, several times precedes the actual comparandum and serves as adverbial qualifier - e.g., I.130.2 áhā víśveva sū́ryam “like the sun through all the days” (cf. also áheva in VI.61.9), and so I interpret it here, though I admit it is still not a compelling image.

In c the Saṃhitā text reads náryápāṃsi (as also in I.85.9), with five syllables, suggesting a word separation nári ápāṃsi and so analyzed by Pp. (followed by Aufrecht and HvN). But this must represent, one way or another, the collocation náryā + ápāṃsi, found in opposite order even in this same tṛca (21c ápāṃsi náryā; see also IV.19.10, as well as ápāṃsi … náryāṇi VII.21.4; also the bahuvrīhi náryāpas- in nearby VIII.93.1). Grassmann suggests reading *náryā́pāṃsi, as does Old (ad I.85.9)(see also Macdonell Vedic Reader ad I.85.9), and this “slight emendation” (Macdonell’s words) not only fixes the morphology but also restores a more standard break ( ̮ ̮ _ ) for the three shorts ( ̮ ̮ ̮) found (though the latter break is by no means uncommon). However, Lubotsky apparently takes nári here as the loc. to the noun nṛ́- (the náryápāṃsi passages would contain the only locatives to this stem in the RV), and Ge adduces the somewhat parallel case of vṛ́śṇi … śávaḥ (V.35.4, VIII.3.10), vṛ́śṇi paúṃsyam (VIII.7.23). Like our nári ápāṃsi / ápāṃsi náryā, the former collocation exists alongside one with a properly formed -iyaadjective, vṛ́ṣṇ(i)yaṃ śávaḥ (VIII.3.8 [same hymn as one of the truncated occurrences], VIII.51.10 IX.64.2). But the easy fix available to the nári ápāṃsi case (lengthening the vowel of ápāṃsi) is not available for the vṛ́ṣṇi examples.

I do not know quite what to do with all this. The vṛ́ṣṇi case looks to me like an artificial truncation that nonetheless was original to the text, while I’m inclined to see nári as a redactional change, perhaps on the model of vṛ́ṣṇi. I am thus willing to follow Gr, Old, and Macdonell in emending to *náryā́pāṃsi. However, these are, to say the least, quite subjective criteria, and I am not at all convinced these views are correct. It is nonetheless possible to sketch a possible but problematic scenario for these developments. The two examples of vṛ́śṇi te śávaḥ are nominal clauses. Cf.


## 10
tád indra vṛ́ṣṇi te śávaḥ, rendered in the publ. tr. “that is your bullish vast power, Indra,” with vṛ́ṣṇi nominally a neut. sg. to an otherwise non-existent i-stem adj. But it might be possible instead to take it as the loc. sg. of vṛ́ṣan-, with vṛ́ṣṇi … śávaḥ “the power is in the bull.” Though in a cursory look I have found no śávaḥ + LOC. constructions in the RV, other abstract words for power do figure in such syntagms (including in our hymn, VIII.96.3). See, e.g., V.33.6 papṛkṣéṇyam indra tvé hí ójaḥ, nṛmṇā́ni ca … “For, Indra, in you are strength to be nurtured and manly powers.” There are two fundamental problems with this suggestion: 1) the zero-grade loc. -ni to -an-stems is not found in the RV; we find only full-grade -ani; 2) it is hard to construe the te, since the bull and 2nd ps. Indra are coreferential. “This power of yours is in (you,) the bull” is awkward and unlikely. A bolder hypothesis - bolder than I would venture - would link these two problems and reconstruct an underlying syntagm *vṛ́ṣaṇi śávaḥ with full-grade loc. and no enclitic pronoun. When the posited vṛ́ṣaṇi reduced to vṛ́ṣṇi (perhaps because of association with adjectival vṛ́ṣṇ(i)ya-), te was introduced to maintain the metrical shape. There are no other attested examples of the loc. sg. of vṛ́ṣan- in the RV to support the trisyllabic reading. In any case, in this scenario the old loc. would be reinterpreted as an endingless adjectival or adverbial element in this collocation, alternating with syntactically impeccable vṛ́ṣṇ(i)yaṃ śávaḥ. With this set up, we can get nári on this model: vṛ́ṣṇ(i)yaṃ śávaḥ : vṛ́śṇi … śávaḥ ápāṃsi náryā : nári ápāṃsi I believe this development was redactional rather than found in the ur-text. First because vṛ́śṇi … śávaḥ is a plausible neut. sg. phrase, but with the pl. ápāṃsi an endingless nári is more difficult. Moreover, an abstract quality located in a being (like “strength is in the bull”) is a much more likely notion than “labors are in the man.” And the metrical evidence strongly favors an original *náryā́pāṃsi, though it does not entirely rule out the short vowel.

But I lay out this scenario very skeptically, primarily because of the wrong grade in the posited loc. sg. Here I would point out that the same trouble would afflict any attempt to explain vṛ́ṣṇ(i)ya- as a thematic descasuative derivative from a locative by pointing to the two synchronically alternating syntagms here. Such a derivation for *-(i)yo-possessive adjectives in general has been proposed (see Balles, Sprache 39 [1997 (2000)] 141-67, cited from Meier-Brügger, Indo-European Linguistics, 283-84, for which ref. I thank JL). I do not believe that the last word has been said about this issue.


## 21
Note the full syntagm ápāṃsi náryā responding to the náryápāṃsi in 19c.

Gerundives occasionally take dative agents, like sákhibhyaḥ here. Cf., e.g., I.33.2 stotṛ́bhyo hávyaḥ. ## 097 Indra VIII.97.1-3, 4-6: All three verses of the first tṛca begin with a form of rel. yáfollowed by voc. indra. Pāda 2c mimics this opening with yá(jamāne). The first two verses of the following tṛca (4-6) continue this pattern, if somewhat raggedly: 4a yác cakra, 5a yád, 5c yát.


## 01
The relative phrase yā́ḥ … bhújaḥ “which delightful things” has no obvious correlative expression in the main clause of cd. Ge supplies “(mit denen),” which is certainly possible and perhaps the default option. But following a suggestion of Old’s, I take the asya of c, otherwise unaccounted for, as the functional correlative, despite the difference in number and gender. Because it is unaccented, asya should be pronominal and refer to something already present in the discourse, and there are few candidates, esp. because stotár- doesn’t seem to take a genitive. It would not be surprising to resume the fem. expression “delightful things” simply with “that (stuff).” The masc. singular referring to the goods Indra has acquired continues in vs. 2, with the yám … tám pair. I tr. asya “from that” rather than “of that,” since the latter doesn’t parse well in English.

In cd stotā́ram … yé ca … vṛktábarhiṣaḥ is a nice example of the “X and which Y” construction.


## 02
Ge tr. ávyayam as ‘ohne Einbusse’ (loss), rather than ‘ovine, belonging to sheep’ (contra Gr, etc.), presumably because of its initial accent (against the normal accent in avyáya- ‘ovine’). This seems unnecessary. The other occurrence of ávyaya- (IX.86.34) modifies the soma filter and Ge renders it “aus Schafwolle” without comment. In our passage he is following Sāy’s vyayarahitam, but vyaya- ‘disappearance, loss, outlay’ is not attested until the epic/Classical language, as far as I know. Furthermore, sheep fit nicely into this equine and bovine context, with the three terms áśvaṃ gā́m bhāgáṃ ávyayam displaying a classic Behagel’s Law configuration. As for the aberrant accent, Debrunner (AiG II.2.213) attributes it to the influence of semantically identical ávya-.

Ge takes the locative phrase in c with ab, “Welches Ross und Rind du … als Anteil … bestimmt hat für den Opfernden …” Again this seems odd and unnecessary.

The locatives of c are summarized by tásmin in d, and contrast with paṇaú at the end of that pāda. Moreover the middle voice of dadhiṣé in the relative clause contrasts functionally with the act. imperative dhehi in the main clause. First Indra acquires goods for himself, then confers them on others. By placing the recipient in the rel.

clause with the middle verb, Ge erases this neat voice contrast. Pāda c then seems to represent a heavy preposed NP picked up by initial tásmin in d.


## 03
Note the doubling of pres. sásti ‘sleeps’ with the adverbial gerund anuṣvā́pam. In Jamison 1982/83 I argue that the gerund is used here because the poet wanted to use a pres. tense of √svap but didn’t really know one, since the various presents to this root are secondary and to some extent improvisational.

The end of the verse … dhehi táṃ tátaḥ with its two final pronominals is striking, but clearly constructed as the mirror image of 2d tásminn táṃ dhehi. The good sacrificer of 2cd is contrasted with the godless, vowless man of 3, and it may not be entirely fanciful to suggest that the unusual word order — tá-forms ordinarily occurring at the beginning of clauses — is a syntactic expression of his perverse nature.


## 04
Following Ge I take keśíbhiḥ “hairy-maned (horses)” as an appositional simile with gīrbhíḥ: the hymns serve as the team that brings Indra to us along “heaven’s way.” This latter form, dyugát ‘heaven-going’ vel sim., is extensively discussed by Scar (106-7), who ultimately concludes that it is “unklar,” though he favors taking it as a nom. sg. modifying the soma presser (sutā́vān). This seems odd: the somapresser is the one element in this verse who is likely to stay put. I take it, with Gr and (implicitly) Old, as adverbial, referring to the movement of the hymns, as metaphorical horses, through heaven. In his note Ge endorses Sāy’s interpretation of it is a shortening of dyugádbhiḥ, which (as Wolff’s suggestion) Old dismisses without argument. This explanation by truncation certainly does not seem necessary, since a neuter adverb works well enough.

## 07-09
The da capo-like structure of the verses in this tṛca, with the first pāda repeated verbatim as the last one, is quite unusual.


## 07
I have chosen to read the impv. bhávā in b with the two small clauses in c as well, though it is certainly possible to interpret those with Ge as straight indicative nominal clauses: “you (are) there with help …; you (are) friendship …”


## 10
Although they belong to different tṛcas, 10ab responds to vs. 9: in both Indra is characterized by the lexeme abhí √bhū ‘dominate, surmount’ (9c abhibhū́ḥ, 10a abhibhū́taram), with each governing an NP beginning with víśva-. Moreover, in vs. 9 it is said that gods (as well as mortals) have not attained (āśata) Indra, while in 10ab the gods appear to be the implied subject of the verbs tatakṣuḥ and jajanuḥ “fashioned and begot” - in other words, paradoxically, though they do not attain him they are credited with creating him.

In c there is pseudo-etymological play between váriṣṭḥaṃ váre, which not only are unrelated but also belong to two different NPs, despite their adjaceny. There is some uncertainty about the position of utá or even what it is conjoining. Klein (DGRV I.346, 349) considers the pāda an XY utá construction, joining the two complex NPs that precede it, with the adjectives in d “merely strung on to the basical phrasal syntagm” (346).

The etymological figure ugrám ójiṣṭham, with a positive and its superlative, is reminiscent of the simplex followed by comparative in 9c / 10a abhibhū́ḥ …  abhibhū́taram. The rest of pāda d, tavásam tarasvínam, almost mimics an etymological figure via phonological scrambling, although the words are of course unrelated.


## 11
There is phonetic play between asvaran (a; see also abhisvárā 1b) to √svar ‘sound’ and s u var(-pati)(c) containing the ‘sun’ word, although the latter of course has a distracted sv cluster.


## 12
I use two different English tr. for namanti, ‘bend’ and ‘bow’, depending on the object; this is merely an English problem, as the passage adduced by Ge shows: VII.23.20 ā́... índram ... name girā́, nemíṃ táṣṭeva.

In cd I supply ‘cry out’ (√svar) on the basis of 11a sám … asvaran (note the sám in 12d) and 12b (abhi)svárā.

Ge takes tarasvínaḥ as nom. pl., which is grammatically possible, but I prefer Old’s gen. sg. (an alternative also for Gr), since the same adj. modifies Indra in 10d.


## 13
The ca in c is one of the rare examples of subordinating ca in the RV, as shown by the accent induced on the verb vavártat; see Klein DGRV I.240-41. Its position, about which Klein does not comment, is peculiar, but it can probably be accounted for metrically. In this particular Atijagatī line (13 syl.), there is a natural break after the first two words (5 syllables), máṃhiṣṭho gīrbhír, and the rest of the line behaves as if it were a dimeter (8-syl.) line, ā́ca yajñíyo vavártat, with initial preverb followed by the enclitic conjunction.


## 14
The final word in a, enā, is taken as enāḥ by the Pp., a reading followed by Gr, Ge, Old, and Lub; in this interpretation it modifies or doubles (since ena- is a pronominal, not an adjectival demonstrative stem) fem. acc. pl. púraḥ earlier in the pāda. I do not rule this out, but wonder whether it can be the enclitic instr. sg. enā to ayám in the meaning ‘in that way, i.e., how’. See enā ‘thereby’ in V.2.11, in addition to personal uses (‘with him’) in IX.96.2, X.108.3.

Pāda b collects several words that have been prominent in the characterization of Indra earlier in the hymn: ójasā (ójiṣṭham 10d), śaviṣṭha (śavasas pate 6b, śávasā 9c), and śakra (śakra 4a). It is esp. clever that the grammatical identities of the first two terms have been switched: s-stem instr. to superlative and vice versa.

Note that though cd forms a single clause with two different subjects (“all the worlds” and “heaven and earth”), the dual verb rejete agrees with the nearer one, the decomposed dual dvandva dyā́vā … pṛthivī́ca.

## 14-15
Both Lü (Var. 20, 506) and Schlerath (Kö. 139) consider this sequence to be a satyakriya. I can see the point, but if it is a truth-formulation, it is a muted one. The concept is clearest in 15a “Let this truth be protective of me,” esp.

since this is the last verse of the hymn. The truth-formulation itself could be either the preceding verse (so Lüders) or the whole hymn (Schlerath allows both possibilities). In the absence of the standard instrumental ṛtéṇa (later satyena) that signals a satyakriya I am reluctant to label it as such, though certainly it is akin.

Schlerath also point out that the last word of the hymn is rājan.


## 15
“The distillate of all mother’s milk” for viśvápsnya- assumes the etymological connection between -psnya- and stána- ‘breast’, which is now standard doctrine. See EWA s.v. stána-.
