+++
title = "098"

+++
Indra

## 02-03
Parts of these two verses reappear, verbatim or slightly modified, in X.170.4, a hymn to Sūrya: 3ab = X.170.4ab, while the first two words of 2c nom. sg.

viśvákarmā viśvádevaḥ correspond to the inst. sg. phrase viśvákarmaṇā viśvádevyāvatā in X.170.4d. In our hymn the subject of 3ab is Indra, who is also the referent of the nom. sg. phrase in 2c; in X.170.4 the referent in both cases is Sūrya.

Because of the verbatim correspondence of 3ab and X.170.4ab save for the identity of the subject, I think they should be translated in the same way. I therefore take svàr in a as nominative and an implicit simile and rocanám in b as an accusative of goal.

Ge by contrast takes svàr in our 3a also as an accusative of goal, parallel to rocanám: “Im Licht erstrahlend gingst du zur Sonne, zum Himmelslicht,” whereas in X.170.4 he takes them both as nominatives: “Im Licht erstahlend kamst du als Sonne als Himmelslicht…” Although of course nothing forbids different interpretations of identical phaseology in different contexts, in situtations where identical interpretations are possible (as here) it seems best not to vary the translations.

The bahuvrīhi epithet of Indra viśvákarmā (2c) is of course a play on the divine figure of the same name, whereas the bahuvrīhi viśvádeva- (also 2c) makes reference to the corporate entity the All Gods (víśve devā́ḥ). The former is simply applied directly to Sūrya in X.170.4d, whereas viśvádeva- has gone through some derivational shenanigans, producing a doubly (or triply) marked viśvádevyi yā-vant-.


## 04
The impv. gadhi is a hapax, beside gahi, which occurs 84 times (per Lub.).

The latter is almost always pāda-final and, when internal, never occupies this precise metrical position (4th and 3rd syllables from end), but although this slight indication of complementary distribution might ordinarily not be sufficient to account for the different endings, the distribution of the two forms fits a more general pattern. The gahi / gadhi question is obviously part of a larger phenomenon, or rather two: 1) the distribution of -hi vs. -dhi in the 2nd sg. imperative, 2) the conditioning for the general loss of occlusion in voiced aspirates, esp. *dh > h. As for the former question, various generalizations work for various defined groups of forms - e.g., that -dhi occurs after consonants - but other groups show fluctuation, particularly disyllabic imperatives. Re (GLV §58) suggests that in this class -hi should be the preference after long vowel and -dhi after short vowel, but that the forms “usées,” stuhi, ihi, and gahi, have generalized -hi “mieux propre évidemment à l'elocution rapide.” This is not particularly satisfactory. The most recent discussion of the whole phenomenon that I know of is Lubotsky’s “Sanskrit h<*dh, bh” (Sthāpakašrāddham, Professor G.A. Zograph Commemorative Volume, ed. N. V. Gurov and Ya. V. Vasil’kov. Pp. 124-44. St.

Peterburg: Orientalia, 1995 [1997], available at http://hdl.handle.net/1887/14207), showing his characteristic thoroughness and clarity of presentation. Dismissing previous claims that the phenomenon is dialectal since the *dh > h change is found in grammatical forms and unlikely to be due to borrowing, he suggests that it must be due to a conditioned sound law and that apparent exceptions to this sound law must be explained on a case-to-case basis. The sound law he proposes is *-VdhV# > -VhV#.

I will not discuss how he handles exceptions to this rule in other grammatical and lexical categories, but obviously the rule defines forms like śrudhi, kṛdhi, and our gadhi as exceptions. Again, I will not treat all his explanations of non-conforming - dhi imperatives, but concentrate on disyllables with -dhi after short vowel. For kṛdhí and other forms in -ṛ (vṛdhi, spṛdhi), he assumes that ṛ blocks the application of the rule, on the assumption that the older pronunciation of ṛ was [ər] (p. 136), while for śrudhí he examines distributional factors. Most important for him is the fact that śrudhi most often shows up in the formula śrudhī hávam (with lengthened final vowel) and therefore the phonological conditions for *-dh > h are not met, because the imperative “formed a whole with the following word” and “does not normally stand in pausa” (p. 134). He also notes that gadhi “stands in the interior of a pāda” (p.

134), while gahi is overwhelmingly pāda-final, and that stuhi is also often pāda-final.

(I would add that, in addition to a number of initial stuhí, the pāda-internal examples of stuhi never occupy the 4th-3rd position.) I am in agreement with Lub that the metrical position of the form shows a strong correlation with the -dhi vs. -hi alternate and also that kṛdhí and other forms in ṛ are a special case (whatever the reason: I am not convinced that the older pronounciation was [ər]), since the metrical distribution of kṛdhi tracks that of gahi and other forms in -hi, not śrudhi and since a cluster * ər-dh- should produce a metrically heavy syllable. He does, however, shift his explanatory ground for śrudhi and company without signaling the change. For śrudhi the most important factor for him at first appears to be the formulaic evidence, that it forms a phonological phrase with hávam, that this phonological bonding is demonstrated by the lengthened final vowel of the imperative, and that therefore the imperative was not really in pausa and therefore not subject to the *dh > h rule. But later in the same paragraph he seems to argue that its position internal to the pāda, in contrast to pāda-final -hi forms like stuhi and gahi, provides the conditioning and the formulaic argument is no longer foremost. Although the śrudhī hávam formula is certainly pervasive, I would contend that it is the metrical position, not the formation of a formulaic phonological phrase, that is the key factor and, moreover, that the lengthening of the final vowel before hávam (also gíraḥ) is the low-level result of metrical factors, to avoid four shorts in the cadence. Certainly our gadhi is not formulaically or syntactically connected with the word that follows it: … gadhi priyáḥ (“come, as dear one”). If we do want to claim that bonding with a following element kept the -dhi from final position, it would surely be better to focus on sequences involving enclitics (e.g. VIII.66.12 … śrudhí me hávam), which would create a phonological word ending with the enclitic.

Unfortunately, such sequences are rare, compared to the śrudhī hávam type.

Pāda-internal position also appears to condition the occurrence of another -dhi imperative, bodhi to √bhū, as I discussed some time ago (“Syntactic Constraints on Morphological Change: The Vedic Imperatives bodhi, dehi, and dhehi,” in Syntaxe des langues indo-iraniennes anciennes, ed. E. Pirart. Pp. 63-80, esp. 69-75.

Barcelona: Editorial Ausa, 1997). The parallel imperatives bodhi and bháva are almost in complementary distribution, with bodhi once again standing internal in the pāda and bháva either initial or final.

The last word has not been said about this complex issue.


## 05
As in the previous hymn (VIII.97.9c, 10a), this one deploys two forms of the lexeme abhí √bhū ‘dominate’ to describe Indra - here 2a abhibhū́r asi and 5ab abhí … babhū́tha - although the two hymns are ascribed to different poets from different lineages.

As for the perfect form here, Kü (344-45) remarks that the perfect of √bhū, both as simplex and with abhí and pári, is generally presential in value, and such a value works well here. There is another issue with this perfect. This verse contains the 2nd sg. babhū́tha without i-liaison, but 11b has babhū́vitha with the liaison. It is striking to encounter both forms in the same hymn, esp. since, as Kü points out (344 n. 618), babhū́tha is the older, babhūvitha the younger form, found only once elsewhere in the RV, while babhū́tha is quite common. Metrics must have encouraged the use of younger babhū́vitha here, since it is final in a 12-syllable line, where the older form would not fit. The other babhū́vitha (VIII.33.19) occurs in an Anuṣṭubh cadence, where iambic rhythm is also favored. It is worth noting that thirteen of the twenty-one occurrences of babhū́tha are final in Triṣṭubh lines, so the insertion of the i-liaison simply converts this common cadential form into one appropriate to Jagatī.


## 07
With Ge I take udā́in c as the acc. pl. neut. of udán-, rather than instr. sg.

to a root noun úd- with Gr, despite Old’s championing of the latter analysis and explicit rejection of the former. See also AiG III.316 and Schindler (Das Wurzelnomen im Arischen und Griechischen [unpubl. diss., Würzburg 1972], pp. 12- 13), which both affirm the nom.-acc. pl. -n-stem interpretation.


## 08
The simile vā́r ná … yavyā́bhiḥ is syntactically ambiguous, in that vā́r can be the comparandum of either subject or object, though it probably makes better sense as an object, as Ge takes it: (a body of) water growing with floods of (tributary?) water. However, a nominative interpretation is by no means excluded, as waters not infrequently swell things and make them grow; cf., e.g., I.65.4 várdhantīm ā́paḥ … súśiśvim “The waters strengthen the lovely child.” For an overelaborate interpretation see Oberlies (Relig. I.521).

## 09
This verse may refer to the “Fallow-bay yoking libation,” which serves as the occasion for the first-maṇḍala Indra hymns I.61-63, 82. However, this libation is ordinarily the final act in a ritual, but is not final here.
