+++
title = "099"

+++
Indra


## 01
The redupl. form ápīpyan is implicitly assigned by Ge to √pā ‘drink’ as a redupl. (causative) aorist: “Dich haben … die … Männer getränkt,” an analysis I follow. However, the majority opinion is that it belongs to √pī ‘swell’, which is not out of the question. The competing claims and morphological possibilities are discussed above ad VIII.66.7 with regard to apīpema. Our form here could have the expected zero-grade to an athematic stem (ápīpy-an), and the long reduplication could be correct for a causative reduplicated aorist, although since the cluster -py- is undistracted here, a short reduplication might be expected (type AV atitrasan).

However, since most of the forms of the act. redupl. aorist paradigm would not have such a cluster (*ápīpet, etc.), the long reduplication would surely be generalized. For further disc. of the proposed formation see VIII.66.7.


## 03
The simile in the first pāda of this verse is quite problematic: not only is the image intended quite unclear, but the verbal stem śrāya- in participial śrāyanta(ḥ) (so Pp., Gr. rather śrāyante) is a near hapax (only here in the RV, other instances in MS I.8.2, TĀr. IV.2.5 = ĀpŚS XV.3.7). Most tr. take it as transitive ‘cooking’ (so Ge, e.g.); Old argues that sū́ryam should be the object: “like those cooking the sun, as it were,” while Ge takes bhakṣata as the governing verb (“As [people] cooking use [nutzen] the sun, they enjoy [geniessen] all [the goods] of Indra” - ‘nutzen’ and ‘geniessen’ must be his alternative tr. of abhakṣata depending on the object).

However, Narten (“Vedic śrīṇāti, gr. κρείων, κρέων,” KZ 100 [1987]: 270-96 = Kl Sch 340-66, cited after latter) points out (p. 342 n. 3) that the stem is elsewhere intrans. with the meaning ‘gar werden’ and tr. the hemistich “wie gar werdende (= sich erhitzende) Leute (Anteil) an der Sonne (haben), so haben sie Anteil an allen (Gütern) des Indra,” flg. a suggestion of Hoffmann’s. The TĀ=ĀpŚS passage explicitly connects “getting done/cooked” with the sun: sūryasya harasā śrāya “become cooked by the glow/heat of the sun.” The Narten-Hoffmann interpretation is followed here, though I am still somewhat puzzled both about the content of the simile and about its relevance to the frame. For the first, getting cooked does not usually require the mediation of the sun but rather of fire, so literally “having a share in the sun” at best ought to mean the “share” of the sun that is actually fire. This is not terribly satisfactory, so, with Narten we must therefore interpret “getting cooked” metaphorically (but not too metaphorically), as indicating heated or excited people whose state is likened to heating by the sun. But even with this interpretation of the simile, there seem far less tortuous ways to indicate that people share in Indra’s goods than to compare this to heated-up people sharing in the sun. However, the transitive interpretations do not improve the sense: Old’s cooking the sun would require quite a lot of metaphor to rescue it, and the same problem with Narten’s interpretation - that cooking doesn’t require the sun - affects Ge’s transitive version.

The only reason I can see for the sun to make this distinctly odd appearance in the simile of pāda a is to prepare us for its implicit appearance in the second hemistich. With Ge I assume that the subject of the loc. absol. in c is the sun, which is born every day, and whose “birth” at dawn sets the early morning ritual in motion, the rite at which the dakṣiṇās are distributed. Ge suggests that jāté jánamāne is metri causa for an āmreḍita jāté-jāte, but this seems unlikely. This is the only occurrence of the middle participle to jána- and indeed one of the only middle forms of this rare 1st class pres. stem (most of the others are -anta 3rd plurals that are re-marked actives; see Jamison "Voice Fluctuation in the Rig Veda: Medial 3rd plural -anta in Active Paradigms", IIJ 21 [1979] 146-69). I would hesitate to suppose that a Rigvedic poet would create a new participial stem simply to avoid a metrical problem. Instead I think he is making a temporal point: the sun has been born previous (jāté) and when he is being born again, that is, at the moment the ritual commences, we think about the goods that will come to us in the ritual.

Note that bhakṣata of the first hemistich is reprised by a nominal derivative of √bhaj, bhāgám, in the second, and that the “goods” that need to be supplied in ab are present as vásūni in c. This interdependence of the two half-verses supports the notion that the sū́ryam of a is a pretaste of the unexpressed sun of c. The next pragātha, vss. 5-6, may show the same covert interdependence; see disc. ad 5c.


## 04
The meaning and root etymology of the first compound member ánarśaare very uncertain; see EWA s.v. arśasāná-. It is here translated as if it belongs to a putative root √arś / ṛś ‘harm’; see the disc. of ánarśani ad VIII.32.2. By contrast, Ge’s “der seine Gaben nicht verschliesst” rests on his tentative connection of it with Lat. arceō ‘keep close, confine’. A contrastive pair qualifying rātí- ‘present’ as ‘not harmful’ (pāda a) (but) ‘beneficial’ (bhadrá-, pāda b) is rhetorically more satisfying than ‘not shut, closed’ / ‘beneficial’, though I confess that “not harmful (but) beneficial” seems somewhat flat-footedly obvious for a Rigvedic poet.

Whose mind is being bestirred to give in pāda d? I assume that it is Indra’s, whose gifts are celebrated in the first hemistich, as well as in the previous verse (3), with which this verse is paired in the pragātha. But Ge, followed by Gotō (1987: 276), takes it as the patron’s, supplying “(des Gönners).” Although for my interpretation I might prefer a middle form rather than the act. part. codáyan and although I.48.4 (not adduced by Ge) … yuñjáte máno dānā́ya sūráyaḥ gives some support for his tr., most instances of dānā́ya involve gods (esp. Indra) as giver, esp. in VIII, but also, e.g., I.55.7 dānā́ya mánaḥ somapāvan astu te “Let your [=Indra’s] mind be on giving, soma-drinker.”

## 05-06
This pragātha is tightly bound lexically. Note first víśvāḥ spṛ́dhaḥ in both 5a and 6c. But more striking are the six occurrences of the root √tari : prátūrtiṣu (5a), (viśva-)tū́r (5c), tūrya taruṣyataḥ (5d), turáyantam (6a), tūrvasi (6d). In this group not a single stem is repeated: there are two different nominal stems and four different verbal stems. (See also átūrtam in 7d, to yet another stem.) On the formulaic use of this root and its Indo-European background, see Watkins, Dragon 344-46.


## 05
The lexeme abhí √bhū ‘dominate’, in play in the previous two hymns (VIII.97.9c, 10a, 98.2a, 5ab), is matched by synonymous abhí √as here. See also


## 04
in the next hymn.

Ge renders the phrase aśastihā́janitā́as “der die Hohnreden niederschlägt und hervorruft”; that is, he construes the 1st compound member aśasti- also with janitā́, flg. Sāy’s gloss of janitā́as asurebhyo ‘śastīnāṃ janayitā, and also ascribes an aberrant meaning to √jan, ‘call out, evoke’. It is certainly true that the normal value of √jan, ‘beget’, seems somewhat out of place in this otherwise hostile context, but I am reluctant to push both the syntax and the semantics as far as Ge’s interpretation requires. I think rather that Indra’s general positive role as cosmic begetter is being alluded to, in addition to his specific role as all-victorious dominator. In fact, the paired verse in this pragātha may give us the clue. In 6ab Heaven and Earth (the underlying referents of the dual kṣoṇī́) run after Indra “like two parents after their child” (śíśuṃ ná mātárā), which reverses an image found elsewhere of Indra as the begetter of Heaven and Earth, as in VIII.36.4 janitā́divó janitā́pṛthivyā́ḥ. In other words, I think we should read janitā́in 5c pregnantly, as “begetter (of Heaven and Earth)” in opposition to 6ab, where Indra is the child and Heaven and Earth the parents. Alternatively, the pregnant usage might be “begetter (of all),” with viśvaborrowed from the first member of the following compound viśvatū́r. Watkins (Dragon, 345) roughly follows the Ge interpretation, though with more persuasive semantics: “you smash the un-song (for the loser) and engender (it for the winner)”; presumably the parenthetic “it” should be not the “un-song,” but its de-negated counterpart, śastí- ‘laud, praise’.

I tr. taruṣyant- as a pseudo-desiderative, contra Ge (Wettstreiter, sim. Gr).

The stem is a hapax, and its formation isn’t entirely clear. But the most orthodox way to explain it is as a denominative to tárus-, ‘power/desire to overcome’; since ‘seeking’ is a standard sense associated with -yá-denominatives, a desiderative sense is certainly possible.


## 06
Following Thieme (KZ 92 [1978] 46), kṣoṇi- is literally a ‘shout’ or ‘warcry’. But in the dual it evolves to refer to Heaven and Earth, presumably by way of the long semantic chain ‘(two) opposing war-cries’ à ‘opponents’ à complementary pair à the archetypal complementary pair, i.e. Heaven and Earth.

Though both duals, pitárā and mātárā, can refer to both parents, it is surely no accident that in this tender image of childhood it’s literally “the two mothers” rather than “the two fathers” who pursue the errant toddler.

With Gr and Old I read *śrathayanta for śnathayanta (√śnath ‘pierce’), flg.

Sāy and the Kashmir ms; see Old ad loc. Although Ge retains śnathayanta, in his note he allows for the possibility of the variant reading. As Old points out, the rhyming śnath form could have been introduced because of the mention of enemies. ### 07-08 The verb havāmahe of 8c must be read with both verses (so also Ge) and is a mark of the unity of the pragātha. This pragātha is, furthermore, cunningly constructed, with a number of rhetorical pairs: variants on “X and non-X” are found in 7b prahetā́raṃ áprahitam and 8a iṣkartā́ram ániṣkṛtam, both pairs with the same morphological structure; adjacent rhyming agent nouns jétāram and hétāram in 7c join the other two agent nouns just cited, though with different accent; the negated ppl. átūrtam in 7d (whose root links it to vss. 5-6) matches previously cited áprahitam and ániṣkṛtam; there are several pairs of adjacent compounds with one identical member: ániṣkṛtaṃ sáhaskṛtam (8a) and śatámūtiṃ śatákratum (8b), as well as the pair vásavānaṃ vasūjúvam (8d) with the first an -āna-formation built to vasuwith full-grade of the suffix (for which type see AiG II.2.275); and the second member of śatám-ūtim (8b) picks up ūtī́(7a), whatever the source of the latter (see below). It may also be that the sequence in 7c … jétāraṃ hétāraṃ rathī́tamam playfully evokes a sequence of two comparatives in -tara- culminating in a superlative.

The phrase itá ūtī́(also, as itá ūtī́ḥ I.119.8, I.130.5) cannot be separated from the compound itáūti- (6x). The latter has an apparent Old Avestan cognate utaiiūiti- ‘youthfulness’, probably containing a *yūti- related to yúvan- ‘youth’. The Vedic compound clearly lost its transparency and has undergone some deformation, resulting, finally, in the folk-etymology “help from here / from then on” represented by the phrasal itá ūtí-. Both the compound and the phrase can co-occur with ajára- ‘unaging’ as here; see also I.146.2, X.31.7. For disc. and lit. see EWA s.v. itáūti-.

Here in this Anhangslied it is likely that ūtí- ‘help’ has captured the de-compounded phrase, but that the phrase is still associated with the notion of constancy, hence my compromise “with enduring help.” Ge tr. “zu eurem unmittelbaren (immediate) Beistand,” but in n. allows “den durch Fortdauer (oder Verjüngung) Alterlosen.”

