+++
title = "100"

+++
Indra On the hymn in general see the publ. intro., as well as Old (Noten ad loc. and "Indra, Vāyu, der Vrtrakampf ̥ und die Erschaffung der Sprache” [pp. 54-60 in “Ākhyāna Hymnen im Ṛigveda,” ZDMG 39 (1885): 52-90 = KlSch. 474-512]) and Ge’s long and rather despairing intro.

## 01-02
As I argue in the publ. intro., the heavy emphasis on Indra’s designating a portion of soma at the beginning of the sacrifice for “you,” the speaker of vs. 1, points strongly at Vāyu as this speaker, rather than Viṣṇu, as Ge suggests.

Old also considers it an Indra-Vāyu dialogue.


## 01
I take dī́dharaḥ as the subjunctive of the redupl. aor., whose indicative forms are generally athematic (dīdhar, etc., though cf. augmented thematic ádīdharat in the very late hymn X.173.3). The sequence yadā́… dī́dharaḥ …, ā́d íd … kṛṇavaḥ with aorist subjunctive in the protasis and present subjunctive in the apodosis seems a rough-and-ready attempt to express anteriority (“when you will [have] …, only after that will you …”) in a language that does not, as far as I can see, have either a formalized system of sequence of tense in conditionals or a standard way to express anteriority with finite verb forms (as opposed to participles and, somewhat later, the gerund).


## 02
Ge (followed by Klein, DGRV I.242, II.108) takes pāda c as a subordinated conditional clause with d, with the subordination marked by ca (i.e., “if you will be my comrade, then we will …”). This is certainly possible, but it is impossible to tell formally if c is subordinated to d or coordinated with b (as I take it) because the accent on the verb ásaḥ can result from its initial position. Perhaps in favor of the Ge/Klein interpretation is the fact that both c and d contain subjunctives, while b has an imperative. On the other hand, in a related passage (also adduced by Ge), the two expressions are parallel, not in a subordinate/main clause relation: X.83.7 … dakṣiṇató bhavā me, ádhā vṛtrā́ṇi jaṅghanāva bhū́ri “Be on my right side.

Then we two will keep smiting obstacles in abundance.”


## 03
Despite the gender, I take the second satyám in pāda b as equated with Indra, contrary to Ge, who interprets it implicitly as referring to the true praise (stómam … satyám) earlier in the hemistich or to truth in general: “… ein Loblied …, ein wahrhaftes, wenn es Wahrheit ist.” Lüders (Varuṇa, 639) argues convincingly that the second hemistich supports the reference of the conditional clause in b, yádi satyám ásti, to Indra and tr. “wenn er wirklich ist” (somewhat different tr. p. 566).


## 04
Indra clearly announces his epiphany, after the doubts expressed in vs. 3.

The opening ayám asmi echoes the opening words of the hymn (1a) ayáṃ ta emi.

víśvā jātā́ny abhy àsmi is reminiscent of vs. 5 in the preceding hymn, VIII.99.5b abhí víśvā asi spṛ́dhaḥ, and belongs to the formula abhí √bhū/as found in this group of hymns. See disc. add VIII.99.5.

On ṛtásya … pradíśaḥ see Lü (Varuṇa, 566-67), who considers them to be Lieder.

The duplication of intensive forms in nominal ādardiráḥ … dardarīmi is taken by Ge (also Lü, 566-67) as merely an etymological figure (esp. clear in Lü’s “zerschmetternd zerschmettere ich…”). This is of course possible, but I wonder if the preverb of the nominal form does not signal more. The lexeme ā́√dṛ is often used for breaking open cowpens and tearing out the cattle, esp. in the Vala myth (cf., e.g., III.30.21), and so Indra may be not only announcing his current actions but also alluding to his regular mythological role as opener of the Vala cave full of cows.


## 05
For my view of the complexities of the participants in this verse, see the publ. intro. I take the speaker to be Indra, the immediate addressee to be the singer (speaker of vs. 3), and the addressees of the speech recounted in pāda d to be the Maruts. One of the first difficulties in this verse is the perennial mystery word vená-, which I render ‘tracker, seeker’. The word is esp. associated with X.123, to which the Anukramaṇī assigns Vena as both poet and deity. There vená- is singular, not plural as here. In the singular Vena appears to be identified with the sun and/or Soma; in the plural (see esp. IX.85.10-11) the word often seems to refer to poets or their hymns. That seems to be the case here: the trackers of truth are poets or their products, then probably further identified with the Maruts, who are also the referents of sákhāyaḥ in pāda d, in my view. The use of vená- to refer both to the deity and his/its praisers presumably rests in part on the reciprocal relationship between them and also perhaps on the notion that just as the deity is sought by those below him, so he also is pursuing something higher.

Both in the singular and the plural vená- is associated with heights. Here the trackers “mounted” (áruhan) to Indra; cf. the same root in I.56.2 giríṃ ná venā́ádhi roha téjasā. The heights are indicated in various ways. In IX.85.9-10 a bull mounts heaven and then the Venas milk him, who is standing on a mountain (giriṣṭhā́m) in the vault of heaven (divó nā́ke), and this vault is mentioned in the remaining two verses of the Vena section of this hymn (IX.85.11-12). The vault recurs in the Vena hymn (X.123.6, 7), probably also as “the highest distant heaven” (paramé vyòman 5b), and there are other indications of a high position: some female figures bestride “the back of truth” (ṛtásya sā́nau 3c, also 2c) while poets mount on the stream (síndhum 4c). In particular in X.123.2b we find the same phrase pṛṣṭháṃ haryatásya “the back of the delightful one” as in our 5b, where Indra is seated thereon.

The question is who or what is the “delightful one.” Ge supplies “heaven,” Lü (567) simply tr. haryatásya as “Himmel,” and Old (1885: 56-57) as “Weltall.” I am dubious about this rendering; although diváḥ is found with pṛṣṭhá- on a number of occasions, haryatá- never qualifies ‘heaven’, but is regularly used of soma, and in fact in X.123.2 Ge thinks that soma is the referent. However, it is perhaps difficult to imagine Indra sitting on soma’s (or Soma’s) back (such is apparently Ge’s objection in his n.), and so it is possible that this is a reference to one of Indra’s fallow bay horses hári-. In V.61.2 pṛṣṭhé sádaḥ “the seat on the back” refers to the Maruts’ seat on the back of their horses. Hence the tentative bracketed identifications in the publ.

tr. “[=fallow bay / soma?].” Perhaps best is to combine these two possibilities - the real referent is soma, as signalled by haryatá-, but since sitting on a liquid is hard to envision, the soma is made conceptually solid by configuring it as a horse, mediated through the common use of the color term hári- for soma; cf., e.g., IX.65.25 haryató háriḥ.

In c the Pp. reads dat. hṛdé, followed by Ge., but I prefer the ablative since hṛdá ā́with underlying ablative is an idiom and used in similar contexts with verbs of speaking (cf. II.35.2 imáṃ sv àsmai hṛdá ā́sútaṣṭam, mántraṃ vocema … “This well-crafted spell we would speak to him from our heart”).

The possessive adj. śíśumantaḥ appears to introduce a child or children that seem to have no place here. I follow Lü’s (567 n. 3) idea that the -mant- suffix functions here as the neut. sg. -vát sometimes does, as a simile marker “my comrades like children,” not “my comrades along with their children.” The -mant- for -vant- would of course be by rule after a stem ending in -u-. Considerably more problematic is the precise form: ordinarily these -vant- simile forms are adverbial neuters and show accent shift to the suffix, so -vát (e.g., manuṣvát ‘like Manu’, jamadagnivát ‘like Jamadagni’). Here we have a case form (nom. pl.) and no accent shift. However, Whitney (§1233f) allows for a sense ‘like to, resembling’ for some -vant-stems, and therefore, though Lü’s interpretation may be a bit over-tricky, I follow it since I think it gives better sense. Support for this interpretation is found in the parallel IX.74.1 śíśur ná … cakradat “like a child he has cried out” with a verb built to the same stem as in our passage ácikradañ chíśumantaḥ …


## 06
Here the singer of vs. 3 seems to be convinced by Indra’s assertions in vss. 4-5 and promises a proper recital of Indra’s deeds, in contrast to the conditional praise of vs. 3.

I take pā́rāvatam in c as a vṛddhi adjective derived from parāvát- ‘distance’, rather than as a PN as Ge does (flg. Sāy, followed tentatively by Mayrhofer, Personennamen s.v.). As an adj. it works nicely with purusambhṛtám ‘brought together by many’, and there is no other mention of human opponents in this hymn.

## 07-09
I take these three Anuṣṭubh verses as the singer’s performance of the recital of deeds promised in 6ab, but cast in the language of dramatic immediacy - almost “you are there” - with the singer himself as the supposed witness, addressing the waters in 7ab. Ge (in his intro.) also seems to assign the verses to the singer, while Old (1885: 57 n. 2) refuses to speculate.


## 08
The stealing of the soma treated here logically precedes the outcome of the Vṛtra battle treated in 7 and 9, since Indra needed to drink the soma in order to fight Vṛtra, as is well known. I suggest that the theft is intercalated here, between two hemistichs about the vájra- (7cd, 9ab), not only because Rigvedic narratives are famously shattered chronologically, but also to play a trick. The vajrá- was let fly (a in 7d (apīpatat); in the next half-verse (8ab) the unspecified subject goes at the speed of thought. The default assumption would be that it is the flying mace, but cd disappoints our expectations by introducing the bird and the familiar soma-theft.


## 09
The poet now plays another trick. The first pāda “within the sea he/it lies” (samudré antáḥ śayate) returns us to the Vṛtra myth and, we would think, to Vṛtra, who, in the most famous treatment of the myth, I.32, lies (√śi, Vṛtra’s signature verb there) submerged in water after his smiting (e.g., I.32.8 … amuyā́śáyānam … áti yanty ā́paḥ “The waters go across him lying in that way”). Here we have both the signature verb and the water - but it’s the vájra that is lying in the water, not Vṛtra, as we discover in the next pāda. Moreover, in that pāda the mace is ‘covered’ (abhī́vṛtaḥ) with water, using the same root (at least synchronically, whatever its source) as the transitive verb expressing Vṛtra’s obstruction of the waters in 7b (ávīvarīt). Both forms of course also evoke Vṛtra himself, “obstruction” embodied.

As far as I know, this image of the submerged mace receiving tribute from the waters is found nowhere else in the Vṛtra myth complex, and seems to have been invented here for the purpose of verbal trickery.

## 10-11
For the possible mythological background of these verses, as adumbrated by Old, see the publ. intro.


## 10
Ge is understandably reluctant to construe avicetanā́ni with vádantī, since this attributes unintelligible speech to Speech herself, but his solution, to construe the neut. pl. loosely with niṣasā́da (“… sich bei den unvernünftigen (Geschöpfen) niederliess”), does not work syntactically. Old’s mythological explanation is preferable.


## 12
For my hypothesis about the relevance of this verse to the rest of the hymn see the publ. intro. The verse is consciously modeled on vs. 2: the voc. sákhe in a picks up sákhā of 2c; hánāva vṛtrám in c echoes vṛtrā́ṇi jaṅghanāva bhū́ri. But, at least in my view and Old’s (though not Ge’s), the two addressees are not the same: Vāyu in 2 and Viṣṇu in 12. As I argued in the publ. intro. Viṣṇu may have been introduced here because his association with three may allow him to represent the Third Pressing in this hymn-length sketch of the ritual day. And, also presented in the intro., the apparent superimposition of Viṣṇu on Vāyu via the close similiarity of vss. 2 and 12 may have been an attempt to integrate the newly ascendant god Viṣṇu into the older inherited religion in which Vāyu is prominent.

