+++
title = "101"

+++
Various gods


## 01
The first word of the hymn, ṛ́dhak ‘separately, one by one’, may be stationed there to indicate that the hymn (or hymn collection; see publ. intro.) to follow praises a number of gods individually, who collectively are summed up in devátātaye ‘for the conclave of the gods’ at the end of the same hemistich.


## 02
The abstract bāhútā- ‘arm-ness’ or ‘collectivity of arms’ occurs twice in the RV (otherwise in I.41.2). I think it must refer to the quintessential qualify of arms, namely strength (see bāhv-òjas- ‘having the strength of arms, armstrong’). Here, in the simile I think the point is that Mitra and Varuṇa guide the chariot with their supernatural skill (daṃsánā) as if with physical arms, the tools that less exalted charioteers would use. The arms of the two gods are found in the next pragātha, 4d.


## 04
I take tásmāt as referring to the unnamed weapon, coreferential with yáḥ in the rel. cl., and ascribe its ablative form to case attraction to infinitival sámṛteḥ.

The weapon is probably the śáru- ‘arrow’ associated with the Ādityas in VIII.18.11, 67.15, 20, as Ge notes. It might therefore have been better to tr. yáḥ in pāda a as ‘which one’ not the animatized ‘who’.

## 05
This verse contains two minor disharmonies: 1) the recipients of the praise song are in the dat. in pāda a (mitrā́ya … aryamṇé) but the loc. in cd (váruṇe … rā́jasu); 2) the verb is 2nd plural (prá … gāyata) but paired with a vocative in the singular, the hapax ṛtāvasaḥ. Ge separates the vs. into abc and d, supplying a verb (“(trage) … vor”) with the former. This solves the number problem, by isolating the plural verb in a separate clause, but not the case problem. Moreover, since the hymn is composed in pragāthas, I would prefer to construe the doubled prá in a with the impv. gāyata in d, for a meta-pun on the name of the verse pairing. Chopping the verse into two clauses is not appealing, particularly since it only addresses one of the disharmonies, in my opinion the lesser one.

As for ṛtāvaso, Re suggests that ṛtāvasu [sic] is a simple variant of ṛtā́van- (or, better formulated, voc. ṛtāvaso is a simple variant of voc. ṛtāvaḥ (/-vo) to the stem ṛtā́van-). This seems somewhat convincing. As a 2nd member of bahuvrīhis of the shape X-vasu-, the noun vásu- can become semantically bleached, from ‘having X as goods’ to ‘rich in X’ and even further to just ‘having X’. Cf. the pair vibhā́van- / vibhā́vasu-. The Vedic voc. in -vas to -van-stems makes the singular vocatives even more similar; to the just-cited pair, compare vibhāvo [before vd. sounds] and vibhāvaso, with the latter offering a convenient way to generate a Jagatī/iambic cadence from a Triṣṭubh. This does not solve our number problem, however; it is unfortunately altogether too artificial to suggest that a singular vocative to the -vanstem, ṛtāvaḥ (<-vas), was reinterpreted as belonging to a real s-stem and a plural voc. in *-vasas (/-vaso) was built to it. The existence of clearly singular vibhā-vaso (4x) beside singular vibhāvo (1x) shows that the morphology was still intact. I would point out, however, that there is no way to produce a plural voc. to either the -vanstem or the -vasu- stem that will fit in a cadence, either Triṣṭubh or Jagatī: ṛtāvānaḥ and ṛtāvasavaḥ are both out. It is therefore possible that the hapax ṛtāvaso was a quick-and-dirty fix for the metrical problem. Or else it represents the not rare situation of a poet addressing himself in the singular but his fellow singers in the plural. I would also point out that vásu occurs pāda-final in the next verse (6a) and du.

voc. vājinīvasū pāda-final in 8b. Ge, by the way, tr. ṛtāvaso as a PN (though allowing for the lexical value in his n.); this doesn’t help one way or the other and can, I think, be dismissed.

I do not understand the change in case from dat. to loc. either. The verb √gā (+/- prá) elsewhere takes only dat., never loc., as far as I know. It might be possible to take the locatives as functionally different from the datives -- “chez or bei Varuṇa (and) the kings.” But since Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman are an almost inseparable trio and Mitra and Aryaman are in the dative in pāda a, it is highly unlikely that Varuṇa would be functionally separate from them in this verse. And it is insulting to the grammatical knowledge of our poet even to suggest that váruṇe owes its ending to a superficial matching with aryamṇé two pādas before, particularly since rā́jasu with a non-rhyming loc. ending follows soon after. I think the poet changed cases just because he thought he could and craved a bit of novelty. For another tricky problem of case, see 8ab below.

## 06
The identity of the three mothers of Agni, the likely referent of the acc. phrases in ab, isn’t clear. Ge suggests the three Opfergöttinen (Iḍā, Sarasvatī, Bharatī) of the Āprī hymns. Agni is called trimātár- in III.56.5, but the three are not identified there either. Since our vs. is the 2nd vs. in a pragātha whose 1st vs. concerns the Ādityas, esp. Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman, I am inclined to think that these three male deities have been slotted into the “three mothers” role just here because of the coincidence of the numbers.

The Pp reads masc. nom. pl. amṛ́tāḥ in c, and Ge so tr. (“Die unbetörten Unsterblichen beobachten das Tun der Sterblichen”). Against the Pp I take it as neut.

pl. amṛ́tā; the sandhi situation allows either, of course. Ge’s tr. assumes that the dhā́māni belong to mortals, but wherever it's possible to tell, dhā́man- is something belonging to gods. Cf. also III.55.10 dhā́māni amṛ́tā.


## 08
The apparent doubling of the du. pronouns vām … yuvā́bhyām is complicated by the fact that at least the second one violates the usual case frame of the verb. Pāda a contains the verb hávāmahe and an undoubted acc. obj., the inanimate rātím ‘giving’, as well as an animate pronoun vām, which could be acc., gen., or dat. This 2nd du enclitic is matched by tonic 2nd du yuvā́bhyām in pāda b, which can be instr. or dat. (Note in passing that Macdonell [VGS, p. 105; VG p. 300] only allows instr. for this form, but there is at least one undoubted dat. example elsewhere, I.109.4, as well as several of nearly identical yuvábhyām. Cf. AiG III.464, which points out that the older instr. form was yuvā́, which is preserved in cmpds like yuvā́-datta.) The only case intersection between vām and yuvā́bhyām is dative, but there is no standard case-frame idiom with √hvā with the structure “call for (s.o. dat.) for (s.th. acc).” Gr classifies the passage under his no. 8, “etwas [A] erbitten,” thus eliding the pronoun(s) entirely under this rubric, though in the lemma he cites it as rātím vām, including the enclitic but not the more intractable tonic form. Ge. takes vām as gen., and declares in his n. 8ab that yuvā́bhyām is also “in Sinn des Gen.,” which would be convenient but is remarkably cavalier about morphology. A further complication is that pāda b is a repeated pāda (=VIII.5.3 -- not registered in Bloomfield’s Rig-Veda Repetitions). The case value of yuvā́bhyām in VIII.5.3 isn’t entirely clear, but the context is probably compatible with a dative, but not with either instr. or gen. -- an acc. might be the best.

I confess I don’t entirely know what to make of this. There are no standard uses of √hvā that take a personal dative, though inanimate datives abound. I am inclined to take pāda a as containing a double acc. (with vām in acc. function): “call you two for giving.” The yuvā́bhyām in the next pāda could be the result of repeating this short pāda from elsewhere without integrating it into the syntactic frame of the rest, or show the case variation (what we might call “case creep”) observed also in vs. 5, with the poet inventing an idiom “call for s.o. (dat.)” based on other verbs of speaking, like √vac, which can take either acc. or dat. of the addressee. Another slight oddity in the first pāda is the characterization of the gods’ giving as arakṣás- ‘undemonic’. I have softened this somewhat to ‘without animus’; Ge tr. ‘ohne Falsch’, which seems more distant from the literal sense of the stem.


## 09
With Gr I take sumánmabhiḥ as a bahuvrīhi, contra Ge’s karmadhāraya “mit guten Gedanken” (though he allows the other alternative in n. 9b). This stem is attested in the nom. sg. masc. in VII.68.9 and therefore must be a bahuvrīhi, since mánman- is neut., and the parallel durmánas- (2x) is found only in the masc. and so must be a bahuvrīhi as well.

Against Ge, I take the second hemistich as referring to two different soma drinks, the one mixed with milk in c, the pure one in d. The offering of two types of soma is made clear in 10cd; note esp. the ‘both’ of c, ubháyasya naḥ piba “drink of both of ours,” which is immediately followed by the definitional d, śúciṃ [matching śukráḥ in our 9d] sómaṃ gávāśiram [matching śrīṇānáḥ in our 9c] “the pure soma (and) the one mixed with milk.” In 9c the present participle śrīṇānáḥ “is being mixed” (my italics) makes it clear that it is not yet ready to be offered, whereas the pure soma (in d) has just that moment been offered, as the passive aor. ayāmi indicates.

This reflects the ritual procedure whereby Vāyu is first offered pure soma.

Assuming that my separation of c and d is correct, this adds another ex. of a predicated non-past participle to the dossier.

Note the phonetic figure ayám … ayāmi.

## 11-12
As noted in the publ. intro., the banality of these vss. is a surprising aberration in RVic style. I will note that pāda-final mahā́m̐asi “you are great,” found 5x in these two vss. (once mid-pāda), is something of a signature of the late VIIIth Maṇḍala (60.6, 19; 64.2, 95.4, 98.2), though it's found occasionally elsewhere.


## 12
Presumably the sun’s light is ‘undeceivable’ (adābhyàm) because the sun is witness to everything.


## 13
The referent of the fem. sgs. in this vs. is not entirely clear. Ge interprets it as the offering spoon or the butter offering, Old as the cow. I think Ge’s 2nd alternative is correct, with ā́huti- or a similar fem. noun as the word underlying.

Pāda b, “her form is created by a/the ruddy (cow),” because butter is a milk product.

(Ge supplies ‘flame’ rather than ‘cow’ with róhiṇyā, but róhiṇī- elsewhere refers to cows [see nearby VIII.93.13].) Pāda c is more or less VII.81.1a práty u adarśy āyatī́, and since the referent there is Dawn, the simile citréva (i.e., citrā́iva) must be comparing the bright butter offering (bright because it is whitish yellow or because it makes the fire brighter) to Dawn. As for the ten arms, Old and Ge both suggest that these are the arms of the five Adhvaryus. However, it seems possible to me that we’re dealing with body-part inflation, and the ten “arms” are the ten fingers (of a single priest) regularly referred to in ritual contexts.

## 14
This difficult and enigmatic vs. is found in slightly variant form in the AV in the mystical skambha hymn X.8.3, is repeated in other Vedic texts, and receives an explanation in ŚB II.5.1.4-5. The interpr. of the verse in this context here has been influenced by its later deployments, esp. the ŚB exegesis — in my opinion misleadingly. The ŚB takes it to refer to the passing of generations or races, expressed by the prajā́ḥ … tisráḥ of pāda a, and this basic understanding is reproduced by Ge and by Re (Hymnes spéculatifs 165, though of AV X.8.3, not the RVic passage). Old sensibly disdains tr. and explanation (“Erklärung dieser Mystik versuche ich nicht.”).

I think the vs. must be taken within its RVic context, which is ritualistic; it is paired in its pragātha with vs. 13, a depiction of the butter offering. Although in the first 3 pādas the wording is obscure, the final pāda seems to suggest the solution to the mystery, in that its first word pávamānaḥ ‘self-purifying’ can hardly refer to anything but soma. (It is probably not an accident that in the reuse of this verse in the AV pāda d is quite different [hárito háriṇīr ā́viveśa] and does not contain the telltale word.) The identity of the harítaḥ is less secure. In the publ. tr. I follow Ge in supply ‘flames’, but this is ritually problematic: soma doesn’t seem to be offered into the fire. Maṇḍala IX twice refers to haríto dáśa “ten tawny ones” (IX.63.9, 69.9), which appear to be the fingers of the ritual officiant. I would now emend the translation to “has entered within the tawny (fingers),” pointing out that “with the ten arms” of 13d may refer to the same phenomenon.

Guided by the clinching word pávamānaḥ in pāda d, an interpr. grounded in soma ritual fits pāda a very well. The most important clue is the compound VP atyā́yam īyuḥ “have made their traversal”; the lexeme áti √i ‘go across’ is regularly used of soma’s trip across the filter (IX.85.9 pávitram áty eti, etc.). The three prajā́ḥ can be the three soma pressings (or perhaps the soma for the first three soma cups); soma drinks are called prajā́divyásya rétasaḥ “the offspring of the heavenly semen” in IX.86.28, a hymn that contains several passages (IX.86.14, 39, 45) in which soma is “fitted into among the worlds/creatures” (bhúvaneṣv árpitaḥ), similarly to our pāda c bhúvaneṣv antáḥ.

The relevance of pāda b to the soma theme is less clear to me. By my rules, anyā́ḥ should be definite “the others” (contrary to the standard rendering “others”) and contrastive to the three offspring of pāda a. I am not sure what “the others” would be (though presumably some other set of soma drinks), nor what “settling down around the chant” would involve. As for pāda c, I’ve already pointed out soma’s position bhúvaneṣu elsewhere, and the towering quality of cosmic soma is also emphasized elsewhere.

I do not feel I have solved all the problems with this verse, but the lexical clues of pādas a and d seem to me to anchor it in a soma context, with this ritual context reinforced by its pragātha twin.


## 15
Note the phonetic figure in pāda d mā́gā́m (á)nāgām.

## 16
According to the transmitted text, this hymn ends on a downbeat: the small-witted man (dabhrácetāḥ), the last word of the hymn, has taken possession (avṛkta) of the cow that has been so extravagantly praised in vss. 15-16, whose right to safety was proclaimed to “observant people” or “the observant man” (cikitúṣe jánāya 15c), the opposite of the small-witted man of 16d. This sad finale seems unlikely to me, and a small emendation to the text will change the tone entirely.

Instead of ā́māvṛkta at the beginning of pāda d, I suggest reading *mā́mā vṛkta. The second part, mā vṛkta, instead of the Pp. mā avṛkta, does not alter the Saṃhitā text.

As for reading the prohibitive negative mā́for preverb ā́, note that the preceding pāda ends with gā́m, and in the sequence … gā́m mā́the pāda-spanning -m m- could well have been degeminated. The posited *mā́may or may not also contain the preverb ā́. Since √vṛj generally appears with a preverb, it probably does. Restoring

*mā́also makes the pāda more parallel to 15d mā́gā́m …, which also contains a mā́
prohibitive with a cow as obj.

