+++
title = "102"

+++
Agni


## 02
The standard interpr. are agreed that the referent of the fem. instr. phrase ī́ḷānayā … duvasyúvā is some form of speech. This makes sense and is certainly not excluded. However, the only other fem. form of the participle ī́ḷāna- in V.28.1 refers to the ghee-filled offering ladle, and I therefore prefer that interpr.


## 07
This vs. consists of two ungoverned sentence fragments, both referring to Agni: an accusative phrase in ab, a dative phrase in c. The former could continue the syntax of the preceding vss., although the intervening tṛca boundary makes some difficulties. The dative phrase is entirely untethered except that it adjoins áchā, which ordinarily takes the accusative, and the next vs. makes a fresh syntactic start with Agni in the nominative. Ge suggests that there are two Agnis in question in this verse, but this seems to be overthinking it. I think we’re dealing with two false starts, with the first perhaps simply carrying on from the previous vs. ### 08
The lexeme ā́√bhū generally means ‘stand by, be at hand’; this works fine for pāda a, but not so well for pāda b. Neither Ge’s “eingehe … in” nor Re’s “s'intègre à” seems to work any better.


## 11
My construction of this vs. follows Ge’s. Re by contrast takes b as a nominal rel. clause and c as the main clause. Since the verb dīdā́ya is initial in its pāda and, as a main-clause verb, could owe its accent to this position, there is no way to tell and no semantic implications. In slight favor of Ge is the fact that √dī is frequently construed with the loc., as it would be with dámeṣu ā́in b.


## 13
The standard interpr. take jāmáyo gíraḥ as a nominative NP (Ge “die verschwisterten Lobreden”), modified by the intens. part. dédiśatīḥ. Although I see the advantages of this, it leaves the participle with little to do (Ge “die dich herausstreichen,” Re “indiquant avec force (leur intention),” Scar (82) “die immer wieder auf dich hinweisen”). I separate gíraḥ from jāmáyaḥ and take it as the acc. obj.

of the intens. participle. The question then is the referent of jāmáyaḥ ‘kindred, siblings’. I tentatively suggest it is the waters, who appear in the next vs. as ritual actors. The waters are called jāmí- elsewhere (I.23.16). Because waters are always gurgling, they can be considered to be the deliverers of hymns.


## 14
I don’t really understand this verse, but it seems to conjoin technical ritual references with an allusion to the myth of Agni’s flight and his concealment in the waters -- and these two interpretive strains are somewhat at cross purposes.

According to the śrauta sūtras, the darbha grass, that is, the barhis, is gathered into three or more bundles (cf., e.g., MŚS I.1.1.42, ĀpŚS I.4.10, BŚS I.2) in preparation for the sacrifice; hence pādas ab seem to depict a situation in which the preliminaries for the sacrifice have not been performed. This may well be because Agni has fled and so the regular ritual procedures have not been carried out. In c the waters in which Agni hides are said to have set down/deposited his footprint; in other words they have established him within themselves to hide him. Agni is regularly the obj. of ní √dhā; for his pádam being set down, see VIII.72.19, III.7.7, I.72.6, etc., and for ní √dhā in the context of Agni’s concealment X.32.6a nidhīyámānam ápagūḷham apsú.

But in ritual context the water’s setting down Agni’s footprint may refer to the sprinkling of the fire with water after it has been surrounded by barhis (see Ge’s n.

14c and Hillebrandt, Rit. Lit. 110), and therefore from a ritual point of view the preparations are proceeding smoothly. The next verse gives support to this alternative.


## 16
Although the other occurrence of the med. part. tepāná- (VIII.60.19) is transitive, a passive interpr. works better here.

The gen. ghṛtásya is best construed with dhītíbhiḥ “with visions/thoughts of ghee.” Both Ge and Old suggest that this refers to what we would now call “virtual ghee,” not the real physical substance -- anticipating the purely mental sacrifice of the last tṛca (19-21). But this tṛca (vss. 16-18) seems otherwise to depict a more standard ritual, and I think it more likely that “with visions of ghee” is a shorthand way of referring both to the physical stimulus of Agni’s flame, namely melted butter, and the mental one, the hymns accompanying the libation.


## 17
It is not clear who the mothers are and whether they are, with Sāy, identified with the gods mentioned in pāda b. Re’s “(tels) des mères” seems to follow this interpr., but in his n. he suggests that the mothers are the waters. The mention of the waters in vs. 14 might support this latter alternative, but given the “three (mothers)” of Agni in the preceding hymn, VIII.101.6, which I take to be the (male) gods Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman (see comm. ad loc.), I am inclined towards Sāy’s interpr., though it is not clearly reflected in my publ. tr.

## 19-22
See publ. intro. for my general interpr. of these verses.
