+++
title = "103"

+++
Agni


## 02
Ge takes the verb of ab to be prá … tasthau, with the tasthau long postponed to pāda d and pāda c (which has its own verb) parenthetical. This seems too fussy. It is perfectly easy to supply a verb of motion with prá in a (so also Re, Kü 464).

## 03-04
In both these vss. tmánā ‘by himself’ contrasts with the vast number (thousands) that the action of this sole individual wins or prospers.


## 05
HvN split the hemistich between vā́jam and árvatā, producing two pādas of 11 syllables each. But since the b pāda then has a bad cadence and since the pāda, minus initial árvatā, is found also at I.40.4, where the iambic cadence is fine in a dimeter line, it seems best to follow the standard view that árvatā belongs with pāda a, which is then hypermetric (so Old).

The famous formula “imperishable fame” (ákṣiti śrávaḥ) ends the second pāda.


## 07
Ge/Re take rathyàm as an adjective with áśvam in the simile (e.g., Ge “Wie ein Wagenross …”). This is possible, if it is derived from the thematic stem rathyà-, rather than rathī́-, where Gr classifies it. However, the interposition of gīrbhíḥ distances it from the simile, and I prefer to take it as the acc. of rathī́- ‘charioteer’. Agni is often called the charioteer of the sacrifice (etc.), e.g., I.44.2 ágne rathī́r adhvarā́ṇām, and his description as “controller of chariots” (ráthānāṃ yámam) a few vss. later (10c) seems like a paraphrase of such a formula. In that case the poetic figures are more complex than the standard interpr.: there is a metaphor (Agni as charioteer), and this metaphorical identification is then compared explicitly in a simile to a horse, which is closely connected conceptually with the charioteer -- a kind of figurative chaining.

The words toká- and tánaya- regularly appear together; cf., with the same verb as here, the acc. sg. pairing VI.48.10 párṣi tokáṃ tánayam. When ending with -e they are typically locatives, as shown by other parallel locatives; cf., e.g., VI.25.4 toké vā góṣu tánaye yád apsú (also I.114.8, VI.31.1, 66.8, X.147.3). Here, however, I think they are dual accusatives, as if elliptical duals from a dual dvandva. (That is, toké tánaye doesn’t mean “two progenies and two prosperities.”) The presence of ubhé ‘both’ serves to mark them as duals (see also I.147.1), since, given the passages just cited, the usual expectation for toké tánaye is locative. So also Old and Re, while Ge takes toké as du and tánaye as loc.: “(Erhalte) beiderlei Samen in der Nachkommenschaft,” a splitting of the usually conjoined phrase that seems very unlikely.

Taking párṣi as the verb governing both ubhé toké tánaye (as VI.48.10 strongly encourages us to do) and rā́dhaḥ in d requires slightly different interpretations of the verb. Re, almost predictably, calls it a zeugma.

## 10
I follow Old, Ge, and Re in taking āsāva as the voc. of a (hapax) PN, though it could be simply ‘o presser’ (ā́√su) as Gr takes it (and perhaps implicitly Mayrhofer, since it does not appear in his PN book). There are no implications either way.


## 11
Note the playful úditā … níditā véditā, already pointed to by Old, in which the three rhyming words are grammatically entirely different: fem. loc. sg., neut. acc. pl., and masc. nom. sg. agent noun respectively.

What is being compared to the waves (ūrmáyaḥ) in c? Ge supplies “Absichten” (intentions), presumably on the basis of dhiyā́in d, but the dhī́- of Agni should not be considered negative or hostile. Re’s suggestion, “flames,” is far more persuasive, but I think this idea should be combined with Old’s view that ūrmáyaḥ belongs with both simile and frame. That is, Agni’s flames are already metaphorically waves and then can be compared with real waves. Cf. the cmpd descriptor of Agni in I.58.45 rúśadūrmi- ‘possessing gleaming waves’.


## 12
The mā́prohibitive here takes an apparent impv. hṛṇītām rather than the expected injunctive *hṛṇīta. KH (94-95) explains this as having an underlying pluti form hṛṇītā3, with nasalization in hiatus, hence *hṛṇītā3m̐, which was misunderstood by the redactors and normalized to hṛṇītām. Although I find this explan. rather ad hoc and over-complex, I have nothing better to suggest. I do not, however, subscribe to his notion that because it is built to a pres. stem, it has inhibitive (“let him stop being angry”) rather than prohibitive (“let him not be angry”) value. There is nothing in the hymn up to this point that would indicate that Agni has anything but benevolent feelings towards us. See IH’s work, which refutes Hoffmann’s assumption of inhibitive value for pres. injunc. with mā́.

Pāda-final eṣáḥ is less rare than I would have predicted, though the usual position of nom. sg. eṣá(ḥ) is pāda initial.

## 12-13
Both vss. end identically with svadhvaráḥ, but in 12c it refers to Agni, in 13d to the weakling (kīrí-) who is offering homage to Agni. The use of the same term for both of course implicitly spreads the power and prestige of Agni to his worshiper.


## 14
On the fem. form sóbharyāḥ referring to the poet, see comm. ad VIII.22.15.