+++
title = "01"

+++
The pass. aor. saṃdā́yi is taken by Gr (etc.) to √dā ‘tie’, surely correctly.

But there are several other occurrences of this lexeme sám √dā that also appear to express the same idiom, but, with different morphological realizations, are generally assigned to √dā ‘give’ (though see, e.g., Kü 244). The idiom, in its fullest expression, is sám √dā nā́bhim [ACC] nā́bhā(u) [LOC] ‘tie navel to navel’, that is, to assert a family connection (often between gods or semidivine figures like seers and us humans. In the passive the first navel is of course in the nom. - a nom. that is gapped in this passage. Another ex. of the idiom is found in IV.44.5, also passive, this time with the loc. gapped (or substituted for by a prn.): sáṃ yád dadé nā́bhiḥ pūrvyā́vām “because (our) ancient umbilical tie is attached to you (or, to your [navel]),” of the Aśvins. Instead of sám the preverb can be ā́: see IX.10.8 with the fullest form of the idiom, containing both case forms of ‘navel’: nā́bhā nā́bhiṃ na ā́dade “he has bound his navel to our navel.” Also IX.79.4 diví te nā́bhā paramó yá ādadé “It was in heaven, to its navel, that your highest (navel) was bound.” (This last tr. is different from the publ. one; see comm. ad IX.79.4 for the alteration and the difficulties in the passage.) Another ex. of the idiom is probably found in the noun saṃdadí- in IX.99.7, though the telltale navel is absent. See disc. there. The other occurrence of saṃdadíin II.39.7 even more attenuated, but still expresses the sense of attachment. A variant of the idiom, ā́√tan nā́bhim LOC is found in I.105.9; see comm. there.

