+++
title = "01"

+++
The non-literal tr. “bird on the wing” for parṇavī́- conceals the problematic analysis of this hapax. Although Re (unconvincingly) suggests that -vī́- is a simple doublet suffix of - yú-, the most likely (and generally accepted) analysis on formal grounds is as a root noun cmpd. to √vī ‘pursue’, like deva-vī́- ‘pursuing the gods’ in the preceding hymn (IX.2.1, itself recalling devā́nāṃ vītí- in IX.1.3). However, on the basis of well-attested deva-vī́- (cf. also pada-vī́-), we expect the 1st member to express the object of pursuit -- and ‘pursuing the/its wings/feathers’ makes little sense. The best we can construct is an instr. relationship, ‘pursuing with its wings’; see Scar 499. The situation is further muddied by the fact that the 2nd member bears a distinct resemblance to ví- ‘bird’, which finds textual expression elsewhere: cf. I.183.1 adduced by Scar, tridhā́tunā patatho vír ná parṇaíḥ “You [=Aśvins] fly with the tripartite (chariot) like a bird with its feathers.” Scar (499-500) sketches a complex scenario whereby pada-vī́- ‘pursuing the track’ was reinterp. to an instr. *padā-vī́- ‘pursuing with the foot’, giving rise to our cmpd, with a different body part. But I think it’s simpler to assume that our poet was pursuing an imperfect pun with ví- ‘bird’, perhaps encouraged by deva-vī́- in the 1st vs. of the preceding hymn (though we have no know way to know how these Gāyatrī hymns were ordered or by whom) and the extreme frequency of that lexeme in the IXth Maṇḍala.

