+++
title = "07-08"

+++
These two vss. are paired; their first two pādas are almost identical: 7ab eṣá dívaṃ ví dhāvati, tiró rájāṃsi dhā́rayā 8ab eṣá dívaṃ vy ā́sarat, tiró rájāṃsi áspṛtaḥ I think this close match actually conceals an important difference in intent. Vs. 7 describes the ritual journey of the just pressed soma in the standard grandiose cosmic style -- the journey from filter to cup configured as a journey through the vast realms of heaven and the midspace. The verb dhāvati is pres. indicative. The vs. picks up from vs. 6, which describes the mixing of the pressed juice with water.

But vs. 8 has an augmented aorist ā́sarat (ā́asarat, so Pp; it could technically be an injunc. ā́sarat). I do not think this simply indicates the endpoint of the journey depicted in 7. Instead it alludes to the origin myth of soma, the bold stealing of Soma from heaven treated esp. in IV.26-27. The clue is the adj. áspṛta-. Although this stem is glossed as ‘invincible’ by Gr, reflected also in Re’s tr., √spṛ means rather ‘gain, win’ and even ‘recover, regain’. The other occurrence of this privative past part. is found in an Indra hymn in VIII, in a pāda almost identical to our b (acc. áspṛtam, not nom. as here). There it also concerns Soma’s journey, but in that passage it is clear that the Somaraub is referred to: VIII.82.9 yáṃ te śyenáḥ padā́bharat tiró rájāṃsi áspṛtam “That which the falcon brought to you [=Indra] with his foot across the airy realms -- the one that could not be recaptured …” The adj. áspṛta- ‘not to be recaptured’ economically encapsulates Kṛśānu’s vain fight against the robber śyená to keep the bird from making off with the Soma confined in heaven. In our passage here the poet is identifying the (humdrum) ritual journey of soma the juice in vs. 7 with the first journey of Soma from heaven in the foundational myth of the Soma Sacrifice, making the two journeys seem as identical as possible by nearly verbatim repetition and thus investing the ritual progress with the glamour and significance of myth.

Thus, although the nearly identical vss. 7 and 8 might seem evidence that the poet was spinning his wheels, in fact the repetition is doing something quite different.

