+++
title = "Adhyāya I, Kaṇḍikā 3"

+++
## 01
1 [^1] . Now wherever he intends to perform a sacrifice, let him besmear (with cowdung) a surface of the dimension at least of an arrow on each side; let him draw six lines thereon, one turned to the north, to the west (of the spot on which the fire is to be placed); two (lines) turned to the east, at the two different ends (of the line mentioned first); three (lines) in the middle (of those two); let him sprinkle that (place with water), establish the (sacred) fire (thereon), put (two or three pieces of fuel) on it, wipe (the ground) round (the fire), strew (grass) round (it), to the east, to the south, to the west, to the north, ending (each time) in the north. Then (follows) silently the sprinkling (of water) round (the fire).

## 02
2. With two (Kuśa blades used as) strainers the purifying of the Ājya (is done).

## 03
3 [^2] . Having taken two Kuśa blades with unbroken tops, which do not bear a young shoot in them, of the measure of a span, at their two ends with his thumbs and fourth fingers, with his hands turned with the inside upwards, he purifies (the Ājya, from the west) to the east, with (the words), 'By the impulse of Savitṛ I purify thee with this uninjured purifier, with the rays of the good sun' - once with this formula, twice silently.

## 04
4 [^3] . The strewing (of grass) round (the fire) may be done or not done in the Ājya offerings.

## 05
5 [^4] . So also the two Ājya portions (may optionally be sacrificed) in the Pākayajñas.

## 06
6 [^5] . And the (assistance of a) Brahman (is optional), except at the sacrifice to Dhanvantari and at the sacrifice of the spit-ox (offered to Rudra).

## 07
7 [^6] . Let him sacrifice with (the words), 'To such and such a deity svāhā!'

## 08
8. If there is no rule (as to the deities to whom the sacrifice belongs, they are) Agni, Indra, Prajāpati, the Viśve devās, Brahman.

## 09
9 [^7] . (Different Pākayajñas, when) offered at the same time, should have the same Barhis (sacrificial grass), the same fuel, the same Ājya, and the same (oblation to Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt.

## 10
10. With reference thereto the following sacrificial stanza is sung:

'He who has to perform (different) Pākayajñas, should offer them with the same Ājya, the same Barhis, and the same Sviṣṭakṛt, even if the deity (of those sacrifices) is not the same.'



[^1]:  3, 1. Comp. Sāṅkh.-Gṛhya I, 7, 6 seq., where the statements regarding the lines to be drawn are somewhat different, and the note there.

[^2]:  Comp. the description of this act of purifying the Ājya, which is in some points more detailed, in Śāṅkh.-Gṛhya I, 8, 14-21.

[^3]:  Comp. Sāṅkh.-Gṛhya I, 8, 12.

[^4]:  On the two Ājyabhāgas offered to Agni and Soma comp. below, chap. 50, 13; Śāṅkh.-Gṛhya I, 9, 5 seq.

[^5]:  Comp. on these exceptions the Sūtras below, I, 12, 7; IV, 8, 15.

[^6]:  Comp. Sāṅkh.-Gṛhya I, 9, 18.

[^7]:  On the oblation to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt, see Indische Studien, IX, 257.