+++
title = "Adhyāya I, Kaṇḍikā 6"

+++
## 01
1 [^1] . (The father) may give away the girl, having decked her with ornaments, pouring out a libation of water: this is the wedding (called) Brāhma. A son born by her (after a wedding of this kind) brings purification to twelve descendants and to twelve ancestors on both (the husband's and the wife's) sides.

## 02
2 [^2] . He may give her, having decked her with ornaments, to an officiating priest, whilst a sacrifice with the three (Śrauta) fires is going on: this (is the wedding called) Daiva. (A son) brings purification to ten descendants and to ten ancestors on both sides.

## 03
3 [^3] . They fulfil the law together: this (is the wedding called) Prājāpatya. (A son) brings purification to eight descendants and to eight ancestors on both sides.

## 04
4 [^4] . He may marry her after having given a bull and a cow (to the girl's father): this (is the wedding called) Ārsha. (A son) brings purification to seven descendants and to seven ancestors on both sides.

## 05
5 [^5] . He may marry her, after a mutual agreement has been made (between the lover and the damsel): this (is the wedding called) Gāndharva.

## 06
6 [^6] . He may marry her after gladdening (her father) by money: this (is the wedding called) Āsura.

## 07
7 [^7] . He may carry her off while (her relatives) sleep or pay no attention: this (is the wedding called) Paiśāca.

## 08
8 [^8] . He may carry her off, killing (her relatives) and cleaving (their) heads, while she weeps and they weep: this (is the wedding called) Rākṣasa.



[^1]:  6, 1. Comp. Vasiṣṭha I, 30; Āpastamba II, 11, 17; Baudhāyana I, 20, 2.

[^2]:  Vasiṣṭha I, 31; Āpastamba II, 11, 19; Baudhāyana I, 20, 5.

[^3]:  Baudhāyana I, 20, 3.

[^4]:  Vasiṣṭha I, 32; Āpastamba II, 11, 18; Baudhāyana I, 20, 4.

[^5]:  Vasiṣṭha I, 33; Āpastamba II, II, 20; Baudhāyana I, 20, 6.

[^6]:  Vasiṣṭha I, 35 (where this rite is designated as Mānuṣa); Āpastamba II, 12, 1; Baudhāyana I, 20, 7.

[^7]:  Baudhāyana I, 20, 9.

[^8]:  Vasiṣṭha I, 34 (where this rite is called Kṣātra); Āpastamba II, a 1, 2; Baudhāyana I, 20, 8. The text of this Sūtra seems to be based on a hemistich hatvā bhittvā ca śīrṣāṇi rudadbhyo rudatīṃ haret; comp. Manu III, 33.