+++
title = "Adhyāya I, Kaṇḍikā 8"

+++
## 01
1 [^1] . If (the newly-married couple) have to make a journey (to their new home), let him cause her to mount the chariot with the (verse), 'May Pūṣan lead thee from here holding thy hand' (Rig-veda X, 85, 26).

## 02
2 [^2] . With the hemistich, 'Carrying stones (the river) streams; hold fast each other' (Rig-veda X, 53, 8) let him cause her to ascend a ship.

## 03
3. With the following (hemistich) let him make her descend (from it).

## 04
4 [^3] . (He pronounces the verse), 'The living one they bewail' (Rig-veda X, 40, 10), if she weeps.

## 05
5. They constantly carry the nuptial fire in front.

## 06
6 [^4] . At lovely places, trees, and cross-ways let him murmur (the verse), 'May no waylayers meet us' (Rig-veda X, 85, 32).

## 07
7. At every dwelling-place (on their way) let him look at the lookers on, with (the verse), 'Good luck brings this woman' (Rig-veda X, 85, 33).

## 08
8 [^5] . With (the verse), 'Here may delight fulfil itself to thee through offspring' (Rig-veda X, 85, 27) he should make her enter the house.

## 09
9 [^6] . Having given its place to the nuptial fire, and having spread to the west of it a bull's hide with the neck to the east, with the hair outside, he makes oblations, while she is sitting on that (hide) and takes hold of him, with the four (verses), 'May Prajāpati create offspring to us' (Rig-veda X, 85, 43 seq.), verse by verse, and with (the verse), 'May all the gods unite' (Rig-veda X, 85, 47), he partakes of curds and gives (thereof) to her, or he besmears their two hearts with the rest of the Ājya (of which he has sacrificed).

## 10
10. From that time they should eat no saline food, they should be chaste, wear ornaments, sleep on the ground three nights or twelve nights;

## 11
11. Or one year, (according to) some (teachers); thus, they say, a Ṛṣi will be born (as their son).

## 12
12 [^7] . When he has fulfilled (this) observance (and has had intercourse with his wife), he should give the bride's shift to (the Brāhmaṇa) who knows the Sūryā hymn (Rig-veda X, 85);

## 13
13. 'Food to the Brāhmaṇas;

## 14
14. Then he should cause them to pronounce auspicious words.



[^1]:  8, 1. Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya I, 15, 13.

[^2]:  Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya I, 15, try. 18.

[^3]:  Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya I, 15, 2.

[^4]:  Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya I, 15, 24.

[^5]:  Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya I, 15, 22; 16, 12.

[^6]:  Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya I, 16, 1. 2.

[^7]:  Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya I, 14, 12.