+++
title = "Adhyāya I, Kaṇḍikā 11"

+++
## 01
1. Now (follows) the ritual of the animal sacrifice.

## 02
2 [^1] . Having prepared to the north of the fire the place for the Śāmitra fire, having given drink (to the animal which he is going to sacrifice), having washed the animal, having placed it to the east (of the fire) with its face to the west, having made oblations with the two Ṛcas, 'Agni as our messenger' (Rig-veda I, 12, 1 seq.), let him touch (the animal) from behind with a fresh branch on which there are leaves, with (the formula), 'Agreeable to such and such (a deity) I touch thee.'

## 03
3. He sprinkles it from before with water in which rice and barley are, with (the formula), 'Agreeable to such and such (a deity) I sprinkle thee.'

## 04
4. Having given (to the animal) to drink of that (water), he should pour out the rest (of it) along its right fore-foot.

## 05
5. Having carried fire round (it), performing that act only (without repeating a corresponding Mantra), they lead it to the north.

## 06
6 [^2] . In front of it they carry a fire-brand.

## 07
7 [^3]  This is the Śāmitra (fire).

## 08
8 [^4] . With the two Vapāśrapaṇī ladles the 'performer' touches the animal.

## 09
9. The sacrificer (touches) the performer.

## 10
10 [^5] . To the west of the Śāmitra (fire) he (the Śamitṛ) kills (the animal), the head of which is turned to the east or to the west, the feet to the north; and having placed a grass-blade on his side of the (animal's) navel, (the 'performer') draws out the omentum, cuts off the omentum, seizes it with the two Agniśrapaṇīs, sprinkles it with water, warms it at the Śāmitra (fire), takes it before that fire, roasts it, being seated to the south, goes round (the two fires), and sacrifices it.

## 11
11 [^6] . At the same fire they cook a mess of food.

## 12
12 [^7] . Having cut off the eleven Avadānas (or portions which have to be cut off) from the animal, from all its limbs, having boiled them at the Śāmitra (fire), and having warmed the heart on a spit, let him sacrifice first from the mess of cooked food (mentioned in Sūtra 11);

## 13
13. Or together with the Avadāna portions.

## 14
14 [^8] . From each of the (eleven) Avadānas he cuts off two portions.

## 15
15 [^9] . They perform the rites only (without corresponding Mantras) with the heart's spit (i.e. the spit on which the heart had been; see Sūtra 12).



[^1]:  11, 2. The Sāmitra fire (literally, the fire of the Samitṛ, who prepares the flesh of the immolated animal) is the one mentioned below in Sūtras 7 and 10. Comp. Indische Studien, X, 345. 'I touch thee' is upākaromi; comp. Kātyāyana-Śrauta-sūtra VI, 3, 19. 26.

[^2]:  It seems that this fire-brand is the same which had been carried round the animal, according to Sūtra 5. Comp. Kātyāyana-Śrauta-sūtra VI, 5, 2-5.

[^3]:  Comp. Sūtra 2.

[^4]:  On the two Vapāśrapaṇīs, comp. Kātyāyana-Śrauta-sūtra VI, 5, 7; Indische Studien, X, 345. The act which is here attributed to the kartṛ ('performer'), belongs in the Śrauta ritual to the incumbencies of the Pratiprasthātṛ.

[^5]:  On the way in which animals had to b. killed at sacrifices, see Weber's Indische Studien, IX, 222 seq.

[^6]:  The Aupāsana fire is referred to.

[^7]:  The eleven portions are indicated by Kātyāyana, Śrauta-sūtra VI, 7, 6.

[^8]:  'A Pañcāvattin cuts off three portions. Having performed the Upastaraṇa and the Pratyabhighāraṇa (the first and second pouring out of Ājya) he sacrifices (the cut-off portions).' Nārāyaṇa.

[^9]:  On the rites regarding the spit, see Kātyāyana VI, 10, 1 seq.; Indische Studien, X, 346.