+++
title = "Adhyāya I, Kaṇḍikā 21"

+++
## 01
1. Some (do this) with a Mantra: 'To Agni I have brought a piece of wood, to the great Jātavedas. Through that piece of wood increase thou, O Agni; through the Brahman (may) we (increase). Svāhā!'

## 02
2. Having put the fuel (on the fire) and having touched the fire, he three times wipes off his face with (the words), 'With splendour I anoint myself.'

## 03
3. 'For with splendour does he anoint himself' - this is understood (in the Śruti).

## 04
4. 'On me may Agni bestow insight, on me offspring, on me splendour.

'On me may Indra bestow insight, on me offspring, on me strength (indriya).

'On me may Sūrya bestow insight, on me offspring, on me radiance.

'What thy splendour is, Agni, may I thereby become resplendent.

'What thy vigour is, Agni, may I thereby become vigorous.

'What thy consuming power is, Agni, may I thereby obtain consuming power' - with (these formulas) he should approach the fire, bend his knee, embrace (the teacher's feet), and say to him, 'Recite, sir! The Sāvitrī, sir, recite!'

## 05
5. Seizing with his (i.e. the student's) garment and with (his own) hands (the student's) hands (the teacher) recites the Sāvitrī, (firstly) Pāda by Pāda, (then) hemistich by hemistich, (and finally) the whole (verse).

## 06
6. He should make him recite (the Sāvitrī) as far as he is able.

## 07
7. On the place of his (i.e. the student's) heart (the teacher) lays his hand with the fingers upwards, with (the formula), 'Into my will I take thy heart; after my mind shall thy mind follow; in my word thou shalt rejoice with all thy will; may Bṛhaspati join thee to me.'




