+++
title = "01"

+++
The form prasákṣat is implicitly taken as a finite form by Scar (602-3) and WG, presumably as an s-aor. subj. In Scar’s tr. it is parallel to the impv. abhy àstu (“so sei es, an Herrlichkeit(en) überlegen sein [und] vorherrschen”), but the verbal accent makes trouble for this main clause interpr. (It could, I suppose, bear a “contrastive” accent.) WG make it a subordinate cl. without overt marking (“indem er vorwärts siegt”), which would account for the accent. Nonetheless it seems best to take the form as a participle. Gr. identifies it as a neut.; if this is so, it would have to be an example of the neut. used adverbially. This seems the analysis presupposed by Old’s (SBE) tr. ‘victoriously’. However, the simplest solution is given in AiG II.2.162 (fld. by Narten, Sig.Aor., 265): it is a masc. nom. sg. with the weak participial suffix appropriate to verbal stems that have weak 3rd pl. endings.

The last word of the verse, the perf. part. cikitvā́n, is characteristically used elsewhere of Agni, in absolute value. Indeed, the same pāda ending jātavedaś cikitvā́n qualifies Agni in nearby IV.3.8 and IV.5.12 (see also cikitvā́n of Agni in IV.8.4). However, in our vs. grammatically this nom. sg. must modify the worshiper, not Agni (pace Re, who manages to attach it to the preceding voc.: “ô Jātavedas, (dieu) qui comprends”). I think rather that the application of this standard epithet of Agni to Agni’s devotee shows the same closed loop discussed with regard to the immediately preceding hymn (see comm. ad IV.11.2), where the worshiper shares qualities of the god, which he receives from the god. There may also be a slight pun: ‘observant’ means one thing for Agni -- he watches over everything -- but another for the mortal who attends on him: ‘observant’ in English can refer to someone who ‘observes’, that is, ‘faithfully carries out’, the prescribed rites.

In the publ. tr. I construe táva krátvā with the preceding pāda: may the man succeed “in accordance with your purpose,” but I now wonder if it is not another indication of the closed loop of reciprocity: the mortal worshiper is observant like Agni because it is Agni’s will or purpose that he should be. Of course it can be applicable to both pādas.
