+++
title = "Adhyāya IV, Kaṇḍikā 3"

+++
## 01
1 [^1] . He should then put the following (sacrificial) implements (on the dead body).

## 02
2. Into the right hand the (spoon called) Juhū.

## 03
3. Into the left the (other spoon called) Upabhṛt.

## 04
4. On his right side the (wooden sacrificial sword called) Sphya, on his left (side) the Agnihotrahavanī (i.e. the ladle with which the Agnihotra oblations are sacrificed).

## 05
5. On his chest the (big sacrificial ladle called) Dhruvā. On his head the dishes. On his teeth the pressing-stones.

## 06
6. On the two sides of his nose the two (smaller sacrificial ladles called) Sruvas.

## 07
7. Or, if there is only one (Sruva), breaking it (in two pieces).

## 08
8 [^2] . On his two ears the two Prāśitraharaṇas (i.e. the vessels into which the portion of the sacrificial food belonging to the Brahman is put).

## 09
9. Or, if there is only one (Prāśitraharaṇa), breaking it (in two pieces).

## 10
10. On his belly the (vessel called) Pātrī,

## 11
11. And the cup into which the cut-off portions (of the sacrificial food) are put.

## 12
12. On his secret parts the (staff called) Śamyā.

## 13
13. On his thighs the two kindling woods.

## 14
14. On his legs the mortar and the pestle.

## 15
15. On his feet the two baskets.

## 16
16. Or, if there is only one (basket), tearing it (in two pieces).

## 17
17 [^3] . Those (of the implements) which have a hollow (into which liquids can be poured), are filled with sprinkled butter.

## 18
18. The son (of the deceased person) should take the under and the upper mill-stone for himself.

## 19
19 [^4] . And the implements made of copper, iron, and earthenware.

## 20
20 [^5] . Taking out the omentum of the she-animal he should cover therewith the head and the mouth (of the dead person) with the verse, 'Put on the armour (which will protect thee) against Agni, by (that which comes from) the cows' (Rig-veda X, 16, 7).

## 21
21. Taking out the kidneys (of the animal) he should lay them into the hands (of the dead body) with the verse, 'Escape the two hounds, the sons of Saramā' (Rig-veda X, 14, 10), the right (kidney) into the right (hand), the left into the left.

## 22
22. The heart (of the animal he puts) on the heart (of the deceased).

## 23
23 [^6] . And two lumps (of flour or rice), according to some (teachers).

## 24
24 [^7] . (Only) if there are no kidneys, according to some (teachers).

## 25
25 [^8] . Having distributed the whole (animal), limb by limb (placing its different limbs on the corresponding limbs of the deceased), and having covered it with its hide, he recites, when the Praṇīta water is carried forward, (the verse), 'Agni, do not overturn this cup' (Rig-veda X, 16, 8).

## 26
26. Bending his left knee he should sacrifice Ājya oblations into the Dakṣiṇa fire with (the formulas), 'To Agni svāhā! To Kāma svāhā! To the world svāhā! To Anumati svāhā!'

## 27
27 [^9] . A fifth (oblation) on the chest of the deceased with (the formula), 'From this one verily thou hast been born. May he now be born out of thee, N.N.! To the heaven-world svāhā!'



[^1]:  3, 1. On the different implements mentioned in the following Sūtras, comp. Prof. Max Müller's paper in the Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, vol. ix, pp. vii seqq.; lxxviii seqq.

[^2]:  On the Prāśitra and the Prāśitraharaṇas, comp. Hillebrandt, Neu- and Vollmondsopfer, pp. 119 (with note 6), 120, 131.

[^3]:  Nārāyaṇa explains āsecanavanti by bilavanti. On pṛṣadājya ('sprinkled butter') comp. the two last Sūtras of the first chapter.

[^4]:  The statement in Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa XII, 5, 2, 14 is somewhat different.

[^5]:  Anustaraṇyā vapām. See chap. 2, 4.

[^6]:  Nārāyaṇa states that these lumps are not put, as one would be inclined to believe, on the heart, but into the hands of the deceased. Sūtra 24 shows that this interpretation is correct.

[^7]:  I.e. if there is no Anustaraṇī animal, which is considered as optional (see chap. 2, 4).

[^8]:  Comp. Kātyāyana XXV, 7, 35.

[^9]:  He who is born out of the deceased, is Agni. See Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa II, 3, 3, 5; and also XII, 5, 2, 15.