+++
title = "Adhyāya IV, Kaṇḍikā 5"

+++
## 01
1 [^1] . The gathering (of the bones is performed) after the tenth (Tithi from the death), (on a Tithi) with an odd number, of the dark fortnight, under a single Nakṣatra.

## 02
2 [^2] . A man into a male urn without special marks, a woman into a female one without special marks.

## 03
3 [^3] . Aged persons of an odd number, not men and women together (gather the bones).

## 04
4 [^4] . The performer of the ceremony walks three times round the spot with his left side turned towards it, and sprinkles on it with a Śamī branch milk mixed with water, with the verse, 'O cool one, O thou that art full of coolness' (Rig-veda X, 16, 14).

## 05
5. With the thumb and the fourth finger they should put each single bone (into the, urn) without making a noise,

## 06
6. The feet first, the head last.

## 07
7 [^5] . Having well gathered them and purified them with a winnowing basket, they should put (the urn) into a pit, at a place where the waters from the different sides do not flow together, except rain water, with (the verse), 'Go to thy mother Earth there' (Rig-veda X, 18, 10).

## 08
8. With the following (verse) he should throw earth (into the pit).

## 09
9. After he has done so, (he should repeat) the following (verse).

## 10
10 [^6] . Having covered (the urn) with a lid with (the verse), 'I fasten to thee' (Rig-veda X, 18, 13), they then should go away without looking back, should bathe in water, and perform a Śrāddha for the deceased.



[^1]:  5, 1. Nārāyaṇa (comp. the Āśvalāyana-Gṛhya-Pariśiṣṭa III, 7) understands this Sūtra in a different way. 'After the tenth Tithi of the dark fortnight, on a Tithi with an odd number, is e. on the eleventh, thirteenth, or fifteenth.' The single Nakṣatras are those the name of which does not denote two Nakṣatras (as, for instance, the two Aṣāḍhās). Comp. Kāty.-Śraut. XXV, 8, 1; Manu V, 59.

[^2]:  Urns, with or without protuberances like female breasts, are considered as female or male accordingly.

[^3]:  See chap. 2, 2.

[^4]:  Comp. chap. 2, 10.

[^5]:  Nārāyaṇa explains pavana by śūrpa. He says that the 'performer' (kartṛ) repeats this and the following texts.

[^6]:  They should give a Śrāddha to the deceased exclusively, according to the Ekoddiṣṭa rite.' Nārāyaṇa.