+++
title = "Adhyāya IV, Kaṇḍikā 8"

+++


## 01 
17 [^10] . In that moment the gifts of perfumes, garlands, incense, lights, and clothes are offered (to the Brāhmaṇas).

## 02 
18. Having taken some food (of the Sthālīpāka prepared for the Piṇḍapitṛyajña), and having besmeared it with ghee, he asks (the Brāhmaṇas) for their permission by saying, 'I shall offer it in the fire,' or, 'I will sacrifice my offering in the fire,' or, 'I will offer it in the fire.'

## 03 
19. The permission (is given in the words), 'It may be offered,' or, 'Sacrifice thy offering,' or, Offer it.'

## 04 
20 [^11] . He then sacrifices in the fire as stated above,

## 05 
21 [^12] . Or, if they give their permission, in the hands (of the Brāhmaṇas).

## 06 
22. 'The mouth of the gods verily is the fire, the mouth of the Fathers is the hand' - thus says the Brāhmaṇa.

## 07 
23. If in the hands, he assigns to them other food, after they have sipped water.

## 08 
24 [^13] . The food (is put together) with the food.

## 09 
25 [^14] . It is said, 'What is given away and offered, that brings prosperity.'

## 10 
26 [^15] . When he sees that they are satiated, he should recite (the verses) containing the word m a dh u, and (the verse), 'They have eaten, they have enjoyed themselves' (Rig-veda I, 82, 2).

## 11 
27 [^16] . Having asked them, 'Relished?' and having taken the food, whatever food he has used, together with the Sthālīpāka, in order to make lumps thereof, he should offer the rest (to the Brāhmaṇas).

## 12 
28. After they have either accepted (that rest of food), or left it (to him), and have finished eating, he should, before they have sipped water, put down the lumps for the Fathers.

## 13 
29. After they have sipped water, according to some (teachers).

## 14 
30 [^17] . Having strewn the food on the ground and suspended the sacrificial cord over his left shoulder, he should dismiss the Brāhmaṇas, (saying to them), 'Say Om! Svadhā!'

## 15 
31. Or, 'So be it! Svadhā!'

[^10]:  Manu III, 209; Yājñavalkya I, 231.

[^11]:  The oblations alluded to in this Sūtra are prescribed in the Śrauta-sūtra, II, 6, 12. They are directed to Soma pitṛmat and to Agni kavyavāhana.

[^12]:  According to Manu (III, 212) this is done only in case there is no fire. Possibly abhyanujñāyām belongs to Sūtra 20, so that we should have to translate, 'He then sacrifices . . . if they give their permission. Or in the hands.'

[^13]:  'The food which is left from the oblations he puts with the food (Sūtra 23) which is to be eaten by the Brāhmaṇas, and has been put into the vessels.' Nārāyaṇa.

[^14]:  Is sṛṣṭam to be understood in the sense of visṛṣṭam? Nārāyaṇa explains it by prabhūtam.

[^15]:  The verses containing the word madhu are Rig-veda I, 90, 6-8.

[^16]:  On the question, 'Relished?' compare Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya IV, 2, 5. For several kinds of Śrāddha ceremonies a Sthālīpāka is prescribed, for others it is not; for the Śrāddhas of the last kind the words 'Together with the Sthālīpāka' are not valid.

[^17]:  They reply, 'Om! Svadhā!'