+++
title = "+038"

+++
38 (272)  
Indra  
Viśvāmitra Gāthina or Prajāpati Vaiśvāmitra or Prajāpati Vācya  
10 verses: triṣṭubh  
A dense and difficult, but rewarding, hymn. Although the hymn is found in the  midst of the Maṇḍala III Indra hymns and is assigned to Indra by the Anukramaṇī,  the name Indra is not found in the hymn (save in the appended Viśvāmitra refrain),  and indeed it is not at all clear that there are any references to Indra in the hymn.  Not surprisingly the hymn has given rise to much discussion.  
Any interpretation of its contents and intent will necessarily be speculative,  and the richness and multivalence of the images should not be reduced to a single  and simple paraphrase. Nonetheless, we will attempt a sketch here. It is regularly  remarked that the hymn is cosmogonic. In fact, it seems to concern two creations: the  Ur-creation of undifferentiated material and the subsequent establishment of indi  
vidual name and form. As usual in ancient India, creation is conceived of as an act  of division and individuation, rather than of assemblage. This second, and more  interesting, creation was carried out by the equivalent of poets, and the current poet  of this hymn identifies himself and his activities with the authors of this second  creation and seeks their model for his own poetic work. The large number of neu  
ter pronouns of unclear reference throughout the hymn seem to be a grammatical  reflection of the undifferentiated material of the first creation, and the poet seems  almost to be inviting us to participate in the second creation by ourselves assigning  them name and form.  
The poem begins with three verses in the poet’s own voice, concerning the older  generations of poets and the poetic tradition. In verse 1 he sounds both tremulous  and self-assured, mindful of the tradition he belongs to but also proud of his own  insight. In the second verse, addressing himself (as so often) in the 2nd person, he  exhorts himself to seek models from the earlier poets, and introduces the notion  that they “crafted heaven for themselves,” a reference to the second creation. The  third verse fleshes out this statement, in describing just how the older poets set  about this creation. Most important is the final pāda, in which they “put apart” the  two worlds—the primal act of separation that makes life possible.  
Verse 4 moves abruptly to a new subject, or rather to an older one. A previously  unmentioned figure is introduced obliquely, and though he is explicitly credited  

with a “name” in pāda c, it is not at all clear what that name is—possibly Viśvarūpa  “possessing all forms” of pāda d. In verse 5 it appears that this bull is responsible  for the Ur-creation preceding the separation just described. The lack of differentia tion in the Ur-creation may be signaled by the androgyny of its source—“the bull  gave birth.” The same verse also introduces two unnamed kings, “sons/descendants  of heaven.” This epithet in the dual usually refers to the Aśvins, but this identifica tion seems unlikely here. Other suggested pairs are Mitra and Varuṇa (Grassmann,  Geldner) or Indra and Varuṇa (Sāyaṇa, Renou, Oberlies); either pairing is perhaps  possible, but the fact that the poet forebears to name them suggests that a precise  identification may run counter to the poet’s intentions. It might also be noted that  the only identifiable dual entities in the hymn are the two world-halves (vss. 3, 8,  probably 9), and in verse 8 they “set  all in motion.” It therefore seems possible  that in this hymn the “two descendants of heaven” could in fact be the two worlds,  which have dominion over (vs. 5) and tend to (vs. 6) the “(cosmic) division,” both  as products of the primal separation in the second creation and producers of the  further individuation occurring in that second creation: note the increasing num  
bers in verse 6ab.  
In verse 7a we return to the androgynous Ur-creator, now explicitly identified as  both bull and cow; the rest of the verse introduces the second creation characterized  by “names” and “form.” The creators here are “masters of artifice,” poets perhaps.  Verse 8 essentially repeats verse 7, as is signaled by the identical opening phrase, but  this time it is the current poet himself (who made a brief reappearance in vs. 6cd),  who by his praise hymn is responsible for movement in the world (i.e., the second  creation) contrasted to the static golden emblem (8b) arising from the first creation.  The poet thus implicitly identifies himself with the masters of artifice, the poets, in  verse 7. In the final verse (aside from the refrain) both the unnamed dual pairing,  quite possibly the two worlds, and the masters of artifice return to bear witness to  the creative actions of the poet himself, who through his powerful tongue seems to  control the individuated forms. We have thus returned to the issues raised in verse  1, but with the poet having successfully assumed his vocation and commanded the  respect of his predecessors in the creative act.  