+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Verily, from out of faith the gods fashioned the initiation, from out of Aditi the opening (sacrifice [^fn_424]), from out of Soma the buying (of Soma-plants), from out of Vishṇu the guest-offering, from out of the sun the Pravargya, from out of the Svadhā (the food of departed ancestors) the Upasads,

[^fn_424]: 138:2 For the Prāyaṇīyeshṭi of the ordinary Soma-sacrifice, see part ii, p. 47 seqq. For the subsequent ceremonies, cf. the table of contents of the same part. They are here alluded to for the reason that they are essential parts of every day's performance during the year's session.

from out of Agni and Soma the day of fasting, and from out of this world the opening Atirātra [^fn_425].

[^fn_425]: 139:1 The Prāyaṇīya Atirātra is the first day of the sacrificial session called Gavām ayanam, the performance of which lasts a year, and includes the following sacrificial periods and days (cf. part ii, p, 427):--

## 02
2. From out of the year (they fashioned) the Caturviṁśa day, from out of the priesthood the Abhiplava (shaḍaha), from out of the nobility the Pr̥shṭḥya (shaḍaha) [^fn_426], from out of Agni the Abhijit, from out of the waters the Svarasāman days, from out of the sun the Vishuvat,--the Svarasāman days have been told;--from out of Indra the Viśvajit,--the Pr̥shṭḥya and Abhiplava have been told;--from out of Mitra and Varuṇa the Go and

[^fn_426]: 139:2 For the difference between these two sacrificial periods of six days, see part iii, introd., p. xxi, note 2.

 Āyus [^fn_427], from out of the Viśve Devāḥ the Daśarātra [^fn_428], from out of the regions the Pr̥shṭḥya-shaḍaha of the Daśarātra, from out of these worlds the Cḥandoma days.

[^fn_427]: 140:1 For the differences between the three modes of chanting the Stotras of the Agnishṭoma and Ukthya Soma-sacrifices--viz. Jyotishṭoma, Goshṭoma, Āyushṭoma--see part iv, p. 287, note 2.

[^fn_428]: 140:2 The Daśarātra, or central ten days of the Dvādaśāha (twelve days’ period), consists of a Pr̥shṭḥya shaḍaha, three Cḥandoma days (of the Ukthya order), and a final (tenth) Atyagnishṭoma day called Avivākya.

## 03
3. From out of the year (they fashioned) the tenth day, from out of Prajāpati the Mahāvrata, and from out of the world of heaven the Udayanīya Atirātra:--such was the birth of the Year; and, verily, whosoever thus knows that birth of the Year becomes more (and more) glorious to (the end of) it, he becomes possessed of a (new) body, he becomes the Year, and, as the Year [^fn_429], he goes to the gods.

[^fn_429]: 140:3 For the Sacrificer as father Time, see part iv, introd., p. xxii.

