+++
title = "Praśna I, Paṭala 4, Khaṇḍa 14"

+++
## 01
1. (That is to say) the Agnihotra, hospitality, [^1] 

## 02
2. And what else of this kind (is ordained).

## 03
3. He whom (a student) asks for instruction, shall certainly not refuse it; [^2] 

## 04
4. Provided he does not see in him a fault, (which disqualifies him from being taught).

## 05
5. If by chance (through the pupil's stupidity the teaching) is not completed, obedience towards the (teacher is the pupil's only refuge). [^3] 

## 06
6. Towards a mother (grandmother and great-grandmother) and a father (grandfather and great-grandfather) the same obedience must be shown as towards a teacher. [^4] 

## 07
7. The feet of all Gurus must be embraced (every day) by a student who has returned home; [^5] 

## 08
8. And also on meeting them, after returning from a journey. [^6] 

## 09
9. The feet of (elder) brothers and sisters must be embraced, according to the order of their seniority. [^7] 

## 10
10. And respect (must) always (be shown to one's elders and betters), according to the injunction [^8]  (given above and according to the order of their seniority).

## 11
11. He shall salute an officiating priest, a father-in-law, a father's brother, and a mother's. brother, (though they may be) younger than he himself, and (when saluting) rise to meet them. [^9] 

## 12
12. Or he may silently embrace their feet. [^10] 

## 13
13. A friendship kept for ten years with fellow citizens (is a reason for giving a salutation, and so is) a friendship, contracted at school, which has lasted for five years. But a learned Brāhmaṇa (known) for less than three years, must be saluted. [^11] 

## 14
14. If the age (of several persons whom one meets) is exactly known, one must salute the eldest (first).

## 15
15. He need not salute a person, who is not a Guru, and who stands in a lower or higher place than he himself.

## 16
16. Or he may descend or ascend (to the place where such a person stands) and salute him. [^12] 

## 17
17. But every one (Gurus and others) he shall salute, after having risen (from his seat). [^13] 

## 18
18. If he is impure, he shall not salute (anybody); [^14] 

## 19
19. (Nor shall he salute) a person who is impure.

## 20
20. Nor shall he, being impure, return a salutation.

## 21
21. Married women (must be saluted) according to the (respective) ages of their husbands.

## 22
22. He shall not salute with his shoes on, or his head wrapped up, or his hands full.

## 23
23. In saluting women, a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya he shall use a pronoun, not his name. [^15] 

## 24
24. Some (declare, that he shall salute in this manner even) his mother and the wife of his teacher. [^16] 

## 25
25. Know that a Brāhmaṇa of ten years and a Kṣatriya of a hundred years stand to each other in the relation of father and son. But between those two the Brāhmaṇa is the father. [^17] 

## 26
26. A younger person or one of equal age he shall ask, about his well-being (employing the word kuśala). [^18] 

## 27
27. (He shall ask under the same conditions) a Kṣatriya, about his health (employing the word anāmaya);

## 28
28. A Vaiśya if he has lost anything (employing the word anaṣṭa). [^19] 

## 29
29. A Śūdra, about his health (employing the word ārogya).

## 30
30. He shall not pass a learned Brāhmaṇa without addressing him;

## 31
31. Nor an (unprotected) woman in a forest (or any other lonely place). [^20] 



[^1]:  14. The Agnihotra, i.e. certain daily oblations of clarified butter.

[^2]:  Manu II, 109-115.

[^3]:  Manu II, 218.

[^4]:  Manu II, 228, 215.

[^5]:  The word Gurus, 'venerable persons,' includes besides the teacher and persons mentioned in the preceding Sūtra, an elder brother, a maternal uncle, and all others who are one's betters or elders. See above, I, 2, 6, 29-35.

[^6]:  'That is to say, whether he himself or "the venerable persons" undertook the journey.'--Haradatta.

[^7]:  Manu II, 133.

[^8]:  See above, I, 4, 13, 2.

[^9]:  Manu II, 130.

[^10]:  The commentator adds that the mode of salutation must depend on their learning and virtue,

[^11]:  Manu II, 134.

[^12]:  This Sūtra, like the preceding, refers to those who are not 'Gurus.'

[^13]:  Manu II, 120.

[^14]:  'Impure,' i.e. unfit for associating with others on account of the death of relations or through other causes, see below, I, 5, 15, 7 seq.

[^15]:  He shall say, 'I salute,' not 'I, N. N., salute.' Manu II, 123.

[^16]:  Āpastamba, of course, holds the contrary opinion. Manu II, 216.

[^17]:  This verse, which is found with slight variations in most Smṛtis contains, according to Haradatta, an instruction given by a teacher to his pupil. Manu II, 135.

[^18]:  Of course. in case the person addressed is a Brahman. Manu II, 127. Kullūka quotes under this verse the above and the following Sūtras. But his quotation has only a faint resemblance to our text.

[^19]:  That is to say in these terms I hope you have not lost any cattle or other property!'--Haradatta.

[^20]:  He shall address a woman in order to re-assure her, and do it in these terms: 'Mother, or sister, what can I do for you? Don't be afraid!' &c.--Haradatta.