+++
title = "01"

+++
Because of the frequent association of the root √śu(m)bh with verbs of motion, esp. √yā ‘drive’ (cf., e.g., nearby I.88.2 śubhé káṃ yānti and cmpds śubhaṃ-yā́(van- )), I interpret prá … śúmbhante more dynamically than most tr. (e.g., Ge “Die sich wie Frauen schön machen…”), esp. given yā́man in the same clause.

The connection of the relative clause in pāda a with its presumed main clause in d is interrupted by the hí clause in c. Ge convincingly suggests that the hí clause gives an explanation or exemplification of the “wondrous power” attributed to them in the last word of b, sudáṃsasaḥ, and he is followed by most tr. including me.

This clause contains a periphrastic causative cakriré vṛdhé with a medial perfect as its base (see Zehnder, Das periphrastische Kausativ im Vedischen, pp. 23, 50-51). Although there is no doubt that the construction is a periphrasis, the reason for its use is unclear. As Zehnder points out (pp. 23, 51), the imperfect of the well- attested morphological causative occurs with just this object in VIII.12.7 yát … ródasī ávardhayat. The context here, which contains two present indicatives (śúmbhante a, mádanti d), does not call for a perfect. I suspect (but cannot demonstrate) that the use of this periphrasis with the perfect has something to do with the middle voice of cakriré, which is also apparently unmotivated in the periphrastic construction, and that there is an underlying pun -- on rodasī́, the consort of the Maruts -- namely “the Maruts made the two worlds/*Rodasī their own” (ródasī … cakriré), which would require a medial form. Since, as I demonstrated long ago (“Voice Fluctuation in the Rig Veda: Medial 3rd Plural -anta in Active Paradigms” IIJ 21 [1979]), 3rd pl. medial secondary forms in -anta to -áya-formations are almost universally interpretable as re-marked actives in -an, using *avardhayanta here would not allow the proposed double reading, with a true medial value in the pun. A different pun is also possibly latent here, involving a reflexive reading of the middle: “they made themselves grow strong” (cakriré vṛdhé). This interpretation would feed naturally into the beginning of verse 2: tá ukṣitā́saḥ “once grown,” and 7a té ‘vardhanta svátavaso mahitvanā́“Those self-powerful ones strengthened themselves in their greatness” would echo this reflexive interpretation. In both of these suggested puns, one of the words in the pāda has to be ignored (vṛdhé in the first, ródasī in the second), but the suggestive if partial phraseology in both cases would resonate with the audience.

It is also worth noting (though I don’t quite know what to do with this fact) that of the fifteen occurrences of cakriré / cakrire in the RV, four of them are found in this hymn (vss. 2, 7, 10 in addition to this one), a strikingly large percentage. And that the three finite verbs in vs. 2 are all medial 3rd pl. with strong subject involvement: pāda a mahimā́nam āśata “obtained (their own) greatness,” b cakrire sádaḥ “made (their own) seat,” and c ádhi śríyo dadhire “put on (their own) splendours.”

