+++
title = "07"

+++
I tr. avardhanta as reflexive, rather than (with most tr.) intransitive ‘grew strong’, in part because svátavas- suggests that their power comes by their own efforts and in part because of its resonance with one interpretation of 1c, for which see above.

On pāda b see comments ad 6c and the similar phrase in 2b. The accent of the apparent main verb tasthúḥ is surprising. Macd (Reader) invokes the principle that the first of two antithetical verbs is accented, but this seems a feeble explanation of this particular situation. Ordinarily such antithetical verbs are adjacent to each other and the semantic antithesis is clearer: “they mounted” and “they made” do not seem particularly antithetical. I see two possible explanations: either the ā́… tasthúḥ clause should be taken as an unmarked subordinate clause (“[when] they mounted the vault, they made …”) or the “antithetical” explanation is correct, but the verb to which it is antithetical is not the following cakrire. Instead it is found in 6c, whose two clauses are in patterned contrast to 7b:  6c sī́datā́barhír urú vah sádas kṛtám  7c ā́nā́kaṃ tasthúr urú cakrire sádaḥ The second part of both pādas contains urú sádaḥ √kṛ; the first parts contain the preverb ā́, main verbs built to the semantically oppositional roots √sad ‘sit’ (sī́data) and √sthā ‘stand’ (tasthúḥ), and an acc. of goal, again oppositional, in that the barhíḥ of 6c is on the earthly ritual ground and the nā́kam is in heaven. I therefore think it likely that the accent on tasthúḥ is meant to signal the contrastive relationship between the two pādas.

The Pp. analyses dhā́vad as ha ā́vat, and most tr. follow this interpretation, as containing an imperfect of √av ‘help’ (Ge “Als Viṣṇu dem … Bullen … beistand…”; Re “eut aidé”; Macd “helped”). (An injunctive ávat would also be possible.) However, we are likely dealing with a double, or even a triple, word play here, for dhā́vat can also simply be the 3rd sg. injunctive belonging to the root (or rather roots) √dhāv ‘rinse’ and ‘run’. This is recognized by WG, who translate with the second, “Als Viṣṇu zu dem vom Rausch bewegten Stier läuft…,” but in the notes also raise the possibility of ‘rinse’, referring to Gotō (Präsensklasse p. 186 n. 333), who in turn refers to Pirart (IIJ 27 [1984] 102ff.).

I think that the two primary readings are “rinsed” and “aided” and that the acc. object vṛ́ṣaṇaṃ madacyútam has different referents depending on the interpretation of the verb, namely soma and Indra respectively. This ambiguity is made possible by the fact that vṛ́ṣan- ‘bull’ is very commonly used of both Indra and soma. The modifying cmpd. madacyút- also has two different interpretations, enabled by the functional ambiguity of root noun compounds like this. Root noun second members regularly have transitive force, governing their first members, hence here “arousing exhilaration.” And in fact this compound is common in this sense, modifying soma (IX.12.3, etc.). But passive value of the root noun with an instrumental or other oblique sense of the 1st member is also possible, hence here “roused by the exhilarating drink / roused to exhilaration.” For general disc. see Scarlatta pp. 128- 29. In this second sense Indra would be the obvious referent, as he is elsewhere (e.g., I.51.2).

While ‘rinse’ may strike the casual reader as an odd choice of words, in fact rinsing is one of the standard steps in the preparation of soma. For Viṣṇu’s participation in this process, see VI.17.11cd pūṣā́víṣṇus trī́ṇi sárāṃsi dhāvan, vrtrahánam mad ̥ íram aṃśúm asmai “Pūṣan, Viṣṇu (and the others) rinse the exhilarating Vrtra ̥ -smashing plant, three lakes (full), for him [=Indra].” In the ‘aided’ interpretation, Indra is the referent of the accusative and the allusion is to Viṣṇu’s help given to him in various exploits including the Vṛtra-smashing. In the “ran to” reading, which strikes me as the least interesting, presumably Indra is also the referent of the accusative, though WG don’t make this exactly clear.

