+++
title = "11"

+++
Old suggests a clever, but ultimately unsatisfactory, reading in pāda a: rather than táyā diśā́with the Pp., he divides tá(y) ādíśā, with the instr. of ādíś- and the older sandhi form of té ‘they’. This would make the end of the pāda more parallel to 10a … tá ójasā. He thinks that the Maruts performed the action in 10a with brute force, but that in 11a “durch klugen Anschlag.” Although I am drawn to this idea because of the persistent parallelisms in this hymn, I cannot accept it in the end. For one thing ādíś- does not occur in the instr., and it generally means ‘aim, intention’, which does not fit here. Old’s proposed reading also involves altering the accent from diśā́to ādíśā, so that it is not merely a matter of redividing the Saṃhitā text. There is also the serious question of why tái̯would be preserved in one prevocalic environment but not in another, in adjacent vss.

The sequence ā́gachantīm in c appears to contain the 3rd pl. pres. gachanti + īm; this is certainly the default interpretation. However, as with vidántīm in I.67.4 and várdhantīm in I.65.4, I now think it should be analyzed as gachant + īm, an injunctive with the inherited *-ant ending preserved because it was early misanalyzed the primary ending fused with the enclitic pronoun īm. Vss. 11 relates how the Maruts brought rain to “thirsting Gotama”; the first two pādas contain preterities (pf.

nunudre, impf. ásiñcan; note also vs. 10, devoted to the same theme, with 3 pfs.

nunudre, bibhiduḥ, cakrire), while pāda d has the functionally ambiguous injunc.

tarpayanta. Only present gachanti intrudes. The publ. tr. moves from past to present in vs. 11 (allowing for a presential reading of tarpayanta): “They pushed the well aslant in this way. They poured out the wellspring for the thirsting Gotama. / They come hither to him with help -- they of bright radiance. They satisfy the desire of the inspired poet through their own essential qualities.” But the narrative sequence would flow better with “they came … they satisfied,” and I would emend the published translation accordingly. For this and other such passages (esp. I.65.4 and I.85.11), see my “Hidden in Plain Sight: Some Older Verb Endings in the Rig Veda” in a forthcoming festschrift.