+++
title = "06"

+++
This vs. is in Paṅkti; that is, it contains five 8-syllable pādas rather than the four of Anuṣṭubh, otherwise the meter of the hymn until the end, where the final two vss. are also in Paṅkti. Here the slight shift in meter seems to mark a boundary: on the one hand it brings the versified paradigm to a close, with the acc. marútaḥ in d; on the other it announces the advent of the gods with their storms and inaugurates the descriptive passages that dominate the remainder of the hymn.

The first pāda lacks a verb; Ge makes a valiant effort to construe asṛkṣata of b with pāda a as well, in two different senses (see his n. 6; ‘… sind … herangesprengt’ for a, ‘haben … geschleudert’ for b), but the former would be a unique sense for ā́ √sṛj. Gr also invents a unique sense ‘decorate X with Y’ to allow the two pādas to be construed as a single construction. To avoid such ad hoc contrivances it seems best to follow Old in supplying a verb of motion with the insistent ā́in pāda a.

The adj. that begins pāda b, ṛśvā́(ḥ), can be either acc. pl. fem. modifying ṛṣṭī́ḥ ‘spears’ (so Gr, apparently also WG) or nom. pl. masc. modifying nára(ḥ) ‘men’.

The pāda break preceding it might favor the former interpr., but 13a, where the Maruts are definitely called ṛṣvā́(ḥ), favors the latter, esp. since the Maruts are also ṛṣvá- elsewhere (e.g., I.64.2). Note that in 13a the adj. is also followed by ‘spear’, but safely bound in a cmpd: ṛṣvā́ṛṣṭívidyutaḥ; this bahuvrīhi ‘whose spears are lightning flashes’ combines the independent words ṛṣṭī́ḥ and vidyútaḥ of our vs. (pādas b and c respectively) and enforces their identity. This resolution in 13a of the ambiguity of 6ab can be seen as another example of “repair.” Partly because the poet seems to be drawing attention to the phrase by resolving it in 13a I am now inclined to take ṛṣvā́(ḥ) in 6b with both of its possible referents and emend the tr. to “the lofty men have launched their spears aloft.” It would be one of the reasonably many examples where a grammatically ambiguous descripter is positioned exactly between its two possible referents.

The hapax fem. part. jájjhatīḥ ‘giggling’ is, of course, phonologically quite striking. As discussed by Hoffmann (Aufs. 306 and n. 3 = KZ 83 [1969]), the form is based on the redupl. pres. to √has ‘laugh’ with a Middle Indic (“dialectal”) development of the cluster *gh-s (rather than the expected -kṣ- found in the masc.

part. to the same redupl. pres. jákṣat- in I.33.7). The use of such a phonologically exotic word is reminiscent of the equally exotic akhkhalī- in the frog hymn (VII.103.3). The latter, as Thieme has convincingly argued, is an importation from pedagogical discourse, conducted for young boys in a preform of Middle Indic. Our form here seems adopted from vernacular “women’s language” and brings a whiff of family life: little girls running after their brothers or parents with little-girl giggles -- a life that would, of course, be conducted in a vernacular (pre-) Middle Indic.

Pāda e has several parallels, given by Ge in his n. 6e. The question in our passage is whether diváḥ is gen., as I’ve taken it (so also Ge and somewhat differently Re), or abl. (“The radiance arose ... from heaven”; so WG). The parallels cut both ways: V.25.8 svānó arta tmánā divaḥ and VII.34.7 úd asya śúṣmād bhānúr nā́rta seem to favor an abl. interpr., but IV.1.17 úd devyā́uṣáso bhānúr arta a genitive. In the end, I don’t think the choice materially affects the sense of the passage: whether the radiance is ‘of heaven’ or ‘from heaven’ the result is pretty much the same.

