+++
title = "07"

+++
This vs. consists of a single rel. cl. (yé … yé) with no main cl. It is most probably preposed to vs. 8 with its correlative the neut. sg. śárdho mā́rutam “the Marut troop,” despite the mismatch in number and gender. The end of vs. 6 has no reference to the Maruts, and, as I noted above, it serves as a boundary vs. The same structure with number disharmony envisaged here across pāda boundary (7a yé …, b yé … // 8a śárdho mā́rutam …) is found, more clearly, within a vs. in 13: 13a yé … / 13c tám … mā́rutaṃ gaṇám …, perhaps another example of repair.

The usual tripartite division of the cosmos (earth, midspace, heaven) is here complicated by the intrusion of a fourth, “the precinct of the rivers” (vṛjánanadī́nām). Re also notes this, but suggests that c does nothing but “enjoliver” (embellish) a -- that is, that the rivers are a variant of the earth. In a basic sense he is correct, but I would add that what we have here may be the clash of two formulaic expressions of contrastive geographic totality -- the standard tripartite model and one, barely attested, in which a nearer or lower vṛjána- is contrasted with something more distant. Cf. esp. I.101.8 (with mention of the Maruts) yád vā marutvaḥ paramé sadhásthe, yád vāvamé vrjáne m ̥ ādayasva, a bipartite phrase where a seat (sadhásthaas here) that is paramá- ‘high/distant’ is contrasted with avamé vṛjáne ‘lowest/nearest enclosure’; a vṛjána- is similarly ávare in II.24.11. Thus, though pāda c may refer to the same general geographical location as a, namely earth, it also evokes a paired, rather than tripartite, contrast like that in I.101.8 just cited.

The pf. injunc. 3rd pl. vāvṛdhánta (see Kü 471) is attested several times elsewhere and manifestly belongs to a redupl. stem. It is worth noting, however, that the poet seems to be playing with its long reduplication. The vā is positioned exactly where we would expect vā ‘or’ to be (Wackernagel’s position: #yé vāvṛdhánta …), anticipating the two vā’s in pādas c and d, also in Wackernagel’s position. I am not suggesting a re-segmentation as vā vṛdhánta, simply pointing to Śyāvāśva’s penchant for verbal play and for making single forms do double duty. To extend this analysis, note the beginning of pāda b, ya urā́v …, with ā́v that could be taken as a metathesis of vā.
