+++
title = "10"

+++
The first half-vs. consists of fanciful names of the individual Maruts (never otherwise named), summed up with the instr. phrase etébhiḥ … nā́mabhiḥ “with these names” in c. The rest of the second hemistich is unclear, however, primarily because the formal identity and meaning of ohate are disputed. The former issue is the easier to solve: though Gr identifies the verb as a 3rd sg. and Re hesitates, it must be a 3rd pl. to the root pres. (of √oh/uh) (see EWA s.v. OH and esp. Narten [Kl Sch.

98-100 =1969]). The basis for considering it a 3rd sg. is the Pp’s interpr. of viṣṭārá as nom. sg. viṣṭāráḥ, but a loc. sg. in -é is equally possible. It is highly unlikely that ohate would be 3rd singular in 10d but 3rd plural in 11a, b, as Gr, for ex., takes them.

The questions then are who is the subj. and how does the verb fit with the rest of the material in the half-verse. Most interpr. take yajñám as the obj. and tr. “praise the sacrifice,” with either the Maruts or unidentified priests/poets as subj. This is not impossible, but given the two ohate in the next vs., which lack objects (unless yajñám is supplied, so, e.g., Gr), I prefer to seek a consistent interpr. of the verb forms. The root is used on a number of occasions as a passive ‘be lauded’ / reflexive ‘vaunt oneself’ (cf., e.g., V.30.6, VIII.5.39). Here I take the Maruts as subject and the names in ab to be the verbal content of the Maruts’ vaunt. (Note that the threefold repetition of ohate here is matched by the three occurrences of vocanta in vs. 16, also with the Maruts as subj.) Under this interpr. the dat. máhyam, which is problematic in most interpr., expresses the verbal recipient of the boast. This leaves yajñám viṣṭāré. For most interpr. the latter word characterizes the Maruts as they come to the sacrifice -- e.g., Ge ‘in breiter Schar’. Again, not impossible. However, the root √stṛ ‘strew’ is almost always closely associated with the ritual, esp. with the strewing of the barhis, and I suggest that viṣṭāré is a infinitival locative that takes verbal rection, hence “at the bestrewing of the sacrifice.” However, I realize that this interpr. has some problems: -stāré is an unlikely infinitival form, and √stṛ doesn’t elsewhere take yajñám as object. Moreover, one nominal form of ví √stṛ, namely viṣṭíraḥ in II.13.10, does seem to have spatial force (JPB ‘far-flung’). I don’t have a good solution.

