+++
title = "12"

+++
This vs. bristles with difficulties. The first to present itself is the hapax kubhanyú-. There are several competing interpr. of this word, though Ge refuses to tr.

it at all. Re tr. “voués à un rite communiel,” which he derives from Benveniste (BSL 52 [1956] 11-12 [not yet seen by me]), who connected it with Ossetic material: see KEWA III.676; the Ossetic connection was disputed by Szemerényi; see KEWA ref.

and EWA s.v., and seems in principle farfetched. Another, going back to Neisser (see EWA s.v.) and followed by Scar (640) and WG, is ‘yelling, shouting’, from √bhan ‘speak’, with the pejorative prefix ku-. (Remmer [Frauennamen, p. 48] also follows this basic analysis, but takes the ku- in positive sense: “welche Redner!” hence “wortgewaltig.”) More likely is an analysis stemming ultimately from Sāy.’s udakecchavaḥ (see Ge’s n. 12a “Wasser wünschend”). Ge cites similarly formed udanyávaḥ ‘water seeking’ in nearby V.54.2, 57.1 (latter also has an útsa- ‘wellspring’ as here). The Kubhā river also figures in this Marut cycle, in the next hymn V.53.9 in a list of river names. A derived adj. *kubhā-yú- ‘seeking the Kubhā’ can easily have been formed. Given the common interchange of -ā-yá/ú- and -anyá/ú- derivatives (type vṛṣāyá-, vṛṣaṇyá-), *kubhāyú- could have been reformed as kubhanyú-, esp. under the influence of udanyú-; see also iṣaṇyata in 14d. Here it can mean either ‘seeking the Kubhā River’ or ‘seeking water’ more generally. Since their goal in the following pāda is a wellspring (útsam), seeking some sort of water source makes good sense in the passage.

The meaning of the word kīrí(n)- is disputed, with the two leading contenders ‘bard’ and ‘weak, poor’. The former, the only sense given by Gr, seems to be currently in the ascendancy after eclipse -- e.g., KEWA glosses it only as ‘gering, niedrig, arm’, but EWA as ‘Dichter, Lobsänger’, with ‘weak’ banished to the small print -- perhaps because it is easier to etymologize (√kṝ ‘celebrate’). But the contexts, esp. the fact that it is regularly followed by cid ‘even’ and often refers to a person receiving divine aid despite his condition, favor the latter. See also my brief disc. in Hyenas (251-52). The sense ‘weak, poor’ fits our context less well, since the Maruts are powerful and outfitted with enough bling to make them rich. But if ‘weak’ can be interpreted as ‘lightweight, light on their feet’, it can work: the Maruts are dancing to the wellspring. Another issue is the status of the stem kīrín- to which this form is assigned. The only other forms possibly belonging to this stem are 3 instr. sg. kīríṇā (I.100.9, V.4.10, 40.8), but they can also of course belong to the reasonably wellattested simple i-stem kīrí-. Mehendale (“Two Vedic Notes: (1) kīrín?” BSOAS 1974: 670-71) attempts to eliminate the -ín-stem entirely by analyzing our form as instr. sg. kīríṇā + u, with u replacing the usual cid, and this interpr. is tentatively followed by WG. But u is hardly equivalent to cid and it is highly unlikely to be placed here, in the middle of a pāda and a clause. Our understanding of Rigvedic particle usage has advanced considerably since 1974. If we want to eliminate, or limit, kīrín-, it should first be noted that of the three instr. sgs., two are in Maṇḍala V (V.4.10, 40.8), and so it is possible that the poets of V reinterpr. kīríṇā as belonging to an -ín-stem; there are no unambig. exx. of the plain i-stem kīrí- in V. Certainly there is no possessive sense associated with the putative kīrín- forms as far as I can see.

The 2nd hemistich also presents difficulties: how to construe the indefinite expression ké cid, why the Maruts are compared to/identified with thieves, and whether c and d form a single expression or two. These questions have been addressed in various ways in the standard transl.; I will treat only my own. My rendering assumes that c and d are separate clauses (contra the standard view) depicting a two-step process. For c I start with the fact that what thieves mostly do in the RV is hide. I assume that the Maruts are likened to thieves because on their first approach, enveloped in clouds perhaps, they are indistinct and unidentifiable; this is also conveyed by the indefinite ké cin ná “like who knows who.” (I do not take ké cid directly with tāyávaḥ, but interpr. them as two different ways of referring to the stealthy Maruts, again against most interpr.) In d the Maruts suddenly flash out (āsan dṛśí tviṣé “came to glitter in my sight”) as the storm, or specifically the lightning. As they become visible in this way, it also becomes clear that they are ‘helpers’ (ū́māḥ); as usual, the assumption behind this is that the storm, though violent, brings fructifying rain -- rain which is previewed in the first hemistich, where the Maruts seek water and prance to the wellspring, while chanting in rhythm, presumably a reference to thunder.

