+++
title = "+052"

+++
Maruts The pattern of the mention of the Maruts’ name in this hymn is worth noting: it might be called a “versified paradigm” (à la I.1) with a hole in it. The various oblique forms of the plural stem marút- are densely clustered at the beginning of the hymn: instr. marúdbhiḥ (1b), gen. marútām (3c), loc. marútsu (4a), dat. marúdbhyaḥ (5d), and acc. marútaḥ (6d) -- each oblique case represented (if abl. is lumped with dat.), each once only. In addition there are three forms of the vṛddhied mā́rutam in the neut. acc. sg. later in the hymn (8a, 13c, 14a). However, though these gods are frequently referred to in the nom. pl. in the hymn, beginning with yé in 1c, and once in the voc. (dhṛṣṇavaḥ 14c), there are no forms of the nom. marútaḥ or the voc. márutaḥ / marutaḥ, although these are the most common forms of this stem in the RV. After the paradigm has been established in the early part of the hymn (1-6), there are no further occurrences of the simple stem in the 11 remaining vss. (7-17), only the three vṛddhi forms. I don’t know what, if anything, to make of this, but it does not seem by chance.

On the responsions and ring-compositional structure of vss. 1-5, see the publ.

intro. and my “Poetic ‘Repair’ in the Rig Veda” (2006: 133-36), as well as The Rigveda between Two Worlds (2007: 112-13). The responsions and the versified paradigm are most likely related; as I argue in “Poetic ‘Repair’” the instr. in the phrase árcā marúdbhiḥ … in vs. 1 is somewhat anomalous, but it is “repaired” by the substitution of the expected dat. in 5d … arcā marúdbhyaḥ. To summarize those discussions briefly, in a hymn devoted to the Maruts, beginning with the selfexhortation of the poet “chant forth,” we might expect the Maruts to be the recipients (dat.) of the chant, not, as it seems, fellow-chanters (instr.) with the human poet. But putting them in the instr. emphasizes an important part of their profile, that they are also known to chant, a feature that is alluded to by the hemistich-final adj. ṛ́kvabhiḥ ‘possessing the chant’. Thus the beginning of the hymn seems concerned with the Maruts’ contrastive and mediating functional roles as expressed by the oblique cases of the paradigm.

