+++
title = "A Model of the Ritual"

+++
The ritual as depicted both in the R̥gveda and in the later Vedic texts treating the  classical śrauta system (and indeed the much later pūjā of classical Hinduism) is  modeled as a hospitality ceremony and festive meal, offered to the visiting gods. The  poets eagerly invite the gods to journey to attend the sacrifice. When they arrive, they are greeted and provided with seats near the center of the action, on a special  grass strewn on the ritual ground to make the ground more comfortable. This grass  strew is called barhís and it has an exact cognate in Avestan barziš “cushion, pillow.”+++(4)+++  In some hymns the horses pulling the gods’ chariots, particularly Indra’s two fallow+++(=yellowish-brown)+++  bays+++(=reddish brown horse)+++, are unhitched and offered refreshment of their own. The gods are then offered  a meal, that is, the oblations, generally consisting of ghee, little grain cakes, and,  in the most important sacrifices, soma, and they are entertained while they eat, by  the hymns of praise that constitute the R̥gvedic corpus.+++(4)+++ The end of this entertain ment is often announced in the final verse of the hymn, and sometimes the gods are  explicitly sent on their way back to heaven. Particularly nice examples of this envoi+++(=concluding poem)+++  are found in I.61–63 and I.82, hymns designed to accompany the Hāriyojana or  “Fallow-bay-yoking” oblation, the ritualized hitching up of Indra’s horses for the  return journey; in I.82.5–6 Indra is charmingly urged to go home to his “dear wife.” 

The “ritual ground” alluded to above is the sacralized space within which the ritual proceeds. It is not a permanent space dedicated to ritual performance, much less  a building or temple; rather, judging from the evidence of the later śrauta texts, it is  demarcated and sacralized for each performance. The space is defined especially by  the presence of three ritual fires, the focal point of the sacrifice and the recipient(s)  of the oblations. In the later texts these are the Āhavanīya (the fire “to be offered  into”) set to the east, the Gārhapatya (“householders’ fire”) to the west, from which  the Āhavanīya is taken out and carried to the east, and the Dakṣiṇāgni (“southern  fire”), and their locations and functions are precisely fixed. The R̥gveda does not  attest these names for the fires, but it does often refer, though often obliquely, to  the three fires of the ritual. Moreover, the god Agni and his physical representative,  the offering fire, regularly receive the epithet puróhita “placed to the east/in front,”  appropriate to the removal of the Āhavanīya fire from the western Gārhapatya  and its movement to the east. (The third word in the R̥gveda is in fact puróhitam I.1.1.) The poets sometimes seem to treat this movement as a sacred mystery (e.g.,  III.31.1–3), a fact that may point to the three-fire model as a ritual innovation of  the pre-R̥gvedic period. There is no parallel to it in Avestan ritual, which uses only  a single fire.+++(5)+++ 

One aspect of the “entertainment of guests” model of Vedic sacrifice is the fear,  constantly expressed, that the gods will choose to go to another party. The R̥gvedic  sacrificers know that everyone in the larger sacrificial community follows much the  same ritual calendar and therefore many competing sacrifices are taking place at  the same time.+++(5)+++ The invitation to the gods often explicitly urges them to pass over  other sacrifices and come to ours, and in order to make ours more attractive, we  must provide the best hospitality, in particular the best entertainment in the form  of exquisitely crafted and novel hymns.+++(4)+++ 

An important feature of the “guest” model is the fact that it envisions and  requires direct interaction between gods and mortals, on the mortals’ turf—or  rather on a space that has been rendered temporarily neutral through its sacralization— though it is on earth, the human realm, rather than in the gods’ world, heaven. The interaction in turn requires epiphany in the technical sense: the gods  must appear in person, as it were. The poets crave this epiphany and fear its failure  to materialize. It is especially Indra whose epiphany they anticipate, and the fear  that it may not happen also leads to the more general fear that Indra does not exist,  a possibility that is often put in the mouth of doubtful “others.”+++(5)+++ 

There is another, more recessive model of sacrifice perceptible in the R̥gveda,  especially in Agni hymns, whereby the offerings go to the gods in heaven, rather  than requiring the gods to come to earth to receive them.+++(5)+++ The libations ascend on  the smoke of the offering fire, an image conceptually close to the Homeric sacrifice.  There seems to be no conflict in the minds of the R̥gvedic ritualists between these  two models, and they are not exclusive to different groups of poets but can in fact  occur in the same hymn+++(5)+++; see, for example, the Agni hymn I.1, where the “guest”  model dominates, with the gods’ travel to the sacrifice explicit in verses 2 and 5, but  the oblation’s movement to the gods is alluded to in verse 4. 
