+++
title = "09"

+++
The last vs. before the summary vs., this one brings the hymn ringcompositionally back to its beginning with its opening impv. vy ùcha ‘dawn forth’, a lexeme found 4x in vss. 2-3 (2b, 2c, 3b, 3c).

As noted in the publ. intro., this prohibition and its striking simile are the most notable features of this hymn. The mā́clause contains a present injunctive, not an aorist. Hoffmann (79) explains it as an inhibitive, not a prohibitive -- his standard explanation for the use of present injunctives in such contexts. Although IH has demonstrated that this explanation of the use of pres. injunctives with mā́doesn’t hold -- they are generally used when an aor. injunc. is not available -- in this case, Hoffmann’s analysis may be correct. There is a perfectly fine root aor. to √tan and it in fact occurs once with mā́(I.91.23), so we may need to seek a functional explanation somewhat in the manner of Hoffmann’s. On the other hand and after further thought, I wonder if the pres. stem is used in this context in order to express a durative prohibitive, rather than an inhibitive. That is, starting now, when you dawn, don’t dawdle at your work. She’s just been ordered to dawn, which makes the start time now, not in the past, but the poet fears that once she starts she’s going to draw it out longer than she should. It shouldn’t be inhibitive in KH’s sense, because that would mean she’s already started the work. On still another hand, however, since this is functionally the final vs., which refers back to the beginning of the hymn, perhaps the poet is saying that Dawn has been at work since that beginning and should finish it up.

It is difficult not to take sū́raḥ as a nom. sg. to a thematic stem (so, e.g., Ge and Re), although many occurrences of sū́raḥ are better interpr. as gen. sg. to svàr- -- incl. in this same sequence sū́ro arcíṣā in VIII.7.36. WG take it as a gen., but then must identify a different subj. for tápāti, leading them to introduce Varuṇa and a superstructure of explanation that seems over-elaborate. As indicated in the publ.

intro., I think the point of contact is the assumption that thieves work at night and if the sun rises on them, they will be caught out.

