+++
title = "06"

+++
## 01
1. The next (verse; M. I, 6, 13), he recites over a boat (with which they are going to cross a river).

## 02
2. And let the wife, when she is crossing, not see the crew.

## 03
3. When they have crossed, let him murmur the next (verse; M. I, 6, 14).

## 04
4. If they have to pass over a cemetery, or if any article (which they carry with them), or their chariot is damaged, the ceremonies from the putting of wood on the fire down to the Ājyabhāga oblations are performed, and while she takes hold of him, he offers the oblations (indicated by the) next (Mantras; M. I, 7, 1-7), then he enters upon the performance of the Jaya and following oblations, and performs (the rites) down to the sprinkling (of water) round (the fire).

## 05
5. If they pass by trees with milky sap or by other trees that serve as marks, by rivers or by deserts, he should murmur the next two (verses; M. I, 7, 8. 9), according to the characteristics in them (which refer to these different cases).

## 06
6. With the next (verse) he shows her the house(M. I, 7, 10).

## 07
7. With the next two (verses; M. I, 7, 11. 12) he unyokes the two animals; the right one first.

## 08
8. Having, with the next (verse; M. I, 8, 1), spread out, in the centre of the house, a red bull's skin with the neck to the east, with the hair up, he causes her to recite the next (verse; M. I, 8, 2), while he makes her enter the house, (which she does) with her right foot.

## 09
9. And she does not stand on the threshold.

## 10
10. In the north-east part of the house the ceremonies from the putting of wood on the fire down to the Ājyabhāga oblations are performed, and while she takes hold of him, he offers the oblations (indicated by the) next (Mantras; M. I, 8, 3-15); then he enters upon the performance of the Gaya and following oblations, and performs (the rites) down to the sprinkling (of water) round (the fire). Then they sit down with the next (verse; M. I, 9, 1) on the skin, the bridegroom to the north.

## 11
11. He then places with the next (verse; M. I, 9, 2), the son of a wife who has only sons and whose children are alive, in her lap, gives fruits to the (child) with the next Yajus (M. I, 9, 3), and murmurs the next ṭwo (verses; M. I, 9, 4-5). Then he (and his wife) observe silence until the stars appear.

## 12
12. When the stars have appeared, he goes out (of the house with her) in an easterly or northerly direction, and shows her the polar star and (the star) Arundhatī with the next two verses (M. I, 9, 6-7), according to the characteristics (contained in those verses).




