+++
title = "08"

+++
## 01
1. [^1]  At the opening and concluding ceremonies of the Vedic study, the Ṛṣi who is indicated (as the


[^1]:  8, 1. Haradatta observes that at the kāṇḍopākaraṇa and kāṇḍasamāpana the Ṛṣi of that kāṇḍa, at the general adhyāyopākaraṇa and samāpana all kāṇḍarshis, should be worshipped.

Ṛṣi of the Kāṇḍa which they study, is the deity to whom the ceremony belongs),

## 02
2. And in the second place Sadasaspati (cf. Mantrap. I, 9, 8).

## 03
3. They reject a sacrifice performed by a wife or by one who has not received the Upanayana initiation, and a sacrifice of salt or pungent food, or of such food as has an admixture of a despised sort of food.

## 04
4. Sacrifices connected with special wishes and Bali sacrifices (should be performed) as stated (even against the clauses of the last Sūtra).

## 05
5. Whenever the fire flames up of itself, he should put two pieces of wood on it with the next two (verses: M. I, 9, 9-10),

## 06
6. Or with (the two formulas), 'May fortune reach me! May fortune come to me!'

## 07
7. Let him notice the day on which he brings his wife home.

## 08
8. (From that day) through three nights they should both sleep on the ground, they should be chaste, and should avoid salt and pungent food.

## 09
9. Between their sleeping-places a staff is interposed, which is anointed with perfumes and wrapped round with a garment or a thread.

## 10
10. In the last part of the fourth night he takes up the (staff) with the next two (verses; M. I, 10, 1-2), washes it and put it away; then (the ceremonies) from the putting of wood on the fire down to the Ājyabhāga oblations (are performed), and while she takes hold of him, he sacrifices the oblations (indicated by the) next (Mantras; M. I, 10, 3-9); then he enters upon the performance of the Jaya and following oblations, and performs (the rites) down to the sprinkling (of water) round (the fire). Then he makes her sit down to the west of the fire, facing the east, and pours some Ājya of the remains (of those oblations) on her head with the (three) Vyāhṛtis and the word Om as the fourth (M. I, 10, 10-13). Then they look at each other with the next two verses (M. I, 11, 1-2), according to the characteristics (contained in those verses); with the next verse (M. I, 11, 3) he besmears the region of their hearts with remains of Ājya; then he should murmur the next three verses (I, 11, 4-6), and should murmur the rest (of the Anuvāka; I, 11, 7-11) when cohabiting with her.

## 11
11. Or another person should recite (the rest of the Anuvāka) over her, (before they cohabit).

## 12
12. [^2]  During her (first) monthly illness he instructs her about the things forbidden (to menstruous women), contained in the Brāhmaṇa, in the section, 'A menstruous woman with whom,' &c.


[^2]:  Taittirīya Saṃhitā II, 5, 1, 6 seq.

## 13
13. After the appearance of her monthly illness, he should, when going to cohabit with her after her illness, recite over her, after she has bathed, the next verses (M. I, 12, 1-13, 4).

