+++
title = "Praśna 8, Section 22"

+++
## 01
1. [^1]  After the ceremonies down to the Ājyabhāga oblations have been performed in the same way as at the fortnightly sacrifices, he makes with his joined hands oblations of the cake with the next (verse, II, 20, 27).

## 02
2. [^2]  The rest (of the cake) he makes ready, divides (it) into eight parts and offers it to the Brāhmaṇas.

## 03
3. On the following day he touches a cow with a Darbha blade, with the words, 'I touch thee agreeable to the Fathers.'

## 04
4. [^3]  Having silently offered five Ājya oblations, and having cooked, the omentum of the (cow), and performed the 'spreading under' and the sprinkling over (of Ājya), he sacrifices (the omentum) with the next (verse, II, 20, 28) with a Palāśa leaf from the middle or the end (of the stalk).

## 05
5. (He sacrifices) boiled rice together with the meat (of the cow) with the next (verses, II, 20, 29-35),

## 06
6. Food prepared of meal with the next (verse, II, 21, 1),

## 07
7. Then the Ājya oblations (indicated by the) next (Mantras, II, 21, 2-9).

## 08
8. (The rites) from the Sviṣṭakṛt down to the offering of the Piṇḍas are the same (as at the Śrāddha).

## 09
9. Some (teachers) prescribe the Piṇḍa offering for the day after the Aṣṭakā.

## 10
10. Here (follows) another (way for celebrating the Aṣṭakā sacrifice). He sacrifices curds with his joined hands in the same way as the cake.

## 11
11. Having left over from the meat of the (cow, see above, 3. 4) as much as is required, on the day after (the Aṣṭakā) (he performs) the rite of the Anvaṣṭakā.

## 12
12. This rite has been explained in the description of the monthly Śrāddha.

## 13
13. If he goes out in order to beg for something, let him murmur the next (Mantras, II, 21, 10-16) and then state his desire.

## 14
14. If he has obtained a chariot, he has the horses put to it, lets it face the east, and touches with the next (verse, II, 21, 17) the two wheels of the chariot or the two side-pieces.

## 15
15. With the next Yajus (II, 21, 18) he should mount, and drive with the next (verse, II, 21, 19) towards the east or north, and should then drive off on his business.

## 16
16. Let him mount a horse with the next (formulas, II, 21, 20-30),

## 17
17. An elephant with the next (formula, II, 21, 31).

## 18
18. [^4]  If any harm is done him by these two (beasts), let him touch the earth as indicated above.

## 19
19. If he is going to a dispute, he takes the parasol and the staff in his left hand.



[^1]:  22, 1. Comp. above, VII, 18, 6.

[^2]:  I believe that śeṣaḥ means the rest of the cake. The word 'siddhaḥ' possibly refers to such preparations of the food as are indicated in Hiraṇyak. II, 5, 14, 7. Haradatta understands śeṣaḥ as the rest of the rites (tantrasya śeṣaḥ): 'The rest of the rites is p. 294 the regular one, without alterations:' it must be admitted that the expressions used by Hiraṇyak. II, 5, 14, 10 would agree well with this explanation.

[^3]:  See above, V, 13, 16.

[^4]:  See VII, 19, 11. On reṣaṇe, comp. below, 23, 9.