+++
title = "12"

+++
## 01
1. Having studied the Veda, when going to take the bath (which signifies the end of his studentship), he enters a cow-shed before sunrise, hangs over its door a skin with the hair inside, and sits there.

## 02
2. On that day the sun should not shine upon him.

## 03
3. [^1]  At noon, after (the ceremonies) from the putting (of wood) on the fire down to the Ājyabhāga oblations (have been performed), he puts a piece of Palāśa wood on (the fire) with the next (verse; M. II, 7, 1), sits down to the west of the fire on a mat or on erakā grass, recites the next (verse, II, 7, 2) over a razor, and hands it over to the barber with the next Yajus (II, 7, 3). (The rites) beginning with the pouring together of (warm and cold) water down to the burying of the hair are the same as above (comp. M. II, 7, 4).


[^1]:  12, 3. See above, IV, 10, 5-8.

## 04
4. He sits down behind the cow-shed, takes the girdle off, and hands it over to a Brahmacārin.

## 05
5. The (Brahmacārin) hides it with the next Yajus (II, 7, 5) at the root of an Udumbara tree or in a tuft of Darbha grass.

## 06
6. [^2]  With water of the description stated above he bathes with the six next (verses; II, 7, 6-11), and with the next (II, 7, 12) he cleanses his teeth with a stick of Udumbara wood.


[^2]:  See IV, 10, 5.

## 07
7. Having bathed and shampooed his body with such ingredients as are used in bathing, (aromatic powder, &c.),

## 08
8. He puts on with the next Yajus (M. II, 7, 13) a fresh under garment, and anoints himself, after having given the salve in charge of the deities with the next (Mantras, II, 7, 14), with the next (verse, II, 7, 15) with sandal salve which is scented with all kinds of perfumes. With the next (verse, II, 7, 16) he moves about a gold pellet with its setting, which is strung on a string, three times from left to right in a water-pot; with the next (verse, II, 7, 17) he ties the (pellet) to his neck; in the same way, without Mantras, he ties a pellet of Bādara wood to his left hand, and repeats the rites stated above with a fresh upper garment, with the (verses), 'May the rich' (comp. above, IV, 10, 10; M. II, 7, 18).

## 09
9. To the skirt (of that garment) he ties two earrings, puts them into the (sacrificial spoon called) Darvi, offers the oblations (indicated by the) next (Mantras; M. II, 8, 1-8), pouring the Ājya over (the ear-rings), and enters upon (the performance of) the Jaya and following oblations.

## 10
10. Having performed (the ceremonies) down to the sprinkling (of water) round (the fire), he should tie (one of the ear-rings) with the same (verses) to his right ear, and with the same (verses one) to his left ear.

## 11
11. In the same way he should with the following (formulas, M. II, 8, 9-9, 5), according to the characteristics (contained in them), (put) a wreath on his head, anoint (his eyes), look into a mirror, (put on) shoes, (and should take) a parasol and a staff.

## 12
12. He keeps silence until the stars appear.

## 13
13. When the stars have appeared, he goes away towards the east or north, worships the quarters (of the horizon) with the next hemistich, and the stars and the moon with the next (M. II, 9, 6).

## 14
14. Having spoken with a friend he may go where he likes.

