+++
title = "13"

+++
## 01
1. Now this (is) another (way for performing the Samāvartana). He bathes silently at a bathing-place and puts silently a piece of wood on (the fire).

## 02
2. [^1]  He sits down on a bunch of grass, as stated above (comp. M. II, 9, 7), at a place where they are going to honour him (with the Argha reception).


[^1]:  13, 2. See above, IV, II, 7.

## 03
3. A king and a chieftain (sit down) in the same way (as a Brāhmaṇa), with the next two (formulas, M. II, 9, 8. 9), according to the characteristics (contained in them).

## 04
4. (The host) announces (to the guest), 'The water for washing the feet!'

## 05
5. [^2]  (The guest) should recite the next (verse, II, 9, 10) over (that water) and should stretch out the right foot first to a Brāhmaṇa, the left to a Śūdra.


[^2]:  Comp. Āśvalāyana-Gṛhya I, 24, 11. 12.

## 06
6. Having touched the person who washes him, he should touch himself (i.e. his own heart) with the next (formula, M. II, 9, II).

## 07
7. (The host, taking the Argha water) in an earthen vessel which he holds with two bunches of grass, announces (to the guest), 'The Argha water!'

## 08
8. (The guest) should recite the next (formula, II, 9, 12) over (that water) and should murmur the next Yajus (II, 9, 13), while a part (of the water) is poured over his joined hands.

## 09
9. Over the rest (of the water) which is poured out towards the east, he recites the next (verse, M. II, 9, 14).

## 10
10. (The host) pours together curds and honey in a brass vessel, covers it with a larger (brass cover), takes hold of it with two bunches of grass, and announces (to the guest), 'The honey-mixture!'

## 11
11. Some take three substances, (those stated before) and ghee.

## 12
12. Some take five, (the three stated before), and grains, and flour.

## 13
13. The guest recites the next two (formulas, M. II, 10, 1. 2) over (the honey-mixture) and sips water with the two Yajus (II, 10, 3. 4) before (eating) and afterwards; with the next (verse, II, 10, 5) he should partake three times (of the food) and should give the remainder to a person towards whom he is kindly disposed.

## 14
14. A king or a chieftain should only accept it and (give it) to his Purohita.

## 15
15. (The host) announces the cow with (the word), 'The cow!'

## 16
16. After the guest has recited the next (formula, M. II, 10, 6) over (the cow, the host) cools its omentum, and having performed the 'spreading under' and the sprinkling over (of Ājya), he sacrifices it with the next (verse, M. II, 10, 7) with a Palāśa leaf from the middle or the end (of the stalk).

## 17
17. If the guest chooses to let (the cow) loose, he murmurs the next (formulas, II, 10, 8-11) in a low voice (and says) loudly, 'Om! Let it loose!' (II, 10, 12).

## 18
18. (In this case) he recites the next (formulas, M. II, 10, 13-17) in a low voice over the food which is announced to him (instead of the cow), (and says) loudly, 'Om! Make it ready!' (II, 10, 18).

## 19
19. For his teacher, for a Ṛtvij, for his father-in-law, for a king he ought to perform this (Arghya ceremony) as often as they visit his house, if at least one year has elapsed (since they came last).

## 20
20. For a renowned teacher (of the Veda the ceremony should be performed) once.

