+++
title = "Praśna 7, Section 19"

+++
## 01
1. The unground grain (which is left over, see above, VII, 18, 11) they give to the boys to eat.

## 02
2. Let him repeat in the same way this Bali-offering of whatever food he has got or of flour, from that day to full moon of (the month) Mārgaśīrṣa.

## 03
3. On the day of the full moon of Mārgaśīrṣa after sunset a Sthālīpāka (is offered as above, VII, 18, 5).

## 04
4. In the Mantra for the Bali-offering he changes (the word 'I shall offer' into) 'I have offered.'

## 05
5. Then he does not offer (the Bali) any longer.

## 06
6. (Now follows) the Āgrayaṇa sacrifice (or partaking of the first-fruits) of one who has not set up the (Śrauta) fires.

## 07
7. He prepares a Sthālīpāka of the fresh fruits, sacrifices to the deities of the (Śrauta) Āgrayaṇa sacrifice with (Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt as the fourth, fills his mouth with grains, swallows them, sips water, forms a lump of the boiled (sacrificial) food, and throws it up with the next Yajus (II, 18, 1) to the summit of the house.

## 08
8. [^1]  (Now follows) the 'redescent' in the winter.

## 09
9. With the next Yajus (II, 18, 2) they 'redescend' (or take as their sleeping-place a layer of straw instead of the high bedsteads which they have used before). With the next Yajus formulas (II, 18, 3-7) they lie down on a new layer (of straw) on their right sides,

## 10
10. The father to the south, the mother to the north (of him), and so the others, one after the other from the eldest to the youngest.

## 11
11. After he has arisen, he touches the earth with the next two (verses, II, 18, 8. 9).

## 12
12. In the same way the lying down, &c., is repeated thrice.

## 13
13. [^2]  Having prepared a Sthālīpāka for Lana and one for Kṣetrapati, he goes out in an easterly or northerly direction, prepares a raised surface, (and then follow the ceremonies) beginning with the putting of wood on the fire.

## 14
14. To the west of the fire he builds two huts.



[^1]:  Comp. the note on Śāṅkhāyana IV, 17, 1.

[^2]:  The description of the śūlagava sacrifice, which here follows, agrees in most points with the statements of Hiraṇyakeśin II, 3, 8.