+++
title = "Praśna 7, Section 20"

+++
## 01
1. [^1]  With the next (verse, II, 18, 10) he has the Īśāna led to the southern (hut),


[^1]:  20, 1-3. Comp. Hiraṇyak. II, 3, 8, 2-4. Haradatta explains the Īśāna, the mīḍhuṣī, and the jayanta as images of the three gods.

## 02
2. With worldly words the 'bountiful goddess' to the northern (hut),

## 03
3. To the middle (between the two huts) the 'conqueror.'

## 04
4. He gives them water to drink in the same order in which they have been led (to their places), takes three portions of boiled rice (from the Sthālīpāka prepared for Īśāna), takes (these portions of rice) to the fire, makes (the three gods) touch them with the next (formulas, II, 18, II-13), sacrifices of these portions, to each god of the portion which belongs to him, with the next (formulas, II, 18, 14-30), cuts off (Avadānas) from all (portions), and sacrifices with the next Yajus (II, 18, 31) to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.

## 05
5. Having worshipped (the god Īśāna) with the next Yajus (II, 18, 32), he distributes with the next (formulas, II, 18, 33-39) leaves together with portions of boiled rice, two (leaves) with each (Yajus), then ten to the divine hosts (II, 18, 40), and ten to the (divine hosts) that follow (and are referred to in the next Yajus, II, 18, 41).

## 06
6. With the next (formulas, II, 18, 42-45) he does the same as before (i.e. he distributes two leaves with each Mantra).

## 07
7. Having formed a lump of boiled rice, he puts it into a basket of leaves, and with the next Yajus (II, 18, 46) hangs it up on a tree.

## 08
8. Here he should murmur the Rudra texts (Taitt. Saṃh. IV, 5),

## 09
9. Or the first and last (Anuvāka).

## 10
10. He places his cows around the fire so that the smoke (of the sacrifice) may reach them.

## 11
11. [^2]  With his firmly shut fist full of Darbha grass he besprinkles (them) with scents; the bull first.


[^2]:  On grumuṣṭi, see the notes of the commentators, p. 93 of Dr. Winternitz's edition, and the commentary on Taitt. Saṃhitā V, 4, 5, 3 (Indische Studien, XII, 60).

## 12
12. He should perform a sacrifice to Kṣetrapati, without a fire, in the path used by his cows.

## 13
13. He has (the Kṣetrapati) led to his place in the same way as the Īśāna (see above, Sūtra 1).

## 14
14. He puts (portions of boiled rice) into four or seven leaves, naming (the god).

## 15
15. [^3]  Let him sacrifice quickly; the god has a strong digestion (?).


[^3]:  I have translated here as in Hiraṇyak. II, 3, 9, 11. Haradatta and Sudarśanārya give another explanation of the words 'pāko devaḥ;' see p. 93 of the edition.

## 16
16. With the next two (verses, II, 18, 47. 48) he does worship (to Kṣetrapati).

## 17
17. The Sthālīpāka (belonging to Īśāna) he gives to the Brāhmaṇas to eat;

## 18
18. That belonging to Kṣetrapati his uterine relations eat,

## 19
19. Or as is the custom in their family.

