+++
title = "21"

+++
## 01
1. [^1]  The times for the monthly Śrāddha are in the second fortnight (of the month), as they are stated.


[^1]:  21, 1. Comp. Dharmaśāstra II, 7, 16, 8 seq.; Sacred Books, vol. ii, p. 139. Comp. Professor Bühler's remarks, vol. ii, p. xiv.

## 02
2. Let him feed, without regard of (worldly) purposes, pure Brāhmaṇas, versed in the Mantras, who are not connected with himself by consanguinity or by their Gotra or by the Mantras (such as his teacher or his pupils), an odd number, at least three.

## 03
3. He makes oblations of the food (prepared for the Brāhmaṇas) with the next (verses, II, 19,1-7);

## 04
4. Then the Ājya oblations (indicated by the) next (Mantras, II, 19, 8-13).

## 05
5. Or invertedly (i.e. he offers Ājya with the verses referred to in Sūtra 3, and food with those referred to in Sūtra 4).

## 06
6. Let him touch the whole (food) with the next (formulas, II, 19, 14-16).

## 07
7. Or the (single) prepared (portions of food destined) for the single Brāhmaṇas.

## 08
8. Having caused them with the next (formula, II, 20, 1) to touch (the food, he gives it to them to eat).

## 09
9. When they have eaten (and gone away), he goes after them, circumambulates them, turning his right side towards them, spreads out southward-pointed Darbha grass in two different layers, pours water on it with the next (formulas, II, 20, 2-7), distributes the Piṇḍas, ending in the south, with the next (formulas, II, 20, 8-13), pours out water as before with the next (formulas, 14-19), worships (the ancestors) with the next (formulas, II, 20, 20-23), sprinkles with the next (verse, 24) water three times from right to left round (the Piṇḍas) with a water-pot, besprinkles the vessels, which are turned upside down, repeating the next Yajus (25) at least three times without taking breath, sets up the vessels two by two, cuts off (Avadānas) from all (portions of food), and eats of the remains at least one morsel with the next Yajus (26).

## 10
10. Of the dark fortnight that follows after the full moon of Māgha, the eighth day falls under (the constellation of) Jyeṣṭhā: this day is called Ekāṣṭakā.

## 11
11. In the evening before that day (he performs) the preparatory ceremony.

## 12
12. [^2]  He bakes a cake of four cups (of rice).


[^2]:  12, 13. Comp. Hiraṇyak. II, 5, 14, 3 seq.

## 13
13. (The cake is prepared) in eight dishes (like a Puroḍāśa), according to some (teachers).

