+++
title = "02"

+++
The first pāda of this vs. is esp. puzzling. As usual in the RV, Āyu sows confusion, and here, since it is not clear who/what Āyu represents, it is also unclear with what to construe the gen. āyóḥ. The standard interpr. take it with rípaḥ ‘swindles, tricks’, while I attach it to áhan ‘day’ (with no confidence in its correctness; Old explicitly rejects it). The problem is that Āyu is generally viewed positively, as in II.2.8 where the ritual fire is “the guest dear to Āyu” and II.4.2 where the Bhṛgus deposit the ritual fire “among the clans of Āyu.” If Āyu is positive in value, then the “swindles of Āyu” must be those directed against him, as Old points out. But as he also points out, the more natural reading of this gen. would be subjective (“swindles perpetrated by Āyu”), not objective. It must be admitted that once in this maṇḍala (II.14.7), Āyu is viewed negatively: Indra strikes down the heros of Āyu along with those of Kutsa and Atithigva, a trio that is subject to Indra’s violence elsewhere, though also individually named as Indra’s comrades in still other passages. More to the point, in my opinion, is the apparent formula VERB uśíjaḥ śáṃsam āyóḥ “The Uśij-priests X-ED the Laud of Āyu” (IV.6.11, V.3.4). In the immediately preceding hymn, II.31, we find in 6a the expression śáṃsam uśíjām “the Laud of the Uśij-priests,” and in the next vs., 7b, the Āyu-s (pl.) figure as fashioners of ritual speech. This suggestive juxtaposition and echo of the fuller expression “Laud of Āyu” found in the preceding closely related hymn suggest that Āyu here is viewed positively and is related to the ritual; I therefore think that “the day of Āyu” is a way of referring to the day of the sacrifice. Most forms belonging to the thematic stem dábha- must be root aor.

subjunctives, but here the mā́requires an injunctive. Formally the root aor. injunctive should have a zero-grade root, *dbhan, but obviously such a form is not viable. With full-grade restored, the injunctive is identical to the subjunctive. On these forms see Hoffman (Injunk. 242-43), who suggests that a new injunc. dabhur was created to avoid this functional coincidence.

sakhyā́occurs several times with ví √yu ‘keep away’. Narten (Sig. Aor. 214) states that the s-aor. to this root is intrans., and Ge (/WG) render it thus here: “Nicht soll sich unserer Freundschaft lösen,” presumably with neut. pl. sakhyā́as subj. of the sg. verb. However, VIII.86.1 mā́no ví yauṣṭam sakhyā́, with dual verb seems to me decisive for a transitive interpr. of this idiom. In the publ. tr. (“Do not keep us far away from your companionship”) I take sakhyā́as an instr. (sg.) of separation.

However, it is also possible that it is an acc. pl., with the tr. “Do not keep your companionship(s) far away from us.” See IV.16.20.

The phrase viddhí tásya naḥ (“know this (speech?) of ours” in the publ. tr) resonates with I.105 vittám me asyá “take heed of this (speech?) of mine, which I adduced above in regard to asyá me … opening our 1a. It might better have been tr.

with “take heed.”

