+++
title = "03"

+++
The priests’ sumnāyatā́mánasā “with a mind seeking favor” is, hopefully, matched by the god’s áheḷatā mánasā “with a mind without anger.” As in the previous hymn, II.31.2, pádyābhiḥ is directly adjacent to a form of āsú- ‘swift’. Ge (/WG) take pádyā- as ‘heels’: “(Wie) en siegesstarkes Rennpferd mit den Fersen.” The image assumed must be from horseback riding, with the rider spurring the horse on by putting pressure on the horse’s flank with his heels. But the evidence for horseback riding in the RV is scant, and, as I understand it, the racing that is done involves chariots. (On the other hand, there may be mention of “a hero on horseback” [vīró árvati] in the next hymn, II.33.1, though it probably refers to Rudra.) Not only does this heel-spurring not fit the realia, as far as we know it, but it makes trouble for the verbal structure, because “with the heels” would at best only be appropriate to the simile (“(like) a swift prize-winner”) not the frame (“you”: we are hardly likely to be poking the god in the side with our heels). And finally, although the heel is of course a part of the foot and so pádya-/pádyā- could in theory refer to it, no other occurrences of either of these stems seems so specialized, and we do have a perfectly good inherited word for ‘heel’, pā́rṣṇi-. I therefore think pádyā- means ‘pace, footstep’. In the simile, “with paces” would refer either to the training the horse is put through or to the pace of another horse running in front or at its side meant to keep the vājín- up to speed. Its use in the frame is more complex. On the one hand, the steps can refer to the movements of the Adhvaryu around the ritual ground; his physical activity is implicitly contrasted with the verbal activity (vácasā) of the Hotar (and Udgātar). I also think that pádyā- can refer to verses measured in feet, metrical measures. Although Re thinks this unlikely (“tentant, mais trop hardi”), I see nothing against it.
