+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


The normal performance of the Agnyādhāna, as that of the full and new-moon offerings, requires two days; the first of which is taken up with preliminary rites, while the second--that is, the first day of the respective half-moon--is devoted to the chief ceremonies, beginning with the production of the sacred fire by friction. (See II, 1, 4, 8 seq.)

After the sacrificer has chosen his four officiating priests--viz. the Brahman, Hotr̥, Adhvaryu, and Āgnīdhra (or Agnīdh)--he proceeds, together with them, to erect the two sheds or 'firehouses.' In order to determine their exact sites, the Adhvaryu first draws from west to east the so-called 'easterly' line (cf. I, 2, 5, 14), and on it marks, at 8, 11, or 12 prakramas or steps from each other, the centres of the Gārhapatya and Āhavanīya fire-places, the outlines of which he then traces, making each a square aratni or cubit in area, the former circular, the latter square. The Dakshiṇāgni

The Adhvaryu then procures a temporary fire,--either producing it by friction, or obtaining it from certain specified sources in the village,--and after the usual fivefold lustration of the Gārhapatya fire-place (cf. p. 2), he lays down the fire thereon. Towards sunset the sacrificer [while seated east of the Āhavanīya house] invokes the gods and manes with 'Gods, fathers! fathers, gods! I sacrifice, being who I am; neither will I exclude him whose I am: mine own shall be the offering, mine own the toiling, mine own the sacrifice!' He then enters the Āhavanīya house from the east, passes through it to the Gārhapatya, and sits down behind (west of) the fire; his wife at the same time entering the Gārhapatya house from the south and seating herself south of him,--both facing the east. Thereupon the Adhvaryu hands to the sacrificer two pieces of wood (araṇi),--if possible, of aśvattha, grown out of a śamī tree,--to be used next morning for the production (or 'churning') of the sacred fire by one of them (the upper araṇi) being rapidly drilled in a hole in the other (or lower araṇi). [The sacrificer and his wife then lay the upper and lower sticks respectively on their laps; whereupon certain propitiatory ceremonies are performed by them, and honours are paid to the priests and the sticks; and the latter are finally deposited on a seat.] In the house of the Gārhapatya a he-goat may then be tied up for the night, which, if it belong to the sacrificer, is to be presented by him to the Āgnīdhra on the completion of the sacrifice.

After sunset the Adhvaryu measures out four vessels of husked rice grains--each containing three handfuls, which quantity is considered sufficient to furnish a meal for one man--on an ox-hide died red [and spread out with the hairy side upwards and the neck-part to the east]. With this rice the (odana) cātushprāśya, or '(pap) to be eaten by the four (priests),' is prepared on the provisional Gārhapatya fire. When it is ready, the Adhvaryu makes a hollow in the pap and pours clarified butter into it. He then takes

During the night the sacrificer and his wife have to remain awake and keep up the fire. When the night clears up, the Adhvaryu extinguishes the fire, or, if there is to be a Dakshiṇāgni, he takes it southwards and keeps it in a safe place till that fire is made up. He then draws with the wooden sword three lines across the fire-place and proceeds with the preparation of the hearth-mounds in the way set forth in the first Brāhmaṇa of this Book.

## 01
1. Now when he equips (Agni, the fire) from this and that quarter, that is the equipping (of the fire) with its equipments [^fn_634]. In whatever (objects) some of (the nature of) Agni is inherent, therewith he equips (the fire); and in thus equipping it he supplies it partly with splendour, partly with cattle, partly with a mate.

[^fn_634]: The verb here translated by 'to equip,' is sam-bhr̥, 'to carry, or bring, together, to collect;' and then 'to make the necessary preparations, to prepare;' hence sambhāra, 'the preparation, outfit,' the technical term for the objects employed in the preparation of the fire-place, with the view of symbolically ensuring success to the fire. In paragraphs 3 seq. the primary meaning 'to bring (together)' has been used, except where it seemed desirable to preserve its technical sense.

## 02
2. In the first place he (the Adhvaryu) draws (three) lines (with the wooden sword on the Gārhapatya fire-place [^fn_635]). Whatever part of this earth

[^fn_635]: The three lines drawn across the fire-place form a necessary part of its lustration; see . According to the Paddhati on Kāty. IV, 8, the Adhvaryu first makes the fivefold lustration of the hearth, and thereupon again draws the mystic lines (? or draws the outline of the fire-place, cf. Kāty. IV, 8, 16) and proceeds with the sambharas; viz. he sprinkles the lines with water, while the sacrificer takes hold of him from behind; then puts down a piece of gold, and on it throws salt soil and the mould of a molehill, with which he forms the hearth-mound (khara)--circular in  the case of the Gārhapatya, square the Āhavanīya, and semicircular the Dakshiṇāgni; but each equal in area to a square aratni or cubit. Along the edge of the mound he then lays pebbles close to each other [50 on the Gārhapatya, 73 on the Āhavanīya, and 22 on the Dakshiṇāgni, according to the Schol. on Kāty. IV, 8, 16]. According to some authorities, the piece of gold is laid on the top of the mound. He thus prepares successively the Gārhapatya, Āhavanīya, and Dakshiṇa hearths; afterwards, if required, those of the Sabhya and Avasathya fires, which are, like the Gārhapatya, of circular form.

is either trodden or spit upon, that he thereby removes from it; and he thus establishes his fire on earth that is entirely proper for the sacrifice: this is why he draws lines (across the fire-place).

## 03
3. He then sprinkles (the lines) with water. When he thus sprinkles (the fire-place) with water, that is the equipment (of the fire) with water. The reason why he brings water is that water is food; for water is indeed food: hence when water comes to this world, food is produced here. Thus he thereby supplies it (the fire) with food.

## 04
4. Water (ap, fem.), moreover, is female, and fire (agni, masc.) is male; so that he thereby supplies the latter with a productive mate. And since all this (universe) is pervaded (or obtained, āpta) by water, he sets up the fire, after he has obtained it by means of water [^fn_636]. This is why he brings water.

[^fn_636]: An etymological play on the word ap, āpaḥ, 'water,' and the verb āp, 'to obtain, pervade.'

## 05
5. He then brings (a piece of) gold. Now Agni at one time cast his eyes on the waters [^fn_637]: 'May I pair with them,' he thought. He came together with them; and his seed became gold [^fn_638]. For this reason the latter shines like fire, it being Agni's

[^fn_637]: In the version of this myth given Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3, 8, the waters courted by Agni are called Varuṇa's wives.

[^fn_638]: Tāḥ sambabhūva tāsu retaḥ prāsiñcat tad hiraṇyam abhavat.

seed. Hence it (gold) is found in water, for he (Agni) poured it into the water. Hence also one does not cleanse oneself with it [^fn_639], nor does one do anything else with it. Now there is splendour (for the fire): for he thereby makes it to be possessed of divine seed, bestows splendour on it; and sets up a fire completely endowed with seed. That is why he brings gold.

[^fn_639]: Sāyaṇa interprets enena na dhāvayati by 'he does not clean (his teeth) with it;'--the St. Petersb. Dict. by 'he does not get himself conveyed (driven) by it.' The Kāṇva text has: Tasmād enad apsv evānuvindanty apsu punanty apsu by enat prāsiñcan nainena dhāvayanti na kiṁ cana kurvanti.

## 06
6. He then brings salt. Yonder sky assuredly bestowed that (salt as) cattle on this earth: hence they say that salt soil is suitable for cattle. That (salt), therefore, means cattle; and thus he thereby visibly supplies it (the fire) with cattle; and the latter having come from yonder (sky) is securely established on this earth. Moreover, that (salt) is believed to be the savour (rasa) of those two, the sky and the earth [^fn_640]: so that he thereby supplies it (the fire) with the savour of those two, the sky and the earth. That is why he brings salt.

[^fn_640]: Cf. Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3, 2: 'The sky and the earth were (originally) close together. On being separated they said to each other, "Let there he a common sacrificial essence (yajñiyam) for us!" What sacrificial essence there was belonging to yonder sky, that it bestowed on this earth, that became the salt (in the earth); and what sacrificial essence there was belonging to this earth, that it bestowed on yonder sky, that became the black (spots) in the moon. When he throws salt (on the fire-place), let him think it to be that (viz. the black in the moon): it is on the sacrificial essence of the sky and the earth that he sets up his fire.'

## 07
7. He then brings (the earth of) a mole-hill (ākhu-karīsha) [^fn_641]. The moles certainly know the

[^fn_641]: On the mythic connection of (the white, sharp teeth of) the  ākhu (mole, mouse, rat), as of that of the boar, with the thunderbolt, see Dr. A. Kuhn's ingenious remarks, 'Herabkunft des Feuers and des Göttertranks,' p. 202. According to Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3, 3, Agni at one time concealed himself from the gods, and having become a mole, dug himself into the earth; so that the mole-hills thrown up by him, have some of Agni's nature attaching to them. The Taittirīyas also put on the hearth the earth of an ant-hill, which the Brāhmaṇa (in the same way as our author does of the molehill) represents as the savour (or marrow, essence) of the earth.

savour of this earth: hence, by entering deeper and deeper into this earth, they (grow) very fat, knowing, as they do, its savour; and wherever they know the savour of this earth to be, there they cast it up. Hence he thereby supplies it (the fire) with the savour of this earth: that is why he brings a molehill. Moreover, they say of one who has attained prosperity (or splendour, śri) that he is purīshya; and purīsha and karīsha [^fn_642] doubtless mean one and the same thing: it is, therefore, for his (Agni's or the sacrificer's) attainment of splendour (śri) that he brings a mole-hill.

[^fn_642]: The primary meaning of karīsha is 'that which is scattered, or strewn about,' hence 'refuse, rubbish' (and ākhu-karīsha, 'mole-cast'). Its secondary meaning, as is that of purīsha, is 'manure' (or perhaps also 'soft, rich mould'), an article naturally valued by an agricultural population. See I, 2, 5, 17, where purīsha is taken symbolically to represent cattle.

## 08
8. He then brings pebbles. Now the gods and the Asuras, both of them sprung from Prajāpati, once contended for superiority. This earth was then trembling like a lotus-leaf; for the wind was tossing it hither and thither: now it came near the gods, now it came near the Asuras. When it came near the gods,--

## 09
9. They said, 'Come, let us steady this resting-place; and when firm and steady, let us set up

the two fires on it; whereupon we will exclude our enemies from any share in it.'

## 10
10. Accordingly, in like manner as one would stretch a skin by means of wooden pins, they fastened down this resting-place; and it formed a firm and steady resting-place. And when it was firm and steady, they set up the two fires on it; and thereupon they excluded their enemies from any share in it [^fn_643].

[^fn_643]: The corresponding myth of Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3, 5, though very different from ours, yet presents one or two points of resemblance. According to it, nothing was to be seen in the beginning except water and a lotus-leaf standing out above it. Prajāpati (being bent on creating the firm ground) bethought himself that the lotus-stalk must rest on something; and having assumed the form of a boar, he dived and brought up some of the earth. This he spread out (prath) on the lotus-leaf, whence originated the earth (pr̥thivī), which he then fastened down by means of pebbles. Hence the latter are put on the hearth in order to afford a firm foundation for the fire.

## 11
11. And in like manner that one (the Adhvaryu) now fastens down that resting-place by means of pebbles; and on it, when firm and steady, he sets up the two fires; whereupon he excludes the (sacrificer's) enemies from any share in it. This is the reason why he brings pebbles.

## 12
12. These then are the five equipments [^fn_644]: for fivefold is the sacrifice, fivefold the animal victim; and five seasons there are in the year.

[^fn_644]: According to the authorities of the Black Yajur-veda there are not five, but fourteen sambhāras, seven of which are taken from the earth, viz. sand, salt, a mole-hill, an ant-hill, mire from a dried-up pool, pebbles, and gold; while the remaining seven consist of pieces of wood from the aśvattha, udumbara, palāśa (? two pieces), śamī, and vikankata trees, and from some tree that has been struck by lightning. The sprinkling of water about the fire-place is not counted by them as a sambhāra, but as one of the usual acts of lustration. Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3 seq.

## 13
13. Now, as to this, they say, 'Six seasons there are in the year.' And in that case the very deficiency (nyūna) itself is rendered a productive union [^fn_645], since it is from the lower part (nyūna, i.e. of the body) that offspring is here brought forth. Thus also a progressive improvement [^fn_646] (is assured to the sacrificer): for this reason there are five equipments. And when (it is nevertheless insisted on that) there are six seasons in the year, then Agni is the sixth of them, and thus there is no deficiency.

[^fn_645]: Or, a deficient pairing is effected (on account of the uneven number). I do not quite understand Sāyaṇa's interpretation of the passage, the published text of the commentary being apparently corrupt in one or two places, The Kāṇva text reads: Tad āhuḥ shaḍ vā r̥tavaḥ saṁvatsarasyeti yadi vai shal r̥tavaḥ saṁvatsarasya nyūnam u vai prajananaṁ nyūnād vā imāh prajāḥ prajāyante, &c.

[^fn_646]: Literally, 'a prevailing (or advancing) better-to-morrow,' śvaḥśreyasam uttarāvat.

## 14
14. Here also they say, 'He should not equip it even with a single equipment!' For (they argue) all those (objects) are on this earth, and hence, when he establishes the fire on this earth, the latter of itself obtains all those equipments: he need not, therefore, equip it with a single equipment. But let him nevertheless bring (those objects) together; for when he establishes the fire on this (earth), then it obtains all the equipments: and what (benefit) accrues from the equipments being brought together, that also accrues to it [^fn_647]. Let him for that reason bring (the objects) together.

[^fn_647]: The drift of the author's reasoning evidently is that it is safer, by putting those objects on the fire-place, to make sure of the magic benefits of those symbols being really secured to the fire, and thereby to the sacrificer. The Kāṇva text of this paragraph, though differently worded, yields the same sense; except that it refers to  the sacrificer himself and to the wishes he entertains in collecting the objects.

