+++
title = "01"

+++
Though somā́nam is assigned to a -man-stem by Debrunner (AiG II.2.760), it seems preferable to analyze it, with Kuiper (IIJ 15 [1973]: 190-94 [my thanks to ET for the ref.]), as having the so-called “Hoffmann suffix” (*-Hon- / -Hn-) (Hoffmann 1955 = Aufs. II, 378-83) added to the thematic noun sóma-, of the same type as Aves.

mąϑrān- ‘possessing mąϑras’ to mąϑra-. Our somā́nam is a hapax, so there are no diagnostic forms; a masc. agent noun in -mán would also have suffixal accent and a long suffixal vowel (cf. dharmā́nam, -as ‘upholder(s)’). In favor of the Hoffmannsuffix interpretation is the quadrisyllabic scansion, inviting distraction of the -ā-, which should not occur in a man-stem. The accent might be a problem; Hoffmann is somewhat cagey about the accent of these forms (not difficult, since most of his examples are Avestan), but he does suggest (p. 381) that the original accent of the acc. sg. might fall on the suffix, as here. Kuiper makes no mention of the accent.

Most translators (Ge ‘Lautsingenden(?)’, Re, Schmidt B+I, WG) take sváraṇam to the ‘sound’ root √svar, though Gr connects it with svàr- ‘sun’ (‘glanzreich’). The metrical distraction to suváraṇam might favor a connection with the ‘sun’ word, since, as far as I know, the ‘sound’ root is never so distracted. This hapax is also phonologically reminiscent of svàrṇara- ‘possessing solar glory’, whose initial cluster is always distracted and which almost always occupies the end of the pāda, as our word does. At the very least, it is likely that svàraṇa- is a pun.

It is surprising to find Kakṣīvant Auśija, the dazzling poet of I.116-26, in the context of this rather simple and mundane hymn, for Medhātithi certainly lacks Kakṣīvant’s skill. The request must then be seen as a species of wishful thinking. I translate auśijá- literally, as ‘descendant of a fire-priest’, though it is also Kakṣīvant’s patronymic, because I think the word previews the Agni theme of the second half of this hymn. The publ. tr. follows Ge in assuming a desired identification of Medhātithi with Kakṣīvant: Ge “Mach … zu einem (zweiten) Kakṣīvat.” ET points out that there is actually no overt mention of Medhātithi and the verse could simply mean “make Kakṣīvant a possessor of soma …” But then we still must explain the presence of Kakṣīvant here.

