+++
title = "01"

+++
The grammatical identity of girijā́(in sandhi) ‘moutain-born’ is problematic (see Old’s disc.). The Pp. takes it as girijā́ḥ, which could be nom. pl. fem. (so Gr and Re) and modify ‘thoughts’, but this makes little sense: the thoughts in question are surely home-grown, as it were, not outsourced from a mountain. (Though Old’s offhand suggestion that the cmpd might mean “in der Rede geboren,” with otherwise unattested loc. sg. of gír- ‘hymn’, is worth considering as a second punning reading, suitable for ‘thoughts’. See girā́in 3a.) girijā́ḥ could likewise be nom. sg. masc. and refer to Viṣṇu. This is the basis for Ge’s first Satzparenthese “-- er ist der Berggeborene, mit dem die Marut gern kommen --” and he is followed by Scar (136).

But switching the ref. to Viṣṇu from dative (… mahé … víṣṇave, marútvate) to nominative in the middle of a pāda right at the end of the dative phrase is highly unlikely. Although the morphology doesn’t entirely work, I think it must be a dative.

The problem of course is that the dat. to this -ā́-root noun should be underlying

*girijé, which should appear in sandhi as girijá, not -jā́, as here. It should be noted,
however, that datives in -é to root nouns in -ā́- are exceedingly rare (see Macd., Vedic Gr. p. 252; AiG III.125), and beside them exist infinitives in -aí to roots in -ā (Macd. loc cit.; AiG III.129) like pratikhyaí, vayo-dhaí. Esp. in this sandhi situation, I see no reason why this extended dat. sg. would not have been available even to a non-infinitive. In favor of a dat. referring to Viṣṇu is the very similar passage I.154.3 prá víṣṇave śūṣám etu mánma, girikṣíta urugāyā́ya vṛ́ṣṇe, with the semantically corresponding dat. root-noun cmpd. girikṣíte ‘mountain-dwelling’ in a lengthy dat. phrase referring to Viṣṇu and prá … etu mánma matching our matáyo yantu almost exactly. (Curiously WG tr. girijā́as if a dat. parallel to marútvate “… zum grossen Viṣṇu, der in Begleitung der Maruts ist, der in den Bergen geboren ist,” but Scar, who was responsible for this vol. of WG, seems to hold onto the nom. sg. interpr. in his n. -- though the n. is a bit incoherent.) The hapax cmpd bhandád-iṣṭi- is variously rendered. Both Ge and WG (latter flg. Gotō, 1st pres. cl., 224) interpr. -iṣṭi- as “sacrifice” (hence Ge’s ‘opferliebend’, WG ‘deren Opferungen erfreuen’). But -iṣṭi- is far more often ‘desire, quest, seeking’ than ‘sacrifice’ in the RV, and notice the concentration of such forms of √iṣ in the previous hymn (V.86.3, 4, at least by my interpr.). As Lowe points out (Participles, 270-71), bhandát- and its ilk result from reanalysis of governing cmpds, producing pseudo-act. participles to roots without an active paradigm (like √bhand, which is otherwise only middle). The cmpd is exactly parallel to rhyming krandád-iṣṭi- (X.100.2), whose interpr. also varies. Although both cmpds have the look of governing cmpds, neither √bhand nor √krand is transitive; I therefore think we have more or less standard bahuvrīhi semantics ‘having a fortunate quest’ and ‘having a roaring quest’ respectively, whose English I have adjusted to something more palatable.

The adjectivally accented taváse beginning d points up the nominally accented rhyming śávase at the end of e. With Re I think the Maruts are being equated with śávas- itself, but it would be possible to take śávase as a separate purpose dative ‘for strength’ (with or without távase).

On dhúni-vrata- see comm. ad V.58.2.

