+++
title = "02"

+++
This vs. is quite loosely constructed. To begin with, the rel. cl. of ab has no obvious main clause, though the two yé’s do, of course, refer to the Maruts, who show up in the voc. in c. The rel. cl. could also hang off vs. 1, with pl. yé picking up the collective sg. śárdha- in 1cde.

The next question is what belongs with each yé. The easiest solution and the one taken by the standard tr. (as well as Klein DGRV I.118) is to take the first as a nominal cl. yé jātā́mahinā́and the 2nd as containing the accented verb prá … bruváte.

But there are several factors against this. For one thing the prá that begins the 2nd pāda is actually a repeat of the one that begins the vs. (#prá yé jātā́ḥ … yé ca …, prá … bruváte …); that is, the first prá seems to have been extracted from the second yé clause and fronted around the first, which may well be a violation of RVic clause structure and at best is highly unusual. If we take prá …, prá … bruváte … as the verb for both yé clauses, as I do, it is considerably less problematic. Moreover, the yé … yé ca construction is far more at home in expressing complementary pairs (see Klein I.115-16) than in conjoining coreferential entities with semantically unconnected predicates, as the standard tr. requires (e.g., Klein 118: “Who were born with greatness and who now themselves proclaim (their might) with knowledge.”). In my interpr. the yé … yé ca construction expresses two types of Marut birth, “born/produced by might” and “self(-produced/born),” with the svayám signalling the 2nd type. The Maruts are called svajā́ḥ in I.168.2; cf. also I.64.4 sākáṃ jajñire svadháyā … “They [=Maruts] were born all at once by their own power.” I see only two arguments against my interpr.: 1) the nú in the second yé clause, which might mark a chronological progression (as in Klein’s tr. [also WG]; Ge and Re both ignore the nú, and it’s certainly true that nú need not be temporal); 2) the apparently required underlying assumption that there are two groups of Maruts. As to that, I don’t think the complementary pairing needs to indicate that there are two distinct groups of Maruts sorted by their means of birth, but rather that we can view their births in different ways.

The next question is how to construe prá … bruváte. Ge and WG both take it as reflexive “announce themselves,” but prá √brū is not elsewhere reflex./pass., even in the middle. Re supplies as object “leur naissance,” which can be justified, but I prefer Klein’s “their might.” The resonant word śávas- is found on either side of this phrase, at the ends of 1e and 2c and is the focus of 2cde, and prá √brū elsewhere takes such objects (indriyám I.55.4, bálāni X.54.2).

The rest of the vs. consists, in my opinion (flg. Re), of two parallel clauses, each beginning with instr. of respect, followed by tád and a gen. referring to the Maruts (2nd ps. in c, 3rd in d), and, as predicate, a negated form of √dhṛṣ ‘dare (against), assail’. The tád is specified as śávas- in the first clause, which identification carries over into the second: krátvā tád vo (maruto) nā́dhṛ́ṣe śávaḥ dānā́mahnā́ tád eṣām ádhṛṣṭāso (nā́drayaḥ) This striking parallelism makes the interpr. of Ge and WG unlikely: they take krátvā as the weapon that someone might try to use, unsuccessfully, against the Maruts’ śávas-, whereas dānā́mahnā́they take as instr. of respect. Actually, Ge’s treatment is more complicated: his tr. reflects the interpr. I just paraphrased (“Diese eure Macht ist nicht durch Einsicht zu erzwingen”), but in his n. 2c-e he describes the three instr.

as parallel: “Der Sinn ist jedenfalls, dass keiner wagt, es ihnen an Umsicht, Freigebigkeit und Grösse gleichzutun.” As Ge points out (n. 2e), masc. pl. ádhṛṣṭāsaḥ has been attracted to the number and gender of the simile (ádrayaḥ); it is still specifying śávaḥ in the frame.

It’s also worth noting that pādas c and d both contain ná in sandhi with a following vowel in quite similar phonological sequences: nā́dhṛ́ṣe … nā́drayaḥ. The first ná is the negative (matched by a- in ádhṛṣṭāsaḥ in the next pāda); the 2nd is the simile marker.

