+++
title = "03"

+++
Like vs. 2 this vs. begins with several relative clauses (yé pāda a, yéṣām c), with no clear main clause.

The first pāda of this vs. is syntactically straightforward, but we might wonder why the Maruts are heard “through a/their hymn.” In answer, there is the fact, often referred to above, that the Maruts are singers as well as sung-to. Further, in this context their “hymn” may be a metaphorical reference to thunder. It is also possible that it is a pun, as indicated in the publ. tr. and also implicitly by Scar (537), with the

-ā variant form of the i-stem loc. sg. of girí-. (Interestingly Scar’s alternative “mit
einem Lied (/im Gebirge)” in the root noun book is not reflected in his tr. in WG, which limits itself to “mit ihrem Lied.”) Of course, such a loc. sg. would be wrongly positioned: it is the -au loc. sg. form that is overwhelmingly found at pāda end (see, e.g., Lanman, Noun Infl., p. 385), but as a secondary punning reading the “wrong” form could be acceptable, esp. as it precedes a consonant, as most forms of loc. sg. -ā do. Thus the Maruts would be heard “on a mountain” -- as their storm often is.

The hapax nom. sg. írī is problematic formally and semantically. In this sandhi sit. the long ī final can only belong to a devī-type -ī stem or an -in-stem. It is usually cited as the latter (e.g., Gr, EWA), but this analysis seems excluded formally because -ín-stems are always suffix-accented. An underlying -in-stem is emphatically denied by AiG II.2.328 (“Die Barytona v. írī … gehören nicht hierher”; see also Old’s serious doubts). Debrunner (AiG II.2.407-8) seems to favor (if “favoring” means sticking it in that section but then calling it “ganz unklar”) a masc.

devī-type -ī-stem, but of course such stems are rare and problematic in all their occurrences. Nothing in the passage actually excludes an analysis as a feminine -īstem, but who would such a feminine be? The other question of course is what is it derived from and what does it mean. I follow the line of least resistance that has been fld. by a number of others and connect it with írya-, which is better attested though not much clearer, and is found in another Marut hymn in V, V.58.4; see comm. ad loc. If the basic sense is something like ‘energetic’, the form of írya- in V.58.4 is positive in sense, while írī is negative.

I do not understand the pāda-final ā́. Assuming that ī́ṣte belongs to √īś, that root does not otherwise appear with ā́(or any other preverb). It’s worth noting that ī́ṣṭe here is the only t-full 3rd sg.; the usual and very well-attested 3rd sg. is, of course, ī́śe. We might try to connect the form with √īṣ or √iṣ, but neither is promising formally or semantically.

The last pāda, prá syandrā́so dhúnīnām, confronts us with a lexical conundrum: it contains two plurals, one nom., one gen., both of which are good Marut words. For the Maruts as syandrá- see V.52.3, 8; for dhúni- see dhúni-vratain this hymn (1e) and V.58.2, as well as the simplex adj. in numerous passages (e.g., V.60.7). So which one modifies the (unexpressed) Maruts, and what should we do with the other? The poet seems to be messing with our minds: we encounter the first, syandrā́saḥ, and understandably assume it refers to the Maruts, then come to the second, dhúni-, which is an even more characteristic Marut word, and have to readjust. Ge supplies ‘chariots’ (Wagen, sim. WG Fahrzeuge) with the nominative, and the publ. tr. tentatively follows that. Re manages to make both words refer to the Maruts, “(dieux) bruyants qui rapides (vont) de l’avant,” breezily remarking “il n’est pas indispensable de sous-entendre <<les chars>>.” But, though I’m sympathetic to his intuition that both words should refer to the Maruts, the grammatical difference is unambiguous. In Max Müller’s tr. of this hymn (SBE 32), he tr. “the rushing chariots of these roaring Maruts come forth” and notes that “chariot” was Oldenberg’s suggestion (presumably in their consultation on the SBE translations; the suggestion is not registered in the Noten). One of the problems with supplying ‘chariots’ is the preceding pāda (d), also in the nom. pl., which seems clearly to describe the Maruts.

If syandrā́saḥ does not refer to the Maruts but to their chariots, we must either assume that the flashing entities in d are also chariots or put an unsignalled break between the two pādas. The publ. tr. essentially does the latter, but it is unsatisfactory.

Ge does the former, which isn’t satisfactory either, and WG stir the pot even further by supplying ‘weapons’ as the comparandum in d.

