+++
title = "04"

+++
The “common seat” (samānásmāt sádasaḥ) is presumably one shared by Viṣṇu and the Maruts and is also presumably the same as the sadhástha- in the previous vs. (3c) -- perhaps the midspace? The standard interpr. (incl. mine) also assume the same seat (or a similar place) is the referent of svā́t ‘from his own’ in pāda c. For other exx. of the idiom √yuj + ABL. ‘yoke from’ with ‘seat’ in the abl., see Old.

Similar to áyukta tmánā is V.52.8 prá ... yujata tmánā; in the latter passage the verb is used absolutely, without expressed obj. That is possible here too, though it is also possible, and indeed more likely, to take víṣpardhaso vímahasaḥ in d as the obj. (so also Re and WG), referring to horses, an interpr. that saves supplying a verb to govern that phrase, as Ge does (“lenkt”). (See Max Müuler’s solution below.) It should be noted, however, that neither of these adjectives is otherwise used of horses: víṣpardhas- is found twice elsewhere, once of human contenders (I.173.10), once of, apparently, flames (VIII.23.2); vímahas- is only attested once elsewhere, in I.86.1 of the Maruts. Max Müller in the SBE 32 tr. takes the two adj. as a voc. phrase addressed to the Maruts. This seems unlikely in the middle of a sentence devoted to Viṣṇu and only turning to the Maruts in its last word, nṛ́bhiḥ, and so a ‘horse’ interpr.

seems the best course.

The publ. tr. renders ádhi ṣṇúbhiḥ as “upon the (mountains’) backs,” but in accord with the standard sense of this phrase (e.g., V.60.7) and in harmony with the standard tr. I would now alter this to “along the (mountains’) backs.” This complicates the rendering of the rest of the clause, because there is no verb of motion, just ‘yoke’. Both Re and WG supply an expression to provide this motion: Re “(pour courir) à travers les hauteurs” and WG “(zur Ausfahrt) über die (Berg-)Rücken.” Reluctantly I would join them and supply something like “(to travel) along …” The standard explanation of śévṛdha- as a haplology of *śéva-vṛdha- (already Gr, endorsed by AiG I.279, tentatively also by EWA s.v. śéva-) seems correct, but this does not settle its sense. Cmpds in -vṛdha- have a range of senses, both transitive and intransitive, and of relationships to their 1st member, and none of the quite varied contexts in which śévṛdha- appears is sufficiently diagnostic. Several of them apply to Agni as the ritual fire just kindled (X.46.3, X.61.20 [the latter accented śevavṛdhá- ]); once (I.54.11) it is used of ‘brilliance’ (dyumná-) and once (III.16.2) of ‘riches’ (rā́yaḥ). The preponderance of the evidence, esp. the two “fire just born” passages, seems to point to an intransitive/passive reading of -vṛdha- and an instr. reading of śé(va)-, hence ‘growing strong through kindness/benevolence’. Although an intrans. reading of the publ. tr.’s “strengthening with kindness’ is possible, this English expression is more likely to be read as transitive, and I would therefore alter the tr. to the clearer ‘growing strong …’ What this descriptor means in our passage is entirely unclear to me -- that the Maruts are treating Viṣṇu well and he thrives?

