+++
title = "07"

+++
This vs., too, reprises earlier material: there is a 3rd “fires” simile, this time marked with yathā, not ná, and extended over the pāda boundary (agnáyo yathā, tuvidyumnā́ḥ); avantu in b echoes avatu in 6b in the same metrical position; the ‘seat’ returns for the third time (pāda c), with yet a different word: sádman- versus 3c sadhástha- and 4b sádas-.

The last two pādas present several problems. One is how to reconcile yéṣām and śárdhāṃsi, which are presumably coreferential and refer to the Maruts. Simplest is to accept Ge’s “der reflexive Gebrauch des Relativs” (n. 7d); cf., e.g., V.61.12 and comm. thereon. The publ. tr. does not render yéṣām literally, but as “when … of them,” for the sake of English, since “at whose drives” is awkward in context.

The causal connection between the journey of the Maruts (d) and the spreading out of the earth (c) is clear in V.58.7, also adduced by Ge: prátiṣṭha yā́man prthiv ̥ ī́cid eṣām “Even the Earth has spread herself at their journey,” but pāda c cannot be brought into the domain of the relative in d (though Old tries) because of the lack of accent on the verb paprathe in c. Instead d and e must together make a circumstantial clause dependent on c. With Ge and Re I supply a verb of motion ‘ap(proach)’; this can be partly generated from the ā́in c, though that ā́is primarily a postposition with the loc. and is not in the right place for a preverb in tmesis. The étana in the next vs. (8a) may support the supplying of a verb of motion here.

The next question in de is the grammatical analysis and reference of maháḥ, which presents us with entirely too many possibilities: abl./gen. sg or nom./acc. pl. of máh-, nom. sg. of mahá-, adv. mahás. On the basis of the gen. phrase in the next vs., 8c víṣṇor maháḥ (cf. also 1a mahé … víṣṇave), I take it as gen. sg. and supply Viṣṇu: the Marut troops are here said to be Viṣṇu’s. This more or less follows Ge; Re takes maháḥ as adv., WG as nom. sg. See also Old’s disc.

The final problem is the bahuvrīhi ádbhuta-enas-, which is found once elsewhere (VIII.67.7). The problem is to find some plausible overlap between the senses of the two members and a plausible reason why whatever is so constructed should apply to the Maruts. The standard sense of énas- is ‘offense, transgression, outrage’; ádbhuta- is famously problematic, but probably the most widely accepted analysis currently is as a negated form of √dabh ‘deceive, trick, harm’ (see EWA s.v.), hence ‘infallible, unerring’, shading (probably because of loss of transparency) into ‘wonderful, astonishing’. Put these together and you get the highly unconvincing ‘having infallible offenses’ or the like -- not a good epithet for a favored group of gods. Clearly something has to give, and in most interpr. it’s the semantic integrity of the parts; e.g., Re decides that énas- here preserves an earlier sense, derived from its relationship to inóti and means ‘élan’, yielding a cmpd “à l'élan extraordinaire,” which fits smoothly into the context by virtue of suppressing the semantics of both cmpd members. In the other occurrence of the cmpd in VIII.67.7 I take it as applying to the Ādityas (most others see it as a gen. sg.) and meaning ‘whom (others’) offenses cannot mislead’. That is, the stripped-down sense is ‘possessing unmisleading/misleadable offenses’, but the offenses are committed by others and the Ādityas are not tricked by them. This may provide more tricky structure than a bahuvrīhi can quite manage, but it does preserve the lexical senses of both members.

It may mean this here as well -- the Maruts are not more trickable than the Ādityas -- and I propose that as an alternate tr. But the publ. tr. takes a different route, with the sense ‘harm’ for √dabh, hence ‘whose offenses are beyond harm’ -- meaning, perhaps, that the violence and turmoil attendant on the Maruts’ stormy passage on the one hand leave no lasting damage and on the other cannot be held against the Maruts. They are not moral lapses.

Note the figure in c: pṛthú paprathe … pā́rthivam, which is both phonological and etymological

