+++
title = "09"

+++
The first two pādas of this vs. are essentially variants on the first two pādas of the previous vs., with 8a gātum étana corresponding to 9a gántā and śrótā hávam identically opening both b pādas. The adverbial adveṣáḥ ‘without hatred’ in 8a is matched by arakṣáḥ ‘undemonically’ in 9b, though the adv. has been moved to the second cl. (With Re I take it as an adv.; Gr takes it as an adj. with hávam, which requires him to identify only this occurrences of háva- as a neut.; WG see it as a nominative in a stand-alone nominal sentence. The patterning of vss. 8-9 just laid out makes the adverbial interpr. the strongest one.) The final word of pāda, suśámi, makes both metrical and morphological trouble. The pāda is short a syllable (11, not 12) and the cadence is bad even for a Triṣṭubh, with a light penultimate syllable. Gr proposes to fix the first of these problems by reading suśámiyā, but though this gets us 12 syllables, it makes the cadence worse -- not to mention that there’s no reason why the textual change would have occurred. Old proposes to read suśámī, matching the other two instr.

occurrences of this stem; the same phenomenon is found with the simplex, where an instr. śámi with short final occurs at the end of the pāda, while śámī is found pādainternal. Since in our passage the next pāda begins with a cons. cluster, the original length of the final vowel would be obscured anyway. However, this suggestion does nothing to fix the cadence or the deficient syllable. See also the disc. in WG; in the WG tr. they take it as a neut. acc., but the disc. in the n. is more equivocal. I have no solution. Of course, those who wish to see laryngeals effects would argue that the problematic short penultimate could be explained by the fact that √śam is a seṭ root and the root syllable would originally have been heavy (*śamH in a bastardized notation).

The rest of the vs. is more opaque, or rather it is difficult to reconcile the simile in c with the directive to the Maruts in de. The problem is similar to the one posed by ádbhuta-enas- -- that the two parts of the expression are semantically disharmonious. The wish expressed to the Maruts is that they should be durdhártu-, which should mean ‘difficult to maintain or uphold’ or, extending the sense of √dhṛ a bit, ‘difficult to restrain’. This works pretty well in the directive: the Maruts should not hold back from punishing someone who insults one of us. The gen./abl. nidáḥ is not the ideal case, but it may well refer back to the same form in 6d té na uruṣyatā nidáḥ “deliver us from insult,” with a highly condensed expression. In the publ. tr. I have tr. the form in 9e as “at an insult” rather than “from an insult,” because “difficult to restrain from an insult” sounds as if the Maruts are itching to insult us.

The question is -- why are they like ancient mountains (jyéṣṭhāso ná párvatāsaḥ) when they are acting thus? As a class of objects, mountains are among the least likely to need restraining: they are fixed and stable. Ge gets out of this problem by supplying, out of whole cloth, a different quality that the Maruts and the mountains have in common, the parenthetical “(ragend),” but there is no basis for this. WG take jyéṣṭḥa- itself as the point of comparison (despite the fact that it should really be part of the simile proper) and push its sense: “sehr mächtig wie die Berge.” I think the clue to the solution is the location of these mountains, vyòman ‘in distant heaven’.

There are of course no mountains in heaven, at least in the usual Vedic cosmological picture -- but there used to be: the winged mountains that flew around until Indra clipped their wings. The splv. jyéṣṭhāsaḥ ‘most ancient’ may refer to this primal, unclipped state. Although this interpr. may seem farfetched, I think it best accounts for the odd expression -- and this may be Re’s view too, based on his tr. “comme de très puissantes montagnes (qui circuleraient) dans l'espace” (he has no disc.). Note in any case that the mountains here recall the mountain(s) in vs. 1 (girijā́-) and possibly vs. 3; the agreement in sense with vs. 1 provides another example of non-lexical ring composition.