+++
title = "THE STOTRAS AND SASTRAS OF THE SOMA-DAYS."

+++


## 01
1. Then, on the morrow, there is (used) Gotama's Stoma (form of chanting) successively increasing by four (verses) [^fn_976]: the Bahishpavamāna thereof is on four, the Ājya (stotras) on eight, the Mādhyandina Pavamāna on twelve, the Pr̥shṭḥa (stotras) on

[^fn_976]: 375:3 Regarding the Catushṭoma, see p. 329, note 1.

sixteen, the Ārbhava Pavamāna on twenty, and the Agnishṭoma-sāman on twenty-four (verses).

## 02
2. Now, some make its Agnishṭoma-sāman a Sāman of four (verses), saying, 'It is neither an Agnishṭoma, nor an Ukthya [^fn_977].' If they do so, let hire (the Hotr̥),

[^fn_977]: 376:1 According to the practice here referred to, the Agnishṭomasāman would not consist merely of the one triplet (usually Sāmav. II, 53-4 i.e. the so-called yajñāyajñīya triplet) ordinarily used for it, but of four different Sāmans, inasmuch as three of the triplets which may be used for the Uktha-stotras (of the Ukthya and other sacrifices) are added to that yajñāyajñīya triplet. In that case, however, the latter is not chanted to its own 'yajñāyajñīya' tune, but the Vāravantīya tune is used for all the four triplets. This practice is somewhat vaguely referred to in Tāṇḍya-Br. XIX, 5, 10-11. 'One Sāman (tune), many metres (texts): therefore one (man) feeds many creatures. Verily, the Agnishṭoma (sāman) is the self, and the metres (hymn-texts) are cattle: he thus secures cattle for his own self. It is neither an Ukthya nor an Agnishṭoma (sacrifice), for cattle are neither (entirely) domestic nor wild (viz. because though kept "in the village," they also freely graze "in the forest").' Here the passage 'One Sāman, many metres,' according to the commentary, refers to the Vāravantīya tune as being employed, on this occasion, for the texts of the Yajñāyajñīya, the Sākamaśva (II, 55-57, here the Calc. ed., by mistake, calls the second tune figured for chanting, like the first, Sākamaśva, instead of Vāravantīya), the Saubhara (II, 230-2, where the Calc. ed., by mistake, omits the name Vāravantīya), and the Tairaśca (II, 233-5; curiously enough, the Tairaśca is not mentioned, in Lāṭy. Sr. VIII, 9-10, amongst the Sāmans that may be used for the third--or the Accḥāvāka's--Uktha, but Sāyaṇa, on Sāmav. II, 233, states distinctly, 'tairaścaṁ tr̥tīyam uktham'). Whilst, as Uktha-stotras, the last three texts would usually he chanted in the ekaviṁśa, or twenty-one-versed form, in the present instance, as part of the catushṭoma, they would be chanted (along with the Yajñāyajñīya) in the twenty-four-versed form. Thus, though an Agnishṭoma sacrifice, inasmuch as it has twelve stotras, yet it is not a regular one; neither is it an Ukthya, because the Ukthas are not chanted as so many Stotras, followed by the recitation of separate Sastras. In the Āśv. Śr. X, 6, different alternatives are proposed for the chanting of the Agnishṭoma-sāman  in the 'Gotamastoma (i.e. Catushṭoma) antarukthya' and the corresponding Sastra, including apparently the employment of the Yajñāyajñīya-sāman either for all the four triplets, or for the Yajñāyajñīya triplet alone with the respective Sāmans used for the other triplets; different modes of recitation being thereby implied with regard to the Stotriya and Anurūpa pragāthas.

after reciting the Stotriya [^fn_978] (strophe) together, recite the Anurūpa (strophe) together: the Rathantara Pr̥shṭḥa-sāman [^fn_979], the Śastra containing the Rathantara (text), and the Agnishṭoma sacrifice--thereby he makes sure of this world.

[^fn_978]: 377:1 For the Āgnimāruta-śastra, recited by the Hotr̥ after the chanting of the Agnishṭoma-sāman, and containing, amongst various hymns and detached verses, the triplet which forms the text of the Stotra, i.e. the 'Stotriya pragātha,' as well as a corresponding antistrophe, the 'Anurūpa pragātha,' see part ii, p. 369 note. On the present occasion, however, this constituent element of the Sastra would have to include the triplets of all the four Sāmans, as well as four 'antistrophes' which are thus 'recited together.'

[^fn_979]: 377:2 Or, Pr̥shṭḥa-stotra, viz. the first stotra of that name at the midday-service, for which that Sāman is used in the Agnishṭoma sacrifice (part ii, p. 339, note 2).

## 03
3. 'There are twenty-one Savanīya [^fn_980] victims, all of them sacred to Agni: for these there is one and the same performance,' so say some; but, indeed, he should immolate two sets of eleven (victims), with the view of his obtainment of whatever desired object there may be in (victims) belonging to a set of eleven.

[^fn_980]: 377:3 That is, victims sacrificed on the Sutyās, or Soma-days. Two complete sets of eleven such victims are, however, required on each of the three days, see p. 309, note 2.

## 04
4. When the Agnishṭoma is completed, and the Vasatīvarī water carried round, the Adhvaryu performs the Annahomas [^fn_981] (oblations of food): the import of these has been explained. With twelve

[^fn_981]: 377:4 See XIII, 2, 1, 1 seqq., and p. 297, note 1.

 Anuvākas (Vāj. S. XXII, 23-34), 'To the in-breathing hail! To the off-breathing hail!' (he offers)--twelve months are a year, and the year is everything, and the Aśvamedha is everything: thus it is for his obtaining and securing everything.

## 05
5. The central day is an ekaviṁśa day [^fn_982]; for the twenty-one-fold is yonder sun, and he is the Aśvamedha: by means of his own Stoma he thus establishes him in his own deity,--therefore it is an ekaviṁśa day.

[^fn_982]: 378:1 That is one on which all Stotras are chanted in the 'ekaviṁśa' Stoma, or twenty-one-versed hymn-form.

## 06
6. And, again, as to why it is an ekaviṁśa day;--man is twenty-one-fold--ten fingers, ten toes, and the body (self) as the twenty-first: by means of that twenty-one-fold self he thus establishes him in the twenty-one-fold (day) as on a firm foundation,--therefore it is an ekaviṁśa day.

## 07
7. And, again, as to why it is an ekaviṁśa day;--the ekaviṁśa, assuredly, is the foundation of Stomas, and manifold is that ever-varying performance which takes place on this day,--and it is because he thinks that that manifold and ever-varying performance which takes place on this day, shall take place so as to be established on the ekaviṁśa as a firm foundation, that this is an ekaviṁśa day.

## 08
8. Now, as to the morning-service of this day. The Hotr̥, having recited as the Ājya (hymn [^fn_983]) in the Paṅkti (metre) 'Agni I think on, who is good . . .,' recites thereto the one of a one-day's

[^fn_983]: 378:2 Viz. R̥g-veda V, 6, forming the special feature of the Ājyaśastra at the Aśvamedha.

 Soma-sacrifice [^fn_984]. And the Bārhata Praüga and the Mādhucḥandasa one he recites both together [^fn_985] in triplets--(this being done) for the obtainment of the objects of desire which (may be contained) both in the Bārhata and the Mādhucḥandasa Praüga. The morning-service is (thus) set right.

[^fn_984]: 379:1 Viz. the Ājya-sūkta, R̥g-veda III, 13, forming the chief part of the Hotr̥'s Ājya-śastra, or first Śastra of the Agnishṭoma, for which see part ii, p. 327 note.

[^fn_985]: 379:2 The Bārhata Praüga, or Praüga-śastra in the Br̥hatī metre,--being the one recited on the fifth day of the Pr̥shṭḥya-shaḍaha (Āśv. Śr. VII, 12, 7), and consisting of the seven different triplets, addressed to as many different deities,--is to be recited also on this occasion; and along with it (or rather, intertwined with it, triplet by triplet) the ordinary Praüga-śastra of the Agnishṭoma, made up of the two hymns Rig-veda I, 2 and 3 which are ascribed to Madhucḥandas, and consist of nine and twelve verses, or together seven triplets. I do not understand why Harisvāmin mentions 'Vāyur agregāḥ' (? Vāj. S. XXVII, 31) as being the first triplet of the Mādhucḥandasa Praüga, instead of I, 2, 1-3 'vāyav ā yāhi darśata.' The Praüga is the Hotr̥'s second Śastra of the morning-service, being preceded by the chanting of the first Ājya-stotra; see part ii, p. 325.

## 09
9. Then as to the midday-service. For the obtainment of the Aśvamedha, the aticḥandas (verse, II, 22, 1), 'In the three troughs the buffalo drank the barley-draught,' is the opening verse of the Marutvatīya (śastra); for outstanding, indeed, is this aticḥandas (hypercatalectic verse) amongst metres, and outstanding is the Aśvamedha amongst sacrifices. This (verse), being recited thrice, amounts to a triplet, and thereby he obtains the object of desire which (may be contained) in the triplet. 'Here, O good one, is the pressed plant' (R̥g-veda VIII, 2, 1-3) is the 'anucara' (sequent triplet): this same (triplet) is the constant

connecting link of the one-day's sacrifice [^fn_986]. Having recited both the paṅkti (verses, I, 80, 1-16) 'Here in the Soma-draught alone (the Brahman gave thee strength),' and the six-footed ones (VIII, 36, 1-7) 'The patron thou art of the offerer of Soma,' he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn) of the one-day's sacrifice. Thus as to the Marutvatīya (-śastra).

[^fn_986]: 380:1 See part ii, p. 337, where the same triplet forms the anucara of this Sastra at the Agnishṭoma. It is followed there by the Pragāthas VIII, 53, 5-6; I, 40, 5-6 (read thus! each two counting as one triplet); three Dhāyyā verses, and the Marutvatīya Pragāthas VIII, 89, 3-4 (!), These are to be followed up, on the present occasion, by the two hymns I, 80, and VIII, 36, after which the Indra hymn X, 73, the chief part of the normal Marutvatīya Sastra, is to be recited, with the Nivid formula inserted after the sixth verse.

## 10
10. Then as to the Nishkevalya (-śastra [^fn_987]). The Mahānāmnī (verses) are the Pr̥shṭḥa (-stotra); and he recites them along with the anurūpa (verses) and pragātha (-strophes), for the obtainment of all the objects of his desire, for in the Mahānāmnīs, as well as in the Aśvamedha, are contained all objects of desire. Having recited the paṅkti verses (I, 81, 1-9) 'Indra hath grown in ebriety and strength,' and the six-footed ones (VIII, 37, 1-7) 'This sacred work didst thou protect in

[^fn_987]: 380:2 That is, the Śastra succeeding the chanting of the first, or Hotr̥'s, Pr̥shṭḥa-stotra (see part ii, p. 339). Whilst, however, in the one-day's sacrifice, the Rathantara (or the Br̥hat) sāman is used for that stotra, the Mahānāmni verses (see part iii, introd. p. xx, note 2), with the Sākvara tune, are to be used as the Stotriyās on this occasion, and are therefore likewise to be recited by the Hotr̥ as Stotriya-pragāthas (cf. Āśv. VII, 12, 10 seqq.), to be followed up by the antistrophe (anurūpa)--here consisting of the triplets I, 84, 10-12; VIII, 93, 31-3; I, 11, 1-3--and the Sāma-pragātha, VIII, 3, 1-2.

fights with Vr̥tra,' he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn) of the one-day's sacrifice [^fn_988]. The midday-service is (thus) set right.

[^fn_988]: 381:1 Viz. after the eighth verse of the hymn R̥g-veda I, 32, the chief part of the normal Nishkevalya-śastra.

## 11
11. Then as to the evening-service. The atīcḥandas verse (Vāj. S. IV, 25), 'Unto that god Savitr̥ within the two bowls (do I sing praises [^fn_989]),' is the opening verse [^fn_990] of the Vaiśvadeva(-śastra [^fn_991]): the mystic import thereof is the same as of the former (aticḥandas verse). The Anucara [^fn_992] (R̥g-veda I, 24, 3-5), 'Unto (abhi) thee, (the lord of treasures), O god Savitr̥, (ever helpful we come for our share . . .),' contains (the word) 'abhi,' as a form (sign) of victory (abhibhūti). Having recited the Sāvitra (triplet, VI, 71, 4-6), 'Up rose this god Savitr̥, the friend of the house . . .,' he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn) of the one-day's sacrifice [^fn_993]. Having recited the four verses to Heaven and Earth (IV, 56, 1-4), 'The mighty Heaven and Earth, the most glorious, here . . .,' he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn I, 159) of the one-day's sacrifice. Having recited the Ārbhava (hymn, IV, 34), 'R̥bhu, Vibhvan, Indra, Vāja, come ye to this our sacrifice . . .,'

[^fn_989]: 381:2 For the complete verse see III, 3, 2, 1 2.

[^fn_990]: 381:3 This verse is again recited thrice, and thus takes the place of the ordinary opening triplet.

[^fn_991]: 381:4 For this Śastra, recited after the Ārbhava-Pavamāna-stotra, see part ii, p. 361.

[^fn_992]: 381:5 Āśv. Śr. X, 10, 6 prescribes the ordinary anucara V, 82, 4-7; whence Sāyaṇa on I, 24, 3 (-5) offers no indication of the ritualistic use of that triplet on this occasion.

[^fn_993]: 381:6 Viz. IV, 54, before the last verse of which the Nivid is inserted.

he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn, I, 111) of the one-day's sacrifice. Having recited the (hymn, V, 41) to the All-gods, 'Who is there righteous unto you, Mitra and Varuṇa? . . .,' he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn, I, 89) of the one-day's sacrifice. Thus as to the Vaiśvadeva (-śastra).

## 12
12. Then as to the Āgnimāruta [^fn_994]. Having recited the (hymn, VI, 7) to (Agni) Vaiśvānara, 'The head of the sky, and the disposer of the earth . . .,' he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn, III, 3) of the one-day's sacrifice. Having recited the (hymn, V, 57) to the Maruts, 'Hither, O Rudras, come ye united with Indra . . .,' he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn, I, 87) of the one-day's sacrifice. Having recited the nine verses (VI, 15, 1-9) to Jātavedas, 'This guest of yours, the early-waking . . .,' he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn, I, 143) of the one-day's sacrifice. And as to why the (hymns) of the one-day's sacrifice are used for inserting the Nivid, it is for the sake of his (the Sacrificer's) not being deprived of a firm foundation, for the Jyotishṭoma is a foundation.

[^fn_994]: 382:1 Viz. the final Sastra of the evening-service, preceded by the chanting of the Agnishṭoma-sāman; see part ii, p. 369.

## 13
13. For this (day) there are those sacrificial animals--'A horse, a hornless he-goat, and a Gomr̥ga [^fn_995],' fifteen 'paryaṅgyas': the mystic import of these has been explained. Then these wild ones--for spring he seizes (three) kapiñjalas [^fn_996], for summer sparrows, for the rainy season partridges: of these

[^fn_995]: 382:2 See p. 298, note 4; p. 338, note 1.

[^fn_996]: 382:3 The 'Kapiñjala' is a kind of wildfowl, apparently of the quail or partridge species--a hazel-cock, or francoline partridge. Some of the later authorities, however, identify it with the 'cātaka'  ('cuculus melanoleucus'). With regard to some of the wild animals referred to in the corresponding section of the Vāj. S., the commentator Mahīdhara significantly remarks (Vāj. S. XXIV, 29; cf. Kāty. XX, 6, 6 scholl.) that the meaning of such names as are not understood must be made out with the help of quotations (nigama), Vedic vocabularies (nighaṇṭu) and their comments (nirukta), grammar (vyākaraṇa), the Unādivr̥tti, and dictionaries.

(wild animals) also (the mystic import) has been told [^fn_997].

[^fn_997]: 383:1 Viz. XIII, 2, 4, 1 seqq. It is not easy to see why the text should break off abruptly with the birds representing the rainy season. For autumn there are to be (three) quails, for winter 'kakara,' and for the dewy season 'vikakara.' Then follow, to the end of the 260 wild animals, a long series of divinities to each of which (or sometimes to allied deities) three animals are consigned. Thirteen of these wild animals are placed on each of the twenty spaces between the twenty-one stakes.

## 14
14. Then those (victims) for the twenty-one (stakes). He seizes twenty-one animals for each of the (eleven) deities of the Seasonal offerings [^fn_998]; for as many as there are gods of the Seasonal offerings so many are all the gods; and all objects of desire are in the Aśvamedha: 'by gratifying all the deities I shall gain all my desires,' so he thinks. But let him not proceed in this way.

[^fn_998]: 383:2 Or, perhaps, for the (eleven) deities of the Seasonal offerings he seizes twenty-one animals for each (stake); which would certainly simplify the distribution of those animals. Regarding the victims actually consecrated to the deities of the Cāturmāsya offerings, see p. 309, note 2.

## 15
15. Let him seize seventeen victims for the central stake [^fn_999], in order that he may gain and secure every-thing,

[^fn_999]: 383:3 This does not include the twelve 'paryaṅgyas' tied to the horse's limbs, but only the horse and two other victims sacred to Prajāpati, and twelve of a long series of beasts, of which three are dedicated to each successive deity (or allied group of deities). To these are afterwards added Agni's two victims belonging to the two sets of eleven victims (of the other twenty of which one is assigned to each of the other stakes).

for the seventeenfold is Prajāpati, and the seventeenfold (stoma) is everything, and the Aśvamedha is everything;--and sixteen at each of the other (stakes) in order that he may gain and secure everything, for everything here consists of sixteen parts, and the Aśvamedha is everything. Thirteen wild (beasts) he seizes for each intermediate space, in order that he may gain and secure everything, for the year consists of thirteen months, and the Aśvamedha is everything.

## 16
16. Now, prior to the (chanting of the) Bahishpavamāna, they (the assistants of the Adhvaryu) bring up the horse, after cleansing it; and with it they glide along for the Pavamāna: the mystic import of this has been explained [^fn_1000]. When the Bahishpavamāna has been chanted, they make the horse step on the place of chanting: if it sniffs, or turns away, let him know that his sacrifice is successful. Having led up that (horse), the Adhvaryu says, 'Hotr̥, sing praises!' and the Hotr̥ sings its praises [^fn_1001] with eleven (verses, R̥g-veda I, 163, 1-11)--

[^fn_1000]: 384:1 XIII, 2, 3, 1.

[^fn_1001]: 384:2 The mode of recitation is similar to that of the kindling-verses (likewise eleven, brought up, by repetitions of the first and last, to fifteen), viz. by making a pause after each half-verse, but without adding the syllable 'om' thereto. Āśv. Śr. X, 8, 5.

## 17
17. 'When, first born, thou didst neigh . . .'--thrice (he praises) with the first, and thrice with the last (verse), these amount to fifteen,--fifteenfold is the thunderbolt, and the thunderbolt means vigour: with that thunderbolt, vigour, the Sacrificer thus from the very first repels evil: thus [^fn_1002], indeed, it is to the Sacrificer that the thunderbolt is given in

[^fn_1002]: 384:3 Harisvāmin explains 'tad vai' as standing for 'sa vai' (liṅgavyatyayena)--viz. that fifteenfold thunderbolt.

order to smite for him whoever is to be smitten.--[R̥g-veda I, 163, 12. 13], The swift racer hath gone forward to the slaying. . . .'--'The racer hath gone forward to the highest place. . .'--

## 18
18. Having omitted these two (verses), he inserts the hymn (I, 162), 'Never (shall forget us) Mitra, Varuṇa, Aryaman, Āyu . . .,' in the Adhrigu [^fn_1003] (litany). Some, however, insert this verse (I, 162, 18), 'Thirty-four (ribs) of the steed, akin to the gods, (doth the knife hit) . . .,' before the (passage,--'twenty-six are its) ribs,' thinking lest they should place the holy syllable 'om' in the wrong place [^fn_1004], or lest they should suggest the plural by a singular [^fn_1005]. Let him not proceed thus, but let him insert the hymn as a whole.--'The swift racer hath gone forward to the slaying . . .'--The racer hath gone forward to the highest place . . .'--

[^fn_1003]: 385:1 On this recitation, consisting of a lengthy set of formulas, addressed to the slaughterers, see part ii, p, 188, note 2. The whole of the formulas are given Ait. Br. II, 6-7. The hymn, according to Āśv. X, 8, 7; is to be inserted either before the last formula of the litany, or somewhat further back--viz. before the formula 'shaḍviṁśatir asya vaṅkrayas,' 'twenty-six are its ribs'--whilst our Brāhmaṇa rather allows the alternative of the eighteenth verse of I, 162 being inserted at the latter place,--unless, indeed, the insertion in that case is to be made immediately before the word 'vaṅkrayaḥ' which is scarcely likely.

[^fn_1004]: 385:2 Harisvāmin seems to take this to mean that as this verse is of the same nature as the formulas of the Adhrigu litany, he is to treat it as such, as otherwise, in reciting he would have to pronounce 'om' after that verse, which is not done after those formulas.

[^fn_1005]: 385:3 Or, the plurality by the individual. Owing to the corrupt state of the MS., the commentator's explanation of this passage is not clear. He seems, however, at any rate, to take the 'plural' to refer to the formula 'shaḍviṁśatir asya vaṅkrayas,' where apparently 'eshām' has to be substituted for 'asya' on this occasion, as many victims are immolated, and the ribs of a plurality of beasts are thus indicated, whilst in verse eighteen of the hymn, on the  contrary, only the ribs of one horse (thus forming a kind of unit) are referred to; and if that verse were recited, along with the whole hymn, before the final formula which refers to all the victims, the necessary connection would be interrupted.

