+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Having uttered these two (verses), he pronounces what remains of the Adhrigu. 'A cloth, an upper cloth, and gold,' this is what they spread out for the horse [^fn_1006]: thereon they 'quiet' (slaughter) it. When the victims have been 'quieted,' the (king's) wives come up with water for washing the feet,--four wives; and a young maiden as the fifth, and four hundred female attendants.

[^fn_1006]: 386:1 See XIII, 2, 8, 1.

## 02
2. When the foot-water is ready, they cause the Mahishī to lie down near the horse, and cover her up with the upper cloth, with 'In heaven ye envelop yourselves,'--for that indeed is heaven where they immolate the victim, . . ., 'May the vigorous male, the layer of seed, lay seed!' she says [^fn_1007] for the completeness of union.

[^fn_1007]: 386:2 Nirāyatyāśvasya śiśnaṁ mahishy upasthe nidhatte 'vr̥shā vājī retodhā reto dadhātv' iti mithunasyaiva sarvatvāya.

## 03
3. Whilst they are lying there, the Sacrificer addresses the horse (Vāj. S. XXIII, 21), 'Utsakhyā ava gudaṁ dhehi!' No one replies to him, lest there should be some one to rival the Sacrificer.

## 04
4. The Adhvaryu then addresses the maiden, 'Hey hey maiden, that little bird . . .'--The maiden replies to him, 'Adhvaryu! that little bird . . .'

## 05
5. And the Brahman addresses the Mahishī, 'Mahishī, hey hey Mahishī, thy mother and father mount to the top of the tree . . .'--She has a hundred daughters of kings attending upon her: these

reply to the Brahman, 'Brahman, hey hey Brahman, thy mother and father play on the top of the tree. . .'

## 06
6. And the Udgātr̥ addresses the favourite, 'Vāvātā, hey hey Vāvātā, turn upwards!' She has a hundred noble-women (rājanyā) attending upon her: these reply to the Udgātr̥, 'Hey hey Udgātr̥, turn upwards!'

## 07
7. And the Hotr̥ says to the discarded wife, 'Parivr̥ktā, hey hey Parivr̥ktā, when large meets small in this aṁhubhedī . . .'--She has a hundred daughters of heralds and head-men of villages attending upon her: these reply to the Hotr̥, 'Hotr̥, hey hey Hotr̥, when the gods favoured the lalāmagu . . .'

## 08
8. Then the chamberlain addresses the fourth wife, 'Pālāgalī, hey hey Pālāgalī, when the deer eats the corn, one thinks not of the fat cattle . . .'--She has a hundred daughters of chamberlains and charioteers attending upon her: these reply to the chamberlain, 'Chamberlain, hey hey chamberlain, when the deer eats the corn, one thinks not of the fat cattle. . .'

## 09
9. These speeches, the derisive discourses, indeed are every kind of attainment, and in the Aśvamedha all objects of desire are contained: 'By every kind of speech may we obtain all objects of our desire' thus thinking, they cause the Mahishī to rise, Those (women) then walk back in the same way as they had come; and the others finally utter the verse containing (the word) 'fragrant' (R̥g-v. IV, 39, 6), 'To Dadhikrāvan have I sung praises. . .'

## 10
10. For, indeed, life and the deities depart from those who at the sacrifice speak impure speech: it is their speech they thereby purify so that the deities may not depart from the divine service.

 Now (some) put the omentum of the Gomr̥ga and that of the hornless he-goat upon the horse and then take it (to the Āhavanīya), saying, 'The horse has no omentum.' Let him not do so: of the horse he should certainly take the fat; the (omenta of the) others are normal.

## 11
11. When the omenta have been roasted, and when they have performed (the oblations) with the Svāhās [^fn_1008], and returned to the back (of the sacrificial ground), they hold a Brahmodya [^fn_1009] (theological discussion) in the Sadas. Having entered by the front door, they sit down at their several hearths.

[^fn_1008]: 388:1 See III, 8, 2, 21-23.

[^fn_1009]: 388:2 For a similar discussion between the Brahman and Hotr̥, prior to the binding of the victims to the stakes, see XIII, 2, 6, 9 seqq.

## 12
12. The Hotr̥ asks the Adhvaryu (Vāj. S. XXIII, 45), 'Who is it that walketh singly [^fn_1010]?. . .' He replies to him (ib. 46), 'Sūrya (the sun) walketh singly. . .'

[^fn_1010]: 388:3 For the complete verse, comprising four questions, see XIII, 2, 6, 10-13; the answers being given there in the form of explanations.

## 13
13. The Adhvaryu then asks the Hotr̥ (Vāj. S. XXIII, 47), 'Whose light is there equal to the sun?. . .' He replies to him (ib. 48), 'The Brahman (n.) is the light equal to the sun. . .'

## 14
14. The Brahman then asks the Udgātr̥ (Vāj. S. XXIII, 49), 'I ask thee for the sake of knowledge, O friend of the gods [if thou hast applied thy mind thereto: hath Vishṇu entered the whole world at those three places at which offering is made unto him?]' and he replies (ib. 50), 'I too am at those three places [at which he entered the whole world:

daily do I, with the one body [^fn_1011], go round the earth, the sky, and the back of yonder sky].'

[^fn_1011]: 389:1 Or, with the one limb (ekenāṅgena) which Mahīdhara takes to mean 'with the mind, in mind.' Possibly 'asya' may have to be taken together with it--'with the one body of his (Vishṇu's).'

## 15
15. The Udgātr̥ then asks the Brahman (Vāj. S. XXIII, 51), 'Into what (things) hath the Spirit [^fn_1012] entered, [and what (things) are established in the spirit? this, O Brahman, we crave of thee: what answer dost thou give unto us thereon?]' and he replies (ib. 52), 'Into five (things) hath the spirit entered, and they are established in the spirit: this I reply unto thee thereon; not superior in wisdom art thou (to me).'

[^fn_1012]: 389:2 Or, man (purusha). The five things, according to Mahīdhara, are the vital airs, or breathings.

## 16
16. When this (verse) has been uttered, they rise and betake themselves from the Sadas eastwards to the Sacrificer. Haying come to him, seated in front of the Havirdhāna [^fn_1013] (shed), they sit down in their several places.

[^fn_1013]: 389:3 That is, behind the uttaravedi, according to Kāty. XX, 7, 22.

## 17
17. The Hotr̥ then asks the Adhvaryu (Vāj. S. XXIII, 53), 'What was the first conception [^fn_1014]?. . .' and he replies (ib. 54), 'The sky was the first conception. . .'

[^fn_1014]: 389:4 See XIII, 2, 6, 14 seqq.

## 18
18. The Adhvaryu then asks the Hotr̥ (ib. 55), 'Who, pray, is the tawny one (piśaṅgilā)? [who is the kurupiśaṅgilā? who moveth in leaps? who creepeth along the path?]' and he replies (ib. 56), 'The tawny one is the uncreated (night) [^fn_1015]; [the kurupiśaṅgilā is the porcupine; the hare

[^fn_1015]: 389:5 Mahīdhara takes 'ajā' (the eternal) here as meaning either the  night, or Māyā; cf. XIII, 2, 6, 17. Perhaps, however, 'ajā' may mean 'goat' here.

moveth in leaps; the snake creepeth along the path].'

## 19
19. The Brahman then asks the Udgātr̥ (Vāj. S. XXIII, 57), 'How many kinds are thereof this (sacrifice), how many syllables?--[how many oblations? how often is (the fire) enkindled? The ordinances of sacrifice have I now asked of thee: how many priests offer in due form?]' and he replies (ib. 58), 'Six kinds there are of this (sacrifice), a hundred syllables, [eighty oblations, and three kindling-sticks; the ordinances of sacrifice do I declare unto thee: seven priests offer in due form].'

## 20
20. The Udgātr̥ then asks the Brahman (Vāj. S. XXIII, 59), 'Who knoweth the navel of this world? [who heaven and earth and the air? who knoweth the birth-place of the great Sun? who knoweth the Moon, whence it was born?]' and he replies (ib. 60), 'I know the navel of this world, [I know heaven and earth and the air; I know the birth-place of the great Sun, and I know the Moon, whence it was born]'

## 21
21. The Sacrificer then asks the Adhvaryu (Vāj. S. XXIII, 61), 'I ask thee about the farthest end of the earth, [I ask where is the navel of the world; I ask thee about the seed of the vigorous steed; I ask thee about the highest seat of speech];' and he replies (ib. 62), 'This altar-ground is the farthest end of the earth; [this sacrifice is the navel of the world; this Soma-juice is the seed of the vigorous

steed; this Brahman (priest) is the highest seat of speech].'

## 22
22. Verily, this is the complete attainment of speech, to wit the Brahmodya, and in the Aśvamedha all desires are contained: 'By means of all speech may we obtain all our desires!' so (they think).

## 23
23. When the colloquy has been held, the Adhvaryu enters the (Havirdhāna), and draws Prajāpati's (first) Mahiman cup (of Soma) in a gold vessel. The Puroruc formula [^fn_1016] thereof is (Vāj. S. XXIII, 1; Rig-v. X, 121, 1), 'The golden germ was first produced . . .' And its Puronuvākyā is (Vāj. S. XXIII, 63), 'Of good nature, self-existent at first (within the great ocean: I verily place the right germ whence is born Prajāpati).'--'May the Hotr̥ offer to Prajāpati: [of the Mahiman Soma (cup); may he relish, may he drink the Soma! Hotr̥, utter the offering-formula!]' is the Praisha (ib. 64). The Hotr̥ utters the offering-formula (ib. 65), 'O Prajāpati, none other than thee hath encompassed all these forms [^fn_1017] . . . ;' and as the Vashaṭ is pronounced, he (the Adhvaryu) offers with (Vāj. S. XXIII, 2), 'What greatness of thine there hath been in the day, and the year, [what greatness of thine there hath been in the wind and the air; what greatness of thine there hath been in the heavens and the sun, to that greatness of thine, to Prajāpati, hail, to the gods [^fn_1018]!]' He does not repeat the Vashaṭ, for he offers the cup of Soma all at once.

[^fn_1016]: 391:1 That is, the preliminary formula, or formulas, preceding the upayāma' ('Thou art taken with a support . . .').

[^fn_1017]: 391:2 See V, 4, 2, 9.

[^fn_1018]: 391:3 See XIII, 2, 11, 2 with note.

