+++
title = "DIFFERENT ARRANGEMENTS OF THE CHANTS OF THE ASVAMEDHA."

+++


## 01
1. Now, Indrota Daivāpa Śaunaka once performed this sacrifice for Janamejaya Pārikshita, and by performing it he extinguished all evil-doing, all Brahman-slaughter; and, verily, he who performs the Aśvamedha extinguishes (the guilt incurred by) all evil-doing, all Brahman-slaughter.

## 02
2. It is of this, indeed, that the Gāthā (strophe) sings,--'In Āsandīvat [^egg_1029], Janamejaya bound for the gods a black-spotted, grain-eating horse, adorned with a golden ornament and with yellow garlands.'

[^egg_1029]: 396:1 Lit., (in the city, nagare, Harisvāmin) possessed of a throne. Cf. Ait. Br. VIII, 2 1.

## 03
3. [There are] those same first two days [^egg_1030], and a Jyotis [^egg_1031] Atirātra: therewith (they sacrificed) for Bhīmasena;--those same first two days, and a Go Atirātra: therewith (they sacrificed) for Ugrasena;--those same first two days, and an Āyus Atirātra: therewith (they sacrificed) for Śrutasena. These are the Pārikshitīyas [^egg_1032], and it is of this that the Gāthā sings,--'The righteous Pārikshitas, performing horse-sacrifices, by their righteous work did away with sinful work one after another.'

[^egg_1030]: 396:2 Viz., as stated before, an Agnishṭoma and an Ukthya.

[^egg_1031]: 396:3 As to the difference between the Jyotis, Go, and Āyus forms of the Agnishṭoma sacrifice, see part iv, p. 287, note 2.

[^egg_1032]: 396:4 That is, according to Harisvāmin (and the Gāthā), the brothers of (Janamejaya) Pārikshita, though one would rather have thought of his sons, the grandsons of Parikshit.

## 04
4. Those same first two days, and an Abhijit [^egg_1033] Atirātra,--therewith Para Āṭnāra, the Kausalya king, once sacrificed: it is of this that Gāthā sings,--'Aṭnāra's son, the Kausalya Para, Hairaṇyanābha, caused a horse, meet for sacrifice, to be bound, and gave away the replete regions.'

[^egg_1033]: 397:1 Regarding the Abhijit and Viśvajit, see part iv, p. 320, note 2.

## 05
5. Those same first two days, and a Viśvajit [^egg_1033] Atirātra,--therewith Purukutsa, the Aikshvāka king, once on a time performed a horse (daurgaha)-sacrifice, whence it is of this that the R̥shi sings (R̥g-v. IV, 42, 8),--'These, the seven R̥shis, were then our fathers when Daurgaha [^egg_1034] was bound.'

[^egg_1033]: 397:1 Regarding the Abhijit and Viśvajit, see part iv, p. 320, note 2.

[^egg_1034]: 397:2 Sāyaṇa, differently from our Brāhmaṇa, takes Daurgaha as the patronymic of Purukutsa (son of Durgaha).

## 06
6. Those same first two days, and a Mahāvrata [^egg_1035] Atirātra,--therewith Marutta Āvikshita, the Āyogava king, once performed sacrifice; whence the Maruts became his guards-men, Agni his chamberlain, and the Viśve Devāḥ his counsellors: it is of this that the Gāthā sings,--'The Maruts dwelt as guards-men in Marutta Āvikshita's house, Agni as his chamberlain, and the Viśve Devāḥ as his counsellors.' And, verily, the Maruts become the guards-men, Agni the chamberlain, and the Viśve Devāḥ the counsellors of him who performs the horse-sacrifice.

[^egg_1035]: 397:3 See part iv, p. 282, note 5.

## 07
7. Those same first two days, and an Aptoryāma [^egg_1036] Atirātra,--it was therewith that Kraivya, the Pāñcāla king, once performed sacrifice,--for Krivis they formerly called the Pañcālas: it is of this that the Gāthā sings,--'At Parivakrā, the

[^egg_1036]: 397:4 See part iii, introd. p. xx.

 Pāñcāla overlord of the Krivis seized a horse, meet for sacrifice, with offering-gifts of a hundred thousand (head of cattle).'

## 08
8. And a second (Gāthā),--'A thousand myriads there were, and five-and-twenty hundreds, which the Brāhmaṇas of the Pañcālas from every quarter divided between them.'

## 09
9. The Agnishṭoma in the Trivr̥t (stoma); the Ukthya in the Pañcadaśa; and the third day, with the Uktha (stotras), in the Saptadaśa; the Shoḍaśin (stotra) in the Ekaviṁśa, the night (stotras) in the Pañcadaśa, and the Sandhi (stotra) in the Trivr̥t,--this is the (sacrifice) resulting in the Anushṭubh [^egg_1037]: it is therewith that sacrifice was performed by Dhvasan Dvaitavana, the king of the Matsyas, where there is the lake Dvaitavana; and it is of this that the Gāthā sings,--'Fourteen steeds did king Dvaitavana, victorious in battle, bind for Indra Vr̥trahan, whence the lake Dvaitavana (took its name).'

[^egg_1037]: 398:1 Viz. inasmuch as, according to Harisvāmin, all the Stotras amount together to 798 verses, which make twenty-five anushṭubh verses (of 32 syllables each) or thereabouts.

## 10
10. The (three) Pavamāna (stotras) in the Caturviṁśa (stoma), and (those performed) by repetitions [^egg_1038] in the Trivr̥t; the Pavamānas in the Katuścatvāriṁśa (44-versed stoma), and (those performed) by repetition [^egg_1039] in the Ekaviṁśa; the Pavamānas in

[^egg_1038]: 398:2 That is to say, all the remaining nine stotras of this, the Agnishṭoma, day, the so-called Dhuryas, viz. the Ājya-stotras, the Pr̥shṭḥa-stotras, and the Agnishṭoma-sāman, in all of which the respective Stoma is obtained by repetitions of the three stotriyā-verses.

[^egg_1039]: 398:3 In this, the Ukthya, day, this includes also the three Uktha-stotras, as being, as it were, the Dhuryas of the Hotr̥'s assistants  (cf. part iii, introd. p. xiv seqq.); whilst in the directions regarding the next day they are not included, as requiring a different Stoma.

the Ashṭācatvāriṁśa (48), and (those performed) by repetition in the Trayastriṁśa (33) up to the Agnishṭoma-sāman, the Uktha (stotras) in the Dvātriṁśa (32), the Shoḍaśin in the Ekaviṁśa, the night (stotras) in the Pañcadaśa, and the Sandhi (stotra) in the Trivr̥t

## 11
11. Suchlike is Vishṇu's striding [^egg_1040],--it was therewith that Bharata Dauḥshanti once performed sacrifice, and attained that wide sway which now belongs to the Bharatas: it is of this that the Gāthā sings,--'Seventy-eight steeds did Bharata Dauḥshanti bind for the Vr̥tra-slayer on the Yamunā, and fifty-five near the Gaṅgā.'

[^egg_1040]: 399:1 Just as there are here wide intervals between the Stomas, so Vishṇu, in his three strides, passes over wide distances, comm.

## 12
12. And a second (Gāthā),--'Having bound a hundred and thirty-three horses, meet for sacrifice, king Saudyumni, more shifty, overcame the other shiftless ones.'

## 13
13. And a third,--'At Nāḍapit [^egg_1041], the Apsaras Śakuntalā conceived Bharata, who, after conquering the whole earth, brought to Indra more than a thousand horses, meet for sacrifice.'

[^egg_1041]: 399:2 This, according to Harisvāmin, is the name of Kaṇva's hermitage. Cf. Leumann, Zeitsch. d. D. M. G., XLVIII, p. 81.

## 14
14. And a fourth [^egg_1042],--'The greatness of Bharata neither the men before nor those after him attained, nor did the five (tribes of) men, even as a mortal man (does not touch) the sky with his arms.'

[^egg_1042]: 399:3 Cf. Ait. Br. VIII, 23; Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 202.

## 15
15. With the Ekaviṁśa-stoma [^egg_1043] Rishabha Yājñatura,

[^egg_1043]: 399:4 That is, using the 21-versed form throughout the three days.

king of the Śviknas, performed sacrifice: it is of this that the Gāthā sings,--'When Rishabha Yājñatura was sacrificing, the Brahman-folk, having received wealth at the Aśvamedha, divided the offering-gifts between them.'

## 16
16. With the Trayastriṁśa-stoma Śoṇa Sātrāsāha, the Pāñcāla king, performed sacrifice: it is of this that the Gāthā sings,--'When Sātrāsāha performs the horse-sacrifice, the Trayastriṁśa (stomas) come forth as (Taurvaśa) horses, and six thousand mail-clad men [^egg_1044].

[^egg_1044]: 400:1 This seems to be Harisvāmin's interpretation of the verse:--torvaśā aśvā jyeshṭḥe tam api sr̥gyeran iti (?) trayastriṁśā stomā udgaccḥanti, sa hi Śoṇas trayastriṁśān eva stomān trishv api divaseshu prayuṅkte nānyān iti to udgaccḥantīty āha, shaṭ tu sahasrāṇi varmiṇāṁ rājaputrāṇāṁ kavacinām aśvapālānām udīrata iti vartate varshe prāptā eva drashṭavyāḥ. The St. Petersb. Dict., on the other hand, construes 'trayastriṁśāḥ' along with 'shaṭ sahasrāṇi' = 6033 (? horses of mail-clad men). This interpretation seems to me to involve serious difficulties. The use of those Stomas doubtless is supposed to result in the advantages here enumerated.

## 17
17. And a second (Gāthā),--'At the sacrifice of thee, Koka's father, the Trayastriṁśa (stomas) come forth, each as six times six thousand [^egg_1045] (horses), and six thousand mail-clad men.'

[^egg_1045]: 400:2 Koko nāma nāthaḥ, ke te aśvā udīrata iti prathamāyāṁ gāthāyām uktaṁ tad atrāpy anuvartate; teshāṁ tatra parimāṇaṁ noktam atra shaṭtriṁsad aśvasahasrāṇi rakshiṇām anucarabhntāny udgaccḥantīty āha; trayastriṁśāś codīrate shaḍ ḍḥi(?) varmiṇāṁ padānetāsu (?) gaccḥantīti. Harisvāmin.

## 18
18. And a third,--'When Sātrāsāha, the Pāñcāla king, was sacrificing, wearing beautiful garlands, Indra revelled in Soma, and the Brāhmaṇas became satiated with wealth.'

## 19
19. Śatānīka Sātrājita performed the Govinata (form of Aśvamedha), after taking away the

horse of the Kāśya (king); and since that time the Kāśis do not keep up the (sacrificial) fires, saying, 'The Soma-drink has been taken from us.'

## 20
20. The mode (of chanting) for this (Govinata form) is:--the Pavamāna (stotras) in the Caturviṁśa (stoma), and (those chanted) by repetitions in the Trivr̥t;--the Pavamānas in the Catuścatvāriṁśa, the Ājya (stotras) in the Ekaviṁśa, the Ukthas [^egg_1046] In the Triṇava, the Pr̥shṭḥas in the Ekaviṁśa;--the Pavamānas in the Shaṭtriṁśa (36-versed), and (those chanted) by repetitions in the Trayastriṁśa (33) up to the Agnishṭoma-sāman, the Ukthas in the Ekaviṁśa, the Shoḍaśin in the Ekaviṁśa, the night (stotras) in the Pañcadaśa, and the Sandhi (stotra) in the Trivr̥t.

[^egg_1046]: 401:1 Why these are here put before the Pr̥shṭḥas, is not clear.

## 21
21. It is of this that the Gāthā sings,--'Śatānīka Sātrājita seized a sacrificial horse, in the neighbourhood, the sacrifice of the Kāśis, even as Bharata (seized that) of the Satvats.'

## 22
22. And a second,--'The mighty Śatānīka, having seized, in the neighbourhood, Dhr̥tarāshṭra's white sacrificial horse, roaming at will in its tenth month, Śatānīka [^egg_1047] performed the Govinata-sacrifice.'

[^egg_1047]: 401:2 Perhaps we ought here to read 'Sātrājita.'

## 23
23. And a fourth [^egg_1048],--'The greatness of the Bharatas neither the men before nor those after them attained, nor did the seven (tribes of) men, even as a mortal man (does not touch) the sky with his flanks.'

[^egg_1048]: 401:3 Unless the Gāthā in the preceding paragraph (being in the Trishṭubh metre) is really counted as two, the author seems here purposely to have omitted a verse. Possibly, however, it may mean, 'the fourth,' viz. referring to paragraph 14.

## 24
24. Now as to the sacrificial gifts. Whatever there is towards the middle of the kingdom other than the land, the men, and the property of the Brāhmaṇa, of that the eastern region belongs to the Hotr̥, the southern to the Brahman, the western to the Adhvaryu, the northern to the Udgātr̥; and the Hotr̥kas share this along with them.

## 25
25. When the Udayanīyā (completing offering) is finished, he seizes twenty-one barren cows, sacred to Mitra-Varuṇa, the Viśve Devāḥ, and Br̥haspati, with the view of his gaining those deities. And the reason why those sacred to Br̥haspati come last is that Br̥haspati is the Brahman (n.), and he thus establishes himself finally in the Brahman.

## 26
26. And as to their being twenty-one of them,--the twenty-one-fold is he who shines yonder: twelve months, five seasons, these three worlds, and yonder sun as the twenty-first--this consummation (he thereby obtains).

## 27
27. When the Udavasānīyā (closing offering) is completed, they give, for a sacrificial gift, four women, with a maiden as the fifth, and four hundred female attendants according to agreement.

## 28
28. And during the following year he performs the animal sacrifices of the seasons,--six (victims) sacred to Agni in the spring, six to Indra in the summer, six to Parjanya, or to the Maruts, in the rainy season, six to Mitra and Varuṇa in the autumn, six to Indra and Vishṇu in the winter, and six to Indra and Br̥haspati in the dewy season,--six seasons are a year: in the seasons, in the year, he thus establishes himself. These amount to thirty-six animals,--the Br̥hatī (metre) consists of thirty-six syllables, and the heavenly world is established

upon the Br̥hatī: and thus he finally establishes himself, by means of the Br̥hatī metre, in the heavenly world.

