+++
title = "02"

+++
The first pāda is truncated, though the frequency of the Vala theme and the stereotyped phraseology associated with it easily allow the missing parts to be supplied. With páry ádrim usrā́ḥ we can add the part. sántam, as in IV.1.15 gā́ḥ … pári ṣántam ádrim “… the rock surrounding the cows” (cf. VI.17.5). As for the verb, √ruj is the (or a) standard root for this mythological action (cf. nearby VI.32.2 rujád  ádrim), and ruját opening pāda c can serve in the first hemistich as well. (Scar [425] unaccountably supplies “ging” instead.) The second pāda contains an elementary etymological figure, with the root noun cmpd ṛtayúj- flanked by its component parts: ṛtá(-dhītibhir) ṛtayúg yujānáḥ.

The publ. tr. renders the first cmpd. as “by those of true insight,” implying that ṛtá- is adjectival, and the second as “the one whose yoke is truth,” implying that it is a bahuvrīhi. I would alter this tr. to “the one yoked with truth, having been yoked by those whose insights are truth (that is, the priest/poets).” The third pāda also contains a simple etymological figure: rujád árugṇam “he breaks the unbreakable.” In d Ge, Schmidt (149), and Scar (425) all take yodhat as a preterite (e.g., Ge ‘bekämpfte’), but I don’t see how it can be anything but a root aor. subjunctive (so explicitly Macd. VGS, 410). If this analysis is correct, it makes it likely that the injunc. ruját in c also falls in the present/future (or perhaps, in Hoffmann’s terms, zeitlos) realm. Note that Hoffmann (Injunk. 142-43) so interprets the following two vss. (3-4), which, as we’ve seen, pattern closely with vs. 2. Nonetheless the three scholars just mentioned take all of vs. 2 as preterital, whereas I consider this to be an instance of the reconfiguring of mythological deeds as actions we hope to be repeated in the current time.

Old wants to emend índraḥ in d to voc. indra, to allow soma to be the subject of yodhat as it is of the rest of the vs., and he points to this same voc. indra at the end of the next hemistich (3b). However, it is hard to see why the first of two identical forms would be redactionally altered to be different from the second, and the shifting conceptual boundary between soma and Indra as agents in this sequence makes the transmitted text unproblematic, as Old also admits.

