+++
title = "002"

+++
2 Vāyu (1–3), Indra and Vāyu (4–6), Mitra and Varuṇa (7–9)
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
9 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in tr̥cas
This and the following hymn constitute what is later called the Praügaśastra, the  “yoke-pole-tip recitation,” which is the second recited litany in the morning soma pressing. In classical śrauta ritual the śastra consists of seven sets of three verses or tr̥cas. In the recitation each triplet of verses is preceded by an introductory nivid, a  brief declaration of the deities invoked in the recitation. Recitations typically combine  verses from different hymns, or they may require that the form of the R̥gvedic verses be  recast, but in this case the nivids need only be added to produce the recitation. These  two hymns, therefore, are already fit for the classical performance of the soma ritual.
As Insler (2002) has shown, the sequence of gods in I.2–3 represents the sequence  of gods who receive cups of soma during the soma-pressing day. The rite reflected  in the hymns was neither a version of the soma ritual represented in the Family  Books of the R̥gveda nor that of the classical ritual, although it comes fairly close  to the latter. Rather, these two hymns represent a transitional period in the develop
ment of the soma rite as it moved toward its classical form.
In the R̥gvedic rite, Vāyu was the first of the gods to receive the soma and there fore the first tr̥ca of I.2 is dedicated to him. In the classical rite, the recipients of  soma at the Morning Pressing are, for the most part, dual divinities. The first pair  is Indra and Vāyu, to whom our second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) is dedicated, and the second  pair is Mitra and Varuṇa, addressed in our third tr̥ca (vss. 7–9).
In I.3 the first tr̥ca is dedicated to the two Aśvins, who are the third set of dual  divinities at the classical Morning Pressing. In the classical rite there are also morn ing offerings to Indra and to the All Gods. Those gods are mentioned in the next  two tr̥cas (Indra, vss. 4–6; the All Gods, vss. 7–9), but at the time of the composition  of these hymns, these verses probably refer to the midday and evening rites rather  than to the morning offering.
In most of the Family Books of the R̥gveda, Indra alone is the principal at the  Midday Pressing, though especially in Maṇḍala III there is evidence that the Maruts  have joined Indra as dedicands, as in the classical rite. The Maruts are not mentioned  in our hymn, however, and were probably not a part of the soma rite for which these  hymns were composed. Although the R̥bhus and Indra were the principal recipients  of soma at the Third Pressing for most of the R̥gvedic period, the R̥bhus are absent  from this hymn, indicating that, as also in the classical rite, they had already all  but disappeared from the soma rite. Rather, in this hymn and in the classical rite,  there is a soma offering to the All Gods in the evening. This association of the All  Gods with the Third Pressing must be fairly old, since the Brāhmaṇa texts refer to  the Third Pressing as vaiśvadevyam “belonging to the All Gods.” The last tr̥ca (vss.  10–12) of I.3 is to Sarasvatī, who does not receive an offering in the Third Pressing  at the classical rite and has only a limited presence in the R̥gveda. However, she  likely did receive soma at the Third Pressing in the period of this transitional rite.
For further on this śastra and the order of divinities addressed, see the other  hymns with this structure, I.23 and II.41, as well as I.139 in part. It is not clear why  the śastra has been split into two hymns just in this case.
The actual content of the two hymns is quite simple. In I.2 the first two tr̥cas to  Vāyu and Indra and Vāyu respectively announce that the soma has been pressed  and urge the gods to come to our sacrifice. The tr̥ca to Mitra and Varuṇa is slightly  more interesting, in that it mentions the frequently conjoined notions of “insight” (dhī́), “skill” (dákṣa), and “resolve” or “purpose” (krátu), the three elements neces sary to conceive and carry out an action.
## 1
O Vāyu, lovely to see, drive here! Here are the properly prepared soma  juices.
Drink of them! Hear our summons!
## 2
O Vāyu, with their hymns the singers sing you here—
they who have pressed soma, who understand the (ritual) days.
## 3
O Vāyu, your nourishing stream infusing (the soma) is going along for  the pious man—
the broadly spreading (stream) for soma-drinking.
## 4
O Indra and Vāyu, here are the soma-pressings: come near with  delight,
for the soma drops are eager for you.
## 5
O Vāyu and Indra, you take note of the pressings, you two rich in  prizewinning mares.
Drive right here at speed.
## 6
O Vāyu and Indra, drive right here to the appointed place of the  soma-presser,
swiftly and according to our insight right to the point, you superior men.
## 7
I call upon Mitra of refined skill and Varuṇa, who cares for the stranger, the two who send our ghee-covered insight to its goal.
## 8
By truth— o Mitra and Varuṇa, strong through truth, touching truth— you have attained your lofty purpose.
## 9
The two sage poets, Mitra and Varuṇa, powerfully born, having a wide  dwelling place,
furnish us effective skill.