+++
title = "003"

+++
3
Aśvins (1–3), Indra (4–6), All Gods (7–9), Sarasvatī (10–12)
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
12 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in tr̥cas
See the introduction to the preceding hymn. This hymn is the continuation and  conclusion of the Praügaśastra and follows the order of divinities discussed in the  introduction to I.2. As in I.2, the contents are fairly banal—urging each god or  divine group to come and enjoy our sacrificial offerings.
In both I.2 and I.3 the tr̥cas contain internal repetitions that unify them, though  these unifying devices are of an elementary type. There are also less apparent link ages between tr̥cas created by verbal repetitions in the last verse of one tr̥ca and the  first of the next. So, for example, I.2.6c and 7c mention our “insight” (dhī́). The last

pāda (c) of I.3 begins ā́ yātam and 4a has ā́ yāhi “drive here,” both imperatives to  the same root. And 6c and 7c refer to sutá “pressed soma,” though there is no obvi ous link between the third tr̥ca of I.3 and the last one to Sarasvatī.
## 1
O Aśvins, quick-handed lords of beauty, in the sacrificial refreshments find your delight, you two providing many enjoyments.
## 2
O Aśvins of many wondrous powers, you superior men with powerful  insight,
you holy ones, cherish our songs.
## 3
O wondrous Nāsatyas, the soma-pressings of the man who has twisted  the ritual grass are seeking you.
Drive here, o you who follow the course of the Rudras [=Maruts].
## 4
O Indra, drive here!—you of bright radiance. These soma-pressings  here are seeking you,
the ones purifed in full measure by delicate (fingers).
## 5
O Indra, drive here!—roused by our insight, sped by our inspired poets, to the sacred formulations of the cantor who has the pressed soma.
## 6
O Indra, drive here!—thrusting yourself onward to the sacred
formulations, o possessor of fallow bays.
Take delight in our pressed soma.
## 7
O helpers, supporters of the peoples, you All Gods—come here as pious ones to the pressed soma of the pious man.
## 8
The All Gods crossing the waters—come here to the pressed soma!— like ruddy (cows) to good pastures.
## 9
The All Gods—unfailing, undeceiving, (with the byword) “come,  don’t go!”—
enjoy the ritual offering as its conveyors.
## 10
Let pure Sarasvatī, providing prize mares along with prizes,
be eager for our sacrifice, bringing goods through her insight.
## 11
The impeller of liberal gifts, taking note of good thoughts,
Sarasvatī has received our sacrifice.
## 12
Her great flood does Sarasvatī reveal with her beacon.
She rules over all insights.