+++
title = "004"

+++
4 Indra
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
10 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in tr̥cas
As Bergaigne (1889: 182) points out, the hymns I.4–9, all dedicated to Indra, all in  gāyatrī, and all attributed to the same Vaiśvāmitra poet, form the texts on which the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin priest, an assistant of the Hotar, draws for supplementary  verses at the Morning Pressing.
This particular hymn consists of three tr̥cas and a final summary verse (10);  the first and last tr̥cas are fairly conventional. In the first (vss. 1–3) the poet calls  on Indra to come to our sacrifice and consume our soma. In the last (vss. 7–9)  the poet again offers Indra soma and recounts Indra’s past deeds inspired by his  soma-drinking, with hopes for similar future exploits.
The middle tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) is a different matter and displays some anxiety about  the poet’s exclusive focus on Indra—“putting all his eggs in one basket,” in the  English idiom. In verse 4, immediately after the peremptory command to Indra,  “come here!” the poet orders himself (or another person?) to “go away!”—to seek  out Indra and inquire who he [=Indra, in our view] favors as a comrade, in an  indirect question with a curious mixture of direct and indirect syntax. The ques
tion is also rhetorical: the poet expects Indra to favor him, and in verses 5 and 6  he defends the exclusive partnership against unnamed cavilers, by asserting that  having Indra alone on his side is a good bargain. The defensive tone of this tr̥ca  may seem an odd feature of the first full hymn to Indra in the R̥gveda, but it does  strike a note that we will meet again and again in the collection—the worried hope  that Indra will indeed choose to attend our sacrifice and that he will extend his help  to us alone.
## 1
The one who assumes a good form for help—like a good milk-cow for a  cow-milker—
do we call upon every day.
## 2
Come here to our pressings. Drink of the soma, soma-drinker.
It’s a rich man’s exhilaration that gives cows.
## 3
Then might we know your favors up close.
Do not look past us—come here!
## 4
Go away! Ask Indra, spirited and indestructible, attentive to poetic  inspiration,
who is your choice from among your comrades.
## 5
And let scorners say to us, “You have missed out on the rest
in placing your friendship in Indra alone.”
## 6
But (even) a stranger—(indeed all) the separate peoples—would say we  have a good portion, o wondrous one.
(For) we would be in the protection of Indra alone.
## 7
Bring the swift to the swift—(bring soma), the glory of the sacrifice,  causing exhilaration to men,
exhilarating our comrade [=Indra] in its flight.
## 8
Having drunk of this, o you of a hundred resolves, you became the bane  of obstacles.
You helped the prizewinner to the prizes.94 I.5
## 9
We incite you, the prizewinner, to the prizes, o you of a hundred  resolves,
to win the stakes, Indra.
## 10
He who is a great stream-bed of wealth but easy to cross, the comrade  of the soma-presser—
to him, to Indra, sing!