+++
title = "005"

+++
5 Indra
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
10 verses: gāyatrī
A generally unremarkable hymn, with the usual offering of soma and praise to  Indra in return, we hope, for help and favor. The favors especially desired are help  and support in battles and raids and the victory prizes won in them (see vss. 3–4,  9–10), and the hymn ends (vs. 10) on a slightly worried note, with a reference to our  enemies among men.
Structurally, the hymn divides into two halves. In the first (vss. 1–5), the poet  addresses his fellow priests, commanding them to sing the songs, pointing to the  prepared soma, and declaring what Indra can do. In the second half (vss. 6–10) he  turns to Indra himself, reminding the god what the offerings will do for him. The  birth of Indra (vs. 6) refers not only to his ancient birth but also to his appearance  at this sacrifice. The single day in which he achieves his full strength is the sacrificial  day, so that by the end of the day, he has the power to help the sacrificers.
## 1
Here—come here—sit down: sing forth to Indra,
o comrades, whose vehicles are praise songs—
## 2
To the first among many, having control of desirable things,
to Indra when the soma is pressed.
## 3
Will he be here for us at our hitching up (for war), he for wealth, he in plenty? Will he come to us with prizes of victory?
## 4
He whose two fallow bays his rivals do not obstruct in the competition or  in combats—
to him, to Indra, sing!
## 5
These pure [=unmixed] pressed soma drinks go in pursuit of the  soma-drinker,
and those mixed with curds.
## 6
You were born and were grown strong in a single day to drink the  pressed soma,
for preeminence, o Indra of good resolve.
## 7
Let the swift soma drinks enter you, o Indra, who long for song.
Let them be weal for you, the discerning one. 8. The praises have strengthened you, you the recitations, o you of a  hundred resolves.
Let our songs strengthen you.
## 9
Providing his imperishable help, Indra should win this prize of a  thousand—
he in whom are all manly powers.
## 10
Let mortals not plot deception against our bodies, o Indra, who long  for song.
Having control of it, keep away the deadly weapon.