+++
title = "006"

+++
6
Indra (1–3, 10), Maruts (4, 6, 8–9), Indra and Maruts (5, 7)
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
10 verses: gāyatrī
A disjointed and episodic hymn. The Anukramaṇī ascription of the verses to a  combination of Indra and the Maruts is reproduced in the above heading, but it  is almost certainly wrong—though the confusion generated by the hymn makes  the error pardonable. The Maruts do not appear to figure in the hymn at all, and,  though Indra does, there are other divine figures in some of the verses assigned to  him. As often, the hymn jumps back and forth from 2nd- to 3rd-person reference  and from past to present time, but in this case the jumps are particularly disorient
ing and the overall structure hard to discern.
Modern attempts at interpretation generally begin with the Vala myth and the  main divine personages therein, Indra and the Aṅgirases, his singer-assistants in  this myth. The myth is most clearly alluded to in verse 5, the central verse (espe cially if vs. 10 is considered to be a mere variant of parallel vs. 9), and we may see  here an interesting structural contrast to the omphalos hymn: instead of embedding  the mystery in the middle verse and leading up to and away from it with clearer  material, the poet here may have designed the middle verse as the key to the many  questions posed by the diffuse fragments surrounding it and a motif in which to  integrate them.
In any case verse 5 presents us with Indra finding the hidden cows within a  stronghold with the help of an unnamed group, who must be the Aṅgirases. In  our view this myth does provide the thematic backdrop for the whole hymn and is  alluded to directly (or as directly as it gets) also in verses 6 and 8. But most of the  rest of the hymn treats the ritual re-creation of Indra’s releasing the dawns from the  Vala cave—namely the rising of the sun, the kindling of the ritual fire, and Indra’s  journey to the early-morning sacrifice, and the most enigmatic verses refer, in our  view, to Agni—not, as in other interpretations, to the sun or to Indra.
A brief and tentative synopsis: the first two verses, parallel in structure, depict  the simultaneous hitching up of the sun (vs. 1) and Indra’s chariot (vs. 2) for their

respectively daily journeys. These verses are set in the present moment. Verse 3 is  structurally paired with verse 7 in the architecture of the hymn; both are addressed  to an unidentified 2nd sg. referent—in our view Agni, who is kindled at dawn (vs.  3) at the same time as Indra arrives at the sacrifice (vs. 7). Verse 3 is set in the mythic  past, perhaps at Agni’s first kindling by the Aṅgirases, an event also presented in  verse 4, while verse 7 returns us to the present. (Verse 3 also contains an absolutely  baffling 2nd plural vocative, “o young men,” embedded within a verse with entirely  2nd singular reference. Short of emendation, there is little to be done with it, though  it may refer to the plural subjects of verse 4, the fire-priests, who kindled the embry onic Agni.) Verse 5 provides the Vala-myth clue, and the remainder of the verses  meld a mythic account of the rituals of dawn with reference to the ritual of the  present moment.
## 1
They hitch up the coppery, ruddy (sun) that circles around the ones  [=stars?] standing still.
The lights are alight in heaven.
## 2
They hitch his beloved fallow bays to his chariot on opposite sides, the bold pair of sorrels, conveyors of the superior man [=Indra].
## 3
You young men—making a beacon for that without beacon and an  ornament for that without ornament,
you [=Agni] were born together with the dawns.
## 4
Certainly, just after that they once again roused his embryonic state  [=kindled the fire] according to his nature,
acquiring for themselves a name worthy of the sacrifice.
## 5
Along with the (ritual-)conveyors [=Aṅgirases] who break even the  stronghold, o Indra,
you discovered the ruddy (cattle) even though in hiding.
## 6
As those seeking the gods (bellow) their thought, the songs have  bellowed to the finder of goods,
great and famous.
## 7
Since you [=Agni] will come to sight along with Indra, having joined  together with the fearless one,
(you two are) the delighting pair who share the same luster.
## 8
Together with the irreproachable, heaven-bound (Aṅgirases), the battler  chants mightily,
together with Indra’s beloved troops.
## 9
From there or from the luminous realm of heaven come here, o  earth-circling one.
The songs converge on him.
## 10
We beseech Indra for gain from here, the earthly realm, or from heaven, or from the great airy space.