+++
title = "007"

+++
7 Indra
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
10 verses: gāyatrī
A relatively simple praise of Indra, focused especially on his possession of the mace  (vss. 2c, 3c, 7b) and his help in battles and contests (vss. 4–6). Indra’s mythologi cal exploits receive cursory treatment in verse 3. A more insistent theme emerges  toward the end, with an accumulation of loaded terms for potentially rival groups  of people: kr̥ṣṭī́ḥ “communities” (8b), carṣanīnā́m “domains” (9a), páñca kṣitīnā́m “the five peoples” (9c), jánebhyaḥ “men” (10b), culminating in the hope that Indra  will leave those rivals behind and become exclusively ours.
But one can say that the real focus of the hymn is Indra’s name. The poem,  especially its first half, is characterized by the insistent repetition of the name, with  “Indra” as the first word in verses 1–5 and also in verse-internal lines 1b, 1c, 2c, and  5b. After verse 5, the poet noticeably pauses in verses 6–8, using the name only once.  Even so, that one occurrence, which is in 7b, is in a marked position as the middle  word of the middle line of the middle verse of this three-verse section. This pause or  break accents the reappearance of the name twice in rapid succession at the begin
ning of 9c and 10a. Thematically, the emphasis on the name of Indra underscores  the poet’s desire that the person of Indra, independent of all else, be present at his  sacrifice.
Verse 6 contains a somewhat obscure request that Indra “uncover yonder pot.”  “Yonder pot” probably refers to anything distant that contains what the poet and  his people want or need. A reasonable parallel is VIII 23.29bc, tváṃ no gómatīr íśaḥ,  mahó rāyáḥ sātím agne ápā vr̥dhi “Uncover for us refreshments consisting of cows  and the winning of great weath, o Agni,” with the same 2nd-sg. imperative ápā vr̥dhi “uncover” and a desirable object.
## 1
Just to Indra have the singers bellowed aloft, to Indra the chanters with  their chants,
to Indra their voices.
## 2
Indra, close-linked with his two fallow bays, (is mounted) on the two  yoked by speech;
Indra is the golden wielder of the mace.
## 3
Indra made the sun mount in heaven for the long view.
He propelled apart the rock with the cows (inside).
## 4
O Indra, help us when prizes and stakes of thousands (are set),
as the mighty one with mighty forms of help.
## 5
Indra do we call upon when the stake is great and Indra when  it’s small,
our mace-wielding yokemate amid obstacles.

## 6
You bull who give in every way, uncover yonder pot
for us, since you are one who cannot be repulsed.
## 7
The praises of mace-wielding Indra that go higher at every thrust— I cannot get enough of good praise for him.
## 8
Like a bull his herds, the buffalo rouses the communities with his might, since he is the master who cannot be repulsed.
## 9
Indra, who alone has control over the settled domains and their goods, and over the five people,
## 10
Indra do we summon for you from the men all around.
Let him be exclusively ours.