+++
title = "008"

+++
8
Indra
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
10 verses: gāyatrī
The first part of the hymn (vss. 1–4) asks Indra for help in battle and for the wealth  (both material and in manpower) to make success in combat possible. With Indra’s  help, the sacrificer and his men become almost aspects of Indra himself. As he is  the “smasher of obstacles,” so they will “keep obstacles hemmed in.” They take up  Indra’s mace (vs. 3) and become his “hammers,” which smash their enemies. They  acquire Indra as their yokemate (vs. 4).
The second part (vss. 5–10) celebrates the extent of Indra’s power and the ben efits it brings to the men who attain him and it. This theme is first expressed rela tively straightforwardly (though with suppressed syntactic connection) in verses  5–6. But in verse 7 Indra’s vastness is conveyed by a striking image, syntactically  untethered, where his cheek and his gullet are compared to the wide, swollen sea.  This image introduces the final three verses (8–10), each of which begins evā́ hí “in just this way, in the same way.” In our view the underlying “same” is Indra’s  vast extent—both physically, in the images of verse 7, and metaphorically, in the  immense liberality (vs. 8) and help (vs. 9) he bestows on us. The final verse (10),  though introduced with the same expression, turns to our obligations to Indra,  and, again by implication, it is suggested that our praises of Indra are as vast as  his gifts to us.
The hymn is characterized throughout by chaining between verses, often not  overtly marked.
## 1
O Indra, bring wealth here—winning, conquering, ever overpowering, highest—for our help—
## 2
(Wealth) by which we will keep obstacles hemmed in, hemmed in by  bare-knuckled fighting,
hemmed in (by fighting) on horseback, when we are helped by you. 3. O Indra, helped by you, might we, as your hammers, take up your mace; might we conquer our opponents completely in the fight.
## 4
With champion archers, with you as our yokemate, Indra,
might we overcome those doing battle.
## 5
Great is Indra, and now let the greatness for the mace-wielder be (even)  beyond (that).
Like heaven in its extent is his capacious power
## 6
(For those) who have attained (him)—either superior men in the clash  or at the winning of offspring
or inspired poets seeking (him) through insight.
## 7
His cheek, the best soma-drinker, which swells like the sea—
his gullet (which is) like the wide waters...
## 8
Just the same is his liberality—copious, great, conferring cattle, like a ripe branch for the pious man.
## 9
Just the same is your help, o Indra—extensive for one like me,
present in an instant for the pious man.
## 10
In the same way those things beloved of him, praise song and
recitation, are to be proclaimed,
for Indra to drink the soma.