+++
title = "009"

+++
9
Indra
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
10 verses: gāyatrī
The “message” of this hymn is the standard one: Indra is urged to drink of our  soma and enjoy our praise songs and in return to provide us with the usual good  things. This relation of reciprocity is nicely conveyed stylistically by complementary  paired repetitions. For example, in verse 2 Indra is to be “sent surging” to the soma  (2a), while the same verb is to be supplied for the soma’s movement to Indra (2b).  Though this verb √sr̥j is an unusual choice to describe Indra’s locomotion, it is a  standard idiom applied to soma’s progress, especially in the Soma Maṇḍala (IX).  (See here also the songs sent surging in verse 4.) Similarly “spur on” in verses 5–6  with “us” once as goal (vs. 5) and once as direct object (vs. 6), and verse 10 where  both Indra and the chant directed to him are characterized as “lofty,” after two  occurrences of “lofty” applied to fame (vss. 7–8).
For readers interested in comparative Indo-European poetics, the most nota ble feature of the hymn is an instance of the famous, but relatively rare, formula  “imperishable fame” (śrávaḥ... ákṣitam) in verse 7, where the two words are found  in separate pādas (b and c). The resonance of this formula and the concept behind  it may account for the near-exact repetition of the “place fame in us” expression in  verses 7–8.

## 01
Indra, come! Reach exhilaration from the stalk with all its soma-joints. (You are) the great one, superiority (itself) by reason of your power.
## 02
Send him [=Indra] surging to the pressed soma, and (send) the
exhilarator [=soma] (surging) to Indra, who seeks exhilaration,
the doer to him who does all things.
## 03
O you of the lovely lips who govern all domains, reach exhilaration  through the exhilarating praise songs
here at these soma-pressings.
## 04
Our songs have been sent surging to you, Indra. They have reared up  toward you—
not (yet) pleasured, they (have reared up) toward the bull, their
husband.
## 05
Spur on your bright benefit entirely in our direction, o Indra—the  benefit worth wishing for:
just yours will be the farmost and foremost.
## 06
Spur us on then for wealth, so that we acquire vehemence
and glory, o powerfully brilliant one.
## 07
Place in us, o Indra, broad and lofty fame, accompanied by cattle and  victory prizes,
lifelong and imperishable.
## 08
Place in us lofty fame and brilliance that best wins a thousand,
and refreshments by the cartload.
## 09
(We are) singing with songs to Indra, the goods-master of goods, the  one worthy of verses,
who will come to the call for help.
## 10
To him who is at home at every soma-pressing, to the lofty one, the  stranger himself chants a lofty,
lusty (chant) to Indra.