+++
title = "010"

+++
10
Indra
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
12 verses: anuṣṭubh
Oldenberg (1888:  226)  remarks on the idiosyncratic arrangement of the  Madhuchandas hymns (1–11) and on the location of this and the following  hymn in particular. Contrary to the usual arrangement, the gāyatrī hymns of this  collection (1–9) are placed as a group together before these final two hymns in  anuṣṭubh.
Though the hymn displays the usual reciprocal balance between what we offer  to Indra and what we ask him for, the poet focuses more on the verbal offerings  we make than on the soma. Songs, praise hymns, and recitations are mentioned in verses 1, 3–5, 9, 12—with a bit of thematic ring composition linking the first verse  and the first half of the last one (12ab).
As in the last hymn (I.9) reciprocal actions are posited of Indra and his wor shipers. For example in verse 4ab Indra is ordered to respond to our verbal praises  by verbal actions of his own. In 4cd/5ab we first command Indra to strengthen  us and our ritual, and then we produce a recitation meant to strengthen Indra  in turn. We both urge him to enjoy our companionship (5d) and beg him to give  us his (6a). The most ingenious example of reciprocal action is found in verse 7,  in the ambiguous form tvā́dātam. The topic is the Vala myth and the glory that  accrues from opening the Vala cave and driving out the cows. Indra of course is  the major actor in this myth, and tvā́dātam íd yáśaḥ can be interpreted as “(that)  glory is acquired only by you” (based on the idiom ā́ √dā “take, acquire”). But  Indra also shared the action with the Aṅgirases, and the myth is also often rein
terpreted as engaging human priests in its ritual re-enactment, so that the same  phrase can also mean “(that) glory is given only by you” (with the simplex √dā “give”). Either interpretation is morphologically, grammatically, and contextually  possible.
There is otherwise little remarkable about the hymn, though in several verses  the poet echoes passages found elsewhere, which he twists to a different, sometimes  opposite meaning (cf. 7b with III.40.6, 8b with I.176.1, and 9ab with VII.32.5).
## 01
The singers sing to you; the chanters chant their chant.
The formulators (of sacred speech) hold you up like a roof-pole, o you  of a hundred resolves.
## 02
When he has mounted from peak to peak and has seen much to be done, then Indra perceives his purpose, and the ram stirs with his flock.
## 03
Hitch up your long-maned fallow bays, the two bullish ones filling their  girthbands;
then proceed to the hearing of our songs, o soma-drinking Indra.
## 04
Come to our praise songs. Cry out to them, applaud them, and bellow  to them.
Together with us, good Indra, make our formulation and our sacrifice  strong.
## 05
A strengthening recitation is to be proclaimed to Indra who provides  many fulfillments,
so that the able one will take pleasure in our soma-pressings and in our  companionship.
## 06
Just him do we beg for companionship, him for wealth, him for an  abundance of good heroes.
He is the able one, and he will be able for us—Indra who distributes  the goods.
## 07
Easily opening (the pen), easily driving out (the cows)—(that) glory is  acquired [/given] only by you, Indra.

Open the pen of the cows; show your generosity, o possessor of
the stone.
## 08
Since both world-halves together cannot budge you when you show  your mettle,
you will conquer the waters along with the sun. Shake loose the cows  for us.
## 09
You of listening ear, listen to our call: now accept my songs.
Indra, make this praise song of mine closer even than your yokemate. 10. Since we know you as the best of bulls, who listen to calls when prizes  (are at stake),
we call for the help of the best of bulls, the help that best wins a thousand. 11. O Indra, (god) of Kuśika, finding exhilaration, drink our pressed soma. Lengthen our lifetime anew; make the seer the winner of a thousand. 12. Let these songs surround you on every side, o you who long for songs. Let strengths accompany the one whose lifetime has been strengthened;  let enjoyments be enjoyed (by him).