+++
title = "011"

+++
11
Indra
Jetar Mādhuchandasa
8 verses: anuṣṭubh
Attributed to a descendant of Madhuchandas, the poet of I.1–10, this relatively  simple hymn has little distinctive about it. Several famous deeds of Indra are men tioned (Vala verse 5, Śuṣṇa verse 7), and our praises and Indra’s countergifts are  celebrated. These general themes are similar to those found in the Indra hymns of  the ancestral Madhuchandas.
The poet is fond of etymological figures: “best charioteer of charioteers” (1c),  “the conqueror who is not to be conquered” (2d), “with your tricks...the tricky...”  (7a), and the probably etymologically unrelated but phonologically similar máṃhate  maghám “grants the bounty” (3d).
## 01
All the songs have strengthened Indra, expansive as the sea,
the best charioteer of charioteers, the lord of prizes and the lord of
settlements.
## 02
In comradeship with you who control the prizes, o Indra, let us not fear,  o lord of power.
We keep crying out to you, the conqueror who is not to be conquered. 3. Many are the gifts of Indra; his forms of help do not become exhausted when he grants to his praisers the bounty of a prize consisting of cattle. 4. He was born as a splitter of strongholds, a youthful poet, possessed of  immeasurable power.
Indra is the sustainer of every deed, the much-praised wielder of the mace. 5. You uncovered the opening of Vala filled with cattle, o possessor of  the stone.
Before the fearless one [=Vala?], the gods, though being pushed back,  came to your aid.
## 06
I came back with your gifts, o champion, announcing (them) to our  boundary river.
O you who long for songs, the bards have approached me: they know of  this (act) of yours.
## 07
With your tricks, Indra, you brought down tricky Śuṣṇa.
The wise know of that (act) of yours. Raise up their fame!
## 08
The praise-songs have cried out to Indra, who holds sway by his might, whose gifts are a thousand or even greater.