+++
title = "012"

+++
12 Agni
Medhātithi Kāṇva
12 verses: gāyatrī
This simple hymn has a high proportion of pādas repeated from other hymns, and  in some ways seems to have been assembled rather than composed. It touches on  the standard characteristics and roles of Agni: messenger, priest, and poet, con veyor of the gods to the sacrifice, and protector and benefactor of men. There is  essentially no description of fire; the focus is entirely on the ritual.
## 1
Agni we choose as messenger, the Hotar affording all possessions, very effective for this sacrifice.104 I.13
## 2
Agni after Agni they always invoke with invocations as the clanlord, conveyor of the oblations, dear to many.
## 3
Agni, convey the gods here, as soon as you are born, for the man who  has twisted the ritual grass.
You are the Hotar, to be reverently invoked by us.
## 4
Awaken the eager ones, when you travel on your mission, o Agni. With the gods sit here on the ritual grass.
## 5
O shining one whose oblation is ghee, burn against those who do harm, o Agni, against demonic beings.
## 6
By Agni is Agni kindled—poet, houselord, youth,
conveying the oblation, with the sacrificial ladle in his mouth.
## 7
Praise Agni, the poet whose ordinances hold true at the ceremony, the god who banishes afflictions.
## 8
The lord of the oblation who honors you as his messenger, o god Agni, for him become a helper.
## 9
The possessor of the oblation who seeks to win Agni to pursue the gods, to him be merciful, o pure one.
## 10
O pure, shining Agni, convey the gods here to us,
right up to our sacrifice and oblation.
## 11
Being praised with our newer song, bring us
wealth, a refreshment made of heroes.
## 12
Agni, with your blazing flame, along with all the invocations to the gods, enjoy this praise of ours right now!