+++
title = "013"

+++
13 Āprī
Medhātithi Kāṇva
12 verses: gāyatrī
This is the first Āprī hymn to be encountered in the R̥gveda of the ten in the text.  In these hymns, associated with a litany during the Animal Sacrifice, a set series  of subjects or key words (here italicized) is treated verse by verse, in fixed order  but with variable wording. This particular Āprī hymn is a much less elaborated  version than some exemplars of this form; in this hymn the default model verse is  a bare mention of the topic as object of the phrase “I invite” (vss. 3, 7, 8, 10, 12).  Description is minimal and for the most part predictable.
## 1
Well-kindled, o Agni, convey the gods here to us, to the man offering  the oblation,
and perform sacrifice, o pure Hotar.
## 2
O Tanūnapāt, make our sacrifice full of honey and make it be among  the gods
today, to be pursued, o poet. 3. Narāśaṃsa, the dear one, I invite here to this sacrifice,
the honey-tongued preparer of the oblation.
## 4
O Agni, on the best-naved chariot convey the gods here when you are  solemnly invoked.
You are the Hotar, installed by Manu.
## 5
Strew in due order the ritual grass with ghee on its back, o
inspirited ones,
where the sighting of the immortal (host) (will be).
## 6
Let them gape open—the Divine Doors, increasing through truth,  inexhaustible—
today and now for sacrifice.
## 7
Night and Dawn, well-ornamented, I invite to this sacrifice,
to sit here on this ritual grass of ours.
## 8
The two well-tongued poets, the Divine Hotars, I invite.
Let them perform this sacrifice for us right here.
## 9
Iḍā, Sarasvatī, Mahī, the three goddesses who are joy itself—
let them sit, unfailing, on the ritual grass.
## 10
Here I invite foremost Tvaṣṭar who provides all forms.
Let him be ours alone.
## 11
Release, o Lord of the Forest, the oblation to the gods, o god.
Let the display of the giver be outstanding.
## 12
With the svāhā-cry perform the sacrifice for Indra in the house of the  sacrificer.
There do I invite the gods.