+++
title = "014"

+++
14
All Gods
Medhātithi Kāṇva
12 verses: gāyatrī
Though this hymn is dedicated to the All Gods, its focus is on Agni’s role in  conveying the gods to the sacrifice and serving as the mouth and tongue through  which they drink the oblations (see esp. vss. 7–8). The All God theme is cleverly  introduced in the first verse by parceling out the phrase “with all these gods,” a  word at the beginning of each pāda (an effect clumsily reproduced in transla
tion), and an enumeration of some of the most important of the gods is given  in verse 3, But otherwise (save for mention of Indra and Vāyu, the recipients  of the first soma offering, in vs. 10) the gods are an undifferentiated group and  backgrounded to Agni.
The poet does not forget his own, however. He mentions his kin-group, the  Kaṇvas, twice (vss. 2, 5) as the ritualists preparing the sacrifice.

## 01
With these, o Agni, hither to friendly service, to hymns—with all (of  them), for soma-drinking—
with the gods, come and perform sacrifice.
## 02
The Kaṇvas have called to you; they hymn your insightful thoughts, o  inspired poet.
With the gods, o Agni, come hither.
## 03
Indra and Vāyu, Br̥haspati, Mitra (and Varuṇa), Agni, Pūṣan, Bhaga, the Ādityas, the Marutian flock (have the Kaṇvas called).
## 04
The drops are brought forward for you (all)—the invigorating,
exhilarating
droplets of honey sitting in the cups.
## 05
Seeking aid they solemnly invoke you, (o Agni)—the Kaṇvas with their  twisted ritual grass
and their oblations, as they make fit preparations.
## 06
Ghee-backed, yoked with mind are the draft-horses that draw you and the gods here to drink the soma.
## 07
Those (gods) deserving the sacrifice, strong through truth—bring them  here along with their wives, Agni.
Make them drink of the honey, you of good tongue.
## 08
Those who deserve the sacrifice, who are to be invoked, let them drink  with your tongue
of the honey, when the vaṣaṭ-call is made, o Agni.
## 09
The inspired poet, the Hotar, will convey all the gods awakening at dawn hither from the luminous realm of the sun.
## 10
With all (the gods), o Agni, with Indra and with Vāyu, drink the  somian honey
according to the ordinances of alliance.
## 11
As the Hotar installed by Manu, Agni, you sit at the sacrifices.
So perform this rite for us now.
## 12
O god, yoke the ruddy (mares) to your chariot, the fallow bays, the  chestnuts.
Then with them convey the gods hither.