+++
title = "015"

+++
15
R̥tudevatāḥ (Sequential Deities)
Medhātithi Kāṇva
12 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn has a precise ritual application: it accompanies a series of ritual offer ings (R̥tugrahas “sequential cups”) made in a fixed order to a fixed sequence of  gods by a similarly fixed sequence of priests, roughly matched in function to  the gods they serve. (See, e.g., Eggeling Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 2: 319 n. 1.) The same sequence is found in the two hymns II.36–37, which together are entirely  parallel to this hymn. (See further remarks in the introductions to those hymns.)  The divine order and the priestly counterparts are the following. (The priests  are not all mentioned by title in this hymn, but those not bracketed are found in  II.36–37.)
## 1
Indra Hotar
## 2
Maruts Potar
## 3
Tvaṣṭar Neṣṭar
## 4
Agni Agnīdh
## 5
Indra/Br̥haspati Brahman
## 6
Mitra and Varuṇa Praśāstar
## 7
Wealth-Giver Hotar
## 8
Wealth-Giver Potar
## 9
Wealth-Giver Neṣṭar
## 10
Wealth-Giver [Achāvāka, in later ritual]
## 11
Aśvins [2 Adhvaryus, in later ritual]
## 12
Agni Gr̥hapati [Yajamāna, in later ritual]
It will be noted that cups 7–10 are dedicated to the same divinity, “Wealth-Giver,”  Draviṇodā(s), a vague figure defined only by his name who is not on the same level  as the other gods, and the associated priests simply repeat the initial order. It has  been convincingly argued by Renou (1950 [1978]) that as the word r̥tú was reinter
preted from merely “sequence, turn” to “season,” the number of divinities in this  litany was increased to twelve to match the months of the year by the insertion of  a simple placeholder. For further on the ritual and its transformation see, inter alia,  Minkowski (1991: 81–89).
## 1
O Indra, drink the soma in your turn. Let the drops enter you,
the invigorating ones finding their home there.
## 2
O Maruts, drink in your turn from the cup of the Potar. Purify the  sacrifice,
for you are the ones of good drops.
## 3
Welcome our sacrifice; o Neṣṭar [=Tvaṣṭar], along with the Wives (of the  Gods), drink in your turn,
for you are the conferrer of treasure.
## 4
O Agni, convey the gods here; make them sit in the three wombs. Attend on them; drink in your turn.
## 5
O Indra, from the Brahman’s largesse drink the soma according to  your turns,
for only your comradeship cannot be brought to ruin.
## 6
You two, o Mitra and Varuṇa of steadfast commandments, have attained  skill difficult to trick
and the sacrifice in your turn.

## 7
As for the Wealth-Giver of wealth—those with the pressing stones in  their hands in the ceremony
solemnly invoke the god at the sacrifices.
## 8
Let the Wealth-Giver give us goods that are famed.
We shall win these for ourselves among the gods.
## 9
The Wealth-Giver desires to drink: pour and set it forth;
send it from the Neṣṭar’s cup by turns.
## 10
When we sacrifice to you, o Wealth-Giver, the fourth time by turns, then become a giver to us.
## 11
O Aśvins, you who have luminous fire and blazing commandments,  drink the honey in your turn, you whose vehicle is the sacrifice.
## 12
Through your lordship in the house, o companion, you are leader of the  sacrifice in your turn.
Sacrifice to the gods for the one who seeks the gods.