+++
title = "017"

+++
17 Indra and Varuṇa
Medhātithi Kāṇva
9 verses: gāyatrī
Like Medhātithi’s other hymns, this address to Indra and Varuṇa is elementary in con tents: the poet calls upon those gods to aid him and give him lavish gifts in exchange  for hymns. The two gods are addressed together, and there is no mention of the dis tinctive qualities of either god. Only in verse 5, the middle verse, are the gods sepa rated, and even there the structures in which they appear are parallel and colorless. In  contrast to the predictable and banal contents, the syntax of the hymn is surprisingly  problematic. There are a number of ellipses that cannot be reliably filled (see, e.g., the  parenthetic additions in verses 3–6) and syntactic clashes that are difficult to rational ize (e.g., in verse 4, whose translation skates over some of the problems). The poet  may have been trying to inject some surprise into a tired poetic assignment.
## 1
I choose the aid of Indra and Varuṇa, the sovereign kings.
They will be gracious to such as us.
## 2
For you two are the ones who come for aid to the call of an inspired poet  like me,
and are the upholders of the settled domains.
## 3
Satisfy (us) according to our desire from your wealth, o Indra and  Varuṇa.
We beseech you two for closest (friendship).
## 4
For we would like to be (part) of the powers of you two,
of your favors that grant victory prizes.
## 5
Indra is (master?) of (favors) that grant thousands, Varuṇa of (riches)  worth proclaiming.
Their resolve becomes worthy of hymns.
## 6
With the aid of just those two might we win and secure (the winnings). And might there be a surplus.
## 7
Indra and Varuṇa, I invoke you two for brilliant bounty.
Make us victors.
## 8
Indra and Varuṇa, just now, while our poetic insights are striving to win  you two,
extend shelter to us.
## 9
Let that lovely praise reach you two, Indra and Varuṇa, which I invoke, which you bring to fulfillment as your joint praise.
