+++
title = "018"

+++
18
Brahmaṇaspati [Lord of the Sacred Formulation] (1–3),  Brahmaṇaspati, Indra, and Soma (4), the Same with Daksiṇ ̣ā (5);  Sadasaspati [Lord of the Seat] (6–8), Sadasaspati or Narāsaḿ ̣sa (9)
Medhātithi Kāṇva
9 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn falls into two parts: verses 1–5 concern Brahmaṇaspati (in part in con junction with other gods), 6–9 Sadasaspati. Though Brahmaṇaspati is a well-estab lished divinity and an allo-form of the even better established Br̥haspati, Sadasaspati  “Lord of the Seat” occurs only here (and once elsewhere, in Medhātithi’s oeuvre,  in the variant epithet sádaspáti used of the dual divinities Indra and Agni, I.21.5).  Thus “lord of the seat” is not a separate divinity, but the functional descriptor of  another god. In our view the god in question is Agni, and the hymn balances the  two major constituents of the sacrifice: the verbal portion overseen by the Lord of  the Sacred Formulation and the physical portion embodied by Agni, the Lord of  the (Ritual) Seat and the conduit for oblations to the gods.
The first part actually says little about the mastery of verbal powers—except by  repeating the name Brahmaṇaspati and, strikingly, by calling on that god to make  the unnamed poet “a Kakṣīvant,” one of the most skilled of R̥gvedic poets, to whom  I.116–126 are ascribed. (Unfortunately, Brahmaṇaspati did not succeed in effecting  this transformation, at least judging from the banality of Medhātithi’s preserved  poems.) Otherwise these first five verses call on the god to help and protect us, espe
cially from hostile speech (vs. 3). Perhaps because the epithet “Lord of the Seat” is  a sort of riddle, the second part of the hymn is more explicit about the activities of  the divinity who has this title, and the descriptions in verses 7 and, especially, 8 make  Agni the clear referent. The final verse (9) begins with another epithet, Narāśaṃsa,  also used of Agni elsewhere, as is the adjective “most extensive” (because of the  spreading of his smoke), and the final phrase “like one besieging the seat of heaven”  can refer to the rising of this smoke toward the sky, taking the oblations with it.
Though, as is generally the case with Medhātithi’s work, the phraseology of the  hymn is not particularly impressive, and it contains a number of phrases borrowed  from other hymns, the complementarity of the two parts and the handling of the  riddling second half make this a more pleasing composition than some of the oth
ers in this group.
## 1
O Lord of the Sacred Formulation, make him a possessor of soma, a  sounding [/sun-like] one,
(make him) a Kakṣīvant, who is (also) descended from fire-priests.
## 2
He who is rich, who smashes afflictions, while finding goods and  increasing prosperity,
let him accompany us, he who is powerful.
## 3
Let not the (male)diction, the malice of the grudging mortal reach us. Guard us, Lord of the Sacred Formulation. 4. That hero is certainly not harmed whom Indra, whom the Lord of the  Sacred Formulation,
whom Soma urges on—(though he is) mortal.
## 5
O Lord of the Sacred Formulation, (protect) him; let Soma and Indra  (protect) the mortal:
Let the Priestly Gift protect (him) from difficult straits.
## 6
The Lord of the Seat, infallible, dear and desirable to Indra,
I have besought for wisdom as our gain.
## 7
Without whom the sacrifice even of one attentive to poetic inspiration  does not succeed,
he drives the team of insightful thoughts.
## 8
Then he brings to success the preparation of the oblation; he advances  the ceremony;
he goes with the libation to the gods.
## 9
“Praise of men” [/Narāśaṃsa], the boldest, most extensive one did I see— like one besieging the seat of heaven.