+++
title = "019"

+++
19
Agni and the Maruts
Medhātithi Kāṇva
9 verses: gāyatrī
The divinity pairing in this hymn—the fire-god Agni and the stormy troop of  Maruts—is an uncommon one and makes little mythological sense and little sense in  R̥gvedic ritual (though in later śrauta ritual there is an Āgnimāruta śastra recited in  the Third Pressing). In fact the pairing exists in this hymn only in its refrain; the first  two pādas of each verse are directed at one or the other: Agni in verses 1, 2, and 9,  the Maruts in vss. 4–8. All of the Marut verses are structured as definitional relative  clauses beginning with yé “which ones, those who,” following the model of hymns  like II.12, and the contents are typical Marut themes. Verse 3 is a curious exception,  for pāda b names the All Gods (or “all the gods”) though in a context and with  a predicate (pāda a) appropriate to the Maruts—and beginning with the same yé.  Medhātithi also identifies the Maruts with the All Gods elsewhere (I.23.10).
## 1
Toward this pleasing ceremony you are called, for its protection.
– With the Maruts, o Agni, come hither.
## 2
For no god nor mortal is beyond the will of you who are great.
– With the Maruts, o Agni, come hither.
## 3
Those who know the great airy realm, the All Gods without deceit— with the Maruts, o Agni, come hither.
## 4
Those who chanted the chant, the strong ones, unassailable through their  strength—
with the Maruts, o Agni, come hither.

## 5
Those who are resplendent, of terrible form, of good dominion, caring  for the stranger—
with the Maruts, o Agni, come hither.
## 6
Those who as gods sit in the luminous realm of the firmament, in  heaven—
with the Maruts, o Agni, come hither.
## 7
Those who make the mountains swing, across the undulating sea— with the Maruts, o Agni, come hither.
## 8
Those who stretch with their reins across the sea with their strength— with the Maruts, o Agni, come hither.
## 9
Toward you I dispatch the somian honey, for you to drink first.
– With the Maruts, o Agni, come hither.