+++
title = "020"

+++
20
R̥bhus
Medhātithi Kāṇva
8 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn works briskly and efficiently through the marvelous feats accomplished  by the R̥bhus, a trio of craftsmen, originally mortal, who attained immortality  and a share in the sacrifice by their skilled work. This last achievement is stated  clearly in the final verse (8; see also 2c, 5), while verses 2–6 enumerate the separate  actions that led to it. Several features give shape to the basic list structure of the  hymn. The name of the divine dedicands appears only once, in the exact middle  of the hymn (vs. 4c), and the adjective “best conferring treasures” of 1c is opened  out into its phrasal syntactic equivalent “confer treasures” in verse 7, providing  a loose ring.
## 1
This praise here has been made for the godly breed by the inspired poets  by mouth—
a praise that best confers treasures.
## 2
Those who fashioned for Indra with mind the two fallow bays yoked by  speech,
they attained the sacrifice through their labors.
## 3
They fashioned for the Nāsatyas an earth-circling, well-naved chariot; they fashioned a juice-yielding milk-cow.
## 4
They whose mantras come true, who aim straight—the R̥bhus—
made their parents young again through their toil.
## 5
Your exhilarating drinks have united with Indra accompanied by  the Maruts
and with the kingly Ādityas.
## 6
And this beaker of the god Tvaṣṭar new produced
you made again into four. 7. On us, on the soma-presser confer treasures, three times seven,
one after the other, for good lauds.
## 8
The conveyors secured and by their good work shared in
the sacrificial share among the gods.