+++
title = "021"

+++
21 Indra and Agni
Medhātithi Kāṇva
6 verses: gāyatrī
Though Indra and Agni are joint recipients of a certain number of R̥gvedic hymns,  they do not form a natural pair (though they do receive a joint offering of soma  in the later śrauta ritual, the Aindrāgnagraha), and the hymns to them rarely rise  above the commonplace—as is true also for this one.
The first four verses are invocation, calling the two gods to the sacrifice and promis ing them praise and soma. The two interior verses (2–3) use the lexeme prá √śaṃs “pro claim, eulogize,” which is later specialized for royal panegyric (the praśastis of classical  inscriptions, etc.), and it may have some of that tone here as well. (For royal associations  of the lexeme in the R̥gveda, see Jamison 2007: 146–48.) In verse 3 the object of the  praśasti is the word mitrá; unlike most commentators, we do not believe that this refers  to the god Mitra, but rather to the abstract “alliance” that Mitra embodies, a sense that  would be appropriate to an official and royal context. The alliance we wish to proclaim  may be (as we have translated it here) the alliance between the two gods, joining two  distinct aspects of Vedic religion, though it could also be their alliance with us.
Verses 5–6 then suggest what these allies can do for us; the final verse is intro duced by the pregnant phrase “by this truth,” characteristic of the later satya-kriyā or “truth-formulation.” Here it presumably refers to the whole preceding hymn as  an expression of truth.
## 1
I call Indra and Agni here. For those two alone we desire a praise hymn. They are the best soma-drinkers of soma.
## 2
Proclaim them at the sacrifices; embellish Indra and Agni, o men. Sing to them in songs.
## 3
We call these two to proclaim their alliance; we call them, Indra and Agni, the two soma-drinkers, to drink soma.
## 4
Those two, though formidable, we will call near to this pressing
pressed here.
Let Indra and Agni come right here.
## 5
As great lords of the seat, Indra and Agni, crush the demonic force. Let the voracious ones be without offspring.
## 6
By this truth be watchful over the footprint of discernment [=ritual  ground].
Indra and Agni, extend (us) shelter.114 I.22