+++
title = "022"

+++
22 Various Gods (Aśvins 1–4, Savitar 5–8, Agni 9–10, Gods 11, Indrāṇī, Varuṇānī, Agnāyī 12, Heaven and Earth 13–14, Earth 15, Viṣṇu or Gods 16, Viṣṇu 17–21)
Medhātithi Kāṇva
21 verses: gāyatrī
The Medhātithi group ends with two lengthy hymns to a variety of divini ties:  the ascriptions of the Anukramaṇī are reproduced above. As Oldenberg  points out (1888: 224–25; Noten ad loc.), both hymns can easily be broken down  into smaller hymns, which then conform to the principles of arrangement in the  Saṃhitā. The clear changes of divinity support the division of this hymn into  smaller units, although Oldenberg’s divisions do not altogether match those  of the Anukramaṇī; Oldenberg’s are clearly superior:  1–4, 5–8, 9–12, 13–15,  16–18, 19–21.
Like the immediately preceding hymn, the first sections of this one are pri marily devoted to invocation of the various gods:  the Aśvins in verses 1–4,  Savitar in 5–8. In a slight variation on this theme, in verses 9–12 Agni is called  upon to bring Tvaṣṭar and the Wives of the Gods to the sacrifice; this divine  group figures in a number of minor rites in the Soma Sacrifice (especially  the Third Pressing) and elsewhere. The next three verses (13–15) concern  Heaven and Earth; the middle verse (14) is the only truly enigmatic one in  the hymn. The final six verses (16–21) consist of two tr̥cas to Viṣṇu, which,  both by the principles of arrangement and by their phraseology, should be  considered two separate hymns. There is no obvious reason, either ritual or  mythological, for collecting these particular short compositions in a single  super-hymn. As Oldenberg argues, the grouping and order seem to be entirely  mechanical.
## 1
Awaken the two who hitch up early in the morning. Let the Aśvins  come here,
to drink of this soma.
## 2
Those two possessing a good chariot who are the best charioteers, both  gods who touch heaven,
the Aśvins we invoke.
## 3
The honeyed whip that is yours, Aśvins, that has a liberal spirit— with that mix the sacrifice.
## 4
For it is not even a little distance from you, when you come in your  chariot
to the house of a man with soma, Aśvins.
## 5
I call upon golden-palmed Savitar for help.
He, through his divinity, is attentive to the track. 6. Praise the Child of the Waters, Savitar, for help.
We desire his commandments.
## 7
We call upon the apportioner of goods, of brilliant bounty,
on Savitar, whose eye is on men.
## 8
Comrades, sit down here: Savitar is now to be praised by us.
The giver beautifies his bounties.
## 9
Agni, convey the eager Wives of the Gods here,
and Tvaṣṭar, for soma-drinking.
## 10
Agni, youngest one, convey the Wives here for help, and
Hotrā Bhāratī,
Varūtrī, Dhiṣaṇā.
## 11
Let the goddesses, Wives of superior men [=gods], attend upon  us greatly with help, with shelter—those with unclipped
wings.
## 12
Here I call upon Indrāṇī, Varuṇānī for well-being,
upon Agnāyī for soma-drinking.
## 13
Let the great ones, Heaven and Earth, mix this sacrifice for us.
Let them carry us through with their support.
## 14
The inspired poets lick the ghee-filled milk of this very pair [=Heaven  and Earth] with their poetic insights,
in the firm footstep of the Gandharva.
## 15
Earth, become comfortable, a place to settle down, not sweeping  men away.
Extend to us widespread shelter.
## 16
Let the gods help us from there whence Viṣṇu strode out
from the earth through the seven domains.
## 17
Viṣṇu strode out this (world); three times he laid down a step:
(this world) is concentrated in his dusty (step).
## 18
He strode three steps, Viṣṇu the undeceivable cowherd,
founding the foundations from there—
## 19
Behold the deeds of Viṣṇu: from (the place) where he watches over the  commandments,
the partner in yoke with Indra,
## 20
That is the highest footstep of Viṣṇu. The patrons always
behold it
stretched out like the eye [=sun] in heaven.
## 21
That do the inspired poets, admiring and wakeful, kindle—
the highest footstep of Viṣṇu.
