+++
title = "023"

+++
23
Various Gods (Vāyu 1, Indra and Vāyu 2–3, Mitra and Varuṇa  4–6, Indra Marutvant 7–9, All Gods 10–12, Pūsan 13–15, Waters ̣ 16–23ab, Agni 23cd–24)
Medhātithi Kāṇva
24 verses: gāyatrī, except puraüṣṇih 19, anuṣṭubh 20, 22–24, pratiṣṭhā 21, arranged  in tr̥cas
Although the principles of hymn arrangement strongly suggest that this twenty four-verse hymn is a composite, consisting of eight individual tr̥cas, the situation  is quite different from the previous hymn, I.22, where the collection was dictated  merely and mechanically by the number of verses in each segment, without a par ticular ritual application. Here the separate tr̥cas follow the order of a structured  recitation in the Morning Pressing, later called the Praügaśastra. Other instances  of this litany are found in R̥gveda I.2–3 and II.41, and to some extent I.139; for a  detailed discussion of the Praügaśastra see the introduction to I.2.
This hymn varies somewhat from the standard Praügaśastra, which has the fol lowing divinities in the following order: Vāyu (1), Indra-Vāyu (2), Mitra-Varuṇa  (3), Aśvins (4), Indra (5), the All Gods (6), Sarasvatī (7). This hymn lacks the Aśvins  in position 4, but in position 5 Indra, instead of being alone, is accompanied by the  Maruts, and though the following tr̥ca (vss. 10–12) is ascribed by the Anukramaṇī to  the All Gods, it is dominated by the Maruts. Since offering to Indra with the Maruts  is made only in the Midday Pressing, and to the Aśvins in the Morning Pressing,  perhaps this version of the litany is shifting its focus to the Midday Pressing and to  the ritual innovation that extended offering to the Maruts, rather than just Indra,  at that pressing. (See further discussion in the introduction to I.165.) Pūṣan is also  added after the All Gods (position 6), and instead of the divine river Sarasvatī in  position 7 we find the functionally similar Waters.
The first three verses to the waters (16–18) bring the Praügaśastra proper to an  end. The last six verses (19–24) are a supplement, in a somewhat Atharvan style,  treating the waters as healers and removers of transgressions. These functions of  the waters bring to mind the “Final Bath” or avabhr̥tha in classical śrauta ritual,  in which the sacrificer and his wife wash each other at the conclusion of the sacri
fice, and these verses may have been included in this hymn in order to encompass  the entire soma-pressing day, from the first offering to Vāyu to the final cleansing.  The middle four verses of this sequence (20–23) are also found in a hymn to the  waters, X.9.6–9, and the introductory and final verses here (19 and 24) may have  been added to create two triplets for this tr̥ca hymn.
As in other of Medhātithi’s hymns, the actual contents are fairly simplistic,  consisting primarily of invocations to the various gods and invitations to the  soma-drinking. Perhaps the most interesting sequence is the tr̥ca to Pūṣan (vss.  13–15), who finds the hidden king and is urged to drive him here “like lost live
stock.” Most commentators identify this king as Soma, but the thematics and  phraseology—particularly the notion of finding and returning a hidden deity—are much more characteristic of Agni, and we have interpreted these verses in that way.  Whether the king is Agni or Soma, however, it is not clear what this snatch of myth  is doing here in this hymn, though Pūṣan’s ability to locate lost cows is proverbial.
## 1
Sharp are the soma drinks—come here. Here are the pressings mixed  with milk.
Vāyu, drink those set forth.
## 2
Both gods who touch the heaven, Indra and Vāyu, do we call,
to drink of this soma.
## 3
Indra and Vāyu, mind-swift, do the inspired poets call for help— the thousand-eyed lords of insight.
## 4
Mitra do we call and Varuṇa, for soma-drinking—
the two born with refined skill.
## 5
Those who through truth increase by truth, the lords of truth, of light, these two, Mitra and Varuṇa, do I call.
## 6
Varuṇa will become a helper, as will Mitra with all forms of help. They will make us well rewarded.
## 7
We call Indra accompanied by the Maruts here for soma-drinking. Along with the troop let him reach satiety.
## 8
Having Indra as chief, the Maruts as troop, and the gifts of Pūṣan,  o gods,
all of you, hear my call.
## 9
Smash Vr̥tra, you of good drops [=Maruts/All Gods], with Indra and  his might as yokemates.
Let no defamer hold sway over us.
## 10
The All Gods we call, the Maruts, for soma-drinking,
for they are strong, with Pr̥śni as their mother.
## 11
The thundering of (you) Maruts, like that of victors, goes boldly, when, o men, you drive in beauty.
## 12
Born out of the laughing lightening, from there let them help us; let the Maruts be merciful to us.
## 13
O Pūṣan, glowing one—the buttress of heaven [=Agni?] with his  glittering ritual grass—
drive him here like lost livestock.
## 14
Pūṣan the glowing has found the king [=Agni], hidden, laid in hiding, with his glittering ritual grass.
## 15
And with drops (of ghee) he will keep driving along to me the six yoked  (flames),
as if plowing a grain(field) with oxen.
## 16
The motherly ones [=waters], siblings, go along the ritual roads of those  who perform the rites,
mixing the milk with honey.

## 17
Those (waters) yonder that are close to the sun, or with whom the sun is— let them propel our rite.
## 18
The goddess Waters do I call upon. Wherever our cows drink,
to the rivers an oblation is to be made.
## 19
Within the waters is deathlessness, in the waters healing, and (it is right)  to glorify the waters.
O gods, become prizewinners.
## 20
“Within the waters,” Soma said to me, “are all healing remedies, and Agni who is weal to all.” And the waters are healing for all.
## 21
O Waters, fully grant healing and protection for my body
and (for me) to see the sun for a long time.
## 22
O Waters, carry this away, whatever trouble is in me—
whether I have committed deceit or I have cursed—as well as untruth. 23. O Waters, today I have followed (you). We have united with your sap. Full of milk, come here, o Agni. Merge me with luster.
## 24
Merge me with luster, Agni, with offspring, with long life.
The gods should know this (hymn?) of mine; Indra should know it
along with the seers.
As Oldenberg (1888: 225) observes, I.24–30, the Śunaḥśepa hymns, like the preced ing Medhātithi hymns (I 12–23), generally follow the organization of the hymns of  Maṇḍala VIII. He argues that irregularities in the placement of I.25, 27, and 30 can  be explained if these hymns are composites of several hymns.
The story of Śunaḥśepa, the putative poet of these hymns, appears in Aitareya  Brāhmaṇa VII 13–18 and Śāṅkhāyana Śrauta Sūtra XV 17–27. According to the  story, King Hariścandra had begged Varuṇa for a son and promised that if Varuṇa  gave him one, he would sacrifice his son to the god. A boy, Rohita, was born to  Hariścandra, but the king managed to delay the sacrifice of his son until Rohita  reached adulthood. When the king could no longer avoid the inevitable sacrifice,  he told Rohita that he was to be sacrificed to Varuṇa. But Rohita refused to be the  sacrificial victim and departed the kingdom. As a result Hariścandra was struck by  dropsy in punishment for not performing the sacrifice.
In his travels Rohita eventually came upon a poor brahmin named Ajīgarta, who  sold his son Śunaḥśepa to Rohita to be a substitute sacrificial victim. Rohita returned  with Śunaḥśepa and Varuṇa accepted the substitution of Śunaḥśepa for Rohita. But  when Śunaḥśepa was bound to the stake and was about to be killed, he appealed to  the gods by reciting I.24.1 to Prajāpati, the god Ka (cf. 1a kásya “of which (god)?”  and 1c káḥ “who?”), 24.2 to Agni, 24.3–5 to Savitar, 24.6–15 and I.25 to Varuṇa,  I.26 and 27.1–12 to Agni, 27.13 to the All Gods, I.29 and 30.1–16 to Indra, 30.17–19  to the Aśvins, and 30.20–22 to Dawn. Each time Śunaḥśepa recited a verse, one of  his bonds was loosened and Hariścandra’s belly became smaller. With the last verse  Śunaḥśepa was free of his bonds and Hariścandra was free of disease. Although I.24 refers directly to Śunaḥśepa and to his rescue by Varuṇa, the story  of Śunaḥśepa in the form in which it told in the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa does not fully  correspond to that at the basis of any of the hymns in this collection. Probably  closer to the R̥gvedic version is that alluded to in the Yajurveda. Taittirīya Saṃhitā
V 2.1.3 and Kāṭhaka Saṃhitā XIX 11 say simply that Śunaḥśepa had been seized by  Varuṇa but then rescued himself from Varuṇa’s bonds.