+++
title = "024"

+++
24 Agni, Savitar, and Varuṇa
Śunaḥśepa Ājīgarti
15 verses: triṣṭubh 1–2, 6–15; gāyatrī 3–5
This hymn consists of three sections in alternating meters, with each section  devoted to a different god. The first two verses in triṣṭubh invoke Agni, then verses  3–5 in gāyatrī address Savitar, and finally the remainder of the hymn, once more  in triṣṭubh, is dedicated to Varuṇa. Despite this variation the hymn is a coherent  composition and not a composite of three hymns wielded together (cf. Oldenberg  1888: 226 n.). Formal evidence for its unity is that Aditi, the goddess who represents  Innocence or Guiltlessness, appears in verses 1 and 2 and then again in the last  verse, verse 15, creating a ring.
Apparently the poet and his people have been afflicted in some way. In the later  Veda dropsy is associated with Varuṇa, and so it could be this or another disease  that troubles the sacrificers. The poet believes that the cause of their affliction is that  Varuṇa is angry with them for some offense they have committed (cf. vs. 11) and  therefore has “bound” them in the bonds of misery.
The first god invoked is Agni, whose presence introduces the ritual that  addresses the plight of the sacrificers. The poet already signals the purpose of  his hymn and rite by asking which god will return his people to Aditi, to the  “Guiltlessness” that the goddess embodies. Aditi is the mother of the Ādityas, and  therefore reference to her leads to mention of the poet’s own mother and father.  The poet implies that because of some offense he might die before his father and  mother. That would be tragic and unnatural, since children should not predecease  their parents.
There follow the three verses to Savitar, which also mention the god Bhaga  “Fortune.” Both Savitar and Bhaga are Ādityas, so the poet is still moving toward  Varuṇa, the greatest of the Ādityas. In verse 3 the poet asks Savitar for a “por tion” (bhāgá) of the wealth that Savitar can bring, and this leads in verse 4 to  mention of the god Bhaga. In verse 4 the priest performing the rite appears to  embody Bhaga because he attains adveṣáḥ “freedom from hostility.” This “hostil ity” represents everything that stands in the way of the life and prosperity of the  poet, but it also prefigures the anger of Varuṇa, from which the poet hopes for  release. The presence of Savitar, who is associated with night, might also suggest

that the rite for which the hymn was composed took place in the evening. In verse  10 also the poet refers to the constellation of Ursa Major and to the moon. But  Varuṇa’s rule is not restricted to the night, since the poet also says that Varuṇa  creates the path for the sun (vs. 8). In verse 7 too the crest of the nyāgrodha or  banyan tree, which sends down aerial roots, may refer to the sun. This would  explain the description of these aerial roots as “beacons” that take root within  humans as the light of inspiration (7c). In verse 12a the rule of Varuṇa over both  night and day is reflected in the truth spoken to the poet at night and by day. It is  a truth toward which the poet’s own intuition—perhaps that light received from  Varuṇa—has struggled (12b).
However, the poet’s concern is not as much with the cosmic roles of Varuṇa as  it is with the bondage Varuṇa has inflicted on the poet and his people. The poet  looks back to Śunaḥśepa as an example of someone who was bound and then  released by Varuṇa. He even merges his own bonds and the bonds of Śunaḥśepa: in  13d the poet’s plea to Varuṇa to “release the fetters” refers to Śunaḥśepa’s bonds  and to the present bonds that afflict him. Once free of those bonds, the poet will  be restored to guiltlessness, under the protection of the commandment of Varuṇa  (vs. 15).
## 1
The dear name of which god, of which of the immortals, shall we recall? Who will return us to great Aditi [/Guiltlessness]? I would see my father  and mother.
## 2
We will recall the dear name of the god Agni, of the first of the
immortals.
He will return us to great Aditi. I would see my father and mother.
## 3
O god Savitar, master of desirable things,
we implore you for a portion, o you who ever give.
## 4
For also the one who is Fortune [/Bhaga], laboring correctly for you  ahead of reproach,
has received freedom from hatred in his hands.
## 5
We would reach upward to (a portion) of that apportioned by Bhaga  through your help,
in order to take hold of the head of wealth.
## 6
Yet not even birds flying yonder have attained your rule, power, or fervor, nor have these waters moving without blinking, nor those [=the gods]  who confound the wind’s formless mass.
## 7
In (the airy realm) without a base, King Varuṇa of purified skill firmly  holds the crest of the (nyāgrodha) tree on high.
They [=its trunks] reach downward, their base above. They should be set  down as beacons within us.
## 8
Since King Varuṇa made a broad path for the sun to follow,
he has created two feet for the footless (sun) to give it support, and he  exorcises even what pierces the heart. 9. A hundred healers are yours, o king, a thousand. Let your favor be  broad and deep.
Drive dissolution far away into the distance. Release from us even the  guilt we have created.
## 10
Yonder Bears [=stars of Ursa Major], set on high, are visible at night;  they have gone somewhere else by day.
The commandments of Varuṇa cannot be cheated: the moon goes at  night, earnestly looking around.
## 11
Extolling you with my formulation, I implore this of you; with his  offerings the sacrificer hopes for this:
Become no longer angry now, Varuṇa! O you of wide fame, do not steal  away our lifetime!
## 12
They say to me just this at night, this by day; my intuition looks out  here from my heart toward this:
The one whom Śunaḥśepa called upon when he was seized, let him,  King Varuṇa, release us!
## 13
Since Śunaḥśepa, seized and bound in three stocks, called upon the  Āditya,
King Varuṇa should set him loose. Let him—the knowing one, never  cheated—release the fetters.
## 14
We beg to appease your anger by our acts of reverence, Varuṇa, appease  it by our sacrifices and offerings.
Holding sway, o attentive lord and king, you will loosen for us the guilt  we have created.
## 15
Loosen above the uppermost fetter from us, o Varuṇa, below the lowest,  away the midmost.
Then under your commandment, o Āditya, we would be without
offense for Aditi [/Guiltlessness].