+++
title = "025"

+++
25 Varuṇa
Śunaḥśepa Ājīgarti
21 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in tr̥cas
Oldenberg suggests that the first four tr̥cas of this hymn (vss. 1–12) originally  formed one hymn, and the last three (vss. 13–21), a second one. One indication of  this division is that verse 12 reads like a concluding verse. Thematically, however,  the two parts of the hymn both emphasize the sovereignty of Varuṇa, and the hymn  as a whole begins (3a) and ends (19b) with an appeal for his mercy. So if this is a  composite hymn, it is nonetheless a coherent one.
One repeated pattern in this hymn is the movement from Varuṇa’s distance,  which can mark his displeasure, to his closeness. The first tr̥ca, for example, fears

the offense that the poet might have given Varuṇa and the anger of the god. In the  second the poet speaks of his songs, which will dispel the god’s fury, and his hopes  that he will bring Varuṇa near (5). He concludes that Mitra and Varuṇa are never  far from one who serves them (6c). The closeness of Varuṇa is again the theme of  the fifth tr̥ca (vss. 13–15), which opens the second part of the hymn. Varuṇa first  appears in majesty, wearing the mantle of a king (13a), but at the same time, like a  king, he is also very near. His spies are everywhere (13c) and no deceit or evildoing  escapes his attention (14). The last verse of the tr̥ca combines his majesty and his  presence. In verse 15 the poet repeats ā́ “here” three times at the end of each of its  three pādas, culminating in the unexpected and dramatic assertion that Varuṇa’s  glory is “right here within our bellies.” We understand the presence of Varuṇa’s  glory in the belly as signifying the radical closeness of Varuṇa, but there are other  ways of interpreting it. The reference to “bellies” has led Geldner, for example, to  understand this as a healing hymn for dropsy, a disease associated with Varuṇa.  The final plea for release from fetters, which occurs also as the last verse of I.24,  offers support for this interpretation. Nevertheless, we regard it as unlikely. It does  not suit the context of verse 15, and the fact that verse 21 is the final verse of  the preceding hymn implies that it is a formal conclusion, not a critical thematic  statement.
The same movement from distance to proximity also occurs in the sixth tr̥ca.  In its first verse (16) the poet says his insights go far away, looking for Varuṇa;  in its last (18) the poet sees Varuṇa and his chariot here on earth. The middle  verse is obscure, although in one way or another it describes the movement of  the god and the poet toward one another, since the poet asks the god to come  to an agreement with him. The “honey” the poet serves is probably not soma,  even though soma is often called “honey” or “honeyed.” Since the poet begins  the tr̥ca with a reference to his “insights,” the honey in verse 17 is more likely his  song, for speech also can be “honeyed” (cf. I.78.5). More difficult is the honey  that is brought to the poet by the god. Perhaps it is the rain, which can also  be “honey” (III.62.16, V.69.2ab), and perhaps too the waters and the rain are  the visible signs of Varuṇa’s presence that the poet sees according to verse 18.  Varuṇa’s control over the rain is an aspect of his kingship: compare VII.49.3,  “In the middle of which king Varuṇa travels, looking down upon the truth and  falsehood of the peoples, / those, clear and pure, that drip honey—let those  waters, goddesses, help me here.”
## 1
Even if every day we confound your commandment, o god Varuṇa, as clans (do their king’s commandment),
## 2
Do not subject us to your deadly weapon when you are enraged,
nor to your fury when you are angry.
## 3
For your mercy we would unbind your thought (from such anger), like a  charioteer a horse that has been tied,
by our songs, Varuṇa. 4. For my fury-dispelling (songs) fly afar to seek a better thing,
like birds toward their nests.
## 5
When will we attract broad-gazing Varuṇa—the superior man, glorious  in his rule—
to gain his mercy?
## 6
The two [=Mitra and Varuṇa] have attained just that (rule) in common.  Keeping watch, they do not keep to a distance
for the pious man who upholds their commandments.
## 7
He who knows the track of birds flying through the midspace,
knows the (courses of the) boats, since he belongs to the sea.
## 8
He whose commandments are upheld knows the twelve months and  their offspring [=the half-months];
he knows the one that is born afterward [=the thirteenth month].
## 9
He knows the trail of the wind—of the broad, towering, and lofty  (wind);
he knows those [=the Maruts] who sit upon it.
## 10
He whose commandments are upheld, Varuṇa sat down among the  dwelling places,
for the sake of his universal kingship—he whose resolve is strong.
## 11
From there, watchful, he looks upon all (deeds), unmistakable
(to him)—
both those done and those that must be done.
## 12
Of strong resolve, the Āditya will make for us easy paths throughout  the days.
He will extend our lifetimes.
## 13
Wearing a golden mantle, Varuṇa dons his cloak.
His spies have seated themselves all around.
## 14
The god whom those inclined to deceit do not try to deceive, nor do the  deceitful ones among men,
nor do the hostile plotters,
## 15
And who has created glory here for himself—and not by halves!— among the sons of Manu,
right here within our bellies.
## 16
My insights go afar, like cows going after pasture-lands,
seeking him of broad gaze.
## 17
Let us two now again come to an agreement as soon as (your) honey  has been brought here to me,
(for me) to serve up my own dear (honey) like a Hotar.
## 18
Now I see him, lovely for all to see; I see his chariot upon the earth. He enjoys these songs of mine.124 I.26
## 19
Now hear my call, Varuṇa, and today have mercy.
It is you whom I desire, seeking help.
## 20
You, wise one, rule over all, both heaven and earth.
Listen in response to my entreaty.
## 21
Release above the uppermost fetter from us, unbind away the midmost, (loosen) below those lowest, in order for us to live.