+++
title = "026"

+++
26
Agni
Śunaḥśepa Ājīgarti
10 verses: gāyatrī
On the surface this is a simple and straightforward Agni hymn, in part assem bled from pre-made phrases, but in its development it traces an argument below  the surface that leads to some surprising conclusions. The argument begins in  verse 3 by drawing attention to the mutuality of relationships (friend–friend,  comrade–comrade), even of those between hierarchically arranged pairs (father/ son). The poet then points out the comradeship between us and Agni (vs. 5),  which leads to the balanced construction of verse 7, again emphasizing the  mutual relationship between us and Agni: he is dear to us and we to him. That  this relationship is also hierarchical is gently implied by identifying him as our  clanlord. By picking up the final term in verse 7, the multivalent word svagní,  which can mean both “having good fires” and “having good Agni,” and deploy ing it, again in a balanced construction, in verse 8, the poet subtly shifts to  making the gods our partners, not merely Agni, who has become merely the  token of this relationship between us and the gods. The hierarchical distance  has been increased, but only step-by-step. The climax (however underplayed)  comes in verse 9, which calls for mutual encomia (práśasti) between mortals and  immortals—in other words, it demands that immortals produce praise for us,  as we do for them. The word práśasti is a charged one, referring to the formal  praise of kings as well as gods (see Jamison 2007: 146–48; see also I.21 above).  Though the conceptual development of the hymn is quite uninsistent, and the  simple rhythms of the gāyatrī meter can lull the audience into inattention, the  end result, when examined, is quite radical.
## 01
Put on your garments, you partaker of the sacrificial meal and lord of  nourishments,
and so perform this rite for us.
## 02
Take your seat as our Hotar, worthy to be chosen by our thoughts and heaven-bound speech, o youngest Agni.
## 03
For a father always sacrifices on behalf of his son, a friend on behalf of  his friend,
a comrade worth choosing on behalf of his comrade. 4. Let Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman, who care for the stranger, take their seats here on our ritual grass, as if (on that) of Manu.
## 05
O ancient Hotar, rejoice in this (ritual grass) and in our comradeship; listen well to these songs here.
## 06
For even when we sacrifice to god after god in unbroken succession, it is just in you that the oblation is poured.
## 07
Let him be our dear clanlord—the delighting Hotar worthy to be  chosen;
let us be dear (to him) and (so) possess good fires.
## 08
Since the gods have good Agni (among them) and established him as a  choice thing for us,
we consider ourselves to possess good fires [/Agni].
## 09
So then, of us both, mortals (and immortals), o immortal one,
let there be encomia each for the other.
## 10
O Agni, along with all the fires, take delight in this sacrifice and in this  speech,
o young (son) of strength.