+++
title = "027"

+++
27
Agni (1–12), Gods (13)
Śunaḥśepa Ājīgarti
13 verses: gāyatrī, except triṣṭubh 13
This second Agni hymn in the Śunaḥśepa collection is longer than the first (I.26),  and is therefore likely to be a composite. This conjecture is supported by the metri cal evidence, in that verses 1–6 and 10–12 are in trochaic gāyatrī, while the interven ing verses 7–9 have no trochaic pādas. These three verses (7–9) are also thematically  unified by a focus on a mortal, aided by Agni, who seeks a prize.
The rest of the hymn is more diffuse in content and surprisingly awkward in  phraseology. The final verse (13), in triṣṭubh, makes no mention of Agni and may  have been tacked onto this already loosely structured assemblage because its signa ture word námas “reverence” matches the last word of the first hemistich of verse 1,  námobhiḥ “with reverences.”
## 01
(This is) to extol you, Agni, with reverences—you bringing choice things  [/long-tailed] like a horse,
ruling over the rites completely.
## 02
Might the son (of strength) by his strength, very kindly, of broad advance, become our benefactor.
## 03
Both from afar and from nearby, from the mortal who wishes ill
protect us always, you who last a whole lifetime.
## 04
This, our winnings, our newer song,
you shall proclaim among the gods, o Agni.

## 05
Give us a share in the furthest prizes, in the midmost ones;
seek mastery over the closest good thing (for us).
## 06
You are the apportioner, o bright-beamed one. (As if) on the wave of a  river, in the nearness
and all at once you stream for the pious man.
## 07
The mortal whom you will help in battles, o Agni, whom you will spur  on to the prizes,
he will hold fast to unfailing refreshments.
## 08
No one will circumscribe anything of his, o overpowering one:
there is a prize worthy of fame (for him).
## 09
Let him, belonging to all domains, be the one who overtakes the prize  with his steeds.
Together with the inspired poets let him be the winner.
## 10
Awake and sing! Bring this about: for the one worthy of sacrifice for  every clan,
for Rudra [=Agni], a praise song that is beauty to be seen.
## 11
Let him who is great without measure, much glittering but possessing a  beacon of smoke,
urge us on to insight and to the prize.
## 12
Like a rich clanlord, let the divine beacon listen to us
along with our hymns—Agni of lofty radiance.
## 13
Reverence to the great ones and reverence to the small; reverence to the  young and reverence to those advanced (in years).
Let us offer sacrifice to the gods if we will be able. Let me not twist
away the laud for one more powerful in my direction, o gods.