+++
title = "028"

+++
28
Indra (1–4), the Mortar (5–6), the Mortar and Pestle (7–8),  Prajāpati Hariścandra or the Soma-Pressing Hide (9)
Śunaḥśepa Ājīgarti
9 verses: triṣṭubh 1–6, gāyatrī 7–9
This brief and somewhat racy hymn has attracted a great deal of scholarly atten tion. Most scholarly treatments are more or less in agreement with Geldner’s  interpretation, signaled already in his title “Die vereinfachte Somapressung” (The  Simplified Soma-Pressing). In this interpretation the hymn depicts an abbreviated  soma-pressing done at home, on the spur of the moment and without formality, by  a sacrificer and his wife, using normal household implements, the mortar (ulū́khala)  and pestle, to pound the soma stalks. The participation of the wife occasioned  the slightly salacious comparisons between the pounding and sexual intercourse.  A woman, presumably the wife, is mentioned explicitly once, in a word play that  implicitly compares her regular movements in wielding the mortar with rhythmic  sexual movement (vs. 3). Despite the weight of scholarly opinion, we consider this literal interpretation  quite unlikely, because the precious and prized substance soma, the focus of the  most elaborate non-royal rites, can hardly have been used for a slapdash, playful  domestic entertainment. Instead, this hymn should be considered together with a  number of others in the late R̥gveda in which women figure in controversial or con
tested roles (e.g., I.179, X.10, X.102, X.109). In our view (see Jamison 2011, forth coming a, forthcoming b, in addition to background in 1996a), the late R̥gveda saw  the introduction of a new ritual model, in which the Wife of the Sacrificer partici pated in the ritual along with her husband and the other male functionaries. This  innovation was, we believe, being bitterly debated by theologians in this period, and  the debate can be discerned beneath the surface of such hymns.
This particular hymn alludes to the new ritual model incorporating the Sacrificer’s  Wife by presenting the solemn soma-pressing as if it were a domestic procedure, utiliz ing tools to be found in every kitchen, the proper domain of the Wife. An implicit iden tification between domestic paraphernalia and that of solemn ritual is found already  in the first verse, where the standard high-ritual word for the pressing stone (grā́van) is  juxtaposed with that for the domestic mortar (ulū́khala). (See also Atharvaveda IX.6.15  with the same identification: yā́ny ulūkhalamusalā́ni grā́vāṇa evá té “the mortar and  pestle—they are the pressing stones,” in a hymn that systematically presents a series of  such statements.) The final verse (9) returns to technical terms for soma equipment in  solemn ritual (camū “cup”; ́ pavítra “filter”; gór ádhi tvací “upon the hide of the cow”),  thus affirming that a real soma sacrifice has indeed been performed. Perhaps the most  important technical term in that verse is śiṣṭá (in the sandhi sequence úc chiṣṭám < úd +  śiṣṭám; cf. later úcchiṣṭa “leftover”): in later śrauta ritual the Wife is particularly active in  the Third Pressing and the soma offered there is “left-over” soma. We thus see the ritual  notion of the “leftover” already associated with the Wife here.
Since one of the aims of introducing the Sacrificer’s Wife into ritual was to  inject sexuality and fertility into the previously sterile realm of sacrifice, the  double-entendres throughout the hymn have a (semi-)serious purpose. As often with  sexual phraseology, the exact intent is sometimes difficult to figure out (e.g., vs. 6).
And what does our poet think about the new model? Although treating the  soma-pressing as if it were a cooking demonstration might seem to debase and  desolemnize it, the cheerful tone and the reassuring presence of Indra, the consum mate soma-drinker (who also seems to favor the introduction of the Wife in other  hymns), appears to indicate approval of the ritual innovation.
## 1
When the pressing stone with its broad bottom becomes erect in order  to press,
you, Indra, will keep gulping down the mortar-pressed (soma drops). 2. When the pair of pressing boards are formed like two buttocks,
you, Indra, will keep gulping down the mortar-pressed (soma drops). 3. When the woman puts her best into thrusting back and forth,
you, Indra, will keep gulping down the mortar-pressed (soma drops).

## 4
When they bind the churning stick on both sides like reins to
control it,
you, Indra, will keep gulping down the mortar-pressed (soma drops). 5. For even though you are hitched up in house after house, little mortar, here speak most brilliantly, like the drum of victors.
## 6
And, o lord of the wood [=pestle?], the wind blows through your top. So then, press the soma for Indra to drink, o mortar.
## 7
These two [=mortar and pestle? / jaws of the soma press?] gain by  sacrifice and are the best prizewinners, since they keep pulling
apart above,
chewing the stalks like a pair of fallow bays.
## 8
Today, you two lords of the wood, towering, with the towering pressers press our honeyed (drink) for Indra.
## 9
Bring what is leftover up into the two wooden cups. Send the soma  surging into the filter.
Put it down upon the hide of the cow.