+++
title = "029"

+++
29 Indra
Śunaḥśepa Ājīgarti
7 verses: paṅkti
The last three pādas of each five-pāda verse in this hymn constitute a refrain beg ging Indra to give us hope of acquiring abundant livestock. The refrain fits well  in the first two verses, but then the hymn takes an odd turn, expressing increasing  hostility toward a variety of unidentified or unidentifiable (see the near hapaxes in  vss. 6–7) beings, while continuing to hope blandly for cows and horses in the refrain.  The hymn is reminiscent of the “sleep charm” (VII.55), though the latter is more  benign in intent, and I.29 also has an Atharvan cast.
## 1
Even when we are devoid of hope, as it were, o you true drinker  of soma,
give us hope for resplendent cows and horses in the thousands, o
powerfully generous Indra.
## 2
O you of the (lovely) lips, you potent lord of prizes—with your
wondrous skill
give us hope for resplendent cows and horses in the thousands, o
powerfully generous Indra.
## 3
Put to sleep the two of opposite appearance [=birds of ill-omen?]; let  those two females sleep unawakening.
– Give us hope for resplendent cows and horses in the thousands, o
powerfully generous Indra. 4. Let them sleep who offer no gifts, but let your gifts be awake, o
champion.
– Give us hope for resplendent cows and horses in the thousands, o  powerfully generous Indra.
## 5
Pulverize the donkey braying in that evil way, o Indra.
– Give us hope for resplendent cows and horses in the thousands, o  powerfully generous Indra.
## 6
Along with the female kuṇḍr̥ṇācī [=bird of ill-omen?] the wind will fly far  away from the woods.
– Give us hope for resplendent cows and horses in the thousands, o  powerfully generous Indra.
## 7
Smash every howler; crush the female kr̥kadāśū [=another bird of ill-omen?]. – Give us hope for resplendent cows and horses in the thousands, o  powerfully generous Indra.