+++
title = "030"

+++
30
Indra (1–16), Aśvins (17–19), Dawn (20–22)
Śunaḥśepa Ājīgarti
22 verses: gāyatrī, except triṣṭubh 16, arranged in tr̥cas
The first five tr̥cas (vss. 1–15) are dedicated to Indra, with the following verse (16),  in a different meter, serving as a summary verse for this, the major part of the hymn.  There follow one tr̥ca (vss. 17–19) dedicated to the Aśvins and one (vss. 20–22) to  Dawn. All of these gods are, of course, associated with the rituals of early morning.
Although the contents of the hymn are fairly standard—praise and invitation to  the gods and requests for their help and gifts—the syntax can be fussy and tricky.  See especially the final tr̥ca to Indra (vss. 13–15), whose structure and import are  not entirely clear. The portion of the hymn devoted to Indra focuses especially on  the mutuality of our relationship as his comrades (see esp. vss. 6–12), and the theme  of prizes and prize contests is prominent as well.
## 01
As (we) seek the victory prize for you, with (soma) drops I sprinkle Indra  like a blood-red (horse)—
most bounteous (Indra) of a hundred resolves.
## 02
The (soma), which is a hundred pure (draughts) or a thousand mixed  with milk,
flows here as if into the deep.
## 03
When they come together for the exhilaration of the tempestuous one,  just by that in his belly
he acquires an expanse like the sea.
## 04
This (soma) here is yours: you rush to it like a dove to its nest.
I shall also solemnly proclaim this speech of ours.

## 05
You whose praise song it is—o lord of bounties, o hero whose vehicle  is songs—
let your liberality be extensive.
## 06
Stand erect to help us at this prize-contest, o you of a hundred resolves. Let us make pledge to each other at the other (contests).
## 07
At every hitching up (for battle), at every prize-contest we call to the  more powerful one—
as his comrades (we call) to Indra for help.
## 08
Surely he will come—when he will hear it—with his thousandfold forms  of help,
with the victory prizes, to our call.
## 09
Following the (custom) of your ancient house, I call upon the excellent  man, powerful in opposition,
upon whom your father before called.
## 10
We hope for you, o much-called-upon granter of all requests, o good comrade for the singers—
## 11
O soma-drinker among us (well-)lipped soma-drinkers,
o mace-wielding comrade among (us, your) comrades.
## 12
Just so let it be, o soma-drinker; o mace-wielding comrade, make it just so as we wish for you to want it.
## 13
Let there be rich (refreshments?) bringing powerful prizes for us for our  joint exhilaration in company with Indra—
(refreshments) with which we, rich in livestock, might reach
exhilaration.
## 14
As one like you, o bold one, obtained in person for the praisers, being  implored (by them),
you fit out (the refreshments) (as you) fit an axle between two wheels, 15. When you fit out your friendship and fit out the desire of the singers, o  you of a hundred resolves,
with your abilities, (as you fit) the axle.
## 16
With his (horses) constantly snorting, bellowing, and panting, again  and again Indra has conquered the stakes.
He of wondrous skill (has given) us a golden chariot—he the winner for  us to win (it)—he has given it to us.
## 17
O Aśvins, drive here with your drink providing powerful refreshment  and accompanied by horses
(along your circuit) that brings cows and gold, o wondrous ones. 18. For your immortal chariot, (always) taking the same route,
speeds upon the sea, o wondrous Aśvins. 19. You two anchored (one) wheel of your chariot on the head of the  inviolable (bull);
the other speeds around heaven.
## 20
Which mortal is to enjoy you, o immortal Dawn, you fair-weather friend? To whom will you come near, far-radiant one?
## 21
For we have brought you to mind from both near and far,
o you, dappled bright and ruddy like a mare.
## 22
Come here with these prizes, o daughter of heaven.
Lay wealth as a foundation for us.
The next five hymns (31–35) are attributed to Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa, and include  one of the most famous hymns in the R̥gveda, I.32, the great Indra-Vr̥tra hymn,  and several that deserve more fame than they have, especially I.33, a mirror-image  companion piece to I.32.