+++
title = "031"

+++
31
Agni
Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa
18 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 8, 16, 18
A rigid verse-initial sequence provides an obvious skeletal structure for this  hymn: each of the first fifteen verses opens with tvám agne “you, o Agni” (or minor  variants thereupon). The remaining three verses (16–18) maintain the second-posi tion vocative agne, but place other items in first position—a typical loosening of  structure toward the end of a hymn.
Superimposed on this strict repetition is a less insistent structure of thematic  ring composition. The opening of the hymn (vss. 1–4) treats the primal installa tion of Agni in the sacrifice, a theme reinforced by the word prathamáḥ “first” sta tioned after the first two words in verses 1–3. Demigods and legendary ancestral  mortals are named in these verses, and some of them return in verse 17, the last  verse before the summary verse (18), in which Agni is explicitly urged to perform  the same actions for us as he did for them in earlier times. In between is the ritual  here-and-now. Verses 5–8 detail the aid that Agni gives to a devoted priest in the  ritual. In verses 9–11 Agni’s relationship to his worshiper is depicted more expan sively: he is a father to us with all of a father’s care, but, in a paradox much loved  by Vedic bards, Agni is also a son, both of the kindling sticks (vs. 9) and of the  priests who wield those sticks (vs. 11). Verse 11 connects the primal creation of Agni  treated at the beginning of the hymn with the current ritual, in which Agni is the son  of “a father as trifling as me.”
The remainder of the hymn (esp. vss. 12–15) begs for Agni’s protection for the  sacrificer and his group, and continues the themes both of Agni’s paternal care (vss.

14, 16) and the weakness and unworthiness of those he cares for (vss. 13–14). The  poet cleverly uses this acknowledged weakness to his advantage by asking Agni to  forgive and forget what we have done wrong in the ritual (vs. 16). There follows the  ring-compositional reminiscence of Agni’s primal installation (vs. 17). As often, the  final verse (18) is somewhat extra-hymnic, in that it sums up the hymn that precedes  with an introductory formula, eténa...bráhmaṇā “through this sacred formula
tion,” designed to simulate Agni’s favor.
## 1
You, Agni, the first Aṅgiras, the seer, the god, became a kindly comrade  of the gods.
Under your commandment were born the sage poets working with their  know-how—the Maruts with glinting spears.
## 2
You, Agni, first and best of the Aṅgirases, as sage poet you tend to the  commandment of the gods,
extending to all creation, wise, (and though) having (just) two mothers,  lying down in so many places for Āyu.
## 3
You, Agni—first become manifest to Mātariśvan; with a display of your  good resolve (become manifest) to Vivasvant.
The two world-halves trembled at the choice of (you as) Hotar. You  tolerated the burden; you sacrificed to the great ones, o good one.
## 4
You, Agni, made heaven bellow for Manu, for Purūravas; for him of  good action [=sacrificer? priest?] you act (even) better,
when through your swelling in your two parents [=the kindling sticks]  you are set free. They [=priests] have led you here to the east, then
again to the west.
## 5
You, Agni, a bull increasing prosperity, should be celebrated by the  (priest) who holds up the offering spoon,
who knows his way around the poured offering and the vaṣaṭ-cry—you  who, throughout your single lifetime, seek to attract the (divine) clans  at the beginning (of the sacrifice).
## 6
You, Agni, in fellowship at the ceremony safely bring the man
on the twisting turns (of the ritual “racecourse”) to the end, o
unbounded one,
you who—at the contest of champions, at the crucial turn, when the  stake (is set)—even with just a few you smash the greater in the clash. 7. You, Agni, establish that mortal in highest immortality for fame day  after day,
you who, yourself thirsting, create refreshment for both breeds [=men  and gods] and a pleasurable meal here for the patron.
## 8
You, Agni—for us to win the stakes, make our bard glorious while you  are being praised.
Might we bring to fulfillment the (ritual) act through a new (poetic)  worker. O Heaven and Earth, along with the gods—help us. 9. You, Agni, in the lap of your two parents, the god wakeful among the  gods, o faultless one—
become body-creator [=father] and (fatherly) solicitude for our bard.  You, lovely one, have strewn every good thing here.
## 10
You, Agni, are (fatherly) solicitude, you a father to us. You are creator  of vitality; we are your kin.
Riches in hundreds, in thousands converge on you, the well-heroed
protector of the commandment, o undeceivable one.
## 11
You, Agni, did the gods create as the first Āyu for Āyu, as the clanlord  of Nahuṣa.
Iḍā they created as instructress of mankind: that the son [=Agni] is
born of a father as trifling as me [=sacrificer].
## 12
You, god Agni—along with your protectors, watch over our benefactors  and ourselves, o you to be extolled.
You are the guardian over the lineage of offspring and cattle,
unblinkingly watchful in accord with your commandment.
## 13
You, Agni, are kindled as intimate protector, four-eyed, for the
worshipful one who lacks even a quiver,
you who, with the bestowed oblation, for nourishment safe from wolves  even for the weak, win this mental spell (for him) with your mind.
## 14
You, Agni, (are kindled as protector) for the cantor chanting far  and wide. What is the highest legacy worth seeking—that you win
(for him).
Even of the feeble you are called (fatherly) solicitude and father. You
instruct the simple, (instruct) the quarters, as the one who knows better. 15. You, Agni, like (well-)stitched armor, protect all around the man whose  priestly gift has been proffered.
Whoever (as host), serving sweet food, providing a comfortable place  in his dwelling, performs the sacrifice of a living thing, he is the very  measure of heaven.
## 16
This (ritual) breach of ours, Agni—make it forgotten; make us forget  this way which we have come on from afar.
You are friend, father, solicitude for those offering soma, a whirling  creator of seers for mortals.
## 17
As (you did) for Manu, o Agni, as for Aṅgiras, o Aṅgiras, as for Yayāti,  as (you did) earlier, o flame,
drive here to your seat; convey hither the heavenly folk; make them sit  on the ritual grass and, you, perform sacrifice to the beloved.
## 18
Through this sacred formulation, o Agni, keep growing strong—the one  that we have made for you by skill or by knowledge.
And lead us forth toward a better state; join us with your benevolence  conferring prizes.134 I.32