+++
title = "032"

+++
32 Indra
Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This justly famous hymn tells of Indra’s most significant victory, his triumph over  Vr̥tra and the release of the waters, in perhaps the clearest treatment of this primal  myth in the R̥gveda. Vr̥tra was a gigantic cobra who lay coiled around a mountain  within which all the waters were entrapped. In his battle with Indra, Vr̥tra spread  his “shoulders,” his cobra’s hood, and struck at Indra with his fangs, but Indra  finally killed Vr̥tra with his mace, broke open the mountain, and let the waters  pour out. They then flowed to Manu (vs. 8), who was the first sacrificer, and by  implication to his descendants. Vr̥tra’s name means “obstacle,” and this victory over  “Obstacle” is therefore paradigmatic for Indra’s victory over all obstacles.
Despite the relative clarity of the treatment of the Vr̥tra battle, the hymn has  a curious structure, obsessively circling around and alternately focusing in on and  drawing back from the moment of dramatic confrontation between the adversar ies. After the initial verses of summary and the preliminaries to the battle (vss.  1–4), the next three verses (5–7) depict the battle, and it is portrayed as extremely  one-sided, with the overconfident Vr̥tra overmatched from the beginning and deci sively smashed by Indra. (The signature verb of the first section of the hymn is  √han “smash, smite.”) Defeated and dismembered, Vr̥tra lies there (the signature  verb of this section is √śī “lie”) with his mother, and the released waters flow over  them (8–11). After this interlude the hymn returns to a new description of the  battle (12–13), which in this reprise is depicted as far more of an even match. Vr̥tra  strikes at Indra with his fangs and deploys various natural forces against his adver sary. This more equal battle is encapsulated in the perfectly balanced construction  índraś ca yád yuyudhā́te áhiś ca “when Indra and the serpent fought each other... ”  (13c). It is unclear why the first triumphalist account has been revised to the more  ambiguous, less glorious version—though both, of course, end with Vr̥tra’s defeat.
The most mysterious part of this hymn is the conclusion. Vr̥tra is dead, and  even his mother Dānu has been killed, so there is no possibility of a new Vr̥tra. And  yet Indra apparently becomes terrified and flies across the rivers “like a frightened  falcon.” Perhaps this puzzling ending is related to the second version of the battle,  in which Indra does not have quite the unchallenged heroic role that he plays in  the first version. The poet does not explain but in the last verse simply returns to a  praise of Indra as victor and king.
## 1
Now I shall proclaim the heroic deeds of Indra, those foremost deeds  that the mace-wielder performed:
He smashed the serpent. He bored out the waters. He split the bellies of  the mountains.
## 2
He smashed the serpent resting on the mountain—for him Tvaṣṭar had  fashioned the resounding [/sunlike] mace. Like bellowing milk-cows, streaming out, the waters went straight down  to the sea.
## 3
Acting the bull, he chose for his own the soma. He drank of the pressed  soma among the Trikadrukas [=the Maruts?].
The generous one took up his missile, the mace. He smashed him, the  first-born of serpents.
## 4
When you, Indra, smashed the first-born of serpents and then beguiled  the wiles of the wily ones,
then, giving birth to the sun, the heaven, and the dawn, since that time  you have surely never found a rival.
## 5
Indra smashed Vr̥tra [/Obstacle] the very great obstacle, whose
shoulders were spread apart, with his mace, his great weapon.
Like logs hewn apart by an axe, the serpent would lie, embracing the  earth [/soaking the earth (with his blood)].
## 6
For, like a drunken non-warrior, he challenged the hard-pressing great  hero whose is the silvery drink [=soma].
(Vr̥tra) did not withstand the attack of his weapons. His mouth
destroyed by the shattering blow, he whose rival was Indra was
completely crushed.
## 7
Handless and footless, he gave battle to Indra. (Indra) smashed his  mace upon his back.
A steer who tried to be the measure of a bull, Vr̥tra lay there, flung
apart in many places.
## 8
*Delivering themselves to Manu, the waters go over him like a split  reed—lying in that way.
Those very ones whom Vr̥tra in his greatness once surrounded—at their feet lay the serpent.
## 9
The strength of Vr̥tra’s mother ebbed; Indra bore his weapon down  upon her.
The mother was above; the son below: Dānu lies like a milk-cow with  her calf.
## 10
In the middle of the turning posts of the never-standing, never-resting  (waters), his body sank down.
The waters move widely over the private parts of Vr̥tra. He whose rival  was Indra lay there in the long darkness (of death).
## 11
The waters stood still—their husband was the Dāsa; their herdsman,  the serpent—hemmed in like the cows by the Paṇi.
What was the hidden opening for the waters—that Indra uncovered  after he smashed Vr̥tra.
## 12
You, Indra, then became the tail of a horse when he struck his fangs at  you—you, the god alone.
You conquered the cows, and, o champion, you conquered the soma.  You set loose the seven rivers to flow.

## 13
Neither the lightning nor the thunder, neither the mist nor the hail that  he scattered repelled (Indra) for him.
When Indra and the serpent fought each other, the generous one
achieved victory also for (all) later times.
## 14
Whom did you see, Indra, as the avenger of the serpent when fear came  into your heart after you smashed him,
and when you crossed over the ninety-nine flowing rivers, like a
frightened falcon through the airy realms?
## 15
Bearing the mace in his arms, Indra is the king of him who travels and  of him who is settled, of the horned and the hornless.
And just he alone as king rules over the different peoples: like a rim the  spokes of a wheel, he encompasses those.