+++
title = "033"

+++
33 Indra
Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn to Indra follows directly upon what is probably the most famous R̥gvedic  hymn to Indra, I.32, which is entirely focused on the Vr̥tra battle, and it is attributed  to the same poet. The second of the pair, I.33, has attracted far less attention than  its famous sibling, which is a pity, for its poetry is often stirring, and it also provides  a complementary companion piece to I.32. While I.32 pits Indra against a demonic  adversary in single combat, in a world in which humans and their concerns are  entirely absent (save for the poet’s introduction “I proclaim” in vs. 1 and the celebra
tion of Indra’s kingship in the final vs. 15), the human world and human strife are  the core of I.33. This focus on the human is clear from the beginning of the hymn.  The poet exhorts himself and his fellows to go right up to Indra and demand goods  from him (vss. 1–3). The interaction between god and mortals lacking in I.32 is thus  immediately established in I.33.
The center of the hymn (vss. 4–10ab, in our view) describes a pitched and desperate  conflict between human moieties, in which Indra intervenes on the side of the good.  Thus, unlike the battle in I.32, where the contestants are unequally matched from the  start (though a more equal match-up is depicted in the second version of the conflict),  in I.33 the clashing sides begin in balance, having separated from each other (vs. 4cd)  in order to fight each other. At issue is fundamental social organization: sacrificers  versus non-sacrificers (4d, 5b), who lack the vratás (“commandments,” 5d) that bind  the sacrificers. The non-sacrificers are several times identified as dásyu (4a, 7c, 9d, curi ously always in the singular), and so this hymn may depict the conflict between indig
enous peoples and the infiltrating Ārya. However, the non-sacrificers may instead be  Ārya following different customs, with Dasyu simply a nasty insult hurled at a larger  kin-group that deviates from the social behavior of the R̥gvedins. Their mutual depar ture in opposite directions from a single place (4c) may argue for the latter view: these are not foes who encountered each other as one group expanded into the territory  of the other, but apparently a once unified group that split. (Verse 18 of the difficult  hymn X.27 is phraseologically close to this verse, and suggests even more strongly that  the groups have split over doctrinal matters.) Also in favor of this view is the fact that  the poet tends to treat the hostile sides in balanced constructions, sometimes allotting  alternating pādas to each (e.g., vs. 6, where in our view 6a describes the enemies, 6b the  Navagvas who are ordinarily clients of Indra, with 6cd returning to the enemies) or  in bipartite phrases (e.g., 7a “those wailing and those laughing”). Indra quickly takes  the side of the sacrificers, “the presser and the praiser” (7d), and his aid proves deci sive—though not before the poet produces some striking images, for instance, of the  enemies girdling themselves in earth, perhaps a reference to their wounding or death,  while Indra’s own side is clothed with the sun (vs. 9).
After this substantial and sustained treatment of this dramatic human conflict and  Indra’s part in it, the rest of the hymn turns into a sort of catalogue of allusions to  other triumphs of Indra, not all of which are clear. Verse 10d must surely depict the  Vala myth, but the vájra (“mace”) of 10c does not fit that myth well and may be a  glancing reference to the Vr̥tra battle, which seems to be treated, though without nam
ing Vr̥tra, in verse 11, and by name in verse 13. Other enemies are defeated in verse 12,  including one, with the curious name Ilībiśa, known only from here, and other clients  are aided in verses 14–15. The final half-verse of 15 may return to the massed enemies  of the central part of the hymn, though that view cannot be strongly supported.
## 1
Come on! Let us go up close to Indra, seeking cattle. Will he increase his  solicitude for us?
With no one to hinder him, will he perhaps then turn his distant
intention toward us for this wealth, for cattle?
## 2
I fly close to the unopposable giver of wealth, like a falcon to its  delightful dwelling,
doing homage to Indra with my best chants, the one who is to be
invoked by praisers on his journey.
## 3
Fully armed, he has laden himself down with quivers; he herds together  the cows of the stranger, of whomever he wishes to.
Keep poking out valuable things in abundance, Indra—don’t be a
niggard, (at a distance) from us, you strengthened one.
## 4
For you smashed the wealthy Dasyu with your deadly weapon, going it  alone, (though accompanied) by your assistants [=Maruts?], Indra.
From the high plain they went apart in opposite directions; the
non-sacrificing old codgers made their departure.
## 5
They just twisted their heads off, Indra—the non-sacrificers contending  with the sacrificers.
O strong horse-possessing (chariot-)mounter, when (you came) forth  from heaven, you blasted those who follow no commandment in the  two world-halves.

## 6
They wished to battle the army of the faultless one; the Navagva  peoples marshaled themselves.
Like castrated bullocks battling with a bull, they seemed to go away  from Indra along slippery slopes.
## 7
You set them to fighting, those wailing and those laughing, on the far  edge of the dusky realm, Indra.
From heaven on high you sent fire burning down on the Dasyu; you  favored the recitation of the presser and the praiser.
## 8
Having made for themselves a girdle from the earth, adorning  themselves with a golden amulet,
(though) urging themselves on, they did not overtake Indra. He clothed  his spies with the sun.
## 9
When, Indra, you coiled around both worlds on all sides with your  greatness,
(you blasted) at the heedless ones with (the aid of) those who pay heed;  you blasted forth the Dasyu with (the aid of) those who create sacred  formulations, o Indra—
## 10
(The Dasyu) who did not reach the end of heaven, of earth, who did  not hem in the wealth-giving (Indra) with their magical wiles.
The bull Indra made his mace his yokemate. He milked the cows out of  the darkness with light.
## 11
In accord with his autonomous power the waters flowed; he grew strong  in the middle of the navigable ones.
With a single-minded thought, with a most powerful blow Indra  smashed him [=Vr̥tra?] to high heavens.
## 12
He pierced down through the fastnesses of Ilībiśa; he split apart horned  Śuṣṇa—Indra.
As much endurance, as much strength (as remained to you), bounteous  one, (using that,) with your mace you smashed the rival who sought  battle.
## 13
Goal-directed, he set out against his rivals; with the sharp bull he split  apart the strongholds.
He made Vr̥tra collide with his mace—Indra. He advanced his own  thinking, exulting all the while.
## 14
You aided Kutsa, Indra, in whom you took pleasure; you furthered the  bull Daśadyu as he did battle.
Stirred up by hooves, the dust reached heaven. Śvaitreya stood up to  conquer the superior men.
## 15
You aided the hornless bull in the Tugriyan (battles), the Śvitriyan cow  at the conquering of dwelling places, bounteous one.
They have made a long delay, just staying here. You have laid low the  possessions of those who behave as rivals.