+++
title = "034"

+++
34 Aśvins
Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa
12 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 9, 12
This hymn has a simple and very insistent organizing principle: the number three.  The Aśvins, of whom there are, of course, two, are urged to perform various actions  three times a day, using equipment, especially their chariot, that has numerous tri ple features. The particular ritual reason for the glorification of three must be the  three soma-pressings, but this ritual application is not made clear until verse 8. If,  as we have argued, the Third Pressing is a ritual innovation in the R̥gveda, a hymn  devoted to extolling it is not surprising.
The hymn falls into two unequal parts, each ending with a triṣṭubh verse (vss.  1–9, 10–12). In the first part the number three is especially celebrated, though the  number is not absent in the second part (see vss. 11 and 12). The last three verses  invite the Aśvins to drink the soma and to offer us rewards in return. Despite the  metrical punctuation and the change in emphasis in the brief second part, there is  no reason not to consider this hymn a unity.
From the grammatical point of view, the hymn contains what many scholars  (including us) take as a precious archaism, the single occurrence of the phrase sū́re  duhitā́ “daughter of the Sun” (vs. 5d), preserving in sū́re the sandhi of final -as of  the genitive *sū́ras as -e before a dental in close phrasal sandhi. (For general discus
sion of this phenomenon, see Jamison 2010.) It perhaps escaped modernization  because the focus of the hymn was not on the mythological marriage of Sūryā,  daughter of the Sun, and she is only mentioned because of the incidental fact that  the chariot she mounted had three standing places.
## 1
Three times today take cognizance of us. Extensive is your journey and  your giving, o Aśvins.
Because clasping you is like clasping on a garment in winter, become  ones who can be clasped by men of inspired thought.
## 2
Three wheel-rims are on your honey-bringing chariot; all know the spoor  of the soma through and through.
Three props have been propped up to take hold of; three times by night  you drive, Aśvins, and three times by day.
## 3
Three times on the same day, you concealers of fault, three times today  equip the sacrifice with honey.
Three times, Aśvins, make prize-giving refreshments swell for us, through  the evenings and the dawns.
## 4
Three times drive your circuit, three times to the folk who follow your  commandment; three times do your best as if threefold for the one
who pursues (his ritual duties) well.
Three times bring delight, Aśvins; three times make nourishment swell  for us, like (a cow) that never runs dry.

## 5
Three times bring wealth to us, Aśvins, three times to the divine  conclave; and three times aid our insights.
Three times (bring) good fortune and three times acclamations for
us. The daughter of the Sun mounted your chariot with its three
standing places.
## 6
Three times, Aśvins, give us heavenly remedies, three times earthly ones,  and three times those from the waters.
Succor and luck and lifetime bring to my little son, and threefold
shelter, you lords of beauty.
## 7
Three times, day after day, Aśvins, deserving the sacrifice, reach around  the earth in its three parts.
You Nāsatyas as charioteers travel over the three distant realms, like  breath blowing over the pastures.
## 8
Three times, Aśvins, along with the rivers with their seven mothers  the three (soma) troughs are prepared and the oblation is made
threefold.
Floating above the three earths, you guard the fixed vault of heaven,  through the days, through the nights.
## 9
Where are the three wheels of your triply turning chariot, where the  three seats which are in the same nest [=chariot box]?
When is the yoking of the prizewinning donkey, with which, Nāsatyas,  you drive up to the sacrifice.
## 10
Come here, Nāsatyas: the oblation is being poured. Drink of the honey  with your honey-drinking mouths.
For Savitar impels your chariot, earlier than dawn, glittering, full of  ghee, for truth.
## 11
Drive hither, Nāsatyas, with the three times eleven gods, here to honey  drinking, Aśvins.
Extend our lifetime; sweep away our maladies; repel hatred; come into  partnership (with us).
## 12
Aśvins, with your triply turning chariot, bring wealth in good heroes  our way.
You two who listen I keep calling to for help. Be there to strengthen us  at the winning of prizes.