+++
title = "035"

+++
35
Savitar (except Agni, Mitra and Varuṇa, Rātrī, and Savitar 1)
Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 1, 9
After an initial verse invoking several gods, Savitar becomes the sole focus of the  hymn—Savitar primarily in his role as god of the evening, as was already suggested by the invocation of Night in verse 1c. The first part of the Savitar portion (vss.  2–5) describes the beauty of Savitar’s chariot and his journey through the night sky.  During this journey he (and his horses, vss. 2 and 5; see also 7–8) survey the crea tures and the larger cosmos in which they live, and in the second part of the hymn  (vss. 6–9) we learn what was seen. These verses enumerate the parts of the cosmos  and sketch its dimensions. This section is presented as mystical instruction (see esp.  vs. 6d), which raises cosmic questions (vs. 7cd), especially about what happens to  the sun during the night that Savitar is presiding over. The anxieties raised by the  absence of the sun are put to rest by Savitar’s ability to pervade the whole realm (vs.  9), and the hymn ends with an invitation to the god to come to us along his well
maintained route through the midspace (vss. 10–11).
## 1
I invoke Agni first, for well-being; I invoke Mitra and Varuṇa here, for help. I invoke Night, who brings to rest the moving; I invoke god Savitar,  for aid.
## 2
Turning hither through the black realm, bringing to rest the immortal  and the mortal,
with his golden chariot Savitar the god drives here, gazing upon the  creatures.
## 3
The god drives on a downward slope; he drives on an upward one; he  drives with two resplendent fallow bays, he who is worthy of the
sacrifice.
God Savitar drives hither from afar, thrusting away all obstacles.
## 4
(It is) covered over with pearls, having every beauty, with golden  yoke-pins, lofty—
his chariot has bright-beamed Savitar mounted, (he) worthy of the  sacrifice, having assumed his own power throughout the black
realms.
## 5
The dusky (horses) with white feet have looked out across the peoples,  while drawing his chariot with its golden forepole.
The clans, all the creatures ever abide in the lap of divine Savitar.
## 6
There are three heavens: two are the laps of Savitar, one is the
hero-vanquishing one in the world of Yama.
Like a chariot (wheel) on the axle-pin, the (creatures) have taken their  place on his immortal (foundations?).—Whoever will perceive this, let  him declare it here.
## 7
The eagle has surveyed the midspaces—the lord possessing profound  inspiration, who gives good guidance.
Where now is the sun? Who perceives it? To which one of the heavens  does his rein extend?
## 8
The eight humps of the earth he has surveyed, the three wastelands three  wagon-treks (wide), the seven rivers.
Golden-eyed god Savitar has come hither, establishing desirable treasures  for the pious man.

## 9
Golden-palmed Savitar, whose boundaries are distant, shuttles between  both, both heaven and earth.
He thrusts away affliction; he pursues the sun; he reaches to heaven
through the black realm.
## 10
The golden-handed lord of good guidance, of good grace, of good  help—let him drive in our direction.
Repelling demons and sorcerers, the god has taken his place facing
evening, while being hymned.
## 11
Your age-old paths, Savitar, dustless, well-made in the midspace, along these easily passable paths (come) to us today. Both guard us and  speak on our behalf, o god.
The next eight hymns (I.36–43) are attributed to Kaṇva Ghaura, and the Kaṇva  family is named a number of times in this sequence. It is noteworthy that this collec tion does not contain a hymn to Indra. However, there are three hymns (I.37–39) to  the Maruts, Indra’s regular companions, and the following hymn, I.40, is dedicated  to Brahmaṇaspati. Indra figures prominently in that hymn and is in fact identified  with Brahmaṇaspati in it.
For the most part the style of these hymns is uncomplex but nicely balanced.