+++
title = "036"

+++
36 Agni
Kaṇva Ghaura
20 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
Long but relatively straightforward, this hymn first celebrates the communal fire  belonging to a number of clans, as Proferes argues (2007: 31), uniting them in com mon action (vss. 1–3). The poet then cites a divine precedent for joint kindling of  the fire (vs. 4) and assigns Agni various social roles: priest, householder, and mes senger (vs. 5), an almost trifunctional structure. Verses 7–8 conflate mortals and  gods in their expansion of territory and defeat of opposing forces, and the next  series of verses also mingle legendary and current mortals in their relation to Agni.
The mood of the hymn changes with verse 13. There follow a number of peremp tory commands to Agni, for help and, especially, protection from and destruction  of enemies, interspersed with mentions of help that Agni offered to previous mor tal clients. The more militant verses are reminiscent of X.87, dedicated to Agni  Rakṣohan (“Demon-Smiter”), although the latter hymn is more inventive than  this one.
## 1
We appeal for you with well-spoken speeches to the youthfully exuberant  (fire) of the many (peoples), of the clans that serve the gods,
to Agni—just the one whom the others (also) reverently invoke. 2. The peoples have installed Agni, the increaser of might. Bringing  oblations, we would do honor to you.
Become today our benevolent helper here when prizes (are at stake), o  comrade.
## 3
We choose you as messenger, as the Hotar who affords all possessions. Since you are great, your flames range widely; your radiant beams
touch heaven.
## 4
The gods Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman kindle you, their primordial  messenger.
With you, o Agni, that one wins every stake—the mortal who ritually  serves you.
## 5
You are the delighting Hotar, the lord of the household, and the  messenger of the clans.
In you are gathered together all the enduring commandments that the  gods made.
## 6
Just in you who bring good fortune is every oblation poured, o
youngest Agni.
Benevolent toward us today and in the future, sacrifice to the gods for  masses of good heroes.
## 7
Bringing homage, they reverently approach him, their sovereign king,  just so.
With their oblations the sons of Manu kindle Agni, after they have
crossed beyond failures.
## 8
Smashing their Vr̥tra [/obstacle], they crossed over the two world-halves and  the waters and made for themselves a wide place for peaceful dwelling.
The bull [=Agni], brilliant when bepoured, came to be at Kaṇva’s side;  the horse [=Agni] whinnied at the cattle-raids.
## 9
Sit together (with us): you are great. Blaze as the best at pursuing the gods. Let loose your beautiful red smoke in every direction, o lauded Agni,  partaker of the ritual meal—
## 10
Whom the gods installed here for Manu as the best sacrificer, o  conveyor of the oblation,
whom Kaṇva (and?) Medhyātithi (installed) as the winner of stakes,  whom Vr̥ṣan [/the bull], whom Upastuta [/the praised] (installed).
## 11
Agni whom Medhyātithi (and?) Kaṇva kindled from truth,
his are the refreshments that shine forth; him do these verses (make  strong) and him, Agni, do we make strong.
## 12
Give fullness of wealth, o autonomous one, for you have friendship  among the gods, o Agni.
You rule over a prize worthy of fame. Have mercy on us: you are great.144 I.37
## 13
Stand upright to help us, like god Savitar,
upright as the winner of the prize when we vie with (other) cantors with  their ornaments in invoking (you).
## 14
Upright, protect us from narrow straits with your beacon. Burn up  every devourer.
Make us upright to move and to live. Find favor for us among the gods.
## 15
Protect us from the demon, o Agni. Protect us from the malice of  the enemy.
Protect from the man who does harm or who seeks to smash us, o
youngest one with lofty beams.
## 16
As if with a deadly weapon, smash asunder our enemies and whoever  deceives us, o you of scorching fangs.
The mortal who sharpens himself throughout the nights, let that cheat  not be master of us.
## 17
Agni gained good heroes en masse, and Agni good fortune for Kaṇva. Agni helped Medhyātithi—as did Mitra (and Varuṇa) [/the two allies]— and Agni (helped) Upastuta in winning.
## 18
With Agni we call Turvaśa and Yadu from afar, also Ugrādeva.
Agni, our force against the Dasyu, led Navavāstva of the lofty chariots  and Turvīti.
## 19
Manu installed you, Agni, to be a light for the people, each and  every one.
Born of truth, you shine when grown strong [/sprinkled] in the company  of Kaṇva—(you) to whom the communities bring reverence.
## 20
The dazzling, hard-charging flames of Agni, terrifying like (wild  beasts), are not to be confronted.
(Burn) the demonic forces, the sorcerers forever—burn up every
devourer.