+++
title = "037"

+++
37
Maruts
Kaṇva Ghaura
15 verses: gāyatrī, probably organized in tr̥cas
Typical Marut themes fill this hymn: their glittering beauty (lightning), their noise  (thunder), and their boisterous character, which strikes fear in both animate and  inanimate nature. The mystery of their birth, also a common feature of Marut  hymns, is mentioned glancingly in verse 9. The language is uncomplex, but as in  many Marut hymns it is energetic and visual, and it often has a conversational tone,  as in the depiction of thunder in verse 13 as the Maruts talking among themselves  as they travel. 1. To the playful Marut troop, unassailable beauty on a chariot,
sing forth, o Kaṇvas—
## 2
Who, together with their dappled (mares) and their spears, their axes  and unguents,
were born having a radiance of their own.
## 3
As if (it were) right here, the whip in their hands is heard, when they  wish to speak.
On their journey they direct the glittering (lightning) downward.
## 4
To the spirited tempestuous troop of flaring brilliance
sing your sacred formulation given by the gods.
## 5
Proclaim the prized bull among the cattle—the playful Marut troop. It has grown strong on the juice in the jaw (of the soma press).
## 6
Which of you is the highest, o superior men—you shakers of heaven  and earth,
since you shake them like the end (of a garment)?
## 7
The tribe of Manu crouches down before your journey, your formidable  battle fury;
the mountain, the peak bends down—
## 8
At whose drives, at whose journeys the earth, like a clanlord
grown old,
trembles in fear.
## 9
Because their birth was secure, (they had) the energy to come out from  their mother,
the power that now as before follows them.
## 10
And these sons (of Rudra) have erected their songs (like) race-course  posts on their drives,
bellowing and bending their knees for their journey.
## 11
Also this child of mist [=cloud]—long, wide, not negligible (in size)— do they stir forth with their journeys.
## 12
O Maruts, since you have the strength, you have stirred up the peoples and stirred up the mountain-peaks.
## 13
When the Maruts go driving, they keep talking with each other on  the road:
anyone can hear them.
## 14
Drive forth quickly with your swift ones: there are friendships for you  among the Kaṇvas.
There you will bring yourselves to exhilaration.
## 15
For (our friendship) is always there for your exhilaration; we are always  there for them [=Maruts],
in order (for us) to live a full lifetime.
