+++
title = "038"

+++
38
Maruts
Kaṇva Ghaura
15 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in tr̥cas
The conversational tone that was occasionally discernible in the previous hymn  (I.37) is fully in evidence here, especially in the first tr̥ca (vss. 1–3), in which the  poet peppers the Maruts with castigating questions about their whereabouts: the  gods are clearly absent from his sacrifice and presumed to be enjoying the sacrificial  offerings of rivals. The poet continues in this intimate tone in the next tr̥ca—first  (vs. 4) slyly suggesting that if their positions were reversed, the Maruts, as poets,  would praise him, the current poet, like a god, and then begging them to keep him  safe (vss. 5–6) and to end the current dry spell (vs. 6c). The compressed and abrupt  quality of gāyatrī meter is ideally suited for this conversational style.
The next six verses (7–12) present a more conventional description of the Maruts  as the thunderstorm, with familiar images. In the last three verses (13–15), the poet  exhorts himself to sing not only to the Maruts but like the Maruts, especially in  verse 14. The first verse of this tr̥ca (13) introduces two other divinities, the Lord  of the Sacred Formulation (to whom the same poet will dedicate nearby I.40) and  Agni; it is not clear why they share this last tr̥ca with the Maruts.
## 01
What is this now, you fair-weather friends?! What have you taken in  your hands,
as a father does his son, o you for whom the ritual grass has been twisted? 2. Where now—what your goal?—have you gone on earth, as if in heaven? Where are they taking pleasure in you, like cows (in a pasture)?
## 03
Where are your newer favors, Maruts, where the easy passages?
Where all the good portions?
## 04
O you whose mother is Pr̥śni, if you were mortals,
your praiser would be immortal.
## 05
Let your singer not be displeasing to you, like a wild animal in a pasture, and let him not go along the path of Yama.
## 06
And let not dissolution, evil rage—(going) ever further away—smite us. It should collapse, along with thirst.
## 07
This is real: the dazzling, hard-charging sons of Rudra even in the desert create unquenchable mist.
## 08
Like a bawling (cow) the lightning bellows. Like a mother her calf, it  accompanies (the rain),
when their rain has been sent gushing.
## 09
Even by day they create darkness, together with Parjanya the
water-carrier,
when they inundate the earth. 10. Then because of the roar of the Maruts throughout the whole earthly seat the sons of Manu trembled.
## 11
O Maruts, along the shimmering (waters) with their riverbanks, drive  with your hard-hooved (horses)
whose journey is never broken.
## 12
Let your wheel-rims be steady, and your chariots and horses,
and your reins be well fashioned.
## 13
Speak here with a song at length to the Lord of the Sacred
Formulation, to awaken him,
and to Agni, lovely to see like an ally.
## 14
Bellow [/measure] the call that is in your mouth. Like Parjanya, you will  thunder [/stretch it out].
Sing the song-verse belonging to the hymn.
## 15
Extol the Marut throng—glittering, inviting admiration, receiving  the chant—
(so that) they will be grown fully strong here with us.