+++
title = "039"

+++
39 Maruts
Kaṇva Ghaura
10 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
The weighty register and solemn syntax of this hymn contrast with the light texture  and somewhat colloquial register of the last two hymns (I.37–38), also dedicated to  the Maruts but in a different meter, even though the rapid-fire questions of verse  1cd remind us of the abrupt questions of I.38.1–3.
Here the poet hopes to harness the overwhelming power of the Maruts in order  to protect himself and his people from some looming, but not entirely defined,  threat. This hope is expressed especially nakedly in the last part of the hymn, verses  7–10. In the earlier parts of the hymn the poet praises the power of the Maruts in  a formal style, but by stating that this might cannot be challenged (vss. 2cd, 4), he  hints that it could in fact encounter a challenge.
The usual buoyant descriptions of the Maruts’ appearance and behavior as the  thunderstorm are muted in this hymn. They serve only to illustrate what power  might be available to the poet and his people (vss. 3, 5–6).
## 1
When from the far distance you cast your measure [/your bellowing], like  a flame, just so,
by whose will, o Maruts, in whose form, and to whom do you drive? To  whom, o you shakers?
## 2
Let your weapons be steadfast for thrusting far away, and let them be  staunch for blocking.
Yours be the might more to be admired, not that of the tricky mortal.

## 3
As you smite the steadfast to the far distance and you set the heavy to  rolling, o men,
you drive across the forests of the earth and across the regions of the  mountains.
## 4
For a rival to you has not been found in heaven nor on earth, o you who  care for the stranger.
Yours be the might, with your full lineage as yokemate; o Rudras, let it  never be open to challenge.
## 5
They make the mountains tremble; they shake the trees asunder. O Maruts, you gods, you have set out, like those badly drunk (on battle  frenzy), o gods, with your whole clan.
## 6
You have harnessed the dappled mares to your chariots; the
chestnut-red pulls as your side horse.
Even the earth has listened for your journey and the sons of Manu have  become afraid.
## 7
We wish (to bring) your help quickly here for our lineage, o Rudras. Come now to us with help in just the same way as (you went) before to  fearful Kaṇva.
## 8
Whether sent by you, Maruts, or sent by a mortal, the formless being  that sets upon us—
keep him away by your strength, by your power, away by the help that  stems from you.
## 9
O you who receive the first of the sacrifice, you discerning ones, because  you gave (to us?) Kaṇva—not a half gift!—
with unhalved help come to us, like lightning bolts to the rain, o
Maruts.
## 10
You bring unhalved power, unhalved strength, you of good gifts, you  shakers.
O Maruts, launch your enmity like an arrow at him who is inimical to  seers, who is enveloped in fury.