+++
title = "040"

+++
40
Brahmaṇaspati
Kaṇva Ghaura
8 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
Brahmaṇaspati, “Lord of the Sacred Formulation,” is addressed in this hymn, but  this divine figure with his transparent name is only a means to accomplish other  ends. As the patron deity of ritual speech, Brahmaṇaspati will make the poet’s  speech effective enough to bring the other gods, especially Indra, to our sacrifice  (vss. 1–2). In the second pragātha (vss. 3–4) the poet seeks Brahmaṇaspati’s indirect help. If the poet’s efforts on behalf of the sacrifice are successful, his patron stands  to gain (see esp. vs. 4cd), and the patron then should give liberal rewards to the  singer (vs. 4a). It is striking that the patron is here called a “hero” and promised,  in the famous inherited phrase, “imperishable fame”—not for his exploits on the  battlefield, but for his generosity to his poet.
The test comes in the following pragātha (vss. 5–6):  the new mantra under  the patronage of Brahmaṇaspati is pronounced both by Brahmaṇaspati and by  the human actors at the ritual. If it is a properly formulated mantra, it will bring  the desired success. Judging from the final pragātha (vss. 7–8), ritual success was  achieved, and this success is expressed in strikingly sexual terms: both the patron’s  dwelling place and his power to rule are infused with productive sexuality (vss. 7d,  8a). He also gains the gods as his allies (8a), and, most surprising of all, becomes  identified as the god Indra himself (8cd), via the very last word in the hymn, vajrín “wielder of the mace,” a qualifier otherwise only of Indra.
## 01
Rise up, o Lord of the Sacred Formulation. Seeking the gods, we  beseech you:
let the Maruts of good drops come forth; o Indra, swelling with strength,  keep (them) company.
## 02
For it is just you, o son of strength [=Indra], that the mortal implores  when the stake is set.
O Maruts, whoever loves you, he would acquire the possession of good  heroes and good horses.
## 03
Let the Lord of the Sacred Formulation go forth, let the goddess  Liberality go forth
to the hero belonging to men, whose gifts come in fives. Let the gods lead  our sacrifice.
## 04
Who gives to the cantor liberal goods, he acquires imperishable fame; for him we win through sacrifice faultless refreshment bringing good  heroes and advancing well.
## 05
Now the Lord of the Sacred Formulation proclaims the mantra worthy  to be spoken,
in which Indra, Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman, and the gods have made
their home.
## 06
Just that would we speak at the rites—the faultless mantra that brings  good fortune, o gods.
And if you gladly receive this speech, o noble men [=gods], it will attain  all things of yours worth winning.
## 07
Who can attain to the man who seeks the gods, and who to the man  whose ritual grass has been twisted?
The pious man has advanced ever further through his abodes; he has  made his own dwelling place pregnant.

## 08
He should inseminate his dominion. Together with the kings [=Ādityas],  he smites: even in peril he has established a good dwelling for himself. There exists no one to obstruct, no one to overcome the one who wields  the mace, be the stake great or small.