+++
title = "042"

+++
42
Pūsaṇ
Kaṇva Ghaura
10 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in tr̥cas, with a final verse
Like other Pūṣan hymns, this one has an informal tone and imaginative depictions of  the circumstances in which Pūṣan can render us aid. In the first part of the hymn the  god is asked to rid our paths of potential enemies (esp. vss. 2–4), while in the latter part  he is to lead us along these roads, now rendered safe, to prosperity (esp. vss. 7–8). The  nine verses of tr̥cas are consistently addressed to Pūṣan in the 2nd person, and all those  verses but 5 contain imperatives; note especially the final explosion of five abrupt,  object-less imperatives in 9ab, the final verse of the hymn proper. In the final summary  verse (10) Pūṣan is in the 3rd person, the object of our attentions and our requests.
## 1
Traverse the roads with (us), Pūṣan, and (release) constraint from (us), o  child of release.
Go forth before us to victory, o god.
## 2
The evil, malevolent wolf that will set his sights on us, o Pūṣan,
smite him away, as always, from the path.
## 3
Drive away this highwayman, the robber who knows the crooked ways, to a distance far from our route.
## 4
The double-dealing utterer of evil, whoever he is—
with your foot stamp on his scorching (weapon).
## 5
We choose that help of yours, o wondrous counselor Pūṣan,
with which you spurred on our forefathers.
## 6
Now then, o you who bring every good fortune, who are the foremost  wielder of the golden axe,
make the stakes easy for us to win.

## 7
Lead us across the parched places. Make easy passages, easy pathways  for us.
– Pūṣan, here you will find the resolve.
## 8
Lead us to good pasture, with no new suffering on the road.
– Pūṣan, here you will find the resolve.
## 9
Strive! Give and proffer! Sharpen up! Fill the belly!
– Pūṣan, here you will find the resolve.
## 10
We do not oppose Pūṣan; we greet him with hymns.
We beg the wondrous one for goods.