+++
title = "043"

+++
43
Rudra (1–2, 4–6), Rudra, Mitra and Varuṇa (3), Soma (7–9)
Kaṇva Ghaura
9 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 9, arranged in tr̥cas
There is only one other R̥gvedic hymn dedicated jointly to Rudra and Soma, gods  who have little apparent in common. In VI.74 the two are invoked together, in a dual  dvandva, but aside from generic divine descriptions only Rudra’s characteristics are  mentioned. Here the two gods are confined to separate tr̥cas; in fact, as Oldenberg  suggests, it may have originally been two hymns: verses 1–6 Rudra, 7–9 Soma.
In contrast to other Rudra contexts the depiction of Rudra here is resolutely posi tive; there is no trace of the dangerous or vengeful Rudra. One might in fact consider  the pile-up of flattering adjectives in the opening question in verse 1 a poetic insur ance policy, making it clear to the god that there will be no caviling from us. The rest  of the two Rudra tr̥cas focuses on the god’s power to provide for the welfare of both  humans and livestock, along with Aditi (vs. 2) and the principal Ādityas (vs. 3).
The first two verses (7–8) of the tr̥ca to Soma are straightforward and generic,  with no particularly somian features. The final verse (9), in a different meter, is syn tactically complex and lexically formal, and has given rise to a number of compet ing interpretations. In our view it depicts Soma, as often, as extending from earth to  heaven, and he finds the gods in both places, in heaven, which is their abode, and on  the ritual ground, because they have come to drink soma at the sacrifice. Both the  relevance of this verse to the rest of the tr̥ca and the connection of the Rudra and  Soma portions of the hymn escape us.
## 1
What might we say to Rudra, the provident, the most generous, the very  powerful;
what might we say that is most wealful to his heart?
## 2
So that for our livestock and men Aditi will create Rudrian power,  likewise for our kine,
likewise for our offspring.
## 3
So that Mitra and Varuṇa will be attentive to us, likewise Rudra,
likewise all (the gods) in concert. 4. To the lord of songs, the lord of ritual offerings, to Rudra whose  remedies are healing [?]
we plead for the favor of luck and lifetime.
## 5
He who shines like the blazing sun, like gold,
as the best of the gods, as the good one
## 6
Will make weal for our steed and easy passage for our ram and ewe, for our men and women, for our cow.
## 7
Upon us, Soma, set down the glory of a hundred men,
great, powerfully manly fame.
## 8
Let neither obstructions nor hostilities deflect us, Soma.
O drop, give us a share in the prize.
## 9
The creatures [=gods] that belong to you, the immortal one—as their  head you seek them in the highest domain of truth [=heaven]
and in the navel (of the earth?) [=ritual ground], Soma. You will know  them as the ones who attend upon (you), Soma.
The next group of hymns (I.44–50), attributed to Praskaṇva Kāṇva, the poet also of  VIII.49 (the first Vālakhilya hymn) and IX.95, has the defining feature that all the  hymns are related to a particular ritual litany, the Prātaranuvāka or “Early-Morning  Recitation” (on which see Eggeling Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 2: 229 n. 2; Hillebrandt  1897: 128; Keith 1925 I: 328). The gods to whom these Praskaṇva hymns are dedi
cated are those mentioned in the litany: Agni, particularly in his capacity as illumi nator of the early morning and conveyor of the dawn divinities, the Aśvins, Dawn,  and the rising Sun.