+++
title = "044"

+++
44
Agni, Aśvins, Dawn (1–2), Agni (3–14)
Praskaṇva Kāṇva
14 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
As indicated in the introduction to the Praskaṇva collection, this hymn to Agni  praises him in his connection to the rituals of the early morning, especially in his  role as conveyor of the other gods who attend this sacrifice. In its fourteen verses  this hymn seldom departs from this simple message. The language is measured and  dignified, but not difficult or poetically contorted.
## 01
Agni, immortal one—the bright benefit radiating from Dawn:
convey it here to the pious man, o Jātavedas; convey here today the gods  who wake at dawn.
## 02
For you are the delightful messenger, conveyor of oblations, o Agni,  charioteer of the ceremonies.
Jointly with the Aśvins and with Dawn establish in us good heroism and  lofty fame.154 I.44
## 03
Today we choose as messenger Agni the good one, dear to many, whose beacon is smoke, but who is foamy with radiance when the  dawns break, the glory of the ceremonies, of the sacrifices.
## 04
The fairest, the youngest guest, well-libated, delightful to the  pious folk—
I reverently invoke Agni Jātavedas when the dawns break, to journey to  the gods.
## 05
I will praise you—o immortal nurturer of all—
as immortal guardian—o Agni, partaker of the ritual meal—as best  sacrificer—o conveyor of the oblation.
## 06
Be one who is good for the singer to laud, o youngest one, one whose  tongue is honey when well-libated.
Lengthening the lifetime of Praskaṇva to live, do homage to the  divine folk.
## 07
Because the clans together kindle you as Hotar who provides all  possessions [/possesses all knowledge],
o much-invoked Agni, bring the discerning gods here at a run— 8. Savitar, Dawn, the Aśvins, Bhaga. Through the nights, when the  dawns break,
the Kaṇvas, their soma pressed, kindle you, Agni, as conveyor of the  oblation, o you of good ceremony.
## 09
For you are the master of the ceremonies, Agni, the messenger of  the clans.
Convey here today the gods who wake at dawn, who look like the sun,  for soma-drinking.
## 10
O Agni rich in radiance, through the earlier dawns you have shone  visible to all.
You are the helper set in front among the settlements; you are the  descendant of Manu (set in front) at the sacrifices.
## 11
O Agni, as the furtherer of the sacrifice, as the Hotar seasonably  sacrificing
would we install you, just as Manu did, o god—and as the discerning,  quick, immortal messenger.
## 12
When as the one set in front for the gods, their intimate, you undertake  their mission, o you of Mitra’s might,
the beams of your fire flash like the clamorous waves of a river.
## 13
Listen, you with listening ears, along with your passengers, the gods  who travel with you, o Agni.
Let them sit on the ritual grass—Mitra, Aryaman, and those who travel  early to the ceremony. 14. Let them listen to the praise—the Maruts of good drops, whose tongue  is Agni, strong through truth.
Let him drink the soma—Varuṇa of steadfast commandment, jointly  with the Aśvins and with Dawn.