+++
title = "045"

+++
45
Agni (except Gods 10cd)
Praskaṇva Kāṇva
10 verses: anuṣṭubh
Like the immediately preceding hymn, this one celebrates Agni as the conveyor of  the gods appropriate to the early-morning sacrifice. Unlike the last hymn, however,  these gods are not individually enumerated; instead generic names for groups of  gods are given in the first half of the first verse, and in the last two verses (9–10)  they are summed up in the phrase “the divine folk.” The emphasis is rather on the  world of men. In verse 3 the poet mentions a number of prior singers as models  for his own interaction with Agni, and he groups himself with his kinsmen the  Priyamedhas (vs. 4) and Kaṇvas (vs. 5), as well as unnamed poets and invokers in  verses 6–8. Thus, while the two pairs of outer verses (1–2, 9–10) concern Agni’s  delivery of the gods to the sacrifice, the middle verses (3–8) are occupied with the  sacrificers’ desire for Agni to listen to their hymns and pleas.
## 1
You, Agni, (bring) the Vasus, the Rudras, and the Ādityas here.
I will sacrifice to the being who assures good rites, born of Manu,
sprinkling ghee [=Agni].
## 2
Because, o Agni, the discriminating gods give attentive hearing to the  pious man,
bring them here, the three and thirty, you with the ruddy horses, you who  long for song.
## 3
As in the case of Priyamedha, of Atri, of Virūpa, o Jātavedas,
as of Aṅgiras, o you of great commandment, hear the call of Praskaṇva. 4. The greatly observant Priyamedhas have called for help
on Agni, ruling over the rites with his blazing flame.
## 5
O comrade whose oblation is ghee, listen well to these songs here, with which the sons of Kaṇva call upon you for aid.
## 6
O you of brightest fame, the kinsmen within their clans call upon you, o much beloved Agni, the flame-haired, to convey the oblation.
## 7
The inspired poets have installed you as their Hotar, seasonably
sacrificing, best finder of goods,
with listening ears, of greatest extent, o Agni, at the rituals of daybreak. 8. The inspired poets whose soma is pressed have roused you to delight— they bearing the lofty light, the oblation for the pious mortal, o Agni.

## 9
O might-made comrade, those who travel early for soma-drinking, the divine folk—here today make them sit on the ritual grass, o
good one.
## 10
The divine folk, o Agni, attract toward us through sacrifice, with  invocations common (to all):
“Here is the soma, you of good drops. Drink it, aged overnight.”