+++
title = "046"

+++
46
Aśvins
Praskaṇva Kāṇva
15 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn is an invitation to the Aśvins to come in the early morning to a soma  offering, either the early morning of the pressing day or the early morning of  the following day in an Atirātra or “overnight” soma ritual. It is a difficult hymn  because of its obscure references (cf. vss. 4 and 5) and its penchant for hapaxes (e.g.,  kúṭa in vs. 4, ā́dāra in 5, avidriyá in 15).
A unifying image running through much of the hymn is the journey of the  Aśvins over the waters to the sacrificial area (vss. 3, 7, 8, 11), introduced by the  poet’s statement that the Sindhu River is the mother of the Aśvins (vs. 2). In  accord with this image, the soma itself is a river, flowing upward to the Aśvins  to bring them to the sacrificial area (vs. 9ab). In this verse “what is good” or “the  good thing” that is “in the track of the rivers” may refer to the soma, as Geldner  suggests. Echoing this image is the poet’s repeated use of derivatives of √pR̥“carry  across” (vss. 4, 6, 12).
In verse 1 Dawn is the first to arrive, before other deities, although with the  arrival of dawn the Aśvins should also appear, and indeed in verse 14 the poet  returns to the arrival of Dawn and says that she has followed the Aśvins. In verse 2  the insight through which the Aśvins find goods may be both their insight and also  the poet’s, for the hymns inspire the Aśvins to bring goods. Verse 4 is very obscure  for several reasons. First, the identity of the “lover of the waters, the carrier” is  uncertain. Among the suggestions are Indra (Pirart 1995: 81) or Soma (Geldner,  Renou, Thieme [1967: 236]), but it might also be Agni, who is also connected with  the waters—he is famously “the Child of the Waters”—and who carries oblations  to the gods and carries sacrificers across difficulties. Unfortunately 4c is not much  help in identifying “the carrier” since kúṭa is a hapax of uncertain meaning. We  have translated it as “house” following Thieme, but it may have another meaning  and could even be a proper name, as Pirart suggests. This “lover of the waters”  is probably also the ā́dāra, again a hapax and again of unsure meaning. We have  translated it as “the one paying heed,” but according to another etymological  analysis it could mean “breaker, splitter.” All we can say with certainty is that  the verse ends with a clear invitation to the Aśvins to drink the soma (5c). As the soma flows to the Aśvins, so the poet hopes that the morning light, correspond ing to the soma, will flow toward the sacrificers (6). In verse 9 the poet turns to  address his fellow Kaṇvas in the first half-verse and the Aśvins in pāda c. In that  last line, the poet asks where the Aśvins are hidden, where they are “cloaked,” for  it is presumably still dark and neither the dawn nor the Aśvins have yet appeared.  The cloaking of the Aśvins in 9 contrasts with verse 13, in which the poet asks the  Aśvins to “clothe” themselves in the soma in the company of Vivasvant, who is  here likely associated with the sun. Then they and the morning will be present to  the sacrificers.
## 1
With none before her, this Dawn breaks, the beloved of heaven.
I shall sing aloft praise to you, Aśvins,
## 2
Who are wondrous, whose mother is the River Sindhu, who are mindful  of riches—
the gods finding goods through insight.
## 3
Your lead (animals) twist and turn upon the (sea’s) broken surface, when your chariot will fly with its birds.
## 4
By the oblation the lover of the waters, the carrier, carries
across, o men—
he, the father and boundary of the house [?],
## 5
The one paying heed [?] to (our) conceptions for the sake of you two, o  Nāsatyas, you for whom (these) words are conceived:
“Drink boldly of the soma.”
## 6
The light-bringing refreshment that will carry us across the darkness,  Aśvins—
give that to us.
## 7
Travel here by the boat of our conceptions to go to the far shore! Hitch up your chariot, Aśvins!
## 8
Your oar is broader than heaven; your chariot is at the ford of the rivers; through our insight the soma drops have been hitched up.
## 9
O Kaṇvas, (in the track) of heaven are the soma drops; in the track of  the rivers is what is good.
Where do you two desire to place that cloak of yours?
## 10
Radiance has come into being for the soma plant: the sun, counterpart  to gold!
The black one [=the fire in the coals] has peered out with his tongue. 11. And the path of truth has come into being to lead right to the far shore. The course of heaven has appeared.
## 12
The singer awaits each and every help of the Aśvins
at the exhilarating drink of soma for the two who carry across.
## 13
Having clothed yourselves with the drink of soma and with song in the  company of Vivasvant,
come here, o you who are good luck, as at the time of Manu!

## 14
Dawn has followed your glory as you circle the earth.
You will win the truths in the nights.
## 15
Aśvins, both of you—drink! Both of you—offer protection to us through your unbreakable help!