+++
title = "047"

+++
47 Aśvins
Praskaṇva Kāṇva
10 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
The hymn is dominated by imperatives, which appear in every verse except the  last. These imperatives command the Aśvins to attend to the poet (e.g., 2d), to  come to the sacrifice (e.g., 2b, 3d, 7c, 8b, 8d, 9a), to drink the soma (e.g., 1c, 3b),  and especially to bestow prosperity on the sacrificer (e.g., 1d, 5c, 6b, 6d). The  last verse summarizes the desire of the poet to bring the Aśvins, together with  many goods, by means of the “recitations and chants” of those performing the  sacrifice.
Like I.34 the hymn also associates a number of triplets with the Aśvins: their  “triply turning chariot with its three standing places” (vs. 2) and the ritual grass  “on which are three seats” (vs. 4). These triplets likely have ritual reference,  although it is not clear what the reference might be. The “three turns” of the  Aśvins’ chariot may describe the three pressings of a soma sacrifice. Compare  X.52.4d  =  124.1b, which speaks of the sacrifice with its páñcayāmaṃ trivŕ̥taṃ
saptátantum “five courses, three turns, seven threads.” The term trivandhurá “with  three standing places” is only used to describe the chariot of the Aśvins, but never  with much indication about its referent. Geldner suggests that “the three seats” of  triṣadhasthá might be for the two Aśvins and Sūryā or that they are simply three  because the Aśvins are regularly associated with triplets. But there are other pos
sibilities. Although triṣadhasthá characterizes various gods, in X.61.14 and V.11.2  it describes the three seats of Agni, the three fires, and perhaps it refers to these in  this context as well. In that case, the three seats are not actually on the ritual grass  but rather at or near it.
In the first verse the reference to the “day-old” soma places this hymn in the  morning of the day following the pressing day in an Atirātra or “overnight” soma  ritual. The soma offerings in the morning are a continuation of the offerings of  the Third Pressing. If recited at the end of the rite, it is no wonder that the poet  emphasizes the goods that he hopes that the Aśvins will bring on their chariot (3c,  6a, 9bc)—the chariot that is both the vehicle on which the Aśvins ride and the  sacrifice itself. These are the goods that should come to the sacrificers as a result of  their completed sacrifice.
In verse 7 the poet calls on the Aśvins to come whether they are far away or with  Turvaśa. The Kaṇva poets of the VIIIth maṇḍala suggest their alliance with the Turvaśa and Yadu tribes (e.g., VIII.4.1 and 4.7; 7.18; 9.14; 10.5; 45.27). Since our  poet is a Kaṇva as well, Turvaśa represents an ally, perhaps the people of the sacrifi cer for whom the hymn was composed. The point is therefore that the Aśvins should  come to this sacrifice whether are far away or close by, among this very people.
## 1
O you growing strong through truth, this most honey-filled soma has  been pressed for you two.
Drink that (soma) aged overnight, Aśvins. Grant riches to the
pious man.
## 2
Journey here, Aśvins, by your triply turning chariot with its three  standing places, with its beautiful adornment.
The Kaṇvas are creating a formulation for you at the rite. Listen well to  their call!
## 3
O Aśvins, growing strong through truth, drink the most
honey-filled soma.
Then today, wondrous ones, come to the pious man, bringing goods on  your chariot.
## 4
O you providing all possessions, mix the sacrifice with honey on the  ritual grass, on which are three seats.
The heaven-bound Kaṇvas, having pressed soma for you, call upon you  two, Aśvins.
## 5
With what superior powers you helped Kaṇva, Aśvins,
with these help us, o lords of beauty! Drink the soma, o you growing  strong through truth!
## 6
Wondrous Aśvins, convey nourishments to the very generous one,  bringing goods on your chariot.
Whether from the sea or from heaven, grant much-desired wealth to us.
## 7
Nāsatyas, if you are in the far distance, or if you are with the Turvaśa, from there come to us by your smoothly rolling chariot, together with  the rays of the sun.
## 8
Turning this way, let your team, the glory of the rite, convey you to our  soma-pressings.
Replenishing refreshment for the good (ritual) performer, and
possessing good drops, sit here on the ritual grass, o men.
## 9
Nāsatyas, come by your sun-skinned chariot,
by which you have ever conveyed goods to the pious man, in order to  drink of the honeyed soma.
## 10
With our recitations and chants we call the two bringing many goods  down this way for their help,
for surely you have always drunk soma at the dear seat of the Kaṇvas,  Aśvins.
