+++
title = "048"

+++
48 Dawn
Praskaṇva Kāṇva
16 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
Another in Praskaṇva Kāṇva’s series devoted to the deities of the early-morning  sacrifice, this hymn to Dawn is especially concerned with the acquisition of goods— a common association because the dakṣiṇā or “priestly gift” is distributed to the  poets and priests at the Morning Pressing. The radiant beauty of Dawn and her  mandate to rouse and animate all living beings are not neglected in the hymn, how ever, especially in the middle verses (5–10). In verses 11–12 she is also, unusually,  charged with a task more appropriate for Agni (see, e.g., I.44), namely conveying  the gods to the sacrifice.
## 1
Along with a thing of value, dawn forth to us, Daughter of Heaven, along with lofty brilliance, radiant goddess, along with wealth, (you who  are) rich in gifts.
## 2
Possessing horses and cows, finding all goods in abundance, (the dawns)  bestir themselves to shine.
Arouse liberalities toward me, o Dawn; stimulate the generosity of the  benefactors.
## 3
Dawn has dawned (before) and will dawn now—the lively goddess of the  chariots.
Those who hold themselves (ready [for giving]) at her approaches, as  those who seek fame on the sea hold themselves (firm),
## 4
And, o Dawn, those who at your journeys yoke their mind for giving— the patrons—
here (the poet) Kaṇva, the latest of Kaṇvas, sings their names, the names  of those superior men.
## 5
Liberal-spirited Dawn drives here, giving delight like a maiden.
Wakening the footed community, she speeds along. She makes the
winged ones fly up.
## 6
She who disperses the assembly, disperses the busy ones, she follows  (them) like a track—she moist (with dew) [/lubricious].
The birds, having flown at your dawning, do not settle, o you who are  rich in prize mares.
## 7
This one has hitched herself up from out of the distance, from (the place  of) the rising of the sun.
With a hundred chariots, this well-portioned Dawn drives out
toward men.
## 8
Every moving creature bows before her gaze. The spirited one
creates light. Dawn, the bounteous Daughter of Heaven, dawns away hatred, away  failures.
## 9
O Dawn, be radiant here with your glittering radiance, o Daughter of  Heaven,
conveying hither abundant good fortune for us, dawning forth at the  rituals of daybreak.
## 10
For the breathing and living of all is in you, when you dawn forth,  spirited one.
With your lofty chariot, radiant one, heed our call, you of bright
bounty.
## 11
Dawn, do win the prize, which is bright for the human race.
With it convey those of good action [=gods] here to the ceremonies, to  those of good action [=sacrificers] who (as oblation-)conveyors sing  to you.
## 12
Convey all the gods here for soma-drinking from the midspace, o Dawn. Establish in us a mass of cows and of horses, worthy of praise, o Dawn,  also victory’s prize and good heroes en masse.
## 13
She whose gleaming, auspicious rays have appeared opposite,
let her—Dawn—give us all-desirable wealth, well ornamented, easy to  come by.
## 14
Because even those previous seers who called upon you for aid, for help,  o great one—
do you (now) greet our praises (as you did theirs) with generosity, o  Dawn, with your bright brilliance.
## 15
Dawn, when today with your radiance you will push apart the two  doors of heaven,
then hold out to us broad shelter that keeps the wolf away, o goddess,  hold out refreshments consisting of cows.
## 16
Mingle us with lofty wealth provided with all ornaments, with
refreshments,
with brilliance surpassing all, great Dawn, with prizes, o you who are  rich in prize mares.