+++
title = "050"

+++
50 Sūrya (1-9), and a Spell against Disease (10–13)
Praskaṇva Kāṇva
13 verses: gāyatrī 1–9, anuṣṭubh 10–13
This final hymn of the Praskaṇva sequence falls into two parts. The last three  verses (11–13) have a clear Atharvan cast, as a spell against disease, specifically  jaundice. By sympathetic magic, the golden sun removes the jaundice from the  afflicted man and displaces it onto other, presumably yellowish creatures—parrots  and other birds.
The first nine verses, in a different meter, are a charmingly simple descrip tion of the rising of the Sun and the beginning of his journey across the sky.  The affinity of the intermediate verse (10) is not clear. Though it matches the  meter of the final three verses, in tone it seems more like a final verse summariz ing the happy result of the sunrise in verses 1–9. (It is not unusual for the final  verse of a hymn to be in a different meter from the rest.) If this is the case, then  the spell in verses 11–13 could have been tacked onto this hymn because of the  phrase “higher heaven” (11b), which echoes “higher light” and “highest light” in  verse 10.
## 1
Up do the beacons convey this god Jātavedas,
the Sun, for all to see.
## 2
Away like thieves go these heavenly bodies with the night,
before the Sun, who has his gaze on all. 3. His beacons have appeared; his rays (extend) widely throughout the  peoples,
flashing like fires.
## 4
Transiting, visible to all, a light-maker are you, o Sun.
You illuminate the whole luminous realm.
## 5
Facing the clans of the gods, facing the descendants of Manu do  you go up,
facing all, (for them) to see the sun—
## 6
With which as your eye, o purifying Varuṇa, you look upon
the one bustling throughout the peoples.
## 7
Across heaven you go, the broad realm, measuring the days with the nights, looking upon the races, o Sun.
## 8
Seven fallow bay mares convey you, the flame-haired, in your chariot— o wide-gazing god Sun.
## 9
He has yoked the seven sleek daughters of the Sun’s chariot.
With these of his own yoking he drives.
## 10
Looking up from the darkness to the higher light, we
have come up to the Sun, god among the gods, the highest light.
## 11
As you go up today, o you of Mitra’s might, and mount the higher  heaven,
banish my heart-affliction and jaundice, o Sun.
## 12
In the parrots, in the ropanā-birds we place my jaundice.
And in the hāridrava-birds we deposit my jaundice.
## 13
Up has gone this Āditya here, along with all his strength,
making the hater subject to me. May I not become subject to the hater.
Here begins the second large division of Maṇḍala I (51–191).
The next seven hymns (I.51–57) are ascribed to Savya Āṅgirasa and consist only  of Indra hymns. For the most part the hymns are a glorification of Indra’s deeds— both the standard and well-known triumphs like the smashing of Vr̥tra (see esp.  I.52) and numerous lesser-known feats, which are presented in catalogue fashion  (see esp. I.51, 53). The style is often syntactically and rhetorically contorted, with  rare words and obscure expressions.