+++
title = "051"

+++
51 Indra
Savya Āṅgirasa
15 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 14–15
This hymn consists primarily of an elaborated list of Indra’s great deeds, some  well known (like the Vala myth in 3a, the Vr̥tra myth in 4, Indra’s involvement164 I.51
with Uśanā Kāvya and Kutsa in the slaying of Śuṣṇa in verses 6a, 10–11) and  others quite obscure. For example, Vimada, mentioned in 3ab, is usually a client  of the Aśvins, who supply him with a wife (often using the same verb [√vah “con vey”] as here: I.112.9, 116.1, 117.20; X.39.7, 65.12). Is the same deed attributed to  Indra here and is the “good thing” that Indra brings him a reference to the wife?  Similarly puzzling are the enemies who make oblation “on the shoulder” in verse 5  (perhaps indicating people following different ritual practices and not part of the  Ārya community; see vss. 8–9), Indra’s role as an ant destroying walls in verse 9,  and his transformation into the female consort of an otherwise unknown figure in  verse 13c.
The catalogue of deeds is interrupted by demands that Indra use his same mar tial powers for our benefit (vss. 7–9ab), and it is framed by an exhortation to the  poets to give praise to the god (vs. 1) and the announcement of the end of the praise  hymn and the boons we seek from it (vss. 14–15).
## 1
With your hymns exhilarate this ram, much-summoned Indra worthy of  verses, the flood of good,
for whom the human (generations) pass by like the days. Chant to the  most liberal inspired one for our benefit.
## 2
His forms of help [=helpers] attained to the very superior one, who fills  the midspace but is enclosed by his powers—
the skillful R̥bhus (attained to) Indra, who was aroused to
exhilaration. Liberality, impelling (him), mounted to him of a
hundred resolves.
## 3
You opened up the cowpen for the Aṅgirases, and you were the
way-finder for Atri in the (house) of a hundred doors.
You also conveyed the good thing [=wife?] to Vimada along with grain  (for the oblation?), when in the contest you set to dancing the stone of  the one clad in it.
## 4
You opened up the covers of the waters; you held fast to the drop-laden  goods in the mountain.
When, o Indra, with your vast power you smashed the serpent Vr̥tra, just  after that you made the sun rise in heaven to be seen.
## 5
With your wiles you blew away the wily ones, who, according to their  own customs, poured (their offering) “on the shoulder.”
You broke through the strongholds of Pipru, o you of manly mind; you  helped R̥jiśvan through in the smashing of Dasyus.
## 6
You helped Kutsa in the smashing of Śuṣṇa, and you made Śambara  subject to Atithigva.
With your foot you trampled down Arbuda, though he was great.
Indeed, from long ago you were born to smash Dasyus.
## 7
In you every power has been placed toward the same end. Your
generosity excites itself to drink the soma. Your mace has become visible, placed in your arms: hew down the
bullish strengths of your rival.
## 8
Distinguish between the Āryas and those who are Dasyus. Chastising  those who follow no commandment, make them subject to the man  who provides ritual grass.
Become the potent inciter of the sacrificer. I take pleasure in all these  (deeds) of yours at our joint revelries.
## 9
Indra—making those who reject his commandments subject to those  who follow his commandments, piercing those who don’t stand by
him with (the aid of) those who do—
being praised, as an ant he smashed apart the mud walls of the one  trying to reach heaven, who, though already full grown, kept
growing.
## 10
When Uśanā fashions might with might for you, then your vast power  thrusts apart the two worlds with its greatness.
The mind-yoked (horses) of the Wind conveyed you, being filled (with  soma?), here to fame, o manly minded one.
## 11
When he has found exhilaration together with Uśanā Kāvya, Indra  mounts the two (horses) that are surging and surging further.
The strong one let loose the waters in a stream for coursing and
propelled apart the fortified strongholds of Śuṣṇa.
## 12
You mount the chariot to the bullish drinks on which you become  exhilarated at Śāryata’s (ritual) presentation,
so that you will take pleasure in (the ceremonies) with their pressed  soma, o Indra. (Then) you ascend to the unassailing signal call in
heaven.
## 13
You gave little Vr̥cayā to great, eloquent Kakṣīvant, the soma-presser,  o Indra.
You became the wife of Vr̥ṣaṇaśva, o you of good resolve. All these  (deeds) of yours are to be proclaimed at the pressings.
## 14
Indra has become fixed in the exclusive possession of the man of good  insight; the praise song (has been fixed) like a doorpost among the
Pajras,
as it seeks horses, cows, chariots, and goods. Indra alone is master of  wealth and will provide it.
## 15
This homage has been pronounced for the bull, the independent king,  the mighty one of real unbridled force.
In this community might we, together with our patrons, be possessors  of hale heroes under your protection, o Indra.
