+++
title = "052"

+++
52
Indra
Savya Āṅgirasa
15 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 13, 15
This hymn begins in the same way as the previous one, by praising Indra in the  form of a ram, but, unlike I.51 with its listing of Indra’s great deeds, I.52 focuses  almost entirely on the Vr̥tra myth and its aftermath—save for a brief reference to  the Vala myth in verse 5 (and possibly verse 3). The account of the Vr̥tra battle  begins in verse 2 and continues through verse 10, with a reiteration in the final verse  15, and thus constitutes one of the longer sustained R̥gvedic passages devoted to  this myth. This account of the myth has not achieved the fame of a hymn like I.32,  however—in part because of the obscurity of its diction and syntax.
This version also allots a large role to the helpers that encouraged and aided  Indra at the battle, not only Tvaṣṭar (vs. 7) as often, but also the Maruts, iden tified as such in verses 9 and 15 (see also vs. 3), but also referred to as per sonified abstractions—“forms of help” (see vss. 2, 4–5, 9), “powers,” et cetera.  Almost paradoxically the hymn also depicts the fear of the divine beings and  of heaven itself during the Vr̥tra battle (vss. 9–10). Moreover, the final verses  (11–14, excluding the summarizing verse 15) concern the extent of Indra’s unri valed power, comparing its reach to the furthest expanses of heaven, earth, and  the midspace.
## 1
I shall exalt this ram, who finds the sun, whose hundred (superior  powers) of good essence arise together.
(Might I turn) his chariot, rushing to the summons, like a steed (rushing to)  the prize; with my well-twisted (hymns) might I turn Indra here for help. 2. Like a mountain, immovable on its foundations, Indra, with his thousand  forms of help, grew strong amid his powers,
when subduing the floods, highly excited by the soma stalk, he smashed  Vr̥tra, who obstructed the rivers.
## 3
For he (was) a skulker among skulkers at the maw (of Vr̥tra?), but he,  having a golden foundation, was strengthened to exhilaration at the  (soma-)udder by the inspired thinkers [=Maruts?]—
Indra—with my skillful work and insight I have summoned him whose  gifts are most generous, for he is a provider because of the soma stalk. 4. Him whom they fill like the sea—his own superior powers of good  essence which have the ritual grass as their seat in heaven—
Indra—his forms of help [=helpers] stood by him at the Vr̥tra-smashing,  as did his unextinguishable gusts whose breath is unobstructed.
## 5
In his exhilaration, while he was fighting, his forms of help rushed to  him, who has his own proper work, like rapids in a torrent,
when the mace-wielding Indra, emboldened by the soma stalk, split the  barricades of the Vala cave, as Trita had. 6. Glowing heat encircles him [=Indra], and his vast power flared. He  [=Vr̥tra], having obstructed the waters, was lying on the foundation  of the dusky realm,
when you, Indra, struck your thunder down upon the jaws of Vr̥tra,  Hard-to-Grasp, in the (waters’) torrent.
## 7
For like waves to a lake, the sacred formulations that make you strong  rush down to you, o Indra.
Tvaṣṭar also strengthened his own power, to be employed by you: he  fashioned the mace of overwhelming might.
## 8
And when you, o Indra of concentrated resolve, together with your  fallow bays, smashed Vr̥tra, making a way for the waters for Manu,
you held the metal mace in your arms. You fixed the sun fast in heaven  to be seen.
## 9
What is lofty, self-luminous, formidable, and praiseworthy [=Indra in form  of sun]—in fear they made that their own means of ascent to heaven,
when the forms of help appropriate to human prize-contests, (that is,)  the Maruts, accompanying that superior man [=Indra], cheered on
Indra, their sun.
## 10
Even formidable heaven kept retreating from the sound of this serpent  and in fear at your mace, Indra,
when, in the exhilaration of the pressed soma, with your vast power  you split the head of Vr̥tra, who was pressing harder and harder
upon the two world-halves.
## 11
Now, o Indra, just as far as the earth with its ten coils (extends) and the  separate peoples will extend throughout all the days,
just to there, o bounteous one, your widely famed strength will pervade  heaven with vast power and mightiness.
## 12
O you of bold mind, at the far edge of this dusky realm and of distant  heaven with the might natural to you
you have made the earth the counterpart of your might for our help.  Encompassing the waters and the sun, you go all the way to heaven. 13. You have become the counterpart of earth and you became the lord of  high (heaven) containing lofty heroes.
You filled the whole midspace with your greatness. This is certainly  true: there is no other like you.
## 14
Whose expanse neither heaven nor earth reaches across—any more than  the rivers reach the end of the dusky realm—
nor (do they reach him) who performs his own proper work in his
exhilaration while he is fighting. You alone have done everything else  in due order.
## 15
There at this same contest the Maruts chanted and all the gods cheered  you on,
when with your deadly weapon covered with spikes, o Indra, you struck  down against the mouth of Vr̥tra.
