+++
title = "053"

+++
53
Indra
Savya Āṅgirasa
11 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 10–11
This hymn is divided into two roughly equal halves. After an initial verse exhorting  the singers to present their work to Indra at the sacrifice, lest a lazy performance  or bad composition deprive them of his gifts, Indra is praised in verses 2–5 for his  quick response in fulfilling the desires of his singers. The mood changes in the next  five verses (6–10), which constitute a brisk catalogue of Indra’s martial deeds in  aid of his named human clients. This survey is somewhat reminiscent of the list of  Indra’s deeds in the first Savya hymn, I.51. The hymn ends with a summary verse  (11), which returns to the hortatory style of verse 1.
## 1
Let us bring forward our speech for the great one, our songs for Indra, at  the seat of Vivasvant,
for never has anyone found a treasure among those who are, as it were,  asleep. A poor praise hymn is not acclaimed among the givers of wealth. 2. O Indra, you are the one who breaks out the horse, breaks out the  cow, breaks out the grain, since you are the forceful lord of (every)
good thing.
He who from of old does his best for men, who does not short their  desires, a comrade to his comrades—to him we now sing.
## 3
O able Indra, most brilliant doer of many (deeds)—just yours is the good  that keeps appearing all around.
Therefore, o overpowering one, having grasped it entirely, bring it here.  Don’t leave lacking the desire of the singer who seeks you.
## 4
He is well disposed through these days by reason of these soma drops,  checking neglect by means of cows and (wealth) in horses.
Might we, breaking up the Dasyu with Indra and the soma drops,
keeping hostility away, be embraced by refreshment.
## 5
O Indra, might we be embraced by wealth, by nourishment, and by  much-glittering prizes bound for heaven.
Might we be embraced by your divine solicitude, having the unbridled  force of heroes, with cows at the front, accompanied by horses.
## 6
These exhilarating drinks exhilarated you and your bullish powers—these  soma juices at the smashing of obstacles, o lord of settlements,
when you laid low ten unopposable obstacles for the bard, a thousand  for the man who spreads the ritual grass.
## 7
Battle after battle you join boldly; fortress after fortress do you now  smash together with your power,
since, with Namī as your comrade, o Indra, in the far distance you laid  low the wily one, Namuci by name.
## 8
You struck Karañja and Parṇaya with the sharpest wheel-edge of Atithigva. You, unyielding, split the hundred fortresses of Vaṅgr̥da that were
besieged by R̥jiśvan.
## 9
You, together with Suśravas with no (other) adherents, (wrenched  down) those twice ten kings of the peoples, who had come too close; you, the famous, wrenched down the sixty thousand ninety-nine with a  chariot wheel and a lame (horse).
## 10
You helped Suśravas with your means of help and Tūrvayāṇa with your  means of rescue, o Indra.
You made Kutsa, Atithigva, and Āyu subject to him, to the great
young king.
## 11
We who, when the chant is raised, will be your most friendly comrades,  Indra, having the gods as our herdsmen—
let us praise you—we having good heroes because of you and receiving  a longer, more extensive lifetime.