+++
title = "054"

+++
54 Indra
Savya Āṅgirasa
11 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 6, 8, 9, 11
Etymological figures and lexical repetitions abound in this hymn, and through  this repetition Indra comes to “own” certain words—particularly “daring” and  “sovereignty.” Much of the hymn (esp. vss. 1–6) consists of praise of Indra’s vari ous violent deeds, interspersed with exhortations to sing these praises to the god.  In verse 7 the earthly king is invested with some of Indra’s prestige—as long as he  emulates Indra’s habit of command and also shows the Indraic quality of generos ity to the poets. This generosity is also urged on Indra himself in verses 8–9 and  11, with a curious and obscurely phrased treatment of the Vr̥tra myth interspersed  in verse 10.
## 1
Do not (leave) us in this distress in our battles, o bounteous one, for the  end of your vast power cannot be reached.
You made the rivers roar, yourself constantly bellowing through the  woods. How have the war cries [/Heaven and Earth] not clashed
together in fear?
## 2
Chant to the able one, the capable one with his abilities. Exalting him,  praise Indra as he listens—
he who, a bullish bull by his bullish nature, with his daring power bears  down on the two world-halves.
## 3
Chant a thunderous speech to lofty heaven. Of which daring one his  daring mind has its own sovereignty—
the lord possessing lofty fame through his lofty might, the bull [=Indra]  has been put in front for his two fallow bays, for he is the chariot.

## 4
You shook the back of the lofty heaven; by yourself, in your daring, you  cut down Śambara,
as, daringly, by reason of the exhilarating (soma), you battle the
sharpened stone, the fist, of the wily one grown weak,
## 5
As you yank down on the head of the snorting Śuṣṇa also grown weak,  yourself constantly bellowing through the woods,
with your mind facing forward and possessed of lofty might. If you will  also do (such) today, who (will evade) you?
## 6
You helped the manly Turvaśa and Yadu; you (helped) Turvīti and  Vayya, o you of a hundred resolves;
you (helped) Etaśa and his chariot when the stake was to be decided,  and you subjugated the ninety-nine fortifications.
## 7
As king and lord of the settlements, that man will grow in strength  who, having bestowed his oblation, advances (Indra’s) command
in turn,
or who greets the (poets’) hymns with generosity. For him the gift
[/drop] of heaven swells here below.
## 8
Unequalled is his sovereignty, unequalled his inspired thinking.  Let the soma-drinkers of our group be preeminent through
their labor—
they who strengthen the great sovereignty, steadfast and bull-strong, of  you who give, o Indra.
## 9
For you alone are these ample beakers, milked by stones and resting in  cups—the draughts of Indra.
Attain (them), satisfy your desire for them, and then put your mind to  giving goods.
## 10
There stood darkness, whose tangles were the foundation for the waters,  a mountain within the belly of Vr̥tra.
Indra smashes all the rows (of palings) set up in succession among the  torrents by the encloser of the rivers.
## 11
Establish in us brilliance increasing in benevolence and your great and  mighty sovereignty, o Indra, as vanquisher of the peoples.
Guard those generous to us and protect our patrons. Destine us for
wealth and for nourishment bringing good descendants.