+++
title = "055"

+++
55
Indra
Savya Āṅgirasa
8 verses: jagatī
The hymn has a weak omphalos shape, with the paired middle verses 4 and 5  contrasting Indra’s central role in peace (4)  and war (5), in parallel syntactic constructions. The hymn begins by describing Indra’s vast size and fierce power  (vss. 1–3) and ends with an appeal to him to come to our sacrifice bearing gifts (vss.  7–8). Despite the emphasis in the hymn on Indra’s martial powers and contrary to  Savya’s usual practice, no particular heroic deeds are recounted or even mentioned  directly; there is simply one indirect allusion to the Vr̥tra myth in the final pāda of  verse 6, which serves as the transition between the omphalos verses and the final  requests.
## 1
His expansion spreads out even beyond heaven; not even the earth is the  counterpart to Indra in greatness.
Fearsome and mighty, a scorching firebrand for the settled domains, he  hones his mace, like a buffalo (its horn), to be piercingly sharp.
## 2
As the sea’s flood receives the rivers, he receives the sprawling
(soma-streams?) with his expanses.
Indra acts the bull to drink the soma. From of old he seeks admiration  as a battler by his power.
## 3
In order to enjoy it [=soma] like a mountain, you are in control of the  principles of great manliness.
Among the gods he shows ever more brightly by his heroism—the
powerful one placed in front for every deed.
## 4
It’s just he who displays his eloquence in the woods along with those  offering homage, when he proclaims his own dear Indrian (name)
among the peoples.
The bull becomes pleasing, the bull delightful, when, as bounteous one,  he impels the nourishing stream (of speech) in peace.
## 5
It’s just he who by his greatness makes great clashes for the peoples, a  battler by his power.
Then indeed they place their trust in turbulent Indra, as he smashes  down his mace, his deadly weapon, again and again—
## 6
For it’s he, seeking fame, who’s destroying the artfully made seats (of the  enemy) across the earth, as he grows strong in power,
and is making lights free of wolves [=safe] for the worshipful man. The  very resolute one released the waters to flow.
## 7
Let your mind be on giving, o soma-drinker. Hearing our tributes, make  your fallow bays turn this way.
These fervent intentions, which are your coachmen, best at guiding, do  not deceive you, o Indra.
## 8
You bear inexhaustible goods in your hands. The famed one takes  undominatable dominance into his body.
Like wells covered over by their makers are the many resolves within  your body, o Indra.
