+++
title = "056"

+++
56 Indra
Savya Āṅgirasa
6 verses: jagatī
Though characterized by rare words and tortuous expressions, both defying easy  interpretation, the hymn follows a fairly straightforward trajectory. The ability of  soma to strengthen Indra for his great feats is described in the first two verses, which  also depict Indra’s journey to our sacrifice. His power in general is the subject of  the next two verses (3–4), while the last two (5–6) focus on the slaying of Vr̥tra and  its cosmogonic effects.
## 1
This one has raised forth for himself the many dippers of this *well (of  soma), as a stallion, all aquiver, raises himself up to [=mounts] a
young mare.
For the great (deed?) he gives himself golden skill [=soma] to
drink, having turned his ingenious chariot here, hitched with his
fallow bays.
## 2
Our greetings in profusion, seeking his leadership, (go) seeking to win  him, like (rivers) in their converging on the sea.
With your sharpness, (o Soma,) ascend to the lord of skill,
(who is) now the power of ritual distribution, as trackers ascend
a mountain.
## 3
He is surpassing and great in masculine strength, (even) without  raising dust. Like the peak of a mountain his power glints with its  thrusting,
(the power) with which his headstrong metal (weapon), in his
exhilaration and among those standing by him, brought wily Śuṣṇa
down to rest in fetters.
## 4
If his divine might, strong through you [=poet], accompanies Indra to  help (him), as the sun accompanies the dawn,
(then) he, who by his daring power repels the darkness, raises the dust  aloft with a cry of hurrah!
## 5
When you spread out the immovable foundation [=earth], you
set the airy realm on the doorposts of heaven with your lofty
power.
When, o Indra, in (the contest) with the sun as its prize, ecstatic in your  exhilaration with the excitement (of soma), you smashed Vr̥tra, (then)  you forced out the flood of waters.
## 6
You set the foundation of heaven and of earth upon their seats with your  power as the great one, o Indra.
You made the waters flow in the exhilaration of the pressed soma; you  broke apart all at once the two jaws of Vr̥tra.