+++
title = "057"

+++
57
Indra
Savya Āṅgirasa
6 verses: jagatī
This final hymn of the Savya group turns its attention from the recounting of  Indra’s great (and lesser) deeds to focus on the ritual performance being offered  to honor the god (vss. 1–3) and on the participants in that performance: “we” who  are “yours,” that is, Indra’s (vss. 4–5). Only in the final verse (6) is there mention of  any of Indra’s exploits, with an oblique reference to the Vr̥tra myth that is featured  heavily in other Savya hymns.
One of the puzzles of the hymn is the identity of the female addressee in verse 3,  “(you,) lovely like Dawn.” Oldenberg (tentatively), Geldner, and Renou all suggest  that she is the Sacrificer’s Wife, but this is quite unlikely. As I have argued elsewhere  (Jamison 2011, forthcoming a, forthcoming b), this ritual participant is only being  introduced in the late R̥gveda and she is a controversial and polarizing figure there,  so it is improbable that she would be addressed without fanfare here. Moreover, the  addressee is called upon to bring or assemble material for the sacrifice, a role that  the Sacrificer’s Wife never has in classical śrauta ritual (see Jamison 1996a passim).
## 01
For the most bounteous one, the lofty one bringing lofty wealth, for the  mighty one of real unbridled force I bring forth my thought—
for him whose generosity is difficult to restrain as if in a torrent of
waters, lifelong generosity opened up to his power.
## 02
Then will everything be at hand for you to seek it: the soma-pressings of  the man who offers oblation (flow) like waters to the depths,
when the gladdening golden mace of Indra has been whetted, as if on a  mountain, to be the piercer.
## 03
For him the fearsome, much to be admired, assemble with homage  (everything) here at the rite, o (you,) lovely like Dawn—
(for him) whose Indrian name has been made a light, a foundation for  fame, like tawny mares for coursing.
## 04
Here we are—those of yours, o much-praised Indra, who carry on,  having seized hold of you, o you providing outstanding goods,
for none other than you bears up to our songs, o you who long for songs.  Gladly receive this speech of ours like war-cries.
## 05
Abundant is your heroism, o Indra. We are yours: fulfill the desire of this  singer, o bounteous one.
Lofty heaven measures itself against your heroism, and this earth bends  to your power.
## 06
You, Indra, cut that great, wide mountain apart joint by joint with your  mace, o mace-wielder.
You released the confined waters to flow. You acquired all strength
exclusively and entirely.174 I.58
The next seven hymns (I.58–64) are attributed to Nodhas Gautama. His Indra  hymns (I.61–63) are especially notable for their verbal agility.