+++
title = "058"

+++
58
Agni
Nodhas Gautama
9 verses: jagatī 1–5, triṣṭubh 6–9
Although Nodhas Gautama’s poetic intricacy is not as much on display in his Agni  hymns as in his Indra hymns, he excels here in his vivid and dense depiction of  physical fire, especially the forest fire. In the jagatī portion of the hymn, verses con cerning ritual fire (1, 3) alternate with evocations of the unchecked passage of fire  in the woods (2, 4–5), while the final four verses (6–9), in triṣṭubh, are only about  the ritual fire. The ritual verses focus on the choosing and installation of Agni as  Hotar (vss. 1, 3, 6–7), especially in its first enactment by the gods and the human  ancestors (see esp. vss. 3, 6).
The counterpoint between wild uncontrollable fire and ritual fire may subtly  emphasize what a feat of civilizing was accomplished by taming fire for sacrificial  (and domestic) purposes in the legendary past, and how this feat is repeated in the  present day. The last two verses (8–9) beg Agni for shelter and protection for us,  the singers. Again, the image of a guardian fire may acquire special intensity by  contrast with the potentially destructive fire in the wild.
## 1
Never is the immortal one, born of strength, forced down. When he  became Hotar, messenger of Vivasvant,
he measured across the airy realm along the paths that lead straightest  to the goal. In service to the gods he entices them here with the
oblation.
## 2
The unaging one, drawing his own food toward him, thirstily eager to  eat, keeps to the thickets.
His back when he is sprinkled shines like a steed; thundering like the  spine of heaven, he has roared.
## 3
He was placed in front successfully by the Rudras and the Vasus, set  down as Hotar, the immortal who conquers wealth,
like a chariot steering straight among the clans descended from Āyu. The  god discloses valuables in due order.
## 4
Sped by the wind, he spreads himself out among the thickets at will, with  his tongues as sickle, powerfully noisy.
When, Agni, thirstily you rush like a bull upon the woods, black is your  course, o unaging one with gleaming waves.
## 5
With scorching fangs, spurred by the wind he gusts down upon the wood,  like a victorious buffalo upon the herd, advancing upon the imperishable airy realm in his full dimension. The  still and the moving fear, and also the winged ones.
## 6
The Bhr̥gus installed you among the sons of Manu, dear like wealth, easy  to invoke for the peoples,
as Hotar, o Agni, a guest worthy to be chosen, favorable like an ally to  the divine race.
## 7
Whom the seven tongues, whom the cantors choose as Hotar, best  sacrificing at the ceremonies,
to Agni, the nave of all goods, I render service with a pleasurable
offering. I beg for a treasure.
## 8
O son of strength with the might of Mitra, today hold out unbroken  shelters to us, your praisers.
O Agni, child of nourishment, deliver the singer from narrow straits,  with your metal strongholds.
## 9
Become a defense for the singer, o radiant one. Become shelter for  bounteous ones, o bounteous one.
Deliver the singer from narrow straits, Agni. – Early in the
morning—soon—he should come, bringing goods through (his)
insight.