+++
title = "059"

+++
59
(Agni) Vaiśvānara
Nodhas Gautama
7 verses: triṣṭubh
Agni in his aspect as Vaiśvānara (“belonging to all men”) is the dedicand of this  hymn, and the epithet Vaiśvānara occurs once in every verse. The universality of  Agni is emphasized throughout. The first and last verses have contrastive víśva (“all”) expressions:  “all the immortals” in 1b contrasting with “belonging to all  (human) communities” in 7a. The first two verses situate him as cosmically central,  between gods and men and heaven and earth, while in verse 3 he is the center that  attracts everything else within him. A different kind of universality is asserted in  verses 5–6, where the signature deeds of Indra are attributed to Agni and he is  called by Indra’s standard epithet, “Vr̥tra-smasher.” This rhetorical ploy makes him  the equivalent of the most powerful of the gods, hence in some sense the embodi
ment of divinity itself.
The hymn also shows an omphalos structure. The outer ring (vss. 1 and  7) noted above, as well as an inner ring defined by the identification of Agni as  king (vss. 3 and 5), point to the middle verse 4 as omphalos. And in a hymn of  reasonably straightforward syntax and imagery, verse 4 does stand out for its rel
ative obscurity. Why this verse should be freighted with the message of the hymn

is not entirely clear, but it brings together the cosmic (the two world-halves) with  the human, in the form of the sacrifice, where the Hotar offers hymns to Agni,  who himself regularly serves as Hotar (see, e.g., the preceding hymn I.58). Thus  the centrality of Agni for both the cosmos and the mundane world is affirmed in  this, the central verse of the hymn, as is the interpenetration of Agni’s twofold  nature as an element of the cosmos (the son of Heaven and Earth, possessed of  the sun) and as a participating member of human society (the Hotar, recipient  of hymns).
It is worthy of note that, in contrast to the last hymn (I.58) with its graphic  depiction of actual fire, this hymn contains almost no mention of Agni’s physical  qualities.
## 1
The other fires are just twigs of you, Agni. In you do all the immortals  bring themselves to euphoria.
Vaiśvānara, you are the navel of the settlements. Like a pillar, as prop  you hold the peoples fast.
## 2
The head of heaven, the navel of the earth is Agni. And he became the  spoked wheel of the two world-halves.
You did the gods beget as god, Vaiśvānara, as light just for the Ārya  (people).
## 3
Like the rays (placed) firm in the sun, in Vaiśvānara, in Agni have goods  been placed—
those that are in the mountains, in the plants, in the waters, that are  among men—of (all) this you are king.
## 4
Like the two lofty world-halves for their son [=Agni], like Manu’s skill,  the human Hotar (brings) hymns—
many (hymns), (like) exuberant maidens—for him possessed of
the sun, him whose bluster is real, for the most manly
Vaiśvānara.
## 5
Even beyond lofty heaven does your greatness project, o Jātavedas  Vaiśvānara.
You are king of the communities belonging to the sons of Manu.
Through combat you made a wide realm for the gods.
## 6
I now proclaim the greatness of the bull, whom the Pūrus attend upon as  Vr̥tra-smasher.
Vaiśvānara, Agni, having smashed the Dasyu, shook the wooden
barriers, cut down Śambara.
## 7
Vaiśvānara, belonging to all communities by his greatness, worthy of the  sacrifice among the Bharadvājas, far-radiant,
Agni, displaying liberality, at the (place of) Śātavaneya of many
stratagems, is awakened with hundredfold (riches).