+++
title = "060"

+++
60 Agni
Nodhas Gautama
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Two double aspects of Agni, touched on in the two previous Agni hymns by Nodhas  Gautama, are united in this brief hymn. On the one hand, Agni’s primal installation  in the sacrifice by the ancestors of humankind is contrasted with his regular re-instal lation by the current sacrificers (see esp. vs. 2ab, but also throughout). In fact, the orig inal theft of fire from heaven by Mātariśvan, who bestowed it on the legendary Bhr̥gu,  ends the first verse. In several places (2c, 3d, 4b, 4d) it is not possible to determine  from the verb form whether the poet is referring to the distant and legendary past or  the recent past of the current ritual, though unfortunately English imposes the choice.  The aorist forms in question often refer to the immediate past, and so we have trans lated them (“has been set down,” etc.), but an unmarked past (“was set down,” etc.)  is far from excluded. It is quite likely that the poet wished to leave the question open.
The other double aspect treated is Agni’s dual role in the sacrifice: he both acts  as priest and is the object of ritual activity by human priests. See especially verse  2b, where the Uśij (“fire-priests”) present oblations to him, and 4a, where Agni is  identified as an Uśij (as well as a Hotar, in 4b).
## 1
Glorious conveyor and beacon of the rite, pursuing (his ritual duties)  well, the messenger who immediately (reaches) his goal,
of double birth, celebrated like wealth—Mātariśvan brought him as a  gift to Bhr̥gu.
## 2
His command do both sides follow in presenting their oblations: his  (ancient) fire-priests and mortals (now).
He has been set down as Hotar even in front of heaven, as clan-lord  worthy of the asking, the ritual adept among the clans.
## 3
Ever newer acclaim from us, from our heart, should reach him as he is  being born, the honey-tongued one,
whom the sons of Manu who sacrifice regularly in ritual community,  who dispense ritual delight, the Āyus, have begotten.
## 4
Himself a fire-priest, pure and good, he has been installed among the  clans of the sons of Manu as the Hotar worthy to be chosen.
As domestic ally, house-lord in the home, Agni has became wealth-lord  of wealth.
## 5
It is you, Agni, that we Gotamas celebrate with our thoughts as lord of  wealth,
grooming you like a swift, prize-bearing (horse). – Early in the
morning—soon—he should come, bringing goods through (his)
insight.
