+++
title = "061"

+++
61
Indra
Nodhas Gautama
16 verses: triṣṭubh
The three Indra hymns by Nodhas share a ritual context: judging from their last  verses (I.61.16, 62.13, 63.9) they were all composed to accompany the Hāriyojana  (“Fallow-bay-yoking”) oblation, when Indra’s pair of horses is yoked up for the  god’s return journey to heaven after the sacrifice is complete. The parts of these  hymns before the final verse do not seem to reflect this ritual moment, and the three  hymns are quite different, though they all display Nodhas’s remarkable poetic skill.
This first hymn, I.61, is a masterpiece of intricate structure and verbal trickery.  We will summarize the main points here, but for more detailed treatment see the  lengthy discussion in Jamison (2007: 60–68). The most obvious structural device is  the fronted repetition of a deictic pronoun: each of the sixteen verses except the last  (which is an extra-hymnic summary verse) begins with either the dative asmaí “for  him” or the genitive asyá “of him,” followed by two emphasizing particles, always  referring to Indra (except in vs. 12—see below). The dative sequence is the more  common and frames the hymn (vss. 1–6, 8, 12, 15); the genitive sequence is found  primarily in the center of the hymn (vss. 7, 9–11, 13–14).
This rigid structural device both parallels and counterpoints the semantic  structure of the hymn. In general in this hymn the dative verses express the ritual  here-and-now, with the production and presentation of hymns and ritual offer ings “to/for just this one,” while the genitive verses concern Indra’s great deeds.  Especially in the dative verses numerous co-referential adjectival datives reinforce  the fronted pronoun, as well as strategically placed dative tokens of the god’s name.  Curiously, in the genitive verses the genitive several times (vss. 7, 10, 11) seems to  have quite a loose syntactic connection to the rest of the sentence, and Indra may  appear in another case in the same verse, as in 

> 61.10ab asyéd evá śávasā śuṣántaṃ, ví vr̥ścad vájreṇa vr̥trám índraḥ  
> Of just this one [gen.]—in (his) expansion Indra [nom.] hewed apart  snorting Vr̥tra with his mace.

But what may appear superficially to be clumsy composition serves a larger  structural purpose:  it seems that the logical structure of the hymn requires a  two-way opposition, between dative asmaí and something else: the something else  is genitive asyá even when a different case form might have been more appropriate,  for a variety of other cases would have obscured the bipartite contrastive structure  of the hymn. Here we see an example of clausal morphosyntax subordinated to and  indeed distorted by the imposition of a larger literary and rhetorical pattern.
The poet Nodhas also lays a few traps for us by playing on the expectations he  has created. Most notable of them is verse 12, which begins with the dative asmaí and therefore appears to return us from the mythological past to the realm of the  current-day poet of verses 1–5, an expectation reinforced by the verb prá bharā, a standard lexeme for presenting a hymn to a divinity. But the phrase in verse 12  quickly goes awry. At the opening of the next pāda, where Indra’s name has been  prominently placed in previous verses (índrāya 1d, 4d, 5b, 8b), we find, most shock ingly, the name of his arch-enemy, vr̥trā́ya, immediately followed by the accusative  object vájram, Indra’s weapon, not the word for hymn we were expecting. The poet  has simply tricked us, having laid a trap with conventional phraseology and syntax  and with the stylistic patterns established earlier in the hymn. He also skillfully  exploits the morphological ambiguity of the verb form bharā: given the pattern set  in verses 1–5 we are primed to interpret bharā as a 1st sg. subjunctive (“I shall pres
ent”), but as the half verse unfolds, it becomes clear that bharā must rather be taken  as a metrically lengthened 2nd singular imperative (“bear down!”).
The meter of this hymn is often irregular, with a number of ten-syllable lines,  but again this irregularity should not be taken as a sign of poor poetic technique.  Rather the hymn seems to be phrase-driven rather than meter-driven, and the metri cal rests that result from “missing syllables” serve to isolate and emphasize crucial  nominal phrases—an effect also heightened by the copious examples of alliteration.
With all the poetic fireworks on display the actual contents of the hymn may  seem almost beside the point, but we will provide a brief sketch. The first five verses  (“dative verses”) are variations on a theme: the poet’s verbal offerings to Indra. The  sixth verse, also a dative verse, modulates to the distant past and the god Tvaṣṭar’s gift  of the newly fashioned mace to Indra. Verse 7 combines two rare Indra myths: his  appropriation of his father’s soma right after his birth and the Emuṣa myth, in which  the god Viṣṇu steals a mess of rice porridge while Indra shoots the boar Emuṣa.  (For further on this myth, see Introduction, p. 40.) Verses 8–12 treat the Vr̥tra myth  for the most part, though with some detours. Verses 13–15 generalize the praise of  Indra’s deeds and bring it back to the present time and to the present poet, Nodhas,  who names himself in verse 14, while the final verse, 16, summarizes the hymn that  precedes and names the ritual application, the “Fallow-bay-yoking” oblation.
It is difficult to do justice to this tour de force of poetic craft, and many of its  finest effects have not been discussed here. It is, unfortunately, even more difficult to  do justice to it in English translation.
## 1
Just for this one, powerful, precipitous, mighty, do I bring forward praise  like a pleasurable offering—
for the one equal to song, not poor, (do I bring) a laud—for Indra (I  bring) sacred formulations best bestowed.
## 2
Just to this one I have held it out like a pleasurable offering. I bring out a  song; I thrust it out with a good twist
to Indra, with heart, with mind, with inspired thought. For the
primordial lord the insights groom themselves.
## 3
Just to this one this utmost sun-winning song do I bring with
my mouth,
to strengthen the most munificent patron with the invitations of my  thoughts, with their good twists.

## 4
Just for this one I put together praise—like a carpenter a chariot for the  one whose gear it is—
and hymns with a good twist for the one whose vehicle is hymns—for  wise Indra (praise) that sets everything in motion.
## 5
Just for this one, for Indra, do I anoint the chant with my tongue [/the  offering ladle], as one anoints a team when seeking fame—
to extol the hero accustomed to giving [/gifts], the splitter of
strongholds whose fame is sung.
## 6
Just for this one Tvaṣṭar fashioned the mace of best workmanship, the  reverberating one, for battle [/for joy],
with which he found the mortal spot of that very Vr̥tra, as, gaining  mastery, he thrust with the thrusting (mace), while conferring (who  knows) how much.
## 7
Just this one—he, having already drunk in an instant the nourishment  of his great (father), the pleasing foods at his mother’s
soma-pressings—
while Viṣṇu the stronger stole the cooked (rice-porridge), he pierced the  boar through the stone, (Indra) the archer.
## 8
Just for this one, for Indra, even the ladies, the Wives of the Gods, wove  a chant at the Vr̥tra-smashing.
He held encircled broad heaven and earth; they did not encompass his  greatness.
## 9
Just this one—his greatness projected beyond heaven and earth, beyond  the midspace.
Sovereign king, Indra, sung by all in the house, a reverberant tankard,  waxed strong for battle [/for joy].
## 10
Just this one—with his swelling strength Indra hewed apart snorting  Vr̥tra with his mace.
The streams, pent up like cows, he released toward fame, of one mind  (with them), for giving.
## 11
Just this one—the rivers with their glittering came to rest when he held  them encircled with his mace.
Performing the master’s part, showing favor to the pious man, the  victorious one made a ford for Turvīti.
## 12
Toward just this one, toward Vr̥tra, bear down the mace, thrusting,  gaining mastery, conferring (who knows) how much.
Scrape through him crosswise as if through the joints of a cow,  dispatching the floods of waters to wander.
## 13
Of just this one, the precipitous—proclaim his former deeds anew with  solemn words,
when, propelling his own weapons to battle, showing his mettle, he  dissolves his rivals. 14. Just this one—in fear of his birth both the firmly fixed mountains and  heaven and earth thrust against each.
Constantly calling upon him [=Indra], who is a (protective) arm for  the seeker, in an instant Nodhas [=the poet] will be (there) for his
[=Indra’s] (next?) manly deed.
## 15
Just to this one has this (soma-drinking?) been conceded by them  [=gods], since he alone won (it?), becoming master of much.
Indra aided Etaśa, who was contending for the sun; he will aid the
soma-presser contending for good horses.
## 16
Thus have the Gotamas made you sacred formulations for the
“Fallow-bay-yoking” (oblation), with a good twist, o Indra.
Do you confer on them an insight with all its ornaments. – Early in  the morning—soon—he should come bringing goods through his
insight.