+++
title = "062"

+++
62
Indra
Nodhas Gautama
13 verses: triṣṭubh
The poetic ingenuity of Nodhas is also on display in this hymn, though in some what different ways from his tricks in I.61. The hymn is full of phonetic play and  alliteration, with numerous somewhat aberrant morphological forms generated  for this play. Repetition and variation on this repetition are also conspicuous—for  example, the word sanā́t (“from of old”) opening 8a, 10a, 12a, with teasingly close  forms (sánemi 9a, sánīḍā 10a) alternating with it.
The hymn falls into two main sections. The first five verses are the more conven tional—if poetically rich—part, treating the Vala myth and especially the role of  the Aṅgirases in it. (Interestingly, the Vala myth is absent from I.61.) The first half  of verse 6 seems to summarize this deed of Indra’s extravagantly: “This is his most  conspicuous deed, the dearest wonder of the wondrous one.” But Nodhas tricks us  here, for the second half of the verse concerns an entirely different and much more  obscure deed of Indra’s, the swelling of the four, probably celestial, rivers. From 6cd  through verse 10 we meet fleetingly recounted fragments of other myths, but these  myths seem connected at a structural level, since they involve female figures in pairs  or groups working reciprocally or jointly: the rivers of 6cd, the two world-halves of 7  (compared to twin consorts), Night and Dawn (compared to young girls) in 8, black  and red cows in 9, and streams again in 10, apparently returning to the rivers of 6cd.  In the second half of 10 we encounter a surfeit of females: two words for wives (jáni and pátnī) as well as sisters, all offering friendship to Indra. These females may refer  to the streams of the first half of the verse, or to the thoughts converging on Indra  in the next verse (11), which are also compared to wives. Most likely the reference in

10cd is double, providing a transition from the cosmic mythological realm in verses  6–10 to the ritual here-and-now of verses 11–13. The hymn ends, like I.61, with a  verse (13) specifically applicable to the “Fallow-bay-yoking” oblation, and like I.61  (vss. 14 and 16) mentions both the poet Nodhas and his clan, the Gotamas.
## 01
We think up a fortifying song for the forceful one who longs for hymns,  just as the Aṅgirases did.
A chant with the good twists of a praiser we chant to the one worthy of  chant, to the widely famed superior man.
## 02
Present your great reverence to the great one, a songful melody to the  forceful one,
with which our forefathers, the Aṅgirases, knowing the track [/word],  chanting, found the cows.
## 03
At the desire of Indra and the Aṅgirases, Saramā found the wellspring  for posterity.
Br̥haspati: he split the rock; he found the cows. The superior men
bellowed together with the ruddy (cows).
## 04
He with (his flock) of good rhythm, he with rhythm, with the seven  inspired poets, with the Navagvas, he, the resounding one, with sound  (split) the rock.
With the hastening ones, o able Indra, you cleft the bolt, with a roar you  cleft Vala with the Daśagvas.
## 05
Being hymned by the Aṅgirases, o wondrous one, you uncovered the  blinding darkness [/soma stalk] along with the dawn, with the sun,
with the cows.
You spread out the back of the earth, Indra; you propped up the nearer  realm of heaven.
## 06
This is his most conspicuous deed, the dearest wonder of the
wondrous one,
that he made the four nearer (celestial?) rivers with their honeyed floods  swell in their eddying.
## 07
Another time, with his chants that were being sung, the irrepressible  one uncovered the age-old pair belonging to the same nest [=the two  worlds].
As Bhaga [/a (good) portion] (supports) his two consorts, he of very  wondrous power supported the two world-halves in farthest heaven.
## 08
From of old the two young girls of distinct forms, (ever) regenerating,  (go) around heaven and earth along their own courses—
Night with her black, Dawn with her gleaming white shapes progress one  after the other.
## 09
Possessing very wondrous power, doing good work, the son with his  strength supported the partnership to its full extent.
You placed the “cooked” (milk) even within the “raw” (cows), the
gleaming white milk in the black and in the red (cows). 10. From of old the streams coming from the same nest, unquenchable and  immortal, guard their commandments with their powers.
For many thousands (of aeons?), like lady wives, the sisters [=streams?  thoughts?] offer friendship to the unabashed one.
## 11
The age-old thoughts, with reverence, with chants, seeking goods, have  run anew (to you), wondrous one.
Like eager wives their eager husband, the inspired thoughts caress you,  you strong one.
## 12
Though (originating) from of old, the riches in your hand do not  become exhausted, nor do they give out, wondrous one.
You are brilliant, Indra, you are resolute and insightful. Do your best  for us with your abilities, able one.
## 13
For the age-old “Fallow-bay-yoking” (oblation) Gotama has fashioned  a newer sacred formulation, Indra—
Nodhas (has fashioned it) for us for good guidance, o forceful one. –  Early in the morning—soon—he should come, bringing goods
through his insight.