+++
title = "063"

+++
63
Indra
Nodhas Gautama
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The fondness of Nodhas for initial repetition is on display in this hymn, where  almost every verse begins with t(u)vám “you,” with a distracted vocative ind(a)ra positioned after an early caesura. The hymn lacks the verbal intricacy of the last  two (I.61–62), though it is full of philological problems.
The tone of the hymn also differs from the two previous ones: it is far more  martial and concerned with Indra’s fearsome power. His aggressive power, even just  after birth, is highlighted in verse 1, and the following verses quickly allude to the  destruction of various foes, usually for the benefit of one of his clients (e.g., Kutsa,  vs. 3) or for mortals in general. Like the last two hymns, this one ends with a sum
mary verse applicable to the “Fallow-bay-yoking” oblation.
## 1
You are great, Indra, you who, on just being born, with your tempests  put heaven and earth in (the path of your) onslaught,
so that all the vast masses, even the mountains, though firmly fixed,  stirred like dust-motes in fear of you.
## 2
When, Indra, you pursued hither your two fallow bays who follow  separate commandments, the singer placed the mace in your two arms, with which, o you whose resolve is not to be deflected, you dispatch the  foes and their many strongholds, o much invoked one.184 I.64
## 3
You are trusty, Indra, and bold against them. You are master of the  R̥bhus, favorable to men; you are victorious.
You smashed Śuṣṇa in his (war-)band, when strengthening nourishment  and the axle-pin (were at stake), for the young, heaven-bright Kutsa,  in partnership.
## 4
You then, Indra, as partner provided the spur, when you knotted up  Vr̥tra, you mace-bearer of bullish deeds,
when, you champion of bullish mind, you cut apart the Dasyus in their  womb far away, as one who is victorious at will.
## 5
You then, Indra, intending no harm to mortals, in your displeasure (you  opened up the doors) even of the stronghold,
opened the barriers for the steed (that comes) from us. As if with a
deadly weapon, mace-bearer, pierce the foes.
## 6
On you then, Indra, the superior men call, at the winning of the flood, in  the contest whose prize is the sun.
This help of yours here in the clash when prizes (are at stake), o
autonomous one, has become something unshakeable.
## 7
You then, mace-bearing Indra, attacking, split seven fortifications for  Purukutsa, one after the other.
When at will you twisted them like ritual grass for Sudās, o king, from  narrowness you made wide space for Pūru.
## 8
You, god Indra, will make this bright refreshment swell for us as waters  do in their circling,
the refreshment with which, o champion, you will extend yourself
toward us like nourishment to flow everywhere.
## 9
(This hymn) has been made for you, Indra, by the Gotamas; sacred  formulations have been spoken with reverence to your two fallow bay  horses.
Bring a well-ornamented prize here to us. – Early in the morning—
soon—he should come, bringing goods through his insight.