+++
title = "064"

+++
64 Maruts
Nodhas Gautama
14 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 15
Exuberant in language and crammed with vivid description, this hymn treats the  usual Marut themes. The poet begins by exhorting himself to produce a worthy  and well-crafted hymn for these gods (vs. 1), and proceeds to do just that. Verses  2–4 describe the Maruts’ birth and beauty, while verses 5–8 turn to their role in  the thunderstorm, with comparisons to various wild animals found in verses 7–8.  Verse 9 is a pun on the word ródasī, which in the first half of the verse is in the dual number and refers to the two world-halves, while in the second half it must refer to  the goddess Rodasī (usually differently accented rodasī́), the regular consort of the  Maruts. (For the same pun, see I.167.4, also in a Marut hymn.) Further description  of their boisterous behavior occupies verses 10–11.
In verse 12 the poet returns to the beginning, by referring to the hymn “we” are  offering to the Maruts. Reestablishing the relationship between the mortal worship ers and the Maruts allows him to make the transition to the boons we ask of them.  After providing a model of the fortunate man who receives the Maruts’ aid in verse  13, the poet calls on the gods to grant good things to the patrons and the worshipers  in general (vss. 14–15).
## 1
To the bullish troop, good battlers and ritual adepts, present a
well-turned (hymn), o Nodhas—to the Maruts.
As one clever in mind and with dexterous hands ornaments his work,  I ornament the hymns standing ready at the rites.
## 2
They were born as the lofty bulls of heaven, the young bloods of Rudra,  lordly, unblemished,
pure white, blazing like suns, like consummate warriors with their drops  as banners, of frightful form.
## 3
The young unaging Rudras, who smite the miser though themselves not  poor, have grown strong like mountains.
All earthly creations, even the firm ones, do they stir up, and the
heavenly ones as well, by their might.
## 4
With bright unguents they anoint themselves for wonder; on their breasts  they arrange brilliants for beauty.
On their shoulders spears have rubbed. They were born all at once by  their own power, the men of heaven.
## 5
Performing the master’s part, the boisterous ones who care for the  stranger have produced winds and lightning flashes with their powers. The shakers milk the udder for heavenly (goods [=rain]). Swirling they  swell the earth with milk.
## 6
The Maruts of good drops swell the waters, the ghee-rich milk, as they  stand ready at the rites.
They lead (their horse) out to piss like a prize-seeking steed. They milk  the thundering, imperishable well-spring.
## 7
Buffalos, masters of artifice, of bright radiance, self-powerful like  mountains yet quick streaming,
like wild elephants you chew up the woods, when you have yoked your  own powers to those of your ruddy (horses).
## 8
Like lions the discerning ones keep roaring, beautifully marked like  mottled (deer), granting all possessions.
Animating the nights, urgently they (join) together with their dappled  (mares), with their spears—those who have a snake’s fury in their
strength.

## 9
Salute the two world-halves [=ródasī], you who are splendor in a flock,  who accompany the superior man [=Indra], champions with a
snake’s fury in your strength.
She [=Rodasī], like lightning lovely to look at, has mounted your
chariot like the ensign on chariot boxes, o Maruts.
## 10
Granting all possessions, at home with riches, linked with powers,  copious,
the archers have taken their arrows in their fists, the superior men of  endless tempests and bullish bangles.
## 11
With their golden wheel-rims the milk-strong ones keep pounding the  mountains like wayfarers (pounding the road with their feet)—
unruly battlers, self-propelling, stirring (even) the fixed, acting
headstrong, the Maruts with their glinting spears.
## 12
The ardent, pure, winning, unbounded offspring of Rudra do we hymn  with an invocation.
The space-traversing, powerful Marut flock, possessing the silvery
drink, bullish—follow it for splendor.
## 13
That mortal has now stood out beyond the people in strength by your  aid—the one whom you helped, Maruts.
He bears away the prize for himself with his steeds, bears away the
stakes with his men, bears resolve worthy of the asking. He dwells
peacefully; he thrives.
## 14
O Maruts, confer on the bounteous (patrons) brilliant bluster ever to be  celebrated, difficult to overcome in battles,
gaining the stakes, worthy of hymns, governing all domains. May we  thrive in life and lineage for a hundred winters.
## 15
Now, Maruts, confer on us durable wealth consisting of heroes,  victorious in the clash,
swelling in hundreds and thousands. – Early in the morning—soon—he  should come, rich through (his) insight.
The next nine hymns (I.65–73) are ascribed to Parāśara Śāktya and are dedicated  only to Agni. The first six (65–70) are in the relatively rare dvipadā virāj meter, while  the last three are in triṣṭubh. Despite the difference in meter, there is a strong sense  of unity in this group of hymns, in phraseology, in style, and in theme. Moreover,  somewhat in Vālakhilya fashion there are several paired hymns, especially I.65–66  and I.68–69 (with I.70 acting as a climatic third to that pairing).
The most important theme running through the series is Agni’s function as  the locus and target of joint action undertaken by men and by gods, and as  the representative of the unity thus produced. In this capacity for mortals he is  named the Vaiśvānara fire (“fire belonging to all men”—for another, nearby Agni  Vaiśvānara hymn see I.59), and the series I.68–70 contains an extended pun on the constituents of this epithet. In the divine realm the joint action of the gods is  represented by the Tānūnaptra rite and its foundation myth, treated in I.72 (see  Proferes 2007: 51–61). These complementary aspects of Agni are not restricted  to the hymns just named, but surface throughout this series, which thus shows a  rare thematic unity.