+++
title = "065"

+++
65 Agni
Parāśara Śāktya
10 verses: dvipadā virāj
As is generally the case with dvipadā virāj meter, the hymn falls into two-verse units,  essentially equivalent to a single trimeter verse (forty syllables, versus forty-four  [triṣṭubh] or forty-eight [jagatī]). The five-syllable units in which the verses are orga nized lend themselves to brief, discrete semantic and syntactic units, producing a  mosaic-like effect. In this hymn, as in the following one, the mosaic fragments are  often similes—especially pronounced here in the middle verses 5–6, though found  throughout. Each simile highlights a particular aspect of Agni.
The hymn also follows a ritual and mythological trajectory. It begins with the  hidden Agni (vs. 1), alluding in mythological terms to the well-known story of  Agni’s flight and rediscovery by the gods, which is treated in verses 2–3, but also, in  ritual terms, to the fire hidden in the wood before kindling. This kindling is accom
plished by the end of the hymn, where Agni spreads through the firewood and  awakens at dawn, conspicuous and visible from afar (vss. 7–10). The relationship of  Agni to waters, in his identity as Apām Napāt, is another theme in the hymn (vss.  4–7, 9), though the epithet Apām Napāt is not mentioned.
## 1
Hiding in secret like a thief with livestock,
yoking homage, conveying homage:
## 2
(You) did the clever, of one accord, follow along your tracks;
all those worthy of the sacrifice reverently approached you.
## 3
The gods followed the commandments of truth.
Like heaven (enclosing) the earth was his enclosing.
## 4
With wonder the waters strengthen the lovely child,
well-begotten in the lap of truth, in its womb.
## 5
Like thriving that brings delight, like a broad (place of) peaceful dwelling, like a mountain a source of benefit, like a gush (of water) that brings  blessings;
## 6
Like a steed on its course, launched in a surge,
like a river (sending) its gush: who can obstruct him?
## 7
Akin to the rivers, like a brother to his sisters,
(yet,) like a king his vassals, he devours the wood.

## 8
When, sped by the wind, he has spread out through the wood,
Agni cuts the hair of the earth.
## 9
He hisses like a wild goose sitting in the waters;
awakening at dawn, he is the most conspicuous to the clans by his
intention.
## 10
Like soma, a ritual expert, begotten of truth;
ranging widely like livestock with their young, far-radiant.