+++
title = "066"

+++
66
Agni
Parāśara Śāktya
10 verses: dvipadā virāj
Like the previous hymn, this one is constructed of short phrases often consisting  of similes. The similes here alternate between images of peace and prosperity and  those of turbulent combat, sometimes strikingly juxtaposed, as in the second half  of verse 3 or the contrasting halves of verse 4.
Toward the end of the hymn we find several puzzles, which have elicited widely  differing interpretations—especially verse 8 with its double mention of twins  (yamá). In our view the end of the hymn builds toward a ritual climax, found in  the final two verses of the hymn (9–10), and verse 8 sets the stage for this, the  early-morning sacrifice, by mentioning the risen sun as the twin already born and  the soma, not yet pressed, as the twin awaiting birth—both also identified with  Agni. Although these identifications would break the pattern of constant refer
ence to Agni set in the earlier parts of the hymn (and our interpretation therefore  gives us pause), the final pair of verses also move beyond the stasis of repeated  Agni-similes and depict a ritual moment, prefigured, in our view, by the mention of  other ritual entities in verse 8.
Note the ring-compositional element, the “sight of the sun,” in the first half of  verse 1 and the last words of verse 10. This double mention may support our inter pretation of verse 8 as mentioning the risen sun.
## 01
Glittering like wealth, like the sight of the sun,
like life-breath, like one’s own son;
## 02
Like a swooping (bird), ever restless, he clings to the wood;
like a milk-cow (yielding) milk, (he is) blazing and widely radiant.
## 03
Delightful like a home, he maintains peace;
ripe like grain, a conqueror of peoples.
## 04
Having rhythm like a seer, lauded among the clans;
well treated like a winning horse, he confers vitality.
## 05
Whose blaze is beyond domestication like one’s own will;
like a wife in the lap, enough for anyone. 6. When, glittering, he has flashed like a white (horse) among the clans, like a brilliant chariot (he is) dazzling in combats.
## 07
Set loose like an army, he initiates an onslaught,
like the arrow of an archer with its dazzling point.
## 08
(The one) twin [=Sun?] has been born, (the other) twin [=Soma?] is  what is to be born:
(the one [=Sun]) is the lover of girls [=Dawns?]; (the other [=Soma]) the  husband of women [=cows’ (milk)?].
## 09
With our movable (goods [=livestock]) and with our settled
household, we,
like cows (going) home, approach him, on your behalf, when he has  been kindled.
## 10
Like a river its gush, he has sent forth those [=butter offerings?] heading  downward.
The cows cry out upon seeing the sun.