+++
title = "067"

+++
67
Agni
Parāśara Śāktya
10 verses: dvipadā virāj
Although this hymn contains several similes (see vss. 1, 2, 5, 10), the simile is not the  organizing principle of the hymn, unlike I.65–66, and metaphors and personifica tions share the stage with formally marked similes.
Agni’s disappearance and hiding (vss. 3, 6–7) and his discovery by the gods  (vss. 3–4), and by implication by pious mortals (vss. 7–8), provide the mythologi cal theme of the hymn. The physical counterpart to this mythic concealment is the  immanence of fire in wood, in plants, and in water, mentioned at the beginning (vs.  1) and end (vss. 9–10) of the hymn. For similar themes, see I.65.
## 01
A conqueror amid the wood, an ally among mortals;
like a king he demands obedience without fail.
## 02
Like peace that brings prosperity, like good resolve;
he has become the very attentive Hotar who carries the oblations.
## 03
Taking in his hand all manly powers,
sitting down in secret, he sets the gods in (the path of) his onslaught. 4. The superior men, producing insights, find him here,
when they have recited mantras fashioned by the heart.
## 05
Like Aja (Ekapad) he supports the broad earth;
he props up heaven with mantras that come true.
## 06
Protect the dear tracks of the livestock.
During your whole lifetime, Agni, you go from hiding place to
hiding place.

## 07
He who perceives him gone into hiding,
and who has taken his seat at the stream of truth—
## 08
Those who unbind (the fetters of deceit?), serving truths —
for him, because of this, he [=Agni] has proclaimed good things.
## 09
He who [=Agni]—along with his offspring—sprouts greatly
in the sprouts and within the fruitful (plants),
## 10
(He is) the bright apparition in the house of the waters through his  whole lifetime.
Like clever men an abode, the wise have made a seat (for him), having  measured it out completely.