+++
title = "068"

+++
68
Agni
Parāśara Śāktya
10 verses: dvipadā virāj
Breaking the pattern of Parāśara’s previous dvipadā virāj hymns (I.65–67), this one  contains only a single, conventional simile (vs. 9). Its focus is instead on ritual, and  especially on the joint activity performed by “all” in their separate ways and the  rewards they share because of it (see esp. vss. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9). Although the identity of  the “all” is never made explicit, we believe that the poet is depicting the communal  fire shared and jointly tended by the united clans, and that the “all” (víśve) are the  members of the separate clans serving their shared fire (the Vaiśvānara fire [see  Proferes 2007: 46–49 and passim]). In fact, in reading this hymn with its twin, I.69,  the motif of the Vaiśvānara fire emerges strongly. In this hymn the focus is on víśva “all,” in the next hymn on náraḥ “(superior) men,” while at the end of I.70 the two  words are found sequentially (vss. 9–10). These are exactly the two elements found  in the vr̥ddhi bahuvrīhi compound vaiśvānará “belonging to all men,” the very name  of the shared clan fire, a word that never appears in this hymn sequence. Thus, I.68– 70 contain a buried but persistent pun, with one half of the compound allotted to  each of the first two hymns until they are reunited in the third. The phonological  resemblance between víśva “all” and víś “clan” is also in play, though the two words  are etymologically unrelated.
## 01
Bringing (the sacrifice) to readiness, bustling about, he approaches heaven. He discloses the still and the moving through the nights,
## 02
When, alone of all these gods,
the god encompasses (them) by his greatness.
## 03
All take pleasure in your resolve because of this:
that you are born alive from the desiccated (wood), o god.
## 04
All have a share in divinity and in its name,
as they serve immortal truth in their own ways. 5. The promptings of truth, the vision of truth—
all have performed their tasks lifelong.
## 06
Whoever will do ritual service to you or who will do his best for you, to him distribute wealth as the attentive one.
## 07
As the Hotar, he has taken his seat among the progeny of Manu. Just he is now the lord of these (offspring/clans? and) of riches.
## 08
They seek the seed mutually among themselves;
no fools—they act in unison, each according to his own skill.
## 09
They take pleasure in his resolve like sons in their father’s—
the powerful ones who obey his command.
## 10
Bringing much livestock, he has opened wide the doors of wealth. He, the master of the house, has emblazoned heaven’s vault with stars.