+++
title = "069"

+++
69
Agni
Parāśara Śāktya
10 verses: dvipadā virāj
Twinned with the preceding hymn (I.68), this hymn also treats the common clan-fire,  which serves as a symbol of unity during joint action undertaken by ordinarily sepa rate groups, although this theme is subtly conveyed. In the first few verses there are  only indirect hints: Agni “encompasses” an unspecified set of objects (vs. 2); in verse  4 he takes his place “in the middle” and is compared to a “friendly __ among the  people”—parallel passages suggest that “ally” should be supplied in this last phrase.
The clans are mentioned explicitly in verse 5, which describes Agni’s extension  through the clans, who are brought together, along with their superior men, in the  next verse (6). As already noted in the introduction to I.68, these men, the náraḥ,  supply the second part of the name of the clan-fire, Vaiśvānara. Agni’s reciprocal  relationship and joint action with these men are described in verses 7–8, and, in  our view, verse 9 describes the brilliance of the newly kindled clan-fire, which is  the focus of the shared sacrificial activity of the united clans. This interpretation is  supported by an adjective qualifying Agni in that verse: sáṃjñāta-rūpa. Although  most translators take this word as meaning “having a well-known form” on the  basis of the verbal root √jñā “recognize,” the idiom sáṃ-jñā has a different and very  specific meaning “come to an agreement, act in unison.” This very idiom is found in  the previous, twinned hymn, in verse 8, where it describes the mutual action of all  the clans, each contributing its own set of skills. Therefore in verse 9 of this hymn  Agni is described as the very form or representation of the agreement reached by  the clans, as well as the focus of the ritual activity that results from that agreement.  (It is worth noting that the final hymn of the R̥gveda, self-consciously advocating  unity, contains two occurrences of this lexeme [X.191.2b, d].)

The final verse (10) describes the successful dawn sacrifice and the rising of the  sun that accompanies it. The rejoicing of “all” at the sight of the sun introduces  into this hymn the “all” that dominated the paired hymn I.68.
## 1
The blazing one, blazing bright like the lover of Dawn,
has filled the two conjoined (world-halves), like the light of heaven.
## 2
(Though just) born, you encompass (them) in accordance with your will. You will become the father of the gods, although you are their son.
## 3
Discerning Agni is the undistracted ritual expert;
like the udder of cows he is the sweetness of foods.
## 4
Like a friendly (ally) among the people, though quick to anger,
(he has) taken his seat in the middle, bringing joy to the house.
## 5
Like a son just born, bringing joy to the house;
well treated like a winning horse, he has traversed the clans.
## 6
When I have summoned the clans of the same nest along with their men, by his divinity Agni should attain all things.
## 7
None transgress these commandments of yours,
since you have given attentive hearing to these men.
## 8
This is your wondrous power: that on (the same) day,
yoked with the same men, you carry out your tasks.
## 9
Ruddy and far-radiant like the lover of Dawn,
he will be conspicuous to him [=the sacrificer?] as the one whose very  form has been produced in unison.
## 10
Carrying him themselves, they [=priests] open wide the doors.
All cry out upon seeing the sun.