+++
title = "070"

+++
70 Agni
Parāśara Śāktya
11 verses: dvipadā virāj
As was noted in the introduction to I.68, this last of the Parāśara’s dvipadā virāj hymns  to Agni is the climax of a sequence of three whose disguised subject is Agni Vaiśvānara,  the clan-fire “belonging to all men.” The Vaiśvānara aspects of I.70 were already dis cussed by Proferes (2007: 48). In particular he points to the movement toward the  unity of a single focal fire (vs. 9) contrasted with the separation of this fire into many,  separately served fires (vs. 10), though he fails to mention the verbal encoding of the  underlying compound members in these climactic verses 9–10, where all (víśve) bear
tribute to the fire (vs. 9) and men (náraḥ) serve him in many places (vs. 10). This hymn also widens the view somewhat, for not only does the fire belong to all  men, but simultaneously to the gods (see the paired divine and human in vss. 2, 4,  and 6), and it is also related to all natural objects (see vss. 3–4, 7), expressed in series  of oppositional merisms, such as “the moving and the still” (vss. 3, 7). This final hymn of the dvipadā virāj series has eleven verses, rather than the ten  found in the other hymns. This eleventh, unpaired verse describes the power, skill,  and eagerness of the martial Agni, and thus expresses one of the roles for which the  Vaiśvānara fire is especially designed: to unite the clans into a force able to oppose  its enemies. (See Proferes 2007 passim.) It may be taken as a summary verse for the  entire sequence of Vaiśvānara hymns.
## 1
Might we vanquish the many inspired thoughts of the stranger by our  inspired thought;
might bright-blazing Agni attain all things (for us),
## 2
Watching over all the divine commandments
and the races of the people descended from Manu.
## 3
He who is the embryo of the waters, the embryo of the woods,
and the embryo of the still, the embryo of the moving,
## 4
Even in the rock (as well as) within the house,
every immortal, like every (member) of the clans, is very attentive
to him.
## 5
For Agni, the protector of riches on earth, does ritual service (for him  [=the mortal])
who does ritual service for him [=Agni] fittingly with good hymns.
## 6
O watchful (Agni), protect these worlds,
since you know the races of gods and of mortals.
## 7
Whom they will make grow through the many nights (and dawns) of  differing forms—
the one conceived by truth (whom) the moving and the still (will
make grow),
## 8
He has been brought to success, installed as Hotar, as the sun,
performing all the tasks to be realized.
## 9
You acquire a laud among the cows and the (fire)wood.
All bear tribute to (you), our sun.
## 10
Men serve you separately in many places;
they bear (you) away separately as (sons bear away) the property of  their aging father.
## 11
Avid like (a horse) heading to the goal, like a champion archer,
fearsome like a (chariot-)driver, dazzling in combats.