+++
title = "071"

+++
71
Agni
Parāśara Śāktya
10 verses: triṣṭubh
The first of the Parāśara hymns in triṣṭubh, this is a curiously structured and very  difficult hymn. It begins with a sexually suggestive verse describing the kindling of194 I.71
the ritual fire by the fingers of the officiant manipulating the kindling sticks. Verse 2  switches to the mythic past and a fairly standard and straightforward summary of  the role of the Aṅgirases in the opening of the Vala cave, but nothing in the hymn  is straightforward after this. Verses treating the here-and-now of the ritual alternate  with snippets of mythology.
The most dramatic mythological material is found discontinuously in verses 5  and 8, which treat the well-known if ill-understood story of the incest between  Heaven and his daughter (see also X.61.5–7, as well as Jamison 1991:  288–301)  and especially the punishment meted out to the offender by his avenger, who is  clearly Agni. Since the birth of the Aṅgirases resulted from this incest, this myth fits  both the dedicand of the hymn and the Aṅgiras verse (2) that follows the opening,  and even the sexual innuendo of verse 1 may have evoked, or been evoked by, the  incest theme.
The other mythological allusion is to Mātariśvan’s stealing of fire (vs. 4); it  is not clear whether this reference is meant to have any points of contact with  the other mythological portions of the hymn. It does, however, connect with  the theme of the interaction between gods and men, especially with Agni as  go-between, found in verses 3, 4, and 7. Another puzzle is why Mitra and Varuṇa  intrude into this Agni hymn in verse 9, though the appearance of the Sun in  that same verse takes us back to verse 2. Ritual concerns are the focus of vss. 3,  6, and 7.
In short, in terms of structure this hymn neither follows a point-to-point tra jectory nor displays an omphalos/ring-compositional shape. Instead it seems  to show, at least in its central sections, sets of interlocking, overlapping paired  verses—3 + 6, 4 + 7, 5 + 8—loosely nestled within a ring consisting of 2 + 9, and  perhaps, more loosely still, 1 + 10.
## 1
The desirous females belonging to the same nest [=fingers] stimulate  the desirous male [=Agni] close by—as wives of the same nest
[=household] stimulate their own husband.
The sisters [=fingers] have delighted in the dusky one and in the
ruddy one [=two fire-kindling sticks], like cows in the brilliantly
dawning dawn.
## 2
Even the firm fastnesses did our fathers, the Aṅgirases, break with their  hymns, and the rock with their shout.
They made the way of lofty heaven for us; they found the day and the  sun, the beacon of the ruddy dawn.
## 3
They set the truth in place and they set the vision of it in motion; just  after that the voracious (visions) of the stranger are dispersed.
Never thirsting, (the [Aṅgirases’/poets’] visions), performing their tasks,  go to the gods, strengthening their race with a pleasing offering.
## 4
When Mātariśvan, borne away, stole him, and he of worthy birth came to  be gleaming in every house, after that (the fire) of the Bhr̥gus undertook the role of messenger, as if  for a more powerful king, being associated with him.
## 5
When he made the sap [=semen] for great Father Heaven, noting the  caresses he stealthily crept up (on him).
The archer boldly loosed a missile at him (when) the god placed his  “spark” in his own daughter.
## 6
Who will radiate widely for you here in his own house, or through the  days will piously offer reverence belonging to (you) who are eager
for it—
as the doubly lofty one, o Agni, you increase his vitality. He whom you  speed will drive in the same chariot with Wealth.
## 7
All nourishments converge on Agni, like the seven youthful streams on  the sea.
Our vitality is not widely perceptible in the form of our kin. Perceiving  (it [=vitality]), find solicitude (for us) among the gods.
## 8
When the (missile’s) sharp point reached the lord of men [=Agni] (for  him) to release it, Heaven, at the moment of contact, (released) the
blazing semen poured out.
Agni engendered the faultless young troop of good intention
[=Aṅgirases] and sweetened it.
## 9
Who, like thought, travels his roads in a single day, the Sun alone is  entirely master of goods,
(as are) the kings Mitra and Varuṇa, they of good hands, who guard  their own dear immortal thing [=milk?] within the cows.
## 10
Agni, do not neglect our ancestral partnerships, being preeminent as a  wise poet.
Old age alters our form like a cloud. Be attentive (to us) in the face of  this curse.