+++
title = "072"

+++
72
Agni
Parāśara Śāktya
10 verses: triṣṭubh
Another hymn in which the overall structure and the relationships among the  parts are unclear. The dominant myth here is the gods’ search for and recov ery of Agni, who had gone missing, and his (re)establishment as the ritual fire.  This myth is treated in verses 2, 4, and 6 at least, and verses 3 and 5 are prob ably related as well. However, sorting out the narrative(s) is made difficult by the  lack of overt subjects (as Geldner already pointed out) and by the number of  injunctive verb forms, as well as some perfects that can have either presential or  preterital value. These grammatical ambiguities allow much of the hymn to be

applicable simultaneously to the mythic past of the gods and the ritual present of  men. Other mythic references include the dog Saramā’s discovery and release of  the penned-in cattle (vs. 8), thematically parallel to the discovery and recovery of  Agni, and a puzzling reference to Aditi and her sons the Ādityas and the suckling  of a bird (vs. 9).
What provides some unity to the hymn is less these unfinished scraps of mythical  narrative than a focus on the vocabulary of knowledge and discovery: forms of the  root vid “find, acquire, possess” and the homonymous root vid “know, discern,” as  well as the semantically related roots jñā “know, recognize” and cit “discern,” are  found, often multiply, in almost every verse. The hymn can thus be read as a sort of  meta-reflection on the process of learning.
Another important feature of the hymn is the preoccupation with names and  bodies, rather like the later category of “name-and-form” (nāma-rūpa). Proferes  argues that verse 5 contains an early reflection of the Tānūnaptra rite, in which  the sacrificer and the officiating priests at a soma sacrifice enter into a pact to be  loyal to each other. The charter myth for this vow involves the gods all depositing  their bodies in a common place (the sun, or Indra standing for the sun) to produce  a common defense against external enemies. (See Proferes 2007: 59 for I.72.5 and  51–61 for the rite in general and its mythological background.) We agree with  his analysis, but in fact think that the theme is more prominent in the hymn than  in just that one verse. The central verses seem to suggest that the gods’ quest for  Agni and their discovery of him and his name (not overtly present, but formulai cally suggested) in verse 2 and their ritual service to him in verse 3 allow them  to acquire their own ritually worthy names and to make their own bodies also  worthy of ritual service in verse 4. This leads to the mutual exchange and mutual  possession of bodies in the Tānūnaptra verse proper (5). Thus rendered ritually  worthy, they find within Agni the intricate and secret “tracks” of the ritual itself  (vs. 6ab), a discovery that allows them to protect their own (6c), and that also  leads to the beneficial actions of Agni in the world of men (6d, 7). More benefits  follow in verses 8–9, though the connection of these to what precedes is admit tedly hazy. The “deposit” in a central entity, here Agni, that is the heart of the  Tānūnaptra pact seems to reappear in verse 10, in a context both cosmogonic  (10b) and apparently ritual (10cd).
The depiction of Agni in this hymn as the locus for the joint deposit of the bod ies of the gods in the Tānūnaptra myth is the mirror and complementary image of  Agni Vaiśvānara, the fire “belonging to all men,” around which all the allied human  clans rally, in the earlier hymns of Parāśara Śāktya’s Agni cycle (esp. I.68–70).
## 01
He outdoes the poetic skills of each and every ritual expert, taking in his  hand many manly powers.
Agni has become the wealth-lord of wealth, making wholly his own all  immortal things. 2. Among us they did not find what was enclosing the calf [=Agni],  though all the immortals—no fools—were seeking it.
Taking pains, following the track, producing insight, they took their  stand at the dear (name) of Agni, on the highest track.
## 03
Since, o Agni, for three autumns they [=gods?] served just you, the  glowing one, with ghee—themselves glowing—
they also acquired names worthy of worship and, well-born, they
sweetened their own bodies.
## 04
Ever possessing the two lofty world-halves [/Rodasī], the sons of Rudra  [=Maruts], worthy of worship, pressed forward.
In the opposite position a mortal, perceiving him, found Agni standing  on the highest track.
## 05
Coming to an agreement, they reverently approached him on bended  knee; along with their wives, they did reverence to the one worthy of  reverence.
Having given up their bodies, they made (each other’s bodies) their
own, guarding them (as) a comrade does (that of) his comrade when  he closes his eyes.
## 06
Since those worthy of worship found deposited just in you the three  times seven secret tracks,
with these do they, of one accord, guard their own immortal one.
Protect the livestock, both the still and the moving.
## 07
Knowing the patterns of the settled peoples, o Agni, distribute
proliferating riches in proper order (for them) to live.
Inwardly knowing the roads leading to the gods, you have become the  tireless messenger carrying the oblations.
## 08
Very attentive, (they discerned) the seven young maidens of  heaven [=rivers]; knowing the truth, they discerned the doors of  wealth.
Saramā found the firmly fixed cattle-pen, by which, even now, the clan  stemming from Manu benefits.
## 09
Those who mounted upon (those actions [=sacrifice]) that bring good  descendants, making themselves a way toward immortality,
by means of (those) sons, great in their greatness, the earth,
their mother Aditi, spread out, in order to suckle the bird
[=Agni? sun?].
## 10
They deposited (their?) own dear splendor within him, when the  immortals made the two eyes of heaven [=sun and moon].
Then like rivers sent surging they stream: heading downwards, the
ruddy ones have recognized the way, o Agni.
