+++
title = "073"

+++
73
Agni
Parāśara Śāktya
10 verses: triṣṭubh
This last hymn of the Parāśara Agni cycle recapitulates some of the poetic devices  and themes found in the earlier hymns and thus in some sense provides the close of  a ring to the whole sequence. It begins with three verses dense with similes, recalling  the first two hymns, I.65–66, which were similarly simile rich. The three verses are  entirely descriptive of Agni, particularly of the sacrificial fire in its position on the  ritual ground, but the god’s name is not mentioned until verse 4, where he is kindled  by men.
The rest of the hymn concerns Agni as the central focus of humans, of gods, and  of ritual substances (for this last, see vs. 6), Agni as a distributor and redistributor  of goods and services among gods, patrons, and poets, a role summed up in the  word “portion” found in verses 5, 6, 7, and 10. This theme was announced in the  first pāda of the hymn, and the “wealth acquired from one’s father” of 1a recurs in  verse 9.
Although this hymn lacks overt reference to the motifs of the Vaiśvānara  fire and the Tānūnaptra rite, in which men and gods respectively become united  by joint action involving the fire, the interrelations among men, among gods,  and among men and gods depicted in this hymn recall the more explicit treat
ment of those motifs in earlier parts of the cycle. That both gods and men  and, among men, both poets and patrons serve the fire in similar ways and  seek similar rewards depicts these groups of beings as having a certain equality  before Agni.
## 01
Who confers vitality like wealth acquired from one’s father, providing  good guidance like the instruction of a perceptive man,
resting in a comfortable place like a guest whose pleasure is served, like a  Hotar he has traversed the (sacrificial) seat of him who does honor.
## 02
Whose thoughts become reality like god Savitar’s, who protects all  communities according to his will,
lauded by many like a (royal) emblem, really present and agreeable like  one’s own self, he has become desirable to install.
## 03
Who, suckling all, dwells peacefully upon the earth, like a god, like a  king with established alliances,
stationed in front like heroes stationed for protection, irreproachable like  a wife pleasing to her husband—
## 04
You, o Agni, kindled here in the house as their own, do men attend on in  their fixed abodes.
They deposited abundant heavenly brilliance within him. Become the  foundation of riches for your whole lifetime! 5. Might the bounteous ones reach nourishments, o Agni, and (might) the  patrons who give (reach) through a whole lifetime.
Might we gain the victory-prize in our clashes with the stranger,
acquiring a portion among the gods for our fame.
## 06
For the bellowing cows of truth, apportioned by heaven, swell with  their udders;
from afar, seeking a portion of (your?) favor, the rivers have flowed
forth all at once over the rock.
## 07
Seeking a portion of favor in you, those worthy of worship [=gods] set  their fame in heaven.
They made night and dawn of different forms, and they put together  the black color and the red.
## 08
Might we—we and our patrons—be those mortals whom you will  sweeten for wealth, o Agni.
Like a shadow you accompany all creation, having filled the two
world-halves and the space between.
## 09
Might we vanquish steeds with steeds, men with men, and heroes with  heroes, o Agni, when aided by you.
As lords of wealth acquired from their fathers, might our patrons,
having a hundred winters, reach through (a whole lifetime).
## 10
Let these solemn speeches be pleasing to you, o Agni, ritual expert—to  your mind and heart.
Might we be able to control (the prizewinning horses) of your wealth,  (so they are) amenable to the chariot-pole, while we acquire the fame  apportioned by the gods.
The next, rather sizable group of twenty hymns is attributed to Gotama Rāhūgaṇa,  who could be the father or other ancestor of the poet of I.58–64, Nodhas Gautama.  If so, the dazzling skill of the son is not on view in the work of his father in the  opening Agni hymns (74–79) or in the All God hymns (89–90), which seem more  dutiful than engaged, but when he treats other gods, especially the Maruts (85–88)  and Dawn (92), his poetry can be inspired.