+++
title = "074"

+++
74
Agni
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
9 verses: gāyatrī
The favor shown to the pious man by Agni is the theme of this short hymn. The  beneficiary of Agni’s patronage is identified as dāśvā́ṃs “pious” in verses 2, 8, and  9, and Agni’s activities on his behalf are the subject of the middle verses 4–5. These

activities are mostly the familiar ones, of serving as messenger between the mortal  and divine realms and going after the gods in order to bring them to the sacrifice  (see esp. vss. 4, 6–7), but Agni is also credited with aiding the pious man under  attack (vs. 2), leading to the god’s covert identification with Indra, via the epithet  “Vr̥tra-smasher” (vs. 3). Another unusual feature of this hymn is the appeal to what  “the people say” about Agni and his devotee (vss. 3, 5).
## 01
Reverently approaching the ceremony, might we speak a solemn formula  to Agni,
to him who listens, (when he is) in the distance and with us (here),
## 02
Who, at the forefront in the “blizzards” (of attacks) when the separate  peoples were clashing together,
guarded for the pious man his patrimony.
## 03
And let the people say: “Agni, the Vr̥tra-smasher, has arisen,
who wins the stakes in every battle!”
## 04
The man whose messenger you are in the dwelling place, for whom you  pursue (the gods) to pursue the oblations,
whose ceremony you perform wondrously—
## 05
Just he has good oblations, has the gods with him, o Aṅgiras, young  (son) of strength,
has a good ritual grass-strew—so the people say.
## 06
And you will convey the gods here for their glorification,
(for them) to pursue the oblations, o much gleaming one.
## 07
No trampling of horses is heard at all from your chariot as it drives, when, o Agni, you travel on your mission.
## 08
Aided by you, the competitor, unabashed (even though he was) behind  the one in front,
the pious man, has taken first place, o Agni.
## 09
And a brilliant, lofty abundance of heroes, Agni, do you strive to win from the gods, o god, for the pious man.