+++
title = "075"

+++
75
Agni
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
5 verses: gāyatrī
This short hymn begins (vs. 1) by urging Agni to enjoy our praise of him, which the  poet hopes will be “a winning sacred formulation” (vs. 2). But, contravening our  expectations, in place of this promised bráhman the poet instead asks a series of  abrupt questions in verse 3. Then once again our expectations are disappointed, for  although verse 4 at first appears to contain the answers to the questions posed in  verse 3, only the first question is actually answered, while the rest of verse 4, though maintaining the clausal structure of verse 3, is only vaguely related in meaning to  the corresponding clauses in verse 3. The hymn ends (vs. 5) with a conventional  directive to Agni to perform sacrifice, with its imperative matching the imperative  beginning the hymn (“take delight,” 1a).
Although the hymn is too brief to develop the theme of thwarted expectations  sketched above, it does uninsistently suggest that verbal form may trump content in  the construction of praise poetry and that the audience should be wary of being led  astray by a poet’s expressed intentions.
## 1
Take delight in the most extensive speech, which affords most delight to  the gods,
while pouring the oblations into your own mouth.
## 2
Then, o Agni, best of Aṅgirases, best of ritual adepts, something  dear to you
might we speak—a winning sacred formulation.
## 3
Who is the kinsman of your peoples? O Agni, who holds the pious  ceremony?
Who are you and fixed in what?
## 4
You are the kinsman of the peoples. O Agni, you are the dear envoy, a comrade for your comrades, to be reverently invoked.
## 5
Sacrifice for us to Mitra and Varuṇa; sacrifice to the gods, to lofty truth. Agni, you will sacrifice to your own home.