+++
title = "076"

+++
76
Agni
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins (vs. 1) with anxious questions about how best to worship Agni  in order to harness his powers. The structure of this question verse is reminiscent  of verse 3 of the previous hymn (I.75), with each pāda containing a separate  query; however, the questions here are more focused on how best to please Agni,  and the longer line of triṣṭubh meter makes the questions seem less abrupt than  in the gāyatrī of I.75.3. As in I.75 the questions here do not receive explicit  answers. Instead the poet devotes most of the rest of the hymn to detailing Agni’s  duties and seeking Agni’s aid as ritual performer and priest (see esp. vss. 2, 4), to  bring the gods, especially Indra (see vs. 3c), to the ritual ground and to sacrifice  to them.
## 01
What reverent approach is to your heart’s desire? What inspired thought  will be the most beneficial, Agni?
Or, who attains your skill through his sacrifices? Or, with what mind  should we piously serve you?

## 02
Come hither, Agni; sit down here as Hotar. Become an undeceivable  leader for us.
Let the two world-halves, which set everything in motion, aid you.
Sacrifice to the gods for great benevolence.
## 03
Burn away all demonic beings, Agni. Become for the sacrifices the  protector from curses.
Then convey here the lord of soma with his two fallow bays. We have  made a guest reception for him who gives well.
## 04
With a speech bringing offspring you are to be invoked as the conveyor  (of oblations) with your mouth, and you will sit down here with
the gods.
You pursue the Hotarship and the Potarship, you instrument of sacrifice.  Become (all this), o provider and engenderer of goods.
## 05
Just as you sacrificed to the gods with the oblations of the inspired poet  Manu, along with the poets, yourself a poet,
even so, o Hotar most truly present, o Agni, today perform sacrifice with  your gladdening tongue.