+++
title = "077"

+++
77
Agni
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is in some ways a twin to the last one: both have five triṣṭubh verses,  and both open with a verse of questions about the proper way to serve Agni, using  some of the same vocabulary (e.g., dāśema “we should piously serve” I.77.1a and  I.76.1d). Lexical similarities continue through the hymn: śáṃtama “most beneficial”  (77.2a, 76.1b), various forms of the verb √vī “pursue” (77.2c, 4b; 76.4c), et cetera.  Like I.76, this hymn also focuses on Agni’s role as priest and sacrificer, although the  rhetoric in this hymn is somewhat more expansive than in I.76.
## 01
How should we do pious service to Agni? Which hymn enjoyable to the  gods is spoken to him, the radiant—
the one who, the immortal among mortals, the truthful Hotar, as the  best sacrificer just does so [=sacrifices] to the gods?
## 02
The one who is the most beneficial at the ceremonies, the truthful  Hotar—attract him here with reverence.
When Agni, for the sake of the mortal, has pursued the gods all
together, he will be attentive to them and will perform sacrifice with  his mind.
## 03
For he is resolve; he is a young buck; he is on target. Like an envoy he  has become charioteer of the unerring. Him, the wondrous one, do the god-seeking Ārya clans entreat first at  the ritual offerings.
## 04
He, most manly of men, who has care for the stranger—let Agni with his  help pursue our hymns, our visionary thought—for us
and for our benefactors, the strongest ones, motivated by prizes, who  propel our prayers at length.
## 05
Thus has Agni, the truthful one, the Jātavedas, been praised by the  Gotamas, inspired poets.
He will swell brilliance among them; he will swell the prize. He drives to  prosperity at his pleasure—the observant one.