+++
title = "078"

+++
78 Agni
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
5 verses: gāyatrī
A hymn of uninspired content, which is rigidly structured and dominated by its  refrain. Its most noteworthy feature is that the first two pādas of the last verse  (5) break the pattern of the preceding ones, and it is here that the name Agni  appears for the first and only time in the hymn, with the reference switched from  the 2nd person of the rest of the hymn to 3rd person in its final verse. It is also  striking that in verses 1 and 4 the refrain is syntactically integral to the verse,  with the initial “to you” the object of the verb in the third-pāda refrain, whereas  in the middle verses 2–3 the refrain is syntactically separate, and the initial “to  you” is construed with the verb in the first hemistich. Thus, its formal properties  are the whole point of the hymn, with meaning essentially backgrounded. For  discussion of other ways in which Gotama privileges form over content, see the  introduction to I.75.
## 1
To you, o boundless Jātavedas, with a hymn do we Gotamas
keep bellowing, with éclat.
## 2
And to you with a hymn does Gotama, desirous of wealth, show  friendship.
– We keep bellowing to (you), with éclat.
## 3
And to you, best winner of prizes, do we call, as Aṅgiras did.
– We keep bellowing to (you), with éclat.
## 4
And to you, best smasher of obstacles, who send the Dasyus
tumbling down,
we keep bellowing, with éclat.
## 5
We Rahūgaṇas have spoken a honeyed speech to Agni.
– We keep bellowing to (him), with éclat.204 I.79