+++
title = "079"

+++
79 Agni
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
12 verses: triṣṭubh 1–3, uṣṇih 4–6, gāyatrī 7–12
As its position in the sequence and its metrical disunity suggest, this hymn actually  consists of four separate hymns of three verses each (1–3, 4–6, 7–9, 10–12). The last  three are relatively simple in their construction and their contents, but the first is  rich and vividly descriptive and poses some problems of interpretation.
This first hymn segment begins (vs. 1) with quick sketches of different forms  of fire:  fire as sun (pāda a); fire as lightning (pāda b); ritual fire, especially as it  is kindled at dawn (pādas cd). This verse manages to convey dynamism without  the use of a single finite verb or participle. The next two verses (2–3) take up the  second image, fire as lightning, and develop it in unexpected ways. In our reading,  the ritual fire (that is, the god Agni) is compared with and ultimately identified  with the thunderstorm, and therefore its product, the fructifying rain, can be pre
sented, paradoxically, as the product of fire itself, a substance that in nature cannot  produce water. In verse 2 the zigzagging lightning flashes are the fire’s flames; the  bellowing bull is the roaring fire itself, and the flying mists and thundering clouds  are the billowing smoke. Verse 3 takes this naturalistic comparison to its logical but  unnatural conclusion: if fire is the embodiment of the thunderstorm, then it is full  of rain, a most desirable product, here called “the milk of truth.” In the last half of  this verse the principal Ādityas as well as Wind become involved by engorging the  clouds with water.
After this complex and allusive vignette, the other three hymn segments are  a serious anticlimax. In verses 4–6 Agni is asked to give wealth and fame and to  protect against demons. Wealth is also the preoccupation of verses 7–9. In the  final three verses the poet, Gotama, exhorts himself to give hymns to Agni, and  then implores Agni to keep demons away. There is nothing in these nine verses to  arrest the attention, but Gotama’s first three verses are indeed a worthy gift for  the god.
## 1
A golden-haired one in his spread through the dusky realm—a snake,  tumultuous, swooping like the wind—
blazing bright (when he becomes) cognizant of Dawn, like the glorious  busy (Dawns themselves) actually present.
## 2
Your fine-feathered (lightning flashes) zigzagged along their ways. The  black bull keeps bellowing. If he is really here,
he has come here with his (lightning flashes) like kindly, smiling (girls).  The mists fly; the clouds thunder.
## 3
When he, swollen with the milk of truth, (has come) leading them [=the  lightning flashes] along the straightest paths of truth—
Aryaman, Mitra, Varuṇa, and the Earth-circling (Wind) engorge the skin  in the womb of the nearer (realm). 4. O Agni, being the lord of the prize consisting of cows, o youthful (son)  of strength,
on us confer great fame, o Jātavedas.
## 5
On being kindled, Agni the good poet is to be reverently invoked with  a hymn.
Shine richly for us, you of many faces.
## 6
Through the nights in your own person, King Agni, and at the dawning  of dawn,
o sharp-fanged one, burn against the demons.
## 7
Help us, Agni, with your help at the presentation of the gāyatrī song, o you to be extolled in all hymnic visions.
## 8
Bring here to us wealth, o Agni, which is victorious in every way,  worthy to be chosen,
and difficult to surpass in all battles.
## 9
(Bring) here to us wealth affording lifelong prosperity with your kind  attention, o Agni.
Confer grace, (for us) to live.
## 10
Present your own purified speeches to sharp-flamed Agni, o Gotama; present your own hymns, as you seek his favor.
## 11
Whoever will assail us, close by or in the distance, let him fall, o Agni. Be (ready) to strengthen only us.
## 12
Thousand-eyed, boundless Agni repels the demonic forces.
As Hotar, worthy of praise, he is hymned.