+++
title = "081"

+++
81 Indra
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
9 verses: paṅkti
Like the immediately preceding hymn, this one is in paṅkti meter, but here the fifth  pāda, rather than being a refrain, is variable and in one instance (vs. 4) syntactically  connected to what precedes it in the verse. (Otherwise the fifth pāda is syntactically  independent but linked thematically.)
The strength and power of Indra are the main theme, but it is clear that for the  poet the purpose of Indra’s might is simply to enable him to provide his worshipers  with goods (vss. 2–3, 6–9)—particularly those goods belonging to “the stranger”  (vss. 6, 9), in this case probably a non-sacrificing member of the Ārya community,  which Indra should redistribute to more deserving men. The demands for largesse  become increasingly peremptory, and the quantity of praise given to Indra is rather  limited. One wonders how much success this bid for riches would have met with.
## 1
Indra has been strengthened for exhilaration, the Vr̥tra-smasher for  strength, by superior men.
Just him do we invoke in great contests, and him in a petty one;
when prizes (are set) he will help us.
## 2
For you are the martial one, hero; you are the one who hands over much. You are the increaser even of the paltry. You exert yourself for the
sacrificer;
for the soma-presser your goods are many.
## 3
When contests loom, rich stakes are set for the daring one.
Hitch up your two fallow bays, aroused to exuberance. Whom will you  smash? Whom will you set in goods?
It’s us you will set in goods, Indra.
## 4
Through his resolve the great, fearsome one has increased his strength in  accord with his own nature.
For splendor the lofty belipped possessor of fallow bays has taken
the metal mace into his own clasped hands.
## 5
He filled the earthly space; he kept thrusting the luminous realms toward  heaven.
There is no one like you, Indra, who has been born or will be born.
You have grown beyond everything. 6. He who hands over to the pious man the sustenance for mortals that  belongs to the stranger—
let Indra do his best for us. Share out your many goods:
might I have a share of your generosity.
## 7
For at every revel (you) of straight resolve give us herds of cattle. Gather together many hundreds of goods with both hands.
Look sharp!—bring riches here.
## 8
Become exhilarated on the pressed soma, for strength, o champion, for  generosity.
Because we know you as possessing many goods, we have dispatched our  desires to you—
so become our helper.
## 9
These (people who are) kin to you [=us] foster everything of value. Because you detect the possessions of the stranger, of the impious
peoples,
bring their possessions here to us.