+++
title = "082"

+++
82
Indra
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
6 verses: paṅkti, except jagatī 6
Like the three Indra hymns (I.61–63) of our poet’s descendant, Nodhas  Gautama, this hymn was composed to accompany the “Fallow-bay-yoking”  oblation at the end of the soma sacrifice, at which the two horses of Indra are  hitched up for the return journey to heaven. The first five verses are in paṅkti  meter, with the fifth pāda a refrain announcing the sacrificer’s intention to per
form this yoking. In the body of those verses the poet announces that the goal  of the sacrifice has been achieved (vss. 1–2): both Indra and his companions the  Maruts have received praise and oblations, and they have provided presents in  return. He offers Indra a last bit of praise and a last oblation to send him on his  way (vss. 3–4), and then turns to the actual yoking of the pair of horses (vs. 5).
The final verse is in a different meter and expresses the act of yoking in a  different tense and mood. The subtle distinction in wording between the refrain  of verses 1–5 and its variant in the first pāda of the final verse (6a) is signifi cant: the refrain contains the 1st sg. root aorist subjunctive yójā in the prospec tive/volitional sense “I will yoke,” while the version in the final verse transposes  the formula into the present indicative with yunájmi, and adds the instrumen tal bráhmaṇā “with a sacred formulation.” These changes make the statement  into a “performative” in the technical linguistic sense; that is, the utterance by  itself performs the action it expresses: “I (hereby) yoke your two shaggy fallow  bays with a solemn formulation.” The bráhman refers to the entire hymn that

precedes, and it is the very recitation of the hymn, identified as a bráhman, that  performs the ritual act of yoking.
A particularly appealing part of the hymn is the mention of Indra’s wife in verses  5–6: the poet is concerned to send the god directly back home to his “dear wife” and  further exhilaration. See also III.53.4–6.
## 01
Listen well to our hymns, bounteous one, not like a nay-sayer.
When you will make us the beneficiaries of your liberality, it’s just then  that you will achieve your goal.
– Now, Indra, I will hitch up your two fallow bays.
## 02
They have eaten; for they have brought themselves to exhilaration; they  have shaken down dear things.
They have been praised—the self-radiant (Maruts)—with the newest  inspired thought.
– Now, Indra, I will hitch up your two fallow bays.
## 03
We would extol you of wholly lovely appearance, o bounteous one. Praised, drive forth now following your will, once your chariot box
is full.
– Now, Indra, I will hitch up your two fallow bays.
## 04
The only one who will mount on the bullish, cow-finding chariot
is the one who will take care that the cup is full for your
“Fallow-bay-yoking” oblation, Indra.
– Now, Indra, I will hitch up your two fallow bays.
## 05
Let your right (horse) be yoked, and your left one, you of a hundred  resolves.
With this (chariot) drive up to your dear wife, while (you are still)
exhilarated from the stalk.
– Now, Indra, I will hitch up your two fallow bays.
## 06
With (this) sacred formulation I (hereby) hitch up your two shaggy  fallow bays. Drive forth; you have taken (the reins? the mace?) in
your fists.
The wild pressed soma-drinks have stirred you up. Accompanied
by Pūṣan, o mace-bearer, you will become exhilarated along with
your wife.