+++
title = "083"

+++
83
Indra
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
6 verses: jagatī
In this hymn the poet uses two different senses of the word “first” to imbue the  good sacrificer with the qualities and prestige of the legendary institutors of the sacrifice. At the beginning of verse 1 the good sacrificer is “the first” to attain to  wealth provided by Indra. The next two verses continue the characterization of the  good sacrificer and the good life bestowed on him by the gods. The next two verses  (4–5) pick up the word “first” (prathamá) that opened the hymn, but here not in the  sense of “foremost, first in line” as in verse 1, but rather “primal, original”: these  verses concern the first establishment of the sacrifice and the actions of the famous  primordial sacrificers. In the final verse (6) we return to the current sacrifice, but  by putting the model of the original sacrificers before us, the poet implies that the  present-day sacrificer is replicating their actions and is identified with them. This is  one of the common themes of R̥gvedic sacrifice: that each new sacrifice is an enact ment of the first one.
## 1
The first to come to (wealth) consisting of horses, to cows with
your help, o Indra, is the mortal who pursues (his ritual duties)
well.
Just him do you engorge with more abundant goods, as waters,
conspicuous from everywhere, engorge a river.
## 2
Like the goddesses, the Waters, they [=gods] approach (the
place) associated with oblation; they look downward onto
the extended (soma-filter? sacrifice?) as if onto an extensive
airy realm.
The gods lead forward the one who seeks the gods. Like suitors,
they delight in the man who pleases (them) with the sacred
formulation.
## 3
You have placed a speech worthy to be spoken in the two (priests), the  pair who ritually serve with their offering spoons extended.
Not mustered (to battle), he dwells in peace under your commandment,  he thrives. Propitious is your potency for the sacrificer who
presses soma.
## 4
The Aṅgirases, who had (previously) kindled the fires with ritual  labor and good ritual performance, after that first acquired their
life-force.
They collected together all the sustenance of the niggard, livestock
consisting of horses and cows—the superior men.
## 5
With sacrifices the Atharvan first stretched the paths. Thereupon was the  Sun, the protector of commandments, the tracker, born.
Uśanā Kāvya drove the cows together. We sacrifice to the immortal birth  of Yama.
## 6
When the ritual grass is twisted for the sake of good descendants, or the  chant sounds its signal-call toward heaven,
when the pressing stone, the praiseworthy bard speaks, just at his
(sacrifice) does Indra take pleasure at suppertime.
