+++
title = "084"

+++
84
Indra
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
20 verses: anuṣṭubh 1–6, uṣṇih 7–9, paṅkti 10–12, gāyatrī 13–15, triṣṭubh 16–18, br̥hatī 19, satobr̥hatī 20; arranged in tr̥cas 1–18, pragātha 19–20
Coming at the end of Gotama’s Indra collection, this long and metrically com plex hymn must actually be composed of smaller hymn segments. The first eighteen  verses are arranged in tr̥cas, and it ends with a single pragātha. The contents range  from the most banal invitation to the sacrifice to elusive and allusive treatments of  little-known myths. There are a number of reminiscences of the Indra hymns pre ceding it in the Gotama collection.
The first six verses, in anuṣṭubh meter, appear to form a unity, urging Indra to come  to the soma sacrifice in clichéd and predictable phraseology. The next tr̥ca (vss. 7–9) is in  uṣṇih meter (8 8 12); the last four syllables of the third pāda are a semidetached refrain  (“Indra indeed!”), so that the verses present themselves like gāyatrī (i.e., 8 8 8). The  contrast between the good sacrificer and his unsatisfactory counterpart is the theme.
The next tr̥ca (vss. 10–12), in paṅkti meter, is highly reminiscent of I.80, also  in paṅkti. As in that hymn the fifth pāda of each verse is a refrain syntactically  unconnected to the rest of the verse. In fact, the last six syllables of the refrain  match those of I.80, and in order to make sense of the refrain here, we must supply  the verb (“they cheer on”) from the refrain of I.80. This tr̥ca concerns the mix
ing of milk with the pressed soma, in metaphorical terms—with the milk streams  depicted as buffalo-cows. Beneath this first metaphor there may be a second: it is  possible that the Maruts lurk behind the buffalo-cow facade. (Remember that the  Maruts were one of the possible subjects of the refrain in I.80.) An association of  the Maruts with “the ritual midpoint” here might allude to their recent incorpora
tion as recipients of the oblation at the Midday Pressing.
Another reminiscence of I.80 is found in the next tr̥ca (vss. 13–15), in gāyatrī,  which treats in most condensed and puzzling fashion the myth of Dadhyañc  and the horse’s head. (For this myth in general, see Macdonell 1897:  141–42.)  Dadhyañc and his father Atharvan were mentioned in passing in the last verse of  I.80 (vs. 16). In other versions of the myth Dadhyañc substitutes a horse’s head  for his own in order to declare the secret location of Tvaṣṭar’s soma. In these three  short verses we find Dadhyañc, the horse’s head, and Tvaṣṭar, but the narrative  in which they are involved is entirely unclear and we confess ourselves mystified.
The last tr̥ca (vss. 16–18) consists entirely of anxious questions, mostly in con nection with the sacrifice, reminiscent of the cascade of questions in other Gotama  hymns (I.75.3, 76.1, 77.1). The first verse (16) wonders who will be able to yoke  particularly ill-behaved cattle and bring them here. “Here” seems to refer to the  sacrifice, and the best guess as to the identity of the cattle is the Maruts, who are  the dedicands of Gotama’s next four hymns (I.85–88). The next verse (17) is more  confused, but the location of Indra and indeed his very existence are in question,  and a formal spokesman on behalf of mortals is sought. The questions are more clearly ritual in verse 18, ending with the sacrificer’s self-doubt about his status with  the gods he sacrifices to. The final two verses (19–20), an independent pragātha,  seem designed to quell this doubt, asserting that Indra himself, in a turn-about, will  praise the sacrificer and show him mercy, as well as offering him help and goods.
Although no strong unity among the various pieces of this hymn is perceptible, it  does mimic in certain ways the progress of a soma sacrifice. It opens with the invita tion (vss. 1–6), made more pointed by the contrast between our well-made and deserv ing sacrifice and the behavior of ungenerous mortals (vss. 7–9). Verses 10–12 concern  the actual preparation of the soma (and also refer, in vs. 7, to the ritual midpoint).  Verses 13–15 can be seen as a mythic interlude, praising the great deeds of Indra while  he is present on the ritual ground. Verses 16–18 raise doubts about the efficacy of the  sacrifice that has been, or is being, performed—doubts somewhat allayed by the final  two verses (19–20), which end with the usual requests for benefits from the god.
## 01
The soma has been pressed for you, Indra. O strongest bold one,  come here.
Let Indrian strength permeate you, as the sun permeates the airy realm  with its rays.
## 02
The two fallow bays convey Indra of irresistible strength
up to the praises of the seers and to the sacrifice of the sons of Manu. 3. Mount the chariot, Vr̥tra-smasher: your two fallow bays have been  yoked with a sacred formulation.
Let the pressing stone with its call make your mind inclined hither.
## 04
Drink this soma here, Indra, the preeminent immortal exhilaration. The streams of the clear (soma) have flowed to you in the seat of truth. 5. Chant now to Indra and speak solemn words.
The pressed drops have exhilarated him. Do homage to (his)
preeminent might.
## 06
No one is a better charioteer than you, Indra, when you control your  two fallow bays.
No one has reached you in greatness, not (even) one with good horses.
## 07
He who alone apportions the goods to the pious mortal,
the unrepulsable master – (that’s) Indra indeed!
## 08
When will he kick the ungenerous mortal with his foot like a mushroom? When will he listen to our hymns? – Indra indeed!
## 09
For someone who has pressed soma seeks to entice you here, away from  the many.
He has control of powerful strength – Indra indeed!
## 10
The buffalo-cows drink just so of the sweet honey belonging to the  (ritual) midpoint,
they who, fellow travelers with bullish Indra, become exhilarated for  beauty—
– The good ones (cheer) on his sovereignty.214 I.85
## 11
These dappled ones, eager for caresses, prepare the soma for him. The milk-cows dear to Indra propel his mace, his missile.
– The good ones (cheer) on his sovereignty.
## 12
They, forethoughtful, serve his might with reverence.
They follow his many commandments, to be first in his thought.
– The good ones (cheer) on his sovereignty.
## 13
With the bones of Dadhyañc unrepulsable Indra
smashed the nine and ninety obstacles.
## 14
The head of the horse that he was seeking set away in the mountains, that he found in the reed-filled (lake?).
## 15
Right there they thought of the secret name of the cow of Tvaṣṭar— likewise in the house of the moon.
## 16
Who today yokes the cattle to the chariot-pole of truth—the vehement,  wrathful, very angry ones,
with arrows in their mouths, shooting at the heart, but embodying joy?  Whoever will succeed in bringing them, he will live.
## 17
Who retreats and who is thrust back? Who is fearful? Who might think  Indra exists? Who (might think he is) nearby?
Who will speak for offspring, who for a retinue and for wealth? Who  will speak on behalf of himself, on behalf of his people?
## 18
Who reverently invokes Agni with oblation and ghee? (Who)
will perform sacrifice with a ladle according to the fixed ritual
sequences?
For whom will the gods swiftly convey the offering here? Who might  think himself a man whose oblations are worth pursuing, who has
gods well on his side?
## 19
Surely you, (though) a god, will solemnly praise the mortal, o
strongest one.
There is no other dispenser of mercy than you, bounteous one. Indra,  I say this speech to you:
## 20
Let not your benefits, nor your help, good one, ever cheat us.
And mete out to us all goods coming from the settled domains, you  who belong to the descendants of Manu.