+++
title = "085"

+++
85 Maruts
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
12 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 5, 12
A typical Marut hymn: their beauty and their adornments, their unruly journey to  the sacrifice and the thunderstorm it represents, their parentage (Rudra as father, Pr̥śni the cow as mother), their fearsome power. One stylistic peculiarity is the ten dency to repeat with minimal variation parts of one verse in the next, an example  of concatenative repetition; see 2c/3ab; 4cd/5a; 6c/7b, d; 10a/11a.
Although the focus throughout is firmly on the Maruts, there is one seemingly  intrusive verse (9), where the Maruts are unmentioned and mythologically irrel evant, in which Tvaṣṭar fashions the mace for Indra to slay Vr̥tra. Indra’s release of  the waters after the slaying must be the point of contact, since the next two verses  (10–11) concern the Maruts’ tipping the heavenly well to pour out its water.
## 1
Those who go forth in beauty like wives, spanned together on their  journey, the sons of Rudra, possessing wondrous power—
for the Maruts made the two world-halves grow strong—the heroes  reach exhilaration, eager at the rites.
## 2
Once grown, they attained greatness: the Rudras made their seat in heaven. Chanting their chant, generating Indra’s strength, they whose mother is  Pr̥śni put on their splendors.
## 3
When those whose mother is a cow beautify themselves with unguents,  the beautiful ones put radiant (ornaments) on their bodies.
They thrust away every antagonist. Ghee flows along their tracks.
## 4
Those good battlers who flash out with their spears, stirring forth even  the unstirrable by their power—
When, o Maruts, in a bullish troop you have yoked the mind-swift
dappled mares to your chariots,
## 5
When you have yoked the dappled mares to your chariots, speeding the  stone at the prize-contest, o Maruts—
they unloose the streams of the ruddy one and inundate the earth with  waters like a skin.
## 6
Let the quick-streaming spans convey you hither; quickly flying with  your arms, go forth.
Sit on the ritual grass: a broad seat has been made for you. Make
yourselves exhilarated, Maruts, on the honeyed stalk.
## 7
Those self-powerful ones strengthened themselves in their greatness.  They mounted the vault; they made themselves a broad seat.
When Viṣṇu rinsed the bull [=soma] arousing exhilaration,
[and/or] When Viṣṇu aided the bull [=Indra], stirred by the
exhilarating drink,
they settled like birds on the dear ritual grass.
## 8
Like champions, like oncoming fighters, like those seeking fame in  battles, they have marshaled themselves.
All creatures fear the Maruts—the superior men glittering in appearance  like kings.
## 9
When Tvaṣṭar the good craftsman had turned the well-made golden  mace with its thousand spikes,

Indra took it to do the manly works: he smashed Vr̥tra, he forced out  the flood of waters.
## 10
They pushed the well upward with their power; they split apart the  mountain, though it was firmly fixed.
Blowing their music, the Maruts of good drops performed these joyous  (deeds) in the exhilaration of soma.
## 11
They pushed the well aslant in this way. They poured out the wellspring  for the thirsting Gotama.
They come hither to him with help—they of bright radiance. They
satisfy the desire of the inspired poet through their own essential
qualities.
## 12
The shelters you have for the one who performs ritual labor—hold these  out threefold to the pious man.
Extend these to us, Maruts; establish for us wealth in good heroes,
o bulls.