+++
title = "086"

+++
86
Maruts
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
10 verses: gāyatrī
The first half of this hymn has a remarkably intricate syntactic structure, especially  for a gāyatrī hymn. Verse 1 makes the outlines of this structure clear: a genitive rela tive pronoun (yásya “whose, of whom”) introducing a clause in which the Maruts  perform some service for the man so identified, with a main clause expressing the  rewards this man receives. (Roughly paraphrased, in vs. 1  “whose dwelling you  protect, he has the best protector.”) With this structure set, the poet feels free to  attenuate and manipulate it. In our view, verses 2 and 3 are examples of this same  structure, but the yásya has been gapped in verse 2 and must be supplied from verse  1, along with a verb for 2a. Moreover, the main clause expressing the reward is  postponed until verse 3c, and there are three different relative clauses that it com
pletes (2a, 2bc, 3ab). The repeated vā’s (“or”) allow this submerged structure to be  discerned, despite the gapping. The three clauses define three different beneficiaries  of the Maruts’ favor: the sacrificer (2a), the poet himself (2bc), or the poet’s patron  (“prize-seeker” 3ab).
Verses 4–5 continue the fronted genitive pattern, but now with a demonstra tive pronoun, not a relative. The referent is still the Maruts’ client, and his success  becomes magnified in these verses; not only is his sacrifice a success (vs. 4), but he  subjugates the surrounding peoples, and his sacrificial offerings go all the way to  heaven (vs. 5).
Verse 6 abruptly switches to the 1st plural from the 3rd singular: it’s we who  have been performing all this sacrificial labor, and the poet implicitly identifies us with the anonymous hard-working and well-rewarded man of the first five  verses. The 3rd sg. sacrificer returns in verses 7–8, with the syntactic structure  switched: the main clause and happy reward precede the relative yásya clause (see  esp. vs. 7). The last two verses call on the Maruts for their help, especially against  aggressors.
Gotama’s penchant for elaborate and varied syntactic patterning has been noted  previously in the introductions to several of his hymns.
## 1
O Maruts of extensive might, certainly the man over whose dwelling  place you keep protective watch from heaven,
he has the best protector.
## 2
Or he by whose sacrifices (you were attracted), o you whose vehicle is  the sacrifice, or of the thoughts of which inspired poet
you heard the call, o Maruts—
## 3
Or for which prize-seeker you fashioned an inspired poet to follow, he will go to a pen full of cattle.
## 4
Of that hero here the soma has been pressed at the rituals of day(break)  on his ritual grass;
his solemn speech and exhilarating drink are being announced.
## 5
To him let the beings listen attentively, to him who dominates all the  separate peoples.
His are the refreshing drinks that have run even to the sun.
## 6
For through many autumns we have done pious work, o Maruts, with the help of the separate peoples.
## 7
O Maruts who receive the first of the sacrifice, let that mortal be  well-portioned
whose pleasurable offerings you will guide.
## 8
You superior men whose strength is real, you know the sweat of the one  laboring to exhaustion,
or the desire of the one who seeks the (ritual) track.
## 9
You whose strength is real—make it [=strength] manifest by your  greatness.
Smite the demon with your lightning.
## 10
Conceal the concealable darkness. Run over every rapacious one. Make the light that we desire.