+++
title = "087"

+++
87
Maruts
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
6 verses: jagatī
The gleeful density of descriptive adjectives in verse 1 opens this hymn with a bang.  It is only in the final pāda of this first verse that we encounter a verb—and its

subject is explicitly left unspecified (“whoever they are”). On the one hand, they  need not be named, as the descriptions are enough to identify them as Maruts; on  the other hand, it is frequently stated that individual Maruts can’t be told apart.  The next two verses (2–3) are more dynamic, depicting the Maruts’ usual wild jour
ney, with its thunder, lightning, and rain.
The first half of verse 4 returns to the style of verse 1, with a torrent of adjectives,  this time applied not to the plural Maruts, but to the singular “flock” (gaṇá). The  second half of this verse opens with the 2nd sg. verb “you are.” Although most inter preters take this as an address to the Marut flock, with a shift of person—and this  would be the default reading—we believe something more tricky is going on. The  patronymic of our poet Gotama is Rāhūgaṇa, whose second element is this word  “flock.” On the basis of this shared verbal designation, Gotama seems to be address ing himself and identifying himself with the Maruts, particularly as the “furtherer  of this insight,” that is, as a producer of sacral poetry arising from inner insight. (He  may call himself a requiter of debts because he pays with his verbal labor for the  benefits given by both gods and patrons.) He clarifies this identification in the fol lowing verse (5). We are poets because of our kinship with our ancestral father, that  is, the Marut flock (pāda a). As with them, our speech (“tongue”) is inspired by the  vision (“eye”) produced by soma (pāda b), and we aspire to emulate the Maruts, who  chanted to Indra to encourage him in the Vr̥tra battle and acquired a share in the  sacrifice (pādas cd). (The relationship between Gotama Rāhūgaṇa, the Maruts, and  verbal inspiration is explored even more elaborately in the following hymn, I.88.) The hymn ends (vs. 6) with a more conventional depiction of the Maruts.
## 1
Projecting power and strength, copious, unbowable, unfaltering,
possessing the silvery drink,
most delightful, most manly, with their unguents they have anointed  themselves—whoever they are—like the ruddy (dawns) with stars.
## 2
When you have set your mind on journeying on the byways like birds, o  Maruts, along who knows what path,
the casks on your chariots drip. Sprinkle ghee the color of honey for the  one who chants.
## 3
At their drives, at their journeys the earth trembles like one with faltering  step, when they hitch up, for beauty.
Playful, boisterous, with glinting spears, the shakers admire their own  greatness.
## 4
For such is the flock: youthful, self-propelling, possessing dappled horses,  irrepressible, showing mastery, swathed in powers.
And you are a real, irreproachable requiter of debts, a furtherer of
this insight here. Therefore you [=Gotama Rāhūgaṇa] are (also) a
bullish flock.
## 5
We speak by virtue of our kinship with our primordial father; the tongue  advances with the eye of soma. When, equipped with chant, they [=Maruts] reached Indra by their  labor, just after that they acquired names worthy of the sacrifice.
## 6
For splendor they join themselves with radiant beams, with rays, with  those equipped with chant—the well-spangled ones,
possessing axes and arrows, fearless. They know their own dear Marut  nature.