+++
title = "089"

+++
89 All Gods
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
10 verses: jagatī 1–5, virāṭsthānā 6, triṣṭubh 8–10
Unlike Gotama’s often clever and verbally inventive hymns to particular gods, this  hymn to all the gods has a dutiful air, and the gods chosen for inclusion (or exclu sion) don’t seem to conform to any pattern. Still, there is a pleasing symmetry,  especially at the beginning and end. This feature is clear in the first two verses of the  hymn, where the word bhadrá “auspicious” is applied both to the ideas that mortals  will acquire and turn into the praise hymns for the gods and to the favors that the  gods will bestow on the properly worshiping humans in return. These unspecified  benevolent gods return toward the end of the hymn (vss. 8–9), and the particular  favor we desire from them is to secure our proper length of life (see esp. vss. 8cd, 9),  the very request with which the first verse pair ended (vs. 2d)
In between are a series of verses invoking various gods and asking for their help.  The longest list is found in verse 3, but gods or cosmic forces are named in every  verse—from the very prominent, such as the various Ādityas (vs. 3) and Indra (vs.  6), to the obscure and marginal, notably Tārkṣya (vs. 6c), a deified racehorse, to  judge from its other appearance in the R̥gveda (X.178). The final verse (10) returns  to the Ādityan emphasis of verse 3 by identifying their mother Aditi with the most  important cosmic features, kinship relations, and beings.
## 1
Let auspicious ideas come here to us from all sides—undeceivable,  uncircumscribable, bursting out—
so that the gods will be (ready) to increase us always, will be our
unfaltering protectors every day.
## 2
The auspicious benevolence of the gods is for those who aim straight; let  the generosity of the gods roll down toward us.
We have reverently approached the fellowship of the gods: let the gods  lengthen our lifetime for us to live.
## 3
Them do we call upon with our age-old formal invocation
[=nivid]: Bhaga, Mitra, Aditi, Skill unfailing,
Aryaman, Varuṇa, Soma, the Aśvins. May well-portioned Sarasvatī
create joy for us.
## 4
At this let the Wind blow us a remedy that is joy itself. At this (let)  Mother Earth, at this (let) Father Heaven,

at this (let) the soma-pressing stones (be) joy itself. To this, o holy
Aśvins, give ear.
## 5
The one who holds sway, the lord of the moving and the still, who  quickens insight, do we call upon for help,
so that Pūṣan will be (ready) to increase our possessions, will be a
guardian, an undeceivable protector for our well-being.
## 6
Well-being for us (may) Indra of strengthened fame (establish);
well-being for us (may) Pūṣan of all possessions;
well-being for us (may) Tārkṣya of indestructible wheel-rims; well-being  for us may Br̥haspati establish.
## 7
The Maruts having dappled horses, having Pr̥śni as mother, charging to  beauty, coming regularly to the rites,
the men having Agni as tongue and the Sun as eye: may all the gods  come here to us with help.
## 8
Might we hear (only what is) auspicious with our ears, o gods; might we  see (only what is) auspicious with our eyes, o you who are worthy of  the sacrifice.
Having praised (you?), with sturdy limbs and bodies might we traverse  the lifetime that has been established by the gods.
## 9
A hundred autumns are now in front (of us), o gods, where you have  made old age for our bodies,
where sons become fathers. Do not harm our lifetime in the midst of  our progress.
## 10
Aditi is heaven. Aditi is the midspace. Aditi is the mother; she is the  father, she the son.
Aditi is the All Gods, the five peoples. Aditi is what has been born,
Aditi what is to be born.