+++
title = "090"

+++
90
All Gods
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
9 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 9
In this hymn as in the last one it is clear that Gotama did not reserve his best efforts  for All God hymns. With its elementary phraseology and patterned repetitions this  hymn is blessedly easy to read but offers little of interest. It falls into three clear  parts, which may well have been originally separate (though the hymn does not dis
turb the pattern of hymn arrangement in the Saṃhitā): verses 1–5, 6–8 (these two  segments in the same meter), and 9.
The first segment begins with the principal Ādityas as our guides (vs. 1)  and  touches briefly on their general benefits to mortals in the next three verses. The  final verse (5) is more specifically focused on the ritual interchange: the hymns we offer to the gods should produce cows in return. The next segment (vss. 6–8) sim ply attributes metaphorical “honey” to all natural phenomena, while the last verse  (9) expresses the hope that a variety of gods will be luck or welfare for us. This final  verse is highly reminiscent of a much longer such litany in VII.35.
## 1
With straight guidance let Varuṇa, let Mitra the knowing guide us; let Aryaman jointly with the gods.
## 2
For they are goods-possessors of goods; unerring, they with their  mighty powers
guard the commandments everywhere.
## 3
They will extend shelter to us, the immortals to the mortals,
thrusting away hatreds.
## 4
Let them clear out paths for us for easy passage—Indra, the Maruts, Pūṣan, Bhaga, (all those) to be extolled.
## 5
And (make) our poetic insights tipped with cows, o Pūṣan and Viṣṇu  traveling your ways;
make us possessed of well-being.
## 6
Honey do the winds (blow) to the one who follows truth; honey do the  rivers stream.
Honeyed be the plants for us.
## 7
Honey by night and at dawn; honeyed is the earthly realm.
Honey be Father Heaven for us.
## 8
Honeyed be the tree for us, honeyed the sun.
Honeyed be the cows for us.
## 9
Luck for us Mitra, luck Varuṇa; luck be Aryaman for us—
Luck for us Indra and Br̥haspati; luck for us Viṣṇu of the wide strides.