+++
title = "091"

+++
91 Soma
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
23 verses: triṣṭubh 1–4, gāyatrī 5–16, uṣṇih 17, triṣṭubh 18–23
Long and metrically disunified, this hymn no doubt falls into distinct segments, but  there is no scholarly agreement about the exact divisions. Some verse groupings are  found together in later liturgical texts (e.g., vss. 16–18, which, though in three dif ferent meters, agree in contents), but in other cases there is no external evidence. It  is possible that the triṣṭubh verses at the beginning (vss. 1–4) and those at the end  (vss. 19–23) belong together, with the dimeter verses 5–16 (plus 17–18) having been  inserted between them. This is suggested by the fact that verse 19 starts with the  same sequence as the beginning of verse 4 (yā́ te dhā́māni), and also by the apparent  ring between 1a prá cikitaḥ and 23d prá cikitsā.
In any case this hymn shares both the rather simplified rhetoric and the totalizing  thematics of Gotama’s hymns to the All Gods. Soma is identified with numerous224 I.91
gods (see, e.g., vss. 3, 5) and is credited with multiple cosmogonic deeds (e.g., vs.  22) and martial powers (e.g., vs. 21). Especially in the gāyatrī verses he is begged for  all sorts of aid and comradeship.
Since this is not a Soma Pavamāna hymn and is not found in the IXth Maṇḍala,  the ritual details that dominate that maṇḍala are essentially absent here. The  exception is the aforementioned triad of verses 16–18, each of which contains a  form of ā́ √pyā “swell,” an idiom used of the soaking of the soma stalks in water  to make them swell up before their pressing. As this action occurs before the puri
fication process proper, it is hardly mentioned in the IXth Maṇḍala (twice in fact,  once [IX.31.4] in an exact repetition of the present vs. 16 in a hymn attributed  to our poet Gotama Rāhūgaṇa), while it is the most prominent ritual detail in  this hymn.
## 1
You, Soma, have become conspicuous through our inspired thought.  You—lead along the straightest path.
Through your guidance, o drop, our insightful forefathers had their
share in the treasure among the gods.
## 2
You, Soma, become very intent through your intentions; very skillful  with your skills, all-knowing.
You are a bull through your bullish powers, your greatness. You became  brilliant through your brilliancies, drawing the gaze of men.
## 3
The commandments of King Varuṇa are yours; lofty and deep is your  domain, o Soma.
You are blazing pure, like dear Mitra. You are besought for skill like  Aryaman, o Soma.
## 4
Your domains that are in heaven, that are on the earth, that are in the  mountains, in the plants, in the waters—
with all those, being well-disposed and not angry, King Soma, accept  our oblations.
## 5
You, Soma, are lord of the settlements; you are king and Vr̥tra-smasher. You are auspicious intention.
## 6
And if you will wish us to live, Soma, we will not die.
(You are) the lord of the forest to whom praise is dear.
## 7
You, Soma, (establish) good fortune for the great man, you, for the  youth who pursues the truth;
you establish skill for living.
## 8
You, King Soma—guard us on all sides from the one who bears malice. No comrade of one such as you could suffer harm.
## 9
Soma, your forms of help that are joy itself for the pious man,
with those become our helper.
## 10
This sacrifice here—having delighted in this speech, come near to it. Soma, be (ready) to strengthen us. 11. Soma, we who know speech strengthen you with our hymns.
Very compassionate to us, enter us.
## 12
Fattening the livestock, smiting afflictions, finding goods, increasing  prosperity,
Soma, be a good ally to us.
## 13
Soma, take pleasure in our heart, as cows do in pastures,
as a young man in his prime does in his own home.
## 14
O Soma, the mortal who will take pleasure in your comradeship, o god, him does skill accompany, him does the sage poet.
## 15
Make a broad space for us against imprecation; Soma, protect us from  narrow straits.
Be a comrade well disposed to us.
## 16
Swell up! Let your bullish power come together from all sides, Soma. Be there at the gathering for the prize.
## 17
Swell up, most exhilarating Soma, with all your shoots.
Become our comrade of best fame, to strengthen us.
## 18
Let your milk-drinks come together and together your prizes, together  the bullish powers of you who vanquish hostility.
Swelling up for the immortal, Soma, establish your own highest
measures of fame in heaven.
## 19
Those domains of yours that they sacrifice to with oblation, let all these  of yours be encompassing the sacrifice.
Fattening the livestock, furthering (us), bringing good heroes, not
smiting heroes, o Soma, advance to our doorways.
## 20
Soma gives a milk-cow, Soma a swift steed, Soma a hero fit for action— one fit for the residence, for the rite, for the assembly, one who brings  fame to the forefathers—(gives these to the man) who will do ritual  service to him.
## 21
Invincible in combats, in battles a deliverer, winning the sun, winning  the waters, herdsman of the community,
born at raids, granting good dwelling and good fame, conquering—you  would we celebrate, o Soma.
## 22
You, Soma, begot all these plants here; you the waters, you the cows. You have stretched across the wide midspace; you have uncovered the  darkness with your light.
## 23
With your god(like) mind, god Soma, battle for a share of wealth for us,  mighty one.
Don’t let it hold out on you. You are master of heroism. On behalf of  both (men and gods? / singers and patrons?) be on the lookout in the  quest for cattle.
