+++
title = "092"

+++
92 Dawn (1–15), Aśvins (16–18)
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
18 verses: jagatī 1–4, triṣṭubh 5–12, uṣṇih 13–18
This metrically complex structure with two different dedicands must originally have  consisted of several independent hymns—probably, with Oldenberg, verses 1–4,  5–8, 9–12, 13–15, 16–18, all but the last dedicated to Dawn. Indeed, the first two  segments (vss. 1–4 in jagatī, 5–8 in triṣṭubh) appear to be partial variants of each  other, the first describing multiple Dawns (except vs. 4), the second a single Dawn.  There are precise agreements in lexicon, phraseology, and imagery, particularly  between verses 1–2 and 5–6, that go beyond standard shared Dawn vocabulary. The  seductive dancing girl of verse 4 also reminds of the smiling siren of verse 6. The  third segment (vss. 9–12) has fewer connections with the first two, but is themati cally unified, especially by the emphasis on “diminishing/belittling” (all expressed  by the root mī in different combinations) in verses 10–12.
All three of the segments in trimeter meter (that is, through vs. 12) contain arrest ing images, and the poet enjoys exploiting ambiguities to poetic effect. In verses 1  and 12, for example, he uses different syntactic constructions in the simile and the  frame because the verb held in common by both can be either reflexive or transitive;  in verse 3 the pun inherent in the root arc (both “shine” and “chant”) allows the  introduction of a simile involving female work-songs, though the dawns themselves  are presumably not chanting.
The last two segments, in uṣṇih meter, to Dawn and the Aśvins respectively (vss.  13–15, 16–18), are, not surprisingly, less complex. Both hope for the arrival of the  divinities at the sacrifice, accompanied by plenty of presents.
## 1
These very Dawns have made themselves a beacon. In the eastern half of  the dusky realm they anoint their beam [=sacrificial post].
Presenting themselves, as bold ones present arms, the reddish cows, the  mothers come toward (us).
## 2
Their ruddy beams have flown up at will. They have yoked their reddish  cows, easy to yoke.
The Dawns have made their patterns as of old. A gleaming beam have  the reddish ones propped up.
## 3
They chant [/shine] like women busy with their labors, (coming always)  along the same route from afar,
conveying refreshment to the man of good action [=sacrificer], the man  of good gifts, the man who sacrifices and presses soma all the days.
## 4
She strews ornaments on herself like a dancing girl. She uncovers her  breast like a ruddy (cow) her udder [?].
Making light for all creation, Dawn has opened up the darkness as cows  (would) their pen. 5. Her gleaming ray has appeared opposite. She spreads herself out,  thrusts away the black void.
The Daughter of Heaven has propped up her bright beam, her
ornament, like (a priest) propping up the sacrificial post, the
ornament at the ceremonies, and anointing it.
## 6
We have crossed to the further shore of this darkness. Dawn, dawning,  is making her patterns.
Like one aiming to please, she, shining forth, smiles for splendor. She of  the lovely face has awakened (us?) to benevolence.
## 7
Light-filled leader of liberalities, the Daughter of Heaven is praised by  the Gotamas.
O Dawn, mete out prizes rich in offspring, rich in men, founded on  horses, tipped with cows.
## 8
O Dawn, might I attain this glorious wealth, rich in good heroes,  founded on horses, with alien-slaves as its forelock—
o you of good portion, who with fame of wondrous power radiate
forth, motivated by (desire for) the prize, to lofty (wealth).
## 9
The goddess, overseeing all creatures, (like) an eye, facing toward them,  shines forth widely.
Awakening all life to activity, she has found the speech of every
zealous one.
## 10
Being born again and again though ancient, (always) beautifying  herself to the same hue,
like a successful (gambler) with the best throw who diminishes the stake  (of his opponent), the goddess keeps diminishing the lifetime of the  mortal as she ages him.
## 11
Uncovering the ends of heaven, she has awakened. She keeps her sister  [=Night] far away.
Diminishing human (life-)spans, the maiden radiates forth with the eye  of her swain [=Sun].
## 12
The bright, well-portioned one spreading herself as if (dispersing)  cattle, like a river (spreading) its surge, she has whitened forth widely. Not belittling the divine commandments, she has come into view,
appearing along with the rays of the sun.
## 13
Dawn, bring that bright (gift) here to us—you who are rich in
prize mares—
by which we may acquire both progeny and posterity.
## 14
Dawn, here today—o radiant one rich in cows and horses—
richly dawn forth to us, o liberal-spirited one.
## 15
So yoke the ruddy horses today! O Dawn rich in prize mares;
then convey to us all good portions.

## 16
Aśvins, (drive) your circuit that brings cows and gold, right up to us,  wondrous ones.
Stop your chariot nearby, like-minded ones.
## 17
You two, who have made your signal-call (reach) all the way to heaven  and at the same time made light for the people,
convey nourishment here to us, you Aśvins.
## 18
The two gods, embodiments of joy, wondrous, of golden course— let (the priests) waking at dawn convey them here, for soma-drinking.