+++
title = "093"

+++
93
Agni and Soma
Gotama Rāhūgaṇa
12 verses: anuṣṭubh 1–3, triṣṭubh 4–8, gāyatrī 9–11, triṣṭubh 12
Another metrically complex hymn, this is the last attributed to Gotama Rāhūgaṇa  in Maṇḍala I. Despite the variety of meters, the piece is unified by the emphasis on  the two gods to whom it is dedicated, and especially by the presence of the dvandva  compound agnī́-ṣómā “Agni and Soma” in every verse. This compound is found  only twice elsewhere in the R̥gveda (both times in Maṇḍala X). Although Agni and  Soma are the quintessential ritual divinities, each representing a crucial sacrificial  substance, this is the only hymn in the R̥gveda explicitly dedicated to them together,  and it is a fairly banal product. However, it is worth noting that, at least in our  view, V.44, sometimes called the hardest hymn in the R̥gveda, seems to concern  Agni and Soma simultaneously, though it is identified in the Anukramaṇī as an All  God hymn.
The essential unity of the hymn is also discernible in its fairly simple  thematic-cum-syntactic structure, which regularly constructs the verse as a rela tive clause referring to the actions of a pious mortal (“whoever serves [etc.]... ”),  and a main clause expressing his reward (see vss. 2–3, 8, 10), as well as in repeated  vocabulary in the earlier and later parts (see, e.g., matches between vss. 2 and 8, 3  and 10). The hymn also has an outer ring: the last word (12d śruṣṭimántam “having  an attentive hearing”) recalls the first verb of the hymn (1b śr̥ṇutam), the imperative  “hear, listen!”
One part of the hymn stands out, verses 4–6, which ascribe various mythological  deeds to the pair. Curiously, the deeds in verses 4 and 5 are really more appropri ate to other gods: the mysterious Br̥saya and the theft in verse 4 are found also  in a hymn to the river goddess Sarasvatī (VI.61.1, 3), while verse 5 sounds like  a generic praise of Indra. In verse 6, however, we do find mythological material  appropriate to the two gods addressed, namely the story of the stealing of those  gods. This is, tellingly, the only place in the hymn where the two gods are treated  separately: Mātariśvan is the figure who stole fire, while the falcon’s theft of soma  from heaven is also often alluded to. 1. Agni and Soma, hear this call of mine, you bulls.
Delight in the well-spoken hymns. Become refreshment for the
pious man.
## 02
Agni and Soma, whoever today renders this speech as service for  you two,
for him establish an abundance of heroes, the thriving of cattle, an
abundance of horses.
## 03
Agni and Soma, whoever will piously perform a poured offering or the  preparation of an oblation for you,
he along with his offspring will attain to an abundance of heroes and a  complete lifespan.
## 04
Agni and Soma, this heroic deed of you two has become conspicuous— that you stole the provender, the cows from the niggard.
You brought low the posterity of Br̥saya. You found the single light for  the many.
## 05
You, Soma and Agni, of like resolve, placed these lights in heaven. You, Agni and Soma, released from imprecation and from reproach the  rivers that had been held back.
## 06
Mātariśvan bore the one here from heaven; the falcon stole the other  from the rock.
Agni and Soma, having grown strong through a sacred formulation,  you have made wide space for the sacrifice.
## 07
Agni and Soma, the oblation set before you—pursue it; yearn for it,  bulls; enjoy it.
Since you are providers of good shelter and good help, therefore
establish luck and lifetime for the sacrificer.
## 08
Whoever will serve Agni and Soma with an oblation, with a mind  turned toward the gods, with ghee,
guard his (ritual) ordinance; protect him from narrow straits; to his  clan, to his people extend great shelter.
## 09
O Agni and Soma, who have common property and a common  invocation—crave our hymns.
You two have come together among the gods.
## 10
Agni and Soma, whoever piously honors you with this (oblation), who  honors you with ghee,
for him shine loftily.
## 11
Agni and Soma, you will enjoy these oblations of ours here.
Together drive right up to us.
## 12
Agni and Soma, deliver our steeds (to safety). Let the ruddy (cows) who  sweeten the oblations swell up.
In us and in our benefactors establish powers. Give our ceremony an  attentive hearing.

Most of the next 22 hymns (94–115) are attributed to Kutsa Āṅgirasa by the  Anukramaṇī. Though a few (99–100, alternatively 105) have other poets named,  the presence of the Kutsa refrain in both 100 and 105 (99 is a one-verse hymn)  supports the unity of the collection. The Kutsa refrain, in triṣṭubh, “This let Mitra  and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth and Heaven,” occupies the  last hemistich of the last verse of every hymn except I.97 (a gāyatrī hymn), 99 (a  one-verse hymn), and 104 (though this last hymn is in triṣṭubh).
The Agni hymns (94–99) are each dedicated to a different form of Agni. There  follow, in the normal order, five hymns to Indra, three to the All Gods, with miscel laneous other divinities making up the collection. The collection is at a generally  high level of poetic craftsmanship, but we will only single out for special mention  104, a challenging Indra hymn, 105, a famous and enigmatic All God hymn, and  the lovely Dawn hymn 113.