+++
title = "094"

+++
94
Agni
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
6 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 15–16
The first fourteen verses in this hymn, in jagatī, end with the refrain “while in com pany with you may we not come to harm.” The first half of the hymn (vss. 1–7) gives  little motivation for this repeated, preventative hope: the subject is primarily the  sacrifice and the mutually beneficial relationship between Agni and the sacrificers.  But in verses 8 and 9 evil rivals of the sacrificer appear, and Agni’s aid against them  is requested. The next two verses (10–11) sketch the dangers posed by Agni himself  as the uncontrolled forest fire, and verse 12 calls for Agni’s help against the most  potent menace of all, the anger of the gods. The remaining verses (13–16) return to  the reassuring realm of properly performed sacrifice, with Agni providing benefits  and protection to the ritualist.
## 01
For Jātavedas, who deserves this praise, we would bring it into being like  a chariot, with our inspired thought,
for his solicitude for us in the assembly is beneficial. – O Agni, while in  company with you may we not come to harm.
## 02
For whom you perform sacrifice, that one reaches his goal. Without  assault he dwells in peace; he will acquire good heroes en masse.
He is powerful; constraint does not reach him. – O Agni, while in
company with you may we not come to harm.
## 03
Might we be able to kindle you. Send our insights to their goal. The gods  eat the oblation poured in you.
Convey the Ādityas here, for we are eager for them. – O Agni, while in  company with you may we not come to harm. 4. We shall bring the kindling, and we shall make oblations to you, while  being attentive at each (ritual) juncture.
For us to live longer, send our insights to their goal. – O Agni, while in  company with you may we not come to harm.
## 05
His kinfolk [=flames], the herdsmen of the clans, (of) both the
two-footed and the four-footed, roam by night.
You are the great, bright sign of dawn. – O Agni, while in company  with you may we not come to harm.
## 06
You are the Adhvaryu and the primordial Hotar, the Praśāstar and the  Potar, by birth the one placed in front [/Purohita].
Wise, you prosper all the priestly offices, o insightful one. – O Agni,  while in company with you may we not come to harm.
## 07
You of lovely face who have the same appearance in all directions— even though far in the distance, you shine across (it [=distance]) as if  right there.
You see across even the blind darkness of night. – O Agni, while in
company with you may we not come to harm.
## 08
Let the chariot of the soma-presser be in front, o gods, and let our  recitation dominate those whose insight is evil.
Take heed of this speech (of ours) and prosper it. – O Agni, while in  company with you may we not come to harm.
## 09
With fatal weapons strike away those of evil recitation and of evil  insight, and whatever rapacious ones are in the distance or nearby.
Then for the sacrifice and for the singer make an easy way. – O Agni,  while in company with you may we not come to harm.
## 10
When you have harnessed the pair of ruddy, wind-sped chestnuts to  your chariot and your bellowing is like that of a bull,
then you spur on the trees [/the winners] with (a flame) whose beacon  is smoke. – O Agni, while in company with you may we not come
to harm.
## 11
And then the winged are afraid of your roar, when your “drops”  [=sparks], consuming the grasslands, have spread out.
That (makes) an easy way for your own little “chariots” [=flames?]. – O  Agni, while in company with you may we not come to harm.
## 12
This (Agni) here is to be suckled, as the unerring appeaser of the anger  of Mitra and Varuṇa and of the Maruts.
Have mercy upon us! Let the mind of these (gods) be once again (as  before). – O Agni, while in company with you may we not come
to harm.
## 13
As a god, of the gods you are Mitra, the unerring ally. As a Vasu [/good  one], of the Vasus you are the one beloved at the rite.
Might we be in your broadest shelter. – O Agni, while in company with  you may we not come to harm.

## 14
This is your benefit—that, when kindled in your own house and  bepoured with soma, you remain wakeful as the most merciful
(of gods).
You provide property and treasure to the man who ritually serves. – O  Agni, while in company with you may we not come to harm.
## 15
For whom you will perform ritual service, o you possessing good  property, for whom there is blamelessness in his entirety, o Aditi
[=Innocence],
and whom you will rouse with your beneficial power and with
generosity that provides offspring—might we be those.
## 16
You, o Agni, knowing the quality of good fortune—for us extend our  lifetime here, o god.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth  and Heaven.