+++
title = "095"

+++
95
Agni (or Agni AUṣasa “Agni at Dawn”) 
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
11 verses: triṣṭubh
A typical puzzle hymn in many ways. The dedicand of the hymn, Agni, does not  appear by name until verse 9, and there are only two occurrences of the name, both  vocatives, in the whole hymn (the second being in the final, summary verse 11). The  address to Agni in verse 9 also breaks the uninterrupted 3rd-person description that  holds sway in the hymn up to that point. In what precedes, Agni’s characteristics,  the ritual service given to him, and the entities that render that service are referred  to in oblique fashion.
The Anukramaṇī suggests that it is Agni “at dawn” who is the subject of the  hymn, and indeed the hymn is specifically concerned with the birth, that is, the  kindling, of the ritual fire at daybreak. The birth imagery dominates the first verses,  with Night and Dawn suckling Agni as their calf (vs. 1) and the fingers of the offici
ants begetting him (vs. 2). Three births of Agni are mentioned in verse 3; though  there is some disagreement about whether the three entities mentioned in pāda b are  the sites of the three births, in our opinion only two sites are found there (the sea  and the heavenly waters), and the third birth is the ritual birth that occupied the first  two verses. Again in our opinion, the second half of verse 3 concerns the removal of  the oblation fire (the fire later called the Āhavanīya) to the east.
The remaining verses of the hymn describe the growing strength of the newly  born fire, first barely visible in the kindling sticks (vs. 4), but with flames rising  higher and higher (see esp. vss. 7–8) as he also spreads across the ground (vss. 8–9).  The expected requests for aid and gifts are rather muted and perfunctory (vss. 9cd  and 11b); the focus is on the riddling descriptions. The hymn displays some omphalos characteristics: the middle verses (5–6) show  responsion, and there is a wisp of a ring in the lexical repetitions between verses 2  and 9. But the omphalos effect is not strong.
## 01
The two of different form [=Night and Dawn] proceed, having (the same)  good goal: one after the other, the two suckle their calf.
At the one [=Dawn] he becomes tawny, possessing his own powers; in the  other [=Night] he is seen blazing, intensely lustrous.
## 02
The ten (fingers) beget this babe of Tvaṣṭar—the tireless young women  (beget the babe) to be carried about.
Sharp-faced, self-glorious, shining widely among the peoples—him do  they lead around.
## 03
They attend upon his three births: one in the sea, one in the heaven, in  the waters.
(Going) forth along the forward quarter of the earthly realms [=to
the east], directing the (ritual) sequences, he has distributed them in  proper order.
## 04
Who of you perceives this one in hiding? The calf begets his mothers  with its own powers.
The babe moves away from the lap of the many hardworking women, the  great poet possessing his own powers.
## 05
The beloved one, manifest, grows strong among them—the self-glorious  one upright in the lap of those aslant.
Both (world-halves) are afraid of (the babe) of Tvaṣṭar while he is being  born, (but turning) back to face him, the two give the lion pleasure in  return.
## 06
Both give pleasure like excellent wives. Like bellowing cows they (all  [=men]) have reverently approached (him) in their own ways.
He has become the skill-lord of skills, whom they anoint from the right  (/south) with oblations.
## 07
Like Savitar, he raises up his arms again and again. He aligns himself along  the two seams (of the world?), the fearsome one charging straight on.
He thrusts his blazing cloak up from his very self; he leaves behind new  clothes for his mothers.
## 08
He makes for himself a glittering form, which is (even) higher, as he  mingles with the cows and waters in his seat.
The poet keeps grooming his foundation all around, while his insight is  being groomed. He has become the meeting point with the assemblage  of the gods.
## 09
Your broad expanse encompasses your foundation, the wide-shining  domain of the buffalo.
When kindled, o Agni, protect us with all your self-glorious,
undeceivable protectors.234 I.96
## 10
He makes himself a stream in the wasteland, a way, and a wave. With  blazing waves he reaches the ground.
He takes all the old things [=dry wood] in his bellies; he roams within  the new, fruitful (plants).
## 11
In just this way, o Agni, as you grow strong though the kindling wood,  shine out richly for fame, o pure one.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth  and Heaven.