+++
title = "096"

+++
96
Agni (or Agni Draviṇodā “Agni Wealth-Giver”)
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
9 verses: triṣṭubh
Simpler and more straightforward than the previous hymn, this one shares a final  verse (9) as well as some themes with I.95: see especially verse 5, where Night and  Dawn suckle Agni, the calf, which matches I.95.1, where the two mothers were  unidentified.
A pāda-length refrain is found in the first seven verses; in the last two of these  (vss. 6–7) the refrain is integrated syntactically into the verse: pāda c with pāda d in  6, the whole verse in 7, while in the first five verses the refrain is independent. Agni  has the epithet “wealth-giver” in this refrain, and in the eighth verse (post-refrain)  that epithet, repeated four times, is the focus. This verse expresses the poet’s desire for  the various types of Agni’s “wealth,” a typical finale. In the earlier parts of the hymn  (vss. 1–5), however, it is not Agni’s material gifts that are dominant, but his ritual and  cosmogonic properties, though his relation to wealth surfaces in verses 6–7 (see also  4a). This gradual integration of the refrain into the fabric of the hymn, both syn tactically and thematically, shows how a skillful poet can deploy even something as  apparently inert as an invariant refrain in building a forward-moving composition.
## 01
Being born with strength as of old, at once he has acquired all poetic  powers—yes indeed!
Both the waters and the holy place [=earth] make the ally [=Agni]
succeed. – The gods uphold Agni, the wealth-giver.
## 02
With the age-old formal invocation [=nivid] and the poetic power of Āyu  he begot these offspring of Manu’s people;
with Vivasvant [=Sun] as his eye (he begot) heaven and the waters. – The  gods uphold Agni, the wealth-giver.
## 03
The Ārya clans solemnly invoke him as the foremost one, bringing the  sacrifice to success when bepoured, aiming straight,
the son of nourishment, the Bharata, possessing buttery drops. – The  gods uphold Agni, the wealth-giver.
## 04
As Mātariśvan he brings prosperity filled with many desirable things; as  the finder of the sun, he finds a way for his lineage. He is the herdsman of the clans, the begetter of the two worlds. – The  gods uphold Agni, the wealth-giver.
## 05
Night and Dawn, ever exchanging their color, together suckle their  single child.
Between heaven and earth the bright ornament shines out. – The gods  uphold Agni, the wealth-giver.
## 06
The foundation of wealth, the assembler of goods, the beacon of the  sacrifice, the bird bringing our thoughts to success.
Protecting their immortality, protecting him, the gods uphold Agni, the  wealth-giver.
## 07
Both now and before the seat of riches, the ground of what has been  born and is being born,
the herdsman of what is and of much coming into being—Agni, the  wealth-giver, do the gods uphold.
## 08
The wealth-giver (shall offer) of his surpassing wealth; the wealth-giver  shall offer of (his wealth) along with superior men.
The wealth-giver (shall grant) us refreshment accompanied by heroes;  the wealth-giver shall grant long lifetime.
## 09
In just this way, o Agni, as you grow strong though the kindling wood,  shine out richly for fame, o pure one.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth and  Heaven.