+++
title = "097"

+++
97
Agni (or Agni śuci “Blazing Agni”)
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
8 verses: gāyatrī
Like the previous hymn, this one has a refrain, which is also not always syntacti cally integrated in the verse. But here the independence is more jarring because the  refrain is just a participial phrase, not a self-contained clause. The rest of this brief  hymn consists of snatches of expressed hopes for the well-being of the sacrificers  and the patrons and for Agni’s aid in overcoming hostilities. The Sanskrit contains  a pleasing counterpoint of preverbs, which cannot be easily rendered in English.
## 1
Blazing away the bad for us, blaze wealth here, o Agni,
—blazing away the bad for us.
## 2
With a desire for good lands, for easy passage, and for goods we offer  sacrifice,
—(you) blazing away the bad for us—
## 3
So that the most fortunate one of these (would become) preeminent, and  preeminent our own patrons,
—(you) blazing away the bad for us—
236 I.98–99
## 4
So that we and our patrons would be further propagated through  you, o Agni,
—(you) blazing away the bad for us—
## 5
When the beams of powerful Agni go forth in all directions
—(you) blazing away the bad for us.
## 6
For you, o you who face in all directions, encompass (everything) in all  directions
—blazing away the bad for us.
## 7
O you who face in all directions, carry us across hostilities as if with a boat —blazing away the bad for us.
## 8
Carry us across (them), as if across a river with a boat, to well-being —blazing away the bad for us.