+++
title = "100"

+++
100
Indra
Five Vārṣāgira poets: R̥jrāśva, Ambarīṣa, Sahadeva, Bhayamāna, and Surādhas 19 verses: triṣṭubh
This first Indra hymn in the Kutsa collection is assigned by the Anukramaṇī to  five named poets with the patronymic Vārṣāgira, only one of whom (Ambarīṣa, of  IX.98) is known from elsewhere. However, the hymn ends with the Kutsa refrain  (vs. 19cd), and the Vārṣāgira attribution must come from the dānastuti, where the  names of these five poets are mentioned (vs. 17, see also 16).
The first fifteen verses (up to the dānastuti, vss. 16–19) end with a refrain  linking Indra to the Maruts, and one of the main themes of the hymn is com radeship:  Indra joined not only with the Maruts but with other like-minded  beings (see, e.g., vss. 4–5, 10–11). The context is almost exclusively martial,  as Indra joins with his forces and his powers to conquer various foes, though  his standard opponents, like Vr̥tra, are curiously absent. The insistent pres ence of the Maruts may mark this as a hymn for the Midday Pressing, where  Indra and Maruts share the oblation. The next hymn also has a strong Marut  presence.
The dānastuti finale begins (vs. 16) with the praise of the gift, a fine mare,  but, after naming the Vārṣāgiras (vs. 17), ends with straightforward praise of  Indra.
Verbally the hymn is structured by the frequent hemistich-initial occurrences  of the pronoun sá “he,” reinforced by plays on this syllable: for instance, verse 1c  satīnásatvā, 18cd sánat. There are also a number of hapaxes, whose translations are  provisional (see vss. 8, 12, 16).
## 01
He who, as bull at home with his bullish powers, is sovereign king of  great heaven and of earth,
the one having trusty warriors is to be invoked in raids. – Accompanied  by the Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help.

## 02
Whose course, like the sun’s, cannot be reached, (who has)  obstacle-smashing bluster in every raid,
the most bullish one (should come) with his comrades along his  own ways. – Accompanied by the Maruts, let Indra be here for us  with help.
## 03
Whose paths, like those of heaven, go milking out (the milk of) their  semen, unencompassible in their vastness,
he, overcoming hatred, is victorious through his male powers.
– Accompanied by the Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help. 4. He has become the best Aṅgiras with the Aṅgirases, a bull with the  bulls, while being a comrade with his comrades,
a versifier with versifiers, preeminent along the routes. – Accompanied  by the Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help.
## 05
He, the skillful one, along with the Rudras [=Maruts] as if with his own  sons having conquered his foes at the time for men-conquering, along with the nest-mates [=Maruts] bringing to triumph (deeds)  worthy of fame. – Accompanied by the Maruts, let Indra be here for  us with help.
## 06
He, confounding the battle-fury (of the foe), the creator of the  battle-elation (of the allies), has won the sun along with our men on this very day, the lord of the settlements invoked by many.
– Accompanied by the Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help. 7. Him do his help(er)s [=Maruts] cause to take pleasure in the contest  of champions; him do the settled peoples make the protector of  their peace.
He alone is lord of every undertaking. – Accompanied by the Maruts,  let Indra be here for us with help.
## 08
Him they inspired [?] in the upsurgings of his vast power—the men  inspired [?] the man to help, inspired [?] him to the stakes.
He found the light even in blind darkness. – Accompanied by the  Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help.
## 09
He with his left (hand) will hold fast even the overweening (foes), in his  right will hold (all) winning throws massed together.
He, even in association with a weakling, is the winner of the stakes.  – Accompanied by the Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help. 10. As a winner with his hordes, a winner with his chariots, he is known by  all the communities now today.
He with his male powers prevails over taunts. – Accompanied by the  Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help.
## 11
Since with his kindred or with his non-kin he will drive together (the  warriors? the spoils?) when the prize of battle (is at stake), he is  invoked by many in (many) ways
for the conquering of the waters, of life and lineage. – Accompanied by  the Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help. 12. He is the mace-bearer, the Dasyu-smasher, fearsome, mighty, of a  thousand insights and a hundred counsels, skillful—
like a beaker [?] in his vastness, belonging to the five peoples.
– Accompanied by the Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help.
## 13
His mace roars alongside, sun-winning, like the reverberating, vehement  bellowing of heaven.
Him do gains follow, him prizes. – Accompanied by the Maruts, let  Indra be here for us with help.
## 14
Whose inexhaustible measure in its vastness, (like our) hymn, will coil  around both worlds on all sides,
he will deliver (us) with his strategies while he is rejoicing.
– Accompanied by the Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help.
## 15
The limit of whose vast power no gods in their divinity, nor mortals,  nor even the waters have reached—
he projects with his energy beyond earth and heaven. – Accompanied  by the Maruts, let Indra be here for us with help.
## 16
A chestnut, dusky mare, marked with “stalks” [?] and a blaze,
heaven-bright, a portion of the wealth of R̥jrāśva,
drawing a chariot with bulls at the chariot-poles, gladdening, has
distinguished herself among the clans of Nahuṣa.
## 17
This very hymn is for you, Indra the bull. The Vārṣāgiras greet your  largesse—
R̥jrāśva with his sidekicks, Ambarīṣa, Sahadeva, Bhayamāna, Surādhas. 18. Invoked by many in (many) ways, having smashed the Dasyus and the  Śimyus to the earth, he has laid them low with his missile.
He has won a dwelling place along with his bright comrades [=Maruts];  he has won the sun; he has won the waters—he with the good mace.
## 19
Let Indra always speak up for us. Not led astray, may we win the prize. – This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth and  Heaven.