+++
title = "101"

+++
101
Indra
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
11 verses: jagatī 1–7, triṣṭubh 8–11
The structure of this hymn is under tight control, giving pleasure both by its pre dictable repetitions and by their breaches. Though the hymn falls into two unequal  metrical segments, there is no reason not to consider it a unity: the two segments  complement each other, structurally and thematically. (One might fancifully com pare it to the 8 / 6 structure of a Petrarchan sonnet.)
The jagatī section (vss. 1–7) is characterized most obviously by its refrain, occu pying all of the fourth pāda of each verse. Interestingly this refrain lacks the name

Indra, though this name appears in first or (modified) second position in each of  the third pādas, save for verse 1. Instead it is his connection with the Maruts that  is foregrounded in the refrain, using the same stem, though in a different case,  that appeared in the refrain of I.100. Verses 1 and 7 also deviate from the signa
ture stylistic feature of the middle verses (2–6), that the first three-fourths of these  verses are all relative clauses: a form of the relative pronoun begins each verse, and  each of the two subsequent pādas in each verse contains (and often begins) with  at least one. (Note the explosion of relative pronouns in the final verse 6: five in  three pādas.) This arrangement, with most of the verse devoted to relative clauses  but ending with a main clause refrain, reminds us of the famous Indra hymn II.12,  with its identificatory refrain “He, o peoples, is Indra!” But this one is more com
plex, in that Indra is not identified directly in the refrain. The jagatī section is also  demarcated by a faint ring, the verb “address” (prá... arcatā 1a, abhy àrcati 7c), and  by the fact that Indra is referred to only in the 3rd person in a series of definitional  descriptions in the indicative.
By contrast, the triṣṭubh verses (8–11) switch to direct address to Indra (save for  the final, summary verse with the Kutsa refrain) and to urgent invitations to him  to come to our sacrifice. The Marut theme is continued, however—already in the  first pāda of the first triṣṭubh verse (8a) with a vocative of the same stem (marútvant
“accompanied by the Maruts”) that dominated the jagatī refrain. (See also 9c, 11a.)  A faint ring also defines the triṣṭubh verses, with vr̥jána “(ritual) circle” in both 8b  and 11a.
As for content, it is largely familiar, praising Indra for his victories over various  enemies, for his aid to mortals hard pressed in battle, and for his steadfast lordship.  Needless to say, the Marut element is quite strong, as in the preceding hymn (I.110).  The most striking formulation may be found in the first verse, with its image of  Indra causing the fortresses of the enemy to abort their fetuses.
## 1
Address a nourishing speech to the exultant one, who, along with  R̥jiśvan, aborted the (strongholds) with their black embryos.
Seeking help from the bull with the mace in his right hand, the one
accompanied by the Maruts do we call for partnership.
## 2
Who with his bristling battle-fury smote the one with its shoulders apart  [=Vr̥tra =cobra], who smote Śambara, who smote Pipru who followed  no commandment,
Indra, who wrenched down insatiable Śuṣṇa—the one accompanied by  the Maruts do we call upon for partnership.
## 3
Whose great masculine nature Heaven and Earth (strengthen); in whose  commandment is Varuṇa, in whose is Sūrya,
Indra, whose commandment the rivers follow—the one accompanied by  the Maruts do we call upon for partnership.
## 4
Who of horses, who of cows is the herdsman exerting his will; who is  acknowledged as steadfast in every action, Indra, who is the weapon of death for the non-presser, even one
standing firm—the one accompanied by the Maruts do we call upon  for partnership.
## 5
Who is the lord of everything moving and breathing, who first found  the cows for the maker of sacred formulations,
Indra, who brought the Dasyus down low—the one accompanied by  the Maruts do we call upon for partnership.
## 6
Who is to be called upon by champions and who by the fearful, who is  called upon by those on the run and who by the victors,
Indra, whom all beings altogether set their sights on—the one
accompanied by the Maruts do we call upon for partnership.
## 7
At the Rudras’ [=Maruts’] direction he goes, wide-gazing; along  with the Rudras the maiden [=Rodasī] stretches her broad
expanse.
Indra the famed does the inspired thought address—the one
accompanied by the Maruts do we call upon for partnership.
## 8
Whether you, accompanied by the Maruts, will reach exhilaration in the  furthest seat or in the nearest (ritual) circle,
from there journey here to our ceremony: with desire for you we have  made an oblation, o you whose generosity is real.
## 9
With desire for you we have pressed soma, o very skillful Indra; with  desire for you we have made an oblation, o you whose vehicle is the  sacred formulation.
So, you with your teams, flocking with the Maruts—reach exhilaration  at this sacrifice here, on this ritual grass.
## 10
Reach exhilaration along with the fallow bays that are yours, Indra.  Unfasten your two lips; unloose the two nourishing streams.
Let your fallow bays convey you here, lovely-lipped one. Eagerly take  pleasure in our oblations.
## 11
As herdsmen of the (ritual) circle that offers praise to the Maruts, may  we win the prize with Indra.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth  and Heaven.