+++
title = "102"

+++
102
Indra
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
11 verses: jagatī 1–7, triṣṭubh 8–11
The structure of this hymn is superficially identical to that of its immediate prede cessor, I.101: eleven verses, the first seven in jagatī, the last four triṣṭubh. But the  tight syntactic and formulaic control of I.101 is not present here. Nonetheless, the

hymn is stitched together by lexical repetitions, and the two metrically diverse seg ments show especially strong lexical responsions.
The hymn begins with a difficult verse, which has received a number of incom patible interpretations. Ours is, perhaps, especially bold, in that we assume that  the poet (in the 1st person) is speaking to a “you” who is not the god (as most  people assume), but the human praise singer, who may, in fact, be the poet him self. (Such incompatibilities in address are not infrequent in such ritual situ ations; the poet often addresses himself in the 2nd person; see discussion in  Jamison 2009a.) The poet thus announces that the composition of his poem is  complete and it is ready to be recited to its object, the god, who is present in the  verse in the 3rd person.
After naming the cosmic forces whose activities provide support to Indra (vs.  2), the poet turns to two intertwined themes: the aid we beg from Indra in conflicts  and contests, where, we know, our rivals and foes will be seeking the same aid  (esp. vss. 3–6, 9–10), and the immeasurable power Indra commands, power that  accounts for the desire of all contenders to get him on their side (esp. vss. 6–8).  These latter verses play with forms of the root mā “measure, match.” The transi
tion between the jagatī and triṣṭubh sections is especially nicely handled: having  claimed in verses 6–7 that Indra has no match in strength, verse 8 takes up the  exact phrase from verse 6, but asserts that indeed there does exist such a match— but it consists of the whole cosmos in all its divisions. The next verse (9) of the  triṣṭubh section densely repeats and rings changes on the lexicon and thematics  from the early parts of the hymn and thus signals a kind of ring composition.  Verse 10 seems to announce the success of our petitions, though in a different  lexicon. The final verse (11) is a refrain verse, repeated from I.100.19, the last half  of which is the general Kutsa refrain.
## 1
I present this great visionary thought to you, the praiser of this great  one, when the Holy Place [=the earth] has been anointed for you.
The one victorious in his upsurging and his outsurging, Indra with his  vast power did the gods cheer on.
## 2
His fame do the seven rivers bear; Heaven and Earth, the Broad One,  (bear) his wondrous form, lovely to see.
For us to look upon (it), to put our trust in (him), the Sun and Moon  roam, traversing in regular alternation, o Indra.
## 3
Help this chariot forward to win, o bounteous one, which we will cheer  on as victorious for you in the clash,
and help us in the contest with your mind, much-praised Indra. Extend  shelter to us who seek you, bounteous one.
## 4
Might we conquer their defense with you as yokemate. For us uphold our  stake in every raid;
for us, Indra, create wide space and easy passage. Break the bullish
powers of our rivals, bounteous one. 5. As these peoples here, each for itself, in admiration are calling for you  along with your help, o securer of prizes—
mount our chariot, to win—because your mind, Indra, when it’s settled,  is victorious.
## 6
Cow-conquering are his two arms—he himself is of unmatched resolve,  providing a hundred forms of help in every action, creating tumult.
In the disorder (of battle) Indra is a match (for all) in his strength. So  the peoples vie in invoking him when they wish to win.
## 7
Your fame reaches higher than a hundred, bounteous one, and even  more—higher than a thousand among the separate peoples.
The great (Earth), the Holy Place has sparked you who are matchless.  So you keep smashing obstacles, you stronghold-splitter.
## 8
The (only) match for your strength has threefold divisions: it is the three  earths, o lord of men, and the three luminous realms.
You have grown beyond this whole world. You are without rival, Indra,  by birth and from of old.
## 9
It is you we call upon first among the gods; you have become the one  victorious in battles.
Let him make this bard of ours fervid and effusive; let Indra put our  chariot in front at the surging out.
## 10
You have conquered; you have not withheld prizes in the petty contests  and in the great ones, bounteous one.
You, the strong, we hone for help. So, Indra, spur us on in the
challenges.
## 11
Let Indra always speak up for us. Not led astray, may we win the prize. – This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth  and Heaven.