+++
title = "105"

+++
105
All Gods
Trita Āptya or Kutsa Āṅgirasa
19 verses: paṅkti, except mahābr̥hatī 8, triṣṭubh 19
This famous hymn has been the victim of a range of unlikely interpretations;  among them that it tells the story of “Trita in the Well” (so Geldner; for discus sion of the verse on which this is based, see the introduction to I.106); that it is  the lamentation of a sick man (so Oldenberg, Noten); that it is the complaint of a  poet who’s unemployed because his patron has died (so Bloomfield 1916: 114–15);  or that it is a charm against a solar eclipse (so Lüders 1959: 576–78). The range  and incompatibility of these hypotheses testify to the interpretive challenges of the poem. Nonetheless, guided by the structure, we feel that we have arrived at an  internally consistent and satisfying interpretation. (See also discussion in Jamison  2007: 82–85).
It is an omphalos hymn. It has nineteen verses, but the last verse is in a different  meter from the rest and does not end with the refrain found in the other eighteen  verses (but rather with the standard Kutsa refrain), so we can legitimately consider  it extra-hymnic for structural purposes. The exact center of the hymn is then verses  9 and 10. As in a number of other omphalos hymns, they are responsive, beginning  identically, with amī́ yé numeral (“those which...”). Their content is, it seems,  mystical—at any rate, it has provoked much scholarly discussion. Also as in other  omphalos hymns a set of concentric verses surround this central pair. But its struc ture is even more intricate than most other omphalos hymns, in that there is also a  certain forward progress in the hymn, held in tension with the architectonic sym
metry of the omphalos structure.
The subject of the hymn is the poet’s doubts and anxieties about the efficacy of  the sacrifice and, in particular, of his own ritual speech and thus about the relation ship between the earthly and heavenly realms, if that relationship exists at all. It is  this central doubt that prompts the refrain “Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you  two world-halves.” The poet wishes both Heaven and Earth to listen to and bear  witness to what he says and thereby prove that there is a relationship between them,  a relationship established and maintained by the sacrifice.
The poet begins with a happy picture of cosmic (vs. 1) and earthly (vs. 2) order,  but he quickly turns to his fear about the maintenance of this order (vs. 3). He fol lows with a series of baffled questions to the gods, introduced by pr̥chāmi “I ask.”  He first questions Agni, the divinity nearest to him, about the fate of his previous  poems (his “truth”), and then turns to the gods in heaven to ask what happens in  heaven to the sacrifice and the poetic formulations of mortals (vss. 5–6). These  questions express almost a loss of faith in the efficacy of these mortal techniques  to make contact with the gods. His anguish grows stronger in verses 7–8, where his  painful thoughts are memorably compared to wolves, to cowives, and to mice gnaw
ing their own tails.
There follows the pair of verses (9–10) we have just identified as the omphalos,  which seem to constitute the oblique response to the poet’s cry for reassurance—a  cosmic vision in which the poet’s connection and kinship with the distant heaven is  manifest, and is attested to by what may be his forefather, the seer Trita Āptya. The  precise nature of this vision is not clear to us, but it seems to involve celestial bod
ies and celestial movement. After this central mystery, the rest of the hymn seems  designed to calm the worries expressed by the poet, in the reverse order of his first  expression, by asserting divine participation in the mortal’s ritual acts. In verse 11 a  cosmic wolf is kept at bay, similar to the earthly, metaphorical one that pursued the  poet in verse 7. In the following verses effective words are established anew (12); Agni  takes charge of the sacrifice (13–14); Varuṇa produces poetic formulations (15); and  the path to heaven and the relations between god and men are made safe (16–17).

Thus I.105 has two structures held in tension—one is the symmetrical architec tural one of concentric rings of verses around a central pair, and the other is the  forward movement of question and answer, worry expressed and reassurance given.  The two structures can be diagrammed as follows:
Structure of I.105 (a): architectural:
1–2 cosmic and earthly order
3 fears about maintaining order
5–6 questions about fate of ritual offerings
7–8 more anguish; thoughts compared to wolves, cowives, mice
9–10 Omphalos: cosmic vision
11 wolf kept at bay
12 effective words reestablished
13–15 gods take charge of sacrifice
16–17 order restored
[18: structure destabilized? (see below)]
Structure of I.105 (b): forward movement:
1–8 poet’s questions and worries
11–17 (gods’) answers and reassurances
The intricacy of the responsive patterns and the tension between the two struc tures compel our attention and provide us with aesthetic satisfaction, even though  we find ourselves puzzled by much of the actual content of the hymn. But there is  a final sly trick that complicates the hymn even more. In the last verse (before the  extra-hymnic one), the wolf returns—the wolf that tracked the poet in verse 7, but  whose threat was curbed by divine power in verse 11. But it seems that that check  was only temporary; the wolf comes back, enigmatically but with a lurking men ace, in verse 18. Have the poet’s fears been calmed after all? Has he really regained  his faith in the efficacy of his own poetry and of the sacrifice they serve? Or will  the wolf prey upon him again? The hymn leaves these questions open and in this  way subtly and uninsistently undermines the reassuring structure of the poem and  destabilizes its architecture. It is a masterful stroke.
## 01
The moon is here in the waters; the fine-feathered one [=sun] runs in  heaven.
They do not find your track, o lightning bolts with golden fellies.
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 02
Those with tasks (pursue) each his own task. The wife draws her
husband to herself. The two squeeze out the bullish milk; having surrendered, he milks out  his sap [/having bound him about, she milks out his sap].
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 03
Let not, o gods, yonder sun fall down [/be miscarried] from heaven. Let us never be in want of the beneficial somian (sap).
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 04
I ask the nearest one [=Agni] about my sacrifice. Will the messenger  [=Agni] declare this:
Where has my earlier “truth” gone? Who bears it now?
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 05
You gods, who are yonder in the three luminous realms of heaven— What is truth for you, what is untruth? Where is the age-old offering  for you?
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 06
Is (the vision) of truth steadfast? Is the vision of Varuṇa (steadfast)? Might we along the path of great Aryaman pass beyond those of evil  intent?
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 07
I am one who used (always) to speak some (speeches) at the pressing. But cares (now) pursue this same me, like a wolf a thirsting wild beast. – Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 08
They scorch me all about, like cowives, (like ailing) ribs.
Like mice their tails, the cares gnaw at me, your praiser, o you of a
hundred resolves [=Indra].
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 09
The seven reins [=seers?] that are yonder—to there is my umbilical cord  stretched.
Trita Āptya knows this. He rasps (witness) to the kinship.
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 10
The five oxen that stand yonder in the middle of great heaven— this is now to be proclaimed among the gods—they have turned back  (toward home), directed toward a single end.
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 11
These fine-feathered ones sit in the middle, on the stairway to heaven. They keep away from the path the wolf that is overtaking the boisterous  waters.
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 12
Anew has this (speech) been established worthy to be spoken, good to  proclaim, o gods.
The rivers stream truth; the sun stretches through the real.
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 13
O Agni, it exists: this friendship of yours among the gods, worthy to be  hymned.

Seated here, sacrifice to the gods for us as you did for Manu—as the  one who knows better.
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 14
Seated here as Hotar, as for Manu, (facing?) toward the gods, as the one  who knows better,
Agni sweetens the oblations, the wise god among the gods.
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 15
Varuṇa creates sacred formulations; we implore him as the finder of  the way.
He opens up the thought in our heart. Let a newer truth be born.
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 16
The path that is yonder, belonging to the Ādityas, made as something to  be proclaimed in heaven—
it is not to be overstepped, o gods; o mortals, you do not (even) see it. – Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 17
Trita, set down in a well, calls upon the gods for help.
Br̥haspati has heard this, making a broad (space) from narrowness.
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 18
Because the reddish wolf has suddenly seen me going along the path, he rears up on having noticed me, like a carpenter with a stitch in
his side.
– Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.
## 19
With this song may we, with Indra on our side and possessing hale  heroes, be preeminent in the community.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth  and Heaven.