+++
title = "108"

+++
108
Indra and Agni
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
13 verses: triṣṭubh
For the ritual pairing of Indra and Agni, see the introduction to I.21. This hymn  is structured by patterned repetition that becomes decidedly more restrictive in the  second half of the hymn. The vocative of the dual dvandva “o Indra and Agni”  occurs in every verse but the middle one (vs. 6). In the first five verses this vocative  moves around the verse (though it always occurs in second position in its pāda), but  in the second half (vss. 7–13) it always occurs in second position of the first pāda,  after the subordinator yád “when” (except in the final verse [13], where it appears  after evā́ in the same position). The second half of these same verses (7–12) is a  refrain, which has slowly been assembled in the earlier part of the hymn: its sec ond half is also found in 1d and 6d, and in part in 5d; the end of its first half first  appears in 6c. These elements all come together first in 7cd. And the first halves of  these same verses are thematically superimposable: in each verse several different  potential locations of the gods are listed, which they are urged to leave in order to  come to us.
The contents of the first six verses are more various. The united front and the  joint activities of Indra and Agni are emphasized, though some verses have a dis tinctly Indraic character (esp. vs. 3, where both gods are called “Vṛtra-smashers”)  and some are more in Agni’s camp (esp. vs. 4). The middle verse (6) is, as noted  above, the only verse without an address to the gods (or any mention of them  by name), and it also contains 1st-person direct speech. In it the speaker recalls  his words when he “chose” the gods, presumably as his priests, and these words  announce the necessity for competing with others (in this case the other human  “lords” [not, in our opinion, the nonhuman Asuras, the later Vedic opponents of  the gods]) for the gods’ visitation, the theme that will dominate the rest of the hymn.  Though we hesitate to call verse 6 an omphalos, it does serve as pivot point for the hymn, and its deliberately different structure from both what precedes and what  follows marks it and its position as exceptional.
## 01
O Indra and Agni, the brightest chariot of yours, which looks upon all  creatures,
with that one drive here, standing together on the same chariot. Then  drink of the pressed soma.
## 02
As great as this whole creation here is, deep and wide-spreading in its  expanse,
so great let this soma here be, for drinking—enough for you two, to  your thinking, o Indra and Agni.
## 03
For you two made your own joint name auspicious, and you two, o  Vr̥tra-smashers, are conjoined.
O Indra and Agni, you bulls, having sat down jointly, drench yourselves  in the bullish soma.
## 04
You two being anointed when the fires have been kindled, with your  offering spoon extended, having strewn your own ritual grass,
with the sharp soma drinks poured about, drive in our direction to
(display) benevolence, o Indra and Agni.
## 05
O Indra and Agni, which manly deeds you two have done; which forms  and bullish powers you have made your own;
which age-old propitious partnerships are yours—with these, drink of  the pressed soma.
## 06
Since I said first on choosing you two: “This soma here is to be invoked  by us in competition with the (other human) lords,”
toward this confidence (of ours) (which has) come true—yes! drive here.  Then drink of the pressed soma.
## 07
When, o Indra and Agni, you are reaching exhilaration in your own  dwelling, when at a brahmin’s or at a king’s, o you who deserve the
sacrifice,
from there, bulls—yes! drive here. Then drink of the pressed soma.
## 08
When, o Indra and Agni, you are among the Yadus, the Turvaśas, when  among the Druhyus, the Anus, the Pūrus,
from there, bulls—yes! drive here. Then drink of the pressed soma.
## 09
When, o Indra and Agni, you are on the lowest earth, on the middle  one, and on the highest one,
from there, bulls—yes! drive here. Then drink of the pressed soma.
## 10
When, o Indra and Agni, you are on the highest earth, on the middle  one, and on the lowest one,
from there, bulls—yes! drive here. Then drink of the pressed soma.
## 11
When, o Indra and Agni, you are in heaven, when on earth, when in the  mountains, in the plants, in the waters,
from there, bulls—yes! drive here. Then drink of the pressed soma.

## 12
When, o Indra and Agni, at the rising of the sun in the middle of the  heaven you bring yourselves to exhilaration by your own power,
from there, bulls—yes! drive here. Then drink of the pressed soma.
## 13
Thus, o Indra and Agni, having drunk of the pressed soma, entirely  conquer all rich prizes for us.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth  and Heaven.