+++
title = "109"

+++
109
Indra and Agni
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Dedicated to Indra and Agni like the preceding hymn, this one takes a livelier and  less predictable course, characterized by a 1st-person voice. This voice announces  in the first two verses that he seeks a better state and must turn to Indra and Agni  for help because his kin-group is unreliable. This is expressed in general terms in  the first verse, but in bitter particulars in the second. Interestingly the deficient rela
tives in that verse are both connections through the female line: his daughter’s hus band and his wife’s brother (the word syālá is specialized for this relationship). In a  patrilocal system like that of ancient India, neither of them would have particularly  close ties to him.
The theme of kinship is continued in verse 3, where the forefathers, a more  satisfactory set of relatives, provide the model for the performance of a soma  sacrifice for Indra and Agni, the success of which seems to have been in doubt  (see 3a). This soma sacrifice continues in verse 4, where the Aśvins, somewhat  surprisingly, participate in its performance. Perhaps the idea is that even other  gods, the Aśvins and the goddess Holy Place, do ritual service to the great Indra  and Agni.
The subject gradually shifts to praise of the two gods’ powers (vss. 5–6) and  requests for their aid (vss. 7–8). In verse 7 the forefathers return, and the poet,  rather indirectly, compares the sacrificial compact the gods had with these ances tors with the one he hopes he has established now.
## 1
Because, seeking a better state, I have surveyed with my mind my kith  and kin, o Indra and Agni,
there exists for me no other (fatherly) solicitude than you two. So I have  fashioned for you a thought that seeks the prize.
## 2
Because I have heard of you two as better givers of abundance than a  no-count son-in-law or brother-in-law—
so with an offering of soma for you, o Indra and Agni, I beget a newer  praise. 3. Crying in distress, “Let us not cut the reins,” guiding themselves
following the skills of the forefathers,
the bulls bring about exhilaration for Indra and Agni—for the two
(pressing) stones are in the lap of the Holy Place.
## 4
For you two, o Indra and Agni, for your exhilaration, the goddess, the  Holy Place, eagerly presses the soma.
You two, o Aśvins, with your auspicious hands and lovely palms—rinse  it with honey, infuse it in the waters.
## 5
O Indra and Agni, I have heard of you as most powerful at the
distribution of goods, at the smashing of obstacles.
Having sat on the ritual grass at this sacrifice here, make yourselves  exhilarated on the pressed soma, o you of extensive domains.
## 6
You extend beyond the bordered domains at the battle cries, you extend  beyond earth and heaven,
beyond the rivers, beyond the mountains in your greatness, beyond and  over all other creatures, o Indra and Agni.
## 7
Bring it to the fore, ready your skill, you two with the mace in your arms.  Help us, o Indra and Agni, with your skills.
Here are the very rays of the sun with which our forefathers were in  communion.
## 8
O stronghold-splitters with the mace in your hands, ready your skill.  Help us, o Indra and Agni, in the raids.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth and  Heaven.