+++
title = "110"

+++
110
R̥bhus
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 5 and 9
The R̥bhus are originally mortal craftsmen who achieved immortality because of a  series of marvelous deeds. This hymn begins in the ritual here-and-now, where the  R̥bhus, already immortal, are offered their share of the sacrifice by the poet-sacri ficer, who speaks in the 1st person. The story of their achievement is then begun  in verse 2, with the R̥bhus depicted as itinerant skilled workers, rather like the poet  and his comrades (thus perhaps holding out the hope that immortality will come  to them as well). The particular feats they accomplished are then recounted, with  special emphasis on their turning Tvaṣṭar’s single cup into four (vss. 3, 5), the oth ers hurriedly covered in verse 8, interspersed with pleas for their favor.
## 01
My (ritual) work has been stretched out, and it is being stretched out  again. My sweetest insight is being recited for a hymn.

Right here is the sea (of soma) belonging to the All Gods. Satiate
yourselves together on the (soma) prepared with the svāhā-cry, o R̥bhus. 2. When, facing front, you shrewd ones went forth in search of your daily  bread, kind of like my pals,
o sons of Sudhanvan, after your fill of roaming you came to the house  of Savitar the pious.
## 03
Then Savitar impelled you to immortality when you went to make  Agohya heed.
This very beaker, the drinking vessel of the lord [=Tvaṣṭar]—though it  was single, you made it fourfold.
## 04
Toiling with labor, with surpassing skill, the cantors, though they were  mortal, reached immortality.
The sons of Sudhanvan, the R̥bhus, who have the sun as their eye, in a  year became infused with insights.
## 05
Like a field with a sharp stick, the R̥bhus measured into parts the single  cup, which was gaping—
they who were crying in want at the praise-invocation, seeking highest  fame among the immortals.
## 06
Let us pour an inspired thought with our know-how, like ghee with a  ladle, for the men of the midspace.
Those who by their surpassing skill followed (the way) of the father of  this one, the R̥bhus mounted to their prize, the realm of heaven.
## 07
(One) R̥bhu is for us a newer Indra by his power; (another) R̥bhu is a  good one by his goods, a giver by his prizes.
With the help of you, o gods, on a favorable day may we stand up to the  battle thrusts of those who don’t press soma.
## 08
O R̥bhus, you carved out a cow from a hide; you sent the mother to join  with her calf again.
O sons of Sudhanvan, superior men, with your skillful work you made  your two elderly parents young.
## 09
Aid us with prizes at the winning of prizes: o Indra, accompanied by the  R̥bhus, break out bright benefit.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth and  Heaven.