+++
title = "111"

+++
111 R̥bhus
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
5 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 5
Unlike the preceding hymn, this one passes over the R̥bhus’ marvelous achieve ments very quickly, in the first verse, in favor of appeals to those gods to use their skills for our benefit (esp. vss. 2–3). The signature verb is √takṣ “fashion.” In the  final two verses (4–5) it opens out into a sort of All God hymn, with appeals first  to Indra as master of the R̥bhus and then to other gods with little or no connection  to the R̥bhus.
## 1
They fashioned the smooth-rolling chariot, working with their
know-how; they fashioned the two fallow bays that convey Indra and  bring bullish goods.
They fashioned—the R̥bhus—for their parents youthful vigor; they  fashioned for the calf a mother to stay by it.
## 2
For our sacrifice fashion R̥bhu-like vigor; for will, for skill (fashion)  refreshment along with good offspring.
So that we may dwell peacefully with a clan possessing hale heroes, you  shall establish this Indrian strength for our troop.
## 3
Fashion winning for us, o R̥bhus, winning for our chariot, winning for  our steed, o men.
Might you bring to pass victorious winning for us always, conquering  kin and non-kin in battles.
## 4
Indra, master of the R̥bhus, do I call upon for help, and the R̥bhus, the  Vājas, the Maruts for soma-drinking.
Both Mitra and Varuṇa now and both the Aśvins—let them impel us to  winning, to insight, to victory.
## 5
Let R̥bhu sharpen winning for the taking; let Vāja, victorious in the  clash, help us.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth and  Heaven.