+++
title = "112"

+++
112 Aśvins (except Heaven and Earth 1a, Agni 1b) 
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
25 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 24–25
This tightly structured hymn conforms to the list format frequently found in Aśvin  hymns. A pāda-length refrain ends every verse but the last two (24–25), urging the  Aśvins to come with the same forms of help they have used in past rescues and  marvelous deeds. The first three quarters of each verse provides examples of said  deeds; as often in Aśvin hymns, many of these involve little-known or unknown  episodes and proper names of otherwise unidentified clients of the Aśvins, inter
mixed with allusions to myths and legends found at least glancingly elsewhere. This  fast-moving catalogue occupies most of the hymn (starting especially with vs. 5,  through vs. 23), and its effect is to convince the audience that, with so many helpful  interventions behind them, the Aśvins will surely answer our calls for help, as finally  articulated in vss. 24–25.

The beginning of the hymn (vss. 1–4), while the rhetorical pattern is still being estab lished, is more difficult and more syntactically and conceptually dense. The climax of  this portion of the hymn is verse 4, where the rhetorical pattern gets its full shape but  the content has not yet settled into the litany that follows. The pervasive double mean ing of verse 4 cannot be conveyed directly in translation, for each part of the verse, on  the one hand, identifies an unnamed divinity associated with the early-morning sacri fice (Wind [Vāyu], Agni, and Soma) by characteristic epithets, while, on the other, all  three descriptions are also appropriate to the Aśvins’ chariot (already mentioned in vs.  2), on which they will make the journey constantly alluded to in the refrain.
## 1
I reverently invoke Heaven and Earth, to be first in their thought; (I  reverently invoke) Agni and the very bright gharma drink, for (the
Aśvins) to seek on their journey.
Those with which you stimulate the decisive act in the match, for (us to  gain) a share—with those forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 2
For you two to give them, inexhaustible (gifts?), easy to carry, have  mounted onto your chariot, as if onto an eloquent (vehicle) for
thinking.
Those with which you help (us) to seek insights at the cultic act—with  those forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 3
You two rule over these clans at the command of the divine, through the  might of the immortal.
Those with which you swell the uncalved cow, you superior men—with  those forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 4
Those through which the earth-encircler [=Wind] is distinguished in the  might of his extension, through which he of two mothers [=Agni] is  distinguished, transiting in his transits,
through which the wide-gazing one [=Soma] became of triple thought— with those forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 5
Those with which from the waters you raised up rasping Rebha, who was  confined and bound, and raised up Vandana to see the sun,
with which you helped Kaṇva desiring gain—with those forms of help  come here, o Aśvins.
## 6
Those with which you revived Antaka, languishing in foreign parts, with  which unwavering ones you revived Bhujyu,
with which you revive Karkandhu and Vayya—with those forms of help  come here, o Aśvins.
## 7
Those with which (you made) Śucanti gain the stakes, keeping good  company, (with which you made) the heated pot comfortable for Atri, with which you helped Pr̥śnigu and Purukutsa—with those forms of help  come here, o Aśvins.
## 8
Those powers with which, o bulls, you (helped) the outcaste, made the  blind to see, the lame to go, with which you released the quail that had been swallowed—with those  forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 9
Those with which you revived the honeyed, inexhaustible river, with  which you revived Vasiṣṭha, you unaging ones,
with which you helped Kutsa, Śrutarya, Narya—with those forms of  help come here, o Aśvins.
## 10
Those with which you revived Viśpalā, to pursue the way, to gain the  stakes in the contest with a thousand battle-prizes,
with which you helped Vaśa Aśvya and Preṇi [?]—with those forms of  help come here, o Aśvins.
## 11
Those through which, o you of good drops, a cask streamed honey for  Dīrghaśravas Auśija the merchant,
with which you helped Kakṣīvant the praiser—with those forms of help  come here, o Aśvins.
## 12
Those with which you swelled the Rasā (River) with a gush of water,  with which you helped the horseless chariot to victory,
with which Triśoka drove up ruddy cows for himself—with those forms  of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 13
Those with which you drive around the sun in the distance and you  helped Mandhātar [/the thinker] in (the battles for) lordship of lands, with which you helped the inspired poet Bharadvāja—with those forms  of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 14
Those with which you helped the great Atithigva Kaśojū and Divodāsa  at the smiting of Śambara,
with which you helped Trasadasyu at the stronghold splitting—with  those forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 15
Those with which you favor Vamra [/the ant], who drinks up, and  Upastuta, with which you favor Kali, who acquired a wife,
with which you helped Vyaśva and Pr̥thi—with those forms of help  come here, o Aśvins.
## 16
Those with which, o superior men, you sought a way for Śayu, with  which for Atri, with which for Manu long ago,
with which you drove the (cows?) of Śara for Syūmarśmi—with those  forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 17
Those with which Paṭharvan, with the might of his belly, shone like a  fire laid and kindled, on his drive,
with which you help Śaryāta in (the contest) for great stakes—with
those forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 18
Those by which, o Aṅgiras, with your mind you two *find a way out  and go to the forefront at the opening up of (the cave) flooding with  cows,
with which you helped Manu the champion with refreshment—with  those forms of help come here, o Aśvins.

## 19
Those with which you brought home wives for Vimada or with which  you did your best to obtain the ruddy (cows),
with which you brought Sudevī (as wife) [/divine favor] for Sudās—with  those forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 20
Those with which you become weal for the pious man, with which you  aid Bhujyu, with which Adhrigu,
(and make) (the woman) R̥tastubh comfortable and easy-bearing—with  those forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 21
With which you favor Kr̥śānu in shooting, with which you helped the  steed of the youth in speed—
you bring the dear honey that comes from the bees—with those forms  of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 22
Those with which you revive the superior man fighting for cattle at the  conquering of men, at the winning of land and descendants,
with which you help the chariots, with which the steeds—with those  forms of help come here, o Aśvins.
## 23
Those with which, o you of a hundred resolves, you promoted Kutsa  Ārjuneya, promoted Turvīti and Dabhīti,
with which you helped Dhvasanti and Puruṣanti—with those forms of  help come here, o Aśvins.
## 24
Make speech fruitful for us, o Aśvins; make for us inspired thought, o  wondrous bulls.
I call you down for help at a time when one shouldn’t gamble. Be there  to strengthen us at the winning of prizes.
## 25
Through the days, through the nights protect us all around, o Aśvins,  with your blessings that can come to no harm.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth  and Heaven.