+++
title = "113"

+++
113 Dawn (except Dawn and Night 1cd)
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
20 verses: triṣṭubh
Dawn often brings out the best in R̥gvedic poets, and this hymn is no exception.  It consists of separate groups of thematically unified verses without seeming dis jointed, because there is an overall theme: unity amid diversity.
In the first three verses Dawn is contrasted with her opposite number, her sister  Night, but they are eternally conjoined and regularly alternating according to the  divine plan. Verses 4–6, marked off by a pāda-length refrain, present the diversity  of the animate world. Dawn wakes all creatures, and they all have different goals to  pursue in their waking lives, while all being subject to Dawn. Verse 7 provides both  summary and transition; it almost sounds like a hymn-final verse. The substantial middle section of the hymn (vss. 8–15) sees a different kind of  unity in diversity, in what is perhaps the most challenging conceptual question  about dawn. Every day has a dawn and every day’s dawn is, in some sense, the  same, while being quite distinct. Today’s dawn has been preceded by countless many  and will be followed by countless many; she is both last and first. But she is also  the capitalized and personified single Dawn. This conceptual puzzle is presented in  verse 8 (especially the first half), and the gist and lexicon of 8ab are repeated in the  final verse of this section, 15cd, forming a ring around the section. The most dif ficult verse in the hymn, verse 10, also treats this same problem, and the next verse  (11) draws the melancholy conclusion: just as there were earlier dawns, now gone,  so were there earlier mortals who saw those dawns—and others will follow and  replace us, to see the dawns to come. Verse 13 provides indirect solace, by reframing  the many dawns as one Dawn, who dawned before, dawns now, and will continue  to dawn. (The other verses in this section, 9, 12, and 14, simply concern the current  Dawn, in fairly standard terms.)
The final section (vss. 16–20) begins (vs. 16) with a triumphal exhortation, which  indirectly counters the consciousness of inevitable death attending on time stated  in verse 11 with the announcement that life is lengthened by the advent of dawn.  The following verses treat the early-morning ritual: the response of the sacrificial  fire (vs. 17), the offering to Vāyu (vs. 18), the recitation and singing of praise (vss.  17–18), and, of course, the gifts that are distributed at the dawn sacrifice by Dawn  herself (vss. 17–20).
## 1
This fairest light of lights has come here. The bright sign, wide-reaching,  has been born.
Just as she [=Dawn] is impelled forth for the impulsion of Savitar, so  Night has left behind the womb for Dawn.
## 2
Having a gleaming calf, herself gleaming white, she has come here. The  black one [=Night] has left behind her seats for her.
Having the same (kin-)bonds, immortal, following one upon the other,  the two, Day (and Night), keep exchanging their color.
## 3
The road is the same for the two sisters—unending. They proceed on it,  one after the other, commanded by the gods.
They do not oppose each other, nor do they stand still, though well  grounded—Night and Dawn, of like mind but different form.
## 4
Light-filled leader of liberalities, the bright one has appeared. She has  opened out the doors for us.
Having stirred forth the moving world, she has looked out for riches for  us. – Dawn has awakened all the creatures.
## 5
The bounteous one (has awakened them), for (even) one who lies  crossways to move, for (another) one to seek wealth to his use,
for (even) those who see (only) a little to gaze out widely. – Dawn has  awakened all the creatures.264 I.113
## 6
(She has awakened) one for dominion, another for fame, another to  seek greatness, another to go to whatever his goal.
Living being are not alike in what they have in view. – Dawn has  awakened all the creatures.
## 7
This Daughter of Heaven has appeared opposite, dawning forth, the  youthful one with gleaming garment.
Holding sway over every earthly good, o well-portioned Dawn, dawn  forth here today.
## 8
She follows the troop of those who go away; she is the first of those  who, one by one, come hither—
Dawn, as she dawns forth, rousing up (every) living being, but
awakening no dead one at all.
## 9
Dawn, since you have caused the fire to be kindled, since you have  shone forth with the eye of the sun,
since you have awakened the sons of Manu who are about to sacrifice,  so you have made for yourself good profit among the gods.
## 10
How long (will it be) until she will be together with those who  (previously) dawned forth and those who will dawn forth now?
Bellowing, she yearns after the early ones; thinking ahead, she goes at  pleasure with the others.
## 11
They have gone, the mortals who saw the earlier dawn dawning forth. (This dawn) has now come to be gazed upon by us. And there are those  coming hither who will see (the dawn) in the future.
## 12
Keeping away hatred, guardian of truth, born in truth, gracious,  arousing liberalities,
of good omen, bringing to birth (our ritual) pursuit of the gods—here  today, Dawn, as the most fairest, dawn forth.
## 13
Over and over in the past the goddess Dawn dawned forth. And today  she has dawned forth here, the bounteous one.
And she will dawn forth through later days. Unaging, immortal, she  proceeds according to her own customs.
## 14
She has flashed forth with her ornaments at the doorposts of heaven.  The goddess has removed the black raiment.
Awakening (the world), with her ruddy horses, Dawn drives hither with  a well-yoked chariot.
## 15
Conveying hither flourishing valuables, she makes herself a bright  beacon, showing herself ever more brightly.
The last of those who, one by one, have gone, the first of those  radiating forth—Dawn has whitened widely.
## 16
Raise yourselves up! The living life-force has come here to us. Away,  forth has gone the darkness; light comes hither.
She has left a path for the sun to drive on. We have come to where they  lengthen lifetime. 17. With reins of speech the conveyor (of oblations), the hoarse-voiced  (singer) [=Agni], himself being praised, arouses the radiant dawns.
Today then, o bounteous one, dawn for the one who sings; for us shine  down a lifetime full of offspring.
## 18
The dawns, bringing cows and hale heroes, who dawn forth for the  pious mortal
when the litany of liberalities is raised like (the litany) of Vāyu—to
them, the givers of horses, shall the soma-presser attain.
## 19
Mother of gods, face of Aditi, beacon of the sacrifice, lofty—shine  forth.
As creator of lauds, dawn forth for our sacred formulation. Beget (it)  here among our people, o you who bring all valuables.
## 20
The bright profit that the dawns convey to the laboring sacrificer—the  auspicious thing—
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth  and Heaven.