+++
title = "114"

+++
114
Rudra
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
11 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 10–11
A simple but pleasing hymn, characterized by considerable chaining and intertwining  of repeated vocabulary and syntactic structures. The helpful and healing aspects of  Rudra are emphasized—the related words sumatí “benevolence” and sumná “favor”  occur six times in this eleven-verse hymn. His fearsome and angry side is for the most  part downplayed, mentioned in passing in verses 4c and 10a, both beginning “in the  distance.” But Rudra’s possible punitive actions are addressed directly in verses 7–8,  which contain twelve occurrences of the prohibitive negative mā “don’t!”
## 01
These poetic thoughts do we proffer to Rudra, the powerful one with  braided hair who rules over heroes,
so that he will be luck for our two-footed and four-footed, so that
everything in this settlement will be flourishing, free of affliction.
## 02
Be merciful to us, Rudra, and create joy for us. To you who rule over  heroes we would do honor with reverence.
Whatever luck and lifetime Father Manu won through sacrifice, that may  we attain under your guidance, Rudra.
## 03
May we attain your benevolence though sacrifice to the gods, the  benevolence of you who rule over heroes, o reward-granting Rudra.
Bestowing only favor, come roaming toward our clans: possessing heroes  who cannot be harmed, we will pour you an oblation.

## 04
We call down turbulent Rudra for help, the wandering poet who brings  the sacrifice to success.
In the distance from us let him shoot his divine anger. It is just his
benevolence we choose.
## 05
We call down with reverence the boar of heaven, flame-red, with  braided hair, turbulent in form.
Bearing in his hand desirable healing remedies, he will extend shelter,  covering, and protection to us.
## 06
This speech here is spoken to the father of the Maruts—speech sweeter  than sweet, strengthening to Rudra.
Both grant us, immortal one, what nourishes mortals, and be merciful  to our selves, to our progeny and posterity.
## 07
Not the great one among us nor the wee little one, not the growing one  among us nor the grown—
don’t smite our father nor our mother. Don’t harm our own dear
bodies, Rudra.
## 08
Don’t do harm to our progeny and posterity nor to our (own) lifespan,  not to our cows nor to our horses.
Don’t smite our heroes, Rudra, when enraged. We, with our oblations,  will always invoke you.
## 09
Like a cowherd, I have driven these praises close to you. Grant your  favor to us, father of the Maruts,
for your benevolence is auspicious, most merciful. It is just your aid
that we choose.
## 10
In the distance be your cow-smiting and men-smiting (anger). You who  rule over heroes, let your favor be on us.
Both be merciful to us and speak on our behalf, o god, and then extend  double-lofty shelter to us.
## 11
We have spoken reverence to him, seeking his aid. Let Rudra,
accompanied by the Maruts, hear our call.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth  and Heaven.