+++
title = "115"

+++
115
Sūrya
Kutsa Āṅgirasa
6 verses: triṣṭubh
As in most hymns and verses dedicated to Sūrya, the Sun, this hymn focuses  on his rising. His function as eye of the gods, especially Mitra and Varuṇa, is  mentioned in verse 1 (and in our opinion also in verse 5), and the activity that  his rising inspires, both ritual and mundane, in verse 3. Verses 4 and 5 are more enigmatic and have occasioned much discussion: many scholars believe that both  verses contrast the sun of the day with the “night sun,” the dark side of the sun  that, in the form of a wheel, travels invisibly from west to east to position itself  for the next daily rising. Thus, in such interpretations, in the first half of verse 4  Night gathers up the dark garment she was weaving (see II.38.4) at the advent of  the rising sun, but swathes the night sun in her garment in the second half of the  verse. Two sides of the sun, bright and dark, are also referred to, more clearly,  in the second half of verse 5. Although these interpretations have much in their  favor, we still remain uncertain about what verses 4 and 5 are actually depicting.  On the one hand, the interpretations offered seem too cut-and-dried for the fluid  cosmology of the R̥gveda; on the other, given the usual concentration on the  happy event of sunrise, too much mention of the less auspicious night sun seems  somewhat out of place.
## 01
The brilliant face of the gods has arisen, the eye of Mitra, Varuṇa,  and Agni;
he has filled heaven, earth, and the space between: the Sun is the
life-breath of both the moving and the still.
## 02
The Sun approaches the gleaming goddess Dawn from behind, like a  dashing youth a maiden,
when the men seeking the gods stretch their yokes across, in response to  the auspicious (god) for the sake of an auspicious (thing).
## 03
The auspicious tawny horses of the Sun—the brilliant ones, worth  cheering on, that win dappled cows—
bringing reverence, they have mounted the back of heaven. They circle  around heaven and earth in a single day.
## 04
This is the Sun’s divinity, this his greatness: in the middle of (her) work  (Night?) has gathered together what was stretched out.
When he has yoked his tawny horses from their seat, just after that Night  stretches her garment for him.
## 05
The Sun takes on his own form in the lap of heaven, for Mitra and  Varuṇa to see.
His one surface, gleaming, is unbounded; the tawny (horses) together  bring the other, the black one.
## 06
Today, o gods, at the rising of the Sun, deliver us from distress and from  disgrace.
– This let Mitra and Varuıa grant to us, and Aditi, River, and Earth and  Heaven.
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa, the son of Dīrghatamas (poet of I.140–164), is the poet  of the next eleven hymns (116–126). As Geldner points out, however, Kakṣīvant  refers to himself as pajriyá (I.116.7, 117.6, 120.5) and to his family as the pajrā́ḥ (I.122.8, 126. 4, 5). According to I.121.13 the Pajras are Aṅgirases. Kakṣīvant also

calls himself the son of Uśij in I.119.9 and 122.4; Sāyaṇa identifies Uśij as a dāsī, a  servant woman.
Whatever his family affiliations Kakṣīvant has one of the most distinctive poetic  personalities in the R̥gveda. He is a very skillful, self-conscious, and tricky artist,  setting traps for his unwary hearers and twisting words and phrases into often  impenetrable knots, with an exuberance that we have to admire despite our fre
quent frustrations. He also has clear thematic preoccupations. Approximately half  of his oeuvre is devoted to the Aśvins (116–120), with important catalogues of their  deeds and services. (Much of what we know or surmise about the mythology of  the Aśvins comes from these hymns.) He is also particularly interested in women in  all their aspects: there are important and high-style treatments of the marriage of  Sūryā and the Aśvins’ wooing of her, as well as two lovely Dawn hymns (123–124)  sketching a range of female roles, but there is also a nearly obscene celebration of  a girl he received as a gift from his patron (126.6–7) that presses the boundaries of  R̥gvedic decorum.
Because so much of Kakṣīvant’s artistry is bound up with his manipulation of  the Sanskrit language even at the phonological level, the special flavor of his poetry  is particularly hard to convey in translation, unfortunately.