+++
title = "116"

+++
116
Aśvins
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
25 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is a catalogue that mentions many stories in which the Aśvins came to  the rescue of those in need but that provides little detail. There is some thematic  linkage among the narratives, which in three instances occur in sets of four. So, for  example, the hymn begins with references to the Aśvins’ chariot or chariots and to  the chariot-animals in verses 1–4 and then returns to them once again not quite at  the end but toward the end, in verses 17–20. Verses 13–16 contain a set of stories  involving body parts: the hands of the Aśvins in verse 13, the mouth of the wolf  in 14, the foot of a mare in 15, and the eyes of R̥jrāśva in 16. Elsewhere the poet  repeatedly returns to references to waters or liquids (vss. 3, 5, 7, 9). Such linked  verses do not structure the hymn tightly, but they keep it from becoming merely a  list of great deeds.
The Aśvins are closely associated with the Pravargya, originally an independent  rite that was incorporated into the classical soma ritual either during the upasad-days  that precede the soma-pressing day or on the pressing day itself. In this rite milk is  poured into a heated pot and offered to the Aśvins. This hymn explicitly refers to  the Pravargya rite in the first verse, which employs the marked verb prá vr̥ñje, which  gave the Pravargya its name. The verb describes either placing the Pravargya pot on  the fire or turning the pot to offer the milk. In the penultimate verse, the poet frames the hymn by an indirect reference to the Pravargya by describing Rebha as “having  twisted” (právr̥kta) in the water.
Many of the deeds alluded to in this hymn are likewise mentioned in the fol lowing four Aśvin hymns (I.117–20), especially the first two, often in the same or  similar phraseology.
## 01
I twist (the milk-pot) as (one twists) the ritual grass and I stir up the  praise songs, like winds the rain clouds, for the Nāsatyas,
who have carried a wife down to our little Vimada with their chariot that  is swift as a weapon,
## 02
As they were exulting in their firm-winged, swiftly speeding (steeds) or in  the gods’ spur.
Then, o Nāsatyas, a donkey [=Vimada?] conquered the thousand at stake  in the contest of Yama.
## 03
Tugra left Bhujyu behind in a cloud of water, Aśvins, as one who has  died (leaves behind) his wealth.
You carried him with your breathing ships [=winged steeds] that bob in  the midspace far from water.
## 04
Through three nights and through three days, o Nāsatyas, you carried  Bhujyu with your winged ones that wander far beyond:
(you carried him) on the wasteland of the sea, at the far shore of the watery  (sea), with your three chariots with their hundred feet and six horses.
## 05
Then you two acted as heroes upon the unsupporting sea, which has no  place to stand and nothing to grasp,
when, Aśvins, you carried Bhujyu home after he mounted your ship of a  hundred oars.
## 06
O Aśvins, the white horse that you gave to (Pedu), whose horse was bad,  to be everlasting well-being (for him)—
that great gift of yours is to be famed. The racehorse of Pedu is ever to  be called upon by the stranger.
## 07
O men, you two dug out plentifulness for Pajra’s son, Kakṣīvant, who  was praising you.
You poured from the filter, the hoof of the bull-like horse, a hundred  pots of liquor.
## 08
With snow you two kept away fire and scorching heat. You placed the  nourishment of solid food for him.
You brought Atri up to well-being, who had been brought down into the  earth cleft together with his whole band.
## 09
You pushed the well far away, Nāsatyas; you put it bottom up, with its  banks [=rim] aslant.
Like waters for drinking they [=inspirations] flowed, for wealth to the  thirsting thousand (descendants [?]) of Gotama.

## 10
And, Nāsatyas, from Cyavāna, who had become old, you removed his  covering [=aged skin] like a garment.
You extended the lifetime of him who was left behind, wondrous ones,  and thereby you made him the husband of young women.
## 11
O men, that is your protective cover to be praised and brought to  realization, o Nāsatyas,
when you knowing ones dug (him) [=Vandana] out because he was  beautiful, like a treasure that had been hidden away, for the sake of  Vandana [/for you to be celebrated].
## 12
O men, I disclose that powerful, wondrous might of yours, like thunder  the rain, in order to win it,
as when Dadhyañc son of Atharvan (disclosed) the honey to you by  means of the head of a horse when he proclaimed it.
## 13
Puraṃdhi has called upon your two hands again and again, o Nāsatyas,  you of many delights [/of many arms], for what is great on your  journey.
You two heard (the call) of Vadhrimatī like a command. You gave (her  a son) with golden hands.
## 14
At the critical moment you two freed the quail-hen from the mouth of  the wolf, men, Nāsatyas,
and, you two of many delights, you made the lamenting sage poet  [=Uśanā Kāvya] to gaze far.
## 15
Because her foot was cut away like the wing of a bird, in the contest of  Khela, at the decisive turn,
right away you inserted a metal shank for Viśpalā to run, when the  stake had been set.
## 16
R̥jrāśva, who butchered a hundred sheep for the she-wolf—him did his  father blind.
You placed two eyes in the unassailable one for him to gaze afar, o  Nāsatyas, you wondrous healers.
## 17
The Daughter of the Sun mounted your chariot, like one winning the  finish-line with her steed.
All the gods approved in their hearts, and, Nāsatyas, you two keep  company with her splendor.
## 18
When you two drove the course for Divodāsa and for Bharadvāja,  Aśvins, urging (your steeds) onward,
your accompanying chariot conveyed wealth. A bull and a river dolphin  were yoked (to it).
## 19
Conveying wealth with good rule and a full lifetime with good  descendants and good men, Nāsatyas,
you two of one mind journeyed here with the prizes of victory to the  wife of Jahnu, who was setting your portion three times a day. 20. At night you conveyed Jāhuṣa, besieged from every direction, through  the easily traversed airy spaces.
With your chariot that cuts asunder, o never-aging Nāsatyas, you
journeyed through the mountains.
## 21
At the dawning of a single (dawn), Aśvins, you gave Vaśa the help  (needed) for the battle in order for him to gain thousands (of cattle). Along with Indra you two smashed misfortunes and hostilities away  from Pr̥thuśravas, o bulls.
## 22
From the (dry [?]) well also of Śara, son of R̥catka, you supplied water  (flowing) upward from below for him to drink.
Also for starving Śayu, o Nāsatyas, with your powers you made his
sterile cow swell (with milk).
## 23
To Viśvaka Kr̥ṣṇiya, who was seeking your help and singing your praise,  who was aiming straight, Nāsatyas, you gave by your powers
Viṣṇāpū to be seen (once more), like a lost animal.
## 24
Within the waters through ten nights and nine days, bound and pierced  by the malicious one,
Rebha, who bobbed and twisted in the water—him you two brought  up, like soma with a ladle.
## 25
I have proclaimed your wondrous deeds, Aśvins. Having good cows and  good men, might I be the lord of this (wealth).
And both seeing and reaching a long lifetime, might I go to old age as  if (going) home.