+++
title = "117"

+++
117
Aśvins
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
25 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is a catalogue of the heroic deeds of the Aśvins, which ultimately leads  to the poet’s request for heroes (vs. 25). The problem for the poet is that such a  hymn listing so many of the gods’ deeds could easily become just an inventory  without any real coherence. One of the poet’s solutions to this problem is to create  verbal and thematic linkages among verses and sets of verses in order to organize  and unify his composition.
At the highest level the great deeds of the Aśvins are arranged according to  theme. First are deeds in which the Aśvins rescue those who have been hidden away  in some fashion: Atri in the earth cleft (3), Rebha in the waters (4), and Vandana  in the ground (5). Then, the poet shifts from the Aśvins’ rescues to their generosity.  The theme is announced in verse 6 and then exemplified in verses 7–9. The Aśvins  give the gift of a wife (7ab) and husband (7cd), a bright body (8ab), fame (8cd),  and a horse (9). Verse 10 then summarizes this theme and announces a new one

that extends the image of the horse in verse 9. The deeds in the next section turn on  the Aśvins as charioteers and horsemen. They bring prizes to the poet (11ab) and  restore the racing mare Viśpalā (11d). Verses 12–16 connect the Aśvins’ deeds to  the journeys of their chariot and horses. On those journeys they come to the aid of  Cyavāna, Bhujyu, and others. The last extended set of verses, verses 16–22, describe  a variety of different acts, but all these verses mention animals: a quail (16), sheep  and a she-wolf (17–18), a barren cow (20), a “wolf” (possibly a plow; 21), and the  head of a horse (22). This leaves aside verse 19, but the “lame one” here is probably  the mare Viśpalā, one suggestion of Sāyaṇa. Note that the last two sets of verses  overlap at verse 16, a join that again helps hold the poem together.
Another way the poet creates a sense of unity is by the repetition of lexical items,  sometimes used in different contexts. So, the poet uses the unusual verb sám √rī “draw  back together” in verses 4, 11, and 19 to describe a rescue from the sea, the repair  of a horse, and the healing of the “lame one.” Or again, the Aśvins carried down  (ní...ūhathuḥ) a horse or a bride (9b, 20d) and carried Bhujyu out (níḥ...ūhathuḥ) of  the sea (14d, 15c). In 5c níkhāta “buried” describes Vandana; níkhāta occurs again in  12c, although it is not clear to whom the latter verse refers. Sāyaṇa suggests that it is  Rebha, who was “buried” in the waters, an interpretation supported by the reference  to the tenth day (cf. I.116.24). However, since the verb níkhāta was just used with  Vandana in verse 5cd, it may be he to whom the verse refers.
Likewise, the poet links consecutive verses by repeating the same or similar  words. The Aśvins rescue the seer (ŕ̥ṣi) Atri in 3a and the seer Rebha in 4b. Each of  verses 20–22 addresses the aśvinā and the “wondrous ones” (dasrā/dasrau). The four  hemistichs of verses 13 and 14 all begin with yuvóḥ or yuvám. Verses 15 and 16 both  begin ájohavīt “he called again and again.” Such verbal concatenation again helps  unify the diverse contents of the hymn.
The poet explores other kinds of verbal play, some of which create intercon nections within the poem, but others reflect other purposes or simply his artistry  as a poet. For example, víṣakta “drooping” of 20a is phonologically rearranged in  24c as the rare word víkasta “split apart.” There appears to be another phonologi cal connection in verse 16cd between viṣvā́c, the personal name Viṣvāc, which may  mean the “Double-Talker,” and viṣá “poison.” However, the interpretation of this  hemistich is problematic, in part because Viṣvāc and his son are only attested here.  Geldner and others understand the poison to be the means by which the Aśvins  destroy the son of Viṣvāc, but if so, such use of poison by the Aśvins is isolated.  Rather, the poison may have given rise to the son of Viṣvāc, an interpretation sup ported by the phonological similarity of viṣvā́c and viṣá. Perhaps the idea is that  Viṣvāc’s son is born from the “poison” of his “double-talking” speech.
## 1
The age-old Hotar [=Agni] seeks to win you in order for you to be  exhilarated on the honeyed soma, o Aśvins.
The gift accompanied by the ritual grass is laid out, (as is) my song. With  refreshment, with prizes of victory, journey here, o Nāsatyas. 2. Your chariot, o Aśvins, swifter than mind, drawn by good horses, comes  to the clans.
By which (chariot) you go to the home of the good ritual performer, by  that, o men, travel your course to us.
## 3
You free Atri, the seer of the five peoples, from narrow straits, from the  earth cleft along with his band, o men—
confounding the wiles of the merciless Dasyu, driving them out, one  after another, o bulls.
## 4
O Aśvins—you men, you bulls—by your wondrous powers you draw  back together the seer Rebha, who bobbed away in the waters,
like a horse hidden by those of evil ways. Your ancient deeds do not  grow old.
## 5
Like one who has gone to sleep in the lap of destruction, like the sun  dwelling in darkness, o wondrous ones,
like a buried gem, lovely to see, (dug out) for beauty, you dug him
[=Vandana] out for Vandana [/for our celebration of you], o Aśvins. 6. This (deed) of yours in your earth-encircling course, o men, deserves to  be praised by Kakṣīvant, the son of Pajra, o Nāsatyas:
from the hoof of your prizewinning horse, you poured a hundred pots  of honey for the people.
## 7
You two, o men, gave Viṣṇāpū to Viśvaka Kr̥ṣṇiya, who was
praising you.
Even to Ghoṣā, living at home with her father, you gave a husband,  though she was growing old, Aśvins.
## 8
You two gave a bright (body) to Śyāva Kaṇva [/Kaṇva, the Dark One]  of the great flood [?], Aśvins.
That deed of yours is to be proclaimed, o bulls: that you bestowed fame  upon the son of Nr̥ṣad [=Kaṇva].
## 9
Assuming many forms, Aśvins, you carried down a swift horse to Pedu, an unstoppable prizewinning horse that gains a thousand (cows), a
smasher of serpents, deserving to be famed as the surpassing one.
## 10
These things deserving to be famed are for you, o you who give good  gifts: the formulation, the song, the seat within the two world-halves. When the Pajras call you, Aśvins, travel with refreshment and toward  victory’s prize for the knowing one!
## 11
Being sung by Sūnor Māna [=Agastya], o energetic Aśvins, digging out  victory’s prize for the inspired poet,
and growing strong alongside Agastya through his poetic formulation,  you draw Viśpalā back together, Nāsatyas.
## 12
Journeying where?—Toward the good praise of (Uśanā) Kāvya? To a  bed, o sons of heaven, o bulls?—
you dug out the one who was buried like a tub of gold on the tenth day,  Aśvins.274 I.117
## 13
You, o Aśvins, made the aging Cyavāna a youth again through your powers. Your chariot did the Daughter of the Sun choose, Nāsatyas, together  with its splendor.
## 14
You turned your minds again to Tugra in your ancient ways, o youthful  ones.
You carried Bhujyu from the flood, from the sea, with your birds, your  silvery horses.
## 15
Carried forth into the sea, the son of Tugra [=Bhujyu] called upon you  again and again, having gone (to you) on an unwavering course, Aśvins. You carried him out with your chariot, swift as mind, with its good  team, o bulls, to keep him well.
## 16
The quail-hen called upon you again and again, Aśvins, so that you  freed her from the mouth of the wolf.
With your victorious (chariot) you journeyed across the back of the  rock. You crushed the (son) of Viṣvāc [=the Double-Talker?], born  by poison.
## 17
Him who had readied a hundred sheep for the she-wolf, who was led  forth into darkness by his merciless father—
in R̥jrāśva you put eyes; you made light for the blind one to see.
## 18
O Aśvins, you bulls, that she-wolf summoned good fortune and the  winner’s stake for the blind man, saying, “O men!
Like the lover of a maiden is R̥jrāśva (to me), since he butchered a  hundred and one sheep.”
## 19
Great is your help, a joy itself, o Aśvins. Even the lame one do you draw  back together, o holy ones.
And so Plenty called upon just you two, and you two came to her with  your help, o bulls.
## 20
Wondrous Aśvins, you made the drooping, barren cow, no milk-cow, to  swell (with milk) for Śayu.
By your powers you carried down to Vimada a wife, the maiden of  Purumitra.
## 21
O Aśvins, wondrous ones, scattering barley by a “wolf” [=a drill plow?],  milking out refreshment for the race of Manu,
blasting sound at the Dasyu with a bagpipe, you made wide light for  the Ārya.
## 22
For Dadhyañc, the son of Atharvan, you substituted the head of a  horse, Aśvins.
Speaking the truth, he proclaimed to you Tvaṣṭar’s honey, which was  hidden from you, o wondrous ones.
## 23
Always, o poets, I delight in your favor. Help all my insights, Aśvins. Give us lofty wealth bringing descendants and worthy of fame, o Nāsatyas. 24. Giving Hiraṇyahasta [the Gold-Handed One], o Aśvins, you granted him  as a son to Vadhrimatī [She Who Has a Steer (for a Husband)], o men. Your raised up Śyāva [the Dark One], who had been split apart in three  places, so that he might live, o Aśvins, who bring good gifts.
## 25
The sons of Āyu have proclaimed these your ancient heroic deeds, o  Aśvins,
creating for you a poetic formulation, o bulls. Obtaining good heroes,  we would announce the ritual distribution.