+++
title = "118"

+++
118 Aśvins
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The structure of the hymn is straightforward. It begins with an invitation to the  Aśvins to come to the sacrifice on their chariot. Indeed, it is their chariot that is  the focus of the poet’s attention through most of the first half of the poem. The  triplets associated with the chariot—its three chariot boxes (vss. 1–2), three wheels  (2), and three turnings (2)—suggest the sacrifice itself with its three soma offer
ings. Within the poem, therefore, the ritual performance thus becomes an image  of the Aśvins’ chariot, and its realization a sign of the arrival of the Aśvins. The  chariot not only brings the Aśvins to the sacrifice but it also brings help to the  sacrificer (vs. 1). Ancient poets have told of the help of the Aśvins (3cd), and the  second part of the poem (vss. 5–9) begins with a recital of the many men and even  animals in their many desperate situations whom the Aśvins have helped. The  hymn then returns to the poet’s own need for help (vs. 10), and in verse 11 there  is once again a summons of the Aśvins. The last verse creates a formal ring, for  just as in verse 1 the Aśvins should come quickly in their “falcon-winged chariot”  (ráthaḥ. . .śyenápatvā), so in verse 11 the Aśvins should come with the “fresh speed  of a falcon” (śyenásya jávasā nū́tanena).
## 1
Aśvins, let your falcon-winged chariot journey here toward us—filled  with compassion, filled with help—
which is swifter than a mortal’s thought, which has three chariot boxes  and the speed of the wind, o bulls.
## 2
Journey toward us by your smooth-turning chariot with its three chariot  boxes, with its three wheels, and three turnings.
Swell the cattle (with milk), quicken the chargers, and strengthen the  hero for us, o Aśvins.
## 3
Racing headlong by your smooth-turning chariot, wondrous ones, hear  this signal-call of the stone.
Have not the inspired poets born long ago said that you are the first to  respond to trouble, Aśvins?
## 4
Aśvins, let the swift, soaring falcons harnessed to your chariot carry  you here—

those that, crossing the waters high in the heavens like vultures, carry  you to (our offered) enjoyment.
## 5
Having become pleased, the young girl, the Daughter of the Sun, has  now mounted your chariot, o men.
Let the soaring horses of your wonder [=your chariot], let your ruddy  birds, carry you at the critical moment.
## 6
You raised up Vandana through your wondrous powers; o wondrous  bulls, (you raised) up Rebha by your powers.
You rescue the son of Tugra from the ocean, and you made Cyavāna  youthful again.
## 7
You granted nourishment and relief to Atri, who was led down into the  scorching (earth cleft).
Having found pleasure in his good praise, in return you granted sight to  Kaṇva, whose eyes were pasted shut.
## 8
You swelled the cow (with milk) for Śayu of long ago, who needed help,  o Aśvins.
You released the quail-hen from tight straits, and you inserted a shank  for Viśpalā.
## 9
You gave to Pedu the serpent-smashing white horse, sped by Indra, o  Aśvins—
the overwhelming, powerful (horse), repeatedly called upon by
the stranger, the strong-limbed bull that wins a thousand
(cattle).
## 10
Needing help ourselves, o men, we call on you, who are nobly born, for  aid, o Aśvins.
Finding pleasure in our songs, journey here to us by your chariot
bearing goods for our safe passage.
## 11
Of one accord, Nāsatyas, journey here to us with the fresh speed of a  falcon,
for, as one who has given an oblation, I call upon you, Aśvins, at the  break of the newest dawn of all.