+++
title = "119"

+++
119 Aśvins
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
10 verses: jagatī
The hymn begins along expected lines with a summons to the Aśvins to come to  the sacrifice (vs. 1). However, the offering mentioned is not soma, but rather the hot  milk (gharmá) of the Pravargya rite (vs. 2cd). In 2cd and probably verse 3 Kakṣīvant  describes the arrival of the Aśvins, who bring Sūryā, the Daughter of the Sun, to  her wedding. The bridegroom of Sūryā is Soma in the late R̥gveda (X.85), but in 5cd she chooses the Aśvins themselves as her husbands. Pirart (1995: 252) suggests  that yuvā́m pátī is a corruption for yuvā́m pátim* and therefore the line means that  Sūryā chose “the young (Soma) as her husband.” But if the gharmá in this hymn  in some sense displaces the soma, perhaps the poet has replaced the god Soma by  the deities of the Pravargya rite, the Aśvins. For further on the self-choice marriage  of Sūryā and Kakṣīvant’s treatments of it, see Jamison (2001). In this connection  verse 3 contains one of Kakṣīvant’s characteristic verbal tricks: the phrase sūrím  ā́ váram, which literally means “the patron according to his will,” is a scrambling  of *sūriyā́m váram, with a reference to Sūryā (whose name is normally read trisyl labically as Sūr(i)yā) and her svayaṃ-vara (self-choice) marriage. This scrambled  phrase is “repaired” in verse 5 with the straightforward declaration of her choice.  See Jamison (2006).
## 1
I summon your chariot with its many wiles, swift as thought, with  speeding horses, and worthy of the sacrifice, in order for us
to live—
the winning (chariot) of a thousand banners, bringing hundreds of good  things, obedient to command, and creating wide space—toward (our  offered) enjoyment.
## 2
At its journey our lofty insight has been aimed at your praise. (Our  praises, going) in (all) directions, converge (upon you).
I sweeten the hot milk; your help comes in return. Ūrjānī [=Sūryā] has  mounted your chariot, Aśvins.
## 3
When, contending with each another, they have clashed with one  another for beauty—(those) innumerable combatants, victorious in  battle—
then your chariot appears ever brighter in its steep descent, when you  convey the patron according to his will, Aśvins.
## 4
You came to Bhujyu, tossing (in the sea), with your self-harnessed birds,  conveying him back from his ancestors [=from the dead].
You traveled your most noble track, o bulls, and your great help became  manifest to Divodāsa.
## 5
For the sake of your marvel [=your chariot], Aśvins, two voices guided  the chariot harnessed by you and its (cargo?) belonging to the warrior  band [? =the Aśvins].
Having come to marriage to you for a partnership with you, the noble  young girl chose you two as her husbands.
## 6
You give Rebha space from being besieged, (and you cool) the intensely  heated, hot (vessel) with snow for Atri.
You swelled nourishment in Śayu’s cow. Vandana was extended through  a long lifetime.
## 7
You constructed Vandana, who had fallen apart because of age, like  workers a chariot, o wondrous ones.

Out of the soil you give birth to the inspired poet [=Vandana?]
amid acclaim. Here (too) your skill will prevail for the one
honoring (you).
## 8
You went to the one piteously crying in the far distance [=Bhujyu],  entrapped by his own father’s abandonment of him.
Your enduring help that brings the sunlight, your brilliant mastery,
arose at the critical moment.
## 9
And the little fly whispered honeyed (speech) to you, (and now) in  the exhilaration of soma, (Kakṣīvant), the son of Uśij, cries out
(to you):
“You two try to win the thought of Dadhyañc, and then the horse’s
head replies to you.”
## 10
In friendship you offer to Pedu a white (horse), bringing many boons,  overcoming contenders,
the heaven-bound (horse), hard to overcome by arrows in battles, to be  celebrated, and conquering the lands, like Indra.