+++
title = "120"

+++
120
Aśvins
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
12 verses:  gāyatrī 1, 10–12; kakubh 2, kāvirāj 3, naṣṭarūpī 4, tanuśirā 5, uṣṇih 6,  viṣṭārabr̥hatī 7, kr̥ti 8, virāj 9
Even for Kakṣīvant, a master of enigmatic poetry, this is an especially puzzling hymn,  and not surprisingly it has given rise to quite different interpretations. For example,  in Geldner’s view the hymn concludes with the poet’s complaint that his patron  has been ungenerous. Much of the hymn reflects that disappointment: Kakṣīvant  pretends to be a simple man but creates metrically irregular, obscure verses, charac
terized by irony and hidden malice. While there is much to recommend in Geldner’s  approach to the hymn, we have taken a different tack.
The most notable feature of this hymn is its strange metrical pattern. The hymn  begins in gāyatrī (vs. 1), a simple and common meter, but then sinks gradually into  metrical chaos and finally emerges gradually into gāyatrī once again (vss. 10–12).  The metrical transitions are marked by verse 2 in kakubh and verse 9 in virāj. Both  are rarer Vedic meters, but they are meters found elsewhere. However, the middle  section (vss. 3–8) changes meter in every verse and with one exception (vs. 6 in  uṣṇih), the meters are jagged and very unusual. The impression they make is one  of dislocation and even poetic incompetence, although it is obviously an artful and  deliberate incompetence.
This metrical structure underscores the theme of the hymn. The poet begins, in  gāyatrī, with a question about who will earn the support of the Aśvins. The first two  pādas are typical and formulaic. Indeed, they reflect a very old, traditional formula, since the phrasing of ab resembles lines from the Gāthās of Zarathustra: Yasna  33.2 tōi vārāi rādəntī, ahurahyā zaošē mazdā “These will bring success to his desire  and will be to the liking of the Wise Lord.” If this formulaic identification is cor rect, then pāda c may stand in intentionally shocking contrast: it is a question not  about a successful worshiper but about an incompetent one, and immediately after  this question the poet’s meter begins to disintegrate. The poet does not have the  knowledge he needs (2) and fears that he might become someone acetás “without  insight,” a word that recalls ápracetas “inattentive” in 1c and the anxiety that pro pels the hymn. The Aśvins know a certain entranceway, “doors,” that the poet does  not. Pirart (1995: 263) suggests that these doors are the “doors of riches,” after  I.68.10, 72.8, and similarly IX.45.3 = 64.3, and Geldner, the “doors of awareness”  after IX.10.6 and similarly VII.95.6. It would be fully in accord with Kakṣīvant’s  enigmatic style to mean either and both, especially since the poet’s knowledge and  his prosperity are bound together.
Because of his anxiety, the poet calls on the Aśvins to help him (3–4). Verses 5 and  6 are particularly problematic, but they appear to describe the poet’s shortcomings.  His speech is not grand like that recited before the Bhr̥gavāna fire, the fire originally lit  by Bhr̥gu that symbolizes the unity of all the clans, and it is not beautiful (5). His voice  is rough, but he asks the Aśvins to hear his song as if it were the song that Takavāna  sings (6). Takavāna appears only here, but judging from the context he is someone  whose beautiful voice the poet hopes the Aśvins will hear instead of his own raspy  one. The poet thus asks the Aśvins to overlook his faults, and not to consign him and  his people to the evildoings of their enemies (7–8). In the last verses the crisis seems  to have passed. The poet’s verse stabilizes (into virāj), and the poet can hope that his  measured pādas will win him measures of goods (9). At the beginning of this verse he  also demonstrates his ability to puzzle. The subject is a cow, suggested by the previous  verse, but what does the cow represent? Although it looks back several verses, one  possibility is his Speech (vs. 5). Before he couldn’t speak the way he wished, but now  he hopes that his Speech will yield the milk that will bind the Aśvins to him.
In verse 10 the “horseless chariot” of the Aśvins is the hymn, which, safely back  in gāyatrī, is now running smoothly. It will carry the poet to successful sacrifices  (11). This then leaves a problem in interpreting the last verse. Perhaps the anxiety he  expressed in the middle of the hymn was not real but imagined, a kind of a dream.  This last verse then might be the dismissal of that anxiety and of the concern that  he will not receive the patronage he deserves.
## 1
What oblation to you will bring success, Aśvins? Who will be to the  liking of you both?
How will he make offering?—he, an inattentive man!
## 2
He should ask just the two [=the Aśvins] who know about the doors—he,  the man who does not know properly, who later (would be) without  insight.
Never are the two inactive around the mortal.

## 3
We call upon you two knowing ones. Knowing, you should speak to us  a (poetic) thought today.
Distributing portions, the one seeking you chants forth.
## 4
In my naïveté I ask (you), not (other) gods, about the unerring (soma),  created with the vaṣaṭ-call, o wondrous ones.
Protect us from the more powerful and the more violent one!
## 5
(The Speech that says,) “I who cry forth as if at the Bhr̥gavāna (fire),  who am beautiful, I the Speech by which Pajriya [=Kakṣīvant]
sacrifices to you”—
seeking refreshment, (I do) not (cry) forth (such Speech) as one
who knows.
## 6
Hear the song of Takavāna, even though I have rasped it out to you,  Aśvins.
(Set) your eyes here, lords of beauty, upon our home.
## 7
Because you two were in great joy surely (then) when you had jerked  it away—
o good ones, you should be fine herdsmen for us!—protect us from the  ill-wishing wolf.
## 8
Do not betray us to a nobody (who is) our enemy. Do not let our cows  go from our house to a nowhere place,
giving sustenance from their udders, though without young.
## 9
She should give milk in order to establish an alliance with you two.  Measure us for wealth accompanied by prizes of victory,
and measure us for nourishment accompanied by cattle.
## 10
I have won the horseless chariot of the Aśvins with their prizewinning  mares.
By it I enjoy abundant delight.
## 11
In every way this easy-moving chariot will carry me again and again  among the peoples, o body (of mine),
to the soma-drinking.
## 12
So then, I take no account of a dream nor of a rich man who gives no  sustenance.
Both these vanish in the morning.