+++
title = "121"

+++
121
Indra or the All Gods
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
15 verses: triṣṭubh
Of all the challenging and maddening hymns in Kakṣīvant’s small but memorable  oeuvre, this hymn may present the biggest challenges and the most maddening set  of puzzles—though the immediately preceding one is at least in competition. It seems that antiquity had a similar reaction, as the Anukramaṇī is not even sure  whether the hymn is dedicated to Indra or to the All Gods. We will here sketch a  structure and suggest some themes, but we make no claims for the correctness of all  the choices made in our translation or commentary.
The predominant deity of the hymn must be Indra, though his name does  not appear until verse 11, and the governing myth of the hymn is that of the  opening of the Vala cave. But other mythic material is interspersed through  the hymn, and the present-day sacrificial situation is also treated—while,  conversely, the Vala myth is sometimes presented as if it were happening  at this moment. In fact, the first verse sets up this scenario, with questions  about Indra’s attendance at a sacrifice where the Aṅgirases, his helpers in the  Vala myth, are performing their hymns. The same prospective appearance  of Indra among the Aṅgirases is also described in verse 3, with the recital  of the Vala myth continued, in the past, in verse 4.  The intervening verse  (2) is also couched in the mythic past and begins (2ab) with Indra’s primal  cosmogonic deed, the separation of heaven and earth. The second half of  verse 2 contains one of the most discussed portions of the hymn, a set of  three memorably described female figures whose relationships to each other  and to the “buffalo” who is gazing upon at least one of them are unclear. In  our view, all three figures are different forms of Dawn, the subject of two  of Kakṣīvant’s other hymns (I.123–124), as she transforms herself from a  young girl choosing her husband (the Sun) to a wife (of the Sun in the form  of a horse) to a mother (of a cow: the light of Dawn is frequently compared  to cows). The buffalo is probably Indra, and the focus on Dawn is appropri ate to a hymn celebrating the opening of the Vala cave and the release of the  dawn-cows.
Verse 4 alluded to the impetus that drinking soma gave to Indra at the opening  of the Vala cave, and the following two verses (5–6) sketch the history of Indra’s  possession of soma and then turn to the soma currently being produced at today’s  dawn sacrifice. The following, quite puzzling verse (7) seems to identify Indra with  the sun and, by implication, with the shining soma of the previous verse, also com
pared to the sun. The poet seems further to suggest that, even in the absence of all  the sacrificial necessities, the presence of radiant Indra is tantamount to a properly  performed sacrifice, for the benefit of the poet and his family. (We suggest that  Kakṣīvant is alluding to himself here, on the basis of similar vocabulary used in  I.126.5.)
Verse 8 begins a series of mythological verses, with an intertwining of the Vala  myth (9ab, 10ab) and that of Indra’s slaying of Śuṣṇa with the aid of Uśanā Kāvya  (9cd, 10cd, 11d, 12) and the related myth of the halting of the Sun’s horses and  chariot (13), with incidental mentions of other deeds of Indra (the Vr̥tra battle,  11c) thrown in. The interpenetration of these mythic allusions keeps the audi
ence off balance, a queasy feeling much increased by the disjunctive and elliptical  syntax.

The final two verses (14–15), asking for protection and valuables, are by contrast  quite straightforward. Presumably on this subject Kakṣīvant did not want the god  to misunderstand.
## 01
Will he, hastening to the cup of the men seeking the gods, listen properly  to the hymns of the Aṅgirases?
When he has reached the clans of the secure habitation, will the one  worthy of the sacrifice stride widely at their ceremony?
## 02
He propped up heaven, and he sprinkled its foundation [=earth]. The  ingenious one (provided) movable wealth of man and cow for the prize. The buffalo gazed after (Dawn,) the self-created maiden making her  choice (of husband), (who turned into) the consort of the horse
[=Sun], (then into) the mother of the cow.
## 03
The surpassing king will come through the days to the age-old call of the  clans of the Aṅgirases for the ruddy (cows).
He will fashion the mace, his team-mate; he will prop up heaven for the  sake of the two-footed and four-footed belonging to men.
## 04
In the exhilaration of this (soma) you gave the noisy vanguard of the  ruddy (cows), (previously) covered over, to truth,
when the three-humped (herd) was (momentarily) turned back in its  forward surge. You uncovered the deceits and unclosed the doors for  the (people) descended from Manu.
## 05
For you is this milk, consisting of good semen, which your two bustling  parents brought as a bounty, (for you) to become surpassing—
your blazing legacy, which they gained through sacrifice, the milk of the  ruddy one who gives sap as milk.
## 06
And now he [=Soma] has been produced—let him give exhilaration as he  advances; he has shone forth like the sun from this dawn,
when the drop, (being impelled) by (priests) having sweat as their
oblation, (itself) pouring with the offering spoon, has reached its old  (ritual) domains.
## 07
(Even) when a woodpile provided with good kindling should be far away,  the sun (still goes) around the cowpens at the ceremony,
when you [=Indra] shine forth, through the days that bring results, for  the surpassing one [=Kakṣīvant?] whose clan is on the (wedding?)
carts, seeking livestock.
## 08
You brought here the two tawny (horses) attained from great heaven,  as you were battling for the wellspring (of soma), which was
overwhelming in heavenly brilliance,
when for you to grow strong they milked with stones the exhilarating  tawny (soma), that was frenzied for cows [=milk], befriended by
the wind. 9. Ingenious, you rolled back from the cow the metallic stone of heaven,  which had been brought nearby,
when, o much-invoked one, vanquishing Śuṣṇa, you kept encircling him  with endless deadly weapons.
## 10
When it is just before the sun enters into (the fold) of darkness, then  cast the missile against the bolt, o possessor of the stones.
Even the power of Śuṣṇa that surrounded him—that you tore away  from heaven, even though it was well-knotted.
## 11
The two great surfaces that have no wheels, Heaven and Earth, cheered  you on at this deed, o Indra:
You put Vr̥tra to sleep powerfully with your mace, as he was lying upon  the streams, (and you put to sleep) the boar [=Śuṣṇa?].
## 12
You, o Indra, the manly one driving to the men for help—mount the  (horses) of the Wind, the best conveyors, easy to yoke.
What Uśanā Kāvya gave to you to provide exhilaration, that decisive,  Vr̥tra-smiting mace had he fashioned.
## 13
You brought to a halt the tawny mares of the Sun for men. Etaśa bore  the wheel; (you were) on your own, Indra.
Having cast (it) forth to the far shore of the ninety and nine (rivers),  you rolled the non-sacrificers over into the pit.
## 14
Protect us from this evil rage and from difficulty in a close encounter, o  Indra, mace-bearer.
Hold out toward us prizes by the cartload, with horses as their
foundation—for refreshment, for fame, and for liberality.
## 15
Let not your favor wither away from us, o you great in prizes:
refreshments will completely cover (us).
Give us a share in the cows of the stranger, o bounteous one. Might we  be your most bounteous feasting companions.