+++
title = "122"

+++
122
All Gods
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
15 verses: triṣṭubh, except virāḍrūpā 5–6
This hymn is divided almost equally between praise and invocation to a variety of  gods (vss. 1–6) and a complex dānastuti (vss. 7–15). As is true of all of Kakṣīvant’s  oeuvre there are many twists and turns along the way. The part devoted to the  gods seems to define an early-morning sacrifice in its first verses, especially those  calling on Dawn and Night (vs. 2), the Wind as well as Indra (vs. 3), and the  Aśvins and Agni (vs. 4), though Rudra and the Maruts (vs. 1), Pūṣan (vs. 5), and,  especially, Mitra and Varuṇa (vss. 6–7, 9) also appear. An early-morning ritual284 I.122
is appropriate for the following dānastuti, since the priestly gifts (dakṣiṇās) are  distributed then.
The dānastuti is filled with personal names, and, as often, it is difficult to disen tangle the relationships among them. In fact it appears that we may be dealing with  competing potential patrons, each praised for a fleeting moment for his generosity  until a larger prize from a different patron is in the offing. In verse 12 the poet seems  to be inviting this competition, promising to act as a kind of kingmaker for whom ever he gets as patron, and in the difficult verse 13 the poet may be suggesting that  patrons with goods to offer are attempting to surpass competing patrons with their  largesse. This interpretation remains uncertain, however.
## 01
O you of quick fervor [=priests], bring forward your drink, your stalk,  your sacrifice for Rudra who grants rewards.
I have praised (him) along with the heroes of the lord of heaven; (I have  praised) the Maruts as if aiming at the two world-halves.
## 02
It is for Dawn and Night, like two wives, to strengthen the Early
Invocation—the two that are known in many ways:
(the one) like a barren woman wearing a castoff cloak, (the other) with  the glory of the sun, lovely to see with her golden (ornaments).
## 03
Let the earth-circling one [=Wind], rising at early morning, invigorate us.  Let the Wind, (child?) of the waters, accompanied by bulls, invigorate us. Sharpen us, o Indra and “Mountain” [=Indra’s mace]. Let all the gods  then create wide space for us.
## 04
And it is for (Kakṣīvant), son of Uśij [/the fire-priest], to call for me this  glorious pair [=Aśvins], the pursuers (of the oblation), the drinkers,  for the whitening (of dawn).
Put forward for yourselves the Child of the Waters [=Agni], forward the  two mothers [=kindling sticks] of abundant [?] Āyu.
## 05
It is for (Kakṣīvant), son of Uśij [/the fire-priest], to call the “screecher,”  the laud, for you as if with a shout, at the attainment of the silvery
one [=soma?].
(Put him [=Pūṣan]?) forward for yourselves, for Pūṣan to give. I would  call here Agni’s assemblage of good ones [=gods].
## 06
Hear these calls of mine, Mitra and Varuṇa, and hear them in your seat  on all sides.
Let the one who grants the gift of hearing, who hears well, hear us—the  Sindhu River with her waters who provides good lands.
## 07
This gift of yours is to be praised, Mitra and Varuṇa. Having received  hundreds of cows among the Pr̥kṣayāmas: Pajra,
Śrutaratha, Priyaratha, they [=priests and poets] immediately came to  prosperity, upon penning them in.
## 08
The largesse of him who offers great bounty is to be praised. Together  might we, having good heroes, win (that) of Nahus, who for the Pajras is the man providing prizewinning mares and for me  is the patron (of largesse) consisting of horses and chariots.
## 09
A man who’s a liar, a crooked liar who presses (soma that’s) like water  for you two, o Mitra and Varuṇa,
he himself installs a wasting disease in his own heart, while the truthful  man gains his object through his oblations.
## 10
He, spurred by wondrous power, is more forceful than proud Nahus,  and his fame is sung by men.
He whose gifts have been set loose drives as a pumped-up runner,
always the champion in all battles.
## 11
Now then, as you go to the call of Nahus the patron, o gladdening  kings of immortality, hear
what largesse of Nabhojū and of Nirava there is for the possessor of  the chariot to proclaim in its greatness.
## 12
“Whichever patron (we belong to), we shall establish him as a force,” so  did they say on the attainment of ten-part (gushing [=soma?]).
The brilliant things in which the assemblage of good ones [=gods] finds  enjoyment—let them all [=gods] gain (them) as their victory prize.
## 13
Let us find elation in the ten-part gush (of soma?), when the twice five  [=fingers?] come, bringing foods.
The one providing desirable horses, the one providing desirable reins,  and these masters (of goods)—are they heading straight toward the  men to surpass (them)?
## 14
The “flood” with golden ears and bejeweled necks—let all the gods  make it wide for us.
Let the ruddy ones [=Dawns?], coming here in an instant to the songs  of the stranger, find pleasure in both of us [=singers and patrons].
## 15
The four young’uns [=foals?] of Maśarśāra and the three of King  Āyavasa, the victorious (come) to me.
Your chariot, o Mitra and Varuṇa, with its long front, with hands as its  guiding rope, has shone like the sun.