+++
title = "123"

+++
123
Dawn
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
13 verses: triṣṭubh
One of the loveliest of the R̥gvedic Dawn hymns. It begins with references to the  dakṣiṇā or “priestly gifts” distributed at the early-morning sacrifice (vss. 1–6),  almost as if to get the business of the hymn out of the way. But even here the gifts  are clearly under the control of the lovely young Dawn, whose beauties are hinted  at. The next section (vss. 7–9) confronts the usual conundrums and paradoxes

about Dawn (see also I.113 above)—both her twinned opposite number, Night  (vs. 7), and the identity and diversity of the dawns of each individual day (vss.  8–9), each one dutifully conforming to the rules that order the cosmos by per forming her appointed rounds. In the last of these verses (9), Dawn’s daily journey  is likened to a girl’s going to a lovers’ tryst, and this simile provides the transition  to the next two verses (10–11), where she is compared to a beautiful young woman  showing herself off. The final two verses (12–13) combine the gift theme of the  beginning of the hymn with the periodicity of the dawns treated in the middle  section.
## 1
A broad chariot has been yoked for the priestly gift. The gods, the  immortals have mounted it.
Up from the dark has arisen the lady of extensive power, being attentive  to the human dwelling place.
## 2
Earlier than all creation she has awoken, the lofty one, conquering,  winning the prize.
On high she has gazed forth—the young woman come into being again.  Dawn has come here, the first one at the Early Invocation.
## 3
When today you will share out a share to the superior men among  mortals, o nobly born goddess Dawn,
god Savitar, master of the house, will here declare to the Sun that we are  without offense.
## 4
To house after house she drives *in her greatness, day after day assuming  (new) names.
Seeking to win, flashing, over and over she has come hither. She has her  share of the very tip-top of goods.
## 5
Sister of Bhaga, kin to Varuṇa, o liberal Dawn, be first awake.
The institutor of evil should lag behind. Might we conquer him with a  priestly gift as our chariot.
## 6
Let liberalities rise up, up plentiful gifts; up have the blazing fires stood. The eagerly sought goods hidden by darkness do the radiant dawns reveal. 7. The one goes away; the other approaches: having distinct forms, the two  day-halves proceed in tandem.
Of the two that circle around, the one has hidden the darkness: Dawn  has flashed with her ever-blazing chariot.
## 8
Of the same appearance today, just the same appearance also tomorrow,  they follow the long(-standing) ordinance of Varuṇa.
The faultless ones make a circuit through thirty “wagon-treks” [=days of  the month], each one encompassing her purpose in a single day.
## 9
Knowing the name of the first day, gleaming, bright-faced, she has been  born from the dark.
She does not violate the ordinance of truth, every day going to the
appointed place like a maiden to a rendezvous. 10. Like a girl exulting in her body, you go, o goddess, to the god who seeks  to attain you [=Sun].
Youthful, full of smiles, radiant, you reveal your breast in the east
[/before (him)].
## 11
Of lovely appearance like a maiden groomed by her mother, you reveal  your body to be seen.
Dawn forth widely, o Dawn, auspicious one. The other dawns will not  achieve this of yours.
## 12
Possessing horses, cows, and all desirable things, aligning themselves  with the rays of the sun,
they go away and they come here again, bearing auspicious
names—the dawns.
## 13
Guiding yourself following the rein of truth, place ever more auspicious  resolve in us.
O Dawn, easy to invoke, dawn forth to us today. Let there be riches  among us and among our bounteous (patrons).