+++
title = "124"

+++
124
Dawn
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
13 verses: triṣṭubh
Another virtuosic Dawn hymn. Here the poet takes the usual generic themes, espe cially Dawn as a beautiful woman, and creates highly specific images, especially in  verses 7–8, which provide a series of almost sociological portraits of ancient Indian  female figures. In verse 7 we first (pāda a) meet a brotherless girl boldly approaching  men; since the brother was important in finding and arranging suitable matches, a  brotherless girl was at a disadvantage in the marriage market and needed to take  initiative on her own. (See Schmidt 1987: 30–75.) The next image is a pun (pāda b),  with one harmless generic image and one shockingly specific one. In the harmless  reading a figure, presumably male, mounts a chariot to seek prizes; in the other a  woman, presumably a prostitute, shows herself off on a platform for money. The  third image (pādas cd) is of the legitimate wife adorned for her husband, but even  there the image shades into that of a loose woman showing her breast. The next  verse (8) treats the common theme of the sisters Dawn and Night, but again Dawn  is presented in a particular female role. In the second pāda, the “girl to be gazed  upon” may well refer to the display motif of the ancient Indian self-choice marriage  (Svayaṃvara; see Jamison 2001), while the “maidens with a choice” may refer to  the same phenomena, girls making their choice of bridegroom at a specially called  assembly (see Jamison 2003).
Even more striking perhaps is verse 4, where Dawn is compared to three differ ent animals or their parts: she is glossy like the breast of a waterbird who preens it;

she reveals herself like an elephant kneeling to drink; and she wakens the sleeping  like a fly, buzzing around again and again. (We owe these interpretations to Thieme  1965 [=1971: 214–27].)
Nothing in the rest of the hymn is quite so quirky, but the standard tropes are  well handled. The common counterpoint between individual Dawn and the multi tude of identical dawns that have preceded and will follow today’s dawn is found  in verses 2–3, 6, and 9. Another common theme, the diversity of beings that Dawn  awakens, appears in verses 1, 6, and 12. The final verses of the hymn raise the hope  of gifts and rewards that will come with the dawn.
## 01
Dawn as she dawns when the fire is being kindled; the sun as it rises— each has propped up its own light widely.
God Savitar here and now has impelled forth our two-footed, forth our  four-footed, each to go to its task.
## 02
Not belittling the divine commandments, but diminishing human (life-) spans,
the last of those who, one by one, have gone, the first of those who come  hither—Dawn has flashed forth.
## 03
This Daughter of Heaven has appeared opposite, dressed in light, in the  same way (as the others), from the east.
She follows along the path of truth, straight to the goal. Like one who  knows the way, she does not confound the directions.
## 04
She has appeared like the breast of a preening waterbird. Like a female  elephant she has revealed her intimate parts.
Wakening the sleeping like a fly, she has come as the latest of those who,  one by one, have come here again (and again).
## 05
In the eastern half of the dusky realm that cannot be flown to, the  begetter of cows has put forth her beacon.
She spreads out further, more widely, filling both laps of her two parents  [=Heaven and Earth].
## 06
Just thus is she, the latest of many, to be seen. Neither the non-kin does  she avoid, nor the kin.
Exulting in her spotless body, neither from the small does she retreat, nor  from the great, as she shines forth.
## 07
Like a brotherless (girl) she goes right up to men—like one mounting a  chariot seat to win prizes [/(display-)platform to gain property].
Like an eager wife, richly dressed, for her husband, Dawn, like a wanton,  lets her breast spill over.
## 08
The (one) sister has left the natal place to her older sister. She goes away  from her, like (a girl) to be gazed upon.
Dawning forth with the rays of the sun, she smears unguent on herself,  like (maidens) with a choice going to assemblies. 9. Day after day the latest of those earlier sisters advances from behind  toward the earlier one.
Let the newer ones now dawn richly for us as of old—the
day-bright dawns.
## 10
Awaken those who grant, bounteous Dawn; unawakening let the  niggards sleep.
Richly dawn for the bounteous ones, o bounteous one, richly for the  praiser, o liberal-spirited one, as you rouse them.
## 11
This young woman has whitened down from the east. She yokes the  forefront of the ruddy cows.
She will dawn forth now; her beacon will stand out. Agni will reverently  come to house after house.
## 12
The birds have also flown up from their dwelling and the men who  partake of food, at your first flush.
To the one who is at home you convey much of value, goddess Dawn,  and to the pious mortal.
## 13
You have been praised, praiseworthy ones, by my sacred formulation.  You, eager (for it), have been strengthened, o Dawns.
Goddesses, with your help may we win spoils in hundreds and
thousands.