+++
title = "125"

+++
125
Svanaya’s Dānastuti
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
7 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 4–5
This hymn falls into two distinct but thematically connected parts. The second part  (vss. 4–7) develops an extravagant picture of the rewards that accrue to the gener ous giver and sacrificer. The whole cosmos seems to exist only to gratify him, and  a place among the gods as an immortal awaits him. The syntax and sentiments are  straightforward and indeed somewhat simplistic.
The other section (vss. 1–3) is quite different. It consists of an apparent dia logue between an “early-coming” figure (vs. 3) and, probably, a householder or  host (vs. 2), with a scene-setting introduction (vs. 1). The word “early-coming”  (prātarítvan) is found only in this hymn and in a narrative in the Kāṭhaka Saṃhitā (besides the later etymological work, the Nirukta), where the same dialogic rela tionship between the Prātaritvan and a householder, in that case Manu, obtains.  In both passages the Prātaritvan seems to be an itinerant priest or poet, offer ing his ritual services to a sacrificer, his potential host. But he also stands in for  or represents a god who is coming to attend the early-morning ritual. (Compare  the compound of similar form and similar meaning prātaryā́van “early-driving,  early-traveling,” used especially of the Aśvins and their chariot.) Thus, the host is

more inclined to receive the itinerant Prātaritvan because he may be entertaining  a god in disguise, and the Prātaritvan is not only seeking payment for his ritual  work, the dakṣiṇā whose giver is lyrically celebrated in verses 4–7, but also himself  brings (or claims to bring) goods and good fortune for his host, as is emphasized  in all three verses of this portion of the hymn. The relationship between them is  also presented as somewhat coercive or threatening in the second half of verse 2  (which unfortunately contains several hapaxes and is therefore not very clear). The  Kāṭhaka Saṃhitā narrative, a version of “Manu’s Cups,” depicts that threat much  more strongly, as an aspect of the “anxieties of hospitality.” For further discussion  see Jamison (1996a: 184–89).
## 01
In the early morning, the early-coming (priest/god) establishes a treasure.  An observant man, receiving him (as guest), lays it in himself.
Increasing his own progeny and lifetime with it, possessing good heroes,  he is accompanied by thriving of wealth.
## 02
[The host:] “He will have good cows, good gold, good horses—for him  Indra establishes lofty vigor—
he who, o early-comer, binds you up like a pard [?] with a thong [?], when  you come hither with goods.”
## 03
[The early-comer:] “I have come here today early in the morning with a  goods-filled chariot, seeking one who performs (sacrifice) well, the son  of my seeking.
Make (Indra?) drink the pressed (soma) of the exhilarating plant;
strengthen the hero-ruling (Indra?) with liberal gifts.”
## 04
The rivers, embodiments of joy, milk-cows, flow near to the one who has  sacrificed and the one who will sacrifice;
seeking fame, the streams of ghee on every side go near to him who
grants and has granted.
## 05
On the back of the firmament he stands firmly fixed. Whoever grants, he  goes among the gods;
to him the waters, the rivers stream ghee; for him this gift-cow (dakṣiṇā)  swells always.
## 06
For the givers of dakṣiṇās only there are these brilliant (bounties) here;  for the givers of dakṣiṇās there are suns in heaven.
Givers of dakṣiṇās have a share in immortality; givers of dakṣiṇās
lengthen their own lifetime.
## 07
Let those who grant not encounter difficulty or outrage; let the patrons,  of good commandment, not grow old;
let there be some other enclosure for them, but to the non-granting one  let there come the flames of pain.