+++
title = "126"

+++
126
Kaksı̣vant’s Da ̄ ̄nastuti
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
7 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 6–7
Kakṣīvant’s last hymn is, to be idiomatic, a humdinger. It details in extravagant  terms the gifts that King Svanaya Bhāvya presented to him, in return for the  fame the poet could bestow on him (see esp. vss. 1d and 2d). The first five verses  list the gifts, especially the (not quite believable) numbers of livestock, given  to Kakṣīvant and his family, the Pajras. The last of these verses (5) ends with  an elaborate simile, not all the details of which are clear, comparing the Pajras  seeking fame with noblemen seeking brides by attending maidens’ Svayaṃvaras  (bridal self-choice ceremonies) with their carts. (The word “cart” [ánas] is spe cialized in the R̥gveda for the vehicle that conveys the bride home.) The phrase  “(the Pajras) sought fame” (5d) provides a ring with the first verse (1d), where  the king, Kakṣīvant’s patron, is “seeking fame,” and brings the dānastuti proper  to a close.
The final two verses (6–7) provide an erotic, indeed rather obscene, appendix,  with a vignette of the poet and one of the girls he received as part of his gift.  Already in verse 3 “ten chariots carrying brides” were mentioned as part of his  loot, and the simile about Svayaṃvaras in verse 5 also helps set up the erotic  atmosphere. Besides the striking simile of a mongoose (kaśīkā, a playful variant  of the poet’s name Kakṣīvant) as sexual partner, verse 6 contains a number of  hapaxes and entirely unclear lexical items, which may well involve phonological  deformation to play on taboo words. (The second half of the verse appears to  allow the word yabh “fuck” to be assembled from parts of several words.) It is a  pity that we understand it as little as we do. The last verse (7) contains the osten sible and crudely seductive speech of the woman herself. Kakṣīvant has indeed  gone out with a bang.
## 01
Not feeble are the praises I present through my inspiration to Bhāvya  who lives on the Sindhu,
who meted out to me a thousand (soma-)pressings, the invincible king  seeking fame.
## 02
A hundred neck-ornaments of the king in want (of fame), a hundred  horses I took as soon as they were offered;
a hundred cows of the lord (I), Kakṣīvant, (have taken). (Now) his
unaging fame stretches to heaven.
## 03
The dusky (horses) given by Svanaya have come to me, and ten chariots  carrying brides.
A thousand and sixty cattle have followed. Kakṣīvant gained them at the  suppertime [=evening] of the days.

## 04
Forty sorrel (horses) of the ten-wagon train lead at the front a rank of a  thousand (cows).
Steeds arousing delight, covered with pearls, have the Kakṣīvants, the  Pajras swept up.
## 05
Following the previous presentation, I got for you three yoked (horses?)  and eight cows that suckle the stranger—
(for you,) the Pajras, who sought fame—as those of good lineage
provided with (wedding-)carts seek maidens with a choice, appropriate  to their clan.
## 06
She who, when squeezed and squished, keeps stinking like a mongoose— fusing (with me), the woman to be enjoyed [/coiled around] gives me  hundreds of “spurts”—
## 07
(Saying,) “Feel me up—keep going further. Don’t belittle my “little  things [=private parts].
I am entirely hairy, like a little ewe of the Gandhāris.”
Hymns I.127–139 are attributed to Paruchepa Daivodāsi. This poet is especially  fond of the long and elaborate atyaṣṭi meter, consisting of seven pādas, generally  arranged in three groups: 12 12 8 / 8 8 / 12 8. The eight-syllable pādas that end the  first and third “lines” (that is, pādas c and g) generally ring changes on the pāda  that precedes, by repetition of the last word(s), by lexical substitution of synonyms,  or by syntactic complementarity. A simple example of the first is I.127.1c, which  repeats the epithet jātávedasam, which also ended 1b. Lexical substitution is found  in 1g, where sarpíṣaḥ “of the melted butter” replaces ghr̥tásya “of the ghee” in 1f.  Sometimes the “rhyme” pāda contributes material necessary to complete the syntax  established in the preceding pāda. See I.127.2fg, where the rhyme pāda g provides  the verb that must be supplied in the relative clause in pāda f. There are more com plex relationships as well, including what will later be called śleṣas, with a word  or construction having two possible and incompatible readings. A nice example is  I.127.3bc, where the form druhaṃtaráḥ can be analyzed either as druhaṃ-tará “over
coming deceit” or dru-hantara “better at striking wood,” the former prevailing in  pāda b and the latter, because of the simile “like an axe,” in pāda c. This patterned  variation creates a pleasing effect. (In our translation the three groups of pādas are  separated into three lines, and the rhyme pādas c and g are set off by dashes.)
Paruchepa is also fond of rare words, sometimes phonetic deformations of  parallel words in the same verse, puns, and contorted syntactic constructions, and  many of the puzzles in his hymns have not been completely solved. But Geldner’s  judgment of his poetry—“wortreich, aber gedankenarm” (rich in words, but poor in  thoughts)—seems harsh and unjustified. These poems are difficult to work through,  but their verbal artistry and intricacy seem to us to provide a more than sufficient  reward.