+++
title = "127"

+++
127
Agni
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
11 verses: atyaṣṭi, except atidhr̥ti 6
Full of puns, phonological tricks, and syntactic give-and-take, this hymn celebrates  Agni in both his ritual role (e.g., vss. 1–2, 8, 10) and in his physical power (e.g., vss.  3–4, 6). The pleasures of the hymn come more from the interplay of the verbal ele ments than from any sustained thematic development, and in that sense Geldner’s  “gedankenarm” (quoted above) may be accurate, but who needs thoughts when we  have such words?
## 01
Agni I consider as the Hotar, rich in gifts, the good one, son of strength,  Jātavedas—like a poet, Jātavedas—
who is the god of good ceremony, with his body erect and pointed
toward the gods.
With his flame he yearns after the blazing forth of the ghee—of the  melted butter being poured.
## 02
We sacrificers would invoke you as best sacrificer, the oldest of the  Aṅgirases, o poet, with our thoughts—(invoke you) through our poets,  o glowing one, with our thoughts—
(you) like earth-encircling heaven, the Hotar of the settled domains, the flame-haired bull whom these clans (help)—let the clans help (him)  to speed.
## 03
Because he, shining upon the many with his radiant might, becomes  the overcomer of deceit—the overcomer of deceit, as an axe is an
excellent striker of wood—
at whose attack even the staunch aborts and whatever is solid, like
the trees,
going forth to conquer, he will hold his place, he will not be moved— with his conquering of the wastelands, he will not be moved.
## 04
Even the firm things give way to him, as is known. (The pious one) does  service with the piercingly hot kindling sticks, for help—he does
service to Agni for help.
He who plunges toward the many, he carves them with his flame
like trees.
Even solid foods he liquefies with his strength—even the solid with his  strength.
## 05
This fortifying power of his might we acquire in future (days), of him  who by night is more beautiful to see than by day—(more beautiful  to see) than the one who traverses by day [=sun], for (the man) whose  lifespan is not (yet) extended,294 I.127
because his [=Agni’s] lifespan provides a handhold, staunch like shelter  for a son.
His help, apportioned (to us?) or not, the unaging ones are pursuing— the unaging fires are pursuing.
## 06
For he is very noisy like the Marut troop, thundering widely in the  productive meadows—thundering widely in the disorderly meadows. The taker has taken, has eaten the oblations, as is his due, he the  beacon of the sacrifice.
And then when he is excited, bristling with excitement, all take pleasure  in his path—as the superior men [=Maruts] (take pleasure) in the  path to beauty.
## 07
When, yet again, the heaven-bound praisers, the Bhr̥gus, tendering  homage, invoke him—the Bhr̥gus, plundering (the fire from heaven),  churning it with piety—
Agni is lord of goods, the blazing one who is their holder—
then his dear coverings the wise one should seek to win—the wise one  should seek to win here.
## 08
We invoke you, lord of all the clans, houselord common to every one  of them, for benefit—you with your trusty vehicle of songs, for  benefit—
the guest of the sons of Manu, by whose mouth, as if by a father’s, (we) and all the immortals yonder (acquire) vigor—(place) the
oblations and vigor among the gods.
## 09
You, Agni, are born as strongest by your strength, most tempestuous,  for the divine conclave—like wealth for the divine conclave—
for most tempestuous is your exuberance and most brilliant your  resolve—
and then they attentively surround you, o unaging one—like obedient  (servants), o unaging one.
## 10
Let your (praise) (stand) out for the great one, who is strong by  strength, wakening at dawn, for Agni, as if for a winner of cattle—let  (your) praise stand (out) for Agni.
When someone with an oblation is calling on him in all the lands, in advance of (dawn’s) rays he “sings” [=crackles] like a hoarse-voiced  (singer)—the glowing Hotar, (in advance of) the rays.
## 11
Becoming visible in the nearest nearness, bring here to us, o Agni, in  concert with the gods, (riches) through your kind attention—great  riches through your kind attention.
Make us regard something great, o most powerful one, for our
benefit here.
Plunder, churn a great mass of good heroes for the praisers, liberal  one—like a mighty (warrior) with vast power.