+++
title = "128"

+++
128
Agni
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
8 verses: atyaṣṭi
The sacrificial fire is the relentless focus of this hymn, and it seldom strays from  the physical location of the fire on the ritual ground. Though its theme is clear  and inescapable, the hymn presents us with manifold interpretive difficulties in its  details, especially in the central verses 4–5, which, with their responsive fronted  krátvā (“though his resolve,” 4cd, 5a), may constitute an omphalos. There is also  some sign of ring composition: the first and last (8) verses each twice refer to Agni  as the Hotar, a word used nowhere else in the hymn, and the mentions of Manu in  verses 1–2 are answered by two occurrences of Manu in the penultimate verse (7).  In general there is much reuse of vocabulary through the hymn, and the poet plays  with the words “good” and “goods” in the second part of the hymn (vss. 5–6, 8).  Though the poet does not himself beg for goods, it seems clear that the desire for  goods he attributes to the gods (8fg) is shared by their human counterparts.
## 1
This one was born here on the foundation of Manu as the best sacrificing  Hotar, following the commandment of the fire-priests—Agni,
following his own commandment—
all attentive to the one who seeks a comrade, like wealth for the one who  seeks fame.
The undeceivable Hotar has sat down in the footprint of refreshment— enveloped in the footprint of refreshment.
## 2
The one who sends the sacrifice to its goal along the path of truth: we  make him our familiar with reverence accompanied by oblations—in  the conclave of gods (with reverence) accompanied by oblations.
Because of our presentation of nourishments he does not waste away  with this body,
he whom Mātariśvan (brought) to Manu from afar—the god he brought  from afar.
## 3
On his way he circles round the earthly (realm) in a single day,
swallowing it up in an instant, the bull (depositing) his seed ever
roaring—depositing his seed ever roaring—
observing with a hundred eyes, the god victorious in the woods,
taking his seat on the nearer ridges—Agni, on the further ridges.
## 4
Strongly resolved (to sacrifice), installed in front in every house, Agni is  attentive to the sacrifice, to the ceremony—through his resolve he is  attentive to the sacrifice.
Through his resolve he is a ritual expert for the straight-arrow; he has  watched over all beings
from the time when as guest he was born splendid with ghee—as the  conveyor (of the offering), the ritual expert, he was born.

## 5
When through his resolve and along with the roaring of fire, which is like  the roaring of the Maruts [=thunder], the (offering-)foods are infused  into his forces [=flames]—like foods for the vigorous one [=Indra?]—
because then he stimulates the giving (of good) and of goods by his might, he will rescue us from going astray, from the crooked way—from evil  utterance, from the crooked way.
## 6
Every (new fire), possessing extensive power, the spoked wheel (of the  sacrifice), the good one, takes (goods) in his right hand; advancing he  does not let (them) loose—because of his longing for fame he does not  let (them) loose.
For everyone who aims straight you have conveyed his oblation among  the gods.
To everyone who performs well he propels his wish—Agni propels apart  the two door-halves.
## 7
He has been established as most beneficial in the ritual enclosure  belonging to Manu; Agni (has been established) like a noble clanlord  at the sacrifices—a dear clanlord at the sacrifices.
He is master of the oblations of the sons of Manu, the oblations
prepared with the refreshing drink.
He will rescue us from the injury of Varuṇa—from the injury of the  great god.
## 8
Agni, the Hotar, the depository of goods do they reverently invoke; the  dear, most conspicuous one they have installed as the spoked wheel
(of the sacrifice)—they have installed as the conveyor of oblations— the one who provides all lifetimes and all possessions, the Hotar
deserving the sacrifice, the sage poet.
The gods, seeking goods, (have installed) the lusty one, for help—seeking  goods (they have installed) the lusty one with hymns.