+++
title = "129"

+++
129
Indra
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
11 verses: atyaṣṭi, except atiśakvarī 8–9, aṣṭi 11
The hymn begins with familiar, and positive, themes: calls to Indra to aid our actual  chariot in prize-contests and also our metaphorical chariot, the sacrifice (vss. 1–2),  and these themes recur throughout the hymn. But the poet seems preoccupied  with more negative topics—not only rivals and enemies in battle (vss. 3–5, 10) and  demons (vss. 6, 9, 11), but also evil thoughts and words (vss. 6–8, 11). Bad Thought  appears to be personified as a menacing female in verse 8, and more surprisingly  Indra seems himself to have potential bad thoughts toward us, his worshipers,  which we must combat by supplying him with good things to think about (vs. 7). Given the forces thus arrayed against us, the calls for Indra’s protection grow ever  stronger toward the end of the hymn (vss. 9–11).
## 01
The chariot which you, o vigorous Indra, lead forward to gain
wisdom, though it [=chariot] is far away—(which) you lead forward,  faultless one—
just in a single day you will make it to prevail as a prizewinner if you so  desire.
(Thrust forward) (this chariot) for us, the ritual adepts, you faultless  thruster—like this speech for (us,) the ritual adepts.
## 02
Listen—you who in every battle are to be besought by men for your skill  for the battle cry, Indra—by men for your skill for the charge—
who with the champions win the sun, who with the poets overtake
the prize.
Those showing mastery set him to succeed as their prizewinner—a
fortifying power like a prizewinning steed.
## 03
For as wondrous one you swell the bullish skin; you keep away every  hostile mortal, o champion—(in that) you shun (that) mortal.
Indra, this to you and to heaven, this to self-glorious Rudra,
to Mitra and Varuṇa I proclaim at length—to the very merciful one at  length.
## 04
We wish to seek Indra as a lifelong comrade for ourselves, a victorious  yokemate—in the prize-contests a victorious yokemate.
(O Indra,) help our sacred formulations to help in every battle,
for a rival will not lay you low whom you lay low—any rival whom you  lay low.
## 05
Bow down the arrogance of every (rival) with your help like piercingly  hot kindling sticks—with powerful help, powerful one.
Lead us as before: you are regarded as free of guilt, o champion.
Carry away all (the goods?) from Pūru, as draft-horse—*like the
draft-horse [=Agni] with his mouth, (carry them) to us.
## 06
I would proclaim this to the soma-drop that is to come, the refreshing (drop)  that is to be poured and that, like him to be invoked [=Indra], sets my
thoughts atremble—the demon-smasher that sets my thoughts atremble. He himself should drive insults and bad thought away from us with his  murderous weapons.
The utterer of evil should drain away lower than low [=be miscarried?]— like a little speck he should drain away.
## 07
Might we win with our conspicuous invocation [/oblation]; might we win  wealth, o wealthy one, and an abundance of heroes—(wealth) that is  delightful and an abundance of heroes.
When he has bad thoughts (toward us) we would engorge him with  (words) good to think about and with refreshment—

Indra (we would engorge) with invocations to heavenly brilliance that  come true—the one worthy of the sacrifice with invocations to
heavenly brilliance.
## 08
(Let) Indra (be) more and more preeminent among us with his
self-glorious help in the shunning of bad thoughts—in the shattering  of bad thoughts.
She herself [=Bad Thought] is to be harmed who has sought us out
with her devourers.
She will be smashed, she will not wax strong—like a firebrand flung
aside she will not wax strong.
## 09
You, Indra, with wealth in profusion for us: drive along a faultless  path—drive forward along (a path) without demons.
Accompany us in the distance; accompany us close to home.
Protect us from a long way, from afar with your superior powers—
always protect us with your superior powers.
## 10
You, Indra, with surpassing wealth for us: greatness will accompany  you, who are so powerful, for our help—(accompany you) like an
ally for great help.
Most powerful rescuer and helper, (you help) every chariot,
immortal one.
Another one than us—any one—should you harm, o possessor of
the stone—(anyone) who (himself) intends harm, o possessor of
the stone.
## 11
Protect us, well-praised Indra, from failure, (you who are) always  a requiter of bad thoughts—as a god (a requiter) of bad
thoughts—
a smasher of the evil demon, a rescuer of a poet like me.
For the begetter has begotten you for this reason, o good one—has
begotten you as smasher of demons, o good one.