+++
title = "130"

+++
130
Indra
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
10 verses: atyaṣṭi, except triṣṭubh 10
The first two verses of the hymn provide a conventional opening, with an invitation  to Indra to journey here to drink our soma. But this journey motif gives way to a  rapid sampling of Indra’s great deeds: Vala (vs. 3), Vr̥tra (vss. 4–5), battles against  various human and legendary enemies (vss. 7–8), ending with a truly impenetrable  verse (9) about the theft of the wheel of the Sun’s chariot and the involvement of  Uśanā, a myth that also elsewhere evokes all the obscurantism the Vedic bard has in  his control (see, e.g., V.29 and 31). The final verse of this hymn, in a different meter,  sums up the poets’ efforts to praise Indra. The emphasis on mythology in this hymn contrasts sharply with the immediately  preceding Indra hymn, by the same poet in the same meter, which lacks any mytho logical content.
## 1
Indra, drive here, right up to us from afar, (drive) on your own to the  landing site, like a master of settlements to the rites of distributions— like a king, master of settlements, to his house.
We invoke you, bringing you the pleasing offering when the soma is pressed. Like sons a father (we invoke you) for the winning of prizes—(you) most  munificent, for the winning of prizes.
## 2
O Indra, drink the soma being pressed by the stones, poured with a  bucket, like a buffalo drinking at a well-spring—like a thirsty buffalo. For your delightful exhilaration, for your most exceptional feeding,
let them [=your horses] guide you here, like the golden (mares) the Sun— like the Sun through all the days.
## 3
He found the depository of heaven, deposited in hiding, enveloped in the  stone like the embryo of a bird (in an egg)—within the boundless stone. The possessor of the mace, the best Aṅgiras, seeking to win (them) like a  pen of cattle—
Indra uncovered the nourishments that were enclosed—(opened) the  doors to the nourishments that were enclosed.
## 4
Firmly holding the mace in his hands, Indra honed it sharp like a carving  knife, for throwing—honed it for the smashing of the serpent.
Enveloping yourself with strength, with vast powers, with might, o Indra, like a carpenter a tree from the wooden one [=forest], you cut down (the  serpent)—as if with an axe you cut (him) down.
## 5
You, Indra, released the rivers to flow at will to the sea, like chariots— like prize-seeking chariots.
The enduring (rivers) hitched themselves up toward the same
imperishable goal,
like milk-cows yielding all milk for Manu—yielding all milk for the people. 6. This speech have the goods-seeking Āyus fashioned for you, like a clever  artisan a chariot—they have fashioned you for favor,
adorning (you / the speech), you inspired poet, like a thoroughbred,  prize-seeking horse at the contests for prizes,
like a steed for power, for winning riches—for winning all riches.
## 7
You, Indra, split the ninety strongholds for Pūru, for Divodāsa the  greatly pious, you prancer—with your mace (you split them) for the  pious, you prancer.
The strong one brought down Śambara from the mountain for Atithigva, the great one distributing riches with his strength—all riches with his  strength.
## 8
Indra aided the Ārya sacrificer in battles, affording a hundred forms of  help in all contests—in contests whose prize is the sun.

Chastising those who follow no commandment, he made the black skin  [=barbarians] subject to Manu.
As a burning (fire) scorches everything dried up, he scorches the
thirsty—scorches Arśaśāna down to the ground.
## 9
Just born, he tore off the wheel of the sun with his strength—(as?) at  the ritual meal the ruddy one [=Agni?/Sun?] steals speech—showing  mastery he steals it—
when you, o sage poet, had come from afar (to the house of) Uśanā
for help,
passing across all appeals for favor as if with Manu—as if passing
across all the days.
## 10
Because of our new hymns, you splitter of strongholds whose deeds are  bullish, protect us along with your capable protectors.
O Indra, being praised by the Divodāsas, you should grow strong, like  heaven through the days.