+++
title = "131"

+++
131 Indra
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
7 verses: atyaṣṭi
At the beginning of the first verse all cosmic forces conspire in giving Indra the first  rank, as a model for the similar honor and obeisance accorded him by men. But it  quickly becomes apparent (vss. 2–3) that Indra is also an object of contention and  competition among different groups of men, who all want him on their side. This con
tention is vividly depicted in verse 3. In verses 4–5 Indra’s own inclinations become  apparent: he aids priests and sacrificers and chastises those without sacrifice. In verse  6 we announce our own sacrifice to Indra, and thereby make a claim for his attention,  and in verse 7 we ask for further aid against our rivals and ill-wishers.
## 1
Because to Indra the lordly Heaven has ever bowed, and to Indra the  great Earth has bowed with her expanses—at the winning of heavenly  brilliance with her expanses—
Indra have all the gods in concert placed in front.
To Indra let all the pressings belong that stem from the sons of Manu— all the gifts that stem from the sons of Manu.
## 2
Because at all pressings those of bullish fervor thrust you forward, (each  of them) separately (thrusts you who are) one and the same—those
seeking to win the sun, (each) separately—
you, like a boat of deliverance, we would place at the chariot-pole of our  forceful (song),
making Indra take notice (of us) with our sacrifices as the Āyus did—as  the Āyus did Indra with their praises. 3. Those seeking aid, paired in opposition, have yanked you back and  forth, at the winning of the cowpen, as they set (the cows) free—being  victorious (over the cowpen), as they set (them) free, o Indra—
when you shove together the two peoples who are seeking cows and  going to (the winning of) the sun,
as you constantly display the bull partnered with (you)—the mace
partnered with (you), Indra.
## 4
The Pūrus know of this manly deed of yours, o Indra, that you brought  down the autumnal strongholds—being victorious you brought
them down.
You will chastise the mortal without sacrifice, o Indra, lord of strength. You stole the great earth (from him) and these waters—being
exhilarated, (you stole) these waters.
## 5
Since then they have constantly celebrated this manly deed of yours at  the revels: that, o bull, you aided the fire-priests—that you aided those  acting as comrades.
You made “Game,” for them to prevail in battles.
They kept winning one river after another—seeking fame they kept winning. 6. And now take note of this dawn—for one should enjoy it—of our chant,  of our oblation along with our invocations—at the winning of the
sun, along with our invocations.
When, o Indra, possessor of the mace, as bull you will have in view to  smash the negligent ones,
(listen) to me, this newer ritual adept—listen to the thought of (me), the  newer one.
## 7
You, powerfully born Indra, grown strong, being kindly toward
us: (smash) the mortal who acts the foe—that mortal, o champion,
with your mace—
smash (him and) whoever wishes us ill. Listen to (us), as the one who  listens best.
Let malevolence stay away, like an accident on a journey—let all
malevolence stay away.