+++
title = "132"

+++
132
Indra
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
6 verses: atyaṣṭi
This short hymn contains many puzzles of detail, which render much of the trans lation provisional, but the general theme is fairly clear. The present time and the  current sacrifice are repeatedly highlighted (see, e.g., vss. 1–2), and the contrast  between now and the past is explicitly drawn (see vss. 3–4). As is usual when past

and present are invoked together, we ask Indra to aid us in the same way as he aided  his companions in myth, particularly, here, the Aṅgirases at the opening of the Vala  cave (vs. 4). The theme of speech, both by and about Indra, is also strongly high lighted, especially in the first four verses.
## 1
With you, bounteous Indra, aided by you, may we overcome those who  do battle over the foremost stakes—may we win against those who
seek to win.
On this, the nearest day speak on behalf of the soma-presser.
At this sacrifice may we pull out the perfect (“hand” of dice) at the
match—seeking the prize, (may we pull out) the perfect one at
the match.
## 2
At the match to win the sun, at the speech of the Propitiator, at the  very anointing of the one who wakes at dawn [=Agni]—at the very
anointing of the one being prepared [=soma]—
on (that) day Indra is to be invoked by every head [=person], in the way  that is known.
Toward us only let your gifts be directed—the auspicious gifts of the  auspicious one.
## 3
This pleasurable offering of yours is glittering as of old, when at the  sacrifice they [=sacrificers] made (you), the shield, as a peaceful
dwelling for themselves—you are the shield of truth, a peaceful
dwelling.
You should announce this now yet again. They [=poets?] look within  (themselves?) with the (coming of) the (sun’s) rays [=dawn].
“This Indra is certainly known as a seeker of cows—as a seeker of cows  for those who dwell among their kindred.”
## 4
Now in the current way and in the earlier one it is to be proclaimed of  you, that you opened up the enclosure for the Aṅgirases—o Indra,
doing your best, (you opened) up the enclosure.
In the same way as for them, win and fight for us.
For those who press soma, weaken anyone who follows no
commandment—who follows no commandment, even when he rages. 5. When the champion makes the peoples see in accord with his
conceptions, seeking fame they will surpass when the prize is set—
seeking fame they will distinguish themselves.
To him they chant, for him to thrust (to them) with his strength a (full)  lifetime along with offspring.
In Indra do our thoughts desire to establish their home—our thoughts  (going) as if to the gods.
## 6
You two, Indra and “Mountain” [=mace], who fight in the front— whoever would give battle to us, smash that very one away—with a
mace smash that very one. (Under these circumstances, even) an abyss will be pleasing to (that one,)  who has fled into the distance—an abyss he will seek to reach.
O champion, (surround) our rivals all around on all sides—let the
splitter split (them) on all sides.