+++
title = "133"

+++
133
Indra
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
7 verses: triṣṭubh 1, anuṣṭubh 2–4, gāyatrī 5, dhr̥ti [atyaṣṭi] 6, atyaṣṭi 7
This metrically complex hymn is the last one in the Paruchepa Indra cycle and is  longer by one verse than the preceding hymn (I.132). It also falls naturally into  two parts on the grounds of meter, subject matter, and diction: verses 1–5, which  are mostly in dimeter meter and have an Atharvan cast, and verses 6–7 in atyaṣṭi  (or modified atyaṣṭi) meter, which more nearly resembles the atyaṣṭi hymns ear
lier in the cycle. As Oldenberg already saw, we can thus analyze it as two hymns,  of five and two verses respectively, which then conform to the usual patterns of  arrangement.
The first hymn contains a number of odd formations, whose meaning and ety mology are unclear; our renderings are provisional. Despite these uncertainties, we  can happily grasp the gusto with which the poet urges Indra to destroy troops of  witches and other demonic beings.
The second short hymn also enthusiastically rouses Indra against enemies, but in  a style more recognizably R̥gvedic, and it situates the action in the interplay between  the soma-pressing sacrificer and Indra, the recipient of the soma and the sacrifice.
## 01
Both world-halves I purify with truth; the deceits—great, but lacking  Indra—I burn up entirely,
where the enemies, having attacked, lay slain, crushed all around the  Place of Hostility.
## 02
You also having attacked, o possessor of the stone: cut off the heads of  the witches
with your foot that overcomes obstacles—with your foot that overcomes  great obstacles.
## 03
Bounteous one, smash down the troop of these witches
at the mudflat (called) Place of Hostility—at the mudflat (called) Place  of Great Hostility.
## 04
When you scattered afar thrice fifty of them with your attacks,
this (deed?) of yours displays your zeal—this little (deed?) of yours
displays your zeal.
## 05
Pulverize the tawny-spiked, ballsy Piśāci entirely, Indra.
Tear down every demon.304 I.134
## 06
Dash the great ones downward, Indra; listen to us. For heaven has blazed  like the earth with fear, o possessor of the stone—as if with fear of
(the sun’s) heat, o possessor of the stone.
As the most tempestuous one, you speed with your tempestuous,
powerful weapons of death,
smashing those who are not men, o unopposable champion, along with  your warriors—o champion, along with your thrice seven warriors.
## 07
For the one who presses soma wins the dwelling place of profusion; for  by pressing, he dashes hatreds down through sacrifice—(dashes) down  hatreds toward the gods.
Just by pressing, he desires to win thousands, as an unobstructable
competitor.
To the presser Indra gives what is ready to hand—he gives the wealth  that is ready to hand.