+++
title = "134"

+++
134 Vāyu
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
6 verses: atyaṣṭi
As in most Vāyu hymns, the overriding focus here is on Vāyu’s journey to the early morning sacrifice and his right to drink first of the soma. The setting of the hymn  at dawn is conveyed by verses 3–4, and the priestly gifts that are distributed at this  morning ritual are alluded to in verses 1–3.
## 1
Let the speedy ones, hastening, convey you here to the pleasurable  offering, o Vāyu, to drink first—to drink first of the soma.
Let Liberality stand upright following your intention, recognizing it. On a chariot with a team drive here for giving—o Vāyu, for the giving of  bounty.
## 2
Let the invigorating drops invigorate you, Vāyu, as they are being  prepared by us, well-prepared, heaven-bound—being prepared with  cows [=milk], heaven-bound.
When his help, being prepared in order to succeed, follows his skill,
our teams, our poetic thoughts are directed toward a single goal, toward  giving—our poetic thoughts call upon him [=Vāyu] (for giving).
## 3
Vāyu yokes his chestnut pair, Vāyu his ruddy pair, Vāyu the two nimble  ones to the chariot, to the chariot-pole to pull—the best pullers to the  chariot-pole to pull.
Awaken Plenitude, as a lover awakens her who sleeps.
Reveal the two world-halves; make the dawns shine—for fame make the  dawns shine. 4. For you do the gleaming dawns stretch their auspicious garments in  the distance, into the houses at the rays (of the sun)—their brilliant  (garments) at the new rays.
For you will the milk-cow, milking her juice, milk out all good things. You begat the Maruts from the belly—from the belly of heaven.
## 5
For you do the glittering, gleaming, rapid, strong ones [=soma drinks /  horses] set themselves aquiver at the revels—(like waves) of the waters  they set themselves aquiver.
You does the stealthy (hunter), as he wearies, reverently invoke for good  fortune in his swooping pursuit.
You drink before every creature by statute—you drink because of your  lordship by statute.
## 6
You, Vāyu, with no one ahead, have first right to the drinking of these  soma drinks of ours—you have the right to the drinking of these
pressings.
And of the clans with their vying oblations who have twisted (you
toward them)—
all their milk-cows have milked out the milk-mixture for you—have  milked out the ghee and the milk-mixture.