+++
title = "135"

+++
135 Vāyu (1–3, 9), Indra and Vāyu (4–8)
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
9 verses: atyaṣṭi, except aṣṭi 7–8, arranged in tr̥cas
The second of Paruchepa’s Vāyu hymns is longer than the first, and presumably  originally consisted of three hymns, corresponding to the tr̥ca divisions. For most  of its length it is preoccupied with the usual themes of Vāyu hymns: Vāyu’s journey  to the sacrifice with his many teams and his right to the first drink of soma at the  Morning Pressing. The first tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) is an invitation to Vāyu alone; the second  (vss. 4–6), thematically and verbally parallel to the first, is addressed to Vāyu and  Indra, who share the second soma oblation at the Morning Pressing.
The last tr̥ca (vss. 7–9) is less straightforward. The first of its verses (7) seems to  describes an ongoing sacrifice to which Vāyu and Indra are traveling, a journey con tinued in the first part of verse 8. And the fortunate results of the successful sacri fice are described at the end of verse 8, the thriving of stock and agriculture. But in  between is the mention of a mysterious fig tree. The final verse (9) is even more mys terious, with its unidentified oxen of paradoxical movement and habits. Since the  vocabulary is reminiscent of the Marut lexicon, the oxen may be the Maruts, and  the association of Vāyu (Wind) with the thunderstorm may be depicted. The pas sage also reminds us of the mysterious oxen in I.105.10, which may be astronomical

phenomena. And, of course, in a hymn focused on the soma sacrifice, any unidenti fied referent may be the soma drinks.
## 1
The ritual grass is strewn. Drive up to us, to pursue it, with a thousandfold  team, o teamster—with hundredfold (teams), o teamster—
for the gods have conceded to you, the god, to drink first.
The pressed, honeyed (soma drinks) have been set forth for you—have  been set forth for your exhilaration and for your resolve.
## 2
For you has this soma been purified all around by the stones; clothing  himself in coveted (garments) he rushes around the cask—clothing
himself in gleaming (garments) he rushes.
For you is this portion poured among the Āyus, is the soma poured  among the gods.
Travel, Vāyu; drive to our teams [=poetic thoughts], seeking us—drive at  your pleasure, seeking us.
## 3
With your hundredfold teams drive here to our ceremony, with
thousandfold ones to pursue it—o Vāyu, to pursue our oblations.
Yours is this portion at its proper time, accompanying the reins [=rays]  when the sun (rises).
Being carried, they have been guided by the Adhvaryus—o Vāyu, the  gleaming (soma drinks) have been guided.
## 4
The chariot with its team will convey you two here for aid, to pursue the  well-placed pleasurable offerings—o Vāyu, to pursue the oblations.
Drink of the honey of the stalk, for the first drinking was established for  you two.
O Vāyu, you two come here with shimmering bounty—and Indra, you  two come here with bounty.
## 5
Our thoughts should turn you two hither to our ceremonies; they  keep grooming this drop, the prizewinner—(the drop) swift like a
prizewinning steed.
Drink of these (soma drinks), seeking us; come here to us with help. O Indra and Vāyu, (drink) of them, pressed by stones, you two—(drink)  to exhilaration, you two prize-givers.
## 6
These soma drinks were pressed here in the waters for you two. Being  carried, they have been guided by the Adhvaryus—o Vāyu, the
gleaming (soma drinks) have been guided.
They have surged toward you two, swift across the filter,
seeking you two beyond the sheep’s fleece—the soma drinks beyond the  sheep’s (fleece).
## 7
O Vāyu, drive beyond sleeper after sleeper. Where the pressing stone  speaks, you two go there—(you) and Indra, go to that house.
Liberality has been sighted; the ghee is flowing. With a full team you two  drive to the ceremony—(you) and Indra drive to the ceremony. 8. Just now you two travel to the poured offering of honey. The victorious  ones [=soma drinks? Maruts?] that approach the fig tree—let these be  victorious for us.
All at once the cows give birth and the grain ripens; the milk-cows do  not give out for you, o Vāyu—the milk-cows do not give up.
## 9
Here, o Vāyu, are those oxen of yours [=soma drinks? Maruts?],
arm-strong, which fly in the river—the oxen that are greatly arrogant— that are not swift though on dry land, yet are nimble in the mountains  though their home is not there,
like the reins [=rays] of the sun difficult to hold back—difficult for the  hands to hold back.