+++
title = "136"

+++
136 Mitra and Varuṇa
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
7 verses: atyaṣṭi, except triṣṭubh 7
Though the paired divinities Mitra and Varuṇa dominate this hymn, they have  plenty of Ādityan company: Aryaman in verses 2, 3, 5, 6; Bhaga in verses 2 and  6; their mother Aditi in verse 3. And as the hymn nears its conclusion there are  non-Ādityan gods as well: Indra and Agni in verses 6–7, the Maruts in verse 7. The  hymn is defined by a ring formed by verses 1 and 6 (vs. 7 is in a different meter  and extra-hymnic), with matches of key words in both verses: “lofty,” “reverence,”  “compassionate,” and “approach with praise.”
Unlike many Mitra and Varuṇa hymns, the focus here is not on their ethical role,  but on their status as receivers of sacrificial offerings. The rising sun in verse 2 (see  also vs. 3) suggests the Morning Pressing, where Mitra and Varuṇa are among the  dual divinities who receive a joint cup of soma. The position of the hymn, imme
diately following two hymns to Vāyu, the first recipient of soma at the Morning  Pressing, supports this view.
## 1
Present preeminent, lofty reverence to the two attentive ones; present  an oblation, a thought to the two compassionate ones—the sweetest  (oblation) to the two compassionate ones.
They are the two sovereign kings, whose potion is ghee, approached with  praise at every sacrifice.
And so the dominion of these two is not to be challenged from
anywhere—their divinity is never to be challenged.
## 2
The way has appeared—a wider one for the wide (light); its path has  been firmly guided by the reins of truth—its eye by the reins of Bhaga. Heaven-dominating is the seat of Mitra and of Aryaman and Varuṇa. And so they two assume lofty vigor, worthy of hymns—lofty vigor to be  approached with praise.

## 3
Light-filled, sunlit Aditi who upholds the communities do the two  accompany every day—being wakeful every day.
Light-filled dominion do they acquire—the two Ādityas, lords of the drop. Of these two Mitra (is the one who by nature) sets the peoples in order,  but Varuṇa (does as well)—(also) Aryaman sets the peoples in order. 4. Let the one here, this soma, be most wealful for Mitra and Varuṇa, the  one who gives shares in the drinking places—the god who gives shares  to the gods.
Him should the gods enjoy, all of them today in joint enjoyment.
O kings, you shall do just as we beg—you truthful ones, as we beg.
## 5
The person who has done honor to Mitra and Varuṇa, that unassailable  one do you two protect all around from difficult straits—the pious
mortal from difficult straits.
Him Aryaman guards, him who aims straight following his commandment, him who with hymns tends to the commandment of these two—with  praises tends to their commandment.
## 6
Reverence I proclaim to lofty heaven, to the two world-halves, to Mitra  and to Varuṇa who gives rewards—to the very compassionate one
who gives rewards.
Approach Indra and Agni, heaven-dominating Aryaman and Bhaga with  praise.
Living for a long time may we be accompanied by progeny—may we be  accompanied by the aid of Soma.
## 7
With the aid of the gods, with Indra on our side along with the Maruts,  might we consider ourselves self-glorious.
Agni, Mitra, Varuṇa will extend shelter; may we attain it—we and the  bounteous ones.