+++
title = "137"

+++
137 Mitra and Varuṇa
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
3 verses: atiśakvarī
Short and relatively simple, this hymn continues the ritual focus of the previous  hymn to Mitra and Varuṇa. The pressed soma in its various forms, the gods’ jour ney to our sacrifice, and the time, sunrise, are its only topics. For some reason,  the hymn has attracted more than its share of scorn: Renou (EVP VII: 33) calls it  “assez banale et facile,” and Gonda (1975: 212) classifies it among hymns that are  “banal, mediocre or devoid of a deeper meaning.” Perhaps the lack of the high  moral tone found in most Mitra and Varuṇa hymns aggrieved these commentators,  but taken on its own terms, with its rollicking rhythm and restricted phraseology, it  makes a pleasant impression. 1. We have pressed—you two, drive hither—with the stones; these
exhilarating ones here are mixed with cows [=milk]—these
exhilarating soma drinks.
You two kings, touching heaven, come here right to us, into our midst. These with their milk mixture are for you two, Mitra and Varuṇa—the  clear soma drinks and those with their milk mixture.
## 2
Here—you two, drive hither—are the drops, the soma drinks mixed with  curds—the pressings mixed with curds.
And at the waking of the dawn, simultaneous with the rays of the sun, it is pressed for you two, Mitra and Varuṇa, for drinking—the pleasing  one (pressed) for truth and for drinking.
## 3
This plant, like a dawn cow, do they milk for you two with the stones— the soma they milk with the stones.
Come here right to us, into our midst, nearby, to drink the soma.
Here it is, pressed by men for you two, Mitra and Varuṇa—the soma  pressed for drinking.