+++
title = "138"

+++
138
Pūsaṇ
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
4 verses: atyaṣṭi
This hymn lacks the colloquial tone and idiomatic style of most Pūṣan hymns.  Instead, as befits the elaborate meter, this is high-register praise, with a somewhat  bombastic and overblown edge and contorted syntax.
The poet is especially concerned to establish “fellowship” (sakhyá, vss. 2–4) with  the god—fellowship that will bring wealth and aid along with it.
## 01
Ever further is (the greatness) of powerfully born Pūṣan proclaimed: the  greatness of him, the powerful, does not flag—the praise of him does  not flag.
Seeking his favor, I chant to him, whose help is nearby, who is
refreshment itself,
who, the bounteous, has bound to himself the mind of everyone—the  bounteous god has bound it to himself.
## 02
So, Pūṣan, with praises I put you forward, like a nimble (horse) on its  course, so that you will get the negligent ones on the move—like a
camel you will carry (us) beyond the negligent ones.
When I, a mortal, call upon you, a god, who are refreshment itself, for  fellowship—
make our songs brilliant—make them brilliant when prizes (are at stake).

## 03
Pūṣan, since in fellowship with you your admirers who have just this  purpose have benefitted by your aid—have benefitted with such a
purpose (as ours)—
in accordance with this we implore you for a newer team of wealth.
O you who are not wrathful, who are widely proclaimed, be a
contender—whenever a prize (is at stake), be a contender.
## 04
Will you come near to us, for the winning of this (“team” of wealth), you  who have goats for horses, who are not wrathful but bestowing—you  who have goats for horses, (for the benefit) of those who seek fame?
We would turn you hither with praises that achieve their goal,
wondrous one,
for I do not disdain you, glowing Pūṣan, nor do I spurn your fellowship.