+++
title = "139"

+++
139
All Gods
Paruchepa Daivodāsi
11 verses: atyaṣṭi, except br̥hatī 5, triṣṭubh 11
This complex hymn presents many interpretational difficulties, though it roughly  follows the model of the Praügaśastra, a recitation at the Morning Pressing found  also in R̥gveda I.2–3, I.23, and II.41. The order of divinities in the Praügaśastra  is Vāyu, Indra and Vāyu, Mitra and Varuṇa, the Aśvins, Indra, the All Gods, and  Sarasvatī; this hymn follows this order through verse 6:  Indra and Vāyu (vs. 1),  Mitra and Varuṇa (vs. 2), the Aśvins (vss. 3–5), Indra (vs. 6), but ends with Agni (vs.  7), the Maruts (vs. 8), Indra and Agni (vs. 9), and Br̥haspati (vs. 10), with verse 11  in a different meter and addressed to all the gods collectively.
The ritual situation is established at the very beginning, with the quotation  of a familiar sacrificial formula ástu śrauṣaṭ, found all over middle Vedic ritual  texts. This ritual-internal quotation is matched, in ring-compositional style, by the  quotation of a praiṣa, or ritual command to the Hotar, in verse 10, the last real  verse of the hymn. It is also clear that the time is early morning (see esp. vs. 4,  though there are also more oblique indications in the first two verses), and that the  sound of the pressing stones is calling the gods to the sacrifice (see vs. 3, and its  ring-compositional echo in vs. 10).
As so often, the difficulties in the hymn may stem in part from the fact that the  poet is reflecting on his poetic lineage and calling. The obscure reference to the  “umbilical tie” or “navel” in verse 1 is made somewhat clearer by verse 9, in which  the poet asserts that his “umbilical ties” are with a series of earlier seers and sacri
ficers, including Manu—whose own ties are to the gods. He thus provides himself  with a poetic pedigree and in following their track, or model, produces his own  hymns that have some chance of reaching the gods, since his predecessors’ did.  In verse 1 he mentions only one such predecessor: Vivasvant (lit., “possessing the shining forth”), who in later Vedic and even in late R̥gveda (Vālakh., VIII.52.1) is  considered the father of Manu and who is often associated, as a proto-priest, with  the pressing of soma. (His Avestan correspondent Vīvaŋuuaṇt is the first man who  pressed haoma [Y 9.4].) So in verse 1 our poet proclaims that he is beginning a new  hymn, by newly attaching himself to a legendary seer-sacrificer. But there is another  likely meaning there as well: Vivasvant is identified as the sun in later Vedic, and  quite possibly in some passages in the R̥gveda as well, and therefore the poet may  also be making reference to the time of “shining forth,” namely early morning.
The double reference to ritual poetry and to dawn continues in verse 2. Mitra  and Varuṇa take “untruth away from truth,” thus enabling the poet and his peers  to see the gods’ golden throne. On the one hand, the untruth can be darkness, and  the removal of this darkness reveals the sun. On the other hand, the priests see this  vision with their insights and their mind, and though they also see with their eyes,  these are the “eyes of soma,” presumably the vision arising from drinking the soma.  So on another level of interpretation what they see is a poetic vision.
The three Aśvins verses (3–5) are fairly clear descriptions of the journey of those  gods to the dawn sacrifice, and the invitation to Indra (vs. 6) is also straightforward,  as is the praise of the Maruts (vs. 8). This clarity is unfortunately obscured in verse  7, whose translation is only provisional, though the direct speech of Agni is quite  intriguing. He seems to be chiding the gods for having given the Aṅgirases a cow  they (or in most interpretations, Aryaman and unspecified others) have milked out.  From the mythological point of view, the cow should represent the cows imprisoned  in the Vala cave that the Aṅgirases helped to liberate. In a ritual context this could  be the cow that provides the milk to mix with soma; in a poetic context the poetic  insight or vision that provided the Aṅgirases with songs. The role of Aryaman here  is entirely unclear.
As noted above, in verse 9 the poet situates himself in the poetic and sacrificial  tradition, and in verse 10, another obscure verse (Geldner calls it “unintelligible”  [unverständlich]), the ritual and poetic ring is closed.
## 1
(Cry) “Let it be; he will hear.” I place Agni in front through my insight.  Now we choose that heavenly troop—we choose Indra and Vāyu.
Since our (umbilical tie) has been effectively bound anew to the umbilical  tie in Vivasvant’s (sphere),
then let our thoughts go forth—our thoughts (going) as if to the gods. 2. Since, Mitra and Varuṇa, you took untruth away from truth by your own  fervor—by your own fervor of skill—
just in this way among the seats we saw the golden (throne) of you two, just with our insights and with our mind, with our own eyes—with our  own eyes of soma.
## 3
O Aśvins, the Āyus, seeking the gods, with their praise songs are causing  you two to hear, as if making the signal-call (of the pressing stone)
heard—the Āyus (are causing) you two (to hear) about the oblations.

In you two are all splendors and nourishments, o you who grant all  possessions.
The wheel-rims on your golden one spray (honey)—on your golden  chariot, wondrous ones.
## 4
It has appeared, wondrous ones: you two unclose the firmament;  your chariot-horses are yoked at the rituals of daybreak—the
unbesmirched ones at the rituals of daybreak.
Your station is on your chariot box, on your golden chariot,
wondrous ones—
(you two) going as if on a path, directing (the chariot) through the  dusky realm—directing (it) straightway through the dusky realm. 5. With your powers, you two whose goods are powers, favor us by day  and by night.
Let your giving never give out—let your giving never give out from us. 6. O bull Indra—these pressed drops, the drink of a bull, pressed by the  stones, are bursting out—for you are the pressed (drops) bursting  out.
Let them invigorate you to giving, to great, glittering generosity. Being praised with songs, you whose vehicle is songs, come here—very  compassionate to us, come here.
## 7
Listen to us, Agni: Reverently invoked, you will say to the gods worthy  of the sacrifice—to the kings worthy of the sacrifice:
“Since, gods, you have given this milk-cow to the Aṅgirases,
they milk her dry. Aryaman is in partnership with the performer  [=Agni/priest]—he knows her (too), in partnership with me
[=Agni].”
## 8
Let these manly deeds of yours not get old because of us, and let the  brilliant deeds not age—let them not age before us.
What glittering, immortal (deed) of yours shall sound anew in every  generation,
o Maruts, fix that firm in us as well as (brilliance) difficult to surpass— and what is difficult to surpass.
## 9
Dadhyañc, the earlier Aṅgiras, Priyamedha, Kaṇva, Atri, and Manu  know my birth—these earlier ones and Manu know mine.
Their attachment is to the gods; our umbilical ties are to them
[=ancient seers].
(Following) along their track I bend (them) here greatly with a song—I  bend Indra and Agni here with a song.
## 10
(Crying) “The Hotar-priest shall sacrifice,” he wins what is choice of the  wooden (cup) [=soma]. Br̥haspati the seeker sacrifices with the bulls  [=soma drinks?]—with the bulls with their many choice gifts.
By ourselves we have grasped the signal-call of the pressing-stone  signaling its intentions afar. The very resolute one upheld the fittings [?]—the very resolute one
(upheld) the many seats.
## 11
O gods, the eleven of you who are in heaven, the eleven who are on  the earth,
the eleven who dwell in the waters in their greatness—(all) of you, gods,  take pleasure in this sacrifice here.
Hymns I.140–164 are attributed to Dīrghatamas, the son of Ucatha, who calls himself  Māmateya, the son of Mamatā, in I.147.3, 152.6, and 158.6. The name Dīrghatamas  means the one “of long darkness.” The Br̥haddevatā IV.14–15 (Macdonell) explains  that he received this name because he was born blind, and the poet himself refers to  his blindness in I.147.3. According to the Br̥haddevatā his sight was later restored  by the gods. His name is also an appropriate reflection of the difficulty of many of  his hymns. His affection for word play, symbolic language, syntactic anomaly, and  ambiguous reference makes his hymns distinctive, original, and often highly elusive.  He is one of the most challenging, but at the same time one of the most interesting  poets of the R̥gveda.
His hymns also present an unusual sequence of divinities. The list begins con ventionally enough with I.140–150, which are dedicated to Agni, but the ordinar ily expected series to Indra is missing. Instead 151–153 are to Mitra and Varuṇa,  154–156 to Viṣṇu or to Viṣṇu and Indra, 157–158 to the Aśvins, 159–160 to Heaven  and Earth, and 161 to the R̥bhus. Then 162 and 163 are praises of the sacrificial  horse, and 164, the climax of the collection, is a very long and very puzzling riddle  hymn, which explores the mysteries of several Vedic rites. The second Aśvin hymn,  I.158, is of particular interest because it is ostensibly an autobiographical hymn,  composed when the poet was an old man and on the verge of being pushed aside.  Partly on the basis of this hymn Br̥haddevatā IV.21–25 gives a second legend that  his servants tried to drown Dīrghatamas. But he floated downstream and was res cued in Aṅga where he married and then gave birth to the poet Kakṣīvant.