+++
title = "140"

+++
140
Agni
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
13 verses: jagatī, except jagatī or triṣṭubh 10, triṣṭubh 12–13
This first hymn in the Dīrghatamas cycle is bristling with difficulties in detail,  although it remains focused on its central topic, the kindling and spread of the fire.  The first two verses establish the ritual scene, with the ritual fire sitting on (or at) the  vedi, the “altar” that is really a dug-out depression in the ground on the axis between  the eastern and western ritual fires, and with the poet’s presentation of his “thought”  (a praise hymn) as clothing for the ritual fire. But natural fire, which spreads through  the woods and devours them, is also referred to, especially in verse 2.314 I.140
The chronological description of the kindling and growth of fire begins in verse  3 with a vivid depiction of the kindling sticks and the first faint stirrings of smoke  and fire. The growing power of the fire and the swiftness of the spread of its flames,  imagined as horses in verse 4, occupy the next verses (4–10). Fire’s burning of the  plants that stoke it is given an erotic cast in verses 6–8, aided by the fact that several  words for “plant” are feminine in gender. Their very destruction by fire is also envi
sioned as a transformation into a better and more vigorous form (see esp. vss. 7cd–8). The prayers for aid and material goods begin in verse 10, on behalf not only  of a generic “us” but especially mentioning our patrons (vss. 10, 12) and others of  our circle (vs. 12). One striking request is for a metaphorical boat to deliver us to  the far shore of difficulty (vs. 12); the boat is described in some detail, including its  possession of a foot or feet. We wonder if this refers to some sort of primitive keel  or centerboard, which would probably be helpful to ensure that the boat make it  across the current of a swift-flowing river. Unfortunately our knowledge of ancient  Indian naval architecture is not sufficient to decide.
## 01
To him sitting on the altar, the very bright one whose domain is dear—to  Agni bear forth his womb like a wellspring (of nourishment).
As if with a garment, clothe the blazing one with a thought—the
smiter of darkness whose chariot is of light, whose color is blazing  bright.
## 02
Having two births, he stretches toward the threefold food. In a year what  was eaten (by him) has grown again.
With the mouth and the tongue of one (of his forms) he is a
thoroughbred bull; with the other he drags down the trees (like) an
elephant.
## 03
Plunging into the black, jerking back and forth, both his mothers  [=kindling sticks], sharing the same abode, move athwart each other  toward their child—
to him, producing smoke, his tongues stretching forward, stirring
thirstily, quivering, worthy to be attended upon, the increaser of his  father [=priest].
## 04
For Manu and the offspring of Manu to come they are harnessed—the  speedy (horses) seeking to break free, running fast, drawing black furrows, quick, racing fast, breaking ranks, sped by the wind, swift.
## 05
After that do these (flames) of his, producing smoke, rise at will, making  and remaking a black void and a great form,
while he goes forth, stroking the great (earth) as his streambed, snorting,  thundering, constantly roaring.
## 06
He who, like a busy attendant, keeps bending over the brown (females  [=plants])—he goes toward (them) like a bull to his wives, constantly  bellowing. And, showing his power, he beautifies their [?] bodies. Like a fearsome  (bull), the one difficult to grasp keeps shaking his horns.
## 07
He masses together those spread asunder and those close-packed  [=plants]. Recognizing the (females) just as they recognize him, he
lies in his own (place).
They grow again; they approach divinity. They make for themselves a  form different from their parents, (though) in company with them.
## 08
For the long-haired spinsters embrace him; despite having died, they  stand erect (to go) forth once again for Āyu [=Agni?].
Removing their old age, he goes constantly roaring, generating a
further living life-force (for them?), which cannot be laid low.
## 09
Licking all around his mother’s [=earth’s] over-garment, he drives  across the expanse with his powerfully spirited warriors,
producing vigor for the footed, while licking and licking always. The  white (track of ash) follows along his tracks.
## 10
Shine upon our bounteous (patrons), o Agni. Then as the snorting bull,  the master of the household,
*having set loose the females who have young [=flames], you have
shone, ever flickering and enveloping like armor in battles.
## 11
Let this well-formed (thought) be dearer to you than one poorly  formed, o Agni, and dearer to you even than your own dear thought. With what of your body shines blazing bright you will win treasure  for us.
## 12
For our chariot and for our house, o Agni, give us a boat with built-in  oars and a foot [=keel? rudder?],
which will carry our heroes and our bounteous (patrons) and our
peoples to the further shore and which (will be) our shelter.
## 13
O Agni, may you welcome just our recitation, (as may) heaven and  earth, and the rivers, which sing their own praises
as they go toward an abundance of cattle and of grain through the
long days. The ruddy (dawns/cattle?) will choose refreshment as their  boon (for us?).