+++
title = "141"

+++
141 Agni
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
13 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 12–13
Like the last hymn, this one is full of puzzles, and also like the last, it focuses  especially on the birth and growth of the fire. The hymn begins and ends with the  installation of the ritual fire (root dhā: 1ab, 13ab), providing a faint ring struc ture; the second mention of its installation, with the adverb pratarám “further

forward,” suggests that it refers to the installation of the new Āhavanīya fire to the  east, a fire removed from the old Āhavanīya at the beginning of classical śrauta  rituals.
The first few verses cryptically describe the various forms of fire (vs. 2) and their  production (vss. 3–4). The means of production are at first mythical or metaphori cal, but in the second half of verse 4 the more familiar ritual churning of the fire is  described, followed by his growth and rapid and unpredictable movement (vss. 5–8;  see also vs. 1c). This type of erratic movement is iconically mirrored with extraor dinary skill by our poet Dīrghatamas, who models it with abrupt changes of tense  and a deliberate disregard for the usual matching of syntax and verse structure. In  our reading there are enjambments across verses in 3–4, 4–5, and 6–7, with sentence  breaks in verse-interior in 4, 5, 6—a very rare conjunction of syntactic anomalies.  The vertiginous effect of piling clause upon clause and image upon image is espe cially marked in the sequence beginning with 6b and lasting through 7—giving us  a faint whiff of the Gerard Manley Hopkins of “The Windhover,” which models a  bird’s flight with verbal means.
The rest of the hymn is somewhat more conventional, beginning with verse 9,  where Agni is addressed for the first time in the 2nd person. Until then not only is  the hymn couched entirely in the 3rd person, but the word agní is entirely absent,  either as the name of the god or as a designation of the natural substance fire.  Verses 9–10 describe Agni’s contributions to the welfare of both men and gods,  while verses 12–13 express hopes for further help and summarize the hymn itself.  But even here, in verse 11 the poet plots a meandering syntactic and conceptual  course starting from the “good fortune” (bhága) desired to be acquired in 10d and  amplified in the first half of verse 11 to a pun on the god’s name Bhaga, with a rich  set of images, a clashing set of objects to the verb “hold fast,” and a covert syntactic  transformation of that very verb at the end of the verse.
All in all, a tour de force of virtuosity.
## 1
Yes, indeed! It is just so: the luster of the god, lovely to see, has been  installed for wonder, after he was born of strength.
When he zigzags up to it, our thought goes straight to success. Flowing  together, the streams of truth have led (him).
## 2
Abounding in food, he lies in his own (place) as the wondrous form  of nourishment; his second (wondrous form lies) here among the
mothers, sevenfold kindly.
His third (wondrous form, that) of the bull to be milked, have the young  women begotten—him of tenfold forethought.
## 3
When the patrons, showing mastery through their power, bring him forth  from the depth, from the form of a buffalo,
when Mātariśvan churns him who, as from olden days, is in hiding in the  mixing vessel of the honey, 4. When he is led forth from his highest father, he mounts the
nourishment-bringing plants in the houses,
when the two [=kindling sticks] set his birth in motion. Just after that  the youngest one became blazing with heat;
## 5
Just after that he entered into his mothers, within whom the blazing one  (stayed) without suffering harm. He grew widely in all directions,
when he mounted the previous ones [=plants] who spurred (him) on  from of old. He races down into the newer, later ones.
## 6
Just after that they choose (him as) their Hotar at the rituals of  daybreak. As if gorging themselves on good fortune, they steer
straight (to him),
since he, much praised, with resolve and with might always pursues the  gods and the laud (of) mortals in order to suckle them,
## 7
When he, worthy of the sacrifice, has spread out, driven by the
wind, wriggling through the old (plants?) like a twisting (snake),
unconfined
in his flight—(the flight) of this burning one of black plumage and
blazing birth, whose road spreads through the airy realm.
## 8
Like a driving-chariot made by dexterous (men), he speeds toward  heaven with ruddy limbs.
After that these black (plumes) of his, the patrons of the burning one,  retreat from his turbulent flaring, as (from that) of a champion, like  birds (from that) *of the sun.
## 9
By means of you, o Agni, have those rich in drops [/gifts] become  exultant—Varuṇa whose commandments are upheld, Mitra, and
Aryaman—
since, following them, you were born extending everywhere by your  resolve, encompassing (everything) like a felly its spokes.
## 10
You, o Agni, impel treasure and the conclave of the gods to the man  who labors and presses soma, o youngest one.
Might we now acquire [/install] you anew, o young (son) of strength,  like good fortune [/Bhaga] at the decisive moment, o you who have
great treasure.
## 11
For us you will engorge good fortune [/Bhaga] like household wealth  meant for a good purpose, like enduring skill,
([good fortune/] Bhaga) who will hold fast both races [=gods and men],  like reins, (and also) the laud of gods, and (who himself), of good
resolve, (is held fast) in truth.
## 12
And the bright-flashing, delighting Hotar with his lively horses and  gleaming chariot will hear us.
Without error Agni will lead us with the best leading to desirable safe  passage, to a better state.

## 13
Agni has been praised with our energetic chants [/with his ardent  flames], while being installed further forward for sovereign rule.
Both those who are our bounteous (patrons) and we (ourselves) would  extend outward, as the sun (extends) beyond the mist.