+++
title = "142"

+++
142
Āprī (1–12), Indra (13)
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
13 verses: anuṣṭubh
Unlike Dīrghatamas’s dense and dexterous Agni hymns among which this hymn is  embedded, this Āprī hymn not only follows the set pattern of that genre, but, using  the standard Āprī diction and tropes (for which see the introduction to I.13, as well  as the general introduction, pp. 33, 63), does so without any perceptible tricks or  poetic exuberance. Its only deviation from the norm is having thirteen verses rather  than the usual eleven or twelve, by including both Tanūnapāt (vs. 2) and Narāśaṃsa  (vs. 3) and by having two svāhā verses at the end (12–13). Dīrghatamas (if he is  indeed the poet) seems to be treading water here.
## 1
Kindled, o Agni, convey the gods here today to the man with offering  spoon extended.
Stretch the ancient thread for the pious man who has pressed soma.
## 2
O Tanūnapāt, measure out the ghee-filled, honey-filled
sacrifice of an inspired priest like me, of the pious man who labors.
## 3
Gleaming, pure, and unerring, Narāśaṃsa mixes the sacrifice with  honey
three times a day—the god devoted to the sacrifice among the gods.
## 4
When solemnly invoked, o Agni, convey Indra here, brilliant and dear, for this thought of mine is twisting its way toward you, o you who have  good tongues.
## 5
They whose offering spoons are extended are strewing the ritual grass at  the sacrifice with its good ceremonies;
I twist (the grass), which provides the broadest expanse to the gods and  extensive shelter to Indra.
## 6
Let them gape open—the great ones who increase through truth—for the  gods to come forth:
the purifying, much-desired, inexhaustible Divine Doors.
## 7
Being happy, let well-ornamented Night and Dawn,
the two youthfully exuberant mothers of truth, sit close together on the  ritual grass.
## 8
Let the two Divine Hotars, poets possessing gladdening tongues and  offering welcome,
perform this sacrifice for us today, (so it) reaches its goal and touches  heaven. 9. Let gleaming Hotrā Bhāratī [/the Oblation of the Bharatas], fitted in her  place among the gods, among the Maruts,
(also) Iḷā and great Sarasvatī, (all) worthy of the sacrifice, sit on the  ritual grass.
## 10
Let Tvaṣṭar, inclined toward us, for the sake of our thriving and wealth,  unbind in our navel
that unerring flow of semen as an abundant choice thing, abundant in  itself.
## 11
Releasing (the sacrificial victim) to the gods, sacrifice to the gods by  yourself, o Lord of the Forest.
Agni sweetens the oblations, the wise god among the gods.
## 12
To Vāyu, accompanied by Pūṣan and the Maruts, by all the gods, and to Indra, pulsing with excitement from the songs, make oblation  with the svāhā-cry.
## 13
Come here right up to the oblations made with the svāhā-cry, to pursue  them.
Indra, come! Hear our summons! You do they summon at the
ceremony.