+++
title = "143"

+++
143 Agni
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
8 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 8
The beginning and end of this hymn focus on the ritual fire and our relationship  to it. The poet begins (vs. 1) by presenting to Agni what he has produced, char acterized as an evolving product: an “insight...the thinking of my speech.” The  poet’s concern with his insight returns toward the end (vss. 6–7), where it is hoped  that Agni will pursue our speech and promote our insights. In between the hymn  touches on many of the standard Agni tropes: for example, the beauty and radiance  of the newly kindled fire (vss. 2–3) and its destructive power (vs. 5). It ends (vs. 8) by  begging for Agni’s protection.
## 1
I present a stronger, newer insight to Agni, the thinking of my speech to  the son of strength,
the Child of the Waters, who, together with the good ones [/Vasus], has  sat down upon the earth as our dear Hotar at his season.
## 2
As he was being born in the highest distant heaven, Agni became  manifest to Mātariśvan.
By the resolve and the might of him as he was kindled, his blaze
illuminated heaven and earth.
## 3
His are the dazzling, his the unaging radiant beams—he possessing a  lovely appearance, a lovely face, a lovely flash.

The (beams) of Agni, with the energy of their radiance, are churning like  rivers of the night, across (the nights), unsleeping, unaging.
## 4
The all-possessor whom the Bhr̥gus have aroused upon the navel of the  earth, of the living world, in his greatness—
Agni—urge him on with songs here in his own home, him who alone  rules like Varuṇa over what is good.
## 5
Who is not to be hindered, like the roar of the Maruts, like an army  unleashed, like a heavenly missile,
with his sharp fangs Agni eats; he devours. Like a fighter his rivals, he  bears down on the trees.
## 6
Surely Agni will be the pursuer of our speech? Surely the good one with  the good ones [/Vasus] will grant our desire?
Surely as a goad he would push our insights to win? I sing to him who  has a blazing face with this insight.
## 7
The one who has kindled him for you all stretches toward ghee-faced  Agni, sitting on the chariot-pole of truth, as if toward Mitra
[/an ally].
A foal [?] while being kindled, shining at the rites, he will raise up our  insight, whose color is blazing bright.
## 8
Staying close, o Agni, protect us with your kindly, able protectors that  stay close.
With your undeceivable, undistracted, unwinking (protectors), o object  of our quest, protect our kindred all around.