+++
title = "144"

+++
144
Agni
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
7 verses: jagatī
As in other of Dīrghatamas’s Agni hymns, the kindling of the ritual fire provides  the major theme of this hymn. In particular, the middle verses 3–5 concern the pro duction of fire by the two churning sticks and the growing strength of that fire. The  hymn begins, however, with the already fully matured fire, identified as the Hotar,  going about his ritual duties (vss. 1–2). The verse immediately after the kindling  verses (vs. 6) opens the ritual frame: Agni there is the ruler of the realms of heaven  and earth, and he even attracts those divine figures (probably Heaven and Earth,  though some have suggested Night and Dawn) from their cosmic positions to take  their place on the ritual ground. The final verse (7) is a typical hymn-ending verse,  commending the hymn just recited to Agni’s enjoyment.
## 1
The Hotar goes forth to his duty with his craft, setting aloft our insight,  which possesses blazing ornaments. He strides toward the ladles turning in respectful circumambulation,  which first kiss his domain.
## 2
Those who produce the milk of truth [=streams of melted butter?] have  bellowed to him—those surrounded on every side in the womb of the  god, in his seat.
When, borne away, he dwelt in the lap of the waters, then he suckled  upon his own powers by which he speeds.
## 3
The two of the same vigor [=fire-churning sticks] seek to keep hold of  that marvelous form, constantly crossing each other in turn, toward  the same goal;
after that he is to be invoked like Bhaga. He has been firmly held by us,  as a chariot-driver holds firm the reins of a draft-horse.
## 4
He whom the two of the same vigor serve—that pair in the same womb,  sharing the same dwelling—
the gray youth was born by day, not by night—he who roams unaging  through many generations of the sons of Manu.
## 5
Our insights and our ten fingers urge him on. We mortals invoke the god  for help.
From the high plain he sets the slopes in motion. With his advancing  (flames?) he has established the new (ritual) patterns.
## 6
For in your own person, o Agni, you rule over the heavenly and the  earthly (realm) like a herdsman.
These two lofty, dappled females [=Heaven and Earth? Night and
Dawn?], excelling in splendor, golden, surging, have attained to your  ritual grass.
## 7
O Agni, enjoy and delight in this speech—o gladdening one of
independent power, born of truth, with strong resolve—
you, lovely to see, facing in every direction, who are delightful to the  sight like a peaceful dwelling abounding in food.