+++
title = "145"

+++
145 Agni
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
5 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 5
The hymn begins with the peremptory (2nd pl.) command “Ask him!” In the first  two verses Agni is depicted as the possessor of secret knowledge that we mortals beg  him to impart to us and, in verses 2–3, as the god who is always attentive to the sac rifice whose success he ensures. A sample of his secret knowledge seems to be given  in verse 4, a riddling and, at least for these translators, unsolved depiction of ritual  activity. The final verse forms a ring with verse 1. It begins with a continuation of  the riddling language of verse 4: the “wild beast of the waters” may be a reference to

Agni’s identification with Apām Napāt (“Child of the Waters”), whose roaming in  the woods refers to his burning of firewood. Once installed as the ritual fire in pāda  b, Agni implicitly answers the questions asked of him in verses 1–2 in pāda c: he  explains the ritual patterns to us. In the final pāda he is characterized by the same  vocabulary as in verse 1:  “knowing” (vidvā́n) matching “he knows (veda) of 1a;  “perceiver of truth” ([r̥ta-]cít) matching “the one who perceives” (cikitvā́n) of 1b.
## 1
Ask him: he has come; he knows. As the one who perceives, he is  implored; he is now implored here.
In him are our commands, in him our wishes [/offerings]. He is the lord  of the victory prize and of unbridled power.
## 2
Just him do they ask, but he himself does not ask in turn, since, like a  clever man, with his own mind he has grasped it.
He does not forget the first nor the later word. Undistracted, he is
accompanied by his resolve.
## 3
Just to him go the offering ladles; to him the mares [=streams of ghee?].  He alone will hear all my words.
Enjoining many ritual commands, triumphant, bringing the sacrifice to  success, offering uninterrupted help, (though) a child, he has taken on  his ferocity entirely.
## 4
He proceeds in a reverential approach (to them) when they [=flames?]  have raised themselves up together. Just born, he has crept together
with the conjoined ones.
He touches the swelling one for joy and delight, when the willing females  [=streams of ghee?] go to him standing right there.
## 5
This wild beast of the waters that roams in the woods has been installed  upon the uppermost skin.
He has declared the (ritual) patterns to mortals—the knowing Agni. For  he is the perceiver of truth who is really present (here).