+++
title = "146"

+++
146
Agni
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Dīrghatamas’s usual preoccupation with the birth and growth of the ritual fire.  In verse 1 Agni is seated in the lap of his two parents, in our opinion the fire churning sticks, though they are not explicitly identified and other interpreters see  the two as cosmic entities. (See I.140.3, 141.4, 144.3–4 for other allusions to these  sticks in Dīrghatamas’s Agni hymns.) The fire grows in verse 2 and is tended in  verse 3. Unidentified duals are found in both verses; the ambiguity seems deliber ate, allowing the pair to represent both the churning sticks in the ritual realm and Night and Dawn (or Heaven and Earth) in the cosmic realm, as the diction referring  to the pair becomes closer to that used especially of Night and Dawn elsewhere.  After a somewhat enigmatic verse (4) sketching Agni’s relationship with poets, the  god is depicted as a birth-giver (using a word ordinarily appropriate only to the  female at parturition)—thus bringing his life-cycle full circle, as it were, from birth  to giving birth.
## 1
I will hymn three-headed, seven-reined Agni, who is without deficiency,  seated in the lap of his parents [=fire-churning sticks],
one (stick) that moves and one that stays firm—(Agni,) who has filled all  the luminous realms of heaven.
## 2
The great young bull has grown upon the two (sticks?). Unaging, ever  young, he stands tall.
He sets his feet down upon the back of the broad (earth); his ruddy  (flames) lick the udder.
## 3
Converging upon the same calf, the two well-grounded milk-cows  wander apart on their separate ways,
measuring their roads whose end can never be reached, taking upon  themselves all the intentions of the great one.
## 4
Clever poets guide his step, guarding with their heart, in different ways,  the one exempt from age.
Seeking to win him, they have surveyed the river. He has become
manifest to them as the sun toward men.
## 5
Desirable to be seen, a thoroughbred around the racecourse; greatly to be  invoked for the small one to live,
since in many places he has become the birth-giver to these embryos—  he, the generous one for all to see.