+++
title = "147"

+++
147
Agni
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is a departure from Dīrghatamas’s focus in previous Agni hymns on  the creation and spread of the ritual fire. Though it begins in a ritual situation (vs.  1) and the poet commends his ritual speech to Agni in the first half of verse 2, the  poet then becomes preoccupied with potential hostilities directed against him by  malevolent and dishonest men and how to foil them. He counts upon the protec
tors deployed by Agni (vs. 3), who may well be the flames referred to in verse 1, and  more generally assumes that well-performed worship of Agni will enlist that god in  his protection. Who the hostile mortals are is not made clear, though in a R̥gvedic  ritual context rival sacrificers are the most likely culprits.324 I.148
The insistence on the cheating and duplicity of these rivals and the general  embattled but combative tone of these verses remind us somewhat of similarly con tentious passages in the Old Avestan Gāthās attributed to Zarathustra.
It is also worth noting that this is the first time in the Dīrghatamas cycle that he  refers to himself by name, that is, by his metronymic Māmateya (vs. 3).
## 01
How do the blazing (flames?) of you, of Āyu, panting hard, perform  ritual service with prizes of victory, o Agni,
when, establishing both progeny and posterity, the gods delight in the  melody of truth?
## 02
Take heed of this most munificent speech of mine that has been brought  forward, o youngest one of independent will.
One man reviles but another sings welcome: as an extoller, I extol your  body [/myself], o Agni.
## 03
Agni, your protectors who, watching, guarded blind Māmateya
[=Dīrghatamas] from distress,
those of good (ritual) action has the possessor [/knower] of everything  [=Agni] guarded. Though wishing to damage, the cheats did no
damage at all.
## 04
O Agni, the ungenerous one wishing us ill and full of hostility who  harms us by his duplicity,
let this heavy spell be back at him: he should bring harm upon his own  body by his evil words.
## 05
Or, o strong one, the mortal who with premeditation harms a mortal by  his duplicity,
from him protect your praiser, o you who are praised. Agni, no one
should give us over to distress.