+++
title = "148"

+++
148 Agni
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn shares some of the concern about malicious enemies with the previous  hymn (I.147); see especially verses 2a and 5. However, the situation is more fluid  and the identity of both friends and enemies is unclear, since the subjects of some  crucial actions are not specified and a liberal use of injunctive verb forms blurs the  temporal reference.
The hymn begins (vs. 1) with an apparent reminiscence of the original mythic  theft of fire and its first installation on the ritual ground. The performers of this  installation (1c) are not identified, but seem likely to be the gods. Verse 2 presents  two inimical but unnamed groups: those who cannot damage Agni but presumably  want to (2a) and those who delight in all his actions (2cd). The latter must be the performers of the ritual, probably both the current mortal ones and the gods who  initiated the sacrifice in verse 1, but the enemies in 2a are defined only by their con trast with the others. Verse 3 appears to reprise the action of verse 1, but in present  time as the regular (re-)installation of the ritual fire for the regular, repeated rites  performed by men—given the “leading forward” of 3c, perhaps the removal of the  Āhavanīya fire from the Gārhapatya fire and its deposit in the east of the ritual  ground.
Verse 4 is a thematic intrusion, with a standard description of a wildfire in  nature. Verse 5 returns to the topic of 2a: Agni’s invulnerability even when only  nascent. A notable feature of verse 5 is the mention of the inability of the blind  enemies of Agni to afflict him with the evil eye, given that Dīrghatamas identified  himself as blind in the immediately preceding hymn (I.147.3).
## 1
Since with effort Mātariśvan stole him, the Hotar bringing all goods,  belonging to all the gods,
whom they installed for wonder among the clans of the sons of Manu,  dazzling like the sun, far-radiant,
## 2
Just him, who gives (inspired) thoughts, they cannot damage. Agni is my  armor: he delights in this.
They take pleasure in all the acts of him, the bard who produces the  invitatory praise.
## 3
Whom even now those worthy of the sacrifice have grasped in his very  own seat and installed with lauds,
him they lead forth, grasping him in their quest, hastening like
chariot-horses.
## 4
The wondrous one dissolves many things with his fangs. After that,  far-radiant, he shines in the wood;
after that the wind fans his flame, like an arrow, the shot of a shooter,  through the days.
## 5
Whom neither cheats nor hurtful men hurt with their hurt, though he is  in the womb,
him can the blind, unable to see, not damage by casting an eye on him.  His very own ones who please him have guarded him.