+++
title = "149"

+++
149 Agni
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
5 verses: virāj
The name Agni is not mentioned in this short and enigmatic hymn. Especially in the  first verse and a half its application to Agni is quite uncertain; Geldner suggests that  Soma is referred to there. In our view the poet is certainly keeping the referent open  at the beginning of the hymn, but moves closer and closer to a clear identification

of Agni as the hymn proceeds. This gradual disclosure of the subject of the hymn  replicates the way that the fire is slowly and carefully kindled and then emerges from  its hiding place, flaming up, when it catches. The kindling is cryptically depicted in  verse 2, while the burst of light and energy takes over verse 3. In the final two verses  (4–5) he is identified as Hotar, a standard role for Agni, and he is revealed as fully  grown, powerful, and a partner in the sacrifice with the mortal worshiper. Thus the  hymn reflects Dīrghatamas’s usual preoccupation with the birth of Agni, though it  is treated somewhat differently here.
## 1
The lord of the house hastens toward great riches—the forceful one here  in the footprint of the forceful good thing.
The stones just honor him as he soars near.
## 2
He who is the bull of the two world-halves as of men by his renown,  whose surge is swelled [/drunk] by living beings,
who, though running forward, would still remain fixed in his womb,
## 3
Who has illuminated the low-lying flatland like a stronghold—a steed, a  poet, like a charger bursting forth,
shining like the sun, possessing a hundred selves [=flames?].
## 4
Possessing two births he has surmounted the three luminous realms,  blazing through all the airy spaces—
the best sacrificing Hotar in the seat of the waters.
## 5
Here he is, the Hotar possessing two births, who with desire for fame has  granted all desirable things (to him),
the easily spurred mortal who performs ritual service for him.