+++
title = "151"

+++
151
Mitra and Varuṇa
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
9 verses: jagatī
The second part of this hymn (vss. 6cd through 9) is fairly straightforward, depict ing Mitra and Varuṇa as the focus of the sacrifice and the patrons of the sacrificer.  The first part is a different story—enigmatic in reference and convoluted in expres sion. However, it appears to concern the same topic: Mitra and Varuṇa’s presence at  and participation in the sacrifice. We can therefore think of the hymn as an example  of large-scale “poetic repair,” with the second part rephrasing the first in less con torted expressions. (On poetic repair see Jamison 2006.)
The hymn begins with the birth of Agni, presented both as ritual fire and as  formidable god. The first half of verse 1 places the birth at the sacrifice itself, “amid  the cows and the waters,” in our opinion referring to the two auxiliary substances  necessary for soma preparation, the milk for mixing and the water for rinsing and  diluting. But in the second half of the verse the birth causes cosmic consternation,  with the two worlds set atremble by his size and his “song,” presumably a reference  to the crackling of a blazing fire.
Mitra and Varuṇa make their appearance in verse 2, as sacrificial partners of  a named soma-offerer; they are brought to the ritual ground and urged to aid the  ritual participants. But the theme of birth returns in verse 3.  Contrary to most  interpretations, we consider the birth in question to be Agni’s birth, treated already  in verse 1, not the birth of Mitra and Varuṇa. (The dual pronoun vām in 3a is in  Wackernagel’s Position, and we construe it later in the verse, as often.) As in verse  1, humans assist at the birth of the ritual fire, a birth that has cosmic resonances.  Mitra and Varuṇa also assist, bringing their skill to bear for the sacrifice (here  referred to as “truth” [r̥tá]) and the fire. Their contributions to the sacrifice are also  treated in verse 4; the skill mentioned in verse 3 they bring from heaven (4c), while  they also make ready the soma-preparing waters mentioned in verse 1 (4d). Soma  preparation is also the subject of the next verse (5). The cows (that is, their milk)  are depicted turbulently milling around the ritual ground, bellowing at the three  times of day associated with soma-pressing—dawn, midday, and sunset. (It should  be noted that vs. 5 is the most puzzling verse in the hymn, and our interpretation  does not entirely match those of others scholars.) In the first half of verse 6 we  return to the ritual fire, kindled in verse 1—or rather to its flames, conceived of as  “long-haired females.” (The poet, Dīrghatamas, uses the same image and the same  word in I.140.8, where the reference to flames is clearer.)

As mentioned above, the highly wrought and cryptic treatment of the sacrifice  and Mitra and Varuṇa’s place in it is succeeded, starting with the second half of  verse 6, by a fairly uncomplex restatement of the major themes.
## 1
Whom [=Agni] like an ally [/Mitra] those very attentive ones, seeking  cattle, begot with energy at the ceremony amid the cows and the
waters—
the two world-halves trembled by reason of his dimensions and his song,  in confronting him, the dear help of (all) the races, worthy of the
sacrifice.
## 2
Just now when the associates of Purumīḍha the soma-offerer, like allies  [/Mitras], have brought you two forward,
now find the will and the way for the one who chants, and listen to the  possessor of the dwelling place, you two bulls.
## 3
The settlements attended upon (his) birth, which was worthy to be  proclaimed in the two world-halves, for the sake of your great skill,
o bulls.
When you bring it [=skill] for truth, when for the steed [=Agni?], with  the oblation you energetically pursue the rite.
## 4
It is the settlement greatly dear (to you) that (gets) ahead, o lord(s)—o  truthful ones, you two loudly sound your lofty truth—
You (hitch up) your skill from lofty heaven (to be) ready at hand; you  hitch up the waters like an ox to a yoke-pole.
## 5
(Like) the two great (world-halves) in their greatness you two propel the  desirable reward here. The milk-cows, pushing and shoving (though)  not raising dust, are at the (ritual) seat.
They cry out to the sun at its zenith (and) up to its setting (and) through  the dawns, like a bird (screeching) in swooping pursuit.
## 6
The long-haired females [=flames] have bellowed to you for truth, where  [=ritual seat] you are chanting the way, o Mitra, o Varuṇa.
Send (them) surging down by yourselves; swell our insights: you two have  control over the thoughts of the inspired poet.
## 7
(The man) who as he labors piously serves you with sacrifices, the poet  and Hotar who performs the sacrifice, bringing his thoughts to
success—
it’s him that you come near; you pursue his rite. Seeking us, come here to  our songs and our good thinking.
## 8
They anoint you first with sacrifices and with cows. O truthful ones, as if  at the yoking of mind
they bring you songs along with uninterrupted thought. With
undistracted mind you have attained rich (vigor).
## 9
You have acquired rich vigor; you have attained it—rich, great, and  enduring—with your magic arts. Through the days neither the heavens nor the rivers have attained your  divinity, nor the Paṇis your bounty.