+++
title = "152"

+++
152
Mitra and Varuṇa
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The nub of this hymn may be found in verse 5c, “(Though it cannot be) compre hended, the youths enjoy the formulation,” and the poet almost seems to be recom mending this course of action to us, the audience:  to enjoy poetic formulations  whether we understand them or not. The hymn provides a number of examples on  which to test this advice.
The power of formulated truth and the frequent opacity of its verbal form are  both treated early in the hymn. In the first verses the poet affirms the close associa tion of Mitra and Varuṇa with truth and their power to defeat untruth (see 1cd, also  indirectly 3d), while in both 2a and 3b he questions the ability of ordinary people to  comprehend. The object of the comprehension is left undefined (“this,” 2a; “that,”  3b), but in our opinion it is the formulation, or the “truth,” or the speech of the  gods and/or poets. He then implies that whether or not we comprehend is immate rial, for mantras proclaimed by poets come true (2b) regardless of whether or not  they were understood by their hearers.
Verse 3 seems to contain a few test formulations (3a, 3c) and comments on them  (3b, 3d). The formulations are constructed as paradoxes: the footless one who is  first of the footed (3a); the embryo who carries its own burden, contravening the  usual expectation that the embryo is the burden that the mother bears (see, e.g.,  III.46.5, VI.67.4, X.27.16). The next three verses (4–6) concern the familiar myster
ies of the ritual day: the rising of the sun following the dawns (vss. 4–5) and the  flaring up of the fire fueled by streams of melted butter (vs. 6). These predictable  daily occurrences are implicitly identified as conforming to “the ordinance of Mitra  and Varuṇa” (vss. 4d, 5d).
The final verse is a simple invitation to the sacrifice with prayers for the  gods’ aid.
## 1
You two wear garments of fat; your counsels are unbroken torrents. You have brought low all untruths; you keep company with truth.
## 2
Many a one will not comprehend this (formulation?) of theirs, (but) the  virile mantra, proclaimed by poets, comes true.
The mighty four-edged (weapon) smites one with three edges; the
scorners of the gods were the first to waste away.
## 3
“Footless she [=Dawn] goes as the first of the footed.” Who
comprehends that (formulation?) of yours, o Mitra and Varuṇa?

“The unborn child bears his burden even here.” He guides the truth
across; he has brought down untruth.
## 4
We look him over, the lover of maidens [=Sun], only when he is going  forth but not when he is settling down near (them)—
(the Sun) wearing (garments) not removed (from the loom), (still)
stretched out (on it)—following the dear ordinance of Mitra and
Varuṇa.
## 5
Born without a horse, a steed without a rein, ever whinnying he [=Sun]  flies with arched back.
(Though it cannot be) comprehended, the youths [=Maruts? Aṅgirases?  gods?] enjoy the formulation, as in (the presence of) Mitra and Varuṇa  they hymn their ordinance.
## 6
Aiding the son of Mamatā [=Dīrghatamas], the milk-cows will swell the  one who gives pleasure with formulations [=Agni?] in the same udder. Knowing the ritual patterns he should seek a share of the food. Seeking  to win her with his mouth, he should make broad space for Aditi
[/Boundlessness].
## 7
Might I turn you two here, Mitra and Varuṇa, to the enjoyment of our  oblation by my reverence, o gods, and with your help.
Ours is the formulation that should prevail in battles; ours is the
heavenly rain that provides deliverance.