+++
title = "154"

+++
154 Viṣṇu
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
6 verses: triṣṭubh
One of the only hymns dedicated entirely to Viṣṇu, this composition reads almost  like a round, with phraseology that is constantly repeated and recombined. The focus  of the hymn is narrow: the three strides made by Viṣṇu, which measured out the cos mic spaces, earth, midspace, and heaven, and provided room for the creatures to live.  These strides are also conceived of as footsteps, which contain the good things sought  by the poet, and which he aspires to reach (vss. 5–6). This goal provides a forward  thrust to the poem, despite the uniformity of the vocabulary throughout. Viṣṇu’s  footsteps are also credited with somewhat surprising actions: in verse 4 they “find ela tion by their own power” and in verse 6 the highest step “shines down amply.”
## 1
Now shall I proclaim the heroic deeds of Viṣṇu, who measured out the  earthly realms,
who propped up the higher seat, having stridden out three times, the  wide-ranging one.
## 2
In this way Viṣṇu will be praised for his heroic deed—(he who is) like a  fearsome wild beast, living in the mountains and roaming wherever it  wants,
in whose three wide strides dwell all living beings.
## 3
Let my fortifying thought go forth to Viṣṇu, the mountain-dwelling,  wide-ranging bull,
who alone with just three steps measured out this dwelling place here,  long and extended,
## 4
Whose three steps, filled with honey, never becoming depleted, find  elation through their own power,
who alone supports heaven and earth in their three parts and all living  beings.
## 5
Might I reach that dear cattle-pen of his, where men seeking the gods  find elation,
for exactly that is the bond to the wide-striding one: the wellspring of  honey in the highest step of Viṣṇu.
## 6
We wish to go to the dwelling places belonging to you two [=Viṣṇu and  Indra], where there are ample-horned, unbridled cows.
There that highest step of the wide-ranging bull shines down amply.
