+++
title = "156"

+++
156
Viṣṇu
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
5 verses: jagatī
The primary deed of Viṣṇu, his claim to fame—the three strides—is not mentioned  directly in this hymn. Instead, he is presented as a protean divinity, likened to or  identified with a number of other gods, especially Agni. This superimposition begins  with the first pāda of verse 1, where he is compared to Mitra, and in verse 2b the  association with the Wives of the Gods immediately brings Tvaṣṭar to mind. In verse  4d he is identified either with Indra/Br̥haspati or with an Aṅgiras in the allusion to  the Vala myth, and earlier in that verse (pāda b) “the ritual expert associated with  the Maruts” may be a reference to Indra, who may be called “ritual expert of the  Maruts” (vedho marútām) in I.169.1. But the primary association appears to be with  Agni. The title “ritual expert,” though used of other gods (like Indra, see above), is  especially characteristic of Agni, and the references to Viṣṇu as embryo and to his  birth (vss. 2–3) are typical Agni themes (compare 3b especially with VI.48.5, of the  birth of Agni). The “three seats” in verse 5 also recalls Agni with his three hearths,  and this word may in fact signal the point of contact between Viṣṇu and Agni, since  “three” is the number that defines Viṣṇu’s great deed, and the “three seats” could  be the three footprints left by his strides. (See the footprints as places in I.154.4–6.)
The theme of Viṣṇu’s multiple identities is announced, in typically oblique  fashion, in the middle verse of this hymn:  “recognizing him, announce his very  names” (3c).
## 1
Become kindly like an ally [/Mitra]—you with ghee as your drink,  traveling your ways, extensive and having far-reaching brilliance.
Then for you, o Viṣṇu, praise can be brought to success only by one who  knows, and sacrifice can be made to succeed by one who offers an
oblation.
## 2
Whoever will do service to the ancient ritual expert and to the newer one,  to Viṣṇu together with the Wives (of the Gods),
who will speak of his birth, the great birth of the great one, just he will  surpass in renown even his yokefellow.334 I.157
## 3
You praisers, carry him to term in the way that is known—the ancient  one who is by birth the embryo of truth.
Recognizing him, announce his very names. Let us share in the favor of  you who are great, o Viṣṇu.
## 4
That resolve of his does king Varuṇa follows, that do the Aśvins, the  resolve of the ritual expert associated with the Maruts.
Viṣṇu upholds the highest skill that knows the days, when with his
comrade(s) he opens up the pen.
## 5
The divine one, Viṣṇu, who sought for Indra to accompany him, sought  for the one of good action as the one who acts (even) better,
the ritual expert, possessing the three seats, he enlivened the Ārya. He  apportioned to the sacrificer a portion of truth.