+++
title = "157"

+++
157
Aśvins
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
6 verses: jagatī 1–4, triṣṭubh 5–6.
As is usual for the Aśvins, this hymn is a morning hymn (vs. 1) recited at the begin ning of the sacrificial day. Less typical but elsewhere attested (e.g., VIII.5) is its  implicit representation of the Aśvins as bringers of rain. This theme is most obvi ous in verse 2, for in 2b ukṣatam, translated “increase,” is a śleṣa, to be read also  as “sprinkle.” The “ghee and honey” by which the Aśvins bring increase to the  dominion are the rain they sprinkle on it. If “honey” refers to rain in verse 2, then  so also do their “honey-bearing chariot” (vs. 3) and their “honeyed whip” (vs. 4).  At least here the latter probably refers to lightning (Pirart 1995: 296, with reference  to Blair 1961: 152–54). The rain they bring is fertilizing for all beings, both animals  and plants (vs. 5). Likewise, the description of the Aśvins’ sending fire and water  into the trees (vs. 6) refers to the water, which not only allows the trees to grow but  also carries fire that emerges when wood is kindled.
The theme of the Aśvins as bringers of rain is interwoven with that of their  chariot as a reflection of the sacrifice. The sets of three often associated with them  and their chariot refer to the three soma-pressings (cf. also I.34). Here, significantly,  in verse 3 their chariot has three wheels and three chariot boxes. And finally, the  Aśvins are not only bringers of rain, but they are also bringers of healing (4cd, 6).  These two functions are connected because they both give and extend life.
One last note: in verse 6 rā́thyebhiḥ “through the parts of your chariot” is a  hapax and there are several other plausible interpretations of it: among them the  chariot-horses (Sāyaṇa), chariot-skills (Geldner), and reins (Pirart). Since the  hymn mentions the chariot itself and its boxes, wheels, whip, and horses, we sug
gest that the word encompasses all those things that constitute the chariot—and  therefore the rain and the sacrifice—and that complement the healing remedies  they bring. 1. Agni has awakened; the Sun rises from the earth; great, glowing Dawn  has dawned widely with her ray of light.
The Aśvins have harnessed their chariot to make their journey. The god  Savitar has spurred the living world in all directions.
## 02
When you harness the bull that is your chariot, Aśvins, then increase  [/sprinkle] our dominion with ghee and honey!
Enliven our sacred formulation in the contests! We would share the  riches in the heroes’ victory.
## 03
Let the three-wheeled, honey-bearing chariot of the Aśvins with its swift  horses, which is well-praised, journey near.
With its three chariot boxes, the generous (chariot), bringing all good  shares, will carry good fortune here to both the two-footed and
four-footed.
## 04
Carry nourishment to us, Aśvins, and mix us with your honeyed whip. Extend our lifetime, wipe away our diseases, repel hatred, and be
companions to us.
## 05
You place the embryo in the females of moving beings; you place it  within all living things.
You, o bulls, have sent fire and water here into the trees, Aśvins.
## 06
You are healers through your healing remedies, and you are also  charioteers through the parts of your chariot.
And again, o powerful ones, you set dominion upon him who ritually  serves with his oblation and by his thought.