+++
title = "159"

+++
159
Heaven and Earth
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
5 verses: jagatī
The various, and sometimes paradoxical, relationships between (masculine)  Heaven and (feminine) Earth, and their joint relationship with their sons, the  gods, are the topic of this hymn. The two are named in the first and last (5) verses  of the hymn, while in between they are only referred to by kinship terms. In the  first half of verse 2 their parental roles are kept separate:  father and mother,  but in the second half they are subsumed in a pregnant dual, “two fathers.” The  tables are turned in verse 3, where they appear as “two mothers.” Although both  of these duals are frequently used in the R̥gveda for the paired parents of both  genders (and such is their reference here), the alternation in this hymn seems  meaningful and contextually appropriate. Minds are not associated with either  gender exclusively, so that “the mind of the. . .father and of the mother” in verse  2ab belongs to each individually, whereas in 2c it is, properly, two fathers who  “possess good semen.” The reason for the feminine “two mothers” in verse 3 is  less clear, though as objects acted upon they may evoke the feminine. After these  various parental designations, the poet branches out in verse 4b, identifying the  two as both siblings and a married couple, with a subtle but unmistakable sug gestion of incest.
In the meantime, the beloved paradox of children giving birth to their parents is  given full play in verses 3 and 4.
As discussed in the introduction to I.160, this hymn is a virtual twin to the one  that follows.
## 01
I shall start up the praise, along with sacrifices, to Heaven and to Earth,  the two great ones growing strong through truth, the discerning ones,  at the rites of distribution,
those of wondrous power, whose sons are gods, who together with the  gods tender things of value (to the mortal) who has an insight right to  the point.

## 02
And I turn my mind to the great and self-powerful mind of the
undeceivable father and of the mother, with my invocations.
The two fathers possessing good semen have made the land wide for  offspring and immortal in its expanses.
## 03
These their sons, good artisans with wondrous powers, begot the two  great ones, two mothers, to be first in their thought.
You two protect what is real in upholding the standing and the moving;  you protect the footprint of your son who is unduplicitous [=Agni?]. 4. Masters of magical power, having good forethought, they measured  [=created] the kindred pair who share the same womb, the married
couple who share the same dwelling place.
They stretch an ever newer thread to heaven and within the sea—the  very brilliant poets.
## 05
The desirable largesse of Savitar shall we think upon today at the  impulse of the god.
For us, o Heaven and Earth, through your kind attention establish
wealth consisting of goods and a hundred cows.