+++
title = "160"

+++
160 Heaven and Earth
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
5 verses: jagatī
Like I.159 this hymn is dedicated to Heaven and Earth and consists of five verses in  jagatī meter, but the similarities are stronger than those bare facts suggest: I.160 is  structurally identical to 159, and they share phraseological and thematic patterns.  Like 159, 160 names Heaven and Earth only in its first and last verses, with the  references in between conveyed by kinship terms and adjectival duals, patterning  in much the same way as in 159—first separate designations for father and mother  (159.2ab, 160.2b), then duals identifying the pair with one gender or another (“two  fathers” 159.2c, “two mothers” 159.3b versus “two world-halves/rodasī” [fem.,  depicted as girls] 160.2c, “two fathers” 160.3a).
One of the notable features of 159 is the relationship between Heaven and Earth  and their sons, the gods. The same parental relationship is depicted in 160, but with  a single son, the Sun. As in 159, this son is first introduced in verse 1, but also as in  159 the theme is developed primarily in verses 3–4, where the same paradox of the  child begetting his parents is employed (esp. in 160.4, but note the child milking out  his own milk from his parents in vs. 3). Similar or identical words are used: the son  in 160.4a is “the best artisan of the artisans (apás) of the gods,” while the sons in  159.3a are “good artisans” (svápas); the two fathers of 159.2c “possess good semen”  (surétas), just as the bull representing Heaven does in 160.3c. Two verbs are used  to express the sons’/son’s begetting of the parents: the literal √jan “beget” (jajñuḥ 159.3b, jajā́na 160.4b) and the metaphorical √mā “measure out” (mamire 159.4a,  ví...mamé 160.4c); both the sons of 159 and the son of 160 possess magical power  (māyínaḥ 159.4a, māyáyā 160.3b).
Once seen, the pervasive underlying identity of these two hymns cannot be denied,  but it is an index of the art of Dīrghatamas that the poems strike the audience as com pletely distinct and that, as far as we are aware, their patterned similarity has not previ ously been recognized—unlike other such pairs, like the Vālakhilya hymns VIII.49–50,  51–52, or IV.13–14, IX.104–105, as discussed by Bloomfield (1916: 13–14).
## 1
Because these two, Heaven and Earth, beneficial to all, truthful, are those  who uphold the poet of the airy realm,
he speeds between the two Holy Places of good birth—the god, the  blazing Sun, between the two goddesses, according to his ordinance. 2. The two great ones of broad expanse, inexhaustible, the father and  mother, protect living beings—
the two world-halves, the very boldest ones, who are like (girls) inviting  admiration, when their father has decked them out with their forms. 3. That draft-horse, the son of the two fathers, the insightful one
provided with the means of purification purifies living beings by his  magical power.
Out of the dappled cow and the bull possessing good semen he has
milked his blazing milk all the days.
## 4
This one here, the best artisan of the artisans of the gods, who begat the  two world-halves beneficial to all,
who measured out the two airy realms with a display of his good resolve,  with unaging props—he has been universally praised.
## 5
While being sung, o great ones, you will establish great fame for us and  lofty dominion, o Heaven and Earth,
by which we will extend (our control) over the communities all the days.  Jointly impel to us power worthy of wonder.