+++
title = "161"

+++
161
R̥bhus
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
14 verses: jagatī 1–13, triṣṭubh 14
This is a difficult hymn, but one essential for understanding the R̥bhus and their  relation to the Third Pressing. Its narrative tells how the R̥bhus attained immortal ity and entered among the gods—or seems to. This theme is stated in verse 2 and  elaborated in verses 11–14. The R̥bhus were priests who attained status as gods by  their sacrificial performance. As gods they are worshiped in the Third Pressing, and  therefore it is not surprising that the ritual acts by which they became gods are those

of the Third Pressing. For a detailed discussion of these acts, see the discussion by  Brereton (2012).
The hymn begins by reference to one of the great acts of the R̥bhus, their trans formation of a single soma cup into four soma cups. This act signifies their divin ization because the four cups represent four soma offerings to Indra and the three  R̥bhus. A single cup would have restricted the soma offering only to Indra. The  hymn opens with the R̥bhus’ address to Agni, who has been sent by the gods. This  dialogue takes place in the middle of the action, for apparently Agni has pointed  to the camasá, the ritual soma cup, and the R̥bhus are concerned that Agni thinks  that they have insulted this soma cup in some way (vs. 1). But Agni reaffirms the  command of the gods that the R̥bhus create four cups out of this one, and he  offers to make them gods (vs. 2). However, the R̥bhus reply that they have much  more to do as priests before they themselves become the objects of worship. First,  they need to make a horse. Elsewhere they fashion the two horses of Indra, and it  is to this act that verse 3 likely refers. The making of these horses points toward  the Hāriyojanagraha, an offering to Indra as he harnesses his horses to leave the  ritual ground at the end of the Third Pressing (see also I.61–63, 82). Second,  they need to make a chariot, which can represent the hymn or the whole ritual.  Third, they need to make a milk-cow, which represents the already-pressed soma  stalks, which are made to yield additional soma in the Third Pressing. And finally  they need to make young two who are old. The two might be the sacrificer and  his wife or another pair. Once the R̥bhus have accomplished all their great sac
rificial deeds, then they will be worthy to follow Agni to heaven (vs. 3). Tvaṣṭar  is introduced in verse 4 probably in connection with another rite in the Third  Pressing in which the Wife of the Sacrificer receives indirect access to the soma.  Verse 5 returns to the four cups and we now learn that Tvaṣṭar, who had origi
nally made the one cup, is angry that the R̥bhus are modifying his creation. The  R̥bhus protect themselves by taking on “other names.” These “other names” may  be their priestly offices, and by these names or priestly offices the “maiden” will  rescue them. The hymn gives little clue to identity of the “maiden,” but she may  be Sarasvatī (cf. VI.49.7) or even Speech (Vāc) herself. In either case, the words  that the R̥bhus master or the knowledge that they possess somehow protects them  from the anger of Tvaṣṭar. Vs. 6 affirms that the R̥bhus did succeed in becoming  gods and divine recipients of soma.
In verse 7 the hymn returns to the sacrificial acts that made them immortal: the  soma-pressing (see vs. 10), the rejuvenation of the aging pair, the creation of a  horse, and the harnessing of the chariot that is the sacrifice or the hymn. Verse 8  marks a return to a dialogue, now between the R̥bhus and the gods. According to  Sāyaṇa, the “water” and the “rinse-water of muñja-reeds” that the gods offer the  R̥bhus are the soma of the first two pressings. This interpretation is contextually  justifiable, but such a denigration of these first two pressings is unlikely. Oldenberg  suggests that the gods first offer the R̥bhus two inferior drinks and only then and  finally the soma. If we take this approach, the first offering would be water, and the second might be a kind of faux-soma. The word múñja approximates mū́javant,  the mountain from which the real soma comes, and therefore the “rinse-water of  muñja-reeds” may represent an inferior approximation of soma. It is only the third  time and in the third soma-pressing that the gods offer the R̥bhus the real soma.  Structurally verse 9 continues verse 8, since again three things are mentioned, of  which the third is the best. However, it is difficult to say what the feminine noun  described as vadharyántī “weapon-wielding” in pāda c might be, since the adjec
tive is otherwise unattested. According to Sāyaṇa, it is either the earth or a line of  clouds and its weapon is lightning. Along similar lines, Geldner suggests that it is  the rainy season and again that its weapon is lightning. Interpreting vadharyántī slightly differently, Witzel and Gotō understand it as the axe (svádhiti) “serving  as a weapon.” We resolve the ellipsis by drawing its sense from the verb pra √brū
“proclaim” in pāda c and the reference to spoken truths in pāda d. The first two  R̥bhus praise water and fire, which are essential to the sacrifice, but the third R̥bhu  recognizes true speech as the most essential element.
Verse 10 returns once again to the great sacrificial deeds of the R̥bhus and this  time especially to the soma that is prepared in the Third Pressing. In the Third  Pressing soma stalks from the first two pressings are pressed again to yield addi tional soma. In verse 10 these stalks are the “lame cow”—lame because they have  already been pressed—which are then soaked in water. The “carving” of the cow is  the re-pressing of the stalks, and the dung is the now thoroughly mangled stems of  the soma plant. The place of 10d is not clear. Whoever the “parents” may be, the  “sons” are likely the R̥bhus or the priests that they represent.
The last sequence of verses, 11–14, probably describes the ascent of the R̥bhus  to immortality, but even if this is correct, the details are obscure. At best we can  point out a few possible identifications and a few possible interpretations. Agohya  in verse 11 is probably the Sun as the “Unconcealable One,” although he might also  be Savitar. In I.110.2–3 the R̥bhus’ attainment of immortality is connected with  Agohya, and if Agohya is the Sun, then perhaps one stage in the R̥bhus’ ascent is to  the sun. The Sun governs the year, and therefore the “grass on the heights” may rep
resent the summer pasturage, and “the waters in the valleys” the winter pasturage.  In verse 13 the identification of the goat and the dog as the sun and moon is doubt ful. It assumes that the bastá “goat” is ajá ekapád, “the one-footed goat,” which  elsewhere is the Sun. The identification of the moon as “the dog” follows Śatapatha  Brāhmaṇa XI.1.5.1, in which the moon is called the heavenly dog. In the last verse,  the gods move throughout the visible world seeking the R̥bhus, but perhaps they do  not find them because they have gone from the visible world.
## 1
[The R̥bhus:] “Why has the best, why has the youngest one come here  to us? For what messenger’s duty does he speed? What is it that we
have said?
We have not insulted the cup with its great hollow. Brother Agni, we have  spoken only of the excellence of the wooden (vessel).”

## 2
[Agni:] “ ‘Make the one cup to be four’—that the gods said to you. For  that I have come to you.
Sons of Sudhanvan, if you will do thus, you will become worthy  (recipients) of the sacrifice along with the gods.”
## 3
When you replied to the messenger Agni, “A horse must be made, and a  chariot also must be made here.
A milk-cow must be made, and the two must be made young. When we  have done these things, brother, we will follow you [=gods].”
## 4
Having done these things, R̥bhus, you asked this: “Just where has he  gone who came here to us as a messenger?”
When he caught sight of the four cups that were made, just then  Tvaṣṭar was anointed among the Wives (of the Gods).
## 5
When Tvaṣṭar said, “We shall smash those who have insulted the cup  that gives drink to the gods”—
they [=the R̥bhus] make other names for themselves during the  soma-pressing—by their other names the maiden will rescue them. 6. Indra has hitched up his two fallow bays, and the Aśvins their chariot.  Br̥haspati drove near (the cow) of all forms.
You—R̥bhu, Vibhvan, and Vāja—went to the gods. By your skillful  work you came to a share in the sacrifice.
## 7
From the hide you made the cow to flow (milk) by your insights. You  made those young who were the aging pair.
O sons of Sudhanvan, you fashioned a horse from a horse, and having  hitched up the chariot, you journeyed toward the gods.
## 8
[The R̥bhus to the gods:] “You said, ‘Drink this water, or drink this, the  rinse-water of muñja-reeds.
Sons of Sudhanvan, if you do not in any way find satisfaction in this,  you shall find exhilaration in the Third Pressing rite.’”
## 9
One (R̥bhu) said, “Waters are most important,” and the other said,  “Fire is most important.”
(The third) one proclaimed the weapon-wielding (speech?) from among  the many. Speaking truths, you carved the cups.
## 10
One drives the lame cow down to the water. One carves the flesh,  carried here with a basket.
Up till sunset one bore away the dung. Have the parents given help to  their sons?
## 11
You made grass for him on the heights and waters in the valleys by your  skillful work, o men,
when you slept in the house of Agohya: you do not continue that here  today, o R̥bhus.
## 12
When, having shut your eyes, you crept around the living worlds, where  were your loving parents? You cursed him who took your arm. Who made a declaration (to you),  to him you also made a declaration.
## 13
After you slept, R̥bhus, you asked this: “Who awakened us here, o  Agohya?”
The billy-goat [=the Sun?] said the dog [=the Moon?] was the awakener.  Here today, after a year, you opened your eyes.
## 14
The Maruts travel through heaven, Agni along the earth; the Wind here  travels through the midspace;
Varuṇa travels through the waters and seas—seeking you, o sons of  strength.
The following two hymns treat the Horse Sacrifice (Aśvamedha) and are the only  absolutely clear reflections of this ritual in the R̥gveda.