+++
title = "162"

+++
162
Praise of a Horse (Aśvastuti)
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
22 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 3, 6
The first of the two Aśvamedha hymns focuses on the actual sacrifice, with an  almost cinematic treatment of the proceedings and an unflinching look at the gory  details. The hymn begins with the parading of the horse on the day of sacrifice: the  year-long preliminaries in the classical Aśvamedha are not mentioned here, and it  is not easy to tell how much elaboration accreted to this ritual in the post-R̥gvedic  period—though it seems likely that the R̥gvedic version was a much simpler affair.
After an initial verse calling on an array of gods to bear witness to the celebra tion of the horse, there follow three verses (2–4) devoted to the goat that is led  in front of the horse and that is itself sacrificed before the killing of the horse.  The goat is the only sacrificial animal mentioned in the hymn besides the horse,  in contrast to the classical version of the rite in which a multitude of wild and  domestic animals are, at least theoretically, bound for sacrifice (and in general  then released). In verses 5–6 a variety of priests (5) and minor ritual functionaries  (6; see also the cooks in vs. 12) are mentioned—the priests being urged, somewhat  shockingly, to “fill your bellies” on the sacrifice. This group of officiants seems to  correspond on the human level to the gods assembled in verse 1, and all are thus  implicated in the performance of the sacrifice, as are the poet himself and his fel
low seers in verse 7.
The gaze then turns to the sacrifice proper (vss. 8–17) and to the equipment asso ciated with the horse (vss. 8, 14, 16), the equipment for cooking the oblation (vs.  13), and, most dramatically, the physical evidence of the slaughter: the fly-blown  flesh and the sticky blood and guts (vs. 9), the bloated belly and the smell of the  butchered animal (vs. 10), the cooking juices running off the skewered beast on344 I.162
the fire (vs. 11). All of the mentioned paraphernalia and the gore are meant to  accompany the horse itself to the gods. This section of the hymn gains much of its  power from a dual focus: the gritty reality of an actual sacrifice competes with the  reverential attitude to the victim, regularly addressed in the 2nd person—such that  the horse is endowed almost with personhood while at the same time being dismem
bered, cooked, and consumed. For this reason, in 3rd-person contexts we use the  pronouns “he, him, his” for the horse, rather than “it,” et cetera: the poet will not  allow us to objectify or neuter-ize the animal and requires us to come to terms with  what “we” are doing to “him.”
The description of the dismembering becomes more detailed beginning in verse  18, where the axe approaches the horse’s ribs. Although this carving up logically  precedes some of the sacrificial actions treated before—especially the cooking of the  already butchered horse—there is a reason for its positioning here. We are entering  the third and last part of the hymn, in which the horse is sent on his journey to the  gods. The emphasis in these carving verses (18–20) is on the proper order of the cut
ting and the patterned positioning of the pieces of the horse, so that he can make its  own way on his “undamaged” legs (vss. 18, 20). The pieces of the horse are arranged  to re-form the actual body of the horse, and this reconstituted body is complemented  by the lifebreath (ātman) that is also making the journey to the gods (vs. 20). The  climax is reached in verse 21, where the horse is assured that he is not dead or injured  and that his journey to the gods will be made easily, in company with the mounts of  the gods. The hymn ends (vs. 22) with the hope that the sacrificed horse will bring  us good things, and with an unemphatic prayer for our “guiltlessness,” presumably  because of the potential guilt associated with the killing of the horse.
To those who know the classical śrauta version of the Aśvamedha the most strik ing omission in this hymn is any mention of the sexual intercourse (or simulated inter course) of the chief wife of the king and sacrificer with the just slaughtered horse. If  our interpretation of X.86, the Vr̥ṣākapi hymn, is correct—that it is a burlesqued ver sion of an Aśvamedha with a randy monkey as victim—the missing sexual element in  our hymn here was omitted out of delicacy rather than being unknown to the R̥gveda.
## 1
Let not Mitra, Varuṇa, Aryaman, Āyu, Indra the lord of the R̥bhus, and  the Maruts disregard us
when we shall proclaim the heroic deeds of the prizewinning, god-born  racehorse at the ritual distribution.
## 2
When they lead the gift [=goat] held fast in front of (the horse, which is)  decked out with a fresh garment and with family treasure,
facing well forward, constantly bleating, the goat, representing all forms,  passes into the fold of Indra and Pūṣan.
## 3
This billy-goat, belonging to all the gods, is led in front, along with the  prizewinning horse, as Pūṣan’s portion.
When (they lead the goat) as the pleasing fore-offering along with the  steed, it is Tvaṣṭar himself who stimulates him for (the deed) that
brings good fame. 4. When the sons of Manu lead around the horse to be offered three times  along (the path) that goes to the gods in proper order,
then the goat, Pūṣan’s portion, goes first, announcing the sacrifice to  the gods.
## 5
The Hotar, the Adhvaryu, the Expiator [?], the Fire-kindler, the  Handler of the Pressing-stones, and the well-inspired Reciter—
with this sacrifice, well prepared and well offered, fill your bellies.
## 6
The hewers of the sacrificial post and its conveyors, those who
fashion the knob for the post for the horse,
and those who assemble the equipment for cooking the steed—let the  applause also of those urge us on.
## 7
(When) he went forth, at that same time my thought was produced— (when) the straight-backed (horse went forth) to the regions of
the gods.
The inspired seers cheer him on. We have made him well connected to  the prospering of the gods.
## 8
The lead-rope of the prizewinner, the harness of the steed, the halter on  his head and his bridle,
and the grass brought up into his mouth—let all this of yours be also  among the gods.
## 9
What of the horse’s flesh a fly has eaten, or what is smeared on the  sacrificial post or on the axe,
what is on the hands of the Queller-priest and what on his nails—let all  this of yours be also among the gods.
## 10
The contents of his belly that bloats up, the odor of his raw flesh— let the Queller-priests make that well-done and let them cook the ritual  offering until it’s cooked to readiness.
## 11
What runs down from your leg as it’s being cooked by the fire when you  have been impaled on the spit—
let that not stick to the ground nor to the grasses; let it be given to the  gods, who are eager for it.
## 12
Those who inspect the prizewinner when cooked and who say about  him: “It smells good! Take it off (the fire)!”
and those who draw near in hopes of a share of the meat of the steed— let the applause also of those urge us on.
## 13
The probe for the meat-cooking cauldron, the cups for the pouring  of broth,
the covers of the bowls that keep them warm, the hooks, and the
baskets are in attendance around the horse.
## 14
(The gear) that made him set his stride, come to a halt, and turn aside,  and the foot-fetter of the steed,
and what he drank and what fodder he ate—let all this of yours be also  among the gods.

## 15
Let the fire that smells of smoke not besmirch you; let the blazing hot  cauldron not topple over.
The one sacrificed, sought out, and greeted when the cry “vaṣaṭ” is
made: that horse do the gods receive.
## 16
The mantel they spread out for the horse, the over-mantel, and the gold  (trappings) that are for him,
the harness, and the foot-fetter—(all these), his own dear things, hold  the steed fast among the gods.
## 17
If, in riding you, anyone goaded (you) with his heel or with a whip,  along with too much “come on, come on,”
I make all these sweet for you with a sacred formulation, as (priests)  sweeten them [=oblations?] by the ladling of the oblation at the rites. 18. The axe converges on the thirty-four ribs of the prizewinning horse,  who has connection with the gods.
Arrange his legs, undamaged, into patterns, and carve them up joint by  joint, having called them out in order.
## 19
There is one carver of Tvaṣṭar’s horse and two to hold him fast: such is  the proper way.
The (sacrificial portions) I make from your legs according to the proper  order, just those lumps, one after the other, do I offer in the fire.
## 20
Let your own dear lifebreath not burn you as you go along; let the axe  not bring the parts of your body to a standstill.
Let a greedy man who is no carver, skipping steps, not make your legs  damaged with a knife gone awry.
## 21
Truly in this way you do not die nor are you harmed: you go to the gods  by paths easy to travel.
The two fallow bays (of Indra) and the two dappled mares (of the
Maruts) have become your yokemates. The prizewinning (horse) has  taken his place at the chariot-pole of the (Aśvins’) donkey.
## 22
(Let) the prizewinner (win) for us a mass of good cattle and good  horses, male children, and all-prospering wealth.
Let Aditi make guiltlessness for us. Let the horse, accompanied by our  oblations, win sovereignty for us.