+++
title = "163"

+++
163
Praise of a Horse (Aśvastuti)
Dīrghatamas Aucathya
13 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn, the other one devoted to the Horse Sacrifice, is very different in tone,  style, and intent from its predecessor, but they clearly form a pair. In fact, this  hymn can be taken as the concrete fulfillment of the announcement in the first verse of the prior hymn (I.162.1): “...when we shall proclaim the heroic deeds of  the...horse.” That hymn did not itself actually accomplish this claim, for there  was no real praise of the horse or what he did. But this hymn has all the trappings  of a proper praise hymn. It begins with a number of verses (vss. 1–4) about the  miraculous birth and mythic history of the horse and its cosmic connections and  divine identifications.
In our opinion, the rest of the hymn concerns the horse’s journey to heaven,  the very journey presented also at the end of 162 (esp. vs. 21). But this is now  no ordinary horse: he is now identified with the sun and described in exalted  and enigmatic language. After a brief mention of the horse tackle in verse 5,  the journey begins in verse 6. That the traveler is the sacrificed horse is strongly  suggested by the language, which connects it to the horse’s journey in 162: the  poet mentally sees the lifebreath (ātman) as it flies, reminding us of the horse’s  lifebreath in 162.20, and this lifebreath as bird is moving on “paths easy to  travel,” the same phrase spoken reassuringly to the horse in 162.21. With the  identification of the sacrificed horse with the sun-bird thus firmly established,  the poet is free to elaborate and complicate his mental vision of the journey in  the following verses (7–11), not all of which are entirely clear. The poet’s vision  also seems to identify the horse/sun-bird with poetic inspiration, in phraseology  that is reminiscent of the “Pataṃga” hymn (X.177), where poetic inspiration  takes the form of a bird.
As this lyrical passage comes toward its end, the figure of the horse reasserts  itself, and the connections to 162 become stronger again. In the much-discussed  verse 10, in our opinion the arrangement of the divine horses, compared to the  V-shaped formation of geese in flight, refers to the divine mounts that accompany  the sacrificed horse in 162.21. Verse 11 addresses the horse as it flies in the guise of  the sun-bird, but we return to the real world of the sacrifice in verse 12, which in  ring-compositional fashion picks up the procession of goat and horse to slaughter  that began 162, reprising some of the language of that hymn as well (úpa prā́gāt “has gone forth” in 163.12–13 and 162.7; puró nīyate “is led in front” in 163.12 and  162.3). The summary verse (13) sends the horse on his way and again expresses  hopes for a return on our sacrificial investment.
## 01
When you whinnied on first being born, rising from the sea or from the  fertile soil,
(having) the two wings of a falcon, the two forelegs of an antelope— your great birth was worthy of praise, o steed.
## 02
Trita yoked him, who had been given by Yama; Indra was the first to  mount him;
the Gandharva grasped his halter. O Vasus, you carved the horse out of  the sun.
## 03
You are Yama; you are Āditya, o steed. You are Trita by reason of your  hidden commandment.

You were separated all at once from Soma [=the moon?]. They say that  you have three (kinship) bonds in heaven.
## 04
Three bonds they say you have in heaven, three in the waters, and three  within the sea.
And you will appear to me like Varuṇa, o steed, (in the place [=sea])  where they say is your highest means of begetting.
## 05
Here are (the waters?) to rub you down, o prizewinner, and here places  for the winner to set his hooves.
Here I saw your good halters, over which the herdsmen of the truth  keep guard.
## 06
With my mind I recognized your lifebreath from afar, a bird flying  below heaven.
I saw your winged head panting along the dustless paths easy to  travel.
## 07
Here I saw your highest form, seeking to win refreshments in the track  of the cow.
When the mortal attained the benefit from you, just after that the  foremost devourer of plants [=Agni] awakened (you?).
## 08
The chariot (goes) after you, after you the dashing youth, o steed; after  you the cows, after you the good fortune of maidens.
The troops have gone after your companionship. The gods have  measured themselves against your heroic strength.
## 09
Having golden horns [=rays], his feet copper, swift as thought he was  (an) Indra in the lower (realm).
The gods themselves came to eat the oblation of him, who first  mounted the steed.
## 10
The heavenly chargers take their places like geese in formation—with  the edges (of the formation) their legs, its middle hollow,
its nose a hero [=the lead horse], when the horses have driven their  heavenly drive.
## 11
Your body is flying, o steed; your perception is swooping like the  wind.
Your horns [=rays], dispersed in many places, keep flickering in the  wilderness.
## 12
The prizewinning steed has gone forth to slaughter, reflecting with a  mind turned to the gods.
The goat, his umbilical kin, is led in front. The poets and singers come  along behind.
## 13
The steed has gone forth to the highest seat, to his father and mother  [=Heaven and Earth].
He should go to the gods today, for he is most pleasing (to them); then  he expresses his hope for desirable things for the pious man.