+++
title = "165"

+++
165
Indra and the Maruts
Indra (1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10–12), the Maruts (3, 5, 7, 9), and Agastya (13–15) 15 verses: triṣṭubh
R̥gveda I.165, 170, and 171 together tell a story in which Indra and the Maruts  argue over their rights to a sacrifice offered by the sage Agastya. In the absence of  a full, contemporary narrative, it is difficult to reconstruct the events of this story.  Apparently Agastya’s sacrifice was originally intended for the Maruts. Indra arrived  at the place of the sacrifice first, however, and complained that nothing was being  given to him (170). Agastya, frightened by the god (cf. 171.4), then gave the sacri
fice to Indra. At this point the Maruts arrived expecting that the sacrifice would be  offered to them. Agastya tried to appease the Maruts (171), who were understandably  angry that the sacrifice had gone to Indra. Indra and the Maruts then confront one  another (165), and each side asserts its power and worthiness to receive the sacrifice.  Ultimately, however, the Maruts concede Indra’s superiority (165.9), and Indra and  the Maruts become reconciled with one another (vs. 11) and share the sacrifice. At the  very end of the hymn the poet states one of the reasons that he recalls this story: he  hopes to be reconciled to the gods, just as the Maruts were reconciled to Indra. Stanley Insler has proposed the attractive theory that this group of hymns  forms a small Aindramāruta epic, whose purpose was to justify a ritual change  that occurred during the time of the poet. In the classical Vedic ritual the Midday  Pressing is dedicated to Indra along with the Maruts, but for much of the core  R̥gveda the Midday Pressing belongs to Indra alone. This narrative tells how the  Maruts also came to share the soma along with Indra.
In verse 9d we read kariṣyā́ḥ with Oldenberg and others, and in verse 15c we read  ’vayā́m, also with Oldenberg.
## 1
[Indra:] With what beauty have the Maruts—all of the same age, all of  the same nest—joined altogether?
With what thought? From where have these antelopes come? With a  desire for good things (these) bulls chant explosively.
## 2
In whose sacred formulations have the youths found delight? Who turned  the Maruts here to the rite,
(thinking,) “By what great thought shall we bring them to rest, soaring  like falcons in the midspace?”
## 3
[Leader of the Maruts:] Why do you travel alone, Indra, although you  are great, o lord of the settlements? Is this proper for you?
Confronting us, are you going to negotiate with us beautiful ones? You  should tell us what you have for us, o master of the fallow bays.
## 4
[Indra:] The formulations, the thoughts, the pressed soma are good  fortune for me. My explosive power rises; the pressing-stone is
brought forth to me.
The hymns hope for, receive me joyfully. These two fallow bays carry us  here to them.
## 5
[Leader of the Maruts:] For this reason, yoking (our chariots) with  nearer (horses) that guide themselves and making our bodies
beautiful,
we now yoke antelopes also (as our lead team) by our great powers, for  you have experienced our independent will, Indra.
## 6
[Indra:] Where was this independent will of yours, Maruts, when you  tasked me alone to smash the serpent?
For I, the powerful and mighty, possessed of might, humbled with my  weapons those of every rival.
## 7
[Leader of the Maruts:] You did many things when we were there, with  our united manly powers (ready) to be deployed, o bull;
we shall do many things in accordance with your purpose, o most
powerful Indra, when we, o fellow Maruts, shall wish it.
## 8
[Indra:] O Maruts, I smashed Vr̥tra with my Indrian strength, having  become mighty through my own rage.
Bearing my mace in my arms, I made these all-gleaming waters go easily  to Manu.

## 9
[Leader of the Maruts:] This is conceded to you, generous one: There is  no one like you known among the gods.
Neither one who is born nor one who was born will attain you. What  *you will do, do!—o you who are grown fully strong.
## 10
[Indra:] Even if I am alone, let my force be far ranging (to do) what in  my daring I shall now do according to my inspired thinking,
for I am known as the powerful one, Maruts. What things I shall set in  motion, just I, Indra, am master of these.
## 11
The praise song here has exhilarated me, o Maruts, the formulation  worthy to be heard that you created for me, o men—
for me, (who am) Indra, the bull and strong combatant—for (me), your  companion as my companions, for me myself by you yourselves.
## 12
It is just so: Reflecting me here and receiving fame and refreshments as  my irreproachable (warrior band),
you, who are to be seen all around with your shimmering colors, have  pleased me, and you will please me now, o Maruts.
## 13
[Narrator:] Now who has given liberally to you here, Maruts? Journey  forth to your companions here, o companions!
Knowing our thoughts intimately, o you shimmering ones, be aware of  these, my truths.
## 14
[Indra:] Since the praise poet will here offer friendship (to you) as if to  his friend, (and since) the wisdom of the son of Māna [=Agastya]
has brought us here,
turn here to the inspired poet, o Maruts. The singer chants these
formulations for you.
## 15
[Narrator:] This is your praise song, Maruts—this song of the praise  poet Māndārya, son of Māna.
With his refreshing offering he would beg *reconciliation (with you) for  himself. – May we know refreshment and a community having lively  waters.