+++
title = "166"

+++
166
Maruts
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
15 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 14–15
Many of the usual Marut themes are present in this hymn: the awesome and ter rifying power of the thunderstorm (vss. 4–6), their glittering bedecked bodies and  chariots (vss. 9–11), their aid to pious men (vss. 2–3, 7–8), their role as singers for  their comrade Indra (vss. 7, 11). Although the order of elements seems somewhat  random, these praises are set within a tight frame. Verse 1 begins “we shall proclaim  their greatness,” which is echoed exactly by verse 12 “this is your greatness”: the promised proclamation has reached its end. Verse 13 is similarly structured, begin ning “this is your kinship...,” and the final verse (14) before the refrain sets forth  what the poet wishes from the Maruts.
Punctuating the hymn is an awareness of the balance between their past glories  and benevolence and the ones of the present day (see esp. vss. 1, 8, 13), and the  model of their previous generosity to sacrificers is given embodiment in verse 13,  where Manu’s offering of poetry induces the Maruts to appear to him with their  favors.
## 01
We shall now proclaim this to the overpowering race—proclaim their  previous greatness to the beacon of the bull.
As if through kindling on your course, you powerfully noisy Maruts, as  if in battle, produce your powers, o able ones.
## 02
Holding their honey close like their own son, the playful ones play, eager  at the rites.
The Rudras [=Maruts] approach the reverent man with help; the
self-powerful ones do not neglect the maker of oblations.
## 03
To whom the immortal helpers have given riches and prosperity—to the  man who does pious service with the oblation—
for him the Maruts, like (steeds) spurred on, sprinkle the many realms  with milk—they are joy itself.
## 04
Of you who with your powers enveloped the realms—your spontaneous  dashes swooped forth.
All creatures and habitations take fright. Brilliant is your course when  your spears have been extended.
## 05
When the manly ones of turbulent course make the mountains roar, or  have stirred the back of heaven,
every tree takes fright at your drive; every plant bends forward as if  driving a chariot.
## 06
You, mighty Maruts, you invulnerable band—with kind attention deliver  us to your benevolence.
Where your missile with its gory teeth scrapes (a path), mightily it
liquefies (the trees) as a well-placed (goad) sets the livestock flowing. 7. (The Maruts) whose generosity is (as steady as) a pillar, whose gifts are  not withdrawn, the restless ones, well-praised at the rites—
they chant forth the chant for the drinking of the exhilarating (soma);  they know the foremost manly deeds of the hero [=Indra].
## 08
With your strongholds with a hundred coils, o Maruts, guard that man  from crookedness and evil whom you (previously) aided,
whom you (now) protect from (evil) utterance amid the flourishing of his  descendants, you mighty, powerful ones who confer abundance.
## 09
All good things are set on your chariots, Maruts—like powers competing  with each other.364 I.167
On your shoulders, in the vanguard, are spangles; your axle turns the  wheels separately but at the same time.
## 10
Many good things are on your manly arms, on your breasts brilliants,  dazzling ornaments,
on your shoulders antelope (skins), on your wheel-rims razors. Like  birds their wings, your splendors have spread out.
## 11
Great by their greatness, extending, extensive, visible from afar like the  heavenly (realms) with their stars,
gladdening, good with their tongues, sounding with their mouths, the  Maruts, linked to Indra, encircling him with their rhythm.
## 12
This is your greatness, o well-born Maruts: your gift is long(-lasting), like  the commandment of Aditi.
For the person of good action to whom you gave it, not even Indra
makes it go awry through dereliction.
## 13
This is your kinship to the earlier generation, o Maruts, that as
immortals you many times favored its laud.
By reason of this poetic insight (of Manu’s), having favored his
attentive hearing, the superior men [=Maruts] showed themselves to  Manu all at once through their wondrous deeds.
## 14
The abundance stemming from you, o powerful Maruts—through  which we shall stay powerfully swollen for a long time,
toward which the people in the community will stretch out—to that  might I attain, *to my desire, with these sacrifices.
## 15
Here is a praise for you, o Maruts, here a hymn from Māndārya, the  respectful bard.
With refreshment he would beg propitiation for himself. – May we
know refreshment and a community having lively waters.