+++
title = "167"

+++
167 Maruts (except Indra 1)
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
11 verses: triṣṭubh
A particularly fine example of Agastya’s poetic skill. The first few verses invite first  Indra (vs. 1) and then the Maruts (vs. 2) to come to us; the last few verses (8–10)  before the refrain (vs. 11) celebrate the massive strength of the Maruts (vss. 8cd–9),  and again express the hope that Indra and the Maruts will stand by us (vs. 10), with  a curious detour through the topic of the Ādityas’ protective powers (vs. 8ab).
But the heart of the hymn (vss. 3–7) is devoted to the Maruts’ relationship with  their consort Rodasī, whose name is identical, save for accent, with the dual referring  to the “two world-halves” (rodasī versus ́ ródasī, though the latter can also some times be used for Rodasī). The verses are marked by what in Classical Sanskrit poetry  would be called śleṣa (“punning”), and the tone is curiously mixed: Rodasī is both extravagantly praised and at the same time scornfully compared to a loose woman,  with those two incompatible attitudes conveyed in the same words. (Unfortunately,  the understated deftness of these verbal plays is overwhelmed by our necessarily  labored and clumsy explanations.) For example, in verse 3 Rodasī is compared to a  young woman running after men by going to the public gaming hall, but also com
pared to fine ceremonial speech appropriate to a public occasion. The same word  (sabhā́vatī) is used both for her shameful appearance in the public hall and her role as  speech honored in public. In verse 4 the word sādhāraṇyā́ “common” is used both of  the Maruts’ joint cherishing of Rodasī and in a simile comparing her to a whore. (This  kind of verbal condemnation of a polyandrous woman is familiar in later Sanskrit  in the taunts sometimes directed to the noble Draupadī, wife of the five Pāṇḍavas in  the Mahābhārata.) A complex pun in the second half of verse 4 plays with the partial  identity of Rodasī and the two world-halves; the grammatical aspects of this pun  cannot be treated here. Despite the somewhat slighting treatment in the similes of  verses 3–4, Rodasī takes on the role of bride in verses 5–6 by mounting the nuptial  chariot like the mythological model of the bride, Sūryā. This depiction of ceremonial  marriage provides a transition to the ritual here-and-now (vss. 6cd–7), where not only  the Maruts, but also Rodasī along with the Wives of the Gods, appear at our ritual.
## 1
A thousand are your forms of help to us, o Indra, a thousand your most  welcomed refreshments, o possessor of the fallow bays,
a thousand your riches, to exhilarate us. Let your thousandfold prizes  come near to us.
## 2
Let the Maruts, masters of artifice, drive hither to us with their help, or  with their preeminent, heaven-lofty (riches?),
even when they, while furthest away, are running their teams on the far  shore of the sea—
## 3
(The Maruts), to whom (Rodasī) has been joined, positioned well, up  close to them like their own spear—she ghee-rich, garbed in gold,
roving in secret, like a young woman going to men when she’s bound for  the public hall [/provided with a public forum] like ceremonial speech. 4. Away (went) the resplendent, irrepressible Maruts in their flood; they  joined (with her) in common, as if with a common (whore).
The fearsome ones did not push Rodasī away as they did push the two  world-halves apart. The gods took pleasure in strengthening (her/
them), for companionship.
## 5
If it please her ladyship to accompany them—Rodasī with unloosened  braid had her mind set on the men—
like Sūryā she mounts the chariot of the one who does honor, she whose  face is turbulent like the approach of a cloud.
## 6
The youths caused the young woman to mount for beauty, she steadfast  and commingling (with them) at the ceremonies.
When the chant is accompanied by oblations for you, o Maruts, and the  one who has pressed soma, seeking friendship, sings the song,

## 7
I proclaim what of theirs is worthy of proclamation, that the greatness  of the Maruts is truly present,
when in company with them, her mind set on the bulls, she, self-reliant  and firm, brings with her the well-portioned Wives (of the Gods).
## 8
Mitra and Varuṇa (and Aryaman) protect from the unspeakable (fault);  Aryaman makes the unlaudable (men) atone.
And the unstirrable fixed things stir, (when) your wish-granting (flock)  has grown strong, o Maruts.
## 9
For they have not reached the limit of your swelling strength, o Maruts,  nearby to us nor even in the distance.
These (Maruts), swollen with bold swelling strength, have boldly
hemmed in hatred like a flood.
## 10
Might we today, might we tomorrow call ourselves dearest to Indra in  the competition,
(as) we (did) before, and let this be a great thing for us through the
days: let the R̥bhu-ruling (flock) consisting of (these) superior men
[=Maruts] stay by us.
## 11
Here is a praise for you, Maruts, here a hymn from Māndārya, the  respectful bard.
With refreshment he would beg propitiation for himself. – May we
know refreshment and a community having lively waters.