+++
title = "168"

+++
168 Maruts
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
10 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 8–10
After an appeal to the Maruts from the poet-sacrificer (vs. 1), the hymn settles down  with gusto to a description of the Maruts as thunderstorm, a description executed  with all of Agastya’s artistry. It is rich with elaborate and trickily constructed simi les and with striking images and jarring turns of phrase. For the latter, consider  the first simile in verse 2: “self-produced like fissures.” Neither the contents of the  simile itself nor its application to the Maruts is immediately clear, but on further  reflection the “self-produced fissures” call to mind earthquakes and their sudden  and unpredictable power to open fissures in the ground, and this image seems an  apt comparandum with the Maruts and their impetuous exercise of their power.  Agastya plays with syntax, too, as in 5b where the verb “quiver” is used transitively  in the frame of the simile and intransitively in the simile itself. In fact, in this hymn  Agastya seems to want to deploy as many different types of structurally and con
ceptually twisted images as he can (the technical details of all of which we cannot  treat here).
The theme throughout is that, although the Maruts display great violence in  their stormy onslaught, the result is the welcome and fructifying rain (see most clearly vs. 7). This theme is nicely expressed in 3cd, which juxtaposes and combines  the warlike and the peaceful: a spear compared to a woman (see also the previ ous hymn, 167.3), and dagger and bangle placed together in their hands, a pairing  emphasized by their phonological similarity: khādíś ca kr̥tíś ca.
## 1
With sacrifice after sacrifice to you (performed always) in the same way  (am I) victorious. Thought after thought have you received, as they
travel to you, the gods.
With well-twisted (hymns) might I turn you our direction, for the welfare  of the two world-halves, for great help.
## 2
They who, self-produced like fissures, self-strong, were born to
refreshment, to sun(light)—the shakers—
numbering in thousands like the waves of the waters, to be extolled
[/*bound?] by the mouth like cows, like oxen.
## 3
They who, like soma drinks, pressed when their stalks are satiated, once  they have been drunk, sit in the hearts like friends—
on their shoulders (a spear) clings tight like a clinging woman; in their  hands both bangle and dagger are placed together.
## 4
Self-yoked, (their horses) have driven down from heaven at will. Spur  (them) on with your own breath, (as if) with a whip, you immortals.
Dustless, powerfully born, the Maruts with their glinting spears make  even the fixed places stir.
## 5
O you Maruts with lightning as your spears, who is the one among  you who sets (the fixed places) to quivering by your own breath, like  someone with his tongue quivering between his jaws?
(You) who stir up the wastelands on your journey as if stirring
refreshments [=rain], who propel many, like Etaśa [=Sun’s horse] on  his daily round.
## 6
Where is the farther (part) of this great dusky realm, where the closer  (part), o Maruts, in which you have driven?
When you stir up the firmly compacted entity like loose pieces, you fly  through the turbulent flood with a stone.
## 7
Violent like your winning yet bringing sun(light), turbulent yet ripening  and swelling, o Maruts—
your gift [=rain] is welcome like the ritual gift-cow of a donor, and it is  of broad expanse and scintillating like lordly (Rodasī).
## 8
The rivers sound in response to your wheel-rims, when they raise up the  speech coming from the (storm) clouds.
The lightning-flashes smile down on the earth, when the Maruts sprinkle  ghee upon her.
## 9
Pr̥śni gave birth to the turbulent face of the unruly Maruts for great joy  [/battle].
They, in shared delight, begat the formless (cloud) mass. Just after that  they surveyed their vigorous self-power.

## 10
Here is a praise for you, Maruts, here a hymn from Māndārya, the  respectful bard.
With refreshment he would beg propitiation for himself. – May we
know refreshment and a community having lively waters.