+++
title = "169"

+++
169
Indra
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
8 verses: triṣṭubh, except virāj 2
The subject of this hymn is the tense ritual standoff and negotiated settlement  between Indra and the Maruts—who both came to Agastya’s sacrifice expecting it  as exclusive offering—a situation also depicted in I.170–171 and the great dialogue  hymn I.165. Although the Anukramaṇī names Indra as sole dedicand, the Maruts  appear in every verse but 4 (though not by name in 6); however, Indra is the only  god addressed—in fact, a vocative indra and a form of the 2nd singular pronoun  appear in each of the first six verses and in the last one (8)—while the Maruts are  always in the 3rd person. There is thus a definite imbalance in their roles.
The poet begins by flattering Indra and suggesting that he is superior to the  Maruts, but soon implies that the Maruts are getting ahead (vs. 2), and coopera tion is suggested (vss. 1ab, 3). In the middle verses (4–5) the poet begs Indra for  wealth in the sacrificial context (as shown by the priestly gift cow in verse 4), and  this sets the stage for the reconciliation between Indra and the Maruts on the sac rificial ground (vss. 6–7). In the final verse Indra is urged to join with the Maruts in  giving us wealth, and is promised in return that he will be praised by the gods, that  is, by the Maruts, who, however, will also receive praise—from the poet-sacrificers.
Not surprisingly, since Agastya is the poet, the hymn is full of intriguing difficul ties and studied similes, such as the superficially puzzling maxim in the second half  of verse 3, which turns on the paradox of waters producing dry land (by silting up  the channel?).
## 1
Indra, you are the one who goes (before) even the great one [=Marut  flock] as it *drives; you are the defender even from great dereliction.
O ritual adept, as observant one win the favors of the Maruts for us, for  they [=favors] are dearest to you.
## 2
They have hitched themselves up, Indra—your (Maruts), who know as  their own the tributes stemming from all communities among mortals. The battle-thrust of the Maruts is racing ahead in the winning of the  prize-contest whose reward is the sun.
## 3
This spear of yours has been fixed among us, Indra; the Maruts speed the  formless (cloud) mass, with all its gear.
For even a fire blazing in the brushwood can produce pleasurable
offerings, as waters do an island. 4. You, Indra—give us wealth, like a present in the form of a most
formidable priestly gift cow.
And the praises that will be enjoyable to you and to Vāyu will swell with  victory-prizes, as (priestly gift cows) swell their breast of honey.
## 5
In you, Indra, are most overflowing riches, the leaders of whoever seeks  the truth.
Let the Maruts have mercy upon us, the gods who up till now have
provided the way, as it were.
## 6
Drive forth toward the men who grant rewards [=Maruts], Indra. Take  your place on the earthly seat of the great one [=Marut flock],
now when their wide-striding antelopes have come to a standstill, like the  manly forces of a stranger at a ford.
## 7
The trampling of the antelopes of the fearsome, irrepressible Maruts is  heard opposite as they come here,
those who fly with their helpers in swarms to the mortal who seeks
battles, as if to a debtor.
## 8
You, Indra, along with the Maruts—for the Mānas dig out proliferating  riches, tipped with cows, destined for all men.
You will be praised, o god, by the gods [=Maruts] (also) being praised.  – May we know refreshment and a community having lively waters.