+++
title = "170"

+++
170
Indra
Indra (1, 3), Agastya (2, 5), Indra or Agastya (4)
5 verses: br̥hatī 1, anuṣṭubh 2–4, triṣṭubh 5
For this hymn see the introduction to I.165. This hymn is the opening of the  story, in which Indra confronts Agastya, who has prepared an offering for the  Maruts rather than for him. Indra asks Agastya if there is really is to be noth ing for him and how can one understand how such a thing could happen (1ab)!  Indra warns Agastya that he may be able to fool someone else with promises of  future offerings, but he cannot deceive or deny Indra (1cd). In fear, Agastya tries  to convince Indra that he should not take the offerings intended for the Maruts,  since they are his warriors, but rather come to some sort of accommodation with  them (2). But Indra insists and accuses Agastya of ignoring him altogether (3).  Agastya quickly capitulates and orders the sacrifice to be readied for Indra (4),  but he still hopes that Indra will come to an agreement with Maruts to share the  offering (5).
Curious is the use of the 1st dual verb tanavāvahai “we two shall extend (the sac rifice)” in verse 4, for it is unclear who the second subject, besides Agastya, would  be. It might perhaps be Indra, taking an active role in his own sacrifice, but we sug gest rather that it is Agastya’s wife Lopāmudrā, who is his ritual partner in I.179.

## 01
[Indra:] Now is there nothing? And tomorrow nothing? Who
understands this (nothing), which is unmistakable (to me)?
The thought of another can be bewitched and what he expected is lost. 2. [Agastya:] Are you going to strike us down, Indra? The Maruts are your  brothers.
Make a proper arrangement with them. Do not strike us down in your  confrontation (with them).
## 03
[Indra:] If you are our companion, brother Agastya, why do you
overlook us?
For we understand what your thinking is: it is only to us that you do not  wish to give.
## 04
[Agastya:] Let them ready the altar. Let them kindle the fire in front  (of it).
The appearance of the immortal (soma will be) there. We two shall
extend the sacrifice for you.
## 05
You are the master of good things, o lord of goods. You are the foremost  institutor of alliances, o lord of alliances.
O Indra, come to an agreement with the Maruts, and then eat the
oblations in the proper ritual order.