+++
title = "171"

+++
171
Maruts (1–2) and Indra and the Maruts (3–6)
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
For this hymn see the introduction to I.165. In this episode Agastya pleads with  the Maruts to reconcile themselves with Indra and with him. He first addresses the  Maruts (1–4) and then turns to Indra himself (5–6). In verse 4 Agastya explains  to the Maruts that Indra terrified him and although the offerings were prepared  for them, Agastya was forced to give them away to Indra. Then he addresses Indra  and asks that Indra together with the Maruts prosper the “sons of Māna.” Māna  is Agastya’s father, and therefore Agastya is seeking prosperity for his extended  family. In verse 6 he pleads with the god not to attack the Maruts, who are his own  men (6a), for ultimately Indra will be even greater because of his alliance with the  Maruts (6cd).
In 5a usrā́ḥ “ruddy” primarily describes the dawns, but it could also modify the  “sons of Māna.” This ambiguity associates the luster of the dawns with the luster  that Agastya wishes for his family. The ruddy color of the dawns is also the charac teristic color of cattle and further suggests that the luster of the sons of Māna will  be based in their wealth of cattle.
## 1
[Agastya:] I come before you with this, my reverence. With my hymn  I beg the favor of you overpowering ones. Through your generosity and knowing ways, o Maruts, put aside your  anger! Unhitch your horses!
## 2
Fashioned by my heart and mind, this praise song with my reverence is  set in place for you, o Maruts, o gods.
Being pleased in mind, travel here to it, for you are those growing strong  by just (such) reverence.
## 3
Praised, let the Maruts have mercy on us, and praised, let the generous  one [=Indra] (have mercy)!—he who is the greatest good luck.
Let our carved [?] wooden (cups) stand upright throughout all (our)  days, o Maruts, in accordance with our desire to win.
## 4
(Then was) I retreating from this mighty one, Maruts, trembling from  fear of Indra.
These oblations (of soma) were sharpened for you, but we have sent  them away. Have mercy upon us!
## 5
(The fame) by which the sons of Māna will shine with power during the  ruddy (dawns), at the dawning of the ever-constant (dawns)—
grant (that) fame to us, o bull!—You together with the Maruts, you  the mighty one together with the mighty ones, you the enduring one  giving strength.
## 6
O Indra, protect your men from the stronger one [=Indra]. Be one whose  anger with the Maruts is appeased,
establishing yourself as the strong one through (the Maruts) bearing  their good signs. – May we know refreshment and a community
having lively waters.