+++
title = "173"

+++
173 Indra
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
13 verses: triṣṭubh
The opening of the hymn (vss. 1–4) depicts the beginning of a sacrifice, as the priests  assemble and raise the song of praise and the other features of the sacrifice take their  places. The expectation of Indra’s arrival and enjoyment of the sacrifice ends verse  4. The next three verses (5–7) constitute a formal praise of Indra, with a lovely image  (vs. 6) of the god dressed in all the parts of the cosmos. These three verses, especially  verse 7, also depict Indra as a feisty combatant whom competing forces wish to have  on their side; the striking image in 7ab is of a tug-of-war. In the next verses (8–9) we  redouble our efforts to secure him for our sacrifice. Verse 10 reprises the theme of  Indra as the focus of competing factions, in a very dense and complex set of images,  while verse 11 expresses the ritualists’ belief that a properly performed sacrifice will  bring Indra here, however long it takes. The meandering route of the sacrifice in that  verse is replicated in form by the meandering syntax. Verse 12 is a thematic departure,  as well as a return to the rivalry of Indra and the Maruts over Agastya’s sacrifice;  here the poet once again offers sacrifice to both parties. The hymn ends (vs. 13) with  a familiar type of summary verse, with internal reference to the poem that is ending.
As a product of Agastya, this hymn poses many verbal puzzles and provides  many verbal rewards.
## 1
He sings the sāman bursting out like (the song of) a bird; we chant this  (chant) that is growing strong, bringing the sun.
The cows, the milkers, the undeceivable ones are on the ritual grass, so  that they will entice here the one whose seat is in heaven.
## 2
The bull chants along with the bulls whose sweat is an oblation, like a  ravenous wild beast, when he would out-sing (them).
The exuberant Hotar sings forth his zeal. The young blood, deserving  the sacrifice, supports the pair (of priests).
## 3
The Hotar approaches, circling around the fixed seats (of the sacrificial  beasts). He bears the embryo of the earth through the years.
The horse neighs while being led; the cow bellows. Speech wanders
between the two worlds like a messenger.
## 4
We have done these more attainable *deeds [=ritual activities] for him.  Those seeking the gods carry the actions further.
He will enjoy them—Indra of wondrous luster, coming easily like the  Nāsatyas, standing upon his chariot.
## 5
Praise this Indra, who is the “real thing,” who is a champion, who is a  benefactor, standing upon his chariot.
More combative even than his opponent, provided with bulls, he’s the  one who smashes apart even the enveloping darkness.
## 6
Since he stands out from (other) superior men in just this way by his  greatness, the two worlds befit him, like belts. Indra has enwrapped himself in the earth, like a circlet. The
autonomous one wears heaven like a headdress.
## 7
O champion, you who are the choice of those who are in battle, you  most in the vanguard, you who are to be yanked around (by the
opposing sides)—
to Indra do they of one accord (direct?) their battle-cries in
exhilaration, they who applaud you also as patron by reason of your  victory prizes.
## 8
Thus, because the soma-pressings in the sea [=mixing of soma with  water] are luck for you, when the waters, the goddesses, reach
exhilaration among these (cows) [=mixing with milk] for you,
every cow will yield to you to be enjoyed, if you pursue the people, also  the patrons, with holy fervor—
## 9
So that we shall be in good fellowship with him and through him  possess good dominance, as if through the lauds of men—
so that Indra will be there for us, standing upon our praise, leading our  hymns, like a powerful one (leading) the work [/ritual performance].
## 10
The contenders—(crying) “Indra with mace in hand will be ours!”— seeking (the one in) the middle [=Indra], try to win him over with
their sacrifices,
as those seeking an ally, (approaching) a lord of strongholds in regard  to his good command, (try to win him over) with lauds of men.
## 11
For any sacrifice that reaches fulfillment, even though it swerves along,  meandering in mind,
brings Indra to the house, as if bringing a thirsting man to a ford—as a  long road brings home a man who reaches his goal.
## 12
Don’t (involve?) us here in your battles with the gods [=Maruts], o  Indra. For there is propitiation for you, tempestuous one,
from the one offering oblations, whose song in its flood also extols the  great Maruts, who grant rewards.
## 13
This praise for you, Indra, is in us. With it you will find the way to us,  you of the fallow bays.
You should turn us here to good faring, o god. – May we know
refreshment and a community having lively waters.