+++
title = "174"

+++
174
Indra
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
10 verses: triṣṭubh
Another hymn bursting with Agastya’s tricks, here especially in the realm of daring  syntax and deliberate omission of key words. The hymn celebrates Indra’s great deeds,  especially his victories over multiple named and unnamed opponents. Allusions to374 I.174
the Vr̥tra myth and the release of the waters recur throughout the hymn (vss. 2, 3,  9), though the name Vr̥tra is mentioned only once (vs. 2). The first verse urges Indra  to “guard the gods,” and he appears in that role as protector of Agni and his ritual  activities (vs. 3) and enforcer of the norms of Ārya society, as embodied in the three  principal Ādityas (vs. 6). Others who break the Ārya social contrast—the impious, the  godless, the speakers of scorn, and the breakers of alliances (vss. 2, 6, 7, 8)—also fall  victim to Indra as enforcer. Thus, though the tone is martial, the message is moral.
Two separate devices structure the hymn. On the one hand, the vocative indra (always to be read trisyllabically) appears in the first pāda of every verse immedi ately after the caesura. On the other hand, there is ring composition: the first and  last (10) verses name Indra as “giver of victorious power” and “protector of men,”  while verse 2 has numerous echoes in verses 7–9.
## 01
You are king, Indra: guard those who are gods and the superior men;  protect us, lordly one.
You, as lord of settlements, are our surpassing benefactor, you the real  possessor of goods and giver of victorious power.
## 02
You subdued the clans whose speech was scornful, Indra, when you split  the seven autumnal strongholds, their shelter.
You set the flooding waters in motion, faultless one. You made Vr̥tra  subject to the youth Purukutsa.
## 03
Drive the troops whose lord is a champion [=you], Indra, and (those  [=Maruts?]) with whom now (you gain?) heaven, much invoked one.
Guard insatiable Agni going in triumph; like a lion, (guard) his labors in  the house at dawn.
## 04
They [=enemies] will lie now in the same womb, Indra, for the
glorification of your metal-edged weapon in its greatness.
When by battle he sent the floods, the cows surging downward, he
mounted his two fallow bays; boldly he swiped the battle-prizes.
## 05
Convey Kutsa, Indra, in whom you take pleasure. Eager for the halter are  the two silvery horses of the Wind.
Then tear off the wheel of the Sun at the moment of encounter. Mace in  hand, he will charge the opponents.
## 06
Once you had smashed those who rout their allies, and had smashed the  impious when you were strengthened by the stimulant, o Indra of the  fallow bays,
those who saw before them Aryaman in company with these two [=Mitra  and Varuṇa], they were shattered by you, taking their progeny along. 7. The sage poet [=Uśanā Kāvya?] murmured, o Indra, at the winning  of the chants [/(sun’s) rays]: “He has made the earth a pillow for
the Dāsa.
The bounteous one will make the three (worlds?) bright with drops; he  has embedded in a woeful womb the one who speaks evil in scorn.” 8. These are your old (deeds), Indra; new ones have come: you
overpowered and exploded the many (strongholds) for the lack of joy  [/end of battle] (of the godless).
You split the godless (clans) into pieces, like strongholds; you bowed  the weapon of the godless reviler.
## 09
You, the tumultuous one, Indra, set the tumultuous waters in motion,  flowing like streams.
When you will cross the sea, o champion, make Turvaśa and Yadu
cross to well-being.
## 10
You, Indra, should be at all times our man-protector of men, who best  keeps the wolf away
and giver of victorious power over all our contenders. – May we know  refreshment and a community having lively waters.