+++
title = "175"

+++
175 Indra
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: anuṣṭubh, except skhandogrīvī 1, triṣṭubh 6
The shorter compass of dimeter meter (vss. 1–5) seems to cramp Agastya’s style  somewhat. The most obvious device in this hymn is the relentless repetition of  forms derived from a very few roots: mad “become exhilarated” (vss. 1, 2, 5), sah “be victorious” (vss. 2–3), san/sā “win” (vss. 1, 2, 3, 5). These three roots create an  inescapable poetic logic of cause (exhilaration) and effect (conquer [enemies] and  win [prizes]), but the effect is still rather clumsy.
Verse 4 stands out as the exception, as it contains no forms of any of the signa ture roots, and it compresses within it a whole mythological complex: the stealing  of the wheel of the Sun, and the involvement of Kutsa, the horses of the Wind, and,  by implication, Uśanā Kāvya in that obscure story—a myth also alluded to in the  preceding hymn (I.174.5, 7, as well as often elsewhere, e.g., I.130.9).
One other feature is worthy of note: the image in verse 3cd, of Indra “firing” the  Dasyu like a piece of pottery.
## 1
Become exhilarated: might has been drunk by you, like the cup’s  exhilarating exhilaration, you of the fallow bays.
The bullish drop is for you the bull, the drop that is the competitor that  best wins thousands.
## 2
Let it come here to us—your exhilarating bullish exhilaration worthy to  be chosen,
possessing victorious power, winning, victorious in battle, immortal. 3. For you are a champion, a winner; you impel the chariot of Manu. Possessing victorious power, you fire the Dasyu who follows no
commandment, like a cup with flame.

## 4
Steal the wheel from the Sun, o poet, showing mastery with your  strength.
Convey Kutsa, bane for Śuṣṇa, with the horses of the Wind.
## 5
For most unbridled is your exhilaration and most brilliant your resolve. By reason of (the exhilaration?) that smashes Vr̥tra and (the resolve?)  that finds wide space, might you be thought the best winner of horses. 6. Just as for the previous singers, Indra, you became like joy, like waters for  the thirsty,
(so) I keep invoking you according to the formal invocation [/nivid].  – May we know refreshment and a community having lively waters.