+++
title = "176"

+++
176
Indra
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: anuṣṭubh
Though also in dimeter meter, this hymn displays an exuberance that the previ ous one (I.175) lacks. Both hymns begin with the same imperative (mátsi “become  exhilarated”) and end with the same verse (6), but in this hymn the soma drop is  generally the addressee, urged to mastermind Indra’s great actions, and especially  to help Indra destroy his, and our, enemies. The language is lively and the images  unclichéd; note for example verse 2cd, where the scattering of power is likened to  the sowing of seed in furrows just plowed by a bull.
## 1
Become exhilarated, to seek betterment for us. O drop, as bull,
enter Indra.
Showing your mettle, you drive the rival; you do not find a rival
facing (you).
## 2
Make the hymns enter into him, who is sole (king) of the domains, following whom autonomous power is strewn, like grain whenever a bull  is plowing,
## 3
In whose hands are all the goods of the five settlements.
Cause our deceiver to be spied out. Like a heavenly missile, smash him. 4. Smash anyone who doesn’t press soma, anyone difficult to get at who is  no joy to you.
Give his possessions to us, even though he will laud himself as a patron. 5. You aided (him,) the doubly exalted (Indra), so that the ridge-frequenter  [=soma] will be his at the chants.
In the contest, o drop, you helped Indra’s prize-seeker to the prizes.
## 6
Just as for the previous singers, Indra, you became like joy, like waters for  the thirsty,
(so) I keep invoking you according to the formal invocation [/nivid].  – May we know refreshment and a community having lively waters.