+++
title = "177"

+++
177 Indra
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Bloomfield (1916: 155) remarks of this hymn, “[It] is certainly late clap-trap. The  jingly use of stems vŕ̥ṣan and vr̥ṣabhá furnishes its main claim to attention. All its  repeated pādas are suspect.” Although we moderns might tend to be less outspo ken, this is certainly one of Agastya’s lesser efforts. The standard tropes of invita tion to the sacrifice (vs. 1ab), journey (vss. 1cd–3), and arrival (vs. 4) are presented  without complexity, and with a certain recycling of vocabulary—not only the “bull”  words scornfully noted by Bloomfield, but also “right up here” (arvā́ṅ vss. 1, 2, 5),  “one such as me” (madrík vss. 1, 3), and the usual lexicon of the journey. The only  really notable feature of the hymn is the first half verse, which uses a number of dif ferent terms to situate Indra in relation to the human populations, while implicitly  asking him to choose us as his destination among these populations.
## 1
Here (let) the bull of the peoples, filling the domains, the king of the  communities, much-invoked Indra (come).
Praised, seeking fame, having hitched up the two bullish fallow bays,  drive right up to one such as me with help.
## 2
Your bullish bulls, Indra, which are yoked by sacred formulations, the  steeds provided with a bullish chariot—
mount them; with them drive right up here. We invoke you, Indra, when  the soma is pressed.
## 3
Mount the bullish chariot. The bullish soma is pressed for you, the  honeyed drinks poured forth.
Having hitched up, with the two bulls, o bull of the settlements, with the  two fallow bays, drive on an easy slope up to one such as me.
## 4
Here is the sacrifice, proceeding to the gods; here is the ritual meal, here  the sacred formulations, here the soma, Indra.
The ritual grass is strewn. Drive forth toward it here, able one. Drink,  having sat down on it. Unharness your two fallow bays here.
## 5
Well-praised, drive right here, Indra, up to the sacred formulations of the  bard of Māna’s lineage.
May we know through your aid, as we sing at dawn... – May we know  refreshment and a community having lively waters.