+++
title = "179"

+++
179
Agastya and Lopāmudrā [Anukramaṇī: Rati “Delight”]
Lopāmudrā 1–2, Agastya 3–4, student 5–6 (so the Anukramaṇī)
6 verses: triṣṭubh, except br̥hatī 5
This justly famous and memorable hymn compresses much matter in a few verses.  The first four verses consist of a dialogue between the seer Agastya, the poet of  this hymn cycle (I.165–191), and his wife Lopāmudrā. It concerns, and contains  in embryo, a persistent theme in Indian religious literature and thought, the com
peting and incompatible goals of male religious figures: ascetic practice and the  production of sons, and it also presents the figure who mediates these goals: the  sexually eager woman who seduces the ascetic, who can thus attain the second goal  without actively abandoning the first (see, e.g., Jamison 1996a: 15–17).
Lopāmudrā speaks the first two verses, urging her husband to allow them both  to cease their ritual labors and have sex. She mentions the deleterious effects of old  age (vs. 1c) and cites as a precedent for her proposed course of action the pious  ancients who nevertheless also stopped working from time to time (vs. 2). In our  view (and that of the Anukramaṇī and Sāyaṇa, inter alia, contra a number of mod
ern scholars, who assign vs. 4 to Lopāmudrā), Agastya speaks the next two verses  (3–4). In verse 3 he counters her proposal with a vigorous call to renewed reli gious endeavor, which he casts as a battle against a tricky and numerous enemy that  they, as a married couple (mithunaú), can defeat together. The word mithunaú is a  charged one, because it of course can refer specifically to a sexual pairing. And this  is what appears to be rather graphically illustrated in verse 4, where Agastya suc cumbs to his lust, as Lopāmudrā engages him in intercourse. The “steadfast” (dhī́ra)  man is undone by the “flighty” (ádhīra) woman.
The next two verses (5–6) are assigned by the Anukramaṇī to a student, and  at least verse 5 may contain the expiatory statement of someone, quite possibly  a brahmacārin or Vedic student, who has broken a vow, quite possibly the vow  of chastity, and has undertaken ritual purification. The myth embodied in the  previous dialogue acts as a Legendenzauber, a magic spell that provides a myth
ological precedent for the misdeed and its expiation. (See Thieme 1964:  76.)  The final verse (6) summarizes the happy results for Agastya, despite—indeed  because of—his lapse: he attained offspring as well as power and a place among  the gods.
Although verse 5 provides support for the expiatory theory, we are inclined to  think there is something more going on, and that the conflict between Agastya  and Lopāmudrā reflects a theological struggle dimly perceptible beneath the sur face of the late R̥gveda—the struggle between the innovative theologians who favor  introducing the new ritual model involving the Sacrificer’s Wife as partner on the  ritual stage, and the conservatives who consider it a dangerous model with poten tially disastrous side-effects. Agastya in verse 3 appears to be a spokesman for the  innovators, urging an energetic ritual partnership between husband and wife—a

partnership that deteriorates in the next verse into a mere sexual encounter. In this  reading Agastya must undertake the penance in verse 5, and although everything  comes out right for him, the hymn cannot be seen as a ringing endorsement of the  introduction of the Sacrificer’s Wife.
## 01
[Lopāmudrā:] “For many autumns have I been laboring, evening and  morning, through the aging dawns.
Old age diminishes the beauty of bodies. Bullish (men) should now come  to their wives.”
## 02
[Lopāmudrā:] “For even those ancients, who served truth and at one with  the gods spoke truths,
even they got out of harness, for they did not reach the end. Wives
should now unite with their bullish (husbands).”
## 03
[Agastya:] “Not in vain is the labor that the gods help. Let us two take on  all contenders;
let us two win here the contest of a hundred stratagems, when as a united  couple we will drive on.”
## 04
[Agastya:] “The lust of a mounting bull [/waxing reed = penis] has come  to me, lust arisen from here, from there, from everywhere.
Lopāmudrā makes the bullish one flow out; the steadfast man does the  flighty woman suck while he is snorting.”
## 05
[Student or Agastya:] “This soma within my heart, just drunk, do  I adjure:
Whatever offense we have committed, let him forgive that, for of many  desires is mortal man.”
## 06
Agastya, digging with spades, seeking offspring, descendants, power— with regard to both “colors” [=offspring and ascetic power] the mighty  seer throve. He arrived at his hopes, which came true among the gods.