+++
title = "181"

+++
181
Aśvins
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
9 verses: triṣṭubh
Although not at the same degree of difficulty as Agastya’s immediately preceding  hymn to the Aśvins, this one certainly has its share of puzzles—though, as so often,  it restricts itself almost entirely to the Aśvins’ journey to the sacrifice and the sacri fice itself. The hymn begins at the sacrifice, with the Aśvins acting as priests (vs. 1),  but then draws back temporally to the usual invitation to travel to the sacrifice (vss.  2–3). Verse 4 gives us a tantalizing glimpse of a potential differentiation between  the two Aśvins, who are otherwise almost always treated as identical and identically  functioning twins.
Verses 5–6 are entirely parallel to each other in structure and return to the jour ney theme, but introduce another, though unnamed, figure by way of a slippery use  of the word anyá “other.” In verse 4 paired anyá’s referred to the two individual  Aśvins, but in the following two verses, each containing an anyá in pāda c, the  Aśvins are jointly established in the first half of the verse and implicitly contrast  with the unidentified “other” of pāda c. In our opinion this “other” must be Indra,  identifiable because of the pair of fallow bay horses in 5c, a pair of horses that are  uniquely Indra’s in the R̥gveda. It is not surprising that the Aśvins and Indra  should be journeying at the same time, since both are recipients of parts of the  Morning Pressing.
The final verses (7–9) take place on the sacrificial ground. Verse 8 is especially  rich in striking images of the ritual: the sacrificial fire is depicted as a “gleaming  wasp” whose sound is likened to a praise hymn, and the imminent mixing of soma  and milk gives rise to a complex erotic image, with the soma a swollen “bullish  cloud” at the “pouring out” (séka) of the milk—its swelling attributed to its sexual  excitement at the “insemination” (séka) of the cow. In general, swelling as a sign of  abundance is a consistent theme in the latter part of the hymn (vss. 5c, 6c, 8b, 8c).
## 01
What (portion) of nourishments and riches (do) you two dearest ones  (draw up), when, acting as Adhvaryus, you draw up (a portion) of the  waters?
This sacrifice here has made its own encomium for you, o you
depositories of goods, helpers of the peoples.384 I.182
## 02
Your blazing, milk-drinking horses, the heavenly steeds whose speed is  the wind’s,
the mind-swift, straight-backed bulls—let (those) self-ruling
[/self-directing] ones convey you Aśvins here.
## 03
Your chariot with its glossy chariot-box should come here like a
forward-coursing stream, for good faring—
(the chariot) that is worthy of the sacrifice and swifter than mind,
(saying) “I am in front,” o you mounters of the bull [=chariot], you
holy ones.
## 04
Born (one) here, (one) there, the two have always bellowed together with  (one) flawless body but with their own (multiple) names.
One of you is lauded as the victorious patron of the good battler, the  other as the son of heaven dispensing a good portion.
## 05
The attentive lead (horse) of you two, your sorrel, should go forth,  following your will, to the (sacrificial) seats,
(as should) the two fallow bays of the other [=Indra]. They will become  swollen with prizes—the skittish (horses) as they (go) through the airy  realms with their cries, o Aśvins.
## 06
Like a bull setting out to conquer, your (lead horse) of (many) autumns,  dispatching many refreshing drinks of honey, goes forth
along the routes of the other [=Indra]. (The horses) will become swollen  with prizes; (like) high, roiling rivers they have come to us.
## 07
A substantial song has been sent surging to you, flowing in three parts to  the plumped-up (ritual grass?), o ritual experts, Aśvins.
When you are approached with praise, help the man in need; whether on  your journey or not, hear my summons.
## 08
And this very song of the gleaming wasp [=sacrificial fire] swells in the  seat of men, which has three layers of ritual grass.
O bulls, the bullish cloud [=soma] is swollen as if at the insemination of  a cow [/at the pouring out of the cow (=milk)], showing favor to the  sons of Manu.
## 09
Just as Pūṣan and Plenitude (summoned) you, o Aśvins—the one with  the oblation sings (to you, as if) to Agni, as if to Dawn,
when I summon you, singing to you, with a longing for wide space.
– May we know refreshment and a community having lively waters.