+++
title = "182"

+++
182
Aśvins
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
8 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 6, 8
The hymn begins (vs. 1) by addressing the ritual participants (in the plural) and  announcing the Aśvins to them; the poet then addresses the Aśvins themselves with extravagant praise (vs. 2), but in the next verse (3) he expresses some impatience  with them: why are the gods wasting their time with a non-sacrificer? They should  destroy such people and reward us, the faithful sacrificers and poets (vss. 3–4). The  “baying hounds” of verse 4 may well be a reference to rival poets.
Most of the remainder of the hymn (vss. 5–7) is devoted to the tale of Bhujyu,  son of Tugra, whom the Aśvins rescued with a marvelous boat (or boats) when he  was set adrift in the sea. This exploit was alluded to briefly by Agastya in I.180.5  and is treated several times in Kakṣīvant’s Aśvin hymns (esp. I.116.3–5, I.117.14–
15) as well as elsewhere in the R̥gveda.
The final verse (8) is a typical summary verse, referring to the poem just recited  and ending with the Agastya refrain.
## 1
This (ritual) pattern has now been set: (all of you,) attend upon it!  The chariot has its bulls: become exhilarated, (all) you of inspired
thought!
(Here are) the two holy ones who quicken thought, who provided
the goods to (the mare) Viśpalā, the sons of heaven whose
commandments are bright for the good performer (of ritual).
## 2
Because you holy ones are the first of Indras and the first of Maruts, the  most wondrous wondrous ones and the best chariot-driving chariot  drivers,
you bring your full chariot loaded with honey. With it you drive right up  to the pious man, o Aśvins.
## 3
What are you doing here, wondrous ones; why are you sitting (by) some  man, who, though offering no oblations, makes a great show of
himself.
Pass him by; wear away the life of the niggard. Make light for the
eloquent inspired poet.
## 4
Crush the baying hounds on every side; smash the scornful. You know  how (to do) these things, o Aśvins.
Make every speech of the singer adorned with treasure. Both of you, o  Nāsatyas—help my laud.
## 5
For Tugra’s son (Bhujyu) in the rivers you made the boat, with a body  [=cockpit?] and wings [=sails?],
with which you carried him out with (your?) mind directed toward the  gods. With good flight you flew out of the great surge.
## 6
The son of Tugra, thrust down within the waters, thrust forth into  darkness that offered nothing to grab onto—
the four welcome boats of paunchy (shape?), sent by the Aśvins, deliver  him up to safety.
## 7
What tree emerged in the midst of the flood to which the son of Tugra  clung in his distress,
to grab hold of its leaves as if to the feathers of a wild bird in flight? You  carried him up, o Aśvins, for (his story) to be heard.

## 8
O Nāsatyas, superior men, it should stay by you—the solemn speech that  the sons of Māna have spoken for you
today from this seat belonging to soma. – May we know refreshment and  a community having lively waters.