+++
title = "183"

+++
183 Aśvins
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
A simple and straightforward hymn, especially in comparison with the first  two of Agastya’s Aśvin hymns (I.180–181), almost entirely concerned with  the Aśvins’ chariot and their journey to the sacrifice. In this hymn they travel  with Dawn (vs. 2). The dangers of the journey and their possible neglect of us  are briefly touched on (vs. 4ab), but with little anxiety, before the offerings are  announced to them.
## 1
Harness that which is swifter than mind, which has a triple chariot-box  and three wheels, o bulls,
with which you drive right up to the dwelling of the good performer (of  rituals). You fly with the tripartite (chariot) like a bird with its feathers. 2. The smooth-rolling chariot rolls on as it goes toward earth, when you  stand on it, resolved to fortify (us).
Let this hymn here accompany the wonder with wonderment; you keep  company with Dawn, the Daughter of Heaven.
## 3
Mount your smooth-rolling chariot, the one providing the oblations that  rolls on according to your commandments,
by which you two, o Nāsatyas, superior men, drive your circuit for our  descendants and ourselves to prosper.
## 4
Let neither the wolf nor the she-wolf venture against you. Do not avoid  (us) nor pass (us) by.
Here is the portion deposited for you, here the hymn, o wondrous ones,  and here the deposits of honey for you.
## 5
Gotama, Purumīḍha, Atri—(each one), providing the oblations,
summons you two for help, o wondrous ones.
Like those going in a straight line to the directed direction, drive here to  my summons, o Nāsatyas.
## 6
We have crossed to the further shore of this darkness. A praise hymn has  been set out in response to you, o Aśvins.
Drive just here along the paths leading to the gods. – May we know
refreshment and a community having lively waters.