+++
title = "184"

+++
184 Aśvins
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
This last hymn in Agastya’s series to the Aśvins is a symmetrically shaped five-verse  composition, since the final verse (6) is simply repeated from the previous hymn  (183.6). The first two verses call the gods to the sacrifice and urge them to enjoy the  sacrifice and be attentive to the poet. Verses 4–5 return to the scene of the sacrifice,  requesting that the gifts and attention of the Aśvins be directed to us, not to others  (vs. 4), while verse 5 contains a common type of summary of the hymn in which it’s  found, announcing its completion (5ab), and ends with the Aśvins in the company  of Agastya (5d). The poet’s positioning of his own name directly adjacent to that  of the Aśvins (voc. Nāsatya) in the final pāda of this series was surely deliberate.
The middle verse (3) makes a brief detour into mythology: the participation of  the Aśvins in the bridal journey of Sūryā, Daughter of the Sun (5ab). The verse  is addressed, in the first instance, to Pūṣan, who also participates in this episode  elsewhere. Several obscure images are found in this verse—the simile comparing  the Aśvins to arrow-makers (3a) and the journey of their lead horses (3cd) with the  well-nigh-impenetrable simile involving “vast Varuṇa,” which may refer to the sea  and reflect the generally later association of Varuṇa with waters. These difficulties  are, of course, appropriate to a structurally isolated middle verse.
## 1
We would summon you today and you later on. When dawn is breaking,  the conductor (of words) with solemn words (summons)
the Nāsatyas, the sons of Heaven, wherever they are, for the man who  gives even more than the stranger.
## 2
Bring yourselves to exhilaration in our company, o bulls! Beat up the  niggards when you are exhilarated by the wave (of soma).
Listen to me, you superior men, brought here through sacrifice by the  invitations of my thoughts, and (be) attentive with your ears.
## 3
O Pūṣan, the two gods, the Nāsatyas, as if making arrows ready for glory,  (made ready) the bridal procession of Sūryā.
Your lead horses, born in the waters, zig-zag along the wagon-treks as if  over the worn (surfaces) of the vast Varuṇa [=the sea?].
## 4
Let your (honeyed) gift be for us, honeyed ones. Spur on the praise song  of the bard, the son of Māna,
when the separate peoples applaud your (deeds) worthy of fame, in order  to (attain) an abundance of good heroes, o you of good gifts.
## 5
This praise song with a good twist has been made for you by the sons of  Māna, o bounteous Aśvins.
Drive your circuit for the sake of our descendants and ourselves,
becoming exhilarated in company with Agastya, o Nāsatyas.

## 6
We have crossed to the further shore of this darkness. A praise hymn has  been set out in response to you, o Aśvins.
Drive just here along the paths leading to the gods. – May we know
refreshment and a community having lively waters.