+++
title = "185"

+++
185
Heaven and Earth
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
11 verses: triṣṭubh
This eleven-verse hymn falls into two connected sections. Verses 2–8 all end with  a pāda-long refrain; since this refrain seems to be an implicit response to verse 1,  we believe that 1–8 form a coherent whole, ending with an expiatory verse (8) and  then followed by a three-verse summary referring to the hymn-within-a-hymn that  precedes.
The refrain addressed to Heaven and Earth, “protect us from the formless  void,” expresses the Vedic fear of the darkness and lack of definition character istic of pre-creation chaos. Heaven and Earth help dispel that fear and provide  protection from the void in several ways. They are the defining structures of the  cosmos, and within the shaped space they produce between them, all separate  forms, animate and inanimate, exist. This seems to be the point of verse 1c, “they  carry everything that is a name”; we take this as a version of the later Sanskrit  nāma-rūpa “name and form,” the multiplicity of individual entities, defined by  the conjunction of a physical form and a word for it. Heaven and Earth are also  the parents of the Sun, the light that allows the individual forms to be seen. Their  parentage of the Sun is, in our opinion, the subject of verses 2–4, though the Sun  is not mentioned directly. The embryo of verse 2 is the “gift of Aditi” in verse 3  (the Sun is already called ādityá, son of Aditi in the late R̥gveda; see, e.g., I.191.9),  while verse 4 describes the wonder that Heaven and Earth are never burned by  the Sun, their son. (On this kinship relation, see also the Heaven and Earth hymn  I.160.)
Heaven and Earth define space, but they also, in part via their son, define  time: the regular alternation of day and night is first mentioned in verse 1d. The two  complementary pairs, Heaven and Earth and Night and Dawn, are treated together  in verse 4c, and in our opinion the siblings of verse 5 are more likely Night and  Dawn than Heaven and Earth, since they are located “in the lap of their parents,”  that is, Heaven and Earth. However, the latter pair are definitely the subject of  verses 6–7, and their role in conception is highlighted again. The final verse of the  refrain-bounded section (8) seeks expiation for an unnamed offense, and offers the  current hymn (“this hymnic vision”) to that end.
The last three verses (9–11) develop this theme. The poet expresses the hope  that the verbal products he has just produced will help him: his “lauds belonging to men” (a variation on the technical term nárāśáṃsa, vs. 9), and the “truth” he  addressed to Heaven and Earth (vss. 10–11).
## 1
Which of these two is the earlier, and which the later? How were they  born, o poets? Who fully understands?
By themselves the two carry everything that is a name. Day and Night  roll through (them) like two wheels.
## 2
The two, unmoving and footless, conceive an ample embryo, moving  and footed,
like a natural son in the lap of his parents. – O Heaven and Earth,
protect us from the formless void.
## 3
I invoke the gift of Aditi, which is without fault, without aggression,  without weapon, and provided with sunlight and reverence.
O you two world-halves, beget it for the singer. – O Heaven and Earth,  protect us from the formless void.
## 4
We should be devoted to the two who are never scorched, (always) giving  help with their help, to the two world-halves whose children are the gods, to the pair among the gods, along with the pairs among the days. – O  Heaven and Earth, protect us from the formless void.
## 5
The two young women, sisters, siblings [=Night and Dawn?],
contiguous and uniting with each other in the lap of their parents,
sniff-kissing the navel of the world. – O Heaven and Earth, protect us  from the formless void.
## 6
The two broad and lofty seats do I invoke with truth, the begetters of  the gods with their help,
they of lovely countenance who conceive the immortal one. – O Heaven  and Earth, protect us from the formless void.
## 7
The two, broad and wide, voluminous and of distant boundary, do  I address with homage in this sacrifice,
who, bringing good fortune and advancing well, conceive (the
embryo). – O Heaven and Earth, protect us from the formless void.
## 8
If we have ever committed any offence at all against the gods or against  a comrade or against the lord of the family,
this hymnic vision should be propitiation to them. – O Heaven and
Earth, protect us from the formless void.
## 9
Let both lauds belonging to men help me; let both (Heaven and Earth)  accompany me with aid, with help.
There is much for him who gives even more than the stranger. Becoming  exhilarated by the refreshment, might we be refreshed, o gods.
## 10
I of good wisdom have spoken this truth to Heaven and to Earth to  hear first.
Let the two of them protect from disgrace and difficulty in close
quarters. Let the mother and father guard (us) with their help.

## 11
Let this come true, Heaven and Earth, which I address to you two, o  Father and Mother.
Become the nearest of the gods with your help. – May we know
refreshment and a community having lively waters.