+++
title = "186"

+++
186 All Gods
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
11 verses: triṣṭubh
Although this hymn provides numerous small difficulties and twists of phrase char acteristic of Agastya, its basic outline is very simple: god after god is urged to come  to our sacrifice, beginning with Savitar (vs. 1) and ending with the gods collectively  (vs. 10d), and working through a list of divinities both major (e.g., the Ādityas [vs. 2],  Indra [vss. 6cd–7], the Maruts [vss. 8–9]) and minor (e.g., Ahi Budhnya [vs. 5]), in no  apparent order. There is much emphasis on shared activity, with expressions like “in  concert” (sajóṣas vss. 2–3, 6), “along with” (smát vss. 6–8), “like-minded” (sámanas vs. 8). The invitations end with verse 10; as so often, the final verse (11) is an internal  reference to the hymn itself and its power to satisfy the gods.
The beginnings of the verses and half-verses display an intricate pattern of rep etition that cannot be rendered in translation: with matching preverbs in verses 1–2  and 9–10 (the latter showing an especially complex phonological pattern), and the  verses of the middle section (5–8) all opening with utá “and” (as well as additional  matching material). The “and” especially contributes to our sense of the additive  quality of the invitations to the gods.
## 1
Let god Savitar, who belongs to all men, come to us here at the rite with  ritual refreshments and a good laud,
so that you, o youths [=gods], will reach exhilaration nearby us—(let)  inspired thought (come) to the whole moving world at the evening
mealtime.
## 2
Let all the gods together come here to us: Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuṇa  in concert,
so that they all will become our strengtheners and will make (all things)  easy to overcome, like faltering power.
## 3
I will sing for you to the dearest guest, to Agni, with my lauds, I who  prevail in concert with (him?),
so that our good praise will be Varuṇa. And he [=Agni] will deliver
refreshments like a patron praised by a stranger.
## 4
With a desire for gain I hasten for you with homage to Dawn and Night,  (who are) like a cow that is easily milked,
as in one and the same day I measure out my chant in milk of dissimilar  forms (though found) in the same udder. 5. And let Ahi Budhnya create joy for us. As a (cow) swelling (with milk)  pursues her young, the River pursues (the hymn?)
with which we will speed the Child of the Waters, whom the bulls
having the speed of thought convey.
## 6
And let Tvaṣṭar come right here to us, in concert with the patrons, at  the evening mealtime.
Indra, the Vr̥tra-smasher, who fills the domains, the most powerful of  men, should come here to us.
## 7
And our horse-yoked thoughts lick him like cows their tender young. Our songs approach him, the sweetest smelling of men, like
wedded wives.
## 8
And let the like-minded Maruts along with Rodasī sit here for us—their  weapons grown strong,
their horses dappled, their chariots like streams—the gods who care for  the stranger, like yokemates in alliance.
## 9
Now that they have become conspicuous in their greatness, they hitch  up their advance teams with a well-twisted (hymn),
then, when, like a (lightning) bolt on a clear day, their weapons spray  all the salt-land.
## 10
Bring the Aśvins forward to help; bring Pūṣan forward, for they are  powerful by nature,
(as are) Viṣṇu without hatred, the Wind, and the Master of the R̥bhus.  I would turn the gods here for their good favor.
## 11
Here among us is this visionary hymn, o you who are worthy of the  sacrifice; it should provide you your fill and a place to sit—
(the hymn) that, seeking goods, takes its place among the gods. – May  we know refreshment and a community having lively waters.