+++
title = "187"

+++
187 Praise of Food (Annastuti)
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
11 verses: anuṣṭubgarbha 1, gāyatrī 2, 4, 8–10, anuṣṭubh 3, 5–7, anuṣṭubh or br̥hatī 11
On the surface a charming address to food, couched throughout in the 2nd per son, this hymn nonetheless enfolds some mysteries. In the straightforward verses  (esp. 1–3, 6), the poet praises food as the necessary support and help for both gods  and men, a theme summarized in the final verse (11).
But the nature of food and of its “juices” (rásāḥ) is also explored in several  obscure verses (esp.  4–5), where they have a cosmic dimension. In our view, the  juices of verse 4, “dispersed throughout the (cosmic) realms and adjoined to heaven  like the winds,” are the rains, localized in the midspace like the winds—and more  generally the endlessly circulating cosmic waters that fall as rain, produce food in

the form of plants and animals, and return to heaven by evaporation and by ritual  offering. In verse 5 these juices both yield food (as the nurturing rains) and are part  of, or belong to, food (as the juicy parts of plants and animals).
The hymn takes a ritual turn in the last four verses (7–10) before the summary  verse (11). Verse 7 seems to introduce the early-morning ritual; in the next three  verses (8–10), marked by a refrain, food is sacralized—made equivalent to soma  (vs. 9) and to a plant, perhaps the soma plant (vs. 10), each addressed as “friend of  the winds” (see vs. 4 for food’s association with the winds)—and transformed into  ritual offerings. The generic “waters and plants” of verse 8 become the milk and  grain mixed with soma in verse 9. (The exact application of vs. 10 is unfortunately  unclear.) In each case, the addressee is urged to “become just the fat,” in other  words (in a more robust society than ours) the choicest part of the food substance.
## 1
Now I shall praise food, the support and power of the great,
by whose might Trita shook Vr̥tra apart till his joints were parted.
## 2
O sweet food, honeyed food, we have chosen you:
for us be a helper.
## 3
Draw near to us, food—kindly with your kindly help,
joy itself, not to be despised, a very kind companion without duplicity. 4. These juices of yours, food, are dispersed throughout the realms, adjoined to heaven like the winds.
## 5
These (juices) are those that yield you, o food, and they also are part of  you, sweetest food.
Those who receive the sweetness of your juices press forward like
strong-necked (bulls).
## 6
On you, food, is the mind of the great gods set.
A dear (deed) was done at your signal: he smashed the serpent with
your help.
## 7
When yonder dawning light of the mountains has come, o food, then you should also come here to us, honeyed food, fit for our portion. 8. When we bite off a full share of the waters and plants,
o you friend of the winds—become just the fat.
## 9
When we take a share of you when mixed with milk or mixed with  grain, o Soma,
o you friend of the winds—become just the fat.
## 10
Become the gruel, o plant, the fat, the steaming [?] suet [?],
o you friend of the winds—become just the fat.
## 11
We have sweetened you with words, o food, as cows [=milk] (do) the  oblations—
you as feasting companion for the gods, you as feasting companion
for us.