+++
title = "188"

+++
188
Āprī
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
11 verses: gāyatrī
Like the other nine Āprī hymns in the R̥gveda, this one treats a set series of sacrifi cial elements in a set order, using the same key words, italicized in translation. It is  not as bare-bones as some examples of the genre (such as I.14, the first in the text),  and phraseologically it closely resembles X.110.
## 01
Kindled today you rule as a god with the gods, o conqueror of
thousands.
As messenger and poet, convey the oblations.
## 02
O Tanūnapāt, for the one following truth the sacrifice is anointed  with honey,
while providing refreshments in thousands.
## 03
Being libated, as the one to be solemnly invoked, convey to us the gods  worthy of the sacrifice.
O Agni, you are the winner of thousands.
## 04
With their power they strewed the ritual grass, which brings a thousand  heroes, toward the east,
where, o Ādityas, you rule widely.
## 05
Wide-ruler and Complete-ruler, wide-ranging and preeminent, those  which are many and many more—
the Doors flowed ghee.
## 06
Because, having lovely ornaments and lovely adornments, the two rule  [/shine] widely with splendor,
let Dawn (and Night) take their seats here.
## 07
Because they are the two foremost Divine Hotars, poets possessing  lovely speech,
let them perform this sacrifice of ours.
## 08
O Bhāratī, Iḍā, and Sarasvatī—all of you whom I implore—
spur us on to splendor.
## 09
Because preeminent Tvaṣṭar anointed all the beasts (with) their forms,  by sacrifice win their fat for us.
## 10
By yourself send (the sacrificial animal) to the fold of the gods, o Lord  of the Forest.
Agni will sweeten the oblations.
## 11
Agni, the leader of the gods, is anointed by the gāyatrī-chant.
He shines at the svāhā-calls.394 I.189