+++
title = "189"

+++
189 Agni
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Although this hymn begins with a hope for an easy journey to wealth, it is clear  that the poet sees menace everywhere, from which he begs Agni for protection.  The imaginative catalogue of possible hazards and enemies continues through verse  6. Verse 7 breaks this pattern, but implicitly suggests why Agni will remain on the  poet’s side:  the god distinguishes between sacrificers and non-sacrificers, and he  makes himself available to the former.
The hymn ends with a typical summary verse characterizing the hymn that pre cedes. The poet’s claim that he has spoken “enigmas” seems overblown; in the uni verse of R̥gvedic discourse this hymn is remarkably straightforward, and Agni is  unlikely to find interpreting it particularly challenging. The final verse does, how ever, draw attention to a structural feature of the hymn: the first seven verses all  contain the vocative of the god’s name, in insistent initial position in the first three,  then somewhat postponed in the next four. In the summary verse the direct address  to Agni is absent, and he appears instead in the locative, a grammatical shift that  underlines the change of topic.
## 1
O Agni, lead us to wealth by an easy path, since you know all the (ritual)  patterns, o god.
Keep from us transgression, going its crooked way. Might we offer you  the greatest expression of reverence.
## 2
O Agni, deliver us anew to the far shore, beyond all hardships, with your  blessings.
And become a wide fortress, thick and broad, for us, and luck and
lifetime for our progeny and posterity.
## 3
O Agni, keep from us afflictions, (so) they will afflict peoples without  Agni’s protection.
Renew the earth for us to go easily upon it, o god worthy of the sacrifice,  along with all the immortals.
## 4
Protect us, Agni, with your unwearying protectors, and when you blaze  here in your own dear seat.
Let not fear find your singer, neither now nor later, o youngest
mighty one.
## 5
Do not release us, Agni, to the evil man, nor to the greedy one, the cheat,  nor to misfortune.
Do not hand us over to the toothed one who bites nor to the toothless,  nor to one who does harm, o strong one.
## 6
One like you, o Agni born of truth, when hymned, will stretch wide a  shield for our body from everyone who seeks to harm or to revile—for you watch widely  over crooked ways, o god.
## 7
Distinguishing between the two [=sacrificers and non-sacrificers?], you  pursue the sons of Manu at the early mealtime, o Agni worthy of the  sacrifice.
At the later mealtime you become tractable for Manu, to be groomed  like a foal [?] by the fire-priests.
## 8
We have spoke enigmas in his presence—I, the son of Māna, (have  spoken them) in the presence of mighty Agni.
May we win a thousand together with the seers. – May we know
refreshment and a community having lively waters.