+++
title = "190"

+++
190
Br̥haspati
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Br̥haspati, the lord of formulations, is here presented as both producer and receiver  of sacred speech and sound. This theme is established in the first verse, where  my chants strengthen Br̥haspati, who himself is the “leader of song.” The physi cal movement of words and sound—between mortals and gods, between earth  and heaven—is a repeated theme in the hymn (see esp. vss. 2, 4, 7). The difficult  verses 3 and 4 concern a particular kind of sacred sound, the signal-call (ślóka)  that Br̥haspati launches daily, most likely a call announcing the sacrifice or some  part of it.
The Br̥haspati depicted in this hymn is no mere gentle wordsmith, but militant  and aggressive, compared to a bellowing bull (vs. 1), a fearsome wild beast (vss. 3,  4), a bird of prey (vs. 7). His words are missiles (vs. 4), and those who underestimate  him and seek to exploit him receive his punishment (vs. 5).
## 01
With chants I will strengthen anew the unassailable bull of gladdening  tongue, Br̥haspati,
the brightly shining leader of song to whom the gods and the mortals  harken as he bellows.
## 02
Words follow close upon him in proper sequence, like a gush that has  been sent gushing from those serving the gods,
for Br̥haspati, far-ranging straightway through the wide spaces, has  become equal to Mātariśvan in regard to truth.
## 03
A praise song and an offering of reverence, as well as his signal-call, will  he hold forth, like Savitar his two arms—
(the call) that happens every day according to his will, (the call) of the  undemonic, which is powerful like a fearsome wild beast.

## 04
When his signal-call speeds in heaven and on earth like a steed, the  discriminating one [=Br̥haspati?], bringing wondrous apparitions, will  control it, *like a steed—
as also when these missiles [=words] of Br̥haspati, like the charges of  wild beasts, go to the heavens that possess serpentine wiles.
## 05
Those who are wicked and tough, who live off you who are good, taking  you for a ruddy little bullock, o god—
to the evil-minded one you do not concede anything of value; you just  punish the reviler, Br̥haspati.
## 06
(You are) easy to approach like a path leading to good pastures, but  difficult to hold onto like an ally gratified by (all those) around.
The unassailable ones who watch over us have taken their stand,
unclosing the enclosed (cows).
## 07
On whom the chants, like streams, converge, like rivers on the sea with  their banks as wheels,
Br̥haspati, the knowing one, gazes between both, the ford and the waters,  (like) a bird of prey.
## 08
Just so has the great, powerful one, powerfully born, the bull Br̥haspati,  the god, been established in his place.
When praised, let him establish for us what brings heroes and cows.
– May we know refreshment and a community having lively waters.