+++
title = "191"

+++
191 Against Poisonous Animals
Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi
16 verses: anuṣṭubh, except mahāpaṅkti 10–12, mahābr̥hatī 13
Very Atharvan in style, this hymn, directed against stinging and poisonous insects,  does indeed have a number of parallels and near-parallels in the Atharvaveda. Like  that text, it frequently uses expressions of the immediate past (especially in the aor ist) as a triumphant predictor of successful measures taken in the present. That is,  a statement like “they have been wiped out” (vs. 1d), though apparently referring to  the past, probably instead announces, hopefully, that the current verbal spell along  with whatever physical magic practices have been undertaken will ensure that the  desired effect will have happened this instant. Unfortunately we have no real idea  what the physical rites involved, though judging from parallels like Atharvaveda  VII.56, entitled by Whitney “Against poison of snakes and insects,” it may well have  involved healing plants and insect-eating birds.
The first nine verses of the hymn are directed particularly against adŕ̥ṣta—“the  unseen, invisible”—apparently small biting insects. English has a remarkably close  counterpart in the colloquially named “no-see-ums,” which also share behaviors  with their Sanskrit counterparts: clinging to grasses (vs. 3) and becoming especially  virulent in the early evening (vss. 4–5). And anyone who has ever attempted to swat a flying bug ruefully recognizes the commands given in verse 6: “stand still! come  to rest!”
In the rest of the hymn (vss. 10–16) the speaker works to render ineffective and  harmless the poison of poisonous insects more generally. One of the most salient  features of this part of the hymn is the density of diminutivization, that is, of the  use of the colloquial, low-register -ka-suffix, which appears not only on nouns  referring to bugs and birds, but also on pronouns and demonstrative adjectives (vss.  11, 15) and even on a participle (vs. 16). (For further on the sociolinguistics of the  -ka-suffix, see Jamison 2009b). Though for the most part the tools deployed against  the poison are homely ones—little birds and plants, insofar as we can tell—this  section of the hymn begins with higher rhetorical ambitions and a mythic model.  In verse 10, whose interpretation is much disputed, the speaker fastens the poison  on the sun and the skin containing the poison (in our view) “on the house of the  possessor of liquor (surā).” Although most commentators, beginning at least with  Sāyaṇa, interpret the latter action as an unmarked simile likening this action to  the fastening of the poison on the sun, in our view it is a parallel mytho-ritual  action and provides the mythic model for the ritual actions that follow. Again in  our view, the possessor of liquor is Indra—a reference to a myth well known in the  Brāhmaṇas and already clearly present in the late R̥gveda (X.131.4–5), in which  Indra, sickened from drinking an excess of soma, is made to drink the usually for bidden alcohol surā by the Aśvins and Sarasvatī. The surā was not pure but mixed,  and both the Aśvins and Indra perform the singular feat of separating the two  mixed liquids in the course of drinking them—a detail found in the R̥gvedic treat ment just cited. The ability to separate liquids, to get rid of (or nullify the effects of)  the noxious one and preserve the beneficial one, is what the ritual performer desires  here, as the last two pādas of the refrain (vss. 10–13ef) make clear.
## 1
The stinger that isn’t a stinger, and the one that’s a real stinger—
these are the two—they’re called fleas. The no-see-ums have been
wiped out.
## 2
As she comes, she smashes the no-see-ums, and as she goes away, she  smashes them.
Smashing them down, she smashes them, and crushing, she
crushes them.
## 3
The reeds and the damn reeds, the darbha-grasses and (the bugs) on the  sira-plants [?],
the no-see-ums on the muñja-grass and on the vīraṇa-grass—all have  been wiped out at once.
## 4
The cows have sat down in the cowshed; the wild animals have settled  down—
down (also) the lights of the peoples. The no-see-ums have been
wiped out.
## 5
And these very ones have come into sight in the early evening, like  thieves.
You no-see-ums seen by all, you have become recognized.

## 6
Your father is Heaven, and your mother the Earth. Your brother is  Soma, and your sister Aditi.
You no-see-ums seen by all, stand still! come to rest!
## 7
The ones on (my) shoulders, the ones on (my) limbs, the little needle  bugs with their stingers out—
you no-see-ums, there is nothing at all for you here. All of you, get  worn down at once!
## 8
Up from the east comes the Sun—the smasher of the no-see-ums, seen  by all,
crushing all the no-see-ums and all the sorceries.
## 9
Up has flown yonder Sun, incinerating all the many—
the Āditya (up) from the mountains, the smasher of the no-see-ums,  seen by all.
## 10
I fasten the poison on the Sun, the skin (containing it) on the house of  the possessor of liquor [=Indra].
Even now he will not die, and we will not die.
The mounter of the fallow bays [=Indra] has (made) its [=poison’s] trek  far in the distance; the honeyed (plant) has made you honey.
## 11
Such a little teeny śakunti-bird—that itty-bitty thing has eaten your  poison.
Even now she will not die, and we will not die.
The mounter of the fallow bays [=Indra] has (made) its [=poison’s] trek  far in the distance; the honeyed (plant) has made you honey.
## 12
Three times seven, the little sparks [=small birds?] have swallowed the  bloom of poison.
Even now they will not die, and we will not die.
The mounter of the fallow bays [=Indra] has (made) its [=poison’s] trek  far in the distance; the honeyed (plant) has made you honey.
## 13
Of the nine and ninety tormentors of poison,
I have mentioned the names of all.
The mounter of the fallow bays [=Indra] has (made) its [=poison’s] trek  far in the distance; the honeyed (plant) has made you honey.
## 14
The three-times-seven peahens, the seven spinster sisters,
these have carried away your poison, like women with jugs
(carrying) water.
## 15
Such a little teeny kuṣumbha-bug—I split that itty-bitty thing with a  rock.
Thence has the poison rolled forth, following channels facing away  (from us).
## 16
The little teeny kuṣumbha-bug said this, as it made its teeny turn forth  from the mountain:
“Without juice is the poison of the little scorpion, without juice is your  poison, little scorpion.”