+++
title = "018"

+++
Indra (Battle of the Ten Kings) I have little or nothing to contribute to the interpr. of this famous hymn, esp.

of its historical or quasi-historical aspects. The hymn has been extensively treated by a number of scholars both fairly recently, esp. H.-P. Schmidt (Indica 17 [1980], 41- 47) and M. Witzel (in The Indo-Aryans in Ancient South Asia [1995], esp. 333-37), and in the past, and I will therefore limit my comments. See the publ. intro. for structural and contextual disc. I am certain that many puns, wordplays, and snide asides are completely unrecoverable today and respectfully suggest that we put our energies into interpreting parts of the RV where we have a chance of success.


## 01
Pāda c contains two parallel nominal clauses. Both should be in the causal domain of the hí, but it is located only in the 2nd of the two. We might have expected \*tu vé hí gā́vaḥ sudúghās tvé áśvāḥ, which would have been just as good metrically.

On the pun in d see publ. intro. and comm. ad vs. 4.


## 02
As I interpr. it, the first hemistich presents us with a causal hí clause followed by an imperatival non-sequitur. What is immediately striking is that it is emphasized that Indra is dwelling in peace and domestic harmony -- not always the first picture of Indra we conjure up -- in a hymn that is about to become very very martial. In the imperatival clause of b, he is also identified as a wise kaví, again not a militant role for Indra. Perhaps the connection between the causal hí clause and the imperatival ones that follow is that Indra has the leisure to pay due attention to our hymns and reward our poetic offerings (which, as a kaví, he has the connoisseurship to appreciate) with aid and material goods.

The interpr. just given assumes that áva opening b and piśā́opening c are both imperatives. Both of these identifications have been questioned. Some (e.g., Lub) take áva as the preverb (Gr by implication, since he does not list it under √av), but both Ge and Old (the latter after some hesitation) interpr. it as an impv. to √av ‘help’.

As for piśā́, Gr takes it as the instr. of a root noun, but most subsequent interpr. as the impv. to an otherwise unattested them. aor. to √piś ‘adorn, ornament’ (see, e.g., Old, Ge, Schindler [Rt. Noun], Lub). Our form could well be a thematic substitute for a form of the root aor., found once in the part. piśāná-, since the expected root aor.

impv. should be the quite opaque *pīḍhí.

As indicated ad I.71.10, I do not have an independent view about the morphology of vidúṣ, which occurs in the same phrase in both passages (abhí vidúṣ kavíḥ sán). I do think that it is a nom. sg. (with Old), not a haplologized acc. pl. as Ge takes it (see his n. 10b ad I.71.10). (Debrunner [AiG II.2.471] seems weakly to assign it to a -u-stem [but possibly to -uṣ- instead] and interpr. as a nom. sg., while Wackernagel [AiG III.300, which publication of course long predates II.2] accepts Ge’s acc. pl.) To me the form looks as if it is a truncated form of the weak form of the pf. part. vidvā́ṃs-, though it could of course belong to a u-stem vidú- instead -- but whether it is archaic or innovative I wouldn’t venture to say. It is also curious that in neither passage is the pres. part. sán concessive, though that is the usual function of the nom. forms of this participle. However, here the sán is by my interpr.

in tmesis with abhí, which opens the repeated phrase, in the sense ‘be preeminent’ (so also Ge), even though participles in tmesis are rare.

The apparent close sandhi with following kavíḥ that vidúṣ exhibits seems to me not to support the haplology explanation, though the sandhi issue is complex.

Mark Hale (in “Preliminaries to the Study of the Relationship between Syntax and Sandhi in Rigvedic Sanskrit” [MSS 51, 1990], as well as the unpubl. Wackernagel’s Law: Phonology and Syntax in the Rigveda [1995], 33-36) insightfully discusses the general problem of irregular sandhi of -s before k-. The great majority of the examples occur before forms of √kṛ, and Hale plausibly accounts for this phenomenon by pointing out that kṛ has an s-mobile doublet √skṛ and that the unusual -s sandhi outcomes can result from the doubled -s s- that would be underlying. The single example of such a result before the PN káṇva- can also be so explained, since we have a synchronic doublet -skaṇva. However, Hale’s invocation of the s-mobile explanation for the exx. before kaví- is not supported by internal evidence for a *skaví- or by solid evidence of s-mobile cognates outside of Indic, and I therefore think the kaví- examples require a different explanation -- though I don’t know what that is. We should first note that they form a more limited set than Hale’s presentation (1995: 36 n. 28) makes clear. The two vidúṣ kavíḥ passages are identical, and paś́uṣ kavíḥ occurs in our same hymn (8d) and is most likely responsive to the earlier example; vásuṣ kavíḥ (I.79.5) is nearby vidúṣ kavíḥ in I.71.10 (though admittedly not attributed to the same poet) and could be based upon it. brahmaṇas kave (VI.16.30) is in a voc. phrase where close sandhi effects are at home; cf. the very similar brahmaṇas pate (I.18.3). Of Hale’s collection, this leaves V.59.4 kás kā́vyā [sic, not Hale’s kāvyāḥ] and ṛtás kavíḥ (VIII.60.5). The latter is problematic for a different reason: it contains one of only two exx. of a masc. ṛtá-; the other is in the same phrase (IX.62.30) but with standard sandhi ṛtáḥ kavíḥ. In fact most occurrences of kaví- (kā́vya-, etc.) preceded by -s do show the standard visarga (e.g., among the many, I.76.5 kavíbhiḥ kavíḥ). I don’t know what to make of all this. I am inclined to think that the irregular sandhi originated in the morphologically problematic phrases vidúṣ kavíḥ and ṛtás kavíḥ and is a dark reflection of their troubled morphology. It then had a very limited spread. But since I don’t understand what the morphology is or how this could affect the sandhi, this is not much of a theory! In any case, the poet of this hymn seems to showcase this sandhi anomaly, by not only including the two - uṣ ka- examples (2b, 8d), but also adding the correct āśúś canéd (9b) and close sandhi rāradhuṣ ṭe (18a); cf. also suṣupuḥ ṣáṭ (14b).

The cows and horses attributed to Indra in 1c reappear here in c as his ornamental gifts to us.


## 04
The desid. part. dúdukṣan is mildly notable because 1) it does not exhibit reverse-Grassmann (*dúdhukṣan) unlike the s-aor. ádhukṣat (also, however, 3 adukṣat); 2) it is a real part., not the u-adj. often substituting for the part. in the desid.

(*dudukṣú-).

Because of the overt switch to the 1st ps. in c, I take the pf. sasṛje in b as 1st ps.

(flg. JPB p.c.), with vásiṣṭhaḥ doubling the underlying subject. The pf. form is of course ambig. between 1st and 3rd.

As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. exhibits a kind of ring comp. via an anagrammatic pun: 1c vásu ... vániṣṭhaḥ “best gainer of goods” is compressed into the name of the poet vásiṣṭhaḥ (vás[u]… [ván]iṣṭhaḥ). This brings the first section of the hymn to a close; the battle scene erupts abruptly in the next vs. ### 05
My tr. of the 2nd hemistich follows Old’s, contra Ge.


## 06
The first hemistich contains two ironic reversals, based on what are presumably personal names or plays on them. In the first pāda yákṣu-, perhaps a pun on Yadu, can be rendered as ‘sacrificer’ (so Schmidt, from whom I adapted the tr.), and he himself becomes the sacrifice, or a part of it: puroḷā́ḥ ‘offering cake’.

The presumed underlying form of this nom. sg., puroḷā́s (also found in III.28.2), is unexpected: to the stem puroḷā́ś- we might rather find *puroḷā́ṭ. See Scar (221) with lit. It is worth pointing out in this case, as well as with equally unexpected sadhamā́s in the next vs., that the final of both forms matches that of sudā́s, our hero the king Sudās, and so there may have been some adjustment in that direction, esp. in a hymn given to phonological manipulation. Unfortunately this doesn’t explain the occurrence in III.28.2.

In b the name of the ill-fated enemy mátsyāsaḥ is also the common noun ‘fish’, and this word should be read in both the simile and the frame. Following Old (and Ge, who adopted Old’s suggestion), I take ápīva as containing not only the particle ápi ‘also’ but also a putative loc. sg. to áp- ‘water’. Although there are vanishingly few singular forms to this stem in the RV, they do exist (also in Avestan). The loc. should also be accented *apí, but in puns accentual fluidity is common. The “fish” pun cries out for the “water” interpr., though Schmidt seems to reject it. He then introduces a pun that isn’t supported by the text, rendering rāyé … níśitāḥ as “hooked on wealth (like fishes on bait).” Though this is appealingly cute, it is hard to push ní √śā ‘whet (down)’ to ‘hook’, and dat. rāyé is also hard to fit into that idiom.

Moreover, (ní) √śā is a sort of signature verb in this hymn; cf. 2d, 11c, 24d, and in particular the positive 2d śiśīhi rāyé asmā́n “whet us for wealth” appears to be the polarized counterpart of our negative rāyé … níśitāḥ. I wish I could find a clever expression to capture the image, but so far I have been unable to.

There is a diversity of opinion on what is happening in d as expressed by the verb atarat. Ge thinks that friend is helping friend, though this requires √tṝ to mean ‘help’, not a usage I’m aware of; Old that the enemy ranks were divided into two parts, both fleeing but one faster than, and therefore overtaking (√tṝ), the other. This seems also to be Schmidt’s view, though his “crossed (overcame)” shows a nonidiomatic usage of English ‘overcame’ (meaning ‘overtook’?). The Old/Schmidt view seems possible, but I interpr. it in the light of VIII.1.4, where I take tartūryante 4 to refer to the crisscrossing movements of people in opposite sides of a conflict. I suggest that here sákhā sákhāyam refers to former comrades who are now fighting on opposite sides and crossing each other’s path in the battle line: the shifting alliances of the participants in the Ten Kings battle are notorious and much discussed (see esp.

Witzel’s treatment cited above).


## 07
Ge (fld. by Gotō, 1st Kl., 222) takes bhananta as reflexive (“… nannten sich”) with śivā́saḥ as pred. nom., but the responsive pairing of act. 3rd pl. pres.

bhananti and mid. 3rd pl. injunc. bhananta in adjacent vss. in the same metrical position in IV.18.6-7 (see comm. ad loc.) marks bhananta as a text-book case of - anta replacement, as disc. in my 1979 article. Flg. Schmidt, I take cd as the direct speech implied by bhananta. Old also rejects the Ge interpr.

The l’s of the names bhalānás- and álina- and the unmotivated retroflex -ṣ- in viṣāṇín- suggest peoples outside of the Ārya mainstream, although of course they could also show the kinds of deliberate phonological deformation found elsewhere in the hymn. It’s possible that bhalānás- reflects a form of √bhṛ, hence my ‘raiders’. It is not clear whether śivā́saḥ should be interpr. as the usual adj. (‘kindly’) or as the name of another group of fighters. The publ. tr. reflects the former (flg. Schmidt), but I am now inclined to consider the latter more likely, primarily because it’s not phonologically outlandish. In this case I’d tr. “The Pakthas and the Bhalānases spoke out, and the Alinas and the Viṣānins -- (all) ‘kindly’ --” This would be a sarcastic aside about the martial forces ranged against us.

If we accept the Schmidt/Witzel distribution of the allegiances of the various named forces, those named in ab are complaining about the defection of the sadhamā́d- who led them to the battle but has now gone over to the Tṛtsu (/Sudās) side and has turned to attack the nṝ̥́n (‘superior men’), by which they mean themselves. The sadhamā́d- is most likely Indra, and so losing him as an ally would be a serious blow.

On the unexpected form sadhamā́s, if the nom. sg. to sadhamā́d-, see Scar (381) with lit. I think it unlikely that it’s an acc. pl., a possibility Old considers by assigning it to a diff. root. As noted above (vs. 6) with regard to puroḷā́s, the rhyme with king Sudās may have played a part.

Ge’s interpr. of the syntax of cd is impossible: it contains an embedded main clause! His rel. cl. consists of ā́yó ‘nayat … yudhā́nṛ́̄n “… der seine Mannen unter Kampf heranführte” -- the beginning of c and the end of d. While his main clause is the end of c and the beginning of d, … sadhamā́ā́ryasya, gavyā́tṛ́tsubhyo ajagan … “Der Mahlgenossen des Ariers … ist aus Verlangen nach Kühen den Tr̥tsu's (zu Hilfe) gekommen.” My tr. follows Old’s, which is slightly adjusted by Schmidt.


## 08
Both this vs. and the following one concern the Paruṣṇī river, known from elsewhere in the RV and later. In the 2nd pāda the VP ví jagṛbhre páruṣṇīm, lit. “they grasped apart the P.,” is generally taken to mean ‘divert’ the course of the river (so already Gr, also Ge; Schmidt slightly differently ‘divided’). The lexeme ví √grabh occurs only once in the RV, but this seems a reasonable interpr. -- though I’m not 5 exactly sure how this feat of engineering would be accomplished. Perhaps so many bodies accumulated in the river that it either had to flow around them (hence Schmidt’s ‘divided’) or switch its course altogether. The use of the middle jagṛbhre might support the former interpr.: they themselves [i.e., their own bodies] parted the river. One is reminded of Iliad 21.205ff., where Achilles drives his enemies towards the Scamander river, which berates and then fights with Achilles for filling the river with corpses.

In the preceding pāda áditi- is also sometimes taken to be a river (Ge n. 8a, Schmidt), but this seems much less likely to me. Aditi is, of course, a well-known goddess, and her miscarriage is also a well-known mythological incident, in the narrative of the sequence of her twin births ending with one miscarriage and one live baby -- found already in the RV (see the clear passage X.72.8). It therefore seems wiser not to make her capriciously into a landscape feature, but to start with the mythological facts that might match the VP áditiṃ srevayántaḥ “making Aditi abort.” Now, as is often related in middle Vedic texts, when the eighth embryo of Aditi aborts, it becomes first the discarded Mārtāṇḍa (‘stemming from a dead egg’), but is then fixed up and becomes Vivasvant, a name for the sun (see my Hyenas, pp. 204-8; this identification is already implicit in the RV, pace Hoffmann). I wonder if “causing Aditi to abort” refers to her aborted son, the sun, and in this case, by metaphor, to an eclipse of the sun -- or at least something that could pass for one. If the dust of a pitched battle got thick enough it could rise to blot out the sun’s rays temporarily. Rising dust is often elsewhere a sign of intense fighting in the RV, and flights of arrows so thick that they obscure the sun are a feature of battles in the epics (e.g., MBh IV.53.26, 31). This loss of light could render the combatants acetás- (b), lit. ‘without perception’ in b.

The durādhyàḥ ‘ill-intentioned ones’ are probably the same faction as those referred to, probably sarcastically, as ‘kindly’ (śivā́saḥ in the previous vs., 7b).

Apparently alone of all tr. and comm., I do not have an opinion about who the personnel are in cd. See the various suggestions, esp. those of Schmidt and Witzel.

As for cā́yamāna-, I assign it the intrans./pass. sense ‘being perceived as, appearing as’, rather than, e.g., Schmidt’s “receiving due respect.” Gotō’s interpr. (1st Kl. 137) is closer to mine, but he considers it reflexive: “sich als ... betrachtend, sich für ... haltend.” He does not tr. this passage (or the other participial form in X.94.14).

Whoever the subject is -- Schmidt and Witzel think it’s Vasiṣṭha, the purohita of Turvaśa, but I remain agnostic -- in my view this kavi has been felled, at least temporarily, and therefore gives the impression of being a paśú-, in this case a sacrificial, or already sacrificed, animal. Note the main verb aśayat (√śi ‘lie’), which is the signature verb describing the slain Vṛtra in I.32. Note paśúṣ kavíḥ, which shows the same sandhi before kavíḥ as vidúṣ kavíḥ in 2b; see disc. there.


## 09
With Ge (etc.), I take ná in pāda a as a simile marker, not a negative; the simile and frame participate in a pun on (-)ártha-. What they reached was a ni-àrtha- ‘failed goal’ (see, e.g., VI.27.6, X.107.8), which is like but tragically not their real goal. 6 In b note āśúś (canéd), which echoes paśúṣ (kavíḥ) in the previous vs. (8d) also pāda-initial. Here the sandhi is of course standard.

The adj. sutúka- occurs 7x in the RV; acdg. to EWA (s.v.) its meaning and etymology are unknown, though it is generally translated in the ‘quick, swift’ realm (like so many other unclear RVic adj.), e.g., Gr “rasch dahin eilend,” Ge (this passage) “spornstreichs fliehend.” On the basis of X.42.5, where it appears parallel to sváṣṭra- ‘easily goaded’, I suggest that it means ‘easily thrust/thrusting’ and is ultimately derived from √tuj ‘thrust’. Under this analysis, of course, the voiceless -kis a problem. Easiest would be to extract it from the unattested nom. sg. of the reasonably well-attested root noun túj-, which should be *túk, supported by pre-C forms like *tugbhís, *tukṣú. This is essentially a variant of Re’s (EVP XII.108) suggestion that it belongs to a root √tuc, a doublet of √tuj, but it avoids the awkwardness of positing this extra root to explain one stem. In fact, Re suggests in passing that it could start from an athematic nom. sg. *sutuk (he gives no accent), but he prefers the √tuc hypothesis.

In view of the disorderly rout of these forces described in the next vs., presumably due to the collapse of their alliance, I now wonder if amítrān refers not to their non-alliance with us (as in the publ. tr.), but to the lack or loss of unity among themselves.

In d Ge takes mā́nuṣe as a place name (“in Mānuṣa”), on the basis of JB III.244, which identifies it as the place of the Ten Kings battle. But, as Ge admits (n.

9d), the JB rendering could easily result from a misunderstanding of our passage.

Old suggests (not very enthusiastically) that it refers to (all) the enemies “in der Menschenwelt.” Schmidt’s interpr. is somewhat puzzling, putting it in an (unexpressed) simile contrasting the “castrates” of vádhri-vāc- to a (presumably virile) man expressed by mā́nuṣa-: “who were talking like castrates in the world of a man.” I think rather that it refers to Manu’s race or people: all other loc. singulars of this stem modify jáne (save for I.12.8.7, where it qualifies the semantically close vṛjáne). I take the expression as concessive “(though) in Manu’s (race)”: the point is that the opponents belong to the larger Ārya community though they are fighting against us. They therefore in principle share the same sacrificial practices, including ritual speech, but their ritual speech is ineffective (or so we hope), like that of a castrate. The extensive ritual references in the account of the battle only work under these conditions.

The cmpd. vádhri-vāc- ‘possessing gelded/castrated speech’ provides another parallel to the famous Indra-Vṛtra hymn I.32, whose vs. 7 likens Vṛtra to a vádhriwishing to become a bull.


## 10
The vs. begins īyúr gā́vo ná, very similar to the opening of the preceding vs. 9 īyúr árthaṃ ná. The simile of the cows without a cowherd (gā́vo ná … ágopāḥ) presumably depicts the disordered flight of the troops that have lost their leader.

I have now considerably changed my interpr. of the 2nd pāda. In the publ. tr. I take citā́saḥ as belonging to √ci ‘perceive’, meaning ‘perceived as, seeming’, rather than to √ci ‘gather’, the usual interpr. I now think the standard root assignment is 7 correct, but that it means not ‘assembled, gathered’ (so Ge, Schmidt) but ‘piled up’.

In other words, the panic-stricken troops, running pell-mell without an overall leader, hit an obstacle and pile up on top of each other in a heap of bodies.

The object they run into (abhí) is the opposing side, which is acting as allied forces under a properly concluded agreement: yathākṛtám … mitrám. The standard view of this phrase is that it describes the situation of the subjects, the fleeing fighters, construed with citā́saḥ and therefore referring to an accidental or on-thespot alliance; so Ge “zu zufällig geschlossener Freundschaft geschart,” Schmidt “...

assembled for an alliance made on the spur of the moment.” But as Old points out, mitrám √kṛ is the standard phrase for concluding an alliance in the normal fashion, not for one made under pressure or by chance. It therefore better describes the wellorganized forces the subjects are confronting, and as I said in the comm. to the preceding vs., the adj. amítrān there may well describe the lack of alliance among these fighters going to defeat, here contrasted with our side, which is acting in concert under a functioning alliance. I would therefore alter the publ. tr. to “They went … piled up against an alliance properly concluded [=their enemies].” In c the pl. pṛ́śnigāvaḥ may well be the name of a clan, as Old suggests; the PN interpr. is followed also by Ge and Schmidt as well as the publ. tr. But it of course has a straightforward bahuvrīhi interpr. (‘having dappled cows’) and, more to the point, echoes the cow simile of the first hemistich, with -gāvaḥ in the same metrical position as gā́vaḥ in a. That the first member pṛ́śni- is immediately repeated in the cmpd pṛ́śni-nipreṣitāsaḥ calls further attention to the cmpd analysis. As for the 2nd cmpd., I am drawn to Ge’s suggestion (n. 10) that pṛ́śni- is a pun on the river name Paruṣṇī.

In d ránti- is problematic. In its other occurrence, IX.102.5, it clearly means ‘joys’. But that makes no sense here. Ge refuses to tr.; Old tentatively suggests that the word has developed into a “sakral-poetisch” term for cow, presumably starting from ‘joy’. Schmidt tr. “supply lines” (< ‘refreshment’ < ‘enjoyment’), but this seems a semantic chain too tenuous, esp. since the logistics and support for the battle do not otherwise figure in this hymn (unless in 15cd). I take it as ‘battler’, assuming that it shows the same semantic bifurcation as ráṇa-, both ‘joy’ and ‘battle’.

The phrase śruṣṭím cakruḥ opening d, “they followed orders,” forms a ring with the same phrase in 6c. This is, at first, puzzling, since vss. 6-10 do not appear to form a discrete section. However, on 2nd glance we can note that these five vss. mark out the most intense and name-heavy portion of the battle. Starting with the next vs. Indra takes over the fighting, and the hymn turns to the celebration of Indra and his victorious feats; vs. 5, preceding this section, also attributes the whole victory to Indra. The god is absent from 6-10, with the combatants on their own and engaged in pitched battle.


## 11
The king who is the subj. of ab may be Sudās (so Ge, flg. Sāy.) or Indra, who appears by name in d, or Sudās identified with Indra. Given the ringcompositional structure discussed ad vs. 10, I favor either Indra or Sudās=Indra. 8 The relationship between the simile of c and the first hemistich is intricate and partly unclear. The first hemistich portrays the destruction by a king of a large force belonging to an otherwise unknown pair (the Vaikarṇas), using the aniṭ root ní √stṛ (root aor. ny ástaḥ) ‘strew down’ found also in other hostile encounters (e.g., II.11.20). Pāda c by contrast sketches a ritual incident in a simile, but the simile is slightly “off” for several reasons. For one thing, the predicate phrase sádman … barhíḥ “the ritual grass on the seat” suggests that the verb to govern it should also be ‘strew down’, though in its seṭ form (cf., e.g., VII.43.2 stṛṇītá barhíḥ). The actual verb of the simile, ní śiśāti ‘whets down’, is far less appropriate to its object, and we must assume a metaphorical use of this verb in the simile -- a piling of figurative language on figurative language, made all the more peculiar by the fact that the verb of b would be better suited to the simile of c and vice versa. (Recall also that [ní] √śā is the signature verb of this hymn; see comm. ad vs. 6.) It is almost as if the simile had been turned inside out or the two clauses had swapped out verbs. Also disturbing the simile is the fact that the subject of the clause, which, as agent of a verb governing ritual grass, should be a priest or ritual functionary, is identified as dasmá- ‘wondrous, wonder-worker’, an adj. otherwise only applied to gods, esp. Indra (e.g., in nearby VII.22.8). So it too seems more at home in the main clause of ab than in the simile of c, an association made stronger by the fact that dasmá- several times occurs with rā́jan- in a simile (IX.82.1 rā́jeva dasmáḥ, X.43.2 rā́jeva dasma) and rā́jā is the subject of ab. The interconnections become even more tangled when we consider the 2nd of those just-cited similes: X.43.2 rā́jeva dasma ní ṣadó 'dhi barhíṣi “Like a king, wondrous one [=Indra], sit down upon the ritual grass,” which contains the grass and the root √sad ‘sit’, but there realized as a verb rather than as the loc. nominal sádman.


## 12
Old suggests that we read ánuṃ, not ánu, in b -- thus a PN, not a preverb -

- given the co-occurrence of the PNs ánu- and druhyú- elsewhere, incl. 14a, I.108.8,
etc., as well as the vṛddhi deriv. ā́nava- in the next vs. (13c). I have adopted this suggestion; note that it does not affect the meter, as the next word (druhyúm) begins with a cluster.

The relationship between the two hemistichs is loose and unclear. On the basis of vs. 11, esp. 11d, and the epithet vájrabāhuḥ in 12b, we are entitled to assume that the 1st hemistich has Indra as subject and is couched in the 3rd ps. But the 2nd hemistich refers twice to ‘you’ (d tvāyántaḥ … tvā), manifestly referring also to Indra, and the verb in the first hemistich, ní vṛṇak is ambig. between 2nd and 3rd -- a typical modulation point. I would keep the publ. tr. (“he wrenched down”), but with the awareness that the transition to 2nd ps. reference may already be underway.

The 2nd hemistich has Indra’s followers as subj., with d containing a rel. cl.

with nom. pl. yé. How to construe it is the question. Although there is no overt (or indeed covert) representation of this plural group in the first hemistich, Ge takes the whole of cd as an improper relative, tr. “während deine Anhänger, Freundschaft für Freundschaft erwählend, dir zujubelten.” This not only reinterprets yé as a general subordinator rather than a rel. prn., but it also has this subordinator placed very 9 deeply in its supposed clause. I prefer to take pāda c as containing a predicated root aor. part. vṛṇānā́ḥ [“(They were) choosing your partnership … (those) who …”], which allows the rel. cl. of d to have a more standard configuration, referring to the pl. subj. of the nominal clause of c.


## 13
With nom. índraḥ this vs. seems to return to 3rd ps. reference—though it’s worth noting that both verbs of which índraḥ is subject are ambig. between 2nd and 3rd ps. (dardaḥ b, bhāk c), and so an appositive 2nd ps. reading “(you,) Indra, …” is barely possible.

The adv. sadyáḥ ‘in an instant, all at once’ seems to clash semantically with its verb dardaḥ, given the usual function of the “intensive” as a frequentative. It would probably be better here to render sadyáḥ with Ge as ‘in a single day’, indicating that Indra could destroy multiple fortifications in a limited time span.

The 1st pl. jeṣma is generally interpr. these days as a precative: see esp.

Hoffmann (Injunk. 254), Narten (Sig.Aor. 119-20), and Ge’s tr. “Möchten wir … besiegen.” Certainly the other two occurrences of this form in the RV (VI.45.12, X.156.1) have clear modal value. But in this context, in a long narrative set in the past, though carried in part by injunctive forms like dardaḥ and bhāg in this vs., a modal would be jarring and would interrupt the narrative by suddenly expressing a hope for the future. I therefore follow, for this form here, the older interpr. of jeṣma (see reff, in Hoffmann and Narten) as an irregular injunc. (for expected *jaiṣma; cf.

ajaiṣma VIII.47.18=X.164.5).


## 14
Pāda b is notable for its alliteration, making full use of all three sibilants: ṣaṣṭíḥ śatā́suṣupuḥ ṣáṭ sahásrā. The sums are tautological, as Old points out: sixty hundred and six thousand amounting to the same number. Both ‘sixty’ (ṣaṣṭíḥ) and ‘six’ (ṣáṭ) reappear in the next pāda. The standard interpr. is that these sixty-six in c are just an addition to the six thousand enumerated in the previous pāda. However, Old suggests that they constitute the opposite side, the ‘heroes’ (vīrā́saḥ) ‘seeking favor’ (duvoyú), who are fighting against those enumerated in pāda b. This interpr.

has the merit of not requiring those two words to be used ironically (on the latter, see Ge’s n. 14c), and it also makes the victory that much more impressive, that this small number, with Indra on their side, could defeat many multiples of themselves. The same point is made more forcefully in vs. 17. The same balance between the good guys and the bad guys, as it were, is found in the next vs., 15, where the Tṛtsus of ab are Indra’s allies, but their opposite numbers are found in cd.


## 15
As just noted, the vs. is divided into two, with the Tṛtsus of Indra’s party in full flood in ab (on the attack, one presumes) and their enemies abandoning their possessions under the pressure of this attack. These enemies are identified as durmitrā́saḥ; as with amítra- of 9c, this descriptor seems meant to signal the fraying or loss of the alliances that bound them and perhaps also to identify these alliances as badly formed in the first place. The other example of this form as a full adj. is nearby 10 in VII.28.4; durmitrá- in X.105.11 is used as a PN in a quite possibly independent play on the PN sumitrá-.

The first hemistich is straightforward; the second has its puzzles, starting with the form prakalavíd (or, theoretically possible, -vín) in c. See, first, Old, who rejects several previous suggestions and hesitantly follows what is found in Gr, as does Ge (as do I): a root-noun cmpd. with √vid ‘know’, a 1st member related to kalā́- ‘small part’ (VIII.37.17), used adverbially (Gr ‘die kleinsten Theile berechnend’ à ‘kleinlich’). Scar (486) discusses in somewhat more detail but reaches the same hesitant conclusions. The universal uncertainty has much to do with the difficulty of fitting this sense into context. I take the cmpd as implicitly contrasted with víśvāni in d. By my interpr., the enemy forces measure their supplies precisely and parsimoniously, “knowing every little piece” (Old “mit Kunde jedes kleinsten Teils”)

-- hence my idiomatic “with a miser’s eye.” But when confronted by the Tṛtsus’
attack, they profligately abandon everything and flee.

Kü (608) interpr. mímānāḥ as reflexive/intrans. ‘die kleinlich sich messen’, though with ?, but, despite the middle voice, the other forms to this stem are consistently transitive.


## 16
Pāda c is notable for the alliterative and etymological figure manyúm manyumyò mimāya, with the middle term manyu-mī́- containing the noun to its left (manyú-) and the root noun of the verb to its right (√mī). Though mimāya phonologically echoes mímānā(ḥ) at the end of 15c, they of course belong to different roots.

Pāda d contains a rare and curious idiom PATH √bhaj; cf. VII.39.1 bhejā́te … pánthām, possibly IX.102.2 ábhakta … padám, which I take (with Ge) to mean “set out on the road,” similar to, though with a different idiomatic verb, Engl. “hit the road.” The expression is complicated here by the question of how to construe pathó vartaním. Is patháḥ acc. pl. and direct object of bhejé, with vartaním the obj. of pátyamāṇaḥ? Such is the interpr. of Ge and Kü (334, 368) -- Ge with an idiomatic interpr. of bhejé patháḥ, Kü with a more literal one. However, I think it more likely that patháḥ is a gen. sg. dependent on vartaním on the basis of IV.45.3 ā́vartaním mádhunā jinvathas patháḥ “You quicken the course of the path with honey.”


## 17
If my interpr. of 14c is correct in taking the small number (66) as the allies of Indra facing off a much larger force, this vs. continues the same theme, first as a straightforward statement (a), then with two different metaphors (b, c): Indra easily prevailed despite the relative insufficiency of his tools.

In b, if the standard interpr. of pétva- as ‘castrated ram, wether’ is correct (see, e.g., EWA s.v.), the pairing of target and instrument is esp. striking: a fierce but female wild animal, the lioness, and a castrated but (originally) male domestic one, a wether, with opposition of both animal-type (wild/domestic) and gender, with the latter complicated by the emasculation of the male representative.

The same thematic and syntactic template prevails in c, but neither the target nor the tool is clearly identified. veśī́- (in the instr. veśyā̀) is a hapax; the standard tr. 11 ‘needle’ derives from Sāy., but in fact this doesn’t make much sense. sraktí- has better representation: it’s found in the cmpd. náva-srakti- ‘9-srakti-ed’ (also VS cátuaḥ-srakti) and has an Aves. cognate sraxti-, �raxti- ‘edge, side’. EWA connects it with sṛká- ‘fang’. To figure out what must be going on, we need to turn to the verb, áva … (a)vṛścat. The lexeme áva √vraśc ‘hew down’ is found only once elsewhere, in I.51.7, where it is used figuratively. But ní √vraśc, with the semantically similar preverb ní, twice appears with a concrete image: hewing down trees with an axe. See esp. I.130.4fg táṣṭeva vrk̥ ṣám vaníno ní vrś̥ casi, paraśvéva ní vrś̥ casi “like a carpenter a tree from the wooden one [=forest], you cut down (the serpent) -- as if with an ax you cut (him) down” (sim. VI.8.5). The acc. pl. sraktī́ḥ in our passage matches the role of the trees in the passages just cited. I suggest that as ‘edge’ it refers to the edges of a tree trunk or to something that is, as it were, pure ‘edge’ -- a pole. As the instr., veśyā̀should correspond to the axe. A needle doesn’t work, but perhaps a pin -

- a small, sharp-pointed object that would ordinarily not have much success in felling
tall poles. I agree with Old that the expression is probably proverbial.

The ending of d, bhójanā sudā́se, is identical to the end of the last vs., 15d, preceded by víśvāni (15d) and víśvā (16d) respectively. The bhójanā that the enemies abandoned in 15 are here given to Sudās by Indra.


## 18
I follow Ge in taking this vs. as direct speech.

Although Ge’s tr. of rándhi- in b as “schwache Stelle” is appealing, I preferred to register the etymological figure between the verb of pāda a, rāradhuḥ, and this noun.

Note the close sandhi rāradhuṣ ṭe, which reminds us of vidúṣ kavíḥ (2a) and paśúṣ kavíḥ (8d), as well as correct āsúś canéd (9b).

The rel. prn. yáḥ is too deep in its clause, following both direct objects of kṛṇóti: mártān … stuvatáḥ and énaḥ. I have no explan. for this violation.


## 19
This is the last vs. with direct reference to the battle. The following two (20-21) provide general praise of Indra’s aid and generosity, leading up to the 4-vs. dānastuti.

Ge (n. 19d) insightfully suggests that pāda d is an ironic reflection on the horses that died in the encounter.


## 20
Ge takes pū́rvāḥ … nū́tnāḥ as qualifying sumatáyaḥ … rā́yaḥ: “Deine Gnaden und deine Reichtümer, die frühere und die neuesten, sind nicht vollständig aufzuzählen, so wenig wie die Morgenröten.” I prefer to take them with uṣásaḥ, for several reasons. First, the word order, with uṣásaḥ nestled between the two temporal adjectives, favors this interpr. Also my interpr. allows the ná … ná … ná sequence to be entirely negative, rather than requiring the last to be a simile marker. Moreover, the contrast between former and current dawn(s) is a standard trope in the RV, with pū́rva- qualifying dawn in a number of passages. And finally morphology is against it: Ge would need to explain why a fem. nom. pl. pū́rvāḥ, rather than the masc. pū́rve, was used to modify a mixed feminine (sumatáyaḥ) and masculine (rā́yaḥ) NP; 12 ordinarily the default would be masc., esp. in this case where the masc. is closer to the adjectives. (He could of course invoke the supposed occasional use of rayí-, rāyas feminine, but these exx. are vanishingly rare, if they exist at all.) I take the whole dawn phrase as an acc. of extent of time. It would be possible to assign the temporal adjectives to uṣásaḥ but interpr. that phrase as a simile in the nom., as Scar (167) does: “Nicht sind deine Gnaden, nicht deine Gaben zu überschauen, genausowenig wie die vergangenen und jetzigen Morgenröten.” I still prefer mine, since Scar’s interpr. again requires the third ná to be a simile marker, even though it does avoid the problems raised by taking the temporal adjectives with the NP in pāda a.

In c dévaka- is a lovely ex. of the use of the -ka- suffix both in a pejorative sense and as signal of a lower register. Edgerton’s (-ka-suffix, 43) tr. is rather nice: “the wretched little fellow who thought himself a godling.” The form mānyamāná- is of course peculiar, though its source is clear: it is a vṛddhi deriv. of the middle part. mányamāna- ‘think oneself to be …’ Although Ge takes it separately from dévaka- as two distinct pejorative epithets (“…den Götzen, den Dünkling”), I find it hard not to think that the participial usage is not still present and that dévaka- is the de facto predicate nominative. The vṛddhi is perhaps used to turn the typical subject of this participle into a category characterized by blind arrogance (“the type of blowhard who would think himself …”) -- well captured by Edgerton’s tr.

The verb in d, bhet (√bhid), recalls the enemy Bheda targeted by Indra in vss.

18-19.


## 21
The sense of the first pāda is disputed, primarily because it is unclear how to construe the abl. gṛhā́t. Old discusses at length without a definite decision; Ge has his own idiosyncratic view: that in this context, with the abl. gṛhā́t, prá √mad means ‘to go on a pilgrimage’ (“die … von Hause fortgepilgert waren”), a bizarre interpr.

(rejected by Old), which he connects to abhí … pramandúḥ in VII.33.1, where his pilgrimage interpr. seems equally odd. The phraseology here needs to be considered in the context of similar expressions, not only VII.33.1, but also VIII.61.9 sá prá mamandat tvāyā́and vs. 12d in this hymn tvāyánto yé ámadann ánu tvā (and consider the immediately preceding pāda 12c vṛṇānā́átra sakhyā́ya sakhyám, which resonantes with our c ná te … sakhyám mṛṣanta). Because of their proximity in the same hymn, I think vs. 12 needs to be weighted more heavily than the other passages, despite the difference in preverb (ánu there versus prá here). That vs. states that the men devoted to Indra cheered him on -- in other words, Indra was the recipient of an overt expression of their devotion -- and in turn they acquired a partnership with him.

I now think that prá … ámamaduḥ in this vs. should also be transitive, with Indra as the object. Perhaps by haplology *tvā tvāyā́. I would therefore alter the publ. tr. to “… who exhilarated (you) in devotion to you,” with a different type of overt expression of devotion, here the soma. Pāda c then indicates that by doing so they did not neglect the responsibilities of their side of the partnership and (d) happy days ensue as a result. Interpreting prá … ámamaduḥ here as transitive also has the merit 13 of matching the use of abhí … pramandúḥ in VII.33.1, where there is an overt object mā. The similar expression in VIII.61.9 is more equivocal; see disc. there.

This reappraisal of the verbal complex does not, however, solve the ablative problem. My proposed solution, already found in the publ. tr., is quite simple: the individuals named in pāda b (who include Vasiṣṭha) are relatives, “from the (same) house” -- a use of ‘house’ similar to that in expressions like “the House of Atreus.” Under this interpr., there is no physical movement out of or location away from an actual dwelling. As this is the only abl. form of gṛhá- in the RV, it is difficult to know if such an idiomatic usage is possible, but given that the verb in its clause is not a verb of motion and cannot be made one without damage to its normal semantics, this seems like a reasonable alternative.

bhojá- ‘provider, benefactor’ is used of Indra elsewhere on a number of occasions (e.g., VI.23.9), but it is also used explicitly of a human sūrí- ‘patron’ in VIII.70.13, as well as being repeated densely in X.107.8-11, the hymn devoted to the dakṣiṇā and the bhoja-s who give it. So I suggest in our vs. that its appliication to Indra in c is an attempt to transfer the epithet to the sūri-s in d.


## 22
The first two pādas begin the enumeration of the Paijavana’s dā́namentioned in c -- an enumeration continued in 23.

The simile in d, hóteva sádma páry emi, is one of the few clear references to the animal sacrifice, with this depicting the Paryagnikaraṇa; cf. IX.97.1, where the animals are explicit.


## 23
On smáddiṣṭi-, see comm. ad III.45.5.

In ab I supply vahanti on the basis of d, with Ge.


## 24
The śrávas- in pāda a echoes the one in 23d.

Ge, flg. Sāy., takes ab as separate clauses, supplying “(sich ausbreitet)” as the verb in pāda a. This is unnecessary: the hemistich can be a single clause, with the accent on vibabhā́jā in b conditioned by the rel. yásya in a. (Ge considers this possibility in n. 24ab.) Kü (333) also follows the single clause interpr.

Note the lengthened 3rd sg. pf. ending in babhā́jā, guaranteed (and required) by the cadence. On lengthening of the pf. endings see the brief remarks by Kü (42), though without any indication of the relative frequency; it is my impression that lengthening of the 1st/3rd sg. -a is quite rare in the RV, but I haven’t made a count.

The fame being distributed is presumably that of Sudās, though covertly assimiliated to Indra’s; note the explicit comparison of the praise he receives to Indra’s in the simile in c. The āmreḍita “every head” (śīrṣṇé-śīrṣṇe) must refer to every person, or rather every person eligible for fame (excluding women and nonelite males), in Sudās’s entourage: they all get a piece of the fame-pie that he acquired by himself. The geographical extravagance of “every head between the two wide world halves” -- that is, every eligible person on earth -- is presumably part of a totalizing claim about the outcome of the Ten Kings’ Battle, that the whole world was brought under Sudās’s sway. 14 The loud sound of rivers in flood is the point of the comparison in c. One of the words for ‘river’, nadī́, is folk etymologically (and probably etymologically; see EWA s.v.) connected with √nad ‘roar’, as in the explicit etymological statement in AV III.13.1 yád adáḥ saṃprayatī́r áhāv ánadatā haté / tásmād ā́nadyò nā́ma stha Wh “Since formerly (? adás) going forth together, ye resounded (nad) when the dragon was slain, therefore ye are streams (nadī́) by name.” The signature verb ní √śā ‘whet down’ that we have met a number of times before (see comm. ad vs. 6) now implicitly takes Sudās as its subject, as a sort of climactic usage.

The PN yudhyāmadhí is obviously a speaking name, with some form of √yudh ‘fight’ embedded in it. See Old for various possibilites for its formation. It is tempting to see as its base a 1st pl. middle *yúdhyāmahi “let’s fight,” with the older expected 1st pl. ending *-madhi before de-occlusion.
