+++
title = "019"

+++
Indra


## 01
Rhetorically interesting to begin a hymn with a syntactically nonindependent verse. This verse consists only of relative clauses (pace Ge; see below), which find their main clause referent in the first word of the 2nd verse (and indeed subsequent verses), namely tvám. Although ‘you’ clearly is the referent, the first relative clause of vs. 1 has a 3rd ps. verb (cyāváyati), though the second one switches to the 2nd person (prayantā́si). It might be possible to attribute the 3rd ps. in ab to attraction to the simile, but such a switch would be very rare.

The simile marker ná in pāda a is wrongly placed, after the 2nd member of a three-word simile, not the first (tigmáśṛṅgo vṛṣabhó ná bhīmáḥ). Ordinarily, given such a structure, the first word would be interpreted as the common term and therefore not a part of the simile proper (“sharp-horned like a fearsome bull”), but Indra doesn’t have horns, which should certainly belong to the bull. The wrong position may result from the fact that X ná bhīmá-, where X = an animal, appears to be a formulaic structure, esp. mṛgá- ná bhīmá- (I.154.2, 190.3, II.33.11, etc.; also siṃhá- ná bhīmá- IV.16.14, IX.97.28 and others). This smaller fixed phrase would then be fitted into a simile containing another term.

Ge takes pāda d as a main clause, following the Pp., which analyses prayantā́si as containing unaccented asi. But this requires him to invent a verb for the relative clause of c (“raubst”) for which there is no support - and no need. Already Old suggested accenting ási contrary to the Pp.

Old (see also Tichy) also notes the nice example of case disharmony, where both gen. gáyasya and acc. védaḥ are objects of the agent noun prayantā́. As has often been noted, suffix-accented -tar-stems generally have genitive complements, as opposed to root-accented ones, which generally take accusatives. But enough exceptions exist to allow prayantā́to take both. That gáyasya is parallel to védaḥ and not to ádāśuṣaḥ is shown by passages like IX.23.3 … ádāśuṣo gáyam and VIII.81.7 ádāśūṣtarasya védaḥ. It is possible, but not necessary, that prayantā́si is a periphrastic future. 15 I have no explanation for the comparative súṣvitara- ‘better soma-presser’, beyond the occasional use of the comparative for emphasis or intensification, without comparandum.


## 02
Pāda b is repeated in IV.38.7, there of Dadhikrā the racehorse. (This repetition is not noted in Bl RR.) Re at IV.38.7 and Ge here (but not there) take śúśrūṣamānaḥ as meaning something like “putting oneself at the disposal (of someone else, here Kutsa).” I assume that they are thinking of the enlarged root √śruṣ ‘be obedient’, but the two meanings seem quite distinct to me - I can’t see Indra being obedient to any man - and formally our participle is a well-formed desiderative to √śru. In both places I take it as meaning “desiring to be heard/famed’; here Indra also helps out Kutsa, but at least part of his aim is to ensure his own fame.

In IV.38.7 there is no subsidiary beneficiary, and so the focus on the subject and his fame is ever clearer. Heenen is similarly puzzled by Ge (238 n. 263) but tr. “(toi qui) en personne as la volonté d’écouter au combat,” attributing an active sense to the middle participle.

The word dā́sam beginning c plays off both (á)dāśuṣo in 1c and sudā́sam in 3b.


## 03
Trasadasyu and the Pūrus also appear in IV.38 (vss. 1, 3), which contains the pāda in common with our 2b.


## 04
This verse puts into analytic (that is, syntactically independent) form some expressions met as compounds in the previous verse. Most obvious is (bhū́rīṇi) vṛtrā́ … haṃsi, which realizes vṛtrahátyeṣu in 3d. (Notice that both refer to plural events, handling their grammatical plurality in different ways.) A real dásyu- is destroyed in 4cd, plucked from the name Trasadasyu in 3c. In a slightly different relationship, devávītau ‘in pursuit of the gods’ here contains a form of the root √vī ‘pursue’ found as 1st compound member in vītahavyam ‘whose oblation is worth pursuing’ in 3a.

And within this verse nṛ́bhiḥ doubles the first member of the next word, nṛmano.


## 05
This verse presents some interlocking syntactic and lexical problems.

Unlike Ge, I take pādas b and c together. Splitting them requires him to supply a verb for b (“brachst”) again lacking support or necessity. Presumably again he is following the Pp, which analyzes śatatamā́viveṣīḥ as containing unaccented aviveṣīḥ.

I prefer to accent it and thus allow it to be the verb of the yád clause beginning in b.

In either case śatatamā́is a problem. Everyone wants it to be the 100th thing (probably púr- ‘fortification’) that Indra destroys (after the 99 in b). Gr suggests reading śatatamā́m, which would provide the desired feminine accusative (agreeing with púr-), but among other things would damage the meter (since, s.v. viṣ, he is still reading an augmented aviveṣīḥ). Ge suggests that it [what is unspecified, presumably the sandhi agglomeration] is to be dissolved (“aufzulösen”) into masc. śatatamám, and the 100th thing that Indra destroys is Śambara himself. He makes no mention of meter, though this dissolution would cause the same metrical problem. Old suggests 16 supplying neut. pl. cyautnā́ni (without translating), but I don’t see how an ordinal “hundredth” can qualify all hundred items in the plural. There is a much simpler solution: to take śatatamā́as a feminine instrumental with the old ending -ā.

Although Old claims (in arguing against Gr) that the fem. stem should be śatatamī́-, this is simply wrong. See AiG II.2 §457, which establishes -ā as the rule and -ī as the rare exception. Cf. for -tama-stems purutámā- of Uṣas and mātŕ̥tamā-, and for ordinals the well-attested feminine prathamā́-. Or, if Ge is correct that the reference is to Śambara himself, śatatamā́can be a masculine instr. sg. In either case the text can stand as it is, with no metrical or sandhi problems, and the syntax can be rescued.

Ge takes nivéśane in c as ‘at evening’. The word generally means ‘causing to settle down’ (the usual association of -ana-nominals with the transitive-causative áya-formations) or, as a noun, ‘settling down’, and is sometimes associated with Savitar’s bringing the world to rest in the evening (IV.53.6, I.35.1, VI.71.2), an association that must have led to Ge’s tr. But the word never otherwise means ‘evening’. I read it with its full lexical value, but with a sinister edge. “Bringing them to rest” is a euphemism like ásvāpayaḥ ‘you put to sleep’ in 4d. Old mentions the “going to rest” possibility, but opts instead for “in the dwelling place (of the enemy).” Again, there seems to me no reason for this attenuation of the meaning.

The root √viṣ means ‘work, work over’, or here ‘work to the end’, again used in a slightly euphemistic sense. Note the phonetic echo between nivéśane and (a)viveṣīr.

The d pāda is a perfect chiasmus, even to the positioning of a conjunction between verb and object: áhañ ca vṛtrám námucim utā́han. The mixture of ca and utá is curious. Klein (DGRV I.186-87) is not sure how to analyze it; he suggests either that it’s a “both … and” type of construction, with each conjunction appearing 2nd in its phrase (or so I interpr. his lapidary disc.), or that “ca is a sentential conjunction adjoining d to the rest of the stanza, and utá conjoins the clauses of d.” I prefer the former.


## 06
sánā is generally taken (Gr, Ge) as a neut. pl. adj. ‘old’ agreeing with bhójanāni, and this is certainly possible. I find the sentiment somewhat odd, however: to announce to Indra that the delights he has given to his client are “old” seems slighting. I prefer to interpret the word as the 2nd sg. act. impv. to √san ‘win’; exactly this form occurs several times in initial position elsewhere. What gives me pause, however, is I.178.4, which contains very parallel phraseology, sánā tā́te indra návyā ā́guḥ, and where I do interpret sánā as ‘old’. The difference there is that the poet contrasts the old deeds of Indra with the new ones (návyā) that have come and so avoids insulting the god. In any case, either the ‘old’ or the ‘win’ interpretation is possible here, though I have a preference for the latter.

The oblation of Sudās’s that was worth pursuing (vītáhavyam) in vs. 3 has now been given by him (rātáhavyāya) here, tracking the progress of the sacrifice to the point of mutual benefit of man and god.

The phrase dāśúṣe sudā́se “for the pious Sudās” displays syllabic metathesis, dā-śū / su-dā, with neutralizing play on all three sibilants. The poet seems to like this 17 collocation: see comment above on vs. 2 for connections across three verses and below on VII.20.2.


## 07
My construction of the first hemistich differs from Ge’s, both with regard to the syntactic role of te and the sense of páriṣṭau and leads to a very different interpretation of the meaning. The latter word, literally ‘encirclement’, is generally taken as always negative, a tight spot or constriction (Ge’s “in dieser Klemme”), but I find this interpretation hard to reconcile with the hic-et-nunc deictic asyā́m, since the poet has given no indication that he is currently in distress. (Ge’s note suggests that this is a memory of the situation in VII.18, the Ten Kings battle, but this seems to me an ill-supported attempt to account for the deictic.) I therefore think the páriṣṭihere is positive - Indra’s encirclement (that is, protection) of us now - and te is to be construed with páriṣṭau: “in this enclosure (that is, protection) of yours.” Weak support for this may be provided by the first pāda of the next verse, 8a, where … te … abhíṣṭau# matches … te … páriṣṭau# here, with rhyming forms and identical morphology - and a parallel positive sense: “in your charge.” There is also a parallel in the next hymn, in roughly the same part of the hymn, with te asyā́m as here and a string of locatives: VII.20.8 … te asyā́m sumataú …várūthe … nṛ́pītau “in this benevolence of yours, in your defense, in your protection for men.” In our passage Ge (followed by Scar 207) instead takes te as the subject of the infinitive parādaí; in order to make this work he has recast the sentence from one with 1st person subject (mā́… bhūma “may we not be…”) to one with 2nd ps. subject: “Nicht sollst du uns … dem Bösen preisgaben.” Scar’s tr. maintains the syntactic structure of the original, but otherwise follows Ge’s interpretation. Better is Keydana’s (Infinitive im Ṛgveda 156, 203) interpretation of parādaí as a passive infinitive, as I take it - though he still takes te as the ultimate agent of the handing over. Again, I don’t see that the poet has expressed any fear that Indra will betray them; rather, he hopes that the protection Indra provides them will keep any such ill-fortune from befalling them, a hope that is repeated in the next pāda.

The poet’s penchant for case disharmony (see 1cd above) recurs in pāda d, where I read priyā́saḥ both with gen. táva and with loc. sūríṣu.


## 09
I take pāda c with ab, since all three have 3rd ps. subjects referring to Indra’s worshipers and clients, with pāda c a rel. cl. beginning with yé. Ge, by contrast, connects c with d, although d now refers to the same people in the 1st ps.

(asmā́n vṛṇīṣva “choose us”). He does not, however, take asmā́n as coreferential with the yé of c, but rather apparently interprets the relationship between the clauses as a kind of improper relativization: “for the same alliance (yújyāya tásmai) as (those) who (yé)…” This has the advantage of providing some reason for the final tásmai, which I find hard to account for, though I find his way of linking the clauses too tricky. Scar takes the first pāda as a temporal subordinate clause (“As soon as they are in your charge, the men…”). This is worth considering, although I am dubious about the subordinating quality of sadyáś cid. In the end, although I am not entirely 18 certain of my own way of putting together the various elements in this verse, I have not been convinced by those of other tr. either.

Note the poet’s playful variation on 8a … te maghavann abhíṣṭau with … té maghavann abhíṣṭau, where the simple addition of an accent turns the 2nd ps. sg. into a 3rd ps. pl.

náraḥ śaṃsanti recalls the epithet nárāśáṃsa, and then participates in an interweaving of two words for ritual speech: śaṃsanti ukthaśāsa ukthā́.

The lexeme ví √dāś occurs only here, as far as I know. Like the idiom ā́√yaj ‘attract by sacrifice’, it combines a directional preverb with a root of ritual activity, producing a portmanteau “(send) away by perfoming ritual service’. So Old ‘hinweghuldigen’, which he paraphrases as “honor the god such that the Pāṇis become distant.” On the syntagm yújyāya √vṝ see comm. ad IX.88.1.


## 10
We might have expected an unaccented gen. pl. *narām in the voc. phrase with nṛtama, but don’t get it. There are no unaccented occurrences of this genitive. It would be possible instead to read narā́m with eté stómāḥ (“these praises of men”), but nṛ́tama- + gen. pl. of nṛ́- is a fixed phrase, though usually with nṛṇā́m (I.77.4, III.51.4, IV.25.4, etc.). I am now inclined to read narā́m with both stómā(ḥ) and nṛtama. It is positioned between them, adjacent to both. The publ. tr. could be modified to “These praises of men are for you, o most manly of men.” The first gen. is subjective. Note the co-occurrence of narā́m, the older gen. pl. to nṛ́-, and the newer one nṛṇā́m in this verse.

Ge takes b as an independent nominal clause, while I consider it a sort of definitional relative clause manqué, that is, lacking the relative pronoun yé which would find its referent in the initial téṣām of c.

Although d looks to contain a simple conjoined NP, each of whose members consists of two members, sákhā śū́raḥ and avitā́nṛṇā́m, each with a ca between the two members (so Ge, JSK I.195), I prefer to take śū́raḥ as the principal predication of Indra, with the other two terms, sákhā and avitā́nṛṇā́m, secondarily predicated of Indra as śū́ra-. Although this introduces a minor complication in word order, the fact that śū́ra- is overwhelmingly a noun and is used independently of Indra in the very next pāda (11a) persuades me that this analysis is correct, especially since both “comrade” and “helper of men” are terms that explicitly encode Indra’s relationship to men, while “champion” is of a different order. The distribution of ca’s makes no problems for this analysis.


## 11
The finals of pādas a and c echo each other: … ūtī́# … úpa stī́n # I think it quite likely that mimihy out of sandhi should be accented (mimihí) contra the Pp., given the balanced clausal-type constructions before and after (úpa no vā́jān … úpa stī́n), a possibility Old raises but considers uncertain.
