+++
title = "020"

+++
Indra 19 This hymn shows some stylistic tics, esp. a penchant for oddly placed particles (vss. 2, 4, 5) and for final enclitics (1d, 7d, 8b, 9a, 9d, as well as the refrain 10d).


## 01
A grammatical figure in the pāda-initial reduplicated i-stems, b cákriḥ, c jágmiḥ, both functioning as verbs (cákriḥ takes acc. direct object ápaḥ; jágmiḥ an acc. goal nṛṣádanam). For this type see Grestenberger 2013 (JAOS 133).

ápo náryaḥ is reminiscent of ápāṃsi … náryāṇi in the next hymn (VII.21.4), though there the words form a phrase and here they are in two different cases and numbers.


## 02
Continuing the focus on nominal forms with verbal rection, the poet picks up the pāda-initial agent noun trātā́of 1d and deploys three more pāda-initial nominative tar-stems in 2a, c, d: hántā, kártā, and dā́tā, each with an acc. object (vṛtrám, ulokám, and vásu respectively). Although pāda b lacks a subject tar-stem, it does have one as object: jaritā́ram. The stem that began it all, trātā́in 1d, contrasts with those in vs. 2 by being suffix-accented, and it should therefore, according to general practice, have a genitive complement. I suggest that it’s not an accident that its object is the enclitic naḥ, which could be accusative (and thus parallel with the objects in vs. 2) or genitive (and thus conform to the usual rule). Recall this poet’s tricky case syntax with the tar-stem prayantā́in VII.19.1.

The occurrence of parallel datives sudā́se (c) and dāśúṣe (d) recall their collocation in VII.19.6; see comments there.

The phrase áha vaí (áha vā́in sandhi) interrupting the VP is very peculiar. It is easier to account for the vaí than the áha: the particle vaí, rather rare in the RV though very common in Vedic prose, is often found directly before the particle u. In this hymn it occurs twice (also 4d), in both cases before u, though not the particle u. Here before ulokám, which by most accounts is a haplology of *urú [*ulú] lokám, and in 4d before the perfect uvoca. I have no explanation for áha, whose function is also opaque to me in general. Although áha often takes Wackernagel (or modified Wackernagel) position, it is more flexibly positioned than most RVic particles, so showing up in the middle of the pāda as here is not as anomalous as it might be. My exclamatory tr. is meant to signal the interruptive quality of the phrase, but makes no claims as to its semantic accuracy. I suspect that the poet is indulging in phonological play (one faint possibility: áha vā́u mimics the opening of the next pāda, dā́tā vásu) or morphological or lexical manipulation, but it’s too deep for me.


## 03
khaja- lacks an etymology (see EWA s.v. khaja-kṛ́t-), but embedded in an epithet of Indra in martial contexts like this, ‘tumult’ serves as well as anything else.

The particle īm here lacks its usual accusative function (see Jamison 2002) and does not take its usual Wackernagel position; it therefore reminds us a bit of the similarly irrational áha vaí of the preceding verse. However, īm does serve to forestall a hiatus between janúṣā and áṣaḷḥaḥ and its position immediately after the former can be taken to signal that janúṣā áṣaḷḥaḥ are to be construed together. For another example of janúṣem see the next hymn (VII.21.1). 20 Note the sibiliant play beginning with samádvā and continuing through the end of the hemistich.


## 04
Again the poet plays with case disharmony, construing both inst. ándhasā and loc. mádeṣu with uvoca.

Note again the apparently functionless vaí and see disc. above ad vs. 2.


## 05
Once again a particle is positioned oddly: ádha in the middle of the relative clause (versus properly positioned ádhā in 3d). Klein (II.130) suggests the ádha here “is either a subclausal conjunction [but conjoining what? sj] or weakly conjoins the second distich with the first,” but neither explanation accounts for the mid-pāda position.


## 06
The final pāda has two linked uncertainties: the identity of the verb and the case form of rāyá. Though the Pp. reads dat. rāyé, gen.-abl. rā́yaḥ is equally possible.

The choice depends in great part on the analysis of the verb kṣáyat: whether it belongs to √kṣi ‘dwell’ or √kṣi ‘rule’. If the former, it would be a subjunctive; if the latter, an injunctive. The immediate context favors a subjunctive (dádhate in the rel.

clause attached to this main clause, plus bhreṣate [on this form as an s-aor. subj. to √bhrī, see EWA s.v. bhrī, with ref. to Hoffmann], reṣat probably, and āvívāsāt in ab), but this does not necessarily decide for an affiliation to ‘dwell’, because there are no overt subjunctives to the Class I present of ‘rule over’ (no *kṣáyāt) and the injunctive might function modally here. Parallel passages cut both ways. On the one hand, ‘rule’ regularly takes the gen. of ‘wealth’: cf. I.51.14 (of Indra) rāyáḥ kṣayati, VII.93.2 kṣáyantau rāyáḥ (Indra and Agni), X.106.7 kṣayad rayīṇā́m (though in an otherwise incomprehensible verse); on the other, a form of ‘dwell’ appears in a parallel passage with the material from the end of the pāda: VI.3.1 … sá kṣesad rtap ̥ ā́r̥tejā́ḥ. Old, having considered both possibilities, opts (slightly) for the latter; Ge’s tr. also assumes an affiliation with ‘dwell’ and a dat. rāyé: “der wird im Frieden lassen, um zu Reichtum (zu gelangen).” The publ. tr. instead chooses ‘rule over’ and gen. rāyáḥ, though I recognize that both possibilities were probably in the poet’s mind. One slender support for my choice may be the parallel phrase in 9d … vásva ā́śakaḥ… “you hold power over goods,” with gen. vásvaḥ reprising the gen. rāyáḥ that opens 9c.


## 07
By my interpr. (and Ge’s) śíkṣan is a predicated pres. participle, parallel to the subjunctive áyat in the 2nd clause; it seems to have adopted the modal sense of this parallel finite verb.

Note the play between the two initial words of pādas a and b: yád and áyad (áyaj in sandhi), where the second is actually a subjunctive to the root present of √i ‘go’.

The question in c is not overtly marked, but I follow both Old and Ge in taking it as such. 21


## 08
ághnataḥ is a gen. sg. negated act. pres. part. modifying te ‘of you’ in the preceding pāda; the heavy modal tr. is a concession to English.


## 09
stāmú- is a hapax and there is no agreed upon etymology or interpretation.

Gr takes it as belonging to √stan ‘thunder’ and meaning something like ‘sighing’ (with no explanation of the semantic distance), and he is followed implicitly by Oberlies (II.210). KEWA also registers this idea, but in EWA it seems to have been abandoned, without anything to replace it. Ge, on the other hand, connects it to the root √stā ‘steal’, a suggestion I find very appealing. However, his further interpretation does not seem compelling: “und verstohlen hat (der Sänger) geklagt.” The structure of the hemistich, with two clauses joined by utá, each with a verb of noisemaking, whose subject in the first clause is an animal, suggests that an animal should be the subject of the second as well. I therefore suggest that stāmú- means ‘thieving’ and it is a well-known characteristic of some animal or other. I suggest ‘monkey’: monkeys are of course well known for thievery and Vṛṣākapi, Indra’s monkey pal in X.86, steals “the goodies of the Arya” (X.86.1). Monkeys are also know for their sharp cries. The presence of vṛ́ṣā (recalling Vṛṣākapi) in pāda a may support this idea, but of course all of this is very tentative, and in particular I have no explanation for why configuring his praise as a screeching monkey would please Indra (unless, again, to remind him of his friend Vṛṣākapi). An alternative animal possibility is the magpie, which has a reputation at least in the West as a thief (cf. Rossini’s opera “The Thieving Magpie” [La gazza ladra]), although the internet tells me that this reputation is undeserved. There are species of magpies in northern India and they do make sharp cries.

While it is impossible to be certain about the meaning and etymology of the hapax, as often with hapaxes and other rare words it is possible to suggest reasons why it appears in just this passage. Its position in its pāda is identical to that of stómo in the preceding pāda, and it echoes that word phonologically. In fact, the phonological play is quite subtle: underlyingly stoma = s t a u m a, and stāmu = s t a a m u, with the vowels around the m simply reversed.

The old idea that stāmú- is cognate to Grk. στωμυλός ‘talkative, loquacious’ was revived with considerable discussion by Ch. de Lamberterie (Les adjectifs grecs en -υς, 1990: 704-14 [esp. 704-5]) and recently considered anew and more or less dismissed as impossible to demonstrate by Brent Vine (“Greek στωμυλός ‘chatty’,” Indo-European Linguistics 7 [2019]). Although the coincidence of form and possible semantics is suggestive, I think it unlikely that an entirely isolated stāmú- (no root, no related nominal forms) would have been preserved in this sense from hoary antiquity, and although it might have inhabited a lower register and therefore generally not surface in “high” Vedic, I know of no possible MIA correspondents.

Furthermore, the anagramatic word play noted above makes it more likely that the word is semi-artificial, though based on attested material -- hence my favoring of the √stā ‘steal’ connection.

The return of the singer (jaritár-) in the last two verses of this hymn (9c, 10c) forms a faint ring with his appearance in 2b. 22
