+++
title = "021"

+++
Indra


## 01
Some recycling and recombination from the last hymn: janúṣem uvoca combines janúṣem (20.3b) and uvoca (20.4d), each in its metrical position, and ándhaso mádeṣu echoes ándhasā mádeṣu of 20.4d.

devám appears to be one of the few adjectival forms of the stem, modifying neut. ándhaḥ. Although I would like to reduce the number of these supposed adjectival forms to zero, it is difficult to see what else to do with it here.


## 02
In the -áya-book (Jamison 1983: 50), I take vipáyanti as intransitive, in keeping with its vocalism, supplying a form of √sad, which is extraordinarily common with barhís-: “(Sitting on) the barhis, they become inspired.” However, the publ. tr. takes vipáyanti as transitive, despite the vocalism, both to avoid supplying extraneous matter and because I did not think the pressing stones that are the verb’s unexpressed subj. should sit on the barhis. I failed to note that in V.31.12, adduced by Ge, the pressing stone “will be brought down to the vedi” (áva védim bhriyāte).

Since the vedi is where the barhis is strewn, the passage seems to put the stone in a position actually to “sit on the barhis.” See also VIII.27.1 agnír ukthé puróhito grā́vāṇo barhír adhvaré “Agni has been set in front while the solemn speech (is being recited), as have the pressing stones and the ritual grass while the ceremony (is going forth),” which has the stones and the barhis set out together, and III.42.2, which describes soma as barhiṣṭhā́ṃ grā́vabhiḥ sutám “stationed on the ritual grass, pressed by stones.” The transitive interpr. found in the publ. tr. has the merit of not requiring an extra verb to be supplied, but what ritual event it might depict is unclear.

I suppose that the vigorous activity that pressing required would make the material on which the pressing apparatus was placed (presumably the barhis) tremble. But I now tentatively favor my old 1983 intransitive interpr., which takes better account of the vocalism. Moreover, since what is most often emphasized about the pressing stones is the noise they make, “become inspired” (like vípras ‘inspired poets’) would express this well-known characteristic of theirs. Note in the next hymn, VII.22.4ab, where the call of the pressing stone (hávam … ádreḥ) is parallel to the thought of the inspired poet (víprasya … manīṣā́m). Indeed in that passage the vípra might refer to the pressing stone itself. On the vedi as the place where the soma pressing apparatus is placed, see Oberlies, Der Rigveda und seine Religion, 254.

Ge takes gṛbhā́d ā́as “bis zur Handhabung,” but in that use of the ablative with ā́(“all the way to”) the noun follows the ā́(see Gr s.v. ā́). Better to interpret it as a standard ablative expressing the place/person from which the pressing stones are being brought to the ritual ground for use (so, e.g., Scar 591). Old argues persuasively that gṛbhá- is an agent noun. For √grabh with the pressing stones, see grāva-grābhá- (I.162.5), the title of a functionary, “Handler of the Pressing Stones.” dūráüpabdaḥ must be nominative plural, so, although the stem is universally (Gr, EWA, AiG II.2.75) given as thematic, this form (versus upabdaíḥ VII.104.17) 23 must belong to a root noun. Gr suggests instead reading -upabdās, an emendation Old rejects as unnecessary without commenting on the stem.


## 04
Ge supplies a second, accusative, form of ā́yudha- as object of viveṣa and supplies “enemies” as the referent of eṣām ‘of them’, while making the accusative phrase in b the object of vidvā́n ‘knowing’: “Der Fürchtbare hat mit den Waffen ihre (Waffen) abgetan, der aller mannhaften Werke kundig ist.” But there are several reasons to reject this interpretation in addition to the necessity of supplying a significant word. The root √viṣ ‘labor, bring to fulfillment’ does not mean ‘abtun’ (dismiss, brush aside). Moreover it regularly takes ápas- ‘work’, a form of which appears in pāda b, as object; see esp. IV.19.10 ápāṃsi ... náryā́viveṣīḥ. By contrast, the participle vidvā́n is usually used absolutely, without object. As for the referent of eṣām it would of course possible to supply “enemies,” although they are not mentioned previously in the hymn: the only preceding masc. or neut. plurals are the pressing stones (subject of the whole of vs. 2), the “finely made (fortifications)” of 3d, and, in a simile, the charioteers in 3c. Because the pressing stones are extravagantly celebrated in vs. 2 and called Indra’s “companions,” I think it likely that they are the referents here: the soma they produce is their weapon, and this soma fuels Indra’s labors. This is also Caland-Henry’s solution (L’Agniṣṭoma, p. 285 and n.

3).

I supply “fortifications” (púraḥ) from c as the obj. of jaghāna in d. It is possible that we are meant to think instead (or in addition) of the archetypal obj. of this verb, the serpent Vṛtra, who is concealed in the instr. (m)ahi(nā́) directly before the verb. Cf. áhinā in 3b.

The first word of the verse, bhīmáḥ, picks up the last word of vs. 3, bhīṣā́.


## 05
A verse with several rare words. The neut. pl. vándanā in b is unclear; the neut. sg. vándanam in VII.50.2 appears to be some medical condition, and in AV


## 02
it refers to some sort of negatively viewed plant (a parasitic plant, acdg. to Gr; see also EWA s.v.), neither of which is helpful here. I think it better to start with the root √vand ‘praise, extol’ and give it a negative twist appropriate to the context, hence my ‘sycophant’: praise gone wrong. A similar negative interpretation is needed for the usually positive term vedyā́- in the same phrase. Why vándanā is neuter and not masculine isn’t clear to me; perhaps a better tr. would be “sycophancy, sycophantic (words).” With sorcerers and flatterers in this first hemistich we then have two different ways in which rtḁ́ can be undermined within our own community, while the arí- ‘stranger’ whose ways are contrary to ours and the phallusworshippers in the second hemistich represent external threats to ṛtá-.

In c víṣuṇa- ordinarily means ‘variable, various’, which here shades into ‘variant’ and, with the negative reading prevailing in this verse, ‘contrary’.

The lexeme ápi √gā occurs in the RV only here, but ápi √gam can have a sexual sense (“inire feminam” as Gr chastely phrases it), and that image would be appropriate here, given the grammatical subject. 24


## 06
I take the injunc. bhūḥ in the first pāda as imperatival, although Ge’s preterital value is also possible.

The particle ádha is once again oddly positioned; cf. VII.20.5. In this case, however, it seems a mistake for (or a play on?) ádhi, which regularly appears with locatives (esp. cosmological locatives) in just this metrical position - including a number of times with the phonological variant of the endingless loc. jmán here, namely the i-loc. kṣámi: … ádhi kṣámi# (5x, e.g., I.25.18). See also nearby pādainitial ádhi kṣámi in VII.27.3b.

Pāda b contains one of the standardly cited examples of neut. pl. subject with singular verb: … vivyak … rájāṃsi.

The verb in d, vividat, is morphologically slightly problematic. Following Gr I interpret it as a subjunctive to the act. pf. of √vid ‘find’, but we ought then to have full-gr. root syllable *vivedat. Kü (493) takes it as an injunctive “in komprehensivem Gebrauch,” but the perfect injunctive ought not to be thematic, but rather *vivet (like vivyak in b). In the end I take it as a wrongly formed subjunctive.

Ge. construes the enclitic te with ántam: “… dein Ende finden,” but the enclitic seems wrongly positioned for this interpretation (insofar as we understand the positioning of adnominal enclitics - but see te asuryā̀ya in 7a), and at least one parallel passage suggests that it is the end of his śávas- that is at issue: I.100.15 ná … śávaso ántam āpuḥ.


## 07
Note the juxtaposition of the gods (devā́ḥ) and Indra’s “lordship” (asuryā̀ya).

For the meaning of the idiom ánu √mā, see Kü (279). It parallels the concessive sense of ánu √dā ‘concede’ and ánu √dhā ‘id.’

## 08-09
Final varūtā́of 8d is matched by final tarutra in 9b.


## 08
The “man like you” (tvā́vataḥ) is the human patron because he, too, distributes largesse. So also Ge (n. 8d).


## 09
vanvántu ‘let them combat’ and vanúṣām ‘rapacious ones’ are presumably derived from the originally separate roots van ‘win, vanquish’ and vani ‘love, desire’, but since these roots have become synchronically entangled, the pair presents itself like an etymological figure, like I.132.1=VIII.40.7 vanuyā́ma vanuṣyátaḥ “may we win against those who seek to win.”


## 10
This verse is identical to the final verse of the last hymn (VII.20.10), but in this case maghávāno junánti “the bounteous ones incite (us)” is the positive equivalent of the negative ná … jūjuvur naḥ “They do not incite us” in vs. 5, where the internal enemies served as subject.
