+++
title = "022"

+++
Indra 25


## 02
I tr. ásti as an existential (“exists to be yoked”) rather than simply a copula with the predicated gerundive yújyaḥ (“is to be yoked”) because the 3rd sg. pres. of √as is almost always an existential, given that the copula is almost always gapped.

However, this may be too emphatic a tr., and it is the case that a surface copula is more likely to be found in subordinate clauses than main clauses. See Jamison 1990 (“Tense of the Predicated Past Participle …,” IIJ 33: 1-19) pp. 4--5. The gerundive + asi in 7c (hávyaḥ … asi “you are to be invoked”) supports a simple copula interpr.

here.


## 03
The position of ā́in the middle of the NP vā́cam … imā́m is worth noting.

Gr takes it as a preverb with bódhā, but √budh does not otherwise occur with ā́, and its position would not be normal for a preverb in tmesis. Note also that bódhā + SPEECH is found in the next vs. (bódhā … manīṣā́m) and in the preceding hymn (VII.21.1d bódhā … stómam), both times without preverb. I am tempted to assume that the poet inserted an unnecessary adverbial ā́‘here’ to produce a proper cadence.

Pāda-final vā́cam émā́m is also found in IX.97.13, a verse attributed to Upamanyu Vāsiṣṭha, again without obvious function.


## 04
The lexeme ví √pā in later Vedic is regularly found in specialized sense in the Sautrāmaṇī ritual, and there it refers to the feat of separating the surā from the other liquid (milk or soma). This sense and context are already found in the late RVic hymn X.131.4 in the med. part. vipipānā́. See Old ad loc. (and NGGW 1893, 348- 49). Though it has been suggested that this usage belongs to a separate root √pā ‘go’ (see, e.g., EWA s.v. PĀ3 ), this seems unnecessary and somewhat perverse. Although the other ví √pā passages (all medial) don't have a Sautrāmaṇī association, I think they (or most of them) belong to this same lexeme, though Old is less certain. Here the stones are separating the soma juice from the stalk. In IV.16.3 the pressing stone is also the subj., and there is a pressing stone association in III.53.10. However, I.112.15 is more enigmatic. The subj. there is an ant (or someone called “ant”), vamrá-, and the vignette occupies half a pāda in a list of the Aśvins’ helpful deeds.

For further on that passage, see disc. ad loc. 
## 05
A nice example of the potential iterative-repetitive value of a reduplicated present (vivakmi) reinforced by an adverb (sádā ‘always’).


## 07
The first pāda could also be another obj. of kṛṇomi in b.


## 08
Ge seems to take the participle mányamānasya as a functional reflexive ‘think oneself to be’, with the added sense of self-conceit (“der du dir darauf etwas einbildest”). Although I would certainly not ascribe to Indra excessive modesty, in this context, where the poet is emphasizing the poets’ inability to capture all of Indra’s greatness, I think it unlikely that he is focusing on Indra’s egotism. I instead take the participle in a passive sense ‘be thought to be’, as sometimes elsewhere - pace Kulikov (339-40), who follows Gotō. 26

## 08-09
The subject of the verb in 8b, úd aśnuvanti, is not specified. In my view the subject is postponed to 9ab: neither the older nor the younger poets are capable of expressing all of Indra’s powers in their formulations. Although this interpretation requires enjambment over a verse boundary, the main clause in 9c to which 9ab is supposedly subordinate has no appropriate referent for the relative pronoun (asmé works awkwardly at best), whereas 9ab neatly completes the thought of vs. 8.


## 09
The publ. tr. interpr. asmé as a dat. But the parallel in IV.10.8 śivā́naḥ sakhyā́sántu ... devéṣu yuṣmé, where the -mé pronominal form is anchored as a loc. by devéṣu, makes a loc. reading more likely. Cf. also VI.18.5 tán naḥ pratnáṃ sakhyám astu yuṣmé. I would therefore change the tr. to “Let there be friendly fellowship of you among [or, with] us.”
