+++
title = "023"

+++
Indra


## 01
I follow Ge in taking upaśrotā́as a periphrastic future (contra Tichy, 189, 364).


## 02
Note the echoes at the beginning and end of the first pāda: áyāmi … (dev)ájāmi(r). As often, the local patterns created by the use of hapaxes (as devájāmiis in the RV) may help account for their deployment.

I don’t understand Ge’s rendering of pāda b, where he seems to take singular ghóṣa(ḥ) of pāda a as the implied subject of plural irajyánta. I take the verb as a contrastive passive/reflexive to the otherwise active stem, more or less following Old’s interpretation, with śurúdhaḥ as subject.

The root noun cmpd vívāc- echoes the redupl. pres. vivakmi in the preceding hymn, VII.22.5, though of course the vi’s have nothing to do with each, being the preverb and the reduplicating syllable respectively.


## 04
‘Teams’ (niyút-) often appear in context with Vāyu and his driving. Often, of course, they are his teams, but here and frequently elsewhere the ‘teams’ clearly stand for our poetic thoughts. Cf., e.g., I.135.2, VI.47.14, X.26.1. Therefore, it is unnecessary to supply, with Ge, a verb of guiding or yoking to make the teams into Vāyu’s.

The instr. dhībhíḥ is taken in the publ. tr. as an instr. of accompaniment, but it could also be an instr. of price/exchange: “in exchange for (our) visionary thoughts.”


## 05
The syntactic frame of dáyase here is wrong: it ordinarily takes an accusative of the material distributed and a dative of recipient on the rare occasions on which the recipient is made explicit. A clear example is found in the preceding verse, 4d … dáyase ví vā́jān, also nearby VII.21.7 maghā́ni dayate. The position of hí is also anomalous, though note that it exactly replicates the position of ví in the phrase in the preceding verse just cited and may well owe its position to this rhyme. 27 Despite the syntactic aberrancy I think that mártān must represent the recipient, and the parallelism of the dáyase phrases in the adjacent verses has imposed the accusative recipient. (There is also an apparent double accusative, of goods and recipient, in one other passage: VI.37.4 maghā́… dáyase ví sūrī́n “you apportion bounties to our patrons.”)
