+++
title = "024"

+++
Indra


## 01
The conjoined phrase avitā́vṛdhé ca is not syntactically parallel in the strict sense, but both the agent noun avitár- and the purpose dative vṛdhé are properly construed with the 2nd sg. copula, subjunctive ásaḥ. For the latter, cf., e.g., I.89.5 … yáthā … ásad vṛdhé, and for the cooccurrence of the two terms VI.33.4 … avitā́ vṛdhé bhūḥ.


## 02
The striking expression “your mind … has been captured” presumably indicates that our successful preparations for the ritual have forcibly brought Indra to the soma sacrifice, with the implication that he is prevented from going to the sacrifices of others.

In pāda a dvibárhāḥ appears to be a masc. nom. sg., though I take it (as Ge does) as modifying neut. mánaḥ. Gr, by contrast, suggests that it belongs with masc.

sutáḥ sómaḥ in the following pāda. Although Gr’s solution might seem to be grammatically more satisfactory, on several occasions dvibárhā(ḥ) does seem to modify a neut.: I.114.10, VII.8.6, possibly IV.5.3, and AIG III.288 allows neut. sg. to

-as-stem adj. in -āḥ. In most instances, as here, the -āḥ is pāda-final, and so the long
vowel isn't metrically guaranteed.

Gotō (1stCl., 226 n. 483) interprets bharate in c not as a passive (with Gr, Ge, and me; also H-P Schmidt, Fs. Nyberg), but as a self-involved middle: “Lobpreisung, deren Milchstrom losgelassen ist, bringt [ihre Milch] dar,” on the basis of his principle that medial Class I presents cannot be used passively. But in my opinion at least, this principle cannot be maintained in general, and certainly in this context, with passive expressions dominating the first hemistich, a passive reading is most natural and the image of the praise hymn bringing its own milk borders on the comic.

With others I take pāda d as an extension of c, with iyám … manīṣā́an appositive to suvṛktíḥ. However, it would be possible to take it independently: “this inspired thought is constantly invoking Indra,” since, though fairly rare, predicated present participles do exist, and the short staccato clauses of the earlier part of the hymn may invite an independent reading here.


## 03
Despite its position, tavásam should not modify āṅgūṣám, though that is grammatically possible, but tvā, since the adjective is a regular epithet of Indra.


## 04
The intens. part. várīvṛjat can only be intransitive here, as there is nothing overt or latent that could serve as object (so also Ge “zu uns einbiegend,” Schaeffer [191] “immer wieder (zu uns) einbiegend” -- though with a different nuance from my 28 tr.). However, forms to the root √vṛj ‘twist’ are otherwise always transitive, including the other ex. of the intens. part. (VI.58.2). I do not have an explanation.


## 05
Uncompounded vṛddhied vā́h- to √vah ‘convey’ is attested only here, but it is common in compounds, e.g., indra-vā́h- (4x). See Scar (473-80; for the grade of the root, esp. 479).

The two different simile markers in b (iva … ná) may be highlighting two different aspects of the complex simile.

The genitive of goods with √īḍ ‘invoke’ is somewhat aberrant. Although for this root Gr allows acc., dat., or gen. of the material desired, the only other genitive passage he cites is VIII.31.14, where the genitive is otherwise to be construed.

However, there seems nothing else to do with vásūnām, and the construction is reminiscent of nearby VII.32.5 ... śrútkarṇa īyate vásūnām “he of listening ears is implored for goods.” Moreover, in X.20.2 agním īḷe bhujā́m, the gen. pl. bhujā́m is best interpr. this way (“I invoke Agni for delights”), contra the standard interpr.

Alternatively we could assume the gapping of a noun like sambháraṇam ‘assemblage’ as in the next hymn, VII.25.2d sambháraṇaṃ vásūnām, but this seems less likely.

In d the śrómatam is presumably the ‘hearing” that gods extend to men’s hymns. See VII.32.5 just cited for a similar sentiment.

The simile divī̀va dyā́m is opaque to me. Ge tr. “Wie Tag auf Tag,” but neither of these case forms of div-/dyu- is used temporally, but only spatially of ‘heaven’.

Placing “heaven upon heaven” must refer to Indra’s cosmogonic deeds, but the connection with Indra’s activity in the frame is vague. Old believes that setting heaven on heaven means that Indra is fixing heaven in its proper place.


## 06
For pūrdhi see EWA s.v. PARIī2 ‘give’.
