+++
title = "025"

+++
Indra


## 01
Although mahá(ḥ) in the first pāda is a genitive, I have tr. it in the vocative phrase to avoid the awkward “(Be) here with the help of you, the great one, o strong Indra.” Ge supplies ‘mind’ from d as the subject of the first pāda, but this seems unnecessary.

I take pāda c as a clause parallel to b, with the yád in b having domain over both, hence accented pátāti in c. By contrast, Ge (see also Old) takes it as a circumstantial clause dependent on d and supplies “(Wenn).” This is certainly possible, but my solution seems simpler.

The threatened possibility of Indra’s wandering mind may account for the capturing of his mind in the previous hymn, VII.24.2.


## 04
The prohibitive clause ná mardhīḥ is of course grammatically incorrect.

We expect mā́with the injunctive in prohibitives, and in fact find it with this same stem several times: mā́no mardhīḥ IV.20.10, mā́no mardhiṣṭam VII.73.4, 74.3, 29 always with the 1st pl. enclitic following the mā́. Non-prohibitive forms of √mṛdh almost always occur with the negative ná, e.g., ná mardhanti (I.166.2, III.54.14); there are no positive attestations of this verb. Our passage must be an odd conflation of the prohibitive passages with enclitic no and the non-prohibitive passages with negative ná. Or alternatively, and in my opinion less likely, this is a non-prohibitive use of the injunctive: “you do/did not neglect.” That, however, is Hoffmann’s solution (Injunk., 101), taking it “als allgemeine Eigenschaft” of Indra’s: “du lässt nicht im Stich.” See his discussion, where he also points out that that *mā́mardhīḥ would be metrically bad.


## 05
The opening of my tr. of this verse is meant to capture the odd order of noun and demonstrative, kútsā eté … With Ge I supply a form of √ṛc ‘chant’ as the main verb of the first hemistich, since this verb takes śūṣám as object in a number of passages (e.g., I.9.10, X.96.2).

Cf. nearby VII.23.6 vásiṣṭhāso abhí arcanty arkaíḥ, with the nom. pl. subj. of a group of contemporary singers and the verb √ṛc in the last vs. of the hymn (VII.25.6 is repeated from VII.24.6).
