+++
title = "026"

+++
Indra


## 01
nṛvát in d may, as frequently, be adverbial (“I manfully beget…”) or, as in the publ. tr., a neuter acc. sg. modifying ukthám.


## 03
On ní √mṛj see comm. ad II.38.3. The idiomatic sense ‘drag down forcefully’ (as in I.140.2, where Agni drags down trees like an elephant) allows the idiom to develop a sense not only of coercion (on the part of the agent) but of submission (on the part of the object), which is probably responsible for its use of a husband’s action towards his wives.

The use of sárva- rather than víśva- for ‘all’ may be a sign of lateness.


## 04
The utá of pāda a is echoed by ūtáyo in c, which in turn is picked up by ūtáye in 5a.

Pāda b opens with ékaḥ ‘one, single’ and c ends with pūrvī́ḥ ‘many’, a contrast that appears to be hightlighted.

The verb saścata in d is morphologically ambiguous. My publ. tr. follows Ge in rendering it as a modal (Ge “… sollen … zufallen,” SWJ “will be companions”).

Ge does not, however, comment on the form. Gr identifies it as a 3rd pl. to an athematic redupl. stem saśc-; since this stem precedes and is distinct from his “schwaches Perf. saśc-,” he must consider it a redupl. pres., as Whitney and Macdonell (VGS) do; Hoffmann (Injunc. 260) likewise calls our form an injunctive.

A 3rd pl. mid. injunc. is certainly possible here, but if we wish to maintain the modal value (which, in fact, is not actually necessary), the injunctive is a small embarrassment, since modal value is fairly rare, and generally limited to particular forms like dhā́s for the injunctive. An alternative would be to take it as a 3rd singular  30 subjunctive, possibly built to the perfect stem. The neut. pl. bhadrā́ṇi … priyā́ṇi could serve as subject to the singular verb in the well-known inherited construction, though it is not overwhelmingly common in the RV. Of course, we would far prefer a primary -te ending for the middle subj., but I do not think secondary -ta is impossible. Alternatively, with an analysis as 3rd plural injunctive, the tr. could be changed to “… are companions to us.”
