+++
title = "027"

+++
Indra


## 02
The relative clause in the first pāda has no overt referent in the main clause of b, but I supply an instr. téna (see also Ge’s n.; his first alternative, to supply tám, is less attractive because śikṣa- doesn’t ordinarily take an acc.).

I interpret c as containing an implicit pun. The form vícetā(ḥ), masc. nom. sg.

of vícetas-, derived from the root √cit ‘perceive’, means ‘discriminating’, hence my ‘tell things apart’, and is regularly applied to Indra (and other gods). But this leaves dṛḷhā́with no verb to govern it. (It cannot be object of ápa vṛdhi in d, because the hí in c should trigger verbal accent.) I suggest that vícetā (in sandhi) might also be secondarily construed as the agent noun of ví √ci ‘pile apart, pull apart’, governing dṛḷhā́. Of course we would expect the Saṃhitā text to show coalescence of the final vowel of the agent noun and the initial vowel of the next pāda, but the recitational text would not reflect that. Although most agent nouns compounded with preverbs take suffix accent, compare nícetar- (I.184.2) to a different root √ci ‘perceive’. If this suggestion seems too radical, it would also be possible to detach the preverb ví from vícetā(ḥ) and supply a form of √vṛ ‘cover’ (found in ápa vṛdhi in d), producing the familiar lexeme ví √vṛ ‘uncover’.


## 03
The cid in d is somewhat surprising: cid generally means ‘even’, but “even when praised” (úpastutaś cid) is the opposite of what we should expect. Both Ge and I have avoided this problem by tr. cid almost as a subordinator or at least a circumstantial (Ge “zumal da …,” SWJ “just when”). I now wonder if it expresses anticipatory polarity with nū́cid in the following pāda (4a). Since nū́cid means ‘never’, cid in 3d could mean ‘always’.


## 04
Note the rhyming pāda-final … (sáh)ūtī (a), … ūtī́(b).

In b Ge takes dānáḥ as gen. sg. of dāmán-, dependent on vā́jam: “… den Lohn der Gabe.” This is possible, though it would be more natural to have vā́jam as object of some form of √dā (esp. given the parallel he cites, VI.45.23 dānám vā́jasya, with vā́jasya dependent on dānám). I therefore prefer to take dānáḥ as the ablative singular of the mán-stem, with verbal rection, or, possibly (but somewhat farfetched) the nom. sg. of an otherwise unattested medial root aorist participle of √dā.

The combination of abhí with √vī ‘pursue’ would occur only here in the RV (and the other saṃhitās); Ge renders it as ‘willkommen’. I suggest that it belongs rather to √vyā ‘envelop’ and continues the theme of confinement found in 1d and 2d.

The idea here is that the cow was once enwrapped or enclosed but freed by Indra to 31 swell for us. It is possible that abhívītā is actually a pun on both those roots, and the tr. should reflect this ambiguity: “… gift-cow swells …, (previously) enclosed, (now to be) pursued by his comrades,” vel sim. The presence of vyántaḥ ‘pursuing’ in 5c supports this possibility.
