+++
title = "028"

+++
Indra


## 01
The 2nd hemistich begins and ends with a form of víśva- ‘all’: #víśve … viśvam(-inva)#.


## 02
Pāda a continues the theme of competitive invocations embodied in the lexeme ví √hvā in 1c vihávanta with hávam … ví, even though the two words are not to be construed together.

“Your greatness” as an agent may seem odd, but consider “your majesty, your highness,” which pose no such problems in English.

I interpret bráhma in b as plural rather than singular because of pl. bráhmā in 1a and because there are multiple seers in 2b.

I take c with ab, contrary to Ge, who takes it with d. His is technically possible, but it seems to imply a backwards sequence of events: Indra is born only when he has taken the mace in his hand. Ge avoids the problem by radically bleaching the meaning of janiṣṭhāḥ to make it an auxiliary or copula substitute (“wardst”) with áṣāḷhaḥ: “so wardst du unbezwinglich.” This seems too high a price, esp. as jajñé appears in the next verse, where Ge gives it its full lexical value (“er ist … geboren”).

With janiṣṭhā áṣāḷhaḥ compare VII.20.3 janúṣem áṣāḷhaḥ.

Although nominative forms of the pres. part. to √as ‘be’, particularly sán, are ordinarily concessive, I cannot see a concessive force here. Perhaps it is here almost as a place-holder, to match the yád forms in the same position in surrounding pādas (2b, c, 3b [whose yán in sandhi rhymes with sán]).


## 03
I take ab as dependent on the previous verse, 2d, describing Indra’s cosmogonic deeds right after birth. For a novel, but not ultimately persuasive interpretation of this hemistich, see Old. Note that forms of √nī open and clause this half-verse: #táva praṇītī … ninétha#.

The position of yád in this dependent clause is somewhat disturbing. It occurs in Wackernagel’s position in the second pāda (b), but the a-pāda is part of this same clause and is intimately interwoven with the elements in pāda b: note esp. the acc. pl.

jóhuvānān, which modifies nṝ́n, the third word in b. Although superficially late position of subordinating elements is not uncommon in the RV (see, e.g., hí in pāda c), what precedes is generally syntactically unified, belonging to a single constituent (as in pāda c), but this is not true of the assorted material found in pāda a. I have no explanation.

For the oppositional pun in sám … ninétha, standing for ví (… ninétha), see the publ. intro. As I explained there, since sám and ví are preverbs of opposite 32 meaning that frequently pattern together, the sám here evokes the ví of the lexeme ví √hvā earlier in the hymn (with √hvā present here in the intensive part. jóhuvānān) and the various expressions of Indra’s pushing apart the two world-halves. E.g., nearby VII.23.3c ví bādhiṣṭa syá ródasī mahitvā́(I.51.10, VI.29.5, etc.). These associations would prompt the audience to take “bring together” as standing for “push apart,” in the standard mythology of Indra.

After the 2nd ps. description of Indra’s mythological activity in 2d-3ab, the second half of vs. 3 summarizes the birth in the 3rd person. Ge’s interpretation, which makes c parenthetical and connects ab with d despite an awkward change of person, seems clumsy.


## 04
A curious verse. It begins conventionally enough, with a plea to Indra to favor us “though these days” (ebhíḥ … áhabhiḥ). Which days is not clear, but I assume it means “now.” The verse then turns towards the moral sphere: the peoples (kṣitáyaḥ) who are durmitrá- ‘having bad allies/alliances’ (or possibly ‘bad allies’) are purifying themselves (pávante). This pāda presents a number of problems: not only whether durmitrá- is a bahuvrīhi or tatpuruṣa (opinion is divided; I take it as the former; see also comm. ad VII.18.15), but also whether the kṣitáyaḥ are intrinsically our enemies or are members of our larger community who have fallen into an evil state. kṣitáyaḥ are ordinarily presented either positively or neutrally, but see III.18.1, where they are purudrúhaḥ ‘possessing many deceptions’, so an intrinsically hostile reading is possible (if, in my opinion, less likely). If here they are intrinsically hostile, the point may be that if they’re sprucing themselves up, we had better get to work on it as well, to meet the challenge of our enemies. If they are not our sworn enemies but peoples with whom we have dealings (or who we ourselves actually are), is it that they are purifying themselves of their bad allies/alliances, and therefore are worthy of Indra’s aid? Varuṇa, as if evoked by his partner Mitra in durmitrá-, then makes his appearance, noting untruth and releasing us from it. As was stated in the intro., Varuṇa’s presence is unexpected here. I now wonder if the hymn is specialized for a particular ritual context (signaled by “these days”), perhaps the Varuṇapraghāsa. A purificatory period (like that described in pāda b) might be appropriate then. For this reason I favor an interpretation of pāda b in which the kṣitáyaḥ are identified with, or associated with, us.


## 05
As noted in the publ. intro., this verse serves as refrain for VII.28-30, so that it does not respond to (or at least need not respond to) the immediately preceding Varuṇa verse.

In b the genitives mahó rāyáḥ and rā́dhasaḥ may either be parallel or one dependent on the other. I follow the latter interpr., with the rāyáḥ phrase dependent on rā́dhas-. Although I have not found absolutely diagnostic passages, rā́dhas- is regularly modified by adjectives (like ‘bovine’) that specify the type of rā́dhas-, and mahó rāyáḥ may be a defining genitive of the same type.
