+++
title = "031"

+++
Indra


## 02
Unlike other interpretors, I take utá as marking a new clause, summing up the actions of the poet (who addresses himself in 2a) and his ritual companions (whom he addresses in vs. 1) and comparing them to the actions of the Maruts (yáthā náraḥ). Klein (I.409) takes utá as connecting vss. 1 and 2, but the position of utá in 2b makes that interpretation awkward. Ge takes it as connecting ukthám and dyukṣám (“… ein Loblied … und zwar ein himmlisches”). His interpretation assumes a new clause beginning with yáthā in the middle of b and also takes cakṛmā́in c as a sort of 34 dummy verb substituting for a verb of poetic speech (“wie wir Männer es … gedichtet haben”). But, although “just as we have done” works fine in English as a dummy verb, I am not sure that √kṛ can be bleached in the same manner in Sanskrit

- though I notice, with some chagrin, that I suggest just such an explanation for
kṛṇóti in I.77.1. Since the Maruts as Indra’s singers are mentioned elsewhere in the hymn (explicitly vs. 8, implicitly vs. 12) and are often called náraḥ, my interpretation of b has some support. The position of yáthā as a simile marker might be problematic, however; it can be ameliorated by assuming that dyukṣám forms part of the simile “as the superior men (made/make) a heavenly (speech), we have made …” For dyukṣá- qualifying ‘speech’, cf. the compound dyukṣá-vacas- (VI.15.4).

## 03-04
Although these verses straddle a tṛca boundary, they are neatly responsive. The repeated tvám of vs. 3 is matched by the initial vayám of vs. 4, and the repeated -yú- (‘seeking X’) adjectives of 3 are again matched by the tvāyú- ‘seeking you’ of 4a. The final word of both verses is the voc. vaso. Even the gavyú- ‘seeking cows’ of 3b has its complement in 4b vṛṣan ‘o bull’.

There is no obvious noun to supply with asyá ‘of this’ in c. Ge supplies “Schrei,” and my “cry” follow him; Klein (I.175) instead “act.” The phraseology reminds us of the refrain of I.105 vittám me asyá rodasī, which I tr. “Take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves.”


## 05
Contra Ge (and Klein DGRV I.175), I take váktave with nidé, not with árāvṇe, which respects the pāda boundary and also conforms better to the semantic domain of the two nouns: níd- ‘scorn’ is verbal, whereas árāvan- is more general. In either interpretation the position of ca is a problem, since it appears with the first member of a conjoined NP, not the second. In my interpretation the configuration is X ca X' ... Y, in the Ge/Klein interpretation X ca Y...Y'.

## 06
On the basis of VIII.92.32 tváyéd indra yujā́vayám, práti bruvīmahi spṛ́dhaḥ “With you as yokemate, we would respond to the challengers,” I supply ‘challenger’ here.

## 06-07
Again there is responsion across the tṛca boundary: 7a mahām̐utā́si echoes 6a tvám vármāsi.

## 07-08
Echo between 7b svadhā́varī and 8b sayā́varī, though they occupy different metrical positions.


## 10
Much phonetic and morphological play, with the repeated prá’s, the repetition of mahé mahi- (note that this replicates the mahé … máhi of VII.30.1cd), and, especially, the chiastic finale: prá carā carṣaṇiprā́ḥ, where the last element, the root noun -prā́ḥ, is of course unrelated to the first one, the preverb prá. 35


## 12
Because the vā́ṇī ‘choir’ in vs. 8 was qualified as marútvatī ‘composed of Maruts’, I supply Maruts here with pl. vā́ṇīḥ. It is also possible, and perhaps preferable, to assume that the plural indicates that several choirs are involved: both the Maruts and (we) the human singers.

In c barhayā could also be 1st sg. subjunctive, as Ge takes it. Either interpretation fits the context fine; I slightly prefer the 2nd sg. imperative, because it returns us to the imperatives of vss. 1-2.
