+++
title = "032"

+++
Indra


## 02
It is tempting to take suté as parallel to mádhau in the simile and sácā with ā́sate, rather than taking suté sácā as a formulaic phrase with semi-pleonastic sácā as the publ. tr. does. The former interpr. would yield “because these who craft sacred formulations for you sit together at [=by/around] the soma like flies on honey when (the soma) is pressed,” an interpr. also suggested to me by Dieter Gunkel (p.c., 11/5/15). I chose the latter path because of the parallel cited by Ge, X.50.7 ...

brahmakṛ́taḥ suté sácā # However, it could be argued that X.50 is presumably a later composition than VII.32 and need not provide unassailable evidence for how


## 02
should be interpreted.


## 03
sudákṣiṇa- is a triple pun. In its only other RVic occurrence (VIII.33.5) it means ‘having a good right (horse)’, but it could equally mean ‘having a good right (hand)’, alluding to the immediately preceding vájrahasta- ‘having the mace in his hand’. And, in keeping with the theme of giving, it can refer to the dákṣiṇā-, the priestly gift’ distributed at the dawn sacrifice. This would respond to the rāyáskāma- ‘desirous of wealth’, which opens the verse.


## 05
Ge joins c with b, rather than d as I do. This is possible, but the topic of giving in both c and d connects them thematically.


## 08
ávase kṛṇudhvam is close to a periphrastic causative, since “make [=create] (him) for help” is unlikely to take the long-created Indra as object. Zehnder (p. 7 and passim) takes it as such.


## 09
kṛṇudhvám … ātúje similarly functions as a periphrastic causative. So also Zehnder (p. 20 and passim).


## 11
Although ‘seeking the prize’ is ordinarily accented as a denominative (vājayánt-), as opposed to ‘incite’ (vājáya-) with causative accent, in this context, the denominative sense seems clear. See comm. on 14d below.


## 14
śraddhā́is most likely instrumental, but its lack of contraction with the following vowel in the Saṃhitā text gives pause. See Old on this problem. 36 vājī́vā́jaṃ siṣāsati seems like a variant of gámad vā́jam vājáyan in 11a with different emphasis. See also 20a below.


## 17
The relative clause of b, yá īm bhávanti ājáyaḥ, is very peculiar. There is no possible referent for the yé in either the preceding or the following main clause, and in addition the īm lacks function. It seems like a mangled paraphrase of I.81.3 yád udī́rata ājáyaḥ “when (battle-)drives arise/happen,” but what caused the mangling is unclear to me. The yé can be by “attraction” to the m. nom. pl. ājáyaḥ from putative *yád, and this set of Indra hymns has several examples of functionless īm (VII.20.3, 21.1). But it still lacks motivation.

The VP nā́ma bhikṣate “desires a share in your name” is striking and a little puzzling. The same phrase nā́ma √bhaj is found in V.57.5, but there it means that the Maruts, the subjects of the verb, all share the same name. Here, by contrast, it must be a clever way of saying that everyone calls Indra’s name, a novel paraphrase of the common epithet of Indra puruhūtá- ‘called upon by many’, found in this verse and vss. 20 and 26. (The English slang equivalent would be “wants a piece of you.”) Ge renders nā́ma bhikṣate as “Deinen Namen fleht … an” (implores), robbing the expression of its vividness.


## 18
The root √īś overwhelmingly takes the gen.; the construction here is identified by Gr (s.v. īś, col. 236: #8 mit dem Acc.) as mixed: the gen. yā́vataḥ is construed with the implied 2nd ps. “as much as you are lord over” (yā́vatas tvám [ī́śiṣe]) in pāda a, which is picked up by the acc. etā́vad in the contrary-to-fact “if I were lord over so much” (yád … etā́vad ahám ī́śiya). I think it more likely that etā́vad here is a quasi-adverbial summing up of the dependent clause; a more literal tr. would be “if I were lord to such an extent as” or the like. The other passages assembled under Gr’s #8 can be variously explained and do not provide strong evidence for an alternative case frame with √īś. In III.18.3 yā́vad is again adverbial; see the publ. tr. “inasmuch as I am master …” In VIII.68.7 ī́śe is properly construed with a gen. (kṛṣṭīnā́m) in its own pāda; the acc. cited by Gr, pūrvyā́m ánuṣṭutim in the previous pāda, is probably an acc. of respect (see comm. ad loc.) For nearby VII.37.7 as well as III.51.4, the latter cited only as a possibility by Gr., see comm. ad locc.


## 22
Despite Ge’s easy “dessen Auge die Sonne ist,” I cannot accept this for svardṛ́śam. First, dṛ́ś- is never an ‘eye’, but rather ‘seeing’ or ‘having the appearance of’, and furthermore, it’s Varuṇa who has the sun as his eye (that is, his spy). Here I think the point is rather that Indra, like the sun, sees everything in the world, here expressed by the merism “the moving and the still.”


## 24
There are two word plays in this verse. The simpler one is between the impv. bhara ‘bring’ in pāda a and the āmreḍita bháre-bhare ‘at every raid’, where the noun bhára- has been specialized from ‘(an occasion for) bearing away’ to ‘raid’.

The more complex one involves the creation and disappointment of expectations. The verse begins with abhī́ṣatáḥ. The juxtaposition of these two forms 37 (the latter being the pres. part. to √as ‘be’ in either gen.-abl. sg. or acc. pl.) and their close sandhi, with retroflex initial ṣ, invites the audience to fill in the semantics of the lexeme abhí √as ‘be superior’. But to our surprise, at the end of this hemistich we find the semantic opposite, kánīyasaḥ ‘the lesser ones’, requiring us to revise our analysis of the opening, dissolving the presumed lexeme into the directional preverb/preposition abhí and the independent pres. participle modifying kánīyasaḥ much later in the line. For extensive discussion see Old.

I cannot follow Gr, Old in interpreting jyā́yaḥ as voc., but take it, with Ge, as neut. sg. with tád. Among other things, AiG III.296 notes only two masc. vocatives in -īyas in the RV, this one and ójīyaḥ in X.120.4, which is also better taken as a neut.
