+++
title = "033"

+++
Vasiṣṭha and the Vasiṣṭhids On the structure and thematics of this famous hymn see the publ. intro., as well as the introductory remarks of both Old and Ge. With VII.18, the account of the Battle of the Ten Kings, it bookends the Indra hymns of VII and contributes its own background to the (fragmentary) narrative of King Sudās and the Ten Kings Battle.

The name vásiṣṭha- appears in every vs. of this hymn, primarily at the end of the d pāda: vss. 1, 2, 3, 4, (not 5, 6, though vásiṣṭha- appears in both c pādas,) 7, (not 8, though it's in middle of d,) 9, (not 10 though in c, nor 11 though in a,) 12, 13, 14.


## 01
By most accounts this vs. is spoken by Indra, who is the referent of the 1st ps. enclitics mā and me in pādas a and d and the subj. of 1st ps. voce in c.

As noted already ad VII.18.21, Ge has a peculiar interpr. of the verbal lexeme (abhí) prá √mad as ‘go on a pilgrimage’, for which there is no support that I can see.

Old also rejects this interpr. I follow Old’s view that Indra is present at a competing sacrifice -- a constant preoccupation of the Indra hymns of VII -- and recalling the Vasiṣṭhas’ ritual service to him, he gets up to the leave the sacrifice where he is present to go to theirs. Pāda d is the embedded self-quotation of Indra, providing the reason for his departure for the Vasiṣṭhas.

The descriptors of the Vasiṣṭhas śvityáñcaḥ … dakṣiṇatáskapardāḥ are found almost identically in VII.83.8 śvityáñcaḥ … kapardínaḥ, where they modify the Tṛtsus, Sudās’s fighting force in the Ten Kings Battle, in a hymn much concerned with that battle. Vasiṣṭha was at least an adoptive member of the Tṛtsu clan. See Ge’s n. 1a and esp. vss. 5, 6, and 15 in this hymn.

Despite the position of the generally sentential, Wackernagel’s Law particle hí far to the right in b, the verb complex abhí hí pramandúḥ must have domain over the entire hemistich, with mā in 2nd pos. in pāda a serving as its object. As often, when a preverb stays with its verb at the end of a clause rather than moving to the front of its clause, hí is inserted, between preverb and verb (or here preverb1 and preverb 2 verb).


## 02
In this vs. the perspective and location shifts from Indra, at the competing sacrifice announcing his intention to go to the Vasiṣṭhas, to the Vasiṣṭhas at their place of sacrifice “leading” Indra to them. The vss. are linked by dūrā́t ‘from a 38 distance’ (1d, 2a), in 1d referring to the distant location of the Vasiṣṭha from Indra’s point of view, in 2a the distant location of Indra from that of the Vasiṣṭhas.

With Old, I consider Pāśadyumna Vāyata the hapless sacrificer whom Indra deserted in favor of the Vasiṣṭhas. But I do not follow Old in thinking that b describes an intermediate place on Indra’s journey from PV to the Vasiṣṭhas.


## 03
With this vs. we pass to the Ten Kings Battle and the Vasiṣṭhas’ crucial efforts in securing Indra’s aid for Sudās. The emphatic repeated opening of the first three pādas evén nú kam highlights the critical incidents. The two sequences evéd and nú kam are both found fairly frequently elsewhere, but never elsewhere together, so it’s difficult to judge the force of their combination.


## 04
Ge appears to be right that this vs. is also Indra’s speech. He picks up the bráhmaṇā vaḥ from 3d in pāda a and also addresses them as ‘superior men’ (voc. naraḥ), just as he spoke about the superior men (acc. nṝ́n) in 1c.

Ge takes pitṝṇā́m with both júṣṭī and bráhmaṇā; I doubt the first, as does Old.

Since I think Indra is addressing the Vasiṣṭhas at the time of the battle, not a younger generation of Vasiṣṭhas long after the battle, his “by reason of your fathers’ sacred formulation” (bráhmaṇā vo pitṝṇā́m) must refer to the formulation they inherited from their own poetic forebears and are putting to use in enlisting Indra’s help.

The action Indra performs in response to the Vasiṣṭhas’ employment of the bráhman- is not altogether clear. (Old, after some speculation, concludes “'ich komme hier nicht zur Klarheit.”) The bare phrasing ákṣam avyayam must mean literally “I enveloped the/an axle,” but whose axle it is and whether the enveloping is a help or a hindrance aren’t recoverable from context. However, as Old points out, III.53.19 may provide some guidance. That vs. is addressed to an axle (voc. ákṣa) in a series of vss. (17-20) mean to avert possible disasters that might afflict a team of oxen and the vehicle they are pulling. In vs. 19 the axle is urged abhí vyayasva khadirásya sā́ram “Engird yourself in the hardwood of the Acacia tree,” before being told to be and stay firm (vīḷáyasva). The first instruction to the axle contains the verb (abhí) √vyā ‘envelop, engird’, which I take as referring to fixing the ends of the axle firmly in the wheel hubs till the ends are literally surrounded with / enveloped in the wood of the wheel hub. If the same type of action is referred to here, Indra is performing a positive action, presumably securing the axle of the Vasiṣṭhas or their allies in position, to protect them and their chariot from harm, as Indra promises with ná kílā riṣātha.

As Ge points out (n. 4c), śákvarī- is the name of a meter with martial associations. As he also points out, this fairly rare meter is found in the first three vss.

of X.133, a hymn to Indra attributed to Sudās Paijavana, that is, the royal hero of the Ten Kings Battle, though there is no particular ref. to that battle in X.133. Since śákvarīṣu is plural here, it would be better tr. “in Sakvarī (verses)” than “in Śakvarī (meter),” as in the publ. tr. 39


## 05
For the very compressed simile of the thirsty and heaven, cf. V.57.1 tr̥ṣṇáje ná divá útsā udanyáve “like the well-spring of heaven for a thirsty man seeking water,” where the “water” part is made clear.


## 06
It is a curious, but perhaps coincidental, fact that the sole occurrence of daṇḍá- in the RV is found in the same hymn with the only occurrence of the vṛddhi deriv. maitrāvaruṇá- (vs. 11), given that the daṇḍa- ‘staff’ is the emblem of office associated with the Maitrāvaruṇa priest in śrauta ritual. See Minkowski, Priesthood in Ancient India, pp. 141-54 and passim. The conjunction in our hymn was pointed out to me by Elizabeth Tucker.

The addition of the pejorative and sometimes diminutive suffix -ka- on a word already meaning ‘small’ -- arbha-ká- -- is a nice slangy touch.

In c the ca appears to be subordinating (so also Klein, DGRV I.242-43), though because ábhavat is pāda-initial, its accent need not be due to subordination.


## 07
For the riddles here, see publ. intro. I make no effort at a definitive solution (or even any solution at all). In this abstention I follow the good example of Old.


## 09
On the weaving, see publ. intro. and vs. 12c, as well as comm. ad vs. 14.

## 10-13
Old discusses Vasiṣṭha’s two births and suggests that they are presented in reverse chronological order. The birth depicted in vs. 10 is the second birth, while 11-13 treat the first. In the first birth Mitra and Varuṇa emit semen at a Sattra, which falls into a pot and ultimately gives rise to the seer Agastya. But a drop of this semen is taken into a lotus, somehow comes to the Apsaras Urvaśī, who somehow conceives and gives birth to Vasiṣṭha “from mind.” In the second birth the wondrously conceived divine being of the 1st birth is received into a human Gotra.

Old is uncertain about the details; I am even more uncertain.


## 10
In III.51.4 I take sám √hā as ‘compact oneself together’, that is, ‘concentrate one’s essence’, and that seems the image here, of the embryonic Vasiṣṭha taking shape from concentrated lightning. Ge (n. 10a) suggests rather that it refers to semen suddenly poured out. I do not see this, and his suggested parallel in X.95.10 seems irrelevant, esp. since the lightning there is Urvaśī.

Old’s argument that vs. 10 depicts one birth and the following vss. another depends in part on taking the two utá’s of 10c and 11a as marking the two births.

This would be more convincing if the first utá were not in the middle of the pāda.

This position seems better accounted for by assuming that 10c refers to both births, with utá conjoining tát te jánma and ékam, as Ge takes it (“das war deine (eine) Geburt and eine …”). So also Klein (DGRV I.368). The double yád in b and d support this interpr., with each yád introducing one of the births. I follow this general interpr.

The yád in b is very deep in its clause, with both subj. and obj. preceding it, if pādas ab form a single clause as in the standard tr. (incl. Ge and the publ. tr.). It 40 would, however, be possible to take pāda a as the main clause on which b is dependent: “light was compacting out of lightning when M+V looked upon you.” This would solve the problem, but the unusual position of yád could also be attributed to an attempt to make b and d parallel, each recounting one of the births and opening with the putative father (or fathers) followed by yád, with a preterital verb and the obj. tvā (the latter in different orders): b mitrā́váruṇā yád ápaśyatāṃ tvā and d agástyo yát tvā viśá ājabhā́ra. In this scenario, pāda a, which is a single NP, would have been fronted around the core clause.

With Old (fld. by Ge), I read dat. viśé contra Pp. viśáḥ. The clan in question is supposed to be the Tṛtsus.


## 11
The pub. tr. reads “born from her mind,” but given the uncertainties of this birth story, the mind need not be Urvaśī’s, but someone else’s, or even pure mind. So it might be better rendered as “born from mind.” On the semen (if that’s what the drop is) and the lotus, see disc. ad vss. 10-13.

If the underlying narrative really does involve transporting spilled semen in a leaf and long-distance conception therefrom, it anticipates the MBh narrative in which the king Vasu ejaculates while hunting, catches the semen in a leaf, and tries to send it home to his wife Girikā by enlisting a bird, though the bird and the semen meet with a disaster over water that leads to the semen impregnating a fish (MBh I.57.35ff.).

I take drapsáṃ skannám as a nominal clause, rather than taking cd as a single clause with drapsáṃ skannám coreferential with tvā.


## 12
As Ge points out (n. 12a), praketá- is otherwise only a noun, and so it is best to go against the Pp’s reading praketáḥ in favor of the loc. praketé. (Ge also entertains the possibility of reading *sapraketáḥ.) The “both” are presumably both births; so Ge.

The weaving in pāda c is repeated almost verbatim from 9c, but with the single Vasiṣṭha, not the pl. Vasiṣṭhas as subject. As noted in the publ. intro., I assume that this refers to the production of the sacrifice. See comm. ad vs. 14 below.

The hapax sádāna- is not entirely clear. Ge suggests that it stands for

*sádādāna- by haplology and tr. “der … immerdar Geschenke hat.” He does not
render the utá vā, implicitly taking sahásradānaḥ … sádānaḥ as appositive adjectives.

Klein (DGRV II.169) follows Ge’s interpr. of sádānaḥ without mentioning the possible haplology and states that the conjoined terms in the phrase sahásradana utá vā sádānaḥ “come close to being synonymous.” His tr. “having a thousand gifts or having constant gifts” both illustrates this suggestion and shows how flat-footed such a phrase would be. Old discusses without coming to a conclusion, though he does reject the haplology explan., which goes back to Ludwig. My own interpr. takes the text as given and interprets the second adj. as additive “and one gift (more),” with sádāna- ‘with (a) gift’ standing for ‘with one gift’. If the utá vā should be read as disjunctive ‘or’ (as I admit it should), perhaps this is instead a version of the Archilochus fox-and-hedgehog dichotomy (“the fox knows many things, but the 41 hedgehog one big one”) -- hence “having a thousand gifts -- or one (big) gift.” This in fact is now my preferred tr. What the gifts refer to I have no idea.


## 13
This vs. is the basis of Old’s (and others’) reconstruction of the 1st birth of Vasiṣṭha (see comm. add vss. 10-13), with Mitra and Varuṇa at a Sattra emitting semen into a pot, which then gave rise to both Agastya and Vasiṣṭha. Unfortunately the details of this vs. are far from clear, though pāda b does (fairly) straightforwardly depict a dual entity pouring semen into a pot.

The gravest problems are in pāda a. The opening satré ha is interpr. by Sāy, fld. by Ge., as standing for sattré ‘at a Sattra’. The single -t- versus double -tt- before

-r- is of course not a problem [Max Müller’s ed. in fact prints sattré], but it is the
case that, though the word sat(t)rá- and its ritual complex are well attested already in Saṃhitā prose, the word is not found elsewhere in the RV. (However, the ritual almost surely already existed; there seems a clear reference to it in vs. 9 of the Indra hymn III.31, where the Aṅgirases “sit a sitting” [sádanam √sad, though with the words not in the same VP] to open the Vala cave. See comm. ad loc.) However, Gr suggests reading *satréhá instead, to be analyzed as the adv. satrā́‘entirely’ and ihá ‘here’; the only change required would be accenting the second word. Old sits on the fence, but seems weakly to favor the Sattra interpr., as do I, since it at least provides richer semantics and a ritual context for the actions. Moreover the particle ha would exactly match the same particle in the same location in pāda c.

The next problem is jātaú. If it is a dual ppl. (rather than a loc. sg. to the putative stem jātí-, which, however, is not found in the RV), it can of course modify the dual subjects of the verb siṣicathuḥ, and it is also quite possible that that dual subject is Mitra and Varuṇa, as Old and Ge interpr. it. The problem is thus not syntactic but semantic. In what way would M+V be “born” at a Sattra? Ge elides the problem by (as far as I can see) folding it into an anodyne phrase with iṣitā́, rendered as “erregt geworden,” where I assume the ‘geworden’ is a bleached, auxiliary-like version of jātaú. Sāy glosses it as dīkṣitau, and this might nicely reflect the middle Vedic configuration of the dīkṣā of a soma sacrificer as tantamount to a second birth.

No forms of the (secondary) root √dīkṣ are found in the RV; however, both dīkṣā́- and dīkṣitá- are attested in the AV, with the former fairly common. I therefore am inclined to follow Sāy’s interpr. -- or what I assume Sāy’s interpr. rests on -- that jātaú refers to the conceptual rebirth of a consecrated sacrificer. This rebirth would be somewhat comparable to the two births of Vasiṣṭha himself. This interpr. of jātaú would be more clearly expressed than in the publ. tr. by rendering it “(re)born [=consecrated] at a (ritual) Session.” Pāda c appears to describe the creation of Agastya (see comm. above ad vss.

10-13). Māna is the name of Agastya’s father and family or indeed of Agastya himself. See Mayrhofer PN s.v. for reff.

Kü (99, 570) has a very diff. interpr. of the vs. In the first hemistich he takes kumbhé as a dual, modified by the dual ppl. in pāda a and subject of the dual verb in b: “Beim Somaopfer geboren, angetrieben durch Verehrungen haben die beiden Krüge den gemeinsamen Samen ergossen” (99). This is grammatically impossible, 42 because kumbhá- is masc., as the two occurrences of the acc. pl. kumbhā́n show, and so its dual should be *kumbhā́(u). In c he takes mā́naḥ as ‘house’: “Mitten daraus ist ein Haus hervorgegangen” (99=570). He does not comment on the mythological content of the vs., but though mā́na- ‘building, house’ is at least marginally attested in the RV (clearest in VII.88.5), the creation of a house from semen would be such an outlandish feat that the creation of a seer seems positively plausible.

In b the pf. siṣicatuḥ has a retroflexed root init., as we would expect. But the other two forms of the pf. in the RV (sisicuḥ II.24.4 and sisice III.32.15) do not. I have no explanation for the discrepancy.


## 14
As Ge (n. 14) points out, this vs. seems to pick up 10d, describing the second “birth” of Vasiṣṭha, when Agastya presents him to the clan, and it seems to consist of Agastya’s direct speech. As Old points out, the first hemistich seems to identify the three priests of śrauta ritual, though not by title: the Hotar, supporter of the ukthá-; the Udgātar, supporter of the sā́man-; and the Adhvaryu, supporter of the pressing stone, i.e., the one who performs the physical actions. Assuming this is the case makes it reasonably likely that the weaving of “the covering stretched by Yama” (9c, 12c) does indeed refer to the production of the sacrifice. Vasiṣṭha is thus presented as responsible for the whole of the sacrifice, not just a portion of it.
