+++
title = "034"

+++
All Gods Re characterizes this hymn as “invitation without praise.” The first 21 (or actually 20 and a half) vss. of this 25-vs. hymn are in Dvipadā meter. Despite its name, this meter should be considered to consist of four pādas of 5 syllables each, since verbs located in the 6th syllable of a putative 10-syl. pāda are generally accented (see 3b, d, 4b, 6b, 20d); however, consider 14d, 17d, where verbs in that position are unaccented. Those two violations fall in the latter part of the Dvipadā portion and may be beginning the transition to Triṣṭubh, which takes over in the 2nd half of vs. 21. On the meter see Old, Prol. 95-98.


## 01
HvN’s resolution of the sandhi and accentuation of Saṃhitā śukraítu in pāda a as śukra étu is incorrect: the Pp rightly reads śukrā́etu.

The reference to the departure of our well-crafted manīṣā́is a fitting beginning to a hymn, as describing the dispatch of the praise hymn to the targeted divinities.


## 02
Ge (n. 2a), flg. Sāy., takes the waters as subj. of vidúḥ and suggests that the point is that the waters are older even than Heaven and Earth: they are the Urelement.

They therefore were around for the creation of H+E and know all about it. In the absence of any other obvious subject, this seems reasonable.

In the 2nd hemistich the function and position of ádha are somewhat puzzling.

Klein (DGRV II.96 n. 23) lists it with passages with the “logical conjunctive value” ‘therefore’. But he does not tr. it or comment on its non-clause-init. position, and I find it difficult to wring a ‘therefore’ sense out of it. In the Prol. (369 n. 1) Old 43 suggests that the PB parallel (I.2.9, VI.6.17) with the reading adhaḥ ‘below’ is correct and the RV should be emended, but he essentially drops that idea in the Noten, remarking that RV ádha is “tadellos” and that the emendation would also require altering the accent (to adháḥ). Our passage is reminiscent of IV.17.10 ayáṃ śrṇ̥ ve ádha jáyann utá ghnán, which I tr. “this one is famed for conquering and smiting.” Both passages have a mid-clause ádha that introduces a pres. participle or participles and both contain a form of √śru. See comm. ad IV.17.10. In both cases I think ádha opens a mini-clause that modifies or expands on the main verb. In our passage I think the point is that, though rivers are very noisy when they flow (as is often emphasized in Vedic texts), these waters also know how to listen. Note also that in our case ádha is pāda-initial, though not clause-initial.


## 03
As noted in the introductory remarks above, both pínvanta and máṃsante are accented because they open 5-syl. pādas.

Both Ge and Re take the (soma) sacrifice as the referent of asmai, contra both Sāy. and Old, who supply Indra instead. I definitely side with the latter. Like many All God hymns, the separate vss. can serve as little riddles, each pointing to a different god,, and the mention of vṛtréṣu ‘(battles against) obstacles’, even in the plural, seems a tip-off that Indra is lurking.

I’m not quite sure what the subjunctive máṃsante is meant to convey -- perhaps that in times to come poets will talk about them that way in the accounts of the Vṛtra-slaying?

## 04-06
Note the chiasmic verb sequence 4b dádhāta [… 5a sthāta] ... 5d tmánā hinota ... 6ab tmánā … hinóta ... 6c dádhāta, with one interruption.


## 04
The 2nd pl. subj. of dádhāta is unspecified, but is probably the priests / poets associated with the current sacrifice, who were referred to in the 1st pl. asmát in vs. 1. See vss. 5-6, where this identification is more explicit.

Once again both Ge and Re take asmai as referring to the sacrifice. They also take the nominative(s) of the 2nd hemistich as coreferential with the subj. of the impv.

dádhāta in a: in other words, “put the horses to the chariot pole, as Indra (does/did).” This seems unnec. Old’s view that the asmai refers to Savitar, who is then the subj.

of the 2nd hemistich, is far more plausible. Although híraṇya-bāhu- is found only here in the RV, the very similar híraṇya-pāṇi- ‘having gold hands’ is used a number of times of Savitar, and the uncompounded phrase bāhū́… hiraṇyáyā is used of Savitar’s arms in nearby VII.45.2 (also VI.71.1, 5), as Old points out. Since Tvaṣṭar fashions the mace for Indra in I.32.2, calling him vajrín- here is perfectly sensible.

## 05-06
The 2nd pl. impvs. in these two vss., 5a abhí prá sthāta, 5d hinota, 6b hinóta, 6c dádhāta, all take the sacrifice (yajñám, explicitly 5b, 6b) as object and make the identification of the subject as the priests/poets, suggested ad vs. 4, more likely. 44


## 05
The simile áheva, despite Pp áha iva, is surely to be analyzed as áhā iva, as Old indicates, pointing out that in other places where it occurs (e.g., IV.33.6) the Pp.

gives the long vowel form. Both Old and Ge take áhā as nom.: “set out on the sacrifice, as the days (do [=follow one after the other]).” Re takes it as acc., supplying “as (the sun) does the days,” which requires that he make the verb abhí prá sthāta transitive (“mettez en marche”), which is unlikely. I prefer to take it as acc. extent of time, meaning something like “'keep going in the performance of sacrifice, as one keeps going day after day.”


## 07
Like vss. 3 and 4, this contains an unaccented oblique form of ayám, in this case asya, and as with those vss., I think it likely that asya is the sign of a riddling mention of a god -- in this case likely Agni, as Old tentatively suggests. Ge and Re also see a reference to the offering fire.

I do not understand the simile in the 2nd hemistich. If the bhū́ma that the earth bears is its surface, what would an equivalent burden be for the offering fire? In order to get 2 Dvipadā pādas in the 2nd hemistich, we must read *pṛthvī́for pṛthivī́, as Old points out. Otherwise we have a Triṣṭubh anticipating the switch to Triṣṭubh that happens much later in the hymn.


## 08
Old asserts that áyātu- is a determin. cmpd., not a bahuvrīhi, thus ‘nonsorcerer’ rather than ‘not having sorcery/sorcerer’. The publ. tr. reflects -- and indeed reflects somewhat loosely -- a bahuvrīhi interpr., though I think the difference is minor. Re also takes it as a b.v.: “sans (user de) sorcellerie” (tr. EVP V), “sans user de procédés magiques” (comm., EVP IV); see also Wh n. ad AV tr. VIII.4.16.

Nonetheless, a determin. interpr. is a reasonable alternative: “I -- no sorcerer -- invoke the gods.” A 2nd RVic occurrence of this stem, acc. áyātum in VII.104.16, with AVŚ+P repetitions, is not registered in Gr., which omission is probably responsible for Re’s erroneously calling our occurrence a hapax in his comm. Unfortunately this other occurrence does not resolve the question of cmpd type. The cmpd. is not disc. in AiG.

Presumably the implied opposition in this vs. is between sorcery in the 1st half-vs. and truth (ṛtá-) of the 2nd half. So also Re (comm.).


## 09
Once again the unspecified 2nd pl. subj. should be the priests/poets.

Note the extreme alliteration of … devī́ṃ dhíyaṃ dadhidhvam.

The morphological identity of this last form, dadhidhvam, can be queried. The three occurrences of this form are normally assigned to the perfect rather than the redupl. pres. (see esp. Kü 275), on the grounds that the -i-liaison is proper to the perfect. Yet no corresponding med. 2nd pl. impv. is built to the pres. stem; indeed, the posited correspondent (cf. Whitney, Gr. §668), the monstrous *dhaddhvam, is not attested in Vedic (as imperative, injunctive, or augmented imperfect). It is likely, therefore, that dadhidhvam serves as impv. to both pf. and redupl. pres., neutralizing the distinction between those T/A stems. In fact, given that in this passage it is parallel to the present impv. kṛṇudhvam in the same vs. and immediately follows on 45 an unambiguous redupl. pres. form to the same root and with the same obj. (8d dhíyaṃ dadhāmi, 9b dhíyaṃ dadhidhvam), a present-stem interpr. is favored. On ambig. pf. impvs. see my 2018 “The Vedic Perfect Imperative” (Fs. Lubotsky).

## 10-11
After several vss. with a ritual, priestly focus, we return to the semiriddling listing of gods, with these two vss. devoted to Varuṇa. In 10 the subj.

Varuṇa is withheld till the 2nd half, thereby producing a quickly solved riddle. Vs. 11 does not name him at all, but the referent is clear from the phraseology, as well as the previous vs. ### 10
The easiest thing to do with fem. gen. pl. āsām is to have it modify fem.

gen. pl. nadī́nām, as Ge and Re do (e.g., “de ces rivières”). But it is unaccented and therefore should be a pronominal demonstrative, rather than an adjectival one. I therefore assume that it picks up the waters (ā́paḥ) earlier in the hymn (2c, 3a); the connection of Varuṇa with the waters, though not as firm in the RV as it is later, would evoke them. The rivers are then in apposition to these unnamed waters. Re in his comm. notes the “lien” of āsām with ā́paḥ earlier in the hymn but seems to stop short of syntactically separating āsām from the rivers in this vs. For further disc. see comm. ad I.68.7.

## 12-13
The 2nd pl. subjects of all the verbs but vy ètu in 13a must be the gods in general. The priests/poets who were previously unspecified 2nd pl. subjects do not command the powers to carry out the desires specified.


## 12
The hapax ádyu- has been variously analyzed and rendered: e.g., Sāy. adīpti- ‘non-shining’, reflected in Gr’s ‘glanzlos’ and probably Re’s ‘sans éclat’; Old ‘excluded from heaven’. But Ge’s (n. 12b) comparison of Old Avestan aidiiu- (YH 2x, plus a YA rep.) ‘harmless’ is surely correct and is accepted by EWA, etc. For disc., with earlier lit., see Narten, YH 280-81.

Our half-verse ádyuṃ kṛṇota śáṃsaṃ ninitsóḥ is nearly identical to VII.25.2c āré táṃ śáṃsaṃ kṛṇuhi ninitsóḥ, though in a different meter (our two 5-syl. pādas of Dvipadā versus Triṣṭubh). To accommodate the meter the verb and object had to be flipped and a different predicate supplied. This metrically driven modification procedure is instructive.


## 14
Initial injunc. 3rd sg. -iṣ-aor. ávīn (for ávīt) matches the init. áviṣṭa (+u) of 12a, which I (and the standard tr.) take as a 2nd pl. -iṣ-aor. impv. Re. takes ávīt here as hortatory/imperatival (“Qu’Agni favorise …”), but I see no problem in having a preterital (or perhaps general present “Agni aids …”) injunc. form in this vs. characterizing an individual god. The 2nd pl. is found in the hortatory address to the gods in general, parallel to impv. kṛṇota in 12c, whereas ávīt is followed by an augmented pass. aor. adhāyi, expressing the reciprocal human action in response to the god’s help. 46 The first half-vs. contains two exx. of -t/d à -n sandhi before nasal: (ávīt à) ávīn no and (havyā́d à) havyā́n námobhiḥ. Re renders the latter as if it were an acc. pl. to havyá- (“… favorise nos oblations”), but this must be an example of a hasty Homeric nod, since havyá- ‘oblation’ is always neut.

Whose námobhiḥ? Ge takes them as Agni’s, which he offers to the gods. I think it more likely that it refers to our acts of reverence to Agni, to which he reciprocates by aiding us. So also Scar (40: “durch {unsere} Ehrerbietungen”). Re takes námobhiḥ with the following clause: “Avec hommages a été déposée … la louange …”). This avoids the problem and works well semantically, but in this hymn verses regularly fall into two clauses separated by the half-vs. boundary, and there are no examples of a portion of b adjoined to the clause of cd.


## 15
Here the 2nd pl. address appears to be to the priests/poets.

This is the one of the few vss. in which the half-vs. break does not coincide with a major syntactic break, and this is made more noticeable by the fact that there is a clause break between pādas c and d.


## 16
Assuming that it is the serpent that is sitting in the depths, that is, that the referent is Ahi Budhnya, who is found explicitly in vs. 17, I see no alternative to taking the nom. sg. pres. part. sī́dan as the predicate of a nominal sentence in cd, picking up the acc. obj. abjā́m …áhim in ab. Sāy. simply indicates that sī́dan is for acc. sī́dantam, and Ge and Re tr. cd as it if were a rel. cl. (e.g., “qui siège …”), a translational choice that blurs the Sanskrit. The alternative, which unifies the syntax at the expense of the sense, is to take sī́dan as implicitly modifying the 1st sg. subj. of gṛṇīṣe ‘I will sing’ in the first hemistich. So Scar (134): “… Den wassergeborenen Drachen preise ich …, {ihn}, der auf dem Grund der Flüsse weilt, wenn ich im Finstern sitze,” construing c (budhné nadī́nām) with the acc. serpent of ab and d (rájassu ṣī́dan) with the 1st sg. subj. This interpr. seems highly unlikely: why would the poet “I” be sitting in the darkness? and where does Scar get the “weilt” for the serpent? I do not understand the reason for the close sandhi of rájassu ṣī́dan.


## 17
The first half vs. is also found in V.41.16, and in both places it is metrically anomalous. Here it has the requisite 10 syllables for Dvipadā, but the caesura/pāda break comes after the 4th syllable, so that it does not fall into two 5-syl pādas. In V.41.16 (which, with the following vs. 17, is metrically different from the Triṣṭubhs that make up the bulk of that hymn) it has 10 syllables, rather than the expected 11. It is also somewhat striking that two vss. in our hymn are devoted to the very minor divinity Ahi Budhnya, when far more important gods receive only one, and I wonder if 17 hasn’t been inserted to make the identification of this divinity clearer, since vs. 16 does not give him his full title. It is worth noting that our 17cd was already flagged above as one of the few places in the hymn in which a verb beginning the d pāda is not accented. This may provide further support for the idea that the vs. is a later insertion. 47


## 18
The nom. pl. subjects of the two half vss. are different, in my opinion. The loc. ‘men’, recipients of the fame bestowed on them by (presumably) gods in ab, are the ones who go forth for wealth in cd.

The phase śárdhanto aryáḥ has an almost identical correspondent in nearby


## 05
sá śardhad aryó víṣuṇasya jantóḥ, where the second phrase shows (or at least strongly suggests) that aryáḥ is gen. sg. On the phrase see Thieme (Fremdling 54-55).


## 19
My tr. “the worlds” assumes that bhū́mā is pl., contrary to the standard, who tr. “the earth.” I would be happy with the latter.

I have taken -senā- as ‘weapon’ here, but it could as well be ‘army’, with Ge, Re, etc. It does not affect the sense appreciably.


## 20
The pl. “wives” (pátnīḥ), as often in the RV, must refer to the Wives of the Gods. As I have argued elsewhere (“‘Sacrificer's Wife’ in the Rig Veda: Ritual Innovation?” 2018 in Proceedings of the 13th World Skt. Conf., 2006), one of the models for the introduction of the Sacrificer’s Wife (pátnī) in Vedic ritual, beginning in the late RV, is the presence of the Wives of the Gods on the ritual ground, as here.

Tvaṣṭar is their usual companion and chaperone. He is also associated with the shaping of the embryo in the womb, as in the pregnancy charm X.184.1. The request that he confer heroes on us here must be a prayer for sons (who will become) heroes.


## 21
As noted above, the first hemistich contains 10 syllables falling into two 5-syllable pādas, but the second half is a straight Triṣṭubh, anticipating the Triṣṭubhs of the rest of the hymn.

The stem vasūyú- can modify both masc. and, as here, fem. nouns. This exact phrase, arámatir vasūyúḥ is also found at VII.1.6.


## 23
Both Ge and Re take rā́yaḥ here as nom. sg., parallel to the other entities like mountains and waters, but I do not see why the construction that ends vs. 22, ví dadhātu rā́yaḥ “let him apportion wealth,” is not simply continued here. There rā́yaḥ must be the obj. of the verb, whether acc. pl. or partitive gen. sg.; in either case the preferred accent would be rāyáḥ, but there are enough forms with the opposite accent that we need not be too troubled. If we can accept the wrong accent in 22d, I see no reason not to do so in 23a. Re gestures towards my interpr. in his n.


## 24
Note the izafe-like yé sahā́saḥ nominal relative clause.

Correctly accented gen. sg. rāyáḥ appears here; see comm. on vss. 22-23.

On the infinitive construction here, see Keydana, Infinitive im Ṛgveda, 70, 159.


## 25
I do not understand why Ge and Re render the juṣanta, to the common and well-understood medial stem juṣáte ‘enjoys’, as ‘grant’ (zibilligen) and ‘agree’ 48 respectively. Although it is true that the final vss. of hymns frequently ask gods for things, it is also true that we commend our praises to them -- and surely that’s what’s going on here: we want the gods to take pleasure in the hymn, or the ritual in general, that we have just offered them.
