+++
title = "035"

+++
All Gods As indicated in the publ. intro., this hymn is remarkably monotonous and has no real content -- simply the unbroken repetition of the wish that various gods or natural elements “be luck” (śám) for us. It therefore needs and deserves very little comment. Besides the deities mentioned in each vs., what variety there is in the hymn is found in the adjuncts associated with each one, often a characterizing adjective (e.g., 1b) or an oblique case form expressing accompaniment (e.g., 1a) or circumstance (e.g., 1d). The 1st 13 vss. follow a fairly rigid template: # śáṃ (naḥ) GOD NAME (ADJUNCT) (“BE”) (with the latter expressed by a 3rd ps. impv. of √bhū or √as, or gapped; there seems no functional difference between √as and √bhū in this hymn). The order of adjunct and “be” can be flipped. Sometimes a single god (or god pair) occupies a pāda; sometimes two separate śám clauses are found in a pāda. In the former case, the adjuncts fill the extra space, while in the latter case the god/power name is all there is room for. In a few cases, noted below, the pattern is broken by the substitution of a verb other than ‘be’.


## 01
This gods listed in this vs. are dual divinities, each with Indra as the first part of the pair and all expressed in dual dvandvas. All have the expected double accent except indrāgnī́in pāda a, which always lacks an accent on the first member in its numerous occurrences. Re suggests this is because the putative dual ending on

*índrā- is not perceived because of its coalescence with the initial vowel of agnī́.

This is fairly plausible, though there are a number of instances where the word must be read with four syllables and there the dual ending of the 1st member should have been recoverable.


## 02
In a and c the provider of luck is śáṃsaḥ ‘Laud’, a clear play on the ubiquitous śám. In c śáṃsaḥ is the head of a NP with dependent gen.: satyásya suyámasya.

In d Ge renders purujātáḥ as “der viele Nachkommen hat,” but given the form of this cmpd., this can hardly be correct. Cmpds. of the shape puru-PAST PPL (+ACCENT), like frequent puru-ṣṭutá-, puru-hutá-, mean ‘much Xed’ or ‘Xed by many’, and in cmpds. with jāta- as 2nd member, -jāta- means ‘born, generated’ not ‘offspring’. Re, who tr. “aux nombreuses naissances,” suggests that Aryaman is so qualified because of his association with marriage.


## 03
Although sg. fem. urūcī́is not otherwise used of the earth in its 5 other occurrences, the du. modifies ródasī in VI.11.4 (and at some distance in IV.56.4), which supports Ge’s supplying of Earth here. 49 The well-attested adj. suháva- almost always modifies a god or gods and means ‘easy to invoke’. Ge supplies ‘names’ here, and I follow him: “god X, easy to invoke” and “the name of god X, easy to invoke” are functionally nearly identical.

And in X.39.1 pitúr ná nā́ma suhávam “(the chariot), easy to invoke like the name of one’s father,” we have the posited phrase, though “name” is in a simile. Re rejects this interpr. in favor of a nominalized suháva- “les appels propices (faits) aux dieux,” with, in my opinion, insufficient reason.


## 04
The relentless pattern “luck be” is briefly broken here in pāda d, with śám the object of the verb ‘blow’ (śám … abhí vātu).


## 05
Ge takes b as another break in the pattern: “Das Luftreich soll uns Glück sehen lassen,” with śám the object of the inf. dṛśáye. But this seems unlikely: the clause is easy to interpret within the template, and furthermore the periphrastic causative assumed by his tr. would be awkwardly or impossibly expressed (lit. “let the Midspace be for us to see luck”); to express such a meaning we would expect rather a form of √kṛ (“let the Midspace make us to see luck”).


## 06
The last pāda here again has a real verb ‘let hear’ (śṛṇotu), not simply ‘be’, and śám is thus displaced from predicated nominative (“X be luck”) to adverbial usage (“for luck”), with naḥ correspondingly promoted from dative (“for us”) to acc. obj. of the verb (“hear us”). Note that this same construction might be found in pāda b and c, which lack verbs, while pāda a must follow the usual pattern because of its astu. Thus bc possibly, “let Varuṇa … (hear us); let Rudra … (hear) us.” However, I think it likely that b+c simply follow a. In any case it’s striking (or at least striking in a hymn that otherwise has so little variation) that the verbal construction changes within the vs., while the pattern of personnel is rigidly fixed: each pāda contains a single god as subject with an instr. pl. of his entourage.


## 08
The first pāda again has a verb with content, úd etu ‘let go up’, and as in 6d this slots śám into an adverbial role.


## 08
bhavítra- is found only here in the RV. My “(the means of) Creation” gives full functional value to the instrument suffix -tra-. Gr “die Welt,” Ge “Creatur (?),” Re “le séjour-des-existences”; see Re’s n. for further, though inconclusive, disc. The immed. preceding hymn contains janítra- (VII.34.2), which seems to mean something similar, insofar as it’s possible to tell.

## 14-15
These last two vss. stand apart from the 13 monotonous vss. that precede them, though they hardly have more content.


## 14
The first hemistich refers, as often, to the hymn just concluding, with particular insistence on its absolute currency in the present moment, as shown by the 50 pres. participle and the comparative adj. ‘newer’: idám bráhma kriyámānaṃ návīyaḥ “this sacred formulation being made anew.” Who the “cow-born ones” are is debated (see, e.g., Ge, Re, and the long n. by Bl [RV Rep. 316-17]), a question I confess to finding not very interesting, perhaps because the longueurs of this hymn have dulled my senses.

The last phrase of 14, the afterthought nominal rel. cl. utá yé yajñíyāsaḥ, is probably meant to include all stray divinities and cosmic or natural elements that don’t fall under the first three categories (heavenly, earthly, cow-born) but might deserve worship. It might be better rendered “and those (others) who are worthy of the sacrifice.”


## 15
The just discussed phrase in 14d yé yajñíyāsaḥ is picked up by 15a yé devā́nāṃ yajñíyā yajñíyānām. I assume that this phrase doesn’t introduce another group of worthies, but is simply an intensive elaboration of the original phrase. The next pāda qualifies them with another derivative of √yaj, the -tra-stem yájatra-, which I interpr., somewhat capaciously, as meaning that they provide the occasion or reason for Manu’s sacrifice.
