+++
title = "036"

+++
All Gods As noted in the publ. intro., this hymn can be read as a progress through a sacrifice. Re (EVP IV.97) follows Hillebrandt in seeing it as a “récitation du pressurage vespéral.” Hillebrandt (Myth. II.128 n. 3) in fact considers it as forming, with VII.37.1-7 and VII.38, an old śāstra for the Evening (or Third) Pressing.

Although the focus on Indra and the Ṛbhus in VII.37 does identify that hymn as associated with the Third Pressing, I do not see that association here. The kindling of the ritual fire that climaxes our vs. 1 (d) suggests rather the Morning Pressing, as does the sun’s sending out the cows in 1b (so also Ge n. 1b). Moreover, most of the gods named in our hymn are not Third Pressing gods; for example, the Maruts, mentioned twice (vss. 7 and 9) are primarily associated with the Midday Pressing, and though the Third Pressing begins with an Āditya cup (which could subsume Mitra and Varuṇa), that pair is prominent in the Morning Pressing and are found here in vs. 2; Sūrya (vs. 1) is certainly not appropriate to the Evening Pressing. As far as I can, VII.36 and VII.37 are ritually independent.


## 01
As Ge (n. 1a) and Re indicate, the opening of this hymn, with prá bráhmaitu (that is, bráhma etu), is very like the opening of nearby VII.34.1 prá śukraítu (=śukrā́etu) … manīṣā́, with both referring to the beginning of the ritual day with the dispatch of the poets’ verbal offering to the gods.

Note the figure ví … sasṛje (b) / ví … sasre (c), both with 3rd sg. mid. perfects built to phonologically similar roots and compounded (in tmesis) with the same preverb.

Narten (1969 “Ai. sṛ in synchronischer und diachronischer Sicht” = Kl. Sch.

135-41) recognizes two synchronically distinct roots √sṛ, primarily act. ‘loslaufen, eilen’ and primarily med. ‘sich ausstrecken’. The two forms of the med. pf. ví sasre 51 (here and X.71.4) belong to the latter root; see also Kü (553). The instr. sā́nunā I take as idiomatic for “on her back,” rather than expressing something like “along the back (of something else).” The other occurrence of the pf. ví sasre in X.71.4 contains an explicitly sexual image utó tvasmai tanvàm vísasre, jāyéva pátye uśatī́suvā́sāḥ “And for another she [=Speech] has stretched out her body, like an eager well-dressed wife to her husband,” and the same picture of feminine yielding is presumably meant here.

Re curiously takes pṛthú prátīkam as a “pre-compound” modifying Agni, but I follow Ge in taking it as an acc. construed with ádhi, a reference to the part of the earth on which the ritual fire is kindled.


## 02
My tr. of bruvāṇáḥ “when called upon” follows Thieme’s (Mitra and Aryaman, p. 69), which in turn follows Meillet’s ([1907] “quand il est invoqué”; see Thieme p. 40). Ge and Re both take bruvāṇáḥ as pass./reflex. ‘be called, call oneself’ with mitráh as predicate (e.g., “der Mitra (Freund) heisst”). I now think something halfway between is probably correct. When √brū is not cmpded with a preverb, it does not seem to take an acc. of addressee, so my passive version with addressee as subj., “when called upon,” is probably wrong. However, I don’t think it’s a mere naming construction. Rather, Thieme’s 1st tr. (p. 40) “Contract, when named …” conveys the intent better: that, when the word -- and god -- alliance/Alliance is spoken at the concluding of a pact, the pact acquires its efficacy. JPB’s tr. of the almost identical III.59.1 “Mitra arranges the peoples when (Alliance) is declared” cleverly plays on the ambiguity of the word mitrá-, and I would substitute something like that here.


## 03
The general consensus, beginning with Sāy. (see also Ge, Re [by implication], Lüders 395, Oberlies RdRV II.213), is that this vs. describes the rainy season, with Parjanya as the divinity. But in a hymn with such a strong ritual focus, such a detour into meteorology would seem out of place. I think that it instead concerns soma/Soma, but, as so often, with a cosmic nimbus surrounding this ritual substance. It is, of course, a commonplace that Soma in the IXth Maṇḍala is regularly called a bull; cf. one of the many passages, with the same verb of roaring as here: IX.82.1ab … sómaḥ … vṛ́ṣā … acikradat. The association of Soma with heaven in IX is also too ubiquitous to need demonstration, as consultation (passim) of the 2nd vol. of Oberlies’s Relig. Ṛgveda, devoted to the Soma hymns (e.g., “Der Himmel als Heimat des Soma” [14-16]), amply demonstrates. For Soma circling “a great heavenly seat” (máhi sádma daívyam) see IX.83.5. That Soma as cosmic bull evokes the concept of the thunderstorm, as I think this vs. does, is quite different from declaring that the vs. directly depicts the storm.

Under my interpr., the sū́dāḥ (for further on this word see below) that swell like milk-cows would be the soma stalks after their soaking or even the cows that provide the milk to mix with the just-pressed soma. Pāda a is more difficult to fit into this scenario. The quieting of the wind does not have an unambiguous analogue in the soma sacrifice. It could refer to the common dying of wind at evening, but this would require following Hillebrandt’s view that this is an Evening Pressing hymn, a 52 suggestion rejected above. In IX.22.2 the surging of the soma juices is compared to that of the wind, and so our passage might refer to arresting the flow of the soma when it is mixed with milk. But I do not consider this a strong suggestion and remain uncertain how to fit pāda a into the overall ritual focus.

I assign rante (so Pp.) to √rā3 ‘(come to) rest’ (so also Lub), along with ranta in I.61.11 and nearby VII.39.3, contra the various other interpr. to be found in the lit.

I see no reason not to read the prim. ending -ante indicated by its sandhi situation and restored by the Pp., despite Lub’s entry “ranta!,” suggesting a sec. ending and injunctive form. As far as I can see this isolated stem can be as easily a root present as the root aorist identified by Lub.

The meaning of the word sū́da- is much disputed. It occurs three times uncompounded in the RV (here and in IX.97.44 and X.61.2), as well as once in sū́dadohas- (VIII.69.3). Gr’s ‘Süssigkeit, süsser Trank’, which I essentially follow, has been rejected by most comm. and tr. since, starting with Pischel, who interprets it as ‘Somabeisatz’, referring to the extras added to the soma. Another strain of interpr., in part dependent on post-RVic passages, takes it as referring to small bodies of standing water. For disc. and various alternate tr., see, e.g., Old, Noten II.263-64; Bloomfield, RR 101; KEWA III.493 (with fuller disc. than EWA II.740); Re comm. ad loc. The general opinion is that there are at two distinct words sū́da-. In our passsage Ge renders it as ‘die Lachen’ (pools) and Re as ‘les mares’ (ponds). While I have not investigated the post-RVic ritual passages, which may belong elsewhere, I see no reason that the RVic occurrences can’t be united under one rubric. The passage in IX.97.44 refers to the preparation of soma and in fact seems almost to gloss the phrase mádhvaḥ sū́dam pavasva “Purify yourself into the sweetness of honey” in its pāda a by svádasva … pávamānaḥ “sweeten yourself as you purify yourself.” X.61.2 is an obscure mythological snippet in a hymn bristling with difficulties, and the use of the word there contributes little or nothing to our understanding of its sense. The cmpd sū́da-dohas- in VIII.69.3 modifies cows in a passage that also treats the preparation of soma and seems to mean something like “milking out the sweetness / giving the sweetening milk”; we can compare the rootnoun cmpd havya-sū́d- ‘sweetening/preparing the oblation’ (I.93.12, IV.50.5), also containing a form of sūd and also modifying cows, in soma-preparation context. It is esp. telling that in I.93.12 the cows are urged to ‘swell’ (ā́pyāyantām), just as the sū́daḥ in our passage are compared to cows and they ‘swell’ (ápīpayanta). The only passage in the RV that might favor a ‘puddle / pool / pond’ interpr. is the one under disc. here, and that is because the vs. has been interpr. (wrongly in my view; see above) as referring to the thunderstorm, whereas I think it is clear that soma preparation is at issue here as well as in the other sū́da- passages. Though I still believe that the word is related to the ‘sweet’ root, my interpr. of sū́da- is otherwise in line with Pischel’s -- I think it likely refers to the sweetness(es) that are added to the pressed soma -- though I have not arrived at this interpr. by the same route as Pischel. Since sū́da- is elsewhere a noun, I would slightly alter my tr. here to “the sweetness(es) have swelled like milk-cows,” though the barbarity of the plural ‘sweetnesses’ would preclude allowing it in the publ. tr. 53


## 04
The construction of this vs. is skewed: the first hemistich contains a typical generalizing rel. cl. referring to proper ritual performance (“who[ever] will yoke …”). It is couched in the 3rd sg. and contains a pres. subjunctive (yunájat). In the 2nd hemistich, pāda c contains another 3rd sg. rel. cl., this time with a pres. indic. (or possibly subj.) (minā́ti), but without a ritual focus, and pāda d contains a 1st sg.

optative that does relate to the ritual (vavṛtyā́m). This ill-assorted trio of clauses has been variously treated. Ge thinks that both rel. clauses have gods as subject, though not necessarily the same god (see n. 4), and that at least the rel. cl. of c has aryamáṇam in d as referent of the rel. prn. Re, mostly flg. Sāy., takes a pious human as subject of ab and supplies a main cl. with it. I think rather that d provides the main cl. for ab, with c a distinct rel. cl. dependent on d, and that there is a switch of reference between the 3rd sg. yáḥ … yunájat of the first hemistich and 1st ps. vavṛtyām of d: “I” am the embodiment of the proper ritual actor as defined in ab. The rel. cl. of c is quite distinct and does indeed depend on aryáman- in d; the god I wish to bring here to my ritual is the one who can neutralize the battle fury of my (and his) enemy.

Switch of reference between 3rd ps. and 2nd ps., even within a single vs., is extremely common when referring to gods, and I see no reason why a similar switch between 3rd and 1st would not be possible when referring to the poet/ritual officiant. For a 1st ps. version of the 1st pāda, cf. I.82.6 yunájmi te bráhmaṇā keśínā hárī (also III.35.4, VII.19.6).

dhāyú- is a hapax. Gr glosses ‘durstig’, connecting it to √dhā ‘suckle’. Old suggests, quite doubtfully, that it belongs rather to √dhāv ‘run’, and this suggestion underlies Ge’s ‘rennlustig’; see also AiG II.2.470, where it is explained as showing an exchange between -v- and -y-. EWA s.v. (rightly) rejects this root affiliation, in favor or one suggested by Gotō (1st Kl. 179 n. 311) to √dhan1 ’id.’. Re tr. ‘riches en dons’, but suggests an association with dhā́yas- ‘nourishment, sustenance’, bringing us back to Gr’s and indeed Whitney’s (Roots) root etym. to √dhā ‘suckle’. My ‘seeking fodder’ reflects the same association.

Note the faint phonological figure of (b) suráthā śūra dhā(yu) / d su(k)rát(um).

I follow JPB (Ādityas, 171-72) in taking aryáman- here as a descriptor of Indra. As Brereton points out, it makes no sense for Aryaman to appear when the poet is seeking to attract Indra. Moreover, the action of pāda c, confounding battle fury, is much more appropriate for Indra (cf., e.g., nearby VII.18.16 índro manyúm manyumyò mimāya), who is also the most common referent for the adj. sukrátu- ‘very resolute’.


## 05
Ge and Re in their different ways attempt to wring a more palatable tr.

from yajante than the VP should allow. The problem is that the acc. with this verb here is not a god, the usual object, but two desirable qualities of a god, namely fellowship/companionship and vitality/vigor. In Ge’s rendering the reverent ones “request” these qualities (erbitten); in Re’s they “obtain them by sacrifice.” But though Re claims that this is the meaning of medial forms of √yaj, in fact uncompounded middles take the god sacrificed to, just like active forms; cf. nearby 54


## 03
yájasva … devā́n. It is forms (both act. and mid.) compounded with ā́that acquire the meaning ‘obtain by sacrifice’. I therefore think the abstract qualities fellowship and vitality must be the objects of our sacrifice/worship, standing in for their divine possessor.

I take ṛtásya dhā́man “domain of truth” as referring to the ritual ground (as does Sāy.).

Ge’s tr. of bābadhe tentatively connects it with √bandh ‘bind’ (flg. Sāy.), not √bādh ‘(op)press’ (see his n. 5c). But √bandh otherwise lacks a pf. in the RV and beginning in the AV its weak forms have a base bedh-. The standard weak 3rd sg. pf.

to √bādh is babādhé; see Kü 330-31. Schaeffer (156) takes bābadhe as an intens.

pres., parallel to badbadhé with both following the standard perfect in function, and Kü (331; cf. also 488) seems to follow, though he takes badbadhé as an intensive perfect, distinguished from the present bābadhe. Since all these stems have a 3rd sg.

ending characteristic of the perfect, I consider at least bābadhe to be a straight perfect, with adjustment of the vowel length of redupl. and root syllable to conform better to such distribution elsewhere in the perfect system; cf. esp. vāvṛdhé versus vavárdha. The intens. badbadhé then adopted the inflectional patterns of the other two redupl. stems. As for what the verb means here, although ví √bādh generally has a negative sense ‘thrust away (undesirable things)’, here I think the same literal sense refers to the god’s pushing out towards us the pṛ́kśaḥ ‘fortifying nourishments’ we want in exchange for praise. Re (comm.) suggests a slightly different semantic pathway.


## 06
According to Old and Ge, this vs. consists only of dependent clauses, and this is certainly true descriptively: there are two subordinate clauses marked by the subordinating conj. yád ‘when’ (a) and the rel. prn. yā́ḥ (c), one accented verb (suṣváyanta) in the rel. cl. of c, and no main verbs. In the publ. tr. I take d as a covert main clause, signalled only by the preverb abhí, with which I supply a verb of motion. However, it is perfectly possible that d is simply a continuation of the rel. cl.

of c, though I do not then know what to do with the abhí init. in d. Under the interpr.

with cd as rel. clause the 2nd hemistich would simply be “who are richly fertile, rich in milk, rich in streams, swelling with their own milk.” In any case, if it lacks a main clause, the vs. cannot be attached either to preceding vs. 5 or following vs. 7; it would have to be an independent if incomplete structure.

The first hemistich lacks a finite verb, and in my view the participle vāvaśānā́ḥ (whether pf. or intens.; Kü 488 [and Schaeffer by omission] favor the former) serves as predicate. However, both Ge and Re supply a verb of motion, presumably on the basis of initial ā́: “her(kommen)” and “ar(rivent).” This is of course possible. Both Ge and Re also take the part. vāvaśānā́ḥ as belonging to the pf.

of √vaś ‘desire’, whose participle is homonymous with that of √vāś: “zusammenverlangend” and “riches en désirs” respectively. Although this cannot be faulted formally, the well-known noise-making quality of rivers (embodied in the very word nadī́-) provides a more vivid image and, on the other hand, it is not clear what the rivers would be eager for. 55 On the near-hapax suṣváyanta see my -áya-Formations (52-53), where I argue that the other occurrence of the stem, act. part. suṣváyantī (X.110.6=AV V.27.8) is founded upon this passage and that the form here has been generated in the playful and alliterative context of this vs. (see esp. the following su- adjectives sudúghāḥ sudhārā́ḥ) loosely to suṣū́- ‘well-bearing’, a connection already suggested by Weber (see Old). Such a derivation matches the theme of the rivers’ burgeoning fertility that dominates the vs. ### 07
HvN’s restoration of the pausal form at the end of c as caránti is incorrect; it must be carántī, as the Pp. has it.

Ge suggests that the ‘imperishable’ (ákṣarā), an esoteric designation for ‘cow’, is the Dakṣiṇā, while Sāy. thinks rather of Vāc. In this Marut vs. I wonder if it doesn’t refer to their mother Pṛśni.

For the phrase yújyam … rayím see VIII.46.19.

The nom. pl. té is very oddly positioned, in the middle of both clause and pāda, breaking up the NP yújyam … rayím, and not even adjoining the caesura. I have no explanation.


## 08
The NP dhiyó avitā́ram, characterizing Bhaga, reprises the VP dhíyam … avantu in 7b, where the Maruts were the subject.

The phrase sātaú vā́jam in d is somewhat problematic. Ge takes it, without comment, as equivalent to the common vā́jasya sātaú (e.g., VII.21.7) with a genitive: “bei dem Gewinnen des Preises.” Re follows, commenting “seul exemple de sātíavec régime Acc.” But this is the problem: although the dative inf. sātáye regularly takes the acc. (e.g., IX.8.2 sātáye vásūni), the loc. to the same stem never does. And in fact even the dative, when construed with vā́ja-, takes the gen.: vā́jasya sātáye (V.9.7, VI.60.13, IX.7.9, X.93.10). In the one apparent exception, IX.68.7 vā́jam ā́ darṣi sātáye, the acc. is actually object of the main verb. I therefore think that vā́jam here has to be an obj. of prá … kṛṇudhvam, parallel to the divinities and semidivinities in the vs. ### 09
On niṣikta-pā́- see Old and now Scar (306).

I take prajā́yai as a quasi-infinitive. See also X.73.5.
