+++
title = "037"

+++
All Gods As noted in the publ. intro., this hymn is primarily devoted to the Ṛbhus (vss.

1-2) and Indra (vss. 3-7), which associates the hymn with the Third Pressing.


## 01
The function of abhí, initial in c, is unclear; the verb of this hemistich, pṛṇadhvam, final in d, does not appear with abhí elsewhere.

On the triple-backed (tripṛṣṭhá-) soma, see Ge’s n. 1c, where he suggests among other possibilities that it refers to the three ingredients making up the soma drink (soma juice, water, and milk). 56

## 01-02
The stationing of the adj. ámṛkta- ‘indestructible’ at the end of the b pādas of both vss., in each case some distance from its noun, is clearly deliberate, but I’m not sure what it’s signaling.


## 03
There is some lexical chaining here: in pāda a the standing epithet of Indra, maghavan, picks up the pl. maghávatsu in 2a (in the same metrical position), thus implicitly asserting an identification of the human patrons of 2 with Indra. The quasiinf. deṣṇám (trisyllabic, to be read dayiṣṇám), also in pāda a, echoes dayadhvam at the end of vs. 2. Although deṣṇá- is standardly taken as a deriv. of √dā ‘give’ (so already Gr., also AiG II.2.927-28, EWA s.v. DĀ, II.714), it is at least secondarily associated with √day ‘distribute’ here. A more distant, and less telling, lexical echo is pūrṇā́‘full’ with 1d pṛṇadhvam ‘fill!’.

Note the abundance of vásu- forms (vásunaḥ b, vásunā c, vasavyā̀d).

For d Ge (n. 3d) appositely cites VIII.32.15 nákir asya … niyantā́sūnṛ́tānām, which he tr. ad loc. as “Keiner tut … seinen Gnadegaben Einhalt,” with sūnṛ́tānām an objective gen. with niyantā́. I am therefore puzzled as to why he does not take sūnṛ́tā here as standing for acc. pl. sūnṛ́tāḥ in sandhi, as the obj. of ní yamate, the same lexeme as in VIII.32.15. Instead he follows the Pp. in taking it as nom. sg.

sūnṛ́tā, subj. of the verb: “Deine Grossmut hält die Schätze nicht zurück” (sim. Re).

My tr. takes account of VIII.32.15 and goes against the Pp.


## 04
The connection of the first two vss., dedicated to the Ṛbhus, and the subsequent Indra vss. is made clear here: Indra is called ṛbhukṣán- (cf. the pl. applied to the Ṛbhus in 1b, 2b) in pāda a and compared with vā́ja- in b. Vāja is of course the name of one of the Ṛbhus, and they are all addressed as vājāḥ in 1b. Both Ge and Re take the simile vā́jo ná as containing the PN (e.g., “comme un Vāja”), though Ge allows the common noun sense as an alternate (“wie der gute Vāja [die gute Beute]”), but I think the comparison is stronger if the ‘prize’ sense is more prominent and the relationship to the Ṛbhu name is backgrounded. However, I would now emend the tr.

to recognize the PN explicitly: “Like a prize [/like (the Ṛbhu) Vāja] …” Pāda b, with its description of Indra going home, is reminiscent of the envoi in the fallow-bay-yoking oblation at the end of the soma sacrifice (cf., e.g., I.82a, III.53.4-6) and is therefore appropriate to the Third Pressing context.


## 05
This vs. presents minor problems of syntax and the uncertain fit of certain lexical items. In the first pāda it is not clear what the pravátaḥ are that Indra regularly gains for his devotee. The stem pravát- generally refers to a slope or sloping course. Ge takes it as an abstract Vorsprung (lead or advantage), Re as a course, Tichy (Nom.ag. 307) as “die schnellen Wege” (with !). I think the clue is found in nearby VII.32.27 VII.32.27 tváyā vayám pravátaḥ śáśvatīr apò 'ti śúra tarāmasi “with you let us cross over the (river-)courses one after another, cross over the waters, o champion.” Here as well the reference seems to be to Indra’s aiding us in gaining new lands by crossing river after river. 57 As for pāda b, all three just-named scholars take dhībhíḥ as part of the main clause found in pāda a and embed the first part of b within this frame. Cf., e.g., Ge’s “Du gewinnst selbst … den Vorsprung ab nach den Absichten, mit denen du (etwas) unternimmst.” But, though convenient, this kind of embedding is foreign to RVic sentence structure. Instead I think we must take the rel. prn. yā́bhiḥ as coreferential with pravátaḥ in the main cl. (pravát- being, of course, fem.). The instr. of pravátgenerally expresses extent: ‘along the slope (etc.)’ (e.g., VIII.5.37=13.8=IX.24.2 ā́po ná pravátā yatī́ḥ “like waters going along a slope”), and so here I assume that Indra accomplishes his work (víveṣaḥ), that is, assures victory for us, along the rivercourses that are being fought for. The other instr. fem. in this hemistich, dhībhíḥ, is then independent of yā́bhiḥ and part of the rel. cl. that yā́bhiḥ introduces, and I take it in the same sense as the instr. matíbhiḥ in 2d and dhiyā́in 6c: “in accord with [thought/vision].” The success of Indra’s activities on our behalf is announced in c and his help duly noted. The number mismatch in the instr. phrase yújyābhir ūtī́is common in Triṣṭubh cadences containing inst. ūtí-, truncated from iambic cadences (dimeter / Jagatī) of the type … víśvābhir ūtíbhiḥ (I.23.6 etc., etc.). See further disc. ad VI.10.5.


## 06
The trans.-/caus. vāsáyasi is here used in a curious idiomatic sense. The other two occurrences of this stem, nearby each other in III.1.17, 7.3, are straightforward in function: ‘cause to dwell / settle down’. But here the verb is used in a complaint: ‘cause to wait, cool one’s heels, hang around, bide one’s time’. The idiom is reinforced by the very rare use of the simile particle iva with a verb. My “seem to be …” is meant to capture this iva; it could also be rendered ‘as it were’. Ge (n. 6) suggests that this is a hint to the poet’s patron that he (the poet) has been waiting too long for his dakṣiṇā.

The adj. tātyá- is a transparent deriv. of the familiar word for father, tatá- ‘daddy, papa’. I therefore think the rather formal register of Ge’s väterlich and Re’s paternel strike the wrong note; surely the idea is that Indra’s dhī́- is affectionate and indulgent.


## 07
The sense and syntax of this vs. are extremely challenging. My interpr.

differs from those of the other standard tr. I will not treat these in detail, but will note two important points of difference. I do not think that Indra is the referent of yám in pāda a (as, e.g., Old does), and I do not think that tribandhú- in c is a PN, much less a reference to Vasiṣṭha (see, e.g., Ge, Mayr PN s.v.).

My sense of the structure of the vs. is that the two outer pādas (a, d), which match by virtue of being relative clauses introduced by yám, go together, with the referent of the yám the same in each: a mortal man beset by difficulties. These relative clauses depict the same unfortunate situation, the dissolution and isolation of this man. The two inner pādas (b, c) are the main clause (or a subordinate and a main clause in b and c respectively) and present Indra as the antidote and refuge for the unfortunate mortal. This complicates the clause relations but has the virtue of making sense (some sense, anyway). Many details remain to be discussed, however. 58 In pāda a the VP (abhí yám … ī́se) is puzzling: √īś does not otherwise occur with abhí, and it is found overwhelmingly with a genitive, not an accusative complement. (For disc. of other possible acc. exx. cited by Gr., see comm. ad VII.32.18. Commenting on this passage, Re suggests that √īś appears with the acc. only when it is a pronoun, but this is not borne out by the distribution; among other things, there are plenty of pronominal genitives with √īś.) Here the clue to the usage is provided by a passage in the next hymn (cited by Old), VII.38.4 abhí yáṃ devy áditir gṛṇā́ti, which has the identical structure, save for a different named goddess (also a -ti-abstract) and a different verb, gṛṇā́ti (against our abhí yáṃ devy nírṛtiś cid ī́śe). The root √gṝ regularly takes both abhí and the acc. In VII.38.4 the one referred to by yám is benevolently greeted by the benevolent goddess Aditi; our passage seems to have been constructed as a deliberate contrast to this happy scene, with the malevolent goddess Nirṛti extending her sway to an unfortunate mortal. (The passages differ in one notable way, however: in VII.48.4 the referent of yám is the god Savitar.) The pairing of the two passages accounts for the unexpected preverb and unexpected accusative with ī́śe in our passage.

The middle pādas referring to Indra (in my view) present the god as a sort of venerable figure with whom the beleaguered man of pāda a (and d) can take refuge.

Indra’s venerable status results from the years that have accumulated for him, as pāda b indicates, and in c the subject (who, in my opinion, is the mortal man referred to by the rel. pronouns in a and d) approaches Indra because of the god’s attainment of age. That old age is presented as a positive feature of Indra also gives the mortal reassurance that his own aging can likewise be positive.

As already noted, I do not follow the almost universal interpr. of the hapax tribandhú- as a PN nor the further identification of that PN with Vasiṣṭha. Instead I take it as the bahuvrīhi it is in full lexical value: ‘having three bonds’, with the bonds referring to kinship as bándhu- does so often. I further think that this is a reference to the three-generations model so prevalent later: a man with both father and son (or perhaps, as later, father, grandfather, and great-grandfather), ensuring the continuity of the male line and, esp. later, the śrāddha offerings to the ancestors. Although this theme is not prominent in the RV, it can be discerned indirectly in several passages; see X.135 (and my article “The Earliest Evidence for the Inborn Debts of a Brahmin: A New Interpretation of Ṛgveda X.135,” Journal asiatique 302.2 [2014]: 245-57) and VI.20.11 (also discussed in that article, as well as comm. ad loc.). A man who had achieved the tribandhú state would be well along in years, and his approach to a similarly aging Indra would be appropriate. In fact, the depiction of Indra at this stage of life in this vs. contrasts strongly with the usual representation of Indra as young and virile. Note that tribandhú- may form a faint ring with tripṛṣṭhá- ‘threebacked’ in 1c.

In d we return to the afflictions visited on our unhappy man -- this time by (other) mortals. Thus a and d show him as the target of a divinity (the devī́Nirṛti, a) and men (mártāḥ, d), with Indra as the literal intercessor. Both Ge and Re tr. the clear subjunctive kṛṇávanta in d as a preterite (“beraubt haben,” “ont rendu”), but there is no justification for this and neither provides one. Exactly what the other 59 mortals will or would do isn’t entirely clear to me, and it depends in great part on how we interpret -veśa- in the compd ásvaveśa-. In V.85.7, containing an array of apparently non-kin relationships, JPB tr. ‘neighbor’; in IV.3.13, again in a set of calibrated relationships, I do so as well, though in X.49.5 I render it as ‘vassal’. Here, if I am correct about the sense of tribandhú-, -veśa- should refer to a relationship outside the close family line. The sense would be: when mortals deprive him of his non-blood (or less closely related) associates (pāda d), he still has his tight paternal lineage (tribandhú- pāda c). My ‘clansmen’ could be correct (based on the usual sense of víś-), but ‘neighbor’ or even ‘vassal’ (or Re’s ‘clientèle’) could, too. I do not think Ge’s Anhang fits, however.


## 08
The first pāda of this vs., ā́no … stavádhyai, is reminiscent of 1a ā́vo … stavádhyai, and thus forms a ring, already anticipated by the echo of 1c tripṛṣṭhaíḥ in 7c tribandhúḥ. However, it also makes an appeal to Savitar, who does not figure otherwise in the hymn, and thus seems to anticipate the first two vss. of the next hymn, VII.38, which are dedicated to that god. Indeed the Anukr. identifies that whole hymn as dedicated to Savitar, but see publ. intro. to VII.38 for the view that it really is an All God hymn.
