+++
title = "038"

+++
Savitar [/All Gods] On the likelihood that this is actually an All Gods hymn, despite the Anukr.’s ascription to Savitar and the domination of Savitar in the first vss., see publ. intro.


## 01
On the presential value of the pf. of √yam and of this passage in particular, see Kü 395.


## 03
Ge takes ápi … astu as “…soll Anteil (an Opfer) haben,” but this isn’t necessary in the passage, and I know of no parallels with that sense.


## 04
On the close parallel to our pāda a in the previous hymn, see comm. ad VII.37.7.

The sequence váruṇaḥ … mitrā́so aryamā́presents a twist on the usual trio of the principal Ādityas, Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman, since mitrā́saḥ is plural and, as Ge suggests (n. 4d), must be a word play, referring to the common noun mitrá- ‘ally’.

Obviously the god Mitra must also be referenced, with mitrā́saḥ found in Mitra’s usual place in the sequence of names.


## 05
On this assortment of minor divinities, see publ. intro. In particular, ékadhenu- ‘having one milk-cow’ is a hapax, and who these beings are is otherwise unknown.

The structure of the vs. is quite loose. The initial abhí invites us to group the vs. with the preceding one, where abhí opens three of the four pādas (a, c, d) as the preverb with two forms of the root √gṝ (gṛṇā́ti a, gṛṇanti c). This is indeed how I construe it, with the main cl. represented only by abhí and a gapped *gṛṇanti (hence 60 my “(as do) those”), and the rest of the first hemistich occupied by the rel. cl.

introduced by yé. In other words, the Gift Escorts, described in the relative clause, also greet Savitar. The root √sap does not otherwise appear with abhí (anywhere in Skt. as far as I know; pace Gr). Therefore taking the whole of the 1st hemistich, beginning with abhí, as a single rel. cl. (as Ge seems to) is not a favored option, esp.

since there is no corresponding main clause in the vs.: the 2nd hemistich has a set of new sg. subjects and singular verbs. Ge is forced to take it as a syntactic truncation; see his —. Re gets out of this difficulty by supplying a pl. impv. to √śru for ab “(qu’ils nous écoutent),” parallel to śṛṇotu in c, but the abhí of pāda a seems to me to point to a connection with the previous vs. as just argued.

I do not understand what mithó vanúṣaḥ is meant to convey -- perhaps that the Gift Escorts avidly compete with each other to provide the best service? IX.97.37 sápanti yám mithunā́so níkāmāḥ, adhvaryávaḥ … is similar, with both √sap and a form of √mith and with níkāma- ‘eager’ semantically matching our vanúṣ-; there the sense seems to be that the Adhvaryus of various sacrifices compete with each other to be best at serving Soma (“whom they serve, eager in rivalry -- the Adhvaryus …”).

The VP rātím √sap seems almost to be a gloss of the root-noun compd. rātiṣā́c- and might help us determine the function of this enigmatic group of divinities or semi-divinities. The use of a transitive VP as apparent gloss makes it unlikely (at least to me) that -sā́c- has a passive / intransitive sense in the cmpd (Scar’s ‘von Gaben begleitet’ [593, Ge sim.], Re’s ‘qui ont le don pour attribut’). Gr’s transitive ‘Gabe gewährend, Spende betreibend’ is closer to the mark, though muddling the sense of the root √sac.

The conj. utá is oddly positioned in the middle of its pāda, and it is not clear what it’s conjoining. Klein (DGRV I.380) follows Re in positing an ellipsed

*śṛnvantu in the 1st hemistich, with the utá conjoining that clause with the śṛṇotu
clause here. But even were we to supply that verb (see above for reasons not to), utá would still be out of position: we would expect it pāda-initial. I think that the utá is loosely conjoining this clause with what precedes, but that this does not require matching verbs. I further think that it has been postponed in order to allow áhiḥ to take initial position, in order to echo the abhí’s that open this vs. (5a) and three of the pādas in the preceding vs. (4a, c, d). Notably, two of the twelve pādas containing áhir budhnyàḥ elsewhere in the RV are opened by utá (I.186.5, VI.50.14), with the latter almost identical to ours except for the order of utá and the divine name: VI.50.14 utá nó ‘hir budhnyàḥ śṛṇotu. This would give support to my view that the ordinary order was disrupted to allow the semi-rhyme of #abhí / #áhi(ḥ). (Note that when utá was moved to mid-pāda, it took the Wackernagel-positioned naḥ along with it.)


## 06
The presence of yā́ti ‘begs’ in d solidifies the affiliation to the same root of the mid. part. iyānáḥ in b. I follow Re in taking the part. as a passive, though this interpr. is somewhat problematic The pāda also appears identically in VII.52.3b, where the participle has transitive, though self-beneficial, usage. Ge takes it that way here as well (“darum bittend”), and Bl (RR, ad our passage) claims that there is “no good reason” to take iyānáḥ passively here. However, the context favors a passive 61 interpr.: Bhaga gives the treasure away when we (or the powerless one of d) beg for it; I do not think Bhaga is himself begging it from Savitar, as an intermediate step before giving it away himself. Moreover, the same mid. part. is regularly used in the passive; cf., e.g., VII.17.7, 29.1 also in VII. Although I am reluctant to give identical pādas, esp. in the same maṇḍala, different interpretations, in this case the multivalence of the medial voice of this root (finite ī́mahe is regularly transitive, e.g.) allows the same sequence to be used in two different ways.

## 07-08
These last two vss. concern the vājínaḥ ‘prize-winners’. As indicated in the publ. intro., although most (in addition to the usual tr., see Oberlies RdV II.240) take these to be horses, as so often, I instead take the referent of vājín- to be the Maruts. In an All God hymn the default expectation is that gods are the dedicands.

And there are numerous phraseological parallels that support the identification. See esp. nearby VII.36.7, where the Maruts are called vājínaḥ, as well as in the immediately preceding hymn, where VII.35.9 śáṃ no bhavantu marútaḥ svarkā́ḥ is almost identical, save for the expressed subj., to our 7ab śáṃ no bhavantu vājínaḥ … svarkā́ḥ. The stem svarká- occurs only 3 times; besides these two occurrences, the third, in I.88.1, refers to the Maruts’ chariots. The voc. phrase amṛtā ṛtājāḥ in our 8b is found also, addressed to the Maruts, in V.57.8 ámṛtā ṛ́tājāḥ (accented).


## 07
The cmpd. sanemí- lit. means ‘along with its/the felly’ (see, e.g., AiG III.75, EWA s.v. némi-), but is a way to express ‘entirely’ (“felly and all”): “with all its gear,” “bag and baggage,” “lock, stock, and barrel” are idiomatic English equivalents.


## 08
It is appropriate that the vājíns should be the topic in a clause with the āmreḍita loc. absol. vā́je-vāje. The etym. figure would be clearer if the loc. had been tr. “whenever prizes (are at stake)” vel sim.
