+++
title = "039"

+++
All Gods


## 01
The first pāda somewhat echoes the first hemistich of the preceding hymn (VII.38.1ab), with the final verb aśret mimicking likewise final áśiśret in 38.1b and the verb’s object sumatím resembling amátim in 38.1b and in the same metrical position. This is perhaps an additional reason to consider VII.38 to be fundamentally an All God hymn properly situated in the All God cycle, rather than an intrusive hymn to Savitar. See disc. in the publ. intro. to VII.38.

I do not know the referent of vásvaḥ. Perhaps, given the connections with VII.38.1, it is Savitar. The same phrase sumatím (…) vásvaḥ is found in III.4.1 (an Āprī hymn), but the referent is no clearer there. Ge suggests that the referent is Agni himself. This would work in both passages and may be correct; inter alia Agni is frequently the referent of vásu-, but the non-signalling of coreference with the subject still seems a little odd. The pl. vásavaḥ appears in vs. 3 modifying the gods.

On the idiom PATH √bhaj see comm. ad VII.18.16. 62 The publ. tr. fails to render naḥ in d. I would emend to “will offer our true (hymn)” or “will offer for us …” Both Ge and Re avoid making ṛtám obj. of yajāti, both by making it an adverbially used acc. of respect (vel sim.): “… möge er … das Opfer richtig [my italics] vollziehen” and “(selon) l’Ordre.” I follow Lü (436-39, esp. 439) in considering ṛtám ‘truth’ here a representation of ‘hymn’: “… möge … ein Lied darbringen.”


## 02
This vs. presents a number of minor problems. The first is the usage of the verb in pāda a, med. pf. prá vāvṛje. Ge and Re interpr. it as passive, e.g. “Das Barhis ist … gelegt,” as does Kü (461). Since this is the only med. form of the pf., against several act. transitive ones, this is possible, but it should be noted that med. forms of the present are generally transitive. Cf. very similar VII.18.4 prá vṛñjate … barhíḥ, where the 3rd pl. form of the verb precludes a passive reading. Moreover, the passive reading would require the adj. suprayā́(ḥ) to modify neut. barhíḥ; in my opinion (contra Gr and possibly Ge, Re; see also Old’s somewhat cryptic n. to II.3.5), this form belongs to the s-stem suprayás- and is a nom. sg. masc., but even if this grammatical analysis is incorrect, I do not see any way to get a properly inflected neut. sg. in -ā(ḥ) out of any possible stem. The difficulty disappears if we take vāvṛje as transitive, supplying Agni from vs. 1 as subject. Undoubted acc. forms of the sstem adj. (suprayásam) modify Agni 3 times out of the 4 clear occurrences of the stem (II.2.1, 4.1, VI.11.4). Although Agni in his physical form as fire is not a likely twister of barhis, of course, he has just been identified as a Hotar in 1d and in his priestly role could perform other priestly actions.

I take eṣām as gen. for dat., as often, and referring to the gods (so also Ge, Re).

As noted in the publ. intro., the hapax bī́riṭa (in sandhi; Pp. bī́riṭe) in b is completely opaque. See EWA s.v. The only thing that is clear is that it has aberrant, non-Indo-Aryan phonology, with plain b and unmotivated retroflex ṭ. It is not even evident what grammatical form it might be: standing next to dual viśpatī́, it might be expected to be a dual as well. Indeed a pragṛhya bī́riṭe would be better metrically, as Old points out. If the sandhi represented in the Saṃhitā text is correct, however, it could be a loc. in -e. Both Ge and Re take it as such, following in their tr. Yāska’s gloss gaṇa- (see also Kuiper, Aryans 31 and Kü 461), and both construe viśā́m in the next pāda with it (“in der Gefolgschaft ihre Clanleute” and “dans l’arroi des clans” respectively). A hemistich boundary between a locative and its dependent genitive seems highly unlikely to me, esp. when it is not a well-known standard expression. In the publ. tr. I take it as a loc., but decline to translate; I would now be inclined to take it as a nom. dual, but also decline to tr., hence “like two ? clan-lords.” Unlike many problematic hapaxes, this one does not seem to be phonologically generated.

With Ge and Re, I interpr. the verb in b, ā́… iyāte, as ‘hasten here’. Lub classifies it with √yā ‘beseech, beg’, and the morphology supports him: the form cannot belong with well-attested ī́yate ‘hastens’ both because of its short root syllable and because of its athematic ending, whereas it could easily belong to the medial root pres. of ‘beg’ (cf. part. iyāná-). But ‘beg’ does not fit the context, and esp. with Vāyu 63 forming one of the paired subjects and with the time specified as dawn and the occasion the Early Invocation, the common formulaic vā́yav ā́yāhi (I.2.1, etc.) and its variants, calling Vāyu to the first pressing, imposes itself here. I don’t understand the morphology, but a poet who could inflict bī́riṭe on us is capable of confecting a nonce verb form in the same pāda.

If viśā́m is not dependent on bī́riṭe, what is it doing? A survey of the occurrences of this gen. pl. reveals that it is often pāda-initial (as here) and dependent on viśpáti- (e.g., III.2.10, 13.5, V.4.3), páti- (e.g., I.127.8, VI.15.1), or a similar authority figure. I therefore loosely construe it with viśpatī in b, though I resupply that word in c. Alternatively, II.4.1 viśā́ m agním átithimṣ suprayásam “Agni, the guest of the clans, who receives very pleasurable offerings” is suggestive, since it contains a form of suprayás- modifying Agni. But ‘guest’ is missing in our passage, and in any case the suprayás- form is in a different clause.

As for the aktór uṣásaḥ phrase, Ge. (n. 2c) has convinced me that it's an abbreviated version of uṣáso yā́man aktóḥ “at the coming of dawn from night” (III.30.13, VI.38.4). Perhaps the loc. yā́man was gapped because of the presence of the loc. pūrváhūtau, although the latter is not part of the same phrase.

The epithet niyútvan- ‘possessing a team’ is primarily used of Vāyu, and therefore, although Pūṣan intervenes between vāyúḥ and niyútvān, it must modify Vāyu, with the name and the epithet polarized at the edges of the pāda.

Vāyu and Pūṣan do not generally appear together and do not form a natural pair; I don’t know the reason for their joint appearance here. As far as I know, Pūṣan has no part in the Morning Pressing.


## 03
There is almost universal agreement that jmayā́represents an adverbial instr. of exactly that shape, despite the hiatus, rather than Pp. jmayā́ḥ. See, e.g., Old, Re, Scar 421, with lit.

With Sāy., cited by Ge, the Maruts must be the referents of śubhrā́ḥ in b: pl.

forms of this adj. generally modify the Maruts, and the midspace is especially associated with them.

Note that marjayanta must be reflexive, with real medial value, rather than being a straight transitive -anta replacement of the type commonly found with -áyaformations.

On urujrayaḥ see comm. ad V.54.2.

Assuming the Agni is the messenger in d (so, e.g., Ge), this vs. contains both standard models of the sacrifice: “the gods come to the sacriifice” and “the sacrifice goes to the gods.”


## 04
Pāda b contains víśve … devā́ḥ, though distracted. Since this is the middle vs. of the hymn, this specification of the dedicands of the hymn may constitute a not very noteworthy omphalos. It also introduces a brief flood of named gods (4d, 5).


## 05
In the first hemistich Agni appears to be playing on both sides, as it were: he is commanded (voc. agne) to bring (ā́… vaha) a series of gods here, including 64 Agni (acc. agním) at the end of pāda b. This seems conceptually odd: Agni the god does not need to be brought to the sacrifice -- he’s already there -- and it is also hard to see how he would bring himself. Ge’s (n. 5b) explanation that including Agni in the list serves for “Vervollständigung der Götterversammlung” seems weak. In that case we might expect Agni to come at the end of the list, and in any case too many gods are missing fom the list to consider it a complete collection. It might be possible to consider the Agni to be brought as the celestial Agni, i.e., the sun. But I think it more likely that agním is parallel to gíraḥ in pāda a, and both are acc. of goal, expressing the ritual elements the gods will encounter at the ritual: hymns and the ritual fire. The standard tr. take gíraḥ in this way, and I see no reason why agním can’t have the same function.

In c eṣām is hard to construe. I follow Old in accepting the BR emendation to

*eṣám ‘quick’. Old cites the parallel in the very next hymn VII.40.5 víṣṇor eṣásya.

As Old points out, the corruption can have arisen on the basis of likewise pāda-final eṣām in 2a. There are of course no metrical consequences. The emendation was not explicitly signaled in the publ. tr., which should read “… Viṣṇu, *the quick.” Neither Ge nor Re accepts (or even takes note of) this emendation.


## 06
I take yajñíyānām as gen. for dat., as in 2a.

In b I assume that Agni obtains from the gods, and then gives to mortals, what the latter wish. Cf. a fuller expression in VI.5.7 aśyā́ma táṃ kā́mam agne távotī́“May we attain this desire, Agni, through your help.” On the basis of that passage, as well as X.96.7 só asya kā́maṃ … ānaśe, both with kā́mam √(n)aś, I also take nákṣat as an s-aor. subjunctive to √(n)aś, rather than as an injunc. to √nakṣ, pace Narten (s-aor.

160) and Gotō (1st Kl. 192), who assert that no such subj. exists to √(n)aś.

In d I take the position of nú within the instr. phrase yújyebhir nú devaíḥ seriously, indicating that the gods are now to be our yokemates, now that we have made successful sacrifice to them.


## 07
A fine meta-summary vs., which is also the final vs. of the next hymn (VII.40.7).
