+++
title = "040"

+++
All Gods


## 01
The standard interpr. take vidathyā̀as nom. sg. fem. modifying śruṣṭíḥ (e.g., Thieme [Unters. 48] “die zur Verteilung führende Erhörung”), and this is certainly the default reading. However, it leaves the sám in the VP sám etu with little to do, and I wonder if vidathyā̀is not instead an instr. sg. fem., which would justify the lexeme sám √i ‘come together’. This adj. modifies vā́c- in I.167.3, and “hearing” and “ceremonial (speech)” would make a nice pair. The speech would also stimulate the praise (stómam) we aim at the gods in the next pāda.

In b I take práti … dadhīmahi in its idiomatic sense, ‘to fix an arrow (on a bowstring), to aim’, though a more generic one (Ge ‘anheben’, Re ‘commencer’) is hardly out of the question. 65 In d ratnínaḥ ‘possessing treature’ is perfectly ambiguous: it can be a gen. sg.

and modify asya (standing for Bhaga) or a nom. pl. modifying the 1st pl. subj. of syā́ma. In the publ. tr. I take it as the former (as does Thieme loc. cit.), while Ge and Re take it as the latter (though Re recants in his notes, deciding that the gen. sg. is better, on the basis of ratna-bhā́j- VII.81.4). In fact, I think it’s probably meant to be both, with the nom. pl. a proleptic use, and would now emend the tr. to “may we, possessing [=acquiring] treasure, be at the apportioning of him who possesses treasures.” Gr (s.v. ratnín-), Ge, Re, and Thieme (loc. cit.) all take the referent of asya to be Savitar, and the presence of unaccented asya, which should refer to someone/- thing already in the discourse, supports this interpr. However, since the next hymn (VII.41) is entirely devoted to Bhaga as distributor of goods and since vibhāgé appears to be a pun on his name, I think Bhaga is equally plausible. The lack of accent on asya could be accounted for by this pun.


## 02
A series of four singular nouns are the subject of dadātu, a singular verb.

The verb niyuvaíte is esp. appropriate for Vāyu, who is regularly called niyútvant- ‘having a team’. Note the use of this adj. in the immed. preceding hymn, VII.39.2, where it must qualify Vāyu rather than Pūṣan, despite the word order (see comm. ad loc.).


## 03
The pl. verb junánti in c has two singular subjects, Agni and Sarasvatī, which should trigger a dual verb, or else a singular one as in 2ab. Since Agni and Sarasvatī do not form a stable set of gods (as, e.g., Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman do), it is not clear what god or gods should be supplied to justify the plural verb. Re adds a parenthetical “(et autres)”; possibly the Maruts addressed in the first hemistich? With Ge and Re, I take tásya as a dependent genitive limiting rāyáḥ and referring to the man whom the Maruts, Agni, and Sarasvatī help -- not as a demonstrative adjective with rāyáḥ, which would be grammatically possible.


## 04
Contrary to Ge and Re, I take pādas a-c as a clause subordinate to the main cl. of d.


## 05
Flg. Old, I emend vayā́to ‘vayā́(=avayā́) ‘propitiation’, which only requires the insertion of an avagraha but no emendation. Ge and Re also accept this suggestion. The word should have been marked with an asterisk in the publ. tr.
