+++
title = "041"

+++
Bhaga (or All Gods) Like VII.38, which is essentially an All Gods hymn though ascribed by the Anukramaṇī to Savitar, this hymn is properly located within the All Gods sequence, the last of three 7-verse hymns in Triṣṭubh (save for our vs. 1 in Jagatī), followed by an All Gods hymn of 6 vss. Nonetheless, the Anukramaṇī assigns most of it (vss. 2- 6) to Bhaga, with vs. 1 to the Liṅgoktadevatāḥ and vs. 7, an extrahymnic vs. (see publ. intro.) to Uṣas. The 1st vs. calls on a range of gods, including Bhaga (pāda c), in 66 monotonous fashion, before settling down to exclusive focus on Bhaga beginning with vs. 2, and it was surely meant as an All God hymn and positioned in the All God collection for that reason. The hymn is also found in AV (Ś III.16, P IV.31)


## 01
As was just noted, this vs. is in Jagatī in an otherwise Triṣṭubh hymn (and hymn sequence) -- or rather its first three quarters are. The final pāda is in Triṣṭubh and ends with the verb 1st pl. opt. huvema, which gives a Triṣṭubh cadence and also ends the first pāda of the next vs. (2a), contrasting with its semantic match 1st pl. pres.

indic. havāmahe in the first pāda (1a), which provides a Jagatī cadence. The switch in meter at the end of the vs., cleverly accomplished while holding the verb essentially constant, and the variant repetition of the opening of the 2nd hemistich, prātár bhágam, at the opening of vs. 2, prātar(-jítam) bhágam, knit the 1st vss. together despite the metrical difference and the range of gods in vs. 1.


## 02
On the first pāda of this vs. see comm. immediately above.

The referent of the repeated rel. prn. yá- (b, c, d) is Bhaga, and we therefore might expect that in the sequence in d yám bhágam the latter word refers to the god (as the same acc. does in pāda a and in 1c). But instead it is almost surely merely a pun on the divine name and its first reading is as the homonymous (and of course etymologically identical) common noun ‘portion’ -- though the more usual word for ‘portion’ is bhāgá-. At best it could be read twice, once as the name, once the common noun (“which Bhaga … portion …”). If we follow the Pp., bhágam must be part of the quotation ended by íti, because the other word in the quotation, bhakṣi, is read by the Pp. as unaccented and cannot therefore be initial in the quotation/clause.

In principle, however, the sandhi form bhakṣī́ti could contain both an accented particle íti and an accented bhakṣí, contra the Pp. which could -- and should -- then be the only word in the quotation.

Part -- but only part -- of the solution depends on how we analyze the verb form. Old and Ge inter alia (e.g., Scar 157) take it as a 1st sg. middle, which could therefore be accented, since medial s-aor. forms take accent on the ending (cf. bhakṣīyá, bhakṣīmahí) -- though it need not be. (Indeed no one, as far as I know, rejects the unaccented Pp reading in favor of *bhakṣí.) I follow the view of Sāy. (also Gr, Wh. [AV tr. III.16.2], Narten [p. 179 n. 512] inter alia [see Old’s reff.]), that it is a 2nd sg. act., that is, a -si impv. (ultimately derived from the act. s-aor. subjunctive; cf. bhakṣat), where we should expect root accent (*bhákṣi) if the form were to be accented. Because there seems to be universal agreement that bhakṣi is unaccented, the divergent interpretations of the morphology do not affect the interpr. of where the quotation begins, but it seems worthwhile to point out the possible interpr. not taken.

One reason I prefer the -si impv. interpr. is that the 1st sg. interpr. might impose more modality on an injunctive than we might expect: cf. Ge’s “ich möchte … teilhaft werden” (though Scar’s “ich bekomme …” avoids modality). The context favors a request, rather than a statement of accomplishment. 67


## 03
Although the prātár of vs. 1 and 2a has disappeared, this vs. seems to contain a reminiscence of it: 1c #prātár bhágam is echoed by 3a #bhága prá(ṇe)tar (in opposite order), and pādas c and d then pick up prá ṇ(etar) of 3a in #bhága prá ṇo and #bhága prá nṛ́bhiḥ (latter without retroflexion). This is hardly the most sophisticated effect in Rigvedic poetry, but it is an illustration of the subtle concatenative effects that can provide unity and a throughline in even the most banal (as this hymn mostly is) composition.

## 03-05
The concatenation continues in the next vss. The ending of vs. 3, … nṛvántaḥ syāma, echoes in the following two vss. The 1st pl. opt. syāma is repeated at the end of 4a and d and 5b, while the -vant-stem adj. shifts from nṛvántaḥ (3d) to another punning bhágavantaḥ (both ‘possessing a portion’ and ‘accompanied by Bhaga’) in bhágavantaḥ syāma (4a, 5b; cf. bhágavān 5a). And bhágavān in 5a matches maghavan in the same metrical position in 4c.


## 04
On the structural relationship of the various utá-s here, see Klein DGRV I.355-56.

## 05
The punning continues here with a clever twist: even Bhaga himself should become possessed of a portion (bhágavant-) (a); (only) in this way (téna) will we become bhágavant- (b). In other words, Bhaga needs to get his own portion before he can pass it on to us.

This vs. forms a slight ring with vs. 1: the intensive verb johavīti provides one additional stem to the two forms of √hū in vs. 1, havāmahe and huvema.

## 06
This vs., bringing the Dawns into the picture, forms the transition to the extra-hymnic vs. 7 (see publ. intro.). Note that we have the newer nom. pl. form uṣásaḥ in 6, whereas 7, a repeated vs. (=VII.80.3), has the inherited uṣā́saḥ.

The racehorse Dadhikrā(van) seems intrusive in this vs., but he is the subject of the nearby hymn VII.44. Here as there he is associated with dawn and the Dawns.

As suggested in the publ. intro. to that hymn, the association may be with the dakṣiṇā, which is distributed at the morning pressing and which often consists at least partly of horses.


## 07
Though this vs. is also found, better situated, in a Dawn hymn (VII.80.3) and is quite possibly extrahymnic here, the emphasis on the valuable goods, esp.

livestock, that the Dawns bring, to distribute as dakṣinā, well fits the hope for a good portion that characterizes the rest of the hymn. Note esp. that in 3cd we hope to be propagated with cows and horses (góbhir áśvaiḥ) and to become possessed of men (nṛvántaḥ), matched here by the entities by which the Dawns are accompanied: áśvāvatīr gómatīḥ … vīrávatīḥ.


## 42-43
All Gods 68 These two hymns are in some ways companion pieces, progressing similarly through the ritual and sharing means of expression and images. For details see individual discussions below.
