+++
title = "042"

+++
All Gods


## 01
The first three pādas of this vs. begin with prá ‘forth’ and seem to express the dynamic beginning of the sacrifice. None of the three verbs (√nakṣ, √vī, √nū) is commonly found with prá, so the use of the preverb here seems situational -- that is, the three prá √X are not standard lexemes; rather, the poet has attached prá to all three to emphasize that all parts of the sacrifice are setting at once.

krandanú- is a hapax, built with the rare suffix -anú- (AiG II.2.210). Of the very few other such stems, one -- nadanú- ‘roar’ (1x, also nadanú-mant- 1x) -- belongs to the same semantic field, and another -- nabhanú- ‘spurting’ (1x, also nabhanū́- 1x) -- belongs to the same root as the genitive qualifier of our form nabhanyà- ‘inclined to / about to burst out’. I think it likely that this roar refers to all the sonic parts of the sacrifice: the just kindled fire (for agní- as subject of √krand, cf. e.g., X.45.4), the soma (often the subject of √krand in IX), the hymns (cf. VII.20.9, with stóma- as subj.)., and most likely also the pressing stones that appear in d.

The cows “swimming in water” in c presumably stand in for the milk to mix with the soma, though the exact ritual reference is unclear. In the soma sacrifice it is the soma that undergoes a water bath (see IX.106.8 where udaprút- modifies the soma drops), not the milk.

The verb yujyā́tām in d requires some discussion. On the surface, the form is a 3rd du. act. opt. root aor., and this is how Ge and Re render it and how Gr and Lub classify it. Old, however, points out that the pressing stones are usually yoked (in the passive) rather than yoking something else (in the active). He wishes to take it instead as built to the passive stem yujyá-, but the question then is what the form is meant to be. Old himself favors a passive injunctive: though this should have the form *yujyetām, he suggests that the rarity of such forms might have generated the “wrong” form on the analogy of athematic 3rd du. med. injunctives/imperfects in - ātām. He also floats the possibility of a subjunctive, though that should have the primary ending (expect *yujyāte, I suppose, not at this period the *yujyaite of the grammars). Although the publ. tr. reflects Old’s view that the context favors a passive, I now believe that the act. opt. analysis of Ge/Re, etc., with péśaḥ ‘ornament’, referring to the soma, as object, is correct. The passage, and the verb, would play with the standard passive expression (pressing stones are yoked), but take them as agents of the yoking. I would therefore now emend the tr. to “The two pressing stones should yoke the ornament of the ceremony.”


## 02
The ‘road’ of Agni, ádhvan-, in pāda a picks up its etymological relative adhvará- ‘ceremony, lit. ritual cursus’ in 1d, a relationship unfortunately difficult to convey without awkwardness in tr. 69 Sāy. reads *sú te for suté, and Old favors this reading on the grounds that suté is rare in Agni context. But since the last hemistich of the preceding vs. (and possibly pāda b as well) concerns the soma, this does not seem a cogent enough objection to change the text. Sāy. likewise reads *jánimā níṣattaḥ rather than jánimāni sattáḥ.

This would make fine sense -- and ní √sad is a very common idiom for Agni’s seating at the ritual when acting as Hotar -- but it again requires emending a text that makes sense on its own.

As indicated in the publ. intro., the vari-colored horses in bc are Agni’s flames. The “I” of d is presumably the poet impersonating Agni as Hotar.


## 03
The pl. subj. of mahayan in pāda is unclear; the most likely referent would be the priestly colleagues of the 1st ps. sg. poet subj. of huvé in 2d; in this spirit Ge supplies “die Sänger,” Re “les chanteurs.” However, Old adduces the almost identical passage VII.61.6 sám u vāṃ yajñám mahayaṃ námobhiḥ with 1st sg.

mahayam. Noting that small differences between otherwise identical passages are common, he does not insist on the 1st sg. interpr. However, given the 1st sg. of 2d, I am now inclined to consider this a strong possibility, and would emend the translation (or at least provide as an alternative): “I magnify the sacrifice for you all …” This makes the interpr. of vaḥ easier: as is common with such enclitics in ritual context, vaḥ should refer to the rest of the officiants, but if they are also the 3rd ps.

subjects of mahayan, this produces a clash. The emendation of -n to -ṃ is of course trivial.

The prá of vs. 1 returns in d, though in the common idiom prá √ric ‘project, extend beyond, surpass’. The medial pf. of this root, acdg. to Kü (426-27), is always presential and has the stative sense ‘hervorhinausragen über Abl.” The ablative is of course missing here. In our passage I think the sense is primarily physical: the ritual fire is gaining strength and its flames project outward on the ritual ground (“in the nearness” upāké), though the fire’s surpassing superiority may also be referenced.

The physical image is found, differently expressed, in the companion hymn VII.42 in vs. 2d ūrdhvā́śocī́ṃṣi … asthuḥ “The flames have stood up erect.” Given the prá here, this might be taken as a reference to the movement of the ritual fire to the east, but the fire seems to me to be already established in its location.

Both Ge and Re supply a ‘speech’ element to their interpr. of mandrá-, “wohlredende” and “à la voix-harmonieuse” respectively, but its derivation from √ma(n)d ‘exhilarate/be exhilarated / gladden/be glad’ does not suggest or require such a semantic extension. It is true that the adj. regularly modifies jihvā́- / juhū́- ‘tongue’ and is also found in the bahuvrīhi mandrá-jihva- ‘having mandrá tongue(s)’.

But generally when Agni’s tongue is mentioned, it is as the instrument for eating the oblation and conveying it to the gods, not as a speech organ. His tongue is gladdening because it gives the gods pleasing nourishment. Agni himself is very often mandrá- as well, as in our passage -- probably for at least two reasons: 1) like his tongue, he is the conveyor of the oblation to the gods, 2) he produces general gladness by his presence and role in the sacrifice. Both factors are probably at issue here: in c he is commanded to sacrifice to the gods (thus conveying the oblation to 70 them); in vs. 4, esp. d, he gives “a desirable reward” to the mortals whose dwelling he is established in.

For dāti see comm. ad IV.8.3.


## 05
The adhvarám of pāda a echoes adhvarásya in 1d and provides a faint ring, since the last vs. (6) is extra-hymnic.

In the publ. tr. in c the verb sadatām is taken as a sg. impv. with Agni as subject. At best, this would be a middle 3rd sg. (though tr. as a 2nd ps.), to a stem, and indeed a root, that is otherwise relentlessly active. This is just an error. The form must be a 3rd du. act. impv., with Night and Dawn (the decoupled dual dvandva náktā … uṣā́sā) as subj. -- as is the standard interpr. (Gr, Ge, Re). The tr. should be emended to “Let Night and Dawn sit here on the ritual grass.” What this is meant to convey is another question, since times of day do not usually have a physical presence at the ritual and it is hard to conceive Night and Dawn sitting on the barhis.

For the “repair” of this image in the next hymn, see comm. ad VII.43.3. The ultimate reference is probably to the daily offering to Agni at the two twilights (later called the Agnihotra).


## 06
As just indicated, this vs. belongs to the class of “meta” final vss., commenting on the hymn just completed. I would now be inclined to tr. the root pres.

injunc. staut as “has just praised.” The second pāda is interesting for the interaction between analytic phrases and compounds. That is, the first member of the bahuvrīhi rāyás-kāma- ‘having desire for wealth’, rāyáḥ, itself a gen. case form rather than stem form in composition, is modified by / compared to an independent gen. viśvápsnyasya. The connection of this adj. with ‘wealth’ is clear from VIII.97.15, where the independent gen. rāyáḥ is modified by viśvápsnyasya: kadā́… rāyá ā́daśasyer, viśvápsnyasya ...

On the sense of the adj., see comm. ad VIII.97.15.
