+++
title = "043"

+++
All Gods

## 01-02
The 1st two vss. of this hymn begin with prá, recalling the insistent prá in the 1st vs. of the preceding hymn (VII.42.1) and presumably fulfilling the same function: to express the energetic initiation of the ritual. However, both prá √ṛc (1a) and prá √i (2a) are standard lexemes, unlike those in 42.1.


## 01
The inf. iṣádhyai is a hapax and variously interpr.: e.g., Ge “dass sie gern kommen,” Re “en sorte que (nous) en tirions profit.” The root affiliation is also not entirely clear; e.g., Lub classifies it with √iṣ ‘send’, though we do not of course know how he would tr. it. Both Re’s disc. and his tr. seem to me plausible: he takes it as “un doublet isolé d’iṣayádhyai” and cites Burrow’s (1955) interpr. “pour que nous soyons prospères.” It is worth noting that the few instances of iṣayádhyai (I.183.3=VI.49.5, VI.64.4) also occur in a Triṣṭubh cadence and that that form in isolation is ill-formed for such a cadence, since the root syllable should be heavy in 71 such a cadence. In I.183.3=VI.49.5 this problem is avoided because the root syllable amalgamates with a preceding final vowel: yéna narā nāsati yeṣayádhyai. But in VI.64.4 rayím divo duhitar iṣayádhyai the cadence is simply bad (and in fact produces an uninterrupted run of 5 light syllables). Haplology of the suffix -ayá- to our form iṣádhyai here fixes this metrical problem.

víprā in c, modifying bráhmāṇi, is the only neut. N/A form of this stem, but the stem does modify a different word for thought/poetic formulation, matí-, as fem.

víprā (VII.66.8, VIII.25.24). The Pp. analyzes it instead as nom. pl. m. víprāḥ, which is of course a possible form underlying the sandhi, but which cannot be easily fitted into the sentence. Sāy. does it by sleight of hand: he glosses the first part of pāda c as yeṣāṃ viprāṇāṃ medhāvināṃ brahmāṇi, converting the supposed nom. pl. viprāḥ into a gen. pl., and then supplies viprāḥ as subj. of pra … arcan in the main clause in a: te viprāḥ prārcann pūrveṇa saṃbandhaḥ, an attempt to justify the nom. in the rel.

cl. Needless to say, this doesn’t work.

The verb viyánti in d is ambiguous. With the Pp., Gr., etc., it may be taken as belonging to ví √i ‘go apart, spread out’, but it could also belong to the root pres. of √vī ‘pursue, go in quest’. In a rel. cl. the accent would be the same for either analysis.

Because of the connections between the preceding hymn VII.42 and this one, I favor the latter affiliation on the basis of (prá) vetu in VII.42.1b, but ví √i is certainly not excluded -- and might make slightly better sense with the simile. The tr. might then alternatively read “go apart” for “go questing.” On the other hand, I like the idea of formulations going in quest of divine response and rewards, an interpr. encouraged by the prá lexemes (like prá … etu in the next pāda, 2a).


## 02
In c I construe dat. adhvarā́ya with sādhú, giving the latter richer semantics than the mere adverbial “richtig” of Ge or even Re’s “correctement.” Found twice in 42 (1d, 5a), adhvará- reappears here, though the word is too common to make much of this.

As noted above ad 42.3, our pāda d seems to be a clearer expression of the image of the increasing flames of the ritual fire found also in 42.3b.


## 03
In two of its four occurrences víbhṛtra- means something like ‘dispersed’, but that makes no sense here. The third occurrence is similar to ours, however: I.95.2 … janayanta gárbham … víbhṛtram. In both these instances it seems to be an idiomatic expression for children of an age to be carried around, in I.95.2 of the newborn fire. In our passage both Ge’s “die Tragekinder” and Re’s “des fils (en âge) d’être portés” seem on the money. Since Eng. lacks a useful expression (or means to make one) like Tragekind, my tr. is an attempt to convey the sense in brief and also to capture the implied locus of the children in our passage. In the simile they are said to be sitting on their mother (acc. mātáram), but in the frame the corresponding term is loc. sā́nau ‘on the back’, and I suggest that the mother’s back is implied in the simile as well. The difference between acc. mātáram and loc. sā́nau is a fairly trivial example of the “case disharmony in similes” discussed in detail in my 1982 IIJ article of the same name. 72 In b the gods are urged to take their seats (devā́saḥ … sadantu) on the barhis.

The action ordered is of course unremarkable and repeated numerous times in the RV, but in the context of this sequence of hymns it can be considered a “repair.” In the preceding hymn, in VII.42.5, Night and Dawn are given the same command, also in the 3rd ps., also in the thematic aor. (náktā … sadatām uṣā́sā). As was noted there, this produces an unusual image; 43.3 replaces and thus repairs it with the familiar one.

In c the problem is that neither of the fem. adjectives -- nom. viśvā́cī or acc. vidathyā̀m -- modifies an expressed noun, and the referential possibilites are wide open. Ge follows Sāy. by taking the nom. as the sacrificial ladle and the acc. as the flame, though in his n. (3c) he suggests that ‘speech’ would be possible for both. Re follows Th. (Unters. 49) in taking over devátāt- from d as the acc., tr. “(la troupe des dieux) arrivant au sacrifice,” while maintaining the ladle as the nom. (One might think that the gods might find this an odd and messy welcome!) Old thinks the nom. is definitely the ladle, but suggests various possibilities for the acc. On the basis of I.167.3 vidathyā̀… vā́k, I take the acc. as speech, with the anointing metaphorical: the ladle pours the butter offering into the ritual fire as ritual speech is recited. There is precedent for this metaphor: cf. I.61.5 arkám … sám añje and I.64.1 gíraḥ sám añje with ‘chant’ and ‘hymns’, respectively, as object of ‘anoint’.


## 04
The isolated form sīṣapanta is hard to assess. By form it appears to belong to a redupl. aor., but no other forms to such a stem are attested and, more to the point, there is no securely attested -áya-transitive. I cannot evaluate sāpáyant- in TB II.4.6.5, which is evidently the Brāhmaṇa form Whitney lists, with ?, in Roots s.v. √sap, but even if it belongs to the same root, it is attested too late to provide a basis on which to generate an associated redupl. aor. in the RV. Nonetheless, I see no choice but to take sīṣapanta as a redupl. aor. and to assume an unattested *sāpáyati for early Vedic. What then does sīṣapanta mean? In my 1983 -áya- monograph (p.

219) I assert that it has intrans./reflex. sense, is not connected with a causative, and that it is based on nearby sápante (VII.38.5) (without specifiying how), but I no longer believe that. Nor, despite the temptation of the -anta ending, do I believe it’s an -anta replacement. Rather I would now take it as a reflexive transitive ‘serve themselves’ (or, since that English idiom is too colloquial, ‘do service to themselves’). The basis for this is expressed in the next pāda: the gods do their own milking (dúhānāḥ), producing the “streams of truth,” presumably the praise hymns, by their own actions -- thus serving themselves. See Lüders (473, 475), who argues for “stream of truth” as Kultlied and (475) interprets this hemistich essentially as I do.

This may be a variant on the notion that the gods are the ultimate source of the hymns that praise them because they provide the inspired thoughts to the poets, or it may be that the sheer arrival of the gods at the ritual ground provides the impetus for the “milking” of the hymns.

Both Ge and Re take the 2nd hemistich as a single cl., with máhaḥ as goal of ā́ gantana. Ge further takes máhas- as “Feier” (celebration), while Re’s “manifestation-de-grandeur” is closer to the root sense of the word. But I see no 73 reason not to take this neut. s-stem in the standard sense ‘greatness’ and construe pāda c as an independent nominal cl., as in the publ. tr.

In d sámanasaḥ ‘of the same mind’ replicates the same word in 2b and provides a bit of a ring. Note that in 2 the referents are the human officiants, whereas here it is the gods, who are thus implicitly equated -- and equation facilitated by the similar structures: the two words are in identical metrical positions and both follow a 2nd pl. impv., with sámanasaḥ modifying the 2nd ps. subj. Although ‘of the same mind’ in the first instance means that all members of each group have the same mind, the repetition may imply that the human officiants of vs. 2 and the attending gods of vs. 4 also share the same thoughts.
