+++
title = "045"

+++
Savitar 75

## 01-02
Although Savitar’s role as god of evening, causing the world and its activities to settle down, is alluded to in 1d, his role as rouser of the world at dawn is given equal billing in that pāda (… ca … ca). The more oblique expression in 2d must also refer to this latter role. The sun “cedes his task” of waking and rousing the world to Savitar.


## 02
Both Ge and Re take the aor. injunc. paniṣṭa in c as modal, but the aor.

injunc. ánu dāt in d as general pres. (e.g., “Jetzt sei … gepriesen; … ordnet …”). But there is no reason that the first needs to be assigned modal value: the temporal adv.

nūnám can instead draw attention to an immediate past action (“has [just] been wondered at”). And it seems preferable, if contextually possible, to take the two adjacent aor. injunctives in the same value.


## 03
Klein (DGRV II.102) asserts that ádha in d “conjoins the second distich with the first, following an intervening participial phrase” (that is, conjoins ab with cd, the participial phrase occupying c); Klein tr. “And propping apart his broadly encompassing sunbeam he shall give mortal’s nourishment to us.” Although this seems roughly correct, the dislocated position of ádha, not only after the participial phrase of c but after the first, heavy word of d, martabhójanam, might have called for more comment. It would be possible to take c with ab -- there are no syntactic obstacles to this: the participial phrase can attach to the nom. subject of ab -- which would situation ádha closer to the beginning of the clause it’s conjoining (after only one word). But I favor a slightly richer semantics for ádha than Klein does: often ‘then’ rather than just ‘and’. And I think it likely here that positioning ádha in the last clause of the vs. and in fact in the last clause of the hymn proper) since vs. 4 is a meta-verse), is meant to emphasize Savitar’s last and most significant action, the actual delivery of his bounty to us mortals. The particle is found directly before the verb to stress the action of granting. With this analysis there is no need to attach c to ab.


## 04
As just noted, this is a meta-summary final vs., referring to the very hymns (imā́gíraḥ) invoking Savitar at the present moment. The 2nd pāda focuses on his hands: pūrṇágabhastim … supāṇím “having full fists [that is, fists full of goods] and good palms.” This provides a semantic, but not lexical ring with the beginning of the hymn, where many good things are in Savitar’s hand (háste 1c). (I would in fact have tr. 4b -pāṇí- as ‘hand’ but used ‘palm’ instead to make the lexical difference clear in English.) The ‘hand’ focus is also continued in the two arms (bāhū́) in 2ab, though that is so standard an image of Savitar that it may be independent here.
