+++
title = "046"

+++
Rudra


## 01
This hymn begins with the NP imā́(ḥ) … gíraḥ “these hymns,” the same phrase that opened the last vs. of the preceding hymn (VII.45.4). In that hymn it was a nom. pl.; here it is an acc. pl., but its grammatical identity does not become clear 76 until almost the end of the vs., when the transitive verb bharatā ‘bring’ is found in the middle of d, right before the final brief cl. śṛṇotu naḥ. The ambiguity of case between the identical phrases in 45.4a and our 1a makes the connection seem closer.

## 02-03
The final pādas of both vss. are semantic variants of each other: “don’t hurt our children.” In 2d the negative is expressed by the privative on the adj.

anamīváḥ (… bhava) “be without affliction,” while 3d contains the stronger and more conventional prohibitive mā́… rīriṣaḥ “do not harm.” The word for ‘children’ is the fairly rare uncompounded root noun jā́- in 2d, replaced by the fuller and more familiar bipartite phrase toká- tánaya- “offspring (and) descendents.”


## 02
The complementary etymological and morphological figure ávann ávantīḥ is noteworthy, but I have no idea what “helping/helpful doors”(ávantīr dúraḥ) are or do. Perhaps it is an indirect way to refer to the sacrificial offerings humans make to help the gods, in return for the help (etc.) they receive from the gods, in this case Rudra. As Re suggests ad loc. (EVP XV.161), “dúraḥ … s’oriente vers «maison»” and the emphasis in this vs. and the next on the protection of our children and offspring may have invited this allusion to the house.


## 03
The first hemistich contains two occurrences of pári, but in fact it should technically have three: the first pári at the end of pāda a governs the preceding abl.

divás in the sense of ‘from’ (note the close sandhi divás pári); the second, in the middle of b, should be construed with both preceding cárati and following vṛṇaktu and is positioned exactly between the two clauses that contain those two verbs.

I take the hapax voc. svapivāta to the lexeme ápi √vat, which I interpr. after the manner of Tichy. See comm. ad I.128.2. The intimacy implied by this lexeme (‘be/make familiar/intimate’) is appropriate to the focus on the household disc. above.

My tr. “o you who are our familiar” does not represent the su-, but it is difficult to incorporate it without making an already heavy tr. even more so.


## 04
The prohibitive mā́, introduced in 3d as a variant of 2d, dominates the first hemistich of this final vs. ## 047
Waters


## 01
I have deliberately omitted to tr. the 2nd enclitic vaḥ, found in c.

## 01-02
devayántaḥ in 1ab with 3rd ps. referent (see the 3rd pl. verb ákṛṇvata) modulates to 1st ps. reference in 2b, also signalled by the verb (aśyāma).

[VII.48 JPB]
