+++
title = "055"

+++
Sleep As noted in the publ. intro., the first vs. does not belong with the rest of the hymn but rather with the preceding one, VII.54, to Vāstoṣpati, the Lord of the Dwelling Place. However, as also noted there, this is not just a product of wrong division of hymns: VII.55.1 is in a different meter from VII.54, and VII.54 ends with the Vasiṣṭha clan refrain, which is always the final pāda of a hymn. Moreover, as Old points out, VII.54 has three vss. and follows correctly on the three-vs. hymns VII.51- 53, while an additional vs. would break that sequence. Old suggests that the single vs. ### 01
originally formed its own hymn and that the rest of VII.55, with 7 vss., is an addition to the original collection (Anhangslied).


## 01
In addition to the voc. vāstoṣ pate that repeats the three vs.-initial vocc.

vā́stoṣ pate in VII.54, this vs. has other similarities to VII.54, esp. VII.54.1: amīvahā́ ‘destroying affliction’ echoes 54.1 anamīváḥ ‘without affliction’, as āviśán ‘entering’ does 54.1 svāveśáḥ ‘easy to enter’; sim. sákhā ‘companion’ and 54.2 sakhyé ‘companionship’. Note also that pāda c sákhā suśéva edhi naḥ is identical to I.91.15; I.91 is the Soma hymn that VII.54.2ab seems to have been partially based on. In addition, pāda b is identical to VIII.15.13b and IX.25.4a, both of which are addressed to Soma (on Soma as the addressee in the former, see comm. ad loc.). I do not quite understand the Soma/Vāstoṣpati connection.


## 02
The target of the simile in pāda b, ‘spears’, does not precede the simile marker iva and in fact is as far as it can be from it in a pāda of only 8 syllables: vī̀va bhrājanta ṛṣṭáyaḥ. This arrangement may have resulted from an attempt to keep metrically unfavorable bhrājante out of the cadence.

On the refrain ní ṣú svapa and the present stem svápa- see my “Sleep in Vedic and Indo-European” (KZ 96 [1982/83], esp. 8 n. 3).


## 03
The hapax voc. punaḥsara may be a word play with sārameya. Bollée (Gone to the Dogs in Ancient India, 43) tr. “recessive one,” indicating that the dog is in retreat. But the rest of the context suggests an aggressive dog on the attack.

On the intens. dardar- here, see Schaeffer (136), who cites a very similar Avestan passage.


## 04
On √sas, again see my ‘sleep’ art. cited ad vs. 2.


## 08
Note the two hapax cmpds with loc. 1st member, proṣṭḥe-śayá- and vahyeśayá- versus talpa-śī́van- (-śī́varī-), with stem form in 1st member and a different 2nd member belonging to the same root √śi ‘lie’.
