+++
title = "056"

+++
Maruts 79


## 01
Ge takes cd to be the answer to the question in ab, but since vs. 2 seems more directly responsive to the question, I take cd here as simply further specification of the subject of the question.

Unusually, īm has no acc. function; there is no possible accusative role it could fill.

I consider vyàktā(s) to be at least an implied pun. The first reading is as the nom. pl. m. of the ppl. of ví √añj ‘anoint, ornament’, referring presumably to the Maruts’ characteristic adornments and their glistening appearance as (wet) bearers of rain. This interpr. is reflected in all the standard tr. However, I think it also is meant to contrast with sánīḷāḥ ‘of the same nest’, as an indication that the Maruts are also separate individuals, and employing the common ví / sá(m) polarization. The problem is to identify a morphological form that could be represented by vyàktā(s) and express the sense ‘separate, individual’ vel sim. I hesitantly suggest that we start with the -añc-stem, vy-áñc-, found only in the cmpd. uru-vyáñc- ‘wide-spreading’.

(The rarity of this stem may be accounted for by competition with the well-attested stem víṣvañc- of almost the same meaning [‘facing in opposite directions, divergent’], which looks like a more substantial version of vyáñc- and is built to the extended form víṣu of the same preverb ví.) If vyáñc- made a collective abstract in -tā-,

*vyáktā- ‘individuality, separateness’, the form in our passage could be its instr. sg.

in adverbial usage. There are obviously weaknesses in every link in this chain of reasoning. First, the stem vyáñc- is very rare and limited in distribution; second, I know of no other such abstracts to -añc-stems and in fact -tā-stems are relatively rare in early Vedic (AiG II.2.617); third, it should be accented *vyáñc- (AiG II.2.619).

However, a poet intent on packing a pun into vyàktā(s) might not scruple to use unusual forms to achieve it, and elsewhere in the RV puns sometimes ignore accentuation for their 2nd reading. In slight support of the suggestion, we might note that this set of hymns has one other ex. of the instr. of such a stem in adverbial usage:


## 04
puruṣátā ‘in human fashion’, as well as an instr. to a -tāt-abstract in the same usage: VII.57.7 sarvátātā ‘in your totality’, referring to the Maruts -- the exact opposite of my suggested vyàktā ‘in their individuality, separately’, also of the Maruts. If my suggestion is correct (by no means certain!), it would also be a pun facilitated by sandhi, since the first reading as ppl. should have underlying -ās and the other one as instr. simply -ā, but both would show up as -ā in this sandhi position.

Because this vs. is in Dvipadā Virāj (which, despite its name, consists of four pādas of five syllables apiece), ádha opens the d pāda and is therefore less oddly placed than might appear. Klein (DGRV II.128) characterizes the ádha as “conjoining the second [term] with the first” and tr. “the young men of Rudra and the ones having good horses.” But since the two terms are coreferential, the ádha (/ Engl.

‘and’) seems unnec. or even misleading.


## 02
This vs. seems a response, if an indirect one, to the question posed in vs. 1.

The hí, as often, has a higher discourse function: it gives the reason for asking the question in the first place. We could tr. “(I ask) because …” I also consider this vs. a further expression of the “individual/collective” theme I identified in vs. 1, here 80 conveyed by the pl. janū́ṃṣi ‘births’ in the first clause, contrasted with the sg.

janítram ‘means of begetting’ in the 2nd. If 1ab asks “who are they individually?” 2ab states that the question needs to be asked because no one knows their individual births, even though (cd) they [=Maruts] know “mutually” (mitháḥ) their own (individual) means of begetting. In other words, they share the knowledge of their separate births -- something we don’t know. Note the middle vidre: they know facts about themselves, contrasting with the 3rd-party lack of knowledge in ab nákiḥ … véda.


## 03
This vs. continues the theme of mutuality in vs. 2, but now concerns the Maruts’ adult behavior as gods of the storm. The mutuality is expressed both by the adv. mitháḥ repeated from vs. 2 and by the reciprocal 3rd pl. verb aspṛdhran “they contended with each other.” The hapax svapū́- has been variously, and surprisingly, interpr. See Old ad loc. (also KEWA s.v., etc.) for the numerous suggestions, incl. BR ‘broom’, Lanman ‘wings’. However, the most obvious analysis also is most likely the correct one, as a root noun cmpd. to root √pū ‘purify’, hence ‘self-purifying’. This is Old’s conclusion, reflected also in Ge’s and Re’s tr. and in Scar (323). Perhaps the resistance to this obvious interpr. resulted from the fact that it is a hapax -- astonishing given the centrality of Soma Pavamāna “self-purifying Soma” in RVic ritual as the subject of the entire IXth Maṇḍala -- and in this passage it has no connection with soma. Here it quite likely refers to the rain drops accompanying the Maruts’ storm, as Ge suggests.

Old acutely notes that the verb in this pāda vapanta resembles pavanta ‘they purify(/ied) themselves’. Rather than considering vapanta a corruption of pavanta (which seems extremely unlikely to me), I would instead suggest that it’s a metathetic word play (vap ≈ pav), aided by preceding (s)vap(ū́bhiḥ).


## 04
Whenever the birth of the Maruts, and esp. the udder of Pṛśni, are found in the RV, bewilderment ensues, and this passage is no exception. At least it is here identified as a secret that only the insightful can perceive -- a characterization that the modern interpreter fully concurs with. For other problematic passages on this topic see II.34.2, VI.48.22, and VI.66.1, 3 with comm. ad locc. Our passage would be fairly easy to interpr. if we could take ū́dhaḥ (that is, ū́dhar) as a loc. sg. Such is Ge’s solution (“im Euter,” explicitly identified as a loc. in n. 4b) and also Re’s, though the latter has the grace to bury the loc. in a parenthesis: “(en sa) mamelle.” But a loc. -ar to r/n stems “ist nicht nachgewiesen” (AiG III.311), and it is safer to take it as an acc. sg. as elsewhere. In my interpr. yád is a neut. pronoun (rather than a subord. conj.) and refers collectively to the Maruts and ‘udder’ is a species of appositive to it though with a bit of a twist: ‘udder’ refers to the contents of the udder, and that contents is the collective Marut embryo(s). This seems to me better than taking yád as ‘that’ or the like, as in Kü’s (175) “Diese Geheimnisse kennt der Weise, dass die grosse Prś̥ ni ein Euter getragen hat.” (On p. 339 Kü simply reproduces Ge’s tr., with ū́dhaḥ as loc. and a pronominal obj. [“sie”], referring to the Maruts, supplied; he doesn’t comment on these two incompatible interpr.) 81


## 05
The good heroes that the clan possesses are in fact the Maruts themselves, specified in the instr. Re calls this an “instrumental of identification.” Whatever term is used, it is not, in my experience, a common usage of the instr., but it is nonetheless not hard to interpret. A similar usage is found two vss. later, in 7cd.


## 06
A very cleverly constructed vs., nicely fitted to Dvipadā Virāj meter. Each 5-syl. pāda consists of two words, phonologically and etymologically (or pseudoetymologically) related. There are both repetition of morphological figures and variation on them. All four pādas end with a nom. pl. masc. adj.; the first two pādas end with superlative -iṣṭhāḥ, the third with the phonologically similar, but morphologically distinct -iślā(ḥ), the last with something phonologically distinct (ugrā́ḥ).

Three (a, b, d) of the four pādas contain etymological pairs; in the first two the etymological relation is reinforced by phonological repetition (yā́maṃ yā́(y)iṣṭhāḥ, śubhā́śóbhiṣṭhāḥ. (As for the first, the Saṃh. has yéṣṭhā́ḥ, but the first vowel must be distracted. HvN restore yáyiṣṭhāḥ with short root vowel, but I think yā is more likely.

In neither of the other two occurrences of this stem [V.41.3, 74.8] does the meter establish the quantity of the root syllable.) In the third ex. (pāda d) the etymological relationship is not transparent, but would be available to the audience steeped in derivational morphology: ójobhir ugrā́ḥ. Although c, śriyā́sámmiślā́(ḥ), lacks the etymological connection, it mimics it through alliteration, though it is notable that we have miśLa, not the also attested miśRa, which would match śriyā́better. Another set of three versus one: in three pādas (b, c, d) the first noun is in the instr., but in pāda a it is not. The 2nd pāda is the only one that doesn’t deviate from the various patterns in any regard: it’s an etymological figure, ends with a superlative, begins with an instrumental.

One can also note the reversal of vowels in the root syllables of the word pairs of b and d: u … o versus o … u.


## 07
The first pāda of this vs., ugráṃ va ójaḥ, restates the last pāda of the preceding vs. (6d ójobhir ugrā́ḥ) as an equational nominal clause. Because of its connection with vs. 6 it also sets up the expectation that what follows will also be an etymological figure, but b sthirā́śávāṃsi is not, though it has the same syntactic configuration as pāda a.

The loose construction of the instr. marúdbhiḥ is similar to that in 5a.


## 08
The nominal equations of 7ab continue in the first half of this vs., and śubhráḥ picks up śubhā́śóbhiṣṭhāḥ of 6b. Although śúṣmaḥ is not etymologically related to śubhráḥ, they are alliterative.

Pāda c contains a rhyming simile: dhúnir múnir. Such full rhyme is quite rare in the RV and seems to provide the crescendo of this highly wrought little passage.

Note also that the final of d, dhṛṣṇóḥ, is a slight flip of the initial of c, dhúniḥ. 82 In order to get a proper Dvipadā Virāj line, the iva of c has to be read ‘va, as it sometimes is elsewhere. See Old. If the particle is disyllabic, however, it makes cd a Triṣṭubh pāda. Since the Dvipadā Virāj section of the hymn is drawing to a close (fully Triṣtubh starting with vs. 12), the possible double metrical reading here may be gesturing towards the upcoming Triṣṭubh takeover. Indeed the Dvipadā Virāj begins to break up beginning in vs. 10, despite the Anukr. identification of 1-11 as DV.

In the simile of c, iva (/va) is out of place; we expect *dhúnir iva múniḥ. This displacement was doubtless made to draw attention to the rhyme noted above. But it also interacts somewhat with the question of whether cd contains two DV pādas or one Triṣṭubh, because a quick glance at Lub shows that iva is fairly rare immediately after the caesura, which would be its position here if we are dealing with a Triṣṭubh pāda. I imagine that this rarity has less to do with iva’s accentless status (though that might contribute) than with its usual tendency to take 2nd position, which would generally put it earlier in the line. There certainly do exist trimeter lines with iva post-caesura, e.g., IV.18.6 ṛtāvarīr iva saṃkróṣamānāḥ (cf. also V.1.1, 11.5, etc.); they are just less common than I had expected.


## 10
The metrical decay noted for 8cd continues here. Although the first half of the vs. has the expected 10 syllables with a word boundary after 5 -- thus allowing a division into two DV pādas -- the opening of b is huve, an unaccented verb. In the immediately preceding vs. pāda b opens with accented yuyóta, which must owe its accent to its pāda-initial position, as there are no syntactic features favoring it. The DV here is far less sensitive to the pāda boundary. Even more clearly, the second half of the vs. is an undoubted Triṣṭubh, since it has 11 syllables and a caesura after the first 4, with the unaccented voc. maruto spanning syllables 5-7.

Both Ge and Re (also Lub) take vāvaśānā́ḥ to √vaś ‘want, desire’ with the supposed object being soma, but I think it makes more sense, and requires less machinery, to assign it to √vāś ‘bellow’. Otherwise too much has been gapped and needs to be supplied; cf. Re’s expansive parenthesis: “… pour qu’à satiété … (vous vous gorgiez de soma, le) désirant-avec-force.” See the same disagreement about the affiliation of the same participle in VII.36.6, with comm. ad loc. 
## 11
This vs. is unambiguously Triṣṭubh, consisting of two pādas of 11 syllables. The first has an opening of 5, which could be a self-contained pāda of DV, but what follows it is 6 syllables, marking the whole as a single Triṣṭubh pāda. The second part is even less ambiguous, as it has an opening of 4, so a DV division is impossible. The only feature that matches that of DV is that there are only two Triṣṭubh pādas in the vs., not four.

On iṣmín- see comm. ad I.87.6.


## 12
The metrical boundary, however fuzzy, between the DV and Triṣṭubh sections separates the first part of the hymn from the more ritually focused one 83 beginning here. The expression hinomy adhvarám “I set the ceremony in motion” announces the inauguration of the sacrifice.

This vs. harps, rather tediously, on the adj. śúci- ‘gleaming’, which occurs 6x, twice each in pādas a, b, and d.

Pāda c contrasts ṛtá- in ṛténa … ṛta-sā́paḥ with satyá-, the latter as goal of √i ‘go, come’. In my view, satyám … āyan refers to the truth-serving Maruts’ epiphany on the ritual ground: they “came to reality” for the sacrificers, that is, they became really present. This epiphany is effected “by truth”: the operation of the properly performed ritual mechanism.


## 13
This vs. has no finite verbs, but three predicated tense-stem participles: pf.

upaśiśriyāṇā́ḥ (b), aor. rucānā́ḥ (c), pres. yáchamānāḥ (d), in a hymn already well provided with such (see 10d, 11d).

As for upaśiśriyāṇā́ḥ, although pf. participles regularly have preterital value, the middle pf. of √śri is presential (Kü 527-28) and stative, and this form contrasts with the far more common ppl. śrita- ‘set’ -- hence my “being set,” though this rendering somewhat undercuts the stative value.

In cd it is possible that only one of the participles is predicated, and in fact the publ. tr. renders pāda c as wholly a simile. However, this hemistich could contain two independent predications: “(you are) shining like …; (you are) holding yourselves …” In any case there is an unsignaled change of subject between the hemistichs: in ab the ornaments (nom. khādáyaḥ, rukmā́ḥ) are the grammatical subjects, while in d the Maruts must be supplied because the participle yáchamānāḥ seems to assume an animate subject. Pāda c is ambiguous: either the brilliants (rukmā́ḥ) or the Maruts can be shining. The etymological relationship between rukmā́ḥ in b and the part. rucānā́ḥ in c might suggest that c goes with b. However, in my publ. tr. I have privileged the hemistich boundary and supplied the Maruts as subj.

of c (as do Ge and Re), but the other interpr. is certainly possible. One argument for the standard interpr. might be that the subjects of medial participles to √ruc (wellattested rócamāna-, as well as rucāná-, rurucāná-, rórucāna-) are generally gods.


## 14
Ge suggests (n. 14a) that the budhnyā̀… máhāṃsi “deep-grounded powers” are the “verborgenen Herrlichkeiten” (niṇyā́) concealed in Pṛśni’s udder in vs. 4. Even leaving aside the fact that, as was discussed above, ū́dhaḥ in vs. 4 should not be a loc., this interpr. seems both unnec. and too specific, esp. since 10 vss.

intervene. budhnyà- here may refer to the powers that the Maruts, gods associated with the midspace, derive from the earth below, or it may simply mean something like ‘fundamental’, by a semantic development parallel to that of the Engl. word.

The preverb prá is showcased in the first hemistich: prá … īrate …, prá … prayajyavas tiradhvam. I am not certain what prá √tṝ nā́māni in b is meant to convey, but I interpr. it in the context of the importance of the Maruts’ individual identities (vss. 1-4) and of calling their names (10a) earlier in the hymn. Perhaps the Maruts need to “put their names forward” and make themselves individually known before they can enjoy the Gṛhamedha offering. 84 As noted in the publ. intro., the ritual references in pādas b-d are quite specific, alluding to the Maruts’ role in the Sākamedha, the last of the Cāturmāsyāni (“Four-monthly”) rituals. See the publ. intro. for further details.


## 15
The phonological figure of the two words adhīthá, itthā́straddling the pāda boundary of ab provide a nice little study in syllable weight. (The echo is of course obscured by the application of sandhi in the Saṃhitā text: adhīthéthā́). If we add in the opening of the vs., yádi, the echo is even more pronounced: yádi … adhīthá, itthā́, with (y)ádi doubling adhī.

Exactly what itthā́is doing here is unclear to me, but this adverb several times appears in context with vípra- and some verb of invoking (see Ge ad VII.94.5), as here (with the invoking represented by the nominal hávīman). Cf. VII.94.5 … īḷata, itthā́víprāsaḥ, IV.29.4 = VIII.7.30 itthā́vípraṃ hávamānam. I suggest that itthā́ refers to the precise manner in which a vípra- makes the invocation.

The Maruts are asked to “give study to / be mindful of” what is stutásya.

stutá- is of course a very common past passive participle meaning ‘(what/who is) praised’. In this context we might rather expect the abstract noun ‘praise’, and indeed Ge simply so tr.: “… des Lobpreises eingedenk seid,” with no explicit comment, but a crossref. (n. 15a) to several passages with a similar idiom but with stotrásya ‘praise song’ instead of stutásya (e.g., V.55.9 ádhi stótrasya … gātana). But the poet could easily have used stotrásya here in the same metrical slot if he had wanted to, and so I think we must take the ppl. seriously. Re in fact does so -- “prêtez-attention à la chose-louée” -- though in his n. he simply notes its similarity to the stotrá- passages.

I think the point is a cleverer one: the poet suggests that if the Maruts pay attention to what we poets praise -- what gifts we poets praise -- they will know what to bestow on us. The “if” clause is immediately followed by its corollary: “right away give (us) wealth …” -- the poet implying that the Maruts are a quick study! Although I must admit that stutá- ‘praised’ seems always to refer to gods, not to material objects, the semantic extension seems an easy one, and we can invoke the term dāna-stuti- ‘praise of the gift’ - though it’s notable that, although this term is ubiquitous in secondary lit. on the RV, it is not actually attested in Vedic.

By my rules, we might expect that anyáḥ in d should be definite (‘the other’) rather than the indefinite ‘another’ that better fits the passage (unless we assume that the anyáḥ is a rival poet). However, I suggest that nū́cid … anyáḥ is a composite negative indefinite expression like ná káś cid anyáh. Cf. VIII.24.11 nū́anyátrā cid … The cadence of d is bad. It is tempting to emend injunc. ādábhat to subj.

ādábhāt, which would fix the meter and fit the sense (in fact, the publ. tr. renders the verb as if a subj.: ‘will … swindle’), though no doubt the temptation should be resisted.


## 16
Each pāda in this vs. contains a simile marked by ná comparing the Maruts to domestic animals (a, d), spirits (b), and children (c). Except in c, the simile begins the pāda. The vs. contains only one finite verb, śubháyanta, in b; the functional role of the finite verb is filled instead by the adjectives that are the point of 85 contact between the simile and the frame. In the publ. tr. I deliberately failed to render ab as the rel. cl. it technically is because the “which Maruts … they …” structure would have intruded upon the succession of similes.

In b opinion is divided on the sense of yakṣa-dṛ́ś-. Ge takes -dṛ́ś- as active, with the first member in an acc. relationship with it (“Geisterseher”), flg. Sāy. in his analysis of the syntax of the cmpd., though not of the meaning of the first member.

So also Re. However, Ge considers the possibility of a pass. sense in his n. (16b), and Old opts for the pass. interpr. For disc. of this cmpd. see Scar (232); of his choices I opt for the bahuvrīhi.

Another oblation to the Maruts at the Sākamedha, besides the Gṛhamedha mentioned above (vs. 14), is made to the krīḍin- (‘playful’) Maruts on the 2nd day of the sacrifice (see, e.g., ŚB II: 20 and Eggeling, SBE XII.408). The characterization of them in d as prakrīḷínaḥ obviously makes ref. to this oblation.


## 17
This vs. has the feel of a final vs. Though there is no overt sign of a break with what follows, the next vs. turns its attention to the Hotar, Agni, and this might be taken as a change of subject.

In the cadence of pāda a mṛḷantu should be read with a light root syllable, contrary to normal practice. Old doubts that the form should be read with this exceptional light syllable and ascribes the irregularity to “die metrische Unebenheit” of this hymn, while HvN do accept the light reading and adduce one other occurrence that requires this scansion (IV.3.3, though that passage looks more equivocal to me).

Ge and Re take varivasyá-, lit. ‘make wide space’, in a general ‘help, protect’ sense (e.g., “qui protègent les Deux Mondes bien fixés”). But surely the beneficiaries are us (not the two worlds), and the idea is to make the worlds spacious for us.

## 18-19
As was just noted, vs. 17 “feels” like a final (or pseudo-final) vs. If vs. 18 marks a new beginning, we can note both that in vs. 18 the Hotar invokes the gods as he would at the beginning of a sacrifice and that in vs. 19 (and 20a) the Maruts are referred to four times (19a, b, c, 20a) with the near-deictic pronoun imé “these right here,” which might indicate their epiphany on the ritual ground.


## 18
The first hemistich of this vs. presents us with a common problem: the most obvious way to interpr. it meets a syntactic stumbling block that should not allow that interpr., and the standard interpr. ignore that obstruction. In this case the issue is the middle participle gṛṇānáḥ. This part. is attested over 50x; the vast majority of these attestations are clearly passive in value. In fact, Gr interpr. only 2 forms as “medial” (that is, transitive, not passive): this passage and I.181.9.

Nonetheless, both Ge and Re take it as transitive here (though with different objects) without comment. But I think we ignore the use of the overwhelming majority of forms at our peril. In fact, since Agni as Hotar is the implicit subject of the sentence, a passive value of gṛṇānáḥ is easily possible: as both Hotar and god, Agni performs a ritual invocation (as priest) while himself being hymned (as god). (The other 86 occurrence flagged by Gr as non-passive, I.181.9, is indeed transitive, but owes its anomalous usage to special circumstances. See comm. ad loc.) If we eliminate gṛṇānáḥ as a potential governor of an object, the acc. satrā́cīṃ rātím must be construed with ā́… johavīti. Although the acc. with (ā́) √hvā is more usually a god or other animate being, abstract entities (like ‘giving’ here) are also possible. The vaḥ in 2nd position in pāda a, which might have served as acc. to ā́… johavīti must then be a gen. dependent on the acc. NP. The more usual configuration is restored in pāda d havate vaḥ “he calls upon you,” a minor ex. of poetic repair.

In c both Ge and Re supply ‘sacrificer’ with gen. ī́vataḥ ‘such’, while I supply ‘wealth’. There is in fact no good support for either position that I can find. I prefer mine because ‘wealth’ would pick up ‘giving’ from the previous pāda, whereas there is no mention of a sacrificer anywhere. But I do not strongly favor my solution.

gopā́- ‘herdsman’ is regularly construed with ṛtásya ‘truth’ (e.g., I.163.5, III.10.2), so perhaps that phrase is meant, anticipating ádvayāvī ‘without duplicity’ in d. Note that the gopā́- is also ádabdha-/ ádabhya- ‘undeceivable’ (e.g., II.9.6, X.25.7).


## 19
As was noted above, this vs. contains three examples of the near-deictic imé, opening the first three pādas. The publ. tr. only fully renders the first one, as three examples of “these here” seemed too heavy. It is also worth noting that, though the imé forms might suggest the presence of the Maruts right here at the sacrifice (as was suggested above), the clauses in which they are found describe general activities of those gods, which would almost necessarily be performed away from the ritual ground.

Both Ge and Re follow the Pp. reading sáhasaḥ. Re interpr. it rather loosely as an abl., whereas Ge takes it as a gen. and as if it were the differently accented poss.

adj. *sahásaḥ (“die Gewalt des Gewaltigen”), without comment. Old suggests that the better reading is dat. sáhase and cites passages containing ā́√nam with the dat. I follow this interpr.


## 20
Ge and Re both take b as a self-contained clause. I think it better (with MMüller in SBE) to take bhṛ́miṃ cid beginning b as obj. to junanti in pāda a, parallel to radhráṃ cid -- beginning a new clause with yáthā in the middle of b. The point would be that the Maruts are so vigorous that they can energize both an entity that has no energy at all (“the feeble”) and one that has energy in excess (a whirlwind).


## 21
The adj. sujātá- ‘well-born’ generally refers to gods, or at least to mortals; it is only here used of material goods (implicitly vasavyà- in the preceding pāda, hence my ‘of good quality’. Of course, it is possible that vasavyà- here refers, at least partly, to human capital (sons), as apparently in II.9.5 ubháyam te ná kṣīyate vasavyàm ... krdhi páti ̥ ṃ svapatyásya rāyáḥ, where the second category of “goods of both types” (ubháyam … vasavyàm) is “wealth in good descendents” (svapatyásya rāyáḥ). But I don’t think this is a necessary interpr.: “well-born/produced” is likely available to semantic extension. 87


## 22
As most interpr. point out, the three locc. in b are especially contested objects for the Ārya. See esp. Proferes (98): “Because of their economic value, rivers, plants and clans were subject to competing claims, and constituted flashpoints for conflict between various groups for whom control over resources meant increased power” -- as well as his elucidation of the three terms. See also Thieme (Fremdling 55), Oberlies (I.350).

Fem. yahvī́- ‘exuberant’ is in the pl. typed for rivers/waters.


## 23
Despite the use of √kṛ ‘make’ (2nd pl. pf. cakra), it is not likely that the Maruts created the ukthā́ni themselves, though they are singers on other occasions; rather they provided the occasion and the subject for the poets of earlier eras to celebrate them. Though Re’s ‘provoke’ is a bit strong, it’s the right idea. My ‘have given rise to’ is a bit weak.


## 24
The sense of pāda d is somewhat unclear and the various tr. incompatible.

Ge’s “wir möchten euch mehr gelten als das eigene Heim” seems esp. difficult to wring out of the Skt., though the other possibilities he suggests in the n. (24d) are somewhat more likely. I start with the abhí √as lexeme, which generally means ‘surmount, dominate, be superior’, which doesn’t seem to be reflected in the Ge suggestions. However, in my interpr. the enclitic vaḥ has only the vaguest syntactic connection to the clause. I do not have a better solution.
