+++
title = "057"

+++
Maruts


## 01
My interpr. differs considerably from the standard—Old, Ge, Re —all of whom take ab as a single clause, with the sg. nā́ma mā́rutam the subject of 3rd pl.

madanti and mádhvaḥ the oblique obj. of that verb. So, e.g., Old “Am Honigtrank erfreut sich … euer Marutname (=Marutgeschlecht).” The number disagreement between subj. and verb is taken as a constructio ad sensum (so explicitly Ge n. 1ab, sim. Old), and the clash between 2nd person encl. vaḥ / voc. yajatrāḥ and the 3rd ps.

verb is glossed over. I find these disharmonies disturbing and prefer to separate the two pādas. By my interpr., as noted in the publ. intro., pāda a has an idiomatic contruction very similar to Engl. “has X’s name on it,” meaning “is destined for / belongs to X.” (“That cookie has your name on it” means “you should take it; I’ll cede it.”) Then in b the person switches from 2nd (vaḥ … yajatrāḥ) to 3rd (madanti with gapped subj. = Maruts), but the number is unchanged. This situation lasts through then first hemistich of vs. 2. As for the sense, I take the ‘honey’ to refer to the soma to be offered to the Maruts at the sacrifices mentioned in b: the soma oblation at the sacrifice in question is intended just for them. Alternatively, but less likely in my view, it could refer to the rain that the Maruts produce. In that case it would have the Maruts’ name because it is their product. The rain is metaphorically referred to in d pínvanti útsam “they swell the wellspring.” The relationship among the clauses in the 2nd hemistich isn’t certain, although there are no real implications whichever interpr. is chosen. With the standard tr. I 88 take pínvanti útsam, which opens d, as the main clause on which both the preceding rel. (c: yé rejáyanti) and the following temporal clause (yád áyāsuḥ) depend. In this case pínvanti would be accented because it opens its pāda. However, that verb could be part of the rel. cl. starting in c (yé …), with all of cd dependent on b: “… they become exhilarated -- they who set … to trembling (and) swell the wellspring, when …”


## 02
The two suffix-accented -tár- agent nouns in the first hemistich take accusative objects, rather than the expected gen. (nicetā́raḥ … gṛṇántam, praṇetā́raḥ … mánma). See Tichy (363-64). Although Tichy suggests some possible reasons for this unexpected (but not vanishingly rare) construction (pp. 367ff.), they don’t seem to be particularly applicable here.

I see no easy way to get a causal sense from hí, hence my “surely.” Object-less vītáye is clarified by 6b vyantu … hávīṃṣi.

The pf. part. pipriyāṇā́ḥ is interpr. by Ge/Re as implicitly prospective: the Maruts will become pleased/gratified as a result of their vītí-. I take it rather as having preterital value: they have first been gratified by the initial guest-reception ritual and are now awaiting their meal. A passage like I.73.1 átithir ná prīṇānáh “being gratified like a guest” supports this interpr.


## 03
Ge takes anyé with marútaḥ: “Nicht glänzen andere Marut so sehr wie diese …” But both the position of yáthā, which in its simile-marking role should follow the first term of the simile, and common sense (who would the other Maruts be?) strongly suggest that anyé refers to a group separate from the Maruts. By my rules anyé should be definite, and I think Re is correct in supplying ‘gods’. This would make sense in a ritual context: the other divine visitors at the ritual (save for Indra) are pretty drab compared with the Maruts.

Since the other occurrence of viśva-píś- modifies Dawn’s cart (VII.75.6), as Old points out a passive sense ‘all-adorned’ is more likely than ‘all-adorning’. So Scar (319) ‘allgeschmückt’.

The middle part. piśāná- is an isolated form: the only apparent attestation of a root aor. to this root, beside the thematized nasal pres. piṃśá- and the pf. pipeśa, etc.

(However, piśā́in VII.18.2 is taken by most as an impv. to a thematic aorist [see comm. ad loc.], which could easily have replaced the opaque root aor. impv. *pīḍhí, so the root does have a fragmentary aor. system.) That it is a participle at all has been called into question by John Lowe, who suggests it may be a Caland adj. instead (“Caland adjectives …” 2012: 92-93; see also Participles in Rigvedic Sanskrit 2015: 133). Although I don’t see any advantage in assigning it to a category of dubious existence (Caland adj. in -āná-), its isolation does make it difficult to interpr. As a medial form, it might be expected to match the medial perfect usage and be pass.

(e.g., VI.49.3) or reflexive (V.60.4) vel sim. However, it is generally taken as transitive, as in the publ. tr., with the transitive value ascribed to the preverb ā́(see Gr) opening c. Lowe (Part. 133) disputes this interpr., declaring the supposed tmesis between preverb and participle here “a unique type of discontinuity.” He prefers to 89 construe ā́with the finite verb añjate in d and take piśānā́ḥ as an intransitive adj.; ródasī is then an obj. of añjate along with samānám añjí and not construed with piśānā́ḥ: “All adorned and decorated, they anoint / the two worlds (with) the same anointing for beauty.” As far as I can find, however, there are no occurrences of √añj with double acc. When the object anointed is in the acc., the ointment is in the instr., so his suggested interpr. would be syntactically unique in a different way. I therefore prefer to construe both ā́and ródasī with piśānā́ḥ. However, the construction need not be transitive “adorning the two-world halves,” as is the standard interpr. and publ.

tr. Old suggests several other possible relations (see also Re’s n.), including that ródasī might be an internal / Inhalts-type of acc., expressing the ornament, hence “wearing the two world-halves as adornment.” Old ultimately rejects this interpr., as does the publ. tr., but it remains a possibility, one that would better reflect the medial form.


## 04
Unlike Ge/Re I attach b to c, not to a. Nothing rests on this, but the cause and the (hoped-for non-)effect are more closely allied that way.

I did not tr. vaḥ in c, which would have necessitated the awk. rendering “… into the way of it of yours.” This vs. is over-supplied with vaḥ-s, with one in each pāda.


## 05
Ge and Re tr. raṇanta as a modal (“sollen sich … erfreuen”; “Que les Maruts se réjouissent …”), as does Hoffmann (259), who explicitly identifies it as a subjunctive, not an injunctive, flg. Re (BSL 33.1: 6-7), who claims that -anta is a regular RVic subjunctive ending. I think a modal value, whether the form is identified as injunctive or subjunctive, is unnecessary and in fact fits the context less well than a preterital reading. Previous vss. refer to the performance of the sacrifice at which the Maruts are present (esp. 1ab and 2). They are now asked to provide benefits in return, and so we might assume that the sacrifice is now over (though 6ab gives me pause), an assumption supported by kṛté with its past reference: ‘what has been/was done’.

In the publ. tr. cid is not tr. I think it is a simple emphatic here “in just what has been done here,” which is somewhat stilted in Eng., or else (perhaps more likely) it actually emphasizes the following word átra: “in what has been done here” -- at our sacrifice, not at someone else’s. So Sāy. It could, of course, mean “also” or “even,” but neither of those makes sense in context -- nor does Ge’s (/Hoffmann’s) “wenigstens” or Re’s “(un peu) même.”


## 06
With Ge, I take víśvebhir nā́mabhiḥ with stutā́saḥ, despite the displacement of word order. In fact, there’s nowhere else to put that unwieldy instr. phrase but at the beginning of a new pāda. Re tr. it as an independent phrase, whose referent and relation to the rest of the sentence aren’t clear to me: “Alors, (une fois) loués, que les seigneurs Marut agréent, de tous (leurs) noms, les offrandes!” 90


## 07
The contrast of víśve … sarvátātā “all (of you) … in (your) totality” highlights a constant theme of Marut hymns, that they are both individuals (emphasized by “all your names” in 6b) and a collectivity. See the treatment of this at the beginning of the previous hymn (VII.56) and comm. thereon.

The position of the patrons (sūrí-) as middle men in the circulation of goods and services is nicely expressed here: you help the patrons; they help us.
