+++
title = "058"

+++
Maruts


## 01
The gen. phrase daívyasya dhā́mnaḥ does not have a clear syntactic relationship to the rest of its clause. The standard interpr. (Ge, Re, Scar [62]) resupplies the word gaṇá- in the rel. clause and seems to take the phrase as gen. of material, as it were: e.g., Ge “die starke (Truppe) der göttlischen Rasse.” By contrast I treat the possessive adj. túviṣmant- as a real possessive with the gen. phrase implicitly dependent on the underlying nominal tuví(s)-/*távis-, hence “having the power of its divine nature.” The utá beginning the 2nd hemistich is relatively functionless. Klein (DGRV I.375-78) says it signals weak nexus between distichs with non-parallel structure. It might also be possible to claim that it is a sort of inverse utá, which should connect c with d, which are syntactically and thematically parallel. I also think it possible that it expresses a covert conceptual connection between the heaven indirectly referred to in b (daívya-) and the midspace defined by the two world-halves in c, a space also indirectly measured by the distance from ‘chaos, disorder’ (nírṛti-) and the heavenly vault (nā́ka-) in d.


## 02
Like the gen. phrase in 1b, the instr. tveṣyèṇa has insufficient syntactic grounding in its clause. Like Ge “(geschieht)” and Re “(s’est produite),” I see no choice but to supply a verb to link the subject janū́ḥ and the instr.

I have no opinion on the morphology of janū́ḥ. Gr calls it a masculine nom. sg.

to the -us-stem janús-, an interpr. bolstered by the acc. form janúṣam (3x). AiG II.2.490 posits a paradigm of alternating gender, with m. or f. in the (nom./acc.) singular, but neuter in the dual and plural, which accords with the distribution of forms in the RV (du. janúṣī, pl. janū́ṃṣi) but fails to account for the gender switch. In the same vol. (II.2.496-97) Debrunner suggests that our janū́ḥ belongs to a -ū-stem (though acc. janúṣam would still need to be a masc. [or fem.] form to an -us-stem).

The problem is that non-neut. forms of -is- and -us-stems don’t lengthen the suffixal vowel in the nom. sg., unlike -as-stems. However, it seems possible that our janū́ḥ contains a nonce lengthening on the model of the vastly more common masc. -asstems, as AiG III.292 indirectly allows. It should also be noted that because of following cid, the suffixal syllable of the preceding noun would be heavy, whether it originally read janū́ś cid, as in the transmitted text, or *janúś cid, as grammar would have us expect.

The relationship between the first hemistich and the rel. cl. in c displays the RV’s customary willingness to switch person reference in midstream and without 91 warning. The first hemistich refers to the Maruts in the 2nd ps., with the enclitic vaḥ in a and the b pāda consisting only of vocatives. Because there is nothing to lean on, all three vocatives are accented, but in all three cases the initial accent contrasts with the inherent accent of the stem: bhī́māsaḥ (bhīmá-); túvimanyavaḥ (tuvi- cmpds. are accented either on the 2nd member [e.g., tuvi-rā́dhas-] or on the 2nd syllable of the first member [e.g., tuví-brahman-]); áyāsaḥ (ayā́s-). There could therefore be no doubt that the reference is 2nd person; yet the rel. cl. that picks up the referents with the nom. pl. prn. yé is unequivocally in the 3rd ps.: (prá …) sánti. The following pāda returns to 2nd ps. ref. with vaḥ.

On the “X Y utá” construction (rather than expected X utá Y) see Klein DGRV I. 344ff.


## 03
In pāda a I take maghávadbhyaḥ as referring to our human patrons, because I take the Maruts as subj. of the 2nd pl. impv.: dadhāta. However given the connections between 3ab and 6ab (for which see below), where maghónām refers to the Maruts, it is quite possible that the subj. of the impv. is the poet’s fellow priests and the Maruts are the referent of maghávadbhyaḥ.

The simile in c causes some interpretational problems. Both Old (ad VI.50.10) and Re suggest interpr. that violate the structure of the RVic simile, and I think both treatments are wrong; Ge’s treatment is more possible, though it differs from my own. All three take jantúm as part of the simile with gató nā́dhvā (= ná ádhvā), roughly for both “as a travelled road leads (the) people on,” while I take jantúm in the frame.

The RVic simile is only nominal; when a verb is involved it is shared by simile and frame. Both Old and Re take c as entirely simile, with its own independent verb (ví tirāti), and d as a loosely (Old) or more tightly (Re) connected frame, with its own verb (prá … tireta). Old explicitly argues (ad VI.50.10) that ná can sometimes be a quasi-clausal simile marker, and he tr. “Der gegangene Weg vergleichsweise mag einen Menschen vorwärts bringen: so bringt auch uns verwärts.” After examining all the similes in the RV (see my “Case disharmony in RVic similes.” IIJ 24 [1982] 251-71), I would vigorously contest his characterization of ná. Re’s tr.

has a more conventional simile/frame relationship, but still violates the shared verb rule: “Comme le chemin parcouru fait passer l’homme outre, qu’elle nous pousse (plus) avant …” (The subject of d, “elle,” seems to refer to the suṣṭutí- in b.) Although the structural violation in Re’s tr. would be mitigated by the fact that the two verbs belong to the same verb stem, tirá-, they have different preverbs (ví and prá), and therefore different senses, and are also in different moods (subj. and opt.).

Ge’s rendering, “Wie ein zurückgelegter Weg der Leute, so möge es (uns) zum Ziele führen,” respects the simile structure, with the subject in the frame (“es”) presumably referring to the good praise in b (see Re also), but the sense seems off. If the praise is to bring anyone or -thing across, it should be the Maruts (brought to our sacrifice), not us. Still I would be willing to consider a variation of Ge’s interpr., with the praise as subj. in the frame, but the Maruts as obj.: “As a road when it’s travelled (does) people, (the good praise) will bring the (Maruts) across.” 92 However, I think it likely that the focus in this 2nd hemistich has shifted to the help that the Maruts will give us when they have enjoyed our praise (see the thrice repeated yuṣmótaḥ ‘aided by you’ in the next vs., 4abc). In particular, pāda d prá ṇá spārhā́bhir ūtíbhis tireta is almost identical to VII.84.3 prá ṇá spārhā́bhir ūtíbhis tiretam, addressed to Indra and Varuṇa. In the latter passage, tiretam must be a 2nd du.

active opt. with Indra and Varuṇa as subj. In other words, in that passage gods are the subject. In our passage tireta is ambiguous: it can be a 2nd pl. act. opt. or a 3rd sg. mid.

opt., and different factors pull in different directions. The parallel in VII.84.3 suggests we have gods, namely the Maruts, as subject here too, and the easiest way to do that is take it as a 2nd pl. A passage in the preceding hymn, VII.57.5 prá vā́jebhis tirata puṣyáse naḥ “Further us with prizes for our thriving,” with 2nd pl. act. impv. to the same stem, also supports this interpr. This is the analysis of Gr, and it is also responsible for Old’s “So bringt …” On the other hand, the clear 3rd sg. tirāti in c invites a 3rd sg. interpr. also of tireta, and the following hymn contains the idioms we have here, prá √tṝ and ví √tṝ, there with a single instance of the verb stem in the 3rd sg. middle positioned between the preverbs: VII.59.2 prá sá kṣáyaṃ tirate ví mahī́r íṣaḥ “He furthers his dwelling place, ex(tends) his great refreshments.” Re and Ge both opt for the 3rd sg. middle interpr., but the subject they each (seem to) provide is the good praise of b, a far cry from the gods we expect as subject of the expression found in d. My interpr. of cd solves both problems, though, admittedly, not in the most elegant fashion. I supply ‘flock’ (gaṇá-; see 1a) as the subj. of both ví tirāti and prá … tireta. We thus have a singular subject that will allow tireta to harmonize with tirāti and the divine subject that will allow d to harmonize with VII.84.3.


## 04
As noted just above, this vs. is structured by three (abc) pāda-init. yuṣṃótaḥ ‘aided by you’. The three separate clauses containing this opening build on each other in an interesting way, and the first two are also linked by a morphophonological relationship.

To begin with the latter, both a and b end with a predicated -ín-stem qualifying the successful poet and the successful steed respectively with semantically parallel descriptors: … śatasvī́, … sahasrī́“possessing hundreds … possessing thousands.” The two words are also phonologically similar; to put it schematically, SaCasRī́, where the -s-Resonant-ī́final is esp. salient. The second one is correctly formed (to sahásra-) and well attested. The first is a hapax and aberrantly formed: the expected -ín-stem to śatá- is śatín-, which is in fact reasonably well attested.

śatasvín- is obviously modeled on sahasrín- (already implied by AiG II.2.917 and Re ad loc.), aided by the fact that -vín- is regularly added to -as-stems (AiG II.2.917). So with śatá- temporarily re-configured as an -as-stem, the suffix -vín- can be affixed, allowing the stem to parallel sahasrín- in metrical and phonological shape. In b sahasrī́is immediately preceded by sáhuriḥ, which reinforces the phonological pattern: sahVri(ḥ).

Now as to the relations among the three yuṣmótaḥ clauses. I suggest that they can be seen as an instance of Behagel’s Law (the law of “increasing members”) involving syntactic blocks, not merely NPs. Pāda a contains a noun and a predicated 93 adj. (vípraḥ … śatasvī́); pāda b a noun and two predicated adjectives (árvā sáhuriḥ sahasrī́). And pāda c has two clauses, a nominal one consisting of a noun (samrā́ṭ) predicated of an unexpressed subject (=Indra), and a full clause, with finite verb and object (hanti vṛtrám). My view of the increasing complication of syntactic structure in these three clauses produces interpr. of two of the clauses that differ from the standard. In b both Ge and Re (also Klein, DGRV I.436) take sáhuriḥ as an attributive adj. and only sahasrī́as predicated (e.g., “… does the winning steed become a possessor of thousand(-fold) booty”). This is of course possible, but both the structural argument already adduced and the pragmatic fact that the horse has to become victorious before he wins prizes speak for my interpr.

In c the difference between interpr. is greater. I take samrā́ṭ as one clause, with the noun predicated of unmentioned Indra : “(Indra) is sovereign king.” This clause is linked to the next (hanti vṛtrám) by utá: “and (he) smites Vṛtra.” Ge, Re, and Klein all take samrā́ṭ simply as the subj. of hanti (e.g., “and with your aid does the great king smash the obstacle”). But this interpr. must ignore or explain away the position of utá. Klein is the only one who is explicit about the function of utá. He groups it with passages that contain “a repeated term within one of a set of parallel clauses,” conjoined by utá. But in the other exx. he gives (pp. 436-37) the utá is adjacent to the repeated element and in Wackernagel’s position. In our passage this should yield *yuṣmóta utá samrā́ṭ. Klein does not comment on utá’s position here.

Although one could argue (though Klein does not) that utá was displaced to the right to avoid the clash …-óta utá, in fact that is the kind of clash that RVic poets like! (Indeed the presence of utá in this pāda may be partly to call attention to the compositionally suppressed -ūtá-.) My interpr. takes the utá as properly positioned to conjoin two clauses, and no special pleading (much less ignoring of the problem) is required.

Although Indra’s name is not mentioned, hanti vṛtrám is of course a definitional predicate for Indra, who is also regularly identified as a samrā́j-. The Maruts’ role in helping Indra in the Vṛtra conflict is of course one of the contended issues in the RV (see the Agastya hymn I.165 for example).

Re takes abc as expressing the three functions, which I find hard to see. Does he assume pāda b is the third function and c the second? Surely he doesn't see the smashing of Vṛtra in c as third function!


## 05
On jijīḷiré as a presential stative, see Kü (610-11).


## 06
The first hemistich, which contains both suṣṭutí- ‘good praise’ and a form of √juṣ ‘enjoy’ with the Maruts as subject, but in separate clauses is an expansion of 3b jújoṣann ín marútaḥ suṣṭutíṃ naḥ. As was noted above, the first pāda of 3 also contains a pl. form of maghávan(t)-, which I take there as referring to our human patrons, because I take the Maruts as subject of the 2nd pl. impv., but the presence of maghónām here, clearly referring to the Maruts, may instead suggest that the maghávant-s in 3a are also the Maruts. 94 idám in b (idáṃ sūktám) is yet another example of the frequent use of a form of ayám in the last vs. of a hymn to refer to the whole preceding hymn.
