+++
title = "059"

+++
Maruts


## 01
The āmreḍita idám-idam in pāda a must go with the clause in b. The ca that connects the two clauses is slightly displaced: we might expect it to occur after the first element of its clause, namely idám-idam. But the pāda boundary and the intrusion of a pāda-initial voc. dévāsaḥ have clearly interfered with the placement, and the sequence yám … yáṃ ca makes the syntax perspicuous.

The sequence of vocc. in cd is puzzling because the first is unaccented, while the rest are accented, including those that follow the first in the same pāda: tásmā agne váruṇa mítrā́ryaman, márutaḥ … We would, I think, expect either all accented (*ágne váruṇa mítrā́ryaman) or all unaccented (agne *varuṇa mitrāryaman). Old suggests that a new “Ansatz” begins after tásmā agne, and it is of course true that the caesura follows agne -- but also of course true that vocatives are not ordinarily accented in that position. He also points out that the three vocc. in the 2nd part of the pāda are the names of the three principal Ādityas, which occur together and as accented vocc. elsewhere (V.67.1, VIII.19.35). In the latter passage the three vocc.

are found pāda-internal post-caesura as here (see comm. ad loc.) Both of the factors adduced by Old no doubt contributed to the accentual behavior of this pāda, but it is a fine reminder that the rules of voc. accent, which we think of as fairly mechanical, are in part rhetorically driven.


## 02
yuṣmā́kam … ávasā is a variant of the cmpd. yuṣmóta- (i.e., yuṣmā́-ūta-) found three times in the preceding hymn in VII.58.4.

The vs. contains two, or implicitly three, 3rd sg. act. present forms of the root √tṝ, tarati in b, prá / ví tirati in c. For the same pairing of preverbs, see comm. ad


## 03
in the previous hymn.


## 03
This vs. plays on the common contrast, also found earlier in this Marut cycle, between the Maruts as individuals -- here “the last” (caramá-) of them -- and as a collective (víśve).

On sácā as loc. absol. marker, see comm. ad IV.31.5.

I have rendered the nom. pl. kāmínaḥ as an adverb (avidly) to avoid the somewhat heavy ‘having desire (for it)’.

## 03-04
Both of these vss. begin nahí vaḥ; in neither one is it easy to produce a causal value for -hí, hence my ‘certainly’. The opening of 4c abhí vaḥ plays on the nahí vaḥ of 3a, 4a.


## 05
Both Ge and Re take c as a single clause (e.g., “Car je vous ai donné ces offrandes”), but the position of hí suggests that a new clause begins with preceding 95 raré, and imā́vo havyā́is a fine nominal clause announcing the oblations present right here on the ritual ground.


## 06
The sequence sádatāvitā́is analyzed by the Pp. as sádata avitá, with the latter form generally taken as a 2nd pl. impv. to √av ‘help’. But this interpr. is problematic on grounds of both form and meaning. There is no stem avi- to √av; the best that can be done is to classify it with the -iṣ-aor. ávīt, etc., but, in addition to -irather than -iṣ-, the accent is wrong, since the -iṣ-aorist has root accent. Moreover, a form of ‘help’ fits badly in the passage, where the main verb should provide syntactic support for the infinitive phrase spārhā́ṇi dā́tave vásu “to give coveted goods.” These difficulties are treated in detail by Narten (Sig. aor. 87-88), who suggests an appealing and convincing solution, to read sádatā vitā́, with the latter the 2nd pl. impv.

to the root pres. of √vī ‘pursue’, a solution that does not require emending the Saṃhitā text. As Narten points out, this pres. appears elsewhere with an infinitive.

Although we ideally would expect a long root vowel (*vītā́), she adduces the 2nd sg.

impv. vihí (3x), beside more common vīhí, as a model. This solution is accepted by Lub, though it is rejected by Baum (Impv. in RV 93, although he hesitates p. 167); Klein (DGRV I.166, 167; II.39) implicitly accepts the Pp. reading, but he does not cite the following pāda containing the infinitive phrase.

The accent on the 2nd pl. impv. sádatā presumably results from its juxtaposition and contrast with adjacent vitā́.

ásredhantaḥ at the beg. of c can be either a voc. or a nom. pl.; nothing hangs on the exact identification.


## 07
I take pāda a as a nominal clause separate from b, with predicated pres. part.

śúmbhamānāḥ. The hemistich cannot form a single clause because apaptan in b is unaccented despite the hí in pāda a. I take the sense of the first pāda to be that storms come out of nowhere, fully beautified as it were, so the beautification must have been done “in secret” (sasvár). The dark-backed geese of b are the storm clouds. The next hymn, dedicated to Mitra and Varuṇa, has a similarly structured vs., VII.60.10 sasváś cid dhí sámṛtis tveṣy èṣām apīcyèna sáhasā sáhante “Because their fiery attack is even in secret and they are strong with hidden strength …” (JPB tr.). In that vs. the finite verb in b, sáhante, is accented and therefore falls under the domain of hí in pāda a.


## 08
tiráś cittā́ni is a striking expression, without obvious parallels. In interpreting it, we can begin by noting that tiráś cid is a reasonably frequent pāda opening (IV.29.1, V.75.7, VIII.33.14, 51.9, 66.12), including in the next hymn, VII.60.6. Although I toyed with the possibility of reading tiráś cit tā́ni here, with the neut. pl. prn., this does not seem to be productive. However, the fact that tiráś cid is a formulaic expression may help account for the fact that our tiráś cittā́ni seems to be only loosely connected syntactically to the rest of the clause. Ge takes the expression as meaning “against/contrary to expectation” (wider Erwartung), but I’m not at all sure that tiráḥ can mean ‘against’ (though see X.171.4 devā́nāṃ cit tiró váśam “even 96 athwart the will of the gods”). And in any case we would surely want to punish someone who tried to kill us, whether we expected him to or not. Re’s “en croisant (nos) pensées” is better; I have adapted an English idiom “cross-purposes,” which is practically a calque on the Skt. phrase. Here it reflects the hostility between the would-be attacker and “us.”

## 08-09
Although, as noted in the publ. intro., the last four vss. of the hymn (9- 12) must be late additions, there is a verbal link between vs. 8 and vs. 9: tápiṣṭhena “with the most scorching …” opening 8d is echoed by the Maruts’ ritual epithet sā́ṃtapanāḥ opening 9a. This link may help account for why these Sākamedha vss.

were attached just here.

## 09-12
For the Sākamedha rites reflected in these vss., see publ. intro. and, e.g., ŚB II.5.3, esp. 3ff.; ĀpŚS VIII.9; sec. lit. including Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, 117-19; Keith, Religion and Philosophy, 322-23, etc.


## 09
With the standard tr., I supply “come” in c, anticipating ā́gata in 10a.


## 11
The āmreḍita ihéha echoes that in vs. 1, idám-idam, forming a superficial ring. Given the apparent composite nature of the hymn, this apparent ring is presumbly not a sign of a hymn conceived originally as a unity, but perhaps a hasty adjustment to try to integrate the separate pieces.

Pāda c appears to mean “I choose the/your sacrifice” (yajñám … ā́vṛṇe), as in Re’s “je choisis votre sacrifice.” But this doesn’t make a lot of sense in its baldest form. Although ā́√vṛ normally just means ‘choose’, in this passage the ā́appears to be used as it is with √yaj: ā́√yaj means ‘attract through sacrifice’ (sim. ā́√pū ‘attract through purification’), hence my “I will you (to come) here to (my) sacrifice,” that is, I attract you to it by the force of my will.

[VII.60-74 JPB]
