+++
title = "075"

+++
Dawn


## 01
Although the Saṃhitā form āvo in pāda a (Pp. āvaḥ) is assigned to √vṛ ‘cover’ by Gr, it clearly belongs to √vas ‘shine, dawn’. See, e.g., AiG I.335. It is rightly glossed by Sāy. with vyaucchat. Both roots occur regularly with the preverb ví as here (‘dawn widely’ / ‘uncover’) and both are regularly found in dawn contexts.

Here ví … āvas explicitly contrasts with ápa … āvar (√vṛ) ‘uncovered’ in c.

The latter form makes a bad Triṣṭubh cadence: … āvar ájuṣṭam#, where we would expect -var to be a heavy syllable. Old (Prol. 424 n. 1) persuasively suggests that this apparent light syllable may actually represent *āvarr (from original 3rd sg.

*āvart), with the same doubling of final resonant before initial vowel that we find in -
nn from older *-nt. He suggests the same for kar (IX.92.5) and abibhar (X.69.10), both of which would be metrically better as *-arr. 97 āv- is something of a signature of this vs.: āvo …, āviṣ(kṛṇvānā́) … / āvar, reinforced by numerous other a-/ā-initial words: ā́gāt / ápa … ájuṣṭam, áṅgirastamā … ajīgaḥ.

The ‘truth’ (ṛténa) of Dawn must refer to her conforming to the standard patterns of the cosmos by dawning every day and indeed her embodiment of these patterns, since the regular alternation of night and day is the most salient sign of cosmic laws. The word here contrasts with drúhaḥ ‘deceits’ in c.

Corey Barnes (class, 12/15) pointed out the repeating pattern (drúh)as táma … (ájuṣ)tam, á(ṅgir)astamā, which showcases ‘darkness’.

In d I take pathyā̀as standing for acc. pl. pathyā̀ḥ in harmony with the Pp. and the standard views. Scar (137 and n. 191) tentatively suggests taking it rather as an instr. pathyā̀(“gegen den Text”), modelled on pathyā̀(jánānām) in nearby VII.79.1, where either instr. sg. -ā̀or acc. pl. -ā̀ḥ is possible. Although “awaken the paths” with the acc. pl. is not an entirely straightforward expression, his instr. interpr. not only goes against the text but also requires supplying an obj. (“der Menschen”), and in addition “awaken (the men) along the path” doesn’t appreciably improve the sense.

(Were they sleeping by the roadside?) I assume that “awaken the paths” is shorthand for “filling the paths with (newly awakened) people moving hither and thither and thereby making the paths lively.” An instr. in VII.79.1 fits the context better.


## 02
Like the āvaḥ forms (see vs. 1), bodhi is ambiguous, and either interpr.

could be made to fit the context. Gr takes it to √budh ‘be aware, be awake’, but most later interpr. assign it to √bhū (Old, Ge, Re, Lub). However, I opt for √budh for several reasons. For one thing, as I have shown elsewhere (1997 “Syntactic Constraints on Morphological Change,” 69-74), bodhi to √bhū is in virtual complementary distribution with the parallel impv. bháva, with bodhi confined to pāda-medial position, against bháva, which occurs initially and finally. A pāda-final bodhi here would violate this distributional rule. Moreover, the last word of the preceding vs. is ajīgaḥ, belonging to √gṛ ‘awaken’, and I think the poet is playing off these two ‘awaken’ roots. Although Old gives numerous supposed parallels with √bhū and the syntactic construction in our pāda, most of these involve dat. infinitives.

However, two give me pause — III.54.3 mahé ṣú ṇaḥ suvitā́ya prá bhūtam, VII.85.4 ásad ít sá suvitā́ya … — both of which contain the dat. suvitā́ya and a form of ‘be(come)’. On the basis of these passages, I admit the possibility that bodhi here belongs to √bhū, but still think it likely that the poet is slyly playing with the ‘awaken’ roots. If it does belong to √bhū, I would explain its wrong positioning on the basis of strict parallelism between the semantically and syntactically parallel clauses of a and b, with the latter ending with the impf. (prá) yandhi.

Ge and Re construe márteṣu with śravasyúm (“… Reichtum, der unter den Sterblichen nach Ruhm strebt”; “… la richesse … qui crée le renom parmi les mortels,” with Re adding a “creative” dimension to śravasyú- that does not seem to me to be justified, though it makes the tr. make more sense). I think rather that the sequence dévi márteṣu mānuṣi is meant to draw attention to two different relationships that Dawn, a goddess, has with the human world: on the one hand, she 98 comes among mortals (márteṣu) every day, awakening the whole human world; on the other, she has a special relationship with the descendents of Manu, that is, the Ārya sacrificial community, a much more restricted set of humans to whom she is more tightly bound by ritual activity.


## 03
The focus shifts from the sg. Dawn of vss. 1-2 to her pl. beams (bhānávaḥ), but with lexical repetition linking them: ā́guḥ at the end of b echoes ā́gāt similarly position in 1b, citrā́ḥ repeats citrám (qualifying ‘wealth’) in 2c. And the nom. pl.

beams and gen. sg. goddess are syntactically intertwined: eté tyé bhānávo [nom. pl.

m.] darśatā́yāś [gen. sg. fem.] citrā́[nom. pl. m.] uṣáso [[gen. sg. fem.] amṛ́tāsaḥ [nom. pl. m.].

The phrase janáyanto daívyāni vratā́ni “generating the heavenly commandments” seems to expand on the ṛténa of vs. 1: by her dawning, Dawn every day recreates in visible form the rules that govern the cosmos.


## 04
The initial eṣā́syā́“this very one” (fem.) matches eté tyé “these very ones” (masc.) opening the previous vs., referring to her beams.

As Old points out, pāda a lacks a syllable (even reading, as expected, s i yā́). He tentatively suggests *yuyujānā́. It is certainly the case that yujāná-, which is fairly common, never appears in this post-caesura position, while the four occurrences of yuyujāná- are all post-caesura. But it is difficult to explain why the corruption would have occurred -- perhaps haplology in the sequence (s i )yā́*yuyu(jānā́)? The “patterns of the peoples” (vayúnāni jánānām) seem almost to be the human equivalent of the daívyāni vratā́ni of 3c.

The pāda-final pres. jigāti picks up the aor. forms to the same root, also pādafinal, ā́gāt (1b), ā́guḥ (3b), but it also plays against the likewise redupl. ajīgaḥ at the end of 1d, belonging to the separate root √gṛ ‘awaken’.


## 05
citrá- reappears in b (cf. 2c and 3b).

The polarized position of the phrases ṛ́ṣiṣṭutā (beg. of c) and váhnibhir gṛṇānā́ (end of d) helps anchor the application of váhni- ‘conveyor’ to ‘conveyor of ritual offerings’, since ‘praised by seers’ is unambiguous. Cf. also I.48.11 yé tvā grṇ̥ ánti váhnayaḥ.


## 06
And citrá- again, for the third time opening a b pāda.

The metaphorical use of váhni- found in the previous vs. contrasts with the literal use (well, as literal as the RV gets) of the participle váhantaḥ ‘conveying’ referring to Dawn’s horses (áśvāḥ).


## 07
The first hemistich consists of four consecutive etymological figures, all nom. sg. fem. + instr. pl. masc. — simple but effective.

On cd see Hoffmann (Injunk. 134). 99


## 08
Since it directly follows vāvaśanta ‘(the cows) keep bellowing (7d)’, nū́no opening the vs. is surely meant to evoke the root √nu ‘bellow, roar’, also used of bovines, with its (pseudo?) intensive (á)nūnot (also nónuv-), though of course it really consists of particle followed by enclitic pronoun.
