+++
title = "076"

+++
Dawn On the intricate structure of this hymn and its relationship to verb tense, see publ. intro. As noted there, vss. 1-2 have augmented aorists referring to the immediate past (áśret 1b, ajaniṣṭa 1c, akar 1d, adṛśran 2a, ábhūt 2c, ā́gāt 2d); vss. 3- 4 have augmented imperfects and one perfect referring to the more distant past (āsan 3a, 4a, dadṛkṣé 3d, avindan 4c, ajanayan 4d); and vss. 5-7 have present indicatives and imperatives stating general truths and urging action (sáṃ jānate … yatante 5b, minanti 5c, īḷate 6a, ucha 6c, jarasva 6d, ribhyate 7b).


## 01
Unlike the previous hymn, which contains no other divinities, this vs. introduces two (though one without name) before mentioning Uṣas, who enters only as the very last word of the vs. The two other gods are Savitar (b) and Sūrya in his role as “eye of the gods” (devā́nām … cákṣuḥ, c).

The two virtually synonymous adj. viśvájanya- ‘belonging to all people’ and viśvā́nara- ‘belonging to all men’ are juxtaposed across the pāda boundary (a/b); they refer to two different entities: the immortal light (jyótir amṛ̥́tam), presumably the sun, and god Savitar (savitā́deváḥ). As such they may also subtly allude to the wellknown group, the All Gods, with their first member(s) viśvá- and the ‘men’ words implicitly summoning up the opposite, devá-. The pl. gods then show up in c, with another occurrence of víśva- in d.

In c it is not possible to determine whose krátu- is being referred to. Ge takes it as the gods’, and certainly the adjacency of the two words (krátvā devā́nām) is suggestive. Re seems to favor Uṣas. However, given that it is Savitar’s action in ab that raised the light, I think it likely that the krátu- is his.


## 02
On the relation of this vs. to its paired frame vs. 5, see publ. intro. Their relationship is signalled in the first instance by patterned repetition, with 2b and 5b almost identical: ámardhanto vásubhiḥ x x x x. This patterned repetition also involves poetic repair. The qualifier ámardhantaḥ ‘not negligent’, used unusually of paths in vs. 2b, returns in 5d with a far more appropriate referent, the Fathers or their modern-day representatives, the Vasiṣṭhas. The standard tr. either ignore the identity of the two words, found in the same metrical position, and tr. each in a way that fits the context as the tr. sees it (so Ge “unfehlbar” 2b versus “nicht zurückstehend” 2d) or choose an anodyne tr. that doesn’t reflect the act. transitive morphology of the form (Re “impeccable” in both places). But forms of the root √mṛdh generally take an acc. obj. (or an enclitic prn. that is likely acc.) in the sense ‘neglect X’, and we would expect the participle, even negated, to reflect the same usage. As usual, I think it is incumbent on us to follow the morphology, even when it leads us to interpretations that seem, at first, awkward. Here I would first point out that Dawn 100 “awakened” the paths in the previous hymn (VII.75.1d pathyā̀ajīgaḥ), so paths in this group of hymns appear to have more animacy than might be expected. The paths in our vs. are the ones that lead to the gods (devayā́nāḥ), and in this context “nonnegligent paths” could be ones that don’t fail to lead us there, perhaps because they stay in good order, as is implied by the qualifier íṣkṛta-. As often with such semantic mismatches, the sense that comes from apparently incompatible words construed together is hard won, but it also leads to a deeper understanding of what the poet intended.

In the ppl. íṣkṛta- here and in a number of other locutions involving íṣ + √kṛ (iṣkartár-, íṣkṛti-, etc.), íṣ- behaves like a pseudo-preverb. The most likely default source for this íṣ- is the root noun of the same shape meaning ‘refreshment, nourishing drink’ (so EWA s.v. íṣ-), although the semantics makes difficulties: the additive meaning we might expect (‘prepare nourishment’ vel sim.) is not found.

Instead it seems to mean something like ‘set in order, set to rights, restore’. Although some interpr. the idiom as ‘heal’ (see EWA loc. cit.), I see no good evidence for this in the RV; certainly “healed paths” here would be even more aberrant than “nonnegligent” ones. The form here is the only occurrence of the lexeme íṣ √kṛ in the Family Books; otherwise it is limited to the late RV: the finite verb íṣkṛṇudhvam X.53.7, the past participle here and in the cmpd. íṣkṛtāhāva- X.101.6, as well as negated ániṣkṛta- VIII.99.8 and IX.39.2, agent nouns íṣkartar- VIII.1.12 and iṣkartár- VIII.99.8, X.140.5, and the fem. abstract íṣkṛti- X.97.9. Besides its possible etymological connection with íṣ- ‘refreshment’ (textually hinted at only in IX.39.2), it also seems to form an antonymic pair with níṣ √kṛ ‘expel’; see the hymn to healing herbs, X.97, where íṣkṛti- is contrasted with níṣkṛti-, níṣ kṛtha. This rhyming contrast may account for the ‘restore’ sense, antonymic to ‘expel’. Our passage also contains interaction with a different pseudo-preverb: íṣ-kṛta- can be seen as picking up (āv)ír akar in 1c. Though the augment induces -r sandhi, the underlying idiom is āvíṣ √kṛ (e.g., IV.4.5 āvíṣ kṛṇuṣva) with -íṣ matching íṣkṛta- here.

purástāt / pratīcī́“from the east, facing west” is another example of a paired contrast across a pāda boundary.

## 03-04
As noted in the publ. intro., these two vss. are defined as an omphalos, and this relationship is signaled by the patterned repetition of their first pādas: 3a tā́nī́d … āsan / 4a tá íd … āsan “just those were …”


## 03
Despite the straightforward, indeed ballad-like opening (“those were the days …”), the syntax of the rest of this vs. is difficult to entangle. The problem is that there appear to be two subordinating expressions (yā́in b, yátaḥ pári in c), though it is difficult to identify more than one subordinate clause; if there are two subordinate clauses, one of them would have very sketchy clausal structure. Nonetheless, Ge and Re opt for the latter solution, supplying a verb in b, both taking yā́as neut. pl. nom. and the subject of this clause (e.g., “Nombreux furent ces jours en vérité qui (surgirent) autrefois …”); for them cd is then a new subordinate cl. marked by yátaḥ pári referring to these same days (e.g., “à la suite desquels …”). Something like this 101 is possible, and in my many fiddlings with this vs. over the years I have more than once hovered over something like it. But the stumbling block is prācī́nam in b, which both Ge and Re must take as an adverbial temporal expression (“vorher” and “autrefois” respectively), even though this stem is otherwise only locational ‘forwards / towards the east’, often in a ritual context. I can see no way to integrate the standard use of this stem into a nominal clause consisting only of pāda b. I therefore take bcd as a single subordinate clause with two markers of subordination, yā́(b) a neut. pl. acc. extent of time (“through which …) and yátaḥ pári (c) referring to the place from which Dawn comes, picking up purástāt in 2c. The yā́is more narrowly construed with the finite verb dadṛkṣé in d (“… the days through which you became visible” -- that is, dawned over and over), the yátaḥ pári with the participle ācárantī “faring forth thence [= from the east].” I further take prācī́nam as the goal of that participle (“faring forth … towards the east-facing [sacrifice]”). As I just noted, prācī́na- is often found in a ritual context, modifying yajñá- (VII.7.3) or barhís- (I.188.4, IV.5.4, X.110.4). Either would be possible here, and the point would be that Dawn is hastening from the east towards the sacrifice that, like an expectant lover, is facing towards her. Assuming with most comm., beginning with Sāy. (see esp. Old’s argumentation) that we should read loc. jāré, contra Pp. jāráḥ, the acc. prācī́nam in the frame would be the functional equivalent of jāré in the simile -- GOAL -- despite the mismatch of cases, a nice example of case disharmony in a simile (as discussed in my 1982 IIJ article).

Although I realize that this is a very fussy solution, I cannot see any other way to deal with the troublesome prācī́nam. And it is, after all, an omphalos vs., where perturbations are common. Strictly speaking, my tr. fails to render both subordinators as such: “thence” should be “whence.” But the tr. is hard enough to parse as it is.

The contrastively paired similes, “like (a maiden) faring forth to her lover, not like one going (home) again” (jārá ivā́cárantī … ná púnar yatī́va), are well understood by the standard comm. and nicely indicate that Dawn dawns with as much speed as she can muster, eager for reunion with her lover, rather than lingering like one reluctantly leaving a tryst. For the first cf. I.123.9 … yóṣā ná ... niṣkr̥tám ācárantī “going to the appointed place like a maiden to a rendezvous,” also of Dawn (see also VI.75.4 in the weapon hymn). The iva is wrongly placed in the 2nd simile, but the poet had too many elements to fit in as it was.


## 04
Although this vs. begins in the same way as vs. 3, the syntax is quite straightforward, with no dependent clauses and the Fathers as subject throughout.

Once again we might consider this an example of poetic repair, given the syntactic difficulties the previous vs. posed.


## 05
As noted above, this vs. marks the transition to present-tense verbs and imperatives from the distant past of vss. 3-4. Who the subject of these verbs is in vs. 5 is not entirely clear. Until the very last syllable of the first hemistich, it is impossible to know even the gender, but the oddly positioned té at the end of pāda b identifies the subject as masc.; up until then, since sáṃgatāsaḥ could be either masc. 102 or fem., the fem. Dawns are a possibility. The second hemistich repeats the té immediately (c), and adds an unambig. masc. adj. ámardhantaḥ (as well as potentially ambig. yā́damānāḥ). Once té restricts the subject to masc., our immediate thought would be the Fathers, who are the subject of vs. 4. This is the solution of both Ge and Re. However, the temporal switch between 4 and 5 might speak against that. In vs. 6 the Vasiṣṭhas are explicitly identified as the subject (6a). My own view is that the subject of vs. 5 is deliberately left unspecified, to allow a transition between, and identification of, the Fathers and their latter-day representatives the Vasiṣṭhas. That the Fathers are at least arguably present is suggested by samāná ūrvé “in a common pen,” since ūrvá- frequently refers to the Vala cave where the cows/dawns are confined and therefore could set the action of the vs. in mythological time when, as the preceding vs. notes, the Fathers “found the hidden light” and “generated the dawns,” as in the Vala myth. As for a contemporary reference, “common pen” could refer to the sacrificial ground, where the Vasiṣṭhas would be acting in concert.

In addition to specifying the gender of the subject of ab, the final té also repeats the final syllables of the two verbs that precede it in the pāda, jānate … yatante.
