+++
title = "077"

+++
Dawn On the structure of this hymn, as signaled by its verb forms and personal reference, see publ. intro. The first three vss. contain a series of sg. augmented aorists (started with a perfect), all but ábhūt with Dawn as 3rd ps. subj.: úpa ruruce, ábhūt, ákar, úd asthāt, áśvait, aroci (which last almost forms a ring with the opening pf.), adarśi, into which fem. sg. pres. participles have been interspersed: prasuvántī, bā́dhamānā, bíbhratī, váhantī, náyantī. Following that we get in vss. 4-5a an equally insistent series of imperatives: ucha, kr̥dhi, yāvaya, ā́bhara, codáya, ví bhāhi, with Dawn as 2nd ps. subject. In 5b the fem. pres. parts return: pratirántī, dádhatī. In the last vs. the pattern is broken again: a pl. present vardháyanti with the Vasiṣṭhas as subject, found in the only subordinate cl. in the hymn, and in the last pāda before the clan refrain an aor. injunctive in imperatival usage, dhāḥ.


## 01
√ruc appears with the preverb úpa only here. I connect it with the simile yuvatír ná yóṣā “like a young maiden”: úpa generally connotes ‘up close, intimate’, and úpa √ruc may suggest the beguiling radiance of a beloved young girl close by.

As Re points out, √bhū + dat. inf. is rare. Here ábhūt … samídhe seems to be the intrans./pass. equivalent of a periphrastic causative √kṛ samídhe, as in I.113.9 úṣo yád agníṃ samídhe cakártha “O Dawn, since you have caused the fire to be kindled ….,” adduced by both Ge and Re. For a periphrastic caus. nearby, see VII.75.8 mā́...

nidé kar “Don’t put to scorn …” I do not know why we have pf. ruruce in a vs. containing two augmented aorists, ábhūt and ákar, with two more in the next hemistich (2a asthāt, 2b aśvait); the passive aor. (a)roci would have been possible, and is in fact found in 2d. 103


## 02
Whatever the reason for the pf. ruruce in vs. 1, its semi-repetition in the aor.

aroci in 2d inaugurates a pattern of lexical chaining in the first part of this hymn.

víśvam opening the vs. may pick up víśvaṃ jīvám “every living thing” of the previous vs. or anticipate víśvam in 3d, where I supply ‘world’.

In c the bahuvrīhi sudṛ́śīka-saṃdṛś- ‘having an appearance lovely to see’ is an internal etymological figure, … dṛ́śīka- … dṛś-. Since the final segment of the cmpd, underlying -ś (or rather the product of nom sg. -ś+s), appears as -g in sandhi, it echoes the -k- of the prior member: sudṛ́śīka-saṃdṛg.


## 03
More chaining: the compound etym. figure with dṛś in 2c is echoed not only by a repetition of the entire first member of the cmpd. sudṛ́śīka- (3b) but also in the pass. aor. adarśi (3c), while the fem. agent noun netrī́of 2d returns as a participle náyantī (3b), likewise fem., and the aor aśvait of 2b matches the adj. śvetá- in 3b.


## 04
On the abrupt change of tense/mood and of person here see above and publ.

intro. Notably, the lexical chaining stops here as well.

In pāda a ánti- ‘nearby’ contrasts with dūré ‘in the distance’, though the first is in a cmpd. and the latter is not. The ‘away’ / ‘here’ contrast is also found in c, though yāváya means ‘keep away’ without benefit of preverb or adverb, while ā́ serves for ‘here’. The objects of the antithetical pairs are similar in the two pādas: “(bring) nearby” takes -vāma- ‘valuable things’ (a), váśuni ‘goods’ (c); “keep/send away” amítram ‘foe’ (a), dvéṣaḥ ‘hatred’ (c). Re comments similarly. ánti- may also implicitly refer back to the semantically similar úpa opening the first vs. and mark the beginning of the 2nd section of the hymn. For the complementary opposition ánti / dūrá- in a similar passage, cf. IX.78.5 jahí śátrum antiké dūraké ca yáḥ “Smash the rival nearby and the one who is in the distance.” The VP dūré amítram ucha “dawn the foe into the distance” displays an apparent transitive sense of √vas ‘dawn’. This transitive sense is otherwise limited to ápa √vas ‘dawn (X) away’, as in nearby VII.81.6 uṣā́uchad ápa srídhaḥ “Dawn dawns away failures” (=I.48.8; cf. VII.104.23, VIII.47.18). In our passage the locational adverb dūré ‘in the distance’ fills the role of the preverb ápa ‘away’, a point also made by Re. Baum’s interpr. (Impv. in RV, 164) of amítram as an acc. of goal, in the sense “‘illuminate the enemy (when he is) far away,’ i.e. prevent him from hiding,” is unlikely, and he does not mention the ápa √vas passages.


## 05
I take the two ca’s in cd as marking a “both … and” construction: íṣaṃ ca … gómad áśvāvad ráthavac ca rā́dhaḥ “both refreshment and largesse in cattle, horses, (and) chariots.” Though ordinarily we might expect the 2nd ca to be placed after the first term in the second constituent (hence* gómac ca …), I explain its late position as resulting from treating the three parallel -vat adjectives as a unitary qualifier; it also allows the complementary placements of ca in cd: #X ca ..., ... ca Y#.

Klein interprets the passage very differently, taking the two ca’s as independent: the first as conjoining the two participial clauses in bc (… pratirántī … / … ca …  104 dádhatī …)(DGRV I.104-5) and the second as an XYZ ca construction, conjoining the -vat adjectives (86 and passim).
