+++
title = "078"

+++
Dawn On the lexical marks of this hymn, see publ. intro. The signature word práti opens the hymn and is repeated at the beginning of the first two pādas of vs. 2 and in the middle of 3a; it returns at the beginning of the last vs. (5), thus sketching a ring.

The other signature word, fem. pres. part. vibhātī́- ‘radiating widely’ is concentrated in the latter part of the hymn, ending the pādas 3b, 4b, and 5c.


## 02
The lexeme ápa √bādh appears, as often, in tmesis. This tmesis appears to be regular even when the lexeme appears, as here, in the participle (univerbated as apabā́dhamāna- only in the late X.103.4; in tmesis I.35.3, 90.3, V.80.5, IX.97.43 as well as here). But in our passage ápa is oddly positioned for a preverb in tmesis (which may account for Gr’s failure to register the preverb, as also in V.80.5): immediately following the object and not adjacent to a metrical boundary, … bā́dhamānā, víśvā támāṃsi duritā́pa devī́. Although this aberrant position might suggest that ápa is not a preverb here but a postposition or adverb, this would require separating the expression from the well-attested verbal lexeme, which I prefer not to do. I should however note that in vs. 1b bā́dhamānā támāṃsi is found without ápa.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. departs from the practice of the rest of the hymn by referring to plural Dawns.

práty adṛśran in the middle of pāda a repeats the opening of the hymn (1a), with polarized #práti … adṛśran#. The plural subject in vs. 1 are Dawn’s “beacons” (ketávaḥ).


## 05
As noted in the publ. intro., the hapax denom. tilvilāyádhvam is the most notable feature of this hymn. This verb is clearly built to the adj. tílvila-, found in V.62.7, where it appears to mean something like ‘fertile’: bhadré kṣétre nímitā tílvile vā “(the pillar) fixed in the good or ___ field/land.” Note not only the l-s, but the rhyming til-vil-, a word-formation tactic not otherwise found in standard Vedic; the standard assumption is that it is a non-Indo-Aryan word (see, e.g., Kuiper, Aryans 14). The standard interpr. take it as a (presumably more specific) synonym to bhadrá-, though of course the vā ‘or’ construction could identify it as a contrast or even opposite to bhadrá-. If the word belongs to the agricultural sphere (as kṣétra- ‘field’ suggests), a non-IAr origin makes sense. It is sometimes connected (see EWA s.v.) with tilá- (AV+) ‘sesame’, which also lacks an IAr etym. The word tílvila- is found in later Vedic; most of the occurrences are in similar passages in the gṛhya sūtras for the erection of a housepost and are clearly dependent on RV V.62.7 (e.g., ĀśGS 2.8.16, ŚāṅkhGS 3.3.1), but a ŚB passage seems to place it in the ‘fruitful, fertile, rich’ sphere. The passage concerns a cow let out to wander; whichever direction she goes will predict what will happen to the sacrificer. ŚB IV.5.8.11 yádi  105 pratī́cīyā́d íbhyatilvila iva dhā́nyatilvilo bhaviṣyatī́ti vidyāt (Eggeling) “If she goes westwards, let him know that he will be rich in dependants and crops.”
