+++
title = "079"

+++
Dawn As noted in the publ. intro., ví is the signature word of this hymn. The first and last hemistichs of the hymn (1a, 5c) begin with ví and a form (indeed two, in the etymological figure in 1a) of √vas: 1a vy uṣā̀āvaḥ and 5c vyuchántī, forming a ring, and ví opens 1d, 2a, 3c, 4d as well. This preverb also gets played with in various ways: 2b opens with víśo ‘clans’, whose 1st syllable falsely promises the preverb. The regular oppositional counterpart of ví, namely sám, opens 2c and provides the 2nd syllable of 1c (susaṃdṛ́gbhiḥ). The alliteration of 3c is also set in motion by its opening ví (see below).


## 01
This vs. echoes the 1st vs. of VII.75 in several ways, and VII.75.1 is helpful in resolving the verbal ambiguities in this one. Our vs. contains two occurrences (pādas a, d) of ví … āvaḥ in exactly that sandhi form. The 3rd sg. augmented root aor.

form āvaḥ is entirely ambiguous between √vas ‘dawn’ and √vṛ ‘obstruct, cover’, and the preverb ví does not help, since ví √vas regularly means ‘dawn widely’ and ví √vṛ ‘uncover, open’. VII.75.1 also contains two such forms, but both of them are in sandhi forms that allow their root affiliation to be unambiguously identified. VII.75.1 opens exactly like our vs., vy ùṣā́āvaḥ, but in VII.75 the sandhi form of the verb is āvo, which must belong to √vas. Pāda c of VII.75.1 contains āvar (though in tmesis with ápa rather than ví); again, the sandhi form -ar makes it clear that this verb must belong to √vṛ. Given the parallelism of the two vss., it seems almost as if VII.75.1 is providing a guide to the ambiguities of our vs. In any case the standard interpr. all distribute the āvaḥ forms in this vs. as just laid out.

There is another echo between the two vss.: pāda a here contains pathyā̀, which could represent either instr. sg. pathyā̀(so Pp.) or acc. pl. pathyā̀ḥ out of sandhi, recalling pathyā̀in VII.75.1d, which must represent acc. pl. -āḥ before a vowel. In this passage I favor the instr. sg. Note also that páñca ksitī́ḥ opening our b pāda opens VII.75.4b.


## 02
Whatever the etymology of aktú- ‘night’ -- I favor the connection with PIE

*nokw
t- ‘night’, pace EWA s.v.; see most recently LIN 505 and n. 20 -- it is here at least secondarily associated with √añj ‘anoint’ (which for some, e.g., EWA, is its etymon), since aktū́n serves as obj. of vy àñjate. My “glossy nights” is an attempt to capture the pun. For those who consider aktú- a derivative of √añj, aktū́n here would be an internal obj. / cognate acc.; cf. Oberlies (Relig. v. II.111): “Die [rotglühenden] Morgenröten verstreichen ihre Farbe …” In any case, aktū́n participates in two phonetic figures: añjate … ánteṣu aktū́n and the near-mirror-image aktū́(n) … yuktā́(ḥ).

As in the previous hymn (VII.78), Dawn is sg. in this hymn, except in one vs., in this case this one; in VII.78, vs. 3. 106


## 03
\#ábhūd uṣā́(ḥ) is reminiscent of \#ábhūd agníḥ in VII.77.2, though there the construction involved a predicated infinitive. See also VII.76.2 #ábhūd u ketúr uṣásaḥ.

Dawn is índratamā because she is maghónī ‘bounteous’ as he is maghávan(t)-.

The splv. suffix -tamā echoes támaḥ ‘darkness’ in the prevous vs., 2c.

As Re points out, suvitā́ya in b recalls duritā́in VII.78.2.

Pāda c displays heavy alliteration: ví divó devī́duhitā́dadhāti. The pattern is set in motion by the preverb ví, which, as was noted above, is the hymn’s signature word. The first three words in c have ví itself, its inverse (d)iv(ó), and a long-vowel variant (de)vī́, but in the meantime the d pattern has asserted itself and carries through to the end of the pāda. The elements of this sequence are found nearby each other in other hymns in this cycle, though not with the same intense concentration. Cf.

esp. VII.77.5-6: 5b devi, 5c dádhatī, 6a divó duhitā́.


## 04
As slowly becomes clear, this vs. concerns the Vala myth, as the last pāda, describing the opening of “the doors of the firm-fixed stone,” illustrates. This slipping into the Vala story accounts for the otherwise puzzling áṅgirastamā ‘best / most like the Aṅgirases’ in the previous vs. (3d; found also in nearby VII.75.1, also in a potential Vala context). The Aṅgirases, of course, were responsible, along with Indra, for opening the Vala cave and releasing the imprisoned cows; they did so by singing. As Ge points out, the praisers who benefit from Dawn’s largesse in 4b are most likely the Aṅgirases, and they would also then be the subjects of c.

Note the phonetic echo between rā́dho (a) and (á)rado (b), which is then found scrambled in d (dú)ro ádr(eḥ). Pāda d also contains internal phonetic play with d’s and r’s, as well as a, u, and o: … dṛḷh(asya) dúro, adr(e)r äūr(ṇ)o(ḥ). This is the only trisyllabic reading of the augmented stem aurṇo- and the vowel hiatus a-ū (or av ū?) emphasizes the phonetic figures.

The verb in c, the pf. jajñúḥ, is perfectly ambiguous between √jan ‘beget’ and √jñā ‘recognize’. It is now standardly taken to the former, though Ge previously (Ved. St.) assigned it to the latter, a stance criticized by Old and silently given up by Ge in his tr.


## 05
As noted in the intro. above, vyuchántī, which opens the last pāda of the hymn (save for the clan refrain), forms a ring with the opening phrase (1a) vy ùṣā́ āvaḥ. This reinforces the affiliaion of āvaḥ in 1a with √vas, not √vṛ.
