+++
title = "080"

+++
Dawn


## 01
This vs. reprises various parts of the other dawn hymns in this cycle. The first hemistich práti … uṣásam … abudhran echoes VII.78.5a práti tvā … budhanta, with each having the mortal worshipers as subject. (Note augmented abudhran versus injunctive budhanta.) In c Dawn is “unrolling” the two world halves (vivartáyantīm), while in VII.79.2c her cows “roll up” the darkness (sám … táma ā́ vartayanti) with the preverb sám complementary to ví. In our vs. sám is found in the 107 same pāda in the adjective describing the two world-halves, sámante ‘adjoining’.

Finally, Dawn’s role in “revealing all beings” (āviṣkṛṇvatī́m bhúvanāni víśvā) reminds us of her revealing her own greatness (āviṣkṛṇvānā́mahimā́nam) in the first vs. of this cycle (VII.75.1b). The act. part. in our vs. is externally focused, while the middle part. in VII.75.1 properly captures the internal focus of that expression. The act. expression is also found in VII.76.1 āvír kar bhúvanaṃ víśvam uṣā́ḥ.

Ge takes du. rájasī as referring to the Dark (and Light), i.e., Night and Day.

But du. rájasī ordinarily refers to the two world-halves and is often used in conjunction with ródasī (e.g., I.160.4, IV.42.3), and I see no reason to seek a different referent here. Dawn’s action of ‘unrolling’ the two world-halves would refer to the visual effect of the gradual revealing of their features as the dawn’s light strengthens. For a similar notion, though with ví √vṛ ‘uncover’, see the previous hymn VII.79.1 ví sū́ryo ródasī cákṣasāvaḥ “The Sun has uncovered the two worldhalves with his eye.”


## 02
Because of the middle voice of the part., I interpr. návyam ā́yur dádhānā as referring to Dawn’s new life, which she would then assume every day. The middle voice contrasts with VII.77.5 pratirántī na ā́yuḥ “(she,) lengthening our lifetime.” Both Ge and Re seem to imply that in our passage the new life is established for others.

The sg. abodhi at the end of the first hemistich matches the pl. abudhran in the same position in vs. 1.

Pāda d prā́cikitat sū́ryaṃ yajñám agním is exactly parallel to VII.78.3 ájījanat sū́ryaṃ yajñám agním, which suggests that ácikitat is felt as a redupl. aor. to the caus.

cetáyati, despite the obvious drawbacks of form (we would expect *acīkitat).


## 03
This vs. is identical to VII.41.7, though it may fit better here.

The three -v/matī- adj., áśvāvatīr gómatīḥ … vīrávatīḥ, modifying the pl.

‘dawns’ reprise the sequence at the end of the first hymn in this cycle, VII.75.8 gómad vīrávat … áśvāvat, where they qualified rátnam.
