+++
title = "081"

+++
Dawn


## 01
Note the adjacency of támaḥ and jyótiḥ, though here across the pāda break.


## 03
The stem vánanvant-, in my opinion, must be separated into two separate words on semantic grounds, neither of which is entirely clear morphologically. In VIII.102.19 and X.92.15, where it is associated with an axe (svádhiti-) in the identical phrase svádhitir vánanvati, it appears to belong with vána- ‘wood’. Cf. for the association IX.96.3 ... svádhitir vánānām, X.89.7 svádhitir váneva But in VIII.6.34 it modifies matíḥ ‘thought’ in a context in which ‘wood(en)’ seems effectively excluded. In both VIII.1.31 and our passage I also find it difficult to make ‘wooden’ work, though Ge, for example, thinks our voc. addressed to Dawn (may -- he tags it with ? --) mean “Wagenbesitzende,” on the assumption that the wagon is 108 wooden and the material has come to refer to the object made of it. In VIII.1.31, where it modifies ‘horses’ (áśvān), he takes it as referring to their wooden yokes. (He refuses to tr. the form in VIII.6.34.) Mayrhofer (both KEWA s.v. vánam and EWA s.v. ván-) favors the ‘wood’ connection as well, and in EWA suggests that vánan- is the -n-form of a heteroclite, whose -r- is found in the locatival 1st cmpd member vanar- (though one would of course not expect the -r- in the oblique). Re, having written in favor of the ‘wood’ connection (BSL 37: 19), disavows it in his n. to this passage in EVP III, in favor of “gracieuse,” on what seem firm grounds. Old discusses the problem with his customary acuity and decides for a derivation from √van ‘win, hold dear’, with a pun on ‘wood’ in VIII.102.19 and X.92.15. Although I generally favor seeing audacious metaphors in the RV, in this particular case I find that putting all the forms of vánanvant- under one rubric unduly stretches the metaphorical fabric -- though I might be open to Old’s suggestion that in VIII.102.19 and X.92.15 there is a pun on ‘wood’, but the form belongs with √van. This does not, however, help with the morphology. I tentatively suggest that the form derived from √van is the result of the further derivation or contamination of originally participial forms. The 8th class present to √van vanóti has an act. part. vanvánt-; if this acquired a -vant-suffix, the result would be in the first instance *vanv-án(t)-vant-, which by dissimilation of the middle -v- could develop into our form (though with accent shift).

Or the pf. part. vavan-váṃs- could have dissimilated to *vanan-váṃs- (again accent is a problem). Or, starting with the pres. part. vanv-ánt-, we could imagine a perseverative form *vanv-an(t)-ant-, with migration of the 2nd -v-. Or we can confect an intens. stem *vanvan- with participle *vanvan-a(n)t-, again with flip of the v. But all of these scenarios are pure fantasy, I’m afraid. As for the form putatively derived from ‘wood’, I have even less idea, though I suppose it’s worth pointing out that all attested forms from both stems vanánvant- actually have the weak form of the suffix

-vat- and *vana-vatV, built directly to vána-, would be metrically unfavorable.


## 04
This vs. presents several minor syntactic problems. Pāda b contains two apparent datival infinitives, the almost synonymous prakhyaí and dṛśé, most likely to be construed with kṛṇóṣi in pāda a. The standard interpr. take the two infinitives as separate parallel constructions, though the details of these constructions differ acdg.

to tr. (cf., besides Ge and Re, Scar [353] and Keydana [Inf., 167, 203]). As a typical ex., see Scar’s “… die du … machst, dass man sieht und man das Licht schaut.” Although as far as I know there is no way to tell, I prefer to take both the datives with svàr; the standard expression svàr dṛśé indicates that the sun is visible, available for seeing, while prakhyaí is used in a similar fashion to cákṣase in 1c.

The 2nd hemistich is more problematic. The first question is the grammatical identity of ratnabhā́jaḥ, which could be gen. sg. and modify immediately preceding fem. gen. tásyās te, or nom. pl. and modify the implied pl. subj. ‘we’ of immediately following 1st pl. īmahe. Ge opts for the latter (“… die du Belohnungen austeilst”), but Old, Re, and Scar favor the nom. pl., as do I. For one thing other -bhā́j- cmpds have similar syntacto-semantic value (“having a share of X”), rather than the transitive sense (“sharing out X”) required by the gen. interpr. It is of course possible that the 109 positioning between the gen. sg. and the 1st pl. was deliberate, and the form is meant to be ambiguous.

The other problem lies in the interpr. of the two verbs īmahe (c) and syā́ma (d). The standard interpr. take the pāda break as a clause break (“as sharers of your treasure we beseech you; may we be like sons …”). I find this mildly problematic, in that ratnabhā́jaḥ would be better construed with syā́ma (“might we be sharers …”) than with īmahe, and I have therefore taken it that way, with īmahe parenthetical and the simile in d an adjunct. This interpr. is supported by VI.71.6 vāmabhā́jaḥ syāma “May we be partakers of the valuables” (sim. III.55.22 sákhāyas te vāmabhā́jaḥ syāma). However, my interpr. not only complicates the syntax slightly, but the lack of accent on parenthetical īmahe might be troublesome -- though I don’t have strong intuitions on how verbal accent works with parentheticals. (The one example I can come up with, however, does accent the verb that interrupts the clause: X.95.1 mánasā tíṣṭha ghore vácāṃsi miśrā́kṛṇavāvahai nau “Thoughtfully -- stand still, fearsome woman! -- let us two now exchange words.”) In any case it might be better to follow the standard interpr. and tr. something like “we beseech you ([for us] to be) sharers in your treasure; may we be like sons to a mother” -- though as the tr. shows, taking īmahe with ratnabhā́jaḥ requires more semantic machinery.

In c tásyās te is a fairly unusual ex. of the double sá tvám construction. As is sometimes the case with oblique forms of this construction, I think it likely that the tásyāḥ is there to indicate the gender of the personal pronoun -- though, given the Dawn context, the fem. gender of te could hardly be a secret.


## 06
codayitrī́maghónaḥ is perfectly ambiguous, since maghónaḥ could be either gen. sg. or acc. pl. In the former case it would refer to Indra, the archetypal maghávan-, in the latter to the pl. patrons (the sūrí- referred to in pāda a). According to the standard distribution of cases, suffix-accented -tár- agent nouns should take the gen.; indeed our stem does just that in I.3.11 codayitrī́sūnṛ́tānām. However, this distribution is not absolute, and given the recent mention of the pl. patrons and the absence of Indra from this hymn (and mostly from this hymn cycle), a pl. reading is quite possible as well.

sūnṛ́tātvatī at the end of c forms a faint ring with sūnárī at the end of vs. 1.

Note that it also recalls I.3.11 just cited.

---
[VII.82-89 JPB]
