+++
title = "090"

+++
Vāyu / Indra and Vāyu


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., this hymn plays on the two senses of niyút- in Vāyu context: his teams of wind-horses and our teams of poetic thoughts. This ambiguity is fully on display in pāda c váha vāyo niyúto yāhy áchā, where acc. pl.

niyútaḥ is stationed between the two imperatives. váha and yāhy. The latter is interpr.

by the Pp. as accentless yāhi, but in this sandhi situation, followed by initially accented áchā, it could also represent yāhí. If this impv. is unaccented, niyútaḥ should be construed with it, with a clause boundary after preceding voc. vāyo. If it is accented, it should begin a new clause and niyútaḥ should be construed with váha.

The situation is complicated by the semi-parallel passage I.135.2 váha vāyo niyúto yāhy asmayúḥ, where unaccented yāhi is the only choice because the following word does not begin with an accented vowel. If niyútaḥ is to be contrued with yāhy, it is an acc. of goal and refers to our teams (poetic thoughts); if with váha, it should refer to Vāyu’s teams. Curiously, both Ge and Re in both passages choose to construe niyútaḥ with váha (e.g., “Fahre, Vāyu, die Niyut-Rosse, komm here!”), even though in I.135.2 this interpr. should be excluded. Old (ad I.135.2) opts for the other construction and tr. “fahre, Vāyu; zu (unsern) n.[iyút-] komm.” This interpr., the only one strictly possible in I.135.2, is further supported by III.35.1=VII.23.4 yāhí vāyúr ná niyúto no áchā “Travel like Vāyu to our teams” where niyútaḥ is clearly construed with yāhí. However, just because niyútaḥ needs to be construed with yāhy in our passage and in I.135.2, construing it also with váha isn’t excluded -- so an alt.

tr. of this passage and of I.135.2 could be “Drive (your teams), Vāyu; travel to our teams.” See also 3c.


## 02
The rel. yáḥ in pāda a may be somewhat deeper in the clause than we would like, following both the indirect obj. īśānā́ya and the direct obj. práhutim.


## 03
I take dhāti as a root aor. subjunctive (as apparently also Kü, judging from his tr. “… soll … führen …,” p. 186); unfortunately it does not have a distracted root vowel.

Note the extreme alliteration of b: … devī́dhiṣáṇā dhāti devám, with mirrorimage plain and aspirated voiced stops, as well as the etym. figure devī́… deváṃ enclosing the whole.

The niyút- in this vs. are explicitly identified as Vāyu’s ‘own’ (svā́ḥ), which supports the view that the niyút- in 1c are not Vāyu’s but ours.

The question in d is the referent of vásudhiti- ‘treasure-chamber’. Both Gr and Ge identify it as Vāyu himself, though this seems pretty much excluded by the fact that acc. vásudhitim is conjoined with the other acc. vāyúm (c) by utá (see Klein DGRV I.323-24, though he also suggests Vāyu could be the referent). Old suggests Indra (flg. Pischel), and Re so renders it in tr. To me Agni seems more likely than either Indra or Vāyu, since Agni is actually called a vásudhiti- in I.128.8, and śvetá- 111 ‘gleaming’ is more appropriate to Agni than to either of those gods. (For Agni as śvetá- see, e.g., V.1.4.) However, to my mind the most likely referent is Dawn, a possibility also floated by Re. Dual vásudhiti- occurs twice (III.31.17, IV.48.3), both times of Night and Dawn. In both cases the noun is modified by dual kṛṣṇé ‘black’, which of course characterizes only one of the pair and evokes the opposite, suppressed quality, ‘bright’ (see comm. ad IV.48.3). In IV.48.3 the two treasurechambers are intimately associated with Vāyu and his journey to the sacrifice. Note also that the dawns show up in the very next pāda in our hymn (4a). The one obstacle to identifying vásudhitim here as Dawn is that the accompanying adj. śvetám is masc., but this would be problematic in any case, if it modifies vásudhiti-, because the noun itself is fem. (see du. fem. kṛṣṇé just cited)—though it can have a masc. referent (e.g., I.128.8 agním hótāram īḷate vásudhitim “They invoke Agni, the Hotar, [as] treasurechamber]”). I assume that *śvetām has been redactionally shortened (without metrical consequences, since it precedes a consonant-initial word) on the basis of such equational passages, or perhaps on the basis of such passages vásudhiti- was simply interpr. as masc. here.


## 04
In the publ. tr. the injunc. uchán is rendered as a preterite; I’d now be inclined towards a pres. “the dawns dawn,” if the vs. depicts the ritual scene unfolding. If, however, it is an account of the Vala myth, a preterital uchán would be better. Since there is probably split temporal reference here, describing the actions both of the mythical Aṅgirases originally opening the Vala cave and of the priests reenacting this mythic model, the injunctive uchán can fit both scenarios—likewise the perfects that follow (vividuḥ b, ví vavruḥ c, sasruḥ d), since that tense can be used both for both distant and immediate past. Unfortunately English does not have a temporally un- (or under-)marked tense like the injunctive, and so a choice between present and preterital translations has to be made.

On the basis of the next hymn, VII.91.4 náraḥ … dī́dhyānāḥ (and see also our 5a), the subject of b should be ‘men’ or the Uśij-priests in the next pāda, though the ‘dawns’ of the previous pāda would technically be available.

I did not render cid in c in the publ. tr. Cf. V.29.12, where the same phrase opens the pāda and cid likewise appears to be functionless. It could perhaps mean ‘also’ here, as a second action after finding the light.

On ánu pradívaḥ see Old’s extensive disc.


## 05
If the previous vs. had two temporal reference points, this one seems completely focused on the ritual here and now. As noted in the publ. intro., the priests have become the draught animals that draw Indra and Vāyu’s chariot -- alluding to the trope of sacrifice as chariot.


## 06
As noted in the publ. intro., the use of īśāná- ‘having dominion’ here cleverly assimilates the patrons modified by this participle with Vāyu (2a) and IndraVāyu (5d), who receive the same modifier. 112 Ge (n. 6a) persuasively suggests that the striking phrase “confer the sun on us,” with the patrons as subject, refers to “the great light of the Dakṣiṇā” (priestly gift).

This is reminiscent of the biblical quotation “Let your light so shine before men …” that always preceded the taking up of the collection in the Episcopal church of my youth.
