+++
title = "091"

+++
Vāyu / Indra and Vāyu


## 01
For my interpr. of the context of this vs. see the publ. intro., where I suggest that the vs. depicts the primal situation before the ritual was first instituted, with the gods existing without a sacrificial compact. I take purā́… ā́san as existential, “existed previously,” as I do almost the same construction (but with pf., not impf.) in IV.51.7 purā́suḥ -- but not purā́-āsitha in VI.45.11, where the purā́is contrasted with nūnám in disjunctive vā clauses. The existential reading seems to me preferable to a predicative one, whether vṛdhā́saḥ or anavadyā́saḥ were to be predicated.

The construction of kuvíd is unusual, in that it appears on the surface that the kuvíd construction consists of a rel. clause introduced by yé without a main clause.

Old’s first suggested rendering is of this type (“Bewiesen sich wohl einst die Götter als tadellos?”); similarly Hettrich (Hypotaxe, 145). But Old alternatively suggests supplying a main verb with kuvíd with the relative clause subordinate to that clause (“Wie denn (verhielten sich) die Götter, welche ... waren?”), a syntactic solution silently adapted by Re. In either case ā́san would unproblematically be accented because it belongs to the rel. cl. Although my interpr. differs somewhat from Ge’s, we both take ā́san as the verb of the main clause with kuvíd (“Ganz gewiss waren es schon früher die untadeligen Götter …”), with the rel. clause either requiring a verb to be supplied (Ge) or simply being a nominal rel. cl. (me). By this interpr. the accentuation of ā́san would contradict Gr’s rule (s.v. kuvíd) that the verb introduced by kuvíd is accented only when it is in the same pāda -- but see comm. ad II.35.1 for further violations of this “rule.” The construction I envisage runs into another problem, that the rel. cl. (námasā yé vṛdhā́saḥ) would seem to be embedded in the main clause kuvíd … ā́san). But we have seen elsewhere (e.g., VI.21.2, 22.5, 64.5, 6) that nominal relative clauses can function as pseudo/proto-izafe constructions and be embedded in the matrix clause. Here the rel. cl. would, further, precede the main clause proper, beginning with purā́, and be preceded only by the rhetorical introductory kuvíd aṅgá, so its “embedding” is slight.

For “hard-pressed Manu” see VI.49.13.


## 02
Ge (n. 2a) suggests that ná in pāda a stands for haplologized *ná ná, with both the simile particle (“Willig wie Boten”) and the negative (“… nicht zu hintergehen”). Certainly it must represent the negative with infinitival dat., since ná dábhāya occurs twice elsewhere (V.44.3, IX.73.8) with gopá-, but it is less clear that we need the simile marker. Though Indra and Vāyu are probably not technically messengers in the way that Agni is, I see no real problem in identifying them thus 113 when they come to the sacrifice from the heavenly world, rather than simply comparing them to messengers.

I do not entirely understand why pātháḥ is accented, and, unusually, Old makes no comment in the Noten. I assume that it falls roughly in the category of expressions with a single verb and “zwei Subjekten, Objekten u. s. w.” (specifically here the u. s. w.) treated in Old’s lengthy article on Verbalenklisis in the Rig Veda (ZDMG 60 [1906]:707-41 = KlSch 182-216; cited phrase p. 708=183), though in a rather cursory scan of the article I did not find this passage. The triggering phrase here would be māsáś ca … śarádaś ca pūrvī́ḥ “though the months and many autumns,” with the accented verb in the middle, even though the conjoined NPs are not contrastive.

Ge tr. the just cited phrase with “viele Monaten und Herbst,” though technically speaking fem. pūrvī́ḥ can only modify śarádaḥ, to which it is also adjacent. Klein (DGRV I.134) echoes Ge’s interpr. forcefully (“… must be taken with both conjoined nouns” [my ital.]), and no doubt this is the ultimate intent, though I find preferable the rendering that matches the grammar (so also Re without comment).


## 03
As discussed in the publ. intro., I differ from the standard tr. (which consider Vāyu the subject of ab and the referent of the acc. pl. in pāda a to be the sacrificers) in considering this first hemistich a disguised reference to the soma offered to Vāyu. Although the Vāyu identification might seem the default -- and it indeed may be correct -- both the vocabulary and the ritual situation seem to point in another direction. The descriptor sumedhás- is never otherwise used of Vāyu, but it is applied 3x to Soma or his drop (IX.92.3, 93.3, 97.23); the only figure who receives this epithet more often is Agni. Similarly śvetá- is not used of Vāyu (for the supposed application in the immed. preceding hymn, VII.90.3, where I think it refers to Dawn, see comm. ad loc.), but does apply to a drop (drapsá-) in nearby VII.87.6, while Soma makes himself a śvetá- rūpá- in IX.74.7. The adj. is also used of horses (VII.77.3), and perhaps, in conjunction with niyútām abhiśrī́ḥ “the full glory of the teams,” Soma is configured here as the lead horse of the “teams” of offerings we will make to Vāyu. The beings (acc.) that the subject accompanies (siṣakti) are called pī́voanna- ‘whose food is fat’, a hapax. It seems an unlikely epithet of human sacrificers, as the standard interpr. requires. It might describe the ritual fires, but it is most clearly reminiscent of X.100.10 ū́rjam gāvo yávase pī́vo attana, ṛtásya yā́ḥ sádane kóśe aṅgdhvé “O cows, eat nourishment in the pasture, eat fat, you who are anointed in the cup, at the seat of truth,” addressed to the milk to be ritually mixed into the soma. The masc. gender of pī́vo-annān is something of a stumbling block to this interpr., but it might result from the variable gender of the underlying referent gó- ‘cow’ or reference a masc. term for milk or liquid in general. The other acc. pl.

in this pāda, rayivṛ́dhaḥ, is a hapax, though reminiscent of námasā … vṛdhā́saḥ in 1a.

Like the numerous other cmpds in -vṛ́dh- the root noun 2nd member could have either intransitive/passive value with the 1st member in an instr. relationship (‘strong/increased by wealth’) or transitive value with an acc. 1st member 114 (‘increasing wealth’) -- though most -vṛ́dh- cmpds conform to the former type. Ge interpr. it as transitive (“die … ihre Reichtümer mehrend”), Gr as intrans.; Old fails to comment, and Re takes refuge in vagueness (“ayant … une richesse abondante”), which seems to lean towards the intrans. Scar (521) allows both possibilities in his gloss, though his tr. of the passage follows the transitive path, “die ihren Reichtum mehren,” echoing Ge. For my larger interpr. of the passage, either would more or less work, but neither adds much or seems particularly apt.

To sum up, though I don’t reject the Vāyu / human ritualist interpr. of the nom. / acc. in ab out of hand, I think an identification of the nom. as Soma and the acc. as the cows(’ milk) with which soma is mixed works better in the passage. (I do have to admit that Indra and Vāyu drink clear, unmixed soma in the very next vs.) Alternatively we might consider the ritual fire (specifically the one that receives the offerings, later called the Āhavanīya) the subject and the libations themselves the acc. And, on the basis of VII.92.3 in the next hymn I also now wonder if the acc. referents in ab might be the teams of wealth we meet in that vs. Basically, no single interpr. of this vs. can account for all the elements of it.

My interpr. of c follows from that of ab. I take the pl. subj. to be the drops of soma, extending themselves as offering to Vāyu -- not the priestly sacrificers. Only in d do these sacrificers make their appearance (náraḥ).


## 04
Both Ge and Re take ab as a series of subordinate clauses truncated without a main cl. By contrast, as I indicated in the publ. intro., I think that the yā́vat ‘as long as’ clauses in ab project the future temporal limit to the institution of sacrifice, with cd inviting the gods to participate as long as it will last.

dī́dhyānāḥ in b matches the same word in the same position in the immed.

preceding hymn VII.90.4b, though the contexts are different.

The 2nd du. act. aor. impv. pātam in c echoes the 2nd du. act. pres. pātháḥ in 2b, but these two root forms belong of course to two different roots √pā, ‘drink’ and ‘protect’ respectively. Both of them are anchored to their roots by root-noun cmpds closely preceding them, go-pā́‘cow-protectors’ (2a) and śuci-pā ‘drinkers of the clear (soma)’ (4a), both dual and both subject of the following verb. In fact śuci-pā looks both left and right, with elementary etymological figures on both sides: śúciṃ (sómaṃ) śucipā pātam ….
