+++
title = "092"

+++
Vāyu / Indra and Vāyu


## 02
For sómam as obj. of prá √sthā, see parallels cited at VI.41.2.


## 03
I assume that the object of Vāyu’s quest in our house is soma. Other interpr.

take iṣṭáye differently: Ge “um gern in sein Haus zu kommen,” which seems quite loose; Re “pour (aller le) chercher en (sa) demeure,” with the referent of “le” apparently dāśvā́ṃsam of pāda a, which I suppose is possible.

As disc. in the publ. intro., this vs. makes clear the equation between the teams (niyút-) in ab that Vāyu drives to the sacrifice, his wind-horses, and the teams 115 of wealth he hitches up (ní … yuvasva) for us in cd. In cd we would expect an accusative resumptive prn. tā́n or the like, picking up the rel. phrase yā́bhiḥ … niyúdbhiḥ of ab and serving as obj. of ní … yuvasva. The absence of this prn. is presumably what led Ge to pronounce the yā́bhiḥ of a as “die freie Verwendung des Relatives” (n. 3) and to tr. the subordinator with “Wenn.” But I think rather that the objects in cd stand for the missing *niyútaḥ. Though the noun niyút- doesn’t appear explicitly in cd, elsewhere that noun can be obj. of its etymologically twin verb; cf., e.g., I.180.6 ní yád yuvéthe niyútaḥ ... and, in the immediately hymn, the passive phrase niyuvānā́niyútaḥ ... (VII.91.5). Therefore the accusatives in cd expressing wealth and its material realizations are implicitly equated with niyút-. The important complementarity of the two forms of ní √yu in the two hemistichs is disguised by Ge’s bland translation of the verb in c: “gib uns”; similarly Klein (DGRV I.26) “grant to us.” In the phrase in d vīráṃ gávyam áśvyaṃ ca rā́dhaḥ “(a) hero and bovine and equine bounty,” the sg. vīrám is superficially unsettling and disharmonious: surely we want more than a single hero! But vīrám most likely is meant to characterize rádhaḥ, along with the common adjectival collocation gávyam áśvyam. However, an adjectival vīryá- *‘consisting of heroes’ is blocked, because that stem has been frozen as a neut. substantive meaning ‘heroism, heroic deed’. I would now be inclined to reflect what I consider the substitution of vīrá- for the non-functional adjectival stem and tr. the acc. phrase as “(teams that are) well-nourishing wealth for us, bounty in heroes, in cows and horses.”


## 04
The standard interpr. (Old, Ge, Re) take the nom. pl. rel. yé of ab to be coreferential with the instr. sūríbhiḥ ‘with the patrons’ in c. This is certainly possible, but I follow Thieme (Fremd. 20) in taking it rather with the 1st pl. subj. of syāma in c, hence “(we) who …” There is no morphosyntactic way to tell, as the rel. cl. of ab has no finite verb, so the person of yé is unspecified. I favor “we” because cd seems to set up a contrastive pair of the two instr. pl. in c / d (sūríbhiḥ / nṛ́bhiḥ), with which we accomplish complementary feats: smashing obstacles along with the patrons (c), conquering in battle with the superior men (=warriors) (d). If the first hemistich refers exclusively to one of these instrumentals the rhetorical balance is disturbed.

I do not follow Thieme (Fremd. 20 n. 1) in accepting the old suggestion (conjectured by Gr; see Old for further lit.) that the Saṃhitā vāyáva should be taken as a nom. pl. vāyávaḥ, against Pp. dat. sg. vāyáve, as an adj. ‘serving Vāyu’ vel sim.

As Old points out, the dat. is supported by té vāyáve found twice in the preceding hymn (VII.91.1, 3), like our yé vāyave, and in any case the posited adjectival form would be morphologically dubious (see, e.g., Re’s remarks inter alia). Most supply another nom. pl. adj. to construe with dat. vāyáve; cf. Ge’s “die dem Vāyu (opfern),” Re’s “(étant) au (service de) Vāyu.” But I think this is unnecessary: I take the phrase vāyáva indramā́danāsaḥ as an example of the fungibility of compounds and free syntagms with the same structure. In other words, I would extract the √mad form from the cmpd and construe it also with dat. vāyáve. Although transitive forms of √mad generally take the acc., cf. IX.25.1 marúdbhyo vāyáve mádaḥ “exhilarating 116 (drink) for the Maruts and for Vāyu” and, with the same nominal form as here,


## 01
prá va índrāya mā́danaṃ, háryaśvāya gāyata “Sing forth your exhilarating (song) to Indra of the fallow bays,” though the dat. there is more likely controlled by the verb prá √gā. The connection between Vāyu and √mad is reinforced in the next vs.: 5c vā́yo … mādayasva.

With Old, Re, Thieme (loc. ci.), I take aryáḥ as gen. sg. of arí-, construed with nitóśānāsaḥ, not as nom. pl. with Gr, Ge.

In cd the opt. syāma seems to serve as a modal-establishing auxiliary to the participles ghnántaḥ (c) and sāsahvā́ṃsaḥ (d), perhaps a more economical and less clumsy alternative to two separate optatives (hanyā́ma and sāsahyā́ma) or else a makeshift attempt to express repeated modal action (expressed by my parenthetical “be (always) X-ing”).

In d amítra- seems deliberately positioned verse-final to contrast with aryáḥ, which ends the previous hemistich, and therefore most likely has its full etymological sense -- ‘(one) without alliance (to us)’ -- in opposition to arí-, which identifies members of our larger sociopolitical community, even if unknown to us personally.

Re treats VII.93-94 in EVP XIV, starting p. 55.
