+++
title = "093"

+++
Indra and Agni Both Ge and Re remark on the prominence of the word vā́ja- in the hymn (“Das Schlagwort ist vā́ja”; “Thème du vā́ja”). Although I would certainly not deny that, the word does not seem to call attention to its dominance in the way that other signature words often do: not only is it absent from three of the eight vss. (4, 5, 7), but especially at the beginning (vss. 1-3) it is not prominently positioned (not at a pāda boundary or after the caesura) nor positioned in the same place in the vs. line -- both being ways in which a word can assert itself -- nor does it repeat the same case and number. In vss. 6 and 8 it is hemistich-final (6d, 8b) and so becomes slightly more salient. In other words, it’s certainly a theme, but a somewhat muted one.


## 02
The first hemistich is hyper-alliterative, with sibilants s and ś and, esp. in the 2nd pāda, v and u, all tied together by alternations of short and long a: tā́sānasī́ śavasānā hí bhūtáṃ, sākaṃvṛdhā śávasā śūśuvā́ṃsā. This phonological effect is reinforced by the etymological figure of śavasānā … śávasā śūśuvā́ṃsā, all belonging to the root √śū, śvā ‘swell’. To capture the etymological relationship I would be inclined to adjust the publ. tr. to “o swelling ones .. swollen with swelling (strength).” It is difficult to say which of the qualifiers is/are being predicated of Indra and Agni with the bhūtám, but Ge, Re, and I seem all to have settled on sānasī́.

vā́ja- is modified by ghṛ́ṣvi- in IV.32.6, 9 and by sthávira- in VI.1.11, 37.5.

The two adjectives seem, if not contradictory, at least slightly incompatible, but note that Indra is qualified by the same two adjectives in the same order, case, and metrical location as here in III.46.1, VI.18.12. In keeping with the Indraic slant to 117 this hymn (on which see publ. intro.), it seems as if a phrase more appropriate to Indra has been transferred to the prize.

## 03-04
There is no main clause in vs. 3: the three co-referential participial phrases (… ichámānāḥ b, … nákṣamānāḥ c, … jóhuvataḥ …d) all simply expanding on the dependent cl. of pāda a, úpo ha yád … gúḥ “When they have come”).

However, the first pāda of vs. 4 echoes 3b exactly, save for number: 3b … víprāḥ prámatim ichámānāḥ (pl.) versus 4a … vípraḥ prámatim ichámānaḥ (sg.), vs. 4 seems to continue vs. 3. Interestingly enough, it is not possible to determine whether his new start in 4 is a main clause or continues the dependent cl. in vs. 3 -- though Ge, Re, and I all take it as an independent cl. The problem is that the finite verb ī́ṭṭe opens the second pāda; its accent then can be owing to its metrical position and it can be a main-cl. verb (as we all interpret it). However, the accent could also signal that it’s the verb of a dependent cl., and the whole complex of vss. 34 could be interpr.

“When the prize seekers have come …., (when) the inspired poet … invokes …, (then,) o Indra and Agni, further us …” -- in other words 4cd would supply the main cl. for all of 3-4ab.


## 07
In d the verb is pl. (śiśrathantu), but only two gods, Aryaman and Aditi, are mentioned in the pāda; the subjects must therefore include the gods found in b.
