+++
title = "094"

+++
Indra and Agni As noted in the publ. intro., this hymn is made up of four tṛcas, which were probably originally independent, since four 3-vs. hymns would fit the standard pattern of hymn arrangement, but a single 12-vs. hymn following one with 8 vss.

would not. There is little sign of unity within the separate tṛcas, but the content of the hymn as a whole is so generic that it would be hard to identify features that would either unify or distinguish the various parts. Also, there may be a faint, probably secondary, ring between the 1st vs. (1c) and the last (12d) (see comm. ad vs. 12), which may suggest that the four tṛcas were combined into a single hymn even before the redaction of the Saṃhitā text. The first tṛca (vss. 1-3) also has a faint sign of internal unity: the dual dvandva voc. índrāgnī beginning the b-pāda in each vs. However, the 3rd tṛca (vss. 7-9) also contains the same form in every vs. (7a, 8c, 9c), and 10b also begins with this cmpd., though there it is not a voc. but an acc., and it requires a distracted reading (indrā̆-agnī́-).


## 01
Both Ge and Re take ajani ‘has been born’ in c as the main verb for ab, while I take ab as a separate nominal cl. Either is possible. I would be more inclined towards the Ge/Re solution if mánmanaḥ were an ablative, parallel to abhrā́t in the simile (“has been born *from this conception, like rain from a cloud”). But though mánmanaḥ itself could be abl., it is anchored as a gen. by asyá, which must be adjectival (and hence go with mánmanaḥ) because of its accent. In fact, at least in tr.

“this … praise hymn of this conception” is a clumsy expression, though both Ge and Re make it slighly less so by adding ‘mine’ (“of this conception of mine”). Though 118 the 1st ps. ref. is not found in the text, it does ameliorate the tr. The point is the usual one, that the verbal product, the hymn, arises from the poet’s mental functions.


## 02
This vs. traces the genesis of the praise hymn further back: the poet’s insight (dhī́-) / conception (mánman-) that produces is the hymn is itself the product of the gods’ stimulation, here expressed by pipyataṃ dhíyaḥ “swell his insights.”


## 04
The loc. phrase índre agnā́beginning this tṛca echoes the repetitive voc. dvandva índrāgnī of the 1st tṛca.

## 05-06
Both vss. begin with the dual pronoun tā́, but the first is 3rd ps. (“these two”) and object of a 3rd ps. verb (īḷate … víprāsaḥ “the inspired poets invoke those two”), while the 2nd, followed by 2nd ps. enclitic vām, has switched reference to 2nd ps.

and is object of a 1st ps. verb (havāmahe “we call upon you two”) -- thus effecting a relationship of considerably more intimacy.


## 07
On īśata see comm. ad I.23.9.


## 08
On my reading *akásya for kásya after mā́, see comm. ad IV.3.13.


## 10
This vs. is a fragment, a yád clause without a main cl. It also contains an augmented intensive ájohavuḥ; this preterital form seems out of place in a hymn that lives almost entirely in the ritual present (our actions for Indra and Agni) and immediate future (via the imperatives we address to those same gods). (Only ajani in vs. 1 is preterital, but this aorist refers to the immediate ritual past.) The verse is also one of the few in this hymn that lacks parallel pādas or near repetitions elsewhere.

(See Ge’s nn and Bloomfield, RReps for some of the details, though Bloomfield does not list partial repetitions.)


## 11
This vs. is likewise a fragment, a nom. dual dvandva (vṛtrahántamā), which supports a rel. clause characterizing Indra and Agni, but no main clause. By my interpr. (and those of Ge and Re), this rel. cl. is nominal, with a predicated part.

mandānā́. Old takes the ambig. āvívasataḥ as a dual finite verb (but cannily doesn’t tr.); this interpr. requires an anomalous meaning for the form, whereas the interpr. as a gen. sg. participle, shared by Ge, Re, and me, allows the form to have its usual sense (“seek to win [the gods]”).


## 12
The 3rd ps. ref. of the nom. du. in vs. 11 is transformed into 2nd ps. ref. by the 2nd du. impv. hatam in 12b, mediated by the dual prn. tāú, which in this context, with a flg. impv., can have either 3rd or 2nd ps. ref. (see my “sá figé”).

Ge and Re take ābhogá- and udadhí- as PNs, which seems odd since both words are easily interpretable. The latter is in fact attested in other passages as a common noun meaning ‘water-holder, reservoir’ and its components are clear. I assume that the reason for assuming a PN is that a ‘water-holder’ is considered to be 119 a positive entity, and since it is to be smashed, it must be negatively viewed here. But “holding” water can shade into “withholding” water, a negative action. We might here also invoke the first vs., where the hymn is produced “like rain from a cloud.” A cloud can be considered a ‘water-holder’, and the positive and negative aspects of water-holding may be contrasted in the 1st and last vss.. As indicated above, although I do think the tṛcas in this hymn were originally independent, some sense of ring composition might have gone into their combining.

As for ābhogá, Old seriously doubts the gloss ‘snake’ found, e.g., in Gr. But I’m somewhat puzzled as to why. There is certainly a root √bhuj ‘bend, coil’ distinct from √bhuj ‘enjoy, benefit’, and bhogá- definitely means ‘(snake’s) coil’ in reference to Vṛtra in V.29.6 ... bhogā́n sākáṃ vájreṇa maghávā vivṛścát “the bounteous one hews apart his [=Vr̥tra's] … coils at one blow with his mace.”
