+++
title = "095"

+++
Sarasvatī


## 01
The problem in this vs. is rathyèva in c. Contextually the most obvious interpr. is as a nom. sg. fem., subject of yāti, but assuming the correctness of the Pp.

reading, rathyā̀iva (and there is no other viable alternative), it is difficult to find a way to get there morphologically. If it belongs to the vṛkī-inflected rathī́- ‘charioteer’, the nom. sg. should of course be rathī́s. Gr assigns it to this stem, but as an instr. sg., but who would this other charioteer in the instr. be? Ge/Re also interpr.

as an instr., but to a stem rathyā̀- ‘Fahrstrasse’ / ‘une route-carrosable’. See Ge’s somewhat opaque comm. in the 4th vol. of his tr. (p. 252, col. 3, ad II.4.6b) and Old’s more illuminating one, interpreting a previous, but similar formulation of Ge’s (ZDMG 61 [1907] 831-32 = Kl.Sch.262-63). Old himself prefers an interpr. as an acc. pl. rathyàḥ with double application of sandhi (to nom./acc. pl. *rathyàs iva).

Here the acc. pl. would presumably be parallel to “all the other waters” that Sarasvatī pushes ahead of her, but the simile would ill fit the passage. (Old does not transl.) The sequence rathyèva occurs several times elsewhere: II.39.2, 3, III.33.2, 36.6, VII.39.1. In all but III.36.6, rathyā̀is clearly the correct dual nom./acc. to the vṛkīstem, and in III.36.6 I interpret it also as a dual (contra most interpr.), for reasons given in the comm. ad loc. But here that solution, wedding morphology and sense, will not work. My ad hoc and admittedly entirely unsatisfactory “solution” here is to take it as a nonce fem. nom. sg. in -ā, perhaps based on asuryā̀(also nom. sg. fem.) in the 1st vs. of the next hymn (VII.96.1), also of Sarasvatī. The hymns are twinned and can be read against each other.


## 02
By my interpr. (as well as the standard ones), this vs. contains two forms of the act. pres. stem céta-, 3rd sg. cetat (or acetat: see immed. below) in pāda a and part.

cétantī in c. The first is found in the sequence ékācetat, analyzed by the Pp. as ékā acetat. This is perfectly possible, but an injunctive form is equally possible on textual grounds and in my opinion would fit the presential/resultative context better. See Gotō (1st cl., 138 and n. 181), who so interprets it. In any case, I take it as intransitive ‘shows / appears’, with ś́úciḥ as the predicate adjective. In c the participle cétantī has 120 the sense ‘perceives, takes note’ and governs the gen. rāyáḥ. Given the semantic multivalence of the root √cit and the pleasure poets take in manipulating and juxtaposing its forms, this functional shift within a verse is not surprising. (Gotō [p.

138] also assigns different functions to the two forms.) The intrans. use of cetat is supported by cetati in the same usage in the next hymn (VII.96.3).


## 03
The male subject of this vs. is not identified, but the Anukramaṇī identifies him as Sarasvant. This seems correct (despite doubts raised, e.g., by Old), given that half of the following hymn, the 2nd tṛca (VII.96.4-6), is devoted to him and he is mentioned by name in all three vss. The two hymns VII.95 and 96, despite being in different meter, should be read against each other. See comm. ad vs. 1 above.

I take med. māmṛjīta as reflexive, with Sarasvant both subj. and obj. (so also, apparently, Kü 373), though Ge thinks that the obj. is the racehorse and Re that both subj. and obj. are the racehorse.


## 04
On mitá-jñu- see comm. ad VI.32.3.

The sákhibhyaḥ of the final pāda must be Sarasvatī’s sister rivers. As Old points out, the stem sákhi- can be used of females as well as males; fem. sákhī- is absent from the older language. See also Re ad loc. For the glorification of Sarasvatī over the other rivers, see vs. 1 and implicitly vs. 2, as well as the 1st vs. of the next hymn (VII.96.1) and VI.61.9, 10, 13. The formulation “higher than ABL” is identical to the boast of the victorious co-wife in X.145.3 úttarāhám … úttaréd úttarābhyaḥ “I am higher, higher even than the higher ones (fem.).”


## 05
My interpr. of the syntax and the reference in this vs. differs considerably from the standard. Most (Ge, Re; see also Old) take b as parenthetic, with pāda a parallel to c, both containing nom. pl. m. med. participles with 1st ps. subjects, júhvānā(ḥ) and dádhānā(ḥ) respectively. The first part. is transitive with imā́as object. Hence, “Offering these (oblations, vel. sim.) … , setting ourselves in your shelter, we …” Under this interpr. according to Re, the yuṣmát in pāda a refers to the patrons, already found in vs. 3 -- rather loosely construed (“de votre part”). Ge fails to identify the 2nd pl. referent, while Old considers both the patrons and the rivers possible and makes no decision.

Although the Ge/Re(/Old) interpr. is certainly possible -- and has the parallelism of the two participles in its favor -- I am reluctant to bring in patrons, who figured only in the Sarasvant vs. 3, and I also prefer to avoid parenthetical clauses if at all possible. I therefore go against the Pp. in taking the first participle as júhvānā and neut. pl., rather than júhvānāḥ and masc. pl. As a nom. pl. neut., the part.

is passive and forms a nominal clause with imā́, with the participle predicated (as is not rare). The part. stem júhvāna- is found with both transitive and passive interpr.

(Note that Gr takes this form as passive, but as a nom. pl. fem. in -āḥ modifying his supplied gíraḥ ‘hymns’, represented by imā́ḥ [requiring him to go against the Pp reading imā́].) 121 By my interpr. of pāda a, the 2nd pl. refers to the (other) rivers just featured in 4d, and in the expression yuṣmád ā́, ā́means ‘all the way to’, though it must be admitted that ā́in that usage usually precedes (see Gr col. 169). Old himself suggests as one of his possibilities “bis zu euch hin” of the rivers or waters. The ambiguous position of ā́in the expression in 2b giríbhya ā́samudrā́t “from the mountains all the way to the sea” also has ā́directly before an abl. expressing goal.


## 06
Ge and Re seem to take vā́jān as the obj. of várdha as well as rāsi, while I supply Vasiṣṭha, the subject of the preceding hemistich.
