+++
title = "096"

+++
Sarasvatī (1-3), Sarasvant (4-6)


## 01
With Gr, Ge (etc.) I take gāyiṣe as a 1st sg. -se form of the stuṣé type; Old, fld by Re, takes it as a 3d sg. passive. Besides separating the form from the standard usage of stuṣé and the like, this leaves bṛhát … vácaḥ syntactically untethered. Old takes it in instr. sense, but it’s hard to get the neut. acc. to function that way.

Re also takes mahayā in c as a 1st sg. subjunctive, but an impv. works better with the voc. vasiṣṭha (d), an example of poetic self-address (treated in my 2005 Fs.

Skjaevø article).


## 02
On the interpretational problem posed by du. ubhé … ándhasī “both stalks,” see publ. intro. As indicated there, I do not subscribe to the interpretation that takes this as a metaphorical expression of political geography. Rather I assume that the usual sense of ándhas- ‘soma stalk’ à ‘soma’ allows the dual to refer to two liquids.

Ge (n. 2a) points out that in ŚB V.1.2.10 this dual is used for soma and surā (the profane intoxicating drink), and since in the Sautrāmaṇī ritual surā is mixed with milk, the second liquid could also be the more benign milk. Old makes a good case for the connection of soma and surā with Sarasvatī and also suggests that the formulation is meant to indicate that the Pūrus make use of profane drinks as well as soma. Re favors soma and surā without disc. Two textual passages nearer to hand suggest other possible solutions. As was noted ad VII.95.1, 3, these two adjacent hymns to Sarasvatī, VII.95 and 96, show twinning tendencies. In VII.95.2 (that is, the vs. corresponding to this one in position) Sarasvatī milks out “ghee and milk” (ghṛtám páyaḥ) for Nāhuṣa, probably the designation of a human family group or lineage (see Mayrhofer, Personennamen s.v. náhuṣ-); here the Pūrus (another such designation) preside over two liquids, which could be those very two. Alternatively, in this same hymn, VII.96.5, Sarasvant’s waves are characterized by honey and ghee (mádhumanto ghṛtaścútaḥ), and this pair is another possibility, esp. if ‘honey’ stands for soma, as often. These two vss. (2, 5) match each other in another way; see ad vs. 5 below. In the end, Ge’s interpr (at the end of his n.) that the Pūrus, living beside the Sarasvatī, inhabit a land rich in soma and milk seems to suggest the most likely image: whatever the two liquids are, they are indications of a place rich in nourishment -- in biblical terms, a land of milk and honey. 122 I do not know why the Maruts would be the particular companions of Sarasvatī, unless their storms swell her waters.


## 03
The subjunctive kṛṇavat seems to have a more strictly modal sense than most subjunctives; I am tempted to tr. “should do good” or “may she do good.”


## 04
Why Sarasvant should receive the pleas of bachelors seeking wives and sons is utterly unclear to me, and the standard tr./comm. don’t address this issue.


## 05
The third pāda of this vs., which is the 2nd vs. in the tṛca addressed to Sarasvant, the masc. equivalent of the far more prominent Sarasvatī, parallels that of the 2nd vs. in the tṛca addressed to Sarasvatī that opens this hymn: 2c sā́no bodhi avitrī́marútsakhā 5c tébhir no avitā́bhava Re suggests that this parallelism attests to the secondary character of Sarasvant. The difference between the two impvs. bodhi and bhava, both to √bhū, conforms to the positional distribution of these two forms discussed in my 1997 “Syntactic constraints on morphological change: The Vedic imperatives bodhi, dehi, and dhehi” (Syntaxe des langues indo-iraniennes anciennes, ed. E. Pirart).


## 06
The acc. phrase in ab pīpivā́ṃsam … stánam is the object, or one of the objects of bhakṣīmáhi in c, which makes the rel. clause yó viśvádarśataḥ, referring to the stána-, technically an embedded rel. But as we have often seen, nominal rel. cl. -- pseudo-izafes -- are regularly found embedded.

The expression “share in the breast” seems somewhat odd, but this “swelling breast” is presumably swelling with the honey and ghee in vs. 5. As noted in the publ.

intro., it is also odd to attribute this breast to the male figure Sarasvant. The more appropriate association between the breast and Sarasvatī is found in I.164.49, a passage adduced by Ge (n. 6ab).
