+++
title = "097"

+++
Indra and Bṛhaspati Re treats this hymn in EVP XV.66-69. For the structure of the hymn and the covert identification of Bṛhaspati (/Indra) with Agni, see publ. intro. This identification is argued for extensively by Schmidt (B+I, 62-67, which also contains a complete tr. and philological comm.).


## 01
This vs. plays on the ambiguity of reference of the noun nṛ́-, which can refer both to superior (mortal) men and to gods. It also cleverly but uninsistently identifies the sacrifice as the meeting place of men and gods, the nṛṣádana- ‘seat of men’ who come from / belong to both heaven and earth (diváḥ … pṛthivyā́ḥ) -- though see Ge’s n. 1a for other, in my opinion less likely, possibilities. The náraḥ in pāda b, however, seem only to be men proper, that is mortals, who seek the gods at the sacrificial common ground. 123 In c sunvé is one of the rare exx. of a singular verb with neut. pl. subj. (here sávanāni), a construction that is of course supported by comparative evidence. Gr interprets the verb rather as a 1st sg. transitive. This is not impossible -- and note the 1st pl. verb in 2a -- but sunve is otherwise passive, with 3rd pl. sunviré likewise passive.

In d the verb gáman (in sandhi) could represent either 3rd pl. gáman or 3rd sg.

gámat, but both the context, with Indra mentioned in the preceding pāda, and the parallel I.178.2d gáman na índraḥ sakhyā́váyaś ca support the 3rd sg.

The pāda is also marked by case disharmony: dat. mádāya and acc. váyaś ca appear to be joint complements of gámat, conjoined by ca. Such case disharmony is rare in ca collocations (see Klein DGRV I.56-57), but at least in this example poses no obstacle to understanding: the dat. expresses purpose, the acc. goal. Although neither Klein nor I find the construction problematic, Re supplies a second verb to govern váyaḥ (“obtenir”), and HPS interprets the acc. as an Inhaltsakk.

A more problematic issue, at least for me, is the position of ca, unmentioned by any one, incl. Klein. The standard tr./interpr. take the 2nd term of the conjoined NP to be prathamáṃ váyaḥ “first vitality/youth,” but we should then expect the ca to follow prathamám, the first word of the second member. Although such positioning is not an unbreakable rule, it is remarkably regular. To avoid the problem I take prathamám as an adverb here, as I do in the parallel I.83.4 (prathamám … váyaḥ without a ca), cited by Old and Re, for which see comm. ad loc. 
## 02
The problem in this vs. is maha (sandhi form) in b bṛ́haspatir no maha ā́ sakhāyaḥ. The Pp reads this as mahe, as do most subsequent interpr. -- though mahaḥ is possible and is in fact the interpr. of at least one tr.: HPS takes it as the voc. pl. of máh-, construed with sakhāyaḥ, hence “ihr grossen Freunde.” But this seems unlikely: there are no voc. forms to this stem in the RV (though the derived fem.

mahī́- does have some), and the intrusion of ā́in the middle of the voc. phrase seems unlikely. Others accept the Pp mahe and generally take it as a 3rd sg. verb, but opinions differ on its root affiliation and meaning. I will not detail these disagreements; see the disc. in Old, Ge’s n. 2b, Re ad loc., and Gotō 243-44. My interpr. is closest to Gotō’s: he assigns this to a root √mah ‘bring about’, separate from √mah ‘magnify’, with a t-less 3rd sg. of the śáye type (see also comm. ad I.94.1) and tr. “Bṛhaspati ist für uns imstande.” I differ from him in the interpr. of the rest of the pāda: he takes ā́as the trigger of an unexpressed verb of motion, “[kommet] o Genossen herbei.” This seems to assume that the friends addressed are not coreferential with naḥ earlier in the pāda, or the referents of the 1st ps. verbs in pādas a and c. I do not entirely understand the position of ā́, but it may show the occasional positioning of a preverb immediately after its verb or simply be an adverbial ‘here’, as in my tr.

As Re points out, the optative (bhávema) is quite unusual in a yáthā purpose cl., where the subjunctive is standard. See Gr s.v. yáthā, cols. 1083-84, nos. 6-8. 124


## 03
Both Ge and Re take great pains to avoid indentifying Indra in c with bráhmaṇas pátim in b and the elaboration on this phrase in d, but as discussed in the publ. intro. and extensively by HPS, the identification is the point.


## 04
The second pāda contains an equational rel. cl. with expressed copula ásti; main cl. equational expressions almost always lack copula (when asti is found, it is generally existential), but overt copulas are not uncommon in dependent clauses. It is of course optional; see the nominal rel. cl. in the preceding vs., 3d, which lacks copula.

Pāda c contains a phrase in the nominative, kā́mo rāyáḥ suvī́ryasya “desire for wealth in good heroes,” which is picked up abruptly by the acc. prn. tám, object of the immediately following verb dāt. There seems no other way to interpret it -- and it goes perhaps too easily into English -- but both the syntax and sense are slightly off.

The fronted expression seems like a topicalized phrase, but in Vedic topics would not default to the nominative but remain in the appropriate case for the larger syntactic frame; see in the next vs. the acc. phrase that occupies the whole of pāda a, which is the obj. of the verb in b. Moreover, one doesn’t give wishes/desires but rather the contents of those desires, so that the referent of tám may be rayí-, not kā́ma-. Both concerns suggest that the relationship between the kā́ma- phrase and the abbreviated táṃ dāt clause is less close than it appears. Re supplies some structure to the first phrase -- “(En nous est) le désir …” -- and something like that might produce the necessary distance.


## 05
On pastyā̀- see comm. ad I.40.7. As noted ad I.40.7 HPS in that passage renders the stem as ‘stream’ but here as ‘house’, the interpr. I prefer. Note that in our passage HvN should be corrected from pastiyā́nām to pastíyānām (that is, pastyā̀nām).


## 06
The construction of the vs. is uncertain in several regards, which center on the 2nd hemistich. The first is whether neut. sáhaḥ belongs in the rel. cl. or not; the position of rel. yásya is compatible with either answer. I take it as an independent qualifier of acc. bṛ́haspátim in b, hence an acc.: Bṛhaspati is identified with the abstract noun ‘strength / force’ itself. I therefore assume that the rel. cl. begins with yásya. This also seems to be the Ge solution. The sense of Re’s tr. is similar, but he puts sáhaḥ in the, or a, rel. cl. as a nominative -- taking c as containing two nominal rel. clauses: “lui dont la force-dominante (est réelle, dont) le séjour-commun (est) noir.” HPS makes sáhaḥ the subject of an equational rel. cl.: “dessen Gewalt eine schwarze Stätte ist.” Since I think it more likely that Bṛhaspati is identified as strength itself than that his seat is, I find Schmidt’s interpr. less likely, though it does have the merit of not inserting a syntactic break in the middle of a pāda. If Bṛhaspati is identified with sáhaḥ here (as I think), Schmidt’s claim that Bṛhaspati is identified with Agni in this hymn -- an identification esp. clear in this vs. (see publ. intro.) -- is strenthened, since Agni is so often called “son of strength” (sūnú- sáhasaḥ, e.g., in this maṇḍala VII.1.21, 22, 3.8, etc.). 125 A more interesting question is what to do with d. The pl. vásānāḥ is universally, and plausibly, taken as referring to to the horses of ab: in pāda they are called ‘ruddy’ (aruṣā́saḥ); in d they “clothe themselves in ruddy form” (rūpám aruṣám). The question then is whether d is simply a continuation of the main cl. in ab, the part. vásānāḥ modifying áśvāḥ in pāda a, with the rel. cl. of c embedded in it.

This is perfectly possible and seems to be the standard interpr. Although we prefer to avoid interpr. with embedded relatives, once again the rel. cl. in this instance is nominal (whichever finer grained interpr. we follow), and nominal relatives are systematic exceptions to this rule. However, I prefer to take d as a continuation of the rel. cl. introduced by yásya, with oppositional nominal expressions, contrasting Bṛhaspati’s dark seat with his horses which take on “ruddy form.” This interpr.

allows the ‘ruddy’ in d to be more than a pleonastic repetition of the same word in pāda a and gives more punch to the nī́lavat sadhástham of c by making it part of a contrastive pair. If this interpr. is correct, the part. vásānāḥ would be predicated.

Ge (n. 6bc) notes the word play between semantically and etymologically distinct saha- (b) and sáhaḥ (c). In fact the play is more tightly constructed than he indicates, with the chiastic figure saha-vā́ho vahanti / sáhaḥ, with the hemistich boundary isolating the semantically non-conforming word.


## 07
It is difficult to wring a causal sense out of hí here. The vs. continues the depiction of Bṛhaspati as Agni: the hundred feathers of the preening bird are the flames dipping and rising much like the action of preening; the golden axe or axes are likewise flames; while the descriptions in cd are focused on the role of Agni in the ritual.

On śundhyú- see comm. ad V.52.9.

I would now be inclined to tr. the bahuvrīhi híraṇya-vāśīḥ (for the inflection see AiG II.2.408) as implicitly pl. (‘having golden axes’, rather than the publ.

‘having a golden axe’ flg. Ge/Re) because it seems to refer to Agni’s flames. HPS tr.

“mit hundert goldenen Äxten bewaffnete” without comment; he seems to have silently transferred the śatá- from śatá-patraḥ in pāda a, presumably an oversight.

svāvesá- is somewhat difficult and disputed. HPS specifically rejects Velankar’s “easy of approach” and Re’s “d’accueil favorable”; Schmidt’s “mit seinem gute Eintritt” is closer to Ge’s “bringt Glück mit seinem Eingang.” HPS (p.

66) suggests that svāveśá ṛṣváḥ simply evokes the image of a fire flaring up, but I don’t see what ‘entrance’ has to do with that. I take it as ‘providing good/easy entrance’; here this would refer to the entry of the libations into the offering fire, an interpretation that is in harmony with d, which concerns the subject’s superior ability to provide āsutí-, the ‘pressed drink’, to his comrades, presumably the gods who consume the oblations through Agni as their mouth.


## 08
I take the ‘comrades’ addressed by the voc. sakhāyaḥ to be different from those mentioned in the dative in the preceding vs. There the comrades of the god were the (other) gods who receive the oblation from Agni; here they are the 126 comrades of the poet, who urges them to tend to the god. The identity of comrades obviously depends on who they are comrades to.

Pāda d implicitly echoes 4d.


## 10
On kīrí- see comm. ad V.52.10.
