+++
title = "098"

+++
Indra


## 01
Verbal forms of the root √pā ‘drink’ do not appear with the preverb áva in the RV or, indeed, elsewhere in Skt. But this noun stem avapā́na- is found 5x in the RV (I.136.4, VII.98.1, VIII.4.10, X.43.2, 106.2); in 3 of these passages (all but I.136.4, X.43.2) it is used of a wild beast come to drink; cf. (besides our passage) VIII.4.10 ṛ́ṣyo ná tṛ́ṣyann avapā́nam ā́gahi “like a thirsting antelope, come to the drinking (hole).” These specialized contexts suggest that rather than meaning simply “das Trinken, der Trunk” (Gr), the stem refers to a drinking hole frequented by wild animals (so already MonWms). The preverb áva ‘down’ would refer to the physical stance of animals lowering their heads to drink. The image of Indra beating buffalos to a watering hole is rather charming.


## 02
With Ge I take yád as a neut. rel. prn. rather than as the subordinating conj.

yád, though this poses some minor syntactic difficulties. If the referent is ultimately soma, we would expect a masc. form (yám); the neut. can be explained as “attraction” to the predicated “food” (neut. ánnam) in the same cl. (“what you made your food …”). As a resumptive pronoun in the main cl. we might also prefer *tásya to asya, though this is a small problem.


## 03
I might now slightly alter the tr. of the pf. part. jajñānáḥ to ‘having (just) been born’ to put emphasis on Indra’s prodigious actions immediately after his birth.


## 04
On the s-aor. of √sah see Narten (Sig.Aor. 264-67) and on the lengthened grade of some forms of this aor., as well as elsewhere in the root, see Narten (op. cit.) Gotō (1st Kl. 325-26), EWA s.v. SAH.

On the root noun vṛ́t-, see Schindler (Rt.Nouns s.v.); it belongs with √vṛ ‘obstruct’ (etc.), not, with Gr, √vṛt ‘turn’. In this passage a derivation from ‘obstruct’ makes sense for the defensive forces that provide an obstacle to the attacking army.


## 05
The first hemistich préndrasya vocam prathamā́kṛtā́ni, prá nū́tanā maghávā yā́cakā́ra is a variant on the famous opening of I.32: I.32.1ab índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi prá vocam, yā́ni cakā́ra prathamā́ni vajrī́. The two contain almost all of the same elements (prá vocam, índrasya, prathamā́(ni), yā́(ni) cakā́ra, nú / nū́tanā), with variation only with vīryā́ni ≅ kṛtā́ni and different epithets of Indra, maghávā / vajrī́.

Nonetheless the distribution of elements between clauses and the word order in each clause are significantly different. This variation is typical of RVic formulae, which 127 generally do not follow a fixed template and are not sensitive to meter alone (both vss. in question are Triṣṭubhs).

Re comments on VII.99-102 in ÉVP XV: 99-100 pp. 39-43, 101-2 pp. 113-14.
