+++
title = "099"

+++
Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu and Indra


## 01
Re supplies “other gods” as the subj. of ánv aśnuvanti in b. This seems perfectly acceptable, though not strictly necessary. And since in vs. 2 it is, presumably, mortals (since they are ‘born’) who fail to reach the limit of Viṣṇu’s greatness, mortals could also be the subject here. See remarks below on the formulatic connection between the two vss.

As Re points out, both the case of the complement (acc. versus gen.) and the voice (act. versus mid.) differ between 1st pl. vidma in c and 2nd sg. vitse in d. The middle voice of vitse makes sense, since Viṣṇu knows his own farthest realm; the variation in case is harder to account for. Perhaps the two earthly realms are subjects of direct knowledge, while the farthest realm is something even Viṣṇu only knows of.

## 01-02
The b-pādas of these two vss. are variants of each other, using two different roots for ‘attain’ (√naś, √āp) and two different formulations of ‘greatness’, the 2nd an elaboration on the first: 1b ná te mahitvám ánv aśnuvanti 2ab ná te … mahimnáḥ páram ántam āpa Another example of the freedom of RVic formulaics; see comm. ad VII.98.5 in the previous hymn for further on this.


## 02
Ordinarily the pres. part. should express ‘being Xed’, in contrast to the past part. ‘Xed’. But in this context jā́yamāna- must refer not to someone in the process of being born, but more likely someone who is still alive, against jātá-, someone born in the past and presumably now dead.


## 03
With Ge I take the first hemistich as Viṣṇu’s quoted speech. This, however, does not solve the puzzle posed by hí bhūtám. Is bhūtám an impv., as Ge takes it -- or an injunctive, with Re? If an imperative, how does it square with hí? This particle is not rare with imperatives, but it always seems somewhat problematic. Often it appears with the first impv. in a series, and the hí clause can command the action on which all subsequent actions depend, with the following impvs. often introduced by áthā -- see comm. ad I.10.3, 14.12, etc. -- but here there is no following imperative.

In the publ. tr. I manage a syntactic sleight-of-hand, reading bhūtám twice, once as an injunctive in a causal hí clause, to be construed with the two adj. in pāda a, írāvatī dhenumátī, and once as an impv. in a main cl., to be construed with the adj. in b, sūyavasínī (schematically “because you are X Y, become Z”). Although this works, it seems somewhat artificial and requires separating the three apparently parallel adjectives into two clauses. This interpr. was based in part on I.93.7, which contains 128 a clause ADJ ADJ hí bhūtám followed by an áthā cl. with an impv. to a different verb.

In the publ. tr. of I.93.7 I take bhūtám as an injunc (with Ge, Re). “Since you are X Y …, therefore …” But in the comm. I cast doubt on that interpr. and prefer an impv.

interpr. “Become X Y, then …” Therefore, I.93.7 is not necessarily a support for my publ. interpr. here; I still weakly prefer it because of the absence of a following impv., but now consider the alternative possible: “Become full of refreshment, rich in milkcows, affording good pasture …” The following impv. may be missing because Viṣṇu’s direct speech is truncated. (Despite their distance in the text, comparing I.93.7 to our passage is justified by the fact that the first pāda in the very next vs. in our hymn, 4a, is identical to I.93.6d, adjacent to the vs. under comparison.)


## 04
As was just noted, the first pāda of this vs. is identical to I.93.6d, where Agni and Soma are the dual subjects. Indeed, the identity of the dual subjects in this vs. is left hanging throughout the vs., and the poet may have left a false trail: the last du. 2nd ps. referents were the two world halves (ródasī), addressed by Viṣṇu in 3ab.

Assuming that the hymn as we have it is a unity (rather than consisting of two separate tṛcas, plus summary vs., as is possible), ródasī would remain a live possibility for the subj. of this vs. until the final pāda (d), where the 2nd du. subjects are addressed as narā ‘superior men’, suppling a gender that clashes with fem. ródasī.

But since nṛ́- has a wide range of reference, this still does not definitively identify them. Even the dual number leaves the identity open: nárā is used of the Aśvins (mostly), Indra-Vāyu, Indra-Agni, Indra-Varuṇa, Mitra-Varuṇa -- and only once (here) of this pair. It is only with the first word of the following vs. (5a), the voc. índrāviṣṇū, that the question is settled.

All of the deeds recounted in this vs. can be attributed to Indra alone (see publ.

intro.), although Viṣṇu’s role in enlarging and defining cosmic space may be alluded to in pāda a, with the creation of space for the sacrifice. Re’s claim that ab belong more to Viṣṇu, cd more to Indra is overstated: the cosmogony in b has little to do with what we know of Viṣṇu but is associated elsewhere with Indra.

As Old points out, the name of the Dāsa in c, Vṛṣaśipra, seems akin to Viśiśipra in V.45.6, whom Manu defeats (note that Manu figures in our vs. 3b) -- a connection not registered in Mayr.’s Personennamen. However, as noted in the comm. ad V.45.6, this gets us nowhere, since we know nothing further of either of these figures. More interesting is the potential relationship between these names and Śipiviṣṭa, the epithet of Viṣṇu found in the RV only in this hymn (vs. 7) and the next (VII.100.5, 6). The first member of this epithet, śipi-, looks like a Caland form of the 2nd member of the two names, śipra-, while the 2nd member, viṣṭá-, is esp. close to the 1st member of the name found in V.45.6, viśi-; vṛṣa- in our passage is a plausible reSansritization cum folk etymology of a possible MIA form *visi-, underlying viśi.


## 05
Both Śambara and Varcin are Indra’s targets elsewhere, with no involvement of Viṣṇu. They are conjoined objects (varcínaṃ śambaraṃ ca) of Indra’s smiting (áhan) in VI.47.21. 129 There is numerical play between the two hemistichs: in c the numbers are raised both by a digit (9 à 10) and by a factor of 10 (9 [/10] à 100; 90 [/100] à 1000). The connection is emphasized by the parallel structure of the numerical expression: b: #náva X navatíṃ ca / c: #śatám X sahásraṃ ca. Varcin is credited elsewhere with the same number of forces: II.14.6, IV.30.15.

I do not know why the verb is in the present in the second hemistich (hatháḥ) but aorist in the first (śnathiṣṭam). In the passages containing the other three occurrences of Varcin (II.14.6, IV.30.15, VI.47.21) the verbs are all preterital.


## 06
The adj. urukramá- ‘wide-striding’ is otherwise used only of Viṣṇu (5x), but here encompasses Indra as well, in the dual.

The dual dvandva voc. índrāviṣṇū that opened vs. 5 is here divided into two pāda-final vocc. in c (viṣṇo), d (indra). Presumably because they belong to separate clauses, the dvandva doesn’t decompose into a vāyav indraś ca construction, but it does follow such constructions in placing the 2nd member of the dvandva first (see my 1988 “Vāyav indraś ca revisited,” MSS 49: 13-59).


## 07
On śipiviṣṭa see comm. ad vs. 4.

