+++
title = "100"

+++
Viṣṇu


## 01
The meter of the first pāda is badly off and is not easily fixable. See Old.

He suggests a distracted reading of nū́and records the suggestion that márto should be emended to márti yo, which HvN print as their text. If both are adopted (distracted nū́and márti yo; so Arnold p. 310), the line achieves 11 syllables, but the price may be too high, esp. as the light fourth syllable would be unusual.

Although dáyate generally means ‘distribute (goods to someone else)’, e.g., I.68.6 tásmai … rayíṃ dayasva, in a few passages it seems to have adopted the more “middle” meaning ‘receive/take a share’, perhaps adjusted to the model of other words of sharing, esp. bhájate ‘receive a share’ versus act. bhájati ‘share out, distribute shares’. See Gotō (1st Kl., 172-73), whose tr. of this passage is close to mine. As noted ad II.33.10, I do not subscribe to Gotō’s separation of forms of dáyate into two separate roots.

The three subsequent pādas (bcd) state the conditions under which the mortal in pāda a will receive the longed-for share. They are marked by the rel. prn. yáḥ in b and c; adopting Re’s strategy I have rendered them as conditionals (“if”) for clarity, rather than as straight rel. clauses (“who”). Unfortunately I don’t think my tr. makes it clear that cd are parallel to b, rather than being part of a resumed main clause, and I would now slightly emend the tr. to “…, if he will set … and will seek …”). The apparent non-parallelism is exacerbated by the fact that the verbs of c and d (yájāte and āvívāsāt respectively) are subjunctives, whereas dā́śat in b should be the injunctive to the thematic pres. dā́śati, which elsewhere attests a real subjunctive (dā́śāt). KH discusses just this passage (Inj. 238), suggesting that in such contexts the indicative present, injunctive, and subjunctive overlap in usage. 130


## 03
Flg. a suggestion by Ge (n. 3a, though not reflected in his tr.), I take eṣáin pāda a (also 4a) as belonging to the stem eṣá- ‘quick’, which is used several times of Viṣṇu in the gen. expression víṣṇor eṣásya (II.34.11, VII.40.5, VIII.20.3), in which confusion with the nom. pronominal eṣá(ḥ) (possible here) is excluded.

The hapax śatárcas- is problematic. The Pp analyses the 2nd member as arcasam, but Wackernagel (AiG I.318) points out that the sandhi between the cmpd members would require rather -ṛcasam. However, Old disputes this, claiming that it would then have to be written (“… geschrieben werden müssen”) *śatáṛcasam , though it’s not clear to me why. Interpr. differ significantly: Sāy. glosses with arcis-.

Old posits a masc. s-stem *arcás- ‘singer’, comparing VI.34.3 yádi stotā́raḥ śatáṃ yát sahásraṃ gṛṇánti “When a hundred, when a thousand praisers sing to him …,” an interpr. followed by Ge -- though the connection between the two passages seems tenuous to me. By contrast, Re tr. “au cent éclats,” perhaps flg. Sāy.’s arcís-. Since an infinitival dat. ṛcáse ‘to praise, for chanting (praise)’ is found in VI.39.5 and VII.61.6, it seems reasonable to take the underlying stem ṛcas- as the base here, as Gr does, glossing ‘hundertfach zu preisen’. My ‘worth a hundred verses’ is close to that, though perhaps ‘praises, chants’ would be better.

Because of the lack of accent on asya, it should be pronominal, not adjectival; I would adjust the tr. to “of him, the stalwart.”

## 03-04
As noted in the publ. intro., vss. 3 and 4 are responsive. The first pāda of 4 concentrates the essence of the 1st two pādas of 3, substituting ví cakrame (of 3b) for trír deváḥ (in 3a) at the beginning of the pāda. This phrase, trír deváḥ, is short a syllable; Old suggests reading t·rir, but this seems unlikely: I don’t know of any other disyllabic readings of this extremely common numeral (either as 1st cmpd member tri- or adverbial trís). I suggest rather that the metrically disturbed opening draws attention to the beginning of this set of paired vss. by being flawed and is “repaired” by 4a. See similar remarks about 3c and 5c ad vs. 5.


## 04
By concentrating Viṣṇu’s strides in the first pāda of 4, the poet is free to express the aim of Viṣṇu’s action -- creating space and dwelling places for the people

-- in the rest of the vs. As Ge points out (n. 4c), asya can refer either to Viṣṇu or to Manu, although in actuality this may not matter. It may be an instance of “trickle-down” ownership: Viṣṇu makes a dwelling place for Manu, and in turn Manu’s people also get firmly planted. Or, Manu and the people may both be under Viṣṇu’s auspices.


## 05
On the name Śipiviṣṭa, see comm. ad VII.99.4. Note that Viṣṇu’s name was already celebrated in 3d, though the actual name is not mentioned there.

The syntactic affiliation of aryáḥ is disputed: the question is whether it depends on vayúnāni or simply picks up te in the previous pāda. With Ge and Re I follow the latter course; Re argues cogently that vayúna- √vid does not normally have a “régime extérieur” (though I.72.7, II.19.3 appear to be exceptions). I would 131 further add that since Śipiviṣṭa seems a type of “secret name,” referring to Viṣṇu as a stranger (arí-) might fit with that. By contrast Thieme construes aryáḥ with vayúnāni, in two somewhat different ways: Fremdling (1938, p. 41) “… kennend die Ordnungen, die für den Fremdling gelten,” later corrected in Unters. (1949, 22 n. 1) to “… kennend die Geheimnisse des Fremden.” The end of pāda c tavásam átavyān#, with the s-stem adj. followed by a (negated) comparative to the same root, nicely echoes the end of 3c with the same configuration but the comparative not negated: tavásas távīyāni. The employment of longer and shorter forms of the comparative (i.e., with or without the linking vowel - ī-) allows the phrases to make an almost exact metrical match -- except that the cadence of 5c is faulty (... -sam átavyān), with a light syllable at the beginning (and in fact 5 light syllables in a row (… -i tavásam a-), starting right before the caesura and continuing through the break and into the cadence. As in the paired vss. 3-4 the metrical disturbance may call attention to the formulaic match. átavyān also picks up kīráyaḥ ‘(even) the weak’ in 4c semantically.

In d the pres. part. kṣáyantam is rendered by both Re and Th (Fremdl.) as if it belongs to √kṣi ‘dwell’ (“qui résides” and “… [dich,] der da wohnt”), but the part. to the root pres. of that root is kṣiyánt-; the part. here must belong to √kṣā ‘rule over’ (them. pres. kṣáyati). Ge may be trying to have it both ways with his “der … thront,” if my German dictionaries are correct in glossing thronen as “sit enthroned.”


## 06
Exactly what this vs. is trying to tell us is unclear. Most tr. and comm. take paricákṣya- as referring to something blameworthy (tadelnswert); so, e.g., Ge (“Was war an dir zu tadeln …?”), Old, KH (Injunc. 78-79). But the other example of this gerundive in VI.52.14 modifies vácas- specifically and seems to mean ‘to be disregarded, overlooked’: mā́vo vácāṃsi paricákṣyāṇi vocam “let me not speak words to you that can be disregarded.” Esp. because the verb in the dependent cl.

belongs to √vac, pf. vavakṣé, it seems reasonable to supply ‘speech’ here as well.

The point seems to be that we should have paid attention when he called himself Śipiviṣṭa, and that even when he appears in other form(s), he should not keep the form of Śipiviṣṭa concealed from us, any more than we should not notice the name.

But what these statements are in service of, I have no idea -- and the hymn ends here (save for the repeated vs. 7, which, however, makes a point of addressing Viṣṇu as Śipiviṣṭa).

