+++
title = "101"

+++
Parjanya


## 01
As was noted in the publ. intro., this hymn has a penchant for triplets, but it is not always clear which three entities are referred to -- as in this vs., at least for me, with “the three speeches.” As Ge points out (n. 1a), the identities of the speeches depends on the identity of the addressee of the impv. “speak forth” (prá vada). If it is Parjanya, the dedicand of the hymn, they probably refer to thunder(claps) (so, e.g., Lü, Va 392 -- three because they sound in the three heavenly domains) or thunder, lightning, and rain (so, e.g., Doniger 174). I am inclined to follow Lü but for reasons 132 differing from his. I suggest that this could be an early version of the triple utterance “da da da” of Thunder in BĀU V.2, made famous in the West by T. S. Eliot in the section of The Wasteland entitled “What the Thunder Said.” Note that in BĀU V.2.3 Thunder or the thundering one (stanayitnuḥ) is identified as daivī vāk (like the three vā́c- here).

If the impv. is the self-address of the poet, it would refer probably to the three types of ritual speech (ṛ́c-, sā́man-, yájus-), or, on the basis of VII.33.14 (which contains prá vadāty ágre, similar to our prá vada [jyótir]agrā), solemn speech (ukthá-), melody (sā́man-), and the sound of the pressing stone -- or, less likely in my view, with Ge three dynamic levels of sound, soft, medium, loud. Needless to say, both sets of referents may be meant. In the natural world interpr., the “light at the front” would of course be lightning; in the ritual interpr. it would be the ritual fire.

The three speeches milk the udder of pāda b. Again the identities of the referents of the udder and the liquid it produces depend on the referents in pāda a. In the natural world interpr., the udder would be heaven or the clouds therein, the liquid the rain; in the ritual the udder would probably be the soma plant and the liquid the soma -- though the udder could possibly be the sacrifice as a whole and the good things that result from its performance.

On vā́d- prá √vad see comm. ad VII.103.1.

In the publ. tr. of the 2nd hemistich it was not made clear which nouns go together -- since Engl. lacks the convenient tool of case. The calf (vatsám) is the same as the embryo of the plants (gárbham óṣadhīnām); both are objects of the participle ‘creating’ (kṛṇván), whose subject is the bull (vṛṣabháḥ), which is also the referent in the phrase “as soon as he is born” (sadyó jātáḥ) and the subj. of “sets to bellowing” (roravīti). The calf, embryo of the plants, is most likely Agni, who is so called elsewhere (see Ge n. 1c). Ge suggests that it is Agni as lightning, which is possible, but I assume that lightning and the ritual fire are here assimilated, via a trope whereby the sound of thunder, likened to ritual speech, kindles the ritual fire.

The bull is surely Parjanya, as is confirmed by the identical phraseology of vs. 2 of the next, related hymn (VII.102.2): yó gárbham óṣadhīnām … kṛṇóti … / parjányaḥ.


## 02
Multiple candidates have been suggested for the three lights of d, but it should be pointed out that there is actually only one light (jyótiḥ), which has three vartu-s (trivártu). Unfortunately this adj. is a hapax, but it is most likely related to the better attested trivṛ́t-. For the relationship between these two and the uncertainty of the root affiliation (√vṛt [which I favor] or √vṛ), see Scar (511). If the form does belong with √vṛt we should properly expect *trivarttu, but of course rTT and rT clusters can generally only be distinguished on etymological grounds (see AiG I.112-14). As for our form, AiG II.2.663 (with lit.) suggests that trivár(t)u in this passage is a nonce creation modeled on well-attested tridhā́tu found in the preceding pāda (c).

In any case the triply layered shelter and triply turned light conform to the triadic focus of this hymn; I’m not sure they need to be more specifically identified. 133


## 03
As disc. in the publ. intro., this vs. is full of gender ambiguity and gender switching, in service of the Vedic love of paradox. Although the subject of the first hemistich is surely Parjanya, he is not identified by name, and a masc. gender pronoun only appears as the very last word of the half-vs. (… eṣáḥ) -- while the state and activity ascribed to the subject of pāda a are quintessentially female.

In the 2nd hemistich the referents probably align well with the implied genders, unlike pāda a: by most interpr. the mother is Earth, the father is Heaven, as usual.

But the action, at least in pāda c, is paradoxical, since it is the “milk” (páyaḥ) of the father that the mother accepts. This milk is of course a metaphor for rain. In d it is said that both the father and son grow strong on it, another apparent paradox.

Assuming that the father is Heaven, this is probably an early ref. to the water cycle: rain produces plants, which ultimately produce the offerings sent to heaven via the smoke of sacrifice, swelling the clouds that then again produce rain. By most accounts the “son” who is also strengthened in d refers to mankind, the offspring of the earth.


## 04
This extravagant claim of Parjanya’s cosmic centrality -- all creatures, the three heavens, and the waters all take him as their basis -- must derive from his control of the rain, as the second hemistich suggests and 5cd further develops. The vs. is also made up of pādas with either exact (a, d) or near repetitions (b, c) elsewhere in the RV (see Ge’s nn. 4a, 4c, 4d and for pāda b partial reps. in I.35.6, VII.87.5; VII.90.4, X.111.8), which may account for the generic impression it gives.


## 05
The subjunctive jujoṣat in b would fit the context better with a modal reading (“let him enjoy it / may he enjoy it”), surrounded as it is by impvs. (astu b, santu c) -- though the standard rendering of the subjunctive, as given in the publ. tr., is certainly not excluded.


## 06
With Lü (506), I take the first hemistich as a truth-formulation, summarily referred to by tád ṛtaṃ “this truth” beginning c.

