+++
title = "103"

+++
Frogs 134 My interpr. of this hymn relies on the treatment of it in my 1993 article “Natural History Notes on the Rigvedic 'Frog' Hymn,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 72-73 (1991-92 [1993]) [=Amṛtamahotsava Volume, for 75th anniversary of the BORI], pp. 137-44. Since this article is not universally accessible, I will reproduce much of the commentary here (without particular ref. to pg. nos. or to the sec. lit. that is excerpted there). The hymn is one of the most popular in the RV and has been constantly tr. -- e.g., besides the usual, Macdonell (VRS and Hymns …), Renou (Hymnes spéculatifs), Thieme (Gedichte), Maurer, Doniger.


## 01
This first vs. is in Anuṣṭubh, as opposed to the rest of the hymn, which is Triṣṭubh, and it reads like a scene-setting introduction. Old suggests that it’s an addition.

The natural history phenomenon corresponding to the “year-long vow” (saṃvatsarám … vrata-[cāríṇaḥ]) undertaken by the frogs is surely estivation, as was already suggested by H. H. Bender in 1917 (“On the Naturalistic Background of the ‘Frog-Hymn,’ RV VII. 103,” JAOS 37: 186-91). The rains (here embodied in Parjanya) trigger the emergence of the frogs, in a frenzy to mate—what is known as “explosive breeding.” A loud chorus of male vocalizations attends the mating, calling females to the breeding place.

The pf. of √śi ‘lie’ is represented in Vedic only by the med. part. śasayāná-, found twice in the RV (also V.78.9). It has full-grade for expected zero-grade in the root syllable, matching the full-grade forms of the archaic root pres. śáye, part.

śáyāna-.

The presence of the stem brāhmaṇá- is of course a sign of the lateness of this hymn, since it is restricted to only the latest layer of the RV.

I now think the phrase brāhmaṇā́vratacāríṇaḥ “(like) brahmins following their commandment” may be a sly reference to brahmacárya- (first found in the AV, but cf. brahmacārín- in late RV X.109.5), which refers not only to the studentship phase of life stages, but also, specifically, to celibacy. The frogs, by virtue of their estivating state of suspended animation, have perforce been celibate, but they now go about energetically remedying the situation.

The phrase vā́cam … prá √vad is reminiscent of nearby VII.101.1 tisró vā́caḥ prá vada in a hymn to Parjanya, who is the instigator of the frogs’ speech here.


## 02
The comparison of the estivating frog to a “dried-out leather bag” (dṛ́tiṃ ná śúṣkam) may reflect a natural phenomenon: a 1932 “Notes on Indian Batrachians” by one C. McCann in the Bombay Journal of Natural History recounts an experiment undertaken by him that involved depriving frogs of water until they became shrunken and dried out like pieces of wood and then rehydrating them, at which point they began behaving normally.

It is difficult to interpr. sarasī́as anything but a loc., but its morphology is a bit problematic. To the well-attested -s-stem sáras- ‘pond’, the loc. sg. is the expected sárasi (IX.97.52), but our form not only shows an unusual ending with a long ī, but it also bears the accent. No other forms to a putative stem sarasī́- (so Gr, 135 etc.) are found. Wackernagel-Debrunner (AiG II.1.306; II.2.384) also posit a sarasī́- stem, a vṛkī-type fem. with collective meaning, with loc. sg. in -ī́(AiG III.170; see also Lanman, Noun Inflection, 389), by way of a contraction of *sarasí y

-i. Though
vṛkī́-loc. sgs. are rare, see nadī́(I.135.9) and gaurī́(IX.12.3) to better established vṛkī́-stems. On balance, it seems best to posit a stem sarasī́- with Gr, Lanman, Old, Wackernagel-Debrunner, etc., but I do so reluctantly because of its extreme isolation and the widespread attestation of the -as-stem sáras-.


## 03
This vs. contains the famous hapax akhkhalīkṛ́tya with the otherwise nonoccurring (in Skt.) cluster -khkh-. The word was brilliantly explained by Thieme (KZ [1951] 109 = KlSch 138). He sees it as the first attested cvi formation in Sanskrit.

The base noun is akṣára- ‘syllable’, and the sense would be ‘making syllables’ -- a reference to the Indian pedagogical technique, still in use today in traditional instruction, of students repeating the text after the teacher, syllable by syllable, word by word. Here the teacher would be the father, as was most likely the original situation -- hence pitáraṃ ná putráḥ “like a son to his father.” Since even in RVic times the language used in instructing young boys would surely have been an early form of Middle Indo-Aryan, it would not be surprising that this technical pedagogical term should appear in MIA garb: akṣára should yield *akkhara- in early MIA -- and in fact does; cf. Pāli akkhara-. This has simply been transformed into the more “froggy” sounding *akhkhara- à akhkharī- in the cvi formation. This onomatopoetic rendering of a frog call is worthy to take its place beside the better known imitation in Aristophanes’s brekekekex koax koax. In fact, because the word does double duty in this passage -- imitating frog vocalizations directly, while implicitly comparing the frog chorus to the call-and-response style of childhood instruction -- our word seems even more ingenious and well chosen than the Greek. And it is quite striking that both the Greek and the Sanskrit immediately convince as froggy, though they are phonologically very distant from each other.


## 04
The verb in the first pāda, ánu gṛbhṇāti, is generally rendered with an anodyne ‘greet’ (Macdonell, Maurer, Doniger; sim. Re ‘salue’), ‘support’ (unterstützt, Ge), or is given a specifically ritual interpr. (Thieme, Gedichte). But the lexeme has a straightforward literal sense ‘grasp in following, grasp from behind’, and this literal meaning exactly describes the posture of frog mating (“amplexus”), with the male grasping the female around her middle with his forefeet (sometimes facilitated by so-called “nuptial pads” developed during the mating season). Since once achieved, this posture is held for long periods—hours, days, even weeks or months—it would be visually salient to any Vedic bard outdoors during the rainy season, which is also the frog mating season. The only potential problem with my interpr. is that the obj. of the verb is masc. anyám. However, the expression here anyó anyám “the one … the other” is already stereotypical in the RV for any mutual activity and will soon be frozen as the adverb anyonyam ‘mutually’. Moreover it is not impossible that the original text had a fem. *anyā́m (anyó *anyā́m ánu gṛbhṇāti enoḥ): four-syllable openings almost always have a heavy fourth syllable (see Arnold, 136 188), whereas the transmitted text has a light one. Thus *anyā́m could have been changed redactionally to anyám on the basis of the later adverb.

Note the phonetic echo … ámandiṣātām / maṇḍū́kaḥ.

The intens. kániṣkan in c, ‘hopped and hopped, continually hopped’, is a nice description of the apparently random and chaotic “scramble competition” of male frogs seeking partners.


## 05
The pedagogical model seen in vs. 3 is made more explicit here: the repetition of one frog’s call by another is likened to that of a pupil and his teacher (śāktásyeva … śikṣamāṇaḥ).

With Maurer, I take sárvam … párva as referring to a group of frogs, not to the section of a lesson with most others.


## 06
This vs. reflects the natural fact that different frogs have different cries, which allow the females to differentiate conspecific males from those unsuitable for their mating.

## 07-09
With the behavioral model of the frogs established in the first 6 vss., the next three treat the ritual application of this model.


## 07
The first ritual application is that of the Atirātra or “Overnight” soma ritual. Frogs are generally nocturnal; they are active during the day only if the weather is rainy or very humid. So, the first signal to humans of the frogs’ emergence from estivation would be the sound of the nocturnal frog chorus when the rain supplied them with the impetus to emerge. Hence they are compared to brahmins at an Overnight ritual speaking around a soma vessel configured as a pond.

The similes are complexly intertwined: the frogs are compared to brahmins, but those hypothetical brahmins are then implicitly compared to frogs around a pond - in other words to the original target of comparison.


## 08
But as the day dawns, the frogs become visible, with their drive to mate overriding any instinct to flee or conceal themselves. This visibility is insistently conveyed by “[they] become visible; none are hidden” (āvír bhavanti gúhyā ná ké cit).

The frogs are compared to two different kinds of priests: brahmins (7a, 8a), who are here responsible for ritual speech, and Adhvaryus (8c), the priests who do the physical labor in Vedic ritual. They are “sweating” (siṣvidānā́ḥ): sweat is a sign of hard ritual labor in Indo-Iranian religious terminology (see my 2011 [2015] “Avestan xšuuīd: A Relic of Indo-Iranian Ritual Vocabulary,” Bulletin of the Asia Institute 25: 19-29). Here, once again the image does double duty -- the frogs would be covered with water drops from the rains, but they are also compared to the hard-working priests officiating at the Pravargya ritual. The Pravargya is an especially sweatinducing ritual, since it involves a hot milk drink (gharmá-), which must be tended as it is heated over the fire. Other features of the Pravargya conform to aspects of the hymn: there is a year-long dīkṣā (period of consecration for the sacrificer), reflected 137 in both 1a (saṃvatsaráṃ śaśayānā́ḥ “lying for a year”) and 8b (bráhma kṛṇvántaḥ parivatsarī́ṇam “creating their yearly sacred formulation”); this dīkṣā involves a taboo on water or moisture of any kind. But the most crucial intersection between the Pravargya and frog behavior is found in the next vs. Note in passing the non-etym. figure vā́cam akrata bráhma kṛṇvántaḥ with two forms of √kṛ governing two words for speech, with the subject, brāhmaṇā́saḥ in a derivational relationship to the 2nd form of speech.


## 09
The year-long preparation for the Pravargya rite is again emphasized here in the first three pādas.

In b the ná is potentially ambiguous. The first reading is no doubt the negative: the ritualists/frogs do not fail to observe the proper ritual calendar. The VP ná (…) (prá) minanti is quite common (e.g., II.24.12, III.28.4, X.10.5). But ná could also be a simile marker in the phrase náro ná, for, after all, the subjects are frogs, compared to men. Since ná occupies the fifth syllable of the pāda, either reading is compatible with its position: an early caesura, followed by ná, for the negative reading; a late caesura, preceded by ná, for the simile.

The final pāda of the vs. is the ritual climax: the gharmá-drinks, heated on the fire, bubble up and overflow their vessel, as milk does when it’s been left too long on the stove. The “obtain their own release” (aśnuvate visargám, note the middle verb), a phrase rendered rather generically by many tr. (e.g., Doniger “the hot fires come to an end”; Maurer “the heated receptacles get emptied out”), is in my view a rendering of the dramatic moment when the bubbling mass boils over. I further suggest that its analogue in the natural world is the female frog’s release of her masses of eggs (up to 2000+ in some species), which are fertilized by the male as they are released - which must be a visually striking event. It may also refer to the practice of some frogs of making a “foam nest” in which to deposit the eggs, liquid albumen whipped up by the frog’s hind legs into a “dense light foam” -- a process that also might appear like milk boiling over.


## 10
The frogs’ release and fertilization of masses of eggs in the preceding vs. serves as a model for the fertility and increase of the ritualists that are major aims in Vedic rituals. This is surely the sense conveyed by the final vs. of the hymn, describing various types of frogs as “giving” goods and hundreds of cows to us, as well as lengthening both their and our lifetimes. They do so “at a pressing of thousands,” which can literally refer to the release of the frogs’ eggs. The prodigious fertility of frogs (no matter what happens subsequent to the thousands of eggs produced) is an encouragement to our own..

The publ. tr. renders prá tiranta ā́yuḥ as “they lengthened (their / our) life.” But the verb is of course tirante, a present indic., out of sandhi and the tr. should be corrected to “lengthen.”

