+++
title = "104"

+++
Multiple divinities, to destroy demons and ward off evil 138 See the publ. intro. for an intro. to this complex composite hymn and its parts.

Complete translations are given by Norman Brown (“The Rigvedic Equivalent for Hell,” JAOS 61 [1941]: 76-80) and Herman Lommel (“Vasiṣṭha und Viśvāmitra,” Oriens 18-19 [1965/66]: 200-27), as well as Doniger.


## 01
The verse contains a remarkable eight verbs of violence, with three in the last pāda alone -- all quite different.


## 02
The syntactic function of aghám in pāda a is ambig. It could be an acc. sg.

masc. parallel to agháśaṃsam, the object of yayastu. So Wh (tr. of AV VIII.4.2) “against the evil plotter, the evil …” The pāda break following it might support this reading. However, it can also be a neut. sg., modifying tápuḥ and therefore the subject of yayastu, as in the publ. tr., flg. Ge, followed also by most subsequent tr.

Ge’s cited parallel, VI.62.8, where tápur aghám belong together, seems decisive here.

See also V.3.7, where aghám is used as a weapon against an agháśaṃsa-: ádhī́d aghám agháśaṃse dadhāta “set evil upon him, the speaker of evil.” The simile particle iva in the simile carúr agnivā́m̐iva is postposed, but such late placement of simile markers is not uncommon in the RV.

The hapax anavāyá- is unclear. Old approvingly cites Bergaigne’s gloss ‘qu'on ne peut détourner par des supplications’, and this interpr. seems to inform most subsequent tr., including mine. But this interpr. should rest on the lexeme now understood to be áva √yā ‘appease’, and I do not see how the morphology would work. √yā has a zero-grade ī, but no ay- forms -- but (an-)avāya- can only be broken down into ava+ay-a, containing no elements of √yā/ī. AiG fails to treat this form. Re (EVP XVI.114) tries briefly to get it from áva √ī, but decides that áva √i is “simpler.” This is certainly the case morphologically, but the semantics are harder: áva is not a particularly common preverb with √i and when it appears, the lexeme generally means ‘go down’ (with ‘down’ the physical direction), occasionally more generally ‘go away’. Re cites V.49.5 ávaitu ábhvam, claiming that the verb there means ‘céder’, thus allowing our form to means ‘qui ne cède pas’. But I do not see a ‘cede’ sense in that passage, just ‘go away’. This is, in fact, the interpr. found in RIVELEX (I.181), which glosses the stem anavāyá- as ‘nicht weggehend’ -- ‘not going away’ (metaphorically ‘nicht vergehend, verbleibend’, 181 n. 1) and analyses as a “Verbales Rektionskompositum/Dete<r>minativkompositum” an- + avāya- ‘weggehend’ (< áva + √ay1

-). This must be the correct analysis, though I am sorry to
abandon the richer semantics of a derivation from áva √yā. My publ. tr. ‘unrelenting’ can still probably stand, as a strengthened expression of ‘not going away’. (Note in passing that RIVELEX I.394 [s.v. ay1

-] glosses verbal forms of áva + this root as
‘herabsteigen; Abbitte leisten — descend; apologize’; the second terms of the German and English glosses must result from confusion with áva √yā / ī and should be stricken.) The rendering ‘worm-eater’ for kimīdín- here and in the following vs., as well as in X.87.24, is based on a suggestion of Schindler and Werba recorded in EWA s.v. and also entertained by Scar (41). Note that in X.87.24 it is associated with 139 yātudhā́na- ‘sorcerer’, which stem figures prominently later in our hymn as well as in other parts of X.87.


## 03
The first hemistich of this vs. contains 2 locative phrases, vavré antár (a) and anārambhaṇé támasi (b). Essentially all tr. are agreed that the two phrases are parallel and refer to the same place -- and this is reasonable and probably would be the default reading. This interpr. in turn leads some (see esp. Norman Brown and Oberlies I.473) to take this as a description of Hell, or the RV equivalent thereof. My interpr. is syntactically bolder, and perhaps less well supported, but it arises from my discomfort with equating the enclosed space denoted by vavrá- (which is several times used of the Vala cave, e.g., IV.1.13, V.31.3) with “ungraspable darkness.” Because these locales seem incompatible, I take vavré antár as referring to the place where the evil-doers are hiding / taking refuge, and the action enjoined on Indra and Soma in b is to roust them from this hole and thrust them into a dark void with no handhold, the very opposite of an enclosure. A similar use of vavré antár as a place from which creatures are ejected is found in the account of the Vala myth in V.31.3 prā́codayat sudúghā vavré antár “(Indra) impelled forth the good milkers (who were) within the cave.” The action there is of course benign, but the loc. phrase also refers to the original location of the cows, not their destination. I must confess, however, that vs. 17 in our hymn, with the phrase vavrā́m̐anantā́n “holes without end” into which the villainess is to fall, does give me pause. (On the other hand, vs. 17 is in a portion that was probably a late addition to the hymn; see publ. intro.)


## 04
The lexeme úd √takṣ (lit. ‘fashion up’) that opens the 2nd hemistich occurs only here in the RV, and at least acdg. to Monier Wms nowhere else in Skt.; it was clearly artificially generated to contrast with the verb nijū́rvathaḥ (‘grind down’) at the end of the hemistich, to highlight the úd ‘up’ / ní ‘down’ contrast.


## 05
párśāna- occurs only 3x in the RV (and nowhere else in Skt.), here and in VIII.7.34, VIII.45.41. It has no good etymology (see EWA s.v.). The sense of ‘deep place, chasm’ is thus entirely dependent on context. Such a meaning is compatible with all three passages; the strongest support for it is VIII.7.34 giráyaś cin ní jihate párśānāso mányamānāḥ “Even the peaks bend down, thinking themselves depths.” Parallel locatives in VIII.45.41 make it likely that it refers to a place, but not what sort of place it might be: yád vīḷā́v indra yát sthire, yát párśāne párābhṛtam “What is in a firm place, what in a solid place, Indra, what has been borne away (in)to a párśāna ....” In our passage the ní ‘down’ does suggest that the destination is a depth, but I also think that this interpr. has been somewhat uncritically embraced by those with preconceptions about the Vedic hell/underworld.

nisvarám ‘in silence, to silence’ contrasts with svaryà- ‘reverberant’, used of the weapon in 4c.


## 06
As disc. in the publ. intro., this vs. closes the first section of the hymn, at least as I understand the structure. 140 The preverb pári appears with √hi ‘impel’ only here in the RV (and, acdg. to Mon Wms., all of Skt.). It seems to have been suggested by the pári in pāda a, construed with √bhū, in the meaning ‘encircle’. The idiom pari √hi ‘impel around’ does not make much sense, unless the image is of hótrā- compared to horses made to circle a race track. Re thinks rather that it reprises pári bhūtu in a: “l’offrande que (je ceins) autour (de vous en la) poussant” -- but this seems more trouble than it’s worth: he is forced to supply the crucial verb (je ceins: ‘gird, buckle on’) while relegating the actual verb stem hinomi to a participial adjunct (“en … poussant”).

hótrā- is of course completely -- and not very interestingly -- ambiguous between ‘libation’ and ‘invocation’.

In the last pāda Indra and Soma are compared to nṛpátī. Some interpr. (Brown, Doniger) take this as a ref. to the Aśvins, and it is true that the other three occurences of this dual refer to the Aśvins (VII.67.1, 71.4, X.106.4), as duals often do. However, I think it’s more interesting to assume that the poet is comparing these two great gods to human ‘lords of men = kings’, a sly switching of the hierarchy of roles. (Of course he just compared the gods to horses, so being compared to humans may be a step up.) I think Ge is correct in his interpr. of this simile: the gods should encourage our poetic formulations in the way that human kings do, by providing us with material goods. If nṛpátī = Aśvins, the simile doesn’t work.


## 07
See publ. intro. for the init. práti here echoed by that beginning 11c and forming a ring defining vss. 7-11 as a subsection. Since práti ‘against’ is not otherwise found with √smṛ (or with √śuṣ, see vs. 11), I think the preverb has been stationed at both ends of this section to focus attention on the targeted victim. See disc. in publ. intro.

The NP rakṣáso bhaṅgurā́vataḥ is entirely ambiguous between gen./abl. sg.

and acc. pl. It is almost universally taken as acc. pl. here, as parallel obj. to druháḥ ‘deceits’, but I prefer gen. sg. for several reasons. For one thing “deceits (and) demons” is a somewhat off-balance coordination (though certainly not impossible in RVic discourse). More important, the second hemistich defines a single enemy who shows hostility “with his deceit” (druhā́); it makes sense to identify this single foe as the singular demon of pāda b, who owns the deceits mentioned there. In favor of the acc. pl. interpr., in X.76.4 (cited by Ge, n. 7b; cf. also X.87.23) the same phrase must be acc. pl. obj. of a form of √han, as here: X.76.4a ápa hata rakṣáso bhaṅgurā́vataḥ.

On the other hand, in IX.71.1 (also cited by Ge) in the two-word sequence druhó rakṣásaḥ, which we also find here, druháḥ is an acc. pl. (as here), obj. of the verb véti, but rakṣásaḥ belongs to a different syntagm and is abl. sg., construed with pāti “protects from the demon.” The point of citing all these parallel passages is to demonstrate that even identical word sequences can function differently syntactically in different contexts: the poets were not locked into a morphological template.

The poss. adj. bhaṅgurā́-vant- (to bhaṅgurá- [AiG II.2.487], to √bhañj ‘break’; see EWA s.v. BHAÑJ) modifies rakṣás- 3x and hantár- once. I choose to render its possessive morphology by tr. ‘with his wreckage’ (lit. ‘having breakage, wreckage’), referring to the damage that a demon brings in his train -- in contrast to 141 looser and more colorful tr. like Brown’s (reproduced almost verbatim by Doniger): “Slay those who employ demons, who hate us, who would break us to bits,” where he manages to turn both the root noun druh- and the poss. adj. bhaṅgurā́vant- into verbs qualifying rakṣásaḥ. Others attenuate the meaning of bhaṅgurā́vant- to ‘crooked’, and then by easy metaphorical extension ‘tricky, malicious’ (see Gr’s ‘tückisch, trügerisch’, also EWA’s ‘trügerisch, mit krummen Wegen’; Ge, Lommel, Lü 419 ‘hinterlistig’). This interpr. is based on the second of BR’s glosses of the base adj. bhaṅgura- 1) zerbrechlich, vergänglich, 2) krumm, kraus, gerunzelt; see Gr’s reproduction of the 1st word of each in his gloss of (bhaṅgurá). This base word is not found in Vedic -- and bhaṅgurā́vant- is found outside the RV only in passages based on RVic passages -- though bhaṅgura is fairly widespread in Classical Skt., where it generally means ‘breakable’, but occasionally ‘curved’ esp. in connection with eyebrows (cf. AiG III.195 in addition to BR s.v.). Since the ‘curved, crooked’ sense seems to be a late and specialized development, I see no reason to impose it on this RVic word, esp. since I see no clear line from ‘break’ to ‘be crooked’ except in such a specialized application.


## 08
The lexeme abhí √cakṣ here seems almost a substitute for abhí √car ‘conjure against’, and note that the object (“me”) is qualified by the part. cárantam.

Re notes that this is the only RVic pejorative ex. of well-attested abhí √cakṣ, which generally means ‘look upon, look towards, oversee’ in neutral or positive sense. It is notable that in our passage the action of this visual idiom is accomplished by verbal means (“untruthful words” ánṛtebhir vácobhiḥ). Re remarks that it coincides “avec le passage de «voir» à «dire»” -- without specifying what he means.


## 09
The hapax pāka-śaṃsá- is taken by some as a bahuvrīhi (implicitly, Gr ‘arglos redend’; cf. Whitney [AV VIII.4.9] “him of simple intent,” Brown “him of pure and single heart,” Doniger “the man of pure heart” [with śaṃsa- = ‘heart’?!]), but by accent it should be a determinative cmpd, contrasting explicitly with the bahuvrīhi aghá-śaṃsa- ‘having evil speech’ with 1st member accent, found in vss. 2 and 4. It is surely my guileless speech that is in question, since I was “acting with guileless mind” (mā pā́kena mánasā cárantam) in the immediately preceding vs (8a).

As Re points out, ví √hṛ probably refers to distortion of ritual speech.

Since pāka-śaṃsá- is a thing, not a person, the parallel bhadrám in b should also likewise be a thing (so Ge, Whitney, Lommel, Brown), not, as the publ. tr. (“an auspicious one”) has it, a person. I would thus take the form as a neut. acc. sg., not a masc. and slightly emend the publ. tr. to “something auspicious.” This something is probably also connected with ritual performance.


## 10
I take ní … hīyatām as belonging to √hā ‘change position’; in most passages ní √hā means ‘bend down’ (e.g., VIII.27.2), but here and in VI.52.1, also a curse, I take the passive as ‘be bent double’. Most tr. are unsatisfyingly generic (‘perish’ and the like). 142


## 11
See disc. in publ. intro. and ad vs. 7 on the use of práti to define this section of the hymn and call attention to the victim. As noted ad vs. 7, práti √śuṣ is found only here.


## 12
The prim. comp. ṛ́jīyas- here (=AVŚ VIII.4.12; also in AVŚ V.14.12), to ṛjú- ‘straight’, should of course have a full-grade root syllable *rájīyas-, like the superlative rájiṣṭha (RV 7x, = Aves. razišta-). Re plausibly suggests that it has adopted the root syllable of the base adjective -- though why other primary comparatives and superlatives tolerate root ablaut is not addressed. It’s worth noting that if we were to restore the expected form, it would fix a problematic cadence (yatarád *rájīyaḥ ß ṛ́jīyaḥ), by producing a heavy syllable four syllables from the end. As it is, the cadence is ⏑ ⏑ - ×, rather than expected - ⏑ - ×. I am reluctant to emend, however, since it is not clear how the erroneous zero-grade would have been introduced.


## 13
Most interpr. (Ge, Oberlies [Rel. RV I.441], Re, Doniger, Wh [AV]), take kṣatríyam here as masc. personal ‘ruler’, modified by the part. dhāráyantam, while I take it as neut. ‘rule’ (as it sometimes is; cf. IV.20.3, V.69.1) and the obj. of the participle. The problem with the standard interpr. is that the part. has nothing to govern, and in fact a number of interpr. supply a second kṣatríyam (or kṣatrám; see Re) to occupy that role. Cf., e.g., Ge “… den Herrscher, der fälschlich (die Herrschaft) führt.” However, Lü (419), Lommel, and Brown interpr. as I do.


## 14
The disjunctive “if” clauses that occupy the first hemistich are more complicated than they first appear. In the publ. tr. I took the first half, yádi vāhám ánṛtadeva ā́sa, as a contrary-to-fact expression “if I were …” The general context speaks in favor of this interpr.: in the 2nd hemistich the speaker asks indignantly why Agni is angry at him, so the implication is that the speaker has not done what would occasion such anger. This assumption presumably accounts for Ge’s tr. “als ob …” (fld. by Lommel), which is strenuously disputed by Old. But the grammar makes problems: the indicative perfect ā́sa should not express contrary-to-fact modality, but a fact in the past (that may or may not have present relevance). For contrary-to-facts of this sort, the pres. opt. usually serves; cf. VII.44.23 yád agne syā́m aháṃ tváṃ, tváṃ vā ghā syā́ahám “If I were you, Agni, or you were me …” Note also that the AV version has an indicative present, ásmi (Wh “If I am one of false gods …”). So we must reckon with the real possibility that “I” did have false gods, at least in the past, and I would slightly alter the tr. to “If I was (previously) a man with false gods …” The parallel verb in b is the perfect apy ūhé. In the publ. tr. I take this as presential -- and this is quite possible, since the other forms of this pf. are so used (see Kü 489-90) -- but Kü takes it as preterital, and, given my slight reinterpr. of pāda a, this might be best: “if I called upon …” Kü accepts Insler’s 1996 positing of a root √vāh ‘respect’ separate both from √vah ‘convey’ and from √ūh ‘laud’ (which latter has a full-gr. root med. pres. à them. pres. óh(a)-). I am not convinced of the 143 need for this separate root and would simply group the pf. ūhé with the pres. of √ūh, despite Kü’s argument that unless the pf. is clearly distinguished from the pres. by meaning or function, they should not belong to the same root.

What exactly this pāda is conveying is not clear. Did the speaker call upon the true gods but in a false (that is, ritually faulty or with false intent or a false heart?) way? Such is the interpr. of most comm. -- e.g., Ge “nur zum Schein” -- but Lü (420) suggests equating mógham and devā́n (“oder wenn ich das Falsche als Götter … auffasste ...”), though he also gives the alternate “in falscher Weise.” And Re is more radical in his interpr. of the verb: “si j'ai une compréhension (fausse des) dieux.” Given the appearance of the same adverb mógham in 15d, with the sense of false speech, the standard interpr. of the occurrence in this vs. seems the correct one, esp.

as it contrasts nicely with the false or untrue gods in pāda a.

The question in d is where to construe te. Ge (fld. by Scar 469, but with ?) takes it as a quasi-agent: “Die Falschredenden sollen dem Tode durch dich verfallen.” Given that te is an enclitic and that the verb is not passive, this seems a stronger statement than the text would seem to support. I take te with the drogha- of the cmpd drogha-vā́c- “deceitful to you,” but I admit that it might rather go with nirṛthám “your dissolution” (so Brown, Doniger “your destruction”; sim. Lü) -- that is, dissolution stemming from you. Not all tr. render the te: it is absent from Lommel’s rendering.


## 15
I use the standard English rendering of yātudhā́na- (with cognates well attested also in Old and Middle Iranian) as ‘sorcerer’ (German Zauberer), without any implications about what practices this figure might engage in. Since in the RV the word is found only in “popular” discourse, he presumably doesn’t work his ill through orthodox ritual means.


## 17
The standard rendering of khargálā- is ‘owl’; see, inter alia, Gr, EWA, and the various tr. of this vs. But I find this unlikely for several reasons. The ‘owl’ is found as úlūka- in 22a, so it is already represented in this sequence of vss. But, though one could argue that there are numerous types of owls, which could have different designations, there are other arguments against this identification. For one thing, if the word is onomatopoetic, as EWA suggests, kharg(a) is not a particularly owl-ish sound. I tentatively suggest the nightjar. A number of species of nightjars are found in the proper geographical area. As for behavior and appearance, judging from information aggregated from the internet, nightjars are nocturnal (“goes forth by night” prá … jígāti … náktam), feeding esp. at the twilights; the sexes are similar, and the birds are small and therefore could be considered typically female (hence the fem. khargálā-). They stay hidden on the ground by day (“concealing her own body by deceit” ápa druhā́tanvàṃ gū́hamānā): images on the internet show them visually almost indistinguishable from the ground and one YouTube video is entitled “Indian Nightjar -- Master of Camouflage”; acdg. to Wikipedia “During the day, the Indian nightjar lies still on the ground, concealed by its plumage; it is then difficult to detect, blending in with the soil.” Moreover, their cries are much easier to connect with 144 kharg(a) than an owl’s, being described as “a continuous churring” (the internet provides numerous recordings of various types of nightjars). Note that etymologically the “-jar” of nightjar is derived from its churring song -- and jar and kharg are reasonably close phonetically. Moreover, their genus name is Caprimulgus “goat-sucker,” based on the old belief that the birds suck milk from goats; if a similar belief was also found in India, it might seem to be the habit of a sinister or at least uncanny creature -- accounting for its inclusion here among the sorcerers in animal form.

The ability of the soma-pressing stones to smash demons, referred to in d, is also found in the pressing stone hymn X.76.4 ápa hata rakṣáso bhaṅgurā́vataḥ “Smash away the demons with their wreckage,” which incidentally contains one of the three other occurrences of bhaṅgurā́vant- in the RV, besides the one in vs. 7 above. The demon-destroying ability of ritual implements, especially the noise made by their clashing, also reminds me of “Manu’s Cups,” whose clattering destroys Asuras. See the various Vedic prose versions of this in my Sacrificed Wife, pp. 21- 26.


## 18
I am not entirely certain why it is the Maruts who are tasked with the destruction of these creatures, though it is probably because the demons in question have taken the form of birds and therefore are moving in the midspace, which is the Maruts’ domain. Re also cites the well-known relationship between the Maruts and the víś- (see vikṣú here), and these animal demons may be associated with the “folk.” The root noun ríp- is otherwise used of cheats and swindles (cf. also ripú- ‘cheating, swindler’), and I am reluctant to allow a sense ‘defilements’ only here -- though it is the almost universal solution of other tr. (Wh, Brown, Klein [DGRV II.149: “impurities”], Lommel “Unsauberes,” but cf. Ge’s “Unredlichkeit” [dishonesty], which has a moral nuance). Deception and cheating are also characteristic of the animal-demons in this section: see the khargálā who conceals her own body “with deceit” (druhā́) in 17b, the flying dog-sorcerers that want to deceive Indra in 20b, and the oblation-stealers in 21b -- so the standard sense of rípfits the larger context. However, I do have to acknowledge that the root √rip does mean ‘smear’, and so ‘defilement’ is not out of the question.

It is difficult to avoid taking devé here as an adjective ‘divine’, modifying adhvaré ‘ceremony’, a temptation that all tr. (including me) have succumbed to and that is endorsed by Old.


## 19
The “mountain” with which Indra smites the demons must be Indra’s vájra- ‘mace’, identified with a mountain elsewhere, as Re points out: in VII.22.6, as well as in the curious dvandva indrā-parvatā (3x, only in voc.: I.122.3, 132.6, III.53.1). See comm. ad locc.


## 21
I have rendered the impf. abhavat in pāda a as an immediate past (‘has become’), though this is not ordinarily a usage of the impf. But this sense fits the context better than a simple past. 145 Note the echo of parāśaró in paraśúr in c.

As Re remarks, this is the only negative use of the desid. vívāsa- (√van ‘win’), usually ‘seek to win, covet, coax’. The negative sense must be attributable to the confrontational preverb abhí.

How to distribute and construe the two similes in cd is the question. I take both similes, paraśúr yáthā vánam “like an axe a tree” (c) and pā́treva “like pots” (d), with the pres. part. bhindán (d) in two slightly different senses, ‘splitting’ and ‘breaking’ respectively (sim. Brown, Doniger). This pres. part. is anticipated by the preverb complex abhī́d that opens the hemistich, looking like an aberrant form of √bhid -- a low-level ex. of poetic repair. Others (notably Ge, Wh, Lommel) take bhindán only with the 2nd simile, with the first controlled by eti in d (e.g., Ge “Śakra fährt auf die Dunkelmänner los wie die Axt in den Baum”). But axes are more likely to “split” than to “advance,” and I take eti only with the acc. pl. (satáḥ …) rakṣásaḥ as goal. It would also be possible to take bhindán + eti as a verb phrase with auxiliary, ‘keeps splitting’ or the like.

The function, and indeed the morphological identity, of satáḥ is unclear. With Gr, I take it as a pres. part. to √as in the acc. pl., modifying rakṣásaḥ. In my interpr.

it means ‘real, really being X’, though that could extend to ‘really present’. Re by contrast suggests that it’s an adverb, meaning here ‘tout à fait’, also probably found as 1st cmpd. member in sató-mahant- (‘entirely great’ VIII.30.1) and sató-vīra- (‘entirely heroic’ VI.75.9). Although Re does not pronounce on the morphological analysis, AiG II.1.237 implies that it contains the adverbial ablatival suffix -tas / -tás and thus does not belong to the pres. part. of √as. See also EWA s.v. satás. Old (ad VII.32.24) allows several possibilities, incl. the adverb, which he considers assured in the cmpds. cited above. Although, with Old, etc., I think that an adverbial satáḥ is found in those cmpds., I do not find that interpr. satáḥ as adverbial here improves the sense, though I grant that the acc. pl. pres. part. doesn’t really either.


## 22
The śuśulū́ka-, occuring beside úlūka-, must be some species of owl, and it is tempting to take it as a deformation of *śiśu-ulūka- ‘baby owl, little owl’, hence presumably the diminutives found in many tr. (incl. mine).

Sāy. takes kóka- as the cakravāka bird (see Ge n. 22b), Gr, Wh, Lommel, Brown, Doniger as the cuckoo, presumably on onomatopoetic grounds. The reinterp.

‘wolf’ is owing to Lü (see Re and EWA s.v.) and has MIA support. Despite the dominance of birds in pādas a and c, ‘dog’ and ‘wolf’ make a natural pair in b.


## 23
Acdg. to Re, Mehendale interpr. the curious formation yātumā́vant- in pāda a (also I.36.20, VII.1.5, VIII.60.20) not as a metrical variant of yātumánt- (so AiG II.2.775) but as a haplology for *yātu-māyyā́vant-. I assume (I have not seen the art.) that his posited form contains -māyā́- in one form or another and anticipates the next vs. where the female sorcerer is “exulting in her magic power” (māyáyā śā́śadānām), though I don’t know why the form posited is not just *yātu-māyā́vant-, containing attested māyā́vant- ‘possessing māyā’ (IV.16.9). If we accept this 146 suggestion, or modified suggestion, the tr. could be slightly altered to “the demonic power of those possessing the magic power of sorcerers.” The kimīdín- was singular in vs. 2, but a dual matched pair (mithunā́yā́ kimīdínā) here. Why the dual is not entirely clear, but the next vs. specifies both male and female sorcerers as Indra’s target, and the mithuná- here suggests a sexual pairing.


## 24
vígrīva- ‘with no / broken neck’ is ambiguous: is it descriptive of a preexisting condition and thus a species, ethnic, or personal slur (in English “no-neck” is an insult, referring to a burly and stupid thug or goon)? or is it used proleptically here, to indicate what will happen to those who “shake to pieces” (ṛdantu). I’ve taken it as the former, but opinion is divided and either would work in the passage.

mū́ra-deva- is also contested. Acdg. to EWA (s.v. mū́la-), flg. Wack., it is an r-form of *mū́la-deva- ‘whose gods are roots’ (Wurzelanbeter)(see also Brown).

This excursion into exotic anthropology seems unlikely to me -- not the sort of divinity that Vedic people would posit even of their worst and most primitive enemies. Most tr. take it as ‘idol-worshiper’ (e.g., Ge Götzanbeter), without, however, indicating what the ‘idol’ rests on: ‘root’ à ‘root as representation of god’ à ‘idol’ (not a semantic chain that seems reasonable to me)? Or, more likely to me, based on mūrá- ‘stupid, foolish, dumb (i.e., non-speaking)’. My own ‘with feckless gods’ is rests on this association, but is closer to the sense of the original adjective. I do not, however, have an explanation for the accent.