+++
title = "+035"

+++
35 (655)  
Aśvins  
Śyāvāśva Ātreya  
24 verses: pariṣṭājjyotis, except paṅkti 22, 24 and mahābr̥hatī 24, arranged in trcas. ̥  
The Anukramaṇī’s attribution of this hymn to Śyāvāśva is supported by his self-refer ence in verses 19–21 and his reference to his ancestor Atri in verse 19, but the virtuos ity so characteristic of Śyāvāśva’s Marut hymns in Maṇḍala V is not on display here.  This long hymn may be one of the most repetitive in the R̥gveda. In the first twenty one verses the c-pāda is identical, and the tr̥cas making up the hymn all have refrains  encompassing at least the second half-verse (pādas cd: vss. 1–3; pādas cde: vss. 22–24)  and usually the second (b)  pāda as well (bcd:  vss. 4–6, 7–9, 10–12, 13–15, 16–18,  19–21). This leaves the first (a) pāda as the only locus of variation in each tr̥ca, and  even that variation is patterned and under strict control. Moreover, the contents and  phraseology of the individual tr̥cas do not differ significantly one from another—urg ing the Aśvins to come to the sacrifice with numerous other gods and to partake of  our offerings while providing us with gifts and aid in return. The repetitive structure  has an incantatory effect, but it does not challenge the decoding skills of the audience.  
The most interesting tr̥ca consists of verses 16–18. As a number of others have  pointed out, these three verses, asking the Aśvins to “quicken” or “animate” various  things for us, are appropriate to the three varṇas in turn: verse 16 to the brahmin, 17  to the kṣatriya, and 18 to the vaiśya. In fact, verse 16 begins with the word bráhma,  while 17 begins with kṣatrám. In 16 we ask for the Aśvins’ aid for ritual and priestly  elements, in 17 for elements related to kingly and martial power, and in 18 for our  livestock and people. As is well known, the varṇa system is not a prominent feature  of the R̥gveda and may well only be taking shape in this period, but this small collec tion of Śyāvāśva hymns displays it clearly—not only in this tr̥ca, but in the next two  twinned hymns (36 and 37) with their reference to bráhman and kṣatrá respectively.  