+++
title = "05"

+++
The break from the themes of the first 4 vss. is signalled by pres. tense forms (cyāváyati, madanti), after the relentless march of injunctives (and one pf.) in 1-4. (Technically speaking saráyanta in 2d is a present out of sandhi [-ante], but it patterns like other -anta forms of this shape. See disc. ad 2d.) But vs. 5 is also verbally linked to what went before: bhū́ma ending the first pāda matches the same word ending the last pāda of vs. 4, and ánu … madanti in c phonologically recalls ánu … manyata in 1b.

The vs. is thematically structured by one / many. Indra alone (ékaḥ) is invoked by many (puruhūtáḥ), as (single) king of the separate peoples (kṛṣṭīnā́m), whom all (víśve) celebrate.

The satyám beginning the 2nd hemistich may signal Indra’s real presence on the ritual ground, as I argue it does in IV.16.1. The rest of the half vs. clearly takes place at the sacrifice. So the tr. might be emended to “All celebrate him (who is) really here …” The construction of the last pāda is unclear, esp. the morphological identity and referents of devásya gṛṇató maghónaḥ. Old takes rātím as the obj. of grṇ̥ atáḥ (“singing the gift”) and sees grṇ̥ atáḥ and maghónaḥ as parallel acc. pl. (“the singers and patrons”). But this phrase is supposed to be coreferential with nominative víśve in c: “Alle: die (Priester), welche des Gottes Gabe besingen, und die freigebigen Herren.” This syntactic slippage seems unacceptable to me (and uncharacteristic of Old). Ge takes grṇ̥ atáḥ as a gen. sg. dep. on gen. sg. maghónaḥ, which is in apposition to devásya: “the gift of the god, who is the generous patron of the singer.” This makes good sense, but I have not been able to find other passages with a genitive dependent on maghávan-. WG take all three as gen. sg. with the same referent, namely Indra, all dependent on rātím. But since this is not a Vala passage, Indra should not be singing, but receiving the singing of others. My tr. starts from passages like VII.12.2 asmā́n gṛṇatá utá no maghónaḥ (cf. also X.22.15), where gṛnatáḥ and maghónaḥ are overtly conjoined (by utá) and refer to humans: “us (who are) singing and our patrons.” In that passage the forms are acc. pl.; in ours here I take them as gen. sg. in datival usage (as often).

