+++
title = "14"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. and its pendant, the single pāda of vs. 15, are quite unclear, though at least 14ab concerns the Etaśa myth. There are also some formal issues.

The med. part. sasṛmāṇá- must belong to the pf. stem, despite its -mānásuffix appropriate to a thematic stem. This is the only such form, beside conventionally formed pf. part. sasrāṇá- (2x). Narten (1969: 81-82 = KlSch 128) explains the aberrancy as a quirk of the poet, who in this and adjacent hymns shows a penchant for -māna- participles. Another question is what is its value. Most pf.

participles have anterior sense, but the publ. tr. renders it as “as he ran” -- in other words as an action simultaneous with the main verb. And I might be inclined to make this simultaneity more overt by tr. “as he was running.” Kü’s interpretation (552) as what he calls “resultativ” and I would call anterior is more in line with the perfect form: “wenn er seinen Lauf gemacht hat.” But contextually that would be puzzling: what is the point of bringing the horse to a halt if it’s already finished running. And on p. 602 he provides a diff. tr., closer to mine: “der sich im Lauf befindet.” WG seem to take it almost as an inchoative -- “der sich in Lauf gesetzt hat” -- but cite alternative translations in their n. I would suggest that the aberrant shape and the aberrant sense are connected and that the poet created a nonce present-like pf. part. to convey the simultaneous and progressive value he was seeking to express, since regular pf. participles often express anteriority. (This, howver, does not explain why the poet didn’t just use a pres. part. built to the redupl. pres. sísarti, here *sísratam; this act. part. is attested once.) The second hemistich is quite obscure. Old suggests reading kṛṣṇé against the Pp. kṛṣṇáḥ, and this has met general acceptance. The apparently parallel loc. ásikhyām ‘on the dark (FEM.)’ in 15a supports this reading, and it goes naturally with the locatives in 14d.

Who is the referent? Ge gives no hint of what he might think, but Kü and WG both think the subj. is Indra, who is acting on/against Etaśa. Judging from Kü’s tr.

(“er ‘träufelt’ ihn [den Vajra] wütend auf das schwarze (Pferd)”; 602), he thinks the verb ‘sprinkle’ (jigharti) is a euphemism for violent action; its unexpressed obj. is Indra’s vájra, which Indra ‘sprinkles’ onto the black (horse, namely Etaśa), while WG understand Etaśa himself as the object. For both, the part. juhurāṇáḥ belongs with √hṝ ‘be angry’ (flg. Insler 1968; see EWA s.v. HARI ), which can capture Indra’s mood in this encounter. (Note that the poet was not tempted here to give the redupl.

part. a thematic suffix, pace Narten.) By contrast, I accept the traditional association of the part. with √hvṛ ‘go crookedly’. I take the referent here to be Agni. Although the Kü / WG view that it is Indra would be the default interpr. in this Indra hymn, the phraseology of pāda d is almost identical to a pāda in an Agni hymn in this maṇḍala: IV.1.11ab sá jāyata prathamáḥ pastyā̀su, mahó budhné rájaso asyá yónau “He was born first in the dwelling places, at the base of this great realm, (as) his womb....” And ‘moving crookedly’ qualifies Agni very well. The simile comparing the subject here to a Hotar in vs. 15 also supports Agni as referent -- though I suppose it could be argued that since Agni is often identified as a Hotar he need not be compared to one. The part. juhurāṇáḥ ‘going crookedly’ is also appropriate to Agni, describing the unpredictable movements of fire and the flickering movement of its flames.

But what is it that Agni (if he is indeed the subj.) is doing? This may be illuminated (however faintly) by two other verbal forms to ā́√ghṛ in the RV (the adj.

ā́ghṛṇi- ‘glowing, ardent (?)’ belongs to the etymologically separate root √ghṛ ‘be warm, hot’ found in gharmá- ‘heat’, etc. See comm. ad VI.53.3). In X.6.4 Agni sprinkles the gods (ā́jigharti devā́n) as Hotar; in V.48.3 Agni (by my interpr.) sprinkles a vájra. Although in both passages most interpr. attempt to make the verb mean something other than ‘sprinkle’ (see comm. ad locc.), in fact a naturalistic explanation is not hard to construct using the literal meaning of the verb: Agni “sprinkles” the objects in question with sparks, a literal “baptism by fire.” That Agni is elsewhere the object of √ghṛ, being sprinkled with ghee (see II.10.4), makes this the kind of paradoxical reversal that RVic poets so much like. Here notice that Agni performs this action “like a Hotar performing sacrifice” (vs. 15 yájamāno ná hótā), as in X.6.4. The image is both of a properly sacrificing priest performing the ritual action of sprinkling (the fire with ghee) and of the ritual fire sending out a stream of sparks, like sprinkled drops, which would be quite visible on the dark background insistently mentioned in this vs. What the object is that he is sprinkling remains obscure to me - but in addition to the possibilities I suggest in the publ. tr. and those of others mentioned above, it might be Indra’s vájra, as suggested by Kü (see above), though with a different sense of the verb than Kü suggests. Recall that in V.48.3 Agni sprinkles Indra’s vájra-with sparks as a sort of ritual sanctification before Indra employs it.

