+++
title = "001"

+++
Agni For the rhetorical structure of the hymn, see the publ. intro.


## 01
The only attestation of the desiderative of √śuc is this hapax adj. āśuśukṣáṇi- ‘eager to blaze here’.


## 02
The accent on ási in d presumably results from its contrastive function in the ca … ca construction. Curiously Old does not comment.

Note the two different words for house in gṛhápatiḥ … dáme, with the former replacing old dáṃpati-. On these various terms for house-lord, see my forthcoming articles “The Term gṛhastha and the (Pre)history of the Householder” (to appear in The Householder in Ancient India: A History of the Gṛhastha, ed. Patrick Olivelle) and “The Double Life of gahapati” (to appear in a forthcoming Fs.).


## 03
HvN suggest the distracted reading namasí yaḥ here and in 10a, which produces 12 syllables for the Jagatī line but a very bad cadence (4 light syllables), while reading an undistracted form produces a good Triṣṭubh line. They argue 1) that namasí ya- is always otherwise distracted in the RV (though it doesn’t otherwise appear in a cadence) and 2) that there are several other similar bad cadences in this hymn (avidhat 7d, 9c). These are good arguments, but I would still favor an undistracted namasyàḥ in a Triṣṭubh line.

Ge suggests that vidhartaḥ in d is a predicate voc. I think rather that it signals the absent middle term, the divinity with which Agni is here identified, namely Bhaga. So Old (SBE). Bhaga is identified as vidhartár- in VII.41.2 and is regularly associated with Puraṃdhi.


## 04
On this vs. see Thieme, Mitra and Aryaman, 83-85.

sambhújam in c is analysed by Gr as a 1st sg. subj. or injunc. (his “Co.”) to a thematic aorist and is so rendered by Ge (“von dem ich Nutzen haben möchte”), though he expresses doubts in his n. However, this aor. stem does not otherwise exist: the multiple bhujema forms, apparent optatives in mā́prohibitives, are convincingly explained by Hoffmann (Injunk. 95-97) as reanalysed from an expression with the infinitive bhujé followed by enclitic 1st ps. pronoun. Moreover, act. forms to this root should mean ‘give pleasure’, not ‘derive pleasure’ (cf. bhuñjatī́ I.48.5). Old (Noten) already disputed the verbal interpr. of sambhújam, and it is now generally taken as a nominal (so Thieme, Mitra and Aryaman, although in Fremdling [16 n. 2, 105] he takes it as a verb; Hoffmann, Injunk. 96 n. 197; Re; Scar 358), though WG tr. it as a verb, allowing for the nominal possibility in their n. Assuming that sambhújam is nominal, the problem is how to fill out the defective rel. cl. yásya sambhújam. Most supply a verb like “we eat” or “we expect,” e.g., Scar. “von dem ich Genuss (erwarte, o. ä).” The publ. tr. takes GEN sambhújam as a possessive expression: “whose common meal (it is)” à “who has a common meal,” further extended to “who offers a common meal.” I find this more satisfying syntactically than the invention of a verb, but it runs into morphological difficulty: by my tr. the meal should be nominative, and if sambhújam belongs to a root noun paradigm, it can only be a masc. acc. sg. This forces me into the unhappy position of assuming a root-accented neut. thematic stem -bhúja-, which may be unlikely enough morphologically to persuade me to supply a verb to govern the acc. 
## 05
Pāda a has the acc. and dat. appropriate to an expression of giving, but no verb; pāda c has the verb (rariṣe) but no dative of recipient. The accusatives of gift in the two pādas are formed in parallel: suvī́r i yam (a), s u váśvi yam (c).The two pādas thus complete each other rhetorically.

In b gnā́vaḥ is morphologically incoherent. By its ending it should be vocative, but since it occupies non-initial position, its accent should preclude that.

Nonetheless, with all the standard interpr. I take it as a voc. An ad hoc explanation could be concocted for its accent -- that the following voc. mitramahaḥ induced accent on the preceding one to support the voc. phrase -- but I think too many counter-examples could be adduced. Ge suggests a word haplology, gnā́<ḥ> gnāvaḥ, but this seems unnecessary and also requires a tr. “you are (the Wives).” It is likely instead that the third term in this pāda is Tvaṣṭar from pāda a, since he is regularly associated with the Wives of the Gods, and in fact the other attestation of this voc. gnā́vaḥ (I.15.3), correctly accented in pāda-initial position, refers to Tvaṣṭar.

As pointed out by Old (SBE) and Ge, the third term in pāda c is presumably Apām Napāt, who is elsewhere called āśuhéman-, including 2x in II. The āśu- in that compound echoes the beginning of āśuśukṣáṇiḥ in 1a, though that form is most probably formed to the desid. stem of √śuc with preverb ā́, since the -ani-suffix is rather commonly built to desiderative stems and there would be no obvious source of the -s- before the suffix otherwise.


## 06
I do not understand the cmpd śaṃgayá-. Wackernagel (AIG II.1.309) classifies it with cmpds with governing first-member prepositions, but śám, though uninflected, does not function like even the improper prepositions/preverbs like áram. He does recognize its singularity (314-15), but keeps it in this category, in which it seems out of place.


## 07
Pāda d has another bad cadence: te (á)vidhat, with 4 light syllables, assuming the normal shortening of -e before vowel. The same cadence is found in 9c. I would be inclined to follow HvN in seeing this irregular cadence as characteristic of this particular hymn (see also 3b, 10a), save for the fact that ávidhat shows a remarkable tendency to position itself in bad cadences: see II.26.4, VIII.23.21, 27.15, 61.9. As IH points out to me, Arnold (p.129, §169.vi) suggests reading ā́vidhat with long augment. Though in all cases the Saṃhitā text transmits either short á or deleted abhinihita (á) and the Pp analyzes it as a in all cases, this seems a reasonable explanation - despite Old’s dismissive “recht zweifelhaft.” There is a tendency to lengthen vowels before elements beginning with v, not only the augment, but preverbs, and 1st cmpd. members, presumably spreading from forms that originally began *Hv. In most of the other occurrences of ávidhat (I.136.5, VI.54.4, IX.114.1) the augment has coalesced with a preceding a-vowel and its weight is therefore unrecoverable. Only in X.83.1 do we find an ávidhat that is not improved by a heavy reading: it occurs in the break after an early caesura. But even here ā́vidhat is a possible reading. Though ⏑ ⏑ - is the most preferred break, - ⏑ - is the next most common.


## 08
Here and in 15a I take práti (+/- copula) + ACC. as an expression similar to pratimā́na- + GEN, meaning ‘be a counterpart to’.

For ṛñjate here, see the fuller expression with instr. in the next hymn, II.2.5.


## 09
It is tempting to take iṣṭíbhiḥ as ‘with sacrifices’, parallel to śámyā ‘with ritual labor’ in the next pāda. So Old (SBE), though he gave it up reluctantly in the Noten.

Unfortunately ‘sacrifice’ is accented íṣti-, against iṣṭí- ‘desire’, and so perhaps the best one can do is suggest a secondary pun (so Scar 455). On the other hand, on the assumption that all -tí-stems began with suffixal accent and that the root accent found in some Vedic -ti-stems is secondary (see Lundquist 2015, -ti-stems), this may be a relic of suffix-accented *iṣṭí-‘sacrifice’, which has not yet undergone accent retraction. It is worth noting that root-accented íṣṭi- is found only in I and X.

On the cadence in 9 see remarks on 7b.


## 10
On the cadence in pāda a, see comm. ad 3b.

As Old (SBE) already pointed out, the first three pādas refer to the three Ṛbhus and pun on their names: ṛbhú- ‘craftsman / Ṛbhu’ in a, vā́ja- ‘prize / Vāja’ in b, and ví bhāsi ‘you radiate / Vibhvan’ in c.

In c dakṣi is surely a -si impv. to √dah ‘burn’ and should be separated from the identical form in I.141.8, for which see the comm. ad loc. Ge, however, takes dakṣi here to √dakṣ.

The form viśíkṣu- in d is taken by Gr as belonging to the desid. of √śak and meaning ‘gerne Gut austheilend’, which seems unacceptably distant from both the root meaning of √śak and the function of the desiderative. Moreover, √śak is not otherwise attested with ví except, supposedly, in the similar form ví śikṣa IV.35.3 (for which see below). Ge tr. “du bist der Prüfer,” Re “tu es celui que si met à l'oeuvre diversement”; neither discusses the form or its root affiliation, and one can only assume they follow the assignment to √śak, though exactly how is unclear. Old (SBE) suggested an appealing alternative, interpreting it as built to the desid. of √śas ‘cut’, which is primarily found with ví -- an idea I find eminently worthy of revival.

This may also be the view of WG, who tr. “Du bist williger Verteiler,” again without disc., so they may in fact simply reproduce Gr’s understanding of the semantics. Old does not sketch out the morphology, but it presumably rests on *śi-śs-su-, with zerograde root and simplification of the medial sibilant cluster śss arising from the two radical sibilants and the desiderative suffix. The finite verb ví śikṣa in IV.35.3 (also a Ṛbhus context) belongs here as well. Heenen (Desid., 232-33) mentions this possibility though without great enthusiasm (“La possiblité … n’est pas exclue”).

The publ. tr. “seek to carve up and to stretch out the sacrifice” implies that ātániḥ is desiderative. This was not meant, and the tr. should perhaps be emended to “seek to carve up the sacrifice, as the one who stretches it out” or “… as you stretch it out.”


## 13
The relevant construction in d is probably tvé … ā́hutam “poured into you,” as it is in the even further distracted identical phrase in 14ab. The tr. of 13d should be corrected to “the gods eat the oblation poured into you.”


## 14
The first half-verse is simply a rather crudely exploded version of 13d (also found in I.94.3), with tvé moved to front of first pāda and the second pāda otherwise intact. See Bloomfield's withering scorn.


## 15
On práti … asi, see comm. ad 8d. As far as I can determine, this is the only occurrence of sám √as in the RV and, rather than meaning something like ‘be together’, it seems to have an idiomatic meaning like prati + ACC, ‘be equal to’ (as if to samá- vel sim.).

On the word order in pāda c, see comm. ad VI.15.14.


## 16
I do not understand the function or position of hí, though the latter question is more tractable.
