+++
title = "002"

+++
Agni One curious feature of this hymn is that it is the home to the densest cluster of uṣás- occurrences in II (vss. 2, 7, 8); the word is otherwise pretty rare in this maṇḍala, and there are no Dawn hymns in it. The focus on Agni’s likeness to the sun probably accounts for this. This likeness is hinted at first in the adj. svàrṇara- ‘possessing solar glory’ in 1c. This adj. is echoed by three occurrences of the simile svàr ṇá “like the sun” (7d, 8b, 10d), where the simile particle ṇá (with close sandhi retroflexion as always after svàr), though having nothing to do with the -ṇa- in the adjective, reproduces it phonologically.

Another notable feature of the hymn is the fact that the stem citáya-, which occurs three times (4c, 5d, 10b), in all three cases must be read doubly, as ‘appear’ in one construction in the passage and as ‘perceive’ in another construction in the same passage.


## 02
Ge (/WG) take náktīr uṣásaḥ as acc. of extent of time, supplying as subj. either prayers or priests. With Old (SBE and Noten) and Re, I take the phrase as subject in the publ. tr. This means that uṣásaḥ must be taken as a nom. (for uṣā́saḥ), rather than the acc. it was historically -- but this is common in the RV. On reflection I wonder if Ge is right: the 2nd hemistich contains two examples of acc. of extent of time (mā́nuṣā yugā́and kṣápaḥ), and there is also one in 8a, uṣáso rā́myāḥ, that is very similar to the phrasing here. If the phrase is interpr. as acc., the subject to be supplied would presumably be the same as the 2nd pl. addressees of 1ab, namely the priestly officiants. So I suggest an alt. tr. “Through the dawns and the nights they [=priests] bellow towards you …” In addition the pf. vavāśire might better be rendered as a habitual pres.

‘(constantly) bellow’.


## 03
The gerundive védya- in c is universally assigned to √vid ‘know’ (e.g., Ge ‘allbekannt’, Re ‘(re)connaissable’), but surely the Vedic Indians would be more anxious to acquire a chariot (√vid ‘find, acquire’) than simply to recognize it! Agni is found with the same simile in VIII.84.1.


## 04
A difficult vs. with multiple interpretations, which I will not treat in detail.

The difficulties of the vs. arise in part from the fact that it can apply to both the ritual fire and the sun. Note that in contrast to the first three vss. the word agní- does not appear in this vs., which absence licenses the double reference. This double reference begins, and is least obscure, in the first pāda, where the entity in question (tám) grows “in the airy realm (as/and) in his own house”: “his own house” is clearly a reference to Agni as the fire in every house (see also 11c), but “in the airy realm” can refer both to the strengthening of the sun’s light after it rises and to the smoke and flames of fire rising in the air. Note that there is no simile marker here: the fire is not compared to the sun or vice versa; they are identified.

The second pāda uses the technical ritual term ā́√dhā ‘establish’ (used of the ceremonial establishment of the ritual fire), but it is also used less technically here for the placement of both fire and sun on their respective paths. Loc. hvāré ‘on a meandering (course)’ can refer to the unpredictable motion of fire and its products (smoke/flames). How this word can apply to the sun is less clear, since the sun’s course is certainly not unpredictable. However, derivatives of the root √hvṛ can refer to curves, and the sun’s trajectory up, across, and down the sky can be seen as a curving path. (This second sense should have been registered in the publ. tr.) I should say that I explicitly do not think that it refers to a snake here (pace Old [SBE], WG), although the interpr. is tempting due to the similarity of the lexicon and imagery in this vs. to I.141.7, where hvārá- refers to Agni as a twisting snake. Such an identification here would require emendation to acc. *hvārám, which Old was willing to accept in SBE and still defends in the Noten, but which does not conform to our current restrained attitude towards RVic emendation (in part due to Old). I also do not think that candrám in the simile refers to the moon (as Thieme [KlSch 78] and WG do).

In c ‘son’ is universally supplied with patarám ‘flying, winged’ (e.g., Ge “den geflügelten (Sohn?) der Pṛśni”). But Pṛśni’s son(s) are the Maruts; Agni never seems to be so identified. The closest any interpreter can come is X.189.1, where a gaúḥ pṛ̥́śniḥ ‘dappled cow’ may, or may not, refer to the fire, but there is no parental engagement there. The gen. pṛ́śnyāḥ (as here; on the ending see comm. ad 7b) is elsewhere construed only with ‘udder’ (ū́dhar-, II.34.2, 10; cf. also IV.3.10) or ‘milk’ (páyaḥ, VI.48.22); though it is true that the alternative gen. pṛ́śneḥ is found with ‘sons’ (pṛ́śneḥ putrā́(ḥ), V.58.5), these are the Maruts, as expected. Since the only other attestations of pṛ́śnyāḥ in II limit ‘udder’, I supply that word here. Although “the flying (udder) of Pṛśni” sounds comical, I take it to refer to a rain cloud, as also apparently in II.34. The fire and the sun are thus implicitly compared to this third entity. I read citáyantam in two senses, ‘appearing’ and ‘perceiving, observing’ (cf.

citayat in the immediately following vs.), with the former sense here.

The other sense of citáyantam governs the rest of the vs.; the instr. akṣábhiḥ ‘with eyes’ signals the ‘perceive’ value, as is reflected in all the standard tr.

(although WG take the participle as a double tr. ‘make perceive’, which is not supported by the zero-grade root syllable [expect *cetáyantam]). We are not home free, however, for the simile, pāthó ná payúm, gives trouble. The problem is pātháḥ.

If we try to take it to as acc. to neut. pā́thas- ‘pen, fold’, which would work semantically (“observing … as a protector (does) a fold”), the accent is wrong; if we try to take it as gen. of pánth- ‘path’, which also works semantically (“like the protector of a path”), the length of the first vowel is wrong. Lub tries to avoid this Scylla and Charybdis situation by identifying it as a 2nd du. pres. to √pā ‘protect’, but this makes more difficulties: who are the two subjects? (perhaps he means the two races, but they are in 3rd ps. ref.), and the placement of the ná is badly wrong. In the end I follow the ad hoc solution set out by Old (Noten): a gen. of the ‘path’ word makes most sense, and it may owe its anomalous long vowel to phonological attraction to pāyúm in the same syntagm along with some conflation with pā́thas-.


## 05
The apparent fem. loc. pl. vṛdhasānā́su to the irregular participial stem vṛdhasāná- ‘growing, having grown’ is generally taken as referring to the plants among which the fire is blazing, on the basis of X.92.1 ... śuṣkāsu háriṇīṣu járbhurat, with járbhurat ‘flickering, quivering’ as here. However, plants do not ‘grow’ when they are burned -- quite the contrary -- and I’m not at all sure that √vṛdh ‘grow, increase, strengthen’ is used of plant growth: we may be misled by translation language. Instead on the basis of IV.3.6 dhíṣṇyāsu vr̥dhasānó agne “growing in the holy places [=hearths], o Agni,” I interpret vṛdhasānā́su as representing vṛdhasāná(ḥ) āsu, with masc. nom. sg. + fem. pronominal loc. and irregular sandhi of -aḥ ā-. There are only three occurrences of the stem vṛdhasāná-; in addition to IV.3.6 and our example here, the other one, at VI.12.3, is also nom. sg. referring to Agni. One potential problem with this suggestion is that, since the hearths have not been previously mentioned, we might expect accented āsú. However, a number of occurrences of unaccented āsu lack clear referents in the preceding discourse (e.g., I.95.5, III.55.9, VIII.41.7).

Like citáyantam in 4cd, citayat in d has two different readings: with the preceding phrase dyaúr ná stṛ́bhiḥ it means ‘appear’, while with the following ródasī ánu (echoing jánasī ubhé ánu in 4d) it means ‘perceive’. The functional split is clearer in this vs. than in 4cd and could be considered a species of poetic repair, or at least “poetic reinforcement.” See also vs. 10 below.

## 06
Note the phonological and morphological parallelism of the infinitival datives, s(u)vastáye, suvitā́ya, vītáye.


## 06-07
6c and 7c are paraphrases of each other. Each contains a dual referring to the two worlds, an impv. of √kṛ, and an indication of directionality.


## 07
sahasrín- (sg. or pl.) regularly modifies rayí- and vā́ja-; bṛhánt- has a wider range of referents, but both rayí- and vā́ja- are found. Since (sg.) rayím occurs in the immediately preceding vs. (6b) and (sg.) vā́ja- in the immediately following pāda (7b), either is available to supply as the referent for the pl. adjectives in pāda a. I opt for vā́ja-, because of the nearer proximity.

If śrútyā in the Saṃhitā text represents dat. śrútyai (so Pp.) and belongs to a - ti-stem, it shows the younger ending (borrowed from the -ī-stems) -yai, confined to 7 stems mostly limited to Maṇḍala X (Macdonell VG p. 282), rather than the extraordinarily common -aye. This younger ending may correlate with the younger accent in this -ti-stem: as Lundquist has shown (“On the Accentuation of Vedic -tiAbstracts,” Indo-European Linguistics 3 [2015]), -ti-stems undergo accent retraction in the course of Vedic, and root-accented forms are innovations in the late RV. Vs. 4 contains another fem. short -i-stem with a younger ending borrowed from long -īstems, namely gen. pṛ́śnyāḥ. However, I wonder how secure śrútyai is. The use of this dative (quasi-)infinitive here is somewhat unusual, and I take its supposed double (also śrútyā in sandhi) in X.111.3 as an ablative. Old (Not.) points out that the gerundive śrútya- appears several times modifying vā́ja- (VII.5.9 vā́jaṃ śrútyam, I.36.12 vā́jasya śrútyasya). I am tempted to take our śrútyā here as somehow reflecting the gerundive, in a situation where the expected masc. acc. sg. *śrútyam would produce a bad cadence. But I cannot construct a plausible scenario; Old says that an acc. pl. is not entirely excluded, but that would have to be an acc. pl. neuter or fem., and vā́ja- is masc.

Kü (251) takes ví didyutaḥ as intrans., not trans.-caus. (in his terms, “inattingent” not “faktitiv”), interpreting uṣásaḥ as temporal. I am doubtful.

The simile in d svàr ṇá “like the sun” is perfectly ambiguous. It can be nominative, compared to Agni, the subject of ví didyutaḥ, as an entity that makes the dawns shine. (Given the temporal proximity of dawn and sunrise, this causal connection is perfectly in order.) Or Agni can make the dawns shine forth like the sun, with the simile in the acc. In 8b and 10d the same simile is in the nominative, but I do not think this is a sufficient reason to impose the same analysis here.


## 08
Note #sá idhāná(ḥ) echoing 1c #samidhānám and 6a #sá … samidhānáḥ.

With Old (SBE), Ge, Re, I take uṣáso rā́myā as parallel in a temporal expression (“dawns and nights”). Hoffmann (Injunk., 121; fld. by WG) rather clevely separates them, construing only rā́myā with ánu: “Entflammt alle Morgen, nach den Nächten leuchtet er.” However, because night(s) and dawn(s) are regularly used in parallel (e.g., 2a in this hymn), I am somewhat reluctant to adopt this interpr. The standard tr. (Old [SBE], Ge, Re, WG) take dīdet as a modal, but it is simply an injunctive and I see no reason to attribute modal value to it. So also Hoffmann (see his tr. just cited) and Kü (228).

In the second hemistich agníḥ was omitted in the publ. tr., which should read “With the libations of Manu Agni conducts …”


## 09
As Old and Ge point out, mā́nuṣā should not be a fem. nom. sg. with dhī́ḥ, since the fem. stem is well-attested mā́nuṣī. Nonetheless, the standard tr., including Ge though excluding Re, interpret it with dhī́ḥ -- Ge by taking it as shortened from mā́nuṣāṇām at pāda end (some shortening!) and tr. “die menschliche Dichtung” as if it were a simple modifying adjective. I instead take it as neut. pl. and supply ‘lifespans’ (yugā́(ni)), which is commonly found with this adj., including in our 2c.

By my interpr. it expresses extent of time, indicating that poetic inspiration is a constant that will always ensure rewards for men generation after generation. For a similar thought see III.39.2 sanajā́pítryā́dhī́ḥ the “ancient-born, ancestral hymnic vision.” Most interpr. take iṣáṇi as a loc. infinitive with the preceding acc. as obj. (For the most recent disc., see Keydana, Infinitive im Ṛgveda, 195-96.) This may well be possible, but given its isolation and the unclarity of its morphological shape (see esp.

the disc. by Old, Noten), I take it as a simple locative, construing the accusatives in d as Inhaltsakk. with dúhānā in c. In any case it produces a bad cadence (4 light syllables); I do not see an easy repair strategy.


## 10
As in vss. 4 and 5, a form of citáya- (here citayema) has two different senses in two different constructions, by my interpr. In pāda a it shows a development of the ‘perceive’ sense, here rendered “get in sight of,” that is, “by our efforts get close enough to see.” The means by which we do so is árvatā “by steed,” namely warfare or contest. In pāda b citayema has a developed sense of ‘be perceived, appear’, namely ‘be distinguished / distinguish ourselves’. Here the means is bráhmaṇā ‘by a sacred formulation’, that is, by ritual or poetic competition. The standard tr. simply supply a verb in pāda a (‘acquire’, vel sim.), but the double usage of the other two forms of citáya- in this hymn suggests that this one, too, can be used for both pādas, and it is always preferable to avoid supplying verbs. Both WG and Proferes (68) in different ways take citayema with both pādas; Proferes interpr. it as a trans.-caus. in both pādas (“manifest”), WG only for the first (“erscheinen machen,” but “schauen können” in b). As noted above (ad vs. 4), the zero-grade root syllable tells against the trans.-caus. interpr.


## 11
With most, I interpr. iṣáyanta as ‘derive nourishment’, though Lub lists it with √iṣ ‘send’ and WG tr. “streben,” presumably assigning it to √iṣ ‘seek, desire’.

The acc. singulars yám … yajñám probably do not belong together, although an interpr. “whom they approach as the sacrifice,” with Agni identified with the sacrifice, is not impossible. Ge considers it attraction from *yásya … yajñám, but a loose purpose/goal accusative, almost a pseudo-infinitive “to sacrifice,” seems syntactically acceptable to me.
