+++
title = "003"

+++
Āprī


## 02
Pāda a is supposed to contain a lexeme práti √añj governing dhā́māni, but this would be the only ex. of the verbal idiom in the RV. I therefore take práti as governing dhā́māni ‘foundations’, in a parallel expression to tisró dívaḥ práti in b. I supply “of the earth” with dhā́māni on the basis of I.22.16 dhā́mabhiḥ pr̥thivyā́ḥ. The participle añján would be used absolutely and anticipate sám anaktu in d. The early part of the hymn has a tendency to station present participles at pāda ends, and not always with obj. (1d árhan, our 2a, 2c undán, 3a árhan).


## 04
The apparent loc. védī (so Pp.) should probably be read védi for metrical reasons (see Old: “nur angeblich Pragṛhya” [Noten]; Proleg. 456). AiG III.154-55 is skeptical about a loc. -ī to -i-stems and suggests that this, the clearest example, is actually to be explained by haplology from *védy[ām] asyā́m, which seems highly unlikely, esp. since it would make the cadence metrically irreparable. I think we have to take this form as given and as a locative (not instr.), with a metrically short final vowel, which may result from shortening in hiatus. For a similar ex. see bhū́mī (/ -i) in IX.61.10 and comm. thereon.

The last pāda contains a mixture of voc. (devā ādityāḥ) and nom. (yajñíyāsaḥ), with pāda-initial víśve ambiguous, since the accent may derive from its position. The tr. does not reflect this case mixture, since a meticulous separation would be fussy and serve no purpose.


## 05
As Old points out, suprāyaṇá- is metrically bad here and worse in several other occurrences; it should be read *suprayāṇá-, which presumably belongs to √yā, not √i.

I take the adjectives in d (yaśásaṃ suvī́ram) as proleptic, the result of the purification, though this interpr. isn’t strictly necessary.


## 06
In b vayyèva belongs to a vṛkī́-type stem vayī́- ‘weaver’, here in the dual. Old suggests that it doesn’t really matter if we analyze it as vayí yā iva, with masc. du., or vayí ye (i)va with fem. du., but given that the other adjectives in the hemistich, ukṣité … raṇvité, are feminine in form and that uṣā́sanáktā is regularly fem., the latter seems more likely.

The vs. lacks a finite verb and there is no verbal form, finite or participial, to govern ápāṃsi ‘labors’ in a. Most tr. supply ‘work’ vel sim., but I think it’s possible that sādhú is an adverbial predicate, “on target” in the publ. tr., and that it loosely governs ápāṃsi.

## 07
Re and WG supply ‘sacrifice’ as the obj. of sám añjataḥ, but since acc. devā́n is already available and was the obj. of exactly the same verb in 2d (sám anaktu devā́n), this is unnecessary.


## 08
sādháya(nti) in pāda a and svadháyā in c occupy the same metrical position and echo each other.


## 09
subhára- here is used in a different sense (or senses) from the same word in 4b, where it referred to the good burden, that is, the seated gods, that the barhis was bearing. Here I think there is a pun: the hero is ‘easy to bear’, that is, his birth, depicted in pāda b, was easy. But the hero so born provides good support to those who depend on him.

With Re, I tr. ví ṣyatu in two slightly different senses with two different objects: ‘unbind’ with ‘navel’ (nā́bhim), referring to the technicalities of the birth process, and ‘release’ with ‘offspring’ (prajā́m), referring to the results of birth.

The Tvaṣṭar verse in Āprī hymns generally directly concerns only his participation in the birth process (see I.142.10, III.4.9=VII.2.9, X.110.9, X.142.10; our pādas abc). Releasing the sacrificial animal and escorting it to (the fold/pen of) the gods is properly the province of the post (“Lord of the Forest,” vánaspátiḥ, 10a), and that expression (“go to [the fold of] the gods”) is a euphemism for the animal’s death. However, note X.70.9-10, where both Tvaṣṭar and the Lord of the Forest convey the animal to the fold of the gods (devā́nām pā́thaḥ). Like X.70.9 our pāda d implies that the journey of the sacrifical animal (that is, its death) occurs under the auspices of Tvaṣṭar, and in fact, given the apparent temporal/logical connector áthā beginning pāda d, the implication is that the offspring born in abc is to undertake this journey. This seems rather muddled: our new (human) offspring is not the sacrificial animal. I think the roles of Tvaṣṭar and the Lord of the Forest were quite distinct, but conflations like this could occur because the Tvaṣṭar and Vanaspati vss. are always adjacent in Āprī hymns and because the vocabulary is similar: Tvaṣṭar’s ví √sā ‘unbind/release’ and Vanaspati’s áva √sṛj ‘release/discharge’. The fact that the victim is usually not overly expressed (presumably a euphemistic avoidance) makes confusion all the more likely.


## 11
The -si form vakṣi would be better tr. as an impv. “convey,” rather than a subj. “you will convey” as in the publ. tr.
