+++
title = "004"

+++
Agni


## 01
The stem suvṛktí- generally refers to a hymn and has in fact virtually been substantivized to mean hymn. However, it must be a bahuvrīhi in origin; I generally tr. ‘having a good twist’, referring to the clever adornments, the turns of phrase, of a skillfully crafted hymn. Here I think it has two senses: first, characterizing Agni himself as ‘having a good twist’, perhaps referring to his swirling smoke and flames, but then, as a sort of secondary or double bahuvrīhi, ‘having [/receiving] (hymns) with good twists’. In this meaning it is parallel to suprayásam ‘having [/receiving] pleasurable offerings’. Note that the two are both final in their pādas. I do not think Ge’s “euren Preis” or Re’s “hymne (incarné)” are either necessary or illuminating.

On the desiderative gerundive didhiṣā́yya- see comm. ad I.73.2. Although the tr. “desirable to install” is somewhat heavy, the complexity of the formation seems to require a weighty tr.

The last pāda indulges in play with the name Jātavedas: devá ā́deve jáne jātávedāḥ. The first and last elements, devá … vedāḥ, are virtual mirror images, with the 2nd word ā́deve reinforcing the first, and jáne making an etymological figure with jātá.


## 02
The combination of honoring Agni “in the seat of the waters” (a) and the Bhṛgus “once again” installing him among the clans (b) suggests that this vs. concerns the well-known myth of Agni’s flight and concealment in the waters and the Bhṛgus’ discovery, recovery, and reinstallation of Agni as the ritual fire. X.46.2 begins with a pāda identical to our pāda a and then relates the Bhṛgu’s finding of the fire gúhā cátantam “hiding in secret”: imáṃ vidhánto apā́ṃ sadhásthe, … padaír ánu gman / gúhā cátantam uśíjo námobhir, ichánto dhī́rā bhṛ́gavo ‘vindan “This one here

-- having done honor to him in the seat of the waters, they followed him along his
tracks ... / With reverences seeking him who was hiding in secret, the fire-priests, the insightful Bhrgus ̥ found him.” The same myth may be alluded to, in ring compositional fashion, in vs. 9 of our hymn. Note also that the poet to whom this hymn is ascribed is Somāhuti Bhārgava.

## 02-03
As IH pointed out to me, dvitā́dadhur in 2b can be read, contra Pp. adadhur, as dvitā́dadhur, with perfect indic. or pres. injunc.; I now favor the unaugmented reading for reasons given below.

The contrast between the verbs in 2ab imám … (a)dadhur bhṛ́gavaḥ and 3ab agníṃ devā́saḥ … dhuḥ seems to encode the primal installation of Agni by the gods (3) and the recent installation, by men (2). Why the primal installation is expressed by a root aor. injunc. is not clear to me, but I would now alter the publ. tr. to “Agni did the gods install …,” from “Agni have the gods installed …,” to reflect the remote past. Note also that the opening of 3b is metrically aberrant, with an opening of 3.

HvN suggest a rest in 4th position. It would be possible to restore *dadhuḥ, which would match the same verb in the same position in 2b, but I think it’s more likely that the omission of a syllable is meant to call attention to the difference in verb stems. A rest in 3rd position, producing a syncopated dhuḥ might be better. If the two verbs are being directly contrasted, an unaugmented dadhur in 2 is more likely than augmented adadhur (in order to highlight the difference in stems). Discussion with IH has helped me clarify my interpr.


## 03
I tr. dīdayat … ū́rmyā ā́“shine towards the nights,” rather than “illuminate the nights” with the standard tr., because I could not otherwise account for the ā́. Narten’s tr. (KlSch 370 n. 5) is similarly intransitive though with a temporal, rather than goal, acc.: “Er soll die Nächte hindurch leuchten.” Note mitrám √dhā in b reprising the same lexeme in 1c.

On dakṣā́yyaḥ, whose morphology resembles didhiṣā́yyaḥ in 1c, see comm. ad I.91.3. As noted there, in this passage it could also or alternatively mean “to be skillfully tended.”


## 04
The predicate adj. raṇvā́qualifies both puṣṭíḥ and sáṃdṛṣṭiḥ; for the latter see X.64.11 raṇváḥ sáṃdṛṣṭau.

I take dákṣu- as a pseudo-desid. u-participle; also dhákṣu- in X.115.4.

Because dodhavīti in d is unaccented, it cannot be the verb of the relative clause beginning with yáḥ in c, despite the standard tr. Instead the intensive part.

bháribhrat must be predicated in the rel. cl. and dodhavīti interpreted as the verb of the main clause.

Because of the equine simile and imagery, the primary reading of dodhavīti vā́rān must be “twitches his tail(-hairs),” but a second reading “shakes out choice things” is also invited.


## 05
This vs. describes the changes in color and form of the kindled fire as a sight to be wondered at. My tr. follows Ge’s in outline and many details. The first sight is of the shapeless dark cloud of smoke (a), but that transforms into color and bright light (bc). On ábhva- see my forthcoming “The Blob in Ancient India” (UCLA CMRS 2015 dragon conf. vol.), and for a parallel passage (also adduced by Ge) VI.4.3 … yásya panáyanty ábhvam, bhā́sāṃsi vaste sū́ryo ná śukráh “He whose formless mass [=smoke] they [=mortals] marvel at …, he (then) clothes himself in lights, like the brilliant sun,” which seems to show parallel progress from dark to light and also contains a form of bhās- as here.

vanád- ‘wood-eater’ assumes a root noun 1st member ván-, preserved in a few forms such as loc. pl. váṃsu (see Schindler, Rt. Noun), against the overwhelming number of forms to thematic vána-.

I do not understand the simile in b, uśígbhyo ná “as if for the fire-priests.” Perhaps the point is that the fire-tending performed by Uśij-priests would cause the smoke to dissipate and the flames to appear, but that in their absence this change comes about anyway. Note that in X.46.2, quoted above ad vs. 2, the Bhṛgus seem to be identified as uśíj-priests, so the simile here may be referring to ritual behavior in ancestral time. WG tr. “wie den (danach) Verlangenden,” but uśíj- is elsewhere the designation of a priest (and cf. Old Aves. usij-) and is so tr. by them elsewhere (e.g., I.60.4).

For ráṃsu as adverbial loc. pl. to the root noun ráṇ- see Schindler Rt. Noun and EWA, both s.v. raṇ. And note raṇvá- in the preceding and following vss. (4a, 6c).

The last pāda describes the graying of the ash (“having grown old”) and then the rejuvenation of the flames presumably by the addition of more firewood.

## 06
The standard tr. take bhā́ti as the operator of the simile (e.g., Ge “Der nach den Hölzern ausschaut(?) wie der Durstige (nach Wasser)”), but this doesn’t make much sense. From vanád- ‘wood-eater’ in the immediately preceding vs. I extract ‘eat’ to govern vánā and to be compared to tātṛṣāṇáḥ ‘thirsting’ in the same semantic realm, hence my “(eating) wood like one athirst.” My ‘red-hot’ for tápuḥ contrasts nicely with kṛṣṇā́dhvā ‘having a black road’, but is unfortunately not entirely legitimate: it is more literally just ‘hot’; there is no color component.

Act. pf. ciketa in c might be expected to mean ‘perceives’, as generally, but it must mean instead ‘appears’; so all the standard tr., and see also Kü (175) on the unusual sense. It is all the more surprising given med. cikite in the same meaning in the immediately preceding vs. (5c). But in this case the two forms may have been seen as metrical variants with identical sense, since ciketa is always pāda-final, cikite always post-caesura, as here.

The unexpressed concept in the simile “like heaven smiling with its clouds” must be lightning, which smiles (I.168.8) or laughs (V.52.6). Lightning is white, like (some) clouds.


## 07
The root √svad is generally a ritual technical term: the ritual fire “sweetens,” that is, “ritually prepares” the oblations. Here the forest fire performs the same action on the non-ritual ground. Although this might depict some version of slash-and-burn agriculture (so WG), I think it more likely that the point is merely to give a ritual dimension to the wild and unpredictable actions of the forest fire, in the hope of exerting some control over it. The same sentiment is found in I.169.3 agníś cid dhí ṣmātasé śuśukvā́n, … dádhati práyāṃsi “For even a fire blazing in the brushwood can produce pleasurable offerings.” The position of ná after the verb asvadayat in our passage suggests that the simile is targeting the verb, an extremely unusual situation in Vedic poetics.


## 08
The phrase tṛtī́ye vidáthe “third rite of distribution” probably refers to the Third Pressing (though the two other occurrences of “three vidáthas”, at VI.51.2 and VII.66.10, do not seem to). Agni is of course present at all the pressings, but is not especially associated with the Third Pressing; however, tṛtī́ye sávane at III.28.5 is in an Agni context.


## 09
In the publ. tr. I supply with gúhā a form like hitám (cf. I.23.14, II.11.5, IV.5.8, etc.), cárantam (III.1.9) or cátantam (I.65.1, X.46.2) referring to Agni when he was hiding in the waters, a myth I also think is referred to obliquely in vs. 2 of this hymn (see above). Our vs. 2 is especially close to X.46.2, which relates this story, and X.46.2c begins gúhā cátantam (and continues with a ref. to the uśíj-; see our 5b).

I therefore think my suggestion is justified, though I am usually reluctant to supply extraneous material. The point is -- if the Gṛtsamadas (re)gain the hidden Agni, just as their ancestors the Bhṛgus did, they will get the upper hand against their enemies.

The standard tr. must construe gúhā with vanvántaḥ ‘gaining in secret’ (e.g., Ge “heimlich überbieten und uüberwinden”). Although this is the obvious way to construe the text as given, the notion that our side would win by stealth and secret means seems antithetic to the Rigvedic ideal of combat, whether on the battlefield or the ritual ground. The adverb gúhā is extremely common in the flight-of-Agni myth and in an Agni hymn would likely call to mind the whole story. I would now be inclined to emend the publ. tr. to “(the one hiding) in secret,” not “(… deposited) in secret,” because of its apparent dependence on X.46.2 or a passage like it.
