+++
title = "005"

+++
Agni The first seven of the eight vss. (the 8th being a summary vs.) name and describe the various priestly roles that Agni assumes in the ritual. In all but vs. 3 the priestly title is given; in 3 the title must be inferred from the description, which unfortunately is somewhat muddled. See extensive disc. below.


## 01
On jénya- see comm. ad I.128.7.


## 02
The priestly subject of this vs. is the Potar, found in the final pāda, but there is a teaser in pāda b, in the form of an agent noun nétar- ‘leader’ in the expression yajñásya netári “to/in the leader of the sacrifice.” But netár- is not a technical priestly role; the real priestly title derived from the root √nī is Neṣṭar, found in vs. 5 (néṣṭuḥ).


## 03
It is not clear what the disjunctive vā is disjoining. Klein (DGRV II.187-88) considers vs. 3 a reformulation of vs. 2, tr. “Or (more precisely) …” But since vs. 3 most likely concerns a different priestly office than vs. 2 (brahmán- by implication, not pótar-), this doesn’t work. No other tr. attempts to account for vā. Since Agni is the implicit subject of these vss. and the referent of the various priestly offices, I think that “or” is simply introducing a different role that the same Agni performs. If, as I suggest below, the first part of vs. 3 (dadhanvé … yád īm ánu “when he has run after it”) picks up the last part of vs. 2 (víśvaṃ tád invati “he sets all this in motion”), the “or” might emphasize the fact that the same Agni who set the sacrifice in motion is now switching roles to run after what he started. The “or” indicates that an alternative Agni-figure is now in question.

The three verbs in ab, dadhanvé, vócat, and véḥ, have been configured in every possible way. Ge takes the first two as parallel in the dependent cl. marked by yád, with véḥ the main cl. verb (accented because it’s in the initial position of its clause). Acdg. to Re, dadhanvé is a main verb, with vócat the verb of its associated yád cl., while véḥ is the verb of an independent main cl. Old (SBE) takes all three as parallel verbs in the yád cl., with c as the main cl. Like me, Klein makes vócat and véḥ parallel main cl. verbs, with dadhanvé in the yád cl. (In his Particle u …” [p. 81] Klein specifically takes u not only as indicating that vócat and véḥ are coordinate but suggests it was syncopated from utá in the context … u tát.) And, finally, WG take dadhanvé in the dependent cl., vócat in the main cl., and véḥ as 2nd sg. direct speech specifying vócat. This chaotic diversity shows that we interpreters are uncertain not only about the syntax of the verse but the sense. In what follows I will pursue this sense, with no certainty that what I present is correct.

Ge (/WG) take the subject of dadhanvé to be the priest and īm as referring to Agni whom the priest pursues, but, as in II.1, Agni is identified with the various priestly functions, and I think he must be the subj. of all the verbs here. I don’t really understand the function of dadhanvé, but it might simply express Agni’s pursuit of the priestly role or of the formulations that he then speaks (in which case īm is better tr. ‘them’, as is quite possible). But I would now suggest that there is continuity with the previous vs., and that Agni in his new rule is running after “all this” (víśvaṃ tád, probably the sacrifice or some part of it) that as Potar he set in motion. See above.

The reason that WG interpret véḥ as direct speech is to render it as a 2nd sg.; they clearly reject the standard 3rd sg. interpr. But I do not think that a 3rd sg. can be avoided here or in I.77.2 or IV.7.7 (WG render the former as 3rd sg. but the latter as 2nd sg.), although Gr’s assignment of the forms to an s-aor. to √vī is most likely incorrect. (Curiously Narten does not discuss veḥ in her entry on √vī, even to reject the s-aor. analysis.) Instead I would take veḥ (underlying ves) as the injunctive to the root pres. of √vī, but with the substitution of -s for -t in the 3rd sg. as if it belonged to an s-aor. or a root aor. of the type (ā́)var (2nd/3rd sg.) -- keeping in mind that before voiced sounds véḥ appears as vér and so an analogy to phonologically similar (ā́)var would not be surprising. There are no 3rd sg. -t forms to this stem, unless augmented ávet (V.34.8) belongs here. One of the idiomatic uses of the root √vī is with an acc. of an office or function (see esp. I.76.4 véṣi hotrám utá potrám “You pursue the Hotarship and the Potarship,” adduced by Ge), which is the apparent sense here, and so assigning véḥ to a different root, such as √viṣ, should be avoided.

As noted in the intro. remark above, this vs. is the only one of the seven “priestly role” vss. in which the priestly title is missing. Instead we must infer it from the description of Agni’s activity. It is probably no accident that this is the only vs. in the hymn in which the priestly title has to be inferred and supplied, since the priestly role depicted in the vs. involves the clever manipulation of language and the capture, via bráhmāṇi, of hidden truths. The poet is in essence making his audience act the role of the bráhman- by figuring out what the vs. is getting at. In my opinion the most crucial piece is pāda b, where Agni “speaks sacred formulations” (vócad bráhmāṇi). The speaker of formulations (bráhman-) is of course the brahmán, and this is the title we must derive from this context. That véḥ is used of the pursuit of priestly roles (see above) but here appears without overt object also invites us to fill in the blank in this way. Our inference is reinforced by cd pári víśvāni kā́vyā … abhavat, where Agni encompasses “all poetic skills,” that is, the ones necessary to produce effective formulations.

This brings us to the problem of abhavat. As IH points out to me, the recent past sense I attribute to this verb here (“has encompassed”) would be highly unusual for an augmented imperfect, and given the perplexing variety of verbs in the earlier parts of the vs. (pf. dadhanvé, injunc. aor. vócat, injunc. pres. véḥ) and the uncertainty of their syntactic distribution, not to mention the sense of the vs. as a whole, adding to the confusion by attributing an unusual sense to abhavat should be avoided if at all possible. It might be possible to read the injunctives vócat and véḥ not as present/future as in the publ. tr., but as pasts: “… he spoke formulations and pursued …,” which would be friendly to a simple past interpr. of abhavat “he encompassed …” However, two things speak against this. First, the rest of the hymn presents Agni’s occupation of the various offices in the present/recent past. And second, injunctive forms of vóca- almost always have a performative pres.-future sense, as in the famous and stereotyped opening of I.32.1 índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi prá vocam “I (will) proclaim the manly deeds of Indra.” Imposing a past interpr. here would contravene the normal usage of this form, esp. since it fits well with the presential focus of the rest of the hymn and nothing else presses a past interpr. My not entirely satisfactory response to this conundrum is to suggest that cd describes Agni’s acquisition of poetic skills in the past - he is elsewhere often called a kaví- -- which allows him to assume the role of Formulator now. So I would alter the tr. to “he encompassed all poetic skills …” Many thanks to IH for extensive discussion of this problematic passage.


## 04
The standard tr. construe śúcinā with krátunā (e.g., Ge “mit lauterem Sinne”).

This is certainly possible -- though śúci- krátu- is not a standard collocation -- but not necessary.

The standard tr. also assume a change of subject in cd from Agni (ab) to a priest “who knows Agni’s vratas” (vidvā́m̐asya vratā́dhruvā́). I find this unlikely; vidvā́n modifies Agni in vs. 8 (in my view), as well as twice in the next, closely related, hymn (II.6.7, 8). Moreover, vidvā́n is regularly used absolutely, taking an object much less often. I construe vratā́dhruvā́instead with ánu: “according to his vratás.” The collocation ánu vratá- is quite common; here the vratá- would be the rules that govern the natural world (plants and fires).


## 05
On the interpretational difficulties of this vs., see publ. intro.


## 06
I take yádī as yád ī, with pronominal enclitic ī standing for ‘him’ = Agni/Adhvaryu. See my “RVic sīm and īm” (Fs. Cardona, 2002).

Ge’s identifications, flg. Sāy., of the mother as the cow and the sister as the offering ladle or, less likely in my opinion, the ghee offering itself, seem reasonable.

He suggests that the pl. tā́sām of c picks up a collective in the previous clause, presumably ghee. This seems less likely to me; I suggest “the arrival of these (fem.)” refers back to the sisters who came here (svásāro yā́idáṃ yayúḥ) in 5d.


## 07
The convoluted but rhetorically balanced expression sváḥ svā́ya dhā́yase kṛṇutā́m ṛtvíg ṛtvíjam (“Let him, as Rtvij, ̥ make himself R̥tvij, to suckle himself”) makes explicit Agni’s double role in this hymn: he is both a divine version of each priest in turn and represents the corresponding human priest. Here as divine Ṛtvij he makes himself into the human Ṛtvij, whose function is to give nourishment to the ritual fire, that is, to himself -- a kind of closed and reflexive circle. Once the mechanism of the identifications that have run through the hymn has been laid bare, the poet briskly finishes up the hymn, beginning with the summary 2nd hemistich here.

Most tr. struggle to construe stómaṃ yajñáṃ ca with the closest verb, vanéma.

Somewhat against my principles, I instead take ā́d áraṃ, vanéma as parenthetical and construe the first NP with rarimā́. (I have displaced the tr. of the ā́d clause to the right, because the parenthetical tr. was difficult to parse.) In favor of this interpr. is the fact that the standard tr. require ā́d to be in a highly unusual position, in the middle of its supposed clause. As it happens, WG interpr. the syntax as I do.


## 08
Ge (/WG) and Re take the subj. of ab to be the sacrificer, flg. Sāy., but Agni as the priestly mediator makes more sense. As noted above, ad 4c, vidvā́n must modify Agni in the last two vss. of the next hymn, II.6.7-8.
