+++
title = "006"

+++
Agni


## 01
The most likely referent to supply with fem. ayā́is girā́, given gíraḥ closing the preceding vs. and the 2 forms of this stem in the first pāda of the next vs. (3a; see also 6b). Cf. also II.24.1 ayā́vidhema ... girā́.


## 05
The vs. lacks a verb, though one can easily be supplied. The standard tr.

supply an imperative: I extract ‘give’ out of vásu-dāvan ‘giving goods’ in 4b, but ‘bring’ (so Ge, Re) works as well. What is clever about the syntax of this vs. is that the only signal of the absent imperative is the presumed 2nd ps. reference of the repeated sá, which of course is ordinarily a 3rd ps. pronoun, but is very frequent with 2nd ps. imperatives (see my “sa figé” article, HS 1992).


## 06
With Ge (/WG) girā́could be construed with ī́ḷānāya “reverently invoking with song.”


## 07
With Sāy., Ge, Old (SBE), etc., I take jányeva as representing janya(ḥ) iva, with double application of sandhi, against the Pp. jányā. There are various different interpr. of the sociological situation represented by jányeva mítryaḥ; mine is closest to Old (SBE). See disc. in my 2001 Fs. Parpola article.


## 08
The undoubted subjunctive (ā́) piprayaḥ seems to anchor the following yakṣi and (ā́) satsi as the haplologized s-aor. subjunctives they originally were, rather than in their later imperative function, esp. given the coordination of the first and last terms by ca … ca. However, the two ca’s could be more or less independent, with the second one conjoining yakṣi and satsi more closely.
