+++
title = "007"

+++
Agni


## 01
Note … bhārata# (a) / … ā́bhara# (b).

## 02
On īśata in the mā́prohibitive see comm. ad I.23.9.


## 03
The simile marker iva is wrongly placed, in that it follows both parts of the simile “watery streams” (dhā́rā udanyā̀).

The verse contains several tricks involving word order. First, the first word of the vs., víśvā(ḥ), and the last, dvíṣaḥ, belong together: “all hatreds.” Their extreme distraction may be iconic of the distance that we must cross to pass beyond them.

Notice that they are also near rhyme forms. Further, there is a clever grammatical switch between vss. 2 and 3: 2c ends with (utá) dviṣáḥ (abl. sg.) / 3c with dvíṣaḥ (acc.pl.), and 3a begins with víśvā(ḥ) (utá). As just noted, this opening víśvā(ḥ) is to be construed with the distant 3c dvíṣaḥ, not with the dviṣáḥ immediately before it -- even though they seem bracketed together, sandwiched in by utá's, with phonologically similar tásyā immed. before and tváyā immed. after: tásyā utá dviṣáḥ // víśvā utá tváyā.


## 05
On the vaśā́cow, see my Hyenas (258-60), building on H. Falk, “Zur Tiersucht im alten Indien” (IIJ 24: 169-80). Although often tr. “barren cow,” a vaśā́ is one that has been mated but has not yet calved -- so possibly barren, possibly not.

My tr. here, “mated cows,” is not fully accurate but far less awkward than accuracy would require.

WG supply “verses” with aṣṭā́padībhiḥ, though they allow the possibility of a cow in their n. Although this pun is probably lurking here -- eight-footed verses would of course be pādas with eight syllables -- the primary reading must be some sort of bovine, given the words with which it is parallel. See Old’s comment on this vs. (SBE).


## 06
The final word of the vs. (and the hymn) ádbhutaḥ echoes the finals of the last two vss., 4c and 5c ā́hutaḥ.
