+++
title = "008"

+++
Agni

## 01-04
The #ya(śástamasya) that opens 1c anticipates the forms of the relative pronoun yá- in the next 3 vss. (2a #yáḥ, 3a #yá(h), 3c #yásya, with the last, 4a #ā́ yáḥ, no longer in initial position), though of course it is entirely unrelated to the relative. The referent of all those rel. pronouns is Agni, who is also the referent of yaśástamasya. Phonology and syntax are thus wedded.

## 04-06
As the just-mentioned structural device expires in 4a, another takes its place. An unbroken alliterative string runs from the end of 4b through the beginning of 5: … arcíṣa / añjānó ajárair abhí // átrim ánu …, and the first words of the most of the remaining pādas also start with a- (5b agním, 6a agnér, 6c áriṣyantaḥ, 6d abhí). Since ádhi is the 2nd word in 5c, only 6b is not part of the chain. ### 04-05 On the disguised Svarbhānu myth in these two vss., see publ. intro. Most tr./comm. are puzzled by the appearance of Atri here, and Ge and Old in particular speculate on possible emendations. But the presence of the Svarbhānu formula guarantees that the text is genuine, in my opinion.


## 09-10
Agni These two six-verse trimeter hymns follow the two six-verse dimeter hymns (II.7-8), though by the normal rules of hymn ordering they should precede them. In his opening n. on II.9 in SBE, Old tentatively suggests that II.9 and 10 should each be divided into two tṛcas, but in the Noten he essentially withdraws this suggestion because he sees signs of unity within the two hymns as transmitted.
