+++
title = "009"

+++
Agni


## 01
vídāna- is ambiguous: it can belong either to √vid ‘know’ (Ge [/WG], Re, though he registers the ambiguity in n.) or √vid ‘find’ (Old [SBE]). I assign it to the latter and think it refers to the myth of the discovery and recovery of the fugitive Agni. The word forms a weak ring with suvidátra- in the final vs., 6a, assuming the latter word is a derivative of √vid; see comm. ad vs. 6.

ádabdhavratapramati- is an unusual cmpd for the RV in having three members, and with its initial accent (on which see AiG II.1.293) the accent falls about as far from word-end as it is possible to be.


## 04
There is some difference of opinion about the meaning of manótar-. Most take it as some version of ‘deviser, inventor’ (so Gr, Ge, HO [SBE], Re, WG), but Tichy (Nomen Agentis, 40 and passim) argues for the sense ‘reminder, rememberer’. I opt for something in the middle, ‘minder’. That is, I don’t think the term means that Agni creates ritual speech (the standard view), nor that he remembers or reminds the officiants of this speech (the Tichy view), but that he takes account of it, pays attention to it. The English term ‘minder’ (as in childminder) also has the connotation of taking care of someone or something, tending or ministering to it or them, and that sense would fit here as well. See also comm. ad IV.5.10 citing several passages containing the verb stem manu- that underlies this unusually formed agent noun with the sense ‘ponder, bring to mind’.


## 05
Various suggestions have been made about the two types of goods in pāda a (see the nn. of Old [SBE], Ge, Re, and WG), but Re’s suggestion that it’s lifestock and offspring seems the most satisfying contexually, given the wishes expressed in cd. For disc. of similar phrases see comm. ad VI.19.10.


## 06
As noted above, I suggest that suvidátra- makes a ring with vídāna- in 1a, a suggestion that rests on assigning both words to the root √vid ‘find’ and on assuming that this root meaning is still apparent in suvidátra-. Neither of these assumptions is unchallenged. Gr assigns -vidatra- to dā1 ‘give’+ ví and glosses it ‘vertheilend’. (That √dā is not otherwise found with ví speaks against this derivation.) In his brief treatment of the word Debrunner (AiG II.2.170) gives its root etymology as √vid with a question mark, glossing it ‘wohlwollend’. Though no doubt other etymological suggestions have been made, I have not to my knowledge encountered them. The standard interpr. of the semantics, however, are like Debrunner’s -- ‘wohlwollend, gnädig, d’accueil favorable’, etc. Whatever the root derivation assumed, this rather vague meaning is far from ‘find’ (or ‘know’ or ‘distribute’) and the semantic pathway to it is unclear. Moreover, a passage like X.15.3 ā́hám pitṛ́̄n suvidátrām̐avitsi “I have found the suvidátra- forefathers (/forefathers that are easy/good to find)” testifies to at least a secondary connection between the form and the root √vid ‘find’, as well as enough semantic connection remaining to allow the phrase to function as a linguistic figure. The word is found twice in the Agni hymns of II, once here, once in II.1.8. Both vss. also contain the word ánīka- ‘visage, face’ (though in II.1.8 admittedly not in the same clause). Especially in our passage I think the point is that because of Agni’s shining face he is easy to find -- he is the brightest thing around.

That the next hymn (II.10), which is at least metrically paired with this one (see comm. ad II.9-10), is also characterized by a ring linking the first and last vss.

and that the first word of the ring is also formed with a -tra-suffix (johū́tra-) lend some support to my speculations about suvidátra- here.
