+++
title = "010"

+++
Agni


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., the first word of the hymn, johū́tra-, forms a ring with johavīmi, the last word. The connection between them is emphasized by the intensive redupl. in johū́tra-; no other -tra- stems show redupl., much less intensive reduplication. Gr (and, it seems, WG, here though not in I.118.9; II.20.3 isn’t clear) take the stem as act. (‘laut rufend’), but a passive value makes better sense in all 3 occurrences (so Old [SBE], Ge, Re). The -tra- form in the next vs., víbhṛtra- (2d), is likewise passive. My tr. “invoked … on every side” is based on the possibility that the -tra- suffix evokes the -tra adverbial locatives (such as átra ‘here’), although this may be pushing the limits (likewise my ‘dispersed in many places’ for víbhṛtra- in 2d). It does, however, work with the thematics of the first few vss.: vs. 2 urgently begs to hear my call (hávam me, with the possessive prn. emphatically placed pādafinal), and the two occurrences of vícetāḥ ‘discriminating’ (1c, 2b) suggest that Agni is choosing among the various sacrifices he might attend on the journey described in 2cd.


## 02
The urgency of the poet’s desire is conveyed by the isolated precative śrūyā́(ḥ), the only precative to this root, hence my “may he please hear.” It also provides a phonological template for śyāvā opening the next hemistich (2c) and, more distantly, uttānā́yām and śiriṇāyām opening 3a and c respectively.

## 03
The fem. sg. loc. uttānā́yām is generally simply tr. ‘outstretched’ or sim. I think the image is more precise: the two kindling sticks, athwart each other, are likened to a woman in birthing position with her legs stretched out and open (my “agape”).

The rhyming form śíriṇāyāṃ opening the 2nd half-vs. is much more difficult.

It is a hapax with no clear root affiliation, and the suggested tr. range widely -- ‘night’, ‘chamber’, ‘hiding place’, etc. (See the standard tr., plus KEWA and EWA s.v.) My own very tentative suggestion links it to sirā ‘stream’ (I.121.11) and sirī́- (if that means ‘stream’, as JPB takes it, X.71.9), as well as to later sirā- ‘vein’ (also found in MIA). By extension I take it to refer metaphorically to the birth canal, in which Agni remains, unborn, during the night -- though he cannot be kept confined for very long. This would again be a reference to the kindling sticks, in whose attenuated interior he is fancied to be hidden. The variation in sibilant would not be surprising, particularly in a body-part word that could be mediated by Middle Indic.

All this is very speculative, however, and it might be wiser to leave the word untranslated.


## 04
This vs. describes what happens to the fire after the peaceful creature depicted in pāda b is sprinkled with melted butter (pāda a): he takes on an appearance (dṛ́śānam) that is larger and more powerful. Contra Ge, Re, WG (but with Old [SBE]) I construe ánnaiḥ with vyáciṣṭham, on the basis of III.50.1 uruvyácāḥ … ebhír ánnaiḥ.


## 05
The first hemistich of this vs., which repeats the verb of the preceding vs., jigharmi ‘I sprinkle’, expresses the hope that this sprinkling, which rendered Agni ‘overpowering, violent’ (rabhasám) at the end of the last vs., will not make him hostile and dangerous: he should enjoy the ghee “with an undemonic spirit” (arakṣásā mánasā).

The second hemistich states that no matter how lovely his appearance is, he is not to be touched; the unexpressed reason for this of course is that he will burn whoever or whatever does touch him. The hapax bahuvr. spṛhayádvarṇa- is variously interpreted. I think it means not ‘having desirable color’ (so, approx. Re.) nor ‘desiring color’ (so approx. Ge and WG), but rather ‘having questing color’ -- that is, his color (=flames) flickering here and there (járbhurāṇaḥ) look in their random motion as if they are seeking something.


## 06
The first pāda of this vs. continues the theme of trying to set limits on the unpredictably powerful Agni. (In my view; it is not so interpr. by others.) Here he is urged (again with a precative, jñeyāḥ) to know or recognize his share. I take this to mean that he should take his share and no more, though his power would allow him to take whatever he wants (sahasānó váreṇa). Agni thus controlled will then help the singer to achieve his goals (pādas bcd).

Note that Manu returns from the 1st vs. — another little ring. The adj.

madhupṛ́cam ‘mixing with honey’ reminds us of the later Madhuparka drink offered to distinguished visitors, but I doubt that such a reference is found here. Though it would be generally appropriate for Agni the átithi- (‘guest’), this hospitality theme, though common in the RV, is not found in this hymn.

For the pun in the 2nd half vs., see publ. intro.
