+++
title = "011"

+++
Indra [II.11-24 JPB] [II.11 Indra (misc. comments by SJ to JPB tr.)

The hymn has a remarkable number of predicated tense-stem participles.

Another notable feature is the large number of occurrences of the particle nú, all in the first pāda of the vs., in short runs of adjacent vss.: 3a, 4a; 6a, 7a; 15a, 16a, 17a. The last vs. of the hymn (21) then begins nūnám, as if in summary.

On the unusual meter of this hymn see Old Prol. 87-90, who also remarks on its unusual vocab., which, taken together, gives the hymn a “Sonderstellung” among the surrounding hymns (87 n. 1).


## 02
The pf. part. vāvṛdhānáḥ would better be rendered as an anterior: “when you had become strong …”


## 03
There are several syntactic problems in this verse. The easiest to deal with is the apparently misplaced ca in b. All the standard tr. as well as the publ. tr. take rudríyeṣu as a modifier of stómeṣu, with the whole loc. phrase #ukthéṣu …, stómeṣu … rudríyeṣu ca# then interpreted as “in the hymns and in the Rudriyan praises,” with the ca following the 2nd word of a bipartite NP and at a considerable distance from the 1st . (We would expect *stómeṣu ca (…) rudríyeṣu.) Klein (DGRV I.54) calls this “the most anomalous position of ca within adjective plus noun syntagms.” This difficulty disappears if we take rudríyeṣu not as an adjective with stómeṣu, but as a third term in the conjoined phrase: “in the hymns, in the praises, and in the Rudriyans.” The ca is then correctly positioned in an X Y Z ca construction (on which see Klein DGRV I.86-91). The Rudriyans in question are the Maruts. It is important to note that the adj. rudríya- is almost never used of anyone or anything but the Maruts, and in the plural never of anything but the Maruts. It is also never used of hymns or praises. It is true that my interpr. produces disharmony in semantic class: two types of verbal products and a group of gods, but Indra does indeed get pleasure and strengthening both from human praises and from the Maruts, who stood by him at the Vṛtra battle. And my interpr. solves the ca placement problem and also allows rudríya- to refer to its accustomed referent.

A more intractable problem is how to interpr. the loc. relative pronouns in a and c. The standard tr. seem to take them (it’s a little hard to tell) as embedded relatives with the loc. nouns (ukthéṣu, etc.) belonging to the main clause whose predicate takes shape in pāda d. The publ. tr. (JPB) takes ab as a separate sentence, supplying an impv. “delight!” as the main cl. verb, governing ukthéṣu … rudríyeṣu ca and generated from the injunctive pf. cākán of the rel. cl. This still leaves the yā́su cl. embedded, since the main clause in cd must include túbhyéd that begins c, parallel to vāyáve in d. Another wrinkle is the fact that the verbal predicate of this 2nd rel.

clause is not finite, but a predicated middle participle (whatever its exact derivational path) mandasānáḥ (on which see comm. ad IV.3.6). In favor of the JPB solution is the fact that the yā́su rel. prn. has a clear antecedent in the main clause of cd: nom. pl.

etā́(ḥ), but it is not clear whether masc. yéṣu does. If we take the nominal loc. pls.

ukthéṣu, etc., as belonging to the main clause, then it does. This seems to be the solution of the standard tr. (e.g., Re’s tenative “parmi (?) les hymnes en lesquels tu te complais et parmi (?) les corps-de-louange rudriens …” I do not know the answer, though I’m inclined to follow the standard tr., against the publ. tr., and take these masc. locatives as belonging to the main clause, with loc. relative clauses dependent on them, parallel to the fem. loc. in c. So, rather like Re, “Amidst the hymns, praises, and Rudriyans in which you take (have taken? injunc. pf.) delight, these (FEM. PL.), in which you are finding exhilaration, run forth to you …” As the just-produced tr. shows, yet another problem is the identity of the subject of the main clause and its verb sisrate. The subj. must be fem. because of the etā́(ḥ) and it is either qualified as śubhrā́ḥ ‘resplendent’ or compared to entities that are. The anomalous position of the simile particle ná is, uneasily, compatible with either: “resplendent like Xes” or “like resplendent Xes.” Various solutions for the identity of the subject have been suggested. The publ. tr. ‘waters’ seems the most likely, since 1) the verb means ‘run forth, flow’, 2) the subj. must be fem. pl., 3) śubhrá- elsewhere characterizes waters and rivers, and 4) the waters were prominent in the immediately preceding vs., though not named, and rivers appear in 1d.

Identifying the referent of śubhrā́ḥ is complicated by the fact that this stem is the signature word of the next vs. ### 04
The first two pādas contain two exx. of predicated pres. participles, vardháyantaḥ and dádhānāḥ, but unfortunately it’s not clear what they are predicated of. Ge, Re, and the publ. tr. supply “we,” which is a reasonable default, WG “diese Lobreden,” from 3a (which does not work because ukthá- is neut. and the participles are masc.). In any case, the referents of these participles are not directly reflected in the rest of the verse (save perhaps for asmé ‘for us / among us’ in c), and it seems best with the standard tr. to assume an abrupt syntactic division between ab and cd because the subject of ab must be plural, not sg., though the intrans./pass. part.

vāvṛdhānáḥ and the adj. śubhráḥ in c show lexical and thematic continuity with the first hemistich.

JPB takes c as an independent nominal clause. I’d be inclined, with the standard tr., to take it with d with the pf. part. vāvṛdhānáḥ expressing anteriority and notional dependence: “… having become strengthened, you should overwhelm …”


## 05
Pāda c is oddly conceived. The problem is the double object of the pf. part.

tastabhvā́ṃsam, namely apó dyā́m “the waters (and) heaven.” The first, in a putative VP apó √stambh, is perfectly fine, and indeed perfectly fine as a description of Vṛtra.

Although √stambh ordinarily means ‘prop up, make fast’, in the latter sense it can come to mean ‘stay, block’, with rivers (bzw. waters) as obj. Cf. III.53.9 ástabhnāt síndhum arṇavám “he stayed the river in flood,” depicting Viśvāmitra’s feat in stopping the rivers to allow Sudās’s forces to cross, presented at length in the famous hymn III.33. Also, with √stambh in the passive, in VIII.96.18 tváṃ síndhūm̐asṛjas tastabhānā́n “you released the rivers, which had been blocked/stayed,” exactly of Indra’s freeing the waters after smiting Vṛtra, as here. But √stambh is far more common with dyā́m as object; this VP means “prop up heaven” and is regularly used of one of Indra’s signature cosmogonic deed - including in this sequence of Indra hymns. Cf. in the next (very famous) hymn, II.12.2 yó dyā́m ástabhnāt sá janāsa índraḥ “who propped up heaven, that, o peoples, is Indra”; II.15.2 dyā́m astabhāyad bṛhántam “he propped up lofty heaven”; II.17.5 ástabhnān māyáyā dyā́m avasrásaḥ “with his craft he propped up heaven (to keep it) from falling.” It is very strange to assign Indra’s deed and its formulaic expression to Vṛtra. To rescue the phrase, Ge suggests that “heaven” stands for “heaven’s light”; neither Old nor Re (whose tr. in EVP XVII of course lacks notes) comments, nor Klein (DGRV 335), who tr. “the one blocking the waters (and) heaven.” WG tr. “der dazu Wasser und Himmel befestigt hat,” with further glosses in the n.: “mehrdeutig: der Wasser und Himmel gespreizt / zur Festung gemacht / festgebunden / paralysiert hat” - none of which helps with the anomaly of dyā́m √stambh in this context. I find it difficult to imagine that the audience (more alert than us Western commentators), hearing dyā́ṃ tastabhvā́ṃsam, esp. in an Indra hymn, would not immediately associate it with the standard Indra formula and find the attribution of such a deed to Vṛtra (whom Indra will smash in the next pāda) disturbing—twisting the perfectly acceptable apáḥ √stambh phrase in a disconcerting direction. But I don’t quite know what to do with this. I would certainly not suggest that they then interpreted this participial phrase to refer to Indra - more that they were forced to rescue it by a semantic reconfiguration, perhaps like the one Ge suggests -- though nowhere else that I'm aware of is Vṛtra credited with blocking the light of heaven.

In any case, against the publ. tr., I would take the pf. part. as expressing anteriority - “having blocked / who had blocked the waters and heaven.”


## 07
The three augmented aorists in this vs. are striking, esp. because two of them are extremely marginal: the s-aor. seen in asvārṣṭām (√svar) is found otherwise in the RV only as 3rd sg. ásvār in late X.148.5; áraṃsta is the only form of this s-aor. in the RV. Both have well-attested 1st cl. present stems with the same meaning, and it is, at first, surprising in this narrative context that we don’t find imperfects. But as IH suggested to me, if we follow the interpr. of the hymn in the publ. intro. and in Brereton 1985, whereby the apparent events of the mythic past—the spreading out of the earth, the coming to rest of the mountain—actually refer to the ritual here-andnow, esp. the establishment of the fire, then the augmented aorists will force an immediate past interpr. and therefore reveal the poet’s intent behind the apparent recital of mythic events.

I would be inclined to take cid with sariṣyán, rather than with párvataḥ, hence “the mountain, though about to run, has come to rest,” rather than “even the mountain …” Note the use of the future participle to express past prospective value in subordination to a preterital main verb and see comm. ad 10b below.


## 08
After the three augmented aorists in the previous vs. and with akrān in pāda b, the injunctive sādi in pāda a is a little surprising, esp. since this pāda seems to describe the same action as 7d. I wonder whether the poet is playing a trick: the negated participle áprayuchan almost seems to have the augment we expect in *asādi but transposed to the next word (and of course etymologically and functionally quite distinct). Note that áprayuchan occupies the same metrical position as áprathiṣṭa in 7c (the immediately preceding hemistich) and shares the same first two syllables.

The s-aor. akrāṇ in b should be tr. “has roared” to match the other augmented aorists in the immediate context.

The lexeme ní √prath occurs only here in the RV and, at least according to Mon.-Wms., in all of Sanskrit. This isolation makes it all the more difficult to figure out what is going on in pāda d, since the reference of the almost equally isolated dhamáni- is unclear. Note the placement of the preverb ní after the verb paprathan at the end of the verse, an almost mirror image of the opening of the vs. ní párvataḥ.

This vs.-final paprathan ní is also echoed by the end of the 1st hemistich in the next vs. asphuran níḥ. Both verbs precede their preverbs, but despite having apparently identical endings, -an, the first is a real 3rd pl. -an, where asphuran represents 3rd sg. asphurat in sandhi.


## 10
It is unusual to find a subjunctive nijū́rvāt in a subord. clause whose main cl. has an imperfect intensive (ároravīt). The publ. tr. renders it as “was about to grind down” -- this seems pretty close to target, though I’d probably substitute rather “was going to” -- a past prospective. Sāy. simply glosses with a desiderative jighāṃsatīty arthaḥ. Of course, the -āt isn’t metrically guaranteed and could have been introduced from vájrāt at the end of 9d, so it is possible that the form was simply injunc. níjū́rvat. Nonetheless, though the usage of the subjunctive here is unusual, I think it can be reconciled with the function of the subjunctive more generally. Note that its function is very much parallel to that of the future participle sariṣyán in 7d.

The pf. part. papivā́n would be better tr. “after having drunk.” Both nijū́rvāt and papivā́n are means of indicating anteriority here.


## 11
In d JPB takes paurá as pauré out of sandhi, as a PN. In VIII.61.6 I take it as ‘multiplier’ (of Indra) in a pun with purukṛ́t-. In VIII.50.5 a clear loc. shows the sense that JPB wants. In V.74.4 there are three exx., one apparently a PN, the other also apparently a pun on puru- (JPB tr. ‘muchness’). I’d be inclined here to take it in non-PN name fashion, either as loc. “in its muchness” or modifying soma: “soma multiplied” (to puru) or perhaps more likely, given pṛṇántaḥ in c, ‘filling’ or ‘in its fullness’.

## 12
I would tr. dhīmahi in c as ‘acquire’ -- the idea being that we want to get a práśasti- from our actions performed with Indra’s help.


## 13
Pāda b contains another predicated pres. participle, vardháyantaḥ.


## 14
Pāda c contains yet another predicated pres. part., mandasānā́ḥ. It cannot belong with the main cl. verb in d, pānti, because it modifies a rel. prn. yé and pānti is unaccented. The primary ending on pānti is disturbing: the context requires a connection with √pā ‘drink’, but that root forms a root aorist. For another such form see I.134.5 and comm. ad loc. 
## 15
And another -- or rather the same mandasānáḥ in the nominal rel. clause introduced by yéṣu.

JPB supplies “be” as the verb in pāda c; I’m inclined to follow Ge (/WG) in supplying a form of √vṛdh ‘strengthen’, generated from ávardhayaḥ beginning d. Ge suggests the impv. vardhaya. It would also be possible simply to read ávardhayaḥ with both pādas: “you have strengthened us in battles (and) have strengthened heaven …”]

