+++
title = "012"

+++
[II.12 Indra (misc. comments by SJ to JPB tr.)


## 03
The hapax apadhā́is probably, flg. Old (and accepted by most), an instr. of a root noun. As Old also points out, ápa √dhā must here be a formulaic variant of ápa √vṛ ‘uncover’, a signature verb of the Vala myth. Old tellingly adduces nearby


## 03
yó gā́udā́jad ápa hí valáṃ váḥ. The alternative lexeme may have been used here because a root noun to √vṛ, vṛ-t- with empty -t as always with roots ending in short resonants, risks being mistaken for a root noun to √vṛt.

Because starting fires with stones is not the standard method in the RV -- it usually involves fire sticks -- I think the “between the two stones” (áśmanor antár) probably refers to the two world halves between which fire would appear, perhaps in addition to stones struck against each other to produce sparks. If I am correct that this is a reference to the world-halves, it would provide some support to the claim that the meaning ‘heaven’ for this etymon, attested in both branches of Old Iranian (asmanin both YAves and OP), was pan-Indo-Iranian, a contested claim (see EWA s.v. áśman-, esp. p. 138).

Note saṃvṛ́k samátsu sa …


## 04
cyávana- is ordinarily agentive, ‘rousing, rouser’, but there is no escaping the sense ‘exploit, deed’ here (like its fellow derivative cyautná-). Perhaps the semantic development is by way of “stirring (deed)” or sim.

## 04-05
The phrases aryáḥ puṣṭā́ni (4d) and aryáḥ puṣṭī́ḥ (5c) with ppl. and fem.

abstract to √puṣ, both in the plural, do not seem to differ from each other semantically or functionally. The only possible (but weak) motivations I can see for the use of different stems are 1) metrical (neut. pl. puṣṭā́ni would not fit in 5c; however, the shorter neut. pl. form puṣṭā́would), and 2) gender matching between simile and frame. We don’t know the gender of the root noun pl. víjaḥ ‘stakes’, but it is clearly not neut. If it is underlyingly fem., puṣṭī́ḥ would be a better match. For aryáḥ puṣṭá-, see loc. pl. aryáḥ puṣṭéṣu in the Vṛṣākapi hymn, X.86.1. That the ppl. is used in this phrase elsewhere suggests that the ppl. is the more idiomatic form in this phrase.


## 05
Although in answer to the question in pāda a kúha sá “where is he,” we might expect naíṣó asti to mean “he is not (here),” I prefer the existential “he does not exist” of the publ. tr. for two reasons. In main clauses the pres. copula asti is almost always existential, and doubts about Indra’s existence are expressed elsewhere in the RV.


## 08
For nā́nā see my disc. in the Hock Fs. “RV sá hinā́yám (VI.48.2) with a Return Visit to nā́yám and nā́nā,” in Grammatica et Verba, Glamor and Verve: Studies in South Asian, Historical, and Indo-European Linguistics in Honor of Hans Henrich Hock, ed. Shu-Fen Chen and Benjamin Slade, 2013. I follow Thieme’s 1949 explanation of the form as an āmreḍita involving the expected nom. sg. of nṛ́- ‘man’, otherwise unattested in Vedic. For reasons given in my article I prefer this account to Klein’s recent (2004) derivation from a pronominal āmreḍita *anā́-anā à *anā́nā “in this way (here), in that way (there)” (Jared S. Klein, “Nominal and adverbial āmreḍitas and the etymology of Ṛgvedic nā́nā,” in The Vedas: Text, Language & Ritual. Proceedings of the Third International Vedic Workshop, Leiden 2002, ed. Arlo Griffiths and Jan E. M. Houben, 251-60).

## 09-11
Note the phonological sequence, with several different interlocking repetitions: 9c yó víśvasya 10a yáḥ śaśvato … śaru vā 10c yáḥ śardhate … śṛdhyā́m 11a yáḥ śambaram … śarádi


## 10
The hapax śṛdhyā́m is generally taken as the acc. sg. of a stem śṛdhyā́-, and this is perfectly plausible both morphologically and contextually. However, it might rather be taken as the loc. sg. of a devī́-type -ī-stem śṛdhī́- “does not yield to the vaunter in his vaunting.” This makes somewhat more sense.


## 13
Pāda b provides a good example of cid taking Wackernagel’s position even though the word it should limit occurs later in the vs. line. In the first pāda cid correctly follows the word it limits, or rather the first part of the dual dvandva dyā́vā cid … pṛthivī́“even Heaven and Earth bow to him.” But in b cid follows the abl.

śúṣmāt, while the geographical feature corresponding to H+E in a, namely párvatā(ḥ) ‘mountains’, is postponed. But surely the clause means “even the mountains fear his explosiveness” (as in the publ. tr.), not “the mountains fear even his explosiveness.”


## 15
As often, a pattern well established through most of a hymn gets broken, or shaken up, at the end. Here the 3rd sg. reference to Indra in the first 14 vss. changes to 2nd sg. address, but this change isn’t immediately signaled: the vs. begins with a rel.

pronoun yáḥ that apparently matches the monotonously regular occurrence of the rel.

with 3rd ps. ref. in the rest of the hymn. Only the verb dárdarṣi in b, the last word in its clause, shows that the pattern has been broken.

The sandhi form dudhrá is ambiguous: it can reflect either a nom. sg. dudhráḥ with the Pp. or a loc. sg. dudhré. The publ. tr. (JPB’s) opts for the latter, a possibility floated by both Ge (n. 15a) and Old, who does not decide. The loc. interpr. has the advantage of allowing the oddly placed ā́cid, which would represent ā́as “Praep. mit vorhergehendem Loc.” (Gr. 169) plus ‘even’ emphasizing that loc. Ge’s tr. follows the nom. of the Pp, and there are arguments in favor of this interpr. -- dudhráelsewhere modifies Indra (I.56.3, VI.22.4 [2 out of 5 total occurrences]), and introducing a new personage in this vs. seems unnecessary. Like Old I can’t decide.

The main clause sá kílāsi satyáḥ “you are certainly real” is an implicit answer to the doubt expressed in 5b utém āhur naíṣó astī́ti enam “And they say about him, ‘he does not exist.’” The 2nd ps. reference of sá in the just quoted expression is contrary to my rules of such reference with this pronoun -- that 2nd ps. sá (etc.) is only found with imperatives and verbs so used. But the whole structure of this hymn, with the refrain sá janāsa índraḥ in the same metrical slot as this declaration, imposes the need for a sá here as well.

The final pāda, suvī́rāso vidátham ā́vadema, is a variant of the standard Gṛtsamāda Triṣṭubh refrain bṛhad vadema vidáthe suvī́rāḥ. The refrain pāda here is found twice elsewhere (I.117.25, VIII.48.14), neither of them in Maṇḍala II or in a Gṛtsamāda hymn. The reason for this variation isn’t clear, since the standard refrain would fit here unproblematically. Perhaps to mark the specialness of this particular hymn?

