+++
title = "013"

+++
[II.13 Indra (misc. comments by SJ to JPB tr.) This hymn is extremely challenging, with a discouraging number of puzzles and no clear overall theme -- though Indra’s cosmogonic activities and his help to particular clients dominate the latter part of the hymn.


## 01
The standard tr. (incl. JPB) seem to assume that pári serves as a postposition with tásyā(ḥ), but the interposition of apáḥ and, esp., the close sandhi of apás pári make this difficult. JL suggests that apáḥ might have a double reading, as a rare singular form of áp- ‘water’, an ablative to be read with tásyā(ḥ), and as the more usual acc. pl., with which the pl. rel. yā́su agrees. Thus “just born from this water he has entered the waters in which he grows strong.” But the most likely referent of tásyā(ḥ) is the immediately preceding jánitrī, which refers to the season, so an abl. of water is unlikely. That pári might form a lexeme with ā́viśat is suggested by 8c ápariviṣṭam.

Note the alliteration in cd: pipyúṣī páyo … pīyū́ṣam prathamám, with the first terms of each pair echoing each other. JL suggests that áṃśóḥ pīyū́ṣam prathamám is in apposition to the páyaḥ phrase, rather than being, with most tr. incl. JPB’s, a nominative expressing the subject of ukthyàm, anticipating tád. This would allow the refrain to be a separate clause, as it overwhelmingly is in the rest of the hymn.


## 02
The pres. part. to the redupl. pres. bíbhratīḥ in a seems to contrast functionally with the finite injunc. (prá) bharanta in b, with the former expressing the regular, repetitive action of the waters bringing milk, while the latter expresses a one-time or at least notably separate action.


## 03
Pāda a is syntactically disturbing, in that it seems to have a clear embedded rel. cl.: ánv éko vadati yád dádāti tád, with tád the referent in the main cl.

corresponding to yád in the dependent cl. (“ … that which he gives” -- so the standard tr. incl. JPB’s). Since such constructions seem strongly disallowed in RV, such a bald example would be striking and in fact begs for a different interpr. The interpr. of this pāda is made more difficult by the fact that the lexeme ánu √vad is found only here in the RV and it is not entirely clear what action is being performed.

If Sāy/Ge (et al.) are correct in identifying the first ékaḥ as the Hotar and the second as the Adhvaryu, a possible solution emerges. The Hotar should not in fact be “giving” anything; his job is to recite in accompaniment (an activity well conveyed by ánu √vad) to the ritual actions. It is the Adhvaryu who gives, that is, who actually makes the physical offering. Assuming that this division of labor already obtains in the RV, it seems likely to me that yád dádāti begins a new sentence and is a preposed rel. with the main cl. … éka īyate. I would tentatively tr. the hemistich “One follows along with this speech. the (other) one hastens when he gives that [=soma/oblation], changing its forms, having that as his work.” If yád is rather taken as the neut. rel.

pron., the tr. can be modified to “What he gives, he hastens to that, having that as his work …” My working assumption is that the independent tád is coreferential with the tád in the cmpd tád-apas-.


## 04
Contra the standard tr. (incl. JPB’s) I wonder if vibhájanta āsate has √ās ‘sit’ in auxiliary function as later: “keep Xing” (in this case “keep distributing”) rather than having the literal sense “they sit, distributing.” I am baffled by pāda b.


## 05
In the causative infinitival phrase akṛṇoḥ pṛthivī́ṃ saṃdṛ́śe divé, Re and WG take dat. heaven as subj. and acc. earth as obj. of the dat. infinitive, in contrast to the publ. tr. and Ge. Since the usual obj. of the infinitive dṛśé is the sun, the Ge/JPB interpr. seems more likely, in that it also involves looking heavenward. Note also that in 8ab the datives pṛkṣā́ya and dāsáveśāya are objects of the dative infin. níhantave, with the same syntactic pattern as is suggested here. There is also an occurrence of the same stem saṃdṛ́ś- in the acc. pl. in 10c, but this seems to have no clear relationship to the dative here and is, in any case, quite opaque.


## 06
With Klein (DGRV I.135, etc.), I take the double ca as conjoining morphologically parallel bhójanam and várdhanam, despite the preposed position of the 2nd ca. This preposing would be supported by 7a where a correctly positioned second ca in a double ca construction is found in the same metrical position and before an almost rhyming final word, dhármaṇā.

Because of the accent on dudóhitha, pāda b must continue the relative cl. of pāda a, rather than serving as its main cl. as in the publ. tr., which should be corrected to “You, who distribute … and who have milked ..., / you have hidden …” I’m inclined to take the loc. vivásvati here as “bei/chez Vivasvant” rather than “in Vivasvant” as in the publ. tr. That is, Indra set down a treasure in the vicinity of Vivasvant, presumably as a reward for V’s sacrifice, rather than within his body.

JL points out the complex mirror-image figure that straddles the pāda break in cd: #sá … dadhiṣe vivásvati, víśvasyaíka īśiṣe sá … The two interior elements, vivásvati and víśvasyaíka(ḥ), are phonologically similar and isosyllabic; they are flanked by 2nd sg. mid. perfects with rhyming ending -iṣe; and the pronoun sá with 2nd sg. reference provides an outer ring.


## 07
dā́na- in b is almost universally taken as ‘pasture’ (Weide) or ‘earth’ (Re ‘sur terre’), a meaning attributed to dā́na- only in this passage. The interpr. goes back, one way or the other, to Sāy: upalūyante sasyāny atreti dānaṃ kṣetram. His remark “grain is cut there” implies a connection with √dā ‘reap, mow’ (EWA’s DĀ2 ). His gloss ‘field’ (dānaṃ kṣetram) is repeated thereafter, most influentially in BR, though they seem to derive the word from √dā ‘divide’ (EWA’s DĀ4 ); subsequent adoptors of the gloss do not bother to comment on the etymology. Sāy’s implied derivation from √dā ‘reap’ is appealing. There are several clear exx. of the root pres. of this root in the RV (grouped under Gr’s 2. dā), as well as nominal derivatives (see EWA s.v. DĀ2 ). The reference in this vs. to the establishment of flowering and fruitful plants would have helped preserve a lexical item specific to agriculture, even though it is homonymous with the more common dā́na- ‘gift’ (and see differently accented dānā́ya ‘to give, for giving’ in 13a).

I wonder, however, about the concrete locational sense that Sāy gives it; it might make more sense as an abstract ‘in their reaping’. The vs. seems to depict Indra as the orderer of the cosmos, with the solemn etymological figure dhármaṇā … ádhārayaḥ “you established by your establishment” (or without English cognate expression, “you established by your ordinance”). (I would not follow JPB’s attribution of the dhárman- to the plants: “according to the foundation (of each).”) Most of the hemistich would then show Indra creating the various plants in their crucial function, to be harvested. (The presence of ádhi might be counter-evidence to my interpr., in that it generally has a locational sense, but I’m not certain that this is enough to derail it.) I further think that the last bit of the hemistich, vy àvánīr ádhārayaḥ, is a somewhat separate expression. That is, I read ádhārayaḥ without preverb with the “plants” segment in pāda a / first part of b (thus not flg. JPB’s “established separately the flowering and fruitful (plants)”), and restrict ví … ádhārayaḥ to the streams of the end of b; its position after the caesura in b favors this syntactic separation. If this interpr. is correct, the problematic dā́ne may require further analysis, for in addition to ‘in their reaping’ for the first part of the hemistich (to √dā ‘reap’) it could also be taken as a derivative of √dā ‘divide’, as JPB does: ‘in their division’. It is ideally positioned to be read with both.

I would thus tr. the hemistich “You who established by your ordinance the flowering and fruitful (plants) in their reaping (and) established the (various) streams separately in their division.” Indra’s division of undifferentiated water into separate streams would be part of his fructifying project -- bringing life-giving water to the various terrestrial regions.

Having created the relevant features of the earth -- plants and streams -- in ab, Indra then turns to a particular heavenly feature, the didyút-s. What exactly is meant here isn’t clear. The stem didyút-, like its near-twin didyú-, generally means ‘missile, dart’, but often a missile sent flying from heaven by a god (cf., e.g., VII.46.3 [Rudra] yā́te didyúd ávasṛṣṭā divás pári “which missile of yours shot downward from heaven …”). As Mayrhofer points out (EWA s.v. didyú-), didyút- has probably been remodeled after √dyot or vidyút- ‘lightning’ (I’d favor the latter). And often it seems to have a naturalistic aspect, as lightning (or the dreaded ‘thunderbolt’ of oldfashioned Vedic exegesis). Here the naturalistic reading seems esp. prominent, and I suggest that ásama- ‘unequalled’ may also have the sense ‘unequal’ -- that is, jagged and asymmetrical, zigzaging like lightning.

The last difficulty of this challenging verse is the first part of d, urúr ūrvā́m̐ abhítaḥ. Ge (/WG) and the publ. tr. take this as an independent nominal clause (e.g., JPB: “you, the wide one surrounding the containers”). Given the cosmogonic cast of the rest of the vs., I would follow Re, who takes ūrvā́n as a 2nd object of ájanaḥ in c: “(qui,) vaste (toi-même, as engendré) les mers tout autours.” Although ūrvá-, lit.

‘container’, generally refers to cow-pens and the like in the RV, Re’s ‘seas’ (as particularly large containers) seems correct here; cf. the same usage, also in Maṇḍala II, in II.35.3, where the rivers all fill “the same ūrvá-” (samānám ūrváṃ nadyàḥ pṛṇanti). I would thus tr. cd “and who begot the unequal(led) flashing missiles of heaven (and) the ‘containers’ [=seas] all about, (you) the wide one.” The juxtaposition urúr ūrvā́n is a play on words; the two are not etymologically related, at least by most lights.

What is striking about this vs. is that, unlike the usual cosmogonic vss., which refer to large generic parts of creation (heaven, earth, etc.), this one highlights particular idiosyncratic aspects of the grand cosmic divisions.


## 08
To avoid the need to supply additional unsupported material (JPB’s “would do likewise”) to the brief beginning of pāda d utaívā́dyá purukṛt, I interpr. purukṛt as a predicated voc. (“and even today (you are) a much-doer”), with most tr.

## 09
The syntax of the 1st hemistich is intricate and hard to parse. The first rel. cl.

(… yásya …) extends through ékasya śruṣṭaú, with yásya coreferential with ékasya.

This clause is in turn dependent on the short yád clause yád dha codám ā́vitha, with codám the referent of yásya. The standard tr. take codá- as a personal name, but this is not necessary, as Mayrhofer (PN s.v.) points out -- and in fact it would be better not to have another name for Dabhīti (c), who is the ultimate referent of both yásya (a) and codám (b).

Note that ā́diya(ḥ) at the end of b matches āsíyam at end of 8c.


## 10
Although víśved … rodhanā́(ḥ) must belong together semantically, it is difficult to make this work grammatically: rodhanā́in this sandhi pos. can’t be neut.

-ā, but must stand for -ā(ḥ) -- so Pp. -- (or, far less likely, -ai). It therefore can’t
properly be modified by a víśvā extracted from víśvéd. Old sees the problem, but Gr simply lists the form as neut. -ā; Ge [/WG], Re don’t mention and tr. as a phrase. The sandhi of either víśvéd or rodhanā́asya has to be tampered with to harmonize the two words; I have no opinion on how to make this work. The only other RVic occurrence of the noun is differently accented: ródhanā, a neut. pl. (I.121.7); AiG II.2.190 considers our form a fem. stem rodhanā́- beside root-accented neut. ródhana-, acdg.

to an existing pattern.

The awkward doubling of asya … asmai should be noted in the tr.: “… have conceded his manliness to him,” with both pronouns referring to Indra. Perhaps the asya is there because most exx. of ánu √dā ‘concede’ involve the subject conceding some quality of its/his own to a third party, so the fact that the paúṃsya- is Indra’s to begin with needs to be emphasized.

I have no idea what the second hemistich is about, except that it obviously involves some cosmogonic activity and the viṣṭíraḥ and the saṃdṛ́śaḥ are implicitly contrasted. In d pári paró shows phonetic play, but I do not understand the function of paráḥ here.


## 11
The first pāda, supravācanáṃ táva vīra vīryàm, is a nominalization of the famous opening of I.32 (found in various forms elsewhere): índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi prá vocam. In that hymn this opening is followed by the account of an undoubted heroic deed, the slaying of Vṛtra. Here the specification in b, introduced by yád (as often in such proclamations) followed by a promisingly heroic ékena krátunā “by your resolve alone,” turns out to be something of an anticlimax: you find goods. This lack of drama is somewhat repaired by d, which sketches a larger world of great deeds.

Unfortunately, however, the syntax of d is disturbing. The rel. cl. of d is universally tr. (incl. by JPB) “all the things you have done,” but “all” (víśvā) is not part of the rel. cl. (yā́cakártha). It has instead been stuck in the refrain, which only in this verse has been altered from sā́si ukthyàḥ (2-10d, 12d) to séndra víśvāsi ukthyàḥ.

Dropping a piece of a rel. cl. into the middle of a main cl. is simply impossible in the RV. It is possible to interpr. víśvā as a real part of the main cl., an acc. of respect: “What (deeds) you have done, you are worthy of hymns with regard to all of them.” But somehow I doubt that’s what the poet intended -- though what his intentions were, esp. given the deliberate alteration of the refrain, are opaque to me.

Another possible wrinkle in d is that yā́need not be the neut. pl. of the rel., illegally anticipating the víśvā intruding in the refrain. It could be an instr. sg. picking up váyaḥ in the preceding pāda: “… the vigor by which you have done …”


## 12
The use of the secondarily shortened stem śraváya- here instead of inherited śrāváya- may have been favored by the similarly short-root-vowel áramayaḥ at the beginning of this vs. (which stem comes by its short root vowel honestly) and by the denom. śravasyá- in the next vs. More problematic is what prá … śraváyan is conveying here. One might think that what the blind and the lame want is not fame but healing. Some such consideration must have led Gr to assign this form (and prā́śrāvayam X.49.8) to a different root śru and a different idiom prá √śru ‘vorwärts bringen’. I see no justification for such a separation. It is possible that the causative here means (as it can elsewhere) ‘make hear/heed’ rather than ‘make heard/famed’, though this wouldn’t appreciably improve the situation of the blind and lame. Or that in the idiom prá √śru, the prá came to dominate, with a sense ‘further, favor (through fame)’.


## 13
The last puzzle in the hymn is found in pāda c and also involves fame. We have just urged Indra to to give us a rā́dhaḥ (‘gift, benefit’) in the first hemistich. In c we find the phrase yác citráṃ śravasyā́(ḥ). Since citrá- very frequently modifies rā́dhaḥ, it seems natural to supply the recently mentioned rā́dhaḥ here. But then what is Indra doing? yác citrám appears to be the obj. of śravasyā́(ḥ). But this denom. doesn’t otherwise take an object (IV.42.2 cited by Gr is to be otherwise interpr.), and even if it did, the phrase would have to mean “which bright (gift) you will seek as fame,” which doesn’t seem to make sense. Ge essentially tr. it this way (“… eine ansehnliche (Lohngabe) … in der du … deinen Ruhm suchen”), but I don’t see why Indra would be looking for his fame in that direction. JPB avoids the syntactic difficulty by tr. as if yác citrám were an instr.: “the bright gift through which you will seek fame” (my italics), but this still requires the gift to be something that would provide Indra with fame. Re’s tendency to supply masses of material to smoothe over the rough places is on full display here: “ce qui est éclatant, veuille le donner-pardésir de-renom” (so hyphenated). WG seem to have arrived at a novel solution, apparently separating citrám from its usual formulaic partner rā́dhas and supplying śrávas- ‘fame’ -- or so I interpret “damit du … deinen ansehnlichen Ruhm suchen mögest.” However, as far as I can tell, śrávas- is never modified by citrá-, and context favors rā́dhas- as referent. I have no solution. The least unsatisfactory may be to assume that, in our self-serving way, we are telling Indra that giving us a good gift will bring him fame (better than heroic deeds? see 11ab) -- and in some sense it will, since we celebrate his generosity with hymns providing lasting śrávas-.
