+++
title = "026"

+++
Brahmaṇaspati


## 01
With Ge, Re, and WG, I take ṛjúr íc cháṃsaḥ as a severed bahuvrīhi, like nárā ca śáṃsam (IX.96.42, cf. X.64.3), with accent and case ending adjusted. For a similar formation, still compounded, see V.44.5 ṛjugātha ‘o you whose song is straight on target’. It would be possible, however, to take the text as given and make a “straight laud” the subject, as a sort of metonymy; so Schmidt (B+I 115).


## 02
The impv. vihi, with short root vowel (also III.21.5, IV.48.1, and possibly VI.48.17), must belong to the root pres. of √vī ‘pursue’, whose properly formed 2nd sg. impv. is vīhí (7x). The easiest way to explain its short vowel is by analogy to ihí belonging to the root pres. to √i ‘go’, with pres. indic. émi, éṣi, éti, and impv. étu, all strikingly well attested, which match vémi, véṣi, véti, and vétu.

Its object, manāyatáḥ, is ambiguous and for that reason its referent is not clear. Its base manā́- means something like ‘zeal’, a meaning found also in other derivatives to it, but zeal can be positively or negatively viewed; for a negative occurrence see nearby II.33.5. In our passage Gr, Re, and Ge [/WG] take it positively, referring to gods (Gr, Re) or priests (Ge), while Schmidt (B+I 115), flg.

Ludwig, negatively, referring to enemies. My tr. is meant to be neutral, since I think both are simultaneously possible.


## 04
On the apparent bad cadence produced by ávidhat see comm. ad II.1.7.

The curious long final of rákṣatī is not remarked on by the standard tr./comm.; the Pp simply reads it short. In my view it represents rákṣati + ī, the latter the enclitic acc. pronoun related to īm, which latter follows the first, parallel verb in the pāda, uruṣyáti + īm. They would show a phonologically motivated distribution here, with īm before vowel and ī before consonant, and would be positioned identically, immediately after a clause-initial verb and before an ablative.

[II.27-28 JPB]
