+++
title = "029"

+++
All Gods


## 02
The sequence in pāda c, abhikṣattā́ro abhí ca kṣámadhvam, invites interpr. as an etymological figure, but the agent noun, as it stands, must belong to √kṣad ‘mete out, apportion.’ Old tentatively suggests an emendation to abhikṣantā́r- (√kṣam), though he also allows that the transmitted reading may be correct and the poet is playing with Gleichklang. This seems the better course, esp. given that the stem is found once elsewhere (VII.21.8), though abhí is not otherwise attested with this root.

It’s worth noting that abhí √kṣam is found only in this little group of hymns (II.28.3, II.33.1, 7, in addition to this).

The reason for the accent on the main verbs (abhí …) kṣámadhvam … mṛḷáyata is not entirely clear, since neither begins its clause or pāda and they are not subordinated. They must be implicitly contrasted in some way, but, impressionistically, other such sequences are not accented.

The three ca’s in cd signal two differerent conjunctions. The first, in the preverb + verb sequence abhí ca kṣámadhvam, conjoins this impv. with mṛḷáyata in d, in an inverse ca construction (X ca … Y); the 2nd two, in d, conjoin the temporal expressions adyā́ca … aparáṃ ca. This is Klein’s view as well (DGRV I.188, 190, 155; cf. II.39).


## 03
As Ge and Re point out, the unexpressed conditional clause with the first hemistich should be something like “if you’re not going to help us now.”

## 04
Pāda c presents interpretational difficulties, particularly if ṛté is taken as the loc. sg. of ṛtá- ‘truth’ with most interpr. The problem in that case is not merely ṛté but also how it relates to madhyamaváh-. None of the suggested tr. seems satisfactory to me, and though Old discusses the passage at some length, he ultimately suggests with some despair that madhyama-váh- is an unknown technical term in Fahrkunst. Given the unconvincing solutions suggested by others, I am inclined towards Re’s quite different interpr.: he takes ṛté as the postposition/adv.

‘without’ and construes it with vaḥ. Old had already argued against the “without” interpr., on the grounds that there is no ablative and that ṛté bhūt occurs also at pāda end in VI.67.8 (where, however, I interpr. it as I do here). And, though vaḥ is not technically an ablative enclitic, it is fairly all-purpose in terms of case. Its distance from ṛté can be attributed to its taking Wackernagel’s position. With a “without” interpr. the rest of the pāda falls out: we do not wish for our chariot to be without you; madhyama-váh- then specifies where the chariot is traveling, possibly “in the middle of its journey” or “in the middle of a battle.” (Though I enthusiastically adopt Re’s analysis of ṛté, I am not at all convinced by his interpr. of this compound: he thinks madhyama- refers to a middling number of draft animals.) If the vaḥ … ṛté interpr. is rejected, the negative concept that prompts the mā́prohibitive must rest in the cmpd. madhyama-váh- and specifically in the 1st member madhyama-. Old lays out some possibilities, crisply summarized by Scar (475). I would assume in this case that ‘middle’ refers to a middling or less than full effort or a position in the middle, rather than at the forefront. So I would consider an alternative translation “let your chariot not be traveling in a middling way / in the middle (of the pack) with regard to truth.” Although most X-váh- cmpds mean ‘drawing/conveying X’ (e.g., the lexicalized anaḍváh- ‘ox’ < ‘pulling a wagon’; indra-váh- ‘conveying Indra’), I don’t see how to get a direct obj. interpr. out of maddyama-.


## 05
In b we expect the simile “like a father his son”; instead we get the father, but a gambler in the place of the son. We must infer the filial relationship. (The distress of his family, including his father, over the fall of their gambler kin is depicted in X.34.4. Nonetheless the pairing here is peculiar.) The expected son then appears in d. The purport of this pāda is clear -- the speaker asks that only he be punished for his offenses, not his son -- until we get to the simile. Why does the poet liken himself to a bird, and what can be supplied in the simile to match putré? The standard tr. conclude, reasonably enough, that the comparison involves baby birds (or maybe eggs?) (e.g., Re “Ne me saisissez pas en (la personne de mon) fils, comme (on saisit) un oiseau (en s’emparant de ses petits).”). But is this meant to imply that bird parents get more upset by the loss of their offspring than other animal parents do? or that robbing birds’ nests was a particular prominent practice? I am baffled. It is possible that the simile only has domain over the acc. mā, with no involvement of the loc. putré: “do not seize me like a bird” -- expressing the trapping/snaring techniques of bird-catching. But this doesn’t make much sense either.

## 06
Technically speaking, pāda d has two ablatives: “rescue us from falling, from the pit.” On the hapax nijúr- see Scar (165).
