+++
title = "030"

+++
Indra and other divinities This hymn has at least three, possibly four modern ling. features: conditional (ábhariṣyat vs. 2), future impv (kṛṇutāt vs. 5 [though the fut. impv. appears to be inherited, it is fairly rare in the RV and generally seems to belong to a more colloquial speech level]), gerund (abhikhyā́ya, hatvī́vss. 9, 10), and mid. subj. in -ai (naśāmahai vs. 11).


## 01
The ceaseless movement of the waters is clearly expressed in the first hemistich, and the question posed in the last pāda is a leading one, at least in my view. It asks at what (temporal) distance, i.e., how long ago, did the waters first start this movement. The implicit answer is “when they were released from Vṛtra’s hold,” which prepares for the account of the Indra-Vṛtra battle in the next vss. (On the unexpected long vowel in kíyāti, see comm. ad I.143.3.) The problematic pāda is c, and this is in great part because of the uncertain interpr. of aktúḥ. Ordinarily this word means ‘night’, but since “the night of the waters” is a curious expression, most comm. instead implictly derive it from √añj and tr. ‘color’ vel sim. (e.g., Ge “das Farbenspiel der Gewässer”). With Old I take the word in its usual meaning ‘night’, contrasted with the āmreḍita áhar-ahar “day after day.” However, I think the expression “night of the waters” is used metaphorically and perhaps has oppositional semantics. The waters are often, esp. in treatments of the Vala myth, identified with the dawns. Here, perhaps, “night” is meant to evoke its opposite, “dawn” (a poetic device we’ve seen elsewhere, e.g., I.103.7; see publ. intro. to I.103 and comm. ad loc.) and the whole expresses the fact that just as the waters keep flowing, so also do the dawns keep dawning. This interpr.

may be too radical, however, and the point of the image may simply be how dark waters can look compared to the sky at dawn (or dusk) -- the “night of the waters” is this dark appearance under certain lighting conditions.


## 02
The first hemistich of this vs. is desperately obscure. It is unclear what is being done to or for Vṛtra in pāda a, much less who is doing it, and the identity of the feminine subject in b is likewise left open. The function of ábhariṣyat, the only conditional in the RV, is uncertain, and also, though this is the least of our problems, whether the verb is ā + ábhariṣyat or is simply an augmented form without preverb (latter Pp.). The unclear meaning of the rare word sína- simply adds to the difficulties.

Let us start with the last one first: the stem sína- occurs twice in the RV (here and III.62.1, also as object of √bhṛ with dat. complement), as well as in the cmpd.

tát-sina- (I.61.4) and the deriv. sínavant- (X.102.11). As indicated in EWA s.v., its root affiliation depends on what we think it means, and what we think it means depends to some extent on what root we ascribe it to. I will not rehearse the various suggestions; suffice it to say that I think it belongs with √sā ‘bind, tie’ and refers to material tied down on a wagon vel sim., a load -- equipment and the like -- hence my ‘gear’. (For a similar semantic development of a derivative of a different root meaning ‘tie’, see my “Sanskrit pāriṇāhya ‘household goods’: Semantic evolution in cultural context,” Fs. E. Hamp [ed. D.Q. Adams], 1997, pp. 139-145.) In this I follow Old.

I also follow Old in my interp. of the rest of the pāda. Someone was going to bring equipment for Vṛtra (hence the conditional, as a contrary-to-fact), but was impeded by the action of the main clause in b: a female, identified as a generatrix (jánitrī) foils the plot by announcing it to a wise or knowing one (vidúṣe). That ábhariṣyat is the only conditional form attested before the Brāhmaṇas (so Whitney) must mean that it carries a very particular force, one that could not be easily expressed by more standard parts of the verbal system.

The potential identities of these actors takes us yet another step into the speculative wilderness. I very tentatively suggest that the potential accomplice of Vṛtra is Sūrya. There are two, rather shaky reasons for this suggestion: There is some evidence in the Rig Veda for enmity between Indra and Sūrya, particularly in the (alas fragmentary) myth where Indra in conjunction with Kutsa steals the wheel of the sun. This hostility is also found, more developed, in the Mahābhārata, as is well known. And within the vs. itself there is a possible reference to Sūrya in pāda c, in the phrase pathó rádantīḥ … asmai “excavating the paths for him.” Elsewhere in the RV Sūrya is the beneficiary of similar actions: VII.60.4 [sū́ryaḥ ...] yásmā ādityā́ ádhvano rádanti, VII.87.1 rádat pathó váruṇaḥ sū́ryāya. Although I know of no other evidence for Sūrya attempting an intervention on Vṛtra’s behalf, I nonetheless tentatively supply him as subject of pāda a. The mother figure described as jánitrī in b could be the Earth, as sometimes (I.185.6, III.31.2), or Indra’s own mother (as in III.48.2, X.134.1). I have more confidence in Indra as the referent of vidúṣe ‘knowing’.

As just noted, I think Sūrya may be the referent of asmai in pāda c -- or rather one referent, for I think the pāda is deliberately ambiguous. If I am right that Sūrya is the covert subject of pāda a, then the phraseological parallels to the “excavating paths” expression that have Sūrya as beneficiary would suggest him as referent of asmai. The feminine pl. agents could be the dawns, who make the path for the rising sun. But in the context of the Vṛtra battle that forms the subject of the first vss. of this hymn, this pāda may refer to the paths dug out by the waters when they were released from Vṛtra, with asmai referring to Indra. Both dawns and waters are potential subjects: the phraseology of pāda d would fit either (or both). Both waters and dawns go to their goal (cf. I.158.6 for waters, III.61.3 for dawns). Although dhúni- ‘boisterous’ seems more suitable for waters than dawns (cf. dhúnimant- 2x of waters, dhunayanta once with rivers as subj.), the emphasis on dailiness (divé-dive) might point rather to the dawns. In short, at least the second half-vs. seems deliberately ambiguous, with potentially double referents both for the female subject and the masc. beneficiary. I have no confidence that my interpr. of this vs. is correct, but I find the other published attempts even less convincing. However, IH has suggested an alternative interpr. to me (p.c.) that is definitely worth considering. In this scenario the sínam ‘equipment’ is Indra’s mace, his ‘(fighting) gear’ (so IH), brought to him (=Indra) against Vṛtra. Dat. vṛtrā́ya here would be a dative of malefit, as it were, exactly as it is in the next vs., 3b. The bringer of the sínam could be Tvaṣṭar or even Uśanā Kāvya, two regular suppliers of the mace to Indra. In b the jánitrī could be Vṛtra’s mother, whom we memorably meet in I.32.9, and the knowing one (vidúṣe) Vṛtra himself, with the participle possibly proleptic.

The potential drawback to this interpr. is that we know that Indra did get the mace and smash Vṛtra, so the hypothetical value of the conditional isn’t accommodated. But since we don’t actually know what the value of the conditional was in the RV, this should not deter us. Alternatively there may have been a previous episode in the myth in which Indra’s first attempt was thwarted when Vṛtra was tipped off. A revised tr. of the hemistich acdg. to this scenario would be “The one [=Tvaṣṭar? / UK?] who was going to carry the gear here for [=against] Vr̥tra -- the mother [Vṛtra’s mother] announced him to the knowing one [=Vṛtra?].” On divé-dive see comm. ad 11 below.


## 03
This vs. is a fairly straightforward account of the Indra-Vṛtra battle, though Indra’s name doesn’t appear until the last word.

I don’t quite understand the function of hí in pāda a. If it is causal (a value I always try to impose on hí), it may take up 2b: we know (at least in one interpr. of vs. 2) that Indra already knew (2b vidúṣe) about the trickery before the mother’s announcement, because he had already taken his position in the midspace. But this may be over-thinking hí. The hí in c is even harder to account for, and I wonder if it isn’t there to provide a mirror-image figure: míham … hī́m á(dudrot) and to serve as hiatus breaker between úpa and īm. IH offers an alternative explanation for the two hí’s. In IH’s account of RVic verbal function, aorists in subordinate clauses express anteriority. Here the hí would be a fine expression of post hoc, ergo propter hoc, with sequential events acquiring a causal cast: “because he had taken his stand, he bore down his weapon” and “because he had run up to him, he conquered …” In b vṛtrā́ya ACC prá √bhṛ echoes 2a vṛtrā́ya ACC √bhṛ. In my interpr. these expressions are contrastive and have different subjects and different intents (though see IH’s interpr. above): in 2a the dat. vṛtrā́ya is a dative of benefit, in 3b a dative of, as it were, malefit. The same vajrā́ya WEAPON prá √bhṛ as 3b is found in I.61.12.

The prá √bhṛ expression may be slyly alluded to even in our vs. 2, where prá opens pāda b and is therefore adjacent to ábhariṣyat pāda-final in a, even though it is construed with uvāca at the end of b.

In c Vṛtra must be the subj., even though it breaks the pattern: Indra is the unexpressed subj. of a and b and postposed subj. of d. However, Vṛtra has a penchant for mist (e.g., I.32.13, V.32.4), and in this context it would uniquely identify him.

## 04
The vs. is nicely framed with vocc., #bṛ́haspate … indra#, thus inviting their identification.

Ge (/WG) take vṛ́kadvaras- as a PN, but Wackernagel’s explan. (KlSchr.

325-26), adducing Aves. duuar, a daevic way of moving, is quite convincing.

ardhám √kṛ ‘go halves’ (also VI.44.18) strikes me as an idiomatic or slangy expression, which may fit with the rare (and also possibly lower-register) future impv. kṛṇutāt.


## 06
WG tr. radhrásya … yájamānasya as “des ermatteten Opferers” and further explain that sacrificing under the hot South Asian sun is exhausting. But surely the point is rather that even a resolute enemy gets slammed down by Indra and Soma (pāda a), while even a weakling gets pepped up if he performs sacrifice to them.


## 07
tandran is, of course, a curious form. The Pp., not surprisingly, reads tandrat (with -t à -n before ná). Gr emends this to *tandat; Whitney (Rts) list the form thus, though with ?; and Old allows it as a possibility, without exactly endorsing it. IH suggests following the Saṃhitā reading and interpreting it as a 3rd pl. med. root aor., with ending -ran. The only other verbal form to this root, tandate, is medial. If this is correct, there would seem to be a change of no. in the subj. from the impersonal 3rd sgs. of the standard tr. to an unspecified 3rd pl.: “It will not tire nor weary me, and they will not flag.” Who the plural subject might be is unclear -- perhaps the 1st plural that is found in the next pāda. And in fact all three verbs could be 3rd pl.: the Pp. 3rd sgs. tamat and śramat also appear immediately before n-, with Saṃhitā -an. Under this interpretation the forms would not be impersonal but have unspecified plural subj.: “they will/do not tire or weary me nor do they flag.” If we prefer to accept the emendation to *tandat, the -r- can be explained, with Gr., as adopted from the nominal derivatives (á-)tandra- and tandra(yú-) (cf. also AV tandrī́-).


## 08
Note that pāda a is modeled exactly on 6c.


## 09
Ge (/WG) supply a verb as the 1st member of the disjunctive utá vā constr., contrasting with jighatnúḥ (“Wenn uns ein Unbekannter (nachstellt), oder töten will …”), invoking VI.5.4 with yó naḥ sánutyo abhidā́sat … But more salient in VI.5.4 is the contrastive pair yáḥ … sánutyaḥ … yó ántaraḥ … Therefore, flg. Schmidt (B+I 81; also Klein DGRV II.171), I supply yó ántaraḥ as the 2nd part of the disjunctive phrase. Re actually proposes a clever variation on the “distant … near” contrast, pairing abhikhā́ya, which he renders “(regandant) en face,” with sánutyaḥ. This avoids the need to supply additional material, but employing the rare gerund simply as a polar term with ‘distant’ seems unlikely.

As Gr points out, the idiom ‘hand over, deliver’ is characteristic of pári √dā, not pári √dhā, which generally means ‘clothe, surround’. He suggests that this sense of pári √dhā is attributable to “Verwechslung mit dā.” In a quick scan of the Gr’s conspectus of dhā forms, I found only one example of pári √dhā ‘deliver’, namely our pári dhehi. I wonder if dhehi for *dehi is a nonce hypercorrection, for a form that appeared to have undergone Grassmann’s Law because of the -hi ending.


## 10
The literal meaning of ánudhūpita- is fairly clear, ‘besmoked’, but there is disagreement about its sense. Gr suggests that it means ‘puffed up, arrogant’, while Ge (/WG) think it refers to besieging enemy strongholds with fire and smoke. (If this were the case, one would think “a long time” was the wrong qualifier: smoke and fire should do the trick fairly quickly or not at all, I would think.) I am more in favor of Re’s equivalence with mohita- ‘bewildered’, a negative mental state. In my view, ‘besmoked’ means either that their minds have been darkened and led astray to evil ways or that they have become confused / befuddled by our constant threats and attacks and it is time for us to administer the coup de grâce.


## 11
On the ring between 1c #áhar-ahar and 11d divé-dive#, see publ. intro.

What I failed to note there (as IH pointed out to me) is that the áhar-ahar of vs. 1 was “repaired” by divé-dive in 2d, and the divé-dive here is responsive to both of them.
