+++
title = "031"

+++
All Gods Ge (/WG) follows Windisch (Fs. Roth) in seeing this hymn as an allegory, with rátha- ‘chariot’ = stóma- ‘praise’ and the solution provided only in the last vs. I find this interpr. overblown. The equation of the hymn / sacrifice with a chariot is a trite trope in the RV; I don’t see that this hymn treats the theme in a special way, but perhaps I’m missing something.


## 01
As pointed out in the publ. intro., the last word of the vs., vanarṣád- ‘sitting in/on the wood(s)’, applies both to the simile -- the birds sitting in the trees -- and the frame -- the charioteers sitting on the wooden chariot. The same qualifier could also characterize other aspects of the sacrifice -- the ritual fires sitting on the firewood, the soma drinks in the wooden cups (for both of which see X.46.7). It is more difficult to apply it to the priests, who are presumably the underlying referents of the plural subject here.


## 05
The root noun cmpd apījū́- is somewhat puzzling, in that the 1st member api- (apī- with lengthening at cmpd seam; for possible explan. see Scar 169 nn. 223, 224) seems to contribute nothing. In fact, the standard tr. simply ignore it. Scar is on the right track, I think, in taking it as only loosely compounded and meaning something like “also speeders,” perhaps in order to preserve some cmpd sense “speeders in addition.” On návyasā vácaḥ see comm. ad VIII.39.2.

Pāda d in itself and in its syntactic relation to c is also problematic. Perhaps the first, and possibly the easiest, issue is the apparently untethered ca. Klein (DGRV I.226-27) takes it as conjoining the two pādas c and d, but this requires supplying a verb (kṛṇve, flg. Ge) that has no support. I think rather that it signals a standard syntagm that has been split across the vs.: “the still and the moving” (gen. sthātúr jágataś ca VII.60.2, X.63.8, plus other examples with ca-less phrases and lexical substitutions) is a common merism for “everything earthly.” In this verse pl. jágatām is found in b, where Night and Dawn are the speeders of moving things; here its formulaic partner, the still (in the sg.), is about to receive an underlayer of vigor. The ca simply reminds us that b and d are implicitly contrasted: moving things are impelled to even more movement, whereas still things are about to acquire a solid base. To draw attention to the pairing it might be worthwhile to begin the tr. of d with “and as for the still (world) …” Another of the questions is the grammatical identity of trívayāḥ: is this bahuvrīhi s-stem a nom. sg. masc., as it appears to be, or a nom./acc. neut., modifying váyaḥ? Although the latter interpr. might seem ungrammatical, Wackernagel (AiG III.288) tentatively allows neut. -s-stem nom./acc. in -āḥ, though the number of exx. he cites is small and it is possible that they could all be explained in other ways. Nonetheless, in VII.24.2 (see comm. ad loc.) I do take dvibárhā(ḥ) as a neut.; in IV.11.3 and X.80.4 vīrápeśā(ḥ) must have a neut. sg. reading; and a neut.

interpr. is the standard one for trívayāḥ here (e.g., Re “la vigueur tri-vigorante”). By contrast I take it in the publ. tr. as a nom. sg. masc., modifying the 1st sg. subject of stuṣé, hence “I possessing triple vigor …” I still think this is quite possible, but I do not consider the alternative (“… to strew triple vigorous vigor as the underlayer …”) out of the question.

The last question is who is doing the strewing. In my publ. tr. it is “I,” and again I still consider this possible. But I think it’s also possible that I praise Heaven and Earth so that they will provide the underlayer. This is esp. likely if trívayāḥ is taken as neut.: “I praise you two … (for you) to strew triple-vigorous vigor …” The pair, or at least Earth, makes sense as the cosmic entity that would provide a base for the still, whereas Night and Dawn, in constant motion, make sense as the speeders of the moving things.


## 06
The first hemistich begins and ends with utá. The pāda-final utá of 6b puts a cap on the series of verse-initial utá’s that began in 3a (3a, 4a, 5a, 6a). This is perhaps fitting because vs. 6 ends the capacious list of gods of every sort (from mighty Indra to shadowy Aja Ekapad) who have been strung together additively.

The vs., or rather pādas a and d, plays on ś: śáṃsam uśijām … śmasi / āśuhémā … śámi. This may be in part to showcase the unusual truncated verb śmasi ending pāda a; note that verse-final śámi is a virtual anagram of this verb. This śámi is also echoed by hemistich-final sám in 7b (in an unusual position). There are also echoes from earlier in the hymn: āśu- picks up āśávaḥ (2a) as ékapād does pádyābhiḥ (likewise 2a). IH cleverly points out that the position of śmasi after (i)va ([i]va śmasi) hints at the root √vaś. See vaśmi in the next vs. The Uśij-priests are credited with the production of a particular śáṃsaelsewhere, the āyóḥ śáṃsa- (IV.6.11, V.3.4). For further see comm. ad II.32.2.

## 07
The 1st sg. vaśmi may be seen as a type of poetic repair, anchoring the truncated (u)śmasi of 6a.
