+++
title = "032"

+++
Various Gods


## 01
The first hemistich here, with the skeleton asyá me dyāvāpṛthivī … bhūtám avitrī́vácasaḥ … “become helpers of this speech of mine, o Heaven and Earth” is somewhat reminiscent of the famous refrain in I.105 vittám me asyá rodasī “take heed of this (speech) of mine, you two world halves,” though with aid rather than mere attention asked of Heaven and Earth. The different ordering of the two genitives asyá and me in the two passagestd conforms to our expectations of the positioning of enclitics.

The syntax of the second hemistich is rather stiff and clotted, with an oblique nominal relative clause (“of which two there is extensive lifetime”) picked up by a long main clause beginning in the middle of pāda c with the 3rd ps. du. prn. té. It is only after some time that we discover that té is an accusative, the object of versefinal dadhe, and that it is doubled by du. enclitic vām, which switches the reference to 2nd ps. The enclitic vām is very oddly placed, smack in the middle of pāda d, not leaning on any of its adjacent elements semantically, as far as I can see. Moreover, puráḥ … dadhe seems to be a phrasal verb, but with the two parts of the phrase distant from each other and separated by extraneous material.


## 02
The first pāda of this vs. is esp. puzzling. As usual in the RV, Āyu sows confusion, and here, since it is not clear who/what Āyu represents, it is also unclear with what to construe the gen. āyóḥ. The standard interpr. take it with rípaḥ ‘swindles, tricks’, while I attach it to áhan ‘day’ (with no confidence in its correctness; Old explicitly rejects it). The problem is that Āyu is generally viewed positively, as in II.2.8 where the ritual fire is “the guest dear to Āyu” and II.4.2 where the Bhṛgus deposit the ritual fire “among the clans of Āyu.” If Āyu is positive in value, then the “swindles of Āyu” must be those directed against him, as Old points out. But as he also points out, the more natural reading of this gen. would be subjective (“swindles perpetrated by Āyu”), not objective. It must be admitted that once in this maṇḍala (II.14.7), Āyu is viewed negatively: Indra strikes down the heros of Āyu along with those of Kutsa and Atithigva, a trio that is subject to Indra’s violence elsewhere, though also individually named as Indra’s comrades in still other passages. More to the point, in my opinion, is the apparent formula VERB uśíjaḥ śáṃsam āyóḥ “The Uśij-priests X-ED the Laud of Āyu” (IV.6.11, V.3.4). In the immediately preceding hymn, II.31, we find in 6a the expression śáṃsam uśíjām “the Laud of the Uśij-priests,” and in the next vs., 7b, the Āyu-s (pl.) figure as fashioners of ritual speech. This suggestive juxtaposition and echo of the fuller expression “Laud of Āyu” found in the preceding closely related hymn suggest that Āyu here is viewed positively and is related to the ritual; I therefore think that “the day of Āyu” is a way of referring to the day of the sacrifice. Most forms belonging to the thematic stem dábha- must be root aor.

subjunctives, but here the mā́requires an injunctive. Formally the root aor. injunctive should have a zero-grade root, *dbhan, but obviously such a form is not viable. With full-grade restored, the injunctive is identical to the subjunctive. On these forms see Hoffman (Injunk. 242-43), who suggests that a new injunc. dabhur was created to avoid this functional coincidence.

sakhyā́occurs several times with ví √yu ‘keep away’. Narten (Sig. Aor. 214) states that the s-aor. to this root is intrans., and Ge (/WG) render it thus here: “Nicht soll sich unserer Freundschaft lösen,” presumably with neut. pl. sakhyā́as subj. of the sg. verb. However, VIII.86.1 mā́no ví yauṣṭam sakhyā́, with dual verb seems to me decisive for a transitive interpr. of this idiom. In the publ. tr. (“Do not keep us far away from your companionship”) I take sakhyā́as an instr. (sg.) of separation.

However, it is also possible that it is an acc. pl., with the tr. “Do not keep your companionship(s) far away from us.” See IV.16.20.

The phrase viddhí tásya naḥ (“know this (speech?) of ours” in the publ. tr) resonates with I.105 vittám me asyá “take heed of this (speech?) of mine, which I adduced above in regard to asyá me … opening our 1a. It might better have been tr.

with “take heed.”


## 03
The priests’ sumnāyatā́mánasā “with a mind seeking favor” is, hopefully, matched by the god’s áheḷatā mánasā “with a mind without anger.” As in the previous hymn, II.31.2, pádyābhiḥ is directly adjacent to a form of āsú- ‘swift’. Ge (/WG) take pádyā- as ‘heels’: “(Wie) en siegesstarkes Rennpferd mit den Fersen.” The image assumed must be from horseback riding, with the rider spurring the horse on by putting pressure on the horse’s flank with his heels. But the evidence for horseback riding in the RV is scant, and, as I understand it, the racing that is done involves chariots. (On the other hand, there may be mention of “a hero on horseback” [vīró árvati] in the next hymn, II.33.1, though it probably refers to Rudra.) Not only does this heel-spurring not fit the realia, as far as we know it, but it makes trouble for the verbal structure, because “with the heels” would at best only be appropriate to the simile (“(like) a swift prize-winner”) not the frame (“you”: we are hardly likely to be poking the god in the side with our heels). And finally, although the heel is of course a part of the foot and so pádya-/pádyā- could in theory refer to it, no other occurrences of either of these stems seems so specialized, and we do have a perfectly good inherited word for ‘heel’, pā́rṣṇi-. I therefore think pádyā- means ‘pace, footstep’. In the simile, “with paces” would refer either to the training the horse is put through or to the pace of another horse running in front or at its side meant to keep the vājín- up to speed. Its use in the frame is more complex. On the one hand, the steps can refer to the movements of the Adhvaryu around the ritual ground; his physical activity is implicitly contrasted with the verbal activity (vácasā) of the Hotar (and Udgātar). I also think that pádyā- can refer to verses measured in feet, metrical measures. Although Re thinks this unlikely (“tentant, mais trop hardi”), I see nothing against it.

## 04
The adj. śatádāya- has a more precise meaning than the standard tr. (e.g., Ge “vollwertigen”) and one different from that in the publ. tr. (“having a hundred shares,” flg. Gr). It was long ago established by Roth (ZDMG 41: 672-76) that this has to do with Wergeld or the worth of a man as measured in cows, hence here ‘(for whom) a hundred (cows) are to be given’; cf. Ge’s n. 4d, Macdonell-Keith Vedic Index s.v. vaira, and V.61.8 with comm. ad loc. I would therefore emend the tr. to “a hero worth a hundred (cows) …”
