+++
title = "033"

+++
Rudra This is a much anthologized hymn, fully translated by Macdonell in VRS, Doniger, and Maurer. Its popularity is not surprising: it’s lively and varied, but does not pose major difficulties, though it has its share of small knots.

Re EVP XV.157-60.


## 01
The only difficult pāda is c, which has received a variety of interpr. The first question is whether vīró árvati should be construed together or árvati taken with some other part of the clause. With Ge (/WG) I take the two words together in the publ. tr.; most other tr. (Macdonell, Re, Doniger, Maurer) take it with naḥ or directly with the verb abhí … kṣameta. Ge (/WG) take the hero to be one of us, a human; this leads Ge to interpr. the verb as passive (“Es möge unser Kriegsmann zu Ross verschont blieben”), although all forms of this idiom, med. abhí √kṣam, all of which appear in this little group of hymns (II.28.3, 29.2, 33.1, 33.7), have the same meaning, “be indulgent/patient towards” (see esp. vs. 7). With most tr. I instead understand vīrá- to be Rudra; it is appropriate to ask for his indulgence or patience.

This leads us to the question of whether Rudra is likely to be on horseback. I know of no evidence for or against, but given that Rudra is the Maruts’ father and they are often associated with horses, it is certainly possible. However, the only other occurrence of árvati in the RV (VIII.71.12) appears to be an unmarked loc. absolute: we ask Agni for help “when a charger (is at stake).” It is therefore possible that the same usage is found here, and the pāda should mean “The hero should be indulgent to us when a charger (is at stake).” I leave the question open.


## 03
This is the only occurrence of sg. vájra-bāhu- that doesn’t qualify Indra.

(The only non-sg. form is dual vajra-bāhū addressed to Indra and Agni in I.109.7.) I do not know why Rudra is thus identified here.


## 04
The sáhūti-, a joint invocation (with another god or gods), may be a sore subject for Rudra. As pointed out in the publ. intro., he receives only three hymns dedicated to him alone in the RV; otherwise two hymns joint with Soma and incidental mentions in hymns to other gods. He may feel slighted. See also disc. ad VI.49.10.


## 05
I am in agreement with most tr. (though not Macd.) that pāda b is the thought of the subject of the rel. cl. in pāda a, namely the over-zealous sacrificer. The verb áva … diṣīya belongs not with √dā ‘give’ (with Gr), but √dā ‘cut, divide’ (so already Wh Roots); see esp. Narten (Sig Aor. 138-40). The idiom áva √dā is generally taken, including by Narten, to mean ‘abfinden’ (propitiate, compensate), but I think it has a more literal meaning here, ‘cut off’. The too-little ritual service of vs. 4 -- poor praise (dúṣṭuti-) and shared invocation (sáhūti-) -- meets the contrasting fault in vs. 5: the over-eager worshiper who wants Rudra as his own exclusively. This is a dramatic opposite of the sáhūti-; not only an invocation directed only to this god, but one not jointly produced by the group of priests and worshippers. Such a private oneon-one human-divine relationship would be quite anomalous in the RVic religious world, where divine service requires cooperation among various ritual personnel.

The personal appeals in the Vasiṣṭha-Varuṇa hymns of VII have such a strong impact in part because they deviate so far from ordinary religious practice.

The standard interpr. of the second hemistich makes the main clause rather loosely attached to the rel. cl. of pāda a. The “us” (naḥ) of c is supposed to pick up the yáḥ of a and the manā́- of d is supposed to refer rather vaguely to the sentiment expressed in ab: in other words, we don’t want to be the sort of person who might think such a thing or be suspected of thinking such a thing. I think the connection is much simpler. manā́- is generally ‘zeal’ or ‘enthusiasm’; it is not inherently a negative notion, but becomes negative in the wrong hands (or mind). In my interpr., the “whoever” of the rel. cl. in a is our sacrificial rival, who is trying to cut us out of the deal, as it were, by getting Rudra to himself. We beg Rudra not to make us subject to, subordinate to, his over-zealous action.

The epithet ṛdūdára- ‘tender-hearted’ is a charming phonetic play on Rudra’s name, which is almost always read trisyllabically (rudara) in this hymn.

Another adj. (see 3b above) otherwise used (almost) exclusively of Indra: suśípra- ‘well-lipped’ (of Agni V.22.4; in pl. of Ṛbhukṣans VII.37.1).


## 06
On ghṛ́ṇī see Old.

I take ‘favor’ (sumnám) as the gapped goal of the verb in c, aśīya ‘might I reach’.


## 07
In b the yó ásti … clause might appear to be embedded in the main clause, if c resumes the question posed in a. However, c could simply be part of the rel. cl.

Even if b is embedded, it is unproblematic, since nominal rel. clauses are an exception to the no-embedding rule, functioning rather like izafe-s.

In d abhī́… cakṣamīthāḥ reprises 1c abhí … kṣameta. Given that final lengthening in the preverb abhí is extremely rare (Lub: 739 abhí, 14 abhī́.), I am inclined to interpr. the form as abhí ī, with the enclitic acc. anticipating the obj. mā, esp. given that in vs. 1 in this same idiom abhí appears without length.


## 08
The verb in c, namasyā́, can be either 2nd sg. impv. or 1st sg. subj., and translations differ. Because of the surrounding 1st ps. verbs (b: 1st sg. īrayāmi, d: 1st pl. gṛṇīmási) I opt for the 1st sg. subjunctive, though there are no implications either way. kalmalīkín- is obviously a possessive -ín-stem built to a -ka-suffixed form of kalmalí-, found once in the AV (XV.2.1-4) in unclear meaning, as descriptor of a jewel. The l’s and the reduplicative rhyming formation (kal-mal-) mark it as nonstandard and suggest that it is affective in some fashion. My tr. “sparkling one” is similar to those of others, but given the uncertainty of the word and its base, it should have been marked with a question mark.


## 09
The tr. should be slight adjusted to “this … world,” to reflect the adjectival demonst. asyá.


## 10
Given that the two words for ‘bow’, dhánus- and dhánvan-, are suppletive in the RV with the former supplying the nom./acc. sg. and the latter the rest of the paradigm (see disc. ad VI.75.2), my tr. of dhánvā̆(and indeed the various tr. of Re, Macd, Doniger, and Maurer; Ge’s “trägst du Pfeile und Bogen” is ambiguous, because Bogen is both sg. and pl.) as singular must be wrong, and Gr’s identification of the form as pl. is correct. In fact, though the Pp reads dhánva with short final, in the Saṃhitā text the word spans the pāda boundary and coalesces with the following word as dhánvā́rhann and so could be underlyingly dhánvā, with an unambig. pl.

ending. In any case I would alter the publ. tr. to “arrows and bows.” The VP in c, idáṃ dayase víśvam ábhvam, is variously rendered: Ge “verfügst du über all diese Gewalt,” Macd “wieldest all this force” (sim. Doniger, Maurer) versus Re “tu détruis tout mal-informe,” WG “… zerstörst du all dieses Unwesen.” I do not think either of these approaches is correct. On the one hand, ábhva- does not mean ‘power’, but rather ‘formless(ness)’, often conceived as monstrous (Re’s ‘malinforme’ [badly shapeless], though odd, seems close). Nor does dayate, if belonging to √dā ‘cut, divide, distribute’ as Ge et al. seem to take it, mean ‘wield, have control’. As for the other view, Re simply states that dáyate can mean ‘destroy’, while WG explicitly adopt Gotō’s view (1st class pres., 172-74) that there are two distinct roots √dā that have dáyate as pres., one ‘divide, distribute’, the other ‘destroy’. None of the passages adduced by Gotō for ‘destroy’ requires segregation in a separate root that has little else to support its existence; they can all be seen as metaphorical extensions of ‘divide, cut apart’ (3 of the 5 passages occur with ví), an extension well within the bounds of RVic poetic imagination (though perhaps not of all its commentators). My own view is that the action attributed to Rudra here is a cosmogonic one, regularly performed by other Rigvedic gods, namely the division of the formless chaos of the pre-creation universe into what will later be referred to by the expression “name-and-form” (nāma-rūpa-) As I have discussed in numerous other places (see, e.g., my forthcoming “The Blob in Ancient India”), the Vedic conception of creation involves division into separate entities, with clear boundaries and names, of an originally fuzzy boundary-less mass, which strikes horror in the hearts of Vedic people. In my view, the verb dayate here has its standard root meaning, ‘cut, divide, apportion’, and Rudra is engaged in cosmogonic division. In this sense the verb often occurs with the preverb ví, which sometimes occurs directly after the verb occupying post-caesura position (e.g. … dáyase ví … VI.37.4, VII.23.4). Although the preverb is not found here, víśvam immediately follows the verb and evokes the preverb. Note a different use of the same root in vs. 5; also note that nā́ma is found in 8d and -rūpa- in 9a, evoking the notion “name and form.” In my publ tr. I did not fully render the idám, however. I would substitute “this whole formless void” or perhaps “the whole formless void here.”


## 12
Although most tr. (Ge, Re, Doniger, Maurer, but not Macd) take nānāma as 1st sg., with nom. kumāráḥ relegated to a simile, I follow Kü (278)(and Macd., see also Gr) in taking nānāma as 3rd sg. For one thing, cid isn’t a simile particle (pace Ge), and so this would have to be an unmarked simile (not, of course, impossible), and for another we might expect (or at least hope for) *nānama with short root vowel as a 1st sg. pf. The point of the half-vs. must be that even a little boy knows to honor someone more powerful and distinguished than he is, and so I surely know to do the same.


## 13
The śáṃ(tama)- here makes a ring with śáṃtama- in 2a.

Note that in HvN the voc. vṛṣaṇo is wrongly given as accented (vṛ́ṣaṇo).


## 14
As IH pointed out to me, gāt in b should have a modal reading, either as an injunc. matching the precative value of the preceding verb vṛjyāḥ or expressing the imperatival value often found in root aor. injunctives; hence either “should go around us” or “let it go around us.” The mid. impv. (áva …) tanuṣva suggests that it is Rudra’s own bows that should be un-strung. Recall that he bore the bow in 10a (bibharṣi … dhánva).


## 15
In the publ. tr., the yáthā cl. is rendered as a purpose cl. (“… that you do not become angry …”), but yáthā purpose cls. always take the subjunctive, as Macd.

already pointed out. It should rather be construed with the vs.-initial evā́, in the usual “just as …, so …” relationship, though with the usual order reversed. Macd. also recognized this, but suggested that evā́is “to be taken with c, since in the normal syntactical order if should follow yáthā in the sense which it has here.” This is a trickier piece of syntax than I think can be justified — hopscotching the evā́over the whole yáthā clause — and the contents of c do not conform to the standard usage of summary evā́. Instead I think evā́sums up the successful achievement of the wishes expressed in the preceding vs. (and perhaps in the whole preceding hymn): “even as you are not angry and do not smite, so (it is): the missile has avoided us, the bows are unstrung, etc.” This is somewhat hard to render in Engl., but I would change the publ. tr. to “Just as you are not angry and do not smite, so (it has come to pass).”
