+++
title = "034"

+++
Maruts A very difficult hymn, whose problems were perhaps not sufficiently signalled in the publ. intro.

## 01
Old rejects the cmpd interpr of dhārāvará- and takes -vará- as a suffix meaning ‘reich an’; Ge (/WG, the latter explicitly) follow his interpr. But as Re pts.

out there is no such secondary suffix in the RV -- pace Debrunner (AiG II.2.908), who lists this as the earliest example of the -vara- / -vala- suffix in the sense of - vant-. It is also Deb’s only r-form; the remaining examples listed have -vala-.

(Curiously, early in II.2 [p. 98] he glosses dhārā-vará- as ‘Regengüsse liebend’, with the cmpd interpr., so he doesn't seem to have paid full attention to this hapax.) One of Old’s objections to the cmpd interpr. is that the accent rules out a bahuvrīhi, but I see no reason why it can’t be a tatpuruṣa with vará- ‘wooer’ as 2nd member.

It is notable that “unclosing the cows” (ápa gā́avṛṇata), the standard culmination of the Vala myth, is here attributed to the Maruts, who ordinarily do not participate in that myth. Of course here “cows” could stand for rain clouds; see the flaming cows in vs. 5.

## 02-05
Note the concentration of pṛSIB forms: 2d pṛ́śni yāḥ, 3d prk̥ ṣám … pṛ́ṣatībhiḥ, 4a prk̥ ṣé, 4c pṛ́ṣadaśva (and scrambled -śiprā in 3c, rapśa- in 5a).


## 02
In pāda a the -ín-stem khādín- in the frame corresponds functionally to the instr. stṛ́bhiḥ in the simile. See 4d below.

The 2nd hemistich presents a severe mismatch between semantic/contextual expectations and morphosyntax. As we know, Rudra is the father of the Maruts. This vs. contains a nom. sg. rudráḥ and enclitic 2nd pl. vaḥ referring to the Maruts, which can be acc., dat., or gen., and a form of the verb √jan ‘beget’. All the standard tr.

render the expression “Rudra begot you, o Maruts” (vel sim.). The problem is that the verb is ájani, a form of the so-called passive aor. Re breezily remarks “seul cas de valeur transitive.” But not only are the other occurrences of this form intrans./pass., but it belongs to a formation (the “passive aorist”) that is strongly typed for this function. Moreover, the medial -iṣ-aor. forms loosely associated with this form (ájaniṣṭa, etc.) are overwhelmingly intrans./pass. It is inconceivable to me that a Vedic audience would attribute or accept transitive value for ájani here, given the robust grammatical support for intrans./passive value.

I therefore think we must interpr. it acdg. to its formal shape, rather than imposing a transitive sense to make the passage easier (or easier by our lights). My way of doing so also requires us to read the sandhi form śukrá as nom. sg. śukráḥ, rather than the Pp.’s loc. śukré. In this interpr. nom. sg. vṛ́ṣā … śukráḥ is a secondary predicate of rudráḥ: “R. was born as bullish semen in the udder of Pṛśni.” It is this semen that combines with Pṛśni to produce the Maruts; it can also, in naturalistic terms, be the rain in the thunderclouds that are Pṛśni’s udder. This gender mingling and loss of distinction between the Maruts’ bull-father (=Rudra) and their mother Pṛśni in the udder are also found, in somewhat different fashion, in IV.3.10d vṛ́ṣā śukráṃ duduhe pṛ́ṣnir ū́dhaḥ “the bull as Pr̥śni milked gleaming (milk/semen) from his (/her) udder” and in VI.66.1d sakṛ́c chukráṃ duduhe pṛ́ṣnir ū́dhaḥ “only once did Prś̥ ni milk the gleaming (milk/semen) from the udder.” See also VI.48.22 and comm. ad loc., which may also refer to the birth of Rudra/his semen as occurring before the birth(s) of the Maruts.

It is somewhat remarkable that both Griffith and Max Müller (SBE) also take ájani seriously (“Rudra .. sprang into life for you in P's radiant lap” and “as soon as R. … was born for you ... in the bright lap of P.,” respectively; see also von Bradke, Fs. Roth, p. 118). Perhaps the commentators who came later wished to distance themselves from these not-always-reliable role models even when they appear to be right.


## 03
My rendering of nadásya kárṇaiḥ “with the ‘ears’ of the reed(-whip)” follows Pischel’s sugg. (Ved. Stud. I.191; see Ge’s n. 3bc and Old) that nadá- is here ‘reed’ (cf. I.32.8) (beside naḍá- ‘id.’) rather than ‘roarer’ and that it refers to a whip or riding crop of some sort. I suggest that the “ears” would be some part of the whip, perhaps knots on the whiplashes or the like. Pischel’s idea has been generally rejected (though Oberlies [Relig. II.247] seems to accept it); see esp. Old’s negative remarks. But the alternative notion, that the Maruts are directing their horses by the ears of a(nother? side?) horse makes no sense to me: how would such direction work? And although Old explicitly states that the number is not an issue, referring to plural (not dual) ears of a single horse (or even several horses, since pairs of body parts generally are referred to in the dual even when several individuals are in question) seems problematic to me.

In my interpr. the two instr. pls. kárṇaiḥ and āśúbhiḥ are separate. So also Old, Re, though they otherwise accept the lead-ear theory. But Ge (/WG) construe them together (“with swift ears”), which in my view makes a puzzling interpr. even more so.

The next question is how to interpr. the intensive part. dávidhvataḥ. Though the stem is usually transitive, Ge (/WG) take it absolutely (“schüttelnd”), while Re supplies an obj. seemingly at random (“qui secouez-puissamment (le monde)”). I extract ‘lips’ (śípra-) from the cmpd. híraṇyaśipra-, since du. śípre serves as object to just this participle in X.96.9.

The pṛkṣám of d should not be severed from pṛkṣé beginning 4a, though at least in Ge’s (/WG’s) tr. the connection is not signalled (Re’s rendering does connect them). In general thematic pṛkṣá- refers to a strengthening substance, esp.

nourishment. The corresponding root noun pṛ́kṣ- has the same basic sense (see Schindler, Rt Noun, s.v.), but here in the dat. is used infinitively (so also Schindler, as well as the standard tr.). The phrase pṛkṣáṃ yātha may well be a syntagm, judging from the PN pṛkṣá-yāma in I.122.7 (adduced by Old), and the acc. appears to be a goal, contra Ge’s (/WG) rendering of pṛkṣám as an adverb (“kräftig”).


## 04
The two alternatives marked by vā ‘or’ (“to fortify all creatures or for alliance”) seem to have little to do with each other. Perhaps we are meant to assume “for alliance with all creatures” for the second alternative, hence my “(with them).” As in 2a an element found in a free syntagm in the simile has its correspondent in a compound: loc. vayúneṣu matches dhūr- and both are governed by the cmpd 2nd member -sád-, at least in my interpr. (guided by Th., Unters., 23); the other standard tr. do not take vayúneṣu with the simile.

The meaning and etym. of the word vayúna- are much disputed; see EWA s.v., which lemma consists only of a list of secondary lit. I follow Th’s interpr.

(Unters.) to some degree, but consider it more likely a derivative of the (secondary) root √vā ‘weave’ than of √vyā ‘envelop’ and the more likely meaning ‘pattern, tracery’ than ‘Umhüllung’. This literal meaning (arising from the repetitive patterns found in woven material) can then be applied, on the one hand, to similar visual effects (e.g., light and shadow produced by sunlight filtering through trees and bushes) or metaphorically to phenomena that show similarly repetitive patterns, such as ritual procedures. In this particular passage both senses may be at play. In the simile (in my view) the birds are sitting on “the traceries (of the branches)”: the pattern of light and shade I just alluded to is turned on its head, to refer to the branches that produce those light patterns. But it is also possible to construe it with the frame, where the Maruts sitting at the chariot pole (often a metaphor evoking the chariot of sacrifice; see, e.g., the same cmpd dhūrṣád- applied to Agni at the sacrifice in the 2nd hymn in this maṇḍala [II.2.1]) could also be sitting among the ritual patterns of the ongoing ceremony. I continue to maintain, however, that vayúneṣu here belongs primarily to the simile. I also suggest that vayúneṣu subtly evokes the word(s) we might expect in this simile. Birds usually sit in trees, and váneṣu √sad is fairly common; compare esp. vanarṣád- (with a bird simile) in nearby II.31.1 (and X.132.7 dhūrṣádaṃ vanarṣádam with the same pole-sitting as here). There is also the word vayā́- ‘twig’, which might be another place birds would be expected to sit (though it does not occur in the loc., unfortunately). A form of this rarer word is found in the next hymn (II.35.8). I therefore wonder if vayúna- here is felt as a nonce blend of vána- and vayā́-, in addition to having its own regular sense.


## 05
Despite the almost comic image of the flaming cows, the reference in this half-verse is fairly clear. The cows with their teeming udders must be the thunderclouds; their ‘enflaming’ quality is presumably the lightning. Although the formation of the hapax índhanvan- is morphologically peculiar, it can hardly belong with anything but the nasal-infix present to √idh ‘kindle’, unless it is corrupt (as Old suggests).

The simile “like geese to good pastures” may initially seem unusual -- we expect cows to come to good pastures (see 8c below), not geese. But anyone familiar with Canada geese frequently sees flocks of them in pastures and post-harvest grain fields, and a Google search of “Canada geese in pastures” turns up numerous complaints about their regular mess-producing presence therein, as well as numerous pictures; similar pictures of (Indian) bar headed geese feeding in fields also turn up in a Google search. The image is appropriate to the Maruts, who would fly down in a flock to settle on the ritual ground just as flocks of geese do in fields.

Note the alliterative pāda d: mádhor mádāya marutaḥ samanyavaḥ.

## 06
The free syntagm narā́ṃ (ná) śáṃsa- with gen. pl. narā́m is found also in I.173.9-10 and, in reversed order, in VI.24.2 śáṃso narā́m. It is obviously a variant of the doubly accented cmpd nárā-śáṃsa-, which also occurs in tmesis without conversion of the 1st member to gen. pl. in nárā (ca/vā) śáṃsa- (IV.86.42 and X.64.3 respectively). It is possible that the final -m of narā́ṃ was generated by the initial nasal of ná and the accent adjusted to produce a case form from an underlying *nárā ná śáṃsa- in the three occurrences of this syntagm that have this order; the meter would be unaffected. However, the example with the opposite order makes this less likely. In any case, this scarcely matters; the problem is to figure out the referent of the phrase here, whose head is nom. sg. and therefore must be compared to the subj.

of the impv. gantana, namely the Maruts. Narāśaṃsa is a shadowy divine figure or divine epithet (cf. Re, EVP X.76 n. 7: “la Récitation personifiée?”), who has a regular role in Āprī hymns (generally in the 3rd vs.) and is sometimes identified with Agni and less frequently with other gods (see, e.g., Macdonell, Ved. Myth., p. 100).

So our vs. may be comparing the Maruts to a divine figure who should be at the sacrifice -- quite possibly Agni. (This interpr. is explicitly rejected by Re. in favor of a common noun “la récitation faite par les officiants,” EVP X.76 n. 7.) Or, in keeping with Re’s view, it may refer to a ritual element, the laud, that should be present at the sacrifice. Alternatively, and in keeping with my interpr. of the expression in VI.24.2 (see comm. there) and the phrase śáṃsam ā́yóḥ (IV.6.11, V.3.4), it may refer to the gods as being like the embodiment of the praise they receive, in an idiom like English “the toast of the town.” Under this interpr. I would alter the tr. to “like the Laud of Men.” In any case, by most interpr. of the cmpd (and associated syntagms) the ‘men’ (narā́m) are in subject-relation to śáṃsa-: that is, they are producing the laud, not receiving it.

The 2nd pl. act. impv. pipyata belongs to the perfect stem, but shows pseudoathematic inflection (expect *pipita). On such forms see my 2018 “The Vedic Perfect Imperative and the Status of Modal Forms to Tense-Aspect Stems” (Fs. Lubotsky); briefly, the act. pseudo-thematic impvs. begin, I think, in the dual act. imperatives (here 2nd du. pipyatam 4x, 3rd du. pipyatām 1x), which owe their disyllabic desinence to the indic. dual endings -athus, -atus. Subsequently the -a- liaison had a limited spread, here to the phonologically similar 2nd pl.

The phrase dhíyam … vā́japeśasam “visionary thought that has prizes as its ornament” is a shorthand way to refer to the standard ritual tit-for-tat, with the gods giving material goods in exchange for praise. But it also probably incorporates another element of that exchange, that the gods themselves inspire or create in the poet the poetic vision that he then shapes into praise of them.


## 08
The function of the presumed loc. bháge (bhága in sandhi) is unclear. Ge (/WG) construe it with sudā́navaḥ (“die im Glück freigebigen”), but this common epithet never elsewhere participates in a syntagm. Re takes it as an expression of purpose, and my tr. also reflects such a function, though the loc. doesn’t ordinarily express purpose. I wonder if this is not a (deliberately) mangled dative. Our supposed loc. (the only loc. to this stem in the RV) is immediately followed by ā́ (bhága ā́), which resembles the dat. bhágāya with quantity flip. If this seems too radical, we can simply take it as loc. + ā́and interpr. it as “in (a state of) good fortune” vel sim.

The simile in c can be viewed as poetic repair for the one in 5c discussed above: “like geese to good pastures” there seemed a bit off (though in fact perfectly compatible with observed realia); here the milk-cow in good pastures provides the expected pairing of cow and fodder.

However, the simile here is off in a different way; it is an example of case disharmony (see my 1982, IIJ 24 article), with the cow (nom. dhénuḥ) in the simile the subj. of an intrans./reflexive sense of pinvate, while in the frame the verb is transitive, with íṣaṃ as obj. (The dat. of benefit stays constant in simile and frame.) This is possible because of the complex semantics of ‘swell’ words in the RV, also discussed in the just-cited article. It would be possible to avoid the case-disharmony explanation, by supplying ‘udder’ as obj. in the simile (“as a milk-cow swells her udder…”). Udders figure prominently in this hymn (see esp. 6c áśvām iva pipyata dhenúm ū́dhani “make the mare, the milk-cow swell in her udder”). However, since this simile is not only intelligible without supplying an object but conforms to case disharmony patterns elsewhere, I see no reason to do so.

Not only is pinvate an ambiguous pivot in terms of syntactic valence, but its very morphology is exploited for ambiguity as well, at least in my view. The thematic Class I pres. pínvati is of course well established in the RV, but it is of course also historically a thematicization of a Class V nó/nu pres. *pinóti / *pinuté, of which a few relic forms are found (e.g., med. part. pinvāná-). The 3rd pl. mid. to this pres. would be pinvaté (pinvate without accent), exactly the form we have here. So in the simile pinvate matches its singular subj. dhénuḥ in number, but in the frame it can also match its underlying plural subject, the Maruts, if it’s assigned to an athematic stem.

Note that the caesura splits the bahuvrīhi rātáhaviṣe. Though such a split is fairly common with dual dvandvas, it is considerably rarer with more tightly constructed cmpds. (I can’t offhand come up with any other exx., though I haven’t systematically looked.)


## 09
The cheating mortal of the rel. cl. has no surface representation in the (first) main clause, the two-word finale of pāda b, but the full clause of c contains tám (in unusual final position), which picks up the yáḥ of the rel. cl. The publ. tr. supplies a reference in the b-clause in the phrase “from his harm,” and this is certainly possible.

It might be better, however, to treat “protect us from harm” as parenthetical as Ge does (see his n. 9b), with the real main cl. found only in c.

Re is insistent on taking tápus- only as a noun, not as an adjective with the standard interpr. (incl. Gr), but though he is technically correct that the root accent should mark it as a noun (‘scorching heat’), it seems to have been reinterpr. as an adj., possibly on the basis of its regular participation in tápus-X cmpds (tápurjambha-, etc.). Though these originally would have meant ‘whose X is searing heat’, it would be easy to slip into ‘having scorching X’.

## 10
The sense of this vs., or rather its second half, is very uncertain. See esp.

Old’s comments. In the first half, the course of the Maruts shows brightly. The intens. 3rd sg. middle with -t-less ending, cékite, is taken by Schaeffer (Intens., 44, 112) as having the (/an) old stative ending, which she takes in passive sense (“wird immer wieder erkannt”) in all occurrences of this form. The passive interpr. seems unnecessary: numerous formations to √cit mean simply ‘appear (bright)’. In the intens. it can mean ‘appear continuously bright’ or ‘appear ever more bright’, and this sense works well for all 5 occurrences of cékite. As for the form, I doubt that we need to reach into deep prehistory for a stative ending; rather it seems likely to me that it is what we might call a “perfecto-intensive,” built alongside med. pf. cikité with adjustment of the redupl. vowel.

A different manipulation of the perfect is probably to be seen in the verb of b, duhúḥ (also twice elsewhere without accent), which appears to have been generated to the -t-less middle root pres. 3rd pl. duhré (3rd sg. duhé) and has acquired the act. 3rd pl. ending -úḥ because those middle forms look like unredupl. pf. forms.

It is not entirely clear who the “friends” are who milk Pṛśni’s udder. The udder itself is presumably, as elsewhere (e.g., 5a above), the rain cloud; milking it causes rain to fall. In nearby II.29.4 the friends (āpáyaḥ as here) are the gods, in V.53.2 more narrowly the Maruts. Either would work here, though the 2nd ps. address to the Maruts in pāda a and the 3rd ps. ref. of āpáyaḥ in b requires person shift if the referent is the Maruts; nonetheless, Ge and Re opt for the Maruts. It is worth noting that the word participates in a word play with the verb: (ā)páyo duhúḥ “milk milk,” with the neut. s-stem páyas- ‘milk’ lurking there (cf. VI.48.22 pṛ́śnyā dugdháṃ sakṛ́t páyaḥ, with páyaḥ √duh as well as Pṛśni). This pun may have invited the use of the stem āpí-. I do not understand the purport of the immediately preceding particle ápi, unless it is meant to resonate with āpáyo. ápi does not otherwise appear with √duh, though Ge unearths an ex. in MS (where it appears to be contextually driven).

The rest of the verse is close to hopeless because, on the one hand, the role of Trita (or “the third one”) cannot be pinned down and, on the other, the syntax is slippery and there is no main verb. The standard tr. think Trita is assuming the role of scapegoat and taking on scorn and old age, to spare us (or others), on the basis of passages like VIII.47.13. But Trita has other functions in Vedic, including in vs. 14 of this very hymn, where he is responsible for delivering multiple Hotars, and a more positive role for Trita than scapegoat therefore seems likely. He is also associated with the Maruts in V.54.2 as one who bellows when the Maruts come together with lightning (sáṃ vidyútā dádhati vā́śati tritáḥ); the presence of a roarer here (návamānasya) is reminiscent of that passage. My tr. is provisional; for the main verb I supply a form of √dhā on the basis of nearby II.23.14 yé tvā nidé dadhiré with nidé as here. Although I supplied a 3rd pl. form, continuing the 3rd pl. of b, it could easily be 2nd pl. (so the standard tr.) with Maruts as subject; the voc. phrase rudriyāḥ … adābhyāḥ may support the 2nd pl. Otherwise I frankly admit that my tr. is not based on a firm sense of what the passage is meant to convey. Note that scorn returns in 15b.

## 12
The relationship between the Daśagvas and the Maruts is not clear. Re suggests that they are identical, but I find this unlikely. The Daśagvas are a rarely mentioned collectivity, generally grouped together with their slightly more prominent kin the Navagvas and associated with Indra in the opening of the Vala cave. The Maruts, though also in Indra’s entourage, are not standard participants in the Vala myth. Here they seem to be implicitly compared to the Daśagvas but not identical to them. The point presumably is to associate the Maruts’ thunderstorm activity, including both the fecundity of the rain, here symbolized by cows, and the return of the light after the storm, with the powerful mythic image of the opening of Vala. The move to configure the Maruts’ activity as on a par with the opening of Vala was already made in the first vs., with the VP in d ápa gā́avṛṇvata “They unclosed the cows” (see also śuśucānā́ḥ in 1c, comparable to śucatā here).

Describing their light as góarṇas- ‘flooding with cows, whose flood is cows’ is esp.

telling, since it connects their floods of rain with the cows of the Vala myth. I supply cows as the obj. of áporṇute in the frame on the basis of 1d, but it might be better to take rāmī́ḥ, here tr. ‘nights’, as ‘dark (things)’, referring to nights in the simile but clouds in the frame. Hence a slightly revised tr. “As Dawn ... uncloses the dark (nights), so did they unclose the dark (clouds) …”


## 13
On this vs. see Thieme KZ 92: 43-44, though his etym. of rudrá- (n. 34) as ‘tree-breaking’ (< dru-dra-) is best passed over in silence. His explanation of kṣoṇī́- as ‘cry’, here standing for thunder, is convincing. With that interpr., we can see the vs. proceed through thunder, lightning (the ornaments), rain (horse’s piss), and poststorm sunshine (or even rainbow).


## 14
The syntax of this vs. is quite broken: a nom. sg. participle (iyānáḥ) in pāda a is followed by a 1st pl. verb (gṛṇīmasi), but cd has a 3rd sg. verb (āvavártat) that may (or may not) pick up the sg. subj. of a. The vs. is also notable for the return of Trita (see 10cd above), whose function is no clearer here than there.

With regard to the number/person mismatch of ab, Ge’s notion that both the 3rd sg. and the 1st pl. refer to ritual personnel seems convincing. If we take a and b as separate clauses, note that the first one has a predicated pres. participle. Since in the dependent cl. of cd the rel. prn. (yā́n) has tā́n in a as its antencedent (both referring to the Maruts), it seems reasonable to assume that the same subject is working on both: the poet (supplied) who implores them in pāda a will cause them to turn here in cd, presumably by means of his imploring words.

It is the simile that is puzzling, though its syntax is impeccable: Trita corresponds to the unnamed subj. of āvavártat, the 5 Hotars to the Maruts expressed by the rel. prn. yā́n. But under what circumstances and for what reason did Trita make the Hotars turn to him, and who were these Hotars? Priests are not usually imported from elsewhere, esp. not from above/heaven (as is implied). I have no solution. ## 035 Apām Napāt The hymn is much translated; in addition to the standard ones, see Macdonell (VRS), Doniger, Maurer.

## 01-04
The first words of each hemistich in this series of vss. echo each other: 1a úpem, 1c apā́m, 2a imám, 2c apā́m, 3a sám, 3c tám, 4a tám. Since similar openings are found only in scattered vss. later in the hymn (9a apā́m, 11c yám, 12c sám) I consider the effect deliberate.


## 01
It is somewhat curious that the hymn begins with the expression “I have set loose my eloquence,” with the augmented aor. asṛkṣi. Such phrases are more usual in the final vss. of hymns, summing up the hymn that has just been produced. Perhaps here the poet means that he has set his eloquence in motion, in preparation for hymn composition. IH suggests it’s a performative “I (have) (hearby) set loose …” kuvíd ordinarily appears with accented verb. Gr allows an unaccented verb only when the particle and the verb are in different pāda -- but in other passages where kuvíd and the verb are not in the same pāda the verb can nonetheless be accented, e.g., VIII.91.4cd, VIII.103.9, IX.19.5. (In VII.91.1 the verb is accented though it is in a different pāda, but it may also be in a relative clause -- though see comm. ad loc.) It would be possible to take kuvíd here as construed only with āśuhémā “surely the Child of the Waters is one impelling swift (horses); he will make (the hymns) well-ornamented.” But this seems rather artificial. Perhaps karati lost the expected accent because the hí induced accent of jóṣisat was more syntactically prominent. In any case the unaccented verb vanate in V.3.10 (cited by Gr) is also difficult not to construe with the kuvíd in the previous pāda. Gr’s rule seems to be variable: in addition to the accented verbs in different clauses cited above, there is at least one example of an unaccented verb in the same clause -- V.36.3 kuvín nú stoṣat … (pace Gr’s accented stóṣan s.v. kuvíd; he gives correct stoṣat s.v. stu). For further on verbal accentuation with kuvíd see Hettrich, Hypotaxe 151-52.

As Ge (and Re) point out, ‘well-ornamented’ (supéśas-) of hymns means not only poetically skillful but also receiving adequate recompense from the gods; cf.

vā́japeśas- ‘having prizes as its ornament’ in the preceding hymn (II.34.6), esp. in conjunction with vājayúḥ ‘seeking prizes’ in our pāda a.


## 02
aryáḥ is morphologically multivalent; I take it as nom. sg. to aryá-, with most (Gr, Ge [/WG], Macdonell, Thieme [Fremdling], Lubotsky, Maurer). Re instead interpr. as acc. pl. to arí- (“les êtres-privilégiés”), in apposition to víśvāni … bhúvanā, and it must be admitted that its position between those two words invites it to be construed with them. Doniger seems to follow Re (“all noble creatures”), but I do not understand how she interpr. aryáḥ grammatically. It could also be gen. sg. of arí- (or nom. pl., though this would not fit syntactically). ### 03-04 These two vss. are closely knit together verbally. Both contain an etymological figure, with nom. pl. fem. and acc. sg. masc. derived from the same root: 3c śúciṃ śúcayo, 4a yuvatáyo yúvānam. The √śuc of 3c recurs in 4c as śukrébhiḥ, which forms a phonetic figure with adjacent śíkvabhiḥ. The repeated PREVERB yánti … PREVERB yanti of 3a is echoed by PREVERB yanti of 4b, while 3d and 4b both end with a formulaic expression in which only the verb varies: 4b … pári tasthur ā́paḥ, 4d … pári yanti ā́paḥ. And finally 3d, 4b, 4d (and 5c) all end with forms of áp- ‘water’ (nom. pl., loc. pl.), contrasting with the pāda-initial gen. pl.

apā́m when the god is mentioned (1c, 2c, 3d).


## 04
The descriptor ásmera-, generally taken as a derivative of √smi ‘smile’, is somewhat curious. It may be simply, as Macd. suggests, that the waters approach their task seriously, not like light-hearted lovers (sim. Doniger). Or (with Maurer) that they are shy. But I somehow think that this hapax is expressing something more particular, though I cannot define it more closely. It may be naturalistic: the circling waters perhaps whirl around without foam, which might be thought of as smiles. Or it may be meant to distinguish these attentive females from other natural phenomena: lightning, especially, is characterized by smiling (see I.168.8) and laughing, and Uṣas also smiles. Though the waters do gleam (see 3c), they are different from those bright celestial females, and the point may be to emphasize the two very different environments in which Apām Napāt finds himself -- the watery and the fiery. Note that in 9b Apām Napāt “clothes himself in the lightning flash” in 9b, but by then his assimilation to Agni/Fire is almost complete.


## 05
The identity of the three female goddesses is unclear. They could be, with Sāy., the three who show up in the Āprī hymns (e.g., II.3.8), Iḍā, Sarasvatī, and Bhāratī -- though even if so, this does not help much, since the role of those goddesses is not well defined. A (possibly) different set of three females associated with Agni is found in II.5.5, but that passage is too obscure to aid interpretation here.

Macd (fld. by Doniger and Maurer) suggests that they are the waters of the three worlds, but I am not aware of a “waters of the three worlds” trope.

A more acute problem in this vs. is kṛ̥́tā (in sandhi before vowel; Pp kṛ́tāḥ) in c. There is no agreement as to what stem it belongs to or what grammatical form it represents. Some simply refuse (or fail) to tr. it (Ge, Doniger, Schaeffer 198-99); others give it a contextual meaning (Macd ‘breasts’, Re ‘plantes’, Maurer ‘nurses’), without attempting etymological justification. WG suggest ‘Spinnerinnen’ (female spinners, spinsters in fact) with a derivation from √kṛt. What makes the word so difficult is the root accent; it would otherwise be easily interpreted as a past participle to √kṛ. The most sensible disc. of the word is Old’s. He sees it a sexual slang, as in the expression kanyāṃ √kṛ, glossing “die Engjungferte” (deflowered girl). Certainly in English “to make” or “to do” a girl/woman is a perennial slangy verb for “have sex with,” and one can also adduce the expression “to make (s.o.) a woman,” for “deflower, have sex with a virgin.” He justifies the accent retraction from the ppl. kṛtá- (or rather fem. kṛtā́-) on the basis of AiG II.1.19-20, where substantivized adjectives retract their accent. This seems the best hypothesis of a generally bad lot, and it would fit the context, in that pāda d describes Apām Napāt sucking the first milk of females who’ve given birth for the first time (if that’s what pūrvasū́- means; see Scar 620-21) -- which makes sense if the females just lost their virginity in the preceding pāda. I therefore take the word as an acc. pl. fem. to a substantivized kṛ́tā- from the ppl. to √kṛ.


## 06
In pāda a the grammatical problem is svàr (to be read as a monosyllable, [almost] uniquely in the RV). Gr identifies it as an acc., Macd (followed implicitly by Doniger and Maurer) as an endingless loc., sim. Re. However, the phraseology, esp.

the accented asyá (which identifies asyá as an adjectival demon., not a pronoun) and the placement of ca (áśvasyā́tra jánimāsyá ca svàḥ, invite, indeed almost impose, a genitive interpr. Ge achieves this by pronouncing svàr indeclinable (n. 6a). However, it is possible to see it as an archaic genitive with zero-grade ending *-s, as in Aves.

xuuə̄ṇg < *sh2uuen̯ -s, but with the -r of the nom./acc. leveled into the oblique. See Klein DGRV I.96, WG.

The identity of the two entities born must also be sorted out. It is possible that the horse is just a horse, since origin in the water is an equine characteristic (see, e.g., I.163.1 adduced by Ge). But it seems likely that the carefully balanced áśvasya … asyá ca svàḥ refers to two contrasted entities, quite likely the fire (Agni) and the sun (Sūrya). The obvious way to get that is for the horse to represent fire/Agni and “this sun” the sun, but I wonder if there isn’t a clever reversal: the “horse” is the sun and “this sun here” is Agni.

In b the addressee of the impv. pāhi is not identified, though the default assumption would be Apām Napāt. It is striking that this is the only instance of the 2nd ps. in this entire hymn.

The “raw” (āmá-) fortifications are convincingly explained by Ge as built from unfired brick. They need not (and in my opinion should not) be further interpreted as cloud citadels (so Macd, fld. by Maurer and, in part, Doniger).

Specifying that the fortifications be unfired is a cute reversal if Agni is supposed to be in residence there. It is also possible, if Apām Napāt is at issue, that the reference is to his residence in the waters, would would most definitely be uncooked/unfired. It is also of course difficult in this post-Lévi-Strauss age not to put his conceptual spin on the term “raw,” though exactly how this concept would pertain to this passage is unclear: perhaps it refers to a place and a society so far away (paráḥ) from Ārya civilization that it counts as “raw” to Ārya “cooked.”


## 07
Note the slight phonological play -- a: #svá ā́dám(e), b: #svadhā́m.


## 08
Pāda c is a variant on an idea expressed several times elsewhere. that the other fires are mere twigs of Agni, the god Fire. Cf., e.g., I.59.1 vayā́íd agne agnáyas te anyé. It seems significant that “the others” are not identified here as fires but as entities, beings (bhúvanāni) -- in my view, because the identification of Apām Napāt with Agni that brings the hymn to its climax is only partially complete here, and the poet is being canny about not directly referring to fire, though at the same time using diagnostic vocabulary and phraseology.

Note the etymological figure #prá jāyante … prajā́bhiḥ#.


## 09
This is a transition vs. from the watery to the fiery. “Those sloping/aslant” in b can be the waters flowing downward, but they can also be firewood piled to be kindled (cf. I.95.5, where the same phrase seems to refer to firewood, as I interpret it), and the golden-hued maidens who circle around him can be either waters or flames.


## 10
This vs. strenuously develops the “golden” theme that appeared in 9d -- a color more descriptive of the fiery than the watery. An even stronger indication of the transition to Agni proper is the gerund niṣádyā ‘having sat down’: the lexeme ní √sad is closely associated with Agni’s installation on the ritual ground (see, e.g., the next hymn, II.36.4).


## 11
See disc. in the publ. intro. on this as the climactic vs. of the hymn -- both introducing unambiguous fire references and identifying Apām Napāt as the secret name of Agni.

## 10-11
The ends of the d pādas in these vss. are very similar: 10d … ánnam asmai, 11d … ánnam asya. In 10d “The givers of gold give food to him” implies that his food is gold; 11d further makes clear that the gold(en) food is really gold-colored ghee.


## 12
The verb mā́rjmi is accented because of its juxtaposition with clause-initial dídhiṣāmi.


## 13
As Old noted (see also Hoffmann, Injunk., 121 n. 29), the need for a caesura suggests a reading vṛ́ṣā janayat, rather than the augmented ajanayat of the Pp. (In fact, this suggestion is already found in Gr.) That two pres. indicatives, dhayati and rihanti, follow this proposed injunctive in the same thematic sequence supports interpreting the form contra the Pp, as Hoffmann points out.

The simile anyásyeva .. tanvā̀“as if with the body of another” is, in my view, another reference to the distinction between but ultimate identification of Apām Napāt and Agni.


## 14
The acc. participial phrases of ab must be construed with pári dīyanti “they fly around (him)” in d, even though the same referent is found in the dat. in náptre in c. The latter participates in a clever word play -- ā́po náptre -- which of course evokes apā́m nápāt even though ā́paḥ is nom. pl. fem. ‘waters’ and not part of a syntagm with náptre. The elision of the first part of his name may be meant: now that he is identified with Agni, he is no longer the child (only) of the waters. But as noted in the publ. intro., that the waters bring him ghee brings the watery and the fiery into harmony. Note that the waters as his cloak here (if I am correct in this interpr., see below) answers to the ghee-cloak in 4d. In the watery vs. 4 the presence of ghee was somewhat anomalous; similarly here in a mostly fiery environment the cloak of the waters stands out.

The phrase svayám átkaiḥ is also unclear, and indeed whether it is actually a phrase. Ge takes it as referring to Apām Napāt: “und sich selbst mit Gewändern (bekleidet).” He adduces IV.18.5 with svayáṃ átkaṃ vásāna(ḥ), but in fact the difference in case between the acc. there and the instr. here speaks against his interpr.

The simplex root pres. always takes the acc. of the garment, while the causative vāsáya- takes the instr. Moreover, as Lü points out (Varuṇa, 146-47 n. 8), the position of this phrase (far from the masc. acc. sg. in ab, adjacent to the fem. nom. pl.

in d) and the “harsh ellipsis” required makes this interpr. unlikely. Lü himself in his tr. (146) implies the waters are bringing the ghee with their cloaks, though in the n.

he sees them as “in Schmelzbutter gekleidet.” Acdg. to Re the waters fly around him “avec des vêtements (qu’elles se sont donnés) elles-mêmes,” an expression I don’t entirely understand. WG appear to separate svayám and átkaiḥ but, with Lü, Re, and me, also take the garments as belonging to the waters: “um ihn fliegen die jugendfrischen Wasser von sich selbst mit (ihren) Reisemänteln herum.” The further (and perhaps unjustified) step I take in my tr. is in interpreting svayám so closely with átkaiḥ, with the waters themselves becoming cloaks for him.

In b ‘paths’ is to be supplied with adhvasmábhiḥ ‘unbesmirched’ on the basis of II.34.5 adhvasmábhiḥ pathíbhiḥ in the adjacent hymn, at least by my interpr. The standard tr. (Ge [/WG, Re, also Lü, 146) supply ‘flames’ instead (though Re in his n.

suggests that “chemins” could be supplied). Where exactly he is located (“highest footprint” generally implies high heaven) and which pathways are meant are unclear to me.
