+++
title = "036"

+++
Ṛtugrahas


## 01
The first pāda lacks a syllable, which can be restored by reading augmented avasiṣṭa. In the position after the final -o of hinvānó, the Saṃhitā text could have applied abhinihita sandhi to initial a redactionally, but the transmitted text never acquired an avagraha. This solution was already noted by Gr and endorsed by Old; Hoffmann discusses it extensively (Injunk. 147).


## 02
The standard tr. construe añjíṣu with priyā́utá (“and dear in your ornaments”), but the position of utá is somewhat against this: utá is less out of place if priyā́ḥ is all that it’s conjoining. And añjíṣu goes better semantically with “resplendent” than “dear”; cf., for a connection with √śubh, X.78.7 śubhaṃyávo nā́ñjibhir vy àśvitan, also of the Maruts.


## 03
As sometimes elsewhere, hí with the first of two imperatives signals that the second action depends on the first. Despite the masc. gender of devébhiḥ, I do not think it identifies a different group from the wives (jánibhiḥ), but that the latter further specifies the neutral devébhiḥ. In this I follow Re ad VI.50.13, which contains the same phrase (also X.64.10). Tvaṣṭar is strongly associated with the wives of the gods and in all clear cases only with them. It is worth noting that the RV contains no examples of fem.

instr. pl. devī́bhiḥ or indeed of any fem. oblique plural.

My tr. of jujuṣānáḥ “having delighted (in the call),” with “call” supplied, followed a claim in John Lowe’s Oxford Univ. dissertation (p. 162) that this pf. part.

only occurs with “call,” as a prior action to the event time of the matrix verb. But in the book based on his diss. (Participles in Rigvedic Sanskrit, 2015) he has revised this view, at least for this passage and allows jujuṣāṇáḥ to be construed with ándhasaḥ, with the main verb mandasva ‘become exhilarated!’ logically following the action of enjoyment (pp. 210-11, 214-15; passage tr. on 215). I would tentatively revise the publ. tr. to “having delighted, become exhilarated on the stalk!” Because of the VP mándasva … ándhasaḥ in the first vs. of the next, closely related hymn (II.36.1) I do not take ándhasaḥ with jujuṣāṇáḥ here, or at least not primarily.


## 04
The lexeme práti √vī expresses a reciprocal notion to √vī ‘pursue’, hence ‘receive’; cf. the nominal form pratīvī- ‘(gift-)reception’.


## 05
This vs. is generally taken as Indra’s, but as I say in the publ. intro., I think it must be Indra as Bṛhaspati. The Brahman’s cup from which he drinks supports this identification.
