+++
title = "037"

+++
Ṛtugraha


## 01
As noted above ad II.36.3 the VP mándasva … ándhasaḥ repeats the same phrase there; our ánu jóṣam echoes the part. jujuṣāṇáḥ there.

## 01-03
The d pādas of the first three vss. have a rigid structure: PRIEST’S CUP sómaṃ draviṇodaḥ píbartúbhiḥ. Noteworthy is only that píba is accented in all three vss., though there is no obvious reason for this, and the last three vss. (4-6), which also contain imperatives to √pā, though of different form (4d pibatu, 5d pibatam, 6d pāyayā), in syntactically variant constructions, lack such accent. I have no explanation (and it seems not to have attracted any attention) beyond the suggestion that píbartúbhiḥ is treated as a detachable refrain, even though what precedes it in the pāda must be construed with it. See now also remarks ad III.32.1.


## 02
The nom. dadíḥ must be part of the rel. cl., specifying acc. nā́ma. dadíḥ is nominative because it is a quotation of the name.


## 03
Although the default referent of the voc. vanaspate in a ritual context might be assumed to be the sacrificial post (cf. III.8.1, 3, 6, 11), the contents of ab -- both the draught animals of a and vīḍayasvā in b -- point rather to the chariot. See VI.47.26 cited by both Ge and Re. Why the chariot is addressed and identified with the wealth-giver is not clear to me, save for the fact that in the later ritual the Ṛtugraha libations take place in the cart shed (see, e.g., Eggeling, SBE 26.319-20).

Note that the havirdhāna carts are the subject of the last tṛca of nearby II.41 (vss. 19- 21).


## 05
Another ex. of hí with the first of two imperatives, providing the grounds for the second action. See II.36.3. Note also that although hí is found deep in its pāda, it is actually in 2nd position, since a new clause begins with ā́. For the curious behavior of hí kam see comm. ad VI.51.14.
