+++
title = "038"

+++
Savitar The word vratá- ‘commandment’ is prominent in this hymn (vss. 2, 3, 6, 7, 9).

The point is repeatedly made that all creatures, incl. the gods, follow the vratá-s of Savitar. Another persistent verbal theme is the contrast between sám and ví (4a, 4c, 6a), which can be discerned even when only ví is present (1c, 3a, 5b, 6c, 7b, 8d). The hymn also has a pronounced tendency towards augmented 3rd sg. root aorists (+/- preverb) at the ends of pādas, esp. at the ends of hemistichs: 1b asthāt, 3d ā́gāt, 4d ā́gāt, 5c ā́dhāt, 6b abhūt, 6c ā́gāt, 8c (ā́…) gāt, 8d ā́kaḥ, 11b ā́gāt (cf. also opt.

avyāḥ 10b).


## 01
The verb of c, dhā́ti with primary ending, can only be a root aorist subjunctive like the other two such forms, though neither Ge nor Re so tr. it -- nor do I. However, WG’s “… soll er … verteilen” does represent the mood (so also Hettrich, Hyp. 177). I would emend the publ. tr. to “will distribute …” Unfortunately it does not require trisyllabic scansion, which would have supported the subj. interpr.

The question then arises how to analyze ā́bhajat in d. The Pp. takes it as ā́ abhajat, with unaccented augment. Under this analysis the verb would not be in the domain of the hí in c; otherwise the augment should be accented and the preverb unaccented and univerbated. The WG tr. reflects the Pp. by separating the clauses, but Ge, Re, and I (implicitly also Klein DGRV II.74) tr. cd as if they contain conjoined parallel clauses. It would also be possible to analyze ā́bhajat as ā́bhajat, that is, without augment. An injunctive might fit the syntactic context better, in that it could just continue the modal reading of dhā́ti (“will distribute … and [will] give a share …”), but paradoxically this would require the two clauses to be more independent because the verb would be unaccented and therefore could not be conjoined to c with accent-inducing hí. In larger interpretational terms the differences among the several possibilities just outlined are fairly minor -- having just given or being about to give actually turn out to be almost identical acts in Rigvedic ritual depiction -- but it is worth noting the multiple ambiguities inherent in an innocent looking form. For two parallel clauses containing first a subjunctive and then an augmented indicative, see 3ab below (mucāti … árīramat).

## 02
The hapax nímṛgra- must clearly be a derivative of ní √mṛj, lit. ‘wipe down’, but generally either ‘clasp to oneself’ or idiomatically ‘drag down’ (for the latter see I.140.2, V.52.17). The context here requires something like ‘submissive’, as all tr.

take it. See comm. ad VII.26.3, which suggests that forceful dragging down implies coercion by the agent and, conversely, submission (voluntary or not) of the object.

Note also that it has an unetymological velar g, presumably extracted from forms where the final palatal j, followed by s-, yields -kṣ-.

The submission of the waters and, especially, the quieting of the wind probably reflect the natural fact that the wind tends to drop at dusk, and this brings about calming of waves that had been raised by the wind.


## 03
The poet seems to get a certain pleasure out of using semi-exotic verb forms that masquerade as something else: in pāda a yā́n, the nom. sg. pres. part. of √yā ‘drive’, not the acc. pl. m. of the rel. prn.; in c rhyming ayām̐(< ayān < *ayāṃst), 3rd sg. s-aor. to √yam. There is also the abl. inf. étoḥ in b.

The creatures that the hapax ahyárṣu- (‘snakes-stickers’, Ge (/WG), Falk ‘Schlangenspiesser’, Re ‘qui picquent les serpents’) refers to cannot be determined for certain. The consensus is that it is some kind of bird of prey; Ge suggests (n. 3c) the Schlangenadler. Indeed, the short-toed snake eagle (Circaetus gallicus) is widespread in India and feeds mainly on snakes (so Wikipedia). The internet (including You Tube) has some remarkable photos and videos of this bird fighting with, swallowing, and feeding its young with snakes, including cobras. The photos with sizable lengths of snake dribbling out of their mouths and esp. the video of one wolfing down a still wriggling spectacled cobra certainly testify to the greed or avidity of these birds. Whether they stop hunting at evening I have no idea.


## 04
Though Sāy., Old, and Re identify the weaver as Night, this seems unlikely, if the hymn really depicts the evening. More likely a real human weaver, finishing her daily work.

Note the unetym. phonetic echoes in avyat … váyantī.

On the semantic and functional nuance of the intensive adardhar, see Schaeffer (Intens., 140-41). The form should be an impf. (see pres. dárdharṣi), and Schaeffer notes that an the iterative value generally expressed by intensives is not appropriate to an aorist, despite rather insistent aoristic context here. She suggests that ádardhar in contrast to the surrounding verbs “bezieht sich nicht auf die unmittelbar vorangegangene Handlung des Gottes, sondern nennt eine Tätigkeit, die er von alterns vollbracht hat; die Funktion des Intensivums dürfte eine kontinuative sein: ‘sich aufraffend ist er aufgestanden; (fortwährend) hielt er die Jahreszeiten auseinander; bereiten Sinnes ist der Gott Savitr̥gekommen.’” My 'always' is an attempt at reconciling this.

Pāda-initial arámatiḥ ‘Proper Thinking’ echoes pāda-initial árīramat (3b) (see also ramate 2d), though they are of course etymologically unrelated. I now think a pun is meant here, with arámati- analyzed as a privative a-rámati- and I would emend the tr. to “As Proper Thinking (/unresting) …”

## 05
ví tiṣṭhate should be evaluated in conjunction with víṣṭhitaḥ in 6a and ví tasthuḥ in 7b.

Ge (/WG) take a and b as separate clauses (sim. Falk). My rendering is closer to Re’s. I think the idea is that Agni/Fire, though in some ways a single entity, is parcelled out into separate domestic fires, one per household, and this holds for a man’s whole lifetime after he has set up his household fire. The coming of night brings the (re-)kindling of these fires and so they come into visual prominence then.

The blazing up of the home fire is accompanied by the evening meal, rather charmingly depicted here: the mother reserving the best of it for her son; the son with his appetite stimulated by the coming of evening.


## 06
The first pāda of this vs. takes up the idiom ví √sthā ‘disperse’ found in 5b and applies it somewhat differently. Here it refers to all those who were dispersed in various directions pursuing their livelihoods -- who all want to come home in the evening. On jigīṣú- see Narten (Yasna H., 122); as she makes clear, the desid. of √ji in both Vedic and Avestan lacks martial or battle context and is simply about gaining food and so on. See also Heenen (Desid. 120-25).

The verb samā́vavarti is taken by Kü (465-66) as a (pseudo-)passive aor. to √vṛt, with ref. to Hoffmann (Aufs. II.589-92), a form that is attested also after the RV (see Kü n. 884). The lexeme sám-ā́√vṛt is used in the causative of Dawn’s cows rolling up the darkness (VII.79.2), so here I think the nuance is the gathering or rolling up together of everything that was dispersed during the day, playing on the common opposition between ví and sám that is prominent in this hymn.

Although we might expect víkṛtam to mean ‘badly/wrongly done’, I think the dominant sám / ví play in this hymn trumps that, and if sáṃskr̥ta- is ‘perfected, brought to completion’, víkrtḁ - can mean ‘incomplete, not done’.

## 07-08
These two vss. have been variously interpr. My interpr. is most influenced by Old (whose views also seems to have been adopted by WG). As noted in the publ.

intro., the vss. enumerates the separate spheres assigned to the various categories of creatures by Savitar, as an extension of his ability to bring every creature to its proper resting place at night.


## 07
In my view, this vs. divides the world into habitats for fish (etc.), wild beasts, and birds. Not surprisingly the watery creatures are placed in water (pāda a). As head noun with ápyam I supply jánma from the summary pāda of this two-vs. sequence, 8d.

The problem in 7a is bhāgám: it is tempting to tr. “the watery (race) has been placed by you among the waters as their share,” but bhāgám belongs to a masc. stem and must be acc., which does not accord with the nominal clause in which it would purportedly be found. I therefore construe this last word of pāda a with b, as an appositive to acc. pl. dhánva ‘wastelands’. Although I would prefer to avoid such enjambment, I see no better choice, and note that a new clause also begins in the middle of pāda c (with nákiḥ) and continues to the end of d. Sim. also 9c. Ge’s interpr., which keeps bhāgám within its pāda by making the whole pāda acc., seems to me to come at too high a cost: he must supply a set of fishermen and a verb ‘seek’ to govern the acc. (“[Fisherman seek] their watery share ..”); these imaginary fishermen are parallel to the “hunters” that he takes mṛgayásaḥ to be, dispersed across the dry land (and presumably hunting wild beasts). I see several conceptual problems with this interpr. For one thing this makes the first two pādas non-parallel with c, for there are no bird-catchers there (Vedic Papagenos?), whereas in my interpr. the three pādas describe the habitats of three types of creatures. Moreover, the hunting has no obvious connection with Savitar, whereas by my interpr. the distribution of habitats is his doing - and is summed up by 8d “Savitar has distributed the races according to their stations.” Nor is the hunting likely to be an activity of night, the other thematic connection it might have to the rest of the hymn: everyone else has gone home, but hunters are out on the plains trying to shoot deer in the dark? For penetrating arguments against the Ge interpr. see Old’s n. 3 ad loc. Pāda b has its own problem, the anomalous form mṛgayásaḥ. Ge (n. 7ab) declares that mṛgayás- can only mean ‘hunter’, but gives no evidence for his certainty. Old’s disc. is more to the point (and rather tart about the ‘hunter’ interpr.), though his morphological analysis of it as an -as-derivative of the denom. mṛgayseems a little shaky (likewise his alternative explan. as a cmpd. of loc. mṛgé + √as ‘shoot’, like hṛtsv-ás- [see Scar 41], with older sandhi and a meaning ‘auf das Wild schiessend’, which unfortunately smuggles in Ge’s hunters in another guise). On the other hand, I don’t have anything better to offer. It reminds us of a suffix-accented masc. deriv. like rakṣás- ‘demon’ next to neut. rákṣas- ‘demonic force’, which itself gets personified. But the assumed base *mṛ́gayas- (or *mṛgáyas-) ‘wild-beast-iness’ doesn’t exist and it’s hard to see to what it would be generated. AiG II.2.223 dismisses the word with a ? and a ref. to Old’s disc. In any case, Old’s structural arguments that it must refer to the beasts, not the hunters are sound. A third occurrence of ví √sthā is found in this pāda.

The asya in pāda c anticipates devásya savitúḥ in d - perhaps better to tr. as Ge does: “… diese seine Gebote, des Gottes Savitar.” This doubling may have arisen because the clause begins in the middle of a pāda and continues over the pāda break.


## 08
The general purport of this vs. is clear: it both summarizes Savitar’s distribution of the creatures (esp. in pāda d) and hints (esp. in pāda c) at their return to their own special places at night. But the first half-verse is quite challenging and my interp. is not fully worked out.

On yādrādhyàm see Old’s disc. My publ. tr. “As far as (Savitar’s) benefit extends” is, I’m afraid, opaque. What it means to convey is that Varuṇa’s presence in his watery womb is at the favor of Savitar, whose distribution of the creatures in their proper places extends even to the gods, or at least one of them. A modern equivalent might be the phrase “to serve at the pleasure of (e.g.) the president.” The dependence of Varuṇa (and other gods) on Savitar’s orders and ordering is stated plainly in the next vs., 9ab. It is esp. striking that Varuṇa follows Savitar’s vratá-, since the vratá- is primarily Varuṇa’s domain. That Varuṇa is the only god named here is probably meant to emphasize what might almost be seen as Savitar’s usurpation of the power and role of Varuṇa. Savitar’s rā́dhas- recurs in 11b.

This passage shows one of the early examples of what becomes Varuṇa’s principal association, that with water. Again, it may be that Savitar is deliberately relegating him to this restricted role. Varuṇa’s hypervigilance, familiar from other, more standard treatments of Varuṇa in the RV, is undeterred by his watery environment, as pāda b indicates.

Note the phonological play in ániṣitaṃ nimíṣi.

The sense of nimíṣi is unclear. My tr. “at (every) blink of the eye” takes it as an implicit āmreḍita with the frequenative járbhurāṇaḥ; it could also be an indication of the great speed of Varuṇa’s movements, like English “in the blink of an eye.” However it shouldn’t be forgotten that the idiom ní √miṣ is associated with the gods and esp. the Āditya—generally in its negation: the gods (or their spies) “never blink” (cf., e.g., IX.73.4, X.10.8, 63.4). For Mitra and Varuṇa or the Ādityas see VII.60.7, 61.3, VII.25.9, and esp. nearby II.27.8 asvapnajo animi ́ ṣā́ádabdhāḥ “unsleeping, unblinking, undeceivable” (of the Ādityas). Is the blinking here (as opposed to the usual non-blinking) another of Savitar’s subtle put-downs of Varuṇa, implying that he does blink after all? In c mārtāṇḍá- is taken by the standard tr. (also Lüders, Varuṇa I.50) as ‘bird’, and this could work well, corresponding to 7c, where the birds are assigned to the forests. However, note that in vs. 7 the other member of the trio of creatures, besides the watery, is the wild beast (7b), whereas here instead of a wild beast we have precisely a domesticated one, the paśú-. Its formulaic partner is mārtāṇḍá-, lit.

‘stemming from a dead egg’, found otherwise in the RV in the creation hymn X.72.8-9 in the myth of Aditi and the birth of her sons. The last son born (or rather the egg miscarried), mārtāṇḍá-, is the ancestor of mortals; for disc. of the word and the myth see Hoffmann 1976 (=1992: 723). That half of this vs. is devoted to Varuṇa and the next vs. has the great trio of Aditi’s sons, Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman, provides further evidence that the Mārtāṇḍa of the Aditi birth story is meant. Under this interpr., the domestic herd animal (paśú-) is paired with the likewise domesticated human, each in its own pen.


## 09
The first hemistich restates 7cd in almost the same words, but instead of the indefinite nákiḥ ‘no one’ specified as the non-violator of Savitar’s vratá-, a selection of the greatest gods serve as subject.


## 10
As Ge points out (n. 10a), the three divinized principles in pāda a—Good Fortune, Insight, and Plenitude—are what the poet needs for success.

As the layout of the publ. tr. shows, I take pāda b as a parenthetical insertion in the sentence that includes a, cd. It would be possible to take vājáyantaḥ as a predicated pres. part. and a separate cl., though this seems less likely to me.

Although gnā́spáti- presumably contains the old gen. sg. of gnā́- (e.g., AiG III.119, 129), I tr. it as a pl., since we usually hear of “wives (of the gods)” - though, since I don’t exactly know what Narāśaṃsa (=Agni?) is doing here, perhaps there’s only one wife. It is also not clear if there are two figures here or if gnā́spátiḥ characterizes Narāśaṃsa as I have taken it (so also Ge, WG). Re does so in tr., but suggests in his n. that it might identify a separate individual, perhaps Tvaṣṭar, whose association with divine females is well established. I now am inclined in that direction and would provide an alternate tr. “Narāśaṃsa (and) the Husband of the (divine) Wives should help us.” That the verb is singular is not an impediment, since a series of sg. subjects can take a sg. verb.

This verb, avyāḥ, is a bit of a problem. It is isolated in the averbo of the root √av ‘help’, which is seṭ and has a well-attested iṣ-aor. (on which see Narten 86-89) beside the even better attested them. pres. Although Narten (86) identifies our avyā́ḥ (also X.139.5) as belonging to an old root aor. (with maintenance of the full grade despite despite being opt.), there are no other unambig. root aor. forms attested (though forms like ā́vīt could of course belong to a seṭ root aor. paradigm and have given rise to the iṣ-aor.). I think it’s more likely an artificial form, makeshift replacement for the non-existent iṣ-aor. opt. (see my 2009 “Where Are All the Optatives?” pp. 31-32 on the absence of act. sigmatic optatives, flg. Narten), as well as the relative dearth even of 3rd sg. thematic optatives to present stems (like ávati), on which see the same art., pp. 32-34.

As for the point of the pāda: it is possible that the arousing of the three principles in pāda a reminds the poet that he needs the help of the ritual fire (if Narāśaṃsa is identified with Agni here). Perhaps gnā́spátiḥ is invoked because two of the three principles are female. But this seems like groping in the dark.


## 11
The verb ā́gāt is interpr. by the Pp as injunc gāt and so treated in most editions and tr., but it could just as well be augmented agāt, a typical aorist in a summary vs. [II.39 JPB]
