+++
title = "040"

+++
Soma and Pūṣan


## 01
The publ. tr. does not capture the etymological play between the transitive nominal jánana- (3x in ab) and the first word of the 2nd hemistich, intrans.-passive jātá-, which could have been tr. ‘begotten’ to reflect this etym. figure. However, this tr. seems a little stiff and would not work with jā́yamānau in 2a.

It is only in d that it becomes clear that the dual nominal phrases in the first 3 pādas are in the acc. and are the obj. of akṛṇvan.


## 02
The etym. figure involving √jan noted ad vs. 1 continues here with intrans.- pass. jā́yamānau (a) and transitive janat (d). Another figure involves √juṣ ‘enjoy’, likewise with trans. vs. pass. manifestations: juṣanta (a), ájuṣtā (b), both pāda-final.

This vs. contains three injunctives: juṣanta (a), gūhatām (b), janat (d), the middle one of which could also be an impv. Ge takes all three as preterital, a course I also follow, but Re takes gūhatām as impv. (flg. Gr); WG take the first two as presential and the last as preterital. There seems no decisive evidence for or against any of these choices (or the others that could be made). On the one hand imaú (2x, ab) and ābhyā́m (c) ‘these two (here)’ would support a here-and-now presential and/or imperatival reading, as perhaps also the pres. part. jā́yamānau in a. On the other, it seems unlikely that the gods would be currently celebrating the birth of Pūṣan (Soma might be another story), and, as for b, inserting an imperative into the mix seems odd to me.

Another ambiguity is posed by ābhyā́m … somāpūṣ́abhyām in cd, which can be instr., dat., or abl. dual. Ge takes it as instr.: Indra performed this feat along with the two gods; Re and WG (see also Hoffmann, Injunk. 124, 193-94) as a dat.: Indra did it for them. I also interpr. the phrase as a dat. -- though not with any strong conviction. On the one hand this deed (putting “raw” milk into “cooked” cows) is almost always attributed to Indra alone, so having Soma and Pūṣan as his accomplices seems somewhat unlikely. But on one occasion (VI.72.4) it's attributed to Indra and Soma in a dual dvandva índrāsomā. However, that hymn basically lays out Indra's great deeds and attributes them to Indra and Soma jointly, so there's no independent evidence of Soma's involvement in this action. As for how they could benefit from the exploit and thus be in the dative -- Soma would benefit from the creation of milk because he (or the ritual substance bearing his name) is mixed with milk in the Soma Sacrifice (a point also made by WG). But what Pūṣan would gain from it isn’t clear -- unless he likes milk with his habitual food, porridge (karambhá- ). (We should probably be wary of reading Anglo-American breakfast habits back into Vedic India.)


## 03
The referent of this marvellous chariot is disputed. Sāy suggested the year, Lüders (Varuṇa, 690) the sun, Ge the praise-song, the sacrifice, or the wish that the gods bring. As Re points out, a choice does not have to be made; the interpretation is “volontairement polyvalente.” However, I assume that the primary reading is the sacrifice and its associated verbal expression, as so often.

The surprising descriptor of this chariot is áviśvaminva- ‘not speeding/moving everyone’. This word has to be evaluated alongside its positive counterpart, viśvaminvá-, used of Pūṣan in 6a. In both that verse and this one Pūṣan (in this vs. along with Soma) is the subj. of √jinv ‘quicken’. This oppositional phraseology favors Old’s suggestion that the chariot lacks something required to “move everyone” until Pūṣan (and Soma) provide the enlivening push. However, Ge’s quite different suggestion, that the chariot only carries gods and qualified priests, gets support from the only other occurrence of áviśvaminva-, in the riddle hymn, I.164.10, where the gods (probably) speak speech that knows everything but does not move everyone (viśvavídaṃ vā́cam áviśvaminvām), a formulation that probably refers to profound speech that only affects initiates or those with already prepared minds. As with the identity of the chariot itself, probably both interpr. can be simultaneously applied. In the publ. tr. vṛ́ṣaṇā appears to be tr. as a voc.; it is not, and the tr. might be clearer as “that do you two bulls quicken.”


## 04
The standard assumption (Ge [/WG], Re) is that pāda a refers to Pūṣan and b to Soma, but the opposition between celestial and terrestrial/atmospheric dwelling places doesn’t seem to me to divide so neatly. Pūṣan seems often to be an earthly god, accompanying us on the ragged roads, finding our lost cattle, and Soma certainly has a celestial presence throughout the IXth Maṇḍala. I imagine that this contrastive pairing is meant to be a genuine riddle, which would require its audience to try out different solutions by bringing to mind everything they know about both gods and trying to match those characteristics with the description in this vs. The two different acc. phrases in cd can both be construed with the verb that lies between them, ví ṣyatām. There seems no reason to supply a diff. verb to govern the first acc. phrase as Ge and Re do. The slightly diff. renderings “unleash” and “unloose” in the pub. tr. were simply adapted to better fit their objects.


## 05
The contrastive anyáḥ … anyáḥ is generally taken to refer to Soma (a) and Pūṣan (b) respectively (Ge [/WG], Re). But the differential characterizations in this vs. seem even less easily assigned than in the preceding vs. “Begetting all creaures” isn’t a standard action attributed to Soma; in fact the same deed is said to be Apām Napāt’s in nearby II.35.2. And Ge can attribute “watching over everything” to Pūṣan only by identifying him with the sun god, while Soma regularly gazes on things, even with the same participle: cf. the very similar IX.57.2 víśvā cákṣāṇo arṣati “he [=Soma] rushes gazing on all (things/beings).” Again I think this differentiation is meant to be genuinely puzzling and provoke thought in the audience.


## 06
Fem. anarvā́here (and VII.40.4) is assigned to the thematic stem anarvá- by Gr. I think it more likely that it is simply the nom. sg. to the well-attested -n-stem anarván-, serving for the fem. as well as the masc., without the fem. derivational suffix -ī.
