+++
title = "041"

+++
Various gods

## 01-03
This tṛca is characterized by lexical chaining. The first pāda of vs. 2 reprises niyútvān from 1c, vāyo from (accented) vā́yo (1a), and ā́gahi (1b). Vs. 3 is less closely tied to what precedes, but śukrá- ‘clear’, which characterizes the first drink of soma, offered to Vāyu, is repeated in 3a from 2b, and niyútvant- also recurs from 1c and 2a. The impv. píbatam (3c) picks up (sóma-)pītaye from 1c. More subtly, ā́yātam repeats the preverb of ā́gahi (1b, 2a) and also echoes the unrelated verb ayāmi of 2b.


## 03
The stem niyútvant- (3b) is repeated from 1c and 2a, as noted above, but here as an apparent gen. sg. modifying the soma drink (or rather one of them), not a god or gods. Ge (n. 3b) suggests that it is a metrically conditioned “hypallage” for dual niyútvantā, which would qualify Indra and Vāyu. This is a clever idea and would restore parallelism to the phraseology of the tṛca, though I’m not sure that’s necessary: Rigvedic poets enjoy tweaking parallelism in the syntactic equivalent of a slant rhyme. Old floats a truly oddball idea, unworthy of his usual acuity: that niyútvant- should modify an unexpressed ráthena but in the absence of a head noun in the proper case it gets sucked [not Old’s term] into the gen. by the “benachbarte” gen. Even if this were a reasonable explanation in principle -- that an untethered adj.

could be captured by an adjacent or nearby word in another case -- niyútvataḥ is actually in a different pāda from the other genitives and is adjacent only to the dual dvandva índrāvāyū.


## 05
Note the phonological echo across the pāda boundary: … druhā, dhruvé …


## 11
The ca here is a subordinator (‘if’) and conditions accent on mṛḷáyāti. See II.42.1.

There are several nice phonetic sequences: ab: … no, ná naḥ, where the 1st and last words are the same, with naśat at the end. And c: bhadrám bhavāti.


## 12
I am tempted to take jétā as a periphr. future, parallel as it is to the subjunctive karat. But this is not nec.


## 15
On the morphological and semantic structure of pū́ṣarātayaḥ, as well as other aspects of this vs., see the disc. of the identical vs. I.23.8.


## 16
Like 15ab, the first two pādas of this vs. consist entirely of accented vocatives.
