+++
title = "043"

+++
Omen-bird This hymn seems late enough to allow terms like sāma(n) √gā, gāyatrá-, and traiṣṭubha- to have their full technical ritual meanings, and I have so rendered them.


## 01
Again as in II.42.3, pradakṣiṇít might refer to ‘south’, rather than ‘right’, though the idiom prá + dakṣiṇá- seems more limited to the traditional circumambulation of the fire with the right side facing inward.

Pāda c is somewhat oddly phrased. The vocalizer is identified as a sāmansinger, but is said to speak (both) speech(es). This raises several questions: does a singer speak? and what are “both speeches”? It is tempting to equate the two speeches with the two entities in pāda d, gāyatrám and traiṣṭubham, but I am not certain that is correct. I think it’s possible that “both speeches” refers to the words and the melody. As for the question of singing versus speech, I wonder if the simile sāmagā́iva should go rather with d than with c: “It speaks both speeches. Like a sāman-singer it regulates both Gāyatrī and Triṣṭubh meters.” Unfortunately this hymn is so isolated in the RV that we have no points of comparison.


## 02
As HvN remark in their metrical comm., although the Anukramaṇī identifies the meter of this vs. as Atiśakvarī or Aṣṭi, it appears simply to consist of 5 Jagatī pādas. That the fifth pāda is a simple variant of the fourth makes it likely that the vs. is just a version of Jagatī.

The “son of the formulation” (brahmaputrá-) is presumably the formulator (brahmán-) himself, as the standard tr. take it.


## 03
The provision of sitting silently reminds us of the actions and role of the Brāhmaṇa priest in later śrauta ritual: associated (secondarily) with the AV, he silently observes the proceedings for errors and omissions. But that development may be too late for even a late RVic hymn.