+++
title = "04"

+++
FOURTH CHAPTER. (The Dvadasāha Sacrifice. Its Origin, and General Rules for its Performa 

ance. The Initiatory Rites.) 

23. (Origin of the Dvadasaha. Its Gayatri Form.) Prajapati felt a desire to create and to multiply himself. He under went (in order to accomplish this end) austerities. After having done so, he perceived the Dvadasāha sacrifice (ceremonies to be) in his limbs and vital airs. He took it out of his limbs and vital airs, and made it twelve fold. He seized it and sacrificed with it. Thence he (Prajā pati) was produced (i.e., that form of his which enters creatures, his material body), Thus he was reproduced through himself in offspring and cattle. He who 

25 Višvakarman means it who does all work." Generally, the architect of the gods is meant by the term, 

204 

has such a kvowledge, is reproduced through himself in offspring and cattle. 

Having the desire to obtain, through the Gāyatrī, throughout the Dvadasāha everywhere, the enjoyment of all things, (he meditated) how (this might be achieved.) 

(It was done in the following way.) The Gāyatri was at the beginning of the Dvadasāba in (the form of) splendour, in the midst of it, in (that of the) metre, at its end in (that of) syllables. Having pene trated with the Gāyatri the Dvādasāha everywhere, he obtained the enjoyment of everything 

He who knows the Gayatri as having wings, eyes, light, and lustre, goes by means of her, being possessed of these things, to the celestial world. 

The Dvadasaha (sacrifice) is the Gāyatri with wings, eyes, light, and lustre. The two wings (of the Drādašāha) are the two Atirātras which are at the beginning and end of it (lit., round about). The two Agniṣtomas (within the two Atirātras) are the two [301] eyes. The eight Ukthya days (between the Atirātra and Aguiṣtoma at the beginning, and the Agnistoma and Atirā tra at the end) are the soul. . 

He who has such a knowledge, goes to heaven by means of the wings, the eyes, the light, and lustre of the Gāyatri. 

24. (On the Different Parts, and the Duration of the Dvadasāha Sacrifice, On the Brihati Nature of this Sacrifice. The Nature of the Brihati.) 

The Dvādasāha consists of three Tryabas (a sacrificial performance lasting for three days) together with the "tenth day" and the two Atirātras. After having undergone the Diksā ceremony (the initiation) during twelve days, one becomes fit for performing (this) sacrifice. During twelve nights he undergoes the Upasads? (fasting). By means of them, he shakes off (all guilt) from his body. 

He who has such a knowledge, becomes purified and clean, and enters the deities, after having during (these) twelve days been born anew and shaken off (all guilt) from his body. 

The Dvadasāha consists (on the whole) of thirty-six days. The Brihati has thirty-six syllables. The Dvādasāha is the sphere for the Brihati (in which she is moving). By means of the Brihati, the gods 

"He keeps the fasting connected with the Upasad ceremony. At this occasion he must live on milk alone. The Upasads are, at the Dradasaha, performed during four days, on each day thrice, that makes twelve. See about them 1, 25. 

205 

med} 

obtained (all) these worlds ; for by ten syllables they reached this world (the eartb), by (other) ten they reached the air, by (other) ten the sky, by 

four they reached the four directions, and by two they gained a firm footing in this world. 

[302] He who has such a knowledge, secures a firm footing (for himself). 

About this they (the theologians) ask, How is it, that this (particular metre of thirty-six syllables) is called Brihati, 2.e., the great one, there being other metres which are stronger, and exceed the (Brihati) in number of syllables? (The answer is) It is called so on account of the gods having reached by means of it (all) these worlds, by ten syllables, this world (the earth), &c. He who has such a knowledge, obtains any thing he might desire. 

25. (Prajapati Instituted the Dvadasaha. The Nature of this Sacrifice. By 

Whom it should be Performed.) The Dvadasāha is Prajāpati's sacrifice. At the beginning, Prajapati sacrificed with it. He said to the Seasons and Months, "Make me sacri fice with the Dvādaśāha (1.e., initiate me for this sacrifice)." 

After having performed on him the Dikṣà ceremony, and pre vented him from leaving (when walking in the sacrificial compound) they said to him, "Now give us (first something), then we shall make the sacrifice." He granted them food, and juice (milk, &c.). Just this juice is put in the Seasons and Months. . When he granted them that, then they made him sacrifice. This is the reason that only the man who can afford to give something is fit for performing this sacrifice. 

When receiving his gifts, they (the Seasons and Months) made him (Prajāpati) sacrifice. Thence must be who receives gifts, sacrifice for another. Thus both parties succeed those who, having such a knowledge, bring sacrifices for others, as well as those who have them performed for themselves. 

[303] The Seasons and Months felt themselves burdened, as it were (with guilt), for having accepted at the Dvadasaha (which they performed for Prajapati) a reward. They said to Prajapati, "Make us (also) sacrifice with the Dvadasaha." He consented and said to them, “Become ye initiated (take the Dikṣā)!" The deities residing in the first (the 80 called bright) half of the months first underwent the Dikṣā ceremony, and thus removed the consequences of guilt. Thence they are in the 

206 

daylight as it were ; for those who have their guilt (really) removed, are in the daylight, as it were (may appear everywhere). 

The deities, residing in the second half of the months) afterwards underwent the Dikṣā. But they could) not wholly remove the evil consequences of guilt. Thence they are darkness, as it were ; for those who have their guilt not removed are darkness, as it were (comparable to it). 

Thence he who has this knowledge ought to have performed his Diksā first and in the first half (of the month). He who has such a kaowledge, thus removes (all) guilt from himself. 

It was Prajapati who, as the year, resided in the year, the seasons, and months. The seasons and months thus resided (also) in Prajapati as the year. Thus they mutually reside in one another. He who has the Dvādasáha performed for himself resides in the priest (who performs it for him). Thence they (the priests) say, “No sinner is fit for having the Dvadasaha sacrifice performed, nor should such an one reside in me." 

The Dvādasāha is the sacrifice for the first-born, He who first had the Drādasāha performed (became) the first-born among the gods. It is the sacrifice for a leader (a śreṣtha). He who first performed it (be came) the leader among the gods. The first-born, [304] the leader (of his family or tribe) ought to perform it (alone); then happiness lasts (all the year) in this the place where it is performed). 

(They say} "No sinner ought to have the Dvādasāha sacrifice performed; no such one should reside in me (the priest).” 

The gods (once upon a time) did not acknowledge that Indra had the right of primogeniture and leadership. He said to Brihaspati, "Bring for me the Dvadasā ha sacrifice.” He complied with his wish. Thereupon the gods acknowledged Indra's right of primogeniture and leadership. 

He who has such a knowledge, is acknowledged as the first-born and leader. All his relations agree as (to his right) to the leadership. 

The first three (Soma) days of the Dvādasáhal are ascending (ie, the metres required are from the morning to the evening libation increasing in number); the middle three (Soma) days are crossed, (i. e., there is no regular order of increase nor decrease in the number of syllables of the metres); the last three (Soma) days are descending (i.e., the number of syllables of the metres from the morning to the evening libations is decreasing).* 

* Here are the nine principal days of the Dyādasáha sacrifice mentioned. They constitute the Navaratra, i.e., sacrifice lasting for nine nights (and days). It consists of 

207 

On account of the (metres of the first three days (tryuha) being ascending, the fire blazes up, for the upward region belongs to the fire. On account of the (metres of the) middle three days being crossed, the wind blows across; the wind moves across (the other [305] regions), and the waters flow (also) across ; for the region which is across (the others) belongs to the wind. On account of (the metres of) the three last days being descending, that one (the sun) burns downwards (sending his rays down), the rain falls down, (and, the constellations (in heaven) send (their light) down. For the region which goes down belonge to the sun. 

The three worlds belong together, so do these three Tryabas. These (three) worlds jointly shine to the fortune of him who has such a knowledge. 

26. (When the Dikṣā for the Drádaśāha is to be Performed. The Animal for 

Prajāpati. Jamadagni Sāmidheni terses required. The Purodasa for Vayu. On Some Peculiar Rite when the Ducidasáha is Performed as a Sattra.) 

The Dikṣā went away from the gods. They made it enter the two months of spring, and joined it to it; but they did not get it out (of these months for using it). They then made it subsequently enter the two hot months, the two rainy months, the two months of autumn, and the two winter months, and joined it to then. They did not get it out of the two winter months. They then joined it to the two months of the dewy season (Sisira); they (finally) got it out of these (two months for using it). 

He who has such a knowledge, reaches any one he wishes to reach, but his enemy will not reach him. 

Thence the sacrificer who wishes that the Dikṣā for a sacrificial session should come (by itself) to him, should hare the Dikrā rites performed on himself [306] during the two months of the dewy season. Thus he takes his Dikṣā when the Dikṣā herself is present, and receives her in person. 

(The reason that he should take his Dikṣā during the two months 

w 

ww 

three Tryanas, i.e., three days' performance of the Soma sacrifice. The order of metres on the first three days is, at the morning libation, Gayatri (twenty-four syllables); at the midday libation, Triṣtubh (forty-four syllables); at the evening libation, Jagati (forty-eight syllables). On the middle three days the order of metres is, Jagati, Gayatri, and Triṣtubh, and on the last three days, Tristubh, Jagati, and Gayatri, 

The Dyadasaha is regarded as a Sattra or session. The initiation for the per formance of a Sattra is a Sattra díksā. 

of the dewy season is) because both tame and wild animals are, in these two months (for want of green fodder), very thin and show only, bones, and present in this state the most vivid image of the Diksā (thè aim of which ceremony is to make the sacrificer lean by fasting). 

Before he takes his Dikṣā, he sacrifices an animal for Prajapati. For (the immolation of) this (animal) he ought to repeat seventeen Sāmi dhenit verses. For Prajapati is seventeen-fold. (This is done) for reaching Prajāpati. Aprī verses which come from Jamadagni are (required) for (the immolation of) this animal. About this they say, Since at (all) other animal sacrifices only such Aprī verses are chosen as are traceable to the Rist ancestors (of the sacrificer), why are at this (Prajapati sacrifice) only Jamadagni verses to be used by all ? (The reason is) The Jamadagni verses have a universal character, and make successful in everything. This (Prajapati) animal is of a universal character, and makes successful in everything. The reason that they use (at that occasion) Jamadagni verses, is to secure all forms, and to be successful in every thing. 

The Purodása belonging to this animal is Vāyu's. About this they. ask, Why does the Purodása, which forms part of the animal sacrifice, belong to Vayu, whilst the animal itself belongs to another deity (Prajapati)? (To this objection) one ought to reply, Prajapati is the sacrifice; (that Purođāša is given to Vāyu), in order to have the sacrifice performed without any mistake. Though this [307] Purodasa belongs to Vāyu, it is not withheld from Prajapati. For Vāyu is Prajapati. This has been said by a Riṣi in the words, pavamānah prajapatih (9,5, 9), i.e., Prajapati who blows. 

If the Dvadasāha be (performed as) a Sattra, then the sacrificers -should put all their several fires together, and sacrifice in them. All 

should take the Dīkṣā, and all should prepare the Soma juice. 

He concludes (this sacrifice) in spring. For spring is sap. By doing so, he ends (his sacrifice) with (the obtaining of) food (resulting from the sap of spring). 

27. 

: 

(The Rivalry of the Metres. The Separation of Heaven and Earth. They 

Contract a Marriage. The Sāma Forms in which they are Wedded to one another. On the Black Spot in the Moon. On Poṣa and Uṣa.) , 

Each of the metres (Gāyatri, Tristubh, and Jagatī) tried to occupy 

See 1, 1. *At Sattra or sacrificial session all the sixteen priests in their turn become sacrificers. They perform the ceremonies for one another, 

200 

the place of another actre. Gayatri aspired after the place of Triṣtubh and Jagatī, Triṣtubh after that of Gayatri and Jagati, and Jagati after that of Gayatri and Triṣțubh. 

Thereupon Prajapati saw this Dvadasāha with metres being remove;l from their proper places (vyūlhachhandasa). He took it and sacrificel with it. In this way, he made the metres obtain (fulfilment of) all their desires. He who has such a knowledge, obtains (fulfilment of) all desires. 

The Hotar removes the metres from their proper places, in order that the sacrifice should not lose its essence. 

This circumstance that the Hotar changes the proper place of the metres has its analogy in the fact (308) that (great) people when travelling (to a distant place) yoke to their carriages, at every stage, fresh horses or oxen which are not fatigued. Just in the same way, the sacrificers travel to the celestial world by employing at every stage fresh metres (repre senting the horses or oxen) which are not fatigued. (This results) from changing the places of the metres. 

These two worlds (heaven and earth) were (once) joined. (Subse quently, they separated. (After their separation) there fell neither rain, nor was there sunshine. The five classes of beings (gods, men, &c ) then did not keep peace with one another. (Thereupon) the goils brought about a reconciliation of both these worlds. Both contracted with one another a marriage, according to the rites observed by the gods. 

In the form of the Rathantara Siman, this earth is wedded to heaven; and in the form of the Bțihat Saman, heaven is wedded to the earth. (And again) in the form of the Naudbasa Sāman, the earth is wedded to heaven; and in the form of the Syaita Saman, heaven is weddeci to tho earth. 

In the form of smoke, this earth is wedded to heaven; in the form of rain, heaven is wedded to the earth. 

The earth put a place fit for offering sacrifices to the gods into heaven. Heaven (then) put cattle on the earth. 

The place fit for offering sacrifices to the gods which the earth put in heaven is that black spot in the moon. 

This is the reason that they perform their sacrifice in those hall months in which the moon is waxing and full (for only then that black spot is visible); for they only wish to obtain that (black spot). to Heaven (put) on the earth herbs for pastorage. About them Tura, the son of Kavaṣa, said:0 Janamejaya, what is to be understood by the worils) (309) poṣet (fodder) and uṣ (herbs of pasturage)? This is the reason that those who care for what proceeds from the cow (sub as milk, &c.) 

balti. 

put the question (when sending a cow to a pasturage), are there ūṣas, i.l., herbs of pasturage ? For uṣa is fodder, 

That world turned towards this world, surrounding it. Thence heaven and earth were produced. Neither came heaven from the air, nor the earth from the air. 

28. 

(On the Sama Prıṣthas.) At the beginning, there were Brihat and Rathantaram ; through them there were Speech and Mind. Rathantaram is Speech, Brihat is Mind. Bribat being first created, thought Rathantaram to be inferior; the Rathantaram put an embryo in its body and brought forth Vairūpain. These two, Rathantaram and Vairūpam joined, thought Brihat to be in ferior to them; Brihat put an embryo in its own body, whence the Vairājam was produced. These two, Bribat and Vairājam joined, thought Rathantaram and Vairūpam to be inferior to them. Rathantaram then put an embryo in its body, whence the Sākvaram was produced. These thee, Rathaptaram, Vairūpam, and Sākvaram thought Bribat and Vaira jam to be inferior to them. Brihat then put an embryo in its body, whence the Raivatam was produced. These three Samans on each side (Rathantaram, Vairūpam, Sākvaram, and Brihat, Vairājam, Raivatam) became the six Priṣthas." 

At this (time, when the Sāma Pristhas originated) the three metres (Gayatri, Triṣtubh, and Jagati) (310) were unable to get hold of these six Pristhas. Gayatri put an embryo in herself and produced Anustubh, Triṣtubh put an embryo in hereself and produced Pankti. Jagati put an embryo in herself and produced the Atichhandas (metres). The three metres having thus become six, were thus able to hold the six Přiṣthas. 

The sacrifice of him becomes (well) performed and (also) becomes well performed for the whole assemblage (of sacrificer), who at this occa sion takes his Dikṣā when knowing this production of the metres and Přiṣthas. 

