+++
title = "01"

+++
Save for the fronted pronoun tám, this hymn opens with a remarkable series of universalizing adverbs, identically formed with -(á-)thā suffix and linking the current ritual situation (the final one in the series, imáthā ‘in this way here’, a hapax) to that of every time and place: pratnáthā pūrváthā viśváthā. This may give us a foretaste of the poet’s laying bare the underlying identity of the two central ritual substances, fire and soma, and of the service accorded them in the sacrifice.

The poet then, in my opinion, produces a red herring: most of the descriptors found in this vs. could apply to Indra -- esp. āśúṃ jáyantam; cf. āśúṃ jétāram of Indra in VIII.99.7. And most interpreters fall into this trap: as Ge says in his n. 1, “all commentators” identify tám as Indra -- incl. Ge himself, Re, and Old (WG forego referents). However, both Agni and Soma receive these or similar descriptors elsewhere. Agni and Soma are both located on the ritual grass (Agni: III.14.2, etc.; Soma: I.16.6, etc.); both are called svarvíd- (more often than Indra; Agni: III.3.5, 10, etc.; Soma: VIII.48.15, etc.), jyéṣṭha- (Agni: I.127.2, etc.; Soma: IX.66.16, etc.), and āśú- (Agni: IV.7.4, etc.; Soma: IX.56.1, etc.). Soma is qualified as jáyant- (I.91.21, etc.), and though Agni is not modified by this participle, he is the subject of verbal forms of √ji (e.g., VI.4.4). All of these are, of course, fairly generic characterizations; the point here is that nothing requires us to leap to the conclusion that Indra is the referent.

Another way to approach the question of the referent of tám is to consider what referent is appropriate as an obj. to dohase ‘you will milk’ -- which first may require us to identify the subj. of this 2nd sg. verb (by most lights: Re takes it as a sigmatic 1st sg., which seems unnec. and doesn’t fit the semantic profile of -se 1st singulars). With Sāy. and Ge., I take it as the self-address of the poet, who will perform his milking task ‘with song’ (girā́). The middle of √duh generally takes milk (either real or metaphorical) as its object, and both Agni and Soma can be conceived of as milk products -- the churning of the fire sticks and the pressing of the soma plant both involve physical actions not unlike milking and what is produced is a fluid or something (fire) that behaves rather like one. Indra is not entirely excluded, however; he could be configured as a cow, “milked” with a praise hymn for him to produce goods. However, as I just said, the milk itself, rather than the cow, is the typical obj. of medial √duh, and so the substances fire and/or soma are more likely referents.

Let us now turn to pāda d. This also contains a 2nd sg. med. present, várdhase, in a relative clause whose rel. prn., fem. loc. pl. yā́su, has no possible referent in the rest of the vs. Before turning to that problem, I will first say that I do not consider the 2nd sg. subj. of várdhase to be the same as that of dohase. Instead I think we have switched to the unidentified god/ritual substance referred to by the acc. sg. in the rest of the vs. Although this introduces an interpretational complication, I would point out that in the next vs. (2cd), the god/substance definitely appears in the 2nd person, and note also 8b, which contain a similarly structured rel. cl. … yā́su nā́ma te#, where the 2nd ps. refers to the god/substance. And, most important, the rel. cl. of 1d shows a closer affinity to Agni and Soma than the generic epithets in the rest of the vs. But first we must identify a possible referent or referents for the fem. yā́su.

The standard ploy, which I think is basically correct, is to supply a fem. pl. obj. to jáyantam ‘winning’ -- generally ‘cows’ (Ge, Re, WG). Old suggests rather ‘waters’, which Ge argues against (n. 1d). Certainly both ‘cows’ and ‘waters’ (both fem. pl.) occur as objects to √ji -- and I see no reason to choose between the two; in fact the reason for not specifying either one is to allow both to be understood, under the neutralizing rel. prn. yā́su. Both Agni and Soma have connections to both cows and waters: Agni is nourished by the streams of ghee (a milk product) poured into the fire, and in a well-known myth he ran away and entered the waters. Soma is mixed with cows’ milk, as is endlessly emphasized in the IXth Maṇḍala, and before soma is pressed, it is soaked in water to swell the stalks. A third possible fem. pl. referent connected with Agni is plants, in which he is invisible and inherent until kindled. Let us consider some passages whose phraseology resembles our own. In II.13.1 ...

apáḥ ... ā́viśad yā́su várdhate Soma, unnamed, “entered the waters among which he grows strong.” (Note the nearly identical rel. cl.) For Agni cf. I.95.5 ... vardhate ...

āsu “he grows strong among/in them” (here prob. = plants); I.141.5 ā́d ín mātṝ́r ā́viśad yā́su ... ví vāvrdhe ̥ “Just after that he entered into his mothers, within whom ....

he grew widely” (again prob. plants; note that vāvṛdhe, as transmitted without accent, is not part of the rel. cl. If the transmitted form is correct). The connection of a fem.

loc. pl. and a form of √vṛdh in these passages is striking, and it is Agni and Soma who participate in this phraseology.

Thus, in my opinion, by the end of the vs. the poet has narrowed down the possible referents and set up the rhetorical situation that will dominate the rest of the hymn: an unidentified masc. sg. referent, who can be simultaneously Agni and Soma, and a set of fem. pl. attendants, likewise unidentified, who are connected to the masculine figure.

