+++
title = "04"

+++
My interpr. of both the syntax and the referents of this vs. generally differs from those of others. I will not undertake a detailed disc. of these differences.

However, I will note that Ge (n. 4) suggests that both Agni and Soma may be the topic of the vs., in agreement with my general thesis.

In my opinion, a new element enters the ritual scene here, namely ritual speech, referred to by the unidentified eté of pāda a. Given the masc. pl. pronoun, the exact referent must be masc. -- perhaps stómāḥ ‘praises’ (cf. nearby V.42.15 eṣá stómaḥ …, 16 praíṣá stómaḥ in the same All God cycle, reminscent of our prá va eté …). These praises are conceived of as horses, which are easy to yoke (a: suyújaḥ) and directed by easily controlled reins (c: suyántubhiḥ … abhī́śubhiḥ). As Ge points out (n. 4c with reff.), the reins of priests are their speeches, an association that makes the identification of ‘praises’ as the subject of pāda a all the more likely. The 2nd ps.

enclitic vaḥ refers in my view to the priests who are launching/driving the praisehorses. The prá … yā̐man “forth on the course/journey” invites a verb of motion to be supplied, perhaps a form of √sṛ, suggested by prasársrāṇaḥ beginning the 2nd hemistich of the previous vs. (3c).

The other question confronting us in pāda a is the identity of the datival inf.

iṣṭáye, which is of course multiply ambiguous: it could belong to √iṣ ‘seek, desire’, √iṣ ‘send’, or √yaj ‘sacrifice’ (on this issue, see Old, ZDMG 62: 473-78 = KlSch 282-87). With Old, I take it to the first, but I also think it takes an acc. goal/obj., and that that acc. is the fem. acc. phrase in b, nī́cīḥ … yamyà ṛtāvṛ́dhaḥ. Old also takes this phrase as acc., though he supplies a different verb to govern it; the other interpr.

take the phrase as nom. and the subject of an independent nominal clause. With Ge (n.

4b) I take the downward-facing twinned sisters to be both the streams of ghee offered into the ritual fire and the streams of water with which soma is rinsed (the milk streams with which soma is mixed could also be in play). The praises’ seeking of these streams expresses the union of verbal and physical activity in the sacrifice, with the hymns accompanying the pouring of the liquid into/onto the ritual substance. The dat. prn. amúṣmai I take as the goal of this pouring: the fire and the soma respectively. The use of the comparatively rare distal deictic asaú is noteworthy, since this stem generally refers to the upward or heavenly world or items located there, esp. the sun (for the sun, cf., e.g., I.105.3, 191.9, VIII.12.30). Yet here the streams are going ‘downward’ towards it. This paradox can be resolved by recalling the phrase in 2a úparasya … svàḥ “the sun of the lower realm,” which made reference to well-known conceptions of Agni and of Soma. Agni is frequently considered the earthly counterpart of the heavenly sun, since both blaze brightly and they also make their appearance at the same time (dawn) of the ritual day. Soma, likewise, is often compared to or identified with the sun because of its bright gleam, and there are both a heavenly Soma and his earthly counterpart depicted in the IXth Maṇḍala. Here, in my opinion, amúṣmai makes implicit reference to the heavenly Sun [=Fire] and heavenly Soma, while depicting the ritual activity centered on their earthly embodiments, thus erasing the distance between heaven and earth and the distinction between the entities found therein.

Pāda d, which I take as a separate clause, brings its own set of problems, not least with the always enigmatic word krívi- (on which see also comm. ad I.30.1).

First, however, note the phonological echo of b amúṣmai / d muṣāyati, though this does not help with the interpr. As for krívi-, I take it here as a conflation of two putative stems. On the one hand, at least once (I.30.1) krívi- seems to refer to a race horse (there compared with Indra). Since the intertwined Agni/Soma figure in this hymn was just referred to as a steed (átya-) in 3a, krívi- here seems to be picking up that joint referent. Ge [n. 4d] makes the same identification of átya- with krívi-, and he also suggests that the pāda expresses the entry of the butter offerings into the fire and/or the streams of water in the soma. I think he is correct as far as he goes, but I think there is a third referent, the poet who is responsible for the praises I suggest are the subject of pāda a. In this case krívi- can be seen as a hyper-Sanskritization of kaví- (as if from *kṛvi-) with the ri that interchanges with ṛ in words like kṛ́mi-/krími- ‘worm’ (cf. AiG I.33 and Nachtr. 19, 21), aided of course by the krívi- already referring to Agni/Soma. See also disc. ad 9c below.

What does it mean that this krívi- “steals (their) names”? Here Old’s suggestion is surely correct for the Agni/Soma krívi- (for Old, only Soma): that the streams (of ghee/water) lose their identities when they merge into Agni/Soma, and the result is simply called fire/soma. As for the poet whom I consider the third referent of krívi-, he may “steal their names” by using them in his poetry, or perhaps by referring to them but not naming them, as he does in this vs. (and throughout the hymn).

