+++
title = "05"

+++
As usual in this hymn, this vs. swarms with difficulties (Re calls it “une suite de cruces”), but it continues to depict a relation between a singular masc. entity and a group of feminines. I see this as the thread that leads us through the labyrinth of this hymn. Note also that, as in vs. 3, there are phonetic figures: ab: saṃjárbhurāṇas tárubhiḥ ... susváruḥ / sutegṛ́bham ... cittágarbhāsu (with mirror-image su). The instr. tárubhiḥ in pāda a is a hapax, obviously built to a stem táru-. Both Ge and Re both take it as ‘tree’, which is tempting given the following vayākín- ‘twiggy’. But II.39.3 járbhurāṇā tárobhiḥ, with the instr. pl. to the better-attested sstem built to √tṝ ‘endure, etc.’, suggests that táru- is more likely connected to that root (see on this point EWA I.630). However, I confess that my tr. “quivering with your powers of endurance” conveys little sense. I think the instr. here may do little more than reinforce the intensive (that is, frequentative) value of the participle: the subject keeps quivering with continued force (“staying power”).

As usual, I think the subj. of the participle saṃjárbhurāṇaḥ is simultaneously Agni and Soma. Agni is elsewhere subject of this intensive (e.g., II.10.5), clearly with reference to his flickering flames. The semantic connection with Soma is not as strong, and Soma is nowhere the subject of this verb, but the scintillating, undulating waves of soma are a common trope in Maṇḍala IX.

Both these substances are aiming towards the vayākín-. The most sensible interpr. of that word is as an -ín-possessive built to an unattested diminutive *vayāká- ‘little branch, twig’ to vayā́- ‘branch’, hence ‘twiggy’ (see Scar’s n. in WG, referring to his treatment in Rt Noun Cmpds). For Agni this twiggy substance can be brushwood or kindling; the association with Soma is again less straightforward, but it can either refer to the twigs of the soma plant itself or, more likely in my opinion, refer metaphorically to the tufts of wool on the sheep’s fleece filter that catch the impurities in the pressed soma juice. This suggestion is supported by the cmpd modifying it, sute-gŕbh- ‘grasping at the pressing’. If the vayākín- is the fleece filter, it most definitely ‘grasps’ the solids that accidentally end up in the pressed juice. For Agni, ‘grasping at the pressing’ is less clear, but the firewood may seem to hold onto the fire burning in it, and the ritual fire burns during the soma pressing.

The rest of the first hemistich consists of cittágarbhāsu susváruḥ. The standard interpr. all analyze the latter word as containing sváru- ‘(sacrificial) post’ (though note that Gr does not provide a gloss for it). Although this analysis works formally, it does not fit easily into the vs. semantically. I am inclined instead to take it as containing a form of √svar ‘sound’; cf. svará- (2x, unfortunately with different accent), svarí-, etc. Ge (n. 5b) in fact suggests an alternate tr. ‘schön tönend’ (vaguely following Sāy.). -sváru- would show the same conversion to a u-stem as the hapax táru- in pāda a and perhaps follows that word in accent as well. The noisemaking capacities of both Agnia and Soma are well known.

On cittágarbha- ‘visibly pregnant’ see Ge’s n. 5b and the TB passage cited there. These females would be, in the Agni realm, the pieces of firewood, which are frequently depicted as having an embryonic Agni inside; for Soma most likely the waters in which the soma plant is soaked, swelling him as their embryo, or perhaps the cows whose milk is mixed with him.

I follow Old (ZDMG 62 [=KlSch 284 n.1]) in taking dhāravākéṣu as referring to a particular ritual moment, the litanies or recitations when the streams of the oblation are offered, but the equational metaphorical interpr. “recitations (like) streams” found in most tr. is also possible. The voc. ṛju-gātha ‘whose song is straight’ is somewhat puzzling. I think it is best illuminated by II.26.1 rj̥úr íc cháṃsaḥ, a phrase I take as a decomposed bahuvrīhi (see comm. ad loc.) meaning ‘whose laud is straight on target’. I would now slightly alter the tr. here to ‘whose song is straight on target’ to make the voc. a little less opaque.

The last pāda is surprisingly straightforward, at least for this hymn. The subject of várdhasva is once again Agni/Soma, who derive their strength from their wives (pátnī), the plants/firewood and waters/cows’ milk respectively.

