+++
title = "07"

+++
Again my interpr. differs markedly from those of others. Again I think the unexpressed subj. of the whole vs. is Agni/Soma, not the sun (sū́ryaḥ) with most others. The nom. sū́ryaḥ is instead used to characterize both, since both Agni and Soma can be identified with the sun; that is, each is (equivalent to) the sun in his own way. Cf. “the sun of the lower realm” in 2a with reference to phenomena related to both Agni and Soma.

In pāda a I take the two adj. ágruḥ ‘unmarried’ and jánivān ‘possessing wife/wives’ as expressing two stages in the development of Agni/Soma, rather than as paradoxically simultaneous with Ge and Re (WG interpr. resembles mine). The position of vaí supports an interpr. with two clauses. In the first stage Agni/Soma pursues females/wives; cf. VII.96.4 janīyánto nv ágravaḥ “bachelors in search of wives.” Again we have unidentified (and here unexpressed) plural females -- in Agni’s case I surmise they are the plants that supply firewood and/or the streams of ghee poured in the fire; in Soma’s the cows, with whose milk he is mixed, or even the waters that swell him. Once Agni and Soma have “married” these females and are jánivān ‘possessed of wives’, each can use the extra power acquired from these females to best his rivals. In this second clause I supply a second verb, perhaps a form of √tṝ, because √vī does not otherwise occur with áti, whereas tuturyāma+áti is found in the next hymn (V.45.11).

In cd I take the verb vanavat in two senses, negative and positive, both well represented for this stem. With the obj. ghraṃsám ‘heat’, the verb has the sense ‘win’ = ‘vanquish’, as in nearby V.29.9 ávanor ha śúṣṇam “you combatted / vanquished Śuṣṇa”; with the obj. śárma ‘shelter’, ‘win’ = ‘gain’. I take rákṣantam as a qualifier of śárma (more or less; see below), with the participle itself taking the obj. gáyam (“shelter … protecting our patrimony”). In taking gáyam as obj. of rákṣantam I am flg. Old, who cites as parallel I.74.2 árakṣad dāśúṣe gáyam, which seems pretty conclusive to me. There are also two passages (VI.71.3/X.66.3) in which gáyam is the object of the semantically parallel verb pári √pā ‘protect all round’ (e.g., X.66.3 ... pári pāhi no gáyam); note pári immed. flg. rákṣantam here. By contrast, Ge, Re, WG all take gáyam as an immed. object of vanavat, modified by rákṣantam, which itself governs ghraṃsám (cf., e.g., Re “Qu’il nous assure une demeure protégeant de toutes parts de (son) ardeur …”). This interpr. not only ignores the √rakṣ + gáyam parallel, but also requires a significant attenuation of the meaning of √van (see Re’s n. on the pāda), and I also don’t know of parallel uses of √rakṣ meaning ‘guard against / from’. Against this we must balance one clear defect in my interpr., that śárman- is neut. and the part. rákṣantam is masc. To account for the gender discrepancy I would suggest that the immediate referent of rákṣantam is not śárma, but a different, underlying, masc. noun to which śárma is an appositive -- perhaps kṣáyam ‘peaceful dwelling’, as in I.133.7 vanóti … kṣáyam. Or it might be enough to invoke the distance between rákṣantam and śárma in the hemistich, which might account for the gender mismatch. (I prefer the former, grammatically blameless, possibility. In this case the tr. might be slightly changed to “will win (peaceful dwelling) as shelter for us, protecting (our) patrimony on all sides.”)

