+++
title = "08"

+++
Old’s stark statement about this vs., “Ich wage keine Erklärung,” is somewhat lowering to the spirit. Nonetheless, I think some sense can be wrung from it. As I said in the publ. intro., I think a new figure enters the scene at this, the midpoint of the hymn -- namely the poet, learning and perfecting his craft -- and in my opinion he is the subject of the vs., though Agni and Soma are still very much present.

By my interpr. the unnamed would-be poet “pursues/proceeds towards/practices” (carati) “the older (/superior) sonority of the seers” (jyā́yāṃsam … ṛṣisvarám), that is, he imitates and aspires to the sound of the legendary poet-seers who preceded him. He does so by means of asyá yatúnasya ketúnā “by the beacon of this yatúna.” Unfortunately yatúna- is a hapax, and there is no agreement on its meaning or etym. (see, e.g., EWA s.v.). However, we can approach the sense of this phrase from several angles. The most promising of these, in my opinion, is the recognition that the phrase yajñásya ketú- “beacon of the sacrifice” is a very common expression in the RV (I.96.16, I.113.19, etc. etc., incl. in this maṇḍala V.11.1).

Moreover, both Agni and Soma are identified as yajñásya ketú-; Agni: the three passages just cited, plus I.1127.6, III.11.3, etc.; Soma: IX.86.7. I take yatúna- as a nonce substitute for yajñá-, with vaguely similar phonology, built to √yat ‘arrange’.

(This is the root affiliation suggested by most [cf., e.g., AiG II.2.485].) Unfortunately this root does not seem to be generally used in ritual context, but a generalized abstract ‘arrangement’ can stand in for the more specific ‘sacrifice’. This hapax yatúna- echoes immed. following instr. ketúnā (though obviously the morphology is different) and also reminds us of the two unexpected -u-stems in 5: táru- and -sváru-.

Putting all this together, I would claim that the poet is pursuing the model of the previous poets by means of the beacon of the sacrifice (/‘arrangement’), and that this beacon is actually the usual amalgam of Agni and Soma, who, as we just saw, can be so called. In other words, the shimmering leaders of the sacrifice, the two ritual substances fire and soma, provide the (en)light(enment) as the poet follows the progress of the sacrifice as it leads him to his poetic goal.

Unlike most interpr. I take the loc. rel. cl. ending b (yā́su nā́ma te) as parallel to the one beginning c (yā́dṛ́śmin dhā́yi), also with a loc. expression. Both remind us of 2d … ṛtá āsa nā́ma te; besides the identical final nā́ma te, note the echo between yā́su and āsa. The fem. loc. yā́su refers to the now familiar mix of fem. plurals -- waters, cows [=milk], streams of ghee -- with the possible addition of fem. words for mental and verbal products: insights, hymns, etc. In any case the poet finds the jyā́yāṃsam … ṛṣisvarám he is looking for at the place where the names of Agni and Soma have been set -- that is, at the heart of the sacrifice. I take the referent of tám to be ṛṣisvára- of b. To find it he needs not only the beacon provided by Agni/Soma but also his own industry (apasyā́-).

The final pāda reiterates that the poet must rely on himself: he must make the journey to poetic mastery by himself, and if he does, he will get it (that is, the poetry) right. The phrasal verb áraṃ karat of course reminds us of alaṃkāra, the later technical term for poetic ornament. Cf. already in the RV VII.29.3 kā́te asty áraṃkrti̥ ḥ sūktaíḥ for a connection between hymns and proper preparation. (Contrary to the standard tr., I do not think that yá u svayáṃ váhate has anything to do with marriage and bringing the bride home.)
