+++
title = "09"

+++
In my interpr., the first half of this vs. depicts the offering of ritual oblations, while the second one connects the poet, whom we first met in the previous vs., with this ritual activity.

The fem. phrase āsām … agrimā́“the foremost (fem.) of these (fem.)” must refer yet again to the females we’ve met before: waters, cows, streams of ghee, as was just noted above. In pāda a the first such female goes down into the ocean (samudrám); this could be the ocean of soma as often or the undulating flames of the ritual fire (see I.71.7 where the offerings entering the fire are compared to streams entering a samudrá-). In pāda b the word sávana- ‘pressing’ limits the reference to soma, but throughout the hymn we have seen phraseology that is more appropriate to one of the gods than to the other (generally, in fact, in favor of Agni). That b is a clear soma pāda does not, in my opinion, invalidate the general interpr. of the hymn as applicable simultaneously to the two gods. It is also worth noting in passing that sávana-, which occurs approx. 100x in the RV, is found only once in the IXth Maṇḍala.

Why it is necessary to state that the pressing is not harmed when the female enters it is not clear. Perhaps it is meant as understatement: it is not only not harmed, but is positively benefitted. Or perhaps there is a whiff of the fear of contamination caused by females.

Pāda c brings us another impenetrable hapax, kravaṇá-. The first thing to notice, perhaps, is that it rhymes with sávana- (though it does not match it in accent).

As with the hapax yatúna- in 8a beside ketúnā, one of the contributors to the formation of the hapax may be phonological echo. There is, as usual, no consensus on the etym. or sense of the word; Ge and Re (inter alia) take it as a PN -- a convenient strategy, but in a hymn that contains no other PNs (at least in my opinion) an unlikely solution. WG take it as ‘Opferschlächter’, related to kravís-, a suggestion mentioned but not endorsed by Old (see also EWA s.v.). My own tentative suggestion has no better support. I consider it, like krívi- in 4d, to be another phonologically scrambled encoding of the word kaví-, here perhaps crossed with a form of √kṛ, hence my tr. ‘working poet’. (A putative participial -āṇá- might have been remodeled under pressure from sávana- in b.) Although I will not attempt a spirited defense of this despairing attempt, it does have certain points in its favor.

First, if kriví- in 4d and kravaṇá- here are both deformations of kaví-, which itself appears in 7b, we have a little ring of references to the poet in the midsection of this hymn. More important, reference to a poet in 9c fits well with the subordinate clause in 9d. Just at the time when oblation is made and the soma is prepared (9ab), the poet who is not intimidated (“his heart does not tremble”) finds the poetic expression (matí-) that connects him to the purified ritual substances soma and fire. (Though pūtá- almost always refers to soma and never to fire directly, other forms derived from the root √pū, like pāvaká-, are standard qualifiers of Agni.) If I am correct that vs. 8 depicts an apprentice or neophyte poet embarking on his journey to poetic mastery, then 9cd shows him achieving his first success at a climactic moment in the sacrifice, which provides inspiration to his undaunted heart.
