+++
title = "10"

+++
Ge and Re deal with the difficulties of this vs. by taking all (or almost all) the genitives as PN, a solution going back to Sāy.: (Ge) Kṣatra, Manasa, Yajata, Sadhri, and Avatsāra, to which Re adds Evāvada. (Note that the Anukr. ascribes this hymn to one Avatsāra Kāśyapa, but this is, in my opinion, based on a later misunderstanding of this vs.) Since all of these forms, on the one hand, either are, or bear a strong resemblance to, real words in the language and, on the other, are not used as names elsewhere, the Ge/Re PN strategy seems like an evasion of responsibility. It is to the credit of WG that this makeshift is not resorted to; all these forms are given full lexical weight. And the WG interpr. of ab is not too distant from mine, in that they take the subject to be a/the poet, who has some connection to the cítti- of the figures mentioned in the gen. (WG: “Denn er is es [ein Ṛṣi?] durch die Einsichten dessen …”), though our treatments of the genitives differ.

My interpr. of the relation between sá and cíttibhiḥ calls upon the ‘bond’ (bándhanī) of 9d, where the poet found the thought that binds him to the ritual substances soma and fire. I think 10ab elaborates on this notion, by ascribing the insights to Soma and Agni themselves.

The second set of genitives, evāvadásya yajatásya sádhreḥ in pāda b, by my interpr. refer to Agni and Soma simultaneously. Both Agni and Soma are elsewhere described as yajatá- ‘worthy of the sacrifice’ (Agni, e.g., I.128.8; Soma, e.g., IX.86.14). Assuming that the hapax evāvadá- has the sense ‘speaking thus’ it transparently presents, it can apply to both Agni and Soma because both substances are often said to speak or sound: for Agni cf., e.g., VI.4.4, 13.6; for Soma cf. esp.

IX.113.4, 6. As for sádhreḥ, the obvious connection with sadhryàñc- ‘directed towards the same goal’ is affirmed by Gr, AiG II.2.154, EWA s.v sadhrī́m, etc. It is the morphology that is puzzling, made more complex by the fact that it should be trisyllabic with a short penultimate, hence *sádhriyaḥ? (so approx. Gr). (HvN simply pronounce the pāda as having 11 syllables, but since this would be a metrical irregularity in a Jagatī hymn and since there is no independent stem *sádhri- to which sádhreḥ would obviously belong, it seems better to perform the metrical distraction.) I have no answer for the morphology or for the accent, but given the morphological flexibility in the rest of this hymn, this is not surprising.) The “same goal” that Agni/Soma are aiming at is the eloquence that the poet is also seeking to harness.

I take this second set of genitives, referring to Agni/Soma, as dependent on, not parallel to, the first pair of genitives, kṣatrásya manasásya. My “mental lordship” refers to the mastery those two gods have of the poetry and the insights that produce it. The adj. manasá- is a hapax, but it fits a common pattern of deriving suffixaccented thematic adjectives to s-stems; cf., e.g., vacasá- ‘eloquent’ to vácas- ‘speech’ and AiG II.2.136.

The second hemistich takes advantage of the double meaning of ráṇa- and its derivatives (ráṇa- ‘joy / battle’, raṇvá- ‘delightful / battle-lusty’, etc.). I take the referent of the pl. ráṇvabhiḥ to be poems (or perhaps the ‘insights’ cítti- of pāda a).

As warriors fighting alongside us they allow us to win the prize (spṛṇavāma …  vā́jam), but as poems they are also delightful or joy-bringing. That winning the prize requires wisdom, not just brute strength, is expressed by vidúṣā cid árdhyam “to be brought to success only by the wise,” a signal that it is insights or their products, poems, that are being deployed.

It remains to identify “the stealthy one” (avatsārá-), assuming as I do that it is not a PN. As I just noted, not only do Ge and Re (but not WG) take it as a PN, but the Anukramaṇī ascribes this hymn to Avatsāra Kāśyapa, who is also purported to be the Soma hymns IX.53-60, a group of short Gāyatrī hymns with no obvious connection to V.44. It seems obvious to connect the word with the lexeme áva √tsar and the root √tsar ‘creep’ more generally. The root is poorly attested, and áva √tsar only occurs once (I.71.5 in the notorious heavenly incest story). Agni is once the subject of √tsar (I.145.4), and the occurrence of áva √tsar is found in an Agni hymn (though not with Agni as subject). Soma is never subject of this verb, but its rarity makes this unsurprising. Both Agni and Soma can be conceived of as creeping or stealthy because of their slow and gradual movements -- Agni as the fire slowly catches in the kindling, Soma as the juice spreads across the filter.

