+++
title = "11"

+++
If it is possible for this hymn to get more obscure, it does so in this vs. (Note that Old simply gives up in vss. 11-13.) Nonetheless, I think a consistent interpr. can be constructed and one that fits well with the increasing pace of the depiction of the ritual in the last few vss. The theme that unifies the vs. is that of ritual binding and unbinding -- conveyed by the words áditi-, which I take as the abstract ‘unboundedness’ not the name of the goddess, kakṣyà- ‘girding’, and viṣā́na- ‘unharnessing’.

The first half of pāda a (śyená āsām áditiḥ) refers to the pre-ritual situation.

While Soma is still a falcon, swooping about in freedom before the sacrifice begins, he is/represents freedom also for the classes of females we keep encountering: waters, cows, hymns. Neither the waters nor the cows (=milk) have taken on their ritual roles, and the words have not yet been pressed into service as ritual speech. (It’s important to note that Soma himself is often called a śyená- in IX; the bird is not simply the conveyor of the stolen soma.) In the second half of pāda a (kakṣyò mádaḥ) Soma has been transformed into the máda-, the exhilarating ritual drink, and that change in turn brings about the girding of the female entities in question. They are hitched up in their various ritual roles, and the sacrifice begins. This ritual commencement is both for the benefit of and involves the active participation of the two gods, Soma and Agni. It is thus that I interpret the genitives in pāda b (viśvávārasya yajatásya māyínaḥ (note the recurrence of yajatásya from 10b), also referring, in my opinion, to Agni/Soma.

(Once again both Ge and Re take all three genitives as PNs; once again WG do not.) In pāda c I take the priests as the subject of arthayanti ‘cause to seek as goal’.

They are now directing the ritual proceedings. The first object of arthayanti is unexpressed, in my view: it is the female ritual elements, waters, milk, hymns. The priests send them to their ritual tasks, the waters and the cows’ milk to soma, the hymns to Soma and Agni. The two gods are here represented by the āmreḍita anyám- anyam ‘the one, the other; one after the other’. So far in the hymn the two gods have been fused into one, verbally speaking; here the āmreḍita is an intermediate step towards separating them, a step that allows for the introduction of a third god, Indra, in the next vs. In pāda d the priests realize that with the mobilization of all the elements of the ritual performance -- the soma, the ritual fire, the waters, milk, and hymns -- the climax of the sacrifice has been reached. The unharnessing of these elements can take place because all that remains is for the prepared soma to be drunk. This sets the stage for the premier soma-drinker, Indra, to appear on the scene, which he does in the next vs. The parallel forms viṣā́ṇam paripā́nam are both best taken as -ana-nouns to -ā́-roots, although Gr identifies the first as a root participle. Cf. AiG II.2.193.

