+++
title = "12"

+++
As I just said, I think this vs. represents the epiphany of Indra, come to drink the just-prepared soma. Although, in keeping with the practice of the hymn, he is not named, the presence of a new actor in the hymn is strongly signaled by the verb phrase in pāda a: ví dvíṣo vadhīt: Indra is almost always the subject of verb forms to the root √vadh. Although the subject of pāda a is also called yajatá-, a word used in the two preceding vss. (10b, 11b) of Agni/Soma (in my opinion), ‘worthy of the sacrifice’ is a generic descriptor of gods, is used elsewhere of Indra (e.g., II.14.10), and can be so applied here. And ‘always giving’ (sadāpṛṇa, though a hapax, is a good description of Indra -- or at least as we wish him to be.

In b Ge and Re take the three words bāhuvṛktáḥ śrutavít táryaḥ as PNs yet again. I think they are all further qualifications of Indra. The first depicts the physical actions of the priest, who by the ritual activities performed by their arms (bāhú-), “twist” Indra to the ritual ground. (For the use of √vṛj to refer to bringing a god to one’s ritual, see VIII.76.1.) There is also a sly echo of the common bahuvrīhi vṛktábarhis- ‘having twisted ritual grass’, a ritual action that would indeed by performed by the priests’ arms. Indra is also easily qualified as śruta-víd- ‘finding [/knowing] what is heard (=praise)’. The third term táryaḥ, a hapax, is more difficult. It may simply be a -ya- deriv. to √tṝ (see WG “der Überwinder [?]”), though this isn’t terribly satisfying morphologically. I tentatively take it as a primary comparative to √tṝ, with the short suffixal form -yas- rather than -īyas- (tárīyas- 1x in nearby V.41.12); cf. návyas- / návīyas-. In that case it would be an adverbially used neut.

(‘surpassingly’) and the predicate is the vaḥ sácā “(is in) partnership with you.” For another predicated pāda-final ENC + sácā see VIII.92.29 ádhā cid indra me sácā “And so, Indra, (you are) in partnership with me.” The second hemistich begins with an explicitly marked dual ubhā́… várā, separated by a nom. sg. sá. Here we have the triad that has just, in this vs., interrupted the fused identification of Agni and Soma. With Indra represented by sá, the two other gods are for the first time in the hymn separated into a grammatical pair (though see the forerunner anyám-anyam in 11c), rather than sharing grammatically singular descriptors applicable to each. (For ubhā́… várā referring to animate beings, see X.85.9, where the two are the Aśvins -- though in that case várameans ‘wooer’.) Indra “comes in response” (práty eti) to these two, i.e., to the ritual fire where offerings will be made to him and to his own ritual drink. The second verb bhā́ti ‘is radiant’ is not a typical Indraic verb, but pāda d with its reference to the gaṇá- ‘troop, throng’ easily brings the rhetoric back to Indra and his close ties with the Maruts, so often identified as a gaṇá-. The lexeme prá √yā, found here in suprayā́van- ‘driving forth easily’, is also particularly associated with the Maruts; cf. III.29.15 marútām iva prayā́ḥ, and verbal instantiations like I.37.14 prá yāta, also I.165.13, V.53.12, 58.6. I've supplied 'chariots' because rátha- several times used in a simile with pra √yā (IV.19.5, VII.74.6, IX.69.9).

