+++
title = "13"

+++
As indicated in the publ. intro., in this last real vs. of the hymn I think the poet, who has been learning his trade, is extravagantly celebrated as the figure on whom the whole sacrifice depends and the representative of various sacrificial personnel and equipment. By contrast, Ge and Re once again opt for a PN, this time Sutambhara whom they consider to be the patron of the sacrifice. I take sutambharáas the transparent cmpd it appears to be, conforming to the model of other -bharátatpuruṣas (cf., with acc. 1st member, puṣṭim-bhará-, vājam-bhará-, etc.) For the underlying syntagm see VIII.66.7 sutám bhara, where the subject is a priest or similar figure (also IX.6.6 sutám bhárāya). I construe the gen. yájamānasya with the 1st member sutam, though it could also be a gen. of benefit (‘for the sacrificer’) and loosely construed with the whole cmpd. I do not think it is dependent on sátpatiḥ, pace Ge, Re, and WG.

The 2nd pāda identifies the poet with the source (the cow’s udder, ū́dhaḥ) and distributor (the ladle or scoop, udáñcanaḥ) of all poetic visions (víśvāsām … dhiyā́m), which are here equated with ghee oblations. (For ud √añc meaning ‘turn / scoop up’, see V.83.8, AV X.29.8, etc.; in AB and ŚB udañcana- is a 'dipping vessel'.) The conflation of poems with liquid offerings we have already met before in this hymn, though it is only here that the dhī́- is explicitly referred to.

In c the Pp and the standard interpr. take dhenū́as the sandhi form of nom. sg.

dhenús before r-. This is of course perfectly possible; however, I take the form as given, as the dual nom./acc. of the same stem. By this interpr. the poet who was the subj. of ab remains the subj. here, with the -bhará- of the cmpd in pāda a extracted and converted into a finite injunctive bhárat. Who are the two milk-cows he bears? It is of course tempting to identify them as Agni and Soma, the pair that has been hiding in this hymn all along. And in part I think that is the correct answer: the poet, whose verbal formulations are the foundation of the sacrifice, thereby supports the two ritual substances (/gods) that provide the material realization of the sacrifice.

Agni and Soma would be called dhenū́because of the benefits they provide through sacrifice. But dual dhenū́is several times used of Heaven and Earth (of the other four occurrences, at last III.6.4, IV.23.10), so that the poet through his sacrificial labors may be supporting the whole cosmos. Moreover, the milk of Heaven and Earth has a special connection with poetry. Cf. the curious passage I.22.14 táyor íd ghrtávat páy ̥ o, víprā rihanti dhītíbhiḥ “The inspired poets lick the ghee-filled milk of this very pair [=Heaven and Earth; see vs. 13] with their poetic insights,” though the meaning of this vs. is obscure (see comm. ad loc.). In any case their milk is brought to perfection (śiśriye) in the rest of the pāda.

Contra Narten (1987: 281) and Kümmel (p. 528), who follows her, in the publ. tr. I take this med. pf. as passive, contrasting with the act. trans. aśiśrayuḥ (2x). However, it is possible that the verb is transitive, as they take it, and the poet remains as subj.: “he brings/has brought their milk to perfection.” This might be preferable, in that it emphasizes the poet’s control over the sacrifice and its cosmic resonances.

The final pāda of the vs., and thus of the hymn, brings us back, abruptly and somewhat reductively, to the poet’s training: “pay attention to your teacher; don’t nod off or go wool-gathering.” The lexemes ánu √brū and ádhi √i belong to pedagogical vocabulary (for the latter see Apālā VIII.91.3 and comm. ad loc.). The final phrase ná svapán “not the one who sleeps” provides a transition to the final two responsive verses with their insistently repested jāgāra ‘is/stays awake’.
