+++
title = "B Format of the Translations"

+++
## No footnotes 
Perhaps the most unusual feature of our translation is our decision to avoid the use  of footnotes entirely. We did not begin with that idea, but several considerations  led us to it. 

- First, the notes in Geldner’s translation, especially the parallels he cites,  are full and informative, and interested readers should consult them: knowledge of  German is not required for tracking down the parallels. 
  - Further, this translation  will appear approximately coincident with the new Witzel-Gotō translation into  German, which contains annotations to verses that build on Geldner’s work. Yet  another set of similar annotations seemed to us unnecessary and redundant. 
- Second and more important, however, this decision reflects our view of the text.  One of the aims of this translation is to demonstrate that the hymns are unified,  structured compositions and not merely collections of single verses randomly collected into hymns. Our emphasis on the integrity and structure of R̥gvedic hymns,  on the idea that the sūkta is the essential compositional unit, is to us the most persuasive reason to avoid footnotes, endnotes, or running commentary. If we were to  invite readers to turn away from the progress of the hymn toward notes of one kind  or another, we would risk causing them to lose precisely the thing we most want our  readers to have, the sense of the hymn as a compositional whole.+++(4)+++ 

## Hymn introductions
The starkness of our presentation is softened by several different strategies,  corresponding to different types of problems the text presents. 

First and most  important, we provide introductions to each hymn. These introductions treat the  overall structure of the hymn, its theme or themes, the development of the hymn,  and any special features it may have—special features being defined as whatever  strikes the translators as particularly noteworthy. These include intertextual connections with other R̥gvedic hymns, especially in the oeuvre of the same poet,  spectacular rhetorical flights or poetic devices, marked metrical features, out-of the-ordinary ritual procedures or models of rituals, little-known myths, interesting  twists on well-known myths, and so forth. We also discuss the conformity or non conformity of the hymn to the expected patterns of organization in the maṇḍala  or hymn collection when relevant—where verses or even whole hymns have been  added and hymns have been combined, divided, or relocated. Such changes reflect  the compositional history of the text and may be important for the interpretation  of the hymn. 

On the other hand, the discussions in the introductions generally do not treat  technical linguistic details, except insofar as they impact the reader’s experience of  the hymn. However, we do not apologize for regularly mentioning grammatical features of the hymn in such cases: the poets were, among other things, expert grammarians and often deployed particular linguistic forms to subtle semantic ends. To remain in ignorance of this linguistic dimension of the hymns is to miss many of  their most striking effects. 

In the introductions we usually do not engage with the considerable secondary  literature on the hymn or the variant interpretations of other translators and commentators, including Sāyaṇa. Although study of this material has deeply affected  our reading of the text, a detailed discussion of how and why we differ from other  interpretations would swell our already long work to unmanageable proportions. 

We know of no other R̥gveda translation that systematically provides such introductions for every hymn, rather than just for the famous or the famously difficult hymns. We hope that these introductions will give readers sufficient guidance  to proceed through the hymn without getting unduly mired in the difficult parts.  We also hope that the introductions will make clear how very different R̥gvedic  hymns are from one another, even when they are “about” the same subject, and will  counter the general assumption that the liturgical material in the R̥gveda, which of  course makes up the greater part of the text, is monotonously the same throughout.  Quite the contrary: the poets obviously sought novelty not only in individual details  of imagery and wording but also in their overall approach to well-worn topics,  and they thought out innovative ways to frame such topics. Even the sixty-seven  gāyatrī hymns to Soma Pavamāna that occupy the first half of the IXth Maṇḍala  and are extremely narrowly focused on a very few steps of ritual procedure manage  an astounding amount of variety within these metrical and topical limits. In fact,  they might serve as a textbook of how a R̥gvedic poet deploys his skills to produce  multiple, very different versions of a simple and single message.+++(4)+++ 

## Identifications
A second type of aid we provide to readers relates to a major stumbling block  they will encounter in approaching the translation directly: while the original audience of the R̥gveda would have been able to identify the referent in a particular  verse on the basis of characteristic epithets, defining actions, or habitual associations, our readers will not have the cultural knowledge that the poet and his audience shared. Therefore, in many cases in which such references may not be clear to  our readers, we have inserted brief bracketed identifications to situate the reader  with as little fuss as possible. We have kept such bracketed additions to a minimum,  since we assume that the general introduction will familiarize our readers with common epithets, characteristics, and tropes, and therefore identifications of the type  “Vr̥tra-smasher [=Indra]” will be unnecessary. These bracketed additions are to  be differentiated from material in parentheses, supplied from context and necessary to complete the syntactic construction of the verse, as was discussed immediately above. We should note that identifying every stray referent and decoding  every cryptic image, either in the introduction or the bracketed insertions, would  prove to be unduly distracting—not to mention sometimes impossible—and readers are encouraged to let the momentum of the poetry carry them across these little  perplexities. 

Some bracketed additions signal possible double meanings (puns or  double references) of single words, expressions, or constructions in the text; the  alternatives will be separated by a slash.

## Detailed paraphrases
Occasionally, for hymns in which density of reference or deliberate obscurity  makes each verse a challenge to decode and appreciation of the hymn as a whole  depends on following the unfolding of its cryptic train of thought, we will provide  a verse-by-verse exegesis in the introduction to the hymn. Again, we have kept such  discursive treatment to a minimum—not only for considerations of space, but also  on principled grounds: the R̥gveda is, first and foremost, poetry, and detailed paraphrase is a terrible crime to commit against poetry. It is especially a crime against  this poetry, where verbal execution, rhetorical ingenuity, and deliberate complexity  are central to its poetic style. 

## Heading, numbering
The heading of each hymn will provide the maṇḍala and hymn number, fol lowed, in parentheses, by its “Grassmann number.” Grassmann’s R̥gvedic lexicon did not make use of the usual numbering system of maṇḍala plus hymn, but  through-numbered the entire text without regard to maṇḍala (or aṣṭaka) divisions.  Although this number will be irrelevant for most readers of the translation, for  those who use the translation in conjunction with the Sanskrit text and the various  relevant reference works, including Grassmann’s lexicon, the Grassmann number  will facilitate cross-reference. (The Grassmann numbers for the first maṇḍala are  not supplied, as they are identical with the hymn number in that maṇḍala.) 

The  deity (or other element) who is the dedicand of the hymn follows the Grassmann  number in the first line, almost always according to the Anukramaṇī, except when  the Anukramaṇī’s identification is plainly fanciful or wrong. 

On the next line is the  poet, again as given by the Anukramaṇī; the third line gives the number of verses in  the hymn, the meter(s), and strophic arrangement, if there is one. 
