+++
title = "07"

+++
The two verbs in ab, éhi and vidā́, seem to conform to the quasi-serial-verb construction (on which see A. Yates 2014 [UCLA IE Conference proceedings]), but hí makes trouble for this assessment and trouble in general for the interpretation.

Since hí triggers verb accentuation, the first imperative should be accented ehí (that is, ā + ihí), not éhi (that is, ā́+ ihi), as Old points out. He suggest that éhi is parenthetical. This is possible, though ad hoc, but this still leaves the function of hí in question. It could be interpreted in the mode of Brereton 2012, as marking the first of two imperatives (in this case vidā́, if éhi is parenthetical) as the basis of the action of the second. Such an interpretation is barely possible here; however, it seems excessively complex, since it requires banishing the truly first imperative éhi from structural consideration. My own ad hoc suggestion is that hí is over-represented in this part of the hymn (2a, 2d, 3c, 5c, 6c) and has been inserted here without its usual function and without triggering verbal accent. But this is of course not a satisfying solution, though it does allow the QSV analysis to be maintained.

For impv. vidā́against Pp subj. vidā́ḥ, see comm. ad IX.19.6. Here the parallel impvs. éhi and vāvṛṣasva reinforce an impv. interpr.

For the hapax céru- see EWA s.v. An association with √ci ‘perceive’ seems possible. Ge is uncertain, tr. ‘seeking’, but in n. suggests ‘traveling’ (to √car).

Morphologically vāvṛṣasva is somewhat problematic: Lub takes it as the medial perfect imperative to a subjunctive stem, Kü (474) more cautiously as a “thematically built” imperative. (It is worth pointing out that a properly built pf. mid.

impv. would come out as *vāvṛkṣva and would be multiply ambiguous.

Thematicization would be a good strategy under these circumstances. For further disc. of this set of “thematic” perfect imperatives see my 2018 “The Vedic Perfect Imperative and the Status of Modal Forms to Tense-Aspect Stems” (Fs. Lubotsky) on the perfect imperative.) As is generally noted, this imperative cannot be separated from the medial participle vāvṛṣāná-, which in two of its three occurrences also appears with úd. Following Neisser (1893, also Gotō 1987), Kü (474-77) assigns these forms to a root √2 varṣ ‘sich ermannen, sich (tatendurstig) erheben’ (associated with the present varṣāyáte, which however appears to be a denominative, not a root formation) separate from √1 varṣ ‘regnen’ and translates our passage rather like Ge’s “Ermannen dich…” I think this separation is unnecessary and also ignores the ā́ vṛṣasva in 3a. I find the liquid semantics of √vṛṣ ‘rain’ not only possible in all the úd √vṛṣ passages but productive of a striking image: ‘bubble/boil up’, expressing Indra’s irrespressible excitement and energy.

