+++
title = "+033"

+++
33 (653)  
Indra  
Medhyātithi Kāṇva  
19 verses: br̥hatī arranged in trcas 1–15, g ̥ āyatrī 16–18, anuṣṭubh 19  
For most of its length (through vs. 15), this is an unremarkable hymn to Indra,  with the usual invitations to him to attend our soma sacrifice along with praise of  his overwhelming strength and requests for his bounty. Indra’s “resolve” (-krátu) is  frequently mentioned (vss. 5, 6, 11, 13, 14).  
The last four verses (16–19), in a different meter, are also entirely different in  tone and intent and have given rise to multiple interpretations—especially the final  taunt (19d): “You, a brahmin, have become a woman.” Our view of this tantalizingly  opaque sequence is that it concerns the introduction of the Sacrificer’s Wife into the  performance of solemn ritual, an introduction celebrated in the nearby hymn VIII.31  (see remarks there). But, unlike the situation in VIII.31, the poet of VIII.33 displays  a conservative opposition to this ritual innovation, an innovation that he nonethe  
less ascribes to Indra’s leadership. In verse 16 the poet complains that an unnamed  ritualist no longer listens to the instructions of his fellow ritualists but only to Indra’s.  In verses 17 and 18 Indra speaks, and though he at first disparages women’s intellect  (vs. 17), he asserts that a sacrifice directed by a complementary pair (mithunā́, a word  often used explicitly of a sexual couple) is especially successful (with implicit contrast  to the older model without female participation)—while at the same time suggesting  that the husband should keep the upper hand (or upper chariot-pole: the common  metaphor of sacrifice as chariot is in play). The final verse is, in our view, spoken by  the jaundiced poet himself. In the first three pādas he mocks his ritually innovative  colleague by pretending to be a mother inculcating proper feminine behavior into  her little daughter. The language is both slangy and heavily diminutivized, and the  crucial noun in pāda c, the dual kaśaplakaú, is a hapax and unclear, though it may  well refer to female genitalia. He then announces his reasons for this mockery: the  innovative colleague, by favoring women’s ritual participation, risks being tainted by  the female presence and becoming a woman himself. (Such charges have frequently  been directed at men who favor women’s rights, at least since the time of John Stuart  Mill.) For more detailed discussion, see Jamison (forthcoming a and 2011).  
It is not entirely clear why this curious sequence is found tacked onto an other wise ordinary Indra hymn. It occupies the position often taken by a dānastuti, and  of course dānastutis often display a linguistic register similar to what is found here,  slangy and colloquial vocabulary, syntactically informal direct speech, and sexual  innuendo. It has been suggested that it is a sort of anti-dānastuti, a “satire” in the  technical sense. This is an appealing explanation for its position in the hymn, but  with the proviso that, at least in our interpretation, the target of the satire is clearly  not the poet’s patron (stingy or not), but a fellow ritualist.  