+++
title = "09"

+++
stāmú- is a hapax and there is no agreed upon etymology or interpretation.

Gr takes it as belonging to √stan ‘thunder’ and meaning something like ‘sighing’ (with no explanation of the semantic distance), and he is followed implicitly by Oberlies (II.210). KEWA also registers this idea, but in EWA it seems to have been abandoned, without anything to replace it. Ge, on the other hand, connects it to the root √stā ‘steal’, a suggestion I find very appealing. However, his further interpretation does not seem compelling: “und verstohlen hat (der Sänger) geklagt.” The structure of the hemistich, with two clauses joined by utá, each with a verb of noisemaking, whose subject in the first clause is an animal, suggests that an animal should be the subject of the second as well. I therefore suggest that stāmú- means ‘thieving’ and it is a well-known characteristic of some animal or other. I suggest ‘monkey’: monkeys are of course well known for thievery and Vṛṣākapi, Indra’s monkey pal in X.86, steals “the goodies of the Arya” (X.86.1). Monkeys are also know for their sharp cries. The presence of vṛ́ṣā (recalling Vṛṣākapi) in pāda a may support this idea, but of course all of this is very tentative, and in particular I have no explanation for why configuring his praise as a screeching monkey would please Indra (unless, again, to remind him of his friend Vṛṣākapi). An alternative animal possibility is the magpie, which has a reputation at least in the West as a thief (cf. Rossini’s opera “The Thieving Magpie” [La gazza ladra]), although the internet tells me that this reputation is undeserved. There are species of magpies in northern India and they do make sharp cries.

While it is impossible to be certain about the meaning and etymology of the hapax, as often with hapaxes and other rare words it is possible to suggest reasons why it appears in just this passage. Its position in its pāda is identical to that of stómo in the preceding pāda, and it echoes that word phonologically. In fact, the phonological play is quite subtle: underlyingly stoma = s t a u m a, and stāmu = s t a a m u, with the vowels around the m simply reversed.

The old idea that stāmú- is cognate to Grk. στωμυλός ‘talkative, loquacious’ was revived with considerable discussion by Ch. de Lamberterie (Les adjectifs grecs en -υς, 1990: 704-14 [esp. 704-5]) and recently considered anew and more or less dismissed as impossible to demonstrate by Brent Vine (“Greek στωμυλός ‘chatty’,” Indo-European Linguistics 7 [2019]). Although the coincidence of form and possible semantics is suggestive, I think it unlikely that an entirely isolated stāmú- (no root, no related nominal forms) would have been preserved in this sense from hoary antiquity, and although it might have inhabited a lower register and therefore generally not surface in “high” Vedic, I know of no possible MIA correspondents.

Furthermore, the anagramatic word play noted above makes it more likely that the word is semi-artificial, though based on attested material -- hence my favoring of the √stā ‘steal’ connection.

The return of the singer (jaritár-) in the last two verses of this hymn (9c, 10c) forms a faint ring with his appearance in 2b. 22