+++
title = "03"

+++
The 2nd member of the cmpd vasarhā́is taken by Gr and Re as -hán-, hence ‘striking at dawn’, but a connection with √hā ‘change position, move’ makes more sense (so Ge [/WG], tentatively Scar 700). Wind does regularly rise at dawn, but it is hard to conceive that it smites then. This probably requires us to take the underlying form as -hā́s, contra the Pp. The 1st member vasar- is only attested here, as a variant to the (likewise secondary) locatival uṣar. See Lundquist 2014 (25th UCLA IE Conf., Proceedings). The somewhat better attested vanar- ‘in the wood’, also found as 1st cmpd member, may have provided the model for the shape of vasar-.

Ge (/WG) construe apā́m with vṛ́ṣanvān as “der Fuhrmann [coachman, teamster] der Gewässer,” while I follow Re in tentatively supplying ‘child’ with gen. apā́m on the basis of the next verse, which contains nápātam apā́m. Note that elsewhere in the hymn (12b / 13a) an incomplete expression (dáśatayasya) is repaired by the fuller form (dáśatayasya dhāséḥ). I don’t see how ‘possessing bulls’ would develop to ‘coachman’. In any case, neither of the alternatives makes much sense as a designation of the wind; I do not know why he would be a coachman of the waters, but I also don’t understand why he’d be the child of the waters -- perhaps because of the association of wind with rain or because wind blowing over open water is very perceptible? (For another interpr., see Keydana, Inf., 315 n. 126 “der Besitzer der Wasserhengste [water-stallions],” which seems to split the difference between the ‘bull[s]/male[s]’ of the nom. and the fem. waters in a way not exactly sanctioned by grammar.) The curious dual dvandva indrāparvatā ‘Indra and Mountain’ is found 3x in the RV (I.132.6, III.53.1 as well as here), always in the voc. I interpret the ‘mountain’ as a reference to Indra’s vájra-. For other passages with the vájra- as ‘mountain’, see VI.22.6 and VII.104.19, as well as Re, EVP XVI.117 (ad VII.104.19).

