+++
title = "04"

+++
The first hemistich is structured like vs. 2, with a nom. subject of a purpose infinitive.

The root √śvit is a Dawn word (see I.92.12, 113.15, 124.11, the last in a nearby Kakṣīvant hymn); I wonder if śvetanā́- is feminine because it's evoking Dawn as the brightener.

Despite their similarity, with most tr. I take pā́ntam in 1a and pā́ntā here as belonging to separate stems, the first to pā́nta- ‘drink’, the second to the act. part. to the root aor. of √pā ‘drink’ (see disc. above ad v. 1). Immediately preceding vyántā can be the clue to its participial identity; for the sequence see I.153.4 (of Mitra and Varuṇa) vītám pātám páyasā … The second hemistich with prá vaḥ … kṛṇudhvam echoes 1ab prá vaḥ … bharadhvam, though in vs. 1 the verb is further distanced from the clause opening.

rāspiná- is a hopeless hapax, surely related to the likewise hopeless hapax rāspirá- in V.43.14, a passage that also contains a mother (mātúṣ padé) and āyóḥ, though not in the same configuration or meaning as here. Ge (/WG) wisely fail to tr.

Re: ‘fougueux’ (fiery, ardent), or, in his notes, ‘bouillant’ (boiling), though without serious argumentation. (For other possibilities see KEWA s.v.; AiG III.215.) Although it is foolhardy even to sketch derivational possibilites, I will toss out several, with no conviction. My tentative tr. ‘abundant’(?) depends on a possible deformation of reasonably well-attested virapśín- ‘id.’ (beside virapśá- ‘abundance’) (derived in turn from vīra-p(a)śu-, in a well-known and generally accepted etym.).

The initial ví-, perceived as a preverb, could be lopped off, and the unusual internal cluster -pś- metathesized and normalized to -sp-, whose order of segments and sibilant type are both more phonologically natural. The apparent vṛddhi might be like that of mā́hina- though they are differently accented. To account for rāspirá- we must assume that rāspiná- was analyzed as containing a -ná-suffix, for which -ráwas substituted for no discernible reason. Another even less good possibility, which partly goes back to Bollensen (ZDMG 22; see KEWA s.v., AiG III.215), starts from the fact that in context both rāspiná- and rāspirá- could use an extra syllable. The first member could be analyzed as a y-less genitive *rāás to rayí- / rāy- ‘wealth’, compounded with a form of √pi ‘swell’. (Note that rāyás regularly shows -s sandhi in syntagms before p: esp. rāyás póṣam, but cf. also rāyás pūrdhi.) However, our current understanding of the historical morphology of the ‘wealth’ word makes it well-nigh impossible to get such a -y-less form (since rāyás < *raHi-̯as) without a series of arbitrarily constructed analogies. Thus, the second possibility is essentially ruled out, and, insofar as I think it’s worth even thinking about an etymology here, I favor the deformation from virapśín-.

I do not know what role Āyu is playing here, as is often the case with this figure.

