+++
title = "06"

+++
This last verse before the dānastuti is free of the manifold difficulties that clot the first five verses of the hymn, but it is not devoid of Kakṣīvant’s poetic flourishes. Note first the play on √śru ‘hear’, which reaches a climax in pāda c: śrótu naḥ śróturatiḥ suśrotuḥ. What is particularly clever here is that though the pāda contains three forms śrótu, the first is completely different from the second two: it is the 3rd sg. act. root aor. impv., while the other two belong to the nominal stem śrótuand are 1st and 2nd compound members respectively. The pāda has only 10 syllables, with a likely rest after śrótu naḥ, which would call attention to the phonological identity / morphological difference.

The phrase viśvátaḥ sīm occurs 5x in the RV; I have discussed this formula at length elsewhere (“Rigvedic viśvátaḥ sīm, or why syntax needs poetics”, Mír Curad, Fs. C. Watkins [edd. J. Jasanoff, H.C. Melchert, and L. Oliver], 1998, pp. 291-300).

The two occurrences in Kakṣīvant’s oeuvre (I.116.20 and here) ring changes on the basic formula in his usual deft and unexpected ways. I will not reproduce the entire discussion, but summarize the main points. Four of the five passages (all but this one) concern the theme “surrounding,” marked by pári + VERB. In three of these (all but the two Kakṣīvant examples) the object is the two worlds / heaven and earth. In  I.20 it is the subject (the Aśvins), not the object, that is dual. In other words, Kakṣīvant has transformed the underlying formula by transferring the abstract grammatical category DUAL from one of the arguments of the verb to the other.

This analysis of I.116.20 is necessary to understand the more attenuated -- and more radical -- instantiation of the formula found in our verse here. As in I.116.20 the DUAL that is inherent in the formula surfaces on the subject, here Mitra and Varuṇa, but the “surrounding” motif is not present, except in viśvátaḥ ‘on all sides’ itself, which seems to have no semantic connection with the rest of its clause. Why is it here? Because it is crossed with a different formula through surface phonological similarity. Consider the word sádane in the same pāda, which has connections with another RVic formula. The phrase “in the seat of Vivasvant” occurs five times in the RV (I.53.1, III.34.7, III.51.3, X.12.7, X.75.1), twice as pāda-final sádane vivásvataḥ# (I.53.1, X.75.1). This provides an almost perfect phonological scrambling of our pāda ending.(In fact, according to Oldenberg [Noten, ad loc.], Ludwig suggested emending viśvátaḥ to vivasvataḥ [no accent given].) sádane vivásvataḥ# sádane viśvátaḥ sīm# Thus our phrase may have been employed in order to evoke the other formula, which is a kenning for “der Opferplatz," so Geldner ad I.53.1. Thus Kakṣīvant deftly marries the grammatical deep structure (the dual) of the viśvátaḥ sīm formula with the surface phonology of sádane vivásvataḥ in a way that allows the semantics of both to be alluded to. (Perhaps an appreciation of the formulaic manipulations involved here would have led Bloomfield (RR) to reconsider his assessment of this verse with its “hysterical repetition of the root śru” as “secondary clap-trap.”) I do not understand why the Sindhu is esp. gifted with hearing.

