+++
title = "12"

+++
My interpr. differs from most (though it is closest to Old’s). There are two major reasons for the different interpr. in pāda a: 1) most take dhāma as part of the rel. cl., but this is impossible because the verb is unaccented; 2) most take śárdham as a reference to the Marut troop. This is, of course, its standard use, but in this hymn it should first be interpreted in conjunction with śárdhastara- ‘more forceful’ in 10b, where it qualifies an unnamed patron. Here we want to establish our patron (sūrí-) as such a force. In my interpr. the rel. cl. is a nominal cl. consisting only of yásya sūréḥ, in which *vayám (or *smás[i]) can be supplied (from the 1st pl. inherent in dhāma), as an expression of possession: “of which patron (we) [are],” i.e., “who is (our) patron.” Cf. the type VIII.92.32 tvám asmā́kaṃ táva smasi “you are ours; we are yours.” The speakers in b are the poet(s) and priest(s). The gen. dáśastayasya ‘tenfold’ must be interpreted in light of the fuller expression dáśastayasya dhāséḥ in 13a “tenfold gush,” probably a kenning for soma, though there is no agreement on its sense. The fact that the fuller expression serves as a complement of the verb mándāmahe, a standard soma verb, in 13a supports this identification. The ‘tenfold’ characterization is not clear; Old plausibly suggests that it refers to the number of servings to be divided among that number of priests.

Ge (/WG) and possibly Re take cd as a resumption of the direct speech of pāda a. This is not impossible, but the 3rd persons of c and d have no clear referents in a.

I take dyumnā́ni in c as a fronted object of sanvantu in d, more or less following Old. This technically makes yéṣu … rārán appear to be an embedded rel.

cl., which I’m afraid I will just have to live with.

As indicated in the comm. to vs. 5, I take vasútāti- here as a reference to the collectivity of good ones, namely gods. I then take the pl. víśve opening the next pāda as referring also to the gods. In this Viśve Devāḥ hymn, the poet cleverly makes reference to them here in this off-kilter expression, with devā́ḥ suppressed and anticipated by the sg. vasútāti-. (The full expression is found in 3d.) My only reservation about this interpr. is that in a dānastuti it should be mortals who are doing the winning, and certainly the phrase prabhṛthéśu vā́jam “the victory prize in the forays” fits a mortal context better. I might then modify my tr. to remove the bracketed “[=gods]” and leave the identity of the subject open. It may in fact be that the two objects dyumnā́ni and vā́jam will be won by gods and mortals respectively, and víśve refers to both, hence “let all (the gods) win the brilliant things in which the assemblage of good ones takes pleasure, and let all (the mortals) win the victory prize at the forays.”

