+++
title = "13"

+++
13. (Viz.) intercourse with females who must not be approached (agamyā, e.g.) cohabitation with the female friend of a female Guru, with the female friend of a male Guru, with an Apapātra woman, and a female outcast, following the profession of medicine, sacrificing for many, living by (performances on) the stage, following the profession of a teacher of dancing, singing and acting, tending cows and buffalos, and similar (low occupations, as well as) fornication. [^9] 


[^9]:  Gautama XXI, is. In explanation of the term agamyā, a female who must not be approached,' Govinda quotes Nārada XII, 73-74, and he takes the four classes of females, who are specially mentioned, not as examples illustrating the term agamyā, but as not included in and additional to the latter. Physicians and the other professional men enumerated are usually not mentioned among the upapātakins, but occur in the lists of those whose gifts must not be accepted, and of those who defile the, company at a funeral dinner, ej. Vasiṣṭha III, 3; XIV, 2, 3, 11. The expression 'sacrificing for many' (grāmayājanam) appears to be a description of the so-called 'Yajamāna Vṛtti, by which the modern Bhaṭṭagīs, or priests who officiate for hire, subsist. In explanation of the term nāṭyācāryatā, 'following the profession of teaching dancing, music, and acting,' Govinda says that 'instruction in the works of Bharata, Viśākhila, and others' is intended. Baudhāyana no doubt intends to forbid the instruction of professional dancers and actors in actual works on their art, such as the nāṭya-sūtras mentioned by Pāṇini.
