+++
title = "04"

+++
As Re points out, jinā́ti must belong to √jyā, so jī́yate, which is ambig. between √ji and √jyā, surely belongs to the latter as well. The tr. should be slightly emended to “who overpowers but is not overpowered.” The standard interpr. of the syntactic structure of the passage (Ge, Re, Ober RdR II.168, as well as the publ. tr.) takes pādas a and b as all part of the rel. cl. introduced by initial yáḥ, with c as the main cl. and Soma as the subject both of ab and of c. This involves a shift in person, from 3rd (ab jinā́ti … jī́yate … hánti) to 2nd (c pavasva). Of course such shifts are commonplace in the RV, and in this case the sá introducing c is used by most tr. as a pivot (“as such”). However, the presence of sá is fully explained by its regular use with 2nd sg. impvs. (see my “sá figé” article) and need have nothing to do with the shift of person. I do think the standard interpr. of the vs. is probably right (even without the sá pivot), but I would point out that it’s not the only syntactically possible analysis: the rel. cl.

could encompass only pāda a, with b as the main cl. The accent on the verb in b, hánti, would be accounted for by its initial position in the pāda. The vs. could then be rendered “Who overpowers and is not overpowered, he smashes his rival on just confronting him.

Purify yourself …” The referent of the 3rd ps. in ab could still be Soma, but it could instead be the person for whom Soma purifies himself, with the happy results on the battlefield that arise from possessing the purified soma.