+++
title = "03"

+++
Ge takes anyé with marútaḥ: “Nicht glänzen andere Marut so sehr wie diese …” But both the position of yáthā, which in its simile-marking role should follow the first term of the simile, and common sense (who would the other Maruts be?) strongly suggest that anyé refers to a group separate from the Maruts. By my rules anyé should be definite, and I think Re is correct in supplying ‘gods’. This would make sense in a ritual context: the other divine visitors at the ritual (save for Indra) are pretty drab compared with the Maruts.

Since the other occurrence of viśva-píś- modifies Dawn’s cart (VII.75.6), as Old points out a passive sense ‘all-adorned’ is more likely than ‘all-adorning’. So Scar (319) ‘allgeschmückt’.

The middle part. piśāná- is an isolated form: the only apparent attestation of a root aor. to this root, beside the thematized nasal pres. piṃśá- and the pf. pipeśa, etc.

(However, piśā́in VII.18.2 is taken by most as an impv. to a thematic aorist [see comm. ad loc.], which could easily have replaced the opaque root aor. impv. *pīḍhí, so the root does have a fragmentary aor. system.) That it is a participle at all has been called into question by John Lowe, who suggests it may be a Caland adj. instead (“Caland adjectives …” 2012: 92-93; see also Participles in Rigvedic Sanskrit 2015: 133). Although I don’t see any advantage in assigning it to a category of dubious existence (Caland adj. in -āná-), its isolation does make it difficult to interpr. As a medial form, it might be expected to match the medial perfect usage and be pass.

(e.g., VI.49.3) or reflexive (V.60.4) vel sim. However, it is generally taken as transitive, as in the publ. tr., with the transitive value ascribed to the preverb ā́(see Gr) opening c. Lowe (Part. 133) disputes this interpr., declaring the supposed tmesis between preverb and participle here “a unique type of discontinuity.” He prefers to 89 construe ā́with the finite verb añjate in d and take piśānā́ḥ as an intransitive adj.; ródasī is then an obj. of añjate along with samānám añjí and not construed with piśānā́ḥ: “All adorned and decorated, they anoint / the two worlds (with) the same anointing for beauty.” As far as I can find, however, there are no occurrences of √añj with double acc. When the object anointed is in the acc., the ointment is in the instr., so his suggested interpr. would be syntactically unique in a different way. I therefore prefer to construe both ā́and ródasī with piśānā́ḥ. However, the construction need not be transitive “adorning the two-world halves,” as is the standard interpr. and publ.

tr. Old suggests several other possible relations (see also Re’s n.), including that ródasī might be an internal / Inhalts-type of acc., expressing the ornament, hence “wearing the two world-halves as adornment.” Old ultimately rejects this interpr., as does the publ. tr., but it remains a possibility, one that would better reflect the medial form.

