+++
title = "05"

+++
This vs. strikes me as very nearly doggerel. Although RVic poets enjoy indulging in etymological figures - and are skilled at deploying them - those in pādas b and c seem to display neither imagination nor skill: b sáṃ sravanti saṃsravā́ḥ (the pāda missing a syllable, to make it worse), c … rasíno rásāḥ.

Moreover, after the solemn use of satyá- ‘reality, what is real’ in vss. 2 and 4, the cmpd satyámugra- in pāda a seems to have downgraded the word to an adverb (so AiG II.1.67, 237) in a word with the banal sense ‘really strong’ (AiG II.1.37 ‘wahrhaft kräftig’, 237 ‘wahrhaft gewaltig’; sim. Ge/Re) and that awkwardly uses the neut. adverbial acc. as first member (so AiG II.1.67), to provide a makeshift hiatusbreaker. And there is also an apparent lapse in grammatical agreement, with sg.

punānáḥ in d modifying the plural subjects of bc, even though pl. punānā́(ḥ) would have been metrically identical. Ge and Re rescue the poet from this lapse in different ways: Ge construes d with the refrain (as he does in other vss: 2, 4, 6), but given that the refrain serves not only for this hymn but for the previous and following hymns and is generally independent syntactically, this seems unlikely. Re implicitly takes the subj. of d from the genitive phrases of pādas a and c.

In c rasínaḥ could be either gen. sg. or nom. pl., and either would fit. Gr and the standard tr. (including mine) take it as gen. sg., presumably because the other two occurrences of rasínaḥ (VIII.1.26, 3.1) are. A gen. also makes the phrase less pleonastic: “the juices of the juicy one” is marginally better than “the juicy juices.”
