+++
title = "01"

+++
The repetition of the same word, prásitim, in a and c without any obvious difference in usage or sense (Re says they are “légèrement” distinct) seems uncharacteristically clumsy for a Vedic poet, which in turn makes it tempting to identify something that does distinguish them. Although he does not tr. them differently (nor does anyone else), Ge suggests in his n. 1a that prásiti- represents the coalescence of two words, one derived from √sā, si ‘bind’ (‘Fanggarn’, a hunting net) and the other ‘Laut, Ansturm’, related to prásita- (IV.27.4, X.77.5) ‘shot forth’.

The latter provides the usual meaning of prásiti- ‘onslaught’ vel sim., and the word is now usually considered to belong to PIE *seh1(i)̯ ‘loslassen’ (cf. LIV2 1.*seh1(i)̯ n. 2; EWA s.v.) and to be related to sā́yaka- ‘missile’. For disc. of some of the occurrences of prásiti- see Hoffmann (Aufs. 417-18 [=MSS 10, 1957]); curiously Hoffmann only notes the second occurrence of the word in this vs., not the first. Ge’s suggestion that the word has two sources opens the possibility of accounting for the poet’s seemingly awkward repetition here, if in fact he’s using two different words prásiti- (or, to him, possibly two different sense of one word; for this cf. sumatí in 6a, 8a below). That the prásiti- in pāda a is ‘broad’ (pṛthvī-), while the ánu ‘along’ in c suggests that it is long and thin there might be a clue. I tentatively suggest that the first occurrence refers to a deployed hunting net -- broad so as to trap as many animals as possible (or to make it difficult for any animal to avoid it) and comparable to an advancing sheet or wall of flame. The second one would then have the usual sense of ‘onslaught, forward dash’. Unfortunately altering the tr. to allows for these two separate meanings would lose the identity of the forms in this suggested pun.

Pace Ge, íbha- means ‘entourage, retinue’ not ‘elephant’ in Vedic, a meaning reinforced by the Middle Indic derivatives. See EWA s.v. On drūṇāṇá- as belonging to √drū ‘cut down, mow’ see Hoffmann (Aufs. 414-21) and EWA s.v. DRAVI .

Pāda c seems to go more naturally with b than with d, as most take it.

