+++
title = "08"

+++
The word sumatí-, found in 6a, is repeated here. There it clearly referred to the benevolence or good will of Agni, which the successful priest/poet comes to know. Here I think it has double meaning. On the one hand, it still refers to Agni’s good will, which the poet praises, but it also refers to the good thought, i.e., the poem, that the poet has produced for Agni. This double reading is enabled not only by the usual double meaning of sumatí- and the grammatical ambiguity of the enclitic te (gen. in the first interpr., dat. in the 2nd), but also by the double meaning of √ṛc ‘chant, recite’, which can take as object either the topic/goal of the praise (e.g., V.29.1 árcanti tvā marútaḥ … “The Maruts chant to/praise you”) or the verbal contents of the recitation (V.30.6 tubhyéd eté marútaḥ … árcanti arkám “Just for/to you do these Maruts chant the chant”).

ghóṣi (also VI.5.6) is a controversial form. The grammars/lexica generally take it as a 3rd sg. passive aor. to √ghuṣ ‘hear’; it would take a putative sumatíḥ as subj. and mean “(the good thought) was/is/will be heard” (Old SBE “it resounded here,” sim. WG). The other instance (in VI.5.6) is taken as a neut. adj. ‘laut ertönend’ by Gr, also Old (Noten, contra SBE). Most tr., however, render it as a 2nd sg. act.

impv. “hear!” Though a passive aor. would also be possible in VI.5.6 (ghóṣi mánma “the thought is heard”) and though the pass. aor. interpr. is morphologically impeccable, I think the 2nd sg. act. impv. is the correct interpr., though the morphology is a little troubled. It appears to be a -si imperative, though not built as usual (at least in my view) to an s-aor. subjunctive, but rather to, or alongside, the 1st class thematic pres. ghóṣati; this analysis also requires that a putative *ghoṣ-ṣi has simplified the double sibilant. One of the arguments in favor of a 2nd sg. impv. in VI.6.5 is the relative density of -si impvs. in that context, with two (śróṣi, párṣi) in the preceding hymn (VI.4.7, 8) in that tightly knit Agni cycle. The interpr. of the form as a -si impv. is accepted and argued for by Gotō (1st cl., 131-32 and n. 160, with lit.); it is curious that in WG[otō] this interpr. has been abandoned without comment. The form is disc., in typically indecisive fashion, by Baum (Impv., 46 and 27 [where he seems to accept the -si impv. analysis]).

The Vāvātā or ‘Favorite’ wife in later śrauta ritual is one of the wives of the king who has a series of set functions in the various royal rituals (see, e.g., my Sacrificed Wife passim). The presence of this figure, or of her prototype, may suggest that the lexeme sám √jṛ, found also in the preceding hymn (IV.3.15), may have deeper resonance than simply ‘be welcome, bring harmony’, perhaps something like ‘be in tune with (s.o.)’, referring to perfect harmonious agreement between two people, esp. two people in love. In both IV.3.15 and our passage the feminine song (gír-) / chant (śastí-) would put herself in tune with the masc. god, as a Favorite wife would to her kingly husband. Note that in IV.3.15 the chant is modified by devávātā ‘favored by the gods’, with the same -vātā as here (save for accent). In fact, as Ge points out (for different purposes) our te vāvā́tā is phonologically very close to IV.3.15 devávātā. It might also be that jara(tām) would be reminiscent of jārá- ‘lover’, to add to the erotic mood.

As Re’s tr. makes clear (“Nous souhaitons t’orner, (dans l’espoir d’obtenir) de bons chevaux, de bons chars”), the two adj. sváśvāḥ … suráthāḥ are most likely proleptic: we want to tend the ritual fire in order to get possession of good horses and chariots. This contrasts with the use of sváśva- in 10a.

