+++
title = "02"

+++
In c I tr. ví paṇī́m̐r aśāyaḥ as “you dispersed the niggards.” I now think this probably is wrong, in that I cannot find a semantic pathway there from ví √(n)aś ‘reach through’, etc. The closest passage to ours that contains this multivalent lexeme is X.29.8 vy ā̀naḷ índraḥ pṛ̥́tanāḥ svójāḥ “The very powerful Indra has penetrated the battling hosts.,” and I would alter the publ. tr. to “you penetrated through the niggards …” The only thing that gives me pause is the very similar passage adduced by Ge, VII.19.9 … ví paṇī́ṃr ádāsan#, which I tr. “They … have distanced the niggards through ritual service” (for which see comm. ad loc.).

As the above disc. suggests, I take aśāya- as belonging to the root √(n)aś, but the morphology is not straightforward. With Whitney’s tentative suggestion (Skt. Gr.

§1066b), I assume it belongs with the class of -āyá-presents to zero-grade roots that are generally related to 9th class presents (e.g., gṛbhṇā́ti, gṛbhāyá-) and ultimately reflect (in my opinion, flg. Saussure) -yá-deverbatives built to the weak stem of the 9th class pres. (-nH-yá-). Unfortunately, of course, √(n)aś had no final laryngeal and no 9th class pres., though it does have a well-attested 5th class aśnóti. I must assume secondary spread of the -āyá-suffix to this root (see also naśāya- X.40.6, also apparently to √naś), perhaps facilitated by the nasal-suffixed present. MLW suggests here a clever alternative, that aśāyaḥ actually represents a haplologized form of the causative of √śi ‘lie’, śāyáyati, and with ví means ‘you caused the niggards to lie in pieces / scattered about’. Although Wh (Rts) lists this causative as beginning only in the sūtras, it may well appear once in the AV (Ś IV.18.4); see my -áya-formations, pp. 134-35. Although MLW’s suggestion is appealing on its own -- and the haplology would not be problematic (see the -yaya- haplology posited above in VI.12.4) -- the other forms of the stem aśāya- (I.34.7, X.43.6, 92.1) are not easily amenable to a ‘lie’ interpr. but fit ‘reach’ quite well; aśāyata in VIII.73.9, usually grouped with these forms, I take to √śā ‘hone, sharpen’ (see comm. ad loc.).

