+++
title = "5 The New and Full Moon Sacrifices"

+++
## 01
### a
Viśvarupa, son of Tvastr, was the domestic priest of the gods, and the sister's son of the Asuras. He had three heads, one which drank Soma, one Sura, and one which ate food. He promised openly the share to the gods, secretly to the Asuras. Men promise openly the share to every one; if they promise any one secretly, his share is indeed promised. Therefore Indra was afraid (thinking), 'Such an one is diverting the sovereignty (from me).' He took his bolt and smote off his heads. (The head) which drank Soma [1] became a hazelcock; (the head) which drank Sura a sparrow; (the head) which ate food a partridge. He seized with his hand the guilt of slaying him, and bore it for a year. Creatures called out upon him, 'Thou art a Brahman slayer.' He appealed to the earth, 'Take a third part of my guilt.' She said, 'Let me choose a boon. I deem that I shall be overcome through digging. Let me not be overcome by that.' He replied, 'Before [2] a year is out it will grow up for thee.' Therefore before the year is out the dug-out portion of earth grows up again, for that was what she chose as a boon. She took a third of his guilt. That became a natural fissure; therefore one who has
  
piled up a fire-altar and whose deity is faith should not choose a natural fissure, for that is the colour of guilt. He appealed to the trees, 'Take a third part of my guilt.' They said, 'Let us choose a boon. We deem that we shall be overcome through pruning [3]. Let us not be overcome by that.' He replied, 'From pruning shall more (shoots) spring up for you.' Therefore from the pruning of trees more (shoots) spring up, for that was what they chose as a boon. They took a third part of his guilt, it became sap; therefore one should not partake of sap, for it is the colour of guilt. Or rather of the sap which is red or which comes from the pruning one should not partake [4], but of other sap at will. He appealed to a concourse of women, 'Take the third of my guilt.' They said, 'Let us choose a boon; let us obtain offspring from after the menses; let us enjoy intercourse at will up to birth.' Therefore women obtain offspring from after the menses, and enjoy intercourse at will up to birth, for that was what they chose as a boon. They took a third of his guilt, it became (a woman) with stained garments; therefore one should not converse with (a woman) with stained garments [5], one should not sit with her, nor eat her food, for she keeps emitting the colour of guilt. Or rather they say, 'Woman's food is unguent, and there fore one should not accept (from her) unguent, but anything else (can be accepted) at will.' The son born of intercourse with (a woman) with stained garments is accursed; (the son born) of intercourse in the forest is a thief; (the son born) of intercourse with a (woman) who turns away is shamefaced and retiring; (the son born) of intercourse with a woman bathing is fated to drown; (the son born) of one who [6] anoints herself has a skin disease; (the son born) of one who combs her hair is bald and feeble; (the son born) of one who anoints (her eyes) is blind; (the son born) of one who cleans her teeth has dirty teeth; (the son born) of one who cuts her nails has bad nails; (the son born) of one who spins is a eunuch; (the son born) of one who weaves ropes is unrestrained; (the son born) of one who drinks from a leaf is drunken; (the son born) of one who drinks from a mutilated (vessel) is mutilated. For three nights he should keep a vow and should drink from his hand or from a perfect vessel, to guard his offspring.
## 02
Tvastr, his son being slain, offered Soma excluding Indra. Indra desired an invitation to the rite, but he did not invite him; (saying) 'Thou hast slain my son.' He made a disturbance of the sacrifice, and forcibly drank the Soma. The remains of it Tvastr cast upon the Ahavaniya (fire), (saying), 'Hail! wax great, Indra's foe.' In that he cast it (avartayat), Vrtra is Vrtra; in that he said, 'Hail! wax great, Indra's foe', therefore [1] Indra became his foe. He sprang into life and came into union with Agni and Soma. He grew on all sides an arrow(shot), he enveloped these worlds. Because he enveloped these worlds, therefore is Vrtra, Vrtra. Indra feared him. He ran up to Prajapati, (saying), 'A foe has sprung up for me.' He dipped his bolt and gave it to him, (saying), 'Slay with it.' He went against (him) with it. Agni and Soma said, 'Hurl it not [2]; we are within.' 'Ye are mine', he replied, 'come to me.' They asked for a share; he gave them at the full moon this offering for Agni and Soma on eleven potsherds. They said, 'We are bitten all round, and cannot come.' Indra produced from himself cold and fever heat; that was the origin of cold and fever heat. Him who knows thus the origin of cold and fever heat [3] neither cold nor fever heat slays. By them he led him on, and as he gaped Agni and Soma went forth from him. Then expiration and inspiration deserted him; skill is expiration, intelligence is inspiration; therefore one who gapes should say, 'Skill and intelligence (remain) in me'; verily he places expiration and inspiration in himself and lives all his days. He, having called off the gods from. Vrtra offered at the full moon the oblation to the Vrtra slayer; they slay him at the full moon [4], but make him swell at the new moon; therefore verses are uttered at the full moon referring to the slaying of Vrtra, at the new moon referring to his increase. Having performed the oblation to the Vrtra slayer, he took his bolt and again went against (him). Sky and earth said, 'Hurl it not; he rests in us two.' They said, 'Let us choose a boon.' 'May I be adorned with the Naksatras', said yonder (sky); I May I be adorned with variegated things', said this (earth). Therefore yonder (sky) is adorned with the Naksatras, this (earth) with variegated things. He who knows thus the boon of sky and earth [5] attains a boon. Indra thus impelled by these two slew Vrtra. The gods having slain Vrtra said to Agni and Soma, 'Bear the offering for us.' They said, 'We two have lost our brilliance, our brilliance is in Vrtra.' They said, 'Who is there to go for it?' 'The cow', they said, 'The cow is the friend of all.' She said [6], 'Let me choose a boon; ye shall feed off both when they are in me.' The cow brought the (brilliance); therefore they feed off both things that
  
are in the cow; ghee indeed is the brilliance of Agni, milk the brilliance of Soma. He who knows thus the brilliance of Agni and Soma becomes brilliant. The theologians say, 'What is the deity of the full moon (rite)?' He should reply, 'Prajapati; by means of it he established his eldest son, Indra.' Therefore they establish their eldest sons with wealth.
## 03
When Indra had slain Vrtra, his enemies threatened him. He saw this enemy-dispelling (oblation) to be offered subsequently at the full moon. He offered it, and with it drove away his enemies. In that the enemy-dispelling (oblation) is to be offered subsequently at the full moon, the sacrificer by it drives away his enemies. Indra, having slain Vrtra, lost the gods and his power. He saw the (offering) to Agni on eight potsherds at the new moon, and the curds for Indra [1]. He offered it, and by it he won the gods and his power. In that at the new moon there is (an offering) to Agni on eight potsherds, and curds for Indra, the sacrificer wins by it the gods and power. When Indra had slain Vrtra, his power and strength went into the earth; then the plants and roots were born. He ran up to Prajapati, (saying), 'Now that I have slain Vrtra, my power and strength [2] have gone into the earth; then the plants and roots have been born.' Prajapati said to cattle, 'Collect it for him.' The cattle collected it from the plants in themselves; they milked it. In that they collected it, has the collected oblation (sammayya) its name; in that they milked it, has fresh milk its name (pratidhuk). 'They have collected it; they have milked it; but it rests not in me', he said. 'Make it ready for him' [3], he replied. They made it ready for him; they made power and strength rest in him; verily the ready (milk) has its name (śrta). 'They have collected it; they have milked it; they have made it ready; but it does not impel me', he said. 'Make it curds for him', he replied. They made it curds for him; that impelled (ahinot) him; verily curds (dadhi) has its name. The theologians say, 'One should offer curds first, for curds is made first' [4]. One should disregard that and offer ready (milk) first; verily one places power and strength in him and later impels him by curds; and he proceeds in order (of production). If he curdles it with Putika plants or with bark, that is fit for Soma; if with jujubes, that is for the Raksases; if with rice grains, for the All-gods; if with rennet, for men; if with curds, that has Indra. He curdles it with curds [5] that it may have Indra. He curdles the remains of the Agnihotra, for the continuity of the sacrifice. Indra having slain Vrtra went to a great distance, thinking, 'I have sinned.' The gods sought to start him. Prajapati said, I He who first finds him will have the first share.' The Pitrs found him; therefore an offering is made to the Pitrs on the day before. He approached the new moon night; the gods met him, (saying), 'Our treasure to-day at home [6] dwells', for Indra is the treasure of the gods, and that is why the new moon night has its name (ama-vasya), 'home dwelling'). The theologians say, What is the deity of the Samnayya?' 'The All-gods', he should reply, for so the All-gods won that as their share.' Or rather he should reply, 'Indra, for it was in healing Indra that they won it.'
## 04
The theologians say, 'He would indeed offer the new and full moon (sacrifices) who should offer them with Indra.' At the full moon there is the subsequent offering of the enemy-dispelling (oblation), and by it the full moon has Indra. There are curds for Indra at the new moon; verily the new moon has Indra. He who knowing thus offers,' the new and full moon sacrifices, offers them with Indra, and day after day it becomes better for him who has so sacrificed. What the gods did at the sacrifice, the Asuras did. The gods [1] saw this offering, one on eleven potsherds for Agni and Visnu, an oblation for Sarasvati, an oblation for Sarasvant; after performing the full moon (sacrifice) they offered this. Then the gods prospered, the Asuras were defeated. He who has enemies should offer this offering after performing the full moon (sacrifice). With the full moon (sacrifice) he hurls the bolt at his enemy, with (the offering) to Agni and Visnu he appropriates the gods and the sacrifice of his enemy, his pairing cattle with (the offerings) to Sarasvati and Sarasvant. Whatever he has, all that [2] he appropriates. One should sacrifice at the full moon, if one has enemies, not at the new moon; having slain one's enemy one does not cause him to grow again. He who desires cattle should sacrifice with the Sakamprasthayiya. The man to whom they bring (any thing) in small measure is not himself pleased, and does not give to another. But he, to
  
whom they bring in large measure, is himself pleased, and gives to another. One should offer in full and large measure; Indra then being pleased delights him with offspring and cattle. He offers with a wooden vessel, for an earthenware one does not hold the offering. It is of Udumbara wood [3]; the Udumbara is strength, cattle are strength; verily by strength he wins for him strength and cattle. One should not sacrifice to, Mahendra, if one is not prosperous. The prosperous are three; a learned (Brahman), a village headman, and a warrior. Their deity is Mahendra. He who sacrifices beyond his own deity loses his own deity, and does not obtain another, and becomes worse. For a year one should sacrifice to Indra, for the vow extends not beyond the year; verily [4] his own deity, being sacrificed to, kindles him with prosperity and he becomes richer. After the year he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, lord of vows; verily for a year Agni, lord of vows, causes him to take up the vow who has slain his foe (vrtra). Thereafter he may sacrifice at will.
## 05
No one who is not a Soma sacrificer should offer the Samnayya. For the milk of him who is not a Soma sacrificer is imperfect, and if one who is not a Soma sacrificer offers the Samnayya he is a thief and does wrong, and (his milk) is poured forth in vain. A Soma sacrificer only should offer the Samnayya. Soma is milk, the Samnayya is milk; verily with milk he places milk in himself. The moon deprives him of offspring and cattle, and makes his enemy wax great on whose sacrifice when offered it rises in the east [1]. He should divide the rice grains into three parts; the mean size he should make into a cake on eight potsherds for Agni, the giver, the largest lie should give as a mess to Indra, the bestower, the smallest (he should give) as a mess in boiled (milk) to Visnu Çipivista. Agni thus generates offspring for him; Indra gives it in crease; Visnu is the sacrifice, and Çipi cattle; verily on the sacrifice and cattle he rests. He should not offer twice [2]. If he were to offer now with the first he would make a failure with the second; if with the second now, he would make a failure with the first; there is no offering at all and no sacrifice, for that cause a son is born shamefaced and retiring. One offering only should one make; a valiant son is born to him. One should disregard this and offer twice. With the first (offering) one grasps the mouth of the sacrifice, and sacrifices with the second. Verily one wins the gods with the first, power with the second; verily one conquers the world of the gods [3] with the first; the world of men with the second; he performs several forms of sacrifice. This offering is called 'the friendly'; for him there is in this world prosperity on whom the moon rises in the west after he hag sacrificed on that day. He who desires heaven should sacrifice with the Daksayana sacrifice. On the full moon he should offer the Samnayya; on the new moon he should sacrifice with clotted curds for Mitra and Varuna. On the full moon (the Soma) is pressed for the gods; during this half-month it is pressed forth for them, and a cow for Mitra and Varuna is to be slaughtered for them at the new moon. In that [4] he sacrifices on the day before, he makes the sacrificial enclosure. In that he drives away the calves, he metes out the seat and the oblation holder. In that he sacrifices, he produces with the gods the pressing day. He drinks for the half-month Soma in carouse with the gods. In that he sacrifices at the new moon with clotted curds for Mitra and Varuna, the cow which is slaughtered for the gods becomes his also. He mounts upon the gods in truth who mounts upon their sacrifice [5]. Just as a great man who has attained (fortune) desires (and does), so he does. If he misses the mark he becomes worse; if he does not, he remains the same. One who desires distinction should sacrifice with it, for this sacrifice has a razor edge, and swiftly he becomes holy or perishes. His vow is: he shall not speak untruth; be shall not eat meat; he shall not approach for all a woman; they shall not clean his raiment with cleansing stuff; for all these things the gods do not do.
## 06
The new and the full moon (sacrifices) are the chariot of the gods. He, who having offered the new and the full moon (sacrifices) Sacrifices with Soma, rests in the chosen resting-place of the gods which is conspicuous for its chariot (tracks). The new and the full moons are the limbs and joints of the year; he who knowing thus offers the new and the full moon (sacrifices) thus unites the limbs and joints of the year. The new and the full moon are the eyes of the year; he who knowing thus offers the new and the full moon (sacrifices) thus sees with them along the world of heaven [1]. The
  
which the gods fare. The new and the full moons are the bay steeds of the gods; he who knowing thus offers the new and the full moon (sacrifices) carries to the gods with their two bay steeds [2] the offering. The new and the full moon (sacrifices) are the mouth of the gods; he who knowing thus offers the new and the full moon (sacrifices) manifestly sacrifices in the mouth of the gods. He who offers the new and the full moon sacrifices possesses an oblation holder. He offers the Agnihotra morn and evening, he offers the new and the full moon (sacrifices); on every day (the Soma) of those who have oblation holders is pressed. By him who knowing thus offers the new and the full moon (sacrifices) regarding himself as possessiug an oblation holder, everything is given as on the strew. The gods [3] could not find the suitable day for the sacrifice. They purified the new and full moons; the new and the full moon (sacrifices) are these pure and sacrificial (days). He who knowing thus offers the new and the full moon (sacrifices) offers them as pure and sacrificial. One should not approach a woman on the new moon or the full moon night; if one were to do so, one would be impotent. The nights of the half-month were the wives of King Soma; of these be did not approach the new moon night and the full moon night [4]. They grasped him about, and illness seized him. 'Illness has seized the king'; that (saying) is the origin of the 'king's evil '. In that he became worse, that is (the origin) of the 'bad illness'; because he got it from his wives, that is (the origin) of the 'wife's disease' (Jayenya), him who knows thus the origin of these illnesses, these illnesses do not visit. He ran up to these two in reverence; they said, 'Let us choose a boon; let us be the appointers of portions for the gods [5]; from us let the gods be sacrificed to.' Therefore of the series of nights it is on the new and the full moon night that the gods are sacrificed to; for they are the appointers of portions for the gods. Men appoint portions to him who knows thus. Creatures slew hunger, man at once, the gods at the half-month, the Pitrs in a month, trees in a year. Therefore day by day men desire food, at the half-month the gods are sacrificed to, every month offering is made to the Pitrs, in a year trees produce fruit. He who knows thus slays the enemy, hunger.  
The Part of the Hotr at the New and Full Moon Sacrifices
## 07
The gods could not rest on the Rc or the Yajus. On the Saman only could they rest. He makes the noise 'Him'; verily he makes the Saman. He makes the noise 'Him'; where the gods rested, there he sets them in motion. He makes the noise 'Him'; this is the yoking of speech. He makes the noise 'Him'; thus the sacrificers produce offspring. He repeats the first (verse) thrice, the last thrice; verily he ties the end of the sacrifice [1] so that it may not slip. He repeats (it) continuously, for the continuity of the breaths and of food, and for the smiting away of the Raksases. The first he repeats is connected with the Rathantara (Saman), this world is connected with the Rathantara; verily he conquers this world. He divides it thrice; these worlds are three; verily he conquers these worlds. The last he repeats is connected with the Brhat (Saman); yonder world is connected with the Brhat; verily he conquers yonder world. 'Forward [2] your viands', he repeats, a verse which has not any indication (of its deity) and (therefore) is addressed to Prajapati. Prajapati is the sacrifice; verily he grasps the sacrifice as Prajapati. 'Forward your viands', he repeats; viands are food; verily he wins food. 'Forward your viands', he repeats; therefore seed is deposited in front. 'O Agni, come hither for the feast', he repeats; therefore offspring are born at the back. 'Forward your viands', he repeats [3]; 'viands' are the months, 'heavenwards' are the half-months, 'rich in the oblation' are the gods, 'full of butter' is the cow, 'he goes to the gods' (that is) the sacrifice, 'desirous of favour ' is the sacrificer. 'Thou art this, thou art this', (with these words) he wins the dear abode of the sacrifice. If he desire for a man, 'May he live all his days', he should repeat for him 'Forward your viands', and then continuously the next half-verse of 'Agni, come hither to the feast' [4]. Verily by expiration does he make steadfast his inspiration, and he lives all his days. He, who knows the elbow of the Samidhenis, puts his enemy in his elbow. He joins the half-verses; this is the elbow of the Samidhenis; he who knows thus puts his foe in his elbow. The Samidhenis were brought out by Rsi after Rsi; if they were not connected together, they would go away from the sacrificer's offspring
  
and cattle. He unites the half-verses; verily he connects them together, and being so connected and secured they yield him all his desires.
## 08
Without a Saman there is no sacrifice. 'O Agni, come hither for the feast', he says; this is the character of the Rathantara. 'Thee with the kindling-sticks, O Angiras', he says; this is the character of the Vamadevya. 'The great and powerful one, O Agni', he says. This is the character of the Brhat. In that he repeats this Trca, he makes the sacrifice have Samans. Agni was in yonder world, the sun in this; these worlds were disturbed [1]. The gods said, 'Let us change them about.' (Saying), 'O Agni, come hither for the feast', they placed Agni in this world, and (saying),'The great and powerful one, O Agni', they placed the sun in yonder world. Then indeed these worlds became calm. In that he repeats (it) thus, (it serves) for the calming of these worlds; these worlds become calm for him who knows thus. He repeats fifteen Samidhenis [2]. The nights of the half-month are fifteen; the year is made up of half-months. There are three hundred and sixty syllables in the Samidhenis; there are as many nights in the year; verily by syllables he obtains the year. Nrmedha and Paruchepa had a theological dispute (and said), 'Let us generate fire in the dry wood (to see) which of us two is the more of a theologian.' Nrmedha spoke; he generated smoke. Paruchepa spoke; he generated fire. 'O Rsi', he said, [3], 'seeing that our knowledge is equal, how didst thou generate fire and not I?' 'I know the character of the Samidhenis', he replied. The character of the Samidhenis is the quarter-verse which is repeated with the word 'ghee' in it. 'Thee with the kindling sticks, Angiras', he says; verily he generates light in the Samidhenis. They are feminine in that they are Rc (verses), they are feminine in that they are Gayatri (verses), they are feminine in that they are Samidhenis. He repeats a verse with the word 'Male' in it [4]. By it he gives them a husband, makes them possess Indra, and mates them. Agni was the messenger of the gods, Uśanas Kavya of the Asuras. They went to question Prajapati; he turned away (from Uśanas) (with the words). 'Agni as messenger we choose.' Then the gods prospered, the Asuras were defeated. The man for whom, knowing thus, he repeats, 'Agni as messenger we choose, prospers himself, his enemy is defeated. He repeats a verse with the word 'imperishable'; verily by it he causes his enemy to perish [5]. 'The flaming locked, him we adore', he says; that is purifying; verily with it he makes pure the sacrificer. 'Thou art lit, O Agni, worshipped', he says; verily he places around a barrier that may not be climbed. If he were to add anything further, it would be just as when (a libation) falls outside the barriers. There are three Agnis, the oblation bearer of the gods, the bearer of the offering of the Pitrs, the guardian of the Asuras. They repeat, 'Me will he choose, me' [6]. 'Choose ye the bearer of the oblation', he says; 'let him choose him who is of the gods. He chooses one of a Rsi's family; verily he departs not from the connexion, (and so it serves) for continuity. He chooses, beginning at the further end, in order of descent; therefore the Pitrs drink after men in order of descent, beginning at the further end.
## 09
'O Agni, thou art great', he says, for Agni is great. 'O Brahman', he says, for he is a Brahman. 'O Bharata',' he says, for he bears the sacrifice to the gods. 'Kindled by the gods', he says, for the gods kindled him. 'Kindled by Manu', he says, for Manu kindled him after the gods. 'Praised by the Rsis', he says, for the Rsis praised him. 'Rejoiced in by sages', he says [1], for learned people are sages. 'Celebrated by the poets', he says, for learned people are the poets. 'Quickened by the holy power (Brahman)', he says, for he is quickened by the holy power (Brahman). 'With ghee offering', he says, for ghee is his dearest offering. 'Leader of the sacrifices', he says, for he is the leader of the sacrifices. 'Charioteer of the rites', he says, for he is the chariot of the gods. 'The Hotr unsurpassed', he says, for no one surpasses him [2]. 'Surpassing, bearing the oblation', he says, for he surpasses all. 'The mouth dish, the ladle of the gods', he says, for he is the ladle of the gods. 'The bowl from which the gods drink', he says, for he is the bowl from which the gods drink. 'O Agni, like a felly the spokes, thou dost surround the gods', he says, for he surrounds the gods. If he were to say, 'Bring hither the gods to the pious sacrificer', he would produce an enemy for him [3].2 'Bring hither the gods to the sacrificer', he says; verily with that be makes the sacrificer to grow great. 'O
  
Agni, bring Agni hither, bring Soma hither', he says; verily he summons the gods in order. 'Bring hither the gods, O Agni; and sacrifice to them with a fair sacrifice, O Jatavedas', he says; verily he quickens Agni, and quickened by him he bears the oblation to the gods. 'Agni the Hotr' [4], he says; Agni is the Hotr of the gods; him he chooses who is the Hotr of the gods. 'We are', he says; verily he makes himself attain reality. 'Fair be to thee the deity, O sacrificer', he says; verily he invokes this blessing (on him). If he were to say 'Who hast chosen Agni as Hotr', he would surround the sacrificer with Agni on both sides, and he would be liable to perish. The ladle has the sacrificer for its deity, the Upabhrt the enemy as its deity [5]. If he were to say two as it were, he would produce an enemy for him. 'Take, Adhvaryu, the spoon (sruc) with ghee', he says; verily by it he causes the sacrificer to wax great. 'Pious', he says, for he aids the gods, 'With all boons', he says, for he aids all. 'Let us praise the gods worthy of praise; let us honour those worthy of honour; let us sacrifice to those worthy of sacrifice', he says. Those worthy of praise are men; those worthy of honour are the Pitrs; those worthy of sacrifice are the gods; verily he sacrifices to the deities according to their portions.
## 10
In the case of a Rajanya let him repeat the Trcas thrice three other sorts of men are there besides the warrior, the Brahman, Vaiśya and Çudra; verily he makes them obedient to him. He should repeat fifteen (Samidhenis) in the case of a Rajanya; the Rajanya is fifteenfold; verily he makes him find support in his own Stoma. Let him surround it with a Tristubh; the Tristubh is power, the Rajanya sacrifices in desire of power; verily by the Tristubh he secures power for him. If he desires [1], 'May there be splendour', he should surround it with a Gayatri, the Gayatri is splendour; verily there is splendour. He should repeat seventeen for a Vaiśya; the Vaiśya is seventeenfold; verily he makes him find support in his own Stoma. He should surround it with a Jagati; cattle are connected with the Jagati, the Vaiśya sacrifices in desire of cattle; verily by the Jagati he secures cattle for him. He should repeat twenty one for one who desires support; the Ekavinśa is the support of the Stomas; (verily twenty-one serve) for support [2]. He should repeat twenty-four for one who desires splendour: the Gayatri has twenty-four syllables, splendour is the Gayatri; verily by the Gayatri he secures splendour for him. He should repeat thirty for one who desires food; the Viraj has thirty syllables, the Viraj is food; verily by the Viraj he secures food for him. He should repeat thirty-two, for one who desires support; the Anustubh has thirty-two syllables, the Anustubh is the support of the metres; (verily thirty-two serve) for support. He should repeat thirty-six for one who desires cattle; the Brhati has thirty-six syllables, cattle are connected with the Brhati; verily by the Brhati he secures cattle for him [3]. He should repeat forty-four for one who desires power, the Tristubh has forty-four syllables, the Tristubh is power; verily by the Tristubh he secures power for him. He should repeat forty-eight for one who desires cattle; the Jagati has forty-eight syllables, cattle are connected with the Jagati; verily with the Jagati he secures cattle for him. He should repeat all the metres for one who makes many sacrifices, for all the metres are won by him who makes many sacrifices. He should repeat indefinitely to win that which is not definite.
## 11
The thread is worn around the neck for men, over the right shoulder for the Pitrs, over the left for the gods. He puts it over the left shoulder; verily he makes the mark of the gods. He repeats standing, for standing he speaks more audibly. He repeats standing, to conquer the world of heaven. He sacrifices sitting; verily he finds support in this world. In that he repeats in the Krauñca, note, that is connected with the Asuras, in the low note, that is connected with men, in the intermediate note, that is connected with the gods. One should repeat in the intermediate note, to secure the gods. Clever indeed [1] were the Hotrs of old; there fore the ways were held apart, and the paths did not conflict. One foot should be within the sacrificial altar, the other outside; then he repeats, to hold the ways apart and to avoid conflict of the paths. Then does he win the past and the future, the measured and the unmeasured does he win, domestic and wild cattle both does he win [2]; verily also the world of the gods and the world of men he conquers.
  
The gods having repeated the Samidhenis could not see the sacrifice. Prajapati in silence performed the sprinkling of the butter. Then indeed did the gods see the sacrifice. In that he silently sprinkles, (it serves) to light up the sacrifice. Verily also he anoints the kindling-sticks. He who knows thus becomes soft. Verily also he delights them. He delights in offspring and cattle [3] who knows thus. If he were to sprinkle with one (verse), he would delight one; if with two, (he would delight) two; if with three, he would make (the offering) go beyond (all others). He sprinkles (repeating the verse) in the mind, for what is imperfect is made perfect by mind. He sprinkles across so as not to make a failure. Speech and mind disputed; 'I will bear the offering to the gods', speech said; 'I to the gods', mind said. They went to question Prajapati; he said [4], Prajapati, 'Thou art the messenger of mind, for what one thinks of in the mind, one utters in speech'. 'Then assuredly they will not sacrifice to you with speech', said (speech). Therefore in the mind they offer to Prajapati, for Prajapati is, as it were, the mind; (verily it serves) to obtain Prajapati. He rubs the enclosing-sticks; verily he purifies them. (He rubs) the middle one thrice; the breaths are three; verily he conquers the breaths. (He rubs) the southern one thrice; these worlds are three [5]; verily he conquers these worlds. (He rubs) the northern one thrice; three are the paths leading to the gods; verily he conquers them. Thrice he fans (the fire); the worlds of the gods are three; verily he conquers the worlds of the gods. They make twelve; the year has twelve months; verily he delights the year; verily also he brings up the year for him, to gain the world of heaven. He sprinkles; the world of heaven is as it were secret [6]; verily he makes the world of heaven resplendent for him. He sprinkles straight, for the breath is as it were straight. He sprinkles continuously, for the continuity of the breaths and of food and for the smiting away of the Raksases. If he desire of a man, 'May he be likely to perish', he should sprinkle crookedly for him; verily he leads his breath crookedly from him, and swiftly he perishes. The sprinkling is the head of the sacrifice, the ladle is the body [7]. Having sprinkled, he anoints the ladle; verily he places the head of the sacrifice on its body. Agni was the messenger of the gods, Daivya of the Asuras; they went to question Prajapati. Prajapati spake to a Brahman (saying), 'Explain the phrase, "Make announcement"', 'Hearken to this, O ye gods', he said; 'Agni the god is the Hotr', (he said). He chose him of the gods. Then the gods [8] prospered, the Asuras were defeated. The man, who knows thus and for whom they chose his list of ancestors, prospers himself, his enemy is defeated. If a Brahman and a non-Brahman have a litigation, one should support the Brahman; if one supports the Brahman, one supports oneself; if one opposes the Brahman, one opposes oneself therefore one should not oppose a Brahman.
## 12
### a
Life to thee.
### b
Life-giving, O Agni,
### c
Swell up.
### d
Together thee.
### e
Thy wrath.
### f
The uppermost.
### g
Forward, O goddess.
### h
From the sky to us.
### i
O Agni and Visnu.
### k
O Agni and Visnu.
### l
This for me, O Varuna.
### m
To thee for that I go.
### n
Upwards that.
### o
The radiant.
### p
The child of the waters hath mounted the lap  
Of the devious ones, rising up and clothed in the lightning;  
Bearing his highest greatness  
The golden-coloured young ones go about.
### q
Some [1] meet, some go up,  
The streams fill their common stall;  
Round the pure shining son of the waters

The pure waters stand.
### r
The austere maidens, go around the youth;  
The waters, making him clean;  
Agni shineth forth with pure radiance with wealth,  
Unkindled, butter-clad in the waters.
### s
I seek the help  
Of Mitra and Varuna, joint kings;  
May they be gracious to such as I.
### t
O Indra and Varuna, grant ye great protection  
To our tribe, our people, for the sacrifice [2]  
May we conquer in battle the evil-minded,  
Him who is fain to overpower the man who long sacrificeth.
### u
To us, O Mitra and Varuna.
### v
Forth your arms.
### w
O Agni, do thou, wise one,  
Appease by sacrifice for us the wrath of Varuna;  
Best sacrificer, best of bearers, radiant,  
Free us from every foe.
### x
Do thou, O Agni, be nearest to us,  
Closest to help, at the dawning of this dawn;  
Appease for us by sacrifice Varuna [3], bestowing (on him); Show thy mercy and be ready to hear our call.
### y
Far-famed is this Agni of Bharata,  
Since his great light shineth like the sun;  
He who overcame Puru in battle,  
Hath shone forth, the heavenly guest, propitious for us.
### z
I sacrifice to thee, I cast forward my prayer to thee,  
That thou mayst be invoked at our invocation;  
Thou art like a well in the desert,  
Thou, O Agni, to the man eager to worship, O ancient king [4]. aa With his lustre.  
bb With light.  
cc Agni, with thy front,  
Burn the sorceresses,  
Shining in the broad dwellings.  
dd Thee of fair face, of fair look, the rapid one,  
The wiser, let us ignorant people follow;  
Let him sacrifice who knoweth all the ways,  
Let him proclaim the oblation among the immortals.  
ee To the freer from trouble.  
ff Which hath entered me.  
gg Away for us, O Indra.  
hh O Indra, might.  
ii Powers, O Çatakratu.  
kk To thee hath been given.
