+++
title = "Praśna II, Paṭala 5, Khaṇḍa 10"

+++
## 01
1. The reasons for (which) begging (is permissible are), (the desire to collect the fee for) the teacher, (the celebration of) a wedding, (or of) a Śrauta-sacrifice, the desire to keep one's father and mother, and the (impending) interruption of ceremonies performed by a worthy man. [^1] 

## 02
2. (The person asked for alms) must examine the qualities (of the petitioner) and give according to his power.

## 03
3. But if persons ask for alms for the sake of sensual gratification, that is improper; he shall not take heed of that.

## 04
4. The lawful occupations of a Brāmaṇa are, [^2]  studying, teaching, sacrificing for himself, officiating as priest for others, giving alms, receiving alms, inheriting, and gleaning corn in the fields;

## 05
5. And (he may live by taking) other things which belong to nobody. [^3] 

## 06
6. (The lawful occupations) of a Kṣatriya are the same, with the exception of teaching, officiating as priest, and receiving alms. (But) governing and fighting must be added. [^4] 

## 07
7. (The lawful occupations) of a Vaiśya are the same as those of a Kṣatriya, with the exception of governing and fighting. (But in his case) agriculture, the tending of cattle, and trade must be added. [^5] 

## 08
8. He (shall) not choose (for the performance of a Śrauta-sacrifice) a priest who is unlearned in the Veda, nor one who haggles (about his fee).

## 09
9. (A priest) shall not officiate for a person unlearned in the Veda.

## 10
10. In war (Kṣatriyas) shall act in such a manner as those order, who are learned in that (art of war).

## 11
11. The Āryas forbid the slaughter of those who have laid down their arms, of those who (beg for mercy) with flying hair or joined hands, and of fugitives. [^6] 

## 12
12. The spiritual guide shall order those who, [^7]  (whilst) participating according to sacred law (in the rights of their caste), have gone astray through the weakness of their senses, to perform penances proportionate to (the greatness of) their sins, according to the precepts (of the Smṛti).

## 13
13. If (such persons) transgress their (Ācārya's) order, he shall take them before the king.

## 14
14. The king shall (send them) to his domestic priest, who should be learned in the law and the science of governing.

## 15
15. He shall order (them to perform the proper penances if they are) Brāhmaṇas.

## 16
16. He shall reduce them (to reason) by forcible means, excepting corporal punishment and servitude. [^8] 



[^1]:  10. Manu IV, 251; XI, 1 seq.; Yājñ. I, 2 16. By the term arhat, I a worthy person,' a Brāhmaṇa is here designated who has studied the Veda and performs an Agnihotra.

[^2]:  Manu I, 88; X, 15; Yājñ. I, 118.

[^3]:  I.e. wild roots and fruits.

[^4]:  Manu I, 89; X, 77, 79; Yājñ. I, 118, 119.

[^5]:  Manu I, 90; X, 78, 79; Yājñ. loc. cit.

[^6]:  Manu VII, 91 seq.; Yājñ. 1, 325.

[^7]:  Haradatta explains the words Śāstrair adhigatānām, 'who whilst participating, according to the sacred law, (in the rights of their caste,)' by 'who have been sanctified according to the law by the sacraments, such as the Garbhādhāna, and are entitled (to the rights and occupations of their caste).'

[^8]:  Probably this Sūtra is meant to give a general rule, and to exempt Brāhmaṇas in every case from corporal punishment and servitude. Manu VIII, 379-380.