+++
title = "02"

+++
The etym. figure involving √jan noted ad vs. 1 continues here with intrans.- pass. jā́yamānau (a) and transitive janat (d). Another figure involves √juṣ ‘enjoy’, likewise with trans. vs. pass. manifestations: juṣanta (a), ájuṣtā (b), both pāda-final.

This vs. contains three injunctives: juṣanta (a), gūhatām (b), janat (d), the middle one of which could also be an impv. Ge takes all three as preterital, a course I also follow, but Re takes gūhatām as impv. (flg. Gr); WG take the first two as presential and the last as preterital. There seems no decisive evidence for or against any of these choices (or the others that could be made). On the one hand imaú (2x, ab) and ābhyā́m (c) ‘these two (here)’ would support a here-and-now presential and/or imperatival reading, as perhaps also the pres. part. jā́yamānau in a. On the other, it seems unlikely that the gods would be currently celebrating the birth of Pūṣan (Soma might be another story), and, as for b, inserting an imperative into the mix seems odd to me.

Another ambiguity is posed by ābhyā́m … somāpūṣ́abhyām in cd, which can be instr., dat., or abl. dual. Ge takes it as instr.: Indra performed this feat along with the two gods; Re and WG (see also Hoffmann, Injunk. 124, 193-94) as a dat.: Indra did it for them. I also interpr. the phrase as a dat. -- though not with any strong conviction. On the one hand this deed (putting “raw” milk into “cooked” cows) is almost always attributed to Indra alone, so having Soma and Pūṣan as his accomplices seems somewhat unlikely. But on one occasion (VI.72.4) it's attributed to Indra and Soma in a dual dvandva índrāsomā. However, that hymn basically lays out Indra's great deeds and attributes them to Indra and Soma jointly, so there's no independent evidence of Soma's involvement in this action. As for how they could benefit from the exploit and thus be in the dative -- Soma would benefit from the creation of milk because he (or the ritual substance bearing his name) is mixed with milk in the Soma Sacrifice (a point also made by WG). But what Pūṣan would gain from it isn’t clear -- unless he likes milk with his habitual food, porridge (karambhá- ). (We should probably be wary of reading Anglo-American breakfast habits back into Vedic India.)

