+++
title = "Praśna I, Paṭala 11, Khaṇḍa 30"

+++
## 01
1. Some declare, that a student shall bathe after (having acquired) the knowledge of the Veda, (however long or short the time of his studentship may have been). [^1] 

## 02
2. (He may) also (bathe) after having kept the student's vow for forty-eight, (thirty-six or twenty-four) years, (though he may not have mastered the Veda).

Some declare, that the student (shall bathe) after (having acquired) the knowledge of the Veda and after (the expiration of) his vow.

## 04
4. To all those persons who have bathed (In accordance with any of the above rules must be shown) the honour clue to a Snātaka.

## 05
5. The reverence (shown to a Snātaka) brings, however, different rewards according to the degree of devotion or of learning (possessed by the person honoured).

## 06
6. Now follow the observances (chiefly to be kept) by a Snātaka.

## 07
7. He shall usually enter the village and leave it by the eastern or the northern gate.

## 08
8. During the morning and evening twilights, he shall sit outside the village, and not speak anything (referring to worldly matters).

## 09
9. (But an Agnihotrī, who is occupied at home by oblations in the morning and evening, must not go out; for) in the case of a conflict (of duties), that enjoined by the Veda is the more important.

## 10
10. He shall avoid all dyed dresses, [^2] 

## 11
11. And all naturally black cloth.

## 12
12. He shall wear a dress that is neither shining,

## 13
13. Nor despicable, if he is able (to afford it). [^3] 

## 14
14. And in the day-time he shall avoid to wrap up his head, except when voiding excrements.

## 15
15. But when voiding excrements, he shall envelop his head and place some (grass or the like) on the ground. [^4] 

## 16
16. He shall not void excrements in the shade (of a tree, where travellers rest).

## 17
17. But he may discharge urine on his own shadow.

## 18
18. He shall not void excrements with his shoes on, nor on a ploughed field, nor on a path, nor in water. [^5] 

## 19
19. He shall also avoid to spit into, or to have connection with a woman in water. [^6] 

## 20
20. He shall not void excrements facing the fire, the sun, water, a Brāhmaṇa, cows, or (images of) the gods. [^7] 

## 21
21. He shall avoid to clean his body from excrements with a stone, a clod of earth, or with (boughs of) herbs or trees which he has broken off, whilst they were on the tree and full of sap.

## 22
22. If possible, he shall not stretch out his feet towards a fire, water, a Brāhmaṇa, a cow, (iniages of) the gods, a door, or against the wind. [^8] 

## 23
23. Now they quote also (the following verse):



[^1]:  30. The bath is taken at the end of the studentship, and forms part of the Samāvartana-ceremony. From this rite a student who has completed his course of study derives the name Snātaka, 'one who has bathed.' See also Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 125.

[^2]:  The rule to wear white garments is given Yājñ. I, 131; Manu IV, 35. 33.

[^3]:  Manu IV, 34.

[^4]:  Manu IV, 49.

[^5]:  Manu IV, 45, 46; Yājñ. I, 137.

[^6]:  Manu IV, 56.

[^7]:  Manu IV, 48, 52; Yājñ. I, 134.

[^8]:  The prohibition to stretch the feet towards a fire occurs also Manu IV, 53; Yājñ. I, 137.