+++
title = "Praśna I, Paṭala 11, Khaṇḍa 31"

+++
## 01
1. He shall eat facing the east, void fæces facing, the south, discharge urine facing the north, and wash his feet turned towards the west.

## 02
2. He shall void excrements far from his house, having gone towards the south or south-west. [^1] 

## 03
3. But after sunset he must not void excrements outside the village or far from his house.

## 04
4. And as long as he is impure he (shall avoid) to pronounce the names of the gods.

## 05
5. And he shall not speak evil of the gods or of the king. [^2] 

## 06
6. He shall not touch with his foot a Brāhmaṇa, a cow, nor any other (venerable beings).

## 07
7. (Nor shall he touch them) with his hand, except for particular reasons.

## 08
8. He shall not mention the blemishes of a cow, of sacrificial presents, or of a girl. [^3] 

## 09
9. And he shall not announce it (to the owner) if a cow does damage (by eating corn or grass in a field).

## 10
10. (Nor shall he call attention to it) if a cow is together with her calf, except for a particular reason.

## 11
11. And of a cow which is not a milch-cow he shall not say, 'She is not a milch-cow.' He must say, 'This is a cow which will become a milch-cow.'

## 12
12. He shall not call 'lucky' that which is lucky. He shall call it 'a mercy, a blessing.' [^4] 

## 13
13. He shall not step over a rope to which a calf (or cow) is tied. [^5] 

## 14
14. He shall not pass between the posts from which a swing is suspended. [^6] 

## 15
15. (In company) he shall not say, 'This person is my enemy.' If he says, 'This person is my enemy,' he will raise for himself an enemy, who will show his hatred.

## 16
16. If he sees a rainbow, he must not say to others, 'Here is Indra's bow.' [^7] 

## 17
17. He shall not count (a flock of) birds. [^8] 

## 18
18. He shall avoid to look at the sun when he rises or sets. [^9] 

## 19
19. During the day the sun protects the creatures, during the night the moon. Therefore let him eagerly strive to protect himself on the night of the new moon by purity, continence, and rites adapted for the season.

## 20
20. For during that night the sun and the moon dwell together.

## 21
21. He shall not enter the village by a by path. If he enters it thus, he shall mutter this Ṛk-verse, 'Praise be to Rudra, the lord of the dwelling,' or some other (verse) addressed to Rudra. [^10] 

## 22
22. He shall not (ordinarily) give the residue of his food to a person who is not a Brāhmaṇa. When he gives it (to such a one), he shall clean his teeth and give (the food) after having placed in it (the dirt from his teeth). [^11] 

## 23
23. And let him avoid the faults that destroy the creatures, such as anger and the like. [^12] 



[^1]:  31. Manu IV, 151; Yājñ. I, 16.

[^2]:  Manu IV, 163.

[^3]:  'In the section on transcendental knowledge (I, 8, 23, 5), "speaking evil" has been forbidden, in connection with the means of salvation. And below (Sūtra 25) the (author) will declare that the sins which destroy the creatures are to be avoided. But this precept (is given in order to indicate that) in the case of cows and the rest an extra penance must be performed.'--Haradatta.

[^4]:  Manu IV, 139.

[^5]:  Manu IV, 38.

[^6]:  'Or according to others, " He shall not pass between pillars supporting an arch."'--Haradatta.

[^7]:  Manu IV, 59.

[^8]:  Others explain (the Sūtra thus): He shall not announce it to others, if he sees (the souls of) good men falling from heaven on account of the expenditure of their merit, (i.e.) he shall not call attention to shooting-stars.'--Haradatta.

[^9]:  Manu IV, 37. 19. Manu IV, 153.

[^10]:  Manu IV, 73; Yājñ. I, 140.

[^11]:  Manu IV, 80. 'This prohibition (given in the first part of the Sūtra) refers to Śūdras who are not dependents; to dependents the following (exception applies).'--Haradatta.

[^12]:  See above, I, 6, 23, 4 and 5, and Manu IV, 163.