+++
title = "09"

+++
The word and particle order of the 1st hemistich seems designed to produce despair in those of us who seek (and believe in) principles and rules for such ordering: ádha dyaúś cit te ápa sā́nú vájrād, dvitā́namat … seems randomly to scatter nouns, pronouns, and particles through the first pāda. However, I think that my interpr. of the first pāda imposes more rationality on the sequence than Ge’s does and also eliminates at least one further problem. Note first the preverb ápa in the middle of the 1st pāda, though preverbs in tmesis (as this is, from anamat in b) usually move to metrical boundaries. [It is true that it appears directly after the caesura, but generally a preverb in tmesis takes this position only when the verb is in the same pāda, or such is my impression.] Note, moreover, the apparent doubling of the subject dyaúḥ with the pronoun sā́likewise in the middle of the same pāda, directly after the preverb. Note finally that after a beginning that seems to conform fairly well to Rigvedic word-order norms (extraclausal introductory ádha, noun+emphatic ptcl dyaúś cid, enclitic prn. in modified 2nd position te), the clause seems to begin over again: preverb ápa, prn. sā́(curiously, fem. sā́seems more inclined to 2nd position than masc. sá), modified 2nd pos. ptcl. nú. Ge’s tr. simply ignores this stuttering start (“Da wich selbst der Himmel von deiner Keule ..”), and he also doesn’t comment on the fact that his interpr. implicitly requires dyaúḥ to be picked up by a fem. prn.: Gr lists this passage as one where that noun has fem.

gender. Although ‘heaven’ sometimes does seem to be fem., such passages are rarer than Gr makes out, and this example would be esp. striking because there’s no reason for dyaúḥ to be doubled by a pronoun in the first place, whatever its gender.

I think both problems can be solved by assuming that sā́actually adds a second referent to the clause; in context with ‘heaven’ this would obviously be the fem. ‘earth’ (generally pṛthivī́-, but perhaps here, because of their joint presence in 7ab, kṣā́-). No Rigvedic audience would need further specification, once the feminine gender of the referent was established. By this interpr. the post-caesura sequence ápa sā́nú … is not an awkward redo of the 1st half of the pāda, but introduces a parallel subject to dyaúḥ, more clearly distinguished from ‘heaven’ than in the usual dual dvandva formulation. The separation of the two subjects is, in my opinion, signalled by dvitā́‘yet again’ beginning the next pāda; I render it here as “likewise also.” The parallels adduced by Ge (IV.17.2, I.80.11, II.12.13, V.32.9) actually support my interpr. because all four of them depict both heaven and earth (or in the case of the last, the two world-halves) trembling in fear of Indra.

Alternatively, MLW suggests (p.c.) that dyaúḥ could have fem. gender here because of its unmanly behavior in flinchig away from Indra’s weapon. Restarting with sā́would emphatically draw attention to this gender switch: “Then even Heaven, really a she …” This is clever, but I still prefer my own solution.

Flg. Ge (“… dass er für alle Zeit erlag”), I take śayáthe here as a quasiinfinitive expressing purpose with jaghā́na; in this function it seems directly parallel to śayáthāya in the next hymn (VI.18.8), to the same stem. Unfortunately they must then be in different cases, the dative, understandably, in VI.18.8, the loc., less understandably, here. However much I would like to, I cannot find a way to make our śayáthe a dative, there being no athematic stem *śayáth-. We could, of course, interpr. the locative as a real expression of location: “struck down the serpent in his lair,” but not only am I reluctant to lose the semantic connection with VI.18.8, but the acc. extent of time viśvā́yuḥ ‘for a full lifespan’ only makes sense with the verbal interpr. of śayáthe ‘to lie’.

Despite Gr and Lub, a number of viśvā́yuḥ forms, which they assign to the stem viśvā́yu- and therefore interpr. as nom. sg. masc., must have the 2nd member ā́yus- and therefore be nom./acc. sg. neut., often used as an adverbial indication of extent of time as here (so Ge’s tr. as well; see above). See AiG II.2.479. I concede that it would be possible to take the form as a nom. here — “when Indra, having a full lifespan, struck down the serpent …” — with Indra’s full lifespan implicitly contrasting with Vṛtra’s death, but I find the extent-of-time adverbial more compelling. And in a passage like I.68.5 viśvā́yur víśve ápāṃsi cakruḥ “all have performed their tasks lifelong,” the plural subject rules out a nom. sg. interpr. for viśvā́yuḥ. Although the stem viśvā́yu- certainly exists, it has a doublet with final -s-, exactly like the simplex pair ā́yu-/ ā́yus-.

Assuming the correctness of the above disc. of viśvā́yuḥ, Vṛtra’s fate, “to lie there for a full lifespan,” is somewhat ironic, since he’s dead: he will spend his full lifespan dead.
