+++
title = "10"

+++
With Old I assume an underlying mahé, contra Pp. maháḥ, despite Ge’s doubts (n. 10b).

The morphological identity of vavṛtat isn’t at all clear. Gr calls it a “Conj.” aor.; Whitney seems to suggest a subj. to a redupl. pres. Lub identifies it as a “[RED.AOR.inj.(them.)].” A pf. subj. makes the most formal sense, save for the zerograde root syllable, but a subjunctive would be out of place in this mythological passage. Kü (460) treats our form as a “Sonderfall” and calls it a thematic injunctive, expressing an action prior to that of the verb sáṃ piṇak in d. Since, in his view, this same anterior value is expressed by the impf. of the caus. (ávartayat in I.85.9), he calls our form an “Oppositionsbildung zum Kausativ,” whatever that means, but ultimately gives up on determining its morphological identity. I agree that the form cannot functionally be a subjunctive and am willing to accept that it is a nonce injunctive -- but this is a description, not an explanation. Note the pf. opt. vavṛtyāt in 13d, whose redupl. profile vavṛt- matches that of this form.

As for what the clause expresses, I assume that Tvaṣṭar is manufacturing the vájra- by turning it on a lathe or lathe-like device. (The internet tells me that the lathe dates back to antiquity, with good evidence from ancient Egypt, but it is difficult to know how much to trust this.) Alternatively, but less likely in my view, Tvaṣṭar is displaying it to Indra by turning it here and there to allow its spikes and edges to glint in the light.

The other verb form in this vs., sám piṇak in d, also presents difficulties, because, despite being in a relative cl., it is unaccented. I have no explanation for the failure to accent (nor does Old, I’d point out). Of course, one can note the unusual position of the rel. prn. yéna, at the end of pāda c as the first word of the subord.

clause that otherwise occupies d, with the rel. prn. intervening between the acc. sg.

masc. phrase níkāmam arámanasam that modifies the vájram of the main cl. and the acc. sg. masc. phrase návantam áhim that provides the object of the rel. cl. But Rigvedic poets are unlikely to be thrown by this positioning. It is also noteworthy that pāda c as it stands has only 10 syllables; Old suggests that we might read iéna to round out the Triṣṭubh, which would be unprecedented in the rel. prn., as far as I know. Pāda c is also unusual in having 5 light syllables in a row: (níkā)mam arámana(saṃ yéna), and indeed, were we to read i y éna, this would rise to 7. Since arámanasa- is a hapax and it participates in a metrically disturbed sequence, it may be that the pāda is somehow corrupt. But no way of fixing any of this comes to mind.

On the retroflex ṇ in piṇak, see Old, ZDMG 55.321.

