+++
title = "04"

+++
For Indra enwrapped in the earth, cf. I.173.6 sáṃ vivya índro vrjána ̥ ṃ ná bhū́ma “Indra has enwrapped himself in the earth like a girth.” Cf. also his wearing the earth III.32.11, VIII.4.8. Although here the enwrapping seems presented as a handicap, esp. given the cid, in the just cited passages the images seem rather to emphasize Indra’s vastness.

As noted also by Ge, Schaeffer, and WG, jígartim … apajárgurāṇaḥ is a word play, but the words presumably belong to different roots. The first is universally assigned to √gṝ ‘swallow’, but the root affiliation of the second is disputed. Ge and EWA (s.v. GARī p. 470) assign it to a √gṝ ‘hold out’, but I follow Schaeffer (Intens., 116-22) in taking it to √gṝ ‘greet, extol’, with the negative sense contributed by the preverb ápa. So also WG and Oberlies (Relig. I.401). See also nearby apagū́rya (V.32.6).

The etymological separation of jígartim and apajárgurāṇaḥ invites further scrutiny of the hapax jígartim. As noted above, this word is generally grouped with √gṝ ‘swallow’ and interpreted as an agent noun ‘swallower’ (my ‘gulper’). However, with apajárgurāṇaḥ off the table, there is no particular contextual support for this interpr., though it is certainly semantically acceptable. Far more troubling are the serious formal problems. For one thing, -ti- is by no means an agent-noun suffix; it normally of course forms feminine abstracts, though AiG II.2.636-37 does register a number of such stems that have been reanalyzed “zur Bez. der persönlichen Träger des Verbalbegriffs zu verwenden.” Debrunner himself identifies our form as a 3rd sg.

verb form inflected as a -ti-stem (AiG II.2.638), but this interpr. has nothing to recommend it. Not only is such a morphological transfer not a feature of the RV, but there is also no such verb stem available to be nominalized. The root √gṝ ‘swallow’ does not have a redupl. pres. or in fact any redupl. stem save for the pf. jagāra and the intensive subj. jalgulas (I.28.1); the single form of the redupl. aor. ajīgar (I.163.7) supposedly belonging to this root (see Gr, and Whit. Roots) actually belongs with the other forms of this stem to the root √gṝ ‘awaken’, and we just discussed intens. part. járgurāṇa- above. It is, further, a seṭ root; it’s hard to know what its pre-C full grade should be in a redupl. pres. formation since there are no parallel formations to roots in -ṝ that I know of (*jígarīti? cf. VS galgalīti and EWA s.vv. GARI2 , GAL), but presumably not simply gar. In short, neither the nominal morphology nor the root formation of jígarti- is easily accounted for under the standard hypothesis, but I have nothing better to substitute. I therefore retain the rendering in the publ. tr., though with full awareness of its fragility. My thanks to Veronique Kremmer, who drew my attention to jígarti- and its many problems and discussed the issues at length with me.

