+++
title = "03"

+++
I tr. b as if vidhā́re has verbal rection, with páyaḥ as obj.: “in spreading your milk.” In this I follow Ge (“wenn du mit Kunst deine Milch verbreitest”), but I now think that this is wrong. Although vidhā́re is a hapax and so its usage elsewhere cannot be compared, I doubt that the loc. of such a stem could be so used (and Bartholomae’s datival infinitive, mentioned by Old, seems morphologically very unlikely). Instead I think it is used in the same sense as loc. vídharman / -ṇi, found 7x in this maṇḍala (3 are identical), incl. the immed. preceding hymn (IX.109.6). In all these passages it refers to the spreading or expansion of the soma liquid as it passes across the filter, and metaphorically to other expansions through space. See comm. ad IX.64.9. If páyaḥ is not dependent on vidhā́re it is most likely a 2nd object to ájījanat (as Re takes it, though not in the same way I will suggest). Ge (n. 3b) adduces IX.34.3 duhánti śákmanā páyaḥ ‘They milk out its milk with their skill,” where páyaḥ refers to the soma juice milked from the plant, not to the cows’ milk with which it is mixed. I think páyaḥ has the same referent here, and the hemistich means “by your skill you have begotten (your) milk as the sun in your expansion.” What this means is that the soma juice (=milk) takes on the look of the sun as it goes across the filter, golden-colored with rays (=rivulets of juice) spread across the fleece.” The 2nd member of the hapax gó-jīra- is universally (Gr, Ge, Re) interpr. as transitive, governing the 1st: e.g., Gr ‘die Kühen zueilend’. But jīrá- both independently and as 1st cmpd member (e.g., jīrā́śva- ‘having lively horses’) is never transitive, but simply means ‘lively, nimble’. One occurrence of the independent adj.

is also generally taken as transitive: I.48.3 jīrā́ráthānām with a supposed objective gen., but see comm. ad loc. Since I do not see attributing an otherwise unattested usage to the word in just this compd, however convenient, we must find an alternative path to sense, made more difficult by the fact that there are no other Xjīra- cmpds and this one is a hapax. The cmpd modifies the somewhat shadowy goddess Puraṃdhi, who is associated with plenty and esp. with plentiful gifts. Cf., in this maṇḍala, IX.93.4 rathirāyátām uśatī́púraṃdhiḥ … dāváne vásūnām “Let Plenitude come eagerly on her chariot … for the giving of goods.” In our cmpd I suggest an instr. relationship between the first member and the second: “lively with cows,” capturing both her quickness (as indicated by her “hastening” here and the eager journey in 93.4) and the presumed accompaniment of a profusion of (living) cows as gift. This type of cmpd — NOUN + INTRANS. ADJ. — seems relatively rare and the relationship between the two members is quite variable. See AiG II.1.233-38. It is also possible, as suggested as a last-ditch alternative by Ge (n. 3c), that the cmpd is an inversion of a straightforward bahuvrīhi *jīrá-go- ‘having lively cows’ (like jīrā́śva- cited above). Though a fem. instr. sg. *jīrá-gavā should not have been difficult to build, it is noteworthy that there are no instr. sgs. to the ‘cow’ word in the RV (for V.30.7 see comm. ad loc.).
