+++
title = "05"

+++
I don’t quite know what to do with śrávasā. Ge and Re bleach it into an adverb (rühmlich, glorieusement), which I am reluctant to do, but it also seems unlikely that it was Soma’s fame that enabled him to do this drilling. Perhaps it is shorthand for a famous deed, referring to this very act of drilling, or it simply characterizes Soma without reference to the action at hand. It may also be a sly allusion to a well-known formula: the adj. ákṣitam ends the hemistich, and śrávas ákṣitam (in sandhi śrávo ákṣitam) is of course the most famous Indo-European verbal formula.

I seem to have misdistributed the elements in pāda b. Because of their proximity I construed janapā́nam ákṣitam together (“inexhaustible drink for men”), but ákṣitam most likely goes with útsam (as well as notionally with śrávasā; see above), because “inexhaustible wellspring” is itself a minor formula: see I.64.6 and VIII.7.16 (both polarized at beginning and end of pāda as here and both obj. of √duh ‘milk’, with Maruts as subj.) as well as III.26.9 útsam ákṣīyamāṇam “a wellspring never becoming exhausted.” In the first two quoted passages the phrase must refer to the sky or some feature in it, which the Maruts milk for rain (the third passage characterizes Agni in a somewhat opaque metaphor).

Thus the hemistich seems to compare Soma’s drilling towards the drink for men (which also must be soma) with drilling for (rain)water in the sky. Or so I would take it; Ge, Re, and Lü (384) do not separate pāda b into simile and frame, as I do, but take the whole phrase together with ná marking it as some sort of approximative

- e.g., Ge: “gleichsam einen unversieglichen Born …, der von Menschen getrunken
wird.” I prefer to distinguish two separate entities being compared, and I suggest that the “drink for men” (janapā́nam) is the earthly ritual soma, while the inexhaustible wellspring contains the heavenly soma. How would Soma be drilling for the ritual soma? what kind of action does this involve? I suggest tentatively that it might refer to the pressing of the juice out of the plant.

But there is another factor to take into consideration: the lexeme abhí √tṛd. In all clear cases (VIII.77.5 is impenetrable) the object of this verb is the Vala cave or the contents thereof, cows or “prizes” (referring to cows). There are a number of such passages: II.24.4 (where in another part of the vs. the Vala cave is referred to as an útsa-), III.31.5, VI.17.1-3 (on vs. 1 see comm. ad loc.), VIII.103.5 (metaphorically of Agni), X.74.4. If we plug this stable association into our passage, we need to ask another question: what could stand for the cave full of cows here? And the obvious answer is the container that holds the milk mixture.

What this adds up to is a set of overlapping and partly contradictory images: the ritual soma drink being drilled out of the plant, but also the inexhaustible wellspring standing for not only heaven which contains the heavenly soma, but also the metaphorical Vala cave containing the milk mixure (remember that útsa- is used of the Vala cave in II.24.4) - both of which could be drilled out for their respective contents. I would suggest that this welter of images is responsible for the oddly tentative and indefinite presentation of the action, first with the āmreḍita-ed preverb abhy-àbhi, which I render as “ever closer” (which I now think is not so good) and Ge as “immer wieder” (Re with “toujours” and Lü not at all). I now think it is objectdistributive, as it were: there are several targets of the drilling. I do not quite know how to convey this in English. This is reinforced by the indefinitizing káṃ cid characterizing the útsa-: “some kind of wellspring, some wellspring or other,” which would be appropriate if útsa- in the simile is meant to call to mind both the heavenly holder of the heavenly soma and the Vala cave full of cows.

I would now emend the publ. tr. to “Because you with your reknown have drilled through to the drink for men as if through now to this inexhaustible wellspring [=the container of heavenly soma], now that one [=the container of milk compared to the Vala cave].” An unfortunately awkward unpacking of a very dense couple of pādas.

And this is only the first hemistich; the final pāda poses its own difficulties, consisting of another condensed simile cum frame.

Both Ge and Re take the whole pāda as the simile, comparing Soma to an archer. Both have to supply a considerable amount of material, including an object for bháramāṇaḥ and a verb and another object to construe with śáryābhiḥ; cf., e.g., Re’s “tel (un guerrier) tenant (l’arc) en ses deux mains (perce la cible) avec les flèches.” His “perce” and, more clearly, Ge’s supplied “das Ziel durchbohrt” pick up abhí tatárditha in pāda a, but ‘drill through to’ is an odd action to perform on a target, and as I just said, a lot has to be supplied. (Kü’s interpr. [216] supplies less but also connects less with the rest of the vs.: “wie einer, der mit Pfeilen etwas (=den Bogen) in seinen Händen trägt.”) My interpr. of the pāda depends on a double reading of bháramāṇaḥ, as both passive (in the frame) and self-beneficial transitive (in the simile). I also read gábhastyoḥ in both simile and frame. Some material has to be supplied, but less than in the Ge/Re interpr., and it also has the merit of connecting the arrows and the hands: Old points to X.61.3 śáryābhiḥ … gábhastau “with arrows in his hand” as a potential clue to our passage. To deal with the frame first: this participle is found in passive usage, also with soma as subj., in I.135.3, 6 adhvaryúbhir bháramāṇā ayaṃsata … śukrā́ḥ “the gleaming (soma drinks), being carried, have been guided by the Adhvaryus” (or “being carried by the Adhvaryus, have been guided …”). The agents there are the priests, and here I would take the gábhastyoḥ in the frame as referring to the priest’s hands that bring the soma forward. In the simile I take med. bháramāṇaḥ as self-beneficial and supply ‘booty’ (or some other desirable material benefit) as the object. Such a usage is found in IX.79.2, containing one of the few medial forms of √bhṛ in IX: vayáṃ dhánāni viśvádhā bharemahi “May we always bear away the stakes.” Here the material borne away was clearly won by the arrows in the winner’s hands. I have recast the simile as passive in English, but more literally the tr. would read “while being carried in the (priest's) hands, as (someone) with arrows in his hands carries away (booty).” If I am correct, this is an implicit example of my “case disharmony in similes,” though neither the passive subject nor the transitive direct object is actually expressed.



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/09/110/04-06.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>