+++
title = "06"

+++
This vs. seems to follow from vs. 5; it begins ā́d ‘just after that, because of that’, which signals temporal or logical nexus - though what that nexus is remains unclear to me. The indefinite ké cid of pāda a also echoes the káṃ cid of 5b, but, again, the reasons why escape me. The vs. isn’t as desperately difficult as 5 but it has more than its share of problems.

The part. in pāda a, páśyamānasaḥ, is one of the few medial forms to this extremely well-attested pres. stem. The same phrase páśyamānāsa ā́pyam is found in VII.83.1. In both passages it describes the subject(s) as “seeing” (that is, contemplating?) the friendship between themselves and another being or beings, in this case Soma. So much is reasonably clear. Also reasonably clear is what action they took or have taken: they (have) roared to him (īm … abhy ànūṣata).

Who the subjects are is harder to determine and in part depends on the grammatical identification of the rt. noun cmpd vasurúcaḥ. This is ordinarily taken as a nom. pl. and either a qualifier of the other nom. pl. divyā́ḥ or as implicitly conjoined with divyā́ḥ as a joint subject. For the former, cf. Re’s “certains (êtres) célestes, brillants (de l’éclat des) Vasu”; for the latter, e.g., Scar’s (457) “gewisse Leute, deren Pracht [für uns] Gut bedeutet [und auch] Himmlische (?).” As for vasurúcaḥ, I prefer to take it as gen. sg., dependent on ā́pyam and referring to Soma (a possibility mentioned by Scar). The next hymn (IX.111) has several forms of √ruc referring to Soma: instr. sg. of the rt. noun rucā́(IX.111.1a) and the pres. stem forms rocate (1d), rócamānaḥ (2g), and in IX.111.2a it is said of Soma vido vásu “you found that good (thing).” Moreover, most of the forms of the uncmpded rt. noun rúc-, found here as 2nd member of our hapax cmpd., appear in IX (10 out of 13), again in connection with Soma. In other words, the default association of -rúc- would be with Soma, not some indefinite set of beings. (For various interpr.

of the sense of this cmpd. see esp. Scar 457-58; my ‘radiant with goods’ is hardly the only one, and many involve a PN in one way or another.) If we accept my interpr. of the grammatical identity of the cmpd., this leaves us with ké cid … divyā́ḥ “some heavenly ones, these heavenly ones and those ones,” as the subj. of abhy ànūṣata. Because of the close connections between vss. 5 and 6, it would be desirable to interpr. the indefinitizers in both vss. in the same way. In vs. 5, as I argued, káṃ cid signals that there’s more than one referent for útsam. I think we should pursue the same interpretive strategy here. In other words, we should expect that divyā́ḥ should have several different referents appropriate to the context.

Unfortunately divyā́ḥ and abhy ànūṣata point in different directions: the verb is generally used of cows, or entities configured as cows - primarily hymns, priestly voices, and the like. But these would not generally be qualified as ‘heavenly’ - though see IX.86.4, where I supply “hymns” with divyā́ḥ. The adj. also qualifies ‘drops’ on occasion (IX.86.1) and soma itself, so perhaps the heavenly Soma here.

And another well-established referent is ‘waters’ (VII.49.2, 103.2; cf. X.98.5), “heavenly waters” being rain. These are all possible, but not particularly compelling, referents here, esp. because they would have to be contemplating friendship with Soma as well as roaring to him. What divyá- does not generally seem to qualify is heavenly beings in the form of gods (except possibly in contrast to pā́rthivāḥ - ‘earthly’ [=humans?]), which seems to be the default interpr. of the standard tr.

(including mine); my remark in the publ. intro. about “the gods’ yearnig for soma” in vs. 6 is therefore probably incorrect. I’ve reached an impasse. Although I think I’m asking the right questions, they don’t produce satisfactory answers.

My interpr. of the final pāda differs from the standard, which takes deváḥ savitā́as solely constituting the simile: “he uncovers a desirable thing like god Savitar.” But this seems pretty flat. Moreover, the simile particle ná is to the left of both parts of the putative simile ( … ná deváḥ savitā́). A better constructed simile would include the portion to the left of ná, namely vā́ram. And I think it does: in my view vā́ram is a perfect pun; the word means both fleece (filter) and desirable object.

In the frame, the first reading is the filter: Soma uncovers the fleece - that is, the juice passes beyond it; “desirable thing” is the reading in the simile, and in fact a 2nd reading in the frame. The tr. should be slightly emended to “He uncovers the fleece (/desirable thing) as the god Savitar uncovers a desirable thing.”


<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/09/110/04-06.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>