+++
title = "05"

+++
ní … vṛṇákṣi is here tr. ‘yank down’, whereas in the preceding hymn, 9d, I render ní … avṛṇak as ‘wrenched down’. The two should have been harmonized in the publ. tr. More serious is the question of what object the verb takes here. Most tr.

use vánā, which, admittedly, is the only available accusative, but I am reluctant to follow this interpretation for two reasons: 1) As noted above róruvad vánā also appears in 1c, which suggests that these words belong together and one shouldn’t be extracted to serve as a complement for a different verb; 2) I really doubt that there’s an alternate version of the Śuṣṇa story that involves felling trees on his head. In fact Śuṣṇa himself serves several times as the object of (ni) √vṛj (I.101.2 śúṣṇam aśúṣaṃ ny ā́vṛṇak, also VI.18.8, 26.3). In nearby I.51.11 Indra destroys Śūṣṇa’s fortified strongholds (dṛṃhitā́ḥ … púraḥ), and I’m inclined to supply them here, with Indra wrenching them down onto the head of their hapless defender. Note that Indra also destroys púraḥ in the next vs. (6d). I would thus change the publ. tr. to “as you wrench down (the fortresses) of the snorting Śuṣṇa onto his head.” The question in the last pāda, kás tvā pári, lacks a verb, but it does contain the preverb pári, which suggests the solution: pari √vṛj is a common idiom meaning ‘evade, avoid’, and since the root √vṛj supplies the main verb of the earlier part of the verse (5a ní … vṛṇákṣi), there is support for supplying it here, with the pleasing effect that the two different preverbs used with it provide two different idioms.

