+++
title = "10"

+++
A poetically dense verse with striking images and concomittant difficulties.

The first problem is the isolated compound dharúṇa-hvara-, modifying támaḥ ‘darkness’ in pāda a. The compound is generally interpreted as a tatpuruṣa, with - hvara- in verbal sense governing the first member (e.g., Ge "die den Urgrund der Gewässer zu Fall brachte"), but the accent is wrong: we would expect final accent of the type puraṃ-dará- ‘fortress-smashing’, brahma-kārá- ‘formulation-making’. By accent the compound should be a bahuvrīhi (so WG “deren Wölbung ihr Grund war”). The s-stem hváras- means ‘snare, tangle’ (from the meaning of the root √hvṛ ‘go crookedly’). I suggest that hvará- has a similar meaning and the whole compound means ‘whose tangles were the foundation (of the waters: apā́m)’. And what would this mean? In order to decode it, we must first note the use of dharúṇa- elsewhere in the Savya hymns: 52.2: párvato ná dharúneṣu ácyutaḥ “like a mountain, immovable on its foundations” and 56.5-6: ví yát tiró dharúṇam ácyutam … “when you traversed the immovable foundation” and … divó dharúṇam … pṛthivyā́ḥ … “the foundation of heaven and of earth.” Given the connection of dharúṇa- with ácyuta- and párvataelsewhere, I think we can confidently take the támaḥ in a and párvataḥ in b as coreferential (unlike Ge [/WG], Re). Remember also that Vṛtra is associated with murky darkness (e.g., his lying “on the foundation of the dusky realm” in I.52.6). In other words the mountain within Vṛtra’s belly in pāda b is the pure darkness of pāda a. Its “tangles” represent the inability to see a clear path in the dark and may also represent what happens to vision as it gets dark, the blurring and distortion of objects.

These tangles provide a foundation, and an enclosure, for the waters. If I am correct, it is a powerful image.

The second hemistich is also problematic. At issue is the meaning of anuṣṭhā́ḥ, which Indra smashes. The form must be acc. pl. feminine (though Scar [644] allows the possibility of a nom. sg. masc., which would necessarily separate it from the preceding víśvāḥ). The lexeme ánu √sthā straightforwardly means ‘stand by, stand following, stand along’ and can be used for helpers who stand by a leader (as indeed in nearby I.52.4); see exx. adduced by Scar. Scar then reasonably suggests that anuṣṭhā́ḥ here refers to ‘Gefolgsleute’ (sim. WG). But this introduces a set of subordinates and helpers to Vṛtra that do not otherwise figure in this well-known myth. Ge takes it as “Einsperrer” (barriers), which makes sense but is hard to extract from the form. Re’s “les positions-successives” is apparently an attempt to render Ge’s translation in a lexically legitimate way, but it doesn’t make much sense. My “rows (of palings) … in succession” is a similar attempt, with the palings a complete invention. I do not feel that a satisfying solution has yet been reached.