+++
title = "08"

+++
Soma goes from affecting the sun in vs. 7 to identity with the sun in this vs, since he yokes Etaśa, the sun’s horse, and travels through the midspace as if on the sun’s daily journey - at least in my interpr. and that of Ge. But the vs. can be interpr. in a number of diff. ways, in part because the sū́ra of the Saṃhitā text is multiply ambiguous. If its underlying form is sū́raḥ, per the Pp., it can be either gen./abl. to svàr- (so Sāy., as well as Ge and the publ. tr.) or nom. sg. to sū́ra-; however, it could also be underlying sū́re and a loc. to sū́ra-. (Re also allows the dat., presumably to svàr-, but the only clear dat. to this stem is accented sūré [IV.3.8]; sū́re duhitā́[I.34.5] is actually an old gen. with close sandhi effect before dental, likewise in IX.97.38; see my Fs. Melchert article, “Sū́re Duhitár's Brother, the ‘Placer of the Sun’: Another Example of -e <*-as in Rigvedic Phrasal Sandhi,” 2010.). In any case, an underlying sū́raḥ is more likely than sū́re because of the sū́ro in the next vs. (9b), which repeats much of the verbal material in this one.

Lü (215-16) objects to Ge’s interpr. of the vs., on the basis that the sun always travels through heaven, and here the travel is through the midspace (antárikṣena). So in his view this cannot refer to heavenly Soma identified with the sun, but must refer to the earthly Soma, who takes the name Sūra (hence sū́raḥ is a nominative for him) and yokes a horse named Etaśa after the Sun’s horse, and journeys towards heaven through the midspace. In other words, his Soma seems as if he’s trying to steal the sun’s identity by stealing his names. I confess that the subtleties of Lü’s distinctions escape me, depending as they do on his strict separation of earthly and heavenly elements throughout his Varuṇa vols. Re seems to adopt some version of the Lü interpr., judging from his tr. of bc “… pour qu’il aille du (domaine de) Manu (au ciel) à travers l’espace-médian,” interpr. manā́v ádhi as if it contained an abl. manór before ádhi. (He interpr. the same two pādas two hymns later [IX.65.16bc] quite differently.) I do see the point about the midspace, however, and am willing to concede that Soma-as-Sun is not quite as high a flyer as the Sun himself. Bl (RReps ad loc.) also considers sū́raḥ a nom., but in his view this expresses “the complete assimiliation of Soma Pavamāna to the sun,” which is a different conclusion from Lü’s. The point is surely not whether Soma is literally in heaven, but that he has acquired and displays the salient characteristics of the Sun and is therefore identified with the Sun despite remaining in the ritual arena.

