+++
title = "01"

+++
The hymn does not start promisingly, with a bad, and unfixable, cadence in pāda a (jyẽ́ṣṭhatamā). Pāda c also ends with a superlative (yámiṣṭhā), which makes a fine cadence. Perhaps this morphological parallelism invited the deployment of the double splv. jyẽṣṭhatamā in this unfavorable position.

Both Ge and Re predicate the infin. vāvṛdhádhyai to a supplied 1st pl. (e.g., “M+V … wollen wir erbauen …”), but there is no reason why the dual dvandva mitrā́váruṇā can’t be a nom., with a passive reading of the infin., as I take it. In Re’s case the supposed 1st ps. subj. leads him to take vaḥ as obj. (“vous les plus puissants …”), though of course it is plural and does not match the referents in number and, compounding the grammatical lapses, to tr. mitrā́váruṇā as voc. (“ô Varuṇa-Mitra”).

This was not Re’s finest hour. Ge manages to shift vaḥ off into an oblique role (“für euch,” presumably referring to the human beneficiaries of the 1st ps. poet-ritualists’ activities), but absent a 1st ps. subj., vaḥ can be attached directly to the poets’ songs used for strengthening, as in the publ. tr.

In c the grammatical identity of raśmā́(in sandhi with the simile particle raśméva) is unclear. It is generally taken, I think correctly, to the -n-stem raśmán-, otherwise found only in cmpds. Gr calls it an instr., and Wackernagel concurs (AiG III.268), as does Re (clearer in the comm. [EVP VII] than in the weaselly tr. “comme (avec) une rêne” [EVP V]). But -mā instr. to -man-stems are rare; AiG cites only the likewise hapax drāghmā́in X.70.4. We might rather expect *raś(a)nā́or the like (cf. mahinā́to mahimán-), and in fact such a posited form might yield the well-attested - ā-stem raśanā́- ‘halter’ as a decasuative from the instr. (though the Iranian forms showing this same internal vowel [see EWA s.v.] might give us pause). Ge by contrast takes it as a nom. sg., which is grammatically impeccable as long as the stem is masc. (Since its other two occurences are in bahuvrīhis, it is impossible to be sure, but suffix-accented -mán-stems are in fact generally masc.; cf. AiG II.2.754.) Either nom. or instr. would work fine in the passage; in the former case the comparison would be to Mitra and Varuṇa as controllers; in the latter to the arms with which they perform the controlling (bāhúbhiḥ svaíḥ). In neither case would raśmā́match the frame in number. I have followed Ge in taking it as a nom., though I would like it to be dual, like apásā in 3c, but this is morphologically impossible.

The verb form yamátuḥ is generally assigned to the pf. stem (Gr, Wh Rts, Kü), though Lub lists it with the root aor., labelling it a nonce. Kü (399) derives this nonredupl. pf. by analogy to “nur scheinbar reduplikationslosem takṣathur : takṣur” to the 3rd pl. injunc. root aor. yamur. Since there is no real semantic connection between the two roots √yam and √takṣ, and the supposed model takṣathur is found only once in the RV, in Maṇḍala X (as opposed to the well-established redupl. pf. tatákṣa, etc.), this seems an unlikely channel. A more likely one is found in the immediate context: the pāda ends … yamátur yámiṣṭhā, with the dual splv. “best controllers” serving as subj. to the etymologically identical verb. In these circumstances substituting the root syllable yam found in the splv. for the weak form yem found in the proper dual pf. yemáthur (2x; cf. also 3rd du. yematur) would not be surprising.

