+++
title = "02"

+++
The first hemistich displays a sort of contrastive ritual synesthesia. In the first pāda an inspired thought (manīṣā́) is ‘spread forth’ (prá stṛṇīte), an action not literally applicable to a verbal product but suitable to the barhis or ritual grass found in b, which is not the obj. of this verb. What is going on in b is not clear until we reach the next vs. The b pāda of 2 contains a set of apparently unconnected notions without a unifying verb: úpa priyā́námasā barhír ácha “up to, the two dear ones (or, with a dear one), with homage, to the ritual grass,” but the corresponding pāda in 3 pulls together this disarray: úpa priyā́námasā hūyámānā. The missing verbal action is ‘call’, and now the two dear ones, the instrumental homage, and the barhis all make sense. I therefore (with Ge, but not Re) supply a form of ‘call’ in 2b. And ‘call’ is more appropriate to the inspired thought of pāda a than the spreading that occurred there. In the publ. tr. I supply a participial form modifying the inspired thought and having active semantics, with priyā́as acc. obj. (“calling [you] two dear ones”). I now see that it might be desirable to supply the exact form found in the next vs., the dual pass. hūyámānā, tr. “… you two, the dear ones being called …” However, there is a grammatical obstacle, in that vām in 2a must be a gen./dat. enclitic, not an acc., and therefore there is no available acc. in the structural frame of the hemistich that a passive participle could modify. This might be finessed by taking b as a sort of loosely connected new start. However, I prefer to stay with the publ. tr., both for the syntactic reasons just mentioned, and because it makes the connection between the inspired thought and the call to the gods more direct.

The nominal rel. cl. yád vāṃ varūthyàm is another ex. of an izafe-like construction. Here, since nothing follows it but a voc., it does not appear embedded, as many such phrases do, but it adds to the dossier of these constructions.

