+++
title = "03"

+++
For the connection of the first hemistich, and esp. b, with 2ab, esp. b, see comm. on the preceding vs. Here, since Mitra and Varuṇa are subjects, the pass.

participle hūyámānā is in the nom. The 2nd hemistich is extremely problematic. Among other things, the rel. prn.

yaú in c calls for an accented verb, but the only finite verb in the hemistich is unaccented yatathaḥ in d; the hapax apnastháḥ in c is of unclear meaning and has an uncertain grammatical identity; the following simile apáseva has been variously interpr.; śrudhīyatáḥ is a hapax denominative part.; and even if all these questions are solved, what does it all add up to? Before addressing any of these questions directly, note several plays on the syllable yā̆ in the early part of the hymn: 1) PREV + dual rel. pronoun in the initial sequences sáṃ yā́(1c), sáṃ yā́v (our 3c) (as well as prá yā́[4c] and, with slight transformation, pári yád [5c]); 2) dual verbs yamátuḥ (1c), yantám (2c), ā́yātam (3a), yatathaḥ (3d). These observations set the stage for a way to reason through the problems of this hemistich.

Let us begin with the problem of the lack of accented verb in what must be a rel. cl. introduced by sáṃ yaú. Assuming that d, with its unaccented verb, is the main cl. corresponding to the rel. cl. of c, which has no overt verb, there is a non-arbitrary way to generate one: in 1c the same opening sequence sáṃ yā́(differing only in the form of the dual rel. prn., attributable to the variation in the following initial) does have an accented verb, pf. yamátuḥ, reinforced by the immediately flg. splv.

yámiṣṭhā, with the verb of 2c, yantám, also belonging to the root √yam. Our opening sáṃ yaú cries out for (or at least whispers for) a similar form of √yam, and so I have supplied it. Note that the obj. of sám … yamátuḥ in 1cd is jánān as here. (Ge [n. 3cd] supplies náyathaḥ, on the basis of V.65.6 yuvám mitremáṃ jánaṃ, yátathaḥ sáṃ ca nayathaḥ, also a M+V passage; this is a reasonable idea based on a good parallel, and in some ways amounts to the same thing: he tr. “die die Menschen zusammen(halten)” -- but I prefer mine because it is generated within the hymn’s context. Old appears to supply a form of √yat matching the one in the main cl. of d, as does Re.) On the question of apáseva there is now a reasonable consensus (Old, Ge, Re, and me, but see Gr and Old for alternative views) that this represents a dual NA apásā referring to M+V as subjects. They are therefore controlling the peoples (jánān) as workers (or, perhaps better, work-overseers) do. But we must now confront the hapax apnastháḥ. This is likely a cmpd of ápnas- ‘property, riches’ and a form of √sthā. But what form? Gr, Debrunner (AiG II.2.37), and EWA (s.v. ápnas-) assign it to a them. stem apnasthá-, which would require it to be a nom. sg., which ill accords with the assumed dual subj. If it is nom. sg., then apásā would be pushed into the acc. slot, where there is no syntactic place for it, or else, with an unenthusiastic suggestion of Old’s, it would be an instr. sg. to the neut. s-stem, for

*ápasā. Better to take it, by Old’s preferred interpr., as belonging to a root-noun
cmpd apnas-sthā́-. Under this interpr. it would be an acc. pl. This seems the least objectionable from a contextual point of view; even though acc. pl. to root nouns in - ā aren't certainly attested (see the not very helpful treatments of Lanman [Noun Inflec. 451 and passim], Macdonell VG 253), both -as and -ās seem to be possibilities. The 1st members of cmpds in -sthā́- generally have a locatival relationship to their 2nd member, so ‘standing/staying in ápnas-’ is the likely meaning. As for its function in the clause, I take it as qualifying jánān (so also Old, though with alternatives), while Ge and Re take it as part of the simile (e.g., “... die die Menschen zusammen(halten) wie Werkmeister die Lohnarbeiter”), and Scar, flg.

Neisser, takes it as the designation of a group of people distinct from the general jánān but still in the frame. In the absence of other attestations of the cmpd or underlying phrase, this cannot be decisively determined. For a detailed disc. of the word and the passage, see Scar 645-46.

The denom. śrudhīyá- is, by most accounts (see Old, Re), but not by Ge’s (see n. 3d), built to the 2nd sg. impv. śrudhí ‘listen!’. It is an acc. pl. part. The question is what sense it is conveying. Gr glosses ‘gehorsam sein’, but since even (cid) this group of people is put in its place by M+V with their greatness (mahitvā́), it is unlikely that they were already obedient. Old (see also Re) suggests that it is people who address M+V with this impv., perhaps indicating that they stand in a close or privileged relationship with those gods. I think rather that it may refer to people powerful enough to command obedience from other men through such peremptory commands. They would then be similar in stature to the apnastháḥ: two sets of people used to getting their own way (rich and demanding), who have to submit to M+V.

