+++
title = "04"

+++
The birth of M+V from Aditi. This vs. is also beset with difficulties. The major structural one is determining the interrelationships of the three subordinate clauses, in abc, marked by yā́, yád, and yā́respectively, and their joint relationship (or not) to the main clause in d. Once again, there are numerous competing views; I will not rehearse them all. In my view, the three subordinate clauses are not all parallel and semi-independent, but rather the two introduced by the dual rel. prn. yā́ (a, c) are parallel and jointly dependent on the middle cl. introduced by yád (b). In tr.

I have flipped the order of a and b in hopes of making the sense a bit more parsable. I further think that the two forms of yā́‘which two’ have as antecedent in b the sg.

gárbham: “the embryo which was those two” or “the two as embryo.” M+V formed one of the pairs that Aditi gave birth to serially and in that sense were a single gárbham.

Let us then concentrate first on pāda a. Here, as in 1ab, there is an infin. in - dhyai predicated of a god’s name, áditiḥ: “When Aditi (was) to bear.” The puzzle in the vs. is ṛtā́, and numerous analyses have been proposed: nom. sg. fem. to normally neut. ṛtá- ‘truth (etc.)’; short instr. sg. to the same stem; dual to the same stem; a 3rd sg. denom. verb to the same stem (emending to *ṛtāyád from ṛtā́yád), or, the solution I favor, as a short loc. sg. to ṛtú- ‘season’ (so Ge, though see his n. 4b), even though -u-stems supposedly have only -au/-avi locc. (but see Lanman p. 411: “if there is any certain instance of a L in -â, it must be regarded as due to false analogy.” I see no problem with analogy, false or otherwise).

The two yā́clauses are nominal. The first (a) presents no problems. In the 2nd (c) most tr. supply a verb with prá, e.g., Ge “die sich gross hervortun” (sim. Re).

However, I take jā́yamānā as a predicated pres. part. and máhi as an intensifier of mahā́ntā.

In d the sense of the verb ní dīdhaḥ is unclear, and the lexeme ní √dhṛ is not common. Gr glosses this passage as ‘machen’ with double acc.; Ge tr. ‘hatte … getragen’, Re ‘avait placé en secret’. In the three other passages containing ní (ā́) √dhṛ that I know of (IV.2.12, VI.17.6, ní-ā́VIII.17.13), the idiom means something like ‘fix’ or ‘secure’, but here I think it applies to the process of birth: ‘bear down’.

Although I know of no other such exx., this kind of technical birth context doesn't come up very often in the RV. The birth process interpr. fits well with the predicated pres. part. of c: “who were being born” as well as with the indication in b that Aditi had reached her precise time for giving birth.
