+++
title = "09"

+++
The first half of this vs. is fairly straightforward; the problems arise in the 2nd hemistich, primarily because of ápi yaḥ in d. The first hemistich describes the behavior of the contentious and impious rivals, while the 2nd defines such people as outside the normal categories of beings. Pāda c asserts clearly that those who don’t attend upon the sacrifice are neither gods nor men, and in d they are compared instead to ápi yaḥ … putrā́ḥ, which is universally tr. as “like the sons of the watery female” (e.g., Ge “wie die Söhne der Wasserfrau”). Not only does this make no obvious (or unobvious) sense, but the morphology is essentially impossible: it is very difficult to get ápi yaḥ to be either the gen. sg. of a fem. -ī-stem or the nom. pl. m. of an adj. See the rather despairing assessments of Ge (n. 9d), Debrunner (AiG II.2.401), and esp. Scar (592 n. 841). Desperate situations require desperate measures, and I therefore part company with the consensus interpr. of ápi yaḥ and suggest an entirely different derivation -- as a negated root noun cmpd to the seṭ form of the ‘swell’ root √pī. We should expect a root-accented *a-pī́-, with nom. pl.

*apíyaḥ, but I would suggest that this unclear hapax would have been attracted to the
reasonably well-attested ‘watery’ stem ápi ya- and the accent retracted. As for meaning, I suggest that ‘not swelling/swollen’ means ‘not growing / thriving’, and in reference to children to stunted or underdeveloped ones, afflicted by what is now called “failure to thrive” in pediatric medicine. Note that the aniṭ form of the ‘swell’ root makes a negated root-noun cmpd apít- in VII.82.3 ápinvatam apítaḥ “you two made the unswollen (waters) swell.” The publ. tr. does not represent the rel. prn. yé in c but treats all of cd as the main cl. corresponding to the subord. clauses of ab. I do not know an easy way to do this, but might suggest an alternative tr. of cd as “those not attending on the sacrifice who are neither gods … nor mortals are like children …”

