+++
title = "10"

+++
Ge and Re take the first hemistich here as a continuation of the description of bad ritual behavior, with cd introducing our contrastively correct practice. I think rather that the whole of 10 describes this good behavior. One advantage of this interpr. is that it allows ā́d opening c to have its normal sense ‘after that’, which Klein (DGRV II.135-36) must explicitly deny it. By my interpr. the first pāda sets the ritual scene, with the various priestly speakers “distributing” the types of ritual speech, as is standard in Vedic ritual. Some of these speakers recite the Nivids, the formal invocations. After this “we” take over by speaking ukthá-.

On kīstá- ‘praiser’ see comm. ad I.127.7. I see no evidence for Re’s ‘mauvaisprêtres’ beyond his contextual assumptions.

The interpr. of ab as referring to bad practice turns on the part. manānā́ḥ, which most take as meaning ‘(falsely) considering X as Y’ (e.g., Ge “was sie für Einladungssprüche halten”), but no evidence is presented that this should be the meaning of this root aor. part., the only occurrence of the participial stem. Most other forms of this medial root aor. (mostly attested in the subjunctive) have a positive sense: ‘bring to mind’, ‘conceive’, ‘ponder’, etc. The publ. tr. has ‘pay heed to’, but any of the other suggested tr. just given would work as well, while ‘(falsely) consider’ has no support in this stem.

Pāda d is syntactically problematic. The last two words (yatatho mahitvā́) are identical to the ending of 3d and appear to sketch a ring and a return to the focus on M+V’s ability to put human beings in order. Because of this salient repetition, I am reluctant to ascribe an entire different sense to this phrase in this vs. than in 3, as both Ge and Re do, with both also unacceptably stretching the meaning of the verb form. In order to take d as a single cl., they must also treat nákiḥ as a simple neg.

rather than in its usual meaning ‘no one’, since the verb yatathaḥ is 2nd du. and cannot take ‘no one’ as subject. In order to avoid this problem, I create problems of my own. I take nákiḥ as a radically truncated sentence “No one …” This is based on the observation that one of the most common contexts in which nákis appears is as subj. of minat (etc.) ‘violate(s)’ (cf., e.g., I.69.7, IV.30.23, VI.30.2, etc.). I therefore suggest that nákiḥ here is an implicit response to the description of the behavior of bad rivals in 9b priyā́dhā́ma yuvádhitā minánti “they violate the dear ordinances ordained by you”. Here in our ritual “no one” performs such violation. With nákis out of the way, the rest of the pāda can be harmonized with the use of yatatho mahitvā́in 3d. There M+V ‘set in place’ various peoples (jánān). Here I would resupply jánān and take devébhiḥ as an instr. of accompaniment: M+V set in place the peoples along with the gods. I would prefer not to have to impose such a radical analysis on this pāda, but I find other analyses even more unsatisfactory.

