+++
title = "001"

+++
## 01-02
After establishing the Soma Pavamāna theme in the 2nd pāda of the 1st vs., with the command pávasva soma “purify yourself, Soma,” in the 2nd vs. the poet presents Soma in an expansive role, as demon-smasher (rakṣohán-) and belonging to all domains (viśvácarṣani-), while at the same time precisely locating him in his seat on the ritual ground. This juxtaposition of hyper-local, ritually defined technical details and the grandiosely universal is typical of the entire IXth Maṇḍala.


## 02
The adj. áyohata- ‘metal-hammered’ occurs twice in the RV (also IX.80.2), both qualifying yóni- ‘womb’ and referring to something that contains soma. Old suggests that it refers to a wooden vessel that has been hewn out by a metal blade.

What the instr. drúṇā is doing here is unclear to me. This instr. appears 5x in the RV; in the two passages outside of the Soma maṇḍala (V.86.3, VIII.96.11) it appears to refer to an implement with which one accomplishes something -- in the latter passage a paddle to propel a boat to reach the far shore. Of the two other passages in IX, IX.65.6 drúṇā sadhástham aśnuṣe is quite similar to this one: “you attain to your seat drúṇā,” and in 98.2 índur abhí drúṇā hitáḥ, which lacks an overt ‘seat’, the interpr. depends on which root hitáḥ is assigned to: √dhā ‘place’ or √hi ‘impel’. In all three soma passages I take drúṇā as an implement (a wooden vessel or even a pusher, a paddle) that allows soma to attain its place or (in 98.2, taking hitá- to √hi) to be impelled on its way. This is not the standard interpr.; most (see, e.g., Old’s disc.) take it as referring to the wooden cup or vessel that constitutes soma’s “seat” (e.g., Ge “an seinen Platz aus Holz”), but the instr. in such an interpr. is troubling. Re remarks “Instr. un peu rude pour d° kṛtám” and renders (ad IX.1.2)  65.6 as “placé (sur la cuve faite) en bois.” Though he further remarks “on ne peut parler qu’avec réserve de l’Instr. de matière en véd.,” an instr. of material is essentially the standard interpr. of drúṇā in this passage -- one that I would prefer to avoid, though perhaps at the expense of inventing another implement in the soma ritual.


## 03
The aggrandizing of Soma’s role continues here, with 3 superlatives: varivodhā́tama- ‘best establisher of the wide realm’, máṃhistha- ‘most munificent’, and vṛtrahántama- ‘best smasher of obstacles’ -- the last of course borrowing Indra’s signature epithet, while máṃhiṣṭha- also regularly characterizes Indra. Re suggests that the three represent the three (Dumézilian) functions, but this does not seem particularly compelling.

Vs. 1 also began with two superlatives, svā́diṣṭha- ‘sweetest’ and mádiṣṭha- ‘most exhilarating’, but these are restricted to soma’s ritual role, whereas the three in this vs. attribute universal powers to him.

Pāda c is identical to VIII.103.7d, found in the very last hymn of Maṇḍala VIII, just as this is found in the first hymn of Maṇḍala IX -- so they are adjacent in the Saṃhitā arrangement. But I don’t know what, if anything, to make of this. If this is more than just accident, it would suggest that the compilers selected this particular Gāyatrī hymn to begin IX on the basis of this verbal correspondence.


## 06
As indicated in the publ. intro., the standard clichéś of the soma maṇḍala gave way here to more novel material. The involvement of the Daughter of the Sun as purifier of soma is puzzling. Ge suggests (n. 6b) that the Daughter of the Sun, also found in this maṇḍala at IX.72.3, 113.3, is the “Dicht- oder Gesangeskunst,” on what seem to me slender grounds (mostly III.53.15, which is not at all clear). Oberlies’s notion (Relig. RV I.241, 282; II.60) that this locution indicates that Soma comes from heaven to earth at dawn is more plausible

-- though it should be kept in mind that Sūryā, the daughter of the Sun, is not the same as
Uṣas, Dawn. I would rather suggest that the presence of this figure in this vs., which immediately precedes two vss. metaphorically concerning ‘maidens’ (yóṣanaḥ) and ‘unwed girls’ (agrúvaḥ), is meant to showcase the mythological marriageable maiden par excellence: Sūryā exists essentially only to get married. Her appearance in this vs. serves as a positive model for the maidens that follow. However, this interpr. does not fit well with my interpr. of the other passages in which she appears in this maṇḍala; see esp. disc. ad IX.72.3.

The referent of te has occasioned some discussion. In this hymn the 2nd ps. referent is otherwise always soma, but the acc. sómam already appears in the vs. as obj. of punā́ti. The solution adopted by most (see Old’s disc.), which I also subscribe to, is that te does refer to soma, but to Soma the god, distinguishing him from soma the liquid, the ritual substance represented by the acc. sómam. Ge (n. 6) cites other possibilities that have been suggested -- the ritual patron or Indra -- though he himself accepts the Soma the god hypothesis.


## 07
The adj. áṇu- ‘delicate, fine’, always in the fem., is used several times of the fingers in their task of pressing soma. Because fingers are, of course, joined in the hand they are also called sisters, as here.

The ‘clash’ (samaryé) presumably refers to the pounding of the pressing stones.


## 08
The ‘unwed girls’ are also the fingers alluded to in the preceding vs.: the pl. agrúvaḥ is always so used.

In b they are clearly blowing into a musical instrument: bākurá- is a hapax, a vṛddhi deriv. of bákura- also a hapax (I.117.21), used of a musical instrument one blows (√dham), as here. Both show non-Indo-Aryan phonology. But what does this have to do with soma preparation? and how can fingers “blow” into a pipe? Ge, ad I.117.21, suggests that the skin pipe is the “bildlicher Ausdruck für die Somapflanze”; perhaps the reference is to the stalk, and perhaps the fingers pressing on the stalk produce a noise similar to a pipe. Or -- perhaps the poet has simply gotten carried away by a picture of festivity, with unmarried girls celebrating at a gathering.

The next question is what to do with the acc. phrase in c. I find it unlikely that the “wild honey” is in apposition to the bag-pipe of b, though Ge seems to take it that way. Re supplies another verb “(elles traient),” whereas I take it as a return to the object of hinvanti in pāda a, with b loosely parenthetical. It is “threefold” (tridhā́tu) perhaps in reference to the three soma pressings, or to some other ritual triplet (see Ge’s suggestions n. 8c). For further discussion of tridhā́tu … mádhu see comm. ad IX.70.8.


## 09
Note the openings of vss. 7-9: 7 tám īm / 8 tám īm / 9 abhī̀m(ám).

Pāda c is a slight variant on 1c and sketches a ring.


## 10
As just noted, the last pāda of vs. 9 seems to bring the hymn to a conclusion with a reprise of the end of the 1st vs., even though another vs. follows. Indeed vs. 10 does seem to stand apart from the rest of the hymn, while picking up various elements from it. First, note that though Indra was mentioned in the ring- compositional pādas, 1c índrāya pā́tave sutáḥ, 9c sómam índrāya pā́tave, he was absent from the rest of the hymn and his characteristics and deeds assigned to Soma instead. But here he reasserts his role as vṛtrá-smasher (b víśvā vṛtrā́ṇi jighnate), posited of Soma in 3b vṛtrahántamaḥ, and as giver of bounties (c maghā́ … maṃhate), also posited of Soma in 3b máṃhiṣṭhaḥ. The superlative mádiṣṭha- ‘most exhilarating’, describing the stream of soma in the first pāda of the hymn (1a), returns as the exhilarations of soma (asyá … mádeṣu)(10a) that spur Indra on to his exploits, the signature root √mad having been absent for all the rest of the hymn. (This particular ringcompositional effect is obscured in the publ. tr. by my use of ‘raptures’ for mádeṣu in 10a.)
