+++
title = "002"

+++
For the sequence of ideas and actions in this hymn, see publ. intro.


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., this hymn begins with the quintessential command of the Soma maṇḍala: pávasva ‘purify yourself’, found in the previous hymn at the beginning of the 2nd pāda (IX.1.1b).

The 2nd word devavī́ḥ ‘pursuing the gods’ also matches up with the previous hymn:

> 1.4
devā́nāṃ vītím.

The expression “across the filter” is iconically split across the pāda break: áti, pavítram.

The last pāda consists of a neat double figure índram indo vṛ́śā́viśa. The play between índra- and índu- ‘drop’ is ubiquitous in the IXth Maṇḍala and is in fact reprised in 9a indav indrayúḥ.


## 02
The standard tr. of (ā́) vacyasva (√vañc) here is ‘gallop’ (Ge, Re), but the root itself means something like ‘move crookedly’ (see comm. ad III.39.1 inter alia). Kulikov (Vedic - ya-presents) devotes considerable space to this -yá-pres. (218-24), rather desperately attempting to account for its apparent passive accentuation (vacyáte). He concludes that the subject of this pres. “always refers to beings set in motion and directed by someone else, not moving on its [sic] own,” and was originally the passive counterpart of a posited transitive redupl. pres. **vívaṅkti [double star is Kulikov’s]. I find this over-elaborate -- and since the subjects are generally horses, or entities configured as horses, and since RVic horses have considerable agency of their own with regard to movement -- not terribly convincing. In this particular case, the verb is in the imperative, and it is difficult to see how something incapable of moving on its own could be commanded to do so. Four of the ten occurrences of this pres. stem are imperatival, three of them 2nd sg. as here. (the fourth is 3rd pl.). As discussed ad III.39.1, etc., I consider one of the nuances of this verb to be ‘coil, twist’, and here I see the soma circling and twisting its way into the cup; the preverb pári ‘around’ is a regular part of the description of soma’s movements around the filter and into the vessels.

I take the injunc. sadaḥ in the sense of an impv.; see KH (Injunk. 263) for this usage of this particular form.

On the sa-aor. ádhukṣa-, here in 3rd sg. mid. adhukṣata, see Narten (Sig.Aor. 143- 44).

## 03-04
These two vss. introduce the trope of “clothing,” a metaphor for mixing the soma juice with various substances: after the pressing proper the soma is mixed first with water (vs. 3) and then with milk (vs. 4), the latter accounting for the ubiquitous “cows” of the IXth Maṇḍala. Thus, though an expression “clothe himself with cows” initially strikes the inexperienced reader as ludicrous, it makes perfect sense in the tightly constructed verbal realm of the Soma hymns: clothing = mixing and cows = waters.


## 04
What I don’t quite understand is why we have the rather exotic form, a causative future reflexive middle in 4c, vāsayiṣyáse (lit. ‘you will cause yourself to be clothed’), in contrast to the straightforward -iṣ-aor. middle vasiṣṭa (‘he has clothed himself’) that corresponds to it in 3c. The need or desire to use the future must have triggered the creation of this baroque form. In this connection it is worth noting that √vas ‘clothe’ lacks a standard future in Vedic and, acdg. to Wh Roots, has only one occurrence in ClSk. of a future vatsyati -- so perhaps the causative allowed a transparent future to be built more easily. This form (repeated in the identical pāda in IX.66.13) is also the only medial form of the caus. to √vas ‘clothe’ in the RV. The question then arises - why is the future so desirable in this context that such morphological shenanigans had to be performed? The clue to the usage may lie in part in the sequencing of the verbs: both b and c are repeated in IX.66.13 (likewise as bc), and so the two clauses form a larger unit and must be evaluated together.

The b pāda contains a pres. indic., ā́po arṣanti síndhavaḥ “The waters, the rivers rush,” while c contains the causative future under discussion. On the one hand, the future may be signaling that the second action (clothing in milk) will follow the first (clothing in waters); this is of course the normal ritual order. But we should also remember that the future, esp.

the finite future, is relatively rare in the RV, and, curiously, it tends to have a more volitional nuance than the subjunctive, with which it competes. A good ex. of this is found in the famous and well-trodden Agni hymn I.1, where in vs. 6 yád … dāśúṣe … bhadraṃ kariṣyási should be rendered “what good thing you will do for the pious man,” indicating Agni’s deliberate choice to favor that man. Here I would suggest that Soma is bound and determined to clothe himself with milk at this point in the ritual proceedings; it is not just the next event on the menu.


## 05
This vs. contains several striking paradoxes, once they have been “unpacked.” First, “the sea has been groomed in the waters,” which seems to reverse volume relations: we would expect “the sea” (samudrá-) to be more larger and more extensive than the waters, but evidently the former can be contained and “groomed” (māmṛje) in the latter. The “sea” is of course soma, which is presumably so called on the basis of the usual aggrandizement of Soma’s cosmic associations.

Then, without transition, soma goes from being “the sea” to “the prop and buttress of heaven” -- that is, from something fluid, unstable, and in constant motion to its exact opposite: solid, fixed, steady enough to support heaven itself. Another paradox and another indication that Soma’s cosmic ambitions cannot be contained.

It is tempting to supply “earth” in b, on the basis of IX.87.2 = 89.6 viṣtambhó divó dharúṇaḥ pṛthivyā́ḥ: “the prop of heaven and buttress of the earth,” but perhaps it is better to stick with the text as we have it.

After the two cosmic identifications in a and b, in c we return to the focused reality of the ritual: the soma in the filter -- the usual toggling between the universal and the hyperparticular.


## 06
Another cosmic association: Soma shines along with the sun, implying that Soma is just as bright -- though this may also be a reference to the timing of the morning pressing, at sunrise.


## 07
Finite forms of the intens. -yá-pres. marmṛjyá- are ordinarily transitive, as in


## 03
etám tyám … marmṛjyánte apasyúvaḥ “This very one [=soma] do the industrious (fingers) groom,” with the same adj. qualifying the subject as here. Though the transitivity of the verb in 38.3 is quite clear, our passage is more ambiguous -- and has been discussed at some length by Ge (n. 7), Bl (RReps ad loc.), and Re. If we wish the verb to be tr., we can supply ‘you’, as Bl suggests (also Re as an alternative). Or we can take gíraḥ as acc., rather than nom., and tr. “the industrious ones constantly groom the songs …” However, I prefer to take the verb as passive (as two of the three forms of the pres. part. marmṛjyámāna- are) and see the vs. as an expression of ritual reciprocity: the songs are groomed by the power of Soma -- that is, the hymns recited at the Soma Sacrifice are refined and perfected by the inspiration given to the poets by Soma -- while those perfected hymns in turn adorn and beautify the soma offering.


## 08
The expression mádāya ghṛ́ṣvaya in the Saṃhitā text may be deliberately ambiguous. The Pp. reads dat. ghṛ́ṣvaye, which is supported by IX.16.1 as well as VIII.64.12, but IX.101.8 has ... mádāya ghṛ́ṣvayaḥ “(cows) avid for exhilaration,” which would allow a tr. here “we, avid for exhilaration …” Although the publ. tr. follows the Pp.

(as do Ge and Re), I think both readings may be intended.
