+++
title = "003"

+++
As discussed in the publ. intro., this hymn is unified by a simple device, the nom. sg.

m. prn/pronominal adj. eṣá ‘this (one)’ that opens each vs. The first three vss. (and vs. 5) begin eṣá deváḥ; in a further two vss. (7, 8) the 2nd word divám is, of course, etymologically related to devá- and a phonological variant (i for e in the initial syllable). Only vss. 4, 6, 9, and 10 stand aside from this pattern -- and 6 and 9 have deváḥ in their 2nd pādas. The final vs., 10, opens eṣá u syá “this one here, this very one,” producing an emphatic summary with the addition of a 2nd prn.

As was also noted in the publ. intro., the maṇḍala’s signature word ‘purify oneself’ is also omnipresent in this hymn, esp. the nom. sg. pres. part. pávamāna- ‘purifying himself’, which opens the pāda in vss. 2(c), 3(b), 4(c), 5(b), 7(c), 8(c); pavítre is found (mid-pāda) in 9, and once again vs. 10 marks a change and a summary, by using the finite form pavate (mid-c). Only vss. 1 and 6 lack a form of √pū. It might be worthy of note (if we understood how this maṇḍala had been assembled) that this flurry of repetitions is the first appearance of the part. pávamāna- in this maṇḍala. The over-abundance of forms of √pū may balance the lack of any overt mention of sóma-.

It can also be noted that the hymn is entirely in the 3rd ps.


## 01
The non-literal tr. “bird on the wing” for parṇavī́- conceals the problematic analysis of this hapax. Although Re (unconvincingly) suggests that -vī́- is a simple doublet suffix of - yú-, the most likely (and generally accepted) analysis on formal grounds is as a root noun cmpd. to √vī ‘pursue’, like deva-vī́- ‘pursuing the gods’ in the preceding hymn (IX.2.1, itself recalling devā́nāṃ vītí- in IX.1.3). However, on the basis of well-attested deva-vī́- (cf.

also pada-vī́-), we expect the 1st member to express the object of pursuit -- and ‘pursuing the/its wings/feathers’ makes little sense. The best we can construct is an instr. relationship, ‘pursuing with its wings’; see Scar 499. The situation is further muddied by the fact that the 2nd member bears a distinct resemblance to ví- ‘bird’, which finds textual expression elsewhere: cf. I.183.1 adduced by Scar, tridhā́tunā patatho vír ná parṇaíḥ “You [=Aśvins] fly with the tripartite (chariot) like a bird with its feathers.” Scar (499-500) sketches a complex scenario whereby pada-vī́- ‘pursuing the track’ was reinterp. to an instr. *padā-vī́- ‘pursuing with the foot’, giving rise to our cmpd, with a different body part. But I think it’s simpler to assume that our poet was pursuing an imperfect pun with ví- ‘bird’, perhaps encouraged by deva-vī́- in the 1st vs. of the preceding hymn (though we have no know way to know how these Gāyatrī hymns were ordered or by whom) and the extreme frequency of that lexeme in the IXth Maṇḍala.


## 02
The expression vipā́kṛtáḥ ‘created by poetic inspiration’ may seem a bit extreme -- after all soma/Soma exists and previously existed independently of the poets. But the usual RVic power attributed to the word is in play here: poetry brings to realization the gods and divine forces on the ritual ground.

The s-stem hváras- belongs to the root √hvṛ ‘go crookedly, swerve’; in a soma context it refers to the curls and tufts of the wool on the sheepskin that serves as the soma filter, trapping the impurities in the just pressed juice. This physical reading seems preferable to the “obstacle” interpr. of Ge, Re, etc. In this regard, I would point out that the smooth, fluffy, brushed sheepskins available commercially are misleading: sheep on the hoof, particularly the shaggy mountain breeds presumably familiar to the Vedic people, have much more rugged and irregular wool.


## 03
Because of their position in the vs., the instr. vipanyúbhiḥ … ṛtāyúbhiḥ appear to be construed with pávamānaḥ, which is nestled between them. However, with Ge and Re I take them with pass. mṛjyate ‘is groomed’ at the end of pāda c. The medial them. pres. pávate is always reflexive (‘purifies oneself’), not passive; when a pass. sense is required, the middle of the IXth Cl. present is used, esp. the part. punāná-. Or, to put it another way, the pávate stem, esp. part. pávamāna-, is syntactically inert; as Re says (ad vs. 2), “Le mot pávamāna semble partout étranger à la syntaxe du v. et se distingue à cet égard de punāná, pūyámāna, pūtá; les exceptions sont de pure apparence.”


## 04
As often, the simile particle iva is “late,” following the first two words: śū́ro yánn iva sátvabhiḥ.

## 07-08
These two vss. are paired; their first two pādas are almost identical: 7ab eṣá dívaṃ ví dhāvati, tiró rájāṃsi dhā́rayā 8ab eṣá dívaṃ vy ā́sarat, tiró rájāṃsi áspṛtaḥ I think this close match actually conceals an important difference in intent. Vs. 7 describes the ritual journey of the just pressed soma in the standard grandiose cosmic style -- the journey from filter to cup configured as a journey through the vast realms of heaven and the midspace. The verb dhāvati is pres. indicative. The vs. picks up from vs. 6, which describes the mixing of the pressed juice with water.

But vs. 8 has an augmented aorist ā́sarat (ā́asarat, so Pp; it could technically be an injunc. ā́sarat). I do not think this simply indicates the endpoint of the journey depicted in 7. Instead it alludes to the origin myth of soma, the bold stealing of Soma from heaven treated esp. in IV.26-27. The clue is the adj. áspṛta-. Although this stem is glossed as ‘invincible’ by Gr, reflected also in Re’s tr., √spṛ means rather ‘gain, win’ and even ‘recover, regain’. The other occurrence of this privative past part. is found in an Indra hymn in VIII, in a pāda almost identical to our b (acc. áspṛtam, not nom. as here). There it also concerns Soma’s journey, but in that passage it is clear that the Somaraub is referred to: VIII.82.9 yáṃ te śyenáḥ padā́bharat tiró rájāṃsi áspṛtam “That which the falcon brought to you [=Indra] with his foot across the airy realms -- the one that could not be recaptured …” The adj. áspṛta- ‘not to be recaptured’ economically encapsulates Kṛśānu’s vain fight against the robber śyená to keep the bird from making off with the Soma confined in heaven. In our passage here the poet is identifying the (humdrum) ritual journey of soma the juice in vs. 7 with the first journey of Soma from heaven in the foundational myth of the Soma Sacrifice, making the two journeys seem as identical as possible by nearly verbatim repetition and thus investing the ritual progress with the glamour and significance of myth.

Thus, although the nearly identical vss. 7 and 8 might seem evidence that the poet was spinning his wheels, in fact the repetition is doing something quite different.


## 09
The mythic resonance in vs. 8 is echoed in pratnéna jánmanā “in the way of his ancient birth.”


## 10
An elementary passive / active figure: jajñānó janáyan “giving birth while he is being born,” somewhat reminiscent of the reciprocal figure in IX.2.7.
