+++
title = "004"

+++
On the formal constraints in this hymn, see publ. intro.


## 01
The double ca construction especially emphasizes the imperatival function of the -si form jéṣi, conjoined as it is with a standard impv. sánā.


## 04
This vs. stands apart from the rest of the hymn, which is otherwise addressed in the 2nd ps. to Soma. Here we have a ref. to the (human) ritual participants (pávītāraḥ ‘purifiers’), and though soma appears in the vs., it is as the substance not the god, and in the 3rd ps.

On pávītāraḥ see comm. ad IX.83.2. Note in passing that this is a voc. with retracted accent; the form given by Gr for this passage, -ā́ras, is incorrect.

## 05-06
These two vss. share not only the refrain pāda (c) found throughout the hymn, but another one (5b = 6a), as well as a common focus on the sun.


## 09
Loc. vídharman lit. ‘in spreading apart / in expansion’ is underspecified and its application unclear -- deliberately so, in my opinion. Once again, the ambiguity allows a blurring of the ritual and the cosmic. In ritual terms the expansion may refer to soma’s spreading across the filter or, as Ge sees it (n. 9b), in the water with which it is mixed; in cosmic terms, it would refer to the spreading of Soma across space (see, e.g., Ober [RR II.152] and VI.71.1 rájaso vídharmaṇi), becoming as extensive as heaven. Re suggests rather that it refers to Soma’s (transitive) spreading (that is, giving) of goods, but I find this less likely. For further disc. see comm. ad IX.64.9.
