+++
title = "005"

+++
Āprī On the interaction of the genre of Āprī hymns with the Soma Pavamāna focus, see the publ. intro.


## 01
The part. prīṇán may signal the Āprī theme, as Old suggests.


## 06
The placement of the simile marker ná seems to make náktoṣā́sā ‘Night and Dawn’ part of the simile itself, rather than the frame, but, esp. given the rigid structure of Āprī hymns, where the pair Night and Dawn is one of the key words, this is not possible. We must just assume that the tendency to put ná after the first word of the phrase has taken over here.


## 07
My interpr. of this vs., esp. pāda c, differs from the standard. I assume that pávamānaḥ and índro vṛ́ṣā are two separate entities: Soma Pavamāna and Indra the bull -- and that they are identified with the two divine Hotars (hótārā daívyā) of b. Old, Ge, and Re all take c as an equational clause: Soma Pavamāna = Indra the bull; there is just one figure, and it has nothing to do with the two Hotars. In their favor is the fact that pāda c has reverted to nominative, whereas the duals are acc. in ab. However, I find it difficult to assume that mentioning the two major divine figures in the Soma Maṇḍala, Soma and Indra, in conjunction with a dual, is utterly unconnected with the dual divine figures in ab.

Otherwise pāda c is a non sequitur. (On 9c and IX.6.2 see below.) As for the reversion to the nominative, I find this somewhat troubling, but it is enabled by the fact that in duals nom. = acc. 
## 09
The listing of figures in cd is puzzling. The publ. tr. follows Ge/Re, with Indra identified as the drop in c and Prajāpati as the self-purifying one in d, but I now very much doubt that this is correct. For one thing, Prajāpati as a separate god is found at best only in X (3x); this is the only occurrence of the stem in IX, and in the only other occurrence outside of X (IV.53.2) it is an epithet of Savitar. This two-pāda sequence (9cd), índur índro vṛ́ṣā háriḥ, pávamānaḥ prajā́patiḥ is a variant and expansion of 7c pávamāna índro vṛ́ṣā, and as in 7 I think it refers to two gods, Soma and Indra. As in 7c the two gods are first identified: here the drop (rather than pávamāna-) and Indra. The next word vṛ́ṣā ‘bull’ appeared to qualify Indra in 7c, but could (and often does) qualify either one, and here it’s placed between Indra and hári- ‘tawny’, a soma descriptor, suggesting affiliation to both. The opening of the next pāda, pávamānaḥ, reasserts the Soma figure. As for prajā́patiḥ, I think it’s possible that it again refers to both, though I have no idea why this stem appears here.

As in vs. 7c I take these pādas as listing other gods to be summoned along with Tvaṣṭar here (tváṣṭāram … ā́huve, like 7b hótārā … huve), with slippage into a free-standing nominative phrase. It anticipates the somewhat random listing of even more gods in 11cd. I don’t find any of this very satisfactory, but I resist the supposed identification of Indra and Soma, who are the two poles of the Soma Maṇḍala.
