+++
title = "006"

+++


## 02
Pāda b índav índra íti kṣara “o drop, flow as ‘Indra’” is the strongest piece of evidence for the identification of Indra and Soma in the previous hymn (IX.5.7, 9) and is so cited by Ge (n. 7c to IX.5). As noted ad locc., I do not believe that those vss. equate the two gods; I do, however, believe that there is a (partial) equation here, on the basis of the mystical phonological near-identity of the two stems ‘drop’ (índu-) and ‘Indra’ (índra-), a similarity that is frequently exploited in this maṇḍala, as we have already noted. The identification of the two here also depends on the ambiguity of the goal of kṣara ‘flow’, namely mádam in pāda a. The stem máda- often refers to the ‘exhilarating drink’, namely soma itself, as well as to the abstract state of exhilaration. With Soma flowing to mádam, the former, concrete meaning is more or less excluded: S/soma can’t flow to itself. But the concrete goal is certainly available to the god Indra; cf. III.42.2 tám indra mádam ā́gahi, barhiṣṭhā́ṃ grā́vabhiḥ sutám “Come, Indra, to the exhilarating drink, stationed on the ritual grass, pressed by stones,” where the second pāda makes it clear that the concrete substance, not the abstract state, is meant. So if “Indra” substitutes for the drop here, mádam as concrete goal is possible. See also 9b and comm. thereon.


## 04
As noted ad IX.3.3, in contrast to pávamāna- ‘purifying oneself’, I consider other medial participles to √pū to be passive and have so tr. punāná- here, though there is no overt sign of passive value and both Ge and Re tr. as reflexive (also in 9a).


## 05
This is a rel. cl. without a main cl., but it is easily attached to vs. 6 (relative / correlative 5a yám … 6a tám …). So also Re.


## 07
This vs. reestablishes the line of demarcation between Soma and Indra that was blurred in vs. 2, by means of the reciprocal figure devó devā́ya “the god for the god,” with the dat. further specified as índrāya.

The stem pīpáya- is ambiguous; it can be both intrans. and trans. (and at least once mixed: I.63.8; see comm. ad loc.). In this passage Ge takes it as intrans. (“wann seine Milch quillt”). The ambiguity is in part the result of the partial coincidence of the pf. subjunctive and the redupl. aor. injunctive (or subj.) (see Kü 301-3), and in this passage we appear to have the trans. redupl. aor. (Kü 302). Partly on the basis of VIII.1.19, Old takes Indra as the subj. of trans. pīpáyat. Re also considers the form “probably” transitive, though he does not specify the subject.

## 08-09
As noted in the publ. intro., the theme of poetry appears in these last two vss., and I think it likely that Soma’s “protecting poetic skill” and “making the hidden hymns his own” refer to the inspiration Soma, and the soma sacrifice, provide to the poets. What it means to “protect” kā́vya (8c) is not entirely clear to me, but the preverb ní with pāti may suggest protection that involves hiding or depositing the thing in question, thus matching the hidden hymns in 9c. (pāti may also pun on √pā ‘drink’, of much more common occurrence in the Soma maṇḍala.) As I suggested in the publ. intro., I think the hymns are “hidden” deep within the poets and are stimulated and evoked by Soma and the ritual in his honor.

Note also that in the next hymn (IX.7.4a) Soma the poet clothes himself (vásānaḥ) in (pl.) kā́vyā.


## 09
This vs. picks up various expressions from the hymn: índrayúḥ (pāda a) matches up with devayúḥ (1b) and asmayúḥ (1c), thus forming a slight ring. In b mádam … vītáye “(for Indra) to pursue exhilaration / the exhilarating drink” “repairs” the slightly anomalous mádam … kṣara in 2ab (see comm. there) and also echoes 6b mádāya devávītaye. I might therefore alter the tr. to “for him to pursue the exhilarating drink.” See also punānáḥ in pāda a, repeating the same part. in 4c.
