+++
title = "007"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., the word sóma- does not appear in this hymn. The word is also absent from IX.3, though there the omnipresence of pávamāna- and other forms of √pū takes up the slack. In this hymn pávamāna- is found only once, in vs. 5.


## 01
Lü (600-601) sees this vs. as representing the heavenly ascent of Soma, but those not subscribing to all of Lü’s presuppositions will find it difficult to see that. My own interpr. is far more earthbound: the filter is both the path of the soma and its foundation. The referent of asya in c is probably the soma, esp. given the near match of 1c vidānā́asya yójanam and 8c vidānā́asya śákmabhiḥ: the asya in 8c must be the soma. Even though in both passages the subject of the sentence is plural and refers to drops bzw. waves of soma, the sg. asya must be a constructio ad sensum.

On 3rd pl. mid. ending -ram see the extensive disc. by Old.


## 02
In keeping with his interpr. of vs. 1, Lü (238) sees the “great waters” (mahī́r apáḥ) here as the celestial waters -- again not necessary, since the ritual soma is mixed with water after it traverses the filter.

mádhvaḥ could in principle be construed either with dhā́rā (“stream of honey”) or agriyáḥ, as in the publ. tr. Though both Ge and Re opt for the former, mádhvo agriyám in VII.92.2 suggests the latter, as does the parallel expression vācó agriyáḥ in the next vs. (3a; also IX.62.25). So Lü (238). Both Ge and Lü take dhā́rā as instr. sg. (Ge: “Mit dem Strome …”). (Old hesitates but slightly favors instr.) This is certainly possible, though not necessary: nom. dhā́rā and nom. agriyáḥ can have different genders because they belong to two different NPs in apposition to each other. In any case, none of these minor differences in interpr. have any real implications.

## 02-03
A verb of motion needs to be supplied with prá in the initial pādas of both vss.


## 03
The phrase satyó adhvaráḥ, which I take as a separate nominal cl., but which can simply be another appositional nominative as most take it, must identify soma as, as it were, the embodiment of the ritual, the substance that must be present for the adhvaráḥ to occur.


## 04
In principle, kā́vyā (and/or indeed nṛmṇā́) could be instr. sg. “… by his poetic skill …”), though the standard renderings (incl. Lü 265) take it as acc. pl. . There is no real way to tell, but in the similarly structured IX.94.3 pári yát kavíḥ kā́vyā bhárate (cf. our pári yát kā́vyā kavíḥ) kā́vyā should be acc. pl. because it is the frame that matches a clear acc. pl.

simile in the next pāda. This is suggestive but hardly decisive.

On pāda c svàr vājī́siṣāsati “The race horse strives to win the sun,” see comm. ad IX.74.1, 76.2. In these passages I think that the sun, with its gleaming light, represents the milk towards which the soma is aiming.


## 06
On rebhá- see comm. ad VI.3.6.


## 07
Gr takes ráṇā as impv. to √ran (them. pres. ráṇati), on the basis of the Pp. reading ráṇa, but it is better to interpr. it as instr. sg. to the root noun rán-, against the Pp. So already Old ZDMG 63 [1909]: 289 = KlSch 305; see also Ge (n. 7c), Schindler (Rt. Nouns, s.v. rán-). With Ge I take it as the referent of the rel. prn. yáḥ that immediately follows, forming a nominal cl. (“with the joy that is …”). The drawback to this is that the new cl.

would not coincide with a metrical break -- but nominal, izafe-like clauses are not infrequently so positioned. Re also takes ráṇā as an instr. sg., but because he expects such a root noun to have fem. gender (see Schindler, who simply says that the gender of this noun can’t be determined), he construes it as part of the rel. cl.: “(ivresse [referring back to mádena in b]) qui est joyeusement [= ráṇā] (présente) dans ces comportements.” Although this allows clause and metrical boundary to coincide, it otherwise seems too fussy to me.


## 08
As disc. in the publ. intro. and above ad vs. 1, the c pāda of this vs. forms a ring with that of vs. 1; the final vs., 9, is addressed to the two world-halves and seems extra-hymnic.

As in vs. 1 the asya of c must refer to soma, although the subj. of the sentence is plural.

Medial forms of √pū when construed with ā́mean ‘attract / bring here through purification’ and take the acc.; similar is ā́√yaj ‘win / attact by sacrifice’. ā́√pū is extremely common in IX.
