+++
title = "009"

+++
On the structure and often puzzling content of this hymn, see publ. intro.


## 01
Some of the uncertainties in this vs. are illuminated by parallel passages, esp.


## 02
in the adjacent hymn. Note that Soma is identified as a poet both in pāda a, where he is in fact “the poet of heaven” (diváḥ kavíḥ), and in c in the bahuvrīhi kaví-kratu- ‘having a poet’s purpose’. See also below ad 6c.

The expression pári … váyāṃsi … yāti (split over 3 pādas) is reminiscent of


## 01
víśvā yád rūpā́pariyā́ti “when he makes the circuit of all his forms …,” as Ge points out (n. 1b). The journey around the filter must be meant.

The two ‘granddaughters [/nieces]’ (loc. du. naptyòḥ) are, in the ritual context, most likely either the two pressing boards (Sāy, Ge) or the two hands of the priest (Re). Because of the similarity between this vs. and 10.2, I favor the latter because of the gábhastyoḥ ‘in the two hands’ of 10.2b. In a cosmic context, the dual could refer to Heaven and Earth, who are identified as Soma’s two mothers (by most interpr.) in 3. The kinship flip -- Soma and his two granddaughters [/nieces] here, Soma and his two mothers in 3 -- would not doom this identification, given the RVic poets’ love of paradox, esp. the paradox of generations.

The ppl. hitáḥ with which naptyòḥ is construed is ambiguous, between √hi ‘impel’ and √dhā ‘place’. Though both Ge and Re favor the latter, I opt for the former on the basis of hitáḥ in 4a and hinvānā́saḥ in the parallel vs. 10.2a, both clearly belonging to ‘impel’.

Either is possible, however; ‘placed’ would weakly favor the ‘pressing boards’ interpr. of naptyòḥ.


## 02
The parallel but oddly assorted dative phrases kṣáyāya pányase “to/for the praiseworthy dwelling place’ and jánāya … adrúhe “to/for the race without deceit” I take as a possible elaboration on the disjunctive pair “men and gods.” Although Re wants the latter to refer to “l’être-humain,” he himself points out that adrúh- is generally an epithet of the gods (though see adrúhaḥ with ‘rivers’ in 4b). By contrast to “the race without deceit [= gods],” kṣáya- may refer to the ritual ground as the ‘dwelling place’ and by extension to the humans who create and inhabit it.


## 03
The referent of the fem. du. here is generally taken as Heaven and Earth.

## 04-06
As noted in the publ. intro., I consider this an omphalos hymn, with vss. 4 and 6 with their repetition of “7” defining vs. 5 as the omphalos. The omphalos effect is muted however, since the “message” of vs. 5 is hardly a deep mystery. For further on this sequence of vss., see publ. intro.


## 04
On the “seven insightful thoughts” see also 8.4.

The subj. of vāvṛdhúḥ in c must be feminine, on the basis of yā́(ḥ), but the choice between the “insightful thoughts” (dhītí-) of a and the rivers (nadī́-) of b is not clear.


## 05
This vs. presents the same problem as 4c: because of init. tā́ḥ, nom. pl. fem., the subject of ā́dadhuḥ has to be feminine, and there are several pl. feminines in play: the “insightful thoughts” (dhītí-) of 4a and the rivers (nadī́-) of 4b. But which one (or both)? In any case, presumably the subjects of 4c and 5 are the same -- though Sāy opts for “fingers” in this vs. but “rivers” in 4c.

The unspecified dat. (or with Re loc.) mahé ‘for/in great …” has too many possibilities for its referent, and I have made no effort to choose one.


## 06
The problem of the fem. referent continues here. In ab Soma, as the draught-horse (váhniḥ) “sees the seven” (saptá paśyati); we have just had “seven thoughts” (4a), and “seven” is the canonical number of rivers, which we also encountered in vs. 4 -- so either referent (or a conflation of both) is possible here. A fem. acc. pl. devī́ḥ ‘goddesses’ is the obj. of the verb ‘satisfied’ (atarpayat) in the next pāda c. Unfortunately this does not clarify the reference: the pl. of devī́- is frequently used of waters and at least once elsewhere (VII.50.4) of rivers, but at least in the singular it is quite commonly used of dhī́- and similar words.

On the hapax vā́vahi- see AiG II.2.292-93.

On the always ghastly krívi- see comm. ad I.30.1 and V.44.4. Esp. in the latter passage I argue that the word often seems to be used of an equine and that it might be a deformation or hyper-Sanskritization of kaví-. Both factors are present here: the first two pādas of this vs. depict Soma as a draught horse drawing (váhniḥ … vā́vahiḥ), but we also had occasion to note ad vs. 1 above that Soma was twice identified as a kaví- there. In the publ. tr. I default to a PN, but I do in fact think that the word has richer semantics, derived from both just mentioned uses, here. I do not see any way to convey that in a single tr. of the word, however.


## 07
The voc. pumas ‘o male’ is rather stark. It is in fact the only occurrence of the voc. of this stem in the RV and the only place where the stem is used of Soma. I ascribe its use here to the contrast being drawn with the feminines in vss. 4-6 (as well, perhaps, as the two mothers in 3) and to the martial content of the vs. As I argued already in my dissertation and the -áya-monograph based upon it, I consider the supposed root √kḷp to have been extracted from the -áya-transitive kalpáyati, itself (in my view) a -p-formation to √kṛ with “popular” l. The early rarity of the thematic noun kálpa-, very common later but found in the RV only here and in the privative form akalpá- (I.102.6), supports this view. In the publ. tr. I followed the standard interpr. of kálpa- in this passage as ‘ritual work’ (Ge “bei den heiligen Bräuchen,” Re “les rite”), based in part on its later usage. I still think this is a possible reading. However, on the basis of my interpr. of akalpá- in I.102.6 (see comm. ad loc.) and the rest of the vs. here, I wonder now if they are not rather (or in addition) martial arrangements: the address to Soma as ‘male’ (pāda a), the statement that darkness must be fought (yódhyā)(b), and the intensive subjunctive of √han, jaṅghanaḥ (c) all favor a more bellicose interpr.


## 08
The duplication of comparatives with slightly different shapes, introduced by the particle nū́, produces a nice phonetic figure, nū́návyase návīyase.


## 09
As was noted in the publ. intro., ‘sun’ (svàḥ) is the last word of the hymn, resonating with the themes of shining and brightness earlier in the hymn (see esp. 3ab and 8c, as well as the darkness to be combatted in 7b).
