+++
title = "010"

+++
For the poetic structure of the hymn, see publ. intro.


## 01
svānā́saḥ can be both the nom. pl. masc. of the adj. svāná- ‘resounding’ (√svan) and the med. rt. aor. part. to √su ‘press’, in passive usage as is usual for this part. I consider the ambiguity intentional and render it twice (“while being pressed … resounding”), but although both Ge (n. 1a) and Re (with more fuss) recognize the double identity, they render only the ‘resound’ sense that is appropriate to the simile.


## 02
With Ge I take c as an independent nominal cl. Re takes c as a continuation of ab, but as Ge points out (n. 2c) c is the Fortsetzung of the image in ab: in ab the chariots are presumably competing for prizes; the prizes or “takings” (bhára-) in c are what these chariots win. For the phrase in c see IX.16.5 mahé bhárāya kāríṇaḥ “for the great taking of the decisive victor.”


## 03
The first hemistich contains a simile embedded, as it were, in a metaphor: kings are only metaphorically “anointed” (that is, decorated, adorned) with praises; the soma juices are somewhat less metaphorically “anointed,” since “the cows” are actually milk, which is liquid enough to anoint.

In c the poet seems silently to switch instrumental functions, while holding the structure constant: NOM. INSTR. añjate. In both a and b the INSTR. expresses the instrument of anointment, either metaphorical or real, but in c the INSTR. expresses the agents who perform the anointing. The “seven ordainers” (saptá dhātár-) are presumably the priests; the priests reappear as Hotars in vs. 7 with “seven siblings,” probably their insightful thoughts or else simply seven other priests. See below.

The relationship between kings and the genre of práśasti-, which I discuss in my RV between Two Worlds (pp. 146-48), is very clear here.


## 04
The pun on svānā́saḥ in 1a recurs here; this time Ge and Re render it only as ‘pressed’.


## 05
On my view of the sense of this vs., see publ. intro. With Ge, I supply bhágam with the gen. vivásvataḥ in a, as well as with gen. uṣásaḥ in b; unlike Ge I take bhága- to mean ‘portion’ (not “das Glück”) and interpr. it as referring to the radiance of the two divinities, by which Soma transforms himself into the sun (or rather a set of suns -- the radiating golden color on the sheep’s fleece filter). Re’s interpr. is quite different: he supplies “la région” with vivásvataḥ, and takes uṣásaḥ as an acc. pl., parallel to bhágam and both as names of divinities (“engendrant les Aurores (et) Bhaga”). For the former he must be thinking of the common expression sádane vivásvataḥ “in the seat of V,” but that expression is only in the loc. and never found in IX. As for the latter, even with his explanatory n. I don’t how this improves the sense of the vs. ### 06
“The raging of the bull” must refer to the headlong journey of the soma as it is being purified, which is set in motion and accompanied by the recitation of ritual poetry -- hence the violent opening of “the doors of poetic thoughts” (dvā́rā matīnā́m). The continuity of the poetic tradition from the pratnā́ḥ (‘ancient’) bards to the current ones is suggested by the use of the pres. ṛṇvanti. I do not think, with Ge (n. 6ab), that pratná- gives the present tense verb a preterital sense, and indeed in IX.73.3 pítā … pratnó abhí rakṣati Ge tr. the pres. rakṣati with the pres. “wacht,” not a preterite.


## 07
Ge and Re take the seven siblings here as the seven dhītí- of 8.4 and 9.4, which is quite likely -- though the priests themselves are also a possibility. Ge adduces IX.66.8 sám u tvā dhībhír asvaran … saptá jāmáyaḥ “Together the seven siblings cried out to you with insightful thoughts,” which has both the 7 siblings and the thoughts -- but the referent of the siblings in that vs. is not clear. Ge there takes it as the fingers, which seems somewhat perverse, given that seven is not a canonical number for fingers -- and fingers don’t cry out.

I prefer rivers, since the “seven streams” were mentioned in the previous vs. ### 08
ā́dade belongs to √dā ‘bind’, not ‘give’; see, e.g., Kü 242. On the idiom see comm. ad I.139.1, IX.79.4.

Ge, Re, and Kü all take b as a simile (“wie das Auge an die Sonne”), presumably with cid as the simile particle. But, as I have stated elsewhere (see, e.g., comm. ad I.173.7), I am not at all convinced that cid is ever so used. Here, the point is the real identification of Soma, or his eye, with the sun, not a comparison to Soma’s kinship with me; see ékam ákṣi in 9.4, the transformation of Soma into sun(s) in our vs. 5c, and esp. the transformation of the sun’s eye into Soma’s eye in the next vs. (9c).

Gr identifies duhe in c as a 1st ps.; Ge and Re take it as 3rd sg. passive with ápatyam as subj. (e.g., “Die Nachkommenschaft des Sehers wird herausgemolken”), interpr. kaví- as a reference to Soma and ápatyam as the soma juice. But medial forms of √duh are generally transitive, with the sense ‘give X as milk’, and I follow that interpr. here, with Soma the unexpressed subject/agent. I suggest that c explains a: “binding his navel to our navel” means that he makes himself our kin and indeed takes responsibility for providing us with offspring. I take kavéḥ as referring to the (human) poet. Soma repays our devotion and care (see esp. vs. 7) with the usual ritual rewards, including sons.


## 09
Ge takes priyā́as nom. sg. fem., with gapped “Daughter of the Sun” -- but it seems unlikely that a new character would be introduced at this point, and it makes more sense for Soma to be the one doing the looking. Better to interpr. priyā́as a neut. pl. with gapped padā́(ni), as in nearby IX.12.8 abhí priyā́divás padā́. Ge (n. 9a) also allows the possibility of a neut. pl., but wants to construe it with sg. pádam, which he takes as a “collective singular,” a concept that I think we can do without but that seems to be encouraged by Old’s remarks. (See comm. ad VI.17.1 for another such ex. proposed by Ge.) I think rather that there are two (sets of) padá- (sim. Re).

Ge also suggests that in this instance of INSTR. gúhā hitám, the phrase means “hidden from,” not “hidden by.” Without a better sense of what this vs. is intended to tell us, I prefer not to contravene the usual agentive value of the instr. For my own speculation on the hidden track, see publ. intro., which may be supported by IX.102.2, where the hidden track that soma follows seems to be in the filter.
