+++
title = "012"

+++
Lü tr. and comm. on vss. 1-6 of this hymn (706-7), with his usual, often overblown, emphasis on the heavenly location of the elements and actions. By contrast, I tend to attribute the heavenly references to the poet’s attempt to project a cosmic dimension on the ritual confined to a small portion of the earth’s surface.


## 03
On madacyút- and vipaścít- see, e.g., Scar (128 and 122 respectively).

gaurī́is the loc. sg. to the vṛkī́-stem gaurī́-, not a dual (per Gr); see AiG III.170 and comm. ad VII.103.2 (sarasī́) and I.135.9 (nadī́). As indicated in the publ. intro., of the possible referents for this buffalo cow, with Ge and Re (see esp. Re’s n.) I favor the hide on which the pressing apparatus is placed -- as opposed to Sāy’s ‘speech’, or Lü’s more complex speech identified with the heavenly waters.


## 05
This vs. seems to posit a distinction between two somas: one, called sóma-, that is in containers and on the filter and another, called índu- ‘drop’, that embraces / surrounds (pári ṣasvaje) the first. What distinguishes them is difficult to discern; Ge suggests that the “nachrinnende” Soma is taken in by the pressed juice, but this doesn’t seem to make ritual sense, since the soma in the tubs and on the filter would already have been pressed as well.

Lü, predictably, thinks the heavenly soma incorporates the earthly soma. Say identifies índu- as the god Soma (somo devaḥ). Of the various possibilities, Sāy’s seems the most plausible -- that is, Soma the god encompasses all the forms that soma the substance takes in the course of ritual processing, though physically that substance is somewhat different at every stage. I also considered the possibility -- given the occasional identification and frequent juxtaposition of índu- and índra- -- that índu- here refers to Indra, and “embrace” is a metaphor for “drink, consume.” But I’d prefer to keep índu- separate from Indra.


## 06
The índu- here “sends forth his speech” (prá vā́cam … iṣyati), which supports an animate reading of índu- in the previous vs. Needless to say, Lü has a heavenly interpr.: índu is the heavenly soma, the sea is the heavenly sea, and the kóśa- is the “Urquell im Himmel.” In the publ. intro. I interpr. the sea as the soma in the vessel or the mixing water.

And the speech is presumably the speech of the ritual participants, prompted by the action of pressing the soma.


## 07
This vs. has no finite verb; I take it as a preamble to 8, in order to capture the play between the two forms of hinvānáḥ (7c, 8b).

When vánaspáti- (lit. ‘lord of the forest’) does not mean simply ‘tree’, it generally refers to the sacrificial post in the animal sacrifice, particularly when found in the Āprī hymns. The word is not found elsewhere in IX, except in the Āprī hymn IX.5.10, where it seems to have that reference. But here it must refer to soma. Since essentially all the plants that have been suggested as the source of soma are fairly insignificant physically, the use of vánaspáti- to refer to it must have seemed slightly comic (like calling a dandelion Lord of the Forest), but also a way of capturing the towering importance of the apparently lowly plant. The word is used of soma once elsewhere, I.91.6 (a soma hymn), in the phrase priyástotro vánaspátiḥ, almost identical to nítyastotro vánaspátiḥ, esp. because nítya- ‘own’ and priyá- ‘dear, own’ are near synonyms in some usages. The point, I think, is that Soma has first claim to praise.

On sabar- as ‘juice’, see EWA s.v. sabardúh- and Narten (YH 212). I construe the gen. pl. dhīnā́m with the first member of the cmpd. sabar-dúgha-: “… juice of insights.” I supply pavítre with antár on the basis of 5b antáḥ pavítre (cf. VIII.101.9). Ge’s “unter Liedern” does not work because antár doesn’t take the gen., and though Re’s “Arbres des intuitions” sounds imposing, it doesn’t make much sense. Old’s first interpr. of this pāda is close to mine, with dhīnā́m dependent on sabar-, though he takes antár as an adverb.

However, he considers the obvious solution to be to take dhīnā́m with antár, since the gen. is possible with antár in the later language. Since “within/amid the thoughts” isn’t a particularly compelling addition to the passage, I prefer my own (and Old’s first) solution.

The common med. part. hinvāná- can be both transitive and passive, in approx. equal numbers. In this vs. it is transitive, but in the next passive.


## 08
As noted just above, hinvāná- is used passively here, in contrast to the same form in 7c -- here referring to the priestly impulsion given to the soma on its journey of purification.

The “tracks of heaven” are, in my view, the traces of the soma on the filter; see 10.9.

Pāda c is identical to IX.44.2c, where I do not construe víprasya with dhā́rayā but with something earlier in the vs. My reason there is that the dhā́rā- ‘stream’ is always otherwise only Soma’s, and so should not belong to the/a vípra-. But in our passage there is nowhere to construe víprasya but with dhā́rayā. I consider ad IX.44.2 the possibility that the pāda was borrowed thoughtlessly here. But there are several ways to make sense of our passage. If the dhā́rā- is Soma’s, the point may be that he is a kaví-, a sage, but he also has the fluency of an inspired poet, who simply pours out verbal eloquence, thus identifying Soma with both types of poet. This suggestion is supported by the next hymn, IX.13.2, where Soma is explicitly identified as a vípra-, as well as his parallel identification as vípra and kaví in IX.18.2. Or dhā́rā- can be used here metaphorically to refer to a stream of words.


## 09
The impv. dhāraya is almost identical to the instr. dhā́rayā in 8c, though their morphology is entirely different.
