+++
title = "013"

+++
This hymn is dominated by forms of med. pávate (vss. 2-4, 8-9), with the first vs. containing instead med. punānáḥ. Only vss. 6-7 lack such forms. Perhaps coincidentally, these two vss. are the only ones containing similes.

The hymn is also constructed from bricolage and ready-made phrases, many found verbatim in other hymns. There is a certain amount of chaining between vss.; it is difficult to know if this is just a result of the assembly process (a word in one vs. suggests to the poet another such phrase, which he then attaches) or was meant as a unifying poetic device.


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., the mention of Vāyu and Indra identifies the occasion as the Morning Pressing, since those two gods receive the first soma offering of the pressing day.


## 02
The publ. tr. does not make this clear, but the addressees are pl., presumably the priests.

The identification of Soma as a vípra- supports the suggestion ad IX.12.8 in the preceding hymn that vípra- refers to Soma there as well.


## 03
Pāda c, with a medial part. characterizing the soma (gṛṇānā́ḥ), followed by the infinitival dat. devávītaye, matches 2c suṣvāṇáṃ devávītaye. The pattern is reinforced by the infinitival dat. vā́jasātaye ending pāda a.


## 04
The chaining continues, with vā́jasātaye likewise ending pāda a of this vs.; see also 6b.

√pū + ACC (here pávasva … íṣaḥ [etc.]) should rightly have the preverb ā́in the idiom ‘bring through purification’; see esp. Re’s n. In tr. I have supplied it, partly on the assumption that since this hymn is constructed of ready-made phrases, this pāda may have been adapted from a context where the previous pāda contained the ā́in tmesis. Re also points out that the construction here can be under the influence of pávantām ā́in 5b. I do not follow Re in seeing √pū without preverb as becoming indiscrinimately transitive in IX, with the sense ‘couler’.


## 05
It is difficult not to take devá- here as adjectival, modifying índavaḥ. See my reluctance to so interpr. this stem in IX.11.2, and see comm. ad VII.21.1.


## 06
The inf. vā́jasātaye is found here a 3rd time (after 3a, 4a).

## 08-09
The impv. ápa … jahi of 8c is converted into the part. apaghnántaḥ in 9a. The sg. subj. of 8 is also replaced by a pl., but sg. sómaḥ / indo and pl. sómāḥ / índavaḥ alternate throughout the hymn.
