+++
title = "014"

+++


## 01
The ‘decisive act’ (kārá-) in question is presumably the purification itself. See Re’s n. on the need to preserve this sense here, rather than giving in to Ge’s convenient “Kampfpreis” (presumably vā́ja-), which Re pronounces “un peu loin.”


## 02
As noted in the publ. intro., the subjects here are the fingers, troops of five (on each hand).

The subord. yádī is best taken as an example of my yád ī -- hence “when him/it …,” not “if.”


## 03
I am disturbed by the sequence of tense -- or lack of it: the augmented aor.

amatsata in the main, ā́d, clause does not fit well with the pres. pariṣkṛṇvánti in the preceding yád clause (vs. 2) or the pres. vasāyáte in the following (3c). I am tempted to make the ā́d clause the follow-up to vs. 1: “the poet flowed around and forth …; after that the gods found exhilaration.” In that case, 3ab would interrupt the sequence of the subordinated present clauses in vs. 2, 3c, but I don’t know of other examples of this kind of alternating structure. Perhaps vss. 2 and 3 should be reversed: the ā́d clause of 3ab would then follow directly after vs. 1, and the parallel subordinate clauses in 3c and vs. 2 would be picked up by the main clause of 4ab, which also has a pres. tense verb.


## 05
As disc. in the publ. intro., in this hymn the poet provides several different metaphorical versions of the same ritual act. This vs. contains two of those alternatives: in ab Soma is groomed “by the granddaughters of Viviasvant,” a reference to the fingers, which were characterized as “troops of five kinsment” in 2ab; in c Soma makes cows like a garment (gā́ḥ kṛṇvānó ná nirṇíjam), a variant of 3c “clothes himself with cows” (góbhir vasāyáte). For the exact phrase see IX.107.26 and for variants without the simile particle IX.86.26, 95.1.


## 06
śrití- is a hapax, on which see Old. It is here an instr. sg. fem., referring to the fine fleece filter, and echoing śritáḥ in 1b.

With Old and Ge I take gavyā́as instr. to gavyā́- ‘longing for cows’, rather than neut.

pl. with Gr and Lub. Re sits on the fence.

Although vidé is ordinarily passive, there are a few precedents for ‘know (as) one’s own’; see VII.40.5, VIII.62.9.


## 07
Here the fingers (kṣípaḥ) are named directly, after the metaphors of 2ab and 5a; the verb √mṛj ‘groom’ recurs from 5b.
