+++
title = "015"

+++
On the structuring principle of the hymn, see publ. intro.


## 01
Pāda c, gáchann índrasya niṣkṛtám, echoes IX.13.1c vāyór índrasya niṣkṛtám. It is not clear to me whether a different ritual occasion is meant, or it’s simply a variant.


## 02
The phrase dhiyā́yāty (with non-vocalic -y in yāty) “drives with insight” in 1a is echoed by the verb dhiyāyate “exercises his insight” in 2a, though in different metrical positions. dhiyāyate also participates in another phonetic figure, with the final word of b: (dhi)yāyate / (devá)tātaye, with the same vowel pattern, but crossed consonants (y y t / t t y).

Denom. dhiyāyáte is of odd formation, presumably built to the instr., which makes it seem context-generated (from dhiyā́in 1a), but there is unfortunately another form to the stem (dat. part. I.155.1 dhiyāyaté), as well as a related -yú-adjective, dhiyāyú- (I.8.6). Still I think generation in this context is likely.

Pāda c contains another mirror-image phonetic figure: (amṛ́)tāsa āsat(e).


## 03
The ppl. hitá- is potentially a pun, both ‘propelled’ (√hi) and ‘placed’ (√dhā), though in this case the former is dominant, given the journey theme of the rest of the vs. (and hymn).

In c yádī is best read yád ī; see also IX.14.2.


## 05
The aṃśú- here is in the first instance the shoots of the soma plant, the usual sense of this stem, but I think a possible secondary sense is the tufts of wool on the fleece filter, which can resemble shoots of vegetation. In the former case the instr. expresses accompaniment, in the latter instr. of path-along-which. See the instr. in 1a (áṇvyā), 2b (pathā́), and 6b (páruṣā), which all refer to the fleece along which soma journeys.


## 06
In contrast to the relative simplicity of the rest of this hymn, this vs. presents a number of lexical puzzles / unusual usages.

On pibdaná- see comm. ad VI.46.6. As indicated there, I take the underlying verb as ‘go step-by-step, plod, trudge’. In our passage I think pibdanā́vásūni, lit. “plodding goods,” is a jocular way to refer to cattle -- the “cows” [=milk] that Soma is rushing towards. Others (Ge, Re) simply see these as the material goods Soma is on his way to gain.

A párus- is a link(age), joint, or juncture; see EWA s.v. párvan- with considerable lit. as well as comm. ad IV.22.2. In this instance I think it’s abstract ‘articulation’ and refers to the 3-D patterns on the fleece filter. As indicated in the comm. to the preceding vs., I take it as an instr. of the path here. Others (esp. Ge and Re) think it refers to the knots or nodules of the soma plant that remain in the filter when the juice has flown out, but then both the singular and the instrumental are hard to explain. Note that in IV.22.2 Indra wraps himself in the párvāṇi of a river, which I take there as tufts of foam that resemble tufts of wool.

śā́da- is a hapax in the RV, but related words are found elsewhere, if rarely, in Vedic: YV texts (VS, MS, KS, ŚB, etc; see Bloomfield Conc.) contain a mantra śādaṃ [śā́dam in accented texts] dadbhiḥ “śād(a) with the teeth,” in a litany listing the disposition of the parts of the sacrificed horse. There is no strong contextual evidence for its identification with a plant, much less with grass or fresh grass. However, in later Skt.

śādvala- means ‘grassy’ and matches the fairly widespread MIA word saddala- ‘id.’ (Pāli etc.), and ‘grass’ is certainly compatible here, since horses crop grass with their teeth. It is also not possible to tell from the mantra whether the stem is thematic (as in our RVic passage) or a root noun. The JB contains two occurrences in a single passage of what is clearly a root noun and which is somewhat more helpful semantically than the YV exx. It is in a passage that lists several plant substitutes to press in place of soma, of which śād is the first: JB I.355 śuklāś śādo ‘bhiṣunuyuḥ / somo vai rājā yad imaṃ lokam ājagāma sa śātsv eva tad uvāsa / sa evāsya saṃnyaṅgaḥ / tam eva tad abhiṣunvanti “They should press white/bright śād-s. When Soma the king came to this world, he dwelled then in śād-s. That is his mark. Thus they press him in this way.” On this basis Soma seems to have an affinity with śā́d(a)-. However, it is not possible to tell whether the JB passage is an independent witness to this association or was constructed on the basis of the RV passage. In any case, I have no idea what aspect of the soma ritual śā́da- is meant to refer to. I assume the descent here should be into some type of soma vessel (see dróṇeṣu in the next vs., 7b). I considered the possibility that śā́da- is meant to evoke some noun meaning ‘seat’, to √sad, with the MIA loss of distinction among sibilants enabling such a pun. But there is no appropriate nominal counterpart belonging to √sad. Another possibility, starting with ‘in / among the grasses’, is that the image is of a worn-out racehorse put out to pasture. But none of these possibilities is particularly compelling, and I’m afraid the reference must remain a mystery.


## 08
The insights of b form a bit of a ring with the insight of 1a. Furthermore, ab with ten fingers and seven dhītí- grooming Soma is almost identical to IX.8.4.
