+++
title = "016"

+++


## 01
On oṇí- see comm. ad VI.20.4, where I am unsatisfied by the current consensus that it means ‘arm’ (see EWA s.v.) but offer nothing to take its place. Here ‘arm’ works perfectly well.

Etaśa is the sun’s horse, so he would be traveling through the air. On √tac as referring generally to birds’ movements, see IX.32.4.


## 02
Ge and Re construe dákṣasya with preceding krátvā, which is certainly possible: krátu- and dákṣa- are often associated, and Ge adduces several passages containing krátvā dákṣasya (III.2.3, V.10.2 -- though in both cases JPB plausibly construed dákṣasya with something else). But since rathī́- ‘charioteer’ is regularly construed with a gen. (incl.

dákṣasya IV.10.2, VI.51.6) and since krátvā appears without gen. in nearby 4c, I take dákṣasya with rathī́-. Better might be the course suggested (but not followed) by Ge in his n.

2a: “dákṣasya wohl nach beiden Seiten zu verbinden.” This would yield the tr. “with the resolve of skill we accompany the charioteer of skill …,” which seems a bit heavy.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., the hapax ánapta- is difficult. Insofar as there is a standard view, it is taken as ‘unwatered, undiluted’ (Gr ‘nicht wässerig’, Ge ‘nicht verwässert’; EWA s.v. with lit.), while Re prefers ‘inaccessible’. Although the connection with ‘water’ makes the most superficial sense, esp. given its juxtaposition with immediately following apsú ‘in the waters’, it doesn’t make ritual sense, in that the soma is watered during these steps in the sacrifice, and in this very pāda the soma is depicted as being “in the waters.” My own desperate suggestion is not appreciably better, that it is formed to naptī́- ‘granddaughter, niece’, used of the fingers that prepare the soma. Two of the six forms of this word are found in hymns by just this poet (Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa), IX.9.1, 14.5). The word would mean ‘without the granddaughters’ (for the accent, cf. words like áprajā- ‘without offspring’ and AiG II.1.239-40), that is, without their ritual ministrations.

The point would be (if there is a point) that the soma speeds through the waters and would do so, even if it had not received these ministrations. I do not, however, set much stock in this suggestion, esp. since the morphology is dicey to say the least.

The phrase apsú duṣṭára- is found also in nearby IX.20.6, so this must be the constituency here -- and apsú is not to be construed with ánaptam. As Re points out, Soma is several time called ap-túr- ‘crossing the waters’ (e.g., IX.63.5, 21), and the expression here redistributes the elements.


## 04
In the publ. tr. I construe punānásya with pavítre, not with adjacent cétasā, as Ge and Re do. I would now emend my tr. to the standard: “with the attention of the one being purified [that is, himself].” Ge comments (n. 4a), “Er weiss von selbst, was er zu tun hat,” and although I’m not entirely sure that this is what the phrase means, my publ. tr. doesn’t make much sense either and overlooks the fact that pāda b, which contains the noun, pavítre, on which I hang the gen. punānásya, is found identically in the next hymn (17.3), as well as in IX.37.1, both times without a gen. 
## 05
The vs. begins prá tvā, reminiscent of the hymn opening prá te (1a), and the audience would surely assume -- not least because 2nd ps. is generally restricted to Soma in the IXth Maṇḍala (see Re’s comm. here) -- that tvā refers to Soma. But this expectation is repaired (or dis-repaired) by the voc. índra that opens pāda b. See vs. 8 below.

I take the referent of gen. kāríṇaḥ in c to be Indra.


## 06
In c the loc. góṣu can be shared by simile and frame: in the frame it refers to the milk into which the soma has entered, in the simile to the cows that a champion wins in the raid or battle.


## 08
Soma is addressed here in the 2nd ps., the first time since the uninsistent te in the first pāda of the hymn (1a prá te …) and thus sketches a sort of referential ring. Throughout the rest of the hymn soma is always in the 3rd ps., and the only 2nd ps. reference is found in vs. 5, where the referent is Indra (see comm. there).

Pāda a is troublingly incomplete, with a nom. subj. (tvám) and an acc. vipaścítam but nothing to govern the acc. The pāda is identical to IX.64.25a, whose b pāda, punānó vā́cam iṣyasi, provides both a transitive verb and a referent for the acc., “being purified, you send forth speech attentive to poetic inspiration.” Although supplying a full pāda is something I would prefer not to do, I see no alternative to doing so (nor does Ge; see his n. 8a, where he expresses his reluctance; Bl, RR ad loc., as well). It is made somewhat more plausible by the appearance in nearby 12.6, by the same poet, of the relevant VP, vā́cam ... iṣyati. (See also iṣṇán in the next hymn, 17.5, where I supply ‘speech’ as the obj. [contra Ge, but in agreement with Re].) This is certainly a better solution than Re’s: he simply treats the acc. as a nom. and uses it as a modifier of Soma (“Toi, ô soma, qui comprends les mots-inspirés …”).
