+++
title = "018"

+++
On the structure of this hymn, see publ. intro.


## 02
The identification of Soma as both vípra- and kaví- is quite explicit here; see disc.

ad 12.8.

In b Ge takes the prá as standing for the predicate “hat den Vorzug” and construes it separately from the jātám, presumably because of its separate accent. I am sympathetic, but still assume that it is loosely construed with jātám. The tr. should perhaps be slightly altered to “born forth from …” On jātám ándhasaḥ see further ad IX.55.2.

## 03-04
Note the two occurrences of víśva- (3a, 4a), which contrast with the sarva- in the refrain.

## 04-07
Vss. 4-6 all (save for the refrain pāda) consist of rel. clauses headed by yáḥ and couched in the 3rd ps.; the main clause appears to be vs. 7, with the resumptive prn. sá and 3rd ps. verb.


## 05
Both Ge and Re take ródasī mahī́as acc. obj. of the frame, with mātárā as subj.

(Re) or obj. (Ge) in the simile: e.g., “qui trait ces Deux grands Mondes ensemble, comme deux (vaches) mères.” In favor of this view is the fact that in VIII.6.17a, identical to our apāda, the dual is acc. (though in a very different context); furthermore, the position of iva in b might suggest that the simile consists only of the preceding word mātárā. However, I prefer to take both duals as part of the simile, parallel nominatives corresponding to the unexpressed subj. of the frame, Soma. Cows (or their correspondants) are the standard subjects of med. forms of √duh, with the obj. being the milk (or milk substitute), and therefore the accusatives of Re and Ge would be semantically and functionally anomalous.

For Heaven and Earth (i.e., the two world-halves represented by ródasī here) as subject of medial √duh, see VI.70.2 ghṛtáṃ duhāte “the two yield ghee as milk,” in a hymn to Heaven and Earth, which are the default referent of the many duals in the hymn.


## 07
Because of the rel. cl. / main cl. structure of vss. 4-7 (see above), I would lightly emend to the tr. to “he/that one, tempestuous in the tubs, kept roaring …,” to display this structure more clearly.
