+++
title = "019"

+++
On the imagery in the hymn, see publ. intro.


## 02
Note the reverse vāyav indraś ca construction, índraś ca soma.


## 03
With Ge (but not Re), I take the pres. part. sán as concessive, as the nom. forms of this participle generally are -- although I’m not sure what the concession is. The most likely possibility is that “sitting down on the womb” is an odd action for a horse. The most common simile with “sit” is “like a falcon,” e.g., IX.82.1 śyenó ná yónim … ā́sadam, with the same lexical material as here. Or perhaps horses don’t thunder.


## 04
I am not entirely certain of the force of ádhi: my ‘over’ does not parse very well in Engl. tr. But the point is probably that the verbal part of the ritual, embodied by the fem.

dhītí- ‘insightful thought/speech’ and therefore conceived of as female, is produced at the same time as the “semen” of Soma, namely the juice itself. This semen is attributed both to a bull, Soma as hypervirile adult male animal, and, if we supply rétasi in c for the genitives to depend on (so also Ge and Re), to a calf, presumably not yet sexually mature, who is further the son of these mothers (the words, at least by my interpr.). Ge (n. 4) calls the verse “ein Paradoxon,” though he doesn’t bother to explain what he thinks the paradox is. I assume that it is the identification of Soma as both bull and calf.

I further assume that the “mothers” (mātáraḥ) of c are co-referential with the dhītáyaḥ of a, though it might be possible to separate them -- with the mothers being the milk-mixture or some other ritual substance. Lü (247) considers the mothers distinct from the dhītáyaḥ and referring to the heavenly streams, but this is a predictable result of his idée fixe.


## 05
As disc. in the publ. intro., this vs. metaphorically expresses the complex interaction between poetry, the thoughts (dhī́- 2c, dhītí- 4a, both fem.) recited at the Soma pressing, and the Soma/soma him-/itself. The (female) thoughts “yearn for the/a bull” (vṛṣaṇyá-) to swell (√pi 2c) and impregnate (gárbhaṃ √dhā 5b) them with his semen/juice, while at the same time they are Soma’s mothers (4c) and themselves “give the gleaming milk” (śukráṃ duhaté páyaḥ 5c) -- śukrám páyaḥ being often a kenning for both soma juice and semen (see Gr, nos. 3 and 7 s.v. śukrá). So they both produce the soma/semen and become pregnant by it.


## 06
The lexeme ápa √sthā is quite rare in the RV with a fairly late distribution: besides this passage I have found only VIII.48.11 (a “popular” hymn acdg. to Arnold), X.106.2, and X.124.8. It means ‘stay/keep away’; in this context, where those who ápa √sthā are to be courted by Soma, in contrast to the śátru-, in whom he is urged to strike fear, it seems to refer to potential allies or members of our group who are currently staying neutral, sitting on the fence, as it were.

Re identifies this vs. as displaying the three functions -- an interpr. that utterly escapes me.

I take vidā́as 2nd sg. impv., with lengthened ending, contra the standard interpr. (Pp, Gr, Old, Lub) as 2nd sg. subj. vidā́s. (Ge and Re tr. as an impv. and do not comment, but it’s quite possible that they are so tr. what they consider a subjunctive.) The form is parallel to 2 impvs. in the same vs., úpa śikṣa (a), ā́dhehi (b), which support an impv. reading; the pāda is repeated twice (IX.43.4, 63.11), but those vss. lack other verb forms that would support one reading or the other. Other occurrences of vidā́are generally better taken as impv.

(I.36.14, VI.48.9, VIII.61.7) or are syntactically and semantically indifferent (I.71.7). (I take the form in V.45.1 as the instr. of a root noun.) The only clear ex. of a subj. is in IX.40.4, where sandhi preserves the final cons.: vidā́ḥ sahasríṇīr … I assume the almost universal embrace of the Pp subjunctive readings results from the fact that there are no unambiguous imperative forms to this them. aor. stem -- that is, forms where the sandhi does not allow a - ā́s reading -- whereas there are several other subjunctives (e.g., vidā́si IX.35.1). But I do not see why an impv. would be excluded on principle; Macd (VedGr §512) gives several exx. of a- aorist imperatives, though he states that the mood is “of rare occurrence” -- a statement he also makes (§509) about the subjunctive to the same formation, however. It’s also worth noting that KH (Injunk. 263) takes vidó ṣú … in X.113.10 as impv. vidá + u, a reading supported by the sandhi of ṣú. On imperatival use of injunc. vidaḥ see comm. ad IX.20.3.
