+++
title = "020"

+++


## 01
vā́rebhiḥ, lit. ‘along the hairs/fleece’ is an instr. of the path-along-which; see comm. ad IX.15.5.


## 03
The sense of the injunc. vidaḥ here is uncertain, but my rendering in the publ. tr. as if it were a subjunctive is almost surely wrong. In general, 2nd sg. injunctives to thematic aorists have been taken as modal (see KH, Injunk. 263), and certainly Ge and Re both tr. this form as an impv. The sá opening the pāda supports the interpr. as an imperative substitute, since, by my rules (“Vedic ‘sá figé’: An Inherited Sentence Connective?,” Historische Sprachforschung 105 [1992]: 213-39), sá (and other nominative forms of this pronoun) are found with 2nd ps. ref. almost exclusively with imperatives. Hoffmann (loc. cit.), however, says that modal use of the various occurrences of vidaḥ is “nicht durchweg sicher.” Nonetheless I would now change the tr. to an imperatival “find fame for us,” because of the sá. I do not think that this calls my interpr. of vidā́ as an impv. in the preceding hymn (19.8) into question. See comm. there. For other occurrences of the form vidaḥ, see comm. ad I.42.7-9.


## 05
Both Ge and Re take ab together, but I do not understand how the simile “like a king” (rā́jeva) would work with the VP (“you have entered the songs” gíraḥ … viveśitha). I have therefore taken the two pādas as separate clauses. The simile in pāda a then works well, since it makes perfect sense that a king should “possess good commandments” (suvratáḥ). The splitting of the two pādas gains further support from IX.57.3b, a pāda closely corresponding to our pāda a: íbho rā́jeva suvratáḥ, where there is no question of entering songs or any similar action and the shared quality of simile and frame must be suvratá-.

For further on the expression “enter songs” in pāda b, see publ. intro.


## 06
On apsú duṣṭáraḥ see comm. ad 16.3.


## 07
On the double sense of makhá- see comm. ad I.18.9; in our passage the ‘bounteous’ sense prevails, though it could also be making a subtle ring with vs. 1. In 1c Soma conquers all opponents, and here he could be secondarily called a battler as well as bounteous.
