+++
title = "021"

+++


## 02
This vs. lacks a finite verb and can go either with vs. 1 or vs. 3 (or both): they all have as subj. the plural soma juices.

The lexeme prá √vṛ is rare and generally means ‘cover [with INSTR.]’ (e.g., X.16.7).

However, here and in VII.82.6 it must mean ‘ward off’ (< ‘obstruct forward’?) vel sim.


## 04
As often in the Soma hymns (see, e.g., comm. ad IX.9.1), hitá- is ambiguous, belonging either to √dhā, hence ‘placed’, or to √hi, hence ‘impelled’. Both Ge and Re opt for ‘placed’, and I admit that this works better with the loc. ráthe. But if they are merely “placed” at/on the chariot, we do not learn how they obtained the desirable things, and I therefore think ‘propelled’ is a necessary part of the scenario. Of course, it might be meant to be read both ways: “when placed at the chariot (and) propelled.”


## 05
On my interpr. of this vs., see publ. tr. Both Ge and Re have quite different views.

Ge takes the asmin to be the sacrificer (flg. Sāy.), with the piśáṅgam … venám (my “tawny tracker,” his “den goldenen Seher”) “ein innerer Mahner” of this would-be stingy man. This anticipation of an Upaniṣadic-type Inner Controller seems anachronistic to me. Re simply -- in my opinion over-simplistically -- takes all elements to be soma in one form or another: the soma drops are urged to put “le (Soma) Veilleur à couleur-d’or” into the soma liquid.

This endless loop doesn’t seem to get us anywhere. I do agree with Re that soma/Soma is represented by two of the elements: the drops that are addressed (indavaḥ) are soma the substance and the “tawny tracker” is Soma the god. The drops are urged to put Soma the god into Indra (my interpr. of the referent of asmin); cf., from the same poet, IX.11.6 índum índre dadhātana.

The subj. of the infin. ādíśe is, in my view, the tawny tracker (i.e., Soma), though the act of placing this Soma in Indra may be part of the instruction. On the constr. see comm. on the almost identical expression in 6b.

Loc. asmin is unaccented and should therefore refer to something already present in the discourse, but that does not eliminate any of the just-given interpr.: Ge’s sacrificer, in the person of the ‘presser’ (súṣvi-), is found in 2, my Indra in 1, and Re’s soma is ubiquitous. In fact even without the mentions in vss. 1 and 2, the sacrificer and Indra are expected personnel on the scene in any Soma hymn.


## 06
The adj. ráthya- generally modifies either chariot horses or chariot wheels; here, with the presence of a craftsman, the latter is most likely. So also Gr, Ge, and Re.

As was just noted, pāda b dádhātā kétam ādíśe is almost identical to 5b dádhātā venám ādíśe. Nonetheless, Ge and Re unaccountably (at least to me) take the VP entirely differently here from 5b: they take návaṃ, dádhātā as a phrasal verb “renew, make new,” with ādíśe filling a different syntactic role. E.g., “Erneuet, um (ihn) zu mahnen, seinen Vorsatz …” (Sim. Keydana, Inf., 318, who shows no awareness of the parallel in the immed.

preceding vs.) First, I know of no other exx. of náva- √dhā in the sense ‘make new’, a sense expressed rather by náva- √kṛ (e.g., X.143.1). But, more important, the close parallelism between 5b and 6b strongly suggests that they should be interpr. the same way, with the acc. the subj. of the infinitive.

By the Ge/Re (/Keydana) interpr., in the simile the craftsman is “renewing” the wheel; by mine, he is “setting/placing” it on the chariot, with a slightly different sense of √dhā than in the frame.


## 07
satáḥ in c is somewhat puzzling. Both Ge and Re take it as adverbial: “in gleicher Weise,” “pareillement.” Ge makes no comment; Re adduces sató-mahant-, -vīra-. For this 1st cmpd member see comm. ad VII.104.21. As I point out there, though I think the cmpds in question contain this adverbial element, I do not think it exists as an independent word.

Supposed exx. of it belong instead to the pres. part. of √as, either gen./abl. sg. or acc. pl.

Here I take it as the gen. sg., dependent on matím. Genitives appearing with this stem generally refer to the poet (e.g., IX.64.10 kavīnā́m matī́). Forms of √as, incl. the pres. part., can have the extended sense ‘be real / really present’, and that is how I take it here. Cf. for a similar use in a nearby hymn IX.19.7 dūré vā sató ánti vā “whether he be in the distance or nearby” (used of an enemy); also IX.31.6 (of Soma).
