+++
title = "022"

+++
On the structure and thematics of this hymn, see publ. intro. Note also that the first 5 vss. begin eté, while the 2nd hemistichs of vss. 5 and 6 begin utédám. Further local chainings are discussed below.


## 01
The preverb prá, which must be in tmesis from the verb aheṣata that ends the vs., is very oddly positioned -- in the middle of a pāda (one that doesn’t even contain the verb), not adjoining a metrical boundary. I have no explanation, though it may be based on a pāda like IX.64.4 ásṛkṣata prá vājínaḥ, also ending prá vājínaḥ, where the preverb immediately follows its verb, a permitted position.


## 02
As in the immed. preceding hymn (21.2), this vs. lacks a finite verb and can be attached either to vs. 1 or vs. 3 or both.

My supplied “(surging)” isn’t strictly necessary -- neither Ge nor Re supplies anything at all -- but it seemed to me that something dynamic was needed here, for wind, rain, and fire.

IX.22.3, 5: Note vy ànaśuḥ in both vss. (3c, 5b), implicitly connecting Soma’s pervasion of poetry with his pervasion of cosmic space. This repetition could also define vs. 4, the middle vs. of the hymn, as an omphalos, but that vs. doesn’t seem to do much if so. For further exx.

of √(n)aś see ad 4-6.


## 04
With Ge/Re I take ná as neg. with pf. śaśramuḥ. In contrast, Kü (524, 551) takes it as the simile particle: “... sind wie [Rennpferde], die gelaufen sind, ermüdet ...” He cites (551 n. 1141) Delbrück (Altind. Syn. 376) for this interpr., but Delbrück in fact takes the ná as neg.: “… sind nicht müde geworden, obgleich sie gelaufen sind.” I assume that Kü so interpr. because of the position of ná after the participle, but in a Gāyatrī pāda the position before the verb is also the position after the NP -- there’s not a lot of space. I think it unlikely that the poets would ever say that the ever-running soma could get tired. Moreover, √śram almost always appears with neg.


## 05
See remarks ad vs. 3.

The part. viprayántaḥ presumably belongs to the lexeme ví-prá √i, but note that it could also be interpr. as belonging to a denom. *vipra-yá- ‘behave like [/seek] an inspired poet’, which would connect this vs. further with the poetic pervasion of vs. 3. The suggested denom. stem is not attested but could of course be easily formed, and I’m tolerably sure this pun was meant. Note vipāscítaḥ and vipā́, both in the matching vs. 3. I would now slightly alter the tr. to “going forth widely [/behaving like inspired poets].”

## 04-06
More chaining: vss. 4 and 6 end with rájaḥ; the exact phrase in 5c is uttamáṃ rájaḥ, whose uttamám is then picked up in 6a and augmented with uttamā́yyam in 6c.

Meanwhile, 3rd pl. pf. (vy) ā̀naśuḥ of 3c, 5b morphs into 3rd pl. root aor. āśata in 6b. As Old points out, √(n)aś is also represented by the desid. íyakṣantaḥ in 4c.

My “that is to be higher still” is meant to capture the pseudo-gerundive form of the nonce uttamā́yi ya-.

## 06-07
As noted in the publ. intro., vs. 7 stands somewhat apart from the rest of the hymn, but there is chaining here as well: 6a tántuṃ tanvānám … is echoed by 7c tatáṃ tántum …


## 07
Both Ge and Re take acikradaḥ as transitive/causative (e.g., “tu l’as fait crier”), but although (á)cikrada- looks like a typical redupl. aor. to an -áya-transitive, it is not so used.

On the problem of this redupl. aor., see my 1983 -áya- book (pp. 110-11)(though I would now disavow a second √krand ‘race’, beside ‘roar’).
