+++
title = "024"

+++
## 01-03
The first 3 vss. are united by the use of the (secondary) root √dhanv ‘run’, with the 3rd pl. -iṣ-aor. adhanviṣuḥ (found only here in the RV) in vss. 1 and 2, with the complementary subjects soma drops (1) and cows (2)(or so I think: see below), and the 2nd sg. pres. dhanvasi in 3.


## 02
Old discusses this vs. at some length and disputes the cows as subject. The problems he sees are that 1) it makes more sense for the soma drops to run than the cows (though he admits that there are some undoubted passages with the latter); 2) the shared verb would more naturally have the same subject than diff. subjects (this is not a stylistic given in soma hymns, where substances swap identities all the time); 3) the part. punānā́ḥ ‘being purified’ is better applied to soma drops than cows (though again he recognizes at least one passage in which the part. is so used). On the basis of these arguments he suggests that gā́vaḥ here should be interpr. as accusative rather than as the nominative it overwhelming is, with abhí gā́vaḥ substituted for abhí gā́ḥ on metrical grounds and the soma drops again the subj. This seems both uncharacteristic and unworthy of Oldenberg.

Positing “metrical” motivation for RVic anomalies is rarely successful, because the poets are flexible enough to avoid situations where they would be forced to use the wrong grammatical form because of meter. Moreover, the construction of the a-pādas of the two vss. -- PREVERB PL.NOUN adhanviṣuḥ -- imposes the subject role on the second noun (gā́vaḥ, 2a), which is in the same position as sómāsaḥ in 1a. The only of his arguments that seems at all worth considering is the one about punānā́ḥ, though given the tendency to identify the substances, esp. the liquid substances, in the soma ritual with each other, I do not find it particularly cogent -- and as Old himself points out, c could be a separate clause with the soma drops supplied as subj. there. (Another possible argument, not brought up by Old, is that this is the only vs. in the hymn where soma [sg. or pl.] is not the subject, but I do not think that is strong enough to contravene the grammar.) He cites another possible ex. of acc. gā́vaḥ, in VIII.41.6, where the form is easily interpr. as nom. (see comm. ad loc.). Re follows Old’s interpr; Ge does not, though in his n. 2b he suggests that the poet meant the soma drops as subject, but reversed the construction (“… er hat aber die Konstruktion umgekehrt,” whatever he means by that).


## 04
Although in the publ. tr. pāda c is unequivocally applied to Soma (“you who are …”), the text is ambiguous: the rel. cl. of pāda c, sásnir yó anumā́dyaḥ, could have either Soma or Indra (under the epithet carṣaṇīsáh-, which ends the preceding pāda) as antecedent.

In IX anumā́dya- is otherwise used of Soma, including two vss. later (24.6) as well as 76.1, 107.11, but it applies to Indra in VI.34.2. Since Indra was just called “conquerer of territories,” the use of sásni- ‘winner’ for the subj. of anumā́dya- makes Indra a distinct possibility. I think the ambiguity is meant; this is another ex. of the trade-off of identities discussed ad vs. 2. See further below.


## 05
The tr. of this vs. needs to be emended: because paridhā́vasi has an accented verb, it must belong to the yád clause, and pāda c must be the main clause. I would now add to the tr. of c “(you are) fit …” Alternatively, the vs. could be entirely a subordinate clause and dependent on either 4 or 6, hence, e.g., “purify yourself … (4), when pressed by the stones you run around the filter, fit for the fundament of Indra (5),” with no alternation of the transl. of 5, but a comma, not a period, at the end of 4.

What dhā́mane is meant to convey here is unclear, and numerous incompatible suggestions have been made -- e.g., Ge “(Eigen)art,” Re “vocation” (and see his n.). I long ago (Ged. Cowgill) suggested that this is a somewhat heavy-handed pun, with “fundament” both referring to Indra’s fundamental being and to his physical foundation, his bottom.


## 06
As noted in the publ. intro., Indra’s most characteristic epithet, “Vṛtra/obstaclesmasher,” is here applied to Soma instead -- another ex. of identity trading. The gerundive anumā́dya-, which was ambiguously used in 4c for either Soma or Indra or both, may signal the blurring of identity between them here.


## 07
Because of the blurring of identity just discussed, I take the predicate of ucyate ‘is called’ to be sómaḥ, a re-assertion of the name of the god being celebrated in this hymn after the equation with Indra in vss. 4 and 6 (and with the cows in vs. 2). This re-assertion is esp.

appropriate in the final vs. of the hymn. Ge/Re take śúciḥ pāvakáḥ as the predicate instead, but this pair of adjectives already characterized the substance identically in 6c. I think the point is that “the gleaming and purified one” has the name / is called “Soma.” In favor of their interpr. is the variant in VIII.13.19 śúciḥ pāvaká ucyate só ádbhutaḥ (which also incorporates all 3 adjectives from our vs. 6c). In that passage the adjectives do seem to serve as predicate with ucyate, but with a twist -- these soma-epithets are applied to the praiser (stotár-) there. I therefore do not think that the two similar pādas need to be construed identically -- rather that one poet (probably the one responsible for VIII.13.19) is playing with the phrase.
