+++
title = "026"

+++
On the rhetorical structure of this hymn, see publ. intro. The tr. replicates the fronting of the acc. pronoun ‘him’ throughout, though in vs. 6 táṃ tvā is represented just by “you,” not “that you.”


## 02
The phrase dhartár- diváḥ (also in opposite order) “supporter of heaven” is well established and used elsewhere in IX of Soma (IX.76.1, 109.6); it is of course the default interpr. here, shared by Gr, Ge, Re, and the publ. tr. inter alia. However, the ā́in the middle of the phrase (dhartā́ram ā́diváḥ) is troubling. It should not be a preverb in tmesis, since it is not adjacent to a metrical boundary and is not in a pāda with a finite verb (nor is there an appropriate verb anywhere in the vs.). The standard use of ā́in such positions is as an adposition, and in particular, in the position before an abl., with the meaning ‘all the way to’. Cf. for this exact expression ā́diváḥ I.92.17 “all the way to heaven,” of a ślóka- ‘signal call’ whose noise goes to heaven. I therefore think there is a syntactic and semantic pun in this vs.: the first reading is “supporter of heaven” with a gen. diváḥ (and the ā́essentially elided), but the second is “all the way to heaven” with an abl. diváḥ governed by ā́. This latter reading indicates that the lowing of the cows found in pāda a (gā́vo abhy ànūṣata) goes not only to Soma on the ritual ground but also to heaven, where the heavenly Soma is found

-- as is made clear in the next vs. That the material going to heaven is noise reminds us of
I.92.17 with the same expression.


## 03
On the anomalous acc. sg. vedhā́m to vedhás- see Old ad loc.; AiG II.2.225, 725, III.283, 285. Re’s suggestion that it may recall “l’origine lointaine ví-dhā” is best ignored, since Aves. vazdah- rules out a vṛddhi of -i- in the initial syllable of vedhás- (as Re surely knew). Note that the correct pl. to the -as-stem, vedhásaḥ, is found in vs. 6.

For the relationship between ádhi dyávi here and ā́diváḥ in 2c, see immed. above.


## 04
On this vs., and esp. pāda b, see Old’s detailed and sensible disc.

The rare and curiously formed word bhuríj- (4x), without clear etymology, is always dual, and the gloss ‘arm’ (flg. Sāy’s bāhu-), or perhaps better ‘hand’, works reasonably well in the various contexts. In IV.2.14 it appears in a vs. with other body parts and in a context where artisans are at work; in VIII.4.16 a razor is being sharpened; in IX.71.5 it qualifies the fingers, which are assembling a chariot. Here the context is rather like IX.10.2, which has du. gábhastyoḥ, belonging to a stem unambiguously meaning ‘hand’. In this passage it’s important to note that bhurí(joḥ) is in the same metrical position as bhū́ri(-) in 3c and 5c and that bhuríjor dhiyā́is close to a phonological approximation of bhū́ridhāyasam (3c).

There is some difference of opinion on how to construe vivásvataḥ. Re supplies “(dans le domaine),” presumably on the basis of the fairly common phrase vivásvataḥ sádane. Old’s interpr (flg. Pischel), that it depends on dhiyā́, is the one I adopt: it has the merit of not requiring anything to be supplied, and vivásvataḥ depends on dhī́- in IX.99.2 vivásvato dhíyaḥ, where the thoughts themselves are impelling soma (hinvánti, like our ahyan). Ge’s interpr. is more complex: he takes dhiyā́independently with ahyan in pāda a (“Ihn haben sie … durch ihre Kunst zur Eile getrieben”), but with vivásvataḥ dependent on it with saṃvásānam in b (“der sich (in die Dichtung) des Vivasvant kleidet”), thus reading dhiyā́twice (see his n. 4b). I think this double reading is essentially correct -- though I see no reason to put the second “in die Dichtung” in parens, nor do I think that the dhiyā́ construed with ahyan in pāda a should lack the dependent genitive.

Though Gr classifies saṃvásāna- (2x) with √vas ‘dwell’, the later consensus (in addition to the usual, see Gotō, 1st Kl., 295 n. 698), patently correct in my view, is that it belongs with √vas ‘wear’, which has a well-attested med. root pres., whose med. participle is esp. common. On ‘hymns’ etc. as garments, see the passages cited by Old.


## 06
With Old I take girāvṛ́dh- as a pun, with the first member both instr. sg. of gír- ‘song’ and loc. sg. of girí- ‘mountain’ -- both meanings being entirely appropriate to soma.

Ge opts for the 1st in his tr. (though he recognizes the 2nd in n. 6b); Re for the 2nd. Scar (516- 17) tentatively accepts Old’s double interpr.
