+++
title = "028"

+++
Like the last hymn, this one has eṣá beginning every vs. Although the hymns share some vocabulary and themes (as which Soma hymns do not?), they are not twinned.


## 01
hitáḥ is taken by all standard interpr. (Gr, Ge, Re) to √hi ‘impel’, as also by me, presumably because of the verb of motion, ví dhāvati, that provides the finite verb in the vs. But it could, of course, belong to √dhā ‘place’. This alternative interpr. is almost encouraged by vs. 4bc daśábhir jāmíbhir yatáḥ / abhí dróṇani dhāvati “(Soma,) held by the ten siblings, runs to the wooden cups,” where a ppl. of static position (yatáḥ) precedes the same verb of motion.

On viśva-víd- see comm. ad 27.3. Because of mánasas pátiḥ (note close sandhi) “lord of mind,” I interpr. the cmpd as ‘all-knowing’ here.


## 02
For c víśvā dhā́māny āviśán Ge reasonably cfs. (n. 2c) IX.25.4a víśvā rūpāṇy āviśán, but then goes the further step to “dhā́man = rūpá” and tr. our passage “alle seine Formen annehmend,” for which I see little or no justification. Yes, the stems in the RV with well-established distinct meanings, and I see no reason to erase that distinction. Ge’s interpr.

has implications for vs. 5, for which see below.


## 05
The c pāda, víśvā dhā́māni viśvavít, has the same neut. pl. acc. NP as 2c and the third word is phonologically similar to 2c āviśán. There are in principle three ways to construe víśvā dhā́māni: 1) as a 2nd object to arocayat in a (“made the sun shine (and) all the domains”); 2) as the goal of āviśán, supplied from 2c (“entering all domains”); 3) as the object of the root noun -víd- extracted the cmpd. viśva-víd- or as further specification of the 1st member of that cmpd. (so, either “all-knowing, (knowing) the domains” as in the publ.

tr., or “knowing all, (viz.) all the domains”). Like the publ. tr., Re chooses the first version of 3), and this seems the most rhetorically satisfying, while Ge opts for a variant of the second version of 3, while being forced to the further step of interpr. dhā́māni as “forms” (“all Formen vollständig kennend”) on the basis of his interpr. of 2c.


## 06
On śuṣmī́see comm. ad 29.6.
