+++
title = "029"

+++


## 01
The metrical structure encourages construing ójasā with sutásya -- so Ge “wenn der Bull mit Kraft ausgepresst ist.” However, I think it likely that the ójas- expressions are otherwise identical, but dhā́man- and rūpá- are both well-established belongs to Soma, rather than the pressers, and have therefore taken it with the participial VP in c. Re seems to take it with the verb of pāda a: “Ses jets ont coulé en avant … d’une forceformidable.” Note the unaccented asya in the first pāda, allowable because the referent is unmistakable. Cf. asmai in IX.11.1a and IX.70.1a.


## 03
The construction in pāda a is clarified by IX.94.5 víśvāni hí suṣáhā tā́ni túbhyam “for all these things are easy to conquer for you,” with a full dative prn. rather than our ambig. enclitic te. The tā́ni is clearly specified by víśvā vásūni in 4a, anticipated by the voc. prabhū-vaso in our b.


## 05
áraruṣaḥ in pāda a can be gen. or abl. sg. Either of them can fit the syntax: as abl. it can be construed directly with rákṣā (“protect from …”) and be parallel to svanā́t in b; as gen., it can be dependent on svanā́t and part of the gen. NP samasya kásya cit. Ge follows the 2nd path (“vor dem Schnauben eines jeden Geizhalses”), while Re (and I) the 1st . I do so partly because an abl. simply gives more oomph -- protection from a non-giver seems more critical than simply from the sound of one -- but primarily because of the word order: the audience hearing a form that could be abl. immediately after √rakṣ would naturally take it as an abl. It’s possible that they would revise their opinion on encountering a 2nd abl.

followed by a gen. sg. to which áraruṣaḥ could belong, but it’s also possible (likely even) that they would see no reason to reinterpr. áraruṣaḥ.

The subordinate cl. in c does not fit with the main cl. very well, as the awkwardness of the publ. tr. shows. The problem is the verb: what is wanted in context is a modal in a purpose-type clause (“so that we will/may become free of insult”); this would work well with protection from the “sound” in pāda b. But mumucmáhe is resolutely pf. indicative (or redupl. pres. indic.; see Kü 380 and nn. 677, 678). Both Ge and Re supply material to smooth the transition, Re with a pres. part. attached to ab: “(nous plaçant) là où nous soyons à l’abri de la nocivité” -- thus also sneaking in the desirable modality. Ge starts a new sentence with c, supplying as main cl. “da wollen wir sein.” Kü avoids supplying anything, but sneaks in futurity in parens: “da wir von der Schmach befreit (worden) sind.” I don’t have a good solution and so stick with the awk. publ. tr.


## 06
This is the 3rd hymn in a row, all attributed to Āṅgirasa poets, with a form of śuṣmín-, śúṣma- in the final vs. Also in the next hymn IX.30, also an Āṅgirasa hymn, vss. 1 (śuṣmín-) and 3 (śúṣma-). As noted in the publ. intro. to IX.30, the word is not characteristic of Āṅgirasa poets elsewhere, even in the IXth Maṇḍala, although there are numerous hymns attributed to them in this maṇḍala (besides our IX.27-30): IX.4, 35-36, 37-38, 39-40, 44-46, 50-52, 61, 67 [part], 69, 72, 73, 83, parts of 97 and 108, 112). Of these, only IX.50.1, 52.4, attributed to Ucatha Āṅgirasa, contain members of this word family. In hymns attributed to Āṅgirasa poets outside of IX, the words are found only in X.43.3 (Kṛṣṇa Āṅgirasa), VIII.96.8 (Tiraṣci Āṅgirarsa), and -- most noteworthy -- VIII.98.12, 99.6, the only two hymns outside of IX attributed exclusively to Nṛmedha Āṅgirasa, the poet of our IX.27, 29.
