+++
title = "032"

+++
## 02-03
The ā́d that begins both these vss. does not seem to have its usual “(just) after that” sense.


## 02
On Trita as the archetypal soma-presser and his “maidens” (yóṣanaḥ) as the fingers, see disc. ad IX.37.4.


## 03
This vs. contains two similes (ab and c respectively), each a bit trickily constructed.

In the first, the caus. redupl. aor. avīvaśat has two slightly different senses in simile and frame: ‘makes bellow’ in the simile: it is the flock (gaṇám) that is making the noise, stimulated by its lead goose (haṃsáḥ); ‘makes bellow(ed)’ in the frame: it is the thought/prayer (matím) of someone else (víśvasya) that Soma causes to be heard. This double sense is the counterpart to that of the caus. to √śru, both ‘make hear’ and ‘makes heard’. My interpr. here is different from that of Re, who takes both acc. as goal of the sound (“… vers (sa) troupe, … vers la prière …”); Ge’s is close to mine, though he doesn’t seem to recognize the slight difference in the function of the object. On this aor. stem, see my -áya-Formations, 111, 166. Another ex. with the same sense is found in nearby IX.34.6; see comm. ad loc. In the second simile, in c, it is not syntactic variation but a pun on the root of the passive ajyate that is at issue: this form can belong either to √añj ‘anoint’ or to √aj ‘drive’, and both are appropriate to the context. Soma can be “anointed” by cows’ milk or driven together with the cows (that is, the milk). The ‘steed’ to which Soma is compared could likewise be both anointed (/groomed) and driven.


## 04
Although mṛgá- generally refers to a wild beast in general in the RV and in later Skt. comes to mean specifically ‘deer’, here it seems close to the meaning of Aves. mǝrǝγa- ‘(large) bird, bird of prey’. Cf. the almost identical pāda IX.67.15 śyenó ná taktó arṣati “Like a falcon launched in flight, it rushes.” The participle avacā́kaśat ‘looking down’ also fits a bird better than an earth-bound beast; cf. esp. X.136.4 antárikṣeṇa patati víśvā rūpā́vacā́kaśat “He flies through the midspace, gazing down on all forms,” in the famous Muni hymn. See also comm. on takva-vī́- ad I.134.5, 151.5. It must be admitted, however, that it is not only birds that √tac; see X.28.4 kroṣṭā́varāháṃ nír atakta kákṣāt “The jackal sprang on the boar from out of the underbrush.” However, there the attack is presumably an airborne pounce, so bird-like. Images on the web of jackals pouncing support this notion.

As for what the mṛgá- is looking down on, it is surely the two worlds, a notion going back to Sāy., which would fit the bird’s-eye view. Ge suggests other possibilities in n. 4a, but not with great conviction.


## 05
Both Ge and Re seem to make heavier weather of hitám than seems called for. Ge (n. 5c) suggests that the acc. is attraction from nom. *hitáḥ and tr. “Er ist wie ein angesporntes (Rennpferd) in das Wettrennen gegangen.” Re allows it to be acc. but not to modify ājím, requiring him to invent a second acc. phrase: “Elles sont allées [Re seems to have nodded on the number of the verb ágan; it cannot be the 3rd pl. of the root aor. to √gā, which is (á)gur, but must be 3rd sg. to the root aor. of √gam] dans l’arène comme (pour rejoindre le soma) mis en branle (par les prières).” I don’t understand the fuss: ājí- is masc.

(the supposed fem. ex. in I.116.15 is not), so hitám is grammatically fine. And I see no reason why a contest can’t be set, as a prize is. Perhaps it is their apparent conviction that hitám has to belong to √hi ‘impel’ that impelled them to these unconvincing makeshifts, or perhaps they believe that yáthā as a simile marker does not behave like ná and iva but requires a pseudo-clausal structure. But see the exx. in Gr’s no. 4 s.v. yáthā (col. 1083).
