+++
title = "034"

+++


## 02
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. is almost identical to IX.33.3; the only difference is that the soma is plural (sutā́ḥ … sómāḥ) in 33.3 and sg. (sutáḥ … sómaḥ) here, which also necessitates a sg. verb (arṣati for the pl. arṣanti in 33.3).


## 03
Acc. vṛ́ṣāṇam is one of the two forms (also X.89.9) of this stem with suffixal -ā- in the strong stem, against the overwhelming prevalence of -an-. See Old. Assimilation to the dominant pattern of -n-stems (rā́jānam type) is not surprising; what is perhaps surprising is how well vṛ́ṣan- resisted the analogic pressure.


## 04
On Trita, see comm. ad IX.37.4.

Ge interpr. the rūpaíḥ with which the soma is anointed as its colors (“mit seinen Farben”). However, (sám) √añj is specialized in IX for cows (that is, their milk). Cf.


## 47
yád góbhiḥ ... samajyáse, IX.72.1 sáṃ dhenúbhiḥ ... ajyate; without sám there are multiple passages, e.g., góbhir añjānáḥ ... (IX.50.5, etc.), góbhir ajyase (IX.85.5), and, esp., nearby IX.32.3 átyo ná góbhir ajyate. I therefore think that our passage must refer to “forms” of milk; so also Re in his n., though unusually for him he does not supply it in tr.

(“de formes-concrètes”). That this vs. is sandwiched between two vss. that contain the verb ‘milk’, 3c duhanti, 5b duhaté, further supports this interpr., though in both 3 and 5 the milk is not literal milk, but soma itself.

The publ. tr. does not reflect the possible pun on sám … ajyate that was noted in


## 03
just cited, where ajyate could also belong to √aj ‘drive’, hence a 2nd reading “is driven together with the forms (of milk).”

## 04-05
The final words of these two vss. are the phonologically similar háriḥ and havíḥ, both referring to soma -- though one is masc. nom. and the other neut. acc. 
## 05
On the sense of this vs., see publ. intro. Needless to say, this vs. is catnip for Lü; see his disc. p. 606.


## 06
I take avīvaśat here as trans./caus, as in nearby IX.32.3 -- an interpr. shared by Ge and Re (“… a fait mugir …”), though Re takes the same form in 32.3 as non-caus. with acc. of goal. See comm. there.
