+++
title = "035"

+++


## 02
Two heavy cmpds in the voc., each with a 2nd member apparently derived from an - áya- trans./caus. governing the first member in the acc.: samudram-īṅkhaya ‘setting the sea to swaying’, viśvam-ejaya ‘setting all in motion’. Of course the final -m- of the 1st member also serves to break the hiatus between the vocalic stem-final of the 1st member and the vowel-initial verb stem. It’s also notable that verbal forms of ejaya- are not found in the RV; they first appear in KS (XI.6 [prose], XXXV.14 [mantra]). (My statement in the -áyamonograph, p. 108, that the first attestation is in ŚB is wrong, relying on the notation in Whitney’s Roots.)


## 03
I take vā́ryam as an Inhaltsakk.


## 04
The first pāda contains a notable word play. Judging from the number of parallels, the default obj. of √iṣ ‘send’ in IX is ‘speech’; cf. IX.30.1, 64.9, 25, 95.5, and esp. IX.12.6 prá vā́cam índur iṣyati, a pāda identical to ours, save for one consonant: vā́cam versus vā́jam. Although an emendation to *vā́cam has been suggested here (see Old, who rejects it), a word play is far more likely. The poet knew (and knew his audience knew) the idiom vā́cam √iṣ, but substituted the nearly identical vā́jam, which is to be construed with síṣāsan ‘desiring to win’ later in the vs. -- vā́jam being a common obj. to forms of √san ‘win’ and in fact found in the root noun cmpd vāja-sā́in b, immediately after the desid. part. This root noun cmpd “repairs” the apparent vā́jam problem, and in the next vs. the poet provides the expected vā́cam, 5a vācam-īṅkhayám, a 2nd repair strategy.

Ge assigns vidānáḥ to √vid ‘know’ (“der sich auf die Vorschriften, auf die Waffen versteht”), while Re (though see his n.) and the publ. tr. take it to √vid ‘find’ (as a root aor.

part.). I now think either (or both) is/are possible, but that in either case vratā́and ā́yudhā are not separate objects as Ge/Re take them, but an equational phrase (as in the publ. tr.).

That is, Soma’s commandments are his weapons. On the formidable nature of Soma’s vratá-s, cf., e.g., IX.53.3 ásya vratā́ni nā́dhṛ́ṣe “The commandments of this one cannot be ventured against.” As an alt. tr. here I would add “knowing his commandments to be his weapons.”


## 05
Reprise of the -īṅkhayá- cmpd from 2a. vācam-īṅkhayá- occurs once elsewhere, in IX.101.6, where it modifies samudráḥ, which is the first member of the cmpd in our vs. 2, a small web of formulaic associations.


## 06
dādhā́ra here is the only intransitive form of this perfect; see Re’s n. and Kü (261).

The root √dhṛ is prominent here (see the immed. following phrase dhármṇas páteḥ ‘master of support’) and echoes rāyó dhartā́in 2c.

The last word of the hymn, prabhū́vasoḥ (“of the one who brings outstanding gifts”) is the gen. of the name of the supposed poet of this hymn, Prabhūvasu Āṅgirasa, who is also assigned the next hymn, IX.36. Of course the name in the Anukramaṇī could well have been generated from the final word of this hymn.
