+++
title = "037"

+++
For the rhetorical structure of the hymn, see publ. intro.


## 03
Note the slight reversed phonetic figure: a ... diváḥ# b ... vi dhāv(ati).


## 04
On the sense of this vs., see publ. intro. As indicated there, there is much disagreement about the referents. To my disc. there I will only add a few comments.

Relevant for the whole vs. is IX.26.5 tám sā́nāv ádhi jāmáyo, hárim hinvanti ádribhiḥ “Him do the siblings [=fingers] impel with the stones on the back (of the filter),” which contains both jāmáyaḥ and sā́nu- as here, with the ‘siblings’ being the fingers and the ‘back’ the filter. The ‘back’ (sā́nu-) in soma hymns is basically always the filter, whatever else it may cosmically represent. Moreover, Trita is an archetypal soma-preparer; for this role see, inter alia, Ge’s n. to IX.34,4 and Ober I.197-98, esp. on the similar role that Θrita fulfills atq the haoma pressing in the Hom Yašt. In at least two other places in IX his ‘maidens’ (yóṣanaḥ), the fingers, are involved: see in the next hymn. IX.38.2 etáṃ trítasya yóṣaṇaḥ, háriṃ hinvanti ádribhiḥ “This tawny one do the maidens of Trita [=fingers] impel with the stones” and almost identical IX.32.2. That the b pāda in these vss. with “Trita’s maidens” as subj.

(in pāda a) is identical to the one in IX.26.5 just quoted with jāmáyaḥ as subj. (in pāda a) imposes the chain of identifications “Trita’s maidens’ = “siblings” = “fingers.” Therefore, though it may be Trita's back in some sense [he owns and deploys the filter] it's surely also his fingers, here called jāmí-, not Soma's or anyone else's (as has been suggested by others), and though they may stand for various things (Dawns, heavenly rivers, whatever -- again based on various scholars’ suggestions), they start out as fingers.
