+++
title = "038"

+++
Like IX.37 with sá opening every vs., every vs. in this hymn begins with a form of the eṣá- pronoun. The pattern here is both more complex and more emphatic: there is case variation (vss. 2 and 3 have acc. sg. etám, the rest nom. sg. eṣá), and in all vss. but vs. 2 the initial pronoun is followed by the appropriate form of syá-/tyá-: eṣá (u) syá, etáṃ tyám, a phrase that means ‘this very (one)’.


## 01
The two nominatives vṛ́ṣā ‘bull’ and ráthaḥ ‘chariot’ are juxtaposed, each qualifying Soma. I consider them separate characterizations, with Soma as both bull and chariot; so also Oberlies (RelRV II.71, 229). Ge takes vṛṣā́as modifying ráthaḥ (“Dieser bullenhafte Wagen”), while Re sneaks in a parenthesis to avoid identifying Soma with a chariot: “le-célèbre (soma), taureau, (cheval attelé au) char.” If taking them as independent seems too radical, Ge’s solution takes fewer liberties with the text than Re’s.


## 02
As noted above, this is the only vs. where the initial pronoun is not followed by a form of syá-/tyá-, though tritásya starts promisingly, with tR, and ends with -sya. See further on this vs. ad IX.37.4.


## 03
The phrase “ten tawny ones” (haríto dáśa) helps define the “maidens of Trita” (tritásya yóṣanaḥ) in the previous vs. as the fingers: “ten” is the giveaway.


## 04
It may be that the adj. mā́nuṣa- here should be rendered more restrictively as “stemming from Manu,” referring to only those clans that participate in Ārya sacrificial culture.


## 05
It is tempting to read diváḥ as abl. with áva caṣṭe: “looks down from heaven”; however, diváḥ śíśuḥ “child of heaven” is found elsewhere (IV.15.6, VI.49.2). It is certainly possible, however, to read diváḥ with both: “the child of heaven looks down from heaven.” The word is well positioned to look both left and right.
