+++
title = "039"

+++


## 01
The hymn opens with a mirror-image phonetic figure: āśúr arṣa.

The voc. bṛhanmate ‘having lofty thought’ puns on the name of the poet given in the Anukramaṇī, Bṛhanmati Āṅgirasa -- or more likely provides the name.

On the direct speech in pāda c of this vs., see publ. intro. The speech itself consists only of the word devā́ḥ. The place identified by this speech is soma’s goal, where the gods will partake of it.


## 02
The phrase pariṣkṛṇvánn ániṣkṛtam is not as much of an etymological figure as it first appears: in the 1st word, the preverb pari is cmpded with the s-mobile form of √kṛ, while the 2nd is the negated form of the somewhat enigmatic lexeme íṣ + √kṛ (the latter without s-mobile), on which see comm. ad VII.76.2. As disc. there, the pseudo-preverb íṣ may derive from the root noun íṣ- ‘refreshment’, and our passage here contains that noun.

The phrase yātáyann íṣaḥ “arranging refreshments” in b functions almost like a paraphrase, or repair, of the putative phrase íṣ- √kṛ “prepare refreshment” à “put in order, set to rights.”


## 03
The med. root pres. part. cákṣāṇa- cmpded with ví is found only here. By contrast the bahuvrīhi vicakṣaṇá- ‘having a wide gaze, wide-gazing’ occurs nearly 20x in Maṇḍala IX alone (including nearby IX.37.2). The two words are distinguished only by the length of the penultimate syllable (and accent). The cmpd is found almost entirely pāda-final (either in Gāyatrī or in Jāgatī), whereas the part. here opens the pāda. However, nothing would prevent vicakṣaṇáḥ from taking that position, as it indeed does in IX.97.2 (Triṣṭubh), so the distribution cannot be purely metrical. See also Re.


## 05
The suppressed object of āvívāsan is probably the gods (so already Sāy) or Indra in particular (supported by pāda c), but there is no reason to supply this obj. in tr.


## 06
As disc. in the publ. intro., this vs. forms a notional ring with vs. 1, with both containing direct speech in a ritual setting in their respective pāda c’s. The speech is more clearly marked in vs. 1, with íti brávan, than it is here. Both the speaker(s) and the addressees are also unclear here. It is likely that the former are the officiating priests, the subjects of the 3rd pl. hinvanti in b and quite possibly of anūṣata in a (so Ge, Lü 602), though Re thinks rather of the soma drinks. As for the addressees of the 2nd pl. impv. sīdata, I think the soma drinks are most likely, as in the identical pāda in IX.13.9, which is preceded by a nom. pl. pávamānāḥ identifying the subject. However, the soma referent in our b pāda is sg.

(hárim) -- though this is not really problematic, given the ubiquitous variation between sg.

and pl. soma(s) in these hymns. However, it could also be addressed to the gods arriving at the ritual ground (so Sāy), the gods whose location was specified in 1c.
