+++
title = "040"

+++


## 02
Both Ge and Re treat ruhat as modal, parallel to the clear aor. subj. gámat in the following pāda (e.g., “… soll … besteigen, … soll … gehen”). But ruhat belongs to a clear them. aor. áruhat, and its zero-grade root syll. would preclude a subjunctive in any case; formally it must be an injunc. I take the sequence of verbs as referring to different stages of the ritual process, one that has just occurred, one that will now occur. KH (Injunk. 222) in fact suggests that the transmitted injunc. ruhat might represents a redactional error for ’ruhat, an augmented aor. in this sandhi context. Hoffmann’s suggestion of course results from his idiosyncratic and restrictive views on the function of the injunctive; in my opinion injunc. ruhat would work fine here as an immed. past, preceding soma’s departure for Indra. (Maur’s tr. [84] is sim. to mine.)


## 03
The expression asmábhyam … víśvataḥ “for us all around” in b I take as a heavy specification of enclitic naḥ in Wackernagel’s position in pāda a. Most take víśvataḥ as qualifying “wealth.” The fact that this pāda (asmábhyaṃ soma víśvataḥ) appears 3x (also IX.33.6, 65.21) suggests that víśvataḥ goes with ‘us’; on the other hand, that all three occurrences involve the acquisition of wealth or other good things somewhat undercuts that argument.

On mahā́m see AiG III.251.


## 04
On subj. 2nd sg. vidā́ḥ see comm. ad IX.19.6. As noted there, I think this is the only actual example of vidā́ḥ. The other supposed exx. are actually 2nd sg. impv. vidā́with lengthened final; their sandhi position is ambiguous and so the forms could represent -ā́ḥ as well as -ā́, and the Pp. analyses them as the former. It is in fact not beyond the realm of possibility that the original reading here was also *vidā́. An impv. would fit the context better, with immediately preceding (4b) and following (5a) impv. ā́bhara. It is possible that the original sequence *vidā́sahasríṇīḥ was interpr. as having a degeminated double -s s- (*vidā́s s…), which was then restored. The meter would be unaffected. The almost identical pāda, IX.61.3 kṣárā sahasríṇīr íṣaḥ, is transmitted with an impv. with lengthened final. Note also impv. vardhayā in 5c. An alt. tr. here would then be “find refreshments …” Curiously, both Ge and Re tr. as impv., though they register no discomfort with the subjunctive.
