+++
title = "041"

+++
## 01-02
These two vss. are somewhat illuminated by IX.73.4-5, containing some very similar expressions: 73.4d padé-pade pāśínaḥ santi sétavaḥ “At every step there are snares that bind”; 73.5bcd … saṃdáhanto avratā́n / … ápa dhamanti … tvácam ásiknīm “…burning up those who follow no commandment, they blow away … the black skin.” Cf. also bhū́rṇayaḥ in 73.4b, corresponding to bhū́rṇayaḥ in our 1a, and note also that ápa dhamanti in 73.5c with “black skin” as its obj. resembles ghnántaḥ … ápa in our 1c, also with “black skin” as object.


## 01
This vs., consisting entirely of a rel. cl., is not resumed by a main cl. Vs. 2, which might be configured as the main cl., is couched in the 1st pl., not the 3rd pl. like vs. 1, and it also has a very different tone. There is no reason, with Re, to supply an anodyne introductory cl. “(Je chante les soma)” to provide a main cl. -- in fact, the abruptness of the expression and its incompleteness enhance the sense of violence.

As I indicated in the publ. intro., I think the unexpressed subj. is the soma juices. Many soma hymns begin with the soma rushing forth after its pressing, often compared to a horse or a bull charging; here the soma drinks are also likened to cattle, but stampeding cattle, and this uncontrollable mob tramples the enemy. So the poet has taken a standard opening trope and “weaponized” it, as it were.

This enemy is identified as the “black skin” (kṛṣṇā́m … tvácam). For this phrase as a designation of non-Ārya “without commandments” (avratá-) see I.130.8 and IX.73.5 (in the latter tvácam ásiknīm; see above). The term avratá- is found in the next vs. (2c).


## 02
As was just noted, avratám in c suggests that this vs. belongs conceptually and rhetorically with vs. 1, because avratá- elsewhere qualifies those “with black skin.” However, as I also indicated ad vs. 1, I do not think vs. 2 is the main clause on which the rel.

cl. of vs. 1 is dependent: “we” are not likened to stampeding cattle in vs. 1, but rather the soma juices are. HPS (Ved. vratá, 94 n. 193) rather trickily suggests taking 2ab as parenthetic, with c returning to the soma juices of vs. 1, modified by the part. sāhvā́ṃsaḥ. I see no reason for this: the victory of the soma juices in 1a is reconfigured as our victory.

With Old, Ge, Re I take the gen. suvitásya as the gen. obj. of manāmahe and construe áti with sétum (contra Gr, who takes it with manāmahe). In IX áti regularly refers to the journey of the soma “beyond” the filter, which here is represented by sétum. Re cites other passages containing √man with gen., but it must be admitted that this particular form, manāmahe, otherwise resolutely takes the acc. sétu- is found 5x in the RV; its only two occurrences in IX are here and in IX.73.4 cited above. The word does not yet have its later meaning ‘bridge’, but a sense closer to its root etym. to √sā / si ‘bind’ (with 2ndary full-grade se built to the zero-grade): ‘fetter, bond, (or here) snare’. Ge and Re instead take it as a dyke or dam (Damm and digue respectively), but these seem to be an attempt to split the difference between the root etymology and the later sense ‘bridge’. Certainly in other RVic passages the sense ‘fetter’ vel sim. is inescapable, e.g. VIII.67.8 mā́naḥ sétuḥ siṣed ayám “Let this fetter here not bind us,” with cognate verb, where Ge tr. “Fessel.” As for what physical object the sétu- refers to here, I think it is an image of the twisty curls of a sheep's fleece, which can be seen as fetters or nooses.

durāvyàm, modifying sétum, is assigned to a stem dur-ā́vya / durā́via by Gr, misrepresenting the accent, inter alia. As Old points out, however, the stem is really durāvī́-, a root noun cmpd. (see now Scar 497), and it must mean ‘difficult to pursue / follow’. Since sétu- here refers to the curls of the sheep’s fleece (in my view), these curls can be conceived of as the tracks that the liquid would follow as it's being strained through the fleece, tracks that can be difficult to pursue. So the acc. phrase sétuṃ durāvyàm jams two different but evocative images into one. Note also that suvitásya … durāv(í)yam is something of a phonetic figure, with the semantically contrastive adverbial prefixes su and dus, but different verbal roots (√i and √vī) -- though internal sandhi provides √i with an apparent initial v matching vī.


## 05
Old takes uṣā́ḥ as acc. pl. (so also AiG III.283) and the object of ā́… pṛṇa in the simile (so presumably “as the sun [fills] the dawns with its rays”; cf Oberlies Rel.RV I.238).

Although an acc. pl. uṣā́ḥ is morphologically possible (like rare gen. sg. uṣáḥ), the simile thus produced does not make sense to me, and despite the parade of citations of supposed parallels that Old provides, no passage has anything remotely like that. I follow Ge in taking uṣā́ḥ and sū́ryaḥ as parallel nom. sg., both participating in the simile. Re seems to take as nom., but pl., for no obvious reason.


## 06
The last pāda begins with a mirror-image figure: sárā rasā́, though the last vowel is obscured in sandhi: raséva.
