+++
title = "044"

+++


## 01
mahé táne “for great extension” is found also in VIII.26.2, 46.25, where it appears to refer to the extension of the family line. This is possible here, esp. if naḥ is construed with it, as in the publ. tr. Ge suggests that it refers to the extension of lifetime (“zu grosser Lebensdauer(?)”) and Re to the ritual continuum, but as Re points out in his n., it could also simply describe, physically, the extension of the stream of soma. If that interpr. is chosen, the tr. should de-couple naḥ from the phrase: “… rush forth for us for (your) great extension.” The referent of the simile ūrmíṃ ná bíbhrat is suggested by IX.96.7 ūrmíṃ ná síndhuḥ.


## 02
The stem juṣtá- with expected ppl. accent occurs only here in the RV, beside wellattested júṣṭa- with unexpected root accent. The latter form is generally construed with the dative of the beneficiary (“enjoyable to X”), save for the late X.125.5 (Vāc) júṣṭaṃ devébhir utá mā́nuṣebhiḥ (though this phrase has a traditional ring), with instr. as here.

The usual uncertainty about the root affiliation of hitá- in IX: to √hi ‘impel’ or √dhā ‘place’? See disc. ad IX.1.2, etc. On the basis of finite hinve in the next pāda, undeniably belonging to √hi, one could argue either way: as a root repetition or as a pun. Both Ge and Re take it to √hi, the latter with some disc. in his n.; I concur, primarily because of phrases like dhiyéṣitá- (I.3.5, III.12.1, 60.5, 62.12) ‘sent by the thought’, dhiyā́jūtá- (IX.64.16) ‘sped by the thought’, even though the doubling of ‘impelled’ seems crude for a RVic poet.

Ge and Re also construe víprasya with dhā́rayā (e.g., “grâce à la coulée du (prêtre)- inspiré”). In the publ. tr. I instead take it with the two types of speech in pāda a, matí- and dhī́- and assume that it has been displaced to c in order to contrast with kavíḥ, referring to Soma there. In favor of this interpr. is the fact that the very common instr. dhā́rayā generally appears alone and refers to the physical stream of the soma liquid, not metaphorically to words or the like. However, the identical pāda IX.12.8c gives me pause, as in that vs. there is no alternative way of construing víprasya except with dhā́rayā. I think it possible that IX.12.8 is a clumsy borrowing of this pāda, but see comm. ad loc., where I consider the possibility that there is a way to interpret víprasya dhā́rayā phrasally.


## 04
In b I take the mid. part. cakrāṇáḥ with a self-beneficial / reflexive sense, contra Ge and Re.

With Ge I take the subj. of c to be the priest, not Soma with Re.


## 05
The first hemistich has no finite verb. Ge somewhat arbitrarily supplies a verb (“empfehlen”) with which to construe the two datives bhágāya vāyáve. If we are to supply a verb, it seems best to be guided by the context in which pāda a is repeated, in IX.61.9a, where the following pāda contains pavasva. Re’s “(qu’il se clarifie)” seems to reflect this, though he does not mention the repeated pāda in his n., where he suggests other possibilities. (That pavasva appears in the immediately preceding vs. 4 in our hymn might also support supplying it here.) The publ. tr. simply takes ab as a nominal expression, with the datives of pāda a construed with sadā́vṛdhaḥ ‘growing ever stronger’. The drawback to my interpr. (and to Re’s) is that there’s no clear function for naḥ, which both Re and I fail to tr. in its hemistich (Ge uses it as object of “empfehlen”). I take naḥ as the fronted Wackernagel-position obj. of ā́yamat in c, assuming that the whole vs. is a single clause.

Ge’s rendering of vípravīra- as “der die Männer beredt macht” cavalierly ignores both accent and the morphology of the first member. It must rather be a bahuvrīhi, as the publ. tr. and Re’s “qui a pour hommes-utiles les orateurs” recognize.
