+++
title = "045"

+++


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., nṛcákṣā in b may form a ring with vicákṣase in 6b, the last vs. of the hymn. For similar phraseology within a single vs., cf. IX.86.23 tváṃ nr̥cákṣā abhavo vicakṣaṇa. nṛcákṣā also resonates thematically with the following devávītaye, with the nṛ- devá- contrast.


## 02
The word order in this vs. is quite jumbled, and there are several alternative ways to try to fix it. The one taken by the publ. tr. follows Ge in taking pāda b as parenthetic.

Unlike Ge’s tr. (though it is the 2nd alt. in his n. 2c), the publ. tr. uses this strategy to allow devā́n in c to be the goal of the verb in a (arṣā́bhí); cf. nearby IX.42.5 abhí viśvāni vā́ryā, abhí devā́n ... arṣati and in the immed. preceding hymn IX.44.1bc ... arṣasi / abhí devā́n, where the verb ends the hemistich and the preverb begins the next pāda, both reasonable positions for those elements. The latter passage (by the same poet as ours) might help explain the postposed preverb in the middle of the pāda here: sá no arṣābhí …, which is otherwise odd.

However, taking devā́n as goal still leaves the rest of pāda c, … sákhibhya ā́váram, unaccounted for. In the publ. tr. I take the sákhibhyaḥ as dat. doubling naḥ in a, with an independent adverbial ā́váram “at will” (which, however, is usually in the opposite order váram ā́). But this ignores the striking parallel cited by both Ge and Re, I.4.4 yás te sákhibhya ā́váram (and cf. II.5.5 … tisrbhya ̥́ ā́váram), rendered in the publ. tr. as “who is your choice from among your comrades.” Although it is always possible that the parallel is a false one, I now think I cannot ignore it and I suggest that this phrase provides a second goal to arṣā́bhí, with sákhibhya ā́váram to be construed together (as in I.4.4) referring to Indra, who was mentioned in the parenthetic pāda b. (Indra is also the referent in I.4.4.) Indra is of course soma’s particular target among the gods, the best drinker of soma. I would now take this phrase as specifying soma’s goal of choice: the juice rushes to the gods, but esp. to Indra - and would alter the tr. to “rush to the gods, to your choice [=Indra] from among the comrades,” with sákhibhyaḥ referring to the gods in general. Although sákhi- in IX generally refers to poets or hymans in general (cf., e.g., IX.97.43), the ABL ā́váram idiom could overrule this. This interpr. unfortunately requires (or at least suggests) that sákhāyaḥ in vs. 5 has a different referent.


## 04
I am not certain what the simile depicts, what it means for a horse to “step beyond the chariot-pole (dhúr-).” Re suggests that the dhúr- is being used here as a pole to mark the limit of the racecourse, but I do not know of another example of dhúr- in this sense. It’s possible that the simile depicts the moment when, as a horse is starting to pull a chariot, it's been hanging back from its tackle and now it pulls on it and pushes beyond it, but my ignorance about the interaction between horses and their tackle makes this interpr.

uncertain. Note also that dhúram here phonetically echoes dúraḥ ‘doors’ in 3c.


## 05
As noted ad 2c, if we take sákhibhyaḥ there as referring to the gods, sákhāyaḥ here is probably not picking up that referent, but likely refers to the human poets.


## 06
Both Ge and Re take vicákṣase as transitive ‘reveal’, but as Re notes, ví √cakṣ is ordinarily intransitive, and I see no reason to willfully ignore this usage. As noted in the publ. intro., the verb forms a ring with nṛcákṣāḥ in 1b.
