+++
title = "046"

+++


## 01
Note the unusual position of iva after the full simile, not its first word.


## 02
The simile “adorned like a maiden with her patrimony” (páriṣkṛtāsaḥ … yóṣeva pítryā́vatī) is presumably the first mention in Sanskrit of the major source of strīdhana or ‘women’s property’ listed in the dharma lit., namely what a bride receives at her wedding, esp. from “mother, brother(s), and father” (see Manu IX.194, though there the wedding is divided into two phases and the property from her three types of natal relatives is counted separately, adding up to five of the six types of strīdhana). Since these gifts would take the form of jewelry - and since the bride would be especially dressed up for her wedding -- the simile here highlights the special sparkling appearance of the soma juices. Alternatively this might be a reference to the institution of the putrikā or “appointed daughter,” who in the absence of sons is made the virtual son and heir of her father, with any children she bears owing their ancestral offerings to him rather than to their paternal grandfather. Oberlies (Relig. RV I.522) calls the maiden in this passage an Erbtochter and seems to be thinking of this institution, and Re may be as well, though his comment (“le *pitrya ou héritage paternal pouvait donc revenir à la fille”) is vague and may reflect a lack of knowledge of the standard sources on strīdhana. I think the “adorned bride” interpr. is far more likely and fits the ritual situation better.


## 03
With Ge and Re, I take kármabhiḥ as referring to the various ritual acts at the Soma Sacrifice. Oberlies (Relig.RV I.534) instead sees these as Indra’s deeds, after the weakened god has been reinvigorated by soma: “… lassen den Indra mit [=zu] seinen Taten wachsen.” This seems farfetched to me, given how frequently forms of √kṛ are used for ritual activity.


## 04
Old is inclined, flg. BR, to emend voc. suhasti yaḥ to *suhasti yāḥ, derived from the stem suhásti ya-, hence a masc. nom. pl. referring to the priestly officiants. Re follows him, remarking rather scornfully “il est peu probable que l’auteur ait voulu désigner par ce Voc. … des entités féminines, à la rigueur toutefois les « doigts ».” But see Ge’s quite sensible n.

suggesting that the fem. refers to the fingers, which are frequently assigned ritual agency in the IXth Maṇḍala. Note that the ten fingers (dáśa kṣípaḥ) explicitly occur two vss. later (6b).

śukrā́… manthínā is a discontinuous dual dvandva. The phraseology matches III.32.2 gávāśiram manthínam ... śukrám ... sómam; cf. góbhiḥ śrīṇīta in c.
