+++
title = "047"

+++


## 01
Both Ge and Re take maháḥ as a nom. sg. masc. to them. mahá- (so also Gr), referring to Soma. With immed. flg. cid the phrase is taken as “already great” (“schon so grosse,” “si grand (fût-il déjà)”), as an implicit contrast with the verb, (abhy) ávardhata, which indicates that he has grown (further) despite his already large size. This if of course possible. By contrast I take maháḥ as acc. pl. m. to máh-. My reason for this is the preverb abhí: in the few occurrences of abhí √vṛdh, the lexeme takes an acc. complement even in the middle. Cf. II.17.4 víśvā bhúvanābhí … abhy ávardhata “he [=Indra] grew strong over all the worlds.” As to who or what these great ones are, perhaps the gods, since the phrase mahó devā́n is not uncommon. Given that Soma here is being assimilated to Indra - who is the standard subject of both mandāná- (I.80.6, etc. etc.) and vṛṣāyáte (cf., e.g., IX.108.2) - asserting his mastery over the (other) gods wouldn’t be surprising.


## 04
On the disputed interpr. of vidhartári, see comm. ad VIII.70.2. As I disc. there, I interpr. the form not as an infinitive (with many), but as the loc. of the agent noun that it is morphologically. Here I envisage Soma in the role of a facilitator: he wants the vípra (presumably the human poet) to get a dakṣiṇā from the patron (/apportioner: vidhartár-), and sets about making that happen.

In c yádī is much better read yád ī, with the enclitic acc. prn. ī doubling the obj.

dhíyaḥ. It is difficult to construct an “if” reading.

The subj. of marmrjyáte is unspecified and unclear; it could either be Soma as kaví or the human vípra - or both.


## 05
This vs. has a number of difficulties, both morphologically and syntactically. The most immediate is the first word siṣāsátū (Pp. rightly siṣāsátuḥ). Gr takes it as a nom. sg. m.

adj. built to the desid. (so already Sāy.; cf. AiG II.2.667), fld by Old, Re, and the publ tr.; the alternative solution is to interpr. it as a 3rd dual perfect-like form built to the desid., as suggested by Ludwig, fld. by Ge (see his n. 5a), Ober. (Relig. RV I.537), and Heenen (Desid. 239 + n. 264). I would be more sympathetic to the du. pf. interpr. if there were a clear way to get a dual subject. But the only indication of a subject in this vs. is contained in the 2nd sg. asi at the end of the vs., and the attempt of Ge et al. to invent a dual subject is exceptionally clumsy: by their interpr. Soma, the 2nd sg. referent in asi, is on one side or faction, and there is another side that ought implicitly to contrast with Soma’s side, but somehow doesn’t in his tr. Acdg to Ge, the two sides are racehorses (árvant- in b) and “Beutemacher” (the victors in raids in c). Since the putative desiderative pf. is already anomalous, the contextual melt-down and the multiplying of invisible actors make this an unattractive solution. So, better to deal with the alternative morphological anomaly, a desiderative adj. in -tu- apparently formed to the desid. verbal stem; this adj., as a singular, can easily qualify the sg. subj. of asi. Debrunner (II.2.666-67) cites a few such forms in -tuthat could be associated with a them. pres. stem (though all with suffixal accent, i.e., -tú-).

He suggests that our form is an Ersatz for the -u-adj. siṣāsú- (1x I.102.6), and this seems to me the right path to take, though the details aren’t clear. I would tentatively suggest that it is a blend - or, perhaps better, a remarking - of the two verbal adj. suffixes available to desiderative stems: the normal pres. part. act. in -ant-, well attested to this stem (síṣāsant-, - at-), and the verbal adj. suffix -u- specific to the desid. (as in siṣāsú- just cited). It might be possible to image the addition of the -u-suffix to the weak form of the pres. part. śiṣāsat-.

Unfortunately this founders on the accent, which cannot easily be explained; this is the only advantage of the pf. du. explanation, which would have the correct accent.

Even assuming that siṣāsátuḥ is a desiderative adj., construed with gen. rayīṇā́m in the same pāda, we are not out of the woods, and I am not satisfied with the publ. tr. or with the suggested tr. of Old and Re. The three pādas of the vs. have an apparently parallel structure, esp. the last two. All three contain a gen. pl. - rayīṇā́m ‘of riches’ (a), árvatām ‘of chargers’ (b), and jigyúṣām ‘of winners’ (c); the last two pādas also contain loc. pls., vā́jeṣu ‘at prize contests’ (b) and bháreṣu ‘at raids’ (c). Pāda b is also marked as a simile, with the simile marker iva following the whole simile, not the first word (as also in the last hymn, IX.46.1b). Are all three pādas truly parallel - and in particular should siṣāsatúḥ be understood in b and c, as in a, where it governs rayīṇā́m? Both Old and Re understand siṣāsatúḥ with all three pādas, but take the genitives of b and c in datival function (identifying the groups for which Soma wishes to win riches), not parallel to rayīṇā́m. Cf.

“Du bist der Erstreber von Reichtümern, wie für die Renner beim Gewinn der Preise, (so) für die Sieger in den bhára.” This neatly solves the problem that the gen. pl.s of b and c refer not to a substance (wealth) one might strive to win, but to animate beings that might be striving to win it themselves, so the morphologically parallel forms do not seem to be semantically or functionally parallel. My own solution in the publ. tr. is, I now see, considerably inferior to the Old/Re one: I take b with a, but not c, making ‘chargers’ a substance Soma seeks to win and also eliding the simile. I would now reject this interpr. For c in the publ. tr. I made the gen. pl a partitive: “you are among those / (one) of those who are victorious …” Although this interpr. seems a little artificial, I think it’s possible, and I would now interpr. b in the same way - with the whole vs. meaning “Desirous of winning riches, you are (one) of those who are victorious in the raids, as if (you were one) of the chargers at prize-contents.” Alternatively, I would substitute a version of Old/Re: “You seek to win riches for those who are victorious at raids, as if for coursers at prize-contests,” though this seems more awkward.

In any case, the vs. is problematic on several counts and I doubt that any of the suggested interpr. captures the poet’s intent.

.
