+++
title = "048"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., vss. 3-4 concern the stealing of Soma from heaven (“Somaraub”), a story not otherwise characteristic of IX but treated in detail in IV.26-27. I now think it possible that vss. 1-2 also allude to the same myth, though very obliquely.

Details in the comm. to the relevant vss. Our poet, Kavi Bhārgava, also treats this myth in IX.77, one of his Jagatī hymns.


## 01
Ge and Re take cā́rum as referring to Soma, as it, admittedly, often does. I interpr.

it rather as a 2nd obj. of īmahe (√yā / ī ‘implore, beg for’. (Ge takes the verb to √yā ‘go’ [“nahen wir”], while Re takes it to ‘implore’, but with a single obj.) Either interpr. is possible; I find myself more sympathetic to that of Ge/Re than I originally was, though I am far from disavowing the publ. tr.

The possible allusion to the Somaraub in this vs. is quite muted, but I wonder if the depiction of Soma “bearing his manly powers among the seats of great heaven” (sadhástheṣu mahó diváḥ) could refer to Soma when he is being kept captive in heaven in the myth. A very slight piece of evidence for this is that Kṛśānu, the archer in the Somaraub story (see IV.27.3), is located sadhástha ā́“in the seat” in X.64.8, but I would put little or no weight on this.


## 02
This vs. is couched in the acc. and entirely dependent on vs. 1, qualifying Soma.

Contra Gr, the cmpd sáṃvṛkta-dhṛṣṇu- must be a bahuvrīhi; cf. esp. Old and Scar (504).

The cmpd mahā́mahivrata- is unusual in having three members, esp. since the first two are etym. identical. With AiG II.1.236 it’s best to take mahā́as ‘very’ (cf. also Schmidt, vrata p. 100).

There is somewhat stronger evidence for a Somaraub connection in this vs. than in vs. 1. In particular Soma is said to be “eager to break a hundred strongholds” (śatám púro rurukṣáṇim); in IV.27.1 these same (or similar) strongholds guarded him (śatám mā púra ā́yasīr arakṣan) before he was rescued, and so he would be eager to break out of them. Note the phonological similarity between arakṣan and rurukṣáṇim; the latter is a hapax, with in fact no other desid. forms built to the root √ruj elsewhere in Skt., so the echo may have been deliberately constructed.

If pāda c refers to Soma’s desire to break out of confinement, it’s possible that sáṃvṛkta-dhṛṣṇu- also refers to this confinement: ‘having his bold(ness) encoiled’, with dhrṣṇu a quality of Soma - rather than my original interpr., that Soma had encoiled the dhṛṣṇú- of another. Note that Soma is qualifed by dhṛṣṇú- in the immediately preceding hymn (IX.47.2). The use of the idiom sáṃvṛkta- ‘encoiled, encircled’ could reflect the circular fortresses.

A connection between the 100 strongholds in this vs. and the explicit Somaraub allusion in the next vs. was suggested by Hilldebrandt, but unfortunately rejected by Old— too fastidiously I think.


## 03
The átaḥ ‘from there’ that begins this vs. was used by Hillebrandt as evidence for the mythological connection between vss. 2 and 3, persuasively in my view, contra Old.

## 03-04
The phrases suparṇáḥ … bharat (3c) “the falcon brought” and vír bharat (4c) “the bird brought” are directly reminiscent of IV.26, where the 3rd sg. (a)bharat occurs 4x in 4 vss. (4-7), incl. 4cd suparṇáḥ … bhárat and 5a bhárat … víḥ, with the same subjects as here.
