+++
title = "049"

+++


## 01
The first pāda of this vs. (pávasva vṛṣṭím ā́sú naḥ) seems syntactically backward, in that we might expect ā́sú naḥ to open the clause. A cursory glance through the sú passages in Lub does not turn up a similarly egregious deviation from left periphery behavior. The solution arises from reading the expression in light of 3c, asmábhyaṃ vṛṣṭím ā́ pava, which is an exact paraphrase with flipped word order. The full dative pronoun asmábhyam takes initial position there, while its enclitic equivalent naḥ is final in our pāda; the verbs occupy the opposite positions: initial in 1a, final in 3c. The obj. vṛṣṭím is identically positioned in the center of the two verses. In 3c the preverb ā̇́is more normally positioned than here, right before the verb (… ā́pava), but, on the other hand, the verb there is morphologically quite anomalous. Thus both pādas have something wrong with them, but their aberrancies can be understood with reference to each other.


## 02
The intent of this vs. is pretty clear, though the expression is a bit contorted: presumably our offering of soma will bring cows as a reward, but how the cows will come “by a stream” of purified soma is unclear. I imagine them in single file, but I don’t think that’s what’s meant.

The adj. qualifying cows, jánya-, is generally interpr. as pregnantly ‘belonging to other people’ (Ge “die Rinder anderer Leute,” Re “les vaches de l’étranger,” enshrined in Gr’s gloss 2a ‘fremden Leuten ausgehend’), but as I disc. ad IV.55.5, in all clear passages jánya- means ‘stemming from one’s own people’. Here it may be proleptic: cows will come here that will by virtue of coming here belong to us.

Note that úpa naḥ is somewhat displaced, though not as much as ā́sú naḥ in 1a.


## 03
On c see the disc. ad vs. 1. The verb here, 2nd sg. impv. (ā́) pava, is the only act.

form to this extraordinarily well-attested Class 1 pres. stem and is obviously truncated from pávasva, in order to fit this exact paraphrase of 1a (see comm. above) into the allotted syllables (asmábhyam being a syllable-hog compared to naḥ). It may help that dhāva in 4b is almost a rhyme. Like many morphological anomalies, pava can be accounted for through sensitivity to the larger context.


## 05
rocáyan rúcaḥ is a nice cognate acc. construction.
