+++
title = "050"

+++


## 01
The b pāda consists of a single simile; as in nearby IX.46.1b and IX.47.5b, the simile particle iva occurs after the 2nd word in the simile, not the 1st - though here the simile consists of 3 words and so iva is non-final.

The c pāda contains a bold image: “spur on the wheelrim of the music” (vāṇásya codayā pavím). Perhaps not surprisingly, both Ge and Re flatten the image by redefining the verb and one or both of the nouns. Ge’s “Schärfe die Spitze der Rede (des Pfeils)” takes paví- as ‘point’, though in all clear cases it refers to a part of a chariot wheel (see EWA s.v. and Sparreboom, Chariot p. 131 with lit.), the tire or wheel rim, while the verb codayā means ‘impel, spur on’, not ‘sharpen’. His alternative ‘Pfeil’ assumes that vāṇá- is a variant of bāṇá- ‘dart’. Re’s “Aiguisse la pointe de la parole-rhythmé” follows Ge; he justifies ‘sharpen’ with ref. to IX.17.5, but the verb there also means ‘spur on’ and has (in my view) speech as obj. Old is having none of this: he sensibly and firmly says that √cud is esp.

common of the impelling of a chariot [this is not entirely true] and he sees no reason to take paví- in anything but its usual sense. To explain the image he suggests that the operation (that is, presumably the playing) of the vāṇá-, which he takes as a musical instrument, is conceived of like the driving of a chariot, whose wheel is therefore being metaphorically impelled. This seems correct in its main outlines. The image blends the concrete (the chariot) and the metaphorical (music), both potential objects of √cud, in a phrase with the latter as dependent genitive. For √cud + ‘chariot’, cf. X.29.8 rátham … yám .. codáyāse; the substitution of paví- is simply part for the whole. As for √cud + ‘speech’ (vel sim.), cf., e.g., III.62.10 dhíyo yó naḥ pracodáyāt.


## 02
The first two pādas of this vs. vary and further specify the opening image in vs. 1 út te śúṣmāsa īrate, with the same verbal lexeme though no longer in tmesis (prasavé ta úd īrate#) and the identification of the sound that rises as “three voices” (tisró vā́caḥ). The loc. prasavé ‘at your stimulus’ can also be seen as a semantic version of codayā ‘spur on’ in 1c.

The three voices, found also in this same context in IX.33.4, are either the voices of the three priests, Hotar, Adhvaryu, and Udgātar, or their three types of ritual speech, ṛc, yajus, and sāman.

Both Ge and Re take makhasyú- in the realm of gifts and bounty: “eine Gabe heischend” and “généreuses” respectively. I consider it a pun, referring both to combat and to bounty. Interestingly, for the most part within IX, derivatives of makhá- are associated with vā́c-: besides this one, IX.64.26 vā́cam … makhasyúvam and IX.101.5 vācás pátir makhasyate. Here it could refer to some sort of competition among the three voices/priests in addition to the association of ritual activity with bounties.


## 03
Just as vs. 2 picks up and varies vs. 1, vs. 3 chains with vs. 2: the loc. “on the sheep’s back” (ávye … sā́navi) of 2c is immediately followed by “on the sheep’s fleece” (ávyo vā́re). Given the sandhi of the first ‘sheep’ (ávya éṣi) and the juxtaposition of the two phrases, one might at first consider going against the Pp in 2c to read ávyaḥ, matching the same apparent form in 3a, However, it is a curious fact of the morphology of these formulae that the loc. phrase containing ‘back’ (sā́navi, sā́no) always has the loc. ávye to the ‘sheep’ adj. ávya-, while the phrase containing vā́ra- ‘fleece’ always has the gen. ávyaḥ to the ‘sheep’ noun ávi-. To capture this the tr. of the two phrases in vss. 2-3 should be switched: “on the sheep’s back” and “on the fleece of the sheep” - though this is hardly a momentous change.


## 04
It is possible to see 4 as chaining with 3: 3c pávamānam, 4a ā́pavasva, though the ubiquity of the páva- stem makes this unremarkable even if true.

On ā́pavasva … pavítram see disc. ad IX.70.10.


## 05
The first pāda, sá pavasva madintama, is almost identical to 4a ā́pavasva madintama. This is somewhat reminiscent of the near identity of 1a and 2a.

As noted in the publ. intro., I consider aktúbhiḥ a pun. The first reading would be as etym. figure with añjānáḥ ‘being anointed’; cf. III.17.1 aktúbhir ajyate, VI.69.3 añjantv aktúbhiḥ. But well-attested aktúbhiḥ is otherwise a temporal designation, ‘with/through the nights’, e.g., I.50.7 áhā mímāno aktúbhiḥ “measuring the days with the nights.” In this case perhaps it would refer to the Atirātra soma sacrifice.
