+++
title = "052"

+++


## 01
As was pointed out in the publ. intro., two parallel governing compounds, sanádrayiḥ 'gaining wealth' (1a) and maṃhayád-rayiḥ 'readying wealth' (5c), open and close the hymn. The former also resonates with the adjacent expression across the pāda boundary, bhárad vā́jam. This phrase cannot help but remind us of the personal name bharádvāja-, which is of course in form also a governing cmpd. This stem is primarily confined to Maṇḍala VI, which is attributed to this ṛṣi and his family, but it would surely be known throughout RVic circles. Note also that some vss. and hymns in IX are attributed by the Anukramaṇī to Bharadvāja or a Bhāradvāja: Bharadvāja IX.67.1-3, Vasu Bhāradvāja IX.80-82, Ṛjiśvan Bhāradvāja IX.98 (jointly with Ambarīṣa Vārṣāṅgira), 108.6-7.

The grammatical identify of the bhárat part of this phrase can be questioned. The standard view (Gr, Ge, Re, Lub, KH [Injunk. 123], Lowe [Partic. 281]) is that it is a 3rd sg.

injunc., with Soma as its subj. This requires a shift of ps. from 3rd (ab) to 2nd (c), given the 2nd sg. impv. arṣa in c. Of course such switches, even within a vs., are common. But it is made somewhat more difficult by the preverb pári, which opens the vs. and would most naturally be construed with arṣa, a point also made by Old. Of the numerous pári √ṛṣ passages in IX, cf., e.g., IX.69.2 … pári vā́ram arṣati. By contrast pári is barely attested with √bhṛ and then only with middle forms, as far as I can see. If pári (in a) is in tmesis with arṣa (in c), a finite verb in between (that is, putative bhárat in b) would have to be parenthetic at best. Re’s attempt to have it both ways (“pári porte sur arṣa … à travers bhárat”) simply shows the desperation required. I therefore follow Old, as well as AiG II.2.164, in taking bhárat as a form of the pres. part. bhárant-. Both Old and AiG consider it a neut. sg. (which it is of course in form) used adverbially, but as Old acutely remarks, an adverb taking an object is problematic. I would analyze it slightly differently: in order to produce a phrase modeled on the cmpd bharád-vāja- (AiG also evokes the PN here), the poet used the weak (neut.) form to stand for the nom. sg. masc. (expected *bháran). In this he would be supported by the well-attested nom. sg. of the redupl. pres. bíbharti, namely bíbhrat built to the weak stem of the participle, which serves for both masc. and neut.

Maṇḍala IX contains several occurrences of this form; cf. for the phraseology here IX.44.1 … bíbhrad arṣasi. I also find suggestive the two exx. of bíbhrad vájram (VI.20.9, 23.1) “bearing the mace,” with vájram a phonological multiform of vā́jam; since these are both in the Bharadvāja maṇḍala, they are likely meant to evoke that name. See comm. ad VI.20.9.


## 02
The apparent 2nd ps. / 3rd ps. switch recurs in more acute form here. The vs. opens with 2nd ps. táva, which surely refers to Soma, but the finite verb in this single-clause vs. is (apparently) yā̛t, a 3rd sg. One solution is to substitute a slightly different subj. in place of Soma - so Ge, flg. Sāy., who suggests rásaḥ ‘sap’ (sim. Ober. II.231). Another is simply to ignore the problem, as Re and the publ. tr. do. I don’t have a solution (beyond the just mentioned avoidance of the issue), but I somehow think that the isolated and minimalist yāt, the only supposed injunctive to this well-attested root pres., is perhaps the artificial result of formulaic cut-and-paste. As Ge (2c) points out, our pāda sahásradhāro yāt tánā is reminiscent of IX.34.1 (prá svānó) dhā́rayā tánā, and in fact tánā quite often follows -ā. If our pāda was somehow based on one containing the very well-attested instr. dhāráyā, but with the substitution of the nom. bahuvrīhi sahásra-dhāra-, the final -yā of the underlying instr. would get detached: x x x *dhāráyā tánā à sahásradhāro *yā tánā, and then this truncated form could have been given morphological identity by extruding (geminating) a t from the initial of tánā (*yā tánā à yāt tánā), with no metrical implications. On geminations and degeminations in the RV, see my several forthcoming articles. However, even I find this explanation overly tricky, and it also deprives the vs. of a verb (though arṣa could be supplied from the preceding vs.), so I do not push this possibility strongly.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., the “pot” that is to be kicked is mostly likely an stingy patron, as Ge suggests. The whole vs. has a slangy and informal feel.

The problematic pāda is b. On the one hand, if we take the voc. indo seriously, this leaves ná badly positioned for a simile marker: it should follow dā́nam. But if dā́nam is supposed to be a simile, the expression is pretty slack: if dā́nam is ‘gift’, we want Soma to push the gift itself, not something compared to a gift. For both reasons Ge suggests that ná marks not a standard simile but an Utprekṣā, and, even so, that ná is in the wrong position.

Re’s tr. seems to follow this view, though it’s somewhat hard to square with his comm. Old suggests emending indo to índro, which allows ná to be properly positioned for a simile and also produces a reasonable, if not particularly interesting simile, “give (him/it) a shove, as Indra (does) a gift.” My solution is quite different and, once again, perhaps over-tricky, but I think it captures the tone of the vs. better. I take dā́na- not as ‘gift’, but rather as the med.

root aor. participle to √dā ‘give’. The immediate problem with this is, of course, that that form should rather be accented *dāná-. But given that the RV attests both dā́na- and dānámeaning ‘gift, giving’, sometimes in parallel formations (e.g., VI.53.3 dā́nāya codaya versus VIII.99.4 dānā́ya codáyan), it would not be surprising if the accent had been changed redactionally to match dā́na-, which stem accounts for most of the acc. sg. forms (cf. esp.

dā́nam ínvati I.128.5, dā́nam ínvan V.30.7). As for the sense, although medial forms of √dā are rare outside of the idiom ā́√dā ‘take’, those that occur seem to mean ‘give of oneself / one’s own store’; cf. V.33.9 sahásrā me cyávatāno dádānaḥ “(when) Cyavatāna was giving a thousand of his own to me.” Taking dā́nam as a participle referring to the stingy patron of pāda a allows ná to be a negative and therefore properly positioned.


## 04
The main cl. of ab lacks a finite verb; the preverb ní suggests several possibilities.

Ge supplies tira on the basis of IX.19.7 ní śúṣmam ... tira (his “halte,” my “undermine”), which is certainly possible. However, on the basis of nijaghní- in the next hymn, IX.53.2, as well as the two forms of √vadh in the immediately preceding vs. (52.3 vadhaír vadhasno), I prefer a form of ní √han (/ √vadh). Nothing depends on the choice, as long as the intent is hostile.

Ge construes jánānām in b with voc. púruhūta “du vielgerufener der Menschen,” which may be correct, given IX.64.27 as well as the nom. phrase puruhūtó jánānām in IX.87.6. (I therefore entertain the alt. tr. “o much invoked of the people.”) But on that basis he should construe eṣām in a with the same voc., since IX.64.27 has the same phrase, … eṣām, púruhūta jánānām, where there is no other obvious way to interpret it and Ge takes the eṣām with jánānām. But here he construes eṣām separately, with śúṣmam. Both Re and I take both genitives with that noun, IX.64.27 notwithstanding.

All of us must face the problem that the rel. cl. in c, which most naturally refers to the blustering people of ab, is in the sg. (yáḥ … ādídeśati). This must simply be a constructio ad sensum, or rather the picking out of a particular referent in the group of hostile men mentioned in ab.


## 05
The two numbers in ab, śatám and sahásram, participate in meaningless syntactic variation. Both must ultimately express an instrumental relationship to the verb; in the first the instr. is directly expressed by ūtíbhiḥ, but in the 2nd the instr. must be assumed (“[with] a thousand”) and the enumerated substance is expressed by a partitive genitive. It’s a clever little slippage and barely noticeable. See Old’s disc.


## 53-60
The next 8 hymns, the last ones before the lengthy hymns assembled from tṛcas (IX.61-68) that end the dimeter collection, are attributed to Avatsāra Kāśyapa. All of them contain four vss., and a number of them are structured such that the first three vss. form a unity, with the last vs. stylistically or thematically contrastive or completive. See esp.

IX.53-57. Old tends to analyze them as a tṛca with Schlussvers, which is strictly accurate, but I think the point is the interplay of 3+1.
