+++
title = "053"

+++
On the rhetorical indirection in this hymn, see publ. intro. as well as more detailed comments below.


## 01
The first pāda of this vs. lacks a syllable. It is also identical, save for the last word, the verb, with nearby IX.50.1a út te śúṣmāso īrate (attributed to a different poet, Ucathya Āṅgirasa) -- with the disyllabic asthuḥ here replacing the īrate of IX.50.1 and thus responsible for the metrical truncation. The sense of the two verbs úd īrate and úd asthuḥ are essentially identical: ‘arise/have arisen’. One can speculate that either Avatsāra Kāśyapa, a tricky poet, is calling attention to the opening of his poem by the manipulation and metrical truncation of the unimpeachable phrase found in IX.50.1, or that he wanted an aorist and there is no aor. clearly related to the pres. ī́rte, ī́rate (though of course there are aor. forms to its ultimate root √ṛ). Given the near identity of the two pādas, it might have been better had the publ. tr. rendered śúṣmāsaḥ in the same way in both instances, although the two different tr. work better contextually.

As was noted in the publ. intro. and as Ge also points out, this vs. might be more appropriate to Indra, and in particular the voc. adrivaḥ ‘possessor of the stone’ in b is otherwise used almost exclusively of Indra: there are nearly 50 occurrences, of which only one, besides this one, is addressed to anyone but Indra (Varuṇa in VII.89.2). There is in fact nothing in this vs. that imposes or even invites the identification of the 2nd ps. referent as Soma; we only assume it (correctly in my view) because this is a soma hymn.

The syntax of c is slightly unusual, in that the obj. of nudásva is a nominal relative cl.

yā́ḥ parispṛ́dhaḥ “(those) who are the challengers all around,” with the main cl. referent (*tā́ḥ ‘those’) gapped. (See also 3c below.) Generally the gapping of the antecedent to nominal relative clauses is found in “X and which Y” constructions, not when the rel. cl. is not conjoined. It’s worth noting that this pāda is very close semantically to IX.52.3a in the immediately preceding hymn: carúr ná yás tám īṅkhaya “Who is like a pot, give him a shove,” but there the nom. rel. clause carúr ná yáḥ that defines the obj. of the main verb does have an expressed antecedent tám in the main cl. Note that, IX.52 is also attributed to Ucathya, like IX.50, and both hymns contain expressions on which Avatsāra seems to be ringing changes.

On parispṛ́dh- see Scar 666.


## 02
This vs. sits somewhat oddly in a soma hymn, and its subject, and indeed its general aim, are not clear until the 3rd pāda.

It begins with a fem. instr. demonst. ayā́without expressed referent, and as Re points out, a number of fem. referents are possible. However, the verb that begins c, stávai ‘I will praise’, makes dhī́- ‘insightful thought’ (or some other reference to a verbal product) quite likely, and the phrase ayā́dhiyā́is in fact fairly common (I.166.13, V.45.11 [2x] [in the hymn adjacent to Avatsāra’s V.44 though V.45 is not attributed to him], VI.71.6, VIII.13.8, 93.17). The supplying of dhī́- here is supported by the contrastive cmpd dūḍhī́- ‘having bad insight’ in the next vs. (3b). On the basis of the Avestan parallel, fem. instr. vācā́‘with speech’ is also a possibility; see below.

Between ayā́and stávai, however, is an image of conflict and contest, with the nom. verbal noun nijaghníḥ ‘slamming down’, the instr. ójasā ‘with strength’, and the loc. phrase rathasaṃgé dháne hité “when chariots clash and a prize is set” - all contributing to a picture of violence seemingly inappropriate to a ritual context. It would be most applicable to Indra, who is the usual subj. of ní √han (e.g., VII.18.18 ní jahi vájram indra), or perhaps to a militant Soma. So the 1st ps. verb stávai ‘I will praise’ that opens the next pāda is a surprise: it is instead the inoffensive poet who has been assimilated to an aggressive warrior or contestant, and it is his act of praising that is implicitly compared to smiting down a rival on the field of conflict. Again Avastsāra seems to have deliberately misled us.

However, the situation is more complex. Ge (n. 2a) tellingly cites a strikingly similar Avestan passage from the Hom Yašt, Y 10.2 uparǝmciṭ tē hauuanǝm / vaca upa.staomi huxratuuō / yahmi niγne narš aojaŋha “The upper (part of the) mortar I praise with speech, o you of good insight [=Haoma], in which it [=haoma] is pounded down with the strength of a man.” This passage clearly refers to the pressing of the haoma, using the lexeme ni √gan, exact cognate to our ní √han, and also contains the instr. aojaŋha ‘with strength’, identical to our ójasā, as well as the 1st sg. verb ‘I praise’ (staomi to the same root as our 1st sg.

stávai) and an instr. of speech vaca (instead of our proposed *dhiyā́, though in fact fem.

instr. vācā́could fit in our passage just as well). This Avestan parallel must indirectly provide the solution to our puzzle: why is the mild-mannered priest-poet depicted in a scene of such violence? Because the pressing of soma is inherently an act of violence. Our b pāda provides a metaphorical scenario of contest, but nijaghnír ójasā in pāda a simply describes, with the same vocabulary as the Avestan passage, the powerful pounding of the soma stalks.

To enhance this interpr., ‘pounding down’ would be better than ‘slamming down’ for nijaghníḥ.


## 03
Because ‘commandments’ (vratá-) are especially associated with Varuṇa and Mitra, the beginning of this vs. might also direct the audience to the wrong referent for initial ásya. However, commandments are the property of a number of gods, and nothing else about the phraseology strongly suggests a referent other than Soma. In any case any doubt about the referent is settled by the beginning of b, pávamānasya.

Pāda c is constructed almost exactly like 1c, with a rel. clause serving as obj. of the main clause imperative, here rujá, without expressed antecedent in the main cl. In this case, however, the rel. clause is not nominal but has a full SOV structure: yás tvā pṛtanyáti.


## 04
As indicated in the publ. intro., this final vs. is characterized by specifically somic vocabulary (madacyútam, índum, matsarám), in contrast to the more equivocal vss. that precede it.
