+++
title = "054"

+++
On the riddling structure of this hymn, see publ. intro. Each of the first three vss.

begins with a form of ayám, with implicit reference to soma.


## 01
Unfortunately it is difficult to render in tr. the initial position of asyá, matching that of ayám in vss. 2, 3, which therefore makes the overall structure of the hymn less clear in English. Perhaps “Of this one - following his age-old brilliance …” áhrayaḥ in b is assigned to a stem áhri- by Gr and taken as a nom. pl.; so also Ge “die nicht Schlüchtern” as subj. of duduhre (referring to the fingers or the soma-pressing priests). This stem is otherwise unattested, and the root from which it is presumably derived is seṭ √hrī, which attests a root noun hrī́- (VS+), whose nom. pl. should properly be *- hriyaḥ. AiG III.187 suggests that the form is an old error for *áhrayāḥ, nom. pl. to the wellestablished them. stem áhraya-, shortened to match páyaḥ, which immediately follows across the hemistich boundary. I instead follow Re’s suggestion, that it actually belongs to an s-stem áhrayas- (see also EWA s.v. HRAYI ) and, as a neut. acc. sg., modifies páyaḥ.

Although the underlying s-stem *hráyas- is not attested, neither is the supposed underlying i-stem *hrí-, and as an s-stem neut. the form would be morphologically impeccable and require no emendation (unlike Wackernagel’s suggestion). The accent would match that of the likewise bahuvrīhi án-āgas-, though it must be admitted that such cmpds generally have suffixal accent (e.g., a-cetás-, a-rādhás-); however, the existence of better attested áhrayaand áhrayāṇa- could have induced initial accent. Another ex. of áhrayas- may be found in X.93.9, q.v. As for sense, √hrī means ‘be modest, shy’, and the negated áhraya- ‘unrestrained, immodest, immoderate’; the primary use of that adj. is with rā́dhas- ‘bounty’ (V.79.5, 6, VIII.8.13, 54.8, 56.1), to express a desire for large, that is immoderate, quantities of it. Cf. also VII.67.6 réto áhrayam, also adduced by Re, with rétas- ‘seed, semen’, a substance rather like páyas-. In our passage the point would be that a more than satisfying abundance of (soma-)milk was milked. If áhrayaḥ is not a nom. pl., the subj. of duduhre is not expressed, but priestly officiants would be the obvious subj., often not overtly expressed in Soma hymns.


## 02
Ge takes dhāvati as transitive, with sárāṃsi and pravátaḥ as obj. (“dieser lässt Seen, sieben Ströme zum Himmel fliessen”), but the thematic pres. to √dhāv ‘run’ (as opposed to √dhāv ‘rinse’) is only a verb of motion with acc. of goal, not a causative. Ge’s interpr. is not shared by others: besides Re, cf. Lü (153), Gotō (1st Kl. 183), Scar (229), all of whose interpr. are very like mine.
