+++
title = "055"

+++
The first three vss. of this hymn all contain a form of the stem ándhas- ‘stalk’. On this word see comm. ad IV.1.19; the tr. of Ge (“Trank”) and Re (“jus”) are misleading.


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. is unusual in its reference to agriculture (see Ober. RdR II.118), in particular to ‘grain, barley’ (yáva-) in pāda a. Perhaps the fact that soma is a plant, and that its stalk (ándhas-) is prominent in this hymn, accounts for the implication that Soma has the ability to provide us with grain and its accompanying fruitfulness (puṣṭá-). It may also be an oblique ref. to the occasional mixing of soma with grain; see the enigmatic expression in IX.68.4.


## 02
According to the opinio communis (Ge, Re, Lü 204 [of IX.61.10], Klein DGRV I.402), jātám ándhasaḥ in pāda b (and the same expression in IX.61.10) contains a substantivized neut. ppl. jātám ‘birth’ with dep. gen. (e.g., Ge “die Geburt deines Tranks”).

However, IX.18.2 mádhu prá jātám ándhasaḥ “the honey born from the stalk” suggests that ‘honey’ (vel sim.) should be supplied here as well, with ándhasaḥ an abl. of source, though Re specifically rejects IX.18.2 as relevant for this passage.

The function of the two yáthā clauses is not altogether clear. I assume that they refer to the two prerequisites for the soma sacrifice: the verbal portion with its praise of the god Soma and the physical production of the ritual substance soma. With both accomplished, the god Soma can take his place on the ritual ground.

On injunc. sadaḥ as a functional impv. see comm. ad IX.2.2 and KH (Injunk. 263).


## 04
As Re points out, jinā́ti must belong to √jyā, so jī́yate, which is ambig. between √ji and √jyā, surely belongs to the latter as well. The tr. should be slightly emended to “who overpowers but is not overpowered.” The standard interpr. of the syntactic structure of the passage (Ge, Re, Ober RdR II.168, as well as the publ. tr.) takes pādas a and b as all part of the rel. cl. introduced by initial yáḥ, with c as the main cl. and Soma as the subject both of ab and of c. This involves a shift in person, from 3rd (ab jinā́ti … jī́yate … hánti) to 2nd (c pavasva). Of course such shifts are commonplace in the RV, and in this case the sá introducing c is used by most tr. as a pivot (“as such”). However, the presence of sá is fully explained by its regular use with 2nd sg. impvs. (see my “sá figé” article) and need have nothing to do with the shift of person. I do think the standard interpr. of the vs. is probably right (even without the sá pivot), but I would point out that it’s not the only syntactically possible analysis: the rel. cl.

could encompass only pāda a, with b as the main cl. The accent on the verb in b, hánti, would be accounted for by its initial position in the pāda. The vs. could then be rendered “Who overpowers and is not overpowered, he smashes his rival on just confronting him.

Purify yourself …” The referent of the 3rd ps. in ab could still be Soma, but it could instead be the person for whom Soma purifies himself, with the happy results on the battlefield that arise from possessing the purified soma.
