+++
title = "056"

+++


## 01
The problem in this vs. is how to construe neut. ṛtám bṛhát. Is it an acc., and if so, is it a goal, like vā́jam in the next vs. (“rushes to the lofty truth”), or an expression of the way loosely construed with pári (“rushes around the lofty truth”)? Or is it a nom. and therefore appositional to sómaḥ. Ge (and to some extent Re) seem to follow the “way” interpr., as does Lü (582) in his first rendering. But he then rejects this (on somewhat contorted grounds) and, flg. Ludwig, goes for a nom. apposition (or nominal predicate). On the basis of IX.107.17, 108.8 (see also 66.24), I also opt for the appositional interpr. Vs. 2 also contains a nominal apposition, dhā́rā apasyúvaḥ, at least by my analysis.


## 02
This vs. consists entirely of a dependent cl. and can most conveniently be attached to the preceding vs. As noted above I take pl. dhā́rā apasyúvaḥ as a nom. in apposition to sg. sómaḥ. Re explicitly calls it an “Acc. interne,” tr. “(en) cent jets actifs,” but internal to what? Ge’s tr. is similar to Re’s, but he doesn’t commit himself as to case. That dhā́rāḥ is definitely nom. in the next hymn, IX.57.1, also with vā́jam as goal, gives some support to my interpr. here.

āviśán in c is most likely the nom. sg. pres. part. it is universally interpr. as (incl. in the publ. tr.), modifying sómaḥ in a. However, it is technically possible that it is a 3rd pl.

injunc. ā-viśán with the pl. dhā́rāḥ of b as its subj. It would be accented on the verb stem because it is still part of the yád clause. This would anchor dhā́rāḥ as nom. and produce a tr.

“When Soma rushes towards the prize (and) (his) hundred hardworking streams enter fellowship with Indra.” I do not advocate for this interpr., which seems too fussy, but I do point out that nothing in the grammar of the vs. precludes it.


## 03
Note that yóṣan- and kanyā̀- appear together in the same vs. and in fact the latter is explicitly compared to the former. It is not clear to me whether they are meant here to refer to different types or lifestages of a young girl / maiden.


## 04
An elementary type of variant ring composition, with pári srava responding to pári … arṣati in vs. 1.
