+++
title = "057"

+++


## 01
On the similarity of this vs. to IX.56.2 in the preceding hymn, see comm. ad loc. 
## 02
The neut. pls. of ab, priyā́ṇi kā́vyā, víśvā offer several different possibilities for construal. The publ. tr. takes priyā́ṇi kā́vyā in pāda a separately from víśvā in b, with the former the goal of abhí … arṣati and the latter the obj. of cákṣāṇaḥ. The oft-repeated pāda abhí víśvāni kā́vyā (IX.23.1, 62.25, 63.25, 66.1), identical to our pāda a with priyā́ṇi substituting for víśvāni, supports my interpr. of the phrase in our pāda a as goal. As for the interpr. of víśvā in b as obj. of cákṣāṇaḥ, this rests on slightly shakier grounds: the víśvāni in the repeated pāda might suggest that our víśvā belongs with pāda a, and it is also not clear that the participle cákṣāṇa- when uncompounded can take an obj. On the one hand we have cmpded praticákṣāṇa- with obj. in IX.85.12 víśvā rūpā́praticákṣānaḥ “gazing upon all his forms” (cf. II.40.5 with abhí and víśvam); on the other, in I.128.3 uncmpded cákṣāṇa- is used absolutely (cf. also X.74.2). I am therefore open to the possibility that all three neut.

pls. serve as goal, producing an alt. tr. “towards all the dear (products) of poetic skill does he rush, being observant.” However, I am tolerably certain that both Ge and Re are wrong, in their different ways. Ge takes the whole acc. phrase as obj. of cákṣāṇaḥ (“auf alle lieben Dichterwerke achtend”), thus ignoring the evidence of the repeated pāda and opting for the participle as the governing element, despite the uncertainty of its ability to take objects. Re seems to take abhí in tmesis with the part. cákṣāṇa-, not with arṣati, thus taking the acc. phrase with abhí, as the repeated pāda strongly supports, but making abhí the preverb to √cakṣ: “Regardant en direction de tous les arts-poétique.” But, though abhí does occur regularly with √cakṣ, it is also extremely common with √ṛṣ, esp. in IX. Since tmesis of preverb and participle is quite rare, given a choice between construing a preverb in tmesis with a participle or with a finite verb, the latter must be preferred unless there are serious semantic drawbacks.


## 03
Pāda b has been variously interpr., primarily because of íbha-. On this word see comm. ad VI.20.8, IV.4.1 and Old’s detailed refutation of the Pischel-Geldner gloss ‘elephant’(reflected in Ge’s unlikely tr. here ‘Königselefant’) in his n. on this passage. Gr, flg. BR, suggests reading *íbhe for íbho, an emendation that Old considers possible, and Re suggests íbho rā́jā is a “composé ouvert” for *ibharāja- ‘roi possédant des vassaux’. I do not think we need to change the text, however. Working with the meaning ‘vassal’ for íbha- (as is now generally accepted), we can first note that íbha- and rā́jan- are a complementary pairing (cf. I.65.7, IV.4.1) expressing a power differential: the king has power over his vassals, who give their fealty to him. This type of relationship between unequal parties is one governed by vrata-s, command(ment)s issued by superiors and binding on inferiors (see Brereton 1981). The adj. suvratá- ‘having good commandments, keeping commandments well’ can therefore technically apply to either side of the equation: the superior issuing the vratá or the inferior following it. Elsewhere in the RV the word is only applied to the superior (who is more apt to draw the interest of the RVic poet than the inferior): the Ādityas (VI.49.1), patrons (sūrí- I.125.7, 180.6), and in this same phrase rā́jeva suvratáḥ (IX.20.5) of Soma compared to a king. In our passage I suggest that the other pole, the inferior, is included in a disjunctive choice “vassal (or) king.” The vassal is suvratá- because he obediently follows the vratá- imposed by the king. My only hesitancy about this interpr.

is that it implicitly compares Soma not merely to a king, as is standard, but also to a vassal. I can only suggest that the poet was too pleased about tapping into the inherent ambiguity of suvratá- to worry about a potentially unflattering comparison, or that the manipulation of soma by the priests, here represented by the Āyus in pāda a, entails a kind of vassalage and domination.

The simile particle comes only after the 2nd word. This is in part because the simile has been adapted from IX.20.5 (not to mention the numerous other exx. of rā́jeva), where the iva is properly positioned. But note also that we have encountered a number of other examples of “late” simile particles in this maṇḍala (see comm. ad IX.3.4, 46.1, 47.5, 50.1).
