+++
title = "059"

+++


## 01
The first hemistich is notable for its sequence of four root noun cmpds in -jít- ‘winning, winner’. For their possible structural role in the hymn, see comm. ad vs. 4.

IX.59.2; As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. contains three occurrences of the impv.

pávasva, each pāda init. Each of these is construed with a dat. pl. (or abl., acdg. to Sāy.; but see the parallel Ge cites [n. 2] that speaks for the dat.). This tight repetitive syntactic structure suggests that the three datives should form a semantic set. The first two are waters (adbhyáḥ) and plants (óṣadhībhyáḥ). As for the third, dhiṣánābhyaḥ, Ge interpr. it as “ die (priestlichen) Werke” (and see his extensive n. on the word, n.2c), Re as “les inspirations (des humains).” However, flg. Pinault (Vedic Workshop, 2007), I take the orig. sense of dhiṣáṇā- to be ‘holy place’, and in this context I think it likely that it refers to the hearths holding the ritual fires. If so, the trio of datives would refer to three vital physical elements of the soma sacrifice: “the waters” for swelling the soma stalk and for mixing the pressed soma, “the plants” representing the soma plant itself, and “the Holy Places / hearths” representing the fire into which the soma is offered. The more attenuated interpr. of Ge and Re are not impossible, but are not as tightly bound to the substances in ab as the fires/hearths would be.

Re notes the phonetic play (pávasv)ādbhyó ádābhyaḥ in a.


## 04
The injunc. vidaḥ in pāda a is interpr. by both Ge and Re as imperatival, while in the publ. tr. it’s taken as a general statement in the present. I am now somewhat inclined to follow the imperatival interpr. of Ge/Re (“find the sun”). On vidaḥ in impv. use, see comm. ad IX.20.3, I.42.7-9. What may indirectly support my original interpr., however, is a potential ring-compositional relationship with vs. 1. As noted above, vs. 1 contains a remarkably pile-up of root noun cmpds in -jít- ‘X-winning’. There exists a very wellattested root noun cmpd svar-víd- ‘sun-finding’, which is semantically very close to the Xwinning cmpds (and cf. also svar-jít- 4x, incl. 2x of Soma in IX). Indeed, svar-víd- is commonly used of Soma (13x in IX) and in a number of passages occupies this same metrical slot, the last four syllables of a dimeter pāda (in the acc. sg. svar-vídam, nom/acc. pl. svar-vídaḥ; e.g., IX.8.9), as our finite VP svàr vidaḥ. This slot is, of course, not available for the nom. sg. svar-víd, but the 2nd sg. VP here svàr vidaḥ is a reasonable simulacrum, with vidaḥ incorporating the nominative subject. Now in vs. 1 the cmpds in -jít- are descriptors of Soma, without modal value. If svàr vidaḥ here is meant as a ringcompositional variant, evoking the cmpd svar-víd- and reprising the X-jít- cmpds of vs. 1, the general meaning I assigned it in the publ. tr. may correctly capture this structural feature.

The finite verb in b presents its own problems. The Pp. reads abhavaḥ, though the putative augment has to be elided after jā́yamāno in order to produce the proper number of syllables. As is well known (see, e.g., Old, Proleg. 389ff.), this elision, i.e., Abhinihita sandhi, is fairly rare in the RV, and therefore the orig. text may have had not the impf.

abhavaḥ, but an injunc. bhavaḥ, which was then wrongly analyzed by the Pp. In that case bhavaḥ could express the same general sense as I just suggested vidaḥ might: “being born, you become great.” However, as both Old (Noten ad loc.) and KH (Inj. 150) point out, the injunctives bhavaḥ and bhavat are not otherwise found in the RV, and therefore both scholars assume that the augmented abhavaḥ is the underlying form here - ‘you became great’, as rendered in the publ. tr.
