+++
title = "060"

+++
On the structure of this hymn, see publ. intro.


## 01
The tr. “sing forth with a song” is meant to capture the etymological relationship of gāyatréṇa gāyata, but gāyatrá- of course refers more technically to a hymn in Gāyatrī meter

- as this one indeed is.
## 01-02
The chaining described in the publ. intro. here involves repeating sahásracakṣasam from 1c in 2a in the same metrical position.


## 02
The deriv. -bharṇas- in sahásra-bharṇas- is somewhat puzzling: it is difficult to see what motivated its formation and indeed to fix its meaning. It is found 4x (once as a repetition), only in IX, always in the acc. sg. occupying the last 6 syllables of a dimeter line (here, IX.64.25 [=98.1], 64.26), modifying Soma (here), vā́c- (IX.64.25, 26), rayí- (IX.98.1), though the referent never appears in the pāda with the adj. and so the adj. is loosely connected with its referent at best. Here it is obviously meant to match sahásra-cakṣas- ‘having a thousand eyes’ in the same metrical position in the preceding pāda, and for this reason I think it possible that this passage is the locus for its creation. But the match is not very good: though both are -as-stems, the suffixes (-nas- versus -as-) aren’t superimposable.

The semantic match is also quite imperfect: whatever -bharṇas- means, it is certainly not a body part like cákṣas-. Since many nominal derivatives of √bhṛ fall in the semantic domain of ‘present, offering’ and such a meaning fits a ritual context, that seems a safe bet and would work with rayí-, though it fits vā́c- somewhat less well. With a confidence whose basis is not clear, Re rejects the notion of ‘offrande’ and asserts that “le suffix -nas- fait décider pour «bénefice (qu’on tire du culte sômique)»,” for reasons he fails to give. Ge by contrast tr. “Tausendaufwiegenden” with a question mark, which he then glosses (n. 2b) with “Tausendwertigen.” Insofar as the suffix -nas- tells us anything (and the -n- is not there just to supply the heavy syllable that a straight -as-stem sahásra-*bharas- would lack), it suggests a meaning in the realm of “stuff,” material substance, esp. with regard to substances of value: cf. rékṇas- ‘inheritance, legacy’, dráviṇas- ‘material goods, chattels’, ápnas- ‘property’, all with Aves. cognates - so that ‘bringing a thousand (material) presents’ would fit reasonably in this group. AiG II.2.738 glosses -bharṇas- with ‘Darbringung’ and considers it probably inherited, despite the lack of non-Indic correspondents. Given its extremely limited distribution, indeed the strong possibility that it was originally created in one passage, I consider inheritance unlikely; rather, it was probably formed as a near nonce on the basis of the inherited words just cited.

IX,60.2-3: Here the chaining is slightly inexact: 2c áti vā́ram / 3a áti vā́rān, each followed by a verbal form of √pū.


## 03
This vs. is in Puraüṣṇih meter (12 8 / 8), i.e., a Gāyatrī with an extended first pāda.

This pāda is almost at the exact center of the hymn, preceded by 6 pādas, followed by 5. The positioning seems deliberate.

## 03-04
Here the chaining involves only the first word índrasya.


## 04
In addition to the chaining with the previous vs. (on which see immediately above), this vs. participates in other verbal echoes, as noted in the publ. intro. The end of the 2nd pāda vicarṣaṇe forms a ring with vícarṣanim at the end of the 2nd pāda of vs. 1, and the last pāda, prajā́vad réta ā́bhara, is identical to the last pāda of the first vs. of the immediately preceding hymn, IX.59.1 prajā́vad rátnam ā́bhara, with the substitution of rétaḥ for rátnam. In our case the semen (rétaḥ) would be both the actual semen that produces offspring and the liquid soma that mimics it.


## 61-67
On the place of these long hymns in the structure of the maṇḍala, see publ. intro. to IX.61. All of these hymns consist of collections of tṛcas of varying degrees of cohesion. In fact, it is surprising how few tṛcas display a real attempt at thematic or lexical unity, and what they do show is often simply the byproduct of the fact that both the lexicon and thematic preoccupations of Maṇḍala IX are comparatively limited and so similar words and themes are not unlikely to show up in adjacent verses. This lack of unity contrasts, I think (this is my unsystematic and anecdotal impression) with collections of tṛcas in other maṇḍalas, notably VIII.
