+++
title = "061"

+++
## 01-03
This tṛca shows some signs of unity. The 1st two vss. are a syntactic unit, with the objects of the verb in 1c partly postponed to 2ab. The third vs. has as its verb pári … kṣárā, which echoes pári srava in 1a.


## 01
The publ. tr. fails to render the demon. ayā́that opens the hymn; more literal would be “flow around in this pursuit (of him) …” Ge (n. 1) considers ayā́a kind of attraction from

*asya ‘of him’, the missing antecedent to yáḥ in b, but the prominent position of ayā́should
be registered. Presumably ayā́vītī́is gesturing towards the physical ritual activity happening right now.

The unnamed referent in the rel. cl. of bc is of course Indra; the “nine and ninety” are fortresses / strongholds, as in IV.26.3 … púraḥ … náva sākáṃ navatī́ḥ śámbarasya. This referent is postponed to the 2nd vs.: púraḥ opens vs. 2.


## 02
As was just noted, púraḥ completes the acc. phrase navatī́r náva that serves as obj.

to avā́han in 1c, as the parallel IV.26.3 just cited demonstrates. But avā́han has another object in vs. 2, namely śámbaram in b, as shown by a different passage in the Indra cycle of Maṇḍala IV, IV.30.14 ávāhann indra śámbaram.

The third pāda of this vs. is radically incomplete, consisting only of a particle, a demon., and two acc. PNs: ádha tyáṃ turváśam yádum. On purely structural grounds, it would make sense to make these parallel to śámbaram in b, as objects of avā́han (in 1c).

However, this structural argument runs into problems of mythological content. Although Turvaśa and Yadu are sometimes enemies of Indra (see, e.g., VII.19.2), at other times they are under Indra’s protection. In particular, in the Indra cycle from which IV.26.3 and IV.30.14, the parallels to our vss. 1-2ab, were cited above, T + Y are rescued by Indra: IV.30.17 utá tyā́turváśāyádū, … / índraḥ … apārayat “And Indra brought these two, T + Y, to the far shore,” just three vss. later than the smiting of Śambara. Note further that IV.30.17a is very like our pāda, a dimeter line with an intro. disyllabic connective, a form of the demonstr. syá- / tyá-, and the two names, though with a dual dvandva turváśāyádū rather than two individual acc. sgs. On this basis, I’m afraid the simple solution of taking T + Y as further victims of Indra should be abandoned, in favor of supplying (or at least assuming) a positive verb to govern them, such as Ge’s (n. 2c) “errettete” or Re’s “sauva.”


## 03
The Inhaltsakk. with pári … kṣárā are disharmonious in formation, with the sg.

noun áśvam (rendered in the publ. tr. as the mass noun ‘horseflesh’, perhaps a bit too vividly) in pāda a followed by two possessive adj. gómat and híraṇyavat ‘possessing / consisting of cattle (and) gold’ in pāda b, followed by a pl. NP sahasríṇīr íṣaḥ ‘thousandfold refreshments’ in c. In a we might have expected áśvāvat ‘possessing / consisting of horses’, to match the adjectival forms in b, but the phonologically similar and adjacent aśvavíd ‘horse-finding’ may have blocked it (to avoid *áśvāvad aśvavíd [though some RVic poets would have loved that phrase]).

## 04-06
There are faint signs of unity in this tṛca: the word pavítram ‘filter’ is found in vss. 4 and 5, and both 4 and 6 have pres. mid. participles derived from √pū ‘purify’ (pávamāna- 4a, punāná- 6a), but since this is a Soma Pavamāna hymn, this is hardly remarkable.


## 04
Both Ge and Re render pávamānasya as simply the epithet Pavamāna, but this loses the parallelism between the two gen. sg. pres. participles that open and close the hemistich: pávamānasya … abhyundatáḥ. I render these participles as “while” clauses, to avoid the awkward “we choose the companionship of you who are Xing.”


## 05
We might fault the poet for a certain laxness of phraseology: how exactly is Soma meant to be gracious / merciful to us “with his waves”?


## 06
Note the echo across the b-c pāda boundary: … íṣam / ī́śānaḥ …

## 07-09
The tṛca is characterized by the mention of gods in all three vss. The Ādityas frame it (ādityébhiḥ 7c, mitré váruṇe ca 9c), with a more miscellaneous group in between. It is also marked by initial repetition: sám opens pādas 7c, 8a, and 8c. This is imperfectly echoed by sá n(o) opening 9a.

## 10-12
It is difficult to discern any particular unity in this tṛca.


## 10
The topic of the verse seems to be heavenly versus earthly soma. See Lü 204.

On jātám as an adj., rather than (with Ge, Re, Lü 204, Ober II.16) the noun ‘birth’, see comm. ad IX.55.2. Another arg. for taking it as adjectival here is that the same form is clearly an adj. in 13a. As in IX.55.2, I take the missing referent to be ‘honey’ (mádhu) on the basis of IX.18.2.

Pāda b contains several forms requiring disc., esp. what appears in the Saṃhitā text as bhū́my. This is analyzed, irregularly, by the Pp as bhū́miḥ. Gr gives the form as bhū́mī but identifies it as a nom. sg. to bhū́mi-. Old refers to the considerable lit. on the form, opting for a loc. interpr. (as do all the standard tr.). Wackernagel has a curiously split opinion: in AiG I.337 (1896) he identifies it as a loc., while in AiG III.136-37 (1930) he decides instead for the nom., though referring to his former opinion - and in the same vol. (III.155) he says the same form doesn’t have to be a loc. (“… muss nicht notwendig as Lok. bhū́mī gefasst werden”), but could alternatively be either a nom. bhū́mī or an instr. bhū́myā. The context, with the contrast diví ṣát “though being in heaven” with loc. diví, certainly favors a loc. interpr. for the form, even though taking ‘earth’ as the subject of the clause is possible: “earth took it, though it was in heaven.” In sum, I think the loc. interpr. is most likely, with an -ī (or -i) loc, to a fem. i-stem, like védī (or védi) in II.3.4 (see comm. ad loc.). A bhū́mi with short final vowel is metrically better here (as védi is in II.3.4), but it may result from shortening in hiatus.

The neut. part. sát has, in my opinion, the concessive value often found with the pres.

part. to √as, though most tr. don’t render it as such (and Re rejects this interpr.). It modifies the unexpressed mádhu in my view, but the neut. ándhas- acdg. to most others.

ā́dade is another ambig. form.: it can be either a 1st or a 3rd sg. mid. pf. (or a 1st sg.

mid. pres.). Gr takes it as a 1st sg. pf., as does Ge (“Den im Himmel befindlichen (Trank) nehme ich auf der Erde zu mich”), but a 3rd sg., with the soma (represented by mádhu or ándhaḥ) as subject (with Re, Lü, Ober) allows pāda c to serve as obj. of ā́dade - Ge has to take it as an independent nominal clause - and the Gr/Ge interpr. also introduces a 1st sg.

that has no other place in the context, where the 1st pl. reigns.

## 13-15
Again no signs of tṛca unity, unless the presence of cows in all three verses counts (13b góbhiḥ, 14b vatsáṃ saṃśíśvarīḥ iva, 15a gáve, 15b dhukṣásva).


## 14
The hapax tatpuruṣa hṛdaṃsáni- ‘gaining the heart’ is curious, in having an apparent acc. in -am to the neut. root noun hṛ́d-, as if to a masc. or fem. stem or to a thematic *hṛda- (see, e.g., AiG II.1.208).

## 16-18
This tṛca is unified by the simple device of stationing a form of pávamāna- at the beginning of each vs. (16a, 17a, 18a). Note also the two forms of rása- ‘sap’ in 17a and 18a (the two pādas are scramblings of each other: 17a pávamānasya te rásaḥ, 18a pávamāna rásas táva, with different case forms of pávamāna- and enclitic versus full form of the gen. sg. 2nd ps. prn.). And 16c jyótir vaiśvānarám … matched by 18c jyótir víśvam …


## 16
The question in this vs. is how to interpr. the simile in pāda b, diváś citráṃ ná tanyatúm. It has been variously rendered. Note first that in none of the available interpr.

(that I know of) is the simile particle ná positioned in the expected 2nd position, so that conforming to the usual structure of the simile cannot be used as a criterion to decide which interpr. is correct. We have had occasion to note this issue before in Maṇḍala IX; see disc.

ad IX.57.3. Re takes the whole of b as a simile, with the “thunder” matching “light” (c) in the frame; in addition he supplies a different subject for the simile: “Pavamāna a engendré la haute lumière propre à (Agni) Vaiśvānara, / comme (les dieux ont engendré) le tonnerre éclatante du ciel.” This is not impossible, of course, but introducing the gods seems unnecessary, and are they the usual creators of thunder anyway? Lü’s (266) interpr. is similar, though he allows Pavamāna as subj. of both the simile and the frame. I find Ge’s interpr. more appealing: he considers tanyatúm part of the frame, with the simile restricted to diváś citrám. “Sich läuternd hat er den Donner, grell wie den des Himmels, hervorgebracht.” The c pāda provides a parallel object, rather than constituting the frame as in the Re/Lü interpr. My tr. essentially follows Ge. The “thunder” that Soma engendered is the noise produced by the pressing, esp. by the pressing stones, which is constantly remarked on. It is comparable to the thunder of heaven. All interpr. must silently reckon with the synaesthesia introduced by the point of the comparison in the simile, citrá- ‘bright, brilliant, glittering, dazzling’, an adj. that ordinarily characterizes visual phenomena not auditory ones (though it’s a not uncommon transfer; cf. Engl. “brilliant tone,” etc., used of voices and musical instruments). For a similar ex. cf. VI.6.2 śvitānas tanyatúḥ “brightening thunder.” This synaesthetic comparison provides a lead-in to the second object, the “light belonging to all men.” Both Ge and Re take jyótir vaiśvānarám as referring to Agni Vaiśvānara specifically.

This is certainly possible, though it is not the soma pressing that ordinarily kindles the ritual fire. I prefer to take it more generally as shared light, perhaps localized as the sun, which would continue the heavenly theme of pāda b. Alternatively, this pāda, which is entirely in the neuter, may be nominative not accusative and refer to Soma himself. This interpr. may be favored by the matching pāda at the end of the tṛca, 18c jyótir víśvam svàr dṛśé “(as) light for everyone to see the sun,” where the soma sap—that is, soma itself—is identified as this light. I would therefore suggest an alternative tr. of pāda c here: “(he) the lofty light belonging to all men.”


## 18
I am, reluctantly, taking dákṣa- as an adj. here (as in IX.62.4), with Ge and Re, though it is generally a masc. noun. Alternatively a noun interpr. is possible (cf. Ober I.457 “dein Saft ist Fähigkeit”): “your sap shines forth brilliant as skill” or “… shines as brilliant skill,” though I still prefer the adjectival interpr. See Re’s disc.

Scar (237) takes ví rājati as ‘rules’ (“dein Saft herrscht weithin als König …” A pun is certainly possible here, but the insistent light imagery (dyumā́n in b and the whole c pāda) suggests that the ‘shine’ sense is the dominant one.

In c Ge takes víśvam as the modifier of jyótiḥ (“… ist alles licht”); so also Scar (237).

This is certainly possible, and jyótir vaiśvānarám in 16c might support it. But “for everyone / all to see the sun” is a locution encountered elsewhere (I.15.1, 5, VIII.49.8, X.136.1), incl.

nearby IX.48.4. My interpr. is shared with Re and Ober (I.457).

## 19-21
Little evidence of unity, though 19 and 20 share ‘smashing’ and 20 and 21 cows.


## 21
As in 16b, the simile in b seems to consist only of what precedes the ná, namely sūpasthā́bhiḥ, while dhenúbhiḥ constitutes the frame. So also Ge, Re.

## 22-24
The tṛca has something of an emphasis on combat and winning, and the Vṛtra topic introduced in 22 is reprised via phonological deformation by vratéṣu in 24c.


## 22
A nice example where surface grammar clashes with mythological content and the latter wins. Pāda b, the complex object of ā́vitha ‘you helped’ in a, consists of an infinitival phrase with the obj. of the inf. “attracted” into the dative, while its subject remains acc.: índraṃ vṛtrā́ya hántave “you helped Indra to smite Vṛtra.” But c, a further specification of this obj., contains an acc. sg. masc. participial phrase vavrivā́ṃsam mahī́r apáḥ “obstructing the great waters.” On the surface, the only noun this can modify is índram because this is the only available acc. sg. masc., but of course it is Vṛtra who obstructed the waters. Though vṛtrā́ya appears in the dative, it must be the referent of the acc. participle - thus suggesting that “attraction” in infinitival phrases is a very late and superficial phenomenon. Unless with Re we want simply to denominate it a “formule morphologiquement non adaptée au contexte.” I prefer to think that the poet enjoyed producing the syntactic misdirection.


## 23
Pāda c … vardha no gíraḥ “strengthen our hymns” is the reciprocal to vs. 14a tán íd vardhantu no gíraḥ “let our hymns strengthen just him.”


## 24
Pāda a consists of the etymologically identical phrases tvótāsaḥ ‘aided by you’ and távā́vasā ‘with your help’, both containing forms of the 2nd sg. prn. and nominal forms of √av ‘help, aid’.

Pāda b contains a curious verbal periphrasis, syā́ma vanvántaḥ “may we be combatting,” with opt. to √as as aux. plus the pres. act, part. to vanóti. This expression does not seem to be conveying anything different from the opt. to the same pres. stem, vanuyā́ma (5x), e.g., X.38.3 tváyā vayáṃ tā́n [śátrūn] vanuyāma “With you might we combat those (rivals).” As noted above, vratá- in this pāda may have been chosen to recall vṛtráphonologically, forming a faint ring with the √vṛ forms in 22 vṛtrā́ya … vavrivā́ṃsam. It may even be that jāgṛhi ‘be watchful’ evokes a form of √han, as in 20a jághnir vṛtrám; see also jahī́in 26b.

## 25-27
This tṛca focuses even more strongly on combat, with forms of √han in 25 and 26 and ‘do battle’ (makhasyá-) in 27. Generosity is also a topic.


## 27
This vs. is rather cleverer than the two that precede it. In pāda a the nom. pl. root noun hrútaḥ is, in my opinion, a pun. It belongs to the root √hvṛ ‘go crookedly, curve’, and its sense was disc., e.g., by KH (Fs. Thieme [1980] =Aufs. III.753-54). He suggests that here it refers to unevennesses (Unebenheiten) in the fleece sieve (i.e., as I see it, the curvy tufts of wool), just as, in the other occurrence of this root noun (VI.4.5), it refers to the curves of a race course (see comm. ad loc.). The literal sense here then is that though the soma must navigate around the tufts on the sieve, they will not keep it from completing the course. The second sense is one referring to unscrupulous enemies—Engl. ‘crook’ is an exact semantic match—and the point is that when Soma wishes to dispense goods to us, our crooked enemies can’t divert him.

The word family that includes makhá- and the denom. makhasyá- found here displays both ‘combat’ and ‘generosity’ senses; see comm. ad I.18.9 and, for the verb, III.31.7. Here I think both are at play, and this double sense is encouraged by the context: as noted, this tṛca focuses on combatting enemies, and the first hemistich of this vs. states that these enemies cannot stop Soma. But the tṛca also concerns Soma’s giving, esp. in the last two vss.: 26a “bring wealth ... 26c “give” … 27b “eager to give largesse.”

## 28-30
The last tṛca continues the concentration on combat and victory.


## 29
The first two pādas open with somewhat emphatic 2nd sg. genitives, the first with a fronted initially accented demonst. + enclitic (ásya te), the second with a more conventional full form of the prn. (táva). See disc. ad IX.66.14.


## 30
The nominal rel. cl. in ab has no resumptive prn. in the main cl. of c, though “with these/them” is clearly the intent.

On the construction of dhū́rvane here, see Keydana, Infin. 247, though the arbitrary line he tends to draw between “true” infinitives and datival purpose nouns seems over-strict here.

As is shown by IX.29.5 rákṣa ... svanā́t samasya kásya cit (cited by Ge), nidáḥ must be an abl. (as we would expect in any case with a form of √rakṣ) with a dependent gen., the indefinite samasya.
