+++
title = "062"

+++
## 01-03
No particular sign of unity in this tṛca, though all three vss. concern the journey of the soma drops across the filter and towards the milk mixture and the rest of the ritual (as do vast numbers of other vss. in IX, of course). Vss. 2 and 3 also both contain the pres. part.

kṛṇvántaḥ and datives of benefit.


## 02
This vs. has no finite verb, just two nom. pl. participles. With its nom. pl. subj. it can be dependent on vs. 1 or vs. 3 (or both); I prefer anticipatory dependence on vs. 3 because of the repetition of kṛṇvántaḥ and the parallel datives.

Note the juxtaposition of the opposites duritā́lit. ‘ill-goings’ (pāda a) and sugā́lit.

‘good-goings’ (pāda b), formed with two different verbs of motion (√i, √gā). It is difficult to capture this relationship in Engl. without awkwardness, as the literal tr. just given demonstrate.

My tr. follows Ge in taking árvate parallel to tokā́ya “for our offsping and for our steed”; I am somewhat tempted to take árvate as an anticipatory parallel to gáve in 3a, with which it forms a more natural class (“making wide space for our steed and for our cow”), but I can’t see how to do that without brutally splitting up 2c, since kṛṇvántaḥ is required to govern sugā́in 2b.

## 04-06
Again no obvious signs of unity, beyond the progress through the preparation of soma. Note, however, that 4b and 5b both begin apsú and the opening of 6b, áśū(śubhan) echoes that opening phonologically.


## 04
As in IX.61.18 I take dákṣa- adjectivally (so also Ge, Re); even more than in that passage, a noun interpr. is difficult: “… the skill, abiding on a mountain”? The loc. apsú and the locativally used stem giri- implicitly contrast.


## 05
The fluent Engl. of the tr. conceals a syntactic problem: soma should be the obj. of the verb svádanti in c, and the first pāda, which is entirely in the neuter, with the NP led by ándhas-, allows such an acc. interpr. However, the intermediate pāda (b) is stubbornly in the masc. nominative (dhūtáḥ … sutáḥ). We must either take b as a parenthetical nominal clause, as Ge and I do, or take ab as entirely in the nominative (as Re may do - his structure is not entirely clear) as a separate nominal clause, and supply a resumptive pronominal acc. for c.

## 07-09
The tṛca shows no strong signs of internal unity, save for the “sitting” found in both 7 and 8, but it does echo some of the material earlier in the hymn: ásṛgram in 7b matches the same verb in 1a; ā́sadaḥ in 7c recalls ā́sadat in 4c, while sī́dan yónā (8c) is a different echo of 4c yónim ā́sadat; arṣa (8a) picks up arṣanti (3b); svā́diṣṭhaḥ in 9b expresses the result of svádanti in 5c; and varivo-víd in 9c is a paraphrase of kṛṇvánto várivaḥ in 2c. It may also be worth noting that this is the first place in the hymn that the divine recipients of soma are mentioned: índrāya 8a, áṅgirobhyaḥ 9b.


## 09
The metaphorical universe of the soma hymns makes it difficult to interpr. the phrase ghṛtám páyaḥ, lit. “ghee (and) milk.” In the publ. tr. I take the phrase as the ultimate goal of pári srava, referring to the milk with which the soma will be mixed after its trip across the filter. See the esp. explicit IX.31.5 túbhyaṃ gā́vo ghṛtám páyah … dudhré “For you the cows have milked out ghee and milk,” which identifies the phrase as referring to substance(s) that the cows produce for soma, real dairy products. But soma is also sometimes compared to milk and to ghee (e.g., IX.74.4), and so the phrase can also be an appositive metaphorically characterizing the subject soma, accounting for Ge’s “Laufe du … als Schmalz und Milch.” However, our 5c svádanti gā́vo páyobhiḥ “the cows sweeten (soma) with their milk” suggests that the milk and ghee in this vs. are likewise firmly bovine

- though see 20b below.
## 10-12
In this tṛca all three vss. have a form of med. páva-: pávamānaḥ 10b, 11b, (ā́) pavasva 12a. This is scarcely surprising in the Soma Pavamāna maṇḍala, but in fact this stem has not yet appeared in the hymn.


## 10
Several items in this vs. present choices of interpr., none of which are strongly either favored or disfavored.

The first issue is hitáḥ: as often in this maṇḍala (cf. comm. ad IX.1.2, 44.2, etc.), it could belong either to √dhā or to √hi. The presence of a verb form belonging undeniably to the latter, hinvānáḥ in c, cuts both ways, as the poet could either be reinforcing the sense by duplicate forms of the same root or making a pun utilizing two different roots. In a similar situation in IX.44.2, with hitáḥ … hinve, I opted to take both to √hi (though not with any emphatic feeling about it), while here I take hitá- to √dhā, as a pun (again, not emphatically). The deciding factor here for me is the deictic demon. ayám ‘right here’, which may point to the current location of the soma, expressed by ‘established, placed’. Re also takes it to √dhā, but Ge to √hi.

The other uncertainty in the vs. is how to construe ā́pyam bṛhát “lofty friendship”: is it the complement of cetati or of hinvānáḥ -- which brings up the further question of the function of the latter participle. Med. hinváte, etc., can either take an obj. or be passive; in particular the part. hinvāná- is about evenly split. For a nearby pass. form, see, e.g., IX.64.9; for a nearby transitive form, see IX.63.7 hinvānó mā́nuṣīr apáḥ. Both Ge and Re take it as tr.

here (e.g., “die hohe Freundschaft zur eile treibend”), while I have chosen to take it as passive and to construe the acc. with cetati, on the grounds that I don’t know what it would mean to “impel friendship” (though such an image is well within the potential range of a RVic poet). Gotō (1st class, 139) takes it as I do.


## 11
The nom. pávamānaḥ in b is helpful in identifying the referent as Soma, in that both vṛ́ṣā ‘bull’ (and related vṛ́ṣa-vrataḥ) and aśastihā́could be (and are) just as well used of Indra.

## 13-15
The first two vss. contain forms of kaví-. The epithet “wide-going” (urugāyá13c) may be further specified in the phrase vimā́no rájasaḥ “measurer of the airy realm” (14b) -- in both cases probably a way of giving a cosmic dimension to the journey across the filter. The third vs. (15) does not participate in these commonalities.


## 15
girā́jātáḥ “born on a mountain” is in the first instance a phrasal variant of giriṣṭhā́ḥ ‘mountain-abiding’ in 4b, with girā́showing the i-stem loc. in -ā regular before consonants (see, e.g., Lanman, Noun Inflect, 385). This interpr. is followed by Ge and Re in their tr. (see also Ober II.13). However, girā́can also be, as Old and Ge (n. 15a) point out, the instr. sg. of gír- ‘hymn’; in fact Gr puts it there. The alt. given in the publ. tr. “[/begotten by a hymn]” reflects this other possible analysis; that soma is produced to the accompaniment of hymns would make this statement true in ritual logic. It is also possible that girā́‘by a hymn’ could be construed with stutáḥ ‘praised’ later in the pāda. And to make things even more complex, stutáḥ might also evoke sutáḥ ‘pressed’.

The pass. dhīyate in b might weakly support taking hitáḥ in 10a to √dhā as well.

Pāda c is the third instantiation (always in the c pāda) of the image comparing soma installed in the wooden cups to a bird on a yóni-: 4c śyenó ná yónim ā́sadat, 8c sī́dan yónā váneṣv ā́, our 15c vír yónā vasatā́v iva - and cf. in the preceding hymn IX.61.21c sī́dañ chyenó ná yónim ā́. Judging from the position of ivain our vs., both the bird and the yónihave become so much part of the identity of soma that only the ‘nest’ (vasatí-) is considered part of the simile proper - though we must keep in mind the multiple disturbances in the position of simile particles in Maṇḍala IX as disc. passim above.

## 16-18
Several elements link at least two of the vss. in the tṛca: the presence of vā́jain 16 and 18 (vā́jam 16b, vā́jāya 18b, vājínam 18c) and the dat. inf. yā́tave in 17b and 18b.


## 17
See publ. intro. for the ritual specificity of the images in this vs. The participle “yoking” in the publ. tr. of c should properly be in parens., since it’s simply generated from the finite yuñjanti in b.

The uninflected numeral ‘seven’ (saptá) is stationed between two pl. nouns, gen. ṛ́ṣīṇāṃ ‘of the seers’ and instr. dhītíbhiḥ ‘with visionary thoughts’. Of course seven is the canonical number of seers throughout Indian religious history, starting with the RV, but ‘seven’ is also used of dhītí- in IX.9.4 sá saptá dhītíbhir hitáḥ and passages cited there. Most tr. choose to construe it with one or the other (Ge, Ober [II.72] ṛ́ṣi-; Re, Lü [710], Ober [II.222] dhītí-), with, surprisingly (to me), more going for dhītí- than ṛ́ṣi-. But surely its position helps signal that it should be construed with both (as Re in his n. and Ober in his 2nd tr. indicate).


## 18
This vs. is notable for its 2nd ps. address to the priests (sotāraḥ … hinota “o pressers, impel …”), also found in vss. 21, 29. Ordinarily 2nd ps. in soma hymns is reserved for Soma (sg.) and his drops (etc.) (pl.).

## 19-21
There is some chaining between vss. (cows/milk in 19, 20; mádhu in 20, 21 and two mentions of gods in pāda c in 20, 21, incl. dat. pl. devébhyaḥ in each). In addition, all three vss. begin with the preverb ā́(univerbated and therefore accentless in 19a).


## 20
With Ge and Re, the publ. tr. interpr. páyo duhanti as “they milk your milk” (or more emphatically, Re “traient de toi le lait” [my ital.]); that is, they assume that milk (páyaḥ) here refers to the soma juice. See above, comm. ad vs. 9, on the ambiguous ref. of this word in the soma maṇḍala. It is also possible here that páyaḥ refers to cows’ milk (see the cows in 19c), and the passage should be interpr. “they milk milk for you for exhilaration.”

## 22-24
gṛṇāná- is found in the first and last vs. (22b, 24c); vss. 23 and 24 contain forms of árṣa-, pári, and cows. In addition vs. 22 seems to chain with the final vs. of the previous tṛca, 21: 22a asṛkṣata picks up 21b sṛjátā, and 22b śrávase echoes (deva)śrút(tamam) in 21c, while madíntama- (22b) contains the same splv. suffix as mádhumattama (21b), (deva)śrúttama- (21c).


## 24
For some disc. of this passage see Scar 641 with n. 906. He gives pariṣṭúbh- an active value (“ringsum jubelnd, rauschend”) in this passage: “… zu allen, die ringsum Töne von sich geben,” in contrast to my passive “encircled with rhythm,” which follows Re’s “environnées de rhythmes.” Since the cmpd modifies íṣaḥ ‘refreshments’, it is hard to see how they could actively produce noise, though Scar (n. 906) suggests it might refer to the cows likewise characterizing the refreshments (gómatīr íṣaḥ), in the form of bellowing milk streams. This seems a bit farfetched, though it does allow the form to be semantically united with its other occurrence, in I.166.11, where it modifies the Maruts, who are actively making noise. For the idiom see I.80.9 pári ṣṭobhata “encircle (him) with rhythm!” where it is parallel to arcata “chant!” See also nearby IX.64.28 pariṣṭóbhant-. Ge takes pariṣṭubhaḥ as a noun ‘lauter Loblieder’, also with active sense.

## 25-27
This tṛca shows more signs of unity than others in this hymn, esp. in the 1st two vss. Both 25 and 26 contain pāda-initial pávasva (25a, 26c) and the variant phrases vācó agriyáḥ (25a) / agriyó vā́caḥ (26b), as well as forms of víśva- (25c víśvāni, 26c viśvam(ejaya)). In 27a Soma is addressed by the voc. kave, while 25c contains the phrase víśvāni kā́vyā.


## 25
Both Ge and Re supply an intermediate infinitive to govern víśvāni kā́vyā: “um alle Sehergabe zu gewinnen” and “en vue de (nous procurer) tous pouvoirs-poétiques” respectively - on what basis is completely unclear to me. I see no reason why it can’t simply be a goal, as I’ve taken it. See also comm. ad IX.75.1.


## 26
Because of the accentual difference between vācáḥ in 25a and vā́caḥ in 26b, we must construe the two superficially near-identical phrases vācó agriyáḥ and agriyó vā́caḥ quite differently. The first is a single constituent with dependent gen. vācáḥ, but in the 2nd agriyáḥ and acc pl. vā́caḥ belong to different constituents, despite their adjacency: vā́caḥ is the (or rather, an) obj. of īráyan.

## 28-30
No overt signs of unity.


## 28
The first two pādas are simply a word-order variant of IX.57.1ab prá te dhā́rā asaścáto, divó ná yanti vṛṣṭáyaḥ.


## 29
Although it may not be clear from the Engl. tr., the phrase beginning “the strong one … the lord” refer to Soma (in the acc.), not Indra (in the dat.).


## 30
On the masc. ṛtáḥ and the phrase ṛtáḥ kavíḥ see comm. ad VIII.60.5, which contains the same phrase, save for sandhi variation.
