+++
title = "063"

+++
## 01-03
No particular signs of unity, though the dat. índrāya in 2b anticipates the three datives índrāya víṣṇave … vāyáve in vs. 3.

## 04-06
Thematically somewhat unified by the journey theme.


## 04
Its opening eté asṛgram āśávaḥ is reminiscent of the beginning of the previous hymn IX.62.1ab eté asṛgram … āśávaḥ.

On hváras- see comm. ad IX.3.2.


## 05
The phrase kṛṇvánto víśvam ā́ryam “making it all Ārya,” esp. in conjunction with aptúraḥ “crossing the waters,” most likely alludes to the Ārya expansion in their migration into the northern part of the subcontinent, specifically to crossing frontier rivers and laying claim to the land on the other side. This territorial expansion is implicitly compared here to Soma’s ritual journey. Since, as Ge notes (n. 5b), the Soma cult is specifically Ārya, importing this practice into new lands would be a key part of the process of Arya-ization.

## 07-09
On this tṛca see publ. intro. In these vss. Soma is compared to the sun, and his ritual journey compared to the Sun’s daily journey across the sky. At the same time the purification of the soma is linked with Manu, the first sacrificer (vss. 7-8), and so the cosmic and the ritual are connected.


## 07
It is specifically stated here that the stream of soma “made the sun shine” (sū́ryam árocayaḥ), in other words that the ritual activity produced cosmic effects.


## 08
Soma goes from affecting the sun in vs. 7 to identity with the sun in this vs, since he yokes Etaśa, the sun’s horse, and travels through the midspace as if on the sun’s daily journey - at least in my interpr. and that of Ge. But the vs. can be interpr. in a number of diff. ways, in part because the sū́ra of the Saṃhitā text is multiply ambiguous. If its underlying form is sū́raḥ, per the Pp., it can be either gen./abl. to svàr- (so Sāy., as well as Ge and the publ. tr.) or nom. sg. to sū́ra-; however, it could also be underlying sū́re and a loc. to sū́ra-. (Re also allows the dat., presumably to svàr-, but the only clear dat. to this stem is accented sūré [IV.3.8]; sū́re duhitā́[I.34.5] is actually an old gen. with close sandhi effect before dental, likewise in IX.97.38; see my Fs. Melchert article, “Sū́re Duhitár's Brother, the ‘Placer of the Sun’: Another Example of -e <*-as in Rigvedic Phrasal Sandhi,” 2010.). In any case, an underlying sū́raḥ is more likely than sū́re because of the sū́ro in the next vs. (9b), which repeats much of the verbal material in this one.

Lü (215-16) objects to Ge’s interpr. of the vs., on the basis that the sun always travels through heaven, and here the travel is through the midspace (antárikṣena). So in his view this cannot refer to heavenly Soma identified with the sun, but must refer to the earthly Soma, who takes the name Sūra (hence sū́raḥ is a nominative for him) and yokes a horse named Etaśa after the Sun’s horse, and journeys towards heaven through the midspace. In other words, his Soma seems as if he’s trying to steal the sun’s identity by stealing his names. I confess that the subtleties of Lü’s distinctions escape me, depending as they do on his strict separation of earthly and heavenly elements throughout his Varuṇa vols. Re seems to adopt some version of the Lü interpr., judging from his tr. of bc “… pour qu’il aille du (domaine de) Manu (au ciel) à travers l’espace-médian,” interpr. manā́v ádhi as if it contained an abl. manór before ádhi. (He interpr. the same two pādas two hymns later [IX.65.16bc] quite differently.) I do see the point about the midspace, however, and am willing to concede that Soma-as-Sun is not quite as high a flyer as the Sun himself. Bl (RReps ad loc.) also considers sū́raḥ a nom., but in his view this expresses “the complete assimiliation of Soma Pavamāna to the sun,” which is a different conclusion from Lü’s. The point is surely not whether Soma is literally in heaven, but that he has acquired and displays the salient characteristics of the Sun and is therefore identified with the Sun despite remaining in the ritual arena.


## 09
Pāda b of this vs., sū́ro ayukta yā́tave, consists entirely of words repeated from the previous vs.; in addition, substituting for étaśam in 8a, we find an expanded horse term, tyā́ haríto dáśa “these ten tawny mares” as obj. of ayukta. Again Soma is being identified with the sun and his ritual journey identified with the sun’s transit; again the cosmic and the ritual are intertwined, for the ten mares are probably both the Sun’s horses (as Lü points out, p.

216 n. 4, the Sun is credited with ten yoked horses in I.164.14; cf. also sū́ryasya harítaḥ in V.29.5) and the ten fingers of the priests that press the soma, exactly so called (haríto dáśa) in IX.38.3.

The third pāda (índur índra íti bruván) presents another set of problems: how much of what precedes íti is part of the direct speech and what is the content of the speech? See Old’s clear formulation of these questions. The standard solution is to take the speech as including both words preceding íti and to take it as a statement of identity; e.g., Ge’s “Der Saft ist Indra” (sim. Old, Lü 216 n. 4, Klein DGRV I.407), in part on the basis of a similar TB statement (see Ge n. 9c), though I don’t think this late parallel should be given much weight. Moreover, IX.6.2 índav índra íti …, with voc. índo outside of the quotation, shows that the ‘drop’ word does not have to be included in the quotation here. In addition, the sandhi of índra íti is ambig.: it can represent nom. índraḥ with the Pp (and the standard interpr.), but it could also be loc. índre, the choice made by Re (“… en disant « c’est bien (pour aller) à Indra »”). In conjunction with the journey theme of this tṛca, I find this interpr.

quite appealing and have adopted it.

## 10-12
No particular unity, though vss. 11-12 are concerned with wealth.


## 10
The datives vāyáve … índrāya of course identify this as a ref. to the morning soma pressing, where both those gods receive the soma, and also echo the same datives (in diff. order) in vs. 3.

If gíraḥ opening pāda b is an acc. pl. (as seems likely), it is somewhat awkwardly placed between two reff. to soma, sutám and matsarám, ending their respective pādas (a and b). All the acc.s should be objects of pári … siñcata ‘pour in circles’, which obviously fits the soma liquid better than the songs. Probably for this reason Gr identifies the form as a voc., the only voc. to the stem, but this certainly does not improve the sense: commanding the songs to pour the soma is appreciably worse than ordering unidentified priests to pour songs as well as soma. Elizarenkova’s tr. (Language and Style of the Vedic Ṛṣis, p. 85) exemplifies this awkwardness however unintentionally: “From here make libation rounds for Vāyu, for Indra, of the pressed intoxication, O eulogies (or: O eulogizers), onto the sheep strainer!” She claims that the root noun gír- can be used as an agent (hence her “O eulogizers”; Sāy. and Ludwig also take it as agentive: see Ge n. 10b), but I know of no such usage of this extremely common noun. On the other hand, the trope of “pouring prayers” is not rare in the RV, though pouring them onto the fleece strainer is a bit extreme. Re solves the problem by supplying a separate verb to govern gíraḥ (“émettez”), but this seems a typical cop-out on his part.

As in the previous hymn (see comm. ad IX.62.18), the priests are addressed in the 2nd pl. here (pári … siñcata). See also vs. 19, with the same verb.


## 11
On vidā́as lengthened impv. rather than subjunctive vidā́(ḥ), see comm. ad IX.19.6. It is accented because it is preceded by a voc. in zero-position.

## 13-15
Again no particular signs of unity. The unmixed (“clear” śukrá-) soma in 14 is contrasted with the soma mixed with curds (dádhyāśir-) in 15.


## 13
As in the tṛca vss. 7-9, Soma is again compared to the Sun - but curiously no clear point of comparison between them appears in the vs. The actions attributed to Soma here - purifying himself, being pressed by stones, putting his sap in the tub - are exclusive to him and certainly not characteristic of the Sun.


## 14
In vs. 5 during his journey Soma “made it all Ārya”; here he crosses these Ārya domains (dhā́māny ā́ryā) on his journey to the cows’ milk. My interpr. takes this first acc. phrase as an acc. of extent, of space traversed, while the acc. in pāda c, vā́jaṃ gómantam I take as the goal of akṣaran. In the next vs., 15c, pavítram áti “across the filter” has the same function I see for dhā́māny ā́ryā here, and in fact the filter may be identified as the Ārya domains. By contrast Ge takes dhā́māny ā́ryā as parallel goal to vā́jaṃ gómantam, while Re characteristically supplies a separate participle (āviśántaḥ “ont occupé”) to govern dhā́māny ā́ryā. The parallels he cites in the n. do not seem sufficient to me.

## 16-18
No evidence of unity, beyond vājínam (17b), vā́jaṃ (18c), and the vss. are quite hackneyed, even for Soma Gāyatrī hymns.

## 19-21
This tṛca has more internal unity, as well as connection to the preceding tṛca, than usual. For its external connections, see 19a vā́je ná vājayúm picking up the vāj- forms just noted, mádhumattamam in 19c matching the same word (in the nom.) in 16a, and 20a kavím mṛjanti echoing 17a tám ī mṛjanti (note the identical vowel pattern in kavím / tám ī).

As for internal connections, see dhībhíḥ (20b, 21a), víprāḥ (20b, 21c), and vṛ́ṣā (20c), vṛ́ṣaṇam (221a).


## 19
This vs. contains a fairly clever double meaning: the verb pári √sic means ‘sprinkle around / in circles’. When soma is the object, as it generally is, it refers to the sprinkling of the drops of soma; in other words, the acc. expresses the material that is being sprinkled. But here in the simile vā́je ná vājayúm, the acc. vājayúm ‘prize-seeking’ refers to a horse in a race or contest, which would be the target or the goal of the sprinkling, with some type of liquid being sprinkled upon it. The word play is cleverer still, in that vājayúm should be read twice, both as referring to the horse in the simile and to soma, which is elsewhere modified by this word (e.g., IX.44.4 sá naḥ pavasva vājayúḥ), in the frame.

Both Ge and Re construe vā́je in the simile rather loosely; I take it as a unmarked loc. absol. of the dháne hité (“when the prize is set,” e.g., IX.53.2) type, though without overt ppl. It adds to the somewhat slant syntax of the simile versus the frame that both contain a loc. (ávyo vā́reṣu in the frame), but the locc. have different functions. In fact ávyo vā́reṣu “onto the sheep’s fleece” expresses the goal of the sprinkling and is functionally parallel to vājayúm in the simile.


## 20
Note kavím (of Soma) contrasting with víprāḥ, the human poets who groom him.

## 22-24
A form of páva- in each vs.: 22a pávasva, 23a pávamāna, 24a pavase, a pattern that is repeated in the next tṛca.


## 22
As in vs. 10, the joint appearance of Indra and Vāyu signals the morning soma pressing.

On āyuṣák (also IX.25.5) see the sensible disc. of Scar (589-90). Note the presence of the Āyus grooming the soma in vs. 17.


## 23
On (ní) √tuś see comm. ad VIII.38.2.

## 25-27
This tṛca shows clear signs of unity, indeed of a monotonous sort. Like the previous tṛca, each vs. in this one contains a form of páva-, but in this tṛca all three are the nom. pl. part. pávamānā(sā)ḥ, always opening the vs. Each vs. also contains one finite verb, an augmented form of √sṛj (asṛkṣata 25a, 27b; asṛgram 26b). The first two vss. also contain nom. pl. índavaḥ in the same metrical position (final in the b pāda). The lexeme ápa √han found in the previous tṛca (apaghnán 24a) also reappears here (26c ghnántaḥ … ápa) (and in the next tṛca).

## 28-30
The páva- sequence found in the last two tṛcas is brought to an end with the alternative pres. part. punānáḥ ‘becoming purified’, which opens this last tṛca. The lexeme ápa √han also found in once each in the last two tṛcas (24a, 26c) occurs in the first two vss.: ápa … jahí (28b, c), apaghnán (29a).


## 30
The first pāda of this, the final vs., echoes the last pāda of the first vs.: 1c asmé śrávāṃsi dhāraya, 30a asmé vásūni dhāraya. It is also worth noting that this 2nd sg. impv.

dhāraya ‘secure’ is phonologically almost identical to the instr. sg. dhā́rayā ‘with/in a stream’, which ends the first pāda of this tṛca (28a) and which is found four other times in the hymn (4c, 7a, 14b, 21b), always in the same metrical position.
