+++
title = "064"

+++
## 01-03
As noted in the publ. intro., this opening tṛca is marked by the identification of Soma and his attributes with a bull (vṛ́ṣan-). This theme is especially dominant in vss. 1 and 2: all three pādas of vs. 1 open vṛ́ṣā, with the bahuvrīhi vṛ́ṣa-vrataḥ ending the first hemistich; vs. 2 is even more insistent, with two forms of the stem (or deriv. vṛ́ṣṇya-) in each of the three pādas. By contrast, vs. 3 only nods at the theme: vṛ́ṣā appears once in 3a, though the final word of the vs., vṛdhi, may be meant to echo the word phonologically.


## 01
Old’s interpr. of vṛ́ṣā in c as a neut. pl. adj. with dhármāṇi seems both unnecessary and unlikely. I know of no other neut. forms of vṛ́ṣan- (the few cited by Old are not convincing), which suggests to me that, despite its widely accepted classification as an adj., the stem is synchronically a masc. noun, which, however, can be used as an adjunct strengthener of another noun, hence “bull X” as the equivalent of “bullish X” - a usage similar to English ‘horse’ as an augmentative, meaning ‘strong, large, coarse’ (as in, for ex., horseradish). See https://www.etymonline.com/word/horseradish Moreover, since nom. sg.

vṛ́ṣā opens the two previous pādas of this vs., it seems unlikely that a morphologically different, and at the least very rare, phonologically identical form would open the third - esp. since, when a neut. adj. is required in the next vs. (2a), the deriv. vṛ́ṣṇya- is employed.


## 03
As noted above, the bull theme gets suddenly muted in this vs.; in compensation, as it were, other animals are introduced: a horse (a), cows and steeds (b).

Opinions vary on how to render the first two pādas, in part because of uncertainty about the verb cakradaḥ. Given the immediately preceding simile áśvo ná, the verb should be intransitive in the sense ‘roar, whinny’; this matches the usage of the simple thematic (aor.?) krada- in passages like IX.97.28 áśvo ná krado vŕ̥ṣabhir yujānáḥ “Like a horse you whinny on being yoked by the bulls.” However, the b pāda, sáṃ gā́ḥ … sám árvataḥ, with two acc. pl.s makes problems. Ge jury-rigs what we might call a semi-transitive usage of the verb with sám, “zusammenbrüllen” (‘roar [smtg] together’)(see also Ober I.518), while registering the intransitive usage in the simile parenthetically: “Wie ein Ross (wiehernd) sollst du, der Bulle, uns Rinder und Rennpferde zusammen brüllen (brausen).” Despite the precarious nature of this solution, it may be the best one available, and I would entertain an alternative tr. “You the bull roar like a horse, (roaring) together cows and steeds.” I adopt a similar one in the publ. tr. for the very similar passage IX.90.4 sáṃ cikrado mahó asmábhyaṃ vā́jān, with the variant stem cikrada-, also cited by Ge and Re, though I am not certain I subscribe to that now (see comm. ad loc.). By contrast, Re clearly takes cakradaḥ as a trans./caus. redupl. aor.: “Tel un cheval, fais mugir ensemble … les vaches … ensemble (fais hennir) les coursiers.” However, the clear intrans. sense of krada- with the simile in the parallel passage cited above speaks against the caus. usage; moreover, as disc. at length in my -áya-book (110-11), neither cakrada- nor the redupl. aor. cikrada- with apparent “caus.” redupl. shows true transitive usage until the late RV; they also seem to be essentially interchangeable.

I have a different solution for this passage (though it won’t work for IX.90.4): it is of course a commonplace that the preverbs sám and ví form a complementary pair. Here I suggest that the standard lexeme ví √vṛ ‘uncover, open up’ found in c has given rise situationally to an opposing expression sám √vṛ ‘cover, surround’ in b, with the verb gapped (or rather anticipated: vṛdhi at the end of c). The bull is urged to deliver cows and horses to us by confining them. The proposed lexeme sám √vṛ does marginally exist; see I.121.15, with sám … varanta in intrans. value, as well as ppl. sáṃvṛta- (VIII.17.7). I thus read the verb cakradaḥ only with pāda a.

## 04-06
No strong signs of unity. Vs. 4 does link to vs. 3 in the preceding tṛca through the mention of cows and horses. The c pādas of 5 and 6 both begin with a finite form of páva-.


## 04
In addition to the link to vs. 3 just mentioned, pāda c contains a clever echo of 2a.

That earlier pāda ends with the neut. s-stem śávaḥ ‘strength’; 4c ends vīrayā́śávaḥ, to be analyzed as two words vīrayā́āśávaḥ “with a yen for heroes the swift ones,” the latter being the nom. pl. m. of the adj. āśú-. But the final + initial vowels have entirely coalesced, and given the accentuation of both words and the underlying long final vowel of the first word, they could have been split vīrayā́*śávaḥ with the latter entirely matching the independent sstem form in 2a.


## 06
The preverb ā́that turns páva- into a quasi-transitive “bring by purifying oneself” immediately follows the verb, allowing pávantām to take a position matching. that of pávante in 5c and pávamānasya in 7a.

## 07-09
As just noted, pávamānasya in 7a chains with forms to the same stem in vss. 5 and 6. 7b prá … asṛkṣata also echoes ásṛkṣata prá, which opens the previous tṛca (4a). The tṛca is unified by the similes comparing Soma to the Sun in vss. 7 and 9, possibly found also in the beacon (ketú-) of vs. 8.


## 07
The root noun cmpd viśva-víd-, like other -víd- cmpds, is completely ambiguous between ‘knowing all’ and ‘finding all’ (for viśvavíd- itself see Scar 489 and more generally 480-93). In this context, given Soma’s bestowal of “all goods” (víśvā … vásu) in the previous vs. (6a), as well as Soma’s journey to all forms in 8b, ‘all-finding’ seems preferable.

The simile in c, sū́ryasyeva ná ráśmayaḥ, is redundantly marked, with adjacent simile particles iva ná. There is no structural reason for this; it must result from the attempt to fit the simile sū́ryasyeva raśmáyaḥ found elsewhere in trimeter verse (see nearby IX.69.6, also I.135.9, V.55.3, X.91.4) into a dimeter line. Or, to be more precise, to accommodate the fact that when a form of sū́rya- opens a vs. line, it does not show distraction to sū́r i ya-, in order to avoid placing a light syllable in 2nd position. In a dimeter line, in which this simile has to occupy the whole pāda, the failure to distract produces a 7-syllable line, and so ná was presumably added to fill the gap in the line. In a trimeter line that has the simile in initial position (with undistracted sū́ryasyeva), further material can be added at the end (so I.135.9, IX.69.6), and in a trimeter line where the simile follows the caesura, sū́ryasyeva can be distracted (so V.55.3, X.91.4) in that position.


## 08
As noted above, it’s quite possible, even likely, that the beacon in pāda a is a reference to the sun and therefore another assimilation of Soma to the Sun, as is more explicit in vss. 7 and 9. For the association between ketú- and the sun, cf., e.g., VII.63.2 ketúḥ … sū́ryasya. Lü (702) suggests rather that the ketú- is lightning, without argument.

Ge renders b as “… rinnst du ... alle Farben annehmend”; similar Lü (702) “strömst du vom Himmel her in alle Erscheinungsformen.” But the acc. with abhí √ṛṣ is always a goal (to choose just one example, cf. nearby IX.62.3 abhy àrṣanti suṣṭutím “they rush towards the lovely praise-hymn”), and I don’t see where (or why) they get their alternative interpr. By my interpr. the “all forms” to which the soma rushes could be the materials the soma will be mixed with (water, milk), or everything found on the ritual ground, or indeed everything on earth and in the midspace, the “all goods” of vs. 6.


## 09
Pāda b, pávamāna vídharmaṇi, is found three times (here, IX.4.9, and IX.100.7) in three different syntactic contexts, so this has to be the constituency: the voc. plus the loc. Re takes the ‘speech’ (vā́cam) from pāda a as the implicit subject of vídharmaṇi (“pour qu’elle se répande au loin”), but because speech is lacking in the other occurrences of the pāda, this cannot be correct. Most helpful for the interpr. is the fuller expression in IX.86.30 (also adduced by Ober II.152) tvám pavítre rájaso vídharmaṇi ... pavamāna pūyase “You, selfpurifying soma, are purified in the filter, in the spreading expanse of space ...,” where the spread of the soma liquid across the fleece filter is compared to the spread (probably of light) in cosmic space (rájas-).

The simile in the third pāda, ákrān devó ná sū́ryaḥ “you have roared like the Sungod,” is abrupt in its imagery, in that roaring is not the first quality we associate with the sun. There are several ways to account for the phraseology. In Old’s view (fld by Lü 258), the shared quality of Soma and Sun is not expressed by the verb, which is independent of the simile. This independence would be comparable to that found in the preceding hymn, IX.63.13, where the same simile (sómo devó ná sū́ryaḥ) is found, with a different but equally incompatible verb phrase ádribhiḥ … sutáḥ “pressed by stones,” which is certainly not true of the Sun. This is the easiest solution. Ge (n. 9c) suggests rather that it’s a condensed comparison to the Sun’s horse (sim. Ober I.224). In my view, Old’s interpr. is strictly correct, but I think the poet, by juxtaposing the simile with an apparently inappropriate verb, is forcing the striking image of a roaring Sun, which both works as a kind of synaesthesia (the intense brightness of the sun is experienced as intense noise) and imposes a third intermediate term, a horse or bull, to which both the Sun and Soma are compared.

## 10-12
There are some unifying features in this tṛca. Although this is hardly striking in the IXth Maṇḍala, all three vs. contain a form of √pū, with those in vss. 11, 12 the identical phrase pavítra ā́“in the filter. The word índu- opens the first and last pādas of the tṛca (10a, 12c). The cmpd devā-vī́- ‘pursuing the gods’ in 11b is echoed by its splv. devavī́tama- in 12b. More subtly, the missing obj. of sṛját in 10c is most likely ‘wave’, found in the resumptive rel. cl. opening vs. 11, ūrmír yáḥ … For the VP ūrmím √sṛj see VI.17.12 asṛja ūrmím apā́m adduced by Old.


## 11
This vs. is entirely a rel. cl. and most comfortably adjoins vs. 10 (see comm. immed. above) - pace Lü (603-4), who attaches 11 to 12.

## 13-15
Again, each vs. has a form of √pū, for what that’s worth (pavasva 13a, punānáḥ 14a, 15a). In 15a devá-vītaye links to the rt. noun cmpd devā́-vī́- (deva-vī́tama- in the previous tṛca, 11b, 12b).

## 16-18
The first two vss. of this tṛca both contain nom. ‘drops’ (índavaḥ) and their acc. goal, the sea (samudrám); their first pādas also both contain nom. pl. pres. middle athem. participles with the extended ending -āsaḥ, hinvānā́saḥ and marmṛjānā́saḥ respectively. The third vs. stands apart.


## 18
The opening of pāda a #pári no yāhi gets remixed into c #pāhi naḥ.

## 19-21
The undiscerning (ápracetasaḥ) in 20c are contrasted with the discerning (prácetasaḥ 21b) and the undiscriminating (ávicetasaḥ 21c). The first vs. (19) of the tṛca does not participate.


## 19
Etaśa, the Sun’s horse, who figured in the previous hymn (IX.63.8), reappears here. In the previous passage Soma yoked Etaśa; here he is identified as Etaśa and is himself yoked.

The interpr. of this vs. is considerably complicated by the universal (Sāy., Gr, Ge, Re, Lü 216, 269) assignment of the main clause verb mímāti to √mā ‘bellow’). This leaves padám in b with nothing to do. In Lü’s 2nd tr. (269) it is the place towards which Etaśa bellows (“… weihert das Etaśa-Ross dem Orte zu”), a transl. that at least does not violate the syntactic structure of the vs. Otherwise the solutions involve on the one hand plucking padám out of the b pāda, which remains part of the main clause, and construing it loosely in the dependent clause of c - an egregious violation of RVic syntax. So Ge: “Es brüllt das Zugross von den Sängern angeschirrt, wenn er in den Ozean gesetzt den Schritt vorwärts (tut).” And even with this trick Ge needs to supply a verb (“tut”) with which to construe padám. The other solutions violate RVic syntax less dramatically, but violate it they do - by making the b pāda part of the yád clause with c, though this would place the yád unacceptably deep into its clause. Lü’s 1st solution (216) is almost identical to Ge’s (including the crucial “den Schritt vorwärts (tut)”) except that he takes b with c, not a. Re deals with padám differently, but still takes b with c: “Il hennit ... quand, attelé par les chantres, il a été placé en avant, en (son) sejour, (à savoir) sur l'océan.” In addition to sweeping b into the c clause, his interpr. requires ā́hitaḥ to take an acc. of place, padám (“placé … en (son) séjour”), which is resumed by a loc., samudré (“(à savoir) sur l'océan”).

This supposed acc. usage with ā́√dhā is unparalleled.

The interpr. of the vs. is almost magically simplified by assigning mímāti to a different root, √mā ‘measure’, which builds a homonymous redupl. pres. mímāti, which is in fact far better attested than the one to √mā ‘bellow’. Although many of its forms are medial, there are a considerable number of act. forms, particularly the impv. mimīhi. I suggest that we have here an idiom “measure (its) pace (<step),” a reasonable activity for a draught horse. I suggest a similar interpr. of the cmpd mitá-dru- (see comm. ad IV.6.5), where I take the 1st member as the ppl. of √mā ‘measure’. This interpr. allows padám to be the obj. of the verb in the main cl. and keeps the two clauses separate. And it certainly makes as much sense for the Sun’s horse to be moving at measured pace through the sky as for it to be bellowing.


## 21
On vená- see comm. ad VIII.100.5.

## 22-24
The mention of the divine recipients of the soma in vss. 22 and 24 marks this tṛca, though the middle vs. lacks this feature. The (human) inspired poets (víprāḥ) in 23 implicitly contrast with the kaví- Soma, addressed in the voc. in 24. Note also that this is the third tṛca in a row that refers to sitting on (or coming to) “the womb of truth” (17c, 20ab, 22c), a trope found also in 11c; all four expressions are slightly different, though containing the same basic elements: 11c sī́dann ṛtásya yónim ā́, 17c ágmann ṛtásya yónim ā́, 20ab ā́… yóniṃ hiraṇyáyam … ṛtásya sī́dati, 22c ṛtásya yónim āsádam. For further on this trope see comm. ad vs. 30 below.


## 23
A minor poetic echo, the rhyming openings of pāda a táṃ tvā and c sáṃ tvā.

## 25-27
The unusual acc. expression vā́cam … sahásrabharṇasam is found in both 25 and 26 (in different order). For sahásra-bharṇas- see comm. ad IX.60.2. All three vss.

contain the nom. sg. masc. punānáḥ.

## 28-30
The contrast between the two types of soma drinks, pure and mixed with milk, are highlighted in this tṛca, at least in my view: 28c sómāḥ śukrā́gávāśiraḥ describes them straightforwardly, while 30ab ṛdhák … saṃjagmānáḥ “separately (and) uniting (with milk)” is more cryptic.


## 28
On pari √stubh see nearby IX.62.24. It is not entirely clear to me how the kṛ́p- (form, body) of Soma would ‘encircle with chant/rhythm’, since its physical form should not be producing noise. More common is the association of kṛ́p- with light (esp. the light of Agni), as Re points out (cf. VI.2.6 kṛpā́… rocase, VII.3.9 sváyā kṛpā́tanvā̀rócamānaḥ), but in our passage rucā́and kṛpā́are parallel and independent. A passive sense ‘encircled with chant/rhythm’ (so Re) would work better in context, but that seems precluded by the use of the act. stem stóbha-.


## 29
Pāda a contains what appears to be an etymological figure, but I consider it somewhat trickier than that. The first two word, hinvānó hetṛ́bhiḥ, are transparently related and easy to construe together, and IX.13.6 hiyānā́ná hetṛ́bhiḥ “like (horses) being driven by their drivers” displays the same apparent configuration. However, the instr. in our passage is followed by a ppl. yatáḥ ‘held, guided’, which is regularly preceded by an instr. agent, often nṛ́bhiḥ (approx. 10x in IX), or in this very hymn, vs. 15 vājíbhir yatáḥ “guided by the prizeseekers.” So I suggest that hetṛ́bhiḥ is actually the agent for following yatáḥ, though also adjacent to its etymological kin - a fine twist on the RVic poetic trick of positioning a word between two words both of which it could be (or indeed is) connected to. A more literal rendering of the pāda would be “ "... impelled, by the impellers held.” The simile in c is problematic for several reasons. To begin with, the subject of ab is singular, but the simile must be couched in the plural, given the pres. part. sī́dantaḥ. This is less of a problem than it appears: first, this hymn and soma hymns in general regularly switch back and forth between sg. (soma) and pl. (soma drinks / drops, etc.) referring to the same substance, and this could easily be a unmarked case of that. Moreover, if the target of the simile is in the pl., it can have attracted the participle into the pl.

This raises the question: what is soma being compared to? and the related but more technical question: is vanúṣaḥ nom. pl. (and therefore the simile target) or some other case (acc. pl., abl./gen. sg.)? Because we need something to license the pl. of sī́dantaḥ and because we need something to compare the soma to, taking vanúṣaḥ as nom. pl. seems the most economical solution - although this requires discounting the attractive parallel adduced by Ge, I.26.3 sī́dantu mánuṣo yathā. In that passage mánuṣaḥ, which rhymes with our vanúṣaḥ, is gen. sg. (and the pl. impv. sī́dantu simply agrees with the pl. subject in ab).

That vanúṣaḥ is nom. pl. is also the judgment of Ge and Re, though with vastly different semantics. Ge “wie die wetteifernden Reiter(?)” (I have no idea where he gets the “riders,” and his question mark shows his uncertainty about it; nonetheless it was taken up by Ober [II.245] as evidence for horseback riding in the RV!); Re “(s’asseyant au séjour du Ṛta) comme les dévots qui s’(y) asseoient.” Re seems closer to the mark, though still pretty far from it. Because of the repetition noted above (ad 22-24) of the trope “sit on the womb of truth” (4x in this hymn), it seems likely that sī́dant- here would evoke this recurrent expression, which is certainly appropriate to the soma (drinks) that are the subject of the simile. It is more difficult to identify who or what vanúṣaḥ refers to. This stem, and the associated denom. verb, can have both positive and negative values, expressing various types of eagerness and craving: “striving, eager, zealous, etc.” on the one hand (hence Re’s dévots), “over-zealous, covetous, rapacious, etc.” on the other. Before identifying its usage in this particular passage, I’d like to introduce a third term into the simile. In similes involving sitting, the comparandum is often a bird - e.g., śyenáḥ in nearby IX.61.21 =


## 19
sī́dañ chyenó ná yónim ā́, as well as IX.96.23 śakunáḥ ná pátvā and with the pl.

VIII.21.5 sī́dantas te váyo yathā “sitting like birds” very similar to our passage. I suggest that birds are the underlying comparandum here as well, and that this underlying target is qualified by vanúṣaḥ ‘rapacious’, or, as I render it “raptor (birds).” This produces a more satisfying, or at least more interesting, simile than Re’s “like devotées,” and it is constructed from readily available elements - though it does require more machinery.


## 30
As indicated above (ad 28-30), I believe that the unmixed and mixed soma drinks are referred to here, though no interpr. I know of shares this opinion. The adv. ṛ́dhak (so accented) means ‘separately, apart’; the form ṛdhák with final accent is found only here, and it is difficult to assess what the accentual difference means: is it just a mistake or meaningless variant? or is it meant to signal some change in grammatical function or meaning? If we can fancifully imagine an internal derivation of adverbs quasi-parallel to that of bráhman- à brahmán-, yáśas- à yaśás-, perhaps ṛdhák refers to something characterized by separateness. With a further flight of fancy, we can suggest that this would be the unmixed soma, referred to unequivocally two vss. earlier as śukrá- (28c), and contrasting with the soma that “unites” (saṃjagmāná-) with milk, again straightforwardly referred to in 28c as gávāśir-. Although neither of the terms in vs. 30 is elsewhere used of a type of soma, at least as far as I know, the contrastive pairing was set up at the beginning of the tṛca and could, I would assert, have been decoded by a RVic audience and applied to the more opaque expressions here. I will not discuss the alternative interpr. (Ge, Re, Lü 259, Ober I.457, II.143), which differ wildly from mine and from each other and, in the case of Ge and Re, depend on an out-of-date interpr. of ṛ́dhak.
