+++
title = "065"

+++
On the qualities of this hymn as a whole, see publ. intro.

## 01-03
No particular signs of unity. Vss. 2 and 3 have forms of the pres. part.

pávamāna- and 3 also the impv. ā́… pavasva, but esp. in this hymn, the appearance of these forms is hardly noteworthy. Vss. 2 and 3 also have devébhyaḥ in their b pādas, but in different cases.


## 01
The identification of Soma with the Sun, noted passim above in the last two hymns, here begins the hymn.

The tr. “rosy (fingers)” is of course an unauthorized allusion to Homer’s “rosyfingered dawn” - though it is more legitimate than it might first appear. The word tr. ‘rosy’, úsri-, is ultimately derived from the ‘dawn’ word; cf. the related usrá-, usríya-, both of which are color terms representing the light of dawn (‘ruddy’) generally applied to bovines.

The next pāda, with its fem. subj. svásāro jāmáyaḥ “kindred sisters” is a standard way of referring to the fingers of the priests that prepare the soma (cf., e.g., IX.89.4). Thus the first two pādas superimpose two images: the ruddy Dawn(s) impelling the sun, the fingers impelling the soma - allowing each to participate in the imagery of the other. Because of the erotic relationship sometimes depicted between Dawn and the Sun, it would be better to tr.

pátim in b as “their husband” (with Ge, Re), not ‘lord’ as in the publ. tr. - making one more link between the imagery of pādas a and b.

Note that Ge nodded (slightly) in tr. mahā́n índum as “den grossen Indra,” enabled by the constant association between those two words in IX.


## 02
The āmreḍita rucā́-rucā evokes the single instr. rucā́at the end of the preceding hymn, IX.64.28 (also vs. 13 of the same hymn and vs. 27 of this one).

Pāda c is characterized by alliteration of an unremarkable type: víśvā vásūny ā́viśa.


## 03
Both Ge and Re take devébhyaḥ as dat. with dúvaḥ: “Eifer für die Götter,” “l’hommage aux dieux,” whereas in the publ. tr. I take it as an abl., “friendship from the gods.” The issue is the multivalence of dúvas- and its derivatives; in the meaning ‘friendship’ it generally refers to the mutually agreeable relationship between men and gods.

In this context it seemed to me odd to order Soma to “bring [us] through purification” friendship for the gods, hence my ablatival interpr. However, a more detailed examination of the usage of dúvas- and the denom. duvasyá- shows that the offering / seeking of dúvasgenerally goes from men to gods (or Agni, as the god closest to men, to gods). E.g., devéṣu kṛṇuto dúvaḥ “The two [= married couple] do friendly service to the gods”; III.3.1 agnír hí devā́m̐amṛ́to duvasyati “For Agni the immortal does friendly service to / befriends the gods.” I therefore would emend the tr. to datival “bring … friendship for the gods.” Like the parallel obj. suṣṭutím ‘good praise’, dúvas- is then something that we mortals offer to the gods, but, though it originates from us, it is Soma who stimulates our production of these offerings, hence ā́… pavasva “bring by purifying yourself.”

## 04-06
No obvious signs of unity


## 06
On druṇā́see comm. ad IX.1.2.

## 07-09
Again no signs of unity.


## 07
The vs. contains an address (in pl.) to priest-singers to sing (gāyata), with comparison to a previous singer Vyaśva (vyaśvavát ‘like Vyaśva’) who did the same. Why Vyaśva appears here is something of a mystery. Aside from a bare mention in an Aśvin list hymn (I.112.15), Vyaśva is found only in VIII, where he is identified as a ṛṣi (VIII.9.10, 23.10) and his descendants receive the dakṣiṇā at the end of the sacrifice (VIII.24.28-29).

The adv. vyaśvavát ‘like Vyaśva’ is found 3x in that little group of hymns in VIII (23-26), attributed in the Anukramaṇī to one of his descendents, Viśvamanas Vaiyaśva. I don’t know why he should surface once in IX; our hymn is not attributed to him or any of his obvious relatives (rather to Bhṛgu Vāruṇi or Jamadagni Bhārgava), and there is nothing particularly somic about his appearances in VIII - though his descendents may once be called somín- ‘having or providing soma” (VIII.24.29; see comm. ad loc.). He is more closely associated with the Aśvins (I.112.15 just mentioned; VIII.9.10, 26.9 [both Aśvin hymns]).


## 08
The construction of the first hemistich is somewhat tricky. The rel. yásya must refer to soma, with the rel. cl. hanging off vs. 7. In pāda a the yásya qualifies várṇam ‘color’, which serves as obj. of hinvánti in b. “They impel his color” is a slightly odd locution, and it becomes odder in b, with the acc. hárim. The stem hári- is a color term and could qualify várṇa- (“tawny color”), but it also is regularly applied directly to soma (e.g., in vss. 12 and 25 of this hymn) and also identifies Indra’s horse(s). Ge (n. 8b) cleverly suggests that hári- is to be read twice, with the second reading an unmarked simile referring to a horse of the appropriate color. This provides a more appropriate obj. for hinvánti (“they impel (like) a fallow bay (horse)”), while connecting the putative horse with the “tawny color” (várṇam … hárim) that is the 1st obj. of the verb.

## 10-12
Again, no particular signs of unity.


## 10
The function of the ca in b is unclear. Klein (DGRV I.256-57) discusses three possible explanations - Ge’s, Re’s, and one of his own - of which he prefers Re’s: that marútvate ca conceals an ellipsis “(for the Maruts) and (for Indra) accompanied by the Maruts,” which seems by far the least likely and the most cumbersome. Among other things, the Maruts barely figure in IX (though cf. vs. 20 below), and I also know of no passages containing marútvant- that also contain a free form of marút-. My solution is admittedly makeshift but simpler, that cs conjoins the disharmonious dhā́rayā “in a stream” and marútvate … matsaráḥ “exhilarating drink for Indra.” This is closest to Ge’s, criticized by Klein as assuming “a harsh conjunction in pādas a and b.”


## 11
With Ge (n. 11a) I tentatively assume that the arms (oṇyòḥ) are Indra’s, since he was mentioned in the preceding vs. But as in IX.16.1 they might belong to the officiant.

## 13-15
Again, no signs of unity.


## 15
A rare sign of hostility (abhimāti-hán- ‘smasher of hostility’) in these anodyne Gāyatrī assemblages.

## 16-18
The tṛca is thematically unified by the journey of Soma and, in vss. 17-18 his conveying good things to us on that journey. Cf. esp. 17 ā́naḥ … váhā and 18 ā́naḥ … bhara. All three vss. end in a purpose dative / dative infinitive: 16 yā́tave, 17 ūtáye, 18 devávītaye.


## 16
īyate is assigned to √yā/ī ‘implore, beseech’ by numerous scholars, incl. Gr, Lub, and Lü (214-15: “Der König wird mit Liedern gebeten”), though Ge, Re and the publ. tr.

take it to √yā/ī ‘speed’ (so also Sāy., who glosses gacchati). In favor of the latter, Re declares that īyate is always “il s’avance” in IX. I would also point out 1) the king is definitely traveling in pāda c (yā́tave, to the same root) and 2) the ‘is sped’ interpr. is supported by a passage like IX.26.3 táṃ vedhā́m medháyā́hyan “They impelled the ritual adept with their wisdom” also containing an instr. of medhā́- with a clear indication of movement (ahyan). Kulikov (495-96) discusses both root possibilities without seeming to decide, though the fact that he lists it with 2 yā (ī) ‘implore, request’ probably indicates his choice.

śatagvínam gávām póṣam, lit. “thriving of cattle that possesses hundredfold cattle” (vel sim.), redundantly codes the cattle twice (-gvínam gávām).


## 18
The s-stem neut. júvas- is a hapax, contrasting with the more conventionally formed and somewhat better attested jávas-. The zero-gr. root syllable is of course anomalous (see AiG II.2.232, without explanation), though see nearby dúvaḥ (vs. 3b), whatever its source. It may owe its form (or have been encouraged in maintaining its form) by the properly formed homonymous root noun pl. (vayo-)júvaḥ (to -jū́-) in the same metrical position in 26a below, as well as the aforementioned dúvaḥ also in the same position in 3b (cf. also ābhúvaḥ 27a, mayobhúvam 28a). A somewhat similar explan. is given by Re. Given the contextual triggers in this passage, it is probably wise not to invest too much in a deep diachronic account of the anomalous root syllable.

The simile in b, rūpáṃ ná (or rūpáṃ ná várcase), is difficult to interpr. Ge simply renders it literally “wie Schönheit unserem Aussehen,” but it is unclear to me what the basis of comparison is. Re’s rendering goes to the opposite extreme, with a flurry of parentheses: “comme (on ajoute) la forme-concrète pour (donner) l'éclat (à une idée).” My own interpr.

arises from the parallelism between vss. 17 and 18. In the former we ask Soma to bring material goods, esp. livestock. Here in pāda a we request abstract qualities, “strength and speed,” and I suggest that rūpáṃ ná “as if (in) physical form” is assimiliating them to the material goods of the previous vs. Re’s alt. interpr., given at the end of his n., “apporte-nous force et vitesse, tel un objet-concret,” is similar and preferable to his more elaborate first interpr.

## 19-21
No clear cohesion, though vss. 19 and 20 both contain a form of √ṛṣ.

## 22-24
As noted in the publ. intro., this tṛca is thematically unified by a listing of the many place in which soma can be pressed in 22-23; all these clauses share a single verb sunviré in 22b. The two vss. are followed by a summary vs. (24) expressing the hope that all these diverse soma types will bring good things to us. The tṛca also shows signs of formal cohesion that are rare in these Gāyatrī assemblages: vss. 22-23 consist of six pāda-length rel. cl., all introduced by yé, with disjunctive vā found in both c pādas, while 24 begins with the resumptive and summarizing correlative té.


## 22
The first two pādas contain antonymic locations.

The location in c is taken by Ge/Re as a place name, “in Śaryaṇāvat,” but a place descriptor seems preferable, given the other locative expressions in these vss. On the word see comm. ad VIII.6.39 and Thieme, Unters. p. 40 n. 2.


## 23
Ge and Re (see also Mayr. PN s.vv.) take ārjīkéṣu and kṛ́tvasu as referring to peoples. On ārjīká- see comm. ad VIII.7.29 and Thieme, Unters. p. 40 n. 2. As for kṛ́tvan-, since in its other two occurrences in the RV (VIII.24.25, X.144.3) it is adjectival, in the meaning ‘active, enterprising’, I see no reason why it should be a proper noun only here. I was tempted to tr. it “ritually active,” but this came uncomfortably close to “sexually active.” As for pastyā̀- as ‘dwelling place’, rather than ‘river’ (Ge, Re, etc.), see comm. ad I.40.7 and IX.97.18.

## 25-27
All three vss. in this tṛca contain a middle form of √hi ‘impel’ (25c hinvānaḥ, 26b hinvānā́saḥ, 27b hinvire, the first two passive, the third transitive. In addition the tṛca opens and closes with a form of páva- (25a pávate, 27c pavasva).


## 25
haryató háriḥ “delightful tawny one” is a word play, with two semantically different stems. This same word play is the focus of a whole hymn, III.44, and obviously was a staple of RVic phraseology.


## 26
On the relationship of vayojúvaḥ in pāda a and sáho júvaḥ in 18a, see comm. ad 18 above. Scar (174) hesitates between act. and pass. meaning for this hapax rt. noun cmpd vayo-jū́-: “die Lebenskraft fördenden” / “von Kraft beschleunigten.” In the publ. tr. I opt for an intrans. + instr. value: “speeding with vigor,” though I now think passive “sped by vigor” would be even better, on the basis of the clear pass. forms in context (hinvānā́saḥ … śrīṇānā́ḥ … mṛñjata) as well as a passage in the immediately preceding hymn, IX.64.16 prá hinvānā́saḥ ... dhiyā́jūtā́ḥ “Being impelled forth … sped by insightful thoughts,” with the passive ppl. jūtá-.


## 27
The pāda-final dat. devátātaye echoes devávītaye in 18c.

## 28-30
As if to make up for scanting tṛca cohesion earlier in the hymn, this tṛca is bound by bonds of iron: 13 occurrences of ā́, most construed with an acc. of a desirable object, all sharing a single verb (ā́) vṛṇīmahe (28b). In addition the three c pādas are identical. This refrain contains the nom. stem pā́nta- ‘drink’, not the pres. part.
