+++
title = "066"

+++
This is the second to the last of the composite Gāyatrī hymns in this maṇḍala; the last (IX.67) is attributed to a variety of named poets, while the Anukramaṇī assigns this one to śataṃ vaikhānasaḥ “100 Vaikhānases.” Both attributions seems to acknowledge the composite nature of these compositions, as opposed to the previous ones, which have a single poet named for the whole hymn. Still, we would be hard-pressed to assemble 100 Vaikhānases: only one, Vamra, is named in the Anukramaṇī, as the author of X.99, a hymn to Indra, and the patronymic (and its underlying base) are both absent from the RVic text.

## 01-03
The tṛca shows clear signs of unity, esp. lexically. Not only do all three vss.

contain a form of páva- (pávasva 1a, voc. pa/ávamāna 2b, 3c), but the stem víśva- is found 4x (1a, b, 2a, 3b), kave (3c) echoes kā́vya (1b), and pl. dhā́māni in 3a echoes du. dhā́manī in 2b. These “domains” of vss 2-3 are thematically connected to the voc. viśvacarṣaṇe ‘common to all the separate peoples’, in defining the spaces over which Soma holds sway.


## 01
The b pāda lacks a verb: Ge supplies (silently) “zu gewinnen,” Re parenthetically “pour (atteindre).” The pāda is found 3x elsewhere (IX.23.1, 62.25, 63.25); in two the vs. contains a form of √sṛj ‘surge’ (asṛgram 23.1, asṛkṣata 63.25) and I therefore supply that verb here.


## 02
The issue in this vs. is the identify of the two dhā́manī; dependent on the answer to that is the function of the du. pronoun tā́bhyām, which could be instr., dat., or abl.

Answering the first question is made difficult by the fact that this is the only du. form of dhā́man- in the RV. Ge tr. “Formen” (likewise Re “formes”) and in n. 2-3 explains these as the different stages (Stadien) the soma goes through in its preparation. This interpr. fails to explain the difference between the du. of vs. 2 and the pl. of 3; nor does it account for how Soma “rules with” these forms (taking tā́bhyām as instr. as he does). Re’s interpr. of dhā́manī in 2 as the pure and mixed forms of soma provides a satisfactory account of the dual, but does not explain the transition to the pl. in 3 and again fails to explain how Soma rules with them. I take the term quite differently, as ‘domains’ (rather than ‘forms’). In vs. 2 the dual refers to Heaven and Earth and alludes to the split of Soma into heavenly and earthly forms, a common trope in IX: he has a home in both places. Taking tā́bhyām as abl., I see Soma as ruling from both those polarized spaces, which together contain everything.

This interpr. gives pratīcī́in c more content than the fairly empty renderings of Ge (“die sich (uns) darbieten”) and Re (“qui se tiennent face (à nous)”): Heaven and Earth as the two cosmic halves face each other.


## 03
My interpr. of the du. dhā́manī in 2 as the two cosmic domains allows the contrast between that form and the pl. dhā́māni to make sense. We have moved from the cosmic, to the ritual, in particular to the ritual ground - and here the pl. ‘domains’ are the ritual spaces that Soma traverses and encloses. This change of venue and focus is signalled esp. by ṛtúbhiḥ ‘according to the ritual sequences’. Thus the themes of space and the cosmic reach of Soma that I identified as characteristic of this hymn find economical expression in the transition from the cosmic Soma in vs. 2 to the ritual Soma of vs. 3.

The main verb of this clause is pári … asi, in the formula viśvátaḥ pári √as ‘surround entirely’ (on which see my 1998 “Rigvedic viśvátaḥ sīm, Or, Why Syntax Needs Poetics,” Fs. Watkins). Within this phrase we seem to have an embedded rel. cl. yā́ni te “which are yours,” dependent on the obj. dhā́māni, and embedded relatives are generally blocked in the RV. But as we have noted elsewhere (see, e.g., comm. ad VI.21.2, 22.5), nominal rel. clauses are an exception to this rule, and here the yā́ni seems to be displaying (proto-)izafe behavior.

## 04-06
This tṛca does not show particular internal cohesion, but it has striking echoes of the preceding tṛca. Like vs. 1, vs. 4 begins pávasva; 4b begins abhí víśvāni like 1b, with a different acc. pl. following; 4c sákhā sákhibhya ūtáye is identical to 1c, save for the final word. Vs. 5 contains dhā́mabhiḥ echoing the two forms of dhā́man- in vss. 2-3. Only vs. 3 is free of links to the 1st tṛca.


## 04
As in 1b, I supply ‘surging’ with 4b, on the basis of their identical construction.


## 05
This vs. seems to unite Soma’s two theatres of operation, as laid out in vss. 2-3, the cosmic and the ritual. His “gleaming rays” (reminiscent of the sun) spread both “on the back of heaven” (divás pṛṣṭhé) and across the ritual filter (pavítram); the instr. dhā́mabhiḥ “through your domains” can make reference both to this combining of cosmic and ritual and also, more specifically, to the limited ritual domains expressed by the pl. dhā́māni in vs. 3.

Re’s characterization in his n. - “Soma-soleil …; en fait, l’image rituelle se combine avec l’image solaire” - expresses this rather nicely, though it’s hard to get it from his tr. On the likening of the soma liquid on the filter to the sun, see IX.10.5 and comm. thereon.

## 07-09
No particular sign of cohesion either internal or external.


## 07
This vs. contains the famous phrase ákṣiti śrávaḥ (or a minor variant of it) “imperishable fame,” interestingly acquired not by a human, but by Soma himself.


## 08
It may not be clear in the publ. tr. that “you” and “the inspired poet” are identical.

The referent of the “seven siblings” (saptá jāmáyaḥ) is disputed. Ge identifies them as the fingers - and certainly jāmí- is regularly used of the fingers of the officiants in IX.

But 1) do fingers “cry out”? and more important, 2) why then “seven”? It seems unlikely that the poet would deliberately evoke an image of disfigurement or, at the very least, incompleteness. Ober (II.73; see II.71) tries to rescue this identification by suggesting that seven and ten are “equivalent” indications of totality. But as he himself notes, a number of other groups of seven are mentioned in IX. A reference to one of these in this vs. would save us from positing an defective set of fingers. The most likely referent in my view are the seven streams, saptá síndhavaḥ found two vss. earlier (6a). Rivers regularly make noise in the RV, and the proximity of that very phrase in vs. 6 tips the scales for me. Another feminine group of seven is the seven insightful thoughts, saptá dhītáyaḥ (IX.8.4, 9.4, 15.8, 62.17). dhītí- also make noise, and they also (though not explicitly numbered 7) appear several vss. later doing just that: 11c ávāvaśanta dhītáyaḥ “the insightful thoughts have bellowed.” However, supplying dhītáyaḥ here would lead to a poetically clumsy nearredundancy: the related dhī́-, also ‘insightful thought’, is found in the same clause, and “the seven (inspired thoughts) cried out to you with inspired thoughts” would be, to say the least, awk. (rather than being a pleasing etymological echo, at least to my mind). Lü (246) also goes for streams, and Re, citing his treatment, seems silently to endorse it. Lü claims that Ge identifies the seven as dhītáyaḥ, despite Ge’s clear n. 1 “Die Finger.” I don’t see where Lü got this - I assume it’s simply a lapse.

In IX the figure Vivasvant seems to be the prototype sacrificer (see Old ad IX.99.2), perhaps in his role as father of Manu. For further on Vivasvant see publ. intro. to I.139 as well as comm. to IX.99.2, X.14.5.


## 09
Since they are grooming (√mṛj) him, the ‘unwed ones’ (agrúvaḥ) are probably here the fingers, continuing the fem. pl. agent but modulating from streams to fingers (whose number is not specified here).

In b the phrase ádhi ṣváṇi is problematic. It is generally taken as a root noun loc. to √svan ‘sound’: Gr, apparently Ge (see his n. 9b and his locatival tr. “unter Gebrause”), apparently Re (but see his hesitations in his n.), Schindler (Rt. Noun p. 51, but see below), Ober (II.73)—though Lub lists it under a stem sváni-, so presumably interpr. it as a nom./acc. sg. neut. Schindler’s disc. suggests a slight variation on the root noun interpr., with the possibility that it is used here as an adj. ‘rauschend’ modifying jīráu, as Gr takes it.

In that case the independent sván- was extracted from the compd tuvi-ṣváṇ- ‘powerfully sounding’, an interpr. that seems over-elaborate.

Whether as root noun or an -i-stem, our form is equated with sváni in the similar pāda-final phrase ánu ṣváṇi in VI.46.14. However, I have demonstrated that sváni in that phrase must be a verb form, a 3rd sg. passive aor., as Old suggests. See comm. ad loc. Scar, in a detailed disc. of the two sváni forms (676-77), suggests that our phrase, too, might contain a verb form. By his analysis pāda b is an (unsignalled) dependent cl., parallel to the yád clause of c, and so the accent on 3rd sg. sváni would be correct for a finite verb. He tr.

“es putzen dich …, während es über der Wollseihe, unter dem fliessenden Wasser raschelt [und] während du … gesalbt wirst.” This is clever, but I am disturbed by marking only one

- and only the second - subordinate clause overtly. Moreover, this interpr. also must assume
that there is a gapped subject to sváni or that it is used impersonally (both possibilities floated by Scar). None of this is impossible, but the required assumptions and syntactic twists pile up.

I am drawn rather to an old suggestion of Aufrecht’s, endorsed by Old (but rejected explicitly by Schindler and Scar) that ádhi ṣváṇi rests on ádhi *ṣṇávi “on (the sheep’s) back.” Because of the morphological difficulties (the nonexistence of a loc. *snávi to begin with), I would not posit Aufrecht’s intermediate form, but simply assume a reduction and metathetic scrambling of sā́navi, which occurs several times in the pāda-final phrase ádhi sā́navi (VI.48.5, IX.31.5, 37.4, 63.27); ádhi is the standard post- (/pre-)position in this expression; cf. also ádhi sā́no avyáye IX.86.3, 91.1, 96.13, 97.40 and numerous variants.

The presence of ávye at the beg. of the pāda would set the audience’s expectation for “on the back of the sheep.” The presence of the “noise” root √svar in the preceding vs. (8a asvaran) may have facilitated the metathesis, to produce a form appearing to belong to the phonologically and semantically similar root √svan, reinforced by rebhá- in the flg. pāda.

In c I take rebháḥ … ajyáse as a pun, dependent on the literal sense of √ribh, which, rather than being ‘sing’ as it generally is glossed, is really ‘creak, rasp’. See comm. ad VI.3.6. Here Soma is as usual ‘anointed’ (ajyase) with milk, and in that regard he is identified as a rebhá-, a ritual officiant with a particular voice quality. But as disc. ad VI.3.6, in a TS passage √ribh is used for a squeaky wheel, and of course the way to fix such a wheel is to “grease” it (√añj). So the unmarked comparison here is “(as) a squeaky (wheel) is greased.”

## 10-12
This tṛca is thematically unified by the journey theme, reinforced by two forms of √sṛj in vss. 10 (asṛkṣata) and 11 (ásṛgram), the former in an etym. figure. Note the juxtaposition of the newer s-aor. 3rd pl. middle and the older root aorist, with no apparent functional or semantic difference. On these two formations see Narten (Sig.Aor. 270-71); she claims that they were originally differentiated functionally and still are occasionally (see IX.86.4), but in almost all occurrences this difference has been lost.


## 10
Soma’s acquisition of “imperishable fame” in 7c is anticipated, as it were, by his streams, likened to horses, “seeking fame” (śravasyávaḥ).

## 13-15
No signs of cohesion.


## 13
On pādas bc and esp. the remarkable causative future reflexive form vāsayiṣyase ‘you will cause yourself to be clothed’, see disc. in the comm. to the parallel passage IX.2.4.


## 14
It is difficult to render the vs.-initial ásya te lit. “of this here you”; the demon.

essentially exists as a prop for the enclitic te and a way to emphasize the 2nd ps. pronoun.

I do not know what the difference is between sakhyá- and sakhitvá-, or if any difference is meant. The former is far better attested and has a fuller paradigm, well distributed across cases and numbers (sg. and pl.); the latter is almost confined to the nom./acc. sg. (with 2 occurrences of the loc. sg.). In any case the vs. comes out a little flat: we want your comradeship because it will benefit us. The poet may have been trying to distract attention from this flatness by varying the derivational realization. It’s also worth noting that pāda a is also found in IX.61.29 without sakhitvá- in context and pāda c is found in IX.31.6 without sakhyá- in context.

In his endearingly crusty way, Bloomfield (RR ad IX.31.6) pronounces our vs. “arrant nonsense”: “pādas a and c, borrowed from good quarters, show that the stanza is irresponsible patchwork.” This seems rather harsh, but probably results in part from his interpr. of íyakṣantaḥ as the desid. of √yaj, rather than the now generally accepted derivation from √(n)aś; see comm. ad VI.21.3. Attributing it to √yaj produces a participial phrase in b that has nothing to do with sakhyé in a: “In thy friendship we, sacrificing with thy help, do we, O Indu, thy friendship crave” (Bl’s tr., which justifies his “arrant nonsense” judgment). Whereas a connection with √(n)aś sets out the reason we want your comradeship—we stand to gain from it—and makes ab a unified expression.


## 15
The usually idiomatic ā́pavasva lacks the usual acc. object (“bring [X] by purifying yourself”). Perhaps the ā́anticipates the ā́in c, in the idiom ā́… viśa ‘enter’.

The question in b are whether the two datives mahé … nṛcákṣase belong together and what the referent(s) is/are. Ge takes them together and identifies the referent as Indra, who appears by name in the next pāda, which would support Ge’s solution. However, as Re points out, nṛcákṣas- is never used of Indra, but generally of Agni or Soma. Re himself separates the datives, supplying ráṇe with mahé from the beginning of the tṛca (13a) and identifying the referent of nṛcákṣase as “le dieu Soma.” Although the first choice seems possible and even reasonable, the second is awkward: it seems odd to order Soma to purify himself for himself, even if the addressee is the substance soma (which shouldn’t actually have such agency) as distinct from the god. Given that the next tṛca but one (vss. 19-21) is addressed to Agni, that god seems a more likely choice. Re’s motivation in separating the two datives in b seems to be to wring the three functions out of the vs. (or, I gather, ab), but I don’t see how they would match up. In any case, a modified tr. à la Re, without reference to the three functions, is conceivable: “… for the quest for cattle, for great (joy), for the one of manly eye [=Agni].”

## 16-18
The first two vss. are linked lexically and by their investment in grammatical comparison. The third is unconncected, but 18c echoes vs. 14 in the previous tṛca.


## 16
As Re points out, sán here is non-concessive. Instead it seems to have a function rather like the one I identified in III.30.5 (see comm. ad loc.), namely a definitional one: where, on the basis of the description of the god’s activities or qualities, he is assigned an agentive title.


## 17
This vs. expands on the etymological figure and superlative phrase in 16b, ugrā́ṇām … ójiṣṭhaḥ, but with three pairs of comparatives, beginning with the ugrébhyaḥ … ójīyān, lexically identical to the splv. phrase but morphologically different. The second is also an etym. figure, of less interest than the first because it lacks morphological variation: śū́rebhyaḥ … śū́rataraḥ. While the third substitutes a synonymic cmpd. for the abl. term: bhūridā́bhyaḥ … máṃhīyān “more generous than those who give much.” A low-key but pleasing set of variations on a phrasal theme.


## 18
The sole Anuṣṭubh verse in a sea of Gāyatrīs. Note that it is the last vs. before the Agni tṛca, and so it may function as a closing or pseudo-closing vs., dividing the larger hymn into parts.

The first hemistich has received a variety of interpr., splitting into two major camps dependent in great part on the identity of sū́raḥ. Ge (see his n. 18ab), Re, Ober (I.494) take it as a gen. sg. of svàr-, one of a string of gen. dependent on sātā́‘at the winning’ - hence, “at the winning of the sun, refreshment, offspring, and bodies.” There are several arguments against this interp., however: 1) sū́raḥ has to be nom. sg. to sū́ra- in 22c, and so consistency would be nice (if not entirely necessary); 2) íṣaḥ has the wrong accent for gen. sg. (expect iṣáḥ); 3) the standard interpr. of the sequence éṣaḥ is ā́íṣaḥ (already Pp., though see other poss. in Ge’s n. 18ab), but the mid-pāda location of ā́, between two supposedly parallel genitives, is an odd position for a preverb / adposition / adverb, and it has no obvious function in the clause. In fact the clause has no verb and no obvious one to supply - witness the variety of suggestions: Ge “(stehst uns),” Re “(qui t’es préparé),” Ober “(hilfst uns).” I therefore follow the path generally sketched by Old (see also Lü 267 n. 4): a nominal equational cl. with nom. sg. sū́raḥ to sū́ra- (note that both Gr and Lub so list the form), tváṃ soma sū́raḥ “you, Soma, are the sun”; followed by a 2nd cl. beginning with ā́. Though ā́ remains mid-pāda, it is initial in its clause, as we would expect. An imperative of bringing / giving / suppying needs to be supplied, with acc. pl. íṣaḥ (properly accented) as obj. Cf.

expressions like III.53.1 ... íṣa ā́vahatam ..., VI.52.16 ... íṣa ā́dhattam, and, with specifically Somian vocab., nearby IX.65.13 ā́... íṣam pávasva “By purifying yourself, bring refreshment here.” More to the point, perhaps, the immediately following vs., 19b, ā́ suvórjam íṣaṃ ca naḥ “impel hither nourishment and refreshment to us,” is quite similar and could provide the missing verb.

A structurally less crucial question is the relationship between the two genitives in b, tokásya … tanū́nām. As indicated above, Ge takes them as parallel; Re by contrast takes tanū́nām as a beneficial “pour nous-mêmes,” independent of the genitives dependent on sātā́. In the publ. tr. I take them as nested, with tanū́nām dependent on tokásya, though I have no particular objection to the parallel interpr.

As noted above, vṛṇīmáhe sakhyā́ya is a permutation of 14c sakhitvám uśmasi.

On vṛṇīmáhe yújyāya, see comm. ad IX.88.1. Given the other exx. of this lexeme, I would now alter the tr. to “we choose you for yoking [/use].”

## 19-21
On this tṛca see publ. intro. It is so insistently Agni-focused (all three vss.

begin with a form of that stem, two as voc.) that the Anukramaṇī lists Agni as the deity of the three vss. But it is of course far more likely that Soma is being identified with Agni here.

The equation and poetic merging of these two ritual gods is found elsewhere, most notably in “the hardest hymn in the RV” (V.44), which is simultaneously applicable to both gods throughout its length. Their blending is shown here by the use of both Somian and Agnian vocab.: for the latter, see esp. puróhitaḥ (20b); for the former, the three forms of páva-, one each in each vs.: 19a pavase, 20a pávamānaḥ, 21a pavasva. Note that after this Agni tṛca the word sóma- doesn’t appear until vs. 29 and a likely identification with Indra (as well as comparison with the sun) intervenes.


## 19
Since pavase has an obj. ā́yūṃṣi, it would be desirable to have the preverb ā́, which has transitivizing function with this root. This is easily done: ā́yūṃṣi can be decomposed into ā́ā́yūṃṣi without change to the Saṃhitā text, though it is contra to the Pp.

This preverb in tmesis shows up apparently 2nd in the clause because it follows the zeroposition voc. ágne.


## 21
Here, despite the obj. phrase in b, pávasva lacks the expected ā́. It would technically be possible to take b with c: “establishing luster and an abundance of heroes for/in us, wealth and thriving in me,” which would leave pavasva intransitive. However, this seems artificial, and the existence of two 1st ps. pronouns in b and c, in different numbers, would be awkward. Moreover, 27c, with an independent dádhat clause, speaks in favor of separating b and c here.

## 22-24
No strong signs of unity, though a form of pávamāna- opens vss. 22 and 24, but Soma as the sun in 22c returns in the theme of light and the defeat of darkness in 24bc.

The adj. vicakṣaṇáḥ ‘visible afar’ in 23c also participates in this imagery, partly matching viśvádarśataḥ ‘visible to all’ in the same position in 22c -- though the Engl. tr. ‘visible’ suggests a closer connection than exists in the Skt., which has √dṛś in 22 but √cakṣ in 23.

The light imagery in this tṛca may pick up on the identification with Agni in the previous tṛca, while the verb jáṅghanat that closes the tṛca (24c) may modulate towards an identification with Indra, probably found in the following tṛca.


## 23
hitáḥ in b could of course belong to √hi ‘impel’, though little would change if did.

As it happens both Ge and Re also opt for √dhā here.


## 24
With Lü (266), I take ṛtáṃ bṛhát as a nom. in apposition to Soma, rather than another acc. obj. to ajījanat as Ge/Re do. Either of course is possible; there are several passages in which an identification of Soma with ṛtá seems likely. See comm. ad IX.56.1.

But I would certainly accept an acc. interpr. as alternative.

## 25-27
Each vs. opens with a form of pávamāna-, which also connects it with the preceding tṛca (see above). An even stronger link to the previous tṛca is the gen. intens. part.

jáṅghnataḥ in 25a, which picks up the same stem (in the nom. jáṅghanat) at the end of the immediately preceding pāda, 24c. As for internal unity, note the free phrase háreś candrā́ḥ in 25b, which is transformed into the cmpd. háriścandra-(only here in the RV, though prominent as a PN beginning in the Br.) in 26c. Superlatives also figure in the last two vss.: rathī́tama- 26a, śubhráśastamaḥ 26b, vājasā́tama- 27b.


## 25
With Ge and Re, I supply ‘darkness(es)’ (támāṃsi) as obj. of jáṅghnataḥ on the basis of 24c.

I supply ‘drops’ with candrā́ḥ on the basis of III.40.4 candrā́sa índavaḥ, though Ge’s “Güsse” and Re’s “coulées de soma” certainly fit the context, too. My “drops” is indirectly supported by the additional descriptor jīrā́ḥ ‘lively’, which is most commonly found in the cmpd. jīrá-dānu- ‘having lively drops’, with a different word for drop.

Note the play jīrā́ajirá-. The cmpd ajirá-śocis- is a bit difficult to fit into context.

The 1st member ajirá- means ‘quick, nimble, agile’, and the whole bahuvrīhi occurs once elsewhere of Agni, VIII.19.13, where I tr. “of nimble flame.” How this would apply to drops is not entirely clear; I assume it refers to the propensity of drops, esp. moving drops, to catch the light. It is also possible that ajiráśociṣaḥ is gen. sg. and modifies Soma, rather than nom. pl. modifying the drops. This would not appreciably change the image.


## 26
The Indraic cast of this vs. is quite clear, and I therefore think that Soma is being identified with Indra here (as he was with Agni in the tṛca 19-21). To begin with, the splv.

rathī́tama- is generally used of Indra (e.g., VIII.45.7); marúd-gaṇa- ‘having the Maruts as his flock’ is of course characteristic of Indra (e.g., VIII.89.2) and also expressed by other, similar but better-attested epithets like marút-vant-. Moreover, the stem śubhrá- ‘resplendent’ in the masc. pl., here in the instr. pl. śubhrébhiḥ, is almost always used of the Maruts (e.g., I.167.4).

The problem in the vs. is the splv. śubhráśastamaḥ in b. The interpr. reflected by Ge and Re stems from Old, who sees it as a haplology from *śubhrá-śasta-tama-, i.e., the splv.

to a ppl. cmpd. Old himself doesn’t provide a gloss, but on the basis of a cmpd. like kaviśastá- ‘praised by poets’ it should presumably be something like ‘most praised by the resplendent’, though neither Ge’s “über die anderen Schönen als der Schönste gepriesen” nor Re’s “par rapport aux (êtres) beaux, il est le plus célébré (quant à son fait d’être) beau” reflects this presumption; that is, they do not take the 1st member as agent. Nor does the accent of the cmpd (either reconstructed or as attested) match that of kavi-śastá-, though admittedly it does match the standard devá-hita- type. And the instr. śubhrébhiḥ seems an odd choice - we would expect a gen. pl. with the splv. of course; the anomalous instr. is surely responsible for the knots that Ge and Re tie themselves into, as well as Ge’s cryptic (or disingenuous) n. 26b “śubhrébhiḥ Instr. = Ablat. in Verbindung mit Superl. = Komparat.” The publ. tr. represents a very different analysis, which I now think must be wrong: as the splv. to a root-noun cmpd. ‘proclaiming splendor’, but, as I realized all along, the accent is wrong (expect *śubhra-śás-(tama-)), and it is difficult to argue that the accent got misplaced because the word structure was misunderstood, esp. given the root noun cmpd splv. in the next vs., vāja-sā́-tama- with correct accent. In addition, śubhrá- is an adj., ‘resplendent’, not a noun ‘splendour’, and √śaṃs doesn’t take any form derived from √śubh as obj. So I now would reject the publ. tr. and return to Old’s haplology - though with a semantic interpr. different from the Ge/Re complex. I would take the 1st member in agentive value, as is usual in such cmpds: “most praised by the resplendent (ones),” with the usual number neutralization. The reference is to the Maruts. What then of the independent instr. śubhrébhiḥ? Either it doubles the 1st cmpd member, whose function in the cmpd may have become unclear because of the haplology - hence “most praised by the resplendent (ones), by the resplendent ones.” Or it may be an instr. of accompaniment: “most praised by the resplendent (ones), along with the resplendent ones.” This would reflect the fact that the Maruts both praise Indra and receive praise themselves. This dual role of the Maruts, both praising and praised, is the subject of “poetic repair” in V.52, the first of Śyāvāśva’s Marut hymns. See comm. ad loc and reff. given there. Although I slightly favor the former explanation, English is better served by the latter, and I would now substitute the 2nd tr. just given; “most praised” should also receive an asterisk.

Unfortunately “gold-glittering” for háriścandra- obscures its relationship to háreś candrā́ḥ in 25b “of the tawny one, the glittering (drops).”


## 27
In this vs. we seem to have returned to the identification of Soma with the sun, as shown esp. by raśmíbhiḥ “with his rays” - this instr. pl. being reserved almost exclusively for the sun’s rays (see, e.g., nearby IX.61.8 sū́ryasya raśmíbhiḥ). The image is of the sun / Soma pervading space, with Soma’s rays being the traces of the golden liquid as it spreads across the filter.

## 28-30
No particular evidence of unity, except for an emphasis in the 1st two vss. on the technicalities of soma-preparation.


## 28
This vs. has two passively used participles, suvānáḥ ‘being pressed’ and punānáḥ ‘being purified’, which contrast with the agency implicitly accorded to Soma Pavamāna, “self-purifying” Soma. This more agentive participle returns in the final vs. (30b), just before we ask Soma for his favor.

The repetition of índuḥ (pādas a and c) is somewhat clumsy, but the 2nd occurrences enables the usual word play with adjacent índram.
