+++
title = "067"

+++
On the structure and authorship of this hymn and their implications for RVic studies more generally, see publ. intro. as well as Old.

## 01-03
Attributed to Bharadvāja, the tṛca shows elementary unity by positoning tvám at the beginning of each vs. ### 01
Gr derives dhārayú- from dhā́rā- ‘stream’ and glosses ‘strömend’, an idea that goes back to Sāy. Ge follows suit (“der hervorsprudelnde”), though in n. 1a he entertains a derivation from √dhṛ, which underlies Re’s “le mainteneur” (see his n.) I also think that √dhṛ is the correct etymon. There would be no reason to shorten the final of dhā́rā- (though dhā́ra-pūta- ‘purified by streams’ (?) and dhāra-vāká- ‘recitation for the streams’ (?) do give me pause), while there is a well-established relationship between -ā̆-yá-(ti) verbs and - ā̆-yú- adjectives (type devayá- / devayú-). Though it has a different accent and a different functional profile, dhā́ráyati is a very common verb, and it is easy to imagine the creation of a -yú- nominal to that stem. However, if it is derived from dhā́rā- ‘stream’, the sense should not be of the type given by Gr and Ge, but rather ‘seeking streams’, as is standard with -yuformations to nouns. The idea would be that the soma, once pressed, goes forth to seek the ritual waters.

## 04-06
The Kaśyapa tṛca: it lacks cohesion across all 3 vss., though 4 and 5 share “rushing across the fleece”; ‘rush’ (árṣa-) also provides a link to the last vs. of the preceding tṛca, 3b, as does the verb acikradat (4c), which echoes kánikradat (3b).


## 05
The preverb/preposition ví is insistent, with 4 occurrences in the vs. Re sees the three functions here, but that seems something of a stretch.

## 07-09
Elementary sign of cohesion in the Gotama tṛca: a form of páva- in every vs. ### 09
On úsrayaḥ as ‘rosy (fingers)’ see comm. ad IV.65.1.

The publ. tr. contains a grammatical error: asvaran should of course be ‘they cried’ not ‘they cry’.

## 10-12
This, the Atri tṛca, shows very tight cohesion. To begin with, Pūṣan, under his name (vs. 10) or characteristic epithets (kapardín- vs. 11, ā́ghṛṇi- vs. 12), appears in every vs., in particular as the recipient of the pressed and purified soma in vss. 11-12. Since, as noted in the publ. intro., Pūṣan is rarely found in IX, devoting a tṛca to him here is striking, and the assumption that he wants soma is esp. anomalous, since in the hymn devoted to Indra and Pūṣan (VI.57) Indra’s desire for soma is explicitly contrasted with Pūṣan’s for porridge (VI.57.2).

More evidence for strong cohesion: the third pāda of each vs. is a refrain: ā́bhakṣat kanyā̀su naḥ “He [=Pūṣan] will give us a share in maidens.” The connection of this refrain with soma is, to say the least, not straightforward. Ge (n. 10-12) suggests that the idea is that Pūṣan, as a thank-you for the soma, will give maidens as compensation for the poet (Dichtersold) or as a guest-gift (Gastgeschenk). This is certainly possible, though the quid pro quo isn’t evident to me in the text; nonetheless it conforms to the dānastuti concept.

Ober refines this somewhat by identifying the maidens as brides (e.g., I.320), but at least in his vol. II he takes Soma as the subject of the refrain (“[D]er [Soma] gewähre uns Anteil an den Jungfrauen”; II.51 n. 240). Simply on the basis of rhetorical structure, this seems unlikely: in the vs. containing the first appearance of the refrain (10) there is not even indirect reference to Soma; the only possible subject is Pūṣan, and there is unlikely to be a switch in subject in the refrain in the following two vss. By contrast, Gr identifies the maidens here as daughters, presumbly implying that this expression is a twist on the “give us sons” wish so often expressed. Though I appreciate Gr’s attempt to save Pūṣan from being a pimp, I doubt that any Rigvedin would wish [at least out loud] for a passel of daughters The last two vss. of the tṛca are simple variants of each other. Both begin with ayám referring to soma; both contain a datival expression identifying Pūṣan as the recipient of the soma; their b pādas both begin ghṛtáṃ ná pavate, with a disyllable qualifiying ghṛtám following.


## 10
The publ. tr. presents the journeys as ours, reading naḥ with both avitā́and yā́mani-yāmani. Ge and Re instead assume the journeys are Pūṣan’s: e.g., “Unser Gönner ist Pūṣan, der auf jeder Ausfahrt Böcke als Rosse hat.” Since one hymn devoted to Pūṣan, I.42, is almost entirely devoted to Pūṣan’s protection of us on the journey and on the path and in the short Pūṣan cycle in VI (VI.53-58) the god is several times asked to lead or direct us (e.g., VI.53.2) and to clear paths for us (VI.53.4, 54.1-2), I think it likely that the focus here is on our journeys.


## 11
kapardín- is used of Pūṣan in VI.55.2, though it is also applied to a few other gods in the RV, notably Rudra (I.114.1, 5).


## 12
ā́ghṛṇi- is an epithet exclusive to Pūṣan. On the word, see comm. ad VI.53.3.

That Pūṣan is addressed in the 2nd ps. here, while the refrain remains in the 3rd ps., might be taken as evidence for Ober’s identification of Soma as the subject of the refrain - since soma is in the 3rd ps. in this vs. However, refrains tend to operate in syntactic independence from their vss., and, as I argued above, once the refrain is set, it is unlikely to change referents.

## 13-15
Little evidence of unity in the Viśvāmitra tṛca, though the falcon (śyená-) as image of Soma occurs in both 14 and 15. More generally, both 14 and 15 depict the rapid and dramatic movement of soma into the ritual receptacles.


## 13
Soma is obviously “child of the speech of the poets” (vācó jantúḥ kavīnā́m) because ritual speech sets in motion the preparation of soma.


## 14
What is the “armor” (várma) that soma “plunges through” (ví gāhate)? Ge (n.

14ab) suggests that the image is of a warrior clothing himself in armor, that is, the wooden cup, but he doesn’t construe várma with the verb, but takes it as loosely descriptive with a verb used absolutely (“er taucht in seinen Panzer unter”). Re also thinks the várma refers to the cup (“la paroi [wall] de la cuve” acdg. to his n.), but has the courage to construe it with the verb: “il plonge dans (le récipient, sa) cuirasse.” But ví is not “dans.” I think it refers instead to the filter, whose fleece both represents his armor and a substance that soma must get through, hence the slightly off-balance image. Note first of all that the same verb, though with different preverb, is used precisely with the filter a few vss. later in this hymn:


## 20
pavítram áti gāhate / … vā́ram avyáyam “he plunges across the filter, the sheep’s fleece.” As for the fleece as Soma’s armor, see the very full expression in IX.98.2 pári ṣyá svānó avyáyam ráthe ná vármāvyata “This one, being pressed, has engirded himself in the sheep's fleece, as a man on a chariot does in armor.” Ober (II.77) also considers the armor to be the fleece.

## 16-18
This tṛca, ascribed to Jamadagni, is unifed first and foremost by its meter, Dvipadā Gāyatrī, the only representative of this meter in the hymn - and in fact in all of the RV (see Arnold p. 244). There is no particular unity in lexicon (though note mandáyan 16a and madíntamaḥ 18a), but the tṛca does mention the two gods who receive the first soma oblation, Indra (16) and Vāyu (18).

## 19-21
This is the last tṛca of the hymn, attributed to Vasiṣṭha. The 1st two vss. are variants of each, couched in 2nd and 3rd ps. respectively: their first pādas differ only in their initial disyllable, with the rest identical: … tunnó abhíṣṭutaḥ; their second pādas both depict the journey to and across the filter, both beginning pavítram. The third vs. stands apart, though the identification of Soma as ‘demon-smasher’ in 20c is thematically linked to the plea in 21 that Soma “smash away” peril.

## 22-27
As noted in the publ. intro., these vss. are a self-contained purificatory spell, with all vss. ending with an act. impv. belonging to the pres. punā́ti: all 2nd sg. punīhi (naḥ) except 22c punātu (naḥ). The means of purification is, in the first instance, the filter (pavítra-), which of course literally means ‘instrument (-tra-) of purification’. The pavítrais mentioned in vss. 22-25, with other, non-physical means of purification added (e.g., the sacred formulation vss. 23-24), with these means appropriate to the gods who wield them (Savitar’s ‘impulsion’ [savá-] vs. 25). The first agent of purification is Soma Pavamāna himself (22), then Agni (23-24), then Savitar (25). The three - Soma, Agni, and Savitar - then appear together in 26, and in the final vs. (27) it opens out to all the divinities. The rhetoric is pretty flat, but the structure is a pleasing example of repetitive variation.


## 22
The nominal rel. cl. yáḥ potā́seems to be another ex. of the embedded, pseudoizafe construction discussed elsewhere, though in this case there is a resumptive pronoun beginning the continuation of the main cl. The structure is: ab beg. of main cl. marked by sáḥ, no verb; c rel. cl. yáḥ potā́, followed by rest of main cl., with verb, but introduced by a repetition of sáḥ: sá punātu naḥ, or, more schematically: ab sá NOMINATIVE NP / C. yáḥ NOM. NP, sá VERB with the two sá hunks together forming the main cl. A sort of hybrid construction.

In the publ. tr. I take pavítreṇa in b with pávamānaḥ in a, unlike Ge and Re, who construe it with punātu in c (e.g., “qu’il nous clarifie avec le filtre”). Their interpr. is supported by the INSTR. punīhi naḥ constr. in 23-24, 26 (and variant in 25), and since I no longer consider yáḥ potā́an embedded rel. clause and therefore have no need to consider ab entirely separate from the resumptive sá phrase in c, there is no syntactic obstacle to this interpr. I’d be inclined, however, to read pavítreṇa with both: “The one who purifies himself through our filter (/purifier) today, the limitless one who is the purifier, with the filter (/purifier) let him purify us.” The agent noun potár- (also pótar-) as if to an aniṭ root is surprising, esp. in juxtaposition to the instrument noun pavítra- and, a few vss. later, the god savitár- to the parallel root √sū. We would of course expect *pavitár- -- a form we almost get in RVic pavītár- and do get in AV pavitár-. The problem is identical to that posed by the priestly title hótar-, derived from √hvā / hū ‘invoke’, so we expect *hávitar- -- although in that instance interference from the likewise ritual verb √hu ‘pour, libate’, whose agent noun should properly be hótar-, helps explain the discrepancy. AiG II.2. 672 explains pótar- by suggesting that it is an inherited word and no longer closely tied to the verb from which it was originally derived. This seems backwards to me - wouldn’t inherited and isolated words be more likely to maintain their expected phonological shape? And, judging from this passage, potár- (so accented) has not lost its connection with √pū. However, a few pp. later (AiG II.2.676) the much more plausible scenario is proposed, that potár- / pótar- has followed hótar-, which owes its shape to the interference just noted, and stotár- ‘praiser’.

Sim. EWA s.v. pótar-.


## 23
The image of the filter stretched out in Agni’s flame is striking, but I don’t know exactly what the picture is meant to be - in contemplating the fire do we have a vision of a purifying apparatus? Or is the expression simply a fancy way of saying “the purifier that is your flame”? The beginning of the next vs., with pavítram arcivát, would support the latter suggestions.

Ge takes bráhma as obj. of punīhi: “… mit der [=pavítram] läutere unsere feierliche Rede.” But 1) this would break the pattern of punātu / punīhi naḥ “purify us” in vss. 22, 24, 26) by demoting naḥ from object; 2) bráhma as a means of purification is found in the next vs. in the cmpd brahmasavaíḥ. The fairly strict rhetorical patterning of these vss. therefore imposes (at least to my view) an instrument-of-means reading on bráhma, and I see no reason why it can’t be part of the definitional preposed rel. cl. yád te “what is your …,” parallel to pavítram. yád would be appropriate to both, since they are both neut., and they are then both picked up by instr. téna in c. That bráhma has been postponed till the beginning of c is not surprising, given the long NP containing pavítram. The new cl. begins mid-pāda with téna; since sá/tám forms regularly take init. position in pāda / clause, the mid-pāda position here suggests that it begins a new cl. and bráhma is not part of it. Like Ge, Re makes bráhma somehow oblique, but I don’t really understand what he’s trying to convey: “clarifies en notre Formule.”


## 24
This vs. has both physical and conceptual purifying instruments: the flame-sieve of 23 and the bráhman- also introduced in 23, which, in the cmpd brahma-savá-, also provides a transition to Savitar and his impulsions in vs. 25.


## 25
In addition to the introduction of Savitar, we also get a slight rearrangement in word order. The conjoined phrase pavítreṇa savéna ca would not fit in the slot right before the impv. in c, a position it occupies in 23c, 24b, 24c, 26c, so the final enclitic naḥ is converted to a full prn. mā́m and placed in initial position. This prn. also has to be read as distracted máām to achieve 8 syllables. I wonder why the poet didn’t just use asmā́n, which would fit the meter and better match naḥ. One of the only instances in which I think I could compose the vs. better than the poet - though “me” (both tonic mā́m and enclitic mā) serves as insistent obj. in vs. 27.


## 26
Initial tribhíḥ matches initial ubhā́bhyām in 25a. Since ubhā́bhyām was further specified by a bipartite NP pavítreṇa savéna ca (25b), I would like to see three instr. in this vs., each correlated with one of the three gods mentioned. And this is how I have rendered it, with várṣiṣṭhaiḥ connected to Savitar (and Soma), dhā́mabhiḥ with Soma, and dákṣaiḥ with Agni. By contrast, Ge and Re construe várṣiṣṭhaiḥ with dhā́mabhiḥ, which they consider to be of three types (that is, “with the three highest dhā́mans …”; Re “avec les trois positions les plus éminentes”) - although in their notes both come close to espousing a position close to mine. Possibly in their favor is the fact that soma is unaccented in b, and if várṣiṣṭhaiḥ is followed by a sub-clausal break, the voc. might (or might not) have been accented. In the publ. tr. I read várṣiṣṭhaiḥ both with Savitar’s savaíḥ, which has to be supplied, and with Soma’s dhā́mabhiḥ, and tr. the latter slightly differently: “through Soma’s domains.”


## 27
This last vs. of the purificatory spell is in a different meter (Anuṣṭubh) and makes reference to a larger variety of personnel - both often signs of finality.

## 28-29
It’s not clear why we return to purely Soma vss. at this point, but the aoristic summary in 29 (úpa … áganma bíbhrato námaḥ “up to him have we come bearing homage”) is another typical hymn-ender, summarizing the hymn that precedes.


## 29
The hapax āhutī-vṛ́dh- could be either passive (as in the publ. tr., also Ge) or act.

‘strengthening the oblation’ (Re). Scar (514) considers both possibilities and opts, weakly, for the former. Either could certainly work in context. The long final vowel -tī- is found only here, versus the standard ā́huti-. This can either be a metrical lengthening of the stem vowel, since *āhutĭ-vṛ́dham, with 3 (or actually 4) light syllables in a row, would produce an unacceptable cadence. Or it can be an instr. sg. to the -ti-stem (see inconclusive disc. in Scar.), which would clinch the interpr. of the cmpd as passive ‘strengthened by the oblation’. I weakly favor the latter.


## 30
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. is extremely puzzling and my tr. and interpr.

are at best speculative. Old’s comments are useful in clearing away the detritus of the more fanciful interpr., but neither he nor the other standard comm. have cracked the code: see Ge’s n. 30a with lit. The syntax and the sequence of events are quite straightforward: someone’s axe has disappeared (contra Gr, nanāśa must belong to ‘disappear’, not ‘reach’; the ‘disappear’ association is now generally agreed upon), and Soma is asked to bring it back through his purification (the common idiom ā́√pū). But whose axe? and why an axe in this context? and what does a rat have to do with it? To begin with the 1st question: most take alā́yyasya as a PN (“the axe of Alāyya”), which saves trouble but doesn’t help us in deciphering the verse. Gr derives it from √lī and tr. ‘sich nicht duckend’; Mayr (EWA s.v.) simply pronounces it “unklar.” I suggest that it belongs to √rā ‘come to / be at rest’, with an l-form like iláyati (see Narten, “Ved. iláyati …,” 1968; Jamison, -áya-, 48-49, EWA s.v. RĀ3 ). I would interpr. it as a gerundive like - pā́yya- (√pā both ‘drink’ and ‘protect’), as well as the more numerous extended stems of the type śravā́yya-, whose -ā- does not belong to the root. A parallel negated form (though again not to a ā-root) may be found in atasā́yya- ‘unshakeable’; see comm. ad I.63.6. I suggest that alā́yya- means ‘not able to be brought to rest, not to be stilled’.

This may not seem to advance us very far, but this word must be evaluated in conjunction with paraśúḥ, on which it depends. The paraśú- is frequently associated with Agni; cf., e.g., I.127.3, IV.6.8, and VI.3.4, in all of which Agni is compared to an axe. The other common word for axe, vā́śī-, is also characteristic of Agni: he carries it (VIII.19.23) and possesses it (vā́śīmant- X.20.6). Agni’s axe must be his flame, and of course fire is always in motion, never still. I therefore suggest that alā́yya- refers to Agni, the axe to his flame, and the pāda declares that his flame has disappeared or been lost. This may refer to the famous myth in which Agni runs away from his ritual duties and has to be coaxed back by offering him a better deal - or it may simply record a ritual disaster: the sacrificial fire has gone out. In any event Soma is taxed with bringing him back in pāda b.

If my interpr. of the first pāda is anywhere near correct, it pleases me to fancy that this is the first (very indirect) textual evidence to Paraśu Rāma.

The real puzzle in this vs. is pāda c, which presents ākhúm as an apparently parallel object to the paraśú- that Soma is supposed to bring back. Both Ge and Re find this relatively easy to deal with because they take it as a simile, marked with cid. But as I have noted in a number of places, there are no clear instances of cid as a simile marker, and here it is also not clear what similarity the poet might be trying to point to (that moles live hidden seems to be the best guess). My own suggestion is hardly better than this (if that). The ākhúis probably a ‘mole-like rat’ since there are no true moles in the subcontinent (see Katz, JAOS 122 [2002], “How the Mole and Mongoose Got Their Names,” esp. 301-2). The word is found only here in the RV, which complicates the interpr., but it has become fairly common by middle Vedic. In particular, the ākhú- is associated with Rudra; already in VS III.57, TS I.8.6.1 the ākhú- is Rudra’s victim / portion at the Tryambaka ritual. I therefore think it is possible (no more than that) that Soma is being asked also to bring Rudra back, in the form of his totem animal. Of the few hymns dedicated in full or in part to Rudra (there are only 3 dedicated to him alone), 2 (I.43, VI.47) are Soma-Rudra hymns, so there is some association between the two gods, whose rationale unfortunately escapes me.

Why this vs. ended up in this hymn I have no idea - except as a composite hymn it may have attracted various vss. that were floating around, and since it addresses Soma and uses a standard Somian verb (ā́√pū), the hymn may have seemed as good a place as any to stash this vs. It clearly has nothing to do with the two Soma vss. that preceded nor with the added summary vss. that follow. It also appears to be a younger vs., given the -l-form and the non-RVic word ā́khu-.

## 31-32
On the import of these two vss., see publ. intro. They are obviously secondary additions to the hymn, promising great benefits to anyone who studies the previous vss. of the hymn.

Commentary IX.68-114

