+++
title = "068"

+++
On the architecture and thematics of this hymn, see publ. intro.


## 01
The position of ā́in b is distinctly odd, breaking up the simile gā́vaḥ … ná dhenávaḥ and not even placed at a metrical boundary; indeed, the pāda has an unusual break (⏑ / - ⏑) after late caesura. It is all the more puzzling because ā́has no apparent function in the vs.: √syand does not otherwise appear with ā́, and the usual nominal cases to which ā́serves as adposition are absent. Perhaps it’s a clumsy attempt to convert the simile gā́vo ná dhenávaḥ, which fits well at the end of a dimeter line (see VI.45.28 and nearby IX.66.12), into a Jagatī cadence. It’s also worth noting that a more conventional order … / *ā́gā́va ná dhenávaḥ, with ā́at the metrical boundary and the simile unbroken, would produce both a worse break and an impossible cadence. So perhaps this was the best the poet could do - though why does he need an ā́in the first place? Old suggests (ad II.3.3) reading *barhiṣ-ṣádaḥ with restored sibilant cluster.

However, of the six occurrences of this cmpd a heavy second syllable would make the meter worse in II.3.3, V.44.1 (bad breaks), though admittedly the other 4, which open the vs., might be somewhat improved by a heavy 2nd syllable. However, the evidence of the break should weigh more heavily than that of the opening. See Scar’s disc. p. 570 and esp. n. 806.

The mirror-image sequence (par)isrú(tam) usrí(yā́) is rather nice.

usríyāḥ in d can be either nom. or acc. pl. (see Old, who doesn’t decide). Flg.

Ge and Re, I take it as the an acc. pl. fem., taking part in a double acc. construction with nirníjam √dhā “assume X as garment.” As Ge points out (n. 1d) this is a paradox: the (masc.) soma drops are likened to cows (b) and provided with udders (c), but clothe themselves in cows(‘ milk) in d. By contrast, Scar (675) takes it as nom. pl., which is certainly possible, but less poetically fruitful.


## 02
ā́váram “at will” may recall vā́ram (in the common Somian phrase ávyo vā́ram, etc. “sheep’s fleece”) referring to the filter.


## 03
As indicated in the publ. intro., this vs. significantly enlarges Soma’s domain: in vs. 2 he circles around the filter at the ritual; in vs. 3 he journeys across the two world halves, Heaven and Earth -- and in fact makes them swell up with his “imperishable milk” (the soma juice itself, presumably).

ákṣitā is most likely instr. sg. with páyasā, on the basis of IX.31.5 páyaḥ ...

duduhré ákṣitam, though Old suggests the possibility that it would be dual nom./acc. Although this would make reasonable contextual sense -- the two imperishable worlds -- it would need to be fem. and therefore *ákṣite. Old floats the possibility that the preceding dual adj. sākaṃvṛ́dhā could have influenced the ending. But on the whole, since páyas- ákṣita- is found elsewhere, it seems best to stick with that grammatically acceptable alternative.

The root affiliation of the intens. part. vivévidat is disputed. Though Gr assigns it to √vid ‘find’, Ge, Re (explicitly in his n.), Lü (228-29) take it to √vid ‘know’ (“Der … genau kennt”; “qui discernes”). I follow Schaef (183-84) (and Gr) in taking it to √vid ‘find’; the point, I think, is that at every soma-pressing Soma refinds and re-defines the domain he crosses, here encompassing the whole universe. It should be noted that the middle part. to this same intens. stem also governs rájasī in I.72.4 ā́ródasī brhat ̥ ī́vévidānāḥ, though I tr. it ‘ever possessing’ there. See comm. ad loc. 
## 04
As indicated in the publ. intro., this vs. carries on and develops the themes of vs. 3. In that vs. Soma moves across the two worlds, implying a horizontal axis, while here, in my view, we shift to the vertical -- with Soma’s head in heaven and his foot(print) on earth. This vs. is much discussed by Lü (228-32), who also emphasizes the cosmic, but because he always strictly separates the heavenly and the earthly soma, I think in a way he misses the point.

My image of the vertical Soma depends on taking padám in b as his ‘footprint’, but this is not the standard interpr. in this passage, where padám is generally taken simply as ‘place’ vel sim. (Ge Stätte, Re séjour), with Ge further specifying it as the cup. His identification of the padá- with the cup then leads Ge to a somewhat aberrant tr. of pinvate (‘overflow’: “… macht … seine Stätte überquellen”). But the middle voice of pinvate, contrasting with act. pinvat in the previous vs. (3b), encourages a self-beneficial (/-involved) interpr. of the verb, as does the instr. svadháyā ‘by his independent power’ -- which supports my interpr. of padám as referring to Soma’s own footprint.

And what does it mean that he “swells his own footprint”? I connect this with vājáyann apáḥ “stirring the waters” in pāda a. Here I would agree with Lü that these are the heavenly waters, and I further suggest that these waters, stirred up by the heavenly Soma and fallen from heaven as rain, are what swells his footprint and the earth on which it’s emplanted. This rain may also be indirectly alluded to in pāda c.

The grain that ornaments the soma plant is probably, on the one hand, a reference to the variety of soma drink into which grain is mixed (see IX.55.1 and comm.; also Ober II.55), but I think it also likely alludes to the fecundating power of rain and the vegatation it produces.

There are two finite verbs in d, both accented (adjacent … násate rákṣate …), with no overt mark of subordination. With most interpr. I take the násate clause as implicitly subordinated, with rákṣate beginning the main cl., but contrastive verbal accent of adjacent verbs could as easily be invoked (and would make little diff. in interpr.: “he joins … he guards …”). Lü makes much of the last clause, and in fact takes śíraḥ as subj. of rákṣate (which seems unlikely on rhetorical grounds), but I think the sense is fairly straightforward: even while soma is being pressed by the fingers at the earthly ritual, he keeps his head safe in heaven.


## 05
As disc. in the publ. intro., this is an omphalos vs., which provides the solution to the paradoxes set up in the earlier vss. of the hymn, albeit in veiled form -

- veiling that has kept its actual contents obscure (and may still do).

The first half is fairly clear, until almost the end: it refers to the birth of Soma, here called both a kaví and “the embryo of truth” (ṛtásya gárbhaḥ)(see further below). This embryo was deposited, presumably at its birth or even its conception, “beyond the twins” (yamā́paráḥ). Given the two previous vss., which contain duals that refer to the two world-halves, Heaven and Earth (so identified by Ge and Re, e.g.), the most sensible interpr. of “the twins” here is as a reference to the same pair -

- esp. since H+E were referred to by the fem. of the ‘twin’ word in 3a (yamyā̀)(in
addition to 3c mahī́apāré rájasī and 4a mātárā). But this interpr. is somewhat clouded by the fact that the next pāda (5c) contains both a dual phrase yū́nā … sántā and a dual verb ví jajñatuḥ. It is of course the default interpr. that all three of these duals (the two NPs and the verb) should refer to the same pair. What is somewhat baffling to me is that Ge (followed by Re) decides that this pair is the Aśvins (see esp. his n. 5bc). The Aśvins do not otherwise appear in this hymn, and indeed Re outlines firm grounds to reject this identification in his hesitant n.: “la participation des Aśvin au cycle du Soma étant faible et le contexte cd insuffisamment précis.” (Curiously, though Ge’s more overreaching mythological interventions often stem from Sāy., Sāy. in this case provides the far more sensible interpr. of the two as Soma and Sūrya.) I think the Aśvins can safely be dismissed as candidates for the dual reference (so also Lü 275). Let us then return to the more likely referent for yamā́in b: Heaven and Earth. Pāda b seems simply to be saying that Soma (or part of Soma) was deposited as an embryo beyond Heaven and Earth, giving him cosmic reach indeed.

The trickier pāda is c. The presence of a dual nom./acc. and a dual verb of course invites the former to be taken as subject of the latter, and the standard interpr.

understandably follow this path, with the sg. subj. of ab supplied as obj. of the verb -- e.g., Ge “Als Jünglinge haben sie ihn zuerst ausfindig gemacht.” This is obviously possible, and it need not involve identifying the two youths as the Aśvins; Heaven and Earth could be the pair in question. However, the dual NP raises several questions. For one thing, are Heaven and Earth really young? And even if so, what does this have to do with the action in question. Further: why sántā? The pres. part.

of √as in the nominative is usually concessive, but “although being young” doesn't make much sense here. I assume Ge’s “Als” is his only recognition of the participle; Re’s “jeunes encores” must be his (see also Lü’s “Als sie jung waren,” 275). But none of these renderings really accounts for why the participle is there, or for why H+E are identified as youths.

I have a less straightforward interpr. of this pāda -- inspired in great part by Ge’s interpr. of pāda d, which he takes (n. 5d) as depicting the two births of Soma, the heavenly and the earthly. I think these two forms of Soma are already present in pāda c, in the accusative phrase yū́nā … sántā, and the subj. of the dual verb ví jajñatuḥ is Heaven and Earth, not overtly present but referred to as the yamā́in b (as well as in vss. 3-4). Under this interpr. the participle sántā has a reason to be there: it is an existential in a predicated proposition after ví √jñā ‘recognize’ -- rendered in the publ. tr. by “that there were two youths.” And of course it makes sense that Heaven and Earth would be the first to notice this, because the two births were located in those two places. It also makes sense that the two forms of Soma would be identified as ‘youths’, since they were recently born.

Following Ge on pāda d, the first mentioned birth “deposited in secret” (gúhā hitám) is the heavenly one (picking up níhito yamā́paráḥ in b), while a bit paradoxically (because of the úd ‘up’), the one “held aloft” (údyatam) is the earthly one, referring to the ritual presentation of the soma.

Given this interpr. of the 2nd hemistich, it is quite possible that pādas a and b refer to these two different births: the poet born with skill and mind (a) would be the earthly Soma, equipped for his ritual role, while the one deposited beyond the twins (b) would obviously be the heavenly one.


## 06
The famous Somaraub, i.e., the stealing of Soma from heaven effected by a falcon and treated esp. (though obscurely) in IV.26-27, is rarely mentioned in Maṇḍala IX, as Ober (II.162) points out. Here it serves to bring the heavenly Soma to earth, to join with and super-charge the earthly, ritual Soma—the difference between the two Somas having been treated in vs. 5.

As noted in the publ. intro., the omphalos vs. 5 is encased in lexical rings.

Here vividuḥ responds to vivévidat in 3c (and both relate semantically to ví jijñatuḥ in the omphalos vs., 5c), aṃśúm (6d) and its semantic doublet ándhas (6b) to aṃśúḥ in 4c, pariyántam (6d) to pariyán (2c) (cf. also pariprayántam 8a), and suvṛ́dham (6c) to sākaṃvṛ́dham (3b).

In addition to lexical rings, there is chaining: 6c marjayanta is picked up by 7a mṛjanti (with no semantic or functional difference between the stems or the voices: marjayanta is an -anta replacement); 6a manīṣíṇaḥ ‘possessing inspired thoughts’ by 8b manīṣā́ḥ ‘inspired thoughts’.


## 07
The fingers of the pressers are found both here in pāda a and in 4d, though with different lexical realizations and different functions in the vs. There is also an exact, though mirror-image, responsion: yató nṛ́bhiḥ (4d): nṛ́bhir yatáḥ (7d). On the other hand, hitám in 7b almost surely belongs to √hi ‘impel’, while hitám in 5d belongs to √dhā ‘place, deposit’.


## 08
Ge (see his n. 8a) takes vayyàm as the PN of a hero aided by Indra to whom Soma is compared: “(einem zweiten) Vayya.” Although a hero of that name does exist, his presence seems limited to passages where he is mentioned with the better attested Turvīti (I.54.6, II.13.12, I.19.6) or, once, in a list of clients of the Aśvins (I.112.6). The du. form in II.3.6 vayyè (or vayyā̀; see comm. ad loc.) belongs to a separate stem vayī́- ‘weaver’. Despite Ge’s energetic attempt to justify it, the introduction of a minor hero from the Indra cycle makes no sense here (any more than his introduction of the Aśvins in vs. 5). I therefore adopt Re’s suggestion (disc.

in detail in his n.) that vayyà- here is a deriv. of vayā́- ‘branch, twig’, which could easily describe the soma, esp. as the pressed juice is circling the filter (see immed.

preceding paiprayántam) and leaving its twigs behind.

On the other hand, Ge’s explan. of suṣaṃsádam ‘keeping good company’ is persuasive; it refers either to the gods and priests or to the water and the milk (or, I would add, both).

The standard tr. (not, however, Scar [608]) construe diváḥ in c with vā́cam in d; cf., e.g., Re “… lance la voix (venue) du ciel,” which is then further interpr. as thunder (see Ge’s n. 8d, Ober II.209). But I prefer to take diváḥ with immed.

preceding ūrmíṇā for several reasons: 1) a pāda boundary and the verb intervene between diváḥ and vā́cam; 2) the ūrmí- from heaven is found in IX.49.1 apā́m ūrmíṃ divás pári; 3) the formulaic VP íyarti vā́cam (II.42.1, III.8.5, 34.2, IV.21.5, etc.) does not otherwise appear with a source of the speech specified. Surely the point here is that when the soma is being ritually prepared he/it inspires ritual speech.


## 09
Here again the standard tr. supply ‘speech’ as obj. of the chained iyarti, as is very probable, but make diváḥ dependent on this gapped obj. (e.g., Ge “(die Stimme) des Himmels”); again I construe diváḥ elsewhere, here with rájaḥ ‘realm’. For the phrase cf. divó rájaḥ I.62.5, 110.6. The further point here is that the ritual speech inspired by Soma is impelled all the way to heaven.

The VP várivo vidat “finds wide space” (d) responds in sense (and partially etymologically) to urú jráyaḥ “wide expanse” in 2c.


## 10
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. functions as an extra-hymnic summary vs., signalled by the initial evā́, which often begins summary vss. It is distinguished from the rest of the hymn by being in Triṣṭubh not Jagatī. Its 2nd hemistich also reaches beyond Soma: in c we call on Heaven and Earth, and d is addressed in the 2nd pl. to the gods in general, not to Soma. This pāda has the feel of a refrain, though it is found only once elsewhere, at X.45.12. However, its major elements are found in various permutations in other passages, e.g., I.85.12 rayíṃ no dhatta vṛṣaṇaḥ suvī́ram. For a similar finale see the next hymn, IX.69.10. On the reason for the focus on Heaven and Earth see comm. on that vs. and on IX.70 passim.
