+++
title = "069"

+++


## 01
The first pāda of this vs. has an overt subject, matíḥ ‘thought’, as does the last, sómaḥ. The intervening pādas have only similes to which the missing subject is compared. In my view both the thought and the soma are possible in b and c, and the double reading is deliberate. Ge (1b) suggests that Indra is another possibility in b, but introducing Indra seems gratuitous.

The referent of init. ásya in d is uncertain. Since sómaḥ is the overt subject of the pāda and is performing his action “under the commandments of this one” (ásya vratéṣu), it might seem that soma is excluded as a referent. Re suggests a priest, Ge the singer or the sacrificer, or perhaps soma, Old (fld by Schmidt, vrata 76) soma, with the ásya reflexive. Since most forms of vratá- in IX are specifically Soma’s (e.g., IX.53.3 ásya vratā́ni nā́dhṛ́ṣe, pávamānasya … “The commandments of this self-purifying one cannot be ventured against”), that seems the likeliest solution here, esp. as no ritual personnel have been mentioned as yet. However, I think it likely that we’re dealing once again with the double identity of soma/Soma: heavenly Soma the god has vratá-; earthly, ritual soma obeys them.

The verb of d, iṣyate, is assigned by Ge (fld. by Kulikov 459), to √iṣ ‘desire’; among other things this requires interpr. vratéṣu in a very forced manner, as ‘work’: “Zu den Werken dieses ist der Soma erwünscht.” Better is the ascription to √iṣ ‘send’ (e.g., Gr, Re, Lub). The verb is unaccented, but (pace Gr, Wh Rts, Lub) it probably does not belong to the same stem as the act. transitive -ya-pres. íṣyati (once 1st sg. mid. iṣye IV.33.1, also transitive), but rather to a separate pass. stem with underlying accent *iṣyáte. It is functionally parallel with úpa sarji ‘is/has been released’ in b.


## 02
The accent of the two adjacent verbs pṛcyáte sicyáte suggests that the first clause is implicitly subordinate. The two subjects of vs. 1, the thought (matí-) and soma, are both found here (soma as ‘honey’ [mádhu]), but each as subj. of one of the verbs, rather than, as in vs. 1, as simultaneous subjects of verbs without overt subjects. Most tr. take úpa … pṛcyáte as ‘is fertilized, impregnated’ vel sim; see the full treatment in Kulikov 152 and n. 372. Because the actions of the two verbs in the pāda are presented as complementary, I prefer the more physically explicit ‘is engorged’: as the thought is filling up and swelling with eloquence, as if with liquid, the liquid soma is being disgorged, poured out.

With the Pp as well as most tr. (see inter alia Ge’s n. 2b), I take mandrā́janī as a karmadhāraya, mandra-ájanī-, rather than the equally possible bahuvrīhi mandráajanī. But its sense, as a metaphorical reference to the tongue, is best illuminated by the bahuvrīhi (obviously based on a karmadh) mandrá-jihva- ‘having a gladdening tongue’.

The stem saṃtaní- is found 3x in the RV (here, V.73.7, IX.97.14), always with regard to loud noise. It seems generally to be assumed that it’s derived from √tan ‘stretch’ (though Gr [s.v.] ascribes it to his 2 tan ‘thunder’ not 1 tan ‘stretch’, that seems to be a mistake: see his comment under 1tan + sám) - hence tr. like Re’s “concert.” It is true that the ppl. saṃtata- to √tan ‘stretch’ is a later (ŚS) tech. term describing “stretched and continuous recitation” (see Re’s Vocabulaire, Sen’s Dictionary of the Vedic Rituals, both s.v.), hence applied to sound, and ‘a stretching together’ for saṃtaní- could perhaps refer to strings sounded in unison. But a more likely root is ready to hand: √tan ‘thunder’, the s-less form of √stan ‘id.’, which can be used metaphorically of the sound of ritual speech, etc. (e.g., VI.38.2). I therefore render saṃtaní- as ‘thunder, thundering’ in all three occurrences. The preverb sam probably contributes its frequent intensifying sense ‘entirely’.

The sense of the simile praghnatā́m iva is not entirely clear. prá √han occurs only three times in the RV: here; in the enigmatic hymn, X.27.1, where, however, it has the fairly clear violent meaning ‘smite, smite off’, as it does in a number of passages in the AV; and in the negated root noun cmpd áprahan- (VI.44.4) also meaning ‘not smiting’. But here it must refer to the noise (“thundering,” saṃtaníḥ) produced by the action of prá √han, not the associated violence (pace Scar 689, who places it in the ‘zuschlagend, losschlagend, kämpfend’ realm). Perhaps prá √han here refers to the beating of drums, or perhaps it is an early reference to the practice of hunting with “beaters” driving the game in the direction of the shooters. On the whole, the former is more likely; we know essentially nothing about hunting practices in ancient India, and furthermore it’s not clear to me that the beaters themselves would make much noise, though the flushed game might, in combination with any dogs the beaters had with them.


## 03
Ge plausibly suggests that the wives Soma is seeking (vadhūyúḥ) are the waters and the milk.

The ritual action referred to in b is quite clear, but the referent of the metaphorical subject is harder to decode. The act in question is the sluffing off of the twigs and other detritus as the juice runs across the filter, as is clear from the more explicit passage in the immediately preceding hymn, IX.68.2 upārúhaḥ śratháyan svādate háriḥ “loosening his shoots, the tawny one becomes sweet,” whose verb śratháya- is of course derivationally related to our verb śrathnīté. The problem is that the subject is feminine, naptī́r áditeḥ “the granddaughter (/niece/descendant) of Aditi.” As Ge (flg. Sāy.) notes, the actual referent is most likely the soma plant. But the words for soma plant (aṃśú-) and soma stalk (ándhas-) are m. and n.

respectively. The best gender match would be óṣadhi- ‘plant’, but the soma plant is never so called, as far as I know, and the word is very rare in IX, where the few occurrences do not refer to the soma plant. I can only suggest that the sexualized image of the plant loosening its garments, combined with the surrounding feminine imagery (esp. 3a, 4ab) encouraged the use of an explicitly female subject - and perhaps an underlying fem. óṣadhi- was conjured up. But I am not particularly satisfied with this. Old suggests instead that the referent is the cow, “die … ihren Verschluss locker macht d. h. Milch gibt.” Though this would solve the gender problem, it would distance the passage from the parallel in IX.68.2.

The subject is all the more puzzling because the female in question is (possibly - see below) identified as the descendant of Aditi. Now Aditi is of course famous for her motherhood, but her children are also famously sons. Brereton (Ādityas, 234-35) thinks that Aditi is here because of the reference to ‘truth’ (ṛtá-), with which she is associated elsewhere, but does not address the question of the gender of Aditi’s offspring here. Again I have no good explanation, but see below for another way of construing áditeḥ.

The referent of the dat. part. in the phrase ṛtáṃ yaté is also disputed. Ge, I think plausibly, takes it as the soma juice, which, having shed the detritus of the plant in the filter, can flow to its goal. Lü (484 n. 1), fld. by Re, thinks rather of the mortal offerer, which is certainly possible. The issue is made more complex by the parallel in IX.74.3, whose b pāda ends, like here, áditer ṛtáṃ yaté. One troubling feature is that in both cases the standard interpr. (incl. the publ. tr.) construes áditeḥ with what precedes, although it is found in the repeated phrase and therefore might be expected to belong with what follows. Moreover, the referent of ṛtáṃ yaté in IX.74.3 is no more - indeed less - clear than it is here. It could be soma or it could be the mortal worshiper. In IX.74.3 I suggest, somewhat unsatisfactorily, that it could be read both ways; here I think soma as referent makes better sense. In IX.74.3 I also suggest that we should take the repeated phrase seriously and construe áditeḥ to the right, not the left, yielding “for him who goes to the truth of Aditi.” If we do that here as well, we are spared the problem of why the plant is the descendant of Aditi, though without a genitive of relationship, “granddaughter” is oddly underdefined. Nonetheless I suggest a possible alternative tr.: “The granddaughter loosens (her garment [=shoots of the soma plant]) for him who goes to the truth of Aditi.” Of course it would be possible to read áditeḥ twice, both with what precedes and with what follows.

## 04-05
There is considerable chaining between these two vss.: pári … avyata (4d), pári vyata (5b); niktám (4d), nirṇijānáḥ (5b), nirṇíje (5c), all referring to Soma’s clothing himself in milk. On the connections with the next hymn, see comm. ad IX.70.1.


## 05
The 2nd half of this vs. once again portrays Soma as reaching through the midspace to heaven. On the technicalities see Ge’s long n. 5cd.


## 06
The form prasúpaḥ to the hapax root noun cmpd prasúp- is potentially multivalent; it has been analyzed as a nom. pl., modifying the soma juices, an acc. pl.

obj. of drāvayitnávaḥ ‘causing to run’, or as an abl. infinitive (see Ge, Re, Old; Gr takes it as nom. pl.). Although most interpr. think it has to be one or the other, I see no reason why this ambig. form can’t be read twice in the passage: I take it as both acc. pl. and abl. sg. Re’s view is similar to mine, in that he wants it to serve as acc. pl. with the causative adj. as well as nom. pl., but he suggests this is the result of “haplologie à distance,” which seems unnec. to me. There are numerous examples of poets exploiting morphological ambiguity to allow a word to have two (or more) different functions in a clause.

With Ge I take the “stretched string” as a reference to the filter.

The final pāda is uncertain. Both Ge and Re take dhā́ma as the subj. of pavate, though with different interpr. of the resonant word dhā́man-: “Ohne Indra läutert sich kein Ding”; “Sans Indra, nulle structure (sômique) ne se clarifie (valablement).” However, I find it unlikely that a dhā́man-, whatever it refers to, can purify itself, and I am reluctant to take pavate, which in its overwhelming number of uses is reflexive, as a passive. Instead I take Soma as subject, as he essentially always is (incl. in vs. 3), with dhā́ma as the object of a transitive self-beneficial, a slight expansion of the usual reflexive usage. The sense (whatever the interpr. of pavate) is of course that the ritual soma-pressing is pointless without Indra, the archetypal soma-drinker, to consume the product. I think it possible that dhā́man- ‘domain’ here refers to the filter, as in IX.63.14.


## 07
The “bulls” of b (vṛ́ṣa-cyuta-) are generally and persuasively taken as the pressing stones (Ge, Re), but it is also possible that it’s a reference to Indra, given 6d.

The presence of Indra gives impetus to the ritual preparation, just as his absence robs it of motivation.


## 08
The naḥ in pāda a was omitted in tr.; it should read “bring us (wealth) …” Soma is addressed in the sg. (voc. soma), but the rest of the clause is couched in the pl. (“you [pl.] are …”: yūyám … sthana), with the common vacillation between the sg. substance / god and the pl. juices / pressings.


## 10
The last pāda of this vs., like the 2nd half of the final vs. of the previous hymn (IX.68.10cd), enlarges the divine range beyond Soma (and Indra). It is addressed to Heaven and Earth, along with the (other) gods - the same set of divine personnel found in X.68.10cd. The focus on Heaven and Earth in both IX.68.10, and this vs. may have to do with the theme of heavenly versus earthly soma explored in these two hymns, esp. IX.68. The theme is continued in IX.70, which focuses even more on Heaven and Earth in the hymn itself, not merely the summary vs. ## 070
On some of the difficulties in the hymn see publ. intro. Much of the problem lies in the fact that the referents of many of the crucial elements are not identified and are not easily supplied from context; it is worth noting, for example, that the word sóma- does not appear till vs. 7c. Framing the whole as an extended treatment of the relationship between the earthly and the heavenly soma aids in interpr. The insistence on the word ubhé ‘both’ (vss. 2-5) noted by Ge (n. 2-5) may underline this double vision.


## 01
The opening pāda of this hymn shows the power of the ritual hic et nunc: the 2nd word, asmai, is unaccented, which indicates that the referent is something already in the discourse. This “something” is of course soma/Soma, both present on the ritual ground and the acknowledged dedicand of the hymn. There is no need for a prior mention. See also IX.11.1a and with asya IX.29.1a and IX.30.1a.

As noted in the publ. intro. (and see Ge’s n. 1), this vs. surely concerns the heavenly soma, whose real (satyā́m) milk mixture is produced for him in distant heaven. I do not think this necessarily requires the cows of pāda a to be the celestial rivers, as Lü predictably does (250); it may involve the interplay between earthly cows and heavenly milk.

The making of Soma’s garments was something of a preoccupation of the previous hymn, IX.69, esp. vss. 4-5, using some of the same phraseology, though the hymns are attributed to different poets from different lineages. Note esp. IX.69.5c divás pṛṣṭhám … nirṇíje kṛta “he has made the back of heaven for his raiment” and our 1c catvā́ri anyā́bhúvanāni nirṇíje, cā́rūṇi cakre “he made the four other dear worlds for his raiment” (in my tr.), both with ACC nirṇíje √kṛ. Both Ge and Lü (438, 566) take bhúvanāni here as “beings” (Wesen), while Re attenuates it to “essences,” but given the cosmic imagery of IX.69.5, I think that it more likely refers to Soma’s clothing himself in “worlds.” Furthermore, I am not at all sure that the substances that Ge (n. 1c, partially flg. Sāy.) considers the referent of bhúvanāni, namely (various) water(s) and milk, would be called bhúvana- in Vedic. Although German Wesen can cover ‘nature, essence’ in addition to ‘being’, I doubt that bhúvana- has the same semantic range. It does give me pause, however, that in the next vs. (2c) Soma wraps himself in the waters.

There is another problem in this little phrase - one of my own making. By my rules (“Vedic anyá- 'another, the other': Syntactic disambiguation,” in Sound Law and Analogy [Fs. Beekes], ed. A. Lubotsky, 1997: 111-18), 2nd position anyá-, the position anyā́takes here, should be definite. I have so translated it (“the four other … worlds”), though I cannot identify which four other worlds these would be. Neither five (1+4) or four is a standard number for cosmic divisions in the RV. The standard tr. take it as indefinite (e.g., Ge “vier andere schöne Wesen”), and I admit that an indefinite reading is less problematic (though scarcely unproblematic). Perhaps the presence of a numeral in first position may displace anyá- to the right, or perhaps it even performs a quasi-definitizing function. The quantifier víśva- always occurs with non-initial anyá-, though usually pāda-final (1997: 112, 114). In any case I would now favor an alternative tr. “He made four other dear worlds to be his raiment,” though in the absence of an understanding of what the “four” are—no good solutions have so far been suggested—a definite interpr. remains a possibility.

Though Ge renders ṛtaíḥ as “nach den Regeln,” Lü (438, 566) is surely right that ṛtá- here refers to hymns (Kultlieder), which are in some sense true speech. Re points out the presence of both satyá- (b) and ṛtá- (d) in the vs. ### 02
The phrase amṛ́tasya cā́ruṇaḥ recurs in the same position in vs. 4 and must have the same referent. (See also IX.108.4, 110.4.) What that referent is is disputed.

Unlikely is Lü’s interpr. (237), fld. by Re, that it refers to a celestial seat: Soma separates Heaven and Earth in order to make a place for himself, from which he can create the heavenly streams. Ge tr. “Göttertrank,” and (n. 2a) equates this with the heavenly Soma. In this I think he is correct, with amṛ́ta- here the nominalized neut.

‘(drink) of immortality’, hence the neut. form of the adj. cā́ruṇaḥ. (On supposed masc. cā́ruṇaḥ in VIII.5.14, see comm. ad loc.). The subject who seeks the share of the heavenly Soma is of course earthly Soma. He has the power to separate H+E because of his kā́vya- ‘poetic skill’; recall that earthly Soma was born as a kaví- in IX.68.5a, and it may be that what earthly Soma has going for him that heavenly Soma does not is his way with words and kinship with the human poet.

The lexeme used to express the separation, lit. the “loosening,” of Heaven and Earth is ví √śrath. The same root is used in IX.68 and IX.69 to characterize Soma’s sluffing off of his stems and twigs on his journey across the filter (IX.68.2b śratháyan, IX.69.3b śrathnīte). Although the action here is very different from that in those two passages, it is worth noting that the same root, a not particularly common one, is used.

The instr. maṃhánā is a bit difficult to fit into context. The stem ordinarily means ‘liberality, generosity’. Ge (Lü) tr. “bereitwillig,” following Gr’s gloss, Re “avec majesté.” If we stick with the base meaning ‘liberality’, I think it’s possible to extend it to ‘lavishly’ - as in “sprinkle liberally with salt,” etc. Here it would refer to the generous amount of Soma’s covering.

In d yádī must surely be decoupled into yád ī, as seems to be tacitly recognized by all the standard tr. “If” would not work in context.

I do not really understand the last pāda, in part because it is unclear who the subj. of vidúḥ is. Ge (n. 2d) tentatively suggests either the waters or the gods, Sāy. (fld. by Lü) the priests; Re’s tr. implies the waters, but he alternatively suggests priests in his n. Since no priests and no gods have been mentioned so far, and the waters are found in the main cl. to which this subordinate cl. is attached, the waters seem the most likely candidate. But what is the point? Does Soma get to appropriate the waters as his garment when they come near because they know he’s there (because of his fame) and recognize his seat? And which Soma are we talking about

- earthly (which I weakly favor, because the waters are likely to be the ritual waters)
or heavenly? The problem is compounded by the verb: the pf. véda is generally stative (‘know’), but my tr. (and those of others) implicitly assumes a dynamic change of state, ‘recognize’ vel sim.; see Ge’s “in Erfahrung bringen,” Re’s “elles eurent (re)connu (son) siège.” A more stative interpr. would be possible if yád is rendered ‘since’, not ‘when’. I confess to puzzlement.


## 03
The dichotomy between the earthly and the heavenly continues here, with Heaven and Earth being replaced by their proxies, gods and men - implied in b by “both races” (janúṣī ubhé) and explicit in c in nṛmṇā́ca devyā̀ca. The ketú- in pāda a also has double reference in my view: on the one hand, ketú- can be used of the beacon(s), that is, the ray(s), of the sun (e.g., I.50.3, VII.63.2); on the other hand, in two of the very few other occurrences of this stem in IX (IX.86.5-6) Soma’s ketávaḥ circle around the filter, an apparent reference to the glinting soma drops. So we have a joint reference to the heavenly Soma as sun’s rays and the earthly soma sparkling in its ritual progress; the two together can pervade the two races of gods and men (b) and purify what is associated with them (c).

In d manánāḥ is problematic. It is a hapax, and assuming it is an -ana-stem, it shows aberrant accent, since such stems either have root or final accent (on the accentuation of such stems in general see AiG II.2.180-82 and on the rarity of this accent pattern 182; cf. 187 for neut. nouns with this accent). It’s generally taken as a primary deriv. of √man in the meaning ‘thoughtful’. My ‘zealous’ rests on an invented connection with manā́- ‘zeal’, which in fact rests on nothing beyond my feeling that ‘thoughtful’ doesn’t particularly fit the context, and in any case there are many ways to express ‘thoughtful’ that would not involve creating a nonce stem with a peculiar accent. But I hold no brief for my own stab in the dark and simply think that we are all missing something. On the other hand, it’s likely that there is a primary or secondary connection to √man ‘think’, so most tr. fall within acceptable limits.


## 04
In the first pāda we are firmly in the realm of earthly ritual soma: the grooming by ten is a clear reference (clear to those familiar with soma rhetoric) to the fingers of the presser at their task.

The question is what is happening in pāda b, and determining this depends in part on the analysis of pramé. This is almost universally taken as a datival infinitive or quasi-infinitive to prá √mā ‘measure forth’. Cf., e.g., Ge “… (fliesst er), um unter den mittleren Müttern als Richtschnur zu dienen” and see, in addition to Old and Re, Lü (242-43), Scar (377-78), Keydana (Inf. 201). There are several problems with the dominant analysis: 1) the lexeme prá √mā ‘measure forth’ is not otherwise found in the RV, except in the late X.130.3, 7, where it has been generated to pratimā́-; 2) it is not at all clear what the pāda is supposed to mean or refer to. The standard view is that “the middle mothers” are the rains (e.g., Ge, Re; middle because they are in the midspace), but this doesn’t actually help with the sense - nor does Lü’s interpr. as (guess what!) die Himmelsflüsse. In fact plural “mothers” in IX, and mostly elsewhere, generally refers either to cows or to waters. None of those who favor ‘rains’ provides evidence for mothers=rains in the RV, and rain would be out of place in this context. Nor do I see what the “measuring” would consist of.

I suggest instead that pramé belongs to √mā ‘bellow’ (a possibility considered, but not favored, by Scar). Although prá does not appear with this root in the RV, it is attested with other verbs of roaring; cf. nearby IX.77.1 eṣá prá kóśe … acikradat “This one has cried out in the bucket.” Soma’s propensity for noisemaking is often highlighted, indeed in this very hymn; see in the next few vss. 6b nā́nadat ‘roaring again and again’, 7a ruváti ‘bellows’ (and by implication 5c śúṣmeṇa ‘with his blustering’). Under this analysis of pramé the pāda can make sense in the ritual context established by pāda a: the prá opening b invites a verb of motion to be supplied (“[goes] forth”), depicting the journey of Soma after his pressing, which was treated in pāda a. He bellows on this journey, as he passes first among the waters and then the cows [=milk]. The “midmost mothers” are, in my view, the waters with which he mixes before reaching the milk - “midmost” because of their position between filter and milk.

As for sácā, as disc. ad IV.31.5 sácā is generally a pleonastic marker of a loc. absol. Here though I do not interpr. madhyamā́su mātṛ́ṣu as an absol. construction, I would still consider sácā essentially functionless, just pleonastically accompanying the loc. phrase. If we want to assign lexical value to it, however, it could express Soma’s bellowing in company with the mothers: waters also frequently make noise.

In c the earthly soma is still at issue - here protecting the commandments (vratā́ni pānáḥ) of the heavenly Soma, once again designated amṛ́tasya cā́ruṇah as in 2a; see comm. ad loc. A similar relationship between the earthly soma and the commandments of the heavenly Soma is found in the previous hymn, IX.69.1d.


## 05
The repetition of a passively used part. to √mṛj, intens. marmṛjāná-, matching mṛjyámāna- in the opening pāda of the previous vs. 4a, situates us in the same ritual context as that vs. Again Soma sets out on his journey beyond the filter, through the territory that here is configured as “between the two worlds” (ubhé antā́ ródasī).

Forms of the root √hṛṣ sometimes take dat. infinitives; cf. VIII.19.19 ágne hárṣasva dā́tave “O Agni, be roused to give” (sim. IV.21.9). Contrary to the standard tr., I therefore construe indriyā́ya dhā́yase with harṣate. The adj. indriyá- lit.

‘Indriyan, relating / appropriate to Indra’ has personal reference here (as also in the same phrase in IX.86.3): “for Indra’s suckling.” On śurúdh- see, inter alia, KEWA, EWA both s.v., Thieme 1941 (=KlSch 338-49), Scar 63, 464. The etymology is disputed, in part because the segmentation of this disyllable is unclear: śur-údh or śu-rúdh-. The former is supposed to be parallel to a putative *iṣ-údh- found in the denom. iṣudhyá-, but I have suggested a different etym. for this word: see comm. ad I.128.6 and my forthcoming “ “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.” The latter segmentation is favored by Thieme, who derives it from *(p)śu-rúdh- ‘das Vieh mehrend’. Scar (464) objects that we would then expect *śū-rúdh- (like anū-rúdh-, vī-rúdh-), but that is precisely what needs to be read here (see already Gr); otherwise the cadence is the very bad - ⏑ ⏑ ⏑ x. No other forms of the stem occur in the cadence; of the other 9 attestations, 5 are found after an early caesura, where a heavy first syllable would change the standard break ⏑ ⏑ - to a still very common - ⏑ -; the other 4 occur after a late caesura ending with a heavy syllable, where - / - ⏑ would definitely be less acceptable than the normal - / ⏑ ⏑ produced by reading a light first syllable. On the whole I am inclined to accept Thieme’s etymology, at least in preference to one based on a 2nd member -udh, and to assume an original *śūrúdh-, at home here and possibly in the 5 forms after early caesura, whose first syllable was ultimately shortened by analogy to compds in su-.


## 06
Both Ge and Re assume that the ná in a is wrongly placed and that the simile really targets usríyaḥ (though they both somehow work the two mothers into it). I think rather that mātárā ná is the complete simile and the “two mothers” are being compared to the gapped goal “Heaven and Earth.” Cf. IX.97.13 nadáyann eti prthiv ̥ ī́m utá dyā́m “roaring he goes to H+E” to our nā́nadad eti. The “two mothers” as stand-ins for H+E are found in our little group of hymns in IX.68.4 sá mātárā vicáran.

The 2nd hemistich is difficult to sort out because it is unclear how to distribute the series of acc. sgs. in c: ṛtám prathamám yát súvarṇaram. I take all three together, with ṛtám modified by prathamám and further specified by yát svàrṇaram, a nominal izafe-type construction, all as obj. of jānán. Ge (and Re) take everything up to yát as obj. of jānán, but svàrṇaram as obj. of avṛṇīta. Lü (396) has ṛtám as obj.

of jānán, yát svàrṇaram as obj. of avṛṇīta, and prathamám as adv. All three take svàrṇara- as a place name: for Ge a place famous for its soma, for Lüders the Himmelsquell of soma. But, as disc. ad IV.21.3, svàrṇara- is a name only in VIII; otherwise it seems to refer to a “realm of solar glory,” different from Heaven and Earth, as shown by IV.21.3 and X.65.4, where Heaven and Earth and various other places appear parallel to svàrṇara-.

However we distribute the accusatives, each of us has to decide what this hemistich is trying to say, and I would not say that any of us has succeeded in this.

With regard to my own interpr., I tentatively suggest that once again its subject is the earthly, ritual soma; in his cosmic journey to and through Heaven and Earth he recognizes the sun as “the first truth” and chooses it as his alter ego, his cosmic doublet, which resounds to his own glorification. In this paraphrase I realize that it is unclear why this is the “first” truth, and I therefore consider it possible that prathamám is adverbial, as Lü takes it - and suggest an alternate tr. “first recognizing the truth that is the realm of solar splendor …” But all this is very sketchy.


## 07
Once again the nirṇíj- (see above, ad vs. 1), here firmly anchored in the ritual here-and-now as the sheepskin filter. The bovine skin (gavyáyī tvák) either refers to the milk mixture or the cowhide on which the pressing apparatus is set up.


## 08
Although the med. part. punāná- is generally passive or at least used absolutely, as opposed to reflexive pávamāna- ‘self-purifying’, here it must be reflexive-transitive, with tanvàm. The construction is in fact proleptic: “purifying his body/himself (so that he/it is) spotless.” On the isolated -iṣ-aor. adhāviṣṭa and its deriv. from √dhāv ‘run’ not √dhāv ‘rinse’, see detailed disc. by Narten (Sig.Aor. s.v. dhāv), also Ge n. 8b, Re n.

In the publ. tr. I interpr. “threefold” (tridhā́tu) as a reference to the soma at the three soma pressings, even though the three pressings are actually not terribly prominent in this maṇḍala. The same phrase is found in IX.1.8 and similar ones at VI.44.23, IX.86.46. However, this is not the standard, or even a standard, view. Sāy. thinks it refers to three additives with which the soma is mixed: water, sour milk/curds (dadhi, not an additive in the RV soma ritual), and milk (payas), though at


## 08
he suggests rather three (later) soma vessels: droṇakalaśa, ādhavanīya, and pūtabhṛt, none of which is found in the RV (though dróṇa and kaláśa- individually are both soma vessels). Ge in both passages (IX.1 n. 8c, IX.70 n. 8d) suggests soma juice, milk, and water. Re tr. “est fabriqué de trois manières,” but does not pronounce on what they are. Since mádhu ‘honey’ is normally a stand-in for sóma- in this maṇḍala, “the honey is made threefold” (tridhā́tu mádhu kriyate) seems to refer to a three-part division of the soma itself. However, the similar phrase in IX.86.46, mádaḥ pári tridhā́tuḥ … arṣati “the exhilarating drinks rushes around threefold,” gives me pause, in that it seems to refer to a single incident of soma’s rushing and is difficult therefore to parcel out to the three pressings. I therefore think that Ge’s suggestion that it refers to a liquid made up of three parts—soma juice, water, and milk—is probably correct, certainly at IX.86.46 but probably here and in IX.1.8 as well. “Three-backed” (tripṛṣṭhá-) in nearby IX.71.7 may belong here too and also perhaps the three heads (trī́n … mūrdhnáḥ) of IX.73.1.


## 09
The last pāda is a nice ex. of what appears to be a semi-gnomic expression.


## 10
Pāda b is oddly phrased: it contains the idiom ā́pavasva, which ordinarily means “attract X-ACC here through your purification” (see comm. ad IX.7.8 and passim), but though it has an acc. (jaṭháram), it would seem quite odd to say “attract Indra’s belly here through your purification.” It seems rather to be a variant of 9b índrasya hā́rdi … ā́viśa “enter the heart of Indra.” And the lexeme ā́pavate does seem to have a variant construction with acc. of goal. Cf. ā́pavasva … pavítram IX.25.6, 50.4 “purify yourself in(to?) the filter.”
