+++
title = "071"

+++
On the structure of this hymn see publ. intro. As indicated there, it is structured as a series of more or less concentric responsions. These include āsádam 1a / 6b; ní riṇite 2a / ā́… riṇanti 6c; várṇam … asya tám 2b / várṇo asya sá 8a; girā́ 3c / 6c; násate 3c / 8d - as well as others less narrowly lexical. However, these responsions don’t seem to define an omphalos.

The hymn continues the preoccupation with the clothing and coverings that Soma assumes in the course of the ritual preparation, particularly in the first two and last two vss.


## 01
The first pāda poses difficulties if dákṣiṇā is taken as a nom., with Sāy, Old, and apparently Re, requiring the hemistich to be chopped up into very small clauses and across the pāda boundary (acdg. to Old, ā́dákṣiṇā sṛjyate / śuṣmy ā̀sádam, véti / druháḥ rakṣásaḥ pāti jā́gṛviḥ) and soma not to be the subj. of passive ā́… sṛjyate, against standard phraseology. The syntactic difficulty disappears if, with Ge, we take dákṣiṇā as an instr., leaving soma as the subject throughout. This leaves us with the question of what is meant; since dákṣiṇā is not otherwise found in IX (though dákṣiṇāvant- occurs once, IX.98.10), we are on our own. I suggest that, since dákṣiṇās are distributed at the Morning Pressing, this is a reference to that ritual moment.

Once again there is a question of Soma’s nirṇíj- as in recent hymns (see comm. ad IX.69.4-5, 70.1). The phrasing here—nábhas páya, upastíre camvòḥ …— is esp. reminiscent of IX.69.5d upastáraṇaṃ camvòr nabhasmáyam “… an underlayer made of cloud in the two cups” and makes it quite likely that “cloud (and) milk” (that is, cloud = milk) are the underlayer here as well. In his tr. Ge makes them both to be both the headdress (opaśám) and the underlayer and in n. 1cd suggests that the milk is the headdress and the cloud the underlayer. But, as Old points out, the close sandhi of nábhas páyaḥ speaks against separating them syntactically, and opaśá- can simply be construed with kṛṇute without a second object; cf. VIII.14.5 cakrāṇá opaśáṃ diví “making himself a headdress in heaven” (though Old thinks this passage is not typical). My tr. is closest to Re’s; Old’s notion that the poet heaped up all the items he had to mention higgledy piggledy (not his term), without sorting them, seems unlikely.


## 02
In b the question is whether he removes his asuryàṃ várṇam (Ge, WEHale 95) or reveals it by letting it spill down (Old, Re, Scar 686, as well as publ. tr.). The lexeme ní √rī here (ní riṇīte) is used twice in Dawn hymns (I.124.7, V.80.6) when she “lets her breast spill over” (ní riṇīte ápsaḥ), in other words, when she reveals her body. The same usage is surely found here, with even more justification for the liquid imagery, since soma is indeed a liquid. Presumably with the “covering” (vavrím), i.e., the twigs and the like, removed (pāda c), the golden color of the juice shows brightly - a color that could easily be associated with lordship. As Old points out, Soma is several times identified as an ásura-, incl. in nearby IX.73.1, 74.7. I see that in the publ. intro. I say that “Soma shed his original form and color” in this vs.; I now no longer believe that he sheds his color.

In c pitúḥ has two competing analyses, each of which is grammatically possible. Ge (flg. Sāy, fld. by Hale 95, Scar 341, 686) takes it as the nom. sg. to pitú- ‘food’ (Ge “… kommt er als Speise”). Although grammatically impeccable, this interpr. is thematically dubious: pitú- is not otherwise found in IX and soma is never identified as pitú- elsewhere. Preferable is the analysis as gen. sg. of pitár- ‘father’ (Re, Lü 211, publ. tr.). As Lü points out, niṣkṛtá- ‘rendezvous’ generally takes a gen. of the being(s) being met, so ‘of [=with] the father’ would met the expectations for such a genitive. With Lü (though without necessarily accepting all of the Lü baggage that goes with it), I think it likely that the father here is Heaven (the standard Father Heaven), once again an indication of the cosmic ambitions of the ritual Soma.

The ‘floating’ (upaprút-) substance he makes into his garment is universally, and convincingly, taken to be the milk mixture.


## 03
This vs. is characterized by an accumulation of finite verbs, esp. in the 2nd hemistich, which contains five: … modate násate sā́dhate … nenikté … yájate.

The cloud in b can be read in two ways, ritually as the milk mixture (see nábhas páyaḥ in 1c; also nabhasmáyam in IX.69.5d, both as ‘underlayer’; also Ge’s n. 3b), but cosmically as a rain cloud. This latter sense connects nicely with the verb vṛṣāyáte: Soma, as often, is depicted as acting like a bull, but this verb can also be associated etymologically or folk-etymologically (on the likely etym. connection see EWA s.v. vṛ́ṣan-) with √vṛṣ ‘rain’ (see Re’s n.).

Pāda c is more intricately structured than at first appears. On the one hand all three verbs, modate násate sā́dhate, appear to be construed with the final instr. girā́; cf., e.g., Re’s “Il jubile, caresse, réussit grâce au chant,” as well as the publ. tr.

However, only the central verb násate is regularly construed with an instr.; modate is found once (X.30.5) with an instr., while the relatively rare medial sā́dhate ‘succeeds’ generally lacks complements. Moreover, when násate takes the instr., it appears with the preverb sám - as it does in fact in vs. 8: sám INSTR násate sám INSTR, with the sám insistently repeated. In our pāda I would suggest that there is a ghostly trace of this sám in the opening sequence sá modate, which could reflect an older or underlying *sám modate. Though this would have metrical consequences, they would be slight, since the quantity of pāda-initial syllables is always indifferent.

This posited *sám cannot be read with the immediately following verb modate, since √mud never appears with sám in the RV (although the rt noun cmpd svādú-sammud- [so accented] is found twice in AVŚ), but “skips” to the 2nd verb in the sequence.

The repeated sám in 8d can then be interpr. as a type of poetic repair.

The verb nenikté ‘washes’ is of course etym. related to nirṇíj-, the word for garment that figures so heavily in these hymns (incl. in the immed. preceding vs., 2d), but their developed meanings are too divergent to allow the connection to be represented in Engl.

párīman- is a hapax, but, as is generally agreed (see EWA s.v., Re’s n.), it most likely belongs to √pṝ̥‘fill’. It may have been formed on the model of better attested várīman- ‘broadness’, which ends the next vs. and occupies the same metrical slot. Both these words function in much the same way as tánā ‘in its full measure/extent’, which ends vs. 2.


## 04
The first hemistich contains two untethered genitives, sáhasaḥ and mádhvaḥ. The first of course evokes the common phrase sūnú- sáhasaḥ “son of strength,” and ‘son’ is easily supplied (see Old, Ge n. 4a, etc.). mádhvaḥ is more problematic. In fact Ge identifies it instead as a nom. pl. fem. (presumably to a stem

*mádhū-? though we might expect trisyllabic reading mádhu
vaḥ) referring to the Apsarases, who in IX.78.3 (which contains the other ex. of the phrase harmyásya sakṣáṇim) do prepare the soma. Despite this parallel, his suggestion has little to recommend it: the Apsarases are not otherwise called ‘sweet, honied’, and mádhu- is so typed as a synonym/descriptor for soma and its gen.-abl. mádhvaḥ so well attested that it is hard to image how an audience could force the fem. pl. interpr. on this word with so little to go on. In the publ. tr. I sneaked it in as parallel to sáhasaḥ, but this is not very satisfactory. Old suggests supplying rásam ‘sap’ or ūrmím ‘wave’, both of which appear with dependent mádhvaḥ, with rása- more common. I would now tr.

“(sap) of honey” (so also Re, Scar 39).

Ge (n. 4b) plausibly suggests that the “secure house” (harmyá-) is the plant’s husk.

The second hemistich depicts a somewhat outlandish situation: cows preparing their milk on the “head” (mūrdhán-) of Soma. IX.93.3 contains a similar picture: cows preparing Soma’s head with milk, using both mūrdhán- and śrīṇanti as here. Both clearly refer to the mixing in of the milk; if the mixing involves pouring the milk into a vessel containing soma, the upper surface of the soma could be considered his “head.” With Ge (fld. by Scar 39), contra Pp., I read dat. suhutā́de not suhutā́daḥ. The dat. would refer to Indra, while the suhutā́daḥ as nom. pl. would modify the cows, who are not typically eaters of oblations, or as abl.-gen. sg. would have no obvious referent. See Old’s efforts in that direction.

On várīman- see disc. of párīman- in vs. 3.


## 05
On bhuríj- see comm. ad IX.26.4.

Though chariot-making is a common trope and regular comparandum in the RV, it is not usual (at least as far as I can recall) to compare the preparation of soma with the assembling of a chariot. It may appear here because the thus-prepared Soma is about to follow the track of the cow, at least in my interpr.

The grammatical identity of jígāt in c is disputed. It appears to be, and is usually taken as, an injunc. to the redupl. pres. jígāti (Gr, Macd [VGr, p. 342], Lub, Hoff. [Inj. 271 n. 12, but hesitantly]; by implication Ge and Re), but Old (and by implication Lü 252) suggests that it’s a nom. sg. pres. part. and, on the grounds of pā́nt- and yā́nt-, sees no difficulty with this analysis. But, of course, for a redupl.

pres. the weak form of the participial suffix is expected even in “strong” forms, and is in fact found in participles to other redupl. pres. to roots in -ā, √dā and √dhā, with well-attested nom. sg. m. dádat-, dádhat-. Though I accepted Old’s word (as I so often do) in the publ. tr., I now think jígāt is better taken as an injunc., though this need not change the actual tr.: “As he goes, he extends …,” with implicitly subordinated 1st verb in a two-verb sequence. “He goes, he extends …” is of course also possible.

The interpr. of the rest of the hemistich is uncertain, due to differing opinions about the sense and syntactic position of padám. With regard to its sense, padá- is of course multivalent: ‘footprint, track, place’and ultimately ‘word’. As for its syntax, does it belong in the main clause beginning in c, modified by apīcyàm, with yád in d beginning a new cl., or does it belong to the yád cl. of d? Ge follows the latter tack, with two NPs, góḥ apīcyàm and padám, in two separate clauses: “er stürtz sich auf das Geheimnis der Kuh, wenn die Andächtigen(?) seine Stätte bereitet haben,” with padá- = ‘place’. The Geheimnis der Kuh is the milk (n. 5c). There is nothing impossible here, but the adj. apīcyà- ‘secret’ invites association with padá-, on the basis of the semantics of the formulaic phrase “hidden track,” which is found in IX in


## 02
gúhā padám and IX.10.9 divás padám … gúhā hitám. Both Re and Lü take apīcyàm padám together, but Re interprets padám as ‘word’ (“le mot secret de la vâche” - though ‘word’ for padá- is barely found in the RV if at all) and Lü as ‘place’, which he further specifies, in his usualy style, as the “Milchflut im Himmel.” On the basis of the formula just cited, I prefer ‘track’, with the verbs of motion in c indicating that Soma is following this track (which, on the basis of 102.2 I think is the track through the filter) to his rendezvous with the milk.

matútha- is a hapax whose formation is unclear, but a derivation from √man ‘think’ is the default (see EWA s.v. MAN1 ). It merits no mention in AiG (at least acdg.

to the index thereto), but see Re’s plausible suggestion that it is connected to mántu-.


## 06
Act. trans. (ā́) riṇanti, with priests vel sim. as subj. and soma as obj., contrasts with medial (ní) riṇīte in 2, with soma as subj. and a self-involved, reflexive-type meaning.

I supply ‘stall’ as the goal in the simile on the basis of passages containing ápi √i with pā́thaḥ as goal (I.162.2, II.3.9, III.8.9, VII.47.3). It is not necessary, however.


## 07
A complex vs. esp. in the 2nd hemistich.

In the publ. tr. I take pāda a as a nominal sentence with párā as predicate: “far away is …” I now think a verb of motion, almost surely from √i, should be supplied: “Away (goes) the ruddy poet …” The lexeme párā √i is matched by parāyatī(ḥ) in pāda c, by my analysis (for which see below). The reference is once again to Soma’s journey from the filter to the rendezvous with the milk.

“Three-backed” (tripṛṣṭha-) is probably to be interpr. like tridhā́tu in nearby IX.70.8. Pace Lü (708-9) I very much doubt it refers to his threefold heavenly Soma.

Pāda c lacks a syllable, which is not easily recovered. This simply adds uncertainty to an already problematic pāda. The subject is yátiḥ, taken by all (incl.

me) as a -ti-stem deriv. to √yam ‘hold, control’. It should in origin be a fem. abstract ‘control’ vel sim., but like other exx. of the formation has acquired a personal agentive sense (on which transference see AiG II.2.637) - hence my ‘marshall’ (for awk. ‘holder-fast, controller’).

More puzzling is parāyátī (Saṃhitā), beginning with what its underlying form is. The Pp gives parāyátiḥ, which is accepted by all the standard interpr., but also possible in this sandhi context would be parāyátī and parāyátīḥ. The standard view is that the form is composed of parā and the selfsame -ti-abstract -yáti- that immediately precedes it and that it also is a nom. sg. masc. referring to Soma - hence Ge’s “abseits lenkend(?),” Re’s “poussant en arrière,” etc. But the lexeme párā √yam doesn’t exist in the RV - or anywhere else for that matter. What does exist, and fairly commonly, is párā √i ‘go away, depart’. In fact in the pres. part. it is used once of the Dawns, the same Dawns who appear in our pāda d: I.113.8 parāyatīnā́m ánu eti pā́thaḥ “She [=current Dawn] follows the troop of those who go away [=previous Dawns].” I suggest here that we have an acc. pl. fem. pres. part. It should be accented

*parāyatī́s, but it is not difficult to imagine that its accent could have been retracted
redactionally to match preceding yátiḥ. This pres. part. then modifies pūrvī́r uṣásaḥ in the following pāda and is part of the simile rebhó ná in that pāda. I take rebhá- ‘hoarse-voiced (singer)’ (on which gloss see comm. ad VI.3.6) here as referring to Agni as often (incl. I.113.17, in the hymn just cited). Like Agni, Soma ‘radiates’ (ví rājati). With Lü (708) and Gotō (1st cl., 268 n. 612) I take the verb to √rāj ‘shine’, not, with Gr, Ge, Re, to √rāj ‘rule’.


## 08
On the responsions between 8a and 2b and between 8d and 3c, see comm. ad locc.

On the basis of 9b, “the glittering form” seems to be appropriated from the sun.

The sequence of tense in b is somewhat troubling. The main cl. contains a pres. sédhati, which seems to express a general truth. The condition on this truth is expressed by the subordinate yátra cl., but we should then expect either a pres.

“when he lies down” or an aor. or pf. of the immed. past “when he has lain down” - as I in fact tr. ā́śayat -- but this is not a normal use of the imperfect.

Properly speaking we would expect the acc. pl. to be accented *srídhaḥ, as it normally is. Formally this should be an oblique sg., but that analysis simply doesn’t work in context.
