+++
title = "072"

+++
In contrast to the contorted thought and metaphorical flights of the first few hymns in the trimeter group (IX.68-71), this one is relatively straightforward, with the major exception of vs. 3.


## 01
The accent on īráyati and its juxtaposition with another finite verb, hinváte, marks the former as implicitly subordinate.

On the hapax pariprī́- see Scar 337-38.


## 02
The subordinating yád appears fairly late in its clause in b, though what precedes it all belongs to the predicate (though consisting of two NPs).

In c yádī must clearly be dissolved into yád ī, esp. given the parallelism between the subordinate clauses of b and cd.


## 03
Although the major problem in this vs. is the impossible hapax vinaṃgṛsáḥ in c, the puzzlement begins with b. What does it mean that Soma goes “across the dear bellow of the daughter of the Sun” (sū́ryasya priyáṃ duhituś tiró rávam), and in particular what is the daughter of the Sun doing here? She is found twice elsewhere in IX in the full phrase sū́ryasya duhitár-: at IX.1.6, where she purifies the soma, and IX.113.3, where she brings soma in the form of rain, as well as, most likely, named only as duhitár- in IX.97.47 (for which see below). Ge (see esp. n. 3b to IX.113.3) considers her “die Rede- und Gesangeskunst selbst,” on the basis of a dubious reading of III.53.15 (see comm. ad loc.), and so in our passage he interpr. her bellow as the song of the priests, which the noisy soma “übertönt” (n. 3b); Re partially follows him by supplying “au chant des prêtres” to gloss “à la chère rumeur de la Fille du soleil” in his tr., but supplies a verb of motion with tíraḥ: “(passant) outre,” though without comment. But Ge’s interpr. requires that tíraḥ ‘across’ when construed with a noun referring to noise can mean something like “(sing) over, drown out.” But when independent, tíraḥ always governs an expression of space, e.g., in IX tíraḥ rájāṃsi “across the realms” (IX.3.7-8), tíraḥ pavítram “across the filter” (IX.68.2, 109.16). Tellingly, tíraḥ is once used with an acc. of noise, calls, but these are conceived of spatially, as the calls of other sacrificers which the Aśvins should travel across to arrive at my sacrifice: VII.68.2 … gantam havíṣo vītáye me / tiró aryó hávanāni “come to pursue my offering / across the calls of the stranger.” There is, however, another, idiomatic, use of tírah, with the root √dhā in the meaning ‘hide (oneself), disappear’. An example is found in the next hymn, IX.73.3 maháḥ samudráṃ váruṇas tiró dadhe “As great Varuṇa, (Soma) has hidden himself in the sea.” Another is found in conjunction with the word duhitár-, identified above as another example of daughter (of the Sun) by most (incl. Ge, Re): IX.97.47 tíro várpāṃsi duhitúr dádhānaḥ “hiding himself in the forms of the daughter (of the Sun).” In that passage I identify the “forms of the daughter (of the Sun)” as the milk, so called because it is white and gleaming like the Sun; in other words, this is yet another version of the mixing of soma with milk. And I now further suggest that that is what we have here as well - that we should supply a form of √dhā to produce the same idiom we find more clearly in the next hymn and in IX.97.47. The sticking point is then rávam: what does it mean to “hide himself in the bellow of the daughter of the Sun”? I would suggest that it is an example of standard RVic breviloquence as well as synaesthesis. The “bellow” refers to the characteristic sound of cows, who were already mentioned (gā́ḥ) in the preceding pāda, so the phrase “the bellow of the daughter of the Sun” collapses the sound and the visual appearance associated with the milk=cows. I would now tr. the hemistich “Not stopping, he goes beyond (the filter) toward the cows, hid(ing himself) in the dear “bellow” of the daughter of the Sun [=milk].” There is comparatively little sensible to say about the hapax vinaṃgṛsá-, though it is possible to indulge in speculation. Perhaps the only truly sensible thing to note is that it is a partial anagram of the patronymic of the poet (Harimanta) Āṅgirasa: (vin)aṅgrsḁ -, and such phonological associations often drive the appearance of problematic forms. Sāy. glosses it stotā ‘praiser’ on the basis of context and a rather perfunctory stab at etymology. Ge renders it ‘arm’ on the basis of Naigh. 2.4 and, again, context: the mention of the fingers in the following pāda would support that interpr. But the word as we have it does not look analyzable acdg.

to Indo-Aryan morphological structure: save for the initial vi there is no sign of internal structure, and segmenting the vi does not produce anything that looks promising on the surface. As Ge points out (pace Old), the context is erotic. The initial ánu certainly belongs with jóṣam in the standard idiom ánu jóṣam “according to (one’s) pleasure,” with unaccented asmai intervening in Wackernagel’s position.

But with Ge (n. 3c) I would now also read it with abharat in the erotic idiom ánu √bhṛ ‘penetrate sexually, stick (one’s penis) in’, as discussed in my 1980 “A Vedic Sexual Pun: ástobhayat, anubhartrī́, and RV I.88.6” (Acta Orientalia 42) - though in that article (p. 59 n. 4) I more or less discounted this passage. Acdg. to this reading, asmai would be Soma and the recipient of the sexual act, while the vinaṃgṛsá- is the sexual actor. As noted in the publ. intro., erotic contexts often contain slang and twisted expressions that we cannot access.

At this point we leave the realm of even shaky evidence and enter that of pure speculation. Although the word we have cited is vinaṃgṛsáḥ, in its sandhi context it might also begin *dvi-: abharad vinaṃgṛsáḥ could be a degemination of abharad

*dvinaṃgṛsáḥ, of the type I have recently discussed in several publications (esp.

“False Segmentations and Resegmentations in the Rigveda: Gemination and Degemination,” forthcoming). There are no metrical implications. If we segment off dvi- ‘two, bi-’, naṃg- (/ naṅg-) could be analyzed as a metathetic taboo deformation of nagná- ‘naked’, of a type that the ‘naked’ word has often received across IndoEuropea. A cmpd with the meaning ‘having two naked …’ could refer to the arms of the presser (per Naigh. cited above, which cites vinaṃgṛsau as a dual and glosses bāhū) or to the pressing stones, and the sexual act would be the violent pressing itself. (If there is anything to this, the phrase nṛ́bāhubhyām coditáḥ “driven by the two arms of men” in 5a might be a reparative paraphrase.) Even by this flight of fancy I cannot figure out what to do with -ṛsa-, whose lack of ruki is another peculiar, non-Indo-Aryan-looking feature. And just to throw in another off-the-wall suggestion, in my 1980 article I suggested that the anubhartrī́- of I.88.6 was a veiled reference to the musical instrument, the vīnā-, and the beginning of our word vinaṃ(- grsḁ )- could be a play on that. None of this is worth much, which is why I leave the word untransl.

Having pronounced the word uninterpretable, Re simply ignores it in his tr., though curiously provides a fem. subject, presumably the daughter of the Sun: “elle lui offrait ses charmes,” a tr. of extreme erotic delicacy.

## 04-05
These two vss., in the center of the hymn, are constructed in parallel. To begin with, the post-caesura portion of 4d and 5b are identical: pavate sóma indra te.

Both vss. also begin with a sequence of AGENT/INSTR. + past part. expressions: 4a has the cmpds nṛ́-dhūto ádri-sutaḥ, while 5a has the analytic expressions nṛ́bāhubhyāṃ coditó dhā́rayā sutáḥ, with the 1st member of the 1st phrase (nṛ́-) and the 2nd ppl.

(sutá-) repeated. The last of the phrases contains a non-agentive instr. dhā́rayā ‘in a stream’ that nonetheless fits the morphological template. The two vss. diverge otherwise, though the beginnings of 4c and 5c, púraṃ(dhivān) and ā́prāḥ respectively have an etymological connection that would no doubt be clear to the audience. As noted in the publ. intro., no particular message seems to be conveyed by this omphalos-like structure, unless it is to put the abruptly addressed Indra in the center of the action. It is also the case that this is the first instance of √pū ‘purify’ in the hymn, and the quintessential IXth Maṇḍala med. verb pávate ‘purifies himself’ appears in these two matching phrases and in vss. 7-9 (7d pavate, 8a pavasva, 9d pavamāna).


## 04
Although both Ge and Re tr. -dhūta- as ‘shaken’, I prefer the more technical soma-ritual sense ‘rinse’. On √dhāv (∾ √dhavi ∾ √dhū) ‘rinse’ as a semantic specialization of the same root meaning ‘shake’, see EWA s.v. DHAVI , Gotō [1st Cl.

186-89]). This root complex is distinct from √dhāv ‘run’. See further ad vs. 8 below.

Both Ge and Re take pradívaḥ with what precedes; this is entirely possible and impossible to determine. Not much rests on it.


## 05
On 3rd sg. ajais and its AV replacements, see Narten (Sig.Aor. 119-20).


## 06
There is a sharp split of opinion on the grammatical identity of punarbhúvaḥ. Gr, Scar (361), and the publ. tr. - as well as, probably, Ge (his “immer aufs neue” is not totally clear) - take it as a nom. pl. fem. with the cows and the thoughts; Re and Lü (224-25), the latter cited verbatim by Ober (II.149), as gen. sg.

masc. dependent on sádane and referring to Soma. Not surprisingly Lü is esp.

adamant and sees the whole vs. as a depiction of Soma’s “Aufstieg in den Himmel,” where he is reborn. I am open to either grammatical analysis. The word order might favor the dependence on immed. preceding sádane and thus the gen. sg. interpr. On the other hand, the two other attestations of punarbhū́- are fem. (though neither is pl.), and in conjunction with saṃyátaḥ ‘in uninterrupted array’, it could describe the constantly new, but always similar, sequence of milk-mixtures and hymns in the soma ritual. However, it is possible to adopt the gen. sg. interpr. without subscribing to the journey to heaven: Soma can be considered reborn or regenerated because the pressing has rendered a new substance from the plant. I would therefore entertain an alt. tr. “The cows and thoughts … go together to him in the womb of truth, in the seat of the regenerated (soma),” though I favor the fem. pl.


## 07
The first pāda gives a classic description of Soma as a pillar reaching from earth (specifically the ritual ground) to heaven, as the support of the latter.

In d cā́ru must be adverbial.


## 08
This is the first time in the hymn that Soma appears in the 2nd ps.; the previous 2nd ps. address was to Indra (4d, 5d). It is also the first appearance of the 1st ps. ‘we’ of the human worshippers.

The nasal pres. dhūnoti is generally considered to express only the ‘shake’ meaning of the root complex √dhāv (∾ √dhavi ∾ √dhū), on which see comm. ad vs. 4 above, while dhā́vati is considered the only pres. to ‘rinse’. Therefore the pres.

part. ādhūnvaté should mean ‘shaker’ here. Gotō (187) seems to see in this passage a sort of play on words with -dhūta- in 4a, tr. “dem Preisenden und dem ‘Schüttelnden’ hilfreich seiend,” with ‘shaker’ in quotes. But I think the nasal pres. was available in a context like this to express the specialized ‘rinse’ sense; I find it difficult to believe that -dhūta- in 4a and ādhūnvaté here are meant to belong to different roots, esp.

since they both refer to humans’ ritual activity in preparing soma. Note that this is the only form of dhūnoti that appears with ā́, which is the standard preverb with dhā́vati ‘rinses’. The preverb here may be participating in a type of repair: the cmpd.

in 4a nṛ́-dūta- does not have the preverb, quite possibly because *nrā̀dhūta- by losing the syllabic quality of its 1st member would be hard to parse and lose the symmetry with nṛ́bāhubhyām in 5a. The nasal pres. may have been used here so the root syllables of the two forms could be matched (dhū) and also to avoid confusion with dhā́vati ‘runs, streams’, which is quite common in IX.
