+++
title = "073"

+++
On the key to this hymn, see publ. intro. Old argues that it is a hymn for rain, but I don’t see that (nor does Ge), despite the presence of Varuṇa. Both Ge and Old properly remark on the repeated phrase sám asvaran.


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., I consider it significant that the repeated phrase sám asvaran never has an overt subject, allowing for double ref.: the soma streams roaring as they cross the filter and the priest-poets accompanying this journey with hymns. I therefore would reject the various subjects supplied here by various tr.

I interpr. drapsásya dhámataḥ as a species of gen. absol., though it could be dependent on one of the implicit subjects of the verb, namely the soma streams.

I am not entirely sure what b is telling us. In the immediately preceding hymn (IX.72.6) as well as elsewhere in IX, the “womb of truth” (ṛtásya yóni-) is the place where the soma and the milk mix; the verb sám aranta “have joined together” invites us to interpr. this as expressing that mixture here as well. If so, then what are the “ties of lineage” (nā́bhayaḥ)? I would tentatively suggest that it refers to the ultimate kinship of cow and bull (that is, of milk and soma). This may be supported by a passage in the next hymn, IX.74.4, where soma, after this mixture, is referred to as “the navel of truth” (ṛtásya nā́bhiḥ). It is also possible that it’s a reference to the unexpressed double subject that “sounded in unison” in the preceding pāda - that is, the roaring soma streams and the singing poets. Their “ties of lineage” would be based on their joint vocalization, and they meet and join together on the part of the ritual ground where the soma is readied for offering to the gods. Others of course have different opinions: for Ge it’s gods and men, for Lü (234-35, fld. by Re) the heavenly and earthly soma.

In c, acdg. to Ge and Re, the ásura created (cakre) for himself three heads, either (Ge; see also WEHale 79) so he could seize the soma (probably; see Ge’s n. 1 cd) or (Re) so he could be more easily seized. By contrast, I interpr. cakra ārábhe as a periphrastic caus.: “made/caused his three heads to be seized,” with the ásura- = Soma, as also in the next hymn, IX.74.7; note also his asuryàṃ várṇam in nearby IX.71.2. It would help, of course, to know what the “three heads” are, but I suggest that since mūrdhán- is often a ‘peak’, it may be the same as Soma’s three backs (see the bahuvr. tripṛṣṭḥá- twice nearby in IX.71.7 and 75.3). As for these expressions of triplication, see the speculations ad IX.70.8. Whatever the identity of the heads, I think the point is that, after the various stages of preparation, Soma is making himself available for ritual use, allowing himself to be “seized” and distributed into the cups. This interpr. is supported by 3d, which contains the acc. inf. ārábham, matching ārábhe here.

In d note satyásya opening the pāda, which contrasts with ṛtásya in the same position in b. Although I am given pause by IX.89.2 r̥tásya nā́vam (like our satyásya nā́vaḥ), I think the two genitives must be interpr. differently. I suggest that it is Soma who is satyá- here: ‘trusty’ as in the publ. tr., or even ‘really present’, referring to the prepared soma on the ritual ground. Sāy’s notion that the boats are the soma cups is quite plausible, though Ge (n. 1d) prefers the hymns.

## 02-04
Ge considers these vss. “doppelsinnig,” with ref. both to the priest-poets and the soma juices. This seems quite reasomable, and his individual notes are worth the attention.

## 02-03
The three even-numbered pādas 2d, 3b, 3d all end with an augmented 3rd pl. redupl. aorist: apīparan, avīvipan, and avīvṛdhan respectively.


## 02
As Ge (n. 2a) points out aheṣata can be either transitive (‘have propelled [soma]’) or intransitive/passive (‘have surged / been propelled’); both usages are paralleled in IX - see the passages cited by Ge. Moreover, as he also points out (and see again his cited passages), mahiṣá- ‘buffalo’ can refer either to soma or to the priests. Thus, to spell out the two senses: “the buffalos [=soma streams] have been propelled / the buffalos [=priests] have propelled (the soma).” The choice of both a noun subject and a verb form that allow double interpr. is unlikely to be accidental, esp. in this hymn of floating reference.

In b the subj. vená- can elsewhere refer either to soma (though usually in the sg.) or to priest-poets; see comm. ad VIII.100.5. The unexpressed element in the pāda is the obj. of avīvipan ‘have set atremble’. Both speech and soma (streams) are appropriate objects. If soma (streams) are the referent of the subject venā́ḥ, then speech is likely the object. Cf. IX.96.7 prā́vīvipad vācá ūrmíṃ ná síndhur, gíraḥ sómaḥ “Like a river its wave, self-purifying Soma has sent the wave of speech, the hymns, pulsing forth.” If the priests are the subject, then soma is most likely the obj.

Although there are no transitive forms of √vip that take soma as obj., note that in nearby IX.71.3 soma is the subj. of the intrans. vépate ‘he trembles’.

In the 2nd hemistich again the unexpressed subj. can be priest-poets or soma streams. Both can “give birth to chant” - the priest-poets directly, soma by inspiring ritual speech -- and both can strengthen Indra’s body.

As Ge (n. 2c) appositely points out, arká- can refer to the roar of the rushing soma, but it can of course also refer to the hymns of the poets. In c pāda-final íd seems relatively functionless: “just the chant / the chant alone” does not seem to add to the sense - unless it somehow underscores the double reading just suggested.

Perhaps it’s simply there to convert a putative Triṣṭubh cadence to a Jagatī.


## 03
Again, the subject of the verb in pāda a is unexpressed. On the basis of pavítravant- ‘provided with the filter’, one might expect that the referent is the ritual officiants, but note that the other occurrence of this -vant- stem in IX, at IX.101.4, modifies sómāḥ. Again, I think both readings are meant.

On tiró dadhe see comm. ad IX.72.3. Though Ge and Old take it as transitive (Ge “… hat den Ozean verborgen (?)”), Re and Lü (268) interpr. it as reflexive ‘hid himself in x’, correctly in my view; Old explicitly rejects the reflexive interpr., but the middle voice makes this the more likely one. Old is motivated by his unconvincing interpr. of the hymn as a rain charm. In the ritual context the “hiding” refers to the post-pressing mixing of soma with water: the soma disappears into it.

In d śekuḥ … ā́rábham “they have been able to seize” responds to 1c cakra ārábhe “caused to be seized.” Their connection would have been clearer in the publ.

tr. if they were tr. with identical renderings of ā́√rabh, rather than “to take hold of” here. I would therefore emend the tr. to “have been able to seize.” The questions then are what is the referent of dharúṇeṣu and how does it relate to ārábham? In the flanking hymns, IX.72.7 and 74.2 sg. dharúṇa- is the soma itself. I am inclined to take the pl. here as referring to the soma configured in parts - in particular to the ‘heads’ of 1c, which soma caused to be seized (by my interpr.). The shared verb ā́ √rabh certainly encourages this identification. The point would be that only the insightful know how to separate soma from the cleansing waters. This interpr.

requires that ā́√rabh can take a loc. of what is grasped, in addition to the more common acc. (as in 1c). For a passage with such a loc. see I.168.3 and comm. thereto. By contrast Ge takes the dharúṇa- not as parts of soma but as instruments in which to seize him, namely the soma cups (n. 3d; apparently fld. by Lü [268]). The use of the stem dharúṇa- in the sg. to refer to soma makes his interpr. difficult to sustain.

## 04-05
See comm. on IX.41.1-2 on the similarity of phraseology in these two pairs of vss. These vss. usher in the use of ritual speech against a variety of enemies.


## 04
The first hemistich seems clearly (at least to me) to contrast the ritual soma streams on earth (a) with those in heaven (b), though curiously it does not seem to have caught Lü’s attention. That pl. asaścátaḥ elsewhere (IX.57.1, 62.28) explicitly modifies dhā́rāḥ ‘streams’ makes that identification in b quite likely. See also


## 06
in the next hymn, with similar phraseology, where ‘streams’ is also the likely referent of asaścatáḥ, and at least one reading involves a contrast between earthly and heavenly soma.

As pointed out also be Ge and Re, the mention of spies in c extends the Varuṇa identification from the preceding vs. The binding snares in d are surely the curls of the sheep’s wool of the filter that can obstruct the progress of the liquid.

## 05-06
These two vss., almost in the center of the hymn, have a similar structure.

Their first pādas are nearly identical: ABL ABL ádhy ā́yé samásvaran “Those who sounded in unison from X X.” The second pādas simply further describe the unspecified subject of the first pādas, while their second hemistichs present what happens to evil beings as a result of the sounding in unison of the first. See also Old on the symmetry of the vss. and how this affects their interpr.


## 05
With Sāy. and Re but contra Ge, I consider the father and mother of pāda a to be Heaven and Earth, matching that same pair in d. The reference is to the earthly and heavenly soma of 4a and b, which “sound in unison,” though also including the priest-poets, as disc. in the publ. intro. They marshall their joint power, embodied in the māyā́associated with Varuṇa, against those “without commandments” (avratā́n); vratá- are of course esp. associated with Varuṇa, and by virtue of their presence in both heaven and earth can banish enemies from both places.

Note the return of √dham ‘blow’ from 1a. In its earlier occurrence this root simply expressed the action of the drop (drapsásya dhámataḥ), but here the verb has been weaponized, as it were, against enemies.


## 06
Ge interpr. mā́na- as “Tonweise” and then imposes a musical-mode interpr.

on the whole 1st hemistich, an interpr. that infects Re as well. With Old I find this “zweifelhaft.” In the publ. tr. it is rendered ‘edifice’; for mā́na- as some sort of building see VII.88.5, where JPB tr. ‘mansion’. Because of the structural parallelism with 5a (see comm. above), I would prefer that this abl. phrase refer to a place. The “ancient edifice” can be both soma’s seat in heaven and the place, or seat, on the ritual ground where soma mixes with the milk and the priest-poets sing their hymns.

For a similar phrase see I.107.5 pratnáṃ sadhástham ā́sadat “he [=Soma] has taken his ancient seat.” As for ślóka-yantra-, in my view it simply expresses the fact that sound - both the sound of the soma streams and the sound of the hymns of the priest-poets - guides and accompanies the soma along the journey of its preparation.

I am less certain about what to do with rabhasásya mántavaḥ, in part because the exact nuance of the fairly rare word mántu- is not clear. (Old’s disc. here seems off the point.) Although in cmpds (sumántu-, etc.) it seems to have the quasiinfinitival sense ‘… to think about / contemplate’ (see AiG II.2.663), as a freestanding noun it generally is glossed as ‘counsel, counselor’ corresponding to Old Avestan maṇtu- (e.g., Gr, AiG II.2.663). This works reasonably well for mántavaḥ in X.63.8 (All Gods), but the other two passages containing mántu- (I.152.1, X.32.4) are too obscure to shed any light - though ‘counsel, counselor’ is not entirely excluded. The poss. deriv. mantumant (3x, always voc., never accented) is compatible with a sense ‘possessing (wise) counsel’ in all three passages (esp.

VI.56.4), though the case is not overwhelming, given the semantic independence of vocatives. Since rabhasá- is elsewhere used of the pressed soma drinks (I.82.6 sutā́so rabhasā́ḥ), I take sg. rabhasásya as referring to soma here as well, but this leads to a possible contradition: if the soma streams are one of the subjects of ā́… samásvaran, then how can they be counselors of themself, -ves? The phrase would work better if it applied only to the priest-poets who form the other part of the subject of the verb.

Since ślókayantra- also works better if it applies only to one part of the subject, namely the soma streams, I now think that pāda b involves a non-overtly conjoined NP: “those with a signalling call for their reins [=soma streams] (and) the counselors [=priest=poets] of the wild one [=Soma].” I would therefore emend the tr. to what was just suggested. This is the closest we have come to specifying who the subj. of the repeated verb is, though both NPs are so opaque that nothing much is given away.


## 07
The first hemistich now begins to solve the riddle of the double reference, by situating the poets in (or at) the filter, purifying their speech like the soma streams that cross the filter.

I do not know why the Maruts appear here, esp. as spies - quite distinct from Varuṇa’s spies in 4c, as Ge (n. 7d) also asserts. His reason for bringing in the Maruts is dependent on his musical mode interpr. of vs. 6 and therefore not helpful.

I would change the tr. of svàñcaḥ in d to “of lovely outlook” (from “well directed”). See comm. ad VI.15.10.


## 08
The subject here is of course Soma, though tricked out with Varuṇian vocabulary (see, e.g., Lü 402-3).

It is not clear what the three filters (trī́… pavítrā) are; the phrase recurs in


## 55
with equal lack of clarity - though there all three don’t have to be fitted into the heart. The three filters here recall the three heads of 1c, though I do not think the referents are the same.


## 09
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs., esp. its first hemistich, provides the solution to the implicit riddle of the hymn, by associating “the thread of truth” (ṛtásya tántuḥ) both with the filter and therefore the soma streams on their ritual journey and with the tongue tip and therefore the priest-poets’ hymns. See disc.

there. Note also that ṛtásya tántuḥ forms a slight ring with ṛtásya yónā in 1b.

The vs. is very similar to IX.83.1, a mystical hymn also treating the filter and attributed to the same poet.

pavítram te vítatam brahmaṇas pate, prabhúr gā́trāṇi páry eṣi viśvátaḥ átaptatanūr ná tá āmó aśnute, śr̥tā́so íd váhantas tát sám āśata The filter is outstretched for you, o lord of the sacred formulation. Advancing, you circle around its limbs on all sides.

A raw one, with unheated body, does not attain it [=filter]; only the cooked ones, driving along, have attained it entirely.

Note esp. pavítram … vítatam matching our vítataḥ pavítra ā́, prabhúḥ matching our áprabhuḥ, and the emphasis on attainment, ná … aśnute, … sám āśata, matching our anínakṣanta āśata. For further disc. see also the publ. intro. to IX.83.

In d padāti must be a double marked subjunctive to the root aor, which is otherwise only middle. The model for its creation is not clear to me.
