+++
title = "074"

+++
Curiously, a much translated hymn, found in Doniger 121-24, Maurer 85-88, despite its difficulties.


## 01
Contra the standard tr. (Ge, Re, Lü [265], Doniger, Maurer), I take b with c, not with a, since the logical relation between a and b is weak and there are two ostensibly different subjects, while c follows from b. In b Soma, configured as a racehorse, seeks to win the sun, which in its brightness is the cosmic equivalent of the milk that is the goal of the ritual soma’s journey (see also IX.76.2). In c he “keeps company with” (sacate) the semen of heaven (divó rétasā). On the cosmic plane this is the rain; in the ritual it is the water with which the soma is mixed after filtering and before the mixing with milk - though here the two acts of mixture, with water and with milk, may be conflated, with rain/mixing water referred to as payovṛ́dh- ‘milkstrong’. For a slightly clearer passage see IX.84.5. The fact that the verbs of b and c, síṣāsati and sacate, recur in the climactic vs. 7 (see below) supports my view of the structure of this vs. In d most tr. take sumatī́as ours (e.g., Doniger “with kind thoughts we pray …”), whereas I assign it to Soma. In general sumatí- can belong either to mortals or to gods, and very little is at stake here - though I still favor my interpr.


## 02
The soma plant as pillar connecting heaven and earth and filling the midspace (ab) gives way to the plant as sacrificer (c)—an abrupt conceptual transition somewhat jarring to modern sensibilities.

In b Re supplies both the world and the filter as complement to paryéti. This seems reasonable, though the verb would have slightly different senses: “encompass (the world)” / “circle around (the filter).” I would now favor making this explicit in the tr.

The standard tr. take ā́vṛ́tā as instr., with a variety of interpr.: Ge “nach dem Herkommen” (sim. Scar 509), Re “par le processus-rituel” (sim. Maurer), Doniger “by tradition.” I take it rather as a fem. du. modifying ródasī (so Gr Nachtr.).

Pāda d contains the only ex. of sám √dhṛ in the RV (and one of the few in Vedic). I would now be inclined to give it a more literal tr.: “the poet holds together …” The poet in this case is of course Soma.


## 03
Pāda b is problematic, and it shares some of its difficulties with IX.69.3, which ends identically: áditer ṛtáṃ yaté. See comm. ad loc. In both cases the standard tr. (incl. my publ. tr.) take áditeḥ with what precedes, despite its being in the repeated phrase. The other problem is the referent of the dat. part. in the phrase ṛtáṃ yaté. Is it Soma, as Ge (and the publ. tr., also probably Maurer) take it, or the mortal worshiper (Re, flg. Lü; Doniger)? Determining this depends in part on deciding what “the wide pasture-land of Aditi” means. It is possible that it refers to the expanse on the ritual ground between the filter and the place where the soma meets the milk, in which case ṛtáṃ yaté could refer to the soma traversing this expanse, as in the publ.

tr. However, in the other two passages containing gávyūti- in IX (IX.78.5, 85.8), “wide pastureland” is the reward for mortals. See esp. IX.78.5 urvī́ṃ gávyūtim ábhayaṃ ca nas kṛdhi “make wide pasturage and fearlessness for us.” In the other passage, IX.85.8, the phrase occurs with śárma sapráthaḥ “extensive shelter/protection,” which is found exactly in our vs. 1d. I therefore now inclined to think that this pāda concerns the mortal worshiper - but this causes problems with the 2nd hemistich, which consists only of two rel. clauses, whose referent must be Soma. If ṛtáṃ yaté does not refer to Soma, there is no antecedent in the first hemistich (or in the following vs.) for the double yáḥ of c and d. Re gets out of this by supplying “(C’est le soma),” which does the trick but contravenes the apparent structure of the vs.; Doniger simply tr. part of d as a main cl. I find myself torn and take refuge, as often, in double reading - suggesting that at least one referent of ṛtáṃ yaté is Soma, and therefore there is at least a partial antecedent for the yáḥ-s of cd.

While fiddling with pāda b, I also wondered if we should take the pattern of repetition seriously and construe áditeḥ with what follows, rather than what precedes. Although urvī́- gávyūti- is found several times elsewhere - in addition to here and the two passages in IX just cited, also V.66.3, VII.77.4 - it is nowhere else associated with Aditi. And Aditi, as mother of Varuṇa among others, is associated with ṛtá-, so “for him who goes to the truth of Aditi” would not be a jarring expression, though its exact sense is hard to pin down. I therefore suggest an alt. tr.

“wide is the pasture-land for him who goes to the truth of Aditi.” See also IX.69.3.

As multiple comm. have remarked, Soma is both associated cosmically with rain and in the ritual preparation drips like rain from the press and off the filter.

All the standard tr. render itáūtíḥ with the older, now obsolete tr. ‘helping from here’ vel sim., rather than ‘eternal, ageless’, on which see comm. ad VIII.99.7 and EWA s.v. However, in this passage it certainly plays off itáḥ ‘from here’ in the previous pāda in the same metrical position; note the pattern c itá u(sr)í(yo) / d itáū(t)i(r), with the vowels ū̆ … i replicating the 2nd half of the word. This pattern is also anticipated by (gávy)ūtir in b (though in a different metrical slot).


## 04
This vs. sets out the identification between soma and rain most clearly (which is, nonetheless, not all that clear). In pāda a the “embodied cloud” (ātmanván nábhaḥ) is, on the one hand, a cloud, which produces rain (called ghee and milk); on the other, it must refer to something from which soma (called ghee and milk) is produced - most likely the soma plant, with Ge (n. 4). The milk (páyaḥ) here seems not to refer to the actual milk mixture.

The word ātmanvánt-, which I render ‘embodied’ (others ‘living, breathing’), is found only three times in the RV, once in another Kakṣīvant hymn (I.116.3 to the Aśvins) and once in another Aśvin hymn, I.182.5. In both those passages it refers to a boat, and I suggest ad I.182.5 that this describes a boat with a cockpit, a substantial body. Here it would indicate that the cloud had enough substance (“body,” as in the Engl. metaphor) to yield significant amounts of liquid, and it may also sketch the rounded contours of a cloud.

In b, with most, I take soma to be the referent of ṛtásya nā́bhiḥ. See comm. ad IX.73.1.

The subj. of cd are in the first instance the priests, but in d esp. there is a double reading, with the Maruts pissing rain, as the priests “piss” down streams of soma by their ritual activity.

On péru- see EWA s.v.; ‘swelling’ is based on Lü -- see reff. in EWA.


## 05
A variety of identifications have been suggested for the various elements in this vs. See the various tr.

In pāda a sácamāna ūrmíṇā “keeping company with the wave” echoes 1c divó rétasā sacate “keeps company with the semen of heaven,” though here the presence of the subj. aṃśúḥ ‘plant’ seems to anchor the expression to the ritual, without cosmic dimensions. In the ritual realm it probably refers to a slightly different part of the ritual from the one depicted in 1c, despite the presence of water in both cases.

There it most likely referred to the mixing of the soma juice with water, after the pressing. Here because of aṃśúḥ I think it refers to the initial soaking of the plant before pressing. This is supported by b, where it, namely the soaking water, swells the skin (pinvati tvácam) - the skin being, in my view, the outer surface of the plant.

The adj. devāvī́- modifying ‘skin’ usually modifies soma itself (see Scar 498), referring to the juice’s journey after pressing to the place where it will be offered to the gods. Here the various moments in the ritual are collapsed: it is not the skin, but the juice pressed from the skin, that seeks the gods.

However, in b the skin may also be the waterskin=cloud from which rain is produced (see, e.g., V.83.7) and in that case the plant of a could also be a cloud, roaring with thunder.

The 2nd hemistich is bookended by verb forms of √dhā: #dádhāti …dhā́mahe#. This etymological connection cannot easily be captured in English because each verb has an idiomatic sense: the first for the setting of an embryo, i.e., impregnation; the 2nd in the middle in the sense of ‘acquire’. Both ritual and cosmic readings are available here.

It is not clear to me whether Aditi here has any meaningful connection with the Aditi in 3b or is simply a reference to the ritual ground.


## 06
The first pāda, sahásradhāré ‘va tā́ḥ asaścatáḥ is an abbreviated version of IX.73.4ab sahásradhāré ‘va té sám asvaran, … aśaścatáḥ. As in that vs. the earthly soma streams in the filter (a) are contrasted with (b) those in heaven (“the third realm” tṛtī́ye … rájasi, comparable to 73.4b divó nā́ke), though the latter are also probably rain.

The interpr. of the 2nd hemistich is complicated by the unclear hapax nā́bhaḥ in c. Numerous suggestions have been made about its meaning: clouds (von Schröder, etc.; see Schindler), openings (Old, fld. by Maurer), teats (Ge), spurts (Re), springs (Lü 285, Doniger); for disc. see Schindler, Rt Nouns, s.v. nábh- and EWA s.v. NABH. Before focusing on the sense, it’s useful to observe that nā̆bh is a favorite phonological configuration for this poet: see nearly matching 4a nábho, in the same metrical position as our nā́bho, as well as 4b nā́bhir likewise in that position. We can also, at least in my view, eliminate the supposed root noun nábh- in I.174.8 from consideration and potential connection, since I take nábhaḥ there as a verb form. See comm. ad loc. With many (e.g., tentatively EWA), I connect nā́bhaḥ here with the root √nabh ‘burst’, and suggest that it has the adjectival sense ‘bursting’; the underlying noun subject is surely ‘streams’ again, referring to both the heavenly soma and the rain. The union of those two with the earthly soma is described in d.

Why “four” is not entirely clear. Our passage might be illuminated by IX.89.5 cátasra īṃ ghrtad ̥ úhaḥ sacante “four, yielding ghee as their milk, accompany him” if there is any illumination to be gotten from that passage. Cf. also I.62.6, VIII.100.10, both with fem. ‘four’ and varieties of liquid nourishment. The most likely explanation for the “four” is suggested by Ge’s tr of nā́bhaḥ as “Zitzen(?)” (see also his n. 6c). Although I do not think that nā́bh- means ‘teat’ directly, I think the number four suggests that the streams here are likened to them: cows generally have four teats.

Another similarity between this passage and IX.89.5 leads me to alter the publ. tr. here. The four in our passage are níhitāḥ (ní √dhā), which, with Re, I tr.

“hidden.” But this ppl. is paralleled in IX.89.5 by the fuller phrase samāné antár dharúṇe níṣattāḥ “set down within the same support,” with an almost synonymous ppl. cmpd ní-ṣatta-: ní √sad), also characterizing the four. There I take níṣatta- in its literal sense and suggest that the “same support” might be the udder itself. I now wonder if níhitāḥ should also be taken literally here and mean “the four, deposited (in the udder), bursting …”

## 07-08
These two vss. seem to resolve the situation set up in vs. 1, esp. 1bc: the racehorse that was striving to win the sun (=milk) there (1b) has achieved this goal and “keeps company” with ritual speech and labor, as it did in 1c (and 5a) with more physical features of the ritual process. The repetition of the desid. síṣāsati from 1b in 7a and the resolution of the desid. into an achieved state via a pf. part. sasavā́n (8b) signal the relationship between vss. 1 and 7-8 - as does the repetition of sacate from 1c (/sácamānaḥ 5a) in 7c.


## 07
As just noted, yát síṣāsati is identical to yád … síṣāsati in 1b, and śvetáṃ rūpám “white form” seems the equivalent of svár ‘sun’, the obj. of síṣāsati in the earlier vs. - both referring to the milk mixture. It might be possible to take yád here as neut. rel. with rūpám and tr. “he makes for himself the/a white form that he is striving to win,” although I’m not sure that’s an improvement. In any case, I think the point is that Soma has attained the milk he was striving for.

Pāda b seems something of a non sequitur, and it may be that bhū́man-, which has a range of senses, should be tr. differently (Ge tr. Natur) - although in the preceding hymn, IX.73.5, in the phrase bhū́mano divás pári it clearly means ‘earth’.

Perhaps it contrasts with diváḥ in d and should be tr. “Soma … knows the earth” - the point being that the earthly Soma is fulfilling his ritual tasks, which will enable him to make contact with the heavenly soma and bring it as rain from heaven in d.

Note that this is the first time that the word sóma- appears in the hymn, and the only occurrence outside of the extra-hymnic vs. 9.

As just noted, sacate reprises the same verb in 1c and its equivalent participle in 5a sácamānaḥ. In both those cases soma was “keeping company” with a physical element of the ritual, namely water. Here the instr. express the human activity in the sacrifice: dhī́- ‘insight’, perhaps better here ‘insightful/visionary thought’ - that is the hymn - and śámī- ‘ritual labor’. This acknowledgement of the human contribution to the soma sacrifice is also found in the next vs.; otherwise it is absent from the hymn, except passingly and enigmatically noted in 4cd. Through most of the hymn Soma is presented as the only actor and agent of the ritual.

The problem in this pāda is pravát, which has received various analyses. See esp. the possibilities laid out by Old, as well as the nn. of Ge and Re. Of the choices, I prefer the nom. sg. Since the stem pravát- is fem. this requires reading sā́/ īm against Pp sáḥ / īm, but this actually improves the reading, since with the masc. prn.

we would expect sá īm in the Saṃhitā text (cf., e.g, IX.88.2). I take sém abhí pravát as a self-contained, almost parenthetical clause: it explains what precedes in the same pāda, namely that the hymns and physical ritual labor of the sacrificers are the way to approach Soma.

And this in turn will lead to his producing rain in d, by splitting open the cask of heaven. This “splitting” (áva darṣat) is perhaps thematically related to the “bursting” down from heaven (nā́bhaḥ … avó diváḥ) in 6c, if that’s what nā́bhmeans. It is difficult to render the áva in the lexeme áva darṣat, but áva is a Lieblingswort of this poet: see 1a, 4d, 6a, as well as aváḥ in 6c - all presumably in service of the “rain down from heaven” theme.


## 08
This is the triumphant realization of the quest set in motion in vs. 1. The race horse (vājī́) of 1b reappears here having won (sasavā́n) at the finish line (kā́rṣman) what it was seeking to win (síṣāsati) there - namely the milk, here given a very full expression: śvetáṃ [recurring from 7a] kaláśaṃ góbhir aktám “the gleaming white tub anointed with cows.” This first hemistich plus pāda c is the actual end of the hymn, and so this successful resolution of vs. 1 provides a thematic ring. Pāda c reintroduces the human ritual personnel, who propel Soma in his guise as racehorse—thus allowing the priest-poets to take some credit for the successful conclusion of the sacrifice, after having been shut out for most of the hymn. Pāda d is a snatch of a dānastuti, and vs. 9 seems an afterthought tacked onto the hymn. Or such is my analysis; most of the other tr. attempt to link the second hemistich with the first, syntactically and thematically. Most radically Ge (fld. by Doniger), who makes d dependent on sasavā́n in b, with c a parenthetical intrusion. Maurer, by contrast, makes d the obj.

of c, which does less violence to the order of elements but is still, to my mind, unsatisfactory. Among other things soma is the usual object of √hi in IX, which contains multiple exx., and so making the cows (somehow) the object violates formulaic expectations. Cf. esp. IX.106.11 hinvanti vājínam, with soma identified as a vājín as here.

It is easy to understand the attempts of others to link d with something else in the vs., because it consists only of a dative phrase (kakṣī́vate śatáhimāya) and a gen. pl. (gónām). However, as I just remarked, this pāda seems to be an abbreviated dānastuti, with the dāna specified and no stuti given, but the poet and would-be recipient emphatically named. In such circumstances condensed phraseology is not surprising. Ge appositely cites as parallel I.126.2 śatáṃ kakṣī́vān ásurasya gónām “A hundred cows of the lord (have I,) Kakṣīvant, (taken).” In our passage the “hundred” is cleverly tucked into the adj. śatáhima-, which otherwise presumably expresses Kakṣīvant’s proleptic wish for a 100-year lifespan; it seems unlikely that he is already that old.


## 09
As I just noted, this vs. seems to be an extra-hymnic afterthought and is stylistically and thematically detached from the rest of the hymn. It is the only one containing 2nd ps. reference, which is insistently carried here by four vocc. (a soma, b pavamāna, c madintama, d pavamāna), an enclitic prn. te (a), and an impv. (d svádasva). It also contains only the 2nd naming of soma (cf. 7b) and the only forms of the root √pū, as well as other standards of the somic lexicon (a rása-; b ávyo vā́ram, ví √dhāv; c √mṛj, madintama; d índrāya … pītáye). In other words, all the clichés - maddeningly absent from the rest of the hymn - are trotted out, like a global example of poetic repair, as if to say, “if you were too dim to figure it out, this is what it was about!” It is not possible to decide whether Kakṣīvant himself added this magic decoder ring or whether it was appended secondarily. IX.74 is the last of the 9-vs. trimeter hymns, so it could have originally been an 8-vs. hymn to which the clarifying vs. was added. The fact that vs. 8 is in Triṣṭubh in an otherwise Jagatī hymn might indirectly suggest that, since final vss. are sometimes in a different meter from the rest of their hymn and, if we remove vs. 9, vs. 8 would be the final vs., ending with Kakṣīvant’s plea for dāna. But it is certainly possible to imagine Kakṣīvant having his little joke by supplying the key to the hymn in an appendix vs. ### 75-79
This next group of hymns is attributed to Kavi Bhārgava, also the poet of the Gāyatrī hymns IX.47-49. They are refreshingly free of the puzzles and contortions of the first set of trimeter hymns.
