+++
title = "075"

+++


## 01
The opening abhí priyā́ṇi pavate … nā́māni is reminiscent of IX.62.25=66.1=107.23 pávasva … abhí víśvāni kā́vyā “purify yourself towards all products of poetic skill,” where in all cases I take the abhí ACC phrase as goal. See comm. ad IX.62.25. The point is that Soma in the course of his ritual preparation aims his journey towards the place where the hymns are being recited - in this case the hymns mentioning his names and epithets. Like the other RVic gods (esp. Indra), Soma “grows strong” on praise. In contrast, Ge thinks that the “names” are “die Formen oder Phasen des zubereiteten Tranks”; sim. Lü (526) “Erscheinungsformen.” I don’t see why the physical needs to replace the verbal here, esp. given the emphasis on the verbal, and indeed on names, in the next vs. Properly speaking, yahváḥ should be part of the main cl., in order for yéśu to take its proper place in the rel. cl. A slightly revised tr. would be “Delighted, the youthfully exuberant one purifies himself towards his own dear names, upon which he grows strong.” The 2nd hemistich implicitly contrasts the heavenly soma with the earthly, ritual one of ab, as so often.

The adj. vícakṣanaḥ ‘wide gazing’, characterizing Soma, is a partial match for acc. víṣvañcam ‘facing in many directions’, used of the sun’s chariot.


## 02
The publ. tr. contains a clear error — ‘father’ instead of ‘lord’, for pátiḥ in b — a regrettable lapse. It should be corrected to “speaker and lord,” and “father” in the publ. intro. should likewise be changed.

Old finds “tongue” as a descriptor of Soma “bizarr,” but given how much emphasis is placed in IX on Soma’s noise-making capabilities and association with speech, I don’t see why. This vs. depicts Soma as the origin and controller of speech and name-giving, while in vs. 1 (ab) in complementary fashion he aims towards and is nourished by the names given him by others, or so I interpr. it.

As Ge points out, cd is (partially) illuminated by I.155.3cd, whose d pāda is identical to ours: dádhāti putró ávaram páram pitúr, nā́ma tṛtī́yam ádhi rocané diváḥ “The son [=Viṣṇu] sets in place the lower and the higher (names) of the father and the third name in the luminous realm of heaven.” In both cases the entities in question in the c pāda are surely Heaven and Earth (so for our passage both Ge [n.

2cd] and Re). The “luminous realm of heaven” must be the realm beyond the nearer sky; the “third realm” (tṛtī́ye rájasi) appears in the preceding hymn (IX.74.6), though the same geographical area may not be in question. In any case Soma’s ability to name these cosmic entities emphasizes his global mastery of speech, and the paradox of the son naming his parents makes the wonder all the greater.


## 03
The same phrase ṛtásya dohánāḥ is found in I.144.3. In our passage I think it refers both to the cows=milk and to the poets.

On tripṛṣṭhá- see disc. ad IX.70.8, 71.7.

I take ví rājati with both ‘shine’ and ‘rule’.


## 04
In IX.98.9 Ge suggests that the world-halves (ródasī) are the jaws of the soma-press, which could account for their being called his mothers (mātárā) here.

On samáyā (ví dhāvati) see comm. ad I.113.10.


## 05
Ge (n. 5c) insists that āhanáso víhāyasaḥ is gen. sg. with te, rather than nom. pl. with mádāḥ (Gr, Re, publ. tr.). That is of course possible, but the difference is fairly minor whether the phrase modifies Soma or his exhilarating drinks.
