+++
title = "076"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., the martial tone is reminiscent of that of another of Kavi Bhārgava’s productions, IX.47, though there is little or no overlap in phraseology.


## 01
On pā́jas- see comm. ad I.58.3. For a god making or assuming his pā́jas-, see, with medial forms of √kṛ, IV.4.1 kṛṇuṣvá pā́jaḥ (of Agni) as well as IX.88.5 vṛ́thā pā́jāṃsi kṛṇute nadī́ṣu, identical to our passage except with a Triṣṭubh cadence, and, with ā́√dā, IX.68.3 pā́ja ā́dade. Presumably in our passage and 88.5 it depicts the swelling of the soma stalks in the waters.


## 02
The participial phrase svàḥ síṣāsan “striving to win the sun” is a match for svàḥ yád … síṣāsati in nearby IX.74.1 “when he strives to win the sun” (also IX.7.4), where I suggest that the sun stands for the gleaming milk with which the Soma will unite at the end of his ritual journey. This association would be emphasized in our passage by gáviṣṭiṣu ‘in the cattle raids’, with cattle standing for milk, as usual. For further on sun=milk see comm. ad vs. 4.

As Ge points out (n. 2d, not reflected in his tr.), ajyate has a double sense, since it can be the passive both of √aj ‘drive’ and √añj ‘anoint’. Both are appropriate here.


## 03
The extreme dislocation of hemistich-initial índrasya from jaṭharéṣu on which it depends must result from the desire to match the initial índrasya of 2c.

The simile-marking particle iva is late here, since the simile must consist of vidyúd abhréva.


## 04
The hapax rt noun cmpd ṛṣi-ṣā́h- ‘vanquishing the seers’ (or, as Scar [600] suggests as an alternative, ‘unter den Ṛṣis siegreich’) is, on first glance, a surprising collocation, since we generally expect √sah to take more obvious enemies as object.

Yet, of course, poetic competition is an important feature of RVic culture, and the rest of the vs. asserts Soma’s dominance in this competition - esp. the final, decisive ásamaṣṭa-kāvyaḥ ‘whose poetic skill is entirely unattainable’, but also his role as “father of thoughts” (pitā́matīnā́m), and his ability to make “the vision of truth” (ṛṭásya dhītím) bellow (presumably louder than the other ṛṣis can). The point of the cmpd might be clearer if tr. “vanquishing the (other) seers”; as Scar points out, Soma is elsewhere identified as ṛ́ṣi-.

ásira- in c is a hapax. It is plausibly derived from √as ‘throw, shoot’: see, e.g., Gr,, AiG II.2.361, as well as, more hesitantly, EWA s.v. AS2 — with a metaphorically tranferred meaning ‘ray, beam’ < ‘missile, spear’; cf. Engl. ‘shaft’ for both shaft of a spear or similar weapon and shaft of light. Say. glosses it first with kṣepakeṇa to √kṣip ‘throw’ and then with raśminā, the more usual (also metaphorically transferred) word for the sun’s rays. Gr’s gloss combines the literal and the transferred sense in ‘Strahlengeschoss’, while Ge (“Strahl”) and Re (“rayon”) render only the transferred sense. Mayrhofer (EWA 144-45) is more tentative: he questions the connection of the word to the ‘throw’ root, and his gloss also expresses doubt about the transferred meaning: “‘Strahl’ (<‘*Geschoss’ [der Sonne]?).” On both etymological and contextual grounds - what does it mean to “be groomed by the lance/ray of the sun”? - it is worth asking what this hapax is doing here. Acdg to Lü (704), the sun is the heavenly pavítra- and so naturally its beam(s) would perform the purification of soma. Although I agree that the sun can sometimes be equated with the filter (see, e.g., IX.83.2), I doubt if that’s what’s going on here. For one thing, the root √mṛj is not generally used for purification across the filter (though it can be; cf.

e.g., IX.86.6, 107.11), but refers rather to the ritual operations involving water (esp.) and milk; cf., e.g., IX.68.9 adbhir góbhir mṛjyate “he is groomed with waters, with cows.” Moreover, the parallelism with raśmí- is not as exact as is implied; most importantly raśmí- is almost always plural, whereas our form is sg., and soma is never “groomed” with/by even pl. raśmíbhiḥ.

Bearing in mind that I interpret “seeking to win the sun” in 2b as expressing Soma’s intention to unite with the milk mixture (metaphorically the sun), as well as the fact that √mṛj ‘groom’ can be construed with an instr. referring to the waters and milk used to prepare the soma, we can now consider a different interpr. of sū́ryasyā́sireṇa. It does not depict the sun’s (single) ray as filter, but the “sun’s shaft” (or even “sun’s shot”) as the milk infused into the soma - referring either to the sun’s light (‘shaft’) as gleaming milk or the infusing itself (‘shot’). The latter would have the merit of requiring fewer semantic steps by simply using the literal meaning of the root in an extended sense; cf. English ‘shot’ used of a small amount of usually powerful liquid, generally alcohol, also (for slightly different reasons) used of espresso. Once this interpr. is considered, the reason for the creation of the hapax becomes apparent (at least to me). The technical term for the milk mixture is āśír- (see nearby IX.75.5); our ásir- is phonologically very close, and I would suggest that it was created as a pun on the standard term. In fact the phonology might be closer still: the Saṃhitā text reads sū́ryasyā́sireṇa, which is resolved by the Pp. into sū́ryasya ásireṇa (the extra syllable is metrically necessary); *ā́sireṇa would also be possible. However, unfortunately I think this latter reading unlikely because it would convert the standard break after late caesura, two light syllables, into a far less common one with heavy - light. Another factor that may have contributed to the creation of this hapax is the presence of ṛṣi(-ṣā́ḍ) in the same metrical position in the preceding pāda, with ṛṣi- a scrambling of ásir-.

Not much changes in the tr., though I would now emend it to “He who is groomed by a “shot” [/a shaft] of the sun [=milk] …” However, this analysis shows once again that when encountering a hapax we should not just seek a plausible meaning and a plausible etymology, but try to figure out why the hapax was introduced in the passage, which often opens the way to better understanding of the other two questions.


## 05
The sá in c with 2nd ps. reference (sá … pavase) violates the rule that such reference is found only with imperatives. (See my “Vedic 'sá figé': An inherited sentence connective?,” Historische Sprachforschung 105 [1992] 213-39.) I think it likely that it has been modeled on the numerous sá (…) pavasva exx. in IX (15 by my count, e.g., nearby IX.72.8=107.24); an imperative would in fact work better with the yáthā purpose cl. in d. The indic. pavase may have been substituted because

*pavasva would produce a very abnormal break. An almost identical pāda is found in


## 32
sá índrāya pavase matsarávān, inexpertly adapted to Triṣṭubh (note the bad cadence [though see comm. ad loc.]).

The splv. matsaríntama- is somewhat oddly formed, with the possessive suffix - ín- added to an adj., with no change in sense. The stem occurs 4x (once in a repeated pāda), always at the end of a pāda. AiG II.2.340 considers it the equivalent of

*matsara-tama-, based on madín-tama-. Given the metrical unfavorability of the
stem *matsaratama-, this seems a plausible explan.
