+++
title = "077"

+++
The word sóma- is absent from this hymn, although four of the five vss. (all but c) open with a nom. sg. masc. referring to the soma and inviting that word.

As mentioned above, Kavi Bhārgava briefly treats the Somaraub here (vs. 2) and in his dimeter hymn IX.48 - a myth otherwise rarely mentioned in Maṇḍala IX.


## 02
The gen. obj. of ā́yuvate, mádhvaḥ, is hard to interpret; it certainly doesn’t seem likely to be a partitive.

I don’t know what to do with the particle áha, which is oddly positioned in the middle of a pāda interrupting an NP. Re’s “d’un coeur, ah! rempli de crainte” is appealing, but áha doesn’t ordinarily have such an exclamatory value, as far as I can see - and it’s a little too conveniently superimposable on our (both French and English) “ah!”


## 03
Both Ge and Re take pū́rvāsa úparāsaḥ as temporal designations: the earlier and later drops. If so, it is hard to understand how we can order both types (esp. the earlier ones, which should be beyond our control) to run. I prefer to see them as spatial. For such a usage cf. V.31.11 pū́rvaṃ karad úparam “(what is) in front ... he will put behind.” As has long been known (see Old, citing Barth., as well as EWA s.v.), ahī́- is etymologically identical to Aves. azī (OA, YA), which characterizes cows - contra Gr’s ‘Schlange’. It’s not clear to me why Ge and Re seem so uncertain about it, esp.

as Ge cites Aves. azī in n. 3c.


## 04
As noted in the publ. intro., the vs. seems to contain a paradox, whereby the masc. Soma conceives an embryo, most likely of himself. See Ge’s n. 4c.

The hapax urubjá- is puzzling. Gr’s suggestion that it derives from a phonological deformation of *ud-ubjá- seems reasonable, esp., as Mayrhofer points out (EWA s.v. UBJ), with the interference of urú-. Verbal forms of úd √ubj are found in AVŚ and TS.


## 05
Soma is notably identified with Varuṇa and Mitra in this vs. - the former because he cannot be deceived by the crooked (hurúg yaté), the latter because (implicitly) he mediates between the ritual communities (vṛjána-).

With Mayr. (EWA s.v. híruk), I take hurúk to √hvar ‘go crookedly’ (also in a moral sense). The expression hurúg yaté contrasts with ṛtáṃ yaté “going to truth” in the same metrical position in nearby IX.69.3, 74.3 and four other times.
