+++
title = "078"

+++
A remarkably straightforward hymn. Oberlies tr. it in Relig. RV II.125.


## 01
Pace Gr, who identifies it as fem. nom. sg., the adj. tā́nvā is most likely acc. pl. n., parallel to riprám. On the basis of IX.14.4 jáhac cháryā́ṇi tā́nvā “leaving behind the stems that belong to his body,” śáryāṇi should be supplied, as indicated by Ge (n. 1c) and Re.


## 02
A causal rendering of hí in c, as in the publ. tr., is somewhat jarring: it is hard to see how cd provides the causal basis for pāda b or for ab together. Moreover the thousand horses in d is a surprising number to be crowded into the soma cups and the identity of those horses is not clear. Although the standard tr. (Ge, Re, as well as Ober [II.125/160] and the publ. tr.) all take c and d as parallel and both under the domain of hí, I would now separate c and d, with d a main clause for which c supplies the causal basis. The amended tr.: “because there are many courses for you to travel, there are a thousand fallow bay horses sitting in the cups.” The point here, I think, is that the poured soma forms multiple rivulets as it crosses the filter, and these separate drippings of soma are conceived of as horses as they go into the cups.

A minor question in d is the grammatical identity of the rt. noun cmpd.

camūṣádaḥ, which can be gen. sg. or nom. pl. Both Ge and Re take it as gen. sg., referring to Soma; the publ. tr. and Oberlies as nom. pl.; Scar allows either and doesn’t decide. In fact it doesn’t really matter and the other attestations, both sg. (1x) and pl. (4x) refer to soma (drinks), which in this case could be either the metaphorical horses or a supplied “you [Soma].”


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., the Apsarases, who are rarely mentioned in the RV, unusually stand here for the waters with which the soma is mixed. Although “sitting within … have streamed” seems slightly contradictory, it must be that they first streamed and then took their seats in the cups. This could be conveyed by a tr.

“The Apsarases …, (now) sitting within, streamed towards Soma.” On the phrase harmyásya sakṣáṇim “conquerer of the secure house,” found also in IX.71.4, see comm. ad loc. Pāda-final sakṣáṇim echoes manīṣíṇam at the end of pāda a, in addition to participating in another phonetic figure with b and d, as noted below.

In d it is unclear what ákṣitam modifies, since both sumnám and pávamānam are possible. Both Ge and Re take it with the former (e.g., “une faveur impérissable”), while Ober (II.125) and I take it with the latter. Although “imperishable favor/grace” might seem closer to the famous expression “imperishable fame,” word order favors the connection with pávamānam, as does an expression like IX.26.2 sahásradhā́ram ákṣitam “the imperishable one of a thousand streams,” definitely referring to soma. I would note, however, that the word order argument may be weak, since ákṣitam may have been placed in final position for the phonological echo of pāda-final akṣaran (b) and sakṣáṇim (c). The stem ákṣita- is also almost always pāda-final (15 out of 18 occurrences). Of course, it would be possible to read the adjective with both acc. ## 079


## 01
I take the loc. bṛháddiveṣu in b as referring to the gods, who inhabit lofty heaven (so also Ober II.60; see also alternative in Ge’s n. 1b). I take it as referring to the destined recipients of our pressed soma. The standard view is rather that it is a personal name and refers to the human pressers, to be construed with suvānā́saḥ (e.g., Klein DGRV I.241 “being pressed among the Bṛhaddiva’s”). But this PN is only certain in a single passage in the late RV, X.120.8-9, in the sg.; elsewhere, and esp. in the plural, the stem refers to gods or other heaven-located substances. Cf., e.g., II.2.9 amṛ́teṣu … bṛháddiveṣu. Mayr (Pers.Nam.) considers the PN possible here (“vielleicht”), but does not commit to it.

The real puzzles in this vs. are found in the 2nd hemistich, which has been much discussed, esp. by Old. See also Ge, Re, and Hoffmann (Aufs. 363). Before considering the problems of interpr., we should first note that pāda c is metrically disturbed: it has only 11 syllables in this Jagatī hymn, and in order to produce the proper Jagatī cadence the final ó in the pāda-final sequence iṣó árātayaḥ must be read long, despite its position in hiatus. (A Triṣṭubh cadence for this 11-syl. verse is excluded.) There is no obvious way to fix either the undercount or the anomalous long o. Note in particular that nothing can be added in the opening ví ca náśan na(ḥ), because it is an opening of 5 and the enclitic naḥ must be part of it, since pronominal enclitics never follow the caesura. So a potential easy fix is impossible: to read

*náśan[ta] na(ḥ), with the verb matching naśanta in b but having undergone a
species of haplology. (For a different possible fix, see below.) It is therefore possible that pāda c is corrupt in some way. On the other hand, the poet may have wanted to draw attention to the similar openings—x x náśan na(ḥ) and x x naśanta—by this metrical disturbance.

In order to approach the sense of the hemistich there are a number of clues we should note: 1) the near-coincidence of verbs: (ví) náśan / naśanta; 2) the accent on the first verb, which must result from the subordinating use of ca as ‘if’ here; 3) several parallels, which unfortunately pull in different ways. See esp. X.133.3 ví ṣú víśvā árātayo, aryó naśanta no dhíyaḥ; also II.35.6 nā́rātayo ví naśan nā́nr̥tāni. A feature that we might expect to be a clue, the different voices of the two verbs, act.

(ví …) náśan, med. naśanta, does not turn out to be helpful, since -anta replacement is always a possibility in 3rd pl. injunctives, and naśanta also immediately precedes sániṣanta and could have adapted itself to that verb. The two passages just cited, with (ví …) náśanta and (ví) náśan respectively and at least possible identity of meaning (see below), demonstrate the problem with using voice as a criterion.

Old’s analysis of the situation, incl. the close parallel in X.133.3, is acute, and he suggests several quite different solutions, without, however, deciding for one. His first question is whether the two verbs belong to the same root. If so, the likely one is √naś ‘reach, attain’, but, in his opinion, this makes trouble for pāda c; moreover, in X.133.3, which he considers an abbreviated reworking of our passage and in a way its oldest commentary, an affiliation with √naś ‘disappear, perish’ makes better sense for the first part of the clause (“all hostilities will disappear”). Old’s first stab at interpr. thus assumes that the two verbs belong to different roots, with ‘disappear’ in pāda c and ‘reach, attain’ in d: “Hinweg mögen schwinden von unsrer Nahrung die Kargheiten: so mögen denn die Geizigen [Akk.] treffen.” This interpr. must take iṣáḥ as an ablative sg., aryáḥ as an acc. pl., and supply árātayaḥ in c as the subj. not only of ví … náśan in c but also of naśanta in d. What doesn’t seem sufficiently represented in his interpr. is the subordinating value of conditional ca. Old’s second alternative interpr. takes into account the missing syllable in c (though not the problematic quantity of o in hiatus). He suggests remedying the undercount by inserting a negative after the caesura: ví ca náśan *ná na …, which would avoid the problem of an enclitic following the caesura we noted above. In his emended pāda there would be an opening of 4; accented neg. ná would immediately follow and host the enclitic. Haplology would easily account for the transmitted text. The sequence with negative would be very like II.35.6 cited above: “hostilities shall not reach [him].” This solution is very clever, and it would allow both verbs to belong to the same root, ‘reach, attain’. He paraphrases (but doesn’t tr.) it as “die árātayaḥ sollen nicht uns treffen; wir wollen die arí treffen.” But the problem once again is that he does not represent the conditional ca. “If the hostilities do not reach us” is significantly worse than his paraphrase. He himself is disturbed by the unusual position of ná (though I think that could be acceptable) and the fact that X.133.3 clearly means something different, perhaps because this passage was misunderstood by the poet of X.133.

My own—quite uncertain—interpr. is that the two verb forms belong to different roots, just as I take the single verb naśanta in X.133.3 as a pun involving the same two roots. But, unlike Old’s first alternative, I think the first verb is ‘reach’ and the 2nd ‘perish’. I take iṣáḥ as acc. pl. (as do Ge, Re, Hoffmann, Klein, and Ober, in their diff. interpr.), even though root-accented *íṣaḥ is expected (though ending-accented acc. pl. in this stem is not rare). I then supply ‘refreshments’ as subject of naśanta in d, with aryáḥ gen. sg. depending not only on this supplied subj.

but also on the árātayaḥ of c. The point is: if the stranger’s hostilities go after our things, theirs will be destroyed as well. It is also possible that the subj. of naśanta in d is the same árātayaḥ: if their hostilities come after us, those hostilities are doomed.

As I just said, I don’t have a high degree of certainty about the correctness of this interpr. Those produced by the others just named, which all assign both verbs to ‘reach, attain’, are certainly not out of the question. Unfortunately I can’t endorse either of Old’s alternatives, however.

## 01-02
The opening of this vs. prá ṇo dhanvantv índavaḥ … echoes that of vs. 1 X no dhanvantv índavaḥ, prá but with the preverb in tmesis relocated to a more standard, pre-verbal position.

Although (a)codásaḥ (1a) and (mada-)cyútaḥ (2a) obviously belong to different roots (√cud, √cyut), they have similar semantics, ‘impel, urge on’ and ‘arouse, set in motion’, and similar phonology. So the negated acodás- ‘without impulsion, without being impelled’ and positive mada-cyút- ‘arousing exhilaration’ (by my interpr., but see below) function as a virtual polarized pair, describing the drops as not themselves needing any impetus to move, but providing impetus to others. A pseudo-etymological figure.


## 02
The rt. noun compd mada-cyút- (on which see also above) is taken by Ge as having passive semantics (“rauscherregt”), in contrast to the active transitive semantics of my ‘arousing exhilaration’ and Re’s “mouvant l’ivresse.” Scar (128-29) allows both for the cmpd in general, without deciding on particular passages. Since, all things being equal, rt noun cmpds to roots with transitive value tend to display that (type vṛtra-hán-), and most of the other -cyút- cmpds are transitive (acyuta-cyút- ‘shaking the unshakeable’, parvata-cyút- ‘shaking the mountains’), a transitive interpr. seems to me the default. For the five attestations of madacyút- in IX, all modifying soma or soma drops, as here, a transitive interpr. is the more natural: soma is, after all, what produces máda-. However, the cmpd. elsewhere also modifies Indra or similar entities, who are more likely to be roused to exhilaration than to rouse it (e.g., I.51.2), and the passive value should be allowed there. Indeed in I.81.3, by my interpr., there are two potential referents (Indra / soma) and two different readings of the cmpd.

Pāda b poses problems: what is the disjunction signaled by vā; where does the rel. cl. with yébhiḥ begin; what is the referent of yébhiḥ; how should dhánā be construed? Ge starts the rel. cl. with yébhiḥ, leaving the disjunctive phrase dhánā vā in (or attached to) the main cl. Since there is nothing in that cl. with which to construe dhánā he must supply a verb parallel to dhanvantu: “… sollen rinnen … oder die Kampfpreise (gewinnen).” Sim. Klein, DGRV II.205. There is nothing objectionable about this solution - ‘win’ regularly takes dhána- as obj., and in fact soma or its equivalent is sometimes the subj. Cf., e.g., IX.65.9 … te … víśvā dhãnāni jigyúṣah “of you [presumably = soma] having won all the stakes” (though it’s worth noting that the exact half-vs. is found in VIII.14.6, applying to Indra). But nothing in the context invites or supports supplying a verb here. Re’s solution is more economical, in using dhánā as an alternative subject for prá … dhanvantu, though running forth is less natural action for stakes to perform. Ober (II.248) also takes the disjunction as belonging to the main cl., but with dhánā as an alternate goal for the running drops: “… sollen vorwärts laufen oder hin zu den Siegespreisen.” All of them, Ge (/Klein), Re, and Ober start the rel. cl. with yébhiḥ and make its antecedent dhánā. By contrast, I take all of pāda b as the rel. cl. (the position of yébhiḥ is of course perfectly compatible with this), with dhánā a 2nd acc., of goal (rather like Ober), with junīmási. The antecedent of yébhiḥ is then the soma drops, which give us (and the horses) the energy to race to the prizes.

Ge, Re, and Ober take c with d. This is certainly possible, but I prefer taking it with b, to express the potential hazards and dirty-dealing facing our horses in this race.


## 03
Both árāti- and arí- return from 1cd, but given the uncertainties in that passage, the return is not terrible useful.

What is most notable here is the carefully balanced construction of ab, with double utá opening the pādas, the following parallel but contrastive gen.-abl.

expressions svásyā árātyā(h) … anyásyā árātyā(ḥ), and finally the similarly parallel but contrastive nominal clausettes arír hí ṣá(ḥ) and vṛ́ko hí ṣaḥ. It is (almost) impossible to escape concluding that the poet was contrasting two similar but very distinct sources of hostility. Unfortunately, Thieme (Fremd. 45-46) does escape this conclusion, deciding that the two gen. phrases and the two annunciatory nominal clauses are merely a way of generalizing to “everybody.” His tr. simply ignores the signposted construction of the two pādas and jumbles the parallel phrases together.

This was not Thieme’s finest hour. Without an idée fixe to prove (as was the case of Th), the construction imposes an analysis: a hostile person belong to our side is an arí, one on the other is a wolf. Now elsewhere in Indo-European and indeed elsewhere in the RV, “wolf” can be used of a human who is outside social boundaries, an outlaw (see, e.g., my “Function of Animals in the RV, 2016: 208-9).

Here the outlaw is contrasted with the arí-; with Th. I take him as a “stranger,” but against Th. as a stranger who belongs to the larger Ārya community, who is “one of ours.” The hostile person outside of that community, the “other,” is a wolf. With Th.

again, I’d say that the ultimate intent of ab is universal, to counter the threats from any possible source, but this universality is achieved by an implicitly conjoined contrast between the two opposites that make up the whole.

By my rules (“Vedic anyá-, Fs. Beekes 1997), anyá- here should be definite because it is in non-initial position - hence “the other.” This works well with the interpr. just elaborated, that the two contrastive phrases define the whole.

One further syntactic issue: what is the gen.-abl. in svásyā árātyā(h) … anyásyā árātyā(ḥ) doing? Ge supplies “protect” to govern an abl., on the basis of VIII.71.1 pāhí víśvasyā árāteḥ. This is certainly possible - and is endorsed by Old.

However, because of the starkness of the expression, which underlines the contrasts between each matching element, I am reluctant to introduce any extraneous words and take the two phrases as independent gen.-abl. in loosely causal/circumstantial usage. Not very satisfactory, I admit.


## 04
On this vs. see publ. intro.

The first pāda is problematic. The standard interpr. is that Soma’s navel is tied either to the navel in heaven (Ge, Old, Ober [II.13], Kü [242]) or Soma’s navel in heaven is tied to our navel (Re). E.g., Ge: “Du, dessen höchster (Nabel) an den abel im Himmel geknüpft ist.” Before even considering what this would really mean, there is a simple grammatical problem: this interpr. (and those of the others) requires masc. paramáḥ and yáḥ both to refer to fem. nā́bhi-. Disc. of this gender clash is remarkably cavalier. Old suggests that nā́bhi- may be masc. here; Ge (n. 4ab) registers this suggestion but also suggests that the synonym bándhu- could be supplied in substitution (not a bad idea, though bándhu- is rare in the RV and doesn’t seem to show up in the vicinity of nā́bhi-). The push to have two forms of nā́bhi- in this pāda is clearly based on very similar IX.10.8 nā́bhā nā́bhim na ā́dade “He has bound his navel to our navel” and the idiom sám / ā́√dā ‘tie’ with two forms of ‘navel’, on which see comm. ad I.139.1. There is another slight problem, that the rel.

prn. yá(ḥ) is rather too deep in its clause, if the whole pāda forms the rel. cl., as in most interpr.

I don’t have a good solution to this pāda. I would first point out that init. diví te matches up with init. pṛthivyā́s te in b, and at least the disturbance in word order in the pāda may result from the desire to locate heaven and earth in parallel positions.

Otherwise, instead of assuming a masc. nā́bhi- I supply ‘form’ with the masc.

paramó yáḥ in the publ. tr., but there is no particular support for this, and if I was thinking of rūpá- at the time, this doesn’t work because rūpá- is neut. There are no masc. nouns that are regularly qualified by paramá-, while nā́bhi- is qualfied as paramā́(with a fem. form) in X.61.18. The upshot is - I’m fairly sure my rendering is wrong, or at least not right, and I’d be inclined to go with the standard, despite the distressing gender clash: “It was in heaven, to its navel, that your highest (navel) was bound.” As to what this means, presumably it is another instantiation of the “heavenly soma” trope: no matter that the physical plant is earthbound (as in pāda b), it has a heavenly analogue. One thing that is clear is that ādadé belongs to √dā ‘bind’; see comm. ad I.139.1 and Kü 242.

Fortunately the rest of the vs. is relatively straightforward. The “fingers” that grow on the earth are the parts of the plant: if soma is ephedra intermedia (wfhich grows in the Himalayas), it has slender upright shoots that could be conceived of as fingers.
