+++
title = "080"

+++


## 01
The rhyming verbs pavate and havate take identical positions in pādas a and b respectively. See also 2d pavase, 3a pavate, 3b śrávase in the same position.

Pāda c compares soma to a thunderstorm, producing a roar like Bṛhaspati’s while flashing forth (ví didyute) like lightning.

In pāda d the value of ná is disputed: is it the simile particle or the negation? The problem prompted a 5-pg. digression by Old on the positioning of the two elements. He comes out strongly for the simile marker here, a view shared by Ge, Re, Kü (250, 503), and the publ. tr., while the negative is favored by Lü (99 and n.

2), Ober (II.216), and Schmidt (B+I 79)(with Ge considering it in n. 1d). Lü recognizes that the position favors the simile particle, but prefers the negative since there’s no obvious element to supply to fill out the simile. Ge suggests that subj. to be supplied is either the soma vessels or the gods, with both Old and Re favoring the gods, who came on the scene in pāda b. I think instead that it is the waters with which the pressed soma is mixed; this would fit the comparison to ‘seas’. Cf. I.173.8 … sávanā samudré “the pressings in the sea,” which I also think refers to the mixing water. (Of course sávanāni could also be the subject of vivyacuh, but this would require supplying an obj.) On the full grade of vivyacuḥ (for expected *vivicuḥ) see Kü 503 n. 1000. One might also note that the expected form would yield a terrible cadence. Acdg. to Kü, the indic. pf. to √vyac is always a presential stative, and he considers the indic.

necessary in this context to express that value. Otherwise, the full-grade 3rd pl. could belong to the plupf. (here as injunc.); cf. the augmented plupf. avivyacuḥ (X.56.4).

Kü considers the injunc. excluded here, but in fact I think it’s quite possible: “they have enveloped the pressings,” parallel to ví didyute ‘has flashed forth’ in c, and might alter the tr. in to the preterital one.


## 02
On áyo-hata- see comm. ad IX.1.2.


## 03
On kukṣí- as ‘cheek’, not ‘belly’, see comm. ad III.36.8, VIII.92.24. Here the context is not diagnostic and might in fact slightly favor ‘belly’, esp. given vs. 1 of the next hymn (IX.81) by the same poet, which contains jaṭháram ‘belly’.

However, the preponderance of evidence for ‘cheek’ elsewhere is pretty strong.

## 04-05
Both vss. open with táṃ tvā, echoing yáṃ tvā beginning vs. 2.


## 04
Pādas a and b share a verb, duhate in b. Each pāda contains a contrastive pair: devébhyaḥ … náraḥ “the men for the gods” and sahásra(dhāram) … dáśa (kṣípaḥ) “thousand(-streamed) … ten (fingers).”


## 05
The first two pādas have the same structure as 4ab: they share a verb form of √duh, duhánti in b, with two different subjects, hastínaḥ (a) and dáśa kṣípaḥ (b) again. The “stones” of 4c (grā́vabhiḥ) return, but with different lexical realization (ádribhiḥ).
