+++
title = "081"

+++


## 01
īm in c anticipates śū́ram in d.


## 02
With Old I see “of gods” (devā́nām) in the phrase “the double birth of gods” as pregnant for “of gods (and men),” very much as a pregnant dual like dyā́vā “two heavens” or pitárā “two fathers” implies its opposite number. As Old points out, the locational adverbs in the next pāda amúta itáś ca “from yonder and from here” strongly suggest heaven and earth as their spheres. Ge considers “gods and men to be the sense, but, in order not to supply a 2nd gen. pl., he achieves this by way of the unlikely “(heavenly and earthly) gods,” that is, gods and men. Ober (I.391) thinks that the double birth is of Devas and Asuras, but this is anachronistic.


## 03
The vs. contains a play on vásu, which further puns on the poet’s name. In pāda a the acc. vásu refers to the material goods we ask Soma to provide for us, while in c the dative vásave appears to refer to a good person, the recipient of Soma’s aid. Since the Anukramaṇī attributes this hymn (along with IX.80 and 82) to Vasu Bhāradvāja, the recipient is presumably the poet himself. (Because Re has a particular, and peculiar, view of vásu, his tr. does not reflect the pun.) párā sicaḥ ‘pour away’, which appears only here in the RV, must play on the very common soma verb pári √sic ‘pour around, pour in circles’, of the circular motion of pouring the soma juice onto the filter. See pári √i / pári √yā of soma’s journey around the filter in vss. 1-2 of the next hymn (IX.82), attributed to the same poet.

With Old I read *sucetúnā (also in V.65.3) for transmitted sú cetúnā. The former cmpd. is pretty well attested, while cetú- doesn’t otherwise exist. And in both instances the phrase/cmpd is pāda-final, which would put an independent particle sú in an unusual location: it otherwise generally takes Wackernagel’s position.


## 04
Ge, Re, and Ober (I.526) take surātáyaḥ as referring to a separate group of divinities (e.g., Re “les (divinités) aux beaux dons”), but there is no such corporate entity as far as I am aware. In other passages the stem simply modifies the gods in general (X.65.4) or the Maruts (X.78.3). Here I think it applies to the listed gods as a group, and as a summary adj. was stationed at the end of a pāda, here matching the position of *sucetúnā at the end of 3c in the previous vs. ## 082
## 01-02
As Ge points out (nn. 1d, 2d), ghee (ghṛtá-) in these two vss. stands for the milk mixture.


## 01
The simile in b is also found in X.43.2 rā́jeva dasma (with voc.), as Ge (n.

1b) points out. The simile is likely to be self-contained, not a necessary part of the rest of the clause, contra Ober (II.214-15), who sees it as expressing a peculiar trope, “der ‘brüllende’ König.”


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. marks a departure from the first two conventional vss., with richer imagery, esp. in the first pāda. The first hemistich must refer to the soma plant, growing in the mountains. The god of the thunder(storm), Parjanya is his father because rain produces plants. The qualifier parṇín- means, in the first instance, ‘feathered’ (e.g., VIII.5.33 váyaḥ … parṇínaḥ “feathered birds”), but of course parṇá- ‘feather’ has already undergone widening in the RV to mean ‘leaf’ as well, and so it must be interpr. here.

The scene shifts back to the ritual ground in cd: the two additional ingredients of prepared soma, water and milk, are found in c, with the pressing stones in d (the actual order of ritual preparation would be the reverse, of course).

In c utá is in an unusual position and its function is unclear. Klein (DGRV I.380-81) simply describes the situation as involving “nonparallel clauses and weak nexus,” remarking further that cd “bears little cohesive relationship to ab,” though that’s what he thinks utá is connecting. Ge and Re both tr. as “also,” and the publ. tr.

follows this interpr., which seems more likely than Klein’s near-null hypothesis.

Perhaps contributing to its unusual position is the parallelism of abhí gā́utā́saran# and 1b abhí gā́acikradat#, with the verbs trisyllabic asaran and quadrisyllabic acikradat respectively. The utá supplies the necessary extra syllable and, by coalescing with the augment, the heavy antepenult needed for the cadence.

In d “unite with the stones” may be a little strong: better “come together with.”


## 04
Since śéva in pāda a must be a vocative morphologically, its accent is unexpected in this pāda-medial position. There are two factors that might have contributed to it, which, however, cancel each other out. On the one hand, the point of contact between the simile “like a wife to her husband” and the frame is this very adj. ‘kindly’, and so an underlying fem. nom. sg. *sévā must also be assumed. This overlap between an expected nom. and the voc. addressed to the correspondent of the wife, namely Soma, may have led to the anomalous accentuation. On the other hand, if the simile was felt to be a self-contained clause, śéva would begin a new clause or at least a new syntactic unit. I’m not sure that either is sufficient, but I weakly favor the second.

The voc. phrase in b, pájrāyā garbha, likewise causes a problem, though not of accent: garbha is properly unaccented, and its dependent gen. pájrāyā(ḥ) shows the expected shift to initial accent in this pāda-initial voc. phrase, from the suffixally accented stem pajrá-. The question is the referent of this fem. pajrā́-. Ge, Re, Ober (I.530) take it as a PN (e.g., “O Kind der Pajrā”). It is certainly true that pajrá- can be a PN (see Mayr [PN], though he doesn’t include this passage in his list), but usually in the pl. of a family of poets. It is never otherwise found in the fem., and it would be very strange (in my opinion) for a named mother to be specified in this kind of context, unless she is a goddess. Far more likely is Sāy.’s identification of the referent as the earth. The stem pajrá- as an adj. means ‘sturdy, steadfast’, a reasonable description of the earth. Earth as Soma’s mother would fit nicely also with 3a, which names Parjanya as his father. The rains generate the plant, but it grows in the earth.

The standard interpr. of prá carā in c is as 2nd sg. impv. addressed to Soma, and this is certainly possible. But I think it is equally possible that, in this 1st ps.

context, it’s a 1st sg. subjunctive, and the contents of the poet’s direct speech announced in immed. preceding brávīmi te. This is how it is rendered in the publ. tr.

The sú in c is in an unusual position, but it is in the same position as sú in the preceding hymn, IX.81.3, attributed to the same poet. There Old suggested (and I followed) reading it with the following noun as cmpd. *sucetúnā. I follow the same path here, reading *sujīváse, though this time without Old’s imprimatur. The case here is not as strong. With regard to IX.81.3 the putative cmpd sucetú- exists independently, while the transmitted stem cetú- does not. Here the opposite is true: the infinitival dat. jīváse is quite well attested, whereas sujīvás- is not found. This gives me pause about the emendation, but even without it, I think that sú should be read with jīváse and with its lexical value, not merely as a particle: “… to live well.”


## 05
In b paryáyā(ḥ) is the augmented impf. to √yā; so correctly Gr, Ge. But Re in a rare grammatical lapse seems in his n. to take it as a subjunctive (presumably to √i), but that form should be (and is) áyaḥ.
