+++
title = "083"

+++
On the structure of this hymn and my interpr. of its enigmatic contents, see the publ. intro. Here I will not treat in detail the interpr. of others.


## 01
As indicated in the publ. intro. and above, ad IX.73.9, this vs. is very like the last vs. of IX.73, a hymn also focused on the filter, both physical and mystical.

The identity of the ‘limbs’ (gā́trāṇi) in b is not entirely clear. I take it as referring to the metaphorical limbs of the filter, though the visual picture thus conjured up is imperfect, unless the fleece filter comes not only from the back but from the legs of the sheep. I do not think it is the limbs of the soma-drinkers, with Re.

I take tád in c to be the filter, again both physical and mystical. As I say in the publ. intro., “raw” versus “cooked” in this hemistich refers to the transformation effected on the soma plant by its ritual preparation, even though “cooking” is not technically involved. The pl. in d is presumably the soma drops or drinks, as opposed to the mass sg. in c referring to the as-yet-unprepared plant.


## 02
The identification of sun and soma, with the rays of the sun across the sky (the cosmic filter, as it were) compared to the tracks of soma across the ritual filter.

The ī of pavītár- is anomalous and may in fact be suspect. The stem only occurs twice in the RV, the other time at IX.4.4, where the ī is not metrically guaranteed. In our passage, as Gr. points out, the SV [also JB] reading pavitā́ram is metrically better. The stem with ī is confined to the RV, except that the repetition of


## 04
in SV also has the ī (as opposed to the SV rep. of our passage). The expected pavitár- is found in the AV and later. Given extremely common savitár- to the parallel root √sū, it is hard to understand how pavītár- acquired its unetymological ī.

I tentatively suggest that it is a metrical analogy to the far more common pavítra-, with heavy 2nd syllable because of the cluster. As this hymn shows, pavítra- occurs in the same contexts as pavītár-. It might also be influenced by the weak forms of the associated 9th class present (suffix nī), which immediately follows the form in


## 04
pávītāraḥ punītána.


## 03
Further identification of soma and the sun. For pṛ́śni- and ukṣán- used of the sun, see, e.g., V.47.3; for the sun supporting the worlds, see X.170.4 (dedicated to Sūrya) yénemā́viśvā bhúvanāny ā́bhr̥tā “by whom all these worlds are borne.” As indicated in the publ. intro., I take the 2nd hemistich as expressing a reciprocal paradox: the forefathers were created as masters of artifice (māyāvín-) by the artifice (māyā́-) of Soma/the sun, but they also engendered him. I take the pf.

mamire as passive, with Gr. The standard tr. (and incl. HPS, B+I, 78) take the verb as transitive, supplying bhúvanāni from b as obj. (I do have to concede that the pf. is otherwise generally transitive.) But under their reading I don’t understand how the forefathers as possessing their own māyā́(māyāvínaḥ) needed “his māyā́” (asya māyáyā) to accomplish the task.

If there is any difference in meaning between māyāvín- (3x) and the far better attested and more orthodoxly formed māyín- I cannot detect it.


## 04
For my view of the Gandharva as another instantiation of soma/the sun see publ. intro. This more or less agrees with Ge (n. 4a: the sun, acdg. to Sāy.) and Re (Soma-Gandharva). I do not see this vs. as referring to the Somaraub as Ober does (II.162).

As indicated in the publ. intro., with the 2nd hemistich we return to the world of ritual and to the filter specifically.

nidhā̇́- clearly means ‘snare’; see the other occurrence in X.73.11 nidháyeva baddhā́n “bound as if by a snare.” But the semantic dev. from the presumed source ní √dhā is not clear. That lexeme generally means ‘set down, deposit, keep safe/secure’. Perhaps ‘snare’ develops from this last meaning: a device used to secure an object. On this problem see detailed disc. by Scar (255). It would be nice to connect it with ní √dā ‘bind’, but pesky phonology gets in the way.


## 05
The garment of cloud in b is presumably the milk in ritual terms, a real cloud for the sun identified with soma.
