+++
title = "084"

+++


## 01
Acdg. to Ober (I.526), this vs. is concerned with the “landerobernde Funktion (König) Somas,” which makes sense. Pāda c directly asks Soma to provide us with wide space, and his epithets vícarṣaṇi- ‘unbound(ari)ed’ and apsā́- ‘waterwinning’ in ab belong to this conceptual realm. In d urukṣitaú ‘in the wide dwelling place’ may as well, if it refers to our (newly acquired) dwelling, per Ober. Re takes it rather as the dwelling place of the divine folk, but given the context Ober’s view is more persuasive.


## 02
The territory-winning theme of vs. 1 may be continued here, but on the cosmic level, with Soma mounting all the worlds. This is also probably a reference to Soma as the sun, as Ge suggests (n. 2a).

As noted in the publ. intro., the “knotting and unknotting” probably has both a ritual and a moral reading. Ritually it presumably refers to soma’s passage across the woolly tangles of the sheep’s fleece filter. But Ge cites as potential parallel IX.97.18 granthíṃ ná ví ṣya grathitám …, ṛjúṃ ca gātúṃ vṛjínaṃ ca … “ Untie like a knot the straight and the crooked way (which are) knotted up, when you are being purified,” which implies a moral dimension as well, since “straight” and “crooked” are often used in that sphere.

Pāda d lacks an acc. in the frame to be construed with siṣakti as parallel to uṣásam in the simile. Perhaps the gods in general (the daívyaṃ jánam of 1d and 3d), or the three gods named in 1b, Indra, Varuṇa, and Vāyu. Re supplies Indra, and the parallel he cites, I.56.4 índraṃ síṣakti uṣásaṃ ná sū́ryaḥ, supports this suggestion, esp. since Indra recurs in vss. 3 and 4.


## 03
The ritual and/or real world situation depicted in pādas a and c is unclear. In particular, in pāda a what plants does soma (+ milk) pour onto? Ober (II.42) may well be right that it depicts soma as rain, though we would still lack a ritual analogue to the plants receiving rain in the real world. Rain in this pāda would fit with the lightning imagery in c. Soma him/itself flashed forth (ví didyute) in IX.80.1, and “ever-flashing light” (dávidyutatī- rúc-) is associated with the soma drinks in IX.64.28.

The publ. tr. construed dhā́rayā with sutáḥ, because this expression (IX.51.5, 72.5, 100.6, 108.5) or minor variants (IX.3.10=42.2, 10.4, 97.45) are fairly common in this maṇḍala. However, both Ge and Re take it with pavate, parallel with vidyútā (e.g., “Der ausgepresste Soma laütert sich mit Blitz (und Regen)guss”), and this may be preferable in the rainstorm context.


## 04
Notice the return of the god Vāyu of 1b in the guise of the common noun ‘wind(s)’ (vāyúbhiḥ) in c, juxtaposed with Indra in d.


## 05
The last pāda is notable for the concentration of poet words: vípraḥ kavíḥ kā́vyena, a role not otherwise attributed to Soma in this hymn.


## 85-86
On the structure of the last two hymns of the Jagatī group, see the publ.

introductions to IX.85 and 86. In brief, after a series of hymns of 5 vss. (IX.75-84), these last two have 12 vss. and 48 vss. respectively. However, they are clearly composites: IX.85 consists of three groups of four vss. apiece, IX.86 of 16 tṛcas. The standard principles of hymn arrangement can thus be restored.
