+++
title = "085"

+++
For the four-vs. sequences and their contents, see publ. intro.


## 02
In pāda c the preverbs abhy ā́are oddly positioned, after the caesura, and, more important, the two apparent acc. objects śátrūn ‘rivals’ and bhandanāyátaḥ ‘those seeking blessings’ are antithetical, with only the first an appropriate obj. to jahí. The problems disappear if, with Ge, we supply a second verb to go with the preverbs and to govern the 2nd acc. A verb of motion fits well, and √i, √gam, and √yā all appear with this combination of preverbs, whereas √han does not. Ge goes for slightly richer semantics: “(komm) … zu (Hilfe)” - without specifying what verb he supplies, but note that √av does not appear with those preverbs.

The identities of Soma and Indra appear to bleed into each other in the course of the vs. In ab the 2nd ps. subject is clearly Soma, on the basis of voc. pavamāna (a) and priyó mádaḥ (b). The assumption then is that the impv. jahí in c is also addressed to Soma. But in d we get direct address of Indra and at the end of the pāda he is the subj. of a second jahi. Therefore pāda c, which contains no lexical clue to the addressee, could be addressed either to Soma or to Indra (or both).


## 03
The blending of identities in 2cd is made explicit in pāda b here, where Soma is called “the very self of Indra” (ātméndrasya).

On the meaning of the secondary root √niṃs see comm. ad VIII.43.10. There I stated my preference for maintaining the older gloss ‘kiss’, against the colorless ‘seek out’, which was suggested by Gotō and adopted by EWA, etc. However, I must admit that, at least superficially, ‘seek out’ works better here than ‘kiss’ and it is reflected in the publ. tr. But a ceremonial kiss signaling fealty is certainly possible - like kissing the pope’s ring or the widespread custom of kissing someone’s feet as a gesture of respect. So Ober (I.531-32) “Sie küssen den [Fuss des] König[s] dieser Erde.” Both Ge and Re render the phrase without interposing a bodypart, e.g., “ils baisent le roi de ce monde.” I am now inclined towards the more precise and physical “they kiss the king,” rather than the publ. tr.’s “They seek out the king.” This interpr.

is made the more likely because “kissing” Soma in the ritual can well indicate consuming soma by mouth, that is, drinking it.


## 05
The passive ajyase has, as often in this maṇḍala, a double meaning, ‘is anointed’ (√añj) and ‘is driven’ (√aj).

On the meaning (‘all at once’, not ‘in the middle’) and the formulaic construction of samáyā, see comm. ad I.113.10.

## 07-08
Pādas 7c and 8a have almost identical structure: pávamānā abhy àrṣanti su(ṣṭutím) pávamāno abhy àrṣā su(vī́ryam) which effects the transition from 3rd pl. to 2nd sg.


## 08
The somewhat awkward tr. “constricting pressure” reflects the literal, additive sense of páriṣūti-: pári ‘around’ + √sū ‘impel, thrust’. Maybe something like “squeezing” would sound a bit more idiomatic, though it is hard to find any English idiom that more or less represents the etymology and fits with the verb. Of course, narrowness and constriction are particularly feared and avoided in the Rig Veda. Perhaps “claustrophobia” might work, though of course the -phobia part is absent; “constriction” is probably the best choice in English. It is also not clear what threat páriṣūti- poses to the ritual soma, which, after all, has been subjected to serious pressing (via the phonologically similar but unrelated root √su) and therefore has nothing left to fear in that regard. In real world terms it of course refers to the opposite of the “wide pasturage and great, extensive shelter” that Soma is urged to rush to in pāda b. In this regard it is similar to the words aṃhatí-, áṃhas- ‘constriction, constraint’. The other occurrence of páriṣūti- (I.119.6) is found in a similar context, with a contrast between constraint and wide space: yuváṃ rebhám páriṣūter uruṣyathaḥ. JPB tr. “You give Rebha space from being besieged,” but in my opinion the sense is more particular: “you give Rebha wide space from (/out of) constriction.” On īśata see comm. ad I.23.9.

## 09-12
As noted in the publ. intro., these four vss. treat the identification of Soma and the sun and are similar to the very enigmatic Vena hymn, X.123, which is attributed to the same poet, Vena Bhārgava.


## 09
The double vision of both heavenly Soma/Sun and earthly ritual soma is clear here, with pādas a, b, d all having a celestial orientation, each containing a form of div-/dyu- ‘heaven’, while the filter of pāda c brings us back to the ritual. The subj.

of d is probably, on the one hand, the ritual officiants, who perform the ritual action of milking (that is, pressing) the soma. But the substance obtained is “the beestings [colostrum, first milk] of heaven” (pīyúṣam … diváḥ), and the next vs. makes clear that those performing the milking here are also the venā́ḥ ‘seekers’ in 10b, where they are located “in the vault of heaven” (divó nā́ke).

## 10-11
The two tr. of vená- in 10b ‘seekers’ and 11b ‘trackers’ respectively should be harmonized. I would now tr. ‘seekers’ for both.


## 10
The cosmic/natural and the earthly/ritual double vision is played out simultaneously throughout this vs. In ab the seekers milk the streams “in the vault of heaven” (divó nā́ke) but milk them out of “the mountain-dwelling ox” (ukṣáṇaṃ giristhā́m), the earthly soma plant. In c the drop grows strong not only “in the waters” (apsú), presumably the ritual waters used to swell the plant, but also “in the sea” (samudrá ā́); in d it is both “in the wave of the river” (síndhor ūrmā́) and “in the filter” (pavítra ā́).

On the basis of the shared verb (duhate in 9d, duhanti in 10b) the venā́ḥ here appear to be identical to the subjects of 9d, as suggested above.

Pāda b is identical to IX.73.4. As noted in the comm. thereon, there is good reason to supply “streams” (dhā́rāḥ) as the referent for the pl. adjs. mádhujihvā(ḥ) and asaścátaḥ, which are therefore fem. acc. pl. Curiously Ge takes the former as nom. pl. m. here, though fem. in 73.4, while Ober (II.13149-50, ) takes them both as nom. pl. m.; Re tr. as I do.


## 11
I would now take the pf. part. upapaptivā́ṃsam as explicitly anterior to the impf. akṛpanta: “the eagle that had flown to the vault.”


## 12
This final vs. is esp. close in phraseology to the Vena hymn, with pāda a identical to X.123.7a and pāda c almost identical to X.123.8c. Note also that ádhi nā́ke asthāt unites ádhi ... asthāt of our 9a and nā́ke of our 10a.

Ge takes the part. praticákṣāṇaḥ as transitive/causative “seine Farben alle offenbarend” (though he questions this in n. 12b); sim. Ober (II.13) “erscheinen lassend.” Re’s tr. is like mine (“regardant-en-face toutes les formes siennes”), although in his n. he considers the opposite possibility, citing passages with práti √cakṣ that supposedly have this transitive sense. But his exx. are not probative, and the middle voice of the participle makes it esp. unlikely to have this sense.
