+++
title = "086"

+++
As noted above, an assemblage consisting of 16 three-vs. units, attributed to a variety of poets and poetic groups and showing no particular unity of structure or special poetic merit. However, there is often patterned repetition both between tṛcas and within them.

## 01-03
The first two vss. of this tṛca begin identically (prá te), and all three vss.

concern the swift journey of the soma drinks, which is compared to that of swift animals. Vss. 1 and 3 share the same verb (√ṛṣ: 1b arṣanti, 3a arṣa; ásṛkṣata in 2b is semantically similar) and the same goal, the kóśa- or ‘cask’, while vss. 1 and 2 both contain āś́vaḥ ‘swift’. Of course none of these features is unusual in the soma corpus, so they are not strong evidence for tṛca unity.


## 01
The rt noun cmpd dhī-jū́- (also in vs. 4) could have two different readings, ‘sped by insight(s)’ and ‘speeding insights’; see Scar 170-71. The publ. tr. opts for the passive interpr., as does Re, while Ge chooses the transitive one. Either is possible in this ritual context, and parallels cut both ways. On the one hand, there is the parallel cmpd dhī-jávana- (3x), which must have transitive value; on the other,


## 16
… āśávaḥ / dhiyā́jūtā́ḥ ..., with āśávaḥ as here, supports the passive reading. And of course both might be meant.

The standard tr. (Ge, Re, also Scar 170) supply ‘horses’ with raghujā́ḥ, and this of course is quite possible. The adj. raghú- and its cmpds do modify horses elsewhere (e.g., V.30.14). However, the cmpds. raghu-pátma-jaṃhas- ‘having plumage (fit) for rapid flight’ (VI.3.5), raghu-pátvan- ‘rapidly flying’ (2x) reference flying, and various related forms reference birds: V.30.9 raghúḥ śyenáḥ, II.19.4 váyo ná paptū raghuyā́. The specification of flight in these forms suggest to me that raghú- (etc.) was originally specialized for the swift flight of birds and then generalized to other fast things, and I therefore supply ‘birds’ in the simile. On the other hand, since vss. 2 and 3 both contain likely (ráthyāsaḥ 2b) or explicit (átyaḥ 3a) horses, tṛca unity might favor ‘horses’ in the simile here as well.


## 02
It seems a little odd to say that chariot horses go “each separately,” since one would think that the horses would be attached to the same chariot and efficient movement would require them to pull together. But almost the same phrase occurs in X.91.7 … rathyò yáthā pṛ́thak, though there referring to charioteers, and so the words must belong together. Perhaps it refers to separate chariots, each with its own set of horses—or that each horse in a chariot team has its own place in harness and each individually contributes to the speed of the whole?


## 03
Pāda a is metrically disturbed, despite apparently having 12 syl. With Arnold and HvN, best to read *hyānáḥ for hiyānáḥ (as sometimes elsewhere), to avoid a too early or too late caesura and a bad Jagatī cadence. The pāda is then a fine Triṣṭubh.

Although, as noted above, vss. 1 and 3 share the same goal, the kóśa-, the physical referent has changed between 1 and 3. In the former, the cask is presumably the soma vessel on the ritual ground, but in 3b it is characterized as kóśaṃ divó ádrimātaram “the cask of heaven, whose mother is the stone”—in other words the vault of the sky (or the soma container in the sky). So the subject is the heavenly soma, not merely the ritual substance, even though the ritual details are re-asserted in cd. For the heavenly cask, see V.53. 6, 59.8, IX.88.6. Old reports without enthusiasm a potential emendation to nom. ádrimātā, modifying soma, with ádri- the pressing stone. This would yield another Triṣṭubh pāda. However, since heaven (or at least the container of the heavenly soma) may be made of stone, there seems no reason to emend.

In the publ. tr. for ease of English parsing I moved the tr. of svarvíd from b to cd, but this mixes the levels: the sun-finding Soma is the one that reaches heaven, while the soma of cd is the substance purified in the sheep’s filter. Better (if somewhat awkward): “… rush to the prize, as the sun-finder (rush) to the cask of heaven …”

## 04-06
The first vs. of the new tṛca is in part a distillation of the previous tṛca.

The next two vss. end their first hemistichs identically: 5b, 6b GEN satáḥ pári yanti ketávaḥ “The beacons of the one being X circle around.” But as in the first tṛca, this identity conceals a fundamental difference of reference, with both a cosmic and a ritual dimension.


## 04
As just noted, this vs. seems to distill the first tṛca and is esp. similar to vs. 1. Like both 1 and 2 it opens prá te, and the 2nd hemistich also begins with prá, with prā́ntár echoing prá ta). Even more strikingly the first pāda matches 1a almost exactly: 1a prá ta āśávaḥ pavamāna dhījávaḥ 4a prá ta ā́śvinīḥ pavamāna dhījávaḥ The only difference is the third word, and the two are phonological multiforms of each other - or rather, ā́śvinīḥ must have been formed as a variant of āśávaḥ, since the vṛddhi deriv. ā́śvina-, -ī is found only here in the RV (though it occurs elsewhere in Vedic), while āśú- is quite common. In addition, asṛgran (4b) and asṛkṣata (4c) reprise ásṛkṣata of 2b, and páyasā (4b) recurs from 2c.

However, these similarities once again mask conceptual differences.

The first question to confront is what the referents are for the fem. pls. ā́śvinīḥ in pāda a and sthā́virīḥ in c, and are they the same? Ge and Re both supply different nouns for the two - dhā́rāḥ ‘streams’ for the first (already Sāy.) and gíraḥ ‘hymns’ for the second. (Sāy. supplies dhā́rāḥ for the second as well.) Although this split reference is perfectly possible - and at least páyasā ‘with their milk’ might favor a liquid interpretation in ab - I prefer to supply gíraḥ for both. In the 2nd hemistich the passage adduced by Old to explain pāda c, I.181.7 ásarji vām sthávirā vedhasā gī́ḥ “A substantial song has been sent surging to you, o ritual experts,” resembles our passage very closely, with fem. gī́ḥ and with verb, adj., and voc. matching elements in cd. There is only one fem. form to the adj. sthávira-, namely the one just cited modifying gír-. The pleonastically vṛddhied adj. in our passage, fem. sthā́virī-, is a hapax in the RV - and in fact I would suggest that it owes its vṛddhi to an attempt to match that of ā́śvinīḥ. Moreover, I.181.7 passage is in an Aśvin hymn (the referents of vām … vedhasā), and to my mind the unusual ā́śvinīḥ ‘destined for the Aśvins’ in the first hemistich invites us to supply a form of praise as the fem. pl. referent. We might also cite other exx. of the Aśvins’ association with praise hymns (not, I realize, unusual for Vedic gods!): VII.72.3 stómāso aśvínoḥ, VIII.9.7 aśvínoḥ ... stómam, VIII.9.16 vācā́.... aśvínaḥ (though none of these is fem. pl.). Thus in my view the entities “destined for the Aśvins” in pāda a are more likely to be hymns than streams.

In the first hemistich the fem. subj. (whatever it is) surges “into the support” (dhárīmaṇi), which I take to be the soma vessel. I supply the same loc. with antár in the 2nd hemistich. Cf. nearby IX.89.5 samāné antár dharúṇe níṣattaḥ “set down within the same support,” with dharúṇe an etymological and semantic match for dhárīman-.

As noted above, asṛkṣata in c repeats ásṛkṣata in 2b, but they are functional opposites: the first verb must be intrans. ‘have surged’ (or pass., ‘have been discharged’) with the soma drinks as subject, while our verb is trans. with the seers as subj. and hymns as obj. The intrans/pass.. function is taken over in vs. 4 by asṛgran in b. The aor. of √sṛj is overwhelmingly medial and overwhelmingly intrans./pass. in function, including the numerous exx. of 3rd pl. ásṛkṣata. There are only two transitive occurrences of this form, this one and one in V.52.6. In our case I think it likely that in this vs. asṛkṣata has been made to contrast functionally with likewise 3rd pl. asṛgran, which patterns with the aor. passive and therefore has more title to intrans./pass. function. Narten (Sig.Aor. 270-71) discusses the functional issues in the s-aor. paradigm of this root, but she holds the (to me) unlikely position that the medial forms should be fundamentally transitive (though she hedges here) and the intrans. use is secondary, despite the clear numerical superiority of the intrans. usage. I think it makes more sense to consider the transitive usage, at least here, as forced on a normally intrans. form by the pressure of asṛgran.

The formation of the hapax voc. ṛṣiṣāṇa is opaque. Gr’s gloss ‘dem Sänger freund’ reveals nothing about his analysis of the 2nd part; sim. Re’s ‘propre aux Prophètes’ without further comment. With Ge, the publ. tr. assigns the 2nd member to √san ‘gain, win’, hence ‘winning seers’. If we maintain that analysis, the sense might be compared to ṛṣi-sáh- in IX.76.4, which means ‘vanquishing (the other) seers’, in poetic competition or the like. However, given the seṭ nature of √san and the persistent short vowel (-)san- in most of its nominal forms, this analysis is not entirely persuasive, esp. since the semantics are not absolutely compelling. AiG II.2.926 posits (without conviction) a suffix -sāna-, but also suggests a connection to the (pseudo-)part. -asāna- type (which is treated at AiG II.2.236-37), but it doesn’t fit the general profile of this group (on which see comm. ad IV.3.6). Perhaps -sānais better connected to √sā ‘bind’; cf. the noun viṣā́na- V.44.11, which has the merit of existing and whose long vowel is predictable. Hence ‘binding seers’ or ‘having the binding of seers’ - that is, holding them fast, commanding their loyalty or attention, as in pāda c. But in the absence of any further information, accentual, contextual, or formulaic, we can’t get much further.

## 05-06
As noted above, these two vss. have parallel structures in the crucial 2nd pāda. Although Ge notes this, his tr. does not reflect the parallelism of the two genitive phrases with pres. part. satáḥ, nor does Re’s. Although taking account of this somewhat complicates my tr., I think it must be done. Vs. 6 is the clearer one: the pres. part. to √as is, as often, concessive: although Soma stays fixed, his beacons (continue) to circle. A concessive sense is harder to excavate from vs. 5 - hence the somewhat awk. rendering in the publ. tr. - but I think it is rhetorically called for. In both vss. the GEN satáḥ phrase specifies the spatial position of Soma. In 6 he is fixed; he has completed his journey to the soma vessels, as pāda d tells us. Vs. 5 is chronologically earlier than 6: Soma is advancing (prabhú-) on his journey, which is still in progress, as he “reaches through” vyānaśí- the domains, i.e., the filter and subsequent locations. Cf., for prabhú-, nearby IX.83.1 pávitraṃ te vítatam …, prabhúḥ … páry eṣi víśvátaḥ “ The filter is outstretched for you, o lord of the sacred formulation. Advancing, you circle around it on all sides.” The lexeme pári √i in soma contexts describes the movement of the soma juices around the filter. I think the point of both our vss., 5 and 6, is that, though Soma has moved on beyond the filter (5) and finally settled in the vessels (6), his beacons continue to circle around the filter. I am not entirely sure what that means in physical terms - perhaps the residual soma, caught as drops in the wool of the filter and glinting as the final drops drip down? or are the beacons pieces of ritual equipment? I think the former is more likely, given the reoccurence of sg. ketú- in vs. 7 referring to Soma himself, but I am tolerably certain that the pl. in 5-6 distinguishes the vanguard of the soma, Soma proper, from the rest of the liquid that follows.


## 05
As should be clear from the immed. preceding discussion, as elsewhere in IX I take dhā́māni ‘domains’ as referring to the filter and subsequent locales that the soma traverses, not, with Ge, Soma’s forms. (What Re means by “structures” is uninterpretable to me.) The physical locations on the ritual ground can also be viewed as the cosmic domains over which Soma has dominion - hence the hyperbolic statement in d, attributing universal rule to Soma.

On víśvasya bhúvanasya rājasi, see the identical phrase in 28b.

vyānaśí- belongs with the redupl. -í-stem type of cakrí-, etc. (cf. weak pf. vyā̀naś- to √(n)aś); see AiG II.2.292. It can therefore govern the acc., like other instances of this formation type, and we can easily supply dhā́māni from pāda a, strongly supported by the parallel later in the hymn: IX.86.15 yó asya dhā́ma prathamáṃ vyānaśe “who has reached through his first domain,” with the medial perfect to ví √(n)aś.


## 06
The referent changes from 2nd ps. (vs. 5) to 3rd (vs. 6), although this is not clear until the 3rd sg. verbs in the 2nd hemistich.

“On both sides” (ubhayátaḥ) probably reflects the double reference just noted: the ritual and the cosmic, or the earthly and the heavenly. See Ge n. 6ab.

I read yádī as yád ī (with enclitic prn.), since “if” does not work well here.

## 07-09
The beginning and end of this tṛca echo the preceding one: ketúḥ in 7a picks up the pl. ketávaḥ in 5-6, and the end of vs. 9, kaláśeṣu sīdati, is identical to the end of 6. The tṛca traces a trajectory from the ritual journey—the filter and the cask in 7—to a cosmic one, with Soma as king (8a) traversing first earthly natural features (seas, rivers, streams, waves 8ab) and then bridging the distance between earth and heaven (8d, 9ab), ending back on the ritual ground (9d). Of course the equivalence of the ritual and cosmic features is always in the foreground, as when in 8c he mounts the sheep’s back (=the filter), which is immediately (8d) then identified as “the navel of the earth” (nā́bhā pṛthivyā́ḥ), with the same word for ‘back’ (sā́nu) used in 8c for the filter and in 9a for heaven.


## 09
The rel. cl. of b lacks a verb. I think that whatever is supplied must be able to be construed with dhármabhiḥ “according to (his) ordinances.” My ‘abide’ is a slight elaboration on Ge’s ‘sind’: “durch dessen Bestimmungen Himmel und Erde sind,” which I think is fundamentally correct. This is another hyperbolic statement of Soma’s cosmic power. Re’s “lui à qui (appartiennent) le ciel et la terre avec les choses-à-maintenir” separates yásya from dhármabhiḥ and finds little work for the instr. pl. to do. The two instances of dhármabhiḥ (here and 5c) should be more or less in harmony.

## 10-12
Following a pattern we’ve met earlier, the first vs. of the new tṛca echoes the previous one. In particular, the beginning of 10a jyótir yajñásya pavate is almost identical to 7a yajñásya ketúr pavate, with ketú- = jyótis- semantically and the order of the first two elements flipped. As for intra-tṛca connections, 10b #pitā́ devā́nām is picked up by 11b #pátir diváḥ. There is also a fair amount of repetition of vocabulary and even phraseology from earlier in the hymn (e.g., 6cd … mṛjyáte háriḥ … kaláśeṣu sīdati and 11cd háriḥ … sádaneṣu sīdati, marmṛjānáḥ), but most of this involves material so ubiquitous in soma discourse that it doesn’t mean much.


## 10
Ge notes the parallels between our vs. and IX.75.2: IX.75.2a. … pavate mádhu priyám, …  2cd dádhāti putráḥ pitrór apīcyàm, nā́ma … IX.86.10a … pavate mádhu priyám, …  .10c dádhāti rátnaṃ svadháyor apīcyàm But he doesn’t seem to take the parallelism too seriously. In particular, though both 75.2c and 86.10c have a dual gen./loc. to be construed with a VP in which the subject deposits / establishes a secret X [name in 75.2, treasure in 86.10], Ge takes the dual as loc. in 75.2 (where there’s a parallel loc. sg. rocané), but gen. here (“Er bringt das verborgene Kleinod der beiden Eigenmächte”)(sim. Re), with a somewhat forced interpr. of dádhāti as ‘bringt’. Since the dual seems to have the same referent in both passages, Heaven and Earth (so both Ge and Re), and the passages are otherwise so similar, it seems to me very likely that they are structured in the same way. I therefore take svadháyoḥ as loc. It’s worth noting that this is the only du. form of the stem svadhā́-


## 11
I do not know why the seats are identified as those of Mitra. I doubt that Lü is correct that it is only because Mitra’s seat is in highest heaven (210), much less that Mitra is at this stage in Vedic being identified with the sun (605).


## 12
The vs. is structured by three pāda-initial forms of ágre + GEN, reinforced by agriyáḥ in b.

## 13-15
This tṛca is characterized by increasingly larger claims for Soma’s cosmic reach. It has fewer connections to previous tṛcas, save for the echo in 15b dhā́ma prathamám vyānaśe of 5a and c, on which see comm. there.


## 13
Ge identifies (n. 13a) and tr. matávān as a real past active participle (“Nachdem er sich bedacht hatte …”)(sim. Lü 243). This seems highly unlikely to me; Whitney’s statement (Gr. §960) should be noted: “Derivative words of this formation [=-távant- sj] are found in RV., but without anything like a participial value. The AV. has a single example … In the Brāhmaṇas also it is hardly met with.” See also Re’s n. The fact that the base, matá-, is not found independently as a ppl. in the RV, but only once (besides here) in the cmpd. matavacas- (voc., so unaccented, I.46.5), makes the building of a past active part. to it even less likely. Instead -vantmust have its usual possessive sense and in context mean ‘accompanied by thoughts’ (like marútvant-), referring to the praises given to Soma at the ritual. These act as a spur to set the soma in motion, hence the following simile.

The 2nd hemistich opens with a form of the 2nd sg prn., táva, followed at intervals by two vocc., kave at the end of c and indra in d, followed immediately by vs.-final te. It only becomes clear in d, with the 3rd ps. phrase pavate sómaḥ, that the 2nd ps. cannot be Soma, as it was earlier in the hymn (vss. 1-3, 4-5). The kave is a bit of a red herring, since it could, and often does, refer to Soma, and though Indra is sometimes so designated, other gods are far more commonly so called. The voc. indra at the end settles the matter, but our poet seems to tease us with other possibilities.

The image of Soma purifying himself “between the two world-halves” of course reflects the cosmic reach of the Soma, but it may also have a narrower ritual application. In IX.98.9 Ge suggests that the world-halves there are the jaws of the soma-press, which would fit nicely here. See also IX.75.4, where the world-halves are called the mothers of Soma.


## 14
I would now tr. the pf. part. jajñānáḥ with past value, “once having been born.” The standard tr. (and incl. Ober II.76; Lowe, Part. 158) take svár as nom. with the pf. part.: “having been born as the sun.” This is of course quite possible. But I would expect a goal with abhí √kram and therefore take svàr as acc. in that function (see also Scar 330).

I take nábhasā as instr. of extent of space, rather than accompaniment (Ge, Lowe) or, even less likely, agent (Re “s’est élancé par la nuée,” despite the absence of any verbal form that could be interpr. as passive).

The identify of the “age-old father” isn’t clear, and various candidates have been suggested: Sāy.: Indra; Ge (n. 14d): Parjanya or Heaven; Re: Heaven. I’m generally inclined towards Heaven, though of course bringing Heaven here is not physcially possible.


## 15
The gen. asya of pāda a could depend instead on viśé - or indeed on both viśé and śárma. Since I don’t know what ‘clan’ is in question, it is hard to determine if it belongs to Soma.

On dhā́ma … vyānaśe, see comm. ad vs. 5. I do not think, with Ge, that the dhā́man- refers to the first “form” of soma in the phases of soma-preparation.

In d note the play in the phrase sáṃ yāti saṃyátaḥ, which belong to different roots (√yā and √yat respectively). The latter has been rendered in quite different ways: Ge: “… gelangt er zu allen Stufenfolgen”; Re “il parcourt toutes les confluences”; Lü (702) “… geht er zu allen Treffpunkten”; Scar (404) Nomen act.

‘feste Aufstellung’. But saṃyát- is generally an adj., usually in the pl. of liquids (V.34.9 ā́paḥ saṃyátaḥ, VIII.100.9); esp. pertinent are two passages in our own hymn: vs. 18 in the next tṛca saṃyátam pipyúṣīm íṣam “continuous, swelling refreshment” and, by implication, in vs. 47 dhā́rāḥ … saṃyátaḥ “continuous streams.” On the basis of these passages, I supply “streams” here as well. See, e.g., vs. 8.

## 16-18
The first two vss. of this tṛca begin with prá with a verb of motion, but otherwise there is little that unifies the tṛca. Nor is there much that connects with the rest of the hymn, save for 16a … ayāsīt … índrasya niṣkṛtám / 7b=32d … úpa yāti niṣkṛtám and the repetition of saṃyát- in 18a (cf. 15d and disc. there).


## 16
Pāda b strikes me as the quotation of a well-known general truth or proverb, providing the basis for the particular action of pāda a: Soma cannot let Indra down, because (of the old saw) “a comrade …” It’s also worth noting that the other occurrence of saṃgír- (X.89.9) is also the obj. of prá √mī. Re also adduces IV.25.7 ná … sakhyám índraḥ … sáṃ gṛṇīte “Indra does not agree to companionship (with …).”


## 17
The publ. tr. does not make it clear that “your” is pl. (enclitic vaḥ) and must refer to the poet/officiants.

What is striking stylistically in this vs. is the sequence of three heavy nom. pl.

fem. -yu-adjectives: mandrayúvo vipanyúvaḥ, panasyúvaḥ, the latter two derived from the same root. Though morphologically parallel, they are somewhat disharmonious: mandrayú- is a hapax, vipanyú- is reasonably well attested and generally modifies the human officiants (gods a few times), while the rather fewer occurrences of panasyú- (and the related verb panasyá-) refer to gods. Hence the “thoughts” of our vs. seem both to “express admiration,” as humans do to gods, and “invite/require admiration,” as gods do from humans - so the thoughts’ purposes seem to be various, both to praise the gods and be admired for their fine crafting? I’m not exactly sure what saṃvásana- (a hapax), lit. ‘dwelling together, joint dwelling’ is expressing here. Ge seems similarly puzzled, tr. “in den Sitzungen” with a question mark; Re’s “dans les sessions-rituelles” is more definite and appealing, but I don’t see where he gets it. Perhaps it doesn’t indicate that the thoughts are dwelling with each other but that they, as a group, are dwelling with something/-one else - perhaps the soma, perhaps the milk and other non-verbal parts of the ritual machinery?


## 18
Note the functional contrast between ā́… pavasva and adjacent pávamānaḥ.

## 19-21
No obvious signs of unity. The instr. manīṣíbhiḥ is found at the end of 19 and immediately afterwards at the beginning of 20. The dawn(s) and the rivers are found in both 19 and 21, but not in mutually reinforcing ways. As for external connections, the “partnership” (sakhyá-) of Indra and Vāyu in 20 is reminiscent of the companions/partners (implicitly Soma and Indra) in 16b. There are various lexical echoes (e.g., vicakṣaṇáḥ 19a = 11b), but the limited vocab. of the Soma hymns makes this unremarkable.


## 19
“Bull of the thoughts” (vṛ́ṣā matīnā́m) is a slightly odd expression, but it fits the pattern of IX.76.4 pitā́matīnā́m, 96.5 janitā́matīnā́m, 103.4 netā́matīnā́m, though without obvious agentive content here —although Ge interpr. ‘bull’ as ‘Befruchter’.

The three genitives with pratarītā́by all the standard accounts (incl. the publ.

tr., also Ober II.53) consist of two temporal expressions (day, dawn) and a spatial one (heaven). It is not clear to me what “lengthening/extending heaven” would involve, and so, though gen./abl. diváḥ is almost always ‘heaven’ rather than ‘day’, I now wonder if it here refers to ‘day’. Other passages containing both ‘day’ words include III.56.6 trír ā́diváḥ savitar vā́ryāṇi, divé-diva ā́suva trír no áhnaḥ “Three times a day, every day, o Savitar, impel valuables to us, three times daily”; X.7.4 dyúbhiḥ … áhabhiḥ; X.12.4 áhā yád dyā́vaḥ … áyan — and, interestingly enough, two expressions in this very hymn, vss. 41 and 42, on which see further ad locc. The question is what, if anything, is the semantic distinction between the two ‘day’ words div- / dyu- and áhar / áhan-. In principle “daytime” (versus night time) could be distinguished from the 24-hour day. Which, then, would be which? Assuming that PIE *d ie̯ u-̯ (and its descendents) referred esp. to the bright sky, we might expect the ‘day’ occurrences of div- / dyu- to refer to the bright day, i.e., day versus night, leaving áhar for the 24-hour day. And the numerous exx. of náktam (…) divā́(and reverse order) “by night and by day” (I.24.10, 12, 34.2, 98.2, etc., etc.) seem to bear out this prediction. We also find div- / dyu- contrasted with other words for ‘night’: e.g., in the instr. pl. dyúbhir áktúbhiḥ (I.34.8, 112.25, III.31.16), and in other case/no.

pairs I.116.24 dáśa rā́trīḥ … náva dyū́n, VI.49.10 rudráṃ dívā vardháyā rudrám aktaú. However, áhar is also commonly found in these contexts. Cf. the cmpd.

ahorātrá- ‘day and night’ and expressions like rā́tryā áhnaḥ (X.129.2), tísraḥ kṣápas trír áhā (I.116.4), vy àktū́n … vy áhāni (V.54.4), rā́trībhiḥ … áhabhiḥ (X.10.9), áhobhiḥ… aktúbhiḥ (X.14.9), aktúbhyaḥ … áhabhyaḥ (X.89.11). Also passages in which light is put into or created for áhar / áhan- — e.g., IX.92.5 jyótir yád áhne ákṛṇot. An esp. telling example is X.68.11 rā́tryāṃ támo dadhur jyótir áhan “They put darkness in the night (and) light in the day.” I therefore find myself at something of an impasse, since both words are used contrastively with ‘night’, and in a passage containing both ‘day’ words assigning one sense to the one and the other to the other seems arbitrary. In any case, I now do think that diváḥ means ‘day’ here, and would substitute the tr. “… the lengthener of the day, of dawn, of the daytime” (having made the arbitrary choice).

On krāṇā́see comm. ad I.58.3. In addition to the adv. sense (‘successfully, effectively’) discussed there, this old instr. can be used with true instr. value: ‘by the action’, as here. In his 1903 art. (cited ad I.58.3) Old (p. 35=Kl Schr. 1113) identifies krāṇā́here as a neut. pl., not instr. sg.: “die Werke der Ströme, die Kufen hat er brüllen gemacht.” But by the time of the Noten he instead takes it as instr.: “durch das Tun der Flüsse.” This is in fact the standard interpr. of krāṇā́síndhūnām here: Ge “Unter Mitwirkung der Ströme”; Re “Par l’action des fleuves”; Lü (254) = Ge, but with (?) inserted after “Mitwirkung.” But this pāda is regularly compared by these very same scholars with IX.102.1 krāṇā́śíśur mahī́nām. And it is generally agreed that mahī́nām in that pāda refers also to the rivers. But there is a split about where to construe this gen. Ge (and perhaps by implication Old) follows the pattern of our passage: “Unter Mitwirkung der grossen (Ströme),” but Lü argues (239, 242), rather persuasively, that mahī́nām belongs rather with śíśuḥ, as “child of the great (rivers),” in part on the basis of síndhumātar- (IX.61.7) ‘whose mothers are the rivers.” He is followed by Re. In the interpr. of the two passages only Ge is consistent, in taking the gen. with krāṇā́in both cases. Lü, Re, and the publ. tr. all construe the gen. differently in the two places. I now think this is wrong and a consistent interpr.

should be made, but I make the opposite choice to Ge’s. In the passage here I would supply ‘child’ as headnoun for síndhūnām and change the tr. to “Through his action, (the child) of the rivers …” There are several reasons for my change of heart besides a desire for consistency. For one thing krāṇā́is never elsewhere construed with a gen. For another, Soma is otherwise the sole subj. of ávīvaśat and doesn’t need any assistance in this action.


## 20
Ge interpr. pavate as a passive, with manīṣíbhiḥ as agent (“Von den Verständigen wird der allerste Seher geläutert”), but pávate is so insistently reflexive in the Soma maṇḍala that I strongly resist a passive here. Re’s tr. is like mine, though he doesn’t comment.

Trita is the ur-Soma presser. See disc. ad IX.37.4. Here, as Ge (n. 20c) suggests, Soma re-creates him for the current pressing, to ensure that Indra and Vāyu will get their soma.


## 21
The first three pādas of this vs. begin ayám ‘this one here’.

The thrice seven cows here are also found in IX.70.1, as Ge (n. 21c) points out. See the seven cows in vs. 25.

## 22-24
The tṛca seems to be characterized by augmented imperfects, though three of the five could be injunctives instead: ā́rohayaḥ [maybe] 22d, abhavaḥ 23c, avṛṇoḥ [maybe] 23d, amadan 24b, ā́bharat [maybe] 24c. It is also characterized by mythic allusions, esp. the Vala myth and the opening of the cowpen for the Aṅgirases (23d) and the stealing of soma from heaven (24c), as well as the cosmogonic act of raising the sun into heaven (22d). Both this latter deed and the opening of the Vala cave are deeds usually attributed to Indra.

As for phraseology, in 22c and 23b the soma is “in the belly of Indra” (índrasya jaṭháre(ṣu) - sg. in 22c, pl. in 23b); pavítra ā́is found in both 22b and 23a.

With regard to external connections, 22d nṛ́bhir yatáḥ is also found in 20b, and 23b índrasya jaṭháreṣv āviśán echoes 19d índrasya hā́rdy āviśán, with a different body part.

It may also be that 22 continues the theme of 21: in 21a Soma made the dawns shine forth (ví rocayat), while in 22d he made the sun mount in heaven (sū́ryam ā́rohayo diví). The two verbs are not only identical in formation (both -áyatransitives) but phonologically similar.


## 22
Although the Pp. analyzes ā́rohayaḥ as containing an augment (ā́/ arohayaḥ), it could equally well have an injunc.: ā́/ rohayaḥ. The latter would fit better with the injunc. ví rocayat in 21a, just disc.; the former with the other augmented forms of this tṛca.


## 23
The augmented impf. abhavaḥ is somewhat surprising in this context, because, at least in the publ. tr., it seems to refer to the recent past, rather than to the mythic past of the following (a)vṛṇoḥ. Perhaps, however, it opens the telling of the Vala myth continued in d (and possibly 24ab; see below).

The augment in (a)vṛṇoḥ is quite insecure: the Pp restores it, but it is not found in the Saṃhitā text and is metrically de trop.


## 24
Both hemistichs open with a distracted 2nd sg. acc. pronoun (t u vā́m). The accusative of this pronoun is, of course, historically monosyllabic, though distraction is not uncommon in the RV. Here the distraction may have resulted from matching the distracted nominative sg. form that opened the 2nd hemistich of the previous vs., 23c.

The impf. amadan in b is wrongly tr. as a present in the publ. tr.: correct to “did … applaud.” This may continue the account of the Vala myth, with the “very attentive poets” being the Aṅgirases themselves. It seems unlikely that it is the first action of the soma-stealing myth found in c.

Once again the Pp. analyzes ā́/ abharat, but the sequence could instead be ā́/ bharat with an injunc.

## 25-27
Cows (that is, the milk-mixture) are esp. prominent in this tṛca: there are seven in 25b (recalling the “thrice seven” that produced the milk-mixture in 21c), here called dhenávaḥ, with gā́ḥ in 26c and góbhiḥ in 27c. Other miscellaneous animals: the sheep’s fleece (ávye … vā́re 25a), buffaloes (mahiṣā́ḥ 26d), a steed (átyaḥ 26d), as well as the tawny one (hárim 25b, 27b), if that is specifically a tawny horse or, as in 31b (vṛ́ṣā … háriḥ), a tawny bull.

25b and 27b both open háriṃ navante, each followed by a diff. preverb to be construed with the verb (abhí, áva). In 27a asaścátaḥ recalls 18c ásaścuṣī.


## 26
The two pres. participles to √kṛ, act. kṛṇván (b) and med. kṛṇvānáḥ (c), provide almost a textbook example of the functional distribution of voices: in b Soma makes X (into) Y for someone else (dat. yájyave), while in c he makes X (into) his own Y.


## 27
On the likely pun on abhiśríyaḥ, see Ge (n. 27ab), also Scar 547-48.

It is not entirely clear what “the third back” (tṛtī́ye pṛṣṭhé) refers to, but most likely the highest (third) realm of heaven. Cf., for the back of heaven in general, divás pṛṣṭhé in IX.66.5.

## 28-30
As noted in the publ. intro., this tṛca shows a high degree of unity. To start with, every pāda but 2 (of 12), begins with a form of the 2nd sg. prn.: mostly nom. t u vám (28b, d, 29a, c, 30a) but also gen, táva (28a, 29b, d), with the final hemistich breaking the pattern with a single acc. t u vā́m (distracted; see comm. ad vs. 24 above) in c and a single dat. túbhya in d. Only 28c and 30b fail to open with such a form (and 28c has the enclitic te later in the pāda). In addition, all 3 vss. contain the voc. pavamāna (28c, 29d, 30b), and all three also have forms of víśva- 28b, d, 29a, 30d). Note also that víśvasya bhúvanasya in the first vs. (28b) is echoed by víśvā bhúvanāni in the last (30d), and that vídharmaṇi (29b) is taken up by better specified rájaso vídharmaṇi (30a); cf. also távemā́h (28a, 29b) varied by túbhyemā́ḥ (30d).

In terms of contents, the tṛca insistently asserts Soma’s universal rule over all cosmic elements.


## 28
Ge and Re (also Ober II.43) construe táva with rétasaḥ (e.g., Ge “Von deinem himmlischen Samen sind diese Geschöpfe”). I am reluctant to do so because of the parallelism of távemā́ḥ (/ túbhyemā́ḥ) just noted: all three expressions should be rendered in the same general way. In addition Ge’s tr. essentially assumes rétasaḥ is abl., but its companion adj. divyásya is stubbornly gen. I would therefore stick to my tr., though slightly modified for clarity to “Yours are these offspring of (your) heavenly semen.” For … víśvasya bhúvanasya rājasi, see 5d, which is identical, and 36d … víśvasya bhúvanasya rājáse, in an acc. + inf. phrase.

Pāda c is essentially a restatement of b.

Since dhāma-dhā́- is an etymological figure, I have rendered it as one, rather than ‘establisher of domains’, vel sim.


## 29
The cmpd. viśva-víd- is ambiguous here. Ge and Re both tr. as ‘allknowing’, and that is favored by the context, since it is immediately followed by the voc. kave (‘sage poet’). But the cmpd recurs in the very similar pāda, 39c tváṃ suvī́ro asi soma viśvavít, and that vs. contains three similarly formed cmpds that surely belong to √vid ‘find’: IX.86.39a govít … vasuvíd dhiraṇyavít. There the context favors ‘all-finding’. (Scar treats the two roots √vid together [489], so he is not forced to distinguish.) I suggest, as usual, that it’s a pun.


## 30
On the expression pavítre rájaso vídharmaṇi and its more succinct variants see comm. ad IX.64.9.

## 31-33
After the tight structure of the preceding tṛca, we have returned to the lax stringing together of soma tropes. There is a lot of noise-making in 31 (b cakradat, c vāvaśānā́anūṣata), which is slightly echoed in 33 (b kánikradat).

Otherwise I see nothing particularly unifying.

As for external connections, GEN niṣkṛtám √yā in 32d is found also in 7b and 16a, and of course much of the soma lexicon is repeated elsewhere.


## 32
Although the standard interpr. of yáthā vidé here makes Soma subj. of the verb (e.g., Ge “wie er es versteht”), pāda-final yáthā vidé is a common tag (I.127.4, 132.2, etc.) with a passive reading of the verb: “as is known, in the way that is known.” The “directives of truth” (ṛtásya praśíṣaḥ) are convincingly identified as the hymns by Lü (469-70), as the adj. návīyas-, a standard descriptor of hymns in the fem., suggests.

I assume that the “threefold thread” (tántum … trivṛtám) refers to the three soma pressings.

## 34-36
Nothing much in the way of internal unity or external connection, beyond the obvious soma themes.


## 34
The publ. tr. does not make sufficiently clear (or clear at all) that pávamāna is a voc. Better tr. “Self-purifying one, as a great flood you run …” With Ge and Re I take máhy árṇaḥ “great flood” as a nom., coreferential with the 2nd sg. subj. The statement “you are the sea” (29a tváṃ samudró asi) gives semantic support to the coreferential reading, though the two words (samudrá- and árṇas-) are different. By contrast, Lü (204, 239; sim. Ober II.152 n. 111) takes it as acc. of extent, indicating the space that the soma traverses, with the “filters” of b parallel to it in a simile: “du durchläufst die grosse Flut, wie die strahlende Sonne die wollenen Seihen.” This interpr. requires that the real filter (the sheep’s fleece) that the real soma ordinarily traverses be part of the simile, expressing what the sun crosses, while the metaphorical filter (“the great flood”) is part of the frame, where the real soma is crossing it. This is either very clever poetics, with several levels of metaphor below the surface simile - or an indication that his interpr. is incorrect. I’m afraid that I incline towards the latter view.

The expression in c gábhasti-pūto nṛ́bhiḥ is somewhat curious, since it essentially provides two agents, or agent-like elements, for the pūtá- ppl.: the 1st cmpd member gábhasti- and the indep. instr. nṛ́bhiḥ. (Of course, the men are the agents whose hands are the instruments.) Without the ‘hand’ (gábhasti-) we would expect *nṛ̥́-pūta-, like nṛ́-dhūta- (1x), nṛ́-ṣūta- (1x)(which, oddly enough, both rhyme with our putative form). Re has a slightly different interpr., but it has the same configuration. His “pressé par les seigneurs à l’aide des pierres” construes nṛ́bhiḥ with what follows, the instr. ádribhiḥ and the ppl. sutáḥ, with the two instr. filling the agent and instrument slots respectively. Since nṛ́bhiḥ is stationed exactly in between the two instrument+ppl. expressions, there’s no way to tell - though it seems to me somewhat more elegant for nṛ́bhiḥ to double a cmpd. member rather than morphologically doubling another instrument. Note that ádri-ṣuta- is also attested (2x) and that the same ádribhiḥ sutáḥ as here is found in this hymn in 23a..

## 35
The accumulation of √mad derivatives is striking: mádvā mádyo mádaḥ. The last, máda-, is of course extraordinarily common, and the 2nd mádya- reasonably well established (13x). But madván- is found only twice.


## 36
Who the seven sisters (bzw. mothers) are is a matter of dispute: Sāy.: the streams or rivers, Ge: thoughts, Re (flg. Lü 246): celestial streams/rivers. No one seems to cite the seven milk-cows (saptá dhenávaḥ) in vs. 25 of this same hymn, or their multiplied number (thrice seven) in 21. But in this hymn “cows” seems the mostly likely immediate referent, esp. given the image of maternal care, whatever those cows may otherwise represent (beyond the milk-mixture).

On the expression in the last pāda, see similar phrases in vss. 5 and 28.

## 37-39
For the first time in this hymn (save for briefly in vs. 18), this tṛca shows some interest in what Soma might do for us, particularly in the 2nd two vss.

Note in 38 first the enclitic naḥ and then the 1st pl. opt. syāma. The poet both asks for benefits directly and by implication, in the cmpds with 2nd member -víd- ‘finding’: góvid-, vasuvíd-, híraṇyavíd-, viśvavíd- “cow-finding, goods-finding, goldfinding, all-finding” and the bahuvrīhi suvī́ra- ‘possessing good heroes’. If Soma finds or possesses these things, he can distribute them to us. The connection between vss. 38 and 39 is nicely signalled by the near identity of 38c and 39a: 38c … pavasva vásumad dhíraṇyavat 39a … pavasva vasuvíd dhiraṇyavít where the suffix of possession (-mant-, -vant-) subtly gives way to the phonologically similar root-noun -víd-, suggesting that Soma possesses those things, which he can now find for us. The epithet nṛ-cákṣas- ‘having his gaze on men’, found several times previously in this hymn (vss. 23, 36), seems finally to take on its full lexical value in 38, where it is predicated of Soma (nṛcákṣā asi) and strengthened by viśvátaḥ ‘on every side’, to express Soma’s interest in us and our welfare. The reciprocal relationship between us and Soma is also expressed by the parallel pādas 38d and 39b, both containing bhúvaneṣu as the location of both us (38d) and Soma (39b).


## 38
I take the -mat and -vat forms adverbially.


## 39
On viśvavíd- see comm. ad vs. 29. Ge takes it as ‘all-knowing’ here, but the other -víd- cmpds in the vs. favor ‘all-finding’. Re, like me, ‘all-finding’ here, though ‘all-knowing’ in 29.

## 40-42
The focus on our welfare found in the last tṛca is found here in vs. 41 but is otherwise muted.


## 40
vanánā- is a hapax, though there seems to be general agreement that it means something like ‘desire’, derived from the seṭ root √vani ‘love, hold dear’.

There is an Old Avestan hapax of the same shape (Y. 44.15) that seems unconnected, in that, contextually, the standard tr. ‘victory’ seems correct, and it should therefore be derived from aniṭ √van ‘win’. But Kellens-Pirart in their OA lexicon (1990) equate it directly with our vanánā- and gloss it ‘charme’ - which makes no contextual sense and can, I think, easily be dismissed. In any case it is easy to see how our form came to be built. It is the object of the verb úd … atiṣṭhipat ‘made to stand up / raised up’. The next vs., 41a, has a very similar VP, bhandánā úd iyarti, where the verb is semantically equivalent to our verb and has the same preverb, and the nominal object is a fem. acc. pl. -ánā- form, which provided the template for vanánā-. Given this parallelism and given the fact that the phrase in vs. 41 has to do with granting blessings to us, I think it likely that the desires Soma raised in 40a are our own (so also Ge, Re), which he will fulfill in the next vs. ví gāhate as in 8a; cf. also áti gāhate in 26a.

Soma is presumably “thousand-spiked” (sahásrabhṛṣṭi-) because of the knobs, thorns, or similar extrusions on the plant.


## 41
On the relation between the first hemistich and vs. 40 see immed. above.

The publ. tr. “… all blessings, consisting of offspring and easy to bear” is awkward and hard to parse. It might be better as “… all blessings, consisting of offspring - a light burden -,” with subhára- used in almost jocular fashion. It can simultaneously also refer to “easy birth,” with ref. to prajā́vatīḥ.

The unusually formed (pseudo-)āmreḍita áhar-divi ‘every day, day upon day’ is esp. interesting in light of the discussion of the two ‘day’ words ad vs. 19 above. It must be a substitute for the more orthodox āmreḍita áhar-ahar (6x) for metrical reasons: the standard cmpd. is metrically awk. With three light syllables in a row, it certainly won’t fit in any cadence and would be difficult anywhere in the vs. line but where it’s always found, pāda-initial (which isn’t all that great either - openings with light syllables in both 2 and 3, not to mention 1 and possibly 4, are quite irregular; see Arnold pp 194-95). It is puzzling, however, that the well-attested (47x) (also somewhat aberrantly formed) āmreḍita to the second ‘day’ stem here, namely divédive, was not used in our vs., since it would fit the cadence perfectly and is quite common in Jagatī cadences. In any case, at least áhar-divi suggests that there’s no clearcut difference of meaning or reference between áhar- and the forms of div-/dyuthat mean ‘day’.

In the 2nd hemistich, Soma is not asked directly for benefits, but rather urged to intercede with Indra - to beg him for our sake - for offspring and wealth. This displacement is made all the stranger by the use of a “future imperative,” yācatāt, which properly should follow another impv. Perhaps the displacement in time that such an impv. represents - that is, there should be an intervening impv. before it - indirectly reflects the displacement in person - that is, Soma is the middleman, intervening between us and Indra. I suppose it is bad form to ask Indra directly in a hymn devoted to Soma.

There is further displacement here. The “sacred formulation bringing offspring” (bráhma prajā́vat) that we want Soma to get Indra to give us is not a direct request for Indra to bestow offspring on us, but rather for him to inspire in us a formulation that we can then offer to him, which will, only then, result in offspring.

It’s a long and winding road to what we want! The interpr. of the hapax bahuvr. áśva-pastya- is disputed. My tr. “consisting of horses in the homestead” essentially follows Gr’s ‘Rosse im Stalle habend’, though it would be more lit. as ‘having a homestead that has horses in it’ - a vájrabāhu- type cmpd. Ge’s tr. “an vielen Rossen” seems to evade the issue, but his statement in n. 41c “wie später -śālin-” is more forthcoming: -śālin- means lit.

‘having a house/room’, but develops to ‘abounding in’. Nonetheless, I find it hard to believe that a RVic poet would go to the trouble of using a fairly rare word as 2nd member, only in order to bleach it of its particular meaning. Re’s “la richesse qui réside dans les chevaux” (and Ober’s “dessen fester Wohnsitz Pferde sind” [I.537 n.

111]) employs an abstract sense of pastyà- to characterize where wealth’s dwelling is: it resides in - that is, is founded on / consists of — horses. Whereas my interpr.

assumes a concrete homestead, which belongs to the speaker and/or his associates, that is stuffed, as it were, with horses. The difference between the abstract and the concrete interpr. is small but significant, and I continue to prefer the concrete one.


## 42
This vs., too, contains the two ‘day’ words, gen. pl. áhnām, dependent on ágre, and the adverbial instr. expression ánu dyúbhiḥ. See comm. ad vss. 19, 41.

I take prá … cetayate as a reflexive trans./caus. ‘makes oneself perceived’, contrary to the intrans. interpr. in my -áya- book (p. 163).

As is generally recognized, nárā ca śáṃsam shows a species of tmesis, from the cmpd nárāśáṃsa-.

## 43-45
This tṛca seems more artful than most of the other, with metaphor layered upon metaphor (vss. 43, 45), varied by similes (vs. 44).


## 43
The first hemistich is striking with its series of identical verbs in pāda a, with pāda b ending with the same verb: añjáte vy àñjate sám añjate, … abhy àñjate.

The first pāda lacks a syllable (rest at 4); as Old suggests, the metrical irregularity is most likely meant to call attention to the word play.

Ge, Re, Lü (239) take the various verbs as reflex., with Ge (n. 43ab) taking the subj. as the soma-drinking singers and Re as the waters. But though mid. √añj is probably more often reflex./pass. than trans., it can be the latter, and that makes more sense here. Cf., e.g., IX.97.57 sám añjate rūpám “they jointly anoint his form,” and recall the many times in this maṇḍala in which soma “is anointed,” using the true passive ajyáte (-se) (often as a pun with ‘is driven’ to √aj). See especially in the next tṛca of this hymn 47c góbhiḥ … samajyáse, in the same metrical position as sám añjate here. I supply the default Soma as obj. throughout the first hemistich; he is found as explicit (though metaphorical) obj. in the 2nd hemistich. As for the subj. of all these verbs, I agree with Re that it is the waters.

The “ox flying in the burbling up of the river” of pāda c is an ex. of the layers of metaphor just alluded to above: it compresses three different representations of Soma into a single image.

I take the subj. of gṛbhṇate and referent of hiraṇya-pāvā́ḥ in d still to be the waters, with āsu functioning as reflexive. Re explicitly changes his subj. here to “les hommes.”


## 44
Ge, Re, Ober (II.54) take ándhaḥ as nom., parallel to dhā́rā in the simile.

But insofar as it is possible to narrow the referent of this word, it is used of the stalk of the soma (see comm. ad IV.1.19). I take it here as acc., construed with áti. This pāda, like the following one, depicts the soma juice leaving behind the solid parts of the plant, and áti ‘beyond’ is used in both pādas to express the material beyond which the soma juice has gone.

The simile in d, átyo ná krīḷan, is also found in 26d.


## 45
In a agre-gáḥ echoes ágre áhnām in 42a; in our vs. áhnām appears in the following pāda, dependent on something else (vimā́naḥ), though Re supplies it with agregáḥ as well.

bhúvaneṣv árpitaḥ also in 39b.

In d I construe rāyé with okyàḥ, although I cannot find any parallel usage. But on its own, okyàḥ is hard to fit semantically into the vs.; cf. Ge’s “gern bleibend” and Re’s “(ce dieu) domestique,” which seem like afterthoughts..

## 46-48
The hymn ends with a tṛca no more unified than most of those that preceded it, repeating the same tropes oscillating between ritual and cosmic images.


## 46
In pāda a skambhó diváḥ reminds us of 35d divó viṣṭambháḥ with a diff.

lexical real On tridhā́tu- see comm. ad IX.70.8.

Pāda c aṃśúṃ rihanti matáyaḥ pánipnatam is identical to 31d, save for the first word, which in 31 is śíśum.

In d yádi would be best read yád *ī, both for sense and for meter, since an opening with light syllables in positions 3 and 4 before an early caesura is very rare (see Arnold 194).

Ge tr. nirṇíjam … yayúḥ as “Staat machen” (make a show), based, he says (n.

46d), on śúbhaṃ yā. I see no reason to attenuate the sense of nirṇíj-. As Scar (284- 85) argues, this stem can be both a concrete noun ‘garment’ and an infin. ‘to array’.

The infinitival usages he cites are mostly the dat. nirṇíje (which, in all quoted cases, I take as a noun) and he is uncertain about the usage of this acc. ex. But since the analysis just proposed of yád *ī provides us with an acc. obj., infinitival usage seems best here.


## 47
Pāda b is awk. in English. The sense is that the streams of the soma being purified go charging forward continuously, with ráṃhayaḥ ‘charges, speedy forward movements’ subj. of yanti.


## 48
The aggressively hostile command in pāda c comes as something of a surprise in this otherwise ritually and cosmically focused hymn.

The last pāda is the Gṛtsamada refrain from Maṇḍala II. This tṛca is attributed by the Anukramaṇī to Gṛtsamada, but perhaps only on the basis of the refrain.

