+++
title = "087"

+++


## 01
In b Soma is urged to run for the prize (vā́jam); in c he is then compared to a prize-winning horse (áśvam … vājínam), a nice ex. of how description shades into simile. It is made somewhat more complex by the fact that the simile (probably) surrounds the target ‘you’: áśvaṃ ná tvā vājínam, so that vājínam could technically be part of the frame, not the simile (“… you, the prize-winner, like a horse”), though in fact tvā is in modified Wackernagel’s position. Soma is directly called a vājín- in 4d.


## 02
This vs. contains two links to the preceding hymn, despite their difference in meter: most of pāda c pitā́devā́nāṃ janitā́… is identical to IX.86.10b, with each closing with a word that conforms to its cadential template; the first two words of d, viṣṭambhó divó, are identical to IX.86.35d divó viṣṭambháḥ, but in opposite order, with minimal metrical difference. (Our pāda is repeated in IX.89.6, while the order in 86.35 is repeated in IX.108.16.)


## 03
The first hemistich contains three resonant words in the realm of poet / wordsmith / seer: ṛ́ṣir vípraḥ … kā́vyena, with kaví- represented by the vṛddhi deriv.

This deriv. is similar, but not identical to the patronymic kāvyá- associated with the immed. preceding uśánā, and by its difference in accent and in case, it cleverly plays on the full name Uśanā Kāvya. (On the tricky morphology of the name, see my 2007 “Vedic Uśanā Kāvya and Avestan Kauui Usan: On the Morphology of the Names,” in Verba Docenti [Fs. Jasanoff].) As Ge suggests, the Anukramaṇī’s attribution of this hymn to the legendary Uśanas Kāvya is no doubt based on this vs. The Engl. tr. does not make clear that “of theirs” is fem. (āsām) and must anticipate the cows (gónām) in the next pāda.


## 05
In pāda b the HvN text reads mahé vā́jāyām ṛ́tāya śrávāṃsi, with word break after putative vā́jāyām. But it should instead read vā́jāyāmṛ́tāya without break (as in both the devanāgarī text and the transliterated text of Aufrecht), to be analyzed, with Pp., as vā́jāya / amṛ́tāya. Undoing the vowel contraction at the caesura in this way produces too many syllables (12, with a Triṣṭubh cadence). Old is uncertain whether to opt for that analysis or for contraction over the caesura, which seems to be Arnold’s (not very clearly expressed) view (p. 192, §215 iii).

Given the importance of vā́ja- ‘prize’ (1a, 5b, 6d ) and vājín- ‘prizewinner’ (1c, 4d)) in this hymn, the tr. of the dat. phrase in pāda b should be corrected to “for the great immortal prize.” In keeping with my view that medial forms of the them. stem pávate are always reflexive, not passive, the tr. should be corrected to “purifying themselves through the filters” - esp. because of the contrastive undoubted passive pūyámānaḥ in the next vs. ### 06
The gen. jánānām is best construed with puruhūtáḥ as (pseudo-)agent. See the same phrase, though with accented voc. púruhūta, in IX.52.4, 64.27 - though in the former passage I construe the gen. with another noun in the publ. tr. I now think that may be wrong.

The accentuation of the athem. part. túñjāna- is puzzling; the other ex. of this part. (IX.57.2) has the expected accent tuñjāná- as do finite forms like tuñjánti.

There also exists a single form of a thematic med. part. túñjamāna- (III.1.16) also with unexpected accent on the root syllable. Gotō (1st Kl, 78) suggests this form is “metrical” for the athem. form, but does not treat the accent.

The finale of d, abhí vā́jam arṣa, is identical to the end of 1b.


## 08
On the mixture of myth and ritual in this vs., see publ. intro. Given the fem.

subj. prn. sā́, the mythological allusion to Saramā would be available to the audience on the basis of the phrase gā́viveda “found the cows”; cf. V.45.7 sarámā gā́ avindat, .8 sarámā vidat gā́ḥ -- though it must be admitted that gā́ḥ √vid has other gods as subject elsewhere. See comm. ad V.29.3.

Notice that the pf. viveda returns here from 3c, which was also, if less clearly, about the Vala myth.


## 09
The publ. tr. takes pāda c as a second complement of pári yāsi in pāda a, parallel to rāśím … gónām. By contrast both Ge and Re take c as the obj. (or pseudoobj.) of śíkṣā in d: e.g., “Suche uns … viele grosse Labsale zu erwirken.” But the lexicalized desid. stem śíkṣa- does not take an obj., but only a dative of benefit (see comm. ad VI.31.4), and so that interpr. seems blocked to me. However, it may be an independent nominal clause: “many are (your) lofty refreshments,” the interpr. I would now favor. Scar’s (636-37) interpr. is similar, though he then sneaks c in as an understood obj. of śíkṣā: “ Viel, gross sind die Labungen … verhilf [zu diesen]” or “… verhilf uns [dazu],” which seems unnec.

All the standard interpr. (incl. the publ. tr.) take the last three words as a separate clause, but this short phrase poses several problems. First, tā́ḥ is a nom. (/acc.) plural fem. demonst., but the following word, the hapax root noun upaṣṭút, is by all appearances singular. Several solutions have been proposed to this mismatch.

Ge simply says (n. 9d) that upaṣṭút at the end of the hymn represents pl. upaṣṭútaḥ, which is not very satisfactory. He tr. “Dein sind diese Lobpreisungen.” Old has two suggestions: 1) upaśṭút is adverbial: “in einer zu den stútaḥ gerichteten Bewegung,” citing phrases like stutī́r úpa (I.84.2). But he gives no parallels for such adverbial formation (maybe the likewise problematic dakṣiṇít?), and it is also hard to see how this would work in context (“these are in the direction of your praise”??). 2) upastút is an agent noun: Soma as praiser. But he rejects this even as he suggests it. Scar (636-37) discusses previous suggestions and suggests further possibiities. Re’s solution as embodied in his tr. “Ces (avantages sont) ta louange (même),” with an equational sentence equating tā́ḥ with upaṣṭút, seems to me the best way to deal with the number disharmony - though in his n. Re floats several other, less compelling possibilities. The question then is what is the reference of tā́ḥ. I’m not sure what Re means by “avantages.” I think the most likely referent is the fem. pl. in the immediately preceding pāda: íṣaḥ ‘refreshments’, and Re’s n. gives what I consider the clue to the interpr. of the whole in his citation of the cmpd. iṣa(ḥ)stút- in V.50.5 (though in fact he cites it in service of a different solution). In V.50.5 iṣa(ḥ)stúto manāmahe I tr. “Let us conceive praise-songs as refreshment” (see comm. ad loc.).

Here I suggest that we are announcing our praise-song as Indra’s refreshments, the counterpart to the refreshments he offers us. The publ. tr. does not convey this sense; it should be changed to “These (refreshments) are (our) praise for you.” The retroflexion in upaṣṭút- is extremely puzzling, esp. given the nonretroflexed úpastuta- (upastutá-), úpastuti-, upastútya-. AiG I.237 registers the form, but simply says that sometimes -ṣ- in cmpds spreads beyond its proper domain, which isn’t terribly helpful.
