+++
title = "088"

+++
On the thematic structure of the hymn, see publ. intro. The similes that begin the middle vss. 3-5 are all further defined by the syntactic structure GOD ná yó. In the first two of these Soma is in the 2nd ps., but in the 3rd ps. in vs. 5.


## 01
The vs. is notable for the dense repetition of the 2nd ps. sg. prn., with five exx. in the first three pādas.

The initial annunciatory ayám should probably be more clearly represented in the tr.: “this soma here …” For the metrically bad vavṛṣé see Kü (459) and comm. ad VI.4.7. As Kü points out, we would expect this seṭ root to have a pre-C weak perf. stem *vavūr-, which would fit the cadence here much better.

The publ. tr. renders mádāya yújyāya sómam as “the soma to be yoked for exhilaration,” falsely giving the impression that dat. yújyāya modifies acc. sómam. I now realize that the five occurrences of dat. yújyāya should be taken as nouns expressing purpose, not as adjectives. Interestingly four of the five passages have as main verb a form of √vṝ ‘choose’: VII.19.9 … vṛṇīṣva yújyāya …, VIII.4.15 prá … vṛṇīmahe, yújyāya …, IX.66.18 vṛṇīmáhe yújyāya, and our … vavṛṣe, … yújyāya.

There thus appears to be a fixed syntagm X yújyāya √vṛ “choose/select X for yoking (/for use),” and I would now tr. this passage “… the drop, the soma, which you have chosen for yoking for exhilaration.” I would not construe it directly with the adjacent dative mádāya, which is a separate expression of purpose.


## 02
The “yoking” theme of 1d is immediately taken up in 2a by the passive aor.

ayoji, with concrete sense at least in the simile.

On the unexpected short vowel in the hapax bhuri-ṣā́ṭ (for bhūri-), see the not entirely satisfactory disc. by Scar (607).

náhus- must be a PN (see Mayr. PN); it is generally, but not exclusively, found in the sg. The deriv. nahuṣyà- here is best interpr. in conjunction with nearby


## 02
kavyaíḥ... nahuṣyèbhiḥ, where it refers to poets. That interpr. would fit the context here as well, since the Nahusian creatures are roaring at the soma on the ritual ground.


## 03
Both Ge and Re take iṣtá- in the cmpd. iṣtá-yāman- as belonging to the root √iṣ ‘send’ (e.g., “[d]er seine Fahrt beeilt” and see Ge’s n. 3a). But as Old (ZDMG 62 [1908] 473-74) points out, we should then expect *iṣitá-yāman-. (Like me, Old attributes iṣṭá- here to √iṣ ‘seek, desire’, though his interpr. of the cmpd. differs from mine.) The parallel passages with iṣṭáye in conjunction with √yā that Ge adduces in his n. (and others he doesn’t cite) all belong, in my opinion, to ‘seek, desire’, not ‘send’.


## 04
In order to connect the comparison with Indra more clearly to the whole vs., I would now be inclined to tr. “Like Indra, who is the doer of great deeds, you are are a stronghold-splitting smiter of obstacles,” though this now makes it less clear that Soma is being compared to Indra also in his general capacity of doer of deeds. The Sanskrit is more forgiving.

Pāda c is metrically defective; see esp. Old for disc. After suggesting, and rejecting, various fixes, he considers the possibility that the pāda ended with hantā́, which was redactionally eliminated by word haplology, since the next pāda begins with hantā́. This would get us the proper syllable count, though, as Old notes, the cadence would be bad, in that the antepenult would be heavy: … áhināmnāṃ

*hantā́#. Despite the problem of the cadence, this seems like the most attractive
solution, and I would now slightly alter the tr. to “Because, like Pedu's (horse) (you are) *the smiter of those with serpents' names, you are the smiter of every Dasyu.” On the serpent-smiting horse that the Aśvins gave Pedu, one of their clients, see I.117.9, 188.9. Unfortunately this is all we know about the horse’s exploits.


## 05
Because the finite verb kṛṇute in b is unaccented, the rel. cl. must be confined to pāda a, and this in turn means that sṛjyámānaḥ is a predicated pres.

participle. On the phrase in pāda b, see comm. ad IX.76.1.

The loc. váne must be read twice, in both simile and frame, with different senses. Just as Agni/fire is set loose in the firewood, Soma is set loose in the wooden cup.


## 06
The simile in b is somewhat odd. It is in the nom. pl., and its comparandum should therefore be the soma juices (eté sómāḥ) in pāda a. But the sense of the simile, “like heavenly buckets” (divyā́ná kóśāsaḥ), doesn’t fit the soma juices, but rather the containers that hold the soma liquid. When the word kóśa- is used in ritual context, it refers to a bucket or cask, towards which the soma is generally moving. I therefore think that the comparison here is between the heavenly kóśa- and the sheep’s fleece filters in pāda a, from which the soma drips as if from a cloud. The third word of the simile, abhrá-varṣāḥ “possessing/holding the rain from clouds,” is the clue: soma is regularly compared to rain (see, e.g., Ober II.40-42) esp. as it comes off the filter, but here the comparison is to containers that are the source of rain. If this analysis is correct, a syntactic problem arises: the simile should be acc. pl. matching vā́rāṇy ávyā. I suggest that pāda b is parenthetical, that it does refer to the fleece filters, and that the fact that the latter is neut. facilitated the switch to the nominative parenthesis.

The simile in c also has a slight twist, but is hardly as problematical as b. The simile particle here is positioned late, assuming that the simile consists of samudráṃ síndhavo ná nī́cīḥ “like rivers downward to the sea,” with samudrám corresponding to kaláśān in d. However, because samudrá- is regularly used in soma hymns as a (perhaps faded) metaphor for the waters that the soma enters, it may be that samudrám is not felt to be part of the simile here. Cf. the parallel passage IX.64.17 vṛ́thā samudrám índavaḥ / ágman “The drops have come at will to the sea,” without overt simile marking.


## 07
Ge and Re take the simile in c to be ā́po ná makṣū́(Ge: “rasch wie das Wasser”), but makṣū́is an adverb, and so the simile would not be well formed. Re deals with this problem by supplying a participle, “(agissant) promptement comme les eaux.” I take makṣū́rather with the imperatival clause that follows: sumatír bhavā naḥ. It is worth noting that makṣū́is almost always initial, and if we detach the simile ā́po ná it could be so here as well.

So what quality of Soma’s is being compared to that of the waters? I take it to be sahásrāpsāḥ, which opens pāda b, a word whose meaning is not transparent. Sāy. glosses it pururūpaḥ ‘having many forms’, which is featureless enough to qualify almost anything; Ge and Re follow him. But ápsas- means ‘breast’, and the cmpd dīrghā́psas- (I.122.15), modifying a chariot, is generally rendered by ‘having a long front’ - presumably a long forward projection. Our cmpd is rendered in EWA [s.v. ápsas-] as ‘tausendfrontig’, but it is hard to conjure up a such a picture, particularly with reference to soma, much less the waters. More promising is the context in which the two independent forms of ápsas- (I.124.7, V.80.6) are found. (The third form usually grouped here, found in VIII.45.5 girā́v ápsaḥ, is better segmented as girā́ vápsaḥ; see comm. ad loc.) Both passages have a female as subject, with the VP ní riṇīte ápsaḥ “she lets her breast spill over,” describing a young woman (/Dawn) displaying her charms. Here the breast is conceptually a liquid, and it seems to refer to the pliant flesh, breast tissue, that spills out of her garment (a metaphor alive in 21st c. US). Starting from this picture of a liquid or liquified breast, I suggest that - apsas- in our cmpd. refers to forward projections, esp. those that could appear in a liquid - in short, ripples - which fits both the waters and the soma reasonably well.

The final simile of the vs., “like a sacrifice that conquers in battle” (pṛtanāṣā́ṇ ná yajñáḥ) is unusual; the other 8 occurrences of the cmpd. pṛtanāṣā́h- qualify gods, the qualities of gods, or a hero. However, the purport of the simile is not difficult to construct: if we mortals perform the sacrifice correctly, it will attract and gratify the gods, particularly Indra, who will provide the divine aid needed to prevail in battle.

Note that pṛtanāṣā́ṭ forms a ring with bhuriṣā́ṭ in 2a.

The retroflex initial of -ṣā́h- in this cmpd is the result of the assimilation of -sto the retroflex final in the nom. sg. -ṣā́ṭ; see Schindler (Rt. Nouns p. 48): 5 of the 9 forms of this cmpd are nom. sg. The retroflex is then spread throughout the paradigm (acc. sg. 3x, gen. sg. 1x) and also into the deriv. pṛtanāṣā́ya- (III.37.1). On the variable length of the root syllable in the oblique (-ṣā́ham 1x, -ṣáham, -as 3x), see Scar (612-13).


## 08
This vs. is identical to I.91.3, also a Soma hymn. Unfortunately the publ. tr.

of the two vss. differ in pāda b. In I.91.3 I tr. “lofty and deep is your domain.” I now think this should be harmonized with the tr. here “yours is his lofty, deep domain.” The vs. attributes to Soma some of the salient characteristics of the three principal Ādityas overtly in a, c, d, and it seems unlikely that one pāda would deviate from this pattern. Both Varuṇa (I.123.8, IV.5.4) and (more often) Varuṇa + Mitra (I.152.4-5, VII.61.4, X.10.6, X.89.8) possess dhā́man-. Here Soma’s dhā́man- can be identified with that of just-mentioned Varuṇa (so the publ. tr.) or anticipate Mitra (pāda c) in addition to Varuṇa.

On dakṣā́yya- see comm. ad I.91.3.
