+++
title = "089"

+++


## 01
The explicitly conjoined loc. phrase mātúr upásthe vána ā́ca “in the lap of the mother and in the wood” is a bit puzzling; the ca implies that the two terms belong to a natural or reasonably comprehensible constructed class. Ge (n. 1d) suggests that “mother” refers to the earth, that is, (he further specifies) the surface of the ground or the Vedi, while “wood” refers to the wooden cup. The latter is quite likely, but I prefer Ge’s 2nd suggestion for the former - that “mother” here refers to Aditi. The phrase upásthe áditeḥ is found 3x in IX (26.1, 71.5, 74.5) as well as 2x in X. Although the exact referent is not entirely clear (see JPB, Ādityas 238-41), it obviously refers to something on the ritual ground or to the ritual ground itself. Aditi is of course the archetypal mother, so “of the mother” is an easy substitute “of Aditi” in the phrase. The referent would be more specific that simply “of the earth,” which could cover a lot of ground, as it were. Alternatively, if the mother = earth, this could be a reference to the soma plant growing on the earth, but the ritual setting of the vs. seems too insistent to allow that - though see 2d.


## 02
Pāda a could also mean “the king has donned his garment of the rivers,” but IX.86.33, which also opens rā́jā síndhūnām, where the constituency is clear, eliminates that possibility.

Note the chiastic #rā́jā … rájiṣṭhām# opening and closing the first hemistich.

Pāda d contains one of the paradoxes beloved of RVic bards. The identities of the subj.s and obj.s of the two duhé are disputed. Old, for ex., thinks that Father Heaven yields Soma in the first clause, while Soma yields Dawn in the second - because pitúr jā́m in X.3.2 refers to Dawn. But this seems to take us too far afield: the strict parallelism of the two mini-clauses—duhá īm pitā́/ duhá īm pitúr jā́m— sketches a closed loop, and introducing an entity not already implicit in the discourse seems unlikely. Ge’s interpr. (n. 2d) seems closer. The subj. of the first duhé is in my opinion Heaven (dyaúṣ pitā́), with half of his name represented by pitā́and the other found earlier in the simile divó ná vṛṣṭíḥ “like the rain from heaven.” This simile is also the clue to the identity of the object: soma as rain. Then this soma/rain is the subject of the 2nd duhé; it yields soma itself, in the form of the plant whose growth is due to rain. This soma(plant) or the soma juice itself can also be reckoned as the “offspring of his father,” namely of Heaven. This could be a reference to the heavenly soma or simply to the soma juice assimilated to rain.


## 03
Gr, Ge, and Old (flg. Lanman, Noun Inflec. 414) take mádhvaḥ as a nom. pl.

Lanman and Gr (supplying drapsā́s or sim.) identify it as masc. (Old says nothing further), while Ge seemingly as a fem., since he supplies “Milchkühe.” This gender switch (and adjectival interpr.) is unnec.; in all cases of supposed masc. or fem. pl.

mádhvaḥ (see the list in Gr) the form can be interpr. as a gen. sg. to the neut. noun. In our passage Re supplies a pl. subj. “streams” on which gen. mádhvaḥ depends: “(Les coulées) de miel …” But I simply take it as a gen. of material, dependent on siṃhám (“lion of honey”). The cmpd. mádhu-pṛṣṭha- ‘honey-backed’, lit. ‘having a back of honey’ (in my interpr., contra Gr/Ge ‘having honey on his back’) supports my interpr., and note that 6d contains a mádhvaḥ that is universally taken as gen. As subj. of nasanta I supply cows or waters, probably the former, since they appear in c and implicitly in d.

Ge seems to take ayā́sam with pátim rather than siṃhám, but given that the adj. appears in the same pāda with the lion and given that another animal, the horse, is described as ayā́sam in the next vs. (4a), “unbridled lion” seems more likely.


## 05
The cátasraḥ … ghṛtadúhaḥ … níṣattāḥ “four (fem.), yielding ghee as milk, set down …” is highly reminiscent of IX.74.6 cátasro nā́bho níhitāḥ “four hidden (lit., ‘put down, deposited’) (streams) bursting out …” See comm. ad loc., where, flg.

Ge, I suggest that “four” is a metaphorical reference to the four teats of a cow’s udder. In our passage I don’t understand what “set down within the same support” (samāné antár dharúṇe) refers to, unless it’s the placement of the teats in/on the udder, which would be the dharúṇa- here. I also don’t know if there’s a secondary reference to some piece or pieces of ritual equipment from which (pitcher with 4 spouts? 4 pitchers?) the mixing milk is poured, or if an actual cow is stationed nearby. But here, as in IX.74.6, I think the immediate physical referent is to the streams of milk that emerge from the teats, rather than their source(s).

The īm in c was omitted from the tr., where it presumably expresses the goal of arṣanti. I would now tr. “They rush to him while being purified …” The parens.

around “him” in the next pāda can be erased, since that pāda also contains īm. The concentration of forms of īm in this hymn should also be noted: 2d (2x), 4c, 5a, 5c, 5d.


## 06
The placement of utá in b is unexpected: it should not break up the NP víśvāḥ … kṣitáyaḥ, which it is conjoining to the two nominal expressions in pāda a.

We would expect #*utá viśvāḥ kṣitáyaḥ. Perhaps the metrically distasteful initial two light syllables prompted a flip. Klein (DGRV I.330-31) does not discuss this placement in his treatment of the passage.

Pāda c ásat ta útso gṛṇaté niyútvān is somewhat puzzling, at least on the literal level: “your wellspring will be possessed of a team for the singer.” Ge’s rendering, “Dein Quell sei freigebig …,” is overly free, but it probably captures the sense fairly closely. The semantic pathway is clearer in Re’s “Que ta source … procure un attelage (de biens).” Cf. III.49.4 … vásubhir niyútvān “teamed with goods.” Perhaps the tr. should be altered to “will provide teams (of goods) …” Although niyútvant- is also found in the preceding hymn (IX.88.2), its use there seems unconnected with this one.


## 07
The dat. índrāya opening pāda b echoes the dat. indriyā́ya, which closes the preceding vs. (6d). It is also piquant that Soma adopts “Vṛtra-slayer” (vṛtrahán-), Indra’s own epithet, when he acts on behalf of Indra.

The two aims of Soma’s purification abhí devávītim and índrāya “towards pursuit of the gods” and “for Indra” are grammatically non-parallel.
