+++
title = "090"

+++


## 01
The fut. part. saniṣyán in b potenially contrasts with the desid. part. síṣāsan in 4c, though I have tr. them the same, and it is not clear whether they are expressing truly different nuances. Nonetheless the future part. here could be tr. “being about to win the prize.”


## 02
As Re also notes, the vs. is strongly marked by v-alliteration, esp. in c: … vṛ́ṣaṇam vayodhā́m (a), … avāvaśanta vā́ṇīḥ (b), vánā vásāno váruṇo … (c), ví … vā́ryāṇi (d). Note also the parallel root-noun cmpds vayo-dhā́m (a) and ratna-dhā́(ḥ) (d), which latter also alliterates with dayate. For vayo-dhā́- see also vs. 6 below.


## 03
This vs. also shows alliteration, this time of sibilants, esp. in pādas a (śū́ragrāmaḥ sárvavīraḥ sáhāvān) and d (áṣāḷhaḥ sāhvā́n pṛ́tanāsu śátrūn). It also contains forms from three different roots meaning (roughly) ‘conquer, win’: √sah (sáhāvān, áṣāḷhaḥ sāhvā́n), √ji (jétā), √san (sánitā).


## 04
ábhayāni in pāda a is the only neut. pl. to this stem. The idiom ábhayaṃ √kr̥ is quite common (and cf. abhayaṃ-kará- 1x). This idiom is formulaically connected with “broad pastures”; see esp. VII.77.4 urvī́ṃ gávyūtim ábhayaṃ krdh̥ ī naḥ “create broad pastureland and fearlessness for us” and nearby IX.78.5 urvī́ṃ gávyūtim ábhayaṃ ca nas krdhi ̥ “Make wide pasturage and security for us.” I have supplied ‘places’ because of the association with pasturage.

The apparent transitive value of sáṃ cikradaḥ … vā́jān “you have roared together prizes …” is anomalous, but hard to avoid. The idiom is similar to IX.64.3 … cakradaḥ …, sáṃ gā́ḥ … sa̐árvataḥ. See disc. ad loc. In that passage I found a way to avoid a transitive reading in the publ. tr., but in the comm. consider a transitive alternate. In our passage here the publ. tr. has a transitive reading, but it would also be possible to make maháḥ … vā́jān another object of síṣāsan and tr.

“Striving to win the waters, also the dawns, the sun, the cows, and great prizes, you have roared at them all together.” Note vā́jaṃ saniṣyán in 1b, and see the disc. ad vs. 1.


## 06
Note that the VP váyo dhāḥ “impart vitality” reprises the cmpd. vayodhā́m in 2a in the same metrical position.

In d sūktā́ya was omitted from the tr., which should be changed to “impart vitality to our well-spoken speech” or, perhaps less likely, “… to our hymn [sūktá], to our speech.”
