+++
title = "091"

+++


## 01
As discussed in several places in the comm. (see lexical list), the root √vañc refers to a number of types of non-linear motion: undulate, curl, coil, etc., with these meanings also distributed among the derivatives of the root, esp. vákvan-. Here my tr. ‘billowing’ refers to the motion of the waves of the liquid soma; cf. X.148.5 ūrmír ná … vákvāḥ “billowing like a wave.” The publ. tr. doesn’t adequately represent the two divergent derivatives of √man ‘think, bring to mind’, manótar- and manīṣī́. The latter, by itself, means ‘possessing inspired thought, inspired thinker’. The former, a rarer derivative, means, in my view, someone who pays mental attention, a ‘minder’. See comm. ad II.9.4. I would emend the tr. here to “the minder, the foremost inspired thinker with his insight.” The point here, I think, is that Soma not only has inspired thoughts of his own but pays attention to those of the human celebrants.

The ten sisters are, as usual, the fingers of the officiant.


## 02
The main clause of this vs., pādas ab, contains a predicated aor. part., svānáḥ, while the rel. cl., pādas cd, may contain a predicated intens. part., marmṛjānáḥ. However, given the prá opening c, it’s quite possible that we should supply a verb of motion “(go) forth” as the main verb, with the part. simply a modifier (“the drop [goes] forth, being groomed …”). Howvever, I prefer the publ.

tr., which does supply ‘go’ but as an oblique expression of purpose. Alternatively prá may actually belong with the part. marmṛjānáḥ, as Gr takes it - though there’s only one other possible ex. of prá √mṛj that I know of, at X.96.9.

On nahuṣyà- see also IX.88.2.


## 03
Both Ge and Re take īrte as transitive (‘set in motion’, e.g., “… met en branle … le blanc lait”), but this medial stem is standardly intrans., and the milk here can be, as so often in IX, the goal of Soma’s motion.

In c vaco-víd- could of course also mean ‘who finds speech’. See Scar (487), who allows both senses for the stem and tr. the occurrence here as “der die Reden findet.” In this ritual context there is little difference between ‘knowing speech’ and ‘finding speech’.

Pāda d cannot be separated from IX.10.5 sū́rā áṇvaṃ ví tanvate “the suns stretch out across the fine (fleece).”


## 04
The syntax of the 2nd hemistich, esp. pāda d, is clotted and has been variously interpreted. Ge takes the problematic upanāyám as obj. of vṛścá (as I do), but considers the referents of yé … eṣām to be the vā́jān of b: “… der sie sich holt, mögen sie nah (oder) fern sein.” Sāy.’s interpr. (see also Ge’s n. 4d) seems a more sensible version of Ge’s: he glosses upanāyám as ‘master’ (svāminam) and takes the plurals to refer to demons. Re seems to make upanāyám an appositive or parallel to the pl. yé … eṣām, which he (semi-)configures as the obj.: “Fends … (les démons) qui sont près (ou) loin, le chef de ces (démons).” All of them take ánti durā́t as a constituent, “near (or) far.” But the contrastive expression “near (or) far” generally matches cases (or adverbial equivalents thereof): ablatival ántitaḥ (...) dūrā́t (II.27.13, etc.) or locatival ánti dūré (I.79.11, etc.; see esp. IX.19.7 dūré vā sató ánti vā, IX.67.21 yád ánti yác ca dūraké). Our passage, by contrast, has locatival ánti and abl. durā́t, and I therefore separate them and assign them to different syntactic units.

I take yé ánti as a minimalist rel. cl. “who (are) near,” while durā́t is construed with upanāyám. I take the latter as meaning ‘leader’, like simplex nāyá- (2x: VI.24.10, 46.11), and the whole sequence durā́d upanāyám eṣām to mean lit. “leader of those from afar” (rendered in English as a rel. cl. “… the one who lead …” for the sake of intelligibility). Cf. for directional durā́t with √nī VII.33.2 dūrā́d índram anayann ā́ … “From a distance they led Indra here.” In other words, I interpret upanāyám as the obj. of the impv. vṛścá at the beginning of c, and it is preceded by a brief nominal rel. cl. yé ánti, whose referent in the main cl. is eṣām. Nominal rel. clauses seem to be exempt from the prohibition on embedding that is evident for full relative clauses.

It may be so positioned to allow ánti to be adjacent to durā́t though belonging to different clauses.

Lowe (Part. 289) claims that tujánt- is a Caland adj. meaning ‘eager’ rather than a participle ‘thrusting’, but the passages, esp. this one and I.61.6 (with two exx.), favor a more dynamic rendering, and in particular tujatā́vadhéna “with your thrusting weapon” recalls IX.57.2 tuñjāná ā́yudhā “brandishing his weapons,” with an undoubted participle. I don’t actually see what is gained by reclassifying these forms as Caland adjectives.


## 05
It is not entirely clear what to supply as the referent for the rel. in c; Re ‘les succès,” Ge the vā̋jān from 4b. Pāda c closely resembles IX.63.11 yó dūṇā́śo vanuṣyatā́“which is difficult to attain by one who craves it,” with instr. vanuṣyatā́ matching our vanúṣā and a different lexicalization of the ‘difficult to obtain’ (duṣ- √naś/sah) compd. The referent in that passage is rayí- ‘wealth’, and note also the cmpd brhád ̥ -rayi- (only 1x) and the regular use of bṛhánt- as a modifier of rayí- (e.g., nearby IX.97.21). I therefore supply a pl. form of rayí-, though Ge’s vā́jawould also work.
