+++
title = "092"

+++


## 01
The injunc sarji would probably be better tr. “has been sent surging,” per IH.

In c ā́pac chlókam indriyám seems illuminated by X.94.1 (one of the pressing stone hymns) ślókaṃ ghóṣam bhárathéndrāya “you bear your signal-call, your cry to Indra.” The ślóka- ‘signal call’ is the audible sign to Indra that soma is being prepared for him; in our passage I assume that the noisy journey of the soma after the filtering produces this ślóka-, just as the noise of the pressing stones in X.94.1 serves that purpose.

The lexeme práti √juṣ sometimes seems to mean what the simplex does: ‘enjoy’ with an acc. of the substance enjoyed, as in I.101.10 uśán havyā́ni práti no juṣasva “(Indra,) being eager, take pleasure in our oblations” (cf. VII.34.21). But sometimes this idiom takes a personal object, with the subject giving enjoyment to the object - a reversal of the usual situation. See III.33.8, VII.54.1, 2. In the latter hymn, we find in vs. 1 the dyadic yát tvémahe práti tán no juṣasva “When we entreat you, favor us in return,” which suggests that práti √juṣ comes as a response to a request of some sort. In vs. 2 pitéva putrā́n práti no juṣasva “Like a father his sons, favor us in return,” the acc. putrā́n in the simile shows the case of the obj. of the verb, which the enclitic naḥ conceals. The personal acc. is also found in our passage: práti devā́m̐ajuṣata práyobhiḥ. As these tr. show, I have generally tr. this idiom ‘favor in return’, but ‘favor in response’ might be better. I confess, however, that neither ‘in return’ or ‘in response’ quite works in our passage.


## 02
Note that this vs. contains the three most resonant “poet” terms: kaví, ṛ́ṣi, vípra-. The first applies to Soma, the other two to the seven seers who approach him.

In b I take kavíḥ as a pred. nominative or an embedded quotation, providing the name that Soma has acquired - though it must be admitted that we might expect an acc. Both Ge and Re take kavíḥ as an independent descriptor (though see Ge’s n.

2b, where he allows the possibility of my interpr.). The name Soma assumes is, for them, “Soma” itself, or so I understand it. By my interpr. Soma gets called “Kavi” because of the noise he makes on his journey; at the end of the journey he becomes (like a) “Hotar” when he sits down (/is installed) in the cups - another human ritual participant. Ge (n. 2b) suggests that he has just become the Soma-drink (by virtue of the pressing?) and thus takes on the name.


## 03
The periphrasis in c bhuvát … rántā, with the aor. injunc. (∾ subj.) to √bhū

+ root-accented -tar- stem, must be signaling some special nuance. Ge tr. “Er pflegte … zu verweilen” (is accustomed to); Tichy (168-69) cites his tr. with apparent approbation and characterizes the use of this periphrasis as expressing “eine gewohnheitsmässig wiederholte Handlung.” Her own rendering (pp. 314, 336) is “er pflegte bei allen Darbietungen der Seher haltzumachen.” My own “is one to take his rest” is close to this view, but lays more emphasis on the agentive aspect of the -tarstem.

There is also the question of which sense of √ram is found here, the orig.

‘(come to) rest’ or the developed ‘be content, enjoy’. Re opts for the latter (and see his n.): “qui se complaît …,” but given the emphasis on Soma’s taking his seat (vss.

2-3), it seems best, with Ge (/Tichy), to operate with the first.

Having been called kaví- himself in 2b, Soma now finds himself in the midst of all kā́vya- -- presumably mostly the poetic effusions of the ritual participants, but also the sounds that he made on his journey that afforded him the kaví- title. This joining of different types of kā́vya- may account for the ‘all’.

Ge’s rendering of pāda d is quite free: “Der Kluge macht die fünf Völker zu seinem Gefolge.” Tichy’s (336) is more accurate: “überall bei den fünf Völkern nimmt der Weise seinen Platz ein.” A proper interpr. of this pāda must first recognize that the lexeme is not ánu √yat, pace Gr: there are no other exx. of this supposed combination in the RV (nor any other registered by Mon-Wms). Instead we must be dealing with the fairly common expression jánām̐ánu (I.50.3, 6, 120.11, etc.), though with flipped order, “through(out) the peoples.” The finite verb yatate then has its normal sense ‘take one’s place, ‘arrange oneself’; here the point is that Soma is common to the whole Ārya community, whatever limited place he occupies on the ritual ground.

I render dhī́raḥ as ‘steadfast’ rather than ‘insightful, wise’, because of the emphasis on Soma’s taking his seat.


## 04
As was suggested in the publ. intro., this vs. may constitute a weak omphalos. In particular, the purport of the first hemistich is not clear to me: what does it mean to say “the gods are in your secret”? Re supplies ‘domain’ with niṇyé, but doesn’t elucidate. Ge floats two possibilities in his n. 4a. The first, which he says is illuminated by IX.95.2, is that the gods are Soma’s secret, which only he can reveal. This is not quite what IX.95.2 says; there Soma reveals the hidden names (gúhyāni nāma) of the gods, with an acc. pl. not a loc. sg. I am more convinced by his 2nd proposal, that we supply loc. nā́mani with niṇyé, and interpr. it to mean that Soma’s “secret name” is amṛ́ta- ‘immortal’ (‘ambrosia’), a word indeed regularly used for soma. Since this word is also, of course, a standard descriptor for the gods, they are/exist, in the verbal sense, “in your secret (name).” Although the loc. nā́man(i) is not found in the RV, this seems an accidental gap. The multistep mystery—1) figure out what, if anything, to supply with niṇyá-: nā́mani; 2) solve for what the “secret (name)” is: amṛ́ta; 3) then apply the resultant name to the gods—is worthy of an omphalos. To make the tr. clearer I would substitute “it is in your secret (name [=(drink of) immortality]) that all these gods [=the immortals] are …”


## 05
Re tr. pāda a “Que cet (acte) de Pavamāna se réalise donc ...” I would prefer this rendering of satyám to the “true” of Ge and the publ. tr., but it is even harder to square with the augmented impf. akṛṇot (c) (and probably prā́vat in d, since √av has no injunctives) that expresses the content of the satyám (“true” is bad enough).

Perhaps the poet is suggesting that some have expressed doubt that Soma accomplished the deeds described in cd, even though kārú-s are agreed that he did, and that he (our poet) wants them to be true. This covert skepticism might well be justified, since all the deeds in cd are attributed elsewhere to other gods. On the other hand, see nearby IX.94.5, where Soma is urged to “make broad light” (urú jyótiḥ kṛṇuhi).

Another word for poet or the equivalent, kārú- ‘bard’, is added to the trio in vs. 2.

I do not know if we should see a difference in nuance between the augmented impf. ákṛṇot in c and the injunc. aor. kar in d; the latter is in the same clause as the (probably augmented) impf. prā́vat.

The stem abhī́ka- ‘close quarters, face-to-face’ is elsewhere used in contrast to ‘wide(ness)’, VII.85.1 … uruṣyatām abhī́ke, X.133.1 abhī́ke cid ulokakṛ́t, and this contrast is evident here as well, with the positive ákṛṇod ulokám ending c, and the negative kar abhī́kam in d.

As Old points out, kar would be better as a heavy syllable; he suggests underlying *karr (< *kar-t). See comm. ad VII.75.1.


## 06
Pāda a contains one of the few technical references to the animal sacrifice in the RV. See the almost identical expression in IX.97.1.

Note that satyá- returns here, where ‘true’ or ‘actual, real’ would both work.
