+++
title = "093"

+++
This hymn is attributed to Nodhas Gautama, the skillful poet of I.58-64. This hymn does not particularly display his verbal agility, but its last pāda (5d) is his refrain, found in I.58.9, etc.


## 01
Notice the alliteration in b: dáśa dhī́rasya dhītáyo dhánutrīḥ.

The stem dhánutar- occurs 3x in the RV, twice as a fem. pl. dhánutrīḥ (here and III.31.16), once as a masc. du. dhánutarau (IV.35.5). Although it is not strictly relevant to our occurrence here, the surprising short suffixal vowel in that strong form requires comment. The form occurs after an early caesura, thus producing a break of three light syllables. Such a break is by no means uncommon (see Arnold, p.

188), but a reading *dhánutārau would produce Arnold’s “normal” break (light light heavy). Old (Noten ad loc.) tentatively suggests that if the form is corrupt, it was altered because it was perceived as a comparative in -tara- or a cmpd with -tara- ‘crossing, overcoming’. Old’s suggestion is tentatively accepted by Wackernagel (AiG III.199), Gotō (1st cl., 179 n. 311). The misparsing of the form would of course be aided by the fact that it is built not to the root, like most agent nouns, but to an enlarged pres. stem *dhan-u-/-va-, which has spawned a secondary root √dhanv. See, e.g., EWA s.v. DHANI , Goto 178-80 with nn. By contrast, Tichy (-tar-stems, 58-59) adduces nearby IV.38.4 sánutaraḥ, which is not originally a -tar-stem, but which, like dhánutarau, modifies a horse. She suggests that since beside the comparative sánutara- (whatever its source: see my comm. ad loc.) there exists an (independent) fem. agent noun sánutrī- (I.123.2, X.7.4), dhánutarau was backformed to the parallel fem. agent dhánutrī-. The suggested string of causation here seems stretched too thin.

As for our fem. pl. form, both Ge and Re take dhánutrīḥ here as effectively transitive, with objective genitive dhī́rasya: “die den Weisen ablaufen lassen”; “animatrices du (soma) habile.” But neither of the other occurrences of this stem have such a sense; they simply mean ‘running’; Gotō (179 and n. 313) concurs with the intrans. reading I see here. The fact that an intrans. form of the pf. to √dhanv, dadhanve, is found in the next vs. (2b) supports this interpr. Another (weak) support is the case of the supposed obj., since root-accented tar-stems ordinarily take acc. However, there are enough counterexamples that this is not a clinching argument.

Ge takes dáśa with dhītáyaḥ “die zehn Gebete,” but, despite the pādaboundary, I think it goes with the sisters=fingers in pāda a, as usual. It has been drawn into b because of the alliteration.

Contra Old, Ge, Re, and Schindler (Rt. Nouns), I analyze jā́ḥ as a nom. sg.

(with Gr), not an acc. pl. (Ge allows for the nom. sg. alternative in n. 1c). In their interpretations, “the children of the sun” refers to the insightful thoughts of b. But this is a distinctly odd way to refer to thoughts, and no convincing parallels are given. Ge’s interpr. of the phrase “daughter of the sun” as a reference to hymns I have discussed (and dismissed) ad IX.1.6 and esp. IX.72.3. Moreover, pāda c describes Soma as dashing around these children, but in IX pári + VERB OF MOTION normally, perhaps exclusively, refers to Soma’s journey around the filter. I do not know what it would mean for him to “dash around” thoughts, much less “children of the sun.” As a nom. sg., jā́ḥ in the phrase “offspring of the sun” makes perfect sense as a description of Soma; Soma’s similarity to and often identification with the sun is well attested, and the use of kinship terms to model such similiarity/identification is also well known. If, nonetheless, we want to interpr. jā́ḥ as an acc. pl., I would take it as a reference to the milk; cf. comm. ad IX.72.3, where I explain “daughter of the sun” there as referring to the milk because of their shared gleaming color.


## 02
In d sám √gam is of course a euphemism of sex, a theme already broached in c.


## 03
The tr. “prepare” for abhí śrīṇanti in b does not harmonize well with the simile vásubhir ná niktaíḥ “as if with freshly washed goods.” Nor does the interpr.

put forth by Narten (“Ved. śrīṇā́ti …,” KZ 100 [1987] = KlSch 340ff., at 349), “vollkommen machen” (complete, perfect). The developed sense of the root noun śrī́- ‘excellence, splendour, beauty’ and esp. the rt. noun cmpd abhiśrī́- ‘excelling in splendour’ (etc.) seems to have affected the meaning of the verb, and I would now tr.

something like “they beautify his head …,” which is not far from ‘bring to perfection’.


## 04
Ge takes vāvaśānáḥ in b to ‘desire’ (√vaś), but the same form in the same metrical position in 2b to ‘bellow’ (√vāś). Given the formal identity of the participles, I think they should be rendered in the same way (‘bellowing’; Ge’s n. 4b recognizes this alternative). But the proximity of uśatī́‘desiring, eager’ in our pāda c teases us with the other root, and it is quite possible that our form should be taken as a pun. For a similar conjunction see IX.95.3-4.

The hapax rathirāyátām (3rd sg. mid. impv., with Old, etc., not gen. pl. pres.

part., with Gr) is baroque in formation. It’s worth noting that 3 of the 11 forms of its presumed base rathirá- ‘charioteer, chariot rider’ are found in nearby IX.97 (vss. 37, 46, 48) with a further occurrence in IX.76.2.


## 05
The vs. shows a number of metrical disturbances; see Arnold p. 317, Old ad loc., HvN p. 649. Arnold suggests reading *māsvā in pāda a, which would fix the cadence. Pāda b has an opening of 3; note, however, that the apparently bad cadence viśváścandram with four heavy syllables is not in fact a problem, since all cmpds in - ścandra- are better read *-candra- (see comm. ad I.165.8), yielding the light antepenult required. On the metrical shape of vātā́pyam see immed. below and comm. ad I.121.8. Pāda c has 10 syllables. Pāda d, the Nodhas Gautama refrain (I.58.9, etc.), has an unusual break.

The adj. vātā́pyam presents problems of both form and meaning. There are three (or more) possible scansions of this stem—vāatā́pya- (or vaatā́pya-), vātaā́pya-, and vātā́pi ya—each of which has its champions. See comm. ad I.121.8.

The sense of the stem is likewise in doubt. It seems obviously related to the voc. vā́tāpe ‘o friend of the wind’ in I.187.8-10, and in I.121.8 Ge tr. “… den Windbefreundeten,” in X.26.2 “die mit dem Vāta befreundet (?) ist.” However, in our passage and in X.105.1 he suggests a different analysis entirely, since (acdg. to his n. 5b to our hymn) that sense “will hier nicht passen.” His alternative involves the ppl. vāta- to √vani ‘long for, crave’ (otherwise attested only as 2nd cmpd. member), with the sense “whose friendship is desired” (dessen Freundschaft begehrt ist). The question is somewhat hard to decide (if it needs to be decided: a pun is also possible, as displayed in the publ. tr.). On the one hand, giving up the connection with vātāpi- (whatever its underlying accent would have been: vā́tāpe has voc. accent) is unappealing. Moreover if the scansion should be vāata-, this would favor ‘wind’, which can be so scanned, whereas the root syll. of the ppl. should not be distracted.

(However, that scansion is declared by Old to be the least likely one.) Ge’s certainty that “wind-befriended” wouldn’t work here is also open to question. We are asking for wealth - and “wind-befriended” wealth could be wealth that comes quickly, on a powerful gust of air. All this favors the “wind” analysis. But there is another consideration: accent. The cmpd is clearly an adj.; just as clearly it has a neut. noun ā́pya- ‘friendship’ as 2nd member. Therefore it should be a bahuvrīhi “having X friendship’ / ‘having the friendship of X’. If the 1st member is the ppl. to √vani , it should be accented *vātá- (though it actually never appears accented elsewhere).

This would allow an analysis vātá-āpya- with expected first-member bahuvrīhi accent (of the sutá-soma- type). But ‘wind’ is accented vā́ta-, and so, if it contains ‘wind’, the cmpd. must be analyzed with 2nd member accent, vāta-ā́pya-, which is not standard bahuvrīhi accent. Nonetheless, weighing these contravening factors, I favor ‘wind-befriended’ as the 1st reading, with Ge’s ‘whose friendship is sought’ as a 2nd punning reading—though I cannot explain the accent.

Although pāda d is the Nodhas refrain and therefore tacked onto the hymn in some sense, note that dhiyā́responds to dhī́ra- dhītí- of 1b.
