+++
title = "094"

+++
This hymn is attributed to Kaṇva Ghaura, the poet of I.36-43.


## 01
Note the unaccented asmin in pāda a, referring to Soma, who is the default referent even without a previous mention in the hymn.

The vs. contains three similes, each of which presents at least some interpretational challenges to the audience. The first two are in ab and match the frame “the thoughts contend over him” (… asmin … spárdhante dhíyaḥ), which preumably refers to the thoughts produced by poets at different and competing rituals (see Ober I.407 and n. 64). The second simile, in b, is the easier to interpret: “like clans over the sun” (sū́rye ná víśaḥ). Like the competing thoughts that each seek to appropriate Soma, different clans all seek to secure their place in the sun, a symbol, acdg. to Ober (I.457), of Leben and Lebenskraft, of Lebensraum.

The first simile, vājínīva śúbhaḥ, reads slightly askew. It should mean “as adornments (contend over) a prizewinner” - but what would that really mean? The passages adduced by Ge in n. 1a are not helpful, and no one else that I know of attempts to elucidate it. I think the poet has deliberately misdirected us. To begin with, although the loc. vājíni appears to match asmin in the frame as the object of contention, I think that may not be the case or may not only be the case. The vs. begins with ádhi, which therefore appears to be in tmesis with spárdhante in b, but there is only one other instance of ádhi √spṛdh in the RV (VI.34.1, where - I must admit - it seems to have the sense attributed to our passage: ‘contend over’ with loc. índre as the object of contention). The word ádhi is more often an adposition, most commonly with the loc., and so I think it is here. Although ádhi is separated from vājíni, what intervenes is Wackernagel’s position material: subordinating yád, which frequently takes 2nd position, and the enclitic asmin, which would lean upon it. So effectively ádhi … vājíni can be a prepositional phrase interrupted by the interpolation of those two Wackernagel’s position words. Under this interpr. the prizewinner is no longer the object of contention but the locus of it. Now as to śúbhaḥ: this root noun is quite well attested (over 40 occurrences, incl. the common voc. śubhás páti-), but only two attestations are plural - our passage and V.54.11, which describes the many appurenances and adornments found on the Maruts and their equipage, incl. pāda b vákṣassu rukmā́maruto ráthe śúbhaḥ “ your breasts brilliants, o Maruts, on your chariot charms” (per the publ. tr.). The śúbhaḥ here are ornaments of some sort, quite possibly sparkly or otherwise eye-catching, that jazz up the chariot to which they’re affixed. I suggest that our loc. (ádhi …) vājíni fulfills the same function as ráthe in V.54.11, and that the śúbhaḥ in our passage are not vying over or for the prizewinner, but, located on him, they are vying with each other to best catch the eye of observers.

The phrase that opens the 2nd hemistich, apó vṛṇānáḥ “choosing the waters,” is a little odd. The waters are surely the ubiquitous waters for mixing found regularly in IX, but why would Soma “choose” them? In a soma context we would expect rather apó *vasānáḥ “clothing himself in the waters”; this exact phrase opens the pāda in IX.78.1, 86.40, 96.13, 107.4, 18, 26, and with acc. sg. of the participle IX.16.2, 109.21. I suggest that our poet is knowingly playing on this standard formula, using a different root but identical formation to throw the expression offkilter. Note that vásāna- (nom. pl.) is found in the same metrical position in 4c. The identical expression, apó vṛṇānáḥ, is, however, found in V.48.1; on this opaque passage see comm. ad loc. Interpretation of the third simile in the vs. is complicated by the fact that it is unclear which part of the clause to construe it with. The frame consists of an acc. mánma ‘thought’ (à ‘poem’), which is compared to vrajáṃ ná paśuvárdhanāya “a stable for raising livestock.” But where these acc. expressions fit in the sentence is disputed: Ge (see n. 1d; also Tichy, dvitā́222 = KlSch 213) takes mánma as a second obj. with vṛṇānáḥ. But the simile then makes little sense: although Soma might well “choose a thought,” choosing a stable is a different proposition. By this interpr. the domain of the comparison would only be the acc. mánma; it could not fit with the verb (despite Tichy’s odd “wie (man) eine Hürde … [wählt]”). Although such similes, detached from the syntax of the rest of the clause, do exist, syntactic integration, esp. of non-nominative similes, is more usual and desirable. By contrast, Old takes the acc. as the obj. (or semi-obj.) of pavate. This latter suggestion seems particularly unlikely, given the stereotyped used of pavate in IX, and Old’s rendering shows how he struggles to make it work: “er verwirklicht durch sein Sichreinigen das m˚, wie (man) einen Stall …(reinigt).” Differing from both these interpr., following a remark of Re’s in his n. (“mánma dépendant librement de kavīyán …”), which is not entirely reflected in his tr., I take it with the act. denom. part. kavīyán.

The stem kavīyá- occurs only twice in the RV (and nowhere else), once as an act.

part. (here), once as a middle part. kavīyámāna- in I.164.18. Nothing therefore forbids us from assuming a direct obj. with the act. form, as I have done here. The content of the simile, which compares the building of a stable or livestock enclosure to the composing of a poem, rests on the commonality often asserted in the RV between physical and mental craftsmanship and thus fits nicely with the verb.


## 02
The nom. part. vyūrṇván in pāda is sg., while the finite verb prathanta in b is pl. Old and Ge attribute this to anacoluthon, with the nom. of pāda a coreferential with the dat. svarvíde in b, while acdg. to Tichy (loc. cit., n. 35) the participle is the predicate of pāda a (“Partizip im Nominative an Stelle eines Verbum finitum”). With Re, I instead take pāda a as a continuation of vs. 1, with a new construction beginning in b.

The referent of amṛ́tasya in the phrase amṛ́tasya dhā́ma is not clear. Ge: the drink of immortality, Re: the immortal principle, Lü (257) and Tichy (loc. cit.): immortality. By contrast I think it may refer to the sun (as I also suggest in the nearby passage IX.97.32); the immediately following description of Soma as ‘finder of the sun’ (svarvíd-) supports this interpr. “Disclosing the domain of the sun” may refer to the Dawn-like behavior of Soma at the morning pressing (see Ge’s n. 2b “Wie bei Sonnenaufgang”), or to his plunging into the milk mixture that is often assimilated to the sun - probably the latter. The adv. dvitā́‘once again’ expresses the regular repetition of the sacrifice.


## 03
This vs. does not contain a main cl., simply a subord. yád cl. in ab, extended by a participial expression in cd. The vs. can depend either on the previous vs. or the following one - or (though in my view less likely) the part. bhū́ṣan in c can be the predicate of the main cl.

The cadence of pāda a is bad; Gr suggests reading subj. *bharāte, which would fix the problem, but as Old comments, this is “natürlich ganz unsicher” - esp.

since both the opening and the break are likewise irregular (see HvN metrical comm. ad loc.).

Note the emphatic return of the poet, with kavíḥ kā́vyā in pāda a picking up kavīyán in 1a.

Pāda b and the simile it contains raise some problems. First, the nom. subject śū́ro ná ráthaḥ. The stem śū́ra- is of course a masc. noun ‘champion’, here juxtaposed with another such noun, rátha- ‘chariot’. Re renders them as distinct subjects: “tel un héros, (tel) un char-de-guerre,” but I think a blended “champion chariot” works better. The phrase also presents another possibility, which Old flirts with but ultimately dismisses: śū́raḥ is phonologically almost identical to sū́raḥ, the gen. sg. of svàr- ‘sun’, and the “chariot of the Sun” (sū́raḥ […] rátha-) is found elsewhere (I.50.9 [see comm. ad loc.], V.31.11; also sū́raḥ […] cakrám “(chariot-)wheel of the Sun” I.174.5, VI.56.3). Although I do not propose emending śū́raḥ to *sū́raḥ, I do think that phrase is lurking in the background, esp. given the presence of the sun in 2b (svar-[víde]) and, if I’m correct, also 2a.

Assuming this double reading of the subject of the simile helps interpr. the rest of pāda b. Ge and Re take bhúvanāni víśvā “all the worlds” as belonging to the frame, as a parallel obj. to kā́vyā in pāda a (e.g., “Quand le (soma) poète porte autour de lui les pouvoirs-poétiques (et) tous les mondes …”). This leaves the acc. slot of the simile unfilled: Re leaves it blank, while Ge supplies “(die Feinde?).” I instead put bhúvanāni víśvā in the simile, matching kā́vyā in the frame. This interpr. is facilitated by the “chariot of the *Sun” reading that I think is implied here, since the Sun’s daily chariot journey across the heaven puts all worlds in his jurisdiction.

Soma’s journey across the ritual ground gives him the same kind of control over poetic skill and its products, both his own and those of the officiants. It may also be that “all the worlds” can secondarily be re-read into the frame. The bhúvanāni that stretched out for sun-finding Soma in 2b (presumably both the cosmic worlds and the worlds of the ritual ground) fall into this control in 3ab.

As pointed out by Old inter alia, in c the transmitted mártāya is best emended to *márti yāya, since a four-syllable reading is called for.

The dual focus on the cosmic and the ritual continues in c, where Soma exerts himself “among the gods” (that is, in his cosmic dimension) on behalf of glory for the mortal, presumably the priest or poet. The expression (yáśo) *mártyāya bhū́ṣan# may play off amṛ́tāya bhū́ṣan# (III.25.2, 34.2) “exerting oneself for the immortal (one).” The rt. noun cmpd puru-bhū́(-tama)- is otherwise used of the Aśvins (4x); I interpr. it to mean ‘appearing in many places’ (see comm. ad IV.44.4). The apparent loc. pl. occurrence here has been variously and only tentatively interpr.; see Ge, Re, Ober (II.229), Scar (362). Given the context, in a participial clause headed by bhū́ṣan, I suggest that our purubhū́ṣu does not in fact belong to puru-bhū́- but rather to an otherwise unattested puru-*bhū́ṣ- -- hence *puru-bhū́ṣ-ṣu, with the geminate sibilant simplified to -ṣ-. Although a root noun to the secondary root √bhūṣ is not found elsewhere, it would not be difficult to generate in this context.


## 04
In pāda a the Pp reads śriyé for the Saṃhitā śriyá ā́. Ge concurs, but Re tr.

“… est issu de la gloire,” with an apparent ablative - which is how I interpr. the form. The lexeme nír √i ‘come out, come forth’ generally takes an abl., and the gesture towards a versified paradigm (śriyé … śriyás [a], śríyam [b]) speak in favor of the abl.

The pl. subj. of c may be the singers, the only plural entitiy overt in the vs. so far. So Sāy. and by implication (see his n. 4c) Ge. However, I think that Re is correct is supplying instead “les sucs-de-soma,” since vasāná-, common in IX, is applied only to soma. The interchange between sg. and pl. in reference to soma and its streams/drops, etc., is of course ubiquitous in this maṇḍala.

The final pāda is quite unclear and its interpr. depends in part on identity of the ref. of the loc. mitádrau ‘of measured pace’. Ge and Re both take it to be Soma.

Acdg, to Ge, the loc. is to be construed with samithā́(“Die Kämpfe um ihn, der einen festen Schritt hat …”), but as far as I am aware, samithá- is not found with a loc. elsewhere. Re makes this loc. into a loc. absolute, by virtue of supplying a near paragraph of extraneous matter, which has a whiff of desperation in it. My interpr.

begins with the fact that of the 5 occurences of the stem mitádru- the two other singular ones both refer to Agni (IV.6.5, VII.7.1). I therefore suggest that he is also the referent here. The “encounters” (samithā́) that are to be realized (bhávanti satyā́) take place at the ritual fire; the loc. is simply recalling us firmly to the ritual ground.

The encounters in question I take to be the encounter of the soma streams/drops (etc.) with the gods who are to consume them - or possibly the encounters with the water and milk mixtures.
