+++
title = "095"

+++
This hymn is attributed to Praskaṇva Kāṇva, the poet of I.44-50, the group of hymns that follow those of Kaṇva Ghaura, the poet of immediately preceding IX.94.


## 01
Ge takes the participles in b (sī́dan … punānáḥ) as implicitly predicated (“er läutert sich und setzt sich …”), but there seems no reason to do so. They are surely parallel to the part. in pāda a (sṛjyámānaḥ) and detail the various circumstances under which Soma keeps roaring.

The verb in b, 3rd sg. mid. janayata, seems to be a true middle with selfinvolvement of the subj. -- “he generates (his own) thoughts through his own powers.” - not dependent on the purely formal 3rd pl. -anta replacement janáyanta (see my “Voice fluctuation in the Rig Veda: Medial 3rd plural -anta in active paradigms,” IIJ 21 ([1979] 146-69). The self-involvement of the subj. is even clearer in the near-twin passage I.95.4 vatsó mātṝ́r janayata svadhā́bhiḥ “ The calf [=Agni] begets his (own) mothers with his own powers.” See comm. ad loc. 
## 02
The opening of this vs., háriḥ sṛjānáḥ, echoes 1a … hárir ā́sṛjyámānaḥ#. I do not know if the root aor. part. here is meant to convey anterior value, as opposed to the pres. pass. part. in 1a, or if it’s just a variant.

For the infinitival use of the dative of this rt. noun cmpd pravā́c- see Scar (470).


## 03
Pada b prá manīṣā́īrate sómam ácha “The inspired thoughts press forward to Soma” is the intrans. equivalent of 2b íyarti vā́cam “He [=Soma] directs his speech,” with act. transitive redupl. pres. íyarti corresponding to its weak form, medial intrans. ī́rte. This connection is obscured by the Engl. tr.

The deployment of ca, first conjoining two preverbs enfolding their joint verb (c … úpa ca yánti sáṃ ca), and then in the next pāda conjoining a new preverb, but with a different verb (d ā́ca viśanti), is a striking effect. The contrastive preverbs in c of course account for the accent on the main-cl. verb yánti.


## 04
The ‘back’ (sā́nā́) is the back of the filter; the fuller expression is sā́no ávye “on the sheep’s back,” as in nearby IX.97.3 mr̥jyate sā́no ávye.

Ge renders vāvaśānám as “dem Verlangenden” (to √vaś ‘desire’), in contrast to Re and the publ. tr., which take it to √vāś ‘bellow’. In actual fact it is probably a pun. On the one hand, in this vs. Soma is strongly typed as bovine (a: mahiṣám ‘buffalo’, b: ukṣánam ‘ox’), which favors ‘bellow’. On the other, the end of the previous vs. contains a reciprocal expression from √vaś: 3d uśatī́r uśántam “(they) desiring, (him) desiring.” So both roots are in play here and equally applicable to Soma. For a similar situation see nearby IX.93.4 and comm. thereon.

For Trita as the archetypal soma-preparer, see comm. ad IX.37.4. Here Soma is identified with Varuṇa because of Varuṇa’s (developing) association with water and the sea. See Lü (52, 268), Ober (II.100 and n. 406).


## 05
The Upavaktar priest prompts the Hotar to speak. On this priestly title and its relationship to the Maitrāvaruṇa priest, see Minkowski, Priesthood in Ancient India, 118-27. It may be no accident that this priestly title, found only 3x in the RV (IV.9.5, VI.71.5, and here), occurs directly after a mention of Varuṇa.
