+++
title = "096"

+++
On the structure of this hymn, see publ. intro. Although the larger structure involves a series of independent four-vs. hymns, there are a number of echoes across these hymns, noted below, that may have influenced their being grouped together


## 02
The publ. tr. doesn’t make it sufficiently clear that “without resting” qualifies the “tawny (horse).” Ge and Re construe gen. índrasya with the chariot, while I take it with the comrade - and Ober vacillates (comrade II.100, chariot II.204). Since índrasya is positioned between chariot and comrade, word order doesn’t help. In my view ‘comrade’ is inherently relational and generally needs to be defined with reference to another being or beings, as comrade to someone, hence my tr. See also nearby


## 06
sákhéndrasya, which both Ge and Re construe together.


## 03
The phrase dyā́m utémā́m raises a number of questions. First, what is utá conjoining? Although it is tempting to suggest “heaven and this (earth),” this would produce the pragmatically unlikely “causing … this (earth) to rain.” Moreover, there are numerous exx. of prthiv ̥ ī́ṃ dyā́m utémā́m “earth and this heaven” (III.32.8, 34.8, X.88.3, 9, 121.1). It seems that the last part of that phrase, containing only the second NP, has been extracted from the fuller expression and inserted here, with the utá pleonastic, or loosely conjoining the participial phrases kṛṇvánn apáḥ and varṣáyan dyā́m utémā́m despite its position within the NP. On the clash between the near deictic ayám ‘this here’ and heaven, which is generally qualified by the distal deictic asaú ‘that yonder’, see disc. ad VIII.40.4 - also for the fem. gender that dyā́m must show here.

Ge tr. d as implicitly comparative, “mach uns die Bahn noch breiter als breit,” presumably because of the abl. uróḥ. But ā́with preceding abl. almost always expresses the source and is not used with a comparative. The few passages, grouped in Gr’s 7) “vor andern, d.h. in höherm vorzuglichern Grade als andere” (p. 169), that do show something like that sense (several in that category are best interpr.

otherwise) depend on ā́váram “the choice from among …” Moreover, varivasyádoes not have a comparative sense ‘make wider space’ but merely ‘make wide space’. In our passage the point seems to be that Soma is already positioned in a wide place, from which he can act to provide us with the same.


## 04
As Old points out, bṛhaté is a masc./neut. form apparently modifying two (or at least one) fem. nouns, svastáye sarvátātaye. Re takes it as a third term: “pour … le haut (rang),” but in his n. he acknowledges the Old/Ge acceptance of gender mismatch here, noting also that that interpr. produces two pairs of paired datives, the negated violence words in pāda a and the positive -ti-abstracts in b. In my view pattern may trump gender here. It’s also worth noting that the cadence produced by bṛhaté is bad, and it would be fixed by a fem. *bṛhatyai, so it is possible that bṛhaté was introduced redactionally - but why?


## 06
Though the syntax is kept absolutely constant - nom. sg. + gen. pl. - there is a shifting functional relationship between the head noun and its genitive in the seven phrases here: the first two are roles Soma performs for the group identified by the gen., the next three a particular, and superior, individual token from the group (though the third pairing, “seer for/of the inspired poets,” is ambiguous between the first type and the second), and the last is sort of a negative version of the role he plays for the group.


## 07
In pāda a, along with Ge and Re (see also Old’s comm. ad loc.) I read ūrmím twice, with both simile and frame; vācáḥ so accented should be gen. sg., not acc. pl., and is therefore not parallel to the two acc. pls. in b, gíraḥ … manīṣā́ḥ.

The standard tr. interpr. the vṛjánā phrase as obj. of antáḥ páśyan (e.g., Re “Regardant à l’intérieur ces sectes (de fidèles) proches”). I instead take the part. in absolute usage (“looking within”; cf. I.132.3) and construe the acc. with ā́tiṣṭhati ‘(sur)mounts’. This makes some spatial sense: if they are ‘below’ (ávarāṇi) it is easy to mount them.

Re and Ober (II.211) think that pāda d refers to copulation. Cf. esp. Ober’s “Der Bulle besteigt die Kühe, [die Kopulation] kennend.” Although “mount” is a standard Engl. term for animal copulation, I am not at all sure that ā́√sthā serves the same function, and I would esp. wonder about using the locative for the female participant(s). And I also doubt that it would need to be added that the bull knew how to do it!


## 08
Ge takes iṣaṇyán in d to mean ‘desiring’ (“nach den Kühen verlangend”) as in the sim. passage he cites, III.50.3. But this verb stem always means ‘drive, send’ (see Re’s n. ad loc.) and is, one way or another, derived from iṣṇā́ti ‘impels, sends’.

## 08-09
Although these two vss. belong to two different hymns within the larger structure of IX.96, it is notable that the a-pādas of both end with a form -vātaḥ; it is not impossible that the hymn consisting of 9-12 was attached here because of this concatenation, esp. given that the etymological figure in 8a is repeated in 11c of the other hymn. But the -vāta-forms belong to two different roots: 8a (/11c) ávāta- to √van ‘win, vanquish’ and 9a devávāta-to √vani ‘love, cherish, long for’. The root affiliation of ávāta- is assured by the etymological figure in which it’s found, vanvánn ávātaḥ “vanquishing but unvanquished” (cf. also VI.16.20, 18.1, IX.89.7 as well as the two occurrences in this hymn, 8a and 11c). But √van is an aniṭ root, and we might expect a ppl. *-vata-, which does not occur; -vāta- is only phonologically proper to the seṭ root √vani . Gotō (1st Kl. 283-84 with n. 656), fld. by EWA (s.v. VAN), suggests that ávāta- (and, per EWA, other apparent seṭ forms of √van) are analogic to the synonymous, rhyming but seṭ root √sani (sātá-, etc.). I certainly think the parallel forms of √sani may well have contributed, but I think it’s a mistake to discount potential confusion and conflation of forms of √vani and √van, esp. since under certain circumstances ‘love, long for’ and ‘win’ can shade into each other.


## 09
In addition to its echoing ávāta- in 8, devávāte is reminiscent of devátāte in 3a.

My “for Indra’s exhilaration” is a somewhat loose rendering of the double dative índrāya … mádāya “for Indra, for exhilaration.”


## 11
As Ge (see n. 11c) and Ober (I.311 with n. 791) point out, the first hemistich depicts the Vala myth, with “forefathers” (pitáraḥ) a reference to the Aṅgirases - made clearer by a similar but more explicit passage in the next hymn, IX.97.39. This mythic episode - the forefathers opening the Vala cave with the help of soma - provides the model for the appeal in c, for Soma to open the paridhí- (paridhī́m̐r áporṇu): paridhí- is used explicitly of the barriers of the Vala cave in I.52.5. But as Ge suggests (n. 11c), the poet here is calling on Soma to open up the livestock pens and provide us with the animals therein.


## 12
As pointed out in the publ. intro., this vs. is strongly marked as a hymnfinal vs., with complementary yáthā ‘even as’ (ab) and evā́‘in just this way’ (cd) clauses, bringing this 4-versed hymn to a close. The matches between clauses are more expicit than in some such structures: the two finite verbs, impf. ápavathāḥ and impv. pavasva, match exactly save for tense/mood, and the root noun cmpd. vayodhā́ḥ of pāda a is recast as a syntagm dráviṇaṃ dádhānaḥ in c with the same root √dhā.

The final pāda consists of two brief clauses, both somewhat aberrant. The first contains an idiom I have not found elsewhere, sám √sthā + LOC. My tr., “stand sideby-side by Indra,” is meant to capture this slightly off expression. The second clause, “beget/generate weapons,” is syntactically fine but semantically odd.

## 12-13
The first vs. of the new hymn (13a) begins pávasva (see also pavasva in 14a), just as the last vs. of the previous hymn ended with pavasva (12c). Again, this concatenation may have led to the attachment of 13-16 at this point. Of course, pávasva is hardly a rare form in this maṇḍala.


## 14
The pavasva in this vs. is construed with an acc. phrase, vṛṣṭíṃ diváḥ. Ge treats it as if it were a straight transitive: “Läutere ... den Regen ... herab,” while Re supplies a participle to govern the acc.: “clarifie toi (nous donnant) la pluie.” It is possible that something like Re’s solution is correct: that we should supply the preverb ā́to form the lexeme ā́√pū ‘attract through purification’ (see comm. ad IX.7.8); on occasion (see, e.g., IX.13.4 and comm. ad loc.), ā́is missing, but the passage seems to require it. However, here I suggest that something different is going on: it is not that we want Soma to bring rain through his purification, but to become, turn into rain. See IX.97.44, 108.10


## 15
I don’t know what íd contributes in b, beyond inducing accent on the verb tárati.

The standard tr. (Ge, Re, Ober [I.232]) take “(the milk) of Aditi” as the frame, with the simile limited to páyo ná dugdhám, e.g., “Tel le lait trait, (le lait) d’Aditi est fort.” I find this puzzling because Aditi has little to do with soma and has no reason to figure here. (On the phrase “in the lap of Aditi” in IX, see comm. ad IX.89.1.) Instead I think that it is soma that is being compared to the milk milked from Aditi; in other words, Aditi belongs to the simile. Since she is the archetype of motherhood, the milk of Aditi would be esp. rich and nurturing - “mother’s milk”; indeed this might be a reference to the beestings or “first milk” (pīyū́ṣa-), with which soma is often compared (see comm. ad IX.85.9).

Old, Ge, and Re all make more of the gender mismatch in the simile urv ìva gātúḥ than I think is justified. Since the target of the simile is milk (páyaḥ), and milk is neuter, I see no problem with attributing the neut. urú to its “attraction” to the neut.

páyaḥ, even though, given the position of ná, the simile should rightly be “like a broad way” rather than “broad like a way.” The masc. suyámaḥ in the next simile may result from the more animate quality of the content of the simile itself, the draught-horse.


## 16
The bahuvrīhi sv-āyudhá- ‘having good weapons’ echoes the odd command that ends the previous hymn in this structure, 12d janáyā́yudhāni “beget weapons!” This echo may have contributed to the attachment of 13-16 at that point in the text.

Soma’s goal in b, “the dear hidden name” (gúhyaṃ cā́ru nā́ma), has a surprisingly large number of possible referents. Lü (526) suggests the sun, Ge (n.

16b) amṛ́ta- the drink of immortality. I would add Soma’s own name (see IX.92.2, 4 and comm. thereon), or the cows on the basis of IX.87.3 apīcyàm gúhyaṃ nā́ma gónām, or the gods, as in the immed. preceding hymn IX.95.2 devā́nāṃ gúhyāni nā́ma, or Indra on the basis of IX.109.14 bíbharti cā́rv índrasya nā́ma.

## 17-18
These two vss. outfit Soma with the lexicon of poetry, with 17c concentrating on kaví- and 18a on ṛ́ṣi-, though with kaví- returning in pāda b


## 17
I don’t know what the Maruts are doing here.

In c I have rendered the nom. pres. part. sán concessively, in its usual value, but it’s not exactly clear what the concession would be. Perhaps the contrast is between Soma as poet - so emphasized by kavíḥ … kā́vyena kavíḥ -- and the less than melodious sound indicated by the root √ribh ‘squawk, rasp’ (see comm. ad VI.3.6, IX.66.9).


## 18
The publ. tr. does not render the rel. yáḥ since the rel. cl. is entirely nominal. It is not clear how far it extends - perhaps the first hemistich, perhaps through pāda c, perhaps only the first pāda - since Soma is nominative both in the rel. cl. and in the main cl. The main cl. must constitute at least the last pāda because the finite verb rājati is unaccented.

The phrase padavī́ḥ kavīnā́m is found also in 6a.

What the referent of the “third domain” (tṛtī́yaṃ dhā́ma) is is unclear. Lü (273), not surprisingly, has precisely mapped the spatial geography and considers the third domain to be heaven (1 earth, 2 midspace, 3 heaven), with the fourth, in the next vs., the samudra-, which is higher than heaven. I think it more likely that these are ritual references, quite possibly to locations on the ritual ground that Soma traverses on his journey (see dhā́māni ā́ryā in IX.63.14 and comm. thereon). If “gaining the sun” (svarṣā́ḥ) refers to Soma’s uniting with the milk mixture (assimilated to the sun because of its gleaming whiteness), then the third domain, which comes after, might be the vessels near the ritual fire. If the dhā́man- are not spatial but temporal, this could be a ref. to the third pressing. Ge (n. 18c) takes it as reference to the forms or phases of soma; Re tr. ‘structure’ without further elaboration.

As generally noted by tr. (Ge, Re, also Scar [72]), pāda d involves a play on the names of the Anuṣṭubh and Virāj meters. The publ. tr. fails to register the pun on virā́jam, well captured by Scar “Soma herrscht nach Art eines Grosskönigs.” I would now substitute a fuller (if more awk.) tr.: “Soma, as rhythm [/ the Anuṣṭubh meter], rules as wide-ruling one [/regulates the Virāj (meter) according to rule].” This tr.

assumes that virā́jam represents not only the acc. sg. of the rt. noun cmpd. virā́j-, but also the nom. sg. pres. part. *virā́jan to the them. pres. rā́jati. This seems preferable to trying to construe it as an acc. sg. in the sense ‘wide-ruling’, and the interchange of final nasals would be fairly trivial for a pun. Scar. (72 n. 97) notes that the lexeme ánu √rāj is used in II.43.1 also of regulating meters, there Gāyatrī and Triṣṭubh. The preverb ánu also has to be read with ṣṭúp, as a cmpd decomposed and flanking rājati (ánu rājati ṣṭúp), for the meter name. The technical references to meters here may be the culmination of the kaví- / ṛ́ṣi- theme of 17-18.


## 19
I follow Ge in interpr. vibhṛ́tvan- as ‘spreading (wings)’, an interpr. that Old finds at least possible and that Re accepts. It is noteworthy - though I’m not sure where it gets us - that the Avestan Hom Yašt in Y. 9.14 contains the phrase vībǝrǝϑuuaṇtǝm āxtūirīm supposedly “with pauses and repeated four times,” describing the recitation of the Ahuna Vairiia prayer, with the equivalent of our vibhṛ́tvan- (/-vant-) and turī́ya-. But the contexts are so different that it is hard to know what, if anything, to make of it - though if there’s a covert reference to recitational styles here it would continue the technical poetic vocab. of 18d.

The stem govindú- ‘cow-finding’ is found only here in the RV and nowhere else in Skt. (though govinda- is of course quite common later). As Re notes, it is a play on índu- ‘drop’ and is immed. doubled by the synonym drapsá-.

The weapons of 16a (and 12d) return here.

I follow Lü (273) and Re in taking samudrám in c as part of a double acc. phrase with vivakti in d: “declares the sea to be the fourth domain” - rather than as taking it as a 2nd obj. with sácamānaḥ as Ge does (“… der Meerflut sich gesellend”).

Accepting Lü’s interpr. of the syntax does not, however, require accepting his view that this is the heavenly ocean, higher than heaven. Again, I think it’s a ritual ref. - perhaps to the waters that accompany him in pāda c.


## 20
Soma’s journey from the filter (vs. 17) and across the domains on the ritual ground (vss. 18-19) reaches its end when he enters the two cups, presumably ready for the gods to consume.

## 20-21
Again these two vss. belong to separate mini-hymns, but they are clearly concatenated: kánikradat “constantly roaring” in 20d is repeated in the same metrical position in 21b (and cf. krándan in 22d), and 20d camvòr ā́viveśa “he has entered the two cups” is immediately echoed by 21c camvòr ā́viśa “enter the two cups” (and cf. 22b kaláśām̐ā́viveśa).


## 22
Given the play on names of meters in 18d, it’s quite possible that sā́man- is a technical term here.

Although eti has a goal in its pāda (at least in the simile) and should therefore be read as a lexical verb of motion, it may also be functioning as an auxiliary in a periphrasis krándann eti “keeps roaring,” which would be an analytic expression functionally equivalent to the “intensive” (that is, iterative-repetitive) kánikradat in 20d, 21b.


## 23
The same double reading may apply to eṣi in pāda a, which has a goal (again in a simile), but also could be read with the part. apaghnán “he keeps smiting rivals.” śakunó ná pátvā “like a flying bird” seems closely modeled on 19a śakunó vibhṛ́tvā “a bird spreading (its wings). In itself the expression is a bit puzzling. If the bird is “flying” it should not already be “sitting” (sī́dan), and it seems unlikely that pátvan- is meant to distinguish it (as ‘flightful’) from a flightless bird like a dodo.


## 24
A last pāda-init. form of √krand, ácikradat in d.
