+++
title = "097"

+++
On the structure of this, the longest hymn in the RV, see publ. intro. It consists of tṛcas with varying degrees of cohesion.

## 01-03
No obvious cohesion in this tṛca, though it ends with a clan refrain.


## 01
As Re points out, init. asyá is reflexive or pseudo-reflexive, referring to Soma.

Gr attributes the instr. preṣā́to a root noun préṣ- (< pra-íṣ-). Scar (59-60) discusses the form extensively, pointing out that a root noun analysis is dispreferred because of the accent on the ending: root nouns generally keeping the accent on the root even in the oblique. An instr. to a putative them. stem preṣá- is possible (at least accentually distinct from préṣa- I.68.5).

Almost identical to IX.92.6a, pāda d contains one of the few technical references to animal sacrifice (other than the horse sacrifice) in the RV.


## 03
The comparative (yaśástaraḥ) with gen. pl. (yaśásām) is a mixed construction: we would expect either a splv. or an abl.

On the disputed etym. of kṣaíta(-vant)- see comm. ad VI.2.1. As was noted there, both kṣaíta- here and kṣaitavant- there are associated with yáśas- ‘glory’.

The final pāda is the Vasiṣṭha clan refrain, and the Anukr. attributes this tṛca to Vasiṣṭha himself, rather than one of the Vasiṣṭhids responsible for vss. 4-30.

## 04-06
As Re points out (ad vs. 6), the key to this tṛca is the dative of purpose: 4b dhánāya, 5b mádāya, 5d mahaté saúbhagāya, 6b bhárāya.


## 05
Ge and Re take ánu dhā́ma pū́rvam as referring to an earlier mode of praise (e.g., “nach der früheren Weise”), but dhā́man- in soma hymns tends, in my view, to refer to the physical domain(s) of the ritual ground, which Soma typically travels across in the course of his ritual preparation. See, e.g., the exx. in the immediately preceding hymn IX.96.18-19 and comm. thereon).


## 06
Like the first tṛca, this one ends with the Vasiṣṭha clan refrain. The tṛca is attributed not to Vasiṣṭha himself, but to one Indrapramati Vāsiṣṭha, who is not known from elsewhere.

## 07-09
This tṛca is attributed to Vṛṣagaṇa Vāsiṣṭha, whose given name was obviously extracted from vs. 8. All three vss. contain wild (or semi-wild) animals: a boar in 7d, geese in 8a, and a “sharp-horned” (tigmáśṛṅga-) one in 9c, a descriptor of vṛṣabhá-s generally.


## 07
In the expression kā́vyam uśáneva the first word is the acc. obj. of bruvāṇáḥ, but it is also of course a play on the patrynomic of Uśanā, the differently accented kāvyá-.

In d the publ. tr. takes padā́as neut. pl., based on IX.12.8 abhí priyā́divás padā́, … arṣati “Soma rushes towards the dear tracks of heaven,” adduced by Re.

However, it is also possible and, I now think, desirable to interpr. it as an instr. sg.

“along the track.” I would not interpr. the instr., with Ge, as “mit dem Fusse.” On PREV eti rébhan# see IX.96.6=17, IX.97.1 (this hymn) and with emi VII.18.22; “snorting” or “grunting” would be a better rendering of rébhan in the boar context.


## 08
My interpr. of this vs. differs from the standard because I don’t interpr.

anything here as a PN, unlike Ge and to a lesser extent Re. In particular, tṛpálamanyú- is taken as PN by Gr, Ge, Re, Mayr (PN); Ge and (waveringly) both Old and Mayr (PN) also so interpr. vṛ́ṣagaṇa-. As for the former, tṛpála- is also found in the cmpd. tṛpála-prabharman- (X.89.5, where it is adjacent to ā́pānta-manyu-, with - manyu- as here), both adj. applying to Soma. There is no question of a PN there. It is also likely to be related to tṛprá- (VIII.2.5), also of Soma. See comm. ad loc., where I accept Mayr’s (EWA s.v.) suggestion that tṛprá- means ‘sharp’. The other part of the dyad, manyú-, is of course a well-attested common noun ‘battle fury’. I see no obstacle to interpr. the phrase as “sharp battle fury,” referring to Soma’s martial progress across the ritual ground.

In the standard tr. the geese of pāda a are in an unmarked simile, and the real subj. is vṛ́ṣagaṇāḥ, which is either a PN (Ge) or a descriptor of officiants (Re: “Les (officiants formant) un groupe mâle”). But again, nothing stands in the way of taking the geese as the subj., modified by vṛ́ṣagaṇāḥ; after all, geese come in flocks! In my view the geese are, metaphorically, the singers (so not too far from Re), who attend the ritual in a flock. The point of comparison is the noise they make; cf., e.g., IX.32.3 ā́d īṃ haṃsó yáthā gaṇám, víśvasyāvīvaśan mátim “just as (the lead) wild goose (sets) its flock (to honking), he has made the thought of everyone bellow.” The last two vss. here (7-8) contrast the harsh noise made by Soma (compared to a boar, 7d) with the equally harsh noise of honking geese, representing the ritual singers. This may be far from the mellifluous singing we imagine, but, as I have long argued, the root √ribh ‘rasp,’ etc. and its deriv. noun rebhá- do not flatter the sound of the singers: they describe the squawking of birds of prey and the creaking of a wagon, inter alia (see comm. ad VI.3.6, IX.66.9). Although the principal image here is of noisily honking geese, the migratory travels of the geese (going from nearby us to their [winter?] home) provide a secondary image. Because in real life the honking of geese is generally perceived as they cross the sky in formation, the two images go together.

Ge and Re take c with ab, with pávamānam another goal (beside Tṛpala Manyu) of ayāsuḥ. I take it rather with d, and I think the 2nd hemistich softens and repairs the uncompromising tunelessness of the noise in ab, by revising the depiction of the singers. They are now “comrades,” and they speak forth (pra √vad, with double acc.) to Soma “songful music” (āṅguṣyàm … vāṇám). Ge and Re take āṅguṣyàm as modifying pávamānam, and in their favor the two words are adjacent.

But the only other occurrence of that stem modifies sā́man- ‘melody’ (I.62.2) and to bleach it to ‘preislichen’ (for which there are already numerous other synonyms) seems unfortunate. I would suggest that the prominent initial position of āṅguṣyàm in c, far from its head noun at the end of d, results from this intention to re-cast the harsh image of ab and do so as soon as possible.


## 09
This vs. presents a number of puzzles, esp. in pāda b.

The verb in pāda a, raṃhate, should be intransitive. I construe the acc. jūtím loosely, as indicating the pace or speed at which Soma moves, which is compared to that of Viṣṇu, who is regularly modified by urugāyá-, though the adj. is not exclusive to him.

The phrase vṛ́thā krīḷánt- is also found in IX.21.3. It’s also worth noting that vṛ́thā is also found with several instances of pā́jas- ‘face, dimension’ disc. below (IX.76.1=88.5, 109.21).

The problems in pāda b center on the root affiliation of the verb mimate and the function of ná. The phrase in question is mimate ná gā́vaḥ. The pāda is incisively and persuasively discussed by Old, with whose analysis my own is in general agreement. To begin with ná, both Ge and Re take it as neg., but as Old points out, its position is against that. I think that it is the simile marker, but, unusually, marking the verb that precedes it as to be read in two senses, rather than marking a nominal phrase as the simile, as is its overwhelming use.

This brings us to the verb. Given the presence of cows, our first impulse is to think ‘bellow’; cf., e.g., IX.33.4 gā́vo mimanti dhenávaḥ. But, though √mā ‘bellow’ does have the requisite redupl. pres. stem mímā-/ mím-, it is only active, as Old also points out. I therefore think that ná here signals that mimate is an imperfect pun: it gestures towards ‘bellow’, but cannot belong to ‘bellow’ because of the middle voice. (Old also thinks the pun is present.) This accounts for my “as they seem to bellow” in the publ. tr. The root to which the verb actually belongs is √mā ‘measure’, which also has a redupl. pres., which, however, is generally middle. The voice of the verb in our passage thus favors √mā ‘measure’, though √mā ‘bellow’, at least initially, seems to fit the context better. What can ‘measure’ contribute? This question was ingeniously answered by Old: the cows, i.e., the milk mixture, “teilen ihm das Mass zu.” They “give him their measure,” that is, provide him further physical substance as he travels through the stages of his ritual preparation.

This image is continued in c, by the VP parīṇasáṃ kṛṇute. Although the acc. is generally taken as a substantivized neut. to a them. adj. parīṇasá- derived from the noun párīṇas- ‘fullness, profusion’ (so Gr; see AiG II.2.137), I consider it still an adj., with which we should supply pā́jas- ‘face, dimension’. This has good support in IX; cf. IX.76.1 = IX.88.5 vṛ́thā pā́jāṃsi kr̥ṇute “he deploys his full dimensions at will” and with a different medial verb IX.68.3 pā́ja ā́dade “he assumed his full dimension” (see also IX.109.21). The added milk allows him to expand and attain ample size or measure. On the association of cows/milk with parīṇas(a)- see VIII.45.24 gó-parīṇasa-, characterizing soma drinks. In the comm. ad VIII.45.24 I suggest that the 2nd cmpd member is parīṇasá- as here (hence a 2nd occurrence of that stem), not párīṇas- (per Gr, etc.).

Acdg. to Ge (n. 9cd), Re, Lü (267), pāda d depicts Soma as sun and moon.

This may well be, but I wonder if the source of the contrastive image is not the Overnight (atirātrá) soma ritual.

## 10-12
This tṛca is attributed to Manyu Vāsiṣṭha, with the name possibly extracted from the previous tṛca, where manyú- in 8a is taken by some as part of a PN (see comm. above).

All three vss. contain a hemistich beginning índuḥ (10a, 11c, 12c); the verb pavate appears in all three (10a, 11b, 12a), though this is hardly unusual. In addition there is the presence of Indra (10b, 11c) or the gods in general (12b), as well as shared vocabulary: hemistich-final mádāya (10b, 11d), √pṛc ‘infuse’ (11a, 12b), \#devó devásya (11d) / #devó devā́n (12d). The net result is an impression of unity, despite the lack of a striking shared theme and the unremarkable nature of the shared material.


## 10
The sense and derivation of gó-nyoghas- are disputed. Ge tr. “der die Kühe würdigt” and tentatively connects the 2nd member with what he cites as ny òhate in V.52.11. I do not construe ní with ohate in that passage (see comm. ad loc.), in part because √uh does not otherwise appear with ní. The sense he attributes to the cmpd is also rather jarring. He is followed in both sense (“respectant les vaches”) and derivation by Re., who adds to the dossier of parallels I.180.5 gór óheṇa, which, however, is too riddled with uncertainties (see comm. ad loc.) to provide good evidence. By contrast Old considers BR’s conjectured emendation *gó-nyokas- ‘accustomed to cows’ (?—he doesn’t gloss) very likely. He rejects the view that the cmpd as transmitted contains an s-stem oghas- ‘flood’, related to later Vedic ogha-, aughá- ‘flood’ (even though he states that if we stick with the transmitted text he would tr. “auf den die Kuh(milch) hernieder flutet”). This dismissal of a potential

*oghas- is shared by Mayr (EWA s.v. ogha-): “RV 9,97,10 gónyoghas- ist nicht für
ein ved. *oghas- ‘Strömung’ verwertbar.” Mayr instead tentatively follows the Ge/Re interpr. (s.v. OH), “vielleicht ‘die Kühe preisend’ od. dgl.” I am puzzled by this blanket rejection, esp. from Mayr, who cites (s.v. ogha-) with approbation Narten’s positing (YH 221) of an Indo-Iranian root √*uag̯ h ‘fliessen’, found in ogha-, aughá-.

Admittedly, there is no independently attested s-stem *óghas-. But consider the semantically and morphologically parallel gó-arṇas- (4x) ‘having a flood of cows’, with the well-attested s-stem árṇas- ‘flood’. It is easy (at least for me) to imagine that an s-stem *óghas- was coined in analogy to árṇas- for just this cmpd.


## 11
The 2nd hemistich contains three pairs of phonological and (partly) etymological figures: #índur índrasya, #devó devásya, matsaró mádāya#, with the 1st two presenting matching nom.+gen. grammatical figures.


## 12
The first pāda is alliterative: … priyā́ṇi pavate punānáḥ, while opening of the 2nd is an etymological figure that matches the one opening 11d.

The referent of priyā́ṇi, the obj. or goal of abhí … pavate, is uncertain. In the pub. tr. I supply ‘tracks’, on the basis of 7c padā́… abhy èti, as well as IX.12.8 abhí priyā́divás padā́… arṣati “he rushes towards the dear tracks of heaven.” However, as noted above, I no longer think padā́in vs. 7 is an acc. pl., and I am also more moved by Ge’s cited parallel, IX.75.1 abhí priyā́ṇi pavate ..., nā́māni “he purifies himself towards his own dear names.” But cf. also IX.57.2 abhí priyā́ṇi kā́vyā ...

arṣati. I would now be inclined to supply ‘names’ (“he purifies himself towards his own dear names”), since Soma’s progress across the ritual ground to his names is a trope (see comm. ad IX.75.1). But since there are a number of other referential possibilities for the construction abhí priyā́(ṇi), it might be best simply to tr.

“towards his own dear (things).” Pāda c is also puzzling: the phrase “clothing himself in his foundations” (dhármāṇi … vásānaḥ) is not immediately interpretable, and there are no illuminating parallels (at least that I have found). The adverbial ṛtuthā́“according to the ritual order” suggests that the process of “clothing himself” involves following the orderly steps of the sacrifice - which in turn suggests that Soma is making his progress across the ritual ground, encountering first the waters, then the milk, before arriving at his destination. I therefore think that the “foundations” here are the waters and the milk - his supports, the materials of which the soma drink is built. But this cannot be demonstrated.

## 13-15
No particular signs of cohesion in this tṛca, which is a collection of soma tropes. If there is any unifying theme it is movement, with eti (13b), eṣi (14b, c), arṣati (13d), arṣa (15d); for other repeated lexical items also pariṣicyámānaḥ (14d), pári … siktáḥ (15d). Also the final vs. (15) begins with evā́, the common hymn-ending summary particle - an effect that is muted in the publ. tr.

The poet is supposed to be Upamanyu Vāsiṣṭha, presumably following up on the Manyu to whom the last tṛca was attributed.


## 13
The part. nadáyan here (as well as the other 2 forms of this stem) is universally taken as a trans.-caus. ‘causing to resound’ with Heaven and Earth as obj.

As I argue in my -áya-book (60-61), all 3 passages are better taken as intrans. In this vs. the focus is on the noise that Soma makes; see esp. the parallel part.

abhikánikradat ‘constantly roaring’. And so intrans. ‘bellowing’ fits this pattern.

Note also IX.70.6 mātárā … nā́nadad eti “he goes bellowing to his two mothers [=Heaven and Earth,” with the same config. of participle to √nad + eti + H+E.


## 14
On saṃtaní- see comm. ad IX.69.2.


## 15
As was noted just above, the hymn-summary quality of the evā́opening this vs. is not sufficiently represented. I would now alter the tr. to “Just in this way purify yourself …” The etym. figure madiró mádāya is reminiscent of matsaró mádāya in the previous tṛca (11d), and pāda-final mádāya is prominent in the first part of this hymn (5b, 10b, 11d, 15a).

The identity of the ‘water-grabber’ (uda-grābhá-) is unclear. The best suggestion, in my view, is Ge’s: Vṛtra. This interpr. entails an implicit identification of Soma with Indra here, but this is not unprecedented: see for ex. the passages in which Soma is called vṛtra-hán(tama)- (IX.1.3, 24.6), and note that in the 1st vs. of this tṛca (13c) Soma’s voice is compared to Indra’s. Sāy. suggests ‘cloud’, but why would Soma be fighting a cloud? Old has an ingenious, ritually oriented solution, whereby udagrābhá- does not identify the (to-be-)vanquished enemy, but rather the type of weapon Soma is using (the gen. thus depending directly on vadhasnaíh)- namely the ritual ladle (Wasserschöpfer). He uses the power of water to vanquish an unexpressed enemy, namely “die feindlichen Mächte.” Although Old rejects the possibility that udagrābhá- refers to Vṛtra, in part because too much would need to be supplied, in fact by his interpr. the hostile object itself would have to be supplied.

His solution also does not mesh with passages like I.165.6 víśvasya śátror ánamam vadhasnaíḥ “I bowed with my weapons (those) of every rival,” which has the exact syntactic configuration of our passage.

The expression in pāda c, “encompassing the glistening color,” presumably refers to Soma’s incorporating the gleaming white milk - rendered clearly, if nonliterally, by Ge’s “weisse Farbe annehmend.”

## 16-18
This tṛca does seem to have a controlling theme and metaphor, esp. in 17-18 -- the passage through the filter, beginning in 16. Navigating among the curly tufts is compared on the one hand to the triumphant progress of the Aryas (vs. 17) and to a sort of moral progress in discriminating between the crooked and the straight (18). Each vs. also contains a form of the impv. dhanva ‘run’ (16d, 17c, 18d).

The Anukramaṇī names Vyāghrapād (‘Tigerfoot(ed)’) Vāsiṣṭha as the poet, a colorful name with no precedent in the text.


## 16
The vs. contrasts easy travel (a: supáthā sugā́ni) with difficult travel (c: duritā́ni); the contrast is signaled by su- / duṣ-, while two different roots for ‘go’ serve as 2nd cmpd. member, √gā (or √gam?) versus √i.

The part. kṛṇván in b should be supplied to govern supáthā sugā́ni in a.

Pace Ge and Re, I do not think naḥ should be construed with the ger. juṣṭvī́; it is simply in Wackernagel’s position and goes better with supáthā sugā́ni.

For the loc. uraú see III.54.9 uraú pathí.

For ghanéva see comm. ad I.63.5.


## 17
As Re hints, śaṃgáyī- is a species of univerbation of the common expression śám + DAT “weal, luck for X.” The 2nd hemistich of this vs. is very difficult. Decoding it is made somewhat easier by recognizing the governing image: the progress of the Soma in and around the tufts of wool on the sheepskin filter. The Soma is urged to ‘pull apart’ ví √ci the bándhūn ‘bonds’; bándhu- is multivalent here. It refers on the one hand to the physical bonds that exist between the wool tufts, blocking Soma’s progress. It is notable that in VS 23.36 ví cinvantu has lóma ‘hair’ as object, and refers to the separation of the hair of the sacrificial horse to mark the lines along which the flaying knives are to follow. But bándhu- can also refer to bonds of kinship and therefore to kin-groups. Here the 2nd sense of ví √ci, ‘discriminate’, is probably in play, as Soma as representative of Ārya progress makes strategic alliances among these groups.

Ge follows this 2nd interpr. still further by emending the unclear (indo) vāyū́n to *indav *āyū́n, tr. “indem du … diese nächsten Freunde [=bándhū́n sj], die Āyu's, aussucht.” In my opinion emending to Āyus doesn’t help much, and I don’t think vāyū́n is as hopeless as he finds it - though I don’t think the path that Old and Re follow is a convincing one either. They both take it, reasonably enough, as belonging to the extremely well-attested stem vāyú- ‘wind’, and Old suggests that these winds might be rain-bringing, thus relating to the vṛṣṭí- desired in the first hemistich. But this takes us far from the fleece filter and the images it produces. I suggest instead that it is a nonce formation to the pseudo-root √vā ‘weave’ (on which see, e.g., EWA s.v. O, esp. p. 276), meaning ‘webs’ and again refers to the tangled non-linear paths through the fleece. In this context the ‘weave’ sense would be available to the audience. Re hints at a connection with ‘weave’ in his n., but his tr. doesn’t reflect it.

One of the curious features of this hemistich is that it is the simile that contains the word that is closest to the actual physical object under discussion - namely (*)stúka- ‘curl’, very close to ‘tuft’. Before discussing the meaning further, I should comment on the form. The stem of this word is generally given as fem. stúkā-, and there are certainly clear fem. forms (acc. stúkām AV VII.74.2, also by implication the poss. adj. stukāvín- RV VIII.74.13, although the latter could show lengthening at morpheme boundary [cf. dvayā-vín- and AiG II.2.917-18]). But nothing forbids us from interpr. stúkā here as a neut. pl. to a them. stúka- (so already Old), which immensely aids the interpr. of the passage, since a nom. ‘tuft, curl’ compared to the subj. Soma and commanded to run is close to senseless. One can interpr. the relationship between fem. stúkā- and neut. stúka- in one of two ways.

Either the neut. stem was so common in bahuvrīhis modifying females - e.g., víṣitastukā ‘with unloosened curls’ of Rodasī in I.167.5 - that the 2nd member was reinterpr. as fem. Or, again because of its presence in bahuvrīhis modifying females, the originally fem. 2nd member was interpr. as -stuka-, with the fem. gender appropriate only when a fem. was so characterized by a bahuvrīhi containing it.

Either way, I think we can confidently assume a neut. acc. pl. here, parallel to bándhūn and vāyū́n. Soma is urged to pull apart the bándhūn “like straightened curls/tufts.” That vītá- means ‘straight, straightened’ is clear from IV.2.11 cited by Ge: cíttim ácittiṃ cinavad ví vidvā́n, pṛṣṭhéva vītā́vṛjinā́ca mártān “Insight and lack of insight will the knowing one [=Agni] distinguish, like backs, straight and crooked, (like) mortals,” where it is contrasted with vṛjiná- ‘crooked’, with both acting as object of ví √ci as here. Cf. also the bahuvr. vītá-pṛṣṭha- ‘straight-backed’, vītá-vāra- ‘straight-tailed’. This adj. is likely derived from the root √vī ‘pursue’, as Gr suggests, but seems synchronically distinct from the other uses of the ppl. to this root. Gr gives it a separate lemma. Old suggests that stúkā … vītā́refers to “Kammwolle” or worsted wool, that is (I learn from the internet), wool yarn that has been combed rather than carded; carded yarn is fuzzier than worsted yarn. Whether this technical interpr. is correct or not, it’s clear that the curls or tufts in question are easier to navigate than those that are not vītá-.


## 18
The “straight versus crooked” theme is continued here, and in fact the expression vītā́vṛjinā́ca “straight and crooked” cited from IV.2.11 in the immed.

preceding comm. is lexically renewed (/clarified) by ṛjúṃ ca … vṛjináṃ ca, with a better attested and unambiguous word for ‘straight’, ṛjú-. Again, Soma’s progress across the tufted filter is the topic, made clearer by the use of gātú- ‘way’. Both Ge and Re (also Ober II.60) take the verb ví ṣya only with pāda a and supply a new verb (‘discriminate’ or the like) with b, relying perhaps too heavily on the model of IV.2.11. I think literal unknotting is what’s at stake - finding a way between the entangled wool tufts. Ge further suggests (n. 18a) that the unknotting refers to getting rid of the stalk of the plant in the soma press, but the filter makes far more sense.

The two images in d seem oddly incoherent together: máryaḥ … pastiyā̀vān “a man in his prime in possession of a dwelling place,” but a passage adduced by Ge (n. 18d) demonstrates that the young man and the house go together: I.91.13 márya iva svá okyè “(take pleasure) like a young man in his own home.” Perhaps the point of the house-proud márya- is that a man in his prime, perhaps roughly the equivalent of the later gṛhastha, should have achieved the goals of a mature life: a house and household; Soma is implicitly likened to such a man after he has been purified and acquired the water and milk that make him the fully prepared ritual substance, and the pastyā̀- itself is the ritual ground. Ge’s parallel also neatly provides indirect evidence for the semantic equivalence of pastyā̀- and okyà- ‘home’ and therefore against the interpr. of pastyā̀- as ‘river’ (often indeed by Ge; see, e.g., IX.65.23, though he tr. it here as Haus). See comm. ad I.40.7.

## 19-21
Attributed to Śakti Vāsiṣṭha, who, unlike most of the other Vasiṣṭhids named by the Anukr. for this hymn, has other vss. attributed to him: VII.32.26, IX.108.3, 14-16. The tṛca is more concerned with the gods’ consumption of soma than previous ones; note the “divine conclave” (devátāte) in 19a, the invitation to the gods to come to the sacrifice to drink soma in 20d, and the pursuit of the gods (devávītim) in 21a. The final verse of the tṛca (21) also begins with a hymnsummarizing evā́and the type of plea for benefits that often end a hymn. The first two vss. of the tṛca also contain forms of √dhanv: impv. dhanva (19b) and dhanvanti (20c), thus continuing the repeated impv. dhanva of the previous tṛca - with this concatenation suggesting a reason for attaching this tṛca here.


## 19
Pāda b pári ṣnúnā dhanva sā́no ávye is identical to 16d ádhi ṣnúnā dhanva sā́no ávye save for the preverb.


## 20
The publ. tr. dispenses with the rel. prn. in pāda a, as tr. the hemistich as a rel. cl. seemed clunky.

Note the alliteration of ab araśmā́no yé arathā́áyuktā, átyāso ná sasṛjānā́sa ājaú.

.

## 22-24
Karṇaśrut Vāsiṣṭha, a name that has no source in the text and is not otherwise found in the Anukr. This tṛca depicts Soma as a king on a royal journey, and associates him with the resonant words ṛtá- (23b, 24d) and dhárman- (22b) / dharmán- (23c) and the traditional roles they imply.


## 22
I read yádī in pāda a as yád ī ‘when him’. Note the parallel īm in pāda c, before a vowel (īm āyan), while our ī occurs before m (ī mánaso) and could in principle represent a degeminated *īm mánaso (though I don’t think this is nec.). As Ge (n. 22ab) implies, the point of this pāda is that the ritual speech of the priest-poet essentially creates the sacral drink soma [/god Soma] from the mere juice of the soma plant.

I do not, however, follow Ge’s interpr. (in the same n.) of b, as meaning that this speech was roused by the prospect of the dakṣiṇā. I am in fact tempted to follow Old’s rather despairing comment, “Der mystischen Verbrämung dieses Gedankens in b weiss ich keine Deutung abzugewinnen.” He finds the other three pādas clear, with the sense that when speech has fashioned soma (or the milk streams, also possible in Old’s opinion), the milk streams stream to the soma. Accepting this as the overall intent of the verse, I think there is some sense - at least structural sense - that can be wrung from b. To begin with, we must focus on the vā. Insofar as I can follow his rendering Ge implicitly interprets the vā as loosely contrasting the fashioning from the mind of the seer with that fashioning under the circumstances set out in b, but his tr. seems to me not really German (“So oft ihn die Rede aus dem Geiste des schauenden (Sehers) heraus formte oder bei der Entscheidung angesichts des besten Stückes Vieh”). Klein’s rendering (DGRV II.147), which seems to follow the structure envisioned by Ge though with somewhat different content, does not seem to me to be English either: “When speech (arising) from the mind of the seer fashioned (it., viz. soma) or in the establishment (of the worship) in the presence of the best cow.” Re at least tries to impose some parallelism between a and b, taking dhármaṇi in b as an infinitive that is roughly parallel to the finite verb tákṣat in a: “Quand la parole (née) de l'esprit du Voyant eut faconné (le soma), ou (quand il s'agissait d') établir (le sacrifice) en présence du plus puissant bétail.” None of these basically clausal or pseudo-clausal interpr. seems to me correct (or even parsable). I instead think that the domain of vā is only pāda b, and that it is conjoining two locative phrases: jyéṣṭhasya … dhármaṇi and kṣór ánīke. If I am correct, we are dealing with an example of inverse vā (X vā Y), rather than the standard X Y vā - a pattern that Klein (DGRV II.139) considers rare but existent. In our case vā is inserted in the middle of the first, complex member, giving a pattern X vā X’ Y Y’. But at least vā would be doing its usual job, conjoining parallel nominal expressions, each consisting of a loc. plus dependent gen. Here each would define the conditions or locations under which the fashioning of pāda a occurred. The first of the choices is “on the foundation of the preeminent one”; in the publ. tr. I suggest that the preeminent one could be either Agni or Indra, both of whom are elsewhere characterized as jyéṣṭha-. I now think this is incorrect. Instead I would invoke the two other expressions in IX with loc. to dhárman- + GEN, both ṛtásya dhárman (IX.7.1, 110.4) “on the foundation of truth.” Although ṛtá- does not seem to be qualified as jyéṣṭha- elsewhere, “preeminent truth” is hardly a jarring expression in RV discourse. Here “on the foundation of preeminent (truth)” would refer physically to the ritual ground and conceptually to the truth that governs the sacrificial enterprise. See also comm. on the next vs. The other loc. expression is harder to interpr. I will start by saying that I accept the interpr. of kṣú- as ‘cattle’ (< *pśu-), going back to Bloomfield (IF 25 [1909]), rejected here by Old, but reaffirmed by Thieme (ZDMG 95 [1941] 347 = KlSch 51), and now generally accepted (see all tr. cited above, as well as EWA s.v.).

But what does “face-to-face with the cattle” (publ. tr.) or possibly “at the forefront of cattle” / “in front of cattle” mean in context (or even, indeed, out of context)? I have two suggestions, though neither of them makes a neat disjunctive pair with the first loc. phrase. The stronger suggestion is that this is a temporal expression, referring to dawn. The stem ánīka- is several times used in this way; cf. VI.47.5 (with loc.) uṣásām ánīke “at the forefront of the dawns,” V.76.1 uṣásām ánīkam “the face of the dawns.” Esp. apposite for our passage is I.124.11 yuṅkté gávām aruṇā́nām ánīkam “She [=Dawn] yokes the forefront of the ruddy cows,” with the cows a reference to the reddish rays of dawn. Since Dawn and her rays are frequently assimilated to cows and ánīka- is used to indicate the moment of the appearance of dawn / dawn’s rays, a shorthand expression “at the forefront of the cattle” could, it seems to me, be a way of saying “at dawn.” This would make the two locative phrases conjoined by vā conceptually non-parallel (though still syntactically parallel), but I think this looseness is within acceptable limits, as offering two alternative ways of identifying the circumstances of the fashioning of Soma by speech: “on the foundation of preeminent (truth) or at the forefront of cattle [=dawn].” I would now emend the tr.

in that way. Alternatively “in front of cattle” could refer to the place on the ritual ground where Soma encounters the milk mixture - which milk then comes to him.

This would more narrowly define the location than the first locative phrase, which gives the whole ritual ground as the locus. The 2nd possibility provides a better set of parallels with vā - both locational - but I prefer the 1st because of the use of ánīkawith dawn elsewhere.


## 23
Since √pū does not appear with prá, it’s best to supply a verb of motion with the prá opening pāda a and take b (with pavate) separately. Note the alliteration in pāda a … dānudó divyó dānu(-pinváḥ).

This vs. identifies Soma as ‘truth’ (ṛtám b) and also contains in c the possessive internal deriv. dharmán- to dhárman-. If I am correct that jyéṣṭhasya … dhármaṇi in the immed. preceding vs. 22b should be interpr. “on the foundation of preeminent (truth -- ṛtásya), both resonant words, ṛtá- and dhárman-/dharmán-, were already implicitly present in the previous vs. In 23 Soma is then depicted as the embodiment of these words (cf. Ge’s “das (verkörperte) Gesetz” for ṛtám), and they define his kingship (rā́jā in c, also in 24b). Unfortunately it does not seem possible to signal the dhárman- / dharmán- connection in English tr., but ‘possessor of the (royal) mandate’ may be too specialized for the latter. Perhaps better ‘founder, foundation-giver, institutor, maintainer’. On Soma as “truth” see also IX.107.15 and IX.108.8.

The ten reins are presumably the fingers of the presser, as is usual for ten anything in IX.

## 23-24
These two vss. each contain the injunc. (/subj.) aor. bhuvat, which in both cases I tr. as an immed. past: “he has become.” After considerable disc. with IH, I now think that this particular form can also express a generic or habitual role or behavior of the subject, which IH felicitously renders with the colloquial “he be-s X.” I am therefore now inclined to alter the tr. of both vss. to “he is the king …” / “he is, now as before, the wealth-lord …” In the absence of a non-colloquial Engl.

habitual/generic, “is” will have to do.


## 24
The two words making up the VP in d, ṛtám bharat, appear also in vs. 23, though not together (ṛtám ṛtā́ya b, bhāri d). As is pointed out by KH (implicitly: Injunc. 122 and esp. n. 34) and Ober (II.121), this appears to be an Indo-Iranian phrase, and it thus invests Soma with yet more traditional dignity. The pāda thus deserves a more solemn tr. than I gave it in the publ. tr. - perhaps “the drop bears the dear truth that is well worth the bearing.” Although the morphological means are different, the lexical duplication in both rayipátī rayīṇā́m (c) and ṛtám bharat súbhṛtam (d) gives the end of this tṛca a stately and archaic air.

## 25-27
Like the tṛca 19-21, this one focuses in great part on the gods as drinkers of soma and the desire to bring them to the ritual; the “pursuit” (vītím) of Indra and Vāyu in 25b is reprised in devā-vī́- ‘pursuing the gods’ in 26a, while the gods are mentioned twice in 27ab. The final vs. also begins with the typical hymnsummarizing evā́as three times elsewhere in this hymn (vss. 13-15, 19-21, 34-36).

The poet is named as Mṛḍīka Vāsiṣṭha, who is also the poet of X.150. In the latter hymn his name is clearly drawn from the dat. mṛḍīkā́ya found in the refrain of every vs., but there is no such basis here.


## 26
The publ. tr. omits the enclitic naḥ; it should be revised to “Pursuing the gods for us while …” Ge takes kṣáyam in b as an Inhaltsakk. (“… sollen … ein Haus … herströmen” (sim. but more elaborate, Re). But a dwelling place is a particularly unlikely object to “stream,” and I prefer to see it as goal (as also Scar 398).

The hapax in d, diviyáj-, has (at least) two possible meanings: ‘sacrificing at day(break)’ as I take it, and ‘sacrificing (to the gods) in heaven’ (so Ge, Re). See Ge’s n. and Scar (398-99). There is nothing in the context that tips the balance one way or the other; I prefer the temporal reading because the other one requires more material to be understood. The word also appears in a metrically disturbed pāda; as it stands it has 12 syllables and a cadence (- ⏑ ⏑ ×) that is bad for both Triṣṭubh and Jagatī. Old suggests the possibility of reading the 1st member of diviyáj- as a monosyllable, either *divyájaḥ or *dyuyájaḥ, which would at least produce an 11-syl.

line, and these possibilities are disc. in more detail by Scar without a firm conclusion.


## 27
The summary evā́might be more emphatically rendered as “in just this way” or sim. The “conclave of the gods” (devátāte) returns from 19a. As Ge points out, the whole hemistich is almost identical to IX.96.3, save for evā́in place of sá naḥ and devapā́naḥ for indrapā́naḥ.

The ppl. in the periphrasis in d, smási hitā́ḥ, could belong either to √dhā or to √hi (so Sāy.). It is actually not clear to me which one Ge favors from his “denn wir sind in grossem Wettstreit begriffen” (and his n. 27c doesn’t entirely clarify). Re clear chose √dhā: “Avec ambition [maháś cid?] nous nous sommes en vérité placéś dans la compétition.” I favor √hi: I think the point is that we are “driven” / “hardpressed” in the hostile encounter, and we need divine help - which we will only get once they have partaken of our soma. But there are several logical steps missing in every interpr.

## 28-30
Attributed to Vasukra Vāsiṣṭha, who is not otherwise known - though a Vasukra Aindra is supposedly responsible for the devilish trio of hymns X.27-29.

The tṛca is marked by the repetition of ā́pavasva in the 2nd hemistich of each vs. (28d, 29c, 30d) expressing the various good things we want Soma to bring us through his self-purification. The root √sṛj ‘surge’ is also prominent in the 2nd two vss. (29a, 30a).


## 28
The opening of the vs., áśvo ná kradaḥ, is very close to 18c átyo ná kradaḥ. The first hemistich contains three animals, incl. the fairly rare lion. Ge, fld.

by Re, identifies the bulls as the priests.


## 29
I take the hapax sanítra- in its full lexical value, as a ‘means of winning’, rather than the bleached Spende, Gabe (Gr), Lohn (Ge), le bénéfice (Re) that prevails. On the accent of the word (and other -tra-stems to seṭ roots), see AiG II.2.701-2, which also glosses the word as I do: ‘Mittel des Gewinnens’, flg. Ludwig.


## 30
I take áhnām as a 2nd, unmarked simile dependent on sárgāḥ, rather than supplying a different headnoun, as Ge and Re do. They are surely both right that “the surges of/from heaven” are the rains. As for “the surges of the days,” this could either refer to the passage of time or to an abundance of light; I favor the former.

In b ná should be read as both the simile particle and the negation; see Old.

Pādas b-c show a clever chaining of significant vocabulary. In b Soma is compared to a king who doesn’t violate his alliance, with mitrá- in its common noun usage. But d contains the part. yatāná- ‘taking one’s place, being put in place’, and √yat is an action esp. associated with the god Mitra. Cf., e.g., VII.36.2 jánaṃ ca mitró yatati “Mitra puts the people in their place” (sim. III.59.1). Although Mitra is not explicitly present here, the lexical continuity might evoke him. It is indeed possible that it is Mitra’s intentions (or those of the alliance itself) acdg. to which Soma takes his place, rather than “ours” as in the publ. tr.

The vs. ends with yet another term relating to social life, namely víś- ‘clan’; as king, Soma would exert himself on behalf of this social unit.

## 31ff.

As noted in the publ. intro., the tṛca divisions seem to continue in this 2nd half of the composite hymn, although the Anukr. attributes the remaining vss. to just two poets, Parāśara Śāktya (31-44) and Kutsa Āṅgirasa (45-58), an apporioning that does not conform to the presumed tṛca division (splitting the tṛca 43-45 between the two). Both poets are known from elsewhere: Parāśara Śāktya is the poet of I.65- 73 and Kutsa Āṅgirasa of I.94-98 and I.101-15.

## 31-33
The first vs. of the tṛca contains a form of √sṛj, thus concatenating with the previous tṛca. Both the first (31) and last (33) vss. contain a reference to the sun, and I see one in the middle vs. as well; see comm. ad 32.


## 31
The skeleton of pāda a, (prá te) dhā́rā (mádhumatīr) asṛgran, is identical to 29a (śatáṃ) dhā́rā (devájātā) asṛgran.

The publ. tr. renders pávase as if it were an imperative; correct to “you purify yourself.” I take “domain of cows” (dhā́ma gónām) in c to indicate that Soma is the substance into which the milk is mixed. Since the milk is sometimes identified as the sun, his swelling of the sun in d may refer to Soma’s providing more body and amplitude to the milk.

As often, arká- can be read as a pun.


## 32
The “domain for the cows” is echoed here by the “domain of the immortal one” (amṛ́tasya dhā́ma). As with the same phrase in IX.94.2 (q.v.), I suggest that the immortal one is the sun, and perhaps specifically milk as representative of the sun.

The role of the sun in the surrounding vss. (31d, 33d) supports this interpr. For alternative interpr. of the phrase, see comm. ad IX.94.2. In our passage Re (sim. Lü 467) suggests that it is actually nom. and refers to Soma, but in IX.94.2 it must be an acc. obj. (also acdg. to Re).

The cadence of c is bad as transmitted, but can be easily fixed by reading

*matsarā-vān with the common lengthening of the stem vowel -a- before -vant- and
-van-; see Old, in agreement with Arnold. The stem is a hapax, and it is clearly a
morphological variant of matsarín(-tama)- (4x), with a different possessive suffix. In fact, our pāda is a nonce Triṣṭubh adaptation of the Jagatī line IX.76.5 sá índrāya pavase matsaríntamaḥ. For further disc. see comm. ad IX.76.5. The interchangeability of -vant- and -ín- for metrical purposes speaks against the two possessive suffixes having crucial functional differences.

The initial sá in both our pāda and the one on which it is based does not follow my rules for sá 2nd-ps. reference. On this aberrancy see comm. ad IX.76.5, where it can be motivated. That pāda was then simply borrowed (and slightly altered) here.


## 33
The form cakṣi (also VII.3.6) is in both of its occurrences pretty clearly an impv., but its formation is something of a puzzle. It appears to be a -si impv. (so Baum, Imperative, 46, 107, with no disc.), but it has none of the standard supports for such a form. Not only does it not have an s-aor. subjunctive, but it has no aorist forms at all, and almost all the occurrences of its well-attested root pres. are medial.

And of course, assuming it belongs to √cakṣ, the form would have to be degeminated from *cakṣ-ṣi (though that would not be hard). The parallel passage IX.71.9 has a medial injunc. to the marginal thematic stem (see KH 122 n. 33): divyáḥ suparṇó 'va cakṣata kṣā́m. I have no explanation for this aberrant form; it is true that the proper med. impv. to the root pres. cakṣva (3x) would not fit this metrical slot, but that doesn’t seem reason enough to invent cakṣi.

## 34-36
All three vss. concentrate on ritual speech and on the noisy approach of both cows and poets to Soma. This theme takes up 32d, where Soma impels his own speech in concert with the productions of the poets. The final vs., 36, begins with hymn-summarizing evā́.


## 34
On the “three voices” (tisró vā́caḥ) see comm. ad IX.33.4, 50.2.

The parallel expressions in c and d -- … yanti … PTCLE contrast the progress of ritual substance (milk) and ritual speech (thoughts). As elsewhere, vāvaśānā́ḥ could belong to both √vāś ‘bellow’ and √vaś ‘desire, be eager’ (cf. IX.93.4, 95.4).

Given the emphasis on noise in this tṛca, the former is probably primary, but both can be meant - hence my tr. “bellowing eagerly.”


## 35
The first two pādas of this vs. are variants of the last two of the previous vs. (34cd), with the repeated yanti of 34 gapped, and redistribution of some of the lexicon: the two participles in 34cd, prchámānāḥ and vāvaśānā́ḥ, switch positions, with each paired with a more natural subject (cows bellowing 35a, poets asking 35b), and the thoughts of 34d are relegated to the instr. in 35b with their producers, the viprā́ḥ, taking over the subject role in 35b, again a more natural configuration. We can consider 35ab as a complex poetic repair of 34cd.


## 36
The hymn-summary evā́could once again be rendered more forcefully: “in just this way” vel sim.

## 37-39
I do not see any signs of unity in this tṛca. All three vss. contain a participle of √pū in passive function, pūnāná- in 37, 38, pūyámāna- in 39, but this is hardly remarkable in the Soma maṇḍala.


## 37
In pāda a vípraḥ … matīnā́m reprises víprā matíbhiḥ of 35b in concatenary fashion. For further on this phrase see below.

Gr, Ge, and Re, as well as Lü (439), take ṛtā́as neut. pl., but this disturbs the syntax, and the tr. all must supply a verb to govern it. I suggest that it is instead the instr. sg. Re explicitly rejects this possibility on the grounds that it would be morphologically isolated. If he means that it would be the only such instr. to this stem, he seems to be correct, but given that the -ā instr. to them. stems is in retreat, this isolation would not be surprising. If he means that them. neuters don’t have instr.

in -ā, this is not correct: Lanman (Noun infl., 335) considers them more frequent than to the masc. and counts 77. Whether all his exx. would hold up under closer scrutiny is irrelevant: 77 would be difficult to reduce to 0.

The standard tr. also construe gen. pl. matīnā́m with ṛtā́, whatever sense they ascribe to ṛtā́, e.g., Ge “die rechten Wege der Gedanken,” Lü “zu den Wahrheiten der Gedanken.” They may be correct, and I could revise my tr. accordingly: “In accordance with the truth of the thoughts, Soma …” However, the association of vípra- with matí- is very strong - I just noted it in 35b in the previous tṛca, and the two words occur in the same pāda numerous times: I.82.2=VIII.25.24 víprā … matī́, I.86.2 víprasya … matīnā́m, II.24.13 vípraḥ … matī́, III.5.3 vípraḥ … matīnā́m, III.30.20=50.4 matíbhiḥ … víprāḥ, IV.3.16 matíbhir vípraḥ, V.80.1 víprāso matíbhiḥ, VII.78.2 víprāso matíbhiḥ, IX.63.21 matī́víprāḥ, IX.85.7 víprāṇāṃ matáyaḥ,


> 107.24
víprāso matíbhiḥ, X.6.5 víprāso matíbhiḥ, X.25.10 matíṃ víprasya, X.64.16 matíbhiḥ … vípraḥ, X.123.1 víprā matíbhiḥ; cf. also IX.71.3, X.11.6 vépate matī.

I therefore construe matī̃nā́m with vípraḥ in the publ. tr., as a loosely descriptive gen. In cd the phrase mithunā́saḥ … adhvaryávaḥ is taken by Ge (fld. by Re) as referring to the pair (or presumably multiple pairs, given the pl.) of Adhvaryu and Hotar. Although at least I.83.2, which he adduces for this sense, does seem to refer to that pair of two priests, in the dual, I think the pl. here instead refers to rivalrous priests at competing sacrifices, which must be implicit in Ge’s rendering, given the pl. They could be pairs of Adhvaryu and Hotar or (more likely in my opinion) just multiple Adhvaryus, each performing in a separate sacrifice.


## 38
The interpr. of this vs. is fairly straightforward, except for the 2nd part of pāda a, sū́re ná dhā́tā. I have treated this simile at length In my Fs. Melchert article, “Sū́re Duhitár's Brother, the ‘Placer of the Sun’: Another Example of -e <*-as in Rigvedic Phrasal Sandhi,” 2010. I will not repeat the disc. here but will summarize the conclusions. The major problem in this simile is what to do with the apparent loc. sū́re ‘in the sun’ (to sū́ra-; or possibly, but less likely, dat. to svàr); this has led to some outlandish and unpersuasive interpr. of the phrase. I argue that sū́re is actually the old gen. to svàr, from *sū́raz before voiced dental stop, as in the well-known sū́re duhitā́“daughter of the sun” in I.34.5. I start with an archaic formula *sū́re dhā́tā “placer of the sun,” with the two words separated here by the simile particle ná and the true interpr. obscured. The “placer of the sun” is most likely Indra, and Soma is being compared to him in his cosmogonic role: filling the two worlds and revealing them.

The word order in the 2nd clause of b, ví ṣá āvaḥ, is worth noting. Both preverb in tmesis and sá seek 1st position, and sá overwhelmingly occupies 1st position, as a glance at Lubotsky shows. Perhaps to maintain sá’s 1st position tendency, often when a clause has both a preverb and sá, the preverb will remain in position before the verb (e.g., I.105.4 sá tád dūtó ví vocati; also pāda d in this vs.: sá … prá yaṃsat). But it seems from a rapid survey that when a preverb is in tmesis, it regularly wins 1st position over sá -- e.g., III.59.2 prá sá …, VIII.20.16 abhí ṣá ... -- with Wackernagel’s position material imposed between—e.g., prá vaḥ sá …, VIII.21.10 ā́tú naḥ sá … Our brief clause shows this PREV sá order.

As Old suggests, in c priyā́is governed either directly or indirectly by the 2nd member of the cmpd. priya-sā́saḥ ‘winning dear things’: “those winning dear things (win) dear things.” The effect is rather like the type gaṇā́nām gaṇápati- “troop lord of troops” (II.23.1), though the means are different. As for priya-sā́saḥ, its stem is given as them. priya-sá- by Gr., and it would have the doubled nom. pl. ending familiar from devā́saḥ, etc. However, it seems possible (and in my opinion desirable) to interpr. it as belonging to a root noun -sā́-. The rt. noun nom. pl. to -ā-stems is ordinarily -āḥ, which is identical to the nom. sg. Though several cmpds in -sā́- do have this nom. pl. (dhanasā́ḥ VIII.3.15, X.65.10; sadāsā́ḥ IV.16.21, sahasrasā́ḥ X.64.6), the nom. sg. -sā́ḥ is far more common. In a passage like this, where there are no other nom. pl. forms to support the nom. pl. interpr. (as there are in the -sā́ḥ nom. pl. passages just cited), doubly marking the nom. pl. would make sense. Scar (585) seems to be leaning in that direction, but doesn’t actually say so.

Parallel to the dative kāríṇe ná “as if to a victor” in the simile, we can assume “to us” vel sim. in the frame. So Ge.


## 39
Pāda a contains another etymological doubling, vardhitā́várdhanaḥ “strengthening strengthener,” rather like the doubling of priyá- in 38c.

Note the allit. in c: … pū́rve pitáraḥ padajñā́ḥ.

The expression gā́ádrim uṣṇán “burned the cows out of the rock” is, to say the least, unusual - and on those grounds disputed. A long tradition, going back to Benfey, emends the text to *muṣṇán ‘stole’, with degemination in the sequence ádrim (m)uṣṇán. This emendation is accepted by, inter alia, Ge and Bloomfield (RR ad I.62.2 and Conc.). There is one strong arg. in favor of the change: √muṣ ‘steal’ is formulaically embedded in the Vala myth (see Ge’s n. 39d and, e.g., I.93.4 yád ámuṣṇītam … paṇím gā́ḥ “when you two stole the cows from the niggard”). Other possible args. are inconclusive: both √muṣ and √uṣ have a 9th class pres., though the latter is only represented by one other form, part. uṣṇán in II.4.7 - but √uṣ is a poorly attested root. The preverb abhí found in our passage does not appear with either root. In the end the clinching arg. seems to me to come from Old, who does not accept the emendation: the meter. The proposed change converts a good cadence into a bad one. Bl. (RR) argues “that the change from ádrim muṣṇán to ádrim uṣṇán was made by the redactor in deference to the meter.” But why would the poet have produced a bad cadence in the first place? I think it more likely that the poet was playing on the rhyming roots √muṣ and √uṣ, with full knowledge that the former is the standard one in the Vala myth, and he is forcing us to invent a new and more difficult image with the latter root. By supplying us with jyótiṣā he is providing us with the means to do so. Old adduces X.87.12 jyótiṣā … ny òṣa “with light burn down …,” comparable to our … jyótiṣā / yénā … uṣṇán and with a verb form of √uṣ.

A poet who could deploy the “placer of the sun” formula in the manner he did in the previous vs. is surely capable of such a sly play on words.

## 40-42
No particular unity detectable in the tṛca, though the 2nd two vss. do focus on Soma’s role in strengthening and exhilarating the gods.


## 40
The verb vāvṛdhe in d concatenates with vardhitā́várdhanaḥ in 39a.

Ge’s tr. of pāda a, “Der Ocean hat gebrüllt bei seiner ersten Ausbreitung,” seems to imply (though this is not a necessary interpr. of his tr.) that the samudrá- is a different entity from Soma himself, and his cited IX.107.23 tváṃ samudrám prathamó ví dhārayaḥ “You were [/are] the first to to spread out the sea” (with both samudrá- and ví √dhṛ) certainly depicts them as separate. However, IX.86.29 tváṃ samudró asi …, távemā́ḥ páñca pradíśo vídharmaṇi “You are the sea, …; yours are these five regions in your [/their] expansion” (also with samudrá- and the -n-stem loc. vídharman/-ṇi as here) asserts the identity of Soma and the samudrá-. Since forms of √krand ‘roar’ in IX (like ákrān here) have Soma as their subject (incl. in vss. 13, 18, 28, 32, 33 in this hymn), the identification of Soma and the sea seems assured here.


## 42
The infinitival dat. iṣṭáye is generally taken to mean “to hasten, for hastening” here (Ge “dass er rasch komme”; Re “afin qu’il se hâte”; Klein GDGRV I.68 “for hastening”; and cf. EWA s.v. EṢ 2 citing Ge’s tr. for just this passage). But I am puzzled as to which root √iṣ the sense ‘hasten’ is supposed to belong to: we have √iṣ ‘seek, desire’ and √iṣ ‘send, set in motion’. It is to the latter that EWA refers this form (and I assume that the others would also connect the two), but either there has to be a de-valencing of the root (from ‘set in motion’ to ‘be in motion’ - but there are no forms to this root with intrans. value) or the form has to be covertly passive (‘to be set in motion’, hence ‘to move’). I think it belongs rather to √iṣ ‘seek, desire’ and means ‘for seeking, for the quest’. In my view all 20 exx. of iṣṭáye can be united under this rubric. See also comm. ad I.112.1 and VII.92.3. In this particular case Vāyu’s quest is for soma, and upon having received it, he benefits us. So the double dative iṣṭáye rā́dhase ca is a bit of a zeugma, in that these beneficial datives are for the benefit of different parties, though the satisfaction of the second depends on the success of the first.

## 43-45
The tṛca has a superficial unity from the (over-)abundance of forms of √pū, esp. in the middle vs.: pavasva 43a, 44a, 44b, 44d; pávamānaḥ 44c; punānáḥ 45c (the only form of √pū in this vs., and belonging to a different stem). Otherwise there is little to hold it together. The supposed transition between the poets Parāsara Śaktya and Kutsa Āṅgirasa happens after vs. 44, but as noted in the publ. intro., this change of poets seems unlikely.


## 43
The first hemistich introduces a note of aggression, but this quickly dissipates. The oppositional pair ‘straight’ (ṛjú-) and ‘crooked’ (vṛjiná-) recurs from vs. 18, where, unlike here, it was a morally neutral description of the paths across the sheep’s fleece filter.

I do not understand the doubling of abhí in pāda c, esp. since abhí seems to add little to this idiom.


## 44
Note the (s)va repetition: mádhvaḥ ... pavasva vásva ... pavasva ...

svádasva ... pavasva.

As in IX.96.14 (see comm. ad loc.), I take the acc. with pavasva as expressing a transformation of soma into the substance expressed in the acc. This use of pavasva with the acc. contrasts with that of ā́pavasvā in pādas b and d, where ā́adds the sense ‘bring here by purification’ and the acc. expresses the materials thus obtained.

On sū́da- see comm. ad VII.36.3. I argue there that, contra most views, it belongs with the ‘sweet’ words, and in fact that in this passage svádasva … pávamānaḥ in c is a virtual gloss (or poetic repair) of sū́dam pavasva in a.

## 46-48
Again very few signs of cohesion as a whole, though the 1st and last vss. have a few echoes: rathiráḥ (46c, 48a) and a satyá-X bahuvrīhi (satyá-śuṣma46c, satyá-manman- 48d), as well as camū́- (46b, 48b). Also, assuming that the “daughter” in 47b is the Daughter of the Sun (as most do), both 46 and 47 have ref.

to the sun.


## 47
In pāda b my interpr. differs significantly from that of Ge (fld. by Re) and that favored by Old., though all of us assume that “daughter” is short for “daughter of the Sun.” Ge takes duhitúḥ as abl. and assumes an idiom ABL X tiráḥ √dhā “hide X from …,” an ex. of which he cites from the Kena Up., which seems a distant text from which to harvest a parallel. He takes the várpāṃsi as Soma’s own forms, but does not suggest why Soma would want to keep them hidden from the Sun’s daughter. I instead take duhitúḥ as gen., dependent on várpāṃsi, which Old considers the more natural construal. Since the acc. with medial tiráḥ √dhā expresses the medium in which the subject hides himself (at least in my view: see comm. ad IX.73.3), in our passage here Soma hides himself “in the forms of the daughter (of the Sun)” - a designation of milk, since the gleaming white milk is often assimilated to the sun. I see the same idiom in IX.72.3, though more disguised: see extensive comm. there. The reference, of course, is to the mixing of soma with milk.

The following pāda provides a different but parallel image of the mixing of soma with water, with the more widespread trope of “clothing himself in.” The last pāda provides a clever multilevel play, as long as rébhan is properly interpr. As I have often disc. (incl. ad vs. 8 above), √ribh does not mean ‘sing’ as it’s usually glossed, but rather expresses a variety of harsh sounds: rasp, creak, squawk, and crackle. In this pāda Soma is compared to a Hotar priest. But the quintessential Hotar is actually the god Agni, the ritual fire - and fires crackle. So the comparison is to the sound of a lively burning fire, but mediated through the priest.

## 49-51
In contrast to the tṛcas with faint or no signs of cohesion, this one is over-determined. The verbal lexeme that dominates is abhí √ṛṣ: the preverb abhí opens every one of the 12 pādas, and the impv. arṣa/ā is found in the first pāda of every vs. (49a, 50a, 51a). The part. pūyámānaḥ ends the first hemistich of each vs. Most of the rest of the material consists of acc. goals of motion. The goals in the first vs. of the tṛca are gods, in the first half of the 2nd vs. the substances with which Soma will be mixed, and in the rest of the tṛca those things that we want Soma to provide us. The result is a tṛca of utmost banality, enlivened by a small play of words in the last pāda.


## 49
Old, Ge, Re identify the acc. goal in c as Pūṣan, because dhījávana- ‘quickening insightful thought’ is used in a simile comparing Soma to Pūṣan in


## 03
pūṣéva dhījávano ‘si soma, which is, of course, a good arg. But Pūṣan doesn’t cut much of a figure in IX, does not really belong in this exalted company (Vāyu, Mitra+Varuṇa, Indra - though see the list in IX.81.4-5), and is not an appropriate referent for the other words in this pāda: náram … ratheṣṭhā̇́m. In the sg.

nṛ́- is almost always used of Indra, as are ratheṣṭhā́- and ratheṣṭhá-. I am therefore certain that c, like d, refers to Indra.


## 50
Ge adds “zu gewinnen” in pādas a and b (also d) with no textual support.

And surely these garments and cows are actually references to the milk mixture, as so often in IX.


## 51
Ge again supplies “zu gewinnen” in both hemistichs. I once again see no reason to do so. He also takes the rel. cl. of c (yéna dráviṇam aśnávāma) as dependent on ā́rṣeyám: “um … uns den Namen eines R̥ṣi zu gewinnen, durch den wir zu Reichtum gelangen können.” This ignores the parallel abhí’s of cd and also assumes an embedded rel. cl. (though not all that embedded). Re takes ārṣeyám as a 2nd obj. of aśnávāma: “afin que nous obtenions la richesse, afin l’état de Prophète …” This is somewhat less disruptive than Ge’s, but assumes a purpose function for yéna that has no good precedent, as far as I know. My own interpr. - supplying a gapped acc. ‘that’ as antecedent for yéna -- seems minimally disruptive and assumes that the insistent structure with abhí arṣa ACC continues in this pāda. The same interpr. is found in Hettrich (Hypotaxe, 550-51): “(fliesse uns das) zu, wodurch wir Reichtum erlangen werden.” The interpr. of Ge and Re also minimize or ignore the only clever part of this tṛca, which provides a climax of sorts. With the pattern abhí (…) arṣa “rush towards …” inescapably established, the poet produces a phonological play on this phrase in the last pāda: abhy ārṣeyám, where the acc. goal, beginning ārṣ-, plays on the impv.

arṣa (the play also noted by Ge, n. 51d). ārṣeyá- is found only here in the RV, though it is extremely common in Vedic prose.

## 52-54
The simplistic repetition of the previous tṛca contrasts markedly with the contents of this one, which is mind-bogglingly difficult and opaque. Old pronounces it “grösstenteils hoffnungslos.” Thematically it seems to deal with the distribution of wealth in a ritual/martial context, and it also shows signs of lexical cohesion, esp. the hapaxes mām̐ścatvá- (52b) and mā́m̐ścatva- (54b), also vásūni (52a, 53c), and of varied formulaic repetition: ayā́pavā́pavasvainā́(52a) / enā́ pavayā́pavasva (53a). My interpr. of this tṛca, in its many obscure details and in its entirety, is very different from the standard ones. In places it pushes the morphology, syntax, and semantics perhaps further than is warranted, and it may seems at times far-fetched. But it has, I think, a richer semantics than the other accounts, and above all it deliberately avoids the refuge taken by others, to make the difficult words into proper nouns.


## 52
The tṛca begins deceptively straightforwardly, with a call to Soma to purify himself and bring goods. The pāda-final vásūni concatenates with the one ending 51a. Given this acc. with pávasva we must assume the idiom ā́pavasva ‘bring ACC through your purification.” The preverb ā́may be concealed in one of the accented final long ā́-s in the pāda, most likely pavā́, which can be pavā́+ ā́, putting the preverb in the standard position right before the verb, or enā́. Or perhaps, if enā́ is adverbial in the meaning ‘here’ (so Gr, s.v. enā́, col. 300; AiG III.524-25), it takes the function of ā́in this lexeme. However, I am inclined, with Sāy. (see Ge’s n. 52a), to take enā́as an aberrant neut. pl. with vásūni - hence ‘these goods’. See AiG III.525, which hesitatingly allows the poss. of neut. pl. elsewhere.

The fun begins with the next pāda and with the first word in that pāda, mām̐ścatvé; as was noted above, the word appears, differently accented, in 54b, and these forms are obviously related to mām̐ścatóḥ in VII.44.3. In our vss. Ge and Re take it as the loc. of a place name, coreferential with loc. sárasi: e.g., “dans le lac Māṃścatva.” This is certainly the safest choice here, but a place name is essentially excluded for the occurrence of the related word in VII.44.3 - and of course making difficult words into otherwise unattested proper nouns is an interpretational cop-out.

As discussed at length in the comm. to VII.44.3 I return to the old notion that this is a cmpd meaning ‘hiding the moon’. In all three passages I take it as a temporal designation, originally ‘at dawn’. This perfectly fits our tṛca if it depicts the beginning of the early morning soma pressing.

VII.44.3 also contains the word bradhná- ‘copper-colored’, found here in pāda c. This word can sometimes refer to soma (VIII.4.13, 14; 69.7), sometimes to Agni/fire (III.7.5, X.20.9), but sometimes, it seems, to the sun: I.6.1 and also the occurrence in VII.44.3. In our passage I think it can be all three: the sun, coppery colored at dawn, is appropriate to the early morning time period identified by mām̐ścatvé, and Sūrya in X.170.1 is vā́tajūta- (like our vā́to ná jūtáḥ). As we have often seen soma is frequently identified with the sun, and it is often urged to speed along the ritual ground (and see IX.64.16 índavaḥ … jūtā́ḥ). But what is most often described as vā́ta-jūta- is the fire or its flames. The ritual fire, the soma, and the sun would all necessarily be present at the dawn sacrifice. Both Ge and Re take bradhnáas referring to a horse, which, in my view, distorts their view of the whole vs. and indeed the tṛca.

In d both Ge and Re take the hapax táku- as referring to a horse (Renner, coursier), the same one they see as the reference of bradhná- in c. Ge seems to think d involves giving this horse a sort of superior groom (“ein tüchtiges Lenker”), with dat. tákave the indirect obj. But as was recently noted (ad vs. 49), nṛ́- in the sg. is almost always used of Indra, and I think it is here as well. Soma, by virtue of being consumed by Indra at the sacrifice, brings Indra to the sacrifice and in effect bestows him upon the human worshipers, and he does so for a particular purpose. I take tákave as an infinitival dative of purpose: ‘to (make the) charge, to rush’ - Indra in his capacity as our supporter in conflict. Old considers, but rejects, such an infinitival interpr., in favor of what he considers the simpler indirect obj. with √dā.


## 53
The mystery deepens in this vs. The first pāda is superficially just a variant of 52a, but it poses several problems. On the one hand pavayā́looks like an instr. sg. to a fem. pavā́-, whose more archaic instr. pavā́is found in 52a. But the accentuation is wrong: it should be

*paváyā. AiG III.117 seems to dismiss the accent problem (sim. AiG II.2.247) and
simply accept it as an instr., but Old considers other possibilities, incl. adverbial accent or analogy to ayā́in 52a. He rejects Lanman’s sugg. that it represents *pavā́yā́ (from *pavā́+ ayā́) on metrical grounds (bad break). I have a similar, but different suggestion that avoids the metrical problem: it represents *paváyā́, namely instr.

*paváyā (with the correct accent) + ā́, the preverb we were seeking also in 52a,
which again would put the preverb directly before the verb. The need for ā́is less acute here because there’s no apparent expressed obj. in the pāda, but vásūni can be assumed on the basis of 52a and the 2nd hemistich of this vs. 53c. Moreover, as in 52a I suggest that enā́may be neut. pl. and therefore there is an expressed obj.

The other problem is enā́, which also appeared in 52a in a different position.

Here, directly before pavayā́, it appears to be an instr., filling the role of ayā́in 52a.

But enā́should be m./n., not fem. Though Ge (n. 53a) convinces himself it is fem.

(and AiG III.524 recognizes at least one possible case of a fem. enā́), I think this is unlikely and, as in 52a, suggest that it is a neut. pl. This means that pavayā́ (/*paváyā) lacks an instr. demonstr. parallel to ayā́in 52a, but this is hardly a problem. Putting all this together, I would thus emend the tr. to “By purifying yourself with purification bring these (goods) here for us.” The next pāda is syntactically unimpeachable: it consists of a loc. phrase governed by ádhi with a gen. dependent on the loc. Moreover, all the words are known and their meanings uncontroversial. The problem is what they refer to when assembled into a phrase. They specify the place (or time) that the self-purification in pāda a is to happen: “at the famous ford GEN.” Given the ritual context, it seems unlikely that a real river ford is meant; instead it must be a metaphorical place or moment in the sacrifice. Most comparable - but unhelpful - is the phrase ā́pnānaṃ tīrtháṃ, which I interpr. as “opulent ford,” found at X.114.7, in a mystical hymn about the sacrifice. I suggest that in our passage it refers to the place/time of the distribution of goods. I further suggest that this refers to the transfer of goods from gods to humans, hence the metaphorical “ford” for crossing the god/mortal divide. In the next hemistich I suggest that it is Indra who is distributing vast numbers of goods. The gen. śravā́yyasya supports this view, since this adj. generally modifies vā́ja- ‘prize’ or rayí- ‘wealth’ (cf., e.g., IX.63.23 rayím … śravā́yyam), as Ge also points out (n. 53b). Ge and Re simply take śravā́yyasya as a PN, again simply to dodge the interpretational problem. Though the publ. tr. suggests it might be the place for the distribution of dakṣinās, I no longer believe that the passage concerns the dakṣiṇā, since I think this is a reference to Indra’s distribution of goods.

The 2nd hemistich is entirely clear, except for the nom. sg. subject, the hapax naigutáḥ. This vṛddhi deriv. must be interpr. with ref. to its base, nigút-, which occurs in the acc. pl. in the next vs., as the designation of overpowered, indeed annihilated, foes; it is also found in X.128.6 (as nom. pl.), where it refers to enemies of some sort who are repulsed and defeated by Agni. Both Ge and Re tr. as a PN in our two vss. (though Ge ‘Schwätzer(?)’ in X.128.6). EWA (s.v.) suggests an appealing interpr., as a rt noun cmpd to √gu (his GAV) ‘call upon’; with the preverb ní ‘*nieder-rufend, schmähend’ in a verbal contest. This interpr. seems to be tacitly accepted by KH (KlSch 447), who tr. it in 54c as “Schmäher’; it is also presented by Scar (112-13), though hesitantly - and like Ge and Re he tr. it as a PN. By contrast, I find the suggestion quite plausible; I suggest the sense ‘challenger’ for nigút-. In contrast to nigút-, its vṛddhi deriv. in our vs. designates a successful and positively viewed figure, opposed to the nigút-s in the next vs. - hence my tr. ‘challengers’ challenger’ (Scar’s ‘Bezwinger der Niguts’, an interpr. that goes back to Sāy. and Ludwig [see Ge’s n. 53c]). As in 52d, I take the unnamed referent here to be Indra, though Ge (n. 53c) suggests Soma. The extravagance of the gifts and the apparent militant nature of naigutá- seems better suited to Indra, though a militant Soma is not out of the question.


## 54
The difficulties do not let up here, esp. in the 1st hemistich. The clearest thing here is the asya, which presumably, because of its lack of accent, must refer to the naigutáḥ in 53cd. This same figure is also the subject of the verbs in c.

The first problem is the first word, whose very form is in question. The Pp.

separates máhīmé into máhi and imé, with the first then a neut. sg.; Gr takes it rather as a du. máhī, with ? This is rejected explicitly by Old on accentual grounds: the standard du. is accented mahī́. If it is neut. sg., it can modify nā́ma; if neut. du., vádhatre. I prefer the latter, despite the formal problems. Old, Ge, and Re take it as a modifier of nā́ma.

Let us now turn to vṛ́ṣanā́ma, taken as a cmpd by Pp., despite its two accents.

The simple solution here is, as has long been known, to split into two words: vṛ́ṣa nā́ma, with vṛ́ṣa a neut. agreeing with nā́ma. I take this as a naming parenthesis “‘Bull’ his name,” though I recognize that we should probably expect the masc. *vṛ́ṣā in that context (type nalo nāma). Perhaps better “‘Bullish’ is his name,” which more easily accommodates a neut. vṛ́ṣa. (Before continuing I will point out that this is most likely a reference to Indra, whose presence I see also in the preceding two vss. - though Soma is possible as well.) A naming parenthesis is not the standard view, which is that “bullish name” is one member of a nominal sentence equating the dual entities (whatever they may be - see below) with this name (“these two Xs are / make up” [ausmachen] his great bullish name” - so Old, Ge, and more or less Re; Scar [112] also follows this interpr. but assumes a du. ‘great’). As that tr. shows, the standard view also has the merit of providing a head noun to the putative neut. máhi that opens the pāda.

Why then do I put myself in morphological difficulties, rejecting neut. sg.

máhi and struggling with neut. vṛ́ṣa? Because I don’t think that the two entities are equivalent to his name, but rather belong to him and are deployed by him under specific circumstances, as indicated in pāda b. I therefore assume a du. máhī, or perhaps correctly accented *mahī́, which has been redactionally changed after the passage ceased to be understood.

The next question: what are the dual entities. Ge (fld. by Scar) takes śūṣé … vádhatre as a discontinuous dual dvandva: “sein Ungestüm und seine Waffe.” This is clever, but to me unconvincing. Real dual dvandvas with two dual endings that involve material or immaterial entities, rather than gods or at least animate beings, are rare. And this would contain two entities that are not associated with each other textually and do not form a natural semantic class, one of which is an immaterial power, the other a material object. If there is an alternative, we should seek it. And indeed there is: śūṣé can simply be the modifier of vádhatre. There are “two forceful weapons of death.” Old’s “diese beide śūṣé vádhatre implies this solution, and Re adopts it as well, though in his n. he claims that śūṣá- is ordinarily a masc. noun. I think rather the reverse: that it is an adj. even though its head noun is often gapped, esp. when it is the obj. of √ṛc ‘chant’ or similar verbs and refers to a “fortifying / powerful (praise / thought - stómam / mánma, etc.).” The adjectival status of śūṣá- is one more reason not to assume it’s one of a pair in a dual dvandva.

The next question after this: what are these two weapons. I suggest that it is the two fatal activities described in c, both of which are slangy euphemisms: ‘put to sleep’ (svāpáya-) and ‘snow’. The caus. stem svāpáya- and assoc. redupl. aor.

síṣvap(a)- are only used in this euphemistic sense of ‘put to death’, a sense that is familiar of course in the Engl. equivalent. The parallel stem sneháya- is found only here. It is clearly related to the IE words for ‘snow’, and, as I discuss in the -áyabook (91), the hostile / fatal nuance it projects in context can be derived directly from ‘snow’; the re-semanticization of the IE root to something like ‘stick together’ advocated by a number of scholars (see -áya-, p. 91 n. 32) is unnecessary. As I point out there, the verb ‘snow’ is also found in Engl., meaning ‘overwhelm’, though (at least decades ago) in a more or less positive sense. The verb sneháyat is accented presumably because it opens a new (sub-)clause.

We must now return to pāda b, which contains a disjunctive vā … vā construction: mā́m̐ścatve vā pṛ́śane vā. The first term, save for accent, is the same as mām̐ścatvé in 52b. I confess I have no explanation of the difference in accent and treat the two as identical, as, it seems, do most interpr. - there’s too much else going on in this tṛca to focus on this! Since most interpr. take the form in 52b as a name, either of a place or a person (person for Scar for the form in this vs.), pṛ́śane receives the same interpr. Since I take mām̐ścatvé in 52b as a temporal designation, I want to impose the same analysis on pṛ́śane. The stem pṛ́śana- is a hapax as a masc/neut., but it is at least derivationally related to the fem. pṛśanī́- (3x: I.71.5, X.61.8, 73.2) with diff. accent (see AiG II.2.184, 197), and the adj. pṛśanāyú- (1x: I.84.11) is based upon it. The fem. stem is found in difficult passages, two of which (I.71.5, X.61.8) concern the cosmic incest of Heaven with his daughter, which are perhaps cryptic by design. However, all three forms seem to mean something like ‘caress, caressing’.

The -yú-adj. is by contrast in a straightforward passage that aids the interpr. of ours: I.84.11 tā́asya pṛśanāyúvah, sómam śrīṇanti pṛ́śnayaḥ “ These dappled ones, eager for caresses, prepare the soma for him,” with the subject dhenávaḥ ‘milk cows’. The theme is the usual one, of the erotic desire of the cows (= milk) for the bull Soma, a theme of course widely represented in IX. I therefore suggest that the loc. pṛ́śane here as a temporal designation refers to “the time of caressing” - that is, to the ritual moment in which Soma unites with the cows’ milk. Thus, pāda b names two key times in the soma sacrifice: the early morning when the sacrifice begins and the moment that the milk is mixed with the soma.

Even if my interpr. of the locc. is correct, why are these ritual times embedded in a vs. that otherwise occupies itself with deadly weapons and hostile encounters. I don’t have a totally satisfactory answer here, but if the subject is Indra, as I have suggested, he may be eliminating rival sacrificers and rival sacrifices that do not conform to the Ārya compact - or he may be deriving this strength to do battle from the sacrifice, which is simply represented by two of its temporal stages.

Pāda d displays pleasing phonological play: cā́pāmítrām̐ápācíto acetáḥ, where the first two sequences are mirror-images of each other: c-ā-p-ā vs. a-p-ā-c.

(Note that the first c is actually borrowed from the end of the last pāda.) It is esp.

cleverly designed because of the discontinuous verb ápa … aca - the impv. aca needing to be extracted from acetáḥ (= aca itáḥ ‘turn away from here’). This acetáḥ looks superficially as if it belongs to the stem acetás- ‘unperceptive’, but it does not.

That sense, and the same privative+√cit, is found instead in the negated rt noun cmpd. acít- in the acc. pl. The pāda provides an exceptionally tricky end to a dazzlingly frustrating tṛca.

## 55-58
The rest of the hymn consists of 4 vss. Old dithers about whether this consists of an odd vs., 55, followed by a final tṛca, 56-58 - or a tṛca 55-57, with a final independent vs. 58. At least to my mind, the latter analysis is clearly superior.

Vs. 58 has the “feel” of a hymn-summary vs., with the expression of “our” wish in ab, and its 2nd half consists of the Kutsa refrain. Nonetheless, there are no clear signs of cohesion in vss. 55-57, though one might point to the filters in both 55 and 56.

Happily none of the vss. presents us with the desperate difficulties of the preceding tṛca.


## 55
We meet the three filters also in IX.73.8, where their identity is not clear.

Needless to say, Lü (703-4) has a cosmic explanation.


## 56
Note the phonological play in d: ví vā́ram ávyaṃ samáyā́ti yāti. The last bit is reminiscent of 54d, in that the phonological agreement crosscuts the word divisions: we have rhyming -yā́ti yāti, but the first yā́ti is to be segmented (samá)yā áti.


## 57
The simile in b is one of the best pieces of evidence for my interpr. of √ribh as ‘squawk, creak,’ etc., rather than ‘sing’. The simile “like birds of prey” (ná gṛ́dhrāḥ) only makes sense if the verb that expresses the sounds of the voices of the poets (kaváyaḥ) is not a mellifluous one. Both Ge and Re struggle with this. Ge reduces rebhanti to ‘become hearable/known’: “… werden die Seher lautbar wie die Geier” (not the first quality one things of for a Geier); Re simply recasts the simile: “sur sa trace ils psalmodient, comme des poètes avides (de gain).”

