+++
title = "098"

+++


## 01
On the pattern set in motion by vāja-sā́tama-, see ad vs. 12.

On sahásra-bharṇas- see comm. ad IX.60.2.

In the rt. noun cmpd vibhvā-sáham Ge, Re, and Scar (609-10) take vibhvā- as a PN, that of one of the Ṛbhus, and also interpr. this PN as having only an indirect relationship to the 2nd member. The cmpd modifies rayím (also in its other occurrence in V.10.7), and they render the phrase “wealth that surpasses that of Vibhvan” - in other words with the actual 1st member implicitly a gen. dependent on a supplied ‘wealth’ that is the implicit 1st member (suggesting a phrase *rayi-sáhaṃ rayím - a similar cmpd. rayi-ṣā́h- does exist). Scar also suggests an alternative analysis: “unter den vorzüglichen [Schätzen] siegreich,” that is, “der beste Schatz,” as well as an even more elaborate analysis by way of the phrase vibhvataṣṭá- rayí- in IV.36.5 (based on Ge’s nn. to V.10.7, IV.36.5), in which they see the Ṛbhu PN as well (but see my comm. ad V.58.4). All of this seems to me a result of over-thinking the cmpd. First of all, I think we would do well to leave the Ṛbhus out of this: they have almost no presence in the IXth Maṇḍala, and taking vibhvā- here as a PN seems to complicate rather than simplify the interpr. of the cmpd. The stem víbhvan- is attested as an adj. meaning ‘extensive, distinguished’, and I see no reason why that meaning can’t fit this cmpd. in a more direct way than Ge/Re/Scar envision: it can either mean ‘overcoming/prevailing over (even) distinguished (wealth)’ or (more likely in my view) ‘overcoming/vanquishing (even) the distinguished (person/people)’ - that is, we want wealth so overwhelming that we can dominate our rivals.

It is possible that vibhvā- does signal a pun on the Ṛbhu PN, but only as a secondary reading. One of the other Ṛbhus is named Vāja, and vāja- is the 1st member of a different rt. noun cmpd in this vs., also with a root meaning ‘win’ in the same semantic sphere as √sah: vāja-sā́tama- ‘best at winning prizes’. No one to my knowledge suggests that vāja- in that cmpd has the primary reading ‘PN, one of the Ṛbhus’, but vāja- may have enabled a pun on vibhvā-. In fact, it’s worth noting that, as Scar points out (609 n. 875), vibhvāsáham gives a bad cadence, and *vibhū-ṣáham (as in vibhū́-vasu- ‘having distinguished goods’) would be better. So perhaps that 1st member *vibhū- was altered to vibhvā- to allow this punning reading.

## 02-03
These two vss. share vocab. and structure. Both begin pári ṣyá s(u)vānáḥ, and both have a pāda-final akṣāḥ (2d, 3a), in addition to índuḥ (2c, 3b), dhā́rā(bhiḥ) (2d, 3c). The meter in both vss. shows some disturbance, esp. in 2d and 3a, and there are several different ways to resolve these disturbances. The HvN solutions as represented by their restorations do not seem to be the most satisfactory ones. As just noted, the initial pādas of both vss. begin in the same way, but though in 2a HvN read the med. part. svānáḥ with contracted root syllable, in 3a they read suvānáḥ. It seems unlikely that in this patterned repetition in successive vss. the participles would have different metrical realizations; moreover, as Gr points out, that participle, which is quite common, is always elsewhere read svānáḥ. A further consideration is that by their reading 3a has a disfavored cadence: (su)vānó akṣāḥ (- ⏑ - x, with shortening of o in hiatus), rather than the more usual iambic cadence of dimeter vs. As for 2d they read med. part. hiyānáḥ; this part. appears both with and without contracted root syllable: hyānáḥ is found, for ex., in IX.86.3. Given contracted svānáḥ in 2a and (contra HvN) 3a, contraction better fits the contextual pattern. And as in 3a their reading also produces a disfavored cadence, (dhā)rābhir akṣāḥ (again - ⏑ - x). The most likely solution is given by Arnold (metrical comm., as well as p. 99 §151 (i)) and Old: distracted akṣãḥ, which provides the right no. of syllables even with the contracted participles and also fixes the cadence.


## 02
On the instr. drúṇā and the phrase drúṇā hitá- see comm. ad IX.1.2. One of the problems with the standard interpr. of this phrase, that it refers to the wooden cup into which the Soma is poured, is that it would be out of sequence, since the vs. otherwise describes the early part of Soma’s journey across the ritual ground.

The pāda-final avyáyam (a) and avyata (b) echo each other.

The actual target of the simile in b, the nominative equivalent of Soma in the frame, is gapped, being represented only by the adjuncts ráthe and várma: “like (a man/warrior) on a chariot his armor.” In the publ. tr. “a man” should be in parens.


## 03
The transmitted akṣā at the end of pāda a before i- should have appeared as akṣār in sandhi; the Pp. reads akṣār íti. Wackernagel (AiG I.1.334-35) considers it a misunderstanding of original akṣāḥ by the redactors.

The simile in d has the same structure as the one in 2b: gapped nominative target whose identity is signalled by an adjunct, in this case bhrājā́‘with flame (/flash/light)’ - most likely pointing to Agni (Ge, Re [tr.], Ober [II.56]), though possibly Sūrya, who is also associated with forms of the root √bhrāj (alt. given by Re in his n.).


## 04
The standard tr. take this vs. as a single clause, and it is certainly tempting.

However, there are several problems. First, despite the hí the main verb vivāsasi is unaccented. It is true that this verb comes only at the end of the vs., while hí is in 2nd position in the first pāda. Old notes the problem but suggests that it’s the result of sliding into being a main clause, presumably because of distance. But the conditioning of verb accent by hí is a robust effect, which does not depend on proximity of the verb to the particle. Another problem is the sá … tvám that opens the vs. As I have demonstrated at length (“sa figé”), sá (+/- tvám) with 2nd ps.

reference is ordinarily found only with imperatives, and the desid. pres. vivāsasi is therefore anomalous.

On these two grounds I therefore divide the vs. into two clauses, ab and cd, with the former an equational nominal cl.: tvám … vásu “you are good(s).” This may seem an outlandish or tortured expression, perhaps a cure worse than the disease.

However, note that the next vs. enables just this identification: in 5b Soma is addressed as “o good one” (voc. vaso), of whose goods (vásvaḥ) we want a part. So the line between good thing(s) and a good (one) is presented as permeable, and Soma may well be both.

This interpr. solves the (lack of) verbal accent problem, but what about sá … tvám. I suggest that this is a syntactically conditioned variant of *tad … tvám …, vásu “you are that, namely good(s).” The neut. tád has been “attracted” to the (underlying) gender of tvám by the well-known syntactic rule of gender attraction of predicated pronouns in nominal equational clauses (see, e.g., Speijer, Vedisch u.

Sanskrit-Syntax, §95b; other examples and sec. lit. citations collected in Brereton 1986: 99-191 and n. 6 ). On the supposed exception, which is not (tat tvam asi in Ch Up), see Brereton “tat tvam asi in Context” (ZDMG 136 [1986]).

śatā́tman- occurs 3x in the RV (I.149.3, X.33.9, and here); in all cases it seems to mean ‘having 100 forms or embodiments’; in X.33.9 it is almost of the “cats have 9 lives” variety. Here it presumably refers to as many varieties of wealth as we can acquire.


## 05
On váso vásvaḥ and its relation to vs. 4, see comm. there.

This vs. is supposed to contain the lexeme ní √as (#ní …, syā́ma). Gr glosses this lexeme ‘Theil haben an [G.]’, and Ge and Re both so tr. But ní is found nowhere else with √as (in the RV or in the rest of Skt, as far as I can see), and neither the additive semantics of ní + √as nor any plausible extension of it would produce ‘have a share in’, at least to my mind. RIVELEX (I. 634, 641 n. 71) agrees with me and instead glosses it ‘jmd ist im Dienst von etw.’ (628), which would yield the not very likely “may we be in service of your goods … of your refreshment and favor.” I therefore think it likely that ní is not a part of a verbal lexeme as a preverb in tmesis.

I suggest, quite tentatively, instead that it is a sort of pseudo-reduplication with the doubly marked splv. nédiṣṭhatama- ‘most nearest’, which it immediately precedes (#ní nédiṣṭhatamāḥ) or that it provides a further directional specification to that splv.: “down nearest.” I construe the various genitives with this splv. - though I recognize that this does not seem to be a standard usage. They are unlikely to go with syā́ma even in the absence of ní, because, as Re points out in his n. (though he tr. flg. Gr and Ge), √as + GEN generally means “être le lot de (qq’un),” which should produce “may we belong to your goods …” On adhrigo see comm. ad I.61.1, VIII.22.11.


## 06
This vs. is entirely a rel. cl., which is resumed by vs. 7, where tyám (7a) picks up yám (6a).


## 08
This vs. presents a number of small interrelated difficulties. We can start with pā́ntaḥ. As was discussed ad I.122.1 (q.v.), forms of the shape pā́nt(a)- belong to two different stems; the better attested is the them. noun pā́nta- ‘drink’, but there are two exx. of the act. root aor. part. to √pā ‘drink’, at I.122.4 and in our passage here. Both stems often show distraction of the root syll., and that scansion is required here. The participle is pl.; the question then is what case it’s in. Ge takes it as a voc., coreferential with vaḥ in pāda a, with dakṣasā́dhanam the subj. of both the main cl. in ab and the rel. cl. in cd, or so I read his tr.: “Denn durch seine Gunst wird euch, ihr Trinkenden, ein kraftwirkendes Mittel, der den freigebigen Herren hohen Ruhm verschafft.” However, this is syntactically impossible: if dakṣasā́dhanam is the subj.

of ab, it must be neut., in which case it cannot be the antecedent of masc. yáḥ in c. It is also somewhat perverse not to construe dakṣasā́dhanam, which always refers to soma (IX.25.1, 27.2, 101.15, 104.3), as the obj. of pā́ntaḥ. Re’s tr. suffers from a different syntactic solecism. Like Ge, he takes pā́ntaḥ as coreferential with vaḥ, but, it seems, as a modifier of vaḥ and therefore an acc. or even dat. pl.: “Pour vous en effet qui buvez (ce soma) réalisateur de la force-agissante …” The problems in both interpr. arise from their assumption that pā́ntaḥ must qualify vaḥ one way or another. But the most likely referent for the part. is “all the gods” of 7c, around which Soma circled with his máda- just previously, as was clearly seen (in his usual way) by Old: “(die Götter, v. 7), den dakṣasā́dhana trinkend.” If we detach pā́ntaḥ from vaḥ, things go more smoothly. I take pā́ntaḥ as a predicated participle with the gods as supplied subj.: “(the gods) are drinking …” So then, what to do with vaḥ? This has two possible solutions, neither of which is flawless, but both of which are better than the knots Ge and Re tie themselves in to construe it with pā́ntaḥ. In the publ. tr. I take it as referring to the poets/ritualists generally (as so often) and construe it with the rel. cl. in cd, in particular with sūríṣu “among (your) patrons.” Old’s solution is similar, though he actually takes pāda a as part of the rel. cl. beginning in c, which I would prefer not to.

So my publ. solution is to take vaḥ as being in a sort of extreme Wackernagel’s position, leapfroging two pādas (and the main cl.) to reach its host. This seems a little extreme, but at least the main cl. is syntactically sketchy - consisting of a predicted aor. participle. A different solution is suggested by the meter of pāda a, which lacks a syllable. Old suggests reading asi yá, and Gr also lists it with this scansion. But this distracted form, if it exists at all, is extremely rare, and I think we should avoid positing it if possible. The lack of a syllable and the problem of vaḥ (vo in sandhi) may well be connected. I suggest that the pāda hasn’t been properly transmitted and vo is the remnant of something else entirely, though unfortunately I don’t have any suggestions for what might have fallen out. The transmitted vo may have been modeled on vām in the next vs. One remaining problem with ab: if asyá refers to Soma in the gen. (“with his help”), what about acc. dakṣasā́dhanam, which as I just said is always used of soma.

I suggest that the máda- ‘exhilarating drink’ of 7d is the referent for this adj., substituting for soma. But in fact there is no real problem even if both the gen. and the acc. refer to Soma/soma.

The 2nd hemistich is considerably more straightforward, though there is one place where I differ from the standard tr. Both Ge and Re take svár as nom., with the simile turning on haryatáḥ: “delightful like the sun” (e.g., “wie die Sonne begehrt”).

I instead take haryatáḥ as an independent modifier of Soma and svár as acc., parallel to śrávo bṛhát, as obj. of dadhé. This is another instantiation of the formula “place the sun (in heaven),” of which I saw a disguised ex. in the preceding hymn, IX.97.38.

See comm. there and my 2010 Fs. Melchert article (this passage and the formula disc. pp. 163-64).

Note that since svàr may invoke sū́rya-, there may be indirect phonetic play between sūríṣu ‘in the patrons’ and the ‘sun’ word.


## 09
The referent of the 2nd ps. du. encl. vām is clearly the World-halves in the repeated fem. voc. phrase mānavī …rodasī / … devī. The vocc. are somewhat contradictory, identifying the World-halves as both goddesses and as related to mankind (or Manu). Ge (n. 9ab) ingeniously and persuasively suggests that the dual referent is the soma-press with its two jaws. In IX.75.4 the World-halves are called the mothers of Soma, and our passage depicts his birth as related to them. Ge supplies “son” for vām to depend on; Re seems to take vām as a dative (or datival gen.): “… est né … pour vous deux,” which loses the maternal relationship. I take the vām as indicating the oblique source with pass. janiṣṭa “was born of,” which avoids Ge’s need to supply a head noun. However, there is no serious semantic distinction between my interpr. and Ge’s.

The final pāda lacks a verb, but contains an apparent obj. tám most likely referring to Soma. The negated nom. part. ásredhan demands a masc. sg. subj.; the adverbial neut.acc. sg. or loc. sg. tuviṣváni ‘very noisily / in/at the very noisy one’ (?) suggests a verb of sound or speech: “I praise’ (Ge) / ‘he [priest] praises” (Re) would fit these conditions fine without imposing itself.


## 10
The identity of “the god sitting on the seat” is unclear, though Sāy.’s suggestion (see Ge’s n. 10d) that it is the Yajamāna seems unlikely. I’d suggest rather Agni, on the basis of IX.92.2 sī́dan hóteva sádane camū́ṣu “taking his seat in the cups like a Hotar on his seat,” since Agni is the archetypal Hotar and √sad is a regular part of the Agni lexicon. Of course in IX it is Soma who is regularly sitting / seated, but he cannot be the indirect object here.


## 11
There is considerable phonological play, esp. in the 2nd hemistich - apaprothantaḥ … prātáḥ … ápracetasaḥ, but anticipated by ab pratnā́saḥ … pavitre … The root √pruth uncompounded simply means ‘snort’; it is ápa that licenses the acc. The rt. noun cmpd huraś-cít- is found once elsewhere, in I.42.3, where the context is more diagnostic than this one. There it is parallel to paripanthínam muṣīvā́ṇam “highwayman (and) robber.” The 1st member huras- belongs to the root √hvṛ ‘go crookedly’ (see, e.g., EWA s.v. híruk). As often (and not only in Skt.), ‘crooked’ has moral implications; here the enemies to be banished are those who actively know/perceive the ways to go wrong as well as those who simply lack perception (ápracetasaḥ). Since both cmpds contain a form of √cit, it would have been better to capture this etymological play in the tr. - perhaps “those who discern the crooked ways and those who lack discernment.” Scar (123) in his disc. of this passage somehow convinces himself that the form must modify the soma drinks and is therefore not acc. pl. (as it is usually taken) but nom. pl. I don’t follow his semantic reasoning, but it did, by chance, suggest another possibility to me.

Elsewhere in IX forms of √hvṛ can refer to the curly wool on the sheep’s fleece filter and the crooked path the soma must follow across the filter. So here I suggest that the morphologically ambiguous huraścítaḥ can be both nom. pl. and acc. pl. As the former, it means ‘knowing/perceiving the crooked ways (of the filter)’ and refer to the clever navigation of the soma drinks. As acc. pl. it refers to those who know morally crooked ways and deserve to be banished. I would represent this, somewhat awkwardly, in a revised tr. “discerning the crooked ways (of the filter), snorting away into the distance those who discern crooked ways and those without discernment.” Of course, since huraścítaḥ can serve for either, the Skt. lacks the clumsiness necessary to spell out the different Engl. readings.


## 12
The hymn ends with two pāda-final cmpds whose first member is vā́ja- (vā́ja-gandhi yam [c], vā́ja-pasti yam [d]), just as its first pāda ends with the same (save for accent): 1a vāja-sā́tamam - thus producing a satisfying ring encompassing the whole poem.

This rhetorical pattern, the pressure to produce matching 1st member vā́jacompds, accounts for some disturbance in the cmpd formation in 12c. The cmpd in 1a is a standard rt. noun type (in the splv.). The cmpd in 12d, vā́ja-pasti ya-‘having a house with prizes in it’, is likewise properly formed: it is a bahuvrīhi of the type of vájra-bāhu-, vájra-hasta ‘having an arm/hand with a mace in it’. With this same 2nd member, see áśva-pastya-, vīrá-pastya- ‘having a house with horses/heroes in it’.

But the hapax vā́ja-gandhi ya- in c is a different matter. Here the 2nd member appears to be a gerundive to the root √gadh ‘seize, secure, hold fast’, though the independent gerundive to that root is gádhi ya- (see below). No other forms of the root have a nasal, and the source of it is unclear, since the etymology is likewise unclear (see EWA s.v. GADH and below). It is worth pointing out that without the nasal the cmpd (and the pāda) would end with 4 light syllables (*vājagadhi yam) due to the distraction of the cluster -dhy-, and the influence of a similarly shaped root with similar meaning, √ba(n)dh ‘bind’, might account for a nonce nasal insertion for metrical purposes.

Despite the difference in shape, it is quite clear that independent gádhya- and our -gandhya- are essentially identical, because the former is found primarily as a modifier of vā́ja- in the phrase ‘prize(s) to be seized’ (IV.16.11, 16, VI.10.6, 26.2).

Only in IV.38.4 does it appear without vā́ja-, but in the same type of context. So our cmpd. replicates this phrase, though with an intrusive nasal in the root syllable.

Before going further, I should note the interpr. of the word(s) that prevails throughout Ge’s tr. and to some extent Re’s. For all attestations of the phrase vā́jagádhya- Ge tr. “die deckenhohe Beute [/Gewinn]”; for the attestation of gádhyā in IV.38.4 without vā́ja- “bis an die Wagendecke reichende (Beute)”; and for our cmpd “der wagenhohe Lohn bringt.” Re in VI.10.6 (EVP XIII ad loc.) “un prix-de-victoire emplissant le chariot” (though just “les butins” in IV.38.4 [EVP XV.162]); our cmpd.

“qui a une charge de prix.” To my knowledge Ge never explains how he came to this narrowly precise rendering, ‘reaching to the top/roof of a cart’, but Re (ad VI.10.6; XIII.131) provides us with the source for it, namely the word gadhā found in late Vedic (ŚSū) referring to some part of a cart, possibly the roof (see Sparreboom, Chariots, p. 123, with lit.). The connection seems to have been suggested in passing by Caland. See in contrast EWA s.v. gadhā-, where Mayr. comments “Schwerlich zu GADH.” Given the large chronological gap in attestation between the supposed derivative (gádhya- RV) and its supposed base noun (gadhā- Sū) and the not entirely compelling semantics, I think we can safely drop this interpr., despite its somewhat puzzling hold on Ge, and interpr. the forms as gerundives, as above.

But we must now confront the issue of the cmpd type. By accent vā́jagandhya- is a bahuvrīhi. Given the independent phrase “prize(s) to be seized/secured” consisting of the same two elements, we should expect the sense of the bahuvrīhi to be “possessing prizes to be secured,” as in the publ. tr. “whose prizes are to be secured.” But the order of the elements seems opposite to what we would expect: the 2nd member of a bv should be a noun; if there is an adj., verbal or not, it should be the 1st member. Hence we expect *gádya-vāja-. Ge seems to ignore the problem (see his tr. above), as does Gr (‘dessen Gaben zu ergreifen, festzuhalten sind’). But others try to press the cmpd into a more orthodox bv mode. See Re’s “who has a load of prizes,” turning gandhya- into a makeshift noun; differently, but responding to the same problem, Scar (457) “dessen Beute in Siegespreisen besteht (?),” interpr. gadhya as the noun Beute, developed from ‘was es festzuhalten, zu ergreifen gilt’ (n. 647). This scrupulousness about the cmpd. type is praiseworthy, but in this case I think it is misplaced. The rhetorical pattern I noted above - the ring compositional use of vā́ja- cmpds at the beginning and end of the hymn - has imposed itself, allowing a technically improper nonce bahuvrīhi to be formed with its elements in the wrong order. The cmpd with which it’s paired in this final hemistich of the hymn, vā́ja-pasti yam, has the same shape: vā́ja-Xi yam, and though they are different types of bahuvrīhis and the 2nd member -pastyā̀- is in fact a noun, they appear superficially to be exactly parallel formations.

The formation of the hapax vā́ja-gandhi ya- may have been aided by the fact that “proper” bahuvrīhis with corresponding elements are rare to non-existent. That is, examples of bahuvrīhis of the shape GRDV + NOUN are surprisingly difficult to find (at least surprising to me), though bahuvrīhis with verbal adjective 1st members are common - when the verbal adj. is a ppl. Cmpds like sutá-soma- ‘having pressed soma’, vṛktá-barhis- ‘having twisted ritual grass, vṛddhá-śavas- ‘having increased power’ are ubiquitous and easily formed, but a search through Gr for bahuvrīhis with gerundive 1st members came up short. The only such cmpds I found are the hapax avāryá-kratu- ‘possessing unobstructable resolve’ (VIII.92.8), with a negated grdv., and váreṇya-kratu- ‘whose resolve is worthy to be chosen’ (VIII.43.12) - save for an-avadyá-rūpa- ‘possessing faultless form’ (X.68.3) with the lexicalized negated grdv. avadyá- ‘fault’.
