+++
title = "099"

+++


## 01
The stem mahīyú- is found also in IX.65.1, also with a fem. pl. subj. There it is quite clearly the fingers of the officiants, and there is no reason why it can’t refer to the fingers here as well (as indeed is the standard view). The adj. is generally rendered ‘considering themselves great’ vel sim., but in both passages ‘seeking the great’ works just as well and better fits the usual sense of -yú-stems (gavyú- ‘seeking cattle’, etc.). I don’t see why the fingers would “pleins d’orgueil” as Re has it.

As Ge points out (n. 1c), by “glowing / bright garment” (śukrā́m … nirṇíjam) the milk is meant.

“At the forefront of the inspired words” (vipā́m ágre) sets the time as the beginning of the sacrifice.

## 02
kṣapā́‘by night’ is somewhat surprising in the context of a soma sacrifice, since the beginning of the sacrifice is supposed to coincide with earliest morning.

Sāy. deals with this problem by advancing the time into morning, glossing ádha kṣapā́with rātreḥ … anantaraṃ prātaḥkāle “immediately following night at the time of early morning.” Ober (I.405 with n. 57) suggests that sacrificers fearing the lure to the gods of their rival sacrificers get a jump on them by preparing the soma at night, but given how regulated the ritual day is, at least in middle Vedic śrauta texts but also seemingly in the RV, this premature anticipatory step seems unlikely to be ritually sanctioned. As for the soma sacrifice that does take place at night, the Atirātra, it employs previously prepared soma. I wonder if kṣapā́should be taken not literally, but metaphorically. In the 2nd hemistich “the insightful thoughts of Vivasvant” (vivásvato dhíyaḥ) propel Soma on his ritual journey. Though Vivasvant seems to be the prototype Soma sacrificer (see IX.66.8 and Old on our passage), his name lit. means ‘having the shining forth’, and he is in some ways the image of the sun. See esp. IX.10.5, where Vivasvant is associated with the Dawns and the sun images produced by the soma poured across the filter. I suggest that here “the thoughts of Vivasvant” that give Soma a push represent the beginning of the verbal portion of the sacrifice as a metaphorical dawn, and therefore anything that happened prior to that in the ritual happened in the metaphorical night. For further on Vivasvant, see publ. intro. to I.139 and comm. ad X.14.5.

In c yádī (‘if’) should be read yád ī (‘when him’).

## 03
I am not certain of the referent of asya in pāda a. Ge and Re seems to interpr.

it as Soma, implicitly dependent on máda-, which they take to be the referent of tám, on the basis of mádo yáḥ in b. I see the point, and it would solve the asya problem.

But I have several objections. First, the object of √mṛj ‘groom’ is unlikely to be exhilaration or the exhilarating drink (máda-) conceived of as separate from Soma him/itself. Moreover, in the central part of this hymn, vss. 3-5, each vs. begins with tám, and I find it difficult to believe that this tám has a different referent from the other two, which refer to Soma. And finally, vss. 6-7 each begin with sá, again referring to Soma, and in 7 sá is the subj. of mṛjyate ‘is groomed’, the passive version of our tám … marjayāmasi “we groom him.” For all these reasons I think tám must be Soma, with mádaḥ in b equated with him. In this case asya can only refer to Vivasvant, who is the only other singular entity previously mentioned.

The 2nd hemistich contains a striking conceptual reversal: the “cows” suck soma, though ordinarily it is the (conceptual) calf that sucks its mother, the cow. This may accompany another conceptual reversal: in IX “cows” are almost always a reference to the milk mixture added to the soma, but here Ge (n. 3cd) plausibly suggests that here they are the pressing stones, sucking the soma out of the plant stalks.

On the configuration of pāda d see Klein, DGRV I.95-96.

## 04
The idiom nā́ma √bhṛ ‘bear the name(s)’ generally means “to have that name, to be so called” (cf., e.g., I.103.4). However, I find it unlikely that the thoughts have—that is, are called by—the names of the gods (this thought is called “Indra,” that one “Agni”). Rather, I think there are two possibilities. The thoughts=hymns directed to Soma contain the names of the gods who are to drink the soma (of the type ubiquitous in IX, “O drop, flow for Indra”). A more elaborate suggestion starts from IX.109.14 bíbharti cā́rv índrasya nā́ma, which means, in my view, not “he bears the dear name of Indra” (so, e.g., Ge), but rather “he bears the name dear to Indra,” namely “Soma.” Here, if we supply cā́ru, the passage could mean “the thoughts bear the name (dear) to the gods”; again that name is “Soma.” In this case the thoughts would not be called “Soma,” but would instead contain numerous instances of the name Soma in the hymns directed towards him. I prefer the former solution, as it does not require supplying additional material.

## 05
Ge and Re (flg. Sāy.) take ukṣámāṇa- to √ukṣ ‘sprinkle’, not √vakṣ / ukṣ ‘grow strong’. I prefer the latter, because even medial forms of ‘sprinkle’ are transitive (cf., e.g., V.59.1 ukṣánte áśvān) and this one would be passive, but ‘sprinkle’ is not excluded.

The publ. tr. of the 2nd hemistich - “Those of insightful thought hope for him to be like a messenger, (for them) to be first in his thought” - is, at the very least, awkward, but, more to the point, opaque. I now think I interpr. it wrongly. In particular, like Ge and Re (also Lü 208), I 1) take the implicit acc. obj. of ā́śāsate, corresponding to dūtám ‘messenger’ in the simile, to be Soma, and 2) interpr. the verb as meaning ‘hope’. Although both interpr. can be amply justified, what they add up to is not sense. To begin with, though ā́√śās can mean ‘hope’, it can also have the more literal and additive sense ‘direct (towards)’, with a variety of objects.

Particularly telling in our case is VIII.24.1 ā́śiṣāmahi bráhméndrāya “we direct our formulation to Indra,” with a verbal product as object.

This now brings us to the simile. The skeleton of the clause means “They direct (X) like a messenger …” Let us focus now on dūtá-; what can be being compared to it here? This is the only occurrence of this well-attested word or its derivatives in IX. The overwhelmingly standard referent of dūtá- is of course Agni; however, there is a subset of passages in which the dūtá- is a hymn, praise-song, vel sim. Cf. V.43.8 … gī́r dūtó ná gantv aśvínā huvádhyai “let the hymn come like a messenger to invoke the Aśvins”; IV.33.1 dūtám iva vā́cam “my speech like a messenger”; VI.63.1 dūtó ná stómaḥ “our praise-song like a messenger” (sim.

VIII.26.16 stómo dūtáḥ). I suggest that in this hymn, so focused on the mental and verbal products of the poets, the object that “those of insightful though” (manīṣínaḥ) are directing is some variety of thought or hymn. Just trolling through the previous vss. provides a number of candidates: víp- ‘inspired word’ (1d), dhī́- ‘insightful thought’ (2c), gā́thā- ‘song’ (4a), dhītí- ‘insightful thought’ (4c), and manīṣā́- ‘inspired thought’ (extracted from manīṣín- in our 5d). Although none of these is masc. to match dūtá-, the genders of simile and frame do not have to agree (note fem.

gír- in V.43.8, vā́c- in IV.33.1, both cited above).

Finally, what about the purpose dat. pūrvácittaye? This form, occurring 8x, only in the dat., in all of its occurrences can mean “for X to be first in (s.o.’s) thoughts.” See comm. ad I.112.1. In two of its occurrences (VIII.3.9, 6.9) it is a formulation (bráhma) that we want to be first in Indra’s thought: e.g., VIII.3.9 tát tvā yāmi suvī́ryam, tád bráhma pūrvácittaye “I beg you for a mass of good heroes and for the sacred formulation to be first in your thought.” I suggest that this is the exact configuration we have here, if we supply a verbal product as the obj. of ā́śāsate, as the parallel to dūtám in the simile, and as the subject of the infinitival pūrvácittaye. A supplied “hymn / thought / formulation” works well with all three of these nested elements and yields sense: “Those of insightful thought direct (a thought/formulation) like a messenger to be first in his thought.” I would now substitute this tr.


## 06
Ge and Re (also Ober II.43) attach c to d as a new sentence, but this makes the already somewhat difficult simile in c all the more puzzling: what does depositing his seed have to do with displaying his eloquence? Whereas b and c work better together: in b “Soma sits in the cups” - that is, the liquid soma is poured into receptacles, expressed in the loc. (camū́ṣu). In c this same transfer of liquid is compared to depositing seed/semen (réta ādádhat) in an animal, also in the loc. (paśaú). So the structural parallelism between simile and frame is exact. The problem is the loc. paśaú, for morphologically this should be masc. or at best neut., but the image is of impregnation, and for that we want a fem. My ad hoc solution is to assume that paśú- here is used as a collective ‘livestock’, in reference to stockbreeding as a general practice.


## 07
The sense of pāda c is not immediately apparent; its interpr. develops from an appreciation of the idiom inherent in the noun saṃdadí-. As discussed esp. ad I.139.1 (but see also IX.10.8, 79.4), the lexeme sám √dā belongs to √dā ‘tie’ and is used in the quite narrow idiom ‘tie/attach navel [ACC] to navel [LOC]’, generally as a metaphor to assert or display a family tie between something human and earthly and something divine and in heaven. In Re’s words (n. to our passage): “partout dit du nombril comme point d’attache entre terre et ciel; on pourra donc ici même suppléer nā́bhiḥ” - though his tr. “quand il se reconnaît dans les (eaux que) voici, s’unissant (à elles)” reflects that interpr. only darkly, at best. The earthly/heavenly connection, in lapidary shorthand, seems to be the intent of our passage, though ‘navel’ is absent. In this particular case I would accept Lü’s constantly asserted conception of the heavenly waters and their connection to Soma. Here because Soma’s umbilical tie to the heavenly waters (represented by the prn. āsu fem. loc.) is well known, he plunges into the ritual waters - though Lü (23-39) identifies the two sets of waters exactly oppositely: the āsu are the earthly waters, and the “great waters” (mahī́r apáḥ) the heavenly ones. The other occurrence of saṃdadí- at II.39.7 is more attenuated even than this one.

Note that ví gāhate here forms a ring with prá gāhate in 2b, which might support my view that the great waters are the ones at the ritual.

