+++
title = "100"

+++
On the structure of this hymn, or rather two twinned hymns (1-5, 4-9), see publ. intro. The hymn also has an even higher percentage of repeated and partially repeated pādas than usual in the Soma maṇḍala. See Ge’s nn. for some of them.


## 01
abhī́with lengthened final may conceal the enclitic acc. ī, anticipating the accs. in b. In fact, because of its position before nasal (abhī́navante) it might represent a degeminated *īm.

The mothers without deceit are, as noted by Ge and Re, the hymns.


## 04
With Ge and Re (who follow Sāy.) I supply ‘horse’ as the headnoun on which jigyúṣaḥ (‘of the one having won / of a victor’) depends in the simile marked by yathā. This seems reasonable, even though there is little positive evidence for it.

The pf. part. jigiváṃs- / jigyúṣ- doesn’t enter into a similar construction elsewhere, and the subj. of (pári) √dhāv is overwhelmingly Soma. Otherwise we occasionally find cows (VIII.22.4, IX.66.6, X.145.6), but “runs like the cow of a victor” does not impose itself. In IX.87.7 we do find a steed (árvan-: … pári sómaḥ pavítre … adadhāvad árvā), and that parallel will have to do. The simile in the 2nd hemistich, vājī́va sānasíḥ “like a winner bringing prizes” reinforces this interpr., since vājínregularly modifies ‘horse’, but of course similes in the same vs. don’t have to have the same content.


## 05
Note the matching krátve … kave beginning and ending the 1st pāda.

## 06-09
As noted in the publ. intro., these vss., constituting a separate hymn, echo and vary the 1st hymn, vss. 1-5.


## 06
The first vs. of the new hymn matches the final vs. (5) of the previous one: 6ab pávasva … dhā́rayā sutáḥ enlarges on 5b pávasva soma dhā́rayā, with 5c containing sutáḥ. The 2nd hemistichs of both vss. consist primarily of datives of the gods who will drink the soma, both beginning with Indra: 5cd índrāya …, mitrā́ya váruṇāya ca; 6cd índrāya … víṣṇave, devébhyaḥ … There is also a strong echo of vs. 4: 6a vājasā́tamaḥ ‘best winner of prizes’ incorporates in a single word the simile in 4d vājī́va sānasíḥ “like a winner possessing prizes.”


## 07
This vs. replicates most of vs. 1 in a different order. I will cite here only the repeated elements: 1 … adrúhaḥ … / vatsáṃ ná … jātáṃ rihanti mātáraḥ 7 … rihanti mātáraḥ … adrúhaḥ / vatsáṃ jātáṃ ná … On the repeated pāda (d) pávamāna vídharmaṇi see comm. ad IX.64.9 and also Ober II.152.


## 08
This vs. has nothing in common with its match, vs. 2, until the end, where the two d pādas are identical: víśvāni dāśúṣo gṛhé “all (things) in the house of the pious man.” The two pādas are adapted to two very different themes: in 2 ‘all’ modifies vásūni ‘goods’ (c), which Soma will make flourish in the house of the pious, whereas in 7 the context is darker: ‘all’ modifies támāṃsi ‘dark shades’, which Soma smashes away in the same location.


## 09
The contents and phraseology of this vs. are furthest from its match, vs. 3, but as noted in the publ. tr., dyā́ṃ ca … pṛthivī́ṃ ca in 9ab recalls 3cd (vásūni) pā́rthivā divyā́ca “heavenly and earthly goods.”

