+++
title = "101"

+++
On the division of this hymn into tṛcas and the structure of the hymn in general see publ. intro. The Anukramaṇī assigns each tṛca to a different poet, in roughly reverse (conceptual) chronological order. The last tṛca plus appended vs., vss. 13-16, is credited to Prajāpati, the Middle Vedic creator god, with no patronymic. The poet of the 2nd to last tṛca, vss. 10-12, is given as Manu Sāṃvaraṇa. This poet is in fact referred to, with the patryonymic Sāṃvaraṇi, in the first Vālakhilya hymn, VIII.51.1 yáthā mánau sāṃvaraṇau, sómam indrā́pibaḥ sutám “Just as at Manu Sāṃvaraṇi's you drank pressed soma, Indra …” But even if the reference is just to a revered ancient poet, the name Manu, as the ur-man and ursacrificer, resonates in the context of Prajāpati. Moreover, there’s a missing step: the Anukr. attributes V.33-34 to one Saṃvaraṇa Prājāpatya, who would be the gapped generational link between Prajāpati and Manu Sāṃvaraṇa (/i). The names of the next two poets display the proper generational relationship: the third tṛca from the end (vss. 7-9) is by Nahuṣa Mānava, with his patronymic from Manu; the fourth tṛca from the end (vss. 4-6) by Yayāti Nāhuṣa, again taking his patronymic from the next poet in order. The first tṛca (vss. 1-3) does not participate in this generational chain; it is attributed to Andhīgu Śyāvāśvi, a patronymic that links him to the skilled poet of the Marut hymns of V (52-61), Śyāvāśva Ātreya (for further on this attribution see comm. ad vs. 1 below). Leaving Andhīgu aside, it seems that the Anukr. takes the hymn from a presumably contemporary poet Yayāti back through the ages (and 4-5 generations) to the primal god Prajāpati, whose primacy is signaled by his lack of patronymic.

## 01-03
There is no particular unity visible in this tṛca, and vs. 1 in particular stands apart from the rest.


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro. the appearance of the sacrifice-defiling dog in this vs. and vs. 13 sketches a ring. The content of the vs. and its reason for inclusion here are puzzling. Our long-tongued dog (acc. śvā́nam … dīrghajihvyàm) is clearly connected with a story widely attested in Vedic prose of an female demon, an Asurī called “Long-tongued” (dīrghajihvī́), who licks (and thus defiles) the sacrifice. The story is found in texts belonging to all three ritual Vedas: RV: AB II.22; YV: MS III.10.6, KS XXIX.1; SV: JB I.161-63, PB XIII.6.9-10, though it is most developed in the JB, where it takes a distinctly and entertainingly sexual turn. The story is treated extensively by Oertel in a number of publs. (see reff. in O’Flaherty, JB, pp.

124-25) and tr. by Caland in JB in Auswahl and his ed. of PB (incl. an Engl. tr. of the JB version ad PB XIII.6.10); see also W. D. O’Flaherty, Tales of Sex and Violence: Folklore, Sacrifice, and Danger in the Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa (1985), 100-103.

Whether the long-tongued demoness of prose is identical with or was inspired by our long-tongued dog is unclear, but at least the JB connects its account, perhaps secondarily, with our vs. After Indra set a certain Sumitra to seduce the demoness and get her into his power so that Indra could slay her, Sumitra calls upon Indra with our vs. (quoted in the JB text I.162), which Indra then makes into his vajra, raises as his weapon (etām anuṣṭubhaṃ vajram udyatya), and smites her. The same vs. then figures in the immediately following story (I.162-63), in which Śyāvāśva, rather nastily tricked by his Sattra mates, recites the verse (now named the Śyāvāśva sāman), to get himself to heaven. And this story involving Śyāvāśva himself is followed soon after (JB I.165) by one whose main character is Andhīgu (see also PB VIII.5.8-12). So at least serially Andhīgu and Śyāvāśva connect to Dīrghajihvī - remember that the poet of this tṛca is given by the Anukr. as Andhīgu Śyāvāśva.

Unfortunately nothing in the prose narratives provides any help in interpreting our vs., esp. the hapax cmpd. purójiti-. Both Ge and Re take the instr. purójitī as expressing purpose: “auf dass euer Trank zuvörderst siege”; “afin qu'il y ait victoire de votre jus.” I do not understand the case syntax of this (instr. of purpose?), esp. as the standard dative of purpose appears in the next pāda (sutā́ya mādayitnáve), and, with the omission of vaḥ, a similar dat. *purojitáye would have fit this vs. line. Old takes the instr. seriously and construes ándhasaḥ with sutā́ya, which is certainly possible: “Durch euren vor (in lokalem Sinn) ihm gewonnenen (und ihn so beschützenden) Sieg schlagt dem berauschenden Saft des ándhas den langzüngigen Hund, ihr Freunde, hinweg.” My own interpr. instead takes ándhasaḥ with purójitī: the “advance victory over the stalk” is by this interpr. the priests’ initial victory over the stalk, by pressing it for its juice, leaving it mangled and spent. This initial victory may provide the model for the violence against the encroaching dog. But I am not at all certain of this interpr.

## 02-03
These two vss. are quoted in JB I.163 just after Indra’s use of our vs. 1 to kill the demoness, and the set of vss. is prescribed for the smiting of haters, rivals, demonic power, and evil. These are the only two Gāyatrī vss. in this Anuṣṭubh hymn.


## 02
Rather than making c a nominal main clause (with Ge and Re), I think it better to take the whole vs. as a rel. cl., dependent on tám, which opens the next vs. ### 03
On the impossible word duróṣa(s)- see comm. ad VIII.1.13. This is the only one of its three occurrences where it qualifies soma, though in Avestan dūraošais only used of haoma. Ge refuses to tr. (though he discusses it extensively in n. 3a); Re ‘difficile à mouvoir’ (see his n. for disc.).

The lengthened ī́of abhī́may represent abhí + ī, the enclitic acc., as I suggest for the same form in the preceding hymn, IX.100.1. In fact, just as in 100.1, it could represent a degeminated īm before the nasal of náraḥ.

Both Ge and Re take yajñám as the direct obj. of hinvanti rather than the goal, as I do (Ge “Soma … als Opfer”). It is certainly true that yajñám √hi is found elsewhere (see Ge’s n. 3c) and that the dat. is more often used for goal or purpose with √hi. Still, the sacrifice is so often the goal of motion, the goal of motion is so often in the acc., and soma is so often the obj. of √hi that I prefer to keep soma and the sacrifice as separate entities.

## 04-06
No particular unity in this tṛca unless the mention of Indra in each vs. counts. After the difficulties of the 1st tṛca, this one is blessedly simple.


## 05
On the double sense of makhá- and its denom. and deriv., see I.18.9, III.31.7.


## 06
The phrase samudró vācamīṅkhayáḥ recalls the variant compds in IX.35.2 and 5: samudramīṅkhaya (2a) and vācamīṅkhayám (5a).

Note that all 4 pādas begin with s-.

## 07-09
Again, quite straightforward and not particularly cohesive.


## 07
bhū́man- generally means ‘earth’ (as opposed to heaven) or ‘world’. Here it seems a little outside its usual patch, as a metrical driven variant of the common phrase víśvasya bhúvanasya “of all creation”; see esp. IX.86.5 pátir víśvasya bhúvanasya rājasi matching our pátir víśvasya bhū́manaḥ, but also occurrences in I.164.21, II.27.4, 40.1, III.46.2, V.85.3, IX.86.28, 36, 97.56, X.45.6, 168.2, all but one straddling a late caesura, where the two light init. syllables of bhuvanasya fit well; bhúvanasya of course fits the cadence of no Vedic meter.


## 09
Both Ge and Re supply ‘wealth’ (rayím), found in d, as the referent of all the previous nom. and acc. forms. I think rather of Indra. The splv. ójiṣṭha- regularly modifies Indra (and never wealth). Though Ge is correct (n. 9a) that śravā́yya- is a “beliebtes Beiwort” of wealth, Indra is hardly unworthy of fame, and see V.86.2b, where du. śravā́yyā characterizes Indra and Agni. In the same vs. (V.86.2c) both gods are described as yā́páñca carṣanī́r abhí (though variants of this pāda are usually applied to Agni alone: IV.7.4=V.23.1, VII.15.2), exactly like our c save for the number of the rel. prn. The clinching arg. against rayí- as the referent seems to me to be pāda d. Ge and Re clearly take the rel. cl. there as consisting only of yéna vánāmahai, with pāda-init. acc. rayím part of the main cl.: the referent for tám back in pāda a and the antecedent of immed. flg. yéna in its own pāda. But this would be an unusual syntactic configuration for several reasons. First, there’s a rel. cl. (in c) intervening between the acc. tám and its distant referent in pāda a (and acc. modifier in b). Moreover, in a pāda with the structure #X REL …, the rel. is usually postposed and the pāda syntactically self-contained - that is, the X is part of the rel. cl. The type of intra-pāda clausal break envisioned by Ge/Re is rare. Moreover, Ge and Re are required to interpr. vánāmahai in absolute usage (“… wir Sieger werden”; “nous serons vainqueurs”), but √van ordinarily takes a direct object, on occasion, in fact, rayím (e.g., VI.38.1). For all these reasons I think it’s clear that rayím and yéna in d cannot be coreferential and we need a different referent for the tám and yá- forms - with Indra the most obvious one, for the reasons just given.

In c I supply a form of √as with abhí in the meaning ‘surmount, dominate, prevail over’.

## 10-12
Again no particular signs of cohesion, save for the X-víd- ‘finding X’ cmpds in 10b, 10d, and 11d.

## 11
This vs. shows a few minor disturbances. To begin with, the employment of the preverb / particle ví is unclear. Gr takes it with the pf. part. suṣvānā́saḥ, which it immed. follows, but √su is not otherwise found with ví. Moreover, tmesis of preverbs with participles is fairly rare, though at least here the two forms are adjacent. Re construes it with the aor. part. cítānāḥ in b; here the problem is opposite: ví √cit is indeed an idiom, but not only is tmesis in participles rare, but the position of ví, if it’s a preverb in tmesis, would be anomalous: mid-pāda and not only separated from its participle, but also intrusive in a consituent: suṣvānā́saḥ … ádribhiḥ “having been pressed by stones.” I don’t have a real solution, but I wonder if it’s meant to evoke the “through/across the sheep’s fleece” expression, found, e.g., in nearby IX.100.4 … vy àvyáyam (cf. also IX.13.6, 49.4, 61.17, 67.5, 85.5, 97.56, 109.16). It is also possible that ví .. cítānāḥ somehow anticipates vipaścítaḥ in the next vs. (12a), but this seems a long shot.

The part. cítāna- is another bit of a problem. It is the only form to this part., which seems to belong to a root aor. otherwise found mostly in the well-attested pass.

aor. áceti / céti. The semantics works fine, but for a root aor. part. its root accent is anomalous (expect *citāná-), and in fact a root-accented zero-grade is peculiar whatever the formation. It could of course have voc. accent - but there’s no place for a voc. in this 3rd ps. context. Perhaps it received its root accent redactionally in imitation of vipaścítaḥ in 12a.

Both Ge and Re take the verbal idiom in cd as transitive, or at least construe iṣám as a species of Inhaltsakk. (e.g., “nous ont en résonnant assemblé de toutes parts la jouissance-rituelle”). But Re’s invocation of the idiom abhí … sám √svar as the basis for our abhítaḥ, sám asvaran seems quite apposite, and that idiom is intrans.

with an acc. of goal. See, e.g., IX.110.8 índram abhí … sám asvaran “ They cried out in unison towards Indra” (sim. IX.106.11, 67.9). The conversion of the preverb abhí into the adverbial abhítaḥ would not be responsible for transitivizing the idiom. Cf., e.g., X.27.8 hávā íd aryó abhítaḥ sám āyan “The cries of the Stranger came together from all sides.” I agree that íṣam is an unexpected goal for this idiom, but I think we have to live with it.

## 13-15
The dog returns from the first tṛca in the first vs. of this one. The tṛca is also more rhetorically ambitious than those in the middle of this hymn, with an abundance of similes (13b, d, 14b, c, d, 15b). Vss. 14 and 15 end identically.


## 13
Ge takes ná in b as the neg. (flg. Sāy.) and asserts (n. 13), contra Old, that the presence of the mortal and the dog in this vs. (and the VS vs. Old cites) is an accident. But the position of ná in the pāda is that of the simile particle (though at least it would immed. precede the verb), and the wealth of similes in this tṛca supports a simile reading here as well. The point of the hemistich is that, like the human, the dog is attracted to the sound of the soma ritual, particularly the sound of the soma pressing, and invades it.

The 2nd hemistich begins like 1c: ápa śvā́nam … The simile in d, “as the Bhr̥gus did the Battler” (makháṃ ná bhṛ́gavaḥ), refers to what Ge calls an otherwise unknown saga. The makhá- is found as a defeated enemy of Indra in X.171.2, a hymn attributed to one Iṭa Bhārgava, the patronymic of the victors in our vs.. Note that the denom. verb makhasyate occurs in our vs. 5c.


## 14
The d pāda (varó) ná yónim āsádam is almost identical to 15d (vedhā́) ná yónim āsádam, both expressing the endpoint of Soma’s ritual journey.


## 15
The isolated summary vs. The cow’s hide (gávye ádhi tvací) closely matches gór ádhi tvací in 11b, but the sheep’s fleece is found nowhere else in the hymn, unless the ví of 11a gestures towards it. See comm. ad loc. 
## 102-06
The following 5 hymns are in Uṣṇih, technically 8 8 / 12 or 8 8 / 8 4 (see Arnold, p. 8). In some hymns, esp. IX.102, the latter variant prevails; that is, there is a word break before the last 4 syllables, which can seem like a syntactic afterthought.

In others, the last 4 syllables are not detachable, and we must assume a 12-syl pāda; see, e.g., IX.103.2 … kṛṇute háriḥ, with 5-syllable finale.

