+++
title = "102"

+++
On the structure of this hymn, see publ. intro. As just noted, the 8 8 / 8 4 variant of Uṣṇih is found throughout the hymn.


## 01
On krāṇā́as instr. see comm. ad IX.86.19. It is echoed by the instr. krátvā in the ring-compositional final vs., 8a. As noted ad IX.86.19, with Lü and Re (see also Tichy Kl.Sch 210) but contra Ge, I construe mahī́nām with śíśuḥ here.

As noted in the publ. intro., the phrase hinvánn ṛtásya dī́dhitim in b forms a ring with the same phrase in the final vs. of the hymn, 8c. Both occurrence fill a pāda, but the repetition in 8 is followed by the 4-syl. extension prā́dhavaré (i.e., prá adhvaré), which needs to be integrated into the clause.

It is not entirely clear what “all the dear things” are that Soma encompasses in c, but on the basis of vs. 2 they may be Soma’s domains (dhā́man-) or places, i.e., the various stations on the ritual ground that the soma passes through.

The 4-syl. extension in this vs., ádha dvitā́, has the look of a new syntactic unit, since ádha is almost always pāda/clause initial, but it also has to be integrated into what precedes.

## 02-03
Trita figures in these two vss. Although the name Trita has several different referents, or at least several different roles, in the RV, in Maṇḍala IX he is the archetypal soma presser: see esp. comm. ad IX.37.4. In these two vss. there is also a play on the literal sense of tritá- ‘third’, which is played off against the dual pāṣyòḥ in 2a and the numeral trī́ṇi ‘three’ in 3a. The Anukr. ascribes this hymn to Trita Āptya, a mythical figure most prominent in X.8, but this ascription is presumably based on the occurrence of tritá- in vss. 2-3. Trita Āptya is credited with several other hymns in the RV, incl., in this maṇḍala, IX.33-34.


## 02
On pāṣī́- see comm. ad I.56.6, the only other occurrence of this stem. In both instances it is dual and seems to refer to a twinned body part. Under this analysis in this passage the body part is metaphorical, referring to the two “jaws” of the soma press, a metaphor also found in the later ritual literature. See Ge (n. 2a) on this interpr., also fld. by Re.

The syntax of the vs. as a whole is very puzzling, and the publ. tr. differs from the way Ge/Re (also Klein DGRV II.128-29) configure its parts - though I recognize the problem inherent in my old interpr. The overarching question that will govern how the details are interpr. is what to do with pāda b. In particular, is ábhakta the verb of the main cl., with immed. flg. yád gúhā padám a self-contained nominal rel.

cl. dependent on the main cl, or is ábhakta part of the yád cl., with postposed subordinator yád? Either of these is syntactically possible; Ge/Re opt for the former, I for the latter. Cf. for the former Re’s “Entre les deux machoires de T., (le soma) a eu part au séjour (qui est) dans la cachette.” Ge’s tr. simply elides the yád: “In des Trita Kinnladen (?) hat er seine geheime Stufe erreicht.” There are several problems with this interpr. First (and perhaps least problematic): úpa at the beg. of the vs. then appears to be a preverb in tmesis with ábhakta, but úpa √bhaj is not found anywhere else, either in the RV or elsewhere in Skt. (to judge from MonWms). For a small set of passages incl. this one, Gr allows for úpa with following loc. in the sense “bei, auf,” and this is probably the way to go if one accepts the Ge/Re configuration—to take úpa as a preposition, rather than positing an otherwise unattested lexeme úpa √bhaj. For my interpr. of úpa in the publ. tr., see below.

The sense that must be attributed to ábhakta (usually ‘have a share, share in’) under their interpr. is stretched. Ge simply tr. “hat ... erreicht,” which is hard to reconcile with the normal usages of the root. In this he follows Gr: “6) me. einen Ort oder Gegenstand [A.] erreichen, hingelangen,” but Gr assigns this contextually generated usage to this passage alone. Re’s “a eu part au séjour” is attentive to the meaning of the root, but what does the tr. actually mean? Then there is the question of what to do with the rest of the verse after these 1st two pādas, which in Ge/Re/Klein’s various renderings gets loosely attached to what precedes with no logical or syntactic connection. Cf., e.g., Klein’s tr. of the whole vs.: “In the two stones of Trita (Soma) has taken for himself a place (of refuge) which is hidden, together (with) the seven orders of the worship, and dear." My publ. interpr. starts with the other configuration of pāda b sketched above, that the pāda is a syntactic unit, a subord. cl. marked by yád with ábhakta as its verb.

I further take ábhakta … padám to be an instance of the rare idiom PATH + √bhaj (med.) ‘take to the path’, found in VII.39.1 bhejā́te … pánthām, VII.18.16 bhejé pathó vartaním; see comm. ad VII.18.16. Taking padá- as ‘track’, we arrive at a tr.

of b “when he took to the hidden track” - meaning, in my view, when Soma set out on his journey of ritual preparation after being pressed.

As for verse-initial úpa, elsewhere in IX it's almost always used with a verb of motion (usually √yā) with acc. goal: cf. esp. the repeated phrase GEN úpa yāti niṣkrtám̥ “he goes the rendezvous with X.” I therefore supply a verb of motion here, with the goal reached only at the end of the vs. in acc. priyám “his own dear (place/domain [perhaps supply dhā́ma]).” The intermediate instr. phrase yajñásya saptá dhā́mabhiḥ is, by this interpr., an instr. of extent of space and indicates the course of his journey, “through the seven domains of the sacrifice.” The 4-syllable extension ádha priyám, like ádha dvitā́in vs. 1, puts some syntactic distance between priyám and the rest of the vs. Here it might help indicate the arduous nature of the journey and the achievement of arriving at the goal, as my “now right to his own dear (place)” is meant to convey.

This interpr. seems to me to provide a more satisfactory account of the vs. than the other alternative. However, it has one major drawback: the yád clause of b is embedded within the main clause, which occupies pādas a, c (/d). If I follow this interpr., there is no way of avoiding this violation of standard practice, whereas in the Ge/Re/Klein interpr. yád gúhā padám is a nominal cl., which is permitted internally. Weighing the two alternatives, I still find myself inclined to my own, though I don’t have an explanation for the problematic embedding. That there appears to be a parenthetic inserted clause in the next vs. may indicate that this hymn is somewhat more lax about the combination of syntactic units than we usually meet with.


## 03
This vs., too, gives the initial impression of a random series of elements strung together, which are difficult to construe with each other. Note, for ex., that ab contains five different nominal forms in four different cases, which cannot easily be connected. I take the vs. as a whole as a restatement of vs. 2, or an extension of it - describing the progress of Soma through his ritual preparation. The vs. is discussed at length by Old, in part responding to a treatment of it by Macdonell in JRAS 1893.

With trī́ṇi I supply ‘filters’, on the basis of IX.73.8 and IX.97.55 (see comm. ad locc.); see also the three seats (trī ṣadhásthā) in the next hymn (IX.103.2) in the same verse with sheep’s fleece filters. The same interpr. is shared by Old (tentatively) and Re, while Ge construes trī́ṇi with yójanā in c, which has the merit of not requiring supplied material, but the referent is fairly distant from its adj. (the basis of Old’s objection to this interpr.).

The next question is on what does gen. tritásya depend. I take it with pṛṣṭhéṣu ‘on the backs’ on the basis of IX.37.4 tritásyā́dhi sā́navi “on the back of Trita” (with a different word for ‘back’). See comm. ad IX.37.4. So also Old, while Re construes it with both trī́ṇi and pṛṣṭhéṣu and Ge with trī́ṇi. The displacement of tritásya from its headnoun can be easily explained by the desire to juxtapose ‘three’ and (lit.) ‘third’: trī́ṇi tritásya.

The real problem in this hemistich, however, is what to do with the impv.

érayā and the acc. rayím. The verb doesn’t fit easily into the ritual context nor does the acc. ‘wealth’. See Old for various possibilities, none of which he particularly likes. Re makes a valiant attempt to make ab into a single cl., but the semantically and syntactically ill-suited awkwardness is apparent: “Stimule avec (ton) jet les trois (filtres) de Trita, (pour procurer) la richesse sur les (trois) dos (de Trita).” For one thing ‘stimulating’ or ‘rousing’ the filters isn’t a standard (or even non-standard) action at the soma sacrifice, and his parenthetic “(pour procurer)” glosses over the fact that rayím has no syntactic connection to the rest of the clause.

For this reason I reluctantly accept Ge’s solution (considered but disfavored by Old), to take the impv. as part of a parenthetical clause, though I restrict that clause more than he does. He takes all of b as parenthetical: “—auf deinem Rücken bringe Reichtum her—” while I would limit it to the impv. + ACC.: —“rouse wealth!—” Although I am loath to solve syntactic problems by a wholesale positing of parentheticals, this seems the least objectionable way to deal with ab. It is not clear to me who the addressee of the impv. is, nor do any of the standard interpr.

seem to worry about this question. I very much doubt that it is Soma, who is otherwise referred to only in the 3rd ps. throughout the hymn, until the final vs.; I find it unlikely that this hymn-length consistency and the dramatic contrast created by the switch in persons in the final vs. would be violated by a seemingly irrelevant impv. just here. The most likely addressee is a ritual officiant of some sort. On a possible interpr. of the short impv. phrase see comm. on the next vs. The 2nd hemistich is, by contrast, relatively straightforward and, like 2cd, sketches the length of the territory Soma traverses, with the verb ví √mā ‘measure out’ and yójana-, a measure of distance. The preverb ví is in tmesis and takes its position after the verb at the beginning of the final, short pāda.


## 04
The “seven mothers” (saptá mātáraḥ) are presumably the rivers (contra Ge n. 4ab, who prefers dhītí- or ‘sisters’), which we also met in vs. 1 as the “great (fem.) ones.” Their appearance here strengthens the likelihood that mahī́nām in 1a is dependent on śíśuḥ; see comm. there.

On vedhā́m instead of expected vedhásam see comm. ad IX.26.3.

The other two occurrences of śriyé in IX (IX.94.4, 104.1) are associated with birth/child: IX.94.4 śriyé jātáḥ and, in the next hymn, IX.104.1 śíśuṃ ná ... śriyé. I therefore construe jajñānám … śriyé together, despite their polarized positions at the two ends of the hemistich.

As Ge points out (n. 4c), dhruvá- can modify rayí- (IV.2.7 and, in this maṇḍala, IX.20.4). I therefore think dhruvó rayīṇā́m is abbreviated from dhruvó

*rayír rayīṇā́m. Unfortunately in Engl. “enduring wealth of wealths” is too awkward
to be parsable, hence my “(treasure) of treasures.” Even more unfortunately the switch in the Engl. obscures the relationship of this vs. to the preceding one. In the context of this vs. the imperative clause “rouse wealth!” (érayā rayím) in 3b can be reinterp. as tantamount to “rouse Soma!” since Soma here is identified as rayí-, in fact the best rayí-.

The 4-syl. addendum pāda is a self-contained subordinate clause, cikéta yát, as is the identically structured juṣánta yát in the next vs. (5d). The poet uses the unusual metrical pattern to his advantage in this hymn. Both Ge and Re think that ‘wealth’ is the understood complement of cikéta, and this would find some support in VII.95.2 rāyáś cétantī “taking note of wealth.” However, as just disc., I consider rayīṇā́m in c as part of a phrase describing Soma. Moreover, as Ge points out (n.

4ab), cíketa responds to aśāsata ‘they instructed’ in b, and I therefore think that the point is that Soma paid attention to his mothers’ instruction.


## 05
My unsignalled addition, “your,” to the nominal cl. of c is unsupported and, I’m now sure, wrong. (It mindlessly follows Ge.) As noted ad vs. 3, Soma is always in the 3rd ps. in this hymn till the final vs. And the initial asyá of pāda a reinforces this. I would now change the tr. to “… are his joys.” As in the previous vs., the 4-syl. last pāda is a self-contained subord. cl., juṣánta yát, with víśve devā́ḥ of b as its subj. Note that juṣánta picks up sajóṣasaḥ in a, which modifies víśve devā́ḥ. The etymological responsion might have better conveyed by a more literal tr., such as ‘of joint pleasure, sharing pleasure’.


## 06
This vs. consists of a rel. cl., which is implicitly picked up by the following vs. The extra four-syllable pāda here consists of a single acc. adj., which is entirely integrated into the rest of the vs., in contrast to the slight syntactic distance the metrical boundary creates in other vss. in this hymn.


## 07
This vs. does not contain an overt referent for the rel. cl. of the previous vs. Ge, Re, and the publ. tr. all supply both this antecedent and a verb: “to him come.” This makes sense, but the only (indirect) support for it is abhí ‘towards’. I would be more comfortable if abhí were initial.

There are several candidates for the identity of the “two mothers of truth” ṛtásya mātárā. The exact phrase yahvī́ṛtásya mātárā refers both to Night and Dawn (I.142.7, V.5.6) and to the two World Halves (VI.17.6, X.59.8). In IX.33.5 in the plural it refers to sacred formulations configured as cows. On the phrase see Lü (631), who rightly disputes Ge’s “… (Tochter) und Mütter”; Lü thinks the ref. here is to the World Halves, but gives no evidence that I could see. However, this identification is likely to be correct, in that samīciné in all three of its other occurrences, incl. 2 in this maṇḍala (IX.74.2, 90.4, X.44.8), is used of the World Halves.

The 2nd hemistich changes subject abruptly without a signal, beyond the change in number/gender from fem. du. (samīciné … yahvī́… mātárā) to masc. pl. in cd. In fact the plural number only becomes clear with the last word, the 3rd pl. verb añjaté; the part. tanvānā́(ḥ) that opens the hemistich could be du., given its sandhi position, tanvānā́yajñám - but it would have to be masc. du. The identity of the masc. pl. is not clear, but the default, esp. given the meaning and usage of both the part. and the finite verb, would be the ritual officiants.

The fourth, short pāda superficially looks like those in vss. 4 and 5, though in opposite order—yád añjate—but it is not self-contained like them but belongs to the clause in c. Nonetheless, the positioning of yád at the beginning of the little pāda provides the same bit of distance we’ve found in most of the vss. of this hymn.


## 08
As noted several times above, this is the first and only time that Soma is referred to in the 2nd ps. in this hymn, and only in the injunc, verb ṛnór ápa ‘you unclosed’. The switch in person is particularly noteworthy because this vs. forms a ring with vs. 1, sharing the pāda 1b, 8c—so the switch in person and the unity implied by the ring are, as it were, at odds with each other.

On ṛṇóti + ápa / ví see comm. ad I.58.3. In our passage Soma has been made the protagonist of the Vala myth (see Ober II.217).

In the publ. tr. I tr. the verb as a preterite, but I would now be inclined to render it as a general pres. (sim. to KH’s view, Injunk. 122), as a repeated ritual action performed by Soma reenacting the Vala myth.

On the 4-syl. afterthought pāda prā́dhvaré, which is found several times in Uṣṇih or its equivalent, see comm. ad VIII.12.31-33. I argue there that it is a truncated version of the fairly widespread loc. absol. prayaty àdhvaré “while the ceremony is pro(ceeding).” I would now change the tr. here to “… spurring the visionary power of truth while the ceremony is pro(ceeding).” Once again the final pāda is a semi-separable unit.

