+++
title = "103"

+++
On the structure of this hymn and its relationship to the previous hymn IX.102, see publ. intro. Unlike IX.102, the variant of Uṣṇih employed here seems to be 8 8 / 12: in two of the six vss. the configuration of words makes a separable 4- syllable final pāda impossible (2c: … kṛṇute háriḥ#; 3c … saptá nūṣata#), and though the other four vss. end with a 4-syllable word, only in vs. 1 does this show the syntactic distancing found throughout IX.102.

As was noted in the publ. intro., IX.102 and 103 share thematic and lexical material. A list of the most obvious includes vs. 1: vedhás- / 102.4  jújoṣate / juṣánta 102.5 vs. 2: “three seats” reminiscent of trī́ṇi in 102.3, not to mention the two tritá's in 102.2, 3.

vs. 3: vā́ṇīr ṛ́ṣīṇām saptá / 102.4 saptá mātáraḥ vs. 4b: viśvádevo ádābhyaḥ / 102.5b víśve devā́so adrúhaḥ This pattern breaks down in the latter part of the hymn. Moreover, IX.103 is considerably more straightforward than 102, and it also possesses a different, quite salient structuring device, the fronted preverb that opens each vs.: prá (1), pári (2-6).

As was also noted in the publ. intro., pári has less and less integral connection to the rest of the vs. as the hymn goes on.


## 01
Ge takes ab as a nominal sentence, separate from c, with vácaḥ the nom. subj.: “… wird eine Rede angehoben.” Re takes ab independently as well, but supplies a 1st ps. verb, which introduces needless complications. Although I was tempted by Ge’s interpr., there are two problems: 1) It leaves the opening preverb prá orphaned. Though Gr lists a prá úd √yam ‘die Stimme erheben’, in fact he registers it only for this passage, which does not inspire confidence in the lexeme, and furthermore having one of two preverbs in tmesis with a ppl. might be unusual.

If we do not separate ab from c, prá can be construed with the verb bharā in c in the common lexeme prá √bhṛ. 2) The vácaḥ in b has to be resupplied in c to provide the frame for the simile bhṛtíṃ ná, whereas if there is no break, acc. vácaḥ is readily available.

In c the verb bharā can be either 1st sg. subjunctive or 2nd sg. impv. There are no implications either way. With Ge/Re/Ober I go for the 1st ps. subj.

As noted above, it is only in this vs. that a separable 4-syl. final pāda seems likely: the 3rd sg. pf. subj. jújoṣate forms a single-word clause, with decisive change of subject. As also noted above, this verb echoes juṣánta in the 4-syl. final pāda juṣánta yát (5d) in the twinned hymn IX.102. This echo may account for the middle voice of jújoṣate; the well-attested pf. subj. jújoṣa- is otherwise only active, while the them. aor. juṣá- is overwhelmingly middle. The unexpected voice of jújoṣate is disc.

by Old and probably accounts for why Gr (also BR; see Old) interprets it rather as a dat. sg. act. part. to an otherwise unattested pres. stem, even though we should expect a weak stem *jújuṣant-. Not to mention that such a participle would require that the stem had been reinterpr. as a present. Though this is not a difficult leap, since the subjunctive has accent on the redupl., as opposed to the finite pf., which has standard pf. accent (jujóṣa, jujuṣúḥ), nonetheless, in the absence of unambig. present forms, it seems best to assign the subjunctive to the existing pf. stem. Ge, Re, Lub all take it as a finite verb, not a part.


## 02
See IX.102.3, where it’s suggested that the trī́ṇi in that vs. corresponds to the “three seats” (trī́ṣadhásthā) here and refers to the filters.


## 03
As noted above, the “seven voices” (vā́ṇīḥ … saptá) remind us of the seven mothers in IX.102.4. As Re points out, Lü (681-82) identifies the saptá vā́ṇīḥ as the heavenly rivers (though not mentioning this passage). If this identification is correct, it is even closer to 102.4, where we identified the seven mothers as rivers. (Gr construes saptá with immediately preceding ṛ́ṣīṇām [“wo weniger gut mit vā́ṇīs verbunden”], which of course evokes the group of the Seven Seers, much more prominent in later texts than in the RV, where they are mentioned only four times, primarily in late hymns: saptá ṛ́ṣayaḥ [IV.42.8, X.130.7], saptaṛṣáyaḥ [X.82.2, 109.4]. However, in that case we might expect overt gen. saptānā́m to modify the gen. pl. ṛ́ṣīṇām). Gr’s objection to taking saptá with vā́ṇīḥ does not seem to have merit, since the phrase saptá vā́ṇīḥ, without the seers, is found elsewhere.)


## 04
Starting with this vs., the pári has no organic connection to the rest of the vs. Here I supply arṣati on the basis of vss. 2-3. So also Re, KH (133).

On viśvádevo ádābhyaḥ as a clever variant on IX.102.5 víśve devā́so ádruhaḥ, see publ. intro.

Ge takes injunc. viśat as model (“… möge sich … niederlassen”), but with Re and KH (133-34) I take it as a general present referring to Soma’s standard ritual action.

