+++
title = "104"

+++
As with the immed. preceding hymn, the Uṣṇih here is of the 8 8 / 12 form, with some vss. not allowing a 4-syllable final because the word breaks don’t coincide (1c, 3c, 5c) and the others not showing a syntactic or semantic break.

For the similarities with the flg. hymn, IX.105, see publ. intro. and comm. on 105.


## 03
Pāda b seems to mix two kinds of expressions of purpose: the datival infinitive (śárdhāya vītáye) and a clause introduced by yáthā, in which we expect a subjunctive. In the absence of such a verb, the yáthā appears pleonastic. The next pāda begins the same way, with yáthā followed by a dative referring to gods (mitrā́ya váruṇāya). The datival gods appear to be exactly parallel to śárdhāya in b, and we would expect vītáye to follow as there, or at least be supplied. But instead we find the nom. śáṃtamaḥ, which suggests that the yáthā in this pāda should be taken seriously and we should supply a subjunctive: “so that he (will be) most wealful for M+V.” (The publ. tr. renders b and c as more parallel than they are and should perhaps be changed.)


## 04
Pāda b, abhí vā́ṇīr anūṣata is a variant on the more elaborate abhí vā́ṇīr ṛ́ṣīṇāṃ saptá anūṣata in the immed. preceding hymn, IX.103.3c, which occupies the long pāda of Uṣṇih, rather than one of the shorter ones, as here.


## 05
Because of the 2nd ps. reference of vs.-init. sá, which is only appropriate with imperatives, I take devápsarā asi as a parenthentical insertion, with sá to be construed with vs.-final bhava. This has the advantage of allowing naḥ in pāda a, which would have no function in ab, to be construed with gātuvíttamaḥ in c, where it most naturally belongs. See asmábhyam gātuvíttamaḥ in two nearby hymns


## 10
and IX.106.6. My interpr. of b is supported by the parallel vs. in the twinned hymn, IX.105.5, which has no intermediate clause and has the same configuration #sá naḥ … / …. bhava# with polarized vs.-init. and vs.-final elements as here.

The Anukr. credits this hymn to Parvata Kāṇva and Nārada Kāṇva or, alternatively, to “Kaśyapa’s two Apsaras daughters Śikhaṇḍinī”: śikhaṇḍinyāv apsarasau kāśyapyau. It seems likely that this second - unusual - ascription is based on a misparsing of the cmpd. devápsarā(ḥ).


## 06
On sánemi see comm. ad VII.38.7.

I do not understand why kṛdhí is accented.

