+++
title = "105"

+++
As noted ad IX.104, this hymn has a very palpable twinned relationship with 104, though extensive exact repetition is avoided. What follows explicitly traces the parallels and the variations.


## 01
The init. voc. sákhāyaḥ in 104.1a is postponed in 105.1a till after táṃ vaḥ.

The 2nd pāda begins with the same middle participle, punāná-, but in diff. case forms: 104.1b dative, 105.1b acc. The rest of b is identical save for the preverb: 104.1b prá gāyata, 105.1b abhí gāyata. The final pādas begin identically, śíśuṃ ná, but go their own ways.


## 02
Pāda a in both hymns has both the calf (acc. in 104, nom. in 105) and its mothers (both instr.), as well as the init. preverb sám and a simile particle (ná in 104, iva in 105). The b pādas are quite different. The c pādas begin with the same two words, devāvī́- máda-, acc. in 104, nom. in 105. Again the rest of the c pāda diverges.


## 03
The a pāda in 105 decompounds dakṣa-sā́dhana- in 104 to dákṣāya sā́dhanaḥ. The two yáthā’s beginning 104.3b and c are replaced by ayám’s (also in a). The rest of b consists of the same datival purpose expression as in 104.3b. A superlative plus dative of benefit is found in both c pādas: 104.3c mitrā́ya váruṇāya śáṃtamaḥ, 105.3c devébhyo mádhumattamaḥ.


## 04
The first two pādas of this vs. in the two hymns diverge from each other.

The third pāda contains cows and color (várṇa-) in both hymns and refers metaphorically to the same ritual action in both, the mixing of the soma with milk, but the metaphors differ as do the verbs. It is in this vs. that the two hymns are most distant from each other.


## 05
The first pāda in each begins sá no, followed by a GEN.PL. + pate voc. expression, with deaccented gen. pl. The second pāda begins with voc. indo, followed by the cmpd. devá-psaras-, in the splv. in 105, but the simple nom. sg. in 104. See disc. ad 104.4 for the parenthetical nature of 104.4b. The structure of c in both is sákheva sákhye … bhava. In 104.5c in between we get a splv., perhaps a delayed match to the splv. in 105.5b. The filler in 105c is different.


## 06
The two versions redistribute some of the lexical material, while keeping other parts constant. Both begin the verse with sánemi and end it with asmád ā́; only the two syllables in between differ. Both b pādas end káṃ cid atríṇam; 105 borrows ádevam from the c pāda of 104, while 104.6b begins rakṣásam, not found in 105. The ápa … dvayúm found at the beginning of 104.6c appears at the end of 105.6c. What precedes has no parallel in 104.6.

The sequence pári bā́dhaḥ was emended to paribā́dhaḥ, here as well as in VIII.45.40 (see comm. there) by BR, fld. by Gr and Old, with Ge skeptical but not entirely opposed (see his n. 6c). I suggest in both passages instead to assume a haplology of the impv. bādhasva in a putative sequence pári *bādhasva bā́dhaḥ, a suggestion made also by Re on our passage here, as it turns out. In our passage we must also assume the gapping of *yuyodhi with ápa, based on 104.6c ápa … dvayúm … yuyodhi.

