+++
title = "106"

+++
On the structure of the hymn, see publ. intro. See also Old’s assessment of the Uṣṇih variants, by tṛca.

## 01-03
All three vss. in this tṛca contain final 4-syllable sequences that could be syntactically distanced from what precedes, hence a likely 8 8 / 8 4 Uṣṇih type (so also Old). In vs. 1 this piece is svarvídaḥ, the signature word that recurs in the same metrical position in 4 (as svarvídam) and 9.

Vss. 2 and 3 are also lexically linked: sānasí- (2a, 3b), jaítrasya (2c) / -jít (3d).


## 01
As Re points out, the exact nuance of śruṣṭī́is hard to pinpoint, but Ge’s recessive adverb “willig” does not seem sufficient. Re also adduces II.3.9 śruṣṭī́… jāyate, similar to our śruṣṭī́jātā́saḥ. I interpr. both passages to mean that the right ritual birth happens because of a/the god’s attention to the process (Tvaṣṭar in II.3.9, Indra here).


## 02
Both Ge and Re take jaítrasya as a noun ‘victory’, but with Gr I supply Indra as the referent for this vṛddhi adj. This would provide a thematic reciprocity between vss. 1 and 2: in 1 the soma drops are born because of Indra’s attentive hearing (in my interpr.), while here Soma repays Indra’s attention with his own.


## 03
The etym. figure grābháṃ gṛbhṇīta seems to belong to dicing vocab.; see comm. ad VIII.81.1 and Lü (Würfelspiel, 49-50).

Ge seems to take gṛbhṇīta as opt. (which, of course, it can be), but this reading makes it even less compatible with the already loosely connected injunc.

bharat conjoined by ca (see Klein, DGRV I.233). The publ. tr. takes both verbs as preterital injunctives, but I would now be inclined to see them, with KH (Injunk.

124), as general presents describing a regularly recurring situation: Indra’s behavior when(ever) he is under the influence of soma. Hence “he grabs … and he carries …” On the phrase sám apsujít, which constitutes an independent 4-syl. pāda in all 3 occurrences (here, VIII.13.2, VIII.36.1-6), see comm. ad VIII.13.2 and Scar’s views cited there.

## 04-06
Old classifies this tṛca as a third variety of Uṣṇih in which the last four syllables are technically separable but form part of a larger Jagatī pāda with the 8 syllables that precede. Although there is not the same semantic or syntactic distance as with some Uṣṇih vss., I’m not sure that Old’s distinction between the two types is nec. As for tṛca unity, all three vss. concern themselves with Soma’s ritual journey and the paths he takes. See esp. pathi- in 5c and 6c and the deconstruction of the bahuvrīhi sahásra-yāman- in 5c into the VP sahásraṃ yāhi, with the addition of pathíbhiḥ to substitute for the noun yā́man-. In this figure there's a nice little phonological interchange: sahásrayāmā : sahásraṃyāhi The dat. índrāya is also found in both 4b and 5a.

## 07-09
Because of the distribution of word boundaries, the first two vss. of this tṛca make a separate 4-syllable pāda impossible (7 … soma naḥ sadaḥ; 8 … amṛ̥́tāya kám papuḥ), though vs. 9 ends with the signature svarvídaḥ. Therefore this must be the 8 8 / 12 Uṣṇih variety. No striking thematic unity.


## 07
On imperatival sadaḥ, see comm. ad IX.2.2.


## 09
The pair of cmpds. vṛṣṭí-dyāvo rīty-āpaḥ is found in the same order in the dual in V.68.5 vṛṣṭídyāvā rīty-ā̀pā of Mitra and Varuṇa. In our passage the 2nd cmpd is unaccented and therefore a voc.; in V.68.5 it is accented and nom. Old suspects that our form should also have the accent, but of course there’s no way to tell. (In any case the publ. tr., for simplicity, renders them as if both nom.). The more pressing question is what kind of cmpds they are. AiG II.1.320 analyzes them as having a verbal 1st member governing the second, of the bharád-vāja- type (whatever that ultimately represents), except with -tí-, and as transformations of the VPs riṇánn apáḥ (e.g., IX.109.22), varṣáya- dyā́m (V.63.3, 6; IX.96.3). Scar (526) provides the more plausible (to me) analysis of vṛṣṭí-dyu- as a bahuvrīhi orig. meaning ‘der Himmel mit Regen hat’, developing into ‘den Himmel regnen lassen’. A similar analysis would produce for the other cmpd. ‘having waters with streaming’ > ‘making the waters stream’. In other words, a bv of more or less the vájra-bāhutype, ‘having an arm with a mace’. The same elements in the same order are found in syntagms in nearby IX.108.10 vṛṣṭím diváḥ (pavasva) rītím apā́m “purify yourself into the rain from heaven, the streaming of waters,” with our 2nd members appearing as genitives depending on the first. As far as I can see, these syntagms cannot directly underlie the cmpds here, because the members would have to be in opposite order. E.g., a bv. meaning ‘having the rain of/from heaven’ would perhaps be expected to be *dyú-vṛṣṭi- or *divó-vṛṣti-. But the problems with making cmpds with those root-noun-like first members may have led to a flip, and perhaps we should render “having /providing the rain of heaven and the streaming of waters.”

## 10-12
In all cases it’s possible to detach the last four syllables, but Old considers this tṛca to belong with those in which those syllables are integrated into a Jagatī line. As for thematic unity, all three vss. concern Soma’s journey (but then what vss. do not?), and the 1st two mention the sheep’s fleece filter. All three also concern the role of the verbal portion of the ritual and Soma’s relation to it: he is “at the forefront of speech” (ágre vācáḥ) in 10c and begets speech (vā́caṃ janáyan) in 12c, while insights (dhī-) are used to impel him in 11a and thoughts (matí-) sound towards him in 11c.

## 13-14
The last two extra vss. do not allow a detached 4-syllable unit, because the word boundaries don’t coincide.


## 13
The well-loved pun haryatá- ‘delightful’ and hári- ‘tawny, fallow bay’ is found here.


## 14
The fem. instr. ayā́opening this final vs. seems to fulfill the same role as evā́in other hymn-summary vss. Both Ge and Re supply a noun with it (Laüterung / clarification), but though the use of the fem. seems to invite something more than a semi-adverbial ‘in this way’, the model of hymn-summary vss. seems to me to outweigh that consideration.


## 107-08
The next two hymns consist of pragāthas made up of various mixed lyric meters: in 107 mostly Bṛhatī (8 8 / 12 8) alternating with Satobṛhatī (12 8 / 12 8), in 108 mostly Kakubh (8 12 / 8) alternating with Satobṛhatī.

