+++
title = "107"

+++
## 01-03
The first metrical unit in the hymn has a third vs. appended to the pragātha with a 2-pāda configuration of 12 8, identified by the Anukr. as Dvipadā Virāj Bhurij. Arnold (248, E72) analyses vss. 2-3 as simply an extended Satobṛhatī (12 8 / 12 8 / 12 8). See Old (Proleg. 104-5) on the types of extensions of pragāthas, incl. this one. Since vs. 3 simply hangs off vs. 2 and need not be syntactically independent, the “extension” suggestion is quite plausible.

The vss. are knitted together by lexical repetition and variation. A sample of the lexical evidence: apsú is found in 1c, 2c; uttamám (1b) is picked up by úttaram (2d); the three instr. pl. ádribhiḥ (1d), ávibhiḥ (2a), góbhiḥ (2d) echo each other - the first two phonologically, the 2nd and 3rd semantically.


## 01
The vs. begins with a most unusual sandhi: párītó ṣiñcatā. Ge (n. 1a; cf.

ZDMG 65: 307) suggests that it is Prakritizing. Old and Re, less dramatically, consider it to be based on IX.63.10 párīto vāyáve sutám, where the sandhi of itás is correct. (Ge also cites this vs.) Re points out that that vs. ends with siñcata and suggests that the unusual sandhi here “résulte de l’assemblage des extrémités du v.

63,10.” Although the invocation of 63.10 seems apposite, it doesn’t entirely explain the sandhi we find here. The -o of párītó can be explained as the adoption of this word sequence from its position before vd. C in 63.10, but the retroflexion in ṣiñcatā does not follow. In fact, in 63.10, though siñcata occurs after -u (vā́reṣu siñcata), there is no ruki-induced retroflexion over morpheme boundary (nor do we expect it).

Instead I think we must explain the retroflexion as an effect of the preverb pári. By far the greatest number of the retroflexed initials of this root occur immediately after pári, esp. the passive stem (pari) ṣicyá- (15 exx.), but also the ppl. páriṣikta- (8x); see also, in the next hymn (IX.108.7), our exact 2nd pl. act. impv. pári ṣiñcata. There is also retroflexion after the preverb ní (5+), and after the particles tū́(2x) and hí (1x). All of these are contact-induced, unlike our example, where the preverb is separated from the verb. Under these circumstances, there is ordinarily no retroflexion (see pári … siñcata X.32.5, pári … siktáḥ IX.97.15). However, here I think either the numerous exx. of pári √ṣic in IX (15+) imposed distant retroflexion here where it was phonologically unmotivated, or an unretroflexed initial was changed redactionally under the influence of pári ṣiñcata in the next hymn.


## 02
The 2nd hemistich of this vs. is intricately interwoven with constituents overlapping; see Old’s sensible treatment at loc. The initial loc. expression consists of suté cit … apsú, with tvā interspersed in modified 2nd position. This tvā is not to construed with the nearby verb madāma (pace Gr), because máda- without preverb is almost never construed with an acc.; here that verb goes with the instr. ándhasā. The tvā finally finds its governing verb form in the participle śrīṇántaḥ beginning pāda d; it is so distant from it, with parts of two different constituents in between, because it took Wackernagel’s position in the clause. The adj. úttaram at the very end of the vs. modifies it: the soma is “higher” or “better” at this point presumably because the mixing with milk, the last step depicted, improves it.


## 03
Both Ge and Re make this vs. a separate cl., supplying a verb (“fliesst,” “coule”), generated from pári srava in 2a, suggested by the init. pári in 3a. This is certainly possible, but since this vs. is an afterthought to the pragātha, I take it as dependent on vs. 2, specifically 2ab, simply stringing together more descriptors of soma.

Note cákṣase … vicakṣaṇáh.

## 04-05
Both vss. describing Soma taking his seat (4c, 5b). There is also concatenation between pragāthas: the final word of 5, vicakṣaṇáḥ, matches that of vs. 3, the final word of its metrical grouping. And the first word of vs. 4, punānáḥ, is reprised as the beginning of 6 (and echoes the same participle in the 2nd position in 2a).


## 05
Gr, Ge, Re all take dhūtáḥ to √dhū ‘shake’, but given apsú dhūtá- in IX.62.5, X.104.2, I prefer √dhū, dhāv ‘rinse’.

## 06-07
The c pādas of these two vss. are identically constructed: tváṃ vípro [6] / kavír [7] abhavo SPLV. Vs. 7 repeats the word vípra- along with ṛṣí- in 7b, so the pragātha seems to have a preoccupation with the varieties of poet.


## 06
The impv. mimikṣa probably belongs to √myakṣ ‘provide, etc’. See Kü (387-88).


## 07
The two splvs ending the a and c pādas show a nice phonological relationship: (gātu-)vít-tama- and (deva-)vī́-tama, with interchange between long vowel + single cons. and short vowel + geminate in otherwise identical phonetic seequences, an effect reminiscent of MIA quantitative trade-offs.

## 08-09
The 2nd hemistich of vs. 8 and the first of vs. 9 have a refrain-like structure reminiscent of the echo pādas in Atyaṣṭi, which is unusual for this meter: 8cd … harítā yāti dhā́rayā, mandráyā yāti dhā́rayā#; 9ab … góbhir akṣāḥ, … dugdhā́bhir akṣāḥ#.


## 08
Since áśvayā is fem., the tr. should be emended to “with a golden mare.” See Ge’s disc. (n. 8cd) and dismissal of Roth’s proposed emendation (also rejected by Old), to bring out the comparison of the stream of soma to the urine stream of a horse, which, as Ge points out, is still possible without emendation.


## 09
Both instances of akṣāḥ should probably be read with distracted 2nd syllable, to provide the right no. of syllables in b and the right cadence in both pādas.

In addition, pāda a is metrically deficient, even with this distracted reading. We expect a 12-syl. pāda in the Satobṛhatī that provides the 2nd vss. of the pragāthas in this hymn; the Anukr. simply identifies the vs. instead as a Bṛhatī, which should have an 8-syl. pāda in this position. Even without distracted akṣāḥ, it would have 9 syllables, and with the distraction 10. Best to consider it a deficient Satobṛhatī, which is the vs.-form expected, than an over-abundant Bṛhatī. As for ways to make up the deficiency, see Old. A distracted reading of anūpé would provide at least one more syllable as well as a standard 4-syl. opening; however, neither etym. (*anu-Hp-á-; see EWA s.v.) nor the other occurrence of the stem (X.27.23) favors this distraction.

Old rather exasperatedly suggests that the metrical disturbances in this vs. (see also the Triṣṭubh cadence of c in a 12-syl. pāda) may result from “mangelhaftes Formgefühl des Vfs.”

## 10-11
Little overt cohesion. The adv. tiráḥ ‘across’ referring to the filter is found in both vss. (10b, 11a). And the part. s(u)vāná- in 10a echoes the occurrences in vss. 3 and 8.


## 10
With Ge, Re, KH (133), in the publ. tr. I supply a verb in ab. I now think this may be unnec. The impetus was the apparent change of person between the first hemistich and the second: with voc. soma in pāda a but a 3rd ps. verb (viśat) with Soma as subj. in c. However, as in vs. 12 the 3rd-ps. verb may result from attraction to the simile (jáno ná purí … viśat “as a man enters a fortress”), and the underlying person could be 2nd throughout; see dadhiṣe in d. It is hard to convey the change in Engl. but something like “O Soma, while you are being pressed by the stones here across the sheep's fleeces, as a man enters a fortress, as tawny one (you enter) into the two cups. You have established …” KH (133) argues that the changes of ps. mark pāda c as parenthetic, allowing it to be interpr. in his “general” sense. This sense should be possible even without branding the pāda as a parenthesis.

## 12-13
No particular signs of cohesion. River(s) appear in both vss., but with different words (síndhu- 12b, nadī́- 13d). jā́gṛviḥ in 12c echoes the one in 6a.


## 12
The first hemistich of this vs. is structured exactly like the more expansive 10a-c above: with a vocative soma in the 1st pāda and a following 3rd ps.

verb (pipye), which owes its 3rd ps. to attraction to the simile surrounding it, síndhur ná … árṇasā. Ge (n. 12b) explicitly attributes the 3rd ps. pipye to “Attraktion an den Vergleich,” though he keeps the 2nd and 3rd ps. strictly separate in vs. 10. The 2nd ps. in the publ. tr., “you have swollen forth,” should, strictly speaking, be in parens.

Ge and Re make heavier weather of the 2nd hemistich than I think nec. or desirable. Because they strictly break the syntax at the end of b, they need to find something to do with the instr. phrase that opens c, aṃśóḥ páyasā, which then leads them to interpr. jā́gṛviḥ as (unprecedentedly) transitive, which then leads them to supply an obj. for it - way too much machinery for something that can be far more simply interpr. The impetus for all this, the instr. phrase in c, can easily be taken as part of the simile/frame construction starting in b, with páyasā corresponding to árṇasā in the simile.

Now, as to their transitive jā́gṛvi-. To be fair, it is not only the instr. phrase at the beginning of the pāda but also the apparent ineptness of the simile madiró ná jā́gṛviḥ that lead them to their baroque interpr. The problem with the simile is that it seems to be a straight description of Soma, not a simile: the apparent meaning “wakeful like an exhilarating drink” or “like a wakeful exhilarating drink” is a fine literal (or as literal as we get in the RV) characterization of soma. Both madirá- and jā́gṛvi- regularly modify Soma, the latter even in vs. 6 in this same hymn. As Ge says (n. 12c), “ná als Vergleichswort macht Schwierigkeit.” And so both scholars search for ways to make this a real simile, which requires both words to be given senses they don’t ordinarily have. They take madirá- as referring to alcohol or some inebriating drink other than soma - even though it is never so used in the RV. And then, though jā́gṛvi- only means ‘wakeful’ in the RV as far as I can tell, including in vs. 6, they take it as expressing the effect that this other drink has on its drinkers: making wakeful, invigorating. And this all adds up to “Avec le lait de ta tige, toi (qui rends l’homme) vif comme (fait l’alcool) enivrant …” / “Mit der Milch des Stengels munter (machend) wie der berauschende (Branntwein) …” Although I realize that the simile is awkwardly comparing soma with a standard description of itself, the cure suggested by Ge/Re seems worse than the disease. I have several, not particularly satisfying suggestions for why we get a simile here. It may be that it is part of a simile chain: soma compared to a river, which in turn is compared to soma.

See VII.103.7ab (the frog hymn), where the frogs are compared to brahmins, who are in turn compared to frogs. Or else the animatized Soma the god is compared to soma the drink. But in any case, I prefer to accept the simile at face value, however clumsy, rather than erecting a fantastic superstructure by reinterpretating standard somic descriptors.

## 14-16
Like vss. 1-3, this pragātha has a two-pāda addition (vs. 16), also 12 8. Both 14 and 15 contain the part. pávamāna-; all three vss. contain forms of samudrá-, samudríya-, while 16 repeats the phrase rā́jā deváḥ from 15b. In 16 haryatáḥ recalls the same word in 13a, and vicakṣaṇáḥ those in 3b, 5d. The voc. of this stem is found in vs. 24.


## 15
On Soma identified as “truth” (ṛtám), see IX.97.23, IX.108.8, and Lü 581-82. Although ṛtáṃ bṛhát could be an acc. goal here, the parallels, esp. the identical pāda in the next hymn, IX.108.8, support a nom. identification. In IX.97.23-24 Soma is also identified as a king (rā́jā 24b) as here and as ‘possessing dhárman’ (dharmā́23c), reminiscent of dhármaṇā here.

The Pp. analyses árṣan opening c as injunc. árṣat, while the publ. tr. assumes a nom. sg. pres. part. árṣan. Either is of course possible, but the parallelism with vs. initial tárat may support the finite verb interpr., as Old points out. So an alt. tr. would be: “he rushes …” See Hoffmann (117) on this vs.; he is surely right that the two injunctives should receive the same interpr., rather than Re’s indic. pres. tárat, modal árṣat, and Hoffmann’s “general” pres. interpr. seems apt here for both.

## 17-18
No particular internal cohesion, but a number of ties with other parts of the hymn. The Āyus are found in 17d as the groomers of Soma, while in 14a they were identified with him. The verb arṣati (17c) returns from 15c (see also 4b, 5c), and avyata (18d) from 13a. The phrase apó vásānaḥ (18c) is also found in 4a, and see disc. of the rest of 18c below.


## 17
The enclitic ī in d could stand for *īm in this sandhi position before mṛjanti with degemination.


## 18
Soma as úttara- is also found in 2d, where it is also associated with cows: śrīṇanto góbhir úttaram “preparing you [tvā 2c] with cows as the higher (oblation)”; see comm. there. I supply ‘oblation’ in both instances because of 1b sómo yá uttamáṃ havíḥ.

## 19-20
This is the first and only place in the hymn in which the 1st person is found. The speaker’s eagerness for fellowship with Soma, who is addressed directly, and his admission of his troubles give an intimate and almost confessional tone. Both vss. have the 1st sg. prn. ahám, a form of sakhyá-, a form of dív- ‘day’, and the voc. to babhrú- ‘brown one’ and are tightly connected, also structurally (see disc. ad 20).


## 19
The indic. pf. of √ran is presential in value; see Kü (413). The form here echoes raṇyati in 18b.

The lexeme ní √car (or ní áva √car) is found nowhere else in the RV or later.

The context clearly requires a negative sense; I’ve used the colloquial English idiom “get (s.o.) down,” meaning ‘discourage, demoralize’. There are two ways to interpr.

áva at the end of the pāda. With Gr (and implicitly Ge and Re), I take it as a 2nd preverb with caranti. Since ní and áva both mean ‘down’, it reinforces by variation, hence my “—way down.” As Ge reports (n. 19c), Ludwig takes áva rather as the impv. to √av ‘help’, accented because it starts a new clause. This is perfectly possible and would fit the context, but I prefer the more unusual semantic doubling of the preverbs in this emotional context.

There are various suggestions about what to supply with purū́ṇi: Sāy. rákṣāṃsi, fld. tentatively by Ge (“böse Geister?”), Re “choses (dangereuses).” Leaving it open seems to me the better solution: the poet is besieged by multiple things he cannot even name.

In the last pāda it is Soma who is urged to “go past the barriers” (paridhī́n); we might have expected the poet to ask Soma for help in getting past them himself (but see next vs.). For Soma’s journey past the paridhī́n Ge and Re cite IX.96.11 paridhī́m̐r áporṇu “open up the barriers.” In both passages the paridhí- are presumably obstacles to Soma’s progress on his ritual journey, perhaps the tufts of the fleece filter.


## 20
This vs. is identical in conceptual structure to 19. The first hemistich expresses the 1st-ps. speaker’s constant close relationship to Soma, using the word sakhyá- ‘fellowship’ and an “every day” expression (divé-dive in 19b, náktam utá … divā́in 20a). The 2nd iteration is more intimate than the first: in 19 the poet simply rejoices in his fellowship, but in 20 he is “at your udder for fellowship” (sakhyā́ya … ū́dhani, suggesting a mother/child suckling relationship.

As for this ū́dhani: because this occurrence is followed by the phrase ghṛṇā́ tápantam “scorching with its heat” and because ū́dhar / ū́dhan- is found in V.34.3 in opposition to ghraṃsá- ‘heat’, Re suggests that the two passages need to be interpr.

in conjunction with each other. For Re this means rejecting the existence of an independent (ū́dhar /) ū́dhan- meaning ‘cold’ (accepted by Ge, EWA, and me), since ‘cold’ does not work in our passage. But I do subscribe to the two ū́dhan- view—see comm. ad VIII.2.12—with the one here belonging to the dominant ‘udder’ stem. I simply consider the mention of scorching heat in the next hemistich to be coincidence.

The 2nd hemistich matches that of 19. In 19 the poet complains about his afflictions and then invites Soma to pass beyond the barriers. In this vs. the escape presumably effected by Soma in 19 provides the model for the one made by “us.” Just as Soma was to go “beyond the barriers” (paridhī́ṃr áti) so did we fly (paptima) “beyond the sun” (áti sū́ryam)—far beyond it (párah). The sun scorching with its heat, described in c, corresponds to the many things that got me down in 19c, and in both d pādas these troubles are overcome, passed beyond. Soma’s presumably successful journey beyond the barriers—barriers that are probably ritually related (see above)—makes it possible for us to overcome our own difficulties with triumphant flight.

## 21-22
Lexical cohesion: mṛjyámānaḥ opening 21a echoed by mṛjānáḥ opening 22a; pávamāna 21d, 22a, c; arṣasi 21d, 22d.


## 21
Both Ge and Re construe samudré with mṛjyámānaḥ (e.g., “Im Meer sauber gemacht”), but surely our passage can't be separated from IX.12.6 prá vā́cam índur iṣyati, samudrásyā́dhi viṣṭápi “The drop sends forth his speech upon the surface of the sea,” a passage adduced by Ge (n. 21b) without comment.

## 23-24
Both vss. contain the impv. pávasva (/ pavasva), and the mention of the sea in 23 is balanced by the earthly and heavenly realms in 24. Still, little evidence of cohesion.


## 23
The injunc. ví dhārayaḥ in c, in conjunction with prathamáḥ, invites a dual reading, both cosmogonic in the past and the ritual present. Hoffmann doesn’t cite this passage.


## 24
Notice the number disharmony in pā́rthivaṃ rájo, divyā́ca “the earthly realm and the heavenly (ones).”

## 25-26
No particular signs of cohesion.


## 25
Pāda c is a clever twist on 17ab índrāya … marútvate sutáḥ “pressed for Indra and the Maruts.” In 17 the recipients of the soma are straightforwardly expressed, but in our vs. the expression is oblique. Indra is present not directly, but in the adj. indriyá- ‘Indriyan, suitable for/associated with Indra (and Indra’s powers)’, which modifies the soma drops identified as horses. The adj. marútvantaḥ also modifies these drops/horses. On the one hand, I think this is meant to associate the Maruts with Indra, as usual, and identify them as the prototypical recipients of soma; on the other hand, however, the drop-horses are metaphorically associated with the Maruts in full gallop on their regularly described journeys. The double sense would be better conveyed by a transl. “the exhilarating courses, accompanied by the Maruts, fit for Indra along with the Maruts …” The fem. stem medhā́- of course means ‘wisdom’ and is so interpr. here by everyone (incl. me). But its explicit coordination with práyāṃsi “pleasing offerings’ (medhā́m abhí práyāṃsi ca) invites, to my mind, a secondary reading associating it with médha- ‘ritual offering/meal’. For other possible conflations of medhā́- and médha- see EWA s.v. médha-.


## 26
apó vásānaḥ returns from 4b, 18c, along with the verb árṣa-, ubiquitous in this hymn.

gā́ḥ ‘cows’ needs to be read with both c and d. In the former it is the referent of the hapax mandánāḥ (whose sense is, however, easy to divine) and the obj. of the caus. redupl. aor. ‘causes to bellow’; in the latter it is the obj. of kṛṇvānáḥ and the target of the simile: “making the cows as if into his garment” (a simile that of course depends on a metaphor: cows = milk). I consider the ná to be displaced - we might expect *nirṇíjaṃ ná. This pāda, in this order, is also found in IX.14.5; for variants on the phrase without simile particle see IX.86.26, 95.1, all adduced by Ge (n. 26d).

