+++
title = "108"

+++
On the structure of the hymn see publ. intro. It consists of pragāthas alternating Kakubh (8 12 / 8) with Satobṛhatī (12 8 / 12 8). The Anukr. attributes the hymn to seven different poets, but the vss. assigned to them generally violate the pragātha division, which, as the publ. intro. indicates, is often reinforced by syntactic structure. The Anukr. also identifies vs. 13 as Gāyatrī Yavamadhyā, but it can be analyzed as a reasonably well-behaved Kakubh.

## 01-02
There is syntactic dependence between the two vss., at least by my reading: 2ab depends on vs. 1, while 2cd consists of a new cl., with a change of person. The Anukr. attributes the two vss. to Gaurivīti Śāktya; there is some support for this, in that V.29 (one of the three other hymns attributed to him [also X.73-74]) has an allusion to the myth involving Etaśa, the sun’s horse (V.29.5), who appears in our 2d.


## 02
This vs. presents us with a syntactic trap of sorts. It appears to consist of a standard REL / COREL construction, with 2a beginning yásya te and 2c beg. sá. And indeed the rel. and the sá are coreferential; however, the grammatical person has changed from 2nd to 3rd. I therefore prefer (contra Ge/Re) to attach 2ab to the previous vs., in which Soma is also 2nd ps. Pāda b acts as a transition from Soma as 2nd ps. to Soma as 3rd ps., with asyá referring to him, but the parallelism between the two “drinking” expressions keeps it within the syntactic domain of the rel. clause.

I have silently converted yásya into yád, since “upon drinking of which - of you --” is unparsable, or at least exceptionally awk., in English.

The gerund pītvā́in a is echoed by the i-stem loc. pītā́in b.

On the unexpected accent of supráketa-, as opposed to supraketá- (4x), see Old, who has no good explanation (nor do I).

## 03-04
Vs. 4 is clearly syntactically dependent on vs. 3, with a series of three rel. cl. introduced by yéna referring to Soma, the 2nd ps. subj. of 3.


## 04
Although pāda a treats the mythological past—the opening of the Vala cave (Navagva) and Dadhyañc’s presumably similar exploit (see his connection with cow pens in X.48.2)—the verb is present tense aporṇuté, where we might expect an impf., a pres. injunc., or a pf. The two parallel yéna clauses have perfects. Hoffmann does not comment on this usage.

The pf. āpiré in b takes the partitive gen. amṛ́tasya cā́ruṇaḥ in c. As in the other occurrences of this phrase (IX.70.2, 4, 110.4) with Ge I take this as a reference to the heavenly soma, with the nominalized neut. amṛ́ta- ‘(drink) of immortality’.

See comm. ad IX.70.2 and, on supposed masc. cā́ruṇaḥ, VIII.5.14. Re supplies instead ‘principe’: “au beau (principe) immortel.” This is the only finite med. form of the well-attested pf. to √āp, beside two occurrences of the part. Kü. (118) asserts that the medial forms have the “inattingent” sense ‘have success’ (implicitly interpr. our form here without the partitive gen. obj.), but he does not cite this passage. Ge (n. 4c) seems to suggest something of the same thing as an alternative, but making amṛ́tasya cā́ruṇaḥ dependent on sumné as he suggests does not seem to me to work. Although it might seem circular for the poets to acquire a share of (heavenly) soma through (earthly) soma, this is exactly the point also of IX.70.2. See comm. ad loc I cannot detect the semantic nuance between √āp ‘acquire’ (āpiré b) and √(n)aś ‘attain’ (ānaśúḥ d). In this passage the first has a more material object, the second an immaterial one, but this distribution does not hold elsewhere.

I take the pl. śrávaṃsi as distributive: each one of the pl. subj. acquires his own śrávaḥ.

## 05-06
The 1st hemistich of vs. 6 is a relative cl. in the 3rd ps. dependent on vs. 5, also in the 3rd ps. The 2nd hemistich of 6 switches to 2nd ps.


## 06
Ge suggests that pāda a concerns the Vṛtra myth and b the Vala myth, based primarily on ápya- ‘watery’ as a descriptor of the cows in the former. This does not seem to me sufficient evidence, esp. because ápya- is not elsewhere used in connection with the Vṛtra myth. In his n. (6b) Ge appears amenable to a unitary interpr. of ab, as only depicting the Vala myth, as I also take it, though why the cows are ‘watery’ isn’t clear to me. Ge’s alternative explanation, involving X.67.5, does not seem terribly strong. It suggest it may be connected with the waters used in the ritual preparation of soma; see vs. 7.

On abhí √tan see comm. ad VIII.6.25.

## 07-08
Once again the 2nd vs. is syntactically dependent on the 1st in this pragātha: 8ab is couched in the acc., continuing the acc. phrase in 7bc, and 8cd is a rel. cl. whose antecedent is the acc. phrase.


## 07
This vs. contains two sleight-of-hand manoeuvres. The first involves the simile and frame with pári ṣiñcata ‘sprinkle around’. This verb ordinarily takes an acc. of the liquid sprinkled; see for ex. the immed. preceding hymn with the same lexeme: IX.107.1 pári … ṣiñcata sutám “sprinkle around the pressed (drink).” But the acc. in the simile, áśvaṃ ná is the target of the sprinkling, not the liquid. So although the cases agree (implicitly: there is no expressed acc. in the frame), they have different syntactic functions (the opposite of my “case disharmony”). So Ge explicitly (n. 7a). For horses as obj. with √sic, see IV.43.6 síndhur ha vāṃ rasáyā siñcad áśvān “The Sindhu River sprinkles your [=Aśvins’] horses with the Rasā.” The 2nd sleight of hand follows immediately. Both the verb and the string of acc. that follow demand the obj. *sómam, but instead we find the near rhyme form stómam ‘praise’. Rather than emend this to the easier reading (as Old seems inclined to do, along with numerous others; see his comm.), it is better to accept the implicit equation of the two ritual elements: the offered liquid and the offered words. This is not the only place in the RV where this trope is found.


## 08
On Soma as truth see IX.97.23, 107.15.

## 09-10
These two vss. are syntactically independent but linked by the theme of rain.


## 09
The impv. didīhí in b is accented because it follows the pāda-init. complex voc. phrase íṣas pate. On the impv. and its twin dīdihí with switched quantity, see Old ad loc. The well-attested redupl. formation(s) to √dī, a perfect transitioning to a redupl. pres. (see, e.g., my “The Vedic Perfect Imperative” [Fs. Lubotsky, 2018]: 58- 59), show a long ī in the root syllable only in the impv. didīhí (1x accented, 11x unacc.); the weak forms otherwise show only dīdi-, incl. the competing impv. dīdihí (1x accented, 17x unacc.). They are mostly distributed metrically: dīdihi is found almost exclusively in final position in a Jagatī or iambic dimeter line; didīhi regularly takes final position in a Triṣṭubh line. But a few examples of both forms are found in metrically unfavorable places. E.g., in VIII.60.6 dīdihi occurs after a 5-syl. opening; although HEAVY LIGHT is an attested break, LIGHT LIGHT (*didihi, to an unattested stem form) would be better. Likewise, our form, found after a 4-syl. opening, presents an unusual L H L break, though neither *dīdihi nor *didihi would give the most favored break. (Old states that we would expect *dīdihi here, but does not suggest emending because there are several other exx. of L H L breaks in this hymn.) It is also worth noting that didīhi is found several times in the curious phrase … sám íṣo didīhi (naḥ)# “illuminate our refreshments entirely” (III.3.7, 54.22, V.4.2), and our passage contains the voc. íṣas pate “o lord of refreshment,” so that the presence of íṣaḥ may have triggered the didīhi variant here. As for the source of the variation, it’s possible that transposing the Jagatī/iambic-final dīdihi into a Triṣṭubh cadence may have led to an almost mechanical balancing of quantities (on the model of alternations like vavardh- / vāvṛdh-), and then both forms were sometimes used outside of their original places (including didīhi in Jagatī/iambic cadences, with the addition of final naḥ [III.3.7, V.25.2]), though this seems too convenient an explanation.

The notion that “the middle bucket” (kóśa- madhyamá-) is the rain cloud goes back to Sāy. and makes good sense, esp. given the explicit rain in the next vs. (10c).

It is possible that the impv. didīhí ‘illuminate’ in the first hemistich is meant to evoke lightning in this context, although it is not otherwise found in this usage, as far as I can tell.


## 10
On this usage of ā́√vañc see comm. ad IX.2.2. This same phrase ā́ vacyasva (…) camvòḥ is found in IX.97.2.

I take viśā́m … viśpátiḥ to be a syntagm like gaṇā́nām … gaṇápatim “trooplord of troops” (II.23.1), with the simile váhnir ná interposed. The expression in II.23.1 also has an interposed word, though just a Wackernagel enclitic tvā. Ge takes the viś- words as part of the simile, “wie ein zu Wagen fahrender Clanfürst” (and folds the gen. pl. viśā́m into its headnoun). He suggests an alternative (n. 10b) closer to mine, though again with the gen. elided: “wie ein Wagenross, du der Clanfürst.” And, with the aid of parentheses, Re gets three separate NPs out of it: “tel un chef de clan, (maître) des clans, conducteur (du char).” The syntagms vṛṣṭím diváḥ … rītím apā́m exactly replicate the problematic compds vṛṣṭí-dyāvo rīty-ā̀paḥ in nearby IX.106.8. See comm. there. Whether there is any direct functional relationship between the cmpds and the syntagms, the two sequences must be considered together.

## 11-12
These two vss. are syntactically independent but both concern Soma as bull (vṛṣabhá- 11b, vṛ́ṣan- 12a).


## 11
The accentuation of dívaḥ poses problems. Pace Ge (n. 11b), who considers dívaḥ a gen. sg. with unusual accent, I take it as acc. pl. (flg. Old, in turn fld. by Re and Lü 202). Given the correctly accented gen./abl. sg. diváḥ in the immediately preceding vs. (10c), it is hard to believe that the poet would get the accent wrong, esp. in this exceptionally common form. As Old suggests, √duh takes a double acc. here. On dívaḥ as acc. pl., see also AiG III.226-27.


## 12
On the “threefold” (tridhā́tu) nature of Soma’s clothing, see comm. ad IX.70.8.

## 13-14
The main cl. in these two vss. consists of the first two words of 13, sá sunve “he is pressed,” followed by a series of rel. cl. that fill the rest of 13 (four yáḥ clauses, all nominal, with a single predicate ānetā́and four dependent genitives) and all of 14 (three yásya clause, one yéna, with one finite verb for the yásya cl. and one for the yéna).


## 14
The nom., acc., voc., and gen. pl. of marút- do not fit any standard RVic cadence. It is not surprising then that though instr. marúdbhiḥ and dat./abl.

marúdbhyaḥ are regularly found in cadences, the other forms are almost entirely absent. Pāda b has a nom. pl. in the cadence (made worse by the fact that the word is preceded by a light syllable, (yá)sya. VII.32.10 has the same sequence, also in a double yásya construction. Most of the few other cadential forms are found in dimeter vs. (e.g., VIII.3.21, VIII.7.30).

## 15-16
No particular signs of cohesion, but see the ring compositional elements connecting vs. 15 to the 1st vs. of the hymn.


## 15
As pointed out in the publ. intro., the beginning of vs. 1, pávasva mádhumattama, índrāya soma …, recurs here, framing the vs., which begins índrāya soma and ends with the pāda pávasva mádhumattama.


## 109-14
These last hymns in the maṇḍala are composed in a variety of meters; the first three are assorted; the last three are in paṅkti.

