+++
title = "109"

+++
## 01-03
No particular signs of cohesion, beyond the mention of Soma’s divine recipients in vss. 1-2. Vs. 3 begins with a possibly summary evā́.

## 04-06
All three vss. contain the impv. pavasva. Vss. 5-6 both contain śukrá-, also found in 3. And pīyū́ṣaḥ in 6 reprises the same word at the end of 3.


## 06
On Soma’s expansion (vídharmaṇ(i) see comm. ad IX.4.9, 64.9.

## 07-09
Unlike the previous tṛca with repeated pavasva, each vs. of this tṛca has a different form or √pū: 7 pávasva, 8 pūtaḥ, 9 punānáḥ. The person switches from the 2nd sg. that has prevailed throughout the hymn to 3rd ps. in vs. 8.


## 07
The morphological identity of mahā́m is uncertain: it could be acc. sg. (m.) (see AiG III.251, etc.) or gen. pl. to máh- (so Gr) - or, in my opinion, nom. sg. masc.

to mahā́nt-. Most (Old, Ge, Re, Lub) take it as an acc., supplying ‘fleece’ or ‘back’, hence “along the great (fleece) of the sheep.” For detailed disc. see Old ad loc. and ad II.24.11. Although this is certainly possible, the filter is not usually so described.

A similar problem arises with a gen. pl. interpr., acdg. to which it would modify ávīnāmi “of the great sheep.” Since the most likely entity to be called ‘great’ in this vs. is Soma (cf., e.g., mahā́n samudráḥ in vs. 4, I think it likely that the form is nom. sg. In this sandhi position (before vowel) we would expect mahā́m̐(cf., e.g., IX.66.16 mahā́m̐asi), but I suggest that the anunāsika was redactionally changed to m because the form was reinterp. as a gen. pl. modifying immed. following ávīnām.


## 08
It is not certain how to construe víśvāni with kṣarat, and how this is decided will also determine what to supply with the adj. Forms of √kṣar ‘stream’ without preverb generally do not take an obj. or an Inhaltsakk. (though cf. IX.35.3, 61.3, 86.37 for the latter), though it is found with an acc. of goal or extent of space (e.g., IX.33.2, 63.14). In vss. 16, 17 in this hymn, akṣāḥ has intrans. value, though in vs. 16 with accusatives of the space traversed. If we take the verb in that sense, víśvāni could pick up víśvā … dhā́ma in vs. 4, with the sense “stream to/across all (domains).” However, the phrase víśvāni dráviṇāni “all goods” might give us pause, and suggest that kṣárat here takes an Inhaltsakk., “stream all (goods).” There is no way to decide, and both may be meant. Ge, Re, and KH (123) all opt for the latter.


## 09
In all clear cases urāṇá- is passive, ‘being chosen’ (see comm. ad IV.6.3).

Gr, Ge, and Re all take it as trans. with prajā́m as obj., but there is no reason why this acc. can’t be taken as an obj. of kárat, parallel to víśvāni drávaṇāni.

kárat opening the 2nd hemistich rhymes with kṣárat in the same position in vs. 8. Nonetheless they are morphologically divergent, with kárat a subjunctive and kṣárat an injunc. Despite their parallelism kṣárat is unlikely to have modal value anticipating kárat; KH (123 and n. 26) convincingly takes kṣárat in “general” sense.

## 10-12
Once again, three different forms of the root √pū: 10 pávasva, 11 punánti, 12 pavítre, all hemistich-initial. The washing/grooming of Soma as horse is found in vss. 10 and 12. The phrase krátve dákṣāya (10) is repeated from vs. 2, though in different metrical position.

## 13-15
The adj. cā́ru- ‘dear’ occurs in 13 and 14. The gods as recipients of soma figure in 14-15.


## 14
This vs. presents a double ambiguity. On the one hand cā́ru índrasya nā́ma can mean either “the dear name of Indra” (as Ge/Re take it) or “the name dear to Indra”; the question is whether the name Soma bears is “Indra,” as the first alternative implies, or “Soma,” with the second. I prefer the second, since constructing a plausible reason why Soma would be called Indra is difficult: Ge’s (n.

14) “er wirkt in Indra and führt so dessen Namen” doesn’t seem sufficient to me.

The second ambiguity is located in the 2nd hemistich and has two parts: what/who is the referent of yéna and who is the subj. of jaghā́na? The Ge/Re interpr.

seems to take the referent of yéna to be “the name Indra” and the subj. of the verb to be Soma (though neither is explicit about it). I recognize that this would be a pleasing paradox, since Indra is the default agent in this formula. But I wonder if instead Indra is the subj. of his signature verb, and yéna refers to soma, with the name equivalent to the substance.

## 16-18
Vss. 16 and 17 contain the sequence akṣāḥ sahásra(-dhāraḥ / -retaḥ) in the same position in the vs. All 3 vss. concern Soma’s journey. The various phrases with agentive instr. in 17 and 18 reprise and reshuffle those in 15: góbhiḥ śrītásya (15) is echoed by góbhiḥ śrīṇānaḥ (17); nṛ́bhiḥ sutásya (15) gets divided and refitted into two phrases, nṛ́bhiḥ yemānáḥ and ádribhiḥ sutáḥ (18).


## 18
On kukṣí- ‘cheek’ see comm. ad III.36.8, VIII.92.24.

## 19-21
No particular signs of cohesion, though assembled from the usual assortment of soma clichés.


## 19
This vs. repeats vājī́from 17, tiráḥ pavítram from 16, and sahásradhāraḥ from 17.


## 21
for vṛ́thā pā́jase see comm. ad IX.76.1. The phrase here is a truncated version of what is found in IX.76.1 and IX.88.5.


## 22
An extra vs. in a different meter. Old suggests either 12 8 or 8 4 8, HvN either 12 8 or 8 12. Although the opening of the vs. contains 5 syllables and could therefore be a Dvipada Virāj pāda, the following finite verb tośate is unaccented and cannot start a new pāda.

