+++
title = "110"

+++
On the rare meters and their deployment in the hymn see publ. intro. Likewise for its thematic structure and its connections to the previous hymn, IX.109. It is probably not an accident that the six middle verses, in a meter otherwise not found in the RV (see Old, Proleg. 130), are the conceptually challenging ones, flanked by three vss. at the beginning and three at the end that are fairly straightforward. An omphalos structure signalled by meter.


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., the opening of this hymn is a variant on the opening of the immediately preceding one, IX.109.1, adjusted to fit the meter:


## 01
pári prá dhanva …, IX.110.1 páry ū ṣú prá dhanva The primary reading of the verb īyase is, no doubt, ‘you speed’, with the standard interpr.; however it may also have a secondary reading as the passive to √yā ‘implore, beseech’.


## 02
The b pāda consists of two words ending in -e, which are construed together by the standard interpr. (e.g., Ge “im grossen Reiche des Wettstreits”). But since -rā́jya- is thematic and a loc. sg., this requires mahé to belong to the rare and secondary them. stem mahá-, rather than the primary and very well-attested root stem máh-. I prefer to separate the two words and take mahé as the dat. to that stem.

There are four other occurrences of clear dat. mahé in IX.108-110 (including our vs. 7), each with a different head noun: ávase (108.14), kṣáyāya (109.3), dyumnā́ya (109.11), vā́jāya (110.7). Both because that last phrase appears in our hymn and because of the vā́jān in c of our vs., I supply ‘prize’, though other datives are possible.


## 03
I tr. b as if vidhā́re has verbal rection, with páyaḥ as obj.: “in spreading your milk.” In this I follow Ge (“wenn du mit Kunst deine Milch verbreitest”), but I now think that this is wrong. Although vidhā́re is a hapax and so its usage elsewhere cannot be compared, I doubt that the loc. of such a stem could be so used (and Bartholomae’s datival infinitive, mentioned by Old, seems morphologically very unlikely). Instead I think it is used in the same sense as loc. vídharman / -ṇi, found 7x in this maṇḍala (3 are identical), incl. the immed. preceding hymn (IX.109.6). In all these passages it refers to the spreading or expansion of the soma liquid as it passes across the filter, and metaphorically to other expansions through space. See comm. ad IX.64.9. If páyaḥ is not dependent on vidhā́re it is most likely a 2nd object to ájījanat (as Re takes it, though not in the same way I will suggest). Ge (n. 3b) adduces IX.34.3 duhánti śákmanā páyaḥ ‘They milk out its milk with their skill,” where páyaḥ refers to the soma juice milked from the plant, not to the cows’ milk with which it is mixed. I think páyaḥ has the same referent here, and the hemistich means “by your skill you have begotten (your) milk as the sun in your expansion.” What this means is that the soma juice (=milk) takes on the look of the sun as it goes across the filter, golden-colored with rays (=rivulets of juice) spread across the fleece.” The 2nd member of the hapax gó-jīra- is universally (Gr, Ge, Re) interpr. as transitive, governing the 1st: e.g., Gr ‘die Kühen zueilend’. But jīrá- both independently and as 1st cmpd member (e.g., jīrā́śva- ‘having lively horses’) is never transitive, but simply means ‘lively, nimble’. One occurrence of the independent adj.

is also generally taken as transitive: I.48.3 jīrā́ráthānām with a supposed objective gen., but see comm. ad loc. Since I do not see attributing an otherwise unattested usage to the word in just this compd, however convenient, we must find an alternative path to sense, made more difficult by the fact that there are no other Xjīra- cmpds and this one is a hapax. The cmpd modifies the somewhat shadowy goddess Puraṃdhi, who is associated with plenty and esp. with plentiful gifts. Cf., in this maṇḍala, IX.93.4 rathirāyátām uśatī́púraṃdhiḥ … dāváne vásūnām “Let Plenitude come eagerly on her chariot … for the giving of goods.” In our cmpd I suggest an instr. relationship between the first member and the second: “lively with cows,” capturing both her quickness (as indicated by her “hastening” here and the eager journey in 93.4) and the presumed accompaniment of a profusion of (living) cows as gift. This type of cmpd — NOUN + INTRANS. ADJ. — seems relatively rare and the relationship between the two members is quite variable. See AiG II.1.233-38. It is also possible, as suggested as a last-ditch alternative by Ge (n. 3c), that the cmpd is an inversion of a straightforward bahuvrīhi *jīrá-go- ‘having lively cows’ (like jīrā́śva- cited above). Though a fem. instr. sg. *jīrá-gavā should not have been difficult to build, it is noteworthy that there are no instr. sgs. to the ‘cow’ word in the RV (for V.30.7 see comm. ad loc.).

## 04-06
A very challenging tṛca, esp. the last two vss.


## 04
Though the meter changes here, vss. 3 and 4 are knit together by initial ájījanaḥ. Here the obj. is left unspecified and presumably re-supplies the obj. of 3.

Re notes the play between ā́m̐ṛtásya and amṛ́tasya, which might suggest that the anunāsika sometimes inserted after final vowels at the end of a pāda to prevent coalescence with the following initial vowel is not merely a redactional addition, as Old (Proleg. 470) asserts.

Ge (n. 4b) identifies amṛ́tasya cā́ruṇaḥ as a reference to the drink of immortality, namely soma. In this I think he is correct; see comm. ad IX.70.2.

However, he also wants it to be a type of partitive genitive (“eine Art von Genit.

partit.”) dependent on ájījanaḥ; it is difficult to imagine what sort of partitive gen. could be construed with ‘beget’. I see no reason why this gen. cannot depend on dhárman as ṛtásya does (Sāy.’s solution).


## 05
I don’t quite know what to do with śrávasā. Ge and Re bleach it into an adverb (rühmlich, glorieusement), which I am reluctant to do, but it also seems unlikely that it was Soma’s fame that enabled him to do this drilling. Perhaps it is shorthand for a famous deed, referring to this very act of drilling, or it simply characterizes Soma without reference to the action at hand. It may also be a sly allusion to a well-known formula: the adj. ákṣitam ends the hemistich, and śrávas ákṣitam (in sandhi śrávo ákṣitam) is of course the most famous Indo-European verbal formula.

I seem to have misdistributed the elements in pāda b. Because of their proximity I construed janapā́nam ákṣitam together (“inexhaustible drink for men”), but ákṣitam most likely goes with útsam (as well as notionally with śrávasā; see above), because “inexhaustible wellspring” is itself a minor formula: see I.64.6 and VIII.7.16 (both polarized at beginning and end of pāda as here and both obj. of √duh ‘milk’, with Maruts as subj.) as well as III.26.9 útsam ákṣīyamāṇam “a wellspring never becoming exhausted.” In the first two quoted passages the phrase must refer to the sky or some feature in it, which the Maruts milk for rain (the third passage characterizes Agni in a somewhat opaque metaphor).

Thus the hemistich seems to compare Soma’s drilling towards the drink for men (which also must be soma) with drilling for (rain)water in the sky. Or so I would take it; Ge, Re, and Lü (384) do not separate pāda b into simile and frame, as I do, but take the whole phrase together with ná marking it as some sort of approximative

- e.g., Ge: “gleichsam einen unversieglichen Born …, der von Menschen getrunken
wird.” I prefer to distinguish two separate entities being compared, and I suggest that the “drink for men” (janapā́nam) is the earthly ritual soma, while the inexhaustible wellspring contains the heavenly soma. How would Soma be drilling for the ritual soma? what kind of action does this involve? I suggest tentatively that it might refer to the pressing of the juice out of the plant.

But there is another factor to take into consideration: the lexeme abhí √tṛd. In all clear cases (VIII.77.5 is impenetrable) the object of this verb is the Vala cave or the contents thereof, cows or “prizes” (referring to cows). There are a number of such passages: II.24.4 (where in another part of the vs. the Vala cave is referred to as an útsa-), III.31.5, VI.17.1-3 (on vs. 1 see comm. ad loc.), VIII.103.5 (metaphorically of Agni), X.74.4. If we plug this stable association into our passage, we need to ask another question: what could stand for the cave full of cows here? And the obvious answer is the container that holds the milk mixture.

What this adds up to is a set of overlapping and partly contradictory images: the ritual soma drink being drilled out of the plant, but also the inexhaustible wellspring standing for not only heaven which contains the heavenly soma, but also the metaphorical Vala cave containing the milk mixure (remember that útsa- is used of the Vala cave in II.24.4) - both of which could be drilled out for their respective contents. I would suggest that this welter of images is responsible for the oddly tentative and indefinite presentation of the action, first with the āmreḍita-ed preverb abhy-àbhi, which I render as “ever closer” (which I now think is not so good) and Ge as “immer wieder” (Re with “toujours” and Lü not at all). I now think it is objectdistributive, as it were: there are several targets of the drilling. I do not quite know how to convey this in English. This is reinforced by the indefinitizing káṃ cid characterizing the útsa-: “some kind of wellspring, some wellspring or other,” which would be appropriate if útsa- in the simile is meant to call to mind both the heavenly holder of the heavenly soma and the Vala cave full of cows.

I would now emend the publ. tr. to “Because you with your reknown have drilled through to the drink for men as if through now to this inexhaustible wellspring [=the container of heavenly soma], now that one [=the container of milk compared to the Vala cave].” An unfortunately awkward unpacking of a very dense couple of pādas.

And this is only the first hemistich; the final pāda poses its own difficulties, consisting of another condensed simile cum frame.

Both Ge and Re take the whole pāda as the simile, comparing Soma to an archer. Both have to supply a considerable amount of material, including an object for bháramāṇaḥ and a verb and another object to construe with śáryābhiḥ; cf., e.g., Re’s “tel (un guerrier) tenant (l’arc) en ses deux mains (perce la cible) avec les flèches.” His “perce” and, more clearly, Ge’s supplied “das Ziel durchbohrt” pick up abhí tatárditha in pāda a, but ‘drill through to’ is an odd action to perform on a target, and as I just said, a lot has to be supplied. (Kü’s interpr. [216] supplies less but also connects less with the rest of the vs.: “wie einer, der mit Pfeilen etwas (=den Bogen) in seinen Händen trägt.”) My interpr. of the pāda depends on a double reading of bháramāṇaḥ, as both passive (in the frame) and self-beneficial transitive (in the simile). I also read gábhastyoḥ in both simile and frame. Some material has to be supplied, but less than in the Ge/Re interpr., and it also has the merit of connecting the arrows and the hands: Old points to X.61.3 śáryābhiḥ … gábhastau “with arrows in his hand” as a potential clue to our passage. To deal with the frame first: this participle is found in passive usage, also with soma as subj., in I.135.3, 6 adhvaryúbhir bháramāṇā ayaṃsata … śukrā́ḥ “the gleaming (soma drinks), being carried, have been guided by the Adhvaryus” (or “being carried by the Adhvaryus, have been guided …”). The agents there are the priests, and here I would take the gábhastyoḥ in the frame as referring to the priest’s hands that bring the soma forward. In the simile I take med. bháramāṇaḥ as self-beneficial and supply ‘booty’ (or some other desirable material benefit) as the object. Such a usage is found in IX.79.2, containing one of the few medial forms of √bhṛ in IX: vayáṃ dhánāni viśvádhā bharemahi “May we always bear away the stakes.” Here the material borne away was clearly won by the arrows in the winner’s hands. I have recast the simile as passive in English, but more literally the tr. would read “while being carried in the (priest's) hands, as (someone) with arrows in his hands carries away (booty).” If I am correct, this is an implicit example of my “case disharmony in similes,” though neither the passive subject nor the transitive direct object is actually expressed.


## 06
This vs. seems to follow from vs. 5; it begins ā́d ‘just after that, because of that’, which signals temporal or logical nexus - though what that nexus is remains unclear to me. The indefinite ké cid of pāda a also echoes the káṃ cid of 5b, but, again, the reasons why escape me. The vs. isn’t as desperately difficult as 5 but it has more than its share of problems.

The part. in pāda a, páśyamānasaḥ, is one of the few medial forms to this extremely well-attested pres. stem. The same phrase páśyamānāsa ā́pyam is found in VII.83.1. In both passages it describes the subject(s) as “seeing” (that is, contemplating?) the friendship between themselves and another being or beings, in this case Soma. So much is reasonably clear. Also reasonably clear is what action they took or have taken: they (have) roared to him (īm … abhy ànūṣata).

Who the subjects are is harder to determine and in part depends on the grammatical identification of the rt. noun cmpd vasurúcaḥ. This is ordinarily taken as a nom. pl. and either a qualifier of the other nom. pl. divyā́ḥ or as implicitly conjoined with divyā́ḥ as a joint subject. For the former, cf. Re’s “certains (êtres) célestes, brillants (de l’éclat des) Vasu”; for the latter, e.g., Scar’s (457) “gewisse Leute, deren Pracht [für uns] Gut bedeutet [und auch] Himmlische (?).” As for vasurúcaḥ, I prefer to take it as gen. sg., dependent on ā́pyam and referring to Soma (a possibility mentioned by Scar). The next hymn (IX.111) has several forms of √ruc referring to Soma: instr. sg. of the rt. noun rucā́(IX.111.1a) and the pres. stem forms rocate (1d), rócamānaḥ (2g), and in IX.111.2a it is said of Soma vido vásu “you found that good (thing).” Moreover, most of the forms of the uncmpded rt. noun rúc-, found here as 2nd member of our hapax cmpd., appear in IX (10 out of 13), again in connection with Soma. In other words, the default association of -rúc- would be with Soma, not some indefinite set of beings. (For various interpr.

of the sense of this cmpd. see esp. Scar 457-58; my ‘radiant with goods’ is hardly the only one, and many involve a PN in one way or another.) If we accept my interpr. of the grammatical identity of the cmpd., this leaves us with ké cid … divyā́ḥ “some heavenly ones, these heavenly ones and those ones,” as the subj. of abhy ànūṣata. Because of the close connections between vss. 5 and 6, it would be desirable to interpr. the indefinitizers in both vss. in the same way. In vs. 5, as I argued, káṃ cid signals that there’s more than one referent for útsam. I think we should pursue the same interpretive strategy here. In other words, we should expect that divyā́ḥ should have several different referents appropriate to the context.

Unfortunately divyā́ḥ and abhy ànūṣata point in different directions: the verb is generally used of cows, or entities configured as cows - primarily hymns, priestly voices, and the like. But these would not generally be qualified as ‘heavenly’ - though see IX.86.4, where I supply “hymns” with divyā́ḥ. The adj. also qualifies ‘drops’ on occasion (IX.86.1) and soma itself, so perhaps the heavenly Soma here.

And another well-established referent is ‘waters’ (VII.49.2, 103.2; cf. X.98.5), “heavenly waters” being rain. These are all possible, but not particularly compelling, referents here, esp. because they would have to be contemplating friendship with Soma as well as roaring to him. What divyá- does not generally seem to qualify is heavenly beings in the form of gods (except possibly in contrast to pā́rthivāḥ - ‘earthly’ [=humans?]), which seems to be the default interpr. of the standard tr.

(including mine); my remark in the publ. intro. about “the gods’ yearnig for soma” in vs. 6 is therefore probably incorrect. I’ve reached an impasse. Although I think I’m asking the right questions, they don’t produce satisfactory answers.

My interpr. of the final pāda differs from the standard, which takes deváḥ savitā́as solely constituting the simile: “he uncovers a desirable thing like god Savitar.” But this seems pretty flat. Moreover, the simile particle ná is to the left of both parts of the putative simile ( … ná deváḥ savitā́). A better constructed simile would include the portion to the left of ná, namely vā́ram. And I think it does: in my view vā́ram is a perfect pun; the word means both fleece (filter) and desirable object.

In the frame, the first reading is the filter: Soma uncovers the fleece - that is, the juice passes beyond it; “desirable thing” is the reading in the simile, and in fact a 2nd reading in the frame. The tr. should be slightly emended to “He uncovers the fleece (/desirable thing) as the god Savitar uncovers a desirable thing.”

## 07-09
Considerably clearer than the previous tṛca.


## 07
Ge and Re take naḥ as the obj. of codaya in c, but I think rather dhíyam from b, with naḥ genitive. Cf. III.62.10 dhíyo yó naḥ pracodáyāt, VI.47.10 codáya dhíyam.


## 09
On niṣṭhā́- see comm. ad III.31.10.

## 10-12
This very straightforward final tṛca concerning the ritual preparation of soma harps on the root √pū, with punānáḥ 10a, pávamānaḥ 10b, punānáḥ 11a, pavate 11b, and pavasva 12a.


## 11
Note the alliteration in c: vājasánir varivovíd vayodhā́ḥ. The first word vājasániḥ forms a ring with vā́jasā́taye in vs. 1a.


## 12
The c pāda also shows alliteration: s u vāyudháḥ sāsahvā́n soma śátrun.

