+++
title = "111"

+++
On the characteristics of Atyaṣṭi meter see comm. ad I.127-39, the only series of Atyaṣṭi hymns in the RV, which are attributed to our poet’s father Paruchepa.


## 01
To achieve 8 syllables in pāda c we need to read sū́raḥ as trisyllabic, as Old points out - a fairly rare scansion for this word.

On “all forms” see comm. ad IX.64.8.

Ge (n. 1fg) suggests that the “versifiers with their seven mouths” refers to the Aṅgirases, since the same word saptā́sya- is used of Bṛhaspati with ref. to the Aṅgireses in IV.50.4 and with direct ref. to Aṅgira in IV.51.4. This is quite plausible, given that the next vs. conerns the Vala myth - but the phrase must simultaneously apply to the current ritualists.


## 02
As indicated in the publ. intro., at least the 1st part of this vs. touches on the Vala myth (as did 1g), but with some twists. In pāda a “that good thing of the Paṇis” (tyát paṇīnā́m … vásu) must be the herd of cows concealed in the Vala cave.

The only other ref. to the Paṇis in IX is IX.22.7 ... paṇíbhya ā́vásu gávyāni dhārayaḥ “You secured from the Paṇis the good things of cattle,” which specifies the vásu (there pl.) as bovine.

As indicated in the publ. intro., problems arise in pāda b, with the verb marjayasi. The morphology of this form is absolutely clear, as is the normal sense of this well-attested -áya-formation: it is transitive and active (save for a fair number of mechanical -anta replacements, which are also transitive). The clarity of its form collides with the expected sense: if Soma is the subject (and who else would it be?), Soma is normally the object of √mṛj (or subj. of passive forms). We do not expect Soma to be the groomer, not the groomee (as it were). It is somewhat distressing to observe fine RVic scholars override the morphology in order to obtain their desired sense. Re simply renders it as reflexive (“tu te nettoies”) without comment; even the usually severe Old, after some disc. of previous suggestions, simply declares that here (as, acdg. to him, often) the active “im ungefähren Sinn des Mediums steht.” Ge, however, holds the line (see his n. 2b rejecting Old’s suggestion), and tr. it as an absolute, without obj. (“mit den Müttern machst du im eigenen Haus sauber”), suggesting that it depicts a child cleaning along with its mother -- producing the somewhat comic image of Soma as an especially tidy child. He then takes back his admirably austere approach to the morphology by remarking “Natürlich ist die saubere Herstellung des Soma gemeint …” I think it must be meant as a real transitive, and the object to supply lies ready to hand: the vásu (so also Gr under √mṛj + sám 4), i.e., the cattle, of the Paṇis, which can also stand for the milk to be mixed with the soma juice. Here Soma acts as agent in the preparation of this milk “in his own house,” that is, the ritual ground. He performs the grooming along with the mothers (b), immediately specified (c) as “the insights of truth” (ṛtásya dhītíbhiḥ), the hymns accompanying the ritual.

After this preparation (/grooming) of the milk, the soma is mixed with it and acquires vitality thereby (fg). On the possible sense of tridhā́tu- see comm. ad IX.70.8. It may refer to three ingredients but exactly which ones aren’t clear; in the publ. tr. I suggest that they are identified with the three forms of ritual speech, as casually suggested by Re, although I am not sure I stand behind that view now.

As for pāda d, both Ge and Re take sā́ma as part of the frame, not the simile, which for them consists only of parāváto ná (e.g., “Wie aus der Ferne (kommt) dieser Gesang”). Ge (n. 2d) suggests it’s the sound of the trickling soma. By contrast I take sā́ma as part of the simile and suggest that it could refer to the song with which Bṛhaspati/Indra and the Aṅgirases opened the Vala cave. The sā́man- is not a prominent feature of the Soma maṇḍala, occurring only once elsewhere (IX.96.22).

I take yátra as standing for yásmin, as the loc. regularly found with √ran, so it need not refer to a place or time. Both for the loc. with √ran and for the sā́man- as locus of pleasure, cf. I.147.1 rtásya s ̥ ā́man raṇáyanta devā́ḥ “the gods delight in the melody of truth.”


## 03
There appears to be a pun on raśmíbhiḥ in b; the word means both ‘reins’ and (metaphorically) ‘rays’, and in fact the extended meaning is more common in the RV than the original literal one. Here both Ge and Re render only the sun’s rays sense (e.g., “avec les rayons (solaires)”), and this sense is certainly there, prompted by Soma’s eastern journey in pāda a, as well as the comparison to the sun in 1c. Cf., with the same verb, V.37.1 sáṃ bhānúnā yatate sū́ryasya “He aligns himself with the radiance of the sun.” But the repeated phrase darśató ráthaḥ (b, c) “chariot lovely to see” suggests that the ‘rein’ sense is also here. But the distinction is somewhat muddled in practice, since the “heavenly chariot” of c is most likely the sun, with which Soma is being identified.

Pāda f contains a non-overt Vāyav Indraś ca construction: vájraś ca yád bhávathaḥ “when (you) and the mace become …” The 2nd du. verb bhávathaḥ presupposes a 2nd ps. Soma (expect voc. soma), conjoined with the nom. vájraḥ by ca.


## 112-114
On these three paṅkti hymns that close the maṇḍala, see Old (Proleg 202): “Diese Paṅkti-lieder werden durch das Versagen der Anordnung, durch ihren von den übrigen Pavamânaliedern sich weit entfernenden Inhalt und durch die Characteristica der Sprache und des Metrums als Zusätze erwiesen.” Among other things, all share the refrain índrāyendo pári srava “O drop, flow around for Indra” as the fifth pāda of every verse.

