+++
title = "112"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., this hymn has no apparent connection with soma except for the refrain.


## 01
The first word of the vs., the hapax nānānám, is an adjectival derivative built to the adv. nā́nā ‘various’, used as an adverb (though for simplicity I have tr. as if an adj.). As Thieme suggests (Unters. 54), it’s a rhyme form to samāná- ‘same’, and nā́nā and samāná- appear together contrastively elsewhere (cf. II.12.8, III.54.6 adduced by Thieme). In our passage it also provides a polarized mirror-image to the word ending the hemistich: #nānānám … jánānām# with reversed vowel quantities (ā ā a … a ā ā) but matching consonantal structure (save for the initial), though the necessary distraction of the last syllable of jánānām disturbs the pattern somewhat.

Pāda c provides a nice example of chiasmus, with the nom. agents at each end and the acc. goals, with similar shape, in the middle: tákṣā riṣṭáṃ rutáṃ bhiṣák.


## 02
On the vs. see esp. Old’s comm. It is couched somewhat as a riddle, though the solution is included in the vs. ### 03
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. contains informal nursery words for father (tatá-) and mother (nanā́-). The latter is not found elsewhere in the RV or indeed elsewhere in Skt. (though similar forms are well established in other IA lgs and in Iranian), while the former is found twice in the Apālā hymn (VIII.91.5-6) and is widespread later (also in the vṛddhi voc. tāta). Of course nanā́plays off the immediately following nā́nā(-dhiyaḥ) beginning pāda c, as well as nānānám opening the hymn.

For upala-prakṣíṇī I’m afraid in the publ. tr. I gave in to my baser inclination towards an alliterative colloquialism: “pushing a pestle.” In fact, upala is of course not a pestle, but the upper millstone of a hand mill, and the standard tr. are more accurate at least for the first member: Ge “… füllt den Mahlstein auf”; Re “… alimente la meule”; Doniger (235) “a miller with grinding stones.” The 2nd member, prakṣíṇī, is obscure. The older association with √pṛc ‘mix’ (see Gr, Old’s citation of Pischel, and AiG I Nachtr. 118) seems unlikely on both semantic and morphological grounds. Similarly the connection (see AiG II.2.346, citing but rejecting Re) with upaprakṣé ‘in copulation’ in V.47.6, which appears to be an s-enlarged from of √pṛc and again not a good semantic fit. Thieme’s etym. (cited in EWA I.220 [s.v. úpara-] and II.185-86 [s.v. práṣṭi-]) connecting it with a PIE *plenḱ- ‘dance’, with verb forms only in Balto-Slavic (these forms differently explained in LIV), is too gossamer to consider. I do not have a good alternative, but suggest a possible derivation from √kaṣ ‘scratch, scrape’, a reasonable characterization of the action of manipulating the upper stone on a handmill (see YouTube). Whatever its ultimate source (see EWA s.v.), verb forms to √kaṣ begin to appear in the AV and it is also widespread in MIA and NIA (see Turner nos. 2970-73, 2979), often associated with testing on a touchstone (perhaps requiring motions similar to manipulating a handmill). Though it does not seem to show up with prá, this combination would not seem surprising. We probably need to assume a zero-grade thematic noun *kṣ-á- ‘scraping’ (vel sim.) from which the -ín-stem was derived. All of this is very tenuous, but at least provides another possible source to evaluate. In any case I would now tr. this pāda as “mama scrapes away with a millstone.”


## 04
In TS (etc.) úpa mantrayate means ‘summon, invite near’, but also seems to have the sense of persuading by tricky, hence ‘beguile, seduce’. I base my interpr.

of hasanā́- on the frequent transitive-causative value of the -ana-suffix; here something that provokes laughter, that is, a joke. Ge/Re simply laughter, Old specifically the laughter of a woman.

