+++
title = "113"

+++
On the structure and thematics of the hymn see publ. intro.


## 01
Pāda a lacks a syllable - no obvious fix. Distraction to *śari yaṇā́vati would produce three light syllables at the beginning of the pāda, which would be highly unusual, and the stem is not otherwise found distracted. On the word see comm. ad VIII.6.39.


## 02
Although in the idiom ā́pavasva the preverb ā́generally governs an acc., with the meaning “bring X through your purification,” here it seems identical in usage to the simplex.

On ārjīká- see comm. ad VIII.7.29. The appearance of śaryaṇā́vant- (vs. 1) and ārjīká- in two successive vss. recalls their appearance in the same vs. in VIII.7.29 (see also śaryaṇā́vant- in the preceding hymn VIII.6.39).

Note the appearance of both ṛtá- and satyá- in the phrase ṛtavākéna satyéna.

Contrary to Ge/Re, who take them as two parallel entities, I construe them as a single NP with satyá- as adj. The interpr. of Ge and Re may be supported by vs. 4, where ṛtá-, satyá-, and śraddhā́- are treated separately and in series, following the order in which they are found here. I therefore propose an alternative possible tr. here “With speech of truth, with what is real, with trust …”


## 03
The buffalo (mahiṣá-) that is the object of all 4 clauses should be the rain, perhaps configured as the heavenly soma. It is not clear to me what the Gandharvas (c) have to do with the production of rain and its transformation into soma sap.

Pāda b has 9 syllables. Old half-heartedly suggests reading duhitā́with slurring (Verschliefung) of the 1st two syllables, but then remarks that the author of this hymn is “kein exakter metrischer Techniker.”


## 04
As noted ad vs. 2, the first three pādas of this vs. pick up the series ṛta(- vākena) satyéna śraddháyā and devote a pāda to each - each one as obj. of vádan ‘speaking’ and the first two also incorporated into bahuv. vocatives: ṛta-dyumna, satya-karman.


## 05
This vs. strikes me as very nearly doggerel. Although RVic poets enjoy indulging in etymological figures - and are skilled at deploying them - those in pādas b and c seem to display neither imagination nor skill: b sáṃ sravanti saṃsravā́ḥ (the pāda missing a syllable, to make it worse), c … rasíno rásāḥ.

Moreover, after the solemn use of satyá- ‘reality, what is real’ in vss. 2 and 4, the cmpd satyámugra- in pāda a seems to have downgraded the word to an adverb (so AiG II.1.67, 237) in a word with the banal sense ‘really strong’ (AiG II.1.37 ‘wahrhaft kräftig’, 237 ‘wahrhaft gewaltig’; sim. Ge/Re) and that awkwardly uses the neut. adverbial acc. as first member (so AiG II.1.67), to provide a makeshift hiatusbreaker. And there is also an apparent lapse in grammatical agreement, with sg.

punānáḥ in d modifying the plural subjects of bc, even though pl. punānā́(ḥ) would have been metrically identical. Ge and Re rescue the poet from this lapse in different ways: Ge construes d with the refrain (as he does in other vss: 2, 4, 6), but given that the refrain serves not only for this hymn but for the previous and following hymns and is generally independent syntactically, this seems unlikely. Re implicitly takes the subj. of d from the genitive phrases of pādas a and c.

In c rasínaḥ could be either gen. sg. or nom. pl., and either would fit. Gr and the standard tr. (including mine) take it as gen. sg., presumably because the other two occurrences of rasínaḥ (VIII.1.26, 3.1) are. A gen. also makes the phrase less pleonastic: “the juices of the juicy one” is marginally better than “the juicy juices.”

## 06-07
On the relationship between these vss. and their function in the hymn, see publ. intro.


## 06
Despite the hemistich boundary and the tr. of Ge/Re, I take grā́vṇā in c with vádan, immediately preceding it in b, because the grā́van- regularly “speaks” elsewhere (cf. VIII.34.2, X.36.4 grā́vā vádan, V.37.2 grā́vāṇaḥ … vádanti). Ge and Re need to supply material in order to construe it with pāda c.

## 08-11
In addition to the fifth pāda refrain found throughout the hymn (as well as IX.112 and 114), these four vss. add a refrain in the fourth pāda: tátra mā́m amṛ́taṃ kṛdhi “there make me immortal,” each time serving as the main clause for a set of yátra clauses.

## 08
The standard view of avaródhanam is that it defines a closed or fortified place (Ge “der verschlossene Ort des Himmels”; Re “le rempart du ciel”; Doniger [133] “where heaven is enclosed”) - deriving ródhana- from √rudh ‘confine, hem in’. But I take it instead to the other √rudh (/ruh) ‘grow’ and interpr. it as ‘means of ascent’, exactly like róhaṇaṃ diváḥ in I.52.9 (q.v.). So my vision of heaven is a more welcoming place, that extends a ladder down for us to make the ascent.


## 10
Re renders kā́mā nikāmāś ca as “les désirs (avoués) et les désirs-secrets”; although ni- might suggest something hidden or deposited in secret, but the related bahuvr. níkāma- (8x) seems just to mean ‘desirous’ without any special nuance.

The phrase bradhnásya viṣṭápam is found also in VIII.69.7, where I take it to refer to the surface of the soma (see comm. ad loc.), but bradhná- ‘coppery colored’ can also refer to the sun (see comm. ad VII.44.3, IX.97.52) and in fact to both simulataneously, with soma identified with the sun. What the phrase is trying to convey here is totally unclear to me.

As Old and Ge (n. 10c) point out (see also Doniger (134 and n. 5), svadhā́- and the root √tṛp ‘satisfy’ are associated with offerings to the Pitars (dead ancestors).

