+++
title = "IV. THE ÂGRAYANESHTI  OFFERING OF FIRST-FRUITS."

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. Now Kahoḍa Kaushītaki spake, 'This sap (of the plants) truly belongs to those two, heaven and earth: having offered of this sap to the gods, we will eat it.' 'That is why the offering of first-fruits is performed.'
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. And Yājñavalkya also spake:--The gods and the Asuras, both of them sprung from Prajāpati, once contended for superiority. The Asuras then defiled, partly by magic, partly with poison, both kinds of plants--those on which men and beasts subsist--hoping that in this way they might over come the gods. In consequence of this neither did men eat food, nor did beasts graze; and from want of food these creatures well-nigh perished [^egg_821].

[^egg_821]: 370:1 The Kāṇva text has: Tā etā ubhayyaḥ prajā anaśanena not parābabhūvuḥ.
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. Now the gods heard as to how these creatures were perishing from want of food. They spake unto one another, 'Come, let us rid them [^egg_822] of this!'--'By what means?'--'By means of the sacrifice.' By means of the sacrifice the gods then accomplished all that they wanted to accomplish [^egg_823]; and so did the R̥shis.

[^egg_822]: 370:2 Viz. the plants, according to the reading of the Kāṇva text: Hantāsām oshadhīnāṁ kr̥tyāṁ tvad vishaṁ tvad apahanāmeti.

[^egg_823]: 370:3 The Kāṇva text reads kalpyam instead of kalpam.
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. They then said, 'To which of us shall this belong?' They did not agree (each of them exclaiming), 'Mine (it shall be)!' Not having come to an agreement, they said, 'Let us run a race for this (sacrifice): whichever of us beats (the others), his it shall be!' 'So be it!' they said, and they ran a race.
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. Indra and Agni won, and hence that Indra-Agni cake on twelve potsherds [^egg_824]; Indra and Agni having won a share in it. And where Indra and Agni were standing when they had won, thither all the gods followed them.

[^egg_824]: 371:1 The MS. of the Kāṇva recension has: Tasmād esha aindrāgno daśakapālaḥ purolāśo bhavati. The commentary on Kāty. IV, 6, 1, on the other hand, makes it a cake on eleven potsherds.
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. Now, Indra and Agni are the Kshatra (nobility), and all the gods (or, the All-gods) are the Viś (common Āryan people); and wherever the Kshatra conquers, there the Viś is allowed to share. Thus they (Indra and Agni) allowed the Viśve Devāḥ (the All-gods) a share (in the offering); and hence that pap of boiled (rice or barley) grain (offered) to the All-gods.
</details>

##  07
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

7. 'Let him prepare it from old (grain) [^egg_825],' say some; 'for Indra and Agni are the Kshatra (and he should therefore use old grain for the Vaiśvadeva pap) lest he (the sacrificer) should exalt (the Viś) to the level of the Kshatra.' Nevertheless let both (the cake and caru) consist of new (grain); for (by the very fact that) the one is a cake and the other a pap, the nobility is not equalled (by the people): hence they should both consist of new (grain).

[^egg_825]: 371:2 Or, he may do so. Kāty. IV, 6, 7 leaves the option between new and old grain.
</details>

##  08
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

8. The All-gods spake, 'This sap (of the rice and barley plants) truly belongs to those two, heaven and earth: let us, then, allow those two a share in it!' They accordingly assigned that share to them, to wit, the cake on one potsherd offered to heaven

and earth [^egg_826]. This is why there is a cake on one potsherd (kapāla) for heaven and earth. Now this (earth) is, doubtless, the cup (depository, kapāla) of that (sap) [^egg_827]; and she indeed is one only: hence (the cake) consists of one potsherd.

[^egg_826]: 372:1 This is a 'low-voiced' oblation, the invitatory and offering prayers thereat (with the exception of the concluding 'Vaushaṭ' and 'Om') being pronounced in a low tone. See p. 171, note 1; p. 192, note 1.

[^egg_827]: 372:2 The Kāṇva text has: 'The reason why it consists of one kapāla is that this earth is a kapāla, and that she is one only.'
</details>

##  09
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

9. An offence (is thereby committed) by him [^egg_828]; since, for whatever deity sacrificial food may be taken out, the Svishṭakr̥t (Agni, the maker of good offering) is invariably allowed a share in it after (the respective deity). But that (cake) he offers entire, and he does not cut off a portion for the Svishṭakr̥t this is an offence, and consequently (that cake), when offered, turns upside down.

[^egg_828]: 372:3 The Kāṇva recension has as follows:--As to this they say, 'It should not be a one-cup cake, (because) therein a neglect is (involved).' Even so (idaṁ nu): for whatever deity they take out sacrificial food, the Svishṭakr̥t is invariably made to share in it after (the respective deity). That (cake) they offer whole: this is consequently a neglect. Moreover, it turns round (paryābhavati). As to this they say, 'That (cake) has turned upside down,' &c.
</details>

##  10
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

10. Hence they say, 'That (cake) contained on one potsherd has turned upside down: it will throw the kingdom into disorder.' No offence (is, however, committed) by him, for the Āhavanīya is the support of oblations; and if, after reaching the Āhavanīya, (the cake) were to turn upside down ten times, he need not heed it. And if others ask as to who would care to incur (the result of) such a combination (of errors), let him offer nothing but butter; for clarified butter is manifestly the sap of

those two, heaven and earth, so that he thereby manifestly gladdens those two with their own sap or essence: hence he need offer nothing but butter.
</details>

##  11
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

11. By performing that same sacrifice, the gods removed the magic spell as well as the poison from both kinds of plants,--those on which men and beasts subsist; and henceforward the men ate food and the cattle grazed.
</details>

##  12
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

12. Now when he performs that sacrifice, he does so either for the reason that no one will then defile (the plants) either by magic or poison; or because the gods did so. And whatever share the gods assigned (to themselves), that share he thereby makes over to them. Moreover, he thereby renders wholesome and faultless both kinds of plants,--those on which men and beasts subsist; and these creatures subsist on those wholesome and faultless (plants) of his: this is why he performs that sacrifice.
</details>

##  13
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

13. The priests' fee for this (sacrifice) consists of the first-born calf (of the season); for that is, as it were, the first-fruits (of the cattle). If he has already performed the new and full-moon offerings, let him first perform those offerings [^egg_829], and thereupon the present (offering of first-fruits). If, on the other hand, he has not yet performed (the new and full-moon offerings), let them cook a cātushprāśya [^egg_830] pap on the southern fire, and let the priests eat it.

[^egg_829]: 373:1 I do not know how to account for the vā. Sāyaṇa seems to take the passage thus:--'If he be a Soma-sacrificer, or if he be performing the Darśapūrṇamāsa, [let him first perform that sacrifice, and] let him then perform the present one.' The Oxford MS. of the Kāṇva text has:--Etat tasya karma ya ījāno vā syād darśapūrṇamāsābhyāṁ vā yajetātha yo ’nījāno ’nvāhāryapacana evaudanam cātushprāśyam pacet tam brāhmaṇebhya upanidadhyāt.

[^egg_830]: 373:2 See II, 1, 4, 4 seq.
</details>

##  14
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

14. Verily, there are two kinds of gods: for the gods themselves, assuredly, are gods; and those priests who have studied, and teach Vedic lore, are the human gods. And in like manner as that is offered whereon the Vashat has been pronounced, so is that (offering of first-fruits consecrated by the feeding of the priests). Let him also, at this (sacrifice), give as much as is in his power, for no offering, they say, should be without a dakshiṇā. At the Agnihotra (performed at the time of the Āgrayaṇeshṭi) let him not offer (milk obtained from the eating of new corn) [^egg_831]; for were he to offer such at the Agnihotra, he would cause a conflict (between the deities of the two offerings). The Āgrayaṇa is one thing, and the Agnihotra is another: let him, therefore, not offer (new material) at the Agnihotra.

[^egg_831]: 374:1 Kāty. has the rules IV, 6, II: 'In the case of one, who only performs the Agnihotra (and no longer the Darśapūrṇamāsa), the evening and morning Agnihotra-oblation (at the time of the Āgrayaṇa) is performed with new (corn).' 12, 'Or with the milk of (a cow) which has been fed with such (new corn).' The Kāṇva text has: 'Now at the Agnihotra also some offer (milk obtained from new corn), but let him not do so; for he would raise a quarrel were he to offer (such milk).'
</details>