+++
title = "THE DÂKSHÂYANA SACRIFICE."

+++


Here also two days were, as a rule, required for the performance, both at full and new moon; but while, at the ordinary sacrifice,

At full moon some authorities add a special ishṭi to Indra Vimr̥dh ('the Averter of evil'). The new-moon performance concludes with libations of whey to the divine coursers (the horses of the gods); and, optionally, with an ishṭi to Āditya.

The performance of the Dākshāyaṇa sacrifice was held to be obligatory only for a period of fifteen years (see XI, 1, 2, 13), whereas the ordinary new and full-moon offerings had to be performed for double that period from the setting up of the sacred fires. Nay, even the daily performance of it with certain modifications, for a whole year, was supposed to acquit the householder of any further obligation in this respect; his sacrificial duties being henceforth limited to the performance of the Agnihotra, or morning and evening libations. The daily performance of the Dākshāyaṇa is so regulated that an afternoon and following forenoon are alternately assigned to the two days' ceremonies of the ordinary fortnightly Dākshāyaṇa sacrifice.

## 01
1. In the beginning Prajāpati, being desirous of offspring, sacrificed with this sacrifice: 'May I abound in offspring and cattle; may I obtain prosperity; may I become glorious; may I become an eater of food!' so he thought.

## 02
2. Now he was indeed Daksha: and because

he sacrificed in the beginning with this sacrifice, it is called Dākshāyaṇa-sacrifice. Some, however, call it the Vasishṭḥa-sacrifice; for he (Prajāpati) is indeed vasishṭḥa (the best) [^fn_833], and after him they call it. He sacrificed with that sacrifice; and what race, what prosperity of Prajāpati was then produced through his performing that sacrifice, that same race he procreates, that same prosperity he obtains, whosoever, knowing this, performs that sacrifice: let him therefore perform that sacrifice.

[^fn_833]: 376:1 The Kāṇva text has:--Sa u vā ekena nāmnā vasishṭḥas, 'and with one of his names he (Prajāpati) is indeed (called) Vasishṭḥa.'

## 03
3. Now that same sacrifice was afterwards performed by Pratīdarśa Śvaikna; and he indeed was an authority [^fn_834] to those who emulated him. An authority, therefore, he will become, whosoever, knowing this, performs that sacrifice: let him, therefore, perform that sacrifice.

[^fn_834]: 376:2 Vivacanam; vivācanam, Kāṇva recension.

## 04
4. Him Suplan Sārñjaya approached for the sake of sanctity; and accordingly he was taught that sacrifice and another [^fn_835]; and having learnt it he went back to the Sr̥ñjayas. Now they knew that he was coming to them after studying the sacrifice for their sake. They said, 'Verily, with the gods (saha devaiḥ) he has come to us who has come after studying the sacrifice:' thus he (was called) Sahadeva Sārñjaya; and even now the saying is, 'Lo, Suplan has taken another name!' He performed that sacrifice; and what race and prosperity of the Sr̥ñjayas was then produced through his performing that sacrifice, that same race he procreates, that same prosperity he obtains, whosoever,

[^fn_835]: 376:3 Viz. the Sautrāmaṇī-sacrifice, according to XII, 8, 2, 3.

knowing this, performs that sacrifice: let him, therefore, perform that sacrifice.

## 05
5. That same sacrifice was afterwards performed by Devabhāga Śrautarsha. He was Purohita both to the Kurus and the Sr̥ñjayas. Now a very high position (is held by him) who is the Purohita of one kingdom: how much higher, then, is the position (of one) who (is the Purohita) of two (kingdoms). A very high position accordingly he obtains, whosoever, knowing this, performs that sacrifice: let him, therefore, perform that sacrifice.

## 06
6. That same sacrifice was afterwards performed by Daksha Pārvati; and even to this day these (descendants of his) the Dākshāyaṇas are possessed of the royal dignity: royal dignity he, therefore, here obtains, whosoever, knowing this, performs that sacrifice: let him, therefore, perform that sacrifice.--Day by day there is one cake [^fn_836]: thereby Fortune (śrī) is (wedded) to him without a rival wife and undisturbed. He offers on two days of the full moon and on two of the new moon: for two means a pair, so that a productive pair is thereby obtained.

[^fn_836]: 377:1 Viz. on the first day of the full moon a cake to Agni-Soma; on that of new moon a cake to Indra-Agni; and on the second day of either ceremony the (ordinary) cake to Agni.

## 07
7. Now when [^fn_837], at full moon, he offers a (cake) to Agni and Soma on the first day,--these are two deities, and two means a pair: hence a productive pair is thereby obtained.

[^fn_837]: 377:2 Or, 'Now, as to the reason why' (yad) here and in the sequel.

## 08
8. And on the morrow there are Agni's cake and Indra's Sānnāyya  [^fn_838],--these are two deities, and two means a pair, so that a productive pair is thereby obtained.

[^fn_838]: 377:3 See I, 6, 4, 9 seq.

## 09
9. Again when, at new moon, he offers a (cake) to Indra and Agni on the first day,--these are two deities, and two means a pair, so that a productive pair is thereby obtained.

## 10
10. Then on the morrow there are Agni's cake and Mitra and Varuṇa's curds. Now Agni's cake (is offered), for the sole purpose that it may not forsake the sacrifice [^fn_839]. Then those two, Mitra and Varuṇa, are two deities, and two means a pair: hence a productive pair is thereby obtained; and thus is (produced) that form (of the sacrifice) whereby he becomes many, whereby he is reproduced.

[^fn_839]: 378:1 See I, 6, 2, 6, with note.

## 11
11. And when, at full moon, he offers the Agni-Soma (cake) on the first day, then this is for him that victim which they slaughter for Agni and Soma on the fast-day (of the Soma-sacrifice) [^fn_840].

[^fn_840]: 378:2 On the upavasatha (fast-day, or day of preparation) preceding the Soma-sacrifice a he-goat is sacrificed to Agni and Soma.

## 12
12. And on the morrow there are Agni's cake and Indra's Sānnāyya. Now Agni's cake is for him what the morning libation is (at the Soma-sacrifice), for the morning libation is indeed sacred to Agni; and the Sānnāyya is for him the mid-day libation, for the mid-day libation is indeed sacred to Indra.

## 13
13. And again when, at new moon, he offers the Indra-Agni (cake) on the first day, that is for him the same as the third (or evening) libation; for the third libation is sacred to the All-gods, and Indra and Agni truly are all the gods [^fn_841].

[^fn_841]: 378:3 Compare II, 4, 3, 5 seq.

## 14
14. And on the morrow there are Agni's cake and Mitra and Varuṇa's curds. Now Agni's cake is (offered) for the sole purpose that it should not

forsake the sacrifice and that dish of curds (payasyā) is to him the same as that barren cow, the anūbandhyā, which has to be slaughtered for Mitra and Varuṇa (at the Soma-sacrifice) [^fn_842]: thus. by performing the full and new-moon offering one gains as much as is gained by performing a Soma-sacrifice; and that (offering) is indeed a great sacrifice.

[^fn_842]: 379:1 In connection with the so-called udayanīyā ishṭi, or concluding offering, of the Soma-sacrifice, a barren cow, called anūbandhyā (literally, 'to be bound afterwards'), is offered to Mitra and Varuṇa. In default of such a cow, an ox, or even a dish of curds (payasyā) serves the same purpose. See Katy. Śr. X, 9, I2-15; Śat. Br. IV, 5, 2, 1 seq.

## 15
15. And again when, at full moon, he offers the Agni-Soma (cake) on the first day,--it was by that (offering) that Indra slew Vr̥tra [^fn_843]; it was thereby he gained that supreme authority which he now wields [^fn_844]: and so does he (the sacrificer) thereby slay his wicked spiteful enemy and gain the superiority. And as to his mixing (sweet and sour milk),--the Sānnāyya is (the oblation) of the new moon (amā-vāsyā) [^fn_845], and the new moon [^fn_846] means being far away: to him who had slain Vr̥tra this was forthwith (offered), and him they regaled with that draught. He therefore who, knowing this, prepares the Sānnāyya at full moon, forthwith

[^fn_843]: 379:2 See I, 6, 4, 1 2.

[^fn_844]: 379:3 Thus the frequently-occurring phrase 'vyajayata yāsyeyam vijitis tām' (literally, 'he conquered that conquest which is now theirs') has been translated throughout.

[^fn_845]: 379:4 On the derivation of amā-vāsyā ('dwelling at home, or together'), see I, 6, 4, 3 seq.

[^fn_846]: 379:5 Or, 'the dwelling at home,' or '(Indra's) dwelling together (with Agni) means (Indra, the Vr̥tra-slayer) being far away.'

drives away evil. Now that moon doubtless is king Soma, the food of the gods: they extract it on the first day, intending to consume it on the next day; consequently when that (moon) wanes, it is being consumed by them.

## 16
16. And when, at full moon, he offers the Agni-Soma (cake) on the first day, he thereby (as it were) extracts that (Soma); and, when extracted, he adds that juice to it, and makes it strong by means of that juice [^fn_847]. Whosoever, then, knowing this, prepares the Sānnāyya at full moon, renders his offering palatable to the gods, and his offering is palatable to the gods.

[^fn_847]: 380:1 See I, 6, 4, 6 seq.

## 17
17. And again as to why, at new moon, he offers the Indra-Agni (cake) on the first day. Indra and Agni doubtless are the deities of the new and full moon: it is to these, therefore, that he offers directly and expressly; and directly to the new and full moon is offering made by him who thus knows this.

## 18
18. And on the morrow there is Agni's cake and Mitra and Varuṇa's curds. Now Agni's cake is (offered) for the sole purpose that it may not forsake the sacrifice. Mitra and Varuṇa, on the other hand, are the two half-moons: the waxing one is Varuṇa, and the waning one is Mitra. During that night (of new moon) these two meet, and when they are thus together he pleases them with that (cake-offering): and, verily, all is pleased with him, all is obtained by him who thus knows this.

## 19
19. In that same night Mitra implants seed in Varuṇa, and when it (the moon) wanes, then it is

produced from that seed. Now as to why that oblation of curds (payasyā) to Mitra and Varuṇa is here exactly analogous (to the Sānnāyya offered at new moon) [^fn_848].

[^fn_848]: 381:1 Or, to the offering of sour and sweet milk at full moon; see next note. The Kāṇva text has: 'Now as to why the oblation of curds is here made exactly analogous (at the full and new-moon ceremonies).' Perhaps it may also refer to the exact correspondence of the offering of curds to Mitra and Varuṇa at new moon and at the Soma-sacrifice.

## 20
20. The new moon doubtless is entitled to the Sānnāyya: it is prepared both then and at full moon. Now were he also here (at the full-moon offering) to mix together (the sweet and sour milk), he would commit a repetition and cause a quarrel (between the respective gods) [^fn_849]. Having collected that (Soma or moon) from the waters and plants, he causes him to be born from out of the oblations; and on being born from the oblations, he is visible in the western (sky).

[^fn_849]: 381:2 At the new-moon offering of the Dākshāyaṇa, the sānnāyya or payasyā offered to Mitra and Varuṇa is prepared in the ordinary way (as at the new-moon ceremony), by fresh (boiled or un-boiled) milk being added to the sour milk of the preceding night's milking. At the full-moon offering, on the other hand, the sour and sweet milk remain separate, and constitute two different havis, or sacrificial dishes, dedicated to Indra. The terms san-nī ('to bring together') and sānnāyya are here likewise applied to the offering of the separate substances.

## 21
21. It is through union that he produces him: the curds (payasyā, fem.) are female, and the whey is seed. Now what is produced by union is (produced) properly: hence he thereby produces him by a productive union; and therefore there is an offering of curds.

## 22
22. He then offers the whey [^fn_850] to the (divine) Coursers. Now the Coursers are the seasons, and the whey is seed: and thus the seed is cast properly, and the seasons bring forth the seed so cast in the form of these creatures. This is why he offers the whey to the Coursers.

[^fn_850]: 382:1 Before the oblations of curds are made, the whey is poured off into a vessel (then optionally sprinkled with butter), and placed on the utkara, or heap of rubbish. After the stalk of grass has been thrown into the fire (see I, 8, 3, 19), or after the dismissal of the spoons (I, 8, 3, 27), the Adhvaryu takes the whey and sprinkles the barhis (the grass covering on the altar) with it. He then pours the remaining whey into the juhū spoon and calls on the Hotr̥ to recite the invitatory prayer to the Coursers. Thereupon he betakes himself with the spoon to the north of the fire, calls on the Hotr̥ for the offering-formula, and at the two concluding Vashaṭs pours some of the whey into the east part of the fire. He then sits down and sprinkles the whey on the fire according to the several quarters, beginning in the east, and moving around from left to right (pradakshiṇam), with the respective texts, Vāj. S. VI, 19 b-e; after which he makes two more libations in the centre and east part of the fire, with VI, 19 f and g.

## 23
23. He offers, as it were, behind the sacrifice: for it is from behind that the male approaches and impregnates the female. He first offers in the east. With 'O Agni, accept . . . !' he repeats the Vashat,--this is in lieu of the Svishṭakr̥t; and (the latter) [^fn_851] he offers in the east.

[^fn_851]: 382:2 The Kāṇva text has tadu instead of sa vai. On the oblation to Agni as 'the maker of good offering,' see I, 7, 3, 1 seq.

## 24
24. He then sprinkles (the whey) in the several quarters, with the texts (Vāg'. S. VI, 19 b-g), 'The quarters!--The fore-quarters (pra-diś)!--The by-quarters (ā-diś)!--The intermediate quarters (vi-diś)! The upper quarters (ud-diś)!--To the quarters,--Svāhā [^fn_852]!' Five are the quarters, and five the

[^fn_852]: 382:3 Svāhā is uttered after each formula,--'The quarters, Svāhā!' &c.

seasons: he thus effects a union between the quarters and the seasons [^fn_853].

[^fn_853]: 383:1 R̥tūn evaitad digbhir mithunān karoti, Kāṇva recension.

## 25
25. Five partake of that (whey remaining in the spoon),--viz. the Hotr̥, the Adhvaryu, the Brahman, the Āgnīdhra, and the Sacrificer; for five are the seasons, so that the characteristic nature of the seasons is thereby obtained; and the seed that is cast is firmly implanted in the seasons. The sacrificer partakes of it first, thinking, 'May I first obtain seed!' But also last (he partakes of it) [^fn_854], thinking, 'May seed remain in me last of all!' By saying, 'Invited,--invite thou [^fn_855]!' they make it (the whey to resemble) the Soma.

[^fn_854]: 383:2 The author does not express himself quite clearly. The sacrificer is to partake of the whey before the priests and also (or, as an alternative) after them. According to Kāty. IV, 4, 26-27, the sacrificer is to eat either last of all, or first and last. The Kāṇva text has: Prathamo yajamāno bhakshayati prathamo retaḥ parigr̥hṇāmīty athottamo mayy uttamaṁ retaḥ pratitishṭḥād iti,--accordingly he is to eat first and last.

[^fn_855]: 383:3 Each of them, in his respective order, takes the spoon, calls on the others in the same order with 'O sacrificer (Hotr̥, Adhvaryu, &c.) invite!' Their permission having been given by 'Invited (thou art)!' he then takes some of the whey, with one of the texts: 'I eat thee, the courser (or whey, vāginam) of the seasons, the coursers!' 'I, the courser (or, mighty one) eat, invited, of the invited, to the whey.' 'May I be a racer in the race!' Kāty. IV, 4, 13-15.

