+++
title = "01"

+++
Although the vs. seems superficially straightforward, it presents a number of small difficulties. We might start with the meter of pāda c: in order to reach 11 syllables, something has to be distracted. HvN suggest nā́satiyā, but this produces a bad cadence: - ⏑ ⏑ ×. Oldenberg (ZDMG 55.300 and Noten) instead suggests distracting the initial preverb ā́, which produces an even worse cadence (-ṇā nā́satyā

- - - ×). And the third possibility, náasatyā, produces a third type of bad cadence
(⏑⏑ - ×). Only if we could read the first vowel of nā́satyā as distracted - ⏑ can we fix the cadence, but there is no real license for this.

The first morphological problem is bā́dhaḥ in pāda b. Gr takes it as the acc. pl.

of a root noun ‘Treiber, Förderer’, but it is hard to fit this into the passage semantically. Schindler (Rt. nouns) finds the passage unclear and does not commit to a root noun interpr., much less a case form. Scar (346-47) takes it as a root noun, but in the abl. sg. (“aus dem Drängen heraus”), in which he calls a “hoffnungslos obskur” passage -- a characterization that, given the super-abundance of hopelessly obscure parts of the RV, seems rather overdramatic for this minor conundrum. With Old (ZDMG 55.300), Ge, and Re -- and pace Scar (346-47) -- I take bā́dhaḥ as an adverbially used neut. s-stem, like (and perhaps truncated from) sabā́dhaḥ, also an adverbially nom.-acc. s-stem, which, however, Scar also thinks is an old abl. sg. of the root noun. However, even if Scar should be right, the interpr. of bā́dhaḥ as abl. sg.

of a root noun could be adapted to the adverbial interpr. with one further step (as he recognizes): ‘out of urgency’ à ‘urgently’.

The next question is the application of the simile marútāṃ ná práyukti and the morphological identity of the last word. To start with the latter, with most interpr. I take it as an instr. *-tī shortened in pause (or, with a more modern descrip., with loss of its final laryngeal in pause [and here before a vowel beginning the next hemistich]). But what does the hitching up of the Maruts have to do with Agni’s sacrificial performance? My assumption is that the simile is limited to qualifying the adverbial bā́dhaḥ ‘pressingly, urgently’. Since everything the Maruts do is precipitous, no doubt the yoking up of their horses is performed with the same urgency, to get on the road as soon as possible. Both Ge and Re push prá √yuj further than I think it should go -- to ‘impulsion, instigation’ (“wie auf Betreiben der Marut” and “à l’instigation des Marut” respectively), a sense that seems distant from the ‘yoke, hitch up’ sense of √yuj. I also don’t see that the Maruts would be the ones to set Agni’s sacrificing in motion; they are not even associated with the dawn sacrifice and don’t have much to do with Agni. My “at the hitching up” reads as if it were a locative. Though that tr. was made for English parsing reasons, I might slightly alter it to “with the hitching up.” In pāda d both Ge and Re (flg. Gr’s interpr.) take hotrā́ya as simply referring to the sacrifice (e.g., “zu unserem Opfer”), but hotrá- is elsewhere not the sacrifice, but the office of Hotar or the performance of the Hotar’s duties. My tr. (“turn [various gods] to the Hotar-work”) makes it seem that those gods will perform that office, but, since Agni is the Hotar par excellence (see, e.g., pāda a, also 2a, 6a), it must rather be that Agni is urged to cause the gods to turn towards his own performance of his duties. It might be clearer if the tr. read “toward my Hotar-work.”

