+++
title = "001"

+++
1 (442)
Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
13 verses: triṣṭubh
A rather stately hymn, appropriate for the first in the Agni sequence in Maṇḍala VI.  It concerns only the ritual fire, with almost no mention of its physical substance, and unlike the typical dawn kindling sequence, the hymn depicts the arrival and  installation of Agni as Hotar and, especially, the ritual fire as joint possession  and responsibility of the whole Ārya community, as Proferes (2007:  33)  points  out. As the first hymn in the maṇḍala, it thus establishes an image of a settled and  well-ordered society unified in its devotion to the gods to which the rest of the  maṇḍala will be dedicated.
The arrival and installation occupy verses 1–3; verses 4–8 show Agni’s reach  through the community, from the individual house, to the clan and settlements, and  indeed to all who claim Manu (the first sacrificer) as ancestor. Verses 9–10 detail  the homage and service Agni deserves, and the remaining verses (11–13) the favors  we ask in return.
## 1
You, o Agni, as first minder of this insightful thought here, became the  Hotar, o wondrous one.
You, o bull, made (the thought) into power difficult to surpass, to
overpower all (other) power.
## 2
Then you sat down as Hotar, superior sacrificer, prospering in the  footprint of refreshment, to be reverently invoked.
You are the first that men have followed when they seek the gods,
distinguishing themselves greatly for wealth.
## 3
The wakeful ones have followed (you) when you come with many goods  as if with a troop, (and they follow) the wealth nearby you—
gleaming Agni, lovely to see, lofty, who receives the omentum (of the  sacrificial beast as offering), shining through all the days.
## 4
Pursuing the track of the god with homage, seeking fame, they will attain  fame indestructible;
even the names they have assumed are worthy of worship. They take  pleasure in your auspicious manifestation.
## 5
You do the settlements strengthen on earth; you (do) both of the “riches  of the peoples” [=patrons and singers?] (strengthen).
You, o surpassing one—become a rescuer worthy of note, a father, a  mother forever for the sons of Manu.
## 6
Dear Agni is to be served among the clans. As Hotar he has sat down,  the gladdening superior sacrificer.
You, shining in our house, do we reverently approach, on bended knee,  with homage.
## 7
You do we of good insight implore when you are new, Agni, seeking your  benevolence, seeking the gods—
you led the clans, while shining through the lofty luminous realm of  heaven, o Agni.
## 8
(You do we implore), the sage poet, the clanlord of each and every clan,  the lavishly overflowing bull of the settled domains,
impelling the forward progress (of the sacrifice), prospering, pure—Agni  who deserves the sacrifice, who rules over riches.774 VI.2
## 9
O Agni, that mortal has sacrificed and ritually labored who after  kindling you has achieved your oblation-giving,
who knows his way around the offering with its acts of homage. Just he  will acquire all things of value, when aided by you.
## 10
To you right here, the great one, great honor would we do, with acts of  homage, o Agni, with kindling wood, and with oblations,
with the altar, o son of strength, with hymns, with solemn words. May  we take our place in your auspicious benevolence.
## 11
You who stretch through the two world-halves with your light and who  through (words of) fame deserve to be famed as surpassing,
with lofty substantial prizes for us, with rich ones, Agni, radiate out  more widely.
## 12
O good one, manfully establish for us forever and for our progeny and  posterity abundance of livestock.
Let there be for us many lofty refreshments that keep evil at a distance  and auspicious things bringing good fame.
## 13
Many goods many-fold in their goodness might I attain of you through  seeking you, o King Agni.
For many are the goods in you, o Agni of many favors, for the one who  does (you) honor, since you are king.