+++
title = "002"

+++
2 (443) Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
11 verses: anuṣṭubh, except śakvarī 11
In its first half (vss. 1–5) this hymn echoes the themes of VI.1: Agni as the joint con cern of all the separate units of Ārya society (and indeed of the gods as well) and  the success that attends the man who fulfills his ritual responsibilities to Agni. The  hymn ends the same way (vss. 10–11), with special mention of Agni’s position in the  individual house as well as his role as clanlord. The similarity between beginning  and ending is marked by a signal of ring composition: the god Mitra compared to  Agni in both the first and last verses. Agni is often compared with or identified with  Mitra (“Ally, Alliance”) because of his position on earth as guest and helper of  men, though himself a god, and because, as god, he mediates the sacrificial alliance  between gods and men.
By contrast, the verses in between (6–9) offer a sequence of increasingly dense  and complex images of fire, starting with a simple one of whirling smoke and sun like brightness (vs. 6), but the comparisons in verses 7cd–8 rely on multiple puns  and terse and elliptical phraseology. This middle section sets the stage for the rest  of the Agni cycle with its focus on the physical aspects of fire. 1. You, o Agni, like Mitra are indeed master of the glory belonging to the  settlements.
You prosper fame like prosperity, o good one without boundaries.
## 2
It is you then that the boundaried domains reverently invoke, with  sacrifices and with hymns;
to you drives the prizewinning (horse), avoiding the wolf, crossing (the  mid)space, the one common to all the boundaried domains.
## 3
In concert the men of heaven kindle you as beacon of the sacrifice, when the human race here, seeking favor, has called upon (you) in the  ceremony.
## 4
The mortal who will bring (the sacrifice) to fulfillment with his insight  and will perform ritual labor for you of good gifts,
with the help of lofty heaven he crosses hatreds like narrow straits.
## 5
The mortal who after kindling (you) will achieve the offering to you and  the whetting of you,
he prospers his dwelling place, (so that it has many) branches and
hundred(-year) lifespans, o Agni.
## 6
Your smoke, when it is in heaven, is turbulent in motion, stretched out  (there) gleaming,
for you shine with your body, o pure one, like the sun with its brilliance. 7. For now you are to be reverently invoked among the clans, as our  dear guest,
to be protected like a son who brings delight to the home, (but also) to  be enflamed like a battle-lusty (warrior) in a stronghold.
## 8
For according to your purpose you are anointed in the wood(en cup)  (like soma) [/in your home =hearth] [/driven into the wood(en cup)]  like a prize-seeker who gets results.
(You are) encompassing like a household (that encompasses all its
members) through your independent power; (you are) made to go in  circles like a young steed (being trained).
## 9
You (eat) just these unstirrable things, Agni, like livestock in a pasture. (This is your) principle: that your dexterous (flames?) hew the woods, o  unaging one.
## 10
Because you pursue (your ritual duties) as Hotar in the house for the  clans who perform the ceremonies, o Agni,
make them unified, o clanlord; enjoy (our) oblation, o Aṅgiras.
## 11
O god Agni with the might of Mitra, to us you call the gods, call the  grace of the two world-halves.
Pursue well-being, good dwelling, pursue the men of heaven. May we  cross over hatreds, over narrow straits difficult to traverse.
May we cross over; with your help may we cross over.
