+++
title = "003"

+++
3 (444)
Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
8 verses: triṣṭubh
The first two verses of this hymn promise success to the mortal who behaves prop erly and performs his sacrificial duties well. With these decorous sentiments out of  the way, the poet can indulge himself for the rest of the hymn (vss. 3–8) in a series  of compressed and vivid images of fire as a natural substance, involving both sight  (esp. vss. 3–5, 8) and sound (esp. vss. 6–7). The almost feverish succession of image  upon image and the contorted phraseology are reminiscent of the depictions of  natural fire in VI.2.6–9, but allowed even freer rein and more space. The hymn ends  abruptly, without the usual prayers for benefits or even a summary verse calling  attention to the praise just offered to Agni. It is a wild, exhilarating, and often baf
fling ride, especially in the original Sanskrit.
## 01
O Agni, he who protects the truth and is born in truth will dwell in  peace; he who seeks you as god will reach broad light,
that mortal whom you, o god, as Varuṇa in concert with Mitra, protect  from narrow straits along with abandonment.
## 02
He has sacrificed with sacrifices, he has labored with ritual labors; for  Agni who brings wishes to success he has performed pious work—
so the displeasure of eminent ones will never reach that mortal, nor will  narrow straits, nor delusion.
## 03
(You) whose appearance is spotless like that of the sun: when your  fearsome insight comes here as you blaze,
rich spoils (become yours), since (you are) armed. (But) on his own this  one here [=you, Agni], born in the wood(s), is sometimes a cozy nest. 4. Sharp is his course, great his form. He will snap with his mouth like a  horse being bridled.
Lolling his tongue out, like an axe (its blade), he makes the wood “run”  like runny stuff [=liquefies it] as he burns.
## 05
He, just like an archer, has aimed (his arrow), about to shoot. He has  whetted its point like a blade of copper—
he, the spoked wheel (of the sacrifice), who is like a bird whose swooping  is brilliant by night, who sits in the woods [/on wood], whose plumage  is (fit for) rapid flight.
## 06
Like a hoarse-voiced (singer), at the dawning of the ruddy (dawn), he  keeps muttering [=crackles] with his flame, he of Mitra’s might,
the ruddy one who (mutters) to them by night, who (mutters) by day to  men—the immortal ruddy one who (mutters) by day to men.
## 07
He whose (roar), like that of heaven, keeps roaring as he does honor,  (that) bull keeps roaring in the tree, in the plants— he who, like a traveler in the (sun’s) heat, going with a swoop, with a  flight, has *stretched with his goods to the two world-halves, who
(thus) have (in him) a good husband.
## 08
Or who (flashes) at his feedings (of fuel) and at the associated chants  [/with his associated rays], (that one) keeps flashing like lightning with  his own tempests.
Or who fashioned the troop of Maruts like a R̥bhu [/craftsman], he,  turbulent and wild, has flashed.