+++
title = "004"

+++
4 (445)
Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
8 verses: triṣṭubh
A more conventionally structured hymn than the last two with less knotty phrase ology. It begins (vs. 1) by asking Agni to sacrifice for us today as always, in his  accustomed role (vs. 2). It ends (vss. 7–8) with a statement of our service to Agni  and prayers for benefits. The verses in between (3–6) describe fire in its naturalistic  aspect, as in the two previous hymns but generally in more straightforward terms  (vs. 5 is an exception and has been variously interpreted).
## 01
Just as you, o Hotar, will (always) sacrifice with sacrifices at Manu’s  attendance on the gods, o son of strength,
even so for us today sacrifice in the same way to the same gods—you  willing, to them willing, o Agni.
## 02
Far radiant like a vision at dawn, Agni worthy to be acquired takes  delight in our extolling—
he who through his whole life has been the immortal among the mortals,  their guest who awakes at dawn, the Jātavedas.
## 03
He, whose formless mass [=smoke] they [=mortals] marvel at as the  heavens do, he (then) clothes himself in lights, like the brilliant sun.
He who, unaging and pure, dispels (hatreds), he has pierced the
primordial (establishments) even of the Devourer.
## 04
You, o son (of strength), are eloquent when you sit for your meal. Agni  right from birth has made his own course into his food.
You, o winner of nourishment, establish nourishment for us. Like a king,  you have conquered; you dwell peacefully in a place without wolves.
## 05
He who eats the wild food sharply, like the wind he goes as ruler across  the nights.
May we, who (serve) you, outstrip the hostilities of (ill-)intentions, as a  steed does the (other) “flying” (steeds), as he curves around the curves  (of a racecourse).

## 06
Like the sun with its radiant rays, o Agni, you stretch through the two  world-halves with your light.
The bright one, anointed, leads (us) around the dark shades with
his flame, like the descendant of Uśij [=fire-priest/poet Kakīṣvant
Dairghatamasa] soaring in flight [=in exhilaration of soma?].
## 07
Since we have chosen you, most gladdening with (your) ray-flames, with  our (chant-)flames, listen hard to us, Agni.
You, Āyu, like Indra by virtue of your power or your divinity, do the  most manly ones fill with benefit.
## 08
Now for us, Agni, pursue well-being and riches along wolfless paths.  Carry us across narrow straits.
Grant these things to the patrons and favor to the singer. – Having good  heroes might we rejoice for a hundred winters.