+++
title = "005"

+++
5 (446) Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
An unremarkable hymn. It begins “I call for you (all)”—the poet announcing that  he is performing his ritual task for his priestly colleagues. He continues with praise  of Agni and description of his roles, including that of giver of goods (vss. 1–3). The  next two verses contrast the enemy of the mortals present and the punishment he  should receive from Agni (vs. 4) with the pious server and the rewards he deserves  (vs. 5). Two more verses (6–7) urge Agni to perform these tasks.
## 1
I call for you upon the son of strength, the youth of undeceptive speech,  the youngest one, with our thoughts—
the provident one of many choices who sends all choice treasures, the  one without deceit.
## 2
To you, o Hotar of many faces, the sacrificial ones have set goods in  motion at evening and at dawn,
you, the pure one, in whom (all) auspicious things are encompassed, as  the earth (encompasses) all creatures.
## 3
You sat down among these clans here from olden days; by your will you  became charioteer of valuables.
Therefore you send goods in due order to him who does (you) honor, o  observant Jātavedas.
## 4
Whoever at a distance will assail us, whoever close by will be rapacious, o  Agni with Mitra’s might,
with your own unaging bulls [=flames], most scorching one, scorch him  with your scorching heat, o you of scorching heat. 5. Whoever with sacrifice and with kindling wood, who with solemn  speeches and with chants will ritually serve you, o son of strength,
he, provident among mortals, o immortal one, shines out with wealth,  with brilliance, with fame.
## 6
Do this straightaway, o Agni, when prompted: thrust away rivals with  strength, strong one.
When you are praised through the days, anointed with words, then take  pleasure in the singer. Listen to his thought.
## 7
May we attain this desire, Agni, through your help. May we attain  wealth, o wealthy one, which affords good heroes.
May we attain the prize when we seek the prize. May we attain your  unaging brilliance, o unaging one.