+++
title = "006"

+++
6 (447)
Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
Most of this hymn consists of a vivid depiction of destructive fire raging across  the earth, though the first half-verse establishes a ritual context and the last verse  (7) begs Agni for wealth. The hymn is full of phonetic and etymological figures,  particularly the last, intensely alliterative verse.
## 01
Forth to the son of strength with newer (speech), with a sacrifice, seeking  a way, seeking help,
he [=the mortal] goes in pursuit—to the heavenly Hotar, wood-hewing,  gleaming but with a black course.
## 02
He is (like) the brightening thunder abiding in the luminous realm, the  youngest one with his unaging, ever-roaring (flames),
the pure one, the latest fire of many, who travels along many broad
expanses as he devours.
## 03
Sped by the wind, your flaming beams, o flaming Agni, spread out wide  asunder.
Powerfully destructive, (like) the heavenly Navagvas, they conquer the  woods, breaking them boldly—
## 04
Your flaming flames, o possessor of flame, which shear the earth— (flames) like unharnessed horses.
Then your flickering radiates forth widely, marshaling itself on the back  of the dappled one [=earth].
## 05
Then the tongue of the bull keeps flying forth, like a cattle-raider’s  missile let loose.
Like the onslaught of a champion is the ardor of Agni. The fearsome  one, difficult to obstruct, fragments the woods.

## 06
With the radiance of the great goad [=sun] you stretch across the earthly  expanses boldly.
Thrust away fears with your strengths; rapaciously grind down the
rapacious rivals.
## 07
O bright one with bright dominion—(that which is) bright, brightest,  showing brightly to us, conferring vigor:
wealth, glittering, lofty, conferring many heroes—o glittering one, with  your glittering (flames) bind (that) to the singer.