+++
title = "007"

+++
7 (448)
Agni Vaiśvānara
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
7 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 6–7
The hymn is dedicated to Agni as Vaiśvānara (“belonging to all men”), but the  focus is primarily on his relationship with the gods (see, e.g., vss. 1–2, 4), on his  cosmic reach and cosmogonic powers (see, e.g., vss. 1, 5–7), in which aspect he  is identified with the sun (see esp. vs. 5), and, especially, on his birth: the root jan
“beget/be born” is found in each of the first five verses. It is only verse 3 that depicts  Agni’s relationship with mortals.
## 01
The head of heaven, the spoked wheel of the earth, Agni Vaiśvānara,  born in truth,
sage poet, sovereign king, guest of the peoples—as a drinking cup to  their mouth did the gods beget (him).
## 02
Navel of sacrifices, seat of riches, the great watering trough—toward  (him) did they cry out together.
Vaiśvānara, charioteer of the ceremonies, beacon of the sacrifice—(him)  the gods begot.
## 03
From you is born the inspired poet who wins the prize, o Agni; from you  the heroes vanquishing hostility.
O Vaiśvānara, establish in us goods to be craved, o king.
## 04
Toward you, o immortal one, while you are being born, do all the gods  cry out together as if to their young.
According to your intentions they went to immortality, o Vaiśvānara,  when you came to light in your two parents [=kindling sticks].
## 05
Vaiśvānara Agni, these great commandments of yours no one dares  venture against,
since, while (just) being born in the lap of your parents, you found the  beacon of the days in the (ritual) patterns.
## 06
By the eye of Vaiśvānara have the backs of heaven been measured out,  by the beacon of the immortal one.
On his head alone are all the creatures; like twigs have his seven
outgrowths [?] grown. 7. He, the very resolute one, who measured out the dusky spaces,
(measured) out the luminous realms of heaven—the sage poet
Vaiśvānara—
who extends himself around all creatures, he is the undeceivable
herdsman, the protector of the immortal.