+++
title = "008"

+++
8 (449) Agni Vaiśvānara
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
7 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 7
Another Vaiśvānara hymn, and the cosmic aspects of Agni (and his double, the  Sun), extensively treated in VI.7, are touched upon (vss. 2–3). Verse 1 strongly  establishes a sacrificial context, however, which returns in verse 4, relating the  primal establishment of the ritual fire. The remaining verses (5–7) beg him for  benefits.
The hymn is also structured by a phonetic figure, the constant repetition of ini tial v- (see, e.g., 2c, 3a, 3c, all beginning with the preverb ví), indexing the epithet  vaiśvānara, a form of which occurs in every verse but 5.
## 1
Of the fortifying bull, flame-red, I now proclaim the might, proclaim the  rites of Jātavedas.
For Vaiśvānara a newer thought purifies itself, gleaming like soma,
(a thought) dear to Agni.
## 2
(Even?) while being born in the highest distant heaven, Agni, as protector  of commandments [=Varuṇa], guarded the commandments.
He, the very effective one, measured out the midspace; Vaiśvānara
touched the vault with his greatness.
## 3
He propped apart the two world-halves, as unerring envoy [/Mitra]. He  made the darkness pregnant with light.
He rolled out the two Holy Places [=world-halves] like skins. Vaiśvānara  assumed all bullish power.
## 4
In the lap of the waters the buffaloes grasped (him). The clans reverently  approached the king worthy of verses.
The messenger of Vivasvant brought Agni hither—Mātariśvan (brought)  Vaiśvānara from afar.
## 5
In every generation, o Agni, establish for the singers glorious wealth for  ritual distribution and a newer (thought).
As if with a metal wheel-rim, o unaging king, hew down like a tree the  one who curses, with your sharpness.
## 6
Among our benefactors, o Agni, uphold dominion, unbowed and  unaging, and an abundance of heroes.
May we conquer spoils in hundreds and thousands, o Vaiśvānara Agni,  with your help.

## 7
With your undeceivable herdsmen, o object of our quest, protect our  patrons, o triply seated one.
And guard the troop of those who have given to us, o Agni Vaiśvānara,  and extend (their/our lifetime), when you are praised.