+++
title = "009"

+++
9 (450) Agni Vaiśvānara
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
A powerfully enigmatic hymn, in which the poet reflects on the craft of poetry,  worries about his ability to practice it, and, on having received the revelation of  the mysteries from the ritual fire, takes heart and assumes his poetic vocation.  In this progression the hymn is very reminiscent of IV.5, also a hymn to Agni  in his Vaiśvānara aspect and one in which a poet receives his poetic inspiration  from Agni.
The first and last (7) verses establish a ritual context: the fire is being kindled  in the darkness just before daybreak; its light, which dispels the physical darkness,  will be configured as the metaphorical light of inspiration in the rest of the hymn.  Verses 2–3 are responsive verses, with verse 2 couched in the 1st-person singular  voice of the poet. He confesses his lack of knowledge of poetic craft, metaphori
cally expressed as weaving. The burden is all the greater in that he feels pressure to  surpass his father, whose poetic heir he is. On the basis of the second pāda of this  verse, many scholars have interpreted the whole hymn as a depiction of a brah modya, a poetic contest among rival poets, but we see no evidence of a formal  contest here, simply a poet struggling to find his place as a poet within the bardic  tradition.
The response to this verse in verse 3 provides the answer to the poet’s perplex ity: he will learn his craft if he rightly perceives the ritual fire (who is not mentioned  by name). This verse not only provides the answer, but serves as an example of the  poet’s growing skill, for the last pāda of the verse can be read with double applica tion, both to the poet and to Agni. On the one hand, the repetition of “higher” and  “below” from 2cd suggests that the same father-son pair is referred to as there, and  that the poet is asserting that he will indeed obtain the upper hand over his father  from the revelation of Agni. On the other, the pāda can be read as a riddling defini tion of the god Agni himself, who “moves about below” on the human plane, but  “sees above the other” (perhaps the sun, as another form of fire), because he goes  all the way to heaven bearing men’s oblations to the gods. Thus, what we translate  as “‘(He [=the poet] is) the herdsmen of the immortal’—(the son who, though) he  moves about below, sees above the other [=his father]” can also be read as “(He  [=Agni] is) the herdsmen of the immortal, who, though he moves about below, sees  above the other [=sun?].” That Agni is the object to be rightly perceived, referred to but not named in verse  3, which will confer poetic prowess, is made very clear in verse 4, though again the  name Agni does not appear—only unmistakable descriptions of fire. The imme diacy of the revelation is underlined by the repeated near-deictic pronoun “here  (is)” (a: ayám, b: idám, c: ayám). This anonymous but unambiguous description  of Agni is continued in verse 5, where he is the entire focus also of the gods. Also  important in verse 5 is the characterization of Agni as “swiftest mind,” for it is the  mental energy of Agni that the poet is absorbing.
In verse 6 the 1st-person poet returns, and with clear excitement testifies to the  new flights of his poetic perception and imagination, matching the swift-flying  mind of Agni in verse 5. The “light deposited in my heart” is clearly the light of  Agni’s inspiration. He ends the verse with questions about what he will now say and  think—no longer out of a feeling of powerlessness (as in vs. 2), but a sense of future  possibilities. (This difference is also conveyed by a change in verbal tense/mood: in  verse 2 he wonders about his speech in the subjunctive mood; here he uses the future  tense, conveying certainty.)
The hymn has a neatly structured omphalos shape. Verses 1 and 7 are the ritual  frame; verses 2 and 6 contain the contrasting 1st-person self-descriptions of the  poet; verses 3 and 5 provide the inner frame, identifying Agni as the object of per ception of both gods and men; while verse 4 is the omphalos, with its insistent,  deictic revelation of Agni immediately before the poet’s (and our) eyes.
## 1
The black day and the silvery day roll out through the two dusky realms  according to their knowing ways.
Agni Vaiśvānara, (even) while being born, like a king suppressed the  dark shades with his light.
## 2
I do not know the thread, nor know how to weave, nor (know) what the  wanderers [=fingers? threads? shuttles?] weave at their meeting.
Whose son will be able to speak what is to be said here, as someone  higher than his father, (who is) below?
## 3
Just he (knows) the thread; he knows how to weave; he will be able to  speak what is to be said in proper order—
(the one) who will rightly perceive him [=Agni]: “(He [=the poet] is) the  herdsmen of the immortal”—(the son who, though) he moves about  below, sees above the other [=his father].
## 4
Here is the foremost Hotar: look at him. Here is the light, immortal  among mortals.
Here was he born, set steadfast down here, immortal, becoming strong  through his own body.
## 5
The steadfast light, set down to be seen—the mind swiftest among (all)  those that fly—
all the gods, of one mind and one perception, come separately straight to  (him) as their single resolve.784 VI.10
## 6
My two ears fly widely, widely my sight, widely this light that was  deposited in my heart.
Widely goes my mind, my intentions at a distance. What shall I say, and  what now shall I think?
## 7
All the gods, in fear, offered homage to you, Agni, while you were (still)  standing in the darkness.
Let Vaiśvānara give help to aid us; let the immortal one give help to  aid us.