+++
title = "010"

+++
10 (451)
Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
7 verses: triṣṭubh, except dvipadā virāj 7
The sentiments in this hymn are familiar ones: Agni as ritual fire being kindled  at the sacrifice, blazing brightly, receiving praise, and bestowing blessings on the  poet and his patrons. It is characterized, however, by a subtle strain of deliber ately misleading expectations (in part necessarily obscured by translation). On  several occasions the audience would automatically assign a referent on the basis  of formulaics and context only to discover later in the verse that the assumed  reference is wrong. In translation this is most easily seen in verse 3, where the first  phrase appears to describe Agni, but it turns out to be instead the poet serving  Agni. The beginning of verse 2 belongs to a formula found in a number of places  in the R̥gveda that imposes an identification of Agni on the opening demonstra
tive “that.” It is only in the second half of the verse that it becomes clear that  the demonstrative instead modifies “praise.” The extreme ellipsis of verse 2 con tributes to this game of disappointed expectations: two objects in that verse lack  overt verbs to govern them.
## 01
Set in front your gladdening, heavenly Agni, (who receives) well-twisted  (hymns), while the sacrifice, the ceremony is proceeding.
(Set him) in front with solemn words, for he is far-radiant for us. As  Jātavedas (he) will perform good ceremonies.
## 02
That—o heaven-bright Hotar of Manu, o Agni of many faces, on being  kindled along with the (other) fires—
(that) praise (take to yourself) which (I chant) to him forcefully like
Mamatā [/in my me-ness]. My thoughts purify themselves like
gleaming ghee.
## 03
That one is swollen with praise among mortals who as inspired poet  performs ritual service for Agni with solemn words.
With brilliant help the one of brilliant flame sets him [=the poet] to the  winning of a stable full of cows.
## 04
He who, (even) while being born, has filled the two wide (world-halves)  with his light, visible from afar—(though) his course is black— so even across the dense darkness of the night the pure one is visible with  his flame.
## 05
Now, Agni, with your help that brings many prizes, establish brilliant  wealth for us and for our benefactors—
those who, by their generosity and fame, surpass the others, and by good  heroes en masse dominate the peoples.
## 06
Eagerly take delight in this sacrifice here, Agni, which the seated one with  his oblation offers to you.
Among the Bharadvājas you have taken to yourself the well-twisted  (hymn); aid in the winning of the prize to be secured.
## 07
Dispel hatreds; increase refreshment. – Having good heroes might we  rejoice for a hundred winters.