+++
title = "011"

+++
11 (452)
Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verse: triṣṭubh
The insistent emphasis throughout this hymn is on Agni as Hotar priest and sacri ficer, who sacrifices both for and to himself.
## 01
Perform sacrifice yourself as superior sacrificer, o Hotar Agni, when  prompted, pressingly as if at the hitching up of the Maruts.
Here to us you should turn Mitra and Varuṇa, the Nāsatyas, Heaven and  Earth to the Hotar-work.
## 02
You are our most gladdening Hotar, without deceit, god among men  through (all) the rites.
As the conveyor (of oblations) with your mouth, o Agni, with your pure  tongue perform sacrifice yourself to your own self.
## 03
For even the wealthy Holy Place longs for (this) in regard to you, (to put  you) forward to sacrifice to the gods, to their races, for the singer,
when the most inspired of the Aṅgirases, the inspired poet rhythmically  speaks his honey, hoarse-voiced in his quest.
## 04
He has flashed, the very clever, wide-radiant one. O Agni, perform  sacrifice yourself to the two world-halves of broad extent—
(you, Agni,) whom, like Āyu, they anoint with reverence—the five
peoples having bestowed oblations (anoint) him who receives the
pleasurable offerings.
## 05
When I twist the ritual grass with reverence beside the fire, the ladle  filled with ghee, along with a well-twisted hymn, has (already) been
held forth;
the sitting place (of Agni) has been fastened to the seat of the earth. The  sacrifice has been fixed (on him), like (a man’s) eye on the sun.

## 06
Be favorable to us, o Hotar of many faces, along with the gods, on being  kindled along with (the other) fires, o Agni.
O son of strength, clothing ourselves in riches as if in a girthband, may  we slip beyond difficult straits.