+++
title = "012"

+++
12 (453)
Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verses: triṣṭubh
As often, the attempt to capture in words the actions of natural fire calls out the  best in the poet. The hymn has a skeleton of typical ritual description, especially  at the beginning, but this seems a simple and inert structure into which to insert a  series of increasingly contorted and fanciful images of fire.
## 01
In the middle of the dwelling, as Hotar, ruler of the ritual grass, (ruler)  of the goad, Agni is to sacrifice to the two world-halves.
Here is the truthful son of strength spread from afar like the sun, with  his flame.
## 02
You in whom heaven in its entirety [=all the gods] will now perform  sacrifice, as it were—you the very clever, the means of sacrifice,
the king—
(you) with your three seats, like the plumage of (a bird) that has
traversed (the sky?), are to sacrifice the oblations, the bounties of the  sons of Manu.
## 03
(He) whose (course) is sharpest, the spoked wheel (of the sacrifice), the  ruler in the wood, like a goad on the (race)course, he has flashed as he  grows strong (on the hearths).
The immortal one appears like an undisguised reaper in person,
(moving) without obstruction among the plants.
## 04
By our fortifying (hymns), Agni like (a horse) at running is praised in the  household, as Jātavedas.
He whose food is wood, winning like a steed with its determination, like  a father he is to be woken dawn after dawn by sacrifices.
## 05
Then they marvel at his light when, carving (the trees) at will, he travels  along the earth.
He who immediately, when unloosened, streams ever faster, like a debtor  (turned) thief he has headed straight across the waste places.
## 06
Do you, o steed, *drive here to us, when you are kindled along with all  the (other) fires, o Agni.
You pursue riches; you drive across misfortunes. – Having good heroes  might we rejoice for a hundred winters.