+++
title = "013"

+++
13 (454)
Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn stays focused on its theme of Agni as the possessor and distributor of  treasures and blessings, and of the mortals who receive these goods through service  to Agni.
## 01
From you, well-portioned one, do all good portions spread out, like  branches from a tree—
at your attentive hearing—wealth, the victory prize at the overcoming of  obstacles, rain from heaven, the streaming of waters, (everything that  is) to be reverently invoked.
## 02
You are our Apportioner, for your treasure here is for our refreshment.  Like an encompassing (household), you of wondrous luster hold sway  (over treasure),
as Mitra does over lofty truth, o Agni. You, god, are the distributer of  an abundance of valuables.
## 03
That lord of settlements smashes the obstacle with power, o Agni, (that)  inspired poet carries the prize away from the niggard,
whom you, o provident one born of truth, incite with wealth, in concert  with the Child of the Waters.
## 04
The mortal who has achieved the “whetting” of you, o son of strength,  through hymns and solemn pronouncements, through sacrifices and  the altar,
he acquires all wealth, according to his wish, o god Agni. He shows  mastery through his goods.
## 05
These (goods) bringing good fame, consisting of good heroes, establish  here for men to thrive, o Agni, son of strength,
since with your power you make an abundance of livestock as vigor  (even) for the wolf, for the famished stranger.
## 06
O Agni, son of strength, eloquent, of extensive power, grant us progeny  and posterity and prizewinning (steeds).
With all my hymns may I attain to fulfillment. – Having good heroes  might we rejoice for a hundred winters.