+++
title = "014"

+++
14 (455)
Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verses: anuṣṭubh, except śakvarī 6
Though it begins with friendship, insight, and refreshment (vs. 1), this is a martial  hymn, naming Agni as the priest specific to the Ārya (vs. 2) and asking him to give

heroes and victory to the Ārya in their battles with the non-Ārya and to our particu lar group of Ārya in internal conflicts (vss. 3–5). The hymn is noteworthy in using  the metaphor of riches/wealth for an abundance of good fighting men: the phrase  “riches of the stranger” in verse 3 refers, in our opinion, to the manpower of the  Ārya, and this metaphor is repeated in verse 5.
## 01
The mortal who (has placed his) friendship in Agni and has savored  insight through his insightful thoughts,
chewing (it [=insight]) now, he should be the first to choose (it as)
refreshment, for help.
## 02
For just Agni is provident; Agni is the seer, the best ritual adept.
Agni as Hotar do the clans of Manu reverently invoke at the sacrifices. 3. For, o Agni, they [=the clans of Manu], the “riches of the stranger,”  contend with each other, every man for himself, for (your) help—
(that is,) the Āyus—(while at the same time) overcoming the Dasyu (and)  seeking to vanquish with their commandments the one who follows no  commandment.
## 04
Agni gives a hero winning the waters, vanquishing with his attack, as  lord of settlements,
whose rivals tremble at the full sight of his vast power, in fear.
## 05
For Agni, the god, through his know-how delivers from scorn
(that) mortal
whose “wealth” is victorious and unobstructible, unobstructible in the  prize-contests.
## 06
O god Agni with the might of Mitra, to us you call the gods, call the  grace of the two world-halves.
Pursue well-being, good dwelling; pursue the men of heaven. May we  cross over hatreds, over narrow straits difficult to traverse.
May we cross over; with your help may we cross over.