+++
title = "015"

+++
15 (456)
Agni
Vītahavya Āṅgirasa or Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
19 verses: jagatī 1–2, śakvarī 3, jagatī 4–5, atiśakvarī 6, jagatī 7–9, triṣṭubh 10–14,  śakvarī 15, triṣṭubh 16, anuṣṭubh 17, brhati 18, tri ̥ ṣṭubh 19, arranged in trcas ̥
With its nineteen verses, this hymn as a unity would clearly be out of place in the  arrangement of the maṇḍala, but dissolved into a series of five independent tr̥cas, its  first fifteen verses fit well. The last four verses (16–19) are considered by Oldenberg  (1888: 194) to be a later addition, and their vocabulary shows certain signs of com
parative modernity. The content of these triads is generally unremarkable, concentrating on the  installation of the ritual fire, Agni’s sacrificial role as envoy between gods and  men, and the ritual service performed for him by mortals. To some extent the tr̥cas  seem to be exercises in variation; for example, the first verses of the first two tr̥cas  (1, 4) share some key words and phrases and can in part be interpreted by compari
son with each other.
## 1
This guest of yours here, waking at dawn, lord of all clans will I stretch  toward with my hymn.
He, ablaze right from his birth, pursues any (food) whatever
from heaven here. For a long time the embryo eats just what is
immovable.
## 2
Whom the Bhr̥gus installed like a well-installed envoy, to be reverently  invoked at the “tree” [=sacrificial post], with flames erect,
you, o infallible one, well pleased in Vītahavya, are magnified with
eulogies every day.
## 3
You—become a strengthener of our skill, one who keeps the wolf away,  an overcomer of the stranger, distant or close.
O son of strength, (hold out) riches among mortals, hold out shelter of  great extent to Vītahavya, of great extent to Bharadvāja.
## 4
Your flashing guest with his solar glory, Agni, the Hotar conducting  good ceremonies for Manu,
possessing heaven-ruling speech like an inspired poet, the
oblation-conveying spoked wheel (of the sacrifice)—to (this) god
I stretch with my well-twisted (hymns).
## 5
Who with his pure, conspicuous body shines on earth as if with the  radiance of Dawn,
who goes in triumph on his course now like the victor in the battle with  Etaśa [=the sun’s horse], who is athirst (for oblations?) here, like (a
traveler) in the (sun’s) heat, the unaging one—
## 6
To your every fire do friendly service with a kindling stick, to your every  dear guest in hymning (them).
Seek to win the immortal one with your hymns, for the god will win what  is choice among the gods; for the god will win friendship for us among  the gods.
## 7
Agni kindled with kindling wood do I hymn with a hymn—the blazing  pure one in front, steadfast at the ceremony,
inspired poet, Hotar of many favors, without deceit—the sage poet we  beseech with appeals for grace as Jātavedas.
## 8
You, Agni, have they established in every generation as immortal  messenger, as oblation-conveyor, as protector to be reverently invoked.

Both gods and mortals set down with homage the wakeful one as their  far-extending clanlord.
## 9
Seeking manifestation, o Agni, following the commandments of both  (men and gods) you speed between the two airy realms altogether. Since we choose for ourselves your thought as grace, so become a  kindly provider of threefold defense for us.
## 10
Him, of lovely countenance, of lovely appearance, of lovely outlook,  might we, who do not know, serve as the one who knows better. He will perform sacrifice, knowing all the patterns; Agni will proclaim  our oblation among the immortals.
## 11
Him, o Agni, do you protect and him do you rescue, who has achieved  an insightful thought for you, the sage poet, o champion,
or (who has achieved) the “whetting” of the sacrifice, or its (proper)  outcome. Just him do you imbue with power and with wealth.
## 12
You, Agni—protect (us) from the rapacious one, and you, mighty one— (protect) us from reproach.
Let the smoke-enwrapped (oblation) come entirely to you, to the  fold (of the gods); let thousandfold desirable wealth (come)
entirely.
## 13
Agni is the Hotar, the houselord; he is the king. He knows all the  creatures, as Jātavedas.
He who is of gods and of mortals the best sacrificer, let him, the  truthful one, set the sacrifice in motion.
## 14
O Agni, pure-flamed Hotar of the ceremony, when today you pursue  (the oblations) of the clan—for you are the sacrificer—
you will offer true (hymns?) as sacrifice when you have become manifest  in your greatness. O youngest one, convey the oblations that are  yours today.
## 15
For you watch over the well-placed pleasurable offerings then. One  should set you down, to sacrifice to the two world-halves.
Help us, bounteous one, in the winning of prizes. Agni, may we cross  over all (narrow straits) difficult to traverse; may we cross over
them—with your help may we cross over.
## 16
O Agni of the lovely face, with all the gods sit first on the
woolly womb,
the ghee-rich one that forms a nest. Lead the sacrifice straight, for the  impeller (of the sacrificer), for the sacrificer.
## 17
This Agni here the ritual adepts churn, as Atharvan (did)— (Agni) who, (though) he sought a crooked (path), they led here  unerring from the dark (places).
## 18
Be born, to pursue the gods in their entirety, for well-being. Convey the gods hither, the immortals growing strong through truth.  You cause the sacrifice to touch the gods.
## 19
O Agni, houselord of the people(s), we have made you lofty with  kindling wood.
May our household (arrangements) not be “one-horse.” With your
sharp sharpness hone us thoroughly.