+++
title = "016"

+++
16 (457)
Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
48 verses: gāyatrī, except vardhamānā 1, 6, anuṣṭubh 27, 47–48, triṣṭubh 46, arranged  in trcas ̥
This lengthy hymn must, like the last one (VI.15), be dissolved into tr̥cas in order  to fit the numerical arrangement of the maṇḍala. As Proferes (2007: 9) points out,  this is an assemblage of Bharadvāja kindling verses, similar to the collections made  by the Vaiśvāmitras (III.27) and the Atris (V.28), likewise placed at or near the end  of their Agni cycle. Again, the content stays primarily focused on the ritual aspects  of Agni. Personal and family names are found fairly commonly (see especially the  second [vss. 4–6, and cf. vs. 19] and fifth [vss. 13–15] tr̥cas). There are overt signs of  unity within some of the tr̥cas: for instance, both the second (vss. 4–6) and the third  tr̥cas (vss. 7–9) begin each verse with a form of “you”; a variant of this is found in  the fifth tr̥ca (vss. 13–15).
## 1
You, Agni, were established as Hotar of all sacrifices
by the gods for the human race.
## 2
With your gladdening tongues sacrifice for us to the great ones in the  course of the ceremony.
Convey the gods hither and sacrifice,
## 3
For you, o ritual adept, know the ways and the paths in their straight  course,
o strong-willed god Agni, very effective at the sacrifices.
## 4
You does Bharata, along with his prizewinners, reverently invoke, now  yet again, for blessing.
He has sacrificed to the sacrificial one at the sacrifices.
## 5
You—(give) these many valuables to Divodāsa the (soma) presser, to Bharadvāja the pious.
## 6
You, as immortal messenger—convey the divine race hither,
when you hear the lovely praise of the inspired poet.
## 7
You, Agni, do the very attentive mortals reverently invoke as god at the  sacrifices,
to pursue the gods.

## 8
Begin the sacrifice: your manifestation and your resolve do those of  good drops,
the desirous ones, all take pleasure in.
## 9
You are the Hotar established by Manu, the conveyor (of oblations)  with your mouth, the very wise one.
Agni, sacrifice to the clans of heaven.
## 10
Agni, being hymned, travel hither to pursue (the oblations), to give the  oblations.
Sit down as Hotar on the ritual grass.
## 11
You, Aṅgiras, with kindling sticks, with ghee do we strengthen. Blaze aloft, youngest one.
## 12
You seek to win for us here a broad, praiseworthy,
lofty mass of heroes, god Agni.
## 13
You, Agni, did Atharvan churn forth from the lotus,
(did) the liturgists (churn) from the head of the whole (world?). 14. You did Dadhyañc, the seer, son of Atharvan, kindle
as obstacle-smasher, stronghold-splitter.
## 15
You did Vr̥ṣan Pāthya kindle as best Dasyu-smasher,
winning the stakes in every battle.
## 16
Come here. I will speak to you, Agni, in this way: “(There are)  other hymns,
but with these drops here you will become strong.”
## 17
Wherever your mind is (set), (there) you will set your skill next, there you will make your seat.
## 18
Since what is granted to you will not be (just) a speck, you good one,  who are on (our) side,
therefore you will win (us) friendship.
## 19
Agni has come here, the one belonging to the Bharatas,
obstacle-smasher, manifest to many,
lord of the settlements of Divodāsa.
## 20
For he will piously offer wealth beyond all earthly (goods) by his  greatness,
winning (though) himself unwon, indestructible.
## 21
O Agni, as of old but anew, with lasting brilliance
you stretch aloft with your radiance.
## 22
Comrades, boldly chant forth to Agni your praise and sacrifice and sing to the ritual adept.
## 23
For he is the one who has sat through the human (life)spans as Hotar  with a poet’s purpose,
and as the messenger conveying the oblations. 24. To the two kings of blazing commandments [=Mitra and Varuṇa], the  Ādityas, the Marutian flock,
o good one, sacrifice here, and to the two world-halves.
## 25
Good is your manifestation, Agni, for the prospering mortal—
(the manifestation) of (you) the immortal, o child of nourishment.
## 26
Acccording to your will let the giver be best off, winning you today,  acquiring a good legacy.
The mortal has achieved a (hymn) with a good twist.
## 27
Those aided by you, Agni, (are ones) prospering through their whole  lifetime,
overcoming the hostilities of the stranger, vanquishing the hostilities of  the stranger.
## 28
Agni with his sharp flame will run down every rapacious one.
Agni will win us wealth.
## 29
Wealth in good heroes bring here, o unbounded Jātavedas.
Smash the demonic forces, o you of good resolve.
## 30
You—protect us from narrow straits, o Jātavedas, from the one who  bears malice.
Guard us, o poet of the sacred formulation.
## 31
The mortal of evil ways who will deliver us to the murderous weapon,  o Agni,
from him protect us and from narrow straits.
## 32
You, god—deflect with your tongue that evil-doer,
the mortal who wishes to smash us.
## 33
To Bharadvāja hold out shelter of great extent,
o overpowering Agni, and goods worthy to be chosen.
## 34
Agni will keep smashing obstacles, seeking chattels, amid
admiration—
kindled, blazing when bepoured (with ghee)—
## 35
In the womb of his mother, as the father of his father, having flashed  forth at the imperishable (syllable?),
sitting on the birthplace of truth—
## 36
Bring here a sacred formulation bestowing offspring, o unbounded  Jātavedas,
o Agni, (a formulation) that will shine in heaven.
## 37
Toward you of delightful appearance, have we, affording (you) pleasure, released our songs, o might-made Agni.
## 38
Toward your shelter we have come, as if into shadow from the
(sun’s) heat,
o Agni of golden appearance—794 VI.17
## 39
You who, like a powerful sharpshooter, like a sharp-horned buffalo, have broken strongholds, o Agni.
## 40
Whom they carry like a bangle on the hand, like an infant just born, Agni, who conducts good ceremonies for the clans,
## 41
(That) god carry forward, to pursue the gods, (him) the best finder  of goods.
Let him sit down on his own birthplace.
## 42
“Whet” the dear guest, just born on (the old fire) Jātavedas,
the houselord in his comfortable (birth)place.
## 43
God Agni, yoke (them) then!—those horses of yours that go straight to  their goal,
that convey (the gods) in accord with your fervor.
## 44
Drive here to us. Convey (the gods) here to the pleasurable offerings, to  pursue (them).
(Convey) the gods here to drink the soma.
## 45
O Agni belonging to the Bharatas, constantly flashing brilliantly  upward with your inexhaustible (flame),
blaze, radiate widely, unaging one.
## 46
The mortal who with pursuit would seek friendship with the god, he,  offering oblations at the ceremony, should reverently invoke Agni.
With outstretched hands he should seek to win with homage the Hotar  whose sacrifice comes true in the two world-halves.
## 47
Here to you, Agni, we bring with a verse an oblation fashioned by  our heart:
let the oxen, bulls, and mated cows be yours.
## 48
Agni do the gods kindle at the front, as the best obstacle-smasher by whom goods are brought here and the demonic powers crushed—by  the prizewinner.