+++
title = "017"

+++
17 (458) Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
15 verses: triṣṭubh, except dvipadā 15
This hymn is divided into two roughly equal parts, with the first devoted to the  Vala myth (vss. 2–6), the second to the Vr̥tra myth (vss. 8–12). The first verse  announces these two themes in order, allotting each a half-verse. The two mythic  segments are separated by a verse about Indra’s general cosmogonic deeds (7); the  last three verses (13–15) urge Indra to use the same powers to help the poet and  his patrons. The account of both narratives emphasizes the role of soma in rousing Indra  to his great deeds, and the hymn begins with three verses (1–3) with the insistent  imperative “drink!” The Vala myth is in fact configured as a model for Indra’s  behavior in the present with the mythic deeds presented as still to happen: he is  enjoined to drill through to the cattle pen (vss. 2, 3) and to disclose the sun (vs. 3).  The hymn thus appears to be associated with the activities at dawn. The Vr̥tra myth  is more consistently presented as a deed in the past (though see vss. 8, 11).
## 1
Drink the soma! The cattle enclosure that you will drill through to,  mighty Indra, when you are greatly sung—
you bold mace-bearer, who will hew apart Vr̥tra and all hostile things  with your powers—
## 2
Drink it! You who are the victorious possessor of the silvery drink, who  are the belipped, who are the bull of poetic thoughts,
who are the cowpen-splitter, the mace-bearer, who are the mounter of  fallow bays, you, Indra—drill through to the shimmering prizes.
## 3
Drink it in just this way, as of old. Let it exhilarate you. Hear our sacred  formulation, and grow strong through our songs.
Disclose the sun, swell refreshments, and smash rivals. Indra, drill
through to the cows.
## 4
The exhilarating drinks here, when drunk, make you grow loftily  brilliant, o autonomous Indra;
the invigorating drinks continually excite (you who are) great, without  deficiency, powerful, distinguished, conquering—
## 5
Becoming exhilarated on which, you made the sun and dawn to shine, as  you shattered the strongholds.
You shoved the great, immoveable rock that was enclosing the cattle  from its own seat, Indra.
## 6
Through your will and your wondrous skills you secured the cooked  (milk) in the raw (cows) by your ability.
You opened the doors, opened up the strongholds for the dawn-red ones.  Accompanied by the Aṅgirases, you sent the cows surging up from the  enclosure.
## 7
You filled the earth broad and wide—great is your wondrous skill.  Towering, you propped up heaven aloft, Indra.
You fixed fast the two world-halves, whose sons are the gods, the two  ancient but youthfully exuberant mothers of truth.
## 8
Then all the gods set you in front alone, o Indra, as the powerful one to  “carry (the day).”
When the non-god has vaunted himself to the gods, they choose Indra  here at the winning of the sun.

## 9
Then even Heaven, she [=Earth] likewise also, bent away from your  mace, through fear of your own battle fury,
when Indra struck down the vaunting serpent to lie there for a full
lifespan.
## 10
Then Tvaṣṭar turned the mace with its thousand spikes and hundred  edges for you who are great, o powerful one,
that eager, devoted (mace) with which you utterly crushed the
screaming serpent, you possessor of the silvery drink.
## 11
(You) whom all the Maruts in concert will strengthen, for you, Indra,  he [=Agni] cooks a hundred buffaloes.
Pūṣan, Viṣṇu (and the others) rinse the exhilarating Vr̥tra-smashing
plant, three lakes (full), for him.
## 12
You sent surging here the great gush of rivers that had been blocked  and surrounded, the wave of waters.
Along their slopes, along their path, Indra, you set the busy (waters)  tossing, downward to the sea.
## 13
Indra having done all these things in just this way, the great, mighty,  ageless giver of strength,
possessing good heroes, good weapons, and a good mace—you—might  our new sacred formulation turn here for help.
## 14
Provide our inspired poets with brilliance—for (them to acquire) the  prize: fame and refreshment, and wealth, o Indra;
at Bharadvāja’s (provide) our patrons with superior men, o Indra. And,  as ever, be there for us, Indra, on the decisive day.
## 15
With this (hymn) might we win the prize established by the gods.  – Having good heroes might we rejoice for a hundred winters.