+++
title = "018"

+++
18 (459)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
15 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet of this hymn seems to be aiming to deploy as many different words for  power, might, strength, and so forth in as many different derivational forms as pos sible. The sheer power of Indra, thus expressed, overshadows his particular deeds,  which are mentioned in a somewhat cursory way: Vala (vs. 5), Vr̥tra (vs. 6, also 9  and 14), the destruction of various named monsters (vs. 8). The poet is also fond  of figures involving a positive and a twist on its negation: “vanquishing but unvan quished” (vs. 1), and so forth.
This focus on Indra’s power betrays some nervous worry about the existence  of that power, expressed especially in the rhetorical question and answer in verses  3–4. A number of hymns in the R̥gveda raise the question of whether Indra himself exists; here the existential anxiety has been displaced to an abstract entity, his might,  but the poet asserts its existence so often and so unequivocally that his audience can  scarcely doubt it. Needless to say, the recital of Indra’s strength is not disinter ested: the poet calls for Indra to use his powers in defense of the poet’s people and,  in the last verse (15), to perform the deed that exists for him to do (a nice return to  the existential theme), in order to merit another poem from the poet.
## 1
Praise him whose might is overpowering, the vanquishing but
unvanquished, much-summoned Indra.
Mighty, conquering but unconquered, the bull of the settled domains— strengthen him with these songs.
## 2
He—the fighting warrior, creator of tumult, combat-hardened, the  powerfully destructive, bellowing partaker of the silvery drink,
with high-mounting dust—alone became the victorious rouser of the  communities of the sons of Manu.
## 3
It was just you who tamed the Dasyus, and who alone vanquished (their)  communities for the Ārya.
Does that heroic power now exist for you, Indra, or does it not? You will  announce that at the proper season.
## 4
It certainly does exist for you!—so I think: strength, o strongest one, (has  come) to you, who were powerfully born, the surpassing surpasser— mighty (strength) has come to the mighty one, more powerful (strength)  to the powerful one who, himself not feeble, furthers the feeble.
## 5
“Let our age-old partnership with you (all) (still) exist,” with the  Aṅgirases speaking in just this way—along with them
you smashed the prospering Vala cave, o wondrous shaker of the
unshakable, and you opened its strongholds and its doors, all of them. 6. He is to be summoned with insightful thoughts—the mighty one who  performs the master’s part in the great overcoming of Vr̥tra,
in the winning of progeny, in (the winning of) posterity. As the
mace-bearer he became worth tussling for in battles.
## 7
Through his greatness and his immortal name he has extended himself  over the races of the sons of Manu.
He is at home with brilliance and with power and wealth, and he, the  best of men, with heroism—
## 8
He, the man who is not to be confused and is not wrong, bearing a name  that is good to think upon. Cumuri and Dhuni
did Indra wring out, and Pipru, Śambara, and Śuṣṇa—to shake their  strongholds and for (them) to lie there even now.
## 9
With your helpful energy, (ever) more to be admired, up and mount your  chariot, Indra, for the Vr̥tra-smashing.
Place your mace in your hand on the right side. Stimulate your magical  powers, o you who give much.

## 10
As fire does dry wood, like a terrifying missile burn down the demon  with your lance, o Indra.
He who shattered the obstacles to progress with a (lance) both deep and  high, he smoked them out and subjugated them.
## 11
Along a thousand paths affording powerful prizes, o powerfully  brilliant Indra, drive here in our direction with wealth,
o much summoned son of strength, whom a godless man never has the  power to repel.
## 12
The greatness of the powerfully brilliant, stalwart, ardent one has  overflowed from heaven and earth.
There exists no rival for him, nor counterpart, no opponent for the
strong one with many magical powers.
## 13
This deed done by you stands out today—that for his sake
[=Tūrvayāṇa’s?] (you ground down) Kutsa, Āyu, and Atithigva;
many thousands did you grind down to earth. You led Tūrvayāṇa up  boldly.
## 14
Then, o god, all the gods cheer you on for the serpent-smashing, (you)  the best poet of poets,
when you will create wide space for oppressed heaven, for its people  and for yourself as you are being sung.
## 15
Heaven and Earth and the immortal gods give way to your
might, Indra.
Do, o doer, what undone (deed) exists for you (to do). Generate a newer  hymn for yourself along with sacrifices.