+++
title = "019"

+++
19 (460)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
13 verses: triṣṭubh
Like the previous hymn, this one exults in the mighty powers of Indra and in the  rich lexicon that describes them, although it is perhaps somewhat less insistent (but  see vs. 6ab). Also as in VI.18 the poet exhorts Indra to put his powers to good use  for the men associated with the poet. The three middle verses (6–8) all contain the  phrase “bring here to us,” each with a different abstract power as object, and the  remaining verses continue these requests for aid and support, especially in defeating  enemies and rivals.
## 01
Great is Indra—manful, filling the domains and doubly lofty,
undiminishing in his powers.
Inclined toward us, he has been strengthened for his heroic deed. Wide  and broad, he was well made by his makers. 2. The Holy Place positioned just Indra for winning, him lofty and  towering, unaging and youthful,
swollen with invincible strength, who in just a single day grew strong  and not by halves.
## 03
Broad are your forearms, ample your fists. Mete out full measures of  fame in our direction.
Like a herdsman to his flocks of livestock, as household master, o
Indra, turn here to us in the contest.
## 04
Striving for the prizes of victory here and now, we would summon him  for you, the elusive Indra along with his able (men);
(might we be) irreproachable, blameless, and invulnerable, just as the  ancient singers were.
## 05
Of steadfast commandment, giving spoils, strengthened by soma (is he),  for he is the possessor of much livestock, of goods worth winning.
The paths of wealth have joined in him, like the rivers uniting in the sea. 6. Bring here to us, o overpowering champion, the strongest strength, the  mightiest mighty might.
All things brilliant and bullish that belong to the sons of Manu—give  them to us, o master of the fallow bays, to exhilarate us.
## 07
Your exhilaration, conquering in battle, never shirking—bring us that,  swollen with strength, o Indra,
through which we could be considered victors in the winning of
progeny and posterity, aided by you.
## 08
Bring here to us, Indra, the bullish unbridled force that gains the stakes,  swollen with strength, of good skill,
through which we will vanquish our rivals in battles, both kin and
non-kin, with your help.
## 09
Let your unbridled force, a bull, come here from behind, here from  above and below, here from in front.
Let it come altogether toward us from all sides. Indra, grant to us
sun-like brilliance.
## 10
Manfully, with your most manly help, Indra, we would win what is  worth winning through your attentions.
Because you are master of both kinds of good, o king, grant a great,  substantial, lofty treasure.
## 11
Him, accompanied by the Maruts, the bull grown strong, not stingy, the  heavenly commander—Indra—
the all-conquering, mighty giver of strength—him we would invoke  here for present help.
## 12
The person who thinks himself to be ever so great, o mace-bearer— make him subject to these superior men, among whom am I—
for therefore do we summon you at the contest of champions when the  earth, lineage, cows, and waters (are at stake).

## 13
By these partnerships with you, o much invoked one, might we be  higher than each and every rival.
Smashing both kinds of obstacles, o champion, we would be exultant  through lofty wealth, when helped by you.