+++
title = "020"

+++
20 (461)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
13 verses: triṣṭubh, except virāj 7
Unlike the usual model, this hymn begins with the prayer for gifts from the god (vs.  1). But most of the rest of the hymn is devoted to a verse-by-verse listing of Indra’s  great deeds, not only the standard Vr̥tra (vs. 2) and Vala (vss. 3–4) tales, but also  the defeat of a series of named enemies on behalf of named mortal clients. Some  of these stories are familiar (the Śuṣṇa/Kutsa story, vss. 4–5, and the stealing of  Namuci’s head, vs. 6), and some are mentioned much more rarely (e.g., Vetasu and  Tuji, vs. 8), with unclear details. Many of these same stories are also treated in VI.26.
## 01
O Indra, wealth that in its vast power surmounts (the wealth) of the  stranger, (namely) the peoples in battles, as heaven does the earth,
that brings thousands as plunder, wins fertile fields, and overcomes
obstacles—give that (wealth) to us, o son of strength.
## 02
All lordly power, like (that) of heaven, was entirely ceded to you by the  gods, o Indra,
when you, accompanied by Viṣṇu, smashed the serpent Vr̥tra, who had  obstructed the waters, you possessor of the silvery drink.
## 03
Overpowering, mightier and stronger than the strong, he for whom the  sacred formulation is created, whose greatness increased—Indra
became king of the somian honey when he aided the splitting of all the  strongholds.
## 04
The Paṇis were felled here by hundreds (of deadly weapons), o Indra, for  the sake of the ten-armed poet at the winning of the (sun’s) rays;
by the deadly weapons the magic powers of the voracious Śuṣṇa (were  felled). Nothing at all had he left over from the meal.
## 05
A whole lifetime of great deception was set aside when Śuṣṇa was felled  at the flying of the mace.
Sharing the same chariot, Indra made a wide way for Kutsa, the sharer  of his chariot, at the winning of the sun.
## 06
Like the falcon stealing the exhilarating plant for him, he, stealing the  head of the Dāsa Namuci,
helped Namī Sāpya as he slept. He imbued (him) with wealth, with
refreshment, and with well-being. 7. You split open the fortified strongholds of Pipru, who had the tricks of  a snake, o mace-bearer, as if with swelling strength.
O generous giver, you gave that legacy not to be spurned as a gift to the  pious R̥jiśvan.
## 08
Indra showed the favor of his dominance to Vetasu of the ten tricks  and ten arms and to the thrusting (Tuji), (saying,)
“Tugra as perpetual vassal for brilliant (Vetasu) shall I dispatch, like  (calves) to their mother, to go (to him).”
## 09
Unopposable, he will vanquish the contenders, bearing his
Vr̥tra-smashing mace in his fist.
He mounts his two fallow bays, like an archer upon his chariot seat;  those yoked by speech convey lofty Indra.
## 10
Might we win anew through your help, Indra. The Pūrus start up the  praise with this (hymn) along with sacrifices.
When he split the seven autumnal strongholds, their shelter, he smote  the Dāsa (clans), doing his best for Purukutsa.
## 11
You, Indra, became the first strengthener. Making wide space for  Uśanā Kāvya,
(to him as?) grandfather you handed over Navavāstu, who was to be  delivered up, as his own grandson.
## 12
You, the tumultuous one, Indra, set the tumultuous waters in motion,  flowing like streams.
When you will cross the sea, o hero, make Turvaśa and Yadu cross to  well-being.
## 13
Everything in the contest is yours, Indra. Dhuni and Cumuri sleep,  whom you put to sleep.
Just he will shine: Dabhīti who presses for you with the soma juices,  who brings the firewood and the cooked food, along with the chants.