+++
title = "021"

+++
21 (462)
Indra (1–8, 10, 12), All Gods (9, 11)
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
12 verses: triṣṭubh
The first pāda of this hymn introduces one of its major concerns: the relationship  between the current poet and the generations of previous poets to whose lineage  he belongs and the question of whether Indra will pay the same attention to the  current poet as he did to the older ones (see also vss. 4–6, 8, 10). This theme is  connected to the common worry about whether Indra himself exists and, if so,  where—subtly articulated in verses 2 and 4, and triumphantly refuted in the last  pāda of verse 10. The themes are connected by the anxiety about Indra’s epiphany  (see esp. vs. 4). Since the goal of the soma sacrifice is to produce Indra’s epiphany,  that is, his appearance at our ritual ground, then his absence may result either from

his favoring another group of sacrificers and poets or from the fact that he doesn’t  exist at all!
## 1
These insights of this latest of many bards, (insights) deserving to  invoke, newly invoke
you who deserve invoking, o hero, the unaging chariot-mounter.
Extensive wealth is sped by their eloquence.
## 2
I will praise him who is known as “Indra,” whose vehicle is songs, who  is strengthened by sacrifice along with songs,
him of many wiles, whose greatness projects beyond heaven and earth  in their greatness.
## 3
Just he made the patternless darkness in its extension to be patterned by  the sun.
When do mortals, seeking gain, not violate the ordinances that belong  to you, the immortal, o autonomous one?
## 4
He who did these things, where then is he—this “Indra”? Upon what  people does he attend? Among which clans?
What sacrifice is weal for your thought, your wish? What chant, Indra?  Which one is your Hotar?
## 5
For up to now they have been ever toiling for you, o doer of many  (deeds)—those who were born long ago, your ancient comrades,
those in between, and the current ones. Much-invoked one, take
cognizance of the one who is closest.
## 6
The closer ones, asking about him, have guided themselves following  your distant, ancient (acts) worthy of fame, Indra.
As far as we know it, that far we chant to you as the great one, you hero  with the sacred formulation as your vehicle.
## 7
The face of the demon has spread out against you, who were born  great. Stand up to it well!
With your ancient, conjoined comrade, your mace, o bold one, thrust  these away.
## 8
Listen, Indra, to the current (bard) creating sacred formulations, you  hero who give succor to bards—
for you, as the friend of our ancestors in olden days, have always been  easy to invoke in the quest.
## 9
Bring forward for help Varuṇa, Mitra, Indra, and the Maruts, to help  us today,
forward Pūṣan, Viṣṇu, Agni and Plenty, Savitar, the plants, and the
mountains.
## 10
These singers here with their chants chant to you, o you of many  talents, receiving the first of the sacrifice.
Listen to the call of him who calls you here as you are called. Immortal  one, there exists no one like you, other than you. 11. Now drive here, right up to my speech, since you know, o son of  strength, together with all those worthy of the sacrifice,
who had Agni as their tongue and served the truth, who put Manu very  close to Dasa.
## 12
Become a leader for us on easy roads and on difficult ones, since you  are known as a path-maker.
The broad, unflagging (horses), the best conveyors—with them convey  the prize to us, o Indra.