+++
title = "022"

+++
22 (463) Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
11 verses: triṣṭubh
Like the previous hymn, this one compares the current poet to previous genera tions of poets (see vss. 2, 4, 7) and asks Indra directly what in the sacrifice might  please him (vs. 4 [cf. VI.21.4]). In fact, the same phrase is used in both hymns to  introduce other questions: VI.21.6 tám pr̥chántaḥ “(the singers) asking about him”  and VI.22.5 tám pr̥chántī “(the song) asking about him.” In each case the subject  (singers or song) seeks information about ways to make contact and find favor with  Indra, though the anxiety seems less in this hymn than in VI.21.
The similarities between VI.21 and 22 extend to their final verses. The exhor tation to come here with his teams in VI.22.11 is structurally and semantically,  though not lexically, parallel to two halves of the two final verses of VI.21, 11ab  and 12cd—an interesting example of how a poet can expand an underlying formu laic sequence by inserting new material.
Otherwise, the hymn alternates verses praising Indra’s qualities and deeds in  list-like fashion (e.g., vss. 1cd, 2cd) and begging him for wealth and martial help  (e.g., vss. 3, 8, 10). Stylistically it is noteworthy that in much of the hymn, particu larly at the beginning, the initial word of every half-verse refers to Indra (1a, c; 2a,  c; 3a; 5a, c; 7a, c; 11a). In 3c, the first half-verse in the hymn not beginning with a  word referring to Indra, the poet tricks us by playing on our expectations: the yáḥ “who” could easily be Indra, as it was earlier (see 1a, c), but in fact has a different  referent. The most complex verse syntactically is verse 5, which is perhaps fitting, as  it describes the poet’s own song.
## 1
To him who alone is to be called by the separate peoples, to Indra chant  with these hymns,
to the bull with bull-like strength who is master, the real “real thing”  with many magic wiles, mighty.
## 2
To him (chanted) our earlier ancestors, the Navagvas, the seven inspired  poets, inciting (him),804 VI.22
to him who catches up to the cheat, the surpassing one who stays on the  mountains, whose speech is without deception, to the strongest one,  with their thoughts.
## 3
This Indra do we beseech for his wealth, consisting of many heroes, of  superior men, of much livestock,
which is not stunted, not aging, and is filled with sunlight. O master of  the fallow bays, bring that here to elate (us).
## 4
Will you declare this to us—whether ever before singers have obtained  your favor, Indra?
What is your portion? What is the vital energy that belongs to a  smasher of (rival) lords, you headstrong hammer-head, invoked by  many, bringing many goods?
## 5
The quivering, surging (song), asking about him whose hand holds the  mace, who stands upon the chariot—about Indra, whose song it is— (him who is) powerfully grasping, powerfully ranging, taking on wild  frenzy—(the song) seeks her way; she catches up to the bulging one  [=Indra].
## 6
With this magic power (of yours), with the mountain [=mace] that has  the speed of thought (you shattered) him who had grown strong  through his magic power, you self-powerful one.
You boldly shattered even the immovable, firm fastnesses, o you of  good might who confer abundance.
## 7
(It is) for you [=poets] to tug at him, the strongest one, from every  direction with a newer insight, him the ancient one as the
ancients did.
Indra, who is without measure, the good conveyor, will convey us  across all difficult depths.
## 8
You set ablaze the earthly and heavenly (realms) and the midspaces  against the deceitful people.
Scorch them on every side with your flame, o bull. Enflame the earth  and waters against the hater of the sacred formulation.
## 9
You become the king of the heavenly folk and of the earthly, moving  world, o you of glittering face.
Set your mace in your right hand, Indra. Unaging one, you fragment all  magic wiles.
## 10
(Set) here uninterrupted well-being for us, lofty and not negligible, for  us to overcome our rivals, Indra,
(well-being) by which you will make the Dāsa and Ārya obstacles easy  to thrust away, o mace-bearer, and those from the Nahuṣas.
## 11
Come here to us with the teams that bring all desirable things, you ritual  adept summoned by many, you who receive the first of the sacrifice. (The teams) that neither a non-god nor a god will hinder, with them  drive here swiftly in my direction. 
