+++
title = "023"

+++
23 (464)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
10 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn focuses on Indra’s vital connection with soma and on the reciprocal  relationship between the soma-presser and Indra, the soma-drinker. This theme is  established in the first pāda of the first verse, and every subsequent verse has some  reference to soma: all but verse 8 contain a form of the word sóma (and vs. 8 does  make clear reference to soma-induced exhilaration), and of those, all but verse 7  have “pressed,” “pressing,” or “presser” as well. The other ritual aspects of the soma  sacrifice, especially the poetry and sacred formulations, also receive frequent men
tion. The reminders to Indra that sacrificial labor should be requited with gifts and  help from the god occur throughout the hymn, but are not annoyingly obtrusive. Stylistically the hymn is noteworthy for its pairs of syntactically linked verses: 1–2  with their “or when” clauses; 3–4 with their run of agent nouns governing accusa tive objects; 5–6 with a number of repeated formulae.
## 1
You are intertwined in the pressed soma, Indra, and in the praise song, in  the sacred formulation, and in solemn speech as it is recited,
when, bounteous one, you drive with your two yoked fallow bays,
bearing your mace in your arms,
## 2
Or when on the decisive day, Indra, you help the soma-presser in the  smiting of obstacles [/Vr̥tra] and at the contest of champions,
or when, (yourself) being unafraid, as their skill became fearful, you  subdued the vaunting Dasyus, Indra.
## 3
Let Indra be the drinker of the pressed soma, the mighty one ever  leading the singer forward with his help,
the maker of wide space for the hero and the soma-presser, the giver of  goods to his praiser, even a feeble one,
## 4
Going to even such pressings as these with his two fallow bays, bearing  his mace, drinking soma, giving cows,
who makes the manly hero possessed of hale heroes, the hearer of the  singer’s call, for praise songs are his vehicle.
## 5
It is for him that we toil at what he holds dear—for Indra, who has  performed labor for us from of old.
When the soma is pressed, we sing praise; (a priest) recites the
solemn words, so that the sacred formulation will be strengthening  for Indra.
## 6
For you have made the sacred formulations strengthening for yourself, to  the extent that we have toiled for you, Indra, with our thoughts.
When the soma is pressed, o soma-drinker, might we make (the
pressings/the formulations) to be most wealful, enjoyable means of
increase (for you) through our sacrifices.

## 7
As giver, take notice of our offering cake; drink the soma, foamy with  cows [=milk], Indra.
Sit right here on the ritual grass of the sacrificer. Make wide, wide
space for him in devoted pursuit of you.
## 8
Find elation according to your liking, mighty one. Let these sacrifices  reach you.
Let these calls among us (reach) the one called by many. Might this
insightful thought guide you here for help, Indra.
## 9
So that he (will be) together with you at the pressings, comrades, fill him  with soma juices, Indra the benefactor.
Surely he will be there for us for the taking? Indra will not neglect the  soma-presser, not neglect to help him.
## 10
Just in this way, when the soma is pressed, Indra has been praised  among the Bharadvājas. Just he has power over the liberal man,
so that he [=liberal man] will be a patron to the singer. Indra is a giver  of wealth that brings all desirable things.