+++
title = "024"

+++
24 (465)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
10 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn begins, like the last one, with a strong statement of Indra’s relationship with  soma, but it then turns to more general praises of the god (vss. 2–8), with some strik ing similes, metaphors, and etymological figures. The importance of mortal praise and  worship for maintaining Indra’s powers is not forgotten; see verses 7–8 and especially  verse 6, which seems to concern the traffic in praise: inspiration going out from Indra  to the poets and then returning to him as praise (for a similar sentiment and phraseol ogy, see VI.34.1). The last two verses (9–10) ask for Indra’s gifts and protection.
## 01
Bullish exuberance, noise, and solemn words are in Indra; he is the  drinker of the pressings and in possession of the silvery drink, when  the soma juices are in his company.
He is worthy to be chanted by men with solemn words as the bounteous  one, the heaven-ruling king of hymns, whose help is imperishable.
## 02
The surpassing hero, favorable to men, discriminating, the hearer of the  singer’s call, whose help is wide-ranging,
the good one, the Laud of Men, who gives succor to bards, praised as  the prizewinner, he gives the prize at the rite of distribution.
## 03
Like an axle beyond its two wheels, your lofty (greatness), o champion,  projects beyond the two worlds in their greatness. (Like) the branches of a tree, your forms of help have grown outward,  o much-invoked Indra.
## 04
The abilities that belong to you, the able one, o you of many abilities,  are converging like streams of cattle.
(They are) like cords for calves, Indra, binding without bonds, o you of  good bonds [/gifts].
## 05
One deed today and another tomorrow, one which is not and another  which is—Indra makes (them) happen in an instant.
Mitra and Varuṇa, also Pūṣan, are there for us, but it is he [=Indra] who  keeps the will of the stranger contained.
## 06
Like waters forth from the back of a mountain, they proceeded forth  from you along with solemn words and sacrifices, Indra.
Along with these good praises, seeking the prize they have (also) gone  to you, like horses to a contest, o you whose vehicle is songs.
## 07
Indra, whom the autumns do not age, nor do the months, nor days  make lean—
may his body, even though he is fully grown, grow stronger while it is  being celebrated by praises and solemn words.
## 08
He does not bow to the tough, nor to the stubborn, nor to the vaunting  one sped by the Dasyus, when he receives praise.
Even the towering mountains are flatlands for Indra. Even in the deep  there is a ford for him.
## 09
With a (vessel) that is deep and wide, o bearer of the vessel, hold forth  to us refreshments and prizes, you drinker of the pressings,
and stand erect with your help, allowing no harm, at the early
brightening of the night, at its final turn.
## 10
Accompany our leader to help him at the close encounter, or protect  him from harm from here, Indra.
Protect him from harm at home and in the wilderness. – Having good  heroes might we rejoice for a hundred winters.