+++
title = "025"

+++
25 (466)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The clear purpose of this hymn is to solicit Indra’s aid against enemies in battle. The  various types of opponents are vividly described, as well as the potential types of  hostile encounter: see especially the apparent wrestling match in 4ab. But the poet’s  expressed confidence in Indra’s ability to provide the decisive assistance is also a  subtle way of asserting the supremacy of Indra. This second theme can be seen

more clearly by examining the structure of the hymn: verse 5, which concerns the  invincibility of Indra, is the exact middle of the hymn and serves as an omphalos;  verses 4 and 6 match each other in structure and referents and form a ring around  the omphalos, with a further ring provided by repeated phrases in verses 1/2 and  8/9, with Indra’s supremacy repeated in verse 8.
## 01
What is your nearest help, what your farthest, and what your midmost,  tempestuous Indra,
with those (forms of help) help us well at the Vr̥tra-smashing and with  these prizes, as the great one among us, o mighty one.
## 02
With these (forms of help), o Indra, (you who) allow no harm—cause  the contenders who oppose (us) to falter, cause the battle fury of the  foe to falter;
with them bring down all the attackers (to be) scattered asunder, bring  down the Dāsa clans for the Ārya.
## 03
O Indra, the rapacious ones who, kin or not kin, have hitched themselves  up, turning here against us,
(render) their powers faltering, smash their bull-like (strengths), put  them far away.
## 04
Now a champion may defeat (another) champion with his limbs when  the two, their bodies gleaming, will set upon each other in their
struggle to overcome,
or when, with offspring, cattle, lineage, waters, and fields at stake, their  two war-cries will dispute with each other.
## 05
Yet no champion, no overpowering and no bold one, no one thinking  himself a fighter has fought against you.
Indra, none of these is equal to you. You dominate all that have
been born.
## 06
He is master of the manly power of both of these (armies) when the  ritual adepts call on him in the clash,
when, whether an obstacle or a dwelling place rich in men is at issue, the  two (armies) in their expansion keep tussling mightily back and forth  with one another.
## 07
So then, when your separate peoples will stir, Indra, become the rescuer  and defender (of those,)
our most manly patrons, who have set us ahead of the stranger, o Indra. 8. It was conceded to you, to your great Indrian power; everything was  entirely conceded to you at the Vr̥tra-smashing;
dominion was conceded, victorious might conceded, o Indra worthy of  sacrifice, conceded to you by the gods at the victory over men.
## 09
In just this way for us herd together the contenders in the battles. Indra,  subdue the godless ones who oppose (us).
And with your help, Indra, might we Bharadvājas know (this), as we sing  just now at dawn. 
