+++
title = "026"

+++
26 (467) Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
8 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins (vss. 1–2) with an appeal to Indra for help in battles and contests,  much as in the immediately preceding hymn. The first two verses also play with  the word vā́ja “prize,” perhaps punning on the name of the poet and his bardic  clan, Bharad-vāja. The middle part of the hymn (vss. 3–6) gives brief accounts of  Indra’s battles against various named enemies and his aid to various named mortal  allies; in this structure it is very reminiscent of VI.20, and many of the same inci
dents, with the same, often obscure names, are found in both hymns. The final two  verses (7–8) beg Indra to show the same powers in aid of the poet and his patrons.  The structure of the hymn is thus both fairly conventional and also symmetrical,  with requests to the god in the first two and last two verses and the middle four  verses providing previous models for the aid the god is asked to supply.
Stylistically noteworthy is the regular fronting of the personal pronoun. Beginning  with verse 2, every half-verse through 5a has a fronted form of the 2nd-person sin gular pronoun “you” (and usually another one in an even pāda: 2d, 3b, 4d), either  nominative tuvám or accusative tvā́m. The rest of verse 5 briefly breaks the pat tern, which returns in verse 6. Then, interestingly, the 1st person asserts itself: 7a  ahám “I”, 8a vayám “we,” with 2nd-person genitive táva (7b) and instrumental  tváyā (7c) interspersed. This distribution corresponds to the thematic structure of  the hymn, with the recounting to Indra of his own deeds followed by requests of  him by us mortals on our own behalf. Verse 7 brings the 1st person “I” and 2nd  person “you” into happy conjunction.
## 1
Hear us, Indra. We are calling to you as we are “boiling over” at the  winning of the great prize.
When the clans clash together at the contest of champions, give us
mighty help on the decisive day.
## 2
To you does the prizewinner, son of a prizewinner, call, at the winning of  the great prize to be secured,
to you, Indra, the surpassing master of settlements, when there are
obstacles; to you does the fist-fighter look as he fights for cattle.
## 3
You spurred the poet [=Uśanā Kāvya] on at the winning of the (sun’s)  rays. You wrung out Śuṣṇa for the pious Kutsa.
You struck far away the head of the invulnerable one, intending to do (a  deed) worthy to be proclaimed for Atithigva.
## 4
You brought forward the towering battle-chariot, and helped the bull  Daśadyu as he did battle.
You struck down Tugra for Vetasu, in partnership. You, Indra,
strengthened Tuji, the singer.

## 5
You made that hymn (endowed) with might, Indra, so that you could  tear out hundreds and thousands (of goods), o champion.
You struck the barbarian Śambara down from the mountain and
furthered Divodāsa with glittering help.
## 6
You, reaching elation through the hospitality offerings and the soma  juices, put Cumuri to sleep for Dabhīti.
You, showing favor to Piṭhīnas, in partnership, smashed Raji and his  sixty thousand with your power.
## 7
Might I also, together with my patrons, attain this, the greater favor and  might that are yours, Indra,
when along with you our heroes are praised, you who have our heroes  as companions, along with Nahus who provides threefold defense, o  strongest one.
## 8
Might we be your dearest comrades, Indra, at this invocation to heavenly  brilliance, o great one.
Let the son of Pratardana, glorious in dominion, be the most glorious at  the smashing of obstacles and the winning of rich stakes.