+++
title = "027"

+++
27 (468)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
8 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn traces a satisfying arc from beginning to end: the trajectory is not pre dictable, but the progress from a large and open question to extreme specificity is  neatly handled. It begins with a question, a question all the more open because one  of the crucial terms is unspecified (though easily supplied), the repeated pronoun  asya “of it”—referring, clearly, to soma. The question is what did Indra make or  create under the influence “of it,” and the surprisingly broad answer given in the  responsive verse 2 is “what exists.”
The unqualified comprehensiveness of Indra’ production—“being,” “what  exists”—is contrasted with our imperfect knowledge of his powers in verse 3. But  even what small proportion of that power we have experienced (vs. 4) was more  than sufficient to destroy the Vr̥cīvant army of the enemy Varaśikha for the benefit  of the poet’s patron, Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna—a battle described in verses 4–7. The  second half of verse 6 is especially notable for its warrior slang: the phrase “playing  the lord’s role for an arrow,” which also appears in X.27.6, in our opinion refers to  warriors’ boasting, and “breaking their pots,” which many commentators have tried  to interpret literally, must show the same use of “pot” for “head” as, for example,  German “Kopf” and French “tête.” In our opinion the site of the battle is the con fluence of two rivers, mentioned by name in verses 5 and 6, and then referred to  jointly in verse 7. The dual bovines in that verse have been variously interpreted, but in our opinion, despite a problem with grammatical gender, the most likely referents  are the rivers, in a phrase very reminiscent of one (III.33.1) describing two rivers as  mother cows licking each other in the famous hymn III.33, the dialogue between  the poet Viśvāmitra and two rivers.
The final verse is a dānastuti, praising and detailing the gift made by Abhyāvartin  Cāyamāna to the poet. The poet gives his patron the epithets “bounteous,” a stan dard qualification of Indra (as in vs. 3 in this very hymn), and “universal king,” also  regularly used of Indra (among other divinities). He thus verbally associates his  patron with the unlimited power of Indra, as it was portrayed earlier in the hymn.
## 01
What did Indra create in the exhilaration of it, what at the drinking of it?  what in the fellowship of it?
Or those [=priests] who were there with joy at the installation of it— what did those previous ones acquire? what do the current ones?
## 02
Indra created what exists in the exhilaration of it, what exists at the  drinking of it; what exists in the fellowship of it.
Or those [=priests] who were there with joy at the installation of it—the  previous ones acquired what exists; the current ones what exists.
## 03
But yet we do not know your whole greatness, nor bounteousness, o  bounteous one,
nor every current benefit (of yours). O Indra, your (whole) Indrian
strength has not shown itself.
## 04
(But) there has appeared just that Indrian strength of yours with which  you smashed the posterity of Varaśikha,
when from the blast of your mace when it was smashed down, from just  its sound, their farthest (division) shattered, Indra.
## 05
Indra smashed the posterity of Varaśikha, doing his best for Abhyāvartin  Cāyamāna,
when at the Hariyūpīyā (River) he smashed the Vr̥cīvants in the front  division, and the rear (division) shattered from fear.
## 06
O much-invoked Indra, at the Yavyāvatī (River), though they were a  hundred thirty altogether and armor-clad, with a yen for fame,
the Vr̥cīvants, playing the lord’s role for an arrow, breaking their own  “pots,” came to failed ends.
## 07
He for whom the two ruddy cows [=rivers?], seeking good pasturage,  acted the go-between as they licked each other again and again,
he handed Turvaśa and the Vr̥cīvants over to Sr̥ñjaya, doing his best for  the son of Devavāta.
## 08
O Agni, chariot-steeds by twos and twenty head of cattle together with  brides does the bounteous, universal king give to me—
Abhyāvartin the son of Cayamāna. Difficult to attain is this priestly gift  of the Pārthavas.
