+++
title = "028"

+++
28 (469) The Cows and Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
8 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 2–4, anuṣṭubh 8
Although this hymn is found right in the middle of the Indra cycle, the Anukramaṇī assigns most of the verses in this hymn to the cows (1, 3–8c), with a few (2, 8d) to  the cows or Indra. The hymn was later used as a blessing for cows as they return  home, but it may originally have been intended to bless the cows given as a dakṣiṇā (priestly gift) as they enter the home of their new owner. According to the Vaitāna  Śrauta Sūtra 21.24, the sacrificer awaited the cows intended for the dakṣiṇā with the  hymn Atharvaveda IV.21 (=R̥V VI.28.1–7). It is worth noting that almost the last  word of the preceding hymn (VI.27.8d) is dákṣiṇā, and this may have invited the  placement of this hymn here.
The safety of the cows of the pious man as they graze is the subject of much of the  hymn, and the various dangers that could befall them are detailed: being stolen by a  thief or in a cattle raid, getting lost, going to the slaughterhouse. They are also given  rather grandiose identifications in verse 5, including with Indra: 5c is a clear echo,  almost to parody, of the famous hymn II.12 with its refrain: “he, o peoples, is Indra.”
The final verse is in a different meter, and as it is not part of the Atharvaveda  version of this hymn, it was probably originally separate. In form it is a magical  exhortation and makes use of the only slightly euphemistic verb upa-√pr̥c “mix  sexually.” The verse obviously expresses the wish that the cows become impreg
nated, and thus picks up the adjective “bearing offspring” in verses 2 and 7. The  use of the near deictic “right here” modifying “the inseminator” suggests that the  performance of the spell has a physical component in addition to the verbal, as is  regularly found in the Atharvaveda.
## 1
The cows have come here and have made (the house) blessed. Let them  find a place in the cow-stall; let them find enjoyment among us.
Here should those of many colors be, bearing offspring, as through
many dawns they give milk for Indra.
## 2
Indra does his best for the man who sacrifices and delivers in full. He  gives more; he does not steal what belongs to him.
Making wealth increase more and more just for him, he establishes the  man devoted to the gods in undivided virgin land.
## 3
These will not be lost, and no thief will take them by deception. No  enemy will venture against their meandering course.
Those (cows) with which he sacrifices and gives to the gods, he keeps  company with them as their cowherd for a very long time.
## 4
No dusty-necked steed gets to them (in a cattle raid), nor do they go to  the place for dressing [=slaughterhouse].
The cows of the mortal who sacrifices wander far across wide-ranging  (space) free of fear. 5. Fortune has appeared to me as cows; Indra as cows. The draught of the  first soma is cows.
These cows here—they, o peoples, are Indra. I am just searching, with  my heart and mind, for Indra.
## 6
You fatten even the thin man, o cows. You make even one without beauty  to have a lovely face.
You make the house blessed, o you of blessed speech. Your vigor is
declared loftily in the assemblies.
## 7
Bearing offspring, cropping good pasturage, drinking pure waters at a  good watering hole—
let not a thief be master of you, nor one who utters evil. Might the lance  of Rudra avoid you.
## 8
Right here is the inseminator: let there be inseminating right here in  these cows,
right here when the semen of the bull (is here), right here when your  virility (is here), o Indra.