+++
title = "029"

+++
29 (470)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verses: triṣṭubh
The most notable feature in this hymn is the theme of “attachment,” which is played  with semantically and syntactically in verses 2–4. In verse 2 it is Indra’s own powers  that are attached to him, or rather to his hand (see also the mace in hand in vs. 1),  but in the following two verses ritual elements offered by men are the attachments.  Since the final verse (6) is a summary verse, introduced as often by evā́ “in this way,”  verses 2–4 constitute an omphalos defined by the attachment theme. Interestingly,  the only one of Indra’s great deeds mentioned in this hymn is his forceful separation of heaven and earth (vs. 5b), which provides a conceptual opposite to the attach
ment elsewhere.
The larger concern of the hymn is the reciprocal relation between men, who offer  Indra sacrifice and praise poetry, and Indra, who places his power in the service of  men and offers them gifts. This relationship is announced in the first verse, espe cially in the word “partnership, comradeship” in the first pāda, and is also conveyed  iconically by the “attachment” of the words “Indra” and “men,” which occur next  to each other initial in the opening pāda of the hymn, and again in 4c (índraṃ [vo]  náraḥ). The relationship between the god and his worshipers is here modeled on  that between the poet-sacrificer and his patron. Indra is in fact called a “patron” in  verse 5 and described as providing the priestly gift (dakṣiṇā) in verse 3, which is the  task and prerogative of a patron.814 VI.30
## 1
The men serve Indra for you [=patrons or priests] for the sake of his  partnership and benevolence, as they go on finding pleasure in the
great one,
for he whose hand holds the mace is the giver of a great (thing). Sacrifice  to the great and delightful one for help.
## 2
To which hand manly powers are firmly attached, (as) a chariot driver is  to his golden chariot,
(as) reins are to the two brawny fists, (as) bullish horses yoked together  are to the road.
## 3
For your glory do our friendly services firmly attach themselves to your  two feet [=do homage]. As the bold mace-bearer, (you) provide the
priestly gift;
wearing a fragrant cloak, (lovely) to be seen like the sun, you have
become vigorous, o dancer.
## 4
(But) the pressed soma has become the most firmly attached (to him),  in whose (presence) the cooked food is cooked and there are roasted  grains,
while the men who create the sacred formulations are praising Indra and  reciting their hymns as the men most cherished by the gods.
## 5
No limit has been set for this vast power of yours. He forced apart the  two world-halves with his greatness.
With his help our patron [=Indra] brings these things to fulfillment as he  keeps thrusting, as if driving his herds together to the waters.
## 6
Just in this way let lofty Indra be easily called—the warrior with golden  lips, with his help that needs no help,
for in this way was he born with unequalled, surpassing might. He will  strike down many obstacles [/Vr̥tras] and Dasyus.