+++
title = "030"

+++
30 (471)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is entirely a celebration of Indra’s cosmogonic and cosmos-maintaining  deeds and powers. The only possible indications of a human dimension in the hymn  are the oblique reference to the soma sacrifice in the first pāda of the hymn, the  granting of good things in the second pāda, and the ruminative “I think” at the  beginning of the second verse. The pace of the hymn is brisk, but this straightfor
ward recital of the high points of Indra’s career has a pleasing balance and variety  in its expressions.
## 1
He has been strengthened even more for the heroic deed; he alone, the  unaging, apportions good things. Indra projects beyond heaven and earth: the two worlds are equivalent to  just half of him.
## 2
Therefore I think his lordly power to be lofty. Those things that he  upholds, no one alters.
Day after day the sun becomes visible. The strong-willed one distributed  the seats widely.
## 3
Even today, even now, this is the labor of the rivers, since you dug out a  way for them, Indra.
The mountains settled down like (flies) settling on food. By you were the  airy realms fixed fast, o you of strong will.
## 4
This is really true: there exists no other like you. Indra, no god nor  mortal is greater.
You smashed the serpent that lay around the flood; you sent the waters  surging toward the sea.
## 5
You (sent) forth the waters, (opened) wide the doors in every direction.  Indra, you broke the fastness of the mountain.
You became the king of the moving world and of the settled domains,  begetting at once the sun, heaven, and dawn.