+++
title = "031"

+++
31 (472)
Indra
Suhotra Bhāradvāja
5 verses: triṣṭubh, except śakvarī 4
This hymn begins by proclaiming Indra’s power over all peoples and all the cosmic  and earthly realms (vss. 1–2), before focusing on several of his famous battles and  the mortals he aided in them (vss. 3–4). The final verse exhorts Indra to perform the  same martial services for us.
The most interesting verse is the first, where at first glance the logical connec tions among the three clauses are not clear. But the contrast between the singleness  and unification of the first half of the verse and the division in the second seems  to be the point. Indra is the single lord of wealth because he can gather all peoples  just in his two hands—peoples who were otherwise disunited and quarreling over  the various goods of existence. Indra’s act of unification in this verse seems to be  a kind of wishful thinking on the poet’s part, however, for the battles depicted in  verses 3 and 4 are the result of disunity, and in verse 5 we call on Indra for aid in the  same sorts of disputations found in 1cd. The “separate peoples” (carṣaṇí) of verse  1 also return in verse 5; the poet wishes to see them as a sort of universal audience  for the fame of himself and his people, brought about by Indra’s intervention on  their behalf.
## 01
You, o wealth-lord, have become the single (lord) of wealth: you have  taken (all) the communities in your hands, Indra.

The separate peoples, disputants, were disputing with each other over  progeny and posterity, the waters, and the sun.
## 02
Through fear of you, Indra, all the earthly realms, though unshakeable,  are brought to shaking.
Heaven and earth, the mountains, and the forests—all that is firmly fixed  takes fright at your drive.
## 03
You, Indra—fight along with Kutsa against the insatiable Śuṣṇa, the  demon of bad harvest, in the quest for cattle,
and against his ten before the (ritual) mealtime. Then you steal the wheel  of the sun. You have toiled at your labors.
## 04
You smashed down hundreds of impregnable fortresses of the Dasyu  Śambara,
when, able one, with your ability you did your best for Divodāsa the  presser and for Bharadvāja the singer, for (them to obtain) goods, o
you who can be bought with the pressing.
## 05
Mount your fearsome chariot, you real “real thing,” powerfully manly,  for the great battle.
O you in the vanguard, drive here toward me with your help, and
proclaim our fame, famous one, to the separate peoples.