+++
title = "032"

+++
32 (473) Indra
Suhotra Bhāradvāja
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Unlike the common practice, whereby the final verse of the hymn constitutes the  poet’s summing up of his hymn, in this hymn the first verse serves this purpose, in  meta-relationship with what follows. The remaining verses, each of which begins  with the pronoun sá “he,” constitute the praise the poet announced in verse 1. Verses  2–3 refer to the Vala myth, with special attention paid to Indra’s companions in this  enterprise, the unnamed Aṅgirases, and verse 5 may be an oblique account of the  aftermath of the Vr̥tra slaying. In verse 4 Indra is exhorted to grant the singer pow
ers and riches.
## 1
For him I have fashioned with my mouth these words, unprecedented,  best of many, most wealful—for the great hero, powerful and
precipitous,
conferring abundance, bearing the mace, stalwart.
## 2
He made the two mothers of the poets shine with the sun; he broke the  rock as he was being hymned.
Bellowing [/being eager] along with the very attentive versifiers, he let  loose the binding of the ruddy cows. 3. He, the doer of many deeds, triumphed every time when cattle were at  stake, in company with the conveyors (of songs), the versifiers with
their knees fixed.
Acting as comrade along with his comrades, the smasher of fortresses  broke the firmly fixed fortresses, being a poet along with poets.
## 4
As great one, drive here to the singer with (riches) to clothe (him), with  prizes, and with your great unbridled powers,
with (riches) bringing many heroes, o bull of the settlements, you who  long for songs—for good faring.
## 5
He, launched in a surge with power along with his coursers, Indra,  overcoming the precipitous, (sent) the waters (surging) to the right.
Sent surging in just that way, without turning aside, day after day (the  waters) have toiled at their purpose, not to be neglected.