+++
title = "033"

+++
33 (474)
Indra
Śunahotra Bhāradvāja
5 verses: triṣṭubh
A martial hymn. The poet reminds Indra that he will receive entreaties for help  from all sides in the combat (vs. 2, using language almost identical to that in nearby  VI.31.1), but begs him to help our side alone, in battles and in contests. The poetry  is for the most part quite straightforward, except for the enigmatic expression in  verse 3 (probably not coincidentally the middle verse), in which Indra’s weapons  against formidable enemies appear to be “well-placed cloaks.” This expression has  been much discussed, and a number of scholars have opted to emend it. But it  likely refers to Indra’s penchant for shape-shifting disguises in combat. Moreover,  the word “well-placed” (súdhita) is phonologically close to a word for “hatchet”  (svádhiti), and this pun may well be lurking in the simile about trees.
## 1
What is the most mighty, o Indra, give that to us: your (battle-)ecstasy,  very superior and rich in gifts, o bull,
which, possessing good horses, will win a mass of good horses and will  defeat obstacles and enemies in battles.
## 2
For the separate peoples, disputants, call (separately) on you for help at  the contest of champions.
You dispersed the niggards through (the inspiration of) the inspired  poets, and it is just through your aid that the charger is the winner of  the prize.
## 3
You, o champion, smite both kinds of enemies, the Dāsa and the Ārya  obstacles,
like trees (with hatchets), with your well-placed cloaks. Break (them)  apart in the battles, o most manly of men.

## 4
You, Indra—by your unstinting help become our lifelong companion  and helper for our strengthening,
when, in the winning of the sun, we call upon you as we fight, facing the  other side in battles, o champion.
## 5
(So) should you be for us, now and for the future, Indra. Be there for us  in mercy and in superiority.
Singing in just this way, might we be under the protection of the great  one and on the decisive day be the best winners of cattle.