+++
title = "034"

+++
34 (475) Indra
Śunahotra Bhāradvāja
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The first verse of this hymn is a remarkably condensed expression of the poetic  economy:  Indra is both the recipient of praise songs and the source of inspira tion for those poetic thoughts. Moreover, all poets, past and present, vie to attract  Indra’s attention, each with his own poem. The rest of the hymn develops these  thoughts. Verses 2–3 continue the theme of multiple poets focusing on a single  object, Indra, and then provide a transition to the final two verses (4–5), which  celebrate the benefits that Indra receives from praise and sacrifice in a manner that  indicates that our praise and sacrifice are happening now.
## 1
Many songs have converged on you, Indra, and out from you go inspired  thoughts far and wide.
Previously and now, the seers’ songs of praise, their recitations and
hymns, have contended over Indra.
## 2
The skillful one, who is called upon by many and welcomed by many,  who alone is celebrated by many with sacrifices—
like a chariot yoked for great power, Indra is to be cheered on.
## 3
Indra, whom neither insightful thoughts nor voices harm; they just  approach him, making him strong.
When a hundred, when a thousand praisers sing to him who longs for  song, that is weal for him.
## 4
This is (weal) for him: seeking attachment, the soma has been set  firmly in Indra, like the two shining ones, (sun and) moon, in
heaven.
Our invocations along with our sacrifices have entirely strengthened  (him), like a man in the desert when waters con(verge) on him.
## 5
This is (weal) for him: a great song for him, a praise hymn for Indra has  been spoken through our composed thoughts,
so that, in the great overcoming of Vr̥tra [/obstacles], Indra will be our  lifelong helper and strengthener.