+++
title = "035"

+++
35 (476)
Indra
Nara Bhāradvāja
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Unlike the last hymn, which calmly contemplates the good our praise is doing for  Indra, this hymn inquires impatiently about the reward we should receive for this  activity, a mood conveyed by the peremptory questions of the first three verses and  the commands of verse 4.
The final verse (5) is syntactically very difficult and has given rise to a variety of inter pretations, especially of the first half-verse. We consider it a reference to the Vala myth  (as is clear at least in the mention of the Aṅgirases in d and also probably of the doors  in b): the poet hopes that the mythic opening of the Vala cave and the good things that  emerged from it will serve as a model for Indra’s wished-for bounties now. The “com munity” is probably both the poet’s own people and the Aṅgirases as comrades of Indra.
## 1
When will the sacred formulations find their resting place in the chariot?  When will you give to the praiser what will prosper a thousandfold?
When will you clothe his praise song with wealth? When will you make  his insights have prizes as jewels?
## 2
Just when will it be, Indra, that you will place in your own nest our men  with your men, our heroes with your heroes? Win the contests!
With cattle at stake, you will win cattle three times over. Indra, grant to  us sunlit brilliance.
## 3
Just when will it be, Indra, that you will make the sacred formulation  provided with all goods for the singer, o strongest one?
When will you team your teams, as (we do our) insights? When will you  go to the calls whose bounty is cattle?
## 4
Lay on for the singer nourishments whose bounty is cattle, whose glitter  is horses, whose fame is prizes of victory.
Swell the good-milking cow with refreshments, Indra. Might you make  them shine very bright among the Bharadvājas.
## 5
This community here and now do I sing, as (I did) also at another time,  when as champion, able one, you (opened) wide the doors.
May I not miss out on the milk-cow whose milk is clear (soma) [/semen].  Quicken the Āṅgirases, o inspired poet, with your sacred formulation.