+++
title = "036"

+++
36 (477) Indra
Nara Bhāradvāja
5 verses: triṣṭubh
An unqualified celebration of Indra’s complete power and his control of all beings  and things, both earthly and heavenly. It is hoped that the peoples’ offerings to

Indra, the soma (vs. 1), the sacrificial offerings (vs. 2), and the songs (vs. 3), will  provoke answering generosity (vs. 4). This reciprocal relationship is economically  expressed in the last half of verse 5.
## 1
Completely yours are the exhilarating (drinks) stemming from all  peoples, and completely the riches that come from the earth.
Completely have you become the apportioner of prizes, as you uphold  your lordship among the gods.
## 2
The people have sacrificed fore and after offerings to his might.
Completely have they conceded to his heroic power
and to the headstrong charger pulling at the reins. They bend their will  (to him) at the smashing of Vr̥tra [/obstacles].
## 3
Directed to the same goal, his forms of help, his bullish powers, his  manly powers, and his teams accompany Indra.
Like rivers to the sea, the songs whose gusts are solemn words enter him  of broad expanse.
## 4
As you are sung, let loose the wellspring of wealth, Indra, and of  much-glittering goods.
You have become the unequalled lord of peoples, you alone the king of  all creation.
## 5
You who seek friendship—hear what is worthy to be heard: Like heaven  over the earth, sur(mount) the riches of the stranger,
so that you will keep finding enjoyment in us and you will keep
showing yourself with your strength and your vigor generation after  generation.