+++
title = "037"

+++
37 (478)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The first three verses follow the model of a “journey” hymn, but with a twist. The  fallow bays of verse 1 are Indra’s familiar horses, bringing his chariot to the sacri fice, but the same word (hárayaḥ) in verse 2 refers to the tawny soma drops. In verse  3 we return to the real horses, qualified as “charging straight on,” just like the soma  in the previous verse. The mention of Vāyu in verse 3 identifies the ritual in question  as the Morning Pressing.
The remaining two verses of the hymn (4–5) do not continue the journey theme.  Instead Indra is configured as a (divine) patron (vs. 5), who gives the priestly gift to  the (human) patrons (vs. 4). See VI.29 for a similar identification of Indra with the  sacrificial patron. 1. Close to here let your yoked fallow bays convey your chariot, which  brings all desirable things, mighty Indra,
for even the weakling calls upon you, (as well as the man) of solar glory.  Might we achieve success as your feasting companions today.
## 2
The fallow bays [=soma drops] have gone forth to their labor in the  wooden cup, and while being purified, they have come to be charging  straight on.
Indra should be the first to drink of this (soma) of ours, as the
heaven-ruling king of soma’s exhilaration.
## 3
Making their run here, the chariot-horses should convey powerful Indra  on (the chariot) with good wheels,
as they are charging straight on toward fame. Never should Vāyu’s
immortal (drink) give out.
## 4
Indra, the most excellent, the most powerfully ranging of the bounteous  ones, sets in motion his priestly gift—
with which, mace-bearer, you evade difficult straits and you apportion  bounties to our patrons, bold one.
## 5
Indra is the giver of the enduring prize. Let Indra increase through the  songs, his greatness increased;
let Indra be the best smiter of Vr̥tra [/the obstacle] as a consummate  warrior. Our patron brings these things to fulfillment as he keeps
thrusting.