+++
title = "038"

+++
38 (479)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The context of this hymn is the morning ritual, and its aim is to attract Indra to it  by our invocation, which is the subject of the first two verses. In verse 1 Agni seems  to carry the invocation heavenward; in the second the invocation turns Indra here.  The strength Indra will derive from both praise and sacrifice occupy the next two  verses (3–4), and the final verse summarizes our attempts to attract him and the  benefits he will provide us.
Especially in the first two verses the poet is coy about reference, and the audience  must guess the subjects of the verbs and the referents of the pronouns until the last  pāda of verse 2.
## 1
He [=Agni?] has drunk from here; the most glittering one will carry up  our great, heaven-bright invocation to Indra.
On his journey he of good gifts will win a more admirable insightful  thought as present for the divine folk.

## 2
Even from a distance, his two ears take residence here. It will sound— when speaking of Indra, it thunders:
this invocation to the gods should turn him—Indra—here toward me,  this one just now being recited.
## 3
With my highest insight, with my recitations I have roared for you to  ageless Indra, born of old.
Not only have the sacred formulations and the songs together been
placed in him, but in Indra the great praise puts strength.
## 4
Indra, whom the sacrifice will strengthen and the soma, (whom) the  sacred formulation will strengthen, and the songs, solemn words, and  thoughts—
so strengthen him at the coming of dawn from night. The months,
autumns, and days will strengthen Indra.
## 5
In just this way we now would seek to attract him here—him who was  born for vanquishing, who has been strengthened, and not by halves,  for famed generosity,
him, great and mighty, for help in the overcoming of obstacles [/Vr̥tra], o  inspired poet.