+++
title = "039"

+++
39 (480) Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Like the previous hymn, this one is tied to the here-and-now of the ritual situation;  also like the previous hymn, this one plays games with reference. The subject of the  hymn is really soma, but the word “soma” does not appear in it, and in the middle  verses of the hymn, which are insistently about soma, the poet intentionally mis
leads us about the referent.
In verse 1 a long series of adjectives in the genitive describing an unidentified being  is resolved by the verb “you have drunk”—the subject is Indra, and the genitive ref erent must be soma. The three middle verses (2–4) form an omphalos defined by  the repeated near deictic “this one here.” This pronoun should have a referent in the  immediate vicinity of the poet, but the first of these verses concerns what is clearly the  Vala myth, which invites the audience to supply Indra as the subject. It is only as the  sequence unfolds (and especially with the specification of “this one” as a “drop” in vs.  3) that it becomes clear that soma is taking the role of Indra is these verses.
For a similar covert coding of soma, there by the use of the genitive pronoun  asya “of it, of this one” see VI.27.1–2.
## 1
Of the gladdening poet, of the heavenly draft-horse, of the one of  inspired thought, of the speaking honey, of this companion of ours have you drunk, o god. Bind refreshments  tipped with cows to the singer.
## 2
This one here eagerly (breaks) the rock en(closing) the ruddy (cows),  as the one whose yoke is truth, having been yoked by those of true
insights;
he breaks apart the unbreakable back of the Vala cave. Indra will fight  against the Paṇis with words.
## 3
This drop here lights up the unlit nights in the evening and at dawn  through the autumns, o Indra.
This one they established to be ever the beacon of the days: he has made  the dawns to have blazing birth.
## 4
This one here, himself shining, makes the unshining ones shine. This one  makes the many (dawns) dawn forth through truth.
This one speeds with his horses whose yoke is truth, with his sun-finding  (wheel-)nave, as he fills the domains.
## 5
Being sung now, ancient king, swell many refreshments for the giving of  good things to the singer.
Give waters, plants without poison, trees, cows, chargers, and men for  the praising.