+++
title = "040"

+++
40 (481) Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is for the most part a typical invitation to Indra, to drive to our sacrifice  and drink the soma. However, it is chronologically backward. The first two verses  urge Indra to drink, the first opening with a peremptory command, “Indra, drink!”  The next two verses (3–4) command Indra to “drive here,” the logically prior action.  Only in the last verse do the two actions occur together, in the temporally appropri
ate order. The imperative “drink!” (píba) found as the second word in the hymn is  matched in the last pāda of the hymn by another imperative “take a drink” (pāhi),  likewise second in its pāda, both verbs formed to the same root but in the present  and aorist systems respectively.
Note also the reciprocal expressions in the final pādas of verses 1 and 4: in verse  1 it is Indra who will create vitality for the singer and the sacrifice; in verse 4 by  contrast the sacrifice creates vitality for Indra.
The final word of the hymn, “with the Maruts,” establishes the Midday Pressing  as the ritual in question. The Maruts are also obliquely referred to in the first verse,  in the phrase “amid your troop.”
## 1
Indra, drink! It is pressed for you for your exhilaration. Unhitch your  two fallow bays; let loose your two partners.824 VI.41
And sing forth here having sat down amid your troop. Then create
vitality for the singer for sacrifice.
## 2
Drink of this, of which you drank when you were just born, Indra, for  your exhilaration and for your resolve, o you who confer abundance. This drop have the cows, the men, the waters, and the stone together  impelled for you—for it to be fully drunk.
## 3
With the fire kindled, Indra, the soma has been pressed. Let your fallow  bays, the best conveyors, convey you here.
With a mind seeking you, I call upon you again and again. Drive here,  Indra, for our great good faring.
## 4
Drive here. Over and over you have driven with your great and eager  mind to the soma-drinking, Indra.
You will listen to these sacred formulations of ours, and then the
sacrifice will create vitality for your body.
## 5
When, Indra, on the decisive day, whether (you are) remote or in your  own seat, or wherever you are ...
from there (drive) with your team to our sacrifice to help us. Take a
drink, joined in revelry with the Maruts, o you who long for the songs.