+++
title = "042"

+++
42 (483)
Indra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
4 verses: anuṣṭubh 1–3, br̥hatī 4
Yet another hymn concerned almost entirely with Indra’s soma-drinking, but unlike  the immediately preceding hymns, Indra is not directly urged to come and drink the  soma. Rather, Indra is in the 3rd person throughout, and commands are issued to  a single individual (vss. 1, 4) and to a group (vss. 2–3), to serve Indra. None of the  addressees is identified until verse 4, with its vocative addressing the Adhvaryu. He  is likely therefore also to be the addressee in verse 1; presumably the priests as a  whole are addressed by the plural imperatives in the internal verses.
In this otherwise ritually focused hymn, the very specific anxiety expressed in  the last half-verse comes as some surprise, a surprise mirrored in the meter, with  the 12/8 half-verse contrasting with the 8/8 structure that has prevailed throughout.  This wondering question about Indra’s possible aid against the boastful slanderer  functionally fills the usual hymn-final slot of direct plea to the god for help, despite  its indirection.
## 1
Present (it) to him who desires to drink, who knows all things,
to the superior man who comes fittingly, who comes regularly, who does  not lag behind.
## 2
Go toward him, the best of the soma-drinkers, with the soma juices, to Indra possessing the silvery drink, with tankards, with the
pressed drops.
## 3
When you attend on him with the pressed soma drops,
the wise one knows of it all, but he boldly hastens just to that one
[=soma].
## 4
Just to this one here [=Indra], o Adhvaryu, bring forth the pressed (juice)  of the stalk.
Surely he will rescue (us) from the calumny of anyone who boastfully  claims high breeding?
826 VI.43–44