+++
title = "044"

+++
44 (485) Indra
Śaṃyu Bārhaspatya
24 verses: anuṣṭubh 1–6, triṣṭubh or virāj 7, 9, virāj 8, triṣṭubh 10–24, arranged in trcas ̥
A composite hymn placed toward the end of the Indra cycle in Maṇḍala VI, the  hymn consists of eight tr̥cas, the first two (vss. 1–6) in anuṣṭubh, the third (vss. 7–9)  in a mixture of triṣṭubh and virāj, and the remaining five (vss. 10–24) in triṣṭubh.  Several of the tr̥cas are rhetorically unified: 1–3 with its repeated second half-verse  following a definitional relative clause; 19–21 with its insistent “bull” theme; 22–24  with its repeated half-verse-initial “this one here” (ayám) referring to soma. The  others have less obvious internal unity, though there is often a continuity of theme  or subject. There is also no visible external unity among the tr̥cas collected in this  “hymn,” though it seldom strays far from Indra and the soma-drinking, the topic of  many of the immediately preceding hymns. Indeed, Oldenberg (1888: 203) suggests  that VI.44 owes its position to the similarity between the refrain of its first tr̥ca and  the refrain of VI.43. 1. The one that is wealthiest, o wealthy one, that is most brilliant through  its brilliance,
the pressed soma—that is your exhilarating drink, o Indra, lord of
independent power.
## 2
The capable one that is yours, o powerfully capable one, the giver of  wealth and of thoughts,
the pressed soma—that is your exhilarating drink, o Indra, lord of
independent power.
## 3
The one through which (you are) like one grown strong by (his own)  power and like one overpowering by his own forms of help,
the pressed soma—that is your exhilarating drink, o Indra, lord of
independent power.
## 4
I will sing for you to this lord of power, who never smites (us) away, to Indra, the all-conquering superior man, most bounteous, possessing  all domains.
## 5
He whom songs make strong, the lord of overpowering generosity— his tempestuous force do the two world-halves, the goddesses, respect. 6. It (is mine) to lay on your behalf, with the power of solemn speech, the  underlayer for Indra,
whose forms of helps are like inspired words, since, dwelling together,  they spread apart in their ascent.
## 7
Our newer ally [=Soma] has found the skill. Having been drunk, he has  perceived what is better for the gods.
Having won with the brawny racers [?], in making broad shelter he
became a protector for his comrades.
## 8
On the path of truth, the ritual adept has been drunk. The gods have  set their minds for glory.
Acquiring the name of “great” by (ritual) speeches, the one worthy of  the quest has disclosed his wondrous form to be seen.
## 9
Bestow the most brilliant skill on us. Repel the many hostilities of the  peoples.
Make our vitality higher through your abilities. Help us in the winning  of the stake.
## 10
Indra, we have become ready just for you, the giver, you generous  possessor of the fallow bays. Do not lose the track.
No one has shown himself as our friend among mortals. Do they not  call you a rouser (even) of the weak?
## 11
Give us not to exhaustion, bull. Let us not come to harm in our  comradeship with you, the wealthy.
Many are the tributes for you among the peoples, Indra. Smite the
non-pressers; rip away those who don’t deliver.

## 12
Like the thunderer the rain clouds, Indra stirs up bounties of horses  and cattle.
It is you who provide nourishment to the bard from of old. Let those  without gifts not trick you away from (our) benefactor.
## 13
O Adhvaryu, hero, give of the pressed (soma drinks) to great Indra, for  he is its king,
he who has grown strong by the previous and the present songs of  singing seers.
## 14
In its exhilaration, knowing many shapes, Indra smashed unopposable  obstacles.
Pour forth for him the honeyed soma, for the belipped hero to drink. 15. Let Indra be the one who drinks the pressed soma, who smashes the  obstacle [/Vr̥tra] with his mace in his exhilaration,
who goes to the sacrifice, even from far away, who is the good helper of  insights, providing nourishment to the bard.
## 16
Here is this drinking cup, giving drink to Indra. Indra’s dear immortal  (drink) has been drunk,
so that it will exhilarate the god for the sake of his good favor and will  keep hatred and constraint away from us.
## 17
Becoming exhilarated by it, o champion, smash your rivals and your  foes, both kin and non-kin, o bounteous one.
Those with weapons aimed at us, setting their sights on us—pulverize  and smash them, Indra, (for them to become) far away.
## 18
Once more, in these our battles, bounteous Indra, make for us a great  wide space and easy passage.
Go halves with our patrons, Indra, in the conquering of the waters, of  life and lineage.
## 19
Your fallow bays, the bulls that have been yoked, the steeds with their  bullish chariot and with their bullish reins,
the bulls that convey your mace—let them, well-yoked, convey you here  in our direction for bullish exhilaration.
## 20
The bulls have mounted the wooden cup for you, o bull, like waves  spraying ghee as they bring exhilaration.
Indra, to you, the bullish bull, they present soma from out of the  (drops) pressed by bulls.
## 21
You are the bullish bull of heaven and of earth, the bullish bull of the  rivers and of the standing waters.
O bull, for bullish you the drop has swelled, the sweet sap, the honeyed  drink, to your liking.
## 22
This god here, being born with strength, with Indra as his yokemate,  blocked the Paṇi [/niggard]. This one here, the drop, stole the weapons of his own father, the tricks  of the unkindly one.
## 23
This one gave the dawns a good husband; this one placed light within  the sun.
This one found the threefold immortal one hidden in heaven among the  third realms of light.
## 24
This one propped apart heaven and earth; this one yoked the chariot  with seven reins.
This one, Soma, by his ability, secures the cooked (milk) within the
cows, the wellspring with its ten fastenings: Soma!