+++
title = "045"

+++
45 (486)
Indra
Śaṃyu Bārhaspatya
33 verses: gāyatrī, except atinicrt 29, anu ̥ ṣṭubh 33, arranged in trcas ̥
Like the preceding hymn, this one is composed of tr̥cas, the first ten to Indra, the  last one (vss. 31–33) a dānastuti to the patron Br̥bu. Given its position in the Indra  cycle, it is unlikely to have been originally a single hymn, but there are some themes  that keep recurring throughout the hymn, such as the comparison of Indra with a  cow or calf (vss. 7, 22, 25–26, 28), the sacred formulation as a vehicle for Indra (vss.  4, 7, 19), and the stake that is set as a prize in a contest (vss. 2, 11–13, 15). However,  rhetorical unity within tr̥cas seems almost entirely lacking.
## 1
Who with good leading led Turvaśa and Yadu here from afar,
he is Indra, our youthful comrade.
## 2
Placing vitality even in the uninspired, even with a steed lacking speed, Indra is the winner of the stake that is set.
## 3
Great is his guidance and many are the encomia for him.
His help does not perish.
## 4
Comrades, chant and sing forth to him whose vehicle is the sacred  formulation,
for he is great solicitude for us.
## 5
You, o Vr̥tra-smasher, are the helper of one, of two,
and for such as we are.
## 6
Only you lead (us) beyond hatreds; you make (us) proclaimers of solemn  speech;
and you are called rich in heroes by superior men.
## 7
To the formulator whose vehicle is the sacred formulation, to the  comrade worthy of verses
do I call with my songs, as to a cow to be milked,

## 8
In whose two hands all good things are at home, now as before— (in the hands) of the hero, victorious in battles.
## 9
(Tear) apart even the strongholds of the peoples, o possessor of the  stone and lord of power;
tear (apart) their tricks, you who can’t be bowed.
## 10
It is just you, o Indra, you real one, you drinker of soma and lord of  prizes,
that we have called upon, seeking fame—
## 11
Just you, who were before or who are now to be called upon when the  stake is set.
Hear our call!
## 12
With insights as our steeds, (might we win) steeds and prizes worthy of  fame, o Indra;
with you might we win the stake that is set.
## 13
You became great when the stake was set, o Indra, you hero who longs  for songs,
and the one worth tussling for at the raid.
## 14
Your help that has the quickest speed, o smasher of foes—
with that impel our chariot.
## 15
As the best charioteer, with our chariot on the attack,
win, o winner, the stake that is set.
## 16
Praise only him, who alone was born as the limitless lord of the  separate peoples,
having a bullish will.
## 17
You who were the only friend with help, the kindly comrade of the  singers,
have mercy on us, Indra.
## 18
Set your mace in your hands to smash the demons, mace-bearer. You should overpower your opponents.
## 19
The ancient yokemate of riches, the comrade who spurs on the weak, the one who most has the sacred formulation as his vehicle—upon him  do I call.
## 20
For he alone is lord of all the good things of the earth,
the rich one who most longs for songs.
## 21
(Coming) here with your teams, fulfill our desire with prizes of horses and of cows, lord of cows, acting boldly.
## 22
Sing this at the pressing to the warrior called upon by many, (this) that is weal for the able one as if for a cow.
## 23
The good one will not hold back his gift of a prize of cattle when he will hear these songs. 24. For the smiter of Dasyus will certainly go forth to somebody’s cattle  enclosure;
with his powers he will open it up.
## 25
These songs bellow out again and again to you, o you of a hundred  resolves,
like mothers to their calf, Indra.
## 26
Partnership with you is difficult to attain. You are, o hero, the cow for  him who seeks cattle.
Become the horse for him who seeks horses.
## 27
Find exhilaration from the stalk, then, to show great generosity with  your own person.
You will not put your praiser to scorn.
## 28
These songs come near to you at every pressing, o you who long  for songs,
as milk-cows do their calf—
## 29
(You,) the first among many at the verbal contest of the many
praiser-singers,
who compete for the prize with their prizes.
## 30
Let ours be the praise song that best conveys you nearest, Indra. Impel us toward great wealth.
## 31
Br̥bu has stood upon the highest head of the niggards [/Paṇis];
(he is) as broad of girth as the Ganges—
## 32
(He) whose propitious gift in the thousands, at a speed like the wind’s, is ready for giving all at once.
## 33
So then do all our bards always hymn here, away from (the sacrifice) of  the stranger,
Br̥bu, the best giver of thousands, the patron, the best winner of
thousands.