+++
title = "046"

+++
46 (487) Indra
Śaṃyu Bārhaspatya
14 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
Like the previous two hymns, this one has too many verses for its position in the  Indra cycle, though its division into the two-verse pragātha units may account for  its placement. Nonetheless, the hymn seems to be a conceptual unity, rather than a  collection of independent pragāthas.
The hymn concentrates on Indra as the helper of his praisers in contests and in  battles. He is exhorted to come to our aid, to provide us with protection, to bring

us the power inhering in rival peoples (see especially vss. 7–8), and to help us defeat  our foes. The hymn is without major complications, and the theme is more repeated  than developed. This regular repetition gives the hymn an unhurried pace, which  contrasts with the urgency of the contests and battles described. This pace begins  to quicken in the last verses: the repeated phrase introducing an imperative, “So  then, as ever” (vss. 10, 11, 12), seems to be building to a finale. But the last pragātha  (vss. 13–14), rather than providing the expected climactic plea to Indra for aid that  would end the hymn conventionally, is instead a two-verse subordinate clause about  Indra and his racing horses that utterly lacks a main clause, and it displays a den sity of imagery, with unrelated similes piled up pell-mell, that seems designed to  replicate the breathless pace of a real contest—a remarkable effect. At the same  time, it harkens back to the beginning of the hymn, with its mention of steeds and  the racecourse (see vs. 1) and the “great stakes” (see vs. 4), so that the apparently  reckless speed and lack of completion of the final two verses is contained within a  ring-compositional structure.
## 1
Because it is just you that we bards call upon at the winning of  the prize,
you, Indra, as master of settlements that our men (call upon) amid
obstacles, you at the finish lines of our steed,
## 2
So you—o dazzling one with mace in hand, o possessor of the stone,  being praised as the great one—boldly
heap up for us cow, horse, and chariotry altogether like a prize for the  winner, o Indra.
## 3
The unbounded one who smites altogether, that Indra do we call upon. O you possessing a thousand testicles, of powerful manliness, master of  settlements—be there to strengthen us in the combats.
## 4
Like a bull, you press the peoples hard with your battle fury at the  spirited competition, o you who are equal to song.
Become our helper at the (contest for) great stakes, at (the contest for)  our bodies, the waters, and the sun.
## 5
Indra, bring us the best, the mightiest, fulfilling fame,
with which you, o dazzling one with mace in hand, fill both these
world-halves, o you of good lips.
## 6
It is you, the mighty conqueror of the bordered domains, that we call  upon to help, o king among the gods.
Make all our things that waver gain foothold and our foes be easily
conquered, o good one.
## 7
The might and manliness that are in the Nahuṣa territories, Indra, or the brilliance that belongs to the five settlements—bring them here: all  the masculine powers altogether. 8. Or what bullish power is in Tr̥kṣi and in the Druhyu people, or whatever  is in the Pūru, o bounteous one,
grant that to us fully at (the time of) the conquering of men, for us to  vanquish our foes in battles.
## 9
O Indra, your threefold, triple-armored shelter that provides
well-being—
that protection hold out to our benefactors and to me. Keep the arrow  away from those
## 10
Who, with their mind set on cattle, outwit their rival and smite him  boldly.
So then, as ever, o bounteous Indra longing for songs, as the protector  of our bodies, come up close to us.
## 11
So then, as ever, be there to strengthen us. Indra, help our leader in  the fight,
when the feathered, sharp-headed arrows fly in the midspace,
## 12
Where champions stretch wide their own dear bodies as shelter for their  ancestors.
So then, as ever, hold out protection to our body and lineage. Keep
away unforeseen hatred.
## 13
When, Indra, at the charge, you will spur on your steeds at the (contest  for) great stakes,
on an uncrowded (race)course, on its twisting path, like falcons
hunting fame,
## 14
(The steeds) going swiftly like rivers in a torrent when (the chariot?) has  sounded following their roar,
who, like birds over raw flesh, keep circling (the racecourse), being held  firm in the cow [=leather (reins)] in your two arms...