+++
title = "047"

+++
47 (488) Soma, Indra, etc.
Garga Bhāradvāja
31 verses: triṣṭubh, except br̥hatī 19, anuṣṭubh 23, gāyatrī 24, dvipadā 25, jagatī 27
Like III.53, the family hymn of the Viśvāmitras, dedicated primarily to Indra and  placed at the end of the Indra cycle in Maṇḍala III, this hymn is the family hymn of  the Bharadvājas, dedicated primarily to Indra and also positioned at the end of the  Indra cycle in its maṇḍala. Also like III.53, VI.47 consists of a number of smaller  units, some of which seem to have little or no connection with each other. Different  scholars have suggested different divisions of the hymn; our own is based in great  part on arguments based on rhetoric.834 VI.47
It begins with an extravagant praise of soma (vss. 1–5), rhetorically unified by  the oft-repeated pronoun “this one here” (ayám), which in several of its occurrences  takes an unusual final position (as opposed to its standard initial slot). With the  presence of soma unquestionably established, Indra is then invited to drink it in  the following verse (6), with the ritual context explicitly identified as the Midday  Pressing. In fact already toward the end of the soma verses, there has been a modu
lation toward Indra: several of the deeds attributed to “this one here” are more  Indraic than Somian, especially the propping of heaven in 5cd, and the final words  of verse 5 “the bull accompanied by the Maruts” would ordinarily uniquely identify  Indra, who is addressed in the next pāda (6a).
The extended middle section of the hymn (vss. 7–21) is entirely devoted to Indra.  Verses 7–10 contain a series of direct pleas, for Indra to lead us forward to wider  space and a better life and to provide refreshment and a good life. The next three  verses (11–13) are similarly general, but couched in the 3rd person. (Two of these  verses [12–13] are repeated in a very late hymn, X.131.6–7, and in turn are used in  the later Sautrāmaṇī ritual, but we see no direct evidence of that ritual here.) Indra  appears in these verses as a sort of universal protector and helper. This character
ization seems to raise questions in the poet’s mind: if Indra is the protector of all,  then how does any particular group get ahead?
This implicit question prompts the next, somewhat jarring, section of the hymn  (vss. 14–19), which concerns the fickle and unpredictable way in which Indra’s  patronage flits from one man to another. The section begins undramatically by  announcing the many verbal and ritual offerings to Indra, coming (it seems) from  many different groups (vs. 14), all seeking his aid. The next verse (15) seems to treat  Indra’s capriciousness as a positive trait: he doesn’t only and always aid the strong,  but will frequently promote a man who has fallen behind. The next two verses (16– 17) continue this theme, but with Indra’s behavior appearing in a darker light, as he  arbitrarily breaks his agreements and betrays his followers. In the following verse  (18) Indra is infinitely multiplied, presenting a different appearance to each differ
ent group and seemingly possessed of a thousand horses, each pair of which might  take him to a different group pleading for his aid. This somewhat disturbing section  is brought to a happy end in verse 19: only one pair of horses is yoked (to bring  Indra to us?), the various forms are under Tvaṣṭar’s control, and in the rhetorical  question that forms the second half-verse (matching the question in vs. 15)  it is  concluded that Indra is unlikely to stay with the enemy when our own patrons are  now providing such a good sacrifice. One of the most notable aspects of this little  section (esp. vss. 15–18) about Indra’s constantly changing behavior is its grammati cal reflection: these verses are packed with āmreḍita nominal compounds “each x,  x after x” and so-called “intensive” verb forms (really iterative-frequentative, mean
ing “keeps x-ing, continually x-es”), forms that are relatively marked in the Vedic  grammatical system. The presence of four āmreḍitas and four intensives in four  verses both calls attention to the message and reflects it by portraying a regularly  alternating set of actions and objects. The reassurance of verse 19 has come none too soon, for in verse 20 the poet  and his group find themselves in a bad spot, not the wide and bountiful place they  prayed Indra to lead them to in verses 7–8. In verse 21 the opposing forces are over come (by Indra, it seems, though he is unnamed). Thus, verses 7–8 and 20–21 form  a larger ring around the Indra section.
A dānastuti follows (vss. 22–25), in which the victorious kings distribute the  bounty won in the battle referred to in verse 21. The dānastuti proceeds briskly and  efficiently, without any of the jocularity commonly found in dānastutis elsewhere,  just a list of the acquisitions.
The last part of the hymn (vss. 26–31) is the strangest. It consists of three verses  (26–28) addressed to the war chariot and three (29–31) addressed to the war drum.  These verses are also found in the Atharvaveda (VI.125–126). Each of these martial  objects is praised in the most extravagant terms and compared with the attributes  of the gods. Although this section seems to have no direct connection with the rest  of the hymn, it may have been attached to the hymn (or even originally composed  as part of it) in response to the battle depicted in verses 20–21 and the distribution  of booty in verses 22–25. Chariots are part of the gift (24a), and it would not be  surprising that a war drum might be allotted as part of the post-battle distribution.  It is also worth remembering that in III.53, the family hymn of the Viśvāmitras  mentioned above, one of the final sections (vss. 17–20) is devoted to the possible  perils besetting a chariot and its team, with phraseology similar to verses 26–28 in  this hymn.
## 1
Sweet is this one, certainly, and it is honeyed; sharp is this one, certainly,  and it is full of sap.
And now that Indra has drunk of it, no one at all overcomes him at the  challenges.
## 2
This sweet one here was the most exhilarating, on which Indra became  exhilarated for the smashing of Vr̥tra,
he who (having performed) many exploits smashed apart the nine and  ninety walls of Śambara.
## 3
This one, when it is drunk, rouses my speech; it has awakened an eager  inspired thought.
This wise one measured out the six broad (realms), from which no world  is at a distance.
## 4
This is the one who created the expanse of the earth; who created the  height of heaven is this one here;
this one (created) the beestings on the three slopes [=worlds?]. Soma  upheld the broad midspace.
## 5
This one found the flood with its brilliant appearance at the (fore)front  of the dawns with their gleaming seats.
This one, great, with a great pillar propped up heaven—he, the bull,  accompanied by the Maruts.

## 6
Boldly drink the soma in the tub, Indra—as smasher of Vr̥tra at the  confluence of goods, o champion.
At the Midday Pressing, drench yourself. Standing amid wealth,  establish wealth in us.
## 7
Indra, look forward for us, like the man who goes ahead; lead us further  forward, toward a better state.
Become one of good passage, who gives us passage beyond; become  one of good guidance and valued guidance.
## 8
Lead us along to a wide world, as the one who knows—to sun-filled  light, to fearlessness, to well-being.
High are the arms of you who are stalwart, Indra. Might we approach  these two lofty shelters.
## 9
Place us in the widest chariot box, Indra, on the two best-pulling  horses, you possessor of hundreds.
Convey hither the highest refreshment of refreshments. Let our  (refreshment) not cross over to the “riches of the stranger,”
bounteous one.
## 10
Indra, be gracious. Seek a means of life for me. Spur on my poetic  vision like a blade of copper.
Whatever I say here in devotion to you, just this enjoy. Make me  accompanied by the gods.
## 11
Indra the protector, Indra the helper, Indra the champion good to call  at every call—
I call on Indra, the able one, called on by many. Let bounteous Indra  establish well-being for us.
## 12
Let Indra be of good protection, of good help with his help, very  gracious, affording all possessions.
Let him thrust away hatred; let him create fearlessness. Might we be  lords of good heroes in abundance.
## 13
Might we be in the favor of him who deserves the sacrifice, in his  propitious benevolence.
Let Indra of good protection, of good help to us keep hatred away even  from a distance.
## 14
Down to you, Indra, run the hymns and the sacred formulations as  teams, like a wave along the slopes.
As broad as your bounty are the many pressings. You join together the  waters, the cows, and the drops, you possessor of the mace.
## 15
Who will praise him, who will fill him, who will sacrifice to him, if the  bounteous one would always help only the strong?
Like one who puts down his two feet one after the other, with his  powers he makes the one who was behind to be in front.
## 16
He is famed as a hero who subdues every strong one, continually  leading the one beyond the other in turn. Hating the flashy, king of both (races [=human and divine]), Indra
keeps prodding the clans, the sons of Manu—first one, then
the other.
## 17
He twists away from his partnerships with those in front; continually  double-crossing them, he goes with those behind.
Indra keeps enduring through the many autumns, shaking them
[=autumns] off so they don’t close in.
## 18
He has a form corresponding to every form; this form of his is for  display.
Indra keeps going about in many forms through his magical powers, for  ten hundred fallow bays are yoked for him.
## 19
Having yoked the two fallow bay mares to his chariot, Tvaṣṭar rules  over the many (forms) here.
Who will always sit on the side of the hostile—and especially when
(our) patrons are sitting (a sacrificial session)?
## 20
We have come here to a field without pasturage, o gods. Though it was  wide, the land has become narrow.
O Br̥haspati, o Indra, be on the lookout for a path for the singer who is  in this state on his quest for cattle.
## 21
Day after day he drove off from their seat the other half, the black  kindred all of the same appearance.
The bull smashed the two Dāsas, mercenaries, Varcin and Śambara, at  the moated place.
## 22
Prastoka from your bounty, Indra, has just now given ten casks, ten  prizewinners.
From Divodāsa, (son?) of Atithigva, we have accepted as bounty the  goods belonging to Śambara.
## 23
Ten horses, ten casks, ten garments, with delights on top—
ten golden balls have I gained from Divodāsa.
## 24
Ten chariots with side-horses, a hundred cows
has Aśvatha given to the Atharvans, to Pāyu.
## 25
The descendant of Sr̥ñjaya has reached toward the Bharadvājas, who  have acquired great bounty belonging to all people.
## 26
O tree, because you should become firm-limbed, a comrade to us,  furthering (us), affording good heroes,
you are knotted together with cows [=leather (straps)]. Be firm! Let the  one who mounts you win what is to be won.
## 27
Strength has been brought up from heaven, from earth; might has been  brought here from the trees.
To the strongness of the waters enclosed by cows, to the mace of
Indra—to the Chariot—sacrifice with an oblation.

## 28
The mace of Indra, the face of the Maruts, the embryo of Mitra, the  navel of Varuṇa—
taking pleasure in this oblation-giving of ours, god Chariot, accept our  oblations.
## 29
Make Heaven and Earth gasp. Let the moving (world [=living
creatures]) dispersed in many places pay attention to you.
O Drum, along with Indra, with the gods, drive away the rivals farther  than far.
## 30
Roar out your power. Set strength in us. Thunder down, thrusting away  difficulties.
Blast away misfortunes from here, o Drum. You are the fist of
Indra: be firm!
## 31
Drive those yonder [=cows] hither and make the ones here turn back.  The Drum keeps speaking, giving the signal.
Our men, with horses as their wings, are converging: (so) let our
charioteers win, o Indra.