+++
title = "048"

+++
48 (489)
Agni (1–10), Maruts (11–12, 20–21), Maruts or
Liṅgoktadevatās (13–15), Pūsan (16–19), Maruts or Heaven and ̣ Earth or Pr̥sni (22) ́
Śaṃyu Bārhaspatya
22 verses: various lyric meters, arranged for the most part in pragāthas
Another curious hymn, made up of apparently disparate sections and composed  in a variety of different lyric meters. The headnote above reproduces the dedicands  suggested by the Anukramaṇī, but they do not exactly fit the contents of the hymn.  The first ten verses, dedicated to Agni, seem a conventional Agni hymn, the curios
ity being that it is not placed among the other Agni hymns. It is also metrically the  most stable portion of the hymn, with paired pragātha verses alternating br̥hatī and  satobrḥatī, save for verses 6–8, where each verse has an extra eight-syllable pāda at  the end.
The next three verses (11–13) offer an odd interlude: the priestly associates of the  poet are ordered to drive a cow nearby, who will give milk for the Maruts. Although  the Anukramaṇī identifies the Maruts as the dedicands of these verses, they seem  incidental. The focus is on the cow—whether as a metaphor for Bharadvāja’s poetic  inspiration, as a real cow meant to provide the milk to mix with soma in the ongoing  sacrifice, or as both. This cow is reminiscent of the apparent cow in the extremely  enigmatic verses of the Viśvāmitra family hymn (III.53.15–16), a hymn that occu
pies a similar place in its maṇḍala.
Pūṣan is the subject of verses 14–19, the heart of the hymn. As Geldner points  out, the Bharadvājas have a special relationship with Pūṣan: Maṇḍala VI contains the only series of hymns devoted to that god (VI.53–58). The first two verses of  this section (14–15) present a solemn, formal praise of Pūṣan, who is compared to  the great Vedic gods in his various qualities, despite his usual rustic and relatively  lowly status. The two verses clearly form a pragātha, though the second of them  (vs. 15) has five pādas (12 12 12 8 8) rather than the expected satobr̥hatī (12 8 12 8).  After these two straightforward verses, notable only for the hyperbolic encomium  of this minor divinity, there follow three verses (16–18) containing a remarkable,  intimate address to Pūṣan, whispered into his ear (see 16ab), some of which, espe cially verse 17, is close to unintelligible. The translation of that verse given here is  extremely provisional; what is clear is that the style and syntax are informal, and  the poet probably uses idioms and popular sayings current in colloquial speech.  Moreover, since it is whispered to Pūṣan, it should be unintelligible to us. The final  verse devoted to Pūṣan (19), though it remains a 2nd-person address, returns to the  high, formal style of the first two (14–15) and is in br̥hatī. It should be noted that  the three intimate verses have the same metrical structure as the three verses about  the cow (11–13) and share with those verses a certain idiomatic register. Each con sists of a sequence of kakubh (8 12 8: vss. 11, 16), satobr̥hatī (12 8 12 8: vss. 12, 17),  and puraüṣṇih (12 8 8: vss. 13, 18).
The final three verses (20–22) are dedicated to the Maruts. The first two form  another pragātha (20 in the expected br̥hatī, 22 with an extra eight-syllable pāda at  the end, like the extended satobr̥hatīs of vss. 6 and 8), while the final verse (22) is in  anuṣṭubh. The reason for their position here is unclear. The final verse is enigmatic,  as verses referring the Maruts’ mother Pr̥śni and their birth often are (cf. II.34.2  and especially nearby VI.66.1), and the hymn, having presented us with a number  of puzzles along the way, ends with a final one.
## 1
With your every sacrifice to Agni, and with your every hymn to his skill, we—that is, I—have proclaimed time after time the immortal Jātavedas,  dear like an ally.
## 2
The child of nourishment—because he is inclined toward us, that one all  on his own—we would ritually serve, for the bestowal of oblations.
He will become our helper in the prize-contests; he will become the  strengthener and protector of our bodies.
## 3
Because, Agni, as a great unaging bull, you radiate widely with
your beam,
constantly flaming up with your untiring flame, o flame-bright one, shine  bright with your bright lights.
## 4
You sacrifice to the great gods: sacrifice in due order with your resolve  and wondrous power.
Bring them nearby for help, Agni. Bestow prizes and win them.
## 5
Whom the waters, the stones, and the trees carry to term as the embryo  of truth,

who is born, when he is churned mightily by men, on the back of  the earth,
## 6
Who has filled both world-halves with his radiance, he races to heaven  with his smoke;
he is seen across the darkness in the nights, a ruddy bull among the  dusky ones,
a ruddy bull toward the dusky ones.
## 7
With your lofty beams, o Agni—with your flaming flame, o god, when kindled at Bharadvāja’s, o youngest one, richly light up for us, o  flaming one,
brilliantly light up, o pure one.
## 8
You are houselord of all the clans stemming from Manu, o Agni. With your hundred strongholds, o youngest one, protect your kindler  from narrow straits for a hundred winters,
and protect those who give to your praisers.
## 9
You good one, conspicuous by your help, impel bounties to us. Of this wealth here you are the charioteer, Agni. Find a ford for our  progeny.
## 10
Deliver our progeny and posterity to the further shore, with deliverers  who are undeceivable and not absent-minded.
O Agni, keep godly rages away from us and ungodly tangles.
## 11
Comrades, drive near a juice-yielding milk-cow with your newer speech. Send one who doesn’t kick—
## 12
Who will milk out undying fame for the self-radiant troop of Maruts, who is in the grace of the precipitous Maruts, who goes her own way  with benevolent thoughts.
## 13
For Bharadvāja, once again, milk both a milk-cow yielding all milk and refreshment yielding all nourishment.
## 14
Strong-willed like Indra, master of artifice like Varuṇa,
gladdening and yielding lush nourishment like Aryaman, just like  Viṣṇu—that one will I praise for you, to mark him out—
## 15
Turbulent like the troop of Maruts, powerfully noisy, without  assailant—Pūṣan (I praise), so that hundreds,
thousands (of goods) he will heap together from the settled domains.  He will make the hidden goods visible; he will make goods easy for  us to find.
## 16
Run up to me, Pūṣan. I will announce close to your ear, o glowing one: “Evil are the hostilities of the stranger.
## 17
“Don’t tear out the Kākambīra tree—pursue the taunts and make them  disappear! And certainly don’t (tear off the wheel) of the sun: for thus never could  you give pursuit to the one who ‘puts the necks’ (of the horses to the  chariot-pole?).
## 18
“Let (us) have a partnership that keeps the wolf away, with you who are  like a leather bag—
an unsplit one that holds curds, a well-filled one that holds curds.”
## 19
For you are beyond mortals and equal with the gods in your splendor. Keep an eye on us in our battles, Pūsan. Help us now, just as before.
## 20
O you shakers, let (us) have the valuable guidance of a valuable one and  let there be the liberal spirit
either of a god or of a mortal who has sacrificed, o Maruts who receive  the forefront of the sacrifice.
## 21
He whose acclaim goes around heaven even in a single day, like the  god Sun,
the Maruts assume his vibrant power, his sacrificial name—his
Vr̥tra-smashing power, his preeminent Vr̥tra-smashing power.
## 22
Only once was Heaven born; only once was Earth born.
Only once was the milk of Pr̥śni milked. Another (of the Maruts) is not  born after this.