+++
title = "049"

+++
49 (490)
All Gods
R̥jiśvan Bhāradvāja
15 verses: triṣṭubh, except śakvarī 15
A hymn of straightforward structure, typical of many All God hymns: each verse  praises a single god (or divine entity, like the pair Night and Dawn [vs. 3] or the  group of Maruts [vs.  11]). Most verses name the god in question, though the  name can be postponed till late in the verse, as in verse 2 dedicated to Agni or  verse 8 to Pūṣan, whose name is the last word in the verse. Two do not name the  god at all: verse 3 to Night and Dawn and verse 12 to Indra. The riddling tech
nique of postponing or omitting the name of an entity defined by the verse is of  course common in R̥gvedic rhetoric, and its use in All God catalogues is especially  appropriate.
There is no obvious ritual or other significance to the order of gods in this hymn,  though many of the parties to the Morning Pressing occur early in the hymn: Agni  (vs. 2), Night and Dawn (vs. 3), Vāyu (vs. 4), Aśvins (vs. 5). On the other hand, the  verse dedicated to Indra (12), a regular participant in the dawn ritual, is late in the  hymn, though he is obliquely present, with the Maruts, in 6cd. No god receives  more than a single verse, though, as just mentioned, Indra and the Maruts have a  presence in the Parjanya and Vāta [=Thunder and Wind] verse (6), as Agni does

in the Mitra and Varuṇa verse (1) and in the Tvaṣṭar verse (9). The reference shifts  between the 3rd and 2nd person, with the former predominating. The final verse of  the hymn, in a slightly different meter (triṣṭubh but with an extra pāda), mentions  no specific gods, but asks all of them for benefits.
## 01
I will praise the people of good commandment with newer hymns, will  praise Mitra and Varuṇa the gracious.
Let them come hither; let them listen here—those of good dominion,  Varuṇa, Mitra, Agni.
## 02
The one to be reverently invoked at the ceremonies of every clan, of  undistracted resolve, the spoked wheel of the two youthful ones
[=Heaven and Earth],
the child of Heaven, the son of strength—Agni—the ruddy beacon of  the sacrifice (I invoke) to perform sacrifice.
## 03
The two daughters of the ruddy one, differing in form: the one is  ornamented with stars, the other is the sun’s.
The two pure ones, transiting alternately, wandering apart—being
hymned they both approach the prayerful thought once it is heard.
## 04
A lofty inspired thought (goes) forth to Vāyu, who, possessing lofty  wealth and all valuables, fills the chariot.
Having a brilliant course, master of teams, as poet you seek to reach the  poet, you who are worshiped at the forefront of the sacrifice.
## 05
That seems to me a wonder—the chariot of the Aśvins, radiant, yoked  with mind,
by which you two, Nāsatyas, superior men, drive your circuit, for our  descendants and ourselves to prosper.
## 06
Parjanya [/Thunder] and Vāta [/Wind], you two bulls of the earth,  quicken the watery outpourings (for him [=human poet])
through whose hymns—you poets who really hear [=Maruts] and you  mounter of the moving world [=Indra]—you made the moving world  your own.
## 07
The daughter of Pavīru, the maiden with a brilliant lifespan, Sarasvatī,  whose husband is a hero, will confer poetic insight.
Together with the (divine) ladies she will hold out to the singer unbroken  shelter, protection difficult to assail.
## 08
I will direct my eloquence to the complete protector of every path.  Prompted by desire, he has attained the chant.
He will bestow on us proliferating riches tipped with gold; he will cause  every visionary thought to reach its goal—Pūṣan.
## 09
To him who receives the first portion, the glorious conferrer of vigor, the  skillful god with lovely palms and lovely hands
who deserves the sacrifice of the dwelling places—to Tvaṣṭar easy to  invoke will far-radiant Agni, the Hotar, sacrifice. 10. The father of creation: with these hymns strengthen Rudra by day,  Rudra by night;
the lofty, high, ageless, very gracious one would we invoke separately,  roused by the poet.
## 11
You youths, poets deserving the sacrifice, you Maruts—come hither in  response to the singer’s longing for space,
for you in your strength quicken even (a place) without brightness,
approaching in just the same way as to Aṅgiras, you superior men.
## 12
Forth to the hero, forth to the powerful, precipitous one will I drive  (praise?), as a guardian of livestock drives his flocks home.
He will make the inspired words of the speaker touch the body of him  who is famed, as one makes the firmament touched by stars.
## 13
He who measured out the earthly realms three times exactly, for Manu,  who was hard-pressed—Viṣṇu—
in this shelter of yours (still) being offered might we rejoice with wealth,  with life and lineage.
## 14
Let Ahi Budhnya take delight in this (praise?) of ours, along with the  waters and the chants; in this let the Mountain, in this let Savitar
take delight;
let the Gift-Escorts, let Fortune, let Plenitude quicken this along with  the plants, for wealth.
## 15
Now to us give wealth in chariots, filling the settled domains, consisting  of many heroes, the herdsmen of great truth;
give ageless peaceful dwelling (and that) with which we will trample  upon the (other) peoples, the godless contenders,
with which we will take on the godless clans.