+++
title = "050"

+++
50 (491)
All Gods
R̥jiśvan Bhāradvāja
15 verses: triṣṭubh
Unlike the last hymn, with its tidy organization allotting one verse per god, this  All God hymn casts a wider and more inclusive net with multiple gods some times mixed in a single verse, some gods given more than one verse (Maruts, vss.  4–5), and marginally divinized figures, like the Waters (vs. 7), also addressed.  The first verse establishes this messy inclusiveness, calling on Aditi, the three  principal Ādityas (Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman), Agni, Savitar, Bhaga, and the  “rescuer gods,” who may, but need not be, the Maruts. The hymn also has a  more direct and intimate feel than VI.49: although both hymns mix 2nd-person  and 3rd-person reference to the gods, in VI.50 the 2nd person predominates, in  contrast to VI.49, and the 2nd-person invocations in VI.50 more often contain844 VI.50
imperatives and requests in the optative, in contrast to the generally descriptive  clauses of VI.49.
Another noteworthy feature is the relative prominence of female divinities.  Again, the first verse sets the scene by placing Aditi first. Besides Earth, in the  pair Heaven and Earth (vs. 3), we find Rodasī (vs. 5), the motherly Waters (vs. 7),  Sarasvatī (vs. 12), the Wives of the Gods, associated with Tvaṣṭar (vs. 13), and  Earth again (vss. 13–14). The divine ladies end the hymn (vs. 15).
## 01
I call upon goddess Aditi for you with reverences, on Varuṇa, Mitra,  Agni, for mercy,
on Aryaman the very well-disposed, who gives without being begged, on  the rescuer gods, on Savitar and Bhaga.
## 02
O very great Sun, pursue the gods of good light whose father is skill, in  (witness to our) blamelessness—
they who have two births, the trusty ones who serve the truth, sunlit,  worthy of worship, having Agni as their tongue.
## 03
And, Heaven and Earth, you two very gracious world-halves—you will  make broad, lofty dominion as shelter
great(ly), so that there will be a faultless wide realm for our peaceful  dwelling, you two Holy Places.
## 04
Let the sons of Rudra incline themselves to us here, the unassailable  good ones invoked today,
since we, placed in petty or in great distress, have called upon the
Maruts, the gods—
## 05
The ones to whom the goddess Rodasī is joined, on whom Pūṣan attends,  sharing the sacrifice by halves.
O Maruts, when, on having heard our call, you make your drive, the  worlds tremble at your agitated course.
## 06
Chant to this hero who has a yearning for songs—to Indra with a new  sacred formulation, o singer.
He will hear the call. While being praised and being greatly hymned, he  will give rewards.
## 07
O Waters belonging to Manu, establish unimpaired succor as luck and  lifetime for our offspring and descendants.
For you are the most motherly healers, the begetters of everything still  and moving.
## 08
God Savitar, who gives protection, should come hither to us—the  golden-palmed one deserving the sacrifice,
who, rich in gifts, like the face of Dawn discloses valuables to the pious. 9. And you, Son of Strength—you should turn the gods hither to us today  to this ceremony here.
Might I be always within (the sphere of) your giving; by your help might  I possess good heroes, Agni. 10. And you Nāsatyas should come here to my summons with your  insightful thoughts—you certainly are inspired poets.
(As you did) Atri from great darkness, release (me)—triumph, men!— from difficulty at close quarters.
## 11
Become for us givers of wealth that is brilliant, rich in prizes, in men, in  much livestock.
Showing favor, o gods—the heavenly, earthly, cow-born, and watery  ones—be merciful.
## 12
Let those who grant rewards be merciful to us in concord—Rudra and  Sarasvatī, Viṣṇu, Vāyu,
the Master of the R̥bhus, Vāja, the divine Distributor. Let Parjanya  [/Thunder] and Vāta [/Wind] swell refreshments for us.
## 13
And this god Savitar and Bhaga and the Child of the Waters—let (each)  help us, supplying gifts,
and Tvaṣṭar jointly with the divine ones, the Wives, Heaven with the  gods, Earth with the seas.
## 14
And let Ahi Budhnya hear us and Aja Ekapad, Earth, Sea,
and all the gods, strong through truth, when they are invoked and
praised. Let the solemn utterances, pronounced by poets, help (us).
## 15
In just this way the Bharadvājas, the descendants of me, this Mamata,  chant with their insightful thoughts, with their chants.
The (divine) ladies, the unassailable good ones who are offered to—all  of you be praised, you who deserve the sacrifice.