+++
title = "051"

+++
51 (492)
All Gods
R̥jiśvan Bhāradvāja
16 verses: triṣṭubh 1–12, uṣṇih 13–15, anuṣṭubh 16
This sixteen-verse hymn falls metrically into three quite unequal portions: 1–12,  13–15, and 16. On the basis of both structure and content, it appears that these  were originally at least two separate hymns. Verses 1–12 are unitary in tone, and  the central, responsive verses 6–7 can be interpreted as an omphalos, supported  by various lexical rings. (Oldenberg [1888: 199–200], however, divides these twelve  verses into four tr̥ca hymns.)
The hymn so defined differs markedly from the last two All God hymns (VI.49– 50), which catalogue a series of gods and their attributes in an unordered list. This  hymn, in contrast, is highly reminiscent of the Mitra, Varuṇa, and Sūrya hymns in  Maṇḍala VII (VII.60–63), in which the Sun surveys the human world and bears wit ness to Mitra and Varuṇa about the innocence and guilt of men. Like those hymns,  this begins with the rising of the sun (vss. 1–2); it then turns to praise of the Ādityas.  The emphasis is on their truth and lack of deceit—Ādityan preoccupations.

The omphalos verses (6–7), marked by initial repeated mā́ “don’t!,” beg the gods  not to subject us to undeserved punishment, thus implicitly claiming our innocence,  which should be visible to the all-seeing Sun (though the final pāda of the follow ing vs. 8 seems to allow the possibility of a modicum of guilt). The remaining five  verses (8–12) return to the theme of the truthful gods, with somewhat more insis tent prayers for grace and help. Toward the end, in verse 11, a larger group of gods  is named: invocations of additional gods at the end of a hymn are very common.  The last verse (12), naming the priestly family and summarizing the content and  intent of the hymn that precedes it, is a typical final verse.
The remaining verses (13–16) may have been appended to this hymn because they  chiefly concern various malefactors whom we wish to banish or destroy, including  the cheat (ripú, vs. 13) and the (clearly human) “wolf” (vŕ̥ka, vs. 14), both of which  were also mentioned as dangers in the omphalos verses (“cheat” vs. 7, “wolf” vs. 6).
## 1
Up goes this great eye of Mitra and of Varuṇa—dear and undeceivable. The blazing, sightly face of truth has flashed forth on its rising like the  bright ornament of heaven.
## 2
The inspired poet who knows their three divisions and the breeds of the  gods far away and here,
who sees the straight and the crooked among mortals, the Sun looks  upon the ways of the stranger.
## 3
I will praise you, the great herdsmen of truth: Aditi, Mitra, Varuṇa, the  well-born ones.
Aryaman, Bhaga, those of undeceivable inspired thoughts, the pure  companions, do I call here.
## 4
Those who care for the stranger, the lords of settlements, undeceivable,  the great kings, givers of good dwelling,
the youths of good rule ruling over Heaven, the superior men—the
Ādityas I beseech and Aditi, in quest of friendship.
## 5
O Father Heaven, Mother Earth lacking the lie, Brother Agni, good  ones—have mercy on us.
All you Ādityas and Aditi jointly—spread out ample shelter for us.
## 6
Don’t make us subject to the wolf, to the she-wolf, to any at all who  wishes us ill, o you who deserve the sacrifice,
for you are the charioteers of our bodies and you have become (the
charioteers) of (our?) skillful speech.
## 7
Don’t let us pay for the offense done to you by another; don’t let us do  that which you avenge, o good ones,
for you rule over all, All Gods. Let the cheat harm his own body.
## 8
Reverence is powerful. I seek to attract reverence here. Reverence  upholds heaven and earth.
Reverence to the gods; reverence is master of them. With reverence
I seek to redeem even an offense committed. 9. You charioteers of truth who possess refined skill, settled in the  dwelling places of truth, undeceivable,
all you great superior men of broad gaze do I bend here with
reverences, o you who deserve the sacrifice.
## 10
For they possess the best luster and they lead us across all difficulties— those of good rule, Varuṇa, Mitra, Agni, whose inspired thoughts are  truth, who are in reality rulers of speech.
## 11
They strengthen our earthly realm—Indra, Earth, Pūṣan, Bhaga, Aditi,  the Five Peoples.
Affording good shelter, good help, good guidance, let them be good  herdsmen for us, offering us good protection.
## 12
To attain the one whose seat is in heaven, o gods, the Hotar of the  Bhāradvājas now begs for favor.
Sacrificing with the ritual meals set here, desiring goods, he has extolled  the breeds of the gods.
## 13
Away with this crooked, cheating, ill-intentioned thief, o Agni.
Make an easy passage for him far, far away, o lord of settlements.
## 14
Surely our pressing stones have bellowed for your
companionship, Soma.
Smash down the rapacious niggard. For he is a wolf!
## 15
Because you of good drops, with Indra preeminent, are heaven-bound, make good passage for us on the road. (Be) herdsmen at home.
## 16
We have gone on the faultless path leading to well-being,
on which one avoids all hatreds and finds goods.