+++
title = "052"

+++
52 (493)
All Gods
R̥jiśvan Bhāradvāja
17 verses: triṣṭubh 1–6, gāyatrī 7–12, triṣṭubh 13, jagatī 14, triṣṭubh 15–17, generally  arranged in trcas ̥
This final, seventeen-verse hymn of the short All God cycle of Maṇḍala VI is met rically and thematically non-unified, and probably consists of originally separate  pieces later joined together. (So also Oldenberg 1888:  199–200.) The first twelve  verses divide into four tr̥cas, the first two in one meter, the second two in another.  The first tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) inveighs against a rival sacrificer and calls on the Maruts  and Soma to destroy him, in lively and imaginative terms. In style, though not in  meter, it more closely resembles verses 13–15 of the preceding hymn VI.51 than  what follows. The second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) is more staid, but notable for calling on not  only the standard deities but also on natural phenomena for aid. The remainder of  the hymn is generic and somewhat repetitive, urging the gods in general to hear our  calls and partake of our sacrifice. Relatively few gods are mentioned by name; there

is instead an effort to include all the gods, whatever their current or original loca tion (see esp. vss. 13, 15). After the first two tr̥cas, the language is for the most part  easy and without much character.
## 1
Not by Heaven nor by Earth do I concede this, not by my sacrifice and  not by these ritual labors.
Let the well-founded mountains crush him. Let the sacrificer of an
excessive sacrifice be bent double.
## 2
Whoever disdains us, Maruts, or will scorn our sacred formulation as it  is being performed,
let his twisted (ways) be twisting, scorching (flames) for him. Let
Heaven blaze at him who hates the formulation.
## 3
Do they not (call) you, o Soma, the herdsman of the sacred
formulation? Do they not call you our protector from taunt?
Do you not see us being scorned? Hurl your scorching lance at the
hater of the formulation!
## 4
Let the dawns help me as they are being born; let the rivers help me as  they are swelling.
Let the steadfast mountains help me; let the forefathers help me at the  invocation of the gods.
## 5
Might we always be of good mind; might we look now upon the sun as  it rises:
so shall he arrange it—he who is lauded over the gods as goods-lord of  goods, as the most welcome arrival because of his help.
## 6
Indra the most welcome arrival in the nearest nearness because of his  help; Sarasvatī swelling with the (other) rivers;
Parjanya—joy itself for us with his plants; Agni good to proclaim, good  to call on, like a father.
## 7
All you gods, come here. Hear this call of mine.
Sit down here on this ritual grass.
## 8
The one who attends to you with a ghee-backed oblation, o gods— you all come close to him.
## 9
Let the sons of the immortal one listen to our hymns.
Let them be very merciful to us.
## 10
Let all the gods, strong through truth, hearing the calls in their turns, enjoy the associated milk.
## 11
Let Indra along with his Marut-flock, let Mitra and Aryaman along  with Tvaṣṭar,
enjoy the praise song and these oblations of ours.
## 12
O Agni, Hotar, perform this ceremony as sacrifice for us according to  its patterns,
as one who attends to the divine folk. 13. All you gods, hear this call of mine—you who are in the midspace or  you who are in heaven,
you who have Agni as your tongue or you who are the means of
sacrifice. Having sat on this ritual grass here, bring yourselves to
exhilaration.
## 14
Let all the gods deserving the sacrifice hear me; let both world-halves  and the Child of the Waters hear my thought.
Let me not speak speeches to you that can be disregarded. Might we, in  nearest contact with you, reach exhilaration just on your favors.
## 15
Whichever great ones, snake-sly, were born on the earth or in the seat of  heaven or of the waters,
let those gods seek a wide place for us to prosper day and night for our  whole lifetime.
## 16
O Agni and Parjanya, help my insightful thought, our lovely praise at  this call here, you who are easy to call.
The one begets the refreshing drink, the other the embryo. Confer
refreshments accompanied by offspring on us.
## 17
When the ritual grass has been strewn, when the fire is being kindled,  I seek to entice (them) here with a hymn, with great reverence.
At this rite of ours here today, all you gods deserving the sacrifice,
bring yourselves to exhilaration on the oblation.