+++
title = "053"

+++
53 (494)
Pūsaṇ
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
10 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 8
Pūṣan is a favorite minor god of the Bharadvājas: this short Pūṣan sequence (VI.53– 58) is the only series of hymns dedicated to Pūṣan in the R̥gveda. This particular  hymn begins with gentle and positive requests of the god (vss. 1–2), but quickly  becomes more bloodthirsty, seeking Pūṣan’s punishment against stingy patrons. The  instruments of punishment are the homely tools of Pūṣan, his awl (vss. 5–8) and goad  (vs. 9). Despite the apparent viciousness of the actions urged on Pūṣan, the short  lines, repeated phrases, colloquial expressions, and phonetic figures (what is trans
lated anachronistically as “shred them, make them shrapnel” in vss. 7–8 is in Sanskrit  the delightful ā́ rikha kikirā́ kr̥ṇu) give a light texture and playful feeling to the hymn.
## 01
We have yoked you, o lord of the path—like a chariot for
prize-winning—
for poetic vision, o Pūṣan.
## 02
Lead us toward goods stemming from men, toward a hero who has  offered a ritual gift,
toward a houselord of value.

## 03
Even one who doesn’t want to give, o glowing Pūṣan—impel him  to give.
Soften up the mind even of the niggard.
## 04
Clear out the paths for prize-winning; smash away the negligent. Let our poetic visions reach their goal, o strong one.
## 05
Bore around the hearts of the niggards with an awl, you poet.
And make them subject to us.
## 06
Thrust through (them) with an awl, Pūṣan. Seek what is dear to the  heart of the niggard.
And make him subject to us.
## 07
Shred them, make them shrapnel—the hearts of the niggards, you poet. And make them subject to us.
## 08
The awl that you carry, which impels the sacred formulation, o
glowing Pūṣan,
with it shred the heart of each one, make it shrapnel.
## 09
Your goad with its cow [=leather] “headband” [=strap] that sends the  livestock to their goal, glowing one,
we implore the favor of this (goad) of yours.
## 10
And make our poetic vision cow-winning for us, horse-winning, and  prize-winning,
make it manfully to be pursued.