+++
title = "055"

+++
55 (496) Pūsaṇ
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verses: gāyatrī
This little hymn is noteworthy for its structure, with a lexical chain knitting the  verses together: each verse, except the last (6), contains at least one word or phrase  from the preceding verse. The last verse does contain a phonological echo of the  preceding one: “brother” in verse 5 (bhrā́tā) is echoed by the last word of verse 6  (“bearing” bíbhrataḥ).
It is also noteworthy for the startling, but oddly offhand and uncensorious, allu sion to incest in verses 4–5, where Pūṣan is identified as the lover of his sister and  the wooer of his mother. This follows on three verses (1–3) seeking Pūṣan as chari oteer and giver of wealth, and after the incest verses the poet returns to the chariot  motif to end the hymn (vs. 6). What the poet is alluding to is Pūṣan’s alleged mar riage to Sūryā, Daughter of the Sun, glancingly mentioned in nearby VI.58.4 as  well as in X.26.6.
## 1
Come here! Let us two, o child of release, glowing one, together
accompany each other.
Become the charioteer of truth for us.
## 2
The best charioteer, with braided hair, holding sway over great bounty, the companion of wealth we beseech for wealth.
## 3
You are a stream of wealth, glowing one, a heap of goods, you with goats  as horses,
the companion of every visionary.
## 4
Pūṣan who has goats for horses let us now approach with praise—the  prizewinner,
who is said to be the lover of his sister.
## 5
The wooer of his mother I have spoken to: let the lover of his sister  hear us,
brother of Indra, companion to me.

## 6
Let the trusty [?] goats draw Pūṣan on his chariot, him who brings (all) to  readiness *with his sharp (goad),
they bearing the god.