+++
title = "057"

+++
57 (498)
Indra and Pūsaṇ
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verses: gāyatrī
Indra and Pūṣan are invoked together at the very beginning of this hymn, in a  construction (the dual dvandva) that implies habitual intimacy. In the next two  verses (2–3) their contrastive attributes are used as definitional descriptors; in verse  2 Indra is the first identified, while in verse 3 the order is the opposite. The end of  verse 3 and verse 4 seem to background Pūṣan while foregrounding Indra’s great  deeds, but the final two verses (5–6) return them to equality, and indeed in both  verses Pūṣan is mentioned first, with Indra almost an afterthought. The implied  equipoise between the two gods would of course be amusing to a Vedic audience,  given the sharp distinction between their importance in the pantheon.
In the translation we have retained as much as possible the order of the ele ments, even though this violates normal English patterns, because the balance  between the two gods and their qualities is conveyed by their careful stationing in  the verse.
## 01
Indra and Pūṣan would we—for partnership, for well-being—
call upon—for prize-winning.
## 02
Soma has the one sat down to, to drink it pressed in the two cups. Porridge does the other one desire.
## 03
Goats are the draft-animals for the one; two fallow bay horses, fully  equipped, are for the other;
along with those two (horses) he keeps smashing obstacles.
## 04
When Indra the most bullish led the streams, the great waters,
then Pūṣan came along.
## 05
The benevolence of Pūṣan—like the branch of a tree—
and that of Indra we seize hold of.
## 06
We ease up on Pūṣan—like a charioteer the reins—
and Indra, for great well-being.