+++
title = "059"

+++
59 (500)
Indra and Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
10 verses: br̥hatī 1–6, anuṣṭubh 7–10
As has been discussed elsewhere, despite the major roles each of these gods plays  in the R̥gveda, Indra and Agni have little in common ritually or mythologically.  Nonetheless, eleven hymns are dedicated jointly to them. In this particular hymn,  the pairing is insisted upon: every verse has a form of the dual dvandva compound  “Indra-Agni.” Moreover, their kinship and joint birth is the subject of the first two  verses, which, as many scholars have claimed, may be conceptually connected to the  murky hymn X.124, possibly concerning the defeat of the Asuras (the Fathers of vs.  1 in this hymn?) by the Devas or gods. Elsewhere in the R̥gveda there is no evidence  for a family connection between Indra and Agni.
As in some other Indra-Agni hymns, Agni is assimilated to Indra at least in the  early verses, since Indra has the more dynamic mythology. The standard promise to  Indra to “proclaim (his) manly deeds” is made to Indra and Agni in verse 1; soma  is offered to them in verses 1, 3 and 4, though it is really Indra’s drink; and they  are both said to possess the mace, Indra’s weapon, in verse 3. The balance changes  somewhat in verses 5–6. The two gods are separated and, though not named, are  identified by their characteristics. The second hemistich of 5 refers to Agni alone,  and in verse 6, after a reference to Dawn and her cows, probably alluding to the  Morning Pressing where Agni is kindled and Indra appears, the second half-verse  contrasts Agni (pāda c) and Indra (pāda d). This brings to an end the first division of the hymn as defined metrically, and  this portion forms a satisfactory unit celebrating the gods and offering them praise  and soma. The last four verses, also metrically unified, make the singer’s requests,  for aid against enemies (vss. 7–8) and for wealth (vs. 9), and again invite them with  praise and soma (vs. 10). Despite the metrical division, which corresponds to a  functional and thematic difference, there is no reason to consider this a composite  hymn, pace Oldenberg (1888: 200). It conforms to a common pattern: praise and  then requests, and the shorter dimeter meter of the last four verses is appropriate  to the specific requests, in contrast to the rhetorically more formal praise section in  the lyric br̥hatī.
## 1
I shall now proclaim, when (soma drinks) have been pressed for you, the  manly deeds that you two have done.
Slain are your fathers whose rivals were the gods, but, o Indra and Agni,  you are (still) alive.
## 2
Yes indeed! It is just so: your greatness is most to be marveled at, Indra  and Agni.
Your begetter was the same: you two are brothers, twins (though) with  one mother here, one there.
## 3
The two who are accustomed to the pressed (soma), like a pair of teamed  horses to their fodder,
Indra and Agni, both possessing the mace, the two gods, we call here  with their aid.
## 4
Indra and Agni, whoever will praise you, strong through truth, at these  pressings—
you two will never snap at one who speaks (such) a pleasurable speech,  you gods who receive substantial oblations.
## 5
O gods Indra and Agni, what mortal shall perceive this one of you two? The single one, (though) having yoked his horses facing in all directions,  goes speeding on the same chariot.
## 6
Indra and Agni, this footless one here [=Dawn] has gone in front of the  footed ones [=cows?].
While (this one [=Agni],) having left his head behind, constantly
chattering with his tongue, goes wandering, (this one [=Indra?]) has  trodden down thirty with his foot.
## 7
Indra and Agni, since gallant men are drawing their bows in their arms, do not shun us in this (contest) for great stakes, in our quests for cattle. 8. Indra and Agni, the evil hostilities of the stranger scorch me.
Make hatreds stay far away from here; keep (him) away from the sun. 9. Indra and Agni, in you are heavenly and earthly goods.
Extend to us here wealth that brings lifelong prosperity.

## 10
O Indra and Agni whose conveyance is hymns, who listen to the  summons through our praise songs,
through all our songs—come here to drink this soma.