+++
title = "060"

+++
60 (501) Indra and Agni
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
15 verses: triṣṭubh 1–3, gāyatrī 4–12, triṣṭubh 13, br̥hatī 14, anuṣṭubh 15, arranged  in trcas ̥
This Indra-Agni hymn, organized into tr̥cas, begins with three verses in trimeter  meter notable for the tendency to address Indra and Agni separately, each in the  vocative singular, though they receive joint epithets, are referred to by shared pro nouns, and are generally, but not exclusively (see vs. 2d), the subjects of dual verbs.  Our translation reflects this peculiar disjunction of vocatives. This separate address  is not characteristic of the rest of the hymn, where the dual dvandva compound  “Indra-Agni” (or, once, a conjoined phrase “Indra and Agni,” vs. 12) is found in  nine of the remaining twelve verses, and the last tr̥ca begins with a verse (13) con
taining four occurrences of the explicit adjective “(you) both” (ubhā́). The content of the praise is generic, with a tendency toward Indraic deeds and  qualities (see esp. vss. 3, 6). The second-to-last tr̥ca treats the two gods separately,  without naming them: Agni in verse 10, Indra in verse 11, and a return to joint ref erence in verse 12. The final triplet (vss. 13–15) is in three different meters, and it has  been suggested that it did not originally belong to the rest of the hymn. However,  notice that the return to longer lines matches the meter of the first tr̥ca, and there  are also verbal responsions with the first three verses, so that a ring-compositional  structure is sketched. The strong emphasis on the unified front presented by the two  gods in verses 13–15 contrasts implicitly with the separate address in the first tr̥ca,  and may hint that our own hymn has brought about the close cooperation between  the two gods that will benefit us.
## 1
He pierces the obstacle and wins the prize who will serve Indra and Agni,  the mighty ones
who have control over abundant goods, the two most mighty with their  might as they seek the victory prize.
## 2
You two, do battle for cows now, o Indra, for the waters, the sun, and the  dawns who were carried (away), o Agni.
The quarters, the sun, the brilliant dawns, o Indra—the waters, the cows,  do you, o Agni, as teamster hitch up as your team.
## 3
O you two obstacle-smashers, with your obstacle-smashing tempests, o  Indra, drive our direction, o Agni, by reason of our reverences.
You two, with unstinting, highest bounties, o Indra, be here for us,
o Agni. 4. I call upon these two whose every previous deed is admired.
Indra and Agni do not neglect (us).
## 5
The two strong ones who hew apart the negligent, Indra and Agni, do  we call upon.
They will be gracious to such as us.
## 6
They smash the Ārya obstacles; they smash those of the Dāsa—the two  lords of settlements;
they smash away all hatreds.
## 7
O Indra and Agni, these praises here have roared to you two.
Drink the pressed (soma), you who are luck itself.
## 8
Those much-sought-after teams of yours which are for the pious, you  superior men,
come here with those, o Indra and Agni.
## 9
With those come here, you superior men, up to this pressing
pressed here,
o Indra and Agni, for soma-drinking.
## 10
Reverently invoke him who with his flame embraces all the trees, who makes them black with his tongue.
## 11
The mortal who, when (the ritual fire) has been kindled, seeks to win  the favor of Indra,
(for him Indra makes) the waters easy to cross for brilliance.
## 12
You two, deliver to us refreshments accompanied by prizes, and deliver  (to safety) swift steeds
to convey Indra and Agni.
## 13
You both, Indra and Agni, are to be called upon; both together are to  invigorate yourselves on bounty.
You both are givers of refreshments, of riches; you both do I call upon  to win the victory prize.
## 14
Come here close to us with bovine and equine goods.
The two partners, the two gods who are luck itself, Indra and Agni, do  we call on for partnership.
## 15
O Indra and Agni, hear the call of the sacrificer who presses (soma). Pursue his oblations: come here, drink the somian honey.