+++
title = "061"

+++
61 (502) Sarasvatı̄
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
14 verses: jagatī 1–3, gāyatrī 4–12, jagatī 13, triṣṭubh 14, organized in tr̥cas
This hymn has a metrical structure similar to the preceding one, VI.60: it is orga nized in tr̥cas, with the first tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) in a trimeter meter, the next three tr̥cas in

dimeter (4–12), a return to the original meter in verse 13, and, here, a final verse (14)  in yet a different meter. The complexity of the meter corresponds roughly with the  density of the thought: the first tr̥ca is rich in imagery and particularities; the follow ing three tr̥cas are less adorned and more generic, though Sarasvatī’s riverine nature  is clear, especially in the second of these tr̥cas, verses 7–9. The hymn ends with a final
statement of her superiority (vs. 13) and a plea for her aid and sustenance (vs. 14). The sheer power of the river and the potential menace of her relentless flow are  nicely conveyed, especially in the first tr̥ca, where she punishes a series of human  foes and even destroys the mountains while rewarding her praisers. In parts of the  hymn, these rewards are clearly related to her identity as river—the streambeds in  verse 3, the milk we pray for in verse 14—but in others the connection is not clear,  especially the gift to Vadhryaśva of (apparently) a son Divodāsa, which opens the  hymns. The hostile Br̥saya of verse 3 is also unclear: the name occurs only once  elsewhere in the R̥gveda (I.93.4) in similar context.
## 1
She gave to the pious Vadhryaśva tempestuous Divodāsa who shakes  the debtor,
she who has wrenched away the provender from one niggard after
another. These are your powerful gifts, o Sarasvatī.
## 2
She, like a root-grubbing (boar) with her snortings, broke the back of  the mountains with her powerful waves.
Sarasvatī, who smashes the foreigners, we would entice here for help  with well-plaited (hymns), with visionary thoughts.
## 3
Sarasvatī, tear down the scorners of the gods, the offspring of every  tricky Br̥saya.
And (while) you found streambeds for the settlements, you flowed
poison for them, o you rich in prize mares.
## 4
Let goddess Sarasvatī, rich in prize mares, with her prizes
help us—the helper of visionary thoughts.
## 5
Whoever makes appeal to you, goddess Sarasvatī, when the stake is set, as if to Indra at the overcoming of Vr̥tra,
## 6
Aid (him), goddess Sarasvatī, at the prize (contests), you prizewinner. Channel gain to us, like Pūṣan.
## 7
And this Sarasvatī, having a golden course, fearsome,
obstacle-smashing, wants our good praise—
## 8
Whose boundless, unswerving, turbulent, roving flood,
her onslaught, proceeds ever roaring.
## 9
Beyond all hatreds, beyond her other sisters [=rivers] has the
truthful one
extended us, like the sun the days.
## 10
And she, dear(est) among the dear (rivers), having seven sisters, very  delightful—
Sarasvatī is (ever) worthy of our praise. 11. Having filled the earthly (places), the broad realm, the midspace, let Sarasvatī protect (us) from scorn.
## 12
Having three seats and seven parts, strengthening the five peoples, at every prize contest she is worthy to be invoked.
## 13
The one who by her greatness shines ever more brightly among the  great (rivers), (beyond) the others by her brilliance, the busiest of
the busy,
like a chariot lofty and fashioned for wide ranging, she is to be praised  by (every) observant one—Sarasvatī.
## 14
O Sarasvatī, lead us to a better state. Do not spring away with your  milk; do not come up short for us.
Take delight in our partnerships and communities. Let us not go from  you to alien dwelling places.