+++
title = "062"

+++
62 (503)
Aśvins
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The first five verses of this hymn cover the familiar ground of Aśvin hymns—the  poet’s eager invitation to the two gods to drive to our sacrifice. Though the theme  and sentiments are familiar, there are a number of nice touches—the enjambment  across verse boundaries (1/2a; 2bcd/3a, at least in our opinion) and the play on the  concepts of newer and older in verses 4–5. This section ends (5d) with the phrase,  modifying the Aśvins, “providing bright gifts to the singer” (gr̥ṇaté citrárātī).
The following two verses (6–7) touch on several of the Aśvins’ famous deeds,  especially the rescue of Bhujyu from the sea (vs. 6), but the two verses after that  (8–9) take a detour, addressing other gods and urging them to take violent action  against various enemies. The poet seems so agitated that he loses his grip on gram
mar:  verse 9, concerning Mitra and Varuṇa, is syntactically fragmented, shift ing without warning or grammatical agreement between dual and singular and  between 3rd and 2nd person. (We have not been able to render the full effect in  English.)
Though verse 10 returns us to the Aśvins’ journey and to a more tranquil gram matical level, it too enlists the Aśvins to attack and also suggests that their journey  to us was prompted by the failure of other men. The final verse gives no hint of  the agitation in the immediately preceding verses and ends with the same phrase as  verse 5, thus implicitly indicating the bipartite structure of the hymn.
## 1
I shall praise the two outstanding men of this heaven; I call upon the  Aśvins, singing [/awakening] with my chants—
they who, at the breaking of the ruddy dawn, in a single day seek to  encompass the ends of the earth and its broad expanses,

## 2
While striding to the sacrifice with their gleaming (horses). (The horses)  have shone the radiant beam of their chariot through the dusky  spaces.
Measuring the many immeasurable expanses, you two drive over the  waters, wastelands, and fields,
## 3
When (you drive) this circuit without slackening, o powerful ones. Over  and over you have conveyed insights that are right to the point, with  your horses
swift as thought and vigorous, in order to circumscribe the wayward  course of the pious mortal.
## 4
The two attend upon the thoughts of (me), the newer singer, having  harnessed their team,
conveying beauty and fortifying power, refreshment and nourishment.  The age-old Hotar without deceit shall offer sacrifice to the two  youths.
## 5
The two, obliging and skillful, best endowed with many abilities—those  age-old ones do I seek to attract here with my newer speech—
those two who become most wealful for the reciter and praiser,
providing bright gifts to the singer.
## 6
You two with your birds conveyed Bhujyu, the son of Tugra, from the  waters, from the sea, through the airy realms,
through dustless treks, bending (him) away from the lap of the flood  with your winged ones.
## 7
With your victorious (chariot), you charioteers drove through the rock;  you harkened to the call of Vadhrīmatī, o bulls.
Showing favor to Śayu, you made his cow swell. Thus (did you show)  your benevolence, you stirring and bustling ones.
## 8
O world-halves, the anger of gods and among mortals that exists from  of old on earth,
direct that evil heat at the yokemate of demons, o Ādityas, Vasus, and  Rudriyas.
## 9
Which (one of) the two kings, Mitra or Varuṇa, will keep watch over the  airy realm, regulating it according to the proper sequence—
hurl your missile at the deep-embedded demonic power and also at the  deceitful speech of the Anu people.
## 10
With your wheels drawing nearer, with your heaven-bright chariot with  its superior men, do you two drive your circuit for our lineage (to  prosper),
because of the distant dereliction of a(nother) mortal. Chop off the  heads of the rapacious ones.
## 11
Drive here with your highest and midmost teams, this way with your lowest. Open the doors of the cattle pen, even though they are shut fast, you  who provide bright gifts for the singer. 
