+++
title = "063"

+++
63 (504) Aśvins
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except ekapadā 11
The first four verses of this hymn are divided more or less equally between the  invitation to and journey of the Aśvins to our sacrifice (vss. 1–2) and the sacrifice  itself (vss. 3–4). The next two verses (5–6) enter mythological territory: the journey  of Sūryā, daughter of the Sun, on the Aśvins’ chariot along with them. This mytho
logical journey returns us to the actual journey of today (vs. 7) and the hopes we  have of these gods when they attend our sacrifice (vs. 8). The final two verses (9–10)  are a dānastuti, naming a number of the patrons of the poet, Bharadvāja, with the  single pāda of verse 11 expressing his hope for the Aśvins’ favor to both himself and  his patrons at the place of sacrifice.
## 1
Where today did our reverential praise song, like a messenger, find these  two obliging ones, called upon by many—
(the praise song) that has (previously) turned the Nāsatyas this way? For  you two will be the dearest in his [=poet’s] thought.
## 2
Come fit for this summons of mine, so that, being hymned, you will  drink the stalk.
You drive, away from harm, around this circuit, which neither a distant  one nor one close by may traverse.
## 3
It has been made for you from the stalk; on the expanse [=ritual  ground] has been strewn the ritual grass, offering the easiest
approach.
With hands outstretched, seeking you, I have greeted (you). Approaching  you, the stones have anointed you.
## 4
The fire has stood upright for you at the ceremonies. The gift goes forth,  glowing, covered in ghee;
forth the chosen Hotar whose thought is welcomed, who has yoked the  Nāsatyas at his call.
## 5
For splendor the Daughter of the Sun mounted your chariot provided  with hundredfold help, o you who offer much enjoyment.
You became foremost then in the lineage of those worthy of the sacrifice  by your magic powers, o magicians, superior men, dancers.
## 6
Along with these splendors lovely to see you conveyed the flourishing of  Sūryā, for beauty.
The birds flew forth after you, for wonder; (their) choir reached you (so  you became) well-praised, o holy ones.
## 7
Let the birds, the horses that convey best, convey you to the pleasurable  offering, o Nāsatyas.
Your chariot swift as thought has been sent surging forth after the many  refreshments and the fortifying powers that bring refreshment.

## 8
Because your giving is much, o you who give much enjoyment, swell our  cow and our refreshment (so that they) don’t dry up.
To you belong praises and the good praise-hymn and the juices that  have followed your gift, o honeyed ones.
## 9
And mine are two silver, swift (mares) of Puraya, a hundred (cows) at  (the hands of) Sumīḷha, and cooked (foods) at (the hands of) Peruka. Śāṇḍa has given gold-bedecked (horses) along with their allotted (gear).  Ten mated cows are attendant upon the high (horses).
## 10
Purupanthā has given altogether hundreds and thousands of horses for  (my) song for you;
to Bharadvāja he has given (them) for the song, o hero(es). Demonic  powers should be smashed, o you of many wondrous powers.
## 11
Might I, along with my patrons, be in your favor on the expanse  [=ritual ground].