+++
title = "064"

+++
64 (505)
Dawn
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins with reference to multiple Dawns, but soon (by the second half of  vs. 1) focuses only on a single Dawn. As so often, the hymn refers to the present and  immediate past when Dawn has just dawned. The standard tropes are present: her  wide radiance (vss. 2, 3), her ease of travel (vss. 1, 4), her feminine beauty (vs. 2),  her accompanying bovines (vss. 3, 5), and especially her connection with the priestly  gift distributed at the early-morning sacrifice and with wealth in general (vss. 1, 4,  5, 6). Although the hymn does not stand out for elaborate rhetorical tricks, it is  characterized by pleasing imagery; see especially Dawn as archer and chariot-driver  in verse 3 and the morning activities of birds and men in verse 6 (a verse found also  at I.124.12).
## 01
The shining Dawns have arisen for splendor, glistening like the waves of  the waters.
She makes all pathways, all passages easy to travel. She has appeared— the good priestly gift, the bounteous one.
## 02
Auspicious, you have become visible; you radiate widely. Your flare, your  radiant beams have flown up to heaven.
You reveal your breast as you go in beauty, goddess Dawn, shining with  all your might.
## 03
The ruddy, glistening cows convey her of good portion as she spreads  widely.
Like a champion archer his rivals, she drives away darkness; she repels it  like a quick (chariot-)driver. 4. Easy are your pathways, easy your passages (even) in the mountains.  (Even) when it is windless you cross over the waters, self-radiant one. Convey wealth here for us to prosper, high Daughter of Heaven with  your broad course.
## 05
Convey (it)—you who as the unsurpassable one with your oxen convey  the boon at your pleasure, Dawn,
you who are a goddess, o Daughter of Heaven. Become worthy to be  seen with your munificence at the early invocation!
## 06
The birds have also flown up from their dwelling, and the men who  partake of food, at your first flush.
To the one who is at home you convey much of value, o goddess Dawn,  and to the pious mortal.