+++
title = "065"

+++
65 (506)
Dawn
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verses: triṣṭubh
In virtual mirror-image to the previous hymn, this one begins with a single Dawn,  but turns for some verses (2–4) to the plural Dawns, before returning to a single  Dawn in the final two verses (5–6). The structure of this hymn is more cunning  than the somewhat bland VI.64, however. The poet uses identical pāda openings  (4a, 4b, 4c, 5a: idā́ [hí] “[for] right now...”), with insistence on the here-and-now,  to modulate from the present situation and current poet to the mythological model  for the dawn and the associated distribution of treasures, namely the Aṅgirases  opening the Vala cave (vs. 5), which is presented as if it were happening now. As  often when this myth is mentioned as a model for the singer (see, e.g., V.45), there  is no mention of Indra, to whom the leadership in this deed is usually attributed.  By the end of verse 5 the mythical and successful Aṅgirases have merged with the  current poets, and the invocation of both is proclaimed as having come true. The  connection between past and present is continued in the pleas for wealth and fame  made in the last verse (6).
## 01
This very one, the daughter born of heaven dawning for us, has
awakened the human settlements,
she who with her glistening radiance amid the nights has been recognized  even across the nocturnal shades of darkness.
## 02
They have driven through it with their ruddy-yoked horses; brightly shine  the Dawns with their gleaming chariots.
Leading the vanguard of the lofty sacrifice, they thrust aside the
darkness of the night.
## 03
Bringing down to the pious mortal fame, reward, refreshment,
nourishment, o Dawns,864 VI.66
as bounteous masters of (wealth) in heroes, establish aid and a treasure  for the one who does honor today.
## 04
For right now there exists a treasure for the one who does you honor,  right now for the hero, for the pious one, o Dawns,
right now for the poet, when he sings his hymns. Even before you used to  carry (it) down to one such as me.
## 05
For right now the Aṅgirases are hymning the cowpens of the cows for  you, o Dawn, you who own the high backs of the mountains.
They have split (them) apart with their chant and sacred formulation.  The men’s invocation of the gods has come true.
## 06
Dawn for us, Daughter of Heaven, as of old, for the one who does (you)  honor like Bharadvāja, o bounteous one.
Grant wealth in good heroes to the singer. Confer wide-ranging fame  upon us.