+++
title = "066"

+++
66 (507)
Maruts
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The only hymn to the Maruts in Maṇḍala VI, this poem is complex, playful, allu sive, and very difficult in parts.
It begins with five dense and syntactically contorted verses about the birth of  the Maruts, a topic that regularly invites such treatment. The story of the birth is  introduced by a signal that it is esoteric knowledge; verse 1a announces it as a mar vel even for someone who really perceives properly. The rest of the verse is both a  paradox and a riddle: two entities have the same name, “milker,” but one of them  constantly gives milk, and the other has done so only once. The riddle is solved by  the last word of the verse, “udder”; the paradox juxtaposes the normal udder of  a cow, which constantly swells with milk, with the udder of the Marut’s mother,  Pr̥śni, who bore them, that is, milked them out, all at once. (This same phenom
enon is referred to in riddling terms in VI.48.22.) Verse 2 continues this theme, and  the other parent of the Maruts, their father Rudra, is introduced in verse 3. But  both 1 and 3 also allude to the androgynous behavior of the mother Pr̥śni, who  elsewhere (see esp. IV.3.10) is identified as a bull who gives milk that is identical  with semen; in verse 3 here she is the subject of the quintessentially male verb of  impregnation (gárbhaṃ √dhā “implant an embryo”). Verse 4 is the most opaque  verse in this sequence. It clearly describes the moment of the Maruts’ birth; they  did not resist being born, but in fact were milked out when they wished, after hav ing “purified their flaws” while still within her womb. A two-word expression early  in the verse (áyā nú) seems to have a double meaning: on the one hand, it is the  poet’s comment about the manner of birth: “now (it happened) in this way”; on the other, it can be read as the direct speech of the Maruts (considered as a group),  “Now I will go” (that is, be born), an indication of their moment of choice. The  final verse of the birth story relates the fact that Pr̥śni, having given them as milk,  did not give them milk after they were born, but they were undeterred. There is  much that is doubtful in our translation of these verses, but the main outlines seem  clear, while the tricks of the poet are much on display.
Though more of his tricks appear in the rest of the hymn, none of it is as dif ficult as these first five verses. Verse 6 turns on a pun between the word for the  “two world-halves” (ródasī) and the female who is often found as the Maruts’ lover,  Rodasī́ (distinguished from the first only by accent). The marvel of their journey  through the midspace is described in verse 7, and the good fortune of the man who  receives their aid in verse 8. The journey of verse 7 must be to carry them to our sac rifice, for the remaining verses bring the hymn to a fairly conventional end: in verse  9 we produce a hymn for the Maruts; in verse 10 they are compared to the ritual  fire, an appropriate simile if they are situated on the ritual ground; in the final verse  (10) the aim of attracting them to the sacrifice is made explicit and the competing  hymns of rival sacrificers are alluded to.
Unlike many Marut hymns, this one lacks any significant description of their  thunderstorm-like aspects.
## 01
Let this be a marvel even for one who (truly) perceives—(though) owning  the same name “milker,”
while the one stays swollen to give milk to mortals, only once did Pr̥śni  milk the gleaming (milk/semen) from (the other) udder.
## 02
Those who kept blazing up like fires being kindled, when the Maruts  were strengthened two or three times over—
dustless, golden were their (chariots)—they came into being all at once  with their manly and male powers.
## 03
Those who are the sons of Rudra the rewarder, and whom she was  stalwart (enough) to bear—
for she is known as the great mother of the great—just she, Pr̥śni,
implanted the embryo for good offspring.
## 04
Those who do not retreat from their birth: now (it happened) in this way  [/(saying) “Now I will go”]—purifying their flaws while still within
(their mother),
they were milked forth gleaming, at their pleasure, growing in splendor  all along their bodies.
## 05
Those for whom even right away [=right after their birth] the irrepressible  one [=Pr̥śni] was not there to give milk—those who, assuming the bold  name “Marut,”
did not (stand still) like posts, (but were themselves) irrepressible in their  greatness. Even now [/never] would the one of good drops [=Pr̥śni]
appease (those) mighty ones.

## 06
Just these mighty ones in a bold host yoked both well-fixed
world-halves [=ródasī] through their vast power.
Then Rodasī mounted among these impetuous ones like a
self-blazing light.
## 07
Let your course be without antelopes, o Maruts, also without horses— the course that one who is no charioteer drives.
Without halt, without reins as it crosses the dusky realm, it travels
through the two world-halves along its paths, heading toward
its goal.
## 08
There exists now no one to obstruct, no one to overcome him whom  you aid in the winning of prizes, o Maruts,
whom (you aid in the winning) of progeny, of cows, of descendants, of  waters. He is the splitter of the (cow)pen just then at the decisive end  of the day.
## 09
Bring forward a brilliant chant for the singing, swift, self-strong  Marut(-troop).
Those who overpower powers with power, before (those) combatants  the earth trembles, o Agni.
## 10
Flaring like the dart of the ceremony [=ritual fire], stirring thirstily like  tongues of fire,
chanting like boisterous heroes, the Maruts with their flashing birth are  unassailable.
## 11
This Marut(-troop) grown strong, with flashing spears, the son(s) of  Rudra I seek to entice here with an invocation.
For (the favor of) the troop of heaven the gleaming inspired thoughts,  mighty like mountains or waters, have contended (with each other).