+++
title = "067"

+++
67 (508)
Mitra and Varuṇa
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
11 verses: triṣṭubh
This is the only hymn dedicated to Mitra and Varuṇa in Maṇḍala VI, though Indra  and Varuṇa are the recipients of the next, unremarkable hymn. By contrast, this  hymn is obscure in reference and meaning, and full of rare words, unclear morpho logical forms, contorted phraseology, puzzling imagery, and ellipses difficult to fill.  Our interpretation of the hymn both in detail and in general outline differs from the  many incompatible interpretations offered by other scholars (differences that we  cannot discuss here), but our interpretation does produce a clear structure within  which the many puzzles can be evaluated.
The hymn begins straightforwardly enough, with an exhortation to the priests  to offer ritual praise to Mitra and Varuṇa (vs. 1) and an invitation to the two gods to come to our ritual sacrifice (vss. 2, 3ab). This first section ends (3cd), in our view,  with an elaborated version of 1ab, declaring the gods’ power to control even the  rich and powerful.
The ritual context returns later in the hymn (vss. 7–8), and the two ritually  oriented portions frame a section relating to the birth of Mitra and Varuṇa from  Aditi (vs. 4) and the powers they assumed to regulate the cosmos (vss. 5–6). The  allusion to their birth recalls the lengthy birth narrative of the Maruts in the  immediately preceding hymn (VI.66.1–5). With the return to the ritual situation,  the two gods are first exhorted to drink the soma, whose preparation is described  in enigmatic terms (vs. 7). In verse 8, again in our view, the two gods receive a  summons from Agni (not named), the ritual fire through whom they will con sume ghee, because he finds they are not there. (See the calls in the structurally  matching vss. 2–3.)
This absence leads to the final section of the hymn (vss. 9–11), which appears  to treat the rivalry among competing sacrificers. If Mitra and Varuṇa are not at  our sacrifice (vs. 8b), they must be elsewhere. The poet describes these competi tors in extremely negative terms (vs. 9) as violating the ordinances that are the  most prominent feature of Mitra and Varuṇa’s moral command. In contrast,  verse 10 presents the proper ritual behavior and attitudes of our side, ending  with yet another affirmation of the gods’ power to control and set in place  the people (10d, reminiscent of 1cd and 3cd). And in the final verse (11) we  are ourselves properly placed in the shelter of Mitra and Varuṇa (a placement  first requested in vs. 2), hoping for generous gifts when the soma sacrifice is  performed. The last half-verse refers, in our view, to this sacrifice: the cows are  the milk mixture pursuing the straight-flying soma; the bold bull in battle-lust  is also the soma. But the expressions also evoke martial images appropriate to  the rivalry among sacrificers found in the preceding two verses. It is worth not
ing that the preceding hymn also made brief allusion to sacrificial rivalry in its  final verse (VI.66.11).
## 1
Of all beings the most preeminent, Mitra and Varuṇa are to be
continuously strengthened by your songs.
The best controllers, the two without equal, who, like reins, firmly
control the peoples with their own arms.
## 2
This inspired thought from me is spread forth for you two, (calling you)  two dear ones with homage to the ritual grass.
Hold forth to us, Mitra and Varuṇa, the unbesiegable shelter of yours  that provides defense, o you of good drops.
## 3
Drive hither, Mitra and Varuṇa, dear ones being called to (the ritual  grass) with good recitation, with homage.
You two who like industrious workers firmly (control) (even) the peoples  ensconced in prosperity, you set in their place even those (who
themselves say) “listen!” [=bosses], with your greatness.

## 4
When at her season Aditi (was ready) to bear as embryo (the two) who  like prizewinning horses were of pure breed,
who were being born forth greatly great, she pushed downward (at
delivery) the two to be terrible for the cheating mortal.
## 5
Since all the gods in concert, being exhilarated, magnanimously  established dominion for you two,
such that you two surround even the two wide world-halves, there exist  spies (in your service), undeceivable, ungullible.
## 6
Because you uphold your dominion through the days and you make  firm (heaven’s) back as if from highest heaven,
firm (also) is the heavenly body [=sun], and belonging to all the gods  it has stretched to earth and to heaven with the gushing [=rain] of
those two [=Mitra and Varuṇa].
## 7
You should appropriate the lively (soma) to fill your belly, when those  of the same pedigree [=soma-pressing fingers?] fill the seat.
The unsurpassable maidens [=fingers] are not neglectful when they
distribute their milk [=soma], o you two who enliven all.
## 8
(You) two (does) the one of good wisdom [=Agni] always (call) here  with his tongue, when the true wheel (of the sacrifice) [=Agni] has
come to be without you.
Let this be your greatness, you who have ghee for food: you open up the  narrow place for the pious one.
## 9
When they start contending over you two but violate the dear
ordinances ordained by you, Mitra and Varuṇa,
they, not attending upon the sacrifice, are neither gods, despite their
vaunting, nor mortals, but like children who do not swell [=grow/thrive]. 10. When the praisers distribute their speech and some recite the formal  invocations, paying them heed,
after that we will speak to you pronouncements that come true: “No  one (will violate your ordinances). You set in their places (the
peoples) along with the gods by your greatness.”
## 11
In just this way, in the charge of you two and of your shelter, (we seek)  of you, Mitra and Varuṇa, (giving) that is not stunted,
when the cows [=milk mixture] will bound after the straight-flying one  [=soma], when they will yoke the bold bull [=soma] in battle-lust.