+++
title = "068"

+++
68 (509) Indra and Varuṇa
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 9–10
The theme of ritual reciprocity dominates here, with praise of the two dedi cands fairly spare, whether individual or joint. The message is simple: the piously performed sacrifice that we offer to the two gods should be generously rewarded  with wealth.
The sacrifice is announced in the first verse, as an enticement to bring the two  gods here. The praise, such as it is, comes in the next three verses, a series of super latives characterizing them both in verse 2, a contrastive glance at their respective  functions in the second half of verse 3, and an assertion that the two are preeminent  even among the other gods in verse 4. (Verse 4 is also noteworthy for the gendered  description of the gods; female deities are not usually given recognition when the  gods in general are mentioned.)
Wealth is the target of the middle verses (5–8), wealth for priests and patrons  alike. The word rayí “wealth” is prominent in all four verses.
The final verses (9–11) depict the here-and-now of the sacrifice, happening  in real time, as it were, signaled by an occurrence of a form of the annunciatory  near-deictic pronoun (“here is/this here”) in each verse (ayám 9c, imám 10a, idám 11c). The gods are present at our sacrifice and urged to drink the soma formally  announced to them.
## 1
The sacrifice has been raised up in concert with obedience, for the man  who has twisted the ritual grass to perform sacrifice to you two, as
Manu (did)—
(the sacrifice) that will turn Indra and Varuṇa here today for great
refreshment and for great favor.
## 2
For you two are the most glorious among the gods with your thrusting,  and you two are the mightiest of mighty warriors,
the most bountiful of bountiful benefactors, powerfully forceful, fully  armed, overcoming obstacles by truth.
## 3
By reason of their favors, sing to Indra and Varuṇa, who take delight,  with forceful, reverential (songs).
The one smites Vr̥tra with his might and mace; the other as inspired poet  attends upon the (ritual) enclosures.
## 4
When all the gods, both ladies and men, grow strong, (their praises) sung  for their own sake by (our) men,
you stand out from them by your greatness, o Indra and Varuṇa, (and  also you two) wide ones, o Heaven and Earth.
## 5
Just he acquires good gifts and good help and possesses the truth who  ritually serves you, o Indra and Varuṇa, in his own person.
With refreshment he, possessing gifts, could overcome hostilities; he will  gain wealth and wealthy peoples.
## 6
The wealth that you two provide to the man who performs pious  ceremonies—wealth consisting of goods and much livestock—
may that abide in us, o Indra and Varuṇa—(the wealth) that shatters the  taunts of the rapacious ones.
## 7
And, o Indra and Varuṇa, for our patrons may there be wealth offering  good protection, with gods as its herdsmen—

(our patrons) whose impetuous force, victorious in battles, surpassingly  extends their éclat all at once.
## 8
Now, Indra and Varuṇa, as you are being sung, replenish our wealth for  the excellence of our fame, o gods.
In just this way singing the force of the great one, might we cross over  difficulties, as if over waters by boat.
## 9
Now chant forth at length your own dear thought to the lofty sovereign  king, to the god Varuṇa.
Here is the one of great commandments who radiates through the two  wide (worlds) with his greatness and by his resolve, like unaging (fire)  with its flame.
## 10
O Indra and Varuṇa, soma-drinkers—drink this exhilarating pressed  soma here, o you of steadfast commandments.
Your chariot drives to the ceremony for attracting the gods, (as if) to  good pasture to drink.
## 11
O Indra and Varuṇa, you bulls—drench yourselves in the most
honeyed, bullish soma.
This stalk has been poured all around for you here among us. Having  sat down on this ritual grass, bring yourselves to exhilaration.