+++
title = "069"

+++
69 (510)
Indra and Viṣṇu
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
8 verses: triṣṭubh
The focus of most of this hymn is entirely ritual, with the two divine recipients of  the hymn treated as a unit. The gods are repeatedly urged to come together to the  sacrifice, to enjoy the various forms of praise, and to drink the soma—as well as  to give us wealth in return. Only one verse (4) is devoted to the gods’ deeds, with  the “wide striding” that is Viṣṇu’s best-known exploit attributed to both of them.  Their unity is reinforced by the grammar. Every verse in this hymn contains a voca
tive address to the two gods, always in a dvandva compound, except for the final  verse (8).
In that verse, the two gods are grammatically separated though still addressed  in the vocative, and this grammatical change marks a sharp change in conception  as well. Though it is emphasized in the first half of the verse that both have con quered and not been conquered, in the second half it is said that they contended  with each other, but in the end divided the stake of a thousand (cows?) in thirds,  with each taking a part. As Geldner points out, this dispute between Indra and  Viṣṇu is referred to a number of times in early Vedic prose and later, and according  to the Taittirīya Saṃhitā (VII.1.5.5) Indra received two thirds of the stake, Viṣṇu  one third. The hymn thus springs a surprise at its end, by this glancing allusion to strife between the two gods who were depicted throughout the rest of the hymn as  an indissoluble pair.
The language and style of most of the hymn are unremarkable and somewhat  repetitive. Noteworthy are verses 2 and 3, with parallel structures in their second  halves, deploying parallel puns on day (the sun’s rays) and night, homonymous with  words referring to verbal productions at the sacrifice.
## 01
With ritual action and with refreshment I propel both of you together, o  Indra and Viṣṇu, to the far shore of this labor.
Enjoy the sacrifice and confer wealth, causing us to cross on paths free  of harm.
## 02
O Indra and Viṣṇu, who are the begetters of all thoughts, the two tubs  holding soma—
let the hymns as they are being recited help you forward, forward the  praises as they are being sung in the form of chants [/along with the  rays (of the sun)].
## 03
O Indra and Viṣṇu, exhilaration-lords of the exhilarating drinks, drive  here to the soma, while conferring wealth.
Let the praises as they are being recited in solemn words anoint both  of you together with the ointments of thoughts [/through the
nights].
## 04
Let your horses, vanquishing hostility, sharers in exhilaration, convey  you two here, o Indra and Viṣṇu.
Enjoy all the invocations of our thoughts. Harken to my sacred
formulations, my hymns.
## 05
O Indra and Viṣṇu, this (deed) of yours is worthy of admiration: in the  exhilaration of soma you two strode widely;
you made the midspace wider; you spread out the realms for us to live. 6. O Indra and Viṣṇu, you who eat first, you on whom the oblation is  bestowed with reverence—having grown strong through the oblation, confer wealth on us, o you whose drink is ghee. You two are the sea, the  tub holding soma.
## 07
O Indra and Viṣṇu, drink of this honey, of the soma, o wondrous ones.  Fill your belly.
The exhilarating stalks have come to you. Harken to my sacred
formulations, my call.
## 08
You both have conquered; you are not conquered. Neither one of these  two has been conquered.
O Viṣṇu and you Indra, when you two were contending, you broke apart  the thousand in three parts.
