+++
title = "070"

+++
70 (511)
Heaven and Earth
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verses: jagatī
This celebration of Heaven and Earth associates them with all sorts of beneficial  liquids. The first word in the hymn is “ghee,” and in the rest of that verse we find  milk, honey, and semen, all of which recur in the hymn: note especially the parallel  verses 4 and 5 devoted to ghee and honey respectively. Besides these liquid endow
ments, the physical qualities of the two divinities are barely mentioned; it is instead  their status as objects of worship and praise at the sacrifice and their ability to grant  rewards to us that preoccupy the poet.
## 1
The two rich in ghee, excelling in glory over the creatures, wide and  broad, milking out honey, well-ornamented—
Heaven and Earth were propped apart according to the foundation of  Varuṇa, the two unaging ones possessing abundant semen.
## 2
Never drying up, with abundant streams, rich in milk, they milk  out ghee for the good performer (of rituals), the two of pure
commandments.
Ruling over this creation, you two World-Halves, for us pour the semen,  as was established by Manu.
## 3
The mortal who, to stride straight, ritually serves you two—you
World-Halves, you two Holy Places—that one reaches his goal.
He is propagated through his progeny forth from your foundation. Those  (creatures) that are poured out from you, (though) of diverse forms,  have the same commandments.
## 4
Heaven and Earth, covered over with ghee, glorious with ghee, mixing  with ghee, strong through ghee,
wide and broad, set in front at the choosing of the Hotar—just these two  do the inspired poets reverently invoke, to seek their favor.
## 5
Let Heaven and Earth trickle honey on us, the two dripping with honey,  milking out honey, having honeyed commandments,
through their divinity establishing sacrifice for themselves, and material  wealth, great fame, the prize of victory, and an abundance of heroes  for us.
## 6
Nourishment let both Heaven and Earth swell for us—father and mother,  all-knowing, of wondrous power.
Jointly bestowing, let the two World-Halves, beneficial for all, jointly  impel gain, the prize of victory, and wealth to us. 
