+++
title = "071"

+++
71 (512)
Savitar
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
6 verses: jagatī 1–3, triṣṭubh 4–6
The two halves of this hymn (vss. 1–3, 4–6) are distinguished by meter, and in fact  they appear to have been originally two hymns, which pattern together in vocabu lary and themes. Geldner suggests that the first is a morning hymn, the second an  evening hymn.
The parallelism is especially clear at the beginning: the first verses of each (1,  4) begin identically: “Up this god Savitar...” (úd u ṣyá deváḥ savitā́...) and fol low with a mention of his golden arms/hands. The second verses (2, 5) are each  appropriate for the time of day they represent: in the morning hymn (vs. 2) Savitar  impels the creatures forth to their daily activities, while in the evening hymn (vs.  5) he brings them to rest. The third verses (3, 6) make the expected pleas for help  and benefit from the god.
## 1
Up has this god Savitar raised his two golden arms for impelling, the  very resolute one.
He sprinkles his hands with ghee, the young battler of good skill, in his  spreading apart of the dusky realm.
## 2
May we be (there) at the best impulsion of the god Savitar and for his  giving of goods—
you [=Savitar] who are (busy) at bringing to rest and at impelling forth  the whole two-footed and four-footed creation.
## 3
With your kindly, undeceivable protectors, o Savitar, today protect our  household all around.
You of golden tongue, guard us for our ever newer welfare; let none who  curse hold sway over us.
## 4
Up has this god Savitar stood—the golden-handed friend of the house— facing evening [=toward the west].
Copper-jawed, deserving the sacrifice, possessing a gladdening tongue,  he impels here to the pious man much of value.
## 5
And up has Savitar raised his golden arms with their lovely fronts like  the Upavaktar priest.
He has mounted the heights of heaven, of earth; he has brought to rest  whatever is flying, even the formless [=wind].
## 6
A thing of value today, o Savitar, and one of value tomorrow—day after  day impel to us a thing of value,
for, o god, *you have control over much of value. Through this poetic  insight may we be partakers of the valuables.874 VI.72–73