+++
title = "072"

+++
72 (513) Indra and Soma
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Each verse in this brief hymn begins with a vocative addressing the two recipients  of the hymn, joined in a dual dvandva compound. Each of the verses recounts  one or more of Indra’s cosmogonic deeds or his beneficial acts for mankind,  here ascribed equally to both gods. Since Indra needs to drink soma in order to  accomplish his feats, this sharing of credit is not surprising. Some of the acts are  expressed in the past tense, some in the present, even those that belong to the  mythical past like the smashing of the serpent (vs. 3). The language is straight
forward, even in the expression of the familiar paradox in verse 4 of the cooked  milk found in the raw cows.
## 1
Indra and Soma, great is this greatness of you two. You did the first great  things:
you found the sun; you found the sunlight; you smashed away all the  shades of darkness—and the scorners.
## 2
Indra and Soma, you make the dawn shine; you lead the sun upward  with its light.
You propped up the heaven with a prop; you spread out Mother Earth. 3. Indra and Soma, you smash the serpent surrounding the waters—Vr̥tra.  Heaven gave consent to you.
You roused forth the floods of the rivers; you filled the many (floods) of  the sea.
## 4
Indra and Soma, you deposited the cooked (milk) within the raw (cows),  just in the udders of the cows.
You held the gleaming (milk), (though) it was not tied on, within the  dappled, moving (cows).
## 5
Indra and Soma, it is you, certainly, who bestowed surpassing (wealth),  bringing descendants in its train, worthy of fame.
You made unbridled force, manly and victorious in battle, as cloak for  the settled domains, you strong ones.