+++
title = "074"

+++
74 (515)
Soma and Rudra
Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
4 verses: triṣṭubh
Although there is another R̥gvedic hymn dedicated to Rudra and Soma (I.43), in  that hymn they are invoked and described in separate verses; this hymn is the only  place in which the two gods are invoked jointly, in a dual dvandva compound that  appears in every verse and is found only in this hymn. Indeed, the gods have little in  common, and the elements in this hymn that are not generic to divinity in general  are applicable only to Rudra—in particular, the plea to destroy disease (vs. 2) and  give healing remedies (vs. 3). The adjective “very kindly” (suśévau) in verse 4 is  etymologically related to and anticipates the epithet śíva “kindly,” which later char acterizes Rudra (already R̥V X.92.9) and ultimately replaces his name.
## 01
O Soma and Rudra, uphold your lordly power; let our desires [/sacrifices]  reach you fittingly.
Depositing seven treasures in every house, be weal for our two-footed,  weal for our four-footed.
## 02
O Soma and Rudra, tear out, tear to pieces the disease that has entered  our household.
Drive calamity into the distance far away. For us let there be auspicious  things bringing good fame.
## 03
O Soma and Rudra, place all these healing remedies on us, in our bodies. Unhitch, release the outrage committed (by us,) which is bound onto our  bodies—(release it) from us.
## 04
You two with sharp weapons, with sharp missiles, very kindly—o Soma  and Rudra, be merciful to us here.
Release us from the noose of Varuṇa; protect us, showing your
benevolence.
