+++
title = "075"

+++
75 (516)
Weapons
Pāyu Bhāradvāja
19 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 6, 10; anuṣṭubh 12–13, 15–16, 19
This supplemental hymn attached to the end of the maṇḍala is one of the most  memorable and delightful in the R̥gveda. It praises the weapons of battle and their  parts, and it is structured as a list of riddles. Each weapon receives one verse; some times the weapon is named at the beginning of the verse (as in vs. 2), but more often  it is found only toward the end, preceded by a riddling definition. Particularly strik ing are the verses in which the subject is described as a seductive woman or tender  mother (vss. 3–4), a characterization that contrasts sharply with the violence of  battle. (Weapons so described are feminine in grammatical gender.) In the following  translation the weapon that is the answer to the riddle is italicized.
The hymn is more or less metrically unified for the first ten verses, and verse 10  reads like a hymn-final verse, breaking the riddle pattern to beg a collection of gods  and ancestors for protection. The rest of the hymn alternates trimeter and dimeter  meter, and although the riddling verses continue (vss. 11, 13–15), there is also direct  address to the weapons themselves and prayers to various gods for protection. The  more various character of this second part of the hymn has led some scholars to  consider it an even later addition, although this does not seem a necessary conclu
sion. The final verse (19) calls down destruction on every type of enemy and affirms  the primacy of the protective sacred formulation—as “inner armor,” thus paired  with the outer armor (the same word várman) found in the first verse of the hymn.  Thus, whether secondarily or not, the hymn has a faint ring structure.
## 01
His mien is like that of a thundercloud, when he drives armored into the  lap of battles.
With an unpierceable body, conquer! Let the greatness of your armor carry you through.
## 02
With the bow may we win cattle, with the bow the contest, with the bow  may we win the sharp battles.
The bow banishes the (battle-)lust of our rival. With the bow may we  win all the quarters.
## 03
Just like (a woman) about to speak, she keeps going up to his ear, while  embracing her dear partner.
Like a maiden (with her anklets?), she jangles when stretched out on the  bow: this bowstring here that makes (the arrow) cross over into the
melee (as if to a [festive] gathering).
## 04
The two faring forth to the melees, like a maiden to (festive) gatherings— let them carry (the arrow) as a mother does a child in her lap.
Let them pierce our rivals when the two find each other: these bow-ends here when they spring apart (against) the enemies. 5. Father of many (daughters [=arrows]), he (also) has many a son; he  makes a clattering when he descends into the melees.
The quiver, tied onto the back, wins clashes and battles—all of them— when it is thrust into action.
## 06
Standing on the chariot, he leads the prizewinners [=horses] forward  wherever he desires: the good charioteer.
Admire the greatness of the reins. The cords guide, following the
(charioteer’s) mind (though it is) behind them.
## 07
They make their sharp cries—the bullish-hooved horses along with the  chariots, as they seek the prize,
trampling down the enemies with their forefeet, they destroy our rivals,  without (even) divesting (them of their armor).
## 08
The chariot-stand, “Oblation(-deposit)” its name, where his weapon, his  armor is deposited—
there may we reverently approach the powerful chariot always when we  seek its benevolence.
## 09
The forefathers: assembling for the sweet (soma), conferring vigor, they  who are props in distress, skillful, deep,
with glittering weapons, arrow-strong, not shirking, entirely heroic,  broad, overwhelming the troops.
## 10
O Brahmins, forefathers, deserving of soma, let Heaven and Earth,  blameless ones, (be) kindly to us;
let Pūṣan protect us from difficult passage, you who are strong through  truth. Guard (us): let none who curse hold sway over us.
## 11
She wears the fine-feathered (eagle); a wild deer is her tooth. Lashed  together with cows, she flies when propelled forth.
Where men clash and separate, there will our arrows provide shelter  for us.
## 12
You (arrow, though) of straight course, avoid us. Let our body become  a rock.
Let Soma speak on our behalf; let Aditi provide us shelter.
## 13
It smashes hard on their back, keeps beating at their haunches— o horsewhip, impel the cautious horses into battles.
## 14
Like a snake with its coils, it encircles the arm, parrying the blow of the  bowstring—
the handguard, knowing all the trajectories (of the bowstring): as a male  let it protect the male all around.
## 15
She who is smeared with poison, with the head of a deer, but whose  mouth is metal:
here is lofty reverence to her who has (received) the semen of Thunder,  to the goddess Arrow.

## 16
Once released, fly away, you arrow, sharpened by a sacred formulation. Go to the enemies; fall on them. Do not leave a single one of them  standing.
## 17
Where the darts fly together, like lads with unruly hair,
there let Brahmaṇaspati, let Aditi provide us shelter—always provide  shelter.
## 18
Your vulnerable places I cover with armor; let Soma the king clothe you  with immortality.
Let Varuṇa make (a space) wider than wide for you; let the gods cheer  you on as you win.
## 19
Whoever wishes to smite us—one of our own or a foreigner, or even  one outside the pale—
him let all the gods injure. The sacred formulation is my inner armor.