+++
title = "07-08"

+++
These two verses are syntactically dependent on each other, consisting of three relative clauses (7ab, cd, 8ab) and a main clause with coreferential pronoun (8cd). However, this structure is complicated by the fact that, though two of the rel.

clauses have singular rel. pronouns (yáḥ 71, 7c) and the pronoun in the main cl. is likewise singular (asmai), the intermediate rel. cl. (8ab) has pl. yé, though all seem to be roughly coreferential. There is no obvious solution for this jarring inconsistency; Ge simply labels it Anakoluthon. However, certain features of the larger context may have encouraged this syntactic anomaly. First, the relative/correlative construction is of the indefinite “whoever …” type, where number is functionally, though not grammatically, neutralized. That is, it doesn't matter how many (or few) people the definitional relative clauses identify: if many people perform the functions, they should all get the reward; if only one does, then only he would. Moreover, as Lüders argues (p. 448), vss. 7-8 respond to vss. 3-4. In those earlier verses Agni goes into hiding (3d), but the “superior men” (náraḥ) find him after they produce and recite effective speech (4). In vss. 7-8 we seem to have the same situation, but in the human realm: he/they who has/have recourse to and do(es) service to the truth (7cd, 8ab) and perceive(s) Agni in hiding (7ab) receive(s) acknowledgement from Agni himself (8cd). Since in vss. 3-4 the discoverers of Agni, the gods, are plural, it may be that the plural crept in here, too. And finally this sequence may anticipate the next hymn, where it is emphasized that “all” (in the plural) perform the proper ritual and devotional functions, and in particular the almost identical phrase ṛtáṃ sápantaḥ (68.4c) echoes our ṛtā́sápantaḥ (67.8b).

