+++
title = "03"

+++
The cosmogonic activities of Agni Vaiśvānara continue here, but I would argue that they are instances of the daily creation of the cosmos by the light of the sun. The propping apart of the two world halves refers to the visual separation of earth and sky at the horizon at first light, and the rolling out of the two skins is a similar image, of the full extent of earth and sky revealed to sight at that time.

It is not entirely clear why Agni Vaiśvānara is called an “unerring ally” (mitró ábhutaḥ; see the identical phrase in I.94.13 and similar I.77.3 mitró ná bhūd ádbhutasya rathī ́ ḥ). Agni is of course regularly identified as an ally (mitrá-) and is compared to Mitra because of his role as go-between between gods and men; in this particular case the sun’s role as the most visible of the gods and the heavenly being most clearly engaged with human life may have elicited this description. The covert presence of Mitra here may also play off the covert presence of Varuṇa in 2b, in the phrase vratā́ni … vratapā́arakṣata “as protector of vratas, he guarded the vratas: vratás are Varuṇa’s special province, although curiously Varuṇa is never called vratapā́- in the RV.

The interpr. of pāda b is disputed because of disagreement about the sense and formation of antarvā́vat (also found in I.40.7). Ge tr. the pāda as “er zerteilte die dazwischenliegende Finsternis durch das Licht” (almost identically also Oberlies Relig. I.191), presumably with the ‘between’ sense of antár nominalized with the complex suffix -vā́-vant-. Re denies that the formation has a complex (or duplicate) suffix but rather considers it an imitation of arvāvát ‘nearby’, despite the difference in accent, and renders the word (in his note) as “un domaine intérieur (= invisible).” His tr. of the pāda is “il a fait que les ténèbres (devinssent) par la lumière un domaine-cachée.” So, he takes antár in the meaning ‘within’, but the further morphological analysis is unclear. Old (ad I.40.7) also sees the ‘within’ sense of antár here, but with a more plausible interpr. of the suffixal material — with the whole meaning ‘inhaltsvoll’ (that is, ‘having [something] within’). He also considers it is entirely or roughly synonymous with antárvant-. (Both of these views are also found in AIG II.2.893, and the whole is laid out with admirable clarity by Schmidt [B+I 102]. Both AiG and Schmidt explain -vā́-vant- as pleonastic.) The second observation seems to me the most important clue: antárvant- is in fact only attested in the fem. antárvatī- (III.55.5, X.91.6) in the meaning ‘pregnant’. In both I.40.7 and our passage here the ‘pregnant’ sense is used metaphorically of non-females (kṣáya- ‘dwelling place’ in the former, támas- ‘darkness’ in the latter). (So also Schmidt; AiG doesn’t go quite this far.) One could speculate that the pleonastic suffix is used because a non-fem. antárvant- would seem distinctly odd, and the addition of a second suffix attenuated this oddness. In our case, the antarvā́vat can directly modify neut. támaḥ; in I.40.7, since kṣáya- is masc., the connection is less direct. See comm. ad loc. In our passage this interpr. produces a striking image, of the darkness of night swelling with light as day breaks.

