+++
title = "05"

+++
In the first hemistich the distribution of the accusatives is at issue: vidathyàm … rayíṃ yaśásam … návyasīm. The first, vidathyàm, must be either masc. or neut.; yaśásam is ambiguous between masc. and fem. (though far more often masc. than fem.); návyasīm is clearly fem. The sole noun, rayím, is generally held to be normally masc., but occasionally fem. Although I think this statement is true, I also think that the number of supposedly fem. occurrences can be considerably reduced, to the point that apparently fem. examples should be viewed as aberrancies, not as normal if rare usages. In this particular case Old (ZDMG 55.296 [=KlSch 755], not restated in Noten) and Ge decide that rayím must be fem. here, as evidenced by návyasīm, so that another noun must be supplied for vidathyàm to modify. Old supplies agním and takes that phrase as an obj. to the part. gṛṇádbhyaḥ (without tr.), while Ge supplies vīrám (which does indeed occur with vidathyàm in I.91.20 and VII.36.8) as an obj.

parallel to rayím: “… einen in Weisheit tüchtigen (Mann) … und Ansehen bringenden neuen Reichtum.” Re allows everything to modify rayím: “une richesse (émanant) des participations-rituelles, (richesse) honorable, plus nouvelle,” with his n. on the gender mixture seemingly meant to cast obscurity rather than illumination.

In my opinion, rayím is masc. here, modified by vidathyàm and yaśásam (so also Thieme, Unters. 48, who simply elides návyasīm), and návyasīm belong to a separate NP, for which I supply matí- ‘thought’, which appears in the phrase matír návyasī in the first vs. of the hymn, 1c. Note that vs. 1 also contains a form of vidátha- ‘ceremony, rite of distribution’, to which our vidathyà- must belong (pace Ge, who seems to derive it from √vid ‘know’). In vs. 1 the poet proclaims the vidáthā of Agni and announces that a “newer thought” is being prepared for him. In this vs. he asks Agni to keep providing both wealth for the vidátha- and a “newer (thought).” Although Agni does not himself compose the poem, it is a commonplace of RVic discourse that the gods provide the inspiration for the poets’ compositions.

In the 2nd hemistich Ge and Re take téjasā with the simile (“mit dem Schärfe (der Axt)” and “avec l’aigu (de la hache)” respectively), while I attribute the sharpness only to Agni in the frame. Certainly their interpr. fits the word order well (vanínaṃ ná téjasā), though it doesn’t necessarily require téjasā to be part of the simile. On the other hand, it does require pavyéva at the beginning of the hemistich to be dissociated from the later simile or at least considerably sidelined. In the end, I would go for a compromise position, that téjasā should be read with both simile and frame: “as if with a metal wheel rim, hew down the curser with your sharpness like a tree with the sharpness (of an axe vel sim.).” I have not separately rendered nīcā́in the phrase nīcā́ní vṛśca, which seems simply to reinforce the ní.

