+++
title = "01"

+++
As indicated in the publ. intro., I interpret the first half-verse very differently from the standard tr. The three major deviations from the ordinary interpretations are the following: 1) I take te in pāda a as referring to the poet, who is also the subj. of the 1st ps. verb prá bhare. This is the most radical of the departures and requires the most special pleading. 2) Rather than the loc. sg. of neut. stotrá- ‘praise song’ (a loc. not found elsewhere in the RV), I take stotré as the dat. sg. of the agent noun stotár- ‘praiser’, coreferential with te in a. This dat. is very common in the RV. 3) I take the first two words of b (asyá stotré) with the main cl. in a, starting the rel. cl. with dhiṣáṇā. This accords better with the placement patterns of yá- subordinators, which ordinarily do not follow more than one constituent.

As for the first departure, as I have pointed out elsewhere (see comm. on I.70.10), the 2nd sg. middle forms of the impv. (prá) bharasva/bhárasva (I.79.10, VII.88.1) are specialized for the self-address of the poet. Here, with the middle prá bhare I think the poet is speaking in the 1st ps. but addressing himself in the 2nd. I do have to admit that prá √bhr̥+ DAT. otherwise has the divinity in the dative and so the te in 2nd position in the verse would immediately be interpreted as referring to Indra -

- and, I have to argue, only as the verse unfolded would the referent be reinterpreted
as the poet. Despite the complications of my interpretation, it solves the difficulties that arise from the standard interpr. First, that interpr. must take the maháḥ as coreferential with te (e.g., Re “à toi (qui es) grand”), but this makes the whole phrase genitival, and, as noted, the prá √bhṛ construction takes a dative (of the many exx., cf. I.143.1 prá … dhītím agnáye, … bhare). Then a referent must be supplied for the asyá opening pāda b; most supply “the singer.” (Under my interpretation, the genitives maháḥ … asyá are construed together and refer to Indra, while te … stotré is the datival phrase.) And the problems I already mentioned, that stotré is otherwise only the dative of the agent noun and that yád comes too late to govern the whole b pāda, also remain in the standard tr.

But what does it mean, in my interpretation, when the poet says “I present to you this thought,” with both “I” and “you” referring to himself. As I suggest in the publ. intro., the poet is announcing that he has finished composing the hymn, which can now be recited to the god at the ritual performance, also by himself (the poet). A slightly attenuated alternative would be to take te as referring to a different member of the larger group of ritual performers, who is charged with reciting the hymn that “I” have just composed.

