+++
title = "04"

+++
Since śéva in pāda a must be a vocative morphologically, its accent is unexpected in this pāda-medial position. There are two factors that might have contributed to it, which, however, cancel each other out. On the one hand, the point of contact between the simile “like a wife to her husband” and the frame is this very adj. ‘kindly’, and so an underlying fem. nom. sg. *sévā must also be assumed. This overlap between an expected nom. and the voc. addressed to the correspondent of the wife, namely Soma, may have led to the anomalous accentuation. On the other hand, if the simile was felt to be a self-contained clause, śéva would begin a new clause or at least a new syntactic unit. I’m not sure that either is sufficient, but I weakly favor the second.

The voc. phrase in b, pájrāyā garbha, likewise causes a problem, though not of accent: garbha is properly unaccented, and its dependent gen. pájrāyā(ḥ) shows the expected shift to initial accent in this pāda-initial voc. phrase, from the suffixally accented stem pajrá-. The question is the referent of this fem. pajrā́-. Ge, Re, Ober (I.530) take it as a PN (e.g., “O Kind der Pajrā”). It is certainly true that pajrá- can be a PN (see Mayr [PN], though he doesn’t include this passage in his list), but usually in the pl. of a family of poets. It is never otherwise found in the fem., and it would be very strange (in my opinion) for a named mother to be specified in this kind of context, unless she is a goddess. Far more likely is Sāy.’s identification of the referent as the earth. The stem pajrá- as an adj. means ‘sturdy, steadfast’, a reasonable description of the earth. Earth as Soma’s mother would fit nicely also with 3a, which names Parjanya as his father. The rains generate the plant, but it grows in the earth.

The standard interpr. of prá carā in c is as 2nd sg. impv. addressed to Soma, and this is certainly possible. But I think it is equally possible that, in this 1st ps.

context, it’s a 1st sg. subjunctive, and the contents of the poet’s direct speech announced in immed. preceding brávīmi te. This is how it is rendered in the publ. tr.

The sú in c is in an unusual position, but it is in the same position as sú in the preceding hymn, IX.81.3, attributed to the same poet. There Old suggested (and I followed) reading it with the following noun as cmpd. *sucetúnā. I follow the same path here, reading *sujīváse, though this time without Old’s imprimatur. The case here is not as strong. With regard to IX.81.3 the putative cmpd sucetú- exists independently, while the transmitted stem cetú- does not. Here the opposite is true: the infinitival dat. jīváse is quite well attested, whereas sujīvás- is not found. This gives me pause about the emendation, but even without it, I think that sú should be read with jīváse and with its lexical value, not merely as a particle: “… to live well.”

