+++
title = "02"

+++
Pādas b and c are difficult. The superficially most natural interpretation is to take the two together, as Ge does (“in dessen Hand … die gerngesehene Keule gelegt ward…”; so also Old), but the putative verb in this relative clause, dhāyi in c, is unaccented. If we take this lack of accent seriously, and I think we should, some other solution has to be found for the relative clause in pāda b, a task made all the more challenging by the disputed form vidhartári. This particular form appears twice (also IX.47.4) and formally belongs to the agent noun vidhartár- (voc. sg. 1x, nom. sg. 4x) ‘distributor, apportioner’. The -tári forms are nonetheless generally taken as infinitives. Tichy (1995: 59-61), by contrast, takes them as loc. sg. of a verbal abstract (here “in dessen Hand, wenn es ans Verteilen geht, ein weiteres Mal die sehenswerte Keule gelegt wird” [p. 60]), and others take it as nom. sg. neut. (See disc.

of these various possibilities with earlier lit. in Old and in Keydana [Infin. 196-99].) Keydana, at least for this verse, suggests that vidhartári is the (infinitival?) subject of the nominal relative clause, yásya its specifier, and dvitā́a predicate adverb: “Der Hand wurde die Keule dargereicht (pāda c), deren Austeilung ein weiteres Mal [erfolgt] (pāda b)” (199 n. 31). I consider the form to be a locative (like Tichy), but a locative not to an abstract but to the agent noun it appears to be and coreferential with Indra in pāda a. Alternatively it could refer to a third party, who is responsible for the return of Indra’s mace; this seems to be Old’s favored solution: “beim (Welt)ordner,” who is responsible for equipping Indra with the mace. In the absence of mythical context we cannot be certain. Though I have added the parenthetical “(in the hand of),” this tr. is an English makeshift for the German bei or French chez, which both render such locatives more efficiently. The statement in b, that the mace has been returned to Indra, is then restated in pāda c more clearly.

The datives hástāya and divé instead of the locatives that might be expected are curious.

