+++
title = "+068"

+++
68 (780)  
Soma Pavamāna  
Vatsaprī Bhālandana  
10 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 10  
The first of the Soma hymns in jagatī meter (IX.68–86), this poem well dem onstrates the increased possibilities for verbal and conceptual richness that the  longer meter affords, in contrast to the concision and constriction of gāyatrī.  The hymn has an omphalos structure: since verse 10 is a summary verse and in  a different meter (triṣṭubh), verse 5 is the middle verse and encodes the esoteric  knowledge that is the hymn’s message. This verse is framed by a number of verbal  and semantic responsions (though not as tightly arranged as in some omphalos  hymns): for instance, the fingers of verses 4 and 7, as well as the same phrase “held  by men” in both verses; the forms of the root vid “find, discover” in verses 3 and  6 (and 9).  
More important is the conceptual architecture: the hymn leads up to the ompha los and away from it, returning to its conceptual starting point. It begins with the ritual soma and the familiar details of its preparation (vss. 1–2): the journey across  the filter and the mixing with milk, complete with details about the actual filtering  process, as the juice leaves its detritus in the filter. But toward the end of verse 2, the  journey gains a larger resonance, however vague: soma circles “the wide expanse,”  an area that sounds more ample than a mere sheep’s fleece. In verses 3 and 4 the  journey has turned cosmic: heaven and earth are now the domain for Soma’s travel  and for his fecundating activity, and in our view the contrast between Soma’s swell  
ing footprint in 4b and his head in 4d expresses his cosmic reach, from his feet on  earth, swelling with rain, to his distant head in heaven.  
Verse 5, the omphalos, provides an explanation, albeit a mystical one, for the  difference between the ritual soma of the first two verses and the cosmic one of  verses 3–4. He really had two births, one in secret even beyond the two worlds and  one made evident to all. And as a consequence there are actually two Somas, a fact  first recognized by Heaven and Earth. (Such is our reading of this verse, which has  generally been interpreted quite differently: one influential opinion identifies the  Aśvins as the twins mentioned, a solution of desperation in our opinion.)  
The second form of Soma, the physical and visible one, is brought to earth in  verse 6, and the poets and ritualists transform him into the ritual soma now familiar  to us. The remaining verses before the summary (7–9) bring us back to the current  ritual soma with which we began, but with a clearer awareness of the powers his  dual nature has bestowed on him. For example, in verse 1 the drops are simply “pro  
vided with speech,” but in verses 8–9 Soma “rouses speech” all the way to heaven.  Similarly, in verse 2 he simply “circles around” the wide expanse, whereas in 9d, the  last pāda of the hymn proper, he “finds” wide space, a feat much desired and much  celebrated by the Vedic Āryas.  