+++
title = "04"

+++
Although pāda a treats the mythological past—the opening of the Vala cave (Navagva) and Dadhyañc’s presumably similar exploit (see his connection with cow pens in X.48.2)—the verb is present tense aporṇuté, where we might expect an impf., a pres. injunc., or a pf. The two parallel yéna clauses have perfects. Hoffmann does not comment on this usage.

The pf. āpiré in b takes the partitive gen. amṛ́tasya cā́ruṇaḥ in c. As in the other occurrences of this phrase (IX.70.2, 4, 110.4) with Ge I take this as a reference to the heavenly soma, with the nominalized neut. amṛ́ta- ‘(drink) of immortality’.

See comm. ad IX.70.2 and, on supposed masc. cā́ruṇaḥ, VIII.5.14. Re supplies instead ‘principe’: “au beau (principe) immortel.” This is the only finite med. form of the well-attested pf. to √āp, beside two occurrences of the part. Kü. (118) asserts that the medial forms have the “inattingent” sense ‘have success’ (implicitly interpr. our form here without the partitive gen. obj.), but he does not cite this passage. Ge (n. 4c) seems to suggest something of the same thing as an alternative, but making amṛ́tasya cā́ruṇaḥ dependent on sumné as he suggests does not seem to me to work. Although it might seem circular for the poets to acquire a share of (heavenly) soma through (earthly) soma, this is exactly the point also of IX.70.2. See comm. ad loc I cannot detect the semantic nuance between √āp ‘acquire’ (āpiré b) and √(n)aś ‘attain’ (ānaśúḥ d). In this passage the first has a more material object, the second an immaterial one, but this distribution does not hold elsewhere.

I take the pl. śrávaṃsi as distributive: each one of the pl. subj. acquires his own śrávaḥ.
