+++
title = "07"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., the chariot journey in this vs. echoes the mythological one in vs. 6 but updated to a wish for the present day.

Ge divides the 2nd hemistich into two separate clauses, by pāda. In this interpr.

the nouns in d are in the nom. pl. and follow the Aśvins’ chariot that was launched in c (“viele Labsale … folgen ihm”). The publ. tr. takes the two pādas as a single cl., with the nouns in d in the acc. pl. and the chariot following them. Neither of these conjures up an entirely comfortable picture if ánu is strictly ‘following’ - either all the good stuff got left behind and has been sent after the chariot, or it’s all zipping along ahead. But my accusative alternative could be taken to mean that the refreshments et al. are already at the ritual ground. This would be supported by ab, esp. b. But it is contra-indicated by VI.62.4 in the immediately preceding Aśvin hymn, where pŕkṣam and íṣam are two of the things the Aśvins are bringing.

However, if iṣídh- is a variant of niṣṣídh- ‘tribute’ (see below), the first of these alternatives is the more likely.

The hapax iṣídh- is of uncertain formation and meaning, though it obviously falls into the category of desirable things at the ritual. There are (at least) two competing etymologies. One has it as the doublet of niṣṣídh- ‘tribute’ (for lit. see EWA I.198; favored by Re); the other (see EWA I.200) as a deformation of a putative *iṣudh-, like the likewise hapax pṛkṣúdh- (I.141.4), serving as the base of the denom. iṣudhyá- and cognate to Aves. išud-. The ud(h)- in these forms is explained by Humbach as the zero-grade of the PIE root √*uedh ̯ ‘lead’, no longer found in Indo-Aryan as a verbal root. (I suggest an alternative etym. of iṣudhyá- ad I.128.6 and more fully in my forthcoming article “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.”) Narten (YH 159-63) accepts Humbach’s etym. and further explains our iṣídh- as altered from *iṣúdh- by folk etymology with √idh ‘kindle, burn’ (162 n. 104) in passages in which the word is connected with Agni, since kindling wood is Agni’s source of strength. This last seems quite weak to me: ‘burn’ contributes no obvious semantics to the noun at least in its only occurrence here -- which has nothing to do with Agni -- and the iṣudhyá- forms, though not numerous, ought to provide some anchor against such a deformation. For this reason I tentatively follow the first interpr., though only because nothing better seems to be currently on offer. If iṣídh- is somehow a doublet of niṣṣídh-, which occurs several times with pūrvī́ḥ (III.51.5, VI.44.11) as here, then the reference would be to the tributes that the Aśvins received from the mortal worshippers. I would now alter the tr. to “… after the refreshments, fortifying powers, and the many tributes.”

