+++
title = "02"

+++
This vs. displays the proper RVic distribution of the suppletive stem of ‘bow’, whose nom./acc. sg. is supplied by dhánus- and the rest of its paradigm (and cmpding forms) by dhánvan-. On this suppletion see AiG III.318 and esp. the detailed disc. of Hoffmann (Aufs. I.330 = Spr. 20 [1974] 18), as well as EWA s.v. dhánuṣ-. Here the instr. sg. dhánvanā opens pādas a, b, and d (and see loc. dhánvan in the next vs. 3c), while nom./acc. sg. dhánuḥ holds the same position in c. Gr identifies a single occurrence of dhánva as nom./acc. sg. (V.7.7), which would thus violate the suppletive pattern, but this is otherwise universally and rightly assigned to the homonymous stem dhánvan- ‘wasteland’. The form dhánva (or quite possibly dhánvā) in II.33.10 is identified by Gr as a pl., which would fit the suppletive paradigm. It is generally, however, taken as a sg., which would not. However, see comm. ad II.33.10, where I now suggest restoring Gr’s pl. interpr., contra the standard sg. renderings incl. that of the publ. tr. The RV suppletive pattern is soon broken: already in the AV dhánus- begins to acquire oblique forms.

Technically speaking, dhánuḥ could be an acc., modified by apakāmám (if this stem can be adjectival; see below), which could be tr. “he makes the bow of his rival lose its desire,” but this requires supplying a generic animate subject for kṛṇoti. The stem apakāmá-, again a hapax in the RV but found elsewhere in early Vedic, is generally taken as a noun (Ge’s ‘Unlust’ being the best rendering), but I think it possible that it’s a nominalized bahuvrīhi ‘having desire gone/away’; there are not enough stems of this structure to anchor the grammatical value to accentual behavior, in my opinion. In any case, lacking the useful German ‘Unlust’, I have tr. as if we had a lexeme *ápa √kṛ ‘make (go) away’, with kā́ma- as obj. Cf. ápa-ā́√kṛ in passages like nearby VI.59.8 ápa dvéṣāṃsy ā́kṛtam “make hatreds stay far away” (≅ III.16.5). (Gr identifies one instance of an ápa √kṛ, in VIII.18.7, but the verb and preverb there belong to separate constituents; see comm. ad loc.)

