+++
title = "03"

+++
In d sámane, lit. ‘togethering’ vel sim., has a double sense, referring to the ‘gathering’ of battle as well as to a festive gathering, with the latter appropriate to the female similes in the vs. Exactly what sound is expressed by the verb śiṅkte is unclear (beyond possibly “shink”). Not only is this verb barely attested, but it is hard to conceive of a sound that both a maiden and a stretched bowstring would make. One of the practical questions is whether this 2nd hemistich still depicts the bowstring pulled back to the archer’s ear and held there or if it has moved on to the release of the bowstring as it propels the arrow; pāda d might suggest the latter. Numerous possibilities have been tried. The publ. tr.’s ‘jangles’ was meant to evoke the later kāvya trope of a woman dancer with jingling anklets, but I recognize that it is a less good fit with the bowstring -- though it might work if the string has just been loosed. The only other occurrence of the verb in early Vedic (not in a repetition of this vs.) is in the riddle hymn, I.164.29, where it may refer to the sound that the gharma pot makes as the milk is being heated in it. The publ. tr. (JPB) renders it ‘hums’ there (so also Doniger), Whitney in the equivalent AVŚ passage (IX.10.7) ‘twang’; the latter is an unlikely noise for a pot, but so, I think, is humming. (And certainly jangling or twanging seems out.) In our passage Ge tr. “quieckt” (squeak, squeal) and Re (Hymnes spéc.) “vibre”; in the TS equivalent (IV.6.6c) Keith “twangeth”; in the VS equivalent (XXIX.40) Griffith “whispers” (so also Maurer for the RV). Acdg. to the internet, all bows make some sort of a twanging sound when the string is released, but the better tuned a bow is, the quieter: well-tuned bows can be almost silent. Since twanging seems excluded for a maiden and since none of the other suggestions is particularly compelling, I will stick with ‘jangle’, though not with much confidence.

The standard tr. take pāráyantī in a fairly generic sense (e.g., Ge’s “die … durchhilft”), but its literal meaning ‘cause to cross / reach the far shore’ works just as well, if not better, if we supply ‘arrow’ as obj.: the bowstring celebrated here causes the arrows to cross the space from the bow to the battle.

