+++
title = "04"

+++
The pun on sámana- implicit in 3d is made explicit in 4a; the single word is held constant, but in two different senses, between the simile and the frame.

Maurer (308) considers the simile in b “a bit irregular, since, strictly speaking, it is not the bow-ends that hold the arrow, but the bowstring.” But if the bow is held on a horizontal axis, with the bow ends horizontally aligned, the part of the bow between the ends dips down like a lap, and it is the lowest part where the tip of the arrow is placed. Again according to the internet, the bow should be parallel to the ground when positioning the arrow on it (an action called “nocking”); this would be the position envisioned above.

The 2nd hemistich depicts the positions of the ends of the bow while the arrow is shot: first (c) the two ends of the bow approach each other as the bowstring is pulled back, decreasing the vertical space between the ends -- although as far as I can tell from YouTube, the ends never actually meet. This movement is described as saṃvidāné ‘finding each other’. The lexeme sám √vid often has the more abstract sense ‘make an agreement’, and I think this may also be operative in the passage, though I’m not quite sure how: perhaps their agreement or compact is to “pierce the rivals” (ápa śátrūn vidhyatām), as the rest of the pāda urges. Most tr. only recognize this latter sense in our passage (e.g., Re, Hymnes spéc., “d’un commun accord”), missing the physical sense applicable to the manipulation of the bow. In d the bowstring is released, propelling the arrow, and the two ends “spring apart” (viṣphurántī) and resume their position at rest. The contrastive preverb pair sám / ví calls attention to these contrastive actions. None of the tr. I consulted (Ge, Re, Doniger, Maurer, as well as Keith for TS and Griffith for VS) seems to have recognized that a two-step process is being described. There is one possible problem with my interpr., namely that forms of the root √sphṝ often take an object, and there is an acc. amítrān here that it could govern. However, there are a number of forms to the root that lack objects, incl. the other occurrences of the participle (VII.89.2) and nearby aor. ápa spharīḥ (VI.61.14). And I prefer to take amítrān either as a further specification of the obj. of ápa … vidhyatām in c or as a poorly marked acc. of goal.

