+++
title = "17"

+++
Another very disturbed verse. My interpretation follows Old in great degree, but with crucial deviations.

In the first pāda I read, with Gr, Old, and Scar (61), a compound áram-iṣe, rather than two separate words with Ge (also Pp.; cf. Lub. p. 321 s.v. iṣe), who is forced to take this as a parenthetical 1st ps. declaration (“ich beeile mich recht”). This compound qualifies Indra in the dative and matches araṃgamā́ya in b quite nicely. The accent on the verb stávāmahe can be accounted for (in a somewhat ad hoc fashion) as Old does, as a separate four-syllable pāda, following an eight-syllable opening.

In de (if this is the correct division), I take gen. pl. viśvámanuṣām with yajñébhir gīrbhíḥ “through the sacrifices and the hymns of all the peoples of Manu.” This has the somewhat awkward consequence of separating it from the immediately following gen. pl. marútām, though if the pāda break follows viśvámanuṣāṃ rather than gīrbhíḥ as Old takes it, the syntactic separation would be less problematic. (This would produce a pāda of 10 or 11 syllables [with distraction of -manuṣaām], followed by one of 8 syllables [also with distraction of gen. pl. -ām].) Ge takes the subject of iyakṣasi to be the poet addressing himself, while I think that it is Indra, who is the subject of the same verb in the immediately preceding hymn (VIII.45.31). The question then is what the object is. Ge supplies the pronoun “dies,” but the referent of this pronoun isn’t clear to me. I suggest rather sumnám ‘favor’: the stem íyakṣa- several times takes sumnám as object (I.153.2, II.20.1. X.50.3), and it appears here in the next verse (18d), where I supply this verb.

If this assumption is correct, we must then ask why Indra would seek to attain the favor of the Maruts. The key to that is probably the odd snatch of dialogue in the last hymn (VIII.45.37-38), in which Indra complains that the Maruts deserted him in his time of need; here he seeks their good will as support in the Vṛtra battle.

