+++
title = "07"

+++
Ge takes tváyā as the agent with stávante: “dass die Helden … von dir gelobt werden.” But Indra as the praiser of mortals seems off; tváyā is better taken as an instr. of accompaniment, esp. given the larger context of the hymn, in which Indra works for and in conjunction with mortals (see esp. disc. ad vs. 4 with regard to sácā).

The hapax cmpd sadhavīra applied to Indra seems to reflect this situation, though exactly what the word means is unclear (Gr ‘mit den Männern seiend’, Ge ‘Heldengenosse’), and its lack of accent makes it difficult to determine even what type of cmpd it is. (AiG has no disc. of it.) I take it as an underlying bahuvrīhi ‘having heroes together (with oneself)’ vel sim., expressing the mutual relationship between our men and Indra.

Ge takes the instr. phrase trivárūthena náhuṣā as referring to Indra: “da du ein dreifacher Nahus bist.” He bases this interpr. on X.49.8 ahám … náhuṣo náhuṣṭaraḥ “I [=Indra] am a greater Nahus than Nahus.” But this passage is in an ātmastuti, a genre in which Indra claims to be the best example of everything, and the construction with comparative in fact precludes an identification of Indra with Nahus: he is asserting that he has more of what makes Nahus Nahus than Nahus himself does. It is an expression like “more Catholic than the Pope.” (As for X.99.7, which Ge also cites, I have now changed my interpr. from the publ. tr. and will register the change in the comm. in due course.) I consider Nahus here another recipient of the praise being doled out, though I do have to admit that the shadowy Nahus otherwise does not figure in the VIth Maṇḍala.

I would also take issue with Ge’s bleaching of trivárūtha- from ‘having/providing threefold defense’ to simply ‘threefold’. This cmpd. otherwise has its full lexical value, mostly modifying śárman- ‘shelter’, and the simplex várūtha- ‘defense’ is robustly attested, so the 2nd cmpd member had not become opaque.

