+++
title = "03"

+++
The first hemistich of this vs. contains 2 locative phrases, vavré antár (a) and anārambhaṇé támasi (b). Essentially all tr. are agreed that the two phrases are parallel and refer to the same place -- and this is reasonable and probably would be the default reading. This interpr. in turn leads some (see esp. Norman Brown and Oberlies I.473) to take this as a description of Hell, or the RV equivalent thereof. My interpr. is syntactically bolder, and perhaps less well supported, but it arises from my discomfort with equating the enclosed space denoted by vavrá- (which is several times used of the Vala cave, e.g., IV.1.13, V.31.3) with “ungraspable darkness.” Because these locales seem incompatible, I take vavré antár as referring to the place where the evil-doers are hiding / taking refuge, and the action enjoined on Indra and Soma in b is to roust them from this hole and thrust them into a dark void with no handhold, the very opposite of an enclosure. A similar use of vavré antár as a place from which creatures are ejected is found in the account of the Vala myth in V.31.3 prā́codayat sudúghā vavré antár “(Indra) impelled forth the good milkers (who were) within the cave.” The action there is of course benign, but the loc. phrase also refers to the original location of the cows, not their destination. I must confess, however, that vs. 17 in our hymn, with the phrase vavrā́m̐anantā́n “holes without end” into which the villainess is to fall, does give me pause. (On the other hand, vs. 17 is in a portion that was probably a late addition to the hymn; see publ. intro.)

