+++
title = "07"

+++
See publ. intro. for the init. práti here echoed by that beginning 11c and forming a ring defining vss. 7-11 as a subsection. Since práti ‘against’ is not otherwise found with √smṛ (or with √śuṣ, see vs. 11), I think the preverb has been stationed at both ends of this section to focus attention on the targeted victim. See disc. in publ. intro.

The NP rakṣáso bhaṅgurā́vataḥ is entirely ambiguous between gen./abl. sg.

and acc. pl. It is almost universally taken as acc. pl. here, as parallel obj. to druháḥ ‘deceits’, but I prefer gen. sg. for several reasons. For one thing “deceits (and) demons” is a somewhat off-balance coordination (though certainly not impossible in RVic discourse). More important, the second hemistich defines a single enemy who shows hostility “with his deceit” (druhā́); it makes sense to identify this single foe as the singular demon of pāda b, who owns the deceits mentioned there. In favor of the acc. pl. interpr., in X.76.4 (cited by Ge, n. 7b; cf. also X.87.23) the same phrase must be acc. pl. obj. of a form of √han, as here: X.76.4a ápa hata rakṣáso bhaṅgurā́vataḥ.

On the other hand, in IX.71.1 (also cited by Ge) in the two-word sequence druhó rakṣásaḥ, which we also find here, druháḥ is an acc. pl. (as here), obj. of the verb véti, but rakṣásaḥ belongs to a different syntagm and is abl. sg., construed with pāti “protects from the demon.” The point of citing all these parallel passages is to demonstrate that even identical word sequences can function differently syntactically in different contexts: the poets were not locked into a morphological template.

The poss. adj. bhaṅgurā́-vant- (to bhaṅgurá- [AiG II.2.487], to √bhañj ‘break’; see EWA s.v. BHAÑJ) modifies rakṣás- 3x and hantár- once. I choose to render its possessive morphology by tr. ‘with his wreckage’ (lit. ‘having breakage, wreckage’), referring to the damage that a demon brings in his train -- in contrast to 141 looser and more colorful tr. like Brown’s (reproduced almost verbatim by Doniger): “Slay those who employ demons, who hate us, who would break us to bits,” where he manages to turn both the root noun druh- and the poss. adj. bhaṅgurā́vant- into verbs qualifying rakṣásaḥ. Others attenuate the meaning of bhaṅgurā́vant- to ‘crooked’, and then by easy metaphorical extension ‘tricky, malicious’ (see Gr’s ‘tückisch, trügerisch’, also EWA’s ‘trügerisch, mit krummen Wegen’; Ge, Lommel, Lü 419 ‘hinterlistig’). This interpr. is based on the second of BR’s glosses of the base adj. bhaṅgura- 1) zerbrechlich, vergänglich, 2) krumm, kraus, gerunzelt; see Gr’s reproduction of the 1st word of each in his gloss of (bhaṅgurá). This base word is not found in Vedic -- and bhaṅgurā́vant- is found outside the RV only in passages based on RVic passages -- though bhaṅgura is fairly widespread in Classical Skt., where it generally means ‘breakable’, but occasionally ‘curved’ esp. in connection with eyebrows (cf. AiG III.195 in addition to BR s.v.). Since the ‘curved, crooked’ sense seems to be a late and specialized development, I see no reason to impose it on this RVic word, esp. since I see no clear line from ‘break’ to ‘be crooked’ except in such a specialized application.

