+++
title = "14"

+++
The disjunctive “if” clauses that occupy the first hemistich are more complicated than they first appear. In the publ. tr. I took the first half, yádi vāhám ánṛtadeva ā́sa, as a contrary-to-fact expression “if I were …” The general context speaks in favor of this interpr.: in the 2nd hemistich the speaker asks indignantly why Agni is angry at him, so the implication is that the speaker has not done what would occasion such anger. This assumption presumably accounts for Ge’s tr. “als ob …” (fld. by Lommel), which is strenuously disputed by Old. But the grammar makes problems: the indicative perfect ā́sa should not express contrary-to-fact modality, but a fact in the past (that may or may not have present relevance). For contrary-to-facts of this sort, the pres. opt. usually serves; cf. VII.44.23 yád agne syā́m aháṃ tváṃ, tváṃ vā ghā syā́ahám “If I were you, Agni, or you were me …” Note also that the AV version has an indicative present, ásmi (Wh “If I am one of false gods …”). So we must reckon with the real possibility that “I” did have false gods, at least in the past, and I would slightly alter the tr. to “If I was (previously) a man with false gods …” The parallel verb in b is the perfect apy ūhé. In the publ. tr. I take this as presential -- and this is quite possible, since the other forms of this pf. are so used (see Kü 489-90) -- but Kü takes it as preterital, and, given my slight reinterpr. of pāda a, this might be best: “if I called upon …” Kü accepts Insler’s 1996 positing of a root √vāh ‘respect’ separate both from √vah ‘convey’ and from √ūh ‘laud’ (which latter has a full-gr. root med. pres. à them. pres. óh(a)-). I am not convinced of the 143 need for this separate root and would simply group the pf. ūhé with the pres. of √ūh, despite Kü’s argument that unless the pf. is clearly distinguished from the pres. by meaning or function, they should not belong to the same root.

What exactly this pāda is conveying is not clear. Did the speaker call upon the true gods but in a false (that is, ritually faulty or with false intent or a false heart?) way? Such is the interpr. of most comm. -- e.g., Ge “nur zum Schein” -- but Lü (420) suggests equating mógham and devā́n (“oder wenn ich das Falsche als Götter … auffasste ...”), though he also gives the alternate “in falscher Weise.” And Re is more radical in his interpr. of the verb: “si j'ai une compréhension (fausse des) dieux.” Given the appearance of the same adverb mógham in 15d, with the sense of false speech, the standard interpr. of the occurrence in this vs. seems the correct one, esp.

as it contrasts nicely with the false or untrue gods in pāda a.

The question in d is where to construe te. Ge (fld. by Scar 469, but with ?) takes it as a quasi-agent: “Die Falschredenden sollen dem Tode durch dich verfallen.” Given that te is an enclitic and that the verb is not passive, this seems a stronger statement than the text would seem to support. I take te with the drogha- of the cmpd drogha-vā́c- “deceitful to you,” but I admit that it might rather go with nirṛthám “your dissolution” (so Brown, Doniger “your destruction”; sim. Lü) -- that is, dissolution stemming from you. Not all tr. render the te: it is absent from Lommel’s rendering.

