+++
title = "17"

+++
The standard rendering of khargálā- is ‘owl’; see, inter alia, Gr, EWA, and the various tr. of this vs. But I find this unlikely for several reasons. The ‘owl’ is found as úlūka- in 22a, so it is already represented in this sequence of vss. But, though one could argue that there are numerous types of owls, which could have different designations, there are other arguments against this identification. For one thing, if the word is onomatopoetic, as EWA suggests, kharg(a) is not a particularly owl-ish sound. I tentatively suggest the nightjar. A number of species of nightjars are found in the proper geographical area. As for behavior and appearance, judging from information aggregated from the internet, nightjars are nocturnal (“goes forth by night” prá … jígāti … náktam), feeding esp. at the twilights; the sexes are similar, and the birds are small and therefore could be considered typically female (hence the fem. khargálā-). They stay hidden on the ground by day (“concealing her own body by deceit” ápa druhā́tanvàṃ gū́hamānā): images on the internet show them visually almost indistinguishable from the ground and one YouTube video is entitled “Indian Nightjar -- Master of Camouflage”; acdg. to Wikipedia “During the day, the Indian nightjar lies still on the ground, concealed by its plumage; it is then difficult to detect, blending in with the soil.” Moreover, their cries are much easier to connect with 144 kharg(a) than an owl’s, being described as “a continuous churring” (the internet provides numerous recordings of various types of nightjars). Note that etymologically the “-jar” of nightjar is derived from its churring song -- and jar and kharg are reasonably close phonetically. Moreover, their genus name is Caprimulgus “goat-sucker,” based on the old belief that the birds suck milk from goats; if a similar belief was also found in India, it might seem to be the habit of a sinister or at least uncanny creature -- accounting for its inclusion here among the sorcerers in animal form.

The ability of the soma-pressing stones to smash demons, referred to in d, is also found in the pressing stone hymn X.76.4 ápa hata rakṣáso bhaṅgurā́vataḥ “Smash away the demons with their wreckage,” which incidentally contains one of the three other occurrences of bhaṅgurā́vant- in the RV, besides the one in vs. 7 above. The demon-destroying ability of ritual implements, especially the noise made by their clashing, also reminds me of “Manu’s Cups,” whose clattering destroys Asuras. See the various Vedic prose versions of this in my Sacrificed Wife, pp. 21- 26.

