+++
title = "21"

+++
I have rendered the impf. abhavat in pāda a as an immediate past (‘has become’), though this is not ordinarily a usage of the impf. But this sense fits the context better than a simple past. 145 Note the echo of parāśaró in paraśúr in c.

As Re remarks, this is the only negative use of the desid. vívāsa- (√van ‘win’), usually ‘seek to win, covet, coax’. The negative sense must be attributable to the confrontational preverb abhí.

How to distribute and construe the two similes in cd is the question. I take both similes, paraśúr yáthā vánam “like an axe a tree” (c) and pā́treva “like pots” (d), with the pres. part. bhindán (d) in two slightly different senses, ‘splitting’ and ‘breaking’ respectively (sim. Brown, Doniger). This pres. part. is anticipated by the preverb complex abhī́d that opens the hemistich, looking like an aberrant form of √bhid -- a low-level ex. of poetic repair. Others (notably Ge, Wh, Lommel) take bhindán only with the 2nd simile, with the first controlled by eti in d (e.g., Ge “Śakra fährt auf die Dunkelmänner los wie die Axt in den Baum”). But axes are more likely to “split” than to “advance,” and I take eti only with the acc. pl. (satáḥ …) rakṣásaḥ as goal. It would also be possible to take bhindán + eti as a verb phrase with auxiliary, ‘keeps splitting’ or the like.

The function, and indeed the morphological identity, of satáḥ is unclear. With Gr, I take it as a pres. part. to √as in the acc. pl., modifying rakṣásaḥ. In my interpr.

it means ‘real, really being X’, though that could extend to ‘really present’. Re by contrast suggests that it’s an adverb, meaning here ‘tout à fait’, also probably found as 1st cmpd. member in sató-mahant- (‘entirely great’ VIII.30.1) and sató-vīra- (‘entirely heroic’ VI.75.9). Although Re does not pronounce on the morphological analysis, AiG II.1.237 implies that it contains the adverbial ablatival suffix -tas / -tás and thus does not belong to the pres. part. of √as. See also EWA s.v. satás. Old (ad VII.32.24) allows several possibilities, incl. the adverb, which he considers assured in the cmpds. cited above. Although, with Old, etc., I think that an adverbial satáḥ is found in those cmpds., I do not find that interpr. satáḥ as adverbial here improves the sense, though I grant that the acc. pl. pres. part. doesn’t really either.

