+++
title = "03"

+++
The sense of the first hemistich -- that by reciting the (yoking-)formulation we will do our part to ensure that your (Indra’s) horses will be yoked -- is fairly clear, but the syntax is messy. First, it’s couched as a triple negative construction: “it is not that X will not happen because of not-Y,” which already puts it on the edge of parsability. The parsing problem is slightly increased by the fact that the content of the negative “that” clause is expressed through a periphrasis involving a negated participle+copula (áyuktāsaḥ … ásan “will be/remain unyoked”). Then, the position of yád is utterly non-standard, being found deep in the clause, after several different constituents, right before the final word. I tried various ways to produce a conforming subordinate clause from the text, but failed. The publ. tr. “if it's for lack of a (yoking) formulation” (as if abrahmátā yád were a separate embedded clausette) gives the appearance of (almost) succeeding, but it doesn’t accurately represent the text (though I still think it might represent the purport of this odd word order). A more accurate tr. would be “Since these horses …. because of a lack …,” as the dependent clause for the main clause in cd. I remain disturbed by the structure of this dep. cl. A separate problem is the abhí asmád in pāda a. The abhí is stranded in the middle of the pāda (though immed. after the caesura) and in any case has no verb from which it could have been separated in tmesis. In the absence of anything else to do with it, the default option seems to be to construe it with asmád, and this phrase has long (see Old’s reff.) been compared to I.139.8 asmád abhí, likewise in the middle of the pāda though in opposite order. The problem is that abhí as a preposition seems otherwise only to take the acc. Nonetheless, connecting the two seems the best bet, with a meaning such as “with regard to us” or, better reflecting the ablative, my “because of us.” So Old, WG. Cf. also Humbach et al. (Gāthās… and the Other Old Avestan Texts, II.118), ad Y 35.5 (Yasna Haptaŋhaiti) ahmaṭ hiiaṭ aibī, a phrase meaning (in his view) “which is with us,” with which he compares both our passage and I.139.8. However, Narten (YH, 271-72), fld. by Hinze (Zoroastrian Liturgy, 77-78), interprets this three-word phrase, occurring twice in the YH (Y 35.5, 40.1), as containing a postposition aibī governing the neut. acc. hiiaṭ not the abl.

ahmaṭ, with the whole meaning “from us towards which,” thus “as far as we are concerned” (Hintze, 78).

