+++
title = "04"

+++
Another troubled vs., though the first hemistich is more transparent than the second. The first thing to notice is that the accent on cakártha in b indicates that b must still be under the domain of yád in pāda a, as parallel dependent clauses. Ge (/WG) attempt to make initial purū́a single-word main clause on which they both depend (“Viel ist, was …”). This assumes that purū́is a neut. sg. here. Although the existence of a neut. sg. in -ū is standard doctrine (see Lanman, Noun Inflec., 406-7, AiG III.145, etc.), this grammatical truism rests primarily on Gr’s identification of twelve forms of purū́as sg. (see Lanman and AiG), but in only one instance, the late X.94.5, does this seem the likely interpr. (There is also one form of urū́and, for Lanmann, two of míthū, which is better taken as an adv.) I do not therefore think that

-ū is a possible neut. sg. ending, except, perhaps, in X.94.5. Here the most obvious
way to construe purū́is with pāda-final neut. pl. ukthā́, the subject of sánti. The attempt to impose a singular interpr. on purū́, as antecedent for the following relative clause with plural subject, yields the awkward rendering of Ge: “Viel ist, was deine Preislieder sind” with mismatch of number (WG more elaborate, but not less clumsy).

For b the only adjustment is to carry purū́over from pāda a and supply a term like kṛtā́ṇi or kármāṇi, easily generated from cakártha: “many are (the deeds) you have done …” The 2nd hemistich is more problematic. The first question is how to relate pāda c and d. Ge takes them as parallel independent clauses with the same verb tatakṣé, while WG takes it as a single cl. (also Kü 207). With Ge I take them as two clauses and agree that they share a verb, but think that c is a dependent clause still under the control of yád in pāda a and parallel to ab, with d the main clause resuming them all.

A related issue is the apparent change of person from 2nd sg. address to Indra in ab and (supposed) 3rd sg. reference to him in cd. The only evidence for this 3rd ps.

reference is the verb tatakṣé, which is one of only two medial forms of this pf. in the RV. It has no obvious medial value here, and in fact the presence of a dat. of benefit (sū́ryāya) eliminates one possible way of accounting for the middle form. (Kü [207] suggests a “Bedeutungskomponente” ‘(auch) in seinem eigenen Interesse’, which seems a bit desperate.) The puzzle of the middle is somewhat reduced if we interpret the form as second sg. mid. The presumed preform *tatakṣ-ṣé would surely come out as our tatakṣé, and it would make sense to substitute this nonce middle form for the non-transparent active 2nd sg., which should be *tatákṣ-tha à *tataktha -- whereas the active 3rd sg. tatákṣa is non-problematic and indeed well attested. So the supposed change of person and the middle form can be accounted for by the same explanation.

After confronting these formal issues, there remains the very knotty problem of what the hemistich is expressing, and part of this depends on whether the relations between Indra and Sūrya here are friendly or hostile: elsewhere they are sometimes one, sometimes the other. (Here I think they are friendly.) A syntactic questions is whether nā́ma is the only object of tatakṣé or if the clause in c (if it is a separate clause) has a different object. Ge opts for the former choice, I for the latter, and I also think that the verb is used in different senses in c and d, positive in c, negative in d.

In c I supply purū́again from a and tentatively supply ‘paths’ as the object, bringing to mind the various passages in which a god (usually Varuṇa) makes or digs out paths for the sun to follow through the sky -- e.g., I.24.8 urúṃ hí rā́jā váruṇaś cakā́ra, sū́ryāya pánthām ánvetavā́u, VII.87.1 rádat pathó váruṇo sū́ryāya. In one late passage (X.111.3) it is Indra who is named as pathikṛ́t sū́ryāya “pathmaker for the sun.” It’s also worth noting that, leaving aside this one, 5 of the other 10 occurrences of the dat. sū́ryāya occur in a path-making context. Though, admittedly, I have no parallels using the root √takṣ ‘fashion, carve’, it seems in the right general semantic range. As for ókasi své this can refer either to Indra’s or to Sūrya’s “own home,” since both of them inhabit the same celestial realms; I favor the Sun’s.

As for d, as is recognized by all, the similarly phrased X.23.2 áva kṣnaumi dā́sasya nā́ma cit must be compared. In that passage Indra says “I whet down even the name of the barbarian,” in my tr. Though this passage is the obvious comparandum, it is hardly transparent in itself or in its bearing on our passage, and in fact I think the two passages are less close semantically than their joint isolation invites us to think. In X.23.2 Indra seems to be boasting about his victory over the Dāsa, which is so complete that even his name is obliterated or at least violently ground down. But √takṣ generally refers to creating something by carving off bits or fashioning in some other way. Perhaps here it means that Indra, just by fighting (and presumably defeating) the Dāsa, has still made the latter’s name conspicuous, as if by carving it into a surface. (Or perhaps, closer to X.23.2, Indra has obliterated the Dāsa’s name as if by gouging it out of a surface.) But either of these interpr. raises a crucial question: what would it mean literally to carve a name into (or gouge it out of) a surface before the existence of writing?! In any case I think that the contrastive positive/negative use of √takṣ in c and d makes the verb sit uneasily in both and poses special challenges to the audience to decode the metaphor in each pāda.

As should be obvious, I do not consider my interpr. of this vs. or most of its part settled and sure. I also don’t understand the sequence of ideas. As indicated in the publ. intro., I think that the first pāda, positing many hymns for Indra, may refer to the existence of competing (Ārya) sacrifices. The second pāda cites his activities as a warrior on earth; the dat. “for the cow” may either mean that Indra has fought in order to obtain cows (for the Ārya warriors he is fighting beside) or that he has won meadows for (the Āryas’) cows to graze in -- in either case advancing the Ārya cause.

In contrast c sets out his beneficial cosmic activity -- keeping the sun on track (if my interpr. of the details of the pāda is correct), which in turn is beneficial to mankind.

In at least the first two cases I think there’s an implicit Ārya presence, which contrasts with the explicit Dāsa in d.

