+++
title = "06"

+++
The first question about this vs. is the structure of the first hemistich. The standard interpr. (Ge, WG, also Old, Klein [DGRV I.263-64]; see also Kulikov -yapres., 580) takes the two pādas as separate clauses with ca conjoining them. There are several problems with this division: 1) ca is not comfortably at home as clauseconjoiner and usually conjoins NPs; 2) with nṛmṇā́ni in the domain of the 2nd clause, it must be the obj. of the participle (or pseudo-participle; see below) nṛtámānaḥ, but non-causative forms of √nṛt ‘dance’ are never transitive. Both difficulties disappear if we take nṛmṇā́ni ca as conjoined with immediately preceding ójaḥ as joint subject of the first clause in the hemistich (so also Lowe, 251; see below). The phonological play between nṛmṇā́ni and nṛtámāṇaḥ may account for the postponing of nṛmṇā́ni till the second pāda, inserting a pāda break between the two conjoined nouns. This phonologically driven positioning may also help account for the very late positon of hí. The loc. prn. tvé ordinarily takes initial position in its clause/verse line, and hí would be expected to follow in Wackernagel’s position. But the whole structure may have been shifted rightwards to allow nṛmṇā́ni to neighbor nṛtámāṇaḥ.

nṛtámāṇa- presents difficulties of its own, even after its supposed object has been eliminated. This participle is the only occurrence of the supposed them. aor. (or 6th cl. pres.) in all of Sanskrit. Although, since all forms of this root are poorly attested in the RV, this is not necessarily problematic on its own, the -ya-present (1x in RV) does continue post-RV (see Kulikov, Vedic -ya-presents, 578-80), and moreover all other verb forms to this root in Vedic are active. Lowe (Participles in Rigvedic Sanskrit, 250-51) suggests that it is an artificial form based on the wellattested splv. nṛ́tama- ‘most manly, most heroic’. This is an attractive hypothesis -- among other things, Indra is frequently called nṛ́tama-; the word regularly appears in immediate post-caesura position, as nṛtámāṇaḥ does here; and it would be playing not merely phonologically but also etymologically with nṛmṇā́ni. Lowe (p. 152) tr.

“being the most heroic,” reflecting its nonce jury-rigged participial form. I do think, however, that the form also consciously references √nṛt ‘dance’. Indra is regularly called a nṛtú- ‘dancer, prancer’, and note the pun involving nṛ́- ‘man’ in VI.63.5 nárā nṛtū (of the Aśvins). I would therefore modify the publ. tr. to “As the most manly [/ the prancing] immortal …” In c rayím must be fem., as occasionally elsewhere, given the fem. adj. énīm. The stem vásavāna- ‘possessing goods, winning goods’ (?) is attested 5x, once as an unaccented voc. sg. vasavāna (X.22.15), otherwise accented and with orthodox -a-stem forms, incl. nom. sg. vásavānaḥ (I.174.1). The form here looks of course like a nom. sg. but lacks accent. Gr calls it “fälschlich unbetont”; Lub. gives it an accent and a rightward star (vásavāno*). This seems the best course; I think an attempt to assign it to different stem (perhaps an aberrant -as stem) is too elaborate, esp. in this hymn with numerous “off” forms: see esp. the voc. ahiśuṣma for expected nom. in 5c. The publ. tr. pays more attention to the lack of accent and tr. as voc.; it would be equally possible to weigh the nom. sg. ending more heavily and tr. it as an appositive subject: “as winner of goods, give us dappled wealth.” Despite the tr.

“winner of goods,” I do not think the stem contains a form of √van but is rather a pseudo-participle (another one, but athematic) built to vásu- ‘good(s)’. Elsewhere I render it ‘goods-lord’ and the like.

In d prá … stuṣe dā́nam “I will start up the praise for the gift” is an analytic expansion of the noun dānastuti, which, however, is not attested in Vedic or, it seems, anywhere else in Sanskrit lit., though the term is in common use in Vedic scholarship.

The last three (or possibly four) vss. in this hymn constitute such a dānastuti, and the poet seems to signalling that it is coming up. In the publ. tr. I identify the arítuvimaghá- as Indra; I now would be more circumspect, since I now think the phrase applies both to Indra and to the patrons praised in vss. (7 or) 8-10. See also aryáḥ in 9d.

