+++
title = "09"

+++
In pāda a the publ. tr. reads “And (let) these (convey me)”; the “me” should not be in parens.

The bahuvrīhi krátvāmagha- is curiously formed, with instr. krátvā as its first member, and the publ. tr. “the bounty of his intentions” oversimplifies its structure in order to avoid impossibly awkward English: a full tr. of b would be “(the horses displaying/constituting) the bounty (produced) by his intention at the time of giving in[/of] the ceremony.” In other words, the horses that the poet receives possess (that is, embody) Mārutāśva’s bounty effected by his intention (to give). See 8d.

Ge takes vidáthasya as a PN, the patron whose patronymic is Mārutāśva, and Mayrhofer (PN s.v.) seems to agree. But there seems no reason not to interpr. it as an example of the well-attested common noun ‘ceremony (of distribution)’, esp. since it fits this context so well. WG do not follow Ge.

The part. dádānaḥ appears to be the predicate of this clause. Though rare, med. forms of √dā without ā́seem to mean ‘give of oneself / one’s own goods’. See also IX.52.3.

I don’t entirely understand d. ānūkám is a hapax, but I follow Old in taking it as an adverbial meaning something like ‘afterwards’; so apparently also WG. Ge, fld.

by Klein (I.425), takes it as the obj. of ārcat, as ‘last (song)’. See Ge’s n. 9d.

The standard interpr. (Ge [/WG], Old, Klein I.425) take aryáḥ as nom. sg., referring to Cyavatāna of c, and Thieme (Fremdl. 85) also thinks it’s probably nom. sg., but declines to discuss the passage because of the obscurity of ānūkám. But a patron like Cyavatāna should not be chanting or singing; that is the province of the poet-priests he is patronizing. Moreover, aryáḥ echoes gen. sg. aryáḥ in 6d, which announced the dānastuti to come, and I think the form should be interpr. in the same way in the absence of evidence to the contrary. In 9d I think that the gift of the arí- is still in question (as in 6d). The unnamed poet praised (‘sang’ ārcat) his gift for the wonder (vápuṣe) of it -- of its over-the-top munificence.

