+++
title = "04"

+++
Purūravas is found only here in the RV outside of his dialogue with the Apsaras Urvaśī in X.95. It’s not entirely clear why he is here, but his is a speaking name (‘having much roaring’), which fits with the bellowing in pāda a. Moreover his son Āyu figures several times in this hymn (vss. 2, 11), and Iḍā, said to be Purūravas’s mother in X.95.18, also appears in vs. 11.

Contrary to most tr., I have segregated sukṛ́te sukṛ́ttaraḥ as a separate clause, since this expression is found in different context in I.156.5. sukṛ́t- is usually used of the priest or ritual performer, and this interpretation fits with the 2nd hemistich, which refers to the ritual here and now. Starting a new sentence in pāda b also helps mitigate the tense disharmony in this verse, where the present in the subordinate clause (múcyase) is by most accounts connected to an imperfect in the main clause of d (anayan), the action of which should temporally follow the verb in c (or to the imperfect avāśayaḥ in a). By connecting c instead with the last part of b, this temporal reversal is avoided.

Ge (following Gr) tr. śvātra- as simply “Kraft,” but the noun belongs with the root √śū ‘swell’, and the image in this pāda is a vivid one: Agni’s “swelling” in his two parents refers to the flaming up of the fire created by the kindling sticks (already referred to in 2d). Both Re and WG render the ‘swell’ sense. With Sāy. (see Ge’s n.

4c) I take pitróḥ with śvātréṇa, not with múcyase. On “two fathers” see comm. ad vs. 2. Because of the contrast between the two mothers in 2 and the two fathers in this vs. and 9a, I would now alter the tr. of both 4 and 9 to “in your two fathers.” I do not understand what the final pāda is conveying. I have tr. pū́rvam … áparam punaḥ as “to the east … then again to the west”; Ge has “vorwärts und wieder zurück.” But in either case the ritual ref. is hard to decode, since generally the fire “taken out” of what will later be called the Gārhapatya fire, situated at the west of the ritual ground, is carried to the east to become what will later be called the Āhavanīya fire. Sāy. (see Ge’s n. 4d) takes the vedi as the reference point, with one part of the fire going to the east (Āhavanīya) and one to the west (Gārhyapatya), but this is not how the placement of the ritual fires happens.
