+++
title = "05"

+++
údyataśruce … śravā́yyaḥ: Ge’s (/WG’s) “ruhmbringend” is not possible for śravā́yya-, because this is a (pseudo-)gerundive and hence passive. The dat. údyataśruce can serve as agent, because RVic gerundives can take dat. agents (see Jamison 1979 [Die Sprache 25] 137-38 n. 14), as also in other IE languages.

The publ. tr. renders bhavasi śravā́yyaḥ as “should be celebrated,” because a more lit. “become one to be celebrated.” However, despite its awkwardness, the more literal tr. should probably be prefered. The use of √bhū + GRDV may well indicate that Agni/the ritual fire only deserves celebration after he/it has been kindled and placed to the west. The ā́huti- in the next pāda may be an indirect ref. to the thusplaced fire as receiver of oblations, what will, by the time of the AV, be called the Āhavanīya.

The rel. pronoun yáḥ in c has double reference: in c it refers to the priest in the 3rd ps. and is the subject of accented védā; in d it refers to Agni in the 2nd ps. and is the subject of the accented āvívāsasi. Both referents are present in the main cl.: the priest as údyataśruce in b and Agni of course as tvám agne in a. This grammatical play cannot be easily rendered in English.

ékāyu- is a hapax and also probably a pun. On the one hand it is formed like viśvā́yu- ‘having a complete lifetime’, dīrghā́yu- ‘having a long lifetime’, hence ‘having a single lifetime’; on the other, it can contain the proper name of Āyu, who is found in vss. 2 and 11 of the hymn, hence Ge’s tr. “im Alleinbesitz des Āyu,” WG “den Āyu (als) einzigen (Opferer) hatte.” Although Ge (/WG) do not recognize the “lifetime” possibility, the parallel formations make such a reading hard to avoid. In the lifetime meaning, the compound presumably refers to the ritual fire’s duration through a single sacrifice or, perhaps more likely, through the lifetime of the sacrificer. In the personal-name reading, it would mean that Agni and our ritual fire have the ur-Aryan sacrificer and clanlord (see 11b) Āyu on their side (‘having Āyu as [yours] alone’?). In vs. 11 Agni is identified with Āyu the clanlord, and so here, in that identity, he brings together the víśaḥ ‘clans’. The publ. tr. does not register the personal-name reading, which should be remedied: I would add as an alternative tr.

“having Āyu as yours alone.” ágre: Although in absolute usage this word can refer to the beginning of time, as it were, that sense seems unlikely here because of the present tense verb. I therefore consider it to reflect a phrase like ágre yajñásya (VII.15.5), at least in the primary reading. Secondarily, with the second meaning of ékāyu- (‘having Āyu as yours alone’), it may allude to the primal sacrifice.

I added the parenthetical “divine” qualifying “clans” because gods (or their qualities) are the usual object of āvívāsa-, and I still think that is the more likely interpretation. However, ET points out to me that, in light of vs. 11b tvā́m … devā́ akṛṇvan náhuṣasya viśpátim “You … did the gods create as the clan-lord of Nahuṣa,” it might instead refer to human clans. Proferes (2007) argues at length, though not mentioning this hymn, that a royal fire can unite several clans.

