+++
title = "06"

+++
sákman is a hapax, rendered by Ge as “in der Freundschaft” but by Re as “en détresse” (followed explicitly by WG “aus der Not”). The former interpretation is surely the correct one, taking it as a derivative of the very common root √sac ‘accompany’ and directly cognate with Aves (O+Y) haxman- ‘association, community’. (So EWA s.v.) Re suggests a derivation rather from √sac2 ‘dry up’, but the semantics of the derivation are not straightforward, and such a connection requires both the apparent Avestan cognate and RVic hapax sákmya- ‘comradeship’ to be decoupled from sákman-. It is hard to see the motivation for this proposal. It must have been that the context seemed not to be one of comradeship, but in fact there is no problem with that meaning in context: Agni demonstrates his comradeship with the man at issue by giving him aid.

I interpret the first hemistich to be entirely concerned with the sacrifice, as the loc. vidáthe ‘at the ceremony’ suggests. In my view vṛjiná-vartani- ‘having twisting turns’ envisions the sacrifice as a race-course, which the sacrificer must navigate, esp.

the tricky turn at the further end. That the sacrifice was commonly envisioned as a course to traverse is clear from the word adhvará- ‘ceremony, rite’, related to ádhvan- ‘road, way’ and found in expressions like rathī́r adhvarā́ṇām “charioteer of the rites” (I.44.9, cf. VI.7.2). Although vṛjiná- ‘twisted, crooked’ often has a morally negative sense (like its English glosses), in this case the twist(s) would simply be tricky (that is, challenging) to steer. It is possible, with some other tr., to assume that the twisting turns are not ritual but refer to unfortunate life circumstances, but then vidáthe is hard to account for.

The image of the sacrifice as a race-course in ab then transitions to the image of a race or contest in general in pāda c. páritakmye ‘at the crucial turn’ picks up the vṛjinávartani- of pāda a. As so often, dháne is a truncated loc. absol. for the common expression dháne hité (I.40.2, etc.) “when the stake is set.” Contra Gr and Ge, I do not take páritakmye as an adj. with dháne; like me, Re. and WG keep the two expressions separate, and Re. suggests that páritakmye dháne is “abregé” from páritakmyāyām … dháne hité. Although I am leery of characterizations like “abregé,” in this case I think that the form we have has been manipulated in some such way. Gr lists an adj. páritakmya- to which our form is said to belong, but this stem does not exist: all clear forms belong to the fem. noun páritakmyā-, almost all of whose forms are loc. sg. páritakmyāyām at the end of a Triṣṭubh line. This stem is subject to various poetic deformations: see comm. ad V.30.113-14. I believe that our páritakmye here also belongs to this noun stem and reflects a loc.; it is positioned exactly like the páritakmyāyām forms, at the end of a trimeter line after an opening of 5. But to conform to the Jagatī line this loc. has been replaced by an apparent masc./neut. loc. in -e, and the independent loc. absol. dháne has been added to supply the requisite light + anceps ending. For further on the phrase dhána- hitá- see comm. ad VI.45.

The last pāda thus turns the contest image into an actual battle; the line between contest and battle is a thin and permeable one in the RV.

