+++
title = "08"

+++
The question in ab is who is winning the stakes. I take it to be “us,” with our winning enabled by Agni’s giving glory to our poet. Most take it to be the poet himself, a poet identified as ours (“for our bard to win the stakes”). This is certainly possible. Indeed Old (SBE) actually interprets sanáye … kṛṇuhi as a periphrastic causative “make/cause to win,” with the poet the first object. Although Zehnder (Periphrastic Kaus., 2011) does not discuss this passage, he does recognize (p. 61) other examples of periphrastic causatives to √san ‘win’, which does not build a morphological causative (expect *sānáyati, or possibly *sanáyati, neither of which would cause phonological problems). Of course at this period of the language, underlying transitive verbs like √san should not build double transitive causatives (“cause X to win Y”).

apásā návena: the suffixal accent of apásā should rule out a tr. ‘work’, but most tr. ignore (Re actually cites it in his notes as ápas-) or overrule the accent. So Ge “durch das neue Machwerk” (i.e., the hymn), sim. Re, WG. Although Gr cites other forms of apás- in the meaning ‘work’, none of these is convincing. Therefore, although it would simplify the tr. to take it as neut. ‘work’, the transmitted text can only mean ‘worker, laborer’. My tr. implies that we have a new poet, or perhaps the bard, made glorious by Agni in pāda b, who takes a new lease on his poetic life.

Alternatively, we might follow Old (SBE), who alone paid attention to the accent and tr. “with the help of the young active (Agni).” The introduction of Heaven and Earth as recipients of our prayers in the last pāda of this vs. is odd, giving the vs. the appearance of a hymn-final vs., since extraneous gods are often brought in at that point. The fact that the vs. is in Triṣṭubh, rather than the Jagatī that prevails in the hymn (save for 16 and 18) also supports the view that this vs. marks at least an internal boundary, and though the initial tváṃ (no) agne sequence continues in the vss. that follow, the subject matter subtly changes.

See publ. intro.

Note the phonological play in bc (… kārúṃ kṛṇuhi … kárma), which may imply a folk-etymological connection of kārú- ‘bard’ with √kṛ, and in d (devair dyāvā pṛthivī prā́vatam) I.31.9-11: Some patterned responsion in these two verses: 9 tanū-kṛ́t … prámatiḥ / 10 prámatiḥ … vayas-kṛ́t. However, although these two verses are roughly in the middle of the hymn and patterned responsion is characteristic of omphalos verses, the repetitions do not seem sufficiently important to constitute an omphalos. On the relationship between prámati- and váyas- and between tanū- and váyas- see disc. ad I.71.7, where it is suggested that tanū́- and váyas- are the tangible and intangible elements that together make up a living being.

The “two fathers” in 9a ushers in the paternal imagery found in the rest of 9- 11 (and beyond). Besides the tanū-kṛ́t- ‘body-creator’ and váyas-kṛ́t- ‘life-forcecreator’, which jointly define the parental contribution to a new human being, we have the repeated word prámati- ‘solicitude’, which is strongly associated with the father (see disc. ad I.71.7). Here the word first appears by itself in 9c, then along with pitā́- in 10a (as well as 14c, 16c). The father figure in these vss. switches back and forth: Agni is first “in the lap of his two fathers” (thus implicitly the son) in 9a, but has the fatherly role in 9cd, 10ab -- then switching back to the son in 11d. The two remaining allusions to the father (14c, 16c) cast Agni in that role again.

