+++
title = "14"

+++
Again my interpr. differs from the standard, though not as radically as in vs. 13. Most tr. take ab as a single clause with, implicitly, an embedded nominal relative clause spā́rhaṃ yád réknaḥ paramám. The main clause resumes with vanóṣi, hence the accent, and the yád clause is picked up by tád. The problem is that the RV does not ordinarily allow embedded relatives; (almost) all relative clauses are either preor postposed, as M. Hale has argued in the past. I therefore supply the frame “you are kindled as protector” + DATIVE from the parallel vs. 13ab. Note that Agni as protector also begins the next verse (15).

The phrase prá pā́kaṃ śā́ssi prá díśaḥ in d causes problems, because, despite the strong superficial parallelism, the two accusatives pā́kam and díśaḥ do not appear to be parallel. I have translated them as parallel, but admit the awkwardness. If the verb prá śāssi is used in the same way in both iterations, the “quarters,” that is, the geographical directions, are receiving the same instruction as the simple man. In support of this interpretation ET remarks “my guess is that the poet intends a contrast between two extremes (the limited simple man and the vast semi-divine quarters) as recipients of instruction from the one who is superior to all in knowledge.” Ge supplies a different verb with the second prá phrase: “du (gibst) Weisungen,” suggesting that while pā́kam refers to the person who receives the instruction, díśaḥ might rather express the content (“directions”) of the instruction.

