+++
title = "16"

+++
I interpret mīmṛṣaḥ slightly differently with its two different objects, as “make X forgotten” and “make us forget X” respectively. The verb ‘forget’ is an I/T verb of perception (in the terms of my 1983 book), and its causative thus can take two different types of constructions.

Agni is “whirling” (bhṛ́mi-) because of the movements of his smoke and flames.

[I.32 JPB] [SJ] I.32.9: John Clayton (p.c.) points out the phonological similarity of the coreferential dā́nuḥ and dhenúḥ, polarized at the beginning and end of pāda d, in frame and simile respectively. This is one of two places in the RV where we meet Vṛtra’s mother by name (and indeed at all), the other being in the bahuvr. sahádānuin III.30.8. Vṛtra himself is called dānavá- on several occasions (II.11.10, V.30.1, 4, 7, probably V.29.4, the only 5 occurrences of this stem). I am inclined to see this designation of Vṛtra as equivalent to YAves. dānauua- (Barth. 2 dānav- “bezeichnet einen den Iraniern feindlichen tūrischen Volksstamm”), with the name of Vṛtra’s mother Dānu backformed from that - rather than taking Dānu as the name of a riverine goddess, who may or may not be attested elsewhere in IE (esp. Celtic), as some others do.

In any case the stem(s) dā́nu- are difficult to sort out. In addition to the fem.

form here (perhaps coerced into that gender), there are 4 masc. forms referring to a demon or demons (pl. only in the late X.120.6), with the 3 sgs. either referring clearly to Vṛtra (II.11.18, also containing dānavá- in vs. 10; II.12.13) or with Vṛtra as likely referent (IV.30.7). In addition there are the neuts. dā́nu- ‘gift’ and dā́nu- ‘drop’, which are hard to separate in context, since “drops” (of rain, esp.) are also “gifts.” There is also a single fem. form that must belong to one of these otherwise neut. stems, in I.54.7, whose non-neut. gender is shown by the nom. sg. -s and its specifically fem. gender by the adj. úparā (dā́nur asmā úparā pinvate diváḥ “For him the gift [/drop] of heaven swells here below.”). In context this fem. obviously cannot designate Vṛtra’s mother. I have no explanation. It is worth noting that what anchors dā́nuḥ as a fem. in I.54.7 is the adj. úparā based on the directional preverb úpa, just as in our passage the feminine is established earlier in the hemistich by the phrase úttarā sū́ḥ “the mother was above,” with the adj. based on the directional preverb úd.

[SJ] I.32.12: This vs. contains a famous crux. The first hemistich reads áśvyo vā́ro abhavas tád indra, srké yát tv ̥ ā pratyáhan devá ékaḥ, rendered (up through pratyáhan) in the publ. tr. as ‘You, Indra, then became the tail of a horse when he struck his fangs at you’. Indra is clearly addressed in the 2nd ps., as shown in pāda a by the 2nd sg. abhavaḥ and the voc. indra and in pāda b by acc. tvā. This means, by easy process of elimination, that the subject of the verb pratyáhan ‘struck at’ must be Vṛtra. What then to do with the following nominative phrase, devá ékaḥ ‘the one god, the god alone’? Indra’s arch-opponent in the Rig Veda is emphatically not a god, and certainly with Indra on the scene he could not be the one god. There are several alternative solutions to this conflict between grammar and sense: to read this nominative phrase as an independent nominal clause, or as a continuation of the clause in pāda a with the dependent clause sr̥ké yát tvā pratyáhan embedded within it (the solution in the publ. tr.), or as anticipating the next hemistich, where Indra returns as the 2nd sg. subject of the verbs ájayaḥ ‘you conquered’, etc. Thus, the first possibility: ‘you became the tail of a horse when he struck his fangs at you; (you are) the one god / (you as) god (were) alone’ (etc.); for the second: ‘o Indra, you became the tail of a horse -- when he struck his fangs at you -- (you) the god alone’; for the third: ‘you became the tail of a horse when he struck his fangs at you; as god alone, you conquered …’. None of these is impossible, but they are all ad hoc, constructed under desperate circumstances to avoid the semantic clash between the undoubted subject of the verb pratyáhan, namely Vṛtra, and the immediately following nominative phrase that should not modify him.

There is a potential way out of this conundrum, however. The verb áhan is the 3rd sg. imperfect to the famous root present hánti; its older form should have been

*ahant. I tentatively suggest that the sequence *áhant evá, containing the emphatic
particle evá, at an early stage underwent external sandhi voicing assimilation to

*áhand evá and then resegmentation to áhan devá, rather than displaying the
expected synchronic sandhi development to *áhann evá. This aberrant resegmentation was facilitated by the existence of the ubiquitous noun devá- and the following adj. ékaḥ, with which that noun could be construed. My proposed underlying original *áhand *evá ékaḥ has the particle evá stationed after the verb to emphasize the unusual use of Indra’s signature verb áhan, found in this hymn five times with Indra as subject (1c, 2a, 3d, 4a, 5a; cf. also 11c jaghanvā́n in the vs. immediately preceding ours), with Vṛtra as subject. The following ékaḥ emphasizes the single combat between Indra and Vṛtra: the equal balance between the two opponents is a feature of this part of the hymn -- cf. esp. 13c índraś ca yád yuyudhā́te áhiś ca “When Indra and the serpent fought with each other …,” with middle dual verb and conjoined subject NP. This contrasts sharply with the much more one-sided depiction of the battle in the earlier parts of the hymn. I would therefore translate 12b as ‘when just he, alone, struck his fangs against you’.

One major stumbling block to accepting this scenario: the sandhi of *evá ékaḥ.

The hiatus found in the transmitted text in the sequence devá ékaḥ is of course expected from underlying *devás ékaḥ (/*deváḥ/z), with loss of the final consonant of the nom. sg. and the resulting hiatus maintained. But we would ordinarily expect the final vowel of the particle evá to coalesce with the initial of ékaḥ to produce *evaíkaḥ (as in IV.54.5, X.44.7 evaívá, X.173.2 ihaívaídhi). However, the application of the sandhi rules governing the coalescence of final and initial vowels is by no means exceptionless. For further discussion, with reff., see my “Hidden in Plain Sight: Some Older Verb Endings in the Rig Veda” in a forthcoming festschrift.