+++
title = "10"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., this is the most challenging verse of the hymn.

Note the phonetic figure kíyāti(y) ā́yát samáyā bhávāti, which may help account for the unusual lengthening in kíyāti (for expected kíyati, which is the Pp.

reading). The only other occurrence of this loc. (II.30.1) is also followed by ā́, though the figure stops there. See AiG III.256 for various alternative explanations of the long ā.

The crucial term for the interpr. of the verse is the instr. adverbial samáyā, which is universally taken as ‘in the middle’ in its various occurrences, presumably from something like “with the same (on both sides).” But this doesn’t really make sense here: since today’s Dawn is precisely in the middle between the former ones and the ones to come, at what point she will be there is not a question we need to ask.

A different interpr. of the word arises from examining all the occurrences in context.

Every passage crucially contains the preverb/particle ví (save for VII.66.15, where víśvam takes its place):


> ví vṛtrásya samáyā pāṣyā̀rujaḥ
ví síndhavaḥ samáyā sasrur ádrim


> kíyāty ā́yát samáyā bhávāti yā́vyūṣúr yā́ś ca nūnáṃ vyuchā́n


> I.163.3ási sùmena samáyā vípṛktaḥ
> I.166.9ákṣo vaś cakrā́samáyā ví vāvṛte
> VII.66.15 śīrṣṇáḥ-śīrṣṇo jágatas tasthúṣas pátiṃ samáyā víśvam ā́rájaḥ
> IX.75.4 rómāṇy ávyā samáyā ví dhāvati
> IX.85.5 vy àvyáyaṃ samáyā vā́ram arṣasi

Since ví ‘apart’ and sám ‘together’ are oppositional preverbs that frequently work formulaically with each other, samáyā seems to partake more in the semantics of sám than of samá- ‘same’ and to mean ‘altogether’, ‘all at once’, or ‘together with’. I take it in the last meaning here: the question being asked is when the current Dawn will be (re)joined with her sister Dawns, both preceding and following her.

