+++
title = "02"

+++
The word order in this vs. is quite jumbled, and there are several alternative ways to try to fix it. The one taken by the publ. tr. follows Ge in taking pāda b as parenthetic.

Unlike Ge’s tr. (though it is the 2nd alt. in his n. 2c), the publ. tr. uses this strategy to allow devā́n in c to be the goal of the verb in a (arṣā́bhí); cf. nearby IX.42.5 abhí viśvāni vā́ryā, abhí devā́n ... arṣati and in the immed. preceding hymn IX.44.1bc ... arṣasi / abhí devā́n, where the verb ends the hemistich and the preverb begins the next pāda, both reasonable positions for those elements. The latter passage (by the same poet as ours) might help explain the postposed preverb in the middle of the pāda here: sá no arṣābhí …, which is otherwise odd.

However, taking devā́n as goal still leaves the rest of pāda c, … sákhibhya ā́váram, unaccounted for. In the publ. tr. I take the sákhibhyaḥ as dat. doubling naḥ in a, with an independent adverbial ā́váram “at will” (which, however, is usually in the opposite order váram ā́). But this ignores the striking parallel cited by both Ge and Re, I.4.4 yás te sákhibhya ā́váram (and cf. II.5.5 … tisrbhya ̥́ ā́váram), rendered in the publ. tr. as “who is your choice from among your comrades.” Although it is always possible that the parallel is a false one, I now think I cannot ignore it and I suggest that this phrase provides a second goal to arṣā́bhí, with sákhibhya ā́váram to be construed together (as in I.4.4) referring to Indra, who was mentioned in the parenthetic pāda b. (Indra is also the referent in I.4.4.) Indra is of course soma’s particular target among the gods, the best drinker of soma. I would now take this phrase as specifying soma’s goal of choice: the juice rushes to the gods, but esp. to Indra - and would alter the tr. to “rush to the gods, to your choice [=Indra] from among the comrades,” with sákhibhyaḥ referring to the gods in general. Although sákhi- in IX generally refers to poets or hymans in general (cf., e.g., IX.97.43), the ABL ā́váram idiom could overrule this. This interpr. unfortunately requires (or at least suggests) that sákhāyaḥ in vs. 5 has a different referent.

