+++
title = "01"

+++
The 2nd hemistich is a little tricky. As noted in the publ. intro. it seems to concern the Vala myth, though with Trita as hero -- an odd substitution in a hymn at least half dedicated to Indra. Moreover, there’s a functional slippage in the accusatives with the verb prá √bhid ‘split (forth)’. The first acc., neut. pl. dṛḷḥā́, is of course very common, used of fastnesses or strongholds (which usually get split or otherwise breached). The standard interpr. (Gr, Old, Ge, Re) take it with dyumnā́ (e.g., Old “feste Herrlichkeiten”), but this is an uneasy collocation. The dyumnā́ should be the brilliant things desired to be obtained; they are more likely to be held within strongholds than to be strongholds themselves, and the consistent use of dṛḷhá- as ‘fastness, stronghold’ makes it unlikely that it can here refer to the thing held rather than what holds it within. I assume that prá √bhid can take a double acc.: ‘split X (to release) forth Y’, with X the container and Y the contained. Old is quite dismissive of a variant on this explanation, but I do not see the objection -- particularly as whatever vā́ṇīḥ refers to, it is more likely to be the contained than the container. As for vā́ṇī-, this stem usually refers to music or voices. Ge’s tentative suggestion, that these are the voices of the cows released from the Vala cave, makes the most contextual sense -- even though, as Ge points out, the word is not otherwise used of animal noises. On the other hand, as he also points out, it is used of rivers, so that application to non-human sounds that are comparable to a choir of human voices is possible. That vā́ṇī- is also sometimes used of the choir that encourages Indra in a Vala context (e.g., III.30.10) might add an additional resonance to the usage here, but I do not think it is the primary reading.

