+++
title = "03"

+++
3cd has elicited much disc.; see esp. the lengthy treatment of it by Old, with several different possible tr. supplied, Ge’s n. 3cd, and a fairly detailed disc. in WG’s n. Among the problems are 1) what is the referent of the ‘wood(en)’ in instr. drúṇā; 2) who is the subj. of the verb and is it his hands (gábhastyoḥ) that are in question; 3) what is gávām construed with; 4) what case is vṛtraghná, that is, what is its pausal form? I will begin with 3): flg. Ge (n. 3cd), I supply a loc. *éṣe to govern gávām “(in the quest) for cattle.” This is supported by éṣate in this pāda, éṣe ráthānām “in the quest for chariots” in the next pāda (4a) likewise with gen., and X.48.9 gávām éṣe.

As Ge suggests, *éṣe éṣate may have been simplified by a sort of word-haplology. As for 4), the underlying form of vṛtraghná — contra the Pp and most interpr., who take it as dat. vṛtraghné, I think it is a genitive (vṛtraghnáḥ), dependent on gábhastyoḥ -- a possibility floated but ultimately rejected by Old. A parallel passage with a weapon (in fact, a didyút; see our 3b) being wielded in the arms of a man is found in VII.25.1 pátāti didyún náryasya bāhóḥ. A dat. does not make much sense here because ā́√īṣ doesn’t ordinarily take a dative, nor does práti, so we are left with no way to fit a dat. *vṛtraghné into the existing syntax of the sentence, save as a free-floating dat. of
benefit. (Re, curiously, seems to take it as a loc. “chez Vṛtrahaṇ” [sic the retroflex ṇ].

This seems to go back to an idea of Hillebrandt’s that it belongs to an otherwise unattested thematic stem; see Old. This has nothing to recommend it.) In answer to 2), if I am thus correct that the hands are those of Indra, it seems likely that he is also the subject of éṣate. Otherwise the subject is an unidentified other party or (so most interpr.) is the missile (didyút) of pāda b. What then to do with drúṇā? This is the most problematic of the problems. Most interpr. take it as the handle of the didyút (which, acdg. to WG, might be a sort of Vedic boomerang). In VIII.96.11 and IX.98.2, the same instr. seems to refer to a wooden paddle or the like. A similar wooden implement, usable as a weapon, may be meant here -- though it seems a come-down for vajra-wielding Indra. More likely it is equipment esp. suitable for cattle herding -- a prod or goad, and this would account for Indra’s trading in his usual weapon for something more appropriate to a quest for cows. Of course, since soma is usually poured into wooden cups, this may also depict Indra with a wooden soma cup in his hands, preparing to drink before he goes out on his quest. I might emend the publ. tr. to “With the wooden (goad / soma-cup) in the hands …” I am not at all certain of the correctness of any of these answers to the questions posed above. Nor do I have any explanation for práti, beyond pointing out that 4c begins with rhyming pátī. And, most especially, I don’t understand why this cramped and obscure half-verse is found in this otherwise rather anodyne hymn.

