+++
title = "Praśna II, Paṭala 3, Khaṇḍa 6"

+++
## 01
1. If he has any doubts regarding the caste and conduct of a person who has come to him in order to fulfil his duty (of learning the Veda), he shall kindle a fire (with the ceremonies prescribed for kindling the sacrificial fire) and ask him about his caste and conduct. [^1] 

## 02
2. If he declares himself to be (of) good (family and conduct, the teacher elect) shall say, 'Agni who sees, Vāyu who hears, Āditya who brings to light, vouch for his goodness; may it be well with this person! He is free from sin.' Then he shall begin to teach him.

## 03
3. A guest comes to the house resembling a burning fire. [^2] 

## 04
4. He is called a Śrotriya who, observing the law (of studentship), has learned one recension of the Veda (which may be current in his family). [^3] 

## 05
5. He is called a guest (who, being a Śrotriya), approaches solely for the fulfilment of his religious duties, and with no other object, a householder who lives intent on the fulfilment of his duties. [^4] 

## 06
6. The reward for honouring (such a guest) is immunity from misfortunes, and heavenly bliss. [^5] 

## 07
7. He shall go to meet such (a guest), honour him according to his age (by the formulas of salutation prescribed), and cause a seat to be given to him.

## 08
8. Some declare that, if possible, the seat should have many feet. [^6] 

## 09
9. The (householder himself) shall wash the feet of that (guest); according to some, two Śūdras shall do it.

## 10
10. One of them shall be employed in pouring water (over the guest, the other in washing his feet).

## 11
11. Some declare that the water for the (guest) shall be brought in an earthen vessel. [^7] 

## 12
12. But (a guest) who has not yet returned home from his teacher shall not be a cause for fetching water. [^8] 

## 13
13. In case a (student comes, the host) shall repeat the Veda (together with him) for a longer time (than with other guests).

## 14
14. He shall converse kindly (with his guest), and gladden him with milk or other (drinks), with eatables, or at least with water.

## 15
15. He shall offer to his guest a room, a bed, a mattress, a pillow with a cover, and ointment, and what else (may be necessary). [^9] 

## 16
16. (If the dinner has been finished before the arrival of the guest), he shall call his cook and give him rice or yava for (preparing a fresh meal for) the guest. [^10] 

## 17
17. (If dinner is ready at the arrival of the guest), he himself shall portion out the food and look at it, saying (to himself), 'Is this (portion) greater, or this?'

## 18
18. He shall say, 'Take out a larger (portion for the guest).'

## 19
19. A guest who is at enmity (with his host) shall not eat his food, nor (shall he eat the food of a host) who hates him or accuses him of a crime, or of one who is suspected of a crime. [^11] 

## 20
20. For it is declared in the Veda that he (who eats the food of such a person) eats his guilt.



[^1]:  6. The person desirous to study addresses his teacher elect with the following Mantra: Bhagavan maitreṇa cakṣuṣā paśya śivena manasānugṛhāṇa prasīda mām adhyāpaya, 'venerable Sir, look on me with a friendly eye, receive me with a favourable mind, be kind and teach me.' The teacher elect then asks: Kiṃgotro ’si saumya, kimācāraḥ, 'friend, of what family art thou? what is thy rule of conduct?'

[^2]:  The object of this Sūtra is to show the absolute necessity of feeding a guest. For, if offended, he might burn the house with the flames of his anger.

[^3]:  The object of this Sūtra is to complete the definition of the term 'guest' to be given in the following Sūtra. In my translation I have followed Haradatta's gloss. The literal sense of Āpastamba's words is,. 'He who, observing the law, has studied one recension of each (of the four) Vedas, becomes a Śrotriya.' Haradatta says this definition would be contrary to the current acceptation of the term. That argument proves, however, nothing for Āpastamba's times.

[^4]:  Manu III, 102, 103; Yājñ. I, 111.

[^5]:  Yājñ. I, 109; Manu III, 101.

[^6]:  Haradatta states that this is also Āpastamba's opinion.

[^7]:  According to Haradatta, Āpastamba is of opinion that it should be brought in a pot made of metal.

[^8]:  I.e. it is unnecessary to offer water for washing the feet to a student.

[^9]:  'Ointment, (i.e.) oil or clarified butter for anointing the feet.'--Haradatta. Manu III, 107.

[^10]:  Manu III, 108.

[^11]:  Manu IV, 213; Yājñ. I, 162.