+++
title = "01"

+++
FIRST CHAPTER. (The Distribution of the Different Parts of the Sacrificial Animal among 

the Priests.) 

22 

A 

04 

Now follows the division of the different parts of the sacrificial animal (among the priests). We shall describe it? The tsvo jawbones with the tongue are to be given to the Prastotar; the breast in the form of an eagle to the Udgātar; the throat with the palate to the Pratibartar; the lower part of the right loins the Hotar; the left to the Brahmā ; the right thigh to the Maitrā varuna; the left to the Brahmapachhańsí; the right side with the shoulder to the Adhvaryu; the left side to those who accompany the chants; * the left shoulder to the Pratipasthātar; the lower part of the right arm to the Nestar; the lower part of the left arm to the Potar; the upper part of the right thigh to the Achhavāka; the left to the Agnidbra; the upper part of the right arm to Atreya ; the left to the Sadasya; the back bone (442) and the urinal bladder to the Grihapati (sacrificer); the right feet to the Gțihapati who gives a feasting; the left feet to the wife of that Gribapati who gives a feasting; the upper lip is common to both (the Grihapati and bis wife), which is to be divided by the Grihapati. They offer the tail of the animal to wives, but they should give it to a Brahmana; the fleshy processes (manikah) on the neck and three gristles (kakasah) to the Grāvastut; three 

* The same piece is found in Asv. ér. S. 12, 4. 

2 The Upagā tris accompany the chant of the Sama singers with certain syllables which correspond to the Pratigāra of the Adhrargu This accompaniment is called ?paganam. It differs according to the different Sāmans. At the Bahiṣ-pavamina Stotra at the morning libation, the rtpagánarni of the Tpagātris is ho. Besides, the sacrificer has to make an apagánam also. This is om at the bahiṣ-payamāna Stotra. 

* The Atreya who is here mentioned as a receiver of a share in the sacrificial apimal, is no officiating priest Butithe circumstance that he receives gold for his Daksiṇā, and that it is given to him before the other priests (save the Agnīdhra), as we learn from the Kātīya Srauta Sutras 10,2,21 shows, that he had a certain right to a principal share in all sacrificial donations. Atreya, meaning only a descendant of the Atrigotry, the right appears to have been hereditary in the family of the ancient Riṣi Atri,other gristles and one-half of the fleshy part on the back (vaikurtta 4) to the Unnetar; the other half of the fleshy part on the neck and the left lobe (kloma ) to the slaughterer, who should present it to a Brahmana, if he himself would not happen to be a Brahmana. The head is to be given to the Subrahmnya), the skin belongs to him (the Subrahmanya), who spoke, sva) sutyam (to-morrow at the Soma sacrifice); that part of the sacrificial animal at a Soma sacrifice which belongs to Ila (sacrificial food) is common to all the priests; only for the Hotar it is optional. 

All these portions of the sacrifical animal amount to thirty-six single pieces, each of which represents the pāda (foot) of a verse by which the sacrifice is carried up. The Brihati metre consists of thirty-six syllables ; and the heavenly worlds are of the Brihati nature. In this way (by dividing the animal into thirty-six parts), they gain life (in this morld) and the heavens, and having become established in both (this and that world), they walk there. 

[443] To those who divide the sacrificial animal in the way mentioned, it becomes the guide to heaven. But those who make the division otherwise, are like scoundrels and miscreants who kill an animal merely (for gratifying their lust after flesh). 

This division of the sacrificial animal was invented by the Riṣi Devabhiga, a son of Sruta.? When he was departing from this life, lie did not entrust the secret to any one). But a supernatural being com- - municated it to Girija, the son of Babhru. Since his time, men study 

