+++
title = "+140"

+++
140  
Agni  
Dīrghatamas Aucathya  
13 verses: jagatī, except jagatī or triṣṭubh 10, triṣṭubh 12–13  
This first hymn in the Dīrghatamas cycle is bristling with difficulties in detail,  although it remains focused on its central topic, the kindling and spread of the fire.  The first two verses establish the ritual scene, with the ritual fire sitting on (or at) the  vedi, the “altar” that is really a dug-out depression in the ground on the axis between  the eastern and western ritual fires, and with the poet’s presentation of his “thought”  (a praise hymn) as clothing for the ritual fire. But natural fire, which spreads through  the woods and devours them, is also referred to, especially in verse 2.314 I.140  
The chronological description of the kindling and growth of fire begins in verse  3 with a vivid depiction of the kindling sticks and the first faint stirrings of smoke  and fire. The growing power of the fire and the swiftness of the spread of its flames,  imagined as horses in verse 4, occupy the next verses (4–10). Fire’s burning of the  plants that stoke it is given an erotic cast in verses 6–8, aided by the fact that several  words for “plant” are feminine in gender. Their very destruction by fire is also envi  
sioned as a transformation into a better and more vigorous form (see esp. vss. 7cd–8). The prayers for aid and material goods begin in verse 10, on behalf not only  of a generic “us” but especially mentioning our patrons (vss. 10, 12) and others of  our circle (vs. 12). One striking request is for a metaphorical boat to deliver us to  the far shore of difficulty (vs. 12); the boat is described in some detail, including its  possession of a foot or feet. We wonder if this refers to some sort of primitive keel  or centerboard, which would probably be helpful to ensure that the boat make it  across the current of a swift-flowing river. Unfortunately our knowledge of ancient  Indian naval architecture is not sufficient to decide.  