+++
title = "001"

+++
1 (517)
Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
25 verses: virāj 1–18, triṣṭubh 19–25
This hymn contains a double ending. The first is at verse 20, which concludes with  the signature pāda of the Vasiṣṭhas in 20d and which is marked by a shift to triṣṭubh  meter in verses 19–20. The hymn continues in triṣṭubh to verse 25, which repeats  verse 20. Oldenberg suggests that there is a deliberate attempt to make this hymn  parallel to VII.34, the first of the hymns to All Gods, which also has twenty-five  verses. The two parts of the hymn, verses 1–20 and 21–25, are thematically similar  since both are concerned with the life and lineage of the householder, although the  second part places particular emphasis on Agni as the sacrificial fire and the bless ings that he can bring.
The hymn describes the kindling of Agni in the house so that the household  fire will guard its prosperity and help it flourish. Agni will be the leader of the  household (vs. 3) and the fire of the sacrifice (vs. 16). In particular, the householder  desires sons and other males in his extended family, who will bring prosperity to  the home and guarantee the householder’s continued lineage. These are the vīrā́ḥ
“men, heroes” (vss. 5, 11, 15, 19, 24), an abundance of whom the poet desires and the  lack of whom he fears (19). The poet also mentions the náraḥ “men” or “fine men”  (vss. 1, 4, 9, 10, 11), who in the first three of these verses are described as ritually  serving Agni. That function is typical of náraḥ, who elsewhere in the R̥gveda are often  priests. Here the vīrā́ḥ and náraḥ do not appear to be different people, however,  since they are described in similar terms. So the náraḥ in 4c and the vīrā́ḥ in 15c are both “well born,” and the poet asks that the householder never suffer from the lack  of either (11a and 19a).
The poet repeats the word nítya in reference to Agni as “our own” or “their own”  (vss. 2, 12) and to “his own” offerings (vs. 17) and “our own” lineage (vs. 21). He  also repeats svá, which has a similar sense, with reference to “our own” devotion (vs.  6) and the householder’s “own” kin (vs. 12). Through their repetition and meaning,  the two words form a nexus between Agni and the householder, which connects  the kindling and tending of the fire to the longevity of the householder’s family.  Likewise in verse 17, as Geldner notes, the circumambulation of the Hotar with  the fire around the fire-place is described as the procession of a bride and groom  around the fire at a wedding. The imagery of the wedding affirms that Agni is now  a member of the family of the householder.
More generally, the poet creates a close connection between Agni and  humans by allowing either one to be the subject of verse 23cd and either one  to be the object. That is, either the god Agni allows the priest to obtain goods  from the gods and the patronage of a sacrificer, or the priest makes it possible  for Agni to obtain goods for mortals and to become accessible to the patrons  of the sacrifice.
## 01
Our men gave birth to Agni in the two fire-churning sticks, by their  insights and the motion of their hands—to him who is proclaimed,
to the flaming houselord, visible far away.
## 02
To give help anywhere, the good (gods) installed in the home Agni,  beautiful to look upon,
the one to be skillfully tended, who was in the house as their own.
## 03
When you are kindled forth, Agni, shine in front for us with your  inexhaustible shaft of light, o youngest one.
Prizes of victory ever go toward you.
## 04
Your brilliant fires blaze forth, abounding in good men, better than  (others’) fires,
here where our well-born men sit together.
## 05
Through insight, Agni, give us wealth abounding in good men and, o  capable one, a good lineage that is proclaimed
and that the invading sorcerer does not overcome.
## 06
The very skillful one toward whom the young, oblation-bearing girl [=the  ladle], filled with ghee, goes in the evening and at dawn,
toward him (goes) our own devotion, seeking goods.
## 07
Agni, burn away all hostile powers with the heat by which you burned  Jarūtha.
Make sickness disappear without a sound.
## 08
O best Agni—flaming, shining, pure—he who will kindle your face  here—
also because of these praise songs (of his) you should be here for us.

## 09
Our ancestral, mortal men, who shared among themselves your face  many times, o Agni—
also because of these you should be favorable here to us.
## 10
Let these men, champions at the smashing of obstacles, prevail over all  ungodly wiles—
they who marvel at my insight that is proclaimed.
## 11
Agni, let us not sit in the absence of men, nor (let us sit) around you  without posterity because of a lack of heroes [=sons]
amid (other) houses filled with offspring, o you belonging to
the house—
## 12
(Let Agni approach) our dwelling, which the horseman [=Agni]  approaches as his own to sacrifice, (a dwelling) filled with offspring  and endowed with a good lineage,
having increased by our own kin’s posterity.
## 13
Protect us, Agni, from the detestable demon. Protect us from the  crookedness of the ungenerous and malicious one.
With you as my yokemate, I would prevail over those doing battle  (with me).
## 14
Let this very Agni be superior to other fires, here where there gather a  prizewinning horse, a strong-handed lineage,
and the syllable [/the inexhaustible cow] with a thousand cattle-shelters. 15. This very Agni, who protects against the rapacious ones, should free his  kindler from constriction.
Well-born men circle around him.
## 16
Here is that Agni, receiving poured oblations in many places, whom the  master kindles, bringing the offering,
and whom the Hotar goes around at the rites.
## 17
In you, Agni, as masters we would pour many oblations that are  your own,
as we make the twin bridal processions at the sacrificial meal.
## 18
And, Agni, these oblations are most sought: unwearying, convey them  to the divine assembly.
Let them [=the gods] seek these, our sweet-scented (oblations).
## 19
Agni, do not hand us over to a lack of men. To neglect with its shabby  dress—do not hand us over to this.
Do not (hand) us (over) to hunger nor to the demon, o you who possess  the truth. Do not be angry at us in our house or in the forest.
## 20
Now direct my formulations upward, Agni. O god, you will sweeten  them for our generous (patrons).
We on both sides [=priests and patrons] would be in your generosity.  – Do you protect us always with your blessings.
## 21
O Agni, you are of easy summons and joy-bringing appearance. Be  brilliant with good brilliance, o son of strength. In company with you, let there be no falling short for our own lineage.  Let not the manly hero fade away among us.
## 22
Do not declare that we maintain them badly, Agni, since these fires are  kindled by the gods.
Let not bad thoughts from you, a god, reach us, not even because of  our confusion, o son of strength.
## 23
That mortal is rich, o Agni of beautiful face, who pours the oblation in  the immortal one.
He [=Agni or the mortal] establishes him [=the mortal or Agni] as one  who gains goods among the gods, the one to whom the inquiring
patron goes, seeking his ends.
## 24
Since you know of the great, easy passage, Agni, convey here to our  patrons lofty wealth,
by which, o powerful one, we would rejoice as those undiminished in  lifetime and having abundant good heroes.
## 25
Now direct my formulations upward, Agni. O god, you will sweeten  them for our generous (patrons).
We on both sides would be in your generosity. – Do you protect us
always with your blessings.