+++
title = "002"

+++
2 (518) Āprı̄
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
11 verses: triṣṭubh
This Āprī hymn offers several original images and turns of phrase, even as it follows  the prescribed sequence of invocations. In verse 2cd the gods who sweeten the offer ings are probably the assembly of the deities and divine objects who are invoked in  the hymn. Two similes complicate the second half of verse 5. The priests open the  doors so that the chariot, probably the sacrifice itself, can pass into the realm of the  gods. In 5cd with their oblations of ghee the priests anoint the many doors that lead  to the gods. In pāda c the doors are compared to cows licking a calf. We have sug gested that the “divine chariot,” the sacrifice, corresponds to the calf and that the  ghee-offerings at the Prayājas, the “fore-offerings,” are the “licks.” It is not entirely  clear why the doors are compared to unmarried girls in pāda d. The ritual situation  to which the verse refers, however, is explained by I.124.8, which describes anointed  brides-to-be who about to choose a husband (vrā́) at the assemblies (sámana) that  include prospective grooms. The two similes are united by the representation of  the dúraḥ, which are grammatically feminine, as females: mothers and brides. And  finally, rather unusually, verse 7 identifies the two divine Hotars, who are not actu ally named, each as Agni Jātavedas. The phrasing suggests that this verse may be  a reversal of V.9.1–2. In V.9.1c the poet says mánye tvā jātávedasam “I think you884 VII.2
[=Agni] to be Jātavedas,” and then in 2a, he calls Agni a Hotar. Alternatively, the  form jātávedasā could be an elliptical dual, as Geldner suggests, in which one of the  pair is Agni Jātavedas and the other the “inspired praise poet.”
The conclusion of the hymn, verses 8–11, is identical to III.4.8–11, so either  the Viśvāmitra Āprī hymn has borrowed from this Vasiṣṭha hymn or vice versa.  Presumably the first part of the hymn was enough to make each of the two hymns  sufficiently unique to its gotra.
## 1
Today find pleasure in our kindling wood, Agni. Blaze aloft, sending up  the smoke of the sacrifice.
Touch the back of heaven with your tufts of hair; you will extend
together with the rays of the sun.
## 2
With our sacrifices we will praise the greatness of Narāśaṃsa, worthy of  the sacrifice, among these,
the bright gods of strong resolve, the ones granting insight, who sweeten  both offerings [=oblations and words].
## 3
The very skillful lord to be invoked, the truth-speaking messenger  between the two world-halves,
Agni kindled by Manu—him would we like Manu ever exalt for you for  the sake of the rite.
## 4
Ritually serving, carrying it in a crouch, they spread ritual grass at the  fire with reverence.
Pouring (ghee) on it, o Adhvaryus, groom the ghee-backed, dappled  (ritual grass) with the oblation.
## 5
Serving the gods, very attentive, they have laid the doors that seek the  (divine) chariot open to the gods’ realm.
They jointly anoint like unwed girls in (marriage) assemblies the many  double (doors) that lick (the chariot) like two mother cows a calf.
## 6
And the two great, heavenly young women, Dawn and Night, like a  milk-cow that gives good milk,
the two generous ones sitting on the ritual grass, summoned by many,  worthy of the sacrifice—let them rest here for our safe passage.
## 7
I think you two inspired praise poets [=divine Hotars] at the sacrifices of  the sons of Manu are both Jātavedas and are to perform the sacrifice. Raise up our rite at our calls. You will win desirable rewards (for us)  among the gods.
## 8
Bhāratī along with the Bhāratīs, Iḷā along with the gods, Agni along with  the sons of Manu,
and Sarasvatī along with the Sārasvatas are near: let the three goddesses sit here on the ritual grass.
## 9
O god Tvaṣṭar, unbind for us this flow of semen and what prospers,  granting (that) from which a hero is born, fit for action and very skilled, who yokes up  the pressing stones and desires the gods.
## 10
O Lord of the Forest, send it [=the sacrificial animal] to the gods. Agni,  the Śamitar-priest, will sweeten the offering.
And it is he, the more real Hotar [=Agni], who will offer sacrifice, since  he knows the births of the gods.
## 11
Journey near here, o Agni, as you are kindled, on the same chariot with  Indra and the swift gods.
Let Aditi of good sons sit on our ritual grass. Svāhā! Let the immortal  gods rejoice!