+++
title = "003"

+++
3 (519)
Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
10 verses: triṣṭubh
Verses 1cd and 9cd share a similar structure with an opening relative clause and  concluding pāvakáḥ “pure” and thereby define the hymn. The last verse, which con tains the poet’s requests for blessings concluding with the usual Vasiṣṭha signature  line, thus stands outside of hymn’s principal development.
The hymn describes the emergence of fire from the friction sticks that give birth  to it. Agni breaks free of these fire-churning sticks as he is fanned into flame (vs.  2). He then appears as a new-born, who never grows old (vs. 3). His flames rapidly  advance over the wood (vs. 4), and then, in the middle verse of this principal section,  he becomes the recipient of offerings (vs. 5). The descriptions of the fire after that  point reflect its intensification through the offerings covered with ghee (vss. 6–7). The  “strongholds” in verse 7 and in verse 8 (if this is how the ellipsis in that verse is to be  completed) refer to Agni’s now brightly shining flames. Their brilliance cuts through  space, protecting the sacrificer and opening a way for the songs to reach the gods.
The hymn is notable especially for its skillful use of simile, especially in the first  half of the hymn. The poet compares Agni to a horse (vs. 2), a weapon (vs. 4), a  stallion (vs. 5), and a jewel (vs. 6), and he calls Agni a bull (vs. 3). In each case the  same verb describes the action of the fire and of the object to which it is compared.  So, for example, in verse 2 Agni and the horse both “snort” and both “stand free”— Agni of the fire-churning wood and the horse of its corral. In verse 5 the fire and a  stallion are both “groomed,” and in verse 6 both fire and a jewel “glow.” In 4d we  may have an exception to this pattern. In this case, the verb is vivekṣi which should  be from √viṣ “toil at,” and we reflect that analysis in our translation. But there is a  pun, for vivekṣi can formally be derived from √vic “sift,” an action that would apply  to the barley in the simile. That is to say, whereas the same action applies to the  simile and the frame in the previous examples, here the same verb form but not in  the same meaning applies to the wood and the barley.

## 1
Make the god Agni along with the fires your best sacrificing messenger  in the rite—
he who is firmly established among mortals and possessing the truth,  the pure one with burning head, with ghee as his food.
## 2
He has snorted like a hungry horse in his pasture, when he has stood  free of his great enclosure.
Then the wind fans his flame, and as always your track is black. 3. You the new-born bull, o Agni, whose ageless (flames), being kindled,  climb upward—
your ruddy smoke goes toward heaven, for as our messenger, o Agni,  you speed to the gods.
## 4
You whose leading edge has spread out upon the earth when it has  hungrily encircled its food with its jaws—
your advance comes like a loosed weapon; wondrous one, you work  over (the wood) like barley with your tongue.
## 5
In the evening and at dawn our men groom just that very young Agni  like a stallion,
sharpening their guest in his womb. His flame shines when the bull is  offered oblations.
## 6
Your visage is lovely to see, o you of lovely face, when, like a jewel, you  glow nearby.
Your outburst comes like heaven’s thunder. Like the shimmering sun,  show your radiant beam.
## 7
In order that with our svāhā-call we would serve Agni for you all with  libations and ghee-drenched oblations,
protect us, Agni, by these immeasurable powers (of yours) and by your  hundred metal strongholds.
## 8
Your unassailable (strongholds)—either those which are for your  servant or those by which you will make a wide path for our
manly songs—
by these, son of strength, protect us altogether, both patrons and  singers, o Jātavedas.
## 9
When, gleaming like a (heat-)purified axe, he has come out, glowing in  his own form, in his own body—
who, eagerly sought, has been born in his two mothers [=the friction  sticks], the pure one strongly resolved to sacrifice to the gods— 10. Shine on us these things that bring good fortune, Agni. We would  acquire a resolve based on good perception.
Let all these things be for the praise singers and the chanter. – Do you  protect us always with your blessings. 
