+++
title = "004"

+++
4 (520)
Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
10 verses: triṣṭubh
According to Geldner, this hymn expresses the wish for a son or for a replace ment for a lost son. This is a wish found already in VII.1, but it is even more  strongly articulated here. The best evidence for this interpretation is verses 7–8,  which describe the importance of a son of one’s own. Nonetheless, in our view,  the subject of this hymn is more likely Agni than a son, and its concern is with a  fire that has not come or is just coming to birth. The poet wants a fire of his own,  which will bring wealth to him and preserve his life. To be sure, the hymn does  contain an implicit analogy between Agni and a son, who likewise brings wealth  and preserves the family.
One of the features of this hymn is the repetition of a word or of related words  in successive lines or verses: jagr̥bhré (3b) and gŕ̥bham (3c); uvóca (3c) and durókam (3d); agnír amŕ̥taḥ (4b), agnír amŕ̥tān (5b), and agnír amŕ̥tasya (6a); pári ṣadāma (6d)  and pariṣádyam (7a); and áraṇasya (7a) and áraṇaḥ (8a). Other repetitions occur at  a greater distance. Thus verse 8, the third from the last verse, has grábhāya (8a) and  ókaḥ (8c), echoing the repetitions within verse 3. This technique does not occur in  the first, introductory verse, nor in the last two verses, which are also VI.15.12 and  VII.3.10 respectively and which may have been borrowed from these hymns. These  verbal repetitions are a challenge to translate, particularly because in some cases the  poet uses the words in different senses. So, for example, amŕ̥ta refers to the “immor
tal” gods in verse 5 but to “living” human beings in verse 6. In verse 6 pári √sad describes the sacrificers “sitting around” the fire, but in verse 7 it probably refers to  sequestering something or keeping it separate by drawing a notional circle around it.
## 01
Bring forth your offering and your thought, well-purified, to the flaming  ray of light, to Agni,
who with wisdom goes among all races, the divine ones and those
descended from Manu.
## 02
Let Agni be sharp-witted, though of tender age, since he has been born  as his mother’s youngest,
who with his flaming teeth completely grips the pieces of wood. He  completely eats his food all at once, even though it be abundant.
## 03
In the company and before the face of this god, the luminous one whom  mortals have accepted as their own,
who is at home with human ownership, but beyond domestication, Agni  flames for Āyu.
## 04
Here the prescient poet has been installed among non-poets, immortal  Agni among mortals.
Do not become angry with us here, o strong one. We would ever have  good thoughts in your company.

## 05
Who has sat here upon the womb made by the gods—for Agni has  surpassed the deathless (gods) in his resolve (to sacrifice)—
that all-nurturing child do plants, trees, and the land carry.
## 06
Because Agni is the master of what is free of death [=alive] and  abundant, (because) he is the master of giving a wealth of men,
lacking men, let us not (sit around) you, o strong one; lacking lifebreath  or friendship, let us not sit around (you).
## 07
Because the legacy of an outsider is to be “sat around” [=sequestered],  might we be lords of our own wealth.
What is born of another is no posterity (for us), o Agni. Do not milk  dry the paths (even) of an inconspicuous man.
## 08
For an outsider, (even one) of great kindness, is not to be accepted as  one’s own, nor is one born of another’s belly to be well regarded in
one’s thinking.
He returns again to his home. Let the overpowering, prizewinning
horse come here to us anew.
## 09
You, Agni—protect (us) from the rapacious one, and you, mighty one— (protect) us from reproach.
Let the smoke-enwrapped (oblation) come entirely to you, to the fold  (of the gods); and let thousandfold desirable wealth (come) entirely.
## 10
Shine on us these things that bring good fortune, Agni. We would  acquire a resolve based on good perception.
Let all these things be for the praise singers and the chanter. – Do you  protect us always with your blessings.