+++
title = "006"

+++
6 (522)
Agni Vaiśvānara
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
In its first verse this poem implicitly connects Agni with Varuṇa and Indra. In 1ab  Agni is called a “universal king and lord” to be honored “by the settlements.” This  description recalls Varuṇa and his rule over settled communities. Then in the second  hemistich Agni’s acts are explicitly compared to the heroic deeds of Indra during  war. The description of Agni as the “breaker”—if that is the meaning of dārú in  1d—is appropriate to him: in X.69.3d the poet asks of Agni sá vā́jaṃ darṣi “Break  out victory’s prize.” But the word also anticipates puraṃdará “breaker of strong
holds” in 2c, here an epithet of Agni but normally one of Indra. In 2cd the two  gods, Indra and Varuṇa, are combined in Agni through the description of him as  puraṃdará and through reference to his vratá “commandment,” a term that is con ceptually and etymologically connected to Varuṇa. But then in verse 3 Agni takes  on the persona of Indra more exclusively as one who pursues the Paṇis, who are the  great enemies of Indra in his destruction of the Vala cave. The reference to Agni as  the one who brings the dawn in verses 4–5 is appropriate to the fire of the morning  sacrifice, but it also continues the reference to the Vala story, telling of the release  of the dawns. In verse 5cd Nahuṣ is the ancestor of the Nahuṣa, a tribe of whom  Agni takes possession. In I.31.11 Agni is the clanlord of the Nahuṣa, but it is still  not clear why they are mentioned here, although doing so does bring Agni’s action  down to earth and perhaps into the present. The last two verses give Agni posses
sion of the whole earth, including the goods and peoples on it.
## 1
(I proclaim) the praise of the universal king and lord, of the man to be  celebrated by the settlements.
Extolling the deeds of the mighty one—I extol the breaker—I proclaim  them like those of Indra.
## 2
They urge on the poet and beacon (of the sacrifice), the wellspring and  light beam from the stone, the luck and rule of the two world-halves. By my songs, I seek to gain the ancient and great commandments of  Agni the breaker of strongholds.
## 3
Down with those of no intelligence, those tying in knots, those of  disdainful words: the Paṇis, not giving hospitality, not giving strength,  not giving sacrifices. Onward and onward Agni has pursued those Dasyus. The first has made  the last to be without sacrifices.
## 4
The best of men, who by his powers has put those (Dawns) in the east,  though they were finding joy in the western darkness—
I shall sing to that Agni, master of the good, the one unable to be bent,  who subdues those doing battle.
## 5
Who bent the ramparts by his deadly weapons, who made the Dawns to  have our compatriot [=Agni] as their husband,
he, the young Agni, having halted the (clans) of Nahuṣ, made (those)  clans give tribute through his powers.
## 6
Under whose protection all the peoples approach in their separate ways,  asking for his favor,
Agni Vaiśvānara has sat here in the lap of the two world-halves, of his  parents, according to his wish.
## 7
The god Vaiśvānara has taken the goods on the land for his own at the  rising of the sun.
From the lower sea and from the higher one, from heaven and from  earth, Agni has taken them.