+++
title = "007"

+++
7 (523) Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet invokes the powerful Agni—the god who acts with strength (sahasānám) in  the first verse and is summoned as the “son of strength” (sūno sahasaḥ) in the last.  Within this recursive frame the poet follows the descent of Agni from the heaven onto  the earth. In 1d Agni runs at “a measured pace” and is found “among the gods in his  own person,” that is, in the form of the burning sun. He is then invited to journey to  earth (vs. 2) and to the sacrificial place as a participant in the rite (vs. 3). Still, Agni  remains simultaneously earthly and heavenly. His “two mothers” or “mother and  father” in 3c are Earth and Heaven, but they can also be the two fire-churning sticks,  the aráṇī̆. In verse 4 Agni’s birth is set squarely on earth and at the sacrifice, where he  assumes his role as chief priest of the rite (vss. 4–5). Verse 6 presents an interesting  problem since it is not clear who is spoken about. In our view the subject is most likely  the gods, to whom the poet now returns at the end of the hymn, thus balancing the  reference to them in verses 1–2. But pādas a and cd can also describe the patrons of  the sacrifice and b can parenthetically refer to the priests, as Geldner suggests. This  ambiguity is likely intentional, allowing a double reference to gods and humans.
## 1
For you I shall urge on Agni like a prizewinning horse, the very god  acting with strength, by my homage:

“Become for us the knowing messenger of the rite!” Running with
measured pace, he has been found among the gods in his own person. 2. Journey here along your own paths, o Agni, as the delighting one who  takes pleasure in companionship with the gods;
(journey) here along the back of the earth, bellowing with outbursts,  burning everything, burning the wood at will with your jaws.
## 3
The sacrifice is turned eastward, for the ritual grass is rightly laid. Agni is  pleased, invoked like a Hotar,
being summoned here to the two mothers [=Earth and Heaven] who  fulfill all desires, from whom, o youngest one, you have been born as  the very kind one.
## 4
At once the discerning descendants of Manu gave birth in the rite to the  charioteer who is theirs.
As their clanlord, he has been placed in the home of the clans—he the  delighting Agni of honeyed speech, possessing the truth.
## 5
Having come here, the chosen conveyor (of oblations) has been seated at  the seat of men—Agni, the ritual formulator and distributor,
whom Heaven and Earth have made strong, the one fulfilling all desires,  to whom the Hotar sacrifices.
## 6
These surpass everything through their heavenly brilliance—the manly  ones who fashioned the solemn utterance and its desirable reward,
who, heeding them, extend the clans and who will reflect upon this,
my truth.
## 7
And now we Vasiṣṭhas beseech you, the master of good things, o Agni,  son of strength.
You have obtained refreshment for the singers of praise and for our  generous (patrons). – Do you protect us always with your blessings.