+++
title = "008"

+++
8 (524)
Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
Commenting on verse 4, Proferes (2007: 37) rightly says that this Agni, the fire of  the Bharatas, is linked to the military power of the tribe, and it is he, not the king  or the warriors, who is credited for the victory over the enemy tribe of the Pūrus.  There are hints of the extent of Agni’s power to repel the Pūrus in the repetition  of ví “afar” in verses 2, 3, and 4. Likewise, the poet describes how Agni, the son  of strength (vs. 7), becomes mighty (vs. 2) and makes his body strong (vs. 5). In an  interesting twist, Agni’s bodily strength, which is marked by his brightness, will  drive human bodily illness into darkness (vs. 6). 1. Our compatriot king is kindled by our homage, upon whose face ghee is  offered.
Our men urgently summon him with oblations. Here, at the head of the  dawns, Agni has been set ablaze.
## 02
And here has this very great one been found—the delighting Hotar, the  young Agni of Manu.
Let loose, he has spread afar his radiance upon the earth. Whose
wheel-rim is black, he has grown mighty by the plants.
## 03
In what way, Agni, will you shine our intricate hymn afar, and what  self-resolve will you put into action when you are proclaimed?
When would we become lords and winners of hard-gained wealth that  brings success, o very generous one?
## 04
Farther and farther is this Agni of Bharata famed when his lofty  radiance gleams afar like the sun.
He who dominated the Pūru in battles blazes as our glowing,
godly guest.
## 05
There will surely be many offerings poured in you, and you will become  benevolent in all your faces.
Though praised, o Agni, you are (already) renowned, as you are being  sung. By yourself make your own body strong, o well-born one.
## 06
Here is our speech: winning hundreds along with thousands, it should be  born doubly lofty for Agni,
so that he, the smasher of demons, will become for his praisers and
his friend [=the singer] brilliant good luck that chases sickness into
hiding.
## 07
And now we Vasiṣṭhas beseech you, the master of good things, o Agni,  son of strength.
You have obtained refreshment for the praisers and our generous
(patrons). – Do you protect us always with your blessings.