+++
title = "009"

+++
9 (525)
Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
The appearance of Agni as the fire of the morning sacrifice and also as the sun  marks the beginning of the sacrifice, and it is he who establishes the two signs of  the sacrifice: the oblations given to the gods and the wealth received in return by  humans (vs. 1). The exchange between sacrificers and gods is reasserted at the end  of the penultimate verse (vs. 5cd), which urges Agni to sacrifice to the gods in order  that they will benefit humans. The theme of exchange is continued in verse 2a, since894 VII.9
Agni’s “strong resolve” is to sacrifice, and as a result of this resolve he opens the  pens of the Paṇis and, as in the Vala story, lets loose cattle, symbols of both wealth  and the dawns. In the latter part of this verse the function of Agni in promoting  the exchange between gods and sacrificers is suggested by word play that turns on  the ambiguity of arká, which can mean either “chant” or “flame,” and of the com
pound purubhójas, either “bringing sustenance” or “consuming sustenance.” That  is, Agni purifies either the chant that creates food for humans or the flames that  consume it on behalf of the gods.
In 3ab, in a different kind of word play, Agni bears the names of three gods, all  of whom, like Agni, have roles in carrying out the ritual: Aditi is the embodiment of  the “Guiltlessness” of one who performs the rite correctly, Vivasvant is the first sac rificer (as Geldner notes), and Mitra is the deity of the sacrificial alliance between  gods and humans. The name Vivasvant may also carry its appellative significance  “shining forth,” which would also fit the fire. In 3cd Agni is brought into connection  with two groups of goddesses, who are complicit in the birth of Agni: the Dawns,  with whom he appears in the early morning, and the Waters, who give birth to Agni  and place him in the “fruitful” plants, from which the fire emerges. There is a final  word play in verse 6c, where puruṇīthā́...jarasva can mean that, as a god, Agni  should awaken to the musical modes of the ritual chants or, as a priest, should sing  musical modes through the sounds of the fire. There is even battle imagery in the  latter part of the hymn: in verse 4 Agni enters the “melee” and in verse 5 with Agni’s  help Vasiṣṭha destroys the Jarūtha, probably a demonized enemy who is part of the  Vasiṣṭha family lore. In that context, puruṇīthā́ could also have a secondary refer ence to warriors’ strategems by which wealth is won.
## 01
The lover of the Dawns has awakened from their lap, the delighting  Hotar, the best of sage poets, the pure one.
He sets in place the beacon for both races: the oblations among the gods  and wealth among the good ritual performers.
## 02
He of strong resolve, who (opens) up the doors of the Paṇis as he purifies  the chant that brings much sustenance for us,
he, the delighting Hotar and the housemaster of the clans, has become  visible, across the darkness of the nights.
## 03
The sage poet who is never misled—Aditi and Vivasvant, Mitra of good  fellowship and our kind guest—
with shimmering radiance, he radiates at the head of the Dawns. The  infant of the Waters has entered the fruitful ones.
## 04
The one to be invoked by you among the generations of Manu, entering  the melee, Jātavedas blazed.
He who radiates forth with a radiance beautiful to see—cows awaken in  response to him as he is kindled.
## 05
O Agni, travel on your mission toward the gods—intend us no harm!— along with the band that creates poetic formulations. Sacrifice to Sarasvatī, to the Maruts, to the Aśvins, and to the Waters,  and to all the gods so that they grant wealth.
## 06
Kindling you, o Agni, Vasiṣṭha smashed Jarūtha. Sacrifice to Plenitude  for riches.
Jātavedas, awaken to many modes. – Do you protect us always with your  blessings.