+++
title = "010"

+++
10 (526)
Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet is particularly fond of alliteration and assonance, which he uses exten sively in the hymn. The first words of the first verse uṣó ná jāráḥ echo its last  uśatī́r ajīgaḥ, and throughout the verse the poet pairs initial sounds: pr̥thú pā́jaḥ,  dávidyutad dī́dyat, and bhāti bhāṣā́, in what may be a sonic representation of the  flickering fire repeatedly flaming. In verses 2 and 3 he strings sets of three repeti tions: dravád dūtó devayā́vā (2d) and susaṃdŕ̥śaṃ suprátīkaṃ sváñcam (3c). He then  returns to pairs in verse 4: rudráṃ rudrébhiḥ, ādityébhir áditim. These repetitions  abruptly stop at the last verse, which states matter-of-factly the principal theme of  the hymn first enunciated at verse 2: Agni brings offerings to the gods in heaven and  wealth to mortals on earth. There is a variation on this theme in verse 4, in which  Agni not only conveys oblations to the gods (as in vs. 3), but also conveys the gods  to earth at the sacrificial place.
## 1
Like the lover of Dawn, flaring, shining, and blazing, he has held up his  broad face.
The bull, the blazing fallow bay, radiates with his radiance. Urging on  our eager insights, he has awakened them.
## 2
Like the sun, at the dawning of the Dawns he has shone, stretching forth  the sacrifice, like fire-priests their thought.
Distinguishing the kinds (of gods and mortals), the god Agni (comes)  here at a run as a messenger, seeking the gods and best bringing gain  (to mortals).
## 3
Our songs and thoughts, serving the gods, come to Agni, seeking a share  in wealth,
to him of lovely appearance, of lovely face, and of lovely look, to him  conveying oblations as the spoked wheel of the descendants of Manu. 4. O Agni, convey Indra to us along with the Vasus, lofty Rudra along with  the Rudras,
Aditi belonging to all peoples along with the Ādityas, and Br̥haspati  granting all wishes along with the reciters of verses.

## 5
The fire-priests invoke him, the delighting Hotar, the youngest one; the  clans invoke Agni at the rites,
for he has become the protector of riches on earth and the unwearying  messenger to bring sacrifice to the gods.