+++
title = "011"

+++
11 (527)
Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The keywords in this hymn are ā́ “hither” and ihá “here.” The poet asks that Agni  come “hither” (vs. 1c) to sacrifice “here” (vss. 1d, 3c). And not only should Agni  come, but he should also bring the gods “hither” (vs. 5a) to enjoy the sacrifice  “here” (vs. 5b). The last pāda—excluding the Vasiṣṭha signature pāda—presents an  interesting twist, for the poet asks that this sacrifice, the sacrifice that is at this place  on earth, that is here where he has asked Agni to come and here where he is to bring  the gods, be placed “in heaven among the gods” (vs. 5c). At the end, therefore, what  is present and local should become celestial and divine.
Verse 3 of this hymn presents an additional puzzle. What does it mean when  it says that good things become visible in Agni “three times at night”? Following  Sāyaṇa, Geldner argues that “night” here means the whole day, and therefore the  reference is to the three soma-pressings. Recognizing the difficulty of this interpre
tation, Oldenberg wonders whether there might be a reference here to an Atirātra or  “overnight” rite. We agree and think that the reference here is to the rites that take  place at night. But what rites these are or why “good things” are visible in the fire  during them remains unclear.
## 1
You are the great sign of the rite; without you the immortals find no  elation.
Travel hither in the same chariot with all the gods. Agni, take your seat  here as the first Hotar.
## 2
Bringing offerings, the descendants of Manu always invoke you, the  nimble one, to act as messenger.
Upon whose sacred grass you sit with the gods, o Agni, for him the days  become bright shining.
## 3
Three times at night, good things become visible within you for the pious  mortal.
As you did for Manu, o Agni, sacrifice here to the gods. Become our  messenger, protecting us from curses.
## 4
Agni is master of the rite reaching aloft; Agni, of every offering that  is made,
for the good (gods) rejoice in his intention, and so the gods established  him as the conveyor of oblations.
## 5
Agni, convey the gods hither to consume the oblations. Let those whose  chief is Indra find elation here.
Place this sacrifice here in heaven among the gods. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.