+++
title = "015"

+++
15 (531) Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
15 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
This hymn divides into five tr̥cas. The first triplet of verses defines Agni as the clan  fire, which lives close to the family and protects it. In the second triplet Agni is  invoked to be present as the fire of the sacrifice. Structurally, the second triplet  replicates the first, since the second two verses in each form a single syntactic unit  that begins with a relative clause and continues with an imperative. This repeated  structure iconically suggests the identity of the clan fire and the sacrificial fire, and  in the third triplet the sacrificial fire and the clan fire are explicitly blended. Agni  represents the clanlord and he receives the sacrificial oblations (vs. 7). Through the  sacrifice Agni provides the clan with “heroes,” the male children who guarantee the  prosperity of the clan. In verse 9, as also in VII.1.14, the ákṣarā refers to both a  syllable—its primary meaning—and a cow that always gives milk. Thus, the “syl lable” of the poets comes with thousands of syllables, and because their speech is  an inexhaustible cow, it brings thousands of cattle.
The fourth tr̥ca takes Agni into the sphere of the minor Ādityas, Savitar, Bhaga,  and the mysterious Diti, who is here the personification of giving embodied in the  sacrificial fire. Geldner suggests that Diti is the female counterpart of Bhaga, but  Diti is as easily male (and we believe more likely so) as female. Diti and Aditi, the  mother of the Ādityas, appear to be in a systematic grammatical relationship, with  the latter being a negated version of the former. But here Diti is not the opposite  of Aditi but seemingly one of her children, since Diti appears alongside other  Ādityas.
If the fourth tr̥ca emphasizes the gifts of the Agni, the last appeals for his power  to protect from bad times and evil people.
## 1
Pour the oblation in his mouth for him to be reverently approached, for  him granting rewards,
who is closest friendship for us.
## 2
Who has sat down in every house, (presiding) over the five peoples— the sage poet and houselord, the youthful one—
## 3
Let him, Agni, guard our household possessions in every direction, and let him protect us from difficult straits.
## 4
Now I give birth to a new praise song for Agni, the falcon of heaven. Will he not win for us what is good?
## 5
Whose glories are eagerly sought to be seen, like the wealth of one rich in  heroes—
(the glories of him) who flames at the beginning of the sacrifice—
## 6
Let him pursue this vaṣaṭ-call. Agni takes pleasure in our songs,
as the best sacrificer, as the conveyor of oblations.

## 7
We would establish you as the brilliant one, o clanlord to be
attained, o god,
as the one having good heroes, o Agni, receiving the poured offering. 8. Shine throughout the nights and dawns. Through you we have
good fires;
seeking us, you have good heroes.
## 9
Our men, inspired poets, come to you with their visions in order to  win gain,
as does their syllable [/their inexhaustible cow] bringing thousands.
## 10
The brightly blazing, immortal Agni wards off demons—
the blazing pure one to be invoked.
## 11
Bring us gifts, being their master, o young (son) of strength,
and let Bhaga give us a desirable reward.
## 12
Agni, you (give) the glory that accompanies heroes. And god Savitar  and Bhaga (give),
and Diti gives a desirable reward to us.
## 13
Agni, guard us from difficult straits. As ever, o god, as the unaging one  burn back those doing harm
with your hottest (fires).
## 14
So then, o you who are unchallengeable, become for us a great metal fortress with a hundred coils to protect our men.
## 15
Guard us from difficult straits and from him wishing evil, o you  dawning in the evening,
by day and at night, o undeceivable one.