+++
title = "016"

+++
16 (532)
Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
12 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
The hymn emphasizes the exchange mediated by Agni, who takes the oblations to  the gods (or brings the gods to the oblations) and who offers sustenance to the sac rificers (see esp. vs. 2cd). Because he thus nourishes both gods and humans, he is the  “child of nourishment” (vs. 1). The poet repeatedly mentions the patron or patrons  of the rite alongside the priests. Agni himself is not only the Hotar, who recites, and  the Potar, who purifies the soma, but also the householder, who is the patron of the  rite (vs. 5). In verse 6 the poet calls on Agni to sharpen not only the priests but also  the one who “praises well” and “is skillful,” a combination of the ability to recite  and the ability to perform the rites. The latter may be a priest, but it might be again  the householder, who is also a participant in the rite and who owns, in a sense, all of  the priestly functions. In verses 7–10 the poet asks Agni to bless generous patrons, who give cattle (vs. 7) and horses along with other gifts (vs. 10). In the final two  verses the poet addresses his fellow priests, urging them to prepare ample offerings  for the gods, but at the end he especially mentions the rewards of wealth and good  men for “the pious man,” who again is likely the householder.
## 01
For you with this homage I summon Agni, the child of nourishment, the dear, most visible circle of spokes that makes the rite good, the
immortal messenger for all.
## 02
He will hitch up his two flame-red (horses) that bring nurture to all. He  will run swiftly, when he receives the well-poured offering.
With its good formulations and with good labor, the sacrifice belongs  to the good (gods), and the divine gift belongs to the peoples.
## 03
Upward has risen the flame belonging to him, the one giving rewards,  when he receives the poured offering;
upward the ruddy smoke, touching heaven: our men kindle Agni.
## 04
We make you our most glorious messenger. Convey the gods here to  pursue (our oblations).
Son of strength, give everything that nourishes mortals; give that which  we beg of you.
## 05
Agni, you are the houselord; you the Hotar in the rite;
you the attentive Potar, o you who grant all wishes—sacrifice and seek  out a desirable reward (for us).
## 06
Create treasure for the sacrificer, o you of good resolve, for you are the  grantor of treasure.
Sharpen us—every priest—upon the truth, and also him who, praising  well, is skillful.
## 07
Agni, let our patrons be dear to you, who receive the well-poured  offering—
they, the generous guides of the peoples, who distribute pens of cattle. 8. Those in whose house Iḷā [/Libation] sits down, with her hands of ghee  and filled to the brim—
save them from deceit and blame, o powerful one. Hold out to us
far-famed protection.
## 09
As the more knowing conveyor, with your delighting tongue and  your mouth
convey wealth to our generous (patrons), Agni, and sweeten our gift of  oblations.
## 10
Who give gifts and rewards of horses with a desire for great fame— rescue them from difficult straits with your rescuers and with your
hundred fortresses, o youngest one.
902 VII.17–18
## 11
The god Wealth-Giver [=Agni] wishes your full outpouring.
Pour it out or fill it up: only then will the god honor you.
## 12
The gods made him, the attentive Hotar of the rite, their conveyor (of  oblations).
Agni grants treasure and an abundance of good heroes to him who
worships, to the pious man.