+++
title = "018"

+++
18 (534) Battle of the Ten Kings: Indra (1–21), Sudās
Paijavana’s Dānastuti (22–25)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
25 verses: triṣṭubh
This very famous hymn, the first in Vasiṣṭha’s Indra cycle, relates, if we can use so  positive a term, the so-called Battle of the Ten Kings, in which King Sudās and his  Bharata followers, with Indra on their side, defeat an alliance of ten kings, which includes their former allies, the Pūrus. The hymn has long been used as a major  source for the reconstruction of R̥gvedic history, perhaps somewhat too credu lously, as the description of the battle is anything but clear and is also clearly full  of puns, derisive word plays, phonological deformations of the names of oppo nents, and other poetic tricks, all couched in slangy language. Since the “historical”  dimension of the hymn has been fully treated elsewhere (see especially Schmidt  1980 and Witzel 1995a), we will not discuss it further here.
The hymn falls into three parts. Verses 1–4 recall the aid that Indra has given us  in the past and ask for his help and gifts now. The poet names himself at the very  end of verse 4, which forms a clever ring with verse 1: the description of Indra in  1d, ... vásu... vániṣṭhaḥ “best gainer of goods,” is condensed into the poet’s own  name in 4d, vás(u)(ván)iṣṭhaḥ → vásiṣṭhaḥ. The language and contents of these first  four verses are well-crafted but unremarkable.
The battle proper and its immediate aftermath occupy verses 5–21; the battle  itself takes place in and around the Paruṣṇī River (see esp. vss. 8–10), whose course  seems to have been diverted during the battle and in which a number of the com batants seem to have drowned. The account, especially the earlier verses, seems to  mirror the confusion and chaos of battle itself (reminiscent on a much smaller scale  of Tolstoy’s great accounts of the unintelligible disorder of battle in War and Peace,  or of Stephen Crane’s in The Red Badge of Courage). The confusion begins to sort  itself out as Indra’s role becomes more prominently featured. It is emphasized sev eral times that the forces of Sudās were outnumbered but that Indra was able to  marshal this overmastered force to defeat their foes (esp. vss. 14, 17). This section  ends with several verses celebrating the victory and Indra’s benevolence (20–21).
The final four verses (22–25) are a dānastuti, praising the extravagant gifts of  Sudās to the poet, ending (vs. 25) by commending Sudās to the protection of the  Maruts.
## 1
Since with you beside (them), o Indra, our fathers, the singers, also won  all things of value—
because in you are the good milking cows, in you the horses—you are the  best gainer of goods for one who serves the gods.
## 2
Because you are simply dwelling peacefully like a king with his wives,  help (us) throughout the days, being preeminent as a wise poet.
O bounteous one, ornament our hymns with cows and horses; whet us,  who are devoted to you, for wealth.
## 3
These gladdening hymns, contending with each other here, seeking the  gods, have reverently approached you.
Let the path of your wealth lead our way. Might we be in your good  thought, Indra, in your shelter.
## 4
Wishing to milk you like a milk-cow in good pasture, I, Vasiṣṭha, have  dispatched sacred formulations to you.
Everyone says that you alone are my herdsman. Let Indra come to our  good thought.904 VII.18
## 5
Even the floods that had spread out—Indra made them into fords easy  to cross for Sudās.
Śimyu, who was vaunting himself above our newer speech—he [=Indra]  made him into the flotsam of the rivers and his taunts (too).
## 6
Turvaśa Yakṣu (the “sacrificer”) was himself the offering cake—also the  Matsyas [“fish”], whetted down (in their quest) for wealth, like fish  in water.
The Bhr̥gus and the Druhyus (just) followed orders. (Former) comrade  crossed (former) comrade on the two opposing (sides).
## 7
The Pakthas [“cooked oblations”?] and the Bhalānases [“raiders”?]  spoke out, and the Alinas, the Viṣānins, and the Śivas:
“The feasting companion of the Ārya [=Indra?], who led (us?) hither— with desire for cattle for the Tr̥tsus he has gone with battle against  superior men [=us].”
## 8
The ill-intentioned ones without insight, causing Aditi to abort,  diverted (the course of) the (river) Paruṣṇī.
With his greatness he [=Indra? Turvaśa?] enveloped the earth, being  master (of it). The poet lay there, being perceived as (just) a
(sacrificial) animal.
## 9
They came to the Paruṣṇī, to a failed end as if to their (real) goal. Not  even the swift one made it home for supper.
Indra made those without alliance (to us) subject to Sudās, those,  easy to thrust away, who, (though) in Manu’s (race), were of gelded  speech.
## 10
They went like cows without a cowherd from a pasture, (though)  seeming (to go) to an alliance properly concluded—
the Pr̥śnigus, propelled down to the dappled one [/P(a)r(u)ṣṇī]. The  teams and the battlers [?] followed orders.
## 11
He who as king with desire for fame has strewn down the one and  twenty peoples of the two Vaikarṇas,
just as a wonder-worker “whets down” the ritual grass on the seat. The  champion Indra made a gush of them.
## 12
Then famous old Kavaṣa he wrenched down into the waters, and *Anu  and Druhyu—he with the mace in his arms.
The ones devoted to you, who cheered you on, (were) choosing there  your partnership for their partnership.
## 13
In an instant Indra split open all their fortified places, their seven  strongholds, with his might.
He shared out the patrimony of the descendant of Anu to Tr̥tsu. We  defeated the Pūru of scornful speech at the rite of distribution.
## 14
The cow-seeking Anu and Druhyu people fell down to sleep—sixty  hundred, six thousand (of them).
(But on the other side there were just) sixty heroes with six on top, in  search of (Indra’s) favor. All these are the manly deeds of Indra. 15. These Tr̥tsus, constantly laboring alongside Indra, ran like waters  released downward.
The ill-allied ones, meting (their supplies) out with a miser’s eye, (yet)  left behind all their goodies for Sudās.
## 16
The (mere) half a hero, who drinks the cooked oblation without Indra,  who vaunts himself, did he thrust away to the ground.
Indra confounded the battle fury of the one who confounds the battle  fury (of others). He took to the course of the path, being master of it. 17. Even with a feeble thing he performed this unique (deed): he smote even  the lioness with a wether.
Indra hewed down the poles with a pin. He handed over all the goodies  to Sudās.
## 18
“Because one after the other, the rivals become subject to you, procure  the subjugation even of vaunting Bheda.
Who(ever) commits an offense against mortals who praise, smash your  sharp mace down on him, o Indra.”
## 19
The Yamunā (River) helped Indra, as did the Tr̥tsus. He despoiled  Bheda there entirely,
and the Ajas, Śighras, and the Yakṣus brought horses’s heads as tribute. 20. Neither your favors nor your riches, o Indra, can be entirely surveyed,  through the previous dawns, nor through the current ones.
You smote even the one who fancied himself a little god. You cut down  Śambara from the lofty (mountain) by yourself.
## 21
Those from (this?) house who reached elation in devotion to you— Parāśara, Śatayātu, Vasiṣṭha—
they did not neglect their partnership with you, who provided for
(them). So now day-bright (dawns) will dawn forth for the patrons.
## 22
Two hundred (head) of cattle from the descendant of Devavant, two  chariots carrying brides from Sudās—
deserving the gift of Paijavana, o Agni, I circle around (it), like a Hotar  the seat (of the sacrificial victim), as I “rasp” [=sing].
## 23
The four gift(-horse)s of Paijavana, along with their allotted (gear),  covered with pearls, (convey) me exclusively.
The silvery ones of Sudās who tread the earth convey me and my
progeny, for my progeny to be famed.
## 24
He whose fame the Apportioner has apportioned to every head between  the two wide world-halves,
they hymn (him) just as the seven streams do Indra. He “whetted
down” Yudhyāmadhi at the moment of encounter.
## 25
You superior men, you Maruts, accompany this (man) here, like  Divodāsa, the father of Sudās.
Give aid to the aspiration of Paijavana—lordly power difficult to attain  and unaging—(as he) seeks (your) favor.
