+++
title = "019"

+++
19 (535)
Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The first half of this hymn (vss. 1–5) celebrates various victories of Indra, giving  aid both to men of the mythic past (e.g., Kutsa, vs. 2) and those of the present,  especially King Sudās (vss. 3, also 6), the leader also in the Battle of the Ten Kings  treated in the preceding, well-known hymn (VII.18). The allegiances and enmities  of that hymn are strikingly different here: for example, Indra helps the Pūru king in  this hymn (vs. 3), whereas in VII.18 the Pūrus are the enemy.
Beginning with verse 6 we attempt to mobilize the powers and protection that  Indra has previously provided for us, and as usual we offer praise in return.
## 1
Who, like a fearsome sharp-horned bull, alone rouses forth all the  communities;
(you) who hold forth to the better (soma-)presser the patrimony and  possessions of each and every impious man—
## 2
Just you, o Indra, helped Kutsa, while seeking fame for yourself with  your own body in the clash,
when for him you weakened the Dāsa Śuṣṇa bringing bad harvest, doing  your best for Arjuna’s offspring.
## 3
You, o bold one, boldly helped on Sudās, whose oblation is worth  pursuing, with all forms of help;
you helped on Trasadasyu, son of Purukutsa, and Pūru in the winning  of land, in the smashing of obstacles.
## 4
You—whose mind is inclined toward men in their pursuit of the gods— along with men you smash many obstacles, you of the fallow bays;
you put to sleep the Dasyu Cumuri and Dhuni, easy to smash, for
Dabhīti.
## 5
Yours are these exploits, you with the mace in hand—that nine and  ninety fortifications at once
along with the hundredth you worked to the end, in bringing them
to rest [=collapse]. You smashed Vr̥tra, and moreover Namuci you
smashed.
## 6
Win these delights of yours, Indra, for the pious Sudās, who has given an  oblation.
For you, the bull, I yoke the two bullish fallow bays. Let my sacred
formulations pursue the prize, o you of many talents.
## 7
(Being) within this enclosure of yours here, may we not be (available) to  be delivered to evil, o mighty possessor of the fallow bays.
Protect us with defenses that keep the wolf away. May we be your dear  ones, and dear to our patrons. 8. Dear indeed to you, o bounteous one, may we men rejoice in your  charge, in your protection, as your comrades.
Grind down Turvaśa, down Yādva, intending to do (a deed) worthy to  be proclaimed for Atithigva.
## 9
Even now, all at once, o bounteous one, those in your charge, the men,  the hymn-proclaimers, are proclaiming hymns,
they who by their invocations of you have distanced the niggards
through ritual service. Choose us for this same yoking [=ritual
companionship].
## 10
These praises are for you, o most manly of men. Those granting  bounties, inclined toward us—
o Indra, become kindly disposed to them at the obstacle-smashing, as a  champion who is both comrade and helper of men.
## 11
Now, o champion Indra, being praised by reason of your help, aroused  by sacred formulations, become strengthened in your own body.
Measure out prizes to us, measure out beings [=people]. – Do you
protect us always with your blessings.