+++
title = "020"

+++
20 (536)
Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
10 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins (vss. 1–2) by implicitly contrasting Indra’s history, in the odd  pādas, with his current activity in the even ones. It continues with praise especially  of Indra’s martial powers (vss. 3–5). Verse 5 takes up the theme of Indra’s birth,  found in the first pāda of the hymn, but it is not entirely clear who the father and  mother are. In our opinion this is only a metaphorical reference to birth: Indra’s  vivification at the soma sacrifice, with the bull-father actually soma, referred to in  the immediately preceding pāda (4d). The identification of the mother is more dif
ficult in this interpretation: it could be a reference to the cow whose milk is mixed  with soma. A non-ritual reading of the verse is also possible, with the father and  mother the unnamed parents of Indra referred to elsewhere in the R̥gveda.
The second half of the hymn (vss. 6–10) describes the usual reciprocal relation  between worshiper and god:  anyone who gives the appropriate ritual devotion to  Indra will be appropriately rewarded (see esp. vss. 6, 8). Yet the poet is not entirely  sure Indra is doing his part, and in verse 7 he rather saucily (and even slangily) con
trasts the proper patron–client behavior among humans with Indra’s failure to come  through. The poet also treats himself somewhat mockingly: in verse 9 he compares his  praise first to a bellowing bull and then—in our view (the relevant word is a disputed  hapax)—to another animal with a wailing or screeching cry, perhaps a monkey. But  these light moments give way to the usual pleas for benefits at the end of the hymn.

## 1
He was born strong for heroic activity, autonomous—doing the work  that a manly one will do.
(Even as) a youth coming to the (ritual) session of men with his help— Indra is our rescuer from transgression, even if it is great.
## 2
The smasher of Vr̥tra, Indra, swollen with strength—the hero has now  aided the singer with help.
The maker of wide space for Sudās [/the good giver], certainly
that too!—in an instant he has become the giver of goods to the  pious man.
## 3
An unassailable battler, creating tumult, combat-hardened—a  champion, conquering entirely, unconquerable even at his birth— Indra of great strength dispersed the battle arrays; then he smashed  everyone who played the rival.
## 4
You have filled even the two world-halves with your greatness, Indra,  with your powers, powerful one.
Indra of the fallow bays, holding fast to his mace, is accustomed to the  exhilarating drinks along with the stalk.
## 5
The bull begat the bull for battle; that manly one did a woman bear. He who as leader of the army stands out from the (other) superior men,  a powerful warrior, he is the daring seeker of cattle.
## 6
Never will that person be injured, nor be harmed, who seeks to win his  [=Indra’s] terrible mind.
Whoever with sacrifices will place his friendship in Indra, he will rule  over wealth as protector of truth, born in truth.
## 7
When, o Indra, a predecessor will be doing his best for his successor  and a more important man will embark on giving to a lesser one, should the immortal be the only one sitting it out far away? Bright one,  bring bright wealth here to us.
## 8
The person dear to you who will perform ritual service for you, he will  be your comrade exclusively, o possessor of the stone.
Most pleasing to you, may we be in this benevolence of yours, in your  defense, in your protection for men, (so that) you will not smite (us). 9. This praise has bellowed (like) a bull to you, and (like) a thieving [?] (monkey?) has screeched, o bounteous one.
Desire for wealth has come over your singer. You alone, powerful one,  hold power over goods for us.
## 10
So, Indra, position us for the refreshment offered by you—and also  position those bounteous ones who themselves incite (us).
Let there be goodly skill for your singer. – Do you protect us always  with your blessings. 
