+++
title = "021"

+++
21 (537)
Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
10 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins with two verses establishing the sacrificial context, the second of  which describes the pressing stones as enthusiastic participants in the ritual. The  remaining verses celebrate Indra’s deeds and powers and beg him to display these  powers for our benefit. Verses 3 and 4 treat previous deeds, verses 6–7 primarily his  incomparable power.
The most striking verse is 5, the middle verse (vs. 10 being a refrain and thus  extra-hymnic). Here various threats to the “truth” of our people are rendered help less by our resistance and Indra’s power: threats internal to the community, namely  sorcerers and flatterers, and the “stranger” (an Ārya but an enemy), people who  deviate from our ways, and phallus-worshipers (presumably non-Āryas) outside it.
The final two verses before the refrain (8–9) recognize Indra’s help in the past  and request it for the future.
## 01
It has been pressed—the divine stalk, foamy with cows [=milk]. Indra is  accustomed to it even from birth.
We take heed of you with sacrifices, you of the fallow bays. Take heed of  our praise amid the exhilarating drinks from the stalk.
## 02
They go forth to the sacrifice, they make the ritual grass tremble—(the  pressing stones) exhilarated on soma at the ceremony, possessing
headstrong speech.
The glorious ones are carried down from their handler—the bulls whose  trampling (is heard) in the distance, the companions of the superior  man [=Indra].
## 03
You, Indra, have made the waters flow, the many waters hemmed around  by the serpent, o hero.
The nourishing streams have twisted away from you like charioteers  (maneuvering). All the finely made (fortifications) tremble with fear. 4. Fearsome, with their [=pressing stones’] weapons [=soma drinks] he  toiled at all manly labors, the knowing one.
Indra, bristling with excitement, shook apart the fortifications. With  mace in hand, he smashed them apart with his greatness.
## 05
Sorcerers do not incite us, Indra, nor sycophants with their knowing  wiles, o most powerful one.
He [=Indra?] will vaunt himself over the stranger, over the race contrary  (to our ways). Let the phallus-worshipers not penetrate our truth.
## 06
Be superior through your will, Indra, on the earth. The realms do not  contain your greatness.
Since with your own vast power you smashed Vr̥tra, no rival will find the  end (of it) in battle with you.

## 07
Even the gods, the ancient ones, measured their strengths (as inferior)  to your lordship, your dominion.
Indra, having conquered, distributes bounties. It is Indra whom (men)  keep calling to in the winning of victory’s prize.
## 08
For even the weakling has called upon you for help, o Indra, who have  control over much good fortune.
O you of a hundred forms of help, you have become a help to us, and  you have become the defender of a man who, like you, distributes
portions.
## 09
May we always be your comrades, Indra, increasing our homage  because of your greatness, surpassing one.
With your help in the encounter, may they combat the attack of the  stranger, the powers of the rapacious ones.
## 10
So, Indra, position us for the refreshment offered by you—and also  position those bounteous ones who themselves incite (us).
Let there be goodly skill for your singer. – Do you protect us always  with your blessings.