+++
title = "022"

+++
22 (538)
Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
9 verses: virāj 1–8, triṣṭubh 9
The focus of this hymn is entirely ritual: Indra is invited to drink the soma and to  listen to the hymns of the poet, Vasiṣṭha, who in the 1st person names himself in  verse 3 and calls attention to his devotion in verses 5 and 7. He acknowledges that  there are competing rituals designed for Indra (vss. 6–7) and also acknowledges  that no ritual activities and no hymns of men can quite measure up to the worth  of Indra (vss. 8–9). Indeed, in this case Vasiṣṭha’s modesty seems justified: though  the hymn is pleasingly phrased, it hardly counts as one of the pinnacles of R̥gvedic  praise poetry.
## 1
Drink soma, Indra. Let it exhilarate you—(the soma) that the stone has  pressed for you, you of the fallow bays,
(the stone) like a steed well guided by the arms of the presser.
## 2
The dear exhilarating drink that exists to be yoked by you, with which  you smash obstacles, you of the fallow bays,
let that one exhilarate you, Indra of preeminent goods.
## 3
Take heed of this speech of mine, o bounteous one, which Vasiṣṭha  chants to you as an encomium;
enjoy these sacred formulations at the (time of) joint revelry.
## 4
Hear the call of the (pressing) stone as it drinks out (the sap); take heed  of the inspired thought of the poet as he chants. Make these gestures of friendship most intimately your own here (at the  pressing).
## 5
I, a knowing (man), do not neglect the hymns for you, the surpassing  one, nor the good praise of your lordship:
always I keep pronouncing your name, self-glorious one.
## 6
Since there are many pressings for you among the sons of Manu, many  times does a man of inspired thought call on you alone.
Don’t make a long delay at a distance from us, bounteous one.
## 7
For you alone are all these pressings, o champion; for you I make  strengthening sacred formulations.
You are to be invoked by men at all times.
## 8
Never do they (quite) reach up to the greatness of you, o wondrous  strong one, (so great as) you are considered to be—
nor to your heroism, Indra, nor to your generosity—
## 9
Neither the older seers nor the new ones, the inspired poets, who have  created sacred formulations, Indra.
Let there be friendly fellowship of you for us. – Do you protect us always  with your blessings.