+++
title = "023"

+++
23 (539)
Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins with Vasiṣṭha’s self-address, exhorting himself to praise Indra,  and it ends (vs. 6) with a verse summarizing the hymn, in which the plural Vasiṣṭhas  chant to Indra. The first two verses seem to establish the context as a verbal contest  between competing poets, although this context is not prominent in the rest of the  hymn. The dominating theme is simply the soma sacrifice (soma drinks, vs. 5) and  especially the accompanying verbal offerings (vss. 1–4). Praise of Indra’s great  deeds and powers is limited to a single pāda in the first verse (1c) and the second  half of verse 3. Even this latter provides a transition to the ritual: 3d seems to refer  to the Vr̥tra myth, and 4a might be taken as expressing the aftermath of the Vr̥tra slaying, namely the release of the waters. But we consider its primary reference to  be the waters used to swell the soma stalks before pressing; “swell” is regularly used  of fertile, milking cows, but here the paradox is that the waters swell as if with milk  although they are not themselves fertile.
Noteworthy is the second half of verse 2, a variant of the usual plea to the  gods to extend our lifetime for a hundred years. Here we ask that we be carried  across the various dangers to long life, though we do not know the lifetime we will  have. Otherwise, Indra receives the standard requests to distribute wealth to us  (vss. 4–6).

## 01
The sacred formulations have risen up, seeking fame. Magnify Indra at  the encounter, o Vasiṣṭha.
He who stretches over all with his vast power will hearken to the words  of such as me.
## 02
The cry that is the gods’ kinsman has been offered, Indra, as the rich  spoils were put in order at the verbal contest.
Because (the length of) their own lifetime is not perceptible to people,  carry us across just these straits.
## 03
The sacred formulations have approached the one who has enjoyed (them),  (for him) to yoke the cow-seeking chariot with his two fallow bays.
This Indra thrust apart the two world-halves with his greatness, after he  smashed the unopposable obstacles.
## 04
Even the waters swell, (though) barren like barren cows. The singers  attain the truth [=a true hymn] for you.
Drive to our teams [=hymns] like the Wind, for you distribute the prizes  along with visionary thoughts.
## 05
Let these exhilarating drinks make you exhilarated, o Indra, the
tempestuous one, powerfully generous to the singer,
for alone among the gods you distribute to mortals. At this pressing, o  champion, make yourself exhilarated.
## 06
In this way, just to Indra the bull with the mace in his arm do the  Vasiṣṭhas chant with chants.
Let him, praised, establish (wealth) consisting of men and of cows for  us. – Do you protect us always with your blessings.