+++
title = "024"

+++
24 (540)
Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
Entirely an invitation to the sacrifice, this hymn conforms to the “journey” model,  with repeated exhortations to Indra to “drive here,” declarations that the sacrifice  has been prepared, and, especially in the final verse (6), hopes for reciprocal benefits  given by a satisfied Indra.
## 01
A womb has been made for you, Indra, on the seat (of the sacrifice).  Drive forth to it along with your men, much-invoked one,
so that you will be a helper for us and for our strengthening, and you will  give goods and will reach exhilaration through the soma drinks.
## 02
Your doubly lofty mind has been captured, Indra; the soma has been  pressed, the honeyed (drinks) poured.
With the milk-streams released, the well-turned (hymn) is borne
(forth)—this inspired thought constantly invoking Indra. 3. Drive here to us from heaven, here from earth, you of the silvery drink,  to this ritual grass to drink the soma.
Let the fallow bays convey you, the powerful one, turned toward me, to  the song, to reach exhilaration.
## 04
Drive here to us, along with all your forms of help, o possessor of the  fallow bays, taking pleasure in the sacred formulation,
twisting and turning (on your route) with your stalwart (horses), you of  good lips, providing to us your bullish impetuous force.
## 05
This praise is to convey the great, strong (Indra); it has been placed like a  prize-seeking steed at the chariot-pole.
Indra, this chant reverently invokes you for goods. Set your hearing in us  (as you set) heaven upon heaven.
## 06
Just so, Indra, give to us of what is choice. May we continually procure  your great benevolence.
Swell nourishment rich in heroes for the bounteous ones [=patrons].  – Do you protect us always with your blessings.