+++
title = "025"

+++
25 (541)
Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
King Sudās, the leader in the Battle of the Ten Kings (VII.18), appears here in verse  3, and the context is once again that of war and hostility. In sometimes vivid lan guage we beg Indra to support our side in the conflict and to destroy our enemies.
## 01
(Be) here with your help, o great strong Indra, when armies equal in  battle fury clash together
and the missile in the arms of a manly one will fly. Let your mind not  roam widely in other directions.
## 02
Indra, jab the foes down into a place of no exit—the mortals who  plague us.
Put the “laud” of the one intending scorn in the distance. Bring here to  us an assemblage of goods.
## 03
Let there be a hundred forms of your help for Sudās, you of the (lovely)  lips, a thousand your lauds and giving.
Smash the weapon of the rapacious mortal. Set brilliance and treasure  upon us.
## 04
Because I am within (the sphere of) the will of one like you, o Indra;  within (the sphere of) the giving of a helper like you, o champion,
for all your days, o powerful strong one, make a home for yourself
(here), o you of the fallow bays. Do not neglect (us).914 VII.26
## 05
The Kutsas are those (who chant) a fortifying (hymn) to the one of the  fallow bays, begging for the god-sped might in Indra.
Make the obstacles utterly easy to smash, o champion. May we,
victorious, win spoils.
## 06
Just so, Indra, give to us of what is choice. May we continually procure  your great benevolence.
Swell nourishment rich in heroes for the bounteous ones [=patrons].  – Do you protect us always with your blessings.