+++
title = "026"

+++
26 (542) Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This brief hymn displays several competing yet complementary types of structure.  On the one hand, the first two verses respond to each other and establish pressed  soma and hymns as the linked indispensible requisites of the sacrifice to Indra; the  doubly negative formulation of the first half of verse 1 is especially striking. The  last two verses (4–5) also respond to each other, each beginning with evā́ “in just  this way.” These two pairs of verses highlight the excluded verse 3, the middle verse,  as an omphalos, and this verse does contrast with the rest of the hymn in several  ways. It is the only place where Indra’s deeds are spoken of, and it also contains  in its second half a striking simile (the only simile describing Indra in the hymn),  in which the submission of fortresses to Indra is compared to the submission of  cowives to their common husband. Thus verse 3 is in a sense a miniature example of  proper praise-poetry, celebrating a god’s mythic exploits in artful language.
A different structural feature pairs verse 1 with the final verse 5, in opposition  to the three middle verses (2–4). In the first verse the speaker is “I”; in the last (vs.  5) it is Vasiṣṭha, who is doubtless identical with the “I” of verse 1. The middle verses  instead have plural ritual participants:  “those of equal skill” who call on Indra  (vs. 2), ritual adepts (vs. 3), and the unidentified subject of “they speak” in verse  4. These middle verses may refer to the competing invocations of rival sacrificers,  a subject that is something of a preoccupation of this set of Indra hymns (see, e.g.,  VII.22.6, 27.4, 28.1). The fear is always that they will attract Indra to their sacri fice rather than to that of the current speaker. The position of the Vasiṣṭha verses  on both sides of these verses and enclosing them seems implicitly to assert that  Vasiṣṭha’s invocation has been successful. The parallelism of the last two verses,  “just in this way [evá] they speak...” (vs. 4) and “just in this way [evá] Vasiṣṭha  hymns...,” highlights this contrast.
The pleasing contrastive balance of both types of ring structures gives substance  to the poet’s boast in verse 1 that he is composing a “newer hymn that [Indra] will  enjoy.” 1. Soma, unpressed, does not exhilarate Indra, nor do pressings
unaccompanied by sacred formulations (exhilarate) the
bounteous one.
For him I beget a hymn that he will enjoy, a newer manly one, so that he  will listen to us.
## 2
Wherever there is a hymn, soma exhilarates Indra; whenever there is  (ritual) conduct, the pressings (exhilarate) the bounteous one,
when, like sons to their father, those of equal skill [=poets/sacrificers]  call urgently upon him for help.
## 3
He did those (deeds)—he will now do others—which the ritual adepts  proclaim at the pressings.
As a single common husband does his wives, Indra has dragged down all  the strongholds to submission.
## 4
Just in this way they speak of him. And Indra becomes famed as the  single, surpassing apportioner of bounties,
whose many forms of help compete for the lead. His dear auspicious  things will be companions to us.
## 5
Just in this way at the pressing Vasiṣṭha hymns Indra, the bull of the  communities, to help men.
Mete out prizes to us in thousands. – Do you protect us always with your  blessings.