+++
title = "027"

+++
27 (543)
Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is much preoccupied with receiving material goods from Indra. The  words “bounty,” “bounteous,” “largesse,” and so forth are prominent. What would  prompt his giving, namely our praise and sacrifice, is barely, but significantly, men tioned: the first verse opens with the martial context that is common throughout  these Indra hymns in the VIIth Maṇḍala, with men in battle position. In our inter pretation of pāda b, Indra is expected to harness the praise hymns directed to him  by the poets of our side “to be decisive”—that is, the hymns will ensure that Indra  will fight on our side and bring us victory. This concern to have Indra on our side in  battle is echoed in verse 4 with the “coincident call.” This call can refer both to war riors on opposing sides each calling Indra to fight on their own side, as in verse 1,  and also to rival sacrificers each calling Indra to come to their sacrifice, as we have  seen elsewhere in this Indra cycle.
Another important theme in the hymn is confinement, with subtle allusion to the  Vala myth. We ask for a share of the cattle enclosure in 1d and in 2d exhort Indra  to break apart the firmly closed fortresses and uncover what is enclosed there; the

swelling gift-cow in 4cd was previously enclosed (in our opinion; this adjective is  ordinarily ascribed to a different root, and it can be a pun, with the second meaning  “sought after”); and in the final verse (5) we ask Indra to make wide space for our  wealth.
## 1
Indra do men call upon when facing the other side, so that he will hitch  up these insights (of theirs) (to be) decisive.
As champion at the winning of men, taking pleasure in your strength,  give us a share in the enclosure containing cattle.
## 2
The unbridled power that is yours, bounteous Indra, (with it) do your  best for your comrades, your men, o much invoked one.
Because as one who can tell things apart you (take) apart the fastnesses,  o bounteous one, (now) uncover largesse like something confined.
## 3
Indra is king of the moving world, of the settled domains, (and of)  whatever of diverse form exists on the earth.
From this he gives goods to the pious man; he impels largesse nearby,  just when he is praised.
## 4
Never does bounteous Indra, because of (another) call coincident with  ours, hold back from giving spoils along with help to us,
he whose unfailing gift-cow swells, a thing of value for his men, his
comrades, she who was (previously) enclosed.
## 5
Now, Indra, make wide space for our wealth. May we turn your mind  here for bounty,
as we pursue (wealth) in cows, horses, and chariots. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.