+++
title = "028"

+++
28 (544) Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Another hymn in this series concerned with competition between sacrificers. The  first verse exhorts Indra to heed only our call, though others are calling, too, and in  the second verse the phrase “penetrate through” seems to refer to Indra’s ability to  ignore the competitive calls in order to come to ours. The second half of verse 2 and  verse 3 then turn to Indra’s great deeds, but this section is connected to the first by a  word play. Although it cannot be rendered easily in English, both the “vie in invok
ing” of verse 1 and the “penetrate through” in verse 2 contain the preverb ví “apart,  through,” which is in regular opposition to sám “together.” In verse 3 it is said that  Indra “united” the two world-halves, using a verb phrase including the preverb  sám (literally “lead together”). But the cosmogonic deed that is regularly credited  to Indra is rather the separation or pushing apart of the same two world-halves  (for a nearby example see VII.23.3); we contend that here this underlying formula is evoked by its opposite—the audience, familiar with the verbal formulae encap sulating Indra’s great deeds, would understand “lead together [sám]” as “lead apart [ví],” primed by the ví forms found earlier in the hymn. For another example of an  underlying formula appearing on the surface as its opposite, see Jamison (1982/83).
Verse 4 is notable because of the intrusion of Varuṇa into this Indra hymn,  and Varuṇa in his role as observer and judge of the moral behavior of humans.  Varuṇa is the tutelary deity of Vasiṣṭha (see the remarkable series of Varuṇa hymns,  VII.86–89 below), but Varuṇa’s presence is otherwise not found, or expected, in  Indraic context. Since the last verse (5) is a refrain verse, in this Indra hymn Varuṇa  has the last word, as it were. For Mitra and Varuṇa’s parentage of Vasiṣṭha, see  VII.33.10–14.
## 1
Drive up to our sacred formulations, Indra, as knowing one. Let your  yoked fallow bays be turned our way,
for although all mortals vie in invoking you, listen only to us, o
all-impeller.
## 2
Your greatness, Indra, has penetrated through to our call, in that you  protect the sacred formulations of the seers, o powerful one,
when, o strong one, you have taken the mace in your hand. Being terrible  by virtue of your will, you were born invincible—
## 3
When with your guidance you “united” the two world-halves, which were  like men eagerly calling upon (you).
Because he was born for great dominion, for power, the thruster pierced  just the non-thruster.
## 4
Through these days, Indra, show favor to us, for the settled peoples who  possess bad alliances are purifying themselves.
When the sinless one [=Varuṇa] observes untruth, once again Varuṇa,  master of artifice, (will) unloose us (from it).
## 5
We would proclaim him, just him: Indra the bounteous, so that he will  give to us of the largesse of great wealth,
he who best aids the preparation of the chanter’s sacred formulation.  – Do you protect us always with your blessings.