+++
title = "029"

+++
29 (545)
Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Although in many ways this is a straightforward invitation to soma, the hymn is  also shot through with the anxiety about whether Indra will choose our sacrifice  that is characteristic of other hymns in this Indra cycle. The first two verses are  simple collections of the clichés of the journey/invitation hymn genre, but in verse 3

the poet worries about the best means of ritual service and in verse 4 reminds Indra  that earlier poets were no different from us.
## 1
This soma here is pressed for you, Indra. Drive here toward (it), you of  the fallow bays, since you are at home with it.
Drink of this pleasing well-pressed (soma). You will give bounties,
bounteous one, when you are implored.
## 2
Formulator, hero, taking pleasure in the preparation of the sacred  formulation, drive swiftly close by here with your fallow bays.
At just this pressing here reach exhilaration. You will listen to these
sacred formulations of ours.
## 3
What is the proper way to prepare for you with hymns? When now might  we do ritual service for you, bounteous one?
I will stretch out all my thoughts, seeking you. So now will you listen to  these invocations of mine?
## 4
They too were just men—those earlier seers you listened to.
So now it is I who eagerly invoke you, bounteous one. You, Indra, are  solicitude for us, like a father.
## 5
We would proclaim him, just him: Indra the bounteous, so that he will  give to us of the largesse of great wealth,
he who best aids the preparation of the chanter’s sacred formulation.  – Do you protect us always with your blessings.