+++
title = "030"

+++
30 (546) Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Again this hymn expresses a martial and competitive spirit, especially in verse  2. Also, as in VII.28, another god is introduced into an Indra hymn, this time Agni  (vs. 3), rather than Varuṇa (VII.28.4). The combination of Agni and the dawns sug gests a dawn sacrifice, and the praise of patrons in verse 4 must refer to the distribu tion of the dakṣiṇā or priestly gift by patrons to priests and poets at that ceremony.
## 1
Drive here to us, o god, with your vast power, tempestuous one. As  increaser of this wealth, Indra, be there (for us)
for great manliness, o lord of men, possessing a good mace—for great  dominion, for masculine power, o champion.
## 2
The champions invoke you who are to be invoked at the verbal contest,  at (the contest) for their own persons, at the winning of the sun.
You are the martial one among all peoples. You—weaken the obstacles  for easy smashing.
## 3
So that the days will dawn forth day-bright, so that you will establish  your utmost beacon in the combats, Indra, Agni has sat down as Hotar, like a lord, calling the gods here for the one  of good portion.
## 4
We are yours, god Indra, and so are those who are praised as giving  bounties [=patrons], o champion.
To our patrons grant utmost defense: being there (for us), they shall  reach old age.
## 5
We would proclaim him, just him: Indra the bounteous, so that he will  give to us of the largesse of great wealth,
he who best aids the preparation of the chanter’s sacred formulation.  – Do you protect us always with your blessings.