+++
title = "031"

+++
31 (547)
Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
12 verses: gāyatrī 1–9, virāj 10–12, arranged in trcas. ̥
This twelve-verse hymn is organized into tr̥cas, the first three (1–9) in dimeter meter,  the last in trimeter, but the hymn seems conceived as a unity. It begins with the  poet’s address to his priestly comrades (vs. 1), followed by his self-address (vs. 2a),  and the joint production of his comrades and himself is referred to in the 1st plural  in 2bc. The last tr̥ca likewise begins with an address to the priests by the poet (vs.  10). At regular intervals throughout the hymn the poet and his fellow celebrants are  compared to the Maruts, who likewise hymned Indra (vss. 2, 8, 12).
The praise of Indra and the benefits we request of him are generic, but nicely balanced.
## 1
Sing forth your exhilarating (song) to Indra of the fallow bays,
to the soma-drinker, o comrades.
## 2
(You yourself, o poet—) recite solemn speech to him of good gifts. And  thus, like the superior men [=Maruts],
we have made a heavenly (speech) for him whose generosity is real.
## 3
You, Indra, are seeking spoils for us; you are seeking cows, o you of a  hundred resolves;
you are seeking gold, o good one.
## 4
We are seeking you, o Indra; we keep bellowing out to you, o bull. Know this (cry?) of ours, o good one.
## 5
Do not make us subject to scorn to be spoken or to the hostility of the  stranger.
On you is my determination (fixed).
## 6
You are armor of broad extent and a fighter in the front, o Vr̥tra-smasher. With you as yokemate, I respond to (the challenger).
## 7
And you are great, you to whose might the two autonomous
world-halves
have yielded, o Indra.

## 8
The choir of Maruts, your fellow travelers, surrounds you,
reaching you all together throughout the days.
## 9
The (soma) drops aloft in heaven come close to you, the wondrous one; the communities jointly bow to you.
## 10
(Sacrificers,) bear forth your (offering) for the great one of great
strengthening; for the forethoughtful one put forth your good thought. (Indra,) fare forth to the many clans, as the one filling up the settled  domains.
## 11
For the great one of broad expanse, for Indra, the inspired poets begat  a (hymn) with a good twist, a sacred formulation.
His commandments the clever do not transgress.
## 12
The (Marut) choirs entirely established Indra—just him to whom the  battle fury is conceded—as king, to be victorious.
Swell his friends altogether for the one of the fallow bays.