+++
title = "032"

+++
32 (548) Indra
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi (1–25), Śakti Vāsiṣṭha (26ab), Vasiṣṭha or Śakti Vāsiṣtha  (26cd–27)
27 verses:  br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, except dvipadā virāj 3, arranged in  pragāthas
This final hymn in the VIIth Maṇḍala Indra cycle is a loose collection of pragāthas,  the first of which has a two-pāda extension (vs. 3). Even within the verse pairs there  is little cohesion. But there is a unifying theme that runs throughout: Indra’s gener ous giving and our grateful receiving, to an extent unusual even in an Indra hymn.  Moreover, it is not only Indra’s giving that we seek: it is repeatedly emphasized that  Indra helps and gives to mortals who themselves give, that is, the patrons of the  sacrifice (see, e.g., vss. 7, 8, 10, 15).
The hymn opens (vs. 1) with the preoccupation that has been visible in many  Indra hymns in VII, the fear that rival sacrificers may attract Indra to their own  rituals, and Indra’s epithet “invoked by many” appears several times (vss. 17, 20,  26). Much of the hymn is concerned with defining the type of ritual behavior that  will cause Indra to choose one sacrifice over another.
Indra is supreme in this hymn. In its twenty-seven verses there is only one men tion of another divinity, the Maruts in verse 10.
## 1
Let not (any other) cantors at all stop you at a distance from us.
Even from afar come here to our joint revelry, or being (already) here  hearken (to us),
## 2
Because these who craft sacred formulations for you sit like flies on  honey when (the soma) is pressed. The singers, seeking goods, set their desire on Indra, like a foot on a  chariot.
## 3
Desirous of wealth I call upon the one with mace in hand, possessing  a good right (hand/horse) [/bringing good priestly gifts], like a son
upon his father.
## 4
These soma drinks here, mixed with curds, have been pressed for Indra. Drive to them with your pair of fallow bays, o you with mace in hand— for exhilaration, for drinking—(as if) to your home.
## 5
He will listen: he of listening ears is implored for goods. He will never  neglect our songs.
The one who just in a single day will give hundreds, thousands—no one  will confound him when he is about to give.
## 6
That hero cannot be repulsed—he becomes puffed up by Indra, along  with his men—
who presses and rinses deep pressings for you, o Vr̥tra-smasher.
## 7
Be a defense for the bounteous (patrons), bounteous one, when you will  herd together those who vaunt themselves.
Might we have a share in the possessions of the one slain by you. Bring  here the patrimony of the one difficult to get at.
## 8
Press soma for soma-drinking Indra who holds the mace.
Cook cooked dishes. Just cause (him) to help. It is only the generous  giver who is a joy to the one who generously gives.
## 9
You pressers of soma, do not fail; be skillful for the great one. Make  (him inclined) to thrust wealth (to us).
It is just the surpassing man who wins: he dwells peacefully, he thrives.  The gods are not for the petty.
## 10
No one has encircled the chariot of Sudās [/the good giver], nor  stopped it.
Whoever has Indra as helper, whoever has the Maruts, he will come to  a pen full of cattle.
## 11
He will come to the prize when he strives for the prize—the mortal  whose helper you will be, Indra.
Become a helper to our chariots, o champion, to our men.
## 12
His share now is outstanding like the spoils of a victor.
Indra of the fallow bays—cheats do not outwit him. He places skill in  the one who has soma.
## 13
A mantra—not stunted, well arranged, well adorned—set it among  those worthy of the sacrifice.
The many onslaughts never overcome him who through ritual work  comes to be in (the good grace) of Indra.

## 14
What mortal will dare against him who has you as his
possession, Indra?
It is with trust in you, bounteous one, that on the decisive day the one  vying for the prize seeks to win the prize.
## 15
At the smashing of obstacles spur on the bounteous ones who give their  own dear goods.
O you of the fallow bays, with your guidance may we, along with our  patrons, overcome all difficulties.
## 16
Yours alone is the lowest good thing, Indra; you prosper the  middling one.
You rule over each highest one entirely. No one obstructs you when  cattle (are at stake).
## 17
You are famed as the giver of spoils to everyone, whenever there are  (battle-)drives.
Every earth-dweller here, when seeking help, desires a share in your  name, o you who are invoked by many.
## 18
If I were lord of as much as you are, Indra,
I would seek to make just my praiser (well) set up, you excavator of  goods; I would not give him over to ill-estate.
## 19
I would do my best just for the one who magnifies (the god) every day,  to (bring him) wealth here wherever it is to be found,
for there exists no other, better friendship for us than you, nor even a  father, bounteous one.
## 20
It is just the surpassing one who seeks to win the prize, as yokemate  with Plenitude.
I bend Indra, invoked by many, here to you with a song, as a carpenter  bends a felly made of good wood.
## 21
Not by a bad(ly made) praise does a mortal find goods, nor will wealth  reach the one who fails.
It’s an easy skill for you, bounteous one—giving to the likes of me on  the decisive day.
## 22
We keep bellowing to you, o champion, like unmilked cows— to you, Indra, who see (like) the sun, lord of this moving (world), lord  of the still one.
## 23
There is no other heavenly one like you, nor earthly; neither born, nor  to be born.
Seeking horses, seeking cows, vying for the prize, we call upon you,  bounteous Indra.
## 24
Bring this greater (good) here, Indra, to those who are lesser, for you, bounteous one, are from of old one with many goods, and the  one to be called upon at every raid. 25. Thrust away the foes, bounteous one; make goods easy for us to find. Become a helper for us in (the contest for) great stakes; become a
strengthener of our comrades.
## 26
Indra, bring your resolve to bear for us, like a father for his sons. Do your best for us on this drive, you who are invoked by many. May  we, (still) alive, reach the light.
## 27
Let not communities unknown—ill-intentioned and unkindly
disposed—trample us down.
With you, o champion, let us cross over the (river-)courses one after  another, cross over the waters.