+++
title = "033"

+++
33 (549)
Vasisṭha’s Sons (1–9); Vasis ̣ ṭha (10–14) ̣
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi (1–9), Vasiṣṭha’s sons (10–14)
14 verses: triṣṭubh
This famous hymn, coming at the very end of the Vasiṣṭha Indra cycle, treats the  mystical birth of Vasiṣṭha and the accomplishments of Vasiṣṭha and his descen dants, particularly the feat of attracting Indra to the side of King Sudās and ensur ing Indra’s support in the Battle of the Ten Kings, the battle treated at length  in VII.18. The Anukramaṇī identifies the poet of verses 1–9 as Vasiṣṭha and the  “deity” as Vasiṣṭha’s sons, with the opposite identifications for verses 10–14, but this  does not seem the most perspicuous assignment of roles. Rather, it seems that the  hymn falls into three parts: 1–6, 7–9, 10–14, starting with a time close to the (semi mythical) present and moving backward to the deep mythical past.
The first six verses celebrate the Vasiṣṭhas’ successful invitation of Indra to their  soma sacrifice and Indra’s subsequent aid to Sudās and the Tr̥tsus in the Ten Kings  battle. Indra himself appears to be the speaker in verses 1 and 4. The first two verses  depict one of the themes running through this set of Indra hymns: competing sacri
fices. Here, Indra seems actually to rise from his seat at another sacrifice to go to the  Vasiṣṭhas in verse 1, with his journey described in verse 2. Verses 3–6 treat his aid to  Sudās in the Ten Kings battle, with all credit given to the Vasiṣṭhas’ poetic skill for  bringing this aid (vss. 3–5), and Indra himself declaring this in verse 4.
The next section begins with a trio of riddles based on the number three (vs.  7), with the last pāda of that verse asserting that it is exactly this knowledge that  the Vasiṣṭhas control—a nice meta-comment on what Vedic poets were supposed  to know. There is no consensus (modern or ancient) on the answers to these three  riddles. The three producers of semen may be the three soma-pressings, or heaven  (with its rain), soma, and man—and other answers have also been suggested. The  three Ārya “creatures” with light in front could be the three ritual fires, or the fire,  the sun, and dawn—and, again, there are other possible solutions. As for the three  “heats,” these could again be the ritual fires, or the sun, the fire, and the gharma924 VII.33
drink, or some other triad. It is perhaps pleasing that the Vasiṣṭhas’ esoteric knowl edge has remained safe with them for over three millennia! This skill of theirs at  decoding secrets and putting them in proper verbal form is celebrated further in  verse 8 and the first half of verse 9.
The second half of verse 9 provides the transition to the last section, concern ing the birth of Vasiṣṭha. What the Vasiṣṭhas are weaving (a motif recurring almost  verbatim in vs. 12) is not entirely clear, but we are inclined to think it concerns the  institution and performance of the sacrifice. It is clear why they are approaching the  Apsarases (the heavenly “nymphs” of Vedic and later Indian culture): one of the  Apsarases’ number, Urvaśī, is their mother (see vss. 11–12), with Mitra and Varuṇa  as their father (see vss. 11, 13), in the first of their forefather Vasiṣṭha’s births. Both  births are referred to in verse 10, both that from Mitra and Varuṇa and that when  Agastya presented him to the clan. To say that the details of the births are murky  is an understatement, and we will not attempt here to interpret all the mysteries in  these verses. The last verse (14) is traditionally taken as Agastya’s words, introduc
ing Vasiṣṭha to his adoptive clan, the Tr̥tsus, and outlining Vasiṣṭha’s ritual role.  The address to “you thrusters forth” (pratr̥daḥ) is most likely a pun on their name.
## 1
[Indra:] They, bright-faced, with their braids on the right side, quickening  thought—because they exhilarated me,
I, standing up from the ritual grass, speak about the superior
men: “They cannot be helped by me from a distance—the Vasiṣṭhas.” 2. From a distance they led Indra here with pressed (soma)—across a lake’s  worth (of soma), on beyond the powerful drink.
Over the pressed soma of Pāśadyumna Vāyata he preferred the Vasiṣṭhas. 3. It was certainly just with them that he crossed the Sindhu; certainly just  with them that he smashed Bheda [/the “Splitter”];
it was certainly just by reason of your sacred formulation that Indra  helped Sudās in the Battle of the Ten Kings, o Vasiṣṭhas.
## 4
[Indra:] Gladly, you superior men, by reason of your fathers’ sacred  formulation, I have engirded the axle: you will certainly not be
harmed,
since with a lofty cry in Śakvarī [=martial] (meter) you established
impetuous force in Indra, o Vasiṣṭhas.
## 5
Like thirsty ones looking toward heaven (for rain), in distress they  looked toward (Indra) when they were surrounded in the Battle of the  Ten Kings.
Indra hearkened to Vasiṣṭha as he was praising; he made the broad space  broad for the Tr̥tsus.
## 6
They were cut off short, like goads for driving cattle—the puny Bharatas. When Vasiṣṭha came to be the leader, right after that did the clans of the  Tr̥tsus spread out. 7. Three produce semen in the world; three creatures belonging to the  Ārya have light in front.
Three heats accompany the dawn. All these (triads) do they know
through and through—the Vasiṣṭhas.
## 8
Their light is like the waxing of the sun; their greatness is deep as  the sea’s;
like the speed of the wind, your praise hymn, o Vasiṣṭhas, can be
pursued by no other.
## 9
Only they converge upon the thousand-twigged secret with the insights  of their heart.
Weaving the covering (garment) stretched by Yama, they reverently  approached the Apsarases—the Vasiṣṭhas.
## 10
When Mitra and Varuṇa saw you as light compacting itself from out of  the lightning—
that was (one) birth of yours, Vasiṣṭha, and (there was) one when
Agastya brought you here for the clan.
## 11
And you are the descendant of Mitra and Varuṇa, o Vasiṣṭha, born  from Urvaśī, from her mind, you formulator.
A drop (of semen?) spurted forth: with a heavenly formulation all the  gods took you in a lotus.
## 12
He, foreknowing of both in his insight, possessing a thousand gifts and  one gift (more),
intending to weave the covering stretched by Yama, was born from the  Apsaras—Vasiṣṭha.
## 13
The two [=Mitra and Varuṇa?], brought into being at a (ritual) Session,  aroused by reverences, poured their common semen into a pot.
From it arose Māna from the middle. From it they say the seer was
born—Vasiṣṭha.
## 14
[Agastya?:] He supports the supporter of solemn speech [=Hotar], the  supporter of the melody [=Udgātar]; supporting the pressing stone
he will speak forth at the beginning.
Do you reverently approach him, seeking benevolence. He will come to  you, you thrusters forth—Vasiṣṭha.