+++
title = "034"

+++
34 (550)
All Gods (except Ahi 16, Ahi Budhnya 17a)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
25 verses: dvipadā 1–21, triṣṭubh 22–25
This loosely structured hymn intersperses verses relating to the sacrifice, especially  its poetic portion (e.g., vss. 1, 4–5, 8–9), with verses dedicated to particular gods.

In the early parts of the hymn, the verses to gods are structured as riddles, and the  god is not named: Indra in verse 3, Savitar in verse 4, Agni (?) in verse 7. But in later  parts of the hymn the gods and divine forces are identified, starting with Varuṇa  in verses 10–11. Minor gods predominate in this section (e.g., Ahi Budhnya, the  Serpent of the Deep, vss. 16–17), through verse 23. There are also several interludes  requesting help against hostility and bodily harm (vss. 12–13, 18–19). The final  two verses call on many of the major gods of the pantheon, without distinguishing  characteristics.
There is a distinct watery theme running throughout the hymn, beginning with  the waters themselves (vss. 2–3). When Varuṇa is mentioned (vss. 10–11), it is in his  association with waters, a mostly later quality of Varuṇa’s. The Child of the Waters  (Apām Napāt, vs. 15) and the “water-born” Serpent of the Deep (vss. 16–17) con
tribute to this aqueous environment, and the waters themselves reappear in verse  23. The reason for this emphasis on water is not clear.
## 01
Let the gleaming divine inspired thought go forth from us,
well-fashioned like a prizewinning chariot.
## 02
They know the means of begetting of earth and of heaven;
the waters listen then, even as they flow.
## 03
The broad waters swell just for him;
they will be considered as powerful champions in the (battles against)  obstacles.
## 04
Put the horses to the chariot-poles for him.
Golden-armed, he carries the mace like Indra.
## 05
Set out on the sacrifice as if through the days.
Like a (chariot-)driver in flight, spur it on by yourself.
## 06
By yourself spur on the sacrifice at the combats.
Establish it as a beacon, a hero for the people.
## 07
From its tempestuous force it has arisen like a radiant beam.
It bears its burden, like the earth its ground.
## 08
I invoke the gods without sorcery, o Agni.
Assuring its success through truth, I produce my insight.
## 09
Harness your divine insight.
Put your speech forward among the gods.
## 10
He inspects the haven of these (waters), of the rivers—
powerful Varuṇa of a thousand eyes.
## 11
King of kingdoms, ornament of the rivers:
lifelong lordship has been conceded to him.
## 12
Aid us amid all the clans;
render harmless the “laud” of him who wishes to scorn.
## 13
Let the unfriendly missile of the haters go wide.
Keep the infirmity of bodies away, off to the side.
## 14
Agni, the oblation-eater, has aided us with our acts of reverence. The dearest praise has been produced for him. 15. Along with the gods, make the Child of the Waters your companion. Let him be friendly to us.
## 16
I will sing to the water-born serpent with hymns:
he is sitting in the depth of the rivers, in the dusky realms.
## 17
Let Ahi Budhnya [/the Serpent of the Deep] not set us up for harm; let the sacrifice of him who seeks the truth not fail.
## 18
And they have placed fame upon these men of ours.
Let them [=men] go forth for wealth, vaunting themselves over the
stranger.
## 19
They scorch the rival, like the sun the worlds—
those possessing great weapons with their onslaughts.
## 20
When the Wives (of the Gods) will come to us,
let Tvaṣṭar of the lovely hands confer heroes (on us).
## 21
Might Tvaṣṭar enjoy our praise.
Might Aramati [/Devotion], seeking goods, be in us.
## 22
The Gift-Escorts will give goods to us. Let Rodasī, let Varuṇāṇī pay heed.
Let him be one affording good shelter (along?) with the Shielding
Goddesses; let generously giving Tvaṣṭar apportion wealth.
## 23
Then let the mountains (apportion) us wealth, then let the waters, then  the Gift-Escorts, the plants, and Heaven,
and Earth jointly with the trees. The two world-halves will protect us all  around.
## 24
Then let the two broad world-halves follow suit, let heaven-ruling  Varuṇa, whose comrade is Indra, follow;
let all the Maruts, who are victorious, follow. Might we be (fit) to found  the buttress of wealth.
## 25
Indra, Varuṇa, Mitra, Agni, the waters, the plants, the trees shall enjoy  this of ours.
Might we be in the shelter, in the lap of the Maruts. – Do you protect  us always with your blessings.