+++
title = "035"

+++
35 (551)
All Gods
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This fifteen-verse hymn is in competition for the most boring hymn in the R̥gveda  (a competition in which there are remarkably few entries). In the first thirteen  verses every pāda begins with the indeclinable word śám “luck, weal” in the  hardly varying formula “luck for us be X,” with X a god or gods, power, or  sacrificial element. There is generally a rationale for the groupings found in each

verse, though it not always transparent (see, e.g., vs. 3). The final two verses  (14–15) inclusively beg all the gods in various groupings to enjoy the praise and  grant space to us.
## 1
Luck for us be Indra and Agni with their help; luck for us Indra and  Varuṇa, on whom oblations are bestowed.
Luck Indra and Soma—luck and lifetime for good faring; luck for us  Indra and Pūṣan at the winning of prizes.
## 2
Luck for us Fortune, and luck for us be Laud. Luck for us Plenitude  and luck be Riches.
Luck for us the Laud of what is real and easy to guide; luck for us be  Aryaman, born many times.
## 3
Luck for us the Establisher and luck be the Upholder for us. Luck for  us be the Wide-Spreading (Earth?) with her own powers.
Luck be the lofty World-Halves, luck for us the Stone; luck let the
easily called (names) of the gods be for us.
## 4
Luck for us be Agni, whose face is light; luck for us Mitra and Varuṇa,  the Aśvins luck.
Luck for us be the good deeds of the good doers; luck let the vigorous  Wind blow to us.
## 5
Luck for us Heaven and Earth at the Early Invocation; luck be the  Midspace for us to see.
Luck for us be the plants, the trees; luck be the victorious lord of the  dusky realm.
## 6
Luck for us be god Indra along with the Vasus; luck Varuṇa of good  laud along with the Ādityas;
luck for us healing Rudra along with the Rudras [=Maruts]; for luck let  Tvaṣṭar along with the Wives hear us here.
## 7
Luck for us be Soma; the Sacred Formulation luck for us; luck for us be  the Pressing Stones and luck the Sacrifices.
Luck for us be the Fixing of the Posts; luck for us be the Fruitful
(plants) and the Altar.
## 8
For luck for us let the Sun of broad gaze go up; luck for us be the four  Directions.
Luck for us be the steadfast Mountains. Luck for us the Rivers and
luck be the Waters.
## 9
Luck for us be Aditi with her commandments; luck for us be the  Maruts of good chant.
Luck for us Viṣṇu and luck be Pūṣan; luck for us (the means of)
Creation and luck be the Wind.
## 10
Luck for us god Savitar who gives protection; luck for us be the widely  radiant Dawns.
Luck be Parjanya for us and for our offspring; luck for us be the Lord  of the Dwelling Place, who is Luck itself. 11. Luck for us be the Gods, the All Gods; luck be Sarasvatī along with her  insights.
Luck the Escorts and luck the Gift-Escorts; luck for us the Heavenly  ones, the Earthly ones, luck for us the Watery ones.
## 12
Luck for us be the masters of the real; luck for us the steeds, and luck  be the cows.
Luck for us the R̥bhus of good action and good hands; luck for us be  the Fathers at the invocations.
## 13
Luck for us be god Aja Ekapad; luck for us Ahi Budhnya [/Serpent of  the Deep], luck the Sea.
Luck for us be the swelling Child of the Waters; luck for us be Pr̥śni,  who has the gods as her protectors.
## 14
The Ādityas, the Rudras, the Vasus enjoy this sacred formulation being  made here anew.
Let them hear us—the Heavenly ones, the Earthly ones, the Cow-Born  ones, and those who are worthy of the sacrifice.
## 15
Those who are the sacrificial ones of the sacrificial gods, the occasion  of sacrifice for Manu, immortal, knowing the truth,
let them grant us wide-ranging space today. – Do you protect us always  with your blessings.