+++
title = "036"

+++
36 (552)
All Gods
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
9 verses: triṣṭubh
Like many All God hymns, this one allots a verse each to a god or group of gods,  most named, some not named but obvious from their description, and a few  less transparently characterized. The verses whose divinities are clear are 1: Sun;  2: Mitra and Varuṇa; 5: Rudra, 6: Rivers, 7: Maruts (and their mother Pr̥śni?);  8:  Aramati, Pūṣan, and Bhaga; 9:  Maruts and Viṣṇu. For verse 3 some schol
ars identify the Wind and Parjanya [Thunder] as the dedicands, but we assign  it instead to Soma; verse 4 may belong to both Indra and Aryaman, but we  consider aryamán here to be used as a descriptor of Indra, rather than as the  name of the third member of the Ādityan triad, since the other descriptors—
strong resolution and confounding of the enemy’s battle fury—are characteristic  of Indra.
The hymn can also be read as a chronological progress through a sacrifice. In  verse 1 the fire is kindled at dawn and ritual speech is uttered on the ritual ground.  The hymn is mentioned in verse 2, and the preparation of soma in verse 3. The  invitation to Indra to come to the sacrifice with his horses is given in verse 4, and  the actual sacrifice occurs in verse 5. Although the verse to the rivers (6) does not  appear to fit this pattern, it could refer to the waters used to swell the soma stalks

(see also vs. 3) or to other ritual uses of water. The final three verses (7–9) call upon  the various gods for wealth and progeny.
## 01
Let the sacred formulation go forth from the seat of truth. The Sun with  his rays has dispatched the cows outward.
The broad Earth has stretched out on her back. Agni has been kindled  on her wide face.
## 02
This well-twisted (hymn) here do I make anew, like a refreshing drink, for  you two, lordly Mitra and Varuṇa.
One of you two, the strong one, is an undeceivable tracer of the track,  and (the other), Mitra, arranges the people in their place when
called upon.
## 03
The movements of the swooping wind come to rest. The sweet (stalks?)  have swelled like milk-cows.
Being born in the seat of great heaven, the bull has roared in the
self-same udder.
## 04
Whoever will yoke with a hymn these two fallow bays of yours, o  champion Indra, the two dear ones, good at the chariot, seeking
fodder,
I (as that person) would turn hither the very resolute god of custom  [/Aryaman, here = Indra] who confounds the battle fury of the one
who wishes to do harm.
## 05
The reverent ones worship his fellowship and vitality on the domain of  truth itself.
He has thrust outward the fortifying nourishments when being praised  by men. This reverence is dearest to Rudra.
## 06
When the glorious ones are bellowing simultaneously—(the other rivers  and) Sarasvatī, whose mother is the Sindhu, as seventh—
who are richly fertile, rich in milk, rich in streams, they (come) toward  (us), swelling with their own milk.
## 07
And these Maruts, exulting—let the prizewinners aid our insight and  progeny.
Let not the imperishable (cow? [=Pr̥śni?]) overlook us as she roams. They  have increased wealth to be harnessed for us.
## 08
Set in front of yourselves great Devotion [/Aramati], in front Pūṣan, like  a hero deserving of the ceremonial distribution;
and Bhaga, who aids this insight of ours, and the prize at its winning,  and Plenitude the Gift-Escort.
## 09
Let this signal-call of ours go to you, o Maruts, to Viṣṇu, who protects  the poured out (semen) with his help.
And let them establish vitality for the singer to produce progeny. – Do  you protect us always with your blessings. 
