+++
title = "037"

+++
37 (553) All Gods
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Although this hymn is technically dedicated to the All Gods, it is only the R̥bhus  and Indra who feature in the hymn proper (R̥bhus esp. vss. 1–2, Indra vss. 3–7), with  Savitar addressed in the final verse (8). The association of Indra with the R̥bhus  identifies the ritual moment as the Third Pressing, which they share, and since  Savitar is often associated with the evening, his presence is also appropriate.
The first four verses concern the sacrifice: the gods come, drink together, and  give gifts to the sacrificer and his patrons. In verse 4 Indra is sent home with a final  chorus. The next verses change the scene. In verses 5–6 Indra is praised for his help  in winning more territory for us, but he seems to be withholding the wealth we  expect. The most puzzling verse is 7, which has elicited various interpretations. In  our opinion, the “triple kin-bonds” refers to the three-generation model, in which a  man is situated conceptually between his father and his sons; this man is threatened  by dissolution and premature death, not only of himself but also of his sons, and he  approaches Indra for aid, since Indra himself successfully attains old age (an inter esting conceit for a “deathless” or “immortal” god). But this interpretation remains  uncertain and speculative. The first pāda of the final verse (8) forms a ring with the  first pāda of the hymn, and the topic returns to the gifts we expect and hope for.
## 1
Let the chariot, the best conveyor, convey you here to be praised, o Vājas,  R̥bhukṣans—(a chariot) indestructible.
Fill yourselves to exhilaration with great triple-backed soma drinks at  the pressings, you lovely-lipped ones.
## 2
You confer a treasure on the bounteous (patrons), you R̥bhukṣans of  sunlike sight—(a treasure) indestructible.
Drink together at the sacrifices, autonomous ones. Apportion rewards to  us in accordance with our thoughts.
## 3
Because you, bounteous one, are accustomed to giving at the distribution  of goods great and small,
both your fists are filled with goods. No (one) will hold back your
liberalities, your masses of goods.
## 4
You, Indra, are the self-glorious R̥bhukṣan. Like a prize reaching its  goal, you go home accompanied by verses.
May we Vasiṣṭhas now be your pious servers, you of the fallow bays, as  we prepare the sacred formulation.
## 5
You regularly gain the (river-)courses just for your pious server, along  which you will accomplish your work in accord with your visions, you  of the fallow bays.
We have now won by your help allied (to us). When, Indra, would you  show the favor of your wealth to us?

## 6
You seem to be causing us, your ritual adepts, to bide our time. When  will you take notice of our speech, Indra?
In accord with a papa’s vision the fortifying prizewinning steed should  carry home to us wealth rich in heroes.
## 7
Even (a man) toward whom the goddess Disorder extends her
dominion—(because) the autumns rich in fortifying nourishment
reach Indra,
that man of triple kin-bonds draws near to him [=Indra, who is] one who  reaches old age—(even a man) whom (other) mortals would render
bereft of his own clansmen.
## 8
Let rewards come here to us to be praised, o Savitar; let the riches of the  mountain come here at (the time for) giving.
Always let the heavenly protector accompany us. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.