+++
title = "038"

+++
38 (554)
Savitar, except Savitar or Bhaga (6cd), Prizewinning  Horses (7–8)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Although the Anukramaṇī assigns most of this hymn to Savitar, with possibly a  half-verse to Bhaga and the final two verses to the Vājins (prizewinning horses), it  seems more likely to have been an All God hymn in original conception. It is found  in the middle of the All God hymns of the VIIth Maṇḍala in proper sequence as  to meter and number of verses, and, in addition to Savitar, mentions a number  of divinities, including several minor ones found also in the surrounding All God  hymns: see especially verse 5 with the Gift-Escorts (also VII.34.22, 23; 35.11; 40.6),  Ahi Budhnya (the Serpent of the Deep; also VII.34.17; 35.13), and the Shielding  Goddess(es); also VII.34.22; 40.6). The mysterious Ekadhenus (literally, “having  a single milk-cow”) are found only here. It is not unusual in an All God hymn for  a single god to predominate and others to be mentioned only in passing; compare  nearby VII.37 with its primary focus on Indra and the R̥bhus.
Savitar’s role is most prominent in the first two verses, where, as usual, he stands  up and raises his emblem, demonstrating his power to impel and compel. The group  of gods known as Vasus praises him in verse 3; Aditi and the Ādityas greet him in  verse 4; and, as already mentioned, several minor divinities are found in verse 5. As  often, the god Bhaga (“Fortune”) is invoked along with Savitar (vss. 1 and 6) as the  distributor of goods, which we seek. The last two verses (7–8) concern the “prize
winners” (vājín). This word is frequently a descriptor of horses in competition, and  a number of scholars consider the reference here to be actual horses in the human  realm. However, the sacrificial context in these two verses is strong, and on the basis of phraseological parallels we consider the referents to be the Maruts (who are  called prizewinners in VII.36.7, while the phrase “let the Maruts of good chant be  luck for us” is found in VII.35.9).
## 1
This god Savitar holds up the golden emblem which he has fixed firm. Now is Bhaga to be invoked by the sons of Manu—he of many goods  who distributes treasures.
## 2
Stand up, Savitar. Listen, o golden-palmed one, at the (ritual)
presentation of this truth,
unloosing your emblem wide and broad, impelling mortals’ sustenance  here for men.
## 3
Let god Savitar, when praised, be nearby, whom also all the Vasus hymn. Let him, worthy of reverence, take delight in our praises. Let him protect  the patrons with all his protectors.
## 4
Whom goddess Aditi greets, taking pleasure in the impulsion of god  Savitar,
(him) do the sovereign kings Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman and their allies  greet in concert—
## 5
(As do) those who, zealous in rivalry, serve the gift of Heaven and Earth  as Gift-Escorts.
And let Ahi Budhnya hear us; let the Shielding Goddess defend (us) with  the Ekadhenus.
## 6
Might the Lord of the Family [=Bhaga] concede this treasure of god  Savitar’s to us, when he is begged for it.
Bhaga does the powerful one keep calling for help, and Bhaga does the  powerless one beg for a treasure.
## 7
Let these prizewinners [=Maruts]—those of measured pace and lovely  chants—be luck for us at the invocations in the divine assembly.
Crushing the serpent, the wolf, the demonic powers, they will keep
afflictions away from us, bag and baggage.
## 8
Help us to every prize, o prizewinners, when the stakes (are set), you  truth-knowing, immortal inspired poets.
Drink of this honey here; make yourselves exhilarated. Satisfied, drive  along the paths that lead to the gods.