+++
title = "039"

+++
39 (555)
All Gods
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The organizing principle of this hymn is the ritual fire (Agni) and the dawn sacri fice over which he presides. In verse 1 the sacrifice is set in motion; the gods begin934 VII.39
to assemble at dawn at the sacrificial ground (vss. 2–3), and Agni is exhorted to  perform the sacrifice (vs. 4) and to bring the various gods to it (vs. 5). The poet  declares his own contribution to the sacrifice and asks Agni for the appropriate  rewards (vs. 6). The final verse (7) summarizes what has gone before, in the name  of the Vasiṣṭhas.
Verse 2b contains an impossible hapax, bī́riṭe, phonologically aberrant and mor phologically opaque. It is generally taken as “crowd, troop,” following Yāska, but,  as there is no particular etymological or contextual support for this, we have simply  declined to translate it.
## 01
Agni, erect, has just propped up the favor of the good one. The firebrand  goes, facing toward the divine assemblage.
The two (pressing-)stones take to the path like charioteers. The Hotar,  when prompted, will offer a true (hymn) as sacrifice.
## 02
The one receiving very pleasurable offerings [=Agni] has twisted the  ritual grass for them [=gods]. Like two clanlords at [/in] bī́riṭa [?], they  hasten here,
(the clanlords) of clans, at (the coming) of dawn from night, at the Early  Invocation—Pūṣan and Vāyu with his team, for well-being.
## 03
Here on the earth the good ones, the gods have come to rest. The  resplendent ones groom themselves in the wide midspace.
You all who extend widely, make your paths inclined hither. Harken to  this messenger of ours [=Agni] who has gone (to you).
## 04
Because these helpers, worthy to receive sacrifice at the sacrifices, the  gods, all surmount the seat,
sacrifice to them, who desire it, at the ceremony, o Agni, with
obedience—to Bhaga, the Nāsatyas, Plenitude.
## 05
O Agni, bring Mitra, Varuṇa, and Indra here from heaven and from  earth to the hymns and to the fire—
also Aryaman, Aditi, Viṣṇu the quick. Let Sarasvatī and the Maruts  make themselves exhilarated.
## 06
I have bestowed an oblation along with poetic thoughts on those worthy  of the sacrifice. The insatiable one [=Agni] will attain the desire of
mortals.
Confer inexhaustible ever-winning wealth. Might we be accompanied by  the gods, who will now be our yokemates.
## 07
Now have the two World-Halves been praised by the Vasiṣṭhas, and the  truthful ones, Varuṇa, Mitra, and Agni.
Let the glittering ones hold out to us the utmost chant. – Do you protect  us always with your blessings. 
