+++
title = "040"

+++
40 (556)
All Gods
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The preoccupation of this hymn is the distribution of wealth, to be carried out in  orderly and fair fashion by a series of gods, starting in verse 1 with Savitar and  Bhaga (Fortune), whose involvement in the apportioning of treasures we met in  the nearby hymn VII.38. But a wide variety of gods are implicated in this giving,  as well as in providing other help (see vss. 3–4). There is little to attract particular  attention in this hymn, save for the sly admonition to Pūṣan not to be jealous of our  receiving gifts (vs. 6).
## 1
Let attentive hearing come together with (speech?) appropriate to  the rite of distribution. Might we (properly) aim our praise of the
surpassing ones.
When today god Savitar will give the impetus, may we be at the
apportioning of him who possesses treasures [=Bhaga].
## 2
Let Mitra, Varuṇa, and the two World-Halves, let Indra and Aryaman  give us what is apportioned by heaven.
Let goddess Aditi designate the legacy that both Vāyu and Bhaga will  harness.
## 3
Let him be powerful, Maruts, let him be headstrong—just that mortal  whom you will help, you of the dappled horses.
And Agni and Sarasvatī spur him on. There exists no one who can
encompass his wealth.
## 4
Because this leader of truth, Varuṇa, as well as Mitra and Aryaman, (all)  kings, have accomplished their work—
and goddess Aditi, easy to invoke and without assault—they will bring  us unharmed across difficult straits.
## 5
There is propitiation for this god who grants rewards [=Rudra], at the  ritual offering to quick Viṣṇu, with oblations,
for Rudra knows his own Rudrian might. Aśvins, drive your circuit of  refreshment.
## 6
Don’t get envious now, glowing Pūṣan, when the Shielding Goddess and  the Gift-Escorts will make bestowal.
Let the steeds who are joy itself protect us. Let Wind in his circling
give rain.
## 7
Now have the two World-Halves been praised by the Vasiṣṭhas, and the  truthful ones, Varuṇa, Mitra, and Agni.
Let the glittering ones hold out to us the utmost chant. – Do you protect  us always with your blessings.
