+++
title = "041"

+++
41 (557)
Bhaga, except Assorted Divinities (1) and Dawn (7)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 1
Like the last hymn, this one is completely devoted to our acquisition of wealth by  distribution, but here the distribution is ascribed almost entirely to Bhaga, the god  of Fortune, whose name also means “portion.” The hymn begins (vs. 1) with a gen eral invocation of a range of gods in early morning, including Bhaga, but the next  five verses (2–5) call insistently on Bhaga, punning several times on his name. The  early-morning context of the hymn returns with the last two verses (6–7), concern ing the Dawns, who bring Bhaga with them (vs. 6). The final verse, which does not  mention Bhaga, is found also in a Dawn hymn later in the VIIth Maṇḍala (VII.80.3)  and is clearly extra-hymnic here.
## 01
At early morning we call on Agni, at early morning on Indra, at early  morning on Mitra and Varuṇa, at early morning on the Aśvins;
at early morning on Bhaga, Pūṣan, Brahmaṇaspati, at early morning on  Soma and Rudra should we call.
## 02
We should call on the one victorious at early morning, Bhaga the strong,  Aditi’s son, who is the distributor,
to whom even a person who thinks himself weak (and also) even the  powerful, even the king says “Apportion me a portion.”
## 03
O Bhaga the leader, o Bhaga whose generosity is real, o Bhaga—promote  this poetic insight of ours as you give to us.
Bhaga, propagate us with cows and horses; Bhaga, might we, possessed  of superior men, be preeminent through our men.
## 04
And just now might we be possessed of portion [/accompanied by  Bhaga], and at evening and at the middle of the days,
and at the rising of the sun, o bounteous one, might we be in the good  grace of the gods.
## 05
Let Bhaga himself be possessed of portion, o gods. In this way might we  be possessed of portion [/accompanied by Bhaga].
Each and every one constantly calls on you, Bhaga. Become our guide  here, Bhaga.
## 06
The Dawns (will) jointly bow in reverence to the ceremony, like
Dadhikrāvan to the gleaming footprint [=sacrificial ground].
Like prizewinning horses a chariot let them convey the goods-finding  Bhaga here in our direction.
## 07
Let the Dawns, accompanied by horses, by cows, by heroes, dawn always  auspicious for us,
milking out ghee on all sides, teeming. – Do you protect us always with  your blessings.