+++
title = "042"

+++
42 (558) All Gods
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
Like VII.39, this hymn concerns the dawn soma sacrifice and especially Agni’s role  in it. The hymn begins with a verse expressing the readiness of all the ritual ele ments. Then Agni takes over and provides the impetus, hitching up his flames in  verse 2, and, as he gets larger, performing the sacrifice (vss. 3, 5). In verse 4 Agni  (identified as a guest, as often) is asked for the reward that is the expected return  for a successful sacrifice. The final verse (6) is a typical summary verse and names  Vasiṣṭha as the poet, as in another summary verse in this series (VII.39.7=40.7).  Although this is an All God hymn, the participation of named gods other than  Agni is limited to verse 5, where they are the simply the recipients of the sacrifice.  The mention of Aṅgirases in verse 1 is probably meant as a reference to the poet  and the other priests.
## 1
The Aṅgirases, possessors of the sacred formulation, are reaching forth.  Let the roar of (the hymn? fire? soma?) that is set to burst out go
questing forth.
The cows swimming in the waters are bellowing forth. The two
pressing-stones should be yoked, as the ornament of the ceremony.
## 2
Easy is your road, Agni, which was found long ago. Yoke your fallow  bays and chestnuts when the soma is pressed,
or those ruddy ones which, conveying heroes, are at your seat. Seated,  I call the races of gods.
## 3
They magnify the sacrifice for you all with acts of reverence; the
gladdening Hotar [=Agni] is projecting in the nearness.
Sacrifice well to the gods, o you of many faces. You should turn hither  Aramati [/Devotion] worthy of the sacrifice.
## 4
When in the dwelling of a rich hero the guest will show brightly, lying in  his comfortable womb,
Agni, well pleased, well established in the house, will give to a clan such  as this a desirable reward.
## 5
Enjoy this ceremony of ours, o Agni. Make it glorious for us among the  Maruts and Indra.
Then sit here on the ritual grass night and dawn. Sacrifice here to Mitra  and Varuṇa, who desire it.
## 6
Just in this way Vasiṣṭha, desirous of wealth (like) the distillate of all  mother’s milk, praised powerful Agni.
He will spread out refreshment, wealth, and victory’s prize for us. – Do  you protect us always with your blessings.
938 VII.43–44