+++
title = "043"

+++
43 (559)
All Gods
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn has even less interest in individual gods than the most recent in this All  God series. Instead the sacrifice is again the focus: it is set in motion in verses 1–2,  with the priests exhorted to perform the ritual actions in the latter verse. The gods’  attendance is described in verses 3–4, and the poet’s relative indifference to their  individual identities is expressed in the phrase “however many you are” at the end  of verse 4. Appropriate to the ritual focus, Agni is the only god named (besides a  glancing reference to Heaven and Earth in vs. 1), and his actions and companion
ship are crucial to our well-being.
## 01
At the sacrifices those seeking the gods chant forth for you all to Heaven  and Earth with acts of reverence, in order to prosper—
those whose unequalled, inspired sacred formulations go questing in  divergent directions like the branches of a tree.
## 02
Let the sacrifice go forth, like a team to be spurred on. Being of one  mind, hold up the (ladles) facing toward the ghee;
spread the ritual grass that brings success to the ceremony. The flames,  seeking the gods, have stood up erect.
## 03
Like piggyback children on their mother, let the gods sit on the back of  the ritual grass.
Let (the ladle) facing in all directions anoint (the speech?) appropriate  to the rite of distribution. O Agni, do not make us negligent in our
attendance on the gods.
## 04
Those worthy of sacrifices do service to themselves according to their  pleasure, milking for themselves the good milkers, the streams
of truth.
Preeminent is the greatness of you good ones here today: come here,  being of one mind, however many you are.
## 05
In just this way, o Agni, show favor to our clans. In company with you, o  mighty one,
with wealth as our yokemate, we feasting companions are free from
harm. – Do you protect us always with your blessings.