+++
title = "048"

+++
48 (564)
R̥bhus
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
4 verses: triṣṭubh
The three R̥bhus are most commonly named R̥bhu, Vāja, and Vibhvan, and they  stand alongside Indra, who is sometimes called r̥bhukṣán “Master of the R̥bhus,”

although r̥bhukṣán can also be a description or name for R̥bhu, as it clearly is in 3c  and must also be in 1a. Here as elsewhere the three R̥bhus can be invoked by the  name of any one of them in the plural. A partial exception is that the stem vibhván or víbhvan is replaced by víbhū or vibhú in the plural to name Vibhvan and the  other two R̥bhus. Further, in this hymn verse 2 employs víbhvaḥ as an equivalent to  víbhvā(m̐), the nominative of Vibhvan. Although the use of the plural of one name  to designate the three gods is peculiar in translation, we have retained the Vedic  idiom to avoid prolonging the addresses to the gods.
The complex mixing of stems and singular and plural forms in such a short  hymn suggests that the poet is deliberately drawing attention to the names of the  R̥bhus and their meanings. Such a strategy is probably behind the repetitions in  verse 2, which mentions “R̥bhu with the R̥bhus,” then “Vibhvan” (or more accu
rately “Vibhva”) “with the Vibhus,” and “Vāja...in winning the vā́ja.” The mean ing of r̥bhú is approximately “craftsman,” víbhū and vibhú are “far-ranging,” and  vā́ja is “prize.” These are all things or imply qualities that the sacrificers want, and  indeed in 2ab the poet asks that the sacrificers be a “R̥bhu” or “a craftsman” and a  “Vibhvan” or “far-ranging” in the company of R̥bhus and Vibhus in order to win  a vā́ja, a prize.
## 1
O R̥bhukṣans, o Vājas, among us find exhilaration in our pressed soma, o  generous men.
Like travelers’ intentions, let them [=your horses] make you, who are  turned this way, and your manly chariot roll here, o Vibhūs.
## 2
As R̥bhu with the R̥bhus, as Vibhvan with the Vibhus, we would
overcome vast powers by your vast powers.
Let Vāja help us in winning the prize (vā́ja). With Indra as our yokemate,  we would overcome our Vr̥tra [=obstacle].
## 3
Because these very ones [=Indra and the R̥bhus] overcome many
(commands) by their command, they conquer (even) in the face of the  superiority of the outsider.
Indra, Vibhvan, R̥bhukṣan, and Vāja will put away the manliness of the  outsider and of the rival by confronting it.
## 4
O gods, now make for us wide space. Be of one accord to help us. The good (gods) should give refreshment to us. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.