+++
title = "049"

+++
49 (565)
Waters
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
4 verses: triṣṭubh
In contrast to VII.47, the waters in this hymn have more physical definition: in par ticular, verse 2 gives a notable typology of types of water: “heavenly waters” (rain), “those that flow” (rivers), “those found by digging” (well water), and “those that  arise by themselves” (springs)—all of which end by flowing into the sea. But the  purity and purifying power of flowing waters, noted in the first three verses, gives  them a moral as well as a physical quality, and in verse 3 the god Varuṇa in his role  as observer and judge of human actions is found among them. From passages like  this it is easy to see how Varuṇa came to be so closely associated with the waters, a  dominant characteristic of Varuṇa in later times. Verse 4 moves from the physical  and moral to the ritual realm, to the employment of water in the soma sacrifice, the  theme that prevailed in VII.47.
## 01
They come from the middle of the (heavenly?) ocean, those whose chief  is the sea—becoming pure, never settling down,
whom the mace-bearing Indra, the bull, dug out—let those waters,
goddesses, help me here.
## 02
The heavenly waters, or those that flow, or are found by digging, or arise  by themselves,
those, clear and pure, whose goal is the sea—let those waters, goddesses,  help me here.
## 03
In the middle of which King Varuṇa travels, looking down upon the  truth and falsehood of the peoples,
those, clear and pure, that drip honey—let those waters, goddesses, help  me here.
## 04
Among which King Varuṇa, among which Soma, among which all the  gods take their nourishment for exhilaration,
into which Agni Vaiśvānara entered—let those waters, goddesses, help  me here.