+++
title = "050"

+++
50 (566) Mitra and Varuṇa (1), Agni (2), the All Gods (3), the  Rivers (4)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
4 verses: jagatī 1–3, atijagatī or śakvarī 4
This is one of the relatively few healing hymns in the R̥gveda. The hymn is included  among those to the waters because of the last verse invoking the rivers for their  help. For a translation of the hymn and notes on the various lexical problems in it,  see Zysk (1985: 28 and 130–32).
The afflictions against which this hymn is recited center on the feet. The reference  to the “creeping thing” in the refrain of 1–3 led Velankar (1963) to propose that the  hymn is for treatment against different kinds of poison but especially against snake  venom. However, the symptoms and the causes of the foot problems, even though  they are too unclear to determine, appear to be varied. Zysk (p. 131) identifies the  “creeping thing” as the ajakāva (vs. 1), “an evil-looking, crawling animal...which944 VII.51
was known to have lived under the skin and to have formed a swelling or eruption”  (pp. 25–26). However, the ajakāva could also be referred to in 1b and therefore be  an ulcer or a swelling, if, as Renou (EVP XVI: 111) suggests, “the nesting thing”  is a skin lesion in contrast to a “swelling thing” on the skin. Likewise, we cannot  identify the vijāman joint, although it could be located in the foot, since the erup
tion apparently spreads from it to the ankles and knees. And, as Zysk (pp. 131–32)  argues, the last verse probably refers to two kinds of female demons, the śipadā and  śimidā, who polluted waters and caused the foot problems.
## 1
Guard me here, Mitra and Varuṇa. Do not let the nesting or the swelling  thing come upon us.
I put the ajakāva of vile appearance out of sight. – Let not the creeping  thing find me, bringing a disease of the foot.
## 2
What eruption will appear on the vijāman joint and will become smeared  over the knees and ankles,
let blazing Agni force that away from here. – Let not the creeping thing  find me, bringing a disease of the foot.
## 3
What poison is in the silk cotton tree, what in streams, and what is  produced from plants,
let the All Gods propel that away from here. – Let not the creeping thing  find me, bringing a disease of the foot.
## 4
(The rivers) that are from the slope, depth, and height, those that are  filled with water and those empty of water—
let (these) kindly (river-)goddesses, swelling with (waters as their) milk,  become for us free of śipadā-demons,
let all the rivers become free of śimidā-demons.