+++
title = "056"

+++
56 (572) Maruts
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
25 verses: dvipadā virāj 1–11, triṣṭubh 12–25
This hymn is structured like VII.34, an All God hymn, in that the first part is in the  short dvipadā meter and the second part in triṣṭubh, although the proportions of  verses in each meter are different. It also shares a final verse with VII.34, a generic  plea for the gods’ protection. But in content there is little in common between the  two hymns.
This hymn begins with four verses about the birth and identity of the Maruts,  alluding both to their mysterious generation from Pr̥śni (see esp. vs. 4) and the para dox that they are both identical (“belonging to the same nest,” vs. 1) and separate  and rivalrous. This theme then disappears from the hymn, save for several refer ences to their plural “names” (vss. 10, 14; we of course know them only under one  name, “Maruts”). The rest of the dvipadā section (vss. 5–11) is essentially descrip tive, of their power, beauty, and accoutrements.
Although this celebration of the Maruts’ qualities continues in the triṣṭubh por tion, there is also a significant ritual component, initiated in the first half of verse  12. Subsequent verses make clear what ritual is involved: in verse 14 it is said that  they are worshiped at the beginning of the sacrifice, and they are invited to enjoy  the House-offering; in verse 16 they are called “playful.” In middle Vedic ritual  the third and last of the “Four-monthly” (Cāturmāsyāni) rituals is the Sākamedha, celebrated in the autumn. On the day before the Sākamedha day proper, the  Maruts receive two oblations—thus, they are worshiped at the beginning of the  sacrifice. Moreover, the second of these two oblations is the “House-offering”  (Gr̥hamedhīya). And on the next day there is an offering to the “playful Maruts,”  using the same word that describes their behavior in verse 16d. (For further refer
ence to the Maruts at the Sākamedha in this Marut cycle, see VII.59.9–10. On the  ritual itself see, e.g., Hillebrandt 1897: 117–19; Keith 1925: 322–23.) As usual, offerings to the gods prompt us to ask for reciprocal benefits from the  gods, and these requests occupy much of the remaining verses (17–24), with the  final refrain verse (25) extending the requests to other gods as well. The last few  request verses specific to the Maruts (vss. 22–24) ask for their help in battles over  land and waters, alluding presumably to the Ārya expansion.
## 1
Who, separately, are these anointed superior men who belong to the  same nest—
the young bloods of Rudra, possessing good horses?
## 2
For no one knows their (separate) births.
But certainly they know, mutually, each his own separate means of
begetting.
## 3
They sprinkled each other mutually, each with his own self-purifying  (rain drops? semen?).
The falcons with the wind’s roar contended among themselves.
## 4
These are the secrets the insightful one perceives:
what great Pr̥śni bore as her udder.
## 5
Let this clan be possessed of good heroes in (the form of) Maruts, the clan prevailing from of old, fostering its manly power.
## 6
Best driving their drive, most beautiful in beauty, supplied with  splendor, strong with strengths—
## 7
Strong is your strength, steadfast your forces. Thus the flock with its  Maruts is powerful.
## 8
Beautiful is your bluster, raging are the minds of the bold troop, like a  raving ecstatic.
## 9
Keep your missile away from us, with all its gear;
let your ill-will not reach us here.
## 10
I call the dear names of you precipitate ones,
when you are here bellowing to your hearts’ content, o Maruts.
## 11
They are possessed of good weapons and arrows, of lovely
neck-ornaments,
and are themselves beautifying their own bodies.
## 12
Gleaming are the oblations for you gleaming ones, o Maruts. I set in  motion a gleaming ceremonial course for the gleaming ones.
By truth the servers of truth came to reality—the gleaming ones of  gleaming birth, pure.

## 13
On your shoulders, Maruts, are spangles, on your breasts brilliants are  being set.
Like lightning flashes shining forth with the rains, (you are) holding  yourselves ready with your weapons according to your nature.
## 14
Your deep-grounded great powers rise forth. Set forth your names, you  who are worshiped at the forefront of the sacrifice.
Enjoy this thousandfold domestic portion of the House-offering, o  Maruts.
## 15
If, Maruts, you give study to what is praised in just this way at the  invocation of the prizewinning inspired poet,
right away give of wealth consisting of heroes, which another man, a  non-giver, will never swindle.
## 16
The Maruts, well directed like racehorses—the young bloods beautify  themselves to look like wondrous apparitions;
they are beautiful like children who live in a grand house, playful like  calves still suckling.
## 17
Showing favor, let the Maruts be merciful to us, as they make the two  well-fixed world-halves spacious.
Let your cow-smiting, man-smiting weapon stay at a distance. With  benevolent thoughts bow to us, good ones.
## 18
The Hotar, once installed, keeps calling for your giving to be  completely directed hither, Maruts, while he is himself being  hymned.
He who is the herdsman of such (wealth), o bulls, without duplicity he  calls upon you with solemn words.
## 19
These Maruts here bring the hasty to a halt; they make might bow  to might.
They protect the laud from the rapacious; they establish heavy hatred  for the ungenerous.
## 20
These Maruts here spur on even the feeble, likewise also the whirlwind,  in whatever way the good ones please.
Thrust aside the dark shades, o bulls. Confer all life and lineage on us. 21. Let us not miss out on your gift, o Maruts; let us not lag behind at the  distribution, o charioteers.
Give us a share in the goods we crave, whatever you have of good  quality, o bulls.
## 22
When the peoples, the champions clash together in frenzies at (contests  for) the boisterous (rivers), the plants, and the clans,
then, o Maruts, Rudriyas, become our rescuers in the battles with the  stranger.
## 23
Maruts, you have given rise to many solemn speeches from the  Forefathers, which have been recited to you long since: along with the Maruts the strong one is the victor in battles; just along  with the Maruts does the charger win the prize.
## 24
Beside us let there be a forceful hero, o Maruts, who is lord and  apportioner for the people,
with whom we might cross over the waters to good dwelling. Then,
(thanks to) you, might we dominate our own home.
## 25
Indra, Varuṇa, Mitra, Agni, the waters, the plants, the trees shall enjoy  this of ours.
May we be in the shelter, in the lap of the Maruts. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.