+++
title = "057"

+++
57 (573)
Maruts
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
Ritual offering to the Maruts is the subject of this whole hymn, although, unlike  the preceding hymn, no specific ritual is referred to. The hymn begins with an invita tion offered to the Maruts to the sacrificial “honey” (soma), an invitation phrased  in a way very close to the English idiom indicating potential possession “has their  name on it” (at least in our interpretation). They travel to the sacrifice and, having  received the guest reception, are asked to sit on the ritual grass, to receive the obla tion (vs. 2). The sacrifice is successfully concluded in verse 5, and their help and gifts  requested. The last two verses (6–7) seem to be a summary of the ritual process—in  6 they are urged to come in pursuit of oblations, in 7 to come in order to give help
in return—the two verses being unified by the opening “when praised.” Verse 4 is somewhat odd in a Marut context. Although it is common to beg the  Maruts to keep their missile away from us (see, e.g., the preceding hymn, VII.56.9),  the reference to an “offense” committed by us humans is more appropriate to a  Varuṇa or Āditya context: see especially the use of the term in the Vasiṣṭha-Varuṇa  hymns later in this maṇḍala (VII.86.4, 87.7, 88.6), since the Maruts are not usually  associated with moral issues (though see vs. 5 in the next hymn, VII.58). Much  more typical is the lovely description of the glittering Maruts in verse 3.
## 1
Your honey has the name “Marut,” o you who deserve the sacrifice. At  the sacrifices they become invigorated with its strength:
they who set even the two wide world-halves to trembling, the mighty  ones swell the wellspring, when they have journeyed.
## 2
It’s surely the Maruts who take note of the singer, who lead forward the  thought of the sacrificer.
Sit on our ritual grass today, having been graciously received, to pursue  (the oblations) at the rites of distribution.

## 3
The others do not glitter like these Maruts here, with their brilliants,  their weapons, their bodies.
All adorned, themselves adorning the two world-halves, they smear a  common unguent on themselves for beauty.
## 4
Let your missile stay aside, Maruts. When we will do offense to you in  our human fashion,
let us not come into its way [=missile], o you who deserve the sacrifice.  Let your most delightful favor rest in us.
## 5
The Maruts have taken pleasure in what has been done here
[=sacrifice]—those faultless, gleaming, pure ones.
Promote us with your favors, o you who deserve the sacrifice. Further us  with prizes for our thriving.
## 6
And, when praised by all their names, let the Maruts, superior men,  pursue the oblations.
Give of immortality to our progeny; awaken riches, liberalities, bounties. 7. When praised, o Maruts, come hither, all of you in your totality, with  help to the patrons,
who, possessing hundreds, strengthen us by themselves. – Do you protect  us always with your blessings.