+++
title = "058"

+++
58 (574) Maruts
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭub
A description of the fearsome power of the Maruts, embodiments of the thun derstorm, begins the hymn (vss. 1–2), but the topic turns to their power to help  the poet and his patrons in verses 3–4, with the mythic model, their aid to Indra,  invoked briefly in verse 4. In verse 5 the potential anger of the Maruts is men tioned, and we seek to atone for whatever act occasioned it. Like the human  offense punished in verse 4 of the previous hymn, VII.57, this moral tone is  somewhat out of place in a Marut hymn. However, here the reference to the  Maruts’ father, Rudra the punisher and healer, provides a better context for this  scene of anger and atonement. The final verse (6) is a summary verse, referring  to the performance in the immediate past of the praise hymn that constitutes the  first five verses.
## 1
Chant forth to the flock, grown strong all together, which has the power  of its divine nature.
They pound the two world-halves with their greatness; they reach to the  vault from chaos, from propless (space).
## 2
Even your birth, Maruts, (was attended) by turbulence, you fearsome  ones, of powerful battle fury, unruly, who stand out because of their great powers and their strength.
Everyone who sees the sun takes fear at your journey.
## 3
Impart lofty vigor to our bounteous (patrons). Only the Maruts shall  enjoy our good praise.
Like a road when it’s traveled, (the flock) will bring the people across;  may it further us with the help we crave.
## 4
Aided by you, Maruts, the inspired poet gets hundreds; aided by you, the  charger is victorious, bringing thousands;
aided by you, (Indra) is sovereign king and smites Vr̥tra. Let this giving  of yours stand out, you shakers.
## 5
I seek to entice here these (sons) of Rudra the rewarder. Surely the  Maruts will bow to us again?
If they are angry in secret, if openly, we make recompense for this
transgression to the forceful ones.
## 6
The good praise hymn of the bounteous ones has been proclaimed: this  is the hymn the Maruts enjoy.
Even from a distance keep away hatred, you bulls. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.