+++
title = "059"

+++
59 (575) Maruts (1–11), Rudra (12)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
12 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī 1–6, arranged in pragāthas, triṣṭubh 7–8,  gāyatrī 9–11, anuṣṭubh 12
As the variety of meters suggests, this is a composite hymn, with some of the sec tions clearly appended at the end of the Marut sequence. Its length confirms this  analysis, since the previous hymn contained only six verses.
The first six verses consist of three pairs of pragāthas concerning the ritual ser vice offered first to a collection of gods (vs. 1, probably vs. 2) and then particularly  to the Maruts (vss. 3–6) and the benefits that accrue to the sacrificer. Vasiṣṭha names  himself in verse 3. This six-verse sequence conforms to the numerical pattern of the  Marut cycle and could have been original to it. The following two triṣṭubh verses  (7–8) continue the same theme, though more vividly. In particular, in verse 7 the  Maruts are compared to “dark-backed geese,” preening themselves in secret and  then flying here. This may be a reference to how quickly storms can seem to arise,  with thunderclouds fully developed (“preened in secret”).
The last four verses are clearly late additions. They make reference to the  Sākamedha rite encountered also in VII.56.14, the last of the Four-monthly rituals  described in middle Vedic texts. In verse 9 the Maruts are called “descendants of the  scorcher” (sā́ṃtapana), in verse 10 “sharers of the House-offering” (gŕ̥hamedha);  at the Sākamedha the Maruts as Sāṃtapana receive an offering at midday, and in954 VII.59
the evening as Gr̥hamedha. The final verse (12), in a different meter, is dedicated  to “Tryambaka,” an epithet of Rudra. The Sākamedha ends with an oblation to  Rudra Tryambaka.
## 1
Whom you safeguard, o gods, and whom you lead right up here, to him—o Agni, Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman, Maruts—extend shelter.
## 2
With the help of you, o gods, on a favorable day the one who has  sacrificed crosses over hatreds.
He furthers his dwelling place, ex(tends) his great refreshments, who  does ritual service to your liking.
## 3
Vasiṣṭha will certainly not neglect even the last of you:
when our (soma) is pressed today, o Maruts, drink it avidly, all of you. 4. Your help in battles certainly does not desert him to whom you have  granted it, o men.
Your favor has turned here anew. Drive straightaway, you who desire  to drink.
## 5
You of ardent generosity, drive here to drink the stalks.
Here are the oblations for you, o Maruts. Because I have bestowed
them, don’t go somewhere else.
## 6
Sit here on our ritual grass and undertake to give us coveted goods. O unfailing Maruts, you will exhilarate yourselves here on the somian  honey—Hail!
## 7
Surely even in secret they keep preening their bodies. The dark-backed  geese have flown here.
As a whole troop you have sat down all around me, like battle-lusty
men, becoming exhilarated on the pressing.
## 8
O Maruts, whoever, being evilly angry at us and at cross-purposes, seeks  to strike us, you good ones,
may he be fastened to the fetters of deceit. With your most scorching  stroke strike him.
## 9
You descendants of the scorcher, Maruts, enjoy this oblation here. (Come here) with your help, you who care for the stranger.
## 10
Come here, you sharers of the House-offering—Maruts, don’t
stay away—
with your help, you of good drops.
## 11
Here, just here—you self-strong, sun-skinned poets—
I will you (to come) here to (my) sacrifice, o Maruts.
## 12
We sacrifice to Tryambaka the fragrant, increaser of prosperity.
Like a cucumber from its stem, might I be freed from death, not from  deathlessness.