+++
title = "060"

+++
60 (576) Mitra and Varuṇa
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
12 verses: triṣṭubh
The opening four verses describe the rising Sun, who watches over the good and  evil that people do. As such, he is the agent of Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman,  since they are the gods whose central character is to govern the actions of mor tals. In verses 3–4 the poet blends the offerings that rise to the gods at dawn with  the antelopes of the Sun that carry him aloft. These antelopes are “rich in ghee”  (vs. 3), as the offerings would be. In verse 4 the “strengthening, honeyed ones”  are primarily the offerings given to Mitra and Varuṇa, but juxtaposed to the  Sun’s ascent and to the description of his antelopes, they also become reflections  of these antelopes, lifting the Sun to the heaven. In 4cd the Ādityas clear a path  for the Sun, and this image leads to the principal theme of the succeeding verses  and of the hymn itself—the ability of the Ādityas to lead even through difficult  circumstances. The Ādityas keep away those who oppose the truths they embody  (vs. 5), and they guide even those who may not understand their truths (vss. 6–7).  The “unwinking, perceptive ones” in 7a might be the gods themselves, although  they could also be the spies of Mitra and Varuṇa, who are described in similar  ways (cf. VII.61.3, 5) and who would be present both in heaven and on earth (cf.  VI.61.3).
If there is benefit in following the Ādityas, there is also danger in not doing so.  The poet warns of the anger of the Ādityas (vs. 8), the hostility of Aryaman (vs.  9), the secret attack they can bring, and the hidden strength they possess (vs. 10).  All this leaves the poet and his people “trembling” (vs. 10) before them. The sense  of danger, either from those who do not follow the ways of the Ādityas or from  not following those ways, is strongly articulated in the second half of the hymn.  It is also here that the hymn designates Sudās, the king, as the special recipient of  the Ādityas’ protection and mercy (vss. 8, 9). This may point toward a time in  which the king and his people were trying to find and to establish a settlement  after the normal period of migration and battle, a time that might well be one of  particular peril.
## 1
If today as you arise, o Sun, you who are free of offense will speak the  truth [=that we are free of offense] to Mitra and Varuṇa,
we would be (offenseless) before the gods, Aditi, and dear to you,
Aryaman, as we sing.
## 2
O Mitra and Varuṇa, this very Sun, who draws the gaze of men, rises up  over both [=standing and moving beings] on earth—
the herdsman of everything, (both) the standing and the moving, seeing  the straight and crooked (acts) among mortals.
## 3
He has harnessed from his abode his seven antelopes, which, rich in ghee,  convey him, the Sun,

who, seeking you, o Mitra and Varuṇa, surveys your domains and the  tribes (of men), like your herds.
## 4
The strengthening, honeyed ones [=offerings] belonging to you two  have risen up, and the Sun has mounted the gleaming flood—
he for whom the Ādityas—Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuṇa all together— clear his roads.
## 5
These are the avengers of much untruth, for they are Mitra, Aryaman,  and Varuṇa.
These have grown strong in the house of truth—the capable,
undeceivable sons of Aditi.
## 6
These hard to deceive—Mitra, Varuṇa, (and Aryaman)—cause even the  unperceptive man to perceive through their skills.
Fully knowing the resolve based on good perception, they lead by a  good path even across narrow straits.
## 7
These unwinking, perceptive ones of heaven and of earth lead the  unperceptive man.
Even in the onrush of a stream there is a ford. They will bring us across  to the far shore of this peril.
## 8
Since Aditi, Mitra, and Varuṇa offer their welcome herdsmanlike  protection to Sudās,
let us, securing our kith and kin under it, not do that which angers the  gods, o overpowering ones.
## 9
By his libations he should ritually cleanse the altar of any
double-dealing that deceives Varuṇa.
Let Aryaman with his hostilities avoid (him [=Sudās], creating) a wide  world for Sudās, o you two bulls.
## 10
Because their fiery attack is even in secret and they are strong with  hidden strength,
(we are) trembling in fear before you, bulls—by the greatness of your  very skill, have mercy on us!
## 11
Who by sacrifice will gain your favor for his formulation at the winning  of victory’s prize and of the highest wealth,
his generous patrons will strive to overpower the battle fury of the  outsider. They have made for themselves a wide and secure place for  their dwelling.
## 12
This installation of the god [=Agni] to the fore has been made for you  two, Mitra and Varuṇa.
Take us across all difficulties. – Do you protect us always with your  blessings.