+++
title = "061"

+++
61 (577)
Mitra and Varuṇa
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
Like the preceding hymn, with which it shares its final verse, this hymn begins with  a description of the rising Sun, who here is the eye of Mitra and Varuṇa, watch ing over the good and evils deeds of humans. In verse 2 the rising Sun parallels  the voice of the poet, who raises his hymn to Mitra and Varuṇa. And just as the  Sun fills the worlds with light, Mitra and Varuṇa penetrate all the worlds and even  go beyond them. Like kings who send their agents into the communities to note  what their subjects are doing and saying, Mitra and Varuṇa also have spies who are  everywhere (vs. 3).
The mention of these spies in verse 3 may help explain the most problematic  verse in the hymn, verse 5. There are several ways to construe the verse: ámūrā víśvā could be vocative and nominative dual respectively, describing Mitra and  Varuṇa as those who can never be fooled (so Geldner), but more likely they  describe the drúhaḥ “deceptions” in 5c. As Oldenberg notes, grammatically dis persing the phrase ámūrā víśvā(ḥ). . . imā́ḥ “all these who are never fooled” seems  forced. But the idea that Mitra and Varuṇa themselves deceive has understand ably given interpreters pause. Still, in X.109.4 Indra is said never to be deceived  but himself deceiving (√dabh) and in the previous hymn, in VII.60.9c, Aryaman  can bring “hostilities” against those who do not act rightly. The “deceptions”  of Mitra and Varuṇa are probably their hidden spies. These spies are actually  not seen and accordingly in this verse they are unidentified and hence verbally  hidden. The verse even works a deception of its own, describing the spies in the  feminine plural—spáśaḥ “spies” is masculine plural—and delaying the feminine  term that stands for them, drúhaḥ, until pāda c.
## 1
Upward arises the eye of lovely appearance that belongs to you two gods,  o Varuṇa—the Sun, who has extended himself.
He who watches over all living beings marks the battle fury among
mortals.
## 2
Truth-possessing, the far-famed inspired poet raises his thoughts forth to  you, o Mitra and Varuṇa—
he whose formulations you will help, o you of strong will, when you two  will bring his autumns to fullness, as if by his will.
## 3
(You have reached) past the wide (midspace), past the earth, o Mitra and  Varuṇa, past the high heaven aloft, o you who bring good gifts.
You have placed your spies among the plants and among the clans,
guarding unwinkingly against him who goes his own way.
## 4
I shall praise the institutes of Mitra and Varuṇa: in its greatness their  unbridled power ever presses upon the two world-halves.

The months of those not sacrificing will pass without bringing heroes,  but he whose thoughts belong to the sacrifice will extend his
settlement.
## 5
O you two bulls, all these of yours who are never fooled, among whom  has been seen neither sign nor wonder—
(these, your) deceptions!—follow the untruths of men. There have not  been secrets that cannot be perceived by you two.
## 6
I make the sacrifice great for you two with my acts of reverence; eagerly  I call upon you two, Mitra and Varuṇa;
my new thoughts (go) forth to you to chant praise. They will enjoy these  formulations created (by me)!
## 7
This installation of the god [=Agni] to the fore has been made for you  two, Mitra and Varuṇa.
Take us across all difficulties. – Do you protect us always with your
blessings.