+++
title = "062"

+++
62 (578)
Sūrya (1–3), Mitra and Varuṇa (4–6)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
As in the two previous hymns, the poet begins with the rising Sun, who shines down  upon all the Ārya tribes and fills the heaven with his light and therefore becomes  equal to heaven (vs. 1). The antelopes of the Sun carry him up, as do the praise  songs as they rise, and from heaven the Sun witnesses the deeds of humans and  attests to the Ādityas and Agni the innocence of the sacrificers (vs. 2). In verse 3 the  poet asks that Varuṇa, Mitra, and Agni bring them the highest arká. The primary  meaning of arká is “chant,” and therefore the first idea is that these gods will inspire  the chant of the sacrificers. But arká can carry a secondary meaning, “flame,” a  sense that is actualized here through the description of the gods as candrá “glitter ing” and by arcís “flame,” the latter etymologically related to arká in this meaning.  So like the Sun these gods will brighten themselves and also make bright the world  of the sacrificers.
In verse 4 three gods—Heaven and Earth and Aditi, the mother of the Ādityas— are addressed in pāda a, but the remainder of ab refers only to two gods, Heaven  and Earth. The poet continues to address two gods in verse 5, revealing only in the  last pāda that the two gods are Mitra and Varuṇa. Finally, in the last verse the poet  matches the image of light spreading over earth and heaven that was introduced in  the first verse with the “wide space” across generations and the freedom of move
ment that Mitra and Varuṇa will offer.
Although the poet does not continue the strategy through the whole hymn,  verses 1–2 have a striking number of sound repetitions. Thus 1d is krátvā kr̥táḥ súkr̥taḥ kartŕ̥bhir bhūt, 2b ebhí stómebhir etaśébhir évaiḥ, and 2d (á)nāgaso aryamṇé agnáye ca. In verse 2 the sound repetitions underscore the tie between the Sun’s ani mals and the praise songs and the bonds between Aryaman, Agni, and the innocent  sacrificers.
## 01
The Sun has raised up his flames aloft, (facing) all the many tribes of  Manu’s sons.
Radiating, he is visible as the equal to heaven. Created by their will, he  has become well created by his creators.
## 02
O Sun, you have arisen in front facing us with these praise songs, with  your coursers in their usual ways.
You will proclaim us to Mitra and Varuṇa to be without offense, and to  Aryaman and to Agni.
## 03
Let those possessing the truth—Varuṇa, Mitra, and Agni—clear the way  to a thousand ritual gifts for us.
Let the glittering ones offer us the highest chant [/flame]. Being praised,  let them fulfill our wish.
## 04
O Heaven and Earth, o Aditi, you two should rescue us, (and so also  should) those good birth-givers [=the gods] who gave birth to you two,  o you two on high.
Let us not be in the anger of Varuṇa or of Vāyu, nor in that of Mitra,  most dear to men.
## 05
Stretch forth your arms for us to live. Sprinkle our pasture-land
with ghee.
Make us famed among the people, you two youths. Hear these my
invocations, Mitra and Varuṇa.
## 06
Now let Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman provide wide space for ourselves  and for our offspring.
Let all our paths be easy to travel. – Do you protect us always with your  blessings.