+++
title = "063"

+++
63 (579) Sūrya (1–5ab), Mitra and Varuṇa (5cd–6)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
Even more than the other hymns in the sequence VII.60–65, this hymn concen trates on the rising Sun. Here the Sun becomes the visible sign and the embodiment  of the Ādityas. He is the eye of Mitra and Varuṇa (vs. 1) and subhága “bringing  good fortune,” like Bhaga, the god Fortune (vs. 1). But the Sun is especially like the  god Savitar, the “Impeller.” He is prasavitár, who “impels forth” (vs. 2); he takes  the form of Savitar (vs. 3); and the people are impelled (prasūtá) by him (vs. 4).  The god Savitar especially drives living beings to their homes at night, so here the

Sun assumes the complementary function of impelling them forth to their various  daytime tasks.
The Sun is also the fire common to all the Vedic peoples. He is the “common  support of the sons of Manu,” creating a cultural or even possibly a political unity  among them (vs. 1) and the “common wheel” (vs. 2), whose turning commences the  day and the activities of the day. Representing Savitar, the Sun upholds the “com
mon institute” (vs. 3) that governs all the peoples.
In verse 5b, the images of the herd and the falcon are puzzling. If the herd  belongs to the frame as we have translated the verse, then it is probably the  gods whom the Sun follows as they clear a road for him across the sky. On the  other hand, if the herd is part of the comparison, then a hungry falcon might  follow a herd of cattle because the cattle would attract birds, which could  become its prey. Of course it is also possible, even likely, that the poem legit
imately allows both interpretations. See also IV.38.5, in which there are like  uncertainties.
## 1
Upward he rises, bringing good fortune and with his gaze on everything,  the common support of the sons of Manu—the Sun,
the eye of Mitra and Varuṇa, the god who has rolled together the shades  of darkness like hides.
## 2
And upward he rises, the one impelling the peoples forth—the great,  undulating beacon of the Sun,
about to turn the common wheel that Etaśa pulls, harnessed on the
yoke poles.
## 3
Gleaming forth from the lap of the Dawns, he rises upward, being  celebrated by the husky-voiced singers.
He appears to me as the god Savitar, who does not violate the common  institute.
## 4
The bright ornament of heaven, having a broad gaze, rises upward— he whose goal is in the far distance, gleaming as he crosses over
(toward it).
Now the peoples, impelled forth by the Sun, will go toward their goals,  and they will perform their tasks.
## 5
Where the immortals have made a way for him, he follows after the herd  [=the gods?], flying like a falcon.
When the sun has risen, we would worship you two with our acts of  reverence and with our oblations, o Mitra and Varuṇa.
## 6
Now let Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman provide wide space for ourselves  and for our offspring.
Let all our paths be easy to travel. – Do you protect us always with your  blessings.