+++
title = "064"

+++
64 (580) Mitra and Varuṇa
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is a prayer to the Ādityas for rain, as the poet makes explicit in verse  2cd. Geldner rightly sees the likelihood of a double reading of verse 1. The “cloaks  of ghee” are butter offerings given to Mitra and Varuṇa, but at the same time they  are rain that the Ādityas send in response to these offerings. So also in verse 4, the  “ghee” that Mitra and Varuṇa should sprinkle on the composer of this hymn is  rain. As a result of the rain, the dwellings of the sacrificers will prosper (4cd, 5c).
As often, the middle verse of the hymn is more cryptic than the others. Mitra and  Varuṇa are addressed, as is the devó aryáḥ, translated here the “civilizing god” and  referring to Aryaman. The point of mentioning Aryaman in such an indirect way  is to create a verbal connection between the devó aryáḥ and the arí, the “stranger”  in pāda c. An arí is an outsider, but one who belongs to the Vedic peoples and fol
lows the customs of the Āryas. The point is that such a stranger will recognize the  sacrificers as those who prosper because they follow the Ādityas and the ways of the  Āryas and will honor them as sudā́saḥ “good givers,” generous people. But Sudās  is also the Bharata king who figures very prominently in the Vasiṣṭha hymns, and,  inescapably, this designation must recall him. That is to say, even one who belongs  to another Vedic tribe will see that the sacrificers are “Sudāses” or like Sudās, the  great king, in their prosperity and generosity.
In verse 4, the “chariot seat” is the seat of honor here at the sacrifice, which is  implicitly imagined as a chariot, as often elsewhere.
## 1
You two who are masters of space in heaven and on earth—to you they  should give cloaks of ghee.
Mitra, well-born Aryaman, and King Varuṇa of strong rule enjoy our  oblation.
## 2
O you two kings, herdsmen of great truth, lords of the rivers, and  rulers—travel here to this place.
Send down refreshment to us and rain from heaven, o Mitra and Varuṇa,  you of lively drops.
## 3
Then let Mitra, Varuṇa, and the civilizing god [=Aryaman] lead us forth  by the most successful paths,
so that a (civilized) stranger will thereby speak of us as “good givers.”  With gods as our herdsmen, might we find exhilaration by your
refreshment!
## 4
Who will fashion for you two this chariot seat by his thought and who  will make and sustain a high vision—
sprinkle him with ghee, Mitra and Varuṇa. Bring satisfaction to our  good dwellings, o kings.

## 5
This praise song, o Varuṇa, o Mitra, has been offered to each of you, like  the gleaming soma to Vāyu.
Give help to our insights. Awaken the ways to plenty. – Do you protect  us always with your blessings.