+++
title = "065"

+++
65 (581) Mitra and Varuṇa
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is similar in theme and phrasing to the preceding hymn, with which it  also shares the final verse. It too is fundamentally a prayer for rain to Mitra and  Varuṇa. There is no reference to Aryaman, although there is an indirect reference  to his function as god of customs in the poet’s description of Mitra and Varuṇa as  aryá “civilizing” (vs. 2a). Verse 4 most explicitly states the theme of the hymn. In  pāda a the poet offers the gods oblations, which include ghee and other ritual liba
tions, and in b he asks for these in return, though in the form of rain. In c we read  váram “wish” twice, once in the phrase práti... váram “at your wish,” referring to  the wish of the gods for oblations, and second in the phrase váram ā́...pr̥ṇītám “fill  our wish” for rain. Thus in both ab and cd, the poet first refers to the desire of the  gods and then his own desire.
The translation below also takes víśva “everyone” twice in the translation of  verse 1, which, like the first verse of the preceding hymn, offers a possible double  reading. According to the translation below, in pāda d Mitra and Varuṇa move  “upon the course of everyone,” that is, they follow or accompany the actions of all  beings. But yā́man “course” can also mean “entreaty,” and if construed with ācít
“attentive,” the line could also mean, “moving on the course of everyone, attentive  to the entreaty of everyone.”
## 1
When the sun has risen, I call upon you two with hymns, upon Mitra and  upon Varuṇa of purified skill,
you two, who possess imperishable and preeminent lordship, you two  moving upon the course of everyone, attentive to the entreaty of
everyone.
## 2
Because you two are lords of the gods and you two are civilizing, make  our dwellings to be nourishing.
Might we reach you two, Mitra and Varuṇa, where heaven and earth will  swell and also the days.
## 3
These two have many fetters, are bonds for untruth, and are hard to  overcome for the cheating mortal.
By your path of truth, Mitra and Varuṇa, we would cross over
difficulties, as (we would) waters by a boat. 4. (Come) here to the enjoyment of our oblation, Mitra and Varuṇa!  Sprinkle our pasture with ghee, with refreshments.
At your wish, in this place and for our people, fill our wish from the  beloved heavenly water.
## 5
This praise song, o Varuṇa, o Mitra, has been offered to each of you, like  the gleaming soma to Vāyu.
Give help to our insights. Awaken the ways to plenty. – Do you protect  us always with your blessings.