+++
title = "066"

+++
66 (582)
Mitra and Varuṇa (1–3, 17–19), Ādityas (4–13), Sūrya  (14–16)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
19 verses: gāyatrī 1–9, 17–19, arranged in trcas; br ̥ hat ̥ ī alternating with satobr̥hatī 10–15, arranged in pragāthas; puraüṣṇih 16
This hymn consists of eight metrical units of various meters. The first three are three  gāyatrī tr̥cas, followed by three br̥hatī/satobr̥hatī strophes and one more gāyatrī tr̥ca.  The hymn then concludes with a final, single puraüṣṇih verse. Despite its metrical  complexity, the hymn sustains its basic themes throughout. Once again this is a  hymn recited at sunrise, and indeed the phrase “at the rising of the sun” occurs  at the beginning of three of its seven strophes (vss. 4, 7, 12). Also the beginning  of fourth strophe (vs. 14) contains a variant of the phrase, the final tr̥ca starts (vs.  16) with a reference to the rising of the sun, and the pragātha beginning at verse 10  opens with a mention of the sun. Therefore of the hymn’s eight units, only the first  tr̥ca (vss. 1–3), which establishes Mitra and Varuṇa as the dedicands of the hymn,  and the final summary invitation to Mitra and Varuṇa lack a reference to the rising  sun in its first verse. This repeated mention of the rising sun is a structuring device  that unifies the hymn despite the diversity of its meter. Thematically, the rise and  movement of the Sun across the heavens becomes the representation of the Ādityas’  lordship extending across the world.
The actions of the Ādityas are also linked with the words and action of the  ritual. This theme is introduced at the outset, when they are described as sudákṣa “of good skill” and the children of Dakṣa, the embodiment of skill and specifically  sacrificial skill (vs. 2). The gods sustain “the three divisions” (vs. 10), a phrase that  likely refers both to the divisions of the world (earth, midspace, and heaven), and  to the divisions of the ritual (the three soma-pressings). They also sustain the divi sions of time (vs. 11): the year, month, and day, but also the sacrifice and the night,  a division that could refer to the sacrificial rites by day and the continuation of the  rites across the night. The Ādityas “impel” (√sū)—a word connected with Savitar,  of course, and therefore with the Ādityas—the sacrificers and thereby bring their  rituals success and take their worshipers “across difficult straits” (vss. 4–5).964 VII.66
## 01
Let our thunderous praise song go forth with our reverence to Mitra  and Varuṇa,
the two powerfully born,
## 02
Whom the gods uphold, the two of good skill whose father is Skill, whose greatness (goes) forward to lordship.
## 03
You two, protectors of our dependents and of our bodies, o Varuṇa— bring the insights of (us) singers to success, o Mitra.
## 04
If today, at the rising of the sun, the one free of offense [=the Sun],  Mitra, Aryaman,
Savitar, and Bhaga will each impel (us),
## 05
Let this dwelling be one that ritually pursues (the gods) well. Now, o  you bringing good drops, (let those go) forth on their course
who take us across difficult straits.
## 06
And the sovereign kings and Aditi, who (are masters) of the  undeceivable command,
as kings are masters of (all that is) great.
## 07
At the rising of the sun I will sing to you two, to Mitra and Varuṇa, to Aryaman, who cares for the stranger.
## 08
With longing for wealth and gold, this thought is for power that knows  no wolf;
this inspired (thought) is for winning wisdom.
## 09
Together with our patrons, might we be these, o god Varuṇa, o Mitra: might we receive refreshment and the sun.
## 10
Many are they whose eye is the Sun, whose tongue is Agni, who  strengthen through the truth,
who sustain the three divisions by their insights, all (the divisions) by  their encompassing powers.
## 11
They who divided the year, the month, then the day; the sacrifice and  the night, then the verse—
as kings, Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman have attained an
unobtainable rule.
## 12
Today for you, at the rising of the sun, with our hymns we will conceive what Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman solemnly declare. You are
charioteers of truth!
## 13
(You) possessing the truth, born of the truth, and strengthening  through the truth, (you) terrifying haters of untruth—
might we be in the most protective favor of you, o men, and might also  our patrons.
## 14
This lovely marvel [=the Sun] arises on the curve of heaven, when the swift god Etaśa conveys him, right for everyone to gaze upon. 15. For his easy passage, the seven sisters—the antelopes on his chariot— convey the Sun—
the lord of each one, head by head, and of the moving and the
standing—through the whole dusky realm altogether.
## 16
That eye, fixed in place by the gods, blazing as it ascends,
might we see for a hundred autumns. Might we live for a hundred
autumns!
## 17
With your poetic arts, o undeceivable ones, travel here in brilliance,  o Varuṇa
and Mitra, in order to drink the soma.
## 18
From heaven through your domains, o Varuṇa and Mitra, you who are  without deception—travel here.
Drink the soma, thrusting yourselves toward it.
## 19
Travel here, Mitra and Varuṇa, enjoying our offering, o noble men. Drink the soma, o you who strengthen through the truth.