+++
title = "067"

+++
67 (583)
Aśvins
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
10 verses: triṣṭubh
The opening verses of this hymn describe the early morning advent of the Aśvins,  when the sacrificial fire is kindled and the dawn becomes visible (vs. 2). They also  present problems of translation and interpretation that turn on the identity of the  Aśvins’ chariot. Elsewhere the Aśvins’ chariot can be the sacrifice or the hymns of  the sacrifice that bring the Aśvins to the rite. Therefore, the chariot in verse 1a is  the vehicle bringing the Aśvins. In 1c “that which” the poet recites and “that which”  serves as a messenger to awaken the Aśvins is the praise song, now become the  Aśvins’ chariot carrying the Aśvins to the rite. In verse 4 there is no explicit men tion of the chariot, but there is a complex ellipsis in 4a, which lacks both subject  and verb. The gapped subject may be the chariot, but again the chariot as the hymn  that seeks the Aśvins.
The hymn itself continues to be the focus of the poet in verses 5–6. In verse 5  he calls upon the Aśvins to advance his insight so that it will win gain for the sac rificers. While the poet previously mentioned the chariotry directly, here he refers  to the hymn using the language of competition and prizewinning appropriate for a  chariot. In verse 7 the poet also speaks of the “treasure,” the soma, which is offered  to the Aśvins along with his hymn, and he shifts attention from his “thought,” which  he offers to the Aśvins in the form of his hymn (vs. 1), to the Aśvins’ thought, which  he hopes will not be hostile to the sacrificers. In the final two verses the poet appeals  to the Aśvins to support his patrons, whose generosity and bounty he celebrates.

Structurally, the hymn forms a ring, since the infinitive jarádhyai “to awaken”  and the verb ájīgar “he has awakened” in the first verse are answered in the last verse  by the imperative járatam “awaken!” However, while the translation of the ájīgar is  secure, the interpretation of neither the infinitive nor the imperative is certain. The  form jarádhyai is a hapax in the R̥gveda, and it is not clear whether it is transitive  or intransitive and, if transitive, who is being “awakened.” In the last verse, járatam
might be from same root, although it also might be from a different root and mean  “make old!”
## 01
To become awake in response to your chariot, o you two lords of men,  with a thought worthy of the sacrifice accompanying offerings,
I recite (to you) here, like a child to his parents, that which, like a
messenger, has awakened you two, o holy ones.
## 02
Agni has blazed up, being kindled among us, and the very borders of  darkness have become visible.
In the east Dawn’s beacon has come into view—(the beacon) of Heaven’s  daughter, which is being born for glory.
## 03
Now the good Hotar attends upon you with his praise songs as he recites,  o Aśvins, Nāsatyas.
Journey this way along many pathways with your sun-finding,
goods-bearing chariot.
## 04
Now, seeking you, o honey-bearing Aśvins, your (chariot carries)  you, when, seeking good things, I call upon you two at the
soma-pressing.
Let your stout horses carry you here. You will drink the well-pressed  honey drinks among us.
## 05
O gods, Aśvins, bring forward my insight—not falling short, seeking  good things—to win gain.
Help all the forms of plenty here in the competition for the prize. Do as  you are able for us with your abilities, o you lords of abilities.
## 06
Help us in these insights, Aśvins. Let our child-producing seed be  abundant.
Propagating ourselves in kith and kin, possessing good riches, we would  go to our godly pursuit of you two.
## 07
This very treasure, like a promissory portion for a companion, is set  down here for you, o honey-bearing ones, and given by us.
With thought free of anger, journey this way, to eat our oblation among  the clans of Manu’s sons.
## 08
In your single, joint trek, o energetic ones, your chariot encompasses the  seven flowing streams.
They do not become exhausted—these your surpassing (horses) of
powerful presence, which, yoked by the gods on their yoke-poles, carry  you two. 9. Be unfailing for the bounteous ones, who speed their gift of bounty  with wealth,
who extend their relationships by their liberal gifts, mingling their
bounties of cattle and of horses.
## 10
Now, hear my call, youthful ones. Journey the course that brings  refreshment, Aśvins.
Grant riches and awaken our patrons! – Do you protect us always with  your blessings.