+++
title = "068"

+++
68 (584)
Aśvins
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
9 verses: virāj 1–7, triṣṭubh 8–9
In its first four verses the hymn opens with an invitation to the Aśvins to come to  the sacrifice in the early morning and to receive the soma offerings being made to  them. In verse 3 the Aśvins come with the daughter of the Sun, Sūryā, which marks  this as a morning hymn (cf. also vs. 9). In verse 4c the vípra “inspired poet” is likely  the reciter of the hymn, but in 4ab the pressing stone also sounds as it crushes the  soma stalks, and therefore it too could be the poet in the latter half of the verse.  The stone prepares the soma offerings, so the reference to the oblations in 4c would  also be appropriate to it.
Then in the second set of four verses (vss. 5–8) the poet briefly describes great  deeds of the Aśvins and four of the past figures whom they helped. In verses 6 and  8 the poet mentions the offerings of Cyavāna havirdā́ “the giver of offerings” and  their summons (hūyámāna) by Śayu, words that echo the present offerings (havís,  2b) and the calls to the Aśvins (hávana, 2c).
Verse 5 alludes to the story of Atri, who was rescued from the heat of a pit oven  by the Aśvins and who received sustenance from them. That is to say, the Aśvins  rescued him with food and from becoming treated like food. In this verse the poet  refers to the “sustenance” (bhójana) and the “relief” (omán) Atri receives. Similarly,  in I.116.8 the Aśvins give Atri “nourishment together with solid food” (pitumátīm  ū́rjam) and in 118.7 they give “nourishment” and “relief” (ū́rjam omā́nam). Geldner  suggests that Atri receives from the Aśvins an elixir that restores him to life, but  these descriptions suggest more mundane gifts of food and drink that saved Atri  from starvation.
In verse 7 Bhujyu’s evil-intentioned companions include his father, Tugra,  who left him behind (I.116.3, 119.8). But somehow the Aśvins changed Tugra’s  mind and rescued Bhujyu through Tugra, who, as the description yuvā́ku “seek ing you” implies, was a worshiper of the Aśvins (cf. I.117.14). In verse 8 the poet  refers to the Aśvins’ willingness to come to the rescue even of a “wolf,” of a bad  person, who is “starving” (jásamāna). This applies to Śayu, since he was once

“starving” (jásuri, I.116.22), but the Aśvins rescued him by making his sterile  cow give milk.
In the final verse (vs. 9), which is reminiscent of the first verse of the previous  hymn, the poet alludes to the cow that the Aśvins swell in verse 8. Geldner under stands the cow to represent the gifts that the poet receives from the sacrificer, but  more likely it is the poem itself, which will yield good things for the poet. Note that  the poem is the focus of 9ab, which refers to “good hymns” and “good thoughts.”  The verb jarate, translated here as “awakens,” can also mean “sings,” and the hymn’s  audience would surely have been aware of the double sense.
## 01
Beautiful Aśvins, wondrous ones, journey here with your good horses,  enjoying the songs of him seeking you
and the oblations brought before you. Pursue our (offerings).
## 02
The exhilarating soma stalks have come forth for you. As is right, come  to pursue my offering
across the calls of the stranger. Hear our (calls).
## 03
O Aśvins, your chariot swift as thought rises forth across the airy spaces,  bringing hundredfold help,
speeding to us, o you who bring Sūryā as goods.
## 04
When this stone—seeking the gods, pressing the soma—speaks aloft to  you two,
the inspired poet should turn you enchanting ones here by the
oblations.
## 05
Since you now have brilliant sustenance (for him), you two keep away the  intense (heat) for Atri,
who will receive relief from you, since he is dear to you.
## 06
And again, Aśvins, this is your recompense to Cyavāna, the giver of  offerings, who was growing old:
that you two lay an ageless appearance on (him).
## 07
And again, Aśvins, his companions of evil intent abandoned this Bhujyu  in the middle of the sea.
His enemy [=Tugra], who seeks you, will rescue him.
## 08
Do as you are able, even on behalf of a wolf that is worn out, and listen  to Śayu as you are called—
you who have swelled the fertile cow like waters—even the barren cow— by your able power, Aśvins, by your abilities.
## 09
This praise-poet here awakens with good hymns, rousing himself at the  beginning of the dawns, bringing good thoughts.
The fertile cow makes him grow strong with her refreshing drink, with  her milk. – Do you protect us always with your blessings.