+++
title = "069"

+++
69 (585)
Aśvins
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
8 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn is dominated by the chariot of the Aśvins and the theme of the journey  of the Aśvins. The poet opens with the chariot (rátha) and refers to it, often explic itly, in every verse. In verse 1 the poet describes their “golden chariot,” whose bril liance reflects the morning light that accompanies its advent. The final pāda of the  verse takes an interesting turn. The chariot is first called voḷhár “conveyor,” a term  that ordinarily refers to the chariot driver (as in I.144.3d, VI.64.3d, VII.2.35c) or  the horse that pulls a chariot (IX.81.2b, 96.15d, 112.4a). But here and in the simi lar pāda VII.71.4a, it describes the chariot itself, attributing agency to it. But then  the poet also calls—or appears to call—the chariot nŕ̥pati “lord of men,” which  should describe the Aśvins themselves, as it does in VII.71.4. Geldner suggests that  it could be a luptopamā, a comparison in which the particle of comparison has been  omitted: “(wie) ein Fürst.” Renou (EVP XVI: 48) describes the figure as a sort of  hypallage caused by the juxtaposition rátho nr̥patī in VII.71.4. Renou is likely right  that the pāda responds to VII.71.4, but it rather appears to be a semantic expansion  of the chariot so that it includes or rather becomes the horses that pull it and the  drivers who direct it. Also in verse 3 the chariot again takes the role of a groom,  “clasping the bride,” who is being carried on the chariot to her marriage. Behind  this semantic expansion of the chariot, if that is what is occurring, may be the  image of the Aśvins’ chariot as the sacrifice itself. Note that the chariot is described  as “having tracks of ghee” (vs. 1c) and “three chariot-boxes” (vs. 2b), corresponding  to the three soma-pressings. The chariot is not just the sacrifice, however. As usual,  it remains the chariot that brings the Aśvins to the sacrifice, as well as being the  sacrifice, at least in these opening verses.
The theme of the journey of the Aśvins is marked by verbal derivatives of √yā “journey,” which appear in every verse except verses 4 and 7. These two verses refer  to the great deeds of the Aśvins: how they brought the daughter of the Sun to her  marriage, how they rescued Atri from the heat of a pit oven, and how they saved  Bhujyu from the sea. The Aśvins’ chariot and thereby the theme of journeying are  involved in all of these rescues.
## 01
Let your golden chariot, ever pressing upon the two world-halves,  journey here with those bulls, your horses—
the (chariot) with tracks of ghee, gleaming at its wheel-rims, the driver  of refreshments, the lord of men with prizewinning mares.
## 02
Spreading over the five lands, yoked by thought, let it with its three  chariot-boxes journey here—
(the chariot) by which you two go to the clans serving the gods, as you  set your journey toward any direction, Aśvins.

## 03
You two glorious ones possessing good horses—journey this way. O  wondrous ones, you will drink the honeyed treasure.
Clasping the bride to itself, your chariot presses upon the boundaries of  heaven with its tracks.
## 04
The young woman—the daughter of the Sun—chose your glory at the  decisive turn.
When by your abilities you help him [=Atri], serving the gods, his vital  force evades the heat by your relief.
## 05
O charioteers, this your chariot, which, having been harnessed at the  dawning of the ruddy light, journeys around its course—
by it convey to us luck and life at the breaking of dawn, at this sacrifice,  Aśvins.
## 06
O you two fine men, like two thirsting buffaloes toward lightning,  journey today toward our pressings,
for in many places (people) call upon you two with their thoughts. Let  not the others seeking the gods [=rival sacrificers] hold you down.
## 07
You two brought Bhujyu, struck down into the sea, up from the flood by  your unfailing
winged ones, which neither tire nor falter, when you were rescuing him  by your wondrous powers, Aśvins.
## 08
Now, hear my call, youthful ones. Journey the course that brings
refreshment, Aśvins.
Grant riches and awaken our patrons! – Do you protect us always with  your blessings.