+++
title = "070"

+++
70 (586)
Aśvins
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: jagatī
In the last verse the poet calls the attention of the Aśvins to his hymn, calling it  “intricate” or “well-twisted” (suvr̥ktí). He is quite right: his hymn is complex, since  it presents metaphors of unclear reference and ellipses of uncertain interpretation.  Such intricacy is attractive to gods like the Aśvins, and the purpose of the poet is to  get the attention of the Aśvins by means of the hymn and to cause them to take notice  of the offerings and other elements of the sacrifice so that they will be present at it.
In verse 1 the poet summons the Aśvins to take their place at the sacrifice, but  1cd, in which he describes the coming of the Aśvins, can be variously interpreted.  In 1c something “stood” when the Aśvins took their place. We have suggested that  this is the sacrificial fire kindled in the early morning, but other interpreters have  offered other reasonable possibilities: the hot milk offered to the Aśvins (Oldenberg,  Renou [EVP XVI: 49]) or the liquid offerings more generally (Geldner), the vessel for the hot milk (Oldenberg), the “good favor” mentioned in verse 2a (Renou), or  the place itself (Geldner, Velankar [1963]). Of these, the gharma or hot milk offer ing, which is mentioned in 2b, is the strongest possibility, and of course, the sup pression of the subject in 1cd might have allowed hearers to recall several or all of  these things that welcome the Aśvins.
In verse 3 the poet shifts attention to the rewards that the Aśvins will bring. The  sacrificer hopes to find prosperity for the sacrificer from the rivers, plants, and clans,  among which the Aśvins find a place, over which they sit “at the peak of the moun tain”—in heaven perhaps? In verse 4a the “plants and the waters” recall the rivers,  plants, and clans of verse 3 and verbally connect the two verses, even though the  poet again shifts the theme back to the sacrifice being offered to the Aśvins. Here  the waters and plants represent sacrificial libations and offerings. In 4b it is not clear  what are the “harness cords” (yogyā́). They might be rites or offerings (especially  the hot milk offering), or hymns. That is, they are elements of the sacrifice of one  kind or another. Whatever these cords are, the image carries forward the descrip
tion of the Aśvins in 2cd as “well-harnessed” horses and therefore should represent  what attaches the Aśvins to the sacrifice. In 4cd the Aśvins reward the present sacri ficers while keeping in mind the ancient ones. The present sacrifices are the equal to  the ones of the past and therefore deserve the reward of the Aśvins.
In the last verses the poet becomes more straightforward in calling the Aśvins’  attention to his hymn, his “formulations,” which he has sent out in search of them  (vs. 7), and to the sacrifice which stands ready for them (vs. 6).
## 1
Come to us, Aśvins, who grant all desires: this has been proclaimed as  your place on earth.
Having prosperity on its back like a prizewinning horse, it [=the fire?]  stood up when you two sat down here as if (sitting) upon your womb  to remain steadfast.
## 2
The most delightful favor clings to you two. In the house of Manu has  been heated the hot milk
that carries you, having been harnessed like a pair of well-harnessed  swift steeds, across the seas and rivers,
## 3
(Across) the places that you two have taken for yourselves, Aśvins,  among the exuberant (rivers) from heaven, among the plants, and
among the clans—
(you two) sitting down at the peak of the mountain, (you two) bringing  refreshment to the pious man.
## 4
O gods, delight in the plants and waters when you will take on the  harness cords [=the ritual acts?] of our seers.
While granting many treasures to us, you two have kept in view the
ancient generations.
## 5
Even though you have heard many, Aśvins, you look upon the
formulations of our seers.

At your wish, journey forth according to our wish for the sake of our  people. Let your most delightful favor be for us.
## 6
Our sacrifice, battle-ready with its offerings and (newly) created
formulations, will become yours, Nāsatyas.
Journey forth to Vasiṣṭha according to his wish. These formulations are  being chanted for you two.
## 7
Here is the inspired thought, here the song, Aśvins—take pleasure in this  intricate (hymn), o bulls.
These formulations have gone, seeking you. – Do you protect us always  with your blessings.