+++
title = "071"

+++
71 (587) Aśvins
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
In its final verse this hymn repeats the last verse of the previous hymn, and as that  verse says, it too is an intricate one (suvr̥ktí). The first verse marks this as an early morning hymn. Since the ruddy light of early dawn is elsewhere associated with the  ruddy cattle, the poet echoes that connection by describing the horses and cattle  that the Aśvins bring. There is also a second possible reading: the two compounds  áśvāmaghā[ḥ] gómaghā[ḥ] “having bounties of horses, bounties of cattle” could  be nominative plurals as well as duals and be taken as proleptic adjectives modify ing the 1st-person “we.” This grammatical ambiguity can imply that the horses and
cattle that the Aśvins bring will become the horses and cattle that we will have. In verses 1–2 the Aśvins are asked also for rescue from enemies, want, and dis ease. In verses 3–4 the poet then turns especially to the chariot of the Aśvins, and, as  often, the chariot is linked to the sacrifice itself. In 3c its horses are “in the harness of  truth,” that is, joined to the hymns and even to the rites, which may also be expres sions of truth. The chariot is also syū́magabhasti, an elusive hapax. Geldner among  others connects gábhasti “hands” to the rays of the sun, but there is no clear instance  of such a use elsewhere in the R̥gveda. We propose, therefore, that the hands, which  normally hold reins, have themselves become the reins (syū́man) of the chariot  because they are the hands of the priests, who control the ritual. In verse 4 the analy sis and reference of viśvápsnya, perhaps “containing all milk,” are obscure. Geldner  wonders whether the word might describe the praise hymn or Agni. The gharma  vessel suggested here is uncertain at best. Verse 5 then returns to the Aśvins’ ability  to save from danger by describing four great acts of rescue. The last, the rescue of  Jāhuṣa, is the least familiar and can be only tentatively reconstructed. The best sug gestion is that of Oldenberg, who says that by combining verse 5d and I.116.20cd we  can get the following: Jāhuṣa was trapped by his enemies is a wild, rocky area, but  the Aśvins brought him out and set him down on light, soft soil. 1. Night recedes from her sister Dawn. The dark leaves behind the path to  the ruddy.
We would call upon you, having bounties of horses, bounties of cattle.  By day and during the night keep the arrow away from us.
## 2
Journey to the pious mortal, conveying what is desirable by your chariot,  Aśvins.
By day and during the night keep thirst and affliction from us, o you rich  in honey. You two should deliver us.
## 3
Let your bulls [=horses], showing us favor, turn your chariot here at the  nearest dawn.
Convey here your (chariot) bearing good things, for which the hands  (of the priests?) are its reins, with its horses in the harness of truth,
Aśvins.
## 4
The chariot that is the conveyor for you, o lords of men, having three  chariot-boxes, bearing good things, journeying at dawn—
by this (chariot) journey here to us, Nāsatyas, when what contains all  milk [=the hot-milk vessel?] goes to you.
## 5
You two released Cyavāna from old age. You brought a swift horse  to Pedu.
You recovered Atri from difficulty and darkness. You set Jāhuṣa down  on soft (soil).
## 6
Here is the inspired thought, here the song, Aśvins—take pleasure in this  intricate (hymn), o bulls.
These formulations have gone, seeking you. – Do you protect us always  with your blessings.