+++
title = "072"

+++
72 (588)
Aśvins
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn is marked by the repeated invitations to the Aśvins to “journey here”  (ā́...yātam, vss. 1, 2, and 5), which create a ring of the hymn’s beginning and end.  The urgent pleas that the Aśvins come here to this place, to this sacrifice and not to  another, is reinforced by other words meaning “near” or “this way” (arvā́k, 2a) and  “here” (áchā, 3d). Only verse 4 counters by opening with ví, here translated “forth,”  but more exactly signifying “away, apart.” This verse shifts the attention to the  spreading light of dawn (pādas a, c), which is matched in pāda d by the spreading  light of the sacrificial fires and in b by the poetic formulations rising from the sing ers. The last verse joins the expansiveness of verse 4 to the invitation to the Aśvins  by describing the four directions in which the Aśvins are present and from which  they can come to the sacrifice at the center.974 VII.73
The four directions and the implicit center in verse 4 are reflected in the “wealth  belonging to the five peoples” (vs. 5c), that is, the wealth belonging to all the Vedic  clans and tribes. This wish also suggests that this hymn is recited on behalf of  one who sees himself, his tribe, or his clan at the center of the Vedic peoples. The  Vasiṣṭha poet is not shy about pointing to his family’s connection to the center  either, since he speaks of the familial formulations that “awaken” in order to bring  the Aśvins (vs. 3ab).
## 1
Journey here, Nāsatyas, by your much gleaming chariot filled with cattle,  filled with horses.
All your teams accompany you, having beautified your bodies with your  eagerly sought glory.
## 2
Journey here near to us by your chariot, Nāsatyas, along with
the gods,
for in you two are our ancestral companionships and common kinship.  Be aware of this!
## 3
The praise songs of the Aśvins have awakened, also our family
formulations and the Dawns, the goddesses.
Seeking to gain these two world-halves, the inspired poet summons here  the two holy Nāsatyas.
## 4
When the dawns break forth, Aśvins, the singers present to you their  formulations.
The god Savitar has fixed the radiant beam on high. The fires awaken  aloft by kindling.
## 5
Journey here from the west or from the east, Nāsatyas, here from the  south or from the north, Aśvins,
here from everywhere with the wealth belonging to the five peoples. – Do  you protect us always with your blessings.