+++
title = "073"

+++
73 (589)
Aśvins
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This short hymn is a summons to the Aśvins at the break of dawn, “the further  shore of ...darkness.” In verse 2 the poet calls the Aśvins’ attention to Agni, the  sacrificial fire and the Hotar of the sacrifice, who has been installed and stands  ready to give the offerings to the Aśvins (2ab). All is ready for the Aśvins to con
sume the soma and the other offerings presented to them (2cd). In verse 3a the poet  compares this sacrifice to a chariot speeding to the Aśvins. This image is answered  in verse 4ab, which looks forward to the arrival of the váhnī, the “two chariot horses.” The term can refer to the horses of the Aśvins, but it might also refer to  the Aśvins themselves as chariot-horses (cf. VIII.8.12). But in either case the idea is that the fully prepared sacrifice races to the Aśvins, and the Aśvins, with or as fully  equipped horses, race to the sacrifice. Again, in verse 4cd the poet draws attention  to the ritual preparations made for the Aśvins and begs the Aśvins not to ignore his  call and overlook his sacrifice. The last verse repeats the final verse of the preceding  hymn. Here it is not so closely tied to the themes of the hymn, but it appropriately  continues the plea to the Aśvins to travel from wherever they are to the sacrifice.
## 1
We have crossed to the further shore of this darkness, aiming our praise  song as we seek the gods.
My song calls to those having many wondrous powers, foremost among  many, born in the distant past, to the immortal Aśvins.
## 2
Manu’s own dear Hotar [=Agni] has been set down, he who sacrifices to  the Nāsatyas and extols them.
Eat of the honey [=soma], Aśvins, nearby to us. Bringing pleasing
offerings, I call on you two at the ritual distributions.
## 3
We have sped the sacrifice, choosing among the paths. Take pleasure in  this intricate (hymn), o bulls.
Sent forth like an obedient servant, Vasiṣṭha has been roused for you  two—(he) awakening in response to you with his praise songs.
## 4
These two chariot-horses—demon-smashing, fully equipped, having hard  hooves—will come near our clan.
The exhilarating (soma-)stalks have gathered together. Do not overlook  us! Come with benevolence!
## 5
Journey here from the west or from the east, Nāsatyas, here from the  south or from the north, Aśvins,
here from everywhere with the wealth belonging to the five peoples. – Do  you protect us always with your blessings.