+++
title = "074"

+++
74 (590)
Aśvins
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
The metrical alternation of br̥hatī and satobr̥hatī structures this hymn into three  pragāthas. All three mention food, most often the soma (vss. 2d, 3b) or other nour ishment (vs. 5b) that the Aśvins receive. But the poet also describes the nourishment  that the Aśvins give (vs. 2a). The last two verses connect these two kinds of nourish ment in the climax of the hymn. In verse 5 the poet pairs the nourishment that his  patrons follow as they approach the Aśvins as a complement to the “glory,” their  prominence in the social order, that they receive from the Aśvins in exchange. As a  result these patrons become godlike—able to keep away “the wolf,” which represents  danger (cf. I.174.10 of Indra), and swelling “with swelling strength” (śávasā śūśuvuḥ;  cf. VII.93.2 of Indra and Agni, VI.19.2 of Indra, and I.167.9 of the Maruts). The

ability of the Aśvins to go to every clan (vs. 1d) likewise parallels the “man-protec tors” (nr̥pātā́raḥ), or kings of the peoples, of the tribes consisting of clans.
## 1
Now the rituals of the day call upon you two, Aśvins, (at the dawning) of  reddening dawn.
Now have I called upon you for help, o you whose goods are powers,  since you go to every clan.
## 2
You two have given brilliant sustenance, o you fine men. Hurry it to the  liberal-minded one.
You of one mind—stop your chariot nearby. Drink the soma-honey!
## 3
Journey here! Attend to us here! Drink of the honey, Aśvins!
The milk has been milked out, o bulls whose goods are worth winning.  Do not overlook us! Come here!
## 4
Your horses that fly to the home of the pious one, bringing you two— by these swift steeds journey here, o men, Aśvins, seeking us, o gods.
## 5
And then our patrons, going to the Aśvins, follow the nourishments. These two Nāsatyas will offer enduring glory to the generous ones and  protection to us.
## 6
The man-protectors of the peoples, keeping the wolf away, who like  chariots have journeyed forth—
these men swell with their own swelling strength, and they dwell upon a  good dwelling.
This group of seven Dawn hymns, VII.75–81, is the largest such collection devoted  to this goddess in the R̥gveda, though none of the hymns is very long (ranging from  eight verses to three). The hymns share and recycle much of the same vocabulary and  phraseology, and there are striking phonologically driven lexical responsions across  hymns, which can unfortunately not be rendered in translation. What distinguishes  the hymns from each other is their structure, which can be quite tightly organized  and reinforced by verbal and grammatical markers. See, for example, VII.76.