+++
title = "075"

+++
75 (591)
Dawn
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
8 verses: triṣṭubh
This Dawn hymn contains most of the usual Dawn themes: her immediate arrival,  which awakens the world, her beauty and brightness, her daily journey, and, espe cially, her bestowal of riches on her praisers. The second half of verse 7 alludes to  the Vala myth and the release of the dawn cows (see also the Aṅgiras reference in  1d); otherwise there are no mythological elements and no mention of other gods. Although there are no particularly vivid images or striking phrases, the hymn is  pleasingly composed and contains some well-crafted phonological figures that are  unfortunately untranslatable.
## 1
Dawn, born in heaven, has dawned widely with her truth; revealing her  own greatness, she has come here.
She has uncovered the deceits, the disagreeable darkness; best of the  Aṅgirases, she has awakened the paths.
## 2
For our great good faring take note of us today; o Dawn, for our great  good fortune provide (for us).
Establish for us bright, glorious wealth that seeks fame—o goddess  among mortals, belonging to the sons of Manu.
## 3
These are the very beams of Dawn, who is lovely to see, the bright  immortal beams that have come here.
Generating the heavenly commandments, filling the midspaces, they have  spread out.
## 4
This is the very one who, hitching herself up out of the distance, circles  around the five settlements in a single day,
looking upon the patterns of the peoples—the Daughter of Heaven,  mistress of the world.
## 5
Possessed of prize mares, the maiden of the Sun who brings bright  bounties has dominion over wealth, over goods.
Praised by seers, awakening (the world), bounteous Dawn dawns, being  hymned by the conveyors (of songs/oblations).
## 6
The ruddy, bright horses have become visible opposite, conveying the  flashing Dawn.
She drives, the resplendent one, with a chariot entirely ornamented; she  establishes treasure for the person who distributes it.
## 7
True along with the true ones, great with the great, goddess with the  gods, worshipful with the worshipful—
she broke the fastnesses, she will give of the dawn-red (cows): the cows  keep bellowing in response to Dawn.
## 8
Now, o Dawn, establish for us a treasure consisting of cows, of heroes,  and of horses, providing much nourishment to us.
Do not put our ritual grass to scorn among men. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.