+++
title = "076"

+++
76 (592)
Dawn
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
A tightly structured hymn: the verbally responsive verses 3–4 are set within an inner  ring (vss. 2, 5) with exact repetition in their final pādas (ámardhanto vásubhiḥ...). This

structure is reinforced by tense usage: the verbs in verses 1–2 are all augmented aor ists referring to the immediate past of today’s dawn; those in verses 5–7 are present  indicatives and imperatives, stating general truths about the behavior of the dawns  and the singers; while those in verses 3–4 are augmented imperfects (with one per
fect) referring to the distant past, which gave rise to the present situation. This structure defines verses 3–4 as an omphalos, and indeed these verses show  clear omphalos features. Verse 3 contains the most intricate syntax in the hymn,  while verse 4 concerns the Father’s finding of “the hidden light” in the Vala cave,  the primeval model for each new dawn. Verses 3 and 4 are in reverse chronologi cal order: the Fathers find the hidden light of Dawn in verse 4, and verse 3 then  describes the subsequent time with the periodic return of the Dawn, eagerly pro ceeding to the sacrifice as if to a lover, not moving slowly and reluctantly like a  maiden leaving an assignation.
The exact repetition in the inner ring mentioned above is not a static feature. It  participates in what we have termed “poetic repair” (Jamison 2006) and therefore  provides forward movement by setting up a puzzle that is resolved later in the hymn.  The adjective ámardhantaḥ “not negligent” modifies “paths” in verse 2. The com
bination seems discordant, although the hearer can construct a meaningful read ing: paths that are not negligent are those, properly maintained and “set in order,”  that lead one where they are supposed to go. The application of “not negligent” to  the priests in verse 5 is far easier to interpret: not negligent priests are those who  properly perform the sacrifice every morning and therefore do not transgress the  gods’ commandments that regulate the proper functioning of the cosmos, since  by ritual logic the sacrifice causes the new day to dawn. The phrase in verse 5 thus  “repairs” the more jarring one in verse 2, but the jarring phrase in verse 2 also  forced the hearers to formulate a more complex conception.
As so often, consideration of poetic structure gives depth to the apparently  conventional expressions and images in this hymn, which recur in so many other  descriptions of Dawn.
## 1
The immortal light belonging to all people—he who belongs to all men,  god Savitar, has propped that up.
In accordance with his will, the eye of the gods has been born. Dawn has  revealed the whole world.
## 2
The paths leading to the gods have become visible to me—paths that are  not negligent and are set in order by the good ones.
The beacon of Dawn has appeared from the east. She has come here,  facing west from her habitation.
## 3
Those were the days: the many days through which, at the rising of  the sun,
you became visible, o Dawn—faring forth thence toward the east-facing  (sacrifice), like (a maiden) faring forth to her lover, not like one going  (home) again. 4. Those were the feasting companions of the gods: the sage poets of old,  provided with truth.
The Fathers discovered the hidden light. With their mantras that come  true, they generated the Dawn.
## 5
Come together in a common pen, they [=priests] act in unison; they do  not marshal themselves in opposition.
They do not transgress the commandments of the gods, they who are  not negligent and are united with the good ones.
## 6
In response to you the Vasiṣṭhas reverently invoke you with praises,  when, waking at dawn, they have praised you, well-portioned one.
Leader of cows, mistress of prizes, dawn for us, o well-born Dawn. Be  first awake.
## 7
She is the leader of largesse, of liberalities. Dawn, while dawning, is  “squawked” to by the Vasiṣṭhas,
as she establishes wealth of long fame in us. – Do you protect us always  with your blessings.