+++
title = "077"

+++
77 (593)
Dawn
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
Renou (EVP III: 95) calls this hymn a “pièce banale,” a designation that seems  hardly fair. Although it lacks the intricate patterning of the immediately pre ceding hymn, its simpler structure gives it a forward-moving urgency encoded  in its deployment of verb forms. The first half of the hymn (vss. 1–3) opens  with a perfect (ruruce “she has shone”) but thereafter consists entirely of aug mented aorists (like vss. 1–2 of VII.76), with aroci of 2d almost forming a  ring with the opening perfect form, built to the same root (√ruc). There is an  abrupt change of verbal mood in verse 4, with a cascade of imperatives in the  next two verses (4–5). The grammatical person also changes: the constant 3rd  person of verses 1–3 is succeeded by 2nd person in the rest of the hymn. Thus  the first half of the hymn describes the immediate arrival of Dawn, and in  the second the poet addresses a series of eager commands to Dawn, who has  just appeared in front of him. Two features tie the hymn together grammati cally: (1) the abundance of present participles modifying Dawn in both halves,  though more common in the first; and (2) the constant use of Dawn as subject.  Except for 1c and the first half of the final verse (6ab) Dawn is always the  grammatical subject. A glance at other Dawn hymns in this series shows that  this uniformity is unusual.
No doubt Renou’s remark concerned the “content” of the hymn, and it is cer tainly true that there are no remarkable images or elaborate conceits. However, the

familiar depiction of Dawn as a lovely and ardent maiden is pleasing here, as it is  elsewhere.
## 1
She has shone—up close like a young maiden, impelling every living  thing forth to activity.
(The time) has just come for Agni to be kindled by the sons of Manu.  She has made light, pressing away the dark shades.
## 2
Facing all, she has arisen in full extension; wearing a luminous, gleaming  garment, she has brightened.
Golden in color, a sight lovely to see, mother of cows, leader of days, she  has shone.
## 3
Well-portioned, conveying the eye of the gods, leading the bright horse  lovely to see,
Dawn has just been seen, decorated with (the sun’s) rays, bringing
brilliant bounties, projecting through all (the world).
## 4
Bringing valuable things nearby, dawn the foe into the distance; create  for us broad pastureland and fearlessness.
Keep hatred away; bring goods here; impel largesse for the singer, you  bounteous one.
## 5
Radiate widely to us with your fairest radiances, goddess Dawn,
lengthening our lifetime,
imparting to us both refreshment and largesse in cattle, horses, and
chariots, you who bring all valuables.
## 6
You whom the Vasiṣṭhas strengthen with their thoughts, o Daughter of  Heaven, well-born Dawn,
as that one place in us wealth high and lofty. – Do you protect us always  with your blessings.