+++
title = "078"

+++
78 (594)
Dawn
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is characterized by two “signature words”: práti “in response to / oppo site” (found in every verse but 4)  and the present participle vibhā́tī “radiating  widely” (vss. 3–5), words regularly found in other Dawn hymns. In fact, there is,  until near the end, little novel about this hymn. The most noticeable feature until  the end is that the middle verse (3) refers to the dawns in the plural, though they
seem to be immediately present, while the other verses have singular Dawn. But the most noteworthy aspect of the hymn is the striking hapax verb that opens  the last half verse (5c): tilvilāyádhvam. This is a transparent denominative built to  the adjective tílvila (V.62.7), but this only displaces the problem, as the meaning  and derivation of this adjective are not at all clear, and its rhyming reduplicative formation (til-vil) deviates markedly from normal Vedic word formation patterns.  The adjective is generally taken to mean “fruitful’ or the like and may be connected  with the word tilá “sesame.” If so, the creation and abundant scattering of seed may  be the intended meaning here, though this is only a guess. The English idiom used  to translate this obscure word is meant to convey its special status in the diction of  this otherwise unremarkable hymn.
## 01
The first beacons have been seen opposite; her unguents diffuse aloft. Dawn, with your lofty, light-filled chariot turned hither, convey to us a  thing of value.
## 02
In response to her the kindled fire awakens; in response (to her awaken)  the inspired poets hymning (her) with their thoughts.
The goddess Dawn travels, while pressing away all shades of darkness, all  difficulties with her light.
## 03
These very dawns have been seen opposite in the east, extending their  light, radiating widely.
They have generated the sun, the sacrifice, the fire. The disagreeable  darkness has gone back behind.
## 04
She has appeared, the bounteous Daughter of Heaven. All look at Dawn  radiating widely.
She has mounted the chariot being yoked by her own power, which
horses of good yoke convey hither.
## 05
In response to you those of good thought have awakened today—our  bounteous (patrons) and we (ourselves).
Be fruitful and multiply, Dawns, while radiating widely. – Do you protect  us always with your blessings.