+++
title = "079"

+++
79 (595)
Dawn
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This little hymn is dense with phonetic figures and puns, and like the preceding  hymn has signature words—in this case the preverb ví “apart, widely” and the pho nologically similar verbal roots vas “dawn” and vR̥(var) “(un)cover.”
Like many Dawn hymns, this one gives the opening of the Vala cave and the  release of the cows imprisoned therein as the mythic model for each new dawn (see  esp. vs. 4). Dawn’s association with the distribution of goods is also emphasized in  the last three verses.
## 01
Dawn has dawned widely along the path of the peoples, awakening the  five settlements stemming from Manu.
Along with her bulls lovely to see she has propped up her radiance. The  Sun has uncovered the two world-halves with his eye.
982 VII.80–81
## 02
They anoint the glossy nights at the ends of heaven; like clans in (battle-) harness the dawns are marshaled.
Your cows roll the darkness up altogether; they extend the light, like  Savitar his arms.
## 03
Dawn has come to pass—a bounteous benefactor most like Indra; she  has generated fame for good faring.
The divine Daughter of Heaven, most like the Aṅgirases, apportions  goods to the man of good action.
## 04
As much largesse grant to us, Dawn, as you excavated for the praisers  when you were being hymned.
(You) whom they brought forth with the bellowing of the bull, you
opened up the doors of the firm-fixed stone.
## 05
Impelling every god to largesse, rousing liberalities in our direction, dawning widely, impart insights to us for our gain. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.