+++
title = "081"

+++
81 (597)
Dawn
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas This final hymn breaks the pattern of the other Dawn hymns in this series: it has  too many verses for its position; it is composed of three pragāthas of br̥hatī alter nating with satobr̥hatī (as opposed to the triṣṭubh meter of the other hymns); and  it lacks the Vasiṣṭha clan refrain. It is therefore likely to have been an addition to  the collection, and the 1st-person plural subjunctive bhunájāmahai in verse 5 with  the modernized -mahai ending supports this assumption. However, the themes and  concerns of the hymn and the phraseology employed do not differ significantly  from those that went before.
## 01
She has appeared opposite, as she comes here dawning, the Daughter of  Heaven.
She unwraps the great darkness for seeing; the spirited one creates light. 2. The sun sends the ruddy (cows) surging up all together, as that heavenly  body itself goes up with his rays.
O Dawn, just at your first flush and that of the sun, might we be united  with what is apportioned.
## 03
In response to you, o Dawn, Daughter of Heaven, we lively ones have  awakened—
you who convey much to be coveted, you winner, (who convey) pleasure,  like a treasure, to the pious one.
## 04
You who in dawning, through your magnanimity, o great goddess, make  the sun to be visible for seeing—
may we—we beseech you—have a share of your treasure, being to you  like sons to their mother.
## 05
Bring here that brilliant bounty, Dawn, that has the longest fame. What of yours provides nourishment to men, o Daughter of Heaven,  give us that. Let us be nourished!
## 06
(Bring) fame immortal and riches for our patrons, prizes in cows for us— The impeller of the bounteous one(s), possessing a liberal spirit, Dawn  dawns away failures.