+++
title = "083"

+++
83 (599)
Indra and Varuṇa
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
10 verses: jagatī
This hymn looks back at the Battle of the Ten Kings described in VII.18, in which  the Bharata king Sudās with the help of the Vasiṣṭhas triumphed over an alliance  of ten rulers. This battle was a key moment in Vasiṣṭha history, and the poet recalls  this historic victory in order to extend it into the present. Now warriors allied with  the Vasiṣṭhas are going forth in their quest for cattle (vs. 1). Looking on Indra and  Varuṇa, who are present at the sacrifice, with their minds if not with their eyes and  thinking of their close association with the two gods, the poet and his allies call  upon the gods to help them. The cry to help Sudās in 1d replicates the call to which  the gods responded before and sets the stage for the poet’s recollection of the Ten  Kings’ battle.
In verse 3 the poet re-enters the earlier battle and speaks as if he were part of it  or speaks in the voice of those who were. In the person of the earlier Vasiṣṭha, he  calls for help in the midst of the turmoil of battle. Then in verse 4ab he remembers  that the gods did help Sudās, and in 4cd the poet returns to his present, calling on  Indra and Varuṇa to hear him. Like the earlier Vasiṣṭha, the poet and his people  confront enemies on every side (vs. 5ab), and therefore he calls upon Indra and  Varuṇa to help at the critical time as they did before (5cd). The poet knows that  others summon the gods as well (vs. 6ab), but in verses 6cd–8 he recalls that the  gods chose to help Sudās and Vasiṣṭha and not the other kings and priests. In the  end the sacrifices of these others were inadequate, and in the end the gods were  present at the sacrifice of Vasiṣṭha (vss. 7–8). In verse 9 the poet distinguishes Indra  and Varuṇa for the first and only time in this hymn. While the two gods may have  different functions, both their divine functions apply to the poet’s present situation.  Indra can bring victory to the poet and his people and Varuṇa can defend them.
## 1
Looking upon you two and their friendship (with you), o you superior  men, the broad-chested ones have gone forward in their quest for
cattle. Strike down the obstacles, both Dāsa and Ārya! Help Sudās with your  help, Indra and Varuṇa!
## 2
Where superior men gather together with their banners set, in a contest  where there is nothing at all to love,
where living beings, seeing the sun, become afraid, there speak for us,  Indra and Varuṇa!
## 3
“The ends of the earth have appeared covered in dust! O Indra and  Varuṇa, the tumult has mounted to heaven!
The tribes’ hostilities have come upon me: o you hearing my call, come  near with help.”
## 4
Indra and Varuṇa, conquering Bheda without opposition with your  deadly weapons, you helped Sudās.
Hear the sacred formulations to summon you! The placement of the  Tr̥tsus [=the Vasiṣṭhas] in front came to be their true (place).
## 5
Indra and Varuṇa, the evils of the stranger and the hostilities of the  aggressive ones burn against me.
Because you two are kings of the good belonging to both (war and
peace?), so once more help us on the decisive day.
## 6
Both (sides) call upon you two in the contests, upon Indra and upon  Varuṇa, to win what is good,
(as) when you helped Sudās together with the Tr̥tsus, when he was hard  pressed by the ten kings.
## 7
Gathered together but without a zeal to sacrifice, the ten kings gave no  fight to Sudās, o Indra and Varuṇa.
The invitatory praise of the superior men [=priests] sitting down to the  [sacrificial] meal came true: at the call of these to the gods, the gods  became present.
## 8
Indra and Varuṇa, you did your best for Sudās, surrounded on every  side in the battle with the ten kings,
when they, the bright-faced ones with braided hair, through their
reverence—the insightful Tr̥tsus through their insight—offered their  service.
## 9
The one [=Indra] smashes obstacles in battles; the other [=Varuṇa] ever  guards his commandments.
We summon you two, you bulls, with our intricate hymns. Extend your  protection to us, Indra and Varuṇa.
## 10
Let Indra, Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman extend to us their brilliance,  their great, widespread protection,
and the unassailable light of Aditi—they who grow strong through the  truth. We will keep in mind the signal call of the god Savitar.
