+++
title = "084"

+++
84 (600) Indra and Varuṇa
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The theme of rapid and forward movement dominates this hymn. This movement  is marked by the repetition of prá “forth” or “forward” in verses 1c, 3d, 4c, and 5b  and by verbal forms such as invati “speeds” in 2a and -jūtaḥ “hastened” in 3c. The  various kinds of movement involve the proffering of hymns and oblations and the  answering progress of the sacrificers by means of the wealth and offspring they  receive from the gods. There is also movement implied in the “speed” of the rule of  Indra and Varuṇa (2a), which extends high and wide. In verse 2, verbally enclosed  within this description of the extent of their rule (2a, 2d), are the “bonds” of the  two gods (2b) and the anger of Varuṇa (2c), which show the menacing power of the  gods to enforce their rule.
Another characteristic of this hymn is verbal sleight of hand in verses 1 and 4. In  verse 1 the “ghee-rich one” (ghr̥tā́cī) would normally described the sacrificial ladle,  but, as Renou (EVP VII: 85) notes, it can also characterize the dhī́, the “insight”  embodied in the hymn (I.2.7) or the “songs” (gíraḥ, VII.5.5). Because this “ghee-rich  one” is held in the arms of the priests, hearers would think first of the ladle. But  in 1d the “ghee-rich one” goes “by itself” and “in its varying appearance.” These  descriptions would fit the hymn, which flies to the gods with its varied sounds and  words. The final line, therefore, creates for hearers an unexpected redefinition of the  “ghee-rich one” and produces a double image of it as both ladle and hymn. As such,  the “ghee-rich one” represents the “oblations and reverence” offered to the gods in 1b.
Neither the translation nor the interpretation of verse 4cd is secure. The rela tive clause in 4c surely describes Varuṇa, but śū́ra “champion” in 4d is more  likely a description of Indra. So the normal relation between relative and main  clauses suggests that the subject in 4d is Varuṇa (as Sāyaṇa understands it to be),  but the content of 4d suggests that it is Indra. Moreover, there is a word play  between minā́ti “confounds,” which ends 4c, and ámitā “immeasurable,” which  opens 4d. They are not from the same root, although they sound as though they  could be. The words thus create a verbal icon of simultaneous similarity and dif ference. These ambiguities accord with the representation of Varuṇa and Indra  as embodying different sides of kingship, which are nonetheless complementary  and necessary to one other. As we read the lines, therefore, the two gods are  separately characterized, but their separation is undermined by formal features  that efface it.
## 1
I would turn you two here to our rite with oblations and reverence, o  kings Indra and Varuṇa.
The ghee-rich one [=the ladle/hymn] (goes) forth to you two, being
held (forth) in our arms. By itself it goes all around in its varying
appearance. 2. Heaven speeds the lofty rule of you two, who bind with ropeless bonds. Might the anger of Varuṇa avoid us. Indra will make a wide, wide world  for us.
## 3
Make our sacrifice cherished at the ritual distributions; make our sacred  formulations acclaimed among patrons.
Let wealth, hastened by the gods, come to us. Further us with the help  we crave.
## 4
On us, o Indra and Varuṇa, bestow wealth granting every wish, rich in  goods and many cattle.
If the Āditya [=Varuṇa] confounds untruths, the champion [=Indra]  apportions immeasurable goods.
## 5
This song of mine has reached Indra and Varuṇa. It helped (us) forward,  multiplying us in kith and kin.
Having good treasure, we would go in pursuit of the gods. – Do you  protect us always with your blessings.