+++
title = "085"

+++
85 (601)
Indra and Varuṇa
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet announces his hymn in the first verse, implicitly comparing it to Agni,  the sacrificial fire. Agni has a “face of ghee,” that is, he is both bright like ghee and  receives oblations of ghee (cf. I.143.7, III.1.18, V.11.1, X.21.7). This prepares for  verse 4, in which the poet asks that Agni be the Hotar of this rite, who will bring  the oblations to Indra and Varuṇa. The last verse is also found as VII.84.5 but is less  thematically connected to this hymn than it is to the previous hymn.
## 01
While offering soma to Indra and Varuṇa, I will purify for you two an  inspired thought free from anything demonic
and with a face of ghee like the goddess Dawn. Let those two give us  wide space at the moment of encounter on our journey.
## 02
Surely they contest with one another here in summoning the gods, where  missiles fly amid the banners.
O Indra and Varuṇa, with your arrow strike those enemies, that they be  far away and dispersed.
## 03
Since even the waters of innate glory, goddesses (themselves) have set  Indra and Varuṇa in their seats among the gods,
the one [=Varuṇa] holds fast the agitated peoples; the other [=Indra]  smashes the unopposable obstacles.
## 04
Let him [=Agni] of strong resolve, perceiving the truth, be our Hotar— the one who bringing homage (turns) you two (here) by his power, o  Āditya.

Bringing oblations, he will turn you two here to help. Bringing pleasure  (to you), he will indeed be the one present for our safe passage.
## 05
This song of mine has reached Indra and Varuṇa. It helped (us) forward,  multiplying (us) in kith and kin.
Having good treasure, we would go in pursuit of the gods. – Do you  protect us always with your blessings.