+++
title = "087"

+++
87 (603)
Varuṇa
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
On this hymn, see the introduction to the previous hymn and especially Jamison  (2007: 101–3).
The name of Varuṇa occurs in each verse of the hymn, and in verse 4 Varuṇa  himself speaks. Like the previous one, therefore, this hymn has an omphalos  structure, organized around the central verse 4 and the words of the god himself.  In hymns organized around a central verse, that verse is often the key to under
standing a hymn or the dramatic climax of the hymn, as it is, for example, in the  previous hymn. But sometimes, as here, it is the most enigmatic verse of all. In 4a,  as implied in the translation below, does Varuṇa know that the poet is wise and  therefore will understand his cryptic words? Or does médhira “wise” anticipate  the wisdom that the poet will receive from Varuṇa’s words? In that case, we might  rather say that Varuṇa spoke “to me (to make me) wise”? As Jamison (2007: 102– 3) argues, the ambiguous placement of ná in 4c allows it to be taken either as a  particle of comparison (“like”) or as a negation (“not”). As a result the pāda  can mean either “he will speak (their names) like secrets,” that is, he will speak  the names but he will do so only in a cryptic manner, or “he will not speak their  secret (names),” that is, he will keep the secrets hidden. But most of all, there are  the obscure words of the god in 4b: “The inviolable cow bears three times seven names.” As often, the “cow” in this verse is speech (e.g., Thompson 1995: 20),  and it is speech, or more specifically this hymn, that carries within it twenty-one  “names.” These names may be similar to the three times seven “tracks” (padā́) in  I.72.6, although these tracks too are also “secret” (gúhyāni) and therefore their  reference unclear.
There is one possible clue to the twenty-one names in the following verse. Verse  5 mentions three heavens and three earths “arranged in six” or “arranged in sixes.”  That is, “six” could refer to the three heavens and three earths, and, if so, we should  translate, “Three heavens are hidden within him, and below are three earths, form
ing an arrangement of six.” On the other hand, if ṣáḍvidhānāḥ refers only to the  three earths and if each of the three earths is arranged in six, then we would have  eighteen earths and three heavens, which gives twenty-one, the number of “names.”  In that case, the “names” might be tokens of the extent of Varuṇa’s rule.
Returning again to verse 4, its last mystery is the “later generation” in 4d,  which may refer not to a future generation of human beings but to humans as the  “generation” of beings later than the gods. If so, then Varuṇa strives to instruct  humans despite their limited capacities, perhaps well illustrated in our attempts to  understand him.
While verse 4 is the most enigmatic in the hymn, it is not the only mysterious  one. We have already touched on the riddle of three heavens and three earths of  verse 5ab. In verse 6a Varuṇa is like the sky, which drops to the horizon at the far  distance where there is the river that surrounds the earth. Because he is like the sky  that drops toward this river, he is called a wild animal (6b) that comes down to the  water to drink and he is like the “bright drop,” which, as Geldner points out, might  be the setting moon or sun or even the soma as it sinks into the waters with which  it is mixed. In 6c Varuṇa is “of deep recitation.” The primary sense is probably that  Varuṇa speaks profound words, but the compound is ambiguous and could also  mean that Varuṇa inspires or receives profound praise-recitations. Verse 7 connects  this hymn to the previous hymn and provides a persuasive reason to link the two  hymns, as Jamison (2007: 103) has noted. In VII.86.2 the poet asks, “When shall  I be within Varuṇa?” Here in verse 7 the poet gives an answer: when we are free of  offense, then “we would be within Varuṇa.” That is, we would be in conformity with  the vratā́ny áditeḥ “the commandments of Aditi,” the goddess representing offense lessness, whose commandments are mentioned in 7c.
## 1
Varuṇa dug the paths for the sun. Forward (went) the floods of rivers to  the sea,
(those) mares, like a surge sent surging, following the truth. He made  great streambeds for the days.
## 2
Your breath, the wind, roars again and again through airy space, like an  ardent animal [=stallion], victorious in its pasture.
(Here are) all your own domains, Varuṇa, between these two great and  lofty world-halves.994 VII.88
## 3
With united desire the spies of Varuṇa survey both well-supported  world-halves,
(as do) the sage poets, possessing the truth and insightful in the
sacrifices, the discerning ones who send their thought.
## 4
Varuṇa said to me who am wise: “The inviolable cow bears three times  seven names.”
Knowing of its track, he will speak (its names) like secrets—he, the
inspired poet who strives on behalf of the later generation.
## 5
Three heavens are hidden within him, and below are three earths,  arranged in sixes.
The clever King Varuṇa created this, the golden swing in heaven [=the  sun], for the sake of beauty.
## 6
Like heaven, Varuṇa has descended to the river—he, the powerful wild  animal, like the bright drop;
he of deep recitation, who takes the measure of the airy space; he the  king of what is, whose lordship offers good passage.
## 7
Might we be without offense within Varuṇa, who will have mercy even on  him who has committed an offense,
as we obediently fulfill the commandments of Aditi. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.