+++
title = "089"

+++
89 (605)
Varuṇa
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: gāyatrī 1–4, jagatī 5
As Oldenberg remarks, although this hymn does not break the sequence of verse  numbers and meter, it appears to be an addition to this Varuṇa collection. It is in  another meter, and Vasiṣṭha does not appear by name within it. Moreover, while  the other three hymns of this collection refer to Vasiṣṭha’s unhappy state, this hymn  more explicitly concerns an illness afflicting the speaker. It is an illness so serious  that it could bring the speaker to the mr̥nmáyaṃ gr̥hám “house of clay” (vs. 1), the  earth, in which the dead are buried.
According to both indigenous commentators and contemporary schol ars, the illness especially associated with Varuṇa is dropsy, on which see Zysk  (1985: 59–61). The reference in verse 2 to the speaker as “inflated like a water-skin”  could point to dropsy, as could prasphuránn iva, here translated “seeming to  kick,” if it is interpreted as stumbling or as describing the water-skin as quiver ing. But the evidence is not very firm.
The last verse, which is in a different meter, brings the hymn closer to the preced ing three hymns, since it lays the blame for the speaker’s condition on a violation of  the commandments of Varuṇa, his dhármā “ordinances.”
## 1
O King Varuṇa, let me not go to the house of clay!
– Be merciful, o you whose dominion is great. Have mercy.
## 2
If I go, seeming to kick, inflated like a water-skin, o master of the  pressing stones,
be merciful, o you whose dominion is great. Have mercy!
## 3
By my weakness of will I have gone against the current in every way, o  bright one.
– Be merciful, o you whose dominion is great. Have mercy!
## 4
Though he is standing in the midst of waters, thirst has found the singer. – Be merciful, o you whose dominion is great. Have mercy!
## 5
Whatever this deceit that we humans practice against the divine race, o  Varuṇa,
if by inattention we have erased your ordinances, do not harm us
because of that guilt, o god.