+++
title = "091"

+++
91 (607)
Vāyu (1, 3), Indra and Vāyu (2, 4–7)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The last half of this hymn (vss. 4cd through 7, the last verse being repeated from  VII.90.7) is a straightforward invitation to Indra and Vāyu to journey to the sacri fice, bringing goods to distribute, and to drink the soma. The first half of the hymn  is both more miscellaneous and more obscurely phrased. True, verse 2 also issues  the invitation to the two gods, but it is sandwiched between two verses with which it  seems to have little in common.
Verse 1 is variously interpreted, with its parts variously arranged in translation.  In our interpretation it contains speculation about the prior existence of the gods  and the beginning of ritual activity: the gods who now derive their strength from  men’s sacrifices must have existed before the sacrifice began, the proof being that  these gods created the dawn and the sun for both Vāyu, a god of the midspace, and  for Manu, the first man and first sacrificer, under trying conditions. (A somewhat  similar situation is depicted in VI.49.13, where Viṣṇu measures out the realms for  “hard-pressed Manu,” another cosmogonic deed.) The creation of dawn would in  turn allow the ritual process, the ritual day, to begin—and begin it does with the  offering to Vāyu. Verse 3 is clearly a depiction of the sacrifice, but the referents of the  various phrases are not entirely certain. Although most scholars consider Vāyu the  subject of the first half-verse, on the basis of shared vocabulary we instead consider  it a disguised reference to the soma and its usual accompaniment, cow’s milk. The  soma drops then offer themselves to Vāyu. The first half of verse 4 complements the  concerns in verse 1: in the first verse the time before the creation of the sacrifice by  the gods is the subject of speculation; in 4ab the unbounded continuance of the sac rifice is envisioned, for as long as men have the power to perform it. With these ends  of the sacrifice demarcated, the offering to Indra and Vāyu in the here-and-now can  proceed, and the simple invitation of the rest of the hymn is issued to them.
## 1
Surely the faultless gods, who (now) grow strong through reverence,  existed previously? (Yes, because) for Vāyu, for hard-pressed Manu they made the dawn  shine, along with the sun.
## 2
Two willing messengers, cow-protectors not to be deceived, you who  protect through the months and the many autumns [=years]—
Indra and Vāyu, this lovely praise hymn, speeding to you two, reverently  invokes you for grace and easy passage anew.
## 3
The very wise one [=Soma], gleaming white, the full glory of the teams,  accompanies those whose food is fat [=cows], who are strong through  wealth.
The like-minded (drops) have extended themselves for Vāyu. The men  have done all (ritual actions) bringing good descendants.
## 4
As long as there is endurance of the body, as long as there is strength, as  long as men keep reflecting with their sight,
(so long) drink the clear soma among us, you drinkers of the clear. Indra  and Vāyu, sit down here on this ritual grass.
## 5
Having hitched up the teams bringing coveted heroes, o Indra and Vāyu,  drive nearby on the same chariot,
for here is the foremost of the honey, presented to you two. Now, being  pleased, unharness (your teams) among us.
## 6
The hundred teams, the thousand that accompany you two, bringing all  valuables, o Indra and Vāyu,
with those, good to acquire, drive nearby. Drink, men, of the honey  brought before you.
## 7
Like steeds seeking their share of fame, we Vasiṣṭhas with our lovely  praise hymns,
seeking prizes, would call upon Indra and Vāyu for help. – Do you
protect us always with your blessings.