+++
title = "092"

+++
92 (608)
Vāyu (1, 3–5), Indra and Vāyu (2)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The “teams” of Vāyu are the primary topic of this hymn. They are identified as  thousandfold in the first and last verses of the hymn, forming a conceptual ring,  and in the middle verse (3) the productive ambiguity of the word is exposed: the  teams are not merely the wind-horses that bring Vāyu here, but also the many forms  of wealth he brings to us in return for the sacrifice. The even verses (2 and 4) first  make the invitation to the sacrifice clear and then express wishes for success both  for the priests and poets and for the patrons.
## 1
O Vāyu, drinker of the clear (soma), attend upon us. A thousand are  your teams, o you who bring all valuables.

The exhilarating stalk has been held out close to you, the first drinking  of which you have as your own, o god.
## 2
The lively presser has set forth the soma at the ceremonies, for Indra and  Vāyu to drink,
as the Adhvaryus, seeking the gods with their (ritual) skills, present the  foremost of the honey to you two.
## 3
With the teams that you drive forth to the pious one, Vāyu, for your  quest in his house,
hitch up (teams that are) well-nourishing wealth for us, (teams that are)  hero(es) and bounty in cows and horses.
## 4
We who are the Indra-exhilarating ones, (exhilarating) to Vāyu, who are  god-directed and lavishly overflowing for the (Ārya) stranger—
may we, with our patrons, be (always) smashing obstacles; may we, with  our superior men, be (always) victorious in battle over those without  alliance (to us).
## 5
With your teams in the hundreds, in the thousands, drive here to our  ceremony, right up to our sacrifice.
Vāyu, at this pressing exhilarate yourself. – Do you protect us always  with your blessings.