+++
title = "093"

+++
93 (609) Indra and Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
8 verses: triṣṭubh
The first six verses of this hymn, though they contain numerous examples of dual  address of and reference to Indra and Agni together, are strongly skewed toward  Indra. The two gods are called “smiters of Vr̥tra” (vss. 1, 4) and “possessors of  good maces” (Indra’s weapon; vs. 4); they “smite” (Indra’s activity) the enemy (vs.  5) and “drive” to the sacrifice (vs. 6; since Agni is kindled on the ritual ground, he  has no need to drive to it). Moreover the theme is the winning of prizes (vā́ja) and  their distribution, and the besting of opponents: this agonistic cast is more typical  of Indra than of Agni. The last two verses (7–8) are addressed to Agni only, in his  familiar ritual role, mediating between the sacrificer and the gods, including Indra.  But even in these verses Agni’s own character is overlaid with that of other gods: for  instance, in verse 7 he seems to be assimilated to Varuṇa and the other Ādityas in  forgiving offenses.
## 1
Enjoy a blazing praise, newborn today, o Indra and Agni, smiters of  Vr̥tra,
for I keep calling upon you both, good to call, the two who best set out  the prize right away for him who wants it. 2. For you two, o swelling ones, grown in an instant, swollen in expanse,  become winners.
Holding sway over wealth, over abundant pasturage, give your fill of a  prize, substantial but thrilling.
## 3
When the prize-seekers have come to the rite of distribution, the inspired  poets with their visionary thoughts seeking your solicitude,
like steeds reaching the finish line, the men ever calling on Indra
and Agni—
## 4
With his hymns the inspired poet seeking your solicitude reverently  invokes (you) for glorious wealth that provides the foremost portion. Indra and Agni, smiters of Vr̥tra, possessing good maces, further us with  new gifts.
## 5
When the two great opposing (forces) mutually contending, shining with  their own bodies, array themselves at the contest of champions,
at the rite of distribution do you two smash utterly the man unallied to  the gods with those allied to the gods, with the soma-pressing folk.
## 6
Drive right up to this soma-pressing of ours here, Indra and Agni, to  (show) benevolence,
for you never have disregarded us. Might I turn you two here with
perpetual prizes.
## 7
Agni, kindled by this reverence, you should call Mitra, Varuṇa, and  Indra here.
Whatever offense we have committed, that forgive; that let (them and)  Aryaman and Aditi unloose (from us).
## 8
Aspiring to these desires, Agni, might we attain prizes in company with  you two.
Let Indra, Viṣṇu, and the Maruts not overlook us. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.