+++
title = "094"

+++
94 (610) Indra and Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
12 verses: gāyatrī 1–11, anuṣṭubh 12, arranged in trcas ̥
This hymn consists of four sets of tr̥cas, and if each tr̥ca is considered originally a  separate hymn, the principle of arrangement is not violated. There are two main  themes, the varieties of poetic thought and its product, verbal praise, which the  poets address to the two gods, and the hope that these gods will favor these poets  over their rivals (see esp. vss. 3, 7, 8, 12). Despite the emphasis on poetic inspiration,  there seems to be relatively little of it on display in this hymn, which is a bricolage  of quotations from other hymns. The two gods, Indra and Agni, also lack traits,  individually and collectively.

## 1
This foremost praise hymn of this conception is for you two, Indra  and Agni.
It has been born like rain from a cloud.
## 2
Hear the call of the singer; Indra and Agni, crave his hymns.
Showing your mastery, swell his insights.
## 3
O Indra and Agni, you superior men—not to evil, nor to imprecation make us subject—nor to scorn.
## 4
To Indra, to Agni we raise lofty reverence, a (hymn) with a good twist, and nourishing streams (of truth?) with our visionary thought as we  seek help.
## 5
For these two do the inspired poets, each and every one, reverently  invoke in just this way, for aid,
urgently, for the winning of prizes.
## 6
You two we invoke, expressing admiration with our hymns, dispensing  ritual delight,
seeking to win at the contest for wisdom.
## 7
Indra and Agni, come here to us with help, you who conquer the  territories.
Let a defamer not hold sway over us.
## 8
Don’t let the malice of a nobody, an ungenerous mortal, reach us. Indra and Agni, extend (us) shelter.
## 9
The goods consisting of cows, of gold, of horses, which we beg you for, Indra and Agni, may we gain them.
## 10
When superior men kept calling Indra and Agni when the soma was  pressed,
(men) seeking to serve the two who possess teams—
## 11
The two best smiters of Vr̥tra who are just delighting in the solemn  speeches, in the hymn,
in the melodies of the one who seeks to win (them)—
## 12
Just you two—(strike) the evil-speaking, evil-knowing mortal of  demonic power—
strike the snake with a stroke; strike the water-(with)holder with a
stroke.