+++
title = "095"

+++
95 (611)
Sarasvatı (1–2, 4–6), Sarasvant (3) ̄
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
The multitalented goddess of wisdom and patroness of arts and music familiar from  classical Hindu sources is not the Sarasvatī of the R̥gveda: in this text she is first and foremost a river, and not the mythical river Sarasvatī of later times, but a real,  physical river that flows “from the mountains to the sea” (see vs. 2). Her distin guishing characteristics are all associated with this physical nature: the power and  beauty of her ever-flowing current, and the nourishment and riches it brings with  it. She is often mentioned along with her sister rivers, as first among equals, and  in this hymn (vs. 3) and the next (VII.96.4–6) also with her shadowy male coun terpart Sarasvant.
## 01
She has flowed forth with her surge, with her nourishment—Sarasvatī is a  buttress, a metal fortress.
Thrusting forward all the other waters with her greatness, the river drives  like a lady-charioteer.
## 02
Alone of the rivers, Sarasvatī shows clear, as she goes gleaming from the  mountains all the way to the sea.
Taking note of the abundant wealth of the world, she has milked out  ghee and milk for the Nāhuṣa.
## 03
He has grown strong as a manly one among maidens, a bullish bull calf  among the (river-maidens) worthy of the sacrifice.
He provides a prizewinner to the benefactors. He should groom his body  for winning.
## 04
And this Sarasvatī, the well-portioned, will harken to this sacrifice of  ours, taking pleasure in it,
being implored by reverential ones with their knees fixed. With wealth as  her yokemate, she is even higher than her companions.
## 05
Here are (oblations) being poured all the way to you (rivers), along with  reverences. Take pleasure in the praise, Sarasvatī.
Being set in your dearest shelter, may we stand nearby it like a
sheltering tree.
## 06
And this Vasiṣṭha here has opened up the doors of truth for you,
well-portioned Sarasvatī.
Strengthen (him?), resplendent one; grant prizes to the praiser. – Do you  protect us always with your blessings.