+++
title = "097"

+++
97 (613)
Indra (1), Br̥haspati (2, 4–8), Indra and
Brahmaṇaspati (3, 9), Indra and Br̥haspati (10)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
10 verses: triṣṭubh
According to the Anukramaṇī (whose identifications are reproduced here in the  heading) there is a wide array of divine dedicands for the individual verses of this  hymn: Indra alone, Br̥haspati alone, Indra and Br̥haspati, and Indra and the more  transparently named Brahmaṇaspati (“Lord of the Sacred Formulation”). The  hymn is more carefully structured than the random listing would suggest, however.
First, as has often been discussed above, Hanns-Peter Schmidt (1968) has shown  that Br̥haspati was originally an epithet of Indra in his priestly role and only gradu ally split off into a separate god. As in IV.50 this divine history is recapitulated in  part in the progress of this hymn, though in a different way from the earlier hymn.  For most of the hymn only one of the divine figures is on stage at a time: verse  1 has Indra, verse 2 Br̥haspati, and Br̥haspati holds sway in verses 4–8. Even in  verse 3, supposedly dedicated to both Indra and Brahmaṇaspati, the two are not  depicted together, and in fact the phraseology seems designed to identify Indra as  Brahmaṇaspati: the two-word phrase bráhmaṇas pátim “lord of the sacred formula
tion” in pāda b is, it seems, paraphrased with the defining relative clause of d, refer ring to Indra: yó bráhmaṇaḥ ...rā́jā “who is king of the sacred formulation,” with  “king” substituting for “lord,” thus superimposing the one on the other. What we  are claiming here, then, is that in verses 1–8 the divine names Indra and Br̥haspati/ Brahmaṇaspati refer to a single divine figure, Indra.
But when the transparent designation Brahmaṇaspati recurs in verse 9, it is  immediately preceded by the dual pronoun vām “you two”; there must therefore  now be two divine addressees, and the split between Indra and his epithet has been  effected. The last two verses (9–10) call upon them both, using dual verbs, pro
nouns, and vocatives quite insistently. It is because we consider bráhmaṇas páti- an  epithet in verse 3 and a divine name in verse 9 that we have translated them differ ently in the two verses. Notice also that Brahmaṇaspati, as opposed to Br̥haspati, is
only found in verses also containing the noun bráhman “sacred formulation.” But the hymn has another divine presence, not named but clearly there, who  complicates the identity problem even more. The entire hymn is set on the ritual  ground; this scene is set at the very beginning, in verse 1, starting with the word  yajñé “at the sacrifice” and continuing with a clear depiction of the locus of ritual  offerings, where men and gods (including Indra) meet. But, in the middle verses  mentioning only Br̥haspati (4–8), that god is described in ways extremely suggestive  of Agni, the ritual fire: he sits on the womb (vs. 4); he is both bright and roaring (vs.  5), bright, golden, and good to enter (vs. 7), and most clearly, in the image of verse  6 he is dark below but possessed of horses like ruddy clouds. All of this phraseol ogy has clear counterparts in descriptions of Agni. Thus, the divine figure Indra/

Br̥haspati is identified here in this ritual context with the ultimate ritually oriented  god, Agni. This identification is found elsewhere; see especially V.43.12. It is noteworthy, but not surprising, that the usual mythological association of  Indra/Br̥haspati with the Vala cave is entirely absent.
## 01
At the sacrifice, at the seat of men (coming) from heaven and from  earth, where men seeking the gods become exhilarated,
where pressings are pressed for Indra, he will come at first for
exhilaration and to vitality.
## 02
We choose divine help. Br̥haspati holds himself ready for us here, o  comrades,
so that we might become without offense to the one who grants
rewards, who is a giver to us from afar, like a father.
## 03
Him, the preeminent, well-disposed Lord of the Sacred Formulation  will I sing, with reverence, with oblations.
Let his divine signal-call mightily accompany Indra, who is the king of  the god-created sacred formulation.
## 04
Let him sit as the dearest in our womb here—Br̥haspati who is
all-desirable [/granting all wishes].
Desire for wealth in good heroes—that will he give. He will carry us
across the parched places unharmed.
## 05
The recitation enjoyable to the immortal one—these immortals here,  born of old, have imparted it to us.
We would invoke the brightly roaring one, worthy of the sacrifice of the  dwelling places, unassailing Br̥haspati.
## 06
The capable, ruddy horses who pull together are pulling Br̥haspati, who is simply strength itself, whose seat has darkness while (the horses)  like a cloud clothe themselves in ruddy form.
## 07
He certainly is flame-bright; he is a preening (bird) with a hundred  feathers; having a golden axe, he is vigorous, sun-winning—
Br̥haspati—good (for libations) to enter, lofty, the best at making the  pressed drink in abundance for his comrades.
## 08
The two goddesses, the world-halves, begetters of the god, strengthened  Br̥haspati with their greatness.
Comrades, exert your skill for the one whose skill is to be besought. He  will make good fords, easy to cross, for the sacred formulation.
## 09
Here is a well-twisted (hymn) for you two, o Brahmaṇaspati. A sacred  formulation has been made for Indra, the mace-bearer.
Aid our insightful thoughts; awaken plentiful gifts. Exhaust the
hostilities of the stranger, of the rapacious ones.
## 10
Br̥haspati and Indra, you two hold sway over heavenly and earthly goods. Establish wealth for your praiser, even a weak one. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.