+++
title = "098"

+++
98 (614)
Indra (1–6), Indra and Br̥haspati (7)
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
This is really an Indra hymn; the final verse dedicated to Indra and Br̥haspati (vs.  7) is simply repeated from the previous hymn (VII.97.10). The theme of the rest of  the hymn is Indra’s close affinity with and unslakable desire for soma. Not only is  it the regular ritual offering that he seeks daily (vss. 1–2), but it belonged to him  from birth (vs. 3) and became his special substance after his first victories (vs. 5).  The deeds and power of Indra are also celebrated. Intriguingly, his mother first  proclaims his greatness (vs. 3): the mention of Indra’s mother, especially in connec
tion with soma, always tantalizingly alludes to apparently fraught family dynamics  associated with Indra’s birth (see III.48 and IV.18). Verse 5, near the end of the  hymn, repeats the proclamation of his deeds, using the formula sometimes found  and expected at the beginning of a hymn (see, e.g., I.32.1, I.154.1), though not rare  later in the unfolding of the poem.
The poet, of course, wishes to profit from the battle-might soma inspires in  Indra (vs. 4) and receive some of the spoils of his victories (vs. 6).
## 01
Adhvaryus, offer the ruddy, milked plant to the bull of the settled  domains.
Better at finding a drinking hole than a buffalo, Indra travels everywhere,  seeking a man who has pressed the soma.
## 02
What you made your own dear food on a distant day, every day you  desire the drinking just of that.
Taking pleasure with heart and with mind, being eager, drink the soma  drinks set out, Indra.
## 03
On being born, you drank the soma for strength. Your mother
proclaimed your greatness.
Indra, you filled the wide midspace; through combat you made a wide  realm for the gods.
## 04
When you will set to fighting those who think themselves great, we shall  overcome them, though they are exulting in their arms.
Or when, Indra, with your superior men you will attack the defensive  forces, with you may we win the contest that brings good fame.
## 05
I proclaim the first deeds of Indra, proclaim the present ones that he has  performed.
When he overcame the godless magic powers, then soma became
his alone.
## 06
Yours is all this (wealth in) livestock all around, which you see with the  eye of the sun.
You alone are the cowherd of cows, Indra. Might we share in your
proffered goods.

## 07
Br̥haspati and Indra, you two hold sway over heavenly and earthly goods. Establish wealth for the praiser, even a weak one. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.