+++
title = "100"

+++
100 (616)
Viṣṇu
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins conventionally enough, with a mortal offering sacrifice to the god  (vs. 1) and a request for gifts in return (vs. 2). Viṣṇu’s three strides are the subject  of the following two, responsive verses (3–4). Verse 3d also introduces the theme  of Viṣṇu’s name, which is the subject of the last two real verses of the hymn (5–6,  since vs. 7 is merely a repetition of the final verse of VII.99). The enigmatic epithet  śipiviṣṭá found in the last verse of the last hymn (VII.99.7) is, as it were, interrogated  in these verses. In verse 6 the poet, who boasts that he knows the hidden patterns,  sets out to proclaim the god’s name, while addressing him as Śipiviṣṭa, and then  asks in the next verse whether the god’s own proclamation of himself as Śipiviṣṭa  was meant to be ignored or passed over. The poet then mysteriously alludes to two  different forms of the god, which may (or may not) correspond to two different  names. The hymn does not resolve these questions, perhaps leaving the shadowy  figure of Viṣṇu to be fully developed in the ensuing centuries.
## 1
Now the mortal desiring to gain gets his share, if he does pious service to  wide-ranging Viṣṇu,

will set the sacrifice in motion with fully focused mind, and will seek to  attract here such a one, favorable to men.
## 2
You, Viṣṇu, traveling your ways—give benevolent thought destined for  all people, concentrated thought,
so that you will give us our fill of abundant welfare, of greatly glittering  wealth in horses.
## 3
Three times did the quick god stride with his greatness across this earth  worth a hundred verses.
Let Viṣṇu be preeminent, stronger than the strong, for vibrant is the
name of this stalwart one.
## 4
Quick Viṣṇu strode across this earth for a dwelling place for Manu,  showing his favor.
Firmly fixed are his peoples, (even) the weak. He, affording good birth,  has made (them) wide dwelling.
## 5
This name of yours, o Śipiviṣṭa, of you the stranger do I proclaim today,  I who know the (hidden) patterns.
I hymn you, the strong—I, less strong—you who rule over this dusky  realm in the distance.
## 6
Was (this speech) of yours to be disregarded, when you proclaimed of  yourself: “I am Śipiviṣṭa”?
Do not hide away this shape from us, when you have appeared in another  form in the clash.
## 7
I make the vaṣaṭ-cry to you from my mouth, Viṣṇu. Enjoy this oblation  of mine, Śipiviṣṭa.
Let my lovely praises, my hymns strengthen you. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.