+++
title = "101"

+++
101 (617) Parjanya
Kumāra Āgneya or Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
Dedicated to Parjanya, the god of thunder, this hymn celebrates the fructifying rain  in sometimes cryptic and riddling terms, which probably involve simultaneous natu ral and ritual reference. The number three is a recurrent theme: the “three speeches”  of verse 1; the “triply layered” shelter and “triply turned” light of verse 2; the three  heavens, three stages of flowing water, and three buckets of verse 4. There is also, as  often with R̥gvedic atmospheric phenomena, gender ambiguity and gender shifting.  The bull of verse 1 creates a calf as his embryo. In verse 3 an unidentified subject  (though surely Parjanya) is sometimes a barren cow and sometimes gives birth.  (The “he” of the translation is a necessary English compromise: the Sanskrit has  no pronominal subject and therefore no gender identifier.) Later in that verse the  father provides milk to the mother. As is often the case with R̥gvedic enigmas, it is likely that there is no one correct answer to the riddles, which are instead meant to  stimulate creative speculation.
## 1
Speak forth the three speeches with light at their front, which milk this  udder milking out honey.
Creating the calf, the embryo of the plants [=Agni], as soon as he is born  the bull sets to bellowing.
## 2
The one who is the increaser of plants, who of the waters, who, as god,  holds sway over the whole moving world,
he will extend triply layered sheltering shelter, triply turned very superior  light to us.
## 3
Sometimes he becomes a barren cow, sometimes he gives birth; he has  fashioned his own body as he wished.
The mother accepts the milk of the father. With it the father grows
strong, with it the son.
## 4
In whom all the creatures abide, (in whom) the three heavens; (in whom)  the waters have flowed in three stages—
(his) three buckets for pouring drip an abundance of honey all
around.
## 5
Here is a speech for Parjanya the self-ruling: let it be the intimate of his  heart. He will enjoy it.
Let there be joy-bringing rain for us; let the plants whose protectors are  the gods be well-berried.
## 6
“The bull is the inseminator of each and every (plant). In him is the  life-breath of the moving (world) and of the still.”
Let this truth be protective of me for a hundred autumns. – Do you
protect us always with your blessings.