+++
title = "103"

+++
103 (619)
Frogs
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
10 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 1
A rain charm, which cleverly matches accurate description of frogs noisily emerging  from estivation and mating at the beginning of the rainy season with the behavior  of priests at a particular ritual, the Pravargya (see esp. vss. 7–9). Although there  has been much debate about whether this hymn satirizes priests by comparing them  to frogs or instead is to be taken with deadly seriousness, the truth no doubt lies  somewhere in between. The poet obviously took great delight in his skill at match
ing frog behavior with ritual behavior and is unlikely to have been unaware of the  potentially comic aspects of the comparison; however, the explosive fertility of the  frogs provides a model for similar increase in the human sphere, and therefore the  comparison has a serious purpose.
Attention to modern studies of animal behavior allows us to see just how  much careful observation of frogs lies behind the depiction of the frogs here, and  understanding anuran mating habits deepens our understanding of the poem. (See  Jamison 1993.) For example, the frog lying “like a dried-out leather bag” is a coun
terintuitively accurate representation of a frog in estivation: some really do go dor mant and dry up during the dry season, and “adding water” plumps them up and  revives them. Once revived, the chorus of frogs begins, the purpose of which is to  draw female frogs to the males, who are vocalizing, for mating. This antiphonal  chorus is described in verses 2–6. Since the calls of different species are quite dis tinctive (as sketched in vs. 6), the different cries serve to attract conspecific females  to the appropriate male. The actual mating posture of frogs is described in verse  4: it involves the male approaching the female from behind and grasping her firmly  for as long as it takes—which for some species can be quite awhile (days or weeks).
Another important aspect of the hymn is its comparison of the frog chorus to  a pedagogical situation (see esp. vss. 3, 5), in which the father/teacher speaks and  the pupils exactly repeat his utterance. This is the clearest and earliest depiction of  pedagogy in ancient India and is an example of how our knowledge of everyday  life at that time must be obliquely won. The most famous word in this hymn is  found in verse 3, the phonologically aberrant akhkhala (underlying the so-called  cvi-formation, akhkhalī-[kŕ̥tya]). On the one hand, it would take a very austere  interpreter, and a killjoy, not to recognize this as an onomatopoetic imitation of a  froggy sound; on the other hand, in the inspired analysis of Paul Thieme (1954),  this is, in Middle Indic guise, a representation of the word akṣara “syllable.” What  the frog pupils are doing is “making syllables,” that is, repeating the utterance of  the teacher verbatim, as sound, not meaning. This is a pedagogical technique that  endures to this day in traditional Vedic learning. It is also telling that the word  akhkhala is in Middle Indic form, as the everyday language of the R̥gvedic poets,  and especially of their wives and children, had most likely already undergone many of the phonological and morphological changes characteristic of Middle Indic, but  only found in preserved texts from a much later period. Instruction of the young,  as well as most ordinary conversation, was no doubt carried out in this language  rather than in the high Vedic Sanskrit of the hymns.
As for the ritual application, the Pravargya rite occurs after a year-long con secration, like that referred to in verse 1 and brought to an end in verses 7–9. The  most salient feature of the Pravargya is the offering of the gharma drink, referred to  specifically in verses 8–9, the heated milk-offering that boils until it overflows. The  last, and most important, implicit comparison between frogs and priests turns on  this ritual offering: the prodigious discharge of eggs after anuran mating, especially  by many pairs simultaneously, must have reminded the poet of the frothy bubbling  overflow of the boiling milk. And since the thousands of eggs released are a tan gible sign of fertility and increase, the frogs are seen as assuring increase for us as  well, in the final verse (10), culminating in the “Pressing of Thousands.”
Oldenberg suggests that that this hymn was added at this point in the Maṇḍala,  just after the two Parjanya hymns (VII.101–2), because of the presence of Parjanya  in the first verse. It is certainly appropriate for the rainy season.
## 01
Having lain still for a year, (like) brahmins following their
commandment,
the frogs have spoken forth a speech quickened by Parjanya.
## 02
When the heavenly waters have come to him, lying like a dried leather  bag in the pond,
like the bellow of cows with their calves, the call of the frogs comes
together here.
## 03
When it has rained on them, who are yearning and thirsting, when the  rainy season has come,
saying “akhkhala” [/repeating syllables] like a son to a father (at
lessons), one goes up close to the other who is speaking.
## 04
One of the two grasps the other from behind, when they have become  exhilarated in the discharge of the waters,
when the frog, rained upon, has hopped and hopped, and the speckled  one mixes his speech with the green one.
## 05
Once one of them speaks the speech of the other, like a pupil that of his  teacher,
(then) a whole section of them speaks as if in unison, when you of good  speech speak amid the waters.
## 06
One of them has a cow’s bellow, one a goat’s bleat; one is speckled,  one green.
Bearing the same name but different forms, they ornament their voice in  many ways as they speak.
## 07
Like brahmins at an “Overnight” soma ritual, speaking around (a soma  vessel) full like a pond,1014 VII.104
you cycle around to that day of the year, which, o frogs, is the one
marking the rainy season.
## 08
The brahmins, having soma, have made speech, creating their yearly  sacred formulation.
The Adhvaryus, having the hot ritual milk-drink (at the Pravargya
ritual), sweating, become visible; none are hidden.
## 09
They guarded the godly establishment of the twelve(-month); these men  do not confound the season.
In a year, when the rainy season has come, the heated ritual milk-drinks  obtain their own release.
## 10
The one with a cow’s bellow has given, the one with a goat’s bleat has  given, the speckled one has given, the green one (has given) us goods. The frogs, giving hundred of cows, lengthened (their/our) life at a
“Pressing of Thousands.”