+++
title = "104"

+++
104 (620)
Destroying Demons, Using Imprecations and Curses.  Indra and Soma (1–7, 15, 25), Indra (8, 16, 19–22, 24), Soma (9,  12–13), Agni (10, 14), Gods (11), Pressing Stones (17), Maruts (18),  Vasisṭha’s Hopes for Himself (23ab), Earth and Midspace (23cd) ̣
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
25 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 1–6, 18, 21, 23; anuṣṭubh 25; jagatī or triṣṭubh 7
This long and rambling hymn coming at the very end of the VIIth Maṇḍala is obvi ously an addition to the original collection, not only on formal grounds but on those  of content. Not a praise hymn, it calls upon a series of gods and other powers to  destroy all manner of threats to us, in all manner of creatively bloodthirsty ways. It  therefore has more in common with what we might term the “instrumental” hymns  of the Atharvaveda than with the R̥gvedic manner, and it is in fact found in almost  identical form as Atharvaveda Śaunaka VIII.4 and in Atharvaveda Paippalāda  XVI. The relentless focus on the elimination of evildoers and the changes rung on  the methods of destroying them can give an impression of homogeneity, despite the  number of different gods called on (mostly Indra and Soma, but with a number of  others interspersed: see the Anukramaṇī ascriptions above).
Nonetheless smaller divisions can be discerned within the hymn as a whole. The  mood is set by verse 1, with no fewer than eight violent imperatives addressed to  Indra and Soma, urging action against the wicked. The first five verses follow the  same pattern: an initial vocative índrāsomā “o Indra and Soma,” followed by imper
atives addressed to those gods. The sixth verse starts the same, with the vocative,  but continues somewhat differently: rather than ordering the gods to unleash their  powers in yet another way, the poet expresses the hope that his own thought (and  its verbal expression) will envelop the gods like horse-tackle. This prayer-offering and the sacred formulations (bráhman) that Indra and Soma are urged to quicken  in pāda d brings the brutal first section to a more benign and R̥gvedic conclusion. Verse 7 is also addressed to Indra and Soma, also in the vocative, but with the  vocative postponed till the beginning of the second half of the verse. This slight  change in structure allows this verse to serve as a transition to the next subsection,  which continues, in our opinion, through verse 11 and is defined by a ring provided  by the preverb práti “against, in response to,” opening 7a and 11c. Though the  demands for action continue in this section, they take a more personal turn. In the  first section, the gods were simply ordered to destroy evildoers; in this section the  target is evildoers who act against us (as the práti signals). These verses all posit an  innocent victim (usually 1st person) of the malefactor who is to be destroyed by the  gods. Moreover, the avengers are no longer just Indra and Soma in tandem; each  verse has a different designated hitter: just Indra in 8, Soma in 9, Agni in 10, and  the gods in general in 11. The nature of the offenses has also become more sharply  defined, in that the transgressions involve evil or false speech (even the “cheat” of  vss. 10–11 means literally “desire to deceive”). Although evil speech and hostility to  sacred speech were already found in verse 2, these linguistic offenses were only some  of the condemned activities in the first section; they are the only ones here. In the two next verses (12–13), speech, true and false, is foregrounded, and the  punishment of the speaker of falsehood is reassuringly affirmed. But the mood  changes abruptly in verse 14: the speaker seems to stand accused of the very offenses  he called upon the gods to punish; the innocent 1st persons of verses 7–11 are the  objects of Agni’s anger. The aborted conditional clause of 14ab seems to convey the  speaker’s distress. In verses 15–16 the speaker swears a dramatic oath concerning  the truth of his denial and calls down further destruction on the man who falsely  accused him. The accusation is that he is a yātu(dhā́na), a “sorcerer.” The speaker’s  ringing assertion of his innocence and his powerful curse against his accuser brings  this section of the hymn to a resounding conclusion.
Indeed, we are of the opinion that the rest of the hymn was simply tacked onto  what precedes because it concerns sorcerers, using the same word yātu, and simi lar demonic beings. The tone of the remainder (vss. 17–25) is very different, with  the theme of true and false speech recessive. The enemies are sorcerers in various  animal forms, and the sense of personal menace and of human evildoing is almost  entirely absent. Nonetheless, even if we are correct that these nine verses were origi nally independent, the fact that the full hymn was transmitted independently in the  R̥gveda and both recensions of the Atharvaveda would indicate that the join was  made early.
The Indian tradition (and many Western commentators, including Geldner)  reads Vasiṣṭha’s biography into the dramatic middle of the hymn, interpreting  the accusation and denial in verses 15–16 as evidence for the hostility between  Vasiṣṭha and Viśvāmitra found in much later texts. In this interpretation Viśvāmitra  is the accuser, and Vasiṣṭha the outraged 1st-person speaker. Needless to say,  there is absolutely no evidence for this in the hymn itself, and no evidence for the

Vasiṣṭha–Viśvāmitra feud elsewhere in the R̥gveda. It is always necessary to be wary  about “reading backward” into the R̥gveda and other Vedic texts.
## 1
Indra and Soma, scorch the demonic force, crush it! Pin down those  who grow strong in darkness, you bulls.
Pound aside the unobservant ones, burn them down. Smite, shove,
grind down the voracious.
## 2
Indra and Soma, like a pot on the fire let your evil heat seethe against  the one who speaks evil.
Set forth unrelenting hatred against the hater of the sacred formulation,  the eater of raw flesh, the one with a terrible glance—against the
worm-eater.
## 3
Indra and Soma, spear the evil-doers within their hole out into
darkness that offers nothing to hold onto,
so that no one at all will come up from there again. Let this power of  yours, full of battle fury, be for vanquishing.
## 4
Indra and Soma, make the crushing weapon of death roll from heaven  and from earth toward the one who speaks evil.
Fashion a reverberating (weapon) up out of the mountains, with which  you grind down the demonic force that has been growing strong.
## 5
Indra and Soma, make it roll from heaven. With fire-heated (weapons)  that smite like stones,
with unaging (weapons) whose murderous force is searing heat, spear  the voracious ones down into a deep place. Let them go to silence.
## 6
Indra and Soma, let this thought here encircle you on all sides, like a  girth-band two prizewinning horses—
the thought that, as ritual offering [/invocation], I impel around you,  with wisdom (as the goad). Like lords of men, quicken these sacred
formulations.
## 7
Keep (this) in mind! With your thrusting ways smite the deceits of the  demon with his wreckage.
Indra and Soma, let there be no good passage for the evildoer who with  his deceit ever shows hostility against us.
## 8
Whoever bears witness against me with untruthful words, as I behave  with guileless mind,
like waters grabbed in a fist, let the speaker of nothing come to
nothing, Indra.
## 9
Those who distort (my) guileless speech in their (usual) ways, or who  spoil an auspicious one according to their wont,
let Soma give them over to the serpent or set them in the lap of
Dissolution.
## 10
Whoever wishes to cheat us of the essence of food, o Agni, or of our  horses, of our cows, of our bodies, let the swindling thief who does the theft go to insignificance. Let him  be bent double, along with his life and lineage.
## 11
Let him be far in the distance, along with his life and lineage; let him be  beneath all three earths.
Let his glory dry up, o gods—whoever wishes to cheat us by day and  whoever by night.
## 12
Good discrimination is (easy) for the perceptive man: the two (types of)  speech, true and untrue, contend with each other.
Which of the two is true, whichever is straighter, just that Soma aids— he smites the untrue.
## 13
Truly, Soma does not promote the crooked man, nor one who sustains  his rule perversely.
He smites demonic force; he smites one who speaks what is untrue.
Both lie in the toils of Indra.
## 14
If I were a man with false gods, or if I call upon the gods wrongly, o  Agni... .
Why are you angry at us, Jātavedas? Let those whose speech is deceitful  to you attend upon dissolution.
## 15
Let me die today if I am a sorcerer, or if I have scorched the lifespan  of a man.
And he should be separated from ten (generations of?) heroes, whoever  says falsely to me: “you sorcerer.”
## 16
Who says to me, who am without sorcery, “you sorcerer,” or who,  (though) a demon, says “I am pure,”
let Indra smite him with a great weapon of death. Let him fall lowest of  all creation.
## 17
She who goes forth by night like a nightjar [?], concealing her own body  by deceit,
she should fall down into holes without end. Let the pressing stones  smash the demons with their tramplings.
## 18
Spread out among the clans, Maruts. Seek, grab, crush together the  demons—
the ones who, having become birds, fly through the nights, or those who  have deployed their swindles at the divine ceremony.
## 19
Roll the stone forth from heaven, Indra; hone the soma-honed one  entirely, bounteous one.
From in front, from behind, from below, from above, strike at the
demons with the mountain.
## 20
These very dog-sorcerers are flying. Those inclined to deceit desire to  deceive Indra, the undeceivable.
The able one is honing his weapon of death for the slanderers. Now he  discharges the missile toward the sorcerers.

## 21
Indra has become the one who pounds aside the sorcerers, the  oblation-stealers, those who seek to ambush.
The able one, splitting them like an axe a tree, breaking them like pots,  advances against those who are really demons.
## 22
The owl-sorcerer, the owlet-sorcerer—smash them, and the dog-sorcerer  and the wolf-sorcerer,
the eagle-sorcerer and the vulture-sorcerer. As if with a mill-stone,  pulverize the demonic power, Indra.
## 23
Don’t let the demonic power of the sorcerers reach us. Let (Dawn)  banish with her dawning the pair that are worm-eaters.
Let Earth protect us from earthly constraint; let the Midspace protect  us from heavenly (constraint).
## 24
Indra, smash the male sorcerer and the female exulting in her  magic power.
Let the no-necks with feckless gods shake to pieces. Let them not look  upon the sun as it rises.
## 25
Look on; look out: Indra and Soma, be vigilant.
Hurl the weapon of death at the demonic forces, the missile at the  sorcerers.