+++
title = "26-27"

+++
Vs. 26 (and if I am right, 25c) are both dependent on vs. 27 by my reading.

VIII.6.28-30: The translation of this tṛca is superficially easy, but its interpretation is difficult. Ge takes 28 as referring to soma, 29 to Indra (or 29ab to Indra and 29c to soma; it’s not entirely clear), while Old emphatically rejects Ge and takes Indra as the referent of both verses. Neither of them is entirely clear about the identity of the plural subjects of 30, though both think that the verse is a reference to the dawn and/or the dawn sacrifice.

I do not have a solution to these riddles, though I have some further suggestions. But before presenting them, I should first point out how different the style of this tṛca is from the rest of the hymn. There are no proper names in the verse, either divine or human; the reference is only 3rd person; there is no specific ritual vocabulary; the presentation is all descriptive, without even an implicit hint of the hortatory; there are no similes, though the imagery is strikingly poetic. The whole effect is almost allegorical, stripped of the busy specificity and the divine-human give-and-take that characterize the rest of the hymn and reappear emphatically in the next tṛca.

As often in the RV, I think some of the difficulties arise because two separate referents are present. On the one hand, the location of the birthplace of the poet in 28 suggests, as Ge says, that soma is the subject. Soma, esp. the celestial soma often encountered in Maṇḍala IX, could also be the subject of 29, looking down upon the sea of the earthly soma. But in both verses poetic inspiration could also be the subject, signaled by the two forms of √vip, vípraḥ in 28c, vipānáḥ in 29c, and by the emphasis on seeing in 29 and 30. The progression from birth with insight (28c) to quivering and stirring (29c) seems to describe first the germ of the poetic idea and then its development. In 30 in a different image “they” (poets/sacrificers?) see “the dawning light of the age-old semen” - a baffling phrase. The “milk of the age-old semen” (páyaḥ pratnásya rétasaḥ) is found in III.31.10 in a Vala context, where it may refer to the poetic products that help open the Vala cave. Here it may refer to the even further development of the poetic insight, now fitted to a ritual context and available to be “seen” by the ritualists who will make use of it. But all this is highly speculative.

