+++
title = "A. THE VOW OF ABSTINENCE."

+++


The ceremonies begin with the preparation of the sacrificial fires. [First, the fivefold lustration successively of the Āhavanīya and Dakshiṇāgni fire-places, to render them fit for receiving the fire from the Gārhapatya or householder's fire, viz. by thrice sweeping the hearths; thrice besmearing them with gomaya; drawing three lines across them from west to east, or south to north, with the wooden sword (sphya); removing the dust from the lines with the thumb and ring-finger; and thrice sprinkling the lines with water [^fn_83].] Then the Adhvaryu performs the agny-uddharaṇa, or twice taking out of the fire from the Gārhapatya, and putting it successively on the forepart of the Āhavanīya and Dakshiṇāgni hearths. After this takes place the agny-anvādhāna, or putting (fuel) on the fires, by either the householder or the Adhvaryu; two logs being put on each of the three fires. This may be done in three different ways, viz. first on the Āhavanīya, then on the Gārhapatya, and last on the Dakshiṇāgni, in which case the first log is put on by him whilst muttering the verse Rig-veda X, 128, 1 (Taitt. S. IV, 7, 14, 1), 'Let there be lustre, O Agni, at my invocations!' &c., the second log silently. Or the first logs are put on with one of the three mystical words 'bhūr, bhuvaḥ, svar' on the Gārhapatya, Dakshiṇāgni, and Āhavanīya successively, and the second logs again silently. Or both logs may be put on silently, the order of fires being in that case the one in which they originate, viz. Gārhapatya, Āhavanīya, and Dakshiṇāgni.

[^fn_83]: 2:1 The statements enclosed in brackets [ ] are drawn from the comments and Paddhati on Kātyāyana's Śrauta-sūtra.

In the afternoon the householder and his wife partake of the vratopanīya or fast-day food (prepared chiefly of rice, barley, or mudga beans) with clarified butter; whereupon they take the vow in the manner prescribed in the Brāhmaṇa. In the evening, immediately after sunset, and on the following morning just before sunrise, the householder has, as usual, to perform the Agnihotra, a burnt-offering of fresh milk, which has to be made by him twice daily, with certain exceptions, from the Agnyādhāna to the end of his life.

 

## 01
1. He who is about to enter on the vow, touches water [^fn_84] whilst standing between the Āhavanīya

[^fn_84]: 2:2 I.e. 'he dips his hand into water contained in a vessel,' Schol. Kāty. Śr. S. I, 10, 14. According to the general rule there given,  the same purificatory act has to be repeated whenever, in the course of ceremonial performances, a sacrificial formula or prayer has been used, which is addressed to, or directed against, Rudra, the Rakshas and Asuras, and the Manes; or one directed against some specified enemy of the sacrificer with the view of exorcising or averting the evil influences with which the latter is supposed to be threatened from that quarter; or lastly, when a touching of one's self has taken place, either accidentally or as part of the ceremonial.

and Gārhapatya fires, with his face turned towards east. The reason why he touches water is, that man is (sacrificially) impure on account of his speaking untruth; and because by that act an internal purification (is effected),--for water is indeed (sacrificially) pure. 'After becoming sacrificially pure, I will enter on the vow,' thus (he thinks); for water is indeed purifying. 'Having become purified through the purifying one, I will enter on the vow,' thus (he thinks, and) this is the reason why he touches water.

## 02
2. Looking towards the (Āhavanīya) fire [^fn_85], he enters on the vow, with the text (Vāj. S. I, 5 a): 'O Agni, Lord of Vows! I will keep the vow! may I be equal to it, may I succeed in it!' For Agni is Lord of Vows to the gods, and it is to him therefore that he addresses these words. In the words, 'I will observe the vow; may I be equal to it; may I succeed in it,' there is nothing that requires explanation.

[^fn_85]: 3:1 'Stepping between the Gārhapatya and Dakshiṇa fires (aparāgnī), and standing west of the Āhavanīya, with his face turned eastward and looking at the fire.' Kāty. Śr. S. II, 1, 11.

## 03
3. After the completion (of the sacrifice) he divests himself (of the vow), with the text (Vāj. S. II, 28 a), 'O Agni, Lord of Vows! I have kept the vow; I have been equal to it; I have succeeded in

it;' for he who has attained the completion of the sacrifice, has indeed been equal to it; and he who has attained the completion of the sacrifice, has succeeded in it. It is in this way that most (sacrificers) will probably enter on the vow; but one may also enter on it in the following way.

## 04
4. Twofold, verily, is this, there is no third, viz. truth and untruth. And verily the gods are the truth, and man is the untruth. Therefore in saying (Vāj. S. I, 5 b), 'I now enter from untruth into truth,' he passes from the men to the gods [^fn_86].

[^fn_86]: 4:1 I.e. 'he obtains a divine body (devatāśarīram),' Mahīdh.; man's existence is untruth on account of its perishableness,' id.

## 05
5. Let him then only speak what is true; for this vow indeed the gods do keep, that they speak the truth; and for this reason they are glorious: glorious therefore is he who, knowing this, speaks the truth.

## 06
6. After the completion (of the sacrifice) he divests himself (of the vow), with the text (Vāj. S. II, 28 b): 'Now I am he who I really am.' For, in entering upon the vow, he becomes, as it were, nonhuman; and as it would not be becoming for him to say, 'I enter from truth into untruth;' and as, in fact, he now again becomes man, let him therefore divest himself (of the vow), with the text: 'Now I am he who I really am.'

## 07
7. Now then of the eating (or) fasting [^fn_87]. And on this point Āshāḍḥa Sāvayasa, on the one hand, was of opinion that the vow consisted in fasting. For assuredly, (he argued,) the gods see through the mind of man; they know that, when he enters on this

[^fn_87]: 4:2 The discussion which here follows refers to the evening meal which the sacrificer is allowed to take after he has performed the Agnihotra. Cf. Kāty. Śr. S. II, 1, 13.

vow, he means to sacrifice to them the next morning. Therefore all the gods betake themselves to his house, and abide by (him or the fires, upa-vas) in his house; whence this (day) is called upa-vasatha [^fn_88].

[^fn_88]: 5:1 The primary meaning of upa-vas probably is 'to dwell or abide near (? the gods or fires);' its secondary and technical meaning being 'to fast,' whence upavasatha, 'a fasting or fast-day,' literally 'the abiding near (? or honouring, the gods or fires).' Cf. III, 9, 2, 7. The term is more usually applied to the preliminary fast-day of the Soma-sacrifice; but the latter being considered the most solemn and efficacious of sacrificial rites, a strong tendency prevails to establish some kind of connection between it and the other ceremonies. Cf. Kāty. Śr. S. IV, 15, 36.

## 08
8. Now, as it would even be unbecoming for him to take food, before men (who are staying with him as his guests) have eaten; how much more would it be so, if he were to take food before the gods (who are staying with him) have eaten: let him therefore take no food at all.

## 09
9. Yājñavalkya, on the other hand, said: 'If he does not eat, he thereby becomes a sacrificer to the Manes; and if he does eat, he eats before the gods have eaten: let him therefore eat what, when eaten, counts as not eaten.' For that of which no offering is made, even though it is eaten, is considered as not eaten. When he therefore eats, he does not become a sacrificer to the Manes; and by eating of that of which no offering is made, he does not eat before the gods have eaten.

## 10
10. Let him therefore eat only what grows in the forest, be it forest plants or the fruit of trees. And in regard to this point Barku Vārshṇa said: 'Cook ye beans for me, for no offering is made of them!' This, however, he should not do; for pulse

serves as an addition to rice and barley; and hence he increases the rice and barley by means of it: let him therefore eat only what grows in the forest.

## 11
11. Let him sleep that night in the house of the Āhavanīya fire or in the house of the Gārhapatya fire. For he who enters on the vow approaches the gods; and he sleeps in the midst of those very gods whom he approaches. Let him sleep on the ground [^fn_89]; for from below, as it were, one serves one's superior.

[^fn_89]: 6:1 A shake-down of grass (āstaraṇam,? a blanket) is not forbidden. Paddh. on Kāty. Śr. II, 1.

After the morning's performance of the Agnihotra and the subsequent rising of the sun, the sacrificer chooses his Brahman, or superintending priest. [In the first place he gets six seats ready, covered with sacrificial grass: two of these, to be used by the Brahman and sacrificer during the ceremony of election, are placed somewhere on the north side of the sacrificial ground; another south of the Āhavanīya fire, to serve for the Brahman's permanent seat (brahmasādanam), and west of the latter (placed so as to be quite close to the altar to be constructed hereafter, cf. Kāty. Śr. I, 8, 28), the sacrificer's permanent seat; finally a seat north of each of the two fires, the Gārhapatya and the Āhavanīya, to be used by the Adhvaryu on certain occasions. The sacrificer and future Brahman then having seated themselves on the two first-mentioned seats on the north side, the former with his face turned northward, and the latter looking toward east; the sacrificer, holding the wooden sword (sphya) in his left hand, touches the right knee of the Brahman with his right hand, in which he holds barley-corns and] chooses him for his Brahman with the formula: ['Thou, of such and such a family, N.N. Śarman! we are about to perform the Full-moon sacrifice,'] 'O Lord of the earth! Lord of the world! Lord of the great universe! we choose thee for our Brahman!' The chosen one then mutters (cf. Vāj. S. p. 57): 'I am the lord of the earth, I lord of the world, I lord of the great universe (mahābhūta)! earth! ether! heaven! O God Savitr̥, thee they choose for their Brahman, their lord of prayer (Br̥haspati)!' &c., 'Br̥haspati is Brahman to the gods, I to the men!' He (or, according

## 12
12. By way of his first act on the following morning he (the Adhvaryu priest) betakes himself to the water, and brings water forward [^fn_90]: for

[^fn_90]: 7:1 He, in the first place, pours water into a jug [usually made of varaṇa wood (Cratæva Roxburghii), four-cornered, about a span or twelve fingers' breadths deep and four fingers' breadths square, and furnished with a handle], puts it down north of the Gārhapatya fire, and touches it with the formula: 'I, the existent, will operate with thee (?tvā karishyāmi), O existent one!' He then addresses himself to the Brahman: 'O Brahman! shall I bring the water forward?' and to the patron or sacrificer: 'Sacrificer, restrain thy speech!' The Brahman,---after muttering the mantra (as he does, with certain modifications, on similar occasions when his permission is asked in the course of the performance): 'Lead on the sacrifice! gladden the deities! May the sacrificer be on the vault of heaven! Where the world of the seven pious R̥shis is, thither do thou lead this sacrifice and sacrificer!'--replies aloud: 'Hail (õm)! bring forward!'

water is (one of the means of) sacrifice. Hence by this his first act he approaches (engages in) the sacrifice; and by bringing (water) forward, he spreads out (prepares) the sacrifice.

## 13
13. He brings it forward with those mysterious words (Vāj. S. I, 6): 'Who (or Prajāpati) joins (or yokes) thee (to this fire) [^fn_91]? He joins thee. For what (or, for Prajāpati) does he join thee? For that (or him) he joins thee!' For Prajāpati is undefined [^fn_92] (mysterious); Prajāpati is the sacrifice: hence he thereby yokes (gets ready for the performance) Prajāpati, this sacrifice.

[^fn_91]: 8:1 'Ka (i.e. who? or Prajāpati) joins thee (i.e. places thee, O water, by the side of the Āhavanīya fire)? (I) . . Casmai (i.e. for what purpose? or, for whom? or, for Prajāpati) does he join thee? (!)' Mahīdh. Dark is the meaning of these words because of the ambiguity of ka, the interrogative pronoun, which speculative theology also takes for a mystic name of Prajāpati. Cf. XI, 5, 4, seq.; Max Müller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 433.

[^fn_92]: 8:2 Cf. also I, 6, 1, 20, where Sāyaṇa says that Prajāpati is anirukta, because he represents all deities.

## 14
14. The reason why he brings forward water is, that all this (universe) is pervaded by water [^fn_93]; hence by this his first act he pervades (or gains) all this (universe).

[^fn_93]: 8:3 A play on the word āpaḥ (ap), 'water,' and the root āp, 'to obtain, to pervade.'

## 15
15. And whatever here in this (sacrifice) the Hotr̥, or the Adhvaryu, or the Brahman, or the Āgnīdhra, or the sacrificer himself, does not succeed in accomplishing, all that is thereby obtained (or made good).

## 16
16. Another reason why he brings forward water is this: whilst the gods were engaged in performing sacrifice, the Asuras and Rakshas forbade (raksh)

them, saying, 'Ye shall not sacrifice!' and because they forbade (raksh), they are called Rakshas.

## 17
17. The gods then perceived this thunderbolt, to wit, the water: the water is a thunderbolt, for the water is indeed a thunderbolt; hence wherever it goes, it produces a hollow (or depression of ground); and whatever it comes near, it destroys (lit. it burns up). Thereupon they took up that thunderbolt, and in its safe and foeless shelter they spread (performed) the sacrifice. And thus he (the Adhvaryu priest) likewise takes up this thunderbolt, and in its safe and foeless shelter spreads the sacrifice. This is the reason why he brings forward water.

## 18
18. After pouring out some of it (into the jug) he puts it down north of the Gārhapatya fire. For water (ap) is female and fire (agni) is male; and the Gārhapatya is a house: hence a copulation productive of offspring is thereby effected in this house. Now he who brings forward the water, takes up a thunderbolt; but when he takes up the thunderbolt, he cannot do so unless he is firmly placed; for otherwise it destroys him.

## 19
19. The reason then why he places it near the Gārhapatya fire is, that the Gārhapatya is a house, and a house is a safe resting-place; so that he thereby stands firmly in a house, and therefore in a safe resting-place: in this way that thunderbolt does not destroy him,--for this reason he places it near the Gārhapatya fire.

## 20
20. He then carries it north of the Āhavanīya fire [^fn_94]. For water is female and fire is male: hence

[^fn_94]: 9:1 After the water has been brought forward by the Adhvaryu from the house of the Gārhapatya fire, its technical name is Praṇītāḥ,  'brought forward.' On putting it down north of the Āhavanīya, he covers the jug over with sacrificial grass.

a copulation productive of offspring is thereby effected. And in this way alone a regular copulation can take place, since the woman lies on the left (or north) side of the man.

## 21
21. Let nobody pass between the water (and the fire), lest by passing between them he should disturb the copulation which is taking place. Let him set the water down without carrying it beyond (the north side of the fire, i.e. not on the eastern side); nor should he put it down before reaching (the north side, i.e. not on the western side). For, if he were to put the water down after carrying it beyond,--there being, as it were, a great rivalry between fire and water,--he would cause this rivalry to break forth on the part of the fire; and when they (the priests and the sacrificer) touch the water of this (vessel), he would, by carrying it and setting it down beyond (the northern side), cause the enemy to rise (spirt) in the fire. If, on the other hand, he were to put it down before gaining (the northern side), he would not gain by it the fulfilment of the wish for which it has been brought forward. Let him therefore put it down exactly north of the Āhavanīya fire.

## 22
22. He now strews sacrificial grass all round (the fires) [^fn_95], and fetches the utensils, taking two at a

[^fn_95]: 10:1 Kāty. Śr. II, 3, 6: 'Having strewn sacrificial grass around the fires, beginning on the east side,' which the Comm. interprets: 'He strews eastward and northward-pointed grass around first the Āhavanīya, then the Gārhapatya, and last the Dakshiṇāgni, beginning each time on the eastern side, and then moving around from left to right, and turning his right side towards the fire, so as to end on the north side' (cf. Kāty. IV, 13, 15). The Paddhati, on  the other hand, following Āpastamba, interprets it to the effect that on the eastern and western sides he strews the grass with its tops turned northward, and on the southern and northern sides with the tops turned eastward.

time, viz. the winnowing basket and the Agnihotra ladle, the wooden sword and the potsherds, the wedge and the black antelope skin, the mortar and the pestle, the large and the small mill-stones. These are ten in number; for of ten syllables consists the Virāj (metre), and radiant (virāj) [^sbe1204.htmfn_96] also is the sacrifice: so that he thereby makes the sacrifice resemble the Virāj. The reason why he takes two at a time is, because a pair means strength; for when two undertake anything, there is strength in it. Moreover, a pair represents a productive copulation, so that a productive copulation (of those respective objects) is thereby effected.

