+++
title = "01"

+++
1 [^1] . In the eighth year after the conception let him initiate a Brāhmaṇa,


[^1]:  1, 1. With regard to the standing terminology of the Upanayana, or the initiation of the student, we may observe that upa-nī does not mean, as, for instance, Professor Stenzler seems to understand it, 'to introduce a student to his teacher.' Thus Pāraskara's Sūtra II, 2, 1, aṣṭāvarṣaṃ brāhmaṇam upanayet, &c., is translated by that distinguished scholar, 'Den achtjährigen Brāhmaṇa soll er (beim Lehrer) einführen,' &c. (comp. also Āśvalāyana-Gṛhya I, 19, 1). The texts clearly point to another translation of upa-nī, for they show that the person that introduces the student (upanayati or upanayate; the middle is used very frequently, for instance, Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa XI, 5, 4, 1; Śāṅkh. II, I, 25) is not the father or a relation of the youth who could be supposed to lead him to the teacher, but the teacher himself; he introduces (upanayati) him to the brahmacarya, or introduces him with himself, and the student enters upon (upaiti) the brahmacarya, or enters with (upaiti) the teacher; he who has thus entered upon studentship, is consequently designated as upeta (Śāṅkh. IV, 8, 1; Pāraskara III, 10, 10), and for the initiation, which is usually called up an ay an a, occasionally also the word upāyana is used (see the Mānava-Gṛhya I, 22, quoted by Professor Jolly in his article, Das Dharma-sūtra des Viṣṇu, p. 79). The following passages may be quoted here as supporting our opinion on this terminology. At Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa XI, 5, 3, 13 Śauceya says to Uddālaka Āruṇi, 'I will enter (as a student) with the reverend One' (upāyāni bhagavantam); and Āruṇi replies, 'Come, enter (with me)!' (ehy upehi), 'and he initiated him' (taṃ hopaninye). Ibid. XI, 5, 4, 16 it is stated that according to some a teacher who has initiated a Brāhmaṇa as a student (brāhmaṇaṃ brahmacaryam upanīya) should abstain from sexual intercourse, for a student who enters upon studentship (yo brahmacaryam upaiti) becomes, as it were, a garbha, &c. Finally we may add that the Buddhist terminology regarding the entering into the order or upon a life of righteousness is clearly connected with that followed, for instance, in the dialogue between p. 59 Śauceya and Āruṇi. As Śauceya there says, upāyāni bhagavantam, we frequently read in the Pāli books expressions like this, upemi Buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ dhammañ cāpi anuttaraṃ, &c. (Dhammap. Aṭṭhakathā, p. 97, ed. Fausböll), and as Āruṇi replies, ehy upehi, Buddha says to those who wish to be ordained, ehi bhikkhu, svākkhāto dhammo, cara brahmacariyaṃ, &c. (Mahāvagga I, 6, 32, &c.; S.B.E., vol. xiii, p. 74, note).
