+++
title = "+067"

+++
67 (779)  
Soma Pavamāna [or, according to Anukramaṇı̄, Soma Pavamāna 1–9, 13–22, 28–30; Soma Pavamāna or Pūsan ̣ 10–12; Agni 23, 24; Agni or Savitar 25; Agni or Agni and Savitar  26; Agni or the All Gods 27; Praise of the Student of the Pavamānı̄ Verses 31–32]  
Bharadvāja 1–3, Kaśyapa 4–6, Gotama 7–9, Atri 10–12, Viśvāmitra 13–15, Jamadagni  16–18, Vasiṣṭha 19–21, Pavitra Āṅgirasa or Vasiṣtha or both 22–32  
32 verses: gāyatrī, except dvipadā gāyatrī 16–18, anuṣṭubh 27, 31–32, puraüṣṇih 30,  arranged in trcas through verse 21. ̥  

This final hymn of the IXth Maṇḍala gāyatrī collection is, according to the  Anukramaṇī, the product of at least seven different poets, most of them found ing poets of the Family Books of the R̥gveda and all eponymous ancestors of  the most prominent gotras of later times—each responsible for a single tr̥ca, with  the last eleven verses assigned either to yet another poet or to Vasiṣṭha, the poet  of the immediately preceding tr̥ca. It has been convincingly argued by Proferes  (2007: 10) that this structure shows that the separate lineage rites were already being  collected into a single pan-Ārya ritual during the R̥gvedic period and that this com posite hymn was a conscious attempt to bring the various clans under one ritual  umbrella. He argues that the final two verses (31–32) were added by the redactors  or compilers and celebrate this ecumenical project, by declaring that the assemblage  is greater and more powerful than the sum of its parts.  
Certainly its parts are quite various. The first twenty-one verses, attributed to the  various clan-poets, are for the most part conventional Soma Pavamāna verses, and  the tr̥cas for the most part exhibit some internal cohesion. The single unconventional  tr̥ca consists of verses 10–12, attributed to Atri, in which the god Pūṣan dominates.  Pūṣan otherwise scarcely appears in the IXth Maṇḍala, has little or no connec  
tion with soma elsewhere (gruel is his favored meal), and barely appears in the Atri  Maṇḍala (V) except in lists of other gods. The reason for his intrusion here is unclear. Verses 22–27 form a self-contained purificatory spell, calling on various gods,  including Soma, Agni, and Savitar, in addition to groups of gods, to purify us with  their own characteristic instruments. There follow two verses (28–29) that return to  the soma theme, and then the strangest verse of all (30). The interpretation of this  verse is much disputed, but it appears to refer to the myth of the disappearance of  the ritual Agni and urges Soma to bring him back, along with a, or the, rat, which  may be a reference to the god Rudra, whose animal victim in later ritual is a rat. But  this is only a guess.  
The last two supplementary verses (31–32) were discussed above.  