+++
title = "15"

+++
The problem in this verse is the referent and syntactic construction of gen. sg. etā́vataḥ … ádābhyasya (assuming that the two are to be construed together).

Most take the phrase as obj., one way or another, of bhikṣeta. Ge takes it as a separate obj. of bhikṣeta, parallel to sumnám: “Um solche unfehlbare (Gabe), um ihre Gunst …” Old, by contrast, suggests that the poet started out with the gen. etā́vataḥ, meaning to continue with *sumnásya, but had to substitute the acc. sumnám for metrical reasons. He then takes ádābhyasya either as continuing the gen. phrase etā́vataḥ … *sumnásya or as having a separate referent, the Maruts considered as a unity. Re also considers sumná- to be the ultimate referent, but has the genitive phrase express a partitive sense: “Puisse le mortel avoir une part, (si) petite (soit-elle), à la bonne grace …” Sim. Bl (RR) ad loc. In favor of the Old/Re/Bl solution is the phrase etā́vataḥ … sumnásya in VIII.49.9 (Vālakh.), construed with īmahe ‘we beg’ (cf. 50.9); see also VIII.5.27 etā́vat... / ... sumnám īmahe. But I find Old’s metrical about-face very unlikely: RVic poets don’t have “whoops, that genitive won’t fit here” compositional moments, as far as I can tell, while Re’s semi-partitive construction seems rather weaselly. Moreover, √bhikṣ is almost always construed with the acc. as here (genitives probably in I.152.6 and VII.90.6). And, further, in the scenario where ádābhyasya is part of the phrase, “unfehlbar” (Ge), “unerring” (Bl) is not what ádābhya- means. My solution is not necessarily better, though it does arise in part from Old’s alternative suggestion for ádābhyasya. I take the gen. sg. phrase as doubling the gen. pl., eṣām, with both referring to the Maruts -- the plural to them individually, the singular to their collectivity (so Old’s “von den als Einheit gedachten Maruts”), i.e., the Marut flock (gaṇá-). This seems to be Gr’s view, also Macdonell’s. It should be noted that the Maruts (in pl.) are several times referred to as ádābhya- (II.34.10, III.26.4).

The publ. tr. reflects that analysis, but I am not entirely certain it is right. If I were to follow some version of the other view, I would render bhikṣeta in two different ways depending on the case of its complement: “might beg their benevolence, might seek a share of such undeceivable ...”

