+++
title = "02"

+++
The nṛ́̄n in pāda b is problematic. It appears to be an acc. pl., and in fact is an acc. in the same phrase tuvirā́dhaso nṛ́̄n in V.58.2 (referring to the Maruts). But here the undoubted gen. sg. tuvidyumnásya immediately preceding (and morphologically parallel to tuvirā́dhasaḥ) invites a gen. sg. reading also of ambiguous tuvirā́dhasaḥ. This in turn presents us with several choices: 1) to take nṛ́̄n as a real gen. sg., 2) to assume that the last two words were borrowed from V.58.2 (or based on the formula found therein) and not adjusted morphologically, so that nṛ́̄n is functionally a gen. sg. but formally an acc. pl., or 3) to detach nṛ́̄n syntactically from what precedes it. Old opts for option 2 (see disc. in ZDMG 55 [1901]: 745-47 = KlSch. 286-88). He assumes that since tuvirā́dhasaḥ can represent either acc. pl. or gen. sg., when the formula in V.58.2 was imported here, nṛ́̄n could come along for the ride, functioning as a gen. sg. though adopted from an acc. pl. environment. The third tack is taken by Ge, who takes ṇṛ́̄n as a complement of gen. sg. tuvirā́dhasaḥ (“des … gegen die Männer Freigebigen”), and by WG, somewhat differently. The latter take nṛ́̄n as a second obj. of stavatha (besides vṛ́ṣṇyāni), with the two genitives preceding it hanging off it and modifying Indra: “… seine stierhaften (Kräfte) sollt ihr hier preisen, (und) die Männer des …” (A fourth option, a variant of 3, would be possible: to take tuvirā́dhaso nṛ́̄n as the 2nd acc. obj., with only tuvidyumnásya a gen.) Presumably the “men” WG have in mind are the Maruts, who do appear with Indra in the very next vs. (marútvān 3c) and as just noted are the referents of the undoubted acc. phrase in V.58.2. As for option 1, without endorsing this solution I would point out that a variant of this might be possible. The expected gen. sg. to the root noun

*nṛ́-, based on comparison with Aves. nǝrǝš, should be monosyllabic *núr (like pitúr)
(see AiG III.212), *nuḥ in pausa. Clearly this brief and opaque form didn’t stand much of a chance of preservation as such; but I wonder if, esp. in formulaic phrases like tuvirā́dhaso *núḥ, it wasn’t substituted for by the acc. pl. nṛ́̄n, the only other (surviving) monosyllabic form in the paradigm, whose affiliation to nṛ́- was much clearer.

In d the verb abhy ásti ‘overwhelms’ picks up the nominal abhíbhūti- ‘overwhelming(ness)’ in 1d, with the substitution of √as for √bhū.
