+++
title = "08"

+++
Note the play in the pāda-initial sequences: ví yád (a), vidád (c), yádī v(…) (d).

As noted in the publ. intro., this last vs. of this obscure three-vs. group is the clearest indication of a Vala-myth subtext in the triad and thus serves as a species of poetic repair. As just noted ad vs. 7, the syntactic construction continues from vs. 7 and therefore indicates that the verses should be interpreted within the same conceptual framework. The vs. contains clear Vala vocabulary (esp. vidát) but leaves both subject and objects unexpressed, therefore allowing the double reading that I also suggested for vss. 6 and 7, namely that of the Vala myth and of the current ritual.

Although the reference is clearer in this vs., the grammar is another matter.

The major problem lies in the two parallel verbs vṛṇvé and jinvé. Both appear to be 1st sg. middle presents to the stems 5th cl. vṛṇóti, vṛṇuté* and 1st cl. jínvati, -te respectively (so Gr, e.g.). However, Whitney and Macdonell group jinvé instead with the marginally attested 5th cl. pres. (RV 1x jinóṣi ‘bring to life’ V.84.1), which would account better for the accent -- and a 5th cl. pres. must of course ultimately underlie thematized jínvati (see Gotō, 1st Kl., 76). But 1st singulars do not fit the context at all, nor really do presents. Old tr. them both as 3rd sg. preterites (“er … enthüllte … belebte …”) with, frustratingly, no comment. In this interpr. he seems to be following (or at least be in agreement with) Sāy., and the publ. tr. reflects the same analysis, though with a historical present interpr. because of the apparent primary ending -é. Ge and WG take them as reflexive (Ge) / passive (WG), with neut. pl.

subjects várāṃsi … jávāṃsi (e.g., Ge “Wenn sich die Breiten des Berges auftun,” etc.). Like Old, Ge keeps silent about the grammar, but WG identify the two verbs as 3rd sg. statives construed with the neut. pl. as subject. I am torn. On the one hand, it is difficult to wring a standard 3rd sg. of the type I want from the forms in the text. On the other, I am very dubious about the existence of the “stative” -- and even if this had been a separate grammatical category in the prehistory of Vedic, I doubt that it would have surfaced in just these two nonce forms in a single passage. Moreover, there is nothing semantically or functionally “stative” about either of these verbs, “open up” / “quicken,” either in isolation or in this passage; note that even in the passive the WG tr. are overtly eventive: “… aufgeschlossen werden … belebt werden” (my italics). I also think that the mythic model found in the passage is against a reflexive or passive interpr. In the other standard depictions of the Vala myth, the opening of the mountain and the flowing out of cows/waters/dawns, are not events that happens spontaneously; the god Indra (/Bṛhaspati) or the Aṅgirases cause these actions. The 3rd sg. vidát ‘he found’ of 8c, a signature verb in the Vala myth, shows the typical pattern of expression in this myth. I therefore, uncomfortably, stand by the 3rd sg. transitive interpr. of these verbs, without being able to account for their form. They do belong to a little morphological pattern in 5th class presents, where 3rd sg. -é is not uncommon: cf. śṛṇvé, sunvé, hinvé. But unfortunately all three of the just cited forms are passive, and, in my reading, vṛṇvé and jinvé are not. The neut. pl. várāṃsi in pāda a I take as a pun. The stem váras- definitely means ‘wide space’ and is of course related to urú. However, as the object of √vṛ ‘enclose’ (+ ví = ‘unenclose, open’) and coming so soon after saṃváraṇeṣu (6d) ‘in the enclosures’, it is not difficult to imagine that it could temporarily acquire a secondary association with √vṛ -- hence my double tr. “opens out the … enclosures into wide spaces.” I supply ‘cows’ as the first obj. of vidát on the basis of the use of this verb with obj. gā́ḥ in the Vala myth elsewhere (e.g., I.62.3=X.68.1, II.19.3; note also the bovine vocab. gaurásya gavayáya in the rest of the pāda), but in keeping with my double reading of this whole passage also supply ‘goods’ as the desired discovery in the ritual context.

The sudhyáḥ ‘those of good insight’ are probably, with WG, the Aṅgirases in the Vala myth, but I would add that this word would also identify the poets/priests at the ritual, in the double reading of this triad of verses that I favor.



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/04/021/06-08.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>