+++
title = "+003"

+++
3 (519)  
Agni  
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi  
10 verses: triṣṭubh  
Verses 1cd and 9cd share a similar structure with an opening relative clause and  concluding pāvakáḥ “pure” and thereby define the hymn. The last verse, which con tains the poet’s requests for blessings concluding with the usual Vasiṣṭha signature  line, thus stands outside of hymn’s principal development.  
The hymn describes the emergence of fire from the friction sticks that give birth  to it. Agni breaks free of these fire-churning sticks as he is fanned into flame (vs.  2). He then appears as a new-born, who never grows old (vs. 3). His flames rapidly  advance over the wood (vs. 4), and then, in the middle verse of this principal section,  he becomes the recipient of offerings (vs. 5). The descriptions of the fire after that  point reflect its intensification through the offerings covered with ghee (vss. 6–7). The  “strongholds” in verse 7 and in verse 8 (if this is how the ellipsis in that verse is to be  completed) refer to Agni’s now brightly shining flames. Their brilliance cuts through  space, protecting the sacrificer and opening a way for the songs to reach the gods.  
The hymn is notable especially for its skillful use of simile, especially in the first  half of the hymn. The poet compares Agni to a horse (vs. 2), a weapon (vs. 4), a  stallion (vs. 5), and a jewel (vs. 6), and he calls Agni a bull (vs. 3). In each case the  same verb describes the action of the fire and of the object to which it is compared.  So, for example, in verse 2 Agni and the horse both “snort” and both “stand free”— Agni of the fire-churning wood and the horse of its corral. In verse 5 the fire and a  stallion are both “groomed,” and in verse 6 both fire and a jewel “glow.” In 4d we  may have an exception to this pattern. In this case, the verb is vivekṣi which should  be from √viṣ “toil at,” and we reflect that analysis in our translation. But there is a  pun, for vivekṣi can formally be derived from √vic “sift,” an action that would apply  to the barley in the simile. That is to say, whereas the same action applies to the  simile and the frame in the previous examples, here the same verb form but not in  the same meaning applies to the wood and the barley.  
