+++
title = "08"

+++
The last pāda is difficult, primarily because of dhúram. This would ordinarily be the acc. of the root noun dhúr- ‘chariot pole’, and indeed that is how I take it. Ge interprets it rather as an acc. infinitive (‘festzuhalten’) to √dhṛ. But that aniṭ root has no seṭ forms in dhur- (unless dhúr- ‘chariot pole’ itself; so Whitney Roots, but see now standard alternative etymology in Schindler, Rt nouns, and EWA, both s.v.).

WG’s semantic interpr. (‘zur Sicherung’) is similar to Ge’s, though derivationally distinct: they see it as a secondary abstract(ion) from the ‘chariot pole’ word. Either of these analyses eases the interpr. of the pāda. But given the chariot-part vocab. in the rest of the pāda (āṇí- ‘axle-pin, peg’, nā́bhi- ‘wheel-nave’), it seems highly unlikely that a standard word for a part of the chariot would in just this context not be so used -- and cf. sudhúr- ‘amenable to the chariot pole’ a few vss. back (5c). I think dhúram has to be an unmarked simile, an acc. goal parallel to nidhím. The Aśvins are asked to go to the nidhí- as draft animals come tamely to the dhúr-, then to enter it as the pin enters the nave.

I supply ‘honey’ with nidhím on the basis of the phrase nidhí- mádhūnām used twice in Aśvin hymns with sim. vocab.: I.183.4 ayáṃ vām bhagó níhita iyáṃ gī́r, dásrāv imé vām nidháyo mádhūnām “Here is the portion deposited for you, here the hymn, o wondrous ones, and here the deposits of honey for you” / III.58.5 éhá yātam pathíbhir devayā́nair, dásrāv imé vāṃ nidháyo mádhūnām “Travel here along the paths leading to the gods. Wondrous ones, these stores of honey belong to you two.” Since 'honey' is thematic in the previous parts of this hymn (1b, 2c, 3a, d, 4c, 6c), supplying it here (esp. in Aśvin context) is easy.

