+++
title = "03"

+++
The standard tr. are in agreement that árcanti only means “they sing” here and that the meaning ‘shine’ for this verb stem is dubious. This judgment seems short- sighted and unresponsive to the poetics of this hymn, and even if ‘shine’ is not the normal sense of árca-, the nominal derivatives like arcí(s)- ‘ray, flame’ (see arcís- in 5a) would allow a ‘shine’ sense under the proper circumstances. And these are the proper circumstances. This verse-initial verb, following on two verses describing the color, brightness, and beams of the dawns, would most naturally be interpreted with a ‘shine’ sense. The simile that follows, involving women at work, would then cause the audience to rethink this assumption, producing the interpretation ‘sing’, with the women singing work songs at their labors. But ‘sing’ makes little sense for the frame of the passage: do dawns ‘sing’? While ‘shine’ makes little sense for the simile: do working women ‘shine’? As in 1c the poet uses the ambiguity of the verbal pivot to craft two incompatible but verbally impeccable pictures, but this time he relies not on syntactic ambiguity as in 1c but synonymity -- a pun on the verbal root underlying the verb form. The pun may be even cleverer than so far presented. Although the primary sense of árcanti for the dawns should be ‘shine’, it is possible that there is a secondary sense ‘sing’, in that birds begin to sing at dawn and the ritual recitation also begins at that time. Similarly, although ‘sing’ should be the primary sense for the women in the simile, they may also be said to shine if they are glistening with sweat from their labors. (Recall the old expression “men sweat, but women ‘glow.’”) It should be noted that Ludwig thought the verb was “doppelsinnig” (see Ge n. 3a).

In terms of the publ. tr. (and other standard tr.), the simile particle ná is late, since the simile is assumed to start with nā́rīḥ. However, it is possible that nā́rīḥ characterizes the Dawns, and the simile consists only of apáso ná viṣṭíbhiḥ. In that case, the chanting workers could be men: an alt. tr. “The ladies chant [/shine] like workers at their labors.” Pace Gr and Lub, áha should be taken not as the particle, but as short neut. pl.

to áhar / áhan- ‘day’, with víśvā; cf. the well-attested expression áhā víśvā.

