+++
title = "+086"

+++
86 (912)  
Vr̥ṣākapi (Conversation of Vr̥ṣākapi Aindra, Indrāṇı, ̄ and Indra)  
Indra (1, 8, 11–12, 14, 19–22), Indrāṇī (2–6, 9–10, 15–18), Vrṣḁ̄ kapi Aindra (7, 13,  23) [per the Anukramaṇī]  
23 verses: paṅkti  
This dialogue hymn was called by Renou “the strangest poem in the R̥gveda” (“le  poème le plus étrange du RV,” 1956: 246). The three participants in the dialogue are  Indra, his wife Indrāṇī, and his raffish monkey pal Vr̥ṣākapi, who is making sexual  advances to Indrāṇī. The hymn contains startlingly explicit sexual discourse, as well  as a dazzling array of apparent non-sequiturs, all embedded in an exaltation of  Indra, signaled by its consistent refrain.  
Not surprisingly its meaning and web of references have been the subject of  much controversy; we cannot discuss the many conflicting interpretations here.  However, in our opinion many of the puzzles can be solved if it is interpreted as  an oblique treatment of the Aśvamedha (Horse Sacrifice) ritual, a royal ritual in  which, according to the middle Vedic ritual texts, the chief queen copulates with  the sacrificed horse to increase and magnify the power of the king, her husband. In  this reading, the monkey represents the horse, with whom Indrāṇī must have sexual  relations. She both indignantly rejects and also encourages Vr̥ṣākapi’s advances  in the course of the hymn, and after their ritual copulation she is called “wife of  Vr̥ṣākapi” (vs. 13). The power of her husband Indra, the king, is extended by the  

performance of this ritual, though he has been, in effect, cuckolded. Hence the  paradoxical announcement in verse 17, which proclaims the sexual “loser” the real  master. For a detailed discussion of the hymn in the context of the Aśvamedha, see  Jamison (1996a: 74–88).  
The hymn begins with Indra’s complaint that he is no longer receiving honor  or soma, a statement echoed by his wife (vss. 1–2). The falling off of ritual obser vance sets the stage for the performance of an Aśvamedha, for Indra to regain  his position. The topic then shifts to Vr̥ṣākapi (vss. 3–6), whose friendship with  Indra is clearly a bone of contention between the married couple. Indrāṇī reveals  in annoyance that he has made advances to her, but then, in a startling descent into  vulgar speech, boasts of her own sexual prowess (vs. 6). Vulgarity is matched by  vulgarity in Vr̥ṣākapi’s first entry into the conversation (vs. 7), where he responds to  her implicit invitation. These two verses may well verbally signal the sexual activ  
ity between them, the climactic moment of interspecies pairing that mimics the  Aśvamedha. The next two verses (8–9), presumably spoken by Indra and Indrāṇī,  may well be a humorous reflection of this intercourse, which may appear to Indra  as spectator more like vexation than pleasure.  
In our view, the next two verses (10–11) are spoken by the narrator, proclaiming  Indrāṇī’s important new ritual status, as the queen ensuring the life and prosper ity of her husband Indra. (The Anukramaṇī assigns them to Indra.) Indra then  laments the loss of his friend (vs. 12), who is going to the gods as sacrificial offer ing, but rejoices in the renewed sacrificial offerings he himself is receiving (vss.  13–14). In these verses he addresses his wife both as Indrāṇī (“wife of Indra,” vs.  12) and Vr̥ṣākapāyī (“wife of Vr̥ṣākapi,” vs. 13), for by her copulation with the  monkey she became his temporary ritual wife. The narrator affirms the renewal of  soma offering to Indra in verse 15, rectifying the lapse in ritual attentions noted  in verse 1.  
The two responsive verses that follow (16–17) are the heart of the hymn and the  best support for and justification of the Aśvamedha. The first contains what would  be a universally accepted truism: the sexually successful male is the master and has  the power. But this is trumped by the paradoxical reversal: the sexually successful  male does not have the power; it’s the unsuccessful one who is master. This state  
ment is beautifully applicable to the Aśvamedha: the king is cuckolded by a horse  (or, in this case, a monkey) and is witness to this humiliating act, but the king also  receives all the benefit from the ritual, which increases his power, while the sexual  partner of the queen is sacrificed.  
With this pair of verses the hymn has reached its high point and conveyed its  message. The remaining verses are something of a letdown. The next five (vss.  18–22) are an extended pun, relating the yearlong journey of the horse/monkey  before the sacrifice with its journey to the gods after its sacrifice. The final puzzling  verse (23) superficially has nothing to do with the rest of the hymn, but relates a  miraculous birth from the daughter of Manu, who has the speaking name “Rib.”  The deeper connection must be the explosive fertility that the performance of the Aśvamedha should confer on its participants. For discussion of this verse in an  Indo-European context, see Watkins (2004).  
The Aśvamedha is treated more directly in two hymns in Maṇḍala I, I.162 and 163.  