+++
title = "26"

+++
The Indraic cast of this vs. is quite clear, and I therefore think that Soma is being identified with Indra here (as he was with Agni in the tṛca 19-21). To begin with, the splv.

rathī́tama- is generally used of Indra (e.g., VIII.45.7); marúd-gaṇa- ‘having the Maruts as his flock’ is of course characteristic of Indra (e.g., VIII.89.2) and also expressed by other, similar but better-attested epithets like marút-vant-. Moreover, the stem śubhrá- ‘resplendent’ in the masc. pl., here in the instr. pl. śubhrébhiḥ, is almost always used of the Maruts (e.g., I.167.4).

The problem in the vs. is the splv. śubhráśastamaḥ in b. The interpr. reflected by Ge and Re stems from Old, who sees it as a haplology from *śubhrá-śasta-tama-, i.e., the splv.

to a ppl. cmpd. Old himself doesn’t provide a gloss, but on the basis of a cmpd. like kaviśastá- ‘praised by poets’ it should presumably be something like ‘most praised by the resplendent’, though neither Ge’s “über die anderen Schönen als der Schönste gepriesen” nor Re’s “par rapport aux (êtres) beaux, il est le plus célébré (quant à son fait d’être) beau” reflects this presumption; that is, they do not take the 1st member as agent. Nor does the accent of the cmpd (either reconstructed or as attested) match that of kavi-śastá-, though admittedly it does match the standard devá-hita- type. And the instr. śubhrébhiḥ seems an odd choice - we would expect a gen. pl. with the splv. of course; the anomalous instr. is surely responsible for the knots that Ge and Re tie themselves into, as well as Ge’s cryptic (or disingenuous) n. 26b “śubhrébhiḥ Instr. = Ablat. in Verbindung mit Superl. = Komparat.” The publ. tr. represents a very different analysis, which I now think must be wrong: as the splv. to a root-noun cmpd. ‘proclaiming splendor’, but, as I realized all along, the accent is wrong (expect *śubhra-śás-(tama-)), and it is difficult to argue that the accent got misplaced because the word structure was misunderstood, esp. given the root noun cmpd splv. in the next vs., vāja-sā́-tama- with correct accent. In addition, śubhrá- is an adj., ‘resplendent’, not a noun ‘splendour’, and √śaṃs doesn’t take any form derived from √śubh as obj. So I now would reject the publ. tr. and return to Old’s haplology - though with a semantic interpr. different from the Ge/Re complex. I would take the 1st member in agentive value, as is usual in such cmpds: “most praised by the resplendent (ones),” with the usual number neutralization. The reference is to the Maruts. What then of the independent instr. śubhrébhiḥ? Either it doubles the 1st cmpd member, whose function in the cmpd may have become unclear because of the haplology - hence “most praised by the resplendent (ones), by the resplendent ones.” Or it may be an instr. of accompaniment: “most praised by the resplendent (ones), along with the resplendent ones.” This would reflect the fact that the Maruts both praise Indra and receive praise themselves. This dual role of the Maruts, both praising and praised, is the subject of “poetic repair” in V.52, the first of Śyāvāśva’s Marut hymns. See comm. ad loc and reff. given there. Although I slightly favor the former explanation, English is better served by the latter, and I would now substitute the 2nd tr. just given; “most praised” should also receive an asterisk.

Unfortunately “gold-glittering” for háriścandra- obscures its relationship to háreś candrā́ḥ in 25b “of the tawny one, the glittering (drops).”

