+++
title = "04"

+++
The parade of ill-assorted divinities and semi-divinities continues. The sequence is made more muddled by the fact that Trita is always a shadowy figure, who is probably (but not certainly) the same as Āptya in vs. 9 (Āptya being Trita’s usual patronymic) and Trita in 10 and who is probably (but not certainly) the referent of pāda a here: “the heavenly victor with Kaṇva as Hotar.” If he is the referent of pāda a, it is slightly odd that he is both qualified as ‘heavenly’ (divyáḥ) and said to be ‘from heaven’ (diváḥ, pāda b). It might be best, with Ge (/WG) to take diváḥ as the place-from-which of all the figures mentioned; however, Wind and Agni are normally associated with the midspace and the earth respectively, and Pūṣan and Bhaga are not particularly heavenly deities. It’s worth noting that divyá- continues the poet’s habit of using deriv. -ya-adjectives in place of (or perhaps here beside) their nominals, and so the doubling divyá- / diváḥ might not be so odd after all.

I do not know exactly what to do with prá initial in the vs., but it is noteworthy that it fits into a sequence of prá-initial expressions, where the preverb is in tmesis, beginning with 3d prá … bharadhvam and continuing with 5a prá … bharadhvam again and 6a prá … kṛṇudhvam (followed by initial prá in 6b and 7b).

In our vs. there is no finite verb to construe it with in tmesis, but note the loc. prabhṛthé in c. My assumption is that vs.-initial prá simply reinforces prabhṛthé in a vs. sandwiched between two full prá … bharadhvam expressions. It could also be construed with jagmuḥ in d, though one might expect a more prominent, metricalboundary-adjoining jagmuḥ in that case.

The loc. prabhṛthé and the acc. ājím both serve as goal with jagmuḥ -- another ex. of the poet’s penchant for slightly off-balance parallels.

