+++
title = "09"

+++
svaítu- in b is a hapax. Following a tentative suggestion of Ge’s (n. 9b), I take it as a vṛddhi form related to Aves. xv aētu- ‘family’, pace Narten (YH 266 n. 59), who, however, does not give reasons for her rejection of the association (though it’s true that we should really expect a thematic *svaitava- or the like). I confess, however, that my rendering of ab is merely a guess (as, it seems, are the other divergent tr.). I don’t know why the mountains should be associated with our production of offspring; the sexual connotation WG suggest in their n., that mountains are felsenhart and knotig, seems farfetched. My own tentative suggestion is that the progeny here belong to the mountains, not to us, and refer to the material goods originating from mountains that we will enjoy: see I.55.3 párvataṃ ná bhójase “like a mountain to be enjoyed” and Ge’s parallels adduced there; also passages like VII.37.8 ā́rā́yo yantu párvatasya rātaú “let the riches of the mountain come here at (the time for) giving”; II.24.2 vásumantam .. párvatam “the goods-filled mountain.” If I am correct, the simile, in which the mountains are said to be vásavo ná vīrā́ḥ “like good heroes” may be a bit of a pun, with vásavaḥ actually referring to the material goods of the mountains. To make my interpr. clearer, I might slightly emend the tr. to “to thrust out their progeny for us.” The alternative etym. of svaítu- found in Gr, favored by Narten, and represented in the tr. of Re and WG analyses it as svá-etu- ‘having their own going’, which seems singularly inappropriate. It is regularly emphasized that mountains can’t be moved — except when they’re in fear of some greater force (like the Maruts) — so “going” should not be one of their properities. It could refer to the myth of the winged mountains (the wings then clipped by Indra), but this does not seem the context for a reference to this myth. WG attenuate the sense to a figurative “die ein Eigenleben führen,” which avoids the mountain-movement problem, but essentially denies the force of the etymology. By contrast, a reference to ‘family’ fits comfortably with the production of progeny.

I don’t know what Āptya is doing here, either. Again, the sexual connotation suggested in WG’s n. is invisible to me. It does seem likely that he is the same figure as Trita in 10b, since both are associated with the production of praise. Trita in 4b is less clearly tied in. Note śáṃsaṃ náryaḥ, which reminds of nárā-śáṃsa- (though they don’t belong to the same syntagm here) and also continues the poet’s fondness for -yaderivatives.

