+++
title = "12"

+++
This vs. presents a number of difficulties. The first is the easiest solved: who is the referent of ab? Although this is almost universally taken to be the Wind, I think it is more likely Agni. Only Agni is called ūrjā́m páti- “lord of nourishments” (otherwise only in the voc. ūrjām pate), also ūrjó nápāt “child of nourishment.” Given this exclusive identification, it seems unlikely that the audience would assign a different referent, esp. since ūrjā́m pátiḥ is the first epithet encountered and sets the frame of reference; the others only show up in pāda b. Moreover, though párijman- ‘earth-circling’ is used of the Wind, it also refers to other entities, including, fairly often, Agni (VI.2.8, VI.13.2, VII.13.3, I.127.2, III.2.9). The other descriptor in b, iṣirá- ‘vigorous’, is applied to a variety of beings and things, including the Wind, but also Agni (III.2.14, 5.4). The only activity posited of the subject of this hemistich is nábhas tárīyān (for which see below), which is also applicable to either.

The pāda-final sá in pāda a is quite unusual. A cursory glance through Lub for parallels yields only II.35.1, III.13.3, (VII.86.6 sā́), IX.71.8, IX.79.3, X.108.4 (a careful search might produce a few more). All of these exx. are either rhetorically contrastive, or sá takes its proper position in a new clause. Although it is possible that the sá here also begins a new, purely nominal clause with b, this seems clumsy. I have a quite speculative suggestion about it, linking it with the immediately following nábhas tárīyān. The standard — and quite persuasive — interpr. of this phrase is “quicker than a cloud,” but this imposes an abl. sg. interpr. on nábhaḥ, which should then belong to a root noun nábh- ‘cloud’, beside the standard s-stem nábhas-. This root noun does not otherwise exist: the supposed root noun nábh- (glossed ‘Zerspalter, Zerbrecher’ by Gr) in I.174.8 is more likely a verb (see comm. ad loc.). And in any case we should expect an accent *nabhás. Re’s suggestion that nábhas is simply haplology for *nábhasas is probably correct, but I suggest that it left a trace of its vanished final -as in the pāda-final sá immediately preceding — a tangible sign of the effects of speed: the final syllable got cut off and left behind.

The second hemistich is very puzzling and has given rise to very different and incompatible interpr. (WG being esp. distant from the rest). Mine more or less follows Old (or one of his alternatives), who discusses the passage with his customary acuity; I will not discuss other renderings in detail. I am not at all certain that mine (/Old’s) is correct, however. The framework of the passage compares the waters, subjects of the verb, with fortifications (púraḥ), the point of comparison being their resplendant appearance (śubhrá-). So far also Ge; Re also follows this structure, but floats the possibility that púr- can mean ‘corps’, which would be convenient but is of course unsupported. With Old and Ge (we now lose Re, who takes d as a separate clause with the ladles as subj.), the fortifications are those of a mountain (ádreḥ), and this mountain is characterized as pári … babṛhāṇá- ‘enclosing’ (pári √bṛh has this meaning in the Brāh.). Although we would not ordinarily expect tmesis of a participle, esp. a part. in an oblique case, the tmesis here is iconic: the enclosed object is located between preverb and participle. This object is srúcaḥ ‘offering ladles’. Now of course in a literal interpr. a mountain enclosing a bunch of ladles sounds very odd, Old cleverly suggests that the ladles stand for cows -- living ladles, as it were, from which ghee comes as it does from the offering ladles. These cows are then the cows trapped within the Vala cave. The hemistich thus starts jointly in the physical world and on the ritual grounds, since the listening waters are probably both “real” natural waters and the waters standing by for the soma sacrifice.

It then moves, via the simile, to the natural world (mountain fortifications) and the world of myth (the Vala cave), and back to the ritual ground, with the enclosed ladles.

If this interpr. is correct, it is a very condensed and clever expression.

