+++
title = "17"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., vss. 16-17, in a different meter from what precedes (and follows), seem to provide a summary of the preceding hymn, esp. 17, with its self-conscious internal quote íti cin nú “in just these (words) now.” See Janert (Dhāsi, pp. 16-17), who argues this position in some detail.

All the standard tr. (as well as Janert, 42) agree in taking d and e as separate clauses and supplying a verb for c. All consider the clauses contrastive: in d I hope to be granted a pleasant or benevolent dhāsí- for my body, while in e I express the wish that Nirṛti should swallow my old age. But this is directly contrary to what was said in 15ab, where the securing of his old age was an occasion for celebration by the poet.

It is true that two different words for ‘old age’ are involved: jarimán- in 15, jarā́- in 17, but these words do not contrast semantically elsewhere as far as I can see (cf. X.32.5, 8, which contains jarā́- followed by jarimán-) (even though Re remarks “noter l’opposition”). An important parallel is provided by X.59.4 dyúbhir hitó jarimā́sū́no astu, parātaráṃ sú nírṛtir jihītām “Throughout the days let our old age be secured for us. -- Let Dissolution move herself further away.” There old age is ‘secured’ (hitáḥ) as it was in our 15a jarimā́ní dhāyi (both to √dhā), and Dissolution (nírṛtiḥ) is urged to move away. (It should be admitted that that pāda is a refrain to the first three vss. of X.59 and so not necessarily as closely tied to the preceding pāda as it might be.) I therefore doubt that in our vs. the poet is hoping that Dissolution will swallow the old age that he (and other poets) elsewhere want to keep safe.

Instead I think de is the expression of his fear that if he fails to win the gods (abc) Dissolution will succeed in depriving him of his wished-for old age. I have pushed átrā perhaps a bit too much -- to ‘otherwise’; I would prefer a ‘lest’ (néd) clause or even a mā́clause, but néd, which becomes well developed in Vedic prose, barely exists in the RV and the poet may have been casting about for a way to express this modality. A further piece of evidence in favor of my interpr. is the word dhāsí.

Although this word often means ‘well-spring’ or ‘source’ (see comm. ad I.62.3, 140.1), in some cases it seems to mean ‘place, depository’ and be associated with (/derived, at least synchronically, from) √dhā. Here the dhāsí- seems to be the nominalization of ní dhāyi in 15 (cf. hitáḥ in X.58.4) — that is, the place in which old age is securely held. I therefore take it as coreferential with jarā́m in e. ### 18-20 If, as suggested above, 16-17 are the finale of the hymn proper, these 3 (or 2 ¼) were tacked on. They certainly lack the complications of the rest of the hymn. The dominance of female figures is striking.

