+++
title = "19-20"

+++
The single pāda of 20 simply continues vs. 19 thematically and syntactically, as Old points out. They constitute a single vs. The signature word of the beginning of the hymn, vā, returns in force: urváśī vā ...urváśī vā brhaddi ̥ vā́... ūrṇvānā́. Note also urváśī ... urváśī ... abhyūrṇvānā́...

ūrjavyàsya.

This vs. sequence seems inspired by 15cd. Vs. 15 has a similar focus on female figures, and 15c #síṣaktu mātā́mahī́rasā́naḥ is echoed by 20a #síṣaktu naḥ, whose subject is likewise a female. The ‘mother’ mātā́of 15c is matched slightly earlier in this vs. sequence, in 19a, and there she is accompanied by rivers (smán nadī́bhiḥ 19b), even as the mother of 15c is identified as the river Rasā.

In fact 19-20 depict a matriarchal lineage of sorts, as Ge points out (n. 19bc).

Besides Iḍā, explicitly “the mother of the flock” (yūthásya mātā́) here, there is Urvaśī, twice: 19b and 19c. I am not entirely sure what to make of this doubling. I doubt that two different Urvaśīs are meant, rather the familiar Urvaśī in two different guises (so Ge). In 19b she is associated with rivers. This reminds us of the attendance of her fellow Apsarases and of the rivers on the birth of Urvaśī’s son in X.95.6-7, with Urvaśī herself qualified as ‘watery’ (ápyā in X.95.10b) and her son as “born from the water” (jániṣṭo apáḥ, X.95.10c). Urvaśī Bṛhaddivā (‘of lofty heaven’; on the accent bṛhaddivā́- see AiG II.1.109, 120) in 19c may refer to a return to her residence in heaven after breaking with Purūravas (not, however, mentioned in X.95). In any case, Urvaśī’s son is named Āyu; his paternal grandmother is Iḍā, the mother of Purūravas (addresed as aiḍa in X.95.18), so the title ‘mother’ given to Iḍā in 19a has another resonance. Because of Urvaśī’s relationship to Āyu, with Ge and Re I supply ‘mother’ in 19d and 20a to govern the various genitives. Thus with Iḍā, Urvaśī, and Āyu we have a three-generational family.

I am uncertain what to do with ūravyàsya in 20 (PN or not), and I also do not know what abhyūrṇvāṇā́in 19d is conveying.