+++
title = "01"

+++
The verb of c, dhā́ti with primary ending, can only be a root aorist subjunctive like the other two such forms, though neither Ge nor Re so tr. it -- nor do I. However, WG’s “… soll er … verteilen” does represent the mood (so also Hettrich, Hyp. 177). I would emend the publ. tr. to “will distribute …” Unfortunately it does not require trisyllabic scansion, which would have supported the subj. interpr.

The question then arises how to analyze ā́bhajat in d. The Pp. takes it as ā́ abhajat, with unaccented augment. Under this analysis the verb would not be in the domain of the hí in c; otherwise the augment should be accented and the preverb unaccented and univerbated. The WG tr. reflects the Pp. by separating the clauses, but Ge, Re, and I (implicitly also Klein DGRV II.74) tr. cd as if they contain conjoined parallel clauses. It would also be possible to analyze ā́bhajat as ā́bhajat, that is, without augment. An injunctive might fit the syntactic context better, in that it could just continue the modal reading of dhā́ti (“will distribute … and [will] give a share …”), but paradoxically this would require the two clauses to be more independent because the verb would be unaccented and therefore could not be conjoined to c with accent-inducing hí. In larger interpretational terms the differences among the several possibilities just outlined are fairly minor -- having just given or being about to give actually turn out to be almost identical acts in Rigvedic ritual depiction -- but it is worth noting the multiple ambiguities inherent in an innocent looking form. For two parallel clauses containing first a subjunctive and then an augmented indicative, see 3ab below (mucāti … árīramat).
