+++
title = "07"

+++
In my view, this vs. divides the world into habitats for fish (etc.), wild beasts, and birds. Not surprisingly the watery creatures are placed in water (pāda a). As head noun with ápyam I supply jánma from the summary pāda of this two-vs. sequence, 8d.

The problem in 7a is bhāgám: it is tempting to tr. “the watery (race) has been placed by you among the waters as their share,” but bhāgám belongs to a masc. stem and must be acc., which does not accord with the nominal clause in which it would purportedly be found. I therefore construe this last word of pāda a with b, as an appositive to acc. pl. dhánva ‘wastelands’. Although I would prefer to avoid such enjambment, I see no better choice, and note that a new clause also begins in the middle of pāda c (with nákiḥ) and continues to the end of d. Sim. also 9c. Ge’s interpr., which keeps bhāgám within its pāda by making the whole pāda acc., seems to me to come at too high a cost: he must supply a set of fishermen and a verb ‘seek’ to govern the acc. (“[Fisherman seek] their watery share ..”); these imaginary fishermen are parallel to the “hunters” that he takes mṛgayásaḥ to be, dispersed across the dry land (and presumably hunting wild beasts). I see several conceptual problems with this interpr. For one thing this makes the first two pādas non-parallel with c, for there are no bird-catchers there (Vedic Papagenos?), whereas in my interpr. the three pādas describe the habitats of three types of creatures. Moreover, the hunting has no obvious connection with Savitar, whereas by my interpr. the distribution of habitats is his doing - and is summed up by 8d “Savitar has distributed the races according to their stations.” Nor is the hunting likely to be an activity of night, the other thematic connection it might have to the rest of the hymn: everyone else has gone home, but hunters are out on the plains trying to shoot deer in the dark? For penetrating arguments against the Ge interpr. see Old’s n. 3 ad loc. Pāda b has its own problem, the anomalous form mṛgayásaḥ. Ge (n. 7ab) declares that mṛgayás- can only mean ‘hunter’, but gives no evidence for his certainty. Old’s disc. is more to the point (and rather tart about the ‘hunter’ interpr.), though his morphological analysis of it as an -as-derivative of the denom. mṛgayseems a little shaky (likewise his alternative explan. as a cmpd. of loc. mṛgé + √as ‘shoot’, like hṛtsv-ás- [see Scar 41], with older sandhi and a meaning ‘auf das Wild schiessend’, which unfortunately smuggles in Ge’s hunters in another guise). On the other hand, I don’t have anything better to offer. It reminds us of a suffix-accented masc. deriv. like rakṣás- ‘demon’ next to neut. rákṣas- ‘demonic force’, which itself gets personified. But the assumed base *mṛ́gayas- (or *mṛgáyas-) ‘wild-beast-iness’ doesn’t exist and it’s hard to see to what it would be generated. AiG II.2.223 dismisses the word with a ? and a ref. to Old’s disc. In any case, Old’s structural arguments that it must refer to the beasts, not the hunters are sound. A third occurrence of ví √sthā is found in this pāda.

The asya in pāda c anticipates devásya savitúḥ in d - perhaps better to tr. as Ge does: “… diese seine Gebote, des Gottes Savitar.” This doubling may have arisen because the clause begins in the middle of a pāda and continues over the pāda break.

