+++
title = "08"

+++
The general purport of this vs. is clear: it both summarizes Savitar’s distribution of the creatures (esp. in pāda d) and hints (esp. in pāda c) at their return to their own special places at night. But the first half-verse is quite challenging and my interp. is not fully worked out.

On yādrādhyàm see Old’s disc. My publ. tr. “As far as (Savitar’s) benefit extends” is, I’m afraid, opaque. What it means to convey is that Varuṇa’s presence in his watery womb is at the favor of Savitar, whose distribution of the creatures in their proper places extends even to the gods, or at least one of them. A modern equivalent might be the phrase “to serve at the pleasure of (e.g.) the president.” The dependence of Varuṇa (and other gods) on Savitar’s orders and ordering is stated plainly in the next vs., 9ab. It is esp. striking that Varuṇa follows Savitar’s vratá-, since the vratá- is primarily Varuṇa’s domain. That Varuṇa is the only god named here is probably meant to emphasize what might almost be seen as Savitar’s usurpation of the power and role of Varuṇa. Savitar’s rā́dhas- recurs in 11b.

This passage shows one of the early examples of what becomes Varuṇa’s principal association, that with water. Again, it may be that Savitar is deliberately relegating him to this restricted role. Varuṇa’s hypervigilance, familiar from other, more standard treatments of Varuṇa in the RV, is undeterred by his watery environment, as pāda b indicates.

Note the phonological play in ániṣitaṃ nimíṣi.

The sense of nimíṣi is unclear. My tr. “at (every) blink of the eye” takes it as an implicit āmreḍita with the frequenative járbhurāṇaḥ; it could also be an indication of the great speed of Varuṇa’s movements, like English “in the blink of an eye.” However it shouldn’t be forgotten that the idiom ní √miṣ is associated with the gods and esp. the Āditya—generally in its negation: the gods (or their spies) “never blink” (cf., e.g., IX.73.4, X.10.8, 63.4). For Mitra and Varuṇa or the Ādityas see VII.60.7, 61.3, VII.25.9, and esp. nearby II.27.8 asvapnajo animi ́ ṣā́ádabdhāḥ “unsleeping, unblinking, undeceivable” (of the Ādityas). Is the blinking here (as opposed to the usual non-blinking) another of Savitar’s subtle put-downs of Varuṇa, implying that he does blink after all? In c mārtāṇḍá- is taken by the standard tr. (also Lüders, Varuṇa I.50) as ‘bird’, and this could work well, corresponding to 7c, where the birds are assigned to the forests. However, note that in vs. 7 the other member of the trio of creatures, besides the watery, is the wild beast (7b), whereas here instead of a wild beast we have precisely a domesticated one, the paśú-. Its formulaic partner is mārtāṇḍá-, lit.

‘stemming from a dead egg’, found otherwise in the RV in the creation hymn X.72.8-9 in the myth of Aditi and the birth of her sons. The last son born (or rather the egg miscarried), mārtāṇḍá-, is the ancestor of mortals; for disc. of the word and the myth see Hoffmann 1976 (=1992: 723). That half of this vs. is devoted to Varuṇa and the next vs. has the great trio of Aditi’s sons, Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman, provides further evidence that the Mārtāṇḍa of the Aditi birth story is meant. Under this interpr., the domestic herd animal (paśú-) is paired with the likewise domesticated human, each in its own pen.

