+++
title = "+060"

+++
Agni Taking off from my comment below on vs. 5, JL has further articulated the structure of this hymn. What follows is mostly verbatim from his comments, with some additions and light editing of my own: I think this little hymn might have a slightly more elegant structure than has been appreciated (I thought of this following your mention ad vs. 5 of the “faint ring”). It seems to me that the 5 verses are nicely balanced rings within rings revolving around vs. 3, the omphalos-like jā́yamānam… jījananta, harking back to Agni’s double birth in 1c. The outer rings would be, as mentioned ad vs. 5, vss. 1c rayím iva praśastám = 5 pátim ... rayīnā́m, prá śaṃsāmaḥ. Vss. 2 and 4 contain the same word vikṣú; note esp. the alliterative and partly etymological figure in 2d viśpátir vikṣú vedhā́ḥ. The hymn has not only a ring structure, but also forward momentum provided by the movement from the larger social organization of the vís-, in the full expression viśpátir vikṣú (2d), to the more intimate setting of the home, emphatically presented in 4c dámūnā gṛ́hapatir dáme. The momentum can also be tracked in the expressions of lordship involving páti-: viśpáti- (2d) to gṛhapáti- (4c) and finally the solemnly pleonastic rayipátī rayīṇā́m (4d). Agni, celebrated (√śaṃs) “like wealth” in 1c (rayím iva), is transformed into the lord of wealth in 4d. This final title is repeated in 5a pátim agne rayīṇā́m, with his name interposed between the two elements, and again the object of √śaṃs. The use of these three -páti- compounds may convey the message that Agni will deploy his wealth in the arenas of clan and house.

