+++
title = "04"

+++
On úpamāti- as belonging to √mā not √man, see comm. ad VIII.40.9. Note that WG (‘Zumessung’) must also derive it from √mā. The Aśvins’ úpamāti- might be an answer to the question in 3d: which one is their best ability? This stem is also the obvious one to supply with the instr. fem. káyā, which immediately follows.

I construe cd very differently from the standard tr., which take c and d as separate clauses (though Ge and Re both supply a form of the verb of d, uruṣyá-, in c). I take kó vām as an independent nominal cl., with the next cl. beginning with maháḥ and running to the end (cf. the structure of ab, which also has a clause break in the middle of pāda a, with the 2nd cl. continuing to the end of b). The reason for this choice is that it is difficult to render c as a unity if abhī́ke is taken in its usual sense (hence the attenutations in the other tr.). Moreover, abhī́ke regularly appears with uruṣyá- and similar ‘make wide space’ expressions: VII.85.1 tā́no yā́mann uruṣyatām abhī́ke “Let those two give us wide space in close quarters on our journey,” X.38.4 yó abhī́ke varivovít “who finds wide space in close quarters…,” X.133.1 abhī́ke cid ulokakṛ̥t “a maker of wide space even in close quarters.” Earlier in IV an ablative phrase like our maháś cit tyájasaḥ is found adjacent to abhī́ke: IV.12.5 maháś cid agna énaso abhī́ke “(Release us) from even a great offense in close quarters, o Agni.” All of these parallels lead to the conclusion that everything starting with maháḥ should be read with uruṣyátam in the next pāda, since abhī́ke patterns with uruṣyá- and the abl. phrase is connected with abhī́ke. However, I realize that the phrase in the publ. tr. “even out of great neglect” seems unconnected to the rest and makes little sense. I now feel that we need to interpr. uruṣyátam in two different senses. With abhī́ke it has its physical literal meaning ‘make wide space’, but with the abl. maháś cit tyájasaḥ it has the extended sense ‘release, free (from)’. I would therefore emend the tr. to “Make wide space for us in close quarters, free us even from great neglect/abandonment.” WG take tyájas- as ‘Lebensopfer’, but this must rest on the later notion of sacrifice as tyāga-. This concept is not really a part of the RVic ritual universe -- though see the single occurrence of tyāgá- in the RV in IV.24.3, where it refers to the abandonment of one’s body in battle.

