+++
title = "05"

+++
I take pāda b with c rather than a, because I think those two middle pādas depict (somewhat playfully?) the Aśvins’ chariot on an independent journey, coming towards them from the sea and, with the journey originating in a wet place, splashing them. I do not see any other easy way to construe the unusual pāda-final vām in b but as the goal of the goal-oriented verb abhí vártate (note similarly pāda-final acc. vām in the next hymn, 44.2). As Ge’s parallels (I.139.3, 180.1) suggest, the likely subject of pruṣāyan is the chariot’s ‘wheel-rims’ (paváyaḥ).

The verb in d, bhurájanta, is a hapax and much disputed. Probably the current standard view is that it is an enlargement of √bhṛ (see the standard tr., as well as EWA s.v. with further lit.). This view is supported by an apparently parallel passage in V.73.8d pakvā́ḥ pṛ́kṣo bharanta vām “they bring cooked foods to you” (or “cooked foods are brought to you”), very close to our yát sīṃ vām pṛ́kṣo bhurájanta pakvā́ḥ.

But it is easy to imagine that a poet, adapting Aśvin phraseology to the simpler dimeter meter and confronting a baffling word like bhurájanta, would substitute a word that sounded more or less similar and would work in the passage. Re suggests breezily that bhuraj- is the same type of formation as bhiṣaj- and saraj-, but this seems to me to undercut the explanation because these two formations are so outré; - aj- is a pretty salient piece of morphology and wouldn’t, I think, be lightly attached to a normal root (particularly one that should not be showing *bhur- forms). I therefore favor the older (Gr, etc., incl. also Wackernagel, AiG I, passim) connection with √bhṛjj ‘roast’. Although this verbal root is found only once in the RV, it is widely attested in Middle and New Indo-Aryan (see Turner, √BHRAJJ and, e.g., 9583-86), and there is an underlying nasal-infix pres. *bhṛnak-ti, which acdg. to Turner (9586) is presupposed by *bhṛñjati ‘parches’. With some manipulation of MIA phonology, this might give us our form. The relative absence of √bhṛjj from the RV and other early Vedic texts is not surprising, since it would belong to kitchen vocabulary.

