+++
title = "08"

+++
My interpr. of this vs. differs from the standard because I don’t interpr.

anything here as a PN, unlike Ge and to a lesser extent Re. In particular, tṛpálamanyú- is taken as PN by Gr, Ge, Re, Mayr (PN); Ge and (waveringly) both Old and Mayr (PN) also so interpr. vṛ́ṣagaṇa-. As for the former, tṛpála- is also found in the cmpd. tṛpála-prabharman- (X.89.5, where it is adjacent to ā́pānta-manyu-, with - manyu- as here), both adj. applying to Soma. There is no question of a PN there. It is also likely to be related to tṛprá- (VIII.2.5), also of Soma. See comm. ad loc., where I accept Mayr’s (EWA s.v.) suggestion that tṛprá- means ‘sharp’. The other part of the dyad, manyú-, is of course a well-attested common noun ‘battle fury’. I see no obstacle to interpr. the phrase as “sharp battle fury,” referring to Soma’s martial progress across the ritual ground.

In the standard tr. the geese of pāda a are in an unmarked simile, and the real subj. is vṛ́ṣagaṇāḥ, which is either a PN (Ge) or a descriptor of officiants (Re: “Les (officiants formant) un groupe mâle”). But again, nothing stands in the way of taking the geese as the subj., modified by vṛ́ṣagaṇāḥ; after all, geese come in flocks! In my view the geese are, metaphorically, the singers (so not too far from Re), who attend the ritual in a flock. The point of comparison is the noise they make; cf., e.g., IX.32.3 ā́d īṃ haṃsó yáthā gaṇám, víśvasyāvīvaśan mátim “just as (the lead) wild goose (sets) its flock (to honking), he has made the thought of everyone bellow.” The last two vss. here (7-8) contrast the harsh noise made by Soma (compared to a boar, 7d) with the equally harsh noise of honking geese, representing the ritual singers. This may be far from the mellifluous singing we imagine, but, as I have long argued, the root √ribh ‘rasp,’ etc. and its deriv. noun rebhá- do not flatter the sound of the singers: they describe the squawking of birds of prey and the creaking of a wagon, inter alia (see comm. ad VI.3.6, IX.66.9). Although the principal image here is of noisily honking geese, the migratory travels of the geese (going from nearby us to their [winter?] home) provide a secondary image. Because in real life the honking of geese is generally perceived as they cross the sky in formation, the two images go together.

Ge and Re take c with ab, with pávamānam another goal (beside Tṛpala Manyu) of ayāsuḥ. I take it rather with d, and I think the 2nd hemistich softens and repairs the uncompromising tunelessness of the noise in ab, by revising the depiction of the singers. They are now “comrades,” and they speak forth (pra √vad, with double acc.) to Soma “songful music” (āṅguṣyàm … vāṇám). Ge and Re take āṅguṣyàm as modifying pávamānam, and in their favor the two words are adjacent.

But the only other occurrence of that stem modifies sā́man- ‘melody’ (I.62.2) and to bleach it to ‘preislichen’ (for which there are already numerous other synonyms) seems unfortunate. I would suggest that the prominent initial position of āṅguṣyàm in c, far from its head noun at the end of d, results from this intention to re-cast the harsh image of ab and do so as soon as possible.

