+++
title = "17"

+++
As Re hints, śaṃgáyī- is a species of univerbation of the common expression śám + DAT “weal, luck for X.” The 2nd hemistich of this vs. is very difficult. Decoding it is made somewhat easier by recognizing the governing image: the progress of the Soma in and around the tufts of wool on the sheepskin filter. The Soma is urged to ‘pull apart’ ví √ci the bándhūn ‘bonds’; bándhu- is multivalent here. It refers on the one hand to the physical bonds that exist between the wool tufts, blocking Soma’s progress. It is notable that in VS 23.36 ví cinvantu has lóma ‘hair’ as object, and refers to the separation of the hair of the sacrificial horse to mark the lines along which the flaying knives are to follow. But bándhu- can also refer to bonds of kinship and therefore to kin-groups. Here the 2nd sense of ví √ci, ‘discriminate’, is probably in play, as Soma as representative of Ārya progress makes strategic alliances among these groups.

Ge follows this 2nd interpr. still further by emending the unclear (indo) vāyū́n to *indav *āyū́n, tr. “indem du … diese nächsten Freunde [=bándhū́n sj], die Āyu's, aussucht.” In my opinion emending to Āyus doesn’t help much, and I don’t think vāyū́n is as hopeless as he finds it - though I don’t think the path that Old and Re follow is a convincing one either. They both take it, reasonably enough, as belonging to the extremely well-attested stem vāyú- ‘wind’, and Old suggests that these winds might be rain-bringing, thus relating to the vṛṣṭí- desired in the first hemistich. But this takes us far from the fleece filter and the images it produces. I suggest instead that it is a nonce formation to the pseudo-root √vā ‘weave’ (on which see, e.g., EWA s.v. O, esp. p. 276), meaning ‘webs’ and again refers to the tangled non-linear paths through the fleece. In this context the ‘weave’ sense would be available to the audience. Re hints at a connection with ‘weave’ in his n., but his tr. doesn’t reflect it.

One of the curious features of this hemistich is that it is the simile that contains the word that is closest to the actual physical object under discussion - namely (*)stúka- ‘curl’, very close to ‘tuft’. Before discussing the meaning further, I should comment on the form. The stem of this word is generally given as fem. stúkā-, and there are certainly clear fem. forms (acc. stúkām AV VII.74.2, also by implication the poss. adj. stukāvín- RV VIII.74.13, although the latter could show lengthening at morpheme boundary [cf. dvayā-vín- and AiG II.2.917-18]). But nothing forbids us from interpr. stúkā here as a neut. pl. to a them. stúka- (so already Old), which immensely aids the interpr. of the passage, since a nom. ‘tuft, curl’ compared to the subj. Soma and commanded to run is close to senseless. One can interpr. the relationship between fem. stúkā- and neut. stúka- in one of two ways.

Either the neut. stem was so common in bahuvrīhis modifying females - e.g., víṣitastukā ‘with unloosened curls’ of Rodasī in I.167.5 - that the 2nd member was reinterpr. as fem. Or, again because of its presence in bahuvrīhis modifying females, the originally fem. 2nd member was interpr. as -stuka-, with the fem. gender appropriate only when a fem. was so characterized by a bahuvrīhi containing it.

Either way, I think we can confidently assume a neut. acc. pl. here, parallel to bándhūn and vāyū́n. Soma is urged to pull apart the bándhūn “like straightened curls/tufts.” That vītá- means ‘straight, straightened’ is clear from IV.2.11 cited by Ge: cíttim ácittiṃ cinavad ví vidvā́n, pṛṣṭhéva vītā́vṛjinā́ca mártān “Insight and lack of insight will the knowing one [=Agni] distinguish, like backs, straight and crooked, (like) mortals,” where it is contrasted with vṛjiná- ‘crooked’, with both acting as object of ví √ci as here. Cf. also the bahuvr. vītá-pṛṣṭha- ‘straight-backed’, vītá-vāra- ‘straight-tailed’. This adj. is likely derived from the root √vī ‘pursue’, as Gr suggests, but seems synchronically distinct from the other uses of the ppl. to this root. Gr gives it a separate lemma. Old suggests that stúkā … vītā́refers to “Kammwolle” or worsted wool, that is (I learn from the internet), wool yarn that has been combed rather than carded; carded yarn is fuzzier than worsted yarn. Whether this technical interpr. is correct or not, it’s clear that the curls or tufts in question are easier to navigate than those that are not vītá-.

