+++
title = "18"

+++
The “straight versus crooked” theme is continued here, and in fact the expression vītā́vṛjinā́ca “straight and crooked” cited from IV.2.11 in the immed.

preceding comm. is lexically renewed (/clarified) by ṛjúṃ ca … vṛjináṃ ca, with a better attested and unambiguous word for ‘straight’, ṛjú-. Again, Soma’s progress across the tufted filter is the topic, made clearer by the use of gātú- ‘way’. Both Ge and Re (also Ober II.60) take the verb ví ṣya only with pāda a and supply a new verb (‘discriminate’ or the like) with b, relying perhaps too heavily on the model of IV.2.11. I think literal unknotting is what’s at stake - finding a way between the entangled wool tufts. Ge further suggests (n. 18a) that the unknotting refers to getting rid of the stalk of the plant in the soma press, but the filter makes far more sense.

The two images in d seem oddly incoherent together: máryaḥ … pastiyā̀vān “a man in his prime in possession of a dwelling place,” but a passage adduced by Ge (n. 18d) demonstrates that the young man and the house go together: I.91.13 márya iva svá okyè “(take pleasure) like a young man in his own home.” Perhaps the point of the house-proud márya- is that a man in his prime, perhaps roughly the equivalent of the later gṛhastha, should have achieved the goals of a mature life: a house and household; Soma is implicitly likened to such a man after he has been purified and acquired the water and milk that make him the fully prepared ritual substance, and the pastyā̀- itself is the ritual ground. Ge’s parallel also neatly provides indirect evidence for the semantic equivalence of pastyā̀- and okyà- ‘home’ and therefore against the interpr. of pastyā̀- as ‘river’ (often indeed by Ge; see, e.g., IX.65.23, though he tr. it here as Haus). See comm. ad I.40.7.
