+++
title = "22"

+++
I read yádī in pāda a as yád ī ‘when him’. Note the parallel īm in pāda c, before a vowel (īm āyan), while our ī occurs before m (ī mánaso) and could in principle represent a degeminated *īm mánaso (though I don’t think this is nec.). As Ge (n. 22ab) implies, the point of this pāda is that the ritual speech of the priest-poet essentially creates the sacral drink soma [/god Soma] from the mere juice of the soma plant.

I do not, however, follow Ge’s interpr. (in the same n.) of b, as meaning that this speech was roused by the prospect of the dakṣiṇā. I am in fact tempted to follow Old’s rather despairing comment, “Der mystischen Verbrämung dieses Gedankens in b weiss ich keine Deutung abzugewinnen.” He finds the other three pādas clear, with the sense that when speech has fashioned soma (or the milk streams, also possible in Old’s opinion), the milk streams stream to the soma. Accepting this as the overall intent of the verse, I think there is some sense - at least structural sense - that can be wrung from b. To begin with, we must focus on the vā. Insofar as I can follow his rendering Ge implicitly interprets the vā as loosely contrasting the fashioning from the mind of the seer with that fashioning under the circumstances set out in b, but his tr. seems to me not really German (“So oft ihn die Rede aus dem Geiste des schauenden (Sehers) heraus formte oder bei der Entscheidung angesichts des besten Stückes Vieh”). Klein’s rendering (DGRV II.147), which seems to follow the structure envisioned by Ge though with somewhat different content, does not seem to me to be English either: “When speech (arising) from the mind of the seer fashioned (it., viz. soma) or in the establishment (of the worship) in the presence of the best cow.” Re at least tries to impose some parallelism between a and b, taking dhármaṇi in b as an infinitive that is roughly parallel to the finite verb tákṣat in a: “Quand la parole (née) de l'esprit du Voyant eut faconné (le soma), ou (quand il s'agissait d') établir (le sacrifice) en présence du plus puissant bétail.” None of these basically clausal or pseudo-clausal interpr. seems to me correct (or even parsable). I instead think that the domain of vā is only pāda b, and that it is conjoining two locative phrases: jyéṣṭhasya … dhármaṇi and kṣór ánīke. If I am correct, we are dealing with an example of inverse vā (X vā Y), rather than the standard X Y vā - a pattern that Klein (DGRV II.139) considers rare but existent. In our case vā is inserted in the middle of the first, complex member, giving a pattern X vā X’ Y Y’. But at least vā would be doing its usual job, conjoining parallel nominal expressions, each consisting of a loc. plus dependent gen. Here each would define the conditions or locations under which the fashioning of pāda a occurred. The first of the choices is “on the foundation of the preeminent one”; in the publ. tr. I suggest that the preeminent one could be either Agni or Indra, both of whom are elsewhere characterized as jyéṣṭha-. I now think this is incorrect. Instead I would invoke the two other expressions in IX with loc. to dhárman- + GEN, both ṛtásya dhárman (IX.7.1, 110.4) “on the foundation of truth.” Although ṛtá- does not seem to be qualified as jyéṣṭha- elsewhere, “preeminent truth” is hardly a jarring expression in RV discourse. Here “on the foundation of preeminent (truth)” would refer physically to the ritual ground and conceptually to the truth that governs the sacrificial enterprise. See also comm. on the next vs. The other loc. expression is harder to interpr. I will start by saying that I accept the interpr. of kṣú- as ‘cattle’ (< *pśu-), going back to Bloomfield (IF 25 [1909]), rejected here by Old, but reaffirmed by Thieme (ZDMG 95 [1941] 347 = KlSch 51), and now generally accepted (see all tr. cited above, as well as EWA s.v.).

But what does “face-to-face with the cattle” (publ. tr.) or possibly “at the forefront of cattle” / “in front of cattle” mean in context (or even, indeed, out of context)? I have two suggestions, though neither of them makes a neat disjunctive pair with the first loc. phrase. The stronger suggestion is that this is a temporal expression, referring to dawn. The stem ánīka- is several times used in this way; cf. VI.47.5 (with loc.) uṣásām ánīke “at the forefront of the dawns,” V.76.1 uṣásām ánīkam “the face of the dawns.” Esp. apposite for our passage is I.124.11 yuṅkté gávām aruṇā́nām ánīkam “She [=Dawn] yokes the forefront of the ruddy cows,” with the cows a reference to the reddish rays of dawn. Since Dawn and her rays are frequently assimilated to cows and ánīka- is used to indicate the moment of the appearance of dawn / dawn’s rays, a shorthand expression “at the forefront of the cattle” could, it seems to me, be a way of saying “at dawn.” This would make the two locative phrases conjoined by vā conceptually non-parallel (though still syntactically parallel), but I think this looseness is within acceptable limits, as offering two alternative ways of identifying the circumstances of the fashioning of Soma by speech: “on the foundation of preeminent (truth) or at the forefront of cattle [=dawn].” I would now emend the tr.

in that way. Alternatively “in front of cattle” could refer to the place on the ritual ground where Soma encounters the milk mixture - which milk then comes to him.

This would more narrowly define the location than the first locative phrase, which gives the whole ritual ground as the locus. The 2nd possibility provides a better set of parallels with vā - both locational - but I prefer the 1st because of the use of ánīkawith dawn elsewhere.



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/09/097/22-24.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>