+++
title = "38"

+++
The interpr. of this vs. is fairly straightforward, except for the 2nd part of pāda a, sū́re ná dhā́tā. I have treated this simile at length In my Fs. Melchert article, “Sū́re Duhitár's Brother, the ‘Placer of the Sun’: Another Example of -e <*-as in Rigvedic Phrasal Sandhi,” 2010. I will not repeat the disc. here but will summarize the conclusions. The major problem in this simile is what to do with the apparent loc. sū́re ‘in the sun’ (to sū́ra-; or possibly, but less likely, dat. to svàr); this has led to some outlandish and unpersuasive interpr. of the phrase. I argue that sū́re is actually the old gen. to svàr, from *sū́raz before voiced dental stop, as in the well-known sū́re duhitā́“daughter of the sun” in I.34.5. I start with an archaic formula *sū́re dhā́tā “placer of the sun,” with the two words separated here by the simile particle ná and the true interpr. obscured. The “placer of the sun” is most likely Indra, and Soma is being compared to him in his cosmogonic role: filling the two worlds and revealing them.

The word order in the 2nd clause of b, ví ṣá āvaḥ, is worth noting. Both preverb in tmesis and sá seek 1st position, and sá overwhelmingly occupies 1st position, as a glance at Lubotsky shows. Perhaps to maintain sá’s 1st position tendency, often when a clause has both a preverb and sá, the preverb will remain in position before the verb (e.g., I.105.4 sá tád dūtó ví vocati; also pāda d in this vs.: sá … prá yaṃsat). But it seems from a rapid survey that when a preverb is in tmesis, it regularly wins 1st position over sá -- e.g., III.59.2 prá sá …, VIII.20.16 abhí ṣá ... -- with Wackernagel’s position material imposed between—e.g., prá vaḥ sá …, VIII.21.10 ā́tú naḥ sá … Our brief clause shows this PREV sá order.

As Old suggests, in c priyā́is governed either directly or indirectly by the 2nd member of the cmpd. priya-sā́saḥ ‘winning dear things’: “those winning dear things (win) dear things.” The effect is rather like the type gaṇā́nām gaṇápati- “troop lord of troops” (II.23.1), though the means are different. As for priya-sā́saḥ, its stem is given as them. priya-sá- by Gr., and it would have the doubled nom. pl. ending familiar from devā́saḥ, etc. However, it seems possible (and in my opinion desirable) to interpr. it as belonging to a root noun -sā́-. The rt. noun nom. pl. to -ā-stems is ordinarily -āḥ, which is identical to the nom. sg. Though several cmpds in -sā́- do have this nom. pl. (dhanasā́ḥ VIII.3.15, X.65.10; sadāsā́ḥ IV.16.21, sahasrasā́ḥ X.64.6), the nom. sg. -sā́ḥ is far more common. In a passage like this, where there are no other nom. pl. forms to support the nom. pl. interpr. (as there are in the -sā́ḥ nom. pl. passages just cited), doubly marking the nom. pl. would make sense. Scar (585) seems to be leaning in that direction, but doesn’t actually say so.

Parallel to the dative kāríṇe ná “as if to a victor” in the simile, we can assume “to us” vel sim. in the frame. So Ge.

