+++
title = "47"

+++
In pāda b my interpr. differs significantly from that of Ge (fld. by Re) and that favored by Old., though all of us assume that “daughter” is short for “daughter of the Sun.” Ge takes duhitúḥ as abl. and assumes an idiom ABL X tiráḥ √dhā “hide X from …,” an ex. of which he cites from the Kena Up., which seems a distant text from which to harvest a parallel. He takes the várpāṃsi as Soma’s own forms, but does not suggest why Soma would want to keep them hidden from the Sun’s daughter. I instead take duhitúḥ as gen., dependent on várpāṃsi, which Old considers the more natural construal. Since the acc. with medial tiráḥ √dhā expresses the medium in which the subject hides himself (at least in my view: see comm. ad IX.73.3), in our passage here Soma hides himself “in the forms of the daughter (of the Sun)” - a designation of milk, since the gleaming white milk is often assimilated to the sun. I see the same idiom in IX.72.3, though more disguised: see extensive comm. there. The reference, of course, is to the mixing of soma with milk.

The following pāda provides a different but parallel image of the mixing of soma with water, with the more widespread trope of “clothing himself in.” The last pāda provides a clever multilevel play, as long as rébhan is properly interpr. As I have often disc. (incl. ad vs. 8 above), √ribh does not mean ‘sing’ as it’s usually glossed, but rather expresses a variety of harsh sounds: rasp, creak, squawk, and crackle. In this pāda Soma is compared to a Hotar priest. But the quintessential Hotar is actually the god Agni, the ritual fire - and fires crackle. So the comparison is to the sound of a lively burning fire, but mediated through the priest.
