+++
title = "52"

+++
The tṛca begins deceptively straightforwardly, with a call to Soma to purify himself and bring goods. The pāda-final vásūni concatenates with the one ending 51a. Given this acc. with pávasva we must assume the idiom ā́pavasva ‘bring ACC through your purification.” The preverb ā́may be concealed in one of the accented final long ā́-s in the pāda, most likely pavā́, which can be pavā́+ ā́, putting the preverb in the standard position right before the verb, or enā́. Or perhaps, if enā́ is adverbial in the meaning ‘here’ (so Gr, s.v. enā́, col. 300; AiG III.524-25), it takes the function of ā́in this lexeme. However, I am inclined, with Sāy. (see Ge’s n. 52a), to take enā́as an aberrant neut. pl. with vásūni - hence ‘these goods’. See AiG III.525, which hesitatingly allows the poss. of neut. pl. elsewhere.

The fun begins with the next pāda and with the first word in that pāda, mām̐ścatvé; as was noted above, the word appears, differently accented, in 54b, and these forms are obviously related to mām̐ścatóḥ in VII.44.3. In our vss. Ge and Re take it as the loc. of a place name, coreferential with loc. sárasi: e.g., “dans le lac Māṃścatva.” This is certainly the safest choice here, but a place name is essentially excluded for the occurrence of the related word in VII.44.3 - and of course making difficult words into otherwise unattested proper nouns is an interpretational cop-out.

As discussed at length in the comm. to VII.44.3 I return to the old notion that this is a cmpd meaning ‘hiding the moon’. In all three passages I take it as a temporal designation, originally ‘at dawn’. This perfectly fits our tṛca if it depicts the beginning of the early morning soma pressing.

VII.44.3 also contains the word bradhná- ‘copper-colored’, found here in pāda c. This word can sometimes refer to soma (VIII.4.13, 14; 69.7), sometimes to Agni/fire (III.7.5, X.20.9), but sometimes, it seems, to the sun: I.6.1 and also the occurrence in VII.44.3. In our passage I think it can be all three: the sun, coppery colored at dawn, is appropriate to the early morning time period identified by mām̐ścatvé, and Sūrya in X.170.1 is vā́tajūta- (like our vā́to ná jūtáḥ). As we have often seen soma is frequently identified with the sun, and it is often urged to speed along the ritual ground (and see IX.64.16 índavaḥ … jūtā́ḥ). But what is most often described as vā́ta-jūta- is the fire or its flames. The ritual fire, the soma, and the sun would all necessarily be present at the dawn sacrifice. Both Ge and Re take bradhnáas referring to a horse, which, in my view, distorts their view of the whole vs. and indeed the tṛca.

In d both Ge and Re take the hapax táku- as referring to a horse (Renner, coursier), the same one they see as the reference of bradhná- in c. Ge seems to think d involves giving this horse a sort of superior groom (“ein tüchtiges Lenker”), with dat. tákave the indirect obj. But as was recently noted (ad vs. 49), nṛ́- in the sg. is almost always used of Indra, and I think it is here as well. Soma, by virtue of being consumed by Indra at the sacrifice, brings Indra to the sacrifice and in effect bestows him upon the human worshipers, and he does so for a particular purpose. I take tákave as an infinitival dative of purpose: ‘to (make the) charge, to rush’ - Indra in his capacity as our supporter in conflict. Old considers, but rejects, such an infinitival interpr., in favor of what he considers the simpler indirect obj. with √dā.

