+++
title = "54"

+++
The difficulties do not let up here, esp. in the 1st hemistich. The clearest thing here is the asya, which presumably, because of its lack of accent, must refer to the naigutáḥ in 53cd. This same figure is also the subject of the verbs in c.

The first problem is the first word, whose very form is in question. The Pp.

separates máhīmé into máhi and imé, with the first then a neut. sg.; Gr takes it rather as a du. máhī, with ? This is rejected explicitly by Old on accentual grounds: the standard du. is accented mahī́. If it is neut. sg., it can modify nā́ma; if neut. du., vádhatre. I prefer the latter, despite the formal problems. Old, Ge, and Re take it as a modifier of nā́ma.

Let us now turn to vṛ́ṣanā́ma, taken as a cmpd by Pp., despite its two accents.

The simple solution here is, as has long been known, to split into two words: vṛ́ṣa nā́ma, with vṛ́ṣa a neut. agreeing with nā́ma. I take this as a naming parenthesis “‘Bull’ his name,” though I recognize that we should probably expect the masc. *vṛ́ṣā in that context (type nalo nāma). Perhaps better “‘Bullish’ is his name,” which more easily accommodates a neut. vṛ́ṣa. (Before continuing I will point out that this is most likely a reference to Indra, whose presence I see also in the preceding two vss. - though Soma is possible as well.) A naming parenthesis is not the standard view, which is that “bullish name” is one member of a nominal sentence equating the dual entities (whatever they may be - see below) with this name (“these two Xs are / make up” [ausmachen] his great bullish name” - so Old, Ge, and more or less Re; Scar [112] also follows this interpr. but assumes a du. ‘great’). As that tr. shows, the standard view also has the merit of providing a head noun to the putative neut. máhi that opens the pāda.

Why then do I put myself in morphological difficulties, rejecting neut. sg.

máhi and struggling with neut. vṛ́ṣa? Because I don’t think that the two entities are equivalent to his name, but rather belong to him and are deployed by him under specific circumstances, as indicated in pāda b. I therefore assume a du. máhī, or perhaps correctly accented *mahī́, which has been redactionally changed after the passage ceased to be understood.

The next question: what are the dual entities. Ge (fld. by Scar) takes śūṣé … vádhatre as a discontinuous dual dvandva: “sein Ungestüm und seine Waffe.” This is clever, but to me unconvincing. Real dual dvandvas with two dual endings that involve material or immaterial entities, rather than gods or at least animate beings, are rare. And this would contain two entities that are not associated with each other textually and do not form a natural semantic class, one of which is an immaterial power, the other a material object. If there is an alternative, we should seek it. And indeed there is: śūṣé can simply be the modifier of vádhatre. There are “two forceful weapons of death.” Old’s “diese beide śūṣé vádhatre implies this solution, and Re adopts it as well, though in his n. he claims that śūṣá- is ordinarily a masc. noun. I think rather the reverse: that it is an adj. even though its head noun is often gapped, esp. when it is the obj. of √ṛc ‘chant’ or similar verbs and refers to a “fortifying / powerful (praise / thought - stómam / mánma, etc.).” The adjectival status of śūṣá- is one more reason not to assume it’s one of a pair in a dual dvandva.

The next question after this: what are these two weapons. I suggest that it is the two fatal activities described in c, both of which are slangy euphemisms: ‘put to sleep’ (svāpáya-) and ‘snow’. The caus. stem svāpáya- and assoc. redupl. aor.

síṣvap(a)- are only used in this euphemistic sense of ‘put to death’, a sense that is familiar of course in the Engl. equivalent. The parallel stem sneháya- is found only here. It is clearly related to the IE words for ‘snow’, and, as I discuss in the -áyabook (91), the hostile / fatal nuance it projects in context can be derived directly from ‘snow’; the re-semanticization of the IE root to something like ‘stick together’ advocated by a number of scholars (see -áya-, p. 91 n. 32) is unnecessary. As I point out there, the verb ‘snow’ is also found in Engl., meaning ‘overwhelm’, though (at least decades ago) in a more or less positive sense. The verb sneháyat is accented presumably because it opens a new (sub-)clause.

We must now return to pāda b, which contains a disjunctive vā … vā construction: mā́m̐ścatve vā pṛ́śane vā. The first term, save for accent, is the same as mām̐ścatvé in 52b. I confess I have no explanation of the difference in accent and treat the two as identical, as, it seems, do most interpr. - there’s too much else going on in this tṛca to focus on this! Since most interpr. take the form in 52b as a name, either of a place or a person (person for Scar for the form in this vs.), pṛ́śane receives the same interpr. Since I take mām̐ścatvé in 52b as a temporal designation, I want to impose the same analysis on pṛ́śane. The stem pṛ́śana- is a hapax as a masc/neut., but it is at least derivationally related to the fem. pṛśanī́- (3x: I.71.5, X.61.8, 73.2) with diff. accent (see AiG II.2.184, 197), and the adj. pṛśanāyú- (1x: I.84.11) is based upon it. The fem. stem is found in difficult passages, two of which (I.71.5, X.61.8) concern the cosmic incest of Heaven with his daughter, which are perhaps cryptic by design. However, all three forms seem to mean something like ‘caress, caressing’.

The -yú-adj. is by contrast in a straightforward passage that aids the interpr. of ours: I.84.11 tā́asya pṛśanāyúvah, sómam śrīṇanti pṛ́śnayaḥ “ These dappled ones, eager for caresses, prepare the soma for him,” with the subject dhenávaḥ ‘milk cows’. The theme is the usual one, of the erotic desire of the cows (= milk) for the bull Soma, a theme of course widely represented in IX. I therefore suggest that the loc. pṛ́śane here as a temporal designation refers to “the time of caressing” - that is, to the ritual moment in which Soma unites with the cows’ milk. Thus, pāda b names two key times in the soma sacrifice: the early morning when the sacrifice begins and the moment that the milk is mixed with the soma.

Even if my interpr. of the locc. is correct, why are these ritual times embedded in a vs. that otherwise occupies itself with deadly weapons and hostile encounters. I don’t have a totally satisfactory answer here, but if the subject is Indra, as I have suggested, he may be eliminating rival sacrificers and rival sacrifices that do not conform to the Ārya compact - or he may be deriving this strength to do battle from the sacrifice, which is simply represented by two of its temporal stages.

Pāda d displays pleasing phonological play: cā́pāmítrām̐ápācíto acetáḥ, where the first two sequences are mirror-images of each other: c-ā-p-ā vs. a-p-ā-c.

(Note that the first c is actually borrowed from the end of the last pāda.) It is esp.

cleverly designed because of the discontinuous verb ápa … aca - the impv. aca needing to be extracted from acetáḥ (= aca itáḥ ‘turn away from here’). This acetáḥ looks superficially as if it belongs to the stem acetás- ‘unperceptive’, but it does not.

That sense, and the same privative+√cit, is found instead in the negated rt noun cmpd. acít- in the acc. pl. The pāda provides an exceptionally tricky end to a dazzlingly frustrating tṛca.
