+++
title = "04"

+++
This verse, by contrast, clearly concerns the Vṛtra myth and is for the most part unchallenging. It is worth noting that its first pāda is structured almost exactly like 3a and begins and ends identically: tvám … (a)vṛṇor ápa. The verse also contains an occurrence of vásu (in b), which unfortunately doesn’t shed any light on the mysterious vásu in 3c. In fact 4b is the only part of this verse that is somewhat unclear: the dā́numad vásu (‘drop-laden goods’, taking dā́nu to ‘drop’ with Gr and Re, rather than ‘gift’ with Ge [/WG]) is of course the water confined in the mountain by Vṛtra, which Indra releases. But why does Indra hold it fast (ádhārayaḥ) in the mountain rather than releasing it as usual? The passage is similar to the Indra ātmastuti X.49.9 aháṃ saptá sraváto dhārayaṃ vṛ́ṣā. Perhaps he gave the waters, as it were, emotional support - but this doesn't sound like either the Rigveda or Indra.

At best we’re left with an attenuated meaning like “help out.” Or — a long shot — this is an expression like I.103.7 sasántaṃ … abodhayó ‘him “you ‘awakened’ the sleeping serpent,” where abodhayaḥ is meant to evoke its opposite, ‘put to sleep’.

See intro. to that hymn and Jamison 1982/83. In that case ‘hold fast’ would evoke ‘let go’. For a possibly similar passage with Indra “bringing to rest” the waters rather than releasing them, see V.32.1 and comm. thereto. However, the formulaic nexus between √budh ‘awake’ and √sas / svap ‘sleep’ is very strong, whereas √dhṛ is not regularly paired with, say, forms of √sṛj ‘release’, and so I advance this possibility only very tentatively. ET offers another intriguing suggestion. She cites the wellknown Old Persian PN Dāraya-vahu (corresponding phonologically to Skt.

*dhāráya- + vásu, and wonders “Could the poet be deliberately using, perhaps even
punning on, an inherited Indo-Iranian collocation of the verb *dhṛ with object *vásu?”

