+++
title = "+050"

+++
50 (346)  
Br̥haspati (1–9), Br̥haspati and Indra (10–11)  
Vāmadeva Gautama  
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 10  
This hymn falls naturally into several sections, but although some scholars con sider it to be a composite of up to three independent hymns, an overall unity can  be detected. (Of course, this unity may results from the combining of once sepa rate elements.) Indeed, the hymn seems to encapsulate the historical development  of the Vala myth, which concerns the freeing of the cows from the Vala cave where  they were imprisoned, and its principal participants, Indra, Br̥haspati, and the  Aṅgirases. As Schmidt has clearly shown (1968), Indra was the original hero of  the Vala myth, in his role as priest-king and with his priestly weapons—songs  and correctly formulated true speech—with the Aṅgiras singers as his helpers. In  this role he received the epithet “br̥haspati.” But in time the epithet was split off  into a separately conceived divine figure Br̥haspati, first as an alloform of Indra  and then detached from Indra as an independent divinity who served as Indra’s  priest—taking with him Indra’s priestly role, while Indra retained the roles of king  and warrior. In this hymn we first see a unitary (Indra-)Br̥haspati figure, then the  human equivalent of the split figure, in the form of king and “Formulator” priest.  And finally the split divine figures, Indra and Br̥haspati, are invited to share the  ritual.  
The first six verses are dedicated to the mythic deeds of Br̥haspati (or  “Br̥haspati”) with the Vala myth occupying verses 2–5. The Aṅgirases are promi nent, though not named. The final verse of this portion (6) clearly brings the sec tion to a close, returning it to the present with explicit treatment of our ritual  honoring of Br̥haspati, and wishes for our continued prosperity typically found  in hymn-final verses. Verses 7–9 promise success of all sorts to the king who does  honor to Br̥haspati and to his earthly representative, the “Formulator” (Brahmán),  a role that will evolve into the later Purohita (house-priest of the king) (note the  verb phrase puró √dhā in vs. 1). This section seems to apply the lessons of the  mythic past found in verses 1–6 to the contemporary situation and to establish a  symbiotic relationship between Formulator and king, matching the relationship  between the mythic Br̥haspati and the (unnamed) Indra, from whom Br̥haspati  has been split. It follows logically that the last two verses (10–11) invite Br̥haspati  and Indra to the sacrifice to drink the soma and bestow blessings on us. The uni tary role in the opening mythic section has evolved into the double divine figures634 IV.50  
summoned in the final section, by way of the mediating section showcasing these  complementary roles in the human domain.  