+++
title = "12"

+++
12 [^8] . The place for the insertion is the interval between the Mahāvyāhṛtis, the general expiation, and the oblation to Prajāpati.


[^8]:  This Sūtra prescribes where the āvāpa, i.e. the special characteristical offerings of each sacrifice, is to be inserted between the regular offerings that belong to the standing model. The same subject is treated of in the Śrauta-sūtra in the two rules, I, 16, 3 and 4: 'Whatsoever is offered between the two Ājya portions and the Sviṣṭakṛt, that is called āvāpa; this is the chief part (pradhāna) (of the sacrifice); the other (oblations) are subordinate thereto (tadaṅgāni).' The position of the āvāpa among the other oblations is indicated by Pāraskara in the following rule (I, 5, 6): Between the general expiation and the oblation to Prajāpati, this is the place for the āvāpa.' (The word vivāhe at the end of this Sūtra seems to me to belong not to this rule, but to Sūtra 7.) Our Sūtra is identical with that of Pāraskara word for word; only instead of sarvaprāyaścitta, as Pāraskara has, we read here, mahāvyāhṛtisarvaprāyaścitta. This means, I believe, that the āvāpa, preceded and followed by the Mahāvyāhṛti oblations (comp. below, I, 12, 13), should be placed between the Sarvaprāyaścitta and the Prājāpatya oblation. The oblations made with the Mahāvyāhṛtayas are four in number; the corresponding formulas are: bhūḥ svāhā, bhuvaḥ svāhā, svāḥ svāhā, bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ svāhā (comp. below, chap. 12, 12). The Sarvaprāyaścitta (general expiation) consists of two oblations, one with the three Mahāvyāhṛtayas, the other with the verse ayāś cāgne, quoted in the Śrauta-sūtra III, 19, 3, and in Āśvalāyana's Śrauta-sūtra I, 11, 13. (On the Sarvaprāyaścitta in the Śrauta ritual, compare Hillebrandt, Neu- und Vollmondsopfer, p. 166.) The Prājāpatya oblation is performed with the formula Prajāpataye svāhā. The discussions of Nārāyaṇa on this Sūtra (see p. 125 of the German edition) evidently fail to bring out the true meaning of the text; according to this commentator the oblations follow each other in this order: the two Ājyabhāgas, the principal oblations (pradhānāhutayaḥ), the Sviṣṭakṛt, the four Mahāvyāhṛti oblations, the two Sarvaprāyaścitta oblations, the Prājāpatya oblation. Finally we may mention the corrupt form in which the corresponding passage of the Śāmbavya-sūtra is preserved p. 29 in the MS. There the two Sūtras 10 and 11 are placed before the Mantra in Sūtra 9. This Mantra then is given down to svāheti, then follows ājyena, which seems to me to form part of the same Sūtra, and to refer to the oblations to which the Mantra belongs. Then the MS. goes on: mahāvyāhṛtishu sarvaprāyaścittāraṃ (sic) etad āvāpasthānaṃ ājyahavishi vyāhṛtishu sarvaprāyaścittāraṃ (the syllables prāyaścittāraṃ seem to be expunged) sviṣṭakṛto sthālīpāke. In the commentary I find the following Ślokas, which I give exactly as they are read in the MS.: tisṛṇāṃ vyāhṛtināṃ ca prāyaścittāhutīr api yad antaraṃ tad āpāpāsthānaṃ sarpiḥpradhānake. sthālīpāke vyāhṛtināṃ yat tat sviṣṭakṛtottaraṃ āhutīnāṃ pradhānānāṃ nānādaivatachandasāṃ yas tu kālas tad āvāpasthānam itācyate budhaiḥ tatas tat taṃ ma ārabhya prāyaścittāhutiḥ kramāt.
