+++
title = "03"

+++
I do not understand what nuance the vṛddhi of ā́mitrá- adds to amítra-. Both seem simply to mean ‘enemy, foe’. MLW suggests that it might be a collective, a possible function for a vṛddhi deriv.

Ge takes vyáthiḥ as a “falsch Weg” upon which the enemy will lead the cows, requiring him to supply a complex verb phrase to √dhṛṣ, “wagen … den falschen Weg (zu führen)” (see also his n. 3b for an even more complex alternative). But vyáthis- ‘wavering or meandering course’ fits the normal aimless wandering of cows in pasture, and surely we wish to prevent cattle rustlers (or the like) from taking advantage of the cows’ wandering. Cf. Whitney, AV IV.21.3 “shall dare attack their track (?)”; Klein (DGRV I.219) “a hostile one shall not venture upon their way.” For the wandering habits of cows, see 4cd urugāyám … ví caranti “They wander far across wide-ranging (space).” Given the acc., it seems best, with Ge et al., to take devā́n only with yájate, not, as in the publ. tr., also with dádāti. I therefore would emend the tr. to “With those (cows) that he sacrifices to the gods and (that) he gives …” The expression is compressed: the instr. yā́bhiḥ should of course only be construed with yájate, and we should have an acc. *yā́ḥ as obj. of dádāti. As a parallel to devā́n, Ge supplies a datival “(den Sänger)” with dádāti (sim. Klein loc. cit.), but I see no reason to limit the recipient in this way. Cf. the open-ended 2b úpéd dadāti, which specifies neither gift nor recipient. The unstinting giver is rewarded.

