+++
title = "04"

+++
On reṇú-kakāṭa- see EWA s.v. kakā́ṭikā-, kṛ́kāṭa-. Some part of the back of the head/neck is meant. What exact threat the dusty-necked steed poses to the cows isn’t exactly clear. Sāy. explains árvā as yuddhārtham āgato ‘śvaḥ. I would limit the “intent to fight” more narrowly to a cattle raid, but there is no further evidence to bring to bear. See immed. below.

saṃskṛtatrám is also somewhat problematic. It is generally referred to the root √kṛt ‘cut’ (see AiG II.2.170 and, most recently, EWA p. 316 s.v. KART1 ), but this affiliation is disputed by Whitney (Roots, p. 23) and, most vigorously, by Old, who assigns it to √kṛ for both formal and semantic reasons. The standard rendering is ‘Schlachtbank’ (slaughter or, Whitney [AV, despite Rts], slaughterhouse). Against this interpr., Old makes the reasonable point that in this pre-ahiṃsā era there’s no reason why a cow-owner wouldn’t have his cows slaughtered when he wanted to.

But Old’s own solution is excessively convoluted and requires that the final -trabelong to √trā ‘protect’, which seems dubious. (On gotrá- and other possible forms of the thematized root noun -trā́- in compounds, see Scarlatta [194-95].) To meet Old’s objections, we can interpr. the clause in the context of the preceding clause and of the whole vs. The 2nd half of the vs. expresses a wish for the safety of cows that roam widely, presumably not always under the control and in the sight of a herdsman.

The first hemistich mentions several misadventures that could befall these roving cattle. Pāda a refers, if I’m right, to a cattle raid conducted by horsemen -- what in the Old West (or at least the Old West of the imagination) would be called rustlers. It may be that the “dusty neck” of the horse in question indirectly indicates that the horse is not a well-cared-for beast of the Ārya elite, or else that the raid requires hard riding in rough country. The second pāda may indicate that the cattle rustled were taken for meat or, under a different scenario, that the cows wandered into territory controled by tribals, non-Ārya, or even non-elite Ārya (all without access to horses) who would ambush, kill, and eat them. Both pādas would imply that the cattle are far from the safety of their home and enclosure.

My “place for dressing” reflects the possibility (see above) that saṃskṛtabelongs to √kṛ not √kṛt, and is a euphemistic expression for slaughter. However, if it does belong to √kṛt “… for slaughter” would be just fine.

The word order in pāda b is somewhat aberrant. The fem. pl. subj. tā́(ḥ) occurs right after the verb, followed by the preverb abhí, which ends the pāda: x x x x x, úpa yanti tā́abhí. We would ordinarily expect the pronoun tā́(ḥ) to occur early in the clause (cf. pāda a #ná tā́(ḥ) [=3a]) and the preverb to precede the rest of the verbal complex. The word order disturbance may have been caused by the need to fit the bulky 4-syllable sáṃskṛtatram into the pāda, since it won’t fit the Jagatī cadence.

