+++
title = "06"

+++
This is the last real vs. of the hymn, preceding the meta-reference to the hymn itself and wishes for its efficacy (vs. 7).

In the first hemistich the subj. of ví tanvate appears to me to be the poets/ ritualists; I am not sure of the identity of asmai, but given its lack of accent, it should be someone already present in the discourse -- probably the īm of 5c, which, as was just discussed, can be either/both Agni or/and, less likely, Sūrya. Pāda b continues the motherhood theme of 5cd. With Re, I consider the mothers here to be an unmarked simile: the production of ritual poetry by the poets is implicitly compared to the weaving of baby clothes by mothers.

The “paths of heaven” of vs. 2 return in the phrase divás pathā́(6d) “along the path of heaven” (note the close sandhi). Who the referents are and what is going on in the 2nd hemistich are unclear, made more so by the grammatical multivalence of the principal actors in the 2nd hemistich: vṛ́ṣaṇaḥ can be nom. pl. or, less likely, acc. pl. (or, even less likely though the solution of most [Ge, Re, WG], gen. sg.: the gen. sg. is otherwise vṛ́ṣṇas and, as far as I know, never read trisyllabically); vadhvàḥ can be nom. pl. (Ge, Re, WG), acc. pl., or gen. sg.; the part. módamānāḥ can be nom. pl.

masc. or fem. or acc. pl. fem. Ge in his Nachtr. does confront the morphological problem of vṛ́ṣanaḥ, suggesting that it’s an irregular gen. sg., but he also provides an alternative transl., with vṛ́ṣanaḥ as nom. pl., that my own tr. follows. In this interpr., acdg. to Ge., the gods are the bulls on their way to unite with their wives, “die Dichtungen der Sänger.” Assuming that the referents of vadhvàḥ are the dhíyaḥ of pāda a, the sexual union of these thoughts and the gods for whom they’re composed seems plausible (in a RVic universe). The only question is who is going to whom, and the two-way street of Vedic ritual allows movement in either direction: the hymns going to heaven to unite with the gods, or the gods coming from heaven to the ritual ground to unite with the hymns. I have gone for the latter. See disc. of the paths ad vs. 2.

With Old I take upaprakṣé as loc. to a them. stem upaprakṣáIf this interpr. of the vs. is correct, it provides the hymn with a thematic ring compositional structure. The first two vss. provide the materials that will return in vs. 6. Vs. 1 introduces the inspired thought coming from heaven and established at the sacrifice, thus linking the divine and human worlds, and vs. 2 sketches the highway linking these two worlds, the encircling paths. In vs. 6 the inspired thought of vs. 1 is represented by the dhíyaḥ (insightful thoughts) produced by the unnamed priests (ab), and these thoughts are configured as the new brides of the bullish gods who have utilized the paths of vs. 2 to come to the sacrifice and unite with them. The interior vss. present the sun (vs. 3) but concentrate on the ritual fire (vss. 4-5). Given the emphasis on the ritual and its connection to heaven, I’m not quite sure why the sun intrudes in 3—perhaps its journey across the sky is compared or contrasted with the journey between heaven and earth we find elsewhere in the hymn.