+++
title = "02"

+++
As I see the movement of the verse, in pāda a the poet sets himself to question the older generations of poets about their creative activity. Pāda b concerns this activity in the past and identifies mánas- ‘mind’ as the foundation (√dhṛ) for the creative act. (I might now alter the tr. to make this clearer, to “making their minds the foundation.”) In cd we turn to the present time and to the poet (te) (who addressed himself in a); the praṇī̀- in c (on which see further below) are the products or models derived from the creative activity in b. In d it is made clear that these precedents, actively sought by the current poet’s mind, rest on the dhárman- ‘foundation’ not only of the mental activity of the former poets but also of his own mind.

The first technical issue in this vs. is whether pṛcha + ACC. here means “ask X” or “ask about X” (in German terms “fragen” vs. “fragen nach”); both uses of the accusative are possible with √pṛch. Related to this question is what jánimā means in this context: ‘births’, ‘generations’, ‘races’? With Ge and Klein (DGRV I.453-54), I take jánimā kavīnā́m to be the personages addressed, not (with Old, Re, Hoffmann [Inj. 225], Scar [276, 288], WG) the topic of the question. The poet is widening his range of interlocutors from the current poets (1d) to the long series of generations, back to the poets who themselves participated in the creation (2b).

With all modern tr./comm, I take takṣata as a med. 3rd pl. middle to the athematic present to √takṣ, rather than a 2nd pl. act. of the thematic stem, as Gr classifies it. I have added the self-beneficial “for themselves” to the tr. because, though the root √takṣ is abundantly attested, this appears to be the only middle form in the RV. In keeping with my larger interpr. of the hymn as concerning two creations, the second of which was the product of poets conjuring up the differentiated cosmos by their verbal powers, I think the medial takṣata here signals the intimate engagement of the poets in the act of creation and the interpenetration of the things created and the creators themselves. Note also that our current poet lays some claim to this primal act by calling himself in 1a a táṣṭar- ‘craftsman, fashioner’, the agent noun to the root √takṣ, which supplies the verb of creation in 2b.

The root-noun cmpd. praṇī́- is found only here in the RV, but the lexeme prá √nī, lit. ‘lead forth’, is very common as a verb form and in other cmpds. The word here has received a not particularly instructive variety of renderings, which I will not repeat. I think it means ‘precedent’ -- that is, the work of creation engaged in by the kavis of old provides the model for the current poet. This seems a reasonable semantic extension of ‘leading forth’. The precedents keep “growing stronger / increasing” both because the elements of creation keep proliferating and because the current poet becomes more familiar with them and adept at employing them.

In the last pāda these precedents that the poet has sought with his mind take up their position in his mind, ready to serve for his own creative endeavors. The older generations of poets were called “firm in mind, holding their minds firm” (or, see above, “making their minds the foundation”)(manodhṛ́t-) in b; it is fitting that their models, which he “sought with his mind” (mánovāta-), should now in turn take up their position on his own mind’s support (dhármaṇi). On the basis of the cmpd.

manodhṛ́t- in b I supply ‘mind’ as the possessor of dhárman-. Most tr. (Ge, Re [twice], Hoffmann [Inj. 225], Klein DGRV I.453-54) interpr. the loc. dhármaṇi as a rather vague adverbial (Ge, Hoff “in rechter Weise,” sim. Klein). I think it needs to be interpr. in full locatival sense; Scar (276) and WG in separate ways do give it a locatival interpr. but their tr. do not reflect its connection with manodhṛ́t- in b.

