+++
title = "04"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., I believe that this vs. turns to the first creation, before the poets’ intervention that was presented in vss. 2-3. It is appropriate that the entities described here are unidentified, for this is the time before the poets brought their verbal skills to bear. The central figure in this vs. is introduced merely by an acc. participle (ātíṣṭhantam ‘mounting’). The form makes it clear that the referent is masculine and singular, but no other information is given; there is not even a pronoun. Likewise the subj. of the verb pári … abhūṣan ‘they tended’ is given only as víśve ‘all’. Again we know the gender (masc.) and the number (pl.), but not the identity: poets (from vs. 2)? gods (the frequent default referent of víśve)? Rather than suggesting referents for these two entities as the standard tr. do, I think we should accept that the lack of referential clues is deliberate.

Certainly it continues through the verse, though some details accumulate. In b the ‘mounting’ entity of pāda a is now presumably the subject. He wears beauties (śríyo vásānaḥ) and is self-luminous (svárociḥ); these descriptions begin to narrow the field, but not enough. (The only other occurrence of svároci- modifies the Maruts, who are not likely to be in question here. And a number of different gods acquire śrī́- .) In c he is identified as both a bull (or bullish one, vṛ́ṣan-) and a lord (ásura-), neither particularly diagnostic, and the pāda claims to provide us with his “great name” (mahát … nā́ma). Indeed d seems at first to give us that name: viśvárūpaḥ.

But the joke is on us, for not only is viśvárūpa- not a name but an epithet, but its literal meaning tells us that the lack of a single identifiable referent in this verse is the point. The word means “having all forms,” and so the entity we’ve been chasing through the vs. is in fact protean and cannot be pinned down to a single identity.

He/it is creation before differentiation. (For a similar figure in a similarly mystical hymn in this maṇḍala, see III.56.3, where the androgynous figure is also called both a bull and viśvárūpa.) The final pāda forms a tight ring with the first, in that the verb ā́√sthā returns, and this time we get some indication of what he is mounting. But even this further specification falls short: it is simply amṛ́tāni, a neut. pl. adjective with multiple possible referents. This repetition makes the unfolding creation seem somewhat circular, but also incremental, in that new details accumulate, if slowly. But what seems to me an important clue has generally been ignored in the standard interpr. I find it impossible to believe that the repetition of ā́√sthā was not deliberate, but all the standard tr. (save in part for Re, Hymnes spéc, though he fell in line in EVP) render the two occurrences quite differently: the first literally (‘mount’), but the second with the idiomatic meaning ‘assume’, with Ge and WG supplying ‘names’ with the adj. ‘immortal’ (Ge “… hat er unsterbliche (Namen) angenommen”). There are two obvious things wrong with this interpr: 1) the lexeme ā́√sthā is extremely common and I know of no passage where it means ‘assume’; 2) translating it thus completely ignores the intra-vs. repetition, which at least to me is extraordinarily salient: the first word of the vs. is ā́tiṣṭḥantam, the last tasthau. I therefore assume that the pf. in d also means ‘mount’ and that the referent of the pl. ‘immortal’ is deliberately unspecified, but is something one could stand on -- in this case probably ‘worlds’ or some kind of solid ‘things’. Cf. VIII.52.7 (Vālakh.) ā́tasthāv amṛ́taṃ diví “[it] has mounted to the immortal (world?) in heaven” and (with adhí √sthā) I.35.6 amṛ́tā́dhi tasthuḥ “they have taken their place on his immortal (foundations?).” The specification of a place to stand on enlarges the cosmic picture. Consider also 9c below with tasthúṣo vírūpā “of him surmounting the various forms,” with √sthā and

-rūpa-.

