+++
title = "08"

+++
As was indicated in the publ. intro., this vs. is in certain ways a rephrasing of vs. 7, but updated, as it were, to the present day. The vs. begins exactly as vs. 7 did: tád ín nv àsya, followed by a genitive specifying the identity of the asya (vṛṣábhasya 7a, savitúḥ 8a), a signal that vs. 8 is a second version of the immediately preceding vs. Hence, by my interpr., savitár- is the equivalent of the original creator, the bull-cow of 5a and 7a. I therefore do not think that this refers to the god Savitar, but is rather to be taken in its literal sense as “the impeller.” Or rather, since b = VII.38.1b (a Savitar vs.), the poet is identifying Savitar in his most generic sense with the Ur-creator, the one who “set in motion / impelled” the creation.

The poet disclaims any part in that original creation (nákir me), and the firmly fixed golden emblem of b seems to me to represent the static, undifferentiated result of the first creation. It reminds us of the hiraṇyagarbha of X.121, another image of undifferentiated creation.

But in cd (at least in my view -- the interpretations vary quite a lot) the poet identifies himself with the poets of old (of 7bcd). In c most tr. supply a verb, with the ródasī phrase as its object. I think, by contrast, that this is a nominal sentence with ródasī as subject. The two world-halves are credited with a role in the second creation, the same role they may play in 5cd (see comm. there): they set everything in motion. But they do so through the stimulus of a suṣtutí-, a ‘good praise-hymn’, and I take this praise-hymn to be the product of the 1st ps. poet, who disavowed a role in the first creation in 8a, but takes credit for contributing to the second creation in 8c.

The puzzling pāda to me is d, and my publ. tr. is opaque even to me. I have now rethought it and will propose here a modified tr. and interpr. First, I suggest returning to Gr’s grammatical analysis of vavre as a 1st sg., not a 3rd sg. (as all subsequent tr. have taken it, incl. my publ. tr.). I take the pāda now as the current poet’s boast, asserting his place in the poetic lineage. The lexeme ápi √vṛ means ‘swaddle, cover over’, as the simile of the woman and her children (one reading of jánimāni here) makes clear. But such a meaning can both be protective and somewhat arrogant or threatening. To understand the sense of the frame here, we need to go back to 2a, where the tremulous poet asked the previous generations (jánimā) of poets about their creative acts. I think these same poetic generations are what’s referred to here, but here our newly confident poet “covers” them -- on the one hand, in a protective sense, like the young woman swaddling her children. He protects their legacy by continuing it. But ‘cover over’ can also mean ‘conceal’, and in this sense the poet boasts that he will (or has?) become more skilled than they and cover up their achievements with his own. I would therefore retranslate the pāda as “I have covered over / swaddled the (poetic) generations like a young woman her children.”

