+++
title = "09"

+++
As discussed in the publ. intro., I take this vs. as showing both contributors to the second creation -- the two (world-halves) from 8c and the masters of artifice (mayínaḥ) from 7d -- bearing witness to our poet’s new skill. In the first half of the verse the two (world-halves) begin by bringing to success the first creation of “the age-old great one” (pratnásya … maháḥ). I supply the equivalent of tád in pāda a, picked up by yád at the end of the pāda and further specified by daívī svastíḥ beginning b. The standard tr. instead take a and b as separate clauses, with daívī svastíḥ somewhat loosely construed with b.

In c the sequence gopā́jihvasya is variously interpr. Ge (/WG), Re (Hymnes spéc.), and at least partially Old read it as two words, the first nom. gopā́, the 2nd emended to jīvásya (Ge, WG) or jagatas (Re; he gives no accent, but it should be jágatas) -- attaching pāda c to b and taking d as a separate clause. I see no reason in this case to go against the Pp, which considers the form a cmpd, much less to emend the text so severely. Instead I take the two apparent genitives in c (gopā́jihvasya tasthúṣaḥ) as referring to the current poet: he boasts that his tongue is a herdsman -- that is, it marshals words -- and that he surmounts the various forms (vírūpā) -- that is, he has (verbal) control over the differentiated forms of the second creation. The poet has achieved his vocation. For the tongue, see vs. 3 of the following hymn (III.39.3b), where the poem, the hymnic vision, “mounts the tip of (the poet’s) tongue.” A form of the root √sthā is also found in the same pāda.