+++
title = "001"

+++
Agni


## 01
As noted ad loc., the first hymn of Maṇḍala IV begins identically (IV.1.1.a): tváṃ hí agne, with the same puzzling use of ordinarily causal hí in the first pāda of a hymn. It might be possible here to tr. the first hemistich as a causal clause subordinate to cd: “Because … you became the first minder of this insightful thought and the Hotar, you made …” On the stem manótar- see comm. ad II.9.4 and IV.1.16, 5.10. Note also that the HvN pausal resolution of the word as manóta is faulty; it should end in a long -ā.

Ge construes the gen. asyā́dhiyáḥ with both manótā and hótā, but the latter doesn’t usually govern a genitive.

The sīm in c presumably refers to the dhī́- of b. The publ. tr. could be slightly altered to “made it into power …”; so Ge “… machtest es zu … Macht.” On the infinitival construction in cd, see also Keydana (253). Note the attraction of the object of sáhadhyai into the dative case (víśvasmai sáhase). Pāda d is also noteworthy in having three forms of √sah, though two belong to the same s-stem.


## 02
Pāda b ends with one of the rare examples of non-concessive sán, nom. sg. m.

pres. part. to √as. Its presence here may be due to an effort at metrical adjustment.

The stem īḍi ya- is almost invariably read distracted as here, and it is extremely common in pāda-final position. This is fine for dimeter meter and for Jagatī, but the distracted stem obviously doesn’t fit a Triṣṭubh cadence. The addition of monosyllabic sán allows such a cadence here. Note also that sán rhymes with gman, which closes the next two hemistichs (2d, 3b). The only ex. of a non-distracted form of ī́ḍya- (save for a lone Xth Maṇḍala gen. sg.) is found likewise in a Triṣṭubh cadence in IV.24.2 sá vṛtrahátye hávyaḥ sá ī́ḍyaḥ, where a non-distracted ī́ḍyaḥ sits uncomfortably after a distracted hávi yaḥ. So, two different solutions to the problem of fitting ī́ḍya- into a Triṣṭubh cadence.

Ge suggests that the second hemistich “spielt auf Agni’s Flucht ins Wasser an.” I don’t myself see this, and I do not know what his evidence is, beyond ánu gman ‘have followed’. In this ritual context, the “god-seeking men” “have followed Agni first,” because he is the conduit of their offerings to the gods and the divinity who is installed in their own houses. They must go through him, as it were, to reach the gods.

The first hemistich emphasizes this ritual connection: Agni “sits down” (that is, is installed) as Hotar and superior sacrificer, and the place where he is installed is specified as “the footprint of refreshment” (iḷás padé), a kenning for the ritual ground (see, for a similar installation scenario, I.128.1 and II.10.1).

On mahó rāyé see comm. ad IV.31.11. The interp. of the rest of pāda d is uncertain, primarily because of the multiply ambiguous citáya- stem. The pāda most resembles V.15.5 mahó rāyé citáyann átrim aspah, rendered by Ge as “du hast jetzt zu grossem Reichtum dich offenbarend dem Atri (aus der Not) herausgeholfen” (though in our passage here he takes citáyantaḥ as “aufmerksam,” a completely different sense of citáya-) and in the publ. tr. (JPB) as “…then appearing greatly for wealth, you have rescued Atri.” My publ. tr. here (“distinguishing themselves”) is closest to Ge’s tr. of V.15.5, though I think it adds a crucial element. The point must (or at least may) be that the men seek to make especially conspicuous offerings to the gods, via Agni, for the sake of acquiring the wealth that accrues to the successful sacrificer. The apparent reflexive tr. ‘distinguish oneself’ is really just an extension of the common value of citáya- ‘appear’/ ‘appear (good), be conspicuous’. Re’s “fixant leur pensée sur la richesse (pour l'atteindre) grandement” is an extension of Ge’s “attentive” sense, but I think he has extended too far.


## 03
The first hemistich of this vs. presents some difficulties. One of the problems is that the acc. yántam in the first pāda most naturally invites Agni as referent, since the main verb of the clause, ánu gman, is the same as in 2cd, where Agni was definitely the acc. complement. But in pāda b Agni is represented by a loc. tvé and there is a different acc. rayím. One solution has been to construe rayím loosely (or not so loosely) with the pf. part. jāgṛvā́ṃsaḥ, leaving yántam in pāda a as the only acc. with ánu gman. This is the solution Old favors (ZDMG 55.271-72 = KlSch 730- 31: “bei dir Reichtum erwachend”), but √gṛ ‘be awake’ does not otherwise take an acc. Both Ge and Re supply a parenthetical non-finite verb more or less dependent on jāgṛvā́ṃsaḥ to govern ‘wealth’: “das sie bei dir Reichtum (erwartend) gewacht haben” and “… vigilants, (pour atteindre) en toi la richesse.” Since I prefer not to supply anything I don’t have to, I’ve tried another tack -- making yántam (with Agni as referent) and rayím conjoined goals of ánu gman. In other words, the wakeful men (presumably the priests alert at the sacrifice) pursue both Agni as he comes with goods and the goods themselves that are nearby him after he has deposited them on the ritual ground. I don’t, however, find this very satisfactory -- though I don’t find the other possibilities satisfying either (and I simply don’t understand Ludwig’s interpr., as reported by Old, 271-72 = 730-31). Somewhat in favor of my interpr. is Re’s comment that tvé rayím … ánu gman is a “variation inorganique” (whatever he means by that adj.) of tvā .. rāyé … ánu gman. I would rephrase it slightly to say that my “they follow you and wealth”(3ab) is a variant (inorganic or not) of “they follow you for wealth” (2cd).

In any case, the string of accusatives in cd all clearly refer to Agni, and we are back on firm ground.


## 04
Again Ge claims that this verse is about the myth of the flight of Agni, presumably on the basis of padám devásya … vyántaḥ, but the track of the god doesn't have to be his flight, but simply the ritual cursus.

How one interprets the larger sense of the vs. depends on how one interprets the verb forms: āpan, dadhire, and raṇayanta, esp. the first. Both Ge and Re take āpan as preterital (“… haben sie … erlangt,” “ont obtenu”), presumably taking it as a pluperfect or a thematic aorist (both either augmented or not) to √āp, and Ge clearly thinks the subj. is the Aṅgirases. (Gr takes it as an aor.) But nothing prevents it from being a pf. subjunctive. In that case, the priests pursuing the ritual cursus in a, who are seeking fame (śravasyávaḥ), will obtain fame through their priestly activities. The pf. dadhire in c can then have, as often, immediate past reference (“they have assumed names” - presumably their priestly titles), and the injunctive raṇayanta in d is easily compatible with that scenario as a general timeless presential. Because of the otherwise exclusive focus on the ritual function of Agni in this hymn, my interpr.

seems preferable to one that goes haring off into the mythological past.

Note śrávaḥ … ámṛktam “indestructible fame” as a variation on the formula śrávaḥ … ákṣitam.


## 05
The referent of the phrase “both riches of the people” (rā́ya ubháyāso jánānām) is not entirely clear. The standard assumption is that it refers to material goods of some sort, but which are the two kinds? Ge (n. 5b) cites Sāy on the TB for heavenly and earthly riches -- though Sāy on our passage suggests rather (domestic) animals and non-animals (paśvapaśurūpāṇi). Ge’s own suggestion is our own goods and those of our enemies, based on VII.83.5 yuváṃ hí vásva ubháyasya rā́jathaḥ, where the publ. tr. (jpb) tentatively suggests rather those of war and peace. Acdg. to Re, they are material and spiritual goods, which he thinks are rayí- and vásurespectively -- a completely arbitrary and ad hoc differentiation of these two extremely common stems, not supported in other passages as far as I can see. Ge’s interpr. is more plausible, but it seems strange to announce that goods of whatever sort “strengthen” Agni -- esp. as in vss. 2-3 Agni is depicted as the bringer and provider of goods for us. I have a completely different view of the phrase -- that it refers metaphorically to manpower. In VI.14.3 the “riches of the stranger” (rā́yo aryáḥ) contend with each other (spárdhante), where the verb invites an animate referent for the subject. Moreover, ubháya- regularly refers to two different groups of beings: e.g., I.60.2 ubháyāsaḥ … uśíjo yé ca mártāḥ “both … his (ancient) priests and mortals (now)”; II.2.12 ubháyāsaḥ … stotā́raḥ … sūráyaś ca “both praisers and patrons.” In II.6.7 jánmobháyā “both breeds” refers to the human and divine races, similarly jātā́m̐ubháyān in IV.2.2. Here either human/divine or patrons/singers (or some other division of mortals) would be possible, but I favor the latter, given the concentration on humans and their ritual activities here.


## 06
Pāda b hótā … ní ṣasāda yájīyān closely echoes 2a ádhā hótā ny àsīdo yájīyān. The opening of pāda c (as well as 7a), táṃ tvā, also matches 2c, and dīdivā́ṃsam of c matches the same adj. in 3d.

Whatever the exact posture described by jñubā́dhaḥ (for detailed disc. see Scar 343-45), the Engl. idiom “on bended knee” conveys the same sense of physical reverence.

## 06-07
I do not understand why 6c has the act. pf. part. dīdivā́ṃsam while, in the same metrical position, qualifying the same entity, and apparently meaning the same thing, 7c has the middle part. dī́diyānaḥ (whose tense-aspect stem affiliation is not entirely clear: its accent weakly suggests that it already belongs to the new redupl.

pres. [reinterpreted from the pf.], but the redupl. forms to this root are in flux; see my “perfect impv” paper in the Lubotsky Fs.). Of course a nom. form of the act. part would not fit this slot in 7c, but an acc. form of the middle part. would be fine in 6c. I doubt that the poet is contrasting old perfect and new pres., or trying to draw a semantic difference between the voices. The participle dī́diyāna- is the only medial form to this root; all the finite forms are active, with intrans. value, as are the two act.

participles, old-style pf. dīdivā́ṃs- and new-style redupl. pres. dī́dyant-.

VI.1.7-8: Both Ge and Re take návyam in 7a as an adv. (e.g., “aufs neue”), but since the adj. návya- in the nom. (hence not a possible adverb) regularly qualifies Agni (V.12.3, VII.4.8, VIII.11.10, X.4.5), I see no reason not to take it as an adj. here. The reference of course is to the newly kindled ritual fire.

Ge, flg. Ludwig, thinks that 7c concerns battle, which again I find difficult to see. I am more persuaded by Proferes’s reading (pp. 29-30), that the hymn in general presents Agni as the fire held in common by the larger community and that in vss. 7- 8 “this common fire is a symbol of centralized sovereignty,” therefore a leader of the clans and, in 8a the clan-lord of each and every clan.

Vs. 8 is couched entirely in the acc., referring to Agni. It can’t be directly attached to either what immediately precedes or what immediately follows, since both 7cd and 9ab have Agni in the nom. However, it follows nicely after the accusatives in 7ab, with 7cd an intrusion. To indicate that the description of Agni is in the acc., I have resupplied “we implore” from 7b.

On the semantics of the root √tuś in nitóśana-, see comm. ad VIII.38.2.

The hapax cmpd. prétīṣaṇi- is curiously formed and its sense not entirely clear, esp. because the root affiliation of -iṣaṇi- is uncertain and because the cmpd type is muddled, at least by its interpreters. Ge takes the 2nd member with √iṣ ‘seek, desire’: “der das Auftreten (des Opferpriesters) wünscht”; while Re opts for √iṣ ‘impel’: “qui pousse en avant l'incitation,” with alternatives in the notes “qui aspire à aller de l’avant” (√iṣ ‘seek, desire’) or “qui fait avancer l'incitation (des humains)” (√iṣ ‘impel’). The ‘seek, desire’ root is also represented by Debrunner’s “zum Vormarsch strebend” (AiG II.2.208). In my interpr. I take Old’s point (Noten ad loc.; he doesn’t discuss in ZDMG 55) that the accent suggests a bahuvrīhi, and I favor a connection of the 2nd member with √iṣ ‘impel’ and esp. the 2ndary verbal stems iṣanaya- and iṣaṇya-, both ‘impel’. A literal rendering would then be something like “having the impulsion of the forward progress (of the sacrifice),” but in English the bahuvrīhi gloss is too awkward, hence my “impelling …” The point here is that Agni controls the pace and movement of the sacrifice, which progress is often expressed by the idiom prá √i (cf. the common loc. absol. prayaty àdhvaré “while the ceremony is advancing”) found in the 1st member préti-. The 2nd member iṣaṇi- is immediately followed by the part. iṣáyantam, but I think this is a playful juxtaposition: the two words have nothing to do with each other, and the sense ‘prospering’ for the latter was established in the fuller expression in 2b.


## 09
There are a few small questions in this vs. In b both Ge and Re take instr.

samídhā as referring to the concrete material kindling stick, as often -- while I think it refers to abstractly to the moment of kindling (as also, in my view, in VI.2.5 and quite possibly VI.5.5). The abstract sense is allowed by Scar (52-53), and the fact that the dat. to the same stem, samídhe, can be used as an infinitive (see, inter alia, Keydana 186 n. 160) supports this interpr. It has to be admitted, though, that the same instr. in the following vs. (10b) does refer to the physical object.

In c my “knows his way around” is a literal calque of pári védā into an English idiom (cf. almost identical passage I.31.5). (A more chaste rendering would have been “thoroughly knows.”) In both passages we might have expected univerbation of the preverb and verb with loss of accent on pári in the rel. cl.; I have no explanation for why this did not happen, save for the possibility that pári does not function as a conventional preverb but as an adverb or postposition and also given the fact that such univerbation is not generally obligatory.

Ge and Re take c with d rather than ab; this is certainly possible and there are no implications either way.


## 10
The doubling of the 2nd sg. enclitic te by init. asmaí, the here-and-now demonstrative, is somewhat unusual, though in the same general vein as táṃ tvā (2c, 6c, 7a).

Ge and Re (see also Klein I.329, Oberlies II.133) take védī as a loc., but in this passage, embedded in a long series of instrumentals, there seems no reason not to interpr. it as the instr. it appears to be. See AiG III.155, where Wack identifies it as an instr. here. The very similar passage VI.13.4 yás te sūno sahaso gīrbhír ukthaíḥ … vedyā́naṭ (that is, probably to be emended to *védyā́naṭ and analyzed *védyā …), supports the instr. interpr. -- which is argued for for both passages by Bloomfield (RR ad VI.1.10) and Old (Noten ad VI.13.4).

Re (see also Klein I.52, 71) take bhāsā́, śrávobhiś ca as a conjoined NP, with Re putting immediately following śravasyàḥ into a separate syntagm (Klein doesn’t treat anything but the two nouns). Although ca does generally conjoin nominals, both the pāda break between the instrumentals and the etymological figure śrávobhiḥ … śravasyàḥ suggest that the two instr. belong with different parts of the clause.

## 12-13
These two vss. play on the two words purú- ‘many’ and vásu- ‘good’ in this final explosion of begging for a suitable return from the god.


## 12
I take nṛvát as an adverb, since this neut. is almost always so used. Ge and Re instead take it as a full adj. ‘consisting of men, accompanied by men’ modifying a gapped noun (Besitz, la richesse) and implicitly parallel to bhū́ri … paśváḥ “abundance of livestock.” I am not convinced, and curiously the passage Ge cites in his n. 10a as support for the interpr. contains a nṛvát that must be adverbial. Still, I do have to admit that a few such expressions do exist outside of the neut. sg.: I.92.7 nrváta ̥ ḥ … vā́jān, IX.93.5 rayím ... nrvántam ̥ .
