+++
title = "002"

+++
Agni ### 01-02 The opening of the first hymn in this maṇḍala, tváṃ hí (see above), is replicated in the first two vss. of this hymn. The hí is similarly hard to account for in both these vss.


## 01
The etymology and therefore the sense of the vṛddhi form kṣaíta- (IX.97.3), kṣaítavant- (here) are disputed; see EWA s.v. The question is whether it belongs with kṣití- ‘settlement’ (Aves. šiti-), etc., to √kṣi ‘dwell’, or is the counterpart of YAves xšaēta- ‘lordly’ vel sim., to √kṣā ‘rule over’. As the Avestan forms show, the two interpr. are not etymologically compatible. With Ge (hesitantly) and Re (sim. AiG II.2.127 [though see 933]), I have opted for the former. For one thing the various ‘people, settlement’ words are prominent in this run of hymns: kṣití- VI.1.5, carṣaṇíin this vs. and twice in the next (VI.2.2), as well as VI.1.8, víś- VI.1.8, and it also makes sense for Agni, as the ritual fire in the household and the focus of the extended family and clan unit, to be associated here with the glory of those people.

Another reason emerges from consideration of the whole vs.: the verb stem púṣya- (see puṣyasi pāda d) is formulaically associated with kṣéti ‘dwells in peace’, belonging to the same root √kṣi ‘dwell’ (cf. kṣéti púṣyati I.64.13, 83.3, VII.32.9 and similar expressions); see esp. in this very same hymn VI.2.5cd … sá puṣyati, kṣáyam … “he prospers his dwelling place.” However, the other interpr., ‘lordly’, is certainly not excluded, esp. since both occurrences of kṣaíta- are associated with yáśas- ‘glory’ (kṣaítavad yáśaḥ here; yaśástaro yaśásāṃ kṣaítaḥ IX.97.3 of Soma).

The simile puṣṭíṃ ná puṣyasi “you prosper X like prosperity” seems a bit lame. I suppose the idea was to capture the cognate accusative. Or it can be a placeholder for puṣyati kṣáyam in vs. 5 and the very awkwardness of the first expression focuses attention on the “repaired” (or perhaps “enhanced”) phrase in vs. 5.


## 02
I doubt that the vājín- of the 2nd hemistich is just any horse. It could be a mythical horse: Dadhikrā is called vājín- viśvákṛṣṭi- “a prize-winner belonging to all communities” in IV.38.2. Or a god, perhaps Soma, Indra, or the Sun.


## 03
The standard tr. take juhvé to √hu ‘pour, offer’, but this causes a problem with the main cl. verb, the pres. indhate ‘kindle’, if we assume that the pf. of √hu has some kind of preterital sense. It does not make ritual sense to offer the melted butter in the fire before kindling it. Ge avoids the problem by translating with a present, but this is ad hoc. With Sāy. I take the verb to √hvā ‘call’ instead, since invocations can be and regularly are made after the fire is kindled. Although Kü follows the √hu interpr. (605), he admits that the alternative should be seriously considered (n. 1316).

It might be objected that a pf. to the seṭ root √hvā should be read trisyllabically (juhu ve), as it indeed is in X.149.5, but as Kü points out (n. 1317), an undoubted 3rd sg. pf. to √hvā, juhve in I.32.6, is disyllabic. (The sequencing of actions problem with √idh -- √hu could be avoided if the former means something like ‘fan the flames’, an action that could indeed follow the pouring of the butter into a banked fire. But I don’t know that we have any evidence for this sense -- beyond the fact that indhate belongs to a pres. stem and could have durative value.) For further support for my interpr. of this vs. see immed. below.

## 04-05
These two vss. are in some ways an expansion of VI.1.9: 4ab are the equivalent of VI.1.9a (for disc. see below); 5ab corresponds to VI.1.9bc. Note esp.

VI.1.9b yás ta ā́naṭ samídhā havyádātim “who after kindling you [lit. with the kindling of you] has achieved your oblation-giving” and VI.2.5ab samídhā yás ta ā́hutiṃ, níśitim mártyo náśat “The mortal who after kindling (you) [lit. with the kindling (of you)] will achieve the offering to you and the whetting of you.” (A side note: havyádātim in VI.1.9b is the counterpart of ā́hutim in VI.2.5a, but note that


## 09
also has ā́hutim in the immediately following pāda (c).) In both VI.1.9b and VI.2.5a the root noun instr. samídhā seems to express priority of action: “with X (then) Y” à “after X (then) Y.” If this interpr. is correct, it provides support for my assertion ad VI.2.3 that kindling must precede oblation and therefore the pf. juhvé cannot belong to √hu ‘pour’. For further evidence for the priority of kindling to oblation, see II.37.6 jóṣi agne samídhaṃ jóṣi ā́ hutiṃ, VIII.19.5 yáḥ samídhā yá ā́ hutī / yó védena dadā́ śa márto agnáye, X.52.2 brahmā́ samíd bhavati sā́ hutir vām.

It might be observed in passing that the temporal priority I’m assigning to the instr. samídhā also accounts for a much more widespread syntacto-semantic development -- that of the standard preterital use of the gerund. Since by most lights the gerund in -tvā́(and most likely the one in -ya) is a frozen instr., we can envision a development of the type “with going” à “having gone,” etc. See my review of Tikkanen, The Sanskrit Gerund (1987), in JAOS 109 (1989): 459-61.


## 04
The problematic form in this vs. is the first word ṛ́dhat. It clearly belongs with the root aor. attested primarily in the opt. (ṛdhyā́ma, etc.) but also found once in the participle ṛdhánt-, with expected suffixal accent. It is the root accent that distinguishes the form here. Old (ZDMG 55.279 = KlSch 738; also Noten) suggests that it is a neut. part. used adverbially, with accent shift (*ṛdhát à ṛ́dhat) -- claiming that adverbial accent shift can go either way, simply marking an oppositional formation. But the standard exx. (dravát to drávati) involve a rightward shift, and in any case the whole notion of adverbial accent shift has recently been called into question (see Emily Barth’s Cornell diss.). Re considers both possibilities and opts finally for the adverb, while Ge takes it as a finite form. I prefer to take it as an aor.

subjunctive (see also Lub, Concordance, where it is so identified) parallel to śaśámate. Although I cannot entirely explain the zero-grade root syllable for expected full-grade *árdhat (though see below), I can suggest a local explanation for the (supposedly) unexpected root accent. The next hymn contains the hapax verbalgoverning cmpd. ṛdhád-vāra- ‘bringing wishes to success’. Whatever the original grammatical identity of the 1st members of this fairly common cmpd. type, synchronically they appear to be neut. sg. participles in -át with accent consistently on the suffix (type bharád-vāja- [in fact, the name of the poet of this hymn and of the VIth Maṇḍala in general], dhārayát-kavi-, etc.; see AiG II.1.317-20), and the verbal stems from which they are derived regularly are accented one syllable to the left. So, for the examples just given, 1st class pres. bhárati, -áya-formation dhāráyati, etc. I would therefore suggest that our poet, who had ṛdhát-vāra- in his repertoire, backformed the root-accented finite form ṛ́dhat on this model. A possibly simpler alternative is to begin with a hypothetical root aorist paradigm, whose injunctive act.

sg. *árdham, *árd/t, *árd/t should have full grade and root accent and whose subjunctive should likewise have both: *árdhā(ni), *árdhas(i), *árdhat(i) (cf. injunc.

kár and subj. kárati, e.g.). As it happens, the root aor. of √ṛdh is attested only in forms where we expect zero-grade root and suffixal accent, but the starred forms just given are the paradigmatically expected act. sg. forms. Under this explanation, the root accent of subjunctive *ṛ́dhat is not the problem; its zero grade is. And we can explain that either by the influence (at time of composition or of redaction) of ṛdhádvāra- in VI.3.2 or by the absence of other attested full-grade verbal forms to this root (though cf. gerundive árdhya-) and consequent generalization of the zero-grade. Of the two explanations just given, I mildly favor the first - in part because the poet Bharadvāja would have been acutely aware of the accentual properties of his name.

A minor support for the interpr. of ṛ́dhat as finite subjunctive, not adverbially used participle is provided by formulaics. As Re sketches, √ṛdh can take yajñám as object; cf. X.110.2 mánmāni dhībhír utá yajñám r̥ndhán “bringing the thoughts and the sacrifice to fulfillment through his visionary thoughts.” The VP yajñám √ṛdh “bring sacrifice to fulfillment” can be seen as a variant of simplex √yaj ‘sacrifice’, and √yaj and √śam form a conjoined pair for our poet in nearby hymns: VI.1.9 só agne īje śaśame ca márto “O Agni, that mortal has sacrificed and ritually labored” and VI.3.2 (the same vs. that contains ṛdhádvāra-) ījé yajñébhiḥ śaśamé śámībhiḥ “he has sacrificed with sacrifices, he has labored with ritual labors.” X.110.2 quoted above also suggests that, despite the pāda break, dhiyā́in our passage is better construed with ṛ́dhat as in the publ. tr. than with śaśamate with, e.g., Ge “… (und) mit Andacht den Dienst versieht.” Note the sandhi ūtī́ṣá, with retroflexion despite the lack of a close syntactic connection, as well as the unusual position of ordinarily pāda-init. sá. An incomplete collection of relevant passages shows that this retroflexion of non-initial sá in ruki contexts is standard but not invariable: IV.26.4 prá sú ṣá ..., VI.2.4 ūtī́ṣá ..., VI.14.1 bhásan nú ṣá ..., VI.20.5 urú ṣá …, VII.104.10 ní ṣá ..., VIII.20.16 abhí ṣá ..., IX.73.8 trī́ṣá ..., IX.79.3 ... arír hí ṣá. But I.64.13 prá nū́sá ..., without ruki.


## 05
The two adjectives vayā́vantam and śatā́yuṣam are best taken as proleptic, with Ge and Re.

For extensive disc. of this vss., see comm. ad VI.2.4-5 above.


## 06
Just as in VI.1.2 there is a nom. sg. masc. pres. part. sán without any obvious concessive value; unlike VI.1.2 there is no metrical explanation available. The close sandhi in the phrase diví ṣán might seem to give us a clue -- that the two words should be read as a constituent and are the equivalent of a circumstantial clause: constituency could account for the ruki. This is responsible for my tr. “when it is in heaven” (sim. Ge), instead of construing diví with ā́tataḥ like Re (“s’étendant au ciel”). However, assembling the retroflexion data both for sán/sát in a ruki environment and for diví with following s- weakens this hypothesis. In the former case sán/sád generally doesn’t exhibit retroflexion; see III.9.2 dūré sán, IV.15.1 vājī́ sán, IV.27.1 nú sán, VIII.43.9 gárbhe sán (though the first and third phrases are constituents); V.44.3 sacate sád, VI.27.2 máde sád + niṣádi sát + vividre sád, X.129.1 nó sád. However, there is retroflexion in II.41.10 abhī́ṣád; ánti ṣád IV.5.10, VIII.73.1 (though the two forms don't form a syntactic constituent in any of these passages) and in IX.61.10 diví ṣád (almost exactly our phrase). In other words, the data are equivocal. On the other hand, the loc. diví regularly retroflexes the initial sof forms of √as, as here: I.108.11 diví ṣṭhó [dual verb], V.2.10 diví ṣantu, V.60.6 diví ṣṭhá, VI.33.5 diví ṣyāma, and the just cited IX.61.10 (cf. also VI.52.13 dyávi ṣṭha), though it does not retroflex other initial s-s; cf. I.125.6 diví sū́ryasya, V.27.6 = V.85.2 diví sū́ryam, V.35.8 diví stómam, VIII.56.5 diví sū́ryo, X.75.3 diví svanó, X.85.1 diví sómo. It thus appears that the retroflexion of ṣán here is an automatic product of a rule that induces ruki in s-initial forms of the verb ‘to be’ after diví and does not give information -- or at least high-quality information -- about constituency.

I have no idea why √as should exhibit this behavior; it cannot be due to (lack of) accent, since several of the ruki-ed forms are accented (including the one here).

MLW comments: “But maybe it was despite its accent somehow a clitic just as there are accented 2nd pos. clit. This reminds me of the loss of s in Old Latin comedy which is especially well attested before the verb ‘to be’.”


## 07
The 2nd hemistich presents some interpretational problems, generated by the standard assumption that jū́rya- belongs to √jṛ ‘be/get old’. Not only is the expression “delightful like an aged one in his stronghold” odd, but such interpr.

require bleaching out the gerundive value of jū́rya- (esp. unlikely given that it’s parallel to trayayā́yyaḥ in d and ī́ḍyaḥ in a). Cf., e.g., Ge’s “behaglich [cozy, snug] wie ein Greis in seiner Burg,” which also pushes raṇvá- into a meaning otherwise unknown to it. Re’s “joyeux, tel un vieil (homme) dans la forteresse” maintains the meaning of raṇvá-, but the connection between it and the simile seems strained. Old (ZDMG 55: 279 = KlSch 738) cleverly suggests that there’s a crisscross word order, with the son of the simile in d appropriate to the adj. in c and vice versa: so something like (he doesn’t actually translate) “delightful like a son, to be protected like an old man in his stronghold.” But this is an ad hoc response to dissatisfaction with the apparent pragmatics of the passage.

These problems can be solved in twofold fashion. 1) I take raṇváḥ as a pun, a word common to both similes. In both cases it applies to Agni, but in two different senses. 2) This reinterpretation is enabled by a different analysis of jū́rya-. I take it to the root √jvar ‘burn, flame’, showing the same zero-grade as in jūrṇí- ‘firebrand’ (<*jvṛH-C, with loss of -v- before ū/u, as in urú- < *vṛH-u). I can see no possible formal objection to this analysis, despite the apparently universal insistence that jū́rya- must belong to √jṛ.

Starting with these assumptions, we can take the two gerundives, jū́ryaḥ in c and trayayā́yyah in d, as the predicates of their respective pādas (as ī́ḍyaḥ is of pāda a). One of the drawbacks to the standard interpr. is that this syntactic parallelism is broken. In c the picture is of an battle-eager (warrior) (for a similar usage of raṇvásee X.115.4 and remember that ráṇa- means both ‘joy’ and ‘battle’) who is to be enflamed / set blazing; in the simile jū́rya- is metaphorical, but of course the word is literally applicable to Agni the fire, who is the upameya, the target of the simile. One minor problem with this interpr. is that the simile marker iva is in the wrong position: we would expect to find it after raṇvá-. But there are enough displaced simile markers in the RV that this positioning is not a major obstacle.

When applied to the simile in d, raṇvá- has its more usual meaning ‘delightful, bringing delight’, which is appropriate to the son and helps explain the desire to protect him. Here the publ. tr. adds “to the home” to “a son who brings delight.” I made this addition because I think there’s a buried pun. On the one hand, in c raṇváḥ purí (“battle-lusty warrior in a fortress”) construes a locative with the subject (acdg. to my view of the constituency) and we might expect a similar loc. in the corresponding expression; on the other, raṇvá- in its meaning ‘delightful’ is often a descriptor of a home or construed with a loc. of ‘home’. Cf. I.69.4-5 raṇvó duroṇé “bringing joy to the house,” precisely of Agni. It may be that pūrí can be directly applied to the simile in d and in that context means ‘home’ -- though I doubt it: RVic púr- does not have domestic associations. Instead I think that raṇvá- in the “protected son” context evokes duroṇé, and this subsurface evocation is realized in the next verse by the phonologically similar loc. dróṇe ‘wood(en) cup’. The unexpected and unusual use of dróṇa- in that vs. (for which see comm. ad loc.) suggests that it may have been deployed there in order to play on the unexpressed (*)duroṇé here. This may seem overclever; in that case the tr. could stop short at “to be protected like a son who brings delight.” In any case, it would probably better to put “to the home” in parens.

A last comment on the hemistich: I have tr. cd in the opposite order, so that the domestic half (d) immediately adjoins the “dear guest” of b. This is not necessary, but given that my interpr. of c involves a radical rethinking of the standard view, it seemed best to make the new reading easier to assimilate.

The gerundive of d, trayayā́yi ya-, is a hapax and a striking formation -- in the first instance, just because of the rhythmic rollout of -VyV- sequences. With regard to its derivation, as Debrunner points out (AiG II.2.285-86), it seems to pattern with

-ā́yya- gerundives built to -áya-stems: panayā́yya-, mahayā́yya-, spṛhayā́yya-.

However, there is no such verb stem *trayáya-. Debrunner adds the parenthetical remark “von v. Präs. trāya-,” but of course in that case we should expect *trāyā́yya-.

Both the short root vowel and the extra -ya- remain unexplained by that derivation. I have only the wispiest gestures towards an explanation. For √trā we would probably expect an -áya-formation *trāpaya-; however, it might have followed the model of √pā and √pyā with a -y-hiatus filler instead (pāyáyati and pyāyáyati [AV+] respectively), hence *trāyáyati. We might then invoke the tendency of roots with the shape CRā to shorten their root vowel in the p-causative, type jñapayati and, specifically with Crā root, śrapáyati (both AV+). For disc. see my 1983 monograph on the -áya-formations, pp. 208-11. So one might posit such a shortening to the differently formed causative to a CRā root *trayáyati, which could serve as base for our trayayā́yya- here (encouraged by the short root vowels of the -áya-stem -ā́yyagerundives quoted above). But the chain of assumptions and unattested forms seems too long, and we might instead just attribute trayayā́yi ya- to a poet’s whimsical multiplication of -ya-s -- his version of tra-la-la. MLW suggests: “From i-extended form of *terh1- 'rub' (Lat. trivi, etc.), with double sense ‘to be rubbed’, i.e., caressed, and also referring to the fire drill?” This is an appealing suggestion, but the lack of other representatives of this root in IIr. might disfavor it.


## 08
The voc. ágne was omitted in the publ. tr. I would insert “o Agni” after “purpose.” Note that the first hemistich begins with krátvā and ends with kṛ́tvi yaḥ.

This vs. displays the same verbal intricacy as the immediately preceding vs. 7.

As also in vs. 7 the first hemistich is less complex than the second, but that doesn’t mean it lacks puzzles. The principal question is the root affiliation of ajyáse. With Ge, I take it as a pun, as passive to both √añj ‘anoint’ and √aj ‘drive’ (Old opts for √aj, Re for √añj)—a pun that we also find frequently in Maṇḍala IX. The primary connection is presumably to √añj: the ritual fire is “anointed” with the offering butter; cf. the nearby occurrences of the ppl. aktá- ‘anointed’ (VI.4.6, 5.6). But the loc. dróṇe casts a shadow on the clarity of this association. Though the stem dróṇais doubtless a deriv. of dā́ru-/drú- ‘wood’ (see EWA s.v.), it doesn’t refer to wood as a general material, much less to firewood. It is specialized as the (wooden) cup for soma; the stem is mostly limited to the Soma Maṇḍala, but even in its two other occurrences in VI (37.2, 44.20) it refers to the soma cup. Therefore, if we want to take dróṇe ajyáse here to mean something like “(the fire located) on the (fire-)wood is anointed,” we must take dróṇe as a specialized stand-in for váne or the like (see the passages assembled by Ge in n. 8a; cf. also druṣádvā ‘sitting on the wood’ in the next hymn, VI.3.5), whose meaning has been twisted. This unusual substitution pushes us in two directions. On the one hand, if dróṇe here is meant to evoke duroṇé ‘at home’ in the previous vs. (7cd), we can explain its unusual employment here and the twisting of its referent from wooden cup to wood -- and even take it as gesturing to ‘home’ here as well, ‘home’ being Agni’s fireplace as well as the home of the sacrificer. On the other hand, since the soma after its purification is regularly driven into its containers, we can take ajyáse also to √aj ‘drive’ and see the common identification of the two ritual substances, fire and soma, that pervades much of the RV. One of the characteristic ritual actions performed on Soma would here be attributed to Agni. The simile in b, vājī́ná ‘like a prize-seeker’ works with either verb, since horses are both anointed and driven. Moreover, both vājín- and kṛ́tvyaare regularly used of soma -- further strengthening the Agni/Soma connection sketched in pāda a.

The similes in the next two pādas cause further problems. In c the first question is the case of svadhā́. Ge and Old favor nom., Re and I instr. If svadhā́is nom., the series of similes with Agni as implicit subject and upameya is disrupted.

The next issue is what is meant by a párijmā … gáyaḥ. Both Ge and Re take it as some sort of mobile home (e.g., Ge “ein fahrender Hausstand”). Although in a pastoral society like that of the RV such a notion is not as comic as it might at first seem — and although fire is frequently depicted as burning across the land — I do not think that that is the image meant there. Note first that gáya- is several times associated with the preverb pári (esp. pári √pā VI.71.3, X.66.3, though as an object not a subject, I have to admit). And from its literal sense ‘earth-encircling’, párijman- can develop the sense ‘encircling, encompassing’. That is the sense I see here, with the domestic deity Agni compared to the extended family that embraces everything belonging to it -- a likely reference to the ritual fire as the joint possession and symbol of the Ārya clans.

The second simile depends on the meaning of hvāryá-. This stem must belong to the root √hvṛ ‘go crookedly’. Ge thinks it refers to a bird, which has little to recommend it since there’s already a horse in the passage; others (Re, Th [KlSch 78]) to the meandering or zig-zag movement of the fire (e.g., Re “(il va) zigzaguant …”). I prefer to take it as a gerundive (despite the accent, which is unusual for such a formation) and indeed one to an underlying causative. My further assumption is that the “young steed” of the simile is being trained, by being run in circles (around someone in the middle holding a rope attached to the horse -- a standard part of horse training today it seems from images and videos conjured up by Google -- and recall the Mitanni horse-training tablets with their numbers of ‘turns’ [vartana]). Although √hvṛ often refers to more random motion, it implicitly contrasts with motion in a straight line, which a circle is not. The advantages to this interpr. are 1) it would refer to something that the ritual fire actually does or is made to do: the Paryagnikaraṇa or the circling of the sacrificial animal (and associated paraphernalia) with a firebrand; 2) it would implicitly pick up párijmā from the beginning of the hemistich, with a more literal sense of ‘encircle, encompass’ than in pāda c. If this latter suggestion is correct, as in 7cd the first word of pāda c, párijmā, would be applicable to the similes in both c and d with slightly different senses, just like raṇváḥ in 7c.


## 09
With Ge, I supply the verb ‘eat’ in pāda a. Although Ge does not give his reasons, the existence of a parallel passage in this Agni cycle gives a clear warrant:


## 01
jyók cid atti gárbho yád ácyutam “For a long time the embryo eats just what is immovable.” Re supplies a different verb in a from the one he supplies in b: “(tu ébranles) … comme le bétail (dévore) …” But this violates the structure of the RVic simile.

The problem in the 2nd hemistich is the form dhā́mā. Gr, fld. by Lub, interprets it as a 1st pl. root aor. injunctive, but though a 1st person would work in some hymns, there seems to be no personal intrusion in this one -- nor can I figure out how a 1st pl. “we establish(ed)” would fit here. Both Ge and Re take it as a neut.

pl. to dhā́man- and therefore the subject of vṛścánti. However, this requires an interpr.

of dhā́man- -- Ge “Kräfte,” Re “pouvoirs-d’état” (whatever that means) -- that I do not think is possible for this word, and, in any case, can “powers” hew? On the basis of VI.6.1 (also in this cycle) vṛścádvana- ‘wood-hewing’ (the compounded version of our vánā vṛścánti), which modifies Agni, I think that the subject of vṛścánti must be Agni, or rather some parts of Agni, since a plural is required. I therefore take śíkvasaḥ as a nom. pl., not gen. sg. (with Ge, Re), referring to Agni’s flames or his various embodiments. This leaves dhā́mā stranded; I take it as an annunciatory main clause with yád as the definitional relative clause: “(this is your) principle, that …” My tr. assumes a neut. singular dhā́mā, allowed by Wackernagel (AiG III.272), Old (ZDMG 55: 280 = KlSch 739), etc. It would also be possible to tr. as a plural: “(these are your) principles, that …” A different possibility is enabled by Ge’s suggested alternative tr. of dhā́mā (n. 9c) as “Erscheinungsformen,” which is more palatable than his “Kräfte.” If we allow the meaning of dhā́man- to stretch to this extent, we could tr. cd “when the forms of you, the dexterous one, hew the woods,” with śíkvasaḥ a genitive with te. Nonetheless, I still prefer the publ. tr.


## 10
I interpr pāda a (which is identical to IV.9.5a) as a variation on passages like X.2.2 véṣi hotrám utá potráṃ jánānām “pursue the office of Hotar and of Potar of the peoples,” but with gapping of the terms for the priestly offices.

The standard tr. take samṛdháḥ as an abstract ‘success’ (e.g., Ge “Schaff … Gelingen”; cf. also Re, Scar [67]), but the only other occurrences of this root noun, in the frog hymn VII.103.5, clearly means something like ‘unison’, referring to the frog chorus. One of the two finite forms of this lexeme, sám ānṛdhe in X.79.7, also seems to have this sense: Agni “comes together” with his parts or limbs (párvabhiḥ). The other, in X.85.27, has a sense closer to simplex √ṛdh ‘be (completely) realized, come to success’. In our passage here, the ‘unison’ interpr. makes sense, esp. in the larger context of this hymns (and also VI.1), with the focus on Agni as clanlord of the separate Ārya clans, which are nonetheless working towards a common goal. On the other hand, the appearance of simplex ṛ́dhat in this hymn (4a, on which see comm. ad loc.) and in the cmpd. ṛdhádvāra- in the next (VI.3.2) might suggest a rendering closer to the simplex here as well.


## 11
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. forms a slight ring with vs. 1, with voc. mitramahaḥ echoing mitró ná of 1b.

Both Ge and Re take vīhí as having a double acc., with svastíṃ sukṣitím the secondary object expressing benefits we seek from the gods whom we pursue (e.g., Ge “Ersuche die Männer des Himmels um Glück, um gutes Wohnen.” But this seems unnecessary (and is not the usual syntax of √vī); the root √vī takes a variety of objects, including concrete inanimates, as in VI.12.6 (in this cycle) véṣi rāyáḥ “you pursue riches,” and here I see it as having both inanimate and animate objects.

Pāda d dviṣó áṃhāṃsi duritā́tarema is a reprise of 4d dviṣó áṃho ná tarati.
