+++
title = "003"

+++
Agni


## 01
The standard tr. take ṭe with jyótiḥ, i.e., “your light.” Because of its somewhat unusual pāda-final position, however, I construe it rather with immediately preceding devayúṣ “seeking you as god.” The retroflexion in devayúṣ ṭe might have been interpr.

as an indication of constituency and therefore as support for my interpr., but this argument does not hold. For retroflexion of te after a rukified or -fiable -s, cf. I.11.6, 7 (I.131.4, IV.42.7) vidúṣ ṭe, I.48.6 (I.69.7, VIII.24.17) nákiṣ ṭe, I.104.1 (VII.24.1) yóniṣ ṭe, IV.4.3 (VIII.71.8) mā́kiṣ ṭe, IV.10.4 ābhíṣ ṭe, V.38.1 uróṣ ṭe, VI.44.11 (VIII.40.9) pūrvī́ṣ ṭe, VII.3.4 prásitiṣ ṭe, VII. 18.18 rāradhúṣ ṭe, VIII.14.3 dhenúṣ ṭe, VIII.17.6 svādúṣ ṭe, VIII.44.23 syúṣ ṭe, IX.104.4 góbhiṣ ṭe, X.33.7 pitúṣ ṭe, X.38.3 asmā́bhiṣ ṭe, X.56.2 tanū́ṣ ṭe, X.85.40 agníṣ ṭe, X.112.1 ukthébhiṣ ṭe.

Counterexamples: I.80.8 bāhvós te, I.147.2 vandā́rus te, I.163.3 āhús te, III.55.22 niṣṣídhvarīs te, IV.12.1 trís te, IX.79.5 āvis te, IX.86.5 prabhós te [VII.99.7 váṣaṭ te].

In other words, retroflexion is the most common outcome of te after a word ending with a ruki-fiable s, though it is not without exception. Constituency does not seem to play a role, nor (though this is not clear from the examples just assembled) does metrical position: all of the non-rukified examples occur first in their pādas, but rukified examples occur in every sort of metrical position, including, regularly, initial in pāda. See also the data on retroflexion discussed just above ad VI.2.6.

In the 2nd hemistich áṃhaḥ is the most problematic form. In the syntagm pā́si … mártam áṃhaḥ we should like an ablatival reading: “you protect the mortal from narrow straits.” There are several ways to achieve this reading or to configure the form in a syntactically different way. For general disc. of this problem see Old, ZDMG 55: 280-81, and Schindler, Root noun, pp. 10-11. Gr (fld. by Kuiper IIJ 1: 49 [1957]) invents a root noun áṃh- for just this passage, beside the very wellattested s-stem áṃhas-, to which our form could be the abl. Although this solves the immediate problem, inventing a stem for a single occasion otherwise has little to recommend it, and we should in any case expect accent on the ending, *aṃháḥ.

Others take it as an abl. to the s-stem, truncated in some way and at some period. M.

Hale (Fs. Melchert) sees it as an archaic zero-grade abl. to the s-stem, preserved from a pre-proto stage of IE -- though he otherwise sets forth quite cogently the arguments against positing the preservation of such archaisms. Wackernagel (AiG III.80) interprets it as a haplology from *áṃhasaḥ, an ad hoc solution that again solves the problem, but rather crudely. Schindler, flg. an oral suggestion of Hoffmann’s (in turn fld by Scar 135, 300), takes it as the acc. it appears to be, governed by a participle to be supplied (he suggests ā́√ṛ, on the basis of V.31.13): “den Sterblichen, den du, O Gott, beschützt, wenn er durch Verlassenheit in Bedrängnis (gerät).” This again takes care of the form, but requires supplying material from nowhere.

I also am inclined to take it as an acc., but not via the same mechanism as Schindler (/Hoffmann), but by way of syntactic ambiguity plus metrical convenience.

I start with the fact that 1) abl. áṃhasaḥ is common with √pā, often final in a Jagatī cadence; in this cycle cf. VI.16.30, 31 (though these two are actually in dimeter cadences) … pāhy áṃhasaḥ#. 2) Another, semantically similar, expression involves áṃhas- and (ví) √muc ‘release’, but this expression can have two different syntactic realizations: personal ACC. + ABL. of the danger, or ACC of danger + personal ABL.

Cf., e.g., I.118.6 ámuñcatam vártikām áṃhaso níḥ “you two released the quail from áṃhas-” versus II.28.6 (etc.) vatsā́d ví mumugdhy áṃhaḥ “release áṃhas- from the calf.” The same duality of construction is found with √pṛ ‘carry across, rescue’. Cf. in the next hymn VI.4.8 párṣy áṃhaḥ “carry (us) across narrow straits” versus VII.16.10 tā́n áṃhasaḥ piprhi ̥ “rescue them from narrow straits.” I suggest that here we have a blend of these constructions extended to semantically similar √pā. The person remains in the ACC., but the danger is put into the ACC. as well. The similarity of the expression here … pā́si … áṃhaḥ# and, in the next hymn, VI.4.8 párṣi áṃhaḥ# may have contributed. And I don’t think we should discount metrical convenience: the expected abl. áṃhasaḥ is fine for a Jagatī cadence but doesn’t fit a Triṣṭubh cadence like this one, whereas áṃhaḥ is quite common in Triṣṭubh cadences.

So if the poet can find a syntactically principled way to use acc. áṃhaḥ here, he will — and, in my opinion, he did. Note also áṃho mártam in the next vs. (2d), the same words in opposite order to our mártam áṃhaḥ, as well as áṃhaḥ in the previous hymn, VI.2.4.

A less pressing problem is how to construe the instr. tyájasā. In the Hoffmann/Schindler interpr., it is simply construed with the invented participle: “wenn er durch Verlassenheit in Bedrängnis (gerät).” Both Ge and Re take it as the cause leading to áṃhaḥ, e.g., Ge “… vor Not infolge einer Unterlassungssünde,” but Ge suggests in a n. (1) that it could be an instr. of accompaniment with áṃhaḥ (“vor Not und Sünde”). That is the tack I adopt here, but I consider tyájas- as something that might befall the hapless mortal rather than something he might commit (like Sünde) and bring about his bad fortune. On the semantics of tyájas- here and elsewhere in the RV, see Old, ZDMG 55.280-82.


## 02
As Ge points out, pāda a recalls VI.1.9a with īje śaśamé as here; the addition of ṛdhát- in pāda b also recalls VI.2.4a ṛ́dhat … śaśámate. In fact, the diction of the first hymns in this Agni cycle is very similar; cf. e.g., the repetition of áṃhas- (VI.2.3, 11; 3.1.2, 4.8), the use of the verb √naś (ā́naṭ VI.1.9, aśyām VI.1.13, naśat 2.5, naśate 3.1, 2, aśyā́ma 4x 5.7), etc. Other echoes have been treated elsewhere in the comm. The two forms of naśate in these first two vss. express mirror images: the first (1b) has the virtuous mortal as subject, suitably rewarded by attaining the light; the 2nd (2d) has the same mortal as object, with the verb negated, to express the evils that will not reach the mortal.


## 03
This vs., esp. its 2nd half, bristles with difficulties and has been interpr. in an exhausting variety of ways (not only the usual tr., but also, e.g., Old at length in ZDMG 55.283-84=KlSch 742-43; Thieme Unters.; Lüders, AcOr 13 [=Phil.Ind.]; Scar 146-47; Gonda, Ved.Lit. 219). I will not treat these other interpr. in detail, but merely lay out my own, which is in closest agreement with Lüders (“Ved. heṣant-...,” Philol. Ind.: 781ff.) through the first half of c. The general point of the vs. seems to be, as often, to contrast the fearsome and militant aspects of Agni with his benign ones.

It might also be pointed out that pāda a, which is the most straightforward part of the vs., has a bad cadence that is not easily fixable; in fact it presents an unusual sequence of 5 light syllables: (sū́ro ná yá)sya dṛśatír a(repā́). I do not see any way to make -tír heavy. The first question, in the relatively transparent 1st hemistich, is what bhīmā́ modifies. Though Ge and Re take it with dṛśatíḥ -- that is, Agni’s appearance is both spotless (arepā́) and fearsome -- the pāda boundary weakly suggests that bhīmā́ should be construed with the other fem., namely dhī́ḥ. On the assumption that this dhī́- is Agni’s, bhīmā́identifies the dhī́- with the violent side of Agni.

In c, with Ge and Lü inter alia, I assume that a new clause begins with nā́yám and, also with Lü, that héṣasvant- means ‘possessing arms, armed’. The opening of this pāda héṣasvataḥ śurúdhaḥ then is a nominal clause, with the gen. héṣasvataḥ expressing possession. Cf. III.38.5 imā́asya śurúdhaḥ santi pūrvī́ḥ “here are his many proliferating riches”; sim. IV.23.8 ṛtásya hí śurúdhaḥ sánti pūrvī́ḥ “Of truth there exist many riches.” The rich spoils that fall to Agni are presumbly the various materials he burns.

The published tr. importantly omits aktóḥ. It should be corrected to “(But) on his own, by night, this one here …” This temporal adverb implicit contrasts with sū́ro ná of pāda a. That is, the appearance of the militant Agni is compared to the sun, the light of day, whereas the benign Agni described in the second half of c + d is a phenomenon of night.

On the famous crux nā́yám see comm. ad VIII.2.28 and my 2013 Fs. Hock article. Pace Thieme (1949: 51-52) and Lub, who classifies this passage separately, I believe that nā́yám here belongs with the other occurrences of this syntagm.

The adj. raṇvá- recurs here from VI.2.7. On its indirect association with ‘home, dwelling’ in that passage and its direct associations elsewhere, see comm. ad loc. Here it might be better to render the phrase raṇvó vasatíḥ as “delightful dwelling” rather than “cozy nest” to bring out the echoes with the passage in the previous hymn.

I take kútrā cid as temporal rather than spatial.


## 04
This vs. continues with the description of violent Agni.

Pāda d has caesura after 3; there are two other exx. of this metrical irregularity in the hymn, 6b and 8b, both of which have bad cadences as well. Here the early caesura might be calling attention to the extreme alliteration of the pāda: dravír ná drāvayati dā́ru dhákṣat. The same is not true of the others.

The 3rd sg. bhásat is most likely a subj. to a root aor.; see Gotō 82.

The hapax yamasāná-, an apparent participle to a supposed “Doppelstamm” to √yam, does not fit the pattern of most of the other -asāná- stems, on which see comm. ad IV.3.6 -- in that it neither falls into the semantic sphere of violent activity nor has an associated s-stem. Note here, however, that rabhasāná-, which meets both criteria, is found in the last vs. of this hymn (8d) and could have provided a model for this formation. I also wonder if yamasāná- is not a pseudo-cmpd. of yáma- ‘bridle’ (e.g., V.61.2) and √sā ‘bind’, as if with a middle part. of the root aor. asāt, etc.

(viṣā́ṇa- in V.44.1, identified as a part. by Gr., is better taken as an -ana- nom. to the same root [<sā́-ana-]; cf. AiG II.2.193). Hence, ‘being bound to the bridle’. Needless to say, this would not be well formed by standard Vedic compounding rules, but is not completely out of the question as a nonce inspired by rabhasāná-, itself a nonce.

Note also the phonological figure (yam)asāná āsā́. The simile in c, vijéhamānaḥ paraśúr ná jihvā́m, has been variously interpr. I take the frame to be (agníḥ) … jihvā́m -- that is, the tongue is Agni’s, as usual, and refers to his flame(s). As for the comparandum, the ax -- I assume that its tongue is its blade, extending from the handle as a tongue does from a mouth. The blade might be found in the next vs. in dhā́rā (5b). See VI.2.7-8, where I argue that a word missing from vs. 7 is found or gestured toward in the following vs. The hapax dravíḥ in the next pāda is universally taken as a nom. sg. masc. to an i-stem draví- meaning ‘smelter’ (so Gr, etc., and cf. AiG II.2.297) or ‘cutter’ (so Hoffmann, Aufs. 420, to √drū ‘cut’, rather than √dru ‘run’). But agent nouns in simple -í-, though they do exist (see AiG II.2.296-97), are not exactly thick upon the ground. I suggest instead that it is a neut. -ís-stem like havís- ‘oblation’, sarpís- ‘melted butter’ (on this type, including those built to aniṭ roots, see AiG II.2.364-67).

It would then be a cognate object to drāvayati in the simile and, on the one hand, be a more likely substance to be caused to run than wood (dā́ru) and, on the other, refer to the parts of wood that really do ‘run’, like sap. It might be worth noting that the much later cvi formation dravī-bhū (etc.) means ‘become liquid, liquefy’. (This of course has nothing to do with the -í- in dravíḥ, but does show that ‘run’ is used of liquids, a reasonably widespread semantic extension -- e.g., in English.) The standard tr. take dā́ru as the obj. of dhákṣat ‘burning’, rather than of drāvayati. This is, of course, the safer course. But cf. V.41.10 ní riṇāti vánā “he liquefies the trees” (also of Agni), V.58.6 riṇaté vánāni “the trees dissolve,” both with the root √ri ‘flow’.


## 05
This vs. is comparatively straightforward, esp. the first hemistich.

I take téjaḥ in its literal etymological value: ‘sharpness’ à ‘point’, given tigmá- ‘sharp’ in 4a.

In c note the phonetic play of (citrádh)rajatir aratír.

Despite the pāda boundary, I take vér ná as the simile with both c and d, unlike most, who limit it to d. The root √dhraj ‘swoop, soar’ (found in the b.v. citrádhrajati-) is generally limited to birds (cf. I.165.2, IV.40.3) and the wind, and so comparison to a bird here would be apt. Note also that a form of √dhraj and an uncompounded form of pátman- are found together in 7c.

Though most interpr. take aktóḥ as a gen. either with aratíḥ, imposing a forced reading on the latter (Ge “der Lenker der Nacht,” Lü [Philol.Ind. 783] “als Herr der Nacht”), or with a gapped “Agni” (Th [Unters.] “der (Agni) des Nachts”), I think it likely that it is adverbial, as it is two vss. earlier (3c) in the same metrical position. So also Re.

Our druṣádvan-, a hapax, exists beside 2 occurrences of the simple root noun cmpd. druṣád- -- one of which is in an exactly parallel context: IX.72.5 #vér ná druṣád (like our #vér ná druṣádvā). I assume that the extension by the derivational suffix -van- simply serves metrical convenience, since the forms seem identical semantically. Several other -sád- cmpds have the same extension: nṛṣádvan- (1x), pariṣádvan- (1x), and admasádvan-, found once in the very next hymn (VI.4.4), and - van- extensions are not rare in root noun cmpds, esp. to roots ending in -ā, such as vājadā́van- ‘giving prizes’, sahasradā́van- ‘giving thousands’, etc.

The final word of the vs., the b.v. raghu-pátma-jaṃhāḥ, is unusual for the RV in having three full members, as Re notes. He discusses the cmpd at some length and considers it a “conglomérat” of a tatpuruṣa *raghu-pátman- (entirely parallel to raghu-pátvan-) and the attested bahuvrīhi kṛṣṇá-jaṃhas-, tr. “(dieu) au vol rapide, au plumage (noir)” (I.141.7). I see no reason to involve the latter cmpd., detach the (compounded) first member raghu-pátman- from the second, jáṃhas-, and insert a ‘black’ not found in the text to qualify the second member. The English designation “flight feathers” would have the same structure (save for the bahuvrīhi) as raghupátma-jaṃhas-, that is, “feathers suitable/specialized for flight.” Note that in this bahuvrīhi with a cmpd first member, “first member accent” actually falls on the second member of the first cmpd., matching that of the original tatpuruṣa (cf. just cited raghu-pátvan-) -- in other words, when the bahuvrīhi is formed, the internal structure of its first member is no longer visible to the process.


## 06
The noun rebhá- is generally tr. ‘singer’ and the root √ribh from which it is derived, ‘sing’. However, as I discussed in “On Translating the Rig Veda” (2000, Proceedings of UCLA IE conf.) and again in the Intro. to the publ. tr. (p. 78), the limited number of attestations of the verbal root and the variety of contexts in which it is found suggest that its meaning is more specific than ‘sing’. That the sound of √ribh can be compared to that made by birds of prey (IX.97.57) or by ungreased wood on a wagon (TS VII.1.1.3) suggests something on the lines of ‘squawk, squeak, rasp’ -- a hoarse or husky voice quality that would perhaps not be surprising in a middle-aged man in antiquity, esp. one who spent a lot of time huddled over fires.

The verb with which rebháḥ is construed in this passage, rārapīti, is likewise usually rendered in very general fashion, as ‘speak, praise’ or the like. But again it seems to have a more specific sense: ‘mutter, murmur’ vel sim. (see EWA and, e.g., Schaefter, Intens., both s.v. rap). So the anodyne tr. of Ge “Wie ein Bard ruft er … laut” and Re “comme un barde … il parle-puissamment” (both ascribing real intensive sense to rārapiti rather than the more likely frequentative) can be replaced with something both more pointed and more appropriate to Agni, who is the referent here: “like a hoarse-voiced (singer) he keeps muttering (=crackling) with his flame.” The phrase práti vasta usrā́ḥ should be read with accented vásta, an old correction, endorsed by Oldenberg inter alia. Cf. pāda-final vásta usrā́ḥ at IV.25.2, VII.69.5, VIII.46.26. The erasure of accent here may be redactional, based on the verb vaste in the next hymn, VI.4.3b. It should be noted, however, that Re interpr.

vasta as a finite verb form to √vas ‘wear’ (“Comme un barde, il se revêt des aurores”), and he is followed by Lub. That the exact phrase, but with accent, occurs 3x elsewhere makes this interpr. unlikely. There remains, however, the question of what the underlying form is. The Pp analyzes it as vaste, but Old prefers -o (both here and for the other occurrences of the phrase), a loc. to vástu-. On -o (from -au) as u-stem loc., see AiG III.153-54. As for usrā́ḥ, in this phrase it appears to be an anomalous gen. sg. to the notional stem usr-, whose gen. sg. also appears as usráḥ (III.58.4, possibly also VI.12.4, but see comm. there). See AiG III.213. The long-vowel -ā́ḥ ending seems to be the result of “feminizing” the form; cf. loc. sg. usrā́m in X.6.5 (on the pattern of devy-ā́s, devy-ā́m). Alternatively, since in all four instances of vásta usrā́ḥ, usrā́ḥ is at the end of the pāda, the length may be redactional for *usráḥ, since the forms would be metrically equivalent. We should also bring into the mix II.39.3 … práti vásta usrā, with an unaccented dual voc. usrā referring to the Aśvins, and perhaps IV.45.5 usrā́jarante práti vástor aśvínā, where the usrā́may be again be a dual modifying the Aśvins (so Ge, implicitly Pp.) or a masc. nom. pl. (usrā́ḥ out of sandhi) modifying the fires that ended the preceding pāda - or another gen. sg. usrā́ḥ to be construed with práti vástoḥ.

Although práti is not found in the other 3 exx. of the phrase, práti vástor is attested in II.39.3, IV.45.5, X.189.3, so it is likely to form part of the phrase here.

Given its position, it would be difficult to take it as a preverb with rārapīti, esp. since √rap isn’t otherwise construed with práti; see comm. ad V.61.9.

As noted previously, pāda b is metrically bad, with caesura after 3 and a bad cadence mitrámahaḥ, where we should have a heavy penult.

The īm in Wackernagel’s position in pāda a is, in my opinion, a long-distance anticipation of the īm in c, and both are placeholders for nṝ́n at the end of c and d.

This might be clearer if the publ. tr. read “he keeps muttering to them.” The second hemistich consists of a pair of parallel relative clauses with no overt verb. It also, quite unusually, shows verbatim repetition after the caesura: x x x x / aruṣó yó divā́nṝ́n. Such tag repetitions are far more characteristic of short echo pādas in meters like Atyaṣṭi, and even in those meters there tends to be some patterned variation. I don’t know what function this repetition serves here. I would attribute it to the poet’s flagging imagination, except the rest of the hymn bursts with imagination.

There have been various solutions to the lack of verb in these relative clauses.

Old, fld. by Re, supplies ‘protects’ (√pā). There’s nothing wrong with this -- it provides a verb to govern acc. pl. nṝ́n, and “protect men” is a relatively common predicate, as Old points out. But there’s nothing in the context that imposes this addition; the closest we can come is pā́si in 1d. Ge takes these as nominal clauses -- “der bei Nacht, der am Tage das rötliche (Ross) der Männer ist” -- which saves him from supplying an unmotivated verb, but requires nṛ́̄n to be a gen. pl., which I think we should avoid if at all possible. The simplest solution, at least as far as I can see, is simply to continue the verb of the first hemistich, rārapīti. The īm of 6a, echoed by īm in c, may suggest that the clauses follow the same template, and as noted above, īm in 6a is easiest to explain if it anticipates nṛ́̄n in the relative clauses. Needless to say, when a verb needs to be supplied in the RV, a silent iteration of a verb in a previous nearby pāda or verse is often the best choice. And in this case the intensive (=frequentative) form of rārapīti in b may be reflected iconically in the implied repetition of Agni’s muttering in the rest of the verb. The next two vss. provide some further support for this suggestion. In 7ab an intensive in the relative clause of pāda is matched by an intensive to the same root in pāda b, and in 8a supplying an intensive in the rel. cl. to match the one in the main clause of b also makes sense.

Although I still think the 2nd half of this vs. is clumsy, it may be clumsy apurpose.


## 07
More or less with Ge (fld. also by Re), I supply a word for sound or noise as the subj. of pāda a; see Ge’s parallels cited in his n. 7a. They opt for ‘voice’, while I favor something generated from the two verbs in this hemistich, both derived from √nu ‘roar’, e.g., nāvá- ‘roar(ing)’.

The two verbs themselves require comment, návīnot and nūnot, both pādafinal. First, note that the accent on the first but not the second requires that pāda b must be the main clause to pāda a. The stems of the two verbs are similar but not identical; both have heavy or intensive redupl. and appear to mean pretty much the same thing. návīnot is clearly an intensive to √nu (or √nū? see EWA s.v.); the stem is attested once elsewhere in the RV (VII.87.2), though the better-attested intens.

stem is ánono/u-. The other verb nūnot, which is also attested once elsewhere (V.45.7), is less clear morphologically. Wh classifies it as a redupl. aor., and Schaeffer (Intens. p. 147) also attempts to argue for this identification. There are two problems with taking it as a redupl. aor. First, there is no causative attested to this root — nāvayati is only found in the Skt. lexica, not independently in text, at least acdg. to Whitney (Rts) — but a redupl. aor. of this shape should be secondarily generated to a causative. Second, a redupl. aor. should have transitive/causative value, but neither occurrence of nūnot has this sense, and in our passage it is difficult to see how to construct such a contrastive value for nūnot in opposition to návīnot. They seem to be used in identical fashion. Schaeffer in fact does try to claim that nūnot has factitive-transitive value, translating návīnot as “brüllt” and nūnot as “Gebrüll erregt.” But “Gebrüll erregt” is a translational sleight of hand -- simply a phrasal paraphrase of “brüllt,” enabled by German (similarly in English “shouted” / “raised a shout”).

There is no acc. obj. in the Skt.; the noun “Gebrüll” is a dummy noun. I therefore think we should take them both as intensives with the same meaning. I do not understand the reduplication vowel of nūnot; metrically *nonot would have been equivalent and could belong to the better attested intensive stem cited above -- though it should be noted that the attested 3rd sg. to that stem is a (pseudo?) seṭ nónavīti, so the secondary form might be expected to be *nonavīt. All of this is made more complicated by the metrical irregulariy of pāda b, which has only 10 syllables.

However, (oṣa)dhīṣu nūnot provides a fine cadence to this line, while repeating navīnot from pāda a would yield enough syllables but a bad cadence, (oṣadhī)ṣu navīnot, and the hypothetical *nonavīt would also produce a bad cadence.

rukṣá- is a hapax. It is generally taken as a nom. sg. -as out of sandhi with a meaning ‘shining’, derived from √ruc. So Gr, Ge, EWA s.v., etc. This is perfectly possible, harmless, and not very interesting. I favor the more daring hypothesis: that it is a loc. in -e out of sandhi and belongs to a *rukṣá- ‘tree’, found also in the widespread MIA rukkha- ‘tree’ (Pāli, Pkts.), which is probably a metathesis of vṛkṣá- ‘id.’ (see EWA s.v. vṛkṣá-). So also Re. In this context it could be indirectly alluding to its source by its position after vṛ́ṣā, which is phonologically close to vṛkṣá-. The second hemistich presents its own difficulties. A crucial problem is the apparent lack of a verb. Ge and Re supply ‘fill’ (e.g., “Himmel und Erde mit Gut (erfüllt)”). I follow Old’s suggestion (ZDMG 55.290=KlSch 749; not very enthusiastically alluded to in the Noten) that we should emend dáṃ in d to tán (root aor. injunctive to ā́√tan ‘stretch’). As he points out, this lexeme with ródasī (vel sim.) as object/goal, often Agni as subject, and an instr. is quite common, esp. in this set of hymns (VI.1.11, 4.6, 6.6 [recall how tight the phraseology is in this Agni cycle]); cf., e.g., ā́yás tatántha ródasī ví bhāsā́. Although I strenuously resist emendation ordinarily, the echo of IV.19.7 dáṃsupatnīḥ might have led to the change here. (On that form see comm. ad loc.) In any case, pace the Pp. (see also Lubotsky s.v. dám-), I think it unlikely that the sequence contains the accented monosyllable dáṃ followed by an accented supátnīḥ. Inter alia, the root noun dám- outside of the cmpd dámpati- and esp. the archaic gen. dán in the phrase pátir dan are confined to Maṇḍalas I and X. If the emendation of dáṃ to *tán seems too radical (and I’m inclined now to think it is), I would read *dáṃsupatnīḥ with one accent, supply a verb, and tr. “… (fills) with goods the two worlds, who (thus) have (in him) a wondrous husband.” In c I take the participle yán with both the simile and the frame.

Note the return of √dhraj (dhrájasā) and pátman (pátmanā) from 5cd.


## 08
The vs. is structured as two vā alternatives; the reason for this is unclear. See Klein II.203-4.

The rel. cl. of pāda a has no verb, and the verb of b, davidyot, must belong to a main clause because of its lack of accent. Ge, Re, and Klein (II.203-4) supply “become strengthened’; this certainly makes sense, but there is nothing in context or parallel passages that encourages this invention. Kü (206) goes for a more restrained “versehen ist,” a nominal clause with predicative instrumentals, I suppose. But given the twin rel. cl./main cl. intensives in 7ab (návīnot … nūnot) and the intens. davidyot in 8b, I wonder if the same pattern holds here, and we should supply an intens. form of √dyut in a.

The arká- of pāda a are most likely both chants and rays.

Pāda b is once again metrically irregular: it has a caesura after 3 and its cadence consists of 4 heavy syllables (s u )vebhiḥ śúśmaiḥ.
