+++
title = "004"

+++
Agni


## 01
As Re also points out, the yáthā … evá framework of this vs. and the adyá and the -si-impv. yakṣi in the evá clause lead us to expect a preterite in the yáthā clause: “as you *have sacrificed (in the past) …, so sacrifice today.” Encountering the pres. subj. yájāsi instead is surprising. Re operates with his usual parentheses to introduce the preterite: “S’il est vrai que (tu as sacrifié et) sacrifieras …” I have inserted the totalizing qualifier “always” (“regularly” vel sim. would also work) to enable the future sense that I generally see in the subjunctive. Taking the subjunctive in a more modal fashion (“should sacrifice”) or, à la Tichy, as expectative (“Just as [I expect] you to sacrifice …”) would be less troublesome in this passage, but I am reluctant to allow context to dictate function to that extent. I should note that Tichy does not treat this passage in her subjunctive monograph. IH suggests that the subjunctive here may show generalizing value, as in Greek, spread from indefinite contexts (“whoever [will] do X …,” as in VI.5.4-5 … yáḥ … dádāsat / sá … “whoever will ritually serve, he …”).


## 02
Ge takes both vibhā́vā and cakṣáṇiḥ as transitive: “Er ist unser Erleuchter wie der Erheller am Morgen.” But well-attested vibhā́van- does not elsewhere take an object or an objective gen. (on X.8.4 see comm. ad loc. [once it exists]). By contrast, cakṣáṇi- is a hapax and so its value is more up-in-the-air. AiG II.2.207 takes it as an agent noun ‘Erheller’ and explains it (p. 208) as a nominalization of an infinitive in - áni; in our passage cakṣáṇir ná “als Anzeiger” is said to rest on *cakṣáṇi ná “wie um anzuzeigen.” But this is not how RVic similes work, and further a class of -áni infinitives is marginal at best (see most recently Keydana, Infinitive im Ṛgveda pp.

190-96). I take it as an intrans. ‘sighting, vision’ -- AiG II.2.207 lists action nouns as one of the two standard values for -ani-nominals -- to harmonize in sense with vibhā́vā, though other interpr. are not excluded. Old suggests ‘Beschauer’, sim. Re.

The tr. of védya- is in accord with my usual interpr. of this stem as ‘to be acquired’ (see comm. ad II.2.3) and my understanding of the original meaning of the epithet jātávedas- (in d here) as ‘having (all) beings as possessions’. However, ‘to be known’, found in the standard tr., would certainly be possible here.

Note that the phrasal verb cáno √dhā ‘take delight’ takes an acc. obj. vandā́ru, as is standard.

In the 2nd hemistich it is uncertain (but not terribly important) which of the nominatives is the predicate with bhū́t. It is more difficult to attribute the usual change of state sense ‘become/became’ to bhū́t; Hoffmann’s interpretation (p. 136) as a general statement about Agni seems reasonable. Indeed, I might be tempted to emend my ‘has been’ to ‘is’, to match the presential injunctive cáno dhāt in the preceding hemistich. The presence of this unnecessary bhū́t may well be accounted for by the figure in which it participates: uṣarbhúd bhū́d, which pleasingly has near rhyme forms from two different roots.

The collocation uṣarbhúd- átithi- recurs in VI.15.1.


## 03
The first hemistich treats the billowing smoke and bright flames of physical fire. The kernel of the first pāda, … yásya panáyanti ábhvam, is almost identical to II.4.5 ā́ yán me ábhvaṃ vanádaḥ pánanta “The formless mass [=smoke] of the woodeater which they (first) marvelled at.” Cf. comm. ad loc. In that verse also the next step for Agni is to become bright. In our vs. I supply ‘mortals’ from 2c as subj.

of panáyanta, but undefined ‘they’ is also possible.

The problem in pāda a is dyā́vo ná. We might like this to be genitive sg., allowing it to be parallel to yásya and depend on ábhvam: “whose formless mass they marvel at like that *of heaven.” But there is no way that dyā́vaḥ can be a genitive, and in any case it is also not at all clear that heaven is shaped like a formless mass. Old (ZDMG 55.291 = KlSch 750) attempts to rescue this interpr. by assuming anacoluthon and mixture between the two constructions “Agni has ábhvam like the heavens” and “they admire A's ábhvam,” but besides being overtricky, in both instances ‘heaven’ should be genitive, since Skt. lacks a ‘have’ verb and uses GEN X for such values. (He does not push this interpr. in the Noten.) Taking dyā́vaḥ as the nom. pl. it must be, Ge and Re assume that dyā́vaḥ ná belongs with the second pāda, as a simile with the verb vaste -- so Ge “Er … kleidet sich wie die Himmel in Glanz.” Although this makes sense, it is syntactically impossible, at least as far as I can see: it requires fronting the simile around the entire relative clause, a major violation of standard RVic syntax. My own interpr. takes both the morphology and the syntax seriously: given the structure of the pāda, nom. pl. dyā́vaḥ should be being compared to the subject of panáyanti. In fact, this is possible semantically as well: the heavens can marvel at Agni’s smoke that is billowing all the way up there. As often, assuming what the meaning of a RVic passage should be has led interpreters to distort the grammar to get to that meaning and has prevented them from reflecting on what the poet meant in producing a non-hackneyed image.

The 2nd hemistich presents its own problems, primarily because of missing or unspecified arguments to the verb. In c ví … inóti lacks an overt object. Ge supplies “Schätze” and interprets the phrase in positive fashion. He reasonably cites as parallels, both from the immediately following hymn, VI.5.3 … inoṣi … vásūni and


## 01
… ínvati dráviṇāni with ‘goods’ and ‘chattels, treasures’ as obj. respectively.

But these passages lack the preverb: although Gr lists VI.5.3 with ví as preverb, and Ge apparently follows him, ví in that passage should be construed otherwise, not as a preverb with inoṣi; see comm. ad loc. In my opinion a more telling parallel is found in VI.10.7, also in this Agni cycle, with the ví: ví dvéṣāṃsīnuhí “dispel hatreds.” Re also considers the expression to be negative, on the basis of the same parallel, and tr.

“lui qui chasse au loin (les ennemis).” The preverb ví is not found elsewhere with this verb. IH now makes the attractive sugg. that the obj. is actually the ‘smoke’ implied in the first hemistich. I consider this an alternative possibility.

In d the verb śiśnathat is construed with an acc. pūrvyā́ṇi, but the referent of this generic adj. ‘primordial’ is not clear. Other occurrences of both of these words (√śnath and pūrvyá-) don't give clear formulaic guidance for what to supply as the real obj. This pāda is identical to II.20.5, an Indra hymn, and it does seem imported from an Indraic context here. (Bloomfield does not comment in RVReps.) Ge supplies Burgen (with ?) here, but Werke in II.20.5. Although the former works fine semantically, púr- ‘fortress’ is fem. and so is excluded. Re supplies “performances”; he does not indicate what Sanskrit word he had in mind or why he thought it was apposite. Though it is the case that both kṛtā́ni and kármāṇi appear with pū́rvyā(ṇi), I do not see how one can ‘pierce’ them. I supply ‘domains’ (dhā́māni), on the basis of IV.55.2 dhā́māni pūrvyā́ṇi, VIII.41.10 dhā́ma pūrvyám, although not with a great deal of confidence.

Ge and Re take áśna- as a PN, but I see no reason not to take it, with Gr, as a straightforward derivative of √aś ‘eat’. Mayr splits the difference in his PN book, listing it as a PN but noting its likely original identity with the adj. áśna- ‘hungry’.

## 04
The rare word vadmán- is found only here and in VI.13.6, also belonging to this cycle. It presumably presupposes a neut. *vádman- ‘speech’, from which vadmán- was derived by accent shift, like neut. bráhman- à adj. brahmán-. vadmā́ here participates in a phonetic figure with pāda-final admasádvā, where both the 1st cmpd member adma and the 2nd sádvā match the basic phonological structure of vadmā́.

The immediate context in VI.13.6 is similar, vadmā́ sūno sahaso no víhāyā, but it contains the full voc. phrase sūno sahasaḥ “o son of strength,” rather than the truncated sūno here (the only place in which the bare voc. sūno is found in the RV).

The phrase “son of strength” is hypercharacteristic of this Agni cycle: besides


## 06
the full voc. is found in the 1st vs. of this hymn (1b), as well as nearby VI.1.10, 5.5, 11.6, 13.4-6, and 15.3, and the acc. sūnúṃ sáhasaḥ in VI.5.1, 6.1, the nom. in VI.12.1. This density of occurrence alone would strongly suggest that gen. sahasaḥ has been gapped here, but I wonder if a factor contributing to the omission of sahasaḥ is the two occurrences of ū́rj- ‘strengthening nourishment’ in pāda c, given the similar, common voc. phrase ū́rjo napāt “o descendent of nourishment” (e.g., in this cycle VI.16.25). The ū́rj- forms would, as it were, substitute for sáhasin this stereotyped “son/descendent of X” expression.

It is difficult to contrive a causal sense for hí here, and the particle is therefore not rendered in the publ. tr.

The meter of pāda c is problematic. HvN make the obvious distraction tuvám, which produces an orthodox opening of 4, but a bad cadence. Old (both ZDMG 55.291 and Noten) suggests not distracting tvám, which produces an opening sá tváṃ na ūrja-, with caesura in the middle of the cmpd ūrja-sane, and reading ūrjam trisyllabic (with a medial rest: ū́rj˙am). Although I usually pay heed to Old’s metrical observations, this requires two highly unusual features: the caesura splitting the type of cmpd that is seldom split and a reading of ū́rjam that is unprecedented in the occurrences of this stem, while failing to distract tvám, which is more often disyllabic than not. In this instance Old’s usual good sense seems to have deserted him, and the HvN reading seems preferable. Part of the bad cadence may be attributable to following a phrasal template: pāda-final ū́rjaṃ dhā(ḥ) has the same structure as pāda-final cáno dhāt in 2b. However, the light final preceding it (ūrjasana ū́rjaṃ dhā(ḥ)) is harder to explain; of course the -a represents voc. -e in sandhi and perhaps we can unusually restore it.


## 05
The first half of this vs. is fairly straightforward; the second bristles with nearly insoluble difficulties.

The adverbial nítikti ‘sharply’ presumably refers to haste -- as in Engl. “look sharp!” meaning “hurry!” Alternatively it could refer to the shape of flames, with their apparent sharp edges.

In b rā́ṣṭrī is somewhat surprising, whether it is applied to vāyúḥ ‘wind’ (so Ge) or to Agni (publ. tr.), since it is fem. and both of those are masc. (pace Debrunner, who suggests, implausibly, in AiG II.2.407 that vāyú- might in this passage be “ausnahmsweise Fem.”). Gr simply lists this occurrence as a separate stem rā́ṣṭrī masc., next to the same stem identified as fem. It unfortunately cannot be the nom. sg. of an -in-stem ‘possessing a kingdom (rāṣṭrá-)’ because it should then be accented *rāṣṭrī́. This -ī-stem occurs twice elsewhere referring to Vāc and therefore is clearly fem., as we would expect. In our passage I think it has been employed as an imperfect pun with (unexpressed) rā́trī- ‘night’ to evoke that stem in this passage concerning Agni’s dominance of the nights (aktū́n), here expressed by a distinct stem aktú-.

The image is that of a triumphant king marching across territory. Cf. the similar sentiment in VI.9.1, again part of this Agni cycle, … ná rā́ jā / ávātiraj jyótiṣāgnís támāṃsi “(Agni) like a king suppressed the dark shades with his light” and IV.4.1 (also of Agni) yāhí rā́ jeva ámavām̐íbhena “Drive like an aggressive king with his entourage.” The relevance of the wind is unclear to me, except perhaps to indicate the speed of Agni’s progress.

As noted above, the 2nd hemistich is a mess. So Old (ZDMG 55.291-92) “Der dritte Pāda ist schwierig und ein s i c h e r e s Resultat wohl unerreichbar.” Interpr.

therefore differ significantly, and I cannot treat the details of all. As already noted by Old, some help is given by semi-parallel passages containing √tṝ + árātīḥ: IX.96.15 átyo ná vājī́táratī́d árātīḥ “(he,) like a prize-winning steed, outstrips hostilities” (also with a horse in the simile, as here); III.24.1 duṣṭáras tárann árātīḥ “hard to overcome, but overcoming hostilities”; and, in this Agni cycle, VI.16.27 táranto aryó árātīḥ “overcoming the hostilities of the stranger.” Similar to this last passage is VIII.60.12 táranto aryá ādíśaḥ “overcoming the aims of the stranger.” These parallels suggest that the frame of the passage is árātīḥ √tṝ. The superimposability of the last two passages further suggests that árātīḥ and ādíśām in our passage should be equated, since acc. plurals of both serve as obj. of tárantaḥ in the same formula, and that ā́díshere has negative connotations, unlike some other occurrences of this stem. Of course, the difference in case between them here (acc. pl. árātīḥ versus gen. pl.

ādíśāṃ) makes the equation tricky, but I think that, in juxtaposing these two negatively viewed objects, the poet has demoted one (ādíś-) to a dependent genitive.

(That is, rather than having “may we outstrip hostilities (and) (ill-)intentions,” we have “may we outstrip the hosilities of (ill-)intentions.”) The remaining problem in pāda c — and it is a major one — is what to do with the truncated relative clause introduced by yás te. Old (ZDMG 55.292, reprised in Noten) considers numerous possibilities, none of which he seems particularly enamoured of, and Ge, Re, Gonda (VedLit. 236), Hoffmann (Fs. Thieme [1980] =Aufs. III.753-54), Scar (708), etc., add more. A number of interpr. take the rel.

construction as embedded between the verb tūryā́ma and its object árātīḥ, sometimes by introducing an otherwise unidentified new actor, sometimes by emending yás to

*yā́s to allow it to refer to one of the fem. pl. ā́díśām or árātīḥ. I would of course
prefer to avoid such embedding on principle, and in fact each attempt to produce such an interpr. runs into further difficulties, which require emendation (of the rel.

pronoun or of gen. ādíśām), highly unusual case usage, or supplying significant amounts of material — or a combination of the three. So embedding does not produce an otherwise clean syntactic or semantic result. I will not rehearse the details of all these ultimately unsatisfactory proposals, but simply present my own (also ultimately unsatisfactory, I’m afraid). I take tūryā́ma yáḥ to be an improper relative construction “… we who …”, with disharmony in number between the 1st pl. verb and the sg. rel. prn.; the sg. yáḥ would have been imported from/enforced by the numerous rel. cl. in this Agni cycle beginning yás te and referring to the pious mortal and his ritual service to Agni. Similar 2nd position rel. are VI.2.4 ṛ́dhād yás te …, 2.5 samídhā yás te …, and there are also a number of pāda-initial exx. of yás te: VI.1.9, 5.5, 13.4, 15.11. Thus, although the overall structure of the sentence in cd is couched as (1st) plural, the template of the “pious mortal” defining relative clause would impose a singular in that construction. (Note that the person is unspecified, since the rel. cl. lacks a verb.) In the publ. tr. I supply a verb “serve,” but I would now omit the verb, with the rel. cl. only nominal yás te “who is/are yours” or “who is/are for you.” The main-clause verb tūryā́ma would have been fronted around this minimal clause.

We come finally to the simile of pāda d, which again has inspired numerous interpr., which again I will leave undiscussed. The particular issues are 1) the precise sense and reference of (pari)hrút-, 2) the grammatical identity of hrútaḥ and pátataḥ, which could both be either gen.-abl. sg. or acc. pl., 3) whether those last two should be construed separately or together, 4) whether √pat can mean ‘fall’ at this period. I answer 4) with a negative, though Ge’s and Scar’s interpr. depend on that sense. I also follow Hoffmann in seeing the simile as depicting a race and racecourse, though I think -hrút- refers to the curves of the racetrack and the curving course of the racehorse. I take both hrútaḥ and pátataḥ as acc. pl., but in separate syntagms: pátataḥ is the obj. of tūryā́ma in the simile and refers to the competing horses “flying” around the course -- thus corresponding to árātīḥ in the frame -- while hrútaḥ is construed with parihrút as an etymological figure and has no direct correspondent in the frame. For the other occurrence of the root noun hrút-, where it likewise refers to real life curves, see comm. ad IX.61.27.


## 06
ā́… bhānumádbhir arkaíḥ … tatántha is an elaboration of VI.6.6 (next hymn) ā́bhānúnā … tatantha. In our passage tatántha is accented because it follow pāda-initial, extra-sentential voc. ágne.

In c nayat ‘leads’ would seem to need an obj.; with Re I supply “us.” Ge leaves it object-less.

There is no agreement about where to construe the instr. śocíṣā. Re takes it with aktáḥ (“oint de flamme(s)”), while Ge’s interpr. isn’t clear (at least to me). I assume it goes with the VP: Agni’s bright flame illuminates the passage around the darkness(es).

I am rather baffled by the simile in d. The vṛddhi form auśijá- is usually used as the patronymic of Kakṣīvant, one of the great poets of maṇḍala I (e.g., I.119.9, 122.4, 5), but morphologically it could also simply be a derivative of uśíj- ‘(type of) priest’. It also occurs once (I.112.11) with the rare word vaṇíj- ‘merchant’; that passage also contains Kakṣīvant (though not in the same syntagm). Ge claims that our passage is part of “die Sage vom fliegenden Kaufmann,” but the two other passages he cites (one of them I.112.11) certainly do not add up to a saga, and dī́yan ‘flying, soaring’ does not have to belong to the simile as he (and Re) take it. I am inclined to think that the referent of auśijáḥ is, as usual, Kakṣīvant. His (other) patronymic, according to the Anukramaṇī, is dairghatamasa ‘descendent of Dīrghatamas’, another celebrated poet of Maṇḍala I, whose name means ‘having long darkness’ (=blindness, quite possibly). I suggest that we have here a reference to Kakṣīvant via the vṛddhi deriv. auśíja-, and this reference to Kakṣīvant then obliquely evokes his relationship to Dīrghatamas. So, somewhat ironically, a poet connected to “long darkness” leads us around (/helps us avoid) darkness. I would further suggest that pátman … dī́yan “soaring in flight” might refer to soma exhilaration (as in X.119 the Labasūkta). Cf. I.119.9 máde sómasyauśijó huvanyati “in the exhilaration of soma, (Kakṣīvant), the son of Uśij, cries out (to you),” where Kakṣīvant, identified as auśíjaḥ, cries out “in the exhilaration of soma.” If this nomenclatural intertextuality seems too far-fetched, we can take auśíjasimply as descended from / connected to (fire-)priests and assume that Agni is being compared to his priest (for, to me, unspecified reasons).


## 07
This vs. has a number of metrical problems or peculiarities. In pāda a the caesura unusually splits the splv. suffix from its base: mandrá-tamam; pāda b has an unusual opening (on which see below). Pāda c is, at least by the Pp. analysis, not only a syllable short (hence HvN’s rest at 5), but has a bad cadence for a Triṣṭubh; for possible solutions, see disc. below. Pāda d also has a bad cadence, but a different one and not easy to fix.

Instr. arkaśokaíḥ unites the instrumentals arkaíḥ of 6a and the śocísā of 6d. I take it as a pun, with arka- representing both ‘ray’ and ‘chant’, both of which meanings are found for this stem in nearby passages: in the immediately preceding vs. 6a it means ‘ray’ and refers to the similarity of Agni’s rays to those of the sun; in the next hymn VI.5.5 it appears in a sequence of ritual items, adjacent to uktaíḥ, and must refer to priestly chants. In our passage “ray-flames” are attributed to Agni, “chant-flames” to “us.” In b, as noted above, the first word vavṛmáhe is metrically bad: a heavy 2nd syllable would be preferable, as it would in the other 4 occurrences of this 1st pl. pf., as well as in 2nd sg. vavṛṣé. Kü (459) plausibly suggests that the original reading of this form was *vuvūrmáhe, as we would expect for this seṭ root, which was redactionally changed, as aniṭ forms crept into this root. Note the echo -máhe máhi.

The accent on śróṣi is somewhat troubling, as it is very unlikely to begin a clause. One could construct such a meaning: “Since we have chosen you … as a great thing for us, listen, o Agni!” But the most natural way to construe the sequence is … naḥ śróṣi “listen to us” (cf., e.g., I.133.6, VI.26.1 (…) śrudhī́naḥ, etc.), as Old (ZDMG 55.292) also points out -- which in turn requires that immediately preceding máhi be part of that clause to host the enclitic naḥ. Old (ZDMG 55.292-93 and Noten) suggests rather that śróṣi is still under the domain of hí, but this seems unlikely, since it would involve an asyndetic conjoining of a preterital perfect and a si-impv. (/subjunctive). I suggest that the accent was supplied redactionally on the basis of párṣi in the next vs. (8b) and, especially, ghóṣi in the next hymn (VI.5.6d), both in the same metrical position and receiving their accents honestly.

śróṣi is also the only attestation of this si-imperative, an isolated formation beside the very well-attested root aorist. In particular, there are no s-aor. subjunctive forms of the type that regularly support the si-impv. I do not entirely understand how or why it was formed, but, given the tight formulaic relationships between the hymns in this Agni cycle, I suggest it may have been based on semantically identical and rhyming ghóṣi in VI.5.6; as was discussed above, it is possible that the accent of śróṣi is owing to the same source. However, MLW reminds me that “s-forms of k'leu are very wide spread in Indo-European (Lith. klausyti, TB. klyaus· and there might even be an exact match for śróṣi in Messapic klaohi. Cf. also srauṣat. Nonetheless, I still favor an internal Skt. explanation.

As already noted, pāda c is both metrically deficient and afflicted with a bad cadence. Old (both ZDMG 55.293 and Noten) suggests restoring devátātā, as in 1a, also pāda final. Though this would fix both metrical problems and would also make contextual sense, I do not understand how such a corruption could have arisen. I prefer, and have adopted, Ge’s suggestion (n. 7cd) to read vāyúm beginning pāda d as vā āyúm, with vā going with the previous pāda. devátā appears several times in a Triṣṭubh cadence followed by a monosyllable (IV.44.2, 58.10, VII.85.3) -- so … devátā vā# would be a fine pāda-end -- and the vā can easily conjoin the two instr.

śávasā devátā. The reanalysis of vā āyúm to vāyúm can have been based on pādainitial vāyúr in 5b. Agni is called Āyu on a number of occasions (see, e.g., I.31.11, X.20.7, and Gr s.v. āyú- def. 2). Although Ge’s idea seems eminently sensible to me, it is passed over in silence by Re. An asterisk should be inserted before “Āyu” in the publ. tr.

I do not see any way to improve the cadence in d. The splv. nṛ́tama- is not suitable for the cadence of any Rigvedic meter, though it also appears there in VI.33.3.
