+++
title = "005"

+++
Agni


## 01
I supply ‘our’ with ‘thoughts’ (matíbhiḥ) in pāda b, though the subject of the overt verb huvé is only 1st singular. I assume that the vaḥ ‘for you’ is addressed to the poet’s fellow celebrants and therefore there is an implicit 1st pl. It would, however, also be possible to tr. “with my thoughts.” ínvati is obviously a thematized Vth Class pres. (see Gotō, 1st class, p. 76).

What is rather surprising is that the athematic stem is found two vss. later, as inoṣi in 3c, as well as in the previous hymn (inóti VI.4.3; cf. also the impv. inuhí in nearby VI.10.7). It is true that ínvati provides a more favorable heavy syllable in 2nd position, but I do not otherwise see the motive for using both stems in this hymn.

Note the etymological connections yúvānam … yáviṣṭḥam, ádrogha(-vācam) … adhrúk, and (viśvá-)vārāṇi (puru)vā́raḥ.

## 02
In almost all occurrences in which it is possible to determine, animate forms of yajñíya- refer to gods. They may be the referents here as well: the gods may send goods to Agni to be redistributed to his mortal worshipers.

The syntax of cd is somewhat problematic, since there is incongruity between the simile and the frame. Ge evades this by taking the simile that begins c (kṣā́meva víśvā bhúvanāni) with ab: “In dir … bringen die opferwürdigen (Götter) … Schätze zum Vorschein wie die Erde alle Geschöpfe,” and beginning a new clause with yásmin. This is not impossible, but it is unnecessary and, given the hemistich break, undesirable if another interpr. can work. Various ones have been tried (see Old, ZDMG 455.293 and Noten), but, flg. Old, I think it is yet another example of case disharmony in similes, utilizing two possible alternative interpr. of the verb (sám …) dadhiré. In the frame this medial verb has a passive sense ‘be held, encompassed’, with saúbhagāni as subj. For this construction cf. VI.38.3 bráhmā ca gíro dadhiré sám asmin “the sacred formulations and the songs together have been placed (/are encompassed) in him.” But the same verb form can also be transitive, with the object expressing what is encompassed or placed. This is the construction of the simile, with nom. kṣā́ma (or kṣā́mā? see Old) and acc. víśvā bhúvanāni. For such a transitive construction, cf. III.19.4 bhū́ rīṇi hí tvé dadhiré ánīkā … yájyavo jánāsaḥ “the peoples eager to sacrifice have established in you [=the fire] your many faces.” In our passage the object of the simile thus corresponds to the subject of the frame; that both are neut. pl. makes their correspondence easier to process, despite their different grammatical functions.


## 03
As noted above ad vs. 1, we have both thematized ínva- and athem. inó- in this hymn, with very similar objects: drávināni ‘movable goods’ (1c), vásūni ‘goods’ (3d). As was also noted above, ad VI.4.3, Ge (and others: cf. Gr and Re) construes the ví opening pāda d with inoṣi in c and uses this supposed lexeme to argue that ví … inóti in VI.4.3 has positive value. As I argued there, ví … inóti is more likely to mean ‘dispel’ and to take a negatively viewed object. In our passage here I do not think that ví belongs with inoṣi. Instead I think ví forms a phrase with immediately following ānuṣák; cf. the same pāda-initial expression I.58.3, 72.7, IV.12.3, as well as #ví … ānuṣák# 16.2. I assume that the expression arose from passages like I.72.7 vy ā̀nuṣak … dhāḥ “distribute in due order” with ví √dhā (reinforced here by vidhaté), and then ví and ānuṣák became phrasally fused.

## 04-05
These two vss. are contrastively paired: each has a generalizing rel. clause describing the activities of a mortal -- harmful in 4ab, beneficial in 5ab -- while the 2nd hemistichs of each set out the results of such actions. The pairing is further emphasized by the phonological similarities of the oppositional verbs abhidā́sat ‘will assail’ (4a) and dádāśat (5b) ‘will ritually serve’.


## 04
Note the extreme etymological figure that occupies the whole of pāda d: tápā tapiṣṭha tápasā tápasvān. For the last two words, see the parallel structure in 6b.

## 05
I now would be inclined to take samídhā as an abstract “with kindling,” rather than as the concrete material “with kindling wood” as in the publ. tr. See disc.

ad VI.1.9, 2.5.


## 06
The pāda-final sáhasā sáhasvān is morphologically entirely parallel to 4d tápasā tápasvān.

In d tád may not be a temporal adverb as in the publ. tr., but a neut. acc. obj.

of juṣasva, with which ‘speech’ vel sim. should be supplied. So Ge and Re -- e.g., Ge “so freue dich an diesem (Gedicht) des Sängers.” However, since √juṣ can take a gen. complement (though more rarely than the acc.), jaritúḥ may be construed directly with the verb, as in the publ. tr.

On ghóṣi, which I take as an anomalous -si imperative, see comm. ad IV.4.8, which contains the other occurrence of this form. On the possible relationship between ghóṣi and śróṣi in VI.4.7, see comm. ad loc. 
## 07
This vs. is characterized by etymological figures: b rayíṃ rayivaḥ, c vā́jam … vājáyantaḥ, d ajarājáram -- a stylistic tick found also in vss. 1, 4, and 6 -- see comm. ad locc.
