+++
title = "006"

+++
Agni


## 01
The subject of this vs. is not overtly expressed, but it cannot be Agni, who is the acc. goal. Re cleverly suggests that the subject is indicated by the participle gṛṇánt- ‘singing, singer’ in the last pāda of this hymn. If so, this is an oblique form of ring composition.

Contrary to my usual principles, rather than construing návyasā with yajñéna in the next pāda (so Ge, Re), I supply a form of ‘speech’. I do so on the grounds that návyas-, particularly in the instr., is specialized to the realm of speech. Cf. návyasā vácasā (VI.62.5) as well as the famous pāda-final disharmonious formula návyasā vácaḥ (II.31.5, VI.48.11, VIII.39.2), along with fem. forms of the comparative with different ‘speech, thought’ words (e.g., nearby VI.8.1 matír návyasī).

The hapax vṛścád-vana- ‘hewing wood’ shows the poet’s penchant for the type of cmpd. that provides his name, Bharád-vāja. Cf. also ṛdhád-vāra- in VI.3.2.


## 02
The first hemistich mixes the visual and the audible in a species of synaesthesia, esp. clear in the description of Agni as “brightening thunder,” but note also his “ever-roaring” flames.

The standard tr. construe purū́ṇi pṛthū́ni with bhárvan; e.g., Ge “die vielen, breiten (Flächen) fressend.” But nearby VI.12.5 anuyā́ti pṛthvī́m favors taking the acc. as an acc. of extent with the verb anuyā́ti, as in the publ. tr.

Note the phonetic figure in pāvakáḥ purutámaḥ purū́ṇi, pṛthū́ni, esp. the last three words, of which the first two also etymologically related.

## 03
Alliteration continues, with ví … víṣvak (a), śuce śúcayaḥ (b), návagvā vánā vananti (cd). The first two are etymological figures; in the third, intricately structured one, vánā vananti is not, but mimics one.

Flg. Ge (fld. by Re), I assume that the Navagvas are in an unmarked simile: the flames break and overcome the woods as the Navagvas broke Vala. The gapping of the simile marker ná would not be surprising in the -na-rich environment of the figure noted above: návagvā vánā vananti: we might have expected divyā́*ná návagvā, and haplology would not be surprising.

The identity of the root found in tuvi-mrakṣá- is disputed; see EWA s.v. MARC, with √mṛc ‘harm’, √mṛj ‘wipe’, and √mṛś ‘touch’ all possibly in play. √mṛc ‘harm’ seems the most likely to me. The Schwebeablaut outcome -mrakṣ- is standard when -kṣ- ending the root syllable would yield a super-heavy cluster *-rkṣ. Cf.

drakṣyati (not *darkṣyati) to √dṛś (see AiG I.212-13). Any of the roots just listed would follow this pattern.


## 04
In my view (flg. Re), the rel. cl. of the first hemistich hangs off the previous vs. 3 and supplies the subject (śúcayaḥ ‘flames’) of vananti in 3d. However, Ge takes the rel. prn. yé as a stand-in for ‘wenn’, providing a subordinate clause to cd, with its resumptive ádha. The conspicuous alliteration of vs. 3, continued here (4a) — śukrā́saḥ śúcayaḥ śuciṣṃah, also a triple etymological figure — might be a weak arg.

in favor of a connection with vs. 3, esp. 3b śuce śúcayaḥ.

In b kṣā́m must be read disyllabically.

In the publ. tr. “like” should be enclosed in parens, as there is no overt simile marker in b. The question is why the flames are likened to “unharnessed horses” (víṣitāso áśvāḥ). Ge and Re think they are grazing, and this interpr. might fit well with vápanti ‘shear, shave’ -- a slightly different image of what happens to vegetation when fire moves across the earth: grazing “shears” the grasses like shaving does. However, I tend to think that víṣita- adds a different semantic dimension: horses out of harness racing about wildly without control.

In d the standard view (e.g., Ge, Re, Macd [Hymns, p. 74], Klein [DGRV II.106], Mau [p. 24]), fld. also in the publ. tr., is that the gen. pṛ́śneḥ, lit. ‘speckled, dappled’, refers to the earth. And this seems perfectly reasonable. However, it should be noted that pṛ́śni- is nowhere else unambiguously used of the earth in the RV.

Though Re (comm. ad loc.) suggests that there is such a ref. in IV.5.7, 10, those are desperately obscure passages and nothing can be built upon them. Generally pṛ́śninames the mother of the Maruts, who seems to have been a dappled cow, and “dappled (cow)” à “earth” is not a difficult step in RVic discourse. Still it should be kept in mind that it’s a step that hasn’t been taken elsewhere.


## 05
The rendering of goṣu-yúdh- as ‘cattle-raider’ loses the specificity of the loc. pl. 1st member, but ‘of the one battling for cattle’ seemed excessively heavy.

The hapax kṣātí- is built to √kṣā ‘burn’. I have borrowed the felicitous bilingual pun ‘ardor’ from Maurer. On Gotō’s posited √di ‘destroy’ supposedly found in dayate here, see comm. ad III.34.1. There is no need for a separate root, as ‘divides’ à ‘fragments’ is a plausible semantic pathway.


## 06
This vs. has a number of connections with phraseology elsewhere in this Agni cycle: ā́… bhānumádbhiḥ … tatántha (VI.4.6): ā́bhānúnā … tatantha (6a); dhṛṣatā́(3d, 6b); spṛ́dho bādhasva (VI.5.6): bādhasva … spṛ́dhaḥ (6cd, though with the two forms belonging to separate clauses, not a VP as in 5.6); vanuṣyā́t (VI.5.4): vanuṣyán vanúṣaḥ (6d).

The referent of the gen. phrase mahás todásya ‘great goad’ is not entirely clear -- some take it as some feature of Agni (e.g., Ge), others as the sun (e.g., Mau).

Most construe it with bhānúnā (as I do), though Re takes it with pā́rthivāni jráyāṃsi.

If, as is likely, it goes with bhānúnā, this provides a good clue to its identity. The bahuvrīhi svàr-bhānu-‘having the radiance of the sun’ is obviously based on a genitival tatpuruṣa *svar-bhānú- ‘radiance of the sun’, and GEN. bhānú- would simply be the analytic version of this cmpd., with the phrase mahás todásya substituted for putative gen. *sū́raḥ or *sū́ryasya. VI.4.6 ā́ sū́ ryo ná bhānumádbhir arkaíḥ “like the sun with its radiant rays” provides further support for this interpr.

Although it is true that in nearby VI.12.1, 3 the ‘goad’ (todá-) appears to be Agni, the qualifier ‘great’ in “great goad” here might point to the cosmic body, the sun, of which the earthly fire is a less powerful earthly counterpart.


## 07
The insistent etymological alliteration in this vs. seems to me inartful overkill, though it certainly provides an explosive climax. The forms of √cit in the first hemistich — citra citráṃ citáyantam …, cítrakṣatra citrátamam — give way to √cand in a slightly more restrained array, candrám … cándra candrā́bhiḥ. Since both roots belong to the same semantic sphere and begin with c, the difference in effect between the hemistichs is minimal.

It is not clear what should be supplied with the fem. instr. pl. candrā́bhiḥ. The standard tr. use ‘flames’, and I’ve followed suit, but śúci-, which figured in vss. 3-4, is unfortunately masc. when used as a noun. Re suggests alternatively stutíbhiḥ ‘praises’ (fld. by Mau), pointing to the adjacent gṛṇaté ‘singer’, but it is more natural to take the instr. candrā́bhiḥ with Agni syntactically, rather than construing it with the dat. participle, and further, candrá- seems never to be used with verbal products.
