+++
title = "007"

+++
Agni Vaiśvānara As noted in the publ. intro., this hymn is heavily seeded with forms of √jan ‘beget, be born’. The epithet vaiśvānará- is also found in every vs. (1b, 2c, 3c, 4d, 5a, 6a, 7a), in all cases initial in its pāda.

## 01-02
These two vss. are paired, both ending with janayanta devā́ḥ and sharing an opening pāda with the structure ACC SG + GEN ACC SG + GEN; this NP structure is also found at the end of 1c and 2c (one iteration each), but is upended by GEN + ACC SG yajñásya ketúm in 2d. It is perhaps a measure of the sensitivity of the RV to subtle patterns that this syntactic metathesis feels strikingly disruptive. It may well be that the poet generated this disruptive order in order to call attention to this very phrase; see the importance of the word ketú- in vss. 5 and 6, with the comm. there. There is an important difference, however: here the “beacon of the sacrifice” must be Agni, whereas in vss. 5-6 it is the sun.

There are only three finite verbs in this two-vs. sequence, all injunctives: 1d janayanta, 2b abhí sáṃ navanta, 2d janayanta. The temporal reference is therefore unspecified. I tr. them as preterites (as do Ge and Re) on the assumption that Agni’s begetting by the gods happened only once in the mythological past. It would be different if priests were the subject.


## 01
Since Agni is often called the mouth of the gods, Ge (and others) assume that the loc. āsán in d refers to Agni, and the gods have produced a drinking cup (pā́tram) to put in his mouth. But this requires Ge to treat the three-pāda accusative phrase that opens the hymn and refers to Agni as grammatically untethered, as an anacoluthon with the referent picked up in the loc. in pāda d (see his n. 1d). But, with Re, I see no reason why Agni cannot be conceptualized here as the cup that the gods drink from.

Re considers āsán simply an attribute limiting the pā́tra-, a “récipient pour la bouche, récipient à boire,” while I take it as referring to the gods’ (collective) mouth.

Note the phonologically matching words aratím and átithim stationed in the same metrical position in pādas a and c.


## 02
On mahā́m as acc. sg. masc. see AiG III.251, EWA s.v. mahā́nt, p. 338.

The paradox of calling fire “a great watering trough” (āhāvá-) simply sharpens the slightly discordant image in 1c of Agni as ‘cup’. Although āhāvá- is clearly derived from ā́√hu, a standard lexeme for the oblations that Agni would be receiving, this particular noun is associated with a well in X.101.5 and is therefore associated with more mundane acts of pouring water (which of course should extinguish fire). Agni is a trough because the gods get their “water” there.

## 03-05
The middle of the hymn is characterized by initial (or modified initial) forms of the 2nd sg. prn.: 3a tvát, 3b tvát, 3c VOC tvám, 4a tvā́m, 4c táva, 5a VOC táva.


## 04
abhí sáṃ navante reprises abhí sáṃ navanta of 2b and perhaps confirms the preterital interpr. of that injunctive, since the verb in this vs. is marked as pres., though the gods are also subject here. However, how to interpret the tense values in the 2nd hemistich is unclear. Pāda c has an unambiguous impf. āyan, which, with its goal of immortality (amṛtatvám), would seem to refer to the remote mythological past (though see below). The verb is the last pāda, ádīdeḥ, can be either a plupf. (to the older stative pf. dīdā́ya) or an impf. to the new redupl. pres. remodeled from the pf. stem (Kü opts for the impf.; see 228). But whatever its morphological identity, it seems to refer to an event in the immediate past or the immediate neighborhood -- assuming that pitróḥ refers to the two kindling sticks -- namely, the regularly repeated kindling of the fire. This interpr. would be supported by 5c with pres. part.: jā́yamānaḥ pitrór upásthe “being born in the lap of your two parents.” In the publ. tr.

I assumed that the first hemistich refers to the regular kindling of the fire and the gods’ response, while the 2nd one refers to the Ur-kindling in mythological time.

However, I now wonder if we should interpret the abstract amṛtatvám in c in light of the voc. amṛta in pāda a. In the first hemistich Agni is addressed as “immortal one” when he is being born and the gods cry out to him; indeed the voc. “o immortal one” might be the content of their cry, expressed in the verb abhí sáṃ navante. In the second hemistich the gods went to immortality (amṛtatvám), that is, to the abstract quality possessed by the one addressed as amṛta, and they did so “according to your [=Agni’s] intentions” (táva krátubhiḥ), again when he was born. The gods’ journey to amṛtatvám may therefore not be one of the distant mythic past (or not only of the distant past), but one they undertake whenever he is kindled. The abstract principle of immortality may also be found in the gen. amṛ́tasya in the last pāda of the hymn (7d), where Agni is identified as its protector.

Note that the phrase víśve … devā́ḥ, parcelled out over two pādas, may teasingly invite us to connect the first term, víśve, with the dominant epithet in this hymn, vaiśvānará-.


## 05
The disjunction between pf. dadharṣa in the main clause of b and impf.

ávindaḥ in the subord. cl. of d is likewise a bit disturbing. Flg. Kü (266), the publ. tr.

renders the perfect presentially as “ventures against,” but I might be tempted to change that now to “has ventured against” (cf. Ge’s “… hat noch keiner angetastet”).

The question is what is the relationship between the two clauses. I think that Agni’s vratás are those that he established after he discovered (ávindaḥ) the phenomenon in d.

This in turn raises the question of what that phenomenon is and, more precisely, to which noun (ketúm or vayúneṣu) the gen. áhnām belongs. Most (Ge, Re, Old) take it with vayúneṣu; cf., e.g., Re “quand … tu eus découvert le signallumineux pour les jalonnements des jours.” Old, who should know better, even cites word order as support of this interpr. And certainly áhnām does (once) occur with vayúna-: II.19.3 aktúnā́hnāṇ vayúnāni sādhat “He perfected the patterns of the days through the night.” But far more often áhnām limits ketú-, several times in a Vaiśvānara context: VII.5.5 vaiśvānarám uṣásāṃ ketúm áhnām “V., the beacon of the dawns and of the days”; X.88.12 vaiśvānaráṃ ketúm áhnām akṛnvan “they made V.

the beacon of the days.” Cf. also III.34.4 ketúm áhnām, X.85.19 áhnāṃ ketúr uṣásām, and VI.39.3 imáṃ ketúm adadhur nū́ cid áhnāṃ, this last with separation between the noun and its gen. as in our passage. In my interpr. of this pāda the vayúna- are the ritual patterns, the regularly repeated sequence of events in the ritual, including the kindling of the fire. The “beacon of the days” is the sun, which rises at that kindling.

(clarified in the next vs.), in contrast to the “beacon of the sacrifice” in 2d, which is Agni. Note that Agni, addressed as Vaiśvānara, is here distinct from the sun, which he finds. (See further ad vs. 6.). Finding the beacon of the days in the (ritual) patterns means recognizing and replicating the regular rising of the sun that coincides with the kindling of the ritual fire. As usual in Rigvedic discourse the correct performance of ritual governs the rhythms of the natural world.

To return to the question of the relationship between the two hemistichs, I suggest that the “great vratás” of Agni that no one has/does venture against are the ritual patterns, esp. the dawn kindling, which in turn control the repeated return of the “beacon of the days.”


## 06
This vs. continues, and clarifies, the theme of the 2nd hemistich of vs. 5.

Although Agni as Vaiśvānara is often identified with the sun and although several of the passages cited immediately above, ad 5d, identify Vaiśvānara with the “beacon of the days,” here Agni Vaiśvānara is separate from the sun (as indeed he was in 5cd), which is his eye (vaiśvānarásya … cákṣasā) and which is further characterized as “the beacon of the immortal one” (amṛ́tasya ketúnā), taking up the ketú- of 5d, which Agni found. The sun “measures out the backs of heaven” by crossing the sky on his daily passage.

In c the referent of tásya in the phrase tásya … mūrdháni “on his head / on the head of this one” is not specified and could either be the sun, as expressed by the instr. of ab, or Agni Vaiśvānara. It is surely the latter, however: mūrdháni echoes the first word of the hymn, mūrdhā́nam, which refers to Agni himself as the “head of heaven.” And the víśvā bhúvanāni “all creatures” who take their place on this head are a twist on Agni’s epithet vaiśvānará- ‘belonging to all men’, which dominates this hymn.

On the formation of visrúh-, which occurs only here and in V.44.3, see comm. ad V.44.3, where I connect it (as a number of others do) to √ru(d)h ‘grow’. In our passage this etymological connection is actualized in the figure ruruhuḥ … visrúhaḥ, and the vegetative image is further anchored by the simile vayā́iva “like twigs.” With Re (and Kellens, Noms. rac., 82-83), I think the ‘outgrowths’ are Agni’s flames, but unlike those two I would not translate visrúhaḥ as ‘flames’: it’s a metaphor.


## 07
In this vs. the subject of the cosmogonic ví √mā ‘measure out’ is Agni Vaiśvānara, not the sun, as in the immediately preceding vs., and the more usual identification of Agni Vaiśvānara with the sun seems to have reasserted itself. See VI.8.2.

In a sukrátuḥ reprises krátubhiḥ in 4c, and it might have been better to render the krátu- in the same way -- either as “by your resolutions” … “the very resolute one” or “by your intentions” … “he of good intention.”
