+++
title = "008"

+++
Agni Vaiśvānara This hymn, like the last, is dedicated to Agni Vaiśvānara and has a form of this epithet in every vs. but 5, always pāda-initial as in VI.7. However, the hymn is somewhat different from VI.7. In that hymn Agni Vaiśvānara was distinct from and dominated the sun (see esp. VI.7.5-6) until the last vs., while in this hymn the usual identification of Agni Vaiśvānara and the sun is in evidence. See esp. vs. 2. As noted in the publ. intro., the hymn is also heavy with initial v’s, esp. in the earlier parts of the hymn, which index the epithet. Note esp. the three hemistichs that begin with the preverb ví (2c, 3a, 3c), as well as 1ab … vṛ́ṣnaḥ … vocaṃ vidáthā …, 2ab … vyòmani, vratā́ni … vratapā́…, 3cd … avartayad, vaiśvānaró víśvam … vṛ́ṣṇyam.


## 01
On pṛ̥kṣá- see comm. ad II.34.3.


## 02
Here Agni Vaiśvānara is “being born in highest distant heaven” (jā́yamanaḥ paramé vyòmani), presumably in the form of the sun, in contrast to VI.7.5 with the same participle but a different location: jā́yamānaḥ pitrór upásthe “being born in the lap of your parents,” usually a kenning for the ritual kindling sticks, so that VI.7.5 refers to the kindling of the ritual fire. In that vs. Agni found the sun (“beacon of the days”), which was therefore distinct from him, and in the next vs. (VI.7.6) the backs of heaven were measured out by the sun as an organ -- the eye -- of Agni Vaiśvānara (vaiśvānarásya vímitāni cákṣasā, sā́nūni diváḥ). Only in the last vs. of that hymn, VI.7.7, did Agni Vaiśvānara himself measure out the cosmos and take on his usual solar aspect. The two pādas VI.7.7a (ví yó rájāṃsy ámimīta sukrátuḥ) and our VI.8.2c (vy àntarikṣam amimīta sukrátuḥ) are almost identical, but the former represents the resolution of the disjunction between Agni Vaiśvānara and the sun, while no such disjunction is found in our hymn.


## 03
The cosmogonic activities of Agni Vaiśvānara continue here, but I would argue that they are instances of the daily creation of the cosmos by the light of the sun. The propping apart of the two world halves refers to the visual separation of earth and sky at the horizon at first light, and the rolling out of the two skins is a similar image, of the full extent of earth and sky revealed to sight at that time.

It is not entirely clear why Agni Vaiśvānara is called an “unerring ally” (mitró ábhutaḥ; see the identical phrase in I.94.13 and similar I.77.3 mitró ná bhūd ádbhutasya rathī ́ ḥ). Agni is of course regularly identified as an ally (mitrá-) and is compared to Mitra because of his role as go-between between gods and men; in this particular case the sun’s role as the most visible of the gods and the heavenly being most clearly engaged with human life may have elicited this description. The covert presence of Mitra here may also play off the covert presence of Varuṇa in 2b, in the phrase vratā́ni … vratapā́arakṣata “as protector of vratas, he guarded the vratas: vratás are Varuṇa’s special province, although curiously Varuṇa is never called vratapā́- in the RV.

The interpr. of pāda b is disputed because of disagreement about the sense and formation of antarvā́vat (also found in I.40.7). Ge tr. the pāda as “er zerteilte die dazwischenliegende Finsternis durch das Licht” (almost identically also Oberlies Relig. I.191), presumably with the ‘between’ sense of antár nominalized with the complex suffix -vā́-vant-. Re denies that the formation has a complex (or duplicate) suffix but rather considers it an imitation of arvāvát ‘nearby’, despite the difference in accent, and renders the word (in his note) as “un domaine intérieur (= invisible).” His tr. of the pāda is “il a fait que les ténèbres (devinssent) par la lumière un domaine-cachée.” So, he takes antár in the meaning ‘within’, but the further morphological analysis is unclear. Old (ad I.40.7) also sees the ‘within’ sense of antár here, but with a more plausible interpr. of the suffixal material — with the whole meaning ‘inhaltsvoll’ (that is, ‘having [something] within’). He also considers it is entirely or roughly synonymous with antárvant-. (Both of these views are also found in AIG II.2.893, and the whole is laid out with admirable clarity by Schmidt [B+I 102]. Both AiG and Schmidt explain -vā́-vant- as pleonastic.) The second observation seems to me the most important clue: antárvant- is in fact only attested in the fem. antárvatī- (III.55.5, X.91.6) in the meaning ‘pregnant’. In both I.40.7 and our passage here the ‘pregnant’ sense is used metaphorically of non-females (kṣáya- ‘dwelling place’ in the former, támas- ‘darkness’ in the latter). (So also Schmidt; AiG doesn’t go quite this far.) One could speculate that the pleonastic suffix is used because a non-fem. antárvant- would seem distinctly odd, and the addition of a second suffix attenuated this oddness. In our case, the antarvā́vat can directly modify neut. támaḥ; in I.40.7, since kṣáya- is masc., the connection is less direct. See comm. ad loc. In our passage this interpr. produces a striking image, of the darkness of night swelling with light as day breaks.


## 04
I have no idea what the buffaloes (mahiṣā́ḥ) are doing here or why they do what they do in the lap of the waters. Ge (n. 4a) suggests that the buffaloes are the gods or the old singers, but this does not actually explain anything (including why they would be called buffaloes). Ge notes the very similar passage X.45.3 tṛtī́ye tvā rájasi tasthivā́ṃsam, apā́ m upásthe mahiṣā́ avardhan “The buffalos strengthened you, who were standing in the third realm, in the lap of the waters.” That passage occurs in a hymn concerned with Agni’s triple birth, one of which is in the waters, but the identity of the buffaloes remains unclear. In X.8.1 it is Agni himself who as buffalo grows strong in the same place: apā́ m upásthe mahiṣó vavardha “the buffalo has grown strong in the lap of the waters.” The second pāda shows the connection between Agni Vaiśvānara and royal power and the second hemistich the connection between that thematic complex and Vivasvant, as Proferes convincingly argues (Sovereignty, pp. 28-29 and passim).

Note the phonological intertwining of #víśo … / … vivásvato # vaiśvānaró …


## 05
In the first hemistich the distribution of the accusatives is at issue: vidathyàm … rayíṃ yaśásam … návyasīm. The first, vidathyàm, must be either masc. or neut.; yaśásam is ambiguous between masc. and fem. (though far more often masc. than fem.); návyasīm is clearly fem. The sole noun, rayím, is generally held to be normally masc., but occasionally fem. Although I think this statement is true, I also think that the number of supposedly fem. occurrences can be considerably reduced, to the point that apparently fem. examples should be viewed as aberrancies, not as normal if rare usages. In this particular case Old (ZDMG 55.296 [=KlSch 755], not restated in Noten) and Ge decide that rayím must be fem. here, as evidenced by návyasīm, so that another noun must be supplied for vidathyàm to modify. Old supplies agním and takes that phrase as an obj. to the part. gṛṇádbhyaḥ (without tr.), while Ge supplies vīrám (which does indeed occur with vidathyàm in I.91.20 and VII.36.8) as an obj.

parallel to rayím: “… einen in Weisheit tüchtigen (Mann) … und Ansehen bringenden neuen Reichtum.” Re allows everything to modify rayím: “une richesse (émanant) des participations-rituelles, (richesse) honorable, plus nouvelle,” with his n. on the gender mixture seemingly meant to cast obscurity rather than illumination.

In my opinion, rayím is masc. here, modified by vidathyàm and yaśásam (so also Thieme, Unters. 48, who simply elides návyasīm), and návyasīm belong to a separate NP, for which I supply matí- ‘thought’, which appears in the phrase matír návyasī in the first vs. of the hymn, 1c. Note that vs. 1 also contains a form of vidátha- ‘ceremony, rite of distribution’, to which our vidathyà- must belong (pace Ge, who seems to derive it from √vid ‘know’). In vs. 1 the poet proclaims the vidáthā of Agni and announces that a “newer thought” is being prepared for him. In this vs. he asks Agni to keep providing both wealth for the vidátha- and a “newer (thought).” Although Agni does not himself compose the poem, it is a commonplace of RVic discourse that the gods provide the inspiration for the poets’ compositions.

In the 2nd hemistich Ge and Re take téjasā with the simile (“mit dem Schärfe (der Axt)” and “avec l’aigu (de la hache)” respectively), while I attribute the sharpness only to Agni in the frame. Certainly their interpr. fits the word order well (vanínaṃ ná téjasā), though it doesn’t necessarily require téjasā to be part of the simile. On the other hand, it does require pavyéva at the beginning of the hemistich to be dissociated from the later simile or at least considerably sidelined. In the end, I would go for a compromise position, that téjasā should be read with both simile and frame: “as if with a metal wheel rim, hew down the curser with your sharpness like a tree with the sharpness (of an axe vel sim.).” I have not separately rendered nīcā́in the phrase nīcā́ní vṛśca, which seems simply to reinforce the ní.


## 06
Both Ge and Re take ajáram with suvī́ryam (e.g., “die unbeugsame Herrschaft, das nicht verwelkende Heldentum”), while I take it with kṣátram. The Ge/Re interpr. is perfectly possible, and there are no grammatical or syntactic features to allow a clear decision. My interpr. is based on the rhetorical arg. that the two privative adjectives (ánāmi and ajáram) belong together, but I can also see that rhetoric might also favor parallel phrases: PRIV-ADJ. X, PRIV-ADJ. Y. My other, quite faint, consideration was that the adj. ajára- was used of the king (=Agni) in the previous vs. (rājan … ajara) and would transfer easily from the king to his dominion (kṣatrá-).


## 07
On Ge’s proposed emendation of iṣṭe to iṣṭébhiḥ see comm. ad I.143.8, which has the same form in a lexically and rhetorically similar passage (containing, inter alia, pāhi and ádabdhebhiḥ). Old (ZDMG 55.296 = KlSch. 755) is adamantly opposed to Ge’s suggestion, and there seems no good reason to emend the passage and no obvious trigger for such a corruption. It is difficult not to interpr. the -iṣ-aor. injunc. prá … tārīḥ as an impv., given its overt coordination with rákṣā in pāda c.
