+++
title = "009"

+++
Agni Vaiśvānara On the structure of this complex hymn and for a verse-by-verse synopsis, see publ. intro. It has been much translated and discussed -- in addition to the usual treatments, see, e.g., Thieme, Gedichte; Renou, Hymnes spéculatifs; Wendy Doniger, Rig Veda. Oldenberg (ZDMG 55.296-97) gives a detailed (for him) account of the contents and pronounces it an ākhyāna, an opinion repeated in the Noten, though he doesn’t spell out who the speakers might be verse by verse. Gonda (Vedic Literature, 99) calls it “a profound glorification of Agni as the great immortal conceived as the inner light and placed among the mortals to guide them in the mysteries and intricacies of the ritual.” As discussed in the publ. intro., the hymn concerns the development of the poet’s craft and resembles IV.5, in which the poet also receives his poetic inspiration from Agni Vaiśvānara. I do not see the poetic contest (brahmodya) that others (starting with Geldner [Ved. Stud. II.181-82], fld by Re, Doniger, George Thompson [“Brahmodya”]) take as the mise en scène of the hymn.

See Old’s explicit rejection of the brahmodya interpr. (ZDMG 55.297), with which I concur. The brahmodya interpr. primarily rests on a brief phrase in vs. 2, on which see below.


## 01
The first hemistich has two nom./acc. dual expressions (áhaś ca kṛṣṇáṃ áhar árjunaṃ ca and rájasī) and a dual verb ví vartete. The question is which of the two dual expressions is the subject of this verb, or is the subject both or neither? The standard interpr. (Old, Ge, Re, Doniger) is that both expressions serve as subject and that rájasī, usually an expression referring to space, here qualifies the two day(- halves), light and dark. However, flg. Thieme, I instead take rájasī as an accusative expressing extent of space, preferring to keep the temporal and spatial concepts separate. I do have to admit that an image of rolling out the dual spaces finds support in the preceding hymn, VI.8.3c ví cármaṇīva dhiṣáṇe avartayat “He rolled out the two Holy Places [=world-halves] like skins,” and even more so in VII.80.1 vivartáyantīm rájasī sámante “(Dawn,) unrolling the two adjoining realms.” The object of the transitive ví vartáya- in those passages should be the subject of the intrans. simplex verb. Nonetheless, see nearby VI.7.7 ví yó rájāṃsi ámimīta “who measured out the dusky realms,” with rájas- as object, and the frequent use of ví to refer to movement through space. As I see it, the image here is of the day and night proceeding through the cosmos, spreading first light and then darkness. Since ví can also be used for alternating movement, that notion is also probably present: “The black day and the silvery day roll out alternately through the two dusky realms,” referring to the regular alternation of night and day.

Re points out two minor anomalies in word placement: ca in pāda a, ná in pāda c. The first is not immediately second in its constituent (expect *áhaś cā́rjunam, like the first constituent áhāś ca kṛṣṇám, not áhar árjunaṃ ca). Klein (DGRV I.133) suggests that the construction is a conflation of the expected sequence (given as starred just above) and one with only an adjective in the second constituent (kṛṣṇáṃ cā́har árjunaṃ ca, as he constructs it). This is possible but seems somewhat overcomplex. It’s worth noting that a properly placed ca would be damaging to the meter, whether it was read undistracted (cā́rjunam), the more common option for ca + V, or distracted (ca árjunam). I had thought that another argument for the unusual placement might be that ca + V is generally avoided, but a quick glance at Lubotsky turns up about 70 instances of ca + V (out of 1094 total instances of ca). I doubt that this represents a statistically significant underrepresentation, although I ran no tests.

As for ná, it ordinarily is also positioned after the first element in the simile, but it is highly unlikely (that is, quite impossible) that Agni is being compared to a king being born, with the simile comprising jā́yamāno ná rā́jā, but rather Agni, even as he is being kindled, is compared to the victorious (adult) king, with the simile just ná rā́jā. Such “wrong” positioning is not unprecedented — other examples have been noted in the comm. — and, as Re points out, it is “masked to the eyes” by jā́yamānaḥ, which matches rā́jā in number, gender, and case.

## 01-02
Note the echo of the last word of vs. 1, támāṃsi, in the last word of the 1st hemistich of b, ’tamānāḥ. The latter form is the pres. part. to the 1st class pres. of √at ‘wander’, with apharesis of the initial vowel after samaré. This abhinihita sandhi, relatively rare in the RV, is metrically guaranteed, and it may have been applied in order to bring the participle more into phonological line with támāṃsi.


## 02
The 1st person speaker, the poet in training, takes over here, with a statement of his ignorance about his own metier. He expresses this ignorance in the metaphor of weaving, a well-known trope for poetic composition that reaches back into IndoEuropean antiquity.

The main support for the brahmodya interpr. is the loc. samaré, which is almost universally construed with (á)tamānāḥ in the sense “entering the contest” (vel sim.: Ge: “wenn sie in den Wettstreit eintreten,” Re: “quand ils marchent dans l’arène”). But this bends the sense of both words. The other occurrence of the medial participle átamāna- (II.38.3) does not signal the type of purposeful motion implied by those translations; there are no other middle forms in the RV, only a single active (I.30.4), whose goal-oriented motion can be accounted for by both the voice and the presence of a preverb. Assuming that √at is continued by younger √aṭ (see EWA, s.v. AT), the usual gloss of the root, ‘wander’, is probably accurate. As for samará-, it is obviously formed of the same elements (sám √ṛ lit. ‘come/move together’) as samáraṇa-, which does usually mean ‘collision, conflict’ (cf. also the hapax denom. samaryáti), and it has a derivative samaryá- that generally refers to the same. But samará- itself is found only twice elsewhere, both times in the meaning ‘gathering, confluence’ with a genitive expressing goods or spoils (VI.47.6 samaré vásūnām, X.139.3 samaré dhánānām), a benign assemblage rather than a hostile clashing together. Thus, “entering the contest” is at best a weakly supported interpr. of samaré ’tamānāḥ; we are free to interpret that phrase differently and, with the supposed rival poet-competitors removed from the passage, to concentrate on the real competition -- that between the poet and his father, as set out in the second hemistich of this vs. However, let us first consider the rest of the first half-verse. The poet expresses his ignorance of three things: tántum … ótum … yáṃ váyanti. Most tr. try to make tántum and ótum grammatically parallel, either by making them both nouns (e.g., Re “Je ne connais point la lisse ni la trame …”) or both infinitives (e.g., Thieme “Nicht verstehe ich [die Fäden des Aufzugs] zu spannen, nicht [die Fäden des Einschlags] zu weben.”). This is understandable, since the two terms are identically formed, with full-grade accented root and -tu- suffix. However, this morphological identity conceals a difference in usage. tántu- behaves like a straight noun: it has nominative forms; it occurs in the plural; it has adjectives modifying it (e.g., IX.83.2 śócantaḥ … tántavaḥ, as well as tatá- ‘stretched’ several times) and genitives dependent on it (e.g., IX.73.9 ṛtásya tántuḥ). By contrast, outside of this hymn ótu- is found only in the clear dative infinitives ótave (X.130.2) and ótavaí (I.164.5, where in fact acc. pl. tántūn is construed with it). I therefore think that tántum and ótum in this passage are non-parallel, just as the third source of ignorance, expressed in a rel.

cl., is not parallel to either of the others. In my view, having three non-parallel objects to the verb ví jānāmi makes the bewilderment stronger: it’s not just three different things the poet doesn’t understand, but three categories of things -- which categories of things are expressed by different grammatical categories: a noun, an infinitive, a relative clause (without antecedent). “I do not understand the thread (noun), nor (how) “to weave” (infinitive), nor “what they weave” (rel. cl.). Although

-tum infinitives are quite rare in the RV (5 stems, acdg. to Macdonell VG §586b, Re
GLV §371), I suggest that ótum was formed and used here, rather than the already existing dat. inf., to provide this grammatical contrast with apparently identical tántum.

Since, contra the standard tr., I do not believe that the subject of the verb váyanti refers to rival poets, I must propose a different subject. Here the alternative possibilities for átamāna- and samará-, as discussed above, provide the clues, along with a rudimentary understanding (which is all I have) of the weaving process. With the warp threads (tántu-) stretched lengthwise on the loom, “wandering” is a pleasingly apt description of the way the weft threads go alternately under and over the warp threads proceeding horizontally, and this mingling of warp and weft could easily be characterized as “a meeting/gathering.” My only uncertainty is the precise identity of the subjects who do the weaving (váyanti). Are they the weft threads themselves as they wander over and under? Are they the human weavers, or their fingers, manipulating the weft threads? Or some technological substitute like shuttles.

As MLW reminds me, that Vedic India knew such technology is clear from X.130, a cosmogonic hymn whose operative metaphor is weaving and that contains a word plausibly taken to be ‘shuttle’ (tásara- in vs. 2).

Of course, since the weaving in this verse is metaphorical for poetic composition, ultimately the subjects of váyanti must underlyingly be poets — those who do know how and what to “weave.” But my point here is that the imagery of weaving is carried further than the standard brahmodya interpretation allows: the wandering and the coming together refer to the weaving process, not to a putative poetic competition. Moreover, with the contest interpr. banished, the underlying poets need not be guys physically present in the next room, as it were, polishing their verses; they can be any poets in the tradition. Which brings us to the father.

The second hemistich contains two sets of polarized terms: putrá- / pitár- ‘son’ / ‘father’ and pará- / ávara- ‘above’ / ‘below’. (That pará- and ávara- make up a polarized pair is clear from numerous passages in which they are contrasted [e.g., I.164.17, X.88.17].) The case assignment in the text, nominative for the first of each pair, instrumental for the second, makes it clear that it is the son who is above, the father below, although this is the counterintuitive pairing. As noted in the publ. intro., despite his professed ignorance of poetic craft, the young poet feels that he must not only equal but surpass his father, to further the poetic lineage. That pará- can mean not only ‘higher’ but also ‘further’, while ávara- means both ‘below’ and ‘nearer’, allows the sense of “furthering” the line also to be read in the passage. The father is close by, both to the poet and the present moment, but the poet himself must go farther, in the future, beyond the model of his father, to speak “what is to be said” (váktvāni); it is perhaps ironic that the only other occurrence of váktva- in the RV outside this hymn is as a genitive pl. dependent on ‘father’: III.26.9 pitáraṃ váktvānām “the father of what is to be said,” referring to Agni. It is a nice touch in our vs. that because ‘father’ is in the instr., it better fits the phonological template of ‘son’ than the direct cases would: putrá … pitrā́.


## 03
This vs. is responsive to vs. 2, repeating pāda a almost verbatim, while transposing it into the 3rd ps. from the 1st and into the positive from the negative. The 2nd pāda abbreviates the 2nd hemistich of vs. 2, pulling out the all-important object and verb (váktvāni … vadāti) that had been scattered across two pādas in vs. 2. The 2nd hemistich introduces new material — identifying the person who does know what the poet says he doesn’t yet — while replacing the pará- / ávara- pair with the almost identical pára- / aváḥ ‘below’ [adv.].

The first half-verse with its near identical repetition is straightforward, but, with its repetition of “just he … he … he” (sá íd … sá … sá) as the subj. of ‘knows’ and ‘will speak’, it promises both a resolution to the poet’s anxiety of ignorance in 2ab and an answer to the question “whose son?” (kásya putráḥ) in 2cd.

But though the identity of the “he” of 3ab is surely revealed by the relative cl.

in the 2nd hemistich, beginning “who …” (yáḥ, 3c), the referent is far from clear.

There are both an apparent and apparently obvious answer and, in my opinion anyway, a covert but enlightening answer that depends on tricky manipulation of the words as given -- which is, after all, the point of the hymn, to learn the ins and outs of verbal weaving. The standard tr. take Agni as the subject of the whole vs.; he is the one who know the thread and the weaving and can say the things to be said.

There is a good, obvious piece of evidence that this interpr. is correct: the subject of the relative clause in c appears to be identified as amṛ́tasya gopā́ḥ “the herdsman of the immortal.” This epithet was used of Agni only two hymns previously (VI.7.7); it seems to clinch the identification. But note what precedes it: yá īṃ cíketat “who will perceive him/it.” Ge (fld. by Doniger) takes īm as referring to the thread, while Re simply ignores it. But Thieme takes amṛ́tasya gopā́ḥ as the content of the act of perception, as a quotation: “der ihn (Gott Feuer) erkannt: ‘[Er ist] der Hüter des Lebens,’” with īm the obj. of cíketat anticipating the revelation of Agni’s role and power in the quote. I find Thieme’s interpr. very persuasive. The one who knows all this is not Agni, but the poet who rightly perceives Agni, who possesses the esoteric knowledge acquired by contemplating the ritual fire and receiving its vision.

Thieme then takes pāda d as referring to the poet-subject of c, but I think we can go one better: d is both a description of the poet, as Thieme takes it, and a continuation of the right perception of Agni that the poet received, the second part of the quoted revelation “he is the herdman of the immortal.” In this latter interpr., Agni “moves about below” (aváś cáran) as the ritual fire of mortals, but “sees above the other one” (paró anyéna páśyan), because he (in the form of smoke) goes to heaven bringing the oblations to the gods. By my rules of placement for anyá- (1997, Fs.

Beekes), it should be definite here (“the other,” not “another,” as in most interpr.).

Here “the other” is quite possibly the sun, which is Agni’s allo-form but also presumably somewhat lower in heaven than the smoke carrying the oblations. In the alternative application of this pāda, to the poet, I differ in some crucial ways from Thieme (whose interpr. I will not present further here). The poet also “moves about below” not only as a mortal on the earth, but also as a son, who in one sense is “below” his father in the lineage. But he “sees above the other,” who is the father whose skills he is trying to best. Though in this pāda both aváḥ and pára- refer to the son, whereas in 2cd pára- referred to the son and ávara- to the father, here the ultimate superiority of the son is triumphantly announced, whereas in 2cd this outcome was in question. The cleverness and intricacy of this 2nd hemistich, esp.

immediately following the near verbatim repetition found in the first, is a clear demonstration that the young poet has come into his skills and his poetic heritage.


## 04
As argued in the publ. intro., this vs. is the omphalos of a well-structured omphalos hymn, and it contains the “message” of the hymn: the revelatory vision of Agni immediately before the eyes of the poet. This immediacy is conveyed by the near-deictic pronoun that begins the first three pādas — ayám (a), idám (b), ayám (c) — and also ends the first pāda (imám). The immediacy is also conveyed by the abrupt command “look at him” (páśyatemám) at the end of the 1st pāda; since the impv. is in the 2nd plural, it cannot be addressed to the poet alone. Instead I suggest that it is the poet speaking, urging his priestly colleagues to behold the revelation that has just come to him. As noted also in the publ. intro., the name Agni does not occur in this verse. In fact, in the whole hymn agní- is found only in the first and last vss.

(1d and 7b), another reinforcement of the omphalos structure. But every phrase in this vs. is an unmistakable description of Agni, and each could be matched by many similar phrases in Agni hymns. Unlike many omphalos vss., this one is not enigmatic and riddling (save for the omission of the name), but straightforward and obvious, one might say blazingly transparent. In this way it captures the poet’s sudden burst of enlightenment, in which he truly sees for the first time what is (and has always been) in front of him. As such it can be characterized as an epiphany in the technical sense: although the ritual fire has been there all along, it is only now that the poet sees that the fire is really the god. This divine revelation is underscored by the two occurrences of “immortal” (jyótir amṛ́tam b, ámartyaḥ d), taking up the poet’s initial true perception in 3c, where he saw that Agni was “the herdsman of the immortal” (amṛ́tasya gopā́ḥ).

dhruvá in dhruvá ā́is ambiguous. The Pp. takes it as nom. dhruváḥ, but modern interpr. differ: Old (ZDMG 55.297 and Noten, with Gr [transl.], Hillebrandt, Pischel) and Thieme opt rather for the loc. dhruvé, while Gr (Wö), Ge, and Re follow the Pp. — as do I: dhruvám modifying Agni as light (jyótiḥ) in the next vs. (5a) seems decisive. The constructions are quite parallel: the “steadfast light” of 5a was also “set down” (níhitam), just as “steadfast (Agni)” was “set down” (níṣattaḥ) in 4c.

A loc. interpr. is not out of the question, however.

## 05-07
The last three vss. of this hymn are dominated by play on the syllable ví, which is also evident, though recessive, in the first part of the hymn. Starting with 5c every hemistich begins with ví: 5c víśve, 6a ví, 6c ví, 7a víśve; note also ví in the middle of 5d and 6a and beginning 6b. This sequence culminates in 7c vaiśvānaraḥ, whose first syllable is phonologically a vṛddhi form of vi and whose first member vaiśva- is morphologically a vṛddhi derivative of víśva-. That the two forms of víśve in 5c and 7a are in the syntagm víśve devā́ḥ “all the gods” and the 2nd member of vaiśvānará- is contrastively -nara- ‘man’ makes the pattern all the more pleasing.

And of course it is Agni Vaiśvānara who is the source of the poet’s revelation and therefore the focus of the hymn. The stationing of vaiśvānaráḥ at the beginning of the last hemistich of the hymn also forms a ring with the same form at the beginning of the second hemistich of the 1st vs. and reinforces the omphalos structure.

## 05-06
The transference of the properties and powers of Agni to our poet is explicit in these two vss. In 5a Agni is light set down or deposited (jyótir níhitam); in 5b he is “swiftest mind” (máno jáviṣṭham). In 6b the poet comments on “this light that has been deposited in (my) heart” (idáṃ jyótir hṛ́daya ā́hitaṃ yát; note the neardeictic idám again), and in 6c “my mind goes widely” (ví me mánaś carati).

The two vss. are also contrastive. In 5 all the gods sharing the same mind and the same perception (sámanasaḥ sáketāḥ) converge on Agni as the single focus of their intention or resolve (ékaṃ krátum abhí ví yanti sādhú), whereas in 6 the poet vividly describes the dis-integration of his senses, emphasized by the repetition of ví ‘widely, apart). But rather than expressing a worrisome loss of physical and mental control, the vs. seems rather to dramatize the exciting expansion of his sensory horizons, the limitless potentials for thought and speech that he now experiences. His ears flying apart (ví me kárṇā patayataḥ), his mind moving widely (ví me mánaḥ carati) are anticipated by Agni’s mind “swiftest among those flying” (jáviṣṭham patáyatsu), and the insistent ví in this vs. is given a positive spin by the pattern of vi-s leading to vaiśvānará-, as discussed above. In the omphalos structure this vs. is twinned with vs. 2, where the poet worried about his lack of knowledge and skill; here his mind and body can literally not contain the possibilities. One index to the change in his mental attitude may be shown by the difference in mood between the tentative subjunctive vadāti in 2d and the purposeful future vakṣyāmi in 6d. Both are in questions, but the first wonders “whose son will (be able) to speak …?” while the latter seems only to question which of the many possibilities he should begin with: “what shall I say?” There are only two finite forms of the future to √vac in the RV (plus one participial form), so the choice of this form must be marked here. The other is pravakṣyā́maḥ in I.162.1, announcing the recital of the heroic deeds (vīryā̀ṇi) of the horse to be sacrificed and therefore functioning exactly like the more common, likewise annunciatory prá vocam (e.g., in the famous opening of the Indra-Vṛtra hymn I.32.1 índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi prá vocam). The correspondent of this future is found rather often in Old Avestan, where 1st sg. (fra) vaxšiiā regularly performs the same function of proclamation, as in Y 30.1, 45.1 — perhaps indicating a common IIr. employment of this future as an introducer of formal praise. The use of this form here suggests that our speaker is foreseeing his role as official encomiast and poet of record, not simply casting about for something to say. It is possible that svid (kíṃ svid vakṣyāmi) contributes to this sense, but I don’t have a good sense of the function of this particle in the RV.


## 07
The final vs. of the hymn forms the outer frame of the omphalos structure with vs. 1. We have already noted the responsion of hemistich-initial vaiśvānaráḥ in 1c and 7c and the only two occurrences of the stem agní- in 1d and 7b. Another important verbal repetition is támas-, the last word of vs. 1, found in 7b in the phrase támasi tasthivā́ṃsam “(Agni,) standing in darkness.” The sentence in which this is found seems an odd way to end a hymn: “all the gods, in fear (bhiyānā́ḥ), offered homage (anamasyan) to you, while you were standing in darkness.” Why are the gods afraid and what time period does the augmented imperfect refer to? And why is this somewhat downbeat statement the real end of the hymn (the last hemistich being a generic request for aid)? I don’t have certain answers to these questions, but I think the omphalos structure gives us some guidance. This final vs. seems not simply to circle round to the 1st vs., but in fact to take us to a time (right) before the events depicted in the first vs. In vs. 1 Agni overcame the darkness with his light (1d); here he is still in darkness, before he has become equipped with light, before he has been kindled, in fact. The gods are afraid because they fear he won’t light up -- and, reading between the lines, he will only light up if the human ritualists kindle him.

Even the gods are dependent on our dawn sacrifice, and, reading further between those lines, our newly minted poet will have a crucial role in making that sacrifice succeed.

The last hemistich has a curious etymological figure, repeated for emphasis: avatūtáye (i.e., avatu ūtáye) “let him help for help.”
