+++
title = "010"

+++
Agni

## 01
In the lexeme puró √dhā, puráḥ serves as a pseudo-preverb; the phrase shows extreme distraction (pseudo-tmesis) here, with puráḥ initial in the 1st hemistich and dadhidhvam final in that hemistich. The phrase is then revitalized with puráḥ opening pāda c, thus directly adjacent to its verb though across a hemistich boundary. That the opening words of pāda c, purá ukthébhiḥ belong to the clause in the first hemistich is further shown by the abrupt clause boundary and change of subject in the middle of c, clearly signalled by a typical clause-initial sequence of PRN + Wackernagel-position particles, sá hí naḥ.

Pāda b has two extra syllables. The meter could be easily fixed by deleting agním with no ill effects to sense or metrical structure. This is an old idea (see Old’s reff., ZDMG 55.298), but though harmless, it may be better to accept the text as given (see Old, Noten ad loc.).

On suvṛktí- as a secondary bahuvrīhi, meaning ‘possessing/receiving (hymns) that possess a good twist’, see comm. ad II.4.1. This interpr. as a masc. adj. is imposed by the otherwise unbroken string of acc. sg. masculines: mandráṃ divyáṃ suvṛktím … agním. In the comm. ad II.4.1 I suggest that it can also have the primary bahuvrīhi meaning ‘having a good twist’, referring to Agni’s curls of smoke and flame. This would also be possible as an alternative or secondary reading here.

I take adhvaré as part of the loc. absol. prayatí yajñé, contra Ge. (Re seems to ignore the second loc.) Nothing much rides on either choice.


## 02
As was discussed in the publ. intro., this hymn traffics in disappointed expectations and truncated syntax, and this vs. displays both in extreme form. The vs. begins tám u “him/it [acc. sg.] PARTICLE.” Given that the dedicand of the hymn is Agni and vs. 1 contained a long acc. phrase referring to Agni (though that vs. ended with Agni as nom. subj.), we might expect that tám = Agni, and our expectations would be supported by a little formula found in various places in the RV (see Klein, Particle u, 67-68): VIII.95.6 tám u ṣṭavāma yáḥ “let us praise him who …” VIII.96.6 tám u ṣṭuhi yáḥ “praise him who …” V.42.1 tám u ṣṭuhi yáḥ (ditto) I.173.5 tám u ṣṭuhi ... yáḥ (ditto) as well as variations on it. In our vs., immediately following u there is a long interruption, consisting mostly of vocatives addressed to Agni (dyumaḥ purvaṇīka hotar, ágne), leaving the tám in syntactic suspension. But when we finally reach the end of the hemistich, we encounter a nominative participle idhānáḥ ‘being kindled’, which can only refer to Agni. This leaves the initial tám doubly unmoored: it can’t refer to Agni, as we’d thought, and it can’t be construed with idhānáḥ, which is intransitive and doesn’t take accusatives.

The resolution of one of these problems comes at the beginning of the second hemistich, which opens with the acc. stómam, which must be the referent of tám.

This is a pleasing twist on the formula just noted: the root √stu is preserved, but as a coreferential nominal, not as the verb governing the tám. There is also an element of “vertical mantra,” since the elements of the NP táṃ stómam are positioned “vertically” in identical metrical slots.

There is no resolution of the other problem, however: what governs this acc. phrase. stómam is immediately followed by the rel. prn. yám introducing a dependent clause (and reminding us of the yáḥ in the quoted formula). There is no overt governing verb in the main clause; all we know is that it should have Agni as subject, given the nom. part. idhānáḥ. Ge, flg. Sāy. and fld. by Re (in his tr., which reflects neither of his suggestions in the n.), supplies the impv. “hear.” This is of course nothing wrong with the sense of this (“[hear] this praise which …”), but there is also nothing in context to support it. I have supplied “take to yourself,” assuming a medial form of √dhā. There are two pieces of supporting evidence for this. It could be generated (somewhat trickily) from dadhidhvam, the impv. in the previous verse.

And — rather stronger evidence — a similar expression is found overtly in vs. 6: “you [=Agni] have taken to yourself the well-twisted (hymn)” (dadhiṣe suvṛktím), with a medial form of √dhā with Agni as subject and a praise as object. Old’s “nimm … an” (both ZDMG 55.299 and Noten) coincides with my interpr., but he does not, as far as I can see, provide a motivation for it.

What to do with the rest of the first hemistich, namely agníbhir mánuṣaḥ, is another problem. With Ge I take mánuṣaḥ as dependent on hotar, despite the distance between them and the fact that mánuṣaḥ is accented in a voc. phrase (easily accounted for by the distance). The phrase mánuṣo hótar- is common in the RV (e.g., I.180.9, II.18.2, IV.6.11, V.5.7). The instr. agníbhiḥ must be construed with the part.

idhānáḥ, as witnessed by the identical expression in the next two hymns (VI.11.6b, 12.6b), but whether it is an instr. of accompaniment as I take it (“along with the [other] fires”), as apparently also Ge, or a true instrument (e.g., Re “allumé par les feux…”) isn’t certain — though I’m not sure what Re’s “being kindled by the fires” would mean.

The relative cl. of pāda c is in no better shape than the main clause of ab. It too lacks a verb. Though there is a finite verb in pāda d, pavante, it not only lacks an accent and therefore can’t be part of the rel. cl., but it is also intrans. and cannot take yám as object. Moreover, both asmai and mamáteva present difficulties of their own.

Let us begin with asmai. It surely refers to the recipient of the praise, which just as surely must be Agni. But Agni is addressed in the extensive vocative phrase in ab, and so he must be present both as 2nd ps. addressee and 3rd ps. recipient in the same sentence. Switch of person even within a syntactic construction is of course not unusual. I have no particular answer to this example of it beyond suggesting that 1) the poet may have lost a bit of track of his referents in this syntactically truncated construction, and 2) asmai may also be serving as a near deictic, pointing to “this (Agni) here.” It is barely possible, but I think highly unlikely, that asmai refers to another ritual participant, despite Ludwig’s interpr. (see Ge n. 2c) “für diesen Opferer.” mamáteva is presumably to be analyzed, with the Pp., as mamátā iva; the resulting mamátā is a hapax. It is generally taken as a PN (“like Mamatā”), an interpr.

whose strongest support is the vṛddhi deriv. māmateyá-, usually a metronymic of Dīrghatamas (I.147.3, 152.6, 158.6, particularly clear in the last passage), which presupposes an underlying PN of this shape. Both the -eyá- suffix of māmateyá- and the name Mamatā itself suggest that the person may be female. However, there is some direct evidence that a masc. *mamáta- is found in the Bharadvāja lineage. Cf. VI.50.15


> evā́ nápāto máma tásya dhībhír / bharádvājā abhí arcanti arkaíḥ
> “In just this way the Bharadvājas, the descendants of me, this Mamata, chant with their insightful thoughts, with their chants,”

where máma tásya is probably a play on the PN. For disc. see Old, ZDMG 42.211-12 = KlSch 580-81, though I do not think the text needs emending. However, our mamátā is also most probably a pun, on a -tāabstract built to the gen. sg. of the 1st ps. pronoun; such a stem is attested Epic+ in the sense ‘Selbstsucht, Eigennutz’. In this reading it could be an instr. sg. of the -tā- stem, ‘with/in my me-ness,’ in addition to being a nom. ‘like Mamatā’. On these questions see now Mayr, PN 2.1.393. Old (ZDMG 55.298-99) explored the possibility of taking mamátā (or -ta) as the missing verb of the rel. cl., as did I, but both of us came up short.

It is therefore likely that another verb has to be supplied. Contextually, ‘sing, speak, chant’ vel sim., is likely, and both Ge and Re go in that direction, as do I.

Specifically I supply a form of √ṛc ‘chant’, which takes śūṣám as obj. on a number of occasions (I.9.10, X.96.2, 133.1); see also VI.50.15 cited just above with the locution abhí arcanti arkaíḥ. All three of us assume that the verb is 1st sg, although there is less support for that assumption, since there are no other 1st persons, sg. or pl., in the hymn. The pun “in my me-ness” that I see in mamáteva would provide some support for my “I,” but neither Ge nor Re so interprets mamáteva.


## 03
This vs. also appears to be deliberately misleading, though less so than vs. 2.

It begins pīpā́ya sá “he becomes swollen.” Although √pī ‘swell’ is not a particularly Agnaic verb, it still could be applicable to the ritual fire, and the audience might expect an unidentified subject to be the deity of the hymn. But the second pāda, with dat. agnáye and nom. vípraḥ, contravenes our expectations: it is the poet who becomes swollen, as a result of his successful service to Agni.

I would emend the tr. of pāda a: śrávasā should be rendered ‘with fame’, not ‘with praise’.


## 05
The usual truncation of instr. pl. ūtíbhiḥ (appropriate to final position in Jagatī and in dimeter meters) to sg. ūtī́in final position of a Triṣṭubh pāda. Cf., e.g., nṛ́tamābhir ūtī́# in VI.19.10 versus, e.g., V.40.3 (etc.) citrā́bhir ūtíbhiḥ#. Our own hymn contains an ex. of the full instr. pl. phrase in 3c #citrā́bhiḥ … ūtíbhiḥ …#. I consider such truncations to be synchronically generated, providing no evidence for any deep historical practice.

The bahuvrīhi puruvā́ja- is a hapax and may be a play on the poetic lineage bharádvāja-, which name appears in 6c.


## 06
Another slightly off expression: with monotonous regularity throughout the RV Agni is described as ‘sitting’ or ‘sitting down” or “made to sit (down)’. Although ‘sit’ in these locutions is always expressed by the root √sad, it still seems odd to characterize the human ritualist as ‘sitting’ (āsānáḥ, using the regularized participle to √ās, not āsīná-), in a context where we might expect the referent to be Agni.

The expression dadhiṣe suvṛktím “repairs” both vs. 1 and vs. 2. In 1a we had the adj. suvṛktím, which had to be a masc. referring to Agni and therefore a secondary bahuvrīhi. Here suvṛktí- has its usual meaning of ‘well-twisted (hymn)’ and is presumably fem. As for dadhiṣe, recall that I suggest supplying a medial form of √dhā to govern stómam in 2. Here we have the full VP.


## 07
The accent on inuhí can easily be explained as contrastive to the immediately following verb vardháya.
