+++
title = "011"

+++
Agni


## 01
Although the vs. seems superficially straightforward, it presents a number of small difficulties. We might start with the meter of pāda c: in order to reach 11 syllables, something has to be distracted. HvN suggest nā́satiyā, but this produces a bad cadence: - ⏑ ⏑ ×. Oldenberg (ZDMG 55.300 and Noten) instead suggests distracting the initial preverb ā́, which produces an even worse cadence (-ṇā nā́satyā

- - - ×). And the third possibility, náasatyā, produces a third type of bad cadence
(⏑⏑ - ×). Only if we could read the first vowel of nā́satyā as distracted - ⏑ can we fix the cadence, but there is no real license for this.

The first morphological problem is bā́dhaḥ in pāda b. Gr takes it as the acc. pl.

of a root noun ‘Treiber, Förderer’, but it is hard to fit this into the passage semantically. Schindler (Rt. nouns) finds the passage unclear and does not commit to a root noun interpr., much less a case form. Scar (346-47) takes it as a root noun, but in the abl. sg. (“aus dem Drängen heraus”), in which he calls a “hoffnungslos obskur” passage -- a characterization that, given the super-abundance of hopelessly obscure parts of the RV, seems rather overdramatic for this minor conundrum. With Old (ZDMG 55.300), Ge, and Re -- and pace Scar (346-47) -- I take bā́dhaḥ as an adverbially used neut. s-stem, like (and perhaps truncated from) sabā́dhaḥ, also an adverbially nom.-acc. s-stem, which, however, Scar also thinks is an old abl. sg. of the root noun. However, even if Scar should be right, the interpr. of bā́dhaḥ as abl. sg.

of a root noun could be adapted to the adverbial interpr. with one further step (as he recognizes): ‘out of urgency’ à ‘urgently’.

The next question is the application of the simile marútāṃ ná práyukti and the morphological identity of the last word. To start with the latter, with most interpr. I take it as an instr. *-tī shortened in pause (or, with a more modern descrip., with loss of its final laryngeal in pause [and here before a vowel beginning the next hemistich]). But what does the hitching up of the Maruts have to do with Agni’s sacrificial performance? My assumption is that the simile is limited to qualifying the adverbial bā́dhaḥ ‘pressingly, urgently’. Since everything the Maruts do is precipitous, no doubt the yoking up of their horses is performed with the same urgency, to get on the road as soon as possible. Both Ge and Re push prá √yuj further than I think it should go -- to ‘impulsion, instigation’ (“wie auf Betreiben der Marut” and “à l’instigation des Marut” respectively), a sense that seems distant from the ‘yoke, hitch up’ sense of √yuj. I also don’t see that the Maruts would be the ones to set Agni’s sacrificing in motion; they are not even associated with the dawn sacrifice and don’t have much to do with Agni. My “at the hitching up” reads as if it were a locative. Though that tr. was made for English parsing reasons, I might slightly alter it to “with the hitching up.” In pāda d both Ge and Re (flg. Gr’s interpr.) take hotrā́ya as simply referring to the sacrifice (e.g., “zu unserem Opfer”), but hotrá- is elsewhere not the sacrifice, but the office of Hotar or the performance of the Hotar’s duties. My tr. (“turn [various gods] to the Hotar-work”) makes it seem that those gods will perform that office, but, since Agni is the Hotar par excellence (see, e.g., pāda a, also 2a, 6a), it must rather be that Agni is urged to cause the gods to turn towards his own performance of his duties. It might be clearer if the tr. read “toward my Hotar-work.”


## 02
The disposition of the elements in pāda b is not entirely clear. In the publ. tr.

I construe antár with mártyeṣu “(god) among men/mortals” and consider vidáthā an acc. of extent of time/occasion “through the rites.” Ge agrees with the first, but supplies a verb to govern vidáthā: sā́dhan “der … die Opfer (zustande bringt),” on the basis of two passages containing this phrase (III.1.18, IV.16.3 vidáthāni sā́dhan).

I did not believe then that these two passages constituted sufficient formulaic support for supplying a form of √sādh, but now I’m more sympathetic to Ge’s view. But there are also other possibilities. In Agni passages antár is often in a lexeme with √i or √car: ‘go between’ -- usually between heaven and earth or men and gods. Flg. Old and Re, such a lexeme, with the verb of motion supplied, could be construed with vidáthā: e.g., Re “(te mouvant) entre les participations-cultuelles.” And, if we take vidátha- in its occasional meaning of ‘(cosmic) divisions’, we can follow Thieme (Unters. 43) in his interpr. “zwischen den Verteilungen (Himmel, Luftraum, Erde) ist er, der Himmlische unter den Sterblichen.” Any of these is, in my opinion, possible, but I will stick with the publ. tr., as involving the least amount of extra manipulation.

Since váhnir āsā́is a fairly common locution (see passages assembled by Ge ad I.76.4), instr. āsā́‘with the mouth’ is not parallel to instr. juhvā̀‘with the tongue’, despite grammatical and semantic similarity.


## 03
There are several metrical problems in this vs. Pāda c has the caesura after 3; there seems no way to remedy this, and the rest of the meter is fine. Pāda a is rather more interesting: the Saṃhitā text as given yields 10 syllables; there are two possible distractions: dhán(i)yā (HvN’s choice) and t(u)vé, but both produce the same bad cadence (⏑ - - ×). As Old points out (ZDMG 55.300 and Noten), if we distract neither of these choices, the vs. reads fine until the last word, with an opening of five and dhiṣáṇā taking post-caesura position. (It is worth noting that dhiṣáṇā- is almost always immediately post-caesura, whether after an opening of 4 or of 5.) All that’s wanting to make a fine Triṣṭubh line is a single light syllable preceding váṣṭi.

Although I would not presume to supply such a syllable (nor does Old), it does seem preferable to allow for a rest here with syncopation, rather than to choose one of the two possible distractions that yield a bad cadence.

The syntax and exact sense of the first hemistich are somewhat unclear. Ge and Re take the pādas together, with dhiṣáṇā as subj. both of váṣṭi and of the infin.

yájadhyai (approx. “the Holy Place wishes to sacrifice in you …”). I have two objections to this interpr.: 1) as Old (ZDMG 55.300) points out (sim. Re; see below), it is Agni who should be doing the sacrificing (though I.109.4, where dhiṣánā presses soma willingly [uśatī́], renders this objection less forceful); 2) the prá beginning pāda b suggests that there’s an intermediate verb form between váṣṭi and the infinitive or at least that there’s a subclausal break at the pāda boundary. Re also notices the 2nd problem indirectly, suggesting in his n. an alternative tr. “elle veut (ceci): qu’(Agni) sacrifie en avant” (with the prá presumably represented by “en avant”). My publ. tr.

reflects such an intermediate verb form, from a supplied form of √dhā, with a form of ‘you’ also to be supplied — with the sense “to (put) (you) forward to sacrifice …” For √dhā + yájadhyai see nearby VI.15.15 ní tvā dadhīta ródasī yájadhyai “One should set you [=Agni] down, to sacrifice to the two world-halves.” The locution dhiṣáṇā √dhā is also quite common, aided by real or pseudo-etymological association; cf. III.31.13 ... dhiṣánā ... dhā́t; III.56.6 dhiṣaṇe ... dhāḥ, IV.34.1 ...

dhiṣáṇā ... ádhāt; VI.19.2 ... dhiṣáṇā ... dhāt; VII.90.3 ... dhiṣáṇā dhāti. However, I am now no longer sure that my objections to the standard tr. are strong enough to merit the additional complexity of my publ. interpr., and I am also disturbed by having to interpr. loc. tvé as “in regard to you.” The next hymn contains a passage that strongly encourages construing tvé here with yájadhyai “to sacrifice in you”:


## 02
ā́yásmin tvé … yákṣat. I would now alter the tr. here to “For even the wealthy Holy Place longs to sacrifice in you to the gods, to their races, for the singer”

-- though I am still bothered by the prá.

Another problem in this syntagm is devā́ñ jánma. Old (explicitly, ZDMG 55.300) and Ge (in tr.) take devā́n as a gen. pl., a form that could either represent the survival of a very archaic PIE gen. in *-ōm or the truncation of the standard form devā́nām. I do not think this nec., subscribing to Re’s assertion (in n.) “devā́ñ jánma ne comporte pas de désinence abrégée our archaïque, mais signifie «la génération (, à savoir) les dieux»,” with devā́n and jánma as parallel acc. In the second hemistich the referent of the subj., vépiṣṭho áṅgirasām … vípraḥ is in question. Ge, flg. Sāy., suggests the current poet, and the presence of the singer in b (gṛṇaté) might support this view. However, his superlative status among the Aṅgirases makes it more likely that it is Agni. Cf. the similar expression in I.127.1 jyéṣṭham ángirasāṃ vipra “(We call upon you), o inspired poet, as the oldest/most important of the Aṅgirases,” as well as the fairly frequent use of áṅgirastama- ‘first/best of the Aṅgirases’ for Agni (I.31.2, 75.2; VIII.23.10, 43.18, 44.8). If Agni is the referent, there has been a switch from 2nd ps. reference (tvé in pāda a) to 3rd ps.

reference here, but this is hardly novel. See the next vs. (5).

As disc. ad VI.3.6, I interpr. rebhá- not as ‘singer’, but as ‘hoarse/huskyvoiced (singer)’, sometimes used of Agni, whose crackling is likened to singing. He is so identified nearby in VI.3.6, and the use of this adj. here is another piece of evidence that Agni is the referent of the subject in this hemistich.

In d chandáḥ is taken by Gr as the sole example of suffix-accented thematic chandá- (not only in the RV but, acdg. to Whit, Rts., anywhere), beside chánda-. Gr glosses our form ‘singend, preisend’ and chánda- as ‘glänzend, strahlend’; Ge, by contrast, takes it as an s-stem and dismisses the accent: “chandáḥ doch wohl für chándaḥ.” Pointing to the suggestive juxtaposition mádhu chandáḥ here, a near exact match for the PN madhuchandaḥ, to whom the first ten hymns in the RV are ascribed (though the name doesn’t appear in the RV text), he tr. “seine süsse Weise.” Re follows suit (“le doux chant”), with the somewhat cryptic note “chandáḥ «qui charme», comme chándaḥ.” (Curiously, Old doesn’t comment.) Although I would like to be able to follow their interpr., with chandáḥ an anomalously accented neut. sstem, rather than an -á-stem with Gr, I do not see any way to get the suffix accent redactionally or grammatically. My interpr. again introduces complications, but in this case I think they are necessary to avoid positing arbitrary accent shifts. I would suggest that the form is an s-stem, derivationally related to neut. chándas- ‘rhythm, meter,’ showing the usual rightward accent shift of adjectival possessive derivatives to neut. s-stems -- hence ‘having rhythm’. I wish that the form in the text were chandā́s (chandā́in sandhi), describing Agni the poet, but it is not. I therefore think it is either a neut. used adverbially (“rhythmically” as in the publ. tr.) or that it qualifies mádhu “rhythmic honey,” of the song.


## 04
On svápāka- see comm. ad IV.3.2.

Note the switch from 3rd ps. reference (pāda a) to 2nd ps. (b). The 2nd ps.

reference continues by default through the rest of the vs., though the publ. tr. appears to switch back to 3rd ps.: (“(anoint) him …”) for Engl. convenience.


## 05
Old (ZDMG 55.301), fld. by Ge and Re, interprets vṛñjé as a t-less 3rd sg.

passive, rather than as the 1st sg. it appears to be. I do not see the necessity for this.

The same VP is found in I.116.1 (… bárhir iva prá vṛñje), where the 1st ps. interpr. is reinforced by the flg. pāda containing the 1st sg. act. iyarmi. Further, in the almost identical pāda VII.2.4 prá vrñjate námas ̥ ā barhír agnaú, the med. 3rd pl. vṛñjate must be transitive with sg. bárhiḥ as obj. The best support (see Old) for a pass. interpr. is that then all 4 pādas in this vs. would begin with a passive (b: áyāmi, c ámyakṣi, d áśrāyi), but in that case we might expect a form more parallel to the other three.

Although √vṛj has no passive aorist attested, there are no morphological or phonological barriers to building *ávarji (cf. the very common ásarji to √sṛj ‘discharge’). I confess I do not understand the sequence of tense, with pres. vṛñjé in the yád clause, followed by 3 main clause augmented aorists, but taking vṛñjé as a passive does not solve this problem.

I do not understand the semantic difference between sádman- and sádana-, if there is one.

## 06
As noted above, ad VI.10.2, the phrase agníbhir idhānáḥ is found both there and in the next hymn, VI.12.6. It therefore seems unlikely that devébhiḥ should be construed in this collocation, despite its apparent parallelism, and, with Ge and Re, I take it as an instr. of accomp. with daśasyā́.

My interpr. of the simile in the 2nd hemistich differs from the standard. Ge and Re assume that the comparandum for vṛjánaṃ ná is áṃhaḥ. Given the adjacency of the two expressions, this is reasonable. Ge’s version, however, relies on a somewhat unlikely interpr. (insofar as we understand this root) of áti √sras as ‘abstreifen’ (strip off): “… möchten wir die Not wie einen Gürtel abstreifen,” and the notion of “stripping off” áṃhas- seems odd. Re’s “puissions nous … glisser hors du défile-étroit comme (hors de) l’encerclement (ennemi)” does better with the verb, but requires vṛjána- to have a particular negative sense not elsewhere met with (pace his citation of X.27.5). In the publ. tr. I take the simile with rāyáḥ .. vāvasānā́ḥ “clothing ourselves in riches,” comparing the wealth we wear with a girthband. For a very similar expression, cf. I.173.6 sáṃ vivya índro vrjána ̥ ṃ ná bhū́ mā “Indra has enwrapped himself in earth, like a circlet,” with the same simile. Although the distance between rāyáḥ and the simile might speak against this interpr., it does work better semantically, and the parallel passage provides strong support. It does give me pause, however, that MLW is not convinced and thinks vṛjánaṃ ná must be construed with áṃhaḥ.
