+++
title = "012"

+++
Agni


## 01
The ‘goad’ (todá-) found in VI.6.6 reappears here, as well as in vs. 3. Thus, 3 of the 5 occurrences of this word in the RV are found in this Agni cycle. In VI.6.6 I argue that the referent of the “great goad” is the sun (see comm. ad loc., sim. I.150.1).

Old (ZDMG 55.301, also Noten) thinks the sun is the referent in our passage as well, and, further, he construes the gen. tódasya in pāda b with śocíṣā tatāna in pāda d, on the basis of VI.6.6 bhānúnā … todásya … tatantha. Although the parallel is suggestive, the distance between the genitive and its supposed governing instr. in our passage seems too far, esp. since the 2nd hemistich begins ayám sá “here is he” or “this one here,” a sequence that seems to open a new (though co-referential) clause.

Moreover, in vs. 3 todá- seems to refer to or be compared to Agni himself, and so the internal evidence of the hymn favors a connection of the goad with Agni, not directly with the sun. I therefore follow Ge in taking todásya as dependent on rā́ṭ, which also governs barhíṣaḥ. It may be that rā́ṭ … todásya “ruler of the goad” is a phrase like sūnúḥ sáhasaḥ “son of strength” (see 1c), where “son of X” is tantamount to X. In the same way “ruler of the goad” may be the equivalent of “the goad” itself. Both the sun (“the great goad”) and Agni are goads because with their appearance at dawn they set the world in motion. Since Agni is often taken as an earthly form of the sun, sharing the same third party identity would not be surprising, with Agni being the lesser of the two by nature.

For Agni as “ruler of the ritual grass,” see VIII.13.4=15.5 ... asyá barhíṣo ví rājasi, though the subject there is Indra. I take yájadhyai as a predicated infinitive (sim. Ge, Re, Keydana [Inf., 171]).

The VP ródasī √yaj is found elsewhere in this cycle: 11.4 yájasva ródasī, VI.15.15 ní tvā dadhīta ródasī yájadhyai, with the same infinitive.


## 02
On svápāka- ‘very clever’, also VI.11.4, see comm. ad IV.3.2. As noted there the Pp. analyses this sequence as sú ápāka-, though Ge and Re take it as a cmpd ‘having a lovely backside’. Kü (214), however, follows the Pp. analysis (also fld. by Gr), and tr. “von Ferne kommend” (as Gr does). I do not see how a derivation from ápā(ñ)c- ‘facing/turned backward’ could yield such a sense, esp. in a non-ablatival formation, and, furthermore, Agni, the most present of gods, should not be “coming from afar.” Keydana’s “der du entfernt bist” lacks the ablatival element but still runs afoul of the other problems just noted.

‘Heaven’ (dyaúḥ) is the performer of the sacrifice in Agni; the qualification sarvátātā-iva “as if in its entirety, in its entirety as it were” is explained, reasonably, by Ge as meaning the gods collectively, with dyaúḥ ‘heaven’ equivalent to “die Götterwelt.” Re follows this interpr., suggesting that sarvátātā is a variant of devátātā. For all the gods performing such sacrifice, see, e.g., X.88.7 adduced by Ge.

In tr. yajatra as ‘the means of sacrifice’ I am taking the -tra- instrument suffix seriously: Agni as the receptacle and recipient of the oblations is indeed the means to sacrifice.

In the publ. tr. the phrase introduced by the em-dash “— you the very clever …” contains only vocatives, though for ease of English they do not read as vocc.

jáṃhas- is found independently only here, but also appears in the bahuvrīhis kṛṣṇá-jaṃhas- (I.141.7) and raghupátma-jaṃhas- (in nearby VI.3.5). Though jáṃhas- has no direct cognates and at best a root connection to IE *ǵhengh ‘go’ (EWA s.v.), the cmpds occur in contexts that limit the semantic realm to birds (to which Agni is compared in both cases, as also here) and that point to a bird body part, pace Gr’s ‘Weg, Gang, Bahn’ -- wings, wing-feathers, or plumage. The question is what the point of comparison between the bird’s jáṃhas- and three-seated (triṣadhástha-) Agni is, if in fact the simile is meant to further characterize that descriptor. Ge suggests that a bird alighting from flight appears to settle on his two wings and his tail-feathers (though MLW points out to me that, observationally, a bird appears to settle not on its two wings, but its two legs). MLW then suggests that “maybe jáṃhas- means originally ‘stride’ and then the ‘striding parts/ locomoting parts’ and finally ‘the bottom parts'” which in a bird may be three. Re, by contrast, takes the simile separate from triṣadhástha- and also interprets jáṃhas- as ‘enjambée’ (stride), though, as he explicitly admits, this involves “renouncing” the meaning ‘plumage’ that he ascribes to the same word in nearby VI.3.5, because “on obtient un sens plus facile” (a very dangerous principle to apply to RVic lexicography!).

With most, I take yájadhyai again as a predicated inf. “(you are) to sacrifice,” as in vs. 1. Kü (214) curiously interprets it as passive (“… sind die Opfergaben … zu opfern”), though, as Keydana (174 n. 171) points out, the nom. triṣadhásthaḥ is then left hanging.

## 03
The rel. cl. that begins this vs. cannot span the hemistich, since the verb that ends b, adyaut, is unaccented. There is the further problem, long noted (see Old ZDMG 55.302), that the apparently easy application of the initial adj. téjiṣṭhā to the next noun aratíḥ is problematic, because aratí- is masc. (though both Thieme [Unters.

29] and Re are willing to allow a fem. here, and Old toys with this notion). In my view the rel. cl. consists only of the first two words, téjiṣṭhā yásya, with yásya of course referring to Agni. The rest of the hemistich is couched in the nominative, with descriptors most naturally applicable to Agni (like aratí-, which generally has Agni as its referent), and so a syntactic shift must happen between the yásya and the following nominatives.

Therefore, a noun must be supplied with téjiṣṭhā in the rel. cl., as Old already suggested (ZDMG 55.302 n. 1). His candidates are ‘Glut’ or (in pl.) ‘Flammen’; Ge follows the former suggestion, supplying tapanī́as in II.23.14. In contrast I suggest ‘course’. As we’ve seen, the Agni cycle of VI is tightly knit, and in VI.3.4 (a hymn with another connection to this one, disc. ad vs. 2) we find tigmáṃ cid éma … yásya “whose course is sharp …” Of course, éman- is a neut. and cannot be supplied with fem. téjiṣṭhā, but cf. I.53.8 téjiṣṭhayā … vartanī́; vartaní- generally means ‘course, track’, though in that particular passage I take it as ‘(wheel)edge’. In any case that fem. would fit here nicely and match the “sharp course” of VI.3.4.

Note that both (-)rā́ṭ and todá- return from vs. 1. As discussed ad vs. 1, todánow seems to apply directly to Agni. I take this word as part of the simile (so also Ge, Re), despite the right displacement of the simile particle, todó ádhvan ná, for which I have no explanation.

Hemistich-final adyaut echoes dyaúḥ at the end of 2b.

In c the first question is the meaning and root affiliation of the hapax dravitā́.

Older interpr. ascribe it to √dru ‘run’: Gr ‘Renner’, apparently (with some attenuation) Ge ‘Ausreisser’, while Re renders it as ‘fondeur’ (smelter), with, presumably, a developed sense of √dru. However, the seṭ character of the agent noun makes this problematic, and Hoffmann (MSS 10 [1957] 70 = Aufs. 420) convincingly connects it with his seṭ root √drū ‘cut, reap’ -- an ascription that has been followed essentially by everyone since (e.g., EWA s.v. DRAVI , Gotō 1st Kl., 138- 39, Tichy Nom.Ag., 35, 285, Keydana Inf., 194 n. 18). The adj. characterizing this agent noun, adroghá-, is unexpected. It ordinarily means ‘undeceptive’ and qualifies speech (as in the bahuvrīhi ádrogha-vāc-), but “undeceptive reaper” is puzzling. I pushed the adjective further than it should probably go, to ‘undisguised’, which, in conjunction with tmán ‘in person’, may express that Agni’s role in cutting down plants is plainly evident to all. But the locution still seems awkward. Tichy’s ‘zuverlässig’ (trustworthy, reliable) mitigates some of this awkwardness and does not stray too far from the sense of the adj.; I would be inclined to emend my tr. to ‘trustworthy’.

In d avartrá- is likewise a hapax. It appears to be a bahuvrīhi built to vártra- (AV+) ‘dam, dike’; see Debr’s Nachtr. to AiG II.1 (p. 58).

## 04
The first hemistich is partly assembled from material also found elsewhere: the quite straightforward 2nd pāda is identical to VII.12.2b. The post-caesura portion of the first pāda, etárī ná śūṣaíḥ, is also found at V.41.10, where the pre-caesura portion, gṛṇīté agníḥ “Agni is sung”, is functionally identical to our 2nd pāda (esp.

agní ṣṭave “Agni is praised”). On etárī as a loc., see comm. ad V.41.10; note that this word is a partial anagram of 3a vanerāṭ.

In c note the insistent phonetic figure: dr(ú)vanno vanván krát(u)vā ná árvā.

The interpr. of pāda d is difficult because of the highly unusual form jārayā́yi, which has been much discussed (see esp. Old ZDMG 55.302-3). Since the hemistich otherwise lacks a verb form, it is tempting to see a verb here. But the accent makes trouble because this is a main clause with no syntactic break evident before the word.

Nonetheless, it is generally taken as a nonce aor. passive and quite possibly a punning one: as a denom. to jārá- ‘wooer, lover’ (hence ‘become a wooer’) and as a pass. built to the caus. jāráyati (/ jaráyati) ‘awaken’. The pun is most clearly expressed in Ge’s tr. “wie der Vater des Uṣas zum Buhlen ward, so wurde er durch die Opfer erweckt”; he takes it as referring to the myth of incest of Heaven, also signalled by the phrase usráḥ pitéva “like the father of Dawn.” Although I am always game (perhaps too game) to see puns everywhere in the RV, I am dubious about the one suggested here. For one thing the somewhat anomalous stem uṣár-/usr- is never used for personified Dawn, but only for the temporal dawn. (For supposed voc. uṣar in I.49.4 see comm. ad loc. and Lundquist 2014.) It seems unlikely that the stem typed for the goddess, uṣás-, would not be used in this myth where her identity is so very crucial. Moreover, I rather doubt that usráḥ here is a gen. sg. with pitéva. Not only is the simile particle wrongly placed (though this is not rare), but usrás is almost always an acc. pl., which can express extent of time (e.g., VII.15.8). The solution I favor for jārayā́yi is one also mentioned by Old, stemming from Ludwig, and endorsed by Debrunner in the Nachtr. to AiG I [p. 163] -- that it belong to a gerundive stem jārayā́y(i)ya- ‘to be awakened’ and the expected nom. sg. * jārayā́y(i)yaḥ lost its final syllable by haplology before yajñaíḥ, not surprisingly in this y(a)-rich environment. This gerundive is predicated and serve in lieu of a finite verb. For a similarly formed predicated gerundive, see nearby trayayā́y(i)yaḥ at VI.2.7.


## 05
With tákṣat we can supply vánā on the basis of I.127.4, as noticed by the standard comm. ṛṇá- is otherwise neut., meaning ‘debt’ (Gr’s supposed fem. ṛṇā́in X.127.7 is actually a neut. pl.) I am inclined to assume that this masc. nom. sg. is a nonce application. But see the cmpd. ṛṇa-cyút- ‘shaking the debtor’ in VI.61.1, in which I also interpr. ṛṇa- as masc. and animate.

The last word of the vs., rāṭ, seems to reprise the similarly pāda-final rā́ṭ in 1a and vanerā́ṭ in 3a, but because it is unaccented, it must be a verb form belonging to √rāj ‘go straight’.

## 06
In the first pāda as transmitted (metrically faulty), there is a hapax nídāyā(ḥ) supposed built to a fem. nídā- ‘scorn’. There is no verb to govern this word, so “protect” vel sim. must be supplied. Ge adduces nearby VI.14.5 nidáḥ … uruṣyáti, while Gr suggests II.34.15 nidó muñcátha. I am now somewhat more sympathetic to these makeshifts than I was when I produced the publ. tr., but the fact remains that protection from scorn would be rather intrusive in the passage, in a hymn that focuses almost exclusively on Agni’s travel and speed. In the publ. tr. I suggest a different analysis of the sequence, which I still favor: arvann íd *ā́yāḥ, resegmenting the Pp. analysis and taking āyā(ḥ) to ā́√yā ‘drive here’. This requires an alteration of the Saṃhitā text by accenting ā́yāḥ. The posited verb form could be an impf., injunc., or subj. to the root pres. to this root, or an indic. or injunc. to the s-aorist. Since no other such forms occur unambiguously in the RV, it could have been reanalyzed and lost accent. For a possibly similar form see yā́(ḥ) in V.33.2 and comm. ad loc. Although the particle íd would be slightly oddly positioned after a voc., it is fairly regular in pre-verbal position when the verb is final in its pāda (e.g., in this maṇḍala


> 19.13
śátroḥ-śatror úttara ít syāma, 42.3 dhr̥ṣát tám-tam íd éṣate, 45.7 yó grṇ̥ atā́m íd ā́sitha).

Note also the phonetic figure closing a and b: nídāyā(ḥ)# ...

idhānáḥ#, which would be stronger if the first was ídāyā(ḥ).

