+++
title = "013"

+++
Agni


## 01
The voc. ágne was omitted from the publ. tr.

Although śruṣṭī́can represent nom. sg. śruṣṭiḥ and is so taken by Ge, Re (and seriously entertained by Old), I accept the traditional analysis as instr. sg. (allowed by Ge in n. 1c); elsewhere the instr. sg. form is almost always pāda-initial as here, whereas the rare nom. sg. never is. The point seems to be that Agni listens to us attentively and subsequently metes out rewards.


## 02
As usual, the form iṣé is subject to multiple possible analyses, but most interpr. opt for a dat. of íṣ- ‘refreshment’, as do I. With most (but not Old), I split pāda a into two nominal clauses, based on the apparently clause-initial sequence ā́hí after the caesura. The enclitic naḥ must of course belong properly to the 1st clause, though it can be understood with the 2nd as well.

In pāda b, the referent in the simile qualified as párijmā ‘encompassing’ has been variously identified: Ge (sim. Lü) Vāyu, Re the sun or Agni solaire, Gr Agni himself. By contrast, I supply ‘household’ (gáya-), on the basis of nearby VI.2.8, where Agni is said to be párijmeva … gáyaḥ “encompassing like a household” (on which see comm. ad loc.). This simile would play on Agni’s well-known connection to the domestic sphere. The point of comparison is that the household is the unit that controls the wealth of its members. I supply “over treasure” on the basis of rátnam in pāda a; kṣayasi in b needs a gen. complement to parallel the simile in c: mitró ná bṛhatá ṛtásya.

## 04
The sequence vedyā́naṭ is emended by Old (ZDMG 55.304 and Noten) to védyā́naṭ with two accents (that is, underlying védyā or védī ‘with the altar’ + ā́naṭ).

He convincingly adduces nearby VI.1.10 védī sūno sahaso gīrbhir ukthaíḥ, identical to our pāda a save for the first word. See comm. ad loc. The standard interpr. read vedyā́(Ge, Re, Lub, etc.) with the Pp and render as ‘with wisdom’ vel sim. It’s worth noting that vedyā́- is otherwise only plural, an argument about ascribing our sg. form to that stem.

With Ge I think práti vā́ram should be construed together, even though the standard expression is práti váram (II.11.21, etc.). Re suggests a haplology from

*práti váram vā́ram, but this seems unnecessarily complex. I consider vā́ram from
*váram a minor metrical adjustment to fit a Triṣṭubh cadence. And see immed. below
for another possible lengthening.

Ge takes dhānyà- as ‘grain’, a deriv. of dhānā́- ‘id.’. Certainly the other occurrence of dhānyà- does have this meaning (V.53.13; cf. also dhānyākṛ́t- X.94.13), but here a deriv. of dhána- ‘wealth’ makes more sense (see Re’s ‘richesse’). Old suggests emending to dhányam, which exists in this meaning, but I don’t see the need for this. Why not simply take it as a (nonce) -ya-suffixed vṛddhi deriv. of dhána- (on such formations see AiG II.2.834ff.), since vṛddhi derivatives are fairly prominent in this hymn (saúbhagāni 1a, sauśravasā́5a)?


## 05
Despite their distance from each other, the two datives nṛ́bhyaḥ … puṣyáse seem to form a de facto infinitive phrase: “for men to thrive” -- although it is certainly possible to construe them as separate datives with dhāḥ “establish (goods) for men, (goods) for thriving.” I supply ‘goods’ with the neut. pl. adjectives sauśravasā́suvī́rā, on the basis of vasavyaìḥ, the last word of the preceding vs. (sim., Re “[choses]”). It would also be possible, with Ge, to take sauśravasā́as a substantive: “Diese Ruhmesherrlichkeiten.” Cf. also Thieme (Fremdl., 47).

On first encounter the sentiment of cd is unsettling. What the text seems to say -- and what I think it does say -- is that Agni provides good things for the archetypal pair of inimical creatures, the wolf (vṛ́ka-) and the stranger (arí-). (For the pairing, see, e.g., nearby VI.15.3, where Agni is asked to keep us free of them.) It seems even worse that what Agni provides in our vs. is “an abundance of livestock” (bhū́ri paśváḥ; cf. nearby VI.1.12) that becomes váyas- (‘vigor, vital energy’) for those creatures: in other words he deprives human communities of their domestic livestock in order to feed hungry wild beasts and outlaws. There have been two basic responses to this apparent breach of the divine/human compact. Acdg. to Old (ZDMG 55.305), since Agni provides even for the wolf and so on, he should most definitely provide at least as much for us. Ge more or less follows this interpr. (see n.

5d), as do I. It is supported by a similar passage in an Aśvin hymn, VII.68.8 (also adduced by Ge) vṛ́kāya cid jásamānāya śaktam “Do as you are able, even on behalf of a wolf that is worn out.” Note the cid, which is unfortunately missing in our passage. (Cf. also VI.45.2 avipré cid váyo dádhat “placing vitality even in the uninspired,” with the VP váyaḥ √dhā as here and a cid.) By contrast, Thieme (Fremdl., 47), fld. by Re, interprets the dat. phrase vṛ́kāyāráye jásuraye not as a dative of benefit, but of malefit, as it were: “…wenn du gross machst die Lebenskraft des Viehs durch deine Stärk für den (i.e. zur Verteidigung gegen den) Wolf, den Fremdling, der verschmachtet.” The slipperiness of glossing “for” as “for defense against” seems unacceptable to me, a clear instance of allowing our contextual expectations to trample the grammar. Th also severs the little formula bhū́ri paśváḥ (found in nearby VI.1.12, as already noted, as well as III.54.15), taking the gen. paśváḥ with váyaḥ (“die Lebenskraft des Viehs”) and bhū́ri as part of a phrasal verb with kṛṇóṣi (“wenn du gross machst”). Re’s interpr. basically follows Th’s, with some curlicues of its own.

Although Th/Re produce a more acceptable sense, they do so at the expense of the clarity of the grammar, which is supported by a number of parallel passages. I think we must accept that Agni is providing for these undesirables. It might be worthwhile to speculate about what the real world analogue might be. Here I suggest (with no certainty at all) that this might be a forest fire. MBh I.217-19 depicts the horrific burning of the Khāṇḍava Forest, in which most of the animal denizens of the forest were killed in the conflagration and those that tried to escape were cut down by men stationed at the perimeter. Although in the MBh account there is no difference between prey animals and their prey -- they all perish -- it does suggest an analogue, that wolves and outlaw men might capitalize on the panic roused by a forest fire to capture easy pickings. An internet search turns up a passage in J. F.

Bendell, “Effect of Fire on Birds and Mammals” (in Fire and Ecosystems, ed. T. T.

Kozlowski, 1974), 75: “many birds and mammals are attracted by fires, probably to feed upon prey driven from their homes. Komarek (1969) mentioned species of birds in Australia, Africa, and North America that come to and hunt in front of fires.” On the meter of d see Old ZDMG 55.305 and Noten.


## 06
Both Ge and Re separate pādas a and b, and Ge’s tr. seems at least potentially to take the subj. of a, vadmā́, as non-coreferntial with Agni (“Ein Redner … (werde) uns ... zuteil”), but since vadmán- occurs only here and in nearby VI.4.4, where it definitely refers to Agni, I do not see the point.

A factor influencing the Ge/Re separation of the pādas may be the apparent presence of enclitic naḥ in both pādas: … no víhāyā(ḥ)# / … no dāḥ#. However, the second naḥ should almost certainly be read as the final syllable of the preceding vājí, thus *vājínaḥ, acc. pl. of vājín-, a possibility floated by Ge in n. 6b. Note only does this reading eliminate the pleonastic enclitic, but it also eliminates the only supposed neut. nom./acc. sg. to vājín-, which would be required to modify neut. tókam (e.g., Ge “siegestekrönten leiblichen Samen”). A change is only required in the Pp.; the Saṃhitā text is undisturbed. An asterisk should be inserted in the publ. tr. before “prize-winning.” The seemingly late position of naḥ in pāda a, before the final word víhāyāḥ, is actually not so late after all: it can count as (modified) Wackernagel’s position, after an accented initial word (vadmā́) followed by the phrasal vocative sūno sahasaḥ. ## 014 Agni


## 01
This vs. is beset with small difficulties, which add up. To begin with, what should be done with dúvaḥ in the first pāda? Since the first hemistich has only a single expressed verb, jujóṣa, the question is whether both dúvaḥ ‘friendship’ and dhíyam ‘insight’ are objects of this verb. Re (flg. Gonda) takes the two nouns as appositional and both objects of jujóṣa: “Le mortel qui a-toujours gouté en Agni le privilège (de) la vision-poétique,” but this depends on his particular interpr. of dúvasand, even with that, doesn’t make a lot of sense to me. Ge in his n. 1ab calls jujóṣa a Zeugma, which I think ought to mean that both nouns are its object, with slightly different senses of the verb -- but in fact he supplies a separate verb with dúvaḥ: “Welcher Sterblicher Agni die schuldige Achtung (erweist) und mit seinen Gedanken gern (seiner) gedenkt.” Since he seems to take dhíyaṃ jujóṣa as a phrasal verb “gern (seiner) gedenkt” [think well of him, vel sim.], he may be using Zeugma in a different sense (unless he’s taking “erweist” as a different sense of jujóṣa). But I do not see submerging the distinct sense of √juṣ ‘taste, enjoy’ into an anodyne idiom with dhī́-, ‘think well of’, and I don’t see how he could get that out of the two words that go into it. In the publ. tr. my solution to the dúvaḥ problem was to supply a form of √dhā as in IV.8.6 (also adduced by Ge), I.4.5, VII.20.6, all with acc. dúvas- + LOC, as here. It would also be possible to supply a form of √kṛ, as in III.16.4, IV.2.9, VIII.31.9 with the same complements. However, the two hymns following this one each contain a form of √van ‘win’ with dúvas- as obj.: VI.15.6, 16.18, and I would therefore change my tr. to “(has won/wins) friendship in/by Agni.” In the second pāda we encounter two closely related stems: the root noun dhī́- as object of jujóṣa and the instr. dhītíbhiḥ to the -tí-stem to the same root, and some distinction must be meant. In my opinion, dhītí-, esp. in the plural, are generally the insightful thoughts of the human poet, whereas dhī́- can be the insight that gods bestow on that very poet and that gives rise to his dhītí-, and those two values are found in our passage: the poet savors the dhī́- that Agni provides him, which is manifested in the poet’s dhītí-.

The second hemistich presents more problems, beginning with the first word: bhásan is analyzed by the Pp. as bhásat, hence as a finite verb form -- either an injunc. to a thematic stem bhása- (so Gr, Macd VGS, tentatively Whitney Rts) or the subjunctive to a root aor. (so Gotō, 1st Kl, 82; also EWA s.v. BHAS1 ). This is not impossible, but I take the underlying form to be the same as the sandhi form, bhásan, and, with Old (ZDMG 55.305-6, Noten), identify it as a act. part. nom. sg. masc. The question is to what stem. Although as just noted, the older authorities posit a them.

pres. bhása-, in fact the other two forms to this putative stem, bhásat VI.3.4 and bhasáthas VI.59.4, are more likely root aor. subjunctives (see Gotō ref. above and my comm. ad locc.) Of course, a root aor. participle should technically be *psán, but one wonders how long that would last. In any case, taking it as a finite form would not appreciably change the meaning of the hemistich; in that case I would alter the tr.

to “he will chew it now; he should …” The pāda-medial sequence X nú ṣá prá is somewhat puzzling, since both ṣá and prá seem out of place. Gr takes prá with bhásan, but I think it goes more naturally with vurīta, though in either case the position of the preverb is odd. I’m also not sure what, if anything, the retroflection of ṣá after nú is telling us. I have found no other examples of this sequence, though cf. VIII.27.18 with … páro nú sā́#, without retroflection.

The next question is what √bhas ‘bite, chew’ is doing in this context. Ge tr.

“der soll zuerst den Mund auftun,” remarking in his n. 1c that it means something like ‘yawn, gape’ -- but he doesn’t explain what this means in context. Both Old and Re supply “enemies” as obj. (e.g., Old “… möge (seine Feinde) zermalmend”); this makes somewhat more sense, esp. given the hostile sentiments later in the hymn. But I think it can be better integrated into the context of the vs. in which it’s found. The vs. has a sequence of verbs √juṣ ‘taste, savor, enjoy’ -- √bhas ‘bite, chew’ -- íṣam √vṛ ‘choose (as) refreshment / nourishment’, all centering on eating. In my view they all take the same object, dhíyam, and all metaphorically refer to the mortal poet’s eating the insight that Agni has conferred on him -- that is, consuming it and turning it into his own substance. It is a striking image.


## 03
As discussed ad IV.48.1 and VI.1.5, I take the phrase rā́yo aryáḥ “the riches of the stranger” here and in IV.48.1 (cf. also VI.47.9; also aryáḥ … rayíḥ in VI.20.1) and the phrase rā́ya ubháyāso jánānām “both the riches of the peoples” in VI.1.5 as referring metaphorically to people, as the most valuable resource of a society. In our passage there are three different parallel designations for these same people: “the clans of Manu” (mánuṣo víśaḥ) understood from the last pāda of the previous vs. (2d), “the riches of the Ārya” (pāda b), and “the Āyus” (āyávaḥ in c). To make matters more complex, these people are not only contending among themselves -- that is, divided and engaging in internal conflict -- but are also fighting united against common enemies, namely the Dasyu (dásyum) and one without commandment (avratám), as was already seen by Ge (n. 3). This is the usual “fission and fusion” model of Rigvedic society, as discussed at length by Proferes (2007, esp. Chap. 2).

The internal conflict is expressed in the first hemistich by the reciprocal verb spárdhante ‘they contend with each other’, while the second hemistich concerns their joint enterprises, expressed by the participles tū́rvantaḥ ‘overcoming’ and sī́kṣantaḥ ‘seeking to vanquish’.


## 04
The hero whom Agni bestows here is the concrete realization of the help (ávas-) sought in vss. 1 and 3.

The standard interpr. (though not Gr) construe śávasaḥ with bhiyā́“with fear of his vast power.” This is certainly possible, but a construction with saṃcákṣi seems equally possible and the adjacency of the two words (though across a pāda boundary) very weakly supports my interpr.


## 05
By my interpr. rayíḥ here has the same metaphorical sense as rā́yaḥ in 3, namely manpower, or perhaps more narrowly the hero given by Agni in 4. Both Ge and Re take sahā́vā ‘victorious’ as an epithet of Agni, despite the hemistich boundary.

This is presumably because the adj. is felt to be more appropriate for an animate being than for wealth -- but this problem disappears if we take wealth figuratively for manpower. (They may also unconsciously take the 2nd position of yásya in c as an indication that the rel. cl. begins there, though of course they regularly interpret 2nd position relatives correctly.) The repeated adj. ávṛtaḥ is also better applied to an animate being (4x of Indra, once [oddly] of barhis), and it must belong to the rel. cl.
