+++
title = "015"

+++
Agni


## 01
On ṛñjase see comm. ad IV.8.1. A tr. “aim at/towards” would be more transparent here.

The problematic pāda here is c: diváḥ, kác cid, and ā́are difficult to construe and interpret. Ge takes the first as referring to ‘day’ rather than ‘heaven’ and makes it dependent on kác cid: “zu jeglicher Zeit des Tages,” but diváḥ is far more often ‘heaven’ than ‘day’ (the latter sense usually confined to use with trír ā́and a few temporal adverbs). Re takes diváḥ as an abl. of ‘heaven’ (“Il s’avance du ciel”), and he takes the kác cid adverbially with jánuṣā … śúciḥ (“pur de toute manière quant à la naissance,” where the indefinite sense of kác cid has been replaced by a totalizing one). In the publ. tr. I agree with Re in taking diváḥ as ablative of ‘heaven’, construing it with distant ā́, and supply ‘food’ with kác cid. But I now don’t think this makes much sense. I will suggest an alternative that makes more sense, but that doesn’t solve all the difficulties and requires some special pleading.

First I’d observe that the word order in this pāda seems particularly contorted.

I ascribe this to the position of janúṣā: this instr. occurs 20 times in the RV and it always occurs immediately after the caesura, whatever its function in the clause. In this particular case, it is generally agreed that janúṣā should be construed with śúciḥ (see Ge’s n. 1c), despite the intervening material. I’d argue that the need to plunk down janúṣā smack in the middle of the pāda has disrupted the constituencies of the rest of the pāda as well. Therefore, we cannot use word order and adjacency as reliable guides here (even less so than in the rest of the RV).

Now, let’s start with the verb véti, which opens the pāda, and with the observation that the poet of this hymn is supposed to be Vītahavya, who is in fact mentioned in both the other vss. of the tṛca (2c, 3d). If we decompose this cmpd.

name we can make a putative havyám ‘oblation’ the object of véti (cf. I.74.4 véṣi havyā́ni; sim. III.53.1, VI.60.15, etc.; for similar gapping in this hymn, see 14b), which can be qualified by kác cid: “he pursues any (oblation) whatever.” I further suggest that diváḥ should be construed with ā́, as in my publ. interpr., but that here ā́ means ‘all the way to X’, rather than ‘from X here’. Although in the ‘all the way to’ sense, ā́normally precedes the ablative (see Gr, s.v. ā́), as already noted, the word order in this pāda seems particularly scrambled, and, in any case, ā́often follows an acc. in the ‘to’ sense. I would therefore now substitute the tr. “Just he, blazing from birth, pursues any oblation whatever all the way to heaven.” This would be a description of the flames rising up towards heaven as they carry the oblation up to the gods.

The next pāda is implicitly contrastive: although the flames of the ritual fire actively reach for heaven in pāda c, the fire itself, just kindled, starts by burning the kindling sticks, which are immovable as opposed to the oblation later poured into the fire.

The cadence of d is bad.


## 02
The first hemistich treats Agni in the accusative, so that no grammatical person needs to be expressed. It therefore appears to continue the 3rd ps. of vs. 1, but modulates to the 2nd ps. reference of cd.


## 04
As noted in the publ. intro., this initial vs. of the 2nd tṛca is a variant on the 1st hemistich of the 1st tṛca: in their first pādas an opening of 5 ending in vo is followed by átithim; the end of the 2nd pāda of vs. 1, ṛñjase girā́, is reprised by 4cd … suvṛktíbhiḥ, … ṛñjase.


## 05
In b both Ge and Re take uṣásaḥ as a nom. pl. rather than a gen. sg. as I do (e.g., “commes les aurores avec leur rayon”). Either would work contextually.

However, in IV.1.17 in the phrase uṣáso bhānúḥ (like our uṣáso ná bhānúnā), uṣásaḥ has to be gen. sg. and Ge so interprets it there.

In c and d I take the crucial terms with double reference, in both simile and frame. In c this term is the pres. part. tū́rvan: in the frame it refers to Agni and is construed with loc. yā́man “going in triumph on his course”; in the simile it is construed with loc. ráṇe “like the victor in the battle.” The battle with (lit. of) Etaśa is a reference to the conflict between Indra and the Sun involving the Sun’s horse Etaśa in some unfortunately puzzling way. To make this clear, “battle over Etaśa would be a better rendering, as MLW points out to me. A further resonance of this phrase tū́rvan ná yā́man is the PN Tūrvayāṇa found several times in the RV, incl.

nearby VI.18.13.

nū́in c seems to have no function and is curiously positioned, though it might be noted that there's a minority position of nú/nū́, penultimate in the pāda, and this is fairly common in VI.

As for d, the standard interpr. (Old ZDMG 313 + Noten, Ge, Re) take the part.

tatṛṣānáḥ only with the simile; this requires supplying an elaborate verbal predicate (“goes to water”) that is not found in the Sanskrit; cf., e.g., Old “er der herbei (eilt) wie im Sonnenbrand der Durstende (zum Wasser eilt).” I again think that the participle applies in both simile and frame: in the simile it refers to someone becoming thirsty in the (sun’s) heat, whereas in the frame it refers to Agni “thirsting” for oblations. This participle is used unambiguously of Agni elsewhere (I.31.7, II.4.6) in describing his voracious appetite for fuel.

In a clever poetic trick the sun is referred to indirectly in both c (his horse Etaśa) and d (his heat: ghṛṇá-).

## 06
The locatival inf. gṛṇīṣáṇi occurs only here and in VIII.12.19. Curiously, in both passages it is construed with āmreḍitas: here priyám-priyam … átithim (matching agním-agnim in pāda a), in VIII.12.19 deváṃ-devam … índram-indram. I don’t quite know what to do with this fact. Keydana (p. 178) takes it as a “Matrixinfinitiv” functionally equivalent to an imperative, pointing to impv.

duvasyata in pāda a. However, it would also be possible to interpret it as I do, with duvasyata the main verb of both pādas and the infinitive an adverbial adjunct to both pādas. I would change the tr. of the āmreḍitas, however, to one more in harmony with that in VIII.12.19: “Time after time do friendly service to the fire with a kindling stick, time after time to your dear guest, in hymning (him).” The morphology of gṛṇīṣáṇi is of course unusual, though it belong with the small group of RV -san-i locatival infinitives, some of which (cf. esp. upastṛṇīṣáṇi, which, however, I now consider to be based on gṛṇīṣáṇi; see comm. ad VI.44.6) are built to already derived verbal stems (see AiG II.2.924-25). In this passage it phonologically echoes ghṛṇé and tatṛṣāṇáḥ in the preceding vs. (5d), and in the next vs. (which also belongs to the next tṛca) pāda-final gṛṇe, which is also of course etymologically related.


## 07
This vs. begins a new tṛca, but seems like a mish-mash of the vss. that precede it. The 1st pāda, sámiddham agníṃ samídhā girā́gṛṇe, telescopes vs. 6: agním-agnim … samídhā (a), gṛṇīṣáṇi (b), gī́rbhiḥ (c). It also contains two etymological figures (sámiddham … samídhā and girā́gṛṇe). The next pāda, śúcim pāvakám puró adhvaré dhruvám, is more eclectic in its sources: śúciḥ (1c), pāvakáyā (5a), svadhvarám (4b); pāda-final dhruvám has no direct correspondent, but resonates with both dúvaḥ (pāda-final in 6e) and adrúham, which ends the next pāda (7c). The first two words of pāda c, vípraṃ hótāram have correspondents in 4c and b respectively. Only pāda d breaks significantly new ground.


## 09
The publ. tr. fails to tr. dūtó devā́nām. The tr. should be emended to “… as messenger of the gods, you speed …” The lexeme ví √bhūṣ occurs only here and I.112.4 until Epic, and it is not entirely clear what it means here. “Seeking manifestation” of the publ. tr. depends on the usage of rare ví √bhū, which can mean ‘become manifest’; an example is found (at least by my lights) in vs. 14. But it might have the less marked meaning ‘becoming conspicuous, distinguished’ or ‘becoming extended/extensive’. In any case it picks up vibhúm, which opens the last pāda of the preceding vs. Note also the polarized preverbs ví and sám at opposite ends of the hemistich.

The Pp. takes ubháyām̐as acc. pl. masc. ubháyān (so also Gr), but as Old suggests (ZDMG 55.313, Noten), it could be neut. pl. ubháyā with nasalization in hiatus, and a neut. pl. construed with vratā́is an attractive choice here. The phrase ubháyā(m) ̐ ánu vratā́“following both (kinds of) commandments” would of course refer to those of gods and men, who were mentioned in 8c.

## 10
This vs. is rhetorically pleasing, though unremarkable in content. It opens with three cmpds with su- as first member, all in the realm of appearance (at least as I interpret the sequence) suprátīkaṃ suḍṛ́śaṃ s(u)váñcam. The next pāda juxtaposes a negated form of the pf. part. of √vid with a comparative built to the same stem (though different allomorph), ávidvāṃso vidúṣṭaram, picked up by a third form to this participle, vidvā́n, at the end of the next pāda -- which itself participates in an alliterative sequence víśvā vayúnāni vidvā́n.

svàñc- of course patterns and inflects with the -añc- stems, generally built to preverbs/adverbs in the meaning of ‘directed’ (e.g., údañc- ‘directed upward’), and in 2 of its 6 occurrences (IV.6.9, VII.56.16) the context favors the sense ‘welldirected’ (VI.58.4 is unclear). But here, as well as in similar adjectival sequences in VII.10.3 and in IX.73.7, it appears with words referring to seeing or appearance, and I suggest that this usage preserves a semantic relic of the ‘eye’ word (*h3eku̯ ) that, according to most, is one contributor to the blend that produces the hybrid suffix - añc- (see, e.g., AiG III.230). I therefore render it in these contexts as ‘of lovely outlook’ (contra Ge’s ‘schön von … Bewegung’). Re’s ‘de belle allure’ avoids the directional sense and may reflect an analysis similar to mine, but he does not comment. A zero-grade of the ‘eye’ word is also buried in prátīka-, also found in our sequence (suprátīka-), and in ánīka, which contributes svanīka- in 16a (for both see EWA s.vv.).

Although pāda-final vidvā́n is generally used absolutely, here it must take an object, vayúnāni.

The clear s-aor. subj. yakṣat in c invites a subjunctive reading of vocat in the next pāda, though it is of course injunctive. Nonetheless, modal readings are quite common for this stem.


## 11
This vs. is unusually conjunction-heavy, with utá in pāda a (conjoining clauses) and in d (conjoining nouns), and vā 3x in c. In fact there at first appear to be more vā’s than there are constituents to conjoin: yajñásya vā níśitiṃ vā-úditiṃ vā.

However, Klein (DGRV II.195) plausibly explains the first vā as sentential (I would prefer the term ‘clausal’ in this case), connecting pāda b with its relative clause yáḥ ...

ā́naṭ … with its continuation in pāda c. The other two vā’s are subclausal, conjoining the two -ti-stem action noun phrases, níśitiṃ vā-úditiṃ vā, both of which govern the gen. yajñásya, the constituency being interrupted by the clausal vā in Wackernagel’s position.

In c I assume that the verb is a gapped repetition of ā́naṭ. Klein tr. the skeleton of bc as “who has attained … or (has brought about) …,” so I assume he thinks c has a different underlying verb from b. But the full VP níśitim … ā́naṭ in nearby VI.13.4, as well as VI.2.5 níśitim … naśat also in this Agni cycle, establish this as a ritual idiom.

Note the complementary preverbs ní ‘down’ and úd ‘up’ in the conjoined níśitim … úditim. The latter word is not otherwise used as a ritual term; in all its other occurrences it is a loc. and refers to the rising of the sun. Here it seems to refer to the outcome or the progress of the sacrifice, though it could be more narrowly used for the “rising up” of the fire when it is kindled. This is probably the better interpr. because in 2 of the 4 occurrences of níśiti-, VI.2.5 and VIII.19.14, it is implicitly use of the fire.


## 12
The problematic pāda here is c. The initial sám in both c and d and the fact that d otherwise contains only a phrase in the nominative invite us to assume that c and d have the same structure and that we should supply the verb abhy ètu from c for d, as well as, quite possibly, tvā. But though the NP in d, “thousandfold desirable wealth,” is something we would quite naturally invite to “come to you entirely,” the general assumption is that dhvasmanvát, whether it modifies pā́thaḥ ‘fold’ (Gr, Re) or not (Old, Ge), refers to something undesirable -- e.g., Old’s (ZDMG 55.313) tentative “was voll von Zerfall [decay] ist.” It is therefore uncomfortable to invite it to come anywhere near Agni or us. Certainly both occurrences of its base dhvasmán- (IV.6.6, VIII.66.15) are in fact in negative contexts. But the substance itself, smoke, is semantically neutral, and in this ritual context something ‘possessing smoke’ can be positive: the oblation as it is poured into the fire will be surrounded by smoke, and, by one model of the sacrifice, it will go to the gods in Agni’s smoke as that smoke rises to heaven. I therefore supply havyám here (found in this tṛca in 10d), and take tvā and pā́thaḥ as two sequential accusatives of goal. Agni is the first destination of the smoke-wrapped oblation, which must be poured into the fire, but it then goes to “the fold (of the gods)” for their consumption -- devā́nām is a standard dependent gen. with pā́thaḥ (esp. in Āprī hymns, II.3.9, III.8.9, etc.).


## 13
Pāda b is nicely configured: víśvā veda jánimā jātávedāḥ. The first two and the last two words alliterate. The final word, the epithet jātávedas-, is immediately preceded by two independent words etymologically related to its two members (in reverse order): veda to -vedāḥ, jánimā to jātá-. (Of course, -vedas- may ultimately derive from √vid ‘find, possess’, but at least folk-etymologically it belongs with √vid ‘know’.) And víśvā veda evokes the cmpd viśvá-vedas-, a parallel formation to jātávedas-. Nothing profound here, but a pleasing way to deploy four words.


## 14
The first pāda is a 13-syllable Triṣṭubh; as Old notes (ZDMG 55.313 and Noten), it would be possible to delete init. ágne without affecting sense, but on the other hand it is difficult to see why it would have been secondarily appended.

In pāda a it is unclear how to construe viśáḥ. Note first that by accent it must be abl./gen. sg., not acc. pl. (víśaḥ). Ge (see n. 14ab) takes it as a second gen. with following voc. hotaḥ, but in that case we would expect viśáḥ to lose its accent in the voc. phrase (as adhvaryasya has), and, further, viśó hótar- is not a standard title, as far as I can find. It might be possible to supply *páti- “(lord) of the clan,” matching gṛhápatiḥ in the previous vs. (13a), next to hótā; cf. viśpátiḥ in 8d. However, I think the most likely solution is similar to the one also proposed for 1c -- to supply havyám as the object of véḥ in b (see havyā́in d), with viśáḥ dependent on havyám. Recall that the poet’s name is Vītahavya, and he seems to like concealed puns on his name.

As a support for their connection, note that the two phonologically similar words viśáḥ and véṣ take the same position in their respective pādas. Re’s solution is somewhat similar to mine, with viśáḥ dependent on an object supplied for véḥ, but his proposed object is “la fonction du messager” and he makes adhvarasya a parallel gen. to viśáḥ ignoring its lack of accent. His supplied obj. dūtyā̀ni is certainly conceivable: he adduces IV.7.8 vér adhvarásya dūtyā̀ni … But to my mind the pun on the name of the poet weighs more heavily.

In pāda b there is close sandhi in the sequence véṣ ṭ(u)vám; the reason for this is unclear, esp. since by all standard interpr. (incl. mine) t(u)vám belongs to a new clause -- the parenthetical one marked by hí -- and so there is a particularly sharp syntactic boundary between them.

In c mahinā́fits semantically much better in the subordinate yád clause than in the main clause (and is so taken by the standard interpr.), but it seems to be positioned too far to the left, with another element interposed before the subordinator: … mahinā́ví yád bhū́ḥ. I attribute this word order disturbance to the same factor that caused trouble in 1c: like janúṣā, mahinā́only occurs immediately after the caesura in trimeter vs. Given this constraint, the only possible adjustment to produce the expected sequence would be an ordering mahinā́*yád ví, which would put the subordinator in the correct 2nd position of its clause but produce a bad Triṣṭubh cadence (- - ⏑ ×). A somewhat similar situation is found in II.1.15c pṛkṣó yád átra mahinā́ví te bhúvat, where mahinā́causes some distortion in word order, though the placement of the subordinator is not affected.

With Lüders (438) I take ṛtā́as neut. acc. pl. and supply ‘hymns’ (Lieder), rather than taking it as an instr. sg.; this interpr. is supported by VII.39.1 ṛtám … yajāti, with the neut. sg. acc. Note the phonetic interplay of v, h, and y in d havyā́vaha yaviṣṭha yā́…


## 15
As Old points out (see publ. intro.), this is no doubt the last vs. of this collection of tṛcas, with vss. 16-19 later additions. There is some faint sign of ring composition with the first tṛca: súdhitāni in pāda a reprises súdhitam in 2a, as dadhīta with Agni as object does dadhúḥ also in 2a. The last three pādas of this vs., esp. de, appear to be a refrain: pāda e is identical to VI.2.11e = 14.6e in this Agni cycle, and pāda d ágne víśvāni duritā́tarema is a variant of VI.2.11d = 14.6d dviṣó áṃhāṃsi duritā́tarema, hence my supplied “narrow straits” here. These refrain pādas also signal that the hymn (or the tṛcas loosely collected into a hymn) once ended here.

On the anomalous position of hí here, see comm. ad III.31.12, where the idiosyncratic behavior of √khyā is discussed. Here the immediate preverbal position of hí is esp. anomalous because the preverb abhí has been fronted (as opposed to III.31.12 … ví hí kyán #, where the preverb stays in the verb complex).


## 16
The phrase “wooly womb” (ū́rṇāvantam yónim) is striking as a designation of Agni’s seat. Ge (n. 16b) thinks it refers to the barhis, but in fact the fire is not placed on that dry grass, which might produce a conflagration disruptive to the ritual.

I think it must rather refer to twigs and foliage still present on the firewood. In agreement with Ge (who is hesitant -- see n. 16c) and Re, I see a verseinternal enjambment: the two accusatives directly after the hemistich boundary, kulāyínaṃ ghṛtávantam, qualify yónim, which ends pāda b; then there is a syntactic break in the middle of the pāda, with dat. savitré construed with d, not c. This is unusual, but it is difficult to find a function for savitré in the preceding clause.


## 17
Ge and Re take aṅkūyánt- as a positive quality parallel to ámūra-; e.g., Re: “(dieu) faiseur de méandres, (dieu) exempt d’egarement.” I think rather that they are opposites and that the vs. concerns the flight of Agni and his recovery by the gods: note the imperfect ā́nayan (Pp. ā́ánayan, though technically it could be ā́nayan with an injunctive). Though Agni sought to elude the gods by taking a circuitous course, they found him and brought him straight back from the dark depths of the water. The “dark places” can of course also refer to the night, after which the ritual fire is kindled, but I think the primary reference is mythological.


## 18
On jániṣvā as belonging to the -iṣ-aorist, see Narten (Sig.-Aor, 68).


## 19
The slangy asthūrí ‘not one-horse’ is appropriate to this later addition to the hymn. Its positive sthū́ri ‘one-horse’ is found in the RV only once in the late X.131.3.
