+++
title = "016"

+++
Agni


## 01
The tr. “for the human race” reads like a dative, but mā́nuṣe jáne is of course a locative. Unfortunately English lacks the “bei” / “chez” locution that would idiomatically tr. this loc. ### 02-03
The first pādas of these vss. end respectively in adhvaré# and ádhvanaḥ#, which seems to signal an awareness of the deeper etym. relationship between the two stems.


## 03
Klein (DGRV II.122) tr. b patháś ca devā́ ñjasā as “and the paths going straight unto the heavenly ones,” apparently reading devā́ ñjasā as a cmpd., contrary to the Pp.

and all standard tr. (incl. mine), which separate deva as a voc. Although I think the voc. interpretation is correct, cf. X.73.7 pathó devatrā́ñjaseva yā́nān “… the paths as if going straight to the gods,” with the adv. devatrā́immed. preceding and construed with áñjasā. On the basis of X.73.7 and similar phraseology, Insler (KZ 82 [1968] “Vedic áñjasā, ṛñjasāná-, and the Type sahasāná-,” p. 6) takes devā́ ñjasā as a shortening of devatrā́ ñjasā or “a type of haplological abbreviation of devayā́ nān áñjasā” or possibly even directly as an “adverbial-type compound” devāñjásā, and Klein must be flg. the Insler interpr. one way or the other. Although X.73.7 is suggestive, I do not think it is sufficient to allow the rather extreme type of haplology posited by Insler.

## 04-06
As noted in the publ. intro., each vs. in this tṛca begins with a form of the 2nd sg. prn., although all three are slightly different: the acc. sg. t(u)vā́ m in 4a shows distraction; both 5a and 6a contain the nom. sg., but the 1st is undistracted, the 2nd distracted.


## 04
Klein (DGRV II.122) ascribes “logical conjunctive value ‘therefore’” to ádha here, connecting vss. 3 and 4. But since vs. 4 begins a new tṛca, it seems unlikely that vs. 4 is being conjoined to the tṛca-final vs. 3. Moreover, ádha here is displaced from its usual pāda-initial position to immediately precede dvitā́, as it does several times elsewhere (I.132.3, VIII.1.28, 84.2, all pāda-final as here; also pāda-initial VIII.13.24 = IX.102.1, VIII.83.8). On the preceding page (DGRV II.121) Klein calls ádha dvitā́a collocation and gives it “quasi-formulaic status.” The occurrence here must belong to this group.

In b bharató vājíbhiḥ “Bharata with his prize-winner” is an untranslatable pun on the poet’s name Bharad-vāja, whose name appears in the next vs. (5c).

The ritualistic verbs īḷe ‘reverently invoke’ (a) and ījé ‘sacrifice’ (c) are exact rhymes (save for accent). I take them here as 3rd sg. , as do Ge and Re. Although the 3rd sg. to the former stem is usually īṭṭ́ e with īḷ ́ e the 1st sg., in this context a 3rd sg. reading is favored, and the lack of accent on īḷe allows it to be drawn into the morphological orbit of the pf. ījé (cf. 3rd sg. perfect-accented īḍé in IV.3.3). Kü (389), flg. Tichy, takes both verbs as 1st sg., which is equally possible, as long as Bharata is referring to himself by name: “You do I, Bharata, reverently invoke …”


## 05
A verb must be supplied in this vs., with ‘give’ being the obvious choice.


## 06
The “divine race” (daívyaṃ jánam) here may resonate with the “human race, race stemming from Manu” (mā́nuṣe jáne) in 1c, though they belong to different tṛcas.

## 07-09
This tṛca likewise has a form of the 2nd sg. prn. beginning each vs. (7 t(u)vā́m, 8 táva, 9 t(u)vám), again all different.


## 08
(prá) yakṣi is morphologically ambiguous -- 2nd sg. act. -si impv. or 1st sg.

middle s-aor. -- and opinion is divided: Old (ZDMG 55.314, Noten) dithers and doesn’t ultimately decide; Ge, Narten (Sig.Aor. 200-201), and Klein (DGRV I.385) opt for the 1st sg., Re for the 2nd but to the root √yakṣ. A strong factor in favor of a 2nd sg. to √yaj is the presence of an undoubted form of this same -si impv. in the following vs. (9c; cf. also 2c); in favor of a non-2nd-sg. interpr. is the difficulty of construing pāda-initial táva with such an impv. I consider the form the 2nd sg. act. to √yaj, on the basis not only of 9c but also vs. 13 in the previous hymn (VI.15), where Agni is the subj. of a (pres.) impv. to prá √yaj: VI.15.13d yájiṣṭḥaḥ sá prá yajatām ṛtā́vā “let him, the best sacrificer, the truthful one, set the sacrifice in motion.” What then to do with the rest of the first two pādas? I accept Ludwig’s suggestion (registered by Old) that prá yakṣi is a parenthesis -- or rather, I think that, because of the rigid parallel patterning in this tṛca, táva, which belongs with the clause beginning saṃdṛ́śam, has been fronted around the peremptory impv. prá yakṣi, and that it is dependent on the NP saṃdṛ́śam utá krátum: “your manifestation and resolve do they take pleasure in.” This is, strictly speaking, ungrammatical, but rhetoric occasionally trumps syntax.


## 10
Both Ge and Re supply ‘gods’ as the underlying object of vītáye, and this is supported by devávītaye in vs. 7 (and 41). But as in the previous hymn (VI.15.1, 14), I think the default object of √vī here is havyá-, suggested by the name Vīta-havya, the poet to whom VI.15 is ascribed. Here the havyá- can easily be extracted from the parallel purpose dative havyá-dātaye in b and its absence explained as gapping.

However, the Ge/Re solution is certainly possible, and there are no major implications either way.

## 13-15
Another tṛca with fronted ‘you’ beginning all three vss., though here the 2nd two occurrences actually involve the enclitic with preposed pronominal prop: 14-15 tám u tvā, as opposed to 13 tvā́m. This tṛca is also characterized by snippets of mythology, contrasting with the otherwise monotonous focus on the standard ritual tropes. Unfortunately the snippets are just that -- they remain undeveloped.

This tṛca is recited in śrauta ritual during the churning of the fire; see Krick (Feuergründung, 297)


## 13
On the ritual use of the lotus and the relevance of this vs., see Krick (Feuergründung, 155-59), where (155) she calls this vs. “die Primärquelle für die Verwendung eines Lotusblattes im Feuerritual.” In c vāghátaḥ can be gen. sg. or nom. pl. (as I take it, with Ge and Re). Since I don’t know what’s going on here, I would certainly not exclude the gen. sg.: “… (churned) from the head of every vāghát” (so Krick 297) It is perhaps relevant that víśvasya vāghátaḥ phonologically echoes víśvasya jágataḥ “of the whole world” (I.101.5, IV.13.3, VI.50.7, VII.60.2, 101.2, X.73.8).


## 16
The stem ítara- is very rare in the RV and has a late distribution: besides this passage it is found only in the funeral hymns X.16.9-10 and X.18.1. This comparative isolation makes it difficult to determine its nuance here. Both Ge and Re (cf. also Klein DGRV I.266, Oberlies RdR I.242) think the phrase “other hymns” (ítarā gíraḥ) refers to the hymns of a rival sacrificer (or sacrificers), and certainly the

-tara- suffix implies a choice of two, which has the further potential implication that
one of them is bad. But, though the publ. tr. rather vaguely reflects this interpr., I now think it is likely wrong. Instead, I think that the implicit contrast is between itthā́ ‘in just this way’ and ítara-, and I further think that ítarā gíraḥ is the acc. obj. of brávāṇi, not the nom. subj. of a nominal clause in embedded direct speech. By this interpr. the speaker is telling Agni that in addition to the hymn or hymns he [=Agni] has already heard, the speaker will tell him other hymns in the same manner as the previous ones. In other words, he is promising a continuation of the recitation that has already pleased Agni, as well as promising to strengthen him with a physical offering — the usual pairing of verbal and physical in the sacrifice. This interpr. follows that of Hertha Krick (Feuergründung, p. 571): “Komm herbei, Agni, schön will ich dir auf solche Weise noch andere Lobpreisungen sagen! Durch diese Tropfen sollst du wachsen.” I would now emend the tr. to “Come here. I will speak other hymns to you, Agni, in this same way, and with these drops here you will become strong.” Oberlies claims that this is one of the only places in the RV that soma is pressed for Agni, but I do not see why the drops (índu-) can’t be drops of ghee. To be sure, índu- overwhelmingly refers to soma drops, but I don’t think that soma has to be the referent.


## 17
Note the phonological resonance between 16b ítarāḥ and 17b úttaram.

The temptation is very strong to take dadhase, despite its lack of accent, as the verb of the subord. cl. introduced by yátra kvà ca in pāda a, whose correlate tátra begins the last pāda (c). And indeed almost all interpr. (Old, Ge, Re, Klein DGRV I.266) have succumbed to this temptation. Old (ZDMG 55. 314-15) constructs an elaborate justification for the interpr., which he maintains in the Noten (though without the extensive special pleading). But despite Old’s claim (Noten) that “dadhase kann nicht ohne Gezwungenheit als Hautptsatzverb aufgefasste werden,” I see no problem. I agree that a form of √dhā should be supplied in the yátra clause -- perhaps hitám, as in I.187.6 tvé … máno hitám. The main clause of b, with its shortvowel subjunctive dadhase, expresses the next step in the process: after he has set his mind on something, he then will apply his skill to it -- the progression from mental conception to physical realization that we frequently encounter in the RV. I take úttara- here not as a qualification of value, ‘higher’ (e.g., Klein’s “higher skill”), but as a temporal or logical ‘next, later’ expressing the progress from a to b. The tátra clause of c gives us a third step, but the fact that this adverb correlates with yátra does not mean that the intermediate clause has to be under the domain of yátra.

## 18
It is not clear whether te pūrtám refers to a gift given to Agni or by him.

The publ. tr. takes it in the former sense, assuming that our gift to Agni will trigger his own actions for us in pāda c, in the standard reciprocal model of Vedic sacrifice.

Scar (293), in keeping with his interpr. of nemānām (see below), also thinks it’s a gift to Agni, but from others (“was [dir von anderen] geschenkt wird”). Re (see esp. his n.

expanding his tr.) takes it as Agni’s gift to us, and I interpr. Ge’s “deine Schenkung” in the same fashion. In fact, either interpr. is possible, and the choice will be influenced by one’s interpr. of pāda c.

The stem néma-, cognate to Aves. naēma- ‘half’, is implicitly oppositional, picking out one moiety or side, or simply “some” out of a larger group. Here the unaccented gen. pl. nemānām, part of the voc. phrase headed by vaso, refers, in my view, to our side. This is clearly Ge’s view because he footnotes his slightly awk.

“du Gott der einen Partei” with “Der Fromme oder Arier.” Other renderings are so awkward as to be almost unintelligible: Re “o Vasu, (dieu) de quelques-uns,” Klein (DGRV II.71) “o Vasu of some (races).” And Scar (293) takes it as referring to the opposition (“o du Vasu der andere”), which then requires Agni to do some amends- making in pāda c. I consider it extremely unlikely that the poet would address Agni, the focus of his praise, as a god of just some people, diluting his power and denying his omnipresence -- much less as a god of others. I might, however, slightly modify the publ. tr. from “on (our) side” to “of (our) side.” At first glance pāda c, átho dúvo vanavase, with its middle voice seems to involve Agni’s winning dúvas- for himself. This would be compatible with the Ge/Re interpr. of pāda a: if Agni gives us a not insignificant gift in pāda a, he has a good chance of winning our dúvas- in c. However, the almost identical expression in the immediately preceding hymn, VI.15.6d devó devéṣu vánate hí no dúvaḥ “for the god will win friendship for us among the gods,” with the crucial loc. devéṣu and dat. of benefit naḥ, suggests that Agni is winning something on our behalf. Cf. also, in this hymn, VI.16.28 agnír no vanate rayím “Agni will win us wealth.” The root √van ‘win’ is strongly represented in this hymn, esp. in the middle section. Here we have vanavase; elsewhere vanvánn ávātaḥ 20, vanván 26, vanvántaḥ 27, vanate 28, as well as vivāsasi 12. This repetition cuts across tṛca boundaries.


## 19
The “passive” aorist agāmi is a hapax and, in this context, a scrambling of adjacent ā́gní(r).


## 20
The root √dāś ‘piously serve’ almost never takes an acc. object of the service or offering (but see vs. 31 below); moreover, it almost exclusively has a mortal subject and a god as recipient of the piety. Here, however, we have the opposite situation: it is impossible to avoid taking Agni as subject and a very concrete rayím as acc. object, with the implied recipients being us mortals. The clue here may be the preverb, as áti √dāś in its other occurrence seems to mean something like ‘out-pious the pious’: maghaír maghóno áti śūra dāśasi “With your bounties you outdo the bounteous ones in piety, o champion [=Indra].” Although the case frame is not exactly the same, the nuance is similar: human patrons are bounteous, but Indra is super-bounteous. In our passage Agni provides wealth “beyond all earthly (goods).” I previously thought that “earthly goods” were simply those material things that have their origins on/in the earth rather than heaven, but it may well be more pointed than that here: “goods that are given by those who stem from/dwell on earth, that is, humans.” So Agni outdoes human givers by providing wealth in excess of all the goods they can supply. On ‘goods’ as the appropriate noun to supply with víśvā … pā́rthivā, cf. VI.45.20ab sá hí víśvāni pā́ rthivām̐, éko vásūni pátyate as well as VI.59.9, IX.100.3, X.111.10.


## 22
Pāda a contains a 2nd plural enclitic prn. and a plural voc. (vaḥ sakhāyaḥ “to/of you, o comrades”), while c has two 2nd singular imperatives (árca gā́ya). The discrepancy in number must reflect the common situation of a poet’s mixing address limited to himself with address to his colleagues and fellow ritual participants. So Ge (n. 22), and see my 2009 “Poetic Self-Reference in the Rig Veda and the Persona of Zarathustra,” BAI 19 (Fs. Skjaervø). Ge suggests without much enthusiasm that árca  gā́ya could be shortened 1st sg. subjunctives (*árcā *gā́yā), evidently responding to Caland/Henry’s reading the verbs thus in their 1906 L’Agniṣṭoma, p. 428 (see Old, who likewise rejects it). It’s worth noting that VI.45.4 has the same configuration but with 2nd plural imperatives: sákhāyaḥ …, árcata prá ca gāyata “o comrades, chant and sing forth …” This parallel is adduced by Bl (RR) ad V.52.4, where he calls our verse “a scrappy stanza …modelled after existing patterns” (that is, VI.45.4). The parallel is certain apposite, but I doubt that our number discrepancy is simply the result of our poet jumbling together scraps drawn from different sources.


## 23
The injunc. sī́dat, in conjunction with the acc. of extent of time mā́nuṣā yugā́“through the human lifetimes,” seems almost to have shed the literal sense of the root √sad ‘sit’ in favor of expressing pure durativity (“who, through the human lifetimes, has (always) been …”) -- though the immediately following hótā evokes the standard phrase for the installation of Agni as Hotar, with the full ‘sit’ clearly present if metaphorically meant. as in VI.1.2 ádhā hótā ny àsīdaḥ … (“then you sat down as Hotar”) in this Agni cycle. I rather imagine both senses are meant.


## 25
Given the proximity of ū́rj- ‘(solid) nourishment’ beginning c, iṣayaté in b might better be rendered in a manner closer to íṣ- ‘refreshment’ in the same semantic domain. So Ge “für die speisewünschenden Sterblichen,” Re “pour le mortel cherchant la jouissance.” I might suggest an alternative “… for the mortal seeking refreshment, / o child of nourishment.” What gives me pause, however, is iṣáyantaḥ in vs. 27 in the same tṛca, where the ‘prosper’ sense is favored. Although our dat. part. has accent on the ending, whereas iṣáyantaḥ has (secondary) “causative” accent, in fact oblique forms of -áya-participles seem regularly to have desinential accent: cf. mahayaté (VII.32.9) to maháyati, kṛpayatáḥ (VIII.46.16) to kṛpáyati. See disc. in my 1983 -áya-book, p. 49 with n. 3. Therefore these two nearby forms are likely to belong to the same stem and invite the same tr.


## 26
The krátu- is presumably Agni’s; cf. vs. 23 kavíkratuḥ used of him. Ge tr.

krátvā as “Mit dem Gedanken,” and takes the interior pādas bc as the directly quoted content of that thought. In addition to the aberrant tr. of krátu- (though one could tr.

“with the intention”), this seems unnecessary. Although, as Ge notes, krátvā in IV.1.1 does introduce such direct speech, it is marked there by íti, and the circumstances there are different as well.


## 29
This vs. ushers in a set of forms of √bhṛ (also vss. 36, 40, 41, 47, 48).


## 30
Note the close sandhi effect in the voc. phrase brahmaṇas kave. As Ge points out, this pāda is a variant of I.18.3 rákṣā ṇo brahmaṇas pate, with the more usual head noun páti-. Because it is part of a voc. phrase and such phrases show close sandhi effects elsewhere, this does not necessarily belong with the other instances of irregular sandhi of -s before kaví-, on which see comm. ad VII.18.2, though that may be a factor.

## 31
I do not know what the ā́ending the first pāda is doing. Sāy. takes it as preverb with dā́śati, but this root doesn’t otherwise appear with ā́, and pāda-final position is a strange place to put a preverb. There’s a pāda-final ā́also in 35a, but it is easier to justify, as governing a locational acc. I am disturbed by the usage of dā́śati here; for another problematic form to this root, see disc. ad vs. 20 above. The example here describes not pious service but a hostile act exactly contrary to the standard usages of the root. It also deviates from the usual case frame (offer service to a god [DAT] with an offering vel sim. [INSTR]), though a few passages match ours by expressing the offering in the ACC, e.g. I.93.3 … yá ā́hutiṃ, yó vāṃ dā́śād dhavíṣkṛtim “whoever will piously perform a poured offering or the preparation of an oblation for you.” Assuming the reading is correct, I think we must see this as a monstrous reversal: instead of piously offering an oblation (ACC) to a god (DAT), the evil mortal is impiously offering us (ACC), as a sort of oblation, to a weapon of death (DAT). The standard tr. (including mine) elide the shock of the use of this verb of ritual service in such a context, by tr. √dāś differently from usual. But I’m not sure how to remedy this in tr. without a lot of explanatory baggage. Perhaps “who will ‘piously’ offer us …”? Ge and Re take tásmāt … áṃhasaḥ as a single NP “from that áṃhas-,” but this requires taking yáḥ in pāda a as an improper rel. for “when” (so Ge) or seeing the relation between ab and c as an anacoluthon (so Re), because their interpr. of c provides no referent for yáḥ … mártaḥ in the dependent cl. This can all be fixed by separating the two abl. in the main clause, with tásmāt the correlative to yáḥ. Since the immediately preceding vs. (30) has exactly the structure envisioned for our c pāda -- two parallel ablatives, one áṃhasaḥ and the other referring to a person -- there is very local precedent.


## 35
This vs. is syntactically incomplete (unless we take sī́dan in c as a predicated pres. part., which seems unlikely, since this is a repeated pāda [=IX.32.4, IX.64.11]), but it works well as adjunct to the previous vs., 34.

Pāda a shows the preoccupation with kinship that is characteristic of Agni material. The paradox “father of his father” (pitúṣ pitā́[note close sandhi effect]) probably reflects two themes -- 1) that the priest who kindles the fire is in some sense his/its father, but Agni the god has a fatherly relationship to his mortal worshipers, 2) that the offering fire (later called the Āhavanīya) is “taken out” of what is later called the Gārhapatya and is therefore in some sense its son, but the offering fire is more important than the other fires on the ritual ground and can therefore be considered their father.

The meaning ‘syllable’ for akṣára- is quite stable in later Skt., but in the RV it sometimes has its literal sense ‘imperishable’. Nonetheless in our passage I think ‘syllable’ is meant: the ritual fire is kindled when the hymn (here represented by the syllable) is recited. So, more or less, Ge “bei der (heiligen) Rede (?) aufleuchtend” (sim. Kü 250), though cf. Re “dans (l'espace) inépuissable.” The pāda-final ā́in c was mentioned above ad vs. 31, where it was pointed out that the occurrence here in 35c can easily be accounted for. ā́frequently governs a preceding acc. (see collection in Gr., col. 169), and in fact yónim ā́is found not only in this pāda and its repetitions (see above), but also in similar pādas in IX.61.21, 65.19).


## 39
Unlike most -hán- cmpds, whose 1st member is the target of the smiting, in śarya-hán- the 1st member śarya- ‘arrow’ must be in an instr. relationship with the 2nd (see Scar 693), like muṣṭi-hán ‘smiting with the fist(s)’. Because “like a powerful shooter with arrows / one who shoots arrows” is exceptionally awk in English, I’ve substituted ‘sharpshooter’, though it interferes with the tigmá- in tigmá-śṛṅga- ‘sharp-horned’ in the next pāda.


## 40
The simile marker ná is wrongly placed in pāda b, for no obvious reason.

The two comparanda to Agni -- a bangle in the hand, a newborn babe, both carried -- suggest that this is the newly kindled fire, probably the offering fire, being taken out of the householder’s fire and carried to the east.


## 41
This impression about vs. 40 is supported by vs. 41.


## 42
However, the waters are somewhat muddied by vs. 42. The loc. jātávedasi (the only such form in the RV) is puzzling, since jātávedas- is one of the standard epithets of Agni and the accusatives in the vs. clearly refer to Agni as well. Thus we must be dealing with two fires. This idea would be perfectly compatible with the scenario I suggested for vs. 40 -- except that acc. gṛhapátim in pāda c suggests that the newly born fire being “whetted” is not the offering fire (later to be called the Āhavanīya) taken out of the old fire and moved to its new location, but rather what will come to be called the Gārhapatya. The (later) ritual complex that our passage most resembles is the creation of the Mahāvedi (see my Hyenas, p. 89, inter alia), in which the old Āhavanīya of the standard ritual ground is moved further to the east during the creation of the Mahāvedi, and the old Āhavanīya becomes the Gārhapatya.

Thus it seems that vss. 40-41 concern the further displacement of the Āhavanīya fire and 42 depicts the resettlement of the original householder’s fire onto the place the Āhavanīya occupied in the more restricted ritual ground. This may be Ge’s view; see his n. 41ab, where he refers to the agnipraṇayana, which is the technical term for carrying the Āhavanīya to the Uttaravedi in the animal sacrifice (see Sen, Dict. of Vedic Rituals, s.v.; Caland-Henry, Agniṣṭoma pp. 78-79). However, his n. 42 goes in a different direction. If this really does concern the creation of the Mahāvedi from the ordinary ritual ground, we would have evidence for this degree of elaboration already in (late) Rigvedic ritual.


## 43
The hí in the impv. clause is somewhat disturbing, since there is no following impv. in this vs. to which the hí impv. clause could serve as basis.

However, 44a contains two impvs. that logically follow the yukṣvā́‘yoke!’ -- namely yāhi ā́vaha “drive and convey here!” and so the usual use of hí in impv. clauses can be seen here, across two vss.


## 44
The very compressed pāda b could be elucidated with “… for (them=gods) to pursue (them=offerings).” There are numerous parallels that establish this as the intention.


## 47
Bloomfield (ad V.6.5) proposes tr. our passage “We bring ... oblation with song fashioned in the mind,” suggesting that “the cases of ṛcā́and havíḥ are inverted.” This is certainly true at the level of deep-structure formula: hṛdā́taṣṭá- “fashioned by the heart” normally modifies a verbal product, e.g. I.171.2 stómo hṛdā́taṣṭáḥ. But, as so often, the poet is playing with our expections by producing a twist on the standard phraseology.

## 47-48
This long hymn (or the short final tṛca) seems to end with a buried poetic signature: 47b ends with bharāmasi, 48c with vājínā, the last word of the hymn. Together they are the elements that make up the poet’s name Bharadvāja.
