+++
title = "017"

+++
Indra This hymn is marked by clusters of localized repetitions and echoes; see disc.

below.

## 01-03
These first three vss. form something of a unity. Each begins with a “drink!” imperative (1a píbā sómam, 2a sá īm pāhi, 3a evā́pāhi), and each contains the lexeme abhí √tṛd ‘drill through to’. As outlined below, it is a pleasingly designed rhetorical structure, whose balance and contrast only become evident after conscious analysis.


## 01
Ge (flg Gr, fld. by Schmidt, B+I, 144) takes yám as obj. of abhí and referring to sómam in the opening impv. phrase (“Drink the soma, towards which …”). As Old points out (both ZDMG 55.319-20 and Noten), this entails either that the soma is within the cow enclosure or at least that breaking into the cow enclosure is a necessary auxiliary action for getting or preparing the soma -- which is, of course, not a standard part of the Vala myth. Old therefore emends the text, from yám to

*yáḥ, producing parallel rel. clauses concerning the Vala myth and the Vṛtra myth
respectively, with Indra the subject of both, represented by *yáḥ. But how would this corruption arise? Old suggests that *yáḥ (*yá in this sandhi context) was changed to yám because it immediately follows abhí, but it is hard to conceive of a Rigvedic poet who could be misled by a separable preverb, esp. since the 2nd hemistich has a supposedly parallel rel. cl. containing yáḥ, likewise following a preverb (ví). I agree with Old that Ge’s interpr. is unlikely, but I do not think this requires changing the text. Instead I think píbā sómam is an abrupt hortatory opening, essentially detached from the rest of the vs., and I take the yám as referring to the ūrváṃ gávyam. This whole clause anticipates the imperatival main clauses that end the next vss., 2d sá indra citrā́m̐abhí tṛndhi vā́jān and 3d … abhí gā́indra tṛndhi, both with abhí √tṛd and an obj. that refers to the contents of the cattle enclosure. My interpr. requires the rel. cl. of 1ab to float in syntactic suspension till it is resolved in 2d, with a number of other things going on in between -- mostly rel. clauses with Indra as subject, but I do not think this is much to ask of a Rigvedic audience. In fact, I think that the rel. cl. in 1ab is the initial marker of the ring structure that prevails in these three vss.

In d Ge suggests that vṛtrám is a “collective singular” and should be construed with neut. pl. víśvā amitríyā, tr. “alle feindseligen Vṛtra’s.” I see no advantage to ignoring the number, and the passages he adduces as parallel do not impose the notion of “collective singular.”


## 02
Again I think the “drink!” imperative is semi-detached from the rest of the vs., a mere interruption of the sequence of rel. clauses with Indra as subj., which begins with a fully realized clause in 1cd and continues in 2abc with a set of five compressed definitional nominal clauses with an izafe-like feel.


## 03
The “drink!” sequence is brought to an end with a summary evā́in 3a. The verse continues with a series of 7 choppy imperatival clauses, all but the first (mándatu tvā) with Indra as subj., which balance the choppy nominal relative clauses of vs. 2. The last of these clauses is the third iteration of abhí √tṛd, with which we began.

## 3-5ab
mándatu tvā in 3a inaugurates a 3-vs. sequence chained together by the root √ma(n)d ‘exhilarate’, a sequence whose 1st vs. (3) overlaps with the last vs. of the initial triad. The other representatives also occur in the 1st pāda: mádāḥ in 4a and mandasānáḥ in 5a. Cf. also matsarā́saḥ in 4d. The conceptual unity of the sequence is underlined by the fact that 5ab is a rel. clause that must hang off the previous vs. The 2nd hemistich of 5 marks a sharp break.


## 06
This last vs. of the Vala section reprises ūrváṃ gávyam from 1b with ūrvā́d gā́ḥ in 6b, both immediately pre-caesura, producing a ring. Thus, the supposedly problematic rel. cl. of 1ab participates in two rings in this brief 6-vs. section, with different parts of the clause in play in the two rings. See disc. ad vs. 1.

VI.17.7-10: An initial phonological sequence unifies this set of vss.: from the 2nd half of 7 through the 1st half of 10 every hemistich begins with ádh (or the variants ád and áh): 7c ádhā(rayo), 8a ádha, 8c ád(eva), 9a ádha, 9c áh(im), 10a ádha.


## 07
Both Old (ZDMG 55.320 and Noten) and Ge (fld. by Klein DGRV II.92- 93) strongly argue that paprā́tha belongs to √prath ‘spread’, not √prā ‘fill’, to which Gr assigns it. I find their insistence puzzling. On their side, ví √prath is a fairly common lexeme, used often of the earth, whereas ví is rare to non-existent with √prā.

But the actual verb form is wrong for all sorts of reasons. First, the indic. pf. of √prath is otherwise only middle, but this would be act. Second, the root √prath  never otherwise has vṛddhi forms, but the root syllable here is prāth. Then, if it is a 3rd sg. (so Ge “Er breitete …”), it opens a cosmogonic sequence of 2nd sg. expressions, and such formulaic cosmogonies tend to be consistent in ps. and no. (though see 9cd below). Recognizing this last problem, Old suggests it’s a 2nd sg., standing for

*paprath-tha > *paprattha, with the heavy syllable *atth redistributing metrical
weight [not his terminology] to āth. This type of change would not be unusual in Middle Indic, but it would have been useful to provide parallel examples in Rig Veda.

Moreover, since √prath is a seṭ root, we should in any case expect a 2nd sg.

*paprathitha. The only factor on their side of the ledger is the preverb, and since our
poet no doubt playfully recognized that the form would evoke √prath, it is not surprising that he would import the preverb. Unambiguous perfect forms to √prā ‘fill’ frequently take the earth as obj. as here (e.g., III.30.11 índra ā́paprau pṛthivīm utá dyā́m), which makes the Old/Ge intransigence all the more surprising.

In pāda a máhi dáṃsaḥ interrupts the obj. phrase kṣā́m … urvī́m. Ge’s nominal phrase “— ein grosses Meisterstück—” is less disruptive than my nominal clause “great is your wondrous skill,” and might be preferable on those grounds.


## 08
As Ge points out, the non-god (ádeva-) is presumably Vṛtra. This identification is clinched by the fact that the verb here, aúhiṣṭa ‘vaunted himself’ (√uh/oh), reappears in the (pseudo-)participle óhasāna- modifying áhi- ‘serpent’ in the next vs. (9c).

In d the pres. vṛṇate is a bit surprising in this mythological narrative.


## 09
The word and particle order of the 1st hemistich seems designed to produce despair in those of us who seek (and believe in) principles and rules for such ordering: ádha dyaúś cit te ápa sā́nú vájrād, dvitā́namat … seems randomly to scatter nouns, pronouns, and particles through the first pāda. However, I think that my interpr. of the first pāda imposes more rationality on the sequence than Ge’s does and also eliminates at least one further problem. Note first the preverb ápa in the middle of the 1st pāda, though preverbs in tmesis (as this is, from anamat in b) usually move to metrical boundaries. [It is true that it appears directly after the caesura, but generally a preverb in tmesis takes this position only when the verb is in the same pāda, or such is my impression.] Note, moreover, the apparent doubling of the subject dyaúḥ with the pronoun sā́likewise in the middle of the same pāda, directly after the preverb. Note finally that after a beginning that seems to conform fairly well to Rigvedic word-order norms (extraclausal introductory ádha, noun+emphatic ptcl dyaúś cid, enclitic prn. in modified 2nd position te), the clause seems to begin over again: preverb ápa, prn. sā́(curiously, fem. sā́seems more inclined to 2nd position than masc. sá), modified 2nd pos. ptcl. nú. Ge’s tr. simply ignores this stuttering start (“Da wich selbst der Himmel von deiner Keule ..”), and he also doesn’t comment on the fact that his interpr. implicitly requires dyaúḥ to be picked up by a fem. prn.: Gr lists this passage as one where that noun has fem.

gender. Although ‘heaven’ sometimes does seem to be fem., such passages are rarer than Gr makes out, and this example would be esp. striking because there’s no reason for dyaúḥ to be doubled by a pronoun in the first place, whatever its gender.

I think both problems can be solved by assuming that sā́actually adds a second referent to the clause; in context with ‘heaven’ this would obviously be the fem. ‘earth’ (generally pṛthivī́-, but perhaps here, because of their joint presence in 7ab, kṣā́-). No Rigvedic audience would need further specification, once the feminine gender of the referent was established. By this interpr. the post-caesura sequence ápa sā́nú … is not an awkward redo of the 1st half of the pāda, but introduces a parallel subject to dyaúḥ, more clearly distinguished from ‘heaven’ than in the usual dual dvandva formulation. The separation of the two subjects is, in my opinion, signalled by dvitā́‘yet again’ beginning the next pāda; I render it here as “likewise also.” The parallels adduced by Ge (IV.17.2, I.80.11, II.12.13, V.32.9) actually support my interpr. because all four of them depict both heaven and earth (or in the case of the last, the two world-halves) trembling in fear of Indra.

Alternatively, MLW suggests (p.c.) that dyaúḥ could have fem. gender here because of its unmanly behavior in flinchig away from Indra’s weapon. Restarting with sā́would emphatically draw attention to this gender switch: “Then even Heaven, really a she …” This is clever, but I still prefer my own solution.

Flg. Ge (“… dass er für alle Zeit erlag”), I take śayáthe here as a quasiinfinitive expressing purpose with jaghā́na; in this function it seems directly parallel to śayáthāya in the next hymn (VI.18.8), to the same stem. Unfortunately they must then be in different cases, the dative, understandably, in VI.18.8, the loc., less understandably, here. However much I would like to, I cannot find a way to make our śayáthe a dative, there being no athematic stem *śayáth-. We could, of course, interpr. the locative as a real expression of location: “struck down the serpent in his lair,” but not only am I reluctant to lose the semantic connection with VI.18.8, but the acc. extent of time viśvā́yuḥ ‘for a full lifespan’ only makes sense with the verbal interpr. of śayáthe ‘to lie’.

Despite Gr and Lub, a number of viśvā́yuḥ forms, which they assign to the stem viśvā́yu- and therefore interpr. as nom. sg. masc., must have the 2nd member ā́yus- and therefore be nom./acc. sg. neut., often used as an adverbial indication of extent of time as here (so Ge’s tr. as well; see above). See AiG II.2.479. I concede that it would be possible to take the form as a nom. here — “when Indra, having a full lifespan, struck down the serpent …” — with Indra’s full lifespan implicitly contrasting with Vṛtra’s death, but I find the extent-of-time adverbial more compelling. And in a passage like I.68.5 viśvā́yur víśve ápāṃsi cakruḥ “all have performed their tasks lifelong,” the plural subject rules out a nom. sg. interpr. for viśvā́yuḥ. Although the stem viśvā́yu- certainly exists, it has a doublet with final -s-, exactly like the simplex pair ā́yu-/ ā́yus-.

Assuming the correctness of the above disc. of viśvā́yuḥ, Vṛtra’s fate, “to lie there for a full lifespan,” is somewhat ironic, since he’s dead: he will spend his full lifespan dead.

## 10
With Old I assume an underlying mahé, contra Pp. maháḥ, despite Ge’s doubts (n. 10b).

The morphological identity of vavṛtat isn’t at all clear. Gr calls it a “Conj.” aor.; Whitney seems to suggest a subj. to a redupl. pres. Lub identifies it as a “[RED.AOR.inj.(them.)].” A pf. subj. makes the most formal sense, save for the zerograde root syllable, but a subjunctive would be out of place in this mythological passage. Kü (460) treats our form as a “Sonderfall” and calls it a thematic injunctive, expressing an action prior to that of the verb sáṃ piṇak in d. Since, in his view, this same anterior value is expressed by the impf. of the caus. (ávartayat in I.85.9), he calls our form an “Oppositionsbildung zum Kausativ,” whatever that means, but ultimately gives up on determining its morphological identity. I agree that the form cannot functionally be a subjunctive and am willing to accept that it is a nonce injunctive -- but this is a description, not an explanation. Note the pf. opt. vavṛtyāt in 13d, whose redupl. profile vavṛt- matches that of this form.

As for what the clause expresses, I assume that Tvaṣṭar is manufacturing the vájra- by turning it on a lathe or lathe-like device. (The internet tells me that the lathe dates back to antiquity, with good evidence from ancient Egypt, but it is difficult to know how much to trust this.) Alternatively, but less likely in my view, Tvaṣṭar is displaying it to Indra by turning it here and there to allow its spikes and edges to glint in the light.

The other verb form in this vs., sám piṇak in d, also presents difficulties, because, despite being in a relative cl., it is unaccented. I have no explanation for the failure to accent (nor does Old, I’d point out). Of course, one can note the unusual position of the rel. prn. yéna, at the end of pāda c as the first word of the subord.

clause that otherwise occupies d, with the rel. prn. intervening between the acc. sg.

masc. phrase níkāmam arámanasam that modifies the vájram of the main cl. and the acc. sg. masc. phrase návantam áhim that provides the object of the rel. cl. But Rigvedic poets are unlikely to be thrown by this positioning. It is also noteworthy that pāda c as it stands has only 10 syllables; Old suggests that we might read iéna to round out the Triṣṭubh, which would be unprecedented in the rel. prn., as far as I know. Pāda c is also unusual in having 5 light syllables in a row: (níkā)mam arámana(saṃ yéna), and indeed, were we to read i y éna, this would rise to 7. Since arámanasa- is a hapax and it participates in a metrically disturbed sequence, it may be that the pāda is somehow corrupt. But no way of fixing any of this comes to mind.

On the retroflex ṇ in piṇak, see Old, ZDMG 55.321.


## 11
For Agni as the subj. of pácat and cooker of the buffaloes, see V.29.7-8 adduced by Ge and Old, ZDMG 55.321.

In the 2nd hemistich we have only two expressed subjects, Pūṣan and Viṣṇu, but a plural verb dhāvan. The obvious solution, as seen by all, is to assume that other gods participated in this action.

The question is -- what action? The verb is generally assigned to √dhāv ‘run’.

Gr gives a transitive-causative value to this stem in this passage and this passage alone (Gr “jemandem [D.] etwas [A.] zuströmen”); Ge follows this trans. interpr.: “… liessen für ihn den … (Soma)stengel … strömen,” and indeed interprets another passage as having this value (IX.54.2). However, since all other acc. with √dhāv are goals to an intrans. verb of motion, this contextual adjustment is unacceptable. Gotō (1st Klasse, 183 and n. 325) disputes both of Ge’s trans. interpretations and fixes this passage by dividing the two pādas into two clauses. The first has an acc. goal sárāṃsi (“…eilen zu den drei [Soma]seen”), which seems reasonable (indeed cf. IX.54.2 ayáṃ sárāṃsi dhāvati), but he must supply a verb (‘gave’) out of thin air to make pāda d to work: “[sie geben] ihm den Vrtrat ̥ ötenden, berauschenden Somastengel.” The problem can be solved by assigning the verb to the other root √dhāv ‘rinse’, part of the standard vocabulary of soma preparation. VIII.2.25 (ā́dhāvata … sómaṃ vīrā́ya) presents an exactly parallel construction with soma as acc. obj. and the recipient, Indra, in the dat. Moreover, ‘rinse’ would add a complementary foodpreparation term to √pac ‘cook’ in pāda b, with both solid and liquid nourishment thus covered, whereas ‘run’ is a bit of a non sequitur. The only thing that gives me pause is X.113.2 tám asya víṣṇur mahimā́nam ójasā, aṃśúṃ dadhanvā́n …, where we have Viṣṇu, the aṃśú, and an undoubted 'run’ (to the separate root √dhan[v]). But this late passage does not seem to me sufficient to outweigh the fact that a ‘rinse’ interpr. here allows the hemistich to be a single syntactic unit and forestalls the need to supply a verb for d out of nowhere.


## 12
In d apásaḥ ‘busy, industrious’ (Ge’s fleissig) is, of course, a pun on the ‘water’ word, whose acc. pl. is apás.


## 14
I take the construction √dhā ACC [anim.] ACC.ADJ -mant-/vant- to mean “provide someone (X) with something (Y),” lit. “establish X as possessing (-mant- /vant-) Y.” The datives of ab are then further objects to aspire to: once the poets have brilliance, they can use that brilliance, which transforms into poems, in pursuit of more worldly goals, the prize, etc. This interpr. essentially follows Ge’s.
