+++
title = "018"

+++
Indra


## 01
This vs. contains two pairs of positive/negative etymological figures, both consisting of a pres. participle with “active” value (though one of them is morphologically middle) and a negated past part.: vanvánn ávātaḥ “vanquishing but unvanquished” and áṣāḷham … sáhamānam “conquering but unconquered.” It may not be an accident that the root syllables in each pair, though related by standard derivational processes, are quite distinct because of morphophonemic changes: van / vā and sah / ṣāḷh.


## 02
On unclear khaja- see comm. ad VII.20.3.


## 03
The sequence 2ND SG. PRN ha tyád (here ha nú tyád) is fairly common and appears to be strongly emphatic, hence my tr. “it was just you” (etc.). In several hymns (I.63.4-7, VIII.96.16-18) this construction is found in series. I take the fronted ásti followed by svid to be a strong existential “does it exist?” rather than simply the possessive constr. that Ge sees: “Hast du … diese Manneskrafte …?”


## 04
The fronted ásti in the previous vs. is matched by equally emphatic, fronted sád íd. Although Ge takes sát as the modifier of the sáhaḥ that begins the next pāda, I think instead that it answers the question posed in 3cd and therefore implicitly modifies vīryàm in 3c. This is then further specified as sáhaḥ beginning in b, which then is qualified by the adjectives ugrám and távīyaḥ in c.

The last three pādas of the vs. are a veritable riot of etymological figures, with two each in b and c and one in d: b sáhaḥ sahiṣṭha turatás turásya, c ugrám ugrásya tavásas távīyaḥ, d áradhrasya radhratúraḥ … The 2nd member of this last cmpd, -tur-, belongs etymologically with the 2nd figure of b, turatás turásya, though unfortunately since it’s used in a somewhat different sense, this connection cannot easily be conveyed in translation. Similarly, the 2nd figure of c, tavásas távīyaḥ, picks up the tuvi- of the cmpd in a, tuvi-jātá-. So, in addition to the juxtaposed linear figures, there is some interweaving across pāda boundaries.


## 05
As the opening words of pāda b, itthā́vádadbhiḥ, indicate, the previous pāda is the direct speech of the Aṅgirases. In keeping with the two immediately preceding vss., I take astu as an existential: “let that partnership (still) exist.” The wording is otherwise very like IV.10.8 śivā́naḥ sakhyā́sántu ... devéṣu yuṣmé. The clear loc. devéṣu in that passage anchors the loc. identity of yuṣmé both in that passage and this one. The loc. is somewhat odd: generally sakhyá- is construed with gen. or instr., as already set forth by Gr s.v. However, cf. VII.22.9 (=X.23.7), which also contains a pl.

ps. prn. in -e: asmé te santu sakhyā́śivā́ni. In the publ. tr. I take the asmé there as a dat.: “Let there be friendly fellowship of you for us.” But in light of the two parallel structures with yuṣmé, I think it must be a loc., and these three passages, each of which is rendered differently in the publ. tr., should be harmonized. I now think that all three are existential (although the two with śivá- could be equational, with a pred.

adj.) and that the loc. specifies the locus of the partnership, either in or “bei” the pronominal referent. Though this is functionally equivalent to “with,” as in the publ.

tr., I would slightly modify the tr. to better reflect the loc.: “Let there (still) be ageold partnership for us among you,” though “… with you” would in fact be clearer.

The placement of valám in the middle of the instr. phrase in b, with its governing verb (hán) not found till c, is somewhat odd, but see comm. ad vs. 8 below.

Presumably the Vala cave is “prospering” because it is full of cows. On the accent of iṣáyantam here, see my -áya-Formations, p. 49 and n. 3.

The positive active / negative passive figure found twice in vs. 1 is here embodied in the single word, the root-noun cmpd voc. acyuta-cyut- ‘shaker of the unshakable’.


## 06
The vs. contains 3 coreferential sá, at the beg. of a and of c and in the middle of c. I have interpr. the first half of c as belonging with ab, with the loc. tokásātā tánaye parallel to loc. mahatí vṛtratū́rye in b and the mid-pāda sá in c introducing a new cl. Others (Ge, Schaef., Intens. 126) take all of c with d. There is no way to determine and very little riding on it. However, see the comm. on the next vs. The hí in pāda a seems to have little or no causal value; similarly the one in 4a.

Although the overt ásti reminds us of the other overt forms of √as in previous vss. (3, 4, 5), which were (at least by my lights) existential, ásti here seems to be a straight copula and therefore pleonastic.

In tokásātā tánaye we can assume that tánaye shows a kind of gapping of the 2nd cmpd member found in toká-sāti-, hence a putative *tánaya-sāti-. Ge’s cited parallels, e.g., II.30.5 tokásya sātaú tánayasya …, confirm this.


## 07
This vs. continues the overabundance of sá from the last vs., esp. in the 2nd hemistich, with initial sá and post-caesura sá in c and initial sá in d, in addition to the one opening the vs. Each of these sá is associated with a different instr. phrase or phrases. The one in the first hemistich has the capacious bipartite majmánā … ámartyena nā́mnā embedded in a full clause with the verb prá sarsre; the two in pāda c occur only with instrumentals (dyumnéna in the opening and the conjoined śávasotá rāyā́after the caesura); the one in d has only a single instr. (vīryèṇa) but is part of a clause again, though with a pred. adj. sámokaḥ, not a finite verb. Since the structure of this vs. is like that of vs. 6, the question again arises as to where to attach c (or the two parts of c). Flg. Ge I take all of c with d, construing all the instrumentals with sámokaḥ ‘at home (with)’. But I now see that, because the structures in c are minimal, it could as well go with ab (or the first half with ab, the second with d). This would produce alternative translations “Through his greatness and his immortal name he extended himself, (and also) through his brilliance and his power and wealth. He is at home with heroism.” or even “Through his greatness and his immortal name he extended himself, (and also) through his brilliance; he is at home with power and wealth and with heroism.” (This last, with the first part of c leaning backward and the 2nd leaning forward, would mimic my interpr. of vs. 6.) Again I do not see a way to decide the question, but I think it’s worth noting how the poet has cleverly constructed pāda c so that it is ambig.


## 08
As Ge points out (n. 8b), the role of Cumuri and Dhuni in the RV is to be put to sleep by Indra, so that Dabhīti can deliver the coup de grâce to them. See the various passages adduced by Ge and esp. nearby VI.26.6. In our vs. they are marooned at the end of the first hemistich, and after an initial verb in c another set of Indra’s victims is introduced: Pipru, Śambara, and Śuṣṇa. Ge asks whether we should assume an ellipsis with Cumuri/Dhuni phrase (in other words, supply a form of “put to sleep”) or a zeugma (in other words, to take them as objects of vṛṇák with the Pipru group, though their fates were met in different ways). I have chosen the 2nd option. The audience would certainly know the particular destiny of Cumuri and Dhuni but would also be able to lump them in with other targets of Indra, all as objects of a generically violent verb. (It may be worth noting that vṛnák here is one of the very few forms of √vṛj that lacks a preverb, though cf. nearby VI.26.3.) The segregation of Cumuri and Dhuni in pāda b, away from the verb and the other victims, might give us pause, but cf. vs. 5, where the obj. valám is found in the interior of pāda b, with the verb beginning c.

In d the datives cyautnā́ya and śayáthāya have parallel infinitival function.

For the latter cf. also śayáthe in the preceding hymn (VI.17.9, with disc. ad loc.) with the same apparent meaning but in a different case.


## 09
udā́vatā is read udávatā by the Pp. and is generally considered the instr. of the pres. act. part. of úd √av ‘help’, with metrical lengthening (so explicitly Lub), a lengthening that is unmotivated. It is also the case that úd is not especially common with √av, though I concede that the six passages I’m aware of make this an established usage. I also find it surprising that there is no preverb with tiṣṭha in the expression in b, rátham … tiṣṭha “mount the chariot,” since this expression is almost always found with preverb, generally ā́, also ádhi. I therefore wonder if the initial string in pāda a is actually concealing the preverb(s), in tmesis: ud-ā́, followed by the uncompounded pres. part. ávatā. This analysis is responsible for my tr. “up and mount …” I realize, however, that a number of objections can be raised. The combination ud-ā́doesn’t otherwise occur with √sthā, but I would point out that both occur with that root individually. Two further potential problems: 1) two preverbs next to each other in tmesis, rather than the usual single one. I confess I do not know of other examples. 2) the accentuation: the accented vowels of ā́and ávatā would coalesce, resulting in a single udātta -- this is unproblematic -- but the lack of accent on ud looms larger. Here I rely on Macdonell’s observation (VGS, p. 469) that when ā́is immediately preceded by another preverb, ā́alone has the accent. In Macdonell’s formulation this applies (only) to these sequences when compounded with verbs; I would here extend that to the same sequence in tmesis. This may be too much machinery to deploy simply in order to account for the surprising, supposed metrical lengthening of udā́vatā and the surprising lack of preverb with tiṣṭha, but it seems worth considering. Alternatively, it could be that udā́vatā is a cmpded pres. part., but cmpded not only with úd, but also ā́. This is the solution of Rivelex (I.541), and it may be the best compromise, though ā́is not otherwise found with √av, as far as I know. (I have not been able to find the ā́+√av claimed by Rivelex in the head note on p. 538, and in the claimed prá ā́passage (VIII.23.2), ā́is a postposition, as is more or less admitted p. 543 n. 1.) The ca in the instr. phrase in pāda a seems pleonastic, and if it is implicitly connecting the two adj. modifying tvákṣasā, viz. ávatā (or udā́vatā) and pányasā (Klein DGRV I.71 “aiding and wondrous”), they seem ill-assorted semantically. I wonder if it is meant to connect the first ADJ.-NOUN pair with a 2nd, with gapping of the noun modified by pányasā (“with your helpful energy and ever more admirable X”). But there is no standard pányas- NOUN formula, so I will not pursue this.

In d Old (Noten) and Ge assume that the māyā́ḥ are negative magical wiles that belong to Indra’s opponents. A negative valuation of māyā́- is of course common, and is clear in the nearby passage VI.22.9, where a pāda almost identical to our c, urging Indra to take his mace in hand, precedes one in which he is urged to destroy māyā́ḥ (VI.22.9cd dhiṣvá vájraṃ dákṣiṇa indra háste, víśvā ajurya dayase ví māyā́ḥ) -

- though see comm. ad loc: a secondary positive reading is also possible. This
parallel is an important piece of evidence for both Old’s and Ge’s assessment of māyā́ḥ here. However, this reasonable interpr. ignores one major factor in our passage: the verb abhí prá manda. This lexeme occurs a number of times elsewhere (V.4.1, VII.33.1, VIII.12.13, 93.19), and it is always otherwise positive: act.

‘exhilarate’, mid. ‘become exhilarated’. A negative interpr. of māyā́ḥ requires a serious distortion of the meaning of the verb (e.g., Old’s ‘verwirren’, adopted from BR), whereas assuming the māyā́ḥ belong to Indra allows it to have a small extension of its usual sense: ‘exhilarate’ à ‘stimulate’. Just as soma exhilarates and stimulates Indra for the Vṛtra-smashing, so does Indra exhilarate and stimulate his own powers.

Old in fact previously (ZDMG 55.323) made a good case that the māyā́ḥ are Indra’s, third in a list of his Kampfmittel that includes the chariot of b and the mace of c, and he suggested a tr. “Setze deine Wunderkräfte in freudige Erregung” very much like mine. He attributes his change of heart in the Noten to VI.22.9 just cited and to his consideration of “Der Gesamteindruck des Auftretens von māyā́ḥ in den Indraliedern.” But, in fact, he overlooked one very crucial occurrence, in this very hymn: in vs. 12 Indra himself is called purumāyá- ‘having many magical powers’ (cf.

also nearby VI.21.2 and 22.1 in this same Indra cycle, also III.51.4). This seems to me clinching evidence against the Ge/Old interpr. of our d: Indra has many māyā́- and he deploys them to achieve his ends. (Gotō [1st Kl., 236 n. 521] finds the passage puzzling, but does try to reconcile it with the usage of the verb, not entirely successfully.)


## 10
The imagery is somewhat mixed here: it is hard to see how either a missile (nom. aśániḥ) or a lance (instr. hetī́[contra Pp. hetíḥ, as seen already by Gr etc.]) can burn down anything. I assume it’s a transferred visual image from the fire simile, since flames can have a lance-like shape and shoot out dramatically.

The fem. instr. adj. phrase gambhīráya ṛṣváyā lacks an overt referent. Ge supplies Stimme without disc. In the absence of any obvious choices, I follow Gr in assuming hetī́from pāda b. Neither ṛṣvá- nor gambhīrá- has a standard fem. referent.

The obj. of rurója is likewise unexpressed. Ge supplies Burgen (púraḥ, a common obj. of this verb), but (n. 10cd) suggests that rákṣaḥ from b is also possible.

Since the yó rurója rel. clause of c is picked up by the main cl. of d, I instead supply duritā́, which is the obj. of the conjoined verbs of d. Elsewhere duritā́is the obj. of √han (IX.62.2, 90.6, 97.16), a verb semantically similar to √ruj.


## 11
Gr takes the referent of yásya as ‘wealth’ (see col. 1114, s.v. yótu-). But it is far more likely that it is Indra, whom we are urging to come here -- and whose arrival might be threatened by the actions of the ungodly man. (It is not possible to determine from Ge’s tr. (“den”) what he thinks the referent is.) The relationship between yāhí and yótoḥ might be clearer if the rel. clause were tr. “… never has the power to keep away.” On yótoḥ see now also Keydana (Inf., 77-78), who does not consider it a true infinitive. He takes yásya simply as the determiner of a gen. action noun yótu-. I am more inclined to see yótuḥ as an infinitive, and therefore consider yásya as an example of “attraction” to the case of the infinitive from an underlying obj. *yám.

The dative to the same stem does function as an infinitive and takes acc. rection: VIII.71.15 agním dvéṣo yótavai no gṛṇīmasi (cf. VIII.18.5 dvéṣāṃsi yótave).


## 13
This vs. is structurally reminiscent of vs. 8. Like there, we have a clause occupying the first pāda (both ending in bhū́t/bhūt, as it happens), with (most of) b belonging to a different but radically incomplete clause, containing a marooned set of accusative PNs whose fate at the hands of Indra is well known. Pāda c continues with other accusative victims of Indra, but also provides a verb to govern them. In both vss. the names in the b clause have a well-known and quite specific outcome at Indra’s hands: Cumuri and Dhuni in 8b were put to sleep by Indra, to weaken them for a death blow administered by someone else; as for our vs., acdg. to I.53.10 Indra made Kutsa, Āyu, and Atithigva subject (arandhanāyaḥ) to Tūrvayāṇa, who also appears by name in our pāda d. In both 8b and 13b the publ. tr. follows the same strategy: co-opting the verb in c (vṛṇák in 8, ní śiśāḥ in 13) to govern not only the accusatives in its own pāda but also those in pāda b. This is syntactically a bit more complex in our vs. because b is a relative clause (with yád) so the unaccented verb of c cannot be applied to it directly. I still think this is the correct strategy in 8 and probably also here as well, but the presence of dat. asmai in b along with its likely referent tū́rvayāṇam in d makes me wonder if Ge (n. 13b) may be right in simply supplying the verb found in the very phrase in I.53.10 tvám asmai kútsam atithigvám āyúm, … arandhanāyaḥ, despite the isolation of that passage and its distance from ours. (Alternatively we could use árdayaḥ, which governs the same three names in VIII.53.2, but there is no dat. there; and it is likewise isolated and distant.) Old (both ZDMG 55.323 and Noten) is also in favor of supplying such a verb. Note in passing that unaccented asyai in our b presupposes a referent already in the discourse, so it must be anticipating tū́rvayāṇam in d. For Tūrvayāṇa cf. the simile tū́rvan ná yā́man in nearby VI.15.5 with disc. ad loc. 
## 14
The aor. subjunctive káraḥ is generally taken as preterital, an interpr.

licensed by Gr, who identifies it as “Impf.” But this is morphologically irresponsible, and further, given the injunc. mádan in the main cl. (b), a proper subj. value is quite possible. I think this is an example of the standard rhetorical move to take Indra’s signal mythological deeds and make them a model for his behavior in the future, to our benefit. The next and final vs. continues this point of view. See Hoff (Injunk. 55 and n. 37) for a similar assessment, though he also envisions the possibility of “Konjunktiv im präteritalen Sachverhalt.”
