+++
title = "019"

+++
Indra This hymn is something of a bricolage, with numerous phrases, pādas, and whole verses borrowed from elsewhere. (I say “borrowed” rather than the more neutral “parallel to,” because the sheer number of the matches strongly suggests that there is a magpie quality to the construction of this hymn. For details of the matches, see Ge’s nn. (though he doesn’t note all of them) and Bloomfield RR.


## 01
The publ. tr. should read “manfully” with adverbial nṛvát.

On possible configurations of the terms connected by utá, see Klein DGRV I.341.

Gr derives aminá- from √am (‘mächtig andringend, gewaltig’), but it must belong to √mī as thematic parallel to áminant-. See Old (ZDMG 55.323).

The phrase in d, súkṛtaḥ kartṛ́bhir bhūt “he was well made by his makers,” is somewhat startling as a description of the great god Indra. Who are his makers? Is this a depiction of his original creation, or does it have a more narrow and current application? Because of the previous pāda, … vāvṛdhe vīryā̀ya “he has been strengthened for his heroic deed,” I am inclined towards the latter: the soma drinks and ritual activities and praise have made him the consummate heroic actor. The pl.

agent noun kartár- may refer to the soma drinks or to the priests who prepared and offered them to Indra. Because I think the reference is to the immediate past, I would slightly alter the tr. from “was well made” to “has been well made.”

## 01-02
These two vss. show a penchant for synonymous pairs: 1d urúḥ pṛthúḥ “wide (and) broad,” 2b bṛhántam ṛṣvám “lofty (and) towering,” ajáraṃ yúvānam “unaging (and) youthful.”


## 02
śávasā śūśuvā́ṃsam “swollen with strength” is an etymological figure, though śávas- has lost its tight connection to √śū ‘swell’. Both words are reused in this hymn: 6a śáviṣṭham … śávaḥ “strongest strength”; 7b, 8b śūśuvā́ṃsam.


## 04
Since śāká-, so accented, is the adj. ‘able’, not a noun śā́ka- ability’, I supply ‘men’ on the basis of IV.17.11 ebhír nṛ́bhiḥ … asya śākaíḥ.

With pāda d I supply opt. syāma. Cf. II.27.7 úpa syāma puruvī́rā áriṣṭāḥ, sim.

vs. 16; X.128.3 áriṣṭāḥ syāma tanvā̀suvī́rāḥ.


## 05
The gen. phrase vāmásya vásunaḥ in b is difficult to construe. Ge supplies “(Spender)” as its head noun; my tr. assumes that it is a loose genitive specification of the paśú- that is lurking in the -kṣú- in the bahuvrīhi puru-kṣú- ‘possessing much livestock’. This interpr. is suggested by the other occurrence of this gen. phrase in VIII.1.31 utá vāmásya vásunaś ciketati, yó ásti yā́dvaḥ paśúḥ “of the valuable goods what will stand out is the livestock coming from Yadu,” where the vāmá- vásu- is identified as a particular paśú-. But the syntax proposed for our passage is sketchy.

By accent rā́yaḥ should be nom. pl., not, as I have tr. it, gen. sg. As Ge suggests in his n. 5c, it reads literally “the paths, the riches …” Nonetheless, Old (ZDMG 55.324 and Noten) considers the nom. pl. reading “forced” (gezwungen) and interprets it as a gen. sg. (on the basis in part of VII.18.3 pathyā̀rāyáḥ with a clear gen. sg.). In the ZDMG treatment he explicitly says that emending the accent isn’t necessary, though he doesn’t indicate why.

In d Ge suggests a haplology of *samudréṇa ná, with an instr. rather than a loc., as in III.36.7 samudréṇa síndhavo yā́damānāḥ, where he proposes a similar haplology. This is possible, but not nec.: I see no reason why rivers can’t unite in the sea as well as with it. As for III.36.7 see comm. ad loc.; I do not think that a simile particle is necessary there.

## 06-08
As noted in the publ. intro., all three of these vss. contain the phrase “bring here to us”: in 6a and 7b na ā́bhara straddles the early caesura; in 8a ā́no bhara opens the vs. Since vss. 6-8 are the middle vss. of this hymn, this repeated phrase might identify an omphalos, but if so it is quite a weak one. The vss. are not particular noteworthy for their content, and the enclosing vss. do not provide the usual frame structure.


## 06
The first hemistich is notable for the superlative etymological figures: double śáviṣṭham … śávaḥ “strongest strength” (or, in fact, triple, since śūra ‘hero’ is ultimately related to these words) and triple ójiṣṭham ójaḥ … ugrám “mightiest mighty might.” The triple etym. connection of the first phrase is better conveyed by Ge’s “Bring uns, du Starker, die stärkste Stärke” than by the publ. tr. Note also that the adjacent words in b ójo abhibhūta “… might, o overpowering one,” though not syntactically connected here, form a bahuvrīhi modifying Indra in the preceding hymn, VI.18.1 abhíbhūti-ojas- ‘of overpowering strength’.

## 07-08
I tr. śūśuvā́ṃsam in both vss. as ‘swollen with strength’, although the śávasā found in 2c is absent, as a portmanteau tr. to capture the full sense of the root.

This participle picks up śáviṣṭham … śávaḥ in vs. 6.


## 07
On the long root vowel in jigīvā́ṃsaḥ, see Old ZDMG 55.324, where on the basis of the metrical evidence he surmises that, at least in this post-caesura position, the form should be read with short root vowel (*jigi-vaṃs-), the form found in the younger Vedic texts. See also Arnold (Ved. Met. 143), who considers the short-i form required in 3 of the 5 occurrences of the strong stem, and Kü (189 n. 225), who considers it proper except in III.15.4. Kü cites Anttila (1969, Schwebeabl. 61) as explaining the lengthening in the Saṃhitā text as analogy to ninīvā́ṃs-. However, it is much more likely that it is a morphologically conditioned lengthening, meant to distinguish the -i-vowel proper to the root from the -i-liaison vowel that has become associated with suffixes/endings. Thus jigī-vā́ṃs- with long vowel is kept separate from the type tasth-ivā́ṃs-, as I already argued in my 1988 article on the vocalized laryngeal (224-25), though without factoring in the metrical evidence pointing to this lengthening as late and redactional. (Of course, in tasthivā́ṃs- the -i- would originally have represented the zero-grade of this -ā root, but by synchronic RV it has been reanalyzed as part of the suffix. See disc. in my 1988 art.)

## 08
In d the utá is oddly positioned, since it appears to be meant to conjoin jāmī́m̐r ájāmīn “kin and non-kin,” there being no other likely candidates. Klein (DGRV I.356-57) calls it a “peculiar passage” and classes it with two other examples of what he schematizes as utá X Y (/ Z …). The pair jāmí- ájāmi- is several times asyndectic (I.111.3, IV.4.5, VI.44.17) as here, so no conjunction is actually necessary, but we can cite nearby VI.25.3 … jāmáya utá yé ‘jāmayaḥ, where the utá is correctly placed. Perhaps our passage is a blend of the asyndectic figure and the “X and which Y” construction in VI.25.3.


## 10
The medial 1st pl. s-aor. opt. vaṃsīmáhi contrasts with the active 1st pl. saor. subjunctive váṃsāma in 8c, but the medial optative must have been modeled on the rhyme form maṃsīmáhi in the same metrical position in 7d. The “rest” following vaṃsīmáhi may call attention to the verb by isolating it metrically.

Besides this echo, note also nṛvát, which replicates nṛvát in 1a, and vāmám recalling vāmásya in 5b, while the gen. vásvaḥ is in slight discord with the differently formed gen. vásunaḥ in 5b.

I tr. śrómatebhiḥ as ‘attentions’, that is, the attentive hearing(s) that Indra gives to men’s words. For similar use of śrómata- in a somewhat clearer context see VII.40.5.

The referent of the “both kinds of good[s]” in c is not clear, at least from immediate context. In the very similar passage VII.82.4 īśānā́vásva ubháyasya, it seems to refer to goods belonging to war and peace; similarly in the next hymn, VII.83.5 yuváṃ hí vásva ubháyasya rā́jathaḥ, where a reference to war and peace -- or perhaps to the goods of enemies and of allies -- is likely. In II.9.5 the referent of ubháyam … vasavyàm is also open-ended, but Re’s suggestion there that it’s livestock and offspring is perhaps the most satisfactory. In our passage the nearest contrastive pair is jāmī́m̐r ájāmīn “kin and non-kin” in 8c, so perhaps “both kinds of good[s]” refers to the goods belonging to these two groups whom we hope vanquish in battle. Note vṛtrā́ṇy ubháyāni “both kinds of obstacles” in 13c, which Ge, persuasively, takes as referring to the “kin and non-kin” of 8d. MLW suggests another possibility: “movable and immovable,” which has a fine Indo-European pedigree.

The acc. obj. phrase in d, rátnam máhi sthūrám bṛhántam, contains an apparent gender clash: rátna- is neut., as is máhi; sthūrám can be either neut. or masc., while bṛhántam must be masc. It is tempting to correlate the two genders with the two kinds of goods in pāda c: a “great treasure” (neut.) and “substantial lofty X” (masc.). This might be possible: sthūrá- bṛhánt- qualifies masc. rayí- in IV.21.4 sthūrásya rāyó bṛható yá ī́śe (and cf. X.156.3 ā́gne sthūráṃ rayím bhara), and bṛhánt- not infrequently modifies rayí- (cf., e.g., VI.6.7). Thus, we could assume an underlying *rayím for the last two adjectives, yielding a tr. “grant a great treasure (and) substantial lofty (wealth).” This might be supported by rāyā́… bṛhatā́in the last pāda of the hymn (13d). Nonetheless, this seems unduly artificial, and I would prefer to assume that at the end of this acc. phrase, encouraged by ambig. sthūrám, bṛhántam has simply taken its accustomed pāda-final place in Triṣṭubh. As reported by Old (ZDMG 55.325 and Noten), Ludwig suggested substituting (that is, emending) rayím for máhi, a suggestion roundly rejected by Old, who simply says (Noten) that masc. bṛhántam is construed with neut. rátnam.


## 12
Note a different kind of gender mismatch in pāda a. Though in the idiom with √man “consider oneself X” / “be considered as X,” X is in the same case as the underlying subject (see, e.g., 7c maṃsīmahi jigīvāṃsaḥ “we could be considered victors”), here it is construed with an adverbial neut. máhi. That this is not necessarily a property of “think oneself great” is shown by I.178.5, VII.98.4 maható mányamānān “… those thinking themselves great,” with acc. pl. matching the subject of the participle.


## 13
On vṛtrā́ṇy ubháyāni “both kinds of obstacles” see comm. ad vs. 10.
