+++
title = "020"

+++
Indra On the metrical irregularities in the hymn, see Old ZDMG 55.324 and Noten.


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., the “ask” in this hymn comes at the beginning, not the end as is more usual. It is also excessively convoluted in syntax and phraseology. (My interpr. of the vs. is in great part guided by Th [Fremdl. 58] and to a certain extent Ge., though as far as I can see Ge simply fails to tr. parts of it.) The actual referent of the definitional rel. cl. that occupies the first hemistich is not encountered until the second word of pāda b (rayíḥ), preceded by a discontinuous simile dyaúr ná … bhū́ma “like heaven the earth,” whose first part has been fronted around the rel. prn. yáḥ, and by a verb in tmesis, abhí … tasthaú “surmounts,” whose preverb is stationed after the caesura in pāda a and whose verb form proper opens pāda b. And this is only the beginning! A first paraphrase of the first hemistich would be “as heaven (surmounts) the earth, the wealth that surmounts …,” with “wealth” corresponding grammatically and functionally to “heaven.” This first stab makes it immediately clear that we need an acc. obj. in the frame to correspond to bhū́ma in the simile, something that wealth can “surmount.” One acc. is obvious: jánān at the end of the hemistich. But what do we do with aryáḥ at the end of the first pāda? Old (ZDMG 54.169-70) takes it as an acc. pl., tr. “wie die Himmel über der Erde (sollen) die Schätze über den Geizigen (erhaben sein).” However, there is a reasonably well-attested phrase rā́yo aryáḥ “the riches of the stranger” (IV.48.1, VI.14.3, VI.47.9, and esp. VI.36.5; cf. also VI.1.5 and comm. on all those passages). In VI.36.5 it is found in exactly this context: dyaúr ná bhū́mābhí rā́yo aryáḥ “Like heaven over the earth, sur(mount) the riches of the stranger,” with rā́yo aryáḥ an object phrase exactly parallel to bhū́ma in the simile. It therefore seems best here to assume a gapping of acc. pl. rā́yaḥ, whose presence is suggested by the nom. rayíḥ, with aryáḥ a gen. as elsewhere. Hence “wealth that surmounts (the wealth/riches) of the stranger …” And what does this “wealth of the stranger” consist of? In all cases it seems to refer to manpower, not to material wealth, and our passage makes this clear by further specifying it as jánān ‘people(s)’.

As if the poet hadn’t misled us enough already with the intertwining of constituents and gapping of a crucial word, he also plants a false cue. The word bhū́ma is of course the acc. sg. to the neut. n-stem bhū́man-, as shown esp. by the parallel VI.36.5. But in its position directly after the preverb abhí, it looks mighty like a verb -- and could almost (but only almost) be the 1st pl. root aor. bhūma, though with wrong accent (expect *bhūmá, a form not found in the RV). The lexeme abhí √bhū is close in meaning to the abhí √sthā we have here (whose verbal part has been postponed till the 2nd pāda), and given its sandhi form the rel. prn. yá (underlying yáḥ) could equally be underlying yé, which could match the number of the putative 1st pl. verb form (“we who surmount …”). Of course, as just noted, the accent on bhū́ma is wrong, and we would further expect abhí to lose its own accent and univerbate with an immediately following verb in a rel. clause. But I nonetheless think that the poet meant for his audience to follow this false trail, however briefly.

After this tangled beginning, the second hemistich is completely straightforward: the acc. tám picks up the rel. cl. couched in the nom., with the implicit referent “wealth,” modified by three acc. OBJ+VERBAL NOMINAL cmpds, all objects of “give” (daddhí). This is the last time in the hymn that Indra is asked to give us anything; the only other appeal to Indra is in 10a, where we pray to “win anew.” Almost all of the rest of the hymn treats previous heroic deeds of Indra, though it should be noted that many of these are presented in the injunctive, and the notoriously slippery usage of the injunctive may leave the possibility of current application open.


## 02
This vs. begins like vs. 1, with a form of ‘heaven’ followed by the simile marker ná (1a dyaúr ná, 2a divó ná). In this case there is nothing in the frame that explicitly corresponds to the gen. diváḥ in the simile, though the dat. túbhyam is roughly parallel: like the “lordship of heaven,” lordship was conceded to you (Indra) and is therefore yours.

The standard idiom for ‘concede’ is ánu √dā, not, as here, ánu √dhā. Cf., with phraseology similar to here, VI.25.8 ánu te dāyi … satrā́te víśvam … (sim.

II.20.8). But √dhā is also found in this idiom elsewhere, e.g., VI.36.2 satrā́dadhire ánu vīryā̀ya. Old (ZDMG 55.326, Noten) seems prepared to follow Gr (Tr.) and v.

Bradke in emending dhāyi to *dāyi, but this seems unnec. The two roots are formally very parallel and in many contexts their meanings are barely distinguishable; I see no reason why √dhā cannot have acquired this idiomatic meaning with ánu in imitation of ánu √dā. In this particular case ánu √dhā may have been used in preference to ánu √dā because of the technical use of anudéya- in vs. 11 below. See disc. there.

Note that the ‘lordship, lordly power’ (asuryà-) is in the control of the gods and conceded to Indra, another indication that the later Asura/Deva divide is not present in the core RV. See also VI.36.1 below.

## 03
The publ. tr. takes Indra as the subj. of ā́vat in d, with dartnúm an action noun “when he aided the splitting …” But, on the basis of other -(t)nú-stems (cf. AiG II.2.696-97 and 741-42), dartnú- is more likely verbal/agentive (‘splitting, splitter’) and the subject of ā́vat should then be soma (“the somian honey” mádhu- sómyá-).

So explicitly Old (ZDMG 55.326, with convincing parallels; Ge appears to follow, though his tr. is more equivocal. I would therefore change the tr. to “when it [=soma] aided the splitter of all the strongholds.”

## 04-05
As Ge (n. 4-5) notes, these two vss. probably belong together as an account of the ever-fragmented Śuṣṇa / Kutsa myth, though the connection of the Paṇis (pāda a) to this myth is somewhat uncertain. Old (ZDMG 55.326-27) treats these vss. in detail.


## 04
I read the instr. plurals opening the two hemistichs (śataíḥ 4a, vadhaíḥ 4c) “vertically” -- that is, as a single NP distributed over two clauses. This seems to be Ge’s solution too: “Durch hundert (Streiche) …; durch (deine) Streiche …”; so also Old ZDMG 55.326. The fact that a form of √pad needs to be read in pāda c, matching apadran in pāda a supports this interpr. It would, however, be possible to interpr. śataíḥ as “by the hundreds,” referring to the felled Paṇis. So Kü (424).

In the publ. tr. I took the beneficiary of Indra’s actions in pāda b to be a single person, “the ten-armed poet” (dáśoṇaye kaváye)(so Ge), and since dáśoṇi- recurs in 8a apparently qualifying vetasú-, I considered this to be a reference to this shadowy Vetasu. But I now think this identification is incorrect or at least misleading. When the word kaví- is found in an Indra / Kutsa / Śuṣṇa context it always (in my current view) refers to Uśanā Kāvya, and I believe that to be the case here — strengthened by the fact that the other two occurrences of arká-sāti- (I.174.7, VI.26.3) are found with kaví- in the Kutsa / Śuṣṇa myth, where the word must surely refer to Uśanā Kāvya. (Old makes the same point, ZDMG 55.326-27.) I therefore now think that “for the poet” means “for Uśanā Kāvya,” and “for the ten-armed” is likely a reference to a different person, identified as Vetasu in vs. 8. (Old considers the additional possibility that dáśoṇi- is an epithet of UK, but seems to favor the separation into two individuals.) On the basis of 8a and Ge’s disc. there (n. 8), it further seems likely, or at least possible, that vetasú- in 8 refers to Kutsa, and therefore in our 4b the two datives refer to Kutsa and UK. I would therefore now alter the tr. to “for the sake of the ten-armed one [=Kutsa?] and of the poet [=Uśanā Kāvya].” My tr. of dáśoṇi- in this vs. and in 8a reflects the current consensus, endorsed by Mayr (EWA s.v. oṇí- “offenbar ‘Arm’”), that oṇí- means ‘arm’ (as opposed to Gr’s ‘Schutz’ and ‘Mutterbrust’), but I think that this interpr. might be ripe for revisiting. The passages are not particularly diagnostic -- the most important evidence is the fact that the stem is generally dual -- and it lacks a clear etymology (though it’s sometimes connected with √av ‘help’). There is also the question of the cmpd. sandhi: if dáśoṇi- consists of dáśa + oṇí-, it should of course come out as

*dáśauṇi-. The -o- has been accounted for (see EWA s.v. oṇí- [p.c from J. Schindler], Mayr PN s.v. dáśoniya-) by invoking TS I.2.6.1, where the widely attested mantra
abhí tyáṃ deváṃ savitā́ram oṇyòḥ kavíkratum (AV VII.14.1, etc.) instead contains ūṇyòḥ. The ū- initial would indeed yield the proper sandhi result, but given the otherwise overwhelming attestation of oṇyòḥ in the mantra, the TS variant does not have much support. Since at present I don’t have a better solution, I stick with ‘tenarmed’, but consider it quite dubious.

That arká-sāti means ‘winning of the (sun’s) rays’ is strongly suggested by sū́ryasya sātaú in the next vs. (5d), though, as Old points out (ZDMG 55.327), it could in addition mean ‘winning of the chants’.

I don’t understand pāda d, but I would point out that another “insatiable Śuṣṇa” passage also has a mention of mealtime: IV.16.12 kútsāya śúṣṇam aśúṣaṃ ní barhīḥ, prapitvé áhnaḥ kúyavaṃ sahásrā “For Kutsa you laid low insatiable Śuṣṇa, who brings bad harvest, with his thousands, before the day's first meal.” Perhaps the point is that despite his voraciousness, Śuṣṇa is deprived of his meal by Indra’s timely blow. In that case the subj. of arirecīt … prá here is Indra, who leaves nothing for Śuṣṇa.


## 05
For the unusual position of sá and its rukied initial (urú ṣá) see disc. ad VI.2.4.


## 08
This vs. is made difficult both by our very sketchy knowledge of the personnel and the myth and by the syntax. Both Old (ZDMG 55.328-29) and Ge (n.

8) devote considerable space to disc. of it. The vs. seems to pun on PNs in a way discouragingly similar to VII.18, the very obscure account of the Ten Kings battle.

The nearby vs. VI.26.4 is of some help in the interpr. of this one, as is X.49.4.

My approach to the vs. partly follows Ge’s, but differs in several important ways. Like Ge (who adopted it from Baunack; see his n. 8), I supply a verb of speaking to introduce the second hemistich, which we both take as the direct speech of Indra. (By contrast Old construes úpa sṛjā in d as the verb governing the acc. in ab, but given the distribution of the rest of the elements in the vs., esp. the preverb ā́ opening pāda c, this seems unlikely.) But rather than taking the acc. PNs in ab as the addressees of this speech as Ge does, I construe them (loosely) with the hapax bahuvrīhi svabhiṣṭí-sumnaḥ ‘having/showing the favor of his dominance’, with Vetasu [=Kutsa?] and Tuji as the recipient of this favor. The intens. adj. tū́tuji- ‘thrusting’, found elsewhere modifying a whirlwind (bhṛ́mi- IV.32.2) and a chariot (X.35.6), punningly points to Tuji, who is found in nearby VI.26.4 in the company of Vetasu and Tugra, as here. (In that vs. there is also redupl., but it is located on the verb: tváṃ tújim … tūtoḥ “you strengthened Tuji.”) In that vs. Indra strikes down Tugra for Vetasu (VI.26.4c tváṃ túgraṃ vetasáve sácāhan). I think the same situation is depicted here in cd, though less violently, with Vetasu(-Kutsa) referred to by the adj. dyótana- ‘brilliant, flashing’ expressing a dat. of benefit. In this connection Baunack’s adducing (see Ge’s n. 8c) of I.63.3 kutsā́ya dyumaté “for heaven-bright Kutsa,” another dat. of benefit in the Śuṣṇa myth, is apposite. Ge (also Gr, Mayr PN) takes dyótanāya as a PN, but no such person Dyotana is found elsewhere, and in its other two occurrences (I.123.4, VIII.29.2) the stem is an adj. with the expected etymological meaning.

The next question is íbham. This is pretty much universally interp. as a PN, referring to another enemy of Indra. This is in part based on X.49.4, where Tugra and one Smadibha are made subject to Kutsa (and the Vetasus [pl.] and Tuji are also found). Old, for ex., considers Ibha here simply a shortening of Smadibha, and the context of the word in our pāda certainly supports a pun on the latter name: (ā́ túgraṃ śá)śvad íbham …; cf. X.49.4 (túgraṃ kútsāya) smádibham, with the last syllable of the adverb śáśvad a close match for the 1st syllable of the PN in X.49.4 (if it is indeed a PN). But íbha- is elsewhere in the RV a common noun meaning ‘retinue’ or ‘vassal’ (the common denominator being the inferior position vis-à-vis someone in power); cf. also the MIA evidence, such as Pāli ibbha. And ‘vassal’ would be an appropriate word for someone made subject to another -- hence my tr. of the phrase śáśvad íbham as “perpetual vassal,” referring to Tugra.

Finally, we must deal with the verbal expressions at the end of the vs., úpa śṛjā iyádhyai. The first question is what form sṛjā represents out of sandhi. The Pp.

reads sṛja, that is, a 2nd sg. act. impv., with lengthening of the final vowel in the Saṃhitā text. But of course in that case the normal outcome in sandhi should be coalescence into *sṛjeyádhyai. After some agonizing, Old accepts the Pp interpr.

(though he also flirts with a 2nd sg. subj. sṛjāḥ), but Ge (n. 8) opts instead for Baunack’s suggestion, that the underlying form is sṛjai, i.e., a 1st sg. middle subjunctive (so also Lub, though with !). This is the interpr. I have also adopted.

Although the 6th cl. pres. sṛja- is predominately active, there are a few middle forms; the pf. is about evenly divided between active and middle forms in transitive usage (including several 1st pl. sasṛjmáhe with úpa), and there are two 1st sg. s-aor. forms ásṛkṣi with úpa in trans. usage. Taking the form as a 1st sg. also entails the directspeech interpr. of Baunack/Ge. (It's worth noting as an aside that Sāy. simply glosses upa sṛja with upāsṛjat, apparently untroubled by matters of sandhi and grammatical identity; this was followed by Gr [Tr.], though unmentioned in the Wö.) As Old points out (ZDMG 55.328), the lexeme úpa √sṛj is often used of releasing / dispatching calves to their mother, and this must account for the simile mātúr ná. Although this idiom is generally benevolent, it also emphasizes the hierarchical dependency of the young on their mother, and this would be appropriate for the vassal Tugra’s subordinate position with regard to Kutsa.

I take the inf. iyádhyai to √i ‘go’, or more particularly to the stem ī́yate ‘speeds’ (√i or √yā), rather than to √yā ‘implore, beg’ with Lub. It simply completes the action of the main verb “release/depatch them to go …” The preverb ā́beginning the 2nd hemistich is more likely to go with this inf. than with úpa srjai (pace Gr, also Ge, who thinks [n. 8c] it could go with either one), simply because we’d otherwise expect the order úpa+ā́(cf. VIII.27.11 úpa … ā́m̐, ásṛkṣi …).

After all this, the alterations of the publ. tr. would be minimal: “Indra showed the favor of his dominance to Vetasu [=Kutsa?] of the ten tricks and ten arms and to the thrusting (Tuji), (saying) ‘Tugra as perpetual vassal for brilliant (Vetasu=Kutsa?) shall I dispatch, like (calves) to their mother, to speed (to him).’”


## 09
The participial phrase bíbhrad vájram here and in VI.23.1 below may be intended to invoke the name bharád-vāja-, the poet of this hymn and indeed of this maṇḍala, by an expression that seems the syntactic equivalent of that type of governing compound — with the prior member belonging to the same root and the 2nd member a phonological variant of the obj. Matching the first member exactly would be problematic, since the nom. sg. of the participle would be bháran. The punning on PNs noted with regard to the immediately preceding vs. may be in evidence here as well.n


## 10
In b enā́can simply be adverbial, as Ge and KH (Injunk. 168) take it, but it is also regularly used as demonstrative with forms like námasā ‘homage’ (I.171.1, II.23.14, etc.), sūkténa ‘hymn’ (II.6.2), bráhmaṇā (IV.36.7), and in this context, where the sacrifice is mentioned (yajñaíḥ), I think it likely that the verbal part of the ritual evidenced by the verb prá … stavante “they start up the praise” is further specified with the near deictic, referring to this current praise hymn.

The syntactic relationship between pādas c and d is ambiguous. With Ge, I take d as the main cl., with c dependent on it. But KH (Injunk. 168) takes them as parallel subordinate clauses dependent on b. Either is possible, because the verb of d, (d)hán, is initial in the pāda and can owe its accent to that alone.

Note the allit. in (śā́ra)dīr dárd, dhán dā́s(īḥ), esp. noticeable because it consists of four syllables in a row, belonging to four separate words.

Old (ZDMG 55.329-30 and Noten) calls dart in c into question, arguing that it should be a 2nd ps. and the -t is faulty. But there seems no reason not to assume that both dart and (d)han are 3rd ps. verbs; although Indra is referred to in the 2nd ps. in pāda a, shift between the persons is a commonplace in RVic discourse. The sandhi situation here favors the retention of the -t, though the matter is somewhat complex.

As is generally known, final clusters are simplified, retaining only the first. The exception is that -t, -ṭ, and -k after -r- are retained if they belong to the root (Wh, Gr.

§150b Macd. VGS §28a, etc.) -- which the -t in dar-t does not (√dṛ). However, dart is pāda-final and the next pāda begins in the transmitted text with dhán (for hán), whose dh is the automatic result of the (re-)introduction of occlusion of initial hafter a final stop (see, e.g., Wh, Gr. §163). The standard practice is that the h- is replaced by the voiced aspirate corresponding to the place of articulartion of the final stop -- in this case, a dental. If we assume that this rule was operative before final clusters were simplified, a sequence of 3rd sg. dard dhán with apparently pleonastic gemination would favor the non-simplification of the cluster -rd dh-. (On cases of gemination and degemination in the text, see my “False Segmentations and Resegmentations in the Rigveda: Gemination and Degemination” [to appear in a forthcoming Fs.].) Pāda c is identical to I.174.2b, and in that passage the case is more difficult because there the context is entirely 2nd ps. As I argued in the comm. to that vs. (q.v.), the final -t there may have been introduced from our passage.

## 11
Pāda c contains one of the three instances of the gerundive anudéya- in the RV and the only masc. form -- a form called by Ge “ganz unsicher.” This gerundive belongs to the lexeme ánu √dā ‘hand over, concede’ discussed above, ad vs. 2. I have discussed one of the fem. forms anudéyī in the difficult hymn X.135 at length (“The Earliest Evidence for the Inborn Debts of a Brahmin: A New Interpretation of Ṛgveda X.135.” Journal asiatique 302.2 [2014]: 245-57). In that article I established that the idiom ánu √dā can be further narrowed in certain contexts to mean ‘forgive/acquit a debt’; and the debt in question can be referred to with the gerund anudéya-, -ī, as (the debt) ‘to be acquited’. In X.135.5-6 this debt is actually a reference to the inborn debts of a Brahman, which he must pay off during his lifetime, one of which is the need to provide his ancestors with (grand)sons. As argued in that article (255-56), I think the same sense can be seen in our passage. To cite from the article: “The second half of this verse seems to allude to a complex intergenerational relationship in which Indra intervenes. The god hands over a grandson (nápāt-) to his grandfather (mahé pitré), a transaction that sounds like a man's fulfillment of his debt to his ancestors by fathering a son, thereby providing them with a grandson. This grandson is said to be anudéya-. I would suggest that the grandson here serves as the concrete manifestation of the debt that is to be acquitted, and the technical term anudéya- is therefore applied to him. If I am correct, this is another, though more muted, piece of evidence for the existence of the notion of a man's inborn debt in the Rig Veda.”


## 12
This is identical to I.174.9; see comm. on that vs., esp. with regard to párṣi.


## 13
Dabhīti is the beneficiary of Indra’s putting Cumuri to sleep in VI.26.6.

Cumuri’s companion Dhuni is found with him in VI.18.8, and in our passage he immediately follows vs. 12, which contains two adj. usages of dhúni- ‘tumultuous, boisterous’.

The second hemistich portrays Dabhīti assembling or preparing four different requisites of the sacrifice in four different morphosyntactic expressions: 1) a full participial phrase sómebhiḥ sunván “pressing with the soma juices,” 2) a bahuvrīhi idhmábhṛtiḥ lit. ‘having the bringing of the firewood’, 3) an -ín-stem possessive pakthī́‘having cooked food’ (based on an unattested *pakthá- ‘cooked food’), and 4) an instr. of accompaniment arkaíḥ “along with the chants.” The identity of the third has been called into question by Old (ZDMG 55.330, Noten). Though the sandhi form pakthy is analyzed by the Pp. as pakthī́with the long vowel appropriate to the nom. sg. of an -ín-stem, in fact in the cadence it would better be read short (though keep in mind the metrical disturbances throughout the hymn). Old toys with the idea that it has been influenced by the PN pakthá- and that it is underlyingly an instr. to the -ti-stem paktí- ‘cooked food’, hence *paktī́with shortening before the following vowel. This seems unnecessarily complex, and the PN pakthá- is neither well attested nor found nearby this passage. Since shortening of -ī́in hiatus was available for the instr., I see no reason why it shouldn’t have been analogically extended to the nom. of an -ín-stem in this case. Moreover, I think the morphosyntactic variety just described was deliberate, and replacing 3) with an instr. like that of 4) would disturb the sequence.
