+++
title = "021"

+++
Indra


## 01
As with hemistich initial #śataíḥ … #vadhaíḥ in VI.20.4 in the immediately preceding hymn, I take #imā́ḥ … #dhíyaḥ as a “vertical” NP, “these insights.” Their positioning allows them to get out of the way of the intense etym. figure in b: hávyam … hávyā havante. This figure is complicated by the fact that hávya- is used in two slightly different senses, controlled by slightly different constructions of the verb √hū / hvā. Although the normal object of this verb is a god or other being called upon, very occasionally it can take the call itself as object (see comm. ad IV.23.3), and of course derivatives like háva(na)- express the call itself. In our passage havante ‘they invoke’ takes the usual type of object, namely Indra here, who is qualified by the gerundive hávya- ‘to be invoked’. But the insights (dhíyaḥ) themselves are also so qualified; here hávyāḥ must mean not ‘to be invoked’, but ‘to be called [=spoken]’. In order to keep the vocabulary constant, I have tr. ‘deserving to invoke’, in contrast to ‘deserving to be invoked’ applied to Indra.

The vertical NP just discussed unbalances syntactic constituency, and, unusually, the hemistich boundary cannot be respected.

In d most take īyate to √yā / ī ‘implore, beg’; so, e.g., Ge “… wird … erbeten” (likewise Lub, Kulikov, -ya-presents 495). I assign it rather to ‘speeds’, though either is possible.


## 02
The nominal rel. cl. yó vídānaḥ, interrupting a string of accusatives, is syntactically curious. It seems to represent a sort of izafe, rather than a real embedded relative cl. I have tr. it as if acc. índram were the predicate of the participle (“who is known as “Indra”), despite the difference in cases. Ge, in contrast: “der bekannt ist.” My interpr. might be better represented as “I will praise him — Indra, as he is known — whose …” This interpr. fits well with the doubts expressed about Indra later in the hymn, esp. vs. 4. See also vídānaḥ in 12b.

The instr. gīrbhíḥ in b might be better construed with the verb stuṣe in a: “I will praise him with songs”; it has been displaced to the right to be nearer to gírvāhasam.

The second hemistich contains a strikingly mixed construction, with the usual matched pair heaven and earth in two different cases, acc. dívam, abl.-gen. pṛthivyā́ḥ, though construed with the same verb. The two different cases are controlled by two different PREVERB + √ric combinations, one overt, one implied. Overt is áti √ric ‘extend beyond, surpass’, which is rather rare but takes the acc., as in VIII.92.14, 22 ná tvā́m indrā́ti ricyate “nothing surpasses you, Indra” (cf. also X.90.5); hence our … dívam áti … riricé. The implied construction is the more common prá √ric ‘extend beyond’ which takes the abl., as in I.61.9 asyéd evá prá ririce mahitváṃ, divás pṛthivyā́ḥ pári antárikṣāt “his greatness projected beyond heaven and earth, beyond the midspace” (note clear abl. antárikṣāt) (cf. also I.59.5, 109.6, etc.), hence our … pṛthivyā́ḥ … ririce mahitvám. Examples of this latter constr. are found in this group of Indra hymns (VI.24.3, 30.1), and despite the absence of prá here it is not surprising that the abl. construction would creep in.


## 03
On the meaning of vayúna-, see comm. ad II.34.4.

As has long been known, the RVic desid. stem íyakṣa- belongs to √naś ‘attain’, not (pace Gr) √yaj ‘sacrifice’. See, inter alia, EWA s.v. NAŚ 1 ; Heenen (Desid. 79-82).

The question in the 2nd hemistich seems like a non sequitur, which makes me somewhat sympathetic to Sāy’s reading as a (negative) indefinite: kadā cid “they do not ever violate …” But this reinterpr. is arbitrary, of course, and further, the kadā́ question inaugurates a series of questions in vs. 4, each with a ka- form: a kúha, b kám … kā́su, c káḥ, d káḥ … katamáḥ. It may be that we have to ask about the whereabouts of Indra in vs. 4 because he has ceased to appear to us because we have (or may have) violated his ordinances.


## 04
-tama-forms implicitly index a referent among three or more possibilities.

The interrog. katamá- here echoes purutáma- of 1a. I have chosen to render katamáwith the heavy tr. ‘which of many’ because in this series of questions the poet is anxiously surveying all the possible sacrifices and sacrificers who may have attracted Indra away from us.


## 05
The utá in the middle of pāda c uncomplicatedly conjoins the temporally contrastive madhyamā́saḥ “the middle ones, those in between” and nū́tanāsaḥ “the current ones” (see Klein DGRV I.301, 311), but the one beginning pāda d, in Klein’s words (DGRV I.382) “introduc[es] a new nonparallel clause.” It is not represented in the publ. tr., which should perhaps read “And … take cognizance of the one who is closest.” The reason for this apparently pleonastic conjunction may be that “the closest one” (singular avamá-) is not only a subset of “the current ones” (plural nū́tanāsaḥ), but the climax of the series of temporally sorted comrades.


## 06
This ultimate insider, “the closest one” of 5d, is immediately picked up by the slightly more distanced “closer ones” (ávarāsaḥ) in 6a. Here their comparative closeness is not contrasted with previous generations of Indra’s comrades, as in vs. 5, but with the older, distant deeds of Indra. These closer one are “asking” (pṛchántaḥ) about Indra. Their asking may refer directly to the questions in vs. 4, but it also implies that, however “close” they are, they do not have direct access to knowledge about Indra.

The limits on our knowledge are explicitly acknowledged in the 2nd hemistich, where we praise Indra only insofar as know him (yā́d evá vidmá). This subordinated expression is embedded in the larger clause: árcāmasi …, yā́d evá vidmá tā́t tvā mahā́ntam, where the obj. of árcāmasi is tvā, but the yā́d … tā́d diptych is clearly formulaic and frozen. This expression reminds us slightly of the yó vídānaḥ of 2b, likewise with √vid ‘know’ and likewise technically embedded.


## 07
JPB suggests that the “face of the demon” spreading out against Indra is hood of the cobra, namely Vṛtra.

The referent of the expression beginning b, máhi jajñānám “having been born great,” is entirely ambiguous. It may be, as the publ. tr. takes it, an acc. with tvā, referring to Indra. Or it may be, as Gr and Ge take it, a neut. nom. modifying the neut.

s-stem pā́jaḥ. Technically speaking, of course, máhi is neut. and might therefore give weight to the latter possibility. But máhi can be adverbial here, evoking the apparently fixed expression máhi jātám (I.163.1, III.31.3, cf. I.156.2); cf. also V.60.3 máhi vṛddháḥ ‘grown great’. I now think the ambigity is meant, and the phrase can apply to either of the antagonists (or rather, in the case of the rakṣás-) its visage. The ambiguity is hard to convey in tr.; perhaps “… (each) born great.” The two verbs in the first hemistich, abhí … ví tasthe# and … abhí … tiṣṭha#, belong to the same root (√sthā), are positioned identically, and differ fairly minimally from each other: tense-aspect stem, voice, person, as well as an extra preverb with the first. Unfortunately the etymological connection can’t be easily capture in tr.: “has stood wide against you” is unidiomatic and opaque.

The 2nd hemistich seems implicitly to convey that our anxieties about our intimacy with Indra were well-founded. In 5ab our forebears were identified as Indra’s “ancient comrades” (pratnā́saḥ … sákhāyaḥ), with later generations apparently grandfathered into this select group (5cd). But here we learn who Indra’s “ancient comrade” really is — his mace: táva pratnéna yújyena sákhyā vájreṇa.


## 09
The use of parallel and etymologically related purpose datives ūtáye and ávase, stationed in the a and b pādas respectively, seems pleonastic. I have tr. one as nominal and one as infinitival, but this distinction rests on nothing in the passage.


## 10
Like 1b, pāda c here contains an extravagant etymological figure based again on √hvā ‘call’: hávam (ā́) huvató huvānáḥ.

The phrasing of d also seems awkwardly pleonastic -- ná tvā́vām̐anyáḥ .. tvád asti “no one like you exists, other than you” -- in comparison with the usual expression, found in nearby VI.30.4 ná tvā́vām̐anyó asti “there exists no one else like you” (cf. VII.32.23).


## 11
In c Ge tr. āsúḥ as if it were a present: “die Agni zur Zunge haben und die Wahrheit pflegen.” Although this is contextually tempting, the pf. of √as is never presential. Cf. Kü (111): “Es ist stets (zumindest auch) vergangenheits bezogen gebraucht.” At best we could render it “who have (always) had Agni as their tongue …”; this might in fact be better.

In any case the pf. āsúḥ in c matches cakrúḥ in d, and this latter action appears to be one in the distant past -- even though it’s not entirely clear what action it refers to. Interpr. is not helped by the fact that dása- is a hapax, though it is reasonable, with Ge (n. 11d), to take it as “der mythische Stammvater der Dāsa’s oder Dasyu’s,” or indeed referentially identical with the well-attested stem dā́sa- referring to some variety of enemy to the Ārya (see Old, etc.). But what the relationship between Manu and Dasa is in this passage and what the gods were attempting to bring about are both unclear -- an unclarity also facilitated by the ambiguity of úpara-, which can mean, inter alia, ‘lower’, ‘closer’, or ‘later’. The publ. tr. “… put Manu very close to Dasa” is opaque; in fact I do not now know what I meant by it. Ge takes úpara- as ‘later’ and assumes that the gods made Manu Dasa’s successor (Nachfolger). I am now inclined towards Old’s solution, however: that the gods put Manu below (the ‘lower’ sense of úpara-) in the earthly region “for Dasa,” with the dative of malefit, not benefit: they set Manu to do to Dasa whatever he deserved. MLW comments “Wouldn't this most sense if it meant 'they made Manus superior to Dasa’? Could the original meaning of *upara- as preserved in Avestan, be kept here? For the sentiment cf. VI.19.13 śátroḥ-śatror úttara ít syāma.” this would be a neat solution, though I wonder whether a reading that requires the opposite sense (‘above’) of one of the senses of this stem (‘lower’) would be available.


## 12
vídānaḥ in b reprises yó vídānaḥ in 2a and thus forms a weak ring.
