+++
title = "022"

+++
Indra


## 01
To add to the similarities between VI.21 and VI.22 noted in the publ. intro., hávya- is applied to Indra in the first pāda here, recalling 22.1b hávyam .. hávyā havante; note also purumāyá- in b, a descriptor of Indra also in VI.21.2d (as well as nearby VI.18.12).

On sátvan- see comm. ad I.173.5.


## 02
The vs. lacks an overt finite verb. With Ge I supply a form of √arc, picking up the main clause verb of vs. 1, abhy àrca of 1b. The instr. matíbhiḥ in our d is parallel to gīrbhíḥ … ā́bhíḥ of 1b.

The “seven inspired poets” (saptá víprāsaḥ) evokes the Saptarṣi, the “seven seers.” I am not certain whether the phrase here refers to the Saptarṣi and, further, whether they are identical to the Navagvas; the numbers suggestnnot. It is worth noting IV.42.8 asmā́kam átra pitáras tá āsan, saptá ṛ́ṣayaḥ “Our forefathers, the Seven Seers, were here,” with pitáraḥ, as here, as well as IX.92.2 ṛ́ṣayaḥ saptá víprāḥ, where the Seven Seers are identified as vípra-s.

The interpr. of the cmpd nakṣad-dābhá- given in the publ tr., ‘who catches up to the cheat’, cannot be correct. That tr. assumed a structure of the verbal governing cmpd type, like bharád-vāja-, but the accent is wrong. I therefore now see that a conventional tatpuruṣa interpr., with the 2nd member an agent nominal governing the first, should be the correct interpr.; so Gr ‘den Nahenden vernichtend’, Ge ‘der den Einholenden (?) täuscht’. (Curiously AiG does not seem to comment on this cmpd, despite its somewhat aberrant form) The cmpd thus conforms to the type hastagrābhá- ‘grasping the hand’, at least as to its 2nd member, but the first member appears to be the weak form of the pres. part. to the pres. nákṣati (√nakṣ ‘approach, reach’). I do not know, offhand, of any cmpds formally so constructed, and I am further puzzled by the apparent sense ‘tricking / cheating / outwitting the one who approaches’. Forms of the root √nakṣ generally have benevolent sense, as in the medial nákṣate in this very hymn (5d), where the song ‘catches up’ to Indra, or act.

nákṣanti in this same Indra cycle, VI.34.3, where thoughts and voices approach Indra, strengthening him, so there is no apparent reason for Indra to √dabh someone innocently coming up to him. I would emend the tr. to “him who outwits the one(s) approaching,” but still feel that the first member is concealing something I can’t crack. Some light on the cmpd may be shed by the verb forms ānaśúḥ and nákṣate in the following vss. (4b and 5d respectively; see below), and this set of vss. seem to share preoccupations and themes. MLW suggests that nakṣat could represent the root √naś ‘disappear, destroy’, with -s- suffix and desid. meaning (“who deceives the one who seeks to destroy him”). This is semantically much more attractive than the suggestions given above, but I am dubious about the morphology. The root √naś does not have a desid. at any period of the language, and in any case we should properly expect reduplicated *ninakṣa-. Moreover, non-caus. stems to this root have the intrans. sense ‘disappear, perish’. The forms in the immediate vicinity cited above that belong to naś / nakṣ ‘reach, attain’ would also cause interference.

Note the presence of both √dabh ‘trick, cheat’and √druh ‘deceive, lie’, with Indra depicted as engaging in the former activity, but possessing speech that is ádrogha- ‘undeceptive’. In 8a he attacks the “deceitful people” (jána- drúhvan-).


## 03
The lack of accent on the demon. in the phrase asya rāyáḥ is notable. Ge tr.

“um solche Reichtum,” clearly taking asya as modifying rāyáḥ, and Old (ZDMG 61.828 [=KlSch 259]) defends a similar interpr., saying “der weitere Verlauf schildert dann den Reichtum ausführlicher.” However, unaccented oblique stems of ayám are ordinarily pronominal, and that interpr. is readily available here: the asya can refer to Indra, who immediately precedes in a different case (índram).

On the yáḥ of pāda c as breaking the pattern established earlier in the hymn of reference to Indra, see the publ. intro.


## 04
Although there is no overt mark, I take initial tán no ví vocaḥ as a question (contra Ge), matching the overt questions in cd and introducing the indirect question in the yádi clause; see also prchántī in the next vs. and the questions in the previous hymn, VI.21 3-4, 6).

The poet seems to be harking back to vs. 2 in 4ab and vs. 3 in 4cd. In vs. 2 the ancestral poets praised Indra, but the god is described as nakṣad-dābhá- ‘outwitting the one(s) approaching’. Here the poet asks if previous singers obtained (ānaśúḥ) Indra’s favor. Although this pf. belongs to the root √(n)aś ‘attain, reach’, which is synchronically separate from √nakṣ ‘approach’, the latter root is a fairly transparent enlargement or development of the former (see EWA s.v. NAŚ1 , p. 28; Narten, SigAor. 160, Gotō, 1st Kl., 192), and, of course, some forms of √(n)aś have the root syllable nakṣ (e.g., desid. ínakṣati, though see íyakṣati in the previous hymn, VI.21.3). I therefore suggest that ānaśúḥ implicitly responds to nakṣat- in 2c. With my new (and, I hope, more accurate) interpr. of nakṣad-dābhá- in 2c, I now think that vs. 2 implies that Indra may deviously rebuff the attentions of his praisers and have done so even to the legendary poets of the past. Here the poet directly asks the question if these previous poets (/singers) actually obtained (ānaśúḥ) the favor they sought in approaching (nakṣat-) Indra, whose benevolence cannot be taken for granted.

In the 2nd hemistich the questions turn to Indra’s portion (bhāgá-) and his vital energy (váyaḥ) in battle, but also refers to the wealth he may bring. The two cmpds púruhūta purūvaso respond to puruvī́rasya .. purukṣóḥ in 3d.

The voc. khidvaḥ, presumably to a -vant-stem *khídvant- (AiG II.2.896, or, less likely, *khídvan- or *khidvāṃs-), belongs to the synchronic root √khid, which, despite its relative rarity, displays a variety of senses centered around aggressive action. Since this stem is a hapax, it’s difficult to know which of the senses is reflected here; Gr renders as ‘drängend (so also EWA s.v. KHED), bedrängend, Ge ‘Abzwacker’. The only RVic nominal form to this root is khédā (3x), which in its clearest occurrence (VIII.76.3) means ‘hammer’ or the like. I have evoked this sense here, in the English idiom ‘hammer-head’, thus forming an unjustified etym. figure in tr. “headstrong hammer-head” -- ‘headstrong’ representing dudhra. Although the standard tr. are safer, the fact that the form is a hapax to a poorly attested root invites a more noticeable tr. than ‘pressing’.

I follow W. E. Hale (Ásura-, 65) in taking asura- in asurahán- as referring to human ‘lords’ who lead forces inimical to us.


## 05
This vs. is beset with difficulties, starting with the syntax, on which see Old.

The major problems are that there is no finite verb until iṣe in d and that it is unclear what the limits are of the rel. cl. marked by yásya in b. If we follow Old’s first option, that the rel. cl. occupies pādas a-c, the rel. prn. (towards the end of b) is positioned far too deeply in the clause. His 3rd option envisions a discontinuous rel. cl. partly embedded in and partly following the main cl., with the rel cl. verb being nákṣate in d -- a syntactic configuration that is simply impossible. His 2nd option, basically adopted by Ge as well, takes the rel. cl. as limited to vépī vákvarī yásya nū́gī́ḥ. This is more acceptable, though the rel. cl. would be definitely embedded, not only in the main clause but within a long acc. NP (tám … índram [REL CL] tuvigrābhám …). My own solution is similar to this, but limits the rel. cl. to yásya nū́gī́ḥ; this not only better accounts for the position of the particle nū́but also diminishes the effect of the embedding, because brief nominal rel. clauses, roughly equivalent to izafe constructions, seem to be at least marginally acceptable in RVic syntax. See esp. yó vídānaḥ in the previous hymn, VI.21.2. Scar’s (208) tr. appears to follow the same analysis, with the rel. cl. limited to “[das Lied,] das nun ihm gehört …” The root noun cmpd rabhodā́- is glossed by Scar (208) in the first instance as ‘Ungestüm, Gewalt, Kraft gebend, aufnehmend’, leaving it undetermined whether Indra bestows or assumes rábhas-, a question that Scar discusses in some detail without coming to a definite conclusion. Since, as Scar notes, there are several good exx. of rábhas- and related words as objects of medial ā́√dā ‘take, assume’ (e.g., I.145.3) and since the pāda in which the adj. is found seems to depict Indra on a rampage (tuvigrābháṃ tuvikūrmím “powerfully grasping, powerfully ranging”), the medial ‘assume’ value makes the most sense. Although ideally we might want the preverb ā́represented, root noun cmpds with the structure NOUN-PREV-√ seem to be rare to non-existent. (Cmpds of the type tveṣá-saṃ-dṛś- in 9b below aren’t counterexamples, because, as the accent shows, the root noun cmpd saṃdŕ̥ś- has been in turn incorporated into a bahuvrīhi), and in any case the outcome of rabhas-ādā́- would be hard to parse once sandhi rules had applied.

The verb of the main clause must be iṣe in d, but what it represents is uncertain. Gr (Nachtr., 1755) assigns it to √iṣ ‘send’, identifying it as a 1st sg.; Old tr.

as 3rd sg. ‘er regt sich … an’, which I assume means that he assigns it to √iṣ ‘send’, though he doesn’t comment on either root affiliation or morphology. Ge suggests a 3rd sg. either to √i (built like stuṣe, acdg. to him, though stuṣe is overwhelmingly first sg.) or to √iṣ (which √iṣ he doesn't say, though his tr. ‘sucht’ suggests √iṣ ‘seek’).

Lub gives iṣe as an independent lemma (p. 321), with a question mark, no gloss, and 4 occurrences. As my tr. ‘seeks’ indicates, I think it belongs to √iṣ ‘seek’ and is a 3rd sg. A number of other forms to this root take gātúm ‘way’ as obj. (pres. ichá- I.80.6, IV.18.10, VI.6.1; pf. īṣ- I.112.16, III.1.2). But what is the form? Almost the only way to get a 3rd sg. in -e (outside of archaic forms like duhé) is in the perfect, and as we just saw, other forms of the pf. of this root take the same object. I suggest that we do, or did, have a pf. here, whose expected form would be *īṣe. This putative form with heavy root syllable would in fact work metrically here. See also IV.23.6 and X.20.7, where I suggest the same underlying form for the transmitted form with light root vowel; the suggested long vowel is a significant metrical improvement in both passages. (Lub’s 4th ex. in VIII.46.17 is better taken as part of a cmpd. áramiṣe.) There are several ways to explain the short vowel. On the one hand, it can be wrongly extracted from combinations with preverbs like upeṣé in I.129.8, whose correct analysis is upa īṣé, but could also in principle contain *iṣé. On the other hand, the dat. iṣé to the root noun íṣ- ‘refreshment’, found in nearby VI.13.2, 17.14, might have influenced it. MLW suggests that it’s simply an archaic 3rd sg. middle pres., like duhé just cited - which would cut the Gordian knot.

Stepping back from the formal difficulties of the vs., we can try to fit its contents into the context of the hymn. The vs. seems to express the same questioning anxiety as vs. 4: do the singers -- and their song -- succeed in reaching Indra and attaining his good opinion, or does he respond to their approach with disdainful tricks? While asking this question, the song seeks her way and approaches what sounds like an intimidatingly formidable Indra, hoping for acceptance and favor.

That we have moved from the plural male poets/singers of vss. 2 and 4 to the lone female song (fem. gī́ḥ) makes the mismatch of power all the clearer. The verb nákṣate in the final clause brings us back to nakṣad-dābhá- in vs. 2.


## 06
Indra’s overwhelming power, viewed with some apprehension in the previous vss., is a positive force when it is exercised for our benefit against external foes, and the hymn now turns to this happier theme. The publ. tr. assigns the instr. phrase ayā́… māyáyā “with this magic power” to Indra, whereas Ge and Old assume that the phrase goes with vāvṛdhānám and refers to Vṛtra’s māyā́; Old is in fact quite scornful of the former interpr. However, see comm. ad nearby VI.18.9, where I argue that Indra is regularly credited with māyā́in this Indra cycle. See, e.g., 1d in this hymn and 2d in the previous one (VI.21.2), both with purumāyá- qualifying Indra. It is also the case that this hymn contains hostile māyā́; see 9d. I therefore now think that māyayā́in this vs. has double application. Its tight embedding in the acc. phrase tyám māyáyā vāvṛdhānám does suggest that it belongs to Vṛtra, but the initial near-deictic ayā́, outside that NP, refers, in my opinion, to “this (māyā́) right here” -- namely Indra’s. I would therefore amend the tr. to “With this (magic power of yours) right here … (you shattered) him who had grown strong with his magic power.” The identification of the vajra with “the mountain that has the speed of thought” goes back to Sāy. Though the first hemistich lacks a verb, it is easy enough to supply ‘shattered’ from rujó ví in the 2nd half-vs. ### 07
The predicated inf. paritaṃsayádhyai has no clear subject, but vaḥ must serve in this capacity, referring to the poets, who will perform this action with “their newer insight” (dhiyā́návasyā). The model for this action is the previous poets referred to in 2ab who praised and stimulated Indra, here represented by the adverbial pratnavát ‘in the ancient way, as the ancients did’. The force of pari- in the infinitive must be to indicate that poets from all competing groups will try to pull Indra to their side.

Ge renders animāná- as ‘ohne Vorbild’ (pattern, model), but there seems to be no support for this tr. The only occurrence of ní √mā that I know of in the RV is in the enigmatic creation hymn III.38.7d ní … mamire, where it is paired with ā́… mamire (7a), with both verbs referring to the ‘measuring out’ of creation and created things. There is another occurrence of the negated adj. animāná- in I.27.11, but nothing in that passage pushes the word to mean anything beyond ‘without measure’.


## 09
The lexeme ví dayate is often used positively, of distributing good things to deserving people; cf., e.g., III.2.11 vásu rátnā dáyamāno ví dāśúṣe “distributing goods and treasures to the pious man.” However, a few passages are, or can be, negative, esp. III.34.1 dáyamāno ví śátrūn “fragmenting his rivals” (probably also IV.7.10). Here the dominant sense must be negative and the wiles must be Vṛtra’s (and perhaps those of other enemies) — though a positive spin is just possible as a second reading: “distributing your magic wiles,” that is, deploying his own māyā-s widely. See comm. ad VI.18.9 on Indra’s use of his māyā́-s in combat.


## 10
The main cl., occupying the first hemistich, has no verb; I supply dhiṣvá from 9a, though any verb of providing, giving, bringing would work as well (see Ge’s “bring”). The contrastive pair dā́śa- ā́rya-, juxtaposed in c, is a species of merism that would seem to encompass all the types of human obstacles we might encounter; nā́huṣāṇi in d appears to be an afterthought that focuses our enmity on a defined group within the larger whole.
