+++
title = "023"

+++
Indra For the repetitive lexicon and the unusual amount of linkage between vss., see publ. intro.


## 01
The rendering of nímiśla- as ‘intertwined’ may be a bit over the top, but ‘attached to’ or ‘linked to’ is too anodyne; assuming an underlying sense ‘mixed’, the point is that Indra can’t be separated from the substances and words offered to him in the ritual.

The standard NP suté sóme is polarized at the boundaries of pāda a, allowing sóme to directly adjoin its rhyme form (and ritual partner) stóme over the pāda boundary -- a simple but effective use of word order.

On bíbhrad vájram see comm. ad VI.20.9.


## 02
The gen. phrase dákṣasya bibhyúṣaḥ is troublesome, as it is not clear who or what it refers to or what its syntactic function is. Old interpr. it as a “dativischer Gen.,” though he gives no tr. But Ge seems to take it as a gen. absolute: “während der Entschlossene Furcht hatte.” In either case dákṣa- seems to be taken as an adj.

qualifying a human and this fearful human is taken to be one on our side, aided either directly (datival gen.) or indirectly (gen. abs.) by fearless Indra. In this passage the single ‘skillful’ (or ‘determined’: Ge’s ‘entschlossen’) person would presumably be the soma-presser (súṣvi-) of ab, and this is not impossible. However, although there are a few undoubted exx. of adjectival dákṣa- ‘skillful’ (e.g., I.51.2 dákṣāsa ṛbhávaḥ), in most clear exx. the stem is a masc. abstract ‘skill, abillity’, and in doubtful cases I prefer to seek such a meaning. Here I suggest that the “fearful skill” belongs to Indra’s enemies, the dásyūn of d, and depicts their fading confidence in their skill or ability to counter Indra. Under this interpr. it can either be a gen. abs. with Ge (though this construction is rare at any stage and is supposed not to exist before Vedic prose; see Delbrück, AIS 389-90) or is a gen. of quality (although this construction is also marginal) with dásyūn “the Dasyus of frightened skill.” The publ.

tr. represents an absolute interpr.; the gen. of quality might be a better analysis, but is difficult to render in Engl., as the tr. just given shows (better “of daunted/craven skill,” but this would lose the etymological figure). (Kü’s [336] tr. avoids the problem, but unfortunately only by an unusual grammatical lapse on his part: he explicitly identifies bibhyúṣaḥ as acc. pl., which it could be, but tr. the phrase dákṣasya bibhyúṣaḥ as a single NP [“für den Geschickten die sich fürchtenden”] apparently failing to remember that dákṣasya requires the whole phrase to be gen. sg.

He takes this supposed acc. pl. as parallel to śárdhataḥ, which he separates from dásyūn and takes as another qualifier of those aided by Indra. His full tr. is “Oder wenn du für den Geschickten die sich fürchtenden furchtlos unterwarfst für den Kühnen, Indra, die Dasyus.” The misparsing of dákṣasya excludes this tr.)

## 03-04
The alternation of root-accented -tar- agent nouns and redupl. agentive - i-stems, both with verbal rection, is a distinctive characteristic of these two vss.


## 05
The first pāda contains an example of an embedded relative that is difficult to sidestep: in ásmai vayáṃ yád vāvā́na tád viviṣma the first two words dat. ásmai and nom. vayám rightly belong to the main cl. tád viviṣma “we toil at that,” which follows the dependent cl. yád vāvā́na “what he holds dear.” The two preposed pronouns set the participants and case roles for the vs. (see esp. índrāya opening b and d, as well as the two 1st pl. verbs viviṣma and stumasi) -- hence my tr. as a cleft construction -- but the construction still seems unusual.

The opening of c, suté sóme stumasi, takes the same elements found in the figure in vs. 1ab and plays on different phonological similarities. Here sut(é) and stu(masi) are scrambled versions of each other, while sóme stands somewhat apart.


## 06
The first hemistich can be interpr. as a rough repair of the problematic 5a: what Indra holds dear (5a) are the formulations that he makes strengthening for himself (6a), and this is what we have toiled for (6b), with viviṣmaḥ in a syntactically more orthodox position than in 5a. (6a also of course is responsive to 5d.) The phrase opening the 2nd hemistich, suté sóme sutapā́ḥ, echoes 5c, with sut(apā́ḥ) an anagram of stu(masi).

The referent of the acc. pl. neut. adjs. in cd is unspecified; either the pressings or the formulations -- or, better, both -- would work. Both are elsewhere qualified as śáṃtama-: cf. VIII.33.15 sávanā santu śáṃtamā and V.73.10 imā́bráhmāṇi várdhanā … santu śáṃtamā.

A rare ex. of variant readings, the hapax rā́ṇdya-/rā́ndrya- is unclear. Ge refuses to tr. it. The publ. tr. ‘enjoyable’ (which should be marked with ?) rests on Hoffmann’s suggestion (reported in EWA s.v. rā́ṇḍya-), deriving it from √raṇ (or √ram). Certainty of course is impossible, but some such meaning fits the context.

vákṣana- in d serves as a synonymous substitute for várdhana- (5d, 6a).


## 07
Note pleonastic #urúm … ulokám#.


## 08
As in III.41.6 (=VI.45.27) mandasvā is not accented despite following hí; see comm. ad III.41.6. I have no explanation (nor does Old, despite his ref. to himself). It can be noted that in all three passages the hí occurs in 3rd position, after the verb (all three identically sá mandasvā hí), but this position is not sufficient to explain the lack of accent, since hí elsewhere occurs after its accented verb (e.g., I.2.4 índavo vām uśánti hí# ; cf., e.g., I.105.18, 131.6, III.14.5, 26.8, VII.3.3, 23.5, 59.5, VIII.21.18, IX.85.2, X.30.12, 34.11). Note esp. I.189.6, IX.49.4, X.68.7, where hí is in 3rd position after the verb as here. Since hí often appears after initial accented verbs -- for 2nd sg. med. impvs. like mandasvā see the numerous exx. of #yukṣvā́hí (I.10.3, etc.) -- it might be possible to construct a scenario wherein when such an impv. is displaced from initial position by the pronoun sá, it loses its accent by some sort of syntactic analogy. But I find this unlikely: RVic poets are quite sensitive to their accent rules.

Pāda c lacks a verb, but the close parallelism of b and c (prá […] imé) and the semantic connection of the two nom. pl.s yajñā́saḥ and hávāsaḥ impose aśnuvantu from b.

In c the 1st pl. prn. asmé, which could be either dat. or loc., doesn’t work very well as either. Ge tr. “von uns,” which makes contextual sense but ill fits either possible case form. The publ. tr. takes it as loc., though the tr. is awkward.

I don’t know why the modal temperature has been raised, as it were, by precative yamyāḥ in d -- though it is the case that there are no 3rd sg. root aor. impvs. attested to √yam, perhaps because a putative *yaṃtu or *yantu would coincide with the much more common 3rd pl. root pres. impv. to √i ‘go’.


## 09
Once again a dependent clause seems to follow fronted portions of the main clause, in this case táṃ vaḥ sakhāyaḥ. (Although vaḥ sakhāyaḥ could belong semantically in the dependent clause, their lack of accent requires them to follow along with tám, or so it seems to me.) As in 5a the fronted material seems to establish the participants in the rest of hemistich: the god and the worshipers. The acc. tám is then doubled by both īm and the real referent índram in the main clause of b.

The foregoing assumes that the ellipsis of the verb in pāda a is not to be filled with a verb that could take tám as object or goal. I have in fact tried to find such a verb that an audience would supply when confronted with sám … sutéṣu, but I have not been able to come up with a plausible one. The most likely verb to supply is √as, esp. given 5d yáthā́sat, 9c ásati, and 10c ásad yáthā. Ge supplies “sich ergötze,” presumably a form of √mad or √mand, which would work contextually. But there is no positive evidence for this conjecture (unlike the three subjunctive forms of √as with yáthā just cited), and both roots are only marginally construed with sám.


## 10
I would slightly change the tr. of the loc. absol. to ‘has been pressed’ or ‘was pressed’ to accord better with the immediate past of the hymn-summary verb astāvi.

Klein (DGRV I.442-43) interpr. maghónaḥ as acc. pl. (“the liberal ones”), which it could be morphologically, but √kṣi ‘rule over’ always takes the gen. (Gr gives one passage with supposed acc., V.37.4, but it belongs to the etymologically separate root √kṣi ‘dwell’, and in any case in that passage I do not construe the acc. with that verb.) The utá in c is troubling: it does not seem to conjoin anything and it seems randomly positioned in the pāda. Klein groups it with a small set of passages where he thinks utá means ‘(and) also, as well’, and he suggests that it focuses on the immediately preceding word jaritré ‘singer’, who will also receive patronage from Indra, in addition to the soma-presser in 9d. I find this unpersuasive, though I don’t have an altogether better solution. One possibility is that we should supply the nom. sg. corresponding to gen. sg. maghónaḥ of b, namely *maghávā, and utá would conjoin this supplied noun with sūríḥ. This would change the tr. to “so that he will be (liberal [/a benefactor]) and a patron to the singer.” A slightly different solution, but still with the supplied *maghávā, would be to take utá as starting a new clause, with sūríḥ qualifying Indra, yielding a tr. “so that he [=the liberal mortal of b] will be (liberal) to the singer, and Indra (will be) a patron and giver of wealth …” Indra is called a sūrí- in this Indra cycle (VI.29.5=37.5) and elsewhere. This second suggestion is probably less disruptive to the syntax than the first one, but I weakly favor the first because sūrí- is more often used of human patrons than of gods.
