+++
title = "024"

+++
Indra


## 01
In the publ. tr. ślóka- is rendered as ‘noise’, but I would now alter that to the sense I usually give that word, ‘signal call’ (see comm. ad I.51.12) -- namely the noise that emanates from the sacrifice, often made by the pressing stones, to alert the gods that the sacrifice is underway. Of course, it is possible here that it refers to more general noise (as in the Engl. expression “joyful noise”) associated with the sacrifice.

In the publ. tr. I give full lexical value to the expression sácā sómeṣu as “when the soma juices are in his company.” This is certainly possible, but, as noted in the comm. ad IV.31.5, sácā with loc. often lacks lexical value and simply signals an absolute (or absolute-like) construction. Here I might substitute the tr. “when the soma juices (are pressed).” Ge seems to take nṛ́bhyaḥ as a beneficial dat. (“für die Männer”), but it is more likely that it is an agent with the gerundive, since such formations do take dat. agents. (See my “Case of Agent …”) It is possible, however, that I’ve misinterpreted his tr. “… ist er … für die Männer zu preisen,” and it’s actually the equivalent of an English “for … to” construction (“for the men to praise”), which would give it agentive value.


## 02
The bahuvrīhi urvyū̀tiḥ, matching 1d ákṣitotiḥ at pāda end, is morphologically problematic. It must be read as a quadrisyllable, and, further, the 2nd vowel must be short (urvĭ(y)-ūtiḥ) in the Triṣṭubh cadence. (The Pp. reads urví ’ūtiḥ.) Old simply remarks of it that the expected form *urú-ūtiḥ “wäre phonetisch unbequem,” which is perfectly true but doesn’t account for the form. There are several different analyses of it in the lit. Wack (AiG II.1.52 [also 274], flg.

Johannson 1897) assumes that it represents *urvī́+ūti- with the fem. form of the adj.

urú- as 1st member compounded with a fem. 2nd member. He does not mention that the form has to be metrically distracted, much less that the distracted vowel must be read short. Of course, the prevocalic outcome of -ī (<*iH) would likely be -ĭ(y) as here. But the real problem is that there seem to be no other good Vedic examples of the type of cmpd envisioned, with a derived fem. adj. stem as first member showing gender agreement with the 2nd; the cmpds uru-kṣití- and urú-gavyūti- with the stem form of the adj. as 1st member even when cmpded with a fem. -ti-stem, provide counterexamples. (Wack could argue that the fem. was used in our case for metrical convenience; but without a grammatical model for this kind of compounding, it seems difficult to imagine a Vedic poet inventing this type even to rescue his cadence.) By contrast Lanman (Noun Inflection, pp. 380-81, esp. 381 B.4c) suggests that the first member represents the older fem. instr. in -ī, shortened to -i. (Actually he thinks -ī is a “contracted” form of -iā, but that aspect of his view is not relevant here.) Although there is more precedent for the instr. sg. than for a fem. stem-form as first cmpd. member, at least with archaic personal pronominal stems (type yuṣmā́- datta- ‘given by you’), the problem here is that there is no functional reason to have an instr.: the cmpd. must mean ‘having broad/wide-ranging help’, not ‘having help with a broad [fem.] X’. Lanman’s solution is found, in a slightly different package, in BR and is reproduced by Gr (though dismissed by Wack). The BR lemma contains the lapidary “urviyā + ūti,” expanded a bit by Gr to “urvī́= urviyā́, I. f. von urú.” Although I think the purport of these formulations is the same as Lanman’s, the invocation of urviyā́allows us to pursue a different path: to take urvi- as truncated from the adverbial urviyā́, orig. of course the long instr. of fem. urvī́- but only used as an adverb. Although the fem. instr. is still the ultimate source, it would be possible for the poet to perceive urvi- in urviyā́as a base form to which the instr./adverbial ending had been affixed and therefore available for compounding. I would also tentatively put forth yet a different, though related, analysis: that urví- preserves in altered form the old Caland compound-forming -i-. The derived u-adj. urú- should substitute this -i- when compounded, yielding *ur-i- (of the type ṛji- ‘silvery’, Aves.

bǝrǝzi- ‘lofty’). This *ur-i- of course never appears, but I would suggest that urvímay indirectly contain it, grafted onto the adj. stem urú-, encouraged by the independent adv. urviyā́.

The phrase śáṃso narā́m is a reordered variant of narā́ṃ (ná) śáṃsa-, on which see comm. ad II.34.6. Here I interpr. it as I do the similar phrase śáṃsam āyóḥ (IV.6.11, V.3.4) “Laud of Āyu,” as referring to the god as a sort of embodiment of the praise he receives. As I point out in the comm. ad IV.6.11, it is rather like referring to someone as “the toast of the town” or perhaps “the talk of the town” -- both of which English expressions are quite peculiar when considered literally.

On dāti as a root aor. subj., see comm. ad IV.8.3. Here it would be better rendered ‘he will give’.


## 03
The ‘help’ (ūtí-) found in the first two vss. (ákṣitotiḥ 1d, urvyū̀tiḥ 2b) recurs here uncompounded. The forms of help “have grown outward” (vy ū̀táyo ruruhuḥ) in d, an image that expands on urvyū̀tiḥ ‘having broad help’ in 2b.

Despite Old’s detailed disc. of the first hemistich, in which he takes bṛhán with ákṣaḥ as “the lofty axle,” I am persuaded instead by Ge’s interpr. Citing the nearby passage VI.21.2 … áti mahnā́… riricé mahitvám, where Indra’s greatness (nom. mahitvám) projects beyond the two worlds in/with their greatness (instr.

mahnā́), he supplies synonymous nom. mahimā́here as well, referring to Indra’s greatness, with instr. mahnā́belonging to the two worlds as in VI.21.2. Although te is adjacent to mahnā́, it has been independently positioned by Wackernagel’s Law and need not limit the following instr. Ge presumably chose to supply mahimā́rather than the mahitvám in VI.21.2 because we need a masc. here, given masc. bṛhán, but it also works better because mahnā́also belongs to this -mán-stem.


## 04
The vs. begins and ends with pādas containing triple etymological figures: a: śácīvatas te puruśāka śā́kāḥ and d: dā́manvanto adāmā́naḥ sudāman. The effect seems clumsily heavy, but it is quite possible that I’m missing something. At least in the 2nd case, sudāman is a pun uniting two roots √dā ‘bind’ and ‘give’. It is possible that there is a buried pun also in pāda a. The previous vs. compared Indra’s aid to the branches of a tree (vṛkṣásya … vayā́ḥ); another word for ‘branch’ is śākhā-, which is phonologically close to the śāk- forms. Perhaps the poet is punning off this unexpressed synonym.

Old is insistent that srutí- should be read *sṛtí- here and in most other instances in the RV (see his comm. ad I.42.3). I don’t understand his reasons and stick with the transmitted reading.

The imagery in pāda b is complex. In its other occurrence (I.56.2=IV.55.6) saṃcáraṇa- is used of the converging of rivers into the sea. Here the word srutáyaḥ ‘streams’ maintains the flowing imagery (another reason to keep the reading, pace Old [see immed. above]; see also 6a), but they are streams of cows, not of water, and this phrase (“converging like streams of cattle”) is a simile, where the comparandum is Indra’s abilities. But in what way do Indra’s abilities flow? On what are they converging? Indra himself? or, more likely, the lucky mortal recipients of his aid? The simile in the 2nd hemistich, “like cords for calves,” likewise applying to Indra’s abilities, is also opaque. Ge cites the dharmasūtra cmpd vatsa-tantī- (ĀpDS I.31.13, GDS IX.52), but though apposite, it is not helpful. The passages in question simply state that a snātaka should not step over a vatsa-tantī. Without knowing more about the details of Vedic animal husbandry, we cannot get too far, but I assume -- based on “binding without bonds” -- that calves were kept under control with very gentle ropes or perhaps by means other than tying. But why should these gentle measures be compared to Indra’s abilities?


## 05
The publ. tr. of this vs. differs in a number of respects from the standard interpr. In particular, in the first hemistich, flg. an interpr. of JPB’s, the two pairs anyád adyá kárvaraṃ anyád u sváḥ “one deed today and another tomorrow” and ásac ca sát “non-existent and existent” are taken as a chiastic square, with anyád adyá matching sát and anyád u sváḥ matching ásat. In other words the deed Indra does today is existent, while the one he will do tomorrow is (as yet) non-existent. The standard interpr. takes ásat ca sát as an expression of process: Indra makes each deed (the one today, the one tomorrow) that was as yet non-existent into an existent one (so Ge “... macht Indra das Unwirkliche alsbald wirklich”). This does seem a possible interpr., and I would suggest an alternative tr. “One deed today and another tomorrow -- Indra makes the not (yet) existent (deed) existent.” Klein (DGRV I.170, II.24) takes ásac ca sát as “the bad and the good,” which deviates from the usual sense esp. of the former and breaks the thematic connection with the first pāda: “(Performing) one deed today and another tomorrow, Indra turns hither immediately the bad and the good.” In the 2nd hemistich the standard interpr. takes Mitra, Varuṇa, and Pūṣan as the individualized seriatim singular subjects of paryetā́sti (=paryetā́asti), as in Ge’s “Mitra und Varuṇa und Pūṣan kommen uns dabei dem Wunsche des Nebenbuhlers zuvor.” (Tichy [-tar-stems, 188] follows Ge’s syntactic template, but with an aberrant interpr. of pári √i.) As Ge’s blithe disregard of the sg. verb shows, the triple subject is somewhat awkward given sg. asti (though singular verbs with a series of singular subjects are indeed found). But there are several other problematic aspects to this strain of interpr. On the syntactic level, it is surprising to find asti in a main clause if its function is simply copular (“M, V, and P is/are parietā́”); asti in main clauses is almost always existential. On the thematic level, these other gods are intrusive in the hymn -- the focus so far has been entirely on Indra -- and it seems odd suddenly to credit these gods with the power to effect a desirable thing for us, when Indra has been performing the heavy lifting all along. I therefore think that Thieme (Fremdling, 53) is correct in taking Indra as the unexpressed subject of parietā́asti, though he doesn’t discuss the passage or, rather disingenuously, even quote the preceding pāda with the other possible subjects. Given these factors, I think that asti is implicitly contrastive and emphatic: the other gods are there for us in some sense, but it’s Indra who … As for the sense of paryetā́and pári √i in general, the literal meaning is ‘go around’, hence ‘encompass’ and hence to contain and control, a sense that works very well here.


## 06
The simile in pāda a makes explicit the flowing water implicit in 4b (see disc. above). But it is not clear what the waters are being compared to. Old suggests Schätze and Segnungen, with various rather vague parallels suggested. I find Ge’s citation of nearby VI.34.1 more to the point. Pāda b of that vs. reads ví ca tvád yanti vibhvò manīṣā́ḥ “Out from you go inspired thoughts far and wide.” Although Indra is generally viewed as the goal and recipient of poetic thoughts and praises, he is also, as Ge says in his n. 6ab to our passage, “der Aufgangspunkt der Dichtkunst und des Kultus.” Here we can supply as subject and comparandum the ‘inspired thoughts’ (manīṣā́ḥ) of 34.1 or some similar reference to poetic production. The more conventional view of Indra as poetic goal is expressed in the 2nd hemistich, which roughly corresponds to VI.34.1a sáṃ ca tvé jagmúr gíra indra pūrvī́ḥ “Many songs have converged on you, Indra.” The verb (ví) … anayanta is a bit troubling because even the rare medial forms of the overwhelmingly active pres. náya(ti) are otherwise transitive. Cf., e.g., V.45.10 udnā́ná nā́vam anayanta dhī́rāḥ “Like a boat through the water the wise ones guided (him).” I see no choice but to assume that this form has acquired a nonce intrans. sense because of its middle voice.


## 07
The distribution of the three measures of time vis-à-vis the two verbs járanti and avakarśáyanti cannot be determined for certain, nor does it really matter. The pāda boundary favors keeping mā́śāḥ with śarádaḥ (“whom neither the autumns nor the months age, nor the days make lean”), but the position of the various ná-s might favor bracketing mā́sāḥ with dyā́vaḥ. This is how Ge tr., and I have followed suit, though I don’t feel strongly one way or the other.


## 08
stavā́n is an intractable form, found also in II.19.5, 20.5. In all three cases it is found in this same, apparently nom. sg., form, referring to Indra, and with the likely value ‘being praised, having/receiving praise’. In all three cases it also occurs at the end of a Triṣṭubh pāda, which suggests that the root syllable should be heavy (*stāvā́n) -- though Old (ad II.19.5) does not regard this as a problem. Old discusses the form in great detail ad II.19.5 without reaching a firm conclusion; see also KEWA III.521, with listing of the lit. but again no conclusions. Assuming that the form belongs to √stu ‘praise’ (other proposed root affiliations are properly dismissed by Old), there are two main strains of explanation: as a truncation or as a haplology.

Several different underlying forms have been suggested for the truncation; the least problematic is Pischel’s suggested pres. mid. part. stavānáḥ (1x; versus fairly common stávāna-). But least problematic doesn’t mean unproblematic: lopping off inflectional endings isn’t a practice we find elsewhere in the RV, esp. when it leaves an unanalysable form, and we might expect the accent to follow that of the common root-accented participle. The haplology explanation (owing ultimately to Johansson, who was responsible for one of the explanations of urvyū̀tiḥ above, vs. 2) has found more general acceptance (see AiG I.Nachtr. 161, though cf. Mayrhofer’s lack of enthusiasm in KEWA, cited above) -- that it is derived from a -vant-stem, nom. sg.

*stava-vā́n, with haplologic loss of the medial syllable. Old raises several objections
to this: first, that the accent is wrong. The accent of -vant-stems is overwhelmingly that of the base noun; if the putative stem was formed to stáva- ‘praise’, it should have yielded *stá(va)vān. Old’s 2nd objection has to do with this base form: that stáva- is found only once in the RV. I tentatively advance a different explanation from either of the prevailing ones, that it is formed with a Hoffmann suffix (*-Hon-/

-Hn-), to the just mentioned stáva- ‘praise’, hence ‘having praise’. This would
produce the attested long vowel; moreover, insofar as we can tell, the Hoffmann suffix attracts the accent. See somā́n- ‘having soma’ (based on root-accented sóma-) and discussion ad I.18.1. Of course, the rarity of the base form stáva- is a problem here, as it was for the -vant-stem explanation just presented, but perhaps because the Hoffmann suffix was not synchronically productive and therefore our stavā́n should be an old form, this rarity is less problematic than for the productive -vant-stems. It might also be possible to posit a long-vowel base *stāva- (cf. fem. stāvā́- VS XVIII.42), with expected Brugmann’s Law outcome for a standard *o-grade thematic noun, producing *stāvā́n. Though, once the formation of *stāvā́n was no longer understood, this vṛddhi would have been eliminated in the transmitted text in favor of the guṇa prevailing in the verbal forms, it would still be reflected in the heavy syllable called for by the cadential pattern.


## 09
In a the instr. ámatreṇa can be supplied with the instr. adj.s, extracted from the possessive amatrin ‘having an ámatra-’. In b sutapāvan reprises sutapā́(ḥ) in 1b.

vyùṣṭau (/-iṣu) almost always occurs with dependent uṣásaḥ -- “at the early brightening of the dawn” -- and of course is derived from the same root √vas ‘dawn’ as uṣás-. Here we find the apparent opposite: aktór vyùṣṭau “at the early brightening of the night”; despite the anonymity of the genitives, I think the two expressions refer to the same time period, the moment when the deep darkness of night begins to lift.

This can be considered as brightening either of the night or of the dawn. On the almost identical expression in V.30.13 and its morphological twist, see comm. ad loc. ## 025
Indra As noted in the publ. intro., the hymn has an omphalos shape, with vs. 5 the omphalos, surrounded by matched vss. 4 and 6. Although vss. 3 and 7 do not show similar matchings, there is some repeated phraseology between vss. 1/2 and 8/9: vrtrahátye ̥ 1c, 8b; spṛ́dhaḥ (...) mithatī́ḥ 2a, 9ab.

## 01-02
On avīḥ (1c) and áva tārīḥ (2d) as “hortativ,” see Hoffmann Injunk. 264.


## 01
That avīḥ of c is also the verb of d is suggested by passages like I.110.9 vā́jebhir no vā́jasātau aviḍḍhi, VIII.46.11 dhíyo vā́jebhir āvitha with √av and an instr.

of vā́ja- ‘prize’.


## 02
Ge supplies the verb ‘drive’ in c (“Mit diesen (treib) alle Angriffe auseinander”), but I see no reason why it can’t be in the orbit of d. In vs. 1 the two pādas cd share a single verb (avīḥ c), as do the first two pādas of this vs. (vyathayā).

With this pattern established, it seems reasonable to take áva tārīḥ in d as also governing the accusatives of c. Under this interpr., I take víṣūcīḥ as proleptic, rather like 3d kṛṇuhī́párācaḥ “put them far away.”


## 03
Pāda c lacks a verb to govern the acc. vithurā́śávāṃsi. On the model of 1cd, 2ab, and 2cd, we might simply deploy the (first) verb of d, jahí, across the pāda boundary: “smash their faltering powers” or, with proleptic adj., “smash their powers (to be) faltering.” However, vithurā́is derived from the root √vyath ‘falter’, whose causative supplied the verb in 2ab, vyathayā. I therefore think there’s a different kind of trick here: the poet expects us to supply the CAUSATIVE feature of the verb in 2b with the lexical feature of that verb contained in the adj. vithurā́-- hence my tr.

“(render) their powers faltering.”


## 04
tanūrúc- is, of course, a root noun cmpd., ‘shining with/in their bodies’, but the bahuvrīhi-like tr. works better in context.

kṛṇvaíte is clearly meant as a 3rd du. mid. subjunctive to the 5th cl. pres. of √kṛ, but it has the wrong grade of the suffix: we expect *kṛnávaite (cf. 2nd du. mid.

aśnávaithe [VII.70.4]). It clearly simply anticipates the root pres. 3rd du. mid.

brávaite, which ends the next hemistich (4d). This imitation comes at a metrical cost: the heavy root syllable kṛṇv produces a bad Triṣṭubh cadence. (The grammatically correct form would also, of course, be metrically problematic.) A root aor. subj.

*karaite would fit the meter better, but there’s no warrant for emendation. For a
passage in which the poet simply avoids the middle dual subjunctive of √kṛ altogether by substituting a plural, see comm. ad I.178.2.

The locative string in cd is the usual expression of the stakes -- a type of loc. absol. lacking an overt participle. The full expression is dháne hité “when the stake is set” (VI.45.11, 13, etc.). The string here contains a formulaic pair, toké … tánaye “progeny and prosperity” with three other locc., one inserted inside the formula. On the basis of VI.31.1 (q.v.), where a ca after tánaye better delineates the pairing, I would slightly change the tr. to “when progeny and prosperity [or, offspring and lineage], cattle, water, and fields are at stake.” The two vā-s (4a, 4c), in conjunction with the subjunctives, seem to set out a deliberative choice: “it may be that X … or it may be that Y.” The two possibilities floated as to how one champion might defeat another set the stage for the next vs. (5), which forecloses any possibility that one of the champions, even a successful one, could take on Indra. The two vā-s are slightly off-balance, however, since the first one is located in the main clause (a) to which the first yád clause is immediately appended (b), while the second is found in the second yád clause, whose main clause seems to be, by default, the original pāda a. This seems to me a minor problem: the point is that the two champions (śū́ra-) in pāda a may defeat each other in single combat (b) or in a full-on battle (cd). The first vā would be better positioned in pāda b, but it has been shifted to the front of the whole main-cl./dep.-cl. construction -- a sort of super-Wackernagel’s Law position. Klein (DGRV II.194, 201-2) treats the two vā occurrences separately, taking the 2nd as conjoining (or disjoining) the parallel yád clauses b and c, but the 1st as the equivalent of “the asseverative particle vaí.” This seems somewhat perverse to me: two occurrences of the same particle in a single verse, esp. a particle that regularly appears in pairs, invite a unified explanation; moreover, I am very dubious that vā is ever used for vaí, a particle that is rare in the RV anyway. Even Klein can only identify 6 passages where he thinks vā = vaí (DGRV II.201), of which he finds syntactic support for only 3. That 6c contains a pair of vā-s whose syntactic connection is clearer provides evidence that these two vā-s also form a pair.

## 06-08
Each of these vss. contains at least one derivative of nṛ́- ‘(superior) man’: 6a nṛmṇám, 6c nṛváti, 7c nṛ́tamāsaḥ, 8d nṛṣáhye.


## 06
By my analysis this vs. matches 4 in structure and in referents, forming with 4 a ring around the omphalos vs. 5. In the first pāda the unspecified pair (ubháyoḥ … ayóḥ “of both of these”) refers, in my view (as also, apparently, Ge), to the two krándasī (lit. ‘war-cries’, viz., opposing forces) of 4d; Indra has mastery over the manly power of both of them, as vs. 5 has already implied. The verb of 6b, hávante, doubles brávaite in 4d semantically; both refer to verbal appeals to Indra for help in battle. The two forces referred to in an oblique case in pāda a return as subject in pāda d, with yet another 3rd du. med. subjunctive, vitantasaíte. Pace Ge, who gives them different roles, the locc. in c are parallel and match those of 4c, expressing what is at stake in the battle. Although it might seem odd to name a vṛtrá- as a stake, I think the point is that the battle may be about confronting an obstacle or about acquiring a rich dwelling place. Klein’s tr. (DGRV II.159) “when they battle each other in the (struggle with the) obstacle or in (the struggle for) great dwelling space rich in heroes” reflects the same view. See Schaeffer (Intens. 126-27) for detailed disc. A similar use of vṛtréṣu is found in the next hymn (VI.26.2), where it is implicitly parallel to góṣu, an expression for the stakes.

I take the subordinator yádī in b as representing yád + ī (‘when’ + acc. particle) (as described pp. 305-9 in my 2002 article “Rigvedic sīm and īm), rather than conditional yádi ‘if’. All that needs to be done is to insert a notional word space between yád and ī. The pāda could use an overt acc. (ī ‘him’, as obj. of hávante), and ‘if’ does not make sense.

The publ. tr. implicitly reflects a similar analysis of yádi in d, but I now think that interpr. is probably incorrect. In favor of it is the parallelism with the matched vs. 4, which contains two parallel yád clauses. But several factors, both formal and functional, weigh against it: the final i of yádi is short and does not occur before a cons. cluster, which elsewhere facilitates the shortening of the particle ī. Moreover, an acc. referent is not necessary to the clause, since the verb is a reciprocal middle (though see I.131.3, also with med. ví √taṃs, ví tvā tatasre “They have tussled over you,” a passage that also contains a loc. of the stakes). The publ. tr. also renders the subjunctive vitantasaíte as an indicative. I now think that the conditional yádi and the subjunctive contribute to the same semantic effect. For a full revised tr. see below.

On the assumption that cd forms a single dependent clause (as it does in the publ. tr. and in Ge), the yádi is too deep in the clause, following not only the nom. du.

adj. vyácasvantā that opens pāda d but also the complex loc. phrase that occupies pāda c. This problem could be easily remedied by connecting c with b, rather than with d, leaving yádi in standard 2nd position in a clause now consisting only of d. The only obstacle to that reassignment is my interpr. of maháḥ, which in the publ. tr. I take as a sentential adverb and construe with vitantasaíte (“… keep tussling mightily”). However, that interpr. is quite fragile, esp. because of the position of maháḥ, and I am happy to abandon it, though I do not have a particularly good alternative suggestion. Schaeffer (Intens. 128) first suggests that it is an adverb, with adjectival aspirations (not her phrase), construed with the following phrase nṛváti kṣáye, in the manner of Old’s (ZDMG 55 [1901]: 270-71) interpr. of mahó rāyé “mächtiglich zu Reichtum” à “zu mächtigem Reichtum” -- in this instance “mächtiglich männerreiches Land” à “grosses männerreiches Land.” Alternatively she suggests it could be an acc. pl. with gapped devā́n as a goal or obj. of vitantasaíte (“sooft die zwei … (Völkerschaften) die Grossen (Götter) angehen …”). This second suggestion seems quite implausible, but the first one is possible, in the absence of anything better. In any event, it is essentially the interpr. given by Ge (“um einen grossen männerreichen Wohnsitz”), however he arrived at it. (Judging from his n.

6cd it rests on Sāy.’s high-handed glossing of maho with loc. mahati.) Klein’s tr. “great dwelling space rich in heroes” (see above) simply follows Ge and also shows a quasi-adj. interpr. of maháḥ.

Putting all this together, I offer the revised translation: “He is master of the manly power of both of these (armies) when the ritual adepts call on him in the clash, whether an obstacle or a dwelling place rich in men is at issue — if the two (armies) in their expansion will keep tussling mightily back and forth with one another.”


## 07
As usual, aryáḥ has a number of possible interpr. Ge takes it as nom. pl.

identical to the sūráyaḥ in d. Old suggests either acc. pl. or abl. sg. without choosing one. Thieme (Fremdling, 73-74) opts for the abl. sg., which he construes (as does Old) with the splv. nṛ́tamāsaḥ: “… als unsere, im Vergleich zum Fremdling sehr heldenhaften Schutzherren …” But of course an ablative with a superlative would be highly unusual (though Old offers a single parallel and a ref. to Delbrück’s Vgl.

Syn.). I also take it as an abl., but suggest construing it with puráḥ. I now see that this is also problematic, since it is not clear that puráḥ ever takes the abl. Gr gives two exx.: but in IV.7.9 the supposed abl. is a gen. and construed elsewhere; in III.53.23 the form in question (áśvān) could be either an abl. sg. or an acc. pl. in sandhi.

Nonetheless I hold to this interpr. Although puráḥ + ABL is not a robust construction, the related purā́is regularly found with the abl. Here I would suggest that we have a sort of pun. The lexeme puráḥ + √dhā ‘set in front, install’ is of course very common, and that phrase is found here, dadhiré puró naḥ. Although, as I just said, to express “ahead of / in front of the stranger” we might expect aryáḥ [abl.] … purā́, there was interference with the VP dadhiré puró naḥ “they have set us in front,” and puráḥ prevailed.


## 08
The HvN ed. resolves the contraction across pāda boundary of yajatréndra as yajatrā́índra. This must be a careless error, since the Pp. has yajatra índra, and the stem yájatra- has root accent.


## 09
Pāda c = I.177.5c and X.89.17c. Ge (fld. by Klein, DGRV I.458) construes vástoḥ with vidyā́ma (“Möchten wir Sänger … den neuen Tag erleben”), but wellattested vástoḥ is otherwise a temporal expression ‘at dawn, in the morning’. In both the other passages, the pāda in question is adjoined by a pāda that likewise begins vidyā́ma (following in I.177.5, preceding in X.89.17), and the obj. of that vidyā́ma can be assumed with the one in the repeated pāda. The d pāda of X.89.17 is almost identical to d here, with the substitution of a different poetic family: viśvā́mitrāḥ for our bharádvājāḥ.

The function and position of utá in d are unclear. The publ. tr. implicitly assumes that it loosely connects the 2nd hemistich with the 1st (“And with your help …”), but locating this clausal conjunction in 2nd position of the 2nd pāda of what it’s conjoining would be an irrational poetic strategy. I now think it likely that it conjoins the temporal expressions vástoḥ and nūnám, and I would alter the tr. to “With your help … might we Bharadvājas know (this), as we sing at dawn and also now” (or “might we know (this) at dawn and also now, as we sing”). The curiosity then is the position of te, which can only belong to something in the preceding pāda: either “with your help” (as I take it in the publ. tr.) or “as we sing to you.” I suppose that utá’s strong tendency to take 1st position makes it a natural host for enclitics even when it is not so located, but it really seems odd that it would sweep te up and away from the elements it should be limiting.
