+++
title = "026"

+++
Indra On the various stylistic tics of this hymn, see publ. intro.

## 01-02
As noted in the publ. intro., the 1st two vss. play on the word vā́ja-, presumably as a reference to the Bharadvāja bardic line: 1b, 2b mahó vā́jasya, 2a vājī́ … vājineyáḥ.


## 01
On vāvṛṣāṇā́ḥ, see comm. ad VIII.61.7 on úd vāvṛṣasva.


## 02
The hapax vājineyáḥ is somewhat surprising, because the -eyá-suffix generally builds metronymics (AiG II.2.505-11), and so it should mean ‘son of a female prize-winner / of a prize-winning mare’ -- a feminine connection that would be particularly surprising if it’s meant as a reference to the Bharadvāja family.

Although I don’t have a good explanation, I do think the intrusion of this marked suffix, fairly rare in the RV, should be taken serious, and if vājineyá- is derived from the vājínī- (found in vājínī-vant- and vājínī-vasu-) (cf. AiG II.2.507 for this possibility), this provides another support for my contention that vājínī- has real fem.

reference, and its -ī- is not simply an Erweiterung (pace Debrunner, AiG II.2.409).

See disc. ad I.48.6.

Since pāda c lacks a main verb, it could belong either with ab or with d. Ge takes it with ab, seeming to refer to VI.46.1 as a parallel, and the publ. tr. follows suit.

On the basis of VI.25.6c with contrastive locatives of the stake, one of which is vṛtré (see comm. immed. above), I am now inclined to reassign it to d, with vṛtréṣu (c) and góṣu (d) the stakes. The revised tr. would be “… secured; to you … when obstacles (are at stake), to you when cows (are at stake) does the fistfighter look as he fights.”

## 03-06
These vss. are tr. and discussed by Hoffman (Injunk., 183-84).


## 03
As discussed ad VI.20.4, the three occurrences of arká-sāti- ‘the winning of the sun’s rays’ (I.174.7, VI.20.4, and here) are all found in conjunction with a poet (kaví-) and in connection with the Kutsa / Śuṣṇa myth. These associations point fairly decisively to Uśanā Kāvya as the poet in question.

Pāda b contains one of the few occurrences of √vṛj ‘twist, wring’ without preverb; another is found nearby at VI.18.8. Hoffmann (183) reads injunc. párā han for Pp. párā ahan. Given the preponderance of injunctives in these vss. and esp. han at the end of 5c, this seems likely. (See also sácāhan in the next vs. and 6d.)


## 04
As in 3c, Hoffmann (184) reads sácā han in c rather than Pp. sácā ahan, which seems perfectly plausible. As for the unequivocal imperfect ā́vaḥ in b, he suggests that this may not have been the original form, citing the almost identical I.33.14b prā́vo yúdhyantaṃ vṛṣabháṃ dáśadyum. If the original reading was *prā́vaḥ, it could contain the injunctive: prá avaḥ. However, it is unclear to me how the corruption would have arisen, particularly because in the next vs. (5) the d pāda begins prā́vaḥ. Moreover the pāda preceding I.33.14b begins with ā́vaḥ, a clear imperfect matching the one here. Hoffmann’s other observation -- that this pres. stem has no clear injunctive forms (and only one possible one, ávaḥ in I.121.12, which more likely belongs to the s-stem noun; see comm. ad loc.) -- seems more apposite.

For whatever reason the injunctive to this stem was avoided -- or, perhaps better phrased, ā́va- was treated as the injunctive stem.

I do not entirely understand what sácā is doing here; it seems to add little and have no obvious syntactic connection to the rest. As discussed ad IV.31.5, sácā with loc. is regularly a pleonastic marker of the loc. abs., but there is no loc. here. Gr cites our passage here as an ex. of sácā after a dat. meaning “zu seinen Gunsten,” but I don’t understand how this meaning would have developed from ‘together with’. The same sequence (sácā han) is found two vss. later (6d) in the same general context: Indra’s smiting of an enemy on behalf of a mortal friend, and I.63.3 tváṃ śúṣṇam … kútsāya dyumáte sácā han shows the same configuration. In all three passages I tr. it ‘in partnership’ as an adverbial. Perhaps sácā signals an esp. close relationship between Indra and his mortal beneficiary. The voc. epithet of Indra in 7c, hapax sadhavīra ‘you who have our heroes as companions’ in my tr., might support this view, and see also 8ab. I am not entirely persuaded by my own interpr., however.

On tūtos, tūtot as belonging to a redup. aor., not the perfect (contra Wh Rts, Macd. VGS), see detailed disc. by Kü (220-21); Hoffmann also identifies it as an aor.

(183); Gr already took it as a caus. aor., and see also Schaeffer (Intens. 129-30).


## 05
For the association of barháṇā and ukthá- see VI.44.6 ukthásya barháṇā.

Pāda b contains one of the few exx. of the “-si imperative” that betrays its non-imperatival source, since dárṣi occurs in a subord. cl., from which imperatives are barred. Here it shows its original subjunctive value in a purpose cl. (so also Hoffmann, 183).

Initial áva in c breaks the long pattern of 2nd sg. pronouns beginning the hemistich (vss. 2-5a, resumed vss. 6, 7c, with such forms also beginning even pādas 2d, 4d, 7b). Perhaps it is meant to resonate with 4b #ā́vo, 5d #prā́vo.


## 06
As I have discussed elsewhere (Sacrificed Wife, 176-84), śraddhā́- in Vedic is not simply an abstract ‘trust, faith’, but refers specifically to trust in the efficacy of ritual and hospitality, and indeed to the concrete manifestations of this trust through ritual gift-giving. The plural śraddhā́bhiḥ here, paired with sómaiḥ, seems to refer to the offerings themselves.

On sácā see comm. ad vs. 4.

Pāda d contains a fine sequence of alliterative sibilants of all three types: ṣaṣtíṃ sahasrā śácyā sácā han.


## 07
Ge takes tváyā as the agent with stávante: “dass die Helden … von dir gelobt werden.” But Indra as the praiser of mortals seems off; tváyā is better taken as an instr. of accompaniment, esp. given the larger context of the hymn, in which Indra works for and in conjunction with mortals (see esp. disc. ad vs. 4 with regard to sácā).

The hapax cmpd sadhavīra applied to Indra seems to reflect this situation, though exactly what the word means is unclear (Gr ‘mit den Männern seiend’, Ge ‘Heldengenosse’), and its lack of accent makes it difficult to determine even what type of cmpd it is. (AiG has no disc. of it.) I take it as an underlying bahuvrīhi ‘having heroes together (with oneself)’ vel sim., expressing the mutual relationship between our men and Indra.

Ge takes the instr. phrase trivárūthena náhuṣā as referring to Indra: “da du ein dreifacher Nahus bist.” He bases this interpr. on X.49.8 ahám … náhuṣo náhuṣṭaraḥ “I [=Indra] am a greater Nahus than Nahus.” But this passage is in an ātmastuti, a genre in which Indra claims to be the best example of everything, and the construction with comparative in fact precludes an identification of Indra with Nahus: he is asserting that he has more of what makes Nahus Nahus than Nahus himself does. It is an expression like “more Catholic than the Pope.” (As for X.99.7, which Ge also cites, I have now changed my interpr. from the publ. tr. and will register the change in the comm. in due course.) I consider Nahus here another recipient of the praise being doled out, though I do have to admit that the shadowy Nahus otherwise does not figure in the VIth Maṇḍala.

I would also take issue with Ge’s bleaching of trivárūtha- from ‘having/providing threefold defense’ to simply ‘threefold’. This cmpd. otherwise has its full lexical value, mostly modifying śárman- ‘shelter’, and the simplex várūtha- ‘defense’ is robustly attested, so the 2nd cmpd member had not become opaque.


## 08
This final wish to become Indra’s dearest companions neatly sums up the dominant theme of the hymn, esp. the last vss.
