+++
title = "027"

+++
Indra

## 01-02
These two vss. form a tight pair, whose responsions are detailed below.


## 01
This vs. is structured by the extreme repetition of kím, found 5 times in interlocking sets. In the 1st hemistich 3 occur in the phrase kím (u) asya LOC. The 1st 2 are initial in the 1st pāda and immediately after the caesura, while the third one, rather than opening the 2nd pāda, gives the impression of syncopation by being placed after pāda-initial índraḥ. The third pāda has the sequence in scrambled order: … LOC kím  (té) asya, with the tonic prn. té incongruously inserted. The last kím u, in pāda d, lacks both asya and the LOC, but clearly is conjoined with kím in pāda c with the rest of the phrase construction truncated.

There are many possible ways to interpr. this construction. The first question is whether kím is a question particle or a neut. interrogative prn. (see, e.g., Etter, Fragesätze, 75, 124-25), or indeed if some of the occurrences are one, some the other. I am firmly of the opinion that, simply on rhetorical grounds, the number of repetitions favors a referential prn. for all, rather than a particle. Moreover, vs. 2 offers a concrete answer to the question “what?” — namely sát ‘being, what exists’ — in the same number and in the same positions as kím in vs. 1. The responsion could hardly be more complete. Another question is whether pāda a should be read independently, as containing two parallel nominal clauses, with the hemistich-final verb only having domain over pāda b, or whether the verb should be read with the whole hemistich. Because of the parallelism of the kím (u) asya phrases I opt for the latter solution, as does Ge.

Another curiosity is the fact that asya is unaccented in all its occurrences.

Unaccented forms of this pronoun should be anaphoric, with a referent preceding in the discourse, but of course in the 1st vs. of the hymn there is no preceding discourse.

However, the first two locatives, in pāda a, establish without doubt the identity of the referent -- soma: “in the exhilaration (máde) of it” and “in the drinking (pītaú) of it” could refer to nothing else in the universe of RVic discourse. See the numerous examples of máde sómasya (generally in that order) in Lub, beginning with I.46.12; the loc. of pītí- is almost confined to our passage, but the dat. phrase sómasya pītáye is almost inescapable (see again Lub). The 2nd set of locatives, sakhyé ‘in the fellowship’ and niṣádi ‘in the installation’ are less clearly typed for soma -- and in fact the latter might sidetrack us to Agni and his ritual installation -- but by that time the soma context has been unequivocally established. The unusual application of ní √sad to soma simply shows the frequent secondary fusion of the two principal ritual divinities/substances.

The first hemistich is otherwise unproblematic, but the second one raises some further questions. The first word, ráṇā, is taken by the Pp as nom. pl. ráṇāḥ in pausa, an interpr. followed by the standard treatments. By this interpr. these “joys” are the subj. of vividre in the main cl. Both act. and mid. forms of this pf. are normally transitive, and so the question should be “what did the previous joys find, what the new ones?” See Ge’s “Oder was seine guten Launen bei der (Opfer)sitzung sind, was haben die … erreicht?” But this does not make a lot of sense to me: in what way are “joy” agents here? Old seems to get out of this semantic problem by taking the verb as a sort of pass./intrans. with gen. asya as the experiencer (presumably referring to Indra) and kím as a predicate nominative: “oder die Freuden, die bei (seinem, des Soma) Sichniederlassen ..., als was sind diese ihm eignen … erfahren?” But besides forcing an unnatural sense on the verb, it assumes a different referent for asya in c from the referents of the 3 occurrences in ab (as does Ge’s). My own interpr. is based on a different analysis of ráṇā — as the instr. sg. of the root noun rán-, attested as dat. sg. ráṇe, loc. sg. rán, and indeed (pace Gr) as this same instr. sg. in IX.7.7 (see Old ZDMG 63 [1909]: 289 = KlSch 305). (Note that with the elim. of the supposed nom. pl. in our passage, the stem ráṇa- is entirely singular, save for a single late loc. pl. ráṇeṣu [X.120.5], quite possibly confected to produce a Triṣṭubh cadence from sg. ráṇe.) With ráṇā otherwise interpr., the subj. of vividre is open. I supply “priests” (or a similar group of mortal devotees of Indra); cf. nū́tanāsaḥ in similar usage in nearby VI.21.5 and the similarly contrastive expression pū́rvebhir ṛ́ṣibhiḥ … nū́tanair utá in I.1.2. One problem remains, however. By my interpr. asya in c has the same referent as the other 3 exx. in ab, and like them it is construed with a loc., here niṣádi: the insistent repetitive pattern of the vs. imposes this reading. But asya is stationed in the main clause, as marked by the immediately preceding té, correlative with yé in the nominal relative cl. (cf. the whole pāda ráṇā vā yé niṣádi kíṃ té asya), though it should precede kíṃ té. (Ge’s rendering cited above also has this problem, though he construes asya with ráṇā(ḥ), not niṣádi.) I can only explain this by assuming that acdg. to the pattern established in ab, kím (x) asya LOC, kím here has carried the pronoun asya along with it into the main cl., even though the constituency is in all cases asya LOC. ### 04-05
Hoffmann (Injunk. 163-64) tr. and discusses this pair of vss., with special reference to the change from augmented to injunctive verbs.


## 05
Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna is the subj. of the dānastuti in vs. 8.

As in VI.20.10, this vs. contains a 3rd sg. root aor. dart with retained (or restored) final cluster -rt, even though such retentions are supposedly only licit if the

-t belongs to the root. I argued ad VI.20.10 that the sandhi situation there favored the
retention of the cluster (before following dh- [< *h-]). I suggest that our form here has been adopted from that passage, since verse-final position would not favor the retention. Another passage containing dart that seems dependent on VI.20.10 is I.174.2b, identical to VI.20.10c, though in I.174.2 dart must be a 2nd sg., and so is doubly illicit.


## 06
On the warriors’ slang in this vs. and the curiously literal attempts at interpreting pā́trā bhindānā́ḥ, see publ. intro. and Old ad loc., Ge n. 6d. For śárave páyamānāḥ see disc. ad X.27.6.


## 07
The purport of this vs. and the referent of yásya in pāda are disputed. As Ge points out (n. 7), Sāy. thinks ab refers to Indra and his two fallow bays, while Ge thinks yásya refers to Śṛñjaya found in c and marks the beginning of the dānastuti. I agree with Sāy. that Indra is the referent of yásya, but not that the two cows are really his two horses. As noted in the publ. intro., I instead assume gā́vau refers to the two rivers found in vss. 5 (Hariyūpīyā) and 6 (Yavyāvatī). A strikingly similar expression refers unequivocally to two rivers in the famous hymn III.33 (Viśvāmitra and the Rivers): III.33.1 gā́veva śubhré mātárā rihāṇé “licking each other like two mother cows (their calves)” (cf. also III.33.3). The only problem is that though, in this gender-variable stem, du. gā́vau can be either masc. or fem. (for the latter, see gā́vā in III.33.1 just cited), one of the du. adjectives in our passage, aruṣā́, should be masc., since the fem. of this stem is áruṣī, which in fact appears with pl. gó- in I.92.1-2: gā́vó ’ruṣīḥ, áruṣīr gā́ḥ. I can only assume that since the rest of this dual NP (gā́vau … sūyavasyū́… rérihāṇā) could be either masc. or fem., aruṣā́was just slotted in, esp. because it looks like a possible fem. du. Alternatively, MLW suggests that aruṣā́could in fact be feminine and an archaism, since the devī́- inflection of thematic color adjectives is an innovation.

The verb antár … cárataḥ is somewhat difficult to interpr. This lexeme generally refers to a journey between two locations -- often of Agni’s journey as messenger between heaven and earth. Here no locations are specified, and, assuming the correctness of my identification of the dual subject as the rivers of vss. 5-6 (not a certain assumption), it is two rivers that must be performing the action. Perhaps the verb is reciprocal, expressing action between the two subjects: “(the two rivers) go back and forth one to the other,” but this would leave yásya without an obvious role in the clause. Instead I take yásya as the beneficiary of the action (that is, as if an honorary dative) and assume the rivers are acting as go-between for Indra, either between his forces and the enemy’s or between the two divisions of the Vṛcīvant forces referred to in 5d. The genitive is assuming some of the functions of the dative already in the RV, and of course in later Sanskrit datival genitives are extremely common -- probably indirectly reflecting the loss of the dative in MIA.
