+++
title = "028"

+++
Cows and Indra


## 01
In pāda a ‘house’ is supplied as obj. of bhadrám akran on the basis of 6c bhadráṃ gṛháṃ kṛṇutha. Ge simply “haben Glück gebracht,” Whitney (AV IV.21.1) “have done what is excellent,” and this is certainly possible.


## 02
What precise kind of land ábhinne khilyé refers to is unclear; see disc. by Old and Ge n. 2d. The general opinion is that ábhinne (‘uncut, unsplit’) describes land that hasn’t been broken into parcels, but I wonder if it instead means ‘unploughed’ -- that is, unsplit by a plough.


## 03
I do not understand what nuance the vṛddhi of ā́mitrá- adds to amítra-. Both seem simply to mean ‘enemy, foe’. MLW suggests that it might be a collective, a possible function for a vṛddhi deriv.

Ge takes vyáthiḥ as a “falsch Weg” upon which the enemy will lead the cows, requiring him to supply a complex verb phrase to √dhṛṣ, “wagen … den falschen Weg (zu führen)” (see also his n. 3b for an even more complex alternative). But vyáthis- ‘wavering or meandering course’ fits the normal aimless wandering of cows in pasture, and surely we wish to prevent cattle rustlers (or the like) from taking advantage of the cows’ wandering. Cf. Whitney, AV IV.21.3 “shall dare attack their track (?)”; Klein (DGRV I.219) “a hostile one shall not venture upon their way.” For the wandering habits of cows, see 4cd urugāyám … ví caranti “They wander far across wide-ranging (space).” Given the acc., it seems best, with Ge et al., to take devā́n only with yájate, not, as in the publ. tr., also with dádāti. I therefore would emend the tr. to “With those (cows) that he sacrifices to the gods and (that) he gives …” The expression is compressed: the instr. yā́bhiḥ should of course only be construed with yájate, and we should have an acc. *yā́ḥ as obj. of dádāti. As a parallel to devā́n, Ge supplies a datival “(den Sänger)” with dádāti (sim. Klein loc. cit.), but I see no reason to limit the recipient in this way. Cf. the open-ended 2b úpéd dadāti, which specifies neither gift nor recipient. The unstinting giver is rewarded.


## 04
On reṇú-kakāṭa- see EWA s.v. kakā́ṭikā-, kṛ́kāṭa-. Some part of the back of the head/neck is meant. What exact threat the dusty-necked steed poses to the cows isn’t exactly clear. Sāy. explains árvā as yuddhārtham āgato ‘śvaḥ. I would limit the “intent to fight” more narrowly to a cattle raid, but there is no further evidence to bring to bear. See immed. below.

saṃskṛtatrám is also somewhat problematic. It is generally referred to the root √kṛt ‘cut’ (see AiG II.2.170 and, most recently, EWA p. 316 s.v. KART1 ), but this affiliation is disputed by Whitney (Roots, p. 23) and, most vigorously, by Old, who assigns it to √kṛ for both formal and semantic reasons. The standard rendering is ‘Schlachtbank’ (slaughter or, Whitney [AV, despite Rts], slaughterhouse). Against this interpr., Old makes the reasonable point that in this pre-ahiṃsā era there’s no reason why a cow-owner wouldn’t have his cows slaughtered when he wanted to.

But Old’s own solution is excessively convoluted and requires that the final -trabelong to √trā ‘protect’, which seems dubious. (On gotrá- and other possible forms of the thematized root noun -trā́- in compounds, see Scarlatta [194-95].) To meet Old’s objections, we can interpr. the clause in the context of the preceding clause and of the whole vs. The 2nd half of the vs. expresses a wish for the safety of cows that roam widely, presumably not always under the control and in the sight of a herdsman.

The first hemistich mentions several misadventures that could befall these roving cattle. Pāda a refers, if I’m right, to a cattle raid conducted by horsemen -- what in the Old West (or at least the Old West of the imagination) would be called rustlers. It may be that the “dusty neck” of the horse in question indirectly indicates that the horse is not a well-cared-for beast of the Ārya elite, or else that the raid requires hard riding in rough country. The second pāda may indicate that the cattle rustled were taken for meat or, under a different scenario, that the cows wandered into territory controled by tribals, non-Ārya, or even non-elite Ārya (all without access to horses) who would ambush, kill, and eat them. Both pādas would imply that the cattle are far from the safety of their home and enclosure.

My “place for dressing” reflects the possibility (see above) that saṃskṛtabelongs to √kṛ not √kṛt, and is a euphemistic expression for slaughter. However, if it does belong to √kṛt “… for slaughter” would be just fine.

The word order in pāda b is somewhat aberrant. The fem. pl. subj. tā́(ḥ) occurs right after the verb, followed by the preverb abhí, which ends the pāda: x x x x x, úpa yanti tā́abhí. We would ordinarily expect the pronoun tā́(ḥ) to occur early in the clause (cf. pāda a #ná tā́(ḥ) [=3a]) and the preverb to precede the rest of the verbal complex. The word order disturbance may have been caused by the need to fit the bulky 4-syllable sáṃskṛtatram into the pāda, since it won’t fit the Jagatī cadence.


## 05
The publ. tr. follows the usual configuration of equational nominal sentences, with the subject in 2nd position, the predicate nominal 1st . This interpr. is supported by the fact that the verb achān is singular, agreeing with bhágaḥ and índraḥ, not with pl. gā́vaḥ ‘cows’. However, the standard tr. (Ge, Wh) follow the opposite order, e.g., Ge “Diese Kühe sind mir wie Bhaga …” In which case, we would have to assume that achān simply agrees with the nearer referent, even though it is the predicate.

In c the phrase sá janāsa índraḥ must be a deliberate echo of the famous refrain of II.12. It also demonstrates the standard Vedic prose syntactic rule that in an expression of the type “what is X, that is Y,” the demonstrative in the 2nd cl. will agree with Y, not X, in number and gender, even though its real referent is X, or in this case cows. For further disc. see Brereton’s “Tat tvam asi in Context.”


## 06
This vs., like 5c, has an echo from the 2nd Maṇḍala: the final pāda bṛhád vo váya ucyate sabhā́su “Your vigor is declared loftily in the assemblies” strikingly resembles the Gṛtsamāda Triṣṭubh refrain br̥hád vadema vidáthe suvī́rāḥ “May we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.” Both begin with adverbial bṛhát and contain a verb of speaking -- a passive in our case -- and a loc. of the place where the speech is spoken: vidáthe ‘at the ceremony of distribution’, sabhā́su ‘in assemblies’, with sabhā́- probably inhabiting a lower register, as might be appropriate for cows.

Kulikov (-ya-pres., 214) denies a passive value for ucyate here and tr. “Your energy sounds loudly in the assemblies” for reasons that don’t seem sufficient to me.


## 07
Note that sūyávasam echoes (gā́vau …) sūyavasyū́in the preceding hymn (VI.27.7).

On īśata see comm. ad I.23.9.


## 08
The usual tr. of this vs. tend towards the euphemistic -- e.g., Ge “Dieses Befrüchtungsmittel soll … sich fruchtbar zeigen”; Kulikov (-ya-pres., 153 with nn.

373, 374) “Let this increase increase in these cows.” But √pṛc means ‘fill, engorge, mingle’, and with úpa, the preverb of intimacy, it takes on a distinctly sexual sense. I take it as ‘inseminate’ in this passage, especially because of the bull’s semen in c.

See disc. also ad I.40.9. Moreover, the -ana-suffix on upapárcana- is one that ordinarily signals a transitive sense and often has a close connection to a transitive - áya-formation (though not in this case). Unlike the standard tr. I take pāda a as a nominal sentence and pṛcyatām in b as an impersonal. In my interpr. upapárcana- is the ‘inseminator’ -- either the bull or the bull’s penis or semen, whose match is found in the hyper-virile Indra in d. My interpr. requires that that the two locc. in the 2nd hemistich (rétasi, vīryè) have a different usage and appear in different clauses from góṣu in b.
