+++
title = "029"

+++
Indra


## 01
Three of the four pādas begin with a form of máh-, incl. the curious acc. sg.

masc. mahā́m in d.

sepuḥ is the only perfect form attested to the root √sap in all of Sanskrit. Ge tr.

it with present value (“Den Indra ehren die Herren”) without comment, and the publ.

tr. follows suit. Kü (547) argues strenuously -- and plausibly -- against this interpr.

on historical grounds and takes it as “kontinuativ”: “Indra haben (seit jeher) die Männer … geehrt (and ehren ihn jetzt noch).” This interpr. might fit well with the curious double participle in pāda b: yántaḥ … cakānā́ḥ. Although both Ge (“voll Verlangen nach der Gunst des Grossen kommen”) and Kü (“indem die [au ihm] gehen, um die Gunst des Grossen [zu erlangen], begierig”) take the two participles as independent and with their full lexical value, Ge suggests (n. 1b) that they could form a periphrastic construction, which is in fact reflected in the publ. tr.’s “as they go on finding pleasure in the great one,” with yánt- supplying a continuative sense. The participial periphrasis might be an attempt to signal the continuative value of the perfect in pāda a, which that form cannot do on its own. The nearest thing to such a continuative in English would be “The men have (always) kept honoring Indra …” or (less clumsily) just “have (always) honored,” and I would now substitute one of these tr.

Ge construes sumatáye with cakānā́ḥ (see tr. cited above), but forms of the root √kā/kan regularly take the acc. or loc., never the dative. Note that Kü supplies a verb to govern sumatáye and takes cakānā́ḥ absolutely. I suggest rather that sumatáye is parallel to sakhyā́ya in pāda a. Since √kā/kan can also occasionally take the gen. (cf. VII.27.1 śávasaś cakānáḥ “taking pleasure in your strength”), I take maháḥ with cakānā́ḥ, though a tr. like Kü’s would also be possible: “for the sake of the partnership and benevolence of the great one, taking pleasure/desiring (it/him).” I do not understand why ásti is found in pāda c, since there is no need for an overt copula, and it is difficult to interpret the verb as an existential. It is true, however, that overt copulas are more common in subordinate than in main clauses.

Or perhaps ásti is part of the effort to express present continuative.


## 03
As in I.37.14 (see comm. ad loc.), dúvaḥ here must be a nom. pl., not the usual sg. neut., nor the acc. pl. identified by Gr. On the somewhat aberrant syntax of this construction, see disc. by Kü (386-87). The juxtaposition of du. pā́dā and dúva(ḥ) suggests that the latter is also meant to evoke du vé, the neut. du. ‘two’ with ‘feet’.

Ge couches b in the 3rd ps. (see tr. cited below), but since this nominal clause is positioned between two clauses with undoubted 2nd ps. ref. to Indra (pāda a: te, d babhūtha) and itself contains no overt indications of 3rd ps., there is no reason to switch person and then switch back. The instr. śávasā was omitted in the publ. tr. Although Ge tr. it with dákṣiṇāvān (“ist durch seine Macht ein Lohnausteiler”), the close association between dhṛṣṇú- and śávas- elsewhere in the RV (e.g., I.54.2, 56.4, I.167.9, IV.16.7, VI.66.6; cf. I.54.2 (etc.) dhṛṣṇúnā śávasā) suggests a tr. “As the mace-bearer, bold with (your) vast power ...” As was just noted, in the publ. tr. śávasā was omitted entirely; the just suggested tr. should be substituted.

Note that pāda b is a lexically variant version of 1c, which contains vájrahastaḥ for our vajrī́and dātā́for our dákṣiṇāvān).


## 04
Whatever the etymological facts -- the root affiliation of the pf. mimikṣ- (etc.) is disputed (see, e.g., Kü 385-89, who assigns it to √myakṣ, and EWA s.v. MEKṢ, esp. 374) -- the two forms of mimikṣúḥ in this passage (vss. 2, 3) are synchronically associated with miśla-/miśrá- here. As noted in the publ. intro., the three vss. form an omphalos with the theme of attachment, and the superlative ā́miślatama- ‘most firmly attached / entwined / intermixed’ in pāda a provides the climax -- at least in my view. Not all interpr. see the contextual continuity and therefore do not tr. accordingly. E.g., Ge renders ā́miślatama- as ‘der anziehendste’ (the most attractive), which captures neither its use in this context nor its probable connection with *meiḱ ‘mix’ (EWA s.v. miśrá-)(though the base verb ‘anziehen’ has a physical dimension closer to the sense I see). I am happy to say that Old’s interpr.

is very close to mine, including supplying Indra with the adj.: “Der gepresste Soma soll der am besten (dem Indra) anhaftende [clinging] sein.” The referent of the loc. yásmin in b is unclear. The structure of the half-vs. suggests sá of a, namely soma, and this seems to be the standard interpr.: cf. Ge’s “Der gepresste Soma ist der anziehendste, zu dem Kochspeise gekocht wird …”; also Kulikov (p. 403, p.c. from W. Knobl) “That Soma is pressed as most easily mixing, with which [, when being pressed,] cooked food is being cooked.” I don’t understand either of these tr., esp. the latter, and they do not make ritual sense: food is not cooked in/for/with soma (though grains can be mixed in it). Since, in my interpr., Indra is another, if unexpressed, participant in pāda a, I take yásmin as referring to him. This identification is supported in the larger context by yásmin in 2a, the beginning of the omphalos, where it refers to Indra’s hand (yásmin háste “in which hand”), or as Ge suggests there (n. 2a), “yásmin ist Attraktion für yásya” (referring to Indra directly). These two occurrences of yásmin (2a, 4b) would frame the omphalos ring-compositionally. The suggested reference to Indra gets further support from passages like IV.24.7 yá índrāya sunávat sómam adyá, pácāt paktī́r utá bhrjj̥ ā́ti dhānā́ḥ “Whoever will press soma for Indra today, will cook the cooked foods, and will roast the grains …” The two pres. participles in cd, stuvántaḥ … śáṃsantaḥ, must be predicated, substituting for a main verb.


## 05
Kü (221) suggests that the pf. part. tū́tujāna- may already be a lexicalized adj. meaning ‘sich bemühend, eilend, eifrig’ and tr. its occurrence in our passage quasi-adverbially, “mit Eifer,” an interpr. fld by Lowe (Participles, 216). But it seems to me to have its full lexical value, deriving from √tuj ‘thrust’, in this context, where the preceding pāda describes Indra forcing apart (bābadhe) the two worldhalves and the following pāda compares him to a herdsman driving together (samī́jamānaḥ) his herds -- both actions requiring some amount of thrusting. In its other occurrences this part. either clearly or arguably has lexical value; cf. e.g.

I.61.12 … prá bharā tū́tujānaḥ … vájram … “bear down the mace, thrusting …” In general, I see no reason to rob forms of lexical value unless they regularly appear in contexts in which such value would be semantically inappropriate. That a participle does not appear with a full panoply of complements does not mean that it has been sematically bleached beyond recognition -- a view that is at odds with, e.g., Lowe’s approach to the issue.

Ge sharply denies (n. 5d) that ī́ja- can belong to √aj ‘drive’, but he was of course writing before the full flowering of laryngeal theory. For the derivation see EWA s.v. AJ, p. 51.

I tr. hemistich-final ūtī́with pāda c, but the fact that that pāda has an exact repetition in VI.37.5d throws that interpr. into doubt. Nonetheless, I still think ūtī́is to be construed with the preceding pāda, skipping over the simile that begins pāda d.

It should really be Indra’s help that is in question, not that of the herdsman, an interpr.

reinforced by the initial sequence in the 2nd pāda of the next vs., 6b ūtī́ánūtī, also referring to Indra.


## 06
The double evā́(a, c) strongly marks this as an extra-hymnic summary vs. ## 030
Indra


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., the first pāda is an oblique ref. to the soma sacrifice that strengthens Indra for the Vṛtra-smashing; cf. III.40.7 pītvī́sómasya vāvṛdhe also with Indra as subj.


## 02
The use of bhūt with the āmreḍita divé-dive seems to reinforce the regularly recurring individual nature of the event: it is not that the sun is always lovely, but that it becomes visible anew, every day. This is more or less Hoffmann’s view -- he cites and tr. the pāda 4x (pp. 135, 140, 267, 274) -- though he slightly changes his terms of analysis from citation to citation (e.g., 135 expressing the truth of natural laws; 140 iterative).

It is striking that both c and d end with 3rd sg. root aor. injunctives, bhūt and dhāt respectively. It is all the more striking because they don’t seem to have parallel functions. As just noted, bhūt expresses a recurrent, hence not time-limited event, but dhāt seems to express a particular (cosmogonic) action in the past. Hoffmann characterizes this as “resultative Konstatierung” (214) and tr. (216) “Der Machtvolle (Indra) hat weithin die Wohnsitze verteilt.” By not considering the two adjacent pādas together, Hoffmann avoids confronting this functional discrepancy; I have no explanation of it, though see comm. on the next vs. ### 03
The relationship between natural activity in the present and the deeds Indra performed in the past to set that activity in motion is made clear in the 1st hemistich.

The rivers continue to do the work (pāda a) -- presumably flowing through their assigned channels -- that Indra started them on by digging those channels in the mythic past (pāda b). The temporal immediacy of the rivers’ work is emphasized by the opening phrase in pāda a adyā́cin nū́cid “even today, even now” with doubled emphasizing cid, while pāda b portrays Indra’s original action with the augmented impf. áradaḥ. This offers us a clue as to how to interpret 2cd, with its functional and temporal discrepancy. As is well known and often expressed, Indra put the sun in heaven in the first place; cf., e.g., I.52.8 ádhārayo divy ā́sū́ryaṃ dṛśé “You fixed the sun fast in heaven to be seen.” Since the audience would be well aware of this, they could connect the continued re-appearance of the sun every day in pāda c (divé-dive somewhat matching 3a adyā́cin nū́cid functionally) with Indra’s original deed, referred to in general terms in the preceding pāda (2b) yā́ni dādhā́ra. Indra’s creation of the sun is also referred to in the final pāda of this hymn, 5d … sū́ryaṃ janáyan.

In pāda a we can possibly see a secondary pun in ápaḥ ‘work’ -- namely apáḥ ‘waters’ (see 4c, 5a), despite the accent difference.


## 05
Pāda a contains two fem. pl. nouns (one clearly, one likely accusative), apáḥ ‘waters’ and dúraḥ ‘doors’, and a fem. pl. adj. víṣūcīḥ ‘wide, wide asunder, in all/opposite directions’ that could modify either or both. It also contains the preverb ví, stationed between the two nouns and with a metrical rest right before it that draws attention to this position. It does not, however, contain a verb. There are three syntactic possibilities (at least as I see it): 1) we should supply two different verbs, each forming a possible lexeme with ví and each governing one of the two nouns; we should supply a single verb, 2) which takes a double acc. or 3) which governs both nouns in parallel. (Old and Ge n. 5a lay out slightly different possiblities.) Ge opts for the second: “Du (liessest) die Gewässer durch die Tore nach allen Seiten (laufen),” supplying asṛjaḥ from 4d. It is not clear what the doors through which the waters surge would be. I think it is rather the first. With Ge I would supply asṛjaḥ, but with only apáḥ as obj. Although √sṛj is relatively rare with ví, ‘waters’ is of course regularly the object of other forms of this root, particularly áva as in the immediately preceding pāda. Moreover ví √sṛj is used of the release of liquid in VII.103.7 (“frog” hymn), where heated milk-drinks “attain their own release” (aśnuvate visargám). As for the 2nd object, ví √vṛ ‘unclose, open’ is standard with ‘doors’, and I supply a form of √vṛ here. The point of this hemistich is that Indra opens up and disperses everything closed and enclosed. What the “doors” are in this scenario is still somewhat unclear: it could be, as in Dawn hymns, the doors of darkness and refer to Indra’s flooding the world with light (note the sun and dawn in the last pāda of the vs.), or it could simply refer to Indra’s general opening up of spaces, esp. the Vala cave.

In b the ppl. dṛḷhá is reprised from 3d, but with a nice twist. In vs. 3 Indra makes the spaces firmly fixed, but here he breaks open what had been firmly fixed. ## 031 Indra


## 01
On the semantic connection between the first and second hemistichs, see publ. intro. Particularly note the simple etymological figure in cd #ví … #ávocanta … vívācaḥ# in the half-vs. concerning the disunity of the various peoples; here the etymological sense of carṣaṇí- as ‘bordered, separate (people)’ also gets fully used.

In contrast to the ví-s of cd, we might have expected the presence of sám in ab to express the unity found there, since this is the standard contrastive pairing. But the theme of unity is expressed in ab by ékaḥ and hástayoḥ: Indra alone takes them all into his two hands.

The phrase rayipate rayīṇā́m is clearly of the familiar “X-lord of X-es” type, though it has some twists. On the one hand, though rayipate is a voc. and lacks accent, rayī́ṇā́m has its usual accent even though oblique case forms in voc. phrases regularly lose their accents. On the other, the nom. ékaḥ should be construed with the voc. rayipate, not independently (that is, the pāda doesn’t mean “You have become the one, o wealth-lord of wealth”). Ge takes the phrase as a predicative voc. The publ.

tr. represents the construction as a haplology, because the predicative voc. is next to impossible to render into English -- or German: Hoffmann’s (Injunk. 218) “du (Indra) bist es allein geworden, o Reichtumsherr der Reichtümer” is cautionary in that regard. Ge’s cited parallel IV.17.6cd satā́bhavo vásupatir vásūnām, dátre víśvā adhithā indra krṣṭ̥ ī́ḥ, which closely resembles the hemistich here, reinforces the constituency of our rayipate rayīṇā́m.

In c the standard formula toká- tánaya- ‘progeny (and) posterity’ is interspersed with other locatives of the stakes, in the sequence toké apsú tánaye ca sūré; I take the ca here as connecting the formulaic pair and have tr. them together, with the others postponed. Cf. VI.25.4, 66.8.


## 02
cyāvayante is the only med. form to this stem, against 16 act. transitive ones.

Although in my 1983 monograph (p. 126 n. 43) I identify it as intransitive, I now think it is a passive to the transitive act.: “are bought to shaking, caused to shake” rather than a simple intr. semantically identical to cyávate (i.e., just ‘shake’). Fear of Indra is the cause and Indra the unexpressed agent.


## 03
The content of this vs. is somewhat illuminated by the similar account of the Śuṣṇa battle and the theft of the sun’s wheel in IV.16.9-14, esp. vs. 12, as Old and Ge point out.

The tenses and moods of this vs. are ill-assorted; for various views, see Old, Hoffmann (Injunk. 190-91), Klein DGRV II.101-2. The first issue is the impv.

yudhya ordering Indra to fight a mythological enemy long since defeated. Old reports with apparent, though not full-voiced, approval, Gr’s (Üb) suggestion to read injunc.

yudhyaḥ, but later points out that the gods are often urged to do a deed that actually happened in the past -- hence the transmitted impv. yudhya would be perfectly fine.

(And Gr Wö lists the form thus.) At the beginning of c, dáśa is taken by Ge (fld. by Klein; see also Gr Wö) as an impv. to √daṃś ‘bite’ (in the sense ‘stachle’ [spur on, goad]), with ‘horses’ supplied as obj. Given the discrepancy between the root meaning and the sense suggested here, as well as the absence of an expressed object, it seems best to follow Old (who cites Gr’s Üb. [though curiously Gr in the Wö interprets it as Ge does]) and Hoffmann and take dáśa as the numeral, referring to the companions of Śuṣṇa (like the thousands [sahásrā] mentioned in IV.16.12 containing śúṣṇam aśúṣam … kúyavam as here).

A new clause begins in the middle of pāda c, introduced by ádha and containing the injunc. muṣāyaḥ, which is hard to harmonize with the impv. (yudhya) that precedes it. Ge (fld. by Klein) interpr. the injunc. as a functional impv., coordinated with the impv. he sees in dáśa; cf. Klein “Goad (thy horses) … and steal the wheel of the sun.” Whereas Hoffmann takes the injunc. as “generell”: “Da stiehlst du die Scheibe der Sonne,” further specified in his discussion with “da … stiehlst du (immer wieder), hast du die Fähigkeit (Eigenschaft) zu stehlen.” Neither the impv. nor the general reading seems satisfactory: although some injunctives function as imperatives, that usage is limited to a few stems, generally the root aorists dāḥ, dhāḥ, and bhūḥ. As for the “general” interpr., although it might make sense to say of someone (even Indra) “you have the capability/propensity to steal,” it is stretching what “general” means to apply it to a single and quite specific event: “you have the capability/propensity to steal the sun’s wheel.” The publ. tr. follows the presential rendering of Hoffman: “you steal” (though without the “general” nuance). I now think this is incorrect and that the injunctive simply expresses the past here. The first part of the vs. vividly evokes the attack on Śuṣṇa by imagining it before our eyes, with the speaker urging Indra to enter the fight. But the narrative then reverts to a recital of the mythical past. I would therefore alter the tr. to “So then you stole the wheel of the sun.” The last VP in the vs. brings up a different issue. The transmitted Saṃh. text is áviverápāṃsi, analyzed by the Pp. as áviveḥ rápāṃsi, from an assumed underlying

*áviver rápāṃsi with simplification of the double r across word boundary by the
well-known sandhi rule. This interpr. is followed by Ge and Klein; cf. Klein “Thou has set aright the damages.” But as in I.69.8 (q.v.) I follow Old (accepted also by Hoffmann) in reading áviver ápāṃsi, with ápas- ‘labor’. This does not require alteration of the Saṃh. text.


## 04
The preverb áva is positioned somewhat oddly for a preverb in tmesis, though it does follows the caesura and is thus adjacent to a metrical boundary. We might have expected it to migrate to the pāda-initial position. Its displacement may be to allow the pattern of verse-initial forms of the 2nd sg. pronoun to continue: 2a t u vád, 3a t u vám, 4a t u vám.

My all-purpose tr. of the (more or less lexicalized) desid. to √śak ‘be able’, namely ‘do one’s best’, loses the etymological connection here with śácyā śacīvaḥ “o able one, with your ability” -- but something like ‘strive to be able’ implies the possibility of Indra’s failure, which does not fit his divine profile. The voc. sutakre is a hapax, analyzed by Gr as belonging to a su-takri ‘very fast’, but by the Pp (fld. by the standard modern interp.) as suta-kre. As Old points out sunvaté suta- would be the same type of etym. figure as śácyā śacīvaḥ. Sāy. glosses abhiṣutena somena krīta, and this in fact remains the standard interpr. For disc. of both sense and morphology (transfer of the root noun to long-vowel √krī to a short i-final) see esp. Old and Scar (87-88). Both cite as support for the purchase of Indra the very interesting passage IV.24.10 (q.v).

This is the only 5-pāda vs. (Śakvarī) in the whole run of Indra Triṣṭubh hymns (VI.17-41) and seems designed to insert the poet of this maṇḍala into the hymn and associate him with his sometime formulaic partner Divodāsa. See esp. VI.16.5bc dívodāsāya sunvaté / bharádvājāya dāśúṣe also in this maṇḍala. Those two Gāyatrī pādas are almost identical to ours, except for one ritual participle, gṛṇaté, substituting for another, dāśúṣe, in the Bharadvāja pāda -- and for the three additional syllables in each pāda (d sutakre, 3 vásūni) to fill out the Triṣṭubh. The addition of this extraneous material to adapt the shorter line to a different metrical form may account for the fact that vásūni seems to have no syntactic or semantic connection to the rest of the vs. Although Ge construes it with áśikṣaḥ (“wobei du … DAT … die Schätze zu verschaffen suchtest”), śíkṣa- does not elsewhere take an acc. (the few su he's doing something beneath his dignity or even shameful pposed passages in Gr are to be interpr. differently) but generally only a dative. The publ. tr. takes vásūni as a loosely attached acc. goal of Indra’s helpful actions: “for goods” or, to make the purpose somewhat clearer, “for (them to obtain) goods.” The poet would have been better off just throwing in another voc., as he did at the end of d. The addition of vásūni here may have been facilitated by the appearance of … gṛṇaté vásūni# twice elsewhere (IV.24.1, IX.69.10), in both of which vásūni is the object of a verb earlier in the pāda.


## 05
Another tricky etymological figure is found in the hapax cmpd satya-satvan, both members of which have developed their own lexical senses but both derived from √as ‘be’.

For prapathin see comm. ad I.166.9.

The stem carṣaní- returns as the last word of the hymn, echoing 1d, for which see publ. intro. The ring composition is rather perfunctory.
