+++
title = "032"

+++
Indra As noted in the publ. intro., the first vs. is a meta-verse in which the poet refers to his own just-composed praise; the remaining vss. constitute that praise, and all begin with the prn. sá, a stylistic repetition that unifies and defines the praisehymn proper. It is noteworthy that, although the vocabulary and rhetoric leave no doubt of the identity of the recipient of the praise, the name “Indra” is not mentioned until the last vs. (5b) and the word “god” not at all. In this connection note the unaccented dat. asmai ‘for him’ in the first pāda of the hymn. Such unaccented oblique pronominal forms assume a referent already in the discourse, so Indra is present from the beginning despite not being named or even referred to at this point in the hymn, and the dative descriptors that follow in this vs., particularly vajríṇe ‘possessing the mace’ in c, simply reinforce the audience’s recognition.


## 02
The identity of the “two mothers/parents of the poets” (mātárā … kavīnā́m) has been much discussed; see esp. Old, as well as Ge (n. 2ab) and Schmidt (B+I 151).

The two leading candidate pairs are Heaven + Earth (/the two World Halves) and Heaven + Dawn, but only the former seems at all likely to me. Dawn and Heaven are not a stable pairing and therefore would be unlikely to be referred to by the pregnant dual mātárā, whereas this dual is regularly used of Heaven and Earth. Cf. esp.

IX.75.4 prarocáyan ródasī mātárā śúciḥ [/ IX.85.12 prā́rūrucad …], where ródasī ‘the two World Halves’ is explicitly present and where the verb is a lexical variant of our ávāsayat ‘caused to shine’.

Why they are considered “the parents of poets” is not clear. If it isn’t simply that Heaven and Earth provide everyone the conditions for existence and therefore count as universal parents (which seems rather lame), perhaps they become parents of poets when Indra makes them shine with the sun, calling forth the poetic effusions at the dawn sacrifice. The tenuousness of the parental connection has led to suggestions for other ways to construe kavīnā́m. Ge suggests that the clause is a blend of two senses: Heaven and Earth are the referents of the dual, and they are simply named as parents without indication of their offspring, but the poet also wanted to refer to Dawn as the (single) mother of the Aṅgirases, and so the gen. pl.

kavīnā́m belongs only to this putative expression (mātáram kavīnā́m). This seems overly complex, and in addition I know of no evidence that Uṣas was the mother of the Aṅgirases. Old suggests that kavīnā́m could be construed as genitval agent with gṛṇānáḥ, but since that participle is in a different clause, that solution is out. Perhaps the best, if we don’t want to construe it with mātárā, is Sāy.’s, to take kavīnā́m as the equivalent of a dative of benefit (aṅgirasām arthāya).

The part. vāvaśānáḥ in c has generally been ascribed to √vaś ‘want, be eager (for)’: so Gr and Lub, as well as the tr. ‘begierig’ of Ge and Schmidt. However, Kü has argued (478-80) that all forms of the perfect stem vāvaś- actually belong to √vāś ‘bellow’, not √vaś -- though he sneaks some of the semantics of the latter into his glosses ‘brüllen sehnsüchtig’ (etc.). Although I do not want to eliminate the pf. to √vaś in so absolute a way as Kü, in this passage at least I think the participle embodies a pun and, moreover, the primary sense is ‘bellowing’, not ‘being eager’.

The central narrative of the Vala myth has Indra vocalizing in concert with the Aṅgirases (“the very attentive versifiers”) in order to break open the cave and release the cows. No doubt he was “eager” to accomplish this, but it is the noise-making that is the focus of the myth. In this vs. we get a double view of Indra: he is both hymned (gṛṇānáḥ b) presumably by the Aṅgirases and also sings (/bellows) along with them, with two complementary participles, both modifying Indra and stationed at the end of adjacent pādas. The cooperation of Indra and the Aṅgirases is emphasized in the next vs. ### 03
On mitájñu- see Scar 344; it is used here in a context very similar to abhijñú in III.39.5, which also concerns Indra and the Aṅgirases at the winning of cattle and contains parallel phraseology: sákhā ha yátra sákhibhiḥ … abhijñú … gā́anugmán “When the comrade with his comrades the Navagvas, the warriors, from their crouch followed after the cows.” The ‘knee’ cmpds presumably describe the stance of the warrior-poets in this conflict, at least in these two passages. However, in VII.95.4, a hymn to Sarasvatī, it describes the position of “reverential ones” (namasyà-) imploring the goddess in prayer, and though there is a martial portion of VII.82.4, where another example of the stem occurs, the form in question is found in the part of the vs. that describes invocations made in peace time. The final instance of the word, in III.59.3, is too generic to pin down. Thus, it seems that a posture with “fixed knees” may be adopted in various circumstances, including that of prayer.

The second hemistich contains a series of balanced etymological figures: púraḥ purohā́sákhibhiḥ sakhīyán, … kavíbhiḥ kavíḥ sán. I am somewhat puzzled by the nom. sg. pres. part. sán, which is usually concessive, but which should not have that function here. The use of sán is esp. surprising because it breaks the parallelism of the two rhyming post-caesura phrases in cd: … sákhibhiḥ sakhīyán, … kavíbhiḥ kavíḥ sán. We should expect rather *kavīyán, matching sakhīyán, and in fact the stem kavīyánt- does exist (IX.94.1 kavīyán, also in pāda-final position). Perhaps an exact match would have been considered too sing-songy, and the near-match phonologically of -íḥ sán with -īyán suggested the figure without insisting on it. Or else the poet wanted to emphasize that Indra is indeed a poet, in addition to his usual roles as victorious warrior and first comrade among comrades. In the latter case, the phrase might be tr. “being himself a poet along with poets.”


## 04
Pāda b is also found at IV.22.3b, where it is a part of an independent nominal clause. However, here it fits well within the larger clause structure, whose main verb is prá yāhi at the end of the vs. Cf., e.g., VIII.2.19 ó ṣú prá yāhi vā́jebhiḥ, with the vā́jebhiḥ of our b. The fact that this pāda is a self-contained repetition aids in the interpr. of the surrounding pādas a and c, both of which contain fem. instr. pls., nīvyā̀bhiḥ and puruvī́rābhiḥ respectively. Although two masc. instr. pls. intervene, vā́jebhiḥ and śúṣmaiḥ, they can be sequestered in the ready-made pāda b, and the two feminines of a, c can be construed together.

Although Gr interpr. the hapax nīvyā̀bhiḥ as belonging to a fem. noun nīvyā̀-, most subsequent interpr. take it as an adj. If both nīvyā̀bhiḥ and puruvī́rābhiḥ are adjectives, we need to determine the underlying referent that they modify. As just noted, the first of these instr. is a hapax, but puruvī́ra- occurs 9x in the RV; in 6 of these occurrences it modifies rayí- ‘wealth’ (IV.44.6, VI.6.7, 22.3, 49.15, VIII.71.6, X.167.1), including 3x in VI. Given the marked predominance of this collocation, the most likely referent for puruvī́ra- in our passage is also rayí-. Now rayí- is ordinarily masc., but there are occasional fem. usages, and although I have tried to whittle down their number (see comm. ad VI.8.5), it cannot be reduced to zero. One occurrence of puruvī́ra- is a clear fem. modifying rayí-: X.167.1 rayím puruvī́rām. I therefore supply a form of ‘wealth, riches’ here, with fem. gender, as referent for both fem. adjectives. It may be that the feminine was chosen here to signal that these instr. pls.

do not modify the masc. instr. pl.s in b.

This now brings us to the meaning and affiliation of the hapax nīvyà-. This is generally and fairly plausibly connected with nīví- ‘loincloth’ or undergarment of some sort, first attested in the AV and found also in the VS and early Vedic prose.

The developed meaning of our adj. is supposed to be ‘(something) to be wrapped and carried in a nīví-’. Cf. Ge’s “mit in den Schurz gebundenen (Geschenken?)”; Old more expansively suggests that Indra could knot into his loin cloth a host of strong sons. He compares nīvibhāryà- ‘to be carried/worn in the nīví- in AV(Ś) VIII.6.20 (=AVP XVI.81.1), which is certainly suggestive. However, this interpr. encounters a practical difficulty: just how much can be carried in a loincloth? Even Indra, whose garments are presumably more capacious than ours, would probably not be able to fit into his underwear the extravagant amount of gifts we generally ask him for. The images that come to mind — at least to my mind — are of a hobo’s bundle at the end of his stick and of a stork delivering a baby in a cloth sling (presumably a diaper?) hanging from its beak, both of which have limited carrying space. The AV passage containing nīvibhāryà- simply confirms this. Found in a hymn “To guard a pregnant woman from demons” (in Whitney’s title), the verse in question concerns possible miscarriage (áva √pad lit. ‘fall down’, but a standard idiom for miscarriage) and recommends that the pregnant woman carry/wear two remedies in her nīví-: VIII.6.20bcd yád dhitáṃ mā́va pādi tát / gárbhaṃ ta ugraú rakṣatāṃ bheṣajaú nīvibhāryā̀“What has been deposited [=embryo], let that not ‘fall down’; let the two powerful remedies to be worn/carried in your nīvi protect your embryo.” This obviously involves inserting into the garment some sort of prophylactic of modest enough size that it could be reasonably worn on an everyday basis -- not taking off the garment and stuffing it full of goodies.

The publ. tr. maintains the connection with nīví-, or rather with √vyā ‘envelop’, which at least some take as the root at issue (see Gr, also [critical] disc. in KEWA s.v. nīvíḥ; the morphology is admitted difficult, and EWA casually suggests a connection to ní √yu ‘join’ [perhaps anticipated by Ge’s invocation, n. 4a, of niyút-], which does not seem a better alternative, as it would require an unprecedented alternate syllabification of the zero-grade of √yu to *iv). The publ. tr. ‘to clothe (him)’ rests on the metaphor of clothing as wealth. Cf. nearby VI.35.1 kadā́stómaṃ vāsayo ‘sya rāyā́“When will you clothe his praise-song with wealth?” However, I now see that I brushed aside problems of both form and function: the root √vyā does not distract its initial cluster, but both meter and accent require a reading nivíyā-; if the form is meant to be a gerundive, it should be passive in function, a usage not reflected in the translation; vowel-final preverbs do not lengthen before √vyā; ní is not found with √vyā in the RV. I now suggest that the form belongs to a different root entirely: √vī ‘pursue’. This root is found with ní in the RV, though only in the intensive (see Schaeffer, 190-91), in a usage I tr. ‘bear down on’, though here it could mean something more like ‘track down’ or simply ‘pursue’. Among the many objects that forms of √vī take, riches and the like are found (e.g., in this maṇḍala


## 06
véṣi rāyáḥ). Moreover, in root-noun cmpds with this root, vowel-final preverbs are lengthened: pratī-vī́- (3x), prā-vī́- (1x), and cf. devā-vī́- (12x) beside deva-vī́- (1x, though cf. common devá-vīti-). (On these lengthenings see Scar 499, 500, 501.) The derivation is not without problems. If the form is a gerundive (as I’d like), the root accent is fine, but we would expect guṇa or vṛddhi, not zero-grade.

Despite this formal problem, I think this root affiliation and formal interpr. solve many of the problems that other interpr. face, and so I would emend the tr. to “… with (riches) to be tracked down/pursued …” in place of “… to clothe (him).”


## 05
sárgeṇa … taktáḥ is a decomposed variant of sárga-takta- (III.33.4, 11)(or, vice versa, the cmpd is compounded from this phrase).

Ge terms this a “dunkler Sagenzug,” but I’m not sure why it can’t just be a snippet of the Vṛtra myth, after the serpent has been killed and Indra has released the pent-up waters, as I say in the publ. intro. Although vss. 2-3 concern the Vala myth, Vala and Vṛtra themes often appear in the same hymns. Ge also considers it difficult to supply the missing verb in b, but given sárgeṇa in a and the passively used aor.

part. sṛjānā́ḥ in c, implicitly modifying the waters, the missing verb is most likely a transitive form of √sṛj, with acc. apáḥ as obj., rather than Ge’s “hat … (geleitet).” Among the many such passages, see very nearby VI.30.4 ávāsṛjo apó áchā samudrám, also with Indra as subj. Sim. Sāy.’s visṛjati.

The root-noun cmpd. turā-ṣā́ṭ picks up turā́ya in 1b in a nod towards ring composition. I tr. ‘overcoming the precipitous’ rather than my ‘overcoming the powerful’ in the other three passages (III.48.4, V.40.4, X.55.8) in order to capture this echo.


