+++
title = "033"

+++
Indra


## 01
The pāda-final dā́svān, to be read with distraction as dáasvān, presumably reflecting a laryngeal hiatus, resonates with sauvaśv(i)yam and s(u)vaśvo in b, despite the different sibilants. The stem dā́svant- (8x) must always be read distracted and presumably reflects, as already indicated by Gr, an underlying s-stem built to √dā, hence in IIr. terms *dáh-as-.


## 02
In c I tr. ví paṇī́m̐r aśāyaḥ as “you dispersed the niggards.” I now think this probably is wrong, in that I cannot find a semantic pathway there from ví √(n)aś ‘reach through’, etc. The closest passage to ours that contains this multivalent lexeme is X.29.8 vy ā̀naḷ índraḥ pṛ̥́tanāḥ svójāḥ “The very powerful Indra has penetrated the battling hosts.,” and I would alter the publ. tr. to “you penetrated through the niggards …” The only thing that gives me pause is the very similar passage adduced by Ge, VII.19.9 … ví paṇī́ṃr ádāsan#, which I tr. “They … have distanced the niggards through ritual service” (for which see comm. ad loc.).

As the above disc. suggests, I take aśāya- as belonging to the root √(n)aś, but the morphology is not straightforward. With Whitney’s tentative suggestion (Skt. Gr.

§1066b), I assume it belongs with the class of -āyá-presents to zero-grade roots that are generally related to 9th class presents (e.g., gṛbhṇā́ti, gṛbhāyá-) and ultimately reflect (in my opinion, flg. Saussure) -yá-deverbatives built to the weak stem of the 9th class pres. (-nH-yá-). Unfortunately, of course, √(n)aś had no final laryngeal and no 9th class pres., though it does have a well-attested 5th class aśnóti. I must assume secondary spread of the -āyá-suffix to this root (see also naśāya- X.40.6, also apparently to √naś), perhaps facilitated by the nasal-suffixed present. MLW suggests here a clever alternative, that aśāyaḥ actually represents a haplologized form of the causative of √śi ‘lie’, śāyáyati, and with ví means ‘you caused the niggards to lie in pieces / scattered about’. Although Wh (Rts) lists this causative as beginning only in the sūtras, it may well appear once in the AV (Ś IV.18.4); see my -áya-formations, pp. 134-35. Although MLW’s suggestion is appealing on its own -- and the haplology would not be problematic (see the -yaya- haplology posited above in VI.12.4) -- the other forms of the stem aśāya- (I.34.7, X.43.6, 92.1) are not easily amenable to a ‘lie’ interpr. but fit ‘reach’ quite well; aśāyata in VIII.73.9, usually grouped with these forms, I take to √śā ‘hone, sharpen’ (see comm. ad loc.).


## 03
The Ārya obstacles are presumably peoples akin to us, but fighting against us.

As noted in the publ. intro., Indra’s apparent weapons of “well-placed cloaks” (súdhitebhir átkaiḥ) are puzzling. I think this is a reference to Indra’s shape-shifting ability, to wear “different hats” in different situations -- and Ge’s parallels in n. 3c suggest that he is of the same opinion. Old discusses at length and uncharacteristically endorses the suggested emendation of Ludwig/Bergaigne of átkaiḥ to arkaíḥ, though he does admit it's hard to explain how the corruption would have arisen. I think this is a fairly insuperable problem, esp. since súdhita- is not a particularly likely descriptor of ‘chants’, and is in fact not found with words of that sort.

As also noted in the publ. intro., I suspect that súdhita- is a buried play on words. It is stationed between váneva “like the woods, trees” and átkaiḥ. In conjunction with the former, it evokes svádhiti- ‘hatchet, axe’; cf., for similar context, X.89.7 jaghā́na vrtrá ̥ ṃ svádhitir váneva “He smote Vr̥tra, like an axe the trees.” For another pun involving svádhiti-, see V.32.10 where the “Heavenly Hatchet” (devī́svádhitiḥ) probably plays on svadhā́- ‘independent power’. See comm. ad loc. As already pointed out ad VI.4.7, nṛtama is not suitable for the cadence of any Vedic meter, and save for this passage and VI.4.7 it avoids this position. It is found several times with nṛṇā́m in the cadence but in the reverse order: IV.25.4 nṛ́tamāya nṛṇā́m, V.30.12, X.29.2 nṛ́tamasya nṛṇā́m, where the oblique forms of nṛ́tamasupport a good Triṣṭubh cadence. The order may have been flipped here, but why?


## 04
The injunc. bhūḥ here has imperatival force, a function of the injunctive generally limited to the root aorists dāḥ, dhāḥ, and bhūḥ.


## 05
I do not see any difference in sense between the imperatival injunc. bhūḥ of 4b and the pres. impv. bhávā in 5b.

With Old, who argues this at length, I take the Saṃhitā mṛḷīká as loc. mṛḷīké, rather than Pp. mṛḷīkáḥ. See also Klein, DGRV I.314. The conjunction utá, which connects it with clear loc. abhíṣṭau, strongly supports this interpr. (Ge’s interpr. is not clear.) The opening of the 2nd hemistich, itthā́PARTICIPLE, matches that of the opening of the last hemistich in the preceding hymn (VI.32.5), and the diví opening pāda d resembles divé-dive in the same position in VI.32.5.

The final pāda has a bad cadence: goṣátamaḥ. As MLW points out, this form should really be *goṣātamaḥ (splv. to goṣā́-). Such a reading doesn’t improve the expected Triṣṭubh cadence, but it would provide a proper Jagatī cadence (and metrical variety at the end of a hymn is not unexpected). The pāda can be read with 12 syllables without difficulty: diví ṣ i yāma pārye *goṣātamaḥ. As for the transmitted short vowel form, it might have been changed to match nṛtama in 3d, although, as noted there, the light initial syllable of that form is itself. metrically problematic.
