+++
title = "035"

+++
Indra This hymn is tr. by Schmidt in B+I 152-53.


## 01
Ge takes bráhma as an abstract “Hohepriesterschaften,” standing for the personal pl. brahmā́ṇaḥ (n. 1a). I see no reason to take bráhma in any sense other than its usual ‘sacred formulation(s)’ (pl. in this instance)(nor does Schmidt, who tr.

“Wann werden die Gedichte ihren Sitz auf dem Wagen haben?” [152]). The vs. concerns the exchange of priestly praise for material goods bestowed by the god: the clothing of our praise with Indra’s wealth (c) and the bejeweling of our insights with his prizes (d) are vivid metaphors. The first pāda contains a likewise striking image: the chariots in which our formulations take up their position are presumably the chariot(s) Indra gives us, which will also be heaped with goods. It is our production of the formulations that brings the chariots. The intent of this image is made clearer by vs. 3b viśvápsu bráhma kṛṇávaḥ.

Both bhuvan and dāḥ are subjunctives, or at least have subjunctive function.

Contra Hoffmann (246), I am inclined to take dāḥ as a real subjunctive (<*dā-a-s), though without metrical distraction, not an injunctive, while both of us take bhuvan as subj. here.


## 02
Both Ge and Schmidt take the first hemistich as depicting a hostile encounter between two sets of men and heroes expressed by the verb nīḷáyāse (Ge: “… dass du Herren mit Herren, Mannen mit Mannen in Kampf verwickeln wirst?”; HPS [153] “… dass du … handgemein (?) werden lässt?”); Old is less certain but suggests that “kämpfen machen, überwinden” is expected. But the basis of this hapax demon. nīḷáyāse, namely nīḷá- ‘nest’, invites an interpr. depicting a more intimate and amicable relationship (like the adj. sánīḷa- ‘of the same nest’, referring to brothers and comrades), and the middle voice reinforces that sense. In my 1983 monograph on -áya-formations, I follow an interpr. suggested by Insler, that the verb means ‘accept as equals’ (pp. 84-85). Although I think that may be an implication, I now think it can be taken more literally: ‘put in your own nest’. Indra is bringing our fighting men into intimate contact with his own (the Maruts and/or Aṅgirases [the latter being mentioned in vs. 5]) under his auspices; with these now conjoined forces he can win the contests and the cattle at stake.

The accent of the denom. nīḷáyāse (expect *nīḷayā́se) has been retracted because the form is transitive (acc. nṛ́̄n … vīrā́n) and has been attracted into the -áyatransitive / causative class (see my 1983 monograph).


## 03
This vs. is a reprise of and variation on vs. 1. Like vs. 1, it treats the rewards that accrue to verbal praise, and in fact repeats two of the three types of verbal products found in vs. 1 (bráhma 1a/3b, dhíyaḥ 1d/3c), with stómam (1c) and hávanāni (3d) being the novel terms. bráhma and hávanāni are modified by bahuvrīhis that express the material reward they will obtain (‘all goods’ [viśvápsu] and ‘cattle as bounty’ [gómaghā] respectively). In the c pāda the chariot motif of 1a returns in slightly different form: we “team up” our insights, as Indra does his teams (niyútaḥ) -- the teams that, pulling his chariot (cf., e.g., I.135.4 rátho niyútvān), will bring Indra and his bounty to the sacrifice, where the “teams” of insights will be exchanged for the goods he brings.

On viśvápsu- see comm. ad I.148.1.


## 04
Both jaritré and gómaghā are repeated from the previous vs. (where they were not in the same clause), though the latter has changed gender: in 3c it is neut.

pl., while in 4a the same sandhi form is fem. pl. and represents underlying gómaghā(ḥ). This bahuvrīhi has spawned two parallel descriptors: áśva-ścandrā(ḥ) and vā́ja-śravasaḥ, all three modifying fem. pl. pṛ́kṣaḥ.

The tr. ‘lay on’ (that is, provide, often lavishly, often of meals or feasts) is an English idiom that precisely calques ádhi dhehi. I take íṣah … dhenúm as a double acc. with √pī ‘swell’ -- lit., ‘swell the cow the refreshments’, that is, ‘swell the cow with refreshments’. Ge hesitates (n. 4c), but in the tr. opts for two acc. in parallel (‘swell the refreshments, (swell) the cow’), as does Schmidt (p. 153).

The root-noun cmpd surúc- (9x) is generally a bahuvrīhi meaning ‘having good light, very bright’, as in II.2.4 tám … candrám iva surúcam “him [=Agni] very bright like gold.” For just this passage Gr posits a substantivization: f. ‘heller Glanz’.

This is unnecessary, as surúcaḥ here can be a fem. pl. acc. picking up and modifying f. pl. íṣah in c (and indeed the glittering pṛ́kṣaḥ in b). It obviously forms an etymological figure with the opt. rurucyāḥ.

As for this verb, it should have transitive/causative value (‘make shine / illuminate’), and it therefore functionally overlaps with the redupl. aor. árūruca-.

This overlap is complicated by the fact that several apparent pf. forms rurucuḥ also have this value, in some of which lengthening the redupl. to *rūrucuḥ would provide a better cadence, though in our passage such a lengthening would produce a worse cadence. For disc. of these ambiguous forms see comm. ad IV.7.1, 16.4. As I say there, because the 3rd sg. pf. ruroca and the pf. part. are intransitive, I am inclined to think that the transitive 3rd pl. forms originated in the redupl. aor. but were absorbed by the pf., with shortening of the redupl. vowel.


## 05
As noted in the publ. intro., the first hemistich of this vs. is quite unclear; I am not at all certain my interpr. is correct, but I don’t think it’s appreciably worse than any others, which I will not treat at length. One observation about it, which doesn’t really aid in its interpr., is that it seems to play off the Agastya Triṣṭubh refrain (I.165.15d, etc.) vidyā́meṣáṃ vṛjánaṃ jīrádānum “May we find refreshment and a community having lively waters.” A large proportion of the occurrences of vṛjánam are found in that refrain. The jinva at the end of our vs. picks up the jīrá- of the refrain, and its íṣam is matched by our íṣaḥ in 4c.

I’d also point out that the antithetical temporal expressions we noted in the two previous hymns, nūnám … aparā́ya ca “now and for the future” (VI.33.5) and purā́nūnáṃ ca “previously and now” (VI.34.1), may be echoed by nūnám … anyáthā cid “now and also otherwise.” But let us now turn to the serious problems of the vs.: 1) there is apparently no verb (or anything else) to govern tám … vṛjánam; 2) there is no verb to govern the presumed acc. dúraḥ ‘doors’ in the rel. clause; 3) esp. if gṛṇīṣé is taken to be the verb of the rel. cl. and a 2nd sg. passive ‘you are praised’ (as it is by most tr.), since the passive can’t govern an object, and ‘doors’ would be quite an outlandish object anyway.

My interpr. starts with the two things I think we can hold onto: 1) the collocation ví dúraḥ inevitably brings to mind the idiom ví dúraḥ √vṛ ‘open the doors’, used inter alia for the breaking of dawn, which is also often homologized to the opening of the Vala cave (e.g., VII.79.4), an act ascribed to Indra.

This is mentioned several times in this Indra cycle (VI.17.6, 18.5, 30.5). Thus the most likely way to interpr. the first part of 5b śū́ro yác chakra ví dúraḥ is as a rel. cl. referring to this action, supplying the verb √vṛ (or sim.): “When, o able one, as champion you (open[ed]) wide the doors.” If we thus interpr. the rel. cl., the supposed passive gṛṇīṣé is displaced from its supposed role as verb in that clause (though we could, of course, assume the ‘open’ idiom was participial and gṛṇīṣé could then be the main verb).

2) gṛṇīṣe (generally unaccented) is otherwise almost entirely a 1st sg. -se form, “I (shall) sing/praise,” so the passive interpr. just mentioned is not attractive in any case. In the last vs. of a hymn such an assertion of a 1st ps. praiser is certainly apposite and expected.

The gist of my interpr. rests on these two observations. I take gṛṇīṣé as a 1st sg. and not part of the dependent clause, which expresses the formulaic ‘open the doors’. gṛṇīṣé’s object is vṛjánam at the beginning of the hemistich. The verb gṛṇīṣé is accented because it immediately follows a subord. clause. The major problem that I see is that this requires that the yád clause be embedded, and I don’t see any way out of that. I would also prefer if Indra were the object of the praise, not (merely) the vṛjánam. He might indeed be represented by the init. tám, which would then not modify vṛjánam. This would produce an alternative tr. “Him here and now do I sing, as (I do/did) otherwise the community, when …” I am not entirely satisfied with this interpr., but I do not have anything better to offer (nor do other interpr.).

The rest of the vs. is much less problematic. The most important thing to note is that the dhenú- ‘milk-cow’ must be masc. because of the adj. śukradúghasya ‘having bright/clear milk’. This gender not only goes against nature, but also against the phrase in 4c sudúghām … dhenúm, with the fem. adj. sudúghām. The gender switch is obviously deliberate, and the likely reason for it was already formulated by Sāy.: that this is a reference to the soma-plant and the soma juice that is milked out of it. (Both Ge and Schmidt take the two genitives separately, which rescues the gender of dhenóḥ but ignores the shock value of the gender switch.) That pāda b has to do with opening the Vala cave is supported by the mention of the Aṅgirases in d.

Also in d, bráhmaṇā is ring-compositionally related to bráhma in 1a.
