+++
title = "036"

+++
Indra


## 01
Although the stem viśvá-janya- is of course a bahuvrīhi and has the basic meaning ‘possessing all peoples’ vel sim., the point here must be that all peoples prepare soma for Indra, hence my ‘stemming from all peoples’ referring to the soma drinks. The reciprocity between the people’s offering of exhilarating drinks and Indra’s apportioning of prizes (c) is clear.

The publ. tr. renders the injunc. dhāráyathāḥ as a present; it could also have past value: “when/as you upheld …” As it is elsewhere (cf. W. E. Hale, Ásura- in Early Vedic Religion, 59-62), asuryà- ‘lordship’ is ascribed to Indra, and the fact that he maintains this lordship ‘among the gods’ (devéṣu) demonstrates once again that devá- / ásura- is not yet an antithetical or hostile pairing in the RV. This same Indra cycle contains a similar expression: VI.20.2 ánu … asuryàṃ devébhir dhāyi víśvam.


## 02
Since verbal forms of √yaj are not otherwise found with ánu nor does the lexeme ánu-prá √yaj occur anywhere else, I take ánu prá yeje as a technical reference to the fore- and after-offerings (prayājá-, anuyājá-, already attested in late RV). The ánu may have been included because of the idiom ánu √dā ‘concede’ in the next pāda. On the weak pf. form yeje (versus īje) see comm. ad I.114.2 and Kü 391-92.

Contra Ge, Klein (DGRV I:224-25), and Scar (115-16), who take c with d, I construe b and c together, with the two datives vīryā̀ya (b) and syūmagṛ́bhe dúdhaye ’rvate (c) parallel to each other and serving as the indirect object to dadhire ánu ‘have conceded’ in b. This allows ca at the end of c to take its usual role conjoining NPs, rather than serving as a clausal conjunction (joining b and cd) as Klein is forced to take it. In either case the ca is unusually positioned, but as a clausal conjunction its position might be more jarring.

This interpr. also allows a better case frame in d: ápi √vṛj krátum + LOC is an idiom of subordination; cf. X.48.3 máyi devā́so ’vṛjann ápi krátum “To me have the gods bent their will” (sim. X.120.3). But for both Ge and Klein the dative of c must take the place of the usual loc.; e.g., Klein “And to (him), the bucking courser grabbing the reins, do they direct their determination in the battle against the obstacle.” In my interpr. I supply a loc. ‘to him’ in d, likely gapped because of the presence of the circumstantial loc. ‘at the smashing of Vṛtra/obstacles’ (vrtrahátye), with the dat. of c more naturally construed with the verb in b, ánu √dhā, which ordinarily takes a dative.

With Gr, Ge, and Klein, I take the root noun cmpd. syūma-gṛ́bh- in c as having the transitive value “pulling at [/grabbing] the reins,” expressing the impatience of the “headstrong charger” that is Indra. Curiously, Scar (115-16) gives it the passive sense “der … beim Zügel gepackt wird,” indicating that the same headstrong charger has to be reined in. Although this interpr. is in principle possible, in practice it seems unlikely that the poets would dare to consider (much less desire) curbing Indra’s impetuous rush.


## 03
I take fem. pl. sadhrī́cīḥ as implicitly modifying all the NPs, though attracted to the gender of the adjacent noun, fem. ūtáyaḥ. So, it seems, also Ge.


## 05
In b Ge takes rā́yaḥ as subject and supplies the same stem as obj., on which gen. sg. aryáḥ is dependent, while apparently supplying a form of the same root √sthā (or √as) with abhí as I do: “Wie der Himmel über der Erde, so (sollen) die Reichtümer sich über die (der) hohen Herren (erheben)” (sim. Thieme, Fremd. 59).

The publ. tr. is different, in taking rā́yaḥ as an acc. despite the accent (expect *rāyáḥ, but the nom. form is sometimes found for the acc.) and supplying Indra as subject of a supplied impv. to abhí √sthā (/as): “Like heaven over the earth, sur(mount) the riches of the stranger.” However, I now see that Ge must be correct, because the expression here has to be interpr. alongside similar phrasing elsewhere in this Indra cycle: VI.20.1 dyaúr ná … abhí bhū́ma aryás, tasthaú ráyiḥ …, which I tr. “wealth … surmounts (the wealth) of the stranger, … as heaven does the earth.” This passage contains the same two-term simile dyaúr ná (…) bhū́ma, the same NP ráyi- aryáḥ, and the same preverb abhí. However, it is more explicit, in having an overt finite verb tastháu, and, most important, in having an undeniable nominative ráyiḥ, which must correspond to dyaúḥ in the simile. The publ. tr. of our passage should therefore be altered to “Like heaven over the earth, let (our) riches sur(mount) (those) of the stranger.” Ge takes cakānáḥ in c as passive: “auf dass du … bei uns beliebt seiest.” But the pf. cake, including its fairly frequent participle cakāná-, is always “active” in sense: ‘take pleasure, desire’; cf. Kü 142-43. In the publ. tr. I moved the instr. śávasā immediately preceding the part. to be construed with the 2nd part. cékitānaḥ, as a parallel to váyasā (“showing yourself with your strength and your vigor …”). I am now uncertain about this because of two similar passages: V.3.10 … sáhasā cakānáḥ with an s-stem instr. as here and VII.27.1 … śávasaś cakānáḥ with a gen. of the same s-stem as here, both immediately preceding cakānáḥ as here. Although I still don’t think śávasā should be construed directly with cakānáḥ as the source of enjoyment, I now think it probably should remain in the larger participial phrase: “so that you with your strength will keep finding enjoyment in us …”
