+++
title = "037"

+++
Indra


## 01
I take svàrvān as implicitly conjoined with kīríḥ, with the pair displaying the range of mortals who call upon Indra. This is one of Old’s suggestions; alternatively he suggests that it is proleptic, but this seems overly complex — though it seems to underlie Ge’s interpr.: “denn auch die Arme ruft dich erleuchtet.”

## 01-02
On the shift in referent between the hárayaḥ in 1b (Indra’s horses) and the one in 2a (soma drops) see publ. intro.


## 02
Accented asyá in c presupposes the gen. phrase in d mádasya somyásya, even though the two genitives are construed differently: the one in c as (partitive) gen. with √pā ‘drink’, the one in d dependent on rā́jā.

## 02-03
The implicit identification of Indra’s horses with the soma drops is reinforced by the use of the part. ṛ́jyantaḥ for both (2b, 3c).


## 03
It is not possible to respect the hemistich boundary in tr. without awkwardness.


## 04
Ge (fld. by Klein, DGRV I: 250) takes váriṣṭhaḥ as an ex. of hypallage.

standing for *váriṣṭhām and characterizing the dákṣiṇā. This must be because they take the adj. as meaning ‘broadest’, splv. to urú- (though I don’t quite see why the priestly gift could be broad if Indra cannot be). By contrast I follow Gr in consider some forms of the stem váriṣṭha- as ‘choicest, most excellent’, a splv. to vára- ‘choice’, though of course that adj. should not, originally, produce a primary splv.

(Note, however, that *váratama- would be metrically unfavorable.) AiG II.2.452-53 allows such a splv. in late Vedic, though not for our period, but I see no reason why it can’t be early, encouraged by semantically and phonologically parallel vásiṣṭḥa- ‘best’ (à Vasiṣṭha).

Ge and Klein also take the ca in 4d as subordinating d to c (cf. Klein “through which … thou dost avoid straitened circumstances, when … though dost deal out the gifts of the lord”). I do not understand the need for this. Since pāda c is a rel. cl. beg.

with yáyā, there is no reason that d cannot still be in the domain of that relative, accounting for the accented verb dáyase, and the action of d does not seem logically subordinate to that in c. I therefore take ca here as conjoining parallel subordinate clauses.

In fact, d is a better candidate for rel. cl. with yáyā than c is: assuming that yáyā refers to the dákṣiṇā of pāda a, it easily makes sense with d: “with which (priestly gift) you distributed …,” but rather less sense with c. Why should the dákṣiṇā enable Indra to avoid áṃhas-? In fact, I wonder if, at least in c, the passage has been adapted from an expression with a different feminine referent. Perhaps a passage like II.34.15a yáyā radhrám pāráyathā́ti áṃhaḥ “with which you carry the feeble one across difficult straits” (with both yáyā and áṃhaḥ, polarized as here), where the referent of yáyā is ūtíḥ ‘help’ (15c).

The last item on which I disagree with Ge (/Klein) is the function/identity of sūrī́n. Flg. Ludwig, they take this as standing for the gen. pl. (hence, “the bounties of our patrons”). But there is no need for this, as Old also points out, since the apparent acc. pl. can be syntactically accommodated -- either as a parallel to maghā́ (“apportion bounties [and] patrons”) or, as both Old and I prefer, in a double acc. construction with dáyase ví: “apportion bounties (to) patrons.” The point of the latter is that the patrons are the middlemen between the gods and the priest/poets: Indra gives the sūrí- riches and they redistribute them to the ritual workers. It would seem odd indeed to have Indra distributing riches that already belonged to the patrons, as the genitive would imply.


## 05
As the last pāda of this vs. shows, Indra is the ultimate super-patron.
