+++
title = "038"

+++
Indra The publ. intro. states that reference is unclear in the hymn “until the last pāda of vs. 2”; this is somewhat misleading, in that a form of índra- is found in the second pāda of vs. 2 -- though the identity of the other referent there remains cloudy.


## 01
The unclear reference just noted is found in the first word of the hymn, 3rd sg. aor. ápāt ‘he has drunk’, whose subject is not expressed. On the one hand, this is an Indra hymn and Indra is the prototypical drinker of soma (cf., e.g., the opening of nearby VI.40.1 índra piba, as well as ápāḥ in the 1st vs. of the next hymn, nearly identical to our verb and with Indra clearly meant as subj.), so we might expect Indra as subject. On the other, the most likely referent of the almost immediately following nominative citrátamaḥ, who bears the invocation upward, is Agni, and as the mouth of the gods, he can also be considered to drink (though not usually soma). Parsimony might suggest that the two unidentified subjects in the first hemistich are identical, hence Agni. In the publ. tr. I supply Agni, with ?, but I am not at all certain that the first subject isn’t Indra. Or, more likely, that the poet meant to leave it open.

The subject of cd is also left unspecified; again I assume Agni: if he is embarking upward in ab, then the journey (yā́man) in c is most likely his, though Ge supplies Indra. The only nominative attribute, sudā́nuḥ, is no help, as it is used of Agni and Indra about equally. What I take from the uncertainties of reference in this vs. is that the poet wants to keep us guessing.

The pāda-final splv. citrátamaḥ produces a bad Triṣṭubh cadence. There is no obvious way to fix it, and the other 5 instances of this stem are found elsewhere in the line, where they work metrically.

## 01-02
As noted in the publ. intro., I think vs. 2 functions as complementary to 1: in the first vs. the índra-hūti- is conveyed up to Indra (presumably in heaven); in 2 he

-- and his ears -- are brought down here to the devá-hūti- performed at the sacrifice.


## 02
In b ghóṣāt is morphologically ambiguous: it can be a subjunctive to the them. pres. ghóṣa- (accented because first in its pāda) or the abl. to the them. noun ghóṣa- (so Gr). For possible interpr. involving this abl., see Old. By contrast I follow Ge (and Lub) in taking it as a verb form, parallel to tanyati later in the pāda. The major problem this interpr. poses is how to construe gen. índrasya. Under the abl.

interpr. of ghóṣāt, the gen. is dependent on that noun, but without that support it must find another role in the following clause (to which it must belong, because tanyati is unaccented and cannot start a new clause). With Ge (n. 2b) I take it as loosely construed with bruvāṇáḥ, though in a different sense from Ge’s “der sich zu Indra Bekennende” -- rather as the topic of the speech.

As for the subject of ghóṣāt and tanyati, I think it anticipates the deváhūti- of c. This of course creates a problem of its own, in that bruvāṇáḥ should be fem. if deváhūti- is the referent. But given the poet’s general evasiveness about referents, I think in b we’re dealing with an as-yet-unidentified verbal product, which is then specified as deváhūti- (the same índra-hūti- of 1b) in c.

## 02-04
After the absence of overt referents in vs. 1, starting with 2b we have a form of índra- in every hemistich through vs. 4 (2b índrasya, 2d índram, 3b índram, 3d índre, 4a índram, 4d índram). His name is again absent in the final vs. of the hymn, vs. 5, suggesting that this pattern is deliberate and a species of ring composition, marked by absence not presence. The next hymn (VI.39) also shows this structure, with the three middle verses (2-4) united by the shared initial deictic ayám and the first and last (1, 5) standing out against this pattern.

## 03
As usual, the enclitic vaḥ ‘for you’ refers to the priestly colleagues of the poet on whose behalf he acts; as is also usual, the Engl. tr. has to be heavier and more prominent than the recessive 2nd position accentless vaḥ.

The second hemistich contains, in my view, a double ca construction conjoining two clauses, in which the first verb, dadhiré, is accented (and the 2nd, vardhat, is not). Klein (DGRV I.176-77) notes that the whole could be interpr. “as a sentential X ca Y ca construction” (as I do), but favors separating the functions of the two ca-s, taking the first ca as conjoining the two nouns in the sequence bráhmā ca gíraḥ, while he allows (DGRV I.226-27) that the 2nd ca is a clausal conjunction. This seems like a desperate makeshift to avoid the (to me, at least) obvious connection between the two ca-s— esp. as it requires that in bráhmā ca gíraḥ the usual X Y ca construction be replaced by the much less usual inversion, Y ca X (or in Klein’s parlance, X ca Y: DGRV I.169ff.). (According to Klein [DGRV I.51 and 169], there are 464 occurrences of X Y ca and 45 of X ca Y -- a factor of 10.) In my opinion, the accented dadhiré is an example of the usual type of contrastive verb accent, and the ca … ca construction is a hyped version of “both … and,” viz., “not only … but also.” In d ádhi vardhat is syntactically somewhat problematic. It lacks an overt acc. obj., even though active forms of várdha- (and other stems to this root) are overwhelmingly transitive -- a value reinforced by no less than 4 pāda-initial occurrences of transitive active várdha- in the very next vs. (4a + b várdhāt, 4c várdha, 4d várdhān), all with Indra as explicit or implied object! It is inconceivable to me that Indra is not meant as the object in 3d as well, despite locative índre in this pāda, but I seem to be alone it that view. Note Ge’s intransitive “'... möge an Indra stark werden,” fld. by Klein (177) “will find strength in Indra.” Gotō (1st Klasse, 291) sees the problem, but suggests that “we” are the gapped object: “'...macht [uns?] bei Indra stark.” In my opinion, the aberrant loc. is conditioned by ádhi, which when independent often takes a loc. (see Gr, s.v. ádhi, p. 45, nos. 13-17). ádhi √vṛdh is found only here, and once in the middle (IX.75.1), in all of Skt. acdg. to MonWms.

My “puts strength in Indra” reflects the transitive periphrasis I see in this lexeme.

The syntactically clearer forms of act. várdha- in the next vs. can be viewed as a type of poetic repair.


## 04
The singular number of both forms of várdhāt (a, b) is worthy of a small note. The subject of the first is the conjoined NP yajñá utá sómaḥ, with 2 singular nouns. As often, the verb agrees with one of them (presumably the nearer one), rather than being in the dual, as would also be possible. In b the subject is the even more complex NP bráhma gíra ukthā́ca mánma, of which the two middle terms are clearly plural (fem. and neut. respectively), while the two neut. -n-stems that bookend the phrase, bráhma and mánma, could be either sg. or pl. Flg. Ge (sim.

Klein DGRV I.198-99), I take the first as sg. and the last as pl., again assuming that the verb agrees with the nearer term, namely bráhma. But it is possible that bráhma is actually pl. and that this is an ex. of the famous but fairly rare construction of a sg.

verb with a neut. pl. subj. Although there is no way to tell, I’m tempted to alter the tr. to pl.: “… the sacred formulations will strengthen,” given the undoubted pl. of the two middle terms and the possible pl. of the last one.

yā́man reprises the same word in 1c, though they have somewhat different meanings.

Although nom. pl. dyā́vaḥ ordinarily refers to ‘heavens’, in this case the context clearly establishes the meaning ‘days’.


## 05
The half-verse boundary has to be breeched in tr. to avoid awkwardness.

After the spate of act. transitive forms of √vṛdh in vs. 4 (and 3d), the middle pf. part. vāvṛdhānám provides a contrastive intransitive/passive, agreeing with Indra, the object of the transitive forms.

Contra Ge, I take ásāmi with vāvṛdhānám despite the pāda boundary, on the basis of VI.19.2 yó vāvrdhé ás ̥ āmi in this same Indra cycle.

On the ca in b, see Klein, DGRV I.54-55.
