+++
title = "039"

+++
Indra The whole hymn is tr. and disc. by Schmidt (B+I 149-51).


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., the NP in the gen. that occupies the first hemistich (and part of pāda c) remains unresolved until the governing verb, ápāḥ ‘you have drunk’, which opens the second hemistich. The referent of this phrase -- namely soma -- also remains unresolved until the very end of pāda b, with the tip-off mádhvaḥ ‘of the honey’. (Though initial mandrásya ‘gladdening’ might appear to point to soma, in fact it’s far more often used of Agni.)

## 02-04
As noted in the publ. intro. (and see comm. ad VI.38.2-4 above), the three middle verses are marked by repeated use of the near deictic in pāda-initial position, beginning every hemistich but 2cd and coming to a crescendo in vs. 4 with three iterations: ayám 2a, ayám 3a, imám 3c, ayám 4a, b, c. The unidentified referent of all these deictic forms is soma — see Old’s disc. — but soma at least partially identified with Indra, as the opener of the Vala cave. The repeated use of the deitic, pointing to something in the immediate vicinity of the speaker, focuses on soma as the ritual substance on the sacrificial ground.

The three vss. also share an etymological figure type, with transitive (/causative) verb taking a negated object to the same root: 2c rujád árugṇam, 3a dyotayad adyútaḥ, 4a rocayad arúcaḥ. And the presence of the preverb ví in pādainterior in each vs. (2c, 3a, 4b) is another shared feature.

On vss. 3-4 see Hoffmann, Injunk. 142-43.


## 02
The first pāda is truncated, though the frequency of the Vala theme and the stereotyped phraseology associated with it easily allow the missing parts to be supplied. With páry ádrim usrā́ḥ we can add the part. sántam, as in IV.1.15 gā́ḥ … pári ṣántam ádrim “… the rock surrounding the cows” (cf. VI.17.5). As for the verb, √ruj is the (or a) standard root for this mythological action (cf. nearby VI.32.2 rujád  ádrim), and ruját opening pāda c can serve in the first hemistich as well. (Scar [425] unaccountably supplies “ging” instead.) The second pāda contains an elementary etymological figure, with the root noun cmpd ṛtayúj- flanked by its component parts: ṛtá(-dhītibhir) ṛtayúg yujānáḥ.

The publ. tr. renders the first cmpd. as “by those of true insight,” implying that ṛtá- is adjectival, and the second as “the one whose yoke is truth,” implying that it is a bahuvrīhi. I would alter this tr. to “the one yoked with truth, having been yoked by those whose insights are truth (that is, the priest/poets).” The third pāda also contains a simple etymological figure: rujád árugṇam “he breaks the unbreakable.” In d Ge, Schmidt (149), and Scar (425) all take yodhat as a preterite (e.g., Ge ‘bekämpfte’), but I don’t see how it can be anything but a root aor. subjunctive (so explicitly Macd. VGS, 410). If this analysis is correct, it makes it likely that the injunc. ruját in c also falls in the present/future (or perhaps, in Hoffmann’s terms, zeitlos) realm. Note that Hoffmann (Injunk. 142-43) so interprets the following two vss. (3-4), which, as we’ve seen, pattern closely with vs. 2. Nonetheless the three scholars just mentioned take all of vs. 2 as preterital, whereas I consider this to be an instance of the reconfiguring of mythological deeds as actions we hope to be repeated in the current time.

Old wants to emend índraḥ in d to voc. indra, to allow soma to be the subject of yodhat as it is of the rest of the vs., and he points to this same voc. indra at the end of the next hemistich (3b). However, it is hard to see why the first of two identical forms would be redactionally altered to be different from the second, and the shifting conceptual boundary between soma and Indra as agents in this sequence makes the transmitted text unproblematic, as Old also admits.


## 03
The identity of ayám as soma is fixed by índuḥ ‘drop’ towards the end of b, but not until fairly late in this sequence. The play of índu- and índra- so prominent in Maṇḍala IX is found here in their adjacency at the end of the hemistich.


## 04
Whether the referent of the ‘unshining’ (arúcaḥ) is the same as that of the ‘unlit’ (adyútaḥ) of 3a, namely the nights (aktū́n 3a), is unclear. Hoffmann suggests so, with ?, and I see nothing against it. Both adyút- and arúc- are hapaxes in the RV, so we can’t bring to bear other usages of these words.

Ge (explicitly n. 2b) considers ṛtayúj- here as having a different sense from the same cmpd. in vs. 2: “mit dem Recht im Bunde” (2b) versus “mit den rechtzeitig geschirrten Rossen” (4c). Even if ṛtá- ever had the sense ‘timely, punctual’ (which it does not), it is inconceivable to me that in a hymn of this length, the poet would use the same cmpd. in two very different senses, within two vss. of each other and marking the boundaries of an omphalos. Schmidt (149) also considers this unlikely, though he attributes the contrary view to Lüders, who, as far as I can see, doesn’t hold it or at least explicitly state it; Scar (425) temporizes in his disc., though he tr.

the other three instances of ṛtayúj- (incl. our vs. 4), all modifying ‘horses’, with the anodyne ‘wohlgeschirrten’, as opposed to our vs. 2, which he renders ‘der Verbündete des Ṛta’ -- in other words, implicitly following Ge’s differentiation. I would alter the publ. tr. from “whose yoke is truth” to “yoked with truth,” as in vs. 2.


## 05
Note that there are some echoes of vs. 1 in this final vs. The singer in the dative gṛṇaté is found in both vss., immediately after the caesura (1d, 5a); íṣaḥ ‘refreshments’ opens the pāda in 1d and 5b; and there is a teasing reflection of pādainitial ápā(ḥ) (1c ‘you have drunk’) in pāda-initial apá(ḥ) (5c ‘waters).
