+++
title = "040"

+++
Indra


## 01
I take gaṇé as referring to the troop of Maruts, as often, not an unidentified set of mortals making up a “(Sänger)schar,” as Ge seems to take it. Assuming that it refers to the Maruts, this provides conceptual ring composition with the final word of the hymn, marúdbhiḥ, as noted in the publ. intro.


## 02
In the 2nd hemistich the series of subjects -- the cows, the men, the waters, and the stone -- detail the various elements, both animate and not, that collaborate to produce the soma: the cows as the milk to be mixed in, the men who perform the pressing and the other ritual actions, the waters that both swell the soma stalk and are mixed with the pressed juices, and the stone used to press the stalks.

As Ge notes (n. 2cd) the final asmai has two possible readings: it can double te in c, “for you … for that one [=you] to drink,” or it can refer to soma, appearing earlier in the clause in the acc. phrase tám … índum “this drop.” I favor the latter, with dat. asmai attracted into the dat. as complement of the dat. infin. pītáye (as subj., as in the publ. tr. “for it to be fully drunk,” or as obj. with te as subj. “for you to drink it fully”). Because the infinitive phrase pītáye sám asmai is separated from the rest of the clause and repeats the preverb/adverb sám, I favor the former. The use of the near-deictic asmai for soma, even unaccented, recalls the insistent ayám for soma in the preceding hymn (vss. 2-4; see comm. ad loc.), and it also forms a little ring in this vs., with init. ásya (2a) having the same referent as asmai at the end of 2d.


## 03
In sandhi the phrase sutá indra sóma ā́is completely ambiguous between nom. sutáḥ … sómaḥ and loc. suté … sóme. The publ. tr. interprets it as the former, while the Pp. reads the latter. Although nothing rides on it, I would now be inclined to follow the Pp., with two parallel loc. absolutes: “with the fire kindled (and) the soma pressed, let your fallow bays …”


## 04
As noted in the publ. intro., váyo dhāt here echoes almost the same phrase in 1d váyo dhāḥ (both also introduced by pāda-init. áthā), but with reciprocal switch of subject and beneficiary: Indra creates vitality for the sacrifice in 1d; the sacrifice does the same for Indra in 4d.


## 05
The disjunctive construction marked by two occurrences of vā ‘or’ describing the possible places where Indra might be contains three non-parallel terms: an adv. ṛ́dhak, a loc. NP své sádane, and a dep. clause with locatival subordinator yátra ... ási. It is also a nice instance of Behaghel’s Law.

A verb of motion has to be supplied in c, but this is amply anticipated by ā́ yāhi in 3d and 4a. Assuming this impv. should be supplied in c, it rhymes with pāhi in d.
