+++
title = "042"

+++
Indra An uninsistent play on preverbs structures this hymn. práti appears with 3 different verbs in the 1st 3 vss.: práti … bhara 1ab, pratyétana 2a, prati bhū́ṣatha 3b, while in the last vs. the práti … bhara of vs. 1 is replaced by the more usual presentation verb prá bhara (4b).


## 02
As sometimes elsewhere (I.9.2, VIII.1.17, X.32.8), enam doubles īm in the phrase ém (that is, ā́+ īm) enam, a pile-up of two acc. enclitics, whose referent is postponed till the end of the hemistich, somapā́tamam. On this sequence see my RVic sīm and īm (2002), 302-3 and n. 18.

There is no obvious reason for the accent on pratyétana (Pp. praty étana).

(Old’s [ZDMG 60: 732] ref. is barely a mention and provides no real explanation.) The assumption about étana is that it is a 2nd pl. impv. of the root pres. of √i, with unexpected full grade of the root, unexpected verb accent in a main clause, and unexpected root rather than ending accent (versus itá, though of course the full grade would account for the root accent). I think rather that it should be analyzed ā́-itana, with accented preverb contracted with the unaccented expected zero-grade root syllable of the verb. We would thus have an unaccented verb as expected in this apparent main clause. But this suggestion raises two problems: 1) when two preverbs precede an unaccented verb, they should both be accented (though most the exx. I have identified have verbal material between the 1st and 2nd preverbs), e.g., IV.4.4 práty ā́tanuṣva, and we should therefore expect accented *práty here as well; 2) ā́is already present pāda-initially in ém. Balanced against these problems is the fact that ā́is usually the 2nd preverb in a complex (see práty-ā́√tan just cited), and the assumed ā́(…) práti would be quite unusual (almost no such sequences registered in MonWms). I think we must assume that, more or less simultaneously, ā́was doubled to serve as clitic host to īm in the frozen sequence ém enam, besides immediately preceding the verb, and that étana was reinterpr. as simply a full-grade accented impv. (cf. unaccented etana in V.61.4, on which see comm. ad loc.), not as containing a preverb — which reinterpretation then induced loss of accent on *práti.

The doubling of ā́is somewhat like the doubling of preverbs sometimes found in the Gāthās, though there that seems to be a redactional change.


## 03
I take yádī as representing yád ī with the enclitic acc. ī, parallel to īm in the last vs. Note that ī here is pre-C, while īm in 2a is pre-V.

As Ge notes (n. 3cd) there is some uncertainty about the subj. and goal of the verbs here -- Indra or Soma. I take the subject in both cases to be Indra. In c védā víśvasya “he knows of it all” echoes 1b víśvāni vidúṣe “to the one who knows all things,” an unequivocal ref. to Indra. I think there is a contrast between c and d of a familiar type: Indra could go to any soma ritual (“knows of it all”) but comes just to our soma (táṃ-tam íd).


## 04
The āmreḍita pronoun táṃ-tam íd referring to soma in 3d is then contrasted with another pronominal āmreḍita, asmā-asmā íd, referring to Indra; the near deictic announces him as having arrived at the ritual ground, to which he was hastening in 3d.

On the surprising last hemistich, see publ. intro.
