+++
title = "043"

+++
Indra


## 02
As Ge points out, this must be a ref. to the three soma-pressings: the “middle and end” are respectively the Midday Pressing and the Third Pressing; the “sharp-pressed” refers to the freshly pressed soma of the Morning Pressing, which must be especially pungent.


## 04
The HvN ed. unaccountably omits this vs. ## 044
Indra

## 01-03
In the refrain of pādas cd, the position of sá and of the unaccented elements indra te strongly suggests that the clause begins in the middle of c -- or rather that sómaḥ sutáḥ has been extraclausally topicalized. Although in vss. 1-2 this nom. phrase could belong to the rel. clause of ab, that prospect is foreclosed in vs. 3, because soma is represented in the rel. cl. of 3ab by the instr. yéna.

I do not understand why this refrain contains an overt form of the copula ásti.

Outside of dependent clauses, overt asti is generally an existential, but that function is highly unlikely here. In addition to the refrain that unifies all three vss. of this tṛca, the three vss.

are structured by rel. clauses in ab with soma as the referent of the rel. prn.


## 03
This vs. subtly undermines the autonomous power of Indra. In the refrain of all three vss. Indra is addressed as svadhāpate ‘lord of independent power’, but here in the first hemistich Indra is said to be like (ná) “one grown strong by (his own) power,” like “one overpowering by his own forms of help” (svā́bhir ūtíbhih). In other words the power that appears to be Indra’s own (svá-) is really produced for him by soma.

## 04-06
Although this tṛca does not have glaring signs of unity, it particularly concerns the songs that strengthen Indra and rouse his aid to us. It also has a subtle morphological ring; see the disc. of the loc. inf. in 3d.


## 04
On áprahan- (or, less likely, áprahaṇa-), see Old, Scar (689). Scar construes vaḥ with this form (“der nicht auf euch einschlägt”) as well as with gṛṇīṣé (“… will ich für euch preisen”). I take vaḥ only with gṛṇīṣé and supply ‘us’ with the root noun cmpd.; Ge likewise takes vaḥ with the verb and supplies “keiner” as obj. of the cmpd. There is no way to choose and no reason to do so, since all three are more or less equivalent: Indra is all powerful but does not threaten the community to which the poet belongs.


## 05
The íd in pāda a seems displaced: we would expect yám íd …, though that order would produce a choppy meter. The íd in c is better positioned, though we actually might expect it to be limiting asya, not the tám anticipating śúṣmam. The publ. tr. does not render either íd; if I were to do so, the result would be “(It’s) just (him) whom the songs make strong … just his tempestuous force that the worldhalves respect.”


## 06
This vs. is syntactically more complex and ritually more technical than the other two vss. in this tṛca.

The most noteworthy form is the loc. inf. upastṛṇīṣáni, a hapax, not surprisingly. In my opinion it is possible to account for the creation of this form from context, albeit indirectly. The first vs. of this tṛca contains the well-attested 1st sg.

gṛṇīṣé (4b), belonging to the tight class of -sé 1st sgs. in the ‘praise/sing’ semantic sphere. Beside gṛṇīṣé there exists a -ṣáni infinitive gṛṇīṣáṇi (2x, incl. once in this maṇḍala, VI.15.6). I think our poet built upastṛṇīṣáṇi on the model of this gṛṇīṣáṇi, as a partial echo of gṛṇīṣé in 4b, based on the existence of 9th class presents to both of these roots. Because it echoes that 1st sg. I interpr. the predicated inf. with 1st ps. ref.

(“it [is mine] to lay …”). Once again, as in 4, the vaḥ refers to the poet’s fellow officiants.

In the ritual the ‘underlayer’ is the layer of butter spread on the ladle underneath the principal offering. Here it is used in a doubly metaphorical sense: the underlayer for Indra could presumably be configured physically as the barhis on which he would sit, but at another metaphorical remove it could refer to the recitations that provide him with a figurative foundation.

The poet then, by a clever trick, mobilizes this underlayer of words to serve as a metaphor for the multiplication of Indra’s forms of help for us. This is accomplished by means of a simile: vípo ná … ūtáyaḥ “forms of help like inspired words,” thus implicitly equating the two. These vípaḥ ‘inspired words’ (not, with Ge, ‘fingers’) are ours, in fact the very ukthá- found in pāda a, dependent on barháṇā.

The connection between the two is suggested by the phrase barháṇā vipáḥ “by the power of inspired speech” in VIII.63.7 (vipáḥ there is gen. sg., as opposed to our nom. pl. vípaḥ, as the accent shows). In cd the poet asserts that like our hymns, which rise to Indra, spreading from their position as interconnected (sakṣítaḥ ‘dwelling together’) underlayer, his forms of help will similarly grow up and out. On this vs. see also Scar (97).

## 07-09
On the meter of this tṛca see Old, Proleg. 91 and HvN metrical comm. The fading in and out between Virāj and Triṣṭubh is further complicated by the openings of 3 in 11-syllable lines in 7b, c.

The tṛca concerns soma and contains lexical and thematic responsions.


## 07
The medial pf. part. papāná- is one of only 3 forms of the middle pf. in the RV, 2 of which, incl. this one, are used passively. See Kü (309). Note that a deriv. of the other root √pā ‘protect’, pāyúḥ, is found in the 2nd hemistich.

The vs. is notable for a number of hapaxes: acait, staulā́-, and dhautárī, the latter two also marked by vṛddhi.

On acait as a nonce s-aor. to √cit ‘perceive’, see Narten (114).

staulā́- here is reminiscent of the likewise impenetrable stauná- in this same maṇḍala VI.66.5. No remotely credible guesses have been proposed for these forms, or for dhautárī-; Ge (n. 7c): “ganz dunkel” and he fails to tr. the NP; Old: “Über staulā́bhir dhautárībhiḥ scheint kein Ergebnis erreichbar”; EWA (II.762 and I.783) also throws up its hands. I am inclined to connect staulā́- and stauná- with similar words but with aspirated initial sth-, namely sthūrá- ‘brawny, sturdy’ and sthū́ṇā- ‘post’ (see comm. ad VI.66.5) respectively, but I cannot explain the phonological discrepancy.

As for dhautárī-, Old tentatively suggests that it might belong with one of the roots √dhāv ‘run’ or ‘rinse’. For translational convenience I have assumed the former, but without any conviction. In any case the striking double vṛddhi -au- of these paired nominals must be meant to draw attention to the phrase.


## 08
The passive interpr. of the pf. part. papāná- in 7b is affirmed by the pass.

aor. apāyi in 8a.

Similarly, the second pāda clarifies the sense of 7b, where it was said that soma “has perceived what is better for the gods.” What is better seems to be the gods’ intent, announced here in 8b, to achieve glory. The VP mánas √kṛ generally means ‘set one’s mind on/to’; cf. V.61.7, I.54.9, II.26.2=VIII.19.20 (though V.30.4 and X.117.2 are outliers).

The forms grouped by Gr under a stem mahás-, an adj. meaning ‘gross’, generally have other interpr., either adverbial or belonging to a diff. stem (e.g., gen. sg. to máh-). Although a suffix-accented adj. mahás- built by accent shift to neut.

máhas- ‘greatness’ would fit the standard pattern (type yáśas- ‘glory’ à yaśás- ‘glorious’), the realization of the pattern in this lexical item seems to have been rare to non-existent. In this passage most (Gr, Ge) do take maháḥ as a neut. adj. to this stem, modifying nā́ma (“acquiring a great name”), but because of the general avoidance of such an adj. I prefer to take maháḥ as the masc. nom. sg. to mahá-, a quotation of the name he received.

In keeping with the interpr. of the root √ven as ‘track, trace, seek’, I interpr.

its grdv. venyá-, when not a PN, as ‘(worthy) to be tracked/sought’.


## 09
This tṛca-final vs. reprises and repurposes some of the statements in the opening vs. 7. The skill (dákṣa-) that Soma found in 7a we ask him to bestow on us in 9a. Soma, “having won” (sasavā́n) in 7c, is asked to help us in winning (sātaú … aviḍḍhi) in 9d. Unfortunately nothing in 9 sheds light on the problematic instr. phrase in 7c.

VI.44.10-12: This tṛca foresees various disasters and tribulations and asks Indra for his help in combatting them.


## 10
I am not sure of the exact nuance of √bhū + DAT. Gr takes it as meaning ‘angehören, eigen sein’, with a rare dat. here, instead of the gen. usual in this idiom (his no. 13). Ge renders it thus (“dir … haben wir uns zu eigen gegeben”). Even with the gen., Gr identifies very few passage with this value, and most of these should be otherwise interpr., and I also wonder about an augmented aor. in such a sense. The publ. tr. is by contrast “we have become ready for you,” and I think something like this is the intention (perhaps “we are here for you”). We are awaiting his advent at the ritual and the generosity he will display there, but there is some worry that he will fail to show up, as the 2nd clause of the 1st hemistich shows.

Note that the fairly rare root √ven appears here soon after the appearance of its deriv. venyá- in 8d. It is possible that this lexical association led to the grafting of this tṛca onto the previous one in this loose collection of short hymns.


## 11
On niṣṣídh- see comm. ad III.51.5.


## 12
The morphological identity and syntactic function of maghónaḥ in d are unclear. See esp. Old’s disc. It can be either acc. pl. or gen.-abl. sg. (or an irregular nom. pl., a possibility that Old considers and dismisses). The problem is that in neither case would it form part of a standard construction with the verb ā́√dabh. Ge (n. 12d) thinks of a double acc.: “trick (our) benefactors out of you” -- that is, the non-giving ones might scare Indra off from our sacrifice or get their invitation to him first, thereby depriving our maghavans of Indra’s presence. This certainly conforms to a regular worry that sacrificers express, but the construction is unprecedented. Old opts for the abl. sg. The purport of his interpr. is essentially the same as Ge’s: that the non-givers not trick Indra away from (abl.) the maghavan, which he sees as our human patron. The publ. tr. follows Old, though it might be clearer if it were “… not trick you away from (our) benefactor.” Although this construction is also unprecedented, adding an oblique complement to a transitive construction seems less radical to me than investing it with a second acc. However, I now see another problem with the Old solution: the tṛca opens with a voc. maghavan addressed to Indra (10a), so it might be odd to have another sg. form of this stem referring to a human. And I don’t see how to construe an abl. maghónaḥ referring to Indra in the same construction that contains an acc. tvā with the same reference. Nevertheless, I still favor Old’s interpr. and simply allow for this shift of reference; such a shift from divine to human is also necessary if the form is taken as plural, with Ge. There is another possibility, raised and dismissed by Old, that maghónaḥ is in fact acc. pl., but the two acc. are conjoined: “mögen nicht die Nichtgeber dich betrügen (und) die Spender.” This is not outside the realm of possibility.

## 13-15
Another soma tṛca.


## 13
The first hemistich contains disharmony of number in a constructio ad sensum: The priest is urged to offer of the pressed (soma-drink)s in the plural (sutā́nām); the reason for this is immediately given in the 2nd part of pāda b, sá hy àsya rā́jā “for he is its king.” Unaccented singular asya presupposes a referent already in the discourse, with “it” referring to soma, represented in the previous clause as a plural. The singular is then continued in the rest of the tṛca (asyá 14a, tám … sómam 14cd, sutám … sómam 15a, with sg. sutám picking up pl. sutā́nām of 13a).


## 14
As Ge point out (n. 14a), the “many shapes” (purú várpāṃsi) that Indra knows could either be his own (given his penchant for shape-shifting) or those of the various demonic enemies he destroys. I assume that the poet meant to leave it ambiguous, though it’s worth noting that the one instance of the bahuvrīhi puruvárpas- refers to Indra (though in the late hymn X.120.6).

The hapax -si impv. hoṣi has no structural support in the RV, the only aor.

attested being the pass. aor. áhāvi. However, an act. s-aor. is reasonably well attested in Vedic prose, beginning with the BYV Saṃhitās (ahauṣīt, etc.); see Narten (Sig.Aor. 288). It is difficult to know whether yoṣi is indirect evidence for a s-aor.

subjunctive to this aor., *hoṣat, etc., to which hoṣi would ultimately belong, or whether it was created as a nonce beside the other -si impvs. in this ritual sphere such as yákṣi, mátsi and has nothing to do with the aor. forms in prose. I weakly favor the latter explanation.


## 15
The vs. is characterized by three root-accented agent nouns (pā́tā a, hántā b, gántā c), all pāda-initial, all with acc. obj./goal. Then in d the pattern is switched: a suffix-accented agent noun (avitā́), interior in its pāda (immed. after caesura) with (objective) gen. complement. All of them are presumably predicates of astu in pāda a. I consider this simply an instance of the RVic tendency to shake up established patterns; I doubt that the poet is attempting to draw a distinction between Indra’s habitual roles as drinker, smiter, and goer, in contrast to a situational role as helper, as Tichy claims (Die Nomen agentis auf -tar- im Vedischen, 298-99; cf. 257 and passim). Among other things, “help” is one of the most frequent things we ask Indra to do for us; it is surely one of his standard, habitual roles. It happens that there is no root-accented *ávitar-, though avitár- is extremely common, and so no such form was available to match the first three -tar- stems in this vs. I do not know if the gap is accidental or systemic.

Note that kārúdhāyas-, a rare bv., reappears here from 12 -- again, a possible reason for attaching this tṛca to the preceding one.

## 16-18
Here the power of soma to rouse Indra to beneficial action is the general subject of the tṛca. The three forms belonging to √pā ‘drink’ in the 1st hemistich, pā́tram ‘drinking cup’, indrapā́nam ‘giving drink to Indra’, and apāyi ‘has been drunk’, in echoing the first word of the preceding vs. (15a pā́tā ‘drinker’), may have caused this tṛca to be grafted onto the last.


## 16
Ge takes índrasya as agent of apāyi (“Indra hat seinen lieben Göttertrank getrunken”), but finite passives, even verbs of consumption, don’t take genitive agents.

## 17-18
These two vss. contain two exx. of unexpectedly accented 2nd sg.

impvs.: 17a jahí and 18d kṛṇuhí, both internal to the pāda and preceded by material belonging to the same clause. Old cites both (in a list of other puzzling passages; ZDMG 60: 736), but provides no real explanation. In both cases it is possible to construct ad hoc justifications. For the jahí of 17a, note that 17d also contains an accented form of this same impv. (though with metrically lengthened final) in the sequence prá mṛṇā jahī́ca, where jahī́contrasts with the immediately preceding impv. prá mṛṇā and has its accent honestly, as it were. It could be that jahí in pāda a received the accent redactionally or as a poetic imitation of the jahī́later in the vs. As for kṛṇuhí in 18d, it might be taken as contrastive with the (rather distant) imperativally used injunctive kaḥ at the end of b to the same root; however, they are not used in the same idiom. It’s also worth noting that kṛṇuhí is followed by particles that ordinarily take 2nd position in a clause (smā no), and so kṛṇuhí by default appears to be in 1st position. And both 17a jahí and 18d kṛṇuhí are right after the caesura. But none of these explanations seems sufficient -- e.g., post-caesura position does not induce accent on verbs -- and I think we must consider these two exx. as peculiarities of the composer of this tṛca.


## 17
The object phrase in the 1st hemistich provides an ex. of number disharmony (of a different type from that in vs. 13). The main objects of Indra’s smiting are “rivals (and) foes,” the pl. phrase śátrūn … amítrān, but they are further specified as “kin and non-kin,” jāmím ájāmim, in the singular. The same disharmony is found in IV.4.5 jāmím ájāmim … śátrūn, where the śátrūn that closes our pāda a substitutes for amítrān.


## 18
For the idiom in sūrī́n kṛṇuhí … ardhám, cf. II.30.5 asmā́n ardhám krṇ̥ utāt.

## 19-21
This tṛca has a more obvious unifying feature than the last several: the repeated ‘bull’ words, vṛ́ṣan- and vṛṣabhá-. I count 16 exx. of the two stems in the three vss. The bull(ish) grammatical subjects of the three vss. are different: 19 Indra’s horses, 20 the soma drinks, 21 Indra himself. The vṛ́ṣan- stem predominates; vṛṣabhá- only appears beginning in the last pāda of 20 (though prepared for by instr.

pl. vṛ́ṣabhiḥ in 20c). I do not see any appreciable difference in their usage; note the coreferential dative vṛ́ṣṇe … vṛṣabhā́ya in 20d and, even more striking, the use of the two stems in strictly parallel expressions in 21a and b: vṛ́ṣā … divó vṛṣabháḥ pṛthivyā́ḥ “the bull of heaven, the bull of earth” and vṛ́ṣā síndhūnāṃ vṛṣabhá stíyānām “the bull of the rivers and the bull of the standing waters.” Nonetheless, Ge carefully distinguishes them, with Bull reserved for vṛṣabhá- and vṛ́ṣan- rendered as Riese / riesig ‘giant’. But I very much doubt if the intent was “you are the giant of heaven, the bull of the earth,” etc.

The concentration on the bull words leaves little room or energy for other poetic flourishes.


## 20
Although they belong to different, and distant, tṛcas, the partitive gen. construction here, … prá … sutā́nām, DAT bharanti …, matches that in vs. 13: … prá … sutā́nām, DAT bhara … and occupies the same position in the vs., though in our vs. √bhṛ also has a direct acc. object sómam.


## 21
Given the parallelism of the phrase vṛ́ṣā síndhūnāṃ vṛṣabhá stíyānām, it is clear that the gen. pl. stíyānām must be in semantic complementarity with síndhūnām ‘of the rivers’. Almost the same pair is found in VII.5.2, with a substitution for the first nom.: netā́síndhūnāṃ vṛṣabhá stíyānām. Gr glosses stíyā- ‘Schneefeld, Gletscher’, but, given the relative lack of attention to snow and the like in the RV once the Indo-Aryans had left the high mountains mostly behind, some other type of water contrasting with rivers seems more likely -- with Ge’s “der stehenden Gewässer” a likely alternative (cf. also Lüders, Varuṇa I.144). Re’s “eauxstagnantes” (EVP XIII.56 and 141), though expressing a similar contrast, is less appealing because of the negative implication of “stagnant waters”: would Indra really want to be their bull? The question then is what the form is derived from; EWA classifies it with the root √styā ‘be stiff’, of limited attestation in Skt. but found also in MIA, which seems reasonable. However, I am tempted to see a primary or secondary association with √sthā ‘stand’, since forms of this root (with the sense ‘stand still’) can be used of waters. Cf., e.g., the famous phrase describiing the rushing of the waters freed by Indra in the Vṛtra battle in I.32.10 átiṣṭḥantīnām “of those (waters) not standing still.” Re (EVP XIII.141) in a lapidary comment -- “fait comme díya-” -- seems to hint at a direct derivation (díya- to √dā, then stíya- to √sthā) without pursuing it, and Lub (System, 104) tentatively suggests that it belongs to an *-i-enlarged form of √*steh2, viz. *steh2-i-, but doesn’t further spell out the details. The trick of course is to keep the laryngeal from aspirating the t; if we start with Lub’s root, the zero-grade *sth2-i- would presumably metathesize to *stih2 (as with √pā(y) ‘drink’: pītá-), which would yield stiy- before a vowel. But I have no commitment to such an analysis. In any case it is impossible to tell whether the form belongs to a short or a long a/ā stem, since it only shows up in the gen. pl.

## 22-24
As noted in the publ. intro., repetition also characterizes this tṛca: the ayám that opens every hemistich, along with two other pādas (23b, 24b). In all instances the referent is Soma, whose name, however, does not appear until the opening of the last pāda, 24d (though the reliable synonym índu- ‘drop’ is found in 22d). The beginning of the first vs., 22a, identifies the subject as a god (ayáṃ deváḥ), and the tṛca attributes powerful agency to him, including deeds generally associated with Indra, such as the defeat of the Paṇi (22b), the placing of light in the sun (23b), and the propping apart of the two worlds (24a). It is only the specification of Indra (in an oblique case) as the “yokemate” of “this god” early in the tṛca (22b índreṇa yujā́) that prevents the audience from assuming that ayáṃ deváḥ refers to Indra (who is, after all, the dedicand of the hymn). Nonetheless, the virtual identification of Soma with Indra is clear.


## 22
As just noted, índuḥ ‘drop’ opening pāda b firmly identifies the subject as Soma, but the common word play between phonologically similar índu- and índra-, found esp. in Maṇḍala IX, underlines the permeable boundary just noted between Indra and Soma in this tṛca.

The brief narrative allusion in pāda c (“stole the weapons of his own father”) sounds like a fractured version of the just-born Indra stealing the soma from Tvaṣṭar, but it is hard to know how to square that tale with this formulation.


## 23
As Ge points out (n. 23cd), in the 2nd hemistich Soma the god is differentiated from soma the drink, with the god finding the distant, hidden drink.

tritéṣu is the only pl. form to this stem in the RV, and it is not at all clear what it is doing here. Ge takes it as the PN Trita, with the pl. referring to Trita and his brothers, among whom Soma (the god) finds soma (the drink). But I know of no such narrative, and Ge does not cite one. I take the form instead as representing the older adj. ‘third’ (see EWA s.v.), the older correspondent of tṛtī́ya- ‘third’ (which, of course, is also old, having Iranian cognates). As is well known, there are three heavens, and I take the “third realms of light” to be the third or highest heaven, here in the pl. because it is conceived of as further subdivided. For soma as resident in the third heaven, see K. Klaus, Die altindische Kosmologie, 175 with n. 66. It is possible (but only possible) that the vs. implicitly depicts the three heavens, with the dawns in the nearer one, the sun in the middle, and the soma in the third. The drink is threefold presumably because of the three pressings of the soma sacrifice.


## 24
(ví) ṣkabhāyat echoes astabhāyat in the first vs. of the tṛca (22b).

I will not speculate on the numerology in saptáraśmi- ‘having seven reins’ and daśayantra- ‘having ten fastenings’, whose referents may be ritual or cosmological, or (most likely) both.
