+++
title = "045"

+++
Indra This hymn contains 5 instances of the phrase “the stake (that is) set,” hitádhána-: 3 acc. sg. hitáṃ dhánam (2c, 12c, 15c), 2 loc. sg. (11b, 13b). All but one of these has the order just given, but one of the loc. exx. (13b) is found in the opposite order, as dháne hité as opposed to 11b hité dháne, which matches the order of the accusatives. A survey of the other examples of the phrase in the RV turns up one more ex. of the acc. hitáṃ dhánam (VIII.80.8), but a number of further loc. exx., almost all of which have the flipped order found in 13b dháne hité (I.40.2=VI.61.5, I.116.15, I.132.5, VIII.3.9, IX.53.2) versus hité dháne (X.63.14). There is only one ex. of the phrase outside of the acc. sg. and loc. sg., namely dháneṣu hitéṣu (VIII.16.5). It thus appears that the acc. and loc. exx. have different underlying orders. Since the word order in this phrase, in both acc. and loc., is, at least to the naked eye, metrically indifferent (always ⏑ - ⏑ -), it is hard to see what is driving the variable order, esp. since almost all instantiations of this phrase are pāda-final (except for I.116.15 and 132.5). Within this very limited data set, it would be possible to assume that the variant order signals different syntactic intentions: “the set stake” (acc.) as opposed to the loc. absol. “when the stake (is/was) set,” with secondary predication. Dieter Gunkel (pers. comm.) tells me that he produced a similar (independent) hypothesis when investigating “swappable bigrams” with Kevin Ryan (some of which results were presented in Vienna, June 24, 2015).

However, given the vagaries of RVic word order, it is difficult to know if such a hypothesis would hold up across a large set of data. It would be useful to investigate word order in clear loc. absolutes.


## 03
I have silently suppressed the plurals in práṇītayaḥ and ūtáyaḥ (guidance and help, rather than guidances and helps). Given that práṇītayaḥ reprises ā́nayat … súnītī in the 1st vs. of the tṛca, it might be better to translate it as “Great is his leading.” The three -ti-stem abstracts práṇīti-, práśasti-, and ūtí- recall súnīti- in 1b.


## 04
As was implied in the publ. tr., there is more cohesion across tṛcas than within them. In this 1st vs. of the 2nd tṛca there are a number of connections to the previous one: the 1st word sákhāyaḥ recalls sákhā in 1c; in b the impv. prá … gāyata “sing forth” is a variant of the nominal form práśasti- (3b) to the lexeme prá √śaṃs ‘proclaim forth’; in c the nominal clause sá hí naḥ X resembles 1c … sá naḥ X; c contains another -ti-stem abstract, prámati-, like those in 3 (two of which are cmpded with prá-); and the final word of the vs., mahī́, echoes the 1st word of 3 mahī́ḥ.


## 05
The sequence ékasya … dváyoḥ … / utédṛśe yáthā vayám “of one, of two and for such as we are” is a nice example of Behagel’s Law. It also shows variant syntax in a conjoined construction, since the third conjoined member is dative (ī́dṛśe), while the first two are gen. (unless dváyoḥ is loc., which seems unlikely). The result, at least in translation, is almost awkward, but the formal switch in case (and number) has semantic consequences, in my opinon. The sequence first presents itself as a purely numerical one (cf. Klein DGRV I.332-33), and we might expect “of one, of two, and *of however many we are.” But the sg. ī́dṛśe changes the focus from the quantity of the beneficiaries to their quality (“such as we,” in implicit contrast to people outside our circle of lesser value), and the dative emphasizes the benefactive nature of Indra’s actions. Ge’s “auch für einen solchen, wie wir sind” misses the point, in my view.


## 06
I supply ‘us’ as obj. in both a and b, adapted from 4c and esp. 5c; Ge supplies “Männer” (in b), presumably on the basis of nr̥bhiḥ in c. Either will work, but ‘us’ seems to provide more continuity.

náyasi in a connects across tṛcas with ā́nayat in 1a, and ukthaśaṃsínaḥ in b with práśastayaḥ in 3b. In 3b Indra is said to have many práśasti-, and here the producers of these (prá)śasti- are identified (as us or, with Ge, men).


## 07
More cross-tṛca connections: bráhma-vāhas- 7a/4a, sákhi- 7b/1c/4a.


## 08
Ge takes ūcuḥ to √vac and supplies hitāni with ní: “In dessen Händen … alle Güter, wie man sagt, nieder(gelegt sind),” but Old’s view, that ūcuḥ belongs to √uc, which regularly takes the preverb ní in the meaning ‘be accustomed to, be at home in’, is preferable. (And in fact Ge admits as much in n. 8a.)


## 09
This vs. contains two parallel direct objects (“strongholds” and “tricks”) in two parallel clauses, which presuppose the same verb. The preverb (ví) is given at the beginning of pāda a, the verb (vṛhá) itself at the beginning of the 2nd hemistich; they must be assembled to produce the full lexeme.

## 10-11
These vss. form a syntactic pair characterized by simple enjambment.

Both vss. begin tám u tvā, with the iteration of this phrase in 11a still part of the main clause of vs. 10 (and the object of 10c áhūmahi). The rest of the first hemistich of 11 consists of two rel. clauses, whose predicate (the predicate for both clauses), hávyaḥ, is found at the beginning of c. The rest of c is a separate impv. clause. Although the content of these two vss. is banal in the extreme, the syncopated effect produced by having the syntactic units not conform to metrical units gives it a bit of oomph. The vs. pair is unified by the ‘call’ motif: 10c áhūmahi ‘we have called upon’, 11c hávyaḥ ‘to be called upon’ / hávam ‘call’. The root √śru also provides unity: 10c śravasyávaḥ ‘seeking fame’, 11c śrudhī ‘hear’, also, in 12b śravā́yyān ‘worthy of fame’.


## 10
After the opening tám u tvā, the rest of the hemistich consists only of vocc.

satya somapā, índra vājānām pate, with only a single accent among them: índra is accented because it’s initial in its pāda, while the gen. pl. vājānām is unaccented because it’s part of a voc. phrase. Note that in the HvN ed. vājānā́m bears an impossible, final-syllable accent, a typo that should be deleted.


## 11
It is worth noting that in the temporally contrastive rel. clauses (a: purā́ ‘previously’, b: nūnám ‘now’) whose joint predicate is the grdv. hávyaḥ (see above), the one with past reference has an overt copula, pf. ā́sitha, while the one with current reference has the copula gapped.


## 12
The phrase hitá- dhána- is repeated from 11b and also picks up the same phrase in 2c. (See disc. above.) In fact 12c tváyā jeṣma hitáṃ dhánam is a telling variant on 2c índro jétā hitáṃ dhánam. In vs. 2 Indra is described as a/the (habitual) winner of the stake, while by vs. 12 it is we who hope to be the winners with his help. The vocalism of the precative jeṣma matches that of the agent noun jétā in 2.

See further 15c. Note also that 2b contains an instr. árvatā “with a steed” (in that case an unsatisfactory one) like árvadbhiḥ in 12a.

The opening of the vs. is called “stark elliptisch” by Ge, who sees two different possible constructions (n. 12a): “with insights (might we overcome) (the insights of other poets) and with steeds (might we overcome) steeds” or “with insights (as) steeds …” His tr. seems to reflect the first (though without supplying any further material), while I prefer the second.


## 13
The new tṛca opens with yet another example of the ‘stake’ phrase, this time in opposite order (dháne hité). For further on the order in this phrase, see the above intro. comm. to the hymn.


## 14
The subjunctive ásati was omitted in tr.: the first line should read “Your help that will have …”


## 15
The VP √ji hitáṃ dhánam returns from 2c and 12c, with two instances of √ji: jéṣi jiṣṇo hitáṃ dhánam. Here the subject is Indra as in 2c, not ‘we’ (12c), but he is making use of our (asmā́kena) chariot.


## 16
As Old notes (though not in those terms), we seem to have an embedded main clause here -- in that tám u stuhi forming the second part of pāda a interrupts the rel. cl. that begins the vs. (yá éka íd) and continues through the rest of b and c, with the accented verb jajñé in c. Since yá éka íd is in fact only a single constituent, it might be best to consider it fronted around the brief main cl.

## 18
The precative perfect sāsahīṣṭhāḥ is striking.

## 19-20
These two vss. contain superlatives to bahuvrīhi s-stems that appear earlier in the simplex: 19c bráhma-vāhastamam: 4a bráhma-vāhase; 20c gírvanastamaḥ: 13a girvanaḥ (also 28b).


## 21
Ge takes niyúdbhiḥ and vā́jebhiḥ as parallel, and therefore the ‘teams’ are among the things with which Indra fulfills our desire. Given the position of niyúdbhiḥ in the 1st pāda and its usual usage, I think it rather refers to Indra’s teams, with which he travels ‘here’, and I take ā́both with pṛṇa and with a verb of motion to be supplied. For a similar use, see VI.22.11 sá no niyúdbhiḥ … ā́gahi …, also addressed to Indra in this cycle.

## 22-24
This tṛca concerns itself with cows, picking up gómadbhir gopate from the end of the preceding tṛca (21c). In particular 23b vā́jasya gómataḥ “prize of cows” reprises 21bc vā́jebhiḥ … gómadbhiḥ and is then echoed by vrajáṃ gómantam “enclosure of cows” in 24ab.


## 22
The first pāda contains the common locution in which a poet addresses himself in the sg., but makes a nod to his ritual colleagues in the 2nd pl.: tád vo gāya.

Lit. this should be “Sing (o poet=me) this, (on behalf of) you all (=priests).” See my “Poetic Self-Reference in the Rig Veda and the Persona of Zarathustra” (Fs.

Skjaervø, BAI 19 [2005]), where this passage is disc. p. 69. The effort to introduce the 2nd pl. into the English would overbalance the tr., in a way that the slender enclitic vaḥ does not.

The simile in c is somewhat unsettling: “Sing what is weal for the able one as if for a cow.” Presumably it’s not the song that would be weal for a/the cow. Sāy.’s explan., reported by Ge (n. 22c), may well be correct: “as (fodder is) for a cow.” Recall also 7c gā́ṃ ná dóhase huve “I call upon (Indra) like a cow for milking,” where the cow simile is filled out. In light of this passage it may be that here what is weal for the cow is not fodder but rather the call to be milked, which would better resemble the song that is weal for Indra: “Sing what is weal for the able one, as (a milking call) is for a cow.”


## 24
There is some difference of opinion on the source of the apparent indefinite kuvítsa-, a hapax. Ge (n. 24a) asserts that sasya is the gen. corresponding to sásmin, enclitic after kuvíd (presumably presupposing a notional word space kuvít sasya). But the standard opinion, already registered by Gr (< BR; see also explicitly AiG II.1.327, repeated AiG II.2.924), is that it is derived from the univerbation of a syntactic sequence kuvít sá (roughly “is it indeed this one?”), which is then secondarily inflected. This seems the more likely explanation, and in fact there is such a sequence attested in IV.51.4 kuvít sá. This passage contains a deliberative either/or question “should it be the old course or a new one …?” kuvít sá … sanáyo návo vā yā́maḥ, a context that favors development into an indefinite of the type “someone or other.” In fact, our passage might be more clearly rendered as “to the cattle enclosure of someone or other.”

## 25-27
There is no obvious unifying feature in this tṛca, though Indra is compared to a cow in the first two vss.


## 25
On the intensive pf. nonuvuḥ see Schaeffer (45) and Kü (283).


## 27
This vs. is identical to III.41.6, q.v. The lack of accent on mandasvā despite the following hí is puzzling.

## 28-30
Again no unity in the tṛca.


## 28
Although, as just noted, there’s no unity in the tṛca, there is some continuity between tṛcas. Like the first vs. of the previous tṛca (25), this one has polarized nom. #imā́ḥ … gíraḥ# “these songs” framing the first hemistich, which responds to the acc. gíraḥ in the middle of the tṛca before that (23c). Moreover, the simile “like cows their calf” (28c) reprises “like mothers their calf” in 25c.


## 29
This vs. is syntactically dependent on 28, with the acc. purūtámam picking up tvā in 28a.

The cognate expression vā́jebhir vājayatā́m “competing for the prize with their prizes” is a bit puzzling. I interpr. it as being a slight play on words, with the instr. vā́jebhiḥ referring to the singers’ songs, expressing the means by which they compete, while the prizes they compete for are material goods and fame. This interpr. is somewhat supported by the next vs., where we hope that our praise-song is the most successful one.


## 30
Notice the very un-Ārya phonology of the name of the patron, Bṛbu with two plain b’s. (On Bṛbu as patron see Kuiper, Aryans, p. 6.) It is probably not an accident that this vs. contains only one of two reff. to the Gaṅgā in the RV (the other a voc. gaṅge in X.75.5), since the Gaṅgā is at the limits of the RVic geographical horizon.

The simile is more lit. “(he is) broad like the Gangetic girth.”


## 31
Pādas ab are identical to VIII.94.3. For my interpr. of the hemistich and esp. of the phrase aryá ā́see comm. there. Given the un-Ārya phonology of Bṛbu’s name, there may be a particular pleasure in hymning the un-Ārya patron Bṛbu away from the aríVI.

