+++
title = "046"

+++
Indra This hymn nicely demonstrates the distribution of impv. forms to √bhū that I discussed in my 1997 “Syntactic constraints on morphological change: The Vedic imperatives bodhi, dehi, and dhehi”: bháva/bhava is found initial (3d) or final (10d, 11a) in its pāda or clause, while bodhi is internal (4c).

## 01-02
Although the presence of hí, with its generally causal value, is often a puzzle when it appears in the first pāda of a hymn, this one helps signal the conceptual unity of this opening tṛca, with vs. 1 providing the various circumstances under which we call upon Indra and vs. 2 containing the contents of our latest address to the god -- a call for additional generosity from him.

The poet plays with the 2nd sg. pronoun. Historically -- and usually synchronically in the RV -- the nom. sg. tvám is disyllabic (t u vám) and the acc. sg.

tvā́m is monosyllabic, with occasional distraction to two syllables in analogy to the nom. But here the 1st vs. has three distracted acc. sg. t u vā́m, prominently pāda-initial (a, c, d), while the nom. sg. at the beginning of the 2nd vs. is monosyllabic. To match disyllabic t u vā́m, in 2a the two syllables are filled out by the addition of the pleonastic sá (#sá tvám), which is syntactically at home as subject marker of the 2nd sg. impv.

kira (see my 1992 “Vedic ‘sá figé’: An inherited sentence connective?”). Since sá in such contexts is unnecessary, its presence draws attention to the metrical interchange between the nom. and acc. of the pronoun here.


## 02
Ge takes rathyàm as an adj. modifying áśvam (Wagenross); Gr does as well, assigning the form to the vṛkī-inflected stem rathī́- (so also Lub). Neither of these interpr. is impossible; however, I prefer to take rathyàm as belonging to the marginal them. stem rathyà- (beside better attested ráthya-) and also to take it as a third term in the gifts we want from Indra. There is nothing riding on the choice of interpr., however.


## 03
This vs. shows some continuities with the previous pragātha: the root noun cmpd satrāhā́(3a) echoes satrā́in 2d, as satpate (3c) does sátpatim in 1c. There is also the variant 1st pl. mid. root form to √hū/hvā, hūmahe (3b), which contrasts with hávāmahe in 1a. I can see no difference in sense here, and I think there are several other factors at work. On the one hand, extremely common hávāmahe (+/- accent) is almost never pāda-internal, whereas the rare-ish hūmáhe (+/- accent) appears about half the time in that position (but see pāda-final hūmahe in 6b) -- so it partly replicates the bháva/bodhi distribution discussed above. But perhaps more important is that the poet seems to be playing with metrical variants in a way similar to sá tvám discussed above. Pāda b reads índraṃ táṃ hūmahe vayám. There is no good reason for tám because índram more than sufficiently provides the acc. obj.; moreover, all things being equal, tám (and its paradigmatic fellows) generally opens its pāda/clause and in particular does not follow a coreferential noun. The common 1st pl. havāmahe, already found in 1a, would easily fit in a version of this pāda that lacked the tám:

*índraṃ havāmahe vayám. I suggest that the poet called attention to his manipulation
of the variant verb forms by inserting a pleonastic tám, like the pleonastic sá in 2a, and inserting it in the “wrong” place, which would draw the attention of his audience even more.

## 04
vṛṣabhéva is somewhat problematic: the Pp. analyzes it as vṛṣabhā́iva, which is phonologically impeccable, but what form would vṛṣabhā́represent? Old’s solution (flg. Lanman, Noun Inflection 329) that it is an underlying nom. sg. is surely the most likely, whether we subscribe to Lanman’s “crasis after elision [of the s],” i.e., vṛṣabhás iva à vṛṣabha iva à -e-. The publ. tr., as well as Ge., implicitly follows this route. A long-shot possibility is that the Pp. vṛṣabhā́is the underlying form, and it’s an old instr. sg. modifying or doubling manyúnā: “with bullish battlefury” or “with battle-fury as a bull.” But vṛ́ṣan- is the ‘bull’ stem generally used (quasi-)adjectivally, not vṛṣabhá-. It might also be possible to see it as a voc. vṛṣabha: this would easily account for the sandhi, but we would have to assume it got secondarily accented after it was no longer understood as a voc., and this would also introduce the interpretational problem of a voc. in a simile (though unfortunately there are a few such).

On the problematic ṛcīṣama see the despairing comm. ad I.61.1.

The three loc. in d specify the ‘stakes’ (dhaná-) referred to by mahādhané.


## 05
The voc. phrase in c, citra vajrahasta, is repeated from 2a.

The verb prā́ḥ must be read disyllabically. It could therefore technically be a subjunctive (so apparently Gr), and in fact the light first syllable required could reflect the loss of root-final laryngeal before the subjunctive suffixal vowel.

Hoffmann insistently calls it an injunc. (215 n. 201, 221), fld. by Lub, and the publ.

tr. (“you … fill”) reflects an injunctive interpr. But since this is not a cosmogonic act

-- Indra is filling the world halves with “fame” -- a subjunctive interpr. is possible,
esp. following the impv.: “bring us fame with which you will fill both these worldhalves.” I consider this a possible, perhaps even desirable alternative.


## 06
The distracted acc. t u vā́m from 1a, c, d returns here, again as object of “we call,” but with hūmahe rather than the hávāmahe of vs. 1.

On pibdaná- see also comm. ad IX.15.6. The stem is obviously derived from a redupl. form of √pad; cf. the hapax med. part. píbdamāna- (X.101.11). The orig.

sense is likely ‘keep stepping, go step-by-step,’ vel sim., as an iter. See EWA s.v. PAD, with ref. to Strunk and Gotō. A literal gloss could then be ‘plod, trudge’. This literal sense is seen, in my view, in the participle in X.101.11 váhnir āpíbdamānaḥ ‘plodding draught horse’, and in IX.15.6 I also take vásūni pibdanā́as a somewhat comic reference to cows as “plodding goods.” Our passage here is more difficult, as the word is contrasted with vithurá- ‘wavering’; this opposition accounts for the standard glosses as (Gr) ‘feststehend, fest’, (AiG II.2.595 ‘fest’ (but .203 ‘erstarkend’), (Ge) ‘dauerhaft’, (Re) ‘solides’ (both latter in IX.15.6), but my ‘gain(ing) a foothold’ seems to preserve the root etymology and sense, while fitting the context.

## 07-08
This pragātha is stitched together by the yád (vā) construction (7a, c, 8a, b).

## 07
The main cl. begins in the middle (or rather towards the end) of pāda c, with ā́bhara. Since this phrase is only 3 syllables, the audience would not mistake the syntactic break for a pāda break despite the extra length of the c-pāda in Bṛhatī.

satrā́reappears once again (cf. 2d, 3a).


## 08
On the verbal rection of turváṇe see Keydana (Inf., 245-47). Note also that the circumstantial loc. nṛṣā́hye “at the conquering of men” and the purpose infinitival phrase amitrā́n … turváṇe “to vanquish our foes” have the same semantic structure, though different syntax.

## 09-10
The unity of this pragātha is required by the fact that the rel. cl. of 10ab must depend on the imperatival cl. of 9d, with initial yé (10a) picking up the last word of 9, ebhyaḥ ‘from those’.


## 10
dhṛṣṇuyā́reprises 2a.

## 11-12
This pragātha shows both internal and external connections. As in the previous pragātha the 2nd vs. is syntactically dependent on the first, with the yátra clause of 12ab parallel to the yád clause of 11cd and both subordinate to the imperatival clause of 11b. In addition the first and last hemistichs (11ab, 12cd) open identically, with ádha smā, which echoes ádha smā of the last hemistich of the previous pragātha (10cd).

On the particular connection of vs. 12 with vs. 9 see immed. below.


## 11
The first pāda is a bare variant of 3d: both contain the complex verbal construction vṛdhé √bhū ‘be for strengthening / be there to strengthen’, each with the complement enclitic naḥ. The only difference is the placement of the impv.: initial bhávā in 3d, final bhava in 11a, differing only in accent and, possibly, in the length of the final vowel: the Pp. resolves the cross-pāda sandhi bhavéndra with short bhava, like 10d, but a long vowel would be equally possible.


## 12
The publ. tr. contains a grammatical error. It takes priyā́as modifying fem.

pl. tanvàḥ, but the sandhi context of priyā́makes this impossible: it would have to be

*priyā́ḥ. It must modify śárma (as Ge takes it, also Gr), which must then be a neut.

plural to the -an-stem. This tr. should be corrected to “… stretch wide their own bodies as dear shelters …” Ge takes tanvàḥ and śárma as implicitly conjoined (“Wo die Tapferen ihre Leiber breit machen (and) die lieben Schilde des Vaters”), but I think it more likely that the champions are stretching their bodes to serve as shelters/shields. Under this interpr. the plural of śárma makes sense: multiple bodies multiple shields.

Pādas abc strongly echo 9abc, with the c pādas esp. close, both containing the VP chardír yacha (in opposite order and non-contiguous in 12c) + conjoined DAT. beneficiary (9c maghávadbhyaś ca máhyaṃ ca; 12c tanvè táne ca). However, the first hemistich of 12 varies tellingly from 9ab: in 9 it is Indra who holds out the shelter (śaraṇám), which is equated with the chardíḥ of c, but in 12 it is the mortal champions (śū́rāsaḥ) who offer their own bodies as shelter (śárma). (Although the two words for ‘shelter’ are different, they are transparently related and share the same descriptors elsewhere.) The bodies of the mortal warriors are theirs to deploy, but also under the protection of Indra, as shown not only by tanvè in the next pāda as recipient of Indra’s protection, but also by tanūpā́ḥ ‘protector of bodies’ in 10d, applied to Indra.

The last pādas of vss. 9 and 12 provide the final thread of connection between the two vss., since both contain the impv. yāváyā̆ ‘keep away’. In 12d the accent on the verb is anomalous, but I have no trouble assuming that it was adapted from 9d, where the initial position of the verb requires it.

## 13-14
As was noted in the publ. intro., this last pragātha stands somewhat apart from the rest of the hymn, though it does show connections with the beginning of the hymn. The near repetition found between the last two pragāthas (9-10 / 11-12; see disc. above) gave the sense that the hymn was coming to an end. As often, RVic poets seem to enjoy shaking up our structural expectations. The lack of a main clause in the whole of this two-vs. complex is especially striking and ends the hymn on an unsettled and somewhat frenzied note.


## 13
The form árvataḥ ends the first pāda of this vs. and the last of vs. 1, but with different grammatical identities: gen. sg. in 1d, acc. pl. here. This difference may be one indication that this pragātha both responds to the rest of the hymn and distances itself from it.

mahādhané is repeated from 4c.


## 14
While vs. 13 has a relatively perspicuous structure -- a single transitive yád clause whose final pāda is a simile matching the acc. direct object -- vs. 14 is a structural mess. Its first pāda is another simile in the acc. matching the direct object of vs. 13; it is followed by a yádi (or *yád ī; see below) clause (b), which may or may not contain a verb, followed by a rel. cl. (cd) introduced by yé, containing another simile referring to the same direct object but now in the nom. By now the original referent is quite distant, and it is not entirely clear which parts belong to the simile, which to the frame.

Pāda b is esp. problematic, mostly because of the ambiguity of the phrase ánu ṣváṇi, in which sváni has been identified variously as a noun or as a verb. The preponderance of opinion favors the former: Whitney (§390b, though see Roots, where he lists it, with ?, as an aor.), Gr (though he allows for the other poss.), Ge, Lub. On the other hand, Old, flg. BR, considers it a verb form, a passive aorist.

Wackernagel (AiG III.23) is uncertain. The noun-faction is further divided by what stem they assign it to: neut. -i-stem (Gr, Lub), root noun in -an- (Wh, and presumably Ge, since he tr. it as a loc. “im Getöse”). If it is a noun (‘sound’, vel sim.), a verb needs to be supplied with ánu, but this of course would pose no problem. I am always reluctant to oppose Old, and in this particular case there is strong objective evidence that he is correct, namely the close sandhi effect that retroflexes ṣ after ánu. A collection of all s-forms after ánu produces remarkably clear-cut results: ánu only retroflexes following verb forms, never nominal forms.

Although it may seem overkill to list all the examples, the collection may be useful for other purposes: ánu + VERB: I.167.10 [=182.8, III.39.8] ánu ṣyāt, I.185.4 ánu ṣyāma, V.73.4 ánu ṣṭáve, VIII.3.8 ánu ṣṭuvanti. There is only one verbal form without retroflexion: IV.4.2 ánu sprś̥ a.

ánu + NOMINAL (etc.): I.33.11 [=I.88.6, 176.2, III.51.11, IV.33.6, 52.6, VII.56.13, VIII.88.5] ánu svadhā́m, I.80.1 (etc.) ánu svarā́jyam, I.121.3 ánu svajā́m, I.134.1 ánu sūnṛ́tā, I.191.15 ánu saṃvátaḥ, III.7.6 [=V.59.1, IX.63.6] ánu svám, III.33.3 ánu saṃcárantī, III.35.8 ánu svā́ḥ, IV.40.4 ánu saṃtávītvat, IV.45.6 ánu svadháyā, V.32.10 ánu svadhā́vne, V.34.1 ánu svadhāmitā, VI.25.8 ánu sáho, VII.7.2 [X.14.2] ánu svā́ḥ, VII.31.7 ánu svadhā́varī, VIII.4.8 ánu spighyàm, VIII.6.38 ánu suvānā́sa, IX.103.5 ánu svadhā́ḥ, X.17.11 ánu saṃcárantam, X.17.11 ánu saptá, X.56.3 ánu satyā́, X.103.6 ánu sám.

Among the nominals it is striking how many begin with sv- as in our case.

I can see only one possible conclusion, that Old must be right, this is a 3rd sg.

passive (or rather, intransitive) aor., and we need to supply a subject. Old suggests chariot, which seems reasonable. As he points out, the RV has a bahuvrīhi svanádratha- lit. ‘having a sounding chariot’ (though prob. used as a PN), and a chariot sounding “following the roar (of the horses)” makes sense. II.4.6 vā́r ṇá pathā́ ráthyeva svānīt “like water along a path, like chariot (wheels) he has sounded” provides a parallel not only for the sounding chariot, but also for the rushing, sounding rivers in the simile of pāda a.

A few other loose ends in pāda b: I interpr. yádi as *yád ī “when it,” with shortening of ī before the cluster kl. A condition ‘if’ doesn’t make sense. As for that cluster, klóśa- is the only -l-form to √kruś ‘cry out’. Is this racetrack slang? Pāda c compares the steeds circling the race course to birds (of prey) circling over the raw flesh of a dead animal (a striking image). Ge considers the loc. gávi to be the correspondent of ā́miṣi in the simile: the cow is the prize over which the horses circle (“die wie die Vögel um das Aas, so um die Kuh(herde) kreisen”). The publ. tr. by contrast takes gávi as a piece of horse tack, the reins or something else made of leather, and construes it with gṛbhītā́ḥ. I now favor Ge’s interpr., which is more striking and which also conforms to the loc. of the stake found several times in this hymn. I would amend the tr. to “who, like birds over raw flesh, keep circling (the race course) over the bovine (prize), being held firm in your two arms …”
