+++
title = "047"

+++
Indra ### 01-05 As indicated in the publ. intro., the first 5 vss. of the hymn constitute a praise of soma, shading, towards the end, into simultaneous praise of Indra. It is formally unified: beginning with vs. 2, all but one (2cd) of the hemistichs begins with ayám, and vs. 1 contains four exx. of ayám as well (2 each in the 1st 2 pādas), though oddly positioned.


## 01
Although this vs. is quite straightforward in general, it has some peculiarities. To begin with, the four nominal clauses with ayám in the first hemistich are all in the unusual order X ayám, which is reversed (/repaired) in the four subsequent vss. See esp. the opening of 1a svādúṣ kílāyám corrected to the more standard 2a ayáṃ svādúḥ. I have no idea what motivated the X ayám order.

It is not clear to me whether the four clauses name four different types/preparations of soma or all four refer to a single soma (or, in some way, both: all soma drinks, no matter how prepared, are in essence one).

Note also the particle kíla, which is rare in the RV, esp. outside of X: only 5 of the 12 occurrences are not in X, and 2 of them are in this vs. I am also puzzled by the accent on asyá in c. Since the soma is amply referred to earlier in the vs., we would expect unaccented asya (cf., e.g., papivām̐índro asya V.29.3, 30.11). I have no explanation, and it seems not to have bothered any other commentator.


## 02
This vs. chains rel. clauses, with the gen. rel. yásya in b referring to the soma in a, while nom. yáḥ in cd refers to Indra, who first appears in the rel. cl. of b.

It is difficult (though perhaps not impossible) to construe ví … hán ‘smash apart’ with the acc. cyautnā́‘exploits’ in c as well as the more likely object dehyàḥ ‘walls’ in d. It is therefore best to follow Ge (also Hoffmann, Injunk. 168) and supply a form of √kṛ or the like in c.

## 03-05
As noted in the publ. intro. as well as above, the praise of soma modulates towards praise of Indra in this sequence, starting in the 2nd half of vs. 3. The first half of 3 clearly identifies soma as referent with the ppl. pītáḥ ‘when drunk’, but the cosmogonic deeds of 3d and of at least the first half of 4 begin to sound Indraic. We are brought abruptly back to soma in 4d (sómo dādhāra), but this almost seems like a trick or a feint to keep us from drifting further. And vs. 5 again sounds Indraic, esp.

the final vṛṣabhó marútvān “the bull accompanied by the Maruts”: marútvant- is overwhelmingly an epithet of Indra. For a similar nearby sequence of vss. that oscillates between soma and Indra (and also uses ayám as an organizing word) see VI.44.22-24 and comm. ad loc. 
## 03
It is not clear what noun to supply with fem. pl. urvī́ḥ, though something like ‘worlds (so Ge), realms’ makes sense. The same ṣáḍ urvī́ḥ is found in X.14.16 in unclear context, and as a voc. in X.128.5 dévīḥ ṣaḍ urvīḥ 'you six broad goddesses’, again with uncertain referent. Elsewhere urvī́ḥ applies to waters or rivers, but liquid doesn’t seem appropriate here. Perhaps in our vs. it’s evoking a pl. of pṛthivī́ ‘earth’, with a pun on a different word for ‘broad’, urú-, urvī́-. Note that pṛthivī́- occurs in the next vs., dependent on varimán- ‘expanse’, which is derivationally related to urú-.


## 04
The first hemistich has a repetitive structure inside a chiastic frame. The opening ayáṃ sá yáḥ is balanced by ayáṃ sáḥ at the end of b; we might perhaps expect *yó ayáṃ sáḥ in fact. The single verb ákṛṇot, inside this frame, does for both objects, which are responsive: morphologically identical and near-rhyming acc. varimā́ṇam … varṣmā́ṇam, each with a dependent gen. belonging to a matched semantic pair, pṛthivyā́ḥ … diváḥ.

Pāda c is problematic. It lacks a verb, so it is impossible to know for sure what relations are envisioned among the ill-assorted lexical items; the real-world referents of pīyū́ṣam ‘beestings’ and tisṛ́ṣu pravátsu “on/in the three slopes” are uncertain; it is not even clear whether it should be grouped with ab or with d. Ge groups it loosely with d, renders pīyū́ṣam as “Seim” and tisṛ́ṣu pravátsu as “in die drei Strömen,” and supplies “hat … geschaffen” as the verb. I am not sure what he’s trying to convey, and pravát- does not straightforwardly mean ‘stream’, but ‘slope’ or ‘plunge’. The publ. tr. takes c with ab, supplying ákṛṇot from there, but I am now doubtful about this, in part on the basis of IX.109.6 divó dhartā́si śukráḥ pīyū́ṣah “You, the gleaming beestings, are the supporter of heaven,” where soma is identified as pīyū́ṣa- and identified as an upholder (dhartár-), reminiscent of our d sómo dādhāra. As for tisṛ́ṣu pravátsu, I wonder if this is shorthand for “pravát- plus two” as expressed in VII.50.4 praváto niváta udvátaḥ “(from) the slope, the depth, and the height”—possibly referring to the three worlds, which all appear in this verse: heaven and earth in ab, the midspace in d. Perhaps the idea is that Soma placed or supports the distillation of himself, his liquid essence, in all three worlds. If this is so, a form of √dhṛ borrowed from d would work better than √kṛ from ab.

I also now realize that the preterital tr. of dādhāra in d, matching that of Ge (“hat … befestigt”), is wrong, since, as Kü points out, the pf. of √dhṛ is always presential.

Putting this all together, I would alter the tr. of cd to “this one (upholds) his ‘beestings’ in the three “slopes” (=worlds); Soma upholds the broad midspace,” with absolutely no certainty about the rendering of c.


## 05
HvN divide the 2nd hemistich as … skámbhanenód # di yā́m, with úd the final of pāda a and di yā́m distracted and pāda-initial. But this is clearly wrong: úd is a preverb in tmesis with astabhnāt and should open the pāda, and dyā́m is rarely if ever distracted. Lub’s division is correct.

As noted above, the 2nd hemistich of this vs. sounds esp. Indraic.


## 06
rayi-sthā́na- is a bahuvrīhi, lit. ‘having your place/standing in wealth’ vel sim., though the publ. tr. is less awk.

## 07
The vs. is built on variant repetition: ab prá ṇah …, prá naḥ … prataram / c su-pāró ati-pārayó / d sú-nītiḥ … vāmá-nītiḥ.

I have no idea why in the identical sequence prá + naḥ, the first has retroflexed ṇ and the latter does not. Both prá-s are preverbs in tmesis with 2nd sg.

impvs. (paśya and naya). The only differences are 1) the first prá sequence is not initial (being preceded by voc. índra), 2) in the second sequence the impv.

immediately follows naḥ, while in the first some verbal material intervenes, and 3) in the first naḥ functions as a dat. but in the second as an acc. None of these differences should (as far as I can see) trigger different sandhi effects.


## 09
The vs. contains three phonologically similar splvs., stationed at pāda edge: \#váriṣṭhe ... #váhiṣṭhayoḥ ... / ... várṣiṣṭhām#. This is somewhat reminiscent of the phonological/morphological figure in 4ab varimā́ṇam … varṣmā́ṇam, esp. since váriṣṭhe and várṣiṣṭhām belong to the same roots as the two forms in 4.

In b the HvN text should read śatāvann. This voc. is variously interpr. (see Old for some reff.), but I follow Ge, and implicitly the Pp., in taking it as (metrically) lengthened *śata-van, to a -van-stem, contra Gr’s śata-ava(n)t-, with the pres. part.

of √av ‘help’. This śatā-van- would be a byform of better attested śatá-vant-. It needs to belong to a -van- rather than a -vant- stem because otherwise the expected voc. would be -vas. But we find -vant- and -van- stems side-by-side, notably in maghávan(t)-. Debrunner (AiG II.2, most clearly p. 904, citing this passage) argues that -vant-stems are “sachlich” while -van-stems are “persönlich,” which would work for śatávant- versus our śatāvan-, but not, obviously, for maghávan(t)-.

The tr. of d is disputed. Ge takes rā́yaḥ as nom. pl. (as it generally is) and the subj. of the sg. verb tārīt: “nicht sollen die Reichtümer eines hohen Herren die unseren überbieten.” This requires that the sg. verb take a masc. pl. subj. While the neut. pl. + sg. verb construction is fairly rare, but attested and inherited, I do not know of masculine pl. equivalents. Old (ZDMG 54: 170) thinks the incongruity of number is the result of the adjustment to the formulaic nature of rā́yo aryáḥ, tr.

“mögen uns nicht die Kargen den Reichtum überwinden,” with aryáḥ nom. pl. of arí-

-- in other words a different masc. pl. subj. with sg. verb. Thieme (Fremdling, 56-57)
makes appropriately short work of both of these proposals, but I find his own solution puzzling: “Möge nicht überholen unsere Reichtümer [der] des Fremdlings.” Since he adamantly rejects the masc. pl. + sg. verb interpr., all I can figure is that he’s generating a singular *rayíḥ to serve as subject (represented by his bracketed [der]), but there is no support for this and it seems an artifice of convenience. No doubt mine does, too: like Thieme I take rā́yaḥ as acc. pl., as it sometimes is (though rāyáḥ would be expected), and for sg. subj. I supply íṣ- ‘refreshment’ from the previous pāda. I also interpr. the verb tārīt not as hostile ‘overcome’ but as a plain verb of motion ‘cross over to’; cf. usages like átāriṣma támasaḥ pā́ram asyá “we have crossed over to the far shore of this darkness” (I.92.6 = I.183-84.6, VII.73.1).

The point is that the refreshment we’ve begged Indra for should not fall into enemy hands. As discussed esp. ad IV.48.1 and VI.14.3, 20.1, I take the phrase rā́yo aryáḥ “riches of the stranger” as referring to manpower.


## 10
For the simile in b, see VI.3.5.


## 11
√hvā is the signature word here.

## 11-13
The first pāda of 12 recasts that of 11: with sutrā́mā matching trātā́ram and s u vávām̐ávobhiḥ matching avitā́ram; 13a then repeats sutrā́mā su vávān. The connections between 12-13 and neighboring vss. in this hymn make it less likely (at least to me) that they are direct evidence of the Sautrāmaṇī ritual here, instead of being pressed into service of that ritual later. See publ. intro.


## 12
In addition to the repetition just described, 12b sumṛḷīkó bhavatu is a variant of 10a mṛḷá, and ábhayaṃ kṛṇotu reminds us of 8ab ánu neṣi … ábhayam.


## 14
The long vowel of urū́is puzzling. Since it appears in the simile urū́ná rā́dhaḥ, it should be neut. sg. urú, and acdg. to Gr and AiG III.145 (with reff.) it is, with metrical lengthening. By contrast, Lub identifies it as a nom. pl. Since the frame corresponding to this simile is neut. pl. sávanāni purū́ni, I also prefer neut. pl.; it may show attraction to the number of the frame: “the many pressings are broad like your bounty.” As Ge (n. 14d) cleverly points out, the waters, cows, and drops are the three ingredients of soma.

## 15-18
As noted in the publ. intro., this section, which concerns Indra’s fickle attentions to various clients in turn, is marked grammatically by āmreḍitas and intensives (i.e., iterative/frequentatives), expressing the constantly shifting nature of the actions and their objects. See the publ. intro. for the continuity of content I see in this section.


## 15
Ge renders d exactly opposite to the publ. tr.: “so macht er den Vorderen zum Hintermann” (fld. by Klein, “āmreḍitas”: “he makes the one at the fore into one who lags behind”). But the simile in c is about walking one step at a time (“putting his two feet down one after the other”), and unless Indra is walking backwards my interpr. must be correct. It’s true that pū́rvam ‘in front’ precedes áparam ‘behind’ in the text, but word order is scarcely a reliable guide in the RV, esp. since in nominal sentences we often get PREDICATE SUBJECT order. (Furthermore, there's a sort of iconic ordering of the two adjectives, with pū́rva- first, which can be independent of the larger sense.)


## 16
In d víśaḥ … manuṣyā̀n do not match in gender. Old suggests that the latter might be gen. pl., and Ge’s tr. as such: “die Stämme der Menschen.” I see no reason not to take it as the acc. pl. it appears to be, as a parallel obj. to víśaḥ, not a modifier.

## 17
The pū́rva-/ápara- binary returns from 15, but here I think it not only refers to those ahead and behind positionally (as there), but also has a temporal sense (not represented in the publ. tr.): his previous allies in pāda a he dumps in favor of newer ones in b.

The hapax ánānubhūtīḥ is not entirely clear, but two things must be kept in mind: 1) it’s a fem. pl., presumably acc.; 2) its sense must be derived from ánu √bhū, which generally means ‘come close to, give way to’. Because of 1), it should modify śarádaḥ ‘autumns’, a fem. cons. stem (so Ge). But Ge’s rendering “dass sie an ihm nicht wahrgenommen werden” seems distant in sense from the verbal lexeme; Old’s “(alles) Sichnichtanschliessen …” seems closer. I take the cmpd as a bahuvrīhi meaning ‘having no intimacy’ and interpr. it as proleptic in an expression of purpose: Indra shakes off the years so that they do not come close/attach themselves to him.

(Ge’s “dass sie … nicht …” has the same proleptic purpose interpr.) The point is that one can’t get old if one keeps the years at a distance; my “close in” is meant to capture the slangy tone of the passage (see also “double-cross” in b).


## 18
This vs. concerns Indra’s shape-shifting propensity, enabled by his māyā́-.

It is a slightly more complex formulation of III.53.8 rūpám-rūpam maghávā bobhavīti, māyā́ḥ krṇ̥ vānás tanvàm pári svā́m “Form after form the bounteous one assumes, wrapping his own body in tricks.” Although prátirūpo babhūva should lit.

mean “he has become one having a form corresponding …,” this seemed awkward.

Ge thinks the form in b is Indra’s true form, to be recognized behind the various disguises in pāda a; by contrast, I think each form Indra assumes is meant for display and none of them is the “real” one. práti √cakṣ is the lexeme used for the display of the girl at the svayaṃvara; see its use with Dawn in I.113.11 and 124.8.

Each constituency is shown a different form—hence the āmreḍita rūpáṃ-rūpam in a and the thousand horses in d, which presumably take each different form of Indra in a different direction.


## 19
This vs. makes a small ring with vs. 15, both containing káḥ + SUBJUNCTIVE. The fact that this vs. is in a different meter (Bṛhatī, not Triṣṭubh) from the whole hymn that precedes it may also signal the end of a section. As indicated in the publ. intro., I think this vs. is meant as reassurance: in contrast to the endlessly multiplying Indra of vs. 18 (and the fickle Indra of the previous vss.), Tvaṣṭar has now taken control, yoking only a single team (for Indra’s journey, in my opinion) and exerting his dominion over forms, thus reining in Indra’s excess shape-shifting.

Although the word rūpá- does not appear in the vs., it can be easily supplied with bhū́ri on the basis of Tvaṣṭar’s well-known role as shaper of forms (cf. Macd., Ved.

Myth. 116, and passages like I.188.9, VIII.10.28, X.100.9, 184.1).

The 2nd hemistich poses a rhetorical question about Indra (unnamed): why would Indra stick by the enemy when our sacrifice is so appealing? We are essentially urging him to switch sides again, and since he does so frequently, we have hope of succeeding. Assuming that pákṣa in sandhi represents pákṣaḥ (so Pp), it belongs to a neut.

s-stem found only here in the RV, but attested in AV and elsewhere. This requires us to allow an acc. with √ās ‘sit’, rather than the usual loc. There is no warrant to emend the accent to pakṣá and take it as a loc. to the -á-stem.

Pāda d constitutes a loc. abs., with the part. ā́sīna- used pregnantly for ‘sitting (a sattra)’. The introductory utá is curious, since there is nothing it can conventionally conjoin. Klein (DGRV 45-56) classifies it with the unclassifiable residue of utá forms, tr. it ‘especially’. The publ. tr. follows this tack. However, I think we can derive it from the standard uses of utá ‘and’. English has an idiom in which ‘and’ is used to add as an afterthought what the speaker considers the clinching, but somewhat off-topic, circumstantial argument -- as in a sequence like “why would he break up with her now-- and with her just graduated?”


## 20
The pres. part. satī́in b is concessive, while saté in the same position in d is not.


## 21
My tr. differs conceptually and syntactically from Ge’s, also, to a lesser degree, from Schmidt’s (B+I 83). Ge thinks the obj. sadṛ́śīḥ … kṛṣṇā́ḥ … jā́ḥ refers to the nights (“die … gleichen (Nächte), die schwarzen Kinder”) and that anyám árdham “the other side” is the goal to which Indra drove the nights. Acdg. to him, this is a different image of the singer’s Not -- the first narrowness, the second unbroken night. I find the supposed change of topic, from the tight place in which we found ourselves in vs. 20, unlikely; instead I consider this vs. a continuation of vs. 20, in which Indra drives away the enemy, as often described as black or dark, that implicitly hemmed us in, a view shared by Schmidt. However, the latter agrees with Ge in taking anyám árdham as a goal, “Täglich vertrieb er die gleichen schwarzen Kinder von ihrem Sitz an die andere (Welt-)Hälfte,” whereas I consider it a characterization of the enemy and so in apposition to sadṛ́śīḥ … kṛṣṇā́ḥ … jā́ḥ, the phrase into which it’s interleaved. The “other half” would be the alternately favored and disfavored sides in vss. 15-18, as well as the “side of the hostile” (dviṣatáḥ pákṣaḥ) of 19c.

HvN disassemble the sandhi across cd as vasnayánta, but this dual must have a long final; so Pp.

The part. vasnayántā is a hapax, but related to vasná- ‘price’, vásnya- ‘to be sold, up for sale’. It modifies the two enemies of Indra, Varcin and Śambara, of whom we know little beyond Indra’s enmity towards them. The denom. vasna-yá- is therefore interpretable in a number of ways. Gr takes it as ‘feilschen’ (haggle), while Ge tr. ‘Lösegeld fordern’ (demand ransom), calling the two enemies Raubritter (robber barons) in his intro. (p. 144). EWA posts both tr., though they do not seem at all equivalent to me. Schmidt returns to Gr’s feilschen. I add yet another possibility -

- ‘mercenaries’ -- on the basis of a literal rendering of normal denom. semantics
‘seek X’, hence ‘seek a price’. But given the state of our ignorance about these two foes, no interpr. is secure (though I very much doubt that the two were ‘haggling’ with Indra when he picked up his vajra). We should note that in the next vs. (22c), we accept “the goods belonging to Śambara” (śāmbaráṃ vásu), which may refer to Śambara’s vasná- in 21, though not in a way that disambiguates it.

Gr takes udávraje as a PN, Ge as a place name. My tr. follows Schmidt’s interpr. (83-84) as a bahuvrīhi ‘dessen Hürde das Wasser ist’, as a description of a mountain surrounded (or semi-surrounded) by a body of water.


## 22
kóśayī- is a hapax; its difference, if any, from well-attested kóśa-, which also appears in the following vs., in the same number of ‘ten’, can’t be determined.


## 25
The verb abhy àyaṣṭa is problematic, at least in my view. It is supposed to be the 3rd sg. mid. root aor. to √yaj ‘sacrifice’. The form is morphologically impeccable, but 1) abhí is not found with √yaj anywhere else in the RV, or indeed in Vedic; 2) for √yaj ‘sacrifice to’ to take an acc. of humans, rather than the standard gods, is skirting blasphemy. In this passage it is said to mean ‘honor’, but it is hard to see how the ubiquitous root √yaj could be so bleached, nor why the addition of the preverb abhí would effect this change. The publ. tr. “has reached towards” reflects a different analysis. I suggest that it actually belongs to the root aor. of √(n)aś ‘reach, attain’, which does appear fairly regularly with abhí. A putative injunc. in this lexeme, *abh(í)y aṣṭa, could have produced a segmentation *abhí-yaṣṭa, and in turn an augmented form abhí ayaṣṭa could have been generated to it. The sense of the passage might be similar to the current (annoying) English idiom “reach out to,” meaning “proactively contact in a positive way,” and refer to the Sārñjaya’s transfer of goods to the Bharadvāja poets. However, I recognize that it is generally preferable not to posit such a morphological misunderstanding and reformation, and also that my semantic substitution isn’t altogether compelling. MLW suggests an alternative etymology, connecting it to yáśas- ‘glory’, etc. and taking it as a med. root formation meaning ‘made famous, ennobled, glorified’. Both the morphology and the root semantics would work, though I am somewhat skeptical that a middle formation of that sort would have transitive-factitive sense.

## 26-31
These vss. are repeated in the Aśvamedha section of several early Vedic ritual texts, directly after the 1st 14 vss. of the weapon hymn VI.75 (e.g., VS XXIX.52-57, TS IV.6.6.


## 26
Because of the hí, I have made ab the causal foundation for the beginning of c. If we are willing to allow hí to be some kind of unspecified emphatic, the clauses can be disjoined, with the first hemistich simply “you should become …” As in the matching sequence … pratáraṇaḥ suvī́raḥ in I.91.19, ‘lifetime’ could be supplied as the implicit obj. of pratáraṇah.


## 27
The awkward ‘strongness’ in English tr. is meant to represent the difference between ójas- ‘strength’ in pāda a, the standard nominal abstract to this root, and ojmán-, found only here in the RV, though attested in subsequent Vedic texts. Although the ref. to the chariot in vs. 26 is hardly transparent, in this vs. it has become a barely solvable riddle. In particular, “the strongness of the waters enclosed by cows” (apā́m ojmā́nam pári góbhir ā́vṛtam) could not be interpr. without 26a, c: the “strongness of the waters” is presumably the tree (vánas-páti- in 26a, 27b), or rather the wood of the tree -- so called because plants grow only when watered.

“Enclosed by cows” recalls 26c “knotted together with cows’ (hide)” (góbhiḥ sáṃnaddhaḥ), referring to the leather that binds the wooden parts.


## 28
Why the chariot is all the things it’s implicitly identified with in ab is not entirely clear: it is the mace of Indra presumably because it performs similar assaults, and the face of the Maruts presumably because its front is as glittery and fast-moving as they are. But the Mitra and Varuṇa identifications elude me.


## 31
Ge explains pāda a persuasively as “Raub und Wiederraub der Kühe,” with the ‘yonder ones’ (amū́ḥ) those belonging to the enemy and the ones here (imā́ḥ) our own.

I do not understand why cáranti is accented. Ge takes it as implicitly subordinated (“Wenn … sich sammeln”), which would account for the accent, but there’s no other evidence for subordination. It could be ascribed to the vague principle that the verb is accented in a clause that provides the basis for the next clause, as Old suggests only to question (ZDMG 60: 725 n. 1 = KlSch. p. 200).
