+++
title = "048"

+++
Agni and Maruts Renou treats this hymn in EVP XV (142-46).


## 01
I take the two pādas of the first hemistich as entirely parallel, with an instr.

āmreḍita followed by a dat. of benefit/purpose. Others (Ge, Re, Klein [āmreḍitas]) instead interpr. dákṣase as a infinitive or quasi-infinitive.

The 2nd hemistich has disharmony of number between the expressed subject, pl. vayám, and the 1st sg. verb śaṃsiṣam, a rare but not unheard-of phenomenon. Here we can link it to the āmreḍitas that dominate the vs., esp. the doubled preverb prápra, in tmesis from the finite śaṃsiṣaṃ. Perhaps this serves as a sort of individuating feature: “I after I …,” that is, “we.” This cannot be conveyed in Engl., though I admit that the publ. tr. “we — that is, I —” is itself barely English.


## 02
The first hemistich of this vs. is problematic. First, the acc. phrase ūrjó nápātam referring to Agni should be (and indeed must be) the obj. of dā́śema ‘we would ritually serve’, but this DIR.OBJ + VERB sequence is interrupted by a parenthetical nominal clause apparently referring to Agni in the nominative (sá … ayám). Further, the make-up of the complex hinā́yám is much discussed. As it happens, I devoted a brief article to just this expression (“RV sá hinā́yám (VI.48.2) with a Return Visit to nā́yám and nā́nā,” Fs. H. H. Hock, 2013). There I suggest that the proper segmentation is *hí nā́ayám, with the particle hí, which has lost its accent in the confusion, the nom. sg. nā́to nár- ‘man’, a form otherwise not found independently until the Amarakośa, extracted from the old āmreḍita nā́-nā ‘man after man’, used adverbially to mean ‘every man for himself, on his own’, plus the near deictic ayám. Alternative views are discussed in the art. cit.


## 03
The second hemistich has two alliterative etymological figures: c śocíṣā śóśucac chuce and d sudītíbhiḥ sú dīdihi. The second is esp. nice, with su- ‘good’ as the first cmpd. member echoed by sú the independent particle.


## 04
Pāda a juxtaposes two 2nd sg. forms of √yaj, the indic. pres. yájasi and the - si-impv. yákṣi, in separate clauses. This juxtaposition presumably accounts for the accent on yájasi.

In d the obj. must be vā́jā, extracted from vā́jotá. Grammatically this should be a dual, but a dual is semantically unlikely (Old “Dual vā́jā ist gewiss nicht anzunehmen”). Best to take it as a pseudo-/nonce neut. pl. For the phrase cf. (as Ge does) I.48.11 vā́jaṃ hí váṃsva; on this basis it is likely that vā́jā is obj. of both rā́sva and váṃsva, although the position of utá associates it esp. with rā́sva.


## 05
On píprati as ‘carry to term’, a specialization of ‘carry to the far shore’, see comm. ad I.156.3, also in a birth context. Most take it as belonging to ‘fill’ (Gr, Re), while Ge tr. ‘nähren’ and considers it a blend of the two roots √pṝ (n. 5ab). Rather than assigning it to ‘fill’, I prefer to think that it participates in a word play with papraú ‘has filled’ in the next vs. (6a).


## 09
Although ūtyā́could be taken with the impv., the instr. of ūtí- has a robust relationship with citrá- elsewhere (e.g. I.172.1, II.17.8, IV.23.2, VI.10.5, VI.26.5).

vidā́in the Saṃhitā text can represent either a lengthened form of the impv.

vida or a subj. vidā́ḥ (so Pp., also Gr, Lub). Both Ge and Re tr. as an impv. (as do I), which fits the imperatival tone of the hymn better than a subjunctive.; see esp.

parallel codaya in b. Although neither Gr nor Lub gives other imperatives to this stem, most of the forms analyzed as vidā́ḥ are better taken as imperatives like this one (e.g., I.36.14, 71.7, VIII.61.7).

The particle tú, which ordinarily takes standard 2nd position, is out of place here. The same sequence, tucé tú naḥ, is also found in VIII.27.14, where it is also out of place. I have no explanation.


## 10
párṣi … partṛ́bhiḥ “deliver to the further shore with deliverers” both continues the ‘ford’ motif of the last vs. and picks up the same verb in 5b, where it has more restricted semantics.

Pādas b and c contain two different forms of √yu ‘keep away’: the negated adj. áprayutvan- lit. ‘not distant / absent, not inattentive’ and the impv. yuyodhi.

Note the chiastic figure héḷāṁsi daívyā ... [á]devāni hvárāṁsi ca. The inner terms, daívyā … ádevāni, are of course etymologically related, but, though both neut.

pl. a-stems, have different endings; the outer terms, héḷāṁsi … hvárāṁsi are paired only by their initial h- and their neut. pl. s-stem ending -āṃsi. The ca is of course misplaced: we would expect *ádevāni ca hvárāṁsi. Klein (DGRV I.53) says that ádevāni hvárāṁsi “is treated as an indivisible unit, and ca is therefore displaced to third position,” but this is a description, not an explanation. I would suggest that the poet didn’t want to interrupt his pretty chiasmus. (The placement of ca also enables an iambic finish to the pāda, whereas the expected order would not, but I doubt if this is the major reason.)

## 11-13
On these three vss., see publ. intro.


## 11
On návyasā vácaḥ # see comm. ad VIII.39.2, I.26.2.


## 12
The publ. tr. renders dhúkṣata as if it were a subjunctive (“will milk out”; sim. Ge) to an s-aor., but the form must be an injunctive to a sa-aor., given the augmented forms ádhukṣata, etc., and the sec. ending -ta. Of course, the injunc.

could be used modally, but a presential “who milks out” might be better.


## 13
With Ge I take dhukṣata, identical save for the accent to dhúkṣata in 12b, as a 2nd pl. act. impv., not a 3rd sg. mid. injunc. In a n. (13a) Ge allows the possibility of the latter analysis, which would produce the paradox that a cow is milking a cow.

Re opts for this latter analysis -- the cow milking herself. Although I am always quick to see paradox in the RV, in this case I think the poet is playing with morphology instead, while bringing the final vs. of this 3-vs. sequence back to the 2nd pl. impvs. of vs. 11.

Note the direct object in balanced coordination, NOUN ca ADJ / NOUN ca ADJ, with both ca-s properly positioned (unlike 10cd above) and with each bahuvrīhi epithet having the shape viśvá-CoCasam.

## 14-19
On these Pūṣan vss., see publ. intro.


## 14
Despite the change in topic, sṛprá-bhojasam (a) responds to viśvábhojasam, which ends the previous vs. (13c).

The enclitic vaḥ in Wackernagel’s position in pāda a must wait for the verb stuṣe towards the end of d to find its syntactic niche. It refers, as usual, to the fellow priests on whose behalf the poet will praise the god. Ge’s “Diesen euren (Gott)” (sim.

Re), attempting to find a function for it within the first pāda, is unnecessary.

This vs. contains four gods to whom Pūṣan is compared and four adjectives. It is therefore not surprising that both Ge and Re distribute one adjective per god. My tr. differs: it honors the pāda boundary between c and d, which sequesters the twoadjective sequence mandráṃ sṛprábhojasam in the pāda with Aryaman, leaving Viṣṇu shorn of any epithet. This decision wasn’t made only on the basis of the pāda boundary (which would be weak evidence), but also because sṛprá-bhojas- ‘providing lush nourishment’ is an adjective more appropriate to the hospitable Aryaman than to Viṣṇu. See Thieme, Fremdling 105, 143; M+A 83. By contrast, Viṣṇu and Pūṣan are often mentioned next to each other, almost as if interchangeable (e.g. VI.17.11, VIII.54.5, with the pāda-opening pūṣā́víṣṇuḥ) and without descriptors.

The final infinitival ādíśe can be taken in a number of ways: Ge (fld. by Scar 221-22) rather whimsically as “um (ihm) einen Wink zu geben,” while Re instead gives “pour attirer-son-attention.” I do not think it can be separated from the two forms of ā́√diś (including vs.-final ādíśe as here) in the nearby Pūṣan hymn VI.56.1.

In that vs. I take the lexeme as meaning ‘designate (X as Y=epithet)’, and I think something similar is meant here: by giving Pūṣan attributes and identifying him with various gods I've uniquely identified him.


## 15
This vs. not only continues the identification of Pūṣan with other gods -- here the Maruts, characterized by three different descriptors -- but is syntactically dependent on the previous vs. and its verb stuṣe. It also contains the first mention of Pūṣan himself (pāda b), at the end of the series of identifications.

The three adjectives, tveṣám, tuviṣváṇi, and anarvā́nam, must qualify both the śárdhaḥ ‘troop’ of the Maruts, a neut. acc. s-stem, in the simile, and pūṣáṇam, a masc. acc. -n-stem, in the frame. They seem to split the difference with regard to gender: tveṣám is of course ambiguous as to gender, but tuviṣváṇi is neut. and anarvā́nam masc. The latter is adjacent to masc. pūṣáṇam and separated by the pāda boundary from the neut. phrase, so it is not surprising that it would adopt a masc.

form. Moreover, a proper neut. acc. to this stem would be *anarvá, which almost fatally obscures the 2nd member of the bahuvrīhi. The same substitution of masc. acc. anarvā́nam for expected neut. *anarvá- is found with the very same neut. acc. referent śárdho mā́rutam in I.37.1; cf. comm. there. The expected neut. NA presumably underlies the them. adj. anarvá-; see comm. ad I.185.3. Ge’s and Re’s strategy of taking anarvā́ṇam as only modifying Puṣan (e.g., Ge “den unerreichten Pūṣan, der …”) is thus both unnecessary and probably wrong, given its application (not in a simile) to the Marut troop in I.37.1.


## 16
The little nominal clause aghā́aryó árātayaḥ with its unremarkable sentiment (“evil are the hostilities of the stranger”) may have been a popular saying, as it’s found in the same form nearby in VI.59.8, an Indra-Agni hymn. It is not clear to me why Pūṣan would care or why the speaker seems to impart it as a secret.


## 17
This vs. seems to continue the poet’s direct speech to Pūṣan, and if it is meant to be a secret, it will remain so: as noted in the publ. intro. the vs. is close to unintelligible. My interpr. differs markedly from those of others (or rather, from that of others: Re and Klein [DGRV I.289] basically follow Ge; Old, however, differs from them in cd, suggesting several other alternatives, none of which he stands behind).

The first pāda is deceptively straightforward, at least syntactically. It is a prohibition against uprooting a particular kind of tree. The tree name, however, is a hapax, with un-Ārya phonology (kākambī́ra- with plain b), and why this tree should be left in the ground is unsaid. As for the word, it’s possible that it’s a partial scrambling of Pūṣan’s epithet karambhā́d- ‘gruel-eater’ (VI.56.1), but even if so, it doesn’t get us anywhere.

The next pāda shows some word-order disturbances that cause me to interpret it differently from the standard and in fact to make a small emendation to the text.

The text as transmitted reads áśastīr ví hí nī́naśaḥ, with, apparently, a preverb in tmesis in 2nd position (ví) and the particle hí in 3rd position. Both of these would be quite unusual, though it must be admitted that in this kind of informal speech we might expect deviations from normal order. The hí also suggests that the pāda offers the causal grounds for either the preceding clause or the following one. Ge and Re choose the former option, but I don’t see how pāda a follows from pāda b as rendered by them, at least given our ignorance of significance of the Kākambīra tree. To address the word-order problems I suggest that instead of ví hí we read *vihí, the 2nd sg. impv. to √vī ‘pursue’. (An asterisk should be inserted in the publ. tr. before ‘pursue’.) Although this impv. is more often vīhí with long root vowel (as in nearby VI.50.2), there are several exx. with short root vowel (e.g., III.21.5, where the short vowel is metrically favored and perhaps guaranteed). Given the obscurity of this vs., it would not be surprising if the puzzled redactors split the syllables and endowed ví with an accent as if it were a preverb. If my reading is accepted, we have either a sort of serial verb construction: “come on (and) destroy,” or simply a chronological series: “pursue and destroy.” The latter is reflected in the publ. tr. By my interpr. the redupl. aor. nī́naśaḥ is accented because it starts a new clause. Unfortunately I cannot explain why we have a redupl. aor. injunc. rather than a caus. impv. (*nāśaya) following the 1st impv.

My interpr. of the 2nd hemistich diverges from the standard even more, taking Klein’s tr. (DGRV I.289) to stand also for Ge’s and Re’s: “And may the sun not (shine) for even a day for the one who grasps the neck of the bird.” We all agree that mótá stands for mā́+ utá, with utá conjoining the two prohibitive particles in a and c.

Beyond this, anyone confronting this hemistich must deal with several textual problems: 1) the meter of c is disturbed; in fact Old calls it “hoffnungslos”; 2) it is difficult to decide what underlies the transmitted sequence áha evā́; the Pp. takes áha as áhar, but, needless to say, this sandhi would be unusual; 3) evā́with long final is almost always pāda- or clause-initial, as opposed to generally 2nd-position evá (see Lub s.vv.). In fact, in Minkowski’s detailed treatment of the two forms (JAOS 115.3 [1995]: 388-400) this particular passage is “the only one possible counterexample” (p. 391) to this rule of placement. (With Old, Minkowski floats the possibility that two syllables are missing after áha, producing an 8-syll. pāda, with evā́caná then pāda-initial in a 12-syl. one. Since it is impossible to know what those missing 2 syllables might have been and since, all things being equal, we’d prefer a Satobṛhatī vs. [see publ. intro.], which would have 12 8, not 8 12, as its 2nd half, I will deal with the text we have.) In addition to these formal problems, there are a few crucial lexical ambiguities: 1) sū́raḥ can be nom. sg. of the thematic stem sū́ra- or gen./abl.

sg. of the athem. stem svàr-; 2) as noted above, the underlying form of áha is unclear: does it belong somehow to the ‘day’ word (áhar, áhan-) or is it the asserverative particle áha? 3) véḥ, which should be read as a disyllable, can be a case forms of the ‘bird’ word (ví-), either nom. or gen./abl. sg., or a verb form to √vī ‘pursue’. The standard interpr. presented above chooses the first of each of those lexical alternatives; in all instances I choose the 2nd.

The standard tr., with ‘sun’ as subject, supplies ‘shine’ as the verb; no justification is given by anyone who so interprets it (as far as I’ve been able to find).

My interpr. attempts to find some clues in context. There are a few; whether they are false trails or not I cannot be certain. The first is the verb of pāda a, which is presented as parallel to pāda c by the mā́… móta construction. The verb is úd √vṛh ‘tear up’. Various forms of √vṛh are found in the often puzzling “wheel of the sun” myth, describing the ripping off of this wheel. Cf. I.130.9 sū́raś cakrám prá vr̥hat …; I.174.5 prá sū́raś cakrám vrhat ̥ ād abhī́ke [=IV.16.2]; V.29.10 prā́nyác cakrám avr̥haḥ sū́ryasya. In two of these three passages the gen. sg. of ‘sun’ is sū́raḥ. Although this is slender evidence, it is, at least, evidence (as opposed to the random fantasy of the standard tr.), and I therefore borrow the verb √vṛh from pāda a and supply ‘wheel’ as its obj., with a dependent gen. sū́raḥ. This is supported by a nearby passage in a Pūṣan hymn, VI.56.3 utā́dáḥ paruṣé gávi, sū́raś cakráṃ hiraṇyáyam / ny aìrayad rathī́tamaḥ “And yonder golden wheel of the Sun he set down in the ‘gray cow’ -- he the best charioteer.” (This is the same hymn that contains the form ādíśe disc. above ad vs. 14.) It is not at all clear what story that passage is telling, but we can see that Pūṣan, who is our addressee here, changes the placement of a detached “wheel of the sun,” with the sun-genitive sū́raḥ as here. The detachment might results from tearing the wheel off the chariot of the sun. This chain of reasoning accounts for my tr. of the first part of pāda c: “And certainly don't (tear off the wheel) of the sun.” I am taking áha as the particle, not a form of ‘day’ (though ‘day’ could be worked into that tr.).

Of course this interpr. does not solve the sandhi problem: we should expect áhaivā́.

But if a new clause begins with evā́, as I think it does, the unusual sandhi break would be more understandable.

Starting a new clause solves the problem of non-initial evā́noted above. But what is the content of the clause? Like the standard tr., I take ādádhate as a dat. sg.

pres. act. participle, with grīvā́ḥ ‘necks’ as object. However, I do not think this refers to the neck(s) of a/the bird. Instead, as noted above, I take véḥ as a verb form to √vī; given my emendation in pāda b to *vihí, véḥ to the same root would follow naturally (or as naturally as we’re going to get in this vs.). Given its disyllabic reading, I take it as standing for *váyas, the 2nd sg. subjunctive to the root present. I’m assuming that Pūṣan wants to give chase to (or at least follow) whoever does whatever he’s doing to the necks, and if he (Pūṣan) tears off the wheel of the sun, he won’t be able to. As for grīvā́ḥ √dhā, I conjecture that this describes one action in the harnessing of horses to the chariot. Note √dhā in VII.34.4 ā́dhūrṣú asmai dádhātā́śvān “Put the horses to the chariot poles for him,” and recall that the horse Dadhikrā is “bound at the neck” (grīvā́yām baddháḥ) in IV.40.4. But the “place necks” phrase is open to multiple possibilities, none of which imposes itself.

There are a couple of grammatical loose ends in this extremely loosely constructed interpr.: 1) dative complements are rare to √vī, 2) véḥ is accented, though there’s no obvious trigger for the accent. It may be that it borrowed the accent from my putative *vihí, or that the implied causal dependency of the evā́clause (thus my “for thus never …”) induced it. Or that the redactors had no idea what this meant (a mental confusion we share) and took it as a form of ‘bird’.

To lay out my reasoning in detail is, I realize, not necessarily to convince -- but at least there is reasoning every step of the way. I challenge other interpr. to provide the same!


## 18
Ge and Re take the comparison to be between the partnership and the leather bag (e.g., Ge “Deine … Freundschaft soll sein wie der … Schlauch”), but the partnership is in the nom. (sakhyám) and the bag is in the gen. (dṛ́teḥ), as is Pūṣan (te). Given the deep uncertainty of this part of the hymn, grammar is all we have to hold onto, and grammar tells us that it is Pūṣan who is compared to the bag. For the partnership with Pūṣan, see I.138.4fg.


## 21
Ge and Re take the rel. cl. of ab as unconnected with the rest of the vs. But surely the yásya refers to Indra, as is made clear by the ‘Vṛtra-smashing’ references in de.

The adj. vṛtrahám, twice modifying neut. śávaḥ (d, e), is attributed to a hapax thematic stem vṛtra-há- by Gr (see also Re’s comm.), beside the very well-attested root noun cmpd. vṛtra-hán-. Although this analysis must be synchronically correct, I wonder if the form here has not been re-marked from the expected neut. to the root noun, which should probably be *vṛtra-há. However, MLW suggests that the neut.

could have been simply the sten form *vṛtrahán, which could be misheard as vṛtrahám. See also disc. of satrā-hám ad V.35.4 and also of anarvám ad I.185.3. The re-marking must already have happened and the thematic stem extracted before the composition of this passage, since the -am ending makes position in the cadence.


## 22
The first half of this vs. is straightforward: both Heaven and Earth were born only once. The same “only once” (sakṛ́t) appears in pāda c as well, but with the mention of Pṛśni things get complicated, esp. when pāda d is taken into account. The hemistich reads pṛ́śnyā dugdháṃ sakṛ́t páyas, tád anyó nā́nu jāyate. Pāda c is unproblematically “only once was the milk of Pr̥śni milked.” Ge takes the milk here to be, symbolically, the Maruts; the point of the pāda is that Pṛśni “ward nur einmal Mutter.” (In this I think he is correct.) His d is “Nach dem wird kein anderer geboren” (sim. Re “(nul) autre ne naît à la suite de (tout) cela”), both with an indefinite reading of anyáḥ as ‘(no) other’; the publ. tr. also has an indefinite reading, but limited to the Maruts -- that is, the Maruts were born all at once and no other Maruts followed: “Another (of the Maruts) is not born after this.” But all of these interpr., however easily they go down, should be wrong. As I have demonstrated at length (“Vedic anyá- 'another, the other': syntactic disambiguation,” Fs. Beekes, 1997, pp. 11-18), indefinite and definite readings of anyá- are distinguished positionally: 2nd position anyá-, as here, is definite. (For a clear ex. see in the next hymn VI.49.3b with an anyá- … anyá- “the one … the other” construction.) Our pāda d should mean “the other is not born after this.” This passage needs to be considered in conjunction with VI.66.1 márteṣv anyád doháse pīpā́ya, sakṛ́c chukráṃ dudhe pṛ́śnir ū́dhaḥ, whose 2nd pāda is very close to our pāda c. VI.66.1 has an implicit anyá- … anyá- construction: the anyád in the 1st pāda refers to Pṛśni’s udder and is contrasted with the ū́dhaḥ in the 2nd pāda, which invites a reading with a second *anyád. The publ. tr. renders this “while the one stays swollen to give milk to mortals, only once did Pr̥śni milk the gleaming (milk/semen) from (the other) udder.” 66.1 is only limited help, however. Although its 2nd pāda is, as just noted, semantically and formulaically very comparable to our first, and its first pāda contains a form of anyá- as our 2nd one does, there are several important discrepancies: the anyá- in VI.66.1 is neut. and therefore pairs easily with the ū́dhaḥ of the following pāda, but our passage contains a masc. anyáḥ which cannot be directly referred to the (neut.) milked páyaḥ of the preceding passage nor to Pṛśni’s (neut.) udder, which must be lurking in the passage too. Moreover, though the sakṛ́t pādas of our vs. (abc) refer to a discrete event in the past, the verb of d, the anyápāda, is present (ánu jāyate).

I can see two ways of handling this problematic pāda, an easy one and a hard one. In the easy one I ignore my own rule about anyá- placement and take anyáḥ as indefinite, with a tr. similar to Ge/Re: “no other is born following this” / “another is not born following this.” The publ. tr. “Another (of the Maruts) is not born after this” was adapted from von Bradke (Fs. Roth 118) and was an attempt to limit the scope of indefinite ‘other’ to “other Maruts” and therefore wring a semi-definite sense out of it. But that’s a cop-out: it’s still indefinite, and the more general rendering of Ge/Re may be more satisfactory if we are going the indefinite route.

Although this is the easier alternative, I am not at all sure it’s the wrong one -- though I’m reluctant to toss out the anyá- rule without a struggle. The harder way makes reference to yet another desperate Pṛśni udder passage, this one II.34.2: rudró yád vo marutaḥ …, vṛ́ṣā́jani pṛ́śnyāḥ śukrá ū́dhani “when Rudra was begotten for you as the blazing bullish (semen = rain?) in the udder of Pr̥śni, o Maruts.” For the difficulties of this passage and my interpr. of it, see comm. ad loc. The passage refers, in my view, to the birth (or a birth) of the Maruts’ father Rudra, which “birth” then led to the birth of the Maruts. Acdg. to this passage, Rudra took shape (“was born”) as “bullish semen” in Pṛśni’s udder. As I say in my comm. ad loc., “It is this semen that combines with Pṛśni to produce the Maruts; it can also, in naturalistic terms, be the rain in the thunderclouds that are Pṛśni’s udder. This gender mingling and loss of distinction between the Maruts’ bull-father (=Rudra) and their mother Pṛśni in the udder are also found, in somewhat different fashion, in IV.3.10d vṛ́ṣā śukráṃ duduhe pṛ́ṣnir ū́dhaḥ ‘the bull as Pr̥śni milked gleaming (milk/semen) from his (/her) udder’ and in VI.66.1d sakṛ́c chukráṃ duduhe pṛ́ṣnir ū́dhaḥ ‘only once did Prś̥ ni milk the gleaming (milk/semen) from the udder.’” I now think it possible (though only that) that the masc. anyá- of our passage refers to Rudra (and/or his semen); in that case the referent is definite (as my rule requires), and the pāda means “The other [=Rudra] is not born after this,” in other words, the normal order of nature prevails: the father/semen was born in Pṛśni’s udder before the sons, the Maruts, who resulted from the mingling of those essences and who were “milked out” of that udder -- a bit of an anticlimax, to be sure: we wouldn’t in fact expect Rudra’s birth to follow his sons’. I am not sure that this is the correct way to interpret the passage, but it does conform to the known syntactic rules and also has suggestive connections with other troubling passages involving the same features: Rudra, his semen, Pṛśni, her udder, her milk, and the Maruts.
