+++
title = "049"

+++
All Gods The verb ‘quicken, enliven’ (√jinv) appears at widely scattered intervals in this hymn (6b jinvatam, 11c jínvathā, 14d jinvatu), but enough to count as a leitmotif.


## 01
Although non-formulaic groupings of gods are frequently encountered in All God hymns, the trio váruṇo mitró agníḥ is perhaps a little strange, since we expect this trio’s third member to be instead Aryaman. And indeed that sequence is quite common: there is a much-repeated dimeter pāda váruṇo mitró aryamā́(I.26.4, etc.; see repetitions listed in Lub), and the same sequence is regularly found at the end of a Jagatī pāda (I.40.5, V.46.5, VII.66.11, 12, etc.). I wonder if agníḥ is some sort of makeshift substitute for aryamā́in a Triṣṭubh cadence where aryamā́wouldn’t fit (cf. the same sequence in the acc. in the next hymn, VI.50.1, and it is found elsewhere in both nom. and acc., incl. the repeated pāda VI.51.10). After all, Agni is compatible with pretty much any Vedic god and could be slotted in when the more specialized divinity was metrically inconvenient.


## 02
The fuller expression in X.3.7 diváspr̥thivyór aratír yuvatyóḥ “the spoked wheel of Heaven and Earth, the youthful ones” makes the identity of “the two youthful ones” clear.

Ge and Re take yájadhyai as a predicated infinitive with unexpressed subject “I” (without comment), with Agni the obj.: “… Agni … will ich verehren”; “je veux lui sacrifier.” I instead supply “(I invoke)” (parallel to stuṣé ‘I will praise’ in 1a) to govern agním, who is then the subject of the inf. Although this involves supplying material, elsewhere in Agni contexts this infinitive is generally used of him, as subject, in his priestly role. Cf., e.g., III.1.1 … mā … váhniṃ cakartha vidáthe yájadhyai “you have made me your draught-horse, to offer the sacrifice at the ritual distribution.” And in this hymn see VI.49.9 hótā yakṣat … agníḥ “the Hotar Agni will sacrifice,” with Agni as agent-subject of the active verb.


## 03
My tr. of sū́ro anyā́“the other is the sun’s” follows Old, who adopted it from Ludwig. Ge (/Re) supply an instr. raśmíbhiḥ ‘with the rays’, parallel to stṛ́bhiḥ, on which sū́raḥ depends. This seems unnec. Re’s claim that the accent on pipiśé “déconseille l’interpretation de sū́raḥ donnée par Old.” does not convince: although by the Old reading pipiśé is not part of both anyā́clauses as it would be with the additional instr., it occurs at the boundary of two explicitly contrastive clauses, which would, I think, be sufficient to induce accent.

## 05
Note the tricky word positioning, with pāda-final yáḥ picking up pāda-init.

sá, in a nominal rel. cl. continued in the next pāda. It may be that in a structurally simple hymn like this the poet seeks to vary the ways he introduces the listed divinities and their attributes and to jazz up the syntax.


## 06
If my comment immed. above is correct, this vs. is a fine example of it. To begin with the surface, the first hemistich has a dual voc. (párjanyavātā) and a dual impv. (jinvatam). So far all is well. But the 2nd hemistich has a plural voc. (sátyaśrutaḥ kavayaḥ), whose referents are not identified, and a singular voc. (jágata sthātar), whose referent is not identified, flanking a rel. prn. in the gen. and an instr.

pl. (yásya gīrbhíḥ), with the rest of the vs., following the singular voc., containing an apparent main cl. verb in the 2nd pl. (ā́kṛṇudhvam [so Pp.]). The simplest thing to do is to disjoin the two half-verses, keeping the dual and plural parts separate. But that leaves us with an incomplete rel. cl. that has nothing to do. The problems are discussed at length by Old, though he does not come to a firm determination.

Both Ge and Re take the first hemistich as independent, as do Old and Scar (556). By contrast, I consider it the main cl. on which cd is dependent. Since my interpr. of ab resembles theirs almost to the end, however, we are in happy agreement so far. For the connection of Parjanya and Vāta with the púrīṣāni … ápyāni “watery outpourings,” cf. X.65.9 parjányāvā́tā vṛṣabhā́purīṣínā. The only question is whether pṛthivyā́ḥ in our passage depends on vṛṣabhā or the watery outpourings: its accent (as opposed to unaccented voc. vṛṣabhā) speaks (weakly: see Old comm.) for the latter, the pāda break for the former, and the consensus is for the former. I’m not at all sure it matters.

In my interpr. of ab as the main cl. to cd, I supply a beneficial dat. “for him,” referring to the human poet, to serve as main cl. referent for the rel. yásya in c. As just noted, the standard interpr. take ab as an independent cl., and therefore must account for the rel. prn. yásya in a different way. Before tackling that, let us first determine who the vocc. in cd refer to.

The pl. voc. phrase sátyaśrutaḥ kavayaḥ beginning pāda c: by almost universal agreement, beg. with Sāy., this refers to the Maruts, on the basis of the pāda-spanning voc. phrase sátyaśrutaḥ kávayaḥ yúvānaḥ used of the Maruts in V.57.8, the only other occurrences of satya-śrut-. (It is worth remarking here that, though in both V.57.8 and here the pāda opens with the first two vocc., in V.57.8 kávayaḥ is accented, whereas here it is not. I have no explan.) The identification with the Maruts seems reasonable, though of course nothing about the phrase uniquely identifies the Maruts. However, note that in vs. 11 below they are addressed as yuvānaḥ kavayaḥ, with two of the terms found in V.57.8.

As for jágata sthātar in d, most tr. leave the referent unidentified (e.g., Ge n.

6cd “Wer der jágataḥ sthātar sein soll, ist nicht deutlich.”). Since the agent noun sthā́tar- in the sg. is otherwise used only of Indra, he seems a likely referent, esp.

because he is also regularly associated with the Maruts. The added wrinkle is that there must be a pun here as well: the stem sthātár- (so accented) ‘the still’, always in the form sthātúḥ, is the regular formulaic partner of jágat- ‘the moving’; cf., e.g., in the next hymn, VI.50.7 víśvasya sthātúr jágataḥ. The poet’s urge to make this play on words may have contributed both to the contorted syntax and the unclarity of reference we’re trying to untangle.

The two referents of the vocative phrases, the Maruts and (if I’m right) Indra, are the joint 2nd pl. subjects of the verb in d. On this, I think, we are all agreed. But all standard interpr. follow the Pp. in taking ā̇́kṛnudhvam as an unaccented, and therefore main clause, verb. (See, explicitly, Old “… ist offenbar Imperativ und hat Hauptsatzakzent.”) Under this interpr., something else has to be done with the yásya gīrbhíḥ of c. Most people supply material like mad: Ge adds a “towards him” in his main cl. and “you take pleasure” as verb in the rel. cl.: “machet alles was lebt, (dem) geneigt, an dessen Loblied (ihr Freude habt)” -- in other words, he manufactures most of the relative cl.; Scar similar, though he gives a wide choice of ways to fill out the rel. cl., thus demonstrating exactly how untethered this interpr. is: “durch dessen Lieder{ihr das könnt/ihr so heiss/ihr gepriesen werdet} (?).” Re, by contrast, eliminates the rel. cl. by folding it into a voc.: “(toi) par les paroles de qui (les chose se réalisent)” -- though it still requires extensive material to fill it out, again based on nothing.

My solution is to take ā́kṛṇudhvam as the verb of the rel. cl.: the Saṃhitā text of course reads ā́kṛṇudhvam; it is only the Pp. that inserts a notional word space after ā́. If we instead interpr. the sequence as an augmented imperfect, with accent on the augment, that is, ā + ákṛṇudhvam (which does not require emendation), we do not have to fill out the rel. cl., because it already has an accented verb and that verb has an object: “you made the moving world your own.” This expression, ā́√kṛ (middle)

+ INSTR. has close parallels, one containing gīrbhíḥ as here: cf. I.77.2 tám ū námobhir ā́krṇ̥ udhvam / X.6.5 agníṃ gīrbhír námobhir ā́krṇ̥ udhvam. In both those passages I tr. “attract here with reverence (and hymns).” The difference in interpr. may be ascribed to the fact that in our passage here, the gods are subj. and the hymns come from the human poet, whereas in the two passages just cited mortals are also the subj.

However, I may want to rethink both of those passages, to “make him [/Agni] your own.” Since in both passages Agni is the object, he does not have to be attracted here, since as the ritual fire he already is here.

Thus, by my interpr. all of cd is a rel. cl., dependent on a “for him” or the like to be supplied in the main cl. of ab. Note that both Ge. (“dem”) and Scar. (“für ihn”) must supply the same beneficial dative, but they do so with the supposed main cl.

verb ā́kṛṇudhvam in d. Although my interpr. produces an awk English tr., it accounts for the Sanskrit considerably better than the alternatives. What it means for the gods to “make the moving world their own” I’m not sure -- but perhaps the usual RVic notion that human praises strengthen the gods for their heroic deeds and, perhaps in this case, that these praises bring the gods and their human worshipers (part of the “moving world”) into a closer relationship.


## 07
After the syntactic pyrotechnics of the previous vs., this one comes as a relief. Because of the subjunctive yaṃsat ending the vs., I assume a modal value also for dhāt ending the first hemistich, as do Ge and Re.

## 08
With most (Gr, Ge, Re), the publ. tr. takes the hapax páripati- as ultimately derived from √pā ‘protect’, not páti- ‘lord’. However, this analysis has grave formal problems not solved by Re’s cavalier “hapax tiré de pā- … mais influencé, pour la forme, par páti”: it would be quite difficult to get a short-vowel root syllable pafrom √pā by any normal derivational process. I now think that it is a cmpd. of -páti-, even though Wackernagel’s ‘ringsum Herr’ (AiG II.1.260) reflecting this analysis is not terribly satisfactory. My change of heart was occasioned by considering the first verse in the first hymn of the Pūṣan cycle that begins soon after this hymn, VI.53.1, whose first pāda ends pathas pate “o lord of the path.” I would now tr. our passage, “the complete lord of every path.” It might be worth noting that VI.53.1 also enlists Pūṣan’s help with our dhī́- ‘visionary thought’, as here.

Most take vacasyā́as instr. sg. to the -ā́stem vacasyā́- ‘eloquence’, requiring a verb to be supplied (e.g., Ge “(preise ich)”). I instead interpr. it as 1st sg. act. to the denom. vacasya- (not otherwise found accented). There are two problems with my analysis: 1) the other two forms of the verb vacasya- are medial; 2) vacasyā́is accented, though supposedly a main-cl. verb. The first is not too difficult: verbs of proclaiming/praising can be labile with regard to voice. The second is more problematic and might require me to follow the standard view, tr. “(I praise, vel sim.) with my eloquence.” But see disc. of vardháyā in 10b, where I suggest that our vacasyā́here is indeed a verb and has borrowed its verbal accent from vardháyā.

The phrase kā́mena kṛtáḥ is used of Pūṣan also in nearby VI.58.3-4.


## 10
The form vardháyā can be either 2nd sg. impv. (Gr, Ge) or 1st sg.

subjunctive (Re). I opt for the latter, partly because there seem to be no other unambiguous impvs. addressed to priests/mortals in this hymn; the priestly/poetic function is represented by 1st sg. (e.g., stuṣé 1a) and 1st pl. (e.g., huvema pāda d this vs.) verbs. It is also accented despite pāda-medial position, presumably because it lies in the center of a balanced construction: rudráṃ dívā … rudrám aktaú “Rudra by day … Rudra by night.” Given this accented, non-initial, 1st sg. subj., I wonder if vacasyā́in 8a is in fact also a verb (as in my first analysis, represented in the publ.

tr.) and has borrowed its accent from vardháyā.

Despite Ge’ and Re’s comments, considering ‘separately’ (‘allein’, ‘à part’) for ṛ́dhak only to reject it, this must be the correct tr. In his n. 10d Ge cites II.33.4, where we hope not to anger Rudra by invoking him with an invocation shared with another god or gods. See comm. ad loc. The fact that Rudra’s sons are addressed in the next vs. (11), as well as namelessly in 6cd (see above), might make the need for a separate invocation of Rudra all the more acute.


## 11
The interpr. of varasyā́- as somehow a deriv. of vára- ‘wish’, found, e.g., in Gr, Ge, and AiG II.2.244, is contextually understandable: Ge’s “Kommet … zum Bittgesuch des Sängers” makes more immediate sense than my “come hither in response to the singer's longing for space,” with “in response to” smuggled in to make the sentence somewhat more parsable. But there is no váras- to √vṝ ‘wish, choose’, whereas váras- means ‘wide space’, something that RVic poets often express a desire for. Re hesitates (his word), but opts for ‘desire for space’ and adduces the quite apposite I.181.9 varivasyā́gṛṇānáḥ “singing (to you) with a desire for space,” comparable to our gṛṇató varasyā́.

The causal relationship between c and ab, suggested by hí (c), is not straightforward. But in its only other occurrence (IV.51.3), acitrá- refers to a place, one without brightness, therefore by implication sterile and lifeless. Thus the desire for (positive) space expressed in b is contrasted with (negative) space that the Maruts can, nonetheless, bring to life.

I don’t understand the point of d.


## 12
This vs. contains two exx. of case disharmony between simile and frame, one each in ab and cd.

Though Gr takes ájā as a 2nd sg. impv., both Ge and Re interpr. it as a 1st sg.

subjunctive, as do I. This would bring the count to three in this hymn, by my interpr.

(8a, 10b, 12b).

This verb takes a straightforward acc. obj. yūthā́‘herds’ in the simile, as well as an adverbial acc. goal ástam ‘home’. But in the frame it lacks an overt obj.: I supply ‘praise’, Ge ‘Lied’, Re ‘mon hymne’. And the goal is the personal dative of the divinity (vīrā́ya, etc.).

The mismatch between simile and frame is greater in cd, and once again the simile is the more straighforwardly expressed. The poet exploits the syntactic ambiguity of intrans./trans. -áya- formations, in the form here of the redupl. aor.

pispṛsati √spṛś ‘touch’, meaning both ‘make X [acc.] touch Y [acc./loc.]’ and, notionally passive, ‘make Y [acc.] touched by X [instr.]’. The simile uses the latter construction: “cause the firmament (acc. nā́kam = Y) to be touched by stars (instr.

stṛ́bhiḥ =X). In the frame the X is the “inspired words” (vípaḥ, acc. pl.) and the Y is the body (tanvì, in the loc., an alternative case to the acc. in this construction). Both words and body are limited by genitives, referring to the poet (vacanásya ‘of the speaker’) and the god (śrutásya ‘of the famed one’). For further disc. of the passage and of the phenomenon in general see my “Case Disharmony.” Our poet further muddies the waters by reversing the more common relationship between forms of √vip and √vac. The stem vacaná- ‘speaking, speaker’, referring to a person, is attested only 3x in the RV, whereas vácas- ‘speech’ is ubiquitous; the root noun víp- ‘inspired (word[s])’ is not uncommon, but is far outnumbered by the stem vípra- ‘inspired poet’. So we might have expected the phrase *víprasya vácaḥ “the speech of the inspired poet” (cf., though not with a gen., VIII.61.9 vípraḥ … vácaḥ), not vacanásya vípaḥ “the inspired words of the speaker.”


## 13
Another syntactic trick, though far less complex than in the last vs. The first half-vs., describing Viṣṇu’s cosmogonic deed, is couched in the 3rd ps., with the pf. vimamé ‘he measured out’, but in the 2nd half, expressing our present-day desire to live under Viṣṇu’s protection, the god is in the more intimate 2nd ps., in the phrase tásya te, lit. “of this you,” where tásya provides the syntactic pivot to 2nd sg. enclitic te. On such doublings see my “sa figé.” For “hard-pressed Manu” (mánave bādhitā́ya), see the same phrase in VII.91.1, where, as here, a god (or gods) perform(s) a cosmogonic deed that allows the sacrifice to be instituted.


## 15
The publ. tr. should read “the herdsman of great truth,” since gopā́m modifies rayím.

With Old I read cakrámāma, a pf. subj., not ca krámāma, pace Klein (DGRV I.188, 190). This reading is accepted by Kü (147 and n. 146).

I take kṣáyam … yéna … abhí cakrámāma as an explicit “X and (which) Y” construction on grounds of content: I do not think our “peaceful dwelling” (kṣáyam) is the means by which we will trample and destroy our enemies. Instead I think we have the usual RVic implicit contrast between war and peace (yoga-kṣemá- in one rendition), with ‘peace’ expressed by a noun and war by an elaborate rel. cl.
