+++
title = "050"

+++
All Gods


## 01
The hymn begins with the 1st ps. mid. huvé ‘I invoke/call upon’, like the last hymn, which began (VI.49.1) stuṣé ‘I will praise’.

On the ill-assorted trio Varuṇa, Mitra, Agni, see comm. ad VI.49.1. Here the phrase is in the acc., but likewise in a Triṣṭubh cadence. The expected Aryaman is added in the next pāda.


## 02
It’s not clear to me which gods Sūrya is supposed to pursue. The last descriptor, agnijihvā́ḥ ‘having Agni as tongue’ suggests it is, in fact, all the gods, since they all receive the oblation through him.

Note the juxtaposition of ṛtá- and satyá-; a similar of more elaborate ex. is found in the next hymn, VI.51.10 rtádh ̥ ītayo vakmarā́jasatyāḥ.


## 03
There is a surprising lack of agreement about the construction of this vs. Both Ge and Re take ab as a separate clause, which requires them to supply a verb for it (“ihr … besitzet”; “qui avez”). In cd they also both construe maháḥ in the yathā́ cl., but this is impossible, since it precedes the main verb karathaḥ. (I take maháḥ adverbially, as often and in 6d below [by my account].) See Old for a rather fussy disc. of various possibilities in cd. I do not see the problem with my interpr., which has karathaḥ in c govern the accusatives in ab, with a yáthā purpose cl. taking up most of cd (starting with várivaḥ right before the subord. conj.) This cl. lacks an overt verb, but an existential subjunctive ásat ‘there will be’ is easy to supply. (All interpr. must do something like this, unless they emend to accented *kárathaḥ.) Ge (n. 3cd) worries about the tautology of … no, asmé …, which he avoids by construing naḥ with maháḥ … várivaḥ and asmé with the NP of d (“Machet, dass uns grosse Freibahn werde (und) unserem Wohnsitz Befreiung von allem Übel”)(sim.

Re), but I find the pronominal doubling far less troublesome than extracting a piece of the subord. clause and fronting it around the main verb, as the Ge/Re interpr.

requires.


## 05
Both Ge and Re take b as an indep. cl., while I interpr. it as a dependent clause parallel to pāda a, likewise hanging off yéṣu. Either is grammatically possible, since the verb of b síṣakti is pāda-initial and could owe its accent to that position.

And in fact there’s little actual difference in content between the two interpr., because both Ge and Re sneak the Maruts into the pāda anyway.

The more crucial question in b is the meaning of the hapax abhyardhayájvan-.

Most take it as expressing a hostile, oppositional, or at least separated relationship, e.g., Ge “Gegenverehrer,” AiG II.1.67 “gesondert opfern,” Re “(dieu) recevant un sacrifice distinct.” Certainly by the time of the BYV Saṃhitās, abhyardhá- (or -ás; see below) is used to mean ‘apart from, separated from’; cf., e.g., MS II.5.4 (52: 14) … yó rājanyò ‘bhyardhó viśáś carati “a Rājanya who goes about apart from his clan” (/ Amano “… der Rājanya, der von seinem Volk abseits wandeln”). (For Amano’s interpr. of the form as an adv. in -aḥ and her detailed discussion of its use in this textual stratum, see her n. 2500 [that number is not a typo!].) However, in the RV árdha- (and ardhá-) refers rather to a ‘half’ or a ‘side’. In X.26.5, a passage adduced by Ge, Pūṣan is described as prátyardhir yajñā́nām, which even Ge tr. as “der bei den Opfern (mit den Göttern) halbpart macht” and Sāy. glosses ardhabhak ‘half-sharer’.

The point, I think, is that Pūṣan is almost always in partnership with other gods, indeed often in dvandvas like índrā-pūṣán- (cf. nearby VI.57.1), somā-pūṣán-, and the only sacrifices he is likely to receive will be shared with (an)other more prominent god or gods. In a way, this characterization of Pūṣan is the exact opposite of Rudra in the previous hymn (VI.49.10), where it is emphasized that Rudra receives a separate invocation, apart from the other gods. For Pūṣan’s relationship to the Maruts, see nearby VI.48, where the Pūṣan vss. (14-19) are sandwiched between Marut vss. (11-13, 20-21) and Pūṣan is compared to the Marut troop (VI.48.15).

Compared to later texts, the gerund is comparatively rare in the RV; the -tvā gerund is found only 21x. The configuration of pāda c shows that the gerund phrase (śrutvā́hávam marutaḥ) must constitute a separate syntactic unit here, since the subord. conj. yád occurs only after the whole phrase, and it is followed by 2ndposition part. (d)ha.


## 06
The publ. tr. omits the íd. I might emend it to “Just he will hear the call.” In cd I take ca as “inverse” ca (X ca … Y, rather than normal X … Y ca) connecting the two very similar participial phrases … úpa ca stávānaḥ, … úpa mahó gṛṇānáḥ# “being praised and being hymned.” Klein (DGRV I.122-23, 125, 173) by contrast takes it as conjoining the verbs of the two clauses, śrávat and rā́sat in the configuration #śrávat … úpa ca stávāno, rā́sat …), but placed after the preverb of the verbal lexeme in the 2nd clause (that is, by his interpr. úpa ... rā́sat). Since úpa never appears otherwise with √rā but is quite common with √stu, this interpr. seems unlikely. As noted above (ad 3c), I take maháḥ as the adverbially used -s-stem, against the standard view that it is a masc. acc. pl. (to the stem máh-) modifying vā́jān. The standard view is not impossible, but given the paired úpa … PART construction, word order favors taking maháḥ as part of the 2nd participle phrase.

## 08-10
These three vss. contain a series of perfect optatives, jagamyāt (8b), vavṛtyāt (9b), jagmyātam (10a), but they do not show any peculiarities of register or usage. The connection among the vss. is also signaled by utá, which opens the second two. Klein (DGRV I.424) notes the co-occurrence of the “optative series” (he does not mention that they are belong to the pf.) and the utá’s.


## 08
With Ge and Re, I take the simile uṣáso ná prátīkam as a nominative phrase, matching the subject Savitar. Since the dakṣiṇās are distributed at dawn and Dawn is therefore associated with munificence, her face (= her light) can be characterized as a discloser of valuables. However, it would also be grammatically possible to take it as acc., with Savitar disclosing valuables as if disclosing the face of Dawn, though I think this less likely.


## 09
“within (the sphere of)” is an attempt to render the loc. rātaú, since “Might I always be in your giving” is hard to parse. Klein’s (DGRV I.422) “Might I be ever (present) at thy giving” is more elegant. I might emend the publ. tr. to “Might I always be (there) at your giving.”


## 10
This vs. poses several syntactic problems. In ab the position of aṅgá speaks against taking the full hemistich as a single cl. (so, more or less, Klein DGRV I.422).

Since aṅgá otherwise invariably takes 2nd position, it should not be found this deep in the clause; moreover the immediately preceding personal prn. yuvám, also encourages an interpr. as a new cl. Both Ge and Re do divide the sequence into two clauses, but both include dhībhíḥ in the 2nd clause -- which essentially defeats the purpose of the clause division, since aṅgá is still in the wrong position, just not as wrong as if the whole thing were one clause. Their solution is understandable because it could allow them to avoid taking viprā as a predicated vocative. So Re “car vous êtes (donneurs) de pensées-poétiques, ô inspirés!” with viprā as real voc. Ge’s interpr. seems to combine the worst of both worlds — including dhībhíḥ in the 2nd cl. despite the position of aṅgá and taking viprā as a predicated voc. (see his n.

10b): “gerade ihr seid redebegabt mit (guten) Gedanken.” My interpr. limits the 2nd cl. to yuvám aṅgá viprā, which imposes a predicated voc. but honors the position of the particle.

The second hemistich is even more problematic. The standard tr. interpret the sequence as a clausal simile / frame construction, with different verbs in the simile and the frame, (a)mumuktam (simile) … tū́rvatam (frame), and ná marking the first clause as a simile. Cf., e.g., Klein (DGRV I.422-23) “As ye freed Atri from great darkness, (so) cause (us) to pass out of difficulty …” (my emphasis). But such constructions do not exist in the RV among the hundreds and hundreds of examples of similes in that text: similes are only nominal, and if a verb is implicitly part of it, it is held constant between simile and frame. See my detailed disc. in “Case Disharmony.” The only possible examples that approach such a clausal construction are those providing a model and the action to be based upon it, but the very few such exx. we have involve yáthā … evā́“just as …, even so …” — as in a childbirth spell: V.78.7 (cf. also 8) yáthā vā́taḥ puṣkaríṇīṃ, samiṅgáyati sarvátaḥ / evā́te gárbha ejatu “As the wind sways a lotus-pond in every direction, so let your unborn child stir.” These conditions are not met here, and I think it a methodologically dangerous practice to posit an entirely unprecedented construction on the basis of a single ambiguous passage.

The way to a solution begins with the first verb, which is realized as amumuktam in the Pp. The only evidence for the augment is the avagraha in the printed Saṃhitā text(s): ’mumuktam; the sandhi conditions do not require the augment. In fact Gr lists the form as unaugmented, and Old gets it right (in my view) the first time: “wie den Atri von der grossen Finsternis, (so) löset (mich ...).” But he then, unfortunately, has second thoughts, and although he recognizes that “ná nicht Satzvergleichungspartikel ist,” he decides that ná can sometimes overstep its boundaries and function like a clausal simile marker (not his term). The single ex. he cites (VII.58.3), however, does not show what he claims it shows, at least in my opinion, and it is also not like our passage, in that even by his interpr. the two clauses would have the same verb (in diff. mood and voice: ví tirāti, … prá … tireta).

Whether Ge, Re, and/or Klein were influenced by Old’s arguments or not, they all follow the clausal interpr., which I hope I have shown is unacceptable.

My own interpr. is identical to Old’s first pass, with impv. mumuktam and a supplied ‘me’ as obj., parallel to átrim in the simile. As for the second verb, I follow Gotō (1st Kl., 163 n. 258) in taking tū́rvataṃ narā as a parenthetical clause. This allows the abl. phrase at the end of d, duritā́d abhī́ke “from difficulty at close quarters,” to be construed with mumuktam, parallel to the abl. mahás támasaḥ “from great darkness” in the simile. However, if the parenthetical interpr. seems too awkward, it might be possible to take d as a single, separate cl.: “be victorious from difficulty at close quarters,” though tūrv seems not to take an abl. elsewhere.


## 11
The only problems in this vs. are found in pāda d: the accented verb mṛḷátā and the immediately following ca: the verb because there is no obvious reason for its accent, the ca because it’s not clear what it conjoins. To begin with the second, Klein (DGRV I.82), flg. Ge, takes ca as conjoining the impv. mṛḷátā with the pres. part.

daśasyántaḥ beginning c, assuming an implicit imperatival expression daśasyántaḥ

*sta “seid gefällig und erbarmet euch” / “(be) favoring and have mercy.” Re, by
contrast, seems to assume that the ca conjoins the last in the series of nom. pl., divyā́ḥ pā́rthivaso, gójātā ápyāḥ, judging by his “… et (vous enfin) nés des eaux,” though this would require an unprecedented displacement of ca to the right, with the verb inserted between the last nominal term and the ca. Between these two ad hoc solutions, the first seems distinctly better than the 2nd. To register it, I should perhaps emend the tr. to “(Be ones) showing favor … and be merciful,” despite the clunkiness.

The verbal accent is -- or may be -- less of a problem. If we do assume that the daśasyántaḥ stands for an imperatival clause, then mṛḷátā would begin a new clause. Although neither Ge nor Klein mentions the accent on the verb, it would be an argument in favor of their analysis. However, if we take the participle simply as the participle it appears to be, then it modifies the implicit subject of mṛḷátā and the verb should not be accented. There could be another way to get the accent in that case, though it seems artificial (or rather, even more artificial than the other suggestion). The sequence of four nom. pl. noted above is divided across two pādas, as shown by the comma in the quoted sequence. Only the first two have to be nominatives rather than vocatives: divyā́ḥ because of its non-initial accent, pā́rthivāsaḥ because it is accented in the middle of a pāda. The following two, the first two words of d, could be vocatives, accented because they are initial in the pāda.

They would then match the undoubted voc. devāḥ at the end of the same pāda. If gójātā ápyāḥ are vocatives, then the immediately following word mṛḷátā would need to be accented after these extra-sentential elements. However, this analysis requires the unappealing step of assuming an unsignaled change of case from nominative to vocative in the middle of an apparently unitary sequence.

After all this syntactic fuss, we may overlook the interesting question, who are the “cow-born” gods (who appear elsewhere, in similar sequence [VII.52.14, cf. also X.53.5]). Quite possibly the Maruts, an offhand suggestion of Re’s. Remember their cow-mother Pṛśni.


## 13
On the phrase tváṣṭā devébhir jánibhiḥ, which, with Re, I consider to be the equivalent of “with the wives of the gods, with the divine wives,” see comm. ad II.36.5.


## 15
On the phrase máma tásya as a probable play on the PN Mamatā̆, see comm. ad VI.10.2.

The phrase vásavo ádhṛṣṭāḥ returns from 4b, where it refers to the Maruts (unless, with Ge and Re we take vásavaḥ there, and here, as referring to a separate group, the Vasus). There it was immediately preceded by hūtā́saḥ ‘invoked’, here by hutā́saḥ ‘offered to’, an understated but clever variation. In this context, the final totalizing vs. of the hymn, the “unassailable good ones” should probably refer to all the gods, in a gender-inclusive pairing with the gnā́ḥ ‘(divine) ladies’ -- an unusual bow to the female side.
