+++
title = "051"

+++
All Gods For the structure of this hymn (or, rather, composite of two hymns), see publ.

intro.

## 01
The full realization of the dual dvandva mitrā́-váruṇā- as two independent dual genitives separated by a pāda-break and several words -- mitráyoḥ … váruṇayoḥ

-- is a fine demonstration of the reality of this type of cmpd. in the Sprachgefühl.

I do not understand the pāda-final ā́(m̐). Generally in this position ā́follows an abl., reinforcing the meaning “von … her” (see Gr. col. 169), or a loc. But mitráyoḥ is of course not an abl., and, though it could grammatically be a loc., by sense it can only be a gen. It seems pleonastic -- perhaps added to allow a Triṣṭubh cadence.


## 02
vidátha- is here not ‘ceremony of division, rite’, but rather ‘division’ itself, referring to the divisions of the gods. Ge aptly adduces VI.52.15 in the next hymn, where the gods are born in 3 different localities.

Old strenuously objects to taking sanutár ā́ca as a conjoined phrase of directional elements (flg. BR), and Re agrees with him. I do not see the problem; ā́is of course generally a preverb and less commonly an adposition, but in these usages it is clearly directional/locational, and conjoining it with another such element seems well within RVic syntactic bounds, even if the other word is more clearly adverbial.

Moreover, neither Old nor Re gives any indication of what to do with ca if it’s not conjoining the two. I therefore follow Ge (flg. BR) and Klein (DGRV I.63). (The case of Re is a bit complex: he expresses his objections to the BR view in the notes to the Viśvedevāḥ hymns in EVP IV, but in the tr. of those same hymns in EVP V he tr.

as a conjoined phrase “au loin et au près.” Either he forgot or he changed his mind.)


## 03
The opening of this vs., stuṣé, is identical to the beginning of VI.49 and very similar to the beginning of VI.50 (huvé), both of which vss. (VI.49.1, VI.50.1) contain the divine list discussed in the next paragraph.

We have already had occasion to note (comm. ad VI.49.1, 50.1) the unexpected trio Varuṇa, Mitra, Agni, in which Agni substitutes for expected Aryaman. Here we have a different third member: Aditi, Mitra, Varuṇa (áditim mitráṃ váruṇam), opening rather than closing the pāda. Of course, as their mother, Aditi has a closer connection to Mitra and Varuṇa than Agni does, but in fact she is rarely found in their immediate company: only in the voc. phrase II.27.14 ádite mítra váruṇotá also pāda-init. and in a larger list of gods in V.46.3. In our passage the missing Aryaman is added at the beginning of the next pāda (3c), just as he was added in the pāda (c) immediately following the list in VI.50.1b. Note that in VI.50.1 áditim precedes the trio in the first pāda of the vs. (VI.50.1a).

In pāda a I take maháḥ as an acc. pl., contra the standard tr. (Ge, Re, Scar 291) “herdmen of great truth.” Either is of course grammatically and semantically possible, but I was influenced by the undoubted acc. pl. maháḥ also referring to the gods in the next vs. (4b) as well as 9d.

The vaḥ in pāda a is ambig. With the standard tr. (Ge, Re, Scar 291), I take it as referring to the gods in the 2nd ps. On the other hand, references to the gods have so far been in the 3rd ps. and will remain so in the next vs.; 2nd ps. address only appears in vs. 5. So it would be equally possible to take vaḥ as an instance of the common practice of a poet addressing his priestly comrades, “I will praise, for you/on your behalf, the great herdsmen of truth …” Nothing much hangs on the difference, nor is there any way to determine which is correct.

Note that ádabdha-dhītīn ‘having undeceivable inspired thoughts’ at the end of c echoes áditim beginning b, despite the differences in lexicon and even segmentation. It also is responsive with ṛtá-dhītayaḥ ‘having truth as inspired thoughts’ in 10d, and the two form part of the ring around the omphalos vss. 6-7.

While ádabdha- is taken up by ádabdhān in 4a.

For sadhanyàḥ I now favor the scenario sketched by Scar (291) as an alternative to the analysis as belonging to a root noun cmpd. sadha-nī́-. See comm. ad IV.1.9. As noted there, Scar begins with a sa-dhána- ‘common wealth’ to which a

*sadhaní- ‘sharer in common wealth’ à ‘companion’ could be formed. He then
suggests that because of a perceived connection with √nī, the stem was reinterpreted and reformed as sadhanī́-. Although this requires more machinery than simply taking it as a root noun cmpd. to √nī in the first place, the semantics of that supposed cmpd.

are somewhat troublesome; moreover the stem sadhanitvá- can be more easily derived by this route. MLW alternatively suggests that the stem is a vṛkī deriv. to sadhána-. This would account for the morphology more easily that what was just sketched; however, it would have to be masc. vṛkī form. Not impossible of course (cf. rathī́-), but one more required assumption.


## 04
I follow Ge (as well as Th Fremdling, Oberlies I.344, etc.) in rendering suvasaná- as ‘good dwelling’, against some potentially good arguments to the contrary. The stem is attested only once elsewhere, IX.97.50 in the phrase vástrā suvasanā́ni, where it clearly refers to good garments (√vas ‘wear, clothe’), and the base of our cmpd, vásana- (a hapax), likewise only means clothing. Citing these words, as well as vastra-dā́- ‘giving garments’ (V.42.8; like our phrase suvasanásya dātṝ́n), Re holds firm to “donateurs de bonne vêture” (so also Gr). But sátpatīn ‘lords of settlements’ in the preceding pāda supports a ‘dwelling’ interpr., and it would be easy to form such a deriv. to the well-attested root √vas ‘dwell’. (Note that the derivatives that would support the ‘clothing’ sense are found in that sense only once apiece, so do not seem well established enough to block such a formation.) Ge construes diváḥ with nṝ́n and take kṣáyataḥ absolutely: “die mächtigen Herrn des Himmels.” As in vs. 2, Re seems to have changed his mind (a phenomenon I know well; witness this comm.) between the comm. fascicle (EVP IV) and the tr.

fascicle (EVP V): in the former he comments of kṣáyataḥ “emploi absolu,” but in the latter tr. “seigneurs résidants du ciel,” with diváḥ dependent on the participle. He evidently assigns the participle to ‘dwell’, though the participle of the root pres. to that root is only kṣiyánt-, while kṣáyant- belongs to kṣáya- ‘rule over’. (Curiously he correctly interpr. the finite kṣáyatha in 7c as “vous régnez.”) Ge (etc.) must base their interpr. on the existence of the phrase divó náraḥ / nṝ́n, but though this collocation is attested elsewhere (e.g., V.54.10, VI.2.3, VI.2.11=14.6), it is not a particularly common expression, and √kṣi ‘rule over’ regularly takes a genitive, incl. in 7c víśvasya hí kṣáyatha “for you rule over all,” a phrase Re in fact cites in his comm. ### 05
This vs. consists primarily of a string of vocatives, plus a couple of 2nd pl.

impvs., so in one way it is quite straightforward. However, the accentual behavior of the vs., and particularly the vocc., is peculiar. The first pāda consists only of vocatives: two double names (Father Heaven, Mother Earth) and a single adjective (by word order belonging to the latter, but it is a root noun cmpd and its voc. is indifferent to gender). Each word in the pāda is accented (with voc. accent): dyaùṣ pítaḥ pṛ́thivi mā́tar ádhruk. The first three words of the next pāda are likewise vocatives: a name plus epithet and a different (pl.) name. Only the first of these is accented: ágne bhrātar vasavaḥ. The next word is an impv. mṛḷátā, and it is accented after the extrasentential voc. phrase (cf. comm. ad VI.50.11, where this was floated as a possibility to explain an unusually accented verb [the same verb in fact], though rejected). The third pāda also begins with three vocatives, one a two-word phrase, one an individual name, with only the first accented: víśva ādityā adite. I am completely puzzled as to why the first pāda differs from the next two. Old is also puzzled: “Behandlung der Vokativakzente befremdet, aber wir haben kein Recht zu rühren.” The content of the vs. is otherwise banal. As Re points out, víśva ādityāḥ is a stand-in for víśve devāḥ.


## 06
Pāda d must remain in the domain of hí in c, as shown by the accent on babhūvá, as is recognized by the standard tr.

The repetition of yūyám at the beginning of d is, I think, due not only to rhetoric but to the desire to make the ps./no. of babhūvá perfectly clear. The 2nd pl.

act. pf. is surely the least well attested form of the act. perfect system (save for 1st du.), and it also has a highly under-characterized ending (-a), which has the misfortune to be identical to the ending of the best attested form in the pf. system, the 3rd sg., as well as the less well attested 1st sg. (For the relative strengths of attestation, a glance at Macdonell’s Vedic Grammar §485 will suffice.) In most pf. paradigms it would be distinguished from those forms by ablaut grade (e.g., 1st sg. cakára, 3rd sg.

cakā́ra, 2nd pl. cakrá), but here, because the pf. of √bhū doesn't ablaut, only the accent separates it from 3rd (and 1st) sg. babhū́va. This may be another reason that it was kept syntactically in the realm of hí, to require it to have an accent. It’s worth noting that this is the only 2nd pl. pf. to √bhū in the RV.

dákṣa- is ordinarily a noun, ‘skill’, but in the publ. tr. I was persuaded by the standard tr. to render it as an adj. ‘skillful’ with vácas-. This phrase also occurs in VIII.86.1 and, with a different derivative of √vac, in X.113.9 dákṣebhir vacanébhiḥ.

In the latter I tr. as an adj. “with skillful words,” but in the former as two independent nouns “of skill and of speech.” I am uncertain which is correct. Re is quite stern: “dákṣa- est nécessairement adjectif ici et en plusieurs passages …: inutile de chercher à éviter ici l’emploi, avec Gr., emploi qui est le seul subsistant en skt cl.” The Classical Skt. usage is suggestive, but I am wary of the absolutist language of “nécessairement” and “inutile”: very few things in RVic interpr. are absolutely necessary. I would therefore allow an alt. tr. here: “you have become (the charioteers) of (our) skill and speech.” That vs. 9 contains a cmpd. containing the noun, pūtá-dakṣa- ‘of refined skill’, though modifying the gods, might support a ‘skill’ interpr. here, esp. as the ‘charioteer’ motif is found there as well.


## 07
On apparently anomalous mā́… bhujema see comm. ad IV.3.13.

Re points out the rarity of the cmpd. viśvádeva- in the pl. referring to the All Gods (though to his X.125.1 should be added VII.35.11). At least in our passage the full voc. viśve devāḥ would produce a bad cadence.


## 08
In this deliberately repetitive vs. (6 occurrences of námas-), it is difficult to render the repeated verbs ā́vivase (a, d) in the same way. As the desid. to √van, vivāsa-, esp. with ā́, means lit. ‘seek to win here’, hence ‘attract’, which is fine in pāda a. But with the object “committed offense” (kṛtám énaḥ) the sense is harder to manipulate. I take it as ‘win back’, hence ‘redeem’; Ge ‘abbitten’ (beg pardon, apologize), with no attempt to connect this tr. to the literal meaning or to the other occurrence of the verb in the passage; Re makes good use of his usual parentheses: “je l’attire (pour le détruire),” which evades the problem.


## 09
This vs. recalls the námas- vs. (8), with its two occurrences of ā́vivase, one of which is construed with instr. námasā. Here we have the verb form ā́name, which imitates ā́vivase in preverb and med. 1st sg. form, but with the verbal root from which námas- is derived, √nam ‘bow, bend’. It also is construed with an instr. of the s-stem, námobhiḥ.


## 10
Judging from the repeated té and the u that follows the 2nd one (strikingly in the middle of a pāda), we should be dealing with two parallel clauses, one nominal, one verbal. The accent on náyanti shows that the 2nd clause is in the domain of the hí in pāda a. Ge renders as two clauses, but does not seem to keep the 2nd in the hí domain; Re ignores the té u and tr. as a single clause. There does not appear to be a main clause in the vs., unless we want to construe cd as a nominal main cl. (“they are of good rule …”).

sukṣatrá- reprises the same word in 4c, and as noted ad vs. 3, ṛtá-dhītimatches ádabdha-dhīti in 3c. The two are part of the supportive ring around the omphalos vss. 6-7.

Once again we meet the trio Varuṇa, Mitra, Agni (see comm. on vs. 3, and previous vss. noted there), but Aryaman is nowhere in the vicinity and Aditi only in a rather random list in the next vs. (11).

Consonant with the focus on truth in this hymn, pāda d is framed by the words ṛtá- and satyá-, the former as first member of a cmpd, the latter as last member. As was just noted, ṛtá-dhīti- is a well-formed bahuvrīhi with a parallel already in the hymn. But vakma-rā́ja-satya- is distinctly peculiar. For one thing, it has three members, which is unusual for the RV. But more striking is the final member satya-, whose relation to the prior (complex) member vakma-rā́ja(n)- is unclear. (Curiously, AiG doesn’t touch this cmpd.) Its only possible parallel is the even stranger ṛtá-jāta- satya-, with both ṛtá- and satyá-, in IV.51.7 (see comm. ad loc.). Gr glosses “dem Lenker der Gebete treu oder willfährig.” Ge treats as two separate words “'die beredten Könige, die wahrhaften,” without commenting on this disjunction (or does he think it’s a dvandva?), though he cites Sāy. as interpr. “wahrhaftig gegen die Herren der Rede d.h. die Sänger,” which is also reflected in Gr.’s gloss. Old’s “in Wahrheit Könige der Rede” and Re’s “qui sont vraiment les rois de la parole (sacrale)” are in essential agreement, and the publ. tr. follows them -- though I feel as though we’re all missing something.


## 11
The publ. tr. seems to suggest an etymological relationship between “earthly realm” and “Earth,” but in fact they are lexically distinct: kṣā́ma and pṛthivī́, though adjacent.

The list of strengtheners in ab is oddly assorted, but up till the last term they are all divinities or (pṛthivī́) capable of being so configured; I therefore don’t understand the presence of the “five peoples” (páñca jánāḥ), who are humans. Ge’s ref. to X.53.4 is no help (at least to me).

Both Ge and Re take the injunc. vardhan as modal “may they / let them strengthen.” Certainly the impv. bhávantu in the 2nd hemistich would support this interpr., but in general modal readings of injunctives are rather rare.

The 2nd hemistich contains 5 cmpds with su- as first member, all but the last bahuvrīhis, as Re points out. The odd-man-out is sugopā́ḥ ‘good herdmen’. All 5 have accent on the 2nd member.


## 12
As disc. in the publ. intro., this is the final vs. of the first hymn in this composite group and as such summarizes the just-concluded hymn and asks for divine favor, naming the poet, or rather his family.

The grammatical identity and the use of náṃśi is uncertain. Gr labels it as an aor. (also Wh Rts), 1st sg. middle, and this interpr. is reflected in Ge’s and Re’s tr. -- though both add a modal feature (“möchte ich …,” “je voudrais …”) that would again be somewhat unusual for an injunctive. Lub also groups it with the root aor.

and calls it an injunc. but with ? (By contrast Hoffmann won’t commit to an analysis [219].) In one sense a finite aor. is the most likely interpr., but if so, we must explain the accent on what appears to be a non-initial main-clause verb. The hemistich would also switch from 1st ps. in this pāda to 3rd ps. in the rest of the vs. (bhā́radvājaḥ … yāti …), and though RVic discourse is certainly capable of that, it’s one more anomaly. The publ. tr. follows Old’s preference for Ludwig’s interpr. of the form as an infinitive. In either case (finite form or infin.) it is, as Old says, “auffallend gebildet.” I take it as a loc. inf. with a purpose function, though I realize that this is ad hoc.

In the context of later śrauta ritual, the application of hotā́and yájamānaḥ to the same individual would be strange. But the ritual roles so distinct in middle Vedic śrauta texts are by no means clearly parceled out in the RV, and in particular yájamāna- does not usually identify a particular ritual role but acts as an attributive participle, as I think it does here.


## 13-15
As noted in the publ. intro., I consider the remaining vss. to belong to a different hymn (or hymns?), appended to the unified, well-structured hymn found in vss. 1-12. Vss. 13-15 are unified by their meter, including an unusual variant of Uṣṇih with the configuration 8 8 / 8 4; see disc. ad vs. 13. Whether vs. 16, in Anuṣṭubh, belongs to this set or was independently appended I don’t know, but it certainly has a “final” feel to it.


## 13
This first vs. of the extra material has various lexical ties to the first hymn: vṛjinám: 2c vṛjinā́; satpate: 4a sátpatīn; ripúm: 7d ripúḥ, which might help explain why it (and the following two vss.) were attached here.

Ge attaches daviṣṭhám asya satpate to ab and begins a new cl. with kṛdhī́: “Schaffe gute Fahrt.” I assume that one of his motivations is the accent on kṛdhī́, which appears to be in the middle of a pāda. And he may feel that making “easy passage” (sugám) for a criminal would be contrary to expectation. However, he seems to ignore the asya -- at least I find nothing in his tr. that corresponds to it. The accentual problem can be easily resolved: the three vss. 13-15 seem to have an 8 8 / 8 4 structure, rather than 8 8 / 12. On this analysis of the meter, kṛdhī́starts a new pāda and should be accented. In vs. 14 vṛ́ko hí ṣáḥ is a new clause and nicely fits a separate pāda, and in vs. 15 gopā́amā́is also syntactically separate.

Vs. 15 also supports my interpr. in another way: kártā naḥ … sugám “make good passage for us” is syntactically parallel to my interpr. of 13 … asya … kṛdhī́ sugám “make good passage for him,” with naḥ corresponding to asya. As for making good passage for a criminal, the point is to get him as far away as fast as possible, and good passage will accomplish this faster than bad.

(Re’s interpr. is overly complex; though he does find space for the asya, he does not deal with the accented verb. I won’t treat it further here.)


## 14
The unusual position of hí, normally a 2nd position element, is due to immediately following kam. For whatever reason (and I don’t know it), hí kam is a phrasal unit, whether it occurs in expected 2nd position (I.98.1, II.28.8, VIII.11.10) or not (VIII.44.24, IX.49.4, X.100.5). II.37.5 may provide a transition between the two, since the hí kam sequence is not pāda-initial there, but it is in 2nd position in its clause.

The standard treatments (Gr, Ge, Re) take vāvaśúḥ to √vaś ‘wish for’, but Kü (477-80) has argued persuasively that morphological factors favor instead a connection with √vāś ‘bellow’ -- though he allows for a secondary contamination from the former root for a sense “sehnsüchtig brüllen.” I am in complete agreement.

The most salient feature of the pressing stones is their noise, and so bellowing for Soma’s companionship like the bovines that are the usual subjects of √vāś makes perfect sense.

See comm. ad vs. 13 for the four-syllable pāda consisting of the nominal sentence vṛ́ko hí ṣáḥ. As I argued in my 2009 “Function of Animals in the RV” (Paris animal vol., 206-9, esp. 208), the wolf is a cross-category in RVic classification, and this statement is a quasi-legal declaration that a particular human evil-doer is an outlaw -- with parallels in other early Indo-European traditions.


## 15
In the second hemistich ádhvan ‘on the road’ and amā́‘at home’ are contrastive, as Re points out. The brief tag gopā́amā́must be a separate clause: both Ge and Re supply an imperatival “be,” as do I. Again clausal division supports the metrical division suggested ad vs. 13.


## 16
One possible arg. for taking vs. 16 with the three that precede, despite their metrical difference, is that s u vastigā́m in b is reminiscent of sugám in 13d and could form a little ring. But I’m not at all certain this is sufficient.
