+++
title = "052"

+++
All Gods For the structure of the hymn, see publ. intro.


## 01
The instr. of ab, in two semantic sets -- Heaven and Earth, sacrifice and ritual labors -- apparently are the entities that the speaker swears by.

The vs., at least its 2nd hemistich, has a slangy feel -- with the unusual phonology of the root √ubj ‘crush’ and the lexeme ní √hā ‘be bent double’ (in my rendering), found elsewhere only in a curse in the Anhangslied VII.104.10.

The agent noun yaṣṭár- seems like a potential candidate for the role of technical term for ‘Sacrificer’, which was rejected in favor of yájamāna-.

## 01-02
It is unfortunately impossible to capture in Engl. the play between ánu √man ‘concede’ (1a) and áti √man ‘disdain’ (2a), with the further echo of áti in atiyā́já- (1d).


## 02
nínitsāt is an unusual formation: a subjunctive to a desiderative. It may lend immediacy to the action, which is to be taken against a formulation that is being performed (note the pres. part. kriyámāṇam).

Old, Ge, and Re all take vṛjinā́ni as a nominalized adjective (“seine Falschheiten,” etc.), modified by or identified with tápūṃṣi (e.g., Ge “dem mögen seine Falschheiten zu Feuerflammen werden”), rather than simply as an adjective. It would be possible to tr. it adjectivally (“for him let there be twisting, scorching [flames]”). In the publ. tr. I chose to render vṛjinā́ni both ways, as a nominalized adj.

(‘twisted [ways]’) and as an adj. ‘twisting’ characterizing the flames. In this way the punishment fits the crime. Note that vṛjiná- was used twice in the preceding hymn, VI.51.2, 13.


## 03
Ge (and to a lesser extent Re) takes the repeated kím aṅgá as “why?” But this seems more insulting to Soma than seems wise if we are urging him to strike our enemies. I take it rather as marking a series of solemn rhetorical question setting out the reasons why Soma should come to our aid.

## 04
Although this vs. begins a new tṛca, it continues the series of pres.

participles that bring a vivid immediacy to the poet’s bids for help: kriyámānam (2b) ‘being performed’, nidyámānam (3c) ‘being scorned’, and here jā́yamānāḥ (4a) ‘being born’, pínvamānāḥ (4b) ‘swelling’. The dhruvā́saḥ ‘steadfast’ in c brings all this ongoing action to a halt, and deváhūtau breaks the series entirely -- until the next vss.


## 05
Another pres. part. uccárantam ‘rising’.

Ge and Re interpr. devā́n as a truncated gen. pl., which would be esp. unusual in pāda-initial position (pāda-final being at least arguably more plausible, since truncation and the adjustment of cadences in different meters are possible factors).

Old seems to take this interpr. as tantamount to a moral lapse (“… scheint mir Verlassen des geraden Weges”). He takes it as the acc. pl. it appears to be, but construes it with ā́gamiṣṭhaḥ (“der den Göttern am besten mit Hilfe beispringt”).

Although this is syntactically possible, it is semantically unlikely: Indra, who by the evidence of the repeated and expanded phrase in 6a is clearly the subject, is most welcome to come to us; I doubt if we care whether the gods hope for his arrival or not. My own solution is somewhat dodgy: I take óhānaḥ as a pass. part. ‘being lauded as’ with the venerable formulaic phrase vásupatir vásūnām “goods-lord of goods” as the title given by the laud (so far so good), with devā́n a loosely relational acc., almost an acc. of extent: “(lauded) over/across the (other) gods.” (Ge’s and Re’s interpr. of vásupatir vásūnām and óhānaḥ vary, and I will not detail them here.)


## 06
The part. pínvamānā is repeated from 4b, with a small twist of phraseology: Sarasvatī swelling with the rivers, rather than the rivers swelling as in 4b.

The syntactic status of the various gods in bcd is unclear. Are they all separate subjects of ā́gamiṣṭhaḥ (so Re)? Or should we supply other verbs? Ge supplies “sei” with cd, but keeps b with a, implicitly making Sarasvatī another subj. of ā́gamiṣṭhaḥ.

Or is this just the beginning of an All God list, with no predicates required -- or feeding into the next tṛca inviting the All Gods to come here?

## 07-12
These two tṛcas (7-9, 10-12) are in Gāyatrī, and the first tṛca esp. is an elementary production, with almost no tricks (though see vs. 9). One wonders whether great swaths of RV-period poetry were similarly lackluster and therefore not generally preserved.


## 09
This vs. consists of two 3rd pl. impv. clauses, ab and c. The 2nd is entirely straightforward, and the first is until the end, where we find a hemistich-final rel.

prn. yé, clearly coreferential with the subj. of the impv. but difficult to construe: úpa naḥ sūnávo gíraḥ, śṛṇvántu amṛ́tasya yé. The only grammatical way to interpr. this is as a tag nominal rel. cl. amṛ́tasya yé “who (are) of the immortal one.” But this leaves the main-cl. subj. sūnávaḥ underdefined: it is not any set of sons that we invite to hear our hymns, but only the sons of the immortal one. But tag rel. clauses generally give additional, not necessary, information about their referents in the main clause, and so such an interpr. would leave the sentence oddly unbalanced. We cannot take the whole hemistich as a rel. cl. (“which sons of the immortal …”), not only because the rel. prn. would be too deep in its clause, following both subject and VP, but also because impvs. do not occur in subordinate clauses in the RV. I think we’re dealing with a poet who knew about tag rel. clauses and wanted to try his hand at one, but didn’t know how they work. As Ge points out (n. 9ab), the substance of the cl. is identical to X.13.1 śṛṇvántu víśve amṛ́tasya putrā́ḥ. Given these considerations, I have not attempted to render the yé -- passing in silence over a journeyman’s lapse.


## 10
The first hemistich here does assay a little figure: ṛtā- ṛtú- across the pāda boundary.

The use of yújya- in c is not entirely clear to me. I take it to mean that the offering, the milk (páyaḥ), is ritually associated with the calls (hávana-) the gods are hearing. Cf. VI.3.8. Ge and Re think that the association is between the substance and the gods.


## 11
This vs. is essentially parallel to vs. 10: various gods are to enjoy both verbal and material offerings, with the verb stem juṣá- ‘enjoy’ held constant. Vs. 10 has an impv. juṣántām, but our vs. an injunc. juṣanta. The latter may be a substitute for the impv. in a metrical situation that favors a light final syl.

## 13-15
I consider these three vss. as a tṛca. They are thematically unified, by their focus on the gods in general and (esp. vss. 13 and 15) by their classification of the gods into groups based on their location and type. On the supposed Jagatī meter of vs. 14, which would not match its tṛca partners, see ad loc. 
## 13
The disjunctive pairing yé agnijihvā́utá vā yájatrāḥ is puzzling if we take the utá vā seriously. Klein’s tr. (DGRV II.168-69) can stand for the standard tr.: “which ones have Agni as their tongue or are worthy of worship.” Klein considers this an example of “opposed but nonantonymous terms” giving a “subcategorization of heavenly ones.” But when so rendered there seems to be no distinction between the two groups: the general run of gods who are worthy of the sacrifice also receive those oblations through Agni -- there’s no reason for a vā. I am therefore inclined to pay attention to the -tra instrument suffix on yájatrāḥ: ‘the instruments or means of sacrifice’. Such an interpr. divides the set into those who require Agni as intermediary and those who directly effect the sacrifice. Exactly who the latter might be, I’m not certain -- perhaps only Soma. If I am correct, yájatra- is used differently from yajñíya- in the next vs. But see vs. 17 where yájatra- does not seem to have the instrument sense.


## 14
This vs. is metrically problematic. The Anukr. (also HvN) identifies it as a Jagatī, but the vs. instead seems mostly to be aiming to be a Triṣṭubh, like the surrounding (and thematically related) vss. 13 and 15. To begin at the end, d is simply a standard Triṣṭubh pāda (though with uncommon break): 11 syllables with a fine cadence. The intermediate pādas b and c have 12 syllables (possibly 13 in c), but a Triṣṭubh cadence, which seems more diagnostic than the syllable count. Old (ad loc. and ad I.53.10) favors an “überzählig” interpr. for both, in other words as Triṣṭubhs with an extra syl.; see his disc. in Prol. 67. Only pāda a is an unproblematic Jagatī, and even here, as Old points out (though he does not favor this analysis), it might be possible to read the final word yajñíyāḥ as a disyllable, which would again produce a perfect Triṣṭubh.


## 16
Agni and Parjanya seem an odd couple, and this dual dvandva is found only here. But recall that the two appear together earlier in the hymn, in vs. 6 (with Indra and Sarasvatī), and in fact Parjanya is oddly well represented in this set of All God hymns; cf. the dual dvandva parjányā-vā́tā in VI.49.6, 50.12. In our vs. the two are given a division of labor, conveyed by the “the one … the other” construction of c (íḷām anyó janáyad gárbham anyáḥ), but curiously which god is responsible for which begetting is unclear enough to have produced entirely opposite interpretations.

In his n. 16c Ge, who does not commit himself in his tr., cites Sāy. at length, who thinks that Parjanya produces the íḷā-, while Agni produces the gárbha-. Re the exact oppposite: “Que l’un [Agni] engendre l’oblation-liquide, l’autre [Parjanya] le germe.” Although I think Re is more likely correct, the analysis is by no means certain. Note, on the one hand, nearby VI.50.12 parjányā-vā́tā pipyatām íṣaṃ naḥ “Let Parjanya and Vāta swell refreshments for us,” which supports Sāy.’s interpr. On the other, Parjanya is more regularly associated with rétas- ‘semen’, and one passage in one of the three hymns dedicated to him, V.83.1, is esp. telling: réto dadhāti óṣadhīṣu gárbham “He deposits his semen as embryo in the plants,” with the gárbhafound here. The ambiguity is probably meant.

As Ge points out, the two products are reconciled in the last pāda, where both gods are urged jointly to give us “refreshments accompanied by offspring” (prajā́vatīr íṣaḥ), with prajā- standing in for gárbha- and íṣ- for íḷā- from pāda c.


## 17
A typical final vs. summarizing the ritual. For yajatrāḥ see comm. ad vs. 13.
