+++
title = "053"

+++
Pūṣan Although, as noted in the publ. intro., this hymn is remarkably bloodthirsty, there is also a minor theme focusing on poetry and poetic formulation. The word dhī́- ‘poetic vision’ is found in the first and last vss., shaping a faint ring, as well as in vs. 4. And Pūṣan is called kaví- in vs. 5, and his awl is the ‘impeller of the bráhman-’ (brahma-códanī-) in vs. 8.


## 02
This is the only possible passage in the RV in which gṛhápati- ‘houselord’ may refer to a human (as also noted by Oberlies, I.355 n. 99); in all other cases its referent is Agni. (See my forthcoming “The Term gṛhastha and the (Pre)history of the Householder.”) The presence of nárya- ‘stemming from men’ and vīrá- ‘hero’ may support a human reading for gṛhápati-; in both cases we seem to be aiming for valuable goods given to us by human patrons, and “a houselord of value” (vāmáṃ gṛhápatim) would be a third such instance. However, since both nṛ́- and vīrá- can also refer to gods in the RV, the human element is by no means assured, and the otherwise exclusive use of gṛhápati- for a god in the RV is telling. If the word does refer to a human, this may be another indication of the popular character and lower linguistic register of the Pūṣan hymns, as gṛhápati- does refer to humans in the AV.

DL suggests to me that, though the dominant sense of vāmá- here must be ‘valuable’, there might be a pun on vāmá- (or vā́ma-; see EWA s.v.) ‘left’, immediately following práyata-dakṣiṇam. The 2nd member of that bahuvrīhi is of course dákṣiṇā- ‘priestly gift’, but the adj. stem dákṣiṇa- means ‘right (/south)’.

Although vāmá-/vā́ma- ‘left’ is not attested until the ŚB, it could well have been current in ordinary speech before that, as its presence in MIA (e.g., Pāli vāma-) suggests. Perhaps another sign of the more demotic lexicon of this hymn.


## 03
For some reason Ge always refuses to tr. the standing epithet of Pūṣan, ā́ghṛṇi-, though he fearlessly takes on far more challenging lexical items. The word must belong to the inherited root √ghṛ ‘be hot, burn’, etc., found only in nominal forms in Skt.; see EWA s.vv. ghṛṇá-, gharmá-. Why Pūṣan is glowing, fiery, I don’t know; perhaps it would be best to adopt Re’s ‘ardent’.

ví mrada is the only verbal form to this root in the RV, and such forms are quite rare in Vedic (ví mradate MS, mradaya- TS). (For detailed disc. see Gotō 247- 48.) The root is otherwise found in the RV only in the cmpd. ū́rṇa-mradas- ‘soft as wool, lit. having the softness of wool’ in the funeral hymn X.18.10. I wonder if mrad belongs to the technical terminology of fabric construction and therefore would fit in with Pūṣan’s connection to homely, practical activities, as in the words for ‘awl’ (or whatever ā́rā- is) and the like in this hymn. However, the TS, MS passages don’t support this speculation.

## 03-04
Note ví mrada (3c), ví mṛ́dhaḥ (4b).

## 05-06
On ā́rā- see EWA s.v. It is difficult to determine exactly what tool it was, but it seems to have had a sharp point, at least later means ‘awl’, and means ‘awl’ in cognate languages. In any case it is the sort of utilitarian implement that we would not expect to find in the hands of, say, Indra, but that is appropriate to the more down-to-earth handyman Pūṣan. The word is found in Vedic only in this hymn (vss.

5, 6, 8). Re’s ‘lance’ seems entirely too elevated; Ge’s ‘Stachel’ is a better fit.

## 07-08
These vss. contains the delightful phrase ā́rikha kikirā́krṇ̥ u, whose playful sonic effects I endeavored to capture in my anachronistic tr. The word kikirā is of course a hapax (though cf. YV kikkiṭā́), and I doubt if a lexical meaning is to be sought for it.

I do wonder whether the original phrase read *kuru for *kṛṇu. The former is, of course, a late form, belonging to the irregular paradigm karóti, kuruté that will replace the well-behaved 5th cl. kṛṇóti after the RV. The impv. kuru is found in only two passages in the late RV, but in a colloquial hymn like this it would be at home, and the phonological patterning would be improved: ā́rikha kikirā́*kuru, with CV syllables containing repeated high vowels and a consonantal r in each word, in addition to the k’s. This *kuru would have been replaced redactionally by the kṛṇu standard in RVic discourse on the basis of kṛṇuhi in 10c. Vs. 10 displays a more formal level of discourse and imitates the final hymn-summary vss. found through the RV, and the standard RVic form of the pres. of √kṛ is in order there.


## 10
As just noted, this vs. leaves the rough-and-tumble and provides a solemn and conventional end to the hymn. For a similar sequence of X-sā́- cmpds in a hymnfinal vs., see, e.g., IX.2.10, whose pāda b is identical to pāda b here, save for the case (nom. vs. acc.). It also, as noted before, ring-compositionally echoes vs. 1 dhiyé with dhíyam. The dhī́- that we launched in vs. 1 will now (we pray) be crowned with goods.

The first hemistich nicely begins and ends with utá, though the two have different functions—the first as interstanzaic conjunction (Klein DGRV I.401) and the other conjoining the acc. obj. nouns in series (ibid. 351-52).
