+++
title = "054"

+++
Pūṣan A remarkably unproblematic hymn on the whole.


## 07
The sequence mā́kiḥ … mā́kīm … mā́kim, each followed by an injunctive in prohibitive sense, is remarkable, in that all three can be read (and are read by me, seemingly also Ge: “keines … keines … keines …”) as expressing the same (negated) subject of the verbs -- but only -kiḥ has a nominative “look.” It would be possible, with Gr, to take mā́kīm as ‘nimmer, nicht’, as against mā́kis ‘niemand, keiner’, but the sing-song parallelism of the passage invites the two forms to be interpr. identically. (A Gr-inspired interpr. should yield “let none disappear; let it never be harmed …, etc.”) Re claims that mā́kis is personal (“puisse aucun(e)”) while mā́kim is impersonal (“puisse rien” or “… jamais”) -- the latter (“jamais”) is of course Gr’s position, the former (“rien”) seems hard to maintain in this passage, where surely the subjects of the verbs are all the same, namely the cow that is our concern in this part of the hymn. I think we must reckon with a morphological extension even greater than that found in the free-standing particles sīm and īm.

Those two stand for all numbers and genders, but always have accusative function.

(See my 2002 Fs. Cardona “RVic sim and īm.”) Here, perhaps by way of the adverbial-type readings favored by Gr and Re (see VIII.45.23), -kīm has lost all distinctive case function and can be used as a nominative.

On Hoffmann’s analysis of neśat as a redupl. aor. to √naś, see comm. ad IV.1.17.


## 08
On írya- see comm. ad V.58.4. In c I take rāyáḥ as a morphological pun, both gen. sg. with ī́śānam and acc. pl. with īmahe. See a more complex example in the next hymn VI.55.2, as well as VIII.26.22, 46.6, 53.1 for the identical pāda with identical interpr.


## 10
The first two pādas are marked by alliteration: pári pūṣā́parástād, dhástaṃ dadhātu dákṣiṇam. The sandhi-induced dh of dhástam (for underlying hástam) is esp.

nice.
