+++
title = "055"

+++
Pūṣan As noted in the publ. intro., the hymn is structured by an ever-shifting lexical chain. The links are as follows: vs. 1 rathī́ḥ -- 2 rathī́tamam / 2 rāyáḥ sákhā́yam -- 3 rāyáḥ ... sákhā / 3 ajāśva -- 4 ajā́śvam / 4 svásur ... jāráḥ -- 5 svásur jāráh. For the last vs. which lacks a precise repetition, note bhrā́tā in 5 phonologically echoed by bíbhrataḥ ending 6, although they are of course lexically unrelated. We might also note that the verb in 1b, sacāvahai ‘let us two accompany each other’, is echoed by the ‘companion’ word sákhi- in vss. 2, 3, and 5, and ajá- ‘goat’, found in the cmpd.

ajā́śva- ‘having goats as horses’ of vss. 3-4, reappears in 6 without the horses.


## 01
The tonic 1st dual nominative prn. vā́m ‘we two’ is a hapax -- the only occurrence of this distinct nominative in all of Sanskrit, replaced post-RV by āvám.

See AiG III.465-66. It opens its clause, but because it follows the vs.-initial impv.

éhi, it appears to be in 2nd position. Is it an accident that this is where the extremely well-attested enclitic dual 2nd ps. vām is ordinarily found?


## 02
As noted ad VI.54.8 above, this vs. contains a more complex variant of ī́śānaṃ rāyá īmahe in VI.54.8c. There I interpr. rāyáḥ as both a gen. sg. with ī́śānam and an acc. pl. with īmahe. In our vs. here, ī́śānam is found in pāda b with an undoubted gen. phrase rā́dhaso maháḥ, while in pāda c rāyó sákhāyam īmahe we again find a rāyáḥ that is both gen. sg. (with sákhāyam) and acc. pl. (again with īmahe). This complex seems like a partial “repair” of 54.8, since it makes clear that ī́śānam takes the gen., which in turn suggests that rāyáḥ in 54.8 may have that reading too.


## 03
The āmreḍita dhī́vato-dhīvataḥ ‘of every visionary’ recalls the focus on dhī́- in the nearby hymn (VI.53.1, 4, 10).

## 04-05
As noted in the publ. intro., these allusions to incest seem remarkably matter-of-fact. The vss. seem to focus more on the kinship relations — sister, mother, brother, comrade — than any potential violation of them.


## 05
Ge interpr. abravam to mean “I have spoken of” (“(Von Pūṣan) … habe ich gesprochen”), but the fact that we immediately urge him to hear us suggests that we have spoken to him. In the next hymn VI.56.4 … tvā … brávāma also clearly means “we speak/say to you.”

## 06
This vs. presents several problems, both located in pāda b: the hapax niśṛmbhā́ḥ and the highly unusual position of the accented 3rd ps. pl. prn. té.

To tackle the first issue first, I am generally persuaded by Berger’s 1966 explan. of the Skt. śrambh forms as hypersanskritizations of MIA vissaddha, etc., in his view itself a cross of Skt. viśvasta- and śraddhā. See EWA s.v. ŚRAMBH and esp.

KEWA s.v. śrámbhate. My ‘trusty’ reflects this possible connection with śraddhā- ‘trust’.

The position of té is highly unusual; this pronominal stem overwhelmingly takes init. (or modified init.) position in its clause. When it does not, it is usually adjacent to the verb or has some other obvious reason for its placement. Here it seems dropped in randomly. I therefore propose to read *tejana-śríyam, with téjana- ‘sharp point’ found once elsewhere in the RV and also thereafter. The only alteration of the Saṃhitā text this requires is dropping the accent on té. Here téjana- would refer to the goad or awl that Pūṣan wields (see, e.g. VI.53.5-6, 9). In the publ. tr. I made use of Narten’s understanding of -śrī́- in such cmpds as meaning “vollkommendmachen”: see her KlSch. 352 n. 19 for the transmitted reading of this cmpd jana-śrī́- rendered as ‘die Menschen … vollkommenmachend’ -- though I took

*tejana- as instr.: ‘who brings (all) to readiness *with his sharp (goad)’. But I now
prefer a different value for -śrī́- ‘splendid with his sharp (goad)’ vel sim., more in keeping with my interpr. of other -śrī́- cmpds like ghṛta-śrī́- ‘splendid with ghee’.

On the multiple semantic possibilities of -śrī́- cmpds see Scar (544-54); on this cmpd in particular, Scar (551): my interpr. is basically his choice B (though of course with jana- rather than tejana- as 1st member).
