+++
title = "056"

+++
Pūṣan


## 01
As noted in the publ. tr., there is difference of opinion about the purport of pāda c ná téna devá ādíśe. Ge thinks it’s a positive expression (n. 1c): Pūṣan likes porridge so much that he’ll come without being asked twice. Re thinks it’s more ambiguous: for him the idiom ā́√diś means ‘target’ (viser), incl. by evil speech or the like, hence ‘menace’ -- here, targeting Puṣan with the epithet means that he doesn’t have to be targeted “réellement.” (Klein’s [DGRV I.420] I just don’t understand: “by that one is the heavenly one not to be so designated.” Does he think that in using that nickname the human is being too familiar with the god?) I find Re’s interpr. simply puzzling, but, though Ge’s is more persuasive, I think the point is rather that the epithet is a unique designation that picks out Pūṣan once and for all.

The usage of ā́√diś in nearby VI.48.14 is similar; see disc. there. See also VI.57.2 below. MLW adds arguments supporting my interpr.: “In Vedic prose ā́√diś is used to refer to the specification of which god gets which offering and I think this may be an old old meaning of this verb with parallels in Umbrian.”

## 02-03
There is general consensus (Ge, Re, Klein loc. cit.) that Indra is the subject of both of these vss., with Pūṣan appearing only as the instr. companion in 2b. By contrast, I consider Pūṣan the “best charioteer” (rathī́tamaḥ in 2a and 3c), because in the immediately preceding hymn rathī́- (VI.55.1c), rathī́tama- (VI.55.2a) are unequivocally used of Pūṣan. My interpr. requires that the subject change from 2a to 2bc, where Indra is indeed the subject, but see the anyáḥ … anyáḥ construction in the next hymn (VI.57.2, cf. 3) where the two gods each appear contrastively in the nominative. This interpr. also has the advantage that Pūṣan doesn’t disappear in the middle of his own hymn.


## 02
Pāda c is essentially identical to VI.57.3 in the next hymn, but there Indra’s two fallow bay horses are Indra’s companions when he smashes obstacles.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., the content of this vs. is quite baffling, though the syntax and, for the most part, the lexicon are not. Ge (n. 3) pronounces it a “dunkler Sagenzug,” and I can only agree. I have argued that it is connected with the even more baffling VI.48.17 (see comm. there) and that these two passages associate Pūṣan with the “tearing off the Sun’s wheel” myth that remains tantalizingly out of our reach. But this must remain speculation.

The paruṣé gávi tr., “in ‘the gray cow’,” is of course masc., so should perhaps be “gray bull,” though I meant cow=bovine. The phrase is reminiscent of V.27.5 paruṣā́ḥ … ukṣánaḥ “gray bulls/oxen,” but that phrase is in a dānastuti and does not help us with the metaphor here. For another possible - if extremely tenuous - connection see comm. ad X.5.5.


## 04
Since Pūṣan is the god who sends the cows home and watches over paths and journeys in general, it is entirely appropriate that he should “make [various objects] reach their goal” (sādhaya), including our thought. Cf. in the first Pūṣan hymn of this cycle, VI.53.4 sā́dhantām … no dhíyaḥ “Let our poetic visions reach their goal.”


## 06
The publ. tr. implies that both ‘well-being’ (acc. svastím) and ‘wholeness’ (dat. sarvátātaye) are the complements of īmahe ‘we beg’, and in fact I think that is the intent of the passage, however loose the syntax. But it might be possible to construe the dat. with ‘well-being’: “we beg you for well-being to completeness,” i.e., for well-being in its entirety.
