+++
title = "058"

+++
Pūṣan As noted in the publ. intro., the style and in part the register of this, the only trimeter hymn in the Pūṣan cycle, is more elevated than the rest. Still, characteristic lexical items -- ajā́śva- ‘having goats for horses’, áṣṭra- ‘goad -- are found.


## 01
It is quite unclear what this vs. is conveying, and my interpr. differs radically from the standard. Flg. Sāy., both Ge and Re supply rūpám as the referent for the anyád … anyád construction and further assume that these are two forms of Pūṣan, namely, in Ge’s words (n. 1ab), “die solare und die gewöhnliche Form des Pūṣan.” I find this unlikely for two reasons: 1) I know of no evidence for two forms of Pūṣan, and none is supplied by those who interpr. it thus; 2) there is a perfectly good neut. referent available for the anyád … anyád construction, namely the two day-halves (áhanī) in b, whose descriptor víṣurūpe ‘of dissimilar form’ seems meant to specify the disjunctive choices given in pāda a. (For a similar disjunctive description of the day-halves, with anyá- … anyá-, see nearby VI.49.3.) Moreover, those who take pāda a as referring to Pūṣan’s two forms are forced to take víṣurūpe áhanī in the simile, as a not very convincing acc. of extent of time (Ge: “du bist wie der Himmel während der verschiedenen Tageshälften”) or the like (Re’s rendering [“tu es commes le ciel aux deux portions-du-jour”] leaves the syntactic status of the dual expression quite vague). Further, this interpr. pushes the simile-marking iva almost to the end of a pāda supposedly consisting entirely of a simile. Although, as just noted (ad VI.57.5), simile markers are sometimes positioned later than expected, this would be quite late indeed.

So by my interpr. the two oppositional day-halves belong, in some sense, to Pūṣan. Why I’m not sure, nor do I know why he is “like heaven.” In conjunction with his mission to the sun in vs. 3 and the ships he uses to travel there, I might speculate that this has to do with Pūṣan’s role as psychopomp for the dead, described in the funeral hymn X.17.3-6, esp. vs. 6 prápathe pathā́ m ajaniṣṭa pūṣā́, prápathe diváḥ prápathe prthivy ̥ ā́ ḥ / ubhé abhí priyátame sadhásthe, ā́ca parā́ca carati prajānán “On the forward path of paths was Pūṣan born, on the forward path of heaven, on the forward path of earth. / He wanders back and forth to both the dearest seats, foreknowing.” Perhaps his wanderings back and forth to heaven approximate the regular alternation of day and night, and that pair is therefore “his” in some sense.

(Such an interpr. gets us close to his two “forms,” an interpr. I have just rejected -- I still think that is wrong, however.) As for why he is like heaven, this must rest on the hí clause of pāda c, his giving aid to all māyā́. What does this mean? Is his mission to take the dead from earth to heaven conceptualized as a transformation of the dead, which might be achieved by māyā́? A last, smaller but nonetheless nagging, question is why, with day characterized as ‘gleaming’ (śukrám), is night said to be ‘belonging to the sacrifice, worthy of the sacrifice’ (yajatám)? Most Vedic sacrifices take place during the day, save for the Atirātra. Perhaps rites for the dead were associated more with night. MLW adds that this is true “certainly in Roman rituals like the Lemuria and Feralia.” All of this speculation is tissue-thin, and I do not set much store by it.

However, at least it confronts questions that the other interpr. have not raised.


## 02
Most of the contents of this vs. conform to the characteristics of Pūṣan elsewhere in this cycle, even dhiyaṃjinvá- ‘quickening poetic vision’ (see esp.

VI.53), but “fitted into all creation” (bhúvane víśve arpitaḥ) and “surveying the creatures” (saṃcákṣāṇo bhúvanā) attribute to him a more cosmic role than usual. His speeding (īyate) may be a reference to his travels between earth and heaven referred to above, ad vs. 1.

víśve is one of two loc. sg. to this stem with the noun ending -e (the other being IV.16.9), but the pronomina víśvasmin is also only found twice, both times in X.


## 03
Pūṣan’s ships (nā́vaḥ) are, to my knowledge, not encountered elsewhere.

But, as noted above vs. 1, I would tentatively connect them and the mission of the Sun (dūtyā́m sūryasya) with his role as psychopomp of the dead. One question is whether there are two sets of ships -- those in the sea and those in the midspace -- or one, with the midspace being configured here as the sea (Ge’s Luftmeer). I subscribe to the latter view.


## 04
Pūṣan’s “good lineage (subándhuḥ) from Heaven and from Earth” directly recalls X.71.6 cited above ad vs. 1 prápathe pathā́ m ajaniṣṭa pūṣā́, prápathe diváḥ prápathe prthivy ̥ ā́ ḥ “On the forward path of paths was Pūṣan born, on the forward path of heaven, on the forward path of earth.” On the Sūryā story, see, inter alia, my 2001 “The Rigvedic svayaṃvara? Formulaic evidence” (Fs. Asko Parpola) and 2003 “Vedic vrā́: Evidence for the svayaṃvara in the Rig Veda?” (Fs. H.-P. Schmidt). It is very telling that Puṣan is given to Sūryā here (yáṃ devā́so ádadhuḥ sūryā́yai) rather than the reverse: the ordinary description of marriage, at least later, is kanyā-dāna- ‘the gift of a maiden’, but here she receives rather than being given, presumably a nod to her active role in the Svayaṃvara. Note the much more conventional depiction of Sūryā’s wedding (to a different bridegroom) in the wedding hymn, X.85.9 sūryā́ṃ yát pátye … savitā́dadāt “when Savitar gave Sūryā to her husband.”
