+++
title = "059"

+++
Indra and Agni On the structure of this hymn and the relationship between the two gods, see publ. intro.


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., the clichéd́ intro. “I shall proclaim (prá √vac) the manly deeds …” associated esp. with Indra hymns (esp. I.32) is here directed to both gods. The “real” subjunctive vocā is found only here in the RV, in contrast to the more common injunctive / functional subjunctive vocam.

The enclitic vām is unusually stationed pāda-final, but in fact it occupies 2nd position in its small clause, the loc. absol. sutéṣu vām “on (the soma-drinks) having been pressed for you two.” Ge takes vām with following vīryā̀(“euren Heldentaten”), but the pāda break that separates them makes that less likely. Re ignores the vām in his tr. and attaches the loc. absol. to the rel. cl., which is syntactically unlikely. Pādafinal vām is in fact a tic of this hymn; see 2a, 4a, and 5a besides our 1a. Perhaps it echoes the 2nd syllable of yuvám ‘you two’, found at pāda end in 1d, 2c.

The contents of the 2nd hemistich is quite dramatic. The standard view going back to Sāy. (see Ge’s n. 1c) is that the slain Fathers are the Asuras and that this event is also reflected in the enigmatic X.124. However, see my 2016 treatment of X.124, “The Divine Revolution of Ṛgveda X.124: A New Interpretation. Beyond Asuras and Devas” (Ged. Staal), which rejects the view that that hymn concerns the Deva/Asura conflict. Here in our passage, certainly the easiest interpretation is that the rivals of the gods are the Asuras, but keep in mind that the Deva/Asura conflict so prominent in the Brāhmaṇas and later does not really surface until very late RV.

Moreover, even in the old interpr. of X.124 neither Indra nor Agni appears to have been an Asura. I do not know what to make of our passage, but I doubt that the old interpr. holds.


## 02
The pāda-final vām here is also in syntactic 2nd position (as it is in 1a), since báḷ itthā́is a extra-clausal exclamation, and the clause proper begins with mahimā́.

For mahimán- with √pan, see nearby VI.75.6, as well as VIII.101.11, X.75.9, etc.

I am puzzled by the pāda-final ā́. Gr (col. 171) classifies it as emphatic after numbers or grades, to show that the number or grade has been reached, but the phrases he lists there are quite heterogenous.


## 03
On pleonastic sácā see comm. ad IV.31.5. Ordinarily such a sácā marks a locative abs., but in this instance suté is to be construed with okivā́ṃsā. The pādafinal phrase suté sacām̐may be there to provide a rhyme-form variant to sutéṣu vām# (1a, 4a), which really are loc. abs.


## 04
In the 2nd hemistich the form bhasáthaḥ is problematic and its identity disputed. With -thaḥ it looks like a 2nd du. act. verb, as is to be expected in a hymn dedicated to dual divinities, esp. directly after a voc. du. devā. However, this should be a main-cl. verb, and it therefore should not be accented. And even if it should be accented, it has the wrong accent: we have two other forms to an apparent them.

stem, both with root accent: 3rd sg. bhásat (subjunctive to root aor., acdg. to Gotō 82)


## 04
and identical (by most lights) VI.14.1 (I consider that form a nom. sg. part.

bhásan). In response to these problems, Ge (inter alia, going back to Aufrecht [see Old] and cautiously endorsed in EWA s.v. BHAS) interpr. it as a noun bhasátha- ‘the noise of the mouth when eating’ (Ge, das Geräusch des Mundes bes. beim Essen).

But although this solves the accent problems, it creates greater difficulty elsewhere: not only would that stem be a hapax, but Ge’s attempt to fit it into the rest of the clause produces something close to nonsense, whereas a du. verb works well in the clausal syntax. Old and Re wisely opt for the verb (maybe also Gotō 82), the latter without remarking on the accentual problem and the former without suggesting a solution. I also accept it as a verb ‘snap at’ and also lack a solution to the accent. It cannot be attributed to caná, which doesn’t induce verbal accent. Its complement is vádataḥ, which I take as gen. sg., the correlative of yáḥ in the rel. cl. of ab -- with gen. as an alternative to acc. in verbs of consumption (biting counts). As Old points out, it could also be acc. pl., but that would lose the connection with the rel. cl. (Re supplies an acc. obj. on which the gen. depends: “vous ne mordez nullement (les richesses de cet homme) qui dit …,” which seems unnec. and unmotivated.)


## 05
As noted in the publ. intro., here the poet dissociates the two gods and in the 2nd hemistich focuses only on Agni. I think the dissociation begins in the 1st hemistich, with … asyá vām … ciketati (in my tr.) “…shall perceive this one of you two,” with asyá referring to one of the gods only. Ge and Re by contrast interpr. asyá as referring to an unidentified thing (a wonder or the like) belonging to both.

On cd as referring to Agni and his flames, see the very similar phrase in an Agni hymn X.79.7 víṣūco áśvān yuyuje. Gonda (Ved. Lit. 133) may be right that this refers to Agni using the same vehicle to carry the oblations to heaven and to bring the gods to the sacrifice. Re interpr. the hemistich as referring to both Agni and Indra, at the cost of a lot of machinery liberally sprinkled with parens.

víśūcaḥ would be better rendered as ‘facing in opposite/different directions’.


## 06
The fem. footless (apadvátī) and footless (padvátībhyaḥ) are most likely Dawn and her cows, either the rays of light that are the Dawn cows or the real cows that go to pasture at dawn. Cf., with Ge, I.152.3. She appears here presumably to mark the dawn worship where the ritual fire is kindled and Indra appears.

Both Ge and Re divide the 2nd hemistich between Agni (c) and Sūrya (d). I am in full agreement that c belongs to Agni, describing the spread of his flames and crackling of the new fire. But I do not follow their assignment of d to Sūrya. Since the hymn is dedicated to Indra and Agni, we would expect the paired god to be Indra, not Sūrya, who has no place in the hymn. And it easily applies to Indra, as long as we interpr. padā́as an instr. sg. of ‘foot’. Cf. with the same phrase, incl. the same verb, I.51.6 ... arbudáṃ ní kramīḥ padā́“With your foot you [=Indra] trampled down Arbuda” and, with a diff. root but the same preverb, also of Indra, VIII.64.2 padā́ paṇī ́ m̐r arādháso, ní bādhasva “With your foot stamp down the ungenerous niggards.” Ge and Re take padā́as neut. pl. to padá- ‘foot-step’, construed with triṃśát as a measure of the distance that Sūrya has crossed. I don’t know why they feel the need to introduce Sūrya here -- I suppose because of Uṣas in ab.

With Ge I take cárat as a finite verb, an injunctive, accented because it’s implicitly contrastive with the next clause.


## 08
With Ge (cf. also Oberlies, RdV I.457) I supply ‘him’ as obj. of yuyutám in d, referring to the ari- of b. Re supplies a pl. obj., referring to the dvéṣāṃsi of b. This is not impossible, but it makes more sense to deprive the stranger of sunlight than his hatreds.
