+++
title = "060"

+++
Indra and Agni


## 01
The vocab. of this vs. shows a slight tendency towards morphological elaboration: in addition to the straightforward sáhastamā sáhasā, there is sáhurī to the same root but with the rare suffix -uri; the deriv. vasavyà- for ‘goods’, rather than standard vásu (as in the preceding hymn VI.59.9). This latter word returns at the end of the hymn.

The 3rd sg. śnáthat that opens the hymn is somewhat puzzling morphologically.

The root √śnath has a poorly attested verbal system, save for the -áya-transitive and associated redupl. aor.; besides śnáthat it consists only of two exx. of the athem.

impv. śnathihi, and a couple of -iṣ-aor. forms. Narten (258-59) argues convincingly that śnathihi should belong to a root aor. (rather than a root pres., as it is generally classed), which could serve as the base for the formation of the -iṣ-aor. Our form śnáthat could formally easily be a subjunctive to this root aor., but the problem is that a subjunctive works quite badly in context, esp., since it is explicitly conjoined (by utá) with the following pres. indic. sanoti. It could alternatively be the injunctive to a them. stem, though in that case it would be the only representative of that stem.

Narten discusses śnáthat in n. 810, where she rather says that though it's used in a general sense, nothing stands in the way of its being a subj. to the root aor. I find this somewhat disingenuous, as subjunctives aren’t generally (/ever?) used in such a sense. She also allows the possibility that it could be injunctive to a thematic stem.

(see also Klein DGRV I.366, who allows either). Much as I dislike multiplying entities, I'm inclined to go for the thematic injunctive for functional reasons.

Unfortunately a root aor. injunc. *śnathīt would have been easy to build, so the thematization cannot be the result of avoiding a problematic form.


## 02
Assuming that uṣásaḥ … ūḷhā́ḥ is a single NP, the question is what happened to the dawns. Ge, fld. by Re, thinks that the dawns were taken away, that is, abducted (entführten, enlevées). If, as Ge suggests (n. 2), this concerns the Vala myth, the dawns qua cows can be conceptualized as taken / stolen by the Paṇis.

(Oberlies [RdV I.180] goes further, seeing this as part of a myth about bridestealing, ultimately involving the Aśvins, though he admits [n. 150] that our vs. does not tell us who abducted the Dawn(s) or where she was taken.) HPS (B+I 180 n. 33, ) indignantly rejects the abduction interpr. and suggests rather that, on the basis of VI.64.3, 5, the dawns are drawn (ūḷhā́ḥ) by bulls. Although this is possible, and the cited passage is quite nearby, it doesn’t make a lot of sense for Indra and Agni to “do battle” for the dawns if the dawns are moving on their own steam, whereas if they were abducted, they need help.

In d Agni must be the immediate subj. of the clause, given the adjacency of the voc. and the 2nd sg. verb (agne yuvase) -- but, as Re points out, niyútvān is more an epithet of Indra than of Agni -- and, as he doesn’t point out, even more an epithet of Vāyu in conjunction with Indra. I therefore wonder if this has not been adapted from an Indra-Vāyu context, with a different set of dual divinities. The d pāda is also very close to an Indra passage fairly nearby: VI.47.14 apó gā́vajrin yuvase sám índūn, with Indra as the subj. of yuvase: “You join together the waters, the cows, and the drops, you possessor of the mace.” The substitution of Agni and the attribution to him of Indra’s qualities and actions is in conformity with the tendency noted in the publ. intro. of favoring the Indraic in this supposedly shared hymn.


## 04
I do not have a view on how (or whether) to fix the meter of pāda a; see Old.

It is thinkable, but by no means necessary, that instead of reading quadrisyllabic índrā-agnī (as in vss. 5, 7, 14), we could read trisyllabic índrāgnī (as in 8, 9, 15) with a haplologized enclitic naḥ: índrāgnī ná *no mardhataḥ.

## 04-05
Note the phonological (and partly etymological) figure mardh(ataḥ) (4c), mṛ́dh(aḥ) (5a), mṛḷ(ātaḥ) (5c).


## 06
Note the curious position of ápa in tmesis, embedded in the obj. NP: ható víśvā ápa dvíṣaḥ.


## 08
I follow Ge in construing dāśúṣe with sánti (“which are for the pious”) rather than with puruspṛ́haḥ (Re “pour l’adorateur les très enviés”) because puruspṛ́h- doesn’t seem to appear with a dat. elsewhere. See the almost identical IV.47.4.

## 08-09
8c and 9a differ minimally from each other, and it is difficult to see an aspectual (or other) distinction between root aor. impv. ā́gatam and pres. impv. ā́ gachatam -- though of course there may be a nuance we cannot catch. Note also 14b úpa gachatam and 15c ā́gatam.


## 10
The root √svañj is ordinarily middle; it has only two active forms, this one (pariṣvájat) and the plupf. paryáṣasvajat in I.182.7. The latter can be explained as an áduhat-type remarking of the middle pf. ṣasvaje (see comm. ad loc.), but this active remarking of the them. pres. -ṣvájate is harder to explain. Gotō (1st Kl., 338-39) notes the prevailing middle voice and this anomalous act., but makes no attempt to account for it.


## 11
The syntactic affiliation of the final pāda of this vs., consisting of a dat. dyumnā́ya and an acc. phrase sutárā apáḥ, is unclear. Old suggests taking the acc. as a second obj. of āvívāsati, or rather suggests supplying the same verb as main clause verb “(he also wins) waters …” But since the structure of ab, in which the mortal seeks Indra’s favor, invites a demonstration of that favor in the main cl., I therefore borrow kṛṇoti (deaccented) from 10c, with Indra as subj. This is also Re’s solution and apparently Ge’s. For √kṛ in similar expressions, see VII.97.8 kárad bráhmaṇe sutárā sugādhā́ “He [=Bṛhaspati/Indra] will make good fords, easy to cross, for the sacred formulation” and IV.19.6 sutaraṇā́m akṛṇor indra síndhūn “You made the rivers easy to cross, Indra.”


## 12
On the double sense of pipṛtam see Ge and Re.

## 13-15
On the connection of these vss. to the hymn, see publ. intro. For the ring composition between the 1st tṛca and this one, note the verbal responsion vasavyà- (1, 14), rā́dhas- (3, 13), vājayántā (1) and vā́jasya sātáye (14).


## 13
On the insistent ubhā́see publ. intro.

I have taken āhuvádhyai (and mādayádhyai) as predicated infinitives with the subj. ubhā́, as does Re. However, vām in pāda a makes some difficulties for this interpr., and Ge takes that pāda (but not b) as having an implicit 1st ps. subj.: “euch beide … will ich herrufen” (a) versus “beiden sollen sich … erfreuen” for mādayádhyai (b). I think the two clauses should be parallel and therefore take vām as a dependent gen. on ubhā́(“both of you two”), although it must be admitted that ubhá- generally agrees with its referent in case.
