+++
title = "061"

+++
Sarasvatī On the structure of this hymn and its similarity to the immediately preceding one, see publ. intro.

## 01-03
The hymn begins with the near-deictic nom. sg. iyám, establishing the feminine subject immediately and emphatically (“this she here”). Since the just-given tr. is at best graceless and, more to the point, not English, I have opted to focus on the gender rather than the deixis. The next vs. also begins with iyám and the final vs. of the tṛca with the voc. sárasvati.


## 01
Although, as just noted, the hymn establishes the feminine referent from the very beginning, she is also credited, from the beginning, with powers and deeds that seem distinctly unfeminine, esp. pāda c.

Sarasvatī’s gift to the pious Vadhryaśva is universally, and I think correctly, interpr. as a son named Divodāsa, and this gift is further interpr. as reflecting the requital of the “debt to the ancestors” found in the doctrine, attested somewhat later (1st clearly articulated in TS), of the three debts that a Brahmin owes on his birth (to gods, ancestors, and ṛṣis). The requital of this debt is, in the standard view, expressed by the root-noun cmpd ṛṇacyút- in our passage. I think this is more or less correct, but not in a straightforward way. Both Ge and Re twist the sense of √cyu to get it to express the requital of the debt directly: “der der Schuld (an die Manen) tilgte [paid off]” (sim. Kü 153); “qui ébranle la dette (aux mânes).” But √cyu means ‘set in motion, agitate, shake’, and the best we could do to get the idiom we want is to push its meaning to ‘shake off’, hence ‘get rid of’, the debt. But ‘shake off’ is not a sense of √cyu at least in my experience. An unmanipulated sense of the cmpd should be ‘shake/agitate the ṛṇa’, and that is how I interpr. it -- ‘shake the debtor’ -- with a masc. ṛṇá- ‘debtor’; the only other non-neut. form of this stem is also in VI (VI.12.5), where it likewise means ‘debtor’, not ‘debt’. In other words I assume that Divodāsa inflicts rough punishment on a debtor; this helps explain why he is characterized as rabhasá- ‘violent, wild’, which does not make much sense if he’s just a baby who serves as his father’s payment to the ancestors.

However, I also think the sense seen by Ge and Re -- Divodāsa as requital for the debt his father owes to the ancestors -- is also indirectly signaled here. The standard lexeme for this technical term is rṇám √ci; a root-noun cmpd formed to this lexeme would be ṛṇa-cí-t-, which in fact is attested once, at II.23.17. Our cmpd ṛṇacyú-t- is phonologically similar to it, and an acc. sg. *ṛṇacítam would produce a terrible cadence (4 lights), whereas ṛṇacyútam is well adapted to a Jagatī cadence (though the immediately preceding syllable should be heavy, not light: (rabha)sám ṛṇacyútam. What I am suggesting is that ṛṇacyútam is the correct reading and it means what it looks like it should mean, without the manipulation of Ge and Re. But that it also phonologically evokes *ṛṇa-cítam, which gives a second, resonant meaning to the passage. This suggestion is similar to, but ultimately quite distinct from, Gotō’s (133 n. 166) that ṛṇa-cyút- is a transitive active version of ṛṇa-cít-, generated from a Zwangslage (predicament, dilemma) in order to express the sense ‘entgegennehmen lassen’ barred from the other cmpd, which in his view means ‘die Busse entgegennehmen’. Scar also discusses ṛṇa-cyút- at some length (126-27), offering several possibilities, but not very usefully.

As for the notion of a man’s inborn debts in the RV, I think it is alluded to in our text, but quite rarely. The clearest ex. is in the late hymn X.135 (see my “The Earliest Evidence for the Inborn Debts of a Brahmin: A New Interpretation of Ṛgveda X.135.” Journal asiatique 302.2 [2014]: 245-57), but there is another more glancing reference to it in Maṇḍala VI in VI.20.11, also discussed in the art. cit. In that article I argue that the original system, as seen in the RV, involves only two debts: a son for the ancestors and sacrifice for the gods; Brahmacarya for the ṛṣis is a later addition after the institution of studentship had developed.

On the root affiliation of cakhā́da see EWA s.v. KHED and Kü (152-53), with lit. The pf., which appears only here in the RV, takes a double acc. On this pāda see Old.

and the parallel I.93.4, with √muṣ ‘steal’: yád ámuṣṇītam avasám paṇíṃ gā́ḥ.


## 02
Once again, the attributes and actions ascribed to Sarasvatī are decidedly unfeminine, starting with the almost comically off-kilter comparison of her to a rootgrubbing boar. The identification of the bisakhā́- as a boar is owing to Hoffmann (MSS 8: 5 = Aufs. 387). The point of comparison between the river and the boar must be their noise: śúṣmebhiḥ ‘with her snortings’, though the root-grubbing is presumably part of it, as the river in spate noisily pulls off pieces of the banks.

Note ávase in c, which echoes avasám in 1c and is in turn echoed by á (vi)vās(ema) in d.


## 03
The phonologically marked (plain b) name bṛ́ṣaya- is found elsewhere only in I.93.4, where his offspring (there called śéṣaḥ ‘remainder’) are destroyed as they are here. That is also the vs. that contains the parallel passage cited above ad vs. 1.

Although I.93 is a hymn to Agni and Soma and there are no clear connections between the hymns otherwise, at the very least we can probably assume that Bṛṣa was a paṇí-. I do not understand why víśva- modifies this PN: “every Bṛṣaya” meaning Bṛṣaya and his ilk? his kin? (MLW adds “In Latin a name can be used in the plural to mean ‘people like X’ Multi Mani Ariciae ‘There are many manius types at Aricia’ This is no doubt a universal.”) Or does this imply that the word is not a PN, but a meaningful descriptor of a foe? Acdg. to Klein (DGRV I.434-35), the 2nd hemistich begins with an ex. of inverse utá, conjoining the clauses of c and d though positioned at the beginning of c.

Although this is probably the default explan., I am drawn to Re’s more content-rich suggestion that utá sets up the contrast between the very different actions of c and d—though under that analysis we might expect a contrastively accented verb in c (*ávindaḥ), and, moreover, he gives no parallel passages in which utá has such a function.

The hapless ‘them’ (ebhyaḥ) in d must be the ‘god-scorners’ (deva-níd-) of a, as is the general consensus.

## 04-06
This tṛca is almost empty of content, in part because so much of each Gāyatrī — not a capacious meter in the first place — is occupied by repeated material: the last 6 of the 8 syllables of the 1st pāda of each vs. contain the nom. (4) or voc. (5, 6) of the NP devī́sárasvatī, and the b pādas of 4 and 6 contain responsive material: vā́jebhiḥ vājínīvatī (4) and x x vā́jeṣu vājini. Otherwise, as a helper (avitrī́) she is twice asked to help (4c avatu, 6b ávā). In the publ. tr. these two impvs. are rendered in two different ways: “Let … help” and “aid” respectively. I would now change the 2nd to “help” as well to mark their essential identity (save for ps.). [Note that the HvN restoration of avitry àvatu in 4c is wrong: correct their avitrí to avitrī́.]

## 05-06
This, the middle vs. of the tṛca, consists only of a rel. cl., which I consider preposed to vs. 6, though without a resumptive pronoun correlative with yáḥ. I supply one (‘him’) as obj. of ávā in 6b. Both Ge and Re instead supply ‘us’ as the obj. of that verb, leaving the rel. cl. in 5 without any syntactic tether. The middle vs. of the next tṛca (8) also consists just of a rel. cl.

## 07-09
Unlike the preceding tṛca, this one dispenses with repetition and therefore has more room for meat, comparatively speaking.


## 07
The vs.-initial utá seems to introduce the tṛca, as does the identically placed utá in vs. 10.


## 08
Like vs. 5, this middle vs. of the tṛca contains only a rel. cl., which I consider to hang off vs. 7, though it could also attach to the flg. vs. 9. Both 7 and 9 have an overt possible correlative for yásyāḥ in 8a: 7a syā́… sárasvatī, 9a sā́.


## 09
The various tr. (Ge, Re, Klein [DGRV I.402]) supply a verb in pāda a, reserving átan (c) for bc. I do not see why. Both Ge (n. 9a) and Re do allow for the possibility that átan has domain over the whole vs., but both identify that possible constr. as a zeugma. Again, I don’t see why -- while it is true that hatreds and rivers are different kinds of entities, mingling of the mental and the physical is standard practice in the RV.

Because of its position within the NP víśvā áti dvíṣaḥ, áti is probably not a preverb in tmesis, but rather an adposition. This view is supported by the fact that there are no other exx. of áti √tan in the RV (as Re points out) or elsewhere, at least acdg. to Mon-Wms.

The position of anyā́ḥ identifies the sisters as a defined and limited group, and of course, as the next vs. states (10b saptásvasā), Sarasvatī has precisely seven sister rivers.


## 10
On tṛca-introducing utá see ad 7 above.

We might expect the splv. priyátamā in this construction.

I don’t exactly know how to interpr. the VP stómyā bhūt, with injunc. aor. of √bhū (or indic. aor? the Saṃhitā sequence stómyābhūt could contain augmented abhūt) and the pseudo-gerundive stómya-. The same construction is found in vs. 12 hávyā bhūt (or hávyā *abhūt). In vs. 12 Hoffmann (140) takes it as iterative, presumably because of the āmreḍita vā́je-vāje: “'ist bei jedem Preiskampf anzurufen.” But √bhū is a change-of-state verb and the aorist should (in a wellbehaved language) be punctual. In both vss. the standing characteristics of Saravatī are being described, so she should not have “become one worthy to be praised/invoked,” because the just-mentioned characteristics are not new. We might speculate that, because there's no injunctive of √as, in order to express a nontemporally marked copula (as opposed to a nominal sentence with suppressed copula) you have to turn to √bhū and the aorist injunctive. But this seems like a long shot. Ge and Re take it as modal: “… sei … preisenswert”; “soit apte à (recevoir) … la louange” (though Re remarks “bhūt au sens d’abhūt,” without recognizing that the Saṃhitā text could in fact contain abhūt). Note that vs. 13 (which is not part of this tṛca) contains a predicated pseudo-gerundive in the same semantic sphere, upastútyā ‘to be praised’, without aux.


## 11
In b urú rájaḥ ‘broad realm’ is identical with antárikṣam ‘midspace’.

Perhaps supplying two terms for one place is designed to give the impression of the usual three-termed whole, earth, midspace, heaven — here: earth, midspace x2. The river’s physical position presumably precludes claiming that she has filled heaven as well.


## 12
But heaven as part of her domain is apparently smuggled in, without naming it, in triṣadhásthā ‘having three seats’ opening this vs. The vs. in general is characterized by fairly straightforward numerology: in addition to the three seats, the seven parts are presumably her sister rivers and “five peoples” is the familiar expression for the totality of the Ārya. The 1st vs. of the tṛca inaugurated the numerology with saptásvasā ‘having seven sisters’.

On hávyā bhūt see comm. ad vs. 10.


## 13
The sequence mahínāsu is perfectly ambiguous. It can be a fem. loc. pl. of the poorly attested them. stem mahína-, as I take it in the publ. tr. and as Old is inclined to do. Or, with Pp., Ge, and Re, it can be disjoined into mahínā āsu, nom. sg.

fem. to the same rare them. stem and loc. pl. fem. to the near-deictic pronoun, unaccented because the referent is in the discourse. (Gr actually lists both mahínā and mahínāsu for this passage.) The difference in meaning is minimal: my “… who by her greatness shines … among the great (rivers)” versus “the great one who by her greatness shines … among the (rivers).” I now find that I am more disposed to go with the Pp. analysis, for reasons of wordplay, not meaning. The instr. mahimnā́in this passage is one of only three exx. of this form in the RV, with the restored -mncluster to the stem mahimán- -- against well-attested instr. mahinā́with the (old) cluster reduction of -mn- to -n-. If we accept the Pp. interpr., the adjacent words mahimnā́mahínā would implicitly play on both forms of the instr., with the nom. sg.

mahínā differing from the standard instr. mahinā́only by accent. If we instead take mahínāsu as a loc., that play is lost or at least considerably diluted.

The construction of b, esp. of anyā́ḥ, rests on that of 9ab.

On upastútyā see comm. ad vs. 10.


## 14
In b the standard tr. (Ge, Re; cf. also Hoffmann 48) take páyasā with the 2nd cl.: “do not come up short with your milk.” However, mā́is almost always clauseinitial, whereas this interpr. requires it to come in 2nd position, with the enclitic naḥ even further into the clause. Moreover, no other forms of √dagh are construed with an instr. Instead I take ápa spharīḥ as intransitive ‘spring away’, with páyasā a species of instr. of accompaniment or, perhaps, an instr. of separation.
