+++
title = "062"

+++
Aśvins The first part of the hymn is marked by repeated dual prns. opening the vs. or hemistich: 1c yā́, 2a, 3a, 4a, 5a tā́, 5c yā́, 6a tā́. This pattern more or less coincides with the division of the hymn discussed in the publ. intro. After the beg. of vs. 6 the pattern is broken and does not reappear.


## 01
The usual ambiguity of jára- ‘awake’ or ‘sing’, with the usual possible double application in a context like this, though járamāṇasya in 4a speaks for ‘sing’.

In c usrā́ is taken as du. by Gr., flg. the Pp. However, it more likely represents usrā́ḥ in sandhi, a gen. sg. fem. See extensive disc. by Old ad II.39.2, as well as his brief acknowledgement of this underlying form in his comm. on this vs..; Ge’s tr. reflects this interpr. Inter alia, 3 (V.3.8, 45.8, VIII.46.21) of the 5 occurrences of vyúṣi are preceded by a fem. gen. sg. asyā́(ḥ), referring to Dawn, and the 4th (besides this one) has a voc. of Dawn uṣo vyúṣi (VII.81.2). On fem. gen. sg. usrā́ḥ see comm. ad VI.3.6 In his n. 1d Ge hesitates about the root affiliation of the desid. yúyūṣataḥ (√yu ‘join’ or √yu ‘separate’) and the function of pári (preverb or adposition). Although his tr. reflects a root affiliation to ‘join’ (“… zu umspannen suchen”), he offers an alternative tr. in the n. reflecting ‘separate’ (“… fortzurücken suchen”), an interpr.

followed by Heenen (Desid. 209). Such an interpr. would be conceptually possible: in the dim light of dawn and the morning mists, the Aśvins allow the boundaries of earth to be seen by “separating” them. However, I consider √yu ‘join’ more likely, in the sense, with pári, of ‘encompass’, referring to the usual round-the-world journey of the Aśvins. The constr. seems a conflation or crossing of the usual sadyáḥ [H+E] pári √i/yā [/VERB OF MOTION] expression “encircle heaven and earth in a single day,” as in I.115.3, 128.3, III.58.8, IV.45.7, etc., with the prior act of harnessing (√yu) the horses. For passages that incl. ántān (as here), see V.47.4, X.108.5: e.g., V.47.4 diváś caranti pári sadyó ántān “They circle around the ends of heaven in a single day.”


## 02
This vs. presents both number and person disagreement, the first more acute than the second. As noted above, the vs. begins with the dual NA prn. tā́, surely referring to the Aśvins, and this 1st pāda ends with an apparent dual part. cakramāṇā́ presumably modifying the prn. But the next pāda contains a plural verb rurucuḥ (rurucū in sandhi), which cannot take the dual as subject -- nor as object. (Because of its sandhi position cakramāṇā́could instead reflect underlying pl. -ā́ḥ, but the initial tā́seems almost designed to anchor the participle as dual as well.) Curiously both Ge and Kü (431) tr. the dual NP as subj. of the pl. verb without comment -- either because of a rare grammatical lapse on their parts or because they view it (without comment) as an example of improper agreement. (It is certainly true that a dual

*rurucatuḥ would be metrically disastrous, so lax haplology would be thinkable.)
I believe that we must take the number and the number disharmony seriously, and I therefore take pādas a and b as separate clauses. The first lacks a finite verb.

We can either consider the participle as predicated (“they two [are] striding …”) or, my preference, as pendant to 1cd, with dual its subj. As noted in the publ. intro., there is another likely enjambment between vss. 2 and 3. The next question is the identity of the pl. subj. of d. There is one pl. form in pāda a: instr. pl. śúcibhiḥ. Ge and Kü take this as referring to the rájobhiḥ ‘spaces’ in b, but Re suggests that it ancitipates the horses (áśvaiḥ) in 3bc. If we accept Re’s identification of the ‘gleaming ones’ as horses, this provides a possible pl. subj. for rurucuḥ. As gleaming ones themselves, they could “shine the radiant beam of the chariot” through the spaces. This may make them sound a little like Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer, but at least it avoids a grammatical solecism.

The ps. disagreement is, by contrast, very mild and standard RVic practice: the dual subj. returns in 2cd but as 2nd ps. rather than 3rd, as we learn by the verb yāthaḥ late in pāda d.

Note c purū́várāṃsi, a rhyme form to urū́várāṃsi ending 1d.


## 03
This vs. presents a different type of grammatical disharmony, though it again concerns how to construe the first pāda. Once again it begins with du. tā́, but in this case that prn. can be the subj. of the 2nd dual pf. ūhathuḥ. (Though by my rules,= I would prefer not to have a 3rd ps. prn serving as subj. to a non-imperatival verb [see my “sa figé”], I do have to reckon with a fairly clear ex. in 6ab.) The problems lie in 1) vartíḥ ‘circuit’ and 2) yád. To begin with the 2nd, if yád is functioning as a subordinating conjunction and ab is a single clause, ūhathuḥ in b should be accented.

(It is not clear to me what Ge does with the yád; he seems just to ignore it.) Now yád is badly positioned for a clausal subordinator, and it is possible that rather than being a subordinating conjunction it’s functioning as a sort of izafe in the phrase tyád vartír yád áradhram, connecting the adj. áradhram to vartíḥ. I would be inclined to that interpr. if it weren’t for the problem of vartíḥ itself. This noun is always the complement of the verb √yā in the phrase “drive the/a/your circuit,” incl. in this same hymn, 10ab … vartíḥ … yātam, and in the next one, with phraseology similar to ours, VI.63.2 pári ha tyád vartír yāthaḥ … It would be very difficult to make it the obj. of ūhathuḥ, which already has an obj. of its own in any case. But the preceding pāda, 2d, has a form of √yā, and I suggest that we simply supply it in 3a as well, which is again pendant on the preceding vs. By this interpr., subordinating yád is still badly positioned, but it could have been displaced by the insistently fronted tā́in this section of the hymn. I take áradhram as a neut. adv., but it could also modify vártiḥ (“unslackening circuit”) without benefit of an izafe.

The lexeme pári √śi means lit. ‘lie around’ and is used, e.g., of Vṛtra surrounding the flood in IV.19.2, etc. Assuming that śayádhyai, pári here belongs to the same lexeme, it must have a developed sense: to surround and thus circumscribe, keep within bounds. Why a “pious mortal” would be pursuing a course that needs such control is not clear to me. I suppose it could just mean that, since the Aśvins circle around the earth (1cd), that circle marks the boundaries of where humans can wander.

Note the echo effect of vártiḥ (a) / vyáthiḥ (d).


## 04
As noted ad vs 1., járamāṇa- here seems to belong to ‘sing’, not ‘awaken’, and therefore may limit the form in 1b as well. Based on 1b huve járamāṇaḥ “singing, I call upon” and 5b ā́vivāse “I seek to attract,” I have supplied a 1st ps.

referent for the genitives here. The bahuvrīhi yuyujāná-saptī ‘having a harnessed team, having a team that has been harnessed’ is unusual in having a middle pf. part. as its first member. (See AiG II.1.43.) The publ. tr. “having harnessed their team,” though it follows both Gr and Ge, is misleading: I do not think it is a bharád-vāja-, codayán-mati type governing cmpd. I would therefore emend to “having a harnessed team,” with the occasional pass. value of the med. pf. to √yuj; see Kü (407). However, things may be somewhat more complex. There are four occurrences of this med. part., one nearby in VI.59.5, three in the same metrical position as here (immed. after an opening of 5). All of them are transitive. It is possible that a free phrase like *yuyujānā́sáptī “the two having yoked their teams” became univerbated and reinterpreted, with adjustment of accent and the like. But I do not insist on this.

In d pratnáḥ ‘age-old’ qualifying the priest contrasts with návyas- ‘newer’ in a, qualifying the singer, as well as yúvānā ‘two youths’ in d referring to the Aśvins. The first pair recurs in the next vs., 5b. See comm. there. The “age-old Hotar” is of course Agni.


## 05
The stems návyas- ‘newer’ and pratná- ‘age-old’, found at opposite ends of the preceding vs. (a and d), are juxtposed here in the phrase pratnā́návyasā, in case the duller members of the audience had missed the contrastive terminology in 4. But this phrase is doing two other things as well: du. pratnā́refers to the Aśvins, who were, in 4d, identified as yúvānā ‘youths’; and návyasā modifies vácasā, “with a newer speech,” repairing the slightly off phrase in 4a, where it was the singer, not his song, who was newer.

The pf. babhūvátuḥ should not have been rendered as a straight pres. in the publ. tr. I would change to “who have become.” It also forms a slight figure with śámbhaviṣṭhā, which precedes it immediately before the pāda break.


## 06
As noted ad vs. 3, I would prefer not to have the 3rd ps. prn. tā́serving as a subject of an indicative 2nd ps. verb (pf. ūhathuḥ), but the repetitive tā́pattern may have imposed it here.

The adj. areṇú- ‘dustless’ (8x) twice qualifies ‘paths’ (I.35.11, 163.6); the latter of these passages is in the instr. pl. as here. This suggests that yójanebhiḥ ‘treks’ is used here as a near synonym for ‘paths’.

Ge takes bhujántā to √bhuj ‘benefit, enjoy à utilize’ (benutzen), but better, with Gr, Re, Lub, to √bhuj ‘bend’. In any case this participle is clearly meant to echo the name Bhujyu.


## 07
In d I take íti as a summarizing device, indicating that the three exploits sketched in abc are examples of the Aśvins’ sumatí-. With Ge I see no choice but to supply a verb like ‘you showed’ to govern the acc. sumatím.

As is clear to all, cyávānā is at the least a play on the name Cyavāna (same accent), another client of the Aśvins.


## 08
The grammatical identity of bhū́mā (Pp. bhū́ma) is disputed. Ge considers it to belong to a (hapax) adj. stem *bhū́man- derived from bhūmán- ‘abundance’, used adverbially (“reichlich”). This does not seem to have much to recommend it. More appealing is to make it somehow related to a word for ‘earth’. Re tries an instr. of bhū́man- ‘earth’, but not with much conviction. Old rehearses -- mostly to firmly reject -- other possibilities, incl. the one that I favor: that it is the loc. of bhū́mi-. He objects that we should expect (and do indeed get) bhū́myām to this fem. stem, but at this period I don’t think this would be necessary for a fem. short-i-stem. His other object is more cogent, that to a short-i-stem we would expect bhū́mau pāda-final. I don’t have a clinching arg. against this, but would point out that there is some variation in these patterns. And this pāda seems to be playing with the heaven / earth distinction by other means: we first have the two world halves (rodasī), followed by (pra-)dívaḥ … bhū́mā, which distantly evokes dyā́vā-bhū́mī. The off-balance pairing is matched by the off-balance pairing of gods and mortals discussed immediately below.

The conjoined NP devā́nām utá martyatrā́“of gods and among mortals” shows the familiar god / mortal opposition, but what Klein (DGRV I.311-12) calls “a peculiar absence of morphological parallelism.” It is tempting to make it mean “the anger of the gods towards mortals,” but I think utá is there precisely to block that reading, pace Scar (429) “Den Groll der Götter … der auch auf die Sterblichen gerichtet …ist.”


## 09
As noted in the publ. intro., the syntax of this vs. is unregulated. However, the sense is quite clear. The first hemistich consists of a rel. clause, whose rel. prn.

and finite verb are both in the 3rd sg.: yáḥ … cíketat “who will keep watch”; it also contains another verbal form, vidádhat, which I take, with Ge and Old, as a pres.

part. nom. sg. m. to the redupl. pres. of √dhā, but which could be, as Old points out, a short-vowel subjunctive (so, “… will regulate … and will keep watch”). (Nothing rides on the choice.) But this happy singular environment is interrupted by a dual nom./acc. (which must be nom. in this case) rā́jānau “two kings,” which is further specified by the two nom. singulars mitró váruṇaḥ. The sense is clearly “which one (of) the two kings, M (or) V …,” but this is not what it says: “which one, the two kings, Mitra, Varuṇa, will keep watch,” leaving the audience to choose what subject, in what number, it prefers.

I take rájasaḥ as the gen. obj. of cíketat (so also Old), in the usual syntactic pattern of verbs of perception, which can take acc. or gen. complements. By contrast, Ge has it dependent on rā́jānāu, but, as Re points out, the two are rather distant, and further I know of no other passages in which rájas- is construed with rā́jan-, although that expression would be appealingly alliterative -- though it is true that M+V are called dhartā́rā rájasaḥ “upholders of the space” in V.69.4.

The second hemistich has no direct syntactic connection to the first, though again it is quite clear what is meant. It contains a 2nd sg. impv. asya ‘hurl’, which must be addressed to the referent of the rel. prn. in ab -- that is, either Mitra or Varuṇa. Although it is common to change person reference even within RVic vss., it is somewhat unusual to do so in this kind of syntagm. In d Re calls the phrase dróghāya cid vácase a bahuvrīhi “défait,” for *droghavacas- [he gives no accent], like drogha-vā́c-. Judging from his tr. “auf den gar verlogenen Anuiden,” Ge seems to agree. But this seems unnec.; the dative targets of the missile in c and d are both s-stem abstracts, rákṣas- ‘demonic power’ and vácas- ‘speech’ respectively. I see no reason to try to manipulate the target in d to be personal. Scar (469) interpr. as I do.


## 10
I supply ‘to prosper’ with tánayāya on the basis of nearby VI.49.5 (=I.183.3) … iṣayádhyai, vartír yāthás tánayāya tmáne ca, with very similar phraseology.

I take pāda c with ab, rather than with d, as is the norm (Ge, Kü [509]), in order to capture the opposition between ántara- ‘nearer’ and sánutya- ‘distant’. Cf., e.g., VI.5.4, which has both ántara- and sánutya- as well as vanuṣyá-. By my interpr. the Aśvins are urged to come near to us, “because of the distant dereliction of a(nother) mortal” -- that is, because some other mortal, far away, hasn't done his ritual duty, they should come to us, who will. I suppose I could construct a way to take c with d: some mortal’s dereliction of duty would cause the Aśvins to chop off some heads.

But I find it easier to account for c as presented. The last, independent pāda just takes part in the general bloodthirstiness of the last few vss.

Against Ge, who takes it to √vṛj, I assign vavṛktam to √vraśc ‘hew’, along with Whit (Rts), Gr, Re, and Kü, inter alia. Cf. the clinching parallel in X.87.16 téṣāṃ śīrṣā́ṇi … ápi vṛśca.


## 11
As noted in the publ. intro., the last phrase of the hymn, gṛṇaté citrarātī “you two providing bright gifts for the singer” exactly repeats the end of vs. 5, which marked a transition in the earlier part of the hymn.
