+++
title = "063"

+++
Aśvins The hymn contains many metrical irregularities and a marked tendency towards 10-syl. lines. See Old for details and disc.


## 02
The abl. (or, in principle, gen.) riṣáḥ is a bit hard to construe. Whenever this form occurs elsewhere (and it’s not rare), it is with a form of either √pā or √rakṣ: “protect from harm.” Ge supplies ‘protect’ here as well: “(zum Schutz) gegen Schaden.” However, in the absence of a lexical ‘protect’ and in the presence of a verb of motion (yāthaḥ), I take it as an ablative of place from which.


## 03
There is no expressed subj. to ákāri and the abl./gen. ándhasaḥ has nothing to depend on. Ge takes it as a partitive gen. (n. 3a) but simply tr. as an indef. subject (“Trank ist euch bereitet”), while Re takes it as belonging to an elliptical construction and suggests supplying either sutám or pā́ntam. I prefer to assume that the subject of ákāri has been gapped, and ándhasaḥ is an abl. of source.

In this context I take várīman ‘in/on the expanse’ as referring to the ritual ground on which the barhis has been strewn, rather than simply Ge’s “in voller Breite.” See váriman in 11.

vavande is of course ambig. as to person, but given the 1st ps. in 2a and no intermediate 3rd ps. officiant, it is most likely 1st (so also Ge).

In real-world terms the phrase “the stones have anointed you” is, of course, distinctly peculiar. But in the foreshortened universe of RVic discourse, this simply abbreviates the sequence “the stones pressed out the soma liquid, which was prepared for you to drink, and your drinking of it was as if it were anointing you (and perhaps did, by running down your chins).”


## 04
The ‘gift’ (rātí-) in b is the ladle containing the ghee. Re points to passages (III.19.2, IV.6.3) where the ladle is described as rātín- ‘possessing/providing gifts’.

In d Ge takes áyukta as passive, with the Hotar as subj. and nā́satyā as the obj.

of a loc. inf. hávīman: “der eingespant is, die Ns zu laden.” The pass. interpr. is explicitly rejected by both Old and Re, in favor of a rendering like mine. Although Ge’s interpr. is appealing in certain ways, there are several things against it: 1) the well-attested mid. root aor. of √yuj is almost always transitive (pass. áyukta in V.17.3, I.48.7) -- there is after all a distinct passive aor. áyoji, áyujran to express this function; 2) I know of no instances (nor does Old) in which loc. hávīman(i) functions as an infin. and takes an object.


## 06
I assume that “the flourishing of Sūryā” is simply an elaborate way of saying Sūryā. (MLW comments simply “Cf. Gk. βίη Ἡρακλείη.”) Ge (n. 6b; fld. by Re) suggests that it is meant to convey that the beauty of Sūryā increases the beauty of the Aśvins but I don't see this. I take the dat. śubhé in the same way as śriyé (5a and commonly elsewhere, e.g., in the next hymn VI.64.1), vápuṣe (6c), as vaguely attached datives of purpose/result.

The latter (vápuṣe) Ge takes adverbially (“erstaunlich”), and he construes vām simply as a poss. gen. (“Eure Vogel(rosse)”). I think there is more content here and take ánu with vām (“after/following you”), separated because vām is taking Wackernagel’s position. The beautiful chariot of the beautiful Aśvins carrying the beautiful Sūryā must have been an amazing sight, and the birds in their wonder follow it. As their relative geographical positions indicate (birds after chariot), I think these birds are not, or not only, the Vogelrosse pulling the Aśvins chariot, but also the birds in the world who see the marvel and rise up to accompany it. The songs of the birds in a choir (vā́ṇī) reach the Aśvins to make them well-praised (súṣṭutā). As this indicates, I take súṣṭutā as dual (so also Gr, Ge), a proleptic adj.

describing the state of the Aśvins after the birdsongs reach them. However, as Ge points out (n. 6d), súṣṭutā could also be a nom. sg. fem. modifying vā́ṇī ‘choir, music’, and the adj. is in fact strategically placed between the nom. sg. fem. and the duals. Although a “well-praised choir” doesn’t make a lot of sense in this context, Ge cites VIII.100.11 … vā́k … súṣṭutā -- though it’s worth pointing out that in that passage the reference is to the goddess Speech, while in our passage, as noted, I take the vā́ṇī as referring to the “choir” of birdsong.

## 07
As noted in the publ. intro., the chariot journey in this vs. echoes the mythological one in vs. 6 but updated to a wish for the present day.

Ge divides the 2nd hemistich into two separate clauses, by pāda. In this interpr.

the nouns in d are in the nom. pl. and follow the Aśvins’ chariot that was launched in c (“viele Labsale … folgen ihm”). The publ. tr. takes the two pādas as a single cl., with the nouns in d in the acc. pl. and the chariot following them. Neither of these conjures up an entirely comfortable picture if ánu is strictly ‘following’ - either all the good stuff got left behind and has been sent after the chariot, or it’s all zipping along ahead. But my accusative alternative could be taken to mean that the refreshments et al. are already at the ritual ground. This would be supported by ab, esp. b. But it is contra-indicated by VI.62.4 in the immediately preceding Aśvin hymn, where pŕkṣam and íṣam are two of the things the Aśvins are bringing.

However, if iṣídh- is a variant of niṣṣídh- ‘tribute’ (see below), the first of these alternatives is the more likely.

The hapax iṣídh- is of uncertain formation and meaning, though it obviously falls into the category of desirable things at the ritual. There are (at least) two competing etymologies. One has it as the doublet of niṣṣídh- ‘tribute’ (for lit. see EWA I.198; favored by Re); the other (see EWA I.200) as a deformation of a putative *iṣudh-, like the likewise hapax pṛkṣúdh- (I.141.4), serving as the base of the denom. iṣudhyá- and cognate to Aves. išud-. The ud(h)- in these forms is explained by Humbach as the zero-grade of the PIE root √*uedh ̯ ‘lead’, no longer found in Indo-Aryan as a verbal root. (I suggest an alternative etym. of iṣudhyá- ad I.128.6 and more fully in my forthcoming article “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.”) Narten (YH 159-63) accepts Humbach’s etym. and further explains our iṣídh- as altered from *iṣúdh- by folk etymology with √idh ‘kindle, burn’ (162 n. 104) in passages in which the word is connected with Agni, since kindling wood is Agni’s source of strength. This last seems quite weak to me: ‘burn’ contributes no obvious semantics to the noun at least in its only occurrence here -- which has nothing to do with Agni -- and the iṣudhyá- forms, though not numerous, ought to provide some anchor against such a deformation. For this reason I tentatively follow the first interpr., though only because nothing better seems to be currently on offer. If iṣídh- is somehow a doublet of niṣṣídh-, which occurs several times with pūrvī́ḥ (III.51.5, VI.44.11) as here, then the reference would be to the tributes that the Aśvins received from the mortal worshippers. I would now alter the tr. to “… after the refreshments, fortifying powers, and the many tributes.”


## 08
The hapax ásakrām is another proleptic adj. (see 6d). This fem. sg. can apply equally to the two fem. sgs. dhenúm and iṣám.

The ánu that has not yielded completely satisfactory sense in 6c and 7d here is entirely at home: the various ritual offerings to the Aśvins, both verbal (stútaḥ … suṣṭutíḥ) and physical (rásāḥ, the soma juices), accrue to them following the gift they bestow on the sacrificers.


## 09
Although in the publ. tr. I accept Ge’s interpr. of pakvā́as ‘cooked (food)’ (so also Gr, Hoffmann [231], Klein [DGRV I.97], Scar [587]), in this mass of valuable livestock I now find it unlikely that the poet would memorialize for posterity the gift of a few ready-prepared meals. It is more likely to be a technical term in animal husbandry -- perhaps ‘mature(d)’ (< ‘ripened’), qualifying horses or cattle of a particular age. Although it is neut. pl. and therefore can’t qualify the animals directly, I suggest that parallel to sg. śatám in the conjoined phrase sumīḷhé śatám peruké ca pakvā́, we may supply *śatā́(ni) *gávām pakvā́“mature hundreds of cows” for “*hundreds of mature cows.” A similar constr. seems to be suggested by Gr (Nachtr. to śatá-), where he proposes that pakvā́be construed with śatám as an ex. of his 10) “der Singular neben einem in gleichem Casus stehenden Substantiv des Plurals.” Although this particular interpr. seems precluded by the ca in the passage, I do think the neut. pakvā́qualifies a (gapped) neut. numeral. I would now alter the tr.

to “and (hundreds) of mature (cows) at (the hands of) Peruka.” Hoffmann (230-31) interprets the two clauses in the 2nd hemistich as modal, with injunc. dāt rendered as ‘soll … schenken’ and the sandhi form abhiṣā́ca interpr.

as an inf. *abhiṣā́ce with the sense “soll … folge.” This is all in service of his somewhat bizarre insistence that the injunctive aorist doesn’t express immediate past tense (aktuelle Vergangenheit), which is, in his view, the province of the augmented aorist. At least in my view, Hoffmann’s restricted and often non-linguistically grounded model of the injunctive has led him to deny the obvious intent of the dānastuti here: the gift generally needs to have been given to be praised! As for the supposed infinitive *abhiṣā́ce (which, it must be admitted, he does not insist on), there are no other such forms, whereas the nom. pl. is attested elsewhere. We must simply accept that it takes verbal rection, here the acc. pl. ṛṣvā́n; see Scar (587-88).

On smáddiṣṭi- see comm. ad III.45.5.


## 10
As in the immediately preceding vs. Hoffmann (230-31) interprets the two forms of dāt as modal, “soll … spenden.” The same objections apply.

The voc. nāsatyā was omitted in the publ. tr.

The voc. vīra is stubbornly sg., though the reference must be to the du. Aśvins.

Perhaps, as MLW suggests, simply a shortened du. voc. 
## 11
I take loc. váriman in the same way as its variant in 3a, as referring to the ritual ground. Ge here: “in weitem Masse,” seemingly referring to the patrons.
