+++
title = "064"

+++
Dawn


## 01
supátha- and sugá- recur in 4a, conjoined by utá.

Note the phonological reciprocity between víśvā and vásvī in the same metrical position in c and d respectively. The latter is, of course, simply the fem. to vásu- ‘good, goods’, and here it must make at least partial reference to the goods Dawn disburses, she being here the Dakṣiṇā, priestly gift, personified. This could have been better conveyed in the publ. tr. by ‘goodly’ rather than just ‘good’. I think there may also be a buried grammatical pun, for, if there existed such a stem, the -in-stem possessive to vásu- should be *vasvín- ‘possessing goods’, with nom. sg. *vasvī́, differing from our form only by accent.

It would be possible to construe pāda with abhūt and a pred. nom.: “she has become the goodly priestly gift …” But it is common in Dawn hymns to announce the arrival of Dawn in the first verse, and an annunciatory “she has appeared” (< “come into being”) is more in harmony with the usual practice of Dawn hymns. This is the tack of the standard tr. (Ge, Re; see also Gonda [Ved. Lit. 218]).


## 03
As Ge points out (n. 3cd), the acc. śátrūn must be read as the obj. of both similes and acc. támaḥ ‘darkness’ as the obj. of both frames, though the former only appears in c and the latter in d. The two similes compare Dawn not only to a male figure, but to a skillful, highly trained male warrior: archer and chariot-driver.

In c the simile marker iva occurs after the 2nd term, not the 1st (might expect

*śū́ra ivā́stā śátrūn). Perhaps śū́ra- ástar- is perceived as a unity, “champion archer”;
cf. I.70.11 ásteva śū́raḥ, IV.36.6 śū́ro ástā, I.8.4 śū́rebhir ástṛbhiḥ, and, with lexical substitution, II.42.2 vīró ástā. There is also the fact that in similes with three terms matching two different cases, there’s some fluctuation in the position of the simile marker.


## 04
For sugá- supátha- see vs. 1.

Ge suggests that avāté “(even) when it is windless” describes a wonder, that Dawn crosses the water even without wind in her sails. I am not sure what evidence we have for sails, in addition to oars, in ancient Indian boats, but I have not systematically inquired into this. However, the “windless” circumstances might simply make reference to the previous pāda: the waters are also sugá- ‘easy to travel’ when there is no wind and therefore no turbulence. The word avāté also plays off the descriptor of Dawn in the next vs. (5a), ávātā ‘unsurpassable, unvanquished’; Old in fact suggests that we might read *ávāte, voc. of the latter stem, though a word play is much more satisfying poetically, and he does not dismiss the ‘windless’ interpr. out of hand.


## 05
The beginning of the first pāda, sā́ā́[so Pp., Saṃhitā sā́] vaha yā́, replicates almost exactly the beginning of 4c, sā́na ā́vaha. The close similarity of the two openings supports the disjoining of sā́in 5a into sā́ā́, which is also required by the meter.

As noted above, nom. sg. fem. ávātā ‘unvanquished, unsurpassable’ plays on the loc. avāté ‘windless’ in 4b. The neg. stem ávāta- is generally paired with the positive pres. part. vanván, in the phrase vanvánn ávātaḥ “winning but unwon” (5x, incl. VI.16.20, 18.1 in this maṇḍala). But here and in nearby VI.67.8 it is found in the fem. and outside of the contrastive pair. In neither of these passages is the application of the adjective clear. I have therefore, somewhat reluctantly, adopted a version of Re’s attenuated ‘insurpassable’ (which, however, he seems to reject in his n.).

Both Ge and Re take cd as a unified rel. cl. (e.g., “die du als Göttin ...

erschienen bist”), but this is impossible, because bhūḥ is unaccented. I instead attach c to ab, and take d as an independent imperatival clause. I now see that it would be possible to take cd together, with the nominal rel. cl. yā́ha devī́acting as an izafe; as noted elsewhere (passim) such izafe-like rel. phrases can be embedded. This would produce a tr. “You, who are a goddess, o daughter of heaven, become worthy to be seen …,” with no appreciable difference in meaning. It might then be better to stick with the arrangement of the publ. tr.


## 06
This vs. is identical to I.124.12.

Pāda b may contain another izafe-like embedded rel. construction, like the possible one in 5c: náraś ca yé pitubhā́jaḥ “and the men who are partakers of food.” The question turns on where to construe hemistich-final vyùṣṭau. It could belong to the rel. cl. “… partake of food at the first flush,” in which case there would be no embedding. But it seems as if this temporal designation should apply to both actions: the flying up of the birds and the eating of the men, not just the latter. Moreover te in 2nd pos. of the hemistich is most easily construed with vyùṣṭau at the end, in which case the nominal rel. must be embedded.

This hemistich also seems syntactically unbalanced. If we assume that we have an “X and which Y” construction, conjoining birds and men (so Klein, DGRV I.56), they should be the joint subject of úd … apaptan ‘have flown up’, an action appropriate to the first group but not the second. Surely the real intent is that at the moment of dawn the birds fly up and the men eat, so what is intended to be conjoined are the two verbal notions, with one a finite verb and the other the 2nd member of a root noun cmpd. (on which see Scar 352).
