+++
title = "065"

+++
Dawn


## 01
As Re points out, the expected expression is duhitā́diváḥ “daughter of heaven,” but it has been elaborated here by the cmpd divojā́ḥ ‘born of heaven’, with the gen. as 1st member. The standard phrase returns in the last vs. This vs. piles on the words for night and darkness: rāmyā́su … támasaś cid aktū́n “amid the nights … even across the nocturnal shades of darkness.”


## 02
The same emphasis on the dark night is found here in táma ū́rmyāyāh (with acc. támaḥ as head noun, against the dep. gen. támasaḥ in the previous vs. (1d). With ū́rmyā- here the poet introduces yet another ‘night’ word.

## 03-04
There is lexical chaining between 3d and 4a with the identical phrase vidhaté rátnam in the same metrical position.

## 04-05
For the repeated opening idā́(4a, 4b, 4c, 5a) see publ. intro. The two outer exx. are both idā́hí; the two inner ones are followed by phonologically similar them. datives: 4b idā vīrā́ya / 4c idá víprāya.


## 06
The voc. divo duhitar repairs, or “de-elaborates,” the phrase in 1a; see ad loc. ## 066
Maruts On the difficulties and with an overview of the Maruts’ birth story in vss. 1-5, see publ. intro. The hymn was treated at length by P. von Bradke, “Von der Marut wunderbarer Geburt, RV̥ 6, 66” in Fs. von Roth (1893), 117-25, whose disc. is in great part incorporated into Old’s notes.


## 01
This vs. is conceptually, lexically, and syntactically similar to VI.48.22; see extensive disc. ad loc., with ref. to other passages alluding to this mythological event.

For nā́ma pátya- “own a name,” cf. II.37.2 dadír yó nā́ma pátyate “who owns the name ‘giver’,” adduced by Re.

The 2nd hemistich consists of a truncated anyá- … anyá- construction, with the 2nd anyá- gapped. This implicitly contrastive structure must account for the accent on pīpā́ya in the first clause.

Contra the standard interpr. (Old, Ge, Re), I take śukrám and ū́dhaḥ separately, as the double acc. obj. of √duh, rather than having the former an adj. modifying ‘udder’, also in other relevant passages that contain the same two words (II.34.2, IV.3.10).


## 02
For a more complex comparison of the Maruts to fire(s), see vs. 10.

In c, where the gen. pl. eṣām seems to preclude the Maruts as referent of the nom. pl. areṇávo hiraṇyáyāsaḥ, Sāy. supplies ráthāḥ, and this might be possible or at least harmless, although the positive evidence for it is slim. The 2nd adj. hiraṇyáyais used not infrequently of chariots or their parts (wheels, wheel-rims), but also of a wide range of other things, including gods and those include the Maruts (V.87.5); ‘dustless’ has a more limited range of application. In nearby VI.62.6 it qualifies yójanebhiḥ, rendered there as ‘treks’ and, as I argue ad loc., a near synonym for ‘paths’, which are twice described as ‘dustless’ (I.35.11, 163.6). This is as close as we’ll get to chariots: in its 8 occurrences it is never used of chariots or parts thereof.

It is, however, used of the Maruts in I.168.4. Because chariots are intrusive in our passage and interrupt the otherwise constant reference to the Maruts in the nom. pl.

(ab and, in my opinion, d) and because the combination of adjectives doesn’t point to chariots -- or any referent but the Maruts, who are described by both adjectives elsewhere -- I now think the nom. plurals in c refer to the Maruts. What then to do with eṣām? I propose construing it with the instrumentals in d. The pāda boundary intervenes, but this is hardly fatal. I would now emend the tr. to “dustless and golden, they came into being all at once with their (eṣām) manly and male powers.” However, pace Ge and Re, even if we were to keep ‘chariots’ as the referent in c, I do not think these same chariots could be the subj. of d. Rather, by that interpr., c is parenthetic and the Maruts return as subj. in d, which again treats the topic of their simultaneous birth. Ge’s parallels (see n. 2cd) contravene his tr. (“ihre staublosen goldigen (Wagen) sind zugleich mit ihren Manneskräften und Stärken entstanden”) because the parallel passages with sākám √jan (etc.) all concern the birth of the Maruts—certainly not their chariots! Pāda-init. sākám plays off identically position sakṛ́t in 1d.


## 03
There is much disagreement about this vs.; my interpr. is closest to Old. In my opinion (and in Old’s too, though he doesn’t use the term ‘gender-bending’), this once again, as in vs. 1, refers to the gender-bending androgyny of Pṛśni who fulfills both maternal and paternal roles in the birth of the Maruts, though Rudra is identified as their father in pāda a.

The masc. pl. rel. pronouns yé (a) and yā́n (b) have no direct correlative in either c or d. But both the gen. sg. maháḥ in c (see below) and subhvè in d (see below) pick up the masc. pl. conceptually. For a similar -- and clearer -- example see vs. 9, with ab referring to the Marut troop in the sg., and cd picking up that reference with pl. rel. prn. yé (c) and a pl. abl. noun (d).

In b, despite the lack of an identifying gendered pronoun or adj., the subject and the referent of dā́dṛviḥ must be Pṛśni, as is generally agreed.

In c Old discusses the possible interpr. of maháḥ at some length. Much depends on the analysis of vidé. Ge takes it as transitive (“denn die Mutter kennt ihre Grossen”), with maháḥ acc. pl.; Re as well, though with a diff. interpr. of maháḥ. But vidé is overwhelmingly pass.-intrans.; only VII.40.5, cited by Ge (n. 3c) seems to require a transitive interpr. I take vidé in its usual passive sense and interpr. maháḥ as a gen. sg. dependent on mātā́; the sg. referent is the collectivity of the Maruts in their flock.

Note the allit. in c: mātā́mahó mahī́and the etymological relationship between the last two terms. Note also the unusual pāda-final position of sā́, which may result both from being displaced by the alliterative sequence (though why not 1st position?) and from the desire for the striking repetitive ṣā́, sā́over the pāda and clause boundary. This repetition is enhanced by the matching vowels before and after: (mah)ī́ṣā́, sā́í(t). This is only one of two rukied ṣā́'s in the RV (the other = X.64.15 \#ví ṣā́), even though sā́occurs elsewhere in ruki environment (even pāda-finally, as in VIII.27.18 ... nú sā́#). I do not understand the reason for the ruki: there does not seem to be particularly close syntactic nexus between mahī́and sā́here.

Pāda d fully expresses the gender paradox, at least by my interpr. (and Old’s).

As noted in the publ. intro., gárbham √dhā ‘place the embryo’ is the defining idiom of the male role in pregnancy, and here it is difficult (but not impossible!) to avoid taking its subject to be the female Pṛśni. In fact, both Ge and Re (tr.) do wriggle out of it, by making sét [= śā́íd] pṛ́śniḥ a nominal sentence (Re’s “elle (s’appelle) Pṛśni” has a particularly peculiar charm) and supplying Rudra as the subj. of the idiom. But there is no support for this in the passage, and only insistence on expected gender roles can impose the interpr. Indeed the init. sā́íd draws attention to the paradox: “it was just her -- Pṛśni -- who emplanted the embryo. (Interestingly, while Re follows the Ge tack in his tr., in his comm. he embraces the paradox: “c’est Pṛśni qui (en fait : íd) a mis le germe …” Since the tr. and the comm. are found in the same fascicle of EVP -- X, pp. 40 and 98-99 respectively -- his about-face is headspinningly rapid. It should also be admitted that Ge [in n. 3d] also allows the possibility of a single clause and a feminine subject.) This leaves subhvè. In the Rudra-as-emplanter scenario, this dat. refers to Pṛśni (see Ge n. 3d and Re [tr.] “en (l’épouse) feconde,” also Scar 369), but part of the reason for Re’s change of heart was that he did not believe that subhvè could be fem.

(see his comm.). In the Pṛśni-as-emplanter scenario subhvè would refer to Rudra (so Gr, Old, Re [comm.]). I think neither solution is correct. The cmpd. subhū́- in the pl.

is used a number of times of the Maruts (5.41.13, 55.3, 59.3, 87.3), including once in a birth context: V.55.3 sākáṃ jātā́ḥ subhvàḥ “born all at once, good in essence.” As with mahȧḥ in pāda c I interpr. the singular here as referring to the collectivity of the Maruts.


## 04
Another difficult vs., esp. the end of pāda a: áyā nú, which has provoked much disc. (see esp. Old). I consider it a śleṣa. Central to my approach is the assumption that there’s a clause break before these two words in either reading. On the one hand, I have adopted von Bradke’s clever idea (op. cit., 121), that áyā nú is direct speech, with áyā the 1st sg. pres. subjunctive to √i ‘go’ followed by the temporal particle nú in expected clause-2nd position. This is the collective announcement of the Maruts, “who do not retreat from their birth”: “I will go now.” They are eager to exit the womb (or udder). We might of course expect a plural verb, but Marut reference always vacillates between pl. and collective sg. (see in fact the immediately preceding vs. 3), and this exact expression echoes that of Indra in the narrative of his unnatural birth in IV.18.2 nā́hám áto nír ayā “I will not go from here,” a narrative that might well have been familiar to all.

The other reading of áyā is the more generally accepted one, though I think other interpr. have missed a crucial detail. It is generally taken as the instr. sg. fem.

of the ayám prn. (back to Max Müller; see Ge n. 4a). But this form is ordinarily accented on the final, ayā́. Initial accent on the oblique forms of this pronominal stem is restricted to emphatic usage in pāda-initial position (cf. the variant usage of, e.g., ásya, asyá, and asya). Those like Ge and Re who take it as this instr. but construe it with the rest of pāda a must wave away the accent (or ignore it, as Re does). For such interpr. cf. “Die nicht vor der Geburt auf diese Art zurückscheuen …”; “… devant un naissance de la sorte” (my italics). However, init. accent is perfectly at home if we assume a clause break before áyā, an assumption supported by the position of nú, which overwhelmingly takes 2nd or modified 2nd position. I think it emphatically announces the way the birth really happened -- and given the unnaturalness of the birth (being “milked out” of their mother), emphasis is certainly called for.

Either of these interpr. seems to require that the yád in c actually have domain over b as well (though there might be a way out of that if one were sufficiently ingenious), but given the syntactic tangle the vs. is already in and the looseness of the relativization elsewhere in this hymn) (see a similar problem in the next vs., 5b, this does not seem to me too much of a problem.

In b it is not clear to me what flaws the Maruts needed to purify; Ge (n. 4b) suggests it’s the unnatural pregnancy and birth, and he may well be right.

Gr (and Lub) assign ukṣámānāḥ to √ukṣ ‘sprinkle’, but ‘grow’ seems more likely (so also Ge, Re).

Our problematic expression may have spawned the two ánu forms (in c and d) from áyā nú. The first is in the familiar expression ánu jóṣam (II.21.3, etc.) “according to / at pleasure”; the latter I construe with tanvàm (cf. I.147.4 ánu mrk̥ ṣīṣta tanvàm, with similar discontinuity). Neither √vakṣ / ukṣ nor √mṛc otherwise ánu.


## 05
This last vs. of the birth saga does not let up on obscurity, and my interpr.

differs in part from those of others, though there is general agreement on the point of the vs.; see, e.g., Ge (n. 5): that the Maruts got no milk from their mother, but undeterred, they quickly became the Maruts we know, with their shared name and their tumultuous behavior. It is striking that the vs. also identifies the Maruts with Pṛśni verbally. Not only is the same construction used for their names (1b, 5b; see next para.), but within the vs. both Pṛśni (a) and the Maruts (c) are called ayā́s- ‘irrepressible’ (with this adj. regularly used of the Maruts elsewhere), and sudā́nu- ‘of good drops/gifts’, a standing epithet of the Maruts, is applied to Pṛśni in d (see Ge’s n. 5d) The vs. is also linked ring compositionally with vs. 1. In 1b it is asserted that the two udders referred to in 1c and d — the latter being Pṛśni’s udder, which will produce the Maruts as milk — “own the same name ‘milker’” (samānáṃ nā́ma dhenú pátyamānam), while in 5b the Maruts after birth assume their (shared) name “Marut”: ā́nā́ma dhṛṣṇú mā́rutaṃ dádhānāḥ -- note, inter alia, the echo of dhenú in dhṛṣṇú. Note also 1c / 5a LOC doháse: in 1c the other (=non-Pṛśni) udder constantly gives milk (doháse) to mortals (márteṣu), while here in 5a Pṛśni does not give milk (ná … doháse) to the Maruts (yéṣu) even right after birth -- even though she milked them out of that very udder.

The vs. also has repeated phonological play with ayā́(a), ayā́so (c), (áv)a yāsad (d), picking up the problematic áyā of 4a.

In addition to its other problems, the vs. is metrically troubled, with a bad cadence in a and 9 syllables in c.

Both Ge and Old (and also von Bradke) take makṣū́with the b pāda, which requires the rel. cl. of pāda a to be embedded, but I think it goes rather with its own pāda, indicating that even right after their birth Pṛśni deprived them of milk (sim.

Re). I then take the yé of c to have domain over b as well -- the same aberrant relative placement as suggested for 4bc.

The hapax stauná- is, as Re says, “ininterprétable” (which does not stop him from trying). Ge suggests reading *astaunāḥ (with abhinihita sandhi after yé in the Saṃhitā text), deriving it from √stu and tr. ‘ohne Lob(?)’. Although this has the merit of connecting it to a known root and without phonological disturbance, I find Re’s tr. “sans être inertes” (without comm. on the etym., but perhaps based on von Bradke’s “Sie stehen nicht still”) more appealing in context, since it would provide a satisfying contrast with ayā́saḥ: in Re’s tr., “eux qui, sans être inertes, (sont bien au contraire) inlassables.” I am also struck by the echo pointed out by von Bradke, with our staunā́matched by (ta)sthau ná in the next vs., 6d. As often, contextual poetics may have led to the choice of an enigmatic word. My own extremely speculative interpr. (“like posts”) is that it is related to sthū́ṇā- ‘pillar’, which is well anchored in Iranian (YAves. stū̆na-, stunā-, OP stūnā-, as well as Middle and Mod. Iranian) and found also widely in MIA and NIA (Pā, Pkt thūṇā, etc.). This suggestion requires the perhaps counter-intuitive assumption that the aspiration in sthū́ṇā is secondary, perhaps based on the MIA form (where initial *st would of course develop into th); the unmotivated retroflex ṇ in the Vedic form might give some support to that hypothesis. And secondary (if it is secondary) association with √sthā ‘stand’ would also encourage an aspirated initial. Another wrinkle is that it may have trisyllabic scansion (so Gr), but that is further than I can go. For a similarly impenetrable form in this maṇḍala with the same phonological profile, see staulā́in VI.44.7 and comm. ad loc. The last problem in the vs. (or at least the last one I will tackle) is in d: does nū́cid here mean ‘even now’ or ‘never’. Ge, Re, and von Bradke opt for the latter; Scar (405) gives a choice of both. Although these two choices seem starkly oppositional, they may amount to the same thing with the subjunctive áva yāsat: even now she is trying to appease them, and she never will be able to.


## 06
With some relief we can pass on from the clotted vss. containing the Maruts’ birth story to the considerably more straightforward terrain of their adult exploits. This vs. is, however, linked to the preceding one: ugrā́ḥ in 6a picks up the last word of 5, ugrā́n. It is also barely possible that suméke ‘well-fixed’ to √mi ‘fix, implant’ resonates with staunā́ḥ in 5c, if that means ‘post’.

As indicated in the publ. tr., the vs. is also structured by the pun on du. ródasī ‘(two) world halves’ and nom. sg. rodasī́, the PN of the Maruts’ consort, differing only by accent.

As noted by Old and Re, the simile marker ná is wrongly positioned, before the simile itself: ná rókaḥ rather than expected *róko ná. Re suggests it is to avoid vs.-final ná. But see the disc. above of 5c, with the ref. to von Bradke’s happy observation that (ta)sthau ná here matches the hapax staunā́(ḥ) in that pāda, which can easily account for the wrong placement here: the order was adjusted to facilitate the inter-vs. echo. My tr. also reflects my interpr. of sváśociḥ at the end of previous pāda as part of the postponed simile (sváśociḥ, … ná rókaḥ# “like a self-blazing light”). Although sváśociḥ can of course modify rodasī́, to which it is adjacent, taking it with the simile would not only put ná in expected, if distant, second position, but also produces a more effective simile in my opinion: “like a light” seems pretty lame, as if Rodasī was a glorified headlight, but “like a self-blazing light” has more oomph.


## 07
Both Ge and Re take pathyā̀as the obj. of sā́dhan (e.g., “… die rechten Wege nehmend”), but since the former is regularly used, with or without ánu, to express extent of space and since the latter can be used absolutely, I prefer my rendering.

## 08
In c, on the basis of VI.31.1 I would adjust the tr. to reflect the formulaic pair toká- tánaya- to “progeny and posterity, the waters, and the sun”; see also VI.25.4.

Flg. Ge, Re, and Klein (DGRV II.123, 194), the publ. tr. takes pā́rye … dyóḥ as referring to a particular, decisive time or hour of the day (Klein “in the last (hour) of the day”), but I now think it more likely that the phrase is simply a metrically driven variant of diví (...) pā́r i ye / pā́r i ye diví# “on the decisive day,” a locution found quite commonly in the VIth Maṇḍala (VI.17.14, 23.2, 33.5, 40.5; also pā́ri ye áhan VI.26.1). In pāda-final position that expression is only appropriate to Jagatī/dimeter cadences. Re makes a similar suggestion in his comm, despite his tr. “à l’heuredécisive du jour.” I would therefore slightly emend the publ. tr. to “on the decisive day”; sense supports this change: the act described in this pāda is more likely to be localized to a particularly important day, not a particularly important part of the day.

On the tendency of ádha to occur adjacent to locatives, see Klein DGRV II.95.


## 09
For the switch between singular reference to the Marut collectivity in ab and plural reference to the same group in cd, see disc. ad 3cd.

A particularly insistent etym. figure in c: sáhāṃsi sáhasā sáhante. The metrical irreg. of the pāda, with a likely rest at 5 (so HvN), after sáhāṃsi, may draw attention to it.

On the address to Agni in d, see comm. ad 10.


## 10
The comparison of the Maruts to fires in 2a (yé agnáyo ná śóśucann idhānā́ḥ “those who kept blazing up like fires being kindled”) returns here in the first hemistich with more contorted imagery. In the similes of both a and b the Maruts are compared not directly to fire, but to something that is a metaphor for fire: “the dart of the ceremony” (a) and the more familiar “tongues of fire” (b). The somewhat unexpected invocation of Agni in the last pāda of the preceding vs. (9d) prepares the way for these similes.

In d I have followed Ge and Re in selecting the final word, ádhṛṣtāḥ ‘unassailable’, as the predicate. But given that the first 5 vss. of the hymn concern the Maruts’ birth and that the 1st half of this vs. compares them to fire, I wonder if the predicate is rather bhrā́jajjanmānaḥ ‘of flashing birth’, as von Bradke takes it: “…...

leuchtend ist die Geburt der unwiderstehlichen Marut.” The striking phonology (…j …jj) of the cmpd certainly draws attention to it.


## 11
Note the fairly common bhrā́jad-ṛṣti- in a immediately following the identically formed hapax bhrā́jaj-janman- in 10d.

The final pāda has attracted more concerned comment than I think it deserves; see esp. the great fuss Old makes about it. The issue is what to do with the simile containing two nominatives giráyo nā́paḥ (= ná ā́paḥ), lit. “like mountains, waters.” The consensus seems to be that the two noms. convey a single image, with a more complex structure underlying it: namely the waters (of) the mountains, mountain water, Bergwasser. I don’t see why this is necessary; instead I think the thoughts are being compared both with moutains and with waters, which are both ugrá- in different ways. (Old allows this possibility.) Note that the adjectives qualifying the inspired thoughts, śúci- and ugrá-, were used of the Maruts earlier in the hymn, in 4c and 5c, 6a respectively.
