+++
title = "067"

+++
Mitra and Varuṇa


## 01
The hymn does not start promisingly, with a bad, and unfixable, cadence in pāda a (jyẽ́ṣṭhatamā). Pāda c also ends with a superlative (yámiṣṭhā), which makes a fine cadence. Perhaps this morphological parallelism invited the deployment of the double splv. jyẽṣṭhatamā in this unfavorable position.

Both Ge and Re predicate the infin. vāvṛdhádhyai to a supplied 1st pl. (e.g., “M+V … wollen wir erbauen …”), but there is no reason why the dual dvandva mitrā́váruṇā can’t be a nom., with a passive reading of the infin., as I take it. In Re’s case the supposed 1st ps. subj. leads him to take vaḥ as obj. (“vous les plus puissants …”), though of course it is plural and does not match the referents in number and, compounding the grammatical lapses, to tr. mitrā́váruṇā as voc. (“ô Varuṇa-Mitra”).

This was not Re’s finest hour. Ge manages to shift vaḥ off into an oblique role (“für euch,” presumably referring to the human beneficiaries of the 1st ps. poet-ritualists’ activities), but absent a 1st ps. subj., vaḥ can be attached directly to the poets’ songs used for strengthening, as in the publ. tr.

In c the grammatical identity of raśmā́(in sandhi with the simile particle raśméva) is unclear. It is generally taken, I think correctly, to the -n-stem raśmán-, otherwise found only in cmpds. Gr calls it an instr., and Wackernagel concurs (AiG III.268), as does Re (clearer in the comm. [EVP VII] than in the weaselly tr. “comme (avec) une rêne” [EVP V]). But -mā instr. to -man-stems are rare; AiG cites only the likewise hapax drāghmā́in X.70.4. We might rather expect *raś(a)nā́or the like (cf.

mahinā́to mahimán-), and in fact such a posited form might yield the well-attested - ā-stem raśanā́- ‘halter’ as a decasuative from the instr. (though the Iranian forms showing this same internal vowel [see EWA s.v.] might give us pause). Ge by contrast takes it as a nom. sg., which is grammatically impeccable as long as the stem is masc. (Since its other two occurences are in bahuvrīhis, it is impossible to be sure, but suffix-accented -mán-stems are in fact generally masc.; cf. AiG II.2.754.) Either nom. or instr. would work fine in the passage; in the former case the comparison would be to Mitra and Varuṇa as controllers; in the latter to the arms with which they perform the controlling (bāhúbhiḥ svaíḥ). In neither case would raśmā́match the frame in number. I have followed Ge in taking it as a nom., though I would like it to be dual, like apásā in 3c, but this is morphologically impossible.

The verb form yamátuḥ is generally assigned to the pf. stem (Gr, Wh Rts, Kü), though Lub lists it with the root aor., labelling it a nonce. Kü (399) derives this nonredupl. pf. by analogy to “nur scheinbar reduplikationslosem takṣathur : takṣur” to the 3rd pl. injunc. root aor. yamur. Since there is no real semantic connection between the two roots √yam and √takṣ, and the supposed model takṣathur is found only once in the RV, in Maṇḍala X (as opposed to the well-established redupl. pf. tatákṣa, etc.), this seems an unlikely channel. A more likely one is found in the immediate context: the pāda ends … yamátur yámiṣṭhā, with the dual splv. “best controllers” serving as subj. to the etymologically identical verb. In these circumstances substituting the root syllable yam found in the splv. for the weak form yem found in the proper dual pf. yemáthur (2x; cf. also 3rd du. yematur) would not be surprising.


## 02
The first hemistich displays a sort of contrastive ritual synesthesia. In the first pāda an inspired thought (manīṣā́) is ‘spread forth’ (prá stṛṇīte), an action not literally applicable to a verbal product but suitable to the barhis or ritual grass found in b, which is not the obj. of this verb. What is going on in b is not clear until we reach the next vs. The b pāda of 2 contains a set of apparently unconnected notions without a unifying verb: úpa priyā́námasā barhír ácha “up to, the two dear ones (or, with a dear one), with homage, to the ritual grass,” but the corresponding pāda in 3 pulls together this disarray: úpa priyā́námasā hūyámānā. The missing verbal action is ‘call’, and now the two dear ones, the instrumental homage, and the barhis all make sense. I therefore (with Ge, but not Re) supply a form of ‘call’ in 2b. And ‘call’ is more appropriate to the inspired thought of pāda a than the spreading that occurred there. In the publ. tr. I supply a participial form modifying the inspired thought and having active semantics, with priyā́as acc. obj. (“calling [you] two dear ones”). I now see that it might be desirable to supply the exact form found in the next vs., the dual pass. hūyámānā, tr. “… you two, the dear ones being called …” However, there is a grammatical obstacle, in that vām in 2a must be a gen./dat. enclitic, not an acc., and therefore there is no available acc. in the structural frame of the hemistich that a passive participle could modify. This might be finessed by taking b as a sort of loosely connected new start. However, I prefer to stay with the publ. tr., both for the syntactic reasons just mentioned, and because it makes the connection between the inspired thought and the call to the gods more direct.

The nominal rel. cl. yád vāṃ varūthyàm is another ex. of an izafe-like construction. Here, since nothing follows it but a voc., it does not appear embedded, as many such phrases do, but it adds to the dossier of these constructions.


## 03
For the connection of the first hemistich, and esp. b, with 2ab, esp. b, see comm. on the preceding vs. Here, since Mitra and Varuṇa are subjects, the pass.

participle hūyámānā is in the nom. The 2nd hemistich is extremely problematic. Among other things, the rel. prn.

yaú in c calls for an accented verb, but the only finite verb in the hemistich is unaccented yatathaḥ in d; the hapax apnastháḥ in c is of unclear meaning and has an uncertain grammatical identity; the following simile apáseva has been variously interpr.; śrudhīyatáḥ is a hapax denominative part.; and even if all these questions are solved, what does it all add up to? Before addressing any of these questions directly, note several plays on the syllable yā̆ in the early part of the hymn: 1) PREV + dual rel. pronoun in the initial sequences sáṃ yā́(1c), sáṃ yā́v (our 3c) (as well as prá yā́[4c] and, with slight transformation, pári yád [5c]); 2) dual verbs yamátuḥ (1c), yantám (2c), ā́yātam (3a), yatathaḥ (3d). These observations set the stage for a way to reason through the problems of this hemistich.

Let us begin with the problem of the lack of accented verb in what must be a rel. cl. introduced by sáṃ yaú. Assuming that d, with its unaccented verb, is the main cl. corresponding to the rel. cl. of c, which has no overt verb, there is a non-arbitrary way to generate one: in 1c the same opening sequence sáṃ yā́(differing only in the form of the dual rel. prn., attributable to the variation in the following initial) does have an accented verb, pf. yamátuḥ, reinforced by the immediately flg. splv.

yámiṣṭhā, with the verb of 2c, yantám, also belonging to the root √yam. Our opening sáṃ yaú cries out for (or at least whispers for) a similar form of √yam, and so I have supplied it. Note that the obj. of sám … yamátuḥ in 1cd is jánān as here. (Ge [n. 3cd] supplies náyathaḥ, on the basis of V.65.6 yuvám mitremáṃ jánaṃ, yátathaḥ sáṃ ca nayathaḥ, also a M+V passage; this is a reasonable idea based on a good parallel, and in some ways amounts to the same thing: he tr. “die die Menschen zusammen(halten)” -- but I prefer mine because it is generated within the hymn’s context. Old appears to supply a form of √yat matching the one in the main cl. of d, as does Re.) On the question of apáseva there is now a reasonable consensus (Old, Ge, Re, and me, but see Gr and Old for alternative views) that this represents a dual NA apásā referring to M+V as subjects. They are therefore controlling the peoples (jánān) as workers (or, perhaps better, work-overseers) do. But we must now confront the hapax apnastháḥ. This is likely a cmpd of ápnas- ‘property, riches’ and a form of √sthā. But what form? Gr, Debrunner (AiG II.2.37), and EWA (s.v. ápnas-) assign it to a them. stem apnasthá-, which would require it to be a nom. sg., which ill accords with the assumed dual subj. If it is nom. sg., then apásā would be pushed into the acc. slot, where there is no syntactic place for it, or else, with an unenthusiastic suggestion of Old’s, it would be an instr. sg. to the neut. s-stem, for

*ápasā. Better to take it, by Old’s preferred interpr., as belonging to a root-noun
cmpd apnas-sthā́-. Under this interpr. it would be an acc. pl. This seems the least objectionable from a contextual point of view; even though acc. pl. to root nouns in - ā aren't certainly attested (see the not very helpful treatments of Lanman [Noun Inflec. 451 and passim], Macdonell VG 253), both -as and -ās seem to be possibilities. The 1st members of cmpds in -sthā́- generally have a locatival relationship to their 2nd member, so ‘standing/staying in ápnas-’ is the likely meaning. As for its function in the clause, I take it as qualifying jánān (so also Old, though with alternatives), while Ge and Re take it as part of the simile (e.g., “... die die Menschen zusammen(halten) wie Werkmeister die Lohnarbeiter”), and Scar, flg.

Neisser, takes it as the designation of a group of people distinct from the general jánān but still in the frame. In the absence of other attestations of the cmpd or underlying phrase, this cannot be decisively determined. For a detailed disc. of the word and the passage, see Scar 645-46.

The denom. śrudhīyá- is, by most accounts (see Old, Re), but not by Ge’s (see n. 3d), built to the 2nd sg. impv. śrudhí ‘listen!’. It is an acc. pl. part. The question is what sense it is conveying. Gr glosses ‘gehorsam sein’, but since even (cid) this group of people is put in its place by M+V with their greatness (mahitvā́), it is unlikely that they were already obedient. Old (see also Re) suggests that it is people who address M+V with this impv., perhaps indicating that they stand in a close or privileged relationship with those gods. I think rather that it may refer to people powerful enough to command obedience from other men through such peremptory commands. They would then be similar in stature to the apnastháḥ: two sets of people used to getting their own way (rich and demanding), who have to submit to M+V.


## 04
The birth of M+V from Aditi. This vs. is also beset with difficulties. The major structural one is determining the interrelationships of the three subordinate clauses, in abc, marked by yā́, yád, and yā́respectively, and their joint relationship (or not) to the main clause in d. Once again, there are numerous competing views; I will not rehearse them all. In my view, the three subordinate clauses are not all parallel and semi-independent, but rather the two introduced by the dual rel. prn. yā́ (a, c) are parallel and jointly dependent on the middle cl. introduced by yád (b). In tr.

I have flipped the order of a and b in hopes of making the sense a bit more parsable. I further think that the two forms of yā́‘which two’ have as antecedent in b the sg.

gárbham: “the embryo which was those two” or “the two as embryo.” M+V formed one of the pairs that Aditi gave birth to serially and in that sense were a single gárbham.

Let us then concentrate first on pāda a. Here, as in 1ab, there is an infin. in - dhyai predicated of a god’s name, áditiḥ: “When Aditi (was) to bear.” The puzzle in the vs. is ṛtā́, and numerous analyses have been proposed: nom. sg. fem. to normally neut. ṛtá- ‘truth (etc.)’; short instr. sg. to the same stem; dual to the same stem; a 3rd sg. denom. verb to the same stem (emending to *ṛtāyád from ṛtā́yád), or, the solution I favor, as a short loc. sg. to ṛtú- ‘season’ (so Ge, though see his n. 4b), even though -u-stems supposedly have only -au/-avi locc. (but see Lanman p. 411: “if there is any certain instance of a L in -â, it must be regarded as due to false analogy.” I see no problem with analogy, false or otherwise).

The two yā́clauses are nominal. The first (a) presents no problems. In the 2nd (c) most tr. supply a verb with prá, e.g., Ge “die sich gross hervortun” (sim. Re).

However, I take jā́yamānā as a predicated pres. part. and máhi as an intensifier of mahā́ntā.

In d the sense of the verb ní dīdhaḥ is unclear, and the lexeme ní √dhṛ is not common. Gr glosses this passage as ‘machen’ with double acc.; Ge tr. ‘hatte … getragen’, Re ‘avait placé en secret’. In the three other passages containing ní (ā́) √dhṛ that I know of (IV.2.12, VI.17.6, ní-ā́VIII.17.13), the idiom means something like ‘fix’ or ‘secure’, but here I think it applies to the process of birth: ‘bear down’.

Although I know of no other such exx., this kind of technical birth context doesn't come up very often in the RV. The birth process interpr. fits well with the predicated pres. part. of c: “who were being born” as well as with the indication in b that Aditi had reached her precise time for giving birth.

## 05
This vs. is refreshingly straightforward, even though the main cl. of d seems something of an irrelevancy after the grand statements in abc.


## 06
The vs. is knit together with phonological and etymological figures. Each pāda contains a form of div/dyu: a dyū́n, b dyoḥ, c -devo, d dyā́m. Note also the phonological similarity of the two du. verbs dhāráyethe (a), dṛṃhéthe (b), with the latter reprised etymologically by dṛḷhó in c. Pādas b and d also rhyme.

Unlike the standard tr. I take b as part of the hí cl. beginning in a, with cd as the main cl. Since the verb of b, dṛṃhéthe, is initial, it can owe its accent either to its position (as most interpr. it) or to belonging to a subord. cl., as I do. Nonetheless, there is little riding on this choice, though I would support mine by pointing out that the fact that M+V made the back of heaven firm (b) could serve as a reason why the sun is also firmly fixed (c).

Contra Klein (explicitly, DGRV I.379-80) and Ge/Re (implicitly), I do not think that utá, positioned in the middle of c, conjoins b and c, but instead begins a new cl., which continues through d.

With Ge (and, judging from his tr., Re), I divide dhāsínāyóḥ into dhāsínā ayóḥ, with the gen.-loc. du. of ayám, not āyóḥ, gen.-abl. sg. of āyú- with the Pp.


## 07
Ge follows Sāy. in interpr. this vs. as referring to rain and river waters.

Although this would accord better with the enigmatic gush (dhāsí-) of 6d, it doesn’t fit the vocabulary or apparent sense of this enigmatic vs. The best clue we have is pāda a, where “to fill the belly” (jaṭháram pṛṇádhyai) belongs to a phrase for drinking soma to satiation (cf. nearby VI.69.7 and V.34.2, X.104.2, as well as other locutions involving soma and the belly). (Both Old and Re also take the pāda as referring to soma.) Once the poet has established the soma context with this reasonably clear phraseology, he can (and does) treat the subject in a more obscure fashion.

In b and c I take the feminine plurals sábhṛtayaḥ ‘of the same rearing / pedigree’ and yuvatáyò ’vātāḥ ‘unsurpassable maidens’ as referring to the fingers (of the priests) that press the soma. Such locutions, referring to the shared kinship of the fingers (because they belong to the same hand), are frequent in the IXth Maṇḍala and the forms are always feminine. I am tolerably certain of the second identification, since the action ascribed to them in pāda d, distributing their “milk,” would be a reasonable way (given the tropes of soma preparation) to characterize the work of the pressing fingers. I am less certain about the identification in b, because “fill the seat” (sádma … pṛṇánti) is not as easy to connect with soma preparation. “Seat” could refer, inter alia, to the ritual ground or the cosmos -- both are attested -- but neither is generally flooded with soma. sábhṛti- is a hapax, so it does not help identify the referent. So the sense of pāda b remains in doubt for me.

Note another ex. of a -dhyai infinitive, though this time not as the predicated substitute for a main verb.

## 08
Pāda a lacks a verb; on its structure and on the grammatical interpr. of sumedhā́(ḥ), see esp. Old. Since it is likely that sumedhā́(ḥ) is a nom. sg., referring to Agni, this slots the du. tā́into the acc., and we need a verb to link the two. Though Old’s ‘lead’ is possible, I follow Ge(/Re) in supplying ‘call’, since this connects this ritual vs. with those in the earlier parts of the hymn (2ab, 3ab; see publ. intro. and comm. ad locc.). As is generally recognized, the referent of the nom. is Agni; III.57.5, adduced by Old, makes this quite clear: yā́te jihvā́madhumatī́sumedhā́, ágne … The word aratí- ‘spoked wheel’ in b is another word regularly applied to Agni.

This pāda also contains, by most interpr., two words associated with truth, satyá-, modifying aratí-, and ṛtá-, but these interpr. are hard-pressed to come up with a convincing interpr. of the loc. ṛté. By contrast, I interpr. it as I do the similarly structured II.29.4 mā́vo ráthaḥ … ṛté bhūt, where, with Re, I take ṛté as the postposition ‘without’, construed with a pronominal enclitic in 2nd position: “Let (our) chariot not come to be without you.” See comm. ad loc. In the passage here I assume that the absence of M+V at the ritual ground induces Agni to call them with his tongue (=crackling). This interpr. also fits with the rivalry vss. to follow (9-11): if M+V are not here, where are they? Probably at the sacrifice of a competitor. In the comm. to II.29.4 I consider an alternative interpr. with ṛté the loc. of ṛtá- ‘truth’. If I were to do so here, the passage could mean “when the spoked wheel (of the sacrifice) [=Agni] has come into existence / has been realized for you at/in the truth [=the sacrifice or place of sacrifice?].” I still prefer the publ. solution.

On (vi) cayiṣṭam see Hoffmann, Aufs. II.367.

## 09-11
As noted in the publ. intro., these vss. seem to concern themselves with rival sacrificers.


## 09
The first half of this vs. is fairly straightforward; the problems arise in the 2nd hemistich, primarily because of ápi yaḥ in d. The first hemistich describes the behavior of the contentious and impious rivals, while the 2nd defines such people as outside the normal categories of beings. Pāda c asserts clearly that those who don’t attend upon the sacrifice are neither gods nor men, and in d they are compared instead to ápi yaḥ … putrā́ḥ, which is universally tr. as “like the sons of the watery female” (e.g., Ge “wie die Söhne der Wasserfrau”). Not only does this make no obvious (or unobvious) sense, but the morphology is essentially impossible: it is very difficult to get ápi yaḥ to be either the gen. sg. of a fem. -ī-stem or the nom. pl. m. of an adj. See the rather despairing assessments of Ge (n. 9d), Debrunner (AiG II.2.401), and esp. Scar (592 n. 841). Desperate situations require desperate measures, and I therefore part company with the consensus interpr. of ápi yaḥ and suggest an entirely different derivation -- as a negated root noun cmpd to the seṭ form of the ‘swell’ root √pī. We should expect a root-accented *a-pī́-, with nom. pl.

*apíyaḥ, but I would suggest that this unclear hapax would have been attracted to the
reasonably well-attested ‘watery’ stem ápi ya- and the accent retracted. As for meaning, I suggest that ‘not swelling/swollen’ means ‘not growing / thriving’, and in reference to children to stunted or underdeveloped ones, afflicted by what is now called “failure to thrive” in pediatric medicine. Note that the aniṭ form of the ‘swell’ root makes a negated root-noun cmpd apít- in VII.82.3 ápinvatam apítaḥ “you two made the unswollen (waters) swell.” The publ. tr. does not represent the rel. prn. yé in c but treats all of cd as the main cl. corresponding to the subord. clauses of ab. I do not know an easy way to do this, but might suggest an alternative tr. of cd as “those not attending on the sacrifice who are neither gods … nor mortals are like children …”


## 10
Ge and Re take the first hemistich here as a continuation of the description of bad ritual behavior, with cd introducing our contrastively correct practice. I think rather that the whole of 10 describes this good behavior. One advantage of this interpr. is that it allows ā́d opening c to have its normal sense ‘after that’, which Klein (DGRV II.135-36) must explicitly deny it. By my interpr. the first pāda sets the ritual scene, with the various priestly speakers “distributing” the types of ritual speech, as is standard in Vedic ritual. Some of these speakers recite the Nivids, the formal invocations. After this “we” take over by speaking ukthá-.

On kīstá- ‘praiser’ see comm. ad I.127.7. I see no evidence for Re’s ‘mauvaisprêtres’ beyond his contextual assumptions.

The interpr. of ab as referring to bad practice turns on the part. manānā́ḥ, which most take as meaning ‘(falsely) considering X as Y’ (e.g., Ge “was sie für Einladungssprüche halten”), but no evidence is presented that this should be the meaning of this root aor. part., the only occurrence of the participial stem. Most other forms of this medial root aor. (mostly attested in the subjunctive) have a positive sense: ‘bring to mind’, ‘conceive’, ‘ponder’, etc. The publ. tr. has ‘pay heed to’, but any of the other suggested tr. just given would work as well, while ‘(falsely) consider’ has no support in this stem.

Pāda d is syntactically problematic. The last two words (yatatho mahitvā́) are identical to the ending of 3d and appear to sketch a ring and a return to the focus on M+V’s ability to put human beings in order. Because of this salient repetition, I am reluctant to ascribe an entire different sense to this phrase in this vs. than in 3, as both Ge and Re do, with both also unacceptably stretching the meaning of the verb form. In order to take d as a single cl., they must also treat nákiḥ as a simple neg.

rather than in its usual meaning ‘no one’, since the verb yatathaḥ is 2nd du. and cannot take ‘no one’ as subject. In order to avoid this problem, I create problems of my own. I take nákiḥ as a radically truncated sentence “No one …” This is based on the observation that one of the most common contexts in which nákis appears is as subj. of minat (etc.) ‘violate(s)’ (cf., e.g., I.69.7, IV.30.23, VI.30.2, etc.). I therefore suggest that nákiḥ here is an implicit response to the description of the behavior of bad rivals in 9b priyā́dhā́ma yuvádhitā minánti “they violate the dear ordinances ordained by you”. Here in our ritual “no one” performs such violation. With nákis out of the way, the rest of the pāda can be harmonized with the use of yatatho mahitvā́in 3d. There M+V ‘set in place’ various peoples (jánān). Here I would resupply jánān and take devébhiḥ as an instr. of accompaniment: M+V set in place the peoples along with the gods. I would prefer not to have to impose such a radical analysis on this pāda, but I find other analyses even more unsatisfactory.


## 11
The first hemistich lacks a verb, but something like ‘we seek’ is a reasonable bet, to govern áskṛdhoyu ‘not stunted’, which elsewhere modifies ‘wealth’ (VI.22.3) and ‘treasure-conferral’ (VII.53.3), hence my ‘giving’.

Ge produces an elaborate interpr. of cd as a portrayal of battle: ‘cows’ = bow string, ‘straight-flying one’ = arrow. Although such tropes would be at home in other parts of the RV, I see no martial context in this hymn that would encourage such a reading. Better to interpr. the hemistich within a ritual context, since this has been prominent in the hymn. The cows can, as so often, be the milk meant to be mixed with the soma; the ‘straight-flying one’ (ṛjipyá-, on which see comm. ad IV.27.4) can be the soma, or, as in IV.27.4, the falcon that carried the soma, and the bull in d is also the soma. Re follows Ge’s battle interpr., though (in his comm.) he also sees it overlaid with soma imagery.
