+++
title = "068"

+++
Indra and Varuṇa Pace Old, I do not think this consists of two (much less three) hymns, with 1-8 forming one, 9-11, or 9, 10-11, one or two more. As indicated in the publ. intro., the last three vss. focus on the ritual here-and-now, but this topic-switch from praise and request to ritual exhortation is easily accommodated within the same hymn. That 9- 10 are in Jagatī in contrast to the Triṣṭubh in the rest of the hymn is not sufficient to signal a hymn break, esp. since 9-10 doesn’t match either of Old’s suggested groupings.


## 01
The opening of this hymn has some features in common with the opening of the last one (VI.67.1), and of course both hymns are dedicated to dual divinities, with Varuṇa shared. The 1st hemistich of each ends with a -dhyai infinitive; the 1st pāda has a 2nd ps. enclitic in 2nd position (vaḥ, vām respectively), and the 2nd hemistich begins PREV yá- (yā́, yáḥ respectively). However the hymns unfold very differently.

Ge takes sajóṣā(ḥ) at the end of pāda a as an “erstarrter Kasus oder Hypallage” (n. 1a) referring to I+V. But grammatically it should modify yajñáḥ, and there is no semantic obstacle to taking it thus. Re agrees, and further remarks that, since sajóṣasregularly takes an instr., it is tempting to construe it with śruṣtī́— a temptation he resists and I have succombed to.

I take the gen./abl. vṛktábarhiṣaḥ as the oblique subject of the inf. yájadhyai, rather than predicating that inf. to cognate yajñáḥ —though the latter construction (reflected in Ge and Re, insofar as I can untangle their clotted syntax) is not impossible: “This sacrifice of the one who has twisted the ritual grass, raised up, is to be sacrificed to you …”


## 02
Although the vs. is addressed to both gods, Indraic qualities predominate: śáviṣṭha- almost always qualifies Indra, who is regularly called a śū́ra-; maghávanis of course a standing epithet of his, and the splv. máṃhiṣṭha- frequently modifies him; both tuviśúṣma- (3x) and sárvasena- (3x) are otherwise only used of Indra; and vṛtratúr- encapsulates Indra’s signature deed. Only ṛténā falls in Varuṇa’s domain.

I do not understand the position of tā́hí, though 1) hí sometimes takes immediate pre-verbal position even deep in the clause, and 2) the heavy NP śū́rāṇāṃ śáviṣṭhā (with the first word having quadrisyllabic scansion) would not fit metrically in a putative pāda #tā́hí śū́rāṇāṃ śáviṣṭhā bhūtam.


## 03
This is the only vs. in the hymn that clearly disjoins the two gods and describes each by his own qualities (though see comm. ad 8-9) -- though as Re points out, the description of Varuṇa in d is somewhat obscure. I take it to refer to Varuṇa’s ritual activity, as against Indra’s warrior exploits.

Although śúṣma- (2c) and śūṣá- (3a) are not etymologically related, their phonological similarity associates them, and they are positioned identically in these two vss. See also the śū́rāṇāṃ śáviṣṭhā figure in 2b and śávasā in 3c: there is an abundance of śu/ū / śav forms.

On the constr. of cakānā́see Kü (142-43 and n. 132), who rejects Ge’s passive interpr.


## 04
As noted in the publ. intro., it is quite rare to present the collectivity of gods as subdivided into female and male divinities. I’m not sure why this context has evoked it.

As Re notes in passing, the 1st hemistich contains two forms of nṛ́- ‘man’ in different usage. The first (náraḥ) is contrasted with gnā́ḥ, as male to female, and identifies these náraḥ as gods; the 2nd (narā́m) appears to refer to the mortal poets as superior men and agents of the praise of the gods. For this putative gen. agent, compare the similar constr. with the same ppl. at I.122.10 narā́ṃ gūrtáśravaḥ “whose fame is sung by men” (and cf. also I.180.8 narā́m ... práśastaḥ).

In 2 of its 4 occurrences svágūrta- modifies rivers and can reasonably be rendered ‘self-praised’ because rivers generate their own noise (gurgling), which can be conceptually configured as praise. But in our passage it seems unlikely that the gods are praising themselves (pace Ge). In IV.19.10 the adj. modifies ápāṃsi, Indra’s ‘labors’, and there I tr. “welcomed for themselves’, since labors don’t have the capacity to praise themselves. I suggest the word in this passage has a similar sense, even though, as animate beings, gods could praise themselves. But I think the point is that, though the All Gods are going to take second place after I+V in pāda c, the poet acknowledges that they deserve some praise of their own. -gūrta- picks up etymologically related gṛṇīhi ‘sing!’ in 3a, with gṛṇānā́(8a), gṛṇántaḥ (8c) continuing the lexical chain.

Pāda d contains a reverse Vāyav Indraś ca construction, dyaúś ca pṛthivi. The introduction and invocation of Heaven and Earth seems a little odd in a hymn celebrating Indra and Varuṇa, and the sense of the pāda is somewhat unclear. See Old’s disc. The pāda seems to indicate that Heaven and Earth stand out from the other All Gods just as much as Indra and Varuṇa do, an elevation of gods other than the addressees of the hymn that deviates from standard RVic practice. The structure of the hemistich, with instr. mahitvā́ending c and expressing the quality by which I+V are preeminent, invites us to take pāda-final urvī́as a similar instr. of an abstract ‘width, breadth’, rather than the usual fem. du. NA. This would yield “you stand out from them by your greatness, o Indra and Varuṇa, (as) do you two, o Heaven and Earth, by your breadth.” Although such an abstract urvī́- does not otherwise exist, I am still tempted to assume that this was the intent of the passage: giving a wellknown measure of superiority (the width of H+E) as a standard by which to judge that of I+V.


## 05
Several minor sound plays in the vs.: dā́śati (b) / dā́svān (c); iṣā́sá dviṣā́s.


## 06
The publ. tr. failed to render devā; insert “O gods” at the beg. of the vs. ### 07
It is difficult to render the comparative of sutrātará- without awkwardness, and so I have not attempted to do so.

Note the etymological and phonological figure tiráte táturiḥ. The cadence is bad, and it would be better to read *tatūriḥ. Of the 5 occurrences of this stem, this reading would be preferable also in IV.39.2 and probably VI.24.2, but dispreferred in I.145.3 and VI.22.2. The 4 occurrences of the similarly formed pápuri- are always metrically better with a light root syllable.


## 08
Ge (n. 8c) claims that this pāda applies only to Indra, but this is not entirely evident to me. It is true that VI.33.5c, adduced by Ge, is almost identical (itthā́ gṛṇánto mahínasya śárman) and refers to Indra, and it is also true that śárdhas- ‘force’ regularly refers to the Marut troop, Indra’s regular associates, and could (but need not) here. However, the context still does not seem to me sufficiently diagnostic.

## 09-11
On the annunciatory forms of ayám in these three vss., see publ. intro.


## 09
Ge also (n. 8c) claims (fld. by Re) that this vs. is entirely Varuṇa’s. This is more plausible: he is mentioned by name in b, and máhivrataḥ ‘having great commandments’in c makes it likely that the clause in cd has Varuṇa as subject — though note that máhivrata- is used of Varuṇa only here, with two occurrences each of Agni and Soma, and moreover dhṛtavratā is addressed to both gods in the next vs. (10b). Nonetheless, samrā́j- in pāda a is used frequently of Indra as well as of Varuṇa, so the 1st hemistich may (and probably does) contain a exhortation to the poet to chant both to Indra (as sovereign king) and Varuṇa. The publ. tr. could make this clearer if ‘and’ replaced the comma: “to the lofty sovereign king (and) to the god Varuṇa”


## 11
The 2nd pāda has a rather insistent but elementary phonetic/etymological figure: vṛ́ṣṇaḥ … vṛṣanā́vṛṣethām, and the last word of the vs. mādayethām resonates with the long adj. qualifying soma in the 1st pāda, mádhumattamasya. ## 069 Indra and Viṣṇu Re’s treatment is in EVP XV.43-46. He claims that the “thème indraique” dominates, though I find the hymn’s phraseology so bland that it’s difficult to assign qualities and deeds to one or the other, and in fact the most salient action in the hymn, the wide-striding of vs. 5, is Viṣṇu’s characteristic deed. See further in the publ. intro.

The hymn is (in my view) repetitive and pedestrian, with only a few striking images and phraseological tricks. This strikes me as an indication that the poet was “phoning it in” -- the composition of the hymn does not seem to have commanded his full attention. The question might then arise why the hymn was preserved in the Saṃhitā. This might be partially due to the rarity of Indra-Viṣṇu hymns (only the first three vss. of I.155 and the middle three vss. of VII.99 -- so this is the only hymn entirely dedicated to both) and in fact of Viṣṇu hymns in general. As Viṣṇu, a fairly recessive god in the RV, began to come to prominence in the post-RVic period, the assemblers of the RV collection may have gathered what scraps they could and exercised less critical judgment than usual in order to create a place in the text for this newly important deity. The O’Henry-type ending, sprung by the final vs. (8), might also account for its preservation.


## 01
Acdg. to Re, kárman- is esp. associated with Indra, íṣ- with Viṣṇu, but I see no clear evidence of this.

pārá- ‘far shore’ and pāráya- ‘cause to cross [to the far shore]’ are of course etymologically related, and here they express allied notions: just as we cause Indra and Viṣṇu to reach the ‘far shore’ of their labor, so do they cause us to cross something unspecified, but quite possibly the reference is to completing the ritual.


## 02
It is striking -- and perhaps a little insulting -- to refer to the gods Indra and Viṣṇu as soma-holding tubs, though of course once they have drunk the soma, that is what, in effect, they are. This image recurs in 6d.

The two heavy pres. passive participles śasyámānāḥ and gīyámānāsaḥ seem meant to convey that the sacrifice is currently ongoing, hence my “as they are being …” In d arkaíḥ is taken by Ge and Re as referring to the chants of the sacrifice, and in the context of recitation and singing this sense is clearly the principal one. Both Ge and Re interpr. the instr. as meaning “in the form of,” and I have followed them in the publ. tr. -- though an instr. of accompaniment “along with chants” would also be possible. I further think the word is a pun, with the secondary sense “along with the rays (of the sun)” as often (e.g., VI.4.6). This would be a temporal designation of dawn, when the sacrifice is taking place. That the next vs. contains a similar pun (in my view) supports such an interpr. here.


## 03
dráviṇo dádhānā in b is essentially the same VP as dráviṇam … dhattam in 1c. I do not know why the s-stem drávinas- was substituted for the thematic dráviṇa-, esp. as the acc. of the latter, dráviṇam, would fit the meter just as well. The first VP, dráviṇaṃ dhattam, reappears in 6c.

There are other echoes of previous vss.: 3cd sáṃ vām … sám repeats 1a, and matīnā́m in c both repeats the same word in the same metrical position in 2a and anticipates it in 4c.

The 2nd half of this vs. is structured like that of vs. 2, esp. pāda d, where both 2d and 3d have the form PREV stómāsaḥ PRES.PASS.PART. INSTR.(‘song’)-aiḥ. The instr.

could, as in the previous vs., express accompaniment.

As in 2, I see a pun here: because of the etym. figure añjantv aktúbhiḥ “let them anoint with ointments,” the principal sense of aktú- must be ‘ointment’, here metaphorical for the “ointments of thoughts.” But instr. aktúbhiḥ often means ‘through the nights’, as in the phrase dyúbhir aktúbhiḥ “through the days and the nights” (e.g., I.112.25), and I see this temporal sense here as well.


## 04
As just noted, matī́nām occurs here for the 3rd time, while juṣéthām is repeated from 1c.


## 05
As noted in the publ. intro., both gods are credited with wide striding (b), although this is normally only Viṣṇu’s act. The cosmogonic opening out of the spaces in the more vaguely phrased 2nd hemistich can be applied to Indra, however.


## 06
The image of the gods as soma-holding tubs returns here in d, but this time it is mediated through the image of them as the sea (samudráḥ) and therefore couched in the singular.

The d pāda is a repetition of 4d, save for the substitution of hávam for gíraḥ.

Such verbatim repetition of a full pāda within a hymn is very rare (save for refrains) and relatively rare even between two hymn -- again, in my view, an indication that the poet was not feeling particularly inspired.


## 07
In ab Ge honors the pāda break and construes sómasya with jaṭháram pṛṇethām. But we might expect an instr. sómena in that case (as in V.34.2), and the enjambment envisioned here is very mild.


## 08
On the surprise ending here and the splitting up of what was throughout the rest of the hymn an indissoluble pair, see publ. intro. The first pāda keeps the two as a pair, with dual verbs jigyathuḥ and jayethe asserting that both won and both did not lose the contest. The audience would first take this as meaning they did not lose to their (joint) opponent. But in b we have the first splitting of the pair into two (implied) singulars (ná … katarás canaínoḥ “neither one of these two”), which could raise the possibility that they were contending with each other -- but paradoxically neither one lost. Their mutual contention is then made explicit in pāda c, with, inter alia, a reverse Vāyav Indraś ca construction (índraś ca viṣṇo) serving as the subj. of a dual verb (ápasṛdhethām), which in the middle voice refers to mutual conflict, and the final pāda explains (or implies) how in such a situation neither one lost: the 1000 (cows) were split into three parts, and as later Vedic texts indicate, Indra got twothirds and Viṣṇu one-third. It may be that the reversal of the Vāyav Indraś ca construction, which puts índraḥ in first position, also signals his relative, but not complete, dominance in this story.
