+++
title = "070"

+++
Heaven and Earth Re XVP.121ff.

## 01-02
As noted in the publ. intro., the focus here is on the various liquids associated with Heaven and Earth and their sheer moisture. Vs. 1 has ghee, honey, milk (by implication, in the compd. madhu-dúghe), and semen; in vs. 2 they are said never to dry up (ásaścantī) and possess streams, milk, ghee, and semen. The cmpd.

madhu-dúgha- ‘milking out honey’ in 1b is reprised by the VP ghṛtáṃ duhāte in 2b (with a diff. obj.). Another responsion is bhúvanānām ‘creatures’ (1a) and (asyá) bhúvanasya ‘(this) creation’ in 2c.


## 01
pṛthvī́here (and in the same phrase in 4c) is of course a blindingly obvious pun: though used as an adj. here (‘broad’) it is of course (almost) identical to the standard word for ‘earth’, found in the dual dvandva dyā́vā-pṛthivī́in the next pāda (also 4a, 5a). By an accident of grammar, the nom./acc. dual fem. (in pṛthvī́, here modifying the dual dvandva) and the nom. singular. fem. pṛthivī́‘earth’ have the same ending -ī́. This grammatical pun is only actualized fully in the final vs. of the hymn, where we get the conjoined singular NP dyaúś ca pṛthivī́ca.


## 03
On the double etym. figure prá prajā́bhir jāyate, see comm. ad VIII.27.16.

With Re I take dhármaṇas pári with a full lexical sense of each element, rather than, with Ge, as a weakened adverbial “pflichtgemäss” (dutifully). Heaven and Earth provide the physical foundation (dhárman-) starting from which the pious man can found his family line, just as Heaven and Earth themselves took their places (apart) according to the dhárman- of Varuṇa in 1c.

The abundant references to real liquids in vss. 1-2 find their metaphorical expression in the creatures ‘poured out’ (siktā́) from Heaven and Earth (d). This ppl.

picks up the imperative rétaḥ siñcatam “pour the semen” addressed to H+E in 2d.

However, I take the implicit subj. of siktā́to be bhúvanā ‘creatures’ vel sim. (see 1a), not, with Gr, rétāṃsi ‘semens’. prajā́ḥ ‘progeny, offspring’ from the previous pāda would also be possible; it would only require altering the Pp reading siktā́to fem. pl.

siktā́ḥ, but no alteration to the Saṃhitā text.

My “poured out from you” of course tacitly misrepresents the case of dual yuvóḥ, which must be gen.-loc., not abl. But it’s worth noting that the 2nd du abl.

yuvát is attested only once in the RV, and I take yuvóḥ as an ex. of the all-purpose genitive: poured out from you and hence yours.

The explicitly contrastive víṣurūpāṇi sávratā reminds us of the phrase in the Yama/Yamī hymn X.10.2, sálakṣmā … víṣurūpā, describing Yamī compared to Yama: “having the same marks, but dissimilar form.” ### 04-05 These two vss., concerning ghee and honey respectively, have similarly structured 1st halves: a case form of the substance opens the vs. (4a ghṛténa, 5a mádhu), while the 2nd pāda consists of three 3 cmpds in the dual with the substance as 1st member. The 2nd members do not repeat (ghṛta-śríyā ghṛta-pṛ́cā ghṛtā-vṛ́dhā; madhu-ścútā madhu-dúghe mádhu-vrate), but only the last two are not root noun cmpds.


## 04
The ghee vs., with four instances in the 1st hemistich, echoing in the first word of the hymn ghṛtávatī. There is also some recycling and remixing of vocab.: 1a abhiśríyā : 4ab abhī́-vṛte ghṛta-śríyā, as well as outright repetition: 1b / 4c urvī́ pṛthvī́.

The third pāda contains a ritual pun, “set in front at the choosing of the Hotar priest” (hotṛvū́rye puróhite): purohité here modifies H+E, but ordinarily it is the Hotar priest himself who is “set in front.”


## 05
In b madhudúghe reprises the same word in the same metrical position in 1b.

What ‘having honeyed commandments’ refers to is not clear to me; it is a hapax and picks up similarly pāda-final śúci-vrate ‘of pure commandments’ (2b) and sávratā ‘having the same commandments’ (3d).

I configure cd slightly differently from the standard, which takes yajñáṃ dráviṇaṃ ca as what H+E establish for the gods and the misc. acc. in d as what they do for us. My interpr. is informed by two passages in the immediately preceding hymn: VI.69.1 juṣéthāṃ yajñáṃ dráviṇaṃ ca dhattam “enjoy the sacrifice and confer wealth” and VI.69.6 dráviṇam dhattam asmé “confer wealth on us.” In both passages dráviṇam is implicitly or explicitly meant for us, while in the 1st yajñám is meant for the gods to enjoy. This matches the use of dráviṇa- elsewhere: it’s what mortals want and gods confer on them. I therefore construe dráviṇam as the first member of the complex NP to be taken with asmé in d (dráviṇaṃ ca … máhi śrávo vā́jam … suvī́ryam. Ge (n. 5c) recognizes the problem but chooses to go with the pāda division. My interpr. has the further advantage of not having to take devátā as an honorary dative, but rather with the instr. value that it should have.


## 06
On the grammatical pun that accounts for the disjoining of the dual dvandva dyā́vā-pṛthivī́, see comm. ad vs. 1. This disjoining is somewhat reminiscent of the same move in the previous hymn, where the dvandva índrā-víṣṇū appears in every vs. except the last, where not only are the two gods separated (índraś ca viṣṇo), but contend with each other. There is no contention here, but the grammatical shift is the same.
