+++
title = "071"

+++
Savitar Re EVP XV.26ff. On the division into two hymns, see publ. intro., as well as Old and Ge (both minimally).

## 01
I take the locatival expression rájaso vídharmaṇi as expressing a verbal notion “in/at his speading apart …,” rather than as marking a location like Ge (“im Zwischenreich des Raumes”). In this I am in general agreement with Re, who calls it a “semi-infinitif,” a typical Re evasion, though I am sympathetic to it here.


## 02
The -mani form vídharmaṇi ending 1d prepares the way for a 2nd such expression, savitúḥ sávimani, though with a subjective, not objective gen. The parallelism might be better expressed in tr. by “at the best impelling of …” This locatival (semi-)infinitive is then explicitly conjoined with a datival one: váśunaś ca dāváne “for the giving of goods.” On the lack of parallelism see Klein DGRV I.94.

Somewhere between the 1st vs. and the last pāda of vs. 2 Savitar’s reference changes from 3rd (clear in the 3rd ps. verbs of which he is subj. in 1b, c ayaṃsta and pruṣṇute) to 2nd (clear in 2nd sg. ási in 2d). This verb makes it clear that the reference in the whole rel. cl. of cd must be 2nd ps., but in the main cl. of ab devásya … savitúḥ could be either 3rd or 2nd -- a typical modulation tactic in the RV.

In both hemistichs the construction of the (semi-)predicated (semi-)infinitives is abrupt. In each case there’s a form of the verb ‘to be’ (syāma b, ási d) with loc. (and in b dat.) infinitivals. For ease of parsing I have supplied “(there)” and “(busy)” respectively.


## 03
On īśata see comm. ad I.23.9.


## 04
On the almost identical first pādas of the 1st and 2nd hymns of this composite, see publ. intro. In addition to the exact repetitions of the a-pādas, note that both 1 and 4 have a verbal expression from the sū root that gives Savitar his name: 1b sávanāya and 4d suvati. This vs. also recycles and remixes some of the vocab. from the final vs. of the preceding hymn, 3: 3c híraṇya-jihvaḥ gets redistributed into 4b híraṇyapāṇiḥ and 4c mandrá-jihvaḥ, and a further X-body part bahuvrīhi, áyo-hanuḥ, is added.


## 05
This vs. continues variations on vs. 1. Like 4a it begins úd u (or in this case ū). The VP in 1ab hiraṇyáyā, bāhū́ayaṃsta is almost entirely matched by 5ab áyān … bāhū́, hiraṇyáyā with exactly reverse order and act. verb rather than middle.

The publ. tr. follows the attractive suggestion of Re concerning ábhvam ‘formless’, that it refers to the wind. That the wind tends to drop at evening provides some support for this interpr. I would further suggest that the cid in the phrase kác cid ábhvam is doing double duty: expressing both ‘(what)ever’ and ‘even’.


## 06
In c I accept the emendation of kṣáyasya to *kṣáyasi, which goes back to Aufrecht (see Old, Ge, Re, all of whom accept it; against this tide is Scar 353-54, though he doesn’t even note the general view). Inter alia, it provides an accented verb for the hí in pāda c; syāma in d is unaccented and should therefore not be construed with the previous pāda. ## 072 Indra and Soma Re’s brief comments are found in EVP XVI.108-9. His assessment -- “banal” -- is spot on. For the structure of the hymn, see publ. intro.


## 01
The pleonastic máhi … mahitvám “great greatness” may be in service of phonological play: máhi tád vām is echoed in abbreviated form by immediately following mahitvám.

The (near?) synonyms sū́ryam and svàr are found as the obj. of the same verb vividáthuḥ in c. I have followed Lü (191) in tr. the first as ‘sun’ and the 2nd as ‘sunlight’ (“Sonne … Sonnenlicht”), which is almost the same as Ge’s “Sonne … Himmelslicht,” but preserves the lexical similarity better. Re prefers ‘ciel’. The verb is accented because it stands between its two predicates and thus implicitly serves two clauses.


## 02
Here the verb in a, vāsáyathaḥ, is accented because it follows the extrasentential voc. índrāsomā and therefore effectively begins the vs. The first hemistich describes dawn and the sunrise in the pres. tense as repeated daily events. The 2nd hemistich by contrast recounts the original separation of Heaven and Earth. The 2nd verb in this hemistich, the augmented impf. áprathatam (d), clearly locates the action in the past. The previous verb, skambháthuḥ (c), is formally anomalous. It is generally identified as a non-reduplicated pf. (so explicitly Gr; listed with the pf. by Whitney [Roots], Macdonell [VGS]; by implication Re) because of its clear 3rd du. pf. ending. But in addition to its lack of redupl., its full-gr. root syllable is unexpected. Kü treats the form in some detail (574), both functionally and formally. Since in the end he decides it is not built to the pf. stem, he begins by trying to deny that it has past value, despite the following augmented impf., suggesting rather that it can have “generell-zeitlos” sense. This (in his view) opens the door to taking it as an injunctive, probably to a root aorist. It then owes its pf.- type ending to analogic spread from the equally non-reduplicated 3rd pl. skambhur (X.65.4), whose ending could belong to the pf. or, possibly, to an aorist. Since the conceptual structure of the vs., with the actions of ab contrasting with those of cd, imposes (in my view) a preterital sense on skambháthuḥ, I am not persuaded by Kü’s general/timeless interpr. But, on the other hand, I don’t need to be: Kü is still under the sway of the Hoffmannian interpr. of the injunctive, but this straitjacket of a linguistically implausible verbal “category” should not limit our readings of this maximally unmarked form-type, and there is, in my view, abundant evidence for injunctives used as straight preterites. I am therefore willing to accept that skambháthuḥ (and skambhuḥ) somehow reflect an aorist, which the root otherwise lacks, and a root aorist might be expected beside the nasal pres. skabhnā́ti, as Kü points out. He provides what seems to me an overly complex analogic explanation for the full-grade root syllable, which can simply result from a formal match with the immediately following cognate instr. skámbhanena. (It might be noted that a putative

*skabháthuḥ with zero-grade root syllable would produce a slightly better break.) What I don’t understand -- and Kü doesn’t mention -- is why the verb is accented. It
is right in the middle of its clause, preceded by a tonic preverb and a tonic object, so the explanations for the accents of vividáthuḥ (1c) and vāsáyathaḥ (2a) are not applicable. Perhaps it acquired its accent redactionally because the reasons for the accents of those two verbs were no longer clear.


## 03
I do not understand why the Vṛtra-smashing is couched in the pres. tense, hatháḥ. The injunc. 2nd du. hatám would fit the same metrical slot, and its corresponding impf. ahatam was in fact used in 1d. The rest of the vs. is preterital, with augmented imperfects amanyata (b), airayatam (c) and pf. paprathuḥ (d). One might argue that the accented injunc. could easily be mistaken for the masc. acc. sg.

ppl. as a modifier of áhim … vṛtrám, but hatám as 2nd du. impv. is fairly common elsewhere (though, it seems, not with an acc. sg. obj. that could facilitate the misidentification). Another possibility is that this is an attempt to convey relative tense in the absence of a functional pluperfect: if Heaven’s giving consent (2nd half of b; ánu … amanyata) logically precedes the smashing itself — not a foregone conclusion: Heaven may have cheered them on while they performed the smashing — then the present hatháḥ would express the action that followed the one conveyed by the impf. amanyata. But I consider this unlikely.

Well-attested samudrá- is otherwise masc.; with Lü (192 and n. 1) I take neut.

pl. samudrā́ṇi in d as an adj. and supply árṇāṃsi from c.


## 04
Ge (see also Gr) takes āmā́su as modifying vakṣáṇāsu (“in die rohen Bäuche”), which is certainly possible grammatically. However, in other instantiation of this paradox it is the cows that are raw. (See an ex. below.) Hence the publ. tr., with first the cows (a), then the udders of the cows (b) as the depoisitory of the cooked milk.

Ge follows Gr in taking the fem. of jágat- (here loc. pl. jágatīṣu) as simply designating a female creature (“in … weiblichen Tieren”), but esp. in this context, in which the milk is held firm despite not being tied, the fact that the cows are in motion seems relevant. Cf. another phrasing of the same image in III.30.14 āmā́pakváṃ carati bíbhratī gaúḥ “Herself raw, the cow roams about carrying the cooked (milk),” where carati seems to correspond semantically to jágatīṣu here.

The publ. tr. might be slightly altered to reflect the unaccented āsu in c: “within them, the dappled moving (cows).”


## 05
Ge, flg. Sāy, supplies rayím in ab, quite persuasively because the same phrase apatyasā́cam śrútyam explicitly modifying rayím is found in I.117.23, II.30.11. Re suggests rather śúṣmam on the basis of c, but this does not enter into the same formulaic nexus and seems a less likely gift in any case.
