+++
title = "073"

+++
Bṛhaspati Re EVP XV.66-67.

## 01
Pāda c is somewhat troubled, since neither of the first two words, dvibárhajmā prāgharmasád, is clear. Let us work from the end. The rt. noun cmpd.

prāgharma-sád- is not otherwise attested, but gharma-sád- ‘sitting by the gharma drink/pot’ is found in adjacent vss. in X.15.9-10, also characterizing pitár-. It is not clear what the prefixed prā- would add semantically (see Old, Ge n. 1c, Scar 564) nor why it should have a long vowel (if it belongs to prá). I therefore favor a different segmentation of the sequence, one roundly rejected by Old even as he mentioned it -- namely, to take the prā as the final of the preceding word, hence (in the first instance, but see below) *dvibárhajmā-prā(ḥ), as the root noun to √prā ‘fill’.

This requires a change in the Saṃhitā text: accenting the prā́(ḥ) and (possibly, but see below) de-accenting dvibárha-, hence *dvibarhajmā-prā́(ḥ). This root noun is common in such cmpds; see, e.g., antarikṣa-prā́- ‘filling the midspace’, rodasī-prā́- ‘filling the two world-halves’, with similar cosmic locales. Rather than seeing in dvibárhajmā- a form of ájman- ‘course, drive’ with Ge, Re, Scar 255 (e.g., Ge ‘der eine doppelte Bahn(?) hat’) (Schmidt B+I 214 refuses to tr.), I segment it rather as - jmā-, with the -jm- ‘earth’ element belonging to the archaic and multiformed kṣám- ‘earth’ word (see also Re, who, though drawn to the possibility in his comm., rejects it in tr.). The supposed prior member dvibárha- obviously strongly resembles the reasonably (14x) well-attested s-stem bahuvrīhi dvibárhas-. But we should expect

*dvibarho-jmā- or the like and must therefore posit either a thematic byform *-
barha- or a secondary redactional adjustment. (Wackernagel’s solution, flg.

Bartholomae [AiG I.339, cf. II.1.65, 125], that dvibárha-jmā- was simplified from

*dvibárhaj-jmā, with -aj- the sandhi form of -ad-, which in turn is a sandhi form of -
as- before a voiced sound, seems to me without merit, though clever.) In any case, the unclarity of the structure of the cmpd. and the uncertainty of the lexical affiliation of -jmā- or -ajmā in the posited *dvibarhajmā-prā́- could have led to redactional reanalysis, with segmentation of *prā́, which was then attached to what follows. However, one problem with my analysis is that it assumes a three-member cmpd. *dvibarha-jmā-prā́-; these are rare in the RV and might be expected to be rarer when archaic elements are involved. I therefore have a further suggestion, which also addresses another problem with the analysis. Consider VI.19.1, where Indra is described as carṣaṇīprā́utá dvibárhā(ḥ) “filling the domains and doubly lofty.” If we re-segment and readjust the beginning of our sequence here, to a twoword phrase *dvibárhā *jmā-prā́(ḥ), *dvibárhā can keep its accent, we are saved from positing the thematic byform (since *dvibárhā would be nom. sg. m. to the sstem), and we avoid a three-member compd. True, we have to lengthen the final of dvibárha, but it is already metrically heavy (before the cluster -jm-). This would yield a description of Bṛhaspati “doubly lofty, filling the earth” that is similar to that of Indra in VI.19.1. It also fits the thematics of the hymn; note Bṛhaspati’s bellowing to the two world-halves in d and, especially, his making wide space (ulokám … cakā́ra) in the next vs. ### 03
I do not understand why hánti in d is accented. Nor does Old (“Akzent … befremdet”). Both Ge and Re evade the problem by reading pāda-init. bṛ́haspátiḥ with the previous pāda as subj. of a nominal sentence, leaving hánti to begin a new cl. The publ. tr. does the same. Despite adopting the Ge/Re strategem in my tr., I consider this solution artificial but have nothing better to offer.
