+++
title = "074"

+++
Soma and Rudra Re EVP IX.74 and 128.


## 01
In my view, iṣṭí- in b is meant to express both ‘desire’ and ‘sacrifice’ (from √iṣ and √yaj respectively), encapsulating the reciprocity inherent in the compact between gods and men. Ge is sympathetic to ‘sacrifice’ (n. 1b) but points to the accent: ‘sacrifice’ is ordinarily accented íṣṭi-. But secondary senses (that is, puns) often ignore accentual differences, and furthermore, as JL has persuasively argued, the older accent of -tí-abstracts was suffixal, and selective accent retraction can be observed in the course of the Vedic period, so we might assume an older *iṣṭí- ‘sacrifice’.


## 03
The nominal rel. cl. yád … ásti is in some sense pleonastic: the two ppl.

baddhám and kṛtám could simply modify the neut. énaḥ directly. But the structure seems designed to sketch a two-level structure: the outrage commited (by us) that is bound to us. Note that abl. asmát should be construed with the main cl. (“unhitch, release … from us”: áva syatam muñcátam … asmát), and so the rel. cl. is technically speaking embedded. But this seems to be one of the fairly common examples of semi-embedded izafe-type relative clauses.


## 04
As often, a pattern imposed earlier in the hymn is partly altered at the end.

In this case the vs.-initial voc. sómārudrau of 1-3 is postponed till the beginning of the 2nd pāda.

The simplicity and banality of this hymn (and perhaps an eye to the finish line) seem to have led both Ge and Re into uncharacteristic (and independent) lapses: Ge tr. ab in the 3rd ps., despite the clear voc. sómārudrau and clear 2nd du. impv.

mṛḷatam; Re twists (at considerable verbal expense and with a characteristic parenthesis) the du. sumanasyámānā ending the vs. as an acc. pl. modifying naḥ: “protégez nous (en sorte que nous ayons) l’esprit bien disposé.”
