+++
title = "075"

+++
Weapons Re EVP XVI (1976): 109-11 provides notes; it is tr. in the earlier Hymnes spéculatifs (1956) but without philological notes.

It is possible that this hymn was tacked onto the maṇḍala because of tigmā́yudhau tigmáhetī “possessing sharp weapons and sharp missiles” at the end of the preceding hymn (VI.74.3), though this is not a necessary hypothesis. The first 14 vss. are repeated in a number of places in the early Vedic ritual texts as part of the Aśvamedha (e.g., VS XXIX.38-51, TS IV.6.6).


## 01
The first word of the hymn, jīmū́tasya, signals that we are out of the core RVic lexical domain: this word for ‘thunder-cloud’ is found only here in the RV, though it is fairly amply attested elsewhere in early Vedic, and it has no obvious synchronic or diachronic etymology.

The construction of the riddle seems a bit weak to me, since the solution, given in d, várman-, is anticipated by its derivative varmín- in b.


## 02
This vs. displays the proper RVic distribution of the suppletive stem of ‘bow’, whose nom./acc. sg. is supplied by dhánus- and the rest of its paradigm (and cmpding forms) by dhánvan-. On this suppletion see AiG III.318 and esp. the detailed disc. of Hoffmann (Aufs. I.330 = Spr. 20 [1974] 18), as well as EWA s.v. dhánuṣ-. Here the instr. sg. dhánvanā opens pādas a, b, and d (and see loc. dhánvan in the next vs. 3c), while nom./acc. sg. dhánuḥ holds the same position in c. Gr identifies a single occurrence of dhánva as nom./acc. sg. (V.7.7), which would thus violate the suppletive pattern, but this is otherwise universally and rightly assigned to the homonymous stem dhánvan- ‘wasteland’. The form dhánva (or quite possibly dhánvā) in II.33.10 is identified by Gr as a pl., which would fit the suppletive paradigm. It is generally, however, taken as a sg., which would not. However, see comm. ad II.33.10, where I now suggest restoring Gr’s pl. interpr., contra the standard sg. renderings incl. that of the publ. tr. The RV suppletive pattern is soon broken: already in the AV dhánus- begins to acquire oblique forms.

Technically speaking, dhánuḥ could be an acc., modified by apakāmám (if this stem can be adjectival; see below), which could be tr. “he makes the bow of his rival lose its desire,” but this requires supplying a generic animate subject for kṛṇoti. The stem apakāmá-, again a hapax in the RV but found elsewhere in early Vedic, is generally taken as a noun (Ge’s ‘Unlust’ being the best rendering), but I think it possible that it’s a nominalized bahuvrīhi ‘having desire gone/away’; there are not enough stems of this structure to anchor the grammatical value to accentual behavior, in my opinion. In any case, lacking the useful German ‘Unlust’, I have tr. as if we had a lexeme *ápa √kṛ ‘make (go) away’, with kā́ma- as obj. Cf. ápa-ā́√kṛ in passages like nearby VI.59.8 ápa dvéṣāṃsy ā́kṛtam “make hatreds stay far away” (≅ III.16.5). (Gr identifies one instance of an ápa √kṛ, in VIII.18.7, but the verb and preverb there belong to separate constituents; see comm. ad loc.)


## 03
In d sámane, lit. ‘togethering’ vel sim., has a double sense, referring to the ‘gathering’ of battle as well as to a festive gathering, with the latter appropriate to the female similes in the vs. Exactly what sound is expressed by the verb śiṅkte is unclear (beyond possibly “shink”). Not only is this verb barely attested, but it is hard to conceive of a sound that both a maiden and a stretched bowstring would make. One of the practical questions is whether this 2nd hemistich still depicts the bowstring pulled back to the archer’s ear and held there or if it has moved on to the release of the bowstring as it propels the arrow; pāda d might suggest the latter. Numerous possibilities have been tried. The publ. tr.’s ‘jangles’ was meant to evoke the later kāvya trope of a woman dancer with jingling anklets, but I recognize that it is a less good fit with the bowstring -- though it might work if the string has just been loosed. The only other occurrence of the verb in early Vedic (not in a repetition of this vs.) is in the riddle hymn, I.164.29, where it may refer to the sound that the gharma pot makes as the milk is being heated in it. The publ. tr. (JPB) renders it ‘hums’ there (so also Doniger), Whitney in the equivalent AVŚ passage (IX.10.7) ‘twang’; the latter is an unlikely noise for a pot, but so, I think, is humming. (And certainly jangling or twanging seems out.) In our passage Ge tr. “quieckt” (squeak, squeal) and Re (Hymnes spéc.) “vibre”; in the TS equivalent (IV.6.6c) Keith “twangeth”; in the VS equivalent (XXIX.40) Griffith “whispers” (so also Maurer for the RV). Acdg. to the internet, all bows make some sort of a twanging sound when the string is released, but the better tuned a bow is, the quieter: well-tuned bows can be almost silent. Since twanging seems excluded for a maiden and since none of the other suggestions is particularly compelling, I will stick with ‘jangle’, though not with much confidence.

The standard tr. take pāráyantī in a fairly generic sense (e.g., Ge’s “die … durchhilft”), but its literal meaning ‘cause to cross / reach the far shore’ works just as well, if not better, if we supply ‘arrow’ as obj.: the bowstring celebrated here causes the arrows to cross the space from the bow to the battle.


## 04
The pun on sámana- implicit in 3d is made explicit in 4a; the single word is held constant, but in two different senses, between the simile and the frame.

Maurer (308) considers the simile in b “a bit irregular, since, strictly speaking, it is not the bow-ends that hold the arrow, but the bowstring.” But if the bow is held on a horizontal axis, with the bow ends horizontally aligned, the part of the bow between the ends dips down like a lap, and it is the lowest part where the tip of the arrow is placed. Again according to the internet, the bow should be parallel to the ground when positioning the arrow on it (an action called “nocking”); this would be the position envisioned above.

The 2nd hemistich depicts the positions of the ends of the bow while the arrow is shot: first (c) the two ends of the bow approach each other as the bowstring is pulled back, decreasing the vertical space between the ends -- although as far as I can tell from YouTube, the ends never actually meet. This movement is described as saṃvidāné ‘finding each other’. The lexeme sám √vid often has the more abstract sense ‘make an agreement’, and I think this may also be operative in the passage, though I’m not quite sure how: perhaps their agreement or compact is to “pierce the rivals” (ápa śátrūn vidhyatām), as the rest of the pāda urges. Most tr. only recognize this latter sense in our passage (e.g., Re, Hymnes spéc., “d’un commun accord”), missing the physical sense applicable to the manipulation of the bow. In d the bowstring is released, propelling the arrow, and the two ends “spring apart” (viṣphurántī) and resume their position at rest. The contrastive preverb pair sám / ví calls attention to these contrastive actions. None of the tr. I consulted (Ge, Re, Doniger, Maurer, as well as Keith for TS and Griffith for VS) seems to have recognized that a two-step process is being described. There is one possible problem with my interpr., namely that forms of the root √sphṝ often take an object, and there is an acc. amítrān here that it could govern. However, there are a number of forms to the root that lack objects, incl. the other occurrences of the participle (VII.89.2) and nearby aor. ápa spharīḥ (VI.61.14). And I prefer to take amítrān either as a further specification of the obj. of ápa … vidhyatām in c or as a poorly marked acc. of goal.


## 05
The expression bahúr asya putráḥ in the singular is somewhat surprising next to the fem. pl. bahvīnā́m, but Re’s suggestion that it is a “bahuvrīhi défait” can be adopted, whatever we may think the grammatical process is. I have adopted Griffith’s “with many a son” (both RV and VS tr.; see also Maurer), which is surprisingly apt. As is generally recognized, the masc. and fem. referents are both arrows: in addition to the standard fem. íṣu-, forming part of the ‘quiver’ cmpd itself (iṣudhí- in c), there are masc. ‘arrow’ words, incl. bāṇá-, found in vs. 17 below, and śalyá-.

Another onomatopoetic word: ciścā́, which is a hapax (though cf. ciściṣākāram, with √kṛ as here, not attested till the sūtras; see Hoffmann Aufs. 39). Since it expresses the sound of the quiver, “clatter” (pub. tr.), “rattle” (Doniger, Maurer), “clang and clash” (Griffith, RV and VS) all seem within reasonable range; Keith’s “whiz” much less so. Again the sound may in fact just be “chishcha.”


## 06
Both hemistichs of this vs. express the same paradox, that an entity behind can lead something in front of it. In ab the good charioteer (suṣārathíḥ) “leads forward” (nayati … puráḥ) the horses that are physically in front of him; in cd the reins, which stretch in front of the charioteer from his hands, follow his mind, which is physically behind them (mánaḥ paścā́d ánu).


## 07
The middle of kṛṇvate is nicely appropriate.

The publ. tr. follows Re in taking vājáyantaḥ as belonging to the denom. stem ‘seek the prize’, despite the accent (expect *vājayántaḥ), since we would otherwise expect the part. to have an object. See also Old, ZDMG 55.294 (=KlSch 753).

In its other RVic occurrence (X.163.4) prápada- means ‘front of the foot’, but here I find it hard to assume that the horses are daintily trampling the soldiers with their tippy-toes and so tr. “with their forefeet.” However, since technically it seems that horses do walk/run on their toes, perhaps that’s what the poet intended.

Moreover, IH points out that it would be the front of the horses’ hooves that would first make impact on the soldiers’ fallen bodies.

The sense of ánapavyayantaḥ is disputed, or rather most tr. water down what I think its sense must be. It’s a negated part. to ápa √vyā ‘strip off, divest’ of garments, to √vyā ‘envelop, wrap’. See VII.81.1 ápo máhi vyayati … támaḥ “She [Dawn] unwraps the great darkness.” But most tr. attenuate this in some way that loses the sense of the root entirely, e.g., Ge “ohne sich zu entziehen” (withdraw oneself), Griffith “never flinching,” Keith “unflinchingly,” Doniger “without veering away,” Maurer “unrelenting”; Re (EVP) assigns it to a different root: ápa-veti ‘cesser’ (whose participle should be *-vyant-; he doesn’t deal with the morphology), though in Hymnes spéc. he tr. “sans même s'écarter (de leur voie).” I think we should take the form seriously and I suggest that it means that the horses’ trampling is so powerful that it can kill a man even while he is still in armor (hence my “without divesting”). That the form is underlyingly transitive (as I have just claimed) is disputed on principle by Lowe (Participles in Rigvedic Sanskrit, 277), where he argues that negated participles are (“almost always”) intransitive and tr. this ex. as “without withdrawing.” I would dispute the principle and therefore his interpr. of this passage.


## 08
I follow Ge in accepting the view of the comm. to VS XXIX.45 that háviḥ is a shortening of havirdhāna- ‘oblation-deposit’, with the √dhā supplied by the definition found in the next pāda, containing níhitam ‘deposited’. However, see Old in particular for other ways to interpr. háviḥ.

The standard tr. take úpa … sadema as transitive with the chariot as object: e.g., Ge “setzen,” Re (Hymnes spéc.) “installer,” Doniger “place,” Oberlies (II.223) “setzen.” But úpa √sad is a standard locution for ‘reverently approach, do honor to’, and that surely is the sense here (so Griffith, Maurer “hono(u)r”).


## 09
On kṛchre-śrít- see most recently Scar (543-44). Re’s (EVP) objection to Ge’s tr. (“die Zuflucht in der Note”) and his over-complex substitute can, I think, reasonably be dismissed.

Most tr. take citrá-senāḥ as containing the ‘army’ word (e.g., Ge “eine wunderbare Heerschar bildend”), and this is certainly possible. I interpr. it rather as ‘weapon’ because of the proximity of íṣu- ‘arrow’ in the adjoining cmpd íṣubalāḥ ‘arrow-strong’.


## 10
This is the last vs. of the first part of the hymn (see publ. intro.), at least by content, though the next vs. is also in trimeter meter, and it has a typically eclectic group of addressees and divine name-checks.

Pāda b could be simply a nominal sentence: “H+E (are) kindly to us,” but the hortatory cast of the 2nd hemistich makes this unlikely.

Pūṣan probably makes his appearance here because he watches over roads and journeys.

The 2nd singular impv. rákṣā beginning d has no obvious subject. The voc. immediately preceding it, at the end of c, is pl. ṛṭāvṛdhaḥ, as are the other vocc. in pāda a. The only available sg. is pūṣā́in c, but he is subj. of a 3rd ps. impv. The pāda is identical to nearby VI.71.3d, where the sg. Savitar is the addressee, and it was presumably adapted from there, as Re (EVP) notes. As the last pāda of the apparent hymn-ending vs., it is not surprising that it has an external source and is only loosely attached.


## 11
The “eagle” is of course the feathers that provide the fletching at the back end of the arrow. The “tooth” of the arrow is presumably its tip -- the arrowhead -- so called because it “bites” its target. The arrowhead is quite unlikely to have been made from a deer’s tooth, however -- their teeth being short and flat and unsuitable for piercing. But acdg to the internet, deer antlers were/are used for primitive arrowheads. The cows in pāda b are of course leather sinews, and again the internet tells us that sinew was/is frequently used to attach the arrowhead to the shaft (with some how-to advice, which generally involves chewing on the leather first).

Pāda b recalls 5d, though the material objects in questions are different, the quiver in 5, the arrow in 11: pāda-final prásūtā matches prásūtaḥ in 5d in the same metrical position, and both contain the past part. of √nah ‘tie’ earlier in the pāda, also in the same metrical position, 5d x x nínaddhaḥ, 11b x x sáṃnaddhā The verb of pāda d is literally “run together and apart” (sáṃ ca ví ca drávanti), but “clash and separate” seemed to me to have a better ring.


## 12
śárma yachatu at the end of d responds to śárma yaṃsan ending the previous vs., though the vss. are in different meters.


## 13
The first hemistich is strongly alliterative: jaṅghanti … jaghánān … jighnate and plays on two different redupl. verb forms to √han: the intensive and the regular redupl. pres. Although I generally agree with Schaefer that “intensives” are really frequentatives most of the time, in this particular passage the presence of the med. redupl. pres. jighnate, which almost always has pl. objects (as here) and therefore fills the frequentative slot, pushes the intens. stem jaṅghan- towards a true intensive value.

prácetas- ‘discerning’ may seem an odd descriptor for horses, but the point is well captured by Doniger’s “who sense what is ahead” (perhaps an expansion on Re’s [Hymnes spéc.] ‘prévoyant’). The horses are presumably too smart to go into battle unless they’re forced by the whip.


## 14
This is the last of the vss. repeated in the Aśvamedha sections of the YV.

pári is the signature word of this vs.: páry eti (a), paribā́dhamānaḥ (b), pári pātu (d).

On the cmpd hasta-ghná- see Old and Lü (ZDMG 96: 39), the latter summarized by Re (EVP).

There are numerous diff. interpr. of vayúnāni here. I assume that it refers to the different possible trajectories of the bowstring when it is released.

The last pāda may emphasize the masculinity of the handguard and the archer because the bowstring, from which the handguard protects the archer, is feminine.


## 15
The antelope head and metal mouth of the arrow are not entirely clear. I assume that this refers to a deer-antler arrowhead (as in 11a) with a further metal tip attached to it. The internet assures me that such things have been discovered, if rarely, in archaeological contexts. Ge (n. 15b) suggests either this or that the múkham is the ring that connects the shaft and the arrowhead. But as far as I can tell, in my exploration of the odd internet world of makers of primitive arrowheads, there would not be a separate metal ring or socket used to attach a bone/antler arrowhead to the shaft; when there’s a metal attachment, the whole arrowhead is metal.

In a hymn so attuned to the grammatical gender, and therefore of the metaphorical gender, of the key words, there is a special frisson in describing the feminine arrow (íṣu-) -- here in the dat. íṣvai, whose -v-ai stem+ending shows the specifically feminine inflection of short -u-stems -- with a cmpd that ends with - retas- ‘semen’. The accent of the cmpd parjánya-retas- shows that it must be a bahuvrīhi ‘having (or in this case, in my opinion, receiving) the semen of Thunder/Parjanya’; hence tr. like Re (Hymnes spéc) “semence de Parjanya,” Doniger “to this seed of Parjanya” are misleading and grammatically wrong. As to what this refers to in practical terms, Re may well be correct that the shaft of the arrow is made of reed, which grows in the rains and is associated with the thunderstorm.


## 16
amī́ṣām is of course the gen. pl. of the far deictic prn. asaú and could be more literally tr. as “do not leave a single one of those yonder standing,” but this seemed a bit heavy.


## 17
The beloved RVic contrast of sám and ví is on display here with saṃpátanti (a) and viśikhā́ḥ (b).

Strictly speaking, iva comes too late in the simile kumārā́viśikhā́iva, since the ‘lads’ must definitely belong to the simile, not the frame. This late placement is not unusual, however. Because of the multivalence of ví the bahuvrīhi viśikhá- can have two different senses and has been interpr. with both. If in this cmpd means ‘without’, as often, the whole cmpd means ‘without/lacking hair’ -- so Gr “ohne Kopfhaare”; he is followed by Re (Hymnes spéc.) “aux crêtes dénouées” and Maurer “tuftless.” By contrast, if ví means ‘out, apart’, as often, the cmpd means ‘with hair apart’, that is, perhaps, sticking out every which way. Ge renders it “mit aufgelöstem Haarbusch,” and he is followed by Doniger “with untrimmed locks of hair” and me; Old implicitly assumes the same meaning. If the first meaning is correct, these could in fact be some kind of projectile that lacks fletching. (Acdg. to the internet, it is possible to shoot unfletched arrows, though not generally recommended.) Or perhaps the arrows lost their fletching in the intensity of the shooting. Nonetheless, this seems the less likely sense. If it means “with hair out/apart” (my “unruly hair”), it can refer either to the arrows themselves, coming in from every angle: if each arrow is compared to a strand of hair, the visual effect would be of “bedhead” hair, matted and sticking out in all directions. Or it can refer to the fletching; when innumerable arrows rain down, their feathers would again produce a chaotic visual effect.

The predicate śárma √yam returns from vss. 11-12, and 17d is identical to 12d.


## 18
Note the near-rhyming forms mármāṇi .. vármaṇā, echoed in c by várīyo váruṇaḥ.


## 19
I take the phrase svó áraṇo yáś ca níṣṭyaḥ as a three-member sequence indicating progressive distance from the speaker. I'm assuming that in this context an áraṇa- is someone who inhabits the same general territory, but belongs to a different group, while the níṣṭya- are from beyond the territory. Re’s tr. (Hymnes spéc.) is in agreement: “Celui, proche ou lointain ou même étranger.” Others seem to take the 2nd two terms as (near-)synonyms; so explicitly Klein (DGRV I.108-9).