+++
title = "01"

+++
The ‘goad’ (todá-) found in VI.6.6 reappears here, as well as in vs. 3. Thus, 3 of the 5 occurrences of this word in the RV are found in this Agni cycle. In VI.6.6 I argue that the referent of the “great goad” is the sun (see comm. ad loc., sim. I.150.1).

Old (ZDMG 55.301, also Noten) thinks the sun is the referent in our passage as well, and, further, he construes the gen. tódasya in pāda b with śocíṣā tatāna in pāda d, on the basis of VI.6.6 bhānúnā … todásya … tatantha. Although the parallel is suggestive, the distance between the genitive and its supposed governing instr. in our passage seems too far, esp. since the 2nd hemistich begins ayám sá “here is he” or “this one here,” a sequence that seems to open a new (though co-referential) clause.

Moreover, in vs. 3 todá- seems to refer to or be compared to Agni himself, and so the internal evidence of the hymn favors a connection of the goad with Agni, not directly with the sun. I therefore follow Ge in taking todásya as dependent on rā́ṭ, which also governs barhíṣaḥ. It may be that rā́ṭ … todásya “ruler of the goad” is a phrase like sūnúḥ sáhasaḥ “son of strength” (see 1c), where “son of X” is tantamount to X. In the same way “ruler of the goad” may be the equivalent of “the goad” itself. Both the sun (“the great goad”) and Agni are goads because with their appearance at dawn they set the world in motion. Since Agni is often taken as an earthly form of the sun, sharing the same third party identity would not be surprising, with Agni being the lesser of the two by nature.

For Agni as “ruler of the ritual grass,” see VIII.13.4=15.5 ... asyá barhíṣo ví rājasi, though the subject there is Indra. I take yájadhyai as a predicated infinitive (sim. Ge, Re, Keydana [Inf., 171]).

The VP ródasī √yaj is found elsewhere in this cycle: 11.4 yájasva ródasī, VI.15.15 ní tvā dadhīta ródasī yájadhyai, with the same infinitive.

