+++
title = "03"

+++
The rel. cl. that begins this vs. cannot span the hemistich, since the verb that ends b, adyaut, is unaccented. There is the further problem, long noted (see Old ZDMG 55.302), that the apparently easy application of the initial adj. téjiṣṭhā to the next noun aratíḥ is problematic, because aratí- is masc. (though both Thieme [Unters.

29] and Re are willing to allow a fem. here, and Old toys with this notion). In my view the rel. cl. consists only of the first two words, téjiṣṭhā yásya, with yásya of course referring to Agni. The rest of the hemistich is couched in the nominative, with descriptors most naturally applicable to Agni (like aratí-, which generally has Agni as its referent), and so a syntactic shift must happen between the yásya and the following nominatives.

Therefore, a noun must be supplied with téjiṣṭhā in the rel. cl., as Old already suggested (ZDMG 55.302 n. 1). His candidates are ‘Glut’ or (in pl.) ‘Flammen’; Ge follows the former suggestion, supplying tapanī́as in II.23.14. In contrast I suggest ‘course’. As we’ve seen, the Agni cycle of VI is tightly knit, and in VI.3.4 (a hymn with another connection to this one, disc. ad vs. 2) we find tigmáṃ cid éma … yásya “whose course is sharp …” Of course, éman- is a neut. and cannot be supplied with fem. téjiṣṭhā, but cf. I.53.8 téjiṣṭhayā … vartanī́; vartaní- generally means ‘course, track’, though in that particular passage I take it as ‘(wheel)edge’. In any case that fem. would fit here nicely and match the “sharp course” of VI.3.4.

Note that both (-)rā́ṭ and todá- return from vs. 1. As discussed ad vs. 1, todánow seems to apply directly to Agni. I take this word as part of the simile (so also Ge, Re), despite the right displacement of the simile particle, todó ádhvan ná, for which I have no explanation.

Hemistich-final adyaut echoes dyaúḥ at the end of 2b.

In c the first question is the meaning and root affiliation of the hapax dravitā́.

Older interpr. ascribe it to √dru ‘run’: Gr ‘Renner’, apparently (with some attenuation) Ge ‘Ausreisser’, while Re renders it as ‘fondeur’ (smelter), with, presumably, a developed sense of √dru. However, the seṭ character of the agent noun makes this problematic, and Hoffmann (MSS 10 [1957] 70 = Aufs. 420) convincingly connects it with his seṭ root √drū ‘cut, reap’ -- an ascription that has been followed essentially by everyone since (e.g., EWA s.v. DRAVI , Gotō 1st Kl., 138- 39, Tichy Nom.Ag., 35, 285, Keydana Inf., 194 n. 18). The adj. characterizing this agent noun, adroghá-, is unexpected. It ordinarily means ‘undeceptive’ and qualifies speech (as in the bahuvrīhi ádrogha-vāc-), but “undeceptive reaper” is puzzling. I pushed the adjective further than it should probably go, to ‘undisguised’, which, in conjunction with tmán ‘in person’, may express that Agni’s role in cutting down plants is plainly evident to all. But the locution still seems awkward. Tichy’s ‘zuverlässig’ (trustworthy, reliable) mitigates some of this awkwardness and does not stray too far from the sense of the adj.; I would be inclined to emend my tr. to ‘trustworthy’.

In d avartrá- is likewise a hapax. It appears to be a bahuvrīhi built to vártra- (AV+) ‘dam, dike’; see Debr’s Nachtr. to AiG II.1 (p. 58).
