+++
title = "Praśna III, Adhyāya 5"

+++
## 01
1. Now we will explain the rule of the most holy Aghamarshaṇa. [^1] 

## 02
2. He goes to a bathing-place and bathes (there). Dressed in a pure dress let him raise, close to the water, an altar, and moistening his clothes by one (application of water), and filling his hand once (with water), let him recite the Aghamarshaṇa hymn (in the manner of his daily) private recitation. [^2] 

## 03
3. (Let him repeat it) one hundred times in the morning, one hundred times at midday, and one hundred times or an unlimited number of times in the afternoon.

## 04
4. When the stars have risen, let him partake of gruel prepared of one handful of barley.

## 05
5. After seven (days and) nights he is freed from all minor sins (upapātaka), whether they have been committed intentionally or unintentionally, after twelve (days and) nights (from all other sins) excepting the murder of a learned Brāhmaṇa, the violation of a Guru's bed, stealing gold, and drinking Surā. [^3] 

## 06
6. After twenty-one (days and) nights he over-comes even those (crimes) and conquers them.

## 07
7. He overcomes everything, he conquers all, he obtains the reward of all sacrifices, he has bathed at all sacred bathing-places, he has performed the vows required for (the study of) all the Vedas, he becomes known to all the gods, he sanctifies a company (of Brāhmaṇas) by merely looking (at them), and his undertakings are successful. Thus speaks Baudhāyana. [^4] 



[^1]:  5. Vasiṣṭha XXVI, S.

[^2]:  Sthaṇḍila, 'an altar,' is a slightly raised mound of earth, which, according to Govinda, in this case must have the shape of the sun's disc. According to the same authority the hand of the performer must remain filled with water as long as the recitation lasts, and the perform, stands behind the altar facing the east.

[^3]:  Regarding the prasṛtiyāvaka, '(subsisting on) gruel prepared from a handful of barley,' see below, III, 6.

[^4]:  Govinda is of opinion that the words, 'thus speaks Baudhāyana,' indicate that this part of the work has been composed by a pupil or some other person.