+++
title = "06"

+++
This verse has to be Nodhas’s joke. It is conspicuously placed, as the central verse of the hymn and thus a potential omphalos, and it announces Indra’s deed (kárma) with extraordinary fanfare, including two superlatives (práyakṣatamam … cā́rutamam). But in a hymn so far devoted to what is one of Indra’s greatest deeds, the opening of the Vala cave, the poet springs on us instead a deed of utter obscurity involving the swelling of four rivers, an act with no other clear mentions in the RV.

Ge valiantly seeks parallels, but the two passages he adduces (I.104.3-4 and I.174.7) have little or nothing in common with our passage and it’s not even clear that there are rivers in the second. Lüders (Varuṇa 335-37) predictably sees these as heavenly rivers — four because they flow “nach den vier Himmelsgegenden.” Re also sees them as associated with heaven, while Schmidt (B+I 164) and WG seem to see them as being “under” (something unspecified). I have no solution for the affinities of this scrap of mythology, although I tend to agree generally with Lüders that the rivers are more likely to be celestial than terrestrial, and I would suggest that it may have to do with producing rain. But I still think the point here is that Nodhas has set us up for a grand announcement and then, by bait and switch, given us a myth that none of us has ever heard of.

The asti in this hemistich may provide another bit of evidence for this view.

Unaccented asti almost always has existential value (“there exists…”) because the 3rd sg. pres. copula in equational sentences (“X is Y”) is regularly (indeed, probably by rule) gapped. But an existential sense here doesn’t work (“There exists this most conspicuous deed…”). I suggest that the overt asti here signals a strong assertion in the face of expected opposition (“This is his most conspicuous deed” - rather like American children’s quarrels: “is too” “is not”). The disputed word upahvaré adds to the obscurity of this bit of myth. It is clearly a derivative of √hvṛ ‘go crookedly, deviate’, but the exact sense of this nominal derivative is not clear. In this passage Ge takes it as ‘lap’ (Schoss), Re as ‘fold, crease’ (repli), WG as ‘abyss, chasm’ (Abgrund), while Schmidt bypasses any literal rendering with “im Felsen.” Lüders considers it the name “für den Behälter des himmlischen Urquells,” which of course fits his larger picture of the heavenly ocean. I consider the word to convey in the first instance a visual image, that of a meander or deviation from the straight. In connection with rivers (as also in VIII.96.14) it refers to eddies, the circular or oval shapes produced against the current by uneven flow -- or to the “oxbows” or “meanders” created in a river’s course by such uneven flow (Google images are quite striking). In other geographical contexts it can refer to byways, detours from the straight path, and ultimately to remote places, the backeddies, as it were, of the mountains.

