+++
title = "07"

+++
Nodhas continues to deploy his tricks in this verse. He has moved on from the obscure four-river reference in the preceding verse, to a more standard domain for Indra to display his power: the two world halves. But in the first hemistich Indra is not depicted as filling them or propping them apart or any of his usual actions with regard to them, but rather as “uncovering” them, using the same lexeme ví √vṛ as was just used in a Vala-myth verse (5a ví var, 7a ví vavre). (That lexeme is close to being the signature Vala verb, though it is actually more commonly ápa √vṛ, with the same sense, but a different preverb.) Notice that the two occurrences of ví √vṛ surround the pseudo-omphalos verse 6, in the usual manner in which concentric lexical rings signal an omphalos. So Nodhas thus presents this new mythological theme as if it were the old one, the Vala myth found in vss. 2-5, though he is entering different mythological territory.

He also reuses the √ṛc lexical theme from vss. 1-2, with arkaíḥ in b, which is apparently qualified by the middle participle stávamānebhiḥ (remember stuvatá in 1c). This participle is somewhat disturbing; like all middle participles to the root √stu, it is used passively here, but unlike all the other passive uses, its subject is not the god praised but the praises themselves. It may be that Nodhas want his audience to take notice of such an aberrant usage. However, I am tempted to read

*stavamānaibhíḥ here - that is, nom. sg. stávamānas + pron. ebhíḥ, with rare double
application of sandhi: -as + e- > -a + e- > -ai-. The participle stávamānas would modify Indra, as would be expected; ebhíḥ occurs several times with arkaíḥ (IV.3.15, 10.13) and the passive of √stu also appears with this instr. (see passages adduced by Ge in n. 7b, where he suggests a similar, but far from identical, reanalysis of the form in the text, calling it “vielleicht Hypallage”). If the emendation is accepted, I would change the tr. to “the irrepressible one being praised by these chants.” The arkaíḥ might also be construed secondarily as it currently is in the tr., with ví vavre, as the instrument with which he performed the uncovering.

ayā́sya- regularly qualifies Indra; there is no reason to take it as a personal name, identifying a distinct second figure here (pace Ge, Re). Phonetic figure: sanájā sánīḷe taking up the sa’s in vs. 4 and prefiguring the sa’s that will be conspicuous in the next few verses.

The second hemistich contains a clever pun between simile and frame. In the frame (pāda d) Indra supported, that is, held up, the two world halves in familiar fashion (somewhat repairing the less standard uncovering he performed in ab, though cf. VIII.96.16). In this task he is compared to the god Bhaga (though it is not an activity that I think of as particularly associated with Bhaga). But in the simile bhága- is used as a common noun ‘(good) portion’, which provides support for two consorts (méne) - the point presumably being that a man needs a particularly large portion of property to support two wives. I do not follow Hoffmann’s view (1960: 245; KZ 76) that méne here is an elliptical dual referring to concubine and lawful wife, and in fact believe that ménā in general has a wider sense than he allows. He restricts it to concubines, but the derivation from √mi ‘exchange’ suggests a wider application, with the wife as an “exchange token” in the economic transaction of marriage.

