+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. He recites a gāyatrī invitatory formula [^egg_132]: the gāyatrī consisting of three feet, these worlds being three in number [^egg_133], it is these worlds the gods thereby established.

[^egg_132]: 26:1 The anuvākyās recited prior to the principal oblations (pradhāna-havis) are in the gāyatrī metre; whilst the yājyās (referred to in the next paragraph), at the end of which the Vaushaṭ! is uttered and the oblation poured into the fire, consist of trishṭubh verses; cf. 1, 7, 2, 15.

[^egg_133]: 26:2 These inserted clauses with 'vai' supply the reason for what follows, not for what precedes, them.
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. He offers with a trishṭubh (verse): the trishṭubh consisting of four feet, and cattle being four-footed, it is cattle the gods thereby established in these established worlds.
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. The Vashaṭ-call consists of two syllables (vaushaṭ): man being two-footed; it is two-footed man they thereby established among the established cattle.
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. Two-footed man, then, is established here among cattle. In like manner this (Sacrificer) establishes thereby the worlds; and in the established worlds he establishes cattle, and among the established cattle he establishes himself: thus, indeed, is that man established among cattle, who, knowing this, offers sacrifice.
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. And when he offers, after the Vashaṭ has been uttered,--that Vashaṭ-call being yonder shining (sun), and he being the same as Death [^egg_134]--he thereby consecrates him (the Sacrificer) after death, and causes him to be born from out of it, and he is

[^egg_134]: 26:3 See X, 5, 1, 4.

delivered from that death. And the sacrifice, indeed, becomes his body: thus, having become the sacrifice, he is delivered from that death, and all his chief offerings are thereby delivered from that death [^egg_135].

[^egg_135]: 27:1 Viz. inasmuch as the oblation is made with the Vashaṭ.
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. And, verily, whatever offering he there performs, that offering becomes his body in yonder world; and when he who knows this departs this world then that offering, being behind him, calls out to him, 'Come hither, here I am, thy body;' and inasmuch as it calls out (invokes, āhvayati), it is called 'āhuti' (offering or invocation).
</details>