+++
title = "04"

+++
This vs. concerns the production of fire by the friction of the two kindling sticks.

His “highest father” (pitúḥ paramā́t) is probably Heaven (Dyaus Pitar), as most take it; it also contrasts with the “depth” (budhnā́t) that is his source in 3a. The pāda-final pári is probably not to be construed with the verb (prá) nīyate, though pári is common with √nī, but, as often, governs the abl. (pitúḥ paramā́t), despite the intercalation of the verb between the abl. phrase and this postposition.

The hapax pṛkṣúdh- in b is variously explained. E.g., Old (Noten) suggests that it is modeled on the immediately following vīrúdh- and also śurúdh-. In the published tr. I followed Humbach’s explanation (Gathas [1st ed. 1958] II.28; accepted by Narten, YH p. 161), which takes -udh as a zero-grade root noun belonging to widespread PIE *√uedh ̯ ‘convey’, otherwise unattested in Indo-Aryan. But I now no longer believe that etymology (see my forthcoming art. “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise”), and I would now follow Old’s suggestion. Note the progression and phonetic play in the pāda: ā́pṛkṣudho vīrúdho dáṃsu rohati. I would also slightly change the published tr. from “nourishmentbringing” to “nourishing.” On dáṃsu see I.134.4. As noted there, I take it as a loc. pl. to the root noun dám- ‘house’ (so Old [SBE], tentatively Ge, WG), rather than as an adverbial deriv.

of √daṃs ‘be wondrous’ (Gr, Re). Here it presumably refers to the domestic fire established in the house(s); since words for ‘house’ in the plural often refer to only a single domestic establishment (presumably because it is made up of several buildings), “in the house” rather than the publ. “in the houses” is also possible.

Pāda c contains a curiously doubled yád in a single clause (ubhā́yád asya janúṣaṃ yád ínvataḥ), which has attracted little attention. Old (SBE) notes it but makes no attempt to explain it, and otherwise the standard tr. (including mine) do not reflect or mention it. The exception is WG, who take the pāda as a kind of stuttering set of false starts: “Wenn die beiden seine Geburt -- wenn (sie überhaupt) -- antreiben.” This seems to be the only way to represent what the text has, since it is impossible to manufacture a separate clause dependent on the second yád. But since both clauses in the WG rendering share subject, object, and verb, and the adverbial addition “überhaupt” reflects nothing in the Skt., it may be just as well to pass over the doubling in silence, assuming that the second yád comes from the occasional tendency for the relatively pronoun to immediately precede a pāda-final verb. Cf., e.g., for this verb stem, I.55.4d kṣémeṇa dhénām maghávā yád ínvati (also V.28.2c, VIII.13.32c … yám ínvasi).

Pāda d contains an augmented impf. abhavat, which contrasts with the presents nīyáte (a), róhati (b), and ínvataḥ (c), esp. since it begins ā́d íd “just after that,” which suggests that the past tense action of d should follow the actions of the earlier part of the verse. Most tr. (Old [SBE], Ge, Re, WG) take c and d together, separate from ab, which produces a jarring sequence of tense: “when they spur on …, then he became …” I connect c rather with ab and indeed with vs. 3 and start a new syntactic sequence with 4d, which is continued by the preterital expressions ā́d íd + ā́viśat in 5a, ví vāvrdhe ̥ in 5b, and áruhat in 5c. Although this is not a complete solution, in that the ā́d íd “just after that” of 4d and 5a begs for a sequentially prior preterite, it keeps the disharmonious sequence of tenses from inhabiting the same sentence. This division is also compatible with the syntactic enjambement characteristic of the hymn.

