+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. The gods were once performing the initiation ceremony for a (sacrificial session) of a thousand years. When five hundred years had passed with them, everything here was worn out--to wit, Stomas, and Pr̥shṭḥas, and metres (texts).
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. The gods then perceived that unexhausted element of the sacrifice, and by means of that unexhausted element they obtained what success there was in the Veda; and, verily, for him who thus knows this, the Vedas are unexhausted, and the work of the officiating priests is pet-formed with the unexhausted threefold science.
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. Now, this is that unexhausted element of the sacrifice:--o-śrāvaya, astu śraushaṭ, yaja, ye yajāmahe, and vaushaṭ [^egg_493]. In these five utterances there are seventeen syllables:--o-śrāvaya consists of four syllables, astu śraushaṭ of four syllables, yaja of two syllables, ye yajāmahe of five syllables;

[^egg_493]: 170:2 For these sacrificial calls, see part i, p. 142, note 2.
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. And the Vashaṭ-call consists of two syllables. This is the seventeenfold Prajāpati, as established in the deity and in the body, and, verily, whosoever thus knows that seventeenfold Prajāpati, as established in the deity and in the body, establishes himself by offspring and cattle in this, and by immortality in the other, world.
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. The gods then spake, 'Find ye out that sacrificial performance which shall be a substitute for one of a thousand years; for what man is equal thereto that he could get through with (a performance of) a thousand years?'
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. They saw the Viśvajit with all the Pr̥shṭḥas [^egg_494] to be an accelerated Soma-feast in lien of the Pr̥shṭḥya-shaḍaha, for there are those (same) Stomas, those Pr̥shṭḥas, and those metres.

[^egg_494]: 171:1 For such a day's performance with all the Pr̥shṭḥa-sāmans, see part iii, introd., p. xx seq.
</details>

##  07
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

7. They saw the Pr̥shṭḥya-shaḍaha to be an accelerated Soma-feast in lieu of the Dvādaśāha, for there are those (same) Stomas, those Pr̥shṭḥas, and those metres [^egg_495].

[^egg_495]: 171:2 The Dvādaśāha, or twelve-days’ performance, includes a Pr̥shṭḥya-shaḍaha as its second to seventh days.
</details>

##  08
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

8. They saw the Dvādaśāha to be an accelerated Soma-feast in lieu of (a session of) a year [^egg_496], for there are those (same) Stomas, those Pr̥shṭḥas, and those metres.

[^egg_496]: 171:3 The one year's session includes a Daśarātra, or ten-days’ performance, forming the central part of the Dvādaśāha; and the first and last days of the latter being, like those of the Gavām ayanam, a prāyaṇīya and udayanīya Atiratra.
</details>

##  09
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

9. They saw the (session of a) year to be an accelerated Soma-feast in lieu of the Tāpaścita [^egg_497], for there are those (same) Stomas, those Pr̥shṭḥas, and those metres.

[^egg_497]: 171:4 See part iv, p. 317, note 2.
</details>

##  10
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

10. They saw the Tāpaścita to be an accelerated Soma-feast in lieu of the thousand years’ performance, for there are those (same) Stomas, those Pr̥shṭḥas, and those metres.
</details>

##  11
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

11. He passes a year with the rites of initiation,

a year with the Upasads, and a year with the pressings of Soma.
</details>

##  12
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

12. When he passes a year with the rites of initiation he thereby secures for himself the first part of the performance of a thousand years; and when he passes a year with the Upasads he thereby secures for himself the central part of the performance of a thousand years; and when he passes a year with the pressings he thereby secures for himself the last part of the performance of a thousand years.
</details>

##  13
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

13. Twelve months he passes with the rites of initiation, twelve with the Upasads, and twelve with the pressings,--that makes thirty-six. Now the Br̥hatī (metre) consists of thirty-six syllables, and by means of the Br̥hatī the gods strove to reach heaven, and by means of the Br̥hatī they indeed attained heaven; and in like manner does this one, by means of the Br̥hatī, now strive to reach heaven, and by means of the Br̥hatī he indeed attains heaven; and whatever object of desire there is in the Br̥hatī, that he thereby secures for himself.
</details>

##  14
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

14. But, indeed, there is that triad that is performed together,--the Agni (fire-altar), the Arkya, and the Mahad Uktham (great litany). When he passes a year with the rites of initiation, and a year with the Upasads, thereby the Agni and the Arka are secured by him; and when he passes a year with the pressings, thereby the Mahad Uktham is secured by him: this, then, to wit, the Tāpaścita, is the substitute for the performance of a thousand years, and this, to wit, the Tāpaścita, conduces to the procreation of creatures.
</details>