+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Prajāpati once upon a time spake unto Purusha

 Nārāyaṇa, 'Offer sacrifice! offer sacrifice!' He spake, 'Verily, thou sayest to me, "Offer sacrifice! offer sacrifice!" and thrice have I offered sacrifice: by the morning-service the Vasus went forth, by the midday-service the Rudras, and by the evening-service the Ādityas; now I have but the offering-place [^fn_498], and on the offering-place I am sitting.'

[^fn_498]: 173:1 ? That is to say, those deities have taken possession of everything else. Cf. J. Muir, Orig. Sansk. Texts, vol. v, p. 377.

## 02
2. He spake, 'Offer yet sacrifice! I will tell thee such a thing that thy hymns shall be strung as a pearl on a thread, or a thread through a pearl.'

## 03
3. And he spake thus unto him, ‘At the (chanting of the) Bahishpavamāna, at the morning-service, thou shalt hold on to the Udgātr̥ from behind, saying, "Thou art a falcon formed of the Gāyatrī metre,--I hold on to thee: bear me unto well-being!"

## 04
4. ‘And at the midday Pavamāna thou shalt hold on to the Udgātr̥ from behind, saying, "Thou art an eagle formed of the Trishṭubh metre,--I hold on to thee: bear me unto well-being! "

## 05
5. ‘And at the Ārbhava-pavamāna, at the evening-service, thou shalt hold on to the Udgātr̥ from behind, saying, "Thou art a R̥bhu formed of the Jagat metre,--I hold on to thee: bear me unto well-being!"

## 06
6. 'And at the close of each pressing thou shalt mutter, "In me be light, in me might, in me glory, in me everything!"'

## 07
7. Now light, indeed, is this (terrestrial) world, might the air-world, glory the heavens, and what other worlds there are, they are everything (else).

## 08
8. And light, indeed, is Agni, might Vāyu (the

wind), glory Āditya (the sun), and what other gods there are they are everything.

## 09
9. And light, indeed, is the R̥g-veda, might the Yajur-vela, glory the Sāma-veda, and what other Vedas there are they are everything.

## 10
10. And light, indeed, is speech, might the breath, glory the eye, and what other vital airs there are they are everything.

## 11
11. Let him know this:--'All the worlds have I placed within mine own self, and mine own self have I placed within all the worlds; all the gods have I placed within mine own self, and mine own self have I placed within all the gods; all the Vedas have I placed within mine own self, and mine own self have I placed within all the Vedas; all the vital airs have I placed within mine own self, and mine own self have I placed within the vital airs.' For imperishable, indeed, are the worlds, imperishable the gods, imperishable the Vedas, imperishable the vital airs, imperishable is the All: and, verily, whosoever thus knows this, passes from the imperishable unto the imperishable, conquers recurrent death, and attains the full measure of life.

