+++
title = "B Devas and Asuras"

+++
Beginning with the Vedic prose texts, one of the most enduring mythological struc tures is the perpetual conflict between Devas (devá being the Sanskrit word for  “god”) and Asuras, with the two (almost) balanced groups contending with each  other in numerous myths and myth fragments in all sorts of situations. The Asuras  are, as it were, the anti-Devas, with negative traits exactly corresponding to the posi tive ones possessed by the Devas. In the various combats depicted, the Devas always  prevail, but only barely. This conflict continues to be prominent in the post-Vedic  religious landscape, as in the well-known story of the churning of the ocean of milk  in which the two moieties fight over the treasures churned up. 

An apparent mirror image of this paired opposition is found in Old Iranian in  the Avestan texts, where ahura, the direct cognate of Sanskrit ásura, is the title of  the head of the pantheon, Ahura Mazdā “Lord Wisdom,” and the daēuuas (exact  cognate of Sanskrit devá) are the enemies of all that is good. Although it has always  been tempting to superimpose the Avestan and middle Vedic situations upon each  other, the R̥gveda makes serious difficulties. There the term ásura is generally in the  singular, used as a title (“lord”) in a positive sense, and is often applied to divinities who are otherwise identified as Devas.+++(5)+++ A particularly striking example is found  in VIII.25.4 where Mitra and Varuṇa are called Devas and Asuras simultaneously  (devā́v ásurā “[the two] Devas, [the two] Asuras”). The Asuras as a defined group  only begin to appear in the late R̥gveda. For further discussion see Hale (1986). The history and significance of the Avestan/post-R̥gvedic mirror-image pairing of the  two terms remain unclear. 
