+++
title = "E Agni “Fire”"

+++
The word agní is both the common noun meaning “fire” and the name of the god  who is deified fire. As with sóma (see below), it is often difficult to draw the line  between these uses. The sacrificial system of the R̥gveda (and later Vedic texts), like  that of the cognate Old Iranian Avestan texts, is focused around the ritual fire. The  sacrificial ground is defined by the presence of sanctified fire(s), oblations are made  into them, and the gods and priests gather round them. Thus, first and foremost,  Agni is the god always present at our ritual performances and the immediate recipient of our offerings. He is the most prominent of the R̥gvedic gods after Indra, and  all the Family Books and most of the smaller bardic collections open with their  Agni hymns.

Agni as ritual fire is both recipient of oblations in his own right and the conduit  of oblations destined for other gods, which are offered into the ritual fire. He is  therefore regularly called the mouth of the gods, and his role as the middleman  between the human offerers and divine recipients is often emphasized. The flames  and especially the smoke of the fire carry the oblations to heaven, but also, perhaps  more often, serve as a means for the gods to come to earth to our sacrifice: Agni is  said to be the conveyor of the gods many, many times in the text. He is a middleman  in another sense, as a god who nonetheless dwells intimately among mortals. For us he is both ally and messenger to the more distant gods, and since he is not one of us  but a divinity, he is viewed as and often called our guest. 

But the ritual fire is not the only form of Agni. The poets emphasize both the  divine aspects of Agni and his purely physical form, often intermingling references  to different forms of fire in the same hymn. As a god he is often identified with the  sun, the celestial form of fire: blazing hot, shining bright, and appearing at the same  time of day, namely dawn when the sun rises and the ritual fire is kindled. But the  fire on our sacrificial ground is also clearly kin to the fire on our domestic hearth;  indeed in later śrauta ritual the fire from which the other ritual fires are taken out  is called the Gārhapatya or “householders’ (fire).” Agni is therefore also praised for  his contribution to daily life and the pleasures of home and family. 

The potentially destructive aspects of fire are not forgotten, however. Many of  the most inventive descriptions in Agni hymns are of the wild, uncontrollable ram pages of forest fire, spreading across the land and “eating” everything in its path.  We seek to harness this destructive power of fire, to turn it against our enemies  and other threats to our safety, and Agni, sometimes with the epithet rakṣohán “demon-smasher,” is urged to turn his relentless flames against opponents we name.  A subtype of destructive fire is the funeral fire, the “flesh-eating” fire of cremation,  which is both welcomed and feared (see esp. X.16). 

The paradoxical nature of physical fire also provides some part of the god  Agni’s personal qualities. That fire is fueled by plants, especially wood, contributes  to the belief that Agni lives concealed within the plants, even very juicy ones, until  his birth.+++(4)+++ Agni also comes to be identified with a minor divinity going back to  Indo-Iranian times, Apām Napāt “child of the waters,” who was probably originally separate—a glowing fiery being concealed and nurtured in the waters, probably configured in part as lightning. 

The creation or birth of the ritual fire from the kindling sticks, his parents, is  a major subject in Agni hymns, with intricate descriptions of the first stirrings of  flame and smoke as the friction of the kindling sticks produces sparks that finally  catch. The just-born Agni is depicted as a tender babe, who quickly grows to become  stronger than his parents and to devour the plants from which he was born.+++(4)+++ 

## Epithets
Many aspects of Agni are expressed through the variety of names and epithets  applied to him. Agni is Jātavedas as the fire established at the beginning of the rite  that continues to its end. As an unbroken presence in the ritual, Agni Jātavedas  also oversees the succession of generations, ensuring that a family’s lineage will  continue. 

Agni Vaiśvānara is the fire become the sun. As the sun, this fire sees every thing and governs everyone. This form of Agni is especially associated with the  king, who like the sun stands above and reaches all beings. The word vaiśvānará means the one “relating to all men.” 

Agni is also Tanūnapāt and Narāśaṃsa. One or  another of these names—or sometimes both (I.13.2–3)—appear in the Āprī hymns,  which are recited in an animal sacrifice, and they both occur outside of the Āprī hymns as well. The word tánūnápāt describes Agni as the “son of himself,” and  nárāśáṃsa as the one “who embodies men’s praise” of the gods. 

As Agni Kravyād, the “flesh-eating fire,” Agni is the fire of the funeral pyre that consumes the body  of the deceased and transports it to heaven. 

Mātariśvan is sometimes identified as  Agni himself, but he is more properly the one who brought the fire from heaven. 

## Mythology
Agni participates in almost no narrative mythology, in strong contrast to Indra.  Besides the very sketchy account of Mātariśvan’s theft of fire from heaven, there is  one, ritually connected, tale—of Agni’s flight from the sacrificial ground and his  self-concealment in the waters, to avoid his ritual role as bearer of oblations to the  gods. The gods find him in his hiding place and coax him back by promising him a  share of the oblations. This myth is treated most fully in the late sequence X.51–53,  but there are glancing mentions of it elsewhere. The story may have in part been  generated by the conflation of Agni with the originally distinct divine figure Apām  Napāt “Child of the Waters,” on which see II.35. 
