+++
title = "F Soma"

+++
Like Agni, Soma is both a god and a crucial ritual substance, and the boundary  between them is not always clear. As has already been discussed, the juice of the  soma plant (whatever that may have been), pressed from the plant and elaborately prepared, is the chief offering of the most important complex of rituals, the  soma sacrifice. This sacrificial substance and its ritual preparation go back to the  Indo-Iranian period, since Avestan attests to the substance haoma, an exact cognate  to Sanskrit sóma, and to its pressing and offering (see especially the so-called Hōm  Yašt, Y 9–10). In both traditions the substance is also deified. 

The “Soma Maṇḍala” of the R̥gveda, Maṇḍala IX, contains 114 hymns dedicated to Soma Pavamāna “Self-Purifying Soma.” These hymns focus entirely on a  single ritual moment, the pressing of the plant, the straining of the juice by pouring it over a sheep’s fleece to trap the impurities (twigs and the like), the mixing  of the juice first with water and then with milk, and the pouring into containers  prior to offering it to the gods, especially Indra. These actions are often presented  metaphorically, with Soma conceptualized as a king making a royal progress across  the filter and into the cups, a progress that can be compared to the conquering of  territory. Or as the Sun in his journey through the cosmos. Or, quite often, as a bull  racing to mate with a herd of cows, who represent the milk with which the juice will  be mixed.+++(5)+++ Soma is thus regularly presented as having agency in the many descrip tions of the purification of the liquid. 

## Mythology
Besides this dynamic deification especially characteristic of the IXth Maṇḍala,  there is little narrative mythology involving the god Soma. The most important  tale is the theft of Soma from heaven, where he was confined in a citadel guarded  by an archer called Kr̥śānu. A falcon stole him and brought him to earth, successfully evading serious injury from Kr̥śānu’s arrow, to deliver him to Manu, the first  sacrificer. This exploit is mentioned a number of times in the text, but is most fully  described in IV.26–27. 

Though one characteristic of Soma in later texts, a commonplace already in  middle Vedic, is his identification with the moon, this equation is only attested in the very late R̥gveda. It is clearly found only in the Wedding Hymn (X.85), whose  first verses depict the wedding of Soma and Sūryā, daughter of the Sun. The bride groom Soma in this hymn has clear lunar qualities, which are distinguished from his  identity as an earthy ritual substance. 
