+++
title = "M Maruts"

+++
The Maruts are a troop of male gods. Though they lack individual identities, they  are quite prominent as a group: over thirty hymns are dedicated to them alone and  several more to them in conjunction with Indra, and they are frequently mentioned  elsewhere. Their character has both naturalistic and social aspects. On the one  hand, they are the embodiments of the thunderstorm, especially of the monsoon,  and many of their aspects reflect this natural phenomenon: like lightning, they are  brilliant and flashing, bedecked with ornaments and glittering weapons; like thunder, they are excessively noisy on their wild chariot journeys, causing the earth to  shake with fear, bending the trees and even the mountain; like thunderclouds, they  are shape-shifting and sometimes clothed in gray; and they are accompanied by  floods of rain.+++(4)+++ The terror they inspire is more than balanced by the fructifying rains  they bring. All these physical aspects of the Maruts often inspire the poets to vivid  and imaginative language. 

As a social phenomenon, the Maruts represent the Männerbund, an association  of young men, usually at a stage of life without significant other social ties (such as  wife and children), who band together for rampageous and warlike pursuits. The  violence of the thunderstorm is akin to the violence of these unruly age-mates, raiding and roistering. It is not unlikely that Vedic society contained and licensed such  groups among its young men, given the frequent warfare depicted in the R̥gveda,  and the divine Maruts provide the charter for this association and behavior. 

## Birth
The Maruts are not, however, entirely without social ties. Their parentage is  clear, though the manner of their birth problematic and disputed—and often  alluded to as a mystery. Their mother is a dappled cow, Pr̥śni, who can display  androgynous characteristics and behavior; their father is Rudra, and they are often  themselves referred to as Rudras. 

## Rodasī
Moreover, they have a female companion, Rodasī.  When the word ródasī appears in the dual number, it refers to the two world-halves,  but as a singular (also accented rodasī́) it is the name of the Maruts’ consort, a  beautiful young woman who accompanies them on their chariot. Their normal  location in the midspace between the two world-halves is presumably responsible  for her name.

## Indra's friends
Perhaps the Maruts’ most important companion is Indra, for whom they serve  as a sort of posse: marútvant “accompanied by the Maruts” is one of Indra’s stand ing epithets. Their major role in dynamic mythology was to provide support and  encouragement to Indra before the Vr̥tra battle, an episode also treated in Vedic  prose narratives. But, according to one of the most striking hymns in the R̥gveda,  I.165, a dialogue among Indra, the Maruts, and the seer Agastya, Indra disputed  the extent of their aid at that time. In this hymn Indra and the Maruts argue over  their respective rights to a sacrifice offered by Agastya; Indra asserts his rights in  part because he claims the Maruts abandoned him to fight Vr̥tra alone, though  elsewhere in the R̥gveda (and later) there is no doubt about their supportive role in  that combat. 

This mythological contretemps has its reflection also in ritual, in fact to a ritual change occurring during the R̥gvedic period. Although in some of the Family  Books Indra alone is the recipient of the offering at the Midday Pressing, in  Maṇḍalas III and VI, in scattered mentions elsewhere, and in the classical śrauta  ritual, the Maruts share the Midday Pressing with Indra. The tense negotiations  among Indra, the Maruts, and the sacrificer Agastya in I.165 and I.170–171 suggest that the change in recipients of the midday oblation was a contested topic for  R̥gvedic ritualists and the inclusion of the Maruts needed and was given mythological underpinning. 
