+++
title = "30"

+++
In contrast to the first two fairly straightforward verses of the dānastuti (28-29), this one bristles with slangy jokes and their attendant puzzles. It is also the only verse in the hymn not in Uṣṇih meter. The verse opens with the sacrificer (ījānáḥ, lit. the pf. mid. participle to √yaj) asking “you” an abrupt question kuhayā́ kuhayākṛte, consisting of an extended form of kúha ‘where’ (the extended form found only here) and an oddly formed, nonce vocative made up of the same adverbial interrogative plus (probably) -kṛti- (though -kṛtā- would also be possible). Judging from vs. 28, the beginning of the dānastuti, which contains a vocative addressed to Dawn, she is also the addressee here, though a reversion to the default Indra is certainly not excluded. So, literally, “where? you where-actor.” Ge takes ījānáḥ as the subject of the question (“where is the sacrificer?”), rather than the questioner. I follow Old: “Die Opferer fragt die Morgenröte …,” although Ge’s interpretation is by no means excluded. The question is whether Varosuṣāman is the sacrificer himself or his patron, and without a better knowledge of the distribution of roles in RVic sacrifice, we cannot know for sure.

It is generally assumed (I think correctly) that the second hemistich is the response of the addressee to the question in ab, and it is an extended pun. He calls the subject, about whose whereabouts the question was just asked, “Vala,” that is, the name of Indra’s opponent and the cave that contained the stolen cows. But Vala is also a phonological variant of Vara, the first part of the name of the patron Varosuṣāman. He is said to be “set apart” (ápaśritaḥ) along the Gomatī (River), but gómant- literally means ‘possessing cattle’ and can also qualify the Vala cave itself (see I.11.5 valásya gómataḥ). Thus this line appears to be a subtle reminder to Varosuṣāman not to withhold his cattle within himself, like his phonological multiform, but to be generous to his clients. The whole line reminds us of the dānastuti in V.61.19: eṣá kṣeti ráthavītir maghávā gómatīr ánu, párveteṣv ápaśritaḥ "This Rathavīti dwells in peace, a bounteous patron throughout the cow-rich (clans) [/along the Gomatī river], set back among the mountains," containing one of the only two other occurrences of ápaśrita. I do not know the significance of this.