+++
title = "05"

+++
Both Ge and Re take b as an indep. cl., while I interpr. it as a dependent clause parallel to pāda a, likewise hanging off yéṣu. Either is grammatically possible, since the verb of b síṣakti is pāda-initial and could owe its accent to that position.

And in fact there’s little actual difference in content between the two interpr., because both Ge and Re sneak the Maruts into the pāda anyway.

The more crucial question in b is the meaning of the hapax abhyardhayájvan-.

Most take it as expressing a hostile, oppositional, or at least separated relationship, e.g., Ge “Gegenverehrer,” AiG II.1.67 “gesondert opfern,” Re “(dieu) recevant un sacrifice distinct.” Certainly by the time of the BYV Saṃhitās, abhyardhá- (or -ás; see below) is used to mean ‘apart from, separated from’; cf., e.g., MS II.5.4 (52: 14) … yó rājanyò ‘bhyardhó viśáś carati “a Rājanya who goes about apart from his clan” (/ Amano “… der Rājanya, der von seinem Volk abseits wandeln”). (For Amano’s interpr. of the form as an adv. in -aḥ and her detailed discussion of its use in this textual stratum, see her n. 2500 [that number is not a typo!].) However, in the RV árdha- (and ardhá-) refers rather to a ‘half’ or a ‘side’. In X.26.5, a passage adduced by Ge, Pūṣan is described as prátyardhir yajñā́nām, which even Ge tr. as “der bei den Opfern (mit den Göttern) halbpart macht” and Sāy. glosses ardhabhak ‘half-sharer’.

The point, I think, is that Pūṣan is almost always in partnership with other gods, indeed often in dvandvas like índrā-pūṣán- (cf. nearby VI.57.1), somā-pūṣán-, and the only sacrifices he is likely to receive will be shared with (an)other more prominent god or gods. In a way, this characterization of Pūṣan is the exact opposite of Rudra in the previous hymn (VI.49.10), where it is emphasized that Rudra receives a separate invocation, apart from the other gods. For Pūṣan’s relationship to the Maruts, see nearby VI.48, where the Pūṣan vss. (14-19) are sandwiched between Marut vss. (11-13, 20-21) and Pūṣan is compared to the Marut troop (VI.48.15).

Compared to later texts, the gerund is comparatively rare in the RV; the -tvā gerund is found only 21x. The configuration of pāda c shows that the gerund phrase (śrutvā́hávam marutaḥ) must constitute a separate syntactic unit here, since the subord. conj. yád occurs only after the whole phrase, and it is followed by 2ndposition part. (d)ha.

