+++
title = "10"

+++
This vs. poses several syntactic problems. In ab the position of aṅgá speaks against taking the full hemistich as a single cl. (so, more or less, Klein DGRV I.422).

Since aṅgá otherwise invariably takes 2nd position, it should not be found this deep in the clause; moreover the immediately preceding personal prn. yuvám, also encourages an interpr. as a new cl. Both Ge and Re do divide the sequence into two clauses, but both include dhībhíḥ in the 2nd clause -- which essentially defeats the purpose of the clause division, since aṅgá is still in the wrong position, just not as wrong as if the whole thing were one clause. Their solution is understandable because it could allow them to avoid taking viprā as a predicated vocative. So Re “car vous êtes (donneurs) de pensées-poétiques, ô inspirés!” with viprā as real voc. Ge’s interpr. seems to combine the worst of both worlds — including dhībhíḥ in the 2nd cl. despite the position of aṅgá and taking viprā as a predicated voc. (see his n.

10b): “gerade ihr seid redebegabt mit (guten) Gedanken.” My interpr. limits the 2nd cl. to yuvám aṅgá viprā, which imposes a predicated voc. but honors the position of the particle.

The second hemistich is even more problematic. The standard tr. interpret the sequence as a clausal simile / frame construction, with different verbs in the simile and the frame, (a)mumuktam (simile) … tū́rvatam (frame), and ná marking the first clause as a simile. Cf., e.g., Klein (DGRV I.422-23) “As ye freed Atri from great darkness, (so) cause (us) to pass out of difficulty …” (my emphasis). But such constructions do not exist in the RV among the hundreds and hundreds of examples of similes in that text: similes are only nominal, and if a verb is implicitly part of it, it is held constant between simile and frame. See my detailed disc. in “Case Disharmony.” The only possible examples that approach such a clausal construction are those providing a model and the action to be based upon it, but the very few such exx. we have involve yáthā … evā́“just as …, even so …” — as in a childbirth spell: V.78.7 (cf. also 8) yáthā vā́taḥ puṣkaríṇīṃ, samiṅgáyati sarvátaḥ / evā́te gárbha ejatu “As the wind sways a lotus-pond in every direction, so let your unborn child stir.” These conditions are not met here, and I think it a methodologically dangerous practice to posit an entirely unprecedented construction on the basis of a single ambiguous passage.

The way to a solution begins with the first verb, which is realized as amumuktam in the Pp. The only evidence for the augment is the avagraha in the printed Saṃhitā text(s): ’mumuktam; the sandhi conditions do not require the augment. In fact Gr lists the form as unaugmented, and Old gets it right (in my view) the first time: “wie den Atri von der grossen Finsternis, (so) löset (mich ...).” But he then, unfortunately, has second thoughts, and although he recognizes that “ná nicht Satzvergleichungspartikel ist,” he decides that ná can sometimes overstep its boundaries and function like a clausal simile marker (not his term). The single ex. he cites (VII.58.3), however, does not show what he claims it shows, at least in my opinion, and it is also not like our passage, in that even by his interpr. the two clauses would have the same verb (in diff. mood and voice: ví tirāti, … prá … tireta).

Whether Ge, Re, and/or Klein were influenced by Old’s arguments or not, they all follow the clausal interpr., which I hope I have shown is unacceptable.

My own interpr. is identical to Old’s first pass, with impv. mumuktam and a supplied ‘me’ as obj., parallel to átrim in the simile. As for the second verb, I follow Gotō (1st Kl., 163 n. 258) in taking tū́rvataṃ narā as a parenthetical clause. This allows the abl. phrase at the end of d, duritā́d abhī́ke “from difficulty at close quarters,” to be construed with mumuktam, parallel to the abl. mahás támasaḥ “from great darkness” in the simile. However, if the parenthetical interpr. seems too awkward, it might be possible to take d as a single, separate cl.: “be victorious from difficulty at close quarters,” though tūrv seems not to take an abl. elsewhere.

