+++
title = "04"

+++
The preverb áva is positioned somewhat oddly for a preverb in tmesis, though it does follows the caesura and is thus adjacent to a metrical boundary. We might have expected it to migrate to the pāda-initial position. Its displacement may be to allow the pattern of verse-initial forms of the 2nd sg. pronoun to continue: 2a t u vád, 3a t u vám, 4a t u vám.

My all-purpose tr. of the (more or less lexicalized) desid. to √śak ‘be able’, namely ‘do one’s best’, loses the etymological connection here with śácyā śacīvaḥ “o able one, with your ability” -- but something like ‘strive to be able’ implies the possibility of Indra’s failure, which does not fit his divine profile. The voc. sutakre is a hapax, analyzed by Gr as belonging to a su-takri ‘very fast’, but by the Pp (fld. by the standard modern interp.) as suta-kre. As Old points out sunvaté suta- would be the same type of etym. figure as śácyā śacīvaḥ. Sāy. glosses abhiṣutena somena krīta, and this in fact remains the standard interpr. For disc. of both sense and morphology (transfer of the root noun to long-vowel √krī to a short i-final) see esp. Old and Scar (87-88). Both cite as support for the purchase of Indra the very interesting passage IV.24.10 (q.v).

This is the only 5-pāda vs. (Śakvarī) in the whole run of Indra Triṣṭubh hymns (VI.17-41) and seems designed to insert the poet of this maṇḍala into the hymn and associate him with his sometime formulaic partner Divodāsa. See esp. VI.16.5bc dívodāsāya sunvaté / bharádvājāya dāśúṣe also in this maṇḍala. Those two Gāyatrī pādas are almost identical to ours, except for one ritual participle, gṛṇaté, substituting for another, dāśúṣe, in the Bharadvāja pāda -- and for the three additional syllables in each pāda (d sutakre, 3 vásūni) to fill out the Triṣṭubh. The addition of this extraneous material to adapt the shorter line to a different metrical form may account for the fact that vásūni seems to have no syntactic or semantic connection to the rest of the vs. Although Ge construes it with áśikṣaḥ (“wobei du … DAT … die Schätze zu verschaffen suchtest”), śíkṣa- does not elsewhere take an acc. (the few su he's doing something beneath his dignity or even shameful pposed passages in Gr are to be interpr. differently) but generally only a dative. The publ. tr. takes vásūni as a loosely attached acc. goal of Indra’s helpful actions: “for goods” or, to make the purpose somewhat clearer, “for (them to obtain) goods.” The poet would have been better off just throwing in another voc., as he did at the end of d. The addition of vásūni here may have been facilitated by the appearance of … gṛṇaté vásūni# twice elsewhere (IV.24.1, IX.69.10), in both of which vásūni is the object of a verb earlier in the pāda.

