+++
title = "04"

+++
There are a number of syntactic questions and problems in this verse. To begin with, in pāda a the sequence divī́yate could be resolved as either diví īyate (so Gr, Pp.) or diví ī́yate. In the latter case, with accented verb, we could have a subordination without an overt subordinator. I have chosen to interpret it so, contra the standard tr. and interpr. (though with Scar 371 n. 516), because the other likely connections between pādas a and b favor this closer nexus.

The next questions arise because of the opening of pāda b, átyo ná yaṃsat.

The simile goes semantically most naturally with the preceding pāda, “like a steed, it speeds …,” but the lack of accent on yaṃsat makes that impossible because this verb would then be initial in its clause. The situation is complicated by the fact that yaṃsat exactly replicates yaṃsat in 3b, where it governs ślókam in the accusative, whereas here a nominative ślókaḥ is subject of the preceding pāda and in order to get it to be object of yaṃsat here, the subject has to change and an unexpressed acc. *ślókam be supplied. Moreover, the steed in the opening of b is a very likely object of yaṃsat, but is in the wrong case. There are several (ad hoc) ways to handle this problem. The first is simply to interpret the text as given, with the steed compared to the subject of yaṃsat, who is probably Bṛhaspati. This is in fact the interpr. of the standard tr., though each one needs to supply material and adjust interpr. in order to make it work semantically. I do not find these various makeshifts satisfactory. In order to confront the semantic problems noted above, it is possible to assume that the verb in 4b was originally really accented *yámṣat, which lost its accent redactionally because of yaṃsat in the preceding verse. This would allow the tr. “When his signal-call speeds in heaven and on earth like a steed, he will control it [=signal call/steed],” with the simile taken with pāda a and a new clause beginning with *yáṃsat. This may be the simplest solution, though it is not exactly the one in the publ. tr. Instead there I (more or less) follow the suggestion sketched out by Old and discussed in more detail by Scar (371 and n. 516), whereby átyo ná stands for *átyaṃ ná; Old explains the nom. as attraction to the preceding pāda. Scar seems to endorse Old’s attraction hypothesis, but his tr. is more complex (and essentially identical to mine), in that he reads the simile both as nom. with pāda a and (in brackets) as acc. with pāda b. Although this may seem over-fussy, it addresses both the syntactic and the semantic problems.

The second hemistich presents a more conventional type of double reading, whereby the word hetáyaḥ is taken to belong both to the simile and to the frame, which its position in the pāda facilitates. In the frame hetí- has its common meaning ‘missile, lance’, a development from the general ‘impel’ meaning of √hi; there is a further metaphorical development here: the missiles of Bṛhaspati are his words. In the simile, with the gen. mṛgā́ṇām, the hetí- are the charges or drives of the wild beasts, using a more abstract or etymological sense of the -tí-stem. This double interpr. is found in Old, Re, and Scar; it seems significantly more satisfying that Ge’s notion (fld by WG) that takes mṛgā́ṇām as a datival gen. -- the missiles/weapons for the wild beasts -- which requires that the two genitives mṛgā́ṇām and bṛ́haspáteḥ be non-parallel.

With Scar I take the ca in c as coordinating cd with a.

I do not understand exactly what yakṣa-bhṛ́t- in b refers to, nor do I understand why the heavens are áhimāya-. For the latter, one can recall that in V.40.6, 8 the māyā́ḥ of Svarbhānu hide the sun and that in my extensive treatment of the Svarbhānu myth (Ravenous Hyenas, 1991) I interpret those māyā́ḥ as the swirling clouds of smoke issuing from Agni. So here the “serpentine wiles” that the heavens possess might be the clouds of smoke from the ritual fire produced at the same time as Bṛhaspati’s ritual signal call (though áhimāya- when applied to the gods would have to have a different sense). This further suggests that the wondrous apparitions (yakṣá-) that Bṛhaspati brings are other marvelous sights associated with the sacrificial performance. But these are just guesses.

