+++
title = "+045"

+++
Indra This hymn contains 5 instances of the phrase “the stake (that is) set,” hitádhána-: 3 acc. sg. hitáṃ dhánam (2c, 12c, 15c), 2 loc. sg. (11b, 13b). All but one of these has the order just given, but one of the loc. exx. (13b) is found in the opposite order, as dháne hité as opposed to 11b hité dháne, which matches the order of the accusatives. A survey of the other examples of the phrase in the RV turns up one more ex. of the acc. hitáṃ dhánam (VIII.80.8), but a number of further loc. exx., almost all of which have the flipped order found in 13b dháne hité (I.40.2=VI.61.5, I.116.15, I.132.5, VIII.3.9, IX.53.2) versus hité dháne (X.63.14). There is only one ex. of the phrase outside of the acc. sg. and loc. sg., namely dháneṣu hitéṣu (VIII.16.5). It thus appears that the acc. and loc. exx. have different underlying orders. Since the word order in this phrase, in both acc. and loc., is, at least to the naked eye, metrically indifferent (always ⏑ - ⏑ -), it is hard to see what is driving the variable order, esp. since almost all instantiations of this phrase are pāda-final (except for I.116.15 and 132.5). Within this very limited data set, it would be possible to assume that the variant order signals different syntactic intentions: “the set stake” (acc.) as opposed to the loc. absol. “when the stake (is/was) set,” with secondary predication. Dieter Gunkel (pers. comm.) tells me that he produced a similar (independent) hypothesis when investigating “swappable bigrams” with Kevin Ryan (some of which results were presented in Vienna, June 24, 2015).

However, given the vagaries of RVic word order, it is difficult to know if such a hypothesis would hold up across a large set of data. It would be useful to investigate word order in clear loc. absolutes.

