+++
title = "03"

+++
The two rhyme words vṛdhasnū́and ghṛtásnū clearly form a rhetorical pair, though they have different origins and grammatical analyses, as their different accents show. ghṛtásnu- is generally taken as a bahuvrīhi with the reduced form of sā́nu- ‘back’ as 2nd member. See Old ad loc. and ad I.16.2, and cf., with a different designation of the same body part, ghṛtá-pṛṣṭha-. However, this cmpd. has a complex relationship with the differently accented ghṛtasnú- as well as ghṛta-snā́- ‘bathed in ghee’. See Scar (661-62). As for vṛdhasnú-, Gr takes it as a root-noun cmpd, with snú- for snā, and glosses ‘Segen triefend’; Scar (662) more or less follows this analysis, though he proposes several different morphological pathways. Debrunner (AiG II.2.930), a bit confusingly, takes it as a “Nachbildung” to ghṛtásnu- though containing a suffix - asnu- (sim. Old SBE). (Debrunner does not gloss it; Old ‘mighty’.) WG seem to take it as containing the same ‘back’ as ghṛtá-snu-, tr. ‘von hochgewachsenem Rücken’. I agree with the general sense that vṛdhasnú- has to have been influenced by ghṛtásnu-, hence my parenthetic ‘strong(-backed)’, but it cannot have been formed in direct parallel because of the accent. I think it should be evaluated in the context of another nearby form belonging to √vṛdh, viz. the irregular (pseudo-)participle vṛdhasāná- in IV.3.6, a stem that occurs 3x in the RV. Since that stem was part of our poet’s repertoire, I think it possible that he could create a reduced form of the “suffix” - sāná- (intermediately *-sná-, just as -snu- is reduced from sā́nu-) with further adjustment of the final vowel to match ghṛtásnu-.

The instr. mánasā must go with jáviṣṭhā given the close relationship between the root √jū and mánas- (cmpds máno-javas-, etc.) throughout the RV; the question is only how to construe the instr. with the splv. I take it as an instr. of quality, rather like Re’s “les plus rapides par rapport à la pensée (même).” Flg. Sāy., Ge tr. the phrase as if it were a comparative with an abl.: “… schneller als den Gedanken,” which certainly makes sense but airbrushes the grammar. WG seem to take mánasā as a dual acc. (“die beiden schnellesten Denkorgane des Ṛta”), which is grammatically impossible for neut. mánas- (expect *mánasī). Masc. du. -as-stems do have the ending -ā, but if the word here is meant to be masc., it should either be in a cmpd. (type su-mánas-) or show accent shift to a derived poss. adj. *manás- ‘having mind’, which is not attested. Others (Lü 454, Scar 662) simply detach mánasā from jáviṣṭhā and tr. it elsewhere in the clause, but the formulaics speak strongly against that.

In the second hemistich the 2nd sg. verb īyase and the 2nd pl. acc. prn. yuṣmā́n comes awkwardly into English (“you [sg.] speed between you [pl.] and …”), but neatly signals Agni’s natal affiliation with one of the two sides for which he acts as go-between. See also 1a mártyeṣv amṛ́taḥ, 10b devó mártyasya, where Agni’s divinity is juxtaposed with his mortal worshiper(s).

Contra Old (SBE and Noten) and Ge, I see no reason to take mártān (or, as Old wants to read, *mártām) here as gen. pl. It is perfectly interpretable as an acc. pl.

appositive to víśaḥ. However, the same form in 11b is a somewhat harder case; see comm. there, as well as nṝ́n in vs. 15.

