+++
title = "11"

+++
Note the phonetic figure in a, with the repetition of ci, followed by vi, which is then doubled by vi(dvā́n): cíttim ácittiṃ cinavad ví vidvā́n.

On vītá- see comm. ad IX.97.17.

It is tempting here to take mártān here as a short genitive plural (see 3d above), as Ge and Re do. However, in X.89.3 ví yáḥ pṛṣṭhéva jánimāni aryá, índraś cikā́ya … “who has distinguished the races of the stranger, like the (straight and crooked) backs (of horses),” the clear acc. pl. jánimāni ‘races, peoples’ suggests that semantically similar mártān here can be the obj. of ví √ci.

I see no reason to supply a verb in c (like Ge); it can be easily construed with d.

The pair dítim … áditim in d recalls the cíttim ácittim that opens the vs. The standard interpr. take dítim áditim as a positive/negated pair, understandably. But this requires one of the words to be positively valued and one negatively valued (not necessarily corresponding to the privative form). The problem is that each of the verbs that govern these accusatives (√rā ‘give’, uruṣyá- ‘make wide space, deliver’) ordinarily takes positively valued objects. Attempts to give uruṣyá- a negative sense (e.g., Old SBE “keep off Aditi”) founder on the large number of positive cases. I therefore think that dítim áditim are not in an etymological relationship but are actually a pun. díti- is the ‘giving’ goddess and derived from √dā ‘give’. For this etymological relationship see VII.15.12 dítiś ca dāti vā́ryam “And Diti gives a thing of value.” áditi- by contrast is both the familiar goddess Aditi and the common noun ‘boundlessness’ (derived from √dā ‘bind’). Each of these is the object of an appropriate verb: a different root meaning ‘give’ for díti- ‘giving’, a verb meaning ‘make space’ for áditi- ‘boundlessness’. For a different wordplay with áditi- see previous hymn, IV.1.20.

