+++
title = "18"

+++
This vs. closes the mythological section of the hymn and is so positioned to seem as if it ought to be the denouement of the Vala myth. But it seems, at least to me, to have no connection with that myth or, indeed, with anything else in this hymn.

I remain baffled by it, and my comments here will be only on matters of detail.

Ge (/WG) take the subj. of ab to be the leader of the Aṅgirases, possibly Bṛhaspati. I follow Old (Noten) and Re in taking Agni as 3rd ps. subj., though he is also addressed with the voc. ugra. In this vs. the discrepancy in person is the least of our problems. My rather weak reason for preferring Agni as subj. is the fact that the hymn, dedicated to Agni, is drawing to a close, and the final two vss. (19-20) are explicitly Agni vss. I see nothing in the vs. to suggest that any Aṅgiras is involved, save for the herds of livestock that remind us of the Vala myth -- but they are in a simile.

Ge takes ā́√khyā as meaning ‘count’, but as Re points out, this sense is not found earlier than the ŚB. A parallel passage shows a clear word for ‘watch over, look at’: VII.60.3 sáṃ yó yūthéva jánimāni cáṣṭe, which supports ‘watch over’ for the verb here. That passage also suggests that the jánima in b is the obj. of ā́… akhyat and corresponds to yūthā́in the simile (similar Old, Noten). I therefore take the yád in b to be a neut. sg. referring to jánima rather than the subordinating conj. (‘when, since’) of the standard tr. -- and I also follow the Pp in taking sg. jánima as the underlying form in the sandhi conglomeration jánimā́nti, rather than pl. jánimā as assumed by others. (The jánimā of 17b does give me pause, however.) With Old I supply ‘pasture’ with kṣumáti in pāda, rather than taking it as a personal designation (Viehbesitzer, maître du bétail), though not much depends on it. In my (/Old’s) reading, it would refer to the ritual ground. Old’s paraphrase of the first hemistich in the Noten is “… dass Agni … vor sich die Götterscharen erblickte wie Viehherden auf der Weides des Opfers.” His interpr. of the passage informed mine.

As to what the “nearby” race of gods consists of, I have no idea -- perhaps the gods that come to the sacrifice. Recall that in vss. 3-4 the poet asked Agni to bring (only) a selection of gods to the sacrifice.

The second half-vs. is even more puzzling than the first, because there seems no reason to introduce Urvaśī and her retinue (pl. urvaśī́ḥ) and her son Āyu. I supply jánima with mártānām rather than construing this gen. independently as most others do; the parallelism of the passage supports this.

