+++
title = "05"

+++
For my view of the complexities of the participants in this verse, see the publ. intro. I take the speaker to be Indra, the immediate addressee to be the singer (speaker of vs. 3), and the addressees of the speech recounted in pāda d to be the Maruts. One of the first difficulties in this verse is the perennial mystery word vená-, which I render ‘tracker, seeker’. The word is esp. associated with X.123, to which the Anukramaṇī assigns Vena as both poet and deity. There vená- is singular, not plural as here. In the singular Vena appears to be identified with the sun and/or Soma; in the plural (see esp. IX.85.10-11) the word often seems to refer to poets or their hymns. That seems to be the case here: the trackers of truth are poets or their products, then probably further identified with the Maruts, who are also the referents of sákhāyaḥ in pāda d, in my view. The use of vená- to refer both to the deity and his/its praisers presumably rests in part on the reciprocal relationship between them and also perhaps on the notion that just as the deity is sought by those below him, so he also is pursuing something higher.

Both in the singular and the plural vená- is associated with heights. Here the trackers “mounted” (áruhan) to Indra; cf. the same root in I.56.2 giríṃ ná venā́ádhi roha téjasā. The heights are indicated in various ways. In IX.85.9-10 a bull mounts heaven and then the Venas milk him, who is standing on a mountain (giriṣṭhā́m) in the vault of heaven (divó nā́ke), and this vault is mentioned in the remaining two verses of the Vena section of this hymn (IX.85.11-12). The vault recurs in the Vena hymn (X.123.6, 7), probably also as “the highest distant heaven” (paramé vyòman 5b), and there are other indications of a high position: some female figures bestride “the back of truth” (ṛtásya sā́nau 3c, also 2c) while poets mount on the stream (síndhum 4c). In particular in X.123.2b we find the same phrase pṛṣṭháṃ haryatásya “the back of the delightful one” as in our 5b, where Indra is seated thereon.

The question is who or what is the “delightful one.” Ge supplies “heaven,” Lü (567) simply tr. haryatásya as “Himmel,” and Old (1885: 56-57) as “Weltall.” I am dubious about this rendering; although diváḥ is found with pṛṣṭhá- on a number of occasions, haryatá- never qualifies ‘heaven’, but is regularly used of soma, and in fact in X.123.2 Ge thinks that soma is the referent. However, it is perhaps difficult to imagine Indra sitting on soma’s (or Soma’s) back (such is apparently Ge’s objection in his n.), and so it is possible that this is a reference to one of Indra’s fallow bay horses hári-. In V.61.2 pṛṣṭhé sádaḥ “the seat on the back” refers to the Maruts’ seat on the back of their horses. Hence the tentative bracketed identifications in the publ.

tr. “[=fallow bay / soma?].” Perhaps best is to combine these two possibilities - the real referent is soma, as signalled by haryatá-, but since sitting on a liquid is hard to envision, the soma is made conceptually solid by configuring it as a horse, mediated through the common use of the color term hári- for soma; cf., e.g., IX.65.25 haryató háriḥ.

In c the Pp. reads dat. hṛdé, followed by Ge., but I prefer the ablative since hṛdá ā́with underlying ablative is an idiom and used in similar contexts with verbs of speaking (cf. II.35.2 imáṃ sv àsmai hṛdá ā́sútaṣṭam, mántraṃ vocema … “This well-crafted spell we would speak to him from our heart”).

The possessive adj. śíśumantaḥ appears to introduce a child or children that seem to have no place here. I follow Lü’s (567 n. 3) idea that the -mant- suffix functions here as the neut. sg. -vát sometimes does, as a simile marker “my comrades like children,” not “my comrades along with their children.” The -mant- for -vant- would of course be by rule after a stem ending in -u-. Considerably more problematic is the precise form: ordinarily these -vant- simile forms are adverbial neuters and show accent shift to the suffix, so -vát (e.g., manuṣvát ‘like Manu’, jamadagnivát ‘like Jamadagni’). Here we have a case form (nom. pl.) and no accent shift. However, Whitney (§1233f) allows for a sense ‘like to, resembling’ for some -vant-stems, and therefore, though Lü’s interpretation may be a bit over-tricky, I follow it since I think it gives better sense. Support for this interpretation is found in the parallel IX.74.1 śíśur ná … cakradat “like a child he has cried out” with a verb built to the same stem as in our passage ácikradañ chíśumantaḥ …

