+++
title = "02"

+++
The first hemistich of this vs. is desperately obscure. It is unclear what is being done to or for Vṛtra in pāda a, much less who is doing it, and the identity of the feminine subject in b is likewise left open. The function of ábhariṣyat, the only conditional in the RV, is uncertain, and also, though this is the least of our problems, whether the verb is ā + ábhariṣyat or is simply an augmented form without preverb (latter Pp.). The unclear meaning of the rare word sína- simply adds to the difficulties.

Let us start with the last one first: the stem sína- occurs twice in the RV (here and III.62.1, also as object of √bhṛ with dat. complement), as well as in the cmpd.

tát-sina- (I.61.4) and the deriv. sínavant- (X.102.11). As indicated in EWA s.v., its root affiliation depends on what we think it means, and what we think it means depends to some extent on what root we ascribe it to. I will not rehearse the various suggestions; suffice it to say that I think it belongs with √sā ‘bind, tie’ and refers to material tied down on a wagon vel sim., a load -- equipment and the like -- hence my ‘gear’. (For a similar semantic development of a derivative of a different root meaning ‘tie’, see my “Sanskrit pāriṇāhya ‘household goods’: Semantic evolution in cultural context,” Fs. E. Hamp [ed. D.Q. Adams], 1997, pp. 139-145.) In this I follow Old.

I also follow Old in my interp. of the rest of the pāda. Someone was going to bring equipment for Vṛtra (hence the conditional, as a contrary-to-fact), but was impeded by the action of the main clause in b: a female, identified as a generatrix (jánitrī) foils the plot by announcing it to a wise or knowing one (vidúṣe). That ábhariṣyat is the only conditional form attested before the Brāhmaṇas (so Whitney) must mean that it carries a very particular force, one that could not be easily expressed by more standard parts of the verbal system.

The potential identities of these actors takes us yet another step into the speculative wilderness. I very tentatively suggest that the potential accomplice of Vṛtra is Sūrya. There are two, rather shaky reasons for this suggestion: There is some evidence in the Rig Veda for enmity between Indra and Sūrya, particularly in the (alas fragmentary) myth where Indra in conjunction with Kutsa steals the wheel of the sun. This hostility is also found, more developed, in the Mahābhārata, as is well known. And within the vs. itself there is a possible reference to Sūrya in pāda c, in the phrase pathó rádantīḥ … asmai “excavating the paths for him.” Elsewhere in the RV Sūrya is the beneficiary of similar actions: VII.60.4 [sū́ryaḥ ...] yásmā ādityā́ ádhvano rádanti, VII.87.1 rádat pathó váruṇaḥ sū́ryāya. Although I know of no other evidence for Sūrya attempting an intervention on Vṛtra’s behalf, I nonetheless tentatively supply him as subject of pāda a. The mother figure described as jánitrī in b could be the Earth, as sometimes (I.185.6, III.31.2), or Indra’s own mother (as in III.48.2, X.134.1). I have more confidence in Indra as the referent of vidúṣe ‘knowing’.

As just noted, I think Sūrya may be the referent of asmai in pāda c -- or rather one referent, for I think the pāda is deliberately ambiguous. If I am right that Sūrya is the covert subject of pāda a, then the phraseological parallels to the “excavating paths” expression that have Sūrya as beneficiary would suggest him as referent of asmai. The feminine pl. agents could be the dawns, who make the path for the rising sun. But in the context of the Vṛtra battle that forms the subject of the first vss. of this hymn, this pāda may refer to the paths dug out by the waters when they were released from Vṛtra, with asmai referring to Indra. Both dawns and waters are potential subjects: the phraseology of pāda d would fit either (or both). Both waters and dawns go to their goal (cf. I.158.6 for waters, III.61.3 for dawns). Although dhúni- ‘boisterous’ seems more suitable for waters than dawns (cf. dhúnimant- 2x of waters, dhunayanta once with rivers as subj.), the emphasis on dailiness (divé-dive) might point rather to the dawns. In short, at least the second half-vs. seems deliberately ambiguous, with potentially double referents both for the female subject and the masc. beneficiary. I have no confidence that my interpr. of this vs. is correct, but I find the other published attempts even less convincing. However, IH has suggested an alternative interpr. to me (p.c.) that is definitely worth considering. In this scenario the sínam ‘equipment’ is Indra’s mace, his ‘(fighting) gear’ (so IH), brought to him (=Indra) against Vṛtra. Dat. vṛtrā́ya here would be a dative of malefit, as it were, exactly as it is in the next vs., 3b. The bringer of the sínam could be Tvaṣṭar or even Uśanā Kāvya, two regular suppliers of the mace to Indra. In b the jánitrī could be Vṛtra’s mother, whom we memorably meet in I.32.9, and the knowing one (vidúṣe) Vṛtra himself, with the participle possibly proleptic.

The potential drawback to this interpr. is that we know that Indra did get the mace and smash Vṛtra, so the hypothetical value of the conditional isn’t accommodated. But since we don’t actually know what the value of the conditional was in the RV, this should not deter us. Alternatively there may have been a previous episode in the myth in which Indra’s first attempt was thwarted when Vṛtra was tipped off. A revised tr. of the hemistich acdg. to this scenario would be “The one [=Tvaṣṭar? / UK?] who was going to carry the gear here for [=against] Vr̥tra -- the mother [Vṛtra’s mother] announced him to the knowing one [=Vṛtra?].” On divé-dive see comm. ad 11 below.

