+++
title = "05"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., the first hemistich of this vs. is quite unclear; I am not at all certain my interpr. is correct, but I don’t think it’s appreciably worse than any others, which I will not treat at length. One observation about it, which doesn’t really aid in its interpr., is that it seems to play off the Agastya Triṣṭubh refrain (I.165.15d, etc.) vidyā́meṣáṃ vṛjánaṃ jīrádānum “May we find refreshment and a community having lively waters.” A large proportion of the occurrences of vṛjánam are found in that refrain. The jinva at the end of our vs. picks up the jīrá- of the refrain, and its íṣam is matched by our íṣaḥ in 4c.

I’d also point out that the antithetical temporal expressions we noted in the two previous hymns, nūnám … aparā́ya ca “now and for the future” (VI.33.5) and purā́nūnáṃ ca “previously and now” (VI.34.1), may be echoed by nūnám … anyáthā cid “now and also otherwise.” But let us now turn to the serious problems of the vs.: 1) there is apparently no verb (or anything else) to govern tám … vṛjánam; 2) there is no verb to govern the presumed acc. dúraḥ ‘doors’ in the rel. clause; 3) esp. if gṛṇīṣé is taken to be the verb of the rel. cl. and a 2nd sg. passive ‘you are praised’ (as it is by most tr.), since the passive can’t govern an object, and ‘doors’ would be quite an outlandish object anyway.

My interpr. starts with the two things I think we can hold onto: 1) the collocation ví dúraḥ inevitably brings to mind the idiom ví dúraḥ √vṛ ‘open the doors’, used inter alia for the breaking of dawn, which is also often homologized to the opening of the Vala cave (e.g., VII.79.4), an act ascribed to Indra.

This is mentioned several times in this Indra cycle (VI.17.6, 18.5, 30.5). Thus the most likely way to interpr. the first part of 5b śū́ro yác chakra ví dúraḥ is as a rel. cl. referring to this action, supplying the verb √vṛ (or sim.): “When, o able one, as champion you (open[ed]) wide the doors.” If we thus interpr. the rel. cl., the supposed passive gṛṇīṣé is displaced from its supposed role as verb in that clause (though we could, of course, assume the ‘open’ idiom was participial and gṛṇīṣé could then be the main verb).

2) gṛṇīṣe (generally unaccented) is otherwise almost entirely a 1st sg. -se form, “I (shall) sing/praise,” so the passive interpr. just mentioned is not attractive in any case. In the last vs. of a hymn such an assertion of a 1st ps. praiser is certainly apposite and expected.

The gist of my interpr. rests on these two observations. I take gṛṇīṣé as a 1st sg. and not part of the dependent clause, which expresses the formulaic ‘open the doors’. gṛṇīṣé’s object is vṛjánam at the beginning of the hemistich. The verb gṛṇīṣé is accented because it immediately follows a subord. clause. The major problem that I see is that this requires that the yád clause be embedded, and I don’t see any way out of that. I would also prefer if Indra were the object of the praise, not (merely) the vṛjánam. He might indeed be represented by the init. tám, which would then not modify vṛjánam. This would produce an alternative tr. “Him here and now do I sing, as (I do/did) otherwise the community, when …” I am not entirely satisfied with this interpr., but I do not have anything better to offer (nor do other interpr.).

The rest of the vs. is much less problematic. The most important thing to note is that the dhenú- ‘milk-cow’ must be masc. because of the adj. śukradúghasya ‘having bright/clear milk’. This gender not only goes against nature, but also against the phrase in 4c sudúghām … dhenúm, with the fem. adj. sudúghām. The gender switch is obviously deliberate, and the likely reason for it was already formulated by Sāy.: that this is a reference to the soma-plant and the soma juice that is milked out of it. (Both Ge and Schmidt take the two genitives separately, which rescues the gender of dhenóḥ but ignores the shock value of the gender switch.) That pāda b has to do with opening the Vala cave is supported by the mention of the Aṅgirases in d.

Also in d, bráhmaṇā is ring-compositionally related to bráhma in 1a.