+++
title = "01"

+++
Ge (/WG) take pāda b as a complete clause, supplying a main verb (‘kommt’ Ge, ‘geht’ WG). They then take the 2nd hemistich as a syntactically independent declarative sentence. Given the density of questions in the first 6 vss. of this hymn, I think a declarative sentence would be intrusive and therefore take bcd as part of the question begun with kásya in pāda a, with vavakṣé in d as the main verb for the whole. On soma as an udder, see III.48.3 cited by both Old and Ge.

Note the close proximity of juṣāṇáḥ (b) and juṣámāṇaḥ (c). The latter is the only occurrence of this participle stem, while juṣāṇá- is of course quite common. I don't see any semantic nuance that would justify using two different stems here. I wonder if juṣámāṇa- is a nonce to create a Behagel effect with the three nearrhyming and semantically similar stems: juṣāṇó … uśānó juṣámāṇo. It should also be evaluated in the context of the other anomalous and phonologically similar middle participles in this Indra cycle, including uṣāná- (IV.16.14), uśámāna- (IV.19.4), uṣámāna- (IV.22.2), and our own middle term uṣānáḥ. (For disc. see esp. comm. ad IV.16.14.) Though uṣāná- is attested twice elsewhere, it is still problematic: though there is a root pres. to √vaś ‘be eager’ with a zero-grade uś, the stem is otherwise only act. and the act. part. uśánt- is extremely well attested (see., e.g., the next hymns, IV.24.6b, 25.1b).

Ge is adamant that the two verse-final datives śucaté dhánāya are not to be construed together. By contrast I think they belong together in principle. Of 6 occurrences of dhánāya (always pāda-final), 2 are preceded by mahaté (I.104.7, IX.97.4), which modifies it. I am just somewhat uncertain what it refers. Although √śuc is generally an Agni root, and cf. śuśucāná- in the immediately preceding hymn, probably of Agni (IV.22.8), I think that referent is unlikely here. dhána- refers to the stakes in play or a prize or spoils, in this case presumably something Indra wants enough to exert himself for it. The verse has made abundantly clear what Indra wants most -- soma (sómam b, ándhaḥ c) -- and I think it likely that soma is the referent here as well. A deriv. of √śuc, the adj. śúci-, is regularly used of a type of soma (clear, as opposed to mixed), and the participle here may be expressing the same thing. I would therefore slightly emend the tr. to “for the gleaming stakes [=soma].”

