+++
title = "06"

+++
ā́d is very rarely not in 1st position. Here the interrog. kím may have displaced it. See kím ā́d at IV.30.7, as Ge also notes, as well as … kuvíd ā́d I.33.1.

Ge (/WG) take the referent of te to be Indra (Ge: “Wann dürfen wir wohl von deiner Brüderschaft öffentlich sprechen?”). I very much doubt that. As I noted in the publ. intro., Indra is always referred to in the 3rd ps. in this hymn, except in the final extra-hymnic Vāmadeva refrain (vs. 11), and the thwarting of the poet’s longing for intimacy by the distancing that the insistent 3rd ps. pattern imposes is in many ways the point of the hymn. I think it unlikely that the poet would introduce the intimate 2nd ps. reference through a single monosyllabic enclitic and then revert, in the next pāda, to the 3rd ps. asya. This leaves me with the problem of identifying an alternative referent for te. My assumption is that it is the poet speaking to himself, while the “we” represents the collectivity of the ritual officiants. Alternatively, it is possible that te does refer to Indra and that this pāda represents a wistful wishful thinking about an intimacy not otherwise achieved -- with its 1st ps. / 2nd ps. structure (the only place where a 1st ps. shows up in the hymn, save for the refrain -- though see comm. on pāda d) and the particularly intimate relationship ‘brotherhood’ (bhrātrám) that is aimed at The second hemistich is problematic, primarily because of the form iṣa (Pp.

iṣe) in d. (Ge characterizes it as “das zu den schwierigen Formen des ṚV. gehört”), a problem compounded by the fact that its first syllable should, ideally, be heavy in this Triṣṭubh cadence. Before tackling it, we should consider the structure of the two pādas. With Old and WG, but not Ge, I take c and d separately, with c a nominal clause equating sárgāḥ ‘surges’ with vápuḥ ‘marvel’. In my view the surges consist of soma: sárga- is regularly used of soma in Maṇḍala IX. Again with Old and WG, but not Ge, I take sudṛ́śaḥ as nom. pl. with sárgāḥ, not gen. sg. -- with śriyé construed with this adj.; cf. V.44.2 śriyé sudṛ́śīḥ. As for d, Old interprets iṣe as a 1st sg. “setze ich … in Bewegung,” with svàr ṇá citrátamam, standing for the surges in c, as its object. WG likewise take iṣe as a 1st sg. (aor. injunctive), but with the meaning ‘ich suche’, with the same obj. as Old. By contrast I take it as a 3rd sg. (so also Ge, it seems) and in fact would emend it (slightly) to *īṣe (an asterisk should be inserted in the publ. tr.), belonging to the perfect to the root given as √eṣ ‘suchen’ (etc.) by Kü (126-28). As was just noted, a heavy initial syllable would better fit the cadence; my one concern is that I do not understand why the short i was introduced. Though he does not include our form in his conspectus, Kü does list two other 3rd sg. med.

occurrences of this shape (īṣé X.89.3 and, with unclear root syllable, upeṣé I.129.8).

He considers the pf. as resultative, and it is possible that my ‘seeks’ should be changed to ‘has sought’. However, neither of his other examples (I.129.8, X.89.3) needs to be preterial, and so ‘seeks’ may as well stay. The same emendation and semantic interpr. also work for iṣe in VI.22.5 and X.20.7; see disc. ad locc. What Indra is seeking here is, in my view, the milk to be mixed with the soma. It is characterized as “very bright like the sun,” and its source as ‘of/from the cow’ (góḥ or ā́góḥ) (ā́may go with either *īṣe or góḥ). The slight disadvantage to my interpr. is that the two occurrences of ā́góḥ here and in the preceding hymn (IV.22.3) are construed differently, but given the convoluted structure in IV.22.3, that is probably unavoidable.

IV.23.7-10: The contrast between the ‘lie’ (pāda-initial drúh- 7a) and ṛtá- (10 pādainitial and 2 pāda-medial exx. in vss. 8-10) certainly underlines and cements the sense ‘truth’ for this word. Note also that ṛṇā́‘debts’, which opens the 2nd hemistich of vs 7, phonologically anticipates the ṛtá’s to come.



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/04/023/05-06.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>