+++
title = "07"

+++
The purport of this vs. and the referent of yásya in pāda are disputed. As Ge points out (n. 7), Sāy. thinks ab refers to Indra and his two fallow bays, while Ge thinks yásya refers to Śṛñjaya found in c and marks the beginning of the dānastuti. I agree with Sāy. that Indra is the referent of yásya, but not that the two cows are really his two horses. As noted in the publ. intro., I instead assume gā́vau refers to the two rivers found in vss. 5 (Hariyūpīyā) and 6 (Yavyāvatī). A strikingly similar expression refers unequivocally to two rivers in the famous hymn III.33 (Viśvāmitra and the Rivers): III.33.1 gā́veva śubhré mātárā rihāṇé “licking each other like two mother cows (their calves)” (cf. also III.33.3). The only problem is that though, in this gender-variable stem, du. gā́vau can be either masc. or fem. (for the latter, see gā́vā in III.33.1 just cited), one of the du. adjectives in our passage, aruṣā́, should be masc., since the fem. of this stem is áruṣī, which in fact appears with pl. gó- in I.92.1-2: gā́vó ’ruṣīḥ, áruṣīr gā́ḥ. I can only assume that since the rest of this dual NP (gā́vau … sūyavasyū́… rérihāṇā) could be either masc. or fem., aruṣā́was just slotted in, esp. because it looks like a possible fem. du. Alternatively, MLW suggests that aruṣā́could in fact be feminine and an archaism, since the devī́- inflection of thematic color adjectives is an innovation.

The verb antár … cárataḥ is somewhat difficult to interpr. This lexeme generally refers to a journey between two locations -- often of Agni’s journey as messenger between heaven and earth. Here no locations are specified, and, assuming the correctness of my identification of the dual subject as the rivers of vss. 5-6 (not a certain assumption), it is two rivers that must be performing the action. Perhaps the verb is reciprocal, expressing action between the two subjects: “(the two rivers) go back and forth one to the other,” but this would leave yásya without an obvious role in the clause. Instead I take yásya as the beneficiary of the action (that is, as if an honorary dative) and assume the rivers are acting as go-between for Indra, either between his forces and the enemy’s or between the two divisions of the Vṛcīvant forces referred to in 5d. The genitive is assuming some of the functions of the dative already in the RV, and of course in later Sanskrit datival genitives are extremely common -- probably indirectly reflecting the loss of the dative in MIA.