+++
title = "02"

+++
In c I read, with Old but contra Pp, árātīr árāva ṇām. This does not require emending the Saṃhitā text, but simply redividing the words.

With most interpr. I take vácaḥ synchronically as a truncated form of the instr.

vácasā to be construed with návyasā (also II.31.5, VI.48.11 in the same pāda-final position; versus medial … návyasā vácasā … VI.62.5). However, I do not regard it as an inherited instrumental showing deeply archaic morphology (with Hale, Fs.

Melchert, esp. 93-95), esp. since Hale sets out very persuasively the cost of assuming such a preserved archaism (87-88), thus undercutting his own view of vácaḥ in these passages. I am not entirely certain what gave rise to what in my view is a synchronic, poetically generated variant. On the one hand, the expected instr. sg.

vácasā would not fit the end of any cadence in Vedic meter; the form is almost invariably found in the break after an opening of either 4 or 5. The instr. pl. vácobhiḥ is, by contrast, quite common pāda final in Triṣṭubh (8 of 13 forms), and I wonder if our “instr.” vácaḥ did not originally start out from a truncation of the -bhiḥ ending to fit into an iambic cadence (Jagatī or dimeter vs.). This of course does not get us the instr. singular with návyasā, however. Another factor that may have contributed is contexts in which a nom./acc. vácaḥ would be grammatically possible, with návyasā an adverbial instr. ‘anew’. Ours is such a passage; vácaḥ here can be parallel to śáṃsam ‘laud’, hence “(set) down … anew a speech, a laud …” (also suggested by Scar 392 n. 544). Then analyzed as an abbreviated instr. because of its proximity to návyasā, the phrase could be used in passages in which a nom./acc. vácaḥ is excluded.

The tr. just suggested depends crucially on accepting my interpr. of pāda b, against that of Ge (see also Gr, Scar 392). The questions are the positive or negative value of śáṃsam and the referent of unaccented eṣām. Most take the latter as referring to the árāvṇām of the following pāda, but, strictly speaking, unaccented forms of ayám should refer to something already in the discourse. Although the proximity of the two forms might allow árāvṇām to “count” as already in the discourse, I would prefer to find a referent preceding eṣām, and devā́n in 1c is available. This also allows us to interpr. śáṃsa- in its more common positive usage ‘laud’, rather than the rare (though definitely attested) negative sense (see, e.g., III.18.2 śáṃsam áraruṣaḥ, with a gen. akin to our árāvṇām).

We thus have two parallel expressions, pādas ab and cd, each beginning with ní and lacking a verb. I supply √dhā for both, with slightly different senses: ‘set down (upon)’ for ab and ‘put down’ in the idiomatic sense also found in English (though without the English specialization to speech) for cd. For √dhā with tanū́ṣu, see, e.g., I.85.3, III.19.5, III.53.18; for śáṃsam √dhā + loc. of god, see X.42.6a yásmin vayáṁ dadhimā́śáṁsam índre “Indra, upon whom we have set our laud” (lit.

“upon which Indra we have set our laud”).

