+++
title = "08"

+++
The verse is full of adornment/clothing terms; clear are śúmbhamāna- ‘adorning themselves’ in b and pari √dhā ‘clothe’ in c. In pāda a the middle participle cakrāṇā́saḥ has a clear parallel in the adornment phrase in VIII.14.5 cakrāṇá opaśáṃ diví “creating for himself a headdress in heaven.” As in the previous verses, there seem to be two contending sides, the enemies found in pādas abc and the friends in d. “Having made for themselves a girdle from the earth” in a is easily interpretable in this framework: the enemies have fallen and are perhaps dead, partially covered by earth. But “adorning themselves with a golden amulet” in b is more difficult, since a golden amulet sounds like a positive decorative item. However, Younger Avestan has a compound zarənu-maini (Yt. 14.33), apparently made of related verbal material, which is the epithet of a vulture, found in a passage in which the vulture espies bloody meat from far distances. If there is a connection between the two (see EWA s.v. maṇí), “to adorn oneself with a golden amulet” may mean figuratively “to become food for vultures.” In contrast to Indra’s doomed adversaries in ab, in d he clothes his “spies” with the sun; sunlight is often a symbol of untroubled life, as in the often repeated wish “to see the sun” (sū́ryaṃ dṛśé and related expressions).

For a detailed discussion of this vs., esp. pāda b and its Iranian correspondents, see my “A Golden Amulet in Vedic and Avestan” (Ged. H.-P. Schmidt). I would now emend the publ. tr. of pāda a to “having made for themselves a coverlet from the earth.”

