+++
title = "05"

+++
Another vs. displaying Agastya’s tricky manipulation of double readings.

The standard tr. (but cf. Scar. 127) take vaḥ as the obj. of réjati (“who sets you atremble?”), but this seems semantically unlikely to me. The Maruts are always the initiators and causers of violent motion, as is esp. emphasized in these vss. (4-6); no one external to them is likely to have the power to make them tremble. (This seems to be implicitly recognized in Re’s supplied modal: “qui (donc pourrait) vous faire trembler au dedans …?”) I instead construe vaḥ with antár (“among you”). The question “who among you?” is a variant on the occasional rhetorical attempt to differentiate among the Maruts. Ge (/WG) and Re take the antár as the locus of the Maruts’ trembling (“within”; see Re’s tr. cited above). Rather than taking vaḥ as the obj. of the verb, I supply dṛḷhā́ni ‘fixed places’ from 4d as obj. of réjati; dhánva, extracted from the cmpd. dhanvacyútaḥ in c would be equally possible. Scar’s (127) tr. is similar to mine, but he takes réjati as absolute (“Wer aus eurer Mitte … bewirkt … das Beben …”). This is also possible. Scar also takes tmánā as “durch seinen Hauch” as I do, contra the standard reflexive interpr.

The simile shows (or implies) a different syntactic configuration from the frame, as Ge also points out (n. 5b), reflected also in Re’s tr. Although the frame has a transitive verb réjati (possibly, with Scar, in absolute usage), the simile assumes an intransitive form of the same verb stem; cf., e.g., III.31.3 agnír jajñe juhvā̀ réjamānaḥ “Agni was born quivering with his tongue,” with the tongue as here. I read antár also with the simile (so also Ge), governing hánvā, interpreted as dual (du.

also Old, Ge, Re; WG take as instr. sg., which is morphologically more satisfying but produces an image that makes no sense to me).

The third pāda continues Agastya’s crafty syntactic slippage between simile and frame. I take the gen. pl. iṣā́m as parallel to the 1st cmpd member dhanva- in dhanva-cyút- ‘stirring the wastelands, stirrer of the wastelands’. The simile would then be an analytic (i.e., de-compounded) *iṣā́ṃ cyút- ‘stirrer of refreshments’ parallel to the synthetic rt. noun cmpd. dhanva-cyút-. ‘Refreshments’ here probably refer to rain. For the root √cyu in this sense, see V.53.6 diváḥ kóśam ácucyavuḥ “The [=Maruts] have stirred the bucket of heaven,” and for íṣ- as rain, e.g., V.68.5 vṛṣṭídyāvā rītyā̀pā, iṣás pátī … (of Mitra and Varuṇa as lords of rain). This analysis allows the loc. yā́mani (like more common yā́man) to refer as usual to the Maruts’ journey. Ge (/WG) and Scar take yā́mani as part of the simile, resulting in a very unlikely image: Ge “wie bei der Ankunft der Speisen,” with the shaking produced by the Maruts compared to that produced by a herd of cattle or by the wagons bringing in the harvest! (Re’s rendering is close to mine.) The point of the last pāda is probably that the Maruts set many in motion, just as the Sun (or in this case, his stand-in, the Sun’s horse) sends people to their tasks on his daily appearance. The common property between simile and frame is purupraíṣa-. Although in I.145.3 praíṣa- in this cmpd seems to have the technical sense ‘ritual command’ common in later Vedic, I do not see that sense here, since neither the Maruts nor Etaśa issues such commands. Re unaccountably takes the second member as passive: “vous qui êtes multiplement incités.”

