+++
title = "01"

+++
On ā́√bhūṣ with vayúna- see VIII.66.8 The first hemistich addresses the ritual performers in the plural, as they make final preparations for the sacrifice. Ge (fld. by WG) takes phrase rátho vṛ́ṣaṇvān “the chariot has its bulls” as referring to the Aśvins’ chariot, which is presumably hitched up and on its way. This is certainly possible, but I think the chariot may rather refer to the sacrifice, as so often, and “its bulls” may be the Aśvins, who have arrived and so the sacrifice can be set in motion, or they could be the priests or even the paraphernalia of the prepared sacrifice. However, I have to admit that the next vs. focuses on the Aśvins’ chariot (2cd) and their skill as charioteers (2b), so Ge’s interpr. may be correct.

Ge takes mádatā in b as transitive, with the Aśvins, under the guise of the various duals in cd, as obj. But máda- is rarely if ever transitive, and it seems best to take cd as containing an annunciatory phrase pointing to the Aśvins’ presence (or soon-to-be presence) at our ritual.

The hapax viśpálāvasū is presumably a bahuvrīhi, like vājínīvasu- ‘having prize-winning mares as goods’, though Ge tr. as a tatpuruṣa, ‘die Gönner der Viśpalā’. WG’s “mit (der Rennstute) Viśpalā als (ihrem) Gut” reflects the compound type better and may well be correct. However, the cmpd must allude to the story (or wisp of a story), found mostly in Kakṣīvant’s oeuvre, about Viśpalā and the Aśvins: Viśpalā is a mare whose legbone the Aśvins stick back together so she can win a race.

The most relevant passage for interpreting this cmpd may be I.112.10 yā́bhir viśpálāṃ dhanasā́m atharvyàṃ sahásramīḷha ājā́v ájinvatam “with which you revived Viśpalā, to pursue the way, to gain the stakes in the contest with a thousand battle-prizes.” (Cf. also I.116.15, 117.11, 188.8; X.39.8.) From these references to Viśpalā it does not appear that she belonged to the Aśvins (was their “Gut”), but rather was benefited -- healed -- by them in order that she could herself win goods in the contest. Hence my more convoluted tr. “who provided the goods to (the mare) Viśpalā.” The idea in our passage is presumably that they made it possible for her to race and therefore to get the goods, so a lot is concentrated in that single cmpd.
