+++
title = "06"

+++
The construction and meaning of the last two words of pāda c, jáṭhalasya júṣṭā(h), are uncertain. Ge (/WG) and Re construe the gen. with júṣṭā(ḥ), though Re readily admits that júṣṭa- never elsewhere takes a genitive. He does not comment on the meaning or reference of jáṭhala-, but Ge (/WG) takes it as referring to the “bauchig (Wagen)” of the Aśvins; Ge further comments, “Die Schiffe trugen den grossen Wagen der Aśvin oftmals über das Meer.” This conjures up a ridiculous image, of four ships towing a bulbous wagon across the water like a water-skier or a barge -- a wagon that, moreover, we have no evidence for either in this hymn or in the other passages concerning Bhujyu. (In the fullest treatment, I.116.3-5, the Aśvins carry him with their ships [naubhíḥ, 3a] after Bhujyu has mounted a ship [nā́vam ātasthivā́ṃsam]. There are no wagons, bulbous or otherwise.) And further, not only the case frame with júṣṭā but its sense would be very peculiar; Ge tr. “die des bauchigen (Wagens) gewohnt sind” (not the usual sense of júṣṭa-), WG “die dem bauchigen (Wagen) angenehm sind.” What would it mean for the ships to be “used to” or “agreeable to” a wagon? (Ge tries to get out of this difficulty by setting up a veritable towing service, operating “oftmals.”) This can all be avoided by separating the two words and interpr. jáṭhalasya as a genitive of description, ‘of paunchy (shape)’, applicable to the boats, which, as noted with regard to 5b, would support an interpr. of ātmanvánt- there as ‘possessing a body’. The one to whom the ships are júṣṭa- ‘agreeable, welcome’ is then Bhujyu, who had been floundering in the sea and would surely be cheered at the sight of them.

