+++
title = "03"

+++
The syntax in the first hemistich is a little rough. yā́te kṛtā́ni in pāda a appears to be an embedded relative clause, a construction that is rare to non-existent in the RV. Its position between the preverb and the verb of the main cl. (prá … brávāma) makes it difficult to interpret it any other way. The fact that it is a nominal clause, an NP serving as direct object, may make the embedding seem less of a syntactic violation. (Note that Ge simply ignores the rel. prn.) The main verb brávāma is accented because it is effectively in pāda-initial position: the initial accented voc. índra is extra-clausal.

The second rel. clause yā́ni no jújoṣaḥ “which of ours you will enjoy” appears to be parallel to the embedded NP, but it is a little skewed semantically. Indra should not enjoy his deeds, but rather enjoy hearing our recital of them (see Ge “die du von uns gern hören wirst” [my italics], with ‘hear’ silently supplied). Alternatively it would be possible to assume that the 2nd rel. is (covertly) conjoined to the first and refers to different deeds, “(and) which (deeds) of ours you will enjoy” -- but it is hardly likely that Indra cares about what we do (besides pressing soma), so this interpr. is pragmatically blocked. WG supply “(in) unseren (Worten)” as the antecedent to the second rel. prn., such that what Indra will enjoy is our words, not his deeds (“(in) unseren (Worten), an welchen du Freude hast”); this seems to me to deploy too much machinery to repair what is simply a somewhat loose expression.

It would be technically possible to take the first hemistich as consisting only of relative clauses, with the main clause represented by c with an unexpressed resumptive “(those deeds)”: “Which deeds of yours we shall now proclaim at the pressing, which you will enjoy, (those deeds) he will learn ...” The accent on brávāma would then be because it is in a dependent clause. Although this interpr.

would save us from an embedded relative (see above), the rhetoric of the 1st hemistich, with prá nú vayám … brávāma reminiscent of I.32.1 índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi prá vocam and similar passages, strongly suggests an annunciatory declaration rather than a subordination.
