+++
title = "07"

+++
There are several uncertainties in this vs. As often the function and syntactic affiliation of janúṣā are unclear. I construe it with mṛ́dhaḥ, but Ge and WG (in different ways) take it with Indra. This is also possible.

The participial phrase dā́nam ínvan “stimulating giving” seems oddly embedded in the distracted VP ví ṣú mṛ́dhaḥ … áhan “you hewed apart the negligent ones.” The positioning between the preverb and its verb in tmesis may be a kind of iconic reflection of the separation sense of the preverb (‘apart’). For a similar ex. see I.103.2. On the participial phrase see further below.

I have been puzzled by the phrase gávā … saṃcakānáḥ, though I think I now see a solution (see below). For one thing, √kā [/kan] is not otherwise found with sám (anywhere in Sanskrit, at least judging from Monier-Williams); for another, this root is not construed with the instr. (pace Gr, whose supposed exx. should all be interpr.

otherwise). And finally I cannot think of a (solitary) cow that figures prominently in Indra mythology, either as a companion (as I took it in the publ. tr.) or as a source of enjoyment. Ge remarks (n. 7a) that Indra gives abundantly as long as he is “im Genuss der erbeuteten Kühe.” I suppose this is possible but it assumes a fairly extensive backstory. Like me, Kü (143) takes the cow as comitative: “mit Rindvieh … dich zusammenwünschend.” I was happy to have company in this tr., but I frankly didn’t understand what either his or mine is actually meant to express. WG also seem to have a comitative reading, which is similarly opaque: “du erpicht darauf wirst, mit dem Rind beisammen zu sein.” On reconsideration of the passage I now see a possible solution. It is striking that gávā is the only apparent occurrence of the instr. sg. to this stem in the RV. In context it appears directly before maghavan. I now think the original form may have been gen. pl. *gávām, with simplification of the double -m m-. The meter is unaffected, and a gen. pl. would fit the sense much better, as I will now show. This hymn contains four other examples of this very gen. pl. (4d, 11d, 12b, 13b), as well as nom. pl. gā́vaḥ (10a). The examples in 12 and 13 are in a dānastuti, but the others refer to the cows that Indra freed from the Vala cave (and are in the same metrical position as our form). I see two possible ways to construe my putative *gávām. Since forms of √kā can take the genitive as a source of enjoyment (e.g., X.54.16 dráviṇasaḥ), it may go with saṃcakānáḥ: “enjoying the cows,” referring to Indra’s pleasure in his deed and its products. But in vs. 11 Indra, having drunk soma, púnar gávām adadād usríyāṇām “gave again of the ruddy cows.” This seems to refer to a redistribution on the ritual ground of the cows that Indra had freed. Bringing together 11d gávām adadāt with 7ab dā́nam ínvan … *gávām, I am inclined to think that the cows are the content of the gift and would now alter the tr. to “setting in motion the gift *of cows” vel sim. Under this interpr. saṃcakānáḥ is used without complement: “taking pleasure, enjoying yourself” (for a similar absolute use of this participle, see IV.16.15 and Kü 143). Thus the hemistich contains a brief précis of the myth: Indra hews apart those who block his freeing of the cows [I would now probably change my rendering of mṛ̥́dhaḥ as ‘negligent’ here], which allows him to set in motion the ultimate giving away of the freed cows, and he thoroughly (sám) enjoys the whole process. The occurrences of gávām in the dānastuti (esp. 12b gávāṃ catvā́ri dádataḥ sahásrā) simply replicate the mythic model provided by Indra’s generous sharing out of the freed cows.

I am not certain what pāda d is conveying. How is it that Indra’s setting Namuci’s head to rolling involves “seeking a way for Manu”? Unfortunately we can glean too little about Namuci from the RV (where he is mentioned only 9x) to know what threat he posed that required Indra to kill him. On the other hand, judging from the usual troubles caused by Dāsas and, particularly, from vs. 9 (see publ. intro.), these foes stand in the way of Ārya movement into new territory. Thus Indra by eliminating Namuci would open the way for Manu and the rest of the advancing Ārya.

