+++
title = "13-14"

+++
The two pāda-final sequences páritakmyāyāḥ (13d) and páritakmyā yā́m̐ (14a) in adjacent pādas are puzzling. The publ. tr. reflects emendations of both forms to loc. sg. páritakmyāyām. This loc. occurs 6x, always pāda-final, including in the next hymn, V.31.11 -- by far the most common form to this stem. Moreover, VI.24.9d is identical to 14d, save for having the loc. páritakmyāyām -- a variation that Bl (RVReps) finds “baffling.” The arguments in favor of emendation are the dominance of the loc. sg. and its appearance both in the next hymn and in the otherwise identical pāda in VI.24.9. However, these arguments cut both ways: it is difficult to understand how these forms would have become mangled - especially given the dominance of that same loc. sg. It cannot be claimed that the redactors misunderstood the forms because they had never seen their like. I therefore now feel that we must accept that the forms were in the urtext, deliberately produced by the poet, who was playing games with this well-known pāda-final temporal expression. I still believe that the intent of both forms is the same as the loc., but that the loc. has been deliberately altered, in two different ways, conditioned by the immediate context.

In 13d aktór vyùṣṭau páritakmyāyāḥ the form has been given a genitive ending to conform, superficially, to the gen. aktóḥ. Gr takes it to an adjectival stem (páritakmya-, which doesn’t exist) as a modifier of aktóḥ, which, as Old points out, would then have to be fem. here, rather than its normal masc. Old suggests it might be a gen. of time, though he prefers to supply rā́tryāḥ or to have it depend on vyùṣṭau.

I consider this over-thinking: the poet gives us the loc. form we expect, right up to the very last segment (-ḥ rather than -m) and then springs the surprise, capitalizing on the superficial resemblance to the gen. sg. áktoḥ.

In 14a aúchat sā́rā́trī páritakmyā yā́m̐the final syllable of the loc. has been truncated and given an accent. The anunāsika can be taken as hiatus-breaking nasalization of a final -ā́before ṛ; this is the standard interpr. (see esp. Old, Noten, with ref. to Prol.). This yields the nom. sg. fem. rel. prn., which allows an interpr. as a nominal rel. clause páritakmyā yā́, which specifies immediately preceding sā́rā́trī.

A pāda-final rel. pronoun and the resulting nominal rel. clause (“… the night, which is páritakmyā”) would be highly unusual, but as a poetic trick involving resegmentation of a well-known form it shows a proto-śleṣa sensibility.

The fact that the poet alters the expected form in two different ways in succeeding pādas should alert us to the fact that he is playing verbal tricks, secure in the knowledge that his audience would expect and interpret both as underlyingly locatival. For a different manipulation of the stem, see comm. ad I.31.6. In any case the publ. tr. should have an * before “at its final turn” in both instances.

