+++
title = "02-03"

+++
Parts of these two verses reappear, verbatim or slightly modified, in X.170.4, a hymn to Sūrya: 3ab = X.170.4ab, while the first two words of 2c nom. sg.

viśvákarmā viśvádevaḥ correspond to the inst. sg. phrase viśvákarmaṇā viśvádevyāvatā in X.170.4d. In our hymn the subject of 3ab is Indra, who is also the referent of the nom. sg. phrase in 2c; in X.170.4 the referent in both cases is Sūrya.

Because of the verbatim correspondence of 3ab and X.170.4ab save for the identity of the subject, I think they should be translated in the same way. I therefore take svàr in a as nominative and an implicit simile and rocanám in b as an accusative of goal.

Ge by contrast takes svàr in our 3a also as an accusative of goal, parallel to rocanám: “Im Licht erstrahlend gingst du zur Sonne, zum Himmelslicht,” whereas in X.170.4 he takes them both as nominatives: “Im Licht erstahlend kamst du als Sonne als Himmelslicht…” Although of course nothing forbids different interpretations of identical phaseology in different contexts, in situtations where identical interpretations are possible (as here) it seems best not to vary the translations.

The bahuvrīhi epithet of Indra viśvákarmā (2c) is of course a play on the divine figure of the same name, whereas the bahuvrīhi viśvádeva- (also 2c) makes reference to the corporate entity the All Gods (víśve devā́ḥ). The former is simply applied directly to Sūrya in X.170.4d, whereas viśvádeva- has gone through some derivational shenanigans, producing a doubly (or triply) marked viśvádevyi yā-vant-.

