+++
title = "16"

+++
The stem ítara- is very rare in the RV and has a late distribution: besides this passage it is found only in the funeral hymns X.16.9-10 and X.18.1. This comparative isolation makes it difficult to determine its nuance here. Both Ge and Re (cf. also Klein DGRV I.266, Oberlies RdR I.242) think the phrase “other hymns” (ítarā gíraḥ) refers to the hymns of a rival sacrificer (or sacrificers), and certainly the

-tara- suffix implies a choice of two, which has the further potential implication that
one of them is bad. But, though the publ. tr. rather vaguely reflects this interpr., I now think it is likely wrong. Instead, I think that the implicit contrast is between itthā́ ‘in just this way’ and ítara-, and I further think that ítarā gíraḥ is the acc. obj. of brávāṇi, not the nom. subj. of a nominal clause in embedded direct speech. By this interpr. the speaker is telling Agni that in addition to the hymn or hymns he [=Agni] has already heard, the speaker will tell him other hymns in the same manner as the previous ones. In other words, he is promising a continuation of the recitation that has already pleased Agni, as well as promising to strengthen him with a physical offering — the usual pairing of verbal and physical in the sacrifice. This interpr. follows that of Hertha Krick (Feuergründung, p. 571): “Komm herbei, Agni, schön will ich dir auf solche Weise noch andere Lobpreisungen sagen! Durch diese Tropfen sollst du wachsen.” I would now emend the tr. to “Come here. I will speak other hymns to you, Agni, in this same way, and with these drops here you will become strong.” Oberlies claims that this is one of the only places in the RV that soma is pressed for Agni, but I do not see why the drops (índu-) can’t be drops of ghee. To be sure, índu- overwhelmingly refers to soma drops, but I don’t think that soma has to be the referent.

