+++
title = "31"

+++
I do not know what the ā́ending the first pāda is doing. Sāy. takes it as preverb with dā́śati, but this root doesn’t otherwise appear with ā́, and pāda-final position is a strange place to put a preverb. There’s a pāda-final ā́also in 35a, but it is easier to justify, as governing a locational acc. I am disturbed by the usage of dā́śati here; for another problematic form to this root, see disc. ad vs. 20 above. The example here describes not pious service but a hostile act exactly contrary to the standard usages of the root. It also deviates from the usual case frame (offer service to a god [DAT] with an offering vel sim. [INSTR]), though a few passages match ours by expressing the offering in the ACC, e.g. I.93.3 … yá ā́hutiṃ, yó vāṃ dā́śād dhavíṣkṛtim “whoever will piously perform a poured offering or the preparation of an oblation for you.” Assuming the reading is correct, I think we must see this as a monstrous reversal: instead of piously offering an oblation (ACC) to a god (DAT), the evil mortal is impiously offering us (ACC), as a sort of oblation, to a weapon of death (DAT). The standard tr. (including mine) elide the shock of the use of this verb of ritual service in such a context, by tr. √dāś differently from usual. But I’m not sure how to remedy this in tr. without a lot of explanatory baggage. Perhaps “who will ‘piously’ offer us …”? Ge and Re take tásmāt … áṃhasaḥ as a single NP “from that áṃhas-,” but this requires taking yáḥ in pāda a as an improper rel. for “when” (so Ge) or seeing the relation between ab and c as an anacoluthon (so Re), because their interpr. of c provides no referent for yáḥ … mártaḥ in the dependent cl. This can all be fixed by separating the two abl. in the main clause, with tásmāt the correlative to yáḥ. Since the immediately preceding vs. (30) has exactly the structure envisioned for our c pāda -- two parallel ablatives, one áṃhasaḥ and the other referring to a person -- there is very local precedent.

