+++
title = "35"

+++
This vs. is syntactically incomplete (unless we take sī́dan in c as a predicated pres. part., which seems unlikely, since this is a repeated pāda [=IX.32.4, IX.64.11]), but it works well as adjunct to the previous vs., 34.

Pāda a shows the preoccupation with kinship that is characteristic of Agni material. The paradox “father of his father” (pitúṣ pitā́[note close sandhi effect]) probably reflects two themes -- 1) that the priest who kindles the fire is in some sense his/its father, but Agni the god has a fatherly relationship to his mortal worshipers, 2) that the offering fire (later called the Āhavanīya) is “taken out” of what is later called the Gārhapatya and is therefore in some sense its son, but the offering fire is more important than the other fires on the ritual ground and can therefore be considered their father.

The meaning ‘syllable’ for akṣára- is quite stable in later Skt., but in the RV it sometimes has its literal sense ‘imperishable’. Nonetheless in our passage I think ‘syllable’ is meant: the ritual fire is kindled when the hymn (here represented by the syllable) is recited. So, more or less, Ge “bei der (heiligen) Rede (?) aufleuchtend” (sim. Kü 250), though cf. Re “dans (l'espace) inépuissable.” The pāda-final ā́in c was mentioned above ad vs. 31, where it was pointed out that the occurrence here in 35c can easily be accounted for. ā́frequently governs a preceding acc. (see collection in Gr., col. 169), and in fact yónim ā́is found not only in this pāda and its repetitions (see above), but also in similar pādas in IX.61.21, 65.19).

