+++
title = "42"

+++
However, the waters are somewhat muddied by vs. 42. The loc. jātávedasi (the only such form in the RV) is puzzling, since jātávedas- is one of the standard epithets of Agni and the accusatives in the vs. clearly refer to Agni as well. Thus we must be dealing with two fires. This idea would be perfectly compatible with the scenario I suggested for vs. 40 -- except that acc. gṛhapátim in pāda c suggests that the newly born fire being “whetted” is not the offering fire (later to be called the Āhavanīya) taken out of the old fire and moved to its new location, but rather what will come to be called the Gārhapatya. The (later) ritual complex that our passage most resembles is the creation of the Mahāvedi (see my Hyenas, p. 89, inter alia), in which the old Āhavanīya of the standard ritual ground is moved further to the east during the creation of the Mahāvedi, and the old Āhavanīya becomes the Gārhapatya.

Thus it seems that vss. 40-41 concern the further displacement of the Āhavanīya fire and 42 depicts the resettlement of the original householder’s fire onto the place the Āhavanīya occupied in the more restricted ritual ground. This may be Ge’s view; see his n. 41ab, where he refers to the agnipraṇayana, which is the technical term for carrying the Āhavanīya to the Uttaravedi in the animal sacrifice (see Sen, Dict. of Vedic Rituals, s.v.; Caland-Henry, Agniṣṭoma pp. 78-79). However, his n. 42 goes in a different direction. If this really does concern the creation of the Mahāvedi from the ordinary ritual ground, we would have evidence for this degree of elaboration already in (late) Rigvedic ritual.

