+++
title = "05"

+++
The first hemistich contains three forms with sva- ‘self’: svayúḥ … svarā́ṭ … sváyaśastaraḥ, and the second hemistich opens sá v-, with a scrambling of the phonetic elements. Other patterning is seen in the comparative sváyaśastaraḥ ending the first hemistich and the superlative suśrávastamaḥ ending the 2nd, both built to -asstems and compounded with the phonological variants sva- and su-.

smáddiṣṭi- occurs 4x in the RV. It is a cmpd. of smád- ‘altogether, together with’ and the -ti-abstract of √diś ‘direct, assign, allot’, and as Ge says (n. 5b), it appears to be a technical term in dānastutis. In its other three occurrences (VI.63.9, VII.18.23, X.62.10) it modifies the gift, while here it qualifies the giver, Indra. As Old points out, medial √diś is used of the allotting of gifts in V.36.6, and such a sense seems to fit here as well. For further see Old’s detailed disc.

The splv. suśrávastamaḥ is rendered by the standard tr. (Ge, Re, WG) as ‘best listener’. Since it is built to the noun śrávas- ‘fame’ rather than directly to the root √śru, I find this meaning unlikely. In some other passages the word simply means ‘most famous, having the best good fame’ (e.g., VIII.13.2). Here because of the involvement of ‘us’ (naḥ), I take it as ‘receiving the best good fame’, i.e., with ‘fame’ being the praises we offer him. In only one passage does ‘best hearer’ seem a likely interpr., and there that meaning is induced by the presence of the verb śṛṇuṣvá: I.131.7 śṛṇuṣvá suśrávastamaḥ “listen (to us) as the one who listens best.”