+++
title = "12"

+++
On this very tricky verse, I simply reproduce (slightly paraphrased) my discussion of it in Jamison 2007: 66: The beginning of 12 appears to return us from the mythological past to the realm of the current-day poet of vss. 1-5; not only does it start with the dative pronoun after a series of verses with the genitive phrase but it continues with a standard lexeme for presenting a hymn to a divinity: prá √bhr̥: asmā́íd u prá bharā ... Cf. from the same poet also with a dative recipient I.64.1b.

nódhaḥ suvrkt ̥ ím prá bharā marúdbhyaḥ “O Nodhas, present a well-turned (hymn) to the Maruts.” But the phrase in 61.12 quickly goes awry. At the opening of the next pāda, where Indra's name has been prominently placed in previous verses (índrāya 1d, 4d, 5b, 8b), we find, most shockingly, the name of his arch-enemy, vr̥trā́ya, immediately followed by the accusative object vájram, Indra's weapon, not the word for hymn we were expecting. The relevant parts of the half-verse asmā́íd u prá bharā..., vrtr̥ ā́ya vájram... must mean "Towards just this one, towards Vr̥tra, bear down the mace..." The poet has simply tricked us, having laid a trap with conventional phraseology and syntax and with the stylistic patterns established earlier in the hymn. He also skillfully exploits the morphological ambiguity of the verb form bharā: given the pattern set in vss. 1-5 we are primed to interpret bharā as a 1st sg. subjunctive (cf. indicative bhárāmi in vss 2-3), but as the half verse unfolds, it becomes clear that bharā must rather be taken as a metrically lengthened 2nd sg.

imperative. [end of citation] In order to let the audience in on the trick, the poet has imported much of verse 6, the first mention of the Vṛtra conflict in this hymn: 6d reads tujánn ī́śānas tujatā́kiydhā́ḥ “gaining mastery, thrusting with the thrusting (mace), while conferring (who knows) how much,” while 12ab echoes this with … tū́tujāno, … ī́śānaḥ kiyedhā́ḥ “thrusting, gaining mastery, conferring (who knows) how much.” In d íṣyan echoes ī́śānaḥ of pāda b (as well as 11c) and anticipates iṣṇānáḥ of 13c.

