+++
title = "01"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro. the appearance of the sacrifice-defiling dog in this vs. and vs. 13 sketches a ring. The content of the vs. and its reason for inclusion here are puzzling. Our long-tongued dog (acc. śvā́nam … dīrghajihvyàm) is clearly connected with a story widely attested in Vedic prose of an female demon, an Asurī called “Long-tongued” (dīrghajihvī́), who licks (and thus defiles) the sacrifice. The story is found in texts belonging to all three ritual Vedas: RV: AB II.22; YV: MS III.10.6, KS XXIX.1; SV: JB I.161-63, PB XIII.6.9-10, though it is most developed in the JB, where it takes a distinctly and entertainingly sexual turn. The story is treated extensively by Oertel in a number of publs. (see reff. in O’Flaherty, JB, pp.

124-25) and tr. by Caland in JB in Auswahl and his ed. of PB (incl. an Engl. tr. of the JB version ad PB XIII.6.10); see also W. D. O’Flaherty, Tales of Sex and Violence: Folklore, Sacrifice, and Danger in the Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa (1985), 100-103.

Whether the long-tongued demoness of prose is identical with or was inspired by our long-tongued dog is unclear, but at least the JB connects its account, perhaps secondarily, with our vs. After Indra set a certain Sumitra to seduce the demoness and get her into his power so that Indra could slay her, Sumitra calls upon Indra with our vs. (quoted in the JB text I.162), which Indra then makes into his vajra, raises as his weapon (etām anuṣṭubhaṃ vajram udyatya), and smites her. The same vs. then figures in the immediately following story (I.162-63), in which Śyāvāśva, rather nastily tricked by his Sattra mates, recites the verse (now named the Śyāvāśva sāman), to get himself to heaven. And this story involving Śyāvāśva himself is followed soon after (JB I.165) by one whose main character is Andhīgu (see also PB VIII.5.8-12). So at least serially Andhīgu and Śyāvāśva connect to Dīrghajihvī - remember that the poet of this tṛca is given by the Anukr. as Andhīgu Śyāvāśva.

Unfortunately nothing in the prose narratives provides any help in interpreting our vs., esp. the hapax cmpd. purójiti-. Both Ge and Re take the instr. purójitī as expressing purpose: “auf dass euer Trank zuvörderst siege”; “afin qu'il y ait victoire de votre jus.” I do not understand the case syntax of this (instr. of purpose?), esp. as the standard dative of purpose appears in the next pāda (sutā́ya mādayitnáve), and, with the omission of vaḥ, a similar dat. *purojitáye would have fit this vs. line. Old takes the instr. seriously and construes ándhasaḥ with sutā́ya, which is certainly possible: “Durch euren vor (in lokalem Sinn) ihm gewonnenen (und ihn so beschützenden) Sieg schlagt dem berauschenden Saft des ándhas den langzüngigen Hund, ihr Freunde, hinweg.” My own interpr. instead takes ándhasaḥ with purójitī: the “advance victory over the stalk” is by this interpr. the priests’ initial victory over the stalk, by pressing it for its juice, leaving it mangled and spent. This initial victory may provide the model for the violence against the encroaching dog. But I am not at all certain of this interpr.


<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/09/101/01-03.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>