+++
title = "09"

+++
Both Ge and Re supply ‘wealth’ (rayím), found in d, as the referent of all the previous nom. and acc. forms. I think rather of Indra. The splv. ójiṣṭha- regularly modifies Indra (and never wealth). Though Ge is correct (n. 9a) that śravā́yya- is a “beliebtes Beiwort” of wealth, Indra is hardly unworthy of fame, and see V.86.2b, where du. śravā́yyā characterizes Indra and Agni. In the same vs. (V.86.2c) both gods are described as yā́páñca carṣanī́r abhí (though variants of this pāda are usually applied to Agni alone: IV.7.4=V.23.1, VII.15.2), exactly like our c save for the number of the rel. prn. The clinching arg. against rayí- as the referent seems to me to be pāda d. Ge and Re clearly take the rel. cl. there as consisting only of yéna vánāmahai, with pāda-init. acc. rayím part of the main cl.: the referent for tám back in pāda a and the antecedent of immed. flg. yéna in its own pāda. But this would be an unusual syntactic configuration for several reasons. First, there’s a rel. cl. (in c) intervening between the acc. tám and its distant referent in pāda a (and acc. modifier in b). Moreover, in a pāda with the structure #X REL …, the rel. is usually postposed and the pāda syntactically self-contained - that is, the X is part of the rel. cl. The type of intra-pāda clausal break envisioned by Ge/Re is rare. Moreover, Ge and Re are required to interpr. vánāmahai in absolute usage (“… wir Sieger werden”; “nous serons vainqueurs”), but √van ordinarily takes a direct object, on occasion, in fact, rayím (e.g., VI.38.1). For all these reasons I think it’s clear that rayím and yéna in d cannot be coreferential and we need a different referent for the tám and yá- forms - with Indra the most obvious one, for the reasons just given.

In c I supply a form of √as with abhí in the meaning ‘surmount, dominate, prevail over’.


<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/09/101/07-09.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>