+++
title = "11"

+++
This vs. shows a few minor disturbances. To begin with, the employment of the preverb / particle ví is unclear. Gr takes it with the pf. part. suṣvānā́saḥ, which it immed. follows, but √su is not otherwise found with ví. Moreover, tmesis of preverbs with participles is fairly rare, though at least here the two forms are adjacent. Re construes it with the aor. part. cítānāḥ in b; here the problem is opposite: ví √cit is indeed an idiom, but not only is tmesis in participles rare, but the position of ví, if it’s a preverb in tmesis, would be anomalous: mid-pāda and not only separated from its participle, but also intrusive in a consituent: suṣvānā́saḥ … ádribhiḥ “having been pressed by stones.” I don’t have a real solution, but I wonder if it’s meant to evoke the “through/across the sheep’s fleece” expression, found, e.g., in nearby IX.100.4 … vy àvyáyam (cf. also IX.13.6, 49.4, 61.17, 67.5, 85.5, 97.56, 109.16). It is also possible that ví .. cítānāḥ somehow anticipates vipaścítaḥ in the next vs. (12a), but this seems a long shot.

The part. cítāna- is another bit of a problem. It is the only form to this part., which seems to belong to a root aor. otherwise found mostly in the well-attested pass.

aor. áceti / céti. The semantics works fine, but for a root aor. part. its root accent is anomalous (expect *citāná-), and in fact a root-accented zero-grade is peculiar whatever the formation. It could of course have voc. accent - but there’s no place for a voc. in this 3rd ps. context. Perhaps it received its root accent redactionally in imitation of vipaścítaḥ in 12a.

Both Ge and Re take the verbal idiom in cd as transitive, or at least construe iṣám as a species of Inhaltsakk. (e.g., “nous ont en résonnant assemblé de toutes parts la jouissance-rituelle”). But Re’s invocation of the idiom abhí … sám √svar as the basis for our abhítaḥ, sám asvaran seems quite apposite, and that idiom is intrans.

with an acc. of goal. See, e.g., IX.110.8 índram abhí … sám asvaran “ They cried out in unison towards Indra” (sim. IX.106.11, 67.9). The conversion of the preverb abhí into the adverbial abhítaḥ would not be responsible for transitivizing the idiom. Cf., e.g., X.27.8 hávā íd aryó abhítaḥ sám āyan “The cries of the Stranger came together from all sides.” I agree that íṣam is an unexpected goal for this idiom, but I think we have to live with it.
