+++
title = "+101"

+++
On the division of this hymn into tṛcas and the structure of the hymn in general see publ. intro. The Anukramaṇī assigns each tṛca to a different poet, in roughly reverse (conceptual) chronological order. The last tṛca plus appended vs., vss. 13-16, is credited to Prajāpati, the Middle Vedic creator god, with no patronymic. The poet of the 2nd to last tṛca, vss. 10-12, is given as Manu Sāṃvaraṇa. This poet is in fact referred to, with the patryonymic Sāṃvaraṇi, in the first Vālakhilya hymn, VIII.51.1 yáthā mánau sāṃvaraṇau, sómam indrā́pibaḥ sutám “Just as at Manu Sāṃvaraṇi's you drank pressed soma, Indra …” But even if the reference is just to a revered ancient poet, the name Manu, as the ur-man and ursacrificer, resonates in the context of Prajāpati. Moreover, there’s a missing step: the Anukr. attributes V.33-34 to one Saṃvaraṇa Prājāpatya, who would be the gapped generational link between Prajāpati and Manu Sāṃvaraṇa (/i). The names of the next two poets display the proper generational relationship: the third tṛca from the end (vss. 7-9) is by Nahuṣa Mānava, with his patronymic from Manu; the fourth tṛca from the end (vss. 4-6) by Yayāti Nāhuṣa, again taking his patronymic from the next poet in order. The first tṛca (vss. 1-3) does not participate in this generational chain; it is attributed to Andhīgu Śyāvāśvi, a patronymic that links him to the skilled poet of the Marut hymns of V (52-61), Śyāvāśva Ātreya (for further on this attribution see comm. ad vs. 1 below). Leaving Andhīgu aside, it seems that the Anukr. takes the hymn from a presumably contemporary poet Yayāti back through the ages (and 4-5 generations) to the primal god Prajāpati, whose primacy is signaled by his lack of patronymic.
