+++
title = "+056"

+++
56 (572)
Maruts
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
25 verses: dvipadā virāj 1–11, triṣṭubh 12–25
This hymn is structured like VII.34, an All God hymn, in that the first part is in the  short dvipadā meter and the second part in triṣṭubh, although the proportions of  verses in each meter are different. It also shares a final verse with VII.34, a generic  plea for the gods’ protection. But in content there is little in common between the  two hymns.
This hymn begins with four verses about the birth and identity of the Maruts,  alluding both to their mysterious generation from Pr̥śni (see esp. vs. 4) and the para dox that they are both identical (“belonging to the same nest,” vs. 1) and separate  and rivalrous. This theme then disappears from the hymn, save for several refer ences to their plural “names” (vss. 10, 14; we of course know them only under one  name, “Maruts”). The rest of the dvipadā section (vss. 5–11) is essentially descrip tive, of their power, beauty, and accoutrements.
Although this celebration of the Maruts’ qualities continues in the triṣṭubh por tion, there is also a significant ritual component, initiated in the first half of verse  12. Subsequent verses make clear what ritual is involved: in verse 14 it is said that  they are worshiped at the beginning of the sacrifice, and they are invited to enjoy  the House-offering; in verse 16 they are called “playful.” In middle Vedic ritual  the third and last of the “Four-monthly” (Cāturmāsyāni) rituals is the Sākamedha, celebrated in the autumn. On the day before the Sākamedha day proper, the  Maruts receive two oblations—thus, they are worshiped at the beginning of the  sacrifice. Moreover, the second of these two oblations is the “House-offering”  (Gr̥hamedhīya). And on the next day there is an offering to the “playful Maruts,”  using the same word that describes their behavior in verse 16d. (For further refer
ence to the Maruts at the Sākamedha in this Marut cycle, see VII.59.9–10. On the  ritual itself see, e.g., Hillebrandt 1897: 117–19; Keith 1925: 322–23.) As usual, offerings to the gods prompt us to ask for reciprocal benefits from the  gods, and these requests occupy much of the remaining verses (17–24), with the  final refrain verse (25) extending the requests to other gods as well. The last few  request verses specific to the Maruts (vss. 22–24) ask for their help in battles over  land and waters, alluding presumably to the Ārya expansion.