+++
title = "08"

+++
O Waters, carry this away, whatever trouble is in me—
whether I have committed deceit or I have cursed—as well as untruth. 9. O Waters, today I have followed (you). We have united with your sap. Full of milk, o Agni, come here. Merge me with luster.
The next ten hymns (X.10–19) form a Yama cycle, though the subject matter found  in the individual hymns is quite various. Yama, the son of Vivasvant, is king of the  land of the dead because he was the first mortal to die. Yet he was apparently born  immortal (see esp. I.83.5) and chose to become mortal, subject to death, “for the sake  of the gods...and for the sake of offspring” (X.13.4). The opening hymn in the cycle,  the dialogue of Yama and his twin sister Yamī, on the fraught topic of embarking on  incestuous sex in order to produce offspring, addresses Yama’s change of status and  his choice, but in a deliberately oblique and misleading fashion, as Yama spurns the  sexual advances of his sister, and at the end of their bitter argument there seems little  likelihood of children. The last six hymns in this cycle (X.14–19) are collectively known as funeral  hymns. The first, X.14, is devoted especially to Yama in his role as king of the realm  of the dead, while the others, especially 15–18, concern various aspects of death  and the treatment of the dead—for example, the forefathers who preceded us to  Yama’s realm in X.15, the cremation fire in X.16, the funeral itself in X.18. The  intermediate hymns, X.11–13, have less superficially clear connections to the Yama  saga, but both X.12 (vss. 6–7) and X.13 (vss. 4–5) make important comments on  Yama and on Yama’s choice.
There is also an underlying unifying theme, that of duality and twinned-ness: the  absolute disjunction between and the ultimate complementarity and unity of the  mortal and the immortal, life and death, men and gods, men and women, heaven  and earth, sacred and profane. It is appropriate that the cycle should begin with the  dialogue between the primal twins, Yama and Yamī, whose very names mean “twin”  and who bridge the gap between mortal and immortal.