+++
title = "05"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., the standard tr. (now incl. WG) take sánat as meaning ‘gave’ (Ge schenkte, Re a donné, WG geschenkt hat), not ‘gained’; Indeed Re claims that the stem sána- means ‘give’ in dānastutis, but provides no parallels. I have found none in any of the occurrences of this stem, but by contrast quite a number of exx. of sána- in dānastutis with the expected meaning ‘gain’ (I.126.3, V.30.14; VIII.25.22, 24; 46.22, 29; 68.17; X.62.11). Note, however, the honorable exception of Klein (DGRV I.431) “That one has obtained [my italics] a herd consisting of horses …”; Grassmann likewise gives the verb in this passage its standard meaning ‘erlangen’. The only possible reason I can imagine that this array of skilled philologists resolutely turned their backs on the very clear evidence of the semantics of this root is that they couldn’t imagine that a female could have won or gained these prizes -- though, as noted in the publ. intro., it would be just as anomalous for a female to give them. If I am right that the woman in question is a favored concubine, or even the Favorite Wife (Vāvātā) of later Vedic ritual, of Śyāvāśva’s royal patron, then he may have indulged her with a little gift at the time of the general distribution of bounty. She does, after all, perform services for him, as pāda d shows.

śatā́vayam is almost universally interpr. as ‘consisting of a hundred (/hundreds of) sheep’, with the 2nd member derived from ávi- (so Gr, Ge, Re, Klein; also AiG II.2.140 and II.1 Nachtr. 34), and certainly sheep fit nicely into a sequence with horses and cows. WG demur, suggesting that such a cmpd should rather be

*śatāvya- and proposing an alternate analysis on the model of cátur-vaya- ‘fourfold’
(2x) -- hence “livestock in horses and cows a hundred fold.” However, the -vaya- of cátur-vaya- is not otherwise found in such cmpds and has no obvious source (see AiG II.2.906), and the long final vowel of the first member śatā́- would not be quite as easily explained (though stems like śatā́magha- and śatāvant- also show unetymological long vowels). I do think WG’s point is well-taken that *avaya- is an unlikely deriv. to ávi-, esp. since that stem shows “closed” inflection, but -vaya- ‘- fold’ has its own problems. I suggest rather that the cmpd orig. contained the wellattested deriv. avyáya- ‘sheep-y, ovine’ (hence *śatāvyaya-), which has undergone haplology of the first y. Note that there's a lot of phononological play in these vss.

(sibilants and v's, with a's), inspired by the poet's name Śyāva-aśva: 5a sā́áśvi yam ...

b śatā́vayam ... c śyāvá-aśva [or HvN’s śyāvāśu va] ... 6a śáśī́ yasī ... b … vásyasī, which could have contributed to the deformation of the underlying cmpd. I would therefore keep the older meaning, but with a different analysis of the 2nd member.

Note also that the end of c, (-stut)āya yā́, is nearly identical to the ends of 1b āyayá and 2b (kath)ā́yaya.
