+++
title = "09"

+++
On this vs. see publ. intro. As detailed there, I take the vs. as an elaborate pun. On the one hand a young woman (yuvatíḥ) is narrating the course of a race (or perhaps the progress of the horses that are to be given to the poet as his prize) to the poet -- thus the word vartaní- ‘course, track’ in b and the two chestnut (horses) (róhitā) in c. (Note also that śyāvá- is not only the short form of the poet’s name but also, more usually, a horse color term.) But a more intimate scene is signalled by her low voice (√rap is ordinarily used of murmuring or muttering; see the esp. telling passage in the Yama/Yamī hymn X.10.4, where it is contrasted with √vad), her use of a nickname “Dusky” (śyāvá-), and esp. the pf. part. mamandúṣī ‘having intoxicated, beguiled, seduced’ (I follow Kü [366-67] in taking the pf. as transitive and supplying ‘me’ as its obj.). And the whole vs. can be read as a description of sexual intercourse. The ‘course’ would be the course of the sex act, and the two ruddy ones in c can be any paired female body parts; given the use of the same verb ví √yam here as in 3b, where men spread their thighs, they may be thighs, but the labia and breasts are also possible. Both Ge and Re take the dat. purumīḷhā́ya in c as a PN and therefore not coreferential with śyāvā́ya in b. But it makes more sense to interpr. purumīḷhá- in its full lexical sense ‘having many rewards’ (so also WG), describing the poet (víprāya in d) who has received his dakṣiṇā from his patron and who is in fact Śyāvāśva -- and implying that part of this dakṣiṇā is the seductive woman in this very vs. On Purumīḍha in later Vedic see comm. on the next vs. As a number of others have noted (e.g., Hoffmann, Injunk. 150), though the Pp. reads arapat, the actual form may be the injunctive rapat; the Pp’s augment is not realized metrically or in the transmitted text. This doesn’t affect the interpr. one way or the other. Though Gr lists práti as a preverb with rapat, this lexeme is not otherwise found (in all of Skt., if Mon-Wms is to be believed), and given the distance between the two words and what would be an unusual position for a preverb in tmesis (pāda-initial but in the pāda after the verb), I think it unlikely that they are to be construed together. I take práti as adverbial, reinforcing the intimacy of the scene, hence my ‘face to face’.

