+++
title = "10"

+++
My interpr. of the dānastuti vs. proper differs from the standard, which has in my opinion been unduly affected by the later Vedic rationalization of the passage.

Both JB (I.151) and PB (XIII.7.12) briefly narrate a tale in which Purumīḍha and Taranta figure as the two sons of Vaidadaśvi, but as we just saw, purumīḷhá- is better taken in its literal sense. I also take tarantá- not as a PN but in lexical value. In either case it is likely a thematization of the pres. participle tárant- (cf. AiG II.2.211), showing the same accent shift as AV jīvantá- from jī́vant-, and it should mean ‘overcoming, victorious’ à ‘victor’. By contrast I do think vaídadaśvi- is a PN, but a speaking name, as the vṛddhi deriv. of *vidád-aśva- ‘finding / acquiring horses’ (cf. vidád-vasu-), an appropriate name for a patron. It is worth noting that both names Śyāvāśva and Vaidadaśvi have Iranian counterparts; see Mayrhofer Personennamen s.vv.

How to distribute yáḥ and yáthā and whether to interpr. the latter as a subordinator or a simile marker are the syntactic problems in this vs., and diff. tr.

have diff. solutions. I take yáḥ as marking a generalizing rel. cl. (‘whoever …’) and yáthā as a simile marker, with c a nominal cl. functioning as the main clause to ab.

The verb in b, dádat is a short-vowel subjunctive (“whoever will give …”) but can also be interpr. as a thematized injunc., which in turn can be read with Vaiśvadaśvi (“as V. did”). If I had had the courage of my convictions, “did” would not be in parens. in the publ. tr.

