+++
title = "001"

+++
1 (235)
Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
23 verses: triṣṭubh
In our interpretation, Agni opens the hymn with a declaration that the priests have  kindled him to carry the oblations. The poet and the priests then confirm that they  have indeed laid the fire to begin the rite. Implied in the first two verses is thus the  birth of the sacrificial fire, and the birth of Agni then becomes the central theme  of the hymn. The first part of the hymn (vss. 3–14) reflects not only on the birth of  the ritual fire, but also on Agni’s ultimate birth from the waters. Indeed, throughout  much of the first half of the hymn, the verses can be taken as describing either the  birth of the ritual fire or the ultimate birth of Agni or both. The poem thus merges  Agni’s original or ultimate birth among the waters and his birth here in the sacrifice  to the accompaniment of the priestly recitations. This poetic strategy complicates  the translation and interpretation of the hymn. For example, verse 4 refers to the  “seven young women,” who are also the mares who tend to Agni (4cd) and who

reappear again in verses 6 and 9. In verse 4 these seven women are likely the riv ers, as Geldner rightly notes, but in verse 6 they are identified, unexpectedly, as the  voices of the seven priests of the soma rite. Retrospectively, therefore, we can view  these women as both the rivers and the voices. Similarly in verse 11 the “kindred
sisters” might be the rivers, or they might again be the voices of the priests. The identity of Agni’s father also complicates the story of Agni’s birth. In verse  10 Agni gives rise to Agni, and therefore Agni is also his own father. But then who  is the father in verse 9? Geldner and Renou think that his father there is Heaven,  Heaven’s udder the raincloud, and therefore the fire here is lightning. More likely,  however, the reference is to the ritual fire. If so, then the father in verse 9 might  be the priest churning the fire, the udder his voice, and the udder’s “spurts and  streams” the words of the priest. Or, again in light of verse 10, the father might  be Agni, who nurtures himself through the “spurts and streams” of his spreading  flames. Or, just as in the case of the “seven young women,” the poet may intend  several of these possibilities.
As Geldner notes, from verse 15 the poet more unambiguously addresses the  ritual fire, though he does return to the theme of Agni’s births in verse 20. This time,  though, the reference may be not only to the ultimate origins of Agni but also and  primarily to the ritual fires of long ago and the ritual fire of the present.
## 01
[Agni:] “You have made me your draft-horse, who am mighty from  soma—(saying,) ‘Convey (the oblations), o Agni’—in order (for me)  to offer the sacrifice at the ritual distribution.”
[The poet:] “As you shine toward the gods—I harness the stone and
I labor, o Agni—take delight in your own body.”
## 02
[The priests:] “We have made the sacrifice turned to the east (in order to  begin). Let our song become strong.” (So saying) they befriend Agni  with kindling wood and with reverence.
From heaven they [=the gods?] have directed the ritual distributions of  the sages. They have sought the way for (Agni), even for the clever and  mighty one.
## 03
The wise (Agni) of refined skill created joy for himself—he who through  his birth is the close kin of heaven and of earth.
The gods found the lovely one within the waters; (they found) Agni in  the work of the sisters [=rivers or fingers of the priests].
## 04
The seven young women strengthened him of good fortune, who is white  as he comes to birth, red in his greatness.
(Those) mares came to him (newly born) as to a new-born colt. The gods  marveled at Agni at his birth.
## 05
Stretching through the airy realm with his blazing limbs, purifying his  resolve through the sage poets as his purifying filters,
clothing himself all around in flame, and being the life of the waters, he  measures out his splendors, lofty and never wanting. 6. He wandered toward them, who neither speak falsely nor can be  deceived, who are the young women of heaven, neither clothing
themselves nor naked.
Here the young women of long ago, who came from the same womb,  conceived their single embryo—they, the seven voices.
## 07
Strewn about and pressing together are his (flames) of all colors in the  womb of ghee and in the stream of the honeyed (soma juices).
Here have the swelling cows [=milk offerings] taken their stand. The  two mothers of wondrous (Agni) [=the two fire churning sticks?] are  the two great ones, the two united.
## 08
Being carried (as an embryo), o son of strength, you have flashed out,  assuming your wondrous forms that blaze and rage.
Streams of honey and ghee drip where the bull has grown strong
through our poetic craft.
## 09
At his birth, he found the udder even of his father. He let loose its  streams and spurts in every direction.
Him who moves in hiding from his kind companions [=the priests]— (though) he was not hidden from the young women of heaven—
## 10
(Him) who was the embryo of his father and begetter did he himself  carry. Alone, he suckled upon the many swelling females.
(Protect) his two kindred cowives for the blazing bull, protect the pair  [=the fire-churning sticks?] belonging to the sons of Manu for him.
## 11
The great one has grown strong in the broad and unrestricted (place).  The waters (go) to Agni, for glory gets the girls.
In the womb of truth lay the lord of the house, Agni, within the work  of the kindred sisters.
## 12
Like a burden-bearing foal [?], at the meeting place of the great (waters?),  the one desirable for a son to see and foaming with radiance,
the begetter who gave birth to the ruddy (cows of dawn), the embryo of  the waters, and the best of men is the young Agni.
## 13
The (fire-churning) Wood—she who brings good fortune—has given  birth to the lovely embryo of the waters and of the plants, to him of  various colors.
Since they have united in their thinking, even the gods befriend the
most admired and powerful one as soon as he is born.
## 14
Like blazing flashes of lightning, lofty radiant beams accompany Agni,  foaming with radiance,
as they yield as their milk the immortal (Agni), grown strong within his  own seat as if in hiding, within the unbounded container.
## 15
I call upon you, sacrificing with my offerings, and I call upon your  companionship and your favor with desire.
With the gods, give help in full measure to the singer, and guard us with  your faces that belong to the house.

## 16
As your dependents, o well-guiding Agni, receiving all riches
and thrusting ourselves forward with a fame that comes with good
seed, we would prevail over the godless battle-mongers.
## 17
Here have you come to be the beacon of the gods, o Agni, delighting  and knowing all poetic crafts.
As the lord of the household, you allowed mortals to settle down, and  as a charioteer bringing success, you journey following the gods.
## 18
The immortal king has taken his seat in the house of mortals, bringing  success to the ritual distributions.
His face covered in ghee, he flashed out widely—Agni knowing all
poetic crafts.
## 19
Come to us together with your kind companionship, hastening as the  great one together with your great help.
Make for us abundant wealth that brings us safely across, and a share  for us that brings beautiful speech and glory.
## 20
These your births of long ago, o Agni, and your present ones I shall  proclaim for the ancient one.
Great soma-pressings for the bull have been made here. Jātavedas has  been installed in one birth after another.
## 21
Having been installed in one birth after another, Jātavedas, the
inexhaustible, is kindled by the Viśvāmitras.
We would be within the good will of him who is worthy of the sacrifice,  even within his favorable benevolence.
## 22
O you endowed with strength, you of strong resolve, place this sacrifice  among the gods for us, giving (it to them).
Hold forth the lofty refreshing drinks for us, o Hotar. O Agni, win great  wealth by sacrifice.
## 23
– Make the milk-libation, the very wondrous winning of the cow,  succeed, o Agni, for him who invokes you most constantly.
There should be for us a son and a lineage that proliferates. Agni, let  this your favor be for us.