+++
title = "002"

+++
2 (236) Agni Vaiśvānara
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
15 verses: jagatī
The first verse announces the two themes of this hymn: the establishment of the fire in  the sacrifice and its connection with the words recited by the priests. The poet begins  by announcing that the priests are creating the dhiṣáṇā, the “Holy Place” for the fire.  The meaning and etymology of dhiṣáṇā are not transparent, but it is synchronically  associated with the root √dhā “place, establish”—allowing the reference to the Holy Place of fire to be carried through this hymn by the frequent use of derivatives of  √dhā (vss. 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 13, and 15, echoed in vs. 6 when √dhā is used not to describe the  placement of fire but the establishment of wealth for the sacrificers). The placement  of fire is also connected to the words of the priests. The chanters “bring together”  Agni as their Hotar (vs. 1); gods originally gave rise to Agni through their “insights”  (vs. 3); and Agni flourishes “through our good thoughts” (vs. 12). The close con
nection between the words of the sacrificial performers and the kindling of fire is  reflected in the poet’s description of Agni as a kaví, a sage poet (vss. 4, 7, 10). This hymn also explicitly describes or refers to the rites surrounding fire, some times connecting them with the character of the god Agni and often his role as  Vaiśvānara, the sun. In 4d, for example, the poet puns on rā́jantam, which can  describe Agni as both “ruling” (as it is translated there) and “shining” with his  heavenly flame as fire is kindled. In verse 9 the three kindling sticks may refer to the  three fires set to the west, south, and east that surround the sacrificial area, which  represents the earth. Thus Agni as the ritual fires around the sacrificial ground is  also Agni as the sun, which encircles the earth. And in verse 12, as Geldner rightly  remarks, the course of Agni is both the course of the sun and the paryagnikaraṇa,  the rite of carrying the fire around the sacrificial animal.
At the end of the hymn, having set the fire in place, the poet turns to the Fire to  beg for easy travel, for the prizes of victory in the sacrificial contest, and for wealth.
## 1
We give birth to the Holy Place for Vaiśvānara, who grows strong  through the truth, like purified ghee for Agni.
Once again, as an axe brings together a chariot, the chanters (bring  together) with their insight the Hotar [=Agni], (who was) also (the
Hotar) of Manu.
## 2
He made both world-halves shine through his birth. He became the son  to be invoked by his two parents [=Heaven and Earth?].
Agni is the conveyor of oblations, unaging and placed for delight,
difficult to deceive, the guest of the clans, rich in radiance.
## 3
In accordance with their will and upon the broad foundation of their skill  and power to surpass, the gods gave birth to Agni through their insights. I speak to the great one, shining with his radiance and his light, as one  who wants to win the prize (speaks) to his steed.
## 4
Wanting to win it, we choose the desirable, audacious, verse-worthy prize  of the delighting (Agni),
the gift of the Bhr̥gus, the fire-priest with a poet’s resolve—Agni
(himself), who rules with his heavenly flame.
## 5
With twisted ritual grass, the peoples have placed Agni in front, him who  brings fame as a prize, for the sake of his favor,
and with offering ladle extended, they (have placed) him, brightly
shining, belonging to all the gods, the Rudra of the sacrifices, bringing  success to the offerings of the (ritual) workers.

## 6
O you of pure flame, because our men with twisted ritual grass in the  sacrifices are all around your dwelling, o Hotar,
they are drawing near, seeking your company, your friendship, o Agni.  Establish wealth for them.
## 7
The great sun filled both world-halves, when the (ritual) workers  supported him when he was just born.
And he, the sage poet, is led around for the rite, like a steed, for the  winning of the prize, being placed for delight.
## 8
Revere him who gives the oblation, who makes the rites good. Befriend  the domestic Jātavedas.
The charioteer of the lofty truth who has no boundary, Agni has  become the one placed in front of the gods.
## 9
The deathless fire-priests purified three kindling sticks for the youthful,  earth-encircling Agni.
While they placed one of these as a benefit for the mortal, two also  went up to the wide world (of heaven) kindred (to the earth).
## 10
The refreshments of the sons of Manu [=the oblations of ghee] have  perfected him, the poet of the clans, the clanlord, to be sharp like  an axe.
He journeys to the heights and the depths, being ever active. He  supports his embryo among these living beings.
## 11
Since he understands how, the bull enlivens himself in his shimmering  bellies like a loudly roaring lion—
deathless Vaiśvānara of broad visage, who distributes goods and  treasures to the pious man.
## 12
As of old, Vaiśvānara mounted the vault of the sky, the back of heaven,  becoming joyful through our good thoughts.
As before, producing the winnings for the (human) race, being awake,  he goes around the same course.
## 13
The inspired one, possessing the truth, worthy of the sacrifice, and  worthy of hymns, the dwelling in heaven whom Mātariśvan
placed here—
him do we beseech, him whose path is shimmering, whose hair is tawny,  beautifully shining Agni, for a newer easy passage.
## 14
Like the blazing (sun) in its course, the vigorous one of sunlike  appearance, the beacon of heaven, standing within the realm of light  and awakening at dawn—
Agni, the unstoppable head of heaven, him do we beseech with our  reverence on high as our prizewinner horse.
## 15
The delighting Hotar, the blazing one free of duplicity, the lord of the  household, worthy of hymns and belonging to all lands,
like the shimmering chariot [=the sun?], lovely to see for his beautiful  form, the one placed by Manu, do we ever beseech for wealth. 