+++
title = "003"

+++
3 (237)
Agni Vaiśvānara
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
11 verses: jagatī
In this hymn the poet stresses the dual role of Agni as fire and sun and therefore  as belonging to mortals and to gods. The movement between Agni as the sacrificial  fire and as the sun is announced in the first verse: Agni befriends the gods, and he  also maintains the integrity of the sacrifice for humans. Because he belongs to both  gods and mortals, Agni moves between the two world-halves, the sphere of the gods  in heaven and the place of mortals on earth—a theme repeated in verses 2, 4, 6,  and 10. Some of the more enigmatic aspects of this hymn may reflect the location  of Agni in both heaven and earth and the unity of Agni as sacrificial fire and as  the sun. In verse 8 Agni’s simultaneous connection to gods and mortals reaches a  climax, in which it is not clear which of the two is being talked about. Who or what  is being strengthened? Is it the gods, the kin of Manu, the sacrifice, or even Agni  himself? In verse 2 Agni’s “lofty dwelling place” could refer both to the place of the  sun in heaven or the place of the sacrificial fire.
A special mystery concerns the last verse of the hymn, verse 11. In 11b, following  the suggestion of Geldner, we have taken Agni as the subject, and Agni’s semen as  the suppressed object. The reference, he suggests, is the mystery and paradox of Agni  as his own father, which is also found in III.2. The image is an unusual one, but sev
eral elements of verse 11 suggest that it is Agni’s semen (rétas) that “flows on high.”  First, rétas is both present in pāda d and suggested by √rī “flow” in pāda b. Second,  that which is “flowing on high” in pādas ab results in Agni’s birth in cd. Finally, the  ellipsis of the object, which occurs between br̥hád / áriṇād, is solved in pāda d by  bhū́ri-retasā “having abundant semen,” which echoes br̥hád / áriṇād phonologically  and thereby suggests “semen” as the missing object. The mystery also brings back  the theme of the Agni as sun and as sacrificial fire, since the fire who is single and  who makes semen flow on high is likely the sun. In any case, that theme is restated in  the last lines, which identify the parents of Agni as both Heaven and Earth.
## 01
To honor Vaiśvānara of broad visage, our inspired words offer him  treasures so that he goes upon strong supports.
Since immortal Agni befriends the gods, therefore, from of old, he has  never corrupted the foundations (of the sacrifice).
## 02
The wondrous messenger journeys between the two world-halves. The  Hotar of Manu has taken his seat, placed to the fore.
He attends upon his lofty dwelling place throughout the days. Bringing  goods through his insight, Agni is urged on by the gods.
## 03
Beacon of the sacrifices, bringer of success to the ritual distribution— Agni do the inspired poets exalt with their thoughts.
In whom they have gathered their tasks and their songs, in him the
sacrificer desires to find favors.

## 04
The father of sacrifices and the lord of those perceiving the inspired  words, Agni is the measure and pattern for the chanters.
He has entered the two world-halves with their abundant forms. Dear  to many, the poet becomes joyful through his manifestations.
## 05
Shimmering Agni, whose chariot is shimmering and whose
commandments are golden, Vaiśvānara, who sits amid the waters
and finds the sun,
the one who sinks deep and moves swiftly, surrounded by his powers— him, ardent and very splendid, have the gods placed here.
## 06
Agni, who, together with the gods and with the kin of Manu, extends  the much-adorned sacrifice by his insight,
speeds between (the two worlds) as a charioteer by means of those
[=the gods and the kin of Manu] who bring the offerings to
success—he the lively houselord, who dispels curses.
## 07
O Agni, be awake to a lifetime rich with descendants (for us). Swell with  nourishment, and shine refreshments on us.
Quicken our vital powers and the (gods) on high, o you who are awake,  as the fire-priest of the gods. You are the one of strong resolve for
inspired words.
## 08
Clanlord, youthful guest, controller of insights, and fire-priest of the  chanters,
sign of the rites, and Jātavedas—him do our men ever proclaim with  reverence, (for him) to give strength by his spur.
## 09
The far-radiant god, the great delight, Agni with his chariot and  through his vast power has surrounded the settlements.
We would attend to the commandments of him who prospers
abundantly here in our house by means of our well-twisted hymns.
## 10
Vaiśvānara, I desire your manifestations, by which you became the one  who finds the sun, o far-gazing one.
As soon as you were born, you filled the living worlds and the two
world-halves. Agni, you surround all these in your own person.
## 11
By the wondrous powers of Vaiśvānara and by his good work, the  single poet [=Agni?] made it [=his semen?] flow on high.
Agni was born, exalting both his parents, Heaven and the Earth, who  have abundant semen.