+++
title = "004"

+++
4 (238)
Āprı̄
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
11 verses: triṣṭubh
One of the ten Āprī litanies found in the R̥gveda. This is one of the eleven-verse  versions, with Tanūnāpāt in position 2 and no Narāśaṃsa. It is a trickier Āprī hymn than most, in that not all the key words are overtly expressed but are implied by  derivationally related (vs. 1) or phonologically similar (vs. 3) words or are simply  gapped (vs. 5). For example, rather than the usual past participle samíddha “kin dled” in the first verse, this hymn has the āmreḍita nominal samít-samid “kindling  stick after kindling stick.” In verse 3 iḷáḥ “of the milk libation” substitutes for the  usual īḍitá “solemnly invoked,” with similar phonology though they are etymo logically and semantically unrelated. In verse 5 the expected Divine Doors do not  appear but can be supplied with the feminine adjective pūrvī́ḥ “many.” As usual,  the key words (or their substitutes) are italicized in this translation. The final four  verses are identical to VII.2.8–11.
## 01
Kindling stick after kindling stick—become favorable to us. With flame  after flame, give the favor of the good one.
Convey here the gods, o god, for the sacrifice. As our companion,
favorable (to us), sacrifice to your companions, o Agni.
## 02
You to whom the gods—Varuṇa, Mitra, and Agni—offer sacrifice three  times in a day, day after day,
make this sacrifice to be honey-filled for us, o Tanūnapāt, and, with its  womb of ghee, to give honor (to the gods).
## 03
The insight that fulfills all wishes goes forth to the Hotar [=Agni] of the  milk-libation in order to offer sacrifice first
and to celebrate the bull here with acts of reverence. When prompted, he  will sacrifice to the gods as the superior sacrificer.
## 04
High above has the path for you two been created in the rite. High above  have the flames advanced into the airy spaces,
or rather the Hotar has been seated at the navel of heaven. We strew the  ritual grass widely, providing an expanse for the gods.
## 05
Choosing in their mind the seven offices of the Hotar, driving everything  onward, they [=the gods] return in accordance with the truth.
They wander forth to this sacrifice through the many (Divine Doors),  which have excellent men [=the gods?] as their adornment and which  are born at the ritual distributions.
## 06
Becoming joyful here, Dawn and Night are close by, and they both smile,  though in body they have different forms,
so that Mitra will rejoice in us, and Varuṇa, and also Indra along with  the Maruts, through their great powers.
## 07
I direct the two foremost Divine Hotars downward. The seven (priests),  giving strength, become exhilarated by their own will.
Reciting the truth, they speak just the truth, reflecting upon their
commandments as the protectors of commandments.
## 08
Bhāratī along with the Bhāratīs, Iḷā along with the gods, Agni along with  the sons of Manu,
and Sarasvatī along with the Sārasvatas are near: let the three goddesses sit here on the ritual grass.474 III.5
## 09
O god Tvaṣṭar, unbind for us this flow of semen and what prospers,  granting (that)
from which a hero is born, fit for action and very skilled, who yokes up  the pressing stones and desires the gods.
## 10
O Lord of the Forest, send it [=the sacrificial animal] to the gods. Agni,  the Śamitar, will sweeten the offering.
And it is he, the more real Hotar [=Agni], who will offer sacrifice, since  he knows the births of the gods.
## 11
Journey near here, o Agni, as you are kindled, on the same chariot with  Indra and the swift gods.
Let Aditi of good sons sit on our ritual grass. Svāhā! Let the immortal  gods rejoice!