+++
title = "005"

+++
5 (239)
Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The address is to Agni as the fire kindled in the morning rites, whose appearance  anticipates that of the dawns and the sun. His advent inspires the recitations  of the priests and Agni himself grows stronger through those recitations and  through the rites, if Geldner has rightly identified “the many manifestations of  truth” in verse 2 as the acts of the sacrifice. The poet’s major theme, though, is  the identification of Agni with various deities whose functions intersect with  those of Agni. In verse 4 and briefly reprised toward the end of the hymn in  verse 9, Agni is Mitra, the god of alliances, because his kindling marks the  re-creation of the alliance between gods and mortals through the performance  of the sacrifice. Agni’s identification with the Adhvaryu, the priest in charge of  the action of the rite, follows from his role as Mitra. In 4d, however, the appella tive sense of mitrá “ally” comes to the fore, and Agni is not only part of the rite  and household, but the ally of the rivers and mountains, all the territories of the  earth. More unusually, in verse 4 he is also identified in his form as Jātavedas as  Varuṇa, the god of commandments. Neither Agni’s identification as Jātavedas  nor his authority to command are central to this hymn, so the introduction of  Varuṇa here is the result of Varuṇa’s close connection with Mitra, and Jātavedas,  although normally a name of Agni, is here semiautonomous from him, like  Tanūnapāt in the previous hymn.
Verses 5 and 6, occupying the mysterious middle of the hymn, are the most  difficult. Verse 5ab might continue from 4d, proclaiming that the highest limits of  the earth and even the sky are governed by Agni. Alternatively, the “summit’s tip”  could be the reach of the sacrificial fire and the track of the bird could be the track  of the sun. In the latter case the verses connect two forms of Agni as the sacrificial fire and as the sun. In verse 6 Agni is identified with another deity, R̥bhu or the  R̥bhu, the craftsman, who, like Agni, is also a priest. The “hide of the grain” is  puzzling, but as also in IV.7.7, it might refer to the ritual grass and the “track of  the bird” again to Agni as the sun, appearing during the kindling of the morning  sacrificial fire.
Verse 7 once more takes up the theme of the birth of Agni. His parents might be  Heaven and Earth, as Sāyaṇa and other interpreters suggest, or, more likely, the two  fire-churning sticks, which are Agni’s new parents with his every birth. Once Agni  is born, the plants—the kindling chips—nurture him and he becomes strong in the  lap of his parents. Then in verse 9 Agni, now flaring up, appears both in heaven as  the sun and in the sacrificial area, the navel of the earth, as the fire of the sacrifice.  The poem ends with one last identification: Agni is Mātariśvan, the fire-bringer, for  fire gives rise to fire.
## 01
In response to the dawns, the ever more visible Agni has awakened, the  inspired (priest), trail-blazer for the poets.
He of broad visage, kindled by those seeking the gods, as the draft-horse  (of the oblations), has opened the doors of darkness.
## 02
To be revered through recitations, Agni has grown still stronger through  the praises and songs of the praise singers.
Delighting in the many manifestations of truth, the messenger has flared  forth at the shining out of dawn.
## 03
Agni has been installed among the clans of the sons of Manu—the  embryo of the waters and Mitra bringing success through the truth.
Beloved and worthy of the sacrifice, he has mounted the back (of the  altar), and has become the inspired (priest) to be invoked by our
thoughts.
## 04
Agni becomes Mitra when he is kindled. As the Hotar, he is Mitra; as  Jātavedas, Varuṇa.
As the vigorous Adhvaryu and the lord of the household, he is Mitra,  the Mitra of the rivers and mountains.
## 05
He protects the summit’s [?] tip dear to him and the track of the bird.  The young one protects the course of the sun.
Agni protects the seven-headed (chant?) in the navel (of the sacrifice).  Towering, he protects the exhilarating (soma?) of the gods.
## 06
The R̥bhu [=Agni] created for himself the beloved name (of R̥bhu) to be  invoked, since he is the god who knows all the ritual patterns.
The hide of the grain and the track of the bird, (each) covered in ghee— just that does Agni guard, never lapsing.
## 07
Being eager, Agni has mounted the eager womb covered in ghee and  providing wide entry.
Shining, blazing, towering, pure—again and again he has made his
mother and father new.

## 08
As soon as he is born, he grows strong through the plants, when the  fruitful (plants) make him strong with ghee.
Like the waters appearing in beauty on their downward course, Agni  makes a wide path [?] in the lap of his parents [=the fire-churning
sticks].
## 09
Praised, the young one has flared up through his kindling, upon the  summit of heaven and the navel of earth.
To be invoked as Mitra and Mātariśvan, Agni as messenger will convey  the gods to the sacrifice.
## 10
Towering, Agni has propped up the vault of the sky through his  kindling, becoming the highest of the lights,
when Mātariśvan kindled him hiding from the Bhr̥gus, conveying the  oblation.
## 11
– Make the milk-libation, the very wondrous winning of the cow,  succeed, o Agni, for him who invokes you most constantly.
There should be for us a son and a lineage that proliferates. Agni, let  this your favor be for us.