+++
title = "006"

+++
6 (240) Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
11 verses: triṣṭubh
From its beginning, this hymn signals Agni’s dual roles as priest and ritual fire and  as fire on earth and fire among the gods. The first verse contains a sustained śleṣa,  a word, or in this case a gapped word, with a double sense. The gapped feminine  noun is probably the juhū́, the sacrificial ladle with which the butter offerings are  poured in the fire. But she can also be the tongue of the poet—not so incidentally,  another meaning of the word juhū́—or even the speech of the poets. If one of the  two latter, then dakṣiṇāvā́ṭ can mean not or not only “conveying to the right” but  also, as Geldner suggests, “conveying the priestly gift” (dakṣiṇā) to the Hotar Agni.  Similarly, in verse 2, the draft-horses are primarily the flames of Agni, but they can  also be the priests of the sacrifices.
From verse 3 the poet launches into his principal theme: the position of Agni  himself as the intermediary between gods and humans, himself a kind of divine  śleṣa, who is simultaneously a Hotar for humans and a Hotar for the gods. The  references to Heaven and Earth (vss. 3, 4) or to the “two world-halves” (vss. 5,  10) point toward his role as intermediary between earth and heaven. Similarly, in  verse 7 Agni appears as both the heavenly fire, the sun, and as the earthly fire of  the sacrifice. Reflecting his double manifestation, the first line of this verse could  mean that Agni shines either as the earthly fire “to heaven” or as the sun “from  heaven.” 1. O praise-poets, twisting around in your mind, lead forth the one [=the  sacrificial ladle] who is turned toward the gods, as you serve the gods; conveying (offerings) toward the right, the prizewinning mare goes to  the east, bringing the offering to Agni, (she who is) rich in ghee.
## 2
You filled the two world-halves as you were born, and now you, o you  who seek the first offerings, have surpassed
even the heaven and the earth by your greatness, o Agni. Let your
draft-horses with their seven tongues twist around.
## 3
Heaven and Earth and the (gods) worthy of the sacrifice set you down  as the Hotar for the house,
when the clans of the sons of Manu, serving the gods and bearing
pleasing oblations, summon your gleaming flame.
## 4
Taking pleasure, the great one is set down here in his enduring abode  between Heaven and Earth, the two great ones,
who are united cowives, unaging and indestructible, the two
nectar-yielding milk-cows of the wide-ranging (Agni).
## 5
Great are the commandments of you who are great, o Agni. Through  your will you extend throughout the two world-halves.
You became the messenger as you were born. You are the leader of the  different peoples, o bull.
## 6
Or place your own two long-maned (horses) of truth, sorrels bathed in  ghee, on the yoke-pole with the harness ropes.
Then convey all the gods here, o god. Perform good rites, Jātavedas.
## 7
Your shining rays shine here even to heaven; you become radiant along  with the many far-radiant dawns,
when, o Agni, the gods marvel at your busy burning at will among the  wood, (the burning) by the delightful Hotar.
## 8
Whether (they be) the gods who rejoice in the broad midspace or those  who are in the luminous realm of heaven,
or those who are helpers, easily invoked and belonging to the
sacrifice—their chariot horses guided themselves here, o Agni—
## 9
With these, o Agni, journey here near to us on the same chariot, or on a  different chariot, for your horses are wide-ranging.
Convey here the three and thirty gods along with their wives, in
accordance with your own will; make then rejoice!.
## 10
He is the Hotar, whose every sacrifice even the two broad world-halves  welcome in order to make it strong.
Turned eastward like two rites stand the two well-supported
(world-halves), the two truth-possessing (parents) of truth-begotten  (Agni), the two real ones.
## 11
– Make the milk-libation, the very wondrous winning of the cow,  succeed, o Agni, for him who invokes you most constantly.
There should be for us a son and a lineage that proliferates. Agni, let  this your favor be for us.
