+++
title = "007"

+++
7 (241)
Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
11 verses: triṣṭubh
Geldner describes this as a deliberately obscure morning hymn. The poet creates  this obscurity by rarely directly identifying the objects concerned, but rather refer ring to them through metaphors, especially of mares and bulls. One reason the poet  chooses this approach may be because he is simultaneously describing and thus  interconnecting three realities relevant to the morning ritual: the priests and their  activity, the appearance of the sacrificial fire and thus of the god Agni, and the ris ing of the sun, which is another form of Agni.
Neither space nor certainty allows us to unpack all of the poet’s metaphors,  but the following brief discussion of a few can illustrate the complexity and pos sibilities of the poet’s imagery. Geldner suggests that the seven voices in verse 1  may be the seven rivers (as in III.1.6), but they might also be the voices of the  seven priests of the soma rite. Agni’s “mother and father” might be Earth and  Heaven—especially since his parents are probably Heaven and Earth in pāda  c. But they could also be the two fire-churning sticks, the aráṇis, in which case  mātárā might better be “the two mothers.” If the mātárā are both Earth and  Heaven and the churning sticks, then the poet may be deliberately exploiting the  paradox that Agni, the ritual fire, is the child of the churning sticks, and Agni,  perhaps as the sun, is the child of Heaven and Earth. In verse 2 Sāyaṇa among  others reasonably understands the mares to be the waters, but we suggest that  they might be, or again also be, Agni’s flames or rays of the sun. If we follow  these latter interpretations, then the “single cow” might be the sun, although this  identification is doubtful since the sun is not otherwise a cow or even female. The  choice of such an image for the sun, if it is such, might have been motivated by  the image of the flames as mares and milk-cows. Alternatively, Geldner thinks  the single cow is probably the sacrificial ladle, which is certainly possible. The  “seers,” who are the likely subject in verse 5 and who appear again in verse 7,  may be the saptarṣayaḥ “seven seers,” the seven stars of the Big Dipper, and  in both verses they may also be the seven priests of the soma rite. As Kiehnle  (1979:  83)  has observed, it is because they may be stars in verse 7 that vípra “inspired” can also have the more literal sense of “quivering,” that is, “twin kling.” Also in verse 7 the young bulls may be the flames of Agni (so Oldenberg)  or possibly the flames of the rising sun (Kiehnle).
## 1
Those (flames) that have gone forth from the wellspring of white-backed  (Agni) have entered his mother and father and the seven voices.
The encircling father and mother [=Heaven and Earth] travel in tandem;  the two stretch far and wide to display their long lifetime. 2. The mares [=the flames?] of the bull, the ruler of heaven [=the sun], are  milk-cows; he took his place upon these goddesses, who convey that  filled with honey.
The single cow travels her course around you, who dwell peacefully in  the seat of truth.
## 3
He mounted upon them that become easy to guide as their watchful  lord and as the wealth-finder of wealth.
The blue-backed (Agni), whose faces are manyfold, made them dwell  apart from the wellspring of the brushwood.
## 4
Nourishing the unaging son of Tvaṣṭar greatly, the carriers [=fingers of  the priests?] carry him [=the newborn fire], who stands fast.
Flaring out with his limbs in his abode, he entered the two world-halves  as if they were one woman.
## 5
They [=the seers?] know the benevolence of the flame-red bull, and they  find joy in the command of the copper-colored one—
they, the shining ones, shining from heaven and brightly shining, to  whose flock belong the milk-libation and the great song.
## 6
And by their knowledge, following his sound, they led their thunderous  (sound) to his father and mother, the great (parents) of great (Agni), when at night the young bull grew strong all around his (fire)place
along the domain of a singer.
## 7
With the five Adhvaryus, the seven inspired ones protect the dear  hidden track of the bird.
Turned forward, the young, unaging bulls [=flames?] become
exhilarated, for gods follow the commandments of the gods.
## 8
I direct the two foremost divine Hotars downward. The seven (priests),  giving strength, become exhilarated by their own will.
Reciting the truth, they speak just the truth, reflecting upon their
commandments as the protectors of commandments.
## 9
The many (mares) [=flames?] act like bulls for the great steed [=Agni  or the sun]; their reins [=rays of light] are easy to guide for the
shimmering bull.
O god and Hotar, as the most delighting and watchful, convey the great  gods and the two world-halves here to this place.
## 10
O Wealth—the dawns, owning the fortifying first offerings, receiving the  beautiful words, bearing lovely beacons, have dawned richly.
And now, o Agni, by the greatness of earth, for the sake of our great  (fortune), be favorable even to the (ritual) fault we have committed.
## 11
– Make the milk-libation, the very wondrous winning of the cow,  succeed, o Agni, for him who invokes you most constantly.
There should be for us a son and a lineage that proliferates. Agni, let  this your favor be for us.
