+++
title = "008"

+++
8 (242) Sacrificial Post(s)
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 3, 7
Though this hymn is found in the middle of the Agni collection, it is dedicated  to the Sacrificial Post (yūpa), to which the animal to be sacrificed is tied. It is not  entirely clear why it has been inserted here, though as an eleven-verse hymn con sisting mostly of triṣṭubhs it comes at the end of the triṣṭubh hymns to Agni and is  preceded by two likewise eleven-verse hymns.
The structure of the hymn has been illuminatingly discussed by Theodore Proferes  (2003b), who shows that not only does it fall into two separate parts devoted to the  single post (1–5) and multiple posts (6–10) respectively, as is already indicated by the  Anukramaṇī, but that the two halves are entirely parallel in phraseology and struc
ture. Originally there were probably two hymns, each appropriate to a different ritual  situation (one sacrificial animal versus several). They were put together and a final  benedictory verse was added (11), and then it was inserted into the Agni cycle.
The ritual action depicted in both parts is the erecting, anointing, and wrapping  of the posts; there is no mention of the sacrificial animal.
## 1
Those seeking the gods anoint you at the ceremony, o Lord of the Forest,  with heavenly honey.
When you will stand erect, after that establish material goods here—or  when you will dwell peacefully in the lap of this mother [=Earth].
## 2
Being propped in front of the kindled (fire), gaining the unaging
formulation that provides good heroes,
thrusting heedlessness to a distance from us, rise up for great good
fortune.
## 3
Rise up, Lord of the Forest, upon the height of the earth.
Being founded with a good founding, establish luster for the one whose  vehicle is the sacrifice.
## 4
As a youth, richly dressed, engirded, he has come here. He becomes more  splendid as he is being born.
Him do the insightful, very attentive poets lead upward, seeking the gods  with their mind.
## 5
Once born, he is born (again) on the brightest day of days, growing  strong at the encounter, at the rite.
The insightful, industrious ones purify (him) with inspired thought.  Beseeching the gods, the poet raises his voice.
## 6
Those of you whom the god-seeking men have fixed down, or, Lord of  the Forest, whom the axe has fashioned,
let those god(like) sacrificial posts, standing there, be disposed to place a  treasure consisting of offspring in us. 7. Those who, hewn, are on the earth, or have been fixed down in it, or  over whom the offering ladles have been outstretched,
let them pursue a thing of value for us among the gods, assuring
success to the cultivated lands.
## 8
The Ādityas, Rudras, Vasus of good guidance, Heaven and Earth, the  Broad One, the Midspace—
let the gods in concert help our sacrifice. Let them make the beacon of  the ceremony erect.
## 9
Like geese, taking their places in a row, wearing gleaming (garments)  the posts have come here to us.
Being led upward by the poets in front, the gods go into the fold of  the gods.
## 10
Just like the horns of horned beasts they appear—the posts, with their  knobs, (standing) on the earth.
Or listening attentively at the competing invocation by the cantors, let  (the gods) help us at the battle drives.
## 11
Lord of the Forest, grow forth with a hundred branches—with a  thousand branches may we grow forth—
you whom this axe here, on being sharpened, has led forth for great  good fortune.