+++
title = "009"

+++
9 (243)
Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The setting of the poem is the kindling of Agni in the very early morning (cf. vs. 7).  Thematically, the poet parallels the gods’ search for Agni and the human priests’  kindling of fire. The fire has disappeared into the waters or into the wood, which  has absorbed the waters. Therefore, it is in the waters that the “watchful and unde
ceiving ones,” either priests or gods, have found him. The double reference is par ticularly well expressed in verse 5. The first part of the verse alludes to the myth  of Agni’s flight from the gods and to the myth of Mātariśvan, who brings the fire  from heaven. But the final phrase devébhyo mathitám pári, here translated “stolen  from among the gods,” could also mean “churned from among the gods.” That is,  it likely refers to the priestly act of creating fire by friction as well as to the story of  Mātariśvan’s bringing fire.
## 01
As your companions, we mortals have chosen you, a god, to help— you, the Child of the Waters, sharing good fortune, shining brightly,  strongly advancing, faultless.

## 02
Since desiring the trees, you went to your mothers, the waters,
therefore your return is not to be ignored, o Agni, since, though being  far away, you have come to be here.
## 03
You have grown beyond the acrid (smoke), and so now you are
benevolent.
The ones [=priests or flames] go farther and farther forth; the
others [=other priests or flames] remain around—those in whose
companionship you rest.
## 04
Him who had gone beyond failures, beyond the ever-parched places— him did the watchful and undeceiving ones find resting in the waters like  a lion.
## 05
Agni, hidden thus, as if he had run away on his own—
him did Mātariśvan lead here from the far distance, stolen from among  the gods.
## 06
You are he whom mortals seized, o you who convey oblations to
the gods,
since you, son of Manu, guard all sacrifices according to your resolve,  youngest one.
## 07
This is auspicious—your wondrous skill appears good even to a
simple man—
that the herd sits together around you, o Agni, when you are kindled at  night’s boundary.
## 08
Pour an offering to him who makes the rite good, sharp (Agni) of  pure flame.
Obediently serve the swift messenger, the quick, the ancient one to be  summoned, the god.
## 09
Three hundred and three thousand, thirty and nine gods served Agni. They sprinkled him with ghee and they strewed ritual grass for him.  Then they seated him as their Hotar.