+++
title = "010"

+++
10 (244)
Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
9 verses: uṣṇih
The hymn is in praise of Agni as he is kindled and installed as the Hotar in the rite.  Because the Hotar recites the hymns in the ritual and because this hymn emphasizes  Agni’s role as Hotar, the poet also connects ritual speech and Agni, in particular,  the speech that addresses him and that he can appreciate and inspire as the Hotar.  Again in accordance with Agni’s role as Hotar, the poet emphasizes Agni’s skill as  a priest and his ability to rectify any failures in the rite. In verse 7, which mentions  such failures, ví rājasi means both “shine in every direction” and “rule in every  direction.” Both, of course, would fit the context. Oldenberg suggests that this hymn (as well as the next two) may be organized  into tr̥cas. The extractions of triplets from these hymns in ritual performance and in  the Sāmaveda also speak in favor of tr̥cas, although not all tr̥cas in the later tradi tion correspond to tr̥cas in the original hymns. So, for example, as Oldenberg points  out, III.11.5, 7, 6 form a tr̥ca in the Sāmaveda, but they have a different order and  cross a tr̥ca boundary in the R̥gveda.
## 01
You, o Agni, the sovereign king over the peoples,
you a god do mortals of inspired thought kindle in the rite.
## 02
You do they summon as priest at the sacrifices and as Hotar, o Agni. Shine as the herdsman of truth in your own house.
## 03
He who will ritually serve you, o Jātavedas, with the kindling wood, he, o Agni, receives an abundance of heroes, and he prospers.
## 04
The beacon of the rites, Agni will come with the gods,
being anointed by the seven Hotars for the sake of him who brings the  offering.
## 05
Bring forward the first lofty speech for the Hotar, for Agni,
as if for a ritual master who brings the lights of inspirations.
## 06
Let our songs strengthen Agni—those from which he is born, worthy to  be hymned,
as the one lovely to see, for the great prize and for great wealth.
## 07
O Agni, as the best sacrificer in the rite, sacrifice to the gods for him  seeking the gods.
As the delighting Hotar, you rule in every direction beyond failures.
## 08
O pure one, shine upon us a brilliant abundance of heroes.
Be very near to the praise singers for their well-being.
## 09
Admiring, inspired poets, being awake, kindle you,
the conveyor of oblations, immortal and strength-increasing.