+++
title = "011"

+++
11 (245)
Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
9 verses: gāyatrī
The theme of the hymn is Agni as the intermediary between gods and mortals. So  in verse 2, for example, he is a fire-priest like a human, but as a god he is immortal;  he is the messenger placed on earth with mortals for the delight of the gods. The  image of Agni as a chariot in verse 5 is unusual and striking, and because it is so  and because it is located in the hymn’s central verse, it dominates the hymn. It finds  echoes in the descriptions of Agni as the “conveyor” (vss. 2, 4), as “overpowering  all attacks” (vs. 6), and as piled high with “well-placed” ritual offerings and hymns  for the gods (vs. 8)—these are the likely “things” of Agni mentioned in the verse— and with “desirable things” for mortals (vs. 9). The image of the chariot is also484 III.12
reflected in the description of the sacrificer journeying to both “pleasing offerings”  and Agni’s “dwelling place” (vs. 7). Indeed, the vā́has, the sacrificer’s “vehicle” in  verse 7, is probably none other than Agni himself, who is described by the cognates  havya-váh and váhni.
## 01
Agni is the Hotar of the rite, who is placed to the fore, who is without  boundaries:
he knows the sacrifice in its proper order.
## 02
The conveyor of oblations, the immortal fire-priest, and the messenger  placed for delight,
Agni through insight assembles (the sacrifice).
## 03
Agni—through insight he becomes visible as the ancient beacon of the  sacrifice,
for his is a surpassing goal.
## 04
Agni, the son of strength famed of old, Jātavedas—
him the gods made their conveyor (of oblations).
## 05
The undeceivable leader of the clans of the sons of Manu is Agni, who is the swift chariot, ever new.
## 06
Who overpowers all attacks as the indestructible resolve of the gods, Agni is the best of those of mighty fame.
## 07
A ritually dedicated mortal attains through his vehicle the pleasing  offerings
and the dwelling place (of Agni), whose flames are pure.
## 08
Through our thoughts we would fully attain all the well-placed things  of Agni;
we inspired poets (would attain those) of Jātavedas.
## 09
O Agni, we shall gain all desirable things among the prizes of victory. In you the gods have placed them.