+++
title = "012"

+++
12 (246) Indra and Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina.
9 verses: gāyatrī
The poet invites Indra and Agni to drink the soma at the morning soma offering.  The two gods are not only invoked together, but the poet  also ascribes the acts  distinctive of each god to both. After invoking them in the 2nd person in the first  two verses, in the third verse he refers to them in the 3rd person and then, espe
cially in verses 4 and 6, tells of the great deeds that belong to both of them. In  verse 4 they are both “smashers of obstacles,” for while Indra is the “smasher of  obstacles” or “smasher of Vr̥tra,” Agni also burns his way through obstacles (e.g.,  VI.16.34). Indra is the god who famously breaks the fortifications of the Dāsas, but  in verse 6 Agni also destroys enemies’ fortifications, as in III.15.4. In verse 8 “cross
ing the waters” belongs to the two of them as well. As Geldner remarks, this last is probably a reference to a victorious march across rivers that is led by the sacrifice,  represented by Agni, and by warriors, represented by Indra.
## 1
Indra and Agni! Come to the pressed soma, to the cloud worthy to be  chosen, through our songs.
Urged on by our insight, drink of this.
## 2
Indra and Agni! The sacrifice of the singer goes (to you two) jointly,  being worthy of your attention.
By this (insight), drink this pressed soma.
## 3
I choose Indra and Agni, the two who appear as sage poets with the spur  of our sacrifice.
So let those two satisfy themselves here with the soma.
## 4
I invoke the streaming smashers of obstacles, ever-conquering, never  conquered
Indra and Agni, best winners of victory’s prize.
## 5
The singers with their recitations, knowing the (poetic) devices, chant  forth to you two.
Indra and Agni, I choose your refreshments.
## 6
Indra and Agni! You shook the ninety fortifications, lorded over by Dāsas, at one time with a single act.
## 7
Indra and Agni! From our (ritual) work our insights go forth toward (you) along the paths of truth.
## 8
Indra and Agni! Mighty are your abodes and your pleasing offerings. The crossing of the waters has been ordained for you two.
## 9
Indra and Agni! You encompass the lights of heaven among your prizes  of victory.
This heroic deed of yours has become revealed.