+++
title = "013"

+++
13 (247) Agni
R̥ṣabha Vaiśvāmitra
7 verses: anuṣṭubh
This is the first hymn of this collection attributed not to Viśvāmitra, but to his son,  R̥ṣabha. Its theme is Agni as the god who inspires the recitations of the priests. As  such, Agni possesses the truth that the hymns express (vs. 2), and he himself is both  an inspired poet (vs. 3) and the Hotar priest (vs. 5). As he is kindled, he becomes  increasingly bright and the hymn connects his visible brilliance with the brilliance  of mind he inspires (vss. 5–6) and finally even the brilliance of the gift he wins for  the sacrificers (vs. 7).
## 1
Chant forth for you all the loftiest (chant) to him, the god Agni.
He will come to us with the gods, and as the best sacrificer he will sit  here upon the ritual grass.

## 2
He possessing the truth, whose skill the two world-halves and (the gods’)  help follow—
him do those bringing offerings summon, him do those striving to win  (summon) for help.
## 3
As inspired poet, he is the controller of these (bringing offerings); he is  (the controller) of sacrifices. Because he is so,
befriend for yourselves Agni, who gives and gains bounty.
## 4
Let Agni extend to us shelters that best bring luck in order (for us) to  pursue (the gods)—
(shelters) from where he will shower here the goods in heaven and in the  waters for the sake of our settlements.
## 5
The shining one who has none before him, Agni, together with his good  insights,
do the verse-reciters kindle as their Hotar and as the clanlord of the clans. 6. And you will help us in our sacred formulation and in our recitations as  the best of those that invoke the gods.
Growing strong through the Maruts, flame up as our good luck, Agni,  since you best win thousands (of cattle).
## 7
And now give us the good that brings thousands, that brings offspring,  that brings prosperity,
and that brings a brilliant abundance of heroes, o Agni, that is highest  and never diminished.