+++
title = "014"

+++
14 (248)
Agni
R̥ṣabha Vaiśvāmitra
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn describes and praises Agni as the master of the sacrifice. The first verse  announces this theme, describing Agni as the Hotar and the “real sacrificer and best of  sages.” In the first verse the poet also mentions Agni’s “chariot of lightning” by which  he speeds to the sacrifice, and he then returns to the image of the chariot in the last  verse. In that final verse, however, the “chariot” is, as often, the sacrifice itself. The last  verse, therefore, takes the role of Agni as priest and the description of Agni as having a  “chariot of lightning” in verse 1 and combines them in the image of chariot as sacrifice.
## 1
The delighting Hotar has taken his stand upon the ritual divisions: as the  real sacrificer and best of sages, he is the master of the rite.
Agni, the son of strength, with chariot of lightning and hair of flame,  has rested his countenance upon the earth.
## 2
It has been offered to you—take pleasure in (this) recitation of homage— to you, who perceive it, o you who possess truth and strength.
As one who knows, convey here the knowing (gods). Sit down in the middle  upon the ritual grass to help us, o you who are worthy of the sacrifice. 3. Let dawn and night, racing to the prize, run to you, o Agni, here along  the paths of the wind.
When (the priests) anoint him as the first with their (butter-)offerings,  those two stand in the house as if upon a chariot-box.
## 4
O Agni, possessor of strength, to you Mitra and Varuṇa and all the  Maruts chant of your favor,
so that you will stand upright with your flame, o son of strength,
spreading out the settlements, a sun (spreading out) men.
## 5
Since today we have given you your desire, having reverently approached  with hands outstretched,
sacrifice to the gods by means of your most sacrificially skillful mind,  being our inspired priest with faultless thought, o Agni.
## 6
Since from you, son of strength, a god’s many forms of help go outward,  and outward (also go) the prizes of victory,
give us real wealth consisting of thousands through your undeceiving  speech, Agni.
## 7
For you, o Skill with a poet’s purpose, are these things that we mortals, o  god, have done in the rite.
Be aware of everyone whose chariot [=sacrifice] is good. Sweeten
everything here, immortal Agni.