+++
title = "015"

+++
15 (249)
Agni
Utkīla Kātya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
This and the next hymn are attributed to Utkīla Kātya, the grandson of Viśvāmitra.  The hymn describes the morning fire, who is the protector and guide of the sacri ficers. Some of the language in the hymn is evocative of Indra, although Indra is  never mentioned. A  possible oblique reference to Indra, however, might help us  understand verse 4, the central and most puzzling verse in the hymn. There Agni is  invoked as an “invincible bull” who conquers fortresses, a description that strongly  evokes Indra, since it is Indra (or twice Soma acting as Indra) who is áṣāḷha “invin cible,” and it is Indra who characteristically breaks open fortresses. This overlay of  the image of Indra onto Agni may explain some of the complications in the second  half of the verse. In cd Agni is surely the “leader of the sacrifice,” but then who is  the pāyú, the “protector” whom he also leads? If he is the leader of the sacrifice,  Agni himself should be its protector as well. For this reason Oldenberg suggested  emending the text so that “protector” is a subject parallel to “leader.” But if we  accept the text as transmitted and translate “leader of its protector” rather than  “leader and protector,” could Agni lead Agni? Possibly he could, if the first Agni  were the priest Agni and the second were Agni as the embodiment of Indra, as sug
gested in the first half of the verse. Or the poet may also be punning on pāyú, which

means “protector” here as elsewhere (cf. VII.37.8), but which formally and sec ondarily—though only secondarily—could be derived from √pā “drink” and mean  “drinker,” a natural description of soma-drinking Indra. In short, the appearance  of Agni could be or could mark the appearance of Indra.
## 01
Ever-blazing everywhere with your broad countenance, press against  hostilities, demons, and afflictions.
I would be under the shelter of the lofty one who gives good shelter,  under the guidance of easily invoked Agni.
## 02
You at the breaking of this dawn, you at the rising of the sun—become  our herdsman!
Take pleasure in my praise song as (you would) in your own birth, as in  your own lineage, o Agni, well born in your own body.
## 03
You, drawing the gaze of men—(be radiant) through many (dawns), o  bull. Flame-red, o Agni—be radiant amid dark (nights).
O good (Agni), lead us and take us across narrow straits. Make us, your  fire-priests, to have wealth, youngest one.
## 04
Shine, Agni, as the invincible bull having conquered all the fortresses and  their good possessions,
and as the leader of the sacrifice and of its foremost, lofty protector, o  Jātavedas of good guidance.
## 05
Your shelters are many and unbreakable, o singer [=Agni?]. As one very  wise, shining up to the gods,
like a winning chariot convey (us) to victory’s prize. Agni, (convey) us to  the well-supported world-halves.
## 06
O bull, swell and quicken for us victory’s prizes and the milk-yielding  world-halves, o Agni,
since you are aflame with good flame, o god with the gods. Let not a  mortal’s evil intent hem us in.
## 07
– Make the milk-libation, the very wondrous winning of the cow,  succeed, o Agni, for him who invokes you most constantly.
There should be for us a son and a lineage that proliferates. Agni, let this  your favor be for us.