+++
title = "016"

+++
16 (250) Agni
Utkīla Kātya
6 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
The hymn consists of pragātha distichs of one br̥hatī verse and one satobr̥hatī verse. The metrics thus organize the verses into three pairs. Structurally, however,  the poet also emphasizes the unity of the hymn through ring composition: verse 1  refers to Agni as the master of saúbhaga “good fortune” and of rayí “wealth,” and  verse 6 to him as subhága “bearer of good fortune” and the agent of “wealth.” Once again, as in the preceding hymn, the description of Agni evokes Indra, espe cially in verse 1, which refers to Agni as the “master of the smashing of obsta cles,” and in verse 2, in which the poet calls on the troops of Indra, the Maruts,  to follow Agni.
## 1
This Agni is master of heroes in abundance and of great good  fortune.
He is master of wealth consisting in good descendants and cattle. He is  master of the smashing of obstacles.
## 2
Follow this one, you superior men, you Maruts, to strengthen him, in  whom are riches that grow strong with kindness,
that overcome those of evil intent in battles, and that every day swindle  his rival.
## 3
Sharpen us for a share of wealth with an abundance of heroes,
o generous Agni,
o you of mighty brilliance—(wealth) reaching the highest, bringing  offspring, free from affliction, and bursting forth.
## 4
Who creates and overwhelms all living beings, who creates friendship  here among the gods,
he takes his place here among the gods, here amid an abundance of  heroes, and here in the praise of men.
## 5
Agni, do not subject us to lack of thought nor to lack of heroes,
nor to lack of cattle, o son of strength, nor to scorn. Put hostilities away  from here.
## 6
Show a mastery over victory’s prize that brings offspring, o bearer of  good fortune, and that is lofty in the rite, o Agni.
Join us with greater wealth that is delight and brings glory, o you of  powerful brilliance.