+++
title = "017"

+++
17 (251)
Agni
Kata Vaiśvāmitra
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn invokes the present sacrificial fire, the present Agni, as the reappear ance of the ancient Hotar who performed the sacrifice. The hymn emphasizes  the centrality of Agni in the sacrifice by insistently using different derivatives of  √yaj “sacrifice” in four of its five verses: verse 1 has suyajñáḥ, yajáthāya; verse  2, ā́yajaḥ, yakṣi, yajñám; verse 3, yakṣi, yájamānāya; and verse 5, yájīyān, yajā.  Strikingly, verse 4 has no derivative of √yaj, but rather is the direct proclamation  of Agni’s becoming the intermediary between gods and mortals and the source  of life for both.

Verse 1 contains a pun, since aktúbhiḥ can mean both “with unguents” and “through  the nights.” Verse 3 is also complicated because the key word, ājā́nī, is a R̥gvedic hapax.  It could mean “birth” and uṣásaḥ could be genitive singular, which could yield either  “your three births belong to Dawn” or, less likely, “three are the births of Dawn.” Or  ājā́nī could mean “birth-giver” or “birth” and uṣásaḥ could be nominative plural, giv
ing “the three dawns are your births or birth-givers.” As Geldner points out, in favor  of “three dawns” is the fact that three dawns also appear in VIII.41.3. In none of the  possibilities is the interpretation of the half-verse transparent. In the last verse, how ever, there is a direct reference to the Agni of the past and the Agni of the present, so  perhaps verse 3 refers to Agnis of the past, present, and future.
## 1
Being kindled according to his first foundations, he who fulfills all wishes  is anointed with unguents—
he, the flame-haired, ghee-cloaked, purifying Agni, who makes the
sacrifice good—in order to sacrifice to the gods.
## 2
Just as you performed the sacrificial role of the Hotar of the Earth, o  Agni, and just as you observantly (performed that) of the Heaven,
Jātavedas,
so sacrifice to the gods with this offering. Like Manu, carry out this
sacrifice today.
## 3
Three lifetimes are yours, Jātavedas, and three dawns are your births,  o Agni.
By these (births) win the help of the gods by sacrifice as the knowing  one, and then become luck and life for the sacrificer.
## 4
Singing to Agni, the one beautifully shining, beautifully appearing, we  revere you who are to be invoked, Jātavedas.
You have the gods made the messenger, the spoked wheel (of flames), the  conveyor of oblations, and the navel of immortality.
## 5
The Hotar, the better sacrificer before you, o Agni, who once again will  take his seat and (be) the one who is good luck by his own will,
according to his foundations, carry forth the sacrifice, o you who are  observant, and set the rite in place for us in pursuit of the gods.