+++
title = "018"

+++
18 (252)
Agni
Kata Vaiśvāmitra
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This is a hymn in praise of the fire as it gains strength. The first two verses look  forward to the fire’s blaze, which should be directed against the enemies of the  sacrificers. The third and middle verse turns to the ritual acts that cause the fire to  increase—adding fuel to it, offering melted butter into it, and even pouring praise upon it. The last two verses then again describe the blazing fire, but this time the  increasing blaze is not turned against enemies but rather represents and effects the  increasing strength and wealth of the sacrificers.
## 01
Become benevolent toward us, Agni, at our reverent approach, bringing  success (to us), like a companion to his companion, like a father and  mother.
Since the dwelling places of the peoples have many deceptions, burn  against the hostilities turned against us.
## 02
Scorch our near enemies, Agni. Scorch the recitation of the distant,  ungenerous one.
And scorch the invisible ones as you become more visible, good (Agni).  Let your unaging, irrepressible (flames) spread out.
## 03
With kindling wood and ghee, o Agni, seeking, I pour an oblation for  endurance and strength.
Insofar as I am master by my ritual formulation, offering praise (by it),  (I pour) this divine insight in order to win hundreds.
## 04
(Flame) up with your flame, son of strength, when you are praised. Set  rising vigor upon those toiling;
(set) rich (vigor) upon the Viśvāmitras, o Agni, for their luck and life. We  have groomed your body many times.
## 05
Create wealth, o you who are good at winning the stakes—when kindled,  you become just that, o Agni;
(create) rich (vigor) in the house of the praise singer of good fortune.  You have acquired glossy forearms and wondrous forms.