+++
title = "020"

+++
20 (254)
Agni and the All Gods
Gāthin Kauśika
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins by naming deities of the morning, although in the last verse the  poet brings all the gods into his invocation. As in the previous hymn, the poet  employs ring composition, a point that the Anukramaṇī underscores by assigning  the address in both the first verse and the last verse not to Agni but to the All Gods. Also once again, the poet varies the first and last verses. Every verse except the last  one begins with “Agni.” But in that last verse Dadhikrā is transposed in front of  Agni. It is difficult to see if the poet has a purpose in mind other than marking the  last verse through this shift.
However, fronting Dadhikrā, who is a deified horse, does underscore a return  to the equine imagery that opens the hymn. In verse 1 the poet not only mentions  the horse Dadhikrā and the two horsemen, the Aśvins, but he also calls the recit ing priest a váhni, a chariot-driver, whose horses may be his recitations, as Geldner  suggests. Then verse 2 refers to Agni’s vā́jinā, here translated “victorious charges.”  The meaning of the word is not certain, but it is in any case derived from vājín “racehorse” or “prizewinning horse.” Overt references to horses and racing then  subside until the last verse.
## 1
Agni, Dawn, the two Aśvins, Dadhikrā—with his recitations the  chariot-driver calls upon them at daybreak.
Let the gods of good light, bellowing all together toward the rite,
hear us.
## 2
Agni, three are your victorious charges, three your abodes. Three are  your tongues [=flames], o you who are born of truth, (and these three  are) many,
and three are your bodies [=the three sacrificial fires], won by the gods.  Never lapsing, protect our songs with these.
## 3
Agni, numerous are the names of you, the immortal one, o Jātavedas, o  god of independent will,
and, o you who propel everything, (yours are) the many wiles of the wily  (gods), which they have assembled in you, o you about whose kinship  people ask.
## 4
Agni is the leader of the heavenly settlements like Bhaga—he, the god  who drinks according to [/protects] the ritual sequence, who possesses  the truth.
The smasher of Vr̥tra from of old, having every possession, will take the  singer across all difficulties.
## 5
Dadhikrā, Agni, and the goddess Dawn; Br̥haspati and the god Savitar; the Aśvins, Mitra and Varuṇa, and Bhaga; the Vasus, Rudras, and
Ādityas—I call upon them here.