+++
title = "021"

+++
21 (255)
Agni
Gāthin Kauśika
5 verses: triṣṭubh 1, 4; anuṣṭubh 2–3; satobr̥hatī 5
Oldenberg judges this to be not so much a hymn as a collection of verses composed  in various meters. In his earlier translation of the Agni hymns, however, he does494 III.22
note that at least the last two verses “seem to form a distich of an irregular pragātha  type.” On the other hand, Geldner observes that TB III 6.7 includes the whole of  the hymn in the animal sacrifice among the stokīyā verses that accompany the drip ping fat from the vapā, the omentum, while it is being roasted, and Elizarenkova  (1995: 116) further proposes that the different meters of the verses reflect the irregu lar rhythm of the drops as they fall. Whether it originated as a verse collection or it  constitutes a unified composition, the hymn does center on the dripping fat of an  animal sacrifice. The hymn mentions médas “fat” in every verse but one, and even  puns on médas in verse 4 by referring to Agni as médhira “wise.”
## 01
Place this our sacrifice among the immortals. Take pleasure in these  oblations, Jātavedas.
Eat of the drops of fat and of ghee, o Agni, our Hotar, taking your seat  as the first.
## 02
Filled with ghee, drops of fat drip for you, o pure one.
O you on your own foundation, set in place for us the best thing, the  thing to be chosen, in order for us to pursue the gods.
## 03
For you, the inspired poet, o Agni, are the drops dripping with ghee, o  companion.
As the best seer you are kindled. Become the helper of our sacrifice.
## 04
For you drip the drops of fat and of ghee, o independent and
capable Agni.
Proclaimed by poets, you have come with your lofty radiance. Take
pleasure in the oblations, wise one.
## 05
We present to you the most powerful fat [=the vapā], extracted from the  middle (of the animal’s body).
The drops drip for you upon your skin, o good one. Capture them (for)  each god in turn.