+++
title = "022"

+++
22 (256)
Purıs̄ya Agnis ̣
Gāthin Kauśika
5 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 4
Like the surrounding hymns, the Anukramaṇī attributes this hymn to Gāthin,  although, as Geldner notes, TS V.2.3.3 names Viśvāmitra as the poet. Verse 5  is the frequent final verse in the Viśvāmitra hymns (cf. III.1.23, 5.11, 6.11, 7.11,  15.7, 23.5).
Both the Black and White Yajurvedic traditions employ the hymn in the  Agnicayana rite (TS IV.2.4.2, VS XII.47–50) at the consecration and laying of the  bricks of the fire altar. Geldner suggests that this application of the hymn may have  resulted from a misunderstanding of the phrase puriṣyā̀so agnáyaḥ in verse 4, here translated “the fires from their overflowing source,” but traditionally interpreted  in the context of the Agnicayana to mean “the fires of the mud” (cf. ŚB VI.3.2.9  pr̥thivyā́ḥ sadhásthād agníṃ purīṣyàm...ā́bhara “From the dwelling place of the  earth, bring the Agni Purīṣya”).
Hoffmann (1975: 50) cites verse 3 of this hymn as one of the few clear instances  of a heavenly ocean, and he is quite likely right. In verses 2–4, however, the image of  an ocean of waters is overlaid with that of an ocean of light. In verse 2 Agni’s luster  is “glittering, undulating radiance watching men,” a likely reference to the sun or  the brightness of the sky more generally. The “undulating sea” to which Agni goes  in verse 3, therefore, might not be a sea of waters, or rather, not only a sea of water,  but also a sea of light. In verse 4 both the fires and the waters cascade downward.  The fires could be in the waters, but they might also be light, which, like rain, pours  down from heaven.
## 01
Here is Agni, in whom the bellowing Indra has received the pressed soma  in his belly.
As (we praise) a steed, a team-horse, (that has won) the prize of a
thousand, you are praised, Jātavedas, since you are victorious.
## 02
O Agni, worthy to receive the sacrifice, your luster, which is in heaven  and on earth, which is here among the plants and the waters,
and by which you have stretched throughout the wide midspace—that is  glittering, undulating radiance watching men.
## 03
O Agni, you go there to the undulating sea of heaven—there you have  spoken to the gods, who are the holy ones—
to the waters, which, in the realm of light, are beyond the sun, and which  draw nearby beneath.
## 04
Let the fires from their overflowing source, along with the falling  torrents—
(all of them) great refreshments free of deception and free of disease— take pleasure in the sacrifice.
## 05
– Make the milk-libation, the very wondrous winning of the cow,  succeed, o Agni, for him who invokes you most constantly.
There should be for us a son and a lineage that proliferates. Agni, let this  your favor be for us.