+++
title = "023"

+++
23 (257)
Agni
Devaśravas Bhārata and Devavāta Bhārata
5 verses: triṣṭubh, except satobr̥hatī 3
The Agni of this hymn is probably the tribal fire of the Bhāratas (Proferes 2007: 37),  which forms the ritual center of the Bhārata clans. This Agni governs the peoples (vs.

3)—likely the peoples of the tribe, as Proferes suggests—from a location, “earth’s most  desirable place” (vs. 4), among the three rivers. Various theories have been offered for  the identity of Devaśravas, who is addressed in verse 3, and Devavāta, to whom the  Agni of the Bhāratas belong. Surely Devavāta is or was the king of the Bhāratas, since  his is the Bhārata fire. Devaśravas could be a priest or poet, or he could have been a  Bhārata leader, perhaps an ally or successor of Devavāta. In any case, along with the  Agni of the Bhāratas himself, they are the focus of the hymn since they are named in  the central verse and this central verse is marked by a change in meter.
## 1
Churned out and well placed in his dwelling, the young poet, the leader  of the rite,
the unaging Agni amid the aging wood—Jātavedas has received
immortality here.
## 2
The two Bhāratas, Devaśravas and Devavāta, have richly churned the  very skillful Agni.
Agni, look upon (every one) separately with lofty wealth. Then become  the leader of our refreshments day after day.
## 3
Ten fingers have given birth to him, the ancient one, the dear one born  well among his mothers.
Praise the Agni of Devavāta, o Devaśravas, (the fire) who will exert his  will over the peoples.
## 4
He has installed you, Agni, here on earth’s most desirable place, in the  track of the milk-libation, on the brightest day of days.
As (the Agni) of Manu, shine richly upon the Dr̥ṣadvatī, on the Āpayā,  and on the Sarasvatī.
## 5
– Make the milk-libation, the very wondrous winning of the cow,  succeed, o Agni, for him who invokes you most constantly.
There should be for us a son and a lineage that proliferates. Agni, let this  your favor be for us.