+++
title = "025"

+++
25 (259)
Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
5 verses: virāj
As in the previous hymn, each verse begins with “Agni,” whom the poet addresses  in the beginning and the final two verses and who is the subject of verses 2 and  3. Actually verse 4 opens with a vā́yav índraś ca construction, which mixes a voca tive and a nominative, and so is a hybrid that may mark a transition between the  nominative of verse 3 and the vocative of verse 5. The hymn is also defined by ring
composition: sūnúḥ (1a) / sūno (5b) // viśvávedāḥ (1b) / jātavedaḥ (5b). The phrase in the last verse “home of the waters” is somewhat puzzling, so much  so that Geldner assumes an ellipsis of nápāt, which would yield a translation “O  Agni, (child) of the waters, you are kindled in the home....” or the like. But there  is little in the hymn itself to suggest such an ellipsis, nor does Sāyaṇa read one here.  Although it is not clear exactly what the “home of the waters” refers to—it might  simply be the firewood—the end of the verse suggests that Agni makes all homes or  abodes great, wherever he is kindled.
## 01
O Agni, you are the watchful son of heaven and of earth by the
continuity (of fires), providing all possessions.
Sacrifice to the gods here one by one, o attentive one.
## 02
Agni, the knowing one, wins heroic deeds. He wins victory’s prize,  exerting himself for immortality.
Convey the gods here to us, o you of many cattle.
## 03
Agni, the unerring one, shines upon heaven and earth, immortal deities,  common to all people,
since, much glittering through our acts of reverence, he is master through  the prizes of victory.
## 04
O Agni—you and Indra!—journey here to the sacrifice at the home of  the pious man pressing soma,
o you two gods who never disdain to drink the soma.

## 05
O Agni, you are kindled in the home of the waters, as our own, o son of  strength, o Jātavedas,
making the abodes great by your help.