+++
title = "026"

+++
26 (260) Agni Vaiśvānara
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
9 verses: jagatī 1–6, triṣṭubh 7–9, arranged in trcas ̥
The deities and attribution of the hymn are more complicated than indicated above.  The hymn comprises three tr̥cas: the first set of three verses is to Agni Vaiśvānara, the  second to the Maruts, and the third begins with Agni’s self-praise in verse 7 and then  continues with the poet’s description of Agni in verses 8–9. This is one way to regard  the hymn. Geldner offers another, quite plausible analysis. According to him, the first  tr̥ca contains verses to accompany the kindling of Agni. In the second the newly cre
ated Agni is fanned with the help of the Maruts. The third tr̥ca is entirely the speech  of Agni. It begins with the god’s praise of himself and then continues with the god’s  praise of the poet. Bergaigne argues that the Āgnimāruta śastra in the later ritual  consists of three major parts addressed to Vaiśvānara, the Maruts, and Jātavedas and  suggests that this hymn represents an old Āgnimāruta śastra. Oldenberg disagrees  with both Geldner and Bergaigne, holding that the hymn does not possess the kind  of unity that either asserts. In his translation of Agni hymns (1897), he describes the  three tr̥cas as “three independent hymns” because of the placement of the hymn in the  collection; that is, it has more verses than the preceding hymns, while in the normal  arrangement it should have the same number of verses or fewer.
Despite its placement in the collection and the change of meter, we believe that  Geldner and Bergaigne are correct in seeing a coherence to the hymn and find  Bergaigne’s suggestion that this is an early Āgnimāruta śastra an attractive one.
## 1
Having discerned with our mind Vaiśvānara, who conforms to what is  real and finds the sun, we Kuśikas, bringing offerings
and desiring goods, invoke with our songs the god of good gifts, the  delighting charioteer.
## 2
We invoke the beautiful Agni for help, who is Vaiśvānara and
praiseworthy Mātariśvan,
who is Br̥haspati for the divine assembly of Manu, who is the inspired  poet and the listener, the guest and the quick-streaming one.
## 3
Whinnying like a horse, he is kindled by the females [=the fingers of  the priest]; Vaiśvānara (is kindled) by the Kuśikas, generation after
generation.
Let Agni, awake among the immortals, grant us treasure and an
abundance of good men and good horses. 4. Let the prizes of victory go forth. Blended with their powers, the fires  have hitched up their spotted antelopes for beauty.
Growing aloft, providing all possessions, the undeceivable Maruts make  mountains tremble.
## 5
The Maruts, with Agni’s splendor and belonging to all communities—we  beg for their powerful and mighty help—
are the noisy sons of Rudra, cloaked in rain, having the will to destroy  like lions but bringing good gifts.
## 6
We beg (the Maruts)—cohort upon cohort, band upon band—with  our good chants for the radiance of Agni and the power of the
Maruts,
with their dappled horses, with their unreceding generosity, the travelers  to the sacrifice, wise at the ritual distributions.
## 7
[Agni:] “I am Agni, Jātavedas by birth. My eye is ghee; the immortal one  [=soma] is in my mouth.
The chant of three parts, which is the measure of space, the
inexhaustible hot milk, and the offering—I am that by name.”
## 8
Since he [=Agni?] purified the chant with three purifying filters,
discovering understanding and light with his heart,
he made for himself the highest treasure by his own will, and then he  surveyed heaven and earth.
## 9
Lead him across—the inexhaustible well-spring of a hundred streams,  the father of words to be said, who understands inspiration,
and the joyful crackling in the lap of his parents—him who speaks what  is real, o you two world-halves.