+++
title = "027"

+++
27 (261) Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
15 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
The hymn comprises five tr̥cas, at least some of which show formal linkages that  connect a tr̥ca to the one following it. This is particularly obvious in the case  of the third (vss. 7–9) and fourth (vss. 10–12) tr̥cas, which are connected to the  fourth and fifth (vss. 13–15) respectively. The last verse of the third tr̥ca (9a,  c) describes Agni as váreṇyaḥ. . . dákṣasya pitáram “(the one) to be chosen, the  father of skill,” a characterization echoed by váreṇyaṃ dákṣasya in 10ab, the first  verse of the fourth tr̥ca. Likewise, the poet “summons” (īḷe) Agni at the end of  verse 12 and then describes him as īḷénya “to be summoned” in verse 13. A ring  formed by havíṣmant “bearing offerings” in the first and penultimate verses pro vides a unity to the whole hymn.

Even though this hymn is closely connected to the ritual, the precise application  of the verses is not clear. Bergaigne thinks that they are sāmidhenī (fire-kindling)  verses to be recited as the fire is kindled, and surely this is true of at least the last  tr̥ca, which repeats the verb sam √idh in each of its verses. Oldenberg agrees that  parts of this hymn are sāmidhenī verses, but suggests that verses 7–9, for example,  describe the agnipraṇayana, the procession of the fire to the uttaravedi in the classi
cal Vedic rite, and that 10–12 refer to the installation of the fire. The agnipraṇayana  and the deposition of the fire are closely conjoined rites.
## 1
Forth to you (go) the heaven-bound prizes, bearing offerings, by the  ghee-filled (ladle).
He [=Agni?] goes to the gods, seeking their favor.
## 2
With my song I summon Agni, recognizing inspired words, bringing  success to the sacrifice,
with his attentive listening and his emplaced (fires).
## 3
Agni, may we be able to guide the prizewinning (horses) of you, a god; may we cross beyond hatreds.
## 4
Being kindled in the rite, the purifying Agni to be summoned,
he with flaming hair—him do we beg.
## 5
Of broad visage, immortal, ghee-cloaked, receiving well-poured oblations, Agni is the oblation-carrier of the sacrifice.
## 6
With their sacrificial spoons held out, bringing the sacrifice with their  insight just so, they eagerly
put Agni here for help.
## 7
As the Hotar, the immortal god goes in front with his craft,
spurring on the ritual distributions.
## 8
The prizewinner is placed among the prizes. He is led forth in the rites as the inspired poet bringing success to the sacrifice.
## 9
Through insight the one to be chosen has been created. He has received  as the embryo of living beings
the father of skill through the continuity (of his fires).
## 10
I have installed you, the one to be chosen, (the father) of skill, o you  who are made with strength by the libation;
(I have installed) you, the bright shining fire-priest, o Agni.
## 11
Agni, guiding (his horses) and crossing the waters—at the harnessing of  the truth, the eager
inspired ones kindle him with the prizes of victory.
## 12
The child of nourishment, shining in the rite up to heaven,
having a poet’s purpose, Agni—him I summon.
## 13
As the one to be summoned, to be revered, visible throughout the  darkness,
the bull Agni is kindled. 14. The bull Agni is kindled, conveying the gods like a horse.
Bearing offerings, they summon him.
## 15
As bulls ourselves, o bull, may we kindle you, the bull,
shining aloft, o Agni.