+++
title = "029"

+++
29 (263) Agni
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
16 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 1, 4, 10, 12; jagatī 6, 11, 14–15
This hymn was composed to accompany the creation of a new fire for the sacrifice.  This fire was created through friction using a fire drill that consisted of two pieces of  wood. The upper fire-churning stick was held vertically, with one end in a recessed  area in the lower piece of wood, which was horizontal. Wood chips were placed  around the recessed area on the lower plank. The upper stick was then rotated back  and forth, like a churn. In the later ritual this is done by wrapping a rope around the  upper stick and pulling on one side and then the other to make the stick rotate back  and forth. Eventually, enough heat was generated so that the wood chips caught fire.
This process of churning out the fire was regularly identified in the R̥gvedic  hymns with sexual intercourse, and this repeated image presents the upper  fire-churning stick as the father, with phallic overtones especially in verse 1, and the  lower fire-churning stick as the mother of fire. Another theme that runs throughout  the hymn, and again a common one in Agni hymns, is the idea that Agni is born as  a priest of the sacrifice, who carries the oblations (vss. 4, 7) and offers the sacrifice  (vs. 8) and who is a sage poet (vss. 5, 12) and a Hotar (vss. 8, 16) in the company of  the seven Hotars (vs. 14), the seven priests of the rite. The priests kindling Agni are  named in verse 15: they are the Kuśikas, whose knowledge and ability to formulate  the truth about Agni the hymn accentuates.
## 1
Here is the base for fire-churning; here is the readied begetting tool  [=upper fire-churning stick].
Bring here the clanlord’s lady [=lower fire-churning stick]. Let us churn  Agni in the ancient way.
## 2
As Jātavedas, who is placed within the two fire-churning sticks, like an  unborn child well placed within women with child,
Agni is to be summoned day after day by those awake, by the sons of  Manu bearing offerings.
## 3
Attentive, bear down upon her who is opened up [=the lower
fire-churning stick]. Impregnated on this day, she has given birth to  the bull.
With flame-red crests—his countenance is glowing—the son of the
libation has been born within the ritual pattern.
## 4
In the footprint of the libation and upon the navel of the earth, we would install you to convey our oblation, o Agni Jātavedas.
## 5
O men, churn out the unduplicitous poet, the discerning and immortal  one of beautiful face.
Beget the beacon of the sacrifice, the foremost one in front—Agni, the  very benevolent, o men.504 III.29
## 6
When they churn him with their arms, he shines out, like a prizewinning  horse, flame-red here in the wood.
Unstoppable, like the shimmering (chariot) of the Aśvins on its course  [=the sun?], he avoids the stones, burning the grasses.
## 7
As soon as he is born, Agni shines, becoming ever more visible—he,  the prizewinning horse, the inspired one praised by poets, the one  bringing good gifts,
whom the gods have established at the rites—the one to be summoned,  knowing all things, conveying oblations.
## 8
Sit attentive, Hotar, in your own broad place; make the sacrifice sit in  the womb of the well-performed (sacrifice).
Pursuing the gods, you will sacrifice to the gods with the offering. Agni,  place lofty vigor in the sacrificer.
## 9
Companions, create the smoky bull and without faltering go toward  victory’s prize.
Here is Agni, overwhelming in battles and rich in good heroes, by  whom the gods overwhelmed the Dasyus.
## 10
Here is your womb at its season, from which you shone at birth. Recognizing it, Agni, take your seat here, and then make our songs  strong.
## 11
He is called Tanūnapāt as the embryo belonging to the lord [=the upper  churning stick?]. He becomes Narāśaṃsa when he is born,
and Mātariśvan when he has assumed his measure in his mother. He  became the rush of the wind in leaping forth.
## 12
The poet is churned out by skillful churning and installed with skillful  installation.
O Agni, perform good rites. Sacrifice to the gods for him seeking  the gods.
## 13
Mortals have begotten the immortal one, who is no miscarriage,  overwhelming, hard-jawed.
Joined together, ten unwed sisters [=fingers] embrace the male just born. 14. From of old, bringing the seven Hotars, he has shone forth in the lap of  his mother when he blazed upon her udder.
Day after day, greatly delighting, he does not blink after he has been  born from the belly of the lord.
## 15
Fighting their enemies like the advance troops of Maruts, those  first-born of the formulation [=the Kuśikas] know everything.
The Kuśikas raised a formulation filled with brilliance. One by one,  each in his house, they kindled Agni.
## 16
Since we chose you here today while the sacrifice was proceeding, o  attentive Hotar—
you have steadfastly journeyed and you have steadfastly labored—as  the knowing one recognizing this, journey here to the soma. 
