+++
title = "030"

+++
30 (264) Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
22 verses: triṣṭubh
This long hymn follows a familiar path. It begins with three verses expressing the  sacrificers’ hopes that Indra will appear at their sacrifice and their worries about his  continuing absence. There follow a number of verses (4–14) describing the powers  and deeds of Indra, past and present, including the defeats of Vr̥tra (8) and Vala  (10). This section ends with two verses (12–13) on the sun and dawn, showing that  Indra orders the cosmos both spatially and temporally. The riddling verse 14, with  the well-known paradox of the “cooked” milk contained within a “raw” cow, ends  this section of the hymn by seeming to identify the dawn as cow with other images  of plenty for which Indra is responsible; it picks up the cow imagery already found  in verse 10 concerning the release of the cows from the Vala cave. Moreover, since  sacrificial gifts are distributed at the dawn ritual, the mention of dawn sets the stage  for the requests for gifts at the end of the hymn.
The next part of the hymn (15–17) begins abruptly with an address to Indra  and a command to him:  he is exhorted to come to the aid of the poet and his  allies against enemies in violent battle. The final section (18–21) continues the direct  requests to Indra, but here for material goods to be distributed peaceably at the sac
rifice. The final verse (before the refrain) applies the model of the Vala victory to the  present, beseeching Indra to continue to break open cowpens and distribute cows. As often, the concerns of the whole hymn are subtly foreshadowed in the first  verse, which both establishes the sacrificers as beset by hostile forces and their sac rifice as a site for beneficial exchange with the god.
The hymn is characterized by a number of hapaxes and by affective morphology,  especially in the sections devoted to Indra’s opponents; the translations of some of  these words are provisional.
## 1
They desire you, your comrades in soma; they press the soma; they set  out pleasurable offerings.
They endure the taunting of the people, for, Indra, there is no sign
from you.
## 2
Even the farthest dusky realms are not at a distance for you. But drive  here with your two fallow bays, bay-horsed one.
It is for (you), the sturdy bull, that these pressings here were made and  the pressing stones yoked when the fire was being kindled.
## 3
Indra of good lips, bounteous, overwhelming, having a great troop,  powerfully ranging, mettlesome—
that which you, powerful one, established among mortals, even when  hard-pressed, where are these manly powers of yours now, bull?
## 4
For you, stirring the unstirrable, alone range about smashing obstacle  after obstacle.

It is following your commandment that heaven and earth and the  mountains stand like (pillars) implanted.
## 5
And, o you who are much invoked with acclamations, in fearlessness  you alone talked tough, since you are the obstacle-smasher.
Even these two world-halves without limits—when you grabbed them  together, bounteous Indra, it was just a handful for you.
## 6
(Come) forth along an easy slope with your two fallow bays; let your  mace come forth, pulverizing the rivals.
Smash those facing you, those following, those turned away. Make all  this come true; let it be accomplished.
## 7
To whatever mortal you have provided sustenance, he takes a portion of  the household goods, even what is not yet apportioned.
Auspicious is your benevolence and covered with ghee, much-invoked  Indra; your generosity provides a thousand gifts.
## 8
The one dwelling together with (his mother) Dānu, the handless vermin  did you utterly crush, much-invoked Indra.
With your powerful (mace), Indra, you smashed at the sneering footless  Vr̥tra, who was growing strong.
## 9
You set down in its seat the whole, great, limitless, vital earth, Indra. The bull propped up heaven and the midspace. Let the waters flow here,  propelled by you.
## 10
Vala, the enclosure of cattle, unquiet and fearful, opened up (even)  before being struck, o Indra.
He [=Indra] made the paths easy to travel, to drive out the cows. The  choir (of Aṅgirases) aided the much-invoked one, blowing (on their  instruments).
## 11
The one—Indra—filled the two—earth and heaven—the joint  repositories of goods.
And from the midspace, at their join [i.e., of heaven and earth], as  charioteer of refreshment (bring) us prizes in yoke together, o
champion.
## 12
The Sun does not confound the directions as they are directed, as they  are day after day propelled forth by him of the fallow bays.
When he has fully reached (the end) of the road, only after that does he  perform his unyoking of the horses. But that is his (way).
## 13
They desire to see, at the coming of Dawn from night, the great  glittering face of her who shines forth [=Dawn].
They all know when she has come with her greatness. Many are the  well-done deeds of Indra.
## 14
Great light was deposited in her udder. Herself raw, the cow roams  about carrying the cooked (milk).
Every sweetness was brought together in the ruddy one, when Indra  established her for nourishment. 15. Indra, stand fast! The (enemies’) “journey-buckets” [=chariots]  have come. Do your best for the sacrifice, for the singer, for your
comrades.
The mortals who use dirty tricks, those of evil ways, the cheaters
wearing quivers are to be smashed.
## 16
All around your battle-cry is heard by the closest foes. Smash your most  scorching missile down on them.
Cleave them below; break them apart; overwhelm them. Smash the
demonic force, bounteous one; make them subject to you.
## 17
Tear out the demonic power, root and all, Indra; cleave its middle;  shatter its top.
How far have you sent it scooting? Hurl your scorching lance at the  hater of the sacred formulation.
## 18
It is for our well-being and with your prize-seeking (horses), o leader,  that you will sit down to many great refreshments.
Might we be winners of lofty wealth. Let your portion, conferring
offspring, be in us, Indra.
## 19
Bring hither to us a brilliant portion, Indra. Might we deposit it amid  the surplus of your giving.
As if in the (sea-)basin, desire spreads out in us. Fulfill it, goods-lord  of goods.
## 20
Invigorate this desire with cows, with horses, with recompense in gold,  and you will (further) spread it out.
Seeking the sun, the inspired poets, the Kuśikas, have made with their  thoughts a (ritual) conveyance for you, for Indra.
## 21
Keep breaking open the cowpens for us, (break out) the cows, lord of  cows; let winnings and victory-prizes together come to us.
You are the ruler of heaven, you bull, whose blusterings are real. For us,  bounteous one, become a giver of cows.
## 22
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.