+++
title = "031"

+++
31 (265)
Indra
Kuśika Aiṣīrathi or Viśvāmitra Gāthina
22 verses: triṣṭubh
This dense and often puzzling hymn has given rise to much discussion. The heart  of the hymn (vss. 4–11 and passim throughout the rest of the hymn) provides one

of the fullest accounts in the R̥gveda of the Vala myth and especially of Indra and  the Aṅgirases as they besiege the Vala cave and seek to free the cows within by  means of song and ritual activity. Since the cows of the Vala myth are often used as  symbols of the dawns, the hymn also celebrates the coming of dawn and its ritual  manifestations, including the distribution of priestly gifts (dakṣiṇā), which occurs  at the early-morning ritual.
Perhaps the most striking part of the hymn, however, is found in the first three  verses, which are often taken as depicting the production of the ritual fire as an alle gory of cosmic incest. Although there are certainly hints of an incestuous liaison,  the relationships among the various kinship terms here are not at all clear, and in  our opinion the ritual references to the production of fire so dominate the picture  and distort the underlying sexual configurations that it is a mistake to seek too  literal a mythological reading. The translation of the first two verses, especially, is  provisional. Our identifications of the personae with various ritual elements differ  from those of other scholars (who also differ among themselves), but in our opinion  the ritual reference here is not to the initial production of ritual fire, but rather the  transformation, through removal to the east, of the undifferentiated ritual fire into  the new offering fire, an action well known from the later ritual literature, where  the new fire with its eastern hearth is called the Āhavanīya and the older one in the  west the Gārhapatya. If this particular ritual procedure was an innovation in the  R̥gveda or pre-R̥gveda, as we suspect, a mystical and riddling presentation of it like  this would not be surprising.
The connection between this opening description of the birth of Agni and the  following treatment of the Vala myth may not be superficially obvious, but it is the  theme of dawn that unites them: fire is kindled at dawn, and the release of the Vala  cows is regularly likened to the breaking of dawn.
It is notable that neither Indra nor the Aṅgirases are named for most of the recital  of the Vala myth, though they are referred to constantly. Indeed the plural Aṅgirases  is not found in the mythic section, only the singular (vs. 7) referring to Indra. Indra  is named, but not until verse 11, the exact center of the hymn (minus the refrain,  vs. 22) and the standard locus for mysteries and their solutions. However, various  epithets, associates, and exploits of Indra that uniquely identify him and that are  irrelevant to the Vala myth have foreshadowed this naming: Saramā, Indra’s dog, in  verse 6; his opponent Śuṣṇa in verse 8; and the Vr̥tra-smashing earlier in verse 11.  After the first naming of Indra in verse 11 the hymn broadens its view to include a  range of Indra’s cosmogonic deeds, especially the separation of Heaven and Earth  and the smashing of Vr̥tra.
The hymn returns to the ritual here-and-now starting around verse 17, and the  theme of dawn, appropriate both to the fire-kindling verses 1–3 and the extensive  treatment of the Vala myth, prompts the requests for Indra’ liberality to be mani fested in the early-morning dakṣiṇā, with the dispensing of gifts compared to the  outpouring of cows from the opened Vala cave. 1. Instructing the (grand)daughter [=Āhavanīya?] of his daughter
[=Gārhapatya?], the (offering-)conveyor [=Agni] has come—he the
knowing one, ritually serving the visionary power of truth—
to where the father [=priest? Agni?], stretching out straight, has run  toward the outpouring of his daughter [=butter offering?] with
capable mind.
## 02
The son of her body [=Agni?] has not left behind his leavings for her  sister [=Gārhapatya?]. He has made the womb [=Āhavanīya?] a
repository for the winner.
When the mothers [=fingers] begot the (offering-)conveyor, one of the  two good workers [=fire-churning sticks] was the actor, the other was  the one assuring success.
## 03
Agni was begotten, quivering with his tongue [/by the offering-spoon,  trembling], to display the sons [=flames?] of the great ruddy one.
Great was the womb, great the birth of these here, great the growth of  the one with fallow bays [=Indra] through the sacrifices.
## 04
The victorious (clans [=Aṅgirases?]) escorted the contender [=Indra?].  They distinguished the great light from the darkness.
Recognizing him, the dawns rose up in response. He became the lone  lord [/husband] of the cows—Indra.
## 05
The insightful ones bored through to the (cows), though they were in  a stronghold. The seven inspired poets impelled (the cows?) with
advancing mind.
They found the whole path of truth. Himself knowing the way, he
[=Indra] entered among them [=cows] with homage.
## 06
When Saramā found the break in the rock, she made the great ancient  herd directed toward one goal.
Sure-footed, she led the vanguard of the cows [/syllables]. First
recognizing (them), she went to their bellowing.
## 07
The foremost inspired poet [=Indra] came, acting in partnership (with  the Aṅgirases). The rock brought the embryo to sweetness for the
good worker.
The young blood won, doing battle alongside the youths. Then he
became (an) Aṅgiras immediately upon singing.
## 08
The counterweight of every being, standing at the forefront, he knows all  the races; he smashes Śuṣṇa.
Following the track of heaven, seeking cows, chanting, the comrade  released us, his comrades, from calumny.
## 09
With cow-seeking mind, they sat down (to a ritual “Session”) with their  chants, making for themselves a way toward immortality.
Just this was their long Session, by which, for months, they sought to  win (the cows) through truth.

## 10
Surveying (the cows) en masse, they delighted in their own possession,  milking out the milk of the age-old semen.
Their cry heated the two worlds through. Amid (all) that was born they  set the outstanding one [=Indra?]; amid the cows they set heroes. 11. He was Vr̥tra-smasher with (the help of) those who were born (together)  [=Maruts], and he sent the ruddy (cows) surging upward with
oblations and with the chants (of the Aṅgirases)—he is Indra.
She of broad extent, bearing ghee-rich (milk) to him, milked out honey,  sweetness—the thoroughbred cow.
## 12
It was for the father that they performed a ritual Session, for him also  they prepared a seat, because the good workers surveyed the great,  turbulent (cowpen).
Propping apart with a prop the two begetters [=Heaven and Earth],  while sitting (the Session) they fixed upright the dazzling (seat).
## 13
When the great (Earth), the Holy Place, has set him to piercing— him who is grown strong in a single day, spread wide in the two  world-halves,
and in whom the flawless hymns are united—(then) all powers are  conceded to Indra.
## 14
Great is your comradeship—I long for it here, and for your powers.  Numerous teams [=our poetic thoughts] come here to the
Vr̥tra-smasher.
Great is the praise song. We have arrived at the favor of the patron  [=Indra]. For us, liberal one, become a protector of cows.
## 15
Great the dwelling place, abundant the gleaming (goods) that he  found; thereupon he assembled movable (goods [=livestock]) for his  comrades.
Indra along with the men, as shining one, begot at one blow the sun,  the dawn, the way, the fire.
## 16
Also the all-gleaming waters, spread wide, did this master of the house  send surging forth toward a single goal.
Through the days, through the nights, (the priests) impel the runners,  (the streams) of honey [=soma] being purified with poets as their  purifying filters.
## 17
The two black treasure-chambers [=Dawn and Night], deserving the  sacrifice, follow (each other) in succession through the magnanimity  of the Sun,
when your amiable, straight-flying comrades (gather) round about, to  twist your greatness (toward them), Indra.
## 18
Become lord of liberalities, you smasher of Vr̥tra, a bull of songs,  conferring vigor all the life long.
Come here to us with your friendly fellowship, a great one hastening  with great help. 19. Serving him with homage like the Aṅgirases, I make new (their hymn)  born of old, for the older one.
Run over the deceits, manifold and godless, and set us up to win the  sun, bounteous one.
## 20
The far-extended mists have just become clear; carry us across to the  edge of them, to well-being.
O Indra, as charioteer protect us from harm. Quickly, quickly make us  winners of cows.
## 21
The Vr̥tra-smasher, lord of cows, has put his cows on display. He has  come between the black (nights) (and bright days) with the ruddy
manifestations (of the cows [=dawns]).
And allotting the liberalities [=gifts] in accord with truth, he opened up  all the doors that are his own.
## 22
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.