+++
title = "032"

+++
32 (266)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
17 verses: triṣṭubh
The ritual application of this hymn is announced in the first verse:  the Midday  Pressing of soma, which in some ritual circles, as here, Indra shares with the Marut  troop, his supporters in the Vr̥tra battle. Throughout the hymn invitations to drink  soma at this rite are interspersed with praises of Indra’s cosmogonic deeds, espe
cially the slaying of Vr̥tra. In verses 9–10 Indra’s powers are ascribed to his origi nal drinking of soma immediately after birth, with the implicit suggestion that the  sacrificers’ current offering of soma will revitalize those powers for the sacrificers’  benefit.
For the most part the language of this hymn is straightforward and even a bit  monotonous, and there are a number of technical terms pertaining to the soma  sacrifice (see, e.g., the types of soma in vs. 2). There are, however, several studied  contrastive pairs (e.g., “vulnerable...invulnerable,” vs. 4; “goddesses...godless,” vs.  6; see also vss. 7, 11), as well as a few striking images, such as Indra “wearing the  earth on his other hip” (vs. 11) as an indication of his greatness.
## 1
O Indra, lord of soma, drink this soma here, the Midday Pressing, which  is dear to you.
Snuffling out your two lips, you bounteous possessor of the silvery drink,  having unhitched your two fallow bays, reach exhilaration here.

## 2
Mixed with cows [=milk], stirred (with meal), or pure, o Indra—drink  the soma. We have given it to you for your exhilaration.
Joined in pleasure with the formulation-making flock of Maruts, with  the Rudras, drench yourself (in it), to satiety.
## 3
They who increased your tempestuousness, who increased your power,  the Maruts, hymning your strength, Indra—
at the Midday Pressing, you with mace in hand, drink in a flock with  the Rudras, you of good lips.
## 4
It was they who became inspired at his honeyed (drink), Indra’s troop,  who were the Maruts,
impelled by whom he found the vulnerable place of Vr̥tra, who thought  himself invulnerable.
## 5
As by Manu, o Indra, enjoying the pressing, drink the soma for manly  power ever new.
Let yourself be turned hither by our sacrifices, you of the fallow bays.  Along with the hastening ones, you set to running the flooding
waters,
## 6
When you sent forth the waters, like steeds to run in a contest—having  smashed Vr̥tra,
who was lying still, with your moving weapon of death, o Indra, him  having surrounded the goddesses, godless himself.
## 7
Let us sacrifice to Indra, increased through homage, lofty and towering,  unaging and youthful,
whose greatness the two dear world-halves measured, but did not  measure up to the greatness of him worthy of the sacrifice.
## 8
Many are the well-done deeds of Indra. The All Gods do not violate  the commandments (of him),
who upholds earth and this heaven. Of wondrous power, he begot the  sun and the dawn.
## 9
Undeceptive one, this greatness of yours is truly real: because, just born,  you drank the soma,
not the heavens, Indra, nor the days, nor the months and years could  obstruct the strength of you, the powerful one.
## 10
You, Indra, just born, drank the soma for exhilaration in the highest  distant heaven.
After you had entered heaven and earth, then you became the first to  suckle the bard.
## 11
You smashed the serpent lying around the flood, displaying its  strength—you powerfully born, as more powerful (than he).
Heaven did not come close to your greatness then, when you wore the  earth on the other hip.
## 12
Since the sacrifice has become your strengthener, Indra, and the dear  ritual meal of pressed soma also, aid sacrifice upon sacrifice, being the one who deserves the sacrifice; the  sacrifice aided your mace in the serpent-smashing.
## 13
With the sacrifice as aid I (previously) brought Indra nearby with his  aid. May I turn him hither for newer favor,
him who was strengthened by previous praises, who by midmost ones  and by the present ones.
## 14
She labored when she begot me [=poet]—the Holy Place [=Earth? ritual  ground?]. I shall praise Indra before the decisive day,
so that at that time he (will) carry us across (to the far shore) of
constraint, as if with a boat. Both (sides) call upon him as he travels. 15. His (soma) tub is filled—hail! As a man pours out a bucket, I have  poured (for him) to drink.
And the dear soma drinks have together turned him here with
respectful circumambulation, to exhilarate Indra.
## 16
Not the deep river nor the surrounding peaks could obstruct you,  much-invoked one,
when impelled just so from your comrades, Indra, you broke into the  cattle enclosure though it was firmly fastened.
## 17
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.