+++
title = "033"

+++
33 (267)
Visvá ̄mitra and the Rivers
Viśvāmitra Gāthina / Rivers
13 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 13
Although this hymn is found in the Indra collection, the Anukramaṇī identifies  Indra as the dedicand only of verses 6–7, with the remainder divided between the  rivers (Nadyas: 1–3, 5, 9, 11–13) and the poet himself, Viśvāmitra (4, 8, 10). After  two opening verses describing the confluence of the Vipāś and Śutudrī rivers, this  justly famous poem consists of a dialogue between those rivers and Viśvāmitra,  who begs the rivers to stop in their course to allow the Bharata forces, under his  patron, King Sudās (not named here, but see III.53.9), to cross. They accede to his  request in return for his ensuring their future fame in his poetry, and the Bharatas  cross successfully, as is announced in verse 12—after which the rivers are urged  to refill themselves with water and flow again. That it is the poet who succeeds in  temporarily stopping the rivers is yet another example of the power of properly  formulated speech to control the physical world. The final verse (13), in a different  meter, may be a magic spell, exemplifying the continuing belief in the power of the  word by applying this legendary river crossing to a team in trouble at a ford.514 III.33
## 01
Forth from the lap of the mountains, eager, racing with each other like  two mares unloosed,
resplendent, licking each other like mother cows (their calves), the  Vipāś and Śutudrī (rivers) speed with their milk.
## 02
Impelled by Indra as you long to take part in the forward thrust, you  drive like two charioteers to the sea,
clashing together, swelling with your waves, the one of you merges into  the other—you resplendent ones.
## 03
[Viśvāmitra:] I have driven to the most motherly river [=Śutudrī]; we  have come to the broad, well-portioned Vipāś—
the two who are like mothers together licking their calf, proceeding  together along the same womb [=riverbed].
## 04
[Rivers:] So we are—swelling with milk, proceeding along our  god-made womb.
Our forward thrust, launched in a surge, is not to be obstructed.  Seeking what does the poet keep calling upon the rivers?
## 05
[Viśvāmitra:] Stop for my somian speech, truthful ones, for an instant,  in your travels.
My lofty inspired thought (has gone) forth to the river: seeking help,  have I, the son of Kuśika, called upon (you).
## 06
[Rivers:] Indra with the mace in his arms dug us channels: he smashed  away Vr̥tra [/the obstacle] surrounding the rivers.
God Savitar of the lovely hands led (us): at his forward thrust we  journey widely.
## 07
[Viśvāmitra:] This act of heroism is to be proclaimed ever anew, the  deed of Indra when he hewed apart the serpent.
He smashed apart the enclosures with his mace. The waters went  seeking a way to go.
## 08
[Rivers:] This speech, singer—do not forget it—so that later generations  will hear it from you.
Favor us in return in your hymns, bard: don’t put us down among men.  Homage to you.
## 09
[Viśvāmitra:] Listen well to the bard, sisters. He has driven to you from  afar with his wagon and chariot.
Bow down; become easy to cross, staying below his axle(s) with your  currents, you rivers.
## 10
[Rivers:] We will listen to your words, bard. You have driven from afar  with wagon and chariot.
I [=one river] will bow down to you like a young woman swollen (with  milk, to her infant), (while) I [=other river] will bend to you like a  maiden to her cavalier.
## 11
[Viśvāmitra:] When the Bharatas should really have crossed you  entirely—the horde seeking cattle, propelled, sped by Indra— then certainly your forward thrust, launched in a surge, will rush
(again). I wish for the favor of you who deserve the sacrifice.
## 12
[Viśvāmitra:] The cattle-seeking Bharatas have entirely crossed; the poet  has shared in the favor of the rivers.
Swell forth, nurturing, very generous; fill your bellies; drive quickly.
## 13
Let your wave push up the yoke-pins; o waters, let loose the
yoking cords.
Let the two inviolable (oxen), doing no ill, without offense, not come to  naught.