+++
title = "034"

+++
34 (268)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The emphasis in this hymn, as often in Indra hymns, is on Indra’s victories and the  gains he won not only for himself but also for gods and mortals. In several verses  (esp. 3 and 6) Indra’s sheer power, reinforced by his backup troops, is contrasted  with his control of clever tricks and artifice; both types of approach contribute to  his success.
The underlying theme of victory, expressed in a variety of ways earlier in the  hymn, becomes insistent in the numerous repetitions of the verb “win” (√san) in the  last three verses before the refrain (vss. 8–10), which contain eight forms of the verb  (including four forms of the perfect sasā́na in a single verse [9]); the root appears  previously in the hymn only in the root noun compound svar-sán “winning the sun”  in verse 4.
The poets’ role in spurring Indra to victory is mentioned several times at the  beginning of the hymn (vss. 1–2), but is otherwise backgrounded; the poets’ task in  the hymn is more to celebrate and praise (vss. 6, 7, 8) the god than to inspire him. In  fact, it is Indra who grants inspiration to the poets (vs. 5), an action that precedes  and makes possible their praises in verses 6–8.
One curious feature of the hymn is the presence of phraseology and imagery  characteristic of the god Agni in 3cd and of fire-priests in 4ab. The point of contact  is probably to be found in verse 4, where Indra is said to win the sun and make it  shine, and to find the light, since the kindling of the ritual fire at dawn is associated  with and often presented as the cause of the sunrise.
## 1
Indra, stronghold-splitter, overcame the Dāsa with his chants, finding  goods, fragmenting his rivals.
Spurred on by the sacred formulation, grown strong in his body, he of  abundant gifts filled both world-halves.

## 2
I rouse forth speech as a spur for you, the forceful combatant, exerting  myself for the immortal one.
Indra, you travel at the forefront of the peoples stemming from Manu  and of the divine clans.
## 3
Indra obstructed the obstacle [/Vr̥tra] through control of his troop  [=Maruts]; he beguiled (the wiles) of the wily ones through control  of forms.
He smashed the one whose shoulders were spread [=cobra]. Burning at  will in the woods, he brought to light the nourishing streams of the  nights.
## 4
Indra, winning the sun, begetting the days, conquered in the battles  along with the fire-priests, as superiority (itself).
He made shine for Manu the beacon of the days [=sun]; he found the  light for lofty joy.
## 5
Indra “got into” mighty thrusts, manfully assuming his many manly  (powers).
He made these insights perceptible to the singer; he extended this bright  hue of theirs [=insights].
## 6
They admire the great things of him, the great one: many are the  well-done deeds of Indra.
He utterly crushed the bent ones with his band; with his tricks (he  crushed) the Dasyus, (though) he had overwhelming strength.
## 7
Through combat Indra with his greatness created a wide realm for the  gods, he the master of settlements, filling the bordered domains. At the seat of Vivasvant [=ritual ground] these (deeds) of his do the  inspired poets, the sage poets sing with their hymns.
## 8
Him, victorious in every way, worthy to be chosen, granting victorious  might, having won the sun and the divine waters,
him, who won the earth and this heaven—Indra do they celebrate, those  who take joy in his insight.
## 9
He won the steeds and the sun he won; Indra won the cow of many  benefits,
and the benefit of gold he won. Having smashed the Dasyus, he aided  the Ārya hue.
## 10
Indra won the plants, the days; the trees he won, the midspace. He split Vala; he expelled the challengers. Then he became the subduer  of those who set their wills against him.
## 11
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes. 
