+++
title = "035"

+++
35 (269) Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
11 verses: triṣṭubh
A simple hymn, entirely devoted to Indra’s journey to the sacrifice and his enjoy ment of it, mostly expressed in the imperative. The progress of the hymn is com pletely chronological, from the yoking of his pair of horses, through the journey,  during which Indra is exhorted to pass by other sacrificers (vs. 5), and finally the  arrival at the ritual ground, properly prepared, and the drinking of the soma. The  mention of the Maruts in verses 7 and 9 suggests that the Midday Pressing, devoted  to Indra and the Maruts jointly at least in Viśvāmitra circles, is the sacrifice in ques tion (see also, for example, III.32). There is also a rather charming concern for the  welfare of Indra’s horses (vss. 3, 7).
In the context of R̥gvedic poetry what is striking are the absent elements. There  is neither praise of the god honored nor any mention of his attributes or heroic  deeds. (The sole exception is 9b, with its unelaborated allusion to the Maruts’ role  in strengthening Indra and the alliance resulting therefrom.) Nor do we hear about  the purpose of Indra’s soma-drinking—rousing him to perform heroic deeds either  in the past or for our benefit now. Nor, despite the many imperatives, does the poet  ask for any gifts or for aid of any sort. It is an extraordinarily focused hymn, and  its apparent simplicity may result not from artlessness, but from careful pruning.
## 1
Mount the pair of fallow bays being yoked to the chariot. Drive, like the  wind, to our teams [=poetic thoughts].
You will drink the stalk when you have surged to us. Indra, hail! We have  given (it) to you for your exhilaration.
## 2
The nimble span, the pair of fallow bays I yoke to the yoke-poles of the  chariot for the much invoked one.
The two will bring Indra right here to this sacrifice assembled from every  side, as if at a run.
## 3
Lead near the two bullish (stallions), protecting them from the scorching  heat, and help them—you autonomous bull.
Let the two horses graze. Unhitch the two sorrels here. Every day eat  roasted grains of the same appearance.
## 4
With a sacred formulation I yoke for you the formulation-yoked pair of  fallow bays, your swift comrades in joint revelry.
O Indra, mounting the sturdy, well-naved chariot, thinking ahead,
knowing, drive up to the soma.
## 5
Let other sacrificers not stop your bullish, straight-backed fallow bays. Drive beyond them, each and every one. We will prepare properly for  you with pressed soma drinks.

## 6
Yours is this soma here. Come here, nearby. Well-disposed, drink of it  each time anew.
At just this sacrifice, having sat down on the ritual grass, put just this  drop into your belly, Indra.
## 7
The ritual grass has been strewn for you, the soma pressed, o Indra.  The roasted grains have been prepared for your fallow bays to eat.
To the bull of many talents who is accustomed to it, to you
accompanied by the Maruts are the oblations given.
## 8
This (soma) have the men, the mountains, and the waters jointly with  the cows made honeyed for you.
Having come here along your own paths, well-disposed, drink of it,
lofty one, thinking ahead, knowing.
## 9
The Maruts to whom you gave a share in soma, who strengthened you  and became your flock—
joined in pleasure with them, eagerly desirous, drink the soma with the  tongue of Agni, Indra.
## 10
Indra, drink of the pressed (soma) just by your own power or take a  drink with the tongue of Agni, o you who deserve the sacrifice.
Either from the hand of the Adhvaryu or from the oblation of the
Hotar enjoy the offered sacrifice, able one.
## 11
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.