+++
title = "036"

+++
36 (270)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina (1–9, 11) and Ghora Āṅgirasa (10)
11 verses: triṣṭubh
In contrast to the pared-down aesthetic of the immediately preceding hymn, this  one, entirely devoted to Indra’s drinking of soma, presents a series of extreme  images and striking turns of phrase. The emphasis is on Indra’s sheer size and capa ciousness when he drinks soma, and liquid images predominate: he is conceived of  both as a vast container for liquid (vs. 4) and as the liquid itself (vss. 6, 8). These  images of Indra’s vastness are deftly used as measures of his capacity to give to his  human worshipers (e.g., vss. 5, 9, 10).
## 1
Set this offering here to be won, being ever newly united with help. At every pressing he is strengthened by strengthenings, he who has
become well famed through great deeds. 2. From olden days the soma drinks are known to Indra, because of which  he, the craftsman, has bullish joints and extensive power.
Grasp at (the drinks) being offered; Indra, drink of the bull, rinsed
by bulls.
## 3
Drink, become strong. Yours are the pressed soma drinks, Indra—the  first ones and these here.
Just as you drank the previous soma drinks, Indra, so take a drink
today, as the one to be admired anew.
## 4
A great ample tankard at the (ritual) enclosure, he is master of powerful  capacity, daring power.
The earth never encompasses him, when the soma drinks have
exhilarated the one with the fallow bays.
## 5
Great, powerful, he is strengthened for the heroic deed. The bull has  been perfected through poetic insight.
Indra is the apportioner. His cows are givers of prizes. His gift-cows  propagate in abundance.
## 6
When the rivers set forth like a shot, their waters went to the sea like  (two) charioteers.
But Indra is wider even than that seat [=sea], when soma, the milked  plant, fills him.
## 7
The rivers, uniting with the sea, are carrying well-pressed soma  to Indra,
(while) those who possess hands [=human priests] milk the plant with  (the tools) they use for carrying [=those same hands]; they purify it
in a stream of honey with purifying filters.
## 8
His cheeks are like lakes holding soma; he entirely encompasses many  pressings.
When Indra devoured the first foods, having smashed Vr̥tra he chose  the soma.
## 9
Bring it here. Let no one contain it. For we know you as the goods-lord  of goods.
Indra, the great giving that is yours—offer it to us, o possessor of the  fallow bays.
## 10
Offer us (a portion) of abundant, all-desirable wealth, o bounteous  Indra of the silvery drink.
Provide a hundred autumns for us to live; (provide) for us ever new
heroes, o Indra of the lips.
## 11
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.
