+++
title = "037"

+++
37 (271)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
11 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 11
This is a good example of a hymn driven almost entirely by rhetoric. The organizing  principle of the hymn is the careful stationing of an accented form of the name indra ́ at the beginning of the third pāda (after the hemistich break) in eight of the first nine  verses. The middle verse of this sequence (vs. 5) instead has indra ́ at the beginning  of the verse, and this slight deviation from pattern marks an unemphatic omphalos.  As often in R̥gvedic hymnic composition, a pattern set through most of the hymn is  both broken and advanced at the end. Verse 10 seems at first to announce the epiph
any of the god, which has been desired throughout the hymn; the name of the god  has been demoted to unaccented second position, after the annunciatory augmented  aorist, the only past tense form in a hymn full of imperatives and presents: “you  have come, Indra.” The poet has tricked us, however: Indra has come not to us but  to fame. The final verse (11) is in a different meter, often a sign of an extra-hymnic  verse, but it also emphatically renews the call for Indra’s epiphany and therefore pro
vides a fitting end to the rest. The name indra ́ opens the final pāda (11d). The “content” of the hymn is relatively conventional and clearly subordinate to  the rhetorical structure, but the light texture and balance of the phrases surround ing the all-important repeated name are quite pleasing.
## 01
For Vr̥tra-smashing capacity and for victory in battle—
Indra—we turn you hither.
## 02
Let the cantors make your mind inclined our way—
Indra of a hundred resolves—and your eye as well.
## 03
We implore your names with all our songs—
Indra of a hundred resolves—in vanquishing hostility.
## 04
We magnify (him) through the hundred embodiments of the
much-praised one,
of Indra, the supporter of the settled domains.
## 05
Indra, much invoked, I call toward me to slay Vr̥tra,
to win spoils in raids.
## 06
Be victorious when the prize (is set). We implore you,
Indra of a hundred resolves, to slay Vr̥tra.
## 07
Amid brilliant outbursts on the battle-drive, amid claims to fame that  bring success in battles,
Indra, be victorious at the hostilities.
## 08
Drink the most unbridled, brilliant, wakeful soma—
Indra of a hundred resolves—to aid us.
## 09
Your Indrian powers that are among the five peoples—
Indra of a hundred resolves—those I want for myself. 10. You have come, Indra, to lofty fame. Establish for yourself brilliance  difficult to surpass.
We exalt your unbridled power.
## 11
From nearby come here to us—also, able one, from afar.
The broad space that is yours—Indra possessor of the stone—from  that come here.