+++
title = "038"

+++
38 (272)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina or Prajāpati Vaiśvāmitra or Prajāpati Vācya
10 verses: triṣṭubh
A dense and difficult, but rewarding, hymn. Although the hymn is found in the  midst of the Maṇḍala III Indra hymns and is assigned to Indra by the Anukramaṇī,  the name Indra is not found in the hymn (save in the appended Viśvāmitra refrain),  and indeed it is not at all clear that there are any references to Indra in the hymn.  Not surprisingly the hymn has given rise to much discussion.
Any interpretation of its contents and intent will necessarily be speculative,  and the richness and multivalence of the images should not be reduced to a single  and simple paraphrase. Nonetheless, we will attempt a sketch here. It is regularly  remarked that the hymn is cosmogonic. In fact, it seems to concern two creations: the  Ur-creation of undifferentiated material and the subsequent establishment of indi
vidual name and form. As usual in ancient India, creation is conceived of as an act  of division and individuation, rather than of assemblage. This second, and more  interesting, creation was carried out by the equivalent of poets, and the current poet  of this hymn identifies himself and his activities with the authors of this second  creation and seeks their model for his own poetic work. The large number of neu
ter pronouns of unclear reference throughout the hymn seem to be a grammatical  reflection of the undifferentiated material of the first creation, and the poet seems  almost to be inviting us to participate in the second creation by ourselves assigning  them name and form.
The poem begins with three verses in the poet’s own voice, concerning the older  generations of poets and the poetic tradition. In verse 1 he sounds both tremulous  and self-assured, mindful of the tradition he belongs to but also proud of his own  insight. In the second verse, addressing himself (as so often) in the 2nd person, he  exhorts himself to seek models from the earlier poets, and introduces the notion  that they “crafted heaven for themselves,” a reference to the second creation. The  third verse fleshes out this statement, in describing just how the older poets set  about this creation. Most important is the final pāda, in which they “put apart” the  two worlds—the primal act of separation that makes life possible.
Verse 4 moves abruptly to a new subject, or rather to an older one. A previously  unmentioned figure is introduced obliquely, and though he is explicitly credited

with a “name” in pāda c, it is not at all clear what that name is—possibly Viśvarūpa  “possessing all forms” of pāda d. In verse 5 it appears that this bull is responsible  for the Ur-creation preceding the separation just described. The lack of differentia tion in the Ur-creation may be signaled by the androgyny of its source—“the bull  gave birth.” The same verse also introduces two unnamed kings, “sons/descendants  of heaven.” This epithet in the dual usually refers to the Aśvins, but this identifica tion seems unlikely here. Other suggested pairs are Mitra and Varuṇa (Grassmann,  Geldner) or Indra and Varuṇa (Sāyaṇa, Renou, Oberlies); either pairing is perhaps  possible, but the fact that the poet forebears to name them suggests that a precise  identification may run counter to the poet’s intentions. It might also be noted that  the only identifiable dual entities in the hymn are the two world-halves (vss. 3, 8,  probably 9), and in verse 8 they “set  all in motion.” It therefore seems possible  that in this hymn the “two descendants of heaven” could in fact be the two worlds,  which have dominion over (vs. 5) and tend to (vs. 6) the “(cosmic) division,” both  as products of the primal separation in the second creation and producers of the  further individuation occurring in that second creation: note the increasing num
bers in verse 6ab.
In verse 7a we return to the androgynous Ur-creator, now explicitly identified as  both bull and cow; the rest of the verse introduces the second creation characterized  by “names” and “form.” The creators here are “masters of artifice,” poets perhaps.  Verse 8 essentially repeats verse 7, as is signaled by the identical opening phrase, but  this time it is the current poet himself (who made a brief reappearance in vs. 6cd),  who by his praise hymn is responsible for movement in the world (i.e., the second  creation) contrasted to the static golden emblem (8b) arising from the first creation.  The poet thus implicitly identifies himself with the masters of artifice, the poets, in  verse 7. In the final verse (aside from the refrain) both the unnamed dual pairing,  quite possibly the two worlds, and the masters of artifice return to bear witness to  the creative actions of the poet himself, who through his powerful tongue seems to  control the individuated forms. We have thus returned to the issues raised in verse  1, but with the poet having successfully assumed his vocation and commanded the  respect of his predecessors in the creative act.
## 01
Like a craftsman I ponder my inspiration. Bending like a prizewinning  steed amenable to the chariot-pole,
touching now on my own dear things, now on distant ones, I seek sage  poets to see (these) whole—(though) I (too) have wisdom.
## 02
Ask also the powerful generations of the poets: they as good workers,  holding their minds firm, crafted heaven for themselves.
These are the precedents for you, which keep growing stronger.
Sought by mind they have now come (to rest) on its [=mind’s] firm
foundation.
## 03
And, in depositing their own secret (tracks/names) in safety just here,  they ornamented the two world-halves for their dominion. (When) they fully measured (them) with their measures, they held fast  the two broad (worlds). They have put apart the two great ones,
which were fitted together, to give (us) nourishment.
## 04
As he was mounting they all tended to him. Donning beauties, he  roams about with his own light.
Great is that name of the bull, the lord. Possessing all forms
[/Viśvarūpa], he mounted the immortal (things/worlds).
## 05
The earlier older bull gave birth. Here are his many proliferating riches. You two sons of heaven, with your insights you established your
dominion over the (cosmic) division, you kings, from olden days.
## 06
O kings, you two tended to the three, to the many, to all the seats in the  (cosmic) division.
Having come here with my mind, I saw even the wind-haired
Gandharvas under your commandment.
## 07
This [=undifferentiated creation] was just his—(he who is both) bull  (and) milk-cow; (then) with (individual) names they meted out the
“fellowship of the cow” [=the joint creation of bull and milk-cow].
Donning one lordly power after another, the masters of artifice
parceled out (individual) form in it.
## 08
This [=creation] was just his, the impeller’s, (it was) nothing of mine— the golden emblem that he fixed firm.
But it is through (my) good praise hymn that the two world-halves set  everything in motion here. He has swaddled the generations, like a
young woman her children.
## 09
You two assure success to (that creation) of the age-old great one, (the  creation) that is the divine blessing. May you two enfold us.
All masters of artifice look upon the deeds of him whose tongue is a  herdsman, who surmounts the various forms.
## 10
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.