+++
title = "039"

+++
39 (273)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins (vss. 1–3) with a charming image of poetic thought as a lovely  young woman, beautifully arrayed, seeking Indra as her husband and giving birth  to twins, who perhaps are two types of ritual speech. The subject changes in verse  4, moving to the mythic past and one of Indra’s great deeds: opening the Vala cave524 III.39
and releasing the cows (of dawn) and by extension the sun (vss. 4–6). The implicit  connection between the verses concerning poetic speech and those treating the Vala  myth is not expressed, but would be well known to the audience: Indra and his help ers the Aṅgirases (here under the names Navagvas and Daśagvas “nine-cowed” and  “ten-cowed”) used the power of properly formulated speech to open the cave. This  is the mythic model for the poet’s use of ritual speech to secure light and safety for  the sacrificer and the sacrifice (vss. 7–8).
## 01
Thought goes toward Indra as her husband, curling herself out of my  heart, crafted as praise,
she who is wakeful when recited at the rite. Indra—what is born for you,  know that.
## 02
Being born of old from heaven itself, wakeful when being recited at the rite, clothing herself in auspicious, silvery garments, this one right here in us  is the ancient-born, ancestral hymnic vision.
## 03
She, as bearer of twins, bore her twins [=R̥c and Sāman?] just here. In  soaring, (she) has mounted the tip of the tongue.
The pair, once born, accompany the wondrous forms (of Agni)—the two,  smashing the darkness, have come here to the base of scorching (Agni). 4. There is no one among mortals who scorns them: our fathers, who were  battlers for cows.
Indra with his great force (emptied out) the fastnesses for them, he with  his wondrous power emptied out the cowpens.
## 05
When the comrade with his comrades the Navagvas, the warriors, from  their crouch followed after the cows—
this is the real truth—Indra with the ten Daśagvas found the sun, which  was dwelling in darkness.
## 06
Indra found the concentrated honey in the ruddy one, found the footed  and the hooved in the “bend of the cow.”
What was placed in hiding, fit to be hidden, hidden in the waters he took  in his right hand—he of right generous gifts.
## 07
He should choose light, distinguishing it from darkness. May we be at a  distance from difficulty in a close encounter.
Indra, you drinker of soma, increased by soma, enjoy these hymns of the  bard, the latest of many.
## 08
Light for the sacrifice should suffuse the two world-halves. May we be at  a distance from abundant difficulty,
for also in abundance are those who grant good passage to the mightily  thrusting mortal, o good ones.
## 09
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.