+++
title = "040"

+++
40 (274) Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
9 verses: gāyatrī
This simple hymn hardly deviates from the theme of Indra’s soma-drinking, a  concentration that is reflected in the repetitive elements: the vocative índra (gener ally verse- or pāda-initial) in seven of the nine verses (1–6, 9) and the collocation  “pressed soma” in four verses (1–2, 4–5) and split over another two (6/7). Note also  the conjoined expressions “nearby and afar” (vs. 8) and “afar and nearby” (vs. 9),  together forming a “magic square.”
## 1
Indra! We invoke you as bull when the soma is pressed.
Drink of the honey, of the stalk.
## 2
Indra! Enjoy the pressed soma that finds the will, you much-praised one. Drink it, drench yourself in it—the ever satisfying (soma).
## 3
Indra! Further our sacrifice, with its emplaced (fires?), along with all  the gods,
o you who are praised as clanlord.
## 4
Indra! These pressed soma drinks of yours go forth, o master of  settlements,
to your dwelling place—the glimmering drops.
## 5
Put into your belly the pressed soma worthy to be chosen, Indra.
Yours are the heaven-ruling drops.
## 6
O you longing for songs, drink our pressed (soma). With streams of  honey are you anointed.
Indra! Just by you is glory given.
## 7
The imperishable heavenly effusions of the wooden (vessel) attend  on Indra.
Having drunk of the soma, he is grown strong.
## 8
From nearby come here to us, and from afar, Vr̥tra-smasher.
Enjoy these songs of ours.
## 9
If you are invoked between the far and the nearby,
Indra, come here from there.