+++
title = "041"

+++
41 (275)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
9 verses: gāyatrī
An elementary hymn, focused entirely on the ritual and on Indra’s journey to it and  participation in it. In this it is reminiscent of III.35, though in a different meter, and

like that hymn this one entirely lacks praise of the god, reference to his past deeds,  and prayers for his gifts and aid.
## 01
You, Indra, when you are called to drink our soma,
drive here toward me with your pair of fallow bays, o possessor of the  (pressing) stone.
## 02
Our Hotar was seated at his season; the ritual grass has been strewn in  due order.
The pressing stones were yoked in the early morning.
## 03
Here are the sacred formulations being made, o you whose vehicle is the  formulation. Sit on the ritual grass;
seek after the offering cake, o champion.
## 04
Take pleasure in our pressings, in these praises, o Vr̥tra-smasher,
in hymns, o Indra who longs for songs.
## 05
Thoughts lick the broad, soma-drinking lord of strength,
Indra—like mothers a calf.
## 06
Find exhilaration from the stalk, then, to show great generosity with  your own person.
You will not put your praiser to scorn.
## 07
Offering our oblations, we sing, seeking you, o Indra,
and you are seeking us, you good one.
## 08
Do not unharness at a distance from us; drive nearby, you who are dear  to your fallow bays.
O autonomous Indra, become exhilarated here.
## 09
Let the two hairy(-maned horses) convey you nearby in a well-naved  chariot, Indra,
the two with ghee on their backs—(for you) to sit on the ritual grass.