+++
title = "043"

+++
43 (277)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Although this hymn, like the two immediately preceding it (41, 42), focuses on  Indra’s journey to and presence at the soma sacrifice, its texture is richer and its  rhetoric more shapely. (It is also in the longer triṣṭubh meter, rather than the gāyatrī of the previous two.) The first four verses insistently establish the journey motif  with the opening “Here—drive” (ā́... yāhi, vss. 1–3) / “Here ...” (ā́, vs. 4), along  with an abundance of adverbs meaning “here, nearby, up close.” Verse 5 consists  of four rhetorical questions, each introduced by the interrogative particle kuvíd,  implicitly begging Indra’s intervention on the singer’s behalf. The initial “Here ...”  and the journey motif return in verse 6; verse 7, the last before the refrain, invites  Indra, presumably finally arrived, to drink the soma, inserting brief mentions of  two well-known myths, the falcon’s stealing of soma and Indra’s opening of Vala.  As is common in these journey hymns, Indra’s horses have a prominent part in the  hymn (see esp. vs. 6, but also vss. 1–4).
## 01
Here—drive right up nearby, stationed on the chariot seat. Just yours is  the soma-drinking from olden days.
Your two dear comrades—unharness them at the ritual grass. These  oblation-bearers are calling you.
## 02
Here—drive across the many settled domains—here, across the prayers  of the stranger, right up to us, with your two fallow bays,
for these thoughts, crafted as praise, are calling you, Indra, taking
pleasure in your fellowship.

## 03
Here—drive swiftly to our sacrifice, which has grown strong with  reverence, o god Indra, together with your fallow bays,
for I keep calling you with my thoughts, (offering) a delightful dish of  ghee, to the joint revelry of the honey drinks.
## 04
Here—if these bullish fallow bays will convey you, the two well-limbed  comrades amenable to the chariot-pole—
taking pleasure in the pressing accompanied by the roasted grain, will  Indra, as our comrade, hear the tributes of his comrade?
## 05
Will you indeed make me your herdsman of the people; will you indeed  (make me) king, you bounteous possessor of the silvery drink?
Will you indeed (make) me a seer, (for) I have drunk of the pressed
drink; will you indeed do your best for immortal goods for me?
## 06
Here—let the lofty fallow bays, on being yoked, joint revelers, convey  you nearby, Indra,
(the horses) that once again stretch forth the doorposts of heaven, the  well-curried dumb (beasts) of the bull [=Indra].
## 07
Indra, drink of the bullish (soma), rinsed by the bulls [=priests], which  the falcon brought here to you, who wanted it,
in whose exhilaration you rouse the communities, in whose exhilaration  you opened up the cowpens.
## 08
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.