+++
title = "044"

+++
44 (278)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
5 verses: br̥hatī
The major trick of this short hymn is the extended pun between the words hári “gold-colored” (also used regularly for Indra’s “fallow bay” horses) and harya “enjoy,” a pun exploited elsewhere. (For a far more elaborate example, see X.96.)  For the purposes of this hymn, we have rendered the former as “golden,” even in  reference to the horses, and the latter as “gladden(ing),” in an attempt to sketch the  pun in English. In the last verse the poet slyly turns the golden mace of verse 4 into  silver, a move that would surely have caught the attention of the audience.
## 1
Let this be gladdening to you—the soma pressed here by the golden  (stones).
Rejoicing, Indra, come here to us along with your golden (horses).
Mount the golden chariot. 2. Being glad, you made the dawn beam; being glad, you made the
sun shine.
Knowing, observant, you wax strong over all the beauties, o Indra of the  golden horses.
## 3
Heaven with its golden nourishment, Earth with its golden form  did Indra
hold firm, (and there was) abundant feeding of the two golden ones  [=Heaven and Earth], between which the golden one [=Sun] wanders. 4. Once born, the golden bull radiates through the whole luminous realm. Having golden horses, he takes the golden weapon, the golden mace into  his two arms.
## 5
Indra (uncovered) the silvery mace glad (in its work), decked out with  gleaming (flames?),
uncovered the soma pressed with golden stones; he drove out the cows  with the golden ones.