+++
title = "047"

+++
47 (281)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This ritually focused hymn is appropriate to the Midday Pressing, where Indra  drinks soma in company with the Maruts. Both Indra and the Maruts are  named in every verse, and all but the final verse contain an imperative of the verb “drink.” The Maruts’ role in strengthening Indra for his various exploits is  treated in verses 3–4.
## 1
Accompanied by the Maruts, o Indra, as a bull drink the soma after your  wont, for joy, for exhilaration.
Pour the wave of honey into your belly. You are the king of the pressed  drinks from olden days.
## 2
In joint enjoyment, Indra, in joint throng with the Maruts, drink the  soma, o champion, as Vr̥tra-smasher and knowing one.
Smash the rivals, push away the despisers. Then make fearlessness for us  on all sides.
## 3
And, seasonable drinker, according to the (right, ritual) seasons take a  drink of the soma pressed by us, o Indra, with the gods [=Maruts] as  your comrades,
the Maruts to whom you gave a share (in the soma), who stood by
you: you smashed Vr̥tra; they established strength for you.
## 4
Those who strengthened you at the serpent-smashing, bounteous one,  who in the fight with Śambara, who at the quest for cattle, o you of  the fallow bays,
who as inspired poets applaud you now—o Indra, drink soma in joint  throng with the Maruts.
## 5
Him accompanied by the Maruts, the bull grown strong, not stingy, the  heavenly commander—Indra—
the all-conquering, mighty giver of strength—him we would invoke here  for present help.