+++
title = "048"

+++
48 (282) Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
5 verses: triṣṭubh
In this short hymn (four verses, without the refrain) we are given a tantalizing  glimpse of Indra’s infancy and what appears to be his youthful rivalry with and  outsmarting and overcoming of his father, here as sometimes elsewhere identified  with Tvaṣṭar; in these activities he is seemingly abetted by his mother. In this primal  scene she offers Indra soma just after his birth, and he, having drunk it, defeats his  father and steals the soma. Unfortunately this brief sketch is the fullest and clearest  expression of this mythological background. See also IV.18.
## 1
Immediately on his birth the young bull showed favor to the ritual  offering of the pressed stalk.
Drink—at pleasure, however your (pleasure) is—the first of the somian  sap-mixture that brings success.

## 2
When you were born, on that day in desire for it [=soma] you drank the  mountain-abiding beestings of the plant.
Your mother, the young woman who gave you birth, poured it around  for you in the house of your great father for the first time.
## 3
On approaching his mother, he called for food; he looked upon the sharp  soma as his udder.
Clever, he took care to keep away the others; of manifold countenances,  he performed great things himself.
## 4
Strong, overcoming the powerful, of overwhelming strength—he made  his body as he wished.
Having overwhelmed Tvaṣṭar at his birth, Indra, having stolen the soma,  drank it in the cups.
## 5
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.