+++
title = "049"

+++
49 (283)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The first word of this hymn, śáṃsā “I will proclaim” (or possibly 2nd sg. imperative  “proclaim!”), sets the tone for the rest, which consists entirely of descriptive glori fication (save for the refrain). There are no direct requests, though the praise of his  victorious power and of his control of goods implicitly invites the god to exert the  same for the singer and his community.
## 01
I will proclaim great Indra, toward whom all the soma-drinking
communities have directed their desire,
the very resolute one, fashioned for distinction, whom the two Holy Places  [=Heaven and Earth] and the gods begot as the bane of obstacles.
## 02
The most manly sovereign king, mounted on fallow bays, whom now as  before no one overcomes in battles,
who along with his warriors is strongest through our fortifying (hymns).  He in his broad expansion curtailed the lifetime of the Dasyu.
## 03
Victorious in battles like an overtaking steed, traversing the two
world-halves, streaming abundance.
Like Bhaga at the decisive moment, he is to be invoked with thoughts;  like a father, he is dear, easy to invoke, conferring vigor.
## 04
As supporter of heaven, of the dusky realm, he is inquired after; erect  like a chariot, he is (like) Vāyu teamed with goods. Illuminator of the nights, generator of the sun, he distributes the share,  like the Holy Place [=ritual ground] the prize.
## 05
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.