+++
title = "050"

+++
50 (284)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This brief “journey” hymn signals its application to the Midday Pressing by the  adjective “accompanied by the Maruts” ending the first half-verse; the usual men tion of Indra’s horses in journey hymns is also found. In addition to the refrain (vs.  5), verse 4 is also a repetition, of the near final verse of the first Indra hymn in this  maṇḍala (III.30.20). Since III.50 is the final hymn in the regular sequence of Indra  hymns in III (III.51 is a collection of tr̥cas in various meters; III.52–53 are similarly  various), the double repetition seems to act as a ring-compositional device to mark  the end of the Indra cycle.
## 1
At “Svāhā!” let Indra drink, to whom the soma belongs. On coming here,  bulging, bullish, accompanied by the Maruts,
let him, though (already) of broad extent, become filled with these foods.  Might the oblation bring to fulfillment the desire of his body.
## 2
I yoke for you these two obliging (horses) for speed, whose obedience you  favored from olden days.
Here should the fallow bays deposit you, you of good lips. Drink of this  pleasing well-pressed (soma).
## 3
While being hymned, (the horses? priests?) have established (the soma)  desirous of mixture with cows [=milk], to nourish Indra, the deliverer,  for preeminence.
Becoming invigorated once having drunk the soma, you of the silvery  drink, drive together cows in quantity for us.
## 4
Invigorate this desire with cows, with horses, with recompense in gold,  and you will (further) spread it out.
Seeking the sun, the inspired poets, the Kuśikas, have made with their  thoughts a (ritual) conveyance for you, for Indra.
## 5
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.534 III.51