+++
title = "051"

+++
51 (285)
Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
12 verses: jagatī 1–3, triṣṭubh 4–9, gāyatrī 10–12, arranged in trcas ̥
The hymn falls into four sets of tr̥cas, in three different meters. Since the hymn  follows one of five verses, each tr̥ca should originally have been a single hymn,  to conform to the normal patterns of arrangement within maṇḍalas. However,  even if it did consist originally of four separate hymns, the evidence of larger  ring composition discussed with regard to III.50 makes it likely that III.51 was  an addition to the original Indra collection, which would once have ended with  III.50.
The first two tr̥cas consist of standard tropes of praise for Indra, with an empha sis on the songs and singers that express this praise. There are no strong indications  of unity within the tr̥cas. The third tr̥ca is devoted to Indra’s drinking of soma in  company with the Maruts and is thus appropriate to the Midday Pressing, like  several other Indra hymns in this maṇḍala (III.32, 35, 47, 50). The final tr̥ca is even  more insistently focused on Indra’s soma-drinking.
## 1
The bounteous supporter of the settled domains, worthy of hymns—to  Indra have the lofty songs roared—
the much-invoked one, having grown strong through well-turned
(hymns), immortal, awakening every day.
## 2
The superior man with a hundred resolves, a flood of powers—my songs  approach Indra from all sides—
winning spoils, splitting strongholds, swift at crossing the waters,
attending to the ordinances, attending closely, finding the sun.
## 3
The singer seeks admiration from him who distributes goods: Indra gives  a friendly reception to his faultless rhythms,
for at the seat of Vivasvant [=ritual ground] he finds pleasure. Praise  him, victorious in every way, the smasher of hostility.
## 4
You [=Indra], the most manly of men—you [=singers], recite to the hero  forcefully with songs, with hymns.
Possessing many magical powers, he compacts himself together for
might. Reverence is his. From olden days he alone is lord.
## 5
Many are the tributes to him among mortals; many goods does the  earth bear (for him).
For Indra the heavens, the plants, and the waters guard their wealth,  and the lively (streams) and woods.
## 6
For you the sacred formulations, for you the songs altogether have been  established, o Indra of the fallow bays. Enjoy them!
Become a friend of help right now; o comrade, o good one, establish  vigor for the singers. 7. O Indra along with the Maruts, drink the soma here, as you drank of  the pressed (soma) beside Śāryāta.
With your guidance, in your shelter, o champion, the wise poets of
good sacrifices seek their win.
## 8
Eagerly desirous, here drink the soma pressed by us, o Indra, with the  Maruts as your comrades—
as when all the gods busied themselves around you, just born, for great  plunder, o much-invoked one.
## 9
At the crossing of the waters, o Maruts, he is a friend. They, who give  favors, have applauded Indra.
Together with them let the Vr̥tra-gnawer drink the pressed soma in the  very seat of the pious worshiper.
## 10
Because this pressed (drink) is right here at hand with its strength, o  lord of benefits,
drink of it, o you who long for song.
## 11
Which(ever soma drink) will suit your nature, halt yourself at that pressing. Let it exhilarate you, who deserve the soma.
## 12
Let it reach to your two cheeks, to your head, Indra, (accompanied) by  a sacred formulation—
to your two arms, o champion, for (you) to give.