+++
title = "053"

+++
53 (287) Indra, etc.
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
24 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 10, 16; anuṣṭubh 12, 20, 22; gāyatrī 13; br̥hatī 18
This sprawling hymn, a supplement to the Indra collection, consists of at least  six different sections in five different meters. There is little or no connection  among the parts, which were probably originally independent. However, the  whole seems intended to glorify the poet Viśvāmitra and his family, the Kuśikas,  as well as his patron, King Sudās, and the Bharatas. Moreover, several of the  different parts have clear reminiscences of other hymns in the Indra cycle of this  maṇḍala, and so the hymn serves as a sort of summary of the themes of this  Indra collection.
The beginning of the hymn (vss. 1–6) is the most conventional part, with its  invitation to Indra to come to our ritual with gifts and to drink the soma. The most  interesting feature is the mention of the pleasures of wife and home (vss. 4–6) and  the envoi to Indra in verse 6, urging him to go home after consuming the soma  at our sacrifice. (See also I.82.5–6.) This dismissal seems appropriate to the final  hymn of the Indra collection and may in part account for this little hymn being  appended here. The next section (vss. 7–14) is subtly soldered to the first:  the final word  of verse 6 is dákṣiṇāvat “accompanied by priestly gifts,” while the first phrase  of verse 7 is imé bhojā́ḥ “these benefactors”—the word bhojá is used through out the hymn devoted to the dakṣiṇā (X.106) to refer to the bestowers of the  priestly gifts. The whole of this second section concerns the relationship of the  poet Viśvāmitra and his family with his patron, King Sudās and his people, the  Bharatas, via the mediation of Indra, whose powers the poet can command for  the sake of Sudās and his subjects because of his poetic gifts. There are several  reminiscences of previous Indra hymns in III. Verse 7, with the patrons com
pared to the Aṅgirases, recalls the extensive treatment of the Aṅgirases in III.31.  Verse 9 gives a synopsis of III.33, in which Viśvāmitra stops the rivers flowing so  Sudās and his troops can cross; the name Sudās is mentioned in this story only  here. Viśvāmitra’s family, the Kuśikas, are found here in verses 9–11; in III.33.5  he calls himself “the son of Kuśika,” and a repeated verse containing the plural  of the name serves as a ring-compositional marker for the whole of the Indra  cycle of Maṇḍala III (III.30.20 = III.50.4), as discussed in the introduction to  the latter hymn. This section ends with a slighting mention of a rival and appar ently non-sacrificing group, whom Indra is urged to subjugate to Sudās and the  Bharatas.
The next two verses (15–16) are the most mysterious in the hymn; they both  concern a female figure identified as sasarparī́, the formation and etymology of  which is unclear and which may either be a proper name or an attributive charac terizing adjective. (Our translation, “the squirming, sappy (cow called) Sasarparī,”  is a portmanteau containing both adjectives evoked by the phonology and mor phology of the word and the proper name; we consider it a multiple semi-pun.)  The Anukramaṇī assigns these two verses to Vāc [=“speech”] Sasarparī, and some  scholars consider that the figure the embodiment of the Kuśikas’ verbal art. In any  case she seems to be responsible for the fame of the people she aids.
The next four verses (17–20) appear to have no connection with the rest of the  hymn. They are prayers to deflect various possible catastrophes that might befall a  team of oxen and the vehicle they pull on a journey, and wish for safe return. This  section reads as if it were a continuation of or expansion on the Zauberspruch at  the end of III.33 against potential difficulties afflicting a team and its wagon at  a ford.
The final four verses (21–24) are very difficult to interpret. They have tradition ally been taken as the expression of the implacable hostility between Viśvāmitra  and Vasiṣṭha, which is a staple of later texts (e.g., the Mahābhārata). But there  is no whiff of this personal hostility in the R̥gveda, in our opinion, and there is  certainly no mention of Vasiṣṭha, direct or indirect, in the verses here. There is,  however, hostility: verse 21 calls on Indra to help us defeat our enemy, and the next  few verses express in colorful images the impotence of the enemy’s actions and  weapons. The most puzzling verse is the final one, where the Bharatas, the people

of Sudās, celebrated in verse 12, appear to be presented in an unflattering light. We  have no explanation for this.
## 1
O Indra and “Mountain” [=Indra’s mace?], with a lofty chariot convey  hither precious nourishments, providing good heroes.
Pursue the oblations at our ceremonies, o gods. Become strengthened by  our hymns, becoming exhilarated on the refreshing drink.
## 2
Stay just so, bounteous one; don’t go away. I will sacrifice to you from the  well-pressed soma.
I grasp your hem like a son his father’s—Indra, powerful one—with the  sweetest hymn.
## 3
Let us both recite, Adhvaryu: sing in response to me. Let us both make a  vehicle enjoyable to Indra.
Sit right here on the ritual grass of the sacrificer. And then the hymn will  be recited to Indra.
## 4
Just the wife is the home; she is the womb. Let your yoked fallow bays  convey you to it.
Whenever we will press soma, Agni the messenger will run to you.
## 5
Drive yon, bounteous one, and drive hither. Brother Indra, in both places  there is a goal for you,
where there is a resting place for your lofty chariot and unhitching for  your prizewinning donkey.
## 6
You have drunk the soma; drive forth home, Indra: your lovely wife, a  great delight, is in your house,
where there is a resting place for your lofty chariot and unhitching
accompanied by (priestly) gifts for your prizewinner.
## 7
These benefactors, the Aṅgirases in different form, sons of heaven,  heroes of the Lord,
giving bounties to Viśvāmitra at the Pressing of a Thousand, lengthen  their own lifetime.
## 8
Form after form the bounteous one assumes, wrapping his own body in  tricks,
when three times a day he has come here from heaven in an instant,
drinking out of turn by (the power of) his own (magic) spells, (though)  he possesses the truth.
## 9
The great seer—god-begotten, god-sped, (though) possessing a man’s  sight—stayed the river in flood.
When Viśvāmitra conveyed Sudās (across the rivers), Indra made
friends with the Kuśikas.
## 10
Like geese, you make a signaling call with the pressing stones,
becoming exhilarated on hymns at the ceremony when (the soma) is  pressed. You inspired seers who have the sight of men, along with the gods
drink the somian honey, you Kuśikas.
## 11
Come forth, Kuśikas; make yourselves known. Release the horse of  Sudās, to (gain) wealth.
The king will smash the obstacle to the east, to the west, to the north.  Then he will sacrifice on the best part of the earth.
## 12
I who have praised both these two world-halves here and Indra— Viśvāmitra’s sacred formulation here guards the Bharata people.
## 13
The Viśvāmitras have given the formulation to Indra who bears  the mace.
He will make us well rewarded.
## 14
What do the cows do for you among the Kīkaṭas? They do not milk out  the milk mixture; they do not heat the gharma[=hot]-drink.
Bring here to us the possessions of Pramaganda. Make the descendant  of Nīcāśākha subject to us, bounteous one.
## 15
The squirming, sappy (cow called) Sasarparī, given by the Jamadagnis,  banishing neglect, has bellowed loftily.
(She like) the Daughter of the Sun has stretched (their [=the
Jamadagnis’]) fame, immortal and unaging, to the gods.
## 16
The squirming, sappy (cow called) Sasarparī swiftly brought fame to  them among the communities of the five peoples,
having taken on new life (like Dawn, though) in her winglessness, she  whom the Palastis and Jamadagnis gave me.
## 17
Let the two oxen be steadfast, the axle firm; let the chariot-pole not be  torn off, nor the yoke be broken off.
Let Indra keep the two pātalyas [=pieces of chariot?] from breaking.  You with indestructible wheel-rims, escort us.
## 18
Put power in our bodies, power in our draft-oxen, Indra—
power for our kith and kin to live, for you are the giver of power.
## 19
Engird yourself in the hardwood of the acacia tree; place strength in the  śiṃśapā(-wood) in its recoil.
O Axle, you who are firm and were made firm, stay firm. Don’t make us  leave off from this journey.
## 20
Let this Lord of the Forest [=tree] here not leave us behind and not  cause us harm.
(Let there be) well-being all the way to the houses, to the unharnessing,  to the unhitching.
## 21
Indra, with your manifold means of help, which are the best possible  ones, quicken us today, bounteous champion.
Whoever hates us, let him fall low. Whomever we hate, let breath
leave him.

## 22
(Though) he heats his axe all the way through, it’s just a śimbala flower  he hacks off.
The ukhā-pot, (though) boiling, boiling over, just throws off foam,
o Indra.
## 23
There is no notice taken of his missile, you people. They lead a lump,  thinking it a beast.
(But) they are not making a non-prizewinner race with a prizewinner,  nor leading a donkey before the horses.
## 24
Are these the sons of Bharata, Indra? They take note of the non-meal,  not the meal.
They spur the alien horse, not their own. At the contest they lead
around the one whose prize is (just) a bowstring.