+++
title = "054"

+++
54 (288)
All Gods
Prajāpati Vaiśvāmitra or Prajāpati Vācya
22 verses: triṣṭubh
This first hymn to the All Gods in this maṇḍala is something of a hybrid, combining  two standard approaches to All God hymns. On the one hand, the second half of  the hymn (starting with vs. 11) treats these deities as a list, granting a verse each to a  number of gods and mentioning their familiar characteristics. This part is relatively  straightforward.
The first half, especially verses 2–9, is ostensibly devoted to Heaven and  Earth, but, though it begins as a conventional praise of those paired deities,  as often in All God hymns the divinity provides a point of departure for spec ulation on the nature of things and unanswered questions about cosmic mat ters; see especially the questions in verse 5, at the middle of this self-contained  hymn-within-a-hymn. The emphasis on truth and reality and on the discovery of  Heaven and Earth (for both themes see vss. 3–4), in combination with the uncer tain questions, suggests that the point is that we only gradually and imperfectly  discover the real dimensions and nature of the cosmos. The style in this portion  is enigmatic, intense, and rhetorically intricate, especially in the climactic verse 9,  where Heaven as the divine begetter, and perhaps the single principle, and heaven  as a place, the home of the gods to which we also aspire, seem to be referred to  simultaneously. This double reference is aided by the ambiguity of the first verb  in the verse, ádhy emi, which can mean either “I go upon” or “I study.” Verse 10  clearly closes off that part of the hymn and makes the transition to the second  part and its list of favored gods.
The hymn begins with a verse to Agni and ends with a verse and a half to him,  thus providing a larger ring around the two very different halves. 1. This fortifying (hymn) here have they presented to the great one
belonging to the rite, who is to be reverently invoked repeatedly time  after time.
Let him listen to us with his faces belonging to the house; let
inexhaustible Agni listen with (his faces) belonging to heaven.
## 2
I will recite a great (hymn) to great Heaven and to Earth. My desire,  seeking, knowing the way, goes (to those two),
at the praise of whom the gods, seeking service at the rites, become
exhilarated in company with them.
## 3
Let your truth be real, you two world-halves. Come to the fore for our  great welfare.
Here is homage to Heaven and to Earth, o Agni. I render service with a  pleasurable offering; I beg for a treasure.
## 4
For also the ancient ones, speaking what is real, found you two, you  truthful world-halves.
Also the superior men at the clash, at the contest of champions, extolled  you two, o (Heaven and) Earth, as they kept discovering you.
## 5
Who knows for certain? Who will here proclaim (it)? What is the pathway  that leads to the gods?
Their lowest seats are visible, (but those) that are amid the highest
hidden commandments... ?
## 6
The sage poet, (though) having a man’s sight, has looked upon them: the  two [=Heaven and Earth], separated but becoming exhilarated
(together) in the womb of truth.
The two have made a seat each for herself as a bird does, (though) being  united by a joint purpose.
## 7
Jointly but kept apart, with their ends at a distance, they have taken their  stand in a fixed place, wakeful.
And (though) they are sisters and young women, they are called
opposing names.
## 8
All these races do the two contain. (Though) supporting the great gods,  they do not waver.
The One is master of all: the moving and the fixed, the walking and the  flying, of various sorts, variously born.
## 9
From afar I tread upon the ancient (path) of old [/study the ancient One of  old]: that is our relationship to the great father [=Heaven?], the begetter, where [=in heaven?] the gods, as admirers, in their own ways took their  stand within (it) on their (own) broad separate path.
## 10
This praise here I proclaim, you two world-halves. The tender-hearted  ones having Agni as their tongue will hear it—
the youthful sovereign kings, Mitra, Varuṇa, the Ādityas, sage poets,  extending far and wide.

## 11
Savitar of the golden hands and the lovely tongue, being master at the  rite three times a day—
and (when), Savitar, you have set your signal-call among the gods, then  impel wholeness to us.
## 12
Of good action, of good hands, of good aid, truthful—let God Tvaṣṭar  establish these things for us for help.
In company with Pūṣan, o R̥bhus, make yourselves exhilarated.  With pressing stones raised, you have fashioned the
ceremony.
## 13
The Maruts with lighting as their chariot, brandishing spears, the  young bloods of heaven, born of truth, irrepressible,
and Sarasvatī—those worthy of the sacrifice will listen. Confer wealth  along with heroes, you powerful ones.
## 14
The recitations, the chants have gone to Viṣṇu of many wonders as if on  a journey of victorious Bhaga—
(Viṣṇu) the wide-striding humped (bull), who has many (women). The  young mothers-to-be are not neglectful.
## 15
Indra, being master by virtue of all his heroic powers, filled both  world-halves with his greatness,
stronghold-splitter, Vr̥tra-smasher, possessor of a bold host.  Having massed it together, bring to us here an abundance of  livestock.
## 16
The Nāsatyas, asked about our kinship, are my fathers. Our cherished  name is our common birth with the Aśvins.
Because you are wealth-givers of wealth to us, you keep watch over  giving with unstinting (gifts), as undeceivable ones.
## 17
Great is this cherished name of yours, o poets [=R̥bhus], that you all  become “gods” to Indra.
You are partner with the dear R̥bhus, much-invoked one. (All of you,)  fashion this insight here for us to win.
## 18
Aryaman, Aditi, (all those) worthy of our sacrifice—the
commandments of Varuṇa cannot be cheated—
(all of you,) keep us from coming to childlessness. Let our course be  full of offspring and livestock.
## 19
The messenger of the gods, impelled forth in many forms—let him  pronounce us blameless in our entirety.
Let Earth, Heaven, and the Waters hear us, and the Sun with the  heavenly bodies, and the broad midspace.
## 20
Let the bullish mountains with stable dwelling places hear us, as they  become exhilarated on the refreshing drink.
Let Aditi with the Ādityas hear us. Let the Maruts extend to us  beneficial shelter. 21. Let our path be always easy to travel, abounding in food. Gods, saturate  the plants with honey.
(Let there be) a share in your fellowship for me, Agni. You should not  be neglectful. Might I reach the seat of wealth consisting in much
livestock.
## 22
Sweeten our oblations, illuminate our refreshments entirely. Mete out  full measures of fame in our direction.
Conquer all our rivals in combat, Agni. Through all the days, shine  benevolently on us.