+++
title = "055"

+++
55 (289)
All Gods
Prajāpati Vaiśvāmitra or Prajāpati Vācya
22 verses: triṣṭubh
The most obvious feature of this hymn is the refrain found in every verse: “great  is the one and only lordship of the gods,” notable for its emphasis on unity  (ékam “one and only” is the final word of each verse) and for the juxtaposition  and implied identity of asura(tvám) “lord(ship)” and devā́nām “gods,” given  that in later Vedic the Asuras and the Devas are locked in eternal enmity. This  familiar Vedic mystery of simultaneous unity and diversity is further exempli
fied by the references to numerous gods (generally unnamed, but usually recog nizable), especially in the second part of the hymn, in the manner of many All  God hymns.
However, the hymn has a more structured trajectory than most All God list  hymns. The first part of the hymn treats the mystery of the birth of Agni; once  Agni has been definitively born, Indra comes to the sacrifice as is usual. After  three verses situating the action at a re-creation of the primordial early-morning  sacrifice and introducing the poet (vss. 1–3), the hymn turns to a mystical  description of fire dispersed in many places and hidden in the plants (4–5), and  of its parents, the two kindling sticks (4–7), then of fire as it catches after the  kindling (8–9) and sends its smoke and flames toward heaven (9–10). The kin dling of Agni then takes on both a cosmic and a ritual dimension, as Night and  Dawn and then the Dawns alone are identified as the mother(s) of the infant  Agni, reflecting, of course, the kindling of the ritual fire at daybreak (11–16).  Soon after (17–18) Indra puts in an appearance, coming to the early-morning  sacrifice.
Not all the referents are clear in these riddling verses, and in some verses several  referents probably lurk beneath the enigmatic phraseology. For example, verse 17  serves as a transition verse between the fire-kindling verses and the appearance of  Indra. The bull here could be Agni himself, or Soma (much of the vocabulary is544 III.55
somian), or a prefiguring of Indra. Commentators differ in their identifications,  and those given in brackets here are sometimes provisional.
## 01
Then when the ancient dawns dawned forth, in the track of the cow a  great imperishable (syllable) was born [/was discerned],
which tends to the commandments of the gods: great is the one and only  lordship of the gods.
## 02
Let not the gods deflect us here, nor the ancient Fathers who know the  track [/word], o Agni.
Between the two seats of the two age-old ones [=Heaven and Earth] is  your beacon. – Great is the one and only lordship of the gods.
## 03
My desires fly apart in many directions, but with my (ritual) labor  I illuminate ancient things.
When Agni has been kindled might we speak only truth: “Great is the  one and only lordship of the gods.”
## 04
The common king has been dispersed in many places; he lies in his  resting places [=hearths], (spread out) for some distance along the
(fire-)logs.
Another bears the calf; the mother rests peacefully [=the two
fire-churning sticks]. – Great is the one and only lordship of
the gods.
## 05
He is dwelling in the older (plants), growing up through the later ones,  within the tender ones (even) when they are just born.
Having (him) within, (though) unimpregnated they give birth to (him).  – Great is the one and only lordship of the gods.
## 06
He who was lying down far away—now he who has two mothers roams  without a binding (rope), their only calf.
These are the commandments of Mitra and Varuṇa: Great is the one and  only lordship of the gods.
## 07
The one with two mothers is the Hotar, the sovereign king at the
rites. The top (of him) roams along (the logs), while his base rests
peacefully.
Those who speak delightful (speech) proffer delightful (things). – Great  is the one and only lordship of the gods.
## 08
His every approach appears right in your face, like that of a champion  battling up close.
The thought acts as go-between to the tribute of the cow [=ghee as
oblation]. – Great is the one and only lordship of the gods.
## 09
The gray messenger [=smoke] keeps bearing down on them
[=hearths? plants?]. The great one acts the go-between through the
luminous realm.
Bearing wondrous forms, he looks out upon us. – Great is the one and  only lordship of the gods. 10. Viṣṇu, the cow-protector, protects the highest pen, establishing his own  dear, immortal domains.
Agni knows all these worlds. – Great is the one and only lordship of  the gods.
## 11
The twins [=Night and Dawn] have assumed wondrous forms, each one  for herself. One of them shines; the other is black;
the dusky one and the ruddy one are sisters. – Great is the one and only  lordship of the gods.
## 12
Where the mother and the daughter [also =Night and Dawn], the two  sap-yielding milk-cows, give suck jointly,
I reverently invoke the two within the seat of truth. – Great is the one  and only lordship of the gods.
## 13
Licking the calf [=Agni] of another [=firestick/Night], she [=oblation/ Dawn] lows: in what form has the milk-cow deposited her udder?
Iḍā [/Refreshment] has swelled with the milk of truth. – Great is the one  and only lordship of the gods.
## 14
At her feet she of many shapes [=Dawn] clothes herself in wondrous  forms. She stands erect, constantly licking the (calf) three
lambing-seasons old.
I roam through the seat of truth as a knowing one. – Great is the one  and only lordship of the gods.
## 15
Like two footprints set down within the wondrous one [=Agni? ritual  ground?], the one of the two is hidden, the other visible [=Night
and Dawn].
Their pathway has a single goal, (but goes) separately. – Great is the  one and only lordship of the gods.
## 16
Let the milk-cows [=Dawns? plants crackling as they burn?] be noisy,  those which are without young (yet) sap-yielding, unfailing, not
milked out,
becoming young ever anew. – Great is the one and only lordship of  the gods.
## 17
Though the bull goes about roaring within the one (herd of) cows, he  deposits his seed in the other herd.
For he is the earth-protector; he is the apportioner; he is king. – Great  is the one and only lordship of the gods.
## 18
The hero’s abundance of horses we will proclaim just now, o people.  The gods know of it.
Yoked sixfold, five after five they convey (Indra) hither. – Great is the  one and only lordship of the gods.
## 19
God Tvaṣṭar, the impeller providing all forms, flourishes; he has  begotten offspring in great quantity,
and all these creatures here are his. – Great is the one and only lordship  of the gods.

## 20
He [=Indra?] has raised up together the two great bowls (to be) united.  Both of them are crammed with his goods.
The hero is famed for finding goods. – Great is the one and only
lordship of the gods.
## 21
And he who suckles all of us [=Agni] dwells peacefully on this earth  here, like a king with established alliances,
stationed in front like heroes stationed for protection. – Great is the one  and only lordship of the gods.
## 22
The plants and the waters offer tribute to you; the earth bears wealth  for you, Indra.
May we be your comrades, sharing in the valuables. – Great is the one  and only lordship of the gods.