+++
title = "056"

+++
56 (290)
All Gods
Prajāpati Vaiśvāmitra or Prajāpati Vācya
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Another enigmatic and mystical All God hymn, with its mysteries, as so often,  couched in numerological terms, primarily as threes or multiples of three. In the  earlier parts of the hymn these numbers seem to refer to cosmic entities—perhaps,  for example, the three heavens and three earths making up the six in verse 2—and  to cosmic creation, though the details are far from clear. But the number three takes  a strongly ritual turn beginning with verse 5, referring to three daily rites, that is, to  the three pressings of the soma sacrifice. Thus the poet implicitly identifies ritual  structure with cosmic structure.
## 01
Neither the tricky ones nor the clever transgress these: steadfast are the  foremost commandments of the god.
Neither the two world-halves without deceit nor the mountains standing  fast are to be bowed down by knowing wiles.
## 02
Six burdens does the One, unmoving, bear. The cows have approached  the highest truth.
Three great females stand below, as steeds: two were deposited in hiding;  one has become visible.
## 03
The bull of all forms [=Tvaṣṭar?] has three groins and three udders, with  offspring in great quantity;
having three faces, he is master [/husband], possessing great force. The  bull is the inseminator of each and every female.
## 04
In a flash the trail-blazer for these (waters) has awakened—I have  invoked the dear name of the Ādityas—
Even the heavenly waters came to a stop for him. Proceeding in separate  directions, they bent around him. 5. Three times three are the seats of the poets, o rivers, and the sovereign  king at the rites [/in the (cosmic) divisions] [=Agni] has three mothers. Three are the truthful watery maidens, who act the master at the rite  three times a day.
## 06
Three times a day, every day, o Savitar, impel valuables to us, three  times daily.
Threefold riches and goods impel here. O Bhaga, o Protector, o Holy  Place, position (them) for winning.
## 07
Three times a day Savitar keeps impelling (and?) the two kings, Mitra  and Varuṇa, of good hands.
Even the waters, even the two broad world-halves beg for his treasure,  for Savitar to impel it.
## 08
Threefold are the highest realms of light, difficult to reach; (there?) rule/ shine three heroes of the Lord.
Truthful, vigorous, difficult to deceive—three times a day let the gods be  at the rite.