+++
title = "057"

+++
57 (291)
All Gods
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
6 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn depicts the beginning of the morning ritual, with the recitation of praise  poetry, the yoking of the pressing stones, and the kindling of the fire. The poet puts  himself at the center of this activity, opening the hymn with a vivid image depicting  his own inspiration as an untethered cow producing abundantly.
## 01
He who has sifted through has found my inspired thought—a milk-cow,  roaming for some distance without a cowherd,
who just in a single day has given milk in abundance from her wellspring.  So Indra and Agni (and other gods) are admirers of her—
## 02
As are Indra and Pūṣan, the two bulls with dexterous hands. The (cows  [=poems]), well treated, give unfailing milk like that of Heaven.
When all the gods take pleasure in her, might I reach your benevolence  there, o good ones.
## 03
The sisters who seek the potency of the bull [=Agni], they recognize their  embryo in him and do homage.
The milk-cows, bellowing, proceed powerfully toward their child who  bears wondrous forms.
## 04
I invite the two well-fixed world-halves, as I yoke the pressing stones at  the ceremony with my inspired thought.
These (Dawns? flames?) of yours here, abounding in valuables for Manu,  stand erect, visible and worthy of the sacrifice.

## 05
Your tongue, honeyed, very wise, wide spreading, which is proclaimed  (even) among the gods, o Agni,
with it make all those worthy of the sacrifice sit here for our help and  make them drink the honeyed (drinks).
## 06
What of yours will swell inexhaustible and shimmering like the stream of  a mountain, god Agni,
that solicitude grant to us and your grace destined for all people, good  Jātavedas.