+++
title = "058"

+++
58 (292)
Aśvins
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins on a note of mystery, since the identities of the milk-cow, the  “age-old (semen),” and the son of the priestly gift are unclear. The latter half  of verse 1 describes the early morning, and therefore our view is that the first  half does as well. We take the cow as the Dawn, whose milk is light, or pos
sibly the hymn sung at dawn, and this milk arises from the semen (see III.31.10  for the ellipsis) that is the fire of Agni or the sun or, less likely, soma. Agni, the  son of the dakṣiṇā, the priestly gift that may be actually or metaphorically a  cow, is a “go-between,” either as a messenger who encourages the morning or  as one who goes between heaven and earth. Intricacy then replaces mystery in  the second verse. In 2c, asmát, “because of us” or “from us,” may be construed  with “awaken” or perhaps secondarily with “away”—“We have put the poetic  inspiration of the miser away (from us).” In 2d cakr̥ma “we have put” should be  construed twice with two preverbs and, as Geldner has pointed out, ā́ “here” can  be construed with the two verbs it stands between.
The remainder of the hymn is neither as mysterious nor as intricate as these  opening verses. It becomes a plea for the Aśvins to appear at the early-morning  soma-pressing, riding in their chariot, which is the sound of the hymns that carry  the Aśvins to the sacrificial site.
In verse 6 Jahnāvī probably refers to the “wife of Jahnu,” who is the father or  ancestor of Viśvāmitra according to the Brāhmaṇas, although others have taken  it as the name of the clan of Jahnu (Geldner) or as a name of the Ganges (Pirart  2001: 91). If the former, perhaps the poet reminds the Aśvins of the wealth that was  with his family in the past in his wish to renew this friendship with them and their  support for him.
## 1
The milk-cow [=Dawn?] is yielding the desirable milk of the age-old  (semen); the son [=Agni] of the priestly gift acts as go-between.
She whose course is beautiful carries brightness here; the praise song of  Dawn has awakened the Aśvins. 2. In good harness, the ritual offerings—they come to be high above!— carry you two like parents back here by the truth.
Awaken because of us! We have put the poetic inspiration of the miser  away (from us) and put here the help of you two. Travel here this way. 3. With your well-harnessed horses and smooth-rolling chariot, wondrous  ones, hear this signal call of the pressing stone.
Is it not true that the inspired poets born long ago have said that you are  the first to respond to trouble, Aśvins?
## 4
Turn your thought here, come here somehow in your usual way—all  peoples call upon the Aśvins—
for like allies they [=the priests] have given this honey, foaming with cows  [=milk], to you at the beginning of the reddening (dawn).
## 5
Even across many airy spaces, Aśvins, the song (travels) among the  peoples, generous ones.
Travel here along the paths leading to the gods. Wondrous ones, these  stores of honey belong to you two.
## 6
Your home is old, your companionship benevolent, and yours the wealth  at (the house of) the wife of Jahnu, you men.
Creating once again your benevolent companionship for ourselves, now  united together, we would find exhilaration through the honey.
## 7
O well-skilled Aśvins, youthful ones, together with the Wind and along  with your teams,
drink the day-old soma, taking pleasure and never faltering, o Nāsatyas  who bring good gifts.
## 8
O Aśvins, ample refreshments have sped around you two, aligning  themselves with the songs and never faltering.
Your chariot, born of truth and hastened by pressing stones, travels  around heaven and earth in a day.
## 9
O Aśvins, the soma that is yours, the best of honeyed pressings—drink it  and come to our house!
Your chariot, again and again creating many a beautiful form, is the first  to come to the appointed place of the soma-offerer.