+++
title = "060"

+++
60 (294)
R̥bhus and Indra
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
7 verses: jagatī
The hymn announces that the present priests have recovered the skills of the R̥bhus  by which, although born as human “children of Manu” (vs. 3), they attained divin ity (vs. 2), immortality (vs. 3), and, like the gods, a share of the sacrifice (vs. 1). The  “form” that the R̥bhus adopt in verse 1 may be the divine form they have earned. In  verses 4–6 the poet turns to Indra and asks him to come to the soma-pressing along  with the R̥bhus, now fully divine, and to drink the soma in the company of the  R̥bhus. Because Indra and the R̥bhus are traveling by chariot, the poet deploys the  imagery of prizewinning racehorses throughout these last verses. He even calls the  R̥bhus themselves “prizewinners” in verse 7, though this metaphor is anticipated  by vā́javant in verses 5 and 6. “Vāja” is the name of one of the R̥bhus, so on one  level this means that Vāja is in the company of the other R̥bhus, but it also means  that the R̥bhus, since they ride in Indra’s chariot, are or will be accompanied by the  prize of victory.
## 01
In one place and another, by their thought and family relationship, by  their knowledge, o men, the fire-priests have arrived at these things:
the craft by which, o sons of Sudhanvan, you have attained a sacrificial  share, rapidly adopting a (different) form;
## 02
The ability by which you carved the cups; the insight by which you made  the cow to flow (milk) from the hide;
the thought by which you fashioned the two fallow bays—by (all) that, o  R̥bhus, you fully attained divinity.
## 03
The R̥bhus attained the companionship of Indra. The artisans, the  children of Manu, raced.
The sons of Sudhanvan rose to immortality by applying themselves to  their labors, ritually acting well by good ritual action.
## 04
You travel on the same chariot with Indra when the soma is pressed, and  then you become joined with the splendor of your wishes.
Your good ritual acts are not to be equaled, o chanters, sons of
Sudhanvan, R̥bhus, nor your heroic deeds.
## 05
O Indra, together with the R̥bhus bringing the Prize of Victory [=Vāja],  drench yourself in the soma pressed and sprinkled in the hands (of the  priests).
Urged on by insight, o generous one, become exhilarated in the
house of the pious one together with the sons of Sudhanvan, those  superior men.
## 06
O Indra, along with the R̥bhus bringing the Prize of Victory [=Vāja],  become exhilarated here at this soma-pressing of ours, along with
your ability, o much-praised one.

These pastures [=soma rites?] have offered themselves to you according  to the commandment of the gods and the (ritual) foundations
of Manu.
## 07
O Indra, together with the R̥bhus, with the prizewinners, racing to the  prize, travel here to the ritually right praise of the singer
with your hundred invigorating intentions for Āyu, since you have a  thousand stratagems at the rite’s invocation.