+++
title = "061"

+++
61 (295)
Dawn
Viśvāmitra Gāthina
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The only hymn dedicated to Dawn in Maṇḍala III, it combines the usual themes: the  beauty of the young goddess, her relation to the morning ritual and the ritual fire,  and her role as giver of rich goods because of the distribution of priestly gifts at the  Morning Pressing. Note that halfway through the hymn (beginning with vs. 4), the  direct 2nd-person address to Dawn changes to 3rd-person description. This change  may mirror the development of the ritual: first the poet coaxes Dawn to appear,  and when his pleas have been successful (the vocatives of the first verses are in part  replaced by aorists and perfects of the immediate past), he turns his attention to the  ritual her appearance has set in motion.
## 1
O Dawn, prize-giver with a rich prize, bounteous—as a discerning one  enjoy the praise of the singer.
O goddess, as a young woman from of old, as Plenitude you proceed  according to your commandment, you who bring all valuables.
## 2
O goddess Dawn, as immortal one radiate widely, possessing a gleaming  chariot, arousing liberalities.
Let your horses, easy to control, convey you hither—you of golden color,  they who have broad flanks.
## 3
O Dawn, facing all beings, you stand erect as the beacon of the
immortal one.
As you make your progress to the same goal (as the older dawns), roll  yourself hither like a wheel, you newer one.
## 4
Like one letting the reins go slack [?], bounteous Dawn drives, mistress of  good pasture.
Generating the sun, she of good portion and wondrous power stretches  all the way to the end of heaven and of earth.
## 5
To the goddess Dawn, radiating widely, proffer your well-twisted (hymn)  with reverence.
The honey-bringer has propped her leading edge upward in heaven. She  of delightful aspect has shone forth through the shining realms. 6. The truthful (daughter) of Heaven has been awakened by our chants  [/been perceived with her rays]. The wealthy lady has brightly mounted  the two world-halves.
Agni, you go begging Dawn for valuable property as she comes hither,  radiating widely.
## 7
Driving (the cows) of the Dawns on the foundation of truth, the bull  [=Sun?] has entered the two great world-halves.
Great is the magic power of Mitra and Varuṇa. As the shimmering
(Dawn) has spread her radiance, it [=magic power] is spread widely in  many places.