+++
title = "062"

+++
62 (296)
Various Gods
Viśvāmitra Gāthina (1–15); Viśvāmitra or Jamadagni (16–18)
18 verses: triṣṭubh 1–3, gāyatrī 4–18, arranged in trcas ̥
This, the last hymn in the maṇḍala, consists of eighteen verses, which should put  it out of sequence. However, it falls naturally into tr̥cas, and probably originally  consisted of six three-verse hymns dedicated severally to Indra and Varuṇa (1–3),  Br̥haspati (4–6), Pūṣan (7–9), Savitar (10–12), Soma (13–15), and Mitra and Varuṇa  (16–18).
In general the tr̥cas are relatively straightforward, even banal, but the first verse of  the first tr̥ca is rhetorically dense and striking in imagery. It seems to suggest that our  hymns, though they appear to be frenetically active, have lost their effectiveness, and  therefore Indra and Varuṇa have ceased to act on behalf of their humans praisers and  worshipers. It may not be entirely fanciful to conjecture that the simple, even simplis
tic, style of the remaining tr̥cas is an attempt to replace the “whirlwinds” of verbal  art (of which there is much in Maṇḍala III) with a meeker and less ostentatious style. The most notable feature of this hymn is the fact that the first verse of the  fourth tr̥ca, dedicated to Savitar (vs. 10), is the famous “Gāyatrī mantra,” with  which orthodox Hindus begin their morning worship even today. In the context  of R̥gvedic poetry, it must be said that the contents and form of this verse are not  particularly striking. As was just suggested, this may in fact be its point.
## 1
These (hymns) here for you two, (though) they are considered
whirlwinds, have become ones that cannot be (successfully)
brandished (even?) by one devoted to you two.
Where is this glory of yours, Indra and Varuṇa, with which you are wont  to carry the gear for your comrades?
## 2
This (man) here, latest of many, seeking wealth, keeps calling on you two  time after time for help.
Indra and Varuṇa, in concert with the Maruts, with Heaven and with  Earth, listen to my call.554 III.62
## 3
May there be goods for us, o Indra and Varuṇa; wealth in hale heroes  for us, o Maruts.
Let the Shielding Goddesses aid us with their shelters; (let) Hotrā Bhāratī (help) us with her priestly gifts.
## 4
Br̥haspati belonging to the All Gods, enjoy our oblations.
Grant treasures to the pious man.
## 5
To blazing Br̥haspati give reverence with recitations at the ceremonies— his unbowed power I desire—
## 6
To the bull of the settled domains, having all forms, undeceivable, Br̥haspati worthy to be chosen.
## 7
Here is a lovely praise hymn, utterly new, for you, Pūṣan, glowing god. It is recited by us to you.
## 8
Enjoy this hymn of mine—help our insight that seeks the prize— like a bride-seeking (man) a maiden.
## 9
He who looks at all creatures separately and sees them whole, that one, Pūṣan will become our helper.
## 10
Might we make our own that desirable effulgence of god Savitar, who will rouse forth our insights.
## 11
Seeking the prize, we beg for the generosity of Bhaga,
along with the plenitude of god Savitar.
## 12
To god Savitar do the men, the inspired poets, give reverence with  sacrifices and well-twisted hymns,
when impelled by insight.
## 13
Soma proceeds, finding the way; he goes to a rendezvous with the gods, to sit in the womb of truth.
## 14
Soma—for us, for the two-footed, and for the four-footed livestock, he will make refreshments that bring no disease.
## 15
Increasing our lifetime, overcoming hostilities,
Soma has sat on the seat.
## 16
Mitra and Varuṇa, sprinkle our pastureland with ghee,
the realms with honey, you of good resolve.
## 17
Widely proclaimed, increasing through reverence, you rule by the  greatness of your skill
through the longest (spaces? times?), you of blazing commandments. 18. Being hymned by Jamadagni, sit in the womb of truth.
Drink the soma, you two increasing through truth.