+++
title = "02"

+++
As was just noted, avratám in c suggests that this vs. belongs conceptually and rhetorically with vs. 1, because avratá- elsewhere qualifies those “with black skin.” However, as I also indicated ad vs. 1, I do not think vs. 2 is the main clause on which the rel.

cl. of vs. 1 is dependent: “we” are not likened to stampeding cattle in vs. 1, but rather the soma juices are. HPS (Ved. vratá, 94 n. 193) rather trickily suggests taking 2ab as parenthetic, with c returning to the soma juices of vs. 1, modified by the part. sāhvā́ṃsaḥ. I see no reason for this: the victory of the soma juices in 1a is reconfigured as our victory.

With Old, Ge, Re I take the gen. suvitásya as the gen. obj. of manāmahe and construe áti with sétum (contra Gr, who takes it with manāmahe). In IX áti regularly refers to the journey of the soma “beyond” the filter, which here is represented by sétum. Re cites other passages containing √man with gen., but it must be admitted that this particular form, manāmahe, otherwise resolutely takes the acc. sétu- is found 5x in the RV; its only two occurrences in IX are here and in IX.73.4 cited above. The word does not yet have its later meaning ‘bridge’, but a sense closer to its root etym. to √sā / si ‘bind’ (with 2ndary full-grade se built to the zero-grade): ‘fetter, bond, (or here) snare’. Ge and Re instead take it as a dyke or dam (Damm and digue respectively), but these seem to be an attempt to split the difference between the root etymology and the later sense ‘bridge’. Certainly in other RVic passages the sense ‘fetter’ vel sim. is inescapable, e.g. VIII.67.8 mā́naḥ sétuḥ siṣed ayám “Let this fetter here not bind us,” with cognate verb, where Ge tr. “Fessel.” As for what physical object the sétu- refers to here, I think it is an image of the twisty curls of a sheep's fleece, which can be seen as fetters or nooses.

durāvyàm, modifying sétum, is assigned to a stem dur-ā́vya / durā́via by Gr, misrepresenting the accent, inter alia. As Old points out, however, the stem is really durāvī́-, a root noun cmpd. (see now Scar 497), and it must mean ‘difficult to pursue / follow’. Since sétu- here refers to the curls of the sheep’s fleece (in my view), these curls can be conceived of as the tracks that the liquid would follow as it's being strained through the fleece, tracks that can be difficult to pursue. So the acc. phrase sétuṃ durāvyàm jams two different but evocative images into one. Note also that suvitásya … durāv(í)yam is something of a phonetic figure, with the semantically contrastive adverbial prefixes su and dus, but different verbal roots (√i and √vī) -- though internal sandhi provides √i with an apparent initial v matching vī.



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/09/041/01-02.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>