+++
title = "03"

+++
I assume that the object of Vāyu’s quest in our house is soma. Other interpr.

take iṣṭáye differently: Ge “um gern in sein Haus zu kommen,” which seems quite loose; Re “pour (aller le) chercher en (sa) demeure,” with the referent of “le” apparently dāśvā́ṃsam of pāda a, which I suppose is possible.

As disc. in the publ. intro., this vs. makes clear the equation between the teams (niyút-) in ab that Vāyu drives to the sacrifice, his wind-horses, and the teams 115 of wealth he hitches up (ní … yuvasva) for us in cd. In cd we would expect an accusative resumptive prn. tā́n or the like, picking up the rel. phrase yā́bhiḥ … niyúdbhiḥ of ab and serving as obj. of ní … yuvasva. The absence of this prn. is presumably what led Ge to pronounce the yā́bhiḥ of a as “die freie Verwendung des Relatives” (n. 3) and to tr. the subordinator with “Wenn.” But I think rather that the objects in cd stand for the missing *niyútaḥ. Though the noun niyút- doesn’t appear explicitly in cd, elsewhere that noun can be obj. of its etymologically twin verb; cf., e.g., I.180.6 ní yád yuvéthe niyútaḥ ... and, in the immediately hymn, the passive phrase niyuvānā́niyútaḥ ... (VII.91.5). Therefore the accusatives in cd expressing wealth and its material realizations are implicitly equated with niyút-. The important complementarity of the two forms of ní √yu in the two hemistichs is disguised by Ge’s bland translation of the verb in c: “gib uns”; similarly Klein (DGRV I.26) “grant to us.” In the phrase in d vīráṃ gávyam áśvyaṃ ca rā́dhaḥ “(a) hero and bovine and equine bounty,” the sg. vīrám is superficially unsettling and disharmonious: surely we want more than a single hero! But vīrám most likely is meant to characterize rádhaḥ, along with the common adjectival collocation gávyam áśvyam. However, an adjectival vīryá- *‘consisting of heroes’ is blocked, because that stem has been frozen as a neut. substantive meaning ‘heroism, heroic deed’. I would now be inclined to reflect what I consider the substitution of vīrá- for the non-functional adjectival stem and tr. the acc. phrase as “(teams that are) well-nourishing wealth for us, bounty in heroes, in cows and horses.”

