+++
title = "01"

+++
This vs. is beset with small difficulties, which add up. To begin with, what should be done with dúvaḥ in the first pāda? Since the first hemistich has only a single expressed verb, jujóṣa, the question is whether both dúvaḥ ‘friendship’ and dhíyam ‘insight’ are objects of this verb. Re (flg. Gonda) takes the two nouns as appositional and both objects of jujóṣa: “Le mortel qui a-toujours gouté en Agni le privilège (de) la vision-poétique,” but this depends on his particular interpr. of dúvasand, even with that, doesn’t make a lot of sense to me. Ge in his n. 1ab calls jujóṣa a Zeugma, which I think ought to mean that both nouns are its object, with slightly different senses of the verb -- but in fact he supplies a separate verb with dúvaḥ: “Welcher Sterblicher Agni die schuldige Achtung (erweist) und mit seinen Gedanken gern (seiner) gedenkt.” Since he seems to take dhíyaṃ jujóṣa as a phrasal verb “gern (seiner) gedenkt” [think well of him, vel sim.], he may be using Zeugma in a different sense (unless he’s taking “erweist” as a different sense of jujóṣa). But I do not see submerging the distinct sense of √juṣ ‘taste, enjoy’ into an anodyne idiom with dhī́-, ‘think well of’, and I don’t see how he could get that out of the two words that go into it. In the publ. tr. my solution to the dúvaḥ problem was to supply a form of √dhā as in IV.8.6 (also adduced by Ge), I.4.5, VII.20.6, all with acc. dúvas- + LOC, as here. It would also be possible to supply a form of √kṛ, as in III.16.4, IV.2.9, VIII.31.9 with the same complements. However, the two hymns following this one each contain a form of √van ‘win’ with dúvas- as obj.: VI.15.6, 16.18, and I would therefore change my tr. to “(has won/wins) friendship in/by Agni.” In the second pāda we encounter two closely related stems: the root noun dhī́- as object of jujóṣa and the instr. dhītíbhiḥ to the -tí-stem to the same root, and some distinction must be meant. In my opinion, dhītí-, esp. in the plural, are generally the insightful thoughts of the human poet, whereas dhī́- can be the insight that gods bestow on that very poet and that gives rise to his dhītí-, and those two values are found in our passage: the poet savors the dhī́- that Agni provides him, which is manifested in the poet’s dhītí-.

The second hemistich presents more problems, beginning with the first word: bhásan is analyzed by the Pp. as bhásat, hence as a finite verb form -- either an injunc. to a thematic stem bhása- (so Gr, Macd VGS, tentatively Whitney Rts) or the subjunctive to a root aor. (so Gotō, 1st Kl, 82; also EWA s.v. BHAS1 ). This is not impossible, but I take the underlying form to be the same as the sandhi form, bhásan, and, with Old (ZDMG 55.305-6, Noten), identify it as a act. part. nom. sg. masc. The question is to what stem. Although as just noted, the older authorities posit a them.

pres. bhása-, in fact the other two forms to this putative stem, bhásat VI.3.4 and bhasáthas VI.59.4, are more likely root aor. subjunctives (see Gotō ref. above and my comm. ad locc.) Of course, a root aor. participle should technically be *psán, but one wonders how long that would last. In any case, taking it as a finite form would not appreciably change the meaning of the hemistich; in that case I would alter the tr.

to “he will chew it now; he should …” The pāda-medial sequence X nú ṣá prá is somewhat puzzling, since both ṣá and prá seem out of place. Gr takes prá with bhásan, but I think it goes more naturally with vurīta, though in either case the position of the preverb is odd. I’m also not sure what, if anything, the retroflection of ṣá after nú is telling us. I have found no other examples of this sequence, though cf. VIII.27.18 with … páro nú sā́#, without retroflection.

The next question is what √bhas ‘bite, chew’ is doing in this context. Ge tr.

“der soll zuerst den Mund auftun,” remarking in his n. 1c that it means something like ‘yawn, gape’ -- but he doesn’t explain what this means in context. Both Old and Re supply “enemies” as obj. (e.g., Old “… möge (seine Feinde) zermalmend”); this makes somewhat more sense, esp. given the hostile sentiments later in the hymn. But I think it can be better integrated into the context of the vs. in which it’s found. The vs. has a sequence of verbs √juṣ ‘taste, savor, enjoy’ -- √bhas ‘bite, chew’ -- íṣam √vṛ ‘choose (as) refreshment / nourishment’, all centering on eating. In my view they all take the same object, dhíyam, and all metaphorically refer to the mortal poet’s eating the insight that Agni has conferred on him -- that is, consuming it and turning it into his own substance. It is a striking image.

