+++
title = "A Nature of the Gods"

+++
## Yāska's classification
The great majority of R̥gvedic hymns are dedicated to individual gods or to groups  of gods. Following a classification articulated already in I.139.11, Yāska (Nir.  VII.5) divided the gods into three categories: gods of the earth, gods of the mid space, and gods of heaven. This simple scheme has the advantage of being clear  and the disadvantage of being misleading. For while the R̥gvedic pantheon includes  deities who represent the visible realities and powers of the natural world, it is not  fully composed of such gods. 

## Names
A better starting place for most of the gods is their  names. As we shall see, the R̥gveda attaches great importance to the names of gods.+++(5)+++  By invoking, varying, and meaningfully placing gods’ names in their verses and by  echoing the sounds of those names, the poets bring about the presence of the gods,  their epiphany. More than in any other single feature, the essential nature of a deity  is expressed in the god’s name. The god is who the god is because the god obeys  the truth embedded in that name. Thus the goddess Dawn is the Dawn because  she adheres to the truth that she appears in the morning before the sun.+++(4)+++ The god  Parjanya, Thunderstorm, is the Thunderstorm because he adheres to the truth that  he sends the rain. To be sure, the meanings of the names of some gods, such as  Viṣṇu, the Nāsatyas, or the Maruts, are unclear or controversial, and the names of  other gods, such as the Aśvins (“Horsemen”), imperfectly represent their characters. By and large, however, the names of gods define their natures and actions. This  is one reason that the gods of the R̥gveda can appear to be flat, since they generally  lack the complex personalities that the gods of classical India possess. But there is  considerable complexity in the relations among R̥gvedic deities, in the fusion and  fission of deities, and in the dimensions of gods indicated by different names and  epithets. 

Starting with their names, we can classify gods according to their different  spheres of action. This categorization will be porous, since some gods cross bound aries of domains and functions, and will be more orderly than R̥gvedic reality, but  it gives an approximate shape to the R̥gvedic pantheon. There are at least five categories of divinities. 

## gods of nature
First there are gods of nature, the powers that represent and  govern natural phenomena and entities, such as Sūrya, the “Sun,” Vāyu “Wind,”  Parjanya “Thunderstorm,” Uṣas “Dawn,” and Dyaus and Pr̥thivī “Heaven and  Earth.” With some exceptions, the names of these deities are also words for the  phenomena they represent. So, for example, the word sū́rya can signify either the sun god or the sun itself, or, rather, it signifies both the sun god and the sun, since  the two are not fully distinguished. However, these gods of nature do not act only  within the natural sphere defined by their names, but enlarge their sphere of action  on the basis of their natural characteristics. In I.115.1, for example, the Sun is called  “the eye of Mitra, Varuṇa, and Agni,” because the Sun, as he transits the sky, looks  down upon the actions of human beings and observes whether they conform to  the ritual and social principles governed by these other deities. 

In V.80.5 the light  brought by the goddess Dawn disperses not only the physical darkness of night but  also the “powers of darkness,” the dangerous forces at work within the world. And  according to V.83.9 the god Parjanya, Thunderstorm, not only shakes the world,  but also smashes evildoers. Thus the principle of hidden connections and corre spondences allows the gods of nature operate in other spheres in manners analogous to their natural functions. 

## Gods defined by the social sphere
A second category of divinity includes those defined by the social sphere in which  they operate. The most prominent deities in this category are the three principal  Ādityas: Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman. As detailed below, these gods represent the  different principles that define social relations, and they ensure that human beings  act according to these principles. As the gods of nature have functions within the  social world, so these gods of the social world also have functions within the natural world. They are associated with the sun, as illustrated by I.115.1, and Varuṇa  especially governs the waters, granting them to those who uphold the principles  he represents, withholding them from those who do not. In this way, the processes  of the visible world become the assurance of the reality of the principles of the  social world. 

## defined by function
Still other gods are defined by an action or function that their names embody.  Perhaps the most obvious example is Savitar, the “Impeller,” who compels humans  and other living beings to action or sends them to rest. Similarly, there is Tvaṣṭar,  the “Fashioner,” Viśvakarman, the “All-Maker,” and various other minor “agent  gods” as Macdonell (1897:  115)  called them. Perhaps fitting into this category,  albeit awkwardly, are the Aśvins, the “Horsemen.” As the name of these two gods  suggests, they characteristically drive their chariot, and their mobility is a significant part of what defines them. They ride to accomplish many purposes: to heal, to  rescue, or even to facilitate marriage. As charioteers and riders, therefore, they move  within a variety of places and spheres. 

## Those embodying aspects of the ritual
Fourth are gods who embody aspects of the ritual, a category dominated by  the two gods who, except for Indra, are the most frequently invoked deities of the  R̥gveda, Agni and Soma. Agni is the sacrificial fire and Soma the central offering  at the principal sacrifice in the R̥gvedic tradition. The particular significance of  the ritual gods is their accessibility to humans.+++(5)+++ Various gods can be present at  the sacrifice, but Indra and other gods like Mitra and Varuṇa remain invisible.  Gods like the Wind, the Dawn, or the Sun are perceptible, but they are distant  or amorphous. Agni and Soma, however, are visibly, tangibly present, right in  front of the priests and sacrificers, and their presence can be reliably brought about by human action. They are the representives of the divine within reach of  humans, and therefore they can create the link between gods and humans upon  which the life of both gods and humans depends. So, Agni is the messenger who  conveys the gods to mortals (e.g., I.14.12, III.6.9, IV.8.2, VII.11.5), and he is  the Hotar priest who brings humans’ offerings to the gods (e.g., I.1.1, VIII.60.1,  X.7.5). And likewise, Soma descends from heaven to the human world (IX.61.10,  63.27, 66.30) and, when offered by humans, goes from these humans to the gods  (IX.25.4, 39.1).+++(4)+++ 

## Indra
The last category belongs to Indra, who stands apart from all the other gods.  Although it might once have had other resonance, the word índra means only Indra,  which makes it not quite unique but a still rarity among the names of gods. The  greatest number of hymns, nearly a quarter of all the hymns of the R̥gveda, are  dedicated to him. This preeminence in the R̥gveda is not surprising since the soma  sacrifice is primarily a sacrifice to Indra. Indra and Vāyu are the first of the paired  divinities who receive soma in the morning; Indra alone or with the Maruts receives  soma at midday; and, at least according to some R̥gvedic traditions, Indra and the  R̥bhus receive soma in the evening (cf. IV.35.7). Thus, even though the soma sacri fice gradually incorporated other rites and other gods, Indra and the offerings to  Indra remained central to it. 
