+++
title = "01"

+++
I take the loc. bṛháddiveṣu in b as referring to the gods, who inhabit lofty heaven (so also Ober II.60; see also alternative in Ge’s n. 1b). I take it as referring to the destined recipients of our pressed soma. The standard view is rather that it is a personal name and refers to the human pressers, to be construed with suvānā́saḥ (e.g., Klein DGRV I.241 “being pressed among the Bṛhaddiva’s”). But this PN is only certain in a single passage in the late RV, X.120.8-9, in the sg.; elsewhere, and esp. in the plural, the stem refers to gods or other heaven-located substances. Cf., e.g., II.2.9 amṛ́teṣu … bṛháddiveṣu. Mayr (Pers.Nam.) considers the PN possible here (“vielleicht”), but does not commit to it.

The real puzzles in this vs. are found in the 2nd hemistich, which has been much discussed, esp. by Old. See also Ge, Re, and Hoffmann (Aufs. 363). Before considering the problems of interpr., we should first note that pāda c is metrically disturbed: it has only 11 syllables in this Jagatī hymn, and in order to produce the proper Jagatī cadence the final ó in the pāda-final sequence iṣó árātayaḥ must be read long, despite its position in hiatus. (A Triṣṭubh cadence for this 11-syl. verse is excluded.) There is no obvious way to fix either the undercount or the anomalous long o. Note in particular that nothing can be added in the opening ví ca náśan na(ḥ), because it is an opening of 5 and the enclitic naḥ must be part of it, since pronominal enclitics never follow the caesura. So a potential easy fix is impossible: to read

*náśan[ta] na(ḥ), with the verb matching naśanta in b but having undergone a
species of haplology. (For a different possible fix, see below.) It is therefore possible that pāda c is corrupt in some way. On the other hand, the poet may have wanted to draw attention to the similar openings—x x náśan na(ḥ) and x x naśanta—by this metrical disturbance.

In order to approach the sense of the hemistich there are a number of clues we should note: 1) the near-coincidence of verbs: (ví) náśan / naśanta; 2) the accent on the first verb, which must result from the subordinating use of ca as ‘if’ here; 3) several parallels, which unfortunately pull in different ways. See esp. X.133.3 ví ṣú víśvā árātayo, aryó naśanta no dhíyaḥ; also II.35.6 nā́rātayo ví naśan nā́nr̥tāni. A feature that we might expect to be a clue, the different voices of the two verbs, act.

(ví …) náśan, med. naśanta, does not turn out to be helpful, since -anta replacement is always a possibility in 3rd pl. injunctives, and naśanta also immediately precedes sániṣanta and could have adapted itself to that verb. The two passages just cited, with (ví …) náśanta and (ví) náśan respectively and at least possible identity of meaning (see below), demonstrate the problem with using voice as a criterion.

Old’s analysis of the situation, incl. the close parallel in X.133.3, is acute, and he suggests several quite different solutions, without, however, deciding for one. His first question is whether the two verbs belong to the same root. If so, the likely one is √naś ‘reach, attain’, but, in his opinion, this makes trouble for pāda c; moreover, in X.133.3, which he considers an abbreviated reworking of our passage and in a way its oldest commentary, an affiliation with √naś ‘disappear, perish’ makes better sense for the first part of the clause (“all hostilities will disappear”). Old’s first stab at interpr. thus assumes that the two verbs belong to different roots, with ‘disappear’ in pāda c and ‘reach, attain’ in d: “Hinweg mögen schwinden von unsrer Nahrung die Kargheiten: so mögen denn die Geizigen [Akk.] treffen.” This interpr. must take iṣáḥ as an ablative sg., aryáḥ as an acc. pl., and supply árātayaḥ in c as the subj. not only of ví … náśan in c but also of naśanta in d. What doesn’t seem sufficiently represented in his interpr. is the subordinating value of conditional ca. Old’s second alternative interpr. takes into account the missing syllable in c (though not the problematic quantity of o in hiatus). He suggests remedying the undercount by inserting a negative after the caesura: ví ca náśan *ná na …, which would avoid the problem of an enclitic following the caesura we noted above. In his emended pāda there would be an opening of 4; accented neg. ná would immediately follow and host the enclitic. Haplology would easily account for the transmitted text. The sequence with negative would be very like II.35.6 cited above: “hostilities shall not reach [him].” This solution is very clever, and it would allow both verbs to belong to the same root, ‘reach, attain’. He paraphrases (but doesn’t tr.) it as “die árātayaḥ sollen nicht uns treffen; wir wollen die arí treffen.” But the problem once again is that he does not represent the conditional ca. “If the hostilities do not reach us” is significantly worse than his paraphrase. He himself is disturbed by the unusual position of ná (though I think that could be acceptable) and the fact that X.133.3 clearly means something different, perhaps because this passage was misunderstood by the poet of X.133.

My own—quite uncertain—interpr. is that the two verb forms belong to different roots, just as I take the single verb naśanta in X.133.3 as a pun involving the same two roots. But, unlike Old’s first alternative, I think the first verb is ‘reach’ and the 2nd ‘perish’. I take iṣáḥ as acc. pl. (as do Ge, Re, Hoffmann, Klein, and Ober, in their diff. interpr.), even though root-accented *íṣaḥ is expected (though ending-accented acc. pl. in this stem is not rare). I then supply ‘refreshments’ as subject of naśanta in d, with aryáḥ gen. sg. depending not only on this supplied subj.

but also on the árātayaḥ of c. The point is: if the stranger’s hostilities go after our things, theirs will be destroyed as well. It is also possible that the subj. of naśanta in d is the same árātayaḥ: if their hostilities come after us, those hostilities are doomed.

As I just said, I don’t have a high degree of certainty about the correctness of this interpr. Those produced by the others just named, which all assign both verbs to ‘reach, attain’, are certainly not out of the question. Unfortunately I can’t endorse either of Old’s alternatives, however.
