+++
title = "01"

+++
The first hemistich has two nom./acc. dual expressions (áhaś ca kṛṣṇáṃ áhar árjunaṃ ca and rájasī) and a dual verb ví vartete. The question is which of the two dual expressions is the subject of this verb, or is the subject both or neither? The standard interpr. (Old, Ge, Re, Doniger) is that both expressions serve as subject and that rájasī, usually an expression referring to space, here qualifies the two day(- halves), light and dark. However, flg. Thieme, I instead take rájasī as an accusative expressing extent of space, preferring to keep the temporal and spatial concepts separate. I do have to admit that an image of rolling out the dual spaces finds support in the preceding hymn, VI.8.3c ví cármaṇīva dhiṣáṇe avartayat “He rolled out the two Holy Places [=world-halves] like skins,” and even more so in VII.80.1 vivartáyantīm rájasī sámante “(Dawn,) unrolling the two adjoining realms.” The object of the transitive ví vartáya- in those passages should be the subject of the intrans. simplex verb. Nonetheless, see nearby VI.7.7 ví yó rájāṃsi ámimīta “who measured out the dusky realms,” with rájas- as object, and the frequent use of ví to refer to movement through space. As I see it, the image here is of the day and night proceeding through the cosmos, spreading first light and then darkness. Since ví can also be used for alternating movement, that notion is also probably present: “The black day and the silvery day roll out alternately through the two dusky realms,” referring to the regular alternation of night and day.

Re points out two minor anomalies in word placement: ca in pāda a, ná in pāda c. The first is not immediately second in its constituent (expect *áhaś cā́rjunam, like the first constituent áhāś ca kṛṣṇám, not áhar árjunaṃ ca). Klein (DGRV I.133) suggests that the construction is a conflation of the expected sequence (given as starred just above) and one with only an adjective in the second constituent (kṛṣṇáṃ cā́har árjunaṃ ca, as he constructs it). This is possible but seems somewhat overcomplex. It’s worth noting that a properly placed ca would be damaging to the meter, whether it was read undistracted (cā́rjunam), the more common option for ca + V, or distracted (ca árjunam). I had thought that another argument for the unusual placement might be that ca + V is generally avoided, but a quick glance at Lubotsky turns up about 70 instances of ca + V (out of 1094 total instances of ca). I doubt that this represents a statistically significant underrepresentation, although I ran no tests.

As for ná, it ordinarily is also positioned after the first element in the simile, but it is highly unlikely (that is, quite impossible) that Agni is being compared to a king being born, with the simile comprising jā́yamāno ná rā́jā, but rather Agni, even as he is being kindled, is compared to the victorious (adult) king, with the simile just ná rā́jā. Such “wrong” positioning is not unprecedented — other examples have been noted in the comm. — and, as Re points out, it is “masked to the eyes” by jā́yamānaḥ, which matches rā́jā in number, gender, and case.
