+++
title = "02"

+++
The 1st person speaker, the poet in training, takes over here, with a statement of his ignorance about his own metier. He expresses this ignorance in the metaphor of weaving, a well-known trope for poetic composition that reaches back into IndoEuropean antiquity.

The main support for the brahmodya interpr. is the loc. samaré, which is almost universally construed with (á)tamānāḥ in the sense “entering the contest” (vel sim.: Ge: “wenn sie in den Wettstreit eintreten,” Re: “quand ils marchent dans l’arène”). But this bends the sense of both words. The other occurrence of the medial participle átamāna- (II.38.3) does not signal the type of purposeful motion implied by those translations; there are no other middle forms in the RV, only a single active (I.30.4), whose goal-oriented motion can be accounted for by both the voice and the presence of a preverb. Assuming that √at is continued by younger √aṭ (see EWA, s.v. AT), the usual gloss of the root, ‘wander’, is probably accurate. As for samará-, it is obviously formed of the same elements (sám √ṛ lit. ‘come/move together’) as samáraṇa-, which does usually mean ‘collision, conflict’ (cf. also the hapax denom. samaryáti), and it has a derivative samaryá- that generally refers to the same. But samará- itself is found only twice elsewhere, both times in the meaning ‘gathering, confluence’ with a genitive expressing goods or spoils (VI.47.6 samaré vásūnām, X.139.3 samaré dhánānām), a benign assemblage rather than a hostile clashing together. Thus, “entering the contest” is at best a weakly supported interpr. of samaré ’tamānāḥ; we are free to interpret that phrase differently and, with the supposed rival poet-competitors removed from the passage, to concentrate on the real competition -- that between the poet and his father, as set out in the second hemistich of this vs. However, let us first consider the rest of the first half-verse. The poet expresses his ignorance of three things: tántum … ótum … yáṃ váyanti. Most tr. try to make tántum and ótum grammatically parallel, either by making them both nouns (e.g., Re “Je ne connais point la lisse ni la trame …”) or both infinitives (e.g., Thieme “Nicht verstehe ich [die Fäden des Aufzugs] zu spannen, nicht [die Fäden des Einschlags] zu weben.”). This is understandable, since the two terms are identically formed, with full-grade accented root and -tu- suffix. However, this morphological identity conceals a difference in usage. tántu- behaves like a straight noun: it has nominative forms; it occurs in the plural; it has adjectives modifying it (e.g., IX.83.2 śócantaḥ … tántavaḥ, as well as tatá- ‘stretched’ several times) and genitives dependent on it (e.g., IX.73.9 ṛtásya tántuḥ). By contrast, outside of this hymn ótu- is found only in the clear dative infinitives ótave (X.130.2) and ótavaí (I.164.5, where in fact acc. pl. tántūn is construed with it). I therefore think that tántum and ótum in this passage are non-parallel, just as the third source of ignorance, expressed in a rel.

cl., is not parallel to either of the others. In my view, having three non-parallel objects to the verb ví jānāmi makes the bewilderment stronger: it’s not just three different things the poet doesn’t understand, but three categories of things -- which categories of things are expressed by different grammatical categories: a noun, an infinitive, a relative clause (without antecedent). “I do not understand the thread (noun), nor (how) “to weave” (infinitive), nor “what they weave” (rel. cl.). Although

-tum infinitives are quite rare in the RV (5 stems, acdg. to Macdonell VG §586b, Re
GLV §371), I suggest that ótum was formed and used here, rather than the already existing dat. inf., to provide this grammatical contrast with apparently identical tántum.

Since, contra the standard tr., I do not believe that the subject of the verb váyanti refers to rival poets, I must propose a different subject. Here the alternative possibilities for átamāna- and samará-, as discussed above, provide the clues, along with a rudimentary understanding (which is all I have) of the weaving process. With the warp threads (tántu-) stretched lengthwise on the loom, “wandering” is a pleasingly apt description of the way the weft threads go alternately under and over the warp threads proceeding horizontally, and this mingling of warp and weft could easily be characterized as “a meeting/gathering.” My only uncertainty is the precise identity of the subjects who do the weaving (váyanti). Are they the weft threads themselves as they wander over and under? Are they the human weavers, or their fingers, manipulating the weft threads? Or some technological substitute like shuttles.

As MLW reminds me, that Vedic India knew such technology is clear from X.130, a cosmogonic hymn whose operative metaphor is weaving and that contains a word plausibly taken to be ‘shuttle’ (tásara- in vs. 2).

Of course, since the weaving in this verse is metaphorical for poetic composition, ultimately the subjects of váyanti must underlyingly be poets — those who do know how and what to “weave.” But my point here is that the imagery of weaving is carried further than the standard brahmodya interpretation allows: the wandering and the coming together refer to the weaving process, not to a putative poetic competition. Moreover, with the contest interpr. banished, the underlying poets need not be guys physically present in the next room, as it were, polishing their verses; they can be any poets in the tradition. Which brings us to the father.

The second hemistich contains two sets of polarized terms: putrá- / pitár- ‘son’ / ‘father’ and pará- / ávara- ‘above’ / ‘below’. (That pará- and ávara- make up a polarized pair is clear from numerous passages in which they are contrasted [e.g., I.164.17, X.88.17].) The case assignment in the text, nominative for the first of each pair, instrumental for the second, makes it clear that it is the son who is above, the father below, although this is the counterintuitive pairing. As noted in the publ. intro., despite his professed ignorance of poetic craft, the young poet feels that he must not only equal but surpass his father, to further the poetic lineage. That pará- can mean not only ‘higher’ but also ‘further’, while ávara- means both ‘below’ and ‘nearer’, allows the sense of “furthering” the line also to be read in the passage. The father is close by, both to the poet and the present moment, but the poet himself must go farther, in the future, beyond the model of his father, to speak “what is to be said” (váktvāni); it is perhaps ironic that the only other occurrence of váktva- in the RV outside this hymn is as a genitive pl. dependent on ‘father’: III.26.9 pitáraṃ váktvānām “the father of what is to be said,” referring to Agni. It is a nice touch in our vs. that because ‘father’ is in the instr., it better fits the phonological template of ‘son’ than the direct cases would: putrá … pitrā́.

