+++
title = "03"

+++
This vs. is responsive to vs. 2, repeating pāda a almost verbatim, while transposing it into the 3rd ps. from the 1st and into the positive from the negative. The 2nd pāda abbreviates the 2nd hemistich of vs. 2, pulling out the all-important object and verb (váktvāni … vadāti) that had been scattered across two pādas in vs. 2. The 2nd hemistich introduces new material — identifying the person who does know what the poet says he doesn’t yet — while replacing the pará- / ávara- pair with the almost identical pára- / aváḥ ‘below’ [adv.].

The first half-verse with its near identical repetition is straightforward, but, with its repetition of “just he … he … he” (sá íd … sá … sá) as the subj. of ‘knows’ and ‘will speak’, it promises both a resolution to the poet’s anxiety of ignorance in 2ab and an answer to the question “whose son?” (kásya putráḥ) in 2cd.

But though the identity of the “he” of 3ab is surely revealed by the relative cl.

in the 2nd hemistich, beginning “who …” (yáḥ, 3c), the referent is far from clear.

There are both an apparent and apparently obvious answer and, in my opinion anyway, a covert but enlightening answer that depends on tricky manipulation of the words as given -- which is, after all, the point of the hymn, to learn the ins and outs of verbal weaving. The standard tr. take Agni as the subject of the whole vs.; he is the one who know the thread and the weaving and can say the things to be said.

There is a good, obvious piece of evidence that this interpr. is correct: the subject of the relative clause in c appears to be identified as amṛ́tasya gopā́ḥ “the herdsman of the immortal.” This epithet was used of Agni only two hymns previously (VI.7.7); it seems to clinch the identification. But note what precedes it: yá īṃ cíketat “who will perceive him/it.” Ge (fld. by Doniger) takes īm as referring to the thread, while Re simply ignores it. But Thieme takes amṛ́tasya gopā́ḥ as the content of the act of perception, as a quotation: “der ihn (Gott Feuer) erkannt: ‘[Er ist] der Hüter des Lebens,’” with īm the obj. of cíketat anticipating the revelation of Agni’s role and power in the quote. I find Thieme’s interpr. very persuasive. The one who knows all this is not Agni, but the poet who rightly perceives Agni, who possesses the esoteric knowledge acquired by contemplating the ritual fire and receiving its vision.

Thieme then takes pāda d as referring to the poet-subject of c, but I think we can go one better: d is both a description of the poet, as Thieme takes it, and a continuation of the right perception of Agni that the poet received, the second part of the quoted revelation “he is the herdman of the immortal.” In this latter interpr., Agni “moves about below” (aváś cáran) as the ritual fire of mortals, but “sees above the other one” (paró anyéna páśyan), because he (in the form of smoke) goes to heaven bringing the oblations to the gods. By my rules of placement for anyá- (1997, Fs.

Beekes), it should be definite here (“the other,” not “another,” as in most interpr.).

Here “the other” is quite possibly the sun, which is Agni’s allo-form but also presumably somewhat lower in heaven than the smoke carrying the oblations. In the alternative application of this pāda, to the poet, I differ in some crucial ways from Thieme (whose interpr. I will not present further here). The poet also “moves about below” not only as a mortal on the earth, but also as a son, who in one sense is “below” his father in the lineage. But he “sees above the other,” who is the father whose skills he is trying to best. Though in this pāda both aváḥ and pára- refer to the son, whereas in 2cd pára- referred to the son and ávara- to the father, here the ultimate superiority of the son is triumphantly announced, whereas in 2cd this outcome was in question. The cleverness and intricacy of this 2nd hemistich, esp.

immediately following the near verbatim repetition found in the first, is a clear demonstration that the young poet has come into his skills and his poetic heritage.

