+++
title = "05-06"

+++
The transference of the properties and powers of Agni to our poet is explicit in these two vss. In 5a Agni is light set down or deposited (jyótir níhitam); in 5b he is “swiftest mind” (máno jáviṣṭham). In 6b the poet comments on “this light that has been deposited in (my) heart” (idáṃ jyótir hṛ́daya ā́hitaṃ yát; note the neardeictic idám again), and in 6c “my mind goes widely” (ví me mánaś carati).

The two vss. are also contrastive. In 5 all the gods sharing the same mind and the same perception (sámanasaḥ sáketāḥ) converge on Agni as the single focus of their intention or resolve (ékaṃ krátum abhí ví yanti sādhú), whereas in 6 the poet vividly describes the dis-integration of his senses, emphasized by the repetition of ví ‘widely, apart). But rather than expressing a worrisome loss of physical and mental control, the vs. seems rather to dramatize the exciting expansion of his sensory horizons, the limitless potentials for thought and speech that he now experiences. His ears flying apart (ví me kárṇā patayataḥ), his mind moving widely (ví me mánaḥ carati) are anticipated by Agni’s mind “swiftest among those flying” (jáviṣṭham patáyatsu), and the insistent ví in this vs. is given a positive spin by the pattern of vi-s leading to vaiśvānará-, as discussed above. In the omphalos structure this vs. is twinned with vs. 2, where the poet worried about his lack of knowledge and skill; here his mind and body can literally not contain the possibilities. One index to the change in his mental attitude may be shown by the difference in mood between the tentative subjunctive vadāti in 2d and the purposeful future vakṣyāmi in 6d. Both are in questions, but the first wonders “whose son will (be able) to speak …?” while the latter seems only to question which of the many possibilities he should begin with: “what shall I say?” There are only two finite forms of the future to √vac in the RV (plus one participial form), so the choice of this form must be marked here. The other is pravakṣyā́maḥ in I.162.1, announcing the recital of the heroic deeds (vīryā̀ṇi) of the horse to be sacrificed and therefore functioning exactly like the more common, likewise annunciatory prá vocam (e.g., in the famous opening of the Indra-Vṛtra hymn I.32.1 índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi prá vocam). The correspondent of this future is found rather often in Old Avestan, where 1st sg. (fra) vaxšiiā regularly performs the same function of proclamation, as in Y 30.1, 45.1 — perhaps indicating a common IIr. employment of this future as an introducer of formal praise. The use of this form here suggests that our speaker is foreseeing his role as official encomiast and poet of record, not simply casting about for something to say. It is possible that svid (kíṃ svid vakṣyāmi) contributes to this sense, but I don’t have a good sense of the function of this particle in the RV.

