+++
title = "07"

+++
The final vs. of the hymn forms the outer frame of the omphalos structure with vs. 1. We have already noted the responsion of hemistich-initial vaiśvānaráḥ in 1c and 7c and the only two occurrences of the stem agní- in 1d and 7b. Another important verbal repetition is támas-, the last word of vs. 1, found in 7b in the phrase támasi tasthivā́ṃsam “(Agni,) standing in darkness.” The sentence in which this is found seems an odd way to end a hymn: “all the gods, in fear (bhiyānā́ḥ), offered homage (anamasyan) to you, while you were standing in darkness.” Why are the gods afraid and what time period does the augmented imperfect refer to? And why is this somewhat downbeat statement the real end of the hymn (the last hemistich being a generic request for aid)? I don’t have certain answers to these questions, but I think the omphalos structure gives us some guidance. This final vs. seems not simply to circle round to the 1st vs., but in fact to take us to a time (right) before the events depicted in the first vs. In vs. 1 Agni overcame the darkness with his light (1d); here he is still in darkness, before he has become equipped with light, before he has been kindled, in fact. The gods are afraid because they fear he won’t light up -- and, reading between the lines, he will only light up if the human ritualists kindle him.

Even the gods are dependent on our dawn sacrifice, and, reading further between those lines, our newly minted poet will have a crucial role in making that sacrifice succeed.

The last hemistich has a curious etymological figure, repeated for emphasis: avatūtáye (i.e., avatu ūtáye) “let him help for help.”