+++
title = "14"

+++
14. [^4]  (The Brahman) stations himself to the east of that (grass), facing the west, and with the thumb and the fourth finger of his left hand he takes one grass blade from the Brahman's seat and throws it away to the south-west, in the intermediate direction (between south and west), with (the words), 'Away has been thrown the dispeller of wealth.'


[^4]:  The ceremonies stated in this Sūtra have to be performed by the Brahman. This is stated in the commentary, and the comparison p. 30 of parallel texts leaves no doubt as to the correctness of this view. Thus Hiraṇyakeśin says (I, 1): etasmin kāle brahmā yajñopavītaṃ kṛtvāpa ācamyāpareṇāgniṃ dakṣiṇātikramya brahmasadanāt tṛṇaṃ nirasya, &c. Comp. also the corresponding passages of the Śrauta ritual given by Hillebrandt, Neu- and Vollmondsopfer, p. 17. I do not think it probable, however, that we should read brahmāऽsanāt, so that it would be distinctly expressed by the text that the Brahman is the subject (comp. Dr. Knauer's Introduction, p. viii). For we read in this same Sūtra brahmāsanāt tṛṇam abhisaṃgṛhya; in Sūtra 15, brahmāsana upaviśati; in Sūtra 21, brahmāsane nidhāya: of these passages it is in the second made probable by the sense, and it is certain in the third, that brahmāsana is to be understood as a compound equal to brahmasadana. Thus it would, in my opinion, be unnatural not to explain it in the same way also in the first passage. Parāvasu is opposed to Vasu (Sūtra 15) in the same way as some texts, for instance Āpastamba, oppose Parāgvasu to Arvāgvasu.
