+++
title = "03"

+++
The stem vánanvant-, in my opinion, must be separated into two separate words on semantic grounds, neither of which is entirely clear morphologically. In VIII.102.19 and X.92.15, where it is associated with an axe (svádhiti-) in the identical phrase svádhitir vánanvati, it appears to belong with vána- ‘wood’. Cf. for the association IX.96.3 ... svádhitir vánānām, X.89.7 svádhitir váneva But in VIII.6.34 it modifies matíḥ ‘thought’ in a context in which ‘wood(en)’ seems effectively excluded. In both VIII.1.31 and our passage I also find it difficult to make ‘wooden’ work, though Ge, for example, thinks our voc. addressed to Dawn (may -- he tags it with ? --) mean “Wagenbesitzende,” on the assumption that the wagon is 108 wooden and the material has come to refer to the object made of it. In VIII.1.31, where it modifies ‘horses’ (áśvān), he takes it as referring to their wooden yokes. (He refuses to tr. the form in VIII.6.34.) Mayrhofer (both KEWA s.v. vánam and EWA s.v. ván-) favors the ‘wood’ connection as well, and in EWA suggests that vánan- is the -n-form of a heteroclite, whose -r- is found in the locatival 1st cmpd member vanar- (though one would of course not expect the -r- in the oblique). Re, having written in favor of the ‘wood’ connection (BSL 37: 19), disavows it in his n. to this passage in EVP III, in favor of “gracieuse,” on what seem firm grounds. Old discusses the problem with his customary acuity and decides for a derivation from √van ‘win, hold dear’, with a pun on ‘wood’ in VIII.102.19 and X.92.15. Although I generally favor seeing audacious metaphors in the RV, in this particular case I find that putting all the forms of vánanvant- under one rubric unduly stretches the metaphorical fabric -- though I might be open to Old’s suggestion that in VIII.102.19 and X.92.15 there is a pun on ‘wood’, but the form belongs with √van. This does not, however, help with the morphology. I tentatively suggest that the form derived from √van is the result of the further derivation or contamination of originally participial forms. The 8th class present to √van vanóti has an act. part. vanvánt-; if this acquired a -vant-suffix, the result would be in the first instance *vanv-án(t)-vant-, which by dissimilation of the middle -v- could develop into our form (though with accent shift).

Or the pf. part. vavan-váṃs- could have dissimilated to *vanan-váṃs- (again accent is a problem). Or, starting with the pres. part. vanv-ánt-, we could imagine a perseverative form *vanv-an(t)-ant-, with migration of the 2nd -v-. Or we can confect an intens. stem *vanvan- with participle *vanvan-a(n)t-, again with flip of the v. But all of these scenarios are pure fantasy, I’m afraid. As for the form putatively derived from ‘wood’, I have even less idea, though I suppose it’s worth pointing out that all attested forms from both stems vanánvant- actually have the weak form of the suffix

-vat- and *vana-vatV, built directly to vána-, would be metrically unfavorable.

