+++
title = "04"

+++
This vs. presents several minor syntactic problems. Pāda b contains two apparent datival infinitives, the almost synonymous prakhyaí and dṛśé, most likely to be construed with kṛṇóṣi in pāda a. The standard interpr. take the two infinitives as separate parallel constructions, though the details of these constructions differ acdg.

to tr. (cf., besides Ge and Re, Scar [353] and Keydana [Inf., 167, 203]). As a typical ex., see Scar’s “… die du … machst, dass man sieht und man das Licht schaut.” Although as far as I know there is no way to tell, I prefer to take both the datives with svàr; the standard expression svàr dṛśé indicates that the sun is visible, available for seeing, while prakhyaí is used in a similar fashion to cákṣase in 1c.

The 2nd hemistich is more problematic. The first question is the grammatical identity of ratnabhā́jaḥ, which could be gen. sg. and modify immediately preceding fem. gen. tásyās te, or nom. pl. and modify the implied pl. subj. ‘we’ of immediately following 1st pl. īmahe. Ge opts for the latter (“… die du Belohnungen austeilst”), but Old, Re, and Scar favor the nom. pl., as do I. For one thing other -bhā́j- cmpds have similar syntacto-semantic value (“having a share of X”), rather than the transitive sense (“sharing out X”) required by the gen. interpr. It is of course possible that the 109 positioning between the gen. sg. and the 1st pl. was deliberate, and the form is meant to be ambiguous.

The other problem lies in the interpr. of the two verbs īmahe (c) and syā́ma (d). The standard interpr. take the pāda break as a clause break (“as sharers of your treasure we beseech you; may we be like sons …”). I find this mildly problematic, in that ratnabhā́jaḥ would be better construed with syā́ma (“might we be sharers …”) than with īmahe, and I have therefore taken it that way, with īmahe parenthetical and the simile in d an adjunct. This interpr. is supported by VI.71.6 vāmabhā́jaḥ syāma “May we be partakers of the valuables” (sim. III.55.22 sákhāyas te vāmabhā́jaḥ syāma). However, my interpr. not only complicates the syntax slightly, but the lack of accent on parenthetical īmahe might be troublesome -- though I don’t have strong intuitions on how verbal accent works with parentheticals. (The one example I can come up with, however, does accent the verb that interrupts the clause: X.95.1 mánasā tíṣṭha ghore vácāṃsi miśrā́kṛṇavāvahai nau “Thoughtfully -- stand still, fearsome woman! -- let us two now exchange words.”) In any case it might be better to follow the standard interpr. and tr. something like “we beseech you ([for us] to be) sharers in your treasure; may we be like sons to a mother” -- though as the tr. shows, taking īmahe with ratnabhā́jaḥ requires more semantic machinery.

In c tásyās te is a fairly unusual ex. of the double sá tvám construction. As is sometimes the case with oblique forms of this construction, I think it likely that the tásyāḥ is there to indicate the gender of the personal pronoun -- though, given the Dawn context, the fem. gender of te could hardly be a secret.

