+++
title = "+018"

+++
18 (314)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
13 verses: triṣṭubh
A famous and enigmatic hymn recounting the prodigious and unnatural birth of  Indra, partly in dialogue form. The hymn begins with a two-verse exchange between  Indra’s mother and the as-yet-unborn Indra: she tries to persuade him to be born  in normal fashion, but, like many heroes world-wide, he insists on an unusual exit,  from her side. Indra is already conscious of his great destiny (see vs. 2cd). The preg
nancy has lasted abnormally long (see vs. 4ab), and after the birth Indra’s mother  appears to abandon him to make his own way (vss. 3ab, 4ab, 8ab, 10cd), but also  hides him (vs. 5ab) and worries about his fate (vs. 11ab). Again like heroes the world  over, Indra is born full-grown and ready to perform great feats (see vs. 5cd), so  that his mother’s protection is not necessary. In verse 3 he follow his mother as she  abandons him and ends up at Tvaṣṭar’s house, where he drinks Tvaṣṭar’s soma.  Elsewhere Tvaṣṭar is presented as Indra’s father (e.g., III.48.2–4, possibly in the previous hymn IV.17.4), and by stealing and drinking his soma, Indra defeats him  (see III.48, where Indra’s mother abets him). Our verse contains no mention of this  rivalry and conflict, but it may be alluded to indirectly toward the end of the hymn  (see below).
In the middle part of the hymn (vss. 6–9) another set of voices (at least in our  opinion) joins the dialogue, that of various waters. These waters seem to represent  benevolent foster mothers (see esp. vss. 7–8), like the rivers attending the birth of  Urvaśī’s son in X.95.7, and their protective aid for Indra contrasts with his mother’s  ambivalence and alienation. But they are also assimilated to the waters released by  Indra in the Vr̥tra myth, as Indra’s mother makes explicit in verse 7. It may be that  both identities were suggested by a natural phenomenon, the breaking of a preg
nant woman’s waters right before birth; the sudden release of those waters is remi niscent of the release in the Vr̥tra myth, while the association of the waters with the  infant being born suggests their beneficent relationship with the fetus in the womb.  Indra’s mother ends this section by disavowing any blame for Indra’s temporary  disadvantage in the Indra–Vr̥tra battle (vs. 9). If we are correct, the second pāda of  this verse alludes glancingly to snakes’ ability to reconfigure their jaws to swallow  large prey, a striking naturalistic image—one of the incidental fragments of realia  to be gleaned from the R̥gveda.
The final verses of the hymn are even more puzzling than what precedes them.  After the episode of the waters and the Vr̥tra battle, we return to the original scene  of Indra’s birth and his mother’s abandonment of him (vs. 10), though in her worry  about his isolation she follows him (vs. 11ab), a mirror image of him following her  in verse 3ab. He does find a companion to aid in the Vr̥tra battle, namely Viṣṇu,  in verse 11cd. The next verse (12) asks a series of rhetorical questions—or they  would be rhetorical if we were certain of the answers. The questions center around  a family tragedy of a type very familiar from world mythology: a father with mur derous intent toward his son (possibly still in the womb; vs. 12b) and the killing  of the father by the son (vs. 12d), an act that leaves his mother a widow (vs. 12a).  Is the father Tvaṣṭar, mentioned briefly and without hostility in the earlier part of  the hymn (vs. 3), or Vr̥tra, whose destruction was depicted several times (vss. 7cd,  9)—or both, or neither? In any case the questions are reminiscent of the question  near the end of the famous Indra-Vr̥tra hymn I.32, when Indra flees after winning  the battle: verse 14 “Whom did you see, Indra, as the avenger of the serpent when  fear came into your heart after you smashed him, / and when you crossed over the  ninety-nine flowing rivers, like a frightened falcon through the airy realms?” And  the final verse of IV.18 (13) seems to depict Indra after such a flight, alone and  in exile, eating taboo food out of necessity and witness to the dishonoring of his  mother because of her widowed state. His own condition only improves when the  falcon steals soma and brings it to him (vs. 13d), a tale that will be treated later in  this cycle in IV.26–27.
Although the abrupt shifts of scene and chronology and the lack of context  in each new scene produce some frustration in the reader (not to speak of the

translator), the vivid focus of each episode and the dramatic tension in each snippet  of speech cause the hymn to resonate in the imagination long after a more rational  account would have done.