+++
title = "11"

+++
In c Ge tr. āsúḥ as if it were a present: “die Agni zur Zunge haben und die Wahrheit pflegen.” Although this is contextually tempting, the pf. of √as is never presential. Cf. Kü (111): “Es ist stets (zumindest auch) vergangenheits bezogen gebraucht.” At best we could render it “who have (always) had Agni as their tongue …”; this might in fact be better.

In any case the pf. āsúḥ in c matches cakrúḥ in d, and this latter action appears to be one in the distant past -- even though it’s not entirely clear what action it refers to. Interpr. is not helped by the fact that dása- is a hapax, though it is reasonable, with Ge (n. 11d), to take it as “der mythische Stammvater der Dāsa’s oder Dasyu’s,” or indeed referentially identical with the well-attested stem dā́sa- referring to some variety of enemy to the Ārya (see Old, etc.). But what the relationship between Manu and Dasa is in this passage and what the gods were attempting to bring about are both unclear -- an unclarity also facilitated by the ambiguity of úpara-, which can mean, inter alia, ‘lower’, ‘closer’, or ‘later’. The publ. tr. “… put Manu very close to Dasa” is opaque; in fact I do not now know what I meant by it. Ge takes úpara- as ‘later’ and assumes that the gods made Manu Dasa’s successor (Nachfolger). I am now inclined towards Old’s solution, however: that the gods put Manu below (the ‘lower’ sense of úpara-) in the earthly region “for Dasa,” with the dative of malefit, not benefit: they set Manu to do to Dasa whatever he deserved. MLW comments “Wouldn't this most sense if it meant 'they made Manus superior to Dasa’? Could the original meaning of *upara- as preserved in Avestan, be kept here? For the sentiment cf. VI.19.13 śátroḥ-śatror úttara ít syāma.” this would be a neat solution, though I wonder whether a reading that requires the opposite sense (‘above’) of one of the senses of this stem (‘lower’) would be available.

