+++
title = "24"

+++
Note the relatively elementary figure in c máyo (no) bhūta … mayobhuvaḥ.

The voc. asacadviṣaḥ has given rise to multiple competing analyses, well summarized by Scar in his detailed treatment of this hapax (246-48). Most start with dviṣ- ‘hatred, hater’ as 2nd member and some form of √sac ‘follow, accompany’ as its first, governing the second. The problem is what form of √sac? It cannot be a straighforward thematic verbal stem or participle/injunctive (saca- or sacat- [though

*asacad-dviṣaḥ is a phonologically possible underlying form]) because the Class I
pres. of √sac is resolutely middle. (Debrunner [Nachtr. AiG II.1.87] also disputes this analysis on the basis that the accent is wrong for a verbal governing cmpd of that sort, but since the form is a voc. and unaccented, this argument is inapplicable. [It does apply to the other form he mentions, jaradvíṣ-, but these forms do not have to be parallel.]) It is also possible to take it as a standard type of root noun cmpd with the root noun governing the 1st member (‘hating the asaca’ or ‘not hating the saca’; at some point I toyed with the idea of ‘hating the non-aligned’), but this still founders on the puzzle of asaca-. Scar’s own solution is to divide the cmpd differently, as asacad-víṣ-, with √viṣ ‘bring about’ as 2nd member and a form of √sac (2) ‘dry out’ as 1st member, hence ‘not bringing about drought’ or ‘bringing about non-drought’.

Unfortunately getting -sacat- from this root requires a lot of not too plausible machinery -- it is no more straightforward than deriving -saca(t)- from √sac (1) -- though I am sympathetic to his argument that the meaning would fit well with the Maruts’ character. My own ‘who do not partner hatred’ rests essentially on a loose interpr. of the verbal governing analysis presented first above, though I hold no particular brief for it. I would point out that if it does contain √sac ‘accompany’, it could pair contrastively with sakhāyaḥ in the preceding vs. (23c). A very weak argument for √sac (1) and √dviṣ could be constructed on the basis of VIII.22.2, a hymn to the Aśvins but also composed by Sobhari. There the Aśvins’ chariot is described as sacanā́vantam ‘provided with companions’ vel sim., the first word of pāda c, and as vídveṣasam ‘free of hatred’, the first word of pāda d, with the same two roots. But I would not make much of this.

