+++
title = "001"

+++
1 (713)
Soma Pavamāna
Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra
10 verses: gāyatrī
The poet to whom the Anukramaṇī ascribes this hymn has the same name as the  poet of the first collection of hymns in the R̥gveda: Madhuchandas Vaiśvāmitra is  the author named for I.1–11 (and a descendant, Jetar Mādhuchandasa, for I.12). It  is possible that in the absence of a known author the Anukramaṇī simply borrowed  the name for this first hymn; in fact, the first four hymns of the IXth Maṇḍala are  attributed to the first four authors of Maṇḍala I.  On the other hand, the Soma  Pavamāna hymns of the first four poets of Maṇḍala I may have been selected to  begin the Soma Maṇḍala in order to provide an ordered framework.
The command “purify yourself” (pávasva) is the first word of the second pāda of  this hymn and sets the theme for the entire maṇḍala: “self-purifying” soma. This first  verse also introduces the necessary complement to this self-purifying soma, namely  the consumer of soma par excellence, Indra. Thus the verse encapsulates in its sim
plicity the endlessly repeated and often monotonous concerns of the maṇḍala. The  second verse alludes to the technical details of soma’s preparation, another topic  that will preoccupy the hymns to follow. Soma’s powers to benefit men and gods  directly are the subject of verses 3–5, while his power to stimulate Indra to do the  same, an indirect benefit for both populations, closes the hymn (vs. 10).
Verses 6–9 contain more idiosyncratic material, a catalogue of female beings  who aid in the preparation of soma. True, both the fingers that perform the press ing, metaphorically described in verses 7–8, and the cows that provide the milk to  mix with soma (vs. 9) are common denizens of soma hymns, but the Daughter of  the Sun is not: she otherwise appears in the IXth Maṇḍala only almost at the end,  in IX.113.3. It is unclear what her role is here; perhaps she signals the Morning  Pressing. Moreover, the “skin pipe” blown by the maidens in verse 8 is somewhat  puzzling; on the basis of other passages (I.117.21 and VII.89.2) it appears to be  a musical instrument, but how this image is meant to apply to soma (perhaps the  stalk?) and how the fingers can also “blow” is not clear.
In short, most of this hymn is familiar, not to say clichéd, material in soma  hymns, but as usual there are small deviations and striking images that challenge  our notion that the soma hymns, particularly those in gāyatrī meter, are an undif ferentiated mass of repetitive phrases.
## 01
Purify yourself in the sweetest, most exhilarating stream, Soma,
when you are pressed for Indra to drink.
## 02
Demon-smasher, common to all domains, he has reached his seat upon  the metal-hammered womb,
upon his sitting place, by means of the wooden (vessel).
## 03
Become the best establisher of the wide realm, most munificent, best  smasher of obstacles.
Deliver (to us) the bounty of the liberal ones.

## 04
Rush to the pursuit of the great gods with your stalk,
to the prize of victory and to fame.
## 05
Toward you do we proceed; this is just our goal every day.
O drop, in you are our hopes.
## 06
The Daughter of the Sun purifies your circling soma
with the fleece-filter in unfailing measure.
## 07
Him do the delicate ones grasp at the clash—the ten maidens [=fingers], the sisters—on the decisive day.
## 08
Him do the unwed girls impel, as they blow the skin bagpipe,
him, the threefold wild honey.
## 09
And him do the inviolable milk-cows prepare, as their child,
the soma, for Indra to drink.
## 10
In the raptures of just this (soma) Indra the champion keeps smashing  all obstacles
and bestows bounties.