+++
title = "002"

+++
2 (714) Soma Pavamāna
Medhātithi Kāṇva
10 verses: gāyatrī
Medhātithi Kāṇva is the named poet of several hymns in the first half of Maṇḍala  VIII (2–3, 32), with its predominantly Kāṇva authorship—but more to the point  also of the second division of Maṇḍala I (I.12–23). So, just as the first hymn of IX  is ascribed to the poet of the first hymns of Maṇḍala I, the second hymn of IX is  said to have been composed by the poet of the second collection in I.
The hymn begins with the signature command “purify yourself” (pávasva), and  the first word of the second pāda belongs to the same root: pavítram, the “means  of purifying,” that is, the filter. The first verses in general follow the steps in the  preparation of soma after the pressing proper: the filtering of the pressed soma  (vs. 1), into a vessel (vs. 2) with water (vss. 3–4), followed by the mixing with milk  (vs. 4). This process is summarized in grandiose and cosmic terms in the following  two verses (5–6), with the verbal accompaniment, the hymns and prayers, intro
duced in verses 7–8. Verse 9 echoes the earlier part of the hymn, particularly verse  3, and the poet ends (vs. 10) with a description of all of Soma’s winnings, which  can be interpreted as a covert request for Soma to provide us with these items.
There is nothing particularly noteworthy or out of the ordinary in this hymn,  which could be taken as a prototypical Soma hymn.
## 1
Purify yourself across the filter at speed, Soma, pursuing the gods. As a bull, enter Indra, o drop.
## 2
Coil yourself toward great enjoyment, o drop, as the most
heaven-bright bull. Sit steadfast on your womb.
## 3
The stream of the pressed one, of the ritual adept, has milked out its  own dear honey.
Very resolute, he has clothed himself in the waters.
## 4
The great waters, the rivers, rush after you, the great one,
when you will clothe yourself with the cows.
## 5
The sea has been groomed in the waters—the prop and buttress of heaven, the soma in the filter, seeking us.
## 6
The tawny bull has bellowed; the great one, lovely to see like an ally, shines along with the sun.
## 7
O drop, the industrious songs are constantly groomed by your power, the songs by which you are (in turn) beautified for exhilaration.
## 8
We implore you, who make wide space, for ardent exhilaration.
To you belong great praise songs.
## 9
For us, o drop, while seeking Indra, purify yourself in a stream
of honey,
like rain-bearing Parjanya.
## 10
O drop, you are cow-winning, man-winning, horse-winning, and  prize-winning.
You are the ancient embodiment of the sacrifice.