+++
title = "003"

+++
3 (715)
Soma Pavamāna
Śunaḥśepa Ājiīgarti
10 verses: gāyatrī
Following the pattern set by IX.1–2, the Anukramaṇī gives as the poet of  this hymn the author of the third collection of hymns in Maṇḍala I  (24–30),  Śunaḥśepa Ājīgarti, also the protagonist of the famous Aitareya Brāhmaṇa story  of father/son sacrifice (AiB VII.13–18), related during the Rājasūya, the Royal  Consecration.
The hymn is verbally unified by the “this (one)” (eṣá), which begins every verse.  It is thematically unified by its focus on only one step of the preparation, the filter ing through sheep’s wool that is the self-purification proper. A form of the verb  “purify oneself” appears in seven of the ten verses (and “filter” derived from the  same root in an eighth; only vss. 1 and 6 lack such a form). The poet provides vari ety with a range of images, from the bird of verse 1 to the chariot rider in verse 5,  and as is common he conflates, and equates, the ritual and cosmic spheres. So, for  example, the filter across which the soma moves is both a tangle of wool (vs. 2) and  the vast spaces of heaven and the atmosphere (vs. 7).
## 1
This god, the immortal, flies like a bird on the wing
toward the wooden cups to take his seat.

## 2
This god, created by poetic inspiration, streaks across the tangles (of  sheep’s wool)
purifying himself, impossible to deceive.
## 3
This god, the tawny one, purifying himself,
is groomed for the prize by the admiring (poets) who pursue the truth. 4. This one, like a champion traveling with his warriors,
strives to win all desirable things, while he purifies himself.
## 5
This god rides on a chariot; while he purifies himself, he shows his favor and makes manifest his noise.
## 6
This one, praised by the inspired poets, the god, plunges through the  waters,
establishing treasures for the pious man.
## 7
This one streaks through heaven, across the airy spaces in his stream, whinnying again and again as he purifies himself.
## 8
This one has now run through heaven, across the airy spaces, and  cannot be recaptured—
good at the rite as he purifies himself.
## 9
This one, pressed in the way of his ancient birth, the god pressed  for gods,
the tawny one, rushes into the filter.
## 10
And this one here, he of much authority, giving birth to refreshing  drinks while he is being born,
purifies himself in a stream when he is pressed.