+++
title = "005"

+++
5 (717)
Āprı̄
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
11 verses: gāyatrī 1–7, anuṣṭubh 8–11
An interesting hybrid: the poet has taken the strict patterning of the Āprī hymns of  the animal sacrifice, in which each verse contains a key word or phrase (italicized  in translation) and the verses appear in the same order, and adapted it to the Soma  Pavamāna genre. The same key words are found in the same order, but they are  no longer directly addressed to or descriptive of a series of different divinities and  divinized ritual elements. Instead Soma is sometimes identified with the divinity

of the original Āprī verse (vss. 2, 7), or characterized by the epithet used for that  divinity (vss. 1, 3), or, most often, he manipulates the divinized element (vss. 4, 5,  10) or associates with the Āprī divinity at the sacrifice (vss. 6, 8, 9, 11). Each verse  contains a form of pávamāna “self-purifying” to anchor the Āprī structure to the  soma context.
## 1
Enkindled, the self-purifying lord shines forth in every direction,
giving pleasure, the ever-roaring bull.
## 2
As Tanūnapāt, the self-purifying one, sharpening his horns, rushes through the midspace, ever-shining.
## 3
Worthy to be invoked, the self-purifying one, heaven-bright wealth,  shines forth
with his streams of honey, with his strength.
## 4
The tawny self-purifying one, strewing the ritual grass toward the east  with his strength,
speeds as a god to the gods.
## 5
With their frames the golden Divine Doors open up aloft,
well praised by the self-purifying one.
## 6
The self-purifying one acts the bull to the two handsomely adorned  females, lofty and great,
Night and Dawn, like two (women) lovely to see.
## 7
Both gods who have the gaze of men, the two Divine Hotars, do  I summon—
the self-purifying one and Indra the bull.
## 8
Bhāratī, Sarasvatī, and Iḍā the great, the three goddesses of beautiful  ornaments,
will come here to this sacrifice of ours for the self-purifying one.
## 9
Tvaṣṭar, the first-born herdsman who journeys in advance, do
I summon here.
The drop is Indra, the tawny bull; the self-purifying one is Prajāpati.
## 10
O self-purifying one, with your honeyed stream anoint the Lord of the  Forest,
the tawny one with a thousand branches, blazing, golden.
## 11
All you gods, come here to the svāhā-cry of the self-purifying one: Vāyu, Br̥haspati, the Sun, Agni, and Indra, all of one accord.