+++
title = "006"

+++
6 (718)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
9 verses: gāyatrī
Soma’s journey—to the gods, to Indra, and to us, as well as to the state of exhila ration and to material rewards—is the primary subject of this hymn. In the last two verses (8–9) Soma’s association with poetry and with the exercise of poetic  skill is mentioned. The last statement, that Soma takes to himself hymns, though  they are hidden, is not entirely clear, but it may refer to his ability to stimulate  poetic inspiration, and to cause poets to create new hymns from deep within  themselves.
Noteworthy is also the pun in verse 2, where the drop (índu) is urged to flow as  “Indra.” The phonological similarity between these two words is often exploited  elsewhere, indeed in the immediately preceding hymn (IX.5.9).
## 01
O Soma, as bull purify yourself in a gladdening stream as you seek  the gods,
as you seek us, in the sheep’s fleece.
## 02
Toward this exhilarating exhilaration, o drop, flow as “Indra”—
and toward prizewinning chargers.
## 03
Toward this ancient exhilaration rush into the filter as you are being  pressed,
and toward victory’s prize and fame.
## 04
In succession, the droplets, the drops, have run like waters down  a slope.
Being purified, they have reached Indra.
## 05
Whom the ten maidens groom like a prizewinning steed,
him playing in the wood(en vessel), beyond the sheep [=fleece],
## 06
That bullish sap—merge it with the cows, for exhilaration, for the gods’  pursuit—
the pressed soma for the taking.
## 07
The god for the god—pressed, he purifies himself in a stream
for Indra,
when he [=Indra] swells his milk.
## 08
The embodiment of the sacrifice, the pressed soma, having been pressed,  purifies himself at speed.
He protects the age-old poetic skill.
## 09
In just this way, as you are being purified and seeking Indra, for him to  pursue exhilaration, you most exhilarating one,
you make the hymns, though hidden, your own.