+++
title = "007"

+++
7 (719)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
9 verses: gāyatrī
The word “soma” does not appear at all in this hymn, and the epithet “self-purify ing” (pávamāna) only once, in verse 5 (a finite verb form from the same root is found  in vs. 8). Verses 1 and 8 have a similar structure, especially in their final pādas, and

form a ring, with the last verse (9) addressed not to soma but to the world-halves  and seemingly extra-hymnic. The two middle verses (4–5) contain the meat of the  hymn: Soma is depicted both as a poet (as in the previous hymn, IX.6.8–9) and a  successful king and warrior. The rest of the hymn (vss. 1–3, 6–8) depicts the usual  journey of the soma around the fleece filter and into the wooden vessel in which  he mixes with water. The final two verses of the hymn proper (7–8) name several  of the divine recipients of soma; those in verse 7 are especially associated with the  Morning Pressing.
## 1
The drops have surged along the path of truth, upon its foundation—the  very splendid ones,
recognizing its route.
## 2
Forth (goes) the stream, the forefront of the honey; it plunges through  the great waters,
to be extolled as the oblation among oblations.
## 3
Forth (he goes) as the forefront of speech, his yokemate; the bull has  roared down into the wood(en vessel),
toward his seat: he is the real rite.
## 4
When the poet, clothing himself in his poetic skills and manly powers,  rushes around (the fleece),
the racehorse strives to win the sun.
## 5
The self-purifying one sits over his opponents, like a king over the clans, when the ritual adepts set him in motion.
## 6
(Having circled) around the sheep’s fleece, the dear tawny one sits in the  wood(en vessels);
husky-voiced, he is eager to prevail with his thought.
## 7
He goes with his exhilaration to Vāyu, Indra, and the Aśvins,
with the joy that is in accord with his ordinances.
## 8
The waves of honey attract here through their purification Mitra and  Varuṇa, and Bhaga,
recognizing them through its powers.
## 9
You two World-Halves, for us to win the prize of honey, conquer wealth, conquer fame and goods.