+++
title = "008"

+++
8 (719)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
9 verses: gāyatrī
Although this hymn is, of course, dedicated to self-purifying Soma, the process is  repeatedly described in the passive (“being purified,” vss. 2, 3, 6) rather than in the  usual reflexive construction. However, this grammatical peculiarity does not seem  to deprive Soma of agency: he (or his juices) are urged to increase Indra’s power (vs. 1), provide us with power (vss. 2, 8), cause Indra to be generous to us (vs. 3) and  provide us with mortal patrons as well (vs. 7), remove hostilities (vs. 7), and cause  the rain to fall (vs. 8), among other things.
The middle verses (4–6) concern the preparation of soma; as usual, the materials  used in the preparation are animatized (vss. 5–6): the “ewes” are the fleece filter, the  “cows” and “cattle” the milk-mixture.
The first three verses reunite the group of gods to whom Soma went in the previ ous hymn (IX.7.7): Vāyu and the Aśvins (vs. 2) and Indra (vss. 1, 3), the principal  deities of the Morning Pressing.
## 01
These soma juices have flowed toward Indra’s own desire,
increasing his heroic power.
## 02
Being purified, finding a seat in the cups, going to Vāyu and the  Aśvins,
let them confer good heroic power on us.
## 03
O Soma, rouse the heart of Indra to generosity, as you are being purified to take your seat on the womb of truth.
## 04
Ten fingers groom you; seven insightful thoughts propel you.
Inspired poets have cheered you on.
## 05
For the gods, for their exhilaration, you who are surging through  the ewes
do we clothe with cows.
## 06
Being purified in the tubs, he, tawny and ruddy,
has wrapped himself in garments of cattle.
## 07
Attract bounteous patrons for us through your purification. Strike away  all hatreds.
O drop, enter your comrade.
## 08
Stream rain from heaven and heavenly brilliance from the earth.
Confer strength in battles on us, Soma.
## 09
Might we have a share in you, drawing the gaze of men, drunk by Indra,  finding the sun—
and a share in offspring and refreshment.