+++
title = "009"

+++
9 (721)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
9 verses: gāyatrī
Unlike the relatively straightforward preceding hymns, this one is full of puz zles and ambiguities, with the implements and process of soma purification  compared to cosmic entities and actions. Some of the puzzles are illuminated  by the next hymn, IX.10, which is in some ways a more straightforward twin  to this one. This one also appears to be an omphalos hymn, with an inner ring1244 IX.9
defined by numerological repetition in verses 4 and 6, around the omphalos  verse 5.
On the ritual level, the soma is pressed between or in his two granddaughters  (vs. 1): most likely the hands of the priest, on the basis of IX.10.2; after his journey  (vss. 1–2), accompanied by hymns he is united with the waters (vss. 4–5), who make  him their eye. He is called upon to give aid to the ritual and to the hymn (vss. 7–8).
This synopsis leaves a number of questions unanswered. Who, for example, are  his two mothers in verse 3? Are they the same as his two female kinsmen in verse  1? Since R̥gvedic poets delight in paradoxical kinship relationships, this is certainly  possible. If so, they could be both the ritual implement (hands) and Heaven and  Earth, and in this latter cosmic manifestation their son Soma, who makes them  shine in verse 3, could be identified with the sun—an identification that is supported  by the “single eye” of verse 4. Again under a cosmic interpretation the rivers of  verse 4 can be not only the waters with which soma mixes in his ritual preparation,  but also the heavenly streams (and indeed real rivers).
The referents in the middle verses 4–6 are especially floating and uncertain: both  the insights and the rivers of verse 4 are feminine in gender. The agent of verse 5  (the omphalos verse) is feminine plural, and so could be either insights or rivers or  both, and “the great” is also left unspecified. In verse 6 we encounter “the seven”  again, which can either be the seven insights of verse 4 (which we also met in the  preceding hymn, IX.8.4) or the rivers, since the canonical number of rivers is seven.  This series of puzzles is capped by the final pāda of verse 6, with the impossible  word krívi, which seems here to refer to Soma. The goddesses whom he satisfies  could, again, be either the rivers or the insights (or perhaps even just goddesses).
The final three verses (7–9), with their requests, cause little difficulty, by contrast. Although the mysteries of the hymn remain largely unsolved, we can note a the matic strain that provides some unity: the issue of light and darkness. The Soma/
Sun of verse 3 lights up his mothers; he may also be the Sun in verse 4. In verse 7  we call upon Soma to help us combat darkness and in verse 8 to light up the lights.  The last word of the hymn (vs. 9) is “sun” (svàḥ). It seems that in this hymn Soma  is both identified with the Sun and seen as a force that can win and keep the light  that Vedic people so craved and worried about. This focus on the sun is also found  in the next hymn, IX.10.
## 01
The poet of heaven makes the circuit of his own vital powers, when  propelled between his two granddaughters
as he is being pressed—he who has a poet’s purpose.
## 02
You, delightful to the praiseworthy dwelling place, to the race without  deceit [=gods]—
rush ever forward in your most pleasing pursuit (of them).
## 03
He, their blazing son, made his two mothers shine—he just born and  they just born,
he the great and they the great, increasing through truth. 4. Propelled by seven insightful thoughts, he quickened the rivers without  deceit,
they who strengthened him as the single eye.
## 05
They installed the youth as dominating and indestructible for the great; they installed the drop, Indra, under your commandment.
## 06
The immortal draft-horse looks upon the seven as he draws.
Krivi has satisfied the goddesses.
## 07
Help us in our ritual arrangements, o male. The shades of darkness must  be fought, Soma.
You shall keep smiting them, o you who are being purified.
## 08
Now make the paths for our newer and newer hymn reach their goal. Make the lights light up as of old.
## 09
Self-purifying one, bestow great fame, the cow, and the horse along with  heroes.
Win wisdom, win the sun.