+++
title = "010"

+++
10 (722)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
9 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn, which shares a number of themes with IX.9, begins with three verses  heavy with similes, quickly sketching the pressing, filtering, and mixing of the soma  juices. After a verse (4)  with no poetic figuration, the second part of the hymn  switches to metaphor, and especially to metaphors of and identifications with the  sun, as in IX.9. The spreading of the soma juices across the sheep’s fleece is likened  to suns and their rays (vs. 5). The “lone one” in verse 7 is probably both the soma  crossing the filter and the sun crossing heaven. Soma’s eye is first tied to the sun (vs.  8), and then the sun implicitly becomes his eye (vs. 9). In addition, the “portion” of  Vivasvant (“the one shining forth”) and of Dawn in verse 5 probably refers to the  radiance of these divinities, obtained by the soma juices, which are then transformed  into suns.
Other metaphors involve the poets and sacrificers: the doors of poetry (vs. 6), the  seven siblings of the priests (vs. 7), who are no doubt the seven inspired thoughts of  previous hymns (IX.9.4, 6; IX.8.4). This latter metaphor of kinship then provides  our own kinship relationship to Soma himself (vs. 8). One image remains somewhat  obscure: in verse 9 the “track of heaven” is said to have been placed in hiding by the  Adhvaryus. This must be a specific ritual reference, with the track of heaven being  likened to Soma’s own tracks—perhaps when Soma disappears into the fleece when  the Adhvaryu priests are first pressing him.

## 1
While being pressed, the soma juices, resounding like chariots, seeking  fame like chargers,
have marched forth for wealth.
## 2
Being propelled like chariots, they have run between the two hands (of  the priest).
Their takings are like those of decisive victors.
## 3
Like kings by encomia, the soma juices are anointed with cows,
like the sacrifice by its seven ordainers.
## 4
While resounding [/being pressed] for exhilaration with might and song,  the drops,
pressed, rush around in a stream.
## 5
Having obtained (the portion) of Vivasvant, begetting the portion  of Dawn,
the suns stretch out across the fine (fleece).
## 6
The ancient bards thrust open the doors of poetic thoughts—
the Āyus for the raging of the bull.
## 7
They sit all together, the Hotars with their seven siblings,
guiding the track of the lone one safely across.
## 8
He has bound his navel to our navel, as also his eye to the sun.
He has yielded progeny to the poet as milk.
## 9
Over his own dear (tracks) and the track of heaven, which was placed in  hiding by the Adhvaryus,
he looks with the eye of the sun.