+++
title = "012"

+++
12 (724)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
9 verses: gāyatrī
Although entirely focused on the process of soma preparation, this hymn displays  the common rhetorical inflation of this process by associating it with cosmic ele ments. Thus, for example, in verse 4 Soma is both “in the navel of heaven” and “in  the sheep’s fleece”—both referring to the filter; the “surface of the sea” in verse 6  is either the soma itself collected in the vessel or the water with which it mixes; the  “dear tracks of heaven” in verse 8 are the meanderings of soma through the fleece  filter (see also IX.10.9). The buffalo-cow in verse 3 is probably the hide on which the  pressing apparatus is set. Only in the last verse (9) does the poet make any requests  of the god.
## 01
The soma juices have surged, the drops pressed in the seat of truth, most honeyed for Indra.
## 02
The inspired poets have roared—like mother cows to their calf—
to Indra, to drink the soma.
## 03
Arousing exhilaration, attentive to poetic inspiration, he dwells in his  seat, in the wave of the river:
Soma is set upon the buffalo-cow.
## 04
In the navel of heaven, he, wide-gazing, shows his greatness in the sheep’s  fleece:
Soma, who is a poet with good purpose.
## 05
The soma that is in the tubs, that is placed within the filter,
that does the drop embrace.

## 06
The drop sends forth his speech upon the surface of the sea,
quickening the cask dripping with honey.
## 07
The lord of the forest who has praise as his own, yielding the juice of  insights within (the filter),
propelling the human generations,
## 08
Being himself propelled, Soma rushes toward the dear tracks of heaven, the sage poet, with the stream of an inspired poet.
## 09
Self-purifying one, secure wealth of a thousand lusters
close at hand to us, o drop.