+++
title = "014"

+++
14 (726) Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
8 verses: gāyatrī
The poet of this hymn seems to be practicing his figurative language, presenting us in  nonsequential verses with several different versions of the same step in the prepara tion of soma. This is especially clear in his depiction of the manual manipulation of  soma: in verse 2 the hands are called “troops of five kinsmen,” in verse 5 the same  fingers are “the granddaughters of Vivasvant” (here the prototype sacrificer), and  in verse 7 a standard word for “fingers” finally makes its appearance. Similarly he  gives two quite similar expressions for the mixing with milk, both using the image  of clothing (vss. 3, 5), and in verse 6 there is a glancing reference to Soma’s desire  for cows.
The episodic structure of the hymn also seems reflected in the shifting tenses of  the verbs. In particular, the past tense of verse 3ab seems to follow directly from  verse 1, with the presents of verses 2 and 3c in alternation.
## 1
The poet flowed around and forth, set upon the swell of the river,
bringing the decisive action for which many are eager.
## 2
When the troops of five kinsmen [=hands], eager to work,
prepare the steadfast one with a hymn—
## 3
After that, all the gods found exhilaration in the juice of him, the  tempestuous one—
when he clothes himself with cows.
## 4
Spilling over, he runs out, leaving behind the stems that belong to  his body.
In this place here he slams together with his yokemate [=Indra].
## 5
He who, like a handsome youth, has been groomed by the
granddaughters of Vivasvant [=fingers],
making the cows like a garment,
## 6
With a yen for cows, he goes crossways along the fine prop [=fleece]. He raises the call that he knows as his own.
## 7
The fingers have come together to him, grooming the lord of
refreshment.
They have grasped the back of the prizewinning horse.
## 8
Ever embracing all good things, heavenly and earthly, o Soma,
seeking us, make your journey.
1250 IX.15–16