+++
title = "015"

+++
15 (727)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
8 verses: gāyatrī
A simple device provides formal unity to this hymn: the form “this one” that begins  every verse. In the first six verses it is the nominative subject (eṣá), in the last two  (vss. 7–8) the accusative object (etám), so that there is some progression and devel opment, even while the referent remains constant.
Except for verse 2, the focus is entirely on Soma’s journey across the fleece and  into the cup, where both the waters (vs. 5) and the milk (vs. 6) await him. (The men tion of grasses in vs. 6 is unclear.)
## 1
This one drives with insight along the fine (fleece), a champion with his  swift chariots,
going to his encounter with Indra.
## 2
This one exercises his insight on many things for the divine assemblage on high, where the immortals have their seats.
## 3
This one, propelled, is led through and within (the filter) along the path of beauty, when the fervent thrust him on.
## 4
This one, the bull of the herd, sharpens his horns, ever shaking them, deploying his manly powers with his might.
## 5
This one, a prizewinning horse, speeds with his beautiful bright shoots, becoming the lord of the rivers.
## 6
This one, having journeyed along the “articulation” (of the fleece) toward  the “plodding goods” [=cows],
goes down into the grasses.
## 7
This one worthy of grooming do the Āyus groom in the wooden cups, when he has produced great refreshments.
## 8
This one here the ten fingers and the seven insights groom,
the most exhilarating one possessing good weapons.