+++
title = "016"

+++
16 (728) Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
8 verses: gāyatrī
This little hymn presents several difficulties of interpretation, even though like  many hymns in this series it does not deviate from the ritual scene, especially the fil tering of the pressed juice, and it is built around a limited verbal lexicon, especially  the phonological near mirror images √sr̥j “surge” and √r̥ṣ “rush.” In verse 1 Soma  is implicitly identified with Etaśa, the sun’s horse, and in verse 7 he swells “like the  back of heaven.” But otherwise cosmic references and comparisons are absent, and the soma again and again runs across the filter (vss. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8) and joins with  the waters (vss. 2–3) and the milk (vss. 2 and 6), to furnish Indra’s drink (vss. 3, 5). The most problematic form is the hapax ánapta in verse 3, about which there is  no scholarly agreement. We have very tentatively connected it with naptī́ “grand daughter,” a very rare word that nonetheless appears twice in this poet’s collection  (IX.9.1, 14.5), used of the preparers of soma or their equipment.
## 1
The pressers pro(pel) your sap in their arms, for ardent exhilaration. Etaśa charges like a surge (of waters).
## 2
With resolve we accompany the charioteer of skill, who clothes himself  in waters along with his stalk,
the winner of cows, among the fine (tufts of fleece).
## 3
Send the soma surging into the filter, the one difficult to overtake in the  waters (even) without the granddaughters(’ preparation) [?].
Purify him for Indra to drink.
## 4
With attention Soma rushes forth into the filter of the one being purified; with resolve he has taken his seat.
## 5
Forth to you, Indra, the drops, the soma juices, have surged with
homage—
for the great taking of the decisive victor.
## 6
Being purified within the sheep’s shape, rushing toward all that is glorious, like a champion he stands among the cattle.
## 7
Having swelled like the back of heaven, the stream of the pressed  ritual adept
rushes at will into the filter.
## 8
You, Soma, (sending forth speech) attentive to poetic inspiration, being  purified in your full measure among the Āyus,
run through the sheep’s fleece.