+++
title = "018"

+++
18 (730)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
7 verses: gāyatrī
The most salient feature of this hymn is its pāda-length refrain, promising health  and wholeness. The beginning (vs. 1) and end (vs. 7) of the hymn record the ritual  moment, the purification in the filter. The intermediate verses, especially 4–6,  ascribe human and then cosmic powers to the ritual substance. Verses 4–6 are  also syntactically unresolved, as they consist of three parallel relative clauses in  the ab pādas, couched in the 3rd person, interrupted by the refrain addressing  Soma in the 2nd person in the c pāda. The 3rd-person main clause that brings  closure to this structure is found in the final verse, 7ab.
It is noteworthy that the word “soma” is found only in the first verse.
## 01
Mountain-dwelling Soma, being pressed, has flowed around in the filter. – You are the one who confers wholeness in the raptures of exhilaration. 2. You are the inspired one, you the sage poet, the honey that is born from  the stalk.
– You are the one who confers wholeness in the raptures of exhilaration. 3. All the gods, joined in fellowship, have attained the drinking of you. – You are the one who confers wholeness in the raptures of exhilaration. 4. He who holds all desirable good things in his two hands—
– You are the one who confers wholeness in the raptures of exhilaration. 5. Who will yield milk like these two great world-halves, the two mothers  together—
– You are the one who confers wholeness in the raptures of exhilaration. 6. Who on the same day rushes around both worlds with the prizes of  victory—
– You are the one who confers wholeness in the raptures of exhilaration. 7. He, tempestuous in the tubs, kept roaring while being purified.
– You are the one who confers wholeness in the raptures of exhilaration.