+++
title = "019"

+++
19 (731) Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
7 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn contains fewer direct ritual references than recent hymns. The focus is  instead on the exchange relation between Soma and his praisers: hymns for goods,  an exchange that is seen as, literally, fecund. Our insights and the words they pro duce are depicted as females waiting to be impregnated (vs. 5) and made to swell (vs.  2), as they call to the bullish Soma for his semen (vs. 4). The impregnated thoughts  will give birth not only to inspired poetry, but also to the material goods that this  poetry will win, as verses 1 and 6 make clear. The final two verses (6–7) also call for  Soma’s help in besting rivals.
## 1
O Soma, what bright good thing, heavenly or earthly, is worthy of hymns, bring that here to us as you are being purified.
## 2
For you two, o Soma, you and Indra, are lords of the sun, lords of cattle. Showing your mastery, make our insights swell.
## 3
The bull, being purified among the Āyus, thundering upon the
ritual grass,
although being a fallow bay horse, has sat down on his womb.
## 4
Our insightful words have bellowed over the seed of the bull,
the mothers (over that) of the calf, their son.
## 5
Will he indeed set an embryo for those females yearning for a bull, as he  is being purified—
for those who give the gleaming milk?
## 6
Seek to win over those who stand aside, but set fear among our rivals. Self-purifying one, find wealth.
## 7
Soma, undermine the bull-like power of our rival, his tempestuousness,  his vigor,
whether he be in the distance or nearby.1254 IX.20–21