+++
title = "020"

+++
20 (731) Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
7 verses: gāyatrī
Like the immediately preceding hymn, this one is less concerned with the details of  the ritual (though they are not absent: the fleece filter, vss. 1, 7; the water and the  cups, vs. 6) than with the ritual economy, where, for example, our thought helps  purify Soma (vs. 3) and he in return finds wealth for the poets, singers, and patrons.  Although most of the phraseology is standard for soma hymns, the image in verse  5 of Soma entering the songs seems to be a deliberate reversal of passages in which  the songs themselves enter a god, and seems also to imitate and vary the numerous  passages in which Soma enters Indra.
## 1
Forth the poet rushes, through the sheep’s fleece, to pursue the gods, having prevailed over all opponents.
## 2
For he sends to the singers a prize of cattle
in thousands, as he purifies himself.
## 3
With your attention you embrace all things; you purify yourself with our  poetic thought.
Soma, you will find fame for us.
## 4
Rush toward lofty glory, toward enduring wealth for our generous  patrons.
Bring refreshment here to the praisers.
## 5
You well keep commandments like a king. You have entered the songs,  o Soma,
while being purified, o unerring draft-horse.
## 6
That draft-horse, difficult to overtake in the waters, being groomed in  (the priest’s) hands,
Soma, sits in the cups.
## 7
Playful, ready to give like a generous patron, you go through the filter,  o Soma,
establishing an abundance of heroes for the praiser.