+++
title = "021"

+++
21 (733)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāsyapa
7 verses: gāyatrī
For most of its length this hymn is a conventional depiction of the flowing of the  soma drops and of the benefits that attend it. Verses 5 and 6, however, which are  constructed in parallel, introduce twists of imagery. Addressed to the soma drops,  the verses urge them to instruct the ungenerous man—presumably a patron who does not distribute the appropriate priestly gifts at the soma sacrifice. In verse 6 the  drops are commanded to set their own will to this task, as a craftsman sets a new  chariot part, probably a wheel. In verse 5 they are meant to set “the tawny tracker”  in an unspecified being or thing (“in this one”); although the referents for both have  been variously identified, we believe that the tawny tracker is Soma himself, and  Indra, already mentioned in verse 1, is the desired location.
## 01
These are running for Indra, these drops, the ardent soma juices,
bringing exhilaration and finding the sun,
## 02
Warding off attackers, finding wide space for the presser,
by themselves creating vitality for the praiser.
## 03
Moving playfully at will toward one and the same seat,
the drops have flowed in various ways into the swell of the river.
## 04
These self-purifying ones have obtained all things of value,
when propelled like the team on a chariot.
## 05
O drops, set the tawny tracker [=Soma himself] here in him [=Indra], to  instruct (the man)
who does not give to us.
## 06
Like a craftsman [/R̥bhu] a new chariot (wheel), set your will to
instruct (him).
Purify yourselves to gleaming with your flood.
## 07
These (drops) here have bellowed; the prizewinning horses have made the  finish line.
They have stimulated the thought of (the poet) who is really present.