+++
title = "022"

+++
22 (734)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
7 verses: gāyatrī
The hymn begins with the conventional image of the soma juices racing forward (vs.  1), but their journey soon becomes both cosmic and mystical. Their rush is com pared to cosmic forces in verse 2, and in verses 4–5 they travel through the cosmos  itself. But the poet reaches even further conceptually: he equates this cosmic jour ney with a ritual one. In matched expressions in verses 3 and 5 the juices pervade  not only the cosmic spaces (vs. 5) but also our “insights” (vs. 3), that is, the thoughts  that produce ritual poetry. And in verse 6 they reach a higher place than the cosmic
space, namely the sacrifice itself, symbolized, as often, by the stretched thread. In the final verse (7) this journey theme is abruptly abandoned, and the disjunc tion between this verse and what precedes is also conveyed by the switch from plural  (“soma juices”) to singular (“Soma”), and from 3rd-person reference to 2nd. It also  contains an implicit equation of Soma with (the unmentioned) Saramā, Indra’s dog

who reacquired for him the cows stolen by the Paṇis (see esp. X.108)—an equation  seemingly unmotivated by what precedes. (The Paṇis are mentioned only one other  time in the IXth Maṇḍala [IX.11.2].) Perhaps the cosmic journey of Soma reminded  the poet of Saramā’s long trek. The stretched thread of the sacrifice ends the hymn,  and brings it back to the ritual scene.
## 01
These swift soma juices have been propelled forward like prizewinning  chariots,
surges (of them) sent surging—
## 02
These, (surging) wide like the winds, like the rains of Parjanya,
(surging) at will like the flickerings of fire.
## 03
These purified soma juices, mixed with curds, attentive to poetic
inspiration,
have pervaded our insights with inspiration.
## 04
These immortal ones, once groomed, have not flagged in their flowing, as they seek to reach the paths through the airy space.
## 05
These, going forth widely, have pervaded the backs of the two
world-halves,
and this highest airy space.
## 06
They have reached the highest thread being stretched, along the inclines, and this one that is to be higher still.
## 07
You, Soma, secured from the Paṇis the good things of cattle.
You have roared toward the stretched thread.