+++
title = "024"

+++
24 (736)
Soma Pavamāna
Asita Kāśyapa or Devala Kāśyapa
7 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn is the last attributed to Asita or Devala Kāśyapa, and yet again the hymn  begins with the running forth of the soma juices. It is an unremarkable hymn, but  covers the major topics, though not in strict chronological order:  the grooming  in water (vs. 1), the mixture with milk (vs. 2), the filtering (vss. 3, 5). That soma is  Indra’s drink is repeatedly emphasized (vss. 2, 3, 5, and under the qualifier “con
queror of territories,” a word regularly applied to Indra, vs. 4). Soma himself is  given the most characteristic of Indra’s epithets—“obstacle-smasher”—in the  superlative in verse 6.
## 1
The soma juices have run forth, the self-purifying drops.
Brought to readiness, they have been groomed in the waters.
## 2
The cows have run toward them, like waters going along a slope.
Becoming purified, they have reached Indra.
## 3
You run forth, self-purifying Soma, for Indra to drink.
Held by men, you are led through (the filter).
## 4
Bringing exhilaration to superior men, o Soma, purify yourself for the  one who conquers the territories,
you who are the winner to be celebrated.
1258 IX.25–26
## 5
O drop, when pressed by the stones you run around the filter,
fit for the fundament of Indra.
## 6
Purify yourself, best smasher of obstacles, to be celebrated with hymns, gleaming, pure, unerring.
## 7
Gleaming and pure he is called “Soma,” he of the pressed honey,
pursuing the gods, smashing those who utter evil.