+++
title = "034"

+++
34 (746) Soma Pavamāna
Trita Āptya
6 verses: gāyatrī
The hymn begins with the usual rushing forth of the soma, but achieves an unusual  ring, since in the last verse (6)  it is the songs that rush (using the same verb,  arṣa(n)ti) to him. What lies between is, for the most part, unremarkable. Verse 2  lists the recipients of the soma, a longer list than usual (and a verse almost identical  to vs. 3 in the previous hymn, IX.33), and verses 3–4 concern the preparation of  the drink. However, verse 5 is difficult: the Maruts milk for themselves (or yield as  their milk) the oblation in the direction of “the upper surface of truth.” Although  in the context of the hymn, soma should be the product of milking (see vs. 3), the  liquid the Maruts ordinarily milk is rain. Moreover, “the upper surface of truth”  is a puzzling phrase, which occurs elsewhere only in the mystical and baffling Vena  hymn (X.123.2). Since the latter hymn seems to concern the mystical identification  between soma and the sun, it is likely that here too we have double reference, with  the ritual substance soma assimilated to the cosmic fecundator, the rain, and “the  upper surface of truth” referring both to the soma filter and to heaven (or the res ervoir of rain in heaven).
## 1
Being pressed, being impelled, the drop rushes forth in its full measure in  a stream,
shattering the fastnesses by its might.
## 2
Pressed for Indra and Vāyu, for Varuṇa and the Maruts,
for Viṣṇu, the soma rushes.
## 3
The bull controlled by bulls, the soma, do they press with stones.
They milk out its milk with their skill.
## 4
It becomes the one for Trita to groom; it becomes the drink of
exhilaration for Indra.
The tawny one is anointed with the forms (of milk).
## 5
They whose mother is Pr̥śni [=Maruts] milk for themselves the cherished  oblation dearest to them
toward the upper surface of truth.
## 6
These unswerving songs, flowing together, rush to him.
Bellowing, he has made the milk-cows bellow.