+++
title = "037"

+++
37 (749) Soma Pavamāna
Rahūgaṇa Āṅgirasa
6 verses: gāyatrī
Several overt devices provide unity to this hymn: each verse begins with sá “he,”  and each verse but 4 contains a verb of motion (“rush, run, flow”) expressing the  journey of the soma through the filter and into the cups for Indra. In addition to  the mundane details of the preparation, however, the hymn makes cosmic claims for  the ritual actions. The sheep’s fleece of verse 3 also stands for “the luminous realms  of heaven”; in verse 5 Soma finds a wide realm, usually a symbol of freedom and  the acquisition of territory.
Verse 4, the pause on the journey, has been much discussed, and its various  phrases, “on the back of Trita,” “along with (his) relatives,” also given cosmic ref erents (though there is no scholarly agreement on just what they are). We are of  the opinion, however, that it primarily concerns the ritual preparation: the “back  of Trita” is the filter and the “relatives” (jāmí) are, as usual in a soma context, the  fingers of the officiant, namely Trita (see “Trita’s maidens,” the fingers, in the next  hymn, IX.38.2). It is this ritual preparation that allows the cosmic act of Soma,  making the sun shine (at the Morning Pressing), in that same verse (4).
## 1
He, the bullish soma, pressed for drinking, rushes into the filter,
smashing aside the demons, seeking the gods.
## 2
He, the tawny one, wide-gazing, rushes steadily into the filter,
continually neighing toward his womb. 3. He, the prizewinner, self-purifying, runs through the luminous realms of  heaven,
through the sheep’s fleece, as demon-smasher.
## 4
He, purifying himself on the back of Trita along with Trita’s kin
[=fingers],
has made the sun shine.
## 5
He, the Vr̥tra-smasher, the bull, finding the wide realm when pressed,  undeceivable—
Soma has flowed as if to a prize.
## 6
He, the god impelled by the poet, runs to the wooden cups—
the drop with his munificence for Indra.