+++
title = "041"

+++
41 (753)
Soma Pavamāna
Medhyātithi Kāṇva
6 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn and the next two (IX.41–43) are attributed to Medhyātithi Kāṇva,  the poet of several hymns in Maṇḍala VIII (VIII.1, 3, 33), who names himself  in IX.43.3. This hymn begins strikingly, with an incomplete sentence describing  the stampede of a wild mob, against the “black skin,” presumably the Dasyu  referred to in verse 2. The constituents of the mob are not identified, but are  presumably the soma juices, here mobilized against the non-Ārya enemy. The  second verse rewrites this scene more tranquilly, though with the victory over  the Dasyu more explicit. But the violence of Soma’s purificatory journey returns  in verse 3.
The second half of the hymn is more conventional, though with Soma’s cosmic  associations clear in the last two verses (5–6).
## 1
Those who strode forth like cattle—frenzied, turbulent, unruly,
smashing away the black skin [=Dasyus]—
## 2
We will bring to mind the easy passage (of Soma), beyond the snare  difficult to navigate [=the curly fleece filter],
we having overcome the Dasyu who follows no commandment.
## 3
A roar like that of rain is heard—the roar of the self-purifying
tempestuous one.
Lightning flashes roam in heaven.
## 4
O drop, in purifying yourself attract great refreshment and wealth in  cattle, in gold,
in horses, and in prizes, when you are pressed.
## 5
Purify yourself, limitless one. Fill the two great world-halves
as Dawn does, as the sun does with its rays.
## 6
O Soma, flow for us in a protecting stream all around on all sides, like (the heavenly river) Rasā, along the upper surface (of the filter).
1270 IX. 42–43