+++
title = "046"

+++
46 (758)
Soma Pavamāna
Ayāsya Āṅgirasa
6 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn surveys some familiar themes, particularly the role of the fingers in prepar ing the soma (vss. 4, 6), though it is perhaps noteworthy that the filter, so prominent in  many soma hymns, is not explicitly present here. In contrast, some qualities of soma  known from elsewhere that are rarely or never mentioned in the IXth Maṇḍala make  their appearance—in particular his source in the mountains (vs. 1) and in verse 4 the  technical distinction between “pure” (that is, unmixed) soma (śukrá) and soma with  grain stirred in (manthín, a word otherwise only found once elsewhere in the R̥gveda  [III.32.2]). (In the later śrauta ritual, cups of śukra and manthin soma form both a  ritual and a grammatical pair, in the dual dvandva compound śukrā-manthinau, here  found in discontinuous form.) The gods Vāyu (vs. 2) and Indra (vss. 3, 6), recipients  of the first soma oblations at the Morning Pressing, are named. Verse 2 contains a  striking image of the soma drops adorned like a girl for marriage.
## 1
They have been released to pursue the gods, like steeds that get results, flowing, grown strong in the mountains.
## 2
The drops, adorned like a maiden with her patrimony,
the soma drinks have been released to Vāyu. 3. These soma juices, the drops, dispensing delight when pressed in the cup, strengthen Indra along with the (ritual) activities.
## 4
Rinse it, you (fingers) of good hands; grasp the two (soma drinks), the  stirred and the pure.
Mix the exhilarating one with cows.
## 5
Purify yourself, you winner of stakes, as provider of great bounty and as pathfinder for us, o Soma.
## 6
The ten fingers groom this one worth grooming, the self-purifying exhilarating drink of exhilaration for Indra.