+++
title = "052"

+++
52 (764)
Soma Pavamāna
Ucathya Āṅgirasa
5 verses: gāyatrī
Unlike the very straightforward preceding hymn (IX.51) attributed to the same  poet, this one is full of tricks, especially in the middle verse (3), which can thus  be viewed as an omphalos. The contents of the first two verses are conventional  enough—the entry of Soma into the filter—but they contain several instances of  phonological and morphological play, as do the final two verses (4–5). These cannot  be conveyed in translation.
Verse 3, characterized by the repetition of the verb īṅkhaya (“push, shove”) of highly  marked formation, has a slangy and disparaging tone. Its object is generally interpreted,  in our opinion correctly, as a reference to an ungenerous rich man, perhaps the poet’s  patron. He is compared to a pot, no doubt both because he is full of goods and because  of his stodgy demeanor, and the soma drop is urged to prod this miser into giving.
Two matching compounds, sanád-rayiḥ “gaining wealth” (vs. 1)  and  maṃhayád-rayiḥ “readying wealth” (vs. 5), provide a thematic and grammatical ring.
## 1
Heaven-ruling, gaining wealth, bringing a prize to us with your stalk, being pressed, rush around into the filter.
## 2
Along your age-old routes, around onto the sheep’s fleece, the dear one drives, a thousand streams in extent.
## 3
The one who is like a pot, give him a shove; give a shove to the one who  doesn’t give on his own, o drop.
Give him a shove with your strokes, you striker.
## 4
(Strike) down the bluster of those people, o much-invoked drop,
of anyone who takes aim at us.
## 5
With a hundred forms of help for us, o drop, or with a thousand
gleaming (soma drinks),
purify yourself, readying wealth.