+++
title = "053"

+++
53 (765)
Soma Pavamāna
Avatsāra Kāśyapa
4 verse: gāyatrī
The next eight hymns (IX.53–60) are attributed to the same poet as V.44, a hymn  to the All Gods often declared to be the hardest hymn in the R̥gveda. Although  these brief soma hymns have some interesting features, they lack the mind-boggling  verbal pyrotechnics of that hymn.
On the other hand, the organizing principle of V.44 is the double application of  each verse to two different divinities, Agni and Soma, with a lexicon ambiguous  enough to allow both interpretations. Something of the same thing is visible in this  hymn, in which each verse but the last (4) invites the audience to supply a refer
ent different from the one meant. The first verse deploys clear Indraic vocabulary,  particularly the vocative “possessor of the stone,” though Soma can, and should,  be its subject. The first two-thirds of the second verse (2ab) suggest either Indra or  Soma as referent, until the 1st singular verb form “I will praise” that opens the last  pāda establishes the 1st-person speaker as the referent. Again, the third verse opens  like a verse to Varuṇa or another Āditya, and only the “self-purifying” that begins  the second pāda ties it to Soma. It is only the last verse that contains unmistakable  somian vocabulary and which, in its final pāda, clarifies the roles of the drop (índu)  and Indra.
## 01
Your blasts have arisen, splitting the demonic power, you possessor of  the stone.
Push aside the challengers all around
## 02
With this (insightful thought), slamming down with strength when  chariots clash and a prize is set,
I will praise with fearless heart.
## 03
The commandments of this self-purifying one cannot be ventured  against by one of bad insight.
Break the one who battles you.
## 04
Into the rivers they impel him who arouses exhilaration, the tawny one  who seeks the prize,
the drop exhilarating to Indra.