+++
title = "061"

+++
61 (773)
Soma Pavamāna
Amahīyu Āṅgirasa
30 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
The first sixty hymns of the Soma Maṇḍala, all in gāyatrī meter, are arranged in the  normal order of descending number of verses, starting with hymns of ten verses  and ending with those of four. (The only exception is the Āprī hymn, IX.5, which  has eleven.) But the gāyatrī sequence ends with six thirty-verse hymns (IX.61–66),  followed by one with thirty-two verses (IX.67)—all arranged in tr̥cas (the final two  verses in IX.67 are supplements) and each attributed to a different poet or group  of poets—before the jagatī group begins. It is probably not an accident that these  groupings of tr̥cas come at the end of the gāyatrī sequence, since, as agglomerations  of three-verse sequences, they logically follow the four-verse hymns.
In this particular hymn there is little evidence of unity either within tr̥cas or between  them: the standard topics of soma hymns—the details of preparation (e.g., vss. 4–5)  and the gods for whom he’s prepared (e.g., vss. 8–9), the cosmic connections of Soma  (e.g., vss. 10, 16, 18), and the largesse and aid we ask him for (e.g., vss. 3, 23–24)—
are strung together in no apparent order. There is a discernible tendency, however, to  emphasize Soma’s role in combating hostile forces, either directly or by strengthening  someone else to do so, especially Indra. The hymn begins with two verses mention ing some of Indra’s exploits performed under the influence of Soma, though without

naming Indra, and the theme of Soma the smiter and aggressive warrior returns  toward the end of the hymn and dominates the last two tr̥cas (vss. 19–20, 22, 24–30).
## 01
Flow around in pursuit (of him) who amid your raptures, o drop, smashed down the nine and ninety—
## 02
(Smashed down) the strongholds in one day for the one whose thought  is to the point, (smashed down) Śambara for Divodāsa,
and as for that Turvaśa and Yadu... .
## 03
Stream around to us horseflesh, as horse-finder, and (wealth) in cattle  and gold, o drop,
and thousandfold refreshments.
## 04
While you are purifying yourself, while you are flooding the filter, we choose your companionship.
## 05
Your waves that flow into the filter in a stream—
with them be gracious to us, Soma.
## 06
Being purified, bring us wealth and refreshment consisting of heroes, while you hold sway everywhere, o Soma.
## 07
Just him do the ten fingers groom, him whose mother is the river(s). He has been reckoned among the Ādityas.
## 08
Pressed, he goes into the filter, uniting with Indra and Vāyu,
uniting with the rays of the sun.
## 09
Purify yourself for us, honeyed for Bhaga, for Vāyu, for Pūṣan,
dear to Mitra and Varuṇa.
## 10
It was born high above from your stalk; though it was in heaven, on  earth it took for itself
mighty shelter and great fame.
## 11
Seeking to gain all the brilliant things of humans from the stranger, with it we shall win them.
## 12
Flow around for worshipful Indra, for Varuṇa, for the Maruts,
finding a wide realm for us.
## 13
Up to the one who, just born, crosses the waters, breaking through,  adorned by cows—
up to the drop have the gods traveled.
## 14
Only him let our hymns strengthen, as (cows) who share their young do a calf— him who gains the heart of Indra.
## 15
Rush as weal for our cow, Soma; milk out swelling refreshment.
Increase the sea, worthy of hymns.
## 16
Purifying himself he has begotten thunder dazzling like that of heaven and the lofty light belonging to all men.
## 17
When you are purifying yourself, o king, your sap, the exhilarating  drink that brings no misfortune, rushes through the sheep’s fleece.
## 18
Self-purifying one, your potent sap shines forth brilliant,
as light for everyone to see the sun.
## 19
Your exhilarating drink that is worthy to be chosen, with that stalk  purify yourself,
pursuing the gods, smashing those who utter evil.
## 20
Smashing Vr̥tra the hostile, winning the prize every day,
you are a winner of cows and of horses.
## 21
Become a ruddy (bull) mingling with milk-cows as if with (ladies) with  lovely laps,
sitting like a falcon on your womb.
## 22
Purify yourself, you who helped Indra to smash Vr̥tra,
who was obstructing the great waters.
## 23
Might we of good heroes win the stakes, o Soma the rewarder.
Becoming purified, strengthen our hymns.
## 24
Aided by you, with your help, might we be combative against
hindrances.
O Soma, be watchful over the commandments.
## 25
Smashing away the scorners, away the ungenerous, Soma purifies himself, going to the rendezvous with Indra.
## 26
Bring great wealth here to us, self-purifying one; smash the scorners. Give glory in heroes, o drop.
## 27
A hundred crooks [/wool tufts] will never confound you when you are  eager to give largesse,
when you, becoming purified, do battle [/act bounteously].
## 28
Purify yourself, o drop, when you, the bull, are pressed. Make us  glorious among the people.
Smash away all hatreds.
## 29
In the companionship of you here, in your highest brilliance, o drop, might we overcome those who do battle.
## 30
Your fearful sharp weapons, which exist to injure,
(with them) guard us from the insult of anyone at all.