+++
title = "062"

+++
62 (774)
Soma Pavamāna
Jamadagni Bhārgava
30 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
Though long, this hymn remains focused on the familiar details of the preparation  of the soma, often ennobled by establishing cosmic parallels. The journey across1284 IX.62
the fleece is especially prominent, and the soma is frequently likened to a fast horse.  One verse, 17, is more specific than the usual generic treatments: here the soma is  a horse yoked to the chariot of the sacrifice, which has three backs and three seats,  presumably the three pressings and the three fires, by the visionary thoughts of the  seven seers. It is also notable how often Soma is called a poet or connected with  poetry in the second part of this hymn (vss. 13, 14, 25, 26, 27, 30). In the final verse  he is in fact called “the entruthed poet” or “the poet (who is) truth (itself),” a power
ful expression of his relationship to creative speech.
Though some of the tr̥cas display internal formal unity (e.g., vss. 19–21 begin ning with ā́), most do not. The poet to whom the hymn is attributed names himself  in verse 24.
## 1
These drops have surged, swift across the filter,
toward all gifts of good fortune.
## 2
The prize-seekers, smashing apart the many obstacles to progress,  making the ways easy going for our offspring
and for our steed by their own extension,
## 3
Making a wide realm for the cow, they rush toward the lovely
praise hymn,
toward lasting refreshment for us.
## 4
The plant has been pressed in the waters for exhilaration, the potent  one abiding on a mountain.
Like a falcon he has sat on his womb.
## 5
The beautiful stalk coveted by the gods—(the soma) rinsed in the  waters, pressed by men—
do the cows sweeten with their milk.
## 6
Then, like drivers a horse, they have beautified him for the immortal, the sap of honey for joint revelry.
## 7
Your streams, dripping with honey, which have surged for our aid,  o drop,
with them you have sat down on the filter.
## 8
Rush, for Indra to drink, across the sheep’s fleece,
sitting on your womb, in the wooden (vessels).
## 9
You, o drop, stream around—sweetest for the Aṅgirases,
finding a wide realm—to the ghee, the milk.
## 10
Here has the limitless one been established; purifying himself, he takes  note of
lofty friendship while being impelled.
## 11
This bull following his bullish commandments, purifying himself,  smashing malediction,
will provide goods for the pious. 12. In purifying yourself bring wealth in thousands of cows and of horses, much gleaming, much craved.
## 13
This one here is poured in circles, being continually groomed by  the Āyus,
the wide-going one with a poet’s purpose.
## 14
Possessing a thousand forms of help, a hundred bounties, measurer of  the airy realm, poet—
the exhilarating drink purifies himself for Indra.
## 15
Born on a mountain [/begotten by a hymn], praised here, the drop is  placed for Indra,
a bird in his womb, as if in a nest.
## 16
Purifying himself, pressed by men, Soma has flowed, as if to a prize, to sit in the cups, through his mastery.
## 17
They yoke him to the three-backed, three-seated chariot, to drive, yoking him by means of the seven visionary thoughts of the seven seers. 18. O pressers, impel the swift one to drive for the prize—the winner of spoils, the tawny prize-seeker.
## 19
Pressed, entering the tub, rushing to all that is glorious,
he stands among the cows like a champion.
## 20
The Āyus milk your milk for exhilaration, o drop;
the gods (milk) honey for the gods.
## 21
Into the filter send our soma, the most honeyed
for the gods, the most audible to the gods.
## 22
These soma juices, while being hymned, have surged for great fame in a stream of most exhilarating (soma).
## 23
You rush to pursue bovine (goods) and manly powers, while being  purified.
Winning the prizes, flow around.
## 24
And rush to all our refreshments provided with cows, encircled with  rhythm,
while being hymned by Jamadagni.
## 25
Purify yourself, Soma, with your bright help, going at the forefront  of speech
toward all products of poetic skill.
## 26
You—going at the forefront, rousing the waters of the sea and the  speeches—
purify yourself, o you who set everything in motion.
## 27
For you, o poet, do these worlds here take their stand, for your
greatness, o Soma;
for you do the rivers rush.

## 28
Like rains from heaven your streams go forth inexhaustible,
toward the gleaming underlayer.
## 29
For Indra purify the drop, the strong one bringing success to skill, the lord whose largesse is worth pursuing.
## 30
Self-purifying Soma, the entruthed poet, has sat in the filter,
establishing for the praiser an abundance of heroes.