+++
title = "063"

+++
63 (775)
Soma Pavamāna
Nidhruvi Kāśyapa
30 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
Like the last hymn, this one is much concerned with the ritual preparation of soma,  but it sketches a larger conceptual world in which this preparation takes place. On the  one hand, the purification is seen as a process of Ārya-ization (vs. 5), and the spaces  that Soma traverses, for example the filter, become “Ārya domains” (vs. 14). The waters  that Soma crosses (vss. 5, 21) and the rivers in which he is groomed (vs. 17) are both  the ritual waters in which the soma plant is rinsed and rehydrated and, metaphorically,  the frontier rivers the Āryas crossed in expanding their realms. (See also the mentions  of finding or making “wide space” in the two preceding hymns [IX.61.12; 62.3, 9].)
On the other hand, Soma is compared to and identified with the Sun (espe cially in the third tr̥ca, vss. 7–9, also vs. 13), and his journey across the filter is also  metaphorically the Sun’s daily journey across the heaven. Since the ritual activity  happens on earth, at the hands of Manu (vss. 7–8), the first sacrificer and the cul tural ancestor of the Ārya, even the rising of the Sun is thus implicitly attributed  to human agency.
The hymn is, of course, also full of requests for material goods of all sorts, and,  especially toward the end, for Soma to smite all manner of enemies and hostile  forces (vss. 24, 26, 28–29; also 5).
Although the hymn does not seem tightly structured, some tr̥cas show formal  unity (e.g., vss. 25–27 with forms of the root sr̥j “surge”), and the hymn begins and  ends with verses containing the imperative dhāraya “secure, sustain.”
## 1
In purifying yourself, o Soma, bring wealth in thousands and an
abundance of good heroes;
secure our claims to fame for us.
## 2
You swell refreshment and nourishment; most exhilarating for Indra, you sit down here in the cups.
## 3
Pressed for Indra, for Viṣṇu, soma has streamed into the tub.
Let it be honeyed for Vāyu.
## 4
These swift brown ones have surged across the tangles (of sheep’s wool), the soma juices, in a stream of truth. 5. Strengthening Indra, crossing the waters, making it all Ārya,
smashing away the non-givers,
## 6
The pressed juices rush along their own realm, the brown ones,
the drops, going to Indra.
## 7
Purify yourself in the very stream with which you made the sun shine, impelling the waters belonging to Manu.
## 8
He has yoked Etaśa, (the steed) of the Sun, purifying himself in Manu’s  presence,
to drive through the midspace.
## 9
And these ten tawny mares of the Sun he has yoked, to drive,
the drop, announcing, “(I go) to Indra.”
## 10
From here sprinkle in circles the soma pressed for Vāyu, the songs, (the  soma) exhilarating to Indra,
onto the sheep’s fleece.
## 11
O self-purifying Soma, find wealth for us that is difficult to surpass, that is difficult to attain by one who craves it.
## 12
Rush toward wealth in thousands of cows and of horses,
toward the prize of victory and fame.
## 13
Soma, like the Sun-god, purifies himself, pressed by stones,
placing his own sap in the tub.
## 14
Across the Ārya domains these clear juices in a stream of truth
have flowed to a prize of cows.
## 15
Pressed for Indra the mace-bearer, the soma juices, mixed with curds, have streamed across the filter.
## 16
O Soma, as the most honeyed, rush forth into the filter for wealth, as the exhilarating drink that best pursues the gods.
## 17
Him do the Āyus groom in the rivers, the tawny prize-seeker,
the drop exhilarating to Indra.
## 18
In purifying yourself, o Soma, bring masses of gold, of horses, of  heroes;
bring hither a prize of cows.
## 19
As if sprinkling a prize-seeking (horse) when the prize (is set), sprinkle  prize-seeking (soma) in circles onto the sheep’s fleece,
(the soma) most honeyed for Indra.
## 20
The inspired poets, seeking help, with their insights groom the sage poet  worthy to be groomed.
The bull rushes ever roaring.
## 21
To the water-crossing bull, Soma, in a stream of truth
have the inspired poets cried out in unison with their insights, their
thought.

## 22
Purify yourself, o god, attended by the Āyus. Let your exhilarating  drink go to Indra;
mount to Vāyu according to the (ritual) statute.
## 23
O self-purifying Soma, you spill down wealth worthy of fame.
As dear one, enter the sea.
## 24
Smashing away the scorners, you purify yourself, finding the resolve,  exhilarating, o Soma.
Thrust from yourself the people who do not seek the gods.
## 25
The self-purifying soma juices, the clear drops have surged
toward all products of poetic skill.
## 26
The swift, resplendent, self-purifying drops have surged,
smashing away all hatreds.
## 27
The self-purifying ones have surged from the heaven, from the midspace onto the back of the earth.
## 28
Becoming purified in a stream, o Soma drop, smash away all errors, away the demonic forces, o you of good resolve.
## 29
Smashing away demons, Soma, rush ever roaring
toward highest brilliant tempestuousness.
## 30
In us, o Soma drop, secure goods—heavenly, earthly,
all that are choice.