+++
title = "064"

+++
64 (776)
Soma Pavamāna
Kaśyapa Mārīca
30 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
The hymn begins with an insistent tr̥ca establishing Soma as a bull. What follows is  for the most part a conventional treatment of the purification process, with special  emphasis on his entry into “the sea” (that is, the purificatory waters, vss. 8, 16, 17,  19, 27). The association with the Sun found in the preceding hymn is also present  here, with Soma not merely yoking the Sun’s horse, Etaśa, but identified with him  (vs. 19) and with the Sun himself in the final words of the hymn (vs. 30; see also  vss. 7, 9). Soma’s light and brilliance are also mentioned throughout (vss. 1, 8, 13,  15, 28).
## 01
A bull are you, Soma, a brilliant one—a bull following his bullish  commandments, o god.
As bull, you have established your own foundations.
## 02
Of you, the bull, bullish is the strength; your wooden (cup) is a bull, your  exhilarating drink a bull.
In truth, o bull, you are really a bull. 3. You, the bull, whinny like a horse. Sur(round) the cows, sur(round) the  steeds, o drop;
open up the doors for wealth for us.
## 04
They have surged forth—the prize-seeking soma juices—with a yen for  cows and for horses,
with a yen for heroes—the swift clear ones.
## 05
Being beautified by those who seek truth, being groomed in the two hands, they purify themselves in the sheep’s fleece.
## 06
All goods for the pious—heavenly, earthly, and those of the midspace— let these soma juices bring in purifying themselves.
## 07
O you who find [/know] all, of you purifying yourself the surges have  surged forth,
like the rays of the sun.
## 08
Making a beacon, from heaven you rush toward all forms.
O Soma, you swell as the sea.
## 09
Yourself being impelled, you send out your speech, you who purify  yourself at your expansion.
You have roared like the Sun-god.
## 10
The drop has become purified, the conspicuous dear one, by the  thought of the poets.
Like a charioteer his horse, it has released (its wave),
## 11
Your wave which, pursuing the gods, has streamed around in the filter, sitting on the womb of truth.
## 12
Rush into our filter, as the exhilarating drink that best pursues the gods, o drop, for Indra to drink.
## 13
For refreshment purify yourself in a stream, being groomed by the  inspired ones.
O drop, with your light come toward the cows.
## 14
Becoming purified, make wide space and nourishment for the people, o  you who long for song,
when you are released into the milk-mixture, o tawny one.
## 15
Becoming purified for the pursuit of the gods, drive to your rendezvous  with Indra,
flashing, guided by the prize-seekers.
## 16
Being impelled forth, the swift drops,
sped by insightful thought, have surged to the sea.
## 17
Continually being groomed, the lively drops
have come at will to the sea, to the womb of truth.
## 18
Inclined toward us, encompass for us all goods with your strength. Protect for us a shelter full of heroes.

## 19
Etaśa the draft-horse measures out his pace, being yoked by the
versifiers,
when he is deposited in the sea.
## 20
When the swift one sits on the golden womb of truth,
he leaves behind the undiscerning.
## 21
The seekers have cried out to (him); the discerning wish to attain (him). The undiscriminating sink down.
## 22
For Indra with the Maruts, o drop, purify yourself as the most honeyed, to sit on the womb of truth.
## 23
The inspired poets knowing [/finding] speech, the ritual adepts,
adorn you;
the Āyus groom you all over.
## 24
Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuṇa drink your sap, o poet,
as do the Maruts, when you purify yourself.
## 25
You, Soma, while becoming purified, send out speech that is attentive to  poetic inspiration
and brings a thousand presents, o drop.
## 26
And speech bringing a thousand presents, ready for combat [/bounty],  o Soma—
becoming purified, o drop, bring that hither.
## 27
Becoming purified, o drop, much invoked by these peoples,
as dear one, enter the sea.
## 28
(Provided) with ever-flashing light, with a form that encircles with chant are (both) the clear soma drinks and those mixed with cows [=milk].
## 29
Being impelled, guided by the impellers, the prize-seeker has stridden to  the prize—
sitting (on the womb of truth) like raptor(-birds).
## 30
Separately [=unmixed], o Soma, and uniting (with milk), as poet  of heaven
purify yourself for well-being and as the sun to be seen.