+++
title = "065"

+++
65 (777) Soma Pavamāna
Bhrgu V ̥ āruṇi or Jamadagni Bhārgava
30 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
Even in this maṇḍala devoted to “self-purifying” Soma, the constant repetition of  that epithet and its associated verbal forms (“purify yourself,” etc.) in this hymn is  remarkable. In particular, the idiom “by purifying yourself bring here ...” (much  more economically expressed in Sanskrit by ā́ pavasva) is insistent, along with other  demands that Soma bring or convey goods here. Intermingled are verses treating the familiar details of soma preparation. All in all, the hymn seems flat, uninspired,  and repetitive.
The tr̥ca consisting of verses 22–24 breaks the monotony to some degree, with  the first two verses listing various places where the soma may be pressed (the  meaning of some of these words is disputed and their translation provisional),  and only the third returning to the dominant theme of the hymn. The final tr̥ca  (vss. 28–30) brings the hymn to a close with a flurry of repetitions of the preverb  ā́ “here, hither,” in a list of items we wish to bring to hand as a result of the soma  offering.
## 1
The rosy (fingers) impel the sun; the kindred sisters impel their lord; those seeking the great impel the great drop.
## 2
O self-purifying one, with light after light, as god from among the gods, enter all good things.
## 3
O self-purifying one, by purifying yourself bring here good praise, rain,  and friendship from the gods,
continuously for refreshment.
## 4
Because you are a bull, we, very attentive, invoke you who are brilliant  with radiance,
o self-purifying one.
## 5
By purifying yourself bring here an abundance of heroes, you yourself  becoming exhilarated, o you of good weapons.
Come just here, o drop.
## 6
When you are poured all around with waters, being groomed in the  two hands,
you attain to your seat by means of the wooden (vessel).
## 7
Sing forth to self-purifying Soma, as Vyaśva did—
to the great one with a thousand eyes—
## 8
Him whose tawny hue, dripping with honey, they impel (like) a fallow  bay with the stones,
the drop for Indra to drink,
## 9
It’s with you—that prize-seeker who has won all the stakes—
that we choose partnership.
## 10
As bull purify yourself in a stream, and as exhilarating drink for the  one accompanied by the Maruts [=Indra],
making all things your own by your strength.
## 11
You, o self-purifying one, who look like the sun, the upholder of  (Indra’s?) two arms,
do I impel—the prize-seeker to the prizes.
## 12
Conspicuous because of this poetic inspiration, purify yourself as  tawny one in this very stream.
Spur on your yokemate to the prizes.

## 13
By purifying yourself bring great refreshment here for us, o drop visible  to all,
finding the way for us, o Soma.
## 14
The tubs have cried out, o drop. In streams, with strength,
enter (them) for Indra’s drinking.
## 15
You, whose exhilarating, sharp sap they milk out with stones— purify yourself as smasher of hostility.
## 16
The king is sped by (words of) wisdom, purifying himself in Manu’s  presence,
to drive through the midspace.
## 17
Convey to us here, o drop, hundredfold thriving of cattle, an abundance  of horses,
and the gift of good fortune, for aid.
## 18
Bring to us here, o Soma, strength and speed, as if in physical form, for  luster,
when you have been pressed to seek the gods.
## 19
Rush, o Soma, most brilliant, to the wooden vessels, constantly  bellowing,
sitting like a falcon in your womb.
## 20
For Indra, for Vāyu, for Varuṇa, for the Maruts, for Viṣṇu
the water-winning soma rushes.
## 21
Establishing refreshment for our offspring and for us on all sides,  o Soma,
by purifying yourself bring thousandfold (wealth) here.
## 22
The soma juices that have been pressed in the distance, those nearby, or those yonder in a reed-filled (lake),
## 23
Those (pressed) in foamy (places) among performers (of rituals), those  in the middle of dwelling places,
or those among the five peoples,
## 24
By purifying themselves, let them bring here to us rain from heaven and  an abundance of heroes—
the gods, the drops, being pressed.
## 25
He purifies himself, the delightful tawny one, while being hymned by  Jamadagni
and being impelled onto the hide of the cow.
## 26
Forth (go) the clear (soma juices), speeding with vigor, being impelled  like teams.
Being brought to readiness, they are groomed in the waters.
## 27
Those present at the pressings have impelled you for the sake of the  divine conclave.
Purify yourself with this light. 28. Here your skill, which is joy itself, we choose today, here (you as)  draft-animal,
here the much coveted drink,
## 29
Here the gladdening (drink), here the one worthy to be chosen, here the  inspired poet, here the inspirited one,
here the much coveted drink,
## 30
Here wealth, here kind attention, here, o strong-willed one, right here  on our bodies,
here the much coveted drink.