+++
title = "066"

+++
66 (778)
Soma Pavamāna, except Agni 19–21
One hundred Vaikhānasa poets
30 verses: gāyatrī (except anuṣṭubh 18), arranged in trcas ̥
This hymn sets larger rhetorical goals for itself than the last one and inhabits  a less airless rhetorical space. Indeed, the hymn is in part about space: the con stricted area in which the soma is prepared and the materials employed in the  preparation are likened to various cosmic domains and natural phenomena (see,  e.g., vss. 2–3, 5–6, 12–13). Soma himself is explicitly or implicitly identified with  other deities and natural forces, and they with him:  the sun (vss. 18, 22, 27),  probably Indra (vs. 26), and especially Agni (vss. 19–21). This last identification  is so complete that the Anukramaṇī identifies Agni as the divinity of this tr̥ca— not surprisingly, as it begins (vs. 19) with an address to Agni, who is assigned  the archetypal Soma epithet “self-purifying” (vs. 20, with verbal forms in vss. 19  and 21), while also keeping his own characteristic vocabulary (esp. “installed in  front” [puróhita] vs. 20).
The poet also seeks comradeship with Soma (vss. 1, 4, 14, 18), in addition to the  usual good things.
From an Indo-European perspective, the hymn is notable for containing one of  three R̥gvedic occurrences of the famous phrase ákṣiti śrávaḥ “imperishable fame,”  cognate with Greek kléos áphthiton “idem,” and the formula, identified by Adelbert  Kuhn in 1853, that launched the field of comparative Indo-European poetics.
## 1
Purify yourself, you who are common to all the separate peoples,
(surging) toward all products of poetic skill,
a comrade for your comrades, to be reverently invoked.
## 2
From those two you rule over all, self-purifying one—from the two  domains [=Heaven and Earth]
that stand facing (each other), o Soma.
## 3
The domains that are yours, Soma, you surround entirely
according to the ritual sequences, o self-purifying poet.1294 IX.66
## 4
Purify yourself, begetting refreshments, (surging) toward all valuables, as a comrade to aid your comrades.
## 5
Yours are the gleaming rays that spread widely on the back of heaven across the filter, Soma, through your domains.
## 6
Yours are these seven streams that flow forth to your command, Soma. For you do the milk-cows run.
## 7
Drive forth, Soma, in a stream, pressed as exhilarating for Indra, establishing for yourself imperishable fame.
## 8
Together the seven siblings cried out to you, inciting with insightful  thoughts
the inspired poet at the contest of Vivasvant.
## 9
They groom you together, the unwed ones, on the sheep’s *back, in the  lively (water),
when, hoarse-voiced [/creaking], you are anointed [/greased] in the  wood(en cup).
## 10
Of you purifying yourself, o poet and prizewinner, the surges have surged, like chargers seeking fame.
## 11
Toward the cask dripping with honey they have surged onto the sheep’s  fleece.
The insightful thoughts have bellowed.
## 12
Toward the sea have the drops gone, like milk-cows toward home, to the womb of truth.
## 13
For our great joy the waters, the rivers rush forth, o drop,
when you will clothe yourself with cows.
## 14
Since we are likely to gain in comradeship with you, with you as  our help,
we long for comradeship, o drop.
## 15
Purify yourself for the quest for cattle, for the great one of manly eye,  o Soma.
Enter here into the belly of Indra.
## 16
Great are you, Soma, preeminent, strongest of the strong, o drop. Being a battler, you win every time.
## 17
(You,) who are stronger even than the strong, more a champion even  than champions,
more generous even than those who give much,
## 18
You, Soma, are the sun; (bring) refreshments here at the winning of the  offspring of our own bodies.
We choose (you) for comradeship; we choose (you) for fellowship.
## 19
O Agni, you bring (longer) lifespans through your purification; impel  hither nourishment and refreshment to us.
Into the distance thrust misfortune. 20. Agni—a seer, self-purifying, belonging to the five peoples, installed  in front—
him we beseech for a great household.
## 21
Agni, as a good worker, through your purification bring luster and an  abundance of heroes for us,
establishing in me wealth and thriving.
## 22
The self-purifying one rushes across failures toward the lovely
praise hymn,
visible to all like the sun.
## 23
He, being constantly groomed by the Āyus, affording pleasure, is  established for pleasure,
the drop, a steed visible afar.
## 24
The self-purifying one, as the lofty truth, has begotten the
gleaming light,
continually smashing (back) the black shades of darkness.
## 25
Of the self-purifying one, continually smashing (back the darkness), of  the tawny one, the glittering (drops) have surged,
lively ones with flickering radiance.
## 26
The self-purifying one, the best charioteer, proclaimed as most
resplendent by the resplendent (Maruts),
gold-glittering, with the Maruts as his flock,
## 27
The self-purifying one will pervade with his rays, the best winner of prizes, establishing for the praiser an abundance of heroes.
## 28
Being pressed, the drop has flowed forth across the fleecy filter;
being purified, the drop (has flowed) to Indra.
## 29
This Soma plays on the hide of cows with the stones,
repeatedly invoking Indra to exhilaration.
## 30
You, self-purifying one, whose heaven-bright milk was brought here  from heaven,
with it be gracious to us, for us to live.