+++
title = "067"

+++
67 (779)
Soma Pavamāna [or, according to Anukramaṇı̄, Soma Pavamāna 1–9, 13–22, 28–30; Soma Pavamāna or Pūsan ̣ 10–12; Agni 23, 24; Agni or Savitar 25; Agni or Agni and Savitar  26; Agni or the All Gods 27; Praise of the Student of the Pavamānı̄ Verses 31–32]
Bharadvāja 1–3, Kaśyapa 4–6, Gotama 7–9, Atri 10–12, Viśvāmitra 13–15, Jamadagni  16–18, Vasiṣṭha 19–21, Pavitra Āṅgirasa or Vasiṣtha or both 22–32
32 verses: gāyatrī, except dvipadā gāyatrī 16–18, anuṣṭubh 27, 31–32, puraüṣṇih 30,  arranged in trcas through verse 21. ̥

This final hymn of the IXth Maṇḍala gāyatrī collection is, according to the  Anukramaṇī, the product of at least seven different poets, most of them found ing poets of the Family Books of the R̥gveda and all eponymous ancestors of  the most prominent gotras of later times—each responsible for a single tr̥ca, with  the last eleven verses assigned either to yet another poet or to Vasiṣṭha, the poet  of the immediately preceding tr̥ca. It has been convincingly argued by Proferes  (2007: 10) that this structure shows that the separate lineage rites were already being  collected into a single pan-Ārya ritual during the R̥gvedic period and that this com posite hymn was a conscious attempt to bring the various clans under one ritual  umbrella. He argues that the final two verses (31–32) were added by the redactors  or compilers and celebrate this ecumenical project, by declaring that the assemblage  is greater and more powerful than the sum of its parts.
Certainly its parts are quite various. The first twenty-one verses, attributed to the  various clan-poets, are for the most part conventional Soma Pavamāna verses, and  the tr̥cas for the most part exhibit some internal cohesion. The single unconventional  tr̥ca consists of verses 10–12, attributed to Atri, in which the god Pūṣan dominates.  Pūṣan otherwise scarcely appears in the IXth Maṇḍala, has little or no connec
tion with soma elsewhere (gruel is his favored meal), and barely appears in the Atri  Maṇḍala (V) except in lists of other gods. The reason for his intrusion here is unclear. Verses 22–27 form a self-contained purificatory spell, calling on various gods,  including Soma, Agni, and Savitar, in addition to groups of gods, to purify us with  their own characteristic instruments. There follow two verses (28–29) that return to  the soma theme, and then the strangest verse of all (30). The interpretation of this  verse is much disputed, but it appears to refer to the myth of the disappearance of  the ritual Agni and urges Soma to bring him back, along with a, or the, rat, which  may be a reference to the god Rudra, whose animal victim in later ritual is a rat. But  this is only a guess.
The last two supplementary verses (31–32) were discussed above.
## 01
You, Soma, are supporting, invigorating, strongest at the ceremony. Purify yourself, readying wealth.
## 02
You, bringing exhilaration to superior men when pressed, most
exhilarating when you have run,
are patron to Indra, with your stalk.
## 03
You, having been pressed by stones—rush, roaring constantly,
toward highest brilliant tempestuous force.
## 04
The drop, being impelled, rushes across the sheep’s fleece;
the tawny one has roared for the prize.
## 05
O drop, you rush through the fleece, through to acclamations, through to  gifts of good fortune,
through to prizes consisting of cows, o Soma.
## 06
Bring here to us, o drop, wealth in cattle and horses—
a hundredfold, a thousandfold, o soma. 7. The self-purifying drops, swift across the filter,
have reached Indra on their journeys.
## 08
The prominent somian sap, the primordial drop
purifies itself for Indra—a lively one for a lively one [/Āyu].
## 09
The rosy (fingers) impel the sun; to the self-purifying one, dripping  with honey,
they cry out in unison with a song.
## 10
Pūṣan whose horses are goats is our helper on every journey.
– He will give us a share in maidens.
## 11
This Soma here purifies himself, honeyed like ghee, for the one with  braided hair [=Pūṣan].
– He will give us a share in maidens.
## 12
This pressed soma here purifies himself, gleaming like ghee, for you,  glowing one.
– He will give us a share in maidens.
## 13
As child of the speech of the poets, o Soma, purify yourself in a stream. You are the one among the gods who establishes treasure.
## 14
He runs into the tubs; the falcon plunges through the armor
toward the cups, roaring constantly.
## 15
Your sap, Soma, when pressed, has surged forth and around into  the tub.
Like a falcon launched in flight, it rushes.
## 16
Purify yourself, Soma, causing exhilaration, most honeyed for Indra. 17. They have been released to pursue the gods, like chariots seeking  the prize.
## 18
The clear pressed soma-juices, most invigorating, have surged to Vāyu.
## 19
Pounded by the stone, bepraised, you go to the filter, o Soma,
establishing for the praiser an abundance of heroes.
## 20
This one, pounded, bepraised, plunges across the filter,
the sheep’s fleece, as demon-smasher.
## 21
What peril nearby and what at a little distance finds me here—
o self-purifying one, smash that away.
## 22
The one who purifies himself through our filter today, the limitless one who is the purifier, let him purify us.
## 23
The filter that is stretched out here within your flame, o Agni,
and the sacred formulation—with that purify us.
## 24
Your filter of flames, Agni—with that purify us;
with the impulsions of sacred formulations purify us.
## 25
With both, god Savitar, with the filter and with your impulsion
purify me all about.

## 26
With the three purify us—you, god Savitar, with your greatest
(impulsions), you, Soma, through your greatest domains,
and you, Agni, with your skills.
## 27
Let the godly folk purify me; let the Vasus purify me with insight. O All Gods, purify me; o Jātavedas, purify me.
## 28
Swell forth, flow forth, Soma, with all your shoots
as highest oblation for the gods.
## 29
Close to the dear youth who always excites wonder, the one growing  strong through the poured offering,
have we come, bearing homage.
## 30
The axe [=flame] of the one not to be stilled [=Agni] (has) disappeared.  By purifying yourself bring it here, o god Soma,
so also the rat [=Rudra?], o god Soma.
## 31
Whoever studies the “Self-Purifying” (verses), the sap assembled by  the seers,
that one eats the whole purified (sap), sweetened by Mātariśvan.
## 32
Whoever studies the “Self-Purifying” (verses), the sap assembled by  the seers,
for him Sarasvatī milks out milk, fresh butter, honey, and water.
Jagatı Hymns: 68–86 ̄