+++
title = "068"

+++
68 (780)
Soma Pavamāna
Vatsaprī Bhālandana
10 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 10
The first of the Soma hymns in jagatī meter (IX.68–86), this poem well dem onstrates the increased possibilities for verbal and conceptual richness that the  longer meter affords, in contrast to the concision and constriction of gāyatrī.  The hymn has an omphalos structure: since verse 10 is a summary verse and in  a different meter (triṣṭubh), verse 5 is the middle verse and encodes the esoteric  knowledge that is the hymn’s message. This verse is framed by a number of verbal  and semantic responsions (though not as tightly arranged as in some omphalos  hymns): for instance, the fingers of verses 4 and 7, as well as the same phrase “held  by men” in both verses; the forms of the root vid “find, discover” in verses 3 and  6 (and 9).
More important is the conceptual architecture: the hymn leads up to the ompha los and away from it, returning to its conceptual starting point. It begins with the ritual soma and the familiar details of its preparation (vss. 1–2): the journey across  the filter and the mixing with milk, complete with details about the actual filtering  process, as the juice leaves its detritus in the filter. But toward the end of verse 2, the  journey gains a larger resonance, however vague: soma circles “the wide expanse,”  an area that sounds more ample than a mere sheep’s fleece. In verses 3 and 4 the  journey has turned cosmic: heaven and earth are now the domain for Soma’s travel  and for his fecundating activity, and in our view the contrast between Soma’s swell
ing footprint in 4b and his head in 4d expresses his cosmic reach, from his feet on  earth, swelling with rain, to his distant head in heaven.
Verse 5, the omphalos, provides an explanation, albeit a mystical one, for the  difference between the ritual soma of the first two verses and the cosmic one of  verses 3–4. He really had two births, one in secret even beyond the two worlds and  one made evident to all. And as a consequence there are actually two Somas, a fact  first recognized by Heaven and Earth. (Such is our reading of this verse, which has  generally been interpreted quite differently: one influential opinion identifies the  Aśvins as the twins mentioned, a solution of desperation in our opinion.)
The second form of Soma, the physical and visible one, is brought to earth in  verse 6, and the poets and ritualists transform him into the ritual soma now familiar  to us. The remaining verses before the summary (7–9) bring us back to the current  ritual soma with which we began, but with a clearer awareness of the powers his  dual nature has bestowed on him. For example, in verse 1 the drops are simply “pro
vided with speech,” but in verses 8–9 Soma “rouses speech” all the way to heaven.  Similarly, in verse 2 he simply “circles around” the wide expanse, whereas in 9d, the  last pāda of the hymn proper, he “finds” wide space, a feat much desired and much  celebrated by the Vedic Āryas.
## 01
Forth toward the god have the honeyed drops flowed, like milk-cows. Sitting on the ritual grass, provided with speech, with (full) udders, they  have assumed as their swirling raiment the ruddy (cows’ milk).
## 02
Bellowing continually he has cried out to the (cows) in front; loosening  his shoots, the tawny one becomes sweet.
Across the filter, circling around the broad expanse, the god will lay
down his stems at will.
## 03
The exhilarating drink, which measured across the converging twin  sisters [=Heaven and Earth], swelled those two imperishable ones,
grown strong simultaneously, with imperishable milk.
Continually rediscovering the two great, unbounded world-halves,
advancing upon imperishable (space), he assumed his full dimension. 4. Wandering between the two mothers [=Heaven and Earth], stirring  up the waters, the wise one swells his own footprint by his
independent power.
The plant is ornamented with grain when he is held by men; while he  joins with his female kin [=fingers], he guards his own head.

## 05
Along with skill and mind the poet is born; the embryo of truth was  deposited beyond the twins [=Heaven and Earth].
Those two were the first to recognize that there were two youths: the  (one) birth deposited in secret and the other held aloft.
## 06
The inspired thinkers discovered the form of the gladdening one, when  the falcon brought the stalk from out of the distance.
They groomed him in the rivers, the eager well-grown plant, circling
around, worthy of verses.
## 07
The ten maidens [=fingers] groom you when you are pressed, Soma,  when you are impelled by the seers with thoughts and insights
and with invocations of the gods through the sheep’s fleeces. Held by  men, you will break out the prize to be won.
## 08
The inspired thoughts, the rhythms have roared to Soma, the branchy  one, circling forth, keeping good company,
who, honeyed, in a stream, in a wave from heaven, rouses speech—the  immortal one who conquers wealth.
## 09
This is the one who rouses (speech) to the whole realm of heaven.  Soma, being purified, sits in the tubs.
He is groomed with waters, with cows, when he has been pressed by
stones. Being purified, the drop finds dear wide space.
## 10
In just this way, o Soma, purify yourself, being poured all around,  establishing for us vigor most bright.
We would invoke Heaven and Earth, the two without hatred. O gods,  establish wealth rich in heroes for us.