+++
title = "069"

+++
69 (781)
Soma Pavamāna
Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa
10 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 10
Attributed to the same poet as the author of the famous Indra hymn I.32 (and  indeed I.31–35, as well as IX.4), this hymn is dense with ever-shifting imagery,  expressed in many forms: similes, metaphors, identifications. Sometimes several ref erents are simultaneously possible, as in verse 1, where both “thought” and “soma”  could be the subject of the middle part of the verse. This verbal richness is quite  appropriate, since at least the first two verses concern the poetic impulse; note the  nice description of the tongue as “the gladdening goad” in 2b.
The middle verses (3–7) treat Soma’s journey across the filter to meet and mix  with the cows/milk. This mixture is described in increasingly elaborate images of  clothing in verses 4–5, ending with the cosmos as his garment (5cd). The journey is  completed in the first half of verse 7, and the hymn comes to a more conventional  ending with prayers for goods and aid. 1. Like an arrow on a bow, my thought is aimed. It is released like a calf  to the udder of its mother.
Like (a cow) with a broad stream, it gives milk as it comes here in the  lead. Under the commandments of this one [=Soma the god], the
soma (juice) is dispatched.
## 02
And while my thought is being engorged, the honey is poured. The  gladdening goad [=tongue] bestirs itself within the mouth.
The self-purifying one is a thundering, like (the thundering) of beaters.  The honeyed drop rushes round the fleece.
## 03
Seeking his wives, he purifies himself all around in the fleece and upon  the hide. The granddaughter of Aditi loosens (her garment [=shoots  of the soma plant]) for him who goes to truth.
The tawny one [/fallow bay], held fast, has whinnied—the sacrificial  exhilarating drink. Sharpening his own manly powers, like a buffalo,  he beautifies himself.
## 04
The bull bellows, and the milk-cows go in response. The goddesses go  to their rendezvous with the god.
He has stridden beyond the silvery sheep’s fleece. Soma has wrapped  himself in (milk) as if in a freshly washed cloak.
## 05
Being arrayed, the immortal tawny one has wrapped himself with an  unworn, gleaming garment.
With his might he has made the back of heaven for his raiment and an  underlayer made of cloud in the two cups.
## 06
Like the rays of the sun that set sleepers in motion, the exhilarating  (soma juices) arise all at once from sleep.
The swift surges (surge) around the stretched string [=filter]. But
without Indra he [=Soma] does not purify any domain of his.
## 07
As at the forward plunge of a river toward the deep, the swift
exhilarating drinks, roused by bulls, have achieved their course.
Weal (be) for our two-footed and our four-footed at their homecoming.  Let prizes and peoples stand by us, Soma.
## 08
By purifying yourself bring (wealth) in goods and gold, in horses, cows,  and barley, and an abundance of good heroes,
for you (soma-juices), o Soma, are my fathers, the heads of heaven, set  forth as creators of vitality for me.
## 09
These self-purifying soma juices have gone forth to Indra, like chariots  to a win.
Pressed, the tawny ones go beyond the ovine filter, having left behind  their cover, to the rain.
## 10
O drop, purify yourself for lofty Indra, since you are very merciful,  beyond reproach, caring for the stranger.
Bring gleaming goods to the singer. O Heaven and Earth, together with  the gods—further us.
