+++
title = "070"

+++
70 (782) Soma Pavamāna
Reṇu Viśvāmitra
10 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 10
An intricate and difficult hymn, some of whose puzzles remain unsolved. The  theme of the hymn is the difference between, and ultimate unity of, heavenly Soma  and earthly, ritual Soma—a theme that was also the subject of nearby IX.68. The  disjunction is announced in the first verse, where the “real” milk-mixture is pro
duced in heaven, and the worlds are Soma’s garment. In verse 2, by contrast, it  seems that the earthly Soma is seeking a share of his heavenly counterpart by per forming cosmic deeds through ritual means. A rapprochement is effected in verse  3, where Soma’s beacons (kétu) go to and work upon both men and gods, and as a  consequence they accept him as their king; on the basis of other passages in which  this term is found, the beacons appear to be both his cosmic sunlike rays and the  glinting streams of ritual soma as they circle in the filter. The intermediary role of  Soma between gods and men and Heaven and Earth remains the subject of the fol lowing verses (4–6), though not all is clear, especially the first half of verse 4 and  the last half of verse 6. The last four verses (7–10) return us to the ritual Soma and  his ultimate goal, the body of Indra, but the cosmic associations he acquired in the  earlier parts of the hymn make him nourishment fit for the gods.
## 1
Three times seven milk-cows have milked out for him the real
milk-mixture in the foremost distant heaven.
He made the four other dear worlds to be his raiment, when he grew  strong through the truths [=hymns].
## 2
Seeking a share of the dear immortal one, through his poetic skill he has  loosened both, Heaven (and Earth), from each other.
He lavishly wraps himself in the glinting-sharp waters when, by the god’s  [=Soma’s] fame, they [=waters] know his seat.
## 3
Let those immortal undeceivable beacons of his suffuse both races  [=gods and men],
the beacons by which both manly and godly (powers) become purified.  Just because of that have the zealous ones accepted him as their king. 4. He, being groomed by the ten who work well [=fingers], (goes) forth to  bellow forth amid the midmost mothers [=waters?].
Protecting the commandments of the dear immortal one [=heavenly
soma], having his sight on men, he surveys both clans [=gods
and men].
## 5
Constantly being groomed, propelled between the two worlds-halves, he  is roused to give suck to Indra.
With his blustering the bull thrusts away evil thoughts, always setting his  sights, like a sharpshooter, on rich spoils. 6. The ruddy one, becoming visible, goes (to Heaven and Earth) as if to  his two mothers, roaring again and again, like the clamor of the
Maruts.
Recognizing the first truth, which is the realm of solar splendor, he of  strong will has chosen it for his glorification.
## 7
The fearsome bull bellows forcefully, sharpening his golden horns,  wide-gazing.
Soma sits down upon his well-made womb. His skin comes to be made  of cattle; his garment of sheep.
## 8
Gleaming, purifying his spotless body, the tawny one has run down  onto the sheep’s back,
pleasing to Mitra, Varuṇa, and Vāyu. The honey is made threefold by  those who make it well.
## 9
Purify yourself as bull, Soma, to pursue the gods. Enter the heart of  Indra, which is the receptacle of Soma.
Ahead of oppression, carry us across difficulties, for he who knows the  territory tells the directions to the one who asks.
## 10
Like a team spurred on, rush to the prize. O drop, purify yourself into  the belly of Indra.
Carry us across (difficulties) as if across a river with a boat, since you  know how. Like a battling champion, rescue us from insult.