+++
title = "071"

+++
71 (783)
Soma Pavamāna
R̥ṣabha Vaiśvāmitra
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 9
The subject of this hymn is, as so often, Soma’s journey across the filter to take  his seat as ritual drink after the various stages of preparation. The journey is pre sented as a straightforward trajectory on the one hand, with his arrival among  the gods and his union with the praise hymn the last step, in verse 8. But the  hymn is also structured by a number of responsions between the earlier and the  later verses; note especially 2b and 8a, with the almost identical phrases “the  color that is his” and “this is his color.” In this particular example the forward  movement of the journey and the architectonic structure of responsions comple ment each other, for in verse 2 Soma sheds his original form and color and in  verse 8 he gains new ones.
## 01
The tempestuous one is sent surging, along with the gift-cow, to take his  seat here. Vigilant, he pursues deceits and protects from the demon.
The tawny one makes himself a headdress, cloud and milk for an
underlayer in the two cups, and the sacred formulation for his raiment.1304 IX.72
## 02
Like a smiter of peoples, explosive he goes forth, roaring again and  again. He spills down the lordly color that is his.
He abandons his covering, and he goes to his rendezvous with his father.  He makes what floats nearby [=milk] in its full measure into his fresh  garment.
## 03
Pressed by the stones, he purifies himself between the two hands. With  his cloud he acts the bull [/rains]; he trembles (in poetic inspiration)
with his thought.
He rejoices in, unites with, achieves success through the song. He washes  himself in the waters. He sacrifices for himself in his fullness.
## 04
All around they sprinkle the heaven-ruling (son) of strength, of honey,  grown strong upon the mountain, the conqueror of the secure house, in whom, on whose head, the cows prepare the foremost (milk) in their
udder in broad (streams) for him who eats the good oblation [=Indra]. 5. The ten sisters on the two hands have assembled him like a chariot, here  in the lap of Aditi.
As he goes, he extends toward the secret track of the cow which the
thoughtful have produced for him.
## 06
Like a falcon to its womb [=nest], the god hastens to sit upon the golden  seat made by insight.
They let the dear one spill onto the ritual grass with a song. Like a horse  (its stall), the one worthy of the sacrifice approaches the gods.
## 07
Far away is the ruddy poet of heaven, all adorned. The three-backed bull  has bellowed to the cows.
The marshal who has a thousand ways and means [=Soma] radiates,  like the hoarse-voiced singer [=Agni], across the many dawns as they  go away.
## 08
He makes for himself a glittering form—that is his color. When he has  lain down in the clash (of the pressing stones), he wards off errors.
Winning the waters, he drives by his own will to the divine folk. He joins  with the lovely praise hymn, with what is tipped with cows.
## 09
Like a bull going around the herds, he has bellowed as he circles. He has  put on the glitterings of the sun.
The heavenly eagle looks down upon the earth. Soma surveys the
creatures in accord with his purpose.