+++
title = "072"

+++
72 (784)
Soma Pavamāna
Harimanta Āṅgirasa
9 verses: jagatī
The role of humans in both the physical and the verbal preparation of Soma is  emphasized in this hymn. The first verse sets this tone, with the anonymous priestly subjects of “they groom” of pāda a and the anonymous praisers who impel the  soma in the second half, a division of labor found as well in verse 2; see also verses  4–6, 8. The exact responsion of the last parts of 4d and 5b seem to mark an ompha los, but there is little other evidence for such a structure.
The hymn contains one major problem: the hapax vinaṃgr̥sá in 3c. The phrase ology in this pāda is strongly suggestive of erotic slang, but unfortunately the word  has so far defeated all attempts to decode it. It is worth noting, however, that it is a  partial anagram of the patronymic of the poet Harimanta Āṅgirasa, and he may be  punning on his name in this playful, erotic context.
## 01
They groom the tawny one [/fallow bay]; like a chestnut he is yoked.  Soma is anointed with milk-cows in the tub.
When he raises his voice, the circle of friends of the one praised by
many—however many they are—speed him on with their thought.
## 02
The many inspired thinkers speak all at once, when they have milked the  soma into the belly of Indra,
when the men of skilled hands groom him, the desirable honey, with the  ten belonging to the same nest [=fingers].
## 03
Not stopping, he goes beyond (the filter) toward the cows, across the  dear bellow of the Daughter of the Sun.
According to his pleasure, the vinaṃgr̥sa [?] “stuck it” to him. He dwells  together with the paired, kindred sisters [=fingers].
## 04
Rinsed by men, pressed by stones, the dear one on the ritual grass, the  husband of the cows, from of old the drop that follows the ritual
seasons,
accompanied by Plenitude, assuring success to the sacrifice of Manu,  gleaming, with insight he purifies himself for you, Indra.
## 05
Driven on by the two arms of men, pressed in a stream, following his  own nature Soma purifies himself for you, Indra.
He has fulfilled their intentions; he has won completely the thoughts at  the ceremony. Like a bird sitting in the wood the tawny one has taken  his seat in the two cups.
## 06
They milk the thundering, imperishable plant; the industrious inspired  poets (milk) the poet.
The cows and the thoughts in uninterrupted array, ever regenerating, go  together to him in the womb, the seat of truth.
## 07
On the navel of earth is the buttress of great heaven. In the wave of the  waters and within the rivers he is sprinkled.
The mace of Indra, the bull possessing conspicuous goods, the
invigorating soma purifies himself in a way dear to the heart.
## 08
Purify yourself all around the earthly realm, as you do your best for the  man who praises and the man who rinses (you), you very resolute one. Don’t deal us out of a portion of a good that will touch our
dwellings: might we clothe ourselves in ample golden wealth.

## 09
(Bring) here for us, o drop, a hundred shares of horses, a thousand shares  of flocks and gold.
Measure out lofty, rich refreshments. Give study to our praise,
self-purifying one.