+++
title = "073"

+++
73 (785)
Soma Pavamāna
Pavitra Āṅgirasa
9 verses: jagatī
A complex and enigmatic hymn, whose difficulties stem primarily from the double  system of reference that pervades the hymn. The signature phrase is “they have  sounded in unison” (sám asvaran, vss. 1, 4, 5, 6); in none of its occurrences is there  an overt subject, an omission that is surely deliberate. The verb forms in ques
tion, and indeed most of the hymn, can be interpreted as referring either to the  soma streams as they noisily cross the filter or to the priests/poets who provide  the hymns that accompany soma’s journey. This double reference is found even in  the name of the poet to whom the hymn is attributed: Pavitra (“Filter”): the filter  is both the sheep’s wool filter that purifies the soma and the poet who creates the  ritual speech; the word pavítra occurs several times in the hymn (vss. 3, 7, 8, 9, and  implicitly 4). The “solution” to the central riddle of the hymn, this dual reference,  is suggested in the first half of verse 7 and definitely expressed in the final verse  (9), where “the thread of truth” (r̥tásya tántuḥ) is stretched both on the filter and  on the tongue-tip. The thread may be both the track of the soma across the filter  and the continuous line of speech. The second half of the verse emphasizes the  importance of united action to attain it, and the necessity of always advancing.
Another thematic strain is the deployment of the power of this unified sound  against enemies and hostile forces (see esp. vss. 5, 6, 8), a power associated with  Varuṇa and his māyā́ (“magic power, artifice,” vss. 5 and 9), with whom Soma is  identified, first in verse 3.  Varuṇa is of course the protector of commandments  (vratá, vss. 3, 5, 8) and is associated with truth/true speech (r̥tá, vss. 1, 6, 8, 9), words  prominent in the hymn. Thus, Soma, as the embodiment of Varuṇa, and the poets  who assist him can marshal Varuṇa’s weapon, “true speech,” against forces that  deny or attempt to thwart it.
Many individual puzzles remain, but the overall structure and purpose of the  hymn are clear.
## 01
In the jaw (of the pressing stones) while the droplet was blowing its blast,  they sounded in unison. The ties of lineage have joined together in the  womb of truth.
The lord [=Soma] has made his three heads to be seized. The boats of  the trusty one [=Soma] have brought the good (ritual) performer
across to the other shore. 2. Altogether joined together, the buffaloes have been propelled [/have  propelled (him)]. The seekers have set (him/speech) atremble in the
swell of the river.
Giving birth to the chant with the streams of honey, they have made  Indra’s own dear body grow strong.
## 03
Provided with the filter, they take their seats around speech. Their  ancient father guards his commandment.
As great Varuṇa, (Soma) has hidden himself in the sea. Only the
insightful have been able to take hold of his supports.
## 04
Down in that (filter) of a thousand streams, they have sounded in  unison—as have the honey-tongued, inexhaustible (streams) in the
vault of heaven.
His fervent spies do not blink: at every step there are snares that bind. 5. Those who sounded in unison from the father and the mother [=Heaven  and Earth], blazing with their verse, burning up those who follow no  commandment,
they blow away by magic power the black skin hated by Indra, from  earth and from heaven—
## 06
Those who sounded in unison from their ancient edifice, those with a  signaling call for their reins, counselors of the wild one [=Soma].
The blind and deaf have retreated: evildoers do not traverse the path  of truth.
## 07
Here in the wide-stretched filter of a thousand streams the poets of  inspired thought purify their speech.
The lively Rudras [=Maruts] without deceit are their spies, well directed,  lovely to see, with their eyes on men.
## 08
The herdsman of truth is not to be tricked: his will is strong. He has set  three filters within his heart.
Knowing, he looks upon all living creatures. He jabs the disgusting
deniers of commandments down into the pit.
## 09
The thread of truth is stretched widely, here on the filter and on the tip  of the tongue, through the magic power of Varuṇa.
Only the insightful, seeking to reach it together, have attained it. The one  who does not advance will fall down into the pit here.