+++
title = "074"

+++
74 (786)
Soma Pavamāna
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 8
This hymn is attributed to Kakṣīvant, the skilled and crafty poet of I.116–126,  who names himself in verse 8. Although it is not as intricate as some of his Ist  Maṇḍala productions, it invites the same sort of double readings as the previous

hymn (IX.73) and achieves this ambiguity by the same means, the suppression of  overt referential subjects and objects. It is notable that the word sóma appears only  twice (and only toward the end, vss. 7 and 9) and derivatives of the root pū “purify”  only in the final verse.
The primary doubled reference arises from the identification of soma with rain.  Particularly in the central verses 4–6 the entities and actions described can apply to  either or both; for example, the men “pissing down” the unnamed substance in 4d  may either be the Maruts producing rain or the priests producing soma. Toward the  end the discourse becomes more clearly somian, and these are the verses in which  the words “soma” and “self-purifying” appear.
## 1
Like a new-born (calf), he has roared down into the wood(en vessel).  When the ruddy racehorse strives to win the sun,
he keeps company with the milk-strong semen of heaven. We implore  him for extensive protection through his benevolence.
## 2
The (soma) plant, the prop and buttress of heaven, which, when well  extended and fully filled, encompasses in every direction,
that (plant) will offer sacrifice to these two great world-halves when they  turn hither. The poet unites the united pair and the refreshing drinks. 3. A great delight is the well-prepared somian honey, and wide is the  pasture-land of Aditi for him who goes to truth,
who, as a dawn-red bull, is master of the rain from here, who is the
leader of the waters, ageless and worthy of verses.
## 4
The embodied cloud is milked of ghee and milk. The navel of truth, the  immortal (drink) is born.
United, possessed of good drops, they please him. The swollen men piss  down the one propelled.
## 5
The plant, keeping company with the wave, has roared. For Manu it  swells the skin that seeks out the gods.
It deposits the embryo in the lap of Aditi, the one by which we will
acquire both progeny and prosperity.
## 6
Let there be inexhaustible (streams) down in the (filter) of a thousand  streams, and in the third realm (streams) bringing offspring.
The four hidden (streams), bursting down from heaven, dripping with  ghee, carry the oblation, the immortal (drink).
## 7
He makes himself a white form when he is striving to win. Soma,
benefactor and lord, knows the world.
He keeps company with insight and (ritual) labor—that is the course  (that leads) to him. He will split open the water-filled cask of heaven. 8. And the racehorse, having won, has stridden to the gleaming white tub  anointed with cows, at the finish line.
Those serving the gods propel him with their mind. (Let there be a
hundred) cows for Kakṣīvant of a hundred winters. 9. Your juice, when you have been infused with the waters, runs through the  sheep’s fleece, o self-purifying one.
Being groomed by the poets, become sweet for Indra to drink, o most  exhilarating self-purifying one.