+++
title = "075"

+++
75 (787)
Soma Pavamāna
Kavi Bhārgava
5 verses: jagatī
Soma’s deep, almost reflexive, involvement in verbal products and production is  the subject of the first two verses of the hymn. He strengthens himself on his own  names in verse 1, and in verse 2 is both the physical (tongue, speaker) and concep tual (father) source of truth and insight. In the second half of verse 2, in the sort of  paradox much beloved by R̥gvedic seers, he not only knows the hidden names but  as son bestows them on his parents.
The remaining three verses are more conventionally concerned with the prepara tion of the ritual soma, though his connection with cosmic entities remains clear,  especially in verse 4.
This hymn and the four following (IX.75–70) are attributed to the same poet as  the gāyatrī hymns IX.47–49.
## 01
Delighted, he purifies himself, (aiming) toward his own dear names, upon  which the youthfully exuberant one grows strong.
The lofty one, wide gazing, has mounted upon the chariot of the lofty  sun that faces in many directions.
## 02
As the tongue of truth, he purifies himself as his own dear honey—he,  the speaker and father of this insight, who cannot be deceived.
The son sets a secret name on his two parents and a third in the
luminous realm of heaven.
## 03
Flashing, he has roared down toward the tubs, being guided by men into  the golden bucket.
Those who produce the milk of truth have bellowed to him.
Triple-backed, he rules [/shines] afar over the dawns.
## 04
Pressed with stones, delighted by our thoughts, making the two
world-halves, his mothers, to shine forth, the blazing one
races through the woolen hairs all at once, as a stream of honey swelling  day after day.
## 05
Run forth all around, Soma, for our well-being. As you are being purified  by men, dress yourself in the milk-mixture.
With those exhilarating drinks of yours, luxuriant and expansive,
stimulate Indra to give us bounty.
1310 IX.76–77