+++
title = "076"

+++
76 (788) Soma Pavamāna
Kavi Bhārgava
5 verses: jagatī
This portrait of Soma militant resembles the martial spirit of another of Kavi  Bhārgava’s hymns, IX.47. The dense series of combative images also track Soma’s  journey through the purificatory procedure, and his warlike power is to be har nessed for our own ends in the final verse (5). But Soma is not merely a warrior; he  is also a master of verbal art, who triumphs in poetic competitions (vs. 4). A short  but very satisfying poem.
## 1
The supporter of heaven purifies himself, the sap that gets results, the  skill of the gods to be celebrated by men.
The tawny one sent surging, like a charger by warriors, deploys his full  dimensions in the rivers at will.
## 2
Like a champion, he takes his weapons in his hands, a chariot-rider  striving to win the sun in the cattle raids.
Rousing Indra’s tempestuous force, the drop propelled by the industrious  ones [=fingers] is anointed [/driven] by those of inspired thought.
## 3
O Soma, purifying yourself in a wave, displaying your power, enter the  belly of Indra.
Swell the two worlds for us, as lightning does the rain clouds. As if
according to our vision, mete out prizes to us over and over.
## 4
He purifies himself, the king of all who see the sun. Vanquishing the  seers, he has made the vision of truth bellow.
He who is groomed by the lance [=ray] of the sun is the father of
thoughts, one whose poetic skill is entirely unattainable.
## 5
Like a bull around the herds, you charge around the cask, a bull roaring  again and again in the lap of the waters.
You purify yourself to be most invigorating for Indra, so that we who  have your help will conquer in the clash.