+++
title = "077"

+++
77 (789)
Soma Pavamāna
Kavi Bhārgava
5 verses: jagatī
In addition to familiar tropes of soma-preparation (e.g., vss. 1, 3, 4), the hymn  briefly treats the famous myth in which a falcon steals soma from heaven (vs.  2), with one of the few R̥gvedic mentions of the heavenly archer Kr̥śānu, who  attempted retaliation. As noted, verse 4 for the most part is a standard soma verse,  but pāda c skates fleetingly and unemphatically over an apparent paradox, with a male Soma conceiving himself as his own embryo. In the final verse Soma is com pared to Varuṇa, because of his control over truth and deceit, and to Mitra, in his  role as mediator among communities.
## 01
This honeyed one has cried out in the bucket, the mace of Indra, more  wondrous than any wonder.
The good milkers of truth, dripping with ghee, rush bellowing to him,  like milk-cows with their milk.
## 02
The primordial one purifies himself—he whom the falcon, propelled  across the airy realm, stole from heaven.
Quivering, with a mind fearing Kr̥śānu the archer, it [=falcon] binds on  the honey.
## 03
Let these drops, those ahead and those behind, run to a great prize of  cows for us—
those drops worth looking at, cherished like fertile cows, which take  pleasure in every sacred formulation, every oblation.
## 04
This one here, knowing how, will win against those who seek to win—the  drop praised by many with fully focused mind,
who has conceived the embryo in the seat of the powerful one and rushes  to the wide-open pen of cows.
## 05
The active, effective sap of heaven purifies himself as great Varuṇa, not  to be deceived by one who goes astray.
The one worthy of the sacrifice has been pressed as Mitra in the (ritual)  enclosures [/communities], constantly whinnying like a charger acting  the bull in the herd.