+++
title = "078"

+++
78 (790)
Soma Pavamāna
Kavi Bhārgava
5 verses: jagatī
A fairly straightforward hymn. The first three verses treat the preparation of the  soma: after being swollen with water it is sent forth into the filter, which captures  the plant detritus, on its way to the milk mixture (vs. 1); it goes across the filter and  into the cup (vs. 2); and it is mixed with waters, here unusually personified as the  nymph-like females, the Apsarases (vs. 3). The last two verses list the benefits that  will accrue to us when the gods drink the soma.
## 1
The king, begetting speech, has flowed forth; clothing himself in the  waters, he seeks to attain to the cows.
The sheep grasps his defilement, (the stems) attached to his body.
Cleansed, he travels to his rendezvous with the gods.

## 2
For Indra, o Soma, you are poured in circles by the men. As a wave  drawing the gaze of men, as poet, you are driven to the wood
[/anointed in the wood],
for there are many courses for you to travel and a thousand fallow bay  horses sitting in the cups.
## 3
The Apsarases belonging to the sea, sitting within, have streamed toward  Soma of inspired thought.
They spur him on, the conqueror of the secure house; they beg the
imperishable self-purifying one for his grace.
## 4
Winning cows for us, winning chariots and gold, winning the sun and the  waters, winning thousands, Soma purifies himself,
whom the gods have made their exhilarating draught for drinking, the  sweetest ruddy drop, who is joy itself.
## 5
O Soma, purifying yourself, you rush, seeking us, while making these  treasures real.
Smash the rival nearby and the one who is in the distance; make wide  pasturage and fearlessness for us.