+++
title = "079"

+++
79 (791)
Soma Pavamāna
Kavi Bhārgava
5 verses: jagatī
The combative spirit of this hymn is reminiscent of that in other hymns attributed  to Kavi Bhārgava, especially IX.47 and IX.76. The hymn is especially interesting  because of the light it throws on social divisions in the R̥gvedic period. The word arí (vss. 1, 3), here translated “stranger” following Thieme (1938), is a much-discussed  and much-contested one, underlying as it does derivatives such as ā́rya “Ārya.”  We are of the opinion that an arí is a member of the larger Ārya society, but not  of one’s immediate community. He is thus a stranger, but one with whom one in  principle shares social values and to whom one owes certain reciprocal duties, such  as hospitality. But as a stranger he may also pose a threat to the smaller community  one belongs to, if he exhibits hostility rather than a communal spirit. The scenario  sketched in this hymn involves the latter type of arí, whose hostility menaces the  success of our sacrifice (vs. 1). Verse 3 is quite explicit about the affinity of the  arí: he is “one of our own,” while a person who does not belong to the larger Ārya  society is called a “wolf,” an outlaw, when his actions threaten us. The poet calls on  Soma to destroy both types of enemies.
Verse 4 provides a brief interlude, outlining the cosmic dimensions of Soma— from heaven to earth, where his “fingers,” the shoots of the plant, grow—and a few  details of the preparation, vividly rendered. This verse cleverly incorporates four  different body parts (navel, fingers, skin, and hands) each belonging to a different entity. The final verse summarizes the process of pressing and calls once more for  Soma to display his feistiness on our behalf.
## 01
Without impulsion let our tawny drops run, forth to those dwelling in  lofty heaven, when they are pressed.
If hostilities will reach our refreshments, those of the stranger will go to  destruction. Our insightful thoughts will prevail.
## 02
Let our drops run forth, those arousing exhilaration, or (those) with  which we speed the chargers to the stakes,
across the crookedness of any mortal. May we always bear away the stakes. 3. Now, in the case of the hostility of one of our own, (we proclaim:) “he,  indeed, is a stranger!” And, in the case of the hostility belonging to
the other (side), (we proclaim:) “he, indeed, is a wolf!”
As if in a desert, thirst should strike them. O self-purifying Soma, smite  those of evil intent.
## 04
It was in heaven, in its navel to which your highest (form) was bound;  your “fingers” have grown on the back of the earth.
The stones gnaw you on the skin of the cow. Those of inspired thought  milk you in the waters with their hands.
## 05
In just this way, o drop, do those foremost ones, excelling in splendor,  express your sap of good essence and good ornament.
Self-purifying one, you will undermine every scorn(er). Let your
tempestuous spirit, your dear exhilaration become manifest.