+++
title = "080"

+++
80 (792)
Soma Pavamāna
Vasu Bhāradvāja
5 verses: jagatī
On the one hand, this hymn is somewhat static, stuck at the same stage of soma’s  preparation, as the almost exact responsion of the last two verses (4–5) emphasizes.  On the other hand, Soma’s relationship with the gods, especially Indra, a relation ship that figures in every verse, enlarges the conceptual frame of the hymn and  keeps it from seeming airless.
## 1
It purifies itself—the stream of Soma, who has the gaze of men. With  truth he summons the gods from heaven.
With the roar of Br̥haspati he has flashed forth. Like seas they [=the  waters?] envelop the pressings.
## 2
You, o prizewinner, toward whom the cows have bellowed—brilliant, you  mount the metal-hammered womb [=cup].
Lengthening the lifetime of the bounteous ones and their great fame, o  Soma, for Indra you purify yourself as bullish exhilaration.1314 IX.81
## 3
The most exhilarating one purifies himself in the cheek of Indra, the  one of good omen clothing himself in nourishment [=milk], for fame. He spreads himself out facing toward all creatures. Playful, the tawny  bullish steed flows.
## 4
You, most honeyed, do the men milk for the gods; you of a thousand  streams do the ten fingers milk.
O Soma, roused by men, pressed by stones, by purifying yourself bring  all the gods here, you winner of thousands.
## 5
You, honeyed, do those having hands milk with stones; you the bull do  the ten fingers milk in the waters.
Exhilarating Indra and the divine race, o Soma, purifying yourself, you  rush like the wave of a river.