+++
title = "081"

+++
81 (793) Soma Pavamāna
Vasu Bhāradvāja
5 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 5
Attributed to the same poet as the preceding hymn (IX.80), this hymn concerns  itself even more strongly with Soma’s connection with the gods, devoting the final  two verses of a five-verse hymn to a litany of gods invited to the soma sacrifice. The  preceding verse contains two occurrences of the word vásu “good (one),” which is  also the name of the poet. Soma’s task of mediating between the world of gods and  men is treated in verse 2, anticipating the appeal for his help to the poet in verse 3  and the invitation to the gods in verses 4–5.
## 1
The bedizened waves of self-purifying soma go forth to the belly
of Indra,
when, ladled up with the curds, with the glorious (product) of the cows,  the pressings have exhilarated the champion for giving.
## 2
For soma has flowed to the tubs. Like a steed that pulls (the chariot), the  bull has a rapid course,
and knowing of the double birth of gods (and men), he attains to what is  from yonder and what from here.
## 3
O Soma, purifying yourself, scatter goods for us; o drop, become a  bounteous (giver) of great largesse.
Conferrer of vigor, do your best for the good one [/Vasu] with your  kind attention. Do not pour away your property at a distance
from us.
## 4
Let Pūṣan, self-purifying (Soma), Mitra, and Varuṇa come here in  fellowship, bringing us lovely presents—
and Br̥haspati, the Maruts, Vāyu, the Aśvins, Tvaṣṭar, Savitar, and
Sarasvatī, who is easy to guide. 5. Both Heaven and Earth who set all in motion, god Aryaman, Aditi, the  Apportioner,
Bhaga, Praise of Men, broad Midspace—all the gods—enjoy the
self-purifying one.