+++
title = "082"

+++
82 (794)
Soma Pavamāna
Vasu Bhāradvāja
5 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 5
The first two verses of this hymn are conventional treatments of Soma’s journey  across the filter and his mixing with milk (here called ghee). Verse 3, however, is more  cryptically phrased, and the name Soma is not mentioned. He appears as a buffalo  with feathers and/or leaves, and his father is Parjanya (“thunder”): the image is of a  plant produced by the rains. As often, his home is in the mountains, here identified  as the navel of the earth. And the rinsing waters, the milk, and the pressing stones  of the ritual preparation appear in the second half of the verse. Verse 4 is notable  for its 1st-person singular speaker; the abrupt phrase “Listen:  I  am speaking to  you” is reminiscent of the famous command given by the goddess Speech (Vāc) in  X.125.4 “Listen to me, you who are listened to. It’s a trustworthy thing I tell you.”  First-person singular speech is quite rare in Maṇḍala IX. The combination of a rid dling middle verse and the poet’s announcement of his own speech is reminiscent of  omphalos hymns, though there is little other support for such a structure.
## 1
Soma has been pressed—the ruddy, tawny bull. Wondrous like a king, he  has roared to the cows.
While being purified, he circles around the sheep’s fleece, to sit, like a  falcon, on his ghee-filled womb.
## 2
As a poet with ritual expertise, you circle around the great (filter).  Groomed like a steed, you rush to the prize.
Warding off difficulties, o Soma, be merciful. Wearing ghee as your
raiment, you drive around.
## 3
Parjanya is the father of the feathered [/leafy] buffalo. In the navel of the  earth, on the mountains he has established his dwelling place.
The sister waters have also flowed to the cows. He will unite with the  stones when the ceremony is undertaken.
## 4
(Kindly) like a wife to her husband, you, kindly one, are generous of  yourself. O embryo of the steadfast (earth?), listen: I am speaking to you: amid the choir I shall advance to good living. O Soma, irreproachable,  be watchful in the ritual enclosure [/community].
## 5
Just as for the earlier ones you encompassed the prize as a winner of  hundreds, of thousands, not shirking, o drop,
so purify yourself for renewed good progress. The waters follow your  commandment.
