+++
title = "083"

+++
83 (795) Soma Pavamāna
Pavitra Āṅgirasa
5 verses: jagatī
A well-known hymn, whose manifold difficulties are also well known. It in many  ways resembles the famous Vena hymn, X.123, which also involves a mystical iden tification between Soma and the sun. The double meanings and enigmas are, as  often, fostered by the suppression of overt reference. Crucial verbs lack expressed  subjects, and unidentified asya “of him/it” substitutes for expressed possession (see  2b, 2c, 3c, 4a). The word sóma does not appear in the hymn at all, nor do his com mon epithets. The hymn has elicited many different and contradictory interpreta tions, to which we add our own.
Attributed to the same poet as IX.73, this hymn shares with that earlier one  the mystical metaphor of the filter (pavítra), which is also the name of the poet.  Indeed, the words “outstretched” and “filter,” construed with each other in the last  verse of IX.73 (vs. 9), open this hymn, and the two verses (73.9 and 83.1) both con
cern the qualities required to attain the filter and what it represents. In this hymn  the necessary quality is being cooked, rather than raw; it is somewhat startling to  encounter this whiff of Claude Lévi-Strauss very much avant la lettre. In this con text “cooked” must refer in the first instance to the ritual preparation of soma.  Although this preparation does not involve literal cooking, via application of heat,  it clearly turns the raw material extracted from the natural plant into a cultural  product, both through physical manipulation and through verbal accompaniment.
But the filter metaphor has a cosmic dimension, as is especially clear in verse  2, where it is compared to the sun with its rays spread across the sky like the  tracks of the soma across the filter. The “cooking” of verse 1 provides a neat  transition to the “hot one” of verse 2, heat being an obvious characteristic of  the sun.
Verse 3 and the first half of verse 4 are quite enigmatic—not surprisingly, given  their position in the middle of the hymn. Both the “dappled one” and the “ox” can  refer both to the Sun and to Soma, each of whom is also associated with dawn,  and the first half of the verse thus continues the Sun/Soma identification of verse  2. The second half of verse 3 appears to contain one of those paradoxes beloved  of R̥gvedic bards. In our (very tentative) interpretation, the forefathers are the  ancestral poet-sacrificers or their divine prototypes. They both “set” the embryo  of Soma/Sun, that is, engendered it, and they were themselves made into poets by  the magic power or artifice (māyā́) of the same Soma/Sun. In this way the Soma/ Sun is both progenitor of the forefathers in their ritual role and, as they fulfill their  ritual role, their child. The identity of the Gandharva in verse 4 is not entirely clear,  but on the basis of parallels, especially in the Vena hymn mentioned above, it seems  likely that it is again a double reference to Soma and the Sun, each guarding his track (or perhaps the track of the other), thus taking up the theme of the track  found in verse 2.
With the second half of verse 4 we return to a much clearer ritual context  and to the filter with which we began. The filter traps the impurities of the soma  as the liquid passes over it, and the priests attain (a reprise of the verb found  twice in vs. 1) the prepared soma. The final verse (5) returns to the 2nd-person  address to the ritual Soma, last found in the first half of verse 1. But the Soma  thus addressed has achieved a much-elevated status:  he is proclaimed a king,  outfitted with cosmic garments and traveling a cosmic course, with the filter, the  focus of the hymn, as his chariot. The very last words of the hymn attribute to  him “lofty fame.”
The omphalos structure of the hymn is quite pronounced. The outermost verses  (1ab, 5)  are couched in the 2nd person and have a clear ritual content, with an  inner ring (vss. 1cd/2ab, 4cd) serving as transition between the ritual context and  the mystical identifications. There are a number of formal responsions that mark  these rings, besides the 2nd versus 3rd person of verses 1 and 5: pavítram (1a, 2a)  / pavítra(-ratha) (5c); páry eṣi (1b) / pári yāsi (5b); āśata (1d, 4d); padá- (2a, 4a).  Enclosed within these rings are the mysterious and shifting identifications that  make the hymn both aggravating and mesmerizing.
## 1
The filter is outstretched for you, o lord of the sacred formulation.  Advancing, you circle around its limbs on all sides.
A raw one, with unheated body, does not attain it [=filter]; only the
cooked ones, driving along, have attained it entirely.
## 2
The filter of the hot one is outstretched to the track of heaven; its blazing  threads have been extended.
His swift (steeds) aid the Purifier. They mount the back of heaven in  their manifestation.
## 3
The dappled one at the front has made the dawns shine. The ox, seeking  the prize, bears the worlds.
They were measured out [=created] as masters of artifice by his artifice;  the forefathers having their gaze on men set the embryo.
## 4
The Gandharva guards his track just so; the infallible one protects the  races of the gods.
The lord of snares [=filter] grasps the defiler with his snare. Those who  best perform (ritual) action have attained the draught of honey.
## 5
You possessor of the oblation, as an oblation yourself you drive around  the great heavenly seat, around the ceremonial course, clothing
yourself in cloud.
As king, having the filter as your chariot, you have mounted the prize.  Having a thousand spikes, you win lofty fame.
1318 IX.84–85