+++
title = "084"

+++
84 (796) Soma Pavamāna
Prajāpati Vācya
5 verses: jagatī
Unlike the last hymn, this one concentrates on the preparation of the soma, and,  although he has a cosmic dimension (see esp. vs. 2), it is always clear that Soma is  the topic and the referent. The most interesting image is found in verse 2, where  Soma “performs the knotting and unknotting.” On the ritual level, this phrase  probably refers to Soma’s journey through the tangle of sheep’s wool on the filter,  but comparison with IX.97.18 suggests that it also has moral force, with Soma  separating and distinguishing the straight way from the crooked one.
## 1
Purify yourself—exhilarating the gods, unbounded, winning the waters— for Indra, for Varuṇa, for Vāyu.
Make for us today wide space accompanied by well-being. Sing to the  heavenly people in the wide dwelling place.
## 2
He who has mounted the worlds, immortal Soma flows around them all. Performing the knotting and unknotting in order to prevail, the drop  accompanies (the gods?), like the sun the dawn.
## 3
He who is sent surging along with the cows onto the plants, prospering in  the benevolence of the gods, bringing goods near at hand,
he purifies himself with lightning, pressed in a stream—Soma,
exhilarating Indra and the heavenly people.
## 4
This very Soma is purifying himself, thousand-winning, spurring on the  vigorous speech that awakens at dawn.
The drop rouses up the sea with his winds; he sits in the heart of Indra in  the tubs.
## 5
The cows mix this soma with milk, him who is strengthened by milk— with thoughts, him who finds the sun.
Winning the stakes, getting results, the sap purifies himself—an inspired  poet, a sage poet through his poetic skill, who delights in the sun.