+++
title = "085"

+++
85 (797)
Soma Pavamāna
Vena Bhārgava
12 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 11–12
The last two hymns of the jagatī group, IX.85–86, break the standard pattern of  decreasing numbers of verses, having twelve and forty-eight verses respectively, after  a group of hymns with five verses (IX.75–84). However, each of these longer hymns  can be divided into a series of shorter ones, which then conform to the patterns of  hymn arrangement. In the case of IX.85, it consists of three groups of four verses  each. The entire assemblage is attributed to Vena Bhārgava, also the supposed poet of the enigmatic “Vena” hymn (X.123; see also a brief discussion under IX.83). As  we will see, there are certainly striking similarities between the last quartet of IX.85  (vss. 9–12) and X.123.
The first quartet (vss. 1–4) begins with Soma the militant, keeping unworthy and  hostile forces at bay and aiding Indra in the same enterprise (vss. 1–2). His relation ship to Indra persists in verses 3–4, which show a more positive side of the militant  Soma: his status as king (vs. 3) and winner of space for us (vs. 4).
The second section (vss. 5–8) is quite straightforward and focuses on the purifi cation of the soma, deploying the standard tropes.
As noted the final four verses (9–12) strongly resemble the Vena hymn (X.123),  but they are considerably easier to decode. They concern heavenly Soma, who is  identified with the sun, but who also appears in a number of different guises: a bull,  a poet, and a king (all in vs. 9), an ox (vs. 10), an eagle, a child, and a bird (vs. 11),  and finally a Gandharva (vs. 12).
## 1
O Soma, when well pressed, flow around for Indra. Let affliction be gone,  along with demonic power.
Let the duplicitous not reach the exhilaration of your sap: let the
wealth-bringing drops be here.
## 2
Spur us on in the clash, self-purifying one, for you are the skill of the  gods, their dear exhilarating drink.
Smash the rivals; (come) here to those seeking blessings. Drink the soma,  Indra; smash down the scorners for us.
## 3
Undeceivable, you purify yourself as most exhilarating, o drop; you  become the very self of Indra, the highest wellspring.
Many men of inspired thought cry out to him; they seek out the king of  this creation.
## 4
Having a thousand channels and a hundred streams, unerring, the drop,  the desirable honey purifies itself for Indra.
Winning a dwelling place, winning the waters, rush onward. Make a wide  course for us, o Soma the rewarder.
## 5
Ever roaring, you are anointed [/driven] with cows in(to) the tub. You  rush across the sheep’s fleece all at once.
Constantly being groomed like a winning steed, Soma, you have flowed  entirely into the belly of Indra.
## 6
Purify yourself sweet for the heavenly breed, sweet for Indra whose name  is lovely to call,
sweet for Mitra, Varuṇa, Vāyu, Br̥haspati—as the honeyed one not to be  deceived.
## 7
The ten fingers groom the steed in the tub. The thoughts, the words of  the inspired poets press forward.
Purifying themselves, they rush to the lovely praise hymn. The
exhilarating drops enter Indra.

## 8
Purifying yourself, rush to an abundance of heroes, to wide pasturage,  to great, extensive shelter.
Let no constricting pressure take control of this (soma) of ours. O
drop, with you may we win prize after prize.
## 9
The wide-gazing bull has mounted heaven. The poet has caused the  luminous realms of heaven to shine forth.
The king goes ever bellowing across the filter. Those having the eyes of  men milk for themselves the beestings of heaven.
## 10
In the vault of heaven the seekers milk honey-tongued, inexhaustible  (streams) from the mountain-dwelling ox,
the droplet growing strong in the waters, in the sea, the honeyed one in  the wave of the river, in the filter.
## 11
The eagle that has flown to the vault—the many hymns of the trackers  yearned after (him).
The thoughts lick the child who always excites wonder, the golden bird  standing on the earth.
## 12
The Gandharva has stood erect upon the vault, gazing upon all
his forms.
Radiance has flashed forth with blazing blaze; the blazing one has
made the two world-halves, the mothers, shine forth.