+++
title = "086"

+++
86 (798) Soma Pavamāna
Akrṣṭā ̥ s, the Māṣā seer-group (1–10); Siktatās, the Nivāvarī seer-group (11–20); Prś̥ nis,  the Ajā seer-group (21–30); Atris (31–40); Atri Bhauma (41–45); Grtsam ̥ ada (46–48) 48 verses: jagatī, arranged in trcas ̥
As noted in the introduction to IX.85, this last hymn of the jagatī group, one of the  longest in the R̥gveda, can actually be easily divided into smaller hymns, in this case  into sixteen sets of tr̥cas, and can thus be made to conform to the patterns of hymn  arrangement. The resulting triadic groupings do not at all match the divisions in  the Anukramaṇī reproduced above. The degree of internal cohesion between tr̥cas  varies considerably: some show no obvious signs of unity, while others (e.g., vss.  28–30) are stylistically unified. There is also some chaining across tr̥ca boundar
ies; for example, verse 4, which begins the second tr̥ca, is strictly parallel to verses  1 and 2 (especially the former). Such chaining is not an argument against the tr̥ca  division, as perceived similarities between particular tr̥cas might have dictated the  arrangement of originally separate hymns. The last tr̥ca (vss. 46–48), attributed to  Gr̥tsamada, ends with the Gr̥tsamada clan refrain of Maṇḍala II.
That said, the impression this sprawling collection gives is of an agglomeration  of soma-hymn clichés, many of which are repeated with little or no variation at  irregular intervals throughout the “hymn.” 1. Forth do your swift exhilarating drinks, sped by insights, rush, o  self-purifying one, like the swift-born (birds) themselves.
The heavenly, fine-feathered, honeyed drops, most exhilarating, take  their seats around the cask.
## 2
Forth have your swift, exhilarating, invigorating drinks surged, like  chariot-horses, each separately.
As a milk-cow (goes) to her calf with milk, the drops, the honeyed
waves (go) to Indra, possessor of the mace.
## 3
Like a steed being spurred, rush to the prize, to the cask of heaven,  whose mother is the stone—
you, the finder of the sun, the bullish Soma, being purified in the filter,  on the sheep’s back, for Indra’s suckling.
## 4
Forth have your heavenly (hymns), sped by insight, destined for the  Aśvins, surged with their milk into the support, o self-purifying one.
Forth within (the support) have the seers sent their substantial (hymns)  surging—those ritual experts who groom you, o you who win
seers [?].
## 5
Your beacons circle around all the domains, though you are in
advance—you ingenious one whose gaze is on all.
Reaching through (the domains), you purify yourself, Soma, according  to your ordinances. You rule as lord of all creation.
## 6
The rays, the beacons of the self-purifying one circle around on both  sides, though he stays fixed.
When the fallow bay is groomed in the filter, seated in his womb, he sits  down in the tubs.
## 7
Beacon of the sacrifice, lovely at the ceremony, he purifies himself.  Soma proceeds toward the rendezvous with the gods.
Having a thousand streams, he rushes around the cask. The bull keeps  bellowing as he goes across the filter.
## 8
The king plunges through the sea, the rivers. Fixed in the streams he  accompanies the wave of waters.
The self-purifying one has mounted upon the sheep’s back, on the navel  of the earth, as buttress of great heaven.
## 9
Thundering like the back of heaven he has roared, he according to  whose ordinances both heaven and earth (abide).
He purifies himself, always finding the fellowship of Indra. Soma, while  being purified, sits in the tubs.
## 10
Light of the sacrifice, he purifies himself as its dear honey, the father,  begetter of the gods, possessing conspicuous goods.
He establishes a secret treasure in the two independent powers
[=Heaven and Earth], as the most invigorating exhilarating
Indrian sap.

## 11
Roaring toward the tub, the prize-seeker rushes, the lord of heaven with  his hundred streams, wide-gazing.
The fallow bay sits in the seats of Mitra, the bull constantly being  groomed by the sheep, the streams.
## 12
At the forefront of the rivers, purifying himself he rushes; at the  forefront of speech he goes foremost among the cows.
At the forefront of the prize(-contest) he takes great stakes as his share.  The bull of good weapons is purified by the pressers.
## 13
This one here, accompanied by thought, like a bird spurred on has run  into the sheep’s (fleece), purifying himself in a wave.
By your resolve, o sage poet, by your insight, the clear Soma purifies  himself between the two world-halves for you, o Indra.
## 14
Clothing himself in a mantle that touches heaven, the one worthy of the  sacrifice, filling the midspace, is fitted into the worlds.
While being born, he has stridden along the cloud toward the sun; he  wishes to entice his age-old father here.
## 15
He extends his great shelter to the clan, when he has reached through  his first domain.
What is his footprint in the highest distant heaven—from that he  proceeds toward all the (streams) in uninterrupted array.
## 16
Forth has the drop proceeded to the rendezvous with Indra: a comrade  does not transgress against an agreement with his comrade.
As a young blood rushes together with young women, so does Soma— into the tub, along a path with a hundred courses.
## 17
Forth have your insights stridden, arousing exhilaration, expressing  admiration, inviting admiration in their joint dwellings.
The inspired thoughts, the rhythms have roared to Soma; the milk-cows  have mixed him with milk.
## 18
O Soma, o drop, purifying yourself, bring us continuous, swelling,  unfailing refreshment by purifying yourself,
(refreshment) that, never drying up, will milk out for us three times  a day an abundance of good heroes, along with cattle, prizes,
and honey.
## 19
The bull of the thoughts, wide gazing, purifies himself—Soma, the  lengthener of day, of dawn, of heaven.
Through the action of the rivers he has made the tubs bellow, entering  the heart of Indra through (the action of) the inspired ones.
## 20
Through the inspired ones the primordial poet purifies himself; guided  by men he has roared around the casks.
Engendering the name of Trita, he flows as honey, to create the
partnership of Indra and Vāyu. 21. This one here, being purified, has made the dawns shine widely; this one  has become the maker of wide space for the rivers.
This one, having milked thrice seven (cows) for his own milk-mixture— the exhilarating Soma purifies himself in a way dear to the heart.
## 22
Purify yourself, Soma, in the heavenly domains, surging into the tub,  into the filter, o drop.
Sitting in the belly of Indra, ever roaring, guided by the men, you have  made the sun mount in heaven.
## 23
Pressed by the stones, you purify yourself in the filter, o drop, entering  the belly of Indra.
You have become one whose gaze is on men, wide-gazing one. Soma,  you opened up the cowpen for the Aṅgirases.
## 24
You, o Soma, purifying yourself, do the very attentive poets applaud as  they seek help.
You did the fine-feathered (falcon) carry here from heaven, o drop, you  who are adorned all over with all thoughts.
## 25
Seven milk-cows roar toward the tawny one being purified on the  sheep’s fleece in a wave all around.
Into the lap of the waters, into the womb of truth have the Āyus, the  buffaloes propelled the poet.
## 26
The drop being purified plunges beyond the scorners, making all paths  good for the worshipful one.
Making the cows into his raiment, the delightful poet, playful like a
steed, rushes around the fleece.
## 27
Inexhaustible, possessing a hundred streams, excelling in beauty  [/serving as mixture], they [=mixing waters] roar down to the tawny
one as they provide water.
The fingers groom him wreathed with cows, on the third back, in the  luminous realm of heaven.
## 28
Yours are these offspring of the heavenly semen; you rule over all  creation.
And all this here is under your will, self-purifying one. You are the
foremost founder of foundations, o drop.
## 29
You are the sea, o poet, the all-knowing [/-finding] one; yours are these  five regions in your [/their] expansion.
You have carried yourself beyond heaven and earth; yours are the
lights, self-purifying one, and the sun.
## 30
You, o self-purifying Soma, are purified for the gods in the filter, in the  expansion of space.
You did the fire-priests first grasp; to you have all these worlds
submitted themselves.1324 IX.86
## 31
The husky-voiced one goes forth across the sheep’s fleece; the tawny bull  has roared down into the woods [/wooden vessels].
The hymnic visions, bellowing [/in their longing], have roared together.  The thoughts lick the child who always excites wonder.
## 32
He has enveloped himself with the rays of the sun, stretching his own  threefold thread, in the way that is known.
Leading the newer directives of truth, as a husband he proceeds to the  rendezvous with his wives.
## 33
The king of rivers, the lord of heaven purifies himself. He proceeds  along the paths of truth, ever roaring.
The tawny one is poured around with his thousand streams as he is  being purified, begetting speech, bringing goods near at hand.
## 34
Purifying yourself as a great flood, brilliant like the sun, you run across  the fleecy filters.
Hand-purified by the men, pressed by the stones, you dash for the great  rich prize.
## 35
Self-purifying one, you rush toward refreshment and nourishment. Like  a falcon in the woods, you sit in the tubs.
For Indra is pressed the exhilarative, exhilarating drink of exhilaration,  the utmost prop of heaven, wide-gazing.
## 36
The seven sisters, as mothers, (go) to the newborn child of worthy birth,  who is attentive to poetic inspiration,
the heavenly Gandharva of the waters, whose gaze is on men—to  Soma, for the regulation of all creation.
## 37
Showing mastery, you speed across these worlds here, o drop, having  hitched up your golden fine-feathered (mares).
Let them stream honeyed ghee and milk for you. O Soma, let the  separate peoples stay under your commandment.
## 38
You, Soma, are one whose gaze is on men on every side. Purifying  yourself, bull, you run across these (worlds).
Purify yourself in a manner rich in goods and gold for us. May we be  (fit) to live in the worlds.
## 39
Purify yourself, as finder of cattle, of goods, of gold. Depositing seed, o  drop, you are fitted into the worlds.
You, Soma, are rich in good heroes, finder of all [/all-knowing]. These  inspired poets here reverently approach you with a hymn.
## 40
The wave of honey has raised (our?) desires; clothing himself in waters,  the buffalo plunges through them.
The king whose chariot is the filter has mounted the prize. He of a  thousand spikes wins lofty fame.
## 41
He rouses all blessings, consisting of offspring and easy to bear,  through our whole lifetime, day upon day. Then, o drop, when drunk, on our behalf beg Indra for a sacred
formulation bringing offspring and for wealth consisting of horses in  the homestead.
## 42
At the vanguard of the days [=dawn] the tawny, delightful, exhilarating  drink makes himself conspicuous with his appearance through the days. Setting in place the two peoples [=gods and men], he speeds between  them in upholding the “praise of men” and the heavenly (praise).
## 43
They anoint him—anoint him separately and jointly. They lick (him  who is) resolve; they anoint him with honey—
him, the ox flying in the burbling up of the river. (The waters,) who
purify the gold (of soma), grasp the stock-animal within themselves.
## 44
Sing to the self-purifying one who is attentive to poetic inspiration. Like  a great stream he rushes beyond his stalk;
like a snake he slinks beyond his withered skin. Playful like a steed, the  tawny bull has run.
## 45
Going in the vanguard, the king who is found in the waters displays his  power, the measure(r) of the days, fitted into the worlds.
The ghee-backed fallow bay, a flood lovely to see, having light as his  chariot, accustomed to wealth, purifies himself.
## 46
It has been sent surging—the prop of heaven, the exhilarating drink  held aloft. It rushes threefold around the worlds.
The thoughts lick the plant that always excites wonder, when the
versifiers have come to array it with a hymn.
## 47
Your streams go forth beyond the fine (hairs) of the ewe; as you are  being purified, there go continuous charges.
When, o drop, you are anointed with cows in the two cups, being
pressed you sit in the tubs, Soma.
## 48
Purify yourself, Soma, finding the will, to be hymned by us. Run around  in the sheep’s fleece as dear honey.
Smite all rapacious demons, o drop. – May we speak loftily at the ritual  distribution, in possession of good heroes.
Trisṭubh Hymns: 87–97 ̣