+++
title = "087"

+++
87 (799) Soma Pavamāna
Uśanas Kāvya
9 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn, attributed to Uśanas Kāvya (perhaps because of the mention of that  figure in vs. 3), is built in part of standard soma-hymn tropes, but the militant

Soma is particularly on view (vss. 2, 7), as well as his association with Indra (vss.  4, 8, 9). There are also the faintest sketches of Soma’s participation in well-known  myths: the Vala myth (vs. 3cd, where Soma is credited with finding the cows), the  falcon’s stealing of soma from heaven (vs. 6c), and the dog Saramā’s role in the  recovery of the cows in the Vala myth (vs. 8ab).
This last example neatly shows the integration of ritual and mythic themes. The  first half of the verse, which alludes to the myth, does not identify the grammati cal subject by name or attribute, but does use a pronoun to mark it as female. This  might seem to exclude Soma as the referent—until we reach the final word of the  verse: dhā́rā “stream,” a feminine noun regularly used of the “stream of soma,”  which does allow the identification. From the mythological point of view, the dog  Saramā comes out of the mountain and finds the cows in the cave; in ritual terms  the (feminine) stream of soma comes out of the pressing apparatus and mixes with  the cows’ milk in the vessel. And this superimposition of ritual upon myth allows  Soma, indirectly, to be identified as the rescuer of the cows himself, as in verse 3.
## 1
Run forth around the cask; sit down; being purified by men, rush to  the prize.
Grooming you like a prizewinning horse, they lead you toward the ritual  grass with reins.
## 2
He of good weapons, the god, the drop purifies himself, smiting
malediction, protecting the community,
the father, begetter of the gods, possessing good skill, prop of heaven,  buttress of the earth.
## 3
Seer, inspired poet, going in front of the people, an insightful craftsman  [/R̥bhu], Uśanā in poetic skill—
only he found what of theirs was deposited, the secret, hidden name of  the cows.
## 4
This very one, honeyed Soma, has flowed for you, Indra, a bull for a bull,  around in the filter.
Thousand-winning, hundred-winning, much-giving, the prizewinner has  mounted the ritual grass ever and always.
## 5
These soma drinks have been sent surging toward bovine thousands,  toward acclamations, for great immortal reward,
being purified by the filters—like fame-seeking steeds driving to battle. 6. Because, much invoked of the peoples, he has flowed around all
nourishments while being purified—
now bring pleasurable things, you falcon-brought one; thrusting out
wealth, rush to the prize.
## 7
This Soma being pressed, the steed like a surge sent surging, has run  around in the filter,
whetting his sharp horns like a buffalo, on a cow-hunt toward cows, like  a champion warrior. 8. This one traveled from within the highest stone [=mountain]; she found  the cows that were somewhere in the enclosure.
Like lightning from heaven thundering with the clouds, the stream of  soma purifies itself for you, Indra.
## 9
And now while being purified, Soma, you drive around a throng of cows  in the same chariot with Indra,
and around many lofty refreshments, you of lively drops. Do your best,  able one. These (refreshments? verses?) are your invitatory praise.