+++
title = "088"

+++
88 (800)
Soma Pavamāna
Uśanas Kāvya
8 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is structured by a series of similes; only the first verse lacks an explicit  simile. Many of the similes also involve identification of Soma with other divinities  (see esp. vss. 3–5, 7), and so the powers and mythological deeds of these gods are  implicitly attributed to Soma by way of these comparisons.
The two outer verses (1, 8) are complementary to each other. The first is addressed  to Indra and announces the soma as distinctively his, while verse 8, emphasizing the  2nd-person pronoun as verse 1 did, declares that to Soma belong the distinctive  qualities and attainments of the Ādityas.
## 01
This soma is pressed for you, Indra; for you it purifies itself.
You—drink of it—
the one that you have made your own, that you have chosen, the drop,  the soma to be yoked for exhilaration.
## 02
It has been yoked, like a chariot that conquers much, as the great one to  win many goods.
Therefore, all creatures stemming from Nahus, standing upright beside  the wood(en cup), roar at him at the winning of the sun.
## 03
You, who like Vāyu with his team maintain your desired course, who like  the Nāsatyas are most availing at a summons,
who like the Treasure-Giver in person bring all desirable things—like  Pūṣan you give speed to insight, o Soma.
## 04
You, who like Indra are a doer of great deeds, are a stronghold-splitting  smiter of obstacles, Soma.
Because, like Pedu’s (horse), (you are the smiter) of those with serpents’  names, you are the smiter of every Dasyu, Soma.
## 05
He who, like Agni in the wood, is being set loose in the wood(en cup), he  deploys his full dimensions in the rivers at will.
Like people battling is the trampling of the great one. Self-purifying  Soma raises a wave.

## 06
These soma juices have surged across the sheep’s fleeces—they are like  the heavenly buckets that hold the rain from clouds—
toward the tubs at will when pressed, like rivers downward to the sea. 7. Tempestuous like the troop of Maruts, purify yourself, impervious to  calumny like that heavenly clan.
Quickly become benevolence for us, having a thousand ripples like the  waters, like a sacrifice that conquers in battles.
## 08
The commandments of King Varuṇa are yours; yours is his lofty, deep  domain, o Soma.
You are blazing pure, like dear Mitra. You are besought for skill like  Aryaman, o Soma.