+++
title = "089"

+++
89 (801)
Soma Pavamāna
Uśanas Kāvya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The standard tropes of soma preparation, the swelling of Soma in water, his  manipulation by the priests’ fingers, his journey across the filter, and his mixing  with milk, provide the subject of this hymn, but, as often, each of these depic tions has a cosmic dimension—as in verses 1–2, where Soma is compared with  heavenly rain.
## 1
This draft-horse has streamed forth along the paths. Like the rain from  heaven, the self-purifying one has flowed.
Having a thousand streams, he has taken his seat by us, in the lap of his  mother, and in the wood: Soma.
## 2
The king of rivers has donned his garment. He has boarded the ship of  truth, (which goes) the straightest.
The drop, sped by the falcon, has grown strong in the waters. His father  yields him as milk; he yields as milk the offspring of his father.
## 3
They [=waters or cows] draw near the unbridled lion of honey, the tawny,  ruddy master of this heaven.
The champion, first in battles, asks for the cows for himself. The young  bull protects them all around with his gaze.
## 4
The honey-backed, terrible, unbridled horse—they yoke that towering  one to the wide-wheeled chariot.
His sisters, his kin, groom him. Those who share an umbilical bond
nourish the prizewinner.
## 5
Set down within the same support, four, yielding ghee as their milk,  accompany him.
They rush, being purified with homage. They, the many, surround him  on all sides. 6. (He is) the prop of heaven, the support of the earth, and all the dwelling  places are in his hand.
Your wellspring will provide (horse-)teams to the singer. The plant of  honey purifies itself for Indrian power.
## 7
Vanquishing but unvanquished, o Soma, as Vr̥tra-smasher purify  yourself for Indra and to pursue the gods.
Have mastery over great, much-glittering wealth. Might we be lords of  an abundance of heroes.