+++
title = "090"

+++
90 (802)
Soma Pavamāna
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
6 verses: triṣṭubh
Attributed to Vasiṣṭha, the poet of the VIIth Maṇḍala, this hymn ends (vs. 6d) with the  Vasiṣṭha clan refrain, encountered constantly in VII. Martial images dominate, start ing with verse 1 and showcased especially in verse 3 (see also 4cd and 5ab). The aim  of war, to secure peace and prosperity, is depicted in the center of the hymn (vs. 4ab).  Some of the divine beneficiaries of Soma’s invigorating capability are listed in verse 5.
## 01
Being propelled, the begetter of the two worlds has driven forth like a  chariot, striving to win the prize,
going to Indra, sharpening his weapons, taking all goods in his hands. 2. Toward the three-backed bull, who imparts vitality, have the voices of the  songs bellowed.
Clothing himself in the woods, like Varuṇa in the rivers, the conferrer of  treasures distributes desirable things.
## 03
Having a horde of champions, having hale heroes, purify yourself as  victorious conqueror and winner of stakes,
with your sharp weapons and snapping bows invincible in combats,
vanquishing your rivals in battles.
## 04
Providing broad pastures, creating (places) without danger, by purifying  yourself procure the two united forms of plenty [=Heaven and Earth]. Striving to win the waters, also the dawns, the sun, and the cows, you  have roared together great prizes for us.
## 05
Exhilarate Varuṇa, o Soma; exhilarate Mitra. Exhilarate Indra, o  self-purifying drop, and Viṣṇu.
Exhilarate the troop of Maruts; exhilarate the gods. Exhilarate great  Indra, o drop, for his exhilaration.
## 06
In this way, like a king full of resolve, ever smiting all obstacles to  progress with your onslaught, purify yourself.
O drop, impart vitality to our speech. – Do you protect us always with  your blessings.
1330 IX.91–92