+++
title = "091"

+++
91 (803) Soma Pavamāna
Kaśyapa Mārīca
6 verses: triṣṭubh
The first three verses of this hymn concentrate on the journey of the soma across  the filter toward the mixing milk and toward Indra, but the militancy characteristic  of the previous hymn (IX.90) asserts itself in verse 4. The final two verses (5–6) ask  for bounties and blessings in return for our verbal and ritual service.
## 1
Billowing, he has been let loose as if at a chariot contest—the foremost  inspired thinker with his insight.
The ten sisters drive the draft-horse on the sheep’s back toward the seats. 2. In pursuit of the heavenly race, the drop is being pressed on (it [=fleece])  by the poets, the sons of Nahus,
the drop that is constantly being groomed (to go) forth by men—by
mortals as the immortal—by the sheep, the cows, and the waters.
## 3
The bull roaring over and over to the bull [=Indra], the plant, purifying  itself for him, moves toward the gleaming white milk of the cow.
A versifier who knows speech, the sun travels widely across the fine
(fleece) by a thousand unbesmirched paths.
## 4
Shatter even the entrenched seats of the demon. While being purified, o  drop, uncover the prizes of victory.
Hew down from above with your thrusting weapon the one who led here  from afar those (enemies) who are (now) nearby.
## 5
As of old, make forward-facing paths for our newer hymn, o you who  grant all wishes.
Lofty (riches?), which are hard to capture by the covetous—might we  attain them from you, o you who do many things and have many
cattle.
## 6
Becoming purified in just this way, (grant) waters, the sun, and cattle to  us, and ample progeny and posterity,
luck, broad dominion, and lights to us, o Soma—grant that we may see  the sun for a long time.