+++
title = "092"

+++
92 (804) Soma Pavamāna
Kaśyapa Mārīca
6 verses: triṣṭubh
Like many hymns in the IXth Maṇḍala this hymn describes Soma’s journey, but  here the focus is on the endpoint, on Soma’s reaching his goal and taking his seat  in the vessels: the “seat” theme is found in three of the six verses (2, 3, 6). Soma is also a poet (vs. 2) and surrounded by poetry (vs. 3). It is this association with the  kaví, the sage poet and master of words, that probably prompted the most striking  statement in the hymn, that all the gods are “in your secret” (vs. 4). This statement  comes in the middle of the hymn and may constitute a weak omphalos, especially  as it is embedded in a series of verses that play with numbers (2–4), often a sign of  an omphalos structure.
## 1
The tawny one, the plant, being pressed, is sent surging all around in the  filter, like a chariot being urged on to win.
He will achieve a signal-call meant for Indra as he is being purified.  He has returned the favor to the gods through his pleasurable
offerings.
## 2
His gaze on men, he has run here, acquiring the name “poet” in the filter,  in his womb,
taking his seat in the cups, like a Hotar on his seat. The seven inspired  seers have approached him.
## 3
The very wise pathfinder who belongs to all the gods, Soma as he is being  purified goes forth to his very own seat.
He is one to take his rest amid all the poems. Steadfast, he arranges
himself throughout the five peoples.
## 4
O self-purifying Soma, it is in your secret that all these gods are, the three  times eleven.
The ten (fingers) with their autonomous powers, the seven exuberant  streams groom you upon the sheep’s back.
## 5
Now, let this be true of the self-purifying one, this on which all the bards  concur:
that he made light for the day and wide space; he furthered Manu but  made close quarters for the Dasyu.
## 6
Circling around, like a Hotar circling the seats provided with (sacrificial)  animals, going to assemblies like a true king,
Soma being purified has traveled to the tubs, taking his seat like a wild  buffalo in the woods [/wooden cups].