+++
title = "093"

+++
93 (805)
Soma Pavamāna
Nodhas Gautama
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Attributed to Nodhas Gautama, the poet of I.58–64, this hymn ends with the clan  refrain found in most of those Ist Maṇḍala hymns, although it does not display the  virtuosity characteristic of those compositions. The first three verses concern the  journey of the soma to the vessels and the mixing with water and with milk. The  last two (4–5) are requests for bounties.

## 1
The ten sisters, grown strong all together, the insightful thoughts of the  insightful one, the runners, groomed (him).
The tawny offspring of the sun dashed around (the filter). He reached  the wooden cup like a prizewinning steed.
## 2
Like a calf bellowing along with the mothers, the bull of many favors  [/tail hairs] has run together with the waters.
Like a young blood going to a maiden at the trysting place, he comes  together with the ruddy (cows) in the tub.
## 3
And the udder of the inviolable cow has swelled forth; the drop of good  wisdom is accompanied by streams.
The cows prepare his head with their milk in the cups, as if with freshly  washed goods.
## 4
O self-purifying drop, along with the gods excavate wealth in horses for  us as you bellow.
Let Plenitude come eagerly on her chariot in our direction, for the giving  of goods.
## 5
Now, as you are being purified, mete out to us all-glittering wealth,  abounding in superior men, befriended by the wind [/whose
friendship is sought].
The lifetime of the extoller has been extended, o drop. – Early in the  morning—soon—he should come, bringing goods through his
insight.