+++
title = "094"

+++
94 (806)
Soma Pavamāna
Kaṇva Ghaura
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The word sóma does not appear until the last pāda (5d) of this hymn, which plots a  sometimes difficult course to this ending. The hymn features similes that exploit idi omatic ambiguity to produce different meanings in the simile proper and the frame  (see esp. vss. 1 and 3) and by obscure turns of phrase (see esp. 4d). It is therefore  not surprising that, as in IX.92, Soma is identified as a kaví, a poet, enmeshed in  poetry (vs. 3), and the main focus of the hymn, especially in the first three verses,  is the interchange between the poetic products of the mortal participants in ritual  and those of Soma himself.
## 01
When the insightful thoughts contend over him, like adornments upon a  prizewinner, like the clans over the sun,
choosing the waters, he purifies himself, poetically crafting a thought like  a stable for the raising of livestock,
## 02
Once again disclosing the domain of the immortal one. The worlds  spread out for the finder of the sun. The insightful thoughts, swelling like cows in good pasture, acting with  truth, have bellowed to the drop,
## 03
When the poet encompasses (all) poems, as a champion chariot
[/the chariot of the *Sun] (encircles) all the worlds,
exerting himself among the gods for glory for the mortal, for his skill  exerting himself anew for riches among (the gods) of much exertion. 4. Born for splendor, he has come forth from splendor; he establishes  splendor and vitality for the singers.
Clothed in splendor, they have gone to immortality. Their encounters  come to pass beside the one of measured pace [=Agni].
## 05
Rush to refreshment and nourishment, to horse and cow. Make broad  light; exhilarate the gods.
Because all these things are easy to conquer for you, o self-purifying  Soma, you repel the rivals.