+++
title = "095"

+++
95 (807)
Soma Pavamāna
Praskaṇva Kāṇva
5 verses: triṣṭubh
As in the preceding hymn, IX.94, the complementarity and interaction between  Soma’s poetic efforts and those of the ritualists provide the subject of this hymn.  Soma’s speech is the topic of the first two verses, culminating in 2cd in his revelation  of the “hidden names of the gods” that will be proclaimed aloud on the ritual ground.  But the verbal compositions of the mortals take center stage in verses 3–4. In the final  verse (5), Soma both prompts the speech of others and (it seems) produces his own.
## 1
The tawny one keeps roaring as he is being set loose, as he is sitting in the  belly of the wood, as he is being purified.
Guided by men, he makes cows his raiment. Thereupon he generates  poetic thoughts through his own powers.
## 2
The tawny one, having been set loose on the path of truth, directs his  speech, like an oarsman his boat.
The god reveals the hidden names of the gods to be proclaimed on the  ritual grass.
## 3
Constantly overtaking each other like the waves of the waters, the  inspired thoughts press forward to Soma.
Doing homage, they come close to him and come together with him, and  desirous they enter him, who is also desirous.
## 4
They milk him, constantly being groomed like a buffalo on the back (of  the filter), the plant, the mountain-dwelling ox.
The poetic thoughts accompany him as he bellows. Trita carries Varuṇa  in the sea.1334 IX.96
## 5
Inciting speech, as the Upavaktar incites the speech of the Hotar, while  being purified, o drop, unleash the inspired thought.
Since (you) and Indra have the power for good fortune, might we be
lords of an abundance of heroes.