+++
title = "096"

+++
96 (808)
Soma Pavamāna
Pratardana Daivodāsi
24 verses: triṣṭubh
This twenty-four-verse hymn, immediately following three five-verse hymns in the  same meter, can easily be made to fit the sequence if it is analyzed as consisting of  a collection of four-verse hymns, as Oldenberg clearly states (1888: 201). The six  hymns thus obtained show different degrees of internal cohesion.
For example, the first four verses display clear thematic unity and development.  The first verse is explicitly martial, with Soma as a warrior about to charge, a pic ture continued in the following verse. In verse 3 he achieves one of the most desired  results of Vedic warfare, wide space for us to inhabit, and with this obtained, verse  4 articulates a counter-message, that of peace and nonviolence. Indra is explicitly  mentioned in the first three verses, and comradeship is a central theme, as is seen in  verses 1, 2, and 4.
The second hymn (vss. 5–8) shows stylistic progression. It begins with a rhe torically restricted verse (5), consisting primarily of seven repetitions of the word  “begetter” with different genitive complements. The next verse (6)  continues the  dominantly nominal construction of vs. 5, but with a more varied verbal repertoire,  though the nominative-genitive syntagm persists. Verse 7 continues to describe the  qualities and characteristic actions of Soma, in the 3rd person, though it abandons  the strict nominal style. And finally vs. 8 breaks out into the dynamic 2nd person  and imperative mood.
The third group (vss. 9–12) ends with a characteristic hymn-final summary verse,  which seems to mark a decisive break from what follows. Although no clear the matic unity imposes itself on the four verses, the focus on Soma’s relationship with  our ancestral ritualists and our hope that this relationship will continue fruitfully is  noticeable, especially in the last two verses (11–12). On the other hand, it is difficult  to identify any unifying features in the next group of four (vss. 13–16), which con sist primarily of standard soma-hymn tropes. In verses 17–20 Soma as poet (esp. in  vss. 17–18) and his journey from the filter to the cups provide a weak cohesion. In  the final group (vss. 21–24), three verses (22–24) contain courtship imagery, and the  root krand “roar” is prominent.
## 01
The army-leader, the champion, at the forefront of the chariots, goes  forth seeking cattle. His army bristles with excitement. Making the invocations of Indra beneficial for his comrades, Soma puts  on his ravishing garments.
## 02
The tawny ones [=fingers] jointly groom his tawny (horse), without  resting, with acts of reverence that spur on the horse.
The comrade of Indra mounts the chariot; the knowing one drives with  him to our good thought.
## 03
Purify yourself, o god, for the conclave of gods, for great delight, o  Soma, as Indra’s drink.
Creating the waters and making this heaven rain, from the wide (realm)  make wide space for us as you are being purified.
## 04
For freedom from overthrow and freedom from assault purify yourself,  for well-being, for lofty wholeness.
This do all these comrades desire; this do I desire, o self-purifying
Soma.
## 05
Soma purifies himself—the begetter of poetic thoughts, begetter of  heaven, begetter of earth,
begetter of Agni, begetter of the sun, begetter of Indra, and begetter  of Viṣṇu.
## 06
Formulator for the gods, trail-blazer for the sage poets, seer for the  inspired poets, buffalo of the wild beasts,
falcon of the birds of prey, axe of the trees—Soma goes rasping
through the filter.
## 07
Like a river its wave, self-purifying Soma has sent the wave of speech  pulsing forth, the hymns, the inspired thoughts.
Looking within, he surmounts these communities here below, a bull  among the cows, recognizing them.
## 08
Exhilarating, vanquishing in battles but unvanquished,
thousand-spurting—rush to the prize.
Purifying yourself for Indra, o drop, as inspired thinker raise a wave  from the plant, driving the cows.
## 09
The dear Soma, sought by the gods, (goes) around in the tub, the  enjoyable one for Indra’s exhilaration.
The drop of a thousand streams, a hundred prizes, goes like a
prizewinning team to the concourses.
## 10
The primordial one, finding goods (even) while being born, being  groomed in the waters, being milked on the stone,
protecting from imprecations, the king of creation, he finds the way for  the sacred formulation as he is being purified.
## 11
Because with you, self-purifying Soma, our insightful forefathers  performed their (ritual) acts,
open up the barriers, vanquishing but unvanquished; become a
benefactor to us with heroes and with horses.

## 12
Even as you purified yourself for Manu, as conferrer of vitality, smiter  of foes, finder of wide space, accompanied by oblations,
just so purify yourself now, conferring wealth. Stand side-by-side by  Indra. Generate weapons.
## 13
Purify yourself, Soma, rich in honey, following the truth, clothing  yourself in waters, on the sheep’s back.
Sit down in the cups full of ghee as the most elating, exhilarating drink  for Indra.
## 14
Having a hundred streams, purify yourself into the rain from heaven— thousand-winning, seeking the prize in pursuit of the gods,
bellowing along with the rivers in the tub, along with the ruddy (cows),  prolonging our lifetime.
## 15
This very Soma, being purified by poetic thoughts, like a prizewinning  steed just outstrips hostilities.
Like the milk milked out of Aditi, it is invigorating, broad like a way,  like a draft-horse easy to control.
## 16
Having good weapons, being purified by the pressers, rush to the dear  hidden name (of the cows? of Indra?),
to the prize, like a team with desire for fame, to Vāyu, to the cows, o  god Soma.
## 17
The colt just born, the delightful one they groom; the Maruts in a flock  beautify the cart horse.
Though being a poet by virtue of his hymns, a poet by his poetry, Soma  goes rasping across the filter.
## 18
Having the mind of a seer, a maker of seers, gaining the sun, having a  thousand devices, trail-blazer for poets,
a buffalo, seeking to gain the third domain, Soma, as rhythm
[/the anuṣṭubh meter], regulates the virāj (meter) according to rule. 19. Sitting in the cups, the falcon, the bird spreading (his wings), the  cow-finding drop, bearing weapons,
accompanying the wave of the waters, the buffalo declares the sea to be  the fourth domain.
## 20
Like a resplendent young blood grooming his own body, like a steed  running to gain the stakes,
charging around the cask like a bull around the herds, constantly  roaring he has entered the two cups.
## 21
Purify yourself, o drop, as self-purifying one, with your mighty powers.  Constantly roaring, rush around the fleeces.
Playing, enter the two cups while being purified. Let your exhilarating  sap exhilarate Indra.
## 22
His lofty streams have been sent surging forth. Anointed with cows he  has entered the tubs. Making a melody [/performing the sāman], devoted to a melody
[/the sāman], attentive to poetic inspiration, roaring he goes as if to a  comrade’s sister.
## 23
Smiting aside the rivals, self-purifying one, you go like a swain to his  beloved, the drop besung.
Sitting in the woods like a flying bird, Soma, being purified, has settled  in the tubs.
## 24
As you purify yourself, Soma, your beams come here like a maiden— the good milkers giving good streams.
The fallow bay granting many favors, led hither into the waters, has
roared in the tub of those who seek the gods.