+++
title = "097"

+++
97 (809)
Soma Pavamāna
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi 1–3, Indrapramati Vāsiṣṭha 4–6, Vrṣ̥ agaṇa Vāsiṣṭha 7–9, Manyu  Vāsiṣṭha 10–12, Upamanyu Vāsiṣṭha 13–15, Vyāghrapād Vāsiṣṭha 16–18, Śakti  Vāsiṣṭha 19–21, Karṇaśrut Vāsiṣṭha 22–24, Mrḷ̥īka Vāsiṣṭha 25–27, Vasukra Vāsiṣṭha  28–30, Parāśara Śāktya 31–44, Kutsa Āṅgirasa 45–58
58 verses: triṣṭubh, arranged in trcas ̥
This is the longest hymn in the R̥gveda, consisting of fifty-eight verses, arranged  in three-verse units. It is also the last IXth Maṇḍala hymn in triṣṭubh. Despite  its extraordinary length, it can be analyzed as consisting of a series of originally  independent tr̥cas combined into one, and it therefore conforms to the prevailing  principles of arrangement in the Saṃhitā. In the first half (vss. 1–30) each tr̥ca is  attributed to Vasiṣṭha or to a different Vasiṣṭhid; the second half is divided between  two, non-Vasiṣṭhid, poets. If we assume that the tr̥ca division continues in this sec
ond half (as most scholars do), the Anukramaṇī ascription does not conform to  the tr̥ca division, as the first two verses of the tr̥ca of verses 43–45 are credited to  Parāśara Śāktya and the last one to Kutsa Āṅgirasa. There is also an extra verse,  most probably the final one (58), which contains the Kutsa refrain of Maṇḍala  I  (I.94.16cd, etc.). Although according to the Anukramaṇī each of these poets  is responsible for fourteen verses, there is no more apparent unity in these larger  stretches than in the individual tr̥cas of the first half.
As is often the case in such long, composite hymns, the tr̥cas exhibit varying  degrees of cohesiveness, from the tight and emphatic verbal repetitions of verses  49–51 to the diffuseness of groupings like verses 7–9, 40–42. Some of the tr̥cas,  though not thematically or verbally unified, have a third verse that marks it as final;  for instance, the first two tr̥cas (vss. 1–3, 4–6) each end with the Vasiṣṭha clan refrain  as the last pāda, and the final verse of three tr̥cas begins with a summary evā́ “thus”  (vss. 13–15, 19–21, 25–27), a word characteristic of final verses.
As might be expected, the contents of this hymn are also extremely various,  but generally exhibit the standard tropes of soma hymns:  the mechanisms of

soma preparation, including the journey across the filter and the mixing with  waters and with milk; the power of soma to incite the gods, especially Indra,  and the power of the ritualists and, especially, the poets, to strengthen the soma  for this task; and the rewards the ritualists will receive from properly prepar
ing the soma. Nonetheless, the hymn contains a number of striking similes and  metaphors, and some passages of great difficulty, chief among which is the tr̥ca  of verses 52–54, which may (or may not) be a dānastuti and whose translation  here is provisional in places. Note also verse 38, which in our interpretation con
tains an archaic formula denoting an archaic figure, the “Placer of the Sun” (see  Jamison 2010).
## 01
Being purified by his impulsion, his drive, the god has intermingled his  sap with the gods.
Pressed, he goes rasping around the filter like the Hotar around the fixed  seats provided with (sacrificial) animals.
## 02
Wearing auspicious festival garments, as a great poet pronouncing  enigmas,
coil yourself into the two cups while being purified, wide-gazing and  watchful in the pursuit of the gods.
## 03
The dear one is groomed on the sheep’s back, the more glorious of the  glorious ones, a fellow countryman at our side.
Cry out, run, as you are being purified. – Do you protect us always with  your blessings.
## 04
Sing forth: let us recite to the gods. Impel Soma for great stakes.
The sweet one will purify himself across the sheep’s fleece. He will sit in  the tub, seeking the gods for us.
## 05
The drop, coming here to fellowship with the gods, purifies himself in a  thousand streams for exhilaration.
Being praised by men, he has gone along his earlier domain, to Indra for  great good portion.
## 06
As a fallow bay, rush for wealth for the praiser as you are being purified.  Let your exhilarating drink go to Indra for the taking.
Drive on the same chariot with the gods to bounty. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.
## 07
Speaking forth his poetry like Uśanā, the god proclaims the races of  the gods.
Of great commandment, of blazing lineage, pure, as a boar he goes
rasping toward his tracks.
## 08
The geese have journeyed forth to (Soma’s) sharp battle-fury, from  nearby to their home, in a bullish flock.
The comrades speak in unison to the self-purifying one a songful music  difficult to forget. 9. He hastens at the pace of the wide-ranging one [=Viṣṇu?]. The cows, as  they seem to bellow, give their measure to the one who plays at will
[=Soma].
The sharp-horned one makes himself an ample (face). By day he
appears tawny, but silvery by night.
## 10
The prizewinning drop purifies himself, bringing cows down in flood— Soma stimulating the power in Indra, for exhilaration.
He smashes demonic force; he deflects hostilities, making wide space as  king of the community.
## 11
Then being infused with honey in a stream, he purifies himself across  the fleece, when he has been milked by the stone,
the drop enjoying the fellowship of Indra, the god, the exhilarating
drink of the god, for exhilaration.
## 12
He purifies himself toward his own dear (tracks?), while being purified,  the god infusing the gods with his own sap.
The drop, clothing himself in his foundations according to the ritual order,  has enwrapped himself in the ten fingers on the back of the sheep.
## 13
The ruddy bull keeps roaring at the cows; bellowing he goes to heaven  and earth.
His voice, like Indra’s, is heard at the contest. He rushes, making this  speech perceptible here.
## 14
Good to taste, swelling with milk, you go, setting in motion the
honeyed plant.
Purifying yourself, you go, producing thunder, while being poured
around for Indra, o Soma.
## 15
Purify yourself thus, an exhilarating one for exhilaration, bowing with  your weapons (those) of the water-grasper.
Encompassing the glistening color, seeking cows, rush to us, when you  are poured around, o Soma.
## 16
Having taken pleasure, o drop, (making) easy pathways easy to travel  for us, purify yourself on a broad (path), making us wide spaces.
Smashing asunder obstacles to progress as if with a deadly weapon, run  along the back, on the sheep’s back.
## 17
Stream rain to us—heavenly, hurrying, bringing refreshment, luck for  the livestock, of lively drops.
Run, pulling apart [=discriminating] these bonds here below, these
webs, like straightened curls, o drop.
## 18
Untie like a knot the straight and the crooked way that are knotted up,  when you are being purified, o Soma.
Like a fallow bay steed you whinny on being let loose; run, o god, as a  man in his prime in possession of a dwelling place.

## 19
Delightful, for the divine conclave for exhilaration, run around the  back, on the sheep’s back.
Possessing a thousand streams, sweet-smelling, not to be outwitted,  flow around at the winning of prizes, at the victory over
superior men.
## 20
Though without reins, without chariot, not yoked, having been let loose  like steeds in a contest,
these gleaming soma-drinks run. O gods, drive right up to them, to  drink them.
## 21
Thus, o drop, flow around the cloud, the flood in the cups, toward our  pursuit of the gods.
Let Soma give to us desirable, lofty wealth, powerful and abounding in  heroes.
## 22
When the speech from the mind of the seeker fashioned him [=Soma]  on the foundation of the preeminent one [=Agni or Indra?] or
face-to-face with the cattle,
thereupon the cows came to him at will, bellowing—to the delightful  husband, the drop, in the tub.
## 23
The divine giver of drops, sweller of drops, (goes) forth. As truth, he  purifies himself for truth, the very wise one.
Possessing the (royal) mandate, he has become the king of what belongs  to the community. He has been brought forward to the earth by the  ten reins.
## 24
Purifying himself with the filters, having his gaze on men, as the king of  gods and mortals
he has become once again the wealth-lord of wealth; the drop bears the  pleasing truth that is easy to bear.
## 25
Like a steed rushing to a win for the sake of fame, rush to the pursuit  of Indra and Vāyu.
Give us a thousand lofty refreshments; become a finder of chattels  while you are being purified, o Soma.
## 26
Pursuing the gods while being poured around, let the soma drinks run  to a dwelling place rich in good heroes,
bringing favor here through sacrifice, possessing all desirable things,  sacrificing at day(break) like Hotars, most gladdening.
## 27
Thus, o god Soma, purify yourself for the conclave of gods, for their  great delight, as the gods’ drink,
for we are greatly driven at the encounter. Make the two world-halves  of good standing while you are being purified.
## 28
Like a horse you whinny on being yoked by the bulls, fearsome like a  lion, swifter than mind. Along paths turned hitherwards—those which are the straightest—
bring benevolence here to us by purifying yourself, o drop.
## 29
A hundred god-generated streams have been sent surging; these  thousand the poets groom.
O drop, by purifying yourself bring here from heaven a means of
winning. You are the leader of great spoils.
## 30
Like surges from heaven, (like those) of days, his surges have surged.  Like a king, the wise one does not violate his alliance.
Being put in your place according to our intentions, like a son
according to the intentions of his father, bring freedom from
overthrow here to this clan by purifying yourself.
## 31
Your honeyed streams have surged forth, when, purified, you go across  the sheep’s fleece.
Self-purifying one, purify yourself as the domain for the cows. On being  born, you swelled the sun with rays [/chants].
## 32
Ever roaring along the path of truth, gleaming you radiate across the  domain of the immortal one [=sun?].
Providing the means for exhilaration, you purify yourself for Indra,
spurring on your own speech with the thoughts of the poets.
## 33
As heavenly eagle, o Soma, gaze down, swelling the streams with (ritual)  action in the pursuit of the gods.
O drop, enter the tub for holding the soma. Roaring, come right up to  the ray of the sun.
## 34
The draft-horse rouses forth the three voices, the hymnic vision of  truth, the inspired thought of the sacred formulation.
The cows go asking for a cowherd; the thoughts go bellowing eagerly  to Soma.
## 35
To Soma (go) the milk-cows bellowing eagerly; to Soma the inspired  poets asking for him with their thoughts.
Soma, pressed, is purified while being anointed [/driven]; to Soma the  chants, the triṣṭubh verses cry out together.
## 36
Thus, o Soma, being poured around, being purified, bring well-being  here to us through your purification.
Enter Indra with a lofty shout; strengthen speech, beget plenitude.
## 37
In accordance with truth, the wakeful inspired poet of the thoughts,  Soma, being purified, has sat down in the cups,
he whom they serve, eager in rivalry—the Adhvaryus of good hands,  the charioteers (of the sacrifice).
## 38
He, being purified close by, like the Placer of the Sun has filled both  world-halves, and he has disclosed them.
He with whose help the winners of dear things (win) dear things, he will  extend spoils as if to a victor.

## 39
The strengthening strengthener, being purified, Soma the rewarder,  helped us with his light,
with which our forefathers, knowing the track, finding the sun, burned  the cows out of the rock.
## 40
As the sea he has roared at his first expansion, begetting the creatures as  king of creation.
The bull in the filter, on the sheep’s back, Soma has grown loftily, the  drop being pressed.
## 41
Soma the buffalo performed this great (deed), that [/when] as embryo of  the waters he chose the gods.
Purifying himself, he placed strength in Indra. The drop begat the light  in the sun.
## 42
Exhilarate Vāyu for his quest and for our benefit; exhilarate Mitra and  Varuṇa, while you are being purified.
Exhilarate the Marutian troop; exhilarate the gods; exhilarate Heaven  and Earth, o god Soma.
## 43
Purify yourself, as the straight smiter of the crooked, thrusting away  affliction and insults,
perfecting your milk with the milk of cows. You are (the comrade) of  Indra; we are your comrades.
## 44
Purify yourself into the sweetness of honey, into a wellspring of goods;  by purifying yourself bring here to us a hero and a portion.
Sweeten yourself for Indra as you purify yourself, o drop, and by  purifying yourself bring here to us wealth from the sea.
## 45
Soma, pressed in a stream, driving like a steed, has streamed like a river  to the deep, as prizewinner.
He has sat in the wooden womb while being purified. The drop has  flowed together with the cows, with the waters.
## 46
This very Soma purifies himself for you, o Indra, in the cups, insightful  and powerful for you who desire it—
the charioteer having the eye of the sun, whose impetuosity is real, who  has been sent surging like the desire of those who seek the gods.
## 47
He, being purified with age-old vitality, hiding himself in the forms of  the daughter (of the Sun [=Dawn]) [=milk],
in the waters clothing himself in shelter providing threefold defense,  rasping like a Hotar he drives to the concourses.
## 48
Now, you, o god Soma, as charioteer—flow around for us in the two  cups, while being purified,
sweetest in the waters, honeyed, truthful, you whose thoughts become  reality, like god Savitar’s.
## 49
Rush toward Vāyu in pursuit while being hymned, toward Mitra and  Varuṇa while being purified, toward the superior man who quickens insightful thought and bestrides  the chariot, toward Indra the bull with the mace in his arms.
## 50
Rush toward your garments that garb well, toward the good-milking  cows, while being purified,
toward glittering golden goods, to bring them to us, and toward chariot  horses, o god Soma.
## 51
Rush toward heavenly goods for us, toward all earthly goods, while  being purified,
toward that by which we shall win property, (that is,) toward a seer’s  (portion) for us like that of Jamadagni.
## 52
By purifying yourself with this purification bring goods here in this way.  O drop, at (the time of) the hiding of the moon [=early morning] run  forth into the lake.
The copper-colored (Sun/Fire), sped like the wind, is also there. The  very wise one [=Soma?] also gives (to us) the superior man [=Indra?]  to make the charge.
## 53
And with this purification purify yourself for us at the famous ford  of the (prize/wealth) worthy of fame [=place of distribution of
dakṣiṇās?].
The challengers’ challenger [=Indra?] will shake off sixty thousand
goods like ripe (fruit) from a tree, for our joy.
## 54
Of him—“Bull” his name—there are these two great forceful weapons  of death either at the hiding of the moon or at the caressing
[=mixing soma with milk]:
he put the challengers to sleep and “snowed” them. Turn back from
here those without alliance (with us), back those without perception.
## 55
You converge on the three filters stretched out, but you run along just  one while you are being purified.
You are Bhaga, you are the giver of the gift; you are bounteous to the  bounteous ones, o drop.
## 56
This one, knowing all, possessing inspired thoughts, purifies himself— Soma, the king of all creation.
Rousing the droplets at the rites, the drop proceeds over and across the  sheep’s fleece all at once.
## 57
The undeceivable buffaloes lick the drop. On his track the poets squawk  like birds of prey.
The insightful ones impel him with their ten fingers. They jointly anoint  his form with the sap of the waters.
## 58
With you who purify yourself, o Soma, we would pull out the perfect  (“hand” of dice) at the match, time after time.
– This let Mitra and Varuṇa grant this to us, and Aditi, River, and
Earth and Heaven.1344 IX.98
Anusṭubh Hymns: 98–101 ̣