+++
title = "098"

+++
98 (810) Soma Pavamāna
Ambarīṣa Vārṣāgira and R̥jiśvan Bhāradvāja
12 verses: anuṣṭubh, except br̥hatī 11
The themes that dominate this hymn are standard soma tropes. The normal stages  in the preparation of the soma are treated (see esp. vss. 2–3, 6–10), and the poet  regularly reminds Soma of the gifts he should bring to his mortal preparers (see esp.  vss. 1, 4–5, 12). Indeed the hymn begins and ends with an appeal for vā́ja “prizes”  (vss. 1a, 12cd), in a sort of ring composition.
However, although the sentiments expressed and descriptions provided are unre markable, the hymn is characterized by very choppy and sometimes incoherent syn tax (which for purposes of translation has been cleaned up somewhat). Since there  are also metrical disturbances in the hymn, one wonders if it has been transmitted  entirely correctly.
## 1
O drop, stream to us the wealth coveted by many that best wins the prize, bringing a thousand presents, powerfully brilliant, vanquishing (even)  the distinguished.
## 2
This one, being pressed, has engirded himself in the sheep’s fleece, as a  man on a chariot does in armor.
The drop, impelled by the wooden (paddle), has flowed in streams while  being impelled.
## 3
This drop, being pressed, has flowed around in the sheep’s fleece, aroused  to exhilaration,
the one who, erect at the ceremony, goes seeking cows with his stream,  like (Agni) with his flame.
## 4
Because you, o god, are goods for each and every pious mortal,
o drop, you seek to win wealth in thousands, which has a hundred
embodiments.
## 5
May we be (most nearest) to these goods of yours, coveted by many, o  good one, Vr̥tra-smasher,
most nearest to your refreshment and favor, o you who are not poor.
## 6
The self-glorious one, smashed by stones, whom the twice five sisters bathe—the one dear and desirable to Indra, full of waves,
## 7
This delightful tawny brown one they purify all around with the fleece, him who circles around all the gods together with his
exhilarating drink.
## 8
For with his help (the gods) are drinking (the exhilarating drink) that  brings skill to realization, the delightful one who has placed lofty fame among your [=poets’]
patrons, like the sun (in heaven).
## 9
The drop has been born of you two at the sacrifices—o you two  world-halves [=jaws of soma press?], goddesses who (yet) belong to
mankind—
the mountain-abiding god. Unfailingly, very noisily (I praise?) him.
## 10
O Soma, you are poured around for Indra, the Vr̥tra-smiter, to drink, and for the superior man who gives priestly gifts, and for the god sitting  on the seat.
## 11
The age-old soma drinks have flowed into the filter at the break
of dawn,
snorting away into the distance those who know the crooked ways and  those without discernment, early in the morning.
## 12
O comrades, might we and you, our patrons, attain him who shines in front, whose prizes are to be secured. Might we gain him who offers a house  full of prizes.