+++
title = "099"

+++
99 (811) Soma Pavamāna
Two sons of Rebha, the Kāśyapas
8 verses: anuṣṭubh, except br̥hatī 1
The varieties of thought and its poetic expressions are the focus of this hymn, espe cially in its earlier verses (1–2, 4–5), and Soma’s mental and verbal powers comple ment those of his mortal worshipers (vs. 6). The physical preparation of soma is not  neglected, however (esp. vss. 3, 7–8).
## 1
For the delightful daring one they draw the bow, the manly power. Those seeking the great one weave a glowing garment for their lord at  the forefront of the inspired words.
## 2
And prepared by night, he plunges toward the prizes,
when the insightful thoughts of Vivasvant impel him, the tawny one,  to drive.
## 3
We groom this one of his [=Vivasvant?], the one who is exhilaration,  Indra’s best drink,
whom the cows have previously sucked with their mouths and now the  patrons do.
## 4
They have cried out to him with an ancient song, while he is being purified. And the insightful thoughts yearn for him, those bearing the names of  the gods.
## 5
They purify him on the sheep’s fleece, while the steadfast one grows strong. Those of inspired thought hope for him to be like a messenger, (for
them) to be first in his thought.

## 6
Becoming purified, the most exhilarating Soma sits in the cups,
depositing his seed (in them) as if in livestock. The lord of insight
displays his eloquence.
## 7
He is groomed by those who work well [=fingers], the god pressed for  the gods.
As his complete attachment to them [=waters] is known, he plunges
through the great waters.
## 8
O drop, pressed and held by men, you are led through into the filter. As the one most exhilarating for Indra, you sit down here in the cups.