+++
title = "100"

+++
100 (812) Soma Pavamāna
Two sons of Rebha, the Kāśyapas
9 verses: anuṣṭubh
As Oldenberg suggests (1888:  128–29), in order to conform to the principles of  arrangement, this hymn must have originally consisted of two separate hymns, of  five and four verses respectively. This division, made solely on numerical grounds,  is confirmed by the structure of the hymn, for the final four verses repeat or ring  changes on the first five. Verse 6, the first of the original second hymn, is structur
ally, and in part verbally, identical to the final verse of the original first hymn (5),  but also incorporates, in variant form, verse 4d. Verse 7 repeats much of verse 1 in  different order. Verse 8 deviates more from its model, verse 2, but reproduces verse  2d verbatim as verse 8d. Verse 9 is the most distant from its model, verse 3, but  contains the “heaven and earth” found in the “earthly and heavenly goods” of 3cd.  Once again we see the ways in which the R̥gvedic poet uses formulaic language and  poetic templates for his own purposes.
## 1
Those without deceit cry out to him, dear and desirable to Indra.
The mothers lick him like a calf in its first stage of life, just born.
## 2
While being purified, o Soma drop, bring here doubly lofty wealth. You foster all goods in the house of the pious man.
## 3
Set loose the insightful thought yoked with mind, as thunder
does rain.
You foster earthly and heavenly goods, o Soma.
## 4
Your stream, when you are pressed, runs in a circle like (the horse) of a  victor,
speeding through the sheep’s fleece like a winner bringing prizes.
## 5
For our will and skill, o poet, purify yourself in a stream, Soma,
pressed for Indra to drink, for Mitra and Varuṇa.
## 6
Purify yourself as best winner of prizes in the filter, pressed in a stream, most honeyed for Indra and Viṣṇu, for the gods, Soma. 7. The mothers, those without deceit, lick you, the tawny one, in the filter, as milk-cows do a new-born calf, o self-purifying one, at your expansion. 8. O self-purifying one, you drive to great fame with your brilliant rays. Vaunting yourself, you keep smashing away all the dark shades in the  house of the pious man.
## 9
O you of great commandment, you have carried yourself beyond heaven  and earth.
You have fastened on your mantle in your greatness, self-purifying one.