+++
title = "101"

+++
101 (813)
Soma Pavamāna
Andhīgu Śyāvāśvi (1–3), Yayāti Nāhuṣa (4–6), Nahuṣa Mānava (7–9), Manu  Sāṃvaraṇa (10–12), Prajāpati (13–16)
16 verses: anuṣṭubh, except gāyatrī 2–3, arranged in trcas ̥
In order to conform to the pattern of arrangement, this last hymn in the anuṣṭubh  group must actually have consisted originally of five three-verse hymns, with a single  verse (16) appended, as was already pointed out by Oldenberg (1888: 201). There is,  however, some interconnection among the tr̥cas that points to a sense of cohesion.  In particular, the first and last tr̥cas (vss. 1–3 and 13–15) are linked by the striking  image in their first verses (1, 13) of a sacrifice-defiling dog drawn to the sound of  the soma being pressed, a dog that must be driven away. Verse 13 also contains a  brief and enigmatic allusion to a myth also enigmatically mentioned to in X.171.2.
Most of the rest of the hymn contains standard material: the details of prepara tion of the drink and its journey across the filter to mix with the milk, as well as its  relationship to the gods, especially Indra. There is some internal unity visible in the  individual tr̥cas, but it is not pronounced.
## 1
With your advance victory over the stalk, for the pressed soma to cause  exhilaration,
pierce away the dog that has the long tongue, o comrades.
## 2
What flows forth and around in a pure stream, the pressed
drop, like a horse that gets results,
## 3
That one, the soma, poor at burning [?], do the superior men, with their  insight aimed toward all,
impel to the sacrifice with stones.
## 4
The most honeyed pressed soma drinks, exhilarating to Indra,
provided with filters, have flowed. Let your exhilarating drinks go to  the gods.
## 5
“The drop purifies himself for Indra,” so the gods said.
The lord of speech does battle [/seeks bounties], holding sway over all  with his strength.

## 6
Possessing a thousand streams he purifies himself, a sea setting speech  aswing,
Soma, lord of riches, comrade of Indra, day after day.
## 7
This one here is Pūṣan, Wealth, Fortune; Soma rushes as he is being  purified.
As lord of all creation, he has surveyed both world-halves.
## 8
Together the dear ones have cried out to him, the cows avid for  exhilaration.
The soma drinks make their own paths, the self-purifying drops. 9. The one who is strongest [=Indra], bring him here, o self-purifying one,  the one worthy of fame,
who sur(mounts) the five domains, with whom we shall gain wealth.
## 10
The soma drops purify themselves, as best pathfinders for us, allies, unblemished, rich in purpose, finding the sun, when they are  being pressed.
## 11
Having been pressed by the stones, conspicuous on the hide of the cow, the finders of goods have roared together from all around toward  refreshment for us.
## 12
These purified soma juices, attentive to poetic inspiration, mixed with curds, are worthy to be seen like suns, mobile yet fixed in the ghee.
## 13
Like a mortal he [=the dog] has shown preference for the speech of the  stalk being pressed.
Smite away the dog, the ungenerous one, as the Bhr̥gus (did) the Battler. 14. Their kinsman has wrapped himself in a cloak (of milk) to enjoy it, like  a son in the two arms (of his mother).
He runs like a swain to a maiden, like a wooer, to sit in the womb. 15. He is a hero, bringing skill to realization, who has propped apart the  two world-halves.
The tawny one has wrapped himself in the filter, like a ritual adept, to  sit in the womb.
## 16
Soma purifies himself with the fleeces of sheep, on the cow’s hide. Ever roaring, the bullish fallow bay goes to his rendezvous with Indra.
Usṇ ̣ih Hymns: 102–106