+++
title = "102"

+++
102 (814)
Soma Pavamāna
Trita Āptya
8 verses: uṣṇih The many obscurities in this hymn exist in tension with the clarity of its larger  structure: it is a ring composition, with a pāda-length phrase in the first and last  verses (1b, 8c) defining the ring: “spurring on the visionary power of truth.” This  phrase also sets one of the underlying themes, that Soma during his preparation  inspires and creates poetic truth. There is clarity also in the general progression of  the hymn, which follows Soma’s journey from the press (vs. 2) and across the filter  (vs. 3) to his final preparation (vs. 7). Another theme that runs throughout is that of  Soma as a child in relation to his mothers (vss. 1, 4, 7; see also 6), who not only gave  him physical birth but also formed him in his ritual rule (see vs. 4).
It must be admitted, however, that much remains puzzling in the hymn. There  are a number of problems of syntax and lexicon. The two adjacent appearances  of Trita (or “the third one,” vss. 2–3) are also unclear, though they clearly play  on the numerals two and three found in those verses. The hymn is ascribed by the  Anukramaṇī to Trita Āptya, and so it might be that the poet is simply inserting  himself in the poem. But, since Trita Āptya is actually a mythological figure, it is  more likely that the Anukramaṇī has assigned the hymn to that figure on the basis  of the occurrences of tritá in those two verses.
## 01
Through his action the child of the great (rivers), spurring on the  visionary power of truth,
encompasses all dear things—now once again.
## 02
In the two “jaws” [?] [=soma press?] of Trita [/the third one], when he  [=Soma] took to the hidden track,
(he traveled) through the seven domains of the sacrifice—now, right to  his own dear (place).
## 03
(Across) the three (filters), on the backs of Trita (“the third one”), in a  stream—rouse wealth!—
he measures out the stages of his journey—the very resolute one.
## 04
The seven mothers [=rivers?] instructed him as a ritual adept, when he  was born for splendor.
This one is the enduring (treasure) of treasures, since he paid attention  (to his mothers).
## 05
Under his commandment are all the gods of one accord and without  deceit.
Eagerly sought are your joys, since they [=gods] take pleasure (in them). 6. The embryo that those strong through truth have begotten as lovely to see, the poet, most liberal at the ceremony, sought by many—
## 07
Toward (him) the two youthfully exuberant mothers of truth
[=world-halves? Night and Dawn?] go, conjoined but each in her own  person—
when stretching the sacrifice in due order, they [=priests] anoint (him). 8. Through your resolve, with gleaming eyes, you unclosed the pen of  heaven,
spurring the visionary power of truth forth in the ceremony.
