+++
title = "103"

+++
103 (815)
Soma Pavamāna
Dvita Āptya
6 verses: uṣṇih
The most salient stylistic feature of the hymn is the preverb that begins each verse— pári “around” in all but the first verse—with the preverb increasingly less integrated  syntactically with the rest of the verse. The focus on pári arises from the description  of the motion of the soma as it is poured in circles into the filter.
Like the last hymn, this one follows the journey of Soma and also focuses on his  ritual role and his participation in reciprocal ritual speech. Not only do we find the  technical term vedhás “ritual adept’ (vs. 1), as in IX.102.4 and 101.15, but also the  likewise technical vāghát “cantor” (vs. 5) in its only appearance in the IXth Maṇḍala.  The poet’s presentation of his speech and poetic thoughts in verse 1 and the voices  of the seers in verse 3 are met by Soma as himself “leader of thoughts” in verse 4.
The hymn shares some lexical and thematic material with the immediately pre ceding IX.102. In addition to the aforementioned vedhás, note, for example, the  cleverly variant pādas 102.5b and 103.4b, which both contain “all the gods” and  lack of deceit. But in 103 all the gods are embedded in a compound modifying  Soma, whereas in 102 they are syntactically independent; moreover, the “deceit”  theme is carried by two different roots (dabh, druh) in two different valences: the  gods of 102 do not deceive, while Soma in 103 cannot be deceived. It is difficult  not to consider 102 and 103 as composed in conversation with each other, and the  Anukramaṇī’s ascription of 103 to Dvita Āptya (“the second Āptya”) clearly plays  off 102’s Trita Āptya (“the third Āptya”—but also the original Āptya from a myth
ological perspective, since he is a commonly mentioned figure and has an Avestan  correspondent, whereas Dvita Āptya is essentially found only here).
## 1
Forth to the ritual adept, to Soma as he is being purified, shall I bear the  upraised speech
like a present, along with my thoughts. He will find enjoyment.
## 2
Around the sheep’s fleeces he rushes, being anointed with cows.
Being purified, the tawny one creates three seats for himself.
## 3
Around the cask dripping with honey he rushes on the sheep’s fleece. The seven voices of the seers have cried out to him.
## 4
Around (he rushes)—the leader of thoughts, belonging to all the gods,  undeceivable.
Soma the tawny, being purified, entered the two cups.
## 5
Around—following your divine independent powers, drive in the same  chariot with Indra,
being purified as an immortal cantor by cantors.
## 6
Around—like a prize-seeking team, the god pressed for the gods,
reaching through (it), the self-purifying one runs through (the filter).