+++
title = "104"

+++
104 (816) Soma Pavamāna
Parvata Kāṇva and Nārada Kāṇva, or the two Apsarases named Śikhaṇḍinī, daugh ters of Kaśyapa
6 verses: uṣṇih
This hymn forms a close pair with 105 and the two are a textbook demonstration  of how R̥gvedic poets generate variations on underlyingly identical lexical and the matic material. The two hymns correspond verse by verse, and even in translation  the identity of many of the words, their grammatical forms, and whole phrases is  clear. But the poets avoid pāda-length repetitions and introduce variation via lexical  replacement or grammatical transformation.
The contents are unremarkable; both hymns deploy the usual soma-hymn tropes,  though the final apotropaic verse is refreshingly vivid.
## 1
Comrades, sit down here; sing forth to him as he is being purified. With sacrifices attend on him like a child for splendor.
## 2
Send him like a calf to join with his mothers—him who brings success to  the household,
who pursues the gods, the exhilarating drink with double strength.
## 3
Purify him who brings success to skill, for him to pursue the troop (of  Maruts),
to be most wealful for Mitra and Varuṇa.
## 4
The voices have cried out to you, the finder of goods for us.
With cows we will clothe your color.
## 5
O drop, lord of exhilarating drinks—you are the one affording delight to  the gods—
like a comrade for a comrade, become the best finder of the way for us. 6. Put away from us bag and baggage any demonic devourer whatsoever. Keep away from us the godless double-dealing one, away difficult straits.