+++
title = "106"

+++
106 (818)
Soma Pavamāna
Agni Cākṣuṣa (1–3), Cakṣus Mānava (4–6), Manu Āpsava (7–9), Agni Cākṣuṣa (10–14) 14 verses: uṣṇih
This last hymn in the uṣṇih collection, as is common with hymns positioned at  the end of their metrical grouping, is too long and needs to be broken down into  smaller units: four tr̥cas (vss. 1–3, 4–6, 7–9, 10–12) followed by a two-verse hymn  (13–14). In this case the division is in general accord with the Anukramaṇī, which  ascribes the hymn to three different mythical poets, marked by their patronymic  relationships as grandson, son, and father, each with a tr̥ca. The grandson returns  as poet of the last five verses, that is, of the final tr̥ca (10–12) and the two-verse unit  that ends the hymn.
The contents of the hymn are entirely conventional, with a focus on Indra as  drinker of the soma, especially in the first part of the hymn. Note that “finding the  sun” is also a preoccupation, and that word (svarvíd) appears once in each of the  first three tr̥cas (vss. 1, 4, 9).
## 01
Let these pressed (soma drinks) go to Indra, the tawny ones to the bull, the drops born because of (Indra’s?) attentive hearing, finding the sun. 2. This one here, bringing gain for the taking, purifies himself for Indra  when pressed.
Soma takes note of the victorious one, as is (well) known.
## 03
Indra, in the raptures of just this (soma), grabbed a handful
bringing gain,
and he carried the bullish mace—he who is entirely victorious in the waters.
## 04
Run forth as the wakeful one, o Soma; flow around for Indra, o drop. Bring here brilliant tempestuous force that finds the sun. 5. For Indra purify yourself into bullish exhilaration, as the one visible  to all,
possessing a thousand courses, path-making, wide-gazing.
## 06
The best finder of the way for us, most honeyed for the gods,
drive along your thousand paths, ever roaring.
## 07
Purify yourself in streams, o drop, to pursue the gods with strength. Honeyed, sit in our tub, o Soma.
## 08
Your droplets, swimming in water, have strengthened Indra for
exhilaration.
The gods have drunk you for immortality
## 09
O you pressed drops, run wealth to us here while being purified,
bringing the heavens to rain and the waters to streaming, finding
the sun.
## 10
Soma, being purified in a wave, runs across the fleece of the sheep, at the forefront of speech, self-purifying, ever roaring.
## 11
With insights they impel the prizewinner, playing in the wood, across  the sheep [=fleece].
The thoughts sound together toward the three-backed one.
## 12
He has been sent surging toward the tubs, like a prize-seeking team at a  competition.
Being purified, begetting speech, he has flowed.
## 13
The delightful fallow bay purifies himself, across the tufts, at speed, streaming glory consisting of heroes to the praisers.
## 14
In this way purify yourself, seeking the gods. The streams of honey have  been sent surging.
Rasping, circle around the filter on all sides.
Hymns Arranged in Pragāthas: 107–108