+++
title = "107"

+++
107 (819) Soma Pavamāna
Seven Seers
26 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas, except dvipadā virāj bhurij 3 and dvipadā virāj 16 as supplemental verses to the preceding pragātha
This long hymn mostly stays focused the usual themes of the IXth Maṇḍala: the  pressing of Soma, his journey across the filter, his entry into the waters, his mixing  with cows’ milk, and his arrival at his destination, the wooden cups. Interspersed1354 IX.107
are references to Soma’s cosmic aspect (e.g., the heavenly udder in vs. 5) and cos mic deeds (e.g., making the sun mount in heaven, vs. 7). Especially prominent in  the middle and late parts of the hymn are mentions of the sea (vss. 9, 14, 15, 16,  21, 23), referring both to the waters that the soma enters and to the expanse of  soma itself.
Toward the end the hymn takes a slightly personal turn, in the pragātha of verses  19–20, where the poet celebrates his fellowship with Soma and, by implication, the  mental state he achieves from drinking the soma. In particular, 20cd “We have flown  like birds far past the sun...” recalls several famous 1st-person descriptions of soma’s  effects: VIII.48.3 “We have drunk the soma; we have become immortal; we have gone to  the light; we have found the gods” and X.119, the Laba-sūkta, in which the soma-drinker  flies through the cosmos, describing his bird’s eye view of heaven and earth.
## 1
From here sprinkle around the pressed drink, which is the soma, the  highest oblation.
The manly one who has run within the waters, the soma did he [=the  priest] press with stones.
## 2
Now, while being purified by the sheep, flow around as one who is  undeceivable, very sweet-smelling.
Even when (you) have just been pressed in the waters, we become
exhilarated by your stalk, while preparing you with cows as the higher  (oblation),
## 3
Being pressed all around to be seen—the exhilarator of the gods, the  wide-gazing drop that is resolve.
## 4
O Soma, you rush while being purified in a stream and clothing yourself  in the waters.
Conferring treasure, you sit here upon the womb of truth as the golden  wellspring, o god.
## 5
Milking the heavenly udder of his own dear honey, he has taken his  ancient seat.
The prizewinner rushes to the support worthy of the asking, the
wide-gazing one rinsed by men.
## 6
O Soma, while being purified all around in the sheep’s fleece, wakeful  and dear,
you became an inspired poet, the best of the Aṅgirases. Equip our
sacrifice with honey.
## 7
Soma the rewarder purifies himself, the best pathfinder, the inspired,  wide-gazing seer.
You became the sage poet who best pursues the gods. You made the sun  mount in heaven.
## 8
Soma, being pressed by the pressers upon the backs of the sheep, drives with his stream as if with a golden horse, drives with his
delighting stream.
## 9
Provided with cows he has flowed together with the cows at the water’s  edge; Soma has flowed together with those that have been milked.
They have gone into the enclosures as if into the sea. The invigorating  one wells out for exhilaration.
## 10
O Soma, while you are being pressed by the stones, (you come) here  across the sheep’s fleeces.
Like a man into a fortress, the tawny one enters into the two cups. You  have established your seat in the woods [/in the wooden cups].
## 11
He has become groomed across the fine (hairs) of the ewe, like a  prize-seeking team at a competition.
Self-purifying Soma is to be cheered on by those of inspired thought,  by the inspired reciters of verses.
## 12
O Soma, like a river that has swollen with its flood, you have swollen  forth with the milk of the plant to pursue the gods,
wakeful like an exhilarating drink, toward the cask dripping
with honey.
## 13
The delightful one has clothed himself in a silvery cloak, to be caressed  like a dear son.
The laborers propel him, in their two hands, as they would a chariot,  into the rivers.
## 14
The soma juices, the Āyus, purify themselves into an exhilarating drink  of exhilaration—
they of inspired thought, bringing exhilaration and finding the sun,
(purify themselves) upon the surface of the sea.
## 15
Purifying himself, he crosses the sea with his wave as king and god— and lofty truth—
rushing according to the ordinance of Mitra and Varuṇa, being
propelled—the lofty truth,
## 16
Being guided by men, the delightful, wide-gazing king and god
belonging to the sea.
## 17
Soma purifies himself as the exhilarating drink, pressed for Indra along  with the Maruts.
Possessed of a thousand streams he rushes beyond the sheep’s fleece.  The Āyus groom him.
## 18
Being purified in the cup, a poet begetting thought, Soma rejoices  among the gods.
Clothing himself in waters, he has wrapped himself with cows as the  higher (oblation), sitting in the woods [/wooden cups].

## 19
O Soma, I rejoice in your fellowship (with me) every day, o drop.
Many things, o brown one, get me down—way down. Go past these
barriers.
## 20
Both by night and by day, Soma, I am at your udder for fellowship with  you, o brown one.
We have flown like birds far past the sun that scorches with its heat.
## 21
While being groomed, dexterous one, you impel your speech upon  the sea.
O self-purifying one, you rush toward ample, much-craved, golden
wealth.
## 22
Being groomed, purifying yourself on the sheep’s fleece, as bull you  have roared down into the wood(en cup).
O self-purifying Soma, you rush to the rendezvous with the gods, being  anointed with cows.
## 23
Purify yourself to win the prize, (aiming) toward all products of  poetic skill.
Soma, you, the exhilarating one, were [/are] the first to spread out the  sea for the gods.
## 24
Purify yourself all around the earthly realm and the heavenly ones, o  Soma, in accordance with your ordinances.
O wide-gazing one, the inspired poets propel you, resplendent, with
their thoughts and insights.
## 25
Purifying themselves, they have been set loose across the filter in  a steam—
the exhilarating coursers, fit for Indra along with the Maruts, toward  wisdom [/the ritual meal] and pleasing offerings.
## 26
Clothing himself in the waters, he rushes around the cask, the drop  being propelled by the pressers.
Begetting the light, he has made the delighting cows bellow, making the  cows as if into his fresh garment.