+++
title = "108"

+++
108 (820)
Soma Pavamāna
Gaurivīti Śāktya 1–2, Śakti Vāsiṣṭha 3, 14–16, Ūru Āṅgirasa 4–5, R̥jiśvan Bhāradvāja  6–7, Ūrdhvasadman Āṅgirasa 8–9, Krtaya ̥ śas Āṅgirasa 10–11, R̥ṇaṃcaya 12–13 16 verses: kakubh alternating with satobr̥hatī, except gāyatrī yavamadhyā 13, arranged  in pragāthas
The Anukramaṇī names seven different poets as authors of this hymn; the  Anukramaṇī’s divisions do not correspond at all to the clear pragātha structure,  however, and therefore seem questionable. Within the pragāthas there is, more often than not, syntactic dependency between verses (e.g., vss. 3–4, 7–8, 13–14), as well as  some thematic continuity. Stylistically the hymn, especially toward the beginning, is  characterized by rather choppy syntax and often presents itself as a mosaic of semi self-contained phrases. On the other hand, there are signs of ring composition: the  first phrase of the hymn, “purify yourself as the most honeyed for Indra, o Soma”  recurs as the framing words of the first verse of the final pragātha (vs. 15), and the  relative clause about the drinking of soma that introduces verse 2 is echoed, with  the same relative pronoun, in 14a.
Allusions to the Vala myth are found in the interior of the hymn (vss. 4, 6). The  heavenly soma, conceived of in part as rain, is also a prominent theme (vss. 9–11,  and also probably vss. 4 [the “dear immortal one”] and 6 [the “watery” cows]). This  cosmic soma is, as usual, a counterpoint to the ritual soma, the standard details of  whose preparation are found throughout.
## 1
Purify yourself as the most honeyed for Indra, o Soma, as the
exhilarating drink that best finds resolve,
greatly, as the exhilarating drink that best rules heaven,
## 2
Since, having drunk of you, the bull acts as a bull, at the drinking of this  sun-finding (soma).
Bearing good marks he [=Soma] strode toward the refreshments, like  Etaśa toward the prize.
## 3
O self-purifying one, it was certainly you as the most brilliant who made  the heavenly races heed
for the sake of immortality,
## 4
With whom Navagva, with whom Dadhyañc uncloses (the cowpen), by  whom the inspired poets have acquired for themselves
(some) of the dear immortal one [=heavenly soma] in the grace of the  gods, by whom they have each attained fame.
## 5
This most exhilarating one here, pressed in a stream, purifies himself  with the fleeces of sheep,
playing like a wave of the waters,
## 6
He who with his might cut the ruddy, watery cows out from within the rock. You have extended your control over the enclosure of the cows and
horses. Like a man in armor, break into it, o bold one.
## 7
Press it, sprinkle it around, as one sprinkles a horse—(the soma that is  stoma, i.e.,) the praise song that crosses the waters, crosses the airy
realms,
that is howling in the wood and swimming in the waters,
## 8
The bull of a thousand streams, growing strong through the milk, dear to  the divine race,
who born of truth through truth has grown strong as king, god, and  lofty truth.

## 9
Illuminate lofty splendor and glory, o lord of refreshment, as you seek  the gods, o god.
Unleash the middle bucket [=rain cloud].
## 10
Coil yourself into the two cups when you are pressed, skillful one, as the  clanlord of the clans, like a draft-horse.
Purify yourself into the rain from heaven, the streaming of waters.
Quicken our insights for the quest for cattle.
## 11
They have milked out of the heavens this thousand-streamed bull, who  arouses exhilaration,
who brings all good things.
## 12
The bull has been born, the immortal that gives birth, burning away the  darkness with his light.
Well-praised by the poets, he dons his raiment, a threefold one, by his  wondrous ability.
## 13
He is pressed—who is the leader of goods, of riches, of Iḍā-offerings, Soma, who (is the leader) of good settlements,
## 14
Our (soma) of which Indra will drink, of which the Maruts, or Bhaga  along with Aryaman,
by whom we will bring Mitra and Varuṇa here and Indra here for
great help.
## 15
For Indra to drink, o Soma—held by men, having good weapons and  most exhilarating,
purify yourself as the most honeyed.
## 16
Enter into the heart of Indra, the repository of soma, like rivers into  the sea,
being pleasing to Mitra, to Varuṇa, to Vāyu, the highest prop of
heaven.
Hymns in Assorted Meters: 109–114