+++
title = "109"

+++
109 (821)
Soma Pavamāna
Dhiṣṇya Fires, descendants of Īśvara
22 verses: dvipadā virāj, arranged in trcas ̥
The Anukramaṇī’s fanciful ascription of this hymn to the dhiṣṇya (“holy”) fires  finds no echo in the composition itself.
The lightness and brevity of this meter (each verse containing four pādas of  a mere five syllables each) do not lend themselves to complex phraseology or elaborate images. Instead the hymn consists primarily of standard apostrophes to  Soma (e.g., the imperative “purify yourself” occurs five times in the hymn: vss. 4, 5,  6, 7, 10) and simple present-tense descriptions of the process of preparation (e.g.,  vs. 11 “they purify”; vs. 12 “they groom”).
For links with the next hymn, see the introduction to IX.110.
## 1
Run forth and around for Indra, o Soma, sweet for Mitra, Pūṣan,  and Bhaga.
## 2
Indra should drink of you, Soma, when you are pressed, for will and  skill—and (so should) all the gods.
## 3
Thus, for immortality and for great peaceful dwelling, rush gleaming as  the heavenly beestings.
## 4
Purify yourself, Soma, as the great sea and as the father of the gods,  (going) to all domains.
## 5
Gleaming, purify yourself for the gods, o Soma, for heaven, for earth,  and as weal for offspring.
## 6
You are the supporter of heaven, the gleaming beestings. In your real  expansion, as prizewinner purify yourself.
## 7
Purify yourself, o Soma, possessing heavenly brilliance and good  streams, along the (fleece) of the sheep as the great ancient one.
## 8
Being guided by men after being born purified, he streams all (goods)  [/to all (domains)]—the gladdening one who finds the sun.
## 9
The drop being purified, being chosen, will make offspring and all  goods for us.
## 10
Purify yourself, Soma, for will and skill, washed down like a
prizewinning horse for the stake.
## 11
The pressers purify that sap of yours for exhilaration, the soma for  great heavenly brilliance.
## 12
They groom the tawny child just born, the soma in the filter, the drop  for the gods.
## 13
The dear drop has been purified for exhilaration in the lap of the  waters, the sage poet (has been purified) for good fortune.
## 14
He bears the name dear to Indra, with which he smashes all
obstacles.
## 15
All the gods drink of him, prepared with cows, pressed by men.
## 16
Being pressed, he has streamed forth in a thousand streams, across the  filter, through the sheep’s fleece.
## 17
The prizewinner has streamed in a thousand spurts, being groomed  with waters, being prepared with cows.
## 18
O Soma, journey forth to the cheeks of Indra, being guided by men,  pressed by stones.

## 19
The prizewinner has been let loose across the filter, Soma of a thousand  streams, for Indra.
## 20
With the sap of honey they anoint him, the drop for Indra the bull, for  exhilaration.
## 21
They groom you, the tawny one clothed in waters, for the gods, for (you  to attain) your full dimension at will.
## 22
The drop spills, spills down for Indra—the mighty one preparing and  setting the waters to flow.