+++
title = "110"

+++
110 (822)
Soma Pavamāna
Tryaruṇa and Trasadasyu
12 verses: pipīlikamadhyā 1–3, ūrdhvabr̥hatī 4–9, virāj 10–12, arranged in trcas ̥
This hymn is made up of verses in three rare meters; in fact verses 4–9 are the only  ones in all of the R̥gveda in this meter (consisting of verses of three pādas of twelve  syllables each), and the first three verses are the only pipīlikamadhyā stanzas in the  R̥gveda with this syllable count (12 8 12). (The meter’s name means “ant-middled,”  because a short pāda is sandwiched between two longer ones.) Despite the hetero
geneity of the meters, there is evidence that the hymn is a conceptual unity, par ticularly in the signs of ring composition: the last two verses (11–12) echo the first  two. “The one who gains the prize” (11c) matches “to gain the prize” in 1a; the two  forms of the root sah “vanquish” in verse 12 (a and c) recall the “vanquisher” in 1b;  the “difficult plunges” in 12b are the negative counterpart of Soma’s plunge in 2c.  Internally we may note that the begetting of the sun in verse 3, at the end of the first  tr̥ca (3a, with its initial verb ájījanaḥ) is immediately reprised in 4a, in a new meter,  again with the fronted verb ájījanaḥ.
The hymn also echoes some of the vocabulary and phraseology of the preceding  hymn, X.109, whose metrical simplicity is in marked contrast to this hymn. Both  hymns begin almost identically, though adjusted by the addition of particles for the  metrical difference: IX.109.1a pári prá dhanva and 110.1a páry ū ṣú prá dhanva ...,  both meaning “run forth and around.” The rare word pīyū́ṣa “beestings, first-milk,”  which makes two appearances in 109 (vss. 3, 6), recurs in 110.8, qualified as “the  beestings of heaven” (diváḥ pīyū́ṣam) like the “heavenly beestings” of 109.3 (divyáḥ
pīyū́ṣaḥ).
In content the first three and the last three (10–12) verses are fairly straight forward, and, especially the last three verses, are concerned with the earthly soma  of the ritual, though also celebrating his great powers in confronting enemies and  obstacles. A hint of the cosmic soma comes in verse 3, in the aforementioned beget ting of the sun, though in this verse this action is linked with Soma’s ritual progress.  The middle six verses (4–9), in an otherwise unattested meter, are more difficult  and treat the interaction and blurred boundaries between earthly, ritual soma and cosmic soma. The gods’ yearning for soma (see esp. vs. 6) and the primal prepara tion of soma (see esp. vss. 7–8) are described, and the final verse of this group (vs.  9) declares Soma’s universal power.
## 01
Run forth and around to gain the prize, around as the vanquisher of  obstacles.
As the requiter of our debts, you speed [/are implored] to overcome
hatreds.
## 02
Because we cheer you on, Soma, when you are pressed for the great  (prize), in your kingship in the clash,
you plunge forward toward the prizes, o self-purifying one.
## 03
For you have begotten the sun, o self-purifying one, in spreading your  milk by your skill,
hastening along with Plenitude, who is lively with cows.
## 04
You have begotten it, o immortal one, here among mortals, upon the  foundation of the truth, of the dear immortal one [=heavenly soma]. You have always flowed, ever streaming toward the prize.
## 05
Because with your fame you drilled ever closer to the inexhaustible  drink for men, as if to some kind of wellspring,
while being carried in the (priest’s) hands, like (booty by someone) with  arrows in his hands—
## 06
Because of that, seeing for themselves a friendship with him who is  radiant with goods [=Soma], some heavenly beings roared to him.
He uncovers the fleece as the god Savitar uncovers a desirable thing.
## 07
In you, Soma, those who first twisted the ritual grass placed their  insight for the great prize of victory and for fame.
Impel our (insight), o hero, for heroic power.
## 08
The ancient beestings of heaven, worthy of hymns—they milked that  out of the great depth of heaven.
They cried out in unison toward Indra as he was being born.
## 09
Now, o self-purifying one, in that (you) sur(mount) these two worlds  here and all these creatures by your greatness,
outstanding like a bull in the herd you extend yourself over them.
## 10
Self-purifying Soma, being purified in the sheep’s fleece, has streamed,  playing like a child—
the drop possessing a thousand streams and a hundred prizes.
## 11
This one being purified, the honeyed and truth-possessing drop, the  sweet wave, purifies himself for Indra—
the one who gains the prize, finds wide space, and confers vitality.
## 12
Purify yourself, vanquishing the battlers, repelling demons and difficult  plunges,
having good weapons, having vanquished your rivals, Soma.
