+++
title = "111"

+++
111 (923)
Soma Pavamāna
Anānata Pārucchepi
3 verses: atyaṣṭi
This hymn is the only one in the IXth Maṇḍala in the intricate atyaṣṭi meter, with  its variable lines and patterned repetition. The poet, according to the Anukramaṇī,  is Anānata son of Parucchepa, a poet not otherwise represented in the R̥gveda.  However, his putative father, Parucchepa, is the author, again according to the  Anukramaṇī, of I.127–39, the only sustained corpus of atyaṣṭi in the R̥gveda.
The hymn begins with a description of Soma’s journey, and the final verse (vs.  3) returns to this theme. The middle verse (vs. 2) is a brief, and quite enigmatic,  treatment of the Vala myth. In our view it involves something of a reversal of some  standard tropes. The 2nd-person subject of the first three pādas of the verse is  Soma, who is here credited with retrieving the cows stolen by the Paṇis. These cows,  of course, also represent the milk with which the soma will be mixed. Soma then  grooms or cleans these cows along with his (or their?) mothers. Now ordinarily it is  Soma who is groomed; he doesn’t perform any grooming on others. And a number  of translators and commentators have attempted to make the verb used here (mar jayasi) reflect this normal usage. However, this particular verb form is emphatically  and unambiguously transitive, and it seems likely that the poet is thus drawing our  attention to the role reversal, with the usual female agents of Soma’s grooming  relegated to auxiliaries.
The reference of the next item, the melody or sāman, is equally obscure. If it  is part of the Vala myth, it may refer to the song sung by Indra/Br̥haspati and the  Aṅgirases to open the cave and free the cows; they came “from afar” bringing their  song, and to the cows within the cave the song would have sounded “from afar.” It  is also possible that the simile just refers to a general situation, the pleasure one gets  from hearing a snatch of song out of nowhere. In any case in the last portion of this  verse Soma acquires vigor or vitality from the cows, who are also identified as the  three forms of ritual speech.
## 01
Being purified with this golden light, he crosses all hatreds with (horses)  of his own yoking—like the Sun with the (horses) of his own yoking.
In the stream of pressed (juice) he shines ruddy and tawny as he is being  purified,
when he makes the circuit of all his forms by (the impetus of) the
versifiers—by (the impetus of) the versifiers with their seven mouths.
## 02
You found that good thing of the Paṇis [=herd of cows]. You groom (it),  along with your mothers, in your own house—in your house through  the insights of truth.
Like a melody (heard) from afar, this is where the insights find pleasure. He has acquired vitality through the tripartite ruddy (cows)—shining, he  has acquired vitality. 3. Following his earlier [/eastern] direction he drives, ever observant. He  aligns himself with the reins [/(sun’s) rays] as a chariot lovely to
see—a heavenly chariot lovely to see.
The hymns, the manly powers, have come: they excite Indra to victory, when you [=Soma] and his mace become unbudgeable—unbudgeable in  battles.
The last three hymns in the IXth Maṇḍala share a refrain, are all in paṅkti meter,  and can be safely considered supplements to the original book on the grounds of  language and subject matter (see Oldenberg 1888: 202).