+++
title = "112"

+++
112 (824) Soma Pavamāna
Śiśu Āṅgirasa
4 verses: paṅkti
This charming little hymn has no obvious connection to soma except through its  refrain (which it shares with the next two hymn, 113–114, also in the same meter),  which sits oddly in each verse, and through the glancing mention of the soma-presser  in 1d. The diversity of people’s occupations and of their goals is the theme, presented  in casual style and sometimes colloquial language (see especially the designations for  father and mother in vs. 3), with the gently cynical message that what everyone really  wants is gain or an easy life. The final verse (4) opens out to the nonhuman world.
Perhaps the most interesting verse, as a small window on realia, is the second  one, which presents a rare picture of a smith and his equipment. The “old plants”  must be for producing a hot fire, the “feathers of birds” for fanning the flames, and  the stones are probably whetstones.
Casting about for a reason for the refrain and for the inclusion of this hymn in  the IXth Maṇḍala—it may be that the point of the refrain is that, like the people  and animals mentioned in the body of the text, the drop has its own goal, particular  to itself, namely simply to seek Indra. Or perhaps the hymn was simply too delight
ful to abandon.
## 1
Truly our thoughts are various, and the obligations of peoples are  different:
a carpenter seeks the broken, a healer the injured, a formulator a man  who presses soma.
– O drop, flow around for Indra.
## 2
With old [=dry] plants, with the feathers of birds,
and with stones—throughout the days the smith seeks a man who
has gold.
– O drop, flow around for Indra.1364 IX.113
## 3
I am a bard, Papa a healer, and Mama is pushing a pestle.
Having varying thoughts but (all) seeking goods, we follow (goods)
like cows.
– O drop, flow around for Indra.
## 4
The draft-horse seeks an easy-rolling chariot, beguilers a joke;
the penis seeks the hairy split, the frog just seeks water.
– O drop, flow around for Indra.