+++
title = "+09"

+++
The IXth Maṇḍala is the only major grouping in the R̥gveda devoted to a single ritual  procedure. It consists of 114 hymns dedicated to Soma Pavamāna, “self-purifying  Soma.” It treats the deified ritual substance, the exhilarating drink soma, whose  preparation and offering are the focus of the most important Vedic ritual, the soma  sacrifice, but it treats that substance at only a single episode in the whole elaborate  sacrifice, the time when the soma juice, which has already been pressed, is poured  across the sheep’s fleece that serves to “purify” it—that is, to remove the vegetable  detritus still present in the liquid—before it is first diluted with water, then mixed  with milk, and poured into the offering vessels. (For more detailed treatment of  the ritual procedures involved see, e.g., Geldner’s introduction to this maṇḍala and  Oberlies 1999.)
There are no other hymns to Soma Pavamāna in the R̥gveda and only a few  to Soma in his other aspects (I.91, VIII.48, VIII.79, X.25, as well as a few dedi cated to Soma and another god [e.g., Soma and Rudra I.43, Agni and Soma  I.93]). Judging from this absence, as well as from the data provided by the poets  named by the Anukramaṇī, it is clear that many of the hymns in the maṇḍala  were extracted from the original bardic collections and assembled in this liturgi cally oriented collection, while other hymns in the maṇḍala were composed by  younger poets. The beginnings of the construction of a pan-Ārya sacrificial sys tem, superseding the separate and competing clan rites—a construction that led  to the middle Vedic śrauta ritual system—can be discerned in various composite  hymns, especially IX.67.
It is little short of remarkable that the R̥gvedic bards could take this ritual  snapshot, consisting of what seems like extremely unpromising material, and make  it into high poetry not once, but 114 times, and even the most devoted Vedicist  approaches this maṇḍala with some trepidation and with fear of the ennui to  be induced by endless repetition of a few ritual tropes. What is truly surprising  is that the poets for the most part managed to create an extraordinary variety  of approaches to this limited theme, and, for readers interested in how the tra
ditional poets of antiquity used all their ingenuity and poetic resources to trick  out and ring changes on an invariant topic, the IXth Maṇḍala serves as a sort of  laboratory to observe these skills in action. The hymns in the latter part of the1234 IX
maṇḍala in trimeter meter especially display this richness of approach, but even  the sixty-seven hymns in the short (24 syllables per verse) gāyatrī meter are very  different from each other.
One of the ways in which the poets imbue this ritual moment with gravity  beyond the simple facts of the procedure is by animatizing all the elements  deployed in the procedure and making them actors, rather than inert things  acted upon. The soma juice is configured as Soma, king and god, making a  royal progress across the filter to his rendezvous with the gods. Or he is a pow
erful charging bull, or a swift racehorse, or a bird in flight. The fleece filter is  a ewe; the milk is regularly conceived of as a herd of cows, eager to mate with  the bull Soma. These ritual elements are also given cosmic dimensions. Soma is  a pillar between heaven and earth; the sheep’s fleece is the whole surface of the  earth or of heaven; the waters for dilution are a vast sea into which the waves  of soma empty themselves; the milk in its gleaming brightness is the sun or the  day-lit sky. Once they have assumed these other poetic identities, the elements  of the ritual then participate in still other metaphors and images that stretch  those identities further. And the identities shift constantly within even brief  hymns. In short, although it may be difficult to love the Soma Maṇḍala, it pro vides an almost ideal lesson in how to construct traditional poetry. However, in  order to appreciate the artistry and the distance between the real subject and  its ennobling verbal treatment, it is necessary to keep the physical facts of the  ritual always in view; we have emphasized these regularly in the introductions  to the individual hymns. For a close study of the imagery, form, and composi tion of the soma hymns, see Oberlies (1999).
The maṇḍala is organized by meter, with the majority of the hymns in the  dimeter gāyatrī meter (IX.1–67), followed by smaller collections of trimeter— jagatī (68–86) and triṣṭubh (87–97)—then anuṣṭubh (98–101), uṣṇih (102–106),  pragātha structures (107–108), ending with miscellaneous meters (109–114).  Within each metrical group the hymns are arranged by length, from longest to  shortest. Although the gāyatrī, jagatī, and triṣṭubh collections end with some  very long hymns, these “hymns” can easily be deconstructed into smaller hymns  containing the correct number of verses. For example, the jagatī group ends  with two apparently nonconforming hymns. After a long series of five-verse  hymns (IX.75–84) we find IX.85 at twelve verses and IX.86 at forty-eight. But  IX.85 can be broken down into three four-verse hymns and IX.86 into sixteen  tr̥cas (three-verse groupings). The longest hymn in the R̥gveda is the final hymn  of the triṣṭubh group, IX.97 with fifty-eight verses, divisible into tr̥cas (with a  final, extra verse).

Gāyatrı̄ Hymns: 1–67 
