+++
title = "Poetic feat"

+++
It is little short of remarkable that the R̥gvedic bards could take this ritual  snapshot, consisting of what seems like extremely unpromising material, and make  it into high poetry not once, but 114 times, and even the most devoted Vedicist  approaches this maṇḍala with some trepidation and with fear of the ennui+++(=weariness)+++ to  be induced by endless repetition of a few ritual tropes.+++(5)+++ What is truly surprising  is that the poets for the most part managed to create an extraordinary variety  of approaches to this limited theme, and, for readers interested in how the traditional poets of antiquity used all their ingenuity and poetic resources to trick  out and ring changes on an invariant topic, the IXth Maṇḍala serves as a sort of  laboratory to observe these skills in action. The hymns in the latter part of the IX maṇḍala in trimeter meter especially display this richness of approach, but even  the sixty-seven hymns in the short (24 syllables per verse) gāyatrī meter are very  different from each other.

One of the ways in which the poets imbue this ritual moment with gravity  beyond the simple facts of the procedure is by animatizing all the elements  deployed in the procedure and making them actors, rather than inert things  acted upon.+++(5)+++ The soma juice is configured as Soma, king and god, making a  royal progress across the filter to his rendezvous with the gods. Or he is a powerful charging bull, or a swift racehorse, or a bird in flight. The fleece filter is  a ewe; the milk is regularly conceived of as a herd of cows, eager to mate with  the bull Soma. 

These ritual elements are also given cosmic dimensions. Soma is  a pillar between heaven and earth; the sheep’s fleece is the whole surface of the  earth or of heaven; the waters for dilution are a vast sea into which the waves  of soma empty themselves; the milk in its gleaming brightness is the sun or the  day-lit sky. 

Once they have assumed these other poetic identities, the elements  of the ritual then participate in still other metaphors and images that stretch  those identities further. And the identities shift constantly within even brief  hymns. 

In short, although it may be difficult to love the Soma Maṇḍala, it pro vides an almost ideal lesson in how to construct traditional poetry. However, in  order to appreciate the artistry and the distance between the real subject and  its ennobling verbal treatment, it is necessary to keep the physical facts of the  ritual always in view; we have emphasized these regularly in the introductions  to the individual hymns. For a close study of the imagery, form, and composi tion of the soma hymns, see Oberlies (1999).
