+++
title = "+030"

+++
30 (384)  
Indra  
Babhru Ātreya  
15 verses: triṣṭubh  
This hymn follows a fairly straightforward chronological trajectory. The poet  begins by wondering where Indra is (vs. 1), locates him on the way to the sacrifice  (vs. 2), and promises the god to recite his deeds at the ceremony (vs. 3). This recital  occupies the middle of the hymn (vss. 4–10), ending (vs. 11) with a return to the  ritual setting, where Indra, pleased by the soma, bestows cows. This mythic model  provides a smooth transition to the last four verses (12–15), the poet’s dānastuti,  praising his patrons the Ruśamas and their king, R̥ṇaṃcaya (lit., “he who requites  his debts”), for their gift to him of four thousand cows, plus a piece of ritual equip ment, a pot. The poet names himself in verse 14. The recital of Indra’s deeds touches on the Vala myth (vs. 4), the Vr̥tra myth (vss.  5–6), and the defeat of Namuci (vss. 7–8). The intriguing mention of the Dāsa “who  made women his weapons” (vs. 9) is unfortunately more opaque; however, it may  be connected with an equally opaque verse, I.104.3. In our view both passages refer  to rivers controlled by the Ārya’s consistent, and perhaps indigenous, opponents,  thus serving as a barrier to Ārya progress. The words “river” and “stream” (dhénā)  are feminine in gender, and so these are the female “weapons” of 9a. Once Indra  has recognized that the “weapons” are mere (female) streams, he leads the charge  against the Dāsa foe. The cows captured in this raid may be referred to in verse 10,  the same cows that Indra distributes in verse 11.  