+++
title = "05"

+++
Ge and Re (flg. Sāy.) take ukṣámāṇa- to √ukṣ ‘sprinkle’, not √vakṣ / ukṣ ‘grow strong’. I prefer the latter, because even medial forms of ‘sprinkle’ are transitive (cf., e.g., V.59.1 ukṣánte áśvān) and this one would be passive, but ‘sprinkle’ is not excluded.

The publ. tr. of the 2nd hemistich - “Those of insightful thought hope for him to be like a messenger, (for them) to be first in his thought” - is, at the very least, awkward, but, more to the point, opaque. I now think I interpr. it wrongly. In particular, like Ge and Re (also Lü 208), I 1) take the implicit acc. obj. of ā́śāsate, corresponding to dūtám ‘messenger’ in the simile, to be Soma, and 2) interpr. the verb as meaning ‘hope’. Although both interpr. can be amply justified, what they add up to is not sense. To begin with, though ā́√śās can mean ‘hope’, it can also have the more literal and additive sense ‘direct (towards)’, with a variety of objects.

Particularly telling in our case is VIII.24.1 ā́śiṣāmahi bráhméndrāya “we direct our formulation to Indra,” with a verbal product as object.

This now brings us to the simile. The skeleton of the clause means “They direct (X) like a messenger …” Let us focus now on dūtá-; what can be being compared to it here? This is the only occurrence of this well-attested word or its derivatives in IX. The overwhelmingly standard referent of dūtá- is of course Agni; however, there is a subset of passages in which the dūtá- is a hymn, praise-song, vel sim. Cf. V.43.8 … gī́r dūtó ná gantv aśvínā huvádhyai “let the hymn come like a messenger to invoke the Aśvins”; IV.33.1 dūtám iva vā́cam “my speech like a messenger”; VI.63.1 dūtó ná stómaḥ “our praise-song like a messenger” (sim.

VIII.26.16 stómo dūtáḥ). I suggest that in this hymn, so focused on the mental and verbal products of the poets, the object that “those of insightful though” (manīṣínaḥ) are directing is some variety of thought or hymn. Just trolling through the previous vss. provides a number of candidates: víp- ‘inspired word’ (1d), dhī́- ‘insightful thought’ (2c), gā́thā- ‘song’ (4a), dhītí- ‘insightful thought’ (4c), and manīṣā́- ‘inspired thought’ (extracted from manīṣín- in our 5d). Although none of these is masc. to match dūtá-, the genders of simile and frame do not have to agree (note fem.

gír- in V.43.8, vā́c- in IV.33.1, both cited above).

Finally, what about the purpose dat. pūrvácittaye? This form, occurring 8x, only in the dat., in all of its occurrences can mean “for X to be first in (s.o.’s) thoughts.” See comm. ad I.112.1. In two of its occurrences (VIII.3.9, 6.9) it is a formulation (bráhma) that we want to be first in Indra’s thought: e.g., VIII.3.9 tát tvā yāmi suvī́ryam, tád bráhma pūrvácittaye “I beg you for a mass of good heroes and for the sacred formulation to be first in your thought.” I suggest that this is the exact configuration we have here, if we supply a verbal product as the obj. of ā́śāsate, as the parallel to dūtám in the simile, and as the subject of the infinitival pūrvácittaye. A supplied “hymn / thought / formulation” works well with all three of these nested elements and yields sense: “Those of insightful thought direct (a thought/formulation) like a messenger to be first in his thought.” I would now substitute this tr.

