+++
title = "17"

+++
This vs. seems to continue the poet’s direct speech to Pūṣan, and if it is meant to be a secret, it will remain so: as noted in the publ. intro. the vs. is close to unintelligible. My interpr. differs markedly from those of others (or rather, from that of others: Re and Klein [DGRV I.289] basically follow Ge; Old, however, differs from them in cd, suggesting several other alternatives, none of which he stands behind).

The first pāda is deceptively straightforward, at least syntactically. It is a prohibition against uprooting a particular kind of tree. The tree name, however, is a hapax, with un-Ārya phonology (kākambī́ra- with plain b), and why this tree should be left in the ground is unsaid. As for the word, it’s possible that it’s a partial scrambling of Pūṣan’s epithet karambhā́d- ‘gruel-eater’ (VI.56.1), but even if so, it doesn’t get us anywhere.

The next pāda shows some word-order disturbances that cause me to interpret it differently from the standard and in fact to make a small emendation to the text.

The text as transmitted reads áśastīr ví hí nī́naśaḥ, with, apparently, a preverb in tmesis in 2nd position (ví) and the particle hí in 3rd position. Both of these would be quite unusual, though it must be admitted that in this kind of informal speech we might expect deviations from normal order. The hí also suggests that the pāda offers the causal grounds for either the preceding clause or the following one. Ge and Re choose the former option, but I don’t see how pāda a follows from pāda b as rendered by them, at least given our ignorance of significance of the Kākambīra tree. To address the word-order problems I suggest that instead of ví hí we read *vihí, the 2nd sg. impv. to √vī ‘pursue’. (An asterisk should be inserted in the publ. tr. before ‘pursue’.) Although this impv. is more often vīhí with long root vowel (as in nearby VI.50.2), there are several exx. with short root vowel (e.g., III.21.5, where the short vowel is metrically favored and perhaps guaranteed). Given the obscurity of this vs., it would not be surprising if the puzzled redactors split the syllables and endowed ví with an accent as if it were a preverb. If my reading is accepted, we have either a sort of serial verb construction: “come on (and) destroy,” or simply a chronological series: “pursue and destroy.” The latter is reflected in the publ. tr. By my interpr. the redupl. aor. nī́naśaḥ is accented because it starts a new clause. Unfortunately I cannot explain why we have a redupl. aor. injunc. rather than a caus. impv. (*nāśaya) following the 1st impv.

My interpr. of the 2nd hemistich diverges from the standard even more, taking Klein’s tr. (DGRV I.289) to stand also for Ge’s and Re’s: “And may the sun not (shine) for even a day for the one who grasps the neck of the bird.” We all agree that mótá stands for mā́+ utá, with utá conjoining the two prohibitive particles in a and c.

Beyond this, anyone confronting this hemistich must deal with several textual problems: 1) the meter of c is disturbed; in fact Old calls it “hoffnungslos”; 2) it is difficult to decide what underlies the transmitted sequence áha evā́; the Pp. takes áha as áhar, but, needless to say, this sandhi would be unusual; 3) evā́with long final is almost always pāda- or clause-initial, as opposed to generally 2nd-position evá (see Lub s.vv.). In fact, in Minkowski’s detailed treatment of the two forms (JAOS 115.3 [1995]: 388-400) this particular passage is “the only one possible counterexample” (p. 391) to this rule of placement. (With Old, Minkowski floats the possibility that two syllables are missing after áha, producing an 8-syll. pāda, with evā́caná then pāda-initial in a 12-syl. one. Since it is impossible to know what those missing 2 syllables might have been and since, all things being equal, we’d prefer a Satobṛhatī vs. [see publ. intro.], which would have 12 8, not 8 12, as its 2nd half, I will deal with the text we have.) In addition to these formal problems, there are a few crucial lexical ambiguities: 1) sū́raḥ can be nom. sg. of the thematic stem sū́ra- or gen./abl.

sg. of the athem. stem svàr-; 2) as noted above, the underlying form of áha is unclear: does it belong somehow to the ‘day’ word (áhar, áhan-) or is it the asserverative particle áha? 3) véḥ, which should be read as a disyllable, can be a case forms of the ‘bird’ word (ví-), either nom. or gen./abl. sg., or a verb form to √vī ‘pursue’. The standard interpr. presented above chooses the first of each of those lexical alternatives; in all instances I choose the 2nd.

The standard tr., with ‘sun’ as subject, supplies ‘shine’ as the verb; no justification is given by anyone who so interprets it (as far as I’ve been able to find).

My interpr. attempts to find some clues in context. There are a few; whether they are false trails or not I cannot be certain. The first is the verb of pāda a, which is presented as parallel to pāda c by the mā́… móta construction. The verb is úd √vṛh ‘tear up’. Various forms of √vṛh are found in the often puzzling “wheel of the sun” myth, describing the ripping off of this wheel. Cf. I.130.9 sū́raś cakrám prá vr̥hat …; I.174.5 prá sū́raś cakrám vrhat ̥ ād abhī́ke [=IV.16.2]; V.29.10 prā́nyác cakrám avr̥haḥ sū́ryasya. In two of these three passages the gen. sg. of ‘sun’ is sū́raḥ. Although this is slender evidence, it is, at least, evidence (as opposed to the random fantasy of the standard tr.), and I therefore borrow the verb √vṛh from pāda a and supply ‘wheel’ as its obj., with a dependent gen. sū́raḥ. This is supported by a nearby passage in a Pūṣan hymn, VI.56.3 utā́dáḥ paruṣé gávi, sū́raś cakráṃ hiraṇyáyam / ny aìrayad rathī́tamaḥ “And yonder golden wheel of the Sun he set down in the ‘gray cow’ -- he the best charioteer.” (This is the same hymn that contains the form ādíśe disc. above ad vs. 14.) It is not at all clear what story that passage is telling, but we can see that Pūṣan, who is our addressee here, changes the placement of a detached “wheel of the sun,” with the sun-genitive sū́raḥ as here. The detachment might results from tearing the wheel off the chariot of the sun. This chain of reasoning accounts for my tr. of the first part of pāda c: “And certainly don't (tear off the wheel) of the sun.” I am taking áha as the particle, not a form of ‘day’ (though ‘day’ could be worked into that tr.).

Of course this interpr. does not solve the sandhi problem: we should expect áhaivā́.

But if a new clause begins with evā́, as I think it does, the unusual sandhi break would be more understandable.

Starting a new clause solves the problem of non-initial evā́noted above. But what is the content of the clause? Like the standard tr., I take ādádhate as a dat. sg.

pres. act. participle, with grīvā́ḥ ‘necks’ as object. However, I do not think this refers to the neck(s) of a/the bird. Instead, as noted above, I take véḥ as a verb form to √vī; given my emendation in pāda b to *vihí, véḥ to the same root would follow naturally (or as naturally as we’re going to get in this vs.). Given its disyllabic reading, I take it as standing for *váyas, the 2nd sg. subjunctive to the root present. I’m assuming that Pūṣan wants to give chase to (or at least follow) whoever does whatever he’s doing to the necks, and if he (Pūṣan) tears off the wheel of the sun, he won’t be able to. As for grīvā́ḥ √dhā, I conjecture that this describes one action in the harnessing of horses to the chariot. Note √dhā in VII.34.4 ā́dhūrṣú asmai dádhātā́śvān “Put the horses to the chariot poles for him,” and recall that the horse Dadhikrā is “bound at the neck” (grīvā́yām baddháḥ) in IV.40.4. But the “place necks” phrase is open to multiple possibilities, none of which imposes itself.

There are a couple of grammatical loose ends in this extremely loosely constructed interpr.: 1) dative complements are rare to √vī, 2) véḥ is accented, though there’s no obvious trigger for the accent. It may be that it borrowed the accent from my putative *vihí, or that the implied causal dependency of the evā́clause (thus my “for thus never …”) induced it. Or that the redactors had no idea what this meant (a mental confusion we share) and took it as a form of ‘bird’.

To lay out my reasoning in detail is, I realize, not necessarily to convince -- but at least there is reasoning every step of the way. I challenge other interpr. to provide the same!



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/048/14-19.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>