+++
title = "22"

+++
The first half of this vs. is straightforward: both Heaven and Earth were born only once. The same “only once” (sakṛ́t) appears in pāda c as well, but with the mention of Pṛśni things get complicated, esp. when pāda d is taken into account. The hemistich reads pṛ́śnyā dugdháṃ sakṛ́t páyas, tád anyó nā́nu jāyate. Pāda c is unproblematically “only once was the milk of Pr̥śni milked.” Ge takes the milk here to be, symbolically, the Maruts; the point of the pāda is that Pṛśni “ward nur einmal Mutter.” (In this I think he is correct.) His d is “Nach dem wird kein anderer geboren” (sim. Re “(nul) autre ne naît à la suite de (tout) cela”), both with an indefinite reading of anyáḥ as ‘(no) other’; the publ. tr. also has an indefinite reading, but limited to the Maruts -- that is, the Maruts were born all at once and no other Maruts followed: “Another (of the Maruts) is not born after this.” But all of these interpr., however easily they go down, should be wrong. As I have demonstrated at length (“Vedic anyá- 'another, the other': syntactic disambiguation,” Fs. Beekes, 1997, pp. 11-18), indefinite and definite readings of anyá- are distinguished positionally: 2nd position anyá-, as here, is definite. (For a clear ex. see in the next hymn VI.49.3b with an anyá- … anyá- “the one … the other” construction.) Our pāda d should mean “the other is not born after this.” This passage needs to be considered in conjunction with VI.66.1 márteṣv anyád doháse pīpā́ya, sakṛ́c chukráṃ dudhe pṛ́śnir ū́dhaḥ, whose 2nd pāda is very close to our pāda c. VI.66.1 has an implicit anyá- … anyá- construction: the anyád in the 1st pāda refers to Pṛśni’s udder and is contrasted with the ū́dhaḥ in the 2nd pāda, which invites a reading with a second *anyád. The publ. tr. renders this “while the one stays swollen to give milk to mortals, only once did Pr̥śni milk the gleaming (milk/semen) from (the other) udder.” 66.1 is only limited help, however. Although its 2nd pāda is, as just noted, semantically and formulaically very comparable to our first, and its first pāda contains a form of anyá- as our 2nd one does, there are several important discrepancies: the anyá- in VI.66.1 is neut. and therefore pairs easily with the ū́dhaḥ of the following pāda, but our passage contains a masc. anyáḥ which cannot be directly referred to the (neut.) milked páyaḥ of the preceding passage nor to Pṛśni’s (neut.) udder, which must be lurking in the passage too. Moreover, though the sakṛ́t pādas of our vs. (abc) refer to a discrete event in the past, the verb of d, the anyápāda, is present (ánu jāyate).

I can see two ways of handling this problematic pāda, an easy one and a hard one. In the easy one I ignore my own rule about anyá- placement and take anyáḥ as indefinite, with a tr. similar to Ge/Re: “no other is born following this” / “another is not born following this.” The publ. tr. “Another (of the Maruts) is not born after this” was adapted from von Bradke (Fs. Roth 118) and was an attempt to limit the scope of indefinite ‘other’ to “other Maruts” and therefore wring a semi-definite sense out of it. But that’s a cop-out: it’s still indefinite, and the more general rendering of Ge/Re may be more satisfactory if we are going the indefinite route.

Although this is the easier alternative, I am not at all sure it’s the wrong one -- though I’m reluctant to toss out the anyá- rule without a struggle. The harder way makes reference to yet another desperate Pṛśni udder passage, this one II.34.2: rudró yád vo marutaḥ …, vṛ́ṣā́jani pṛ́śnyāḥ śukrá ū́dhani “when Rudra was begotten for you as the blazing bullish (semen = rain?) in the udder of Pr̥śni, o Maruts.” For the difficulties of this passage and my interpr. of it, see comm. ad loc. The passage refers, in my view, to the birth (or a birth) of the Maruts’ father Rudra, which “birth” then led to the birth of the Maruts. Acdg. to this passage, Rudra took shape (“was born”) as “bullish semen” in Pṛśni’s udder. As I say in my comm. ad loc., “It is this semen that combines with Pṛśni to produce the Maruts; it can also, in naturalistic terms, be the rain in the thunderclouds that are Pṛśni’s udder. This gender mingling and loss of distinction between the Maruts’ bull-father (=Rudra) and their mother Pṛśni in the udder are also found, in somewhat different fashion, in IV.3.10d vṛ́ṣā śukráṃ duduhe pṛ́ṣnir ū́dhaḥ ‘the bull as Pr̥śni milked gleaming (milk/semen) from his (/her) udder’ and in VI.66.1d sakṛ́c chukráṃ duduhe pṛ́ṣnir ū́dhaḥ ‘only once did Prś̥ ni milk the gleaming (milk/semen) from the udder.’” I now think it possible (though only that) that the masc. anyá- of our passage refers to Rudra (and/or his semen); in that case the referent is definite (as my rule requires), and the pāda means “The other [=Rudra] is not born after this,” in other words, the normal order of nature prevails: the father/semen was born in Pṛśni’s udder before the sons, the Maruts, who resulted from the mingling of those essences and who were “milked out” of that udder -- a bit of an anticlimax, to be sure: we wouldn’t in fact expect Rudra’s birth to follow his sons’. I am not sure that this is the correct way to interpret the passage, but it does conform to the known syntactic rules and also has suggestive connections with other troubling passages involving the same features: Rudra, his semen, Pṛśni, her udder, her milk, and the Maruts.