+++
title = "03"

+++
With Ge I take the first hemistich as Viṣṇu’s quoted speech. This, however, does not solve the puzzle posed by hí bhūtám. Is bhūtám an impv., as Ge takes it -- or an injunctive, with Re? If an imperative, how does it square with hí? This particle is not rare with imperatives, but it always seems somewhat problematic. Often it appears with the first impv. in a series, and the hí clause can command the action on which all subsequent actions depend, with the following impvs. often introduced by áthā -- see comm. ad I.10.3, 14.12, etc. -- but here there is no following imperative.

In the publ. tr. I manage a syntactic sleight-of-hand, reading bhūtám twice, once as an injunctive in a causal hí clause, to be construed with the two adj. in pāda a, írāvatī dhenumátī, and once as an impv. in a main cl., to be construed with the adj. in b, sūyavasínī (schematically “because you are X Y, become Z”). Although this works, it seems somewhat artificial and requires separating the three apparently parallel adjectives into two clauses. This interpr. was based in part on I.93.7, which contains 128 a clause ADJ ADJ hí bhūtám followed by an áthā cl. with an impv. to a different verb.

In the publ. tr. of I.93.7 I take bhūtám as an injunc (with Ge, Re). “Since you are X Y …, therefore …” But in the comm. I cast doubt on that interpr. and prefer an impv.

interpr. “Become X Y, then …” Therefore, I.93.7 is not necessarily a support for my publ. interpr. here; I still weakly prefer it because of the absence of a following impv., but now consider the alternative possible: “Become full of refreshment, rich in milkcows, affording good pasture …” The following impv. may be missing because Viṣṇu’s direct speech is truncated. (Despite their distance in the text, comparing I.93.7 to our passage is justified by the fact that the first pāda in the very next vs. in our hymn, 4a, is identical to I.93.6d, adjacent to the vs. under comparison.)

