+++
title = "+001"

+++
1 (517)
Agni
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
25 verses: virāj 1–18, triṣṭubh 19–25
This hymn contains a double ending. The first is at verse 20, which concludes with  the signature pāda of the Vasiṣṭhas in 20d and which is marked by a shift to triṣṭubh  meter in verses 19–20. The hymn continues in triṣṭubh to verse 25, which repeats  verse 20. Oldenberg suggests that there is a deliberate attempt to make this hymn  parallel to VII.34, the first of the hymns to All Gods, which also has twenty-five  verses. The two parts of the hymn, verses 1–20 and 21–25, are thematically similar  since both are concerned with the life and lineage of the householder, although the  second part places particular emphasis on Agni as the sacrificial fire and the bless ings that he can bring.
The hymn describes the kindling of Agni in the house so that the household  fire will guard its prosperity and help it flourish. Agni will be the leader of the  household (vs. 3) and the fire of the sacrifice (vs. 16). In particular, the householder  desires sons and other males in his extended family, who will bring prosperity to  the home and guarantee the householder’s continued lineage. These are the vīrā́ḥ
“men, heroes” (vss. 5, 11, 15, 19, 24), an abundance of whom the poet desires and the  lack of whom he fears (19). The poet also mentions the náraḥ “men” or “fine men”  (vss. 1, 4, 9, 10, 11), who in the first three of these verses are described as ritually  serving Agni. That function is typical of náraḥ, who elsewhere in the R̥gveda are often  priests. Here the vīrā́ḥ and náraḥ do not appear to be different people, however,  since they are described in similar terms. So the náraḥ in 4c and the vīrā́ḥ in 15c are both “well born,” and the poet asks that the householder never suffer from the lack  of either (11a and 19a).
The poet repeats the word nítya in reference to Agni as “our own” or “their own”  (vss. 2, 12) and to “his own” offerings (vs. 17) and “our own” lineage (vs. 21). He  also repeats svá, which has a similar sense, with reference to “our own” devotion (vs.  6) and the householder’s “own” kin (vs. 12). Through their repetition and meaning,  the two words form a nexus between Agni and the householder, which connects  the kindling and tending of the fire to the longevity of the householder’s family.  Likewise in verse 17, as Geldner notes, the circumambulation of the Hotar with  the fire around the fire-place is described as the procession of a bride and groom  around the fire at a wedding. The imagery of the wedding affirms that Agni is now  a member of the family of the householder.
More generally, the poet creates a close connection between Agni and  humans by allowing either one to be the subject of verse 23cd and either one  to be the object. That is, either the god Agni allows the priest to obtain goods  from the gods and the patronage of a sacrificer, or the priest makes it possible  for Agni to obtain goods for mortals and to become accessible to the patrons  of the sacrifice.