+++
title = "01"

+++
It is necessary to supply a verb for ab; Ge “Traget” but I supply “chant” on the basis of the beginning of the second tṛca, 4ab abhí prá … arca, and the insistent repetition in vs. 8: árcata prā́rcata, … árcata# / árcantu … arcata#. Pāda a is essentially identical to VIII.7.1a prá yád vas triṣṭúbham íṣam, where the verb governing the acc. is ákṣarat ‘has let flow’ (pāda b), which is not possible here. The “Triṣṭubh refreshment” is obviously the praise hymn; interestingly neither this passage nor VIII.7 is in Triṣṭubh meter.

The second hemistich is somewhat obscure, in part because, as Ge points out, it is not clear who the subject is. Perhaps the “Triṣṭubh refreshment” (that is, the praise), or the drop (that is, the soma) to which it is chanted, or the poet. (I favor the praise hymn.) The pair dhī́- and púraṃdhī- appears elsewhere together (VIII.92.15, X.65.13-14). Ge takes them here as names of the goddesses of religious poetry and of the dakṣinā respectively. In VIII.92.15 I take them as qualities that Indra confers on us, but here at least the dhī́- is probably that of the poet(s). Perhaps they are a reciprocal, rather than parallel, pair: we receive plenty in exchange for insight (as in V.41.6). The interpretation is further complicated by the fact that ā́vivāsaeverywhere else takes an accusative, often in conjunction with an instr. of means: “seek to attract X with Y” (e.g., VIII.15.1 índraṃ gīrbhís taviṣám ā́vivāsata), but there is no accusative immediately available. (Though vaḥ could technically be an accusative, that interpretation seems unlikely here.) However, this is of course an Indra hymn, and in thinking about this verse again, I have concluded that Indra should be supplied here as the default object, and therefore for the publ. tr. I would substitute “With your visionary thought and with plenitude it [=hymn] is seeking to entice (Indra) here, in order to gain wisdom.” Cf. VIII.3.18 imé hí te kārávo vāvaśúr dhiyā́, víprāso medhásātaye “For these bards, inspired poets, have bellowed for you [=Indra] for the winning of wisdom with their insight,” with both dhiyā́and medhásātaye in a similar context, where poets seek Indra.

