+++
title = "02"

+++
Another verse with unclear reference: neither the 2nd singular subject of iṣudhyasi nor the bull and cows are clearly identified, and it is complicated by the fact that there are also two occurrences of 2nd plural vaḥ in the verse. I take the subject to be the same as that of ā́vivāsati in 1d, namely the praise hymn, with the common switch of persons. That the praise hymn is in reality inanimate is not in RVic discourse an obstacle to addressing it. The 2nd pl. vaḥ is then the same group of poets / ritual officiants as in 1a and 1c. As for the bull (nadá-, a and b) and the páti- (c), I agree with Ge (n. 2) that it can be either Indra or soma. In the latter case, the referent is then the same as the índu- ‘drop’ that was the target of the hymn in 1ab; in the latter, the same as the unexpressed object of ā́vivāsati in 1cd. The cows are easier to account for if soma is the referent: they would then be the mixing milk as so often. If the bull is Indra, the cows may be the cows he brings us as largesse or praise hymns conceived of as cows (many words for hymn are feminine), and the sexual tinge of ab would be a nod to Indra’s hypersexuality. Probably both referents are meant.

On iṣudhyasi see comm. ad I.128.6 and my forthcoming article “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.” Since I analyze

*iṣudh- as a root noun cmpd ‘aim an arrow’, a metaphor for aiming praise towards a
divine target, the nadám … pátim must refer to the god receiving praise. Indra or Soma are both possible, of course.

