+++
title = "Praśna I, Paṭala 8, Khaṇḍa 23"

+++
## 01
1. That Brāhmaṇa, who is wise and recognises all creatures to be in the Ātman, who pondering (thereon) does not become bewildered, and who recognises the Ātman in every (created) thing, shines, indeed, in heaven.

## 02
2. He, who is intelligence itself and subtler than the thread of the lotus-fibre, pervades the universe, and who, unchangeable and larger than the earth, contains the universe; he, who is different from the knowledge of this world, obtained by the senses and identical with its objects, possesses the highest (form consisting of absolute knowledge). From him, who divides himself, spring all (created) bodies. He is the primary cause, he is eternal, he is unchangeable. [^1] 

## 03
3. But the eradication of the faults is brought about in this life by the means (called Yoga). A wise man who has eradicated the (faults) which destroy the creatures, obtains salvation.

## 04
4. Now we will enumerate the faults which tend to destroy the creatures.

## 05
5. (These are) anger, exultation, grumbling, covetousness, perplexity, doing injury, hypocrisy, lying, gluttony, calumny, envy, lust, secret hatred, neglect to keep the senses in subjection, neglect to concentrate the mind. The eradication of these (faults) takes place through the means of (salvation called) Yoga.

## 06
6. Freedom from anger, from exultation, from grumbling, from covetousness, from perplexity, from hypocrisy (and) hurtfulness; truthfulness, moderation in eating, silencing a slander, freedom from envy, self-denying liberality, avoiding to accept gifts, uprightness, affability, extinction of the passions, subjection of the senses, peace with all created beings, concentration (of the mind on the contemplation of the Ātman), regulation of one's conduct according to that of the Āryas, peacefulness and contentedness;--these (good qualities) have been settled by the agreement (of the wise) for all (the four) orders; he who, according to the precepts of the sacred law, practises these, enters the universal soul.



[^1]:  23. This Sūtra again contains a description of the Paramātman. The translation strictly follows the commentary, though the explanation, given in the latter, is open to objections.