+++
title = "002"

+++
Vāyu, etc. (Praügaśastra)

The recipients of the various tṛcas making up these two rather simple hymns are clearly signalled. All three verses making up the first tṛca to Vāyu (vss. 1-3) open with a voc. vāyo; the second tṛca (to Indra and Vāyu, vss. 4-6) opens with the voc. índravāyū, while the next two begin with the famous “Vāyav Indraś ca” construction (on which see Jamison 1988). The pattern is varied in the Mitra and Varuṇa tṛca (7- 9), with the conjoined accusatives mitrám and váruṇaṃ ca opening the first and second pādas of vs. 7, and the dual dvandva mitrā́váruṇā(v) in second position in the next two verses, first as a vocative, then as a nominative.

There appears to be some attempt to create bridges between the tṛcas: verses 3 and 4 both sketch a reversal of the usual ritual model; vss. 6 and 7 both concern our ‘insight’ (dhī́).


## 02
Ge. suggests that jarante here can be ambiguous, belonging not only to ‘sing’, but also to ‘awaken’, with identical present stem. This is possible, but only with an intransitive sense of ‘awaken’: “the singers awaken / wake up to you,” since the ‘awaken’ present is only intrans. (see Gotō 1987: 150). In any case surely the primary sense is ‘sing’, given the the etymological figure produced by its grammatical subj. jaritā́raḥ ‘singers’.


## 03
The difficult words dhénā and prapṛñcatī́complicate the interpretation of this verse. The former, investigated in detail by H.-P. Schmidt (Gd. Nyberg), is now generally interpreted as ‘(milk)stream’, rendering Geldner’s ‘lip’ and Renou’s ‘tongue’ out of date. As for prapṛñcatī́, the simplex pṛñcatī́appears in another Praügaśastra hymn (I.23.16), modifying waters and referring to the mixing of milk (acc.) with honey (instr.). Given the similarity of context, a direct object referring to a liquid should be supplied.

What is also puzzling here is in what way the ‘stream’ is Vāyu’s: it should not originate with him, but rather be destined for him, but then why is the ‘pious man’ apparently receiving the benefit of it? As in the next verse, there seems to be a bit of role reversal here, with the gods depicted as providing the ritual benefits rather than receiving them. Presumably the point is that the pious man gets the benefit secondarily, by having pleased the god, but the dative dāśúṣe is striking, esp. as it is apparently parallel grammatically (though it cannot be functionally) to the dat. sómapītaye ending the verse. Although the verse presumably depicts the sacrificer’s offering of soma to Vāyu to drink, the lexicon and the case usage complicate the message.


## 04
As noted in the comment on the last verse, the ritual model here is shaken up a bit: Indra and Vāyu are urged to come with práyobhiḥ, a word generally used of ‘pleasurable offerings’ that are presented to the gods and to which they come (cf.

VIII.60.4 abhí práyāṃsi ... gahi). Our translation “with delight,” agreeing with most other translators, avoids, and conceals, the problem. The gods should not be bringing práyāṃsi. The little disturbance of the ritual model is confined to these two verses in this hymn.

The pāda-final position of hí here is unusual, and I have no explanation for it, esp. as it does not take second position in its clause as is usual.

I.2.7-9: As mentioned in the intro., this tṛca contains the trio dhī́‘insight’ (vs. 7), krátu- ‘intention’ (vs. 8), and dákṣa- ‘skill’ (vs. 9), the three elements necessary to conceive and carry out an action. Their interconnection is emphasized by the fact that all three are in the accusative and each is stationed initial in the last pāda of its verse.

The juxtaposition across vss. 8-9 of krátum (beginning 8c) and kavī́ (beginning 9a) may also be meant to evoke the well-established compound kavíkratu- ‘having the will/resolve of a poet’, ‘having a poet’s purpose’, an occurrence of which is found in the preceding hymn by the same poet (I.1.5).


## 07
Here and everywhere else it is found, the word riśā́das-, an epithet of various gods, is opaque. There are currently two competing and entirely different interpretations: that of Karl Hoffmann (Aufs. 564 n. 16) as ‘discriminating, fastidious’ (< ‘picking at food’) and Paul Thieme’s ‘caring for the stranger’ (Fremdling). See EWA s.v. The contexts are not diagnostic, and it is probably the case that the epithet was no longer understood even as it was being deployed (note that it is almost always pāda-final, possibly a sign of formulaic freezing).

Throughout our translation we have followed the Thieme interpretation, but not with any great conviction. One thing in favor of the Thieme interpretation is that the word is regularly applied to one or more of the Ādityas (as here), who might be expected to show care for humans in their charge. That it is also regularly used of the less ethically inclined Maruts might give us pause (though these contexts are generally benevolent ones) - except that ‘fastidious’ is even less a likely quality of the Maruts than ‘caring for the stranger’.


## 08
The unaccented voc. ṛtāvṛdhāv opening the 2nd pāda has been thus transmitted, though we would expect *ṛ́tāvṛdhāv. In fact there is a striking string of 13 unaccented syllables in this hemistich, starting after the first word of the vs., ṛténa (14, counting -na). See Old, who has no good explanation for the lack of accent on the first word of the 2nd pāda, though he considers it an old error. It cannot be simply a peculiarity of this hymn, because I.3.1b (forming part of the Praügaśastra sequence with I.2, as discussed in the publ. intro.) opens with an initially accented voc. drávatpāṇī (to the stem dravátpāṇi-).
