+++
title = "003"

+++
(Praügaśastra continued) As in I.2 the recipients of the various tṛcas are emphatically signalled. In vss.

1-3 to the Aśvins, the voc. áśvinā opens the first two verses, while their alternative name nāsatyā opens the second pāda of the third. The voc. índra opens all three verses of the next tṛca (4-6). The Viśvedevāḥ tṛca contains three instances of that phrase: the voc. in 7b, nominatives opening vss. 8 and 9. The final tṛca to Sarasvatī likewise contains three occurrences of her name in the nominative, but all three end their pādas (10a, 11c, 12a).


## 02
śávīra- rendered as ‘powerful’ in the publ. tr. But see disc. below ad I.30.17.

dhíṣṇya- and related forms are obscure and much discussed; indeed Ge.

refuses to translate the word. We generally follow the view of Pinault (UTexas Vedic Workshop), who takes it to mean ‘related to / proper to the holy place’, thence simply ‘holy’.


## 03
In the compound rudra-vartanī, number is of course neutralized in the first member. The Maruts are regularly called Rudras (without vṛddhi or derivational suffix) after their father. The ‘course of the Rudra/Maruts’ is simply a reference to the midspace (antarikṣa) much frequented by the Maruts, where the Aśvins are now driving.


## 05
The peculiarly formed stem vāghát- clearly refers to a ritual officient of some sort, but in the absence of both a set of diagnostic contexts and a convincing etymology, it is hard to narrow his function down. Because his voice (vā́ṇi-) figures in a simile (I.88.6 vāgháto ná vā́ṇiḥ); because he is associated with verbal products, like the bráhmāṇi here; because Vāghats are the agents at vying sacrificial invocations (e.g., I.36.13 vāghádbhir vihváyāmahe; cf. III.8.10, VIII.5.16); and because they are associated with the Aṅgirases, the singers in the Vala myth (X.62.7), we chose to render the term by ‘cantor’, though this is only a guess - esp. since in most of the occurrences the ritual role and priestly activity are pretty generic. The word is also twice applied to the Ṛbhus (I.110.4, III.60.4).


## 07
On the voc. of víśva- see comm. ad X.15.6.


## 08
A small grammatical mismatch here: the phrase viśve devā́saḥ and the adjectives modifying it (aptúraḥ, tū́rṇayaḥ) are nominatives and should not be the subject of the imperative ā́ganta. Ge. (and WG) ignore the problem by translating the nom. as voc. (“Ihr Allgötter”). Although the effect is minor, my translation reflects the grammatical disjunction by rendering pāda b as an interjection.

Another question is why 7b contains the same 2nd pl. imperative, except with a different grade of the root: ā́gata vs. ā́ganta. Both forms are reasonably well attested, with 7b a repeated pāda (=II.41.13a, VI.52.7a). Whatever the history of the distinction, the synchronic distribution seems to be metrical, with ā́gata almost always final, providing an iambic cadence in dimeter verse, and ā́ganta found earlier in the verse.

In b tū́rṇayaḥ was carelessly omitted from the tr., which should read “Come here swiftly…”

## 09
I follow the analysis of the hapax éhimāyāsaḥ as a frozen 2nd sg. imperative phrase, “éhi mā́+yāḥ” (“come! don’t go”), transformed into an adjective in the nom. pl. masc. - an analysis that goes back at least to Sāyaṇa. Ge also follows this analysis, though it is somewhat difficult to excavate from his “willkommen und ungern fortgelassen.” I interpret it as representing the words of the singers’ invitation regularly heard by the VDs. The other currently competing explanations, as a frozen phrase “éhi māyā” [better voc. māye?] “come here, magic” (Old) or as a deformation of áhi-māya- ‘vielgestaltig’ (Gr) [=‘snake-sly’ (J+B)] (BR, followed by Gr), fit less well into the content of the hymn, which after all focuses on calling the various gods to the ritual; note the ā́gata, ā́ganta of vss. 7-8 addressed to the same VDs. Support for this analysis may also come from the next hymn (I.4), attributed to the same poet, in which successive vss. (3c, 4a) contain the imperatives ā́gahi ‘come here’ and párehi ‘go away’, with at least the former addressed to the god Indra.

I.3.11-12: Note the contrastive values of the simplex pres. cétantī ‘perceiving, taking note’ and the -áya-pres. (prá) cetayati ‘makes perceived, reveals’ in successive vss.
