+++
title = "006"

+++
Indra and the Maruts (per Anukr.) As noted in the intro. the Anukramaṇī’s identification of the divinities as Indra (1-3, 10), Maruts (4, 6, 8-9), and Indra and Maruts (5, 7) does not conform to the content of the hymn, which is quite disjointed, but appears to concern, at least in part, the Vala myth. The Maruts do not seem to figure at all in the hymn; the plural entities with Indra are probably the Aṅgirases. For my view of the structure (which is informed by the discussions of Ge and Old), see publ. intro.

I.6.1-2: These verses begin identically (yuñjánti ‘they yoke’), inviting the audience to equate the action of the two verses.

1b: The referent of the apparent acc. plural tasthúṣaḥ ‘(those) standing still’ is not given. Ge. (/WG) thinks it refers to stable things on the earth, but if the sun is referred to in the first pāda, it is more likely to “move around” celestial features than earthly ones, and the stars or other luminous heavenly bodies are referred to in the next pāda. Re’s interpretation (flg. Ludwig) of tasthúṣaḥ as an abl. sg. (“from the one standing still” - “à partir de (l’espace) immobile”) is ingenious and would match the minor syntactic idiom ‘yoke from ABL’ (e.g., I.115.4 yadéd áyukta harítaḥ sadhásthāt), so it cannot be dismissed. The ablatives in the final verses (9-10) might lend weak support for Re’s view.

2b: The hapax compound vípakṣasā is difficult and has been variously interpreted. The second member, pákṣas- (and related and more common pakṣá-), can mean either ‘wing’ or ‘side’; the first member, ví-, is most likely the preverb ví, but in compounds this element has a number of possible meanings: ‘without’, distant’, ‘wide’,‘alternating/opposite/different’, ‘dispersed’. It could also possibly represent ví- ‘bird’, which has been claimed as the first member of some other compounds (see EWA s.v. váy-, KEWA III.266). The possible combinations of these two ambiguous elements allow for a number of interpretations. I more or less follow the Sāy/Gr interpretation, ‘auf beiden Seiten des Wagens gehend’, though I take it as an adverbial instrumental, not a dual. (The presence of a number of duals in -ā in the verse does not favor an adverbial interpretation, however.) Re’s “aux ailes d’oiseau” obviously takes the first member as the ‘bird’ word, while WG “die mit weiten Flügeln” takes ví as the preverb, but with the second member meaning ‘wing’ as in Re’s interpretation. Ge’s ‘auseinanderstrebenden(?)’ treats the second member quite loosely.


## 03
The baffling part of this verse is the voc. plural maryāḥ ‘o young men’ in b, embedded in a verse that otherwise has 2nd singular reference (ajāyathāḥ c, along with sg. ptcpl. kṛṇván in a). There is no clear referent for this voc., though it may refer to the unidentified plural subjects of the verbs in vss. 1-2 (yuñjánti) and 4 (eriré). In the plural márya- is often used of the Maruts, which may account for the Anukramaṇī identification of them as divinities of the hymn. Though Ge suggests they may constitute the audience for the singer and Re that they are the singers themselves, this seems unlikely because when márya- has an identifiable referent, it is never a human. I tentatively assume that it refers to the Aṅgirases as the firepriests who first kindled Agni, the subject of the verse.

As for the subject of ajāyathāḥ, contrary to most interpretations I take this as primarily referring to Agni, not the sun, though perhaps, with Re, “Agni solaire.”


## 04
Grammatically problematic is the accent on the verb eriré in b, a fact that seems to have been elided in most translations, including mine. Old suggests that the particle áha may have conditioned the accent, but this seems unlikely because áha doesn’t have this effect elsewhere. I would now alter the translation to make vs. 4 syntactically dependent on vs. 3, without an overt subordinator. Thus, “you were born together with the dawns, / (as/when) just after that they once again roused …” Again, though most commentators (save Old) consider this to concern the rebirth of the sun, I think it more likely that Agni/the ritual fire is the object, esp. as erire +/- ní is regularly used of establishing the ritual fire (e.g., I.134.4). As for c, the service to the ritual fire of the unnamed subjects (=Aṅgirases?) would account for their receiving a name worthy of the sacrifice; see, e.g., I.72.3.


## 05
As noted in the intro., this verse helps resolve the unclear referents in the earlier part of the hymn by giving a relatively clear sketch of the Vala myth, with Indra finding the cows after his companions “break the stronghold (=Vala).”


## 06
This verse contains, in my opinion, what Re might call a “legère zeugma,” in which the verb anūṣata “they bellowed” takes (as is usual) an acc. of the target of the bellowing (“to the finder of goods,” i.e., Indra) in the frame, but in the simile it takes an acc. of the content of the bellowing (“their thought”). Ge avoids this mismatch of acc. function by removing matím from the simile by supplying a form of √bhṛ ‘bear, present’, leaving devayántaḥ as the only term directly compared in the simile: “Wie Gottverlangende, die das Lied [vortragen], so haben die Lobreden … hergerufen.” It is certainly true that matí- is common as the object of √bhṛ and that √nu doesn’t normally take an acc. of content, but since the poet of the hymn has pushed the linguistic limits elsewhere, I prefer to think he meant the jarring figure. Note that there is also a mismatch between the two subjects, with the simile referring, implicitly, to human actors, while the frame has ‘songs’ (gíraḥ) as subject (unless we take the Aṅgirases or the cows as subj. and allow anūṣata to take two accusatives: “they bellowed their songs to the finder of goods” - however, √nu doesn’t take two acc., to my knowledge).

The zeugma may iconically represent the fact that the verse connects across a temporal gap as well: the simile seems to refer to present-day worshippers producing their praise, but the frame (with augmented verb form) refers to the mythic past of the Vala tale. This verse thus serves as a transition to the here-and-now of the current ritual, which is treated in vs. 7.


## 07
As noted in the intro., this verse pairs structurally with vs. 3; I therefore take Agni to be the subject, with the verse expressing the kindling of the fire at the time when Indra arrives to receive the morning offering.

The form dṛ́kṣase is isolated, but its grammatical identity is fairly clear (see Narten, Sig. Aor. p. 146): a 2nd sg. mid. s-aor. subj. with the “wrong” grade of the root (expect *darkṣase); it is probably based immediately on the other s-aor. middle form, 3rd pl. indic. adṛkṣata (5x, once accented) of the same metrical shape (minus augment), which always appears final, as does dṛ́kṣase, and usually in dimeter verse as here.

The two beings in pādas ab, one as unexpressed sg. subj. of the verb, one in the instr., are then referred to as a pair in the du. nom. of pāda c, the predicate of an unexpressed nominal sentence “you two are…”


## 08
The Aṅgirases are presumably the referents of the instr. phrases, and the verse is, like 5, a pretty clear allusion to the Vala myth.


## 09
As suggested in the intro., this is the last real verse of the hymn, as vs. 10 is a mere variant of 9, and it shows a bit of ring composition: the diváḥ … rocanā́t echoes rocanā́diví of 1c, and if we were to accept Re’s interpr. of 1b tasthúṣaḥ as an ablative, the ablatives átaḥ and rocanā́t would match it grammatically.

This is a rare example of the present middle ṛñj not taking an acc. (see Tucker 2002: 284 n.17, HS 115 “RV rgmín-, ṛgmíya- and ṛñjate”). (JL)
