+++
title = "007"

+++
Indra


## 01
anūṣata provides a link to the immediately preceding hymn, I.6.6.

## 02
Though a number of interpreters (Gr, WG, Scar) take vacoyújā as an instr. sg.

and supply ráthena ‘chariot’, this form otherwise (4x) is only du. and modifies hárī ‘the two fallow bays’. Thus, it seems better to follow the Sāy/Ge/Re interpr. As Ge points out, the untethered ā́in b allows a form of √sthā to be supplied, in the idiom ā́ √sthā ‘mount’. The verse is then slightly unusual in referring to Indra’s twin horses in two grammatical cases in the same sentence (háryoḥ loc., [hárī] vacoyújā acc.).


## 03
A more felicitous tr. of dīrghā́ya cákṣase might be “to be seen for a long time,” but “for the long view” allows the phrase to be read as referring to either time or space (“to be seen for a long distance”) or both.

The usage of the instr. góbhiḥ is somewhat strange; it is clearly not meant either as an instr. of agent/instrument or of accompaniment, at least of simple accompaniment. It might be an instr. of separation, or, as in this tr., an adjunct or accompaniment to the obj.: “the rock (which was) with cows.” ET points out to me that such a construction would be very unusual; I suggest that it could derive from an instr. of accompaniment: “the rock along with its cows.”


## 06
For the pot, see intro. The doubling of the 1st pl. pronoun (naḥ in a, asmábhyam in c) is probably simple redundancy, with naḥ a Wackernagel placeholder at the beginning of the sentence, anticipating the full pronoun that opens c. However the naḥ could possibly be construed with the voc. sátrādāvan ‘who give in every way’ in b, though it seems a bit distant from the enclitic.


## 07
Improper relative, as shown best by Re’s rendering, “Les corps-de-louange qui, poussée, (vont toujours) plus haut…” (Re’s suspension dots). The masc. nom. pl. yé … stómāḥ of ab has no matching grammatical referent in the main clause of c, though it is picked up by its semantic and etymological equivalent, fem. sg. suṣṭutí-.


## 08
Connected to vs. 6 by shared vocab., vṛ́ṣan- (a) and (the rather rare) ápratiṣkuta-, though separated by vs. 7.


## 09
Incomplete sentence, consisting only of rel. cl., completed by main cl. of 10.

The ékaḥ opening this last sentence of the hymn and the kévalaḥ ‘exclusively’ that is its last word are more insistent counterparts of íd in the opening pādas of vss. 1-2.

Once again Madhuchandas seems to be faintly signalling ring composition.
