+++
title = "008"

+++
Indra


## 02
Incomplete sentence, with relative hanging off rayím ‘wealth’ in the previous verse. Two methods of fighting are contrasted: ‘fighting (-hatyā́-) by fist’ (muṣṭi-, my ‘bare-knuckled’) and ‘on horseback’ (árvatā). Although the two terms are grammatically parallel (instrs. muṣṭi-hatyáyā and árvatā), they are not semantically, since it’s the first member of the compound, muṣṭi- that corresponds to árvatā, and ‘fighting’ must be supplied with the second term. The verse shows overt signs of late grammatical features: esp. the -ai ending of the middle subjunctive ruṇádhāmahai (rather than -e), but also the longer -ā-stem instr. -áyā (rather than -ā́), though of course the latter is fairly well distributed throughout the RV.


## 03
Concatanation of tvótāsaḥ (pāda a) with the same form in 2c, though the one in 2c requires distraction (tuvo-), but not the one in 3a. Ge/Re take ghanā́as (an archaic) instr. sg., but nom. pl. ghanā́(ḥ) seems preferable, esp. as Madhuchandas uses the same word in the sg. as a personal designation in I.4.8 (where it applies to Indra and which I tr. ‘bane’). So Old. Although designating animate beings (namely “us”) as “hammers” may seem unusual, it’s not unprecedented, at least in English: cf. the rock song entitled “Sometimes you’re the hammer and sometimes you’re the nail,” and (gleaned from Google) a quotation from an American poet unknown to me, Edwin Markham (1852-1940), “For all your days be prepared, and meet them ever alike. When you are the anvil, bear - when you are the hammer, strike.”


## 06
The whole verse is a relative clause with accented verb (yá ā́śata), with no overt antecedent available in either the preceding or the following vs. My solution follows Old, who suggests that it implicitly hangs off vs. 5: Indra’s power is (for those) who… This fits the message of the hymn, that men’s success is entirely dependent on Indra’s aid and intervention, a message that is reinforced by the interdependence of various vss. already noted (1-2 [main cl., rel. cl.], 2-3 [lexical concatenation]) and to be described below [7-10].

Though ā́śata lacks expressed obj., ‘him’ (=Indra) should be supplied, on the basis of passages like I.85.7, VIII.97.9.

In the publ. tr. I follow Gr’s deriv. of samohá- from sám √ūh ‘shove together’, but I now think that it is better analyzed as sa-mohá- to √muh ‘be confused’ (see comm. ad IV.17.13) and would slightly modify the tr. here to “in the confusion (of battle).”


## 07
Yet another untethered rel. cl. In my view, the description of Indra’s physical capacity serves as the basis for the expressions of Indra’s vast liberality and help in vss. 8-9, each of which begins with evá hí “for just in the same way.” Therefore the yáḥ ‘which’ of 7a seems a substitute for yáthā ‘even as’, the usual relative with evá.

Although I do not so translate it, 7-8 could be rendered “even as his cheek … swells …, even so is his liberality…” For kukṣí- as ‘cheek’, not ‘belly’, see Jamison 1987 (Gs. Cowgill).


## 08
The image of Indra’s generosity as “a ripe branch” is an unusual one; I do not know of a parallel. In any case, “ripe branch” must be a condensed expression for something like a branch laden with ripe fruit. (JL)


## 10
Despite sharing the evā́hí opening with vss. 8-9, this verse is not entirely parallel with those two, which express the vastness of Indra’s liberality and help. Here it is what we owe Indra, praise and recitation, that are implicitly suggested to be as vast as what he gives us. A tr. more parallel to the previous two verses would be “Just the same [that is, just as vast] are those things beloved of him, the praise-song and recitation to be proclaimed …” However, I favor the published tr., with śáṃsyā ‘to be proclaimed’ as predicate, because it provides a hortatory end to the hymn.
