+++
title = "009"

+++
Indra


## 01
somapárvan- ‘soma-joint’ could refer either to the segments of the stalk of the soma plant (e.g., Re) or to the segments of the Soma Sacrifice (e.g., WG). Ge suggests it’s a word play. It is difficult to judge, but I weakly favor the horticultural interpretation.

There is no explicit 2nd ps. in c, but the general interpretation of this pāda as referring to Indra seems correct.


## 02
For the doubling of the enclitics īm enam see Jamison 2002.


## 06
With Re I take the two acc. pl. -vant-adjectives (rábhasvataḥ … yáśasvataḥ) as proleptic, with the acquisition of these qualities being the result of Indra’s impelling of us - rather than taking them as qualities we already possess, as most translators do.


## 08
rathín- should of course mean ‘possessing chariots’ or express some looser association with a chariot or chariots (such as Re’s “carried on chariots”) but since there’s no obvious association of refreshments with chariots, an idiomatic and figurative use like Ge’s “wagenvoll” seems appropriate - hence my “by the cartload.”


## 09
In my view gṛṇánta(ḥ) is an instance of the comparatively rare (but more common than generally supposed) predicated present participle. Other translators (Ge, Re, WG) take the participle as attributive and consider the sentence incomplete.


## 10
As Thieme (Fremdling, pp. 11f.) points out, the verse sets up an implicit contrast between Indra, who is “at home” (nyòkas-) wherever soma is pressed, and the stranger - but this opposition also implicitly suggests that, despite being a stranger or foreigner, any man can offer soma and praise to Indra, who will make himself at home in those foreign parts. This contrast would be better expressed by “even the stranger chants…” rather than the published “the stranger himself chants…” The position and function of ā́(embedded in éd) in b are unclear. The verb √arc doesn’t take ā́and in any case preverbs don’t usually ended up stranded in the middle of a pāda (of course the etymological figure bṛhád bṛhaté could have been fronted around it); a mid-pāda position suggests a role as adposition, but as an adposition ā́doesn’t take a dative.
