+++
title = "010"

+++
Indra

## 01
The first three pādas almost, but not quite, provide a tripartite ritual speech division: Sāmaveda, Ṛgveda, X? Veda. The last is the problem: the “formulators” don’t work very well as speakers of Yajurveda yajuses, and it’s too early for the brāhmaṇa priest to be associated with the Atharvaveda, as in later Vedic.

Pace most translators, pf. yemire is ordinarily presential in value; see Kümmel s.v. yam.


## 02
Most translators take the subject of ab to be the sacrificer, but Indra seems a more likely candidate, esp. since kártva- ‘to be done’ is regularly used of the prospective deeds of Indra (e.g., II.30.10, IV.18.2, VIII.63.6).


## 03
On hí with the imperative marking that clause as the causal basis of the next clause, here initiated by the logical connector átha, see Brereton 2012 [Bronkhorst Fs.].


## 05
rāráṇat: pf. subj. with presential value, like the whole pf. system of this root.

See Kümmel s.v. ran and Jamison (García Ramón Fs).


## 06
The case usage here is somewhat odd, in that the three benefits we beg Indra for, in strict parallel structure, are in loc., dat., and loc. respectively (underlying forms sakhitvé … rāyé … suvī́rye). However, all end in -e — showing that surface phonetic agreement can sometimes trump case function.

The transformation of an epithet (śakrá- ‘able’) into its associated verb (śakat ‘he will be able’) is a neat little figure and demonstrates the importance of gods’ dynamically living up to their verbal attributes. (For the almost identical pāda see VIII.32.12.) It is an example of a type of verbal transformation of divine epithets into desired divine action that Elizarenkova (1968: 267-68) attempted to claim as the, or an, organizing principle of RVic hymnic composition., despite its relative rarity. Of the other standard translations, only Re (“… le puissant; qu’il exerce .. sa puissance”) captures the etymological figure.


## 07
The two compounds in pāda a, suvivṛ́taṃ sunirájam, do not occur elsewhere and are grammatically and interpretively ambiguous. The semantic reference of the two words is clear — the easy opening (ví √vṛ) of the Vala cave and the easy driving out (nir √aj) of the cows, using the standard lexemes for those actions — but 1) what are their stems? and 2) assuming they are adjectival, what do they modify? Gr/Lub analyse them as -a-stems -- also AiG II.1, though AiG II.2 takes sunirájam as belonging to an a-stem (p. 86) but suvivṛ́tam to a root noun (p. 43) [and Hauschild’s Index to AiG lists them both as root nouns, somewhat emphatically] -- while, e.g., Old and Scar take both as root nouns. There is another formal anomaly: the pāda they form, suvivṛ́taṃ sunirájam, has only one internal heavy syllable, the final syllable of the first word, where the initial consonant of the second makes position. A very unusual metrical line. Arnold (VM 125-26, 290) suggests the possibility of reading suvīvṛ́tam on the basis of the lengthening of the final vowels of the preverbs ápi, abhí, pári, etc., before forms of √vṛ. Thanks to ET for pointing this out.

As to their reference, the general approach has been to take them as modifying an unexpressed índram, supplying the whole structure of 6a (tám … īmahe “we beseech him”) or some similar verb phrase to provide a grammatically acceptable referent for the two forms in 7a. But this solution is not very satisfying: Indra appears in the 3rd ps. nominative in 6c and as 2nd ps. vocative and subject of impv. in 7bcd, so extracting an acc. from a pāda in the past seems arbitrary. Scar suggests that the two words might instead modify yáśaḥ in b, which has the merit of providing a referent close by; however, this would technically eliminate the possibility that the two are root nouns, since yáśaḥ is neut. and presumably nom., and if the two words in pāda a are root nouns, they can only be acc. sg. I am nonetheless attracted by this solution (and would therefore be open to the -a-stem interpretation), with the possible modification that the two might actually be nouns (“the easy opening …, the easy driving …”) that specify the glory (yáśaḥ) of b. I have not troubled myself to figure out how the accent and other details of the formation would work, however.

On the possible double sense of tvā́dātam in b, see publ. intro.


## 08
jéṣaḥ: The standard translation take this s-aor. subj. as a functional impv.

parallel to dhūnuhi in d, whereas I take it as having real subjunctive value. This has the merit of providing a main clause to the subordinated hí clause of ab. Moreover, the otherwise identical pāda VIII.40.10 with 3rd sg. subj. jéṣat has clear subjunctive value, and in addition there is already a well-attested “-si imperative” jéṣi (7x) that fills that function for the s-aor., so it seems unlikely that jéṣaḥ would be so used.


## 09
ā́śrutkarṇa śrudhī́… shows the same transformation of an epithet into a derivationally related divine action as 6c.


## 10
Takes the verb phrase of 9a śrudhī́hávam and elaborates on both its members, with b havanaśrútam and c hūmahe.


## 11
Kuśika is the ancestor of the Viśvāmitras, the family to which our poet belongs. As this is the last hymn attributed to Madhuchandas in this set, an ancestral reference is in order.
