+++
title = "011"

+++
Indra


## 01
The phraseology involving “songs” (gíraḥ) and “strengthening” (√vṛdh) matches that of the last verse of the preceding hymn (I.10.12) attributed to the father (or other ancestor) of this poet.

“Lord of prizes and lord of settlements” in d may set up an implicit contrast between battle and battle-like activity (contests with prizes) and peace.

## 02
“Conquerer” (jétar-) as epithet of Indra here may be responsible for the poet’s name Jetar in the Anukramaṇī.


## 03
Though the printed text reads yádī ‘if’, with (as often) lengthened final vowel, nothing prevents us from taking this as yád ī, ‘when’ + enclitic acc. pronoun, anticipating the expressed acc. obj. For this phenomenon, see Jamison 2002.


## 05
Though it may seem odd that the enemy Vala is called ‘fearless’, the other solution, to take ábibhyuṣaḥ as an “irregular” nom. pl. masc. pf. part. (expect ábibhīvāṃsaḥ) (so Sāy/Old), is not satisfying, esp. as it’s hard for me to see how the gods could be both “fearless” and “being pushed back” (although ET points out that they could have come to Indra’s aid without fear, even though being pushed back).

The question is what syntactic function the gen./abl. ábibhyuṣaḥ is fulfilling. Re seems to take it as a gen. agent with tujyámānāsaḥ (“pressés par le (dieu) sans peur”), but gen. agents are rare and confined to semantically and grammatically specialized situations (see Jamison 1979), and an ablative value “before,” as implied by Ge, seems better. Since expressions of fearing take the ablative, we can even assume an underlying implicit contrast: “the gods, (fearful) of [=from] the fearless one…”


## 06
Although Ge suggests simply that the poet is announcing Indra’s gifts to the river of his native land, this may have a further mythological reference. Esp. in X.108 (Saramā and the Paṇis), the (Vala) cave in which the Paṇis have trapped Indra’s cows is on the edge of the world, across the river (Rasā) that borders the world. Here the poet may be evoking this myth to indicate the efforts that he (and Indra) must expend to retrieve the good things his community desires, and to emphasize that poets and wise men (see also vs. 7) must bear witness to Indra’s deeds performed far away in order to attract his munificence.
