+++
title = "014"

+++
All Gods


## 03
All these gods names are in the accusative, but there is no verb to govern them, either in the verse or in the immediately preceding or following pādas. One solution is to reach back to 2a ā́ACC káṇvā ahūṣata “The Kaṇvas have called ACC here,” though skipping over the intervening syntactic constructions is not appealing.

However, the recurrence of a similar construction in 5ab īḷate ACC … káṇvāsaḥ “The Kaṇvas solemnly invoke ACC” may suggest that the structure of invocation underlies the hymn.


## 04
Acdg. to Gr, mádhvaḥ is a nom. pl. masc. adj., modifying drapsā́ḥ. But it is surely a gen. sg. of the neut. noun: “drops of honey” (so also, e.g., Ge). Note the identical form in 7c, which has to be a gen. sg., varying with mádhoḥ, also gen. sg., in the flg. vs. (8c) in the same metrical position. In fact, no exx. of mádhvaḥ identified as m. or f. nom. or acc. pl. are secure; they can all be interpr. as the gen. sg.

of the noun. See further disc. ad IX.89.3.


## 06
By making pāda a a nominal sentence, from which the relative clause of bc hangs, I avoid the need to supply a main clause verb for c that other tr. encounter.

E.g., Ge “Die … Fahrrosse, die dich fahren, (mögen) die Götter … her(fahren).” However, in the following vs. (7) Agni himself is urged to bring the gods here, so lumping together the transport of Agni and the gods as in my interpretation of 6 may not be in the spirit of their separation in 7. Nonetheless, I still feel that the syntactic argument is strong.


## 07
The ab pādas literally mean “make (the gods) possess wives,” but we know from the ritual that this refers to the coming of the gods along with their wives. Cf. III.6.9 pátnīvataḥ … devā́n … ā́vaha. Ge translates our phrase literally: “Die Opferwürdigen … mache beweibt,” but then paraphrases it in his note: “D. h. bring ihre Frauen mit.” The problem would be solved by supplying the preverb ā́, because ā́√kṛ generally means ‘bring/attract here’. Although I am generally loathe to supply material without a clear warrant, it is the case that the immediately preceding pāda, 6c, begins with ā́, which might have been taken to have domain over what follows.


## 09
The hapax ā́kīm (so, e.g., Gr, Aufr, HvN, Lub) or, more likely, ā́kīm contains what is apparently a now meaningless particle kīm, matching the shape of the acc. particles īm and sīm. Though clearly derived from the interrogative *ku̯

-stem, it has
lost all interrogative value, presumably “laundered” through the weak negative indefinites ná kīm (or nákīm) and mā́kīm (or mā́kīm). It is not at all clear what, if anything, kīm is doing here.

## 10
Instrumental plurals begin (víśvebhiḥ) and end (dhā́mabhiḥ) the verse. The question is whether they should be construed separately or together. Ge chooses the latter path: “Mit allen Verkörperungen des Mitra (der Freundschaft).” But because the hymn is dedicated to the Viśve Devas and there is an emphasis on them throughout (see esp. vss. 1, 9, with ‘gods’ or words referring to them collectively in vss. 2, 6, 7, 8), I prefer to supply ‘gods’ with víśvebhiḥ and take dhā́mabhiḥ separately (sim. Re, WG), interpreting mitrásya not as the god’s name (or not principally the god’s name) but as referring to the alliance that undergirds the sacrificial system.


## 12
The construction involving the normally causal particle hí and the imperative is a troubling one. Brereton (2012 Bronkhorst Fs.) plausibly argues that in cases like this, with two imperative clauses in sequence, the hí clause expresses the action necessary for the second one to take place. In other words, the usual causal value of hí is found there as well, though the addition of imperative modality makes it difficult to render in English.
