+++
title = "015"

+++
Sequential deities (for the ṛtugrahas) Although this hymn is in some ways a rote and formulaic listing of the Ṛtugraha deities with invitations to drink of their respective cups, the poet does inject some life in the hymn by varying the expected phraseology. After having established the formula DRINK ṛtúnā in the first few verses, the poet introduces deviations from that formula. In vs. 5 he urges Indra to drink not from the Brahman’s cup (as would be standard: see II.36.5), but from the Brahman’s “largesse” (rā́dhasaḥ) and ṛtū́m̐ ánu substitutes for ṛtúnā (note the phonological crossing of únā: ánu). In vs. 6 there is no invitation to drink, though ṛtúnā is found in another expression. In vs. 7 the expected deity (“Wealth-giver”) appears in the nominative (draviṇodā́(ḥ)) as expected, but there is no attached predicate: the verse goes off in a different direction.

The Wealth-giver is the subject of the next three verses (8-10) as well, but it is only in vs. 9 that any drinking goes on. Here the imperative “drink!” is replaced by the desiderative “desires to drink” (pipīṣati), and though there is an ablative of a priestly cup, it is one belonging to a different priest and the verb used with it is not ‘drink’.

Although this is not high art, it does show that even the most cut-and-dried litany affords some room to tinker with the verbal form.


## 01
The accent on píba is syntactically unnecessary and not well explained.

Oldenberg (ZDMG 60) suggests either that it's a not explicitly marked foundation clause for the following clause, or that píba has a tendency to emphatic accentuation.

Although he does not want to get the accent from píbata ṛtúnā in the next verse, where the accent is correct (following voc. márutaḥ; cf. also píba ṛtúnā in 4c, again with correct accent), this seems a possibility. One might also note that in the second Ṛtugraha hymn sequence (II.37.1-3), the verb is accented in the phrase píba ṛtúbhiḥ, though again the accent is unnecessary. So perhaps píba ṛtúnā/ṛtúbhiḥ was a separable refrain-phrase in the Ṛtugraha ritual, and therefore received accent even when incorporated into a hymnal context. See now comm. ad III.32.1.


## 02
sudānavaḥ lacks accent and is therefore a vocative, not (as the tr. implies) a predicative nominative. The predicated vocative has been much discussed in the lit.; see Old, Noten ad loc. and Bloomfield, RR. On this repeated pāda see comm. ad VIII.7.12.


## 03
Tvaṣṭar is called Neṣṭar (‘leader’) here because he regularly “leads” the wives of the gods.


## 04
The three wombs are presumably the three ritual fires, so “at/by” would be a more felicitous translation than the published “in.”


## 06
The voc. dhṛtavrata ‘of steadfast commandments’ is apparently a singular in the Saṃhitā text, though the Pp. reads -ā. There is, however, no sandhi situation that could have triggered a shortening of the final vowel. Although the epithet is several times found in the du. modifying Mitra and Varuṇa (VIII.25.2, 8), it is more often in the singular modifying only Varuṇa (e.g., I.44.14, 141.9), and this may have been the intent here. The vratá is really Varuṇa’s province, not Mitra’s. However, the matter is complicated by the fact that the clear dual dvandva voc. mítrāvaruṇa in b also has a singular ending, rather than expected -ā.. I would attribute this shortening to an attempt to match the short final of sg. dhṛtavrata, rather than assuming the shortening affected both words for the same reason. Alternatively, as JL points out to me, it would be possible to consider the final short vowel of dhṛtavrata an example of Kuiper’s Law, with loss of final laryngeal in pausa, though this could not account directly for the following mítrāvaruṇa, which is the real problem.


## 09
For prá √sthā with soma as expressed or implied obj., see parallels cited at VI.41.2.
