+++
title = "017"

+++
Indra and Varuṇa

## 03
The other standard translations take tarpayethām as a self-beneficial reflexive “satisfy yourselves” with anukāmám referring to the gods’ desire (e.g., Ge “freuet euch nach Herzenslust”; Re “Rassasiez-vous à votre gré”), but this doesn’t make sense. The whole hymnic context depicts Indra and Varuṇa as givers, not takers, and it’s not clear to me that gods ever desire wealth, per se. It is much more likely that the poet is asking the gods to grant us wealth, and that the kā́ma is the mortals’, not the gods’. For further discussion, with a strikingly parallel usage, see Jamison 1983: 140-41 and esp. n. 73, though I would not now emend the text to ánu kā́mam, as I suggested there. Curiously, though Ge translates the verb as a reflexive, he goes to elaborate pains to interpret the whole phrase as urging the gods to give us their wealth, in other words much the same meaning as I favor.

In b rāyá ā́is ambiguous as to case; it could be either dat. rā́ye or abl./gen. rā́yas (so Pp.). Ge takes it as a gen., construed with anukāmám, but rā́ya ā́is a fairly well-established expression (e.g., I.81.7, III.56.6) and the rā́ya seems too distant from anukāmám to be naturally construed with it. Most other tr. seems to favor the dat. (see esp. disc. of Old ad loc, also Re.), but I weakly favor an abl. reading “from (your) wealth.” A further question is what noun to supply with nédiṣṭham ‘closest’ or what else to do with it. Ge suggests ‘wealth’ in a note; Re seems to take the word as adverbial (“de la manière la plus proche,” whatever that means). My supplied “friendship” is based on two occurrences of ā́pyam (VII.15.1, VIII.73.6) and one of āpím ‘friend’ with nédiṣṭham. Esp. telling is VIII.73.6 nédiṣṭhaṃ yāmy ā́pyam “I beseech (you two) for closest friendship,” with the same verb as here.


## 04
A curious construction: √bhū + GEN., which seems to express partitive value: “become (part of) X” à “partake of,” though the path to partitive meaning is not straightforward. (Other translators seem to feel less guilt about making this leap than I do.) Closest to it formulaically is vidyā́ma + GEN, “might we know of X.” Cf.

vidyā́ma sumatīnā́m (I.4.3, X.89.17) “might we know (of) your favors.” The oddity of the construction is exacerbated by the emphatic pāda-initial repetition (a, b) of indeclinable yuvā́ku ‘of you two’.


## 05
As noted in the intro., this is the middle verse of the hymn and the only one in which Indra and Varuṇa are separated, and in my view translations that don’t take this into account are likely to be on the wrong track. (So, Ge’s “Indra, Varuṇa sind der preisliche Rat der rühmlichen Tausendschenker,” which puts all nominatives and all genitives together.) The rhetorical structure of ab, nom. sg. - gen. pl. / nom. sg. - gen. pl., invites an association of each nom. sg. with its immediately following gen. pl., producing a contrastive pair of Indra associated with thousand-giving and Varuṇa with (something) to be proclaimed. I have followed this rhetoric clue and, further, have tentatively supplied a noun (‘master’) to head the gen. phrase. Alternatively, krátuḥ of c may be the head (“Indra becomes the krátu of …”), as WG take it (also Ge). There is the further question of what śaṃsyā̀nām refers to. I have somewhat reluctantly supplied ‘riches’, since this is a theme of the hymn and śaṃsyà- several times modifies rayí- and similar words (e.g., VIII.60.11, X.47.2). However, it also regularly qualifies verbal products like ukthyà- or ukthá-, and given Varuṇa’s nature, an association with “(solemn words) to be proclaimed” is probably more likely than with “(riches) to be proclaimed.” I might therefore modify my published translation, though the desire for wealth is quite strong in this hymn (see vss. 3-4, 6-7).


## 08
The doubled nū́nú ‘now now, just now’ is found only here, though doubling with an intercalated particle is found (nū́cin nú I.120.2, VI.37.3, VII.22.8). It is possible that the sequence nū́nú vām is meant to evoke a form of √nu ‘bellow, shout’, in this verse concerning the poet’s praise of the gods. Various forms of song and so forth serve as subjects of √nu. Cf. nearby I.6.6, 7.1.


## 09
suṣṭutí- ‘lovely praise’ is not a particularly good obj. of huvé, which ordinarily takes the addressee, not the content of the call. (See … vām … huvé in vs. 7.) Here the semantic disharmony may suggest that the lovely praise is personified and urged to do her part to please Indra and Varuṇa.
