+++
title = "018"

+++
Brahmaṇaspati and Sadaspati


## 01
Though somā́nam is assigned to a -man-stem by Debrunner (AiG II.2.760), it seems preferable to analyze it, with Kuiper (IIJ 15 [1973]: 190-94 [my thanks to ET for the ref.]), as having the so-called “Hoffmann suffix” (*-Hon- / -Hn-) (Hoffmann 1955 = Aufs. II, 378-83) added to the thematic noun sóma-, of the same type as Aves.

mąϑrān- ‘possessing mąϑras’ to mąϑra-. Our somā́nam is a hapax, so there are no diagnostic forms; a masc. agent noun in -mán would also have suffixal accent and a long suffixal vowel (cf. dharmā́nam, -as ‘upholder(s)’). In favor of the Hoffmannsuffix interpretation is the quadrisyllabic scansion, inviting distraction of the -ā-, which should not occur in a man-stem. The accent might be a problem; Hoffmann is somewhat cagey about the accent of these forms (not difficult, since most of his examples are Avestan), but he does suggest (p. 381) that the original accent of the acc. sg. might fall on the suffix, as here. Kuiper makes no mention of the accent.

Most translators (Ge ‘Lautsingenden(?)’, Re, Schmidt B+I, WG) take sváraṇam to the ‘sound’ root √svar, though Gr connects it with svàr- ‘sun’ (‘glanzreich’). The metrical distraction to suváraṇam might favor a connection with the ‘sun’ word, since, as far as I know, the ‘sound’ root is never so distracted. This hapax is also phonologically reminiscent of svàrṇara- ‘possessing solar glory’, whose initial cluster is always distracted and which almost always occupies the end of the pāda, as our word does. At the very least, it is likely that svàraṇa- is a pun.

It is surprising to find Kakṣīvant Auśija, the dazzling poet of I.116-26, in the context of this rather simple and mundane hymn, for Medhātithi certainly lacks Kakṣīvant’s skill. The request must then be seen as a species of wishful thinking. I translate auśijá- literally, as ‘descendant of a fire-priest’, though it is also Kakṣīvant’s patronymic, because I think the word previews the Agni theme of the second half of this hymn. The publ. tr. follows Ge in assuming a desired identification of Medhātithi with Kakṣīvant: Ge “Mach … zu einem (zweiten) Kakṣīvat.” ET points out that there is actually no overt mention of Medhātithi and the verse could simply mean “make Kakṣīvant a possessor of soma …” But then we still must explain the presence of Kakṣīvant here.


## 03
The śáṃso áruruṣaḥ … mártyasya “(male)diction of the grudging mortal,” which is dreaded by the poet, anticipates the desirable nárāśáṃsa- ‘praise of men’ that opens the last verse of the hymn (9).


## 06
ayāsiṣam: I take this form to the root √yā ‘beseech, implore’, not to √yā ‘drive, go’, which does, admittedly, have a well-attested -siṣ-aorist. So also WG, though other translators (including Schmidt, B+I) render as a verb of motion (Ge “habe ich … angegangen”). That interpretation isn’t impossible, but ‘beseech’ fits the context better.


## 07
If the referent of yásmāt is Agni and the two halves of the hymn concern the verbal and the physical parts of the sacrifice respectively, as I argue in the intro., this verse makes particular sense: even a skilled poet has to get the oblations right.


## 08
All standard tr. take hótrā as nom. sg. and the subject of the clause. But since the point of this verse and the last is the labor Agni expends in making the sacrifice succeed, it seems better to keep him as subj. of gachati, as he was of ṛdhnoti (a) and kṛṇoti (b). hótrā can then be an instr. sg. of the ā-stem, as commonly. The ritual model in which Agni goes to the gods with the offering is of course quite widespread in the RV.


## 09
Note the high proportion of sibilants in this verse.

The meaning of makhá- and its relatives (here represented by the second cmpd. member -makhas-) is much discussed. I consider it to have both martial and bountiful senses. I take the original sense to be martial and, despite some difficulties, believe the often suggested connection with Grk. μάχομαι. The ‘bounteous’ sense comes, in my opinion, from secondary association with maghá-, etc. In this compound sádmamakhas- most tr. take the second member in a ‘give, be bounteous’ sense (e.g., Ge “der einen Wohnsitz beschert,” Re “qui confère-généreusement un siège,” WG “den … mit einem Himmelssitz freigebigen”). However, the martial sense fits the context well. The image is of the smoke of the ritual fire rising to, and thus visually ‘besieging’, heaven itself (so Gr). See Old’s disc.; Scar (277) questioningly suggests both.
