+++
title = "022"

+++
Various divinities


## 04
The use of the diminutivizing -ka-suffix on dūraké ‘at a (little) distance’ reinforces the point of the verse, that it’s not much of a trip for the Aśvins to come here.


## 06
It is not entirely clear why we “desire the commandments (vratā́ni)” of Savitar, though I think it is likely that it is because his vratá keep the world functioning, esp. the cyclical rising and setting of the sun.


## 10
Note the opening phonetic figure ā́gnā́agna.

The shadowy goddess figures mentioned here are difficult to sort out. I assume that there are three goddesses here, with Hotrā Bhāratī the double name of the deified libation belonging to the Bharatas. In this passage Ge takes them as two different figures (also in II.1.11, III.62.3), but in I.142.9 as a doubly named single figure. See Old (SBE, ad I.142.9): “Hotrâ Bhâratî, i.e., the personified Offering of the Bharatas, seems to be one goddess, more usually called simply Bhâratî,” with reff.


## 11
The goddesses “with unclipped wings” (áchinnapatra-) are found only here in the RV, but appear in a set of YV mantras used in the Agnicayana at the placing and heating of the ukhā pot (for firing the bricks). See VS XI.61, MS II.76, KS XVI.6, ŚB VI.5.4.8, etc. A number of other female divinities are mentioned in the same context. What áchinnapatra- actually refers to is unclear to me. Griffith (ad VS XI.61) suggests “moving freely and without interruption.” It mightb evoke the myth of the originally winged mountains, whose wings Indra clipped so that they would settle down. But the mountains are masculine fitures. I also do not see any sign of the later Agnicayana employment here, simply an association with other female divine figures.


## 13
mahī́is grammatically ambiguous, as it can be either fem. singular or fem.

(or neut.) dual. Most tr. take it as the former, modifying only dyaúḥ, but all things being equal, it is preferable to take dyaúḥ as masculine (though fem. occasionally is unavoidable), esp. as mahī́by itself can refer to the earth without further specification. I see no reason why mahī́cannot be dual here, modifying the conjoined NP dyaúḥ pṛthivī́ca.

## 14
The meaning of this verse is entirely obscure to me, and it comes as a surprise in a hymn (or set of hymns) displaying no other verbal tricks at all. (It is true that the Gandharva spreads obscurity almost every place he appears in the RV.) I might speculate that what the verse is conveying is that by their inspired hymns the poets have achieved a place in the highest firmament, where the Gandharva often seems to be located, and where they consume the luscious food produced by Heaven and Earth. If this speculation has any merit, the instr. dhītíbhiḥ should not be taken as an instrument of licking (“lick … with their poetic insights”), but rather as an instr.

of cause (“by reason of their [prior and successful] poetic insights”), so the publ. tr.

could be amended accordingly.


## 15
On anṛkṣará- as ‘not sweeping men away’, rather than ‘thornless’, see Jamison 1993 (Fs. Rix). The standard ‘thornless’ interpretation has no real support; I derive the word instead from a-nṛ-kṣara-, to the root √kṣar ‘flow, stream’, cognate with Greek φϑείρω ‘I destroy’. Formulaic and textual support for this analysis is given in the art. cit.

“A place to settle down” (nivéśanī) might have been better tr. adjectivally “bring to rest, causing to settle down,” but this causes awkwardness in the English.

I.22.16-18: This tṛca is marked by minor ring composition: the átaḥ [sandhi áto] ‘from there’ that begins 16a also begins the last pāda of 18, in the same sandhi form.


## 20
The image in pāda c needs a little unpacking. The “eye in heaven” is of course the sun; the incongruity is that it is depicted as “stretched out,” which might suggest an elongated ovoid sun, not a happy picture. The concentrated expression of pāda c rests on the common formula of the sun stretching (through space) with its rays (raśmí-), as in VII.47.4 yā́ḥ sū́ryo raśmíbhir ātatā́na “towards which [=waters] the sun has stretched with its rays.” Note that sūráyaḥ ‘patrons’ ending b phonologically evokes the absent sū́r i ya- in c.


## 21
This verse also contains some semantic incongruities: “kindling the footstep” is of course a curious expression, and that poets, presumably human, perform this action on the “highest footstep of Viṣṇu,” usually an expression for highest heaven, makes it all the odder. Ge (also Old, WG) plausibly identify “the highest footstep of Viṣṇu” here as the sun, and the verse would therefore express the common notion that priests kindling the ritual fire at dawn cause the sun to shine.
