+++
title = "023"

+++
Various gods (Praügaśastra) I.23.4-6: This tṛca to Mitra and Varuṇa stations the two names in three different ways in the three verses. In 4 mitrá- opens the first pāda and váruṇa- the second; in 5 they are expressed in the dual dvandva mitrā́váruṇā in c; in 6 they again open the first two pādas, but with váruṇa- first and mitrá- second.

## 08
It is striking that all of ab is made up of vocatives, with each one accented: because of the place of the accent, three of the four words have to be vocatives; only índrajyeṣṭhā(h) could be nom. pl., since índra- has inherent initial accent. The first word of c, víśve, may also be and probably is a voc., making a pair with voc. dévāsaḥ, which opens the preceding pāda. On the voc. of víśva- see comm. ad X.15.6.

It would be satisfying to have three GOD-X bahuvrīhis parallel in semantic and morphological structure, but although Ge (followed by WG) interprets the rāti- in pū́ṣa-rātayaḥ as an agent noun (“mit Pūṣan als Gönner”), rātí- both as simplex and in its fairly numerous compounds is always an abstract ‘giving’ or concretized version thereof (‘gift’), as its morphology as a deverbal feminine abstract would require. I therefore take the third cmpd as a tatpuruṣa pūṣa-rātí- the gift(s)/giving of Pūṣan’. It owes its initial accent to the fact that it is a voc. (as does the bahuvrīhi márudgaṇāḥ [expect *marúdgaṇa-].) The ‘gift’ or ‘giving’ of Pūṣan is described as auspicious (bhadrā́) in VI.58.1.


## 09
Ge (WG), following Gr, tr. sáhasā as an adj. modifying Indra (“mit dem starken Indra”), but this is of course impossible. With that accent it must be a neut.; accent shift to *sahás- would turn it into an adjective, but this form is unattested (versus, e.g., yáśas- ‘glory’à yaśás- ‘glorious’).

On the analysis of fairly common 3rd sg. īśata (always with mā́(kiḥ)) as an injunc. to a reduplicated aor., see Hoffmann 1967 (Injunk.): 64-66 (seemingly accepted by Lub, Concordance). Although he adduces semantic and syntactic factors that impose this interpretation, it nonetheless does not seem entirely satisfying, because the thematic stem envisioned (īśa- [never accented]) seems insufficiently distinguished from the presential perfect stem ī́ś-, and Hoffmann does not suggest a mechanism for deriving such an aorist stem from either the presential perfect stem or directly from the root. Moreover, his argument that mā́preventive clauses should have an aorist might falter in the face of a root that simply lacks an aorist. (See now IH’s work demonstrating just that.) I prefer Debrunner’s explanation, rejected by Hoffmann, that īśata represents a re-marking of īśa with -ta to make it more clearly a 3rd sg. Judging from the accent (ī́śe, ī́śāna- [versus īśāná-]), the old presential perfect had been mostly reanalyzed as a root present, and īśa would be an anomalous 3rd sg.

injunctive to such a present.

I.23.13-15: As noted in the intro., I take the “king” that Pūṣan is returning as Agni, not, with most tr., Soma. The theme of the finding and returning of the god-in-hiding in 14 is much more appropriate for Agni than for Soma, and the “glitttering barhis” is also more likely to be associated with Agni. Both Agni and Soma are called “buttress, support” (13) (Agni in V.15.1-2) and both are called king (14). The drops (índu-) in 15 might seem rather to indicate Soma, but in VI.16.16 Agni is strengthened by drops (índubhiḥ), which must be drops of ghee.


## 15
The ritual referent of the “six yoked” entities (ṣáḍ yuktā́n) is unclear, no matter whether Soma or Agni is taken as the main referent: those in the Soma camp consider the yoked ones to be the dakṣiṇās due the poet; I consider them the flames of the recovered Agni, roused by the drops of ghee. In terms of the simile in c, the six yoked ones are clearly the teams for plowing. See esp. AV VI.91.1, cited by Schaefer (1994: 197). On anu √sidh as ‘entlangtreiben’, see Schaefer 1994: 196-97.

In my translation I have reversed the renderings of the finite intensive (unaccented carkṛśat in c) and the intensive participle (accented anuséṣidhat) to make the relationship between simile and frame clearer.


## 16
Contra Ge and others but with Re, I construe the gen. pl. adhvarīyatā́m ‘of those performing the rites’ with ádhvabhiḥ ‘along the roads’, as I do not think the waters are the mothers of the priests (Ge “Die Mütter der diensttuenden (Priester)”).


## 18
Ge and others attach b to a, with c a separate sentence, which is also possible.


## 19
Again I disagree with most tr. in the disposition of the b pāda. I take it with a, because I think we mortals are to glorify the waters. Others think the gods should become strong or victorious in order to praise the waters - but gods are not usually the agents of such praising.

I.23.20-23 = X.9.6-9, save that the fourth pāda of 20 is missing in X.9.6.


## 20
The semi-direct speech and esp. the casual conversational tone of this verse are quite unusual for the RV. Although most tr. take the whole as indirect speech (“Soma said to me that…”), the construction of the verse seems to me to mix direct and indirect speech, with c, couched in the acc., shading into indirect speech. I take the final pāda separately, as it is absent from the parallel in X.9.6.

Note the distraction of the apsú antár phrase that opens 19a into two pāda opening words: 20a #apsú … b #antár.


## 22
The construction of the 2nd hemistich is complex, containing a double vā conjoining two yád clauses and an utá, which reaches back to conjoin the indefinite yát kím ca duritám mama “whatever trouble is in me” (b) and the final word of the vs. ánṛtam (d). The two yád clauses of cd are alternative expansions of the indefinite expression of b, while ánṛtam is a new term. So Ge, WG, and, with explicit disc. of the construction, Klein (DGRV I.301). By contrast Lü (417; sim. Ober II.37) takes ánṛtam as part of the 2nd yád vā clause and seems to ignore the utá: “… was immer Sunde an mir ist, was ich betrogen habe oder was ich geschworen habe als Lüge


## 23
Most tr. take ā́paḥ as acc. here (“I have followed the waters.”). This is of course possible: the nom. of this stem does get used for acc. occasionally in the RV.

However, such an interpr. is not nec. in this case, since it is easy to supply an acc. “you.” And the fact that the two previous vss. (21a and 22a) contain vocatives ā́paḥ and āpaḥ respectively supports a vocative interpretation here.

## 24
It is difficult to know what, if anything, is the referent of asya. I have tentatively supplied ‘hymn’, but the poet may simply be calling upon the gods to witness the general situation (so Ge). The same expression √VID me asya is found in the refrain of I.105, except with accented asyá, for which reason I more confidently supply ‘speech’ there.

[I.24-25 JPB]
