+++
title = "026"

+++
Agni


## 01
As often, the hí in the first of two imperative clauses marks the action urged in ab as subordinate to and the basis for the consequence expressed in c. See Brereton 2012.


## 02
As on some other occasions the pāda-final vácaḥ, superficially a nom.-acc. (or a stem form), is to be construed as an instr. with the instr. adj. (divítmatā in this case), whatever the source of this truncated form. (See M. Hale [Fs. Melchert] for an attempt, unsuccessful in my view, to see it as an archaic zero-grade s-stem instr. [*- es-H, not the renewed and standard *-es-eH]. For further disc. see comm. ad VIII.39.2.) In this particular phrase, the existence of a fully instr. parallel in X.76.6 vā́cā divítā divítmatā strongly suggests that vácaḥ should indeed be construed with divítmatā here. On divítmant- itself, see comm. ad IV.31.11.


## 03
A paradigm ex. of the use of the act. of √yaj to express sacrificing on behalf of someone other than the grammatical subj.


## 05
In the phrase … asyá naḥ, mándasva sakhyásya ca most tr. render the ca as ‘also’ and construe the demonstrative with the noun (Ge “… freue dich auch dieser Freundschaft mit uns”). However, the most natural way to take the syntax is as a conjoined NP: “of this (x) and the comradeship of ours.” The question is what asyá is modifying. Following Gr I supply ‘ritual grass’, because barhíḥ is the most recent ritual referent (4a). Although “rejoicing in ritual grass” may seem an odd activity, cf. VIII.13.4=VIII.15.5 mandānó asyá barhíṣo ví rājasi, with the same verb √mand ‘rejoice’ and the fuller version of the nominal phrase. (As it happens, in that passage I construe the barhis phrase with the main verb ví rājasi, but it is certainly ambiguous.)


## 08
Although most tr. implicitly take pāda a as subordinated to b (e.g., Ge. “Denn wenn …, so…”), again the ca suggests rather that they are coordinate structures, with pāda a a nominal sentence (svagnáyaḥ predicated of devā́saḥ) coordinated with the finite verb dadhiré in b. This verb is accented because it is under the domain of hí in a. In this reading, pāda c functions as the main cl. of ab. I also supply ‘him’ (=Agni) as first object of dadhiré, again unlike most tr.

(eg., Ge “so bringen sie auch uns Erwünschtes”). For the reasons for this in the structure of the hymn, see disc. in intro.
