+++
title = "027"

+++
Agni


## 01
vandádhyai is a predicated infinitive, serving as the main verb.

Pāda a contains a likely et, the possessive -vant-stem adj. vā́ravantam modifying Agni. In the first instance it means ‘having (that is, providing) choice things’ (vā́ra-, to √vṛ ‘choose’), but the homonym vā́ra- means ‘hair, tail-hair’ (cf., e.g., nearby I.32.12) and so the -vant-stem can mean ‘possessing (long) tail-hair’.

Either of these meanings is applicable to the horse of the simile, which has tail-hair by nature and brings choice things by winning races and contests. ‘Bringing choice things’ is more applicable to Agni than ‘having hair’, but his flames could be so conceived. Note that Agni is characterized as “ghee-haired” (ghṛtá-keśa-) in VIII.60.2.


## 02
With Old I supply śávasaḥ with sūnúḥ, to complete the common epithet of Agni “son of strength,” which is suggested by the associated instr. śávasā. Indirect support might come from the parallel voc. sahaso yaho ‘o young (son) of strength’ (with a different word for strength, also regularly appearing as an epithet of Agni) that ends the preceding hymn (I.26.10c). However, this supplement is not strictly necessary, and most tr. do not supply it (e.g., Ge simply “unser Sohn”). In favor of a translation like Ge’s is the presence of naḥ in pāda a. However, this could simply be a Wackernagel place-holder for asmā́kam in c. Although the difference might seem slight, in fact the two interpretations are quite different. Ge’s emphasizes that we have created Agni, supplying ‘our’ with śávasā (“unser Sohn durch (unsere) Kraft”); this might suggest that Agni is in our debt because we begot him and he ought therefore to become our benefactor. The other tr. invest Agni with his own strength and hopes that he will graciously use some of it to benefit us.


## 06
With Ge (/WG) and Re I take the expression in pāda b as a simile or comparison that provides the basis for the verb ‘stream’ (kṣarasi) in c. Agni/the fire cannot literally be on or in a river’s wave.


## 07
It is difficult not to interpret the agent noun yantā́in c as a periphrastic future, given the subjunctives in ab, pace Tichy 1995: 226. Although it is sometimes claimed that no examples (or “no certain examples”) of this usage are found in the Saṃhitās (see esp. Macdonell VGS §152), there are too many passages in the RV where a future interpretation of the -tar-stem is more natural and fits the context better than a purely agentive one.


## 08
Since this verse continues the thought of 7, the agent noun paryetā́in b should likewise be future in value, despite Ge’s “Keiner überholt ihn.” asya … káyasya cit: most tr. take these two genitives as coreferential, with the indefinite referring to a person - so Ge’s “Keiner überholt ihn, wer er auch sei.” But the person in question has already been defined as a client of Agni’s, and so an indefinite seems odd in context. Moreover, the other two instances of paryetár- both take inanimate complements; cf. VII.40.3 ná tásya rāyáḥ paryetā́sti "There exists no one who can encompass his wealth." Therefore I take káyasya cit as referring to anything belonging to the favored man, expressed by asya. Ge’s note seems to lean in this direction, but not his tr.

On śravā́yya- see I.31.5 below.


## 10
The supposed voc. járābodha in a is problematic on several grounds. It is generally taken to mean something like “attentive to the early call,” but 1) the first member, jarā́-, is only attested in the meaning ‘old age’ (hence Old’s suggested “im (bis zum) Greisenalter wachend”), and 2) the second member, the thematic nominal bodhá-, is not otherwise found in the RV (though it does occur in the AV). I therefore prefer to interpret it as a pair of linked imperatives, járā bodha. The latter is found 5x in the RV, as impv. to the thematized aor. to √budh ‘awake’; the former would belong to the thematic pres. jára- of √gṛ/jṛ ‘sing’. Although this present is ordinarily only middle (vs. járati ‘make old’), attraction in voice would not be surprising in a construction like this. The long -ā of járā simply reflects the common lengthening of the 2nd sg. impv. Although we might expect bodha to be accented, it may have lost the accent when the construction ceased to be understood, or it may never have received it in this close semantic nexus. Under this analysis the order of imperatives is actually “sing (and) awake!” which I have reordered for clarity.

Alternatively, we might take járā to √gṛ/jṛ ‘awake’, which likewise builds a Class I middle pres., and translate “awake (and) take heed.” See Gotō 1987: 150-56 for discrimination of the various Class I jára- presents.

Since dṛ́śīka- is otherwise a neut. substantive, I have rendered it as appositional to stómam rather than as an adjective (e.g., Ge “ein schönes Lied”). So also Re (“un corps-de-louange, chose belle à voir”). Note also the synesthesia, with the praise-song something to be seen, not heard. This usage somewhat anticipates the later Vedic notion that ṛṣis “see” divinely bestowed sāmans.
