+++
title = "028"

+++
Indra (Abbreviated Soma Rite) See intro. for detailed discussion of my interpretation of the context of the hymn, which differs significantly from the standard view. I discuss this further in a treatment of the prehistory of the śrauta/gṛhya ritual split: “Vedic Ritual: The Sacralization of the Mundane and the Domestication of the Sacred” (Thite Fs., 2019, ed. Lauren Bausch).


## 01
Both pṛthúbudhna- ‘having a broad bottom’ and ūrdhvá- appear to be doubleentendres. The salacious references continue, more clearly, in vss. 3-4.

## 04
The word mánthā- occurs only here in the RV; it clearly refers to the churning stick later known as mantha or cāt(t)ra-, which is bound around with cords that, manipulated by a priest, move it rapidly back and forth while its bottom tip is inserted in the hole (yoni) of the lower kindling stick (aráṇi-) to create the friction that produces fire. The cords here are obviously likened to reins. For equine imagery in this context and for further disc. of the process, see comm. ad X.27.14.

Here there is a bit of slippage between frame and simile (as Ge also notes, n.

4a): though acc., the reins (raśmī́n) should not be directly compared to the churning stick, also acc. (manthā́m), and we might rather expect instr. *raśmíbhiḥ. However, it’s quite possible that raśmī́n is actually dependent on yámitavaí and is not directly parallel to manthā́m. So perhaps “when they bind the churning stick, as if to control the reins” (vel sim.); for other passages in which raśmī́n is obj. of √yam see I.144.11, VIII.35.21.

What is somewhat puzzling is what the reference to the churning stick is doing in this hymn focused on the preparation of soma, since the implement and the process are characteristic of the production of the ritual fire. Either kindling the ritual fire is considered part of the soma preparation here, or, more likely, the pestle used to pound the soma stalks has been homologized to the churning stick, in great part because of the highly sexualized nature of that implement in the fire-kindling ritual (see comm. ad X.27.14).

The inf. yámitavaí here is one of the few not appearing in the configuration - tavā́u, on which see Klein, Particle u, 164-67. Inter alia, the substitution of iva for

*u gives the desired iambic cadence.


## 06
The reference in this verse is not entirely clear, but “the lord of the wood” (vánaspáti-, ordinarily a word for tree, or an esp. prominent tree, then applied the sacrificial post) is probably here the pestle and metaphorically the erect penis. If so, ágram might be better tr. ‘tip’ than ‘top’ and the whole clause as “the wind blows across [rather than ‘through’] your tip.” In an unpublished paper on this hymn, "Rgveda I.28 and the Two Forms of Pressing Soma," Hanns-Peter Schmidt cites a Kuntāpa verse AV 20.136.6 = ŚŚS 12.24.2.7, which he tr. "The harlot, stepping over the mortar, said, 'Just as on thee, o tree (o wooden mortar), they strike (with the pestle) so may they strike on me,'" which also shows the connection of mortar and pestle with unlicensed sex. If the tr. is correct, the “lord of the wood” there is the mortar, not the pestle, as it seems to be here. In vs. 8 below, both the mortar and the pestle seem to be so called.


## 07
On the motions involved, see Schaefer 1994: 163-64.
