+++
title = "030"

+++
Indra, Aśvins, Dawn


## 01
The word krívi- makes trouble wherever it shows up. In some of its occurrences it appears to be a personal name, but that is unlikely here. It is not even clear if all the occurrences of krívi-, even in non-personal uses, belong to a single stem -- in fact it seems unlikely (see comm. ad V.44.4). Here the context favors an equine reference, and I have taken it as designating a particular color of horse, viz., ‘blood-red’. Assuming, with most scholars, that krívi- in at least some of its usages is connected with krívis- in the hapax adj. krívir-dant- (I.166.6), which possibly means ‘having gory teeth’, and that both are etymologically connected with kravís- ‘raw, bloody flesh’, as a color term ‘blood-red’ would work well. The details of the derivational relation I leave to others, but a putative -i-stem to the underlying root krū < *kruh2 (in krūrá- [AV+]) would have the shape *kruh2-i- > *kruv-i-, and assimilation to krívi- would not be difficult.

The verse is structured by number disharmony — the pres. part. vājayántaḥ is nom. plural, but the finite verb siñce is singular — reflecting the common conceptual fluctuation between the collectivity of priests and singers and the priest-poet speaking in his individual voice.


## 02
The number disharmony continues here, at least in my view. Ge. takes the sg.

rel. pron. yáḥ as referring to Indra and then supplies the verb ‘drinks’ to governing the ‘hundred’ and ‘thousand’ phrases referring to soma. But if yáḥ is instead taken as referring to soma and coreferential with the (unexpressed) subj. of the verb in the main clause rīyate, no material needs to be supplied. Instead the singular ‘which (soma)’ is defined as consisting of a hundred or a thousand separate drinks. So also Re.


## 03
The form śuṣmíṇa (in sandhi) can represent either śuṣmíne (dat. sg.) or śuṣmíṇaḥ (in turn, either gen.-abl. sg. or nom.-acc. pl.). (The Pp. reads -e.) Any of these possibilities is possible in context, and so it may well be that the ambiguity is meant. As a nom. pl. it could characterize the subj. (‘they’ = soma drinks), as Re.

takes it. As a gen. sg. it could refer to Indra, who is indeed regularly modified by this adj. As a dat. sg. it could modify mádāya (so Ge), or it might still refer to Indra, in well-known double dative construction of the type “for the tempestuous one for his exhilaration” à “to exhilarate the tempestuous one.” I favor an interpretation that attributes the word to Indra; among other things, this makes the unaccented asya in b easier to account for. Preferably genitive śuṣmíṇaḥ, though I have not been able to find a parallel expression.

On the surface, pāda a lacks a main verb, but it is possible that it is lurking there. The subordinator yád appears as yán in sandhi before a nasal. The otherwise unattested 3rd pl. injunctive of √i ‘go’ would have the same shape and is the expected verb in this idiom (cf., e.g., 3rd pl. impf. sám āyan X.27.8). I therefore suggest we have a notional haplology sáṃ *yád yán.

I do not understand the function of hí in b, which triggers accentuation of the main verb dadhé in c. I would at all costs prefer to avoid attributing pure emphatic function to hí, but this passage comes perilously close to that.


## 04
ohase is generally taken as a 2nd sg. mid. to the root √ūh / oh, which has a messy set of forms. Cf., e.g., Ge. “Diese Rede von uns weisst du gewiss zu würdigen.” However, I interpret it as a 1st ps. -se form of the type stuṣé ‘I shall praise’, gṛṇīṣé ‘I shall sing’, all of which fall into this semantic sphere. Indeed the root has a -se formation of different shape in VIII.5.3 vā́cam … ohiṣe, with almost identical object (our passage: vácaḥ). For the thematic/(pseudo-)subjunctive form here, cf. arcase ‘I shall address” (X.64.3). Despite the complications involved in positing a second 1st ps. -se form to this root and separating ohase from the identical form in VIII.80.9, which I take as a 2nd sg. in passive usage, I prefer my interpretation to that of Ge (/WG) ‘value’, Re ‘take into consideration, take note of’, because these latter seriously attenuate or alter the meaning of the root, which otherwise means ‘solemnly proclaim, praise, vaunt oneself’.


## 05
The word order of ab is rather tortured. The clause is simply a nominal sentence forming a relative clause, but the relative pronoun phrase yásya te, instead of appearing in 2nd or modified position after pāda-initial stotrám as is overwhelmingly common (see, e.g., modified 2nd in 2a śatáṃ vā yáḥ … above), comes at the very end of the hemistich, separated from its noun by three vocative phrases, which take up the rest of pāda a and most of pāda b: … rādhānām pate, gírvāho vīra .... This still counts as 2nd position since the vocc. are extra-syntactic, but the poet is cheekily pushing the limits. The te is simply there to indicate that the rel.

pron. has 2nd ps. reference, which is of course not syntactically coded onto the relative. Cf. the common phrase táṃ tvā (e.g., 10a below), where the 2nd ps. pronoun has the same function: to give 2nd ps. ref. to the demonstrative.


## 08
yádi here stands for yád *ī, ‘when … it’ rather than ‘if’. The pronominal enclitic ī has been shortened before the initial cluster of śrávat. See Jamison 2002.


## 09
Although huvé in c is morphologically problematic, its interpretation is imposed by context: a past-tense 3rd ps. ‘he called’. But this is the only 3rd ps. huvé (in contrast to over 70 exx. of 1st ps. huvé, -e), and it must be preterital not present, as huvé otherwise is. I have no explanation.

The referent of te ‘your’ in the same pāda is unclear. Assuming the relevant constituent is “your father’ (te … pitā́), te should refer to the poet, or some poet, in whose lineage “you” are, but I would expect the poet to be the 1st ps. speaker of the first huvé (pāda b). Perhaps the reference to the “ancient house” in pāda a indicates that another, more venerable poet is on the scene, whose model (and that of his forebears) the current poet is following. The publ. tr. of pāda a supplies “your” with “ancient house” - implying that the current poet is modeling himself on “you” and “your father,” but it should be remembered that the “your” of a is not explicit in the text. It could well be “my ancient house” (or indeed someone else’s). Though the pāda is repeated in VIII.69.18, that passage is not helpful in interpreting this one.

However, I.87.5 contains an occurrence of pratná- modifying father that seems to assert a similar entitlement to poetic speech by lineage: I.87.5 pitúḥ pratnásya jánmanā vadāmasi “We speak by virtue of our kinship with our primordial father.”


## 11
Though it modifies asmā́kam ‘of us’ and “we” are definitely male, śipriṇīnām ‘of the (well-)lipped ones’ is a feminine gen. pl. The form must be contextually motivated: the other two pādas end with (masc.) gen. pls. in -Vnām / - Vnaam (somapā́vanām [my preference, for HvN somapā́vnãm], sákhīnãm). Esp. the latter, with -īnãm, invites a type of dittography: *śipriṇãm à śipriṇīnãm. Although this form reminds us of the equally unexpected fem. for masc. návyasīnãm V.53.10, 58.1, I explain the latter differently. See comm. ad V.53.10.


## 12
Ge (WG) take iṣṭáye as “dass du rasch kommst,” without comment, but it is not clear to me what root they are using to produce ‘come quick’. There are several roots √iṣ to which iṣṭáye could belong: ‘seek, desire’ and ‘send’ are the most likely, along with the marginal root ‘prosper’ found in iṣáyati. A zero-grade of √yaj ‘sacrifice’ could (and does) also produce iṣṭí-. None of these comes close to ‘come quick’; my conjecture is that they are connecting it with ‘send’, but forms of this root are always transitive. Re more reasonably assigns it to the ‘seek’ root: “… que (tu) cherches (des biens pour nous),” but must supply much material for it to work. I suggest that it belongs to this same root, but in the sense ‘desire, want’, and that the message here is the mutually reinforcing “we want you to want what we want.” This expression is somewhat reminiscent of sá naḥ sanitā́sanáye in vs. 16: “he the winner, for us to win it,” though using two different but synonymous roots, rather than the etymological figure of 16.


## 13
A noun needs to be supplied with revátīḥ ‘rich (fem.)’. Old suggests íṣaḥ ‘refreshments’, which works formulaically with the rest of the lexicon in the passage (including the verb in c; cf., e.g., VII.64.3 iṣā́madema, with an instr. as in our yā́bhir madema). Ge’s “Geschenke” (gifts) is not so happy.

sadhamā́da out of sandhi could end in either -e (so Pp., followed by most) or - aḥ. Complicating the decision is the fact that both a thematic stem sadhamā́da- and a root noun sadhamā́d- are well attested. Though most tr. take presumed underlying sadhamā́de as loc. to the thematic stem (Ge “bei dem Mahlgenossen”), I think it possible that it is the dat. of purpose to the root noun. It may be that Re’s “pour le symposion” also assumes such a dative.


## 14
Vss. 14-15 are parallel in structure and phraseology, but this does not help as much as we might like. To begin at the beginning, it seems odd to refer to Indra as “one like you” (tvā́vān), and grammatically it is also problematic, because tvā́vant- ordinarily takes a 3rd ps. verb, not 2nd ps. as here. It is tempting to follow Ge’s path and make ab into a subordinate clause (“Wenn einer wie du…”), but this doesn’t work because the initial ā́of pāda a must be construed with the ṛṇóḥ of c. The rest of the first hemistich, two participial phrases, is somewhat awkwardly phrased (at least in translation) but comprehensible: the praisers obtain Indra (or his like) in his own person and implore him for aid, which he provides in c. That pāda uses an idiomatic expression for fitting an axle between two wheels. As the presence of ná in 14c and the structure of vs. 15 show, this expression is a simile, to which some other action of Indra is being compared, even though in 14 there is no obvious frame. The meaning of ā́ṛṇóḥ in the frame is somewhat different from the idiomatic usage, but not, to my mind, the “untranslatable wordplay” that Ge sees. I take it mean ‘fit out’, namely ‘provide’. In 14c I supply ‘refreshments’ from the preceding vs. (13), the first vs. of the tṛca. Nonetheless, this translation of the tṛca, esp. 14-15, strikes me as less than satisfactory.


## 17
śávīra-. Although this may just have a suffix -īra-, it is tempting to see it as a bahuvrīhi containing a Caland form śavi- (root śū; cf. śū́ra-) plus írā- ‘refreshment’, so ‘possessing powerful refreshment’. For the accent, see the many compounds with śuci-, e.g., śúci-jihva- ‘having a blazing tongue’. If this is correct, the translation of the same word in I.3.2 should be modified. There it modifies dhī́- ‘insight’, which might not be as apt, but thoughts and hymns that provide refreshment are not foreign to the RVic conceptual universe. Although we might expect *śuvi-, ET suggests comparing presumed Caland forms RV ákravihasta- and PN dabhī́ ti-, which apparently show full grade of the root.

The neut. adjectives gómat and híraṇyavat are generally taken to refer directly to the gifts that the Aśvins will provide us (e.g., Ge “Rinderbesitz … Goldbesitz (sie uns)!” But (as Ge suggests in his note) in I.92.16 and VIII.22.17, where the pāda is repeated, the adjectives modify vártiḥ ‘circuit, course’, in turn the object of forms of √yā ‘drive’ in VIII.22.17 (and often elsewhere). Since 17b contains yātam, I supply vártiḥ here as well.


## 18
Because yójana- has a number of different meanings (‘yoking, stage of journey, distance, route’), the compound samānáyojana- has received a number of different translations. The analytic phrase samānéna yójanena occurs in I.92.3 of Dawn’s journey, where again ‘route’ best fits the context.


## 19
Other passages also depict the Aśvins’ chariot with one wheel at rest (presumably on earth, on the ritual ground) and the other in motion (V.73.3, VIII.22.4), as Ge explains in his note.

The “head of the inviolable (bull)” is somewhat opaque, but is probably a mystical expression for the ritual ground - more clearly expressed in mūrdhán yajñásya “on the head of the sacrifice” (II.3.2, IX.17.6). Others have speculated that the whole complex (the two wheels and the bull’s head) refer to a constellation. See WG n.

## 20
“Fair-weather friend” translates the voc. kadhapriye and is an attempt at an idiomatic English rendering of ‘when-friend’, i.e., ‘uncertain, fickle, or capricious friend’ - following Bloomfield’s (RR, ad I.38.1) attractive explanation of closely related kadhaprī́- as built to the Aśvins’ epithet adhapriyā ‘then-friends’. The epithet is appropriate to the usually reliable Dawn in this verse because the poet questions her as to where she will bestow her presence and favors.


## 21
All of pāda c is a vocative, though it is syntactically peculiar for the noun in the simile to be in the vocative: áśve ná, literally “like o mare.” It must have been attracted into the voc. by the voc. adjectives that are the points of comparison: citre aruṣi “bright and ruddy.” See also I.57.3 below.
