+++
title = "031"

+++
Agni This is the first of five hymns attributed to Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa and the only one addressed to Agni. It is noteworthy that the hymn begins and ends with references to the Aṅgirases: 1a (agne ...) áṅgirā ṛ́ṣiḥ, 2a (agne ...) áṅgirastamaḥ and 17a (the last vs. before the extra-hymnic summary vs.) (agne) aṅgirasvád aṅgiraḥ, a reference to his parentage and a word that often plays off its phonological similarity to agní- (cf. RV I.1), a voc. of which occurs in every vs. in this hymn.

I.31.1-2: Some reciprocal vocabulary: in 1c the kavis (the Maruts) are born under the vrata of Agni, while in 2b Agni as kavi tends to the vrata of the gods.


## 01
Wackernagel treats the structure of the bahuvrīhi vidmanā́pas- differently in different parts of the grammar. It is clear that the first member is the instr. of vidmán- ‘wisdom, know-how’, but in some places (II.1.234, III.268) he suggests that the 2nd member is the secondary adj. apás- (so also Gr) and that the first member is accented (as is customary in bahuvrīhis), but with end-accent vidmanā́, rather than the attested independent vidmánā (I.110.6, etc.)(so explicitly III.268). Elsewhere (esp. II.1.301) he groups it with other bahuvrīhis containing -as-stems as 2nd members, which have accented 2nd members (on the 1st syllable), such as pṛthu-pákṣas- (and cf. purū-rávasin 4b). The latter analysis must be correct: inter alia, we don’t expect bahuvrīhis of similar sense to have adjectives as 2nd members, and it seems arbitrary to assume ending accent of the instr. against the independent usage of -n-stems. Therefore, the cmpd. must represent vidmanā-ápas-, built to the neut. -as-stem ‘work’, inflected as a masc. nom. pl. because the cmpd. is a bahuvrīhi and hence an adjective. The meaning should be literally ‘having/displaying work with know-how’.


## 02
In c note the phonetic figure vibhúr víśvasmai bhúvanāya, with the two elements of the first word distributed over the next two.

Note that Agni here is said to have “two mothers” (dvimātā́), while in vs. 4 he swells in his “two fathers” (pitróḥ; see also 9a) -- in both cases referring to the kindling sticks. Although both “two mothers” and “two fathers” can refer pregnantly, as it were, to a mixed gender set of parents, it is striking that both are used so close together here, and of the same referents.


## 03
The mythology behind ab is related in I.143.2, as Ge points out; see also VI.8.4. It is not clear here why a mythological situation should be couched in the imperative (“become manifest!”), esp. as the second hemistich contains three augmented imperfects, but I cannot see any way to fix it. As Old points out, various scholars have suggested reading injunc. bhavaḥ but it is not easy to switch that form in, esp. because 1) the hymn has no other injunctives, and 2) the stem bháva- doesn't have any clear injunctives, certainly no bhavaḥ, in the RV. In I.143.2 the same myth is related in the same phraseology in the impf.: ā́vír agnír abhavan mātaríśvane.

sukratūyā́must mean something more than simply krátvā / krátunā; see the denom. sukratūyase in X.122.6.


## 04
Purūravas is found only here in the RV outside of his dialogue with the Apsaras Urvaśī in X.95. It’s not entirely clear why he is here, but his is a speaking name (‘having much roaring’), which fits with the bellowing in pāda a. Moreover his son Āyu figures several times in this hymn (vss. 2, 11), and Iḍā, said to be Purūravas’s mother in X.95.18, also appears in vs. 11.

Contrary to most tr., I have segregated sukṛ́te sukṛ́ttaraḥ as a separate clause, since this expression is found in different context in I.156.5. sukṛ́t- is usually used of the priest or ritual performer, and this interpretation fits with the 2nd hemistich, which refers to the ritual here and now. Starting a new sentence in pāda b also helps mitigate the tense disharmony in this verse, where the present in the subordinate clause (múcyase) is by most accounts connected to an imperfect in the main clause of d (anayan), the action of which should temporally follow the verb in c (or to the imperfect avāśayaḥ in a). By connecting c instead with the last part of b, this temporal reversal is avoided.

Ge (following Gr) tr. śvātra- as simply “Kraft,” but the noun belongs with the root √śū ‘swell’, and the image in this pāda is a vivid one: Agni’s “swelling” in his two parents refers to the flaming up of the fire created by the kindling sticks (already referred to in 2d). Both Re and WG render the ‘swell’ sense. With Sāy. (see Ge’s n.

4c) I take pitróḥ with śvātréṇa, not with múcyase. On “two fathers” see comm. ad vs. 2. Because of the contrast between the two mothers in 2 and the two fathers in this vs. and 9a, I would now alter the tr. of both 4 and 9 to “in your two fathers.” I do not understand what the final pāda is conveying. I have tr. pū́rvam … áparam punaḥ as “to the east … then again to the west”; Ge has “vorwärts und wieder zurück.” But in either case the ritual ref. is hard to decode, since generally the fire “taken out” of what will later be called the Gārhapatya fire, situated at the west of the ritual ground, is carried to the east to become what will later be called the Āhavanīya fire. Sāy. (see Ge’s n. 4d) takes the vedi as the reference point, with one part of the fire going to the east (Āhavanīya) and one to the west (Gārhyapatya), but this is not how the placement of the ritual fires happens.

## 05
údyataśruce … śravā́yyaḥ: Ge’s (/WG’s) “ruhmbringend” is not possible for śravā́yya-, because this is a (pseudo-)gerundive and hence passive. The dat. údyataśruce can serve as agent, because RVic gerundives can take dat. agents (see Jamison 1979 [Die Sprache 25] 137-38 n. 14), as also in other IE languages.

The publ. tr. renders bhavasi śravā́yyaḥ as “should be celebrated,” because a more lit. “become one to be celebrated.” However, despite its awkwardness, the more literal tr. should probably be prefered. The use of √bhū + GRDV may well indicate that Agni/the ritual fire only deserves celebration after he/it has been kindled and placed to the west. The ā́huti- in the next pāda may be an indirect ref. to the thusplaced fire as receiver of oblations, what will, by the time of the AV, be called the Āhavanīya.

The rel. pronoun yáḥ in c has double reference: in c it refers to the priest in the 3rd ps. and is the subject of accented védā; in d it refers to Agni in the 2nd ps. and is the subject of the accented āvívāsasi. Both referents are present in the main cl.: the priest as údyataśruce in b and Agni of course as tvám agne in a. This grammatical play cannot be easily rendered in English.

ékāyu- is a hapax and also probably a pun. On the one hand it is formed like viśvā́yu- ‘having a complete lifetime’, dīrghā́yu- ‘having a long lifetime’, hence ‘having a single lifetime’; on the other, it can contain the proper name of Āyu, who is found in vss. 2 and 11 of the hymn, hence Ge’s tr. “im Alleinbesitz des Āyu,” WG “den Āyu (als) einzigen (Opferer) hatte.” Although Ge (/WG) do not recognize the “lifetime” possibility, the parallel formations make such a reading hard to avoid. In the lifetime meaning, the compound presumably refers to the ritual fire’s duration through a single sacrifice or, perhaps more likely, through the lifetime of the sacrificer. In the personal-name reading, it would mean that Agni and our ritual fire have the ur-Aryan sacrificer and clanlord (see 11b) Āyu on their side (‘having Āyu as [yours] alone’?). In vs. 11 Agni is identified with Āyu the clanlord, and so here, in that identity, he brings together the víśaḥ ‘clans’. The publ. tr. does not register the personal-name reading, which should be remedied: I would add as an alternative tr.

“having Āyu as yours alone.” ágre: Although in absolute usage this word can refer to the beginning of time, as it were, that sense seems unlikely here because of the present tense verb. I therefore consider it to reflect a phrase like ágre yajñásya (VII.15.5), at least in the primary reading. Secondarily, with the second meaning of ékāyu- (‘having Āyu as yours alone’), it may allude to the primal sacrifice.

I added the parenthetical “divine” qualifying “clans” because gods (or their qualities) are the usual object of āvívāsa-, and I still think that is the more likely interpretation. However, ET points out to me that, in light of vs. 11b tvā́m … devā́ akṛṇvan náhuṣasya viśpátim “You … did the gods create as the clan-lord of Nahuṣa,” it might instead refer to human clans. Proferes (2007) argues at length, though not mentioning this hymn, that a royal fire can unite several clans.


## 06
sákman is a hapax, rendered by Ge as “in der Freundschaft” but by Re as “en détresse” (followed explicitly by WG “aus der Not”). The former interpretation is surely the correct one, taking it as a derivative of the very common root √sac ‘accompany’ and directly cognate with Aves (O+Y) haxman- ‘association, community’. (So EWA s.v.) Re suggests a derivation rather from √sac2 ‘dry up’, but the semantics of the derivation are not straightforward, and such a connection requires both the apparent Avestan cognate and RVic hapax sákmya- ‘comradeship’ to be decoupled from sákman-. It is hard to see the motivation for this proposal. It must have been that the context seemed not to be one of comradeship, but in fact there is no problem with that meaning in context: Agni demonstrates his comradeship with the man at issue by giving him aid.

I interpret the first hemistich to be entirely concerned with the sacrifice, as the loc. vidáthe ‘at the ceremony’ suggests. In my view vṛjiná-vartani- ‘having twisting turns’ envisions the sacrifice as a race-course, which the sacrificer must navigate, esp.

the tricky turn at the further end. That the sacrifice was commonly envisioned as a course to traverse is clear from the word adhvará- ‘ceremony, rite’, related to ádhvan- ‘road, way’ and found in expressions like rathī́r adhvarā́ṇām “charioteer of the rites” (I.44.9, cf. VI.7.2). Although vṛjiná- ‘twisted, crooked’ often has a morally negative sense (like its English glosses), in this case the twist(s) would simply be tricky (that is, challenging) to steer. It is possible, with some other tr., to assume that the twisting turns are not ritual but refer to unfortunate life circumstances, but then vidáthe is hard to account for.

The image of the sacrifice as a race-course in ab then transitions to the image of a race or contest in general in pāda c. páritakmye ‘at the crucial turn’ picks up the vṛjinávartani- of pāda a. As so often, dháne is a truncated loc. absol. for the common expression dháne hité (I.40.2, etc.) “when the stake is set.” Contra Gr and Ge, I do not take páritakmye as an adj. with dháne; like me, Re. and WG keep the two expressions separate, and Re. suggests that páritakmye dháne is “abregé” from páritakmyāyām … dháne hité. Although I am leery of characterizations like “abregé,” in this case I think that the form we have has been manipulated in some such way. Gr lists an adj. páritakmya- to which our form is said to belong, but this stem does not exist: all clear forms belong to the fem. noun páritakmyā-, almost all of whose forms are loc. sg. páritakmyāyām at the end of a Triṣṭubh line. This stem is subject to various poetic deformations: see comm. ad V.30.113-14. I believe that our páritakmye here also belongs to this noun stem and reflects a loc.; it is positioned exactly like the páritakmyāyām forms, at the end of a trimeter line after an opening of 5. But to conform to the Jagatī line this loc. has been replaced by an apparent masc./neut. loc. in -e, and the independent loc. absol. dháne has been added to supply the requisite light + anceps ending. For further on the phrase dhána- hitá- see comm. ad VI.45.

The last pāda thus turns the contest image into an actual battle; the line between contest and battle is a thin and permeable one in the RV.


## 07
Though both Ge and Re make amṛtatvé ‘immortality’ and śrávase syntactically parallel, despite superficial appearances they are in different cases and should be so rendered. In the 2nd hemistich kṛṇóṣi has a complex direct and indirect object phrase: ubháyāya jánmane máyaḥ kṛṇóṣi práya ā́ca sūráye, with the chiasmic structure DAT.- IO ACC-DO VERB ACC-DO DAT-IO arranged around the verb. In such a structure we might expect coordinating ca to be positioned immediately after the 1st term of the second object complex, that is, after práyaḥ (práyaś ca); see Klein DGRV I.54 and passim. The interruption of this balanced construction by ā́is also curious; the point seems to be that Agni makes refreshment for the first, mixed set of beneficiaries in an unspecified place but the meal for the patron right here (ā́) on the ritual ground. It may be that the propensity of ca to follow preverbs in tmesis (/adverbal usage) has dictated the position; Klein implies as much (DGRV I.134 and n. 49, 227).


## 08
The question in ab is who is winning the stakes. I take it to be “us,” with our winning enabled by Agni’s giving glory to our poet. Most take it to be the poet himself, a poet identified as ours (“for our bard to win the stakes”). This is certainly possible. Indeed Old (SBE) actually interprets sanáye … kṛṇuhi as a periphrastic causative “make/cause to win,” with the poet the first object. Although Zehnder (Periphrastic Kaus., 2011) does not discuss this passage, he does recognize (p. 61) other examples of periphrastic causatives to √san ‘win’, which does not build a morphological causative (expect *sānáyati, or possibly *sanáyati, neither of which would cause phonological problems). Of course at this period of the language, underlying transitive verbs like √san should not build double transitive causatives (“cause X to win Y”).

apásā návena: the suffixal accent of apásā should rule out a tr. ‘work’, but most tr. ignore (Re actually cites it in his notes as ápas-) or overrule the accent. So Ge “durch das neue Machwerk” (i.e., the hymn), sim. Re, WG. Although Gr cites other forms of apás- in the meaning ‘work’, none of these is convincing. Therefore, although it would simplify the tr. to take it as neut. ‘work’, the transmitted text can only mean ‘worker, laborer’. My tr. implies that we have a new poet, or perhaps the bard, made glorious by Agni in pāda b, who takes a new lease on his poetic life.

Alternatively, we might follow Old (SBE), who alone paid attention to the accent and tr. “with the help of the young active (Agni).” The introduction of Heaven and Earth as recipients of our prayers in the last pāda of this vs. is odd, giving the vs. the appearance of a hymn-final vs., since extraneous gods are often brought in at that point. The fact that the vs. is in Triṣṭubh, rather than the Jagatī that prevails in the hymn (save for 16 and 18) also supports the view that this vs. marks at least an internal boundary, and though the initial tváṃ (no) agne sequence continues in the vss. that follow, the subject matter subtly changes.

See publ. intro.

Note the phonological play in bc (… kārúṃ kṛṇuhi … kárma), which may imply a folk-etymological connection of kārú- ‘bard’ with √kṛ, and in d (devair dyāvā pṛthivī prā́vatam) I.31.9-11: Some patterned responsion in these two verses: 9 tanū-kṛ́t … prámatiḥ / 10 prámatiḥ … vayas-kṛ́t. However, although these two verses are roughly in the middle of the hymn and patterned responsion is characteristic of omphalos verses, the repetitions do not seem sufficiently important to constitute an omphalos. On the relationship between prámati- and váyas- and between tanū- and váyas- see disc. ad I.71.7, where it is suggested that tanū́- and váyas- are the tangible and intangible elements that together make up a living being.

The “two fathers” in 9a ushers in the paternal imagery found in the rest of 9- 11 (and beyond). Besides the tanū-kṛ́t- ‘body-creator’ and váyas-kṛ́t- ‘life-forcecreator’, which jointly define the parental contribution to a new human being, we have the repeated word prámati- ‘solicitude’, which is strongly associated with the father (see disc. ad I.71.7). Here the word first appears by itself in 9c, then along with pitā́- in 10a (as well as 14c, 16c). The father figure in these vss. switches back and forth: Agni is first “in the lap of his two fathers” (thus implicitly the son) in 9a, but has the fatherly role in 9cd, 10ab -- then switching back to the son in 11d. The two remaining allusions to the father (14c, 16c) cast Agni in that role again.


## 09
As noted above (ad vs. 4), I would now change “your two parents” to “your two fathers” because of the contrast with the “two mothers” of 2.

The naḥ in 2nd position in the vs. does not fit easily into the first hemistich (though cf. Ge “Du Agni (sei) uns im Schosse der Eltern als Gott …”). I have postponed it to the 2nd hemistich -- with no verb in the 1st this seems possible -- and taken it as a gen. dependent on kāráve ‘bard. It could also be taken as a dat. with tanūkṛ́t in a chiasmic construction exactly like that of 7cd discussed above. Hence, “become body-creator for us and fatherly solicitude for the bard. Otherwise it might be possible just to assume that it was generated to the pattern tváṃ (no) agne in the rest of the hymn, when another syllable was needed. Both Re and Old (SBE) simply ignore it.


## 11
On Āyu and Iḍā see disc. ad vs. 4 above. This verse clearly refers to the primal institution of the ritual fire at the Ārya sacrifice, but the details are somewhat obscure.

Because of the tense differences between c and d (augmented impf. akṛṇvan vs. pres. jā́yate), I follow Re in taking d as the content of Iḍā’s instruction, namely that in mundane current-day terms Agni/ritual fire has a mere human father, the sacrificer, though it was the gods who originally created him/it.

I would now tr. mánuṣasya as “of Manu,” since this refers to the original establishment of the sacrifice.


## 12
The theme of protection gets hammered home by the use of three different roots in this semantic sphere: √pā (pāyúbhiḥ a), √rakṣ (rakṣa b, rakṣamāṇaḥ d), and √trā (trātā́c ).

In the conjoined NP maghónaḥ … tanvàś ca, tanváḥ must be reflexive “(we) ourselves,” despite tanū-kṛ́t, where tanū- refers specifically to the body. In c the standard tr. construe the genitives tókasya .. gávām with trātā́, but I take them with tánaye, which they flank, as in the symmetrical constructions discussed above ad vss. 7 and, possibly, 9.

Pāda d can be seen as a paraphrase of 9b, with ánimēṣaṃ rákṣamāṇaḥ “unblinkingly watchful” an expansion of jā́gṛviḥ “wakeful,” and of 10d, with rákṣamāṇas táva vraté “watchful in accord with your commandment” expanding vratapā́- “protector of the commandment.”


## 13
The man who lacks even a quiver lacks weapons and is therefore defenseless.

My interpr. of cd differs significantly from the standard (though it is close to Ge’s alternate, given at the end of his n. on 13cd). Most take yó rātáhavyaḥ as a nominal rel. cl. referring to the worshipper, with coreferential resumptive pronoun tám in the main clause vanóṣi tám, whose subject is Agni (e.g., Ge “Wer Opfer spendet … den begehrst du.”). (Its initial position in its clause would of course account for the accent on the main verb.) This interpretation has several merits: the skeletal syntactic structure is clear; it explains the unusual position of the tám; it parallels the structure of 14b; and rātáhavya- is more often used of mortals than of gods (a usage that might be supported here by the parallel compound práyatadakṣiṇa- in 15a). However, it makes the phrase kīréś cin mántram mánasā impossible to construe: the acc. sg. mántram has nothing governing it, and the “solution” in such tr. is simply to set it off by dashes and hope for the best. I therefore prefer to take cd as a single relative clause with Agni as subject. The adj.

rātáhavya- can modify gods, including Agni in IV.7.7. This reconfiguring of the syntax allows mántram to be the obj. of vanóṣi, with the point being that Agni, by properly performing his ritual duties, acquires a powerful mantra for the weakling in his charge. (The perhaps overly heavy tr. “mental spell” was meant to highlight the etymological relationship with mánas- ‘mind’.) My interpretation differs from the standard in other smaller ways. In c I take dhā́yase not as a quasi-infinitive to √dhā ‘place, establish’ (e.g., Ge “um sich Sicherheit zu schaffen”), a formation not otherwise found, but to the standard s-stem dhā́yas- ‘nourishment’ to √dhā(y) ‘nourish’. I also take kīréś cid with the preceding dative phrase, rather than with mántram.


## 14
Again my interpr. differs from the standard, though not as radically as in vs. 13. Most tr. take ab as a single clause with, implicitly, an embedded nominal relative clause spā́rhaṃ yád réknaḥ paramám. The main clause resumes with vanóṣi, hence the accent, and the yád clause is picked up by tád. The problem is that the RV does not ordinarily allow embedded relatives; (almost) all relative clauses are either preor postposed, as M. Hale has argued in the past. I therefore supply the frame “you are kindled as protector” + DATIVE from the parallel vs. 13ab. Note that Agni as protector also begins the next verse (15).

The phrase prá pā́kaṃ śā́ssi prá díśaḥ in d causes problems, because, despite the strong superficial parallelism, the two accusatives pā́kam and díśaḥ do not appear to be parallel. I have translated them as parallel, but admit the awkwardness. If the verb prá śāssi is used in the same way in both iterations, the “quarters,” that is, the geographical directions, are receiving the same instruction as the simple man. In support of this interpretation ET remarks “my guess is that the poet intends a contrast between two extremes (the limited simple man and the vast semi-divine quarters) as recipients of instruction from the one who is superior to all in knowledge.” Ge supplies a different verb with the second prá phrase: “du (gibst) Weisungen,” suggesting that while pā́kam refers to the person who receives the instruction, díśaḥ might rather express the content (“directions”) of the instruction.


## 15
In upamā́I prefer to see the first attestation of the root noun compound upamā́- ‘likeness’ (< ‘measure’), rather than the adverbial instrumental preferred by Old and apparently followed by the standard tr. How an instr. would function here is not clear to me, and Ge’s “der kommt zu oberst im Himmel” seems to push sópamā́ diváḥ further than the meager expression will take it. Old’s objection is that for such a root noun we would expect nom. sg. upamā́ḥ, but this isn’t apposite: in this sandhi situation upamā́would be the outcome in any case, so it is only the Pp. reading that enforces an underlying -ā́final. Moreover, the parallel compounds pramā́- and pratimā́- are attested in the RV with clear asigmatic nom. sg. (X.130.3), suggesting that they have been reinterpreted as -ā-stems (see Scar p. 378). There is no reason that an upamā́- wouldn’t have been treated similarly. See also upamā́in VIII.60.13.


## 16
I interpret mīmṛṣaḥ slightly differently with its two different objects, as “make X forgotten” and “make us forget X” respectively. The verb ‘forget’ is an I/T verb of perception (in the terms of my 1983 book), and its causative thus can take two different types of constructions.

Agni is “whirling” (bhṛ́mi-) because of the movements of his smoke and flames.

[I.32 JPB] [SJ] I.32.9: John Clayton (p.c.) points out the phonological similarity of the coreferential dā́nuḥ and dhenúḥ, polarized at the beginning and end of pāda d, in frame and simile respectively. This is one of two places in the RV where we meet Vṛtra’s mother by name (and indeed at all), the other being in the bahuvr. sahádānuin III.30.8. Vṛtra himself is called dānavá- on several occasions (II.11.10, V.30.1, 4, 7, probably V.29.4, the only 5 occurrences of this stem). I am inclined to see this designation of Vṛtra as equivalent to YAves. dānauua- (Barth. 2 dānav- “bezeichnet einen den Iraniern feindlichen tūrischen Volksstamm”), with the name of Vṛtra’s mother Dānu backformed from that - rather than taking Dānu as the name of a riverine goddess, who may or may not be attested elsewhere in IE (esp. Celtic), as some others do.

In any case the stem(s) dā́nu- are difficult to sort out. In addition to the fem.

form here (perhaps coerced into that gender), there are 4 masc. forms referring to a demon or demons (pl. only in the late X.120.6), with the 3 sgs. either referring clearly to Vṛtra (II.11.18, also containing dānavá- in vs. 10; II.12.13) or with Vṛtra as likely referent (IV.30.7). In addition there are the neuts. dā́nu- ‘gift’ and dā́nu- ‘drop’, which are hard to separate in context, since “drops” (of rain, esp.) are also “gifts.” There is also a single fem. form that must belong to one of these otherwise neut. stems, in I.54.7, whose non-neut. gender is shown by the nom. sg. -s and its specifically fem. gender by the adj. úparā (dā́nur asmā úparā pinvate diváḥ “For him the gift [/drop] of heaven swells here below.”). In context this fem. obviously cannot designate Vṛtra’s mother. I have no explanation. It is worth noting that what anchors dā́nuḥ as a fem. in I.54.7 is the adj. úparā based on the directional preverb úpa, just as in our passage the feminine is established earlier in the hemistich by the phrase úttarā sū́ḥ “the mother was above,” with the adj. based on the directional preverb úd.

[SJ] I.32.12: This vs. contains a famous crux. The first hemistich reads áśvyo vā́ro abhavas tád indra, srké yát tv ̥ ā pratyáhan devá ékaḥ, rendered (up through pratyáhan) in the publ. tr. as ‘You, Indra, then became the tail of a horse when he struck his fangs at you’. Indra is clearly addressed in the 2nd ps., as shown in pāda a by the 2nd sg. abhavaḥ and the voc. indra and in pāda b by acc. tvā. This means, by easy process of elimination, that the subject of the verb pratyáhan ‘struck at’ must be Vṛtra. What then to do with the following nominative phrase, devá ékaḥ ‘the one god, the god alone’? Indra’s arch-opponent in the Rig Veda is emphatically not a god, and certainly with Indra on the scene he could not be the one god. There are several alternative solutions to this conflict between grammar and sense: to read this nominative phrase as an independent nominal clause, or as a continuation of the clause in pāda a with the dependent clause sr̥ké yát tvā pratyáhan embedded within it (the solution in the publ. tr.), or as anticipating the next hemistich, where Indra returns as the 2nd sg. subject of the verbs ájayaḥ ‘you conquered’, etc. Thus, the first possibility: ‘you became the tail of a horse when he struck his fangs at you; (you are) the one god / (you as) god (were) alone’ (etc.); for the second: ‘o Indra, you became the tail of a horse -- when he struck his fangs at you -- (you) the god alone’; for the third: ‘you became the tail of a horse when he struck his fangs at you; as god alone, you conquered …’. None of these is impossible, but they are all ad hoc, constructed under desperate circumstances to avoid the semantic clash between the undoubted subject of the verb pratyáhan, namely Vṛtra, and the immediately following nominative phrase that should not modify him.

There is a potential way out of this conundrum, however. The verb áhan is the 3rd sg. imperfect to the famous root present hánti; its older form should have been

*ahant. I tentatively suggest that the sequence *áhant evá, containing the emphatic
particle evá, at an early stage underwent external sandhi voicing assimilation to

*áhand evá and then resegmentation to áhan devá, rather than displaying the
expected synchronic sandhi development to *áhann evá. This aberrant resegmentation was facilitated by the existence of the ubiquitous noun devá- and the following adj. ékaḥ, with which that noun could be construed. My proposed underlying original *áhand *evá ékaḥ has the particle evá stationed after the verb to emphasize the unusual use of Indra’s signature verb áhan, found in this hymn five times with Indra as subject (1c, 2a, 3d, 4a, 5a; cf. also 11c jaghanvā́n in the vs. immediately preceding ours), with Vṛtra as subject. The following ékaḥ emphasizes the single combat between Indra and Vṛtra: the equal balance between the two opponents is a feature of this part of the hymn -- cf. esp. 13c índraś ca yád yuyudhā́te áhiś ca “When Indra and the serpent fought with each other …,” with middle dual verb and conjoined subject NP. This contrasts sharply with the much more one-sided depiction of the battle in the earlier parts of the hymn. I would therefore translate 12b as ‘when just he, alone, struck his fangs against you’.

One major stumbling block to accepting this scenario: the sandhi of *evá ékaḥ.

The hiatus found in the transmitted text in the sequence devá ékaḥ is of course expected from underlying *devás ékaḥ (/*deváḥ/z), with loss of the final consonant of the nom. sg. and the resulting hiatus maintained. But we would ordinarily expect the final vowel of the particle evá to coalesce with the initial of ékaḥ to produce *evaíkaḥ (as in IV.54.5, X.44.7 evaívá, X.173.2 ihaívaídhi). However, the application of the sandhi rules governing the coalescence of final and initial vowels is by no means exceptionless. For further discussion, with reff., see my “Hidden in Plain Sight: Some Older Verb Endings in the Rig Veda” in a forthcoming festschrift.
