+++
title = "033"

+++
Indra


## 01
There is no overt interrogative marker in b, but the kuvíd of c may suggest a similar question in b.

The transitive thematic subjunctive vāvṛdhāti is assigned to the “Aorist des Caus.” by Gr, but the properly formed redupl. caus. aorist ávīvṛdha- occupies that slot. Other than our form, all forms belonging to the vāvṛdha- stem are medial, and it seems best to follow Kü (471) in seeing this thematic stem as built to the perfect in order to allow the root-final consonant to be maintained in forms like 2nd sg. impv.

vāvṛdhásva (since athem. *vāvṛtsvá could be taken to the root √vṛt ‘turn’); see now further my 2017 art. on perf. impv (García Ramón Fs.). These medial intrans./reflex.

forms in turn generated the oppositional trans. act. vāvṛdhāti.

I take kétam páram in d as referring to Indra’s “distant intention” (which we hope to move closer to us; see úpa in 1a, 2a), rather than our “highest wish,” as is standard. The middle voice of āvárjate may support this. However the other interpretation is certainly possible.


## 02
Given the importance of the close/distant theme in these verses and the repeated úpa’s of 1a and 2a, upamébhiḥ in c should probably be rendered not only as “best” but also “nearest/most intimate.”


## 03
Although the gen. in the rel. cl. yásya váṣṭi appears to be parallel to aryáḥ, as I’ve tr. it, it may be better as a datival gen. “for whomever he wishes,” that is, Indra redistributes cows belonging to enemies to his friends.

I’ve tr. the part. coṣkūyámāṇaḥ as an impv. to avoid the awkwardness of “continuing to poke…” In my opinion asmád ádhi continues the “distance” theme, and is equivalent to the common āré asmát.


## 04
vádhīḥ … ghanéna, with verbal √vadh and nominal √han reverses the expected distribution found, e.g., in VII.104.16 … hantu mahatā́vadhéna (cf. also I.94.9), with verbal √han and nominal √vadh.

The phrase ékaś cáran is a first instantiation of the lexeme famous in much later times from the Rhinoceros(-horn) Sūtra. For the phrase in the dharma lit. and the association with the rhinoceros (not, in my opinion, its horn), see Jamison 1998.

upaśāká- is only here, but śāká- is several times used of the Maruts or Aṅgirases in their roles as helpers of Indra (IV.17.11, V.30.10). Therefore, though there is a disjunction between “going it alone” and being accompanied by a host of helpers, I take upaśākébhiḥ as personal here. The upa- may mark them as particularly subsidiary, or it may simply have been prefixed to the stem because it is a signature word in this part of the hymn.

Other tr. take sanaká- as the name of a group, but it seems a perfectly wellformed -ka-suffixed form of sána- ‘old’, with a pejorative diminutive sense appropriate to belittling one’s enemies. So Edgerton (1911 [k-suffixes]): 53): “the old rascals.” My “old codgers” is also an attempt to capture the slangy and deprecatory tone. On the demotic value of -ka- see Jamison 2009 (IIJ 52).

Ge takes prétim īyuḥ as an idiom “gingen in den Tod,” but despite the later such usage of pra √i, this idiom does not appear in the RV. As indicated in the intro., I take this as referring to the separation of sacrificers from non-sacrificers.


## 05
Because the verb in d, adhamaḥ, is unaccented, something must be supplied to complete the subordinate clause of c (prá yád …). It seems simplest to supply a form of the verb √i ‘go’, esp. as prá √i is found in 4d. Ge’s solution, to supply the same verb as in d, is possible, but seems pleonastic.


## 06
The Navagvas are ordinarily adherents of Indra’s. In order to preserve this alliance, we must assume that the plural reference in pādas a-c alternates, with a and c referring to Indra’s enemies, and b to his friends.

vṛṣāyúdho ná vádhrayaḥ is the clearest echo in this hymn of the phraseology of the immediately preceding, very famous hymn depicting the Indra-Vṛtra battle: I.32.7c vṛ́ṣṇo vádhriḥ pratimā́nam búbhūṣan “a steer who tried to be the measure of a bull.” citáyantaḥ is unclear, as forms built to this stem often are, and the tr. differ appreciably: Ge “zu Einsicht kommend,” WG “erkennend,” Re “se rendant compte.” In my opinion, it is in its usual intrans. value “appearing” and adds a simile-like aspect to the main verb āyan, a sort of utprekṣā.


## 08
The verse is full of adornment/clothing terms; clear are śúmbhamāna- ‘adorning themselves’ in b and pari √dhā ‘clothe’ in c. In pāda a the middle participle cakrāṇā́saḥ has a clear parallel in the adornment phrase in VIII.14.5 cakrāṇá opaśáṃ diví “creating for himself a headdress in heaven.” As in the previous verses, there seem to be two contending sides, the enemies found in pādas abc and the friends in d. “Having made for themselves a girdle from the earth” in a is easily interpretable in this framework: the enemies have fallen and are perhaps dead, partially covered by earth. But “adorning themselves with a golden amulet” in b is more difficult, since a golden amulet sounds like a positive decorative item. However, Younger Avestan has a compound zarənu-maini (Yt. 14.33), apparently made of related verbal material, which is the epithet of a vulture, found in a passage in which the vulture espies bloody meat from far distances. If there is a connection between the two (see EWA s.v. maṇí), “to adorn oneself with a golden amulet” may mean figuratively “to become food for vultures.” In contrast to Indra’s doomed adversaries in ab, in d he clothes his “spies” with the sun; sunlight is often a symbol of untroubled life, as in the often repeated wish “to see the sun” (sū́ryaṃ dṛśé and related expressions).

For a detailed discussion of this vs., esp. pāda b and its Iranian correspondents, see my “A Golden Amulet in Vedic and Avestan” (Ged. H.-P. Schmidt). I would now emend the publ. tr. of pāda a to “having made for themselves a coverlet from the earth.”


## 09
ET points out that the verb of ab pári … ábubhojīḥ “you coiled around” might be more appropriate as a description of Vṛtra; it is almost as if Indra is appropriating the qualities of his opponents in addition to his own and thereby showing himself to be even more powerful. The form ábubhojīḥ itself is isolated, the only reduplicated form to the root √bhuj ‘bend’. Kü gives it a lemma in his monograph on the perfect (351-52) but does not commit himself further, beyond stating that the form is a 2nd sg.

preterite “in der statisch-attingenten Bedeutung” and suggesting that there might have originally been a stative perfect that is no longer alive in Vedic. This would allow a plausible analysis of our form as a pluperfect, with a renewed ending -īs, to avoid expected but non-transparent *abubhok. JL points to the mirror-image phonetic echo ubhe ábubhojīr across the pāda boundary.

adhamaḥ in d needs to be read with both pādas, c and d.


## 10
The rel. clauses with plural subj. in ab have no possible connection with anything in the second hemistich. I take them instead as completing the portrayal of the conflict between the two moieties depicted in the earlier parts of the hymn. The pl. rel. prn. yé has no direct antecedent in the preceeding pāda (9d), though it can pick up the intent of sg. dásyum; it can also hark a little further back to 9c ámanyamānān ‘heedless ones,’ as H-P Schmidt suggests (B+I).

If pādas ab close the preceding myth, the rest of the verse seems to allude glancingly to the Vṛtra (c) and Vala (d) myths.


## 11
abhí dyū́n: acc. pl. dyū́n almost always refers to ‘days’ (as in the expression ánu dyū́n “through the days,” which regularly occupies this same metrical position.

However, pace Re’s “pour toujours” (which is, in any event, not equivalent to “through the days”), a temporal interpretation does not work here. Ge (/WG) “für die Himmels(götter),” for which there is no support (their I.190.4 is better tr. otherwise) and whose datival “für” is an odd rendering of abhí. My “to high heavens” (the “high” being imported from the English idiom) rests on the adj. abhídyu- ‘heaven-bound’; as ET suggests it can be taken as a decomposition of this adjective, which, as it happens, is almost always pāda final.


## 12
Bloomfield’s disc. of the 2nd hemistich (RR) is interpretively useful, though somewhat dismissively phrased. It is too long to paraphrase here, but he acutely observes that previous translators have glossed over the problem that Indra is uncharacteristically depicted as at the end of his strength.


## 13
Stylistically the verse is marked by 4 fronted preverbs in tmesis, an effect not possible to convey in English without awkwardness.


## 15
śáma- ‘hornless’ found only here and in I.32.15, another piece of shared terminology.
