+++
title = "034"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
“Three times a day” (tríḥ … adyá) opens the hymn, announcing the hymn’s “three” theme and also linking it to the three pressings of (some Ṛgvedic versions of) the Soma Sacrifice.

Predicative voc. navedasā here rendered as part of a phrasal verb, with impv.

bhavatam.

The second hemistich is built on an etymological relationship between the instrument noun yantrá- (c) and the gerundive abhyāyaṃsénya- (d), both built to the root √yam ‘hold’ (the second form presumably to the s-aor. of that root; so AiG II.2.503, though the reason for using this base isn’t clear). This word play is lost in Ge’s (/WG’s) tr., but I have aimed to keep it, unfortunately producing some awkwardness in the English.


## 04
suprāvyè: prāvī́- and related forms I take, following Old (Noten ad II.13.9; also Scar. 501) to √vī ‘pursue’, rather than to √av ‘help’ (e.g., Gr). The forms are specialized for the pursuit of ritual activities.

tredhéva “as if threefold” presumably refers to the Aśvins, who, though only being a pair, are as effective as if they were three.

With Ge (/WG) I take akṣárā (in akṣáreva) as nom. sg. fem., corresponding to the Aśvins, who are subject to pinvatam. See Old’s somewhat inconclusive disc.

(ZDMG 63 [=KlSch p. 310]) of the various options. Rivelex (I.16-17) takes it as a neut. nom. pl. collective; Gr. also as a neut. pl., though without specifying case.


## 05
sū́re duhitā́“daughter of the Sun” preserves, by most accounts, the archaic sandhi of final -as > -e before initial dental. For further disc., see Jamison 2010 (Fs. Melchert). The myth on which this pāda is based, Sūryā’s marriage, is not otherwise mentioned in this hymn. On the formulaic representation of the myth in the RV see Jamison 2001 (Fs. Parpola).


## 06
Ge (/WG) take mámakāya as referring to the poet himself (“… meiner Wenigkeit”), with sūnáve in apposition and identifying the poet as the Aśvins’ son (“als (eurem) Sohne”). This is certainly possible and in line with the self-deprecatory use of mámaka- in I.31.11 for the poet-sacrificer’s self-reference. It is by no means necessary, however, and it does introduce extra machinery.


## 07
On aśāyatam see VI.33.2.

ātméva vā́taḥ is an underlying grammatical pun. Though vā́ta- is of course an Indo-Iranian word for ‘wind’, historically it is actually a thematized present participle to the ‘blow’ root. Here I think it is an adjective ‘blowing’ qualifying ā̛tmā́, which is itself being compared to wind in this simile. ātmán- here shows its older ‘(life-)breath’ sense, not the ‘self, soul’ that already begins to take over in the RV.


## 08
I take the kṛtám in b as predicated of both āhāvā́ḥ and havíḥ, with number agreement with the nearer noun and slightly different senses (at least in English).


## 09
The “three wheels” (trī́cakrā́) here are surely imposed by the insistent “three” theme of this hymn. Vedic chariots ordinarily had two wheels (see Sparreboom, Ved.

Ch., 10-11), and how a third wheel would even be affixed isn’t clear to me.


## 10
It is a physical oddity that the two Aśvins are apparently credited with plural mouths. There are two possible solutions: 1) The plural expression has been adopted from elsewhere. There is one other occurrence of madhupébhir āsábhiḥ (IV.45.3), unfortunately also in an Aśvins hymn; however, other examples of āsábhiḥ occur in plural context. 2) The mouths don’t belong exclusively to the Aśvins, but to other soma-drinking gods. The 33 gods who accompany the Aśvins here for drinking in the next verse might support this possibility.


## 12
The ca of d has no obvious function; Klein (DGRV I.227-28) ascribes the construction to “looser nexus.”
