+++
title = "035"

+++
Savitar


## 04
I take kṛṣṇā́rájāṃsi loosely as an accusative of extent. Others (Ge, Re) supply a verb to govern this phrase (‘verbreitend’ and ‘pour traverser” respectively), while still others (Macd., Falk 1988, WG) take it as a second acc. with dádhānaḥ, as appositive to táviṣīm “assuming the dark realms as his power.” This latter solution is possible grammatically and does not require additional material to be supplied, but I am somewhat dubious that the dark realms constitute his power.

## 06
This verse of cosmic mystery decked out in numerology comes as a surprise after the simple, descriptive beginning of this hymn. The syntax of c is ambiguous: Ge (Re / WG) takes amṛ́tā as nom. pl., supplying “him” as acc. with ádhi √sthā: “Alles Unsterbliche ruht (auf ihm)…” I follow Old, who takes it as acc. pl., citing III.38.4 ā́viśvárūpo amṛ́tāni tasthau “Having all forms, he mounted on the immortal (things?).”


## 07
In some ways a responsive verse to the previous one(s): ví … akhyat (a) parallels 5a ví … akhyan; ciketa (c) responds to cíketat in 6d; and the three heavens of 6a are alluded to in the query in 7d katamā́ṃ dyā́m “to which heaven (of three or more)?”


## 08
In b I read trī́with both dhánva and yójanā (taking both as neut. pl.). The position of the numeral favors taking it with dhánva, which could, however, be singular; in favor of reading the numeral (also) with yójanā is X.86.20 dhánva ca yát krntátram ca, káti svit t ̥ ā́ví yójanā “Wasteland and chasm -- how many yojanas (of distance) are they away (from here).” (Note that dhánva is singular in that passage.)


## 10
On svávām̐as nom. sg. of the -s-stem sv-ávas-, see AiG III.287. The Pp.

analyses it rather as svá-vān ‘possessing property’. Curiously Macdonell (Ved.

Reader, ad loc.) claims to be following the Pp., but tr. ‘aiding well’.

Most tr. take pratidoṣám as a temporal, “towards evening” or “every evening.” I think rather that it’s spatial, construed naturally with ásthāt ‘took his place, stood’.

The god is facing west. (Cf. Peter Pan: “straight on ‘til morning,” presumably meaning ‘east’.) The same expression, also of Savitar, is found in VI.71.4, though it does not clinch the interpretation.


## 11
Although it is possible to construe c directly with d, it seems best, following Ge, to supply a verb of motion in c. The d pāda has a close parallel in I.114.10, suggesting that it is independent.

Note the unusual duplication of the nominal referent in both rel. and main clause: yé … pánthāḥ … / tébhiḥ … pathíbhiḥ.
