+++
title = "036"

+++
Agni


## 01
purūṇā́m is generally construed as qualifying yahvám, but this requires taking the latter as an implicit superlative (Ge “den Jüngsten unter vielen”), which it is not.

(JL points out that a derivative of the real superlative, yáviṣṭhya, appears twice in the hymn, vss. 6, 15.) Better to take it as parallel to viśā́m, though, since víś- is fem., not modifying it as Proferes (2007: 31) does.

I.36.10, 17: As often, it is difficult to know when to tr. analyzable words as PNs rather than literally. There is no particular reason that I explicitly allowed both possibilities in vs. 10 and only the PN in 17.

## 13
añjíbhiḥ would have been better rendered as ‘ornaments’ than ‘unguents’, and as ET suggests, these ornaments could be vocal.


## 14
On vidā́versus vidā́ḥ, see comm. ad IX.19.6. Since the verb is parallel to three impvs. (pāhi a, daha b, kṛdhī́c), an imperatival interpr. works better than a subjunctive.

In keeping with I.37.14, it might be best to change ‘favor’ to ‘friendship’ for dúvaḥ in d.


## 16
On īśata see comm. ad I.23.9.

On ghanéva see comm. ad I.63.5.


## 18
Ge (/WG) takes dásyave sáhaḥ as a phrasal personal name “Dasyave Sahas,” a personal name that would have to be neuter. Better to follow Old (SBE) by taking it as a qualifier of Agni. Re also rejects the personal name interpr., but considers it a pāda-final truncation of the instr. sáhasā. (Because sáhaḥ can be construed without problem as the nom./acc. neut. it appears to be, there is no reason to resort either to Re’s truncation or to an archaic instr. sg. zero-grade ending *-h1 in the mode of Hale [Fs. Melchert].) Old’s interpretation finds support in 19, where the second pāda contains an entirely parallel phrase qualifying Agni, with neut. noun construed with benefactive dative: jyótir jánāya “a light for the people.”


## 19
ukṣitá- is ppl. to both √vakṣ/ukṣ ‘grow’ and √ukṣ ‘sprinkle’; both meanings are apt for Agni.


## 20
I read ná twice in b, both as the neg. with the dat. infinitive prátītaye and as a simile marker, evoking the common phrase mṛgó ná bhīmáḥ (I.154.2, etc.) and its variants.
