+++
title = "037"

+++
Maruts


## 01
There are two ways to take the apparent masc. acc. phrase anarvā́ṇaṃ ratheśúbham in b. In the publ. tr. I interpret ratheśúbh- as a noun, ‘beauty on a chariot’, modified by masc. anarvā́ṇam, with the phrase an appositive to the neut.

śárdho mā́rutam in pāda a. But there are some problems with this. First, the indep.

noun śúbh- is fem. Of course, its acc. is also śúbham, and it is arguable that the bahuvrīhi adj. anarván- would make a fem. of the shape -ā́ṇam, rather than a deriv.

fem. *anarvaṇī- (acc. *-aṇīm). So the interpr. of the publ. tr. remains (barely) possible. However, the standard tr. treat the phrase as adjectival with the preceding neut. acc. This interpr. finds support in V.56.9 śárdhaṃ ratheśúbham, with masc.

śárdham, and also from VI.48.15, where masc. acc. anarvā́ṇam apparently modifies the same neut. phrase as here, but in a simile śárdho ná mā́rutam. See comm. ad loc. To construct a proper neut. for our phrase here is enough to provide the answer: *anarvá *ratheśúp is remarkably unappealing, and a slide into a form more recognizably acc. and more recognizably associated with the underlying stems is easy to understand. For anarvá- see comm. ad I.185.3.

I.37.1-2: An “improper” relative construction, with masc. pl. yé in 2a picking up śárdhaḥ ‘troop’ of 1a, which is grammatically neut. sg., though conceptually plural.


## 03
The Pp. reads pl. káśāḥ ‘whips’ here, and standard tr. follow this, making it the subj. of vádān. But káśā- is otherwise only sg. in the RV, even when plural entities wield it. I therefore take it as sg. káśā and as the subj. of śṛṇve, with the Maruts as unexpressed subj. of vádān. This also makes better sense of the positions of both eṣām and yád: most tr. construe eṣām with hásteṣu, which means the unaccented pronoun would begin a clause. And yád would be too far to the right in its clause: we expect yá-forms to follow at most one constituent. (Of course, it might be possible to interpret eṣām káśā hásteṣu “the whip in their hands” as a single constituent, but this would be pushing it.)


## 05
It is possible to take prá śaṃsā as 1st sg. subjunctive, as Re. does, though there seems no compelling reason not to continue with a 2nd sg. impv., following the 2nd pl.

gāyata in the previous pāda (4c).

Pāda b seems an incipient izafe construction, with an appositive introduced by yád -- even though it is grammatically impeccable as a standard rel. cl. (allowing for the attraction in gender to neut. yád of putative *yám, whose antecedent ághnyam is masc.).

Ge unaccountably interprets the med. pf. vāvṛdhe as a 1st sg. (“Ich habe mich … gestärkt”; so also WG), though he doesn’t read prá śaṃsā in a as 1st ps. Although this is grammatically possible, context suggests that the Marut troop is the subj. of this verb.


## 06
Although nouns not in the vocative case generally lose their accent in vocatival phrases (type sūno sahasaḥ “o son of strength”), the conjoined genitives diváś ca gmáś ca retain their standard accent though being part of the voc. phrase headed by dhūtayaḥ “o shakers” - presumably in part because the pāda needs to begin with an accented word and also because this particular voc. phrase is not only structurally complex (with a conjoined NP as gen.) but also not a fixed idiom. Of course, since diváś ca gmáś ca opens the pāda, it would have to be accented one way or other other, but if it had received default voc. accent we would expect dívaś ca gmaś ca.


## 07
With Ge, I read ní with both clauses. For c (ní) … jíhīta, cf. VIII.7.2 ní párvatā ahāsata “The mountains have bent down.”


## 09
The syntactic structure of this verse is not clear, in great part because it contains no finite verbs, and most tr. leave the structure undefined. In my interpr. pāda a is a causal clause dependent on the main clause of pāda b, with yát … śávaḥ in the relative clause of pāda c coreferential with the váyaḥ of b. The point is that at the point of birth, in a stable situation (a), the Maruts had the strength to leave their mother’s womb on their own (nír √i is a lexeme specialized for birth contexts; cf., e.g., IV.18.2, V.78.9) (b), and that same strength remains with them (c).

I construe ánu with preceding sīm (“follows them”); cf. I.141.9.


## 10
The standard tr. separate pādas a and b and supply a verb with the former (e.g., Ge “stimmen”) with no obvious source. I prefer to take the two pādas together and take kā́ṣṭhāḥ as an unmarked simile: “their songs (like) race-course posts.” The lexeme úd √tan then has the meaning ‘stretch upward, erect’; this is the only finite form of the idiom in the RV (or, it seems, anywhere), which is mostly attested in the frozen adjective uttāná- ‘stretching upward, stretching out’.

Why their knees are bent is a matter of speculation, but it probably refers to a crouching position suitable for driving (cf. VIII.92.3).


## 11
Although most tr. take the “child of mist” to be the rain, its physical description here (“long and wide”) makes better sense for a cloud.

ámṛdhra- normally means ‘not neglectful, not slighting’, but this doesn’t yield much sense here. I therefore take it in the passive sense ‘not (to be) neglected / slighted’; English “not negligible” provides a perfect idiomatic counterpart.


## 13
The mutual chatter of the Maruts on their journey refers of course to the thunder.


## 14
For plural dúvaḥ pl. see Schindler, Rt. noun, p. 25, EWA s.v. dúvas-. The same nom. pl. is found in VI.29.3.


## 15
This final verse is oddly disjointed. For one thing there must be a change of person from 2nd (vaḥ) to 3rd (eṣām) in ab in reference to the Maruts; it is difficult not to take these pl. pronouns as coreferential. I supply dúvaḥ in a, because this pāda is structurally similar to 14b; however, this is not strictly necessary, and an interpretation like Ge’s “Denn es gibt etwas für euch zum Schwelgen” is certainly possible. As for pāda b, it is generally taken to mean “we are theirs,” and, again, this is possible. But given its structural similarity to the immediately preceding pāda, I interpret it in similar fashion, as suggesting that we have something to offer them.

The last pāda then expresses what our service to the Maruts should bring about for us.
