+++
title = "038"

+++
Maruts


## 01
For kadhapriyaḥ see I.30.20. In this passage the connection of this voc. with the interrogative is esp. clear, since the pāda begins kád dha “what indeed?” kád is translated twice, for clarity.

## 02
The gen./abl. form of diváḥ and pṛthivyā́ḥ is somewhat surprising, but, with Old, it is best to assume they depend on kvà. Although the ná separating them is also somewhat surprising, it is possible to take it as a real simile particle rather than a bleached connective (Re’s “aussi bien que…”). Since the point of this tṛca is the anxiety occasioned by the Maruts’ absence from our sacrifice, the poet worries that the Maruts have disappeared to some other sacrificer on earth as definitively as if they had gone off to heaven.

In the simile in c, “in a pasture” is supplied on the basis of the formula √RAN gā́vo ná yávase (V.53.16, etc.). Note that the expected yávase shows up below in 5a, in a slightly off-kilter simile. This might be taken as “poetic repair” (see Jamison 2006: Paris poetics), but simultaneously “de-repair,” in that it introduces an element from one verbal complex into another, where it is unexpected.


## 05
See remarks ad vs. 2 on the simile here.

The “path of Yama” is of course the path to death (or after death, to Yama’s world). The prohibitive mā́of pāda a must have domain also over pāda c.


## 06
durháṇā and related forms are most likely Middle Indic developments of

*durhṛ́ṇā (etc.) ‘evil rage’ from √hṛ ‘be angry’. See EWA s. HAR I
. Ge (WG) take párāparā as representing pára+apara- ‘further and nearer, earlier and later’, but Old’s interpr. (followed by Re) as an āmreḍita preposition ‘further and further, ever further’ is more appealing. As Re points out, the adv. párā and related forms are characteristic of nírṛti-.


## 07
The standard interpr. of avāta- here is ‘windless’, but with Gr (see also Lub) I take it to the homonymous stem ‘unextinguishable, unquenchable’ (√vā ‘extinguish’).

The point here is that even in a waterless place the Maruts can make rain: wind is irrelevant, but water that doesn’t give out is crucial. Cf. avánīr avātā́ḥ “unquenchable streams” in I.62.10.


## 08
“lightning bellows” - a mixed image, of a type not uncommon in Marut hymns.


## 10
Ge (WG) takes the sádma phrase as a parallel subject to mā́nuṣāḥ (requiring a sg. form of reja- to be supplied), but an acc. extent-of-space interpretation works just as well, without needing an extra verb. So also Re.

The last three verses (7-9) describing the thunderstorm are all couched in the present tense, so the augmented imperfect árejanta is somewhat surprising. Vs. 10 does begin a new tṛca, however.


## 11
ródhas- is a bulwark or fortification (√rudh ‘obstruct’), in this context indicating the ‘banks’ of a river, which keep the waters within.

## 12
The change of person between pādas, 2nd pl. vaḥ in a, 3rd pl. eṣām in b, is exactly the same as in I.37.15 and equally inexplicable. I have therefore failed to tr.

eṣām. It is possible, of course, that eṣām doesn’t refer to the Maruts, but to part of the listed equipage, perhaps the chariots - hence “Let your wheel-rims be steady, and (your) chariots and their horses” - but the parallel structure in the previous hymn makes that unlikely.


## 13
I have tr. jarā́yai as ‘to awaken him’, but this is probably wrong, however appealing in context. The noun jarā́- only means ‘old age’, and therefore some version of Ge’s “dass er das Greisenalter (uns schenke)” is better. Its intent would match the last pāda of the previous hymn, I.37.15c “in order (for us) to live a full lifetime,” and the two hymns have much in common.


## 14
The first two pādas contain two punning verbs, whose double meanings reinforce each other: mimīhí can belong to √mā ‘bellow’ and √mā ‘measure’ (generally assigned only to the latter and so tr.). In the first meaning it refers to the sound of the song, in the second to its regulated production, that is, to its meter.

tatanaḥ can belong to √tan ‘thunder’ and √tan ‘stretch out’ (Gr assigns to the former, but standard tr. reflect the latter). In the first meaning it again refers to the sound of the song, in the second, again to its method of production - in this case, the prolonging of a tone or note. The second meanings of both verbs clearly belong to the technical vocabulary of singing (see the next pāda, 14c, as well), the former connect the poet’s sounds to those of the Maruts’ thunderstorm (cf. mimāti ‘bellows’ in 8a).


## 15
The two occurrences of tveṣá-, 7a and 15b, both referring to the Maruts, should have been harmonized in tr. (currently ‘dazzling’ and ‘glittering’ respectively). A regrettable if minor lapse.
