+++
title = "039"

+++
Maruts


## 01
mā́na- seems to activate the same pun on the homonymous roots √mā as was noted in the preceding hymn, I.38.14. The Maruts project both their bellowing and the measure of their song. (Standard tr. only recognize the ‘measure’ sense.) “Like a flame” - what does śocíḥ correspond to in the frame of the passage? Ge (/WG) take it as parallel to “you” (=Maruts), as the agent of throwing, and supply an object “(ihren Schein).” But since śocís- is a neuter, it can as easily be an accusative and express the thrown object, and this seems to me the more likely interpretation (perhaps influenced by the modern flame-thrower). In a Marut context it could stand for the lightning they deploy in addition to the thunder represented by mā́nam. For further on this image see disc. at vs. 10.


## 02
The two contrastive pādas of the first hemistich express offensive and defensive procedures respectively.

## 03
Standard treatments (including Old) divide pāda a into a rel. cl. and main clause (e.g., Ge “Was fest ist, stosset ihr um”), accounting for the accent on hathá by its placement immediately after the rel. cl. However, this interpr. requires taking yát sthirám as an embedded relative, preceded by the preverb+part. associated with the main verb (párā ha). Since RV does not (ordinarily) have embedded relatives, it is best to take yád as the subordinator for the whole hemistich (with domain over vartáyatha as well). This also makes the two pādas more parallel: Ge’s tr. of b as also consisting of rel. cl. main cl. (“was schwer ist, bringet …”) is impossible.


## 04
The opening of pāda c is identical to 2c. The rest of this hemistich presents a few problems. The phrase tánā yujā́is rendered variously. My translation is based on the observation that in almost every single instance yujā́follows an instr. in an expression meaning “with X as yoke-mate” (X may either be animate [e.g., I.8.4 tváyā yujā́] or inanimate [e.g., X.83.3 tápasā yujā́“with fervor as yokemate”]). In this case, I take the root noun tán- to refer to the Marut’s entire lineage, in other words their family heritage and their sibling connections to each other. The instr.

phrase sárvayā viśā́“with your whole clan” in the next vs. (5d) may convey the same meaning. Taking tánā as ‘lineage’ here also has the merit of allowing a semantic connection with tánāya in 7a.

I separate the two pādas (so also Re), in great part because of the position of nū́cid, which usually opens its clause (here after an extra-sentential voc. rúdrāsaḥ).

However, a tr. similar to Ge’s, “your might is never to be open to challenge,” would also be possible.


## 05
The two other occurrences of durmáda- ‘badly drunk’ (I.32.6, VIII.2.12) are both in martial context and seem to refer to warriors intoxicated on the frenzy of battle. The other occurrences are quite negative, whereas here we must take the word as positive or neutral in describing the Maruts, who are, to be sure, frequently depicted as being almost out of control. I think this is the point of comparison.


## 08
The threatening ábhva- (< privative á- + √bhū; cf. WG “Unwesen”) that besets us represents the Vedic fear of formlessness. See my forthcoming “The Blob in Ancient India.”


## 09
The signature word of this final tṛca is ásāmi-, Ge’s “vollkommen” “complete.” It literally means “without a half, not halved,” and the insistence on this unusual form merits a literal translation, in my view, although it is less fluent than the paraphrase.

káṇvaṃ dadá “you gave Kaṇva” -- the grammar is clear, but the meaning somewhat odd. What is presumably meant is the ancient poet Kaṇva, ancestral to the current line.

## 10
This verse shows a type of ring composition with vs. 1, in sense though not vocabulary. The hymn begins (1b) with a shooting/throwing metaphor, śocír ná mā́nam ásyatha “(when) you cast your measure/bellowing like a flame.” The last pāda of the hymn (10d) makes the shooting image more pointed: íṣuṃ ná sṛjata dvíṣam “you launch your enmity like an arrow.” The “shooting” verb √as of 1b is replaced by more generic √sṛj ‘launch, release’, but the simile specifies an arrow, rather than the potentially destructive but less specific ‘flame’. The responsion between these two expressions may give added support to the interpretation of śocíḥ as an accusative in vs. 1; see discussion there.
