+++
title = "040"

+++
Brahmaṇaspati


## 03
The sense of the hapax paṅktírādhas- ‘whose gifts come in fives’ is unexplained. It may of course be some ritual reference (and the range of available explanations tends in that direction), but I suggest that it might be a reference to the fingers and mean that gifts come by the handful, that is, abundantly.


## 06
The ca in c is subordinating, as the verbal accent shows (pratiháryathā). See Klein: DGRV I.240.


## 07
Although the standard tr. take antarvā́vat as referring to territory “in between” (e.g., Ge “das dazwischen liegende (Land)”), I follow Schmidt’s (B+I, 102; see also Old ad loc., AiG II.2.893) suggestion that it is a pleonastically marked variant of antárvant- ‘pregnant’, an interpretation that works nicely with the following verse.

Although my translation implies that antarvā́vat modifies kṣáyam, this cannot be true because kṣáya- is masc. My rendering is an abbreviated form of “made his dwelling place into (something) pregnant” (cf. Schmidt “seinen Wohnsitz hat er zu etwas gemacht, das … schwanger ist”).

Where I differ from Schmidt (and some others) is in the interpr. of pastyā̀bhiḥ in pāda c. Opinion is split over whether this stem (and pastyà-) means ‘stream’ or ‘dwelling place’, and Schmidt goes with the former. Although that meaning works well in this passage -- Schmidt takes pāda d as meaning “pregnant (with streams),” that is, well-watered -- on balance the ‘dwelling place’ interpretation fits more contexts better. (Curiously in the same work [B+I, p. 64] Schmidt renders pastyā̀nām in VII.97.5 as “der Häuser.”) For disc. see EWA s.v. pastyà- (favoring ‘dwelling place’ for pastyà- and, less strongly, for pastyā̀-) and Brereton (Ādityas, 94-96 n. 45).

For additional if indirect evidence for ‘dwelling place’ see comm. ad IX.97.18.


## 08
Most tr. (including Schmidt) render pṛñcītá with the anodyne ‘increase’, but úpa √pṛc is a sexual idiom (‘inseminate’ < ‘engorge’; see, e.g., VI.28.8). The accent on this verb probably results from its adjacency to accented hánti (on which see, HO and JSK - reff.). Note the gapping out of compound in the contrastive phrase mahādhané … árbhe “when there is a large stake or a small,” where the independent loc. árbhe is functionally parallel to the 1st compound member mahā-.
