+++
title = "041"

+++

Ādityas


## 04
The voc. ādityāsaḥ was omitted from the tr. “O Ādityas” should be added at the end of the first line.


## 08
The first two pādas have elicited a fair amount of discussion and disagreement.

The questions are these: 1) What is the nuance of práti √vac and, in particular, what is the function of the accusative construed with it? 2) Are ghnántam, śápantam, and devayántam parallel accusatives, or is there a dependency relationship among them? Ge (/WG) take devayántam as the object of ghnántam and śápantam (Ge “der den Gottergebenen schlägt oder flucht”), while Re (EVP V) and Old consider the three accusatives parallel, with the first two given as negative examples, the third one as a positive one. Although I think the latter view is correct, I do not follow these scholars in their assessment of the function of the accusative with práti √vac: both take it as the topic spoken about (as opposed to Ge and WG). However, though práti is rare with vac (one other occurrence in the RV, VIII.100.5, non-diagnostic because it is not construed with an accusative there), when that preverb appears with other verbs of speaking (√vad, brū, ah), the complement identifies the person spoken to, not the contents of the speech. I therefore take the clause to mean that “I” will not bother to answer back to a man who behaves badly, either physically (ghnántam) or verbally (śápantam), though I would to a godly man. The parenthetical “as if” could be omitted here, as ET points out. With devayántam freed from its potential as object of the first two participles, they can instead take vaḥ ‘you’ as their object (though admittedly how a mortal can “smite” the Ādityas is a bit unclear).
