+++
title = "042"

+++
Pūṣan


## 01
Note the regularly contrasting preverbs sám and ví opening the first two pādas.

Though Re and, judging from his tr., Ge take sákṣvā to √sac ‘accompany’, following Gr., according to Narten (265 and n. 834, and already so in BR, Whitney’s Roots, etc.) it belongs with √sah ‘conquer’. That prá √sah is fairly common in the RV (including nominal compounds) while prá √sac occurs only once (X.27.19) may support this root assignment. I am, however, disturbed by the position of the preverb and its accompanying enclitic pronoun naḥ: the collocation looks like the start of a new clause. I wonder if we don’t in fact have two imperative clauses here, the second with a gapped ihi. Cf. VIII.17.9 índra préhi purás tvám. My translation “go forth … to victory” reflects this possible interpretation.


## 03
On huraś-cít- see comm. ad IX.98.11.

## 04
tápuṣi- is attested only twice elsewhere, both times modifying hetí-, hence the supplied ‘weapon’ here.

I.42.7-9: vidaḥ is formally an injunctive and therefore functionally multivalent.

Hoffmann (1967: 263) is not certain that it has modal value, though most tr. (Ge, Re, WG) take it as an impv. (e.g., Ge “schaff hierfür Rat!”). The other question is whether the krátu- that Pūṣan is to find is his own or meant for us (e.g., Re “procure (nous)…”). I have chosen to take the injunctive not as an impv. but a future-oriented indicative and to interpret the krátu- as Pūṣan’s, not ours - the point being that Pūṣan will find the resolve at our sacrifice to fulfill the requests we make of him in the imperatives. However, the other possibilities sketched above are not excluded, and at least in IX.20.3 an imperatival value of vidaḥ is likely; see comm. ad loc. I therefore put forth the alternative tr. “find resolve” for the refrain in this tṛca.


## 08
My “with” tr. of pāda b obscures what I think the grammatical structure is.

Pace Gr and Old, on accentual grounds navajvārá- should not be a bahuvrīhi, but rather a karmadhāraya ‘new suffering’. The question is what relationship its pāda bears to the previous one. Re’s suppressed purpose clause (or so his supplied “qu’il n’y ait” suggests) may be the best possibility syntactically. If we simply assume an imperatival “let there not be …” (so Maurer, sim. WG “nicht (sei uns)…”), parallel to pāda a, we should expect mā́, not ná as the negative. It may be, however, that existential prohibitives (of the “let there not be” type) are blocked, because the root √as ‘be’ does not build an aorist and also lacks injunctive present forms, although functionally similar mā́bhūt does occur. I have not found a discussion of this issue in Hoffmann 1967, but I may have missed it.


## 09
Though most of the verbs represented in this catalogue of imperatives normally take objects, the rhetorical point of this listing is the stark abruptness, and the inclusion of an object (udáram ‘belly’) with the final verb lays particular stress on this last desire expressed, to eat one’s fill.
