+++
title = "043"

+++
Rudra and Soma


## 01
Tr. of vocéma repeated for clarity.

I.43.2-3: It is striking that Aditi and her two most illustrious sons, Mitra and Varuṇa, are depicted here as closely connected with Rudra. It is not entirely clear why, though perhaps it is simply an attempt in this relentlessly upbeat hymn to associate Rudra, who can be viewed ambivalently, with these powerful and positive figures.


## 04
jálāṣa- is “of unclear meaning” (so EWA s.v.) and shows non-Indo-Aryan phonology. In the RV it occurs twice independently and twice in this compound jálāṣabheṣaja- (and one of its independent occurrences is adjacent to bheṣajá-), always in association with Rudra. The translation ‘healing’ (see also Kuiper, Aryans 25-26, 46) therefore makes contextual sense, despite the lack of etymological support.


## 05
A verse-length relative clause, which can be construed either with vs. 4 (so Ge) or, by my preference, with vs. 6 (so also Re, WG). There is no strong evidence either way, however.


## 06
Global ref. to human kind as “men and women” is vanishingly rare in the RV.

I know only one other potential case, the identical dative phrase in VIII.77.8, though it has a more restricted sense in that passage.


## 08
Although juhuranta and related forms are assigned to the root √hṝ ‘be angry’ by Insler (1968: 219ff.), an assignment accepted by Mayrhofer (EWA s.v. HARI ) and further developed by Kü (602-3), such a meaning simply doesn’t make sense in this passage or in III.55.2, and so I take the form to √hvṛ ‘go crookedly, go amiss’. The phonology is perfectly apt, with a zero-grade having vocalic u and consonantal r before vowel, despite the metathesized zero-grade hru found in some forms.


## 09
The construction of the various parts of this rhetorically ambitious verse is not entirely clear, and various tr. make various choices. (In addition to the standard ones, see Lüders [231-32] and Hoffmann [Injunk. 260].) I take amṛ́tasya as modifying te, rather than construing it with prajā́ḥ (as, e.g., Ge does). I consider the two locatives, párasmin dhā́man ṛtásya and nā́bhā, to be parallel and to express the two geographically opposed places where Soma will be searching: highest heaven and the navel of the earth (supplying pṛthivyā́ḥ with nā́bhā as often). The larger meaning of this verse is addressed in the publ. intro.


## 44-49
For illuminating remarks on the rhetorical and grammatical connections among these hymns, see Jesse Lundquist 2014 (25th UCLA IE Conf., Proceedings).
