+++
title = "044"

+++
Agni


## 01
On the locatival -ar in uṣarbúdh-, see Lundquist 2014.


## 02
sajū́s-, opening pāda c and here rendered ‘jointly’, is etymologically related to júṣṭa- ‘enjoyable, delightful’, which opens the verse, and the poet clearly recognizes the connection. A tr. “in joint enjoyment with…” seems too heavy, however.


## 03
My interpretation of bhā́ṛjīka- I owe to Thieme (Unters. 40 n. 2; see EWA s.v. ṛjīka-).

adhvaraśrī́-. Pace Gr, Old (SBE) Ge (/WG), I very much doubt that -śrī́- in this compound (or others) has transitive value: ‘das Opferfest verschönend’. For extensive disc. see Scar (545-46), who lays out a number of interpretive possibilities but seems to lean towards the one I also favor. (So also Re.) Related to the analysis of this compound is the interpretation of yajñā́nām adhvara-. Ge (WG) take the former as dependent on the latter (clearest in WG “der die Opferhandlungen der Opfer verschönt”), but I think it more likely that the two nouns are parallel and depend on -śrī́-, one as an independent gen., one as 1st compound member. So Re.; Scar adduces VIII.44.7 adhvarā́ṇām abhiśríyam, with an independent gen. of adhvará-, which supports this analysis.


## 04
The initial word of this verse, śréṣṭham is the superlative associated with śrī́-, the last word of the previous verse. A translation “glory … / Most glorious…” would have captured this connection.


## 06
All standard tr. take suśáṃsa- in an active sense (e.g., Ge “der …Schönes sagt”) with the singer the recipient of Agni’s good speech. Certainly when applied to mortals, this has to be the sense, but when applied to gods I take the adj. in passive sense ‘good to proclaim/laud’, with here the singer in the dat. (gṛṇaté) as the agent of the praising.


## 07
The very common epithet viśvávedas-, used especially of Agni, has a potential double sense in all its occurrences: ‘possesing all possessions’ and ‘possessing all knowledge’. In fact, although the latter is generally favored in standard RV translations, the former may be the more stable sense, in that its 2nd member védas- is widespread in the meaning ‘possession, property’, but not found as a simplex in the meaning ‘knowledge’. The parallel formation jātávedas- (see above, vs. 4) has a similar problem. Though generally rendered as ‘who has knowledge of the beings’ it could as well mean ‘who has possession of the beings’. Since jātávedas- seems to have become more opaque to its users than viśvávedas-, which does often (?) participate in its context, in the publ. tr. we do not translate jātávedas-.


## 08
Pāda a, with the list of gods in the accusative, is an expansion of devā́n in 7d.

Though b begins with a god’s name in the acc. (agním), this is to be construed with the following pādas.


## 09
As with vs. 4, the beginning of this verse connects with the final word of the previous one: 8d … svadhvara ‘o you of good ceremony’ / 9a … adhvarā́ṇām ‘of the ceremonies’.

svardṛ́ś- is a difficult word, with multiple interpretations. See Scar (pp. 234- 39) for discussion of the various possibilities, though his favored one (“das Sonnenlicht sehend”) seems to me the less common, since the adj. generally modifies gods. I generally take it as meaning ‘having the look/appearance of the sun’, that is ‘looking like the sun’, but occasionally as ‘having the sight of the sun’, that is, ‘seeing the sun’. Interpretations like Ge’s “deren Auge die Sonne ist” are unlikely because dṛ́ś- is not ‘eye’. See Re (EVP XII.81). In this particular passage, it is possible that ‘seeing the sun’ might also be appropriate, as anticipating the description of Agni in the next vs. (10b) viśvádarśata- ‘visible to all’. In other words, the gods in 9 “see the sun” and in 10 Agni, often homologized to the sun, is something that everyone sees.

I.44.10, 12: In my opinion, purohitá-, though preserving its literal meaning ‘set in front’, also already refers technically to a priestly office, the figure later known as the Purohita. Agni is called purohitá- both because he is literally ‘set in front’, that is, moved to the east to serve as the offering fire (later called the Āhavanīya), and because he serves as priest. JPB, however, does not believe that the word has developed this technical meaning in the RV. See esp. his 2004 “Bráhman, Brahmán, and Sacrificer,” in Griffiths and Houben, eds., The Vedas: Texts, Language & Ritual: Proceedings of the Third International Vedic Workshop, Leiden 2002, 325-44.


## 10
As just noted, this verse also shares lexicon with the previous one: 9d X-dṛ́ś-, 10b X-darśata-.

“Rich in radiance” is a less clumsy alternative for a literal rendering of the bahuvrīhi vibhā́-vasu- ‘whose goods are radiance’.


## 11
Another lexical reminiscence across verses: 10d mā́nuṣaḥ# ‘descendant of Manu’ and 11c #manuṣvát ‘like Manu’. As with the other examples, it is the last word of the previous verse that is matched in the next.


## 12
Again, lexical echo, though in this case it’s the next-to-last word of the preceding verse: 11d dūtám / 12b dūtyàm.

Note the synaesthesia in the second hemistich, with the sounds of the river’s waves compared to the flashing of fire. The gen. agnéḥ here is a common noun referring to the substance fire, not to the god. Its parallelism with síndhoḥ, also pādainitial, helps ground this usage.

I.44.13-14: The emphasis on hearing in these verses is continued in the next hymn (vss. 2-3, 5, 7).


## 13
váhni- is usually ‘conveyor’, but here the gods cannot be conveying Agni, and the word seems to be quite loosely connected with the notion of conveyance. My ‘passengers’ is probably pushing it beyond where it should go.


## 14
The final pāda makes a little ring with 2c.
