+++
title = "045"

+++
Agni The theme of “hearing,” found also in the last two verses of I.44, is further explored here, with its complement, the “call” that the gods should hear.


## 01
My understanding of the structure of this verse is quite different from the consensus, which takes yájā of 1c as a 2nd sg. imperative, addressed to Agni, governing all the accusatives in the verse (“sacrifice to the Vasus …”). I instead take yajā as 1st sg. subjunctive, governing only the accusatives of the 2nd hemistich, and supply ā́vaha ‘bring here’ from 2d to govern those in the 1st hemistich. (This is supported by the fact that tráyastriṃśatam ‘three and thirty’ in 2d is a virtual shorthand for 1ab vásūn … rudrām̐ādityā́m̐utá, the three divisions of the gods, adding up to 33).

Despite the extra machinery, I think my interpretation better accounts for the contrast between the accusatives in ab and cd: the first set names the large generic groups of gods expected to attend the sacrifice, brought by Agni. The accusatives in the second set do not fit this category; in fact, their most likely referent is Agni himself: svadhvará- ‘of good ceremony’ is primarily and characteristically applied to Agni, including in the previous hymn (I.44.8, a hymn that insistently associates Agni with the adhvará- in 2b, 3d, 9a; see also 4c of this hymn), and mánujāta- ‘born of Manu’ cannot be applied to other gods, but is appropriate to Agni; see mā́nuṣa- ‘descendant of Manu’ in the previous hymn (10d) and also used elsewhere of Agni, as well as passages like VII.2.3 ... agním mánunā sámiddham “… Agni, kindled by Manu.” It’s true that ghṛtaprúṣ- ‘ghee-sprinkling’ is not a particularly Agnian epithet, though it could work if a passive interpretation of the root noun pruṣ- is allowed (‘ghee-sprinkled’; cf. I.58.2), and that jána- is somewhat awkward as a designation of Agni (see my uneasy ‘being’).

Still, the standard interpretation of the verse is more awkward: if the accusatives in cd are held to refer to the gods (“the divine race”; see 10a daívyaṃ jánam), they are described by adjectives that ill befit them; if Agni is held to be their referent (as supported by the above arguments), then the verse calls upon Agni to sacrifice to himself; if the accusatives refer to the human race, then the verse calls upon Agni to sacrifice to humans, which is entirely contrary to the Vedic model of sacrifice. By separating the two halves of the verse into different clauses and by interpreting yájā as a 1st singular, I account for the different referent types of the two sets of accusatives and avoid having Agni sacrifice to himself by providing another agent for the verb in cd.


## 03
On vírūpavát see comm. ad X.14.5. This is the only place in the RV where vírūpa- has to be interpr. as a PN.


## 04
máhikeru- is a hapax of unclear meaning. Mayrhofer (EWA s.v. máhikeruand céru-) plausibly suggests a connection with √ci ‘observe, take note’; so also Old.

Its apparent structural similarity to mahivrata in 3c might invite a complementary semantic analysis.

The etymological figure śukréṇa śocíṣā is not rendered so in English because “blazing blaze” strikes me as limp.


## 08
Note the phonetic figure in c: br̥hád bhā́bíbhrato havír, playing with b, bh, and h; ṛ and r.

Most tr. take bṛhád bhā́ḥ ‘lofty light’ as coreferential with tvā (=Agni), not as object of bíbhrataḥ, parallel with havíḥ. This in some ways makes better sense, though the word order weakly favors my tr. Old (SBE) also takes the phrase as the obj. of bíbhrataḥ and adduces a telling parallel, IV.5.1 kathā́dāśemāgnáye bṛhád bhā́ḥ, where the phrase is emphatically not coreferential with Agni.


## 10
I tr. sudānavaḥ as “you of good drops,” rather than “of good gifts,” which is always also possible for this ambiguous stem, because of “the Maruts of good drops” (marútaḥ sudā́navaḥ) who ended the previous hymn (44.14) in the same structural position. But as a general descriptor of the gods in this verse it might be better as “of good gifts.” [I.46-47 JPB]
