+++
title = "048"

+++
Dawn


## 01
The voc. uṣaḥ was carelessly omitted in the published tr.


## 02
With most tr./comm. I follow Bloomfield in interpr. viśvasuvíd- as haplology for *viśva-vasu-víd-.

The pāda break favors taking bhū́ri with the verb, as most do (e.g., Ge “geben sie sich viele Mühe”), but semantically it goes better with pāda a. Cf. expressions like bhū́ri te vásu (I.81.2, 6, VIII.32.8), bhū́ri vā́mam (I.124.12, VI.71.4), and esp.

bhū́ri … saúbhagam in 9c below.

On sūnṛ́tā- as ‘liberality, liberal (gifts)’, see Re’s discussion here (EVP III.17), summarizing previous work.


## 03
Most tr. take jīrā́as agentive with an objective genitive (e.g., Ge “die Wagen in Bewegung setzend”), but I think this unlikely because it would be the only such usage of jīrá-. (gó-jīra- in IX.110.3 is sometimes so interpreted [Ge ‘die Kühe zutreibend’] but need not be.) Although not taking jīrā́as transitive leaves ráthānām without any clear governing word, that seems preferable to claiming a unique value for jīrá- in this passage. That Dawn may be “the lady of the chariots” is also suggested by her hundred chariots in 7c.

The referent of yé in c and the affiliation of that rel. cl. are disputed. Ge takes the rel. pronoun as referring to the ráthānām of b. This has the merit of associating the rel. with an adjacent noun in the proper number and gender and keeping the relative clause syntactically confined to the verse in which it appears. However, it affords these chariots more agency and significance than I think they deserve. Instead, the rel. cl. of cd seems to group more naturally with the identically structured yé clause in 4ab, which also has a 3rd pl. presential reflexive verb preceded by a loc. pl.

and also contains a genitive referrring to Dawn. The two clauses also begin with a metrically irregular 11-syllable pāda with a rest right before the caesura, an irregularity that also speaks for their association. This pair of relative clauses is resolved by the main clause in 4cd. Such an enjambed structure is characteristic of pragāthas. (Re also take the two verses this way.) Then there is the question of the meaning of dadhriré. It belongs to the root √dhṛ ‘hold, support’, and in this (rare) middle usage seems to have reflexive value ‘hold oneself’/‘hold oneself fast’, with the possible pregnant sense ‘hold oneself ready’ (so Re, WG, Ge n.). I take it as having slightly different meanings in simile and frame (a favored poetic strategy of Vedic bards). In the simile it depicts sailors (or some sort of boatsmen) standing firm against the rigors of the voyage, whereas in the frame the subjects (who are identified in the parallel rel. clause of 4ab as patrons) hold themselves ready to give, an action that is also the topic of that parallel rel.

clause. In fact, one could almost construe (or supply) the dānā́ya of 4b with dadhriré as well as with its own clause.


## 04
This verse is somewhat oddly constructed, especially the distribution of elements in cd. The opening of c, átrā́ha tád, seems overburdened with functionless elements, esp. the tád, which has no obvious referent. As it turns out, this opening is found elsewhere (I.135.8, 154.6), with a likewise referent-less tád. I therefore assume that the tád here emphasizes the temporal/logical átra. Then we find two gen. plurals, eṣām and nṝṇā́m, separated from each other, but probably ultimately coreferential. I assume that enclitic eṣām serves as the correlative for yé in pāda a (though we might expect téṣām) and that the unusually heavy opening of the pāda has bumped it into pseudo-second position after the first real word of the clause, káṇvaḥ. But until we understand more about the interaction of the placement of these various elements, this is simply an after-the-fact description. It should be noted that eṣām generally does not show the standard Wackernagel’s Position behavior (modified 2nd position) that we might expect from an enclitic, and in particular has a tendency to take final position. The nṝṇā́m at the end of the verse simply doubles and further specifies eṣām.

I have tr. nā́ma twice, for ease of English.


## 06
The first pāda depicts the usual effect of Dawn - sending all creatures on their daily business.

ódatī: Though this form appears to be a fem. pres. participle to a Class I present (also in its other occurrence VIII.69.2), such an analysis is formally troublesome, because the feminine stem is weak (-at-ī), though a strong suffix is expected in Class I (e.g., bhávantī-). Moreover, there are no other forms to the putative present *ódati; the standard present is nasal-infix unátti with transitive value.

And ódatī- lacks participial sense: it simply means ‘wet’. It thus seems best to take it as a non-participial -ant- adjective (as járant- is often interpreted). It is worth noting that Whitney (Roots) classifies it as a primary derivative of the root and gives no Class I present and that Gotō makes no mention of it in his monograph on Class I; it is likewise undiscussed in Lowe’s monograph on RVic participles.

As for its meaning here, it is used simultaneously in two senses: the literal one, ‘wet’, referring to the dew characteristic of early morning, and ‘lubricious’, referring to Dawn’s notorious hyperfeminine and sexual qualities, also reflected in 5ab yóṣeva … prabhuñjatī́“giving delight like a maiden.” vājínīvant- (also vājínī-vasu-). This fairly common adjective is obviously a derivative of extremely well-attested vājín- ‘prize-winning (horse)’, itself a possessive adjective formed to vā́ja- ‘prize’. The usual tr. of vājínīvant- are rather attenuated — Gr ‘gabenreich’, Ge (here) ‘du Reichbelohnende’, Debrunner (AiG II.2.

875) ’gabenreich’ — or render it as if it were identical to vā́ja-vant-; so Re. (here) ‘porteuse des prix de victoire’, WG ‘du Rennpreisbesitzende’. By contrast, I feel that both the apparent feminine vājínī and the second possessive suffix (-vant- in addition to -in-) should be noted and I interpret the stem as meaning ‘possessing prizewinning mares’. vājínīvant- is esp. characteristic of Dawn and other female figures (e.g., Sarasvatī), who might be expected to have female animals; though vāj́inī-vasuis almost entirely confined to the Aśvins, those gods are very closely associated with Dawn. Debrunner (AiG II.2.409) instead ascribes the -ī- to “Erweiterung durch -īnach Analogie anderer Wörter,” but doesn’t in this case suggest what other word(s) might be involved.


## 09
The standard tr. take the injunctive uchat as a modal (Ge “soll … hinweg leuchten”), but since this verb is parallel to a presential perfect nānāma (so Kü 278- 79, pace WG “hat sich … gebeut”) and a pres. indic. kṛṇoti, I see no reason to ascribe modal value to uchat.


## 10
The publ. tr. “with your lofty chariot … heed our call” implies that the chariot is the instrument of her hearing. This was not the intent: the chariot is simply one of her attributes.


## 11
sukṛ́taḥ is multiply ambiguous. Though it literally means ‘doing/performing well’ / ‘of good action’, it is ordinarily specialized for performing the sacrifice well and refers to the human actors in the ritual. However, it can also on occasion be used of gods (e.g., X.63.9). In this passage most tr. take it as a gen. sg. referring to the sacrificer and dependent on adhvarā́n (e.g., Ge “zu den Opfern des Frommen”).

However, this leaves ā́vaha without an object. I therefore read sukṛ́taḥ as acc. pl., and in fact I read it so twice — once as obj. of ā́vaha and referring to gods (so also Gr) and once as the goal of ā́vaha and referring to the mortal sacrificers. The first reading seems confirmed by the first pāda of the next verse, 12a, which “repairs” the less clear expression with víśvān devā́m̐ā́vaha, using the same verb. The second reading, referring to the sacrificers, allows the yé of 11d to have an antecedent of the right grammatical number. It would of course be possible to take sukṛ́taḥ only once, as referring to the gods, assuming the gapping of a pronominal antecedent to yé, but this loses the neat equation of gods and sacrificers.


## 14
The relative clause of ab (lit. “which previous seers …” yé … ṛ́ṣayaḥ pū́rve…) has no explicit referent in the main clause, but implicit is the notion that our praises should receive the same favorable response from Dawn as theirs did, so there is a suppressed gen. pl. téṣām or the like. The other passage containing the 3rd pl. mid.

pf. juhūré (VIII.8.6) is constructed almost identically to this one, though in dimeter meter, with a similar implicit understanding of the relation between subordinate cl.

and main cl.
