+++
title = "050"

+++
Sūrya Although this is the last hymn in the Praskaṇva group (I.44-50), it does not belong directly with the preceding hymns, which are clearly grouped in pairs and belong to the Prātaranuvāka litany.


## 03
I separate pādas a and b and supply a verb of extension with b. Most tr. take ádṛśram as the main verb of the whole verse. Although my interpretation requires more machinery, it takes account of the fact that ví is vanishingly rare with the root √dṛś (though it must be admitted that there’s an example in the nearby Praskaṇva hymn I.46.11), while it is common with roots like √tan ‘stretch’, which also appears regularly with raśmí-. Cf. X.129.5 vítato raśmíḥ. However, the standard tr. is certainly possible. ET also suggests that since ví is fairly common with √bhrāj, that might be the verb to understand with bc: “… his rays flashing widely through the peoples like fires.” Of course, ordinarily participles with preverbs are univerbated, but not always.


## 04
I don't understand Ge’s “pünktlich” for taráṇiḥ, which does not seem to reflect any of the possible meanings of √tṝ ‘cross over, surpass, etc.’. Here the idea is clearly that the Sun crosses the sky.


## 06
The first mention of any divine being but the Sun. The question here is whether we have two additional gods or one. The two vocatives pāvaka and varuṇa are in two different pādas (a, c), and the former is almost exclusively used elsewhere of Agni. However, already in the hymn (vs. 1) another standard epithet of Agni, jātávedas-, has been applied to a different god (Sūrya), and so it may be that aspects of Agni, an alter ego of the Sun in some sense, are being distributed to other gods in this hymn. Moreover, the sun is regularly considered Varuṇa’s eye, but not, I think, Agni’s. Re, however, takes pāvaka as Agni.

The other question is the identity of the “bustling one” (bhuraṇyánt-). The root √bhur and its derivatives are sometimes used of Agni and this referent is possible here, but I think it more likely that it refers to the human ritualist, who is active at the dawn sacrifice.

## 08-09
I assume that the seven mares of vs. 8 are the same as the sleek daughters (śundhyúvaḥ … naptyàḥ) (or granddaughters) of the chariot, but I do not know why the rare word naptī́- is used of them. Thieme (KlSch: 220), on the basis of śundhyúvaḥ, thinks they are wild geese (“…hat sich sieben Wildgänse als Tochter des Wagens angeschirrt”), but this seems to introduce an unnecessary complication since śundhyú- can be taken in its literal meaning.


## 08
The reassignment of Agni epithets continues in this verse: śocíṣkeśa- ‘flamehaired’ is otherwise only of Agni.


## 09
sū́raḥ: Although most take this as nom. sg. (Gr, Ge, Th, Lü), Re makes a good case for it as gen. sg. (followed, it seems, by WG), also adducing V.31.11 sū́raś cid rátham.


## 12
ET comments “1.50.12 is AVS 1.22.4, AVP 1.28.4, the final verse of 4-verse compositions for getting rid of jaundice. However, it's interesting that in both AV recensions the first verse refers to the sun, but it's not the same as RV 1.50.11. The RV seems to have a tṛca which incorporates the verse that appears as 1.50.12 whereas AV tacks it on to a different tṛca. On the other hand, the 1st pl verb forms are jarring in RV 1.50.12, but in the AV they harmonise with other 1st pls.” This formal and structural argument suggests that the verse was taken over from Atharvan context, a possibility that its contents also support.
