+++
title = "051"

+++
Indra


## 02
This verse displays a type of “poetic repair”: the first hemistich has a grammatical subject that is ordinarily inanimate (ūtáyaḥ ‘[forms of] help’) with a verb that ought to have a personal subject (abhí .. avanvan ‘they attained to / gained’), with an object possessing a number of qualities, but unnamed; the third pāda solves this slight puzzle by giving names to both: the subject is the Ṛbhus, the object Indra.

The spatial contrast in b between filling the midpace, but being himself enclosed by his own powers (muscle-bound?) is nice.

jávana- occurs only here in the RV, but the -ana-suffix ordinarily makes transitive nominals (pace Ge’s “raschhandeln,” Re’s “véloce”).


## 03
Though the verse starts promisingly, with two identifiable myths (Vala, pāda a; Atri, pāda b -- though the 100-doored [house] is not otherwise known), the second hemistich brings obscurity. As noted in the intro., the standard myth about Vimada involves the Aśvins bringing him a wife, usually with the verb (ní) √vah. Is this the same story, with vásu ‘good thing’ a generic substitution for ‘wife’, or is Indra’s relationship with Vimada of a different sort from the Aśvins’? As for pāda d, the action here is completely obscure (see Ge’s somewhat desperate note attempting to make this about a rocky nest [Felsennest] of robbers), and what it has to do with the Vimada story is equally obscure. Since nartáyan in d is only a participle, it should be attached to the main clause in c rather than relating a separate myth. A final bit of obscurity is saséna ‘with grain’, which opens c. The stem sasá- generally shows up in enigmatic phrases referring, probably, to the ritual grass and/or the cereal ritual oblations.


## 04
This verse, by contrast, clearly concerns the Vṛtra myth and is for the most part unchallenging. It is worth noting that its first pāda is structured almost exactly like 3a and begins and ends identically: tvám … (a)vṛṇor ápa. The verse also contains an occurrence of vásu (in b), which unfortunately doesn’t shed any light on the mysterious vásu in 3c. In fact 4b is the only part of this verse that is somewhat unclear: the dā́numad vásu (‘drop-laden goods’, taking dā́nu to ‘drop’ with Gr and Re, rather than ‘gift’ with Ge [/WG]) is of course the water confined in the mountain by Vṛtra, which Indra releases. But why does Indra hold it fast (ádhārayaḥ) in the mountain rather than releasing it as usual? The passage is similar to the Indra ātmastuti X.49.9 aháṃ saptá sraváto dhārayaṃ vṛ́ṣā. Perhaps he gave the waters, as it were, emotional support - but this doesn't sound like either the Rigveda or Indra.

At best we’re left with an attenuated meaning like “help out.” Or — a long shot — this is an expression like I.103.7 sasántaṃ … abodhayó ‘him “you ‘awakened’ the sleeping serpent,” where abodhayaḥ is meant to evoke its opposite, ‘put to sleep’.

See intro. to that hymn and Jamison 1982/83. In that case ‘hold fast’ would evoke ‘let go’. For a possibly similar passage with Indra “bringing to rest” the waters rather than releasing them, see V.32.1 and comm. thereto. However, the formulaic nexus between √budh ‘awake’ and √sas / svap ‘sleep’ is very strong, whereas √dhṛ is not regularly paired with, say, forms of √sṛj ‘release’, and so I advance this possibility only very tentatively. ET offers another intriguing suggestion. She cites the wellknown Old Persian PN Dāraya-vahu (corresponding phonologically to Skt.

*dhāráya- + vásu, and wonders “Could the poet be deliberately using, perhaps even
punning on, an inherited Indo-Iranian collocation of the verb *dhṛ with object *vásu?”


## 05
Note alliteration: … pipror … prā́rujaḥ púraḥ, prá …


## 06
JL cleverly suggests that the verse contains a word play on the PN of Indra’s defeated opponent Arbuda: by characterizing him as ‘great’ (mahā́nt-), the poet implicitly evokes the semantic opposite árbha-, arbhaká-, which resembles the PN phonologically and would help regularize the non-IndoAryan -b- in arbudá. So, “you trampled down Arbuda (the little one), though he was great.” As JL points out, support for this interpretation comes from 13a ádadā árbhām mahaté …, kakṣī́vate vṛcayā́m … “You gave little Vṛcayā to great Kakṣīvant.

## 07
The phrasing of pāda b is conceptually backwards, strikingly so. Ordinarily Indra drinks the soma and is moved to be generous, whereas here his (latent) generosity rouses itself in anticipation of the soma.

víśvāni carelessly omitted in publ. tr.: “all the bullish strengths.” More alliteration: vṛścā́śátror áva víśvāni vṛ́ṣnyā, with sequences of v with either i or ṛ, followed by ś or ṣ (with a few more v’s and a ś thrown in).


## 09
The avratá- ‘having no commandment’ of 8b is transformed into the even less savory ápavrata- ‘against/rejecting commandments’ and contrasted with their opposite number, the ánuvrata- ‘following commandments’.

The image of Indra’s transformation into an ant (vamrá-) presumably concerns his ability to pass unnoticed in the enemy camp and then bring the fortifications down from within. However, “smashing apart” (ví √han) doesn't seem a likely action for an ant, or even a huge nest of ants, so the combined image is somewhat unsettled.

The identity of the enemy in this hemistich is not clear. The other occurrence of the phrase dyā́m ínakṣant- (X.45.7) refers to Agni, but that identification seems unlikely here. It should also be noted that the other genitive phrase referring to this enemy, vṛddhásya cid várdhataḥ “the one who, though already full grown, kept growing,” is grammatically problematic because the active present participle várdhant- should be transitive, as the rest of this extremely well-attested active inflection is. Gotō (1987: 291) notes the problem but has no explanation either.

Expected middle *várdhamānasya would of course not fit this metrical position, but that is not enough for a Rigvedic poet to contravene grammar. However, the active part. more nearly matches the paired ppl. phonologically: vṛddha… vardha…, and this may have influenced the poet to use the active form.


## 10
A nice adjacency figure, nṛmaṇo manoyujaḥ.

Ge (/WG) supplies “with strength” with pū́ryamānam ‘being filled’, but Re’s “with soma” (an alternative allowed by Ge in his n.) seems more likely on the basis of other “fill” phrases involving Indra. Esp. apposite is V.34.2, adduced by Ge, where Indra fills his belly with soma while Uśanā offers him a weapon, much as here.

Indra’s exhilaration in the immediately following verse here (11a) also supports the soma interpretation.


## 11
vaṅkū́vaṅkutárā is generally taken as characterizing the speed of the two horses, and I agree that that is the general idea -- but think this meaning arises indirectly. Ge takes it as ‘flying’, Re as ‘rapid’, Hoffmann (Inj. 221) ‘ever faster moving’, WG ‘ever faster galloping’, but this basic meaning does not fit the root to which it most likely belongs, √vañc ‘move crookedly’, or the other occurrences of vaṅkú-, esp. I.114.4. I think the nuance here is the same one found in the deriv. adj.

vákva(n)- ‘billowing’ à ‘surging’. The non-linear movement of the root is here concretized as a wave motion, with the attendant speed and power associated with waves.

The c pāda presents some difficulties of construction, particularly the two accusatives yayím and apáḥ, which do not match in number. Ge and Re supply ‘mounts’ (ádhi tiṣṭhati) from the end of pāda b (or perhaps ā́… tiṣṭhasi from 12a) and ‘chariot’ with yayím and begin a new clause with nír. So, “the powerful one (mounted) the speeding (chariot); he released the water in a stream.” Alternatively Ge suggests that c is a single clause, but that apáḥ is not an acc. pl., as is usual, but the rare gen. sg. construed with srótasā, so “the powerful one released the speeding (chariot) with the water’s stream(speed) [mit des Wassers Strom(schnelle)].” Neither of these fussy solutions is appealing. With regard to the latter, nir apáḥ [acc.pl.] √sṛj appears to be formulaic (cf. I.103.2, X.124.7, the only other examples of níḥ √sṛj that I know of), and so a gen. sg. is unlikely; with regard to the former, it seems overly elaborate to supply so much material in a pāda that can be read as a unity. I follow Old in taking yayím as an epithet of (so Old) or, better, an appositive or qualifier to the waters. Since áp- ‘water(s)’ is in essence a plurale tantum, a parallel singular would not be surprising. For yayí/ī́- qualifying waters, cf. X.78.7 síndhavo ná yayíyaḥ “coursing like rivers,” adduced by Old (also X.92.5). My tr. “for coursing” rather than “as coursing” or the like is a concession to English.


## 12
Another verse with tricky constructions. In the first pāda the loc. vṛṣapā́ṇesu goes misleadingly easily into English (“you mount the chariot to…” like “the bus to town”). Despite my tr. I think it more likely that vṛṣapā́ṇesu is functionally a loc. absolute of the type “when bullish drinks (are available)” à “on the occasion of bullish drinks / when there are bullish drinks.” In pāda b most tr. (Gr, Ge, Re, WG) take prábhṛtā as representing -āḥ out of sandhi - following the Pp., hence a nom. pl. m. past participle - but as Old points out, this is very disruptive to the syntax. Better, with Old, to interpret it as a loc. sg. to the

-i-stem prábhṛti- ‘presentation’, a possibility suggested by Pischel (see Old) and
mentioned by Ge in his n.

Pāda c is standardly taken as preposed to d and the verb is tr. as indicative (e.g., Ge “du … deine Freude hast,” Re “tu prends plaisir”), but cākánaḥ is undeniably subjunctive; yáthā + subjunctive regularly builds purpose clauses, which are regularly postposed. I therefore take pāda c with ab: the purpose of Indra’s mounting of the chariot is the pleasure he will receive at the soma sacrifice.

In d all tr. take ślókam as ‘fame’, but the noun refers rather to a very perceptible noise or call that signals some event. The event is often the sacrifice and the ślóka-, the noise, is often issued by the pressing stones (e.g., I.113.3, 139.10, III.53.10); the noise of the ślóka- is loud enough to reach to heaven (e.g., I.83.6, 190.4). This pāda contains this same notion of the ślóka-, the audible signal of the sacrifice, going to heaven, but it seems also, oddly, to suggest that Indra follows it there. Perhaps this refers to Indra’s departure to heaven at the end of the sacrifice, a common theme.

## 13
Indra’s transformation into a human female is no more surprising than his changing into an ant in vs. 9, and is better supported. See Ge’s note, as well as my 1991 Hyenas, where in a widespread story in Vedic prose Indra is transformed into a female hyena.


## 14
The standard tr. take pāda b as a nominal sentence (“the praise song is a doorpost”), but the verb of pāda a, aśrāyi ‘has been fixed, propped’, fits b very nicely, as Old argues. Ge suggests such an interpretation in his notes, without rendering it in tr.

The poet Kakṣīvant mentioned in vs. 13 is associated with the Pajras, who are mentioned a number of times in the hymns attributed to Kakṣīvant. ET points out that pāda b probably contains a pun on the PN pajrá-, which literally means ‘sturdy, steadfast’, a meaning which works well with the fixed doorpost.

I take prayantā́in d as a periphrastic future, not a straight agent noun.
