+++
title = "052"

+++
Indra


## 01
The verb mahayā can either be a 2nd sg. imperative (so Ge [/WG]) or a 1st sg.

subjunctive (so Re). In favor of the former interpretation is the parallel initial verse of the last hymn, I.51.1. abhí tyám meṣám ... madatā, with imperative (2nd pl.); in favor of the latter is the other main verb in this verse, 1st sg. opt. vavṛtyām. Either is possible; I weakly favor the 1st ps. subjunctive.

Since subhū́- ‘of good essence’ is adjectival, a noun should be supplied as the subject of pāda b (pace Ge, who simply tr. “Kräfte”). The likely solution is found in vs. 4 subhvàḥ svā́abhíṣtayaḥ “his own superior powers of good essence,” and I have supplied abhíṣtayaḥ here. (So also, it seems, WG.) The standard tr. take cd as a single clause, with the acc. índram of d identified with the rátham of c. Although this is not impossible, turning the literal chariot of a god towards the sacrifice is a common practice in the RV, just as turning the god himself is, and an equation of Indra and the chariot is somewhat awkward. I therefore think we have two separate clauses, with ā́… vavṛtyām applicable to both.

The c pāda has, in my interpretation, a non-insistent but appealing syntactic play, with the compound havana-syád- “rushing to the summons” parallel to the simile átyaṃ ná vā́jam “like a steed (rushing to) the prize” — the suppressed term being a form of the root √syand and the accusative vā́jam matching the first compound member havana-.


## 03
A challenging verse, describing Indra in unusual ways and deploying unusual words and constructions.

The first pāda contains the difficult but clearly related words dvaró dvaríṣu, which seem also to belong with vṛ̥́ka-dvaras- (II.30.8) ‘having the X of a wolf’.

Wackernagel (1918 [see details in EWA s.v. dvará-] = KlSch 325-26) adduces the Avestan root duuar, which expresses a daevic way of moving. If vṛ̥́ka-dvaras- means ‘having the movement/gait of a wolf’, I tr. the words in this passage as ‘skulking, skulker’, as characteristic of a wolf.

The rest of the first pāda consists of vavrá ū́dhani. The latter is clearly a locative, but the former is taken by the Pp. as vavráḥ, nom. sg. of vavrá- ‘cave, cavity’ out of sandhi, an interpretation followed by the standard tr. and argued for by Old. (Gr, however, takes it as a 3rd sg. pf. to √vṛ ‘cover’, vavré.) The sense is taken to be “a cavity at the (soma) udder”; that is, Indra’s mouth, throat, and stomach are an enormous empty space to be filled with soma. By contrast I take it as a loc. to the same noun vavrá- and a simultaneous reference to the Vṛtra myth and the Vala myth, as well as fitting the image conjured up by the dvar-words. To start with the last, caves are good places to skulk and quite possibly a haunt of wolves. As for the Vṛtra myth, Vṛtra himself is called a vavrá- in V.32.8, while Vala is itself a cave and the word vavré is several times used of this myth and Indra’s involvement in it (IV.1.13, V.31.3). Thus Indra is “skulking” in the vicinity of these mythological enemies in the first part of this verse. The published tr. limits the reference of vavré to the Vṛtra myth; I would now expand that.

I then take the adjacent loc. ū́dhani as contrastive and construe it with pāda b: Indra skulks near his enemies (the “cavities”), but at the (soma-)udder he becomes roused to elation and display his golden foundation, that is, the riches he will dispense in return for the soma. Indra’s bright budhná- here contrasts with the budhná- associated with Vṛtra in vs. 6, where the latter lies on the budhná- “of the dusky realm” (rájasaḥ).

The last part of the last pāda, sá hí páprir ándhasaḥ, is also problematic. It is universally interpreted as “he is filled / fills himself with soma,” which makes good sense. Unfortunately it does violence to the grammar. First, pápri- does not otherwise mean ‘filling’ (in my opinion, but see, e.g., Grestenberger, JAOS 133.2: 271, though she does not give exx.), but either ‘providing’ or ‘delivering’.

Furthermore, reduplicated -i-nominals are otherwise agentive (AiG II.2.291-93) and regularly take accusatives (see esp. VI.50.13 dā́nu pápriḥ ‘supplying gifts’)(see Grestenberger JAOS 133.2). Ge is aware of the morphological problem (though not, it seems, the semantic one) and in his n. suggests that the form is either reflexive or that jaṭháram ‘belly’ should be supplied, but there is no basis for either of these solutions. Therefore, although I see the attractions of “is filled with soma,” I do not see a way to wrest this meaning out of the text. Instead I take ándhasaḥ as a causal ablative and pápriḥ in the same fashion as VI.50.13. The clause then paraphrases pāda b: Indra provides wealth because he becomes exhilarated on soma.


## 04
It is not clear to me why Indra’s superior powers have barhis as their heavenly seat, but this does not license the grammatically impossible tr. of Ge and Re, who seemingly take sádmabarhiṣaḥ as modifying índram.

For avātá- see comm. ad I.38.7 and VIII.79.7.


## 05
svávṛṣṭi- is found only here (and 14c below, in the same phrase), and the etymological identity of vṛṣṭi- is not clear. Easiest (with Gr) would be to take the second member as vṛṣṭí- ‘rain’, but ‘having his own rain’ doesn’t make much sense.

Ge (n. to 14bc) connects it with várṣman- ‘height’, várṣiṣṭha- ‘highest’, vṛ́ṣan- ‘bull’, tacitly positing a root √vṛṣ ‘be high/great’ and tr. ‘Eigengrösse’. One of the difficulties with this interpretation is that the word should be a bahuvrīhi (so Old) not a karmadhāraya, judging from parallel formations (cf. svá-yukti, svá-vṛkti [pace Gr, Old]). I prefer the interpretation that links the word to the IE root *uer̯ ǵ ‘work’, found in Aves. varəz (and of course Engl. work, Grk. ἔργον)(see EWA s.v. svávṛṣṭi-).

So, evidently, Re: “son action propre,” though Re also takes it as a karmadhāraya.

Because of the formal parallels, I interpret it as a bahuvrīhi ‘having his own work’, even though this causes some problems: in this clause Indra must be referred to both in accusative, in this compound, and in the genitive, in the phrase asya yúdhyataḥ, which depends on máde. Nonetheless, as usual I don’t feel we can ignore grammar whenever it complicates interpretation.


## 06
durgṛ́bhiśvan- clearly belongs with durgṛ́bhi-, but the -śvan- is curious.

Probably best to explain it, with Scar (116) as a Kunstbildung based on ṛjíśvan- and possibly mātaríśvan-. For this reason I’ve translated it as a nickname.


## 07
I take yújyam as having gerundive force, construed with te, rather than simply ‘his own’ < ‘associated (with himself)’ of other tr.


## 09
Another puzzling verse, and my interpretation is accordingly not at all certain.

I take the first pāda, couched in the neuter, to refer to the sun (n. svàr-), the placing of which in heaven (as m. sū́ryam) was Indra’s last act in vs. 7. In the 2nd pāda the subjects of ákṛṇvata (note the middle, which should have self-beneficial force) make this sun into their own means of getting to heaven. As an -ana-nominal, róhana- (only here) should have transitive-causative force.

However, I think there is more going on here, for in the 2nd hemistich Indra is identified as the sun (n. svàr), while his helpers, the Maruts, are associated with humans, the descendents of Manu (mā́nuṣa-), and their activities. If Indra is the sun, then the sun of pāda a, which the Maruts/gods used to get themselves to heaven in pāda b, may well be Indra. For this identification note the -(ś)candra- reminiscent of Indra’s candra- in 3b, and in 6a the glowing heat surrounding Indra and his flaring power seem to depict something very like a solar Indra. The Maruts’ aid to Indra in the Vṛtra battle (4c, where they are called ūtáyaḥ as here) stood them in good stead, enabling them to bridge the distance between the human world and heaven by hitching their wagon to a star (=sun, =Indra).

I do not quite understand the bhíyasā of b, though it obviously must be considered in connection with the same word in the same metrical position in the b pāda of the next verse. I assume it refers here to the awe- and fear-inspiring aspects of Indra in his celestial form.

## 10
I agree with Ge (against Pp, Gr, Old, Re, WG) that loc. vájre should be read for Pp. nom. vájraḥ and that this locative is functionally, but not grammatically, parallel with áheḥ svanā́t “from the sound of the serpent.” With Ge and Old (and back at least to Ludwig), I see no choice but to accent the apparent voc. rodasī as ródasī. In the publ. tr. it should therefore be marked with an asterisk.


## 11
I supply a form of √tan ‘extend’ in the first pāda, though with a general injunctive sense, not the subjunctive of tatánanta in b. The “ten coils” of pāda a invite an interpretation of increased or increasing space, as do the next verses with their emphasis on distance and vast space.


## 13
The 2nd sg. act. forms bhuvaḥ and bhūḥ that serve as the main verbs of the first two pādas respectively are difficult to distinguish. (Note that Hoffmann [Inj.

214-15] translates them both as “bist.”) The problem is made more acute by the fact that though bhūḥ is definitely a root aor. injunctive, bhuvaḥ can either be the injunctive (on which see comm. ad IV.16.18) or the subjunctive to the root aor., as it is, in fact, in 11d. I have made an effort to distinguish them in tr., and given the general preterital cast of this verse and the previous one I am reluctant to interpret bhuvaḥ as subjunctive (“you will become the counterpart of earth”), though that interpretation is not beyond possibility.
