+++
title = "053"

+++
Indra


## 01
I am puzzled by Ge’s (/WG) interpretation of this pāda, which introduces a thief with no support from the text (“Noch nie hat ja einer das Kleinod wie (ein Dieb) bei Schlafenden gefunden”). As far as I can tell, the proposed purport is that it’s easy for a thief to find (and presumably steal) a treasure that belongs to people who are asleep, but not so easy for us to do so in this case. WG remark that stealing something from sleepers is a favored theme in later literature. But it is not otherwise met with in the RV, as far as I know, and it doesn’t fit the context very well. I think the point is rather simpler: we had better get to work presenting our praise to Indra because the lazy and somnolent don’t get rewarded - “asleep at the switch” is an English idiom for people who don’t pay attention.


## 02
The slightly slangy tone of the previous verse is continued here, in the repeated verb duráḥ ‘break out’ and the cpd. ákāmakarśana- ‘not shorting desires’, as well, perhaps, as śikṣānará- (for which see AiG II.1.316-17, which classifies it with cmpds of the type trasá-dasyu- with verbal 1st member governing the 2nd).

There is surely more to be said about śikṣānará-; among other things, its accent doesn’t match the trasádasyu- type. But at least for now I will avoid the very contentious topic of such cmpds. śikṣānará- is also found in IV.20.8.

## 03
mā́… kā́mam ūnayīḥ “don’t leave the desire lacking” matches the compound akāmakarśanaḥ “who does not short their desires” in 2c.


## 06
tā́ni vṛ́ṣṇyā can be either nom. or acc. Most tr. opt for the former, but I do not see how “bullish powers” can be the agent of exhilaration in the same way that soma drinks are. Surely the point is to rouse Indra’s bullish powers for the fight to come.

Ge (/WG) take dáśa … sahásrāṇi as “ten thousand,” while Re separates the two numbers as I do. The former interpretation is certainly possible, although the distance between the words mildly supports taking them separately. The compound numbers in vs. 9 are adjacent to each other. However, note navatím … náva ‘99’ in I.54.6d.

A little phonological play: barhíṣmate … barháyaḥ.


## 07
Note the parallel complex double figures opening pādas a and b: yudhā́ yúdham and purā́púram, with instr. and acc. sg. of a root noun in each instance.
