+++
title = "054"

+++
Indra


## 01
The mā́prohibitive lacks a verb, and there is nothing nearby to supply. The universal solution, “leave, abandon,” does the trick, although it would be nice to have some support for it.

róruvad vánā is variously interpreted. I have taken vánā as extent-of-space, though construing it as a second object of ákrandayaḥ (WG) would also be possible, save for the fact that the same phrase recurs in 5b and WG must construe it with a different verb. There seems no reason to supply a separate verb to govern it, as Ge does: “(du knackest),” and taking vánā as agreeing with róruvat as Re does (“les arbres (ont) grincé-violemment”) introduces unnecessary grammatical complications.

(Is he thinking of this as a variant on neuter pl. + sg. verb?) For an expression similar to my suggested interpretation see váne … vacasyate “display his eloquence in the wood” in the next hymn (55.4).


## 03
The construction of the second hemistich is not entirely clear. Most tr. take barháṇā kṛtáḥ together (e.g., Re “créé par une pression-violente”), but this requires supplying a verb with the first part of pāda d (e.g., Re “(s’est mis)”). I instead think the idiom is puráḥ √kṛ ‘put in front’ (I.102.9, VIII.45.9, X.171.4, of which the first two have ‘chariot’ as obj. - e.g., VIII.45.9 rátham puráḥ … kṛṇotu). I do not take háribhyām as an ablative, because 1) puráḥ + ABL is only dubiously attested, and 2) setting Indra-as-chariot in front of his horses would be literally putting the cart before the horse. I take háribhyām as dative, and think the idea is that Indra/the chariot is set out front for the horses, that is, for them to be hitched up.

Ge and Re take vṛṣabháḥ with rátho hí ṣáḥ, but this is basically impossible, given the position of the hí, which overwhelmingly takes 2nd position. Nonetheless I agree that Indra is being identified with the chariot (not, however, with Ge the chariot(-fighter)); WG supply “word” as the referent of sáḥ, but the striking equation of Indra and chariot better fits the extravagance of the praise of Indra.


## 05
ní … vṛṇákṣi is here tr. ‘yank down’, whereas in the preceding hymn, 9d, I render ní … avṛṇak as ‘wrenched down’. The two should have been harmonized in the publ. tr. More serious is the question of what object the verb takes here. Most tr.

use vánā, which, admittedly, is the only available accusative, but I am reluctant to follow this interpretation for two reasons: 1) As noted above róruvad vánā also appears in 1c, which suggests that these words belong together and one shouldn’t be extracted to serve as a complement for a different verb; 2) I really doubt that there’s an alternate version of the Śuṣṇa story that involves felling trees on his head. In fact Śuṣṇa himself serves several times as the object of (ni) √vṛj (I.101.2 śúṣṇam aśúṣaṃ ny ā́vṛṇak, also VI.18.8, 26.3). In nearby I.51.11 Indra destroys Śūṣṇa’s fortified strongholds (dṛṃhitā́ḥ … púraḥ), and I’m inclined to supply them here, with Indra wrenching them down onto the head of their hapless defender. Note that Indra also destroys púraḥ in the next vs. (6d). I would thus change the publ. tr. to “as you wrench down (the fortresses) of the snorting Śuṣṇa onto his head.” The question in the last pāda, kás tvā pári, lacks a verb, but it does contain the preverb pári, which suggests the solution: pari √vṛj is a common idiom meaning ‘evade, avoid’, and since the root √vṛj supplies the main verb of the earlier part of the verse (5a ní … vṛṇákṣi), there is support for supplying it here, with the pleasing effect that the two different preverbs used with it provide two different idioms.


## 06
Support for supplying ‘help’ in pāda c (from āvitha in a) comes from VIII.50.9 yáthā prā́va étaśam kṛ́tvye dháne, with the same root √av ‘help’ and the same situation depicted.


## 07
As Ge notes, práti inoti is not otherwise attested, and so its sense here is unclear (Ge “der sich an das Gebot hält,” Re “qui … va au-devant de l’ordonnance,” WG “der … das Gebot entgegensendet”). I prefer to read the práti as adverbial ‘in turn’, not as a preverb, and ínvati in its usual transitive sense ‘drive, advance [smtg]’.

See I.55.4.

On the apparent fem. dā́nu- ‘drop/gift’ see comm. ad I.32.9.


## 10
A poetically dense verse with striking images and concomittant difficulties.

The first problem is the isolated compound dharúṇa-hvara-, modifying támaḥ ‘darkness’ in pāda a. The compound is generally interpreted as a tatpuruṣa, with - hvara- in verbal sense governing the first member (e.g., Ge "die den Urgrund der Gewässer zu Fall brachte"), but the accent is wrong: we would expect final accent of the type puraṃ-dará- ‘fortress-smashing’, brahma-kārá- ‘formulation-making’. By accent the compound should be a bahuvrīhi (so WG “deren Wölbung ihr Grund war”). The s-stem hváras- means ‘snare, tangle’ (from the meaning of the root √hvṛ ‘go crookedly’). I suggest that hvará- has a similar meaning and the whole compound means ‘whose tangles were the foundation (of the waters: apā́m)’. And what would this mean? In order to decode it, we must first note the use of dharúṇa- elsewhere in the Savya hymns: 52.2: párvato ná dharúneṣu ácyutaḥ “like a mountain, immovable on its foundations” and 56.5-6: ví yát tiró dharúṇam ácyutam … “when you traversed the immovable foundation” and … divó dharúṇam … pṛthivyā́ḥ … “the foundation of heaven and of earth.” Given the connection of dharúṇa- with ácyuta- and párvataelsewhere, I think we can confidently take the támaḥ in a and párvataḥ in b as coreferential (unlike Ge [/WG], Re). Remember also that Vṛtra is associated with murky darkness (e.g., his lying “on the foundation of the dusky realm” in I.52.6). In other words the mountain within Vṛtra’s belly in pāda b is the pure darkness of pāda a. Its “tangles” represent the inability to see a clear path in the dark and may also represent what happens to vision as it gets dark, the blurring and distortion of objects.

These tangles provide a foundation, and an enclosure, for the waters. If I am correct, it is a powerful image.

The second hemistich is also problematic. At issue is the meaning of anuṣṭhā́ḥ, which Indra smashes. The form must be acc. pl. feminine (though Scar [644] allows the possibility of a nom. sg. masc., which would necessarily separate it from the preceding víśvāḥ). The lexeme ánu √sthā straightforwardly means ‘stand by, stand following, stand along’ and can be used for helpers who stand by a leader (as indeed in nearby I.52.4); see exx. adduced by Scar. Scar then reasonably suggests that anuṣṭhā́ḥ here refers to ‘Gefolgsleute’ (sim. WG). But this introduces a set of subordinates and helpers to Vṛtra that do not otherwise figure in this well-known myth. Ge takes it as “Einsperrer” (barriers), which makes sense but is hard to extract from the form. Re’s “les positions-successives” is apparently an attempt to render Ge’s translation in a lexically legitimate way, but it doesn’t make much sense. My “rows (of palings) … in succession” is a similar attempt, with the palings a complete invention. I do not feel that a satisfying solution has yet been reached.
