+++
title = "055"

+++
Indra


## 01
phonetic figure … ví papratha, … pṛthivī́… práti #

## 01-02
The two stems varimán- and várīman- appear here in successive verses without clear differentiation in meaning (though they do appear in different grammatical forms, nom. sg. and instr. pl. respectively).


## 02
The object of the verb práti gṛbhṇāti in the frame, which would correspond to the rivers in the simile, is not expressed. Ge (/WG) supplies “die Somaströme,” Re “chants.” Given the liquid nature of the simile, Ge’s suggestion seems the most likely.

Unfortunately most of the examples of ví √śri are used of the opening of the divine doors in Āprī hymns, so there is no formulaic material to aid in determining what to supply. The phrase yudhmá ójasā is repeated in 5b and ójasā alone in 6b, both in the same metrical position.


## 03
As Ge notes, √bhuj ‘enjoy, derive benefit’ is formulaically associated with mountains, however odd that association may be to us. The question is then what does Indra enjoy like a mountain. Ge takes it to be one of the elements in b, either the ‘principles’ (neut. pl. dhárman-) or the ‘manliness’ (neut. sg. nṛmṇá-), and interprets masc. sg. tám in pāda as attraction from tā́ni or tád respectively. This is not impossible, but I prefer to take the object in the frame as soma, which has the correct gender and number, appeared in the previous vs. (2c), and is certainly something Indra enjoys (although I have found no passages in which soma is explicitly construed with √bhuj). The message of this first hemistich of vs. 3 - that Indra displays manly power in order to enjoy the soma - is essentially the same as that of 2c, where he “acts the bull” to drink the soma.

Re rather trickily interprets the simile / frame construction with one verbal expression in the frame (irajyasi “tu règnes sur”) and one in the simile (bhujé “comme on jouit”), but this completely violates the structure of RVic similes, which always hold the verbal notion constant between simile and frame. See Jamison 1982 (IIJ 24). WG supply soma, as I do, but also supply the verb ‘drink’ in pāda a and separate it syntactically from pāda b. There seems no reason to do that.

In c I am very tempted to read *devátāti with one accent, the loc. sg. of devátāt-, rather than the transmitted devátā́ti, that is, devátā + áti, with the adverbial instr. to devátā plus the preverb áti. (An asterisk should therefore be inserted in the publ. tr.) The loc. *devátāti would convey essentially the same meaning as devátā, and though prá √cit is very common, prá-áti √cit would only occur here. For a parallel construction with prá cékite + instr. and loc., see VI.61.13 prá yā́mahimnā́ mahínāsu cékite “The one who by her greatness shines ever more brightly among the great (rivers).”


## 04
What’s going on in this verse is a little baffling, but it seems to concern Indra’s participation in the ritual as a (quasi-)priest-poet, speaking along with the other priests (namasyúbhiḥ)(a) and (b) announcing his own name at that ritual. (That ‘name’ should be supplied here is clear from I.57.3, another Savya hymn, with nā́ma indriyám.) Indra’s “singing along” with the human priests, as it were, is also found in the passages adduced in Ge’s n. to 4a. It is a familiar topic.

Indra also seems to be homologized to soma in the first pāda: the only other occurrence of vacasyate is found in a soma hymn (IX.99.6), where soma “displays his eloquence” while sitting in the cups (camū́ṣu). Our word vána- ‘wood(en)’ is often used in the soma maṇḍala for the wooden cup in which soma is put, and a wellattested formula combines váne, the bull (there =soma), and noisemaking, as here: IX.7.3 vṛ́ṣā́va cakradad váne “the bull has roared down into the wood(en) cup” (cf.

IX.74.1, 88.2, 107.22). This superimposition of soma imagery on Indra contributes to the obscurity of this pāda, esp. what “in the wood” means in reference to Indra. Ge (n.

4a) seems to think of a sort of summer camp in the woods for ṛṣis and their families, while Re suggests a “marche” in the forest. I doubt both scenarios, although I do not have a satisfactory solution of my own. If váne … vacasyate evokes the phrase róruvad vánā of the immediately preceding hymn (54.1, 5), it can on the one hand refer to Indra’s loud roar while doing battle in a natural setting; but in a ritual context it might refer to the sacrificial posts or to the wood for the ritual fire, though I am not entirely persuaded by either.

Indra’s benevolent aspect, despite his bullish nature, is emphasized in the second hemistich.


## 05
As noted in the intro., this martial verse contrasts with the peaceful preceding one, a contrast emphasized by their parallel structure.

A cute play in nighánighnate, where the preverb ni appears to repeat in the middle of the word, although the second ni consists of the root-final n of the intensive reduplication followed by an i-liaison.


## 06
This verse cannot be a single clause (as Re, WG seem to take it) because the finite verb sṛjat in d lacks accent, while hí in the first pāda should induce accent on the verb. But if we separate the last pāda from the rest, there is no main verb, just the pres. participles vināśáyan and kṛṇván. Although present participles are rarely predicated (as opposed to past participles), there are cases of such predication (pace Lowe 2012), and I consider this one of them. In fact I connect the first three pāda of this verse with the preceding verse, 5cd - with 6abc giving the reasons why the people trust Indra - and the present participles in some sense reflect the intensive (that is, iterative-frequentative) participle of 5d: he “is doing” rather than “did/does” the actions; they are repetitive and ongoing.


## 07
“mind on” is the English idiom and is therefore used here, despite the Skt.

dative dānā́ya.

kéta- can belong either to gods or to men; here they must be Indra’s since they are identified with his sā́rathi- ‘coachmen, charioteers’. His intentions are presumably to come to the sacrifice for praise and soma and, more to the point from our point of view, to give to us, as expressed in the first pāda.


## 08
The etymological figure in b, áṣāḷhaṃ sáhaḥ, rendered here with the somewhat awkward “undominatable dominance” and belonging to the root √sah ‘vanquish, conquer’, is notable in part because the two root syllables ṣāḷh and sah share no surface phonemes, since the past participle has undergone several regular phonological processes that obscure its relationship to sah. Nonetheless any Vedic speaker would instantly see the connection.

The simile in c is a little unclear in the absence of real-world knowledge of life in Vedic India. WG suggest that, on departure from a temporary stopping place, wells need to be covered over to avoid their getting filled in or otherwise damaged; this seems reasonable, although I don’t see that this action needs to be restricted to camps that are being left. In general it makes sense also in permanent settlements to cover wells to avoid their being contaminated. In any case, the simile seems rather more pointed and precise than necessary: that Indra has many hidden powers, mental and physical, is a commonplace, and the image of wells seems, at least to me, a bit of a distraction.
