+++
title = "056"

+++
Indra


## 01
A bit of a mess, but very clever, once decoded.

For the first hemistich two features of interpretation are crucial: 1) I read

*avatásya ‘of the well’ instead of áva tásya, a reading already suggested by Gr (s.v. áva). The ‘well’ word appears in the last verse of the preceding hymn (55.8c) and so belongs to Savya’s diction. 2) The simile / frame structure of ab involves a disharmony, with the verb to be interpreted in two different senses. In the frame, prá … úd ayaṃsta, with the medial s-aorist to √yam ‘hold’, has a fairly literal meaning: ‘raised forth for himself’. The object is the “many dippers” (pū́rvīḥ … camríṣaḥ) of the well (*avatásya). (In the publ. tr. “this” should probably be replaced by “the,” since tásya is by my reading no longer there.) The word camríṣ- is found only here, but it appears to be related esp. to camrīṣá- (I.100.12), apparently ‘beaker’, and the ‘cup’ words (camasá-, camū́-) specialized for the serving of soma. The well is of soma; in X.101.5-7 the preparation of soma is likened to raising water from a well. In the simile (pāda b) the verb is used reflexively: the horse “raises himself up and forward” to (mount) the mare, a pretty good representation of equine copulation. The acc. yóṣām in the simile is not parallel to the acc. pū́rvīḥ … camríṣaḥ of the frame: the latter is a direct object, while the former is a goal. The excitement of the mounting stallion is implicitly transferred to Indra’s excitement at the many drinks of soma in store for him.

In c I take dákṣam … hiraṇyáyam “golden skill” as a descriptor of soma: golden because of its color, skill because drinking it gives Indra the ability to do battle. It is a bit like calling alcoholic drinks “Dutch courage.” (In the next vs. Indra is, or has become, the “lord of skill.”) The verb pāyayate is a lovely example of a reflexive double I/T (in the terminology of my 1983 book): “he causes himself to drink X,” with the appropriate middle voice. It is hard to know what (if anything) to supply with mahé. I supply kárman- ‘deed’, whose only appearance in the RV is in the preceding verse (55.3), Ge (/WG) “Kraft,” while Re takes mahé as standing for an abstract, “pour (sa) grand(eur).” Any of these is possible; none is highly favored over the others.

In d “ingenious” may not be the happiest tr. of ṛ́bhvas- as applied to an inanimate thing. The word refers to craft or skill, and Re’s “habile(ment construit)” may be the point.


## 02
On nemanníśaḥ see the lengthy treatment by Scar (55-56). I take párīṇasaḥ somewhat loosely, following Gr, as an adverbial ablative.

In c Ge takes sáhaḥ as a pāda-final truncation of instr. sáhasā as sometimes elsewhere, but this seems unnecessary. In the final verse of the preceding hymn (55.8) Indra took sáhas- into his body. It does not seem odd that he would here be identified as sáhas- itself. The odd placement of nū́may support this analysis: the NP vidáthasya … sáhaḥ may be structurally parallel to pátiṃ dákṣasya, and the 2ndposition nū́could mark the second NP as a new syntactic unit.


## 03
“Like a mountain peak, … glints with its thrusting” - the image seems to that of a pointed, snow-capped mountain, with the snow shining in the sun and the point appearing to thrust into the sky, though of course it doesn’t move.

Again Ge suggests that pāda-final śávaḥ could be for instr. śávasā, though he doesn’t so tr. - only wistfully remarks that ab could be a single sentence if śávaḥ were instr.


## 04
arhariṣváṇiḥ is completely unclear; -sváni- is ‘sound, noise’, but the first member appears nowhere else and has no etymology. All tr. take it as a cry of triumph, but this unanimity reflects a dearth of other choices rather than conviction in its rightness. Ge suggests arhari might be onomatopoetic, but it’s hard to see what sound it’s imitating. One tack might be to play with MIA possibilities, but juggling the phonology according to known MIA sound laws has not so far yielded anything useful.


## 05
Though Gr and Lub take tiráḥ as the prepositional adverb, standard tr.

interpret it as the 2nd sg. injunctive to tiráti, which is surely the correct analysis.

There is a surprising disagreement among tr. as to what ácyutam ‘immovable’ should modify. I take it with dharúṇam on the basis of Savya’s I.52.2 dharúṇeṣv ácyutaḥ. I take rájaḥ as obj. of átiṣṭhipaḥ, despite the pāda boundary, since otherwise this causative aorist is left without an expressed object.


## 06
pāṣyā̀has neither an etymology nor a secure meaning; it occurs only once elsewhere (pāṣyòḥ IX.102.2). Although the stem is given by Gr as (pāṣýa), pāṣía, it is better taken to a vṛkī-type -ī́-stem pāṣī́- (see Old ad loc.; AiG I. Nachtr. p. 126; tentatively also EWA s.v. pāṣāna-). By this analysis both forms can be du., and both contexts support an interpr. as a twinned body part. In this passage it is used of something belonging to Vṛtra that gets broken apart, so “jaws” is a contextually attractive translation. Savya’s I.52.6 vṛtrásya … nijaghántha hánvor indra tanyatúm “when you, Indra, struck your thunder down upon the two jaws of Vr̥tra” is similar to our ví vṛtrásya … pāṣyā̀rujaḥ “you broke apart the two pāṣī́of V.” In IX.102.2 the ref. seems to be to the two jaws of the soma-press. Despite the similarity of their aberrant phonology, it is hard to connect our pāṣī́- with later pāṣāna- ‘stone’, widely distributed also in Middle and New IA. See EWA s.v. pāṣāna- and, for the rejection of the connection, Old.
