+++
title = "057"

+++
Indra

## 01
Unlike the standard tr., I take d to mean not that his generosity is meant to display his power, but rather that his generosity has opened up to, that is, has been set in motion by his exercise of power.

## 02-04
A bit of word play in the sequence haryatá(ḥ) (2c), haríto (3d), harya tád (4d).


## 02
Note the Wackernagel particle ha positioned between the preverb ánu and the verb asat, despite the material preceding it in its clause.

With Ge I supply a verb of motion in b, because the “like waters to the depths” simile regularly appears with one (e.g., V.51.7 nimnáṃ ná yanti síndhavaḥ).


## 03
The phrase úṣo ná śubhre is quite problematic. In the first place, it is syntactically odd to have a voc. in a simile (“X like o Dawn”). úṣaḥ may be vocative by attraction from an underlying nominative, as in I.30.21 áśve ná citre aruṣi “O you, dappled bright and ruddy like a(n o) mare.” Then, for reasons given in the intro., I am certain that the fem. voc. śubhre in b cannot be addressed to the Sacrificer’s Wife, despite the standard view, but that leaves the identity of the addressee baffling. Fem.

śubhrā́- is ordinarily used of Dawn herself, not someone or something like Dawn.

However, its other standard referent is Sarasvatī or another river or rivers (III.33.1-2, VII.95.6, 96.2, V.42.12; waters V.41.12, maybe II.11.3; drops IX.63.26), so it is barely possible that the water similes of vss. 1-2 here evoke an actual river to bring the materials to the sacrifice. Better, but textually problematic: perhaps the identity of simile and frame should be reversed, and the phrase means “O Dawn, like a lovely (river), assemble …” (assuming an underlying *úṣaḥ śubhrā́ná…). This would make fine sense in the passage: Dawn comes at the beginning of the sacrifice, bringing materials for it, and is compared to a river that picks up material from its banks.

Although this requires more manipulation of the text than I would like, a sequence such as I just reconstructed, with the ná following two feminine singulars, might have seemed anomalous and been restructured to a more conventional order: X ná X’.

On balance and with due caution, I endorse this solution and would now translate the phrase as suggested above.

As for the object of sám … ā́bharā, I supply ‘everything’, based on víśvam in 2a, also referring to the sacrificial materials.

The semantic basis for the simile in d is somewhat obscure. On the one hand, the “tawny mares” (harít-) are often the horses of the sun, so that Indra has been made a light (jyótiḥ) like the sun’s horses. On the other hand, Indra’s name and form (dhā́ma … nā́mendriyám) are as suited for fame as horses are for running.

In d nā́yase is analyzed (starting with the Pp.) as ná áyase, but this produces a bad cadence. I do not see any obstacle to assuming a preverb ā́, so ná ā́yase ‘for coursing hither’, which fixes the cadence.


## 04
The translation “Here we are -- those of yours” reflects the annunciatory imé as well as the te … té vayám, which identifies the speakers as Indra’s own. In c I take cárāmasi as an independent verb, meaning to ‘carry on’ with life and activities, though it is possible that it is an auxiliary verb with the gerund ārábhya, as Ge takes it.

On kṣoṇī́- as ‘war-cry’, see Thieme (1978[79]: KZ 92: 46), EWA s.v. ### 05
táva smasi is a paraphrase of 4a (imé) te … té vayám


## 06
The “cut” in the first hemistich is ambiguous in English but is a past tense rendering pf. cakartitha. I added ‘apart’ despite the absence of ví because unadorned English “cut the mountain” sounds odd. The vájreṇa vajrin opening pāda b at least provides the desired v-.

Verbal play, in which two unrelated words mimic an etymological connection: párvatam (a) … parvaśáḥ (b) “mountain … joint by joint.” The two items are in the same metrical position, and each is in a pāda that begins with an alliterative pair: t u váṃ tám and vájreṇa vajrin.
