+++
title = "058"

+++
Agni


## 01
Phonetic figure spanning the end of the first hemistich and the second (esp. its end): ... vivásvataḥ# #ví ... , ... havíṣā vivāsati# The lexeme ní √tud is generally taken to mean something like ‘spur on’, but that tr. fails to render the ní. I prefer to take it in the literal sense ‘push down, force down’, meaning that, in the English idiom, you can’t keep Agni down.

I connect pāda b with c, rather than with a, as the standard tr. do, because of the difference in tense (pres. ní tundate, impf. ábhavat). This tense mismatch requires the yád of b to have the sense “ever since” (Ge[/WG] “seitdem,” Re “depuis que”), which does not seem to me to be natural to it. By contrast, Agni’s assuming the office of messenger in b leads directly to his journey in c.


## 02
In b tiṣṭhati can mean, as I take it, “stays (within)” or, with Ge, “stands up (in).” In the latter case, the image would be of a forest fire, fed by brush, flaring up.

This is possible, but in the absence of the preverb úd or similar directional indications, I prefer the former.


## 03
On krāṇā́‘successfully’, derived from the old fem. instr. sg. of the med. root aor. participle of √kṛ in adv. usage, see Old (Fs. Kern [1903] 33-36 = KlSch 1111- 14 [details in EWA s.v. kṛāṇā́]).

Since ví / ápa + ṛṇóti/ṛṇváti regularly refers to the unclosing of doors and the like (e.g., I.128.6 dvā́rā vy ṛ̀ṇvati; IX.102.8 ṛṇór ápa vrajám), the tr. ‘distribute’ (Ge ‘teilt … aus’, WG ‘verteilt’, Re ‘répartit’) seriously manipulates the idiom. I therefore prefer ‘disclose’ - that is, unclose and reveal to sight. (So also Old SBE.) In this usage the stem has clearly assimilated itself to ūrṇoti (√vṛ) + ápa / ví ‘open’, and one wonders if they were felt to belong to different roots by the poets. For further on this stem see Kü 104-5.

## 04
The voc. rúśad-ūrme ‘o you possessing gleaming waves’ should, strictly speaking, not be accented. It may owe its accent to IV.7.9 krṣṇ̥ áṃ te éma rúśataḥ puró bhā́ḥ “Black is your course, (though) you are gleaming; your light is in front,” with a gen. sg. part. rúśataḥ following an identical opening. (So tentatively Bl RR.) Or perhaps as the first of two voc., in post-caesura position, it was felt to begin a new syntagm.


## 05
On pā́jas- see Re ad loc. (n.; EVP XII) and EWA s.v., with lit. It seems to refer to a surface or face, then to shape, area, or dimension in general, often with the sense of “full dimension.”


## 05
On sthātúḥ (in the pair sthātúś carátham “the still and the moving”) as neut.

sg. to the -tar-stem (< *-tṛ́) see AiG I.23, 301; III.204 and most recently Frotscher 2012. Tichy (1995: 71) rejects this explanation, but her alternative (a masc. nom. sg.

to a -tu-stem) breaks the tight rhetorical structure of this merism by pairing a masculine with a neuter (carátham). Thus, whatever phonological problems there may be in assuming an *-ṛ# > -ur# change (as opposed to *-ṛs > -ur as in the gen. sg.

of -ṛ-stems), I favor the older view. Frotscher’s suggestion that accented final -ṛ́ develops to -úr may help solve the problem. In any case the nom./acc. neut form here would also be reinforced by the semantically identical genitive sg. phrase sthāthúś ca ... (jágataś ca (I.159.3, II.31.5).


## 06
The last halves of the two hemistichs are parallel and complementary, referring to humans and gods respectively: b: … jánebhyaḥ# / d: … divyā́ya jánmane# In c mitrám is of course ambiguous: it can refer simply to the god of that name (so Re), but more likely is at least a pun on the meaning of the common noun ‘ally’. Agni is often so called because he serves as go-between between gods and men.


## 07
The “seven tongues” (saptá juhvàḥ) are somewhat puzzling, or rather the phrase has several possible interpretations. Re takes it as a “pré-bahuvrīhi” (probably better expressed as “de-composed” bahuvrīhi), referring to the priests “having seven offering ladles” (juhū́- meaning both ‘tongue’ and ‘ladle’); it is, of course, also possible to take the ladles as subject without reference to an underlying bahuvrīhi (so Old SBE, Ge), since inanimate things often have agency in the RV. But the other meaning ‘tongue’ could also be meant literally (either in a de-composed bahuvrīhi or not): (priests having) seven tongues, that is seven voices devoted to praising Agni.

See Ge’s n. (also WG). This interpretation would make the first pāda semantically parallel with the second, where ‘cantors’ (vāghátaḥ) is the subject. And I will add another, more distant possibility, but one that makes better sense of the ‘seven’ - viz., the seven rivers or streams. The seven rivers are credited with giving birth to and nourishing Agni in a mystical passage in III.1.3-6, where they are also identified as seven vā́ṇīḥ ‘voices’ (III.1.6d). Seven is a number especially characteristic of rivers, and since rivers are often said to be noisy (indeed the word nadī́- ‘river’ is derived from the root √nad ‘roar), calling the rivers “seven tongues” here would fit semantically. In the end I don’t think that choosing one of these possibilities and eliminating the others is the right strategy; the phrase is meant to be multivalent, evoking a number of features of the ritual context.

## 08-09
Vs. 9 is essentially a paraphrase of vs. 8, with several parallel expressions.

And the final pāda of 9 is the Nodhas refrain.
