+++
title = "059"

+++
Agni Vaiśvānara


## 02
On aratí- as a spoked wheel, which often serves as the symbol for the ritual fire, see Thieme (Unters. 26ff., EWA s.v.).


## 04
The first pāda of this verse is metrically disturbed, which, in conjunction with its syntactic incompleteness, leads some tr. to consider the text corrupt. I’m afraid I find that reasoning too convenient.

This verse is variously interpreted, with its difficulties in great part arising from the fact that there is no finite verb, but it can be decoded by paying attention to the functional roles of the nominal complements. What seems to unify the verse is the presence of a dative recipient in pādas a, cd, and I therefore (with most tr., but not Ge) take the verse to be a single sentence, with the datives throughout referring to Agni. The objects presented to Agni are songs (gíraḥ b), qualified as many (pūrvī́ḥ c), and implicitly compared to exuberant maidens (yahvī́ḥ d), based on the fact that gír- ‘song’ is feminine in gender. The grammatical subject is hótā in b, with parallel subjects in similes: the two world halves (ródasī) in the first pāda and “skill” (dákṣaḥ) in the second. The manuṣyàḥ in b I read twice: on the one hand, its position directly before ná marks it as the first word of the simile, going with dákṣaḥ, hence “Manu’s/manly skill,” but I believe it should also be read with the immediately preceding hótā (“manly/human Hotar”). In Agni hymns the title Hotar is ordinarily specialized as a designation of that god (see, e.g., immediately preceding I.58, vss.1, 3, 6-7), and manuṣyàḥ here would make it clear that the human priest is at issue, with Agni himself the dative recipient. The last question is what verb to supply, and in a sense the exact identity of the verb is not terribly important, as long as it has approximately the right meaning and the right case frame. With Old (SBE, Noten) I supply ‘bring’ (√bhṛ), which is frequently used with gíraḥ and a dative recipient (e.g.,


## 10
… agnáye / bhárasva … gíraḥ), but ‘sing, present, give,’ etc., would all work.

I do not see any reason for, or justification of, supplying a 1st

-person subject,
however, pace Old SBE (1st pl.), Ge, Re (1st sg.).

## 05-06
5d pāda here = VII.98.3d, of Indra, and Nodhas uses a similar expression of Indra in I.63.7d. Vs. 6 is even more Indraic. As noted in the intro., this part of the hymn is designed to associate Indra and his great deeds with Agni.

## 07
The rest of pāda a essentially glosses vaiśvānaráḥ.

I take puruṇīthá- as a qualifier, not a personal name, contra most tr.
