+++
title = "060"

+++
Agni Taking off from my comment below on vs. 5, JL has further articulated the structure of this hymn. What follows is mostly verbatim from his comments, with some additions and light editing of my own: I think this little hymn might have a slightly more elegant structure than has been appreciated (I thought of this following your mention ad vs. 5 of the “faint ring”). It seems to me that the 5 verses are nicely balanced rings within rings revolving around vs. 3, the omphalos-like jā́yamānam… jījananta, harking back to Agni’s double birth in 1c. The outer rings would be, as mentioned ad vs. 5, vss. 1c rayím iva praśastám = 5 pátim ... rayīnā́m, prá śaṃsāmaḥ. Vss. 2 and 4 contain the same word vikṣú; note esp. the alliterative and partly etymological figure in 2d viśpátir vikṣú vedhā́ḥ. The hymn has not only a ring structure, but also forward momentum provided by the movement from the larger social organization of the vís-, in the full expression viśpátir vikṣú (2d), to the more intimate setting of the home, emphatically presented in 4c dámūnā gṛ́hapatir dáme. The momentum can also be tracked in the expressions of lordship involving páti-: viśpáti- (2d) to gṛhapáti- (4c) and finally the solemnly pleonastic rayipátī rayīṇā́m (4d). Agni, celebrated (√śaṃs) “like wealth” in 1c (rayím iva), is transformed into the lord of wealth in 4d. This final title is repeated in 5a pátim agne rayīṇā́m, with his name interposed between the two elements, and again the object of √śaṃs. The use of these three -páti- compounds may convey the message that Agni will deploy his wealth in the arenas of clan and house.


## 02
diváś cit pū́rvaḥ is standardly taken as temporal “before day(break),” but this case form of div/dyu is more often spatial than temporal (note diváś cid … bṛhatáḥ in the immediately preceding hymn, 59.5), and pū́rva- + ABL. has a spatial sense elsewhere in just this ritual context: e.g., X.53.1 ní hí ṣátsad ántaraḥ pū́rvo asmát “for he [=Agni] will sit down (as Hotar) close by, in front of us.” Cf. also II.3.3 mā́nuṣāt pūrvaḥ.


## 04
Note the extraordinary pile-up of ‘house’ words in this vs.: dámūnā gṛhápatir dáma ā́. On the relation between the dám(a)- and gṛhá- designations for ‘house’ and their use in the RV, see my forthcoming “The Term gṛhastha and the (Pre)history of the Householder,” to appear in The Householder in Ancient India: A History of the Gṛhastha ed. P. Olivelle.


## 05
ab pátim ... rayīnā́m, prá śaṃsāmaḥ picks up 1c rayím iva praśastám, forming a faint ring.
