+++
title = "061"

+++
Indra For general discussion of the intricate structure of this hymn, see the publ.

intro. as well as Jamison 2007: 60-68.


## 01
ṛ́cīṣama-, an epithet of Indra, is an impossible word; Ge wisely refuses to tr. it.

However, it is difficult not to see in it a combination of ṛ́c- ‘chant, song’ and samá- ‘like, same’, however obscure the morphological details are - and obscure they certainly are. The first member cannot, straightforwardly, be a case form of ṛ́cbecause the case-ending should be accented. The length of the -ī- might be analogical to the long ī in phonologically similar ṛjīpín-, ṛjīṣín-, but motivating a short -i- (in putative *ṛ́ci-) is hard enough (Caland compounding form, like śúci-?). It is tempting (and some have succumbed to the temptation) to connect -sama- with another designation of ritual speech, sā́man-, but the difference in vowel length is probably fatal. Note that in our passage the word is adjacent to another old crux, ádhrigu-, the controversies about which (see KEWA and EWA s.v.) should have been definitely settled by comparison with OAv. drigu- ‘poor, needy’ (Narten, YH 238-40). Both ṛ́cīṣama- and ádrigu- are disproportionately represented in the VIIIth Maṇḍala, the home of much aberrant vocabulary. In the end those who elect to tr. ṛ́cīṣama- take it as a compound of the two elements suggested above: Re ‘égal à la strophe’, WG (somewhat peculiarly, though starting with the same elements) ‘der im Preislied (immer) als dieselbe Person erscheint (?)’; so also the publ. tr. ‘equal to song’. For further, see EWA s.v. ### 01-02
Here and throughout the hymn, there is a certain amount of phonological and lexical chaining (in addition to the repeated fronted demonstratives). Here 2b bhárāmi picks up both 1c harmi and 1d bráhmāṇi, and 2a asmā́íd u práyaḥ … prá yaṃsi playfully echoes 1a asmā́íd u prá…, with práyaḥ of 1b substituted for the bare preverb prá.


## 02
In addition to the inter-verse echoes just noted, alliteration in 2c mánasā manīṣā́and 2d pratnā́ya pátye. JL adds 2a práya iva prá yaṃsi.

bā́dhe in 2b is universally taken as a dat. infinitive (as it is in I.132.5), but this makes semantic difficulties because √bādh means ‘thrust, press, oppress’. Ge’s “um (ihn) … zu nötigen(?),” Re’s “pour contraindre (le dieu),” and WG’s “um (ihn) … zu überhäufen” thus misrepresent the sense of the verb. The √bādh is esp. common with the preverbs ápa and ví in the meanings ‘thrust away, thrust apart’, but I here take the prá of pāda a with both verbs (bhárāmi and bā́dhe) in pāda b. As for morphology, I take bā́dhe as a 1st sg. mid. pres. (the root is always inflected in the middle), rather than as an infinitive, which allows the root to maintain its standard sense: I push the hymn toward Indra with particular forcefulness. As a finite verb, bā́dhe owes its accent to its initial position in the new clause.

suvṛktí- is a bahuvrīhi specialized for praise hymns (and occasionally the gods who receive them) and is often simply tr. ‘praise(-song)’ (e.g., Ge ‘Preis’ here). I prefer to render it literally; -vṛktí- belongs to the root √vṛj ‘twist’, and the English idiom “good twist” refers to particularly clever turns in a plot or other verbal products.

Most tr. take c with d, not ab. This is possible, but not necessary.


## 04
As Ge suggests (in n. 3 to his n. to 4ab), the apparent pleonastic doubling of the simile particle (ráthaṃ ná tā́ṣṭā-iva) may instead signal that two images have been crossed here: one with a simplex hinomi (“I impel the praise like a chariot”) and the other with sáṃ hinomi and the addition of the carpenter as subject (“I, like a carpenter, put together praise, like a chariot”).


## 05
juhvā̀has its standard double meaning, ‘tongue’ and ‘offering ladle’, a pun that is enabled by the verb sám añje “I anoint”: anointing with the tongue means producing praise, while ‘offering ladle’ fits better with the literal meaning of the verb.

dānaúkas- is likewise of double sense, both ‘accustomed to giving’ and ‘accustomed to gifts’, representing the reciprocal trade in praise and sacrifice given to the gods, in return for the gods’ material gifts to us.


## 06
The tváṣṭā here has been prepared for by 4b táṣṭā, and both appear in alliterative phrases: táṣṭeva tátsināya and tváṣṭā takṣat.

Another word with a standard double sense: ráṇa-; both senses are possible here, also in vs. 9 below.

The position of yéna in this subordinate clause is anomalous, as we expect at most one constituent to precede the yá- form. I have no explanation, but there is much that is off-kilter in the deployment of sentence parts in this hymn.

I’ve tr. the participle tuján as it were a finite verb, because the English otherwise dribbles off into unintelligibility. In fact, because of the rel. cl. in c, it’s better to take d as a new cl. with tuján as predicated participle (“Gaining mastery, he was thrusting …”). On this stem see comm. ad IX.91.4.

The unclear kiyedhā́- is found only here and in vs. 12. See EWA s.v. and Scar’s (250-52) discussions of previous attempts at explanation. I favor the suggestion registered (and dismissed) by Scar that it consists of the weak stem of kíyant-‘how much, how great’ + the root noun dhā́-, with the development *-nt̥-dh- >

*-adzdh- > *-azdh- > -edh-, despite Hoffmann’s dismissal of the posited
phonological development (Aufs. 400)—although I recognize the phonological problems of this solution. Re’s “lui qui confère (on ne sait) combien” represents this etymology one way or the other.


## 07
On the introductory gen. asyá referring to Indra, even though Indra is otherwise in the nominative in this verse (as subj. of papivā́n [b] and of vídhyat [d]), see disc. in intro. and in Jamison 2007 noted above.

The verse concerns Indra’s surreptitious drinking of his father’s soma right after birth, an act enabled by his mother (ab), and Indra and Viṣṇu’s vanquishing of the Emuṣa boar (cd), a rarely told tale. For Indra’s mother’s complicity in the soma drinking, see esp. III.48.2-3. In our passage Indra’s father is not directly referred to (only by initial maháḥ ‘of the great [one]’ in b), but the beginning of the next word promises the genitive of ‘father’ (i.e., pitúr), and only the final consonant of pitúm removes that possibility — one of the many tricks Nodhas plays on us in this hymn.

(Ge ascribes the absence of pitúḥ to Worthaplologie, but I think rather that Nodhas is laying a trap.) On the basis of other tellings of the Emuṣa myth, the word to supply with pacatám is odanám ‘rice-porridge’; cf. VIII.69.14, 77.6, 10.

The final pāda is quite artfully composed, beginning and ending with alliterative phrases: vídhyad varāhám and ádrim ástā. Moreover, the first of these is a variant of the very common formula that compresses the Vṛtra slaying, áhann áhim “he/you slew the serpent.” Here, with the victim beginning with v-, the poet substitutes a verb beginning with v-.


## 08
Although I tr. devápatnīḥ as ‘wives of the gods’, it is of course grammatically a bahuvrīhi ‘having the gods as husbands’ (with the fem. stem patnī- substituted for the masc. equivalent pati- in this feminine adjective). It reminds us of dāsápatnī- ‘having a Dāsa for a husband’, applied to the waters confined by Vṛtra, often identified as a Dāsa, most famously in I.32.11 but also twice elsewhere of the waters and Vṛtra (V.30.5, VIII.96.13). Since the context here is the Vṛtra battle (ahihátye), the complementary terminology is probably deliberate.

JL notes that there is complementarity also in the second hemistich: 8c has pári jabhre with Indra as subject and dyā́vāprthivī ́as object, while 8d reverses this: ná ... pári staḥ with dyā́vāprthiv ̥ ī ́as implicit subj. and Indra as implicit object (via his mahimā́nam). This theme and its lexicon are picked up in the 9ab: mahitvám / divás pṛthivyā́ḥ páry antárikṣāt.


## 09
The phrase “reverberant tankard” (svarír ámatraḥ) is striking, but intelligible in Ṛgvedic context. Indra is compared to a large drinking vessel because of his immense capacity and size, also described in 8cd and 9ab; “tankard” hints at his ability to drink vast quantities of soma and implicitly promises his generosity because he can contain vast quantities of goods. I follow Old in taking all forms of ámatra- as belonging to a single stem (pace Gr, Lub, and EWA). As for ‘reverberant’ (svarí-), it echoes svarā́ḷ, which opens the preceding pāda; it also suggests the deep sound made when a large (empty) vessel is struck and Indra’s own war-cries. (For a possibly similar image, see I.100.12.)


## 10
Numerous phonological plays in this verse: a śávasā śuṣántam; b ví vṛścad vájreṇa vṛtrám; c gā́ná vrā́nā avánīr (in this last example note the rhyme of the 1st two words with the 2nd one).


## 11
This verse nicely juxtaposes a well-known deed of Indra’s, when he stops the waters to make a ford for his client(s), with the even better known deed of releasing the stopped waters in the Vṛtra myth, treated in the preceding vs. (10). On the playful transition between these two myths here, see Jamison 2007: 113-14 n. 20. The stopping of the waters causes mild surprise immediately after a verse concerning their release.

tveṣásā is universally taken as belonging to Indra, whereas my published tr.

ascribes it to the rivers. I would now probably correct this, also to take it as Indra’s: “just this one - with his turbulence/glittering,” because of the parallelism between 10a asyéd evá śávasā and 11a asyéd u tveṣáśā. But I am still disturbed by the form.

Its accent suggests that it should be adjectival, not a neuter -s-stem abstract like śávas-, despite AiG II.2.224, which implies that it is nominal despite its accent. It is curious that the expected root-accented neut. noun (*tvéṣas-) is not attested, and this is the only (supposed) attestation of the suffix-accented stem. If it is a real adjective, it could modify vájreṇa in pāda b, but this not only breaks the parallelism between 10a and 11a just noted, but, more seriously, would have to be extracted from one clause and plunked into the next. (Ge in his note suggests supplying vájreṇa in pāda a.) The a-stem adj. tveṣá- is also sometimes used of waters, e.g., VI.61.8 tveṣáḥ … arṇaváḥ “glittering/turbulent flood,” which accounts for my original connection of tveṣásā with the rivers.

The distribution of elements in pāda b is odd, with the subordinating yád in normal 2nd position, but sīm, ordinarily another 2nd position element, just before the verb.

īśāna-kṛ́t- is variously interpreted, either with the 1st member in a direct object relationship with the 2nd -- “zum Herrscher, mächtig machend” (Scar’s tr; sim.

also Ge, Re, WG) - or in a sort of appositive subject relationship, “als Herrscher handelnd” (Scar’s tr.; sim. Gr). Because the first member īśāna- is itself a participial form ‘being lord, showing mastery’, I prefer the 2nd alternative. Note also that independent ī́śāna- is used three times of Indra in this hymn (6d, 12b, 15b), and it is more likely that the same form in the compound refers to Indra’s masterful ways, not to someone else whom he makes masterful. Scar allows both, though somewhat preferring the 2nd.

More phonological play: c dāśúṣe daśasyan; d turvī́taye … turváṇiḥ.


## 12
On this very tricky verse, I simply reproduce (slightly paraphrased) my discussion of it in Jamison 2007: 66: The beginning of 12 appears to return us from the mythological past to the realm of the current-day poet of vss. 1-5; not only does it start with the dative pronoun after a series of verses with the genitive phrase but it continues with a standard lexeme for presenting a hymn to a divinity: prá √bhr̥: asmā́íd u prá bharā ... Cf. from the same poet also with a dative recipient I.64.1b.

nódhaḥ suvrkt ̥ ím prá bharā marúdbhyaḥ “O Nodhas, present a well-turned (hymn) to the Maruts.” But the phrase in 61.12 quickly goes awry. At the opening of the next pāda, where Indra's name has been prominently placed in previous verses (índrāya 1d, 4d, 5b, 8b), we find, most shockingly, the name of his arch-enemy, vr̥trā́ya, immediately followed by the accusative object vájram, Indra's weapon, not the word for hymn we were expecting. The relevant parts of the half-verse asmā́íd u prá bharā..., vrtr̥ ā́ya vájram... must mean "Towards just this one, towards Vr̥tra, bear down the mace..." The poet has simply tricked us, having laid a trap with conventional phraseology and syntax and with the stylistic patterns established earlier in the hymn. He also skillfully exploits the morphological ambiguity of the verb form bharā: given the pattern set in vss. 1-5 we are primed to interpret bharā as a 1st sg. subjunctive (cf. indicative bhárāmi in vss 2-3), but as the half verse unfolds, it becomes clear that bharā must rather be taken as a metrically lengthened 2nd sg.

imperative. [end of citation] In order to let the audience in on the trick, the poet has imported much of verse 6, the first mention of the Vṛtra conflict in this hymn: 6d reads tujánn ī́śānas tujatā́kiydhā́ḥ “gaining mastery, thrusting with the thrusting (mace), while conferring (who knows) how much,” while 12ab echoes this with … tū́tujāno, … ī́śānaḥ kiyedhā́ḥ “thrusting, gaining mastery, conferring (who knows) how much.” In d íṣyan echoes ī́śānaḥ of pāda b (as well as 11c) and anticipates iṣṇānáḥ of 13c.


## 13
On this verse as a species of “poetic repair” of verse 12, see Jamison 2007: 66-67. The expected offering of praise to Indra thwarted in 12ab is successfully effected in 13ab.


## 14
dyā́vā ca bhū́mā has the appearance of a dual dvandva, interrupted by the ca that connects it to the NP with which it’s conjoined, giráyaś ca dṛḷhā́ḥ. But the uninterrupted dvandva is actually dyā́vābhū́mī, with a different stem for ‘earth’, and bhū́man- (n.) has no dual attested (and its dual should of course not be bhū́mā, but probably *bhūmanī). See the next hymn for a variant on this usage. It is likely that the lengthened N/A sg. form or the N/A pl. form is being used, but why? On this problem, see AiG II.1.152.

In the publ. tr., “other” was careless omitted at the end of the first hemistich: it should read “against each other.” The mention of the poet Nodhas at the very end of the verse has perhaps been prepared by several not entirely expected o’s: úpo ... jóguvāna oṇíṃ, sadyó, only the last of which is a normal sandhi o < -as. The poet’s fondness for his own vowel may account for the appearance of several relatively rare words: the intensive jógu- and the noun oṇí-.


## 15
I follow Ge’s suggestion (in n. to 15a, followed by WG) that the unexpressed subject that is being conceded to Indra is the soma-drink. The parallel he adduces, V.29.5, contains the gods, the soma-drink, the concession, and Etaśa: ádha krátvā maghavan túbhyaṃ devā́ánu víśve adaduḥ somapéyam yát sū́ryasya harítaḥ pátantīḥ puráḥ satī́r úparā étaśe káḥ Then according to your will, o bounteous one, all the gods conceded the soma-drinking to you, when you put the flying golden mares of the Sun behind, though they were in front, in Etaśa('s presence).

In the publ. tr. I take eṣām as a genitival agent, somewhat reluctantly. However, ET suggests a much more attractive solution, which rescues the syntax: that eṣā́m is dependent on asmaí “just to this one of them [=gods].” The singularity of Indra would then be emphasized by the ékaḥ that begins the next pāda.

Etaśa is the horse of the Sun and is not, as far as I know, a soma-presser (the physical image is a little comical). Against all tr., I therefore do not take súṣvim in d as coreferential with étaśam in c, but rather as a second object with the verb. Nodhas is now juggling the mythic past (the aiding of Etaśa) and the desired future (the aiding of the soma-presser), as he nears the end of the hymn. I read the participle paspṛdhānám twice, once with each object, with a different desired goal in the locative for each. I also give the verb āvat two simultaneous morphological analyses, fitting its two objects: the first as augmented imperfect to the Class I present ávati, the second as perfect subjunctive to the pf. ā́va (cf. āpas, āpat taken by Hoffmann 1967: 64 n. 102, 101 n. 220, and Kümmel 2000: 118 as subjunctives to pf. ā́pa √āp ‘attain’). Although such an interpretation might be too artificial in some cases, I have no hesitation in assuming Nodhas is capable of this.

Another phonetic play: d saúvaśvi ye súṣvim


## 16
hāriyojanā is unaccented and therefore taken by most as a vocative addressed to Indra. I follow Old in emending to an accented form (hāriyojanā́), modifying bráhmāṇi. See in the next hymn bráhma hariyójanāya “formulation for the fallow-bay-yoking.” As Old points out, taking it as a vocative with Indra requires either shortening the last vowel or allowing a lengthened vocative ending (which is not usual), and possibly also shortening the first vowel.

This verse is extra-hymnic in some ways: its opening breaks the pattern set in the previous 15 vss.; it makes a meta-announcement about the contents of the hymn just recited; and it ends with the Nodhas refrain. But it also forms a ring with the first verse, with the repetition of bráhmāṇi, and with the first part of the hymn concerning the presentation of praise-hymns, with the reappearance of suvṛktí, which was a signature word there (2b, 3d, 4c).
