+++
title = "062"

+++
Indra Shares much vocabulary with I.61 and sometimes plays off the turns of phrase in that hymn.


## 01
Rich with phonetic figures: a śavasānā́ya śūṣám; b āṅgūṣáṃ gírvaṇase aṅgirasvát [note that āṅgūṣám participates in both: it rhymes with preceding śūṣám, but its initial matches aṅgirasvát, while gírvaṇase takes up the 2nd syllable of aṅgirasvát]; cd ṛgmiyā́ya, árcāma arkám [this last also a clear etymological figure].

śavasānā́ya śūṣám recalls śávasā śuṣántam of 61.10a in the same metrical position, with our phrase referring to Indra, the one in I.61 to Vṛtra.

The Pp. reads stuvaté in c, a reading that is universally followed. But this dative is awkward: if it is coreferential with the other datives in the verse, it must refer to Indra, and Indra “praising” is an odd concept in a hymn devoted instead to presenting praises to him. Although Indra occasionally joins in the verbal parts of the sacrifice (see above ad I.55.4), he does not ordinarily (or ever?) praise others. Nonetheless, this is Re’s solution: “(dieu) louangeur.” Schmidt (1968, B+I, 163) suggests a variant of this: “den mit guten Liedern (selbst) preisenden,” but self-praise suggests a medial form, not the active we have. If the participle does not modify Indra, another person in the dative needs to be introduced, despite the unlikelihood of a separate dative referent. This is Ge’s solution: “ihn [=Indra], der für den Sänger … zu preisen ist,” construing stuvaté with ṛgmiyā́ya. So also WG with slightly different tr., though both they and Ge consider the “praising” possibility. But the difficulty disappears if, against the Pp., we read instead stuvatáḥ, genitive sg. of the participle, as I do.


## 02
This verse is in some ways a double of vs. 1. They both begin with prá, and the opening phrases prá manmahe and prá vo mahé rhyme, although the two mahe’s have entirely different analyses. (Note also the mahé máhi play in 2a.) The next phrase of 1a, śavasānā́ya śūṣám, is paralleled in 2b, with the first word identical and sā́ma substituting for the second (both śūṣám and sā́ma referrring to the verbal product offered to Indra). At the beginning of the second pādas, āṅgūṣyàm of 2b matches āṅgūṣám of 1a. “Like the Aṅgirases” (aṅgirasvát) of 1b is picked up by the Aṅgirases themselves áṅgirasaḥ in 2d, and the heavy etymology figure involving the root √arc ‘chant’ is reprised by the participle árcantaḥ in 2d, which opens its pāda just as the finite verb árcāma does in 1d.


## 03
I follow Janert (1956, Sinne und Bedeutung des Wortes “dhāsi” und seiner Belegstellen im Rigveda und Awesta) in taking dhāsí- as ‘wellspring’.

The post-caesura phrase in c bhinád ádriṃ vidád gā́ḥ contains rhyming verbs followed by their objects; the disyllable ádrim contrasts with monosyllable gā́ḥ, creating an almost syncopated effect. The strict parallelism of the two VPs may account for the unnecessary accent on bhinát, which functions rhetorically like a fronted verb, just like vidát. In fact, as my tr. indicates, I consider the initial subject bṛ́haspátiḥ to be essentially extrasentential, a very topicalized topic.

The second of the VPs is also a mirror-image of the final phrase in 2d gā́ ávindan (imperfect in 2, versus aorist in 3), and it can be considered a “repair” of the somewhat opaque vidát … dhāsím “found the wellspring” that intervenes (3b).


## 04
The repetitions and lexical and phonological echoes that have served Nodhas well in the first three verses increase here, to an almost incantatory level. To point to a few of these: a sá suṣṭúbhā sá stubhā́(again a syncopation, as in 3c); b svaréṇa … svarí yo …; c: saraṇyubhiḥ echoes the sá’s of a and the s(v)ar’s of b, while finding its own faint echo in the final śakra of the pāda; d ráveṇa is a virtual anagram of svaréṇa in b, darayo is almost a rhyme form of svarí yo in b in the same metrical position, and both svarí yo and darayo precede the hemistich-final words ending in - gvaiḥ.

All other tr. take this verse as a single sentence with 2nd ps. subj. However, as I have shown (1992: “sa figé”), sá with 2nd ps. reference is limited to imperatives and should not appear with an injunctive like darayaḥ. I therefore consider the first hemistich to continue the 3rd ps. reference of vs. 3, with a switch to 2nd ps. in the second half. This type of switch is quite common in the RV.

In c I do not take saraṇyú- and phaligá- as personal names, pace Ge et al. The tr. ‘bolt’ for the latter follows Hiersche (Asp., ‘Riegel, Vershluss’), based on a possible connection with parigha- (Up+) ‘iron bar for shutting a door/gate’; see EWA s.v. However, as ET points out, a less specific sense such as ‘barrier’ would fit the contexts better and would also make fewer assumptions about early technology.


## 05
The instrumentals in b (uṣásā sū́ryeṇa góbhiḥ) are not parallel with áṅgirobhiḥ in a. The Aṅgirases there are the agents of the passively used participle gṛṇānáḥ (and also potentially instrumental of accompaniment with the main verb, as Indra’s helpers: “along with the A’s you uncovered…”). The instrumentals in b are the additional elements that Indra uncovered.

ándhaḥ is a potential pun, as a homophone meaning both ‘blind darkness’ and ‘soma stalk’. The former is surely the first reading in this treatment of the Vala myth, with the cave a black hole, as it were. So Ge, Re, WG. But soma is never far from Indra’s mind, and the cosmogonic deeds with which he is credited in the second hemistich are often performed under the influence of soma. Schmidt (p. 164) favors ‘(Soma-)Flut’, following Bergaigne and Lüders.


## 06
This verse has to be Nodhas’s joke. It is conspicuously placed, as the central verse of the hymn and thus a potential omphalos, and it announces Indra’s deed (kárma) with extraordinary fanfare, including two superlatives (práyakṣatamam … cā́rutamam). But in a hymn so far devoted to what is one of Indra’s greatest deeds, the opening of the Vala cave, the poet springs on us instead a deed of utter obscurity involving the swelling of four rivers, an act with no other clear mentions in the RV.

Ge valiantly seeks parallels, but the two passages he adduces (I.104.3-4 and I.174.7) have little or nothing in common with our passage and it’s not even clear that there are rivers in the second. Lüders (Varuṇa 335-37) predictably sees these as heavenly rivers — four because they flow “nach den vier Himmelsgegenden.” Re also sees them as associated with heaven, while Schmidt (B+I 164) and WG seem to see them as being “under” (something unspecified). I have no solution for the affinities of this scrap of mythology, although I tend to agree generally with Lüders that the rivers are more likely to be celestial than terrestrial, and I would suggest that it may have to do with producing rain. But I still think the point here is that Nodhas has set us up for a grand announcement and then, by bait and switch, given us a myth that none of us has ever heard of.

The asti in this hemistich may provide another bit of evidence for this view.

Unaccented asti almost always has existential value (“there exists…”) because the 3rd sg. pres. copula in equational sentences (“X is Y”) is regularly (indeed, probably by rule) gapped. But an existential sense here doesn’t work (“There exists this most conspicuous deed…”). I suggest that the overt asti here signals a strong assertion in the face of expected opposition (“This is his most conspicuous deed” - rather like American children’s quarrels: “is too” “is not”). The disputed word upahvaré adds to the obscurity of this bit of myth. It is clearly a derivative of √hvṛ ‘go crookedly, deviate’, but the exact sense of this nominal derivative is not clear. In this passage Ge takes it as ‘lap’ (Schoss), Re as ‘fold, crease’ (repli), WG as ‘abyss, chasm’ (Abgrund), while Schmidt bypasses any literal rendering with “im Felsen.” Lüders considers it the name “für den Behälter des himmlischen Urquells,” which of course fits his larger picture of the heavenly ocean. I consider the word to convey in the first instance a visual image, that of a meander or deviation from the straight. In connection with rivers (as also in VIII.96.14) it refers to eddies, the circular or oval shapes produced against the current by uneven flow -- or to the “oxbows” or “meanders” created in a river’s course by such uneven flow (Google images are quite striking). In other geographical contexts it can refer to byways, detours from the straight path, and ultimately to remote places, the backeddies, as it were, of the mountains.


## 07
Nodhas continues to deploy his tricks in this verse. He has moved on from the obscure four-river reference in the preceding verse, to a more standard domain for Indra to display his power: the two world halves. But in the first hemistich Indra is not depicted as filling them or propping them apart or any of his usual actions with regard to them, but rather as “uncovering” them, using the same lexeme ví √vṛ as was just used in a Vala-myth verse (5a ví var, 7a ví vavre). (That lexeme is close to being the signature Vala verb, though it is actually more commonly ápa √vṛ, with the same sense, but a different preverb.) Notice that the two occurrences of ví √vṛ surround the pseudo-omphalos verse 6, in the usual manner in which concentric lexical rings signal an omphalos. So Nodhas thus presents this new mythological theme as if it were the old one, the Vala myth found in vss. 2-5, though he is entering different mythological territory.

He also reuses the √ṛc lexical theme from vss. 1-2, with arkaíḥ in b, which is apparently qualified by the middle participle stávamānebhiḥ (remember stuvatá in 1c). This participle is somewhat disturbing; like all middle participles to the root √stu, it is used passively here, but unlike all the other passive uses, its subject is not the god praised but the praises themselves. It may be that Nodhas want his audience to take notice of such an aberrant usage. However, I am tempted to read

*stavamānaibhíḥ here - that is, nom. sg. stávamānas + pron. ebhíḥ, with rare double
application of sandhi: -as + e- > -a + e- > -ai-. The participle stávamānas would modify Indra, as would be expected; ebhíḥ occurs several times with arkaíḥ (IV.3.15, 10.13) and the passive of √stu also appears with this instr. (see passages adduced by Ge in n. 7b, where he suggests a similar, but far from identical, reanalysis of the form in the text, calling it “vielleicht Hypallage”). If the emendation is accepted, I would change the tr. to “the irrepressible one being praised by these chants.” The arkaíḥ might also be construed secondarily as it currently is in the tr., with ví vavre, as the instrument with which he performed the uncovering.

ayā́sya- regularly qualifies Indra; there is no reason to take it as a personal name, identifying a distinct second figure here (pace Ge, Re). Phonetic figure: sanájā sánīḷe taking up the sa’s in vs. 4 and prefiguring the sa’s that will be conspicuous in the next few verses.

The second hemistich contains a clever pun between simile and frame. In the frame (pāda d) Indra supported, that is, held up, the two world halves in familiar fashion (somewhat repairing the less standard uncovering he performed in ab, though cf. VIII.96.16). In this task he is compared to the god Bhaga (though it is not an activity that I think of as particularly associated with Bhaga). But in the simile bhága- is used as a common noun ‘(good) portion’, which provides support for two consorts (méne) - the point presumably being that a man needs a particularly large portion of property to support two wives. I do not follow Hoffmann’s view (1960: 245; KZ 76) that méne here is an elliptical dual referring to concubine and lawful wife, and in fact believe that ménā in general has a wider sense than he allows. He restricts it to concubines, but the derivation from √mi ‘exchange’ suggests a wider application, with the wife as an “exchange token” in the economic transaction of marriage.


## 08
From the spatial dual females of vs. 7 Nodhas now moves to the temporal: night and dawn, also dual females, whose activities have kept occurring “from of old” (sanā́t), linking them lexically to the two world-halves of 7a who were born of old (sanájā).

In dívam pári bhū́mā we encounter the not-quite-dvandva also met in 61.14; there in dyā́vā ca bhū́mā, dyā́vā was definitely dual, but its partner bhū́mā was either singular (with lengthened final) or plural. Here dívam is definitely singular, with bhū́mā either of the choices just given, probably singular.

punarbhū́- later (already in the AV) has a specialized legal application as a designation for a remarried widow (see Thieme Kl.Sch. 445-60 = KZ 78, 1963), but this sense does not seem to be in play here or in the other RV passages.

Though most take aktā́(which only appears here) as the ppl. of √añj ‘anoint’, serving as a poetic designation for ‘night’, I favor a root connection with the ‘night’ word, with zero-grade in the root syllable, esp. since aktú- ‘night’ is probably so connected (pace EWA s.v.). See EWA s.v. and AiG III.234, though both are skeptical. Of course secondary association with √añj would be natural.

JL notes the chiasmic kṛṣṇébhir aktā́-uṣā́rúśadbhiḥ of c; for a similar chiasmus see 11c.

JTK suggests that vápus- here and in other dawn/night passages refers to bridal clothing and suggests a tr. ‘finery’.


## 09
Although the first hemistich is perfectly easy to tr., it is not at all clear what it is referring to. First, what is the “partnership” (sakhyám)? Ge thinks it is with the beings named in vss. 7-11, while Sāy thinks rather of the sacrificers. Nothing in the context helps to define what type of partnership it is or with whom, and the verb that governs it, “supported” (dādhāra), seems oddly chosen. The subject of this verb is also not fully identified: the larger context of course points to Indra, and sudáṃsāḥ ‘possessing very wondrous power’ was just used in 7c of Indra (where he was likewise the subject of a form of √dhṛ), and see dáṃsaḥ applied to his deed in 6b.

But who is he the “son” (sūnú-) of? and more to the point, the epithet śávasaḥ sūnúḥ “son of strength” is ordinarily Agni’s. Here we have the variant sūnúḥ … śávasā with instr., and sūnúḥ śávasā is used of Agni in I.27.2. On the other hand, śavasānáis twice use of Indra in the beginning of this hymn (1a, 2b) and śavasāvan in 11d, śavasāna in 13c; cf. also the clear śávasaḥ sūnúm índram in IV.24.1. I tentatively suggest that there is an attempt to blur the lines between Indra and Agni here, and that the partnership or fellowship may be the mutually beneficial relationship between gods and men centered on the sacrifice, where Agni officiates. But I cannot point to hard evidence for this interpretation.

The paradox of the cooked milk in the raw cows is a standard one, often trotted out as a natural wonder to contemplate. Here it seems to be taken further: there are literal milk and literal cows in c, but in d the black and red cows are likely to be the nights and dawns (as in 8cd) and the “gleaming white milk” the early light known as the “milk of the dawn cows” (see Watkins MoreDawnCows). As far as I can see, this hemistich has no integral connection with the first half of the verse, and the shift from 3rd to 2nd person underlines this disconnect.


## 10
A nicely balanced alliterative pāda sanā́t sánīḷā avánīr avātā́, with the first phrase picking up 7a sanájā sánīḷe. Note also that the first word of b, vratā́, echoes avātā́. On avātá- see comm. ad I.38.7 and VIII.79.7.

Again the reference of this verse is somewhat obscure. Are the streams here the same as the four rivers in 6cd? or are they the streams released from Vṛtra’s confinement? (Ge suggests sensibly that Indra gave them the command to wander in I.61.12, though it is their own commandments, not Indra’s, that they safeguard here.) The identity of the sisters of cd, compared to wives, is even less clear. Are they the same streams as ab? or possibly praise-songs (gíraḥ appear with the same simile, jánayo ná pátnīḥ in I.186.7, and in our next vs., 11cd, “inspired thoughts” [manīṣā́ḥ] are compared to eager wives). Again, I think the reference is supposed to be shifting, with the literal streams of mythological time replaced by the thoughts and praises of the ritual here-and-now, mediated by the feminine gender of the words used of both streams and praises. The temporal shift in this part of the hymn, or rather the double temporal vision, is signalled by the repeated initial sanā́t ‘from of old’ and related terms (8a, 10a, 11a, 12a, 13a) and its contrast with the present tense verbs that prevail in this section.


## 11
sanāyú- ‘age-old’ is found only here, and was clearly created to match the other pāda-initial sanā- ‘old’ forms in this section, while matching its nom. pl.

sanāyúvo with vasūyávo, which opens the next pāda. JL suggests that part of the motivation for creating this particular hapax is to invoke the paradoxical juxtaposition of sana- ‘old’ and yuvan- ‘youth’. Verse 8 contains the same juxtaposition: sanā́t … yuvatī́“from of old the two young girls,” and the theme of old and new runs throughout this hymn, indeed in this verse.

JL also notes the chiasmic pátiṃ ná pátnīr uśatī́r uśántam of c.

## 13
sanāyánt- is likewise only here. Note its semantic opposite návyam at the end of the pāda, the same contrast as sanāyúvo … návyo in 11a.

Like the last verse of the preceding hymn (I.61.16), this verse is extra-hymnic in some ways, but also has connections with the rest of the hymn. The “old” pattern continues to open the verse, and the voc. śavasāna in c forms a ring with the same stem in the dative in 1a.
