+++
title = "063"

+++
Indra


## 01
The very first hemistich of this hymn presents us with a syntactic problem: although the most natural way to read this is with a rel. clause beginning with yó ha and continuing through the second pāda, the verb there, dhāḥ, is unaccented. There are three possible ways to handle this. The first, the one I followed in the publ. tr., is to assume that dhāḥ got de-accented for some reason. Several possible reasons are available, though none of them strong: 1) it lost its accent redactionally from being matched to (properly) unaccented dhāt in 2b, also at the end of its hemistich; 2) the same idiom áme (…) dhāt is found in nearby I.67.3 (unfortunately by a different poet) and this caused the loss of accent redactionally; 3) because the 2nd hemistich of the verse in question is also a subordinate clause (beginning yád dha), the previous subordinate clause lost its verbal accent and became a kind of “honorary” main clause, because the action of cd is based on that of the relative clause that precedes it.

(This seems to be one possibility that Old floats, though he is rather sketchy about it.) Though Ge does not mention the lack of accent, he tr. the whole as a rel clause.

The other two ways to deal with the problem involve having the rel. clause end at the end of the first pāda. Old also suggested the possibility that the rel. cl. is limited to yó ha śúṣmaiḥ. Re, Hoffmann (1967: 181), and WG all follow this path, with tr. of the type “You are great, Indra, who are (so) because of your śúṣma.” I rejected that because of its awkwardness, although I recognized that it solves the accentless verb problem, since the main clause can occupy pāda b without problem.

A third way, also ending the relative clause with the end of the first pāda, seems to me to be less clumsy, and that is to make all of the first pāda the relative clause.

Though yáḥ appears to be fairly far into that clause, in fact it is not preceded by more than one constituent (plus a vocative, which doesn’t count). This produces a tr.

“(you) who are great because of your śúṣma-, you placed ….” This actually has a parallel in IV.22.3 yó deváḥ …, mahó vā́jebhir mahádbhiś ca śúṣmaiḥ “The god who … is great by reason of his prizes and his great śúṣma.” I would therefore now change the tr. accordingly, to this third option.

The next problem in this half verse is the construction of áme √dhā. All the standard tr. render it more or less as “you put Heaven and Earth in panic/fear.” This makes sense of the syntax, but attenuates the meaning of the noun: áma- is an attack or onslaught, or more abstractly offensive power, whereas ‘panic, fear’ suggests the opposite. Therefore, although slightly more machinery is required, I tr. this idiom (found also in I.67.3, IV.17.7) as “put X in the path/way of your onslaught.” Notice that here Nodhas manages to deploy a perfectly orthodox de-coupled dual dvandva for Heaven and Earth (dyā́vā … pṛthivī́). See remarks on I.61.14, 62.8.

The subject NP(s) of cd are neatly interwoven: with víśvā … ábhvā (neut.) chained with giráyaś cid … dṛḷḥā́saḥ (masc.).

Hoffmann (p. 181) argues convincingly that naíjan should not be interpreted as ná aíjan with the Pp., but with the injunctive éjan.


## 02
If my new parsing of the syntax of vs. 1 is correct, these two verses are structurally parallel, with a relative/subordinate clause in a, the main clause in b, and a further subordinate clause, esp. dependent on the main clause, in cd.

Note the phonological trick, where (ā́) yád dhá(rī) opens 2a, apparently matching yád dha of 1c (which in turn shows dha for ha, found in the grammatically different rel. clause yó ha in 1a). The verse ends with more alliteration: d púra(ḥ)...

puru- ... pūrvī́ḥ.

The meaning of vívrata-, several times of Indra’s horses, but also with a few other referents, isn’t entirely clear, because it depends on which of the many value of ví to assume. I favor ‘having separate commandments’, that is, acting independently but each in obedience to Indra, but it could also mean ‘without commandments’ (which must underlie Ge’s ‘widerspenstige’ [stubborn], followed by Hoffmann [but with ?]).

The c pāda lacks a caesura and in its place has a somewhat bizarre compound, voc. aviharyata-kratu-. The second member is clear, and the whole must be a bahuvrīhi. The first member appears to contain the well-attested adj. haryatá- ‘gladdening’, but this presents certain problems: the present háryati does not appear with the preverb ví and it is difficult to construct an appropriate meaning, esp. one that would harmonize with krátu- ‘resolve’. Possibly, with double negation via a + ví, “whose resolve is not undelightful” - not a particularly compelling possibility.

Nonetheless, this derivation seems the path of least resistance and is probably responsible for Ge’s “dessen Rat nicht verschmäht wird” and WG’s “… nicht unbeliebt ist” (possibly also Hoffmann’s “… nicht zu unterschätzen ist” - it’s hard to tell). But all of these must take the -haryata- in a passive sense, although the simplex adjective never has that value.

I think it’s likely that the compound involves some complex word play, scrambling and recombining the (d)hárī and ví(vratā) of pāda a. Despite the ad hoc explanations required, I’m inclined to consider the -viharyata- somehow a derivative of ví √hvṛ ‘deflect, swerve, overturn’, a well-established idiom. (Re’s “dont le pouvoir est incontrariable” seems to reflect this.) Two negated nominal derivatives of this lexeme are found in the RV: ávihruta- ‘unswerving’, jpb: ‘not overturned’ (V.66.2, X.170.1) and ávihvarant- jpb: ‘not overturning’ (IV.36.2). Unfortunately the morphological details are not going to be easy. Accounting for the loss of the v in a putative *avihvaryata- is not so difficult: it can be ascribed to dissimilation, in combination with the word play on (d)hárī just mentioned. But what about the rest of the word. For the suffix -ata- I can only invoke the (small) class of -ata- adjectives with full-grade root syllable of the type darśatá- ‘(lovely) to be seen’, yajatá- ‘worthy of the sacrifice’, and the aforementioned haryatá- ‘delightful’. As for the intermediate -y- between root syllable and ending, I again invoke the play on (d)hárī, with the -y- representing the sandhi of -ī- before the suffix -ata-. If word play is indeed involved here, it’s possible that a second reading of the first member could be “not without his fallow bays” and the whole compound means “who has no resolve without his fallow bays.” I am fully aware of what a house of cards this is and only sketch these scenarios because I think Nodhas is capable of such manipulations. I do think it possible, however, that the lack of caesura and the problematic compound are connected and that the transmitted text is not what Nodhas originally composed. It should be noted that the word division yénā viharyatakrato is also a possibility, but this doesn’t help either with the lack of caesura or the analysis of the compound.


## 03
I interpret dhṛṣṇúḥ as governing the acc. etā́n, though as a goal not a direct object..

## 04-07
tváṃ ha tyád provides the opening of the next four verses. Although tyád is a neut. pronoun and in 4a could function as the object of the otherwise object-less codīḥ, in the following verses it does not have pronominal function; the expression X ha tyád is a way of providing emphasis, particular of the 2nd ps. pronoun (cf., e.g., VII.19.2, VIII.96.16-18). I would now be inclined to tr. the vss. in this sequence with “It was just you who …” rather than the rather recessive “You then, …”


## 05
This verse contains many small problems of interpretation that hinder putting together the whole. I’ll start with the details and turn to the construction of the whole thereafter.

áriṣaṇyan is universally taken as intrans., patient-oriented ‘not receiving harm, not being harmed’, but in all cases this stem is better taken as ‘not allowing harm’.

The finite verb riṣaṇyáti also has this meaning “intends harm, allows harm’. The parallel stem áriṣaṇya- in II.29.4 has the same meaning and takes a genitive (áriṣaṇyā tanū́nām “not allowing harm to our bodies”), and I construe the gen. mártānām in b with áriṣyan: “not intending harm to mortals.” The next problem is dṛḷhásya. Ge takes this as the causer of the harm to Indra (gen. agent), while Hoffmann, followed by WG, construe it with ájuṣṭau, with the gen. pl. mártānām dependent on dṛḷhásya (KH “bei Missfallen selbst eines Feststehenden unter den Sterblichen”), but both the Ge and the WG interpretations require that dṛḷhá- be a person. This is unprecedented: this past participle is virtually always used of a place, a fortified stronghold. Indra is once (VIII.44.12) called dṛḷhá-, presumably because he is as steadfast as a fortress (in the vein of “a mighty fortress is our god”), but I know of no examples with people so called. If at all possible it should have the standard meaning here. I think this is possible, by reading the verb ví … var of pāda c also with the first hemistich and supplying the word dúraḥ ‘doors’.

In fact, the other two passages containing the gen. sg. dṛḷhásya strongly support this solution, as they both contain the verb ví √vṛ and the headnoun dúraḥ: VI.62.11 drḷ̥hásya cid gómato ví vrajásya, dúro vartam ... “Open the doors of the cattle pen, even though it is shut fast” and VII.79.4 ví dr̥ḷhásya dúro ádrer aurṇoḥ “you opened up the doors of the firm-fixed stone.” Note that ví … var is rather more appropriate to this hemistich than it is to the pāda in which it’s found. (Recall the double use of ví √var in I.62.5 and 7.) The last word to be accounted for in this hemistich is ájuṣṭau. Unlike most tr.

I take it to be Indra’s displeasure. The object of his displeasure is not expressed, but it is easy to supply — presumably Vala, since Indra is opening up his stronghold. His displeasure at Vala (or other demonic enemies) is implicitly contrasted with his benevolent care not to injure mortals.

I am less sure about what pāda c is conveying. I assume this is a racing image: Indra starts the race by opening the barriers at the starting line. Ge and Re take the injunctive ví … var as a functional imperative, but this is certainly not necessary. I tr.

as a past tense, in keeping with its rendering in the first hemistich, but it would be possible to take it as a present in c, as Hoffman/WG do. The phrase asmád ā́ “(coming) from us” seems a bit heavy simply to express that it’s our horse, so there may be some racing terminology embedded here.

In d ghanéva contains the old instr. ghanā́. The same phrase is found in


## 16
and IX.97.16.


## 06
The gerundive atasā́yya- is taken by Ge as belonging to √at ‘wander’ and tr.

“soll … erreichbar sein,” while most (Gr, Re (?), AiG II.2.286, Hoffman, WG) take it to mean “to be asked for/begged” and derived from the hapax atasī́- supposedly ‘beggar’ (VIII.3.13). But this is entirely circular, with the meaning of each of these two words determined on the basis of the other, with an occasional nod towards √at ‘wander’ as their possible root (whose relevance Mayrhofer casts doubts on; see EWA s.v. atasī́-). I instead take it as a negated gerundive to √taṃs ‘tug, yank, shake’, which forms a similar gerundive to its intensive, vitantasā́yya-. Negated gerundives do not ordinarily take accent on the privative (AiG II.1.217), and the derivational opacity of atasā́yya- would make it likely to receive the usual -ā́yya- gerundive accent. Ge also suggests the possibility of derivation from √taṃs in a note.


## 07
“one after the other” is my attempt to render an “object-distributive” value for the intensive dardaḥ. (For this notion see Schaefer 1994: 86-87, though she considers dardar- lexicalized and does not attribute this sense to it, pp. 135-36.) The use of várg ‘you twisted’ differs in tone in simile and frame. In the frame it is distinctly hostile and destructive, but in the simile it simply expresses the ritual action of twisting the barhis grass into seats for the visiting gods.


## 08
ā́paḥ in b can certainly be the old nominative plural used as an accusative, as occasionally happens in late RV (so Gr and implicitly most tr.), but as I suggested elsewhere (1982: 260), it may be the nominative plural it appears to be; this may be an example of case disharmony in a simile, exploiting the ambiguities in syntax of the verb √pi ‘swell’ that the poets were always happy to capitalize on. In the frame pīpayaḥ is transitive (“you swell the refreshment”), but in the simile intransitive (“as waters [swell]”).

I take tmánam as functioning as a reflexive pronoun (“extend yourself”), while most tr. take it as a noun (Ge ‘Lebensgeist’, WG ‘Lebenshauch’). This is the only acc. to the truncated stem tmán-, and so its usage is hard to determine. The oblique cases (dominated by inst. tmánā) generally refer to the self (‘by yourself, for ourselves’, etc.), without a full-blown nominal sense, which accounts for my tr.

However, the active form of yáṃsi gives my pause, and so the standard tr. should be considered (though I am not ready to adopt it). “Extend nourishment to us” seems to be formulaic, with an active form of √yam, and so that voice may have prevailed here, despite the reflexive tmánam; cf. III.1.22 prá yaṃsi … íṣo nah, IV.32.7 sá no yandhi … íṣam.


## 09
I supply ‘hymn’ as subject for ákāri in the first pāda and take bráhmāṇy ùktā in b as a separate nominal clause. It is of course grammatically possible to take the latter phrase as subject of ákāri, since neuter plurals famously can take singular verbs.

But, fame aside, this construction is quite rare in the RV, and in this case there are two different recipients, Indra in a and the horses in b. However, I do not consider the other interpretation impossible.
