+++
title = "064"

+++
Maruts


## 01
Ge argues that apó (apparently the acc. pl. of ‘waters') should be emended to ápo (neut. acc. sg. of ‘work’). His parallels are persuasive, and I accept the emendation. Therefore the published tr. should have an asterisk * before ‘work’. The accent shift may have been made redactionally, on the basis of vs. 6, which contains apó ‘waters’ in its first pāda and vidátheṣv ābhúvaḥ in its second, as here. On the other hand, if we choose to retain the reading apó (see below), the hemistich can mean “Wise in mind, with dextrous hands I anoint the hymns, like waters standing ready at the rites.” WG accept the reading as given, but take it as “Werkmeister,” i.e., to the internally derived adjectival stem apás- ‘possessing work’. This would be appealing save for the fact that the masc. nom. sg. should be *apā́s (or ápā in this sandhi context). This morphological problem is not mentioned.


## 04
vy àñjate here responds to sám añje in 1d, though here the verb is reflexive and in the 1st vs. it is transitive but with subject involvement (“I ornament [my own] hymns”). I tr. the verbs slightly differently because the ‘anoint’ sense doesn’t work very well in vs. 1, esp. with the simile, whereas here the etymological figure with añjíbhiḥ ‘unguents’ enforces the more literal sense.

Gr suggests emending mimṛkṣur ‘they rubbed’ to mimikṣur ‘they were fixed/attached’ (accepted by WG), since this verb √myakṣ is used elsewhere of spears in similar contexts. However, ‘rub’ makes fine sense, and the poet may well be playing with a well-known phrase. (This perhaps should give us pause about emending apó to ápo in 1.) Pāda d sākáṃ jajñire svadháyā … “They were born all at once by their own power” -- that the Maruts were self-born is asserted in I.168.2; see also V.87.2.


## 05
Very alliterative verse, esp. in 2nd half, with pāda c duhánty ū́dhar divyā́ni dhū́tayo (cf. also dhúnayo in pāda a) and d … pinvanti páyasā párijrayaḥ. Cf. also b vā́tān vidyútas (ta)vi(ṣībhir).

Most tr. take ū́dhar divyā́ni together (e.g., Ge “die himmlischen Euter”).

Although divyá- does modify ū́dhar- elsewhere in similar context (e.g., IX.107.5 duhāná ū́dhar divyám mádhu priyám), the collocation is not grammatically possible here, since ū́dhar is definitely singular and divyā́ni is definitely plural. At best one would have to argue that short-vowel neut. plurals to n-stems, which are identical to their neut. sgs., provided some sort of model (cf., e.g., I.173.3 sádma mitā́“fixed seats”). Old (ZDMG 55.273 n. 1 [=KlSch 732]) claims that this is a vicarious introduction (“ein vicarirendes Eintretung,” whatever that means) of the sg. ū́dhar since the plural of ū́dhar- doesn't exist. (We would expect *ū́dhāni, like áhāni to áhar, though Old bizarrely produces *ū́dhṝṇi instead; I see no reason why *ū́dhāni could not exist and assume its non-attestation is an accidental gap.) But the issue here is not the singular of ‘udder’, but the plural of ‘heavenly’, which the poet could easily have made singular (as in the parallels) if he had wanted. The root √duh can take a double accusative, as in IX.107.5 just quoted: “milking the heavenly udder of its dear honey”), and this is how I interpret divyā́ni here, supplying a form of vásu ‘goods’, which divyá- regularly modifies. In one way or another this alternative goes back to Gr and Delbrück AiS.80 and is accepted by WG. Again, Nodhas seems to be playfully evoking a familiar phrase but modifying it.

On párijrayaḥ, supposedly a cmpd with root noun -jri-, lacking the usual -textension, see comm. ad V.54.2.


## 06
vidátheṣv ābhúvaḥ, repeated, as noted above, from 1d, is ambiguous. It can modify the waters of the first pāda, as Ge (/WG) take it, or the Maruts (so Re). I have tried to maintain the ambiguity. In vs. 1 the phrase qualified the hymns (fem. pl.

gíraḥ) and, if apó of pāda c is not emended, those waters as well.


## 08
piśá- in b occurs only here in the RV, so although the meaning assumed by most (‘mottled [deer]’ vel sim., beginning with Sāy) is plausible, it has no other support. The plethora of wild animals in this run of verses (7: buffalos, wild elephants, 8: lions, snakes) does suggest that this term names animals too. Re by contrast tr. the etymological phrase piśā́iva supíśaḥ as “bien ouvragés comme des oeuvres-peintes,” though he is more cautious in his n. Kulikov (JIES: 2009) suggests ‘cheetah’ or ‘leopard’ on the basis of the wild animal company it keeps in its AV occurrence (AVŚ XIX.49.4 = AVP XIV.8.4). This is plausible but by no means certain.


## 09
As noted in the intro., ródasī is a pun. In pāda a it refers to the two worldhalves, but in cd the unexpressed subject is feminine and mounts the Maruts’ chariot. This can only be Rodasī, the Maruts’ consort (for mounting their chariot, see I.167.5-6), who ordinarily is accented rodasī́but here must be generated by otherwise homonymous ródasī in pāda a.

áhimanyavaḥ should probably be unaccented, in a voc. phrase with śūrāḥ, but since the phrase śávasā́himanyavaḥ is exactly repeated from the preceding vs., 8d, where it is properly nom., it could hardly have failed to acquire an accent redactionally.


## 10
Properly speaking, the tr. should read “have taken their arrow in their fists,” since íṣum is singular. With dual gábhastyoḥ the passage is shorthand for “(each) has taken his arrow in his two fists.”


## 11
payovṛ́dh- has several possible values. In addition to the ‘milk-strong’ in the publ. tr., it would also be possible to take the -vṛdh- transitively: “strengthening with their milk [=rain]” or “strengthening the milk [=rain]”; either alternative is supported by vss. 5-6.

The lexeme úd √han is quite rare and occurs with the verb stem jíghna- only here. Since the exact sense of the lexeme is not certain, it is difficult to know how to complete the simile. I have interpreted the verb to mean ‘beat up’; with regard to roads there is a nice parallel in the English idiom “pound the pavement.” I assume that ā́pathi- refers to walkers on a path and supply ‘road’ as the object parallel to the mountains and their feet as the instrument of pounding that is parallel to the wheelrims. ET compares the French idiom ‘frayer le chemin’, used of blazing a trail, which may well be the sense meant here. Ge takes the verb as ‘aufreissen’ (tear open/up) and supplies ‘stones’ as the object (sim. WG). I am a little puzzled as to why his Strassenfahrer would be tearing up stones, but I suppose it might be to clear a rugged path. Re: “… arrachent les montagnes, tels des frayeurs-de-voie.” I do not know what he means by this.


## 12
The word sūnú- ‘son’ in the singular takes one aback in a hymn devoted to celebrating the very plural Maruts. It clearly refers to the ‘flock’ (gaṇá-) in pāda c, but I have tr. ‘offspring’ to avoid the misleading “we hymn the son of Rudra…”


## 13
Ge (/WG) construes āpṛ́chyaṃ krátum with ā́kṣeti, giving the latter the meaning ‘possess’. But this Class II present means only ‘inhabit, dwell’ (as opposed to Class I kṣáyati ‘rules over, owns’ to a different [synchronic] root √kṣi). Re clearly recognizes the problem and tries to reconcile the meaning of the root present with its construal with an object, producing the very odd “il habite une force-spirituelle digne-d'être-recherchée.” It seems preferable to me to take āpṛ́chyaṃ krátum with the previous pāda and tr. ā́kṣeti púṣyati separately. The two verbs (admittedly without the preverb ā́) form a fixed expression (I.83.3, V.37.4, VII.32.9). The position of the preverb also does not favor construing the preceding accusative with ā́kṣeti: we might then expect the preverb to begin the clause, though this argument is considerably weakened by the fact that the pāda would begin *ā́āpṛ́chyam, in sandhi ā́pṛ́chyam, and the separate preverb would be essentially lost. As for the sense of bharate … āpṛ́chyaṃ krátum, I interpret it as what I think Re would call a “legère zeugma.” The first two objects of bharate, vā́jam and dhánā, are both physical objects that the subject carries from one place to another; the third proposed object is a mental attitude. The English idiom “carries himself” and the English noun “bearing” use ‘carry, bear’ in a similar sense, to refer to a person’s mental self-presentation, and the middle voice of bharate would neatly fit such a value.
