+++
title = "065"

+++
Agni

## 02-03
These verses contain 3rd pl. act. root aorists ánu gman (2b) and ánu … guḥ (3b) to the associated roots √gam and √gā respectively, with no apparent difference in semantics. Here one might almost invoke the much over-used explanation of metrical convenience: both of these 3rd plurals are always (gman) or almost always (guḥ) pāda-final, with the first “making position” with a preceding light syllable (often ánu) and the latter not.


## 03
The second half of this verse is very economically and ingeniously expressed.

First, the syntactic modes of simile and frame are entirely different. The frame consists of a single noun, nominalized from an underlying verb (páriṣṭiḥ ‘enclosing’ < pári √as ‘enclose’), with the object (Agni, an underlying objective genitive) to be supplied from context (“the enclosing [of Agni]”). The simile contains both subject and object in the appropriate cases (nom. dyaúḥ and [presumably] acc. bhū́ma) but no verb, which must be generated from the noun páriṣṭiḥ (“as heaven [encloses] the earth”), which in turn was generated from the underlying verb. Thus, the frame and the simile are in syntactic complementary distribution - the former with a verb (or verb substitute) but no overt nominal complements, the latter with nominal complements but no overt verb. That the verb-y half is expressed nominally and the noun-y half as if it contained a governing verb is a further bit of cleverness. This syntactic skew produces case mismatch, with the nom. “heaven” of the simile apparently compared to nom. “the enclosing” (páriṣṭir dyaúr ná), and, further, the mismatch between the single (presumed) complement of the frame and the two overt complements in the simile gives an impression almost of case disharmony of the type treated in Jamison 1982, although in fact the objective gen. “of Agni” that must be supplied matches the acc. object bhū́ma in the simile.

Or at least it matches bhū́ma acdg. to the standard renderings (Ge, Re, WG, Lü, Varuṇa p. 590, and the publ. tr.). However, bhū́ma is a neuter and ambiguous as to case, and heaven enclosing the earth does not strike me as a standard Vedic image — though it slips easily into our round-earth cosmological worldview. Far more commonly in Vedic heaven and earth together encompass something else (e.g., X.27.7, under an epithet) or fail to (II.16.3, again under an epithet), or they themselves are encompassed (see the expressions quoted in Jamison 1998). For a nicely balanced passage in which the two appear both as object and subject, see nearby (but attributed to a different poet) I.61.8cd pári dyā́vāprthivī́jabhra urvī́,  nā́sya té mahimā́nam pári ṣṭaḥ “He held encircled broad heaven and earth; they did not encompass his greatness.” I therefore now wonder if bhū́ma should be taken as a nominative parallel to dyaúḥ, with an object to be supplied (“… as heaven [and] earth [encompass X]”) or even if dyaúḥ … bhū́ma should be recombined into a dual dvandva (cf. dyā́vā-bhūmī́, with slightly different 2nd member) and taken as an object (“as [X encompasses] heaven [and] earth”). (Note that the disyllabic reading of di yaúḥ could accommodate a dyā́vā.) In any case, I believe that the poet kept these possibilities open by the ambiguous concision of his wording.

Yet another aspect of this little expression is its relation to other such expressions in this small group of hymns attributed to Parāśara Śāktya (I.65-73): twice elsewhere in this collection Agni is depicted as encompassing something else, with the lexemes pári √bhū (I.68.2 pári … bhúvat, I.69.2 pári … babhūtha), while in


## 02
something else is enclosing Agni, configured as a calf (vátsaṃ), using pári √as.

(I wonder if the somewhat pleonastic presence of bhúvat in our passage is meant to resonate with those pári √bhū passages.) Thus, though in our passage Agni is clearly the object of enclosure in the myth of his hiding in the waters, he himself can take the role of encloser in this tight-knit collection - allowing for the possibility that he might here be supplied as subjective genitive with páriṣṭiḥ, save for the mythological context.

All in all, I.65.3cd packs a lot into its ten syllables and five words, as witnessed by the many more words (more than ten times as many) in this entry required to describe its syntactic and semantic tricks.


## 04
The initial sequence in this vs. várdhantīm can, uncontroversially, consist of the 3rd pl. act. pres. várdhanti and the enclitic pronoun īm, as the Pp. and all subsequent analyses take it. I wonder, however, if it should not be analyzed like nearby I.67.4 vidántīm (q.v.; also a Parāśara hymn), where I segment the sequence as vidánt īm, with the old secondary ending *-ant preserved because it was misanalyzed as -ánti + īm. In I.67.4 there is stronger motivation to accept my reanalysis because vidá- is otherwise only an aorist stem and should not have indicative forms with primary endings. Here, of course, várdha- is a present stem and várdhanti would be perfectly at home. Nonetheless, the first four vss. of this hymn treat the disappearance of Agni and his concealment in the waters and are couched in the past

-- note esp. ánu guḥ ‘they followed’ in 3a, the vs. paired with this one. I would
therefore tentatively emend the published tr. to “the waters strengthened the lovely child.” For this and other such passages (esp. I.65.4 and I.85.11), see my “Hidden in Plain Sight: Some Older Verb Endings in the Rig Veda” in a forthcoming festschrift.

It is unclear with what part of the sentence the instr. panvā́ should be construed. I take it with the verb várdhant(i) (though I do not go as far as Old, who suggests that the phrase is equivalent to panáyanti), while Ge (/WG) and Re, in slightly different ways, take it with súśiśvim. The stem is a hapax and there is no obvious way to decide the matter, though the passages Re adduces for his instr. of characterization (IX.85.11, 86.31 śíśum .. pánipnatam and III.1.13 apā́ṃ gárbham … pániṣṭhaṃ jātám) may tip the scales in his direction. So I might modify the publ. tr. to “The waters strengthen(ed) the lovely child in his wonder” or (see below) “… strengthen(ed) the one growing well with/in wonder,” though construing it with várdhant(i) still seems to yield more sense.

The matter is made more difficult by the fact that súśiśvi- is also a hapax. It is generally taken as an adj. “schön wachsend” (ultimately to √śū ‘swell’), and this is certainly possible. But because of śíśvā, instr. of śíśu- ‘child’, in 10c, I follow Old (SBE, “the fine child”) and Re (“le beau Nouveau-né”) in taking it as a noun.


## 05
It is tempting to take the adjectives raṇvā́, pṛthvī́, and śambhú as referring to Agni and specifying the term of comparison with the item in the simile (“broad like a place of peaceful dwelling,” etc.), and in fact Ge (mostly) and Re (entirely) give in to this temptation. However, all three adjectives agree in gender with the noun in the simile (fem. in the first two, neut. in the last), and although it would be possible to explain this agreement as “attraction” (so Re), a simpler solution is to assume that the adjective belongs with the comparandum. (So also WG.) The phrase girír ná bhújma poses a different problem, in that girí- is masc., and therefore if bhujmá is an adjective, it does not modify giríḥ — unlike the otherwise entirely parallel expression in VIII.50.2 (Vālakh.) girír ná bhujmā́. We should either emend the text (à bhujmā́, so Gr) to agree with that passage (“like a beneficial mountain”) or take it as a nominalized neut. “source of benefit,” the solution adopted in the publ. tr. On this characteristic of mountains, see, e.g., I.55.3.

## 06-07
The similes continue in these verses, but with less strict parallelism in structure.


## 06
The construction of síndhur ná kṣódaḥ is clarified by its occurrences in the next hymn, I.66.10 síndhur ná kṣódaḥ prá nī́cīr ainot “Like a river its gush, he has sent forth those [=butter offerings?] heading downward.” Hence the “(sending)” supplied here.


## 07
íbhya- is found only here in the RV, though it occurs later. It is a derivative of íbha-, which is slightly better attested in the RV and seems to mean ‘(group of) servants, retinue’. Tr. of íbhyān split dramatically between ‘wealthy’ (Ge “die Reichen,” WG “die Begüterten”) and ‘vassal, servant’ (Re “les vassaux”), and the Pāli cognate ibbha- is also glossed with both, though with the ‘vassal’ sense first and dominant (see the newest ed. of the PTS dictionary, 2001 s.v.: “a member of a king’s entourage; a vassal; dependent; wealthy”). I will not enter into a reexamination of all the Sanskrit and MIA evidence, but in my opinion context here favors ‘vassal, dependent’ rather than ‘wealthy’. See Proferes’s disc. of vss. 7-9 (2007: 111-12); although he refuses to tr. íbhyān, he argues that it refers “to those who are subordinated to the king,” quite possibly the clans — as the AV passage he adduces suggests: AV IV.22.7 víśo addhi “eat the clans,” addressed to the king at his consecration.

## 09
Strictly speaking, given the position of ná, the apsú should go with the frame, not the simile: “he hisses in the waters, like …” This is presumably a reference both to the myth of Agni’s hiding in the waters treated earlier in the hymn and to his identification with Apām Napāt, but the haṃsá- is surely sitting in the waters, too - though the primary point of comparison is the hissing noise both make.

How to construe gen. viśā́m is not clear. I take it loosely as a datival gen. with the cétiṣṭhaḥ, while Re considers it dependent on a “virtual” viśpáti- (“le plus remarquable … de (ceux qui président aux) tribus”), and Ge and WG, in slightly different ways, take it as dependent on uṣarbhúd (Ge “der Frühwache der Ansiedelungen”; WG “der von Niederlassungen am Morgen wach wird”). Proferes’s rendering is quite awkward, but closest to my own in intent: “the clans' brightest as concerns strategems.”


## 10
The simile in cd is unclear; its purport depends on what meaning is assigned to multivalent vibhú-, whose senses include ‘conspicuous’, ‘distinguished’, and ‘wide-ranging’, to which Ge adds ‘sich mehrend’, Re ‘abondant’, and WG ‘kräftig’.

In Ge’s and Re’s readings, the point of the simile would be the size of the herd and its growth through the birth of its young. This is certainly possible, and the point of contact with Agni would be the growth, that is, the blazing up, of the fire after its kindling. However, I do not see ‘increase’ as one of the core meanings of ví √bhū and prefer ‘wide-ranging’ here, with the simile expressing the grazing behavior of herds and the frame the fire’s tendency to spread. See 8b vánā vy ásthāt “he has spread out through the wood.” The final word of 10, dūrébhāḥ ‘far-radiant’, may support this interpretation. I do admit, however, that śíśvā ‘with their young’ makes less sense than in the Ge/Re interpretation.

Note that the opening of the last hemistich of the hymn, paśúr ná śī́śvā, “unpacks” the hymn’s first word paśvā́in a type of ring comp., and that this phrase was in a sense anticipated by 4b panvā́súśiśvim.
