+++
title = "066"

+++
Agni


## 01
The fem. gender of citrā́is a problem. The standard solution (see, e.g., Gr) is to assume that rayí-, which is normally masc., is occasionally fem. (so also, supposedly, in nearby I.68.7, though see disc. there). I find this unsatisfactory and explain the gender by assuming that citrā́modifies not only rayíḥ but also fem.

saṃdṛ́k and agrees with the latter.

Gr takes sū́raḥ as the nom. sg. of the thematic stem sū́ra-; in this he is apparently followed by Re: “(propre à la) vision (des hommes) comme le soleil.” I find this unlikely, since saṃdṛ́ś- regularly takes the gen., incl. sū́ryasya (II.33.1, X.37.6, X.59.5). I therefore take sū́raḥ as gen. of svàr-, with, apparently, Ge (/WG).

More problematic is ā́yur ná prāṇáḥ, where the first word should be the neut.

noun ā́yus- ‘lifetime’, since Gr’s supposed adjectival stem ā́yu- ‘beweglich’ does not exist (only the neut. noun ā́yu-, also ‘lifetime’). Thus, properly speaking, we should have an equational simile “breath like lifetime,” represented in Re’s “souffle-animé comme la vie (même)” and WG “der Atem gleichsam als Leben.” Nonetheless I consider the interpretation as an improper compound, as in Ge’s “wie der Lebenshauch,” to make more sense.


## 02
Both tákvan- and bhū́rṇi- have received diverse tr., which I will not treat in detail here. For √tak as ‘plunge, rush’, etc., see EWA s.v. TAK; here and in takva-vī́- I take it to refer to a “swooping” bird of prey. As for bhū́rni, it belongs to √bhur ‘quiver’, and I tr. it here as ‘restless’ to capture the constant circling and diving of birds of prey. How then can he ‘cling’ (siṣakti) to the wood? The image must be of the flames of the fire constantly licking and dancing (to use our preferred metaphors in English), but always in contact with the wood. My “clings” is a more vivid version of the literal “accompanies, keeps company with.” To avoid the appearance of contradiction, the phrase might better have been rendered “ever restless, like a swooping (bird), he (yet) clings to the wood.” Note that the second syllable of vánā somewhat echoes the ná simile markers of previous pādas.

The simile of c is syntactically problematic, consisting of a neut. NA sg.

páyaḥ ‘milk’ and a fem. nom. sg. dhenúḥ ‘milk-cow’, with the relation between them unspecified. Ge simply takes it as a functional compound (“wie die Kuhmilch”), though unlike “life-breath” in 1c, the order of the elements would be wrong; Re takes dhenúḥ as if it were gen. (“comme le lait (de) la vache-laitière”), while Old (SBE) and WG render it as two similes (Old “like milk, like a milch-cow”). I have supplied a verb “(yielding),” allowing páyaḥ to serve as acc. object, on the basis of IV.57.2 dhenúr iva páyaḥ ... dhukṣva. None of these solutions is immediately satisfying. One clue might be whether the adjectives in d (śúcir vibhā́vā ‘blazing/gleaming and ‘farradiant’) are applicable to either the one or the other of the nouns in the simile, but this doesn’t turn out to be very helpful. Although both adjectives are regularly used of Agni, they are characteristic of neither milk nor cows. One exception is V.1.3 śúcir aṅkte śúcibhir góbhir agníḥ “blazing Agni is anointed with blazing cows,” but there the “cows” stand for products of the cow, either milk (so the publ. tr.) or, more likely, ghee, so that a metaphorical application to either noun is possible. And it may be that the simile in c is to be taken by itself, detached from the adjectives in d; see, e.g., 3cd, where the two pādas, one a simile, the other not, are semantically independent.


## 03
As Re notes, we might expect suffix-accented jetā́with gen. jánānām. WG, following Tichy (1995: 343-44), interpret the gen. in datival function (“als Sieger für die Menschen”) to avoid nominal rection with a root-accented agent noun. But since this accentual “rule” is often broken, I see no problem with the standard interpr. as objective gen. “conquerer of peoples.”


## 05
The two halves of this verse are conceptually more complex than those preceding. Most tr. take a and b as implicitly contrastive: Agni’s blaze is undomesticated but he is nonetheless intimately familiar -- e.g., Ge “Dessen Flamme schwer heimisch wird, (und doch ist er) eingeboren wie die Einsicht.” This is certainly possible. However, although I recognize the contrast between duróka- and nítya-, I think the poet is equating the two elements in a clever play: Agni’s flame can’t be controlled and “domesticated” anymore than a man in the grip of his own will.

As for the second half, I find it hard to believe that the poet is implying that one’s wife is at the disposition of everybody, with the distasteful sexual connotations this implies -- as in Re’s “(se mettent) à disposition pour chacun comme l’épouse sur la couche.” Rather I think this is the Papageno situation: all it takes for anyone to be happy is his own wife in his lap.


## 06
The “horse” generally supplied with śvetáḥ ‘white’ is based on the regular cooccurrence of that adj. with áśva- and other expressions for ‘horse’, including metaphorically of Agni (e.g., V.1.4). It of course also harmonizes nicely with the chariot of cd.


## 07
In the RV it’s necessary to allow sénā- to mean both ‘army’ and ‘weapon’; although the latter could make sense here (so Re), an army is more likely to produce an onslaught than a single weapon.


## 08
As discussed in the publ. intro., this verse is quite opaque and breaks the pattern of Agni-describing similes that has prevailed up to now in this hymn (and the last one). It has, not surprisingly, stimulated much discussion and some fanciful interpretations, all the details of which I will not rehearse here. The first question that must be addressed is what the first word (and the fourth), yamáḥ, represents here. Is it the PN Yama, naming the first man and the king of the dead? or the common noun ‘twin’? or even the common noun ‘controller’ (though we might then expect the accent yáma-)? What one decides about this question determines the direction of interpretation of the rest of the verse. Ge (/WG) take it as Yama, here identified with Agni; Re and Old (and I) as ‘twin’, with the two twins displaying different characteristics. The rhetorical structure of the verse favors this interpretation; not only do the first two pādas both begin yamáḥ, a repetition that invites (but does not require) a “the one … the other …” reading, but the contrastive characterizations found in cd also support it.

The next problem is the gender discrepancy between jātáḥ (m.) and jánitvam (n.) in what appear to be parallel equational clauses. To solve this Ge (/WG) simply supply a verb with the second, to which jánitvam serves as object: “als Yama (erzeugt er) das künftiges Geschlecht.” But this would disturb the balanced structure of the verse, and it seems best to allow jánitvam to be predicated of yamáḥ, as Old and Re (and I) do. Where I differ from these latter is in my interpretation of the two equations. Old and Re take both twins to be identified with Agni, with each “twin” representing one aspect of Agni’s nature. I think that each twin is identified first with another entity, which is then secondarily identified with Agni. Although this might seem complex, it allows the other parts of the verse to bear more meaning than the exclusive “Agni = one twin, Agni = other twin” interpretation admits. As indicated in the publ. intro., I take the verse as reflecting the circumstances of the early morning ritual, when the fire is kindled at sunrise and the soma is pressed for the first offering.

Under that interpretation the twin that has (already) been born (jātáḥ) would be the sun, at whose appearance the ceremony gets started. The twin that is the substance to be born (jánitvam) would be the soma. The two are not only twins of each other, but each is the twin of Agni. Soma and the sun are not infrequently identified (see, e.g., IX.66.18 tváṃ soma sū́ra éṣaḥ “you, Soma, are the sun”); the identification of Agni and the sun is a commonplace; and Agni can also be identified with Soma (see, e.g., the tṛca IX.66.19-21), and they frequently share epithets (like śúci-, discussed above 2d, though in another context).

I then take the two pādas cd as referring to the sun and the soma respectively.

The sun is “the lover of girls” because he appears with the Dawns. For the same phrase, in the acc., referring (most probably) to the sun, see I.152.4. Whereas in IX.86.32 our same phrase pátir jánīnām is applied to Soma, where the “women/wives” are the milk-drinks with which he is mixed. As for the secondary reference to Agni, of these characterizations, either group of females (or both) might refer to the offering ladles (fem. juhū́-) that approach the ritual fire with their oblations or the streams (fem. dhā́rā-) of melted butter being offered. See the fem. pl.

nī́cīḥ in 10b.

Despite the complications of this interpretation, it provides a rich reading of the enigmatic verse, which fits well with the two ritually centered verses that end the hymn.


## 09
As indicated in the publ. intro., I consider the last two verses of the hymn to reflect the ritual situation. This scenario is supported by the presence of 1st and 2nd pronouns (vayám and vaḥ respectively), with the 2nd ps. enclitic indicating, as often, the other human participants and observers besides the poet and priests, who are the “we.” The crux in this verse is carā́thā. The first problem with it is the long ā in the 2nd syllable, the only instance of such a stem in the transmitted RV beside regularly formed carátha- (13x). However, the situation is more complex: 4 of the transmitted carátha- forms occur in the Parāśara hymns (I.68.1, 70.3, 7, 72.6), but of these, 3 (68.1, 70.3, 7) would be metrically better if read *carā́tha-. I have no explanation for the variation and will not pursue the issue further. More interesting is the grammatical identity of the form and the semantic role it plays in the verse. Old (SBE, Noten) and Ge (/WG) take it as a nom. pl. ‘wanderers’, neuter if flg. the Pp., though Ge suggests that it might reflect masc. carā́thāḥ. They further interpret it as conjoined with vayám (Old, Ge) or identified with it (WG). However, in the Noten (ad loc., fn. 1) Old allows the possibility that the form could be an instr. parallel with vasatyā́(“mit Gehen und mit Verweilen”), an idea that Re develops, suggesting that the pair are semantically parallel to the contrastive pair yóga / kṣéma (roughly “activity and rest”). Re believes that the instrumentals characterize Agni (“(soit) dans (sa) marche, (soit) dans (sa) demeure”). This is possible, though it would be a slightly odd use of the instr. With Re I consider carā́thā an instr. contrasting with vasatyā́, but think that the pair is applicable to “us”: we approach Agni with homage with both our movable goods, that is, the livestock that provides the butter and milk offerings, and our household establishment that supplies the rest.

The 3rd pl. nákṣante (nákṣanta in sandhi) does not agree with its 1st pl. subject vayám. With Ge I take it as attraction to the immediately preceding simile, ástaṃ ná gā́vaḥ. It is accented because it begins the pāda.


## 10
The fem. pl. nī́cīḥ has almost too many possible referents -- waters, flames, cows, or butter offerings (configured as cows) - all of which have been proposed by one or more tr. I favor butter offerings. See also VIII.101.13, also containing nī́cī and showing the same range of possibilities; sim. V.44.4. The cows of c may well be the same offerings metaphorically.

See intro. for the ring compositional final pāda. As Re points out, svàr dṛ́śīke is a nominalizing extension of the infinitive phrase svàr drś̥ é “to see the sun,” and we need not try to interpret svàr as a genitive.
