+++
title = "067"

+++
Agni


## 01
‘Demand’ may push √vṛ ‘choose’ a bit, but the simile suggests a degree of coercion.

Adverbial ajuryám is lit. ‘undecaying, unaging’, but in the developed sense ‘unfailing’ or, in English idiomatic terms, ‘without fail’.


## 03
On the idiom áme √dhā see disc. ad I.63.1; this expression must also be considered in relation to Parāśara’s ámaṃ √dhā in the preceding hymn (I.66.7).

Although a tr. like WG “setzt er die Götter in Schrecken” is easier, I do not think we should lose the sense of ‘onslaught’ for áma- by redefining it as ‘panic’ or ‘terror’ in this idiom. Here I think the point is that the leaping flames of Agni put even the gods in his way, even though he is, for the moment, sitting undetected. The first pāda of the hymn (váneṣu jāyúḥ “a conquerer amid the wood”) also implicitly contrasts his martial power with his apparently humble station.


## 04
The anomalous 3rd pl. vidánti, to the thematic aorist ávidat, is the only apparent primary indicative form to this stem and should belong to a present.

However, I think it can be eliminated: rather than following the Pp. vidánti īm, we can instead read vidánt īm, an injunctive with secondary ending whose final -t was preserved in this ambiguous sandhi situation. No alteration of the text is required.

The publ. tr. need not be altered either, though a preterital interpretation is in fact better: “They found him there when they recited mantras…” - since this passage appears to refer to the mythological tale of the gods finding Agni hidden in the waters. Cf. I.72.2 (also a Parāśara product), where the immortals did not find him (ná vindan) though they sought him; they are also described as dhiyaṃdhā́-, as here. For this and other such passages (esp. I.65.4 and I.85.11), see my “Hidden in Plain Sight: Some Older Verb Endings in the Rig Veda” in a forthcoming festschrift.


## 05
Tr. of the subj. ajáḥ vary between ‘unborn’ (Ge, Re) and ‘goat’ (Old SBE, WG), but parallel passages show that it must be the shadowy divinity Aja Ekapad (“One-footed Aja”), whatever the ajá- signifies in that conjunction. (Old recognizes as much in his n.) Cf. esp. AV XIII.1.6 tátra śiśriye 'já ékapādó 'dr̥ṃhad dyā́vāprthiv ̥ ī bálena; also RV X.65.13 where ékapād ajáḥ is adjacent to divó dhartā́.

In our passage the word padá- appears in the next verse and gestures toward the epithet.

The pf. dādhā́ra is ordinarily always presential (Kü 261); Kü cannot decide whether the pf. of √stambh is presential or preterital, but at least in this context I think it matches dadhā́ra in value.


## 06
The verse is highly alliterative: ab: priyā́padā́ni, paśvó ní pāhi; d: guhā́ guháṃ gāḥ. For the stylistic figure guhā́guhám see Hoffmann, KZ 76 (1960) 242-48, esp. 246-47 [=Aufs. I.113-19]. Note that guhā́has a different accentuation from adverbial gúhā.

## 07-08
These two verses are syntactically dependent on each other, consisting of three relative clauses (7ab, cd, 8ab) and a main clause with coreferential pronoun (8cd). However, this structure is complicated by the fact that, though two of the rel.

clauses have singular rel. pronouns (yáḥ 71, 7c) and the pronoun in the main cl. is likewise singular (asmai), the intermediate rel. cl. (8ab) has pl. yé, though all seem to be roughly coreferential. There is no obvious solution for this jarring inconsistency; Ge simply labels it Anakoluthon. However, certain features of the larger context may have encouraged this syntactic anomaly. First, the relative/correlative construction is of the indefinite “whoever …” type, where number is functionally, though not grammatically, neutralized. That is, it doesn't matter how many (or few) people the definitional relative clauses identify: if many people perform the functions, they should all get the reward; if only one does, then only he would. Moreover, as Lüders argues (p. 448), vss. 7-8 respond to vss. 3-4. In those earlier verses Agni goes into hiding (3d), but the “superior men” (náraḥ) find him after they produce and recite effective speech (4). In vss. 7-8 we seem to have the same situation, but in the human realm: he/they who has/have recourse to and do(es) service to the truth (7cd, 8ab) and perceive(s) Agni in hiding (7ab) receive(s) acknowledgement from Agni himself (8cd). Since in vss. 3-4 the discoverers of Agni, the gods, are plural, it may be that the plural crept in here, too. And finally this sequence may anticipate the next hymn, where it is emphasized that “all” (in the plural) perform the proper ritual and devotional functions, and in particular the almost identical phrase ṛtáṃ sápantaḥ (68.4c) echoes our ṛtā́sápantaḥ (67.8b).


## 08
The verb ví … cṛntánti lacks an overt object, and several different ones have been proposed: Ge (in n.) suggests it’s “the stream of truth” from 7d; Re supplies “(l’énigme)”; and WG read ṛtā́with this verb as well as the participle sápantaḥ (“welche … die Ṛtas aufknoten, (sie) pflegend”). Since the other two occurrences of this root (impv. ví … cṛta I.25.21, ppl. vícṛtta-) are both construed with pā́śa- ‘fetter’, that seems the likely object here as well. More speculatively, on the basis of VII.59.8 druháḥ pā́śān ‘fetters of deceit’, I have supplied that whole phrase here, since ‘deceit’ contrasts nicely with the emphasis on ṛtá- ‘truth’.

The pf. prá vavāca is one of the very few pf. forms to √vac with full reduplication (against uvā́ca, etc.). On the basis of its agreement with Aves. vauuac-, Kü (p. 441) considers this the older type of reduplication, with the newer type spreading from Samprasāraṇa roots.


## 09
The second half of the verse is metrically disturbed. As HvN note in their metrical commentary, it actually reads better as a Triṣṭubh, as is occasionally the case with Dvipadā Virāj.

The syntax of the verse is also problematic. The two utá-s of c are difficult to construe, and partly for this reason Gr, Old (SBE [disavowed in Noten]), Re, and Klein (DGRV 358) emend prajā́utá to prajā́su (presumably then *prajā́sūtá in the Saṃhitā text, though it’s not stated). If the original text had read this, it is hard to see why it would have become corrupted, given the two other loc. pl. in this verse. I consider the problematic utá-s and the problematic prajā́ḥ connected and suggest that the utá-s are connecting different entities: the first connects the nominatives yáḥ … utá prajā́ḥ “who [Agni] and his offspring” (not grammatical in English, of course, but possibly so in Skt; consider the common “X and which Y” construction), the second the locatives vīrútsu … utá prasū́ṣu antáḥ “in the sprouts and within the fruitful (plants).” Both Agni and his offspring grow in both media; note that because of its sandhi position ródhan can be both sg. (ródhat) and pl. and thus construed with both suggested subjects.

Note also that the verse begins ví REL, just like vs. 8, but with entirely different referents for the rel. pronoun. This might be another reason why 8ab shifts to the plural, to establish the difference between those who serve Agni and Agni himself.


## 10
The exact sense of cittí- and the syntactic disposition of apā́m are the two issues in this verse. Although cittí- ordinarily means ‘perception, insight’ and most tr.

so take it, I prefer to make it the abstract to a different, but well-represented, sense of √cit, namely ‘appears’, hence ‘apparition’. I also, with Old SBE, take apā́m with dáme rather than cittíḥ. I find tr. like “la pensée active des eaux” (Re), “der Verstand der Wasser” (WG) hard to interpret, indeed even lacking sense. Since much of the hymn has dealt with the theme of Agni’s hiding - and since his hiding place was the waters, though this was not overtly stated earlier - I think that this verse describes him glowing in the waters (and therefore detectible) and also makes reference to him as Apām Napāt.

The sádma of c must be read with both simile and frame.

## 68-70
Agni I consider these three hymns to be thematically and verbally linked, treating the Vaiśvānara fire and encoding this theme by deploying the two words underlying this vṛddhi compound, víśva- and nṛ́-. The first, víśva-, dominates I.68, the second, nṛ́- I.69, and they are juxtaposed in the climactic verses of I.70.9-10. See the introductions to the three hymns in the publ. tr., and for a detailed discussion, Jamison, Fs. J. S. Klein (“Inter-hymnic Rhetorical Structure in Ṛgveda I.68-70: Parāśara Śāktya’s Vaiśvānara Cycle,” 2016).
