+++
title = "068"

+++
Agni Note that Hoffmann tr. the entire hymn (1967: 141-42) because it contains 10 injunctives. I agree with Hoffmann’s tr. of these forms as presents, although I do not think this requires a Zeitlos-type interpretation.


## 01
For this interpr. of śrīṇán, which lacks overt object, see Narten 1987: 281 (=KlSch p. 351).

Rather than taking aktū́n as a second object with vy ū̀rṇot, I make it an acc. of extent of time, as it often is elsewhere (e.g., V.54.4).

On the metrical shape of carátham see I.66.9.


## 02
The second half-verse does not work as Dvipadā Virāj, since it would have pādas of 4 and 6 syllables. It has long been suggested (for reff. see Old SBE and HvN comm., both ad loc.) that putting devó devā́nām in the opposite order would fix this problem. However, Old argues in the Proleg. (97) that this is unnecessary, that Dvipadā Virāj has an affinity to Triṣṭubh, and that this line, though 10 syllables, configures itself nearly as a Triṣṭubh. See I.67.9 above.

The verb pári … bhuvat lacks overt object, and various suggestions have been made. I assume that its object is the same as the object of 1cd “the still and the moving.” Hoffmann (sim. WG) tr. the verb simply as “überragt” (stands out), but this interpr. ignores the emphasis on “encompassing” in this set of hymn (see disc. ad I.65.3).

The unaccented gen. pl. eṣām presents a problem similar to that posed by āsām in vs. 7, though I account for them in different ways. Given its lack of accent, eṣām should be a pronominal, not adjectival, demonstrative, but it appears to be construed with víśveṣām … devā́nām “of all these gods.” Because devā́nām is fairly distant from both eṣām and víśveṣām and appears to be bound to immediately preceding deváḥ, I would now take eṣām … víśveṣām together, separate from devā́nām and emend the tr. to “When alone of all these, the god among the gods, encompasses …” Though it may be difficult to maintain this in the face of vs. 7, as I argue in the forthcoming article cited above, the poet is doling out the genitive plurals here and does not want to specify that “these all” are the gods until the last minute, since masc. pl. “all” in this hymn otherwise refers to the unified worshipers of the Vaiśvānara fire.

## 04
The publ. tr. has “All have a share in divinity and its name.” I would now replace this with “… your divinity and your name.” As I argue in the art. cit., the “all” literally share the name Vaiśvānara.

The contrast between the joint enterprise of those unified by the Vaiśvānara fire, expressed by bhájanta víśve, and the separate actions of each of the members, expressed by évaiḥ, is the theme of this verse as well as vs. 8.


## 05
The logical and syntactic connections between the nominal expressions of ab and the clause in cd are not clear. Ge simply pronounces ab elliptical and suggests supplying cakruḥ from cd, while Re supplies “(telles sont/est)” with the two phrases.

My assumption is that the promptings and vision of truth are the indirect cause of the actions in cd by defining the proper tasks that all should perform throughout their lifetimes.


## 07
There is a syntactic problem in cd that is ignored by all tr. as far as I can see, though Old treats it briefly (ZDMG 61 [1907]: 829 = KlSch p. 260; see below): the fem. gen. pl. demonstr. āsām is unaccented. Oblique forms of the ayám demonstrative are unaccented when used pronominally, but accented when used adjectivally. The two accented forms of āsā́m appear with NPs, pū́rvāsām … svásṝṇām “previous sisters” I.124.9 and viśā́m .. ábhayānām “fearless clans” X.92.14, and unaccented āsām (25x) is always pronominal (for VII.34.10 and X.75.4 see disc.

ad loc.) Yet all interpr. of our passage construe āsām with rayīṇā́m (e.g., Ge [/WG] “der Herr dieser Reichtümer,” Re “le maître de ces richesses”). This produces another anomaly: rayí- is overwhelmingly masculine and should not be modified by a feminine demonstrative. (On supposed fem. rayí- in I.66.1 belonging to this group of hymns, see disc. ad loc. It need not be, and in my opinion is not, feminine there either.) Although it introduces some complexity, I therefore think that āsām “of these” must stand for a different feminine noun also construed with páti-. The problem then is what noun? It should already be present in the discourse, since unaccented forms of ayám are anaphoric, but there are no obvious candidates - indeed, no candidates at all if we limit ourselves to overt feminine plurals in the previous verses of this hymn.

However, an underlying feminine referent can be generated from the context. I see two possibilities. 1) From ápatya- ‘progeny’ in the phrase mánor ápatye we can generate the synonym, fem. prajā́- ‘offspring’ - note their juxtaposition in I.179.6 prajā́m ápatyam. The gen. pl. of prajā́- does not occur in Vedic (indeed no gen. pl. to a root noun in -ā does; see Macdonell VG), presumably because it should be prajā́m and identical to the acc. sg. (though with possible distracted 2nd syllable). By this interpretation Agni would essentially be prajā́-pati. 2) More likely, in my view: the underlying noun is víś- ‘clan’. Although no direct reference to clans is made in the hymn, as I point out in the publ. intro. and argue in more detail elsewhere (Jamison Klein Fs., 2016; see above), the repeated víśve ‘all’ triggers a pun with víś- in this set of hymns (see esp. I.70.4) and so would be present in the minds of the poet and his audience. Agni is regularly called viśā́m páti- and viśpáti-, sometimes at the same time - e.g., III.13.5 hótāraṃ viśpátiṃ viśā́m, which also contains hótar-, as also here. The mention of Manu might also have triggered the association; cf., e.g., V.4.3 viśā́ṃ kavíṃ viśpátim mā́nuṣīnām “the poet of the clans, the clanlord of the (clans) of the sons of Manu.” If this solution seems too fussy, it is possible to follow Old’s explanation of the lack of accentuation (see ref. above): that āsām does not modify rayīṇā́m but anticipates it (“he is the master of them, of the riches”), while being anaphoric to sg. rayím in 6d. This does not eliminate the gender issue, however, and also seems over-tricky. The eṣām … víśveṣām … devā́nām of vs. 2 makes some problems for my interpretation here, but see discussion there.


## 08
This verse has given rise to a number of different interpretations, which cannot be discussed in detail here. I interpret it in the framework of Proferes’s treatment of the joint clan-fire (see publ. intro.; also Fs. Klein), which must be kindled and tended by members of the separate clans working together. This cooperative and reciprocal enterprise is expressed by the phrase mithás tanū́ṣu “mutually among themselves” (at least in my interpretation; it has received varying tr., but with most rendering tanū́ṣu as ‘bodies’), by sáṃ jānata “they agree, act in unison” to the resonant lexeme sám √jñā (see publ. intro. to I.68 and esp. I.68.9), and by the middle voice of ichanta “they seek (from each other).” The rétaḥ they seek is, I think, the means of kindling the fire, though I admit that this is not a usual sense of that word. Again, as in 4cd, there is a contrast between joint action (sáṃ jānata) and each individual’s contribution to it (svaír dákṣaiḥ).


## 09
This verse returns us to vs. 3; the b-pādas of both are identical: krátuṃ juṣanta “They take pleasure in your/his resolve.” In vs. 3 the subject is “all”; here we can assume that the unidentified subject here is “all” as well, and, since vs. 8 follows easily on vs. 7, we can superimpose “all” as subject there too. In vs. 3 the “all” found this pleasure when Agni was born in cd; the parallelism between vs. 3 and vss. 8-9 supports my view that vs. 8 also concerns the kindling of the fire, and the birth metaphor of 3cd (jániṣṭḥāḥ ‘you are born’) further supports my suggestion that the rétaḥ ‘seed’ of 8a refers to the means of begetting the fire.


## 10
As Hoffmann points out, ví … aurṇot is the only augmented form in the hymn and is esp. striking because it forms a ring with vy ū̀rṇot in 1d. The use of a clear past tense form seems to me to mark the conclusion of the ritual kindling of Agni and the attendant distribution of largesse. In other words, like so many final verses it summarizes the ritual activity whose general description precedes it. The final half-verse, in which Agni decorates the vault with stars, may seem out of place, but it also forms a ring, thematic not lexical, with vs. 1, where Agni approaches heaven and performs his tasks through the nights: the vault (nā́kam) reprises heaven in 1ab, and the stars are appropriate to the nights.

Strictly speaking, rā́yaḥ is acc. pl., not gen. sg. (rāyáḥ), and a more literal translation would follow Ge’s “Er schloss die Reichtümer, die Töre (dazu), auf,” or - to match my tr. of 1cd and accommodate English idiom - “he disclosed riches, opened wide (its) doors.” However, Old strenuously argues that it should be interpreted as gen., and certainly the idiom rāyó dúraḥ (with the correct accent) is found nearby in Parāśara’s oeuvre (I.72.8) What exactly is meant by Agni’s decorating heaven with stars is unclear.

However, in a similar passage (IV.7.3) Proferes (p. 27) argues that the stars in the sky represent the domestic fires distributed though many households.
