+++
title = "069"

+++
Agni As discussed in the publ. intro. and in the art. cit., this hymn is twinned with I.68.


## 01
The etymological figure śukráḥ śuśukvā́n is not as redundant as it seems, because both forms are found in similes with the sun — svàr ṇá śukrám (II.2.7, IV.45.2) with the adjective and svàr ṇá śuśucīta (II.2.10, X.43.9) with the perfect — both are found together in X.43.9 svàr ṇá śukráṃ śuśucīta. In other words, since the similes "like the lover of Dawn" and “like the light of heaven” have the sun as their underlying referent, at least one of the √śuc forms is, as it were, bound to it formulaically.


## 02
This verse is parallel to its twin in I.68, with the same verb: #pári … babhūtha [/bhúvat 68.2]… ; the emphasis on Agni’s status among the gods (devó devā́nāṃ 68.2, devā́nām pitā́69.2); and an instr. in -tvā (mahitvā́68.2, krátvā 69.2), though to non-parallel stems (mahitvá-, krátu-). It is therefore surprising that tr. do not note the parallelism of the two verses or necessarily treat them in the same way.

In particular, both Ge and Old (SBE) take the pári…bhúvat in 68.2 as ‘encompass’, but pári … babhūtha in 69.2 as ‘be superior, excel’. (Re tr. both as ‘encompass’ and WG both as ‘excel’.) Given the focus on encompassing/surrounding in this set of hymns (see disc. ad I.65.3 above), I think both lexemes should be tr. the same way, and each requires an object to be supplied. In 68.2 I supply “the still and the moving” from the previous verse; here I would use the conjoined world-halves, also from the previous verse.

The poet handles the parallelism between the two verses in almost a syncopated fashion. As just noted, each verse contains the idiom pári √bhū; in 69.2 this is contained within the first hemistich, whereas the finite form bhúvat opens the second hemistich in 68.2. But 69.2 has the almost identical form bhúvaḥ in that same position, but not as part of the idiom (see also bhúvat I.67.2, 65.3). As Hoffmann argues (e.g., 1967: 236-37), bhuvaḥ, bhuvat are formally ambiguous, both injunctive to the thematic aorist and subjunctive to the root aorist of √bhū. In the publ. tr. I render bhúvaḥ in I.69.2 as a subjunctive, but now I am inclined to take it as a presential injunctive “you become…” parallel to my interpretation of bhúvat in 68.2.


## 04
I supply mitráḥ ‘ally’ on the basis of a number of similar formulaic phrases: jáne mitró ná X.22.1; mitráṃ ná jáne VIII.23.8 (of Agni); mitrá iva ... jáne II.4.1 (of Agni). This would be via the collocation mitrá śéva; cf. nearby I.58.6 mitráṃ ná śévam divyā́ya jánmane “favorable like an ally to the divine race,” also of Agni, with a different word for ‘people, race’ (cf. also śévam mitrā́ya X.113.5, a diff. permutation). Note also, two hymns previously, I.67.1b márteṣu mitráḥ, where márteṣu is a reasonable equivalent to jáne.

āhū́rya- is a hapax, universally taken to belong to √hvṛ ‘go crookedly, go astray’; although this derivation is not impossible, it leads to some forced tr. (e.g., Ge Durchgänger [‘bolter’, of horses]). I take it rather as the gerundive to the seṭ root √hṝ ‘be angry’.


## 05
The phrase víśo ví tārīt is variously interpreted. The first issue it raises is whether to take the acc. víśaḥ as direct object (so Ge, Re, WG) or to construe it with the preverb ví as acc. of extent of space (Old SBE). Both usages are attested for ví √tṝ, but it is worth noting that the latter usage is found in Parāśara’s oeuvre using the same form ví tārīt (I.73.1), and I adopt it here. In the simile, “traverse the clans” may refer to the year-long journey of the horse ultimately sacrificed in the Aśvamedha. In the frame it reflects the idea of the Vaiśvānara fire spread through all the clans, not limited to a single household or small family group.


## 06
The intrusion of the 1st sg. speaker through áhve “I have summoned” is remarkable. Who is he? Although ordinarily in the RV the default referent of a 1st ps., esp. a 1st sg., is the poet, I wonder in this instance if it is not the leader of the united forces, the Kriegskönig, calling the clans and their leaders and best warriors to unite them for action.

My tr. differs syntactically in several ways from most tr., though it agrees with Re in both. First, I do not construe instr. nṛ́bhiḥ with sánīḷāḥ (“of the same nest with the men”) but as an independent instr. of accompaniment. This would be the only ex. of sánīḷa- with an instr. By specifying “the clans along with their men,” the poet both refers to the whole social group and singles out its most conspicuous and important members, perhaps the viśpáti-s.

Second, I take devatvā́as an instr. sg., not acc. pl. neut. with víśvāni. There are several reasons for this. The first verse of the next hymn (I.70.1) contains the same phrase víśvāny aśyāḥ, without further specification, and if at all possible the two phrases should be rendered in the same way. Moreover, as Re points out, no direct cases of the plural are attested in this type of derivative. It’s also the case that Agni is characterized by instrumentals in -tvā in this group of hymns (mahitvā́I.67.9, 68.2; krátvā I.69.2), and his divinity is emphasized (I.68.2, 4, 69.2). I am, however, given pause by several passages containing devatvám (sg.) √(n)aś: I.151.9 ná devatvám paṇáyo nā́naśuḥ … and III.60.2 téna devatvám ṛbhavaḥ sám ānaśa.


## 08
The first hemistich has 11 syllables and is best interpreted as a Triṣṭubh, with HvN.

The verse is otherwise problematic, and my interpretation differs sharply from that of others. The crucial point of difference is áhan, which is universally taken as the 2nd sg. impf. of √han ‘smite’. This seems to me contextually very unlikely: √han is a very rare verb with Agni as subject, and when it is found, it is almost always of Agni’s special form as rakṣo-hán- (see IV.3.14, V.2.10, VI.16.29, and with a different object V.4.5). The context does not favor a verb of violence, and I find it hard to believe that √han would be attributed to Agni out of the blue, esp.

without specifying an object and esp. announcing this action as his particular “wondrous power” (dáṃsaḥ). Instead I take it as the loc. sg. of áhar ‘day’, in the formula samāné áhan “on the same day” (cf. I.34.3, 186.4), with the samāné suggested by (or suppressed by) adjacent samānaíḥ. (Something like this possibility is considered by Old in his n. in SBE and attributed to Aufrecht in Noten.) The major argument against this interpr, as far as I can see, is the double yád, which is unusual under any interpretation but passes better with two verbs (yád áhan … yád … vivéḥ) than one. I do not have a good solution for this doubling. Either it is rhetorical or simply pleonastic, or it marks off nṛ́bhiḥ … yuktáḥ as a quasi circumstantial clause: “This is your wondrous power, that (yád 1) on the (same) day, when (yád 2) yoked with the same men, you …” But I know of no parallels for such a usage. Another argument for seeing √han here, made by Old (Noten), comes from X.147.1, which contains both áhan and vivér apáḥ (see immed. below), but I do not think that very late hymn, dedicated to Indra, should overly influence our interpretation of this passage.

With Old (SBE and Noten) I read vivér ápāṃsi, against Pp. vivé rápāṃsi; Old’s parallels are very persuasive, and this analysis does not require a change in the Saṃhitā text. Ge’s tr. appears to follow the Pp. reading, however, as does Re’s, though in his n. he accepts Old’s reading.


## 09
The first pāda is identical to 1b and thus forms a ring.

Gr, Ge, Re (apparently), and Lub take usráḥ as gen. to uṣár-, but since there exists a robust stem usrá- ‘ruddy’, I see no reason not to take it as nom. sg. to that stem, esp. since vibhā́van- doesn’t otherwise take a gen.: the three passages Ge adduces are not compelling.

As discussed in the publ. intro., I do not follow the standard interpr. of sáṃjñāta-rūpa-, i.e., “having (his) well-known form,” since the idiom sám √jñā has a quite specific meaning ‘come to agreement’. The idiom is distinctive enough, and the compound is heavy enough, that that idiom is surely meant, esp. because it appears in finite form in I.68.8. Instead of being an anodyne description of the fire, this is a meaningful characterization of the shared clan-fire as the symbol of, and the product of, the mutual and unified ritual activity of the clans. Unfortunately, to render this comprehensibly in English requires a heavy and awkward locution.

The referent of asmai is not entirely apparent. The standard solution, going back to Sāy, is that it is the sacrificer. This is basically correct. However, the lack of accent on the pronoun should require that the referent is already present in the discourse. I suggest that it is to be found in the 1st ps. subject of áhve “I have summoned” in vs. 6, a subject that may be one of the ritual participants or, as suggested above, the Kriegskönig. Switch between persons is of course extremely common in the RV.

## 10
The phrase dúro vy ṛ̀ṇvan echoes ví … aurṇod dúraḥ, which opens the last verse of the preceding hymn (I.68.10) and which itself forms a ring with vy ū̀rṇot of I.68.1.

The tmánā ‘by himself/themselves’ must refer to the priests; since Agni is regularly the subject of √vah, as the conveyor of oblations to the gods and of the gods to the sacrifice, it is here emphasized that others are conveying him.

The last hemistich is identical with the last one of I.66.10, which itself forms a ring with I.66.1. This set of hymns is very tightly knit together! As argued in the art.

cit., this verse marks the completion of the fire’s transformation into the Vaiśvānara fire. Since that fire is identified with the sun, “all cry out on seeing the sun” is a expression of the unified group’s first sight of and recognition of the fire that symbolizes their unity - which has been presented to them by the priests who carry it and throw open the doors for it to be seen in 10ab.
