+++
title = "070"

+++
Agni Again, for detailed discussion of the thematics of this hymn and its relation to the two that precede it, see the publ. tr. and the art. cited above.


## 01
It is perhaps appropriate that this last hymn in the Vaiśvānara series begins with the martial verb vanema “may we vanquish,” since the function of the Vaiśvānara fire is to unite the clans as a force to oppose its enemies.

The Pp. reads manīṣā́; most tr. read manīṣā́(ḥ) (see Old’s disc [Noten]).

However, I take it as both an instr. sg. -ā́and acc. pl. -ā́ḥ, with the poet, as so often, taking advantage of potential ambiguity. This double reading is supported by I.73.9 (also Parāśara’s work), which contains the athem. opt. vanuyāmā corresponding to them. vanéma here and three pairs of instr. + acc.: árvadbhiḥ … árvato nṛ́bhir nṛ́̄n, vīraír vīrā́n vanuyāmā “Might we vanquish steeds with steeds, men with men, and heroes with heroes.”


## 03
sthātā́m and caráthām are pseudo-genitive plurals to this merism much favored by Parāśara. There’s no orthodox way to generate them morphologically; Re’s suggestion that sthātā́m is a compromise between *sthātrām and something that looks more like a gen. pl. and that caráthām simply copied it seems a reasonable proposal, however sketchy the details.


## 04
A verse subject to numerous clashing interpretations. To deal with ádrau first

- Ge cites several passages in which Agni is born from or is the son of a/the stone. I
think it also likely that it is meant to contrast with duroṇé; the fire in the house is actual and visible, while the fire in the rock is merely latent and not easily acquired.

Most tr. take the two hemistichs as independent units, which then necessitates supplying something (what depends on the tr.) to make ab an actual clause. I prefer to take the whole verse as a single clause, with svādhī́ḥ as the predicate, whose complement is asmai (“… is very attentive to him [=Agni]”). This leaves the enigmatic expression viśā́ṃ ná víśvo amṛ́taḥ. Most tr. want this to refer to Agni; hence their interpretational separation of the two half-verses. I think rather that it refers to those who serve Agni, both gods and humans. The two groups are expressed in different ways and the connection between them is actualized by a pun on víś- ‘clan’ and víśva- ‘all’; this pun in turn makes the secret connection with Vaiśvānara, the clan fire (see Proferes p. 48). In the phrase, víśvaḥ can be read both with amṛ́taḥ (“every immortal”) and with the gen. pl. viśā́m “every (one) of the clans,” thus providing an indissoluble link between the mortal and divine realms. And the ná makes clear that gods are exactly like men in their devotion to Agni. I am reasonably convinced that this is the correct interpretation, but it does trouble me that it is apparently identical to Max Müller’s (as reported by Old, SBE n.), “To him also who dwells in the rock and in the house, every immortal like every one among men is well disposed.”


## 05
The interpretation of kṣapā́vant- as ‘earth-protector’, containing a zero-grade form of the archaic noun kṣám- ‘earth’, goes back at least to the Petersburg dictionary and is the overwhelming consensus in Western scholarship (see EWA, s.v. kṣám-). However, a connection with the root noun kṣáp- ‘night’ has a more ancient pedigree: the Pp. divides the word kṣapā́‘vān, and Sāy comments kṣapeti rātrināma / rātrimān / āgneyī vai rātriḥ. At the very least we have a potential pun, and this pun is actually realized in this hymn, since vs. 7b, two verses later, contains the relatively rare root noun kṣáp-. Though vs. 5 has no mention of night and ‘earth-protector’ works fine in that context, the surfacing of kṣáp- ‘night’ so soon after might make the audience reconsider and produce a secondary semantic association for kṣapā́vān.

With a suggestion of Scarlatta (1999: 303), we could then analyze kṣapā́vant- as based on a syntagm with original predicative instrumental (kṣapā́“[he is] with night”), which was then provided with a -vant- possessive suffix. Scarlatta (1999: 303) also suggests other ways to incorporate kṣáp-‘night’, e.g., by haplology from

*kṣápā + pā́- ‘protecting by night’ (his reconstructed initial accent reflects a posited
adverbial accent shift from inst. kṣapā́; see p. 303 and n. 452). The exact details matter less than the fact that the Vedic audience could likely see a pun in this word, between kṣa- as a combining form of kṣám- ‘earth’ and kṣap- ‘night’. The publ. tr.

“protector of riches on earth” reflects the standard Western interpr., though with an adjustment to incorporate rayīṇā́m; I do believe that the pun on ‘night’ was available to the audience, however. (See also X.29.1 and Jamison 2015 [Gerow Fs., IJHS 19].) It should also be noted, however, that the analysis ‘earth-protector’ for kṣapā́vān is reinforced in the next vs. (6ab) by an apparent paraphrase etā́… bhūmā ní pāhi “protect these worlds.” The poet seems to be even-handedly offering alternative views of kṣapā́vān.

Most tr. take ab as a nominal clause with suppressed dative (asmai or the like), the antecdent of the yáḥ of the rel. cl. (“Agni is the protector … [for him] who…”). I follow the interpr. of Velankar (1993: 41), who takes dā́śat as the verb of both main and relative clauses, accented in the former because it is initial in its pāda (and in a hí clause), in the latter because it’s in a subordinate clause. This grammatical and semantic reciprocity would match that of the (asmai …) asmai, where the first, suppressed dative refers to the worshiper and the second overt one to Agni. The theme of reciprocity is prominent in this hymn group.


## 06
mártān is almost surely an irregular gen. pl., rather than the acc. pl. it appears to be. (Though “knowing the races of the gods and (knowing) the mortals” is possible, the tight formulaic connection between gods and men/mortals throughout the RV strongly favors the gen. pl.) Whether it is an archaism or is simply following the morphologically sketchy lead of sthātā́m … caráthām in vs. 3 cannot be determined.


## 07
The phrase pūrvī́ḥ kṣapó vírūpā(ḥ), lit. “many nights of differing form,” is convincingly taken by most commentators as an elliptical pl. for “… nights (and dawns)…,” since vírūpe regularly modifies the dual dvandva náktoṣā́sā ‘night and dawn’, including in Parāśara’s I.73.7. (See Old’s lucid presentation in SBE n.) Most tr. take it as the nom. pl. subject of várdhān, but, with Ge, I take it as an acc. pl.

expressing extent of time, supplying a pronominal subj. ‘they’, picking up “the races of gods and men” in the previous vs. Either interpr. is possible, and there is little to tip the balance one way or the other. Old argues that under the nominative interpr., which he favors, kṣapáḥ should probably be accented *kṣápaḥ (there are no other nom. pl. forms), and the need to account for the wrong accent (if such it is) and the fact that almost all occurrences of kṣapáḥ express extent of time (save for VIII.41.3, where it’s a direct obj.) might favor the acc. interpr.

With essentially all Western commentators starting with Benfey, I read carátham for the Pp. ca rátham, producing yet again Parāśara’s beloved, but morphologically troubled, merism “the still and the moving.” With most tr. I take it as neut. sg. and a second subject of várdhān (adjusted for number), though Ge interprets it as a gen. dependent on the “Keim” he supplies.

The ppl. právīta- always means ‘impregnated’ (of females) or, as here, ‘conceived’ (see Scar p. 501); WG’s “den vom Ṛta gesuchten” seemingly rests on the root etymology to √vī ‘pursue’, without taking into account the idiom.

## 08-09
See Proferes (pp. 47-49), esp. for the identification of the Vaiśvānara fire in particular with the sun, and the publ. intro. and the art. cit, esp. for the encoding of the Vaiśvānara fire by the successive grammatical subjects víśve (9cd) and náraḥ (10ab).


## 09
Note the vocabulary associated with human kingship: práśasti- ‘panegryic, laud’ and balí- ‘tribute’. Since kings receive práśastis rather than bestowing them and since the verb dhiṣe is medial (whatever else it is morphologically), the tr. of Old SBE and Ge whereby Agni bestows the práśasti (e.g., Ge “du legst Wert auf die Kühe, auf die Hölzer”) seem incorrect to me, esp. with the semantic bleaching of práśasti to ‘worth, value’ (Old ‘excellence’). Although the phrase is distinctly odd, I think the point of “you receive/acquire a laud among cows and firewood” is that both the butter oblations represented by the cows and the firewood make noise when in contact with fire, and this noise can be interpreted as an audible expression of praise.

For another instance of prá √śaṃs in Parāśara’s oeuvre, see I.73.2.

## 09-10
See Proferes (pp. 48-49) on these contrastive verses. Note the complementary bháranta / bharanta beginning 9c and ending 10d respectively. Their relationship and their semantic contrast is emphasized by the vi(…)s: bháranta ví(śve)… ví … bharanta.


## 10
Neither of these hemistichs produces two proper Dvipadā Virāj pādas. The first divides into 4 / 6 and presents as a Triṣṭubh lacking a syllable; the second has 11 syllables and is simply a Triṣṭubh, though with an irregular break.


## 11
What referent to supply with the adjectives sādhúḥ and gṛdhnúḥ isn’t entirely clear. I follow Ge with ‘horse’, because sādhú- several times modifies horses (see Ge’s cited parallels), though Re’s ‘warrior’ is equally plausible contextually.

As disc. in the art. cit., I do not believe, with Old (SBE, Noten) and others, that this verse is a later addition. Rather it is a summary verse of the whole threehymn Vaiśvānara sequence, or even of all of Parāśara’s Dvipadā Virāj hymns to Agni, and describes the Vaiśvānara as the ideal warrior and leader for the united clans embarking on a joint enterprise.
