+++
title = "071"

+++
Agni


## 01
The meter of this first verse almost serves as a transition from Parāśara’s Dvipadā Virāj hymns that precede it to his Triṣṭubh ones beginning here (-I.73), as all four pādas (as well as 2a) have openings of 5 (as if in Dvipadā Virāj) and the first two are syntactic units. The hymn then settles down into a pattern of mostly 4- syllable openings.

The underlying fem. subject of this verse is universally taken to be the fingers of the priest producing fire by friction from the kindling sticks. The qualifier sánīḷāḥ can be read with both the simile and the frame: the fingers belong to the same hand as the co-wives do to the same household. So Ge, etc. The sexual innuendo fits the friction context well, in addition to setting the stage for the incest theme to come.

The object phrase śyā́viṃ áruṣīm “the dusky and the ruddy [fem.]” is generally taken to refer to night and dawn (although Old [SBE and Noten] wishes to emend the text to fem. nom. pls. modifying the sisters, a generally bad idea). The identification with night and dawn is certainly supported by III.55.11, adduced by Ge, etc., with the same vocabulary. However, it would essentially duplicate the simile of d (“they delighted in night and dawn, like cows in dawn”), a clumsiness that seems uncharacteristic of Parāśara, and one also wonders why the fingers would care about night and dawn. I think, instead, that this is another of Parāśara’s tricks, using color terms associated with the two time periods to pick out another referent entirely, namely the aráṇi- (fem.) ‘kindling sticks’, which the fingers should care about, since they are manipulating them. The color differentiation is a little odd, but I don't think it's entirely out of the question. In X.184.3 the kindling sticks are called 'golden' (hiraṇyayī), and one can imagine that as the fire begins to catch hold, the upper stick might glow red, while the lower one would be wreathed in dark smoke.


## 03
A difficult verse with a discouragingly large number of competing interpretations. In outline, though not in detail, I follow Ge’s interpretation: pāda a concerns the production of poetry and the poetic vision by our side, in contrast to the poetic visions of the stranger, our rival, in b. After the stranger’s attempts are gotten rid of, the topic returns in cd to our poetic products, which have success. (WG basically follow Ge, while Old [SBE] and Re take b as coreferential with cd.) The first hemistich, esp. its first pāda, is highly alliterative and rhyming: dádhann ṛtáṃ dhanáyann asya dhītím, ā́d íd aryó didhiṣvò víbhṛtāḥ. The two parallel 3rd pl. verbs dádhan and dhanáyan technically do not match in mood, since dádhan should be a subjunctive (the injunctive to this redupl. pres. should be either

*dadhat or dadhur, and the subjunctive of the latter verb should be dhanáyān; see
Hoffmann 1967: 271 n. 13, who produces a tr. with subjunctive contrasting with preterite. However, in this context I think dádhan was created as a nonce injunctive to match the two an sequences in dhanáyan. The subjects of these verbs are simultaneously the Aṅgirases and the current poet-ritualists; the injunctive conveniently elides the difference between past and present action.

The beginning of b, ā́d íd, generally has temporal value (“just after that”) and is so tr. in the publ. tr. But Parāśara uses the expression in causal value in I.67.8 and I.68.3, and a causal value is possible in the next verse (71.4); such an interpretation works better here, and I would therefore change the tr. to “because of that …” The launching of their own poetic vision by our side scatters the visions of our opponents.

The sentiment, but not most of the vocabulary, echoes that in I.70.1, where the arí- is also the opponent.

The desid. adj. didhiṣú- to √dhā is based on the middle value of that root (‘acquire’); so Heenen p. 165, though I do not subscribe to the additional semantic baggage Heenen attaches to the stem. It means ‘desirous to acquire’, hence ‘greedy, voracious’. With most tr. I assume a pl. of dhītí- as the referent.

Just as the injunctives of pāda a can have either presential or preterital value, the lack of verb in b allows the temporal value to be set by the preceding clause, hence applicable both to the current ritual situation and its mythological model. The publ. tr. might be changed to “are/were dispersed.” There is no agreement on what víbhṛtra- means here, but ví √bhṛ generally means ‘disperse, pull apart, carry away’, and the form also needs to be considered in conjunction with víbhṛtaḥ in the next vs. The “unthirsting” dhītí- belonging to us/the Aṅgirases are implicitly contrasted with the voracious ones of the arí-, as Ge, etc., point out.

With Gr, Old, Re, I take apásaḥ as a nom. pl. fem.; Ge (/WG) rather as a gen. sg. masc. referring to the singer/priest. This is certainly possible and would provide a neat contrast to the gen. sg. aryáḥ of b. I would prefer, however, to keep the possible reference to the Aṅgirases alive. I would prefer not to take devā́n in d as a truncated gen. pl. construed with jánma (or as a second acc. with vardháyantīḥ “strengthening the gods, their race”); therefore, despite the pāda boundary, I take it with áchā, which frequently governs devā́n (so, apparently, also Re); cf. esp. I.132.5 (=139.1) devām̐áchā ná dhītáyaḥ, which is our underlying phrase.


## 04
Another difficult verse, though it is clear that it alludes to the theft of fire by Mātariśvan in the first hemistich. This theft is expressed through word play: the verse begins máthīt, which can mean either ‘churn, rub’ (to produce fire) or ‘steal’.

In this Agni context, esp. given vs. 1, which concerns the churning of fire, ‘churn’ would be the most likely reading - and so it is tr. by Ge, Old (SBE), and Proferes (2007: 31). But the name Mātariśvan ends the pāda, and this mythological allusion would tip the balance towards ‘steal’ (so Re, WG).

The real problem comes in the middle of that pāda: the ppl. víbhṛtaḥ. This form should mean ‘dispersed’ or ‘carried away’, and grammatically it should modify mātaríśvā. However, sense would require it instead to qualify fire, the underlying direct object in the clause; fire is often carried away and dispersed in various locations. Cf. ví … bharanta in the preceding hymn I.70.10 and discussion there, as well as the passages adduced by Old SBE, n. to vs. 4. There is no solution that satisfies both sense and syntax. Ge suggests it's a transferred epithet, from Agni to Mātariśvan; this seems a description of the problem, not a solution. Old suggests simply displacing it rightward to read it with the assumed subj. of pāda b, namely Agni (“When Mātariśvan had produced him by attrition, he …, who was brought to many places, has come to every house”), and WG apparently follow. But this kind of extraction from one clause and insertion in another is not syntactically possible in my opinion, esp. given that in its clause it is placed between the acc. referring to Agni (īm) and the nom. mātaríśvā, so that its grammatical affiliation is emphasized. Narten reports a clever suggestion of Hoffmann’s, that the ví- is really ‘bird’, and the form means ‘carried by a bird’ (“Das vedische Verbum math,” n. 38 [=KlSch p. 23 n. 38]), but Mātariśvan should no more be carried by a bird than be dispersed. In the end the least jarring rendering is Re’s “s’étant transporté çà et là,” presumably referring to Mātariśvan’s journey. My “borne away” reflects a similar notion, and I also toyed with the possibility that “carried away” may have the same extended meaning as the English idiom, namely, “overcome with excitement.” No doubt Parāśara recognized the trap he was setting, forcing the audience to find a way to interpret víbhṛtaḥ with Mātariśvan rather than with the far more natural Agni.

As noted above, the subject of the next pāda must be Agni, established “in every house” (cf. V.11.4, X.91.2). Because of the accent on bhū́t, the clause must be parallel to pāda a and is not the main clause, which is introduced by ā́d īm in c.

On the second half of the verse see Proferes 2007: 30-31. Agni’s role as messenger is of course well known: he travels between gods and men, heaven and earth. This regular route may be prefigured here by Mātariśvan’s theft in a, for elsewhere it is clear that M. stole fire from heaven (e.g., I.93.6). It is also said that M.

bestowed the stolen fire on Bhṛgu (see nearby I.60.1), and so the epithet bhṛ́gavāna-, whatever its morphology, is apposite. What is unfamiliar is the simile, in which Agni serves as messenger as if for a more powerful king. According to Proferes, Agni is here “depicted … as the symbol of the presence of a leader’s authority within each household.” I’m not sure, because Agni’s dūtá role involves traveling, not staying put. I am inclined to think the simile was generated simply from dūtyàm and is not meant to apply directly to Agni and his relationship to royal power.


## 05
This vivid account of the incestuous attack of Father Heaven on his own daughter (elsewhere Dawn) comes as a surprise in this hymn. The connection must be the fact that this incest led to the birth of the Aṅgirases, who were the subject of vs. 2 (and possibly vs. 3); this birth is mentioned in the other incest verse, vs. 8cd, though without naming the Aṅgirases. The other connection is that Agni, unnamed, is the avenger in this verse, shooting Heaven as he released his semen into his daughter. Although the avenger is usually identified as Rudra on the basis of postṚvic passages (see Ge n. to vs. 5, Re, WG), I have demonstrated (Hyenas, 288-97) that the original avenger was Agni. Note that ástā ‘archer’ is used of Agni in the last verse of the immediately preceding hymn (I.71.11). I also take Agni as the subj. of pāda b: like a hunter on his prey, he creeps up on the pair, having noticed the caresses (pṛśanyàḥ) Heaven was bestowing on his daughter.

In addition I consider Agni to be the subject of pāda a (with most tr.), but the action there is harder to explain: how and why does Agni make the sap=semen for Heaven if he disapproves of Heaven’s sexual designs on his daughter and in fact punishes him for the rape? For one thing, fire is unlikely to produce anything we might consider sap; in a naturalistic sense, making rása for heaven would seem to be storing up rain. However, our notions of nature and Vedic India’s are often at odds.

That the same semen (or possibly its delivery agent, the penis) is called tvíṣi- ‘spark, flare’ in pāda d and, even more telling, is referred to as “blazing semen” (śúci rétaḥ) in 8b, brings it into fire’s conceptual sphere. It may be that the flaring up of fire produces Heaven’s semen. But what is Agni’s motivation? I’m afraid this remains mysterious; perhaps it was involuntary, produced by the flaring up just suggested.


## 06
This verse returns us to the ritual here-and-now and is considerably easier to interpret than the scraps of mythology in the previous two verses. Still, there are a few puzzles.

The verb ví bhāti ‘radiates widely’ is surprising, since its subject must be the mortal worshiper, even though Agni (or occasionally Dawn) is ordinarily the subject of this common verb. Old (SBE, repeated in Noten) suggests emending it to ví dhāti ‘worships’ (in Old’s tr.). (I sometimes get the feeling that in the Noten Old felt the need to stick with emendations he’d suggested in his far more free-wheeling SBE tr., even though in his later years he was otherwise very reluctant to emend.) But a metaphorical sense of ‘radiate’ works fine in the passage, as Ge points out, citing parallels like VI.5.5, also of a mortal worshiper. And this would be an instance like víbhṛtaḥ in 4 in which the most natural referent of a word is not the grammatically supported one. Old (SBE and Noten) also proposes to read dat. uśaté in b, or rather suggests that the underlying form in sandhi was a dat. uśatá, since the spellings uśató ánu and uśaté ánu “belong to the inventions of Vedic grammarians” (SBE n. 2 to vs. 6). This is certainly possible, but a gen. form uśató would reflect what we might call the “proleptic” use of the genitive for dative to express indirect object: the reverence was offered to you and so it is now yours. This colonization of the dative by the genitive is very common both in Vedic and in Classical Sanskrit, and already here it may reflect the weakening of the dative case that led to its disappearance in MIA. I certainly see no reason to take the transmitted uśató as acc. pl. with dyū́n, as Old (Noten) and Ge (n. to 6b) tentatively suggest.


## 07
The second hemistich consists of two contrasting halves: in c the speaker complains that his (“our”) vitality (váyaḥ), the same vitality that Agni was said to increase in 6c, is not to be seen throughout his kinsmen; this leaves Agni as the sole figure who will find solicitude (prámati-) for him among the gods. Put thus, the passage does not make much sense in English. It relies on the close relationship between ‘solicitude’ and kinship (see esp. I.31.9-10, I.108.1, X.23.7, also adduced by Ge) in the RV. The word prámati- denotes the kind of care and concern a father shows for his children (or sons) and is regularly associated with, and indeed identified with, the pitár- ‘father’ (see, e.g., I.31.9, 10, 14, 16) and secondarily with the kin-group; cf. X.23.7 vidmā́hí te prámatiṃ deva jāmivát “for we know your (fatherly) solicitude, o god, like that of kin.” Since in our passage the jāmí- has proved disappointing, the poet turns to Agni for satisfaction. The question then is what is the relationship between vitality and solicitude, which seem conceptually distant. This is less clear, but the connection is also found in the prámati-heavy I.31 already cited; cf. I.31.10ab tvám agne prámatis tvám pitā́si nas, tváṃ vayaskṛ́t táva jāmáyo vayám “You, Agni, are (fatherly) solicitude, you a father to us. You are creator of vitality; we are your kin.” In the immediately preceding verse (I.31.9) Agni is also called tanūkṛ́t- ‘body-creator’. The balanced pairing of tanūkṛ́t- and vayaskṛ́t- in a paternal context suggests that in producing children the father creates both the physical body and the intangible essence of life that together make up a living being - ‘life-force’ might be a reasonable rendering of váyas - and the father’s prámati- seems to be the catalyst that brings them together. Moreover, at least on the evidence of our passage, váyas- seems to be something that can be shared by the kingroup, but in this case is not, and in such circumstances if one cannot rely on the shared vitality of his relatives, he must look only to his father and his father’s solicitude. For another association of vitality and the father in Parāśara’s work, see I.73.1.

The publ. tr. does not convey this very well. In c I would replace “is not widely perceptible” with “is not widely evident” or “does not appear throughout.” I also question my supplying an object (vitality) with cikitvā́n; I now think this simply characterizes Agni as the perceptive one or indicates that he perceives the situation as a whole. The same word cikitvā́n does seem to take an object in 5b, however. Against the Pp. I prefer to take vidā́as a lengthened 2nd sg. imperative rather than subj. vidā́s, though there are no real implications either way.


## 08
The incest myth treated in vs. 5 returns here with no more clarity. The various alternative treatments are too numerous to discuss here, so I will present only my own version, some of whose details I have adopted from others. The first hemistich describes again Agni as the avenger, loosing his weapon at Heaven in the midst of the latter’s sexual encounter with his daughter. In pāda a the téjaḥ, the sharp point of the arrow, reaches the lord of men (=Agni, in my view), so that he can shoot it. I do not understand why his preparation for shooting should be described thus, and in a phrase ā́naṭ + ACC we might expect the acc. to express the target of the arrow.

Nonetheless, Heaven is not otherwise called nṛpáti-, and it would be odd to give him this positive epithet in this situation. For Agni as an archer whose arrow has a téjassee VI.3.5 sá íd ásteva práti dhād asiṣyáñ, chíśīta téjò 'yasā ná dhā́rām “He, just like an archer, has aimed (his arrow), about to shoot. He has whetted its point like a blade of copper.” I take iṣé in this pāda as an infinitive to √iṣ ‘impel, send’ (others interpret it as ‘to enjoy’); I then supply a form of this same verb in the next pāda, which otherwise lacks one.

Note that the product of this incest, the young troop (śárdham … yúvānam), is characterized as both ‘faultless’ (anavadyám) and ‘well-intentioned’ (svādhyàm), asserting their goodness despite the circumstances of their birth.


## 09
As mentioned in the publ. intro., the reason for including this verse, containing the Sun and Mitra and Varuṇa but no mention of Agni, isn’t clear.

However, it may be that Mitra and Varuṇa, the guardians of the moral and ethical order, and their all-seeing eye, the Sun, who observes all behavior, are brought in as witnesses of the shocking incest of the last verse and the appropriate punishment inflicted by Agni.


## 10
Another apparent non sequitur. I have nothing to say about the morphology of the famous crux vidúḥ, which occurs also in VII.18.2 in the same phrase with the same irregular sandhi (abhí vidúṣ kavíḥ sán). I do consider it a nom. sg., not acc. pl.

For further disc. see comm. at VII.18.2.
