+++
title = "072"

+++
Agni


## 01
The lexeme ní √kṛ, literally ‘make/do down’, idiomatically means to surpass one’s opponent with regard to some quality by “putting” or “bringing” [them] “down.” Indeed the English idiom “put down” is very close, but I chose not to use it because it doesn’t convey quite the right sense with the right case frame. The verb generally takes an acc. of the quality in question; the person who is outdone can be either in the acc. (X.49.8), hence a double acc., or gen. (II.23.12), and there is some disagreement among tr. about which construction we have here, since vedhásaḥ śáśvataḥ can be either gen. sg. or acc. pl. Ge opts for the acc. pl. in the tr., but offers the gen. sg. as alternative in his n.; Old, Re, WG choose the sg., as I have done, though for no principled reason.

The náryā ‘manly powers’ in b contrasts both with kā́vyā in a and amṛ́tāni in d. The first contrast would be between, roughly, warrior skills and verbal skills, the second between human (though of course nṛ́- can often be used of gods, too) and divine. For the latter pairing note that the two acc. pls. are construed with similar verbs: middle participles to reduplicated formations, dádhānaḥ and cakrāṇáḥ.


## 02
After the general proclamation of Agni’s universal powers in vs. 1, the hymn turns to the myth of the disappearance and recovery of Agni.

The immortals’ inability to find Agni “among us” (asmé) is contrasted with the success of the mortal who finds him “on the highest track,” presumably in the realm of the immortals, in vs. 4.

The acc. phrase vatsám pári ṣántam is ambiguous, since the participle can either modify vatsám (“the calf enclosing …”) or take vatsám as object (“enclosing the calf”). Ge (WG) interpret it as the latter, Old, Re the former. Ge is surely correct: pári ṣántam elsewhere (IV.1.15, VI.17.5, adduced by Ge) qualifies the rock that is the Vala cave and takes “cows” as its object; cf. VI.17.5c … ádrim pári gā́ḥ … sántam “… the rock enclosing the cows.” Although in the usual myth of the disappearance of Agni, he is hidden not in a rock but in the waters, this transference of Vala phraseology is enabled here because Agni is called a calf, and cattle were enclosed in the Vala cave.

There is a slight phonological play in the phrase amṛ́tā ámūrāḥ. Also note víśve amṛ́tāḥ “all the immortals,” a variant of víśve devā́ḥ. The use of this phrase is telling because in Parāśara’s Vaiśvānara series (I.68-70) víśve is reserved to evoke “all (men).” See discussion esp. in I.68 and in Jamison Klein Fs. 2016. I.68.8 also contains a pāda-final ámūrāḥ, there referring to men.

Although the perfect of √sthā without preverb is almost always presential (see Kü p. 580), in this mythological narrative it must be preterital (or at least so tr.

into English), like the injunctive vindan in pāda a; perhaps we can think of it as a sort of “honorary” injunctive, whose temporal value is determined by context.

The form cā́ru (so Pp.; Saṃhitā cā́rv) is taken as a locative by Sāy (cāru cāruṇi śobhane). This unlikely analysis is followed explicitly by Ge and Old (SBE, more doubtfully Noten) and implicitly by Re and WG. (Gr. takes it as an adverb.) I take it rather as the neut. acc. it appears to be and an alternative locational expression to the adjacent loc. padé paramé, supplying nā́ma ‘name’ on the basis of nā́māni in the next verse (3c) and the frequency of the collocation cā́ru nā́ma. It’s worth noting that cā́ru nā́ma can be hidden or secret (e.g., II.35.11, IX.96.16), and so it would be appropriate to this tale of the hidden Agni. What exactly it would mean to take their stand at his name is not clear, perhaps at the place where Agni’s name is invoked in ritual performance. This would fit with the following verse. It’s also possible that if Agni’s dear name is what’s at issue, then the padé paramé might be the highest word, as well as or instead of the highest track. (See 6ab below.)

## 03
For my interpr. of the purport of this verse in a Tānunāptra context, see publ.

intro.

The identity of the subjects in this verse is disputed: Ge “die Erzväter,” Sāy the Maruts, Re the gods. I consider this vs. a continuation (of sorts) of vs. 2 with víśve amṛ́tāḥ still the subject. I have no explanation for the “three autumns.” The interpretation of the verb form saparyā́n is quite problematic. It certainly appears to be a subjunctive, and contrasts with the 3rd pl. injunctive saparyan that Parāśara places in the same pāda-final position in I.70.10. But a subjunctive does not sit comfortably in the dependent clause whose main clause contains a preterital perfect (dadhire) and an augmented imperfect (ásūdayanta). Ge (also Re) compares várdhān in I.70.7 (which I take differently) and calls it the subjunctive “bei Zeitangabe” (n. to I.70.7ab), whatever that means. He tr. it as a preterite. Hoffmann calls it a “Konjunktiv in präterital Sachverhalt” (p. 244). Re “ont honoré et honoreront encore,” attributing what seems to me a unique interpretation to the subjunctive. I consider the form a straight preterital and have an admittedly quite ad hoc way to account for the apparent subjunctive. The present participle to this stem, saparyánt-, is found 7x pāda-final as nom. sg. masc. saparyán; I suggest that in order to make it clear that the form here is not that pres. participle, the final vowel was lengthened, perhaps redactionally. This lengthening has no metrical consequences, of course. The lengthening did not happen in saparyan in I.70.10 because it was unaccented and couldn’t be mistaken for a participle. I am quite unhappy with this explanation but even more unhappy with the idea of a subjunctive in this context.


## 04
I consider ródasī a word play. It is of course a dual, referring to the two world halves, but it also evokes rodasī́, the consort of the Maruts. Properly speaking she should be in the acc. sg., hence a putative rodasī́m, but this form is not attested. In


## 04
we find rodasī́in acc. usage: the singular consort has simply been grammatically assimilated to the dual world halves in all her appearances.

The intensive part. vévidānāḥ could technically belong either to √vid ‘know’ or √vid ‘find’, whose middle generally means ‘acquire’, and it is somewhat difficult to know which root is supposed to be represented in Ge’s “Gehör finden bei” and Re’s “trouvant-accueil près de.” With Old and Schaeffer (p. 183-85) I take it with ‘find, acquire’, though I am somewhat puzzled by what the intensive part is supposed to contribute - perhaps the sense of constantly keeping their acquisition close by; this would work better for the consort than the two worlds. Schaeffer’s tr. (p. 185) “nachdem sie die beiden hohen Rodasī gefunden haben” has no intensive nuance, and she indeed suggests that the form does not really belong to the intensive, but is a substitute for the perfect participle (*vividānā́ḥ) on metrical grounds, hence her preterital tr. I find this substitution hypothesis unlikely, given that the intensive is quite a marked formation and the accent patterns of the two formations are different.

The Pp. reads rudríyā (neut. pl.), not -āḥ with most tr. As Ge and Old (Noten) point out, the Pp. reading is not impossible, but the masc. pl. works better. If the first pāda makes reference to Rodasī, a nom. pl. referring to the Maruts makes better sense. Tr. differ on the interpretation of nemádhitā; I render it as close to my interpr.

of its other three occurrences, ‘when facing the other side’, used of battle arrays (VI.33.4, VII.27.1, X.93.13). That it refers to men and gods being divided (so Ge, WG) seems farfetched and ignores the evidence of the other identical occurrences and inserts a referent (men and gods) that is simply not there.

The last pāda echoes 2d, except it is Agni standing on the highest track, not his pursuers.


## 05
On this verse as an expression of the Tānunāptra ritual see Proferes 2007: 59.

The verse begins with a form of the resonant idiom sám √jñā ‘come to an agreement, act in harmony” that was so important in Parāśara’s Vaiśvānara cycle (see I.68.8, 69.9 and disc. there and in Jamison Fs. Klein 2016). Here it expresses the unity not of all men, as in the Vaiśvānara cycle, but of the gods, even including their wives. Or so I interpret it; Ge and Re thinks the group includes both gods and men.

This seems unlikely to me, in part because pátnīvant- only qualifies gods (except for pressed soma drinks in VIII.93.22). As I have discussed elsewhere, I do not think that the Sacrificer’s Wife later called pátnī was yet established in the ṚV; she was only being introduced (and this introduction contentious) in the latest strata of the text.

Most tr. take ririkvā́ṃsas tanvàḥ kṛṇvata svā́ḥ to mean “having abandoned their former bodies, they took on their own (new bodies),” but this is somewhat incoherent: were their old bodies any less “their own” than the putative new ones? Proferes’s tr. (p. 59) seems self-contradictory, “Having yielded their bodies, they made [their bodies] their own,” but his explanation makes sense of this: they “overcome their atomization by relinquishing their ‘bodies’ in the course of a fire rite; they thus make their own (svā́ḥ) the collectivity of their own individual bodies, which is to say that each individual within the group identifies with the ‘bodies’ of all the others.” By taking kṛṇvata as reciprocal, as I do, rather than just reflexive, this sense can be found in the passage directly.


## 06
The Pp. reads unaccented avidan, but accented ávidan should be extracted from the ambiguous sequence padā́vidan.

As often with RVic numerology, the identity of the three times seven secret padā́is not clear. Ge tr. padā́as Wörte (sim. Re), which is certainly possible and has parallels (see Ge’s disc. in n. to 6ab), but the padé paramé that figured significantly earlier in the hymn (2d, 4d) should be kept in mind. Moreover, in the next vs. Agni is said to be “inwardly knowing the roads (ádhvanaḥ) leading to the gods” (7c), and since the padā́were found in Agni here, it may be that these padā́are tracks and identical to the ádhvanaḥ that he inwardly knows. As I argued in the publ. intro., I think the padā́are the “tracks” of the ritual.

What amṛ́tam refers to is also unclear; it could be, as Sāy suggests, Agni, or simply “immortality, the immortal principle” (so Re). It unfortunately cannot be the body, which is fem. Note the “way towards immortality” (amṛtatvā́ya gātúm) in 9b below. The phrase sthātṝ́n caráthaṃ ca with its number mismatch shows Parāśara’s fondness for this merism (I.66.9, 68.1, 70.3, 7) and the grammatical anomaly found in most of the occurrences in his oeuvre; see disc. ad locc.


## 07
The referent of “for them” in the tr. of b is the “settled peoples” of a.

On the possible relationship between the ádhvanaḥ here and the padā́of 6b, see disc. there.


## 08
The first pāda lacks an overt verb, but it is easy to read ví … ajānan from b (with most tr.), rather than supplying an entirely different verb as Ge does (“brachten”). The identity of the subject is likewise not given, but, with Ge, it is quite likely the Aṅgirases. The qualifier svādhī́- ‘very attentive’ is a signature word of Parāśara’s (I.67.2, 70.4, 71.8); the occurrence in 71.8 is applied to the troop, presumably the Aṅgirases, that Agni begets in punishing Heaven’s incest.

The “seven youthful ones of heaven” are the heavenly rivers; note the corresponding phrase in the previous hymn, I.71.7 (though in a simile) sravátaḥ saptá yahvī́ḥ “the seven youthful streams,” and for divó yahvī́- III.1.6, 9, VII.70.3.

The position of ā́between diváḥ and saptá yahvī́ḥ does give one pause, however, since postposed ā́with abl. can mean ‘from’. Perhaps this is a mixed construction: “from heaven they discerned the … maidens of heaven.” I do not know what the seven maidens of heaven are doing here.

The VP “discerned the doors of wealth” (rāyó dúro ví … ajānan) is a variant of “opened the doors (of wealth)” found twice earlier in the Parāśara collection:


## 10
ví rāyá aurṇod dúraḥ … and I.70.10 duró vy ṛ̀ṇvan.


## 09
This verse is the most baffling in the hymn, both for its contents and for its connection to the rest of the hymn. Ge has a very busy interpretation (followed by WG) that involves the Aṅgirases and the Ādityas separating themselves from the earth and contending to reach heaven. His interpr. rests on scraps of later mythology, and it is very difficult for me to see where he finds contending parties in the passage, much less the signs that would identify them as Aṅgirases and Ādityas. It also requires an unlikely reading of ví √sthā as ‘separate’, rather than the usual ‘spread out’ (as Re points out). All in all, the interpretation requires a superstructure that the verse cannot support, and examining the passage without the presuppositions Ge brings to it yields a very different picture. Unfortunately, however, the picture isn’t appreciably clearer.

I think that the verse continues the theme of the original discovery of the hidden “tracks” of ritual performance: having discovered them (see 6ab), the subjects of 9ab, the gods most likely, perform the required ritual actions, which lead both to offspring and to “immortality.” The second hemistich is considerably more difficult, but I tentatively suggest that it also depicts a primal sacrifice. The “stretching” of the ritual ground in an ordinary sacrifice, that is, the laying out of its boundaries and the positioning of the offering fire, is here expressed in cosmic terms: the earth herself spreads out to provide the ritual ground; she does this through the actions of her sons, the ritual participants. And she then “suckles the bird.” Most take the bird as Agni, whatever else they do with the verse, and the suckling, that is, the tending of the ritual fire with wood and oblations, would work fine in this scenario. Re thinks rather the sun, and again the sun as cosmic representative of the ritual fire is thinkable.

I will now treat some of the elements of the verse in more detail. Although svapatyá- can be substantivized to mean “good descendants,” it is originally and more commonly an adjective, and even when a head noun is absent, it can be supplied. In this case I interpret the word in the same way as VII.91.3c víśvén náraḥ svapatyā́ni cakruḥ “The men have done all (ritual actions) bringing good descendants.” Here the governing verb is “mount” (ā́… tasthuḥ), which I take as metaphorical for ‘embark on’. With the journey theme of pāda b, the (actions of) the sacrifice can be conceived of as a chariot, as so often in the RV.

The yé of ab is picked up by the “great sons” of cd (mahádbhiḥ … putraíḥ).

These can be the offspring produced by the ritual in pāda a or, more likely in my opinion, the performers of those actions - the gods or, perhaps more narrowly, the Ādityas - who are responsible for the cosmic sacrifice in which their mother, the earth herself, spreads out as the ritual ground. I would slightly alter the publ. tr. to “by means of her sons … the earth …” Keep in mind that the gods are the sons of Heaven and Earth (cf. the bahuvrīhi in the dual devá-putre ‘having the gods as sons’), so Earth is their mother. I am inclined against restricting the subject to the Ādityas. I think rather that mother Earth is called Aditi because Aditi is an archetypal mother, but her sons are all the gods, not just the Ādityas. The next verse (10b) simply refers to the immortals, in what seems to be a continuation of this narrative, and the default subject throughout seems to be the gods in general.

Note that “to suckle the bird” (dhā́yase véḥ) is a paradox that would be recognized by any reasonably alert observer of nature (as the Vedic people certainly were), in that birds aren’t mammals and don’t suckle. The sense of dhā́yase can of course be bleached to something like Old’s (SBE) “for the refreshment of the bird,” but I prefer to think this paradox was meant to be savored, along with the paradox of the sons bringing about the action of their mother.


## 10
The first half of the verse may return to the Tānunāptra theme. Although I would prefer a middle verb rather than active ní dadhuḥ, the first pāda could depict the joint deposit of their shared śrī́in the ritual fire (cf. the echo of níhitā in 6b), while the second pāda continues the cosmogonic theme of the previous verse. I confess, however, that the very parallel I.73.4c ádhi dyumnáṃ ní dadhur bhū́ry asmin gives me pause. Either I need to interpret that as also a Tānunāptra passage or delete the reflexive implication here. Because of the active verb, I am inclined to change my Tānunāptra interpretation and tr. simply “they deposited dear splendor in him,” although since cā́ru- can have a quasi-reflexive sense ‘own dear’, it may be possible to interpret the two passages differently.

As for the second hemistich, the rivers of pāda c are most likely the oblations poured into the fire. The referent of the fem. pl. nī́cīḥ … áruṣīḥ is less clear, and in fact most tr. (Ge, Old SBE, Re, WG) take the two feminines separately, with one nom., the other the acc. object of prá … ajānan. I think rather that the two words belong together as subj. and refer again to the oblations. The lexeme prá √jñā does not otherwise take an object, but just means ‘know the way, think ahead’. As underlying referent of the feminine adjectives I would supply dhā́rā ‘stream’ vel sim.; ‘downward facing’ certainly applies to the oblations, though ‘ruddy’ is more difficult. However, fem. áruṣī- can be used of cows; since the ghee poured into the fire is a product of cows, it can be so described, even though ghee is of course not ruddy itself.
