+++
title = "073"

+++
Agni


## 01
For the complex relationship between ‘vitality’ (váyaḥ) and the father, see disc. ad I.71.7. The “wealth acquired from one’s father” also reminds us of I.70.10, where the sons divide and carry away the property of their aged father.

Agni’s traversing of the (sacrificial) seat (sádma … ví tārīt) in my opinion refers to the removal of what is later called the Āhavanīya fire from the Gārhapatya fire at the west end of the ritual ground and its ceremonial placement at the east end.

See 2d.


## 02
Pāda a is more literally “who, like Savitar, possesses realized thoughts,” but I have adjusted the English to avoid awkwardness.

In c most tr. take satyáḥ as the shared term in the simile amátir ná (Ge “wahr wie ein Bildnis”) or as modifying amátiḥ in the simile (WG “wie eine verwirklichte Erscheinung”). The latter is impossible because amáti- is feminine. The former does not convey much sense. The purport of the simile of course depends on the meaning of amáti-, which I consider to be more concrete and specific than the usual glosses ‘appearance, form, picture’. An amáti- can be golden (III.38.8), broad and wide (V.62.5, VII.38.2, 45.2); it is associated with lordship (V.69.1 amátiṃ kṣatríyasya), can be displayed on a chariot box (I.64.9), and is unloosed or unfurled (V.45.2, VII.45.3). All of this suggests that it is a pennant or ensign or other flag-like object.

On the basis of its association with lordship, I suggest that it can be a royal emblem and that that is the basis for the simile here. As discussed ad I.70.9 and in Jamison forthcoming, prá √śaṃs ‘proclaim, laud’ is a lexeme particularly appropriate to kings, and here Agni is lauded by many like the royal emblem, which is the symbol of the king. This interpretation leaves pāda-final satyáḥ somewhat stranded, and I read it with the following pāda. Perhaps it was stationed in the c pāda because of satyá(manmā) in almost the same position in the a pāda. Alternatively it can simply be another qualifier of Agni in b, independent of the simile: “lauded by many like a (royal) emblem, real …” Most tr. give a rather vague and general rendering of the morphologically elaborate desiderative gerundive didhiṣā́yyaḥ, “desirable to hold/win’. I think it has a more technical ritual sense, referring to the installation of the fire (so also in the other occurrence of this form in II.4.1). This would reflect the same sense of √dhā as the adjective puróhita-, of the fire ‘placed/installed in front/to the east’ and the later ritual complex the Agnyādheya ‘establishment of the fire(s)’. If my interpr. of 1d is correct, namely that the offering fire has been taken from west to east, then the next step would be its installation in the east.


## 03
For the first three pādas, cf. III.55.21.

The construction of this verse is more complex than the two preceding ones and, in my opinion, displays some tricky relationships with Parāśara’s phraseology elsewhere. To begin with, the first simile as it stands is pleonastic at best: Agni should not be “like a god,” since he is a god. Nor should he be “like a god who dwells on earth,” since in fact Agni is the only god, or (counting Soma) the primary god, who dwells on earth. I suggest tentatively that the opening devó ná is there to match ná rā́jā at the end of the hemistich. Even more tentatively I suggest that what is really being compared is pṛthivī́ṃ viśvádhāyā(ḥ). Note first that in the preceding hymn (10cd) mother earth spread out “to suckle the bird [probably =Agni]” (dhā́yase véḥ) and elsewhere earth is called “all-nourishing” (II.17.5 pṛthivī́ṃ viśvádhāyasam).

I think here that Parāśara is covertly comparing Agni to the earth with regard to this well-known trait of hers, but does so playfully and allusively by stationing acc. pṛthivī́m next to nom. viśvádhāyā(ḥ) (in the same metrical position as II.17.5 though in Triṣṭubh not Jagatī cadence) and by the intertextual associations evoked by his stating that earth suckled Agni in I.72.9. So the, or an, underlying meaning of pāda a is “the god who, all-nourishing like the earth, …,” though both the position of the simile marker and the case of ‘earth’ disallow this as a surface meaning. (Let me make clear that I am not suggesting emending the text to *pṛthivī́.) The two compounds hitá(mitra-) (b) and puraḥ(sádaḥ) may make implicit reference to the word I suggested is to be associated with didhiṣā́yyaḥ in 2d, namely puró-hita, as a descriptor of the installed ritual fire. The second, puraḥsád-, is essentially a synonym of puróhita-.

Although I try to avoid explanations like “attraction,” I am afraid I must follow Ge in taking the common term of the similes in c and d as “attracted” to the comparandum: puráḥsadaḥ to the pl. vīrā́ḥ from putative sg. *puráḥsad, anavadyā́to the fem. nā́rī from putative masc. *anavadyáḥ. Although it would be possible to avoid the attraction analysis by reading both terms as part of the simile proper (“like heroes stationed in front and stationed for protection, like an irreproachable wife pleasing to her husband,” so WG), this puts the simile marker one element too far to the right and it also submerges the common term. This would be particularly unfortunate in the first simile, since there is a play on two slightly different senses of

-sád- there. (In I.65.5 a similar gender mismatch is found, explained by Re as
attraction, an explanation I rejected. But there it does not involve a misplaced simile marker.)


## 04
As noted at I.72.10 our c is almost identical to pāda a there. The publ. tr.

treats the first as a Tānunāptra passage (“deposited their own śrī́”) but not this one, and the two should probably be brought into harmony. I now favor taking neither one as a Tānunāptra expression, but see disc. ad I.72.10. In this case the deposit of ‘heavenly brilliance’ (dyumná-) may be what allows Agni to become the foundation of riches.


## 05
The verb ví … aśyuḥ should be read with both pādas, but, in my opinion, with slightly different senses. In pāda a pṛ́kṣaḥ is a straight acc. object to the lexeme in the meaning ‘reach, attain’; in pāda b víśvam ā́yuḥ may be one too (“attain a whole lifetime”) as most take it, but it may also be an acc. of extent of time (“reach through a whole lifetime”). The meaning is almost the same, but it would be like Parāśara to put the constructions slightly off-balance, and the compound viśvā́yuḥ is something of a signature word for Parāśara (see the immediately preceding vs. 4d, plus I.67.6, 10, 68.5) as an adverb expressing extent of time (“lifelong,” etc.). Note the phonetic echoes, pāda a: ví … aśyur, b: ví … ā́yuḥ; the first of these distracted sequences also evokes viśvā́yuḥ.

Pāda c sanéma … aryó is reminiscent of I.70.1a vanéma … aryó … The phrase bhāgáṃ devéṣu … dádhānāḥ is almost a paraphrase of I.68.4a bhájanta … devatvám. I would therefore change the publ. tr. “a portion among the gods” to “a share in the gods.”


## 06
The referents of the “cows of truth” (ab) and the rivers (cd) are unclear, nor is it clear whether they refer to the same thing. But I think they must be evaluated in the context of this hymn, in which men (vs. 4), patrons (vs. 5), and gods (vs. 7) all serve Agni in one way or another and seek rewards from him; the cows and the rivers then must be another set of devotees and aspirants to his favor, esp. since the same phrase sumatím bhíkṣamāṇā(ḥ) “seeking a portion of favor” is used of the rivers (6c) and the worship-worthy (gods) (7a). I would tentatively suggest a twofold interpretation: 1) A naturalistic one: the swelling cows are the rains, “apportioned by heaven,” with their bellowing the thunder and the udders the clouds. The rains both are the (heavenly) rivers and feed the (earthly) rivers. Recall the seven heavenly rivers of


## 07
and 72.8. Thus, the natural world pays heed to Agni, along with men and gods.

2) A ritual one: as Ge points out, these can be the milk and the water needed for the soma sacrifice, though I confess I would prefer ritual substances more associated with Agni. See I.72.10 where I suggested that the rivers were streams of ghee. I do not believe that we need to see a reference to the Vala and Vṛtra myths here, as Ge suggests.

I do not think that the rivers flow through the rock, pace Ge, etc., but rather over. There are three passages in IX with samáyā and ví+VERB OF MOTION, all dealing with soma going across the fleece (IX.75.4, 85.5, 97.56; cf. IX.85.5 vy àvyáyaṃ samáyā vā́ram arṣasi “You rush across the sheep's fleece all at once.”). So I think the rivers are flowing across or over the rock, but it would help tremendously if I had any idea what the rock represents.


## 07
The voc. agne was inadvertently omitted from the publ. tr., so “o Agni” should be inserted after “in you.” The second pāda could also mean “they acquired fame in heaven.” The phrase should be read with 5d bhāgáṃ devéṣu śrávase dádhānāḥ and 10c ádhi śrávo devábhaktaṃ dádhānāḥ. The latter passage, especially, suggests that ‘acquire’ is the better rendering.

The accented cakrúḥ in c can be explained, following Klein (DGRV I.176-77), as triggered by the “rhetorically complementary nature of pādas c and d.” There is no need to take the ca in c as a subordinator, particularly because subordinating ca introduces conditional clauses. Note the contrast between ví(rūpe) and sáṃ (dhuḥ), a common rhetorical pairing.


## 09
Note the echo of I.70.1, with optatives to the same (synchronic) root and a likely identical case frame. See disc. ad I.70.1.

The second hemistich reprises material from earlier in the hymn: “wealth acquired from their fathers” is exactly the same phrase, though in a different case, as the simile that begins the hymn (I.73.1a); the patrons with their long lives were encountered in 5b.


## 10
Ge’s interpr. of pāda c is persuasive. II.5.1 śakéma vājíno yámam (also III.27.3, VIII.24.22) contains the missing horses supplied here. I take sudhúraḥ as proleptic.

For pāda d cf. 5d and 7b; for devábhakta- cf. dyúbhakta- in 6b.
