+++
title = "074"

+++
Agni Several verses in this hymn are linked in relative cl. / main cl. structures: 1/2, 4/5. Vs. 6 may also be connected to 4/5. See disc. below.


## 02
This interpr. of snī́hitīṣu rests on a metaphorical use of the original sense of √snih ‘snow’. On this root as warrior slang, see Hoffmann MSS 18 (1965) = Aufs. 447ff.


## 04
The second pāda contains two forms of √vī ‘pursue’, which by most tr. get reduced to one, with the finite veḥ seemingly playing merely a modal or auxiliary role: Ge “du … die Opferspenden entgegenzunehmen wünschest”; Re “tu vas pour agréer ses oblations”; Old (SBE) “to whose sacrificial food thou eagerly comest for feasting.” The doubling is, however, captured by WG: “der du (die Götter) aufspürst, damit sie die Opfergaben aufspüren,” resting on observations of Scar (498-99). I am in independent agreement with WG on this construction. The root √vī regularly takes both gods and oblation(s) as object; here the oblations are overt, but the gods are the missing first object - the initial goal of Agni’s pursuit, to cause them in turn to pursue the mortal worshiper’s oblations as underlying subject of the infinitive vītáye.

Cf. I.77.2 (also a Gotama hymn) agnír yád vér mártāya devā́n “When Agni, for the sake of the mortal, pursues the gods,” where the gods are surface object of véḥ and the benefit for the mortal worshiper is emphasized. In our own hymn vs. 6 has a full surface realization of the structure presumed here, with the gods as subj. of the infinitive and the oblations its object, though with a different main verb: ā́ca váhāsi tā́m̐ihá, devā́n … / havyā́… vītáye “You will convey the gods here to pursue the oblations.”


## 05
I recast the acc. to nom. in English, in order to be able to preserve verse structure.


## 06
There is no obvious reason for the accent on the verb váhāsi. Ge (/WG), Re, Klein (I.243-44) take it as triggered by a subordinating ca, as does, somewhat tentatively, Old (ZDMG 60: 733 = Kl Sch 208). But this verse does not work very well as a conditional clause for vs. 7, and in fact Re recognizes this semantic disconnect by ending his tr. of vs. 6 with suspension dots. If vs. 6 is subordinated to anything, it would be better to connect it with vs. 5, repeating the message of vs. 4, which is likewise subordinated to 5. I would simply call attention to several passages with this same conjunction of elements with an accented verb and no clear motivation for the accent: III.43.4 ā́ca ... váhātaḥ, X.110.1 ā́ca váha ... We may be dealing with a catchphrase or with spread of the accent redactionally from a passage in which it was correct to superficially similar phrases.

On the vītáye construction, see disc. ad vs. 4.
