+++
title = "076"

+++
Agni

## 01
As often, vā ‘or’ doesn’t present two balanced choices, but could be paraphrased as “or, to put it another way…” That is, it rephrases and varies (often substantially) a previous statement or question.

The first and last pādas contain forms of mánas-, which I have tr. differently.

The first, in the phrase mánaso várāya, is idiomatic in English as “heart’s desire,” not “mind’s desire/choice/wish.” The expression in the last pāda, kéna … mánasā, might better be rendered “in what spirit,” though I’ve chosen to stick closer to the ‘mind’ sense.

The pf. of √āp can be used presentially (so also Kü, though not with ref. to this passage), and that value works best here: the focus in all four clauses is what we can do to best serve Agni, not what someone has done in the past.


## 03
The accent on dhákṣi is unmotivated. WG label it as antithetical accent, but that is only found in sequences that are more tightly bound rhetorically than this one.

(If all imperatives in sequence received “antithetical accent,” there would be many more of them, beginning with ní ṣīda and bhavā in 2ab.) Ge and Re both assert that the referent of asmai in d, the recipient of the guest reception (ātithyám), is Agni. This seems perverse to me, though grammatically possible. Agni is urged to bring Indra (“the lord of soma”) to the ritual ground; the guest reception is surely for this new arrival and will consist of the usual ritual offerings given to Indra, including soma. It is of course true that Agni is regularly called ‘guest’ (átithi-), but that doesn’t seem relevant here.

The two hemistichs end with two unusual -van- forms: (abhiśasti-)pā́van- and (su-)dāvan-. Though parallel in formation, they are in different cases (nom. and dat. respectively), which somewhat conceals their morphological match. They are near hapaxes: the first is found only once elsewhere in the RV (VII.11.3) in a similarly constructed pāda, the latter only here.


## 04
Although the contents of this verse are pretty straightforward, the syntax is particularly nasty.

The major problem comes in the first hemistich, with huvé, whose identity and function are not clear. Or rather what it appears to be is not easily compatible with the context. The form huvé and its unaccented counterpart are extremely common and always 1st sg. mid. to √hū / hvā ‘call’, with the sense “I call / invoke X.” If we take it in this sense and construe it with the nominative of pāda a, váhniḥ ‘conveyor’, there is semantic mismatch. The most likely referent of the expression váhnir āsā́“the conveyor by mouth” is Agni, who carries the oblations to the gods in or with his mouth; see havyā́júhvāna āsáni in the previous hymn (I.75.1) and the next and final verse of this hymn where he performs sacrifice juhvā̀“with his tongue.” He should properly be the object of huvé. Old and Ge (/WG) interpret the váhnir āsā́ instead as the human poet, who brings the god(s) to the ritual by mouth, that is, by his hymns. This is a clever idea and does allow the 1st ps. interpretation. The problem then is the accent of huvé, though it could be classified with the problematic accent in ā́ca váhāsi in Gotama’s first hymn (I.74.6), which shares the opening ā́ca. Re does not want to give up the identification of the váhnir āsā́with Agni (nor do I), and attributes the syntax to anacoluthon: the first pāda is a nominative expression describing Agni, which breaks off and gives way to an abrupt imperative “je (l’)appelle.” The verbal accent remains a problem. I have another equally ad hoc solution: that huvé is an infinitive (built like bhuvé to √bhū) and used predicatively, as huvádhyai can be. This would solve the problem of accent, but the drawback is inventing an otherwise unattested form that is homonymous with the extremely wellattested 1st sg. mid.

Note the sequence (vá)casā ...āsā́(ā́) ca ... ca sa(tsī).

The other syntactic issue in the verse is the predicated vocative phrase in d: bodhí prayantar janitar vásūnām. My tr. fails to render the predication; others (e.g., Ge) fail to render the voc. There is no good way to do this in English (or German).

Note that vásūnām is accented, although oblique cases that are part of voc. phrases often are not (type sūno sahasaḥ “o son of strength”).
