+++
title = "077"

+++
Agni


## 01
All tr. take the kṛṇóti in d as if it were ā́kṛṇóti as in 2b, with the meaning “attract the gods hither.” But the ā́√kṛ idiom in vs. 2 is medial, and there is no ā́here.

I prefer to take kṛṇóti as a dummy verb, standing for yájati, extracted from yájiṣṭhaḥ ‘best sacrificer’. Hence “does so,” that is “sacrifices.” This also helps account for the íd.


## 02
On the basis of VI.49.6 I most likely want to rethink my interpr. of tám … ā́ kṛṇudhvam from “attract him here” to “make him your own.” See comm. ad loc. Among other things, since “him” is Agni and Agni as ritual fire is already here, we need not attract him here.

The injunc. véḥ (vér in sandhi) is by most analyses a 3rd sg. to the root pres.

to √vī ‘pursue’, despite the -s ending. The same form with the same 3rd ps. value is found in II.5.3 and IV.7.7; see comm. ad locc. I would now be inclined to alter the tr.

to “when Agni … pursues,” to avoid the appearance of an aoristic interpr.

The verse contains yet another example in Gotama’s collection of anomalously accented verbs, here bódhati in the sequence sá cā bódhati. Cf. ā́ca váhāsi (I.74.6), ā́ca huvé (I.76.4), as well as dhákṣi (I.76.3). Although it would be desirable to have a uniform treatment of these verbs, esp. those following X ca, a unitary account does not come to mind, and I have explained them in separate ways.

Here I suggest that we read the adverb sácā at the beginning of d and group it with c (“… pursued the gods altogether”). Lubotsky gives only two examples of lengthened cā, this one and III.57.5, out of over a thousand occurrences of ca, so, as Old (Noten) points out, the form is suspect. Old also considers but rejects a reading sácā, though without giving reasons (beyond “kaum wahrscheinlich”). If sácā goes with the preceding pāda, bódhāti begins a new clause and its accent is correct. Note that in the previous hemistich (2ab), yáḥ …, hótā tám ū … ā́kṛṇudhvam, the second pāda begins with a nom. hótā that likewise belongs to the previous pāda, and a new clause begins with the second word tám, whose clause-initial status is emphasized by following ū.


## 03
Note the verbal play in … ná bhūd ádbhut(asya) …


## 04
There are a number of interconnected difficulties in this verse, mostly focused on what is happening in cd and the relation of this hemistich with the first one. I take … ca yé maghávānaḥ … as the second part of an “X and which Y” construction with naḥ in pāda a in Wackernagel’s Position: “… for us and (for those) who, our benefactors …” Old (SBE), Re, and WG (if I am reading this last correctly) also consider “us” and our benefactors to be the conjoined terms, though with differences in detail. Ge, however, takes the benefactors as conjoined with Agni, and they should also √vī our hymns and thought along with Agni. The frequency with which maghávānaḥ (and also sūráyaḥ ‘patrons’) are conjoined with forms of the 1st pl.

favors the non-Ge interpr.

Another issue is the identity of the verb iṣáyanta in d. Ge seems to take it with the fairly well-established stem iṣáyati ‘prospers, derives benefit’ (“… soll günstig aufnehmen”), similarly Re (“jouissent”) and WG (“sich … erquicken”). With Old (SBE) I take it as meaning ‘send, propel’ and ultimately a deverbal formation from iṣnā́ti, via *iṣāyáti, of the type gṛbhṇā́ti, gṛbhāyáti, gṛbháyati.

The final problem is the form tánā. Ge (/WG) and Re take it as an instr. of accompaniment “along with their offspring/descendents.” This is not impossible, but this meaning is ordinarily found in the collocation tanvā́tánā ca (e.g., VI.49.13). By itself tánā occurs several times with girā́(e.g., I.38.13, II.2.1) “with song at length,” and I take it that way here as well, semantically construable with mánma ‘prayers’ at the end of the hemistich.
