+++
title = "078"

+++
Agni See the publ. intro. for the structure of this rather dull hymn. Not only is the third and final pāda identical in the first four (of five) verses, but in these same verses the opening of the first pāda is also rigidly structured: abhí tvā (vs. 1), tám u tvā (vss. 2-4). The remainder of the first pāda of these verses consists of two variant pairs: gótamā girā́(vs. 1), gótamo girā́(vs. 2); vājasā́tamam (vs. 3), vṛtrahántamam.

It is thus only the second pāda of each verse that contains fully independent material.

The tvā in the various a-pādas has a slightly different syntactic status in this seemingly rigid schema. In vs. 1 it serves as the goal of the verb in pāda c, with doubling of the preverb abhí (a, c). (Alternatively one can supply a verb in ab and an object in c, as Ge (/WG) do, but this seems uneconomical.) In the following two verses it is governed by a verb in pāda b (2 duvasyati, 3 havāmahe), leaving nonumaḥ in c without an expressed object. In vs. 4 it is again the goal of the verb in c, with an apparent embedded relative clause in b.


## 04
The use of the epithet vṛtrahán-, esp. in the superlative, for Agni is of course striking since this is overwhelmingly an Indra descriptor. The name agní- hasn’t yet figured in the hymn, but jā́tavedaḥ in vs. 1 clearly announces him as the recipient of this praise.

As noted above, the second pāda is technically an embedded relative (assuming that nonumaḥ in c governs tvā in a).


## 05
As noted in the publ. intro., this final verse breaks the pattern of the rest of the hymn, although it maintains the refrain. The aorist ávocāma “we have spoken” marks this as a typical summary verse, referring to the activity in the rest of the hymn.
