+++
title = "079"

+++
Agni See the publ. intro. for the structure of this hymn (or rather the four hymns collected here) and for an analysis of the first three verses.


## 01
As Ge notes, the identifications of Agni with sun (a), lightning (b), and fire (cd) are Ludwig’s.

Most comm. take rájasaḥ as a subjective genitive with visāré (most clearly in Ge’s “wenn der Raum sich weitet,” referring to morning in his view). I take it rather to refer to the light of the sun’s rays (his golden hair) spreading through the midspace at dawn.

The third pāda refers to the blazing up of the ritual fire at dawn. The fourth pāda consists only of a simile, couched entirely in the feminine plural. The referent of these feminine adjectives and the point of comparison with Agni are both unclear.

Ge supplies Frauen; Re suggests waters; Old (SBE) waters or dawns. The dawns seem most likely (so also WG), since a sg. dawn already appears in c and dawns make sense in this ritual context. Dawns are called apásas ‘busy’ in I.92.3, also a Gotama hymn, and Uṣas is yáśasvatī in X.11.3. If the feminines are the dawns, the point of comparison may be śúcibhrājāḥ ‘having bright blazing’, since the dawns are also bright. If instead it is one of the adjectives in pāda d (‘glorious’ yáśasvatīḥ, ‘busy’ apasyúvaḥ, or ‘actually present’ satyā́ḥ), we must assume that an original masc. sg. adj. has been attracted into the fem. pl. in the simile - not a problematic assumption.


## 02
Again, the interpretation of the image in pāda a depends on what the referent is. Most (Ge, Re, WG) take suparṇā́(ḥ) as referring to Agni’s flames as birds. These flames transform themselves (ā́… aminanta) into storm clouds. As indicated in the publ. intro., I instead think this verse develops the image of Agni as lightning found in 1b. The suparṇā́ḥ are then the lightning flashes. This entails a somewhat bold interpretation of the verb (though I would say no bolder than ‘transform themselves’, for which no parallels are cited), from ‘change, exchange, alternate’ to the physical image ‘zigzag’, from ‘change/alternate back and forth’. The middle of √mī is several times used of night and dawn swapping their colors back and forth (I.96.5, 113.2), which can be conceived of as an alternating pattern like zigzags. Against the flickering light of the lightning there appears the black bull, that is, the thunder cloud, in b. The nonce perfect nonāva, backformed to the intensive (see the repeated nonumaḥ of the immed. preceding hymn I.78), I take as presential, with Narten (1981 “Vedisch lelā́ya,” p. 2 with nn. 7, 8, = KlSch. p. 234), against most comm., although no harm would come of taking it as a preterite.

The pāda-final tag yádīmám is curious. It cannot be part of what precedes, since nonāva is unaccented. The same phrase is found at IV.5.11, where I tr. “if it is here.” I interpret it in the same fashion here, but in addition assume an enjambement with the following pāda. Others keep it within its half verse (which I would prefer), but in their interpretation the phrase seems like mere filler (e.g., Ge’s “wenn dies (so ist)”).

The smiling females of c must be the lightning flashes (so also Ge, Re); cf. V.52.6 vidyútaḥ … jájjhatīr iva “lightning flashes like giggling (girls).” Old (SBE): rain showers, WG (tentatively): dawns. The “he,” subject of ā́gāt is the black bull of b, the thundercloud as roaring fire.

For the semantic connection between these parts of the thunderstorm and the aspects of fire see the publ. intro.


## 03
I take ab as a parallel and paraphrase of 2c, with Agni/the thunder cloud leading (náyan) the lightning flashes, while himself swollen with rain. Others supply different objects, and a radical (and in my view misguided) view of the passage makes náyan a 3rd pl. finite verb with Agni as its object - quite awkward because he is in the nominative in pāda a (píyānaḥ). Those who hold that view resolve the syntactic problem in ad hoc ways, by emendation (*píyānaṃ Old [SBE], subsequently rejected in Noten) or by taking ṛtásya páyasā píyānaḥ as a parenthetical (Re).

It is unclear whether párijmā is meant as an epithet of Varuṇa or a separate entity. Arguments can be made either way: in VII.40.6 the adjective qualifies wind and is associated with rain, and having Wind (Vāta) involved in this thunderstorm context would be understandable. On the other hand, a fourth god would break up the unity of the standard Āditya triad. The same pāda is found in X.93.4, but in the context of a longer list of gods.

Ge, Re take the “skin” as that of the earth, but I think it is rather the clouds in the lower atmosphere. So, more or less, Old (SBE) and WG. Cf. nearby I.62.5 (attributed to a Gautama) divó rája úparam astabhāyaḥ “you propped up the nearer realm of heaven.”


## 05
The irregular sandhi of váṣuṣ kavíḥ may be based on that in nearby vidúṣ kavíḥ in I.71.10, though the hymns are attributed to different poets. On this sandhi phenomenon in general, see comm. ad VII.18.2.


## 06
I take the point of the double utá construction (probably, with Klein DGRV 359, a nonce based on ca … ca) to be the contrast of the two time periods: at night Agni must burn against the demons by himself (tmánā), but when Dawn comes, her light helps him out.

## 07
Since this is the first verse of a hymn in Gāyatrī (vss. 7-9), I take gāyatrásya as a reference to a composition in that meter, rather than just a song.

On the basis of X.4.1 vándyo no háveṣu, I construe the loc. in c with the gerundive.


## 09
I supply bhara from 8a; giving the matching verse openings, ā́no, and the same object ráyim, this seems the correct choice (so also Ge, Re, WG). It would also be possible to make ráyim here the object of dhehi (so Old [SBE]). There are no consequences either way.


## 10
The middle voice of the impv. bhárasva is correlated with the self-addressed of the poet. See Jamison 2007: 104; 2009 [Skjaervo Fs.], esp. p. 70, and VII.88.1.


## 11
The unusual post-verbal, pāda-final sáḥ is a nice match for the initial yáḥ that it picks up.
