+++
title = "080"

+++
Indra


## 01
Old takes śaśā(ḥ) to √śā ‘sharpen’ rather than √śās ‘order’ (as does Re, judging from his portmanteau and barely comprehensible tr. “as-chassé-comme-enaiguisant”), but there seems no advantage in this. Neither root is found elsewhere with níḥ, but a literal additive tr. of níḥ √śās works well here. And √śā does not have a reduplicated form of this shape, whereas √śās has a pf. śaśāsa (etc.), to which this can be a (plupf.) injunctive. So Kü (521), as well as Gr, etc. The níḥ found in vss. 2 and 4 (also 10), also of the expulsion of Vṛtra, may account for the use of this preverb here: it seems to be a signature word of this hymn.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., this verse represents a quoted example of the “cheering on” alluded to in the refrain.


## 04
Ge suggests that the waters are “accompanied by the Maruts” (marútvatīḥ) because the waters here are storm-rains. Although in a Marut context this would seem reasonable, in this Vṛtra-smashing context the waters should not be rain but the rivers confined by Vṛtra, and this interpretation is in fact possible here. Note that Sarasvatī, the river par excellence, is called both marútvatī (II.30.8) and marútsakhā (VII.96.2); this association must be a mediated one: the river is accompanied by or the companion of the Maruts because their storm-rains swell the rivers.

## 05-06
I don’t see any real difference between áva jighnate (5) and ní jighnate (6) that could account for difference in case frame: acc. in 5, loc. in 6.

## 07
In c I supply a preterital form of the redupl. jighnate of the last two verses (*ájighnathāḥ, though no forms with sec. endings exist to the stem), because the main clause verb is the suppletive aorist to √han, avadhīḥ.


## 08
On pl. vájrāsaḥ see publ. intro.


## 09
With Re I take the numbers to refer to the people producing the songs, rather than the songs or song-types themselves (as in the interpretation of Ge [/WG]). The problem is that viṃśatíḥ is undeniably nominative, so the tr. “zu zwanzig” (and parallel “zu tausend”) (Ge, [/WG]) misrepresents the grammar.


## 12
Ge tr. vépasā as “durch seinen Wortschwall,” with the verbal (“Wort-“) component presumably on the basis of vípra- ‘inspired poet’. But near-adjacent vépete in 11b, which refers only to physical trembling with no verbal component, is surely the word against which to interpret it.

Augmented āyata is one of the few clear occurrences of a thematic med. pres.

to √i.


## 13
The expression in ab is striking, with Indra presiding over a fight between Vṛtra and his (=Indra’s) missile, but such is the usage of yodháyati, as opposed to yúdhyati ‘attacks’ (see Jamison 1983: 151)


## 14
The phrase yát sthā́jágac ca is curiously formed, though the meaning is clear. Because the verb rejate is unaccented, the yád cannot mark a “real” subordinate clause. I wonder if it does not involve the imposition of an “X and which Y” construction on an indivisible merism. In other words, with an “X and which Y” we might expect *sthā yác ca jágat “the still and what is moving”; cf. X.88.4 (also adduced by Ge) sthā́jágad yád with a similarly pleonastic and apparently misplaced yád. But sthā́jágat is a fixed expression and nothing can be inserted into it.

Note the repetition of cit táva manyáve from 11a, again with a verb of trembling (vépete 11b, vevijyáte 14d) and an instr. of fear (bhiyásā 11b, bhiyā́14d).


## 15
ná … káḥ must be read as a negative indefinite (“no one”) despite the absence of an indefinitizing particle like cit.


## 16
Although the first hemistich begins with a rel. pron. (yā́m) and the second with a form of sá/tám (tásmin), this is not a rel. cl. / main cl. structure, as the difference in gender between yā́m and tásmin shows. The latter has Indra as referent, and the former, which modifies dhíyam ‘poetic vision’ in b, is loosely picked up by bráhmāni … ukthā́“sacred formulations and hymns” in the main clause. In fact, I think the referent slippage is deliberate, with bráhmāṇi being the culminating product in our day of the age-old dhī́of ab, attributed to legendary priest-poets. Recall that this verse is in ring-compositional relationship with vs. 1, where a brahmán- creates poetry in the new style. ## 081 Indra


## 02
see vs. 6 below.


## 03
Note the alliteration in b: dhṛṣṇáve dhīyate dhánā, a phrase that also contains an example of neut. pl. with sg. verb (dhīyate dhánā).


## 06
This verse paraphrases and expands vs. 2. The nominal expression in 2b ási bhū́ri parādadíḥ is turned into the verb parādádāti in 6b; śikṣasi in 2d is echoed by śikṣatu in 6c; the phrase bhū́ri te vásu is repeated verbatim (2e, 6d); and the dative beneficiaries in 2 (yájamānāya 2d, suvaté 2e) are replaced by dāśúṣe (6b) and, more tellingly, asmábhyam (6c). The source of the wealth that Indra distributes is also made clear: it belonged to the stranger and is presumably plunder.


## 07
Most tr. render ab in the 3rd ps., but there is no 3rd ps. verb here, and the phrase is surrounded by 2nd ps. constructions (táva 6e, 2nd ps. impv. gṛbhāya 7c).

Nothing forbids an underlying tvám in ab.

Ge supplies “us” with śiśīhi, but, although this collocation does occur, I don’t feel it’s necessary in this context.


## 09
On antár √khyā see disc. ad V.30.9. I suggest there that ‘detect’ is a semantic development of ‘look within’, but also that a diff. tr., ‘distinguish between’ might be a worthwhile alternative: Indra would be distinguishing between the possessions of the unworthy, which he should bring to us, and those of the deserving.
