+++
title = "082"

+++
Indra


## 01
artháyāse owes its accent to íd.


## 02
Most tr. take the two verbs ákṣann ámīmadanta as parallel (e.g., Ge “Sie haben ja geschmaust, gezecht”), but the position of the hí after the second verb strongly suggests that the second verb belongs to a separate clause that provides the causal grounds for another clause. My translation reflects this: “for they have brought themselves to exhilaration” explains what “they have eaten” actually refers to: the consumption of soma or soma plus food-offerings. Then in b, as a consequence of their having received nourishment from us, they repay us with goods.

Most tr. take priyā́(ḥ) in b as nom. pl. masc. referring to the Maruts; this requires supplying an object for adhūṣata (e.g., Re “des biens”). I take it rather as an acc. pl. fem., implicitly referring to a fem. noun like íṣaḥ ‘refreshments’; cf. X.134.3 áva tyā́bṛhatī́r íṣaḥ … dhūnuhi “shake down these lofty refreshments,” with the same VP.

With Old, etc., víprā must be a fem. instr. sg. modifying matī́.

## 03
The exact sense of the hapax pūrṇávandhura- ‘having a full chariot box’ is not entirely clear. Ge suggests that it is full either because Indra has drunk so much or because he is taking Opfergabe home with him; Re goes for the latter: “plein (de biens).” This seems unlikely, since Indra is supposed to bring goods to distribute to us, not take them away with him like party favors. Moreover the vandhúra- appears to be the place where the charioteer stands (cf. the cmpd vandhureṣṭhā́-, as well as I.139.4, III.14.3), not a container for cargo. Although a jocular interpretation like Ge’s is possible, I wonder if a “full chariot box” is simply one that has the driver in it; in other words, Indra has mounted the chariot and is ready to go. In any case, pūrṇá- here has to be read in the context of the same word in the next verse.


## 04
I am puzzled by the reference here. The referent of cd, the one who makes sure Indra’s cup is full, should be the sacrificer, but the sacrificer should not be mounting Indra’s chariot. We might entertain the possibility that Indra is actually the referent (and is looking out for his own interests by making sure the cup is full), but, though switch between persons is very common in the RV, referring to the same referent in both 2nd and 3rd persons in the same clause does not happen, as far as I know - and there’s a voc. indra in the 3rd ps. yáḥ … cíketati clause.


## 06
With dadhiṣé we can supply either ‘reins’ or (as sometimes elsewhere with √dhā and a loc. of ‘hand’) the vájra- (cf., e.g., VI.45.18 dhiṣvá vájraṃ gábhastyoḥ).

The presence of voc. vajrin in d might support the latter interpr.

The Pp. reads amadaḥ in d. This causes interpretational difficulties: Indra was ordered to leave the ritual ground and drive off to his wife in the immediately preceding verse; he is still here in this verse, so how can he have already become exhilarated in the company of his wife? Re must have recognized the problem, given his tr. “tu t’es (toujours) enivré avec ta femme,” but this doesn’t work very well.

However, nothing prevents us from reading pátnyā madaḥ, with an injunctive, not an augmented form. It is true that injunctive forms are quite rare to this stem, but this does not seem to me a decisive argument. (I now see that WG also take it as an injunctive, independently.)
