+++
title = "083"

+++
Indra


## 01
Most tr. take vícetas- as ‘perceptive’ vel sim. (Ge “die verständigen (?) Gewässer,” Re “les eaux discernantes”), but in this context it makes more sense to use the intransitive sense of the root √cit ‘be perceptible, appear’ rather than the I/T ‘perceive’; hence, with ví, ‘widely perceptible, conspicuous’. The point of the simile is surely that the goods with which Indra supplies the worshiper are abundant enough to be easily visible, like the sparkling waters filling a river. Note the case disharmony: logically the waters are compared not to Indra, but to the goods he bestows.

## 02
This verse presents a number of small problems of interpretation, and it helps first to determine what the verse is about in general. It seems to involve the gods’ ritual approach to the place of the soma pressing. They are compared to the goddess waters in a because waters are brought at the soma-pressing to mix with the pressed soma (cf. IX.69.4, e.g.). The identity of “the one who seeks the gods” (devayú-) in c is not entirely clear, but my assumption is that it is soma. I also assume that the acc. in d does not refer to the soma, but rather to the priest-poet, though it is not impossible that the two accusatives have the same referent, most likely in that case the priest-poet.

In b (with Ge [/WG]) I take the shared term of the simile to be vítatam ‘extended, extensive’. Both Ge and WG supply “Opfer” in the frame, but I would suggest that it is, more specifically, the soma-filter, which is elsewhere so qualified.

Cf. IX.83.2 tápoṣ pavítraṃ vítataṃ divás padé, where the filter has cosmic dimensions, as it would here.

In d brahmaprī́- is universally taken as ‘loving the formulation’, and this interpr. would match that of brahma-dvíṣ- ‘hating the formulation’. However, both here and in its other occurrence in I.152.6 I take it instead as ‘pleasing [someone] with the formulation’ with the transitive value of act. prīṇā́ti, etc. In this passage it makes more sense that the gods would delight in someone attempting to please them, rather than someone who is himself deriving pleasure from something else. The passage in I.152.6 invites a similar interpr.


## 03
With Ge (/WG) I take the two as the Hotar and Adhvaryu priests, with pāda a appropriate to the former and b to the latter. Although it is something of a surprise to find the charged word mithunā́, which is usually used of a sexual pairing, applied to two males, it is presumably because the two priests have complementary duties. I do not think that it refers to the sacrificer and his wife, contra Old (flg. Benfey). As I have argued at length elsewhere (Jamison 2011, 2016 [UTexas Vedic conf.], and forthcoming [World Skt. Conf. Edinburgh]), I consider the ritual Patnī to be a ritual role introduced only in the late RV and very controversial at that time, and I doubt that she would be so casually alluded to here.


## 04
Assuming a thematic stem áṅgira- here is unavoidable, next to the far more common s-stem áṅgiras-.

In order to give ā́d its usual temporal reading (“just after that”), I follow Old in assuming that pāda b provides the grounds for the Aṅgirases’ acquisition of lifeforce.

The standard tr. (Ge, Re, WG) take prathamám … váyaḥ as a syntagm (“first youth,” vel sim.), whereas I take prathamám as an adverb. Their evidence is VII.97.1 prathamáṃ váyaś ca, but there the position of ca favors separation of prathamám and váyaḥ. See comm. ad loc. Ge and Re supply a verb in d, but this seems unnecessary; the accusatives here can simply expand on bhójanam in c.

## 05
This verse seems to jumble together a lot of primal mythology that does not seem to be connected (or, rather, whose connection eludes me). As noted in the publ.

intro., vss. 4-5 describe the first institution of the sacrifice and touch on a number of the primordial players. It is esp. noteworthy (but I don’t quite know what to do with it) that vs. 4 contains the Aṅgirases and vs. 5 Atharvan, reminding us of the old designation for the Atharva Veda, atharvāṅgirasaḥ (see, e.g., Bloomfield, Intro. to Hymns of the Atharvarveda [SBE 42, 1897]).

The form tate is a pseudo-perfect to √tan; at this period we would expect

*tatne (which we in fact get at X.130.2). The light root-syllable is metrically
guaranteed. Kü (210) points out that it is formed as if to a root √tā, and such a root morpheme could have been extracted from the passive tāyáte. I would add that, as with many aberrant forms, the context invites this form: note the immediately following word, opening the next pāda, tátaḥ (recall also vítatam in 2b).

Note the chaining of ā́jani (b) … ājat (c) … jātám (d), with the middle term belonging to a different root (√aj) from the first and last (√jan).


## 06
The relation between the three subordinate clauses (abc) and the main clause is irregular in that tásya in d does not pick up a relative pronominal referent. I take it as referring to the sacrificer who has been regularly present in the hymn (the presenttime vss. 1-3). Ge and Re may well be right that the kārú- ‘bard’ of c, which is identified with the pressing stone, is its logical referent.
