+++
title = "084"

+++
Indra See the publ. intro. for the structure of this composite hymn.


## 01
Unlike the standard tr., WG take rájaḥ ‘Raum’ with the frame, not the simile: “… soll dich (und) den Raum erfüllen, wie die Sonne …” I assume this is because the simile particle ná, which usually follows the first word of a simile, here follows the second word, by most interpretations (rájaḥ sū́ryo ná raśmíbhiḥ). This does not seem to me sufficient reason to split apart this cosmological image. I attribute the position of ná to the particularly close association of sū́rya- and raśmíbhiḥ, which are frequently adjacent (cf. esp. the identical simile but without a third term … sū́ryo ná raśmíbhiḥ in VIII.43.32, IX.41.5).


## 02
Note the chiasmic structure of cd: [ṛ́ṣīṇāṃ (GEN.) ca stutī́ḥ (ACC.)] úpa [yajñáṃ (ACC.) ca mā́nuṣānām (GEN.)]. This could have been sketched in tr. by “up to the seers’ praises and the sacrifice of the sons of Manu.”

## 07-09
Bloomfield (RR, ad I.7.8) suggests that each of these three verses reads like a brahmodya, with the last two words (the four-syllable tag índro aṅgá, which he considers to be prose “quite out of the metre”) serving as the answer. This analysis words best for vs. 7, but his separation of the two-word tag from the rest of the verse is clearly correct for all three verses -- though I do not think we need to consider índro aṅgá “simple prose.”

## 07
I take índro aṅgá as the main clause corresponding to the rel. cl. introduced by yáḥ.


## 08
The hapax kṣúmpa- is universally rendered by modern tr. as ‘mushroom’, though there is no unanimity in earlier interpretations (cf., e.g., Gr: Staude [perennial plant]). There is some etymological support for ‘mushroom’ from modern languages (see EWA s.v.), and ‘mushroom’ works well in the simile, since kicking many varieties of mushroom demolishes them, whereas a perennial plant is generally a sturdier entity. I might go so far as to suggest specifically a puffball, since kicking puffballs releases a satisfying cloud of dust (easily viewed on various YouTube videos), and puffballs do appear to be found in the appropriate geographical area.


## 09
A broken construction. The subject of the 3rd ps. verb in c (patyate) must be Indra, though he is represented by 2nd ps. tvā in the apparent rel. cl. of ab. (The parallel in III.36.4b ugráṃ śávaḥ patyate dhṛṣṇv ójaḥ, where Indra is undeniably the subject, makes it clear that the mortal soma-presser of our ab cannot be the subject of patyate.) The yá- clause of ab thus has no direct grammatical connection with what ought to be its main clause in c, and I therefore take yáś cid as the functional equivalent of the indefinite káś cid.

I.84.10-12: See publ. intro. for the structure of this tṛca and its relation to I.80. The subjects of all three verses are feminine (gauryàḥ, yā́ḥ … sayā́varīḥ 10; tā́(ḥ) … pṛ́śnayaḥ, … dhenávaḥ 11; tā́(ḥ) 12; vásvīḥ 10-12), but, in my opinion, the hidden referent of all three verses is the Maruts. See also comm. on vs. 16.


## 10
Ge (followed by Re, WG) takes the feminine plurals as referring to the milk streams, mixing with the soma, here called honey. This of course accords well with the feminine gender, and I agree that this is the first layer of reference. But both the refrain, echoing the refrain of I.80, which has the Maruts as one set of subjects, and sayā́varīḥ ‘fellow travellers, driving along with’ point to the Maruts as a second layer.

The adj. sayā́van- is used 3x (out of 6) with the instr. pl. of devá-, once (X.113.2) quite clearly of the Maruts along with Indra. Why would the hyper-masculine Maruts be referred to with feminines? I think the point is to conflate two of the sources of Indra’s mastery: the soma-milk mixture animatized as cows, which enhances his physical strength, and the Maruts, who provide verbal encouragement and moral support.

I construe instr. vṛ́ṣṇā with sayā́varīḥ rather than with mádanti as most tr. do.

The latter is of course possible.


## 11
This verse contains another clue that the Maruts are the underlying referent.

The fem. subjects are identified as pṛ́śnayaḥ ‘dappled’, but pṛ́śni- is also the name of the Maruts’ mother. They would be called Pṛśnis here, just as they are regularly called Rudras, after their father Rudra. Note the phonetic figure pr̥śanāyúvaḥ ... pṛ́śnayaḥ.


## 13
The use of the bones of Dadhyañc as a vajra-substitute is a particularly puzzling part of this puzzling version of the Dadhyañc myth. The appearance of this motif in the JB and MBh versions (see Ge n. on vss. 13-15) seems to me an afterthe-fact rationalization of the verse here.


## 14
The syntax of this verse is somewhat unclear. I take ab as a rel. clause with the pres. part. ichán functioning as the main verb and an unusual, indeed disturbing, position of the rel. pron. yád (we might expect *ichán yád áśvasya …), which is then picked up by tád in the main clause of c. Most other tr. take ichán as part of the main clause and the yád as the marker of an embedded rel. cl.: roughly “seeking the head of the horse, which was set away in the mountains, he found it…” But not only would I prefer not to allow embedded relatives in the RV, but the position of yád makes this interpretation difficult, too (expect *ichánn áśvasya śíraḥ yád …?).


## 15
I confess myself to be entirely baffled by this verse, though the grammar is straightforward. Ge’s reconstruction of the mythology (n. to vs. 15) is not entirely compelling, nor is that found in WG.


## 16
The consensus of modern tr. is that the objects that the subject is struggling to yoke are the priests (see esp. Ge), but I find this unlikely. The violent adjectival descriptors seem uncharacteristic for priests, but quite suitable for the Maruts, to whom the poet of this hymn (now drawing to a close) will dedicate the next four hymns. Note esp. that both śímivant- and mayobhū́- are used of the Maruts, once in the same hymn (VIII.20.3 and 24 respectively; for mayobhū́- see also I.166.3, V.58.2). I therefore take the Maruts as referents of the acc. pls. and also suggest that this verse is the pivot for the Marut reference found also (in my interpretation) in vss.

10-12. In that tṛca the Maruts are referred to in the guise of clearly feminine bovine figures; here the cattle (gā́ḥ) are the first acc. object we encounter. Because gó- has fluctuating gender, this form can of course be feminine (as the bovines were in 10- 12), but the immediate following adjectives establish it decisively as masculine. If both 10-12 and this verse refer to the Maruts, this verse returns them to their proper grammatical gender. Lüders (Varuṇa II.455) also thinks the Maruts are the referents.

ṛtásya can be construed with either dhurí or gā́ḥ, and tr. divide on which they choose. I attach it to the chariot pole in part because ṛtásya is often construed with a place (e.g., frequent ṛtásya yóni-), but the other is not impossible: cf. I.73.6 r̥tásya ...

dhenávaḥ.


## 17
Contra the interpretation of íbha- as ‘elephant’ in Vedic (so Ge), see EWA s.v. ### 18
yajātai is, as far as I can tell, the only RVic examples of a medial 3rd sg.

subjunctive in -tai, the form that takes over beginning with the AV, spreading from the 1st sg. As such it may be a sign that at least this part of this last hymn in the Indra group is late.

Pāda c presents a problem that has been glossed over by most modern tr.: the active of ā́√vah should take an acc. of what is being conveyed, but it is distinctly odd to say that the gods are bringing the oblation here. Ge (Re, WG) avoid the difficulty by interpreting the verb as intrans. ‘fahren’ (/‘arriver-en-char’), a usage associated with the middle, with hóma an acc. of goal. Old, however, disapproves of this makeshift (as do I), setting out the arguments very clearly. Though he agrees that “der Gedanke befremdet,” he sticks to the expected syntax (as do I) and cites a number of passages in which gods do bring oblations. The closest is V.41.7 in which Night and Dawn bring the sacrifice to the mortal (V.41.7d ā́hā vahato mártyāya yajñám). I suggest that the role-switch in this verse (gods bring the oblation, rather than coming to our oblation to take it away) is also found in the next verse, where the god praises the mortal.


## 19
As in the last verse the usual ritual roles of god and mortal are reversed, with Indra producing a praśasti of a mortal. I do not understand why, but, unlike 18c, there is no way to wriggle out of the undeniable purport of this verb phrase - thus supporting the “gods convey the oblation” interpretation of 18c.

tvám aṅgá reprises the tag of vss. 7-9, índro aṅgá, with of course the same referent.

I follow Ge (/WG) in taking vs. 20 as the quoted vácaḥ of pāda d, though it would be equally possible to interpret vácaḥ as referring to what precedes, indeed even to the whole of the hymn.


## 20
It is tempting to take dabhan as related to or contextually assimilated to dabhrá- ‘paltry, few’ in the meaning ‘come up short’, though the asmā́n would be more difficult to construe.
