+++
title = "085"

+++
Maruts On the concatenative repetition in this hymn, see publ. intro.


## 01
Because of the frequent association of the root √śu(m)bh with verbs of motion, esp. √yā ‘drive’ (cf., e.g., nearby I.88.2 śubhé káṃ yānti and cmpds śubhaṃ-yā́(van- )), I interpret prá … śúmbhante more dynamically than most tr. (e.g., Ge “Die sich wie Frauen schön machen…”), esp. given yā́man in the same clause.

The connection of the relative clause in pāda a with its presumed main clause in d is interrupted by the hí clause in c. Ge convincingly suggests that the hí clause gives an explanation or exemplification of the “wondrous power” attributed to them in the last word of b, sudáṃsasaḥ, and he is followed by most tr. including me.

This clause contains a periphrastic causative cakriré vṛdhé with a medial perfect as its base (see Zehnder, Das periphrastische Kausativ im Vedischen, pp. 23, 50-51). Although there is no doubt that the construction is a periphrasis, the reason for its use is unclear. As Zehnder points out (pp. 23, 51), the imperfect of the well- attested morphological causative occurs with just this object in VIII.12.7 yát … ródasī ávardhayat. The context here, which contains two present indicatives (śúmbhante a, mádanti d), does not call for a perfect. I suspect (but cannot demonstrate) that the use of this periphrasis with the perfect has something to do with the middle voice of cakriré, which is also apparently unmotivated in the periphrastic construction, and that there is an underlying pun -- on rodasī́, the consort of the Maruts -- namely “the Maruts made the two worlds/*Rodasī their own” (ródasī … cakriré), which would require a medial form. Since, as I demonstrated long ago (“Voice Fluctuation in the Rig Veda: Medial 3rd Plural -anta in Active Paradigms” IIJ 21 [1979]), 3rd pl. medial secondary forms in -anta to -áya-formations are almost universally interpretable as re-marked actives in -an, using *avardhayanta here would not allow the proposed double reading, with a true medial value in the pun. A different pun is also possibly latent here, involving a reflexive reading of the middle: “they made themselves grow strong” (cakriré vṛdhé). This interpretation would feed naturally into the beginning of verse 2: tá ukṣitā́saḥ “once grown,” and 7a té ‘vardhanta svátavaso mahitvanā́“Those self-powerful ones strengthened themselves in their greatness” would echo this reflexive interpretation. In both of these suggested puns, one of the words in the pāda has to be ignored (vṛdhé in the first, ródasī in the second), but the suggestive if partial phraseology in both cases would resonate with the audience.

It is also worth noting (though I don’t quite know what to do with this fact) that of the fifteen occurrences of cakriré / cakrire in the RV, four of them are found in this hymn (vss. 2, 7, 10 in addition to this one), a strikingly large percentage. And that the three finite verbs in vs. 2 are all medial 3rd pl. with strong subject involvement: pāda a mahimā́nam āśata “obtained (their own) greatness,” b cakrire sádaḥ “made (their own) seat,” and c ádhi śríyo dadhire “put on (their own) splendours.”


## 02
On the verbs in this verse, see final comments on vs. 1.


## 03
The pf. dadhire of b is not in harmony with the three pres. forms, śubháyante a, bā́dhante b, rīyate c; in particular, the tenses of the subordinate-main clause dyad in ab clash: “when they beautify themselves …, they have put on …” (The tr. avoids the clash by using simply ‘put’, ambiguous between present and past in English, but the Sanskrit is not so amenable.) It is difficult to wring a stative/resulative meaning (“they have put on and now have on …”) out of dadhire, esp. given the identical form in preterital use in 2d. It may be best to assume that dadhire here just echoes the form in 2d, though it might be worth noting that the 3rd pl. mid. present indicative to the redupl. pres., dádhate, which we might expect here, is quite rare. However, there is another possible solution to this clash. The pres. śubháyante in the yád clause in pāda a appears before vowel-initial añjíbhiḥ in the cadence, with, as is usual, the final

-e scanning short in hiatus (that is, probably as *-ay
). It is possible that the underlying form of the verb was actually the injunctive *śubháyanta and that the primary ending

-ante was substituted editorially to prevent the redactional contraction that might have resulted (*śubháyantāñjíbhiḥ). This would allow a past-time reading of the first
hemistich, “When they beautified themselves …, they put on …”


## 04
This verse contains no main clause, just two different subordinate clauses introduced by yé (ab) and yád (cd) respectively, with the first couched in the 3rd ps., the second in the 2nd ps. Although such switches of person in the middle of a verse are far from rare in the RV (see in fact vs. 5), in this case it seems best to consider the first half of this verse a pendant to vs. 3 (also in the 3rd ps.) and the second half an anticipation of vs. 5 (also in the 2nd ps.), esp. since 5a is an abbreviated duplicate of 4cd.

The adj. manojúvaḥ ‘mind-swift’ could equally well be a nom. pl. masc.

modifying the Maruts or an acc. pl. fem. modifying pṛ́ṣatīḥ. Most tr. opt for the latter, I think correctly on thematic grounds, but grammatically and semantically either is possible. Gr and Macd (Vedic Reader) take it as a nominative; certainly its position right before marutaḥ in pāda a, with pŕṣatīḥ appearing only in the middle of the second pāda, suggests that the initial audience interpretation would be as a modifier of the Maruts.

## 04-05
Verse 5 is an intrusive Triṣṭubh in this Jagatī hymn. (The final verse is also in Triṣṭubh, but meter change is more usual in concluding verses.) The transition between the meters is cleverly managed here (as Old already pointed out): the final word of 4d (in Jagatī) and 5a (in Triṣṭubh) is áyugdhvam. The ending has the distracted reading -dhu vam in 4d, but is simply -dhvam in 5a. The reason for the change in meter is unclear to me.


## 05
As noted ad vs. 4, the person changes from 2nd to 3rd in the middle of this verse. But this is not the only disruption: the main clause of 5cd begins with utá, which has nothing to conjoin. Klein (DGRV I: 451) is puzzled and suggests, somewhat desperately, that the utá “focuses on and emphasizes the second action of the Maruts.” This seems to open the usage of utá unacceptably wide. It is possible instead to see it as an example of “inverse utá,” conjoining the actions of the two clauses of cd, with the parallel verbs ví ṣyanti and vy undanti (so also explicitly Macd, Reader). Or it may be signaling the resumption of 3rd ps. discourse after the 2nd ps.

intrusions of 4cd-5ab.

The inundation of the skin in pāda 4 presumably refers to the wetting of hides in the tanning process (so Ge).


## 06
In vs. 1 the Maruts were themselves called sáptayaḥ ‘spans’, but here that image is “repaired” by separating the Maruts from the spans of draught animals that bring them here.

The two raghu- cmpds. pick up raṃháyantaḥ in 5b.

The phrase urú vaḥ sádas kṛtám could technically be in apposition to barhíḥ and hence accusative -- “Sit on the barhis, the broad seat made for you” -- but none of the standard tr. so render it. The position of the vaḥ favors, but does not impose, this nominal sentence interpretation. For another reason supporting a separation into two clauses see comm. ad I.85.7.

The seat made for the Maruts on the ritual ground is here contrasted with the one they made for themselves in heaven in 2b (diví … ádhi cakrire sádaḥ), which event is then repeated in the next verse, 7b urú cakrire sádaḥ, though there the seat is in/on/above the “vault” (nā́kam).


## 07
I tr. avardhanta as reflexive, rather than (with most tr.) intransitive ‘grew strong’, in part because svátavas- suggests that their power comes by their own efforts and in part because of its resonance with one interpretation of 1c, for which see above.

On pāda b see comments ad 6c and the similar phrase in 2b. The accent of the apparent main verb tasthúḥ is surprising. Macd (Reader) invokes the principle that the first of two antithetical verbs is accented, but this seems a feeble explanation of this particular situation. Ordinarily such antithetical verbs are adjacent to each other and the semantic antithesis is clearer: “they mounted” and “they made” do not seem particularly antithetical. I see two possible explanations: either the ā́… tasthúḥ clause should be taken as an unmarked subordinate clause (“[when] they mounted the vault, they made …”) or the “antithetical” explanation is correct, but the verb to which it is antithetical is not the following cakrire. Instead it is found in 6c, whose two clauses are in patterned contrast to 7b:  6c sī́datā́barhír urú vah sádas kṛtám  7c ā́nā́kaṃ tasthúr urú cakrire sádaḥ The second part of both pādas contains urú sádaḥ √kṛ; the first parts contain the preverb ā́, main verbs built to the semantically oppositional roots √sad ‘sit’ (sī́data) and √sthā ‘stand’ (tasthúḥ), and an acc. of goal, again oppositional, in that the barhíḥ of 6c is on the earthly ritual ground and the nā́kam is in heaven. I therefore think it likely that the accent on tasthúḥ is meant to signal the contrastive relationship between the two pādas.

The Pp. analyses dhā́vad as ha ā́vat, and most tr. follow this interpretation, as containing an imperfect of √av ‘help’ (Ge “Als Viṣṇu dem … Bullen … beistand…”; Re “eut aidé”; Macd “helped”). (An injunctive ávat would also be possible.) However, we are likely dealing with a double, or even a triple, word play here, for dhā́vat can also simply be the 3rd sg. injunctive belonging to the root (or rather roots) √dhāv ‘rinse’ and ‘run’. This is recognized by WG, who translate with the second, “Als Viṣṇu zu dem vom Rausch bewegten Stier läuft…,” but in the notes also raise the possibility of ‘rinse’, referring to Gotō (Präsensklasse p. 186 n. 333), who in turn refers to Pirart (IIJ 27 [1984] 102ff.).

I think that the two primary readings are “rinsed” and “aided” and that the acc. object vṛ́ṣaṇaṃ madacyútam has different referents depending on the interpretation of the verb, namely soma and Indra respectively. This ambiguity is made possible by the fact that vṛ́ṣan- ‘bull’ is very commonly used of both Indra and soma. The modifying cmpd. madacyút- also has two different interpretations, enabled by the functional ambiguity of root noun compounds like this. Root noun second members regularly have transitive force, governing their first members, hence here “arousing exhilaration.” And in fact this compound is common in this sense, modifying soma (IX.12.3, etc.). But passive value of the root noun with an instrumental or other oblique sense of the 1st member is also possible, hence here “roused by the exhilarating drink / roused to exhilaration.” For general disc. see Scarlatta pp. 128- 29. In this second sense Indra would be the obvious referent, as he is elsewhere (e.g., I.51.2).

While ‘rinse’ may strike the casual reader as an odd choice of words, in fact rinsing is one of the standard steps in the preparation of soma. For Viṣṇu’s participation in this process, see VI.17.11cd pūṣā́víṣṇus trī́ṇi sárāṃsi dhāvan, vrtrahánam mad ̥ íram aṃśúm asmai “Pūṣan, Viṣṇu (and the others) rinse the exhilarating Vrtra ̥ -smashing plant, three lakes (full), for him [=Indra].” In the ‘aided’ interpretation, Indra is the referent of the accusative and the allusion is to Viṣṇu’s help given to him in various exploits including the Vṛtra-smashing. In the “ran to” reading, which strikes me as the least interesting, presumably Indra is also the referent of the accusative, though WG don’t make this exactly clear.


## 09
The array of tenses in this verse requires comment. The subordinate-main clause dyad of ab/c contains an imperfect ávartayat in the yád clause and a present dhatté (dhattá in sandhi) in the main clause. Pāda d, which describes actions that necessarily follow the one in pāda c, then has two imperfects (áhan and aubjat). I consider the imperfect / present combination in the first sentence to be a makeshift attempt to convey anteriority in a language without a semantic pluperfect. That is, there is no structural means in Rigvedic Sanskrit to convey past anterior action (“when he had X-ed, he Y-ed”) via a finite verb (though see recent work by IH with a contrary opinion), since the “pluperfect” is simply the past tense to presential perfects. In later Sanskrit the gerund serves as a non-finite way to express the value (“having X-ed, he Y-ed”), but the gerund barely exists in the RV. In the RV the perfect participle does serve this function, in contrast to finite forms of the perfect system. Here the relative tense values are conveyed by the imperfect followed by the present, since the imperfect does express action prior to that of the present tense. The imperfects in pāda d then re-establish the past-time context. I therefore tr. the imperfect and present of abc with the English pluperfect and preterite.

On náry ápāṃsi see disc. ad VIII.96.19.


## 11
Old suggests a clever, but ultimately unsatisfactory, reading in pāda a: rather than táyā diśā́with the Pp., he divides tá(y) ādíśā, with the instr. of ādíś- and the older sandhi form of té ‘they’. This would make the end of the pāda more parallel to 10a … tá ójasā. He thinks that the Maruts performed the action in 10a with brute force, but that in 11a “durch klugen Anschlag.” Although I am drawn to this idea because of the persistent parallelisms in this hymn, I cannot accept it in the end. For one thing ādíś- does not occur in the instr., and it generally means ‘aim, intention’, which does not fit here. Old’s proposed reading also involves altering the accent from diśā́to ādíśā, so that it is not merely a matter of redividing the Saṃhitā text. There is also the serious question of why tái̯would be preserved in one prevocalic environment but not in another, in adjacent vss.

The sequence ā́gachantīm in c appears to contain the 3rd pl. pres. gachanti + īm; this is certainly the default interpretation. However, as with vidántīm in I.67.4 and várdhantīm in I.65.4, I now think it should be analyzed as gachant + īm, an injunctive with the inherited *-ant ending preserved because it was early misanalyzed the primary ending fused with the enclitic pronoun īm. Vss. 11 relates how the Maruts brought rain to “thirsting Gotama”; the first two pādas contain preterities (pf.

nunudre, impf. ásiñcan; note also vs. 10, devoted to the same theme, with 3 pfs.

nunudre, bibhiduḥ, cakrire), while pāda d has the functionally ambiguous injunc.

tarpayanta. Only present gachanti intrudes. The publ. tr. moves from past to present in vs. 11 (allowing for a presential reading of tarpayanta): “They pushed the well aslant in this way. They poured out the wellspring for the thirsting Gotama. / They come hither to him with help -- they of bright radiance. They satisfy the desire of the inspired poet through their own essential qualities.” But the narrative sequence would flow better with “they came … they satisfied,” and I would emend the published translation accordingly. For this and other such passages (esp. I.65.4 and I.85.11), see my “Hidden in Plain Sight: Some Older Verb Endings in the Rig Veda” in a forthcoming festschrift.
