+++
title = "086"

+++
Maruts On the structure of this hymn and its syntactic patterns, see publ. intro.


## 01
I do not understand the function of hí here, which is doubly unusual in occurring both in a relative clause and in the initial clause of a hymn. Hettrich (Hypotaxe, p. 181) also finds it puzzling. Finding hí in the opening pāda of a hymn is not unprecedented (cf., e.g., IV.1.1, VI.1.1, VI.2.1), but the relative clause is a further complication.

The abl. diváḥ is construed by Ge and Re with the voc. vimahasaḥ (Ge “ihr ausgezeichneten (Mannen) des Himmels”), but we might expect it to lose its accent in the vocative phrase, like divo naraḥ (II.36.2, V.54.10) and divo duhitar (IV.51.10, etc.). It is better taken with √pā ‘protect’, which is elsewhere found with the ablative (e.g., X.158.1 sū́ryo no divás pātu), indicating the location of the protector and hence the direction from which the protection comes. So also WG.

## 02-03
As discussed in the publ. intro., the syntax of these two verses is to be interpreted in the template provided by vs. 1, namely a relative clause (or clauses) expressing the beneficiary of the Maruts’ favor with the genitive yásya and a main clause assigning a reward to him. The full structure is seen in 1ab (rel. cl. with yásya) / 1c main clause with coreferential sá. Verses 2 and 3ab serve as the relative clauses to the main clause of 3c, also beginning sá. However, the relative pronoun is suppressed until 3a and the structure of parallel relative clauses is only conveyed by the repeated vā ‘or’ (2a, 2b, 3a). Indeed, though 2b contains a genitive of the human beneficiary (víprasya), 2a lacks even that: we must infer a yásya to limit the yajñaíḥ, as well as a verb to construe with that instrumental. I would diagram the structure as follows, with what is to be supplied in parentheses: template, vs. 1: yásya … pāthā́(2nd ps. pl. verb) (1ab) / sá for whom … you Maruts perform benevolent action (1c) / he is (rewarded) complex variation, vss. 2-3 (yásya) yajñaíḥ vā (2nd ps. verb) (2a) or by (whose) sacrifices (you were attracted?) (yásya) víprasya vā … śṛṇutā́(2bc) or of (which) poet … you heard utá vā yásya vājínaḥ … átakṣata (3ab) / sá or of which prize-seeker … you fashioned / he is (rewarded) This interpretation differs significantly from that of other tr. In particular, vs. 2 is generally taken as an independent sentence that does not parallel the yásya structures of vss. 1 and 3 and that has śṛṇutā́as the verb of a main clause, not of a subordinate clause, as I take it. (By that account śṛṇutā́is accented because it follows the extraclausal vocative that opens the pāda.) Although my interpretation requires several elements to be supplied, esp. in vs. 2, most other tr. also supply a verb with 2ab, and they fail to capture the structural parallelism that allows the ellipses to be filled in a principled fashion.


## 02
My interpretation requires matīnā́m to be construed with hávam “the call of the thoughts”; for this expression see, e.g., VI.69.4 hávanā matīnā́m.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., I take the vājín- here to be the patron, for whom the Maruts create a worthy poet.

I take gántā as a periphrastic future. VII.32.10 gámat sá gómati vrajé is entirely parallel, save for having a subjunctive (gámat) in place of the agent noun here, which suggests a future sense for the latter.

## 04-05
As indicated in the publ. intro., the genitive of the human worshiper is continued in these verses, though with the demonstrative, not relative pronoun.


## 05
The condensed expression of the earlier part of the hymn continues here, and there is no consensus on how to construe pāda c, which has no overtly signaled connection with the rest of the verse. For example, Ge takes it as a simile, marked by cid, with its comparandum in pāda b (roughly, “who dominates the peoples like the flowing nourishments the sun”). But even if cid could mark similes (and I don’t think it can), the simile doesn’t make sense. I will not rehash here the various possibilities floated by other interpretations. My own generally follows Renou’s in supplying asyá from 1a as the oblique predicate of a possessive nominal sentence: “(his) are …” It would also be possible to take the perfect participle sasrúṣīḥ as the predicate: so WG “Sogar zur Sonne sind (seine) Nahrungen gelaufen (erreicht),” but the exact value of such a predicated perfect participle eludes me.


## 06
There is an abrupt shift from the unidentified 3rd sg. worshiper rewarded for his work who dominated vss. 1-5 to the 1st ps. plural, but the rhetorical structure invites the audience to identify the “us” of vs. 6 with the 3rd sg. of the earlier verse.

The dadāśimá ‘we have done pious work’, combined with the causal hí ‘for’, seems to offer a summary of the activities of the previous verses. The repetition of the pl.

carṣaní- in 5b and 6c also supports this identification: he who “dominated” the carṣaní- in 5b can be the same as the “we” who accomplished what we have done with the help of the carṣaní- in 6c. This lexical chaining should have been signaled in the translation, where instead the two words are rendered differently: “bordered domains” (5b), “separate peoples” (6c). I would now use “separate peoples” also for 5b.


## 07
The 3rd sg. protagonist and the syntactic structure of vss. 1-5 return here, but with the syntax reversed: sá … yásya.


## 08
I take the vā here as inverse, connecting the two double gen. phrases śaśamānásya … svédasya and kā́masya vénataḥ, though it appears after the first word of the first gen. phrase (śaśamānásya vā … svédasya …). Klein (DGRV II: 205) also thinks an inverse reading is possible (though he doesn’t use the term), but he also suggests vā here might be equivalent to vaí. This seems unnecessary, and the inverse interpretation gets some support from the inversion of the syntax in vs. 7.

Note the chiastic structure of the two genitive phrases: in the first the personal participle śaśamānásya depends on the material svédasya, while the likewise personal participle vénataḥ depends on kā́masya.


## 09
The first two pādas show a nice syntactic conversion: the 2nd member śávasof the voc. bahuvrīhi satya-śavas- ‘having real strength’ (unaccented, but would be satyá-śavas-) is implicitly extracted from the compound and represented by tát, object of āvíṣ karta.

The third pāda has a striking phonetic figure vídhyatā vidyútā, which was already anticipated by pāda-initial vidā́in 8c.


## 10
Another phonetic figure in a: gū́hatā guhyàm, whose -atā also echoes vídhyatā.

In the publ. tr. guhyàm would have been better rendered as “to be concealed” than “concealable,” since the concealment is not merely possible but desirable.
