+++
title = "087"

+++
Maruts

## 01
Ge tr. usrā́(ḥ) as “Sternbilder (?)” because he considers the interpretation with dawns as “kein naturwahres Bild.” But at early dawn stars are still visible.


## 02
On upahvará- see disc. ad I.62.6.


## 04
As noted in the publ. intro., in contradistinction to all standard tr. I take the gaṇáḥ of d to refer to the poet Gautama, whose patronymic is Rāhūgaṇa, and consider the 2nd sg. reference of the 2nd hemistich as Gautama’s self-address. The other tr. assume that the flock of Maruts is being addressed.

All standard tr. also take pāda d as a single clause (e.g., Ge “darum ist die bullenhafte Schar ein Gönner dieser Dichtung”). But this interpretation fails to account for the medial position of áthā, which is otherwise almost invariably initial.

(Klein, DGRV II: 70-71, notes the anomalous position here but follows the standard tr.) I take áthā as clause initial, proclaiming Gotama’s identification with the Marut flock on the basis of the shared qualities stated previously.


## 05
See the publ. intro. for discussion of the contents of this verse.

It may not be too farfetched to note, in connection with pāda d, where the Maruts acquire “their names worthy of worship” (nā́māni yajñíyāni), that in 1d they were explicitly unidentified and undifferentiated (ké cid “whoever they are”). The acquisition of these names follows their “reaching” (ā́śata) Indra, presumably to render him moral support in the Vṛtra battle with their chants (ṛ́k-) (pāda c). In other treatments of the aftermath of this battle they successfully negotiate with Indra for a share in the soma sacrifice (see I.165, etc.), and the expression “acquired names worthy of worship / sacrificial names” may be a way of expressing this incorporation of them into the dedicands of the soma sacrifice. Note that in VI.48.21 the Maruts assume Indra’s sacrificial name (dadhire nā́ma yajñíyam), also in connection with the Vṛtra battle.


## 06
It is odd that the Maruts, just called ṛ́kvan- themselves (5c), here join themselves with ṛ́kvabhiḥ. Ge suggests either that they have an “Anhängerschaft” of singers or have gone among singers themselves; Re that it’s an instrumental of identification (“en tant que chantres”). Gr invents, for this passage alone, a meaning ‘Glanz, Strahl’ for ṛ́kvan-. Given the identification of the human poet with the Maruts in the same capacity in vss. 4-5, the singers of 6b may be human singers, although the other instrumental attributes in this verse do not fit this picture. Ge points out that in the first verse of the next hymn, I.88.1b, the Maruts’ chariots are svarká- ‘equipped with lovely chants’, and so the ṛ́kva- here might refer to their chariots, which are conspicuously absent from the list in pādas a-c. This is the explanation I currently prefer.

The word iṣmín- is glossed by Gr as ‘eilend, stürmend’ (followed by WG), while Ge and Re take it as ‘possessing arrows’, deriving apparently from a suggestion of Bloomfield (see EWA s.v.), a suggestion emphatically rejected by Mayrhofer (loc. cit.). Certainly a derivation from íṣu- ‘arrow’ is, to say the least, not without problems. But in two of its other three occurrences, iṣmín- is found in a weapons context as it is here, and the derivation therefore seems worth attempting.

Starting from íṣu-, the -in- possessive would be *iṣvín-. It is possible that the normal distribution of -vant- and -mant- possessives, with -mant- regularly built to stems in - u- (paśu-mánt-, etc.), as opposed to -vant-, would make *iṣvín- beside íṣu- appear anomalous, and it was “corrected” to iṣmín-. Note the regularly formed íṣumant- (2x).
