+++
title = "088"

+++
Maruts


## 03
As indicated in the publ. tr., I take the so-far-unnamed poets (who appear as the Gotamas in the next verse) as the subject of kṛṇavante. They are erecting their thoughts like trees for the Maruts to chop down with the axes in pāda a. By contrast, most tr. take the Maruts as subject of kṛṇavante (so explicitly Re, implicitly WG; Ge hesitates between the Maruts and the poets).

The simile in pāda b causes some minor grammatical problems. The Pp reads medhā́, but if this word belongs to medhā́- (fem.) ‘wise thought’, we should rather read medhā́ḥ (so Ge, Gr.). This is of course possible in this sandhi context, but pādafinal ūrdhvā́is not amenable to such an analysis: it must be neuter plural and therefore can’t modify a fem. medhā́ḥ. Gr sets up a neut. medhá- ‘Schaft’ for just this passage, presumably to deal with the apparent gender disharmony. But it is simpler to assume that ūrdhva- has been attracted into the neuter by the vánā in the simile (so Old).

The epithet tuvidyumná- is otherwise only used of gods, save for IX.98.1, where it modifies the wealth brought by Soma. The only other plural form (V.87.7) modifies the Maruts, but the standard tr. assume that it here qualifies the priests, because the Maruts appear in the dative in pāda c and should therefore not be the subjects of the verb in the same clause. The difficulty disappears if we read c with b, rather than d. I then take the Maruts to be the subject in d, with the epithet appropriate to them, and also take the middle dhanayante as intransitive with an acc. of goal, rather than transitive “set the (pressing) stone in motion” with other tr.


## 04
For the imagery here, see the publ. intro.

The sequence páry ā́va ā́gur with doubled preverb is curious. Ge provides numerous parallels in his n. 4a, but none like this, with the two preverbs separated only by an enclitic pronoun and contained within a preverb (pári) - verb sequence. I have no explanation for this, though I would note that of the 8 occurrences of supposed aguḥ / águḥ, 7 are pāda-final and are univerbated with the preverb ā́, as ā́guḥ.

The hapax vārkār i yā́m is of course very obscure. Ge simply takes it as an unanalyzable name of the “Sangeskunst” of the Gotamas. However, it is clearly a compound and the compound members are easily identified: vār- ‘water’ and √kṛ ‘make’, and so it should be susceptible to meaningful analysis. As indicated in the publ. intro. I believe that it has the same underlying referent as anubhartrī́in 6a, namely the musical instrument, in my view the vīṇā, and that the poet was playing with the paradox that the instrument is grammatically feminine but in some forms looks remarkably like male genitalia. I therefore follow Gr’s gloss ‘Wasser … schaffend’ and assume that it refers to the penis. The problem is what kind of formation it is, and how to get an agentive-like meaning out of kār i yā́-. First, note that the formation does not have gerundive accent and is therefore not a conventional sgerundive despite the vṛddhi in the root and the shape of the suffix. Formally it is most likely a verbal abstract ‘water-making, Wasserbeschaffung’, as Old takes it (so also AiG II.2.832 following Old). However, because it was a feminine abstract, I think that it was secondarily available to be identified with the underlying feminine referent, the vīṇā, and animatized as a quasi-agent.

Note the phonological play between vārkār- (b) and arkaír (c).


## 05
All standard tr. take ná as negating the verb aceti. It seems unlikely to me that an annunciatory aorist would be negated (“this very thing has not just been seen”), and its clause-internal position, not immediately preceding the verb, also seems unusual for such an interpretation. I take it instead as negating only the following word yójanam and expressing the surprise that what has just appeared is very close, not (even) a trek away.

I thus take yójana- as a measure of distance, as it generally is, rather than as “Gespann,” with most tr. Rather than yójanam I take the referent of etát tyát to be the formulation (bráhma) that the Gotamas made in the previous verse. This formulation, also referred to as a dhī́- ‘insight’ in 4b, providentially appears at the same moment as the Maruts approach. In what sense does the formulation “appear”? I interpret this verb to mean that the poem that Gotama created in private (sasvár 5b) is now being performed in public (i.e., at the ritual welcoming the Maruts). This interpretation also entails supplying the verb “made” in 5b (echoing kṛṇvantaḥ in 4c), rather than “saw” (with most tr., anticipating páśyan 5c).

My last departure from the standard tr. in this verse is in taking the acc. pl.

masculines in cd, híraṇyacakrān, áyodaṃṣṭrān … varā́hūn as comprising two separate but conjoined NPs without overt conjunction (as so often), rather than one single NP, since I find “golden-wheeled boars” an unlikely entity even in the RVic universe of discourse. With ‘golden-wheeled’ in c it is natural to supply ‘chariots’; the “copper-tusked boars” in d can easily be an extravagant characterization of the Maruts.


## 06
For detailed disc. of this verse, see my 1981 article, “A Vedic sexual pun: ástobhayat, anubhartrī, and RV I.88.6,” Acta Orientalia 42 (1981[82]) 55-63. The gist of the article is the interpretation of anubhartrī́, a feminine agent noun built to ánu √bhṛ, a euphemistic idiom that refers to sexual penetration -- e.g., in the cosmic incest myth (X.61.5). The paradox of creating a feminine agent noun from this idiom is the trick of the verse and echoes the use of vārkāryā́- in vs. 4 -- both, in my view, referring to the vīṇā, a feminine noun but a musical instrument with a characteristically phallic shape. The hapax causative ástobhayat ‘cause to sound’ (beside the simplex stobhati in b) has as its implicit subject the (male) player of the instrument and taps into the (probably universal) notion of a man playing a woman like an instrument in sexual encounters, with the added fun of the gender reversal in anubhartrī́. The instrument both sounds (práti ṣṭobhati, b) and is caused to sound (ástobhayat, c), a reasonable dual view of what a musical instrument does. I take vṛ́thā āsām, with its unidentified fem. gen. pl., as referring to all women, who, in male fantasy anyway, all “want it” -- conveyed by my somewhat loose tr. “the way women like it.” Other tr. supply ‘songs’ or ‘chants’ with āsām, for which there is no particular support.
