+++
title = "089"

+++
All Gods


## 01
The subjunctive of √as plus infinitival vṛdhé, lit. “will be for the increasing/strengthening of…,” i.e., “will be (ready/available/amenable) to increase/strengthen” is found also in 5c: 1c vṛdhé ásan, 5c ásad vṛdhé.

On áprāyu- see comm. ad V.80.3.


## 02
A form of devá- is stationed at the beginning of every pāda, the first three being the gen. pl. devā́nām -- an effect difficult to capture in English without awkwardness.


## 04
Ge (/WG) take the repeated tád’s of a-c (but not the one in d) as referring to the mayobhú … bheṣajám “the remedy that is joy itself” and supply verbs in pāda bc to support this object. Re by contrast takes the repeated tád as adverbial, ‘ainsi’. This is more or less what I arrived at, though ascribing somewhat more meaning to the adverbially used neuter pronoun. I assume it refers to the call embodied in the nivídof 3a (though nivíd- itself is fem.), which call is finally the suppressed object of tád … śṛṇutam “listen to this” in d.


## 06
The rigid parallel structure of the four pādas is resolved by the final word of the verse dadhātu, which verb must be supplied for the first three pādas. This rigid structure, svastí naḥ GOD EPITHET, also allows the metrical irregularity of the first two pādas to be kept under strict control. Under HvN’s interpretation each of those two pādas has a rest after the s u vastí naḥ opening, with the GOD EPITHET phrase taking the rest of the line. Old suggests reading trisyllabic indi ra, as often, as well as pū̂ṣā́, with distracted ū. The former seems more likely than the latter, but because of the parallelism of a and b in HvN’s reading, I prefer theirs.


## 07
The identify of the mánavaḥ in c is not clear. I take it as a continuation of the description of the Maruts, though it is the case that mánu- and its derivatives do not otherwise characterize the Maruts. Ge (/WG) suggests that it refers to men who have become gods or been assimilated to the gods, like the Ṛbhus, while Re thinks c belongs with d and refers to the All Gods, though this explanation runs into the same problem as the Marut identification.

## 09
The publ. tr. takes ā́yuḥ as obj. of rīriṣata, but it may be better to take naḥ as the obj. of that verb and construe ā́yuḥ with the inf. gántoḥ. Cf. Krick’s rendering (316): “Schädigt (tötet) uns nich mittendrinnen, bevor wir die volle Lebensdauer erreicht haben.” I would differ from Krick in taking gántoḥ as a gen. dependent on madhyā́“Do not harm us in the middle of our going through our lifetime.” For madhyā́+ gen. inf., cf. madhyā́kártoḥ I.115.4, II.38.4.


## 10
Pāda b is a textbook example of gender attraction of the pronoun in equational clauses. Since the referent of the pronoun is feminine Aditi, we might expect *sā́pitā́*sā́putraḥ, but the gender of the predicated noun is transferred to the pronoun.
