+++
title = "091"

+++
Soma


## 01
The multiple possible meanings of the root(s) √cit and the unclear morphological identity of (prá) cikitaḥ make the interpretation of the first pāda somewhat difficult. I follow Thieme’s solution (Plusq.), adopted also by Kü (176-77), that it is underlyingly a medial injunctive to the perfect stem (that is, an unaugmented pluperfect), patterning with pf. cikité, etc. But the underspecification of this posited

*cikita caused it to be re-marked with an active ending (like root presents of the type
aduha-t). It should not be a subjunctive, despite its thematic appearance, because of the zero-grade root syllable, and, pace WG, it should not be a trans./caus.

reduplicated aorist because of the light reduplicating syllable (expect *cīkitas) -- although I do have to admit that acikitat in VII.80.2 does seem to function like a redupl. aorist. WG supply panthā́m, from b, as object in a, but this seems unnecessary. On a potential ring made by prá cikitaḥ here and prá cikitsā in the last pāda of the hymn (23d), see publ. intro. The other question in pāda a is whose inspired thought is at issue. I assume that it is ours (that is, the poets’), in that the priests and poets create the ritual that makes soma manifest.


## 02
This verse is structured by a series of etymological figures involving a nom. sg. modifying soma and an instr. pl. specifying his qualities -- a: krátubhiḥ sukrátuḥ, b: dákṣaiḥ sudákṣaḥ, c: vṛ́ṣā vṛṣatvébhiḥ, d: dyumnébhir dyumnī́. It is a not a subtle device, but effective. On the first hemistich see further ad vs. 14.


## 03
Soma is here identified with the three principal Ādityas. This vs. is identical to IX.88.8, though the two publ. tr. differ in pāda b. I would now alter the tr. here to “yours is his lofty, deep domain, o Soma.” See disc. ad IX.88.8.

The (pseudo-)gerundive dakṣā́yya- has attracted a number of different renderings -- in this passage alone, Ge “zu Gunst geneigt,” Re “qu’on doit-servirefficacement,” WG “als Zufriedenzustellender.” I prefer to tie it more closely with dákṣa- ‘skill’, as “whose skill is to be sought,” despite the awkwardness of the English gloss. In this passage Soma was just credited with skill (2b) and will later dispense it (7c; cf. also 14c), and in both I.129.2 and VII.97.8 the ability of Indra and Bṛhaspati to bring about good things is emphasized. JPB in VII.1.2 prefers “to be skillfully tended,” quite close to Re’s rendering above. This latter tr. would work for Agni (II.4.3, VII.1.2), who requires ritual tending, but less well for Indra, Bṛhaspati, and (here) Aryaman.


## 04
The perennially difficult dhā́man-, found also in 3b, is a bit difficult to interpret here as well. In both 3b and 4ab, the dhā́man- appear to be concrete and locatable in space, for which the tr. ‘domain(s)’ fits well (cf. also WG “Stätten”). But then in cd Soma is urged to accept our oblations with them, which seems difficult to do with a place and edges closer to Ge’s “Formen,” a nebulous and all-purpose rendering that I try to avoid with this word. Re’s “structures” doesn’t help either. I must assume that “accept with all your (domains)” is a compressed way of saying “wherever you are, accept.” The same problem is found, to some extent, in vs. 19.


## 06
A good example of subordinating ca.

On the use of vánaspáti- ‘lord of the forest’ for soma, see comm. ad IX.12.7.

This usage is found only here and in IX.12.7. Because our phrase priyástotro vánaspátiḥ is almost identical to IX.12.7 nítyastotro vánaspátiḥ, I am now inclined to translate the bahuvr. ‘who has praise as his own’, not ‘to whom praise is dear’.


## 07
As Ge and Re both point out, the dat. yū́ne ‘youth’ in b suggests that the parallel mahé in a refers specifically to an adult.


## 10
I take the pf. part. jujuṣāṇáḥ as expressing an action anterior to that of the main verb, impv. upā́gahi. If this is correct, the verse is constructed chiastically, with imáṃ yajñám construed with upā́gahi, while the call that precedes Soma’s arrival at the sacrifice is nested in between (idáṃ váco, jujuṣānáḥ).

## 11-12
The two alliterative root noun compounds vacovíd- (11b) and vasuvíd- (12b) nonetheless contain the two synchronically separate roots, ‘know’ and ‘find’.


## 14
Although it is tempting to take dákṣa- as adjectival here (so Ge, WG), I am somewhat dubious that this stem can be an adjective, and in any case the emphasis on the skill associated with Soma in this hymn (vss. 2b, 3d, 7c) suggests a nominal reading here. Although the pairing of an abstract quality (skill) with an animate being (poet) might seem awkward, I see it as a variant reprise of 2ab, where krátu- (‘intention’) and dákṣa- were paired; as discussed ad I.2.7-9, krátu- and dákṣa- are two of the three qualities required to bring an action about and are regularly associated. Here kaví- stands in for krátu-. This substitution is enabled by the syntagm “the poet’s krátu-, as in the cmpd. kaví-kratu-. (Re’s interpr. is similar; see his n.)


## 19
Here again, as in vs. 4, the dhā́māni of Soma are recipients of the oblation; Ge’s Formen again works more smoothly, but I still consider these to be the locales listed in 4ab, each of which can be a site of sacrifice.

Note the disharmony in number between the neut. pl. subj. (tā́viśvā) and the sg. pred. nom. (paribhū́ḥ) and verb (astu). This could be an example of the inherited construction of neuter pl. with a singular verb, but I think it’s more likely just a constructio ad sensum, with “all these” summarizing the plural subjects of the rel. cl.

as if in a mass. English “all this” can be similarly used, after a listing of discrete entities. The Sanskrit has just been more punctilious about maintaining number agreement.

Ge, Re, WG all supply ‘lifetime’ as the implicit object of pratáraṇaḥ, rather than my ‘us’; they are most likely correct, given how common the idiom ā́yus- prá √tṝ is. I might change the publ. tr. to “lengthening (our lifetime).”


## 20
Ge (/WG) takes the final phrase of d yó dádāśad asmai as expressing the indirect object with dadāti in b (“gives [to him,] who …”), rather than as a qualification of vīrám (or even of pitṛ-, as Re almost seems to). I think this is correct, but it is mildly disturbing that there is no overt expression of the datival recipient in the main clause; we would expect tásmai (see Ge’s n. 20d). It may have been gapped because of the asmai in the rel. clause. Note that asmai cannot be a part of the main clause and refer to the indirect object, the man who does pious service, because it is unaccented; it must be part of the rel. cl. and refer to Soma.


## 21
This verse plays a minor syntactic trick. It consists of a string of acc. sg.

masc. qualifiers; since the previous vs. also consists largely of an acc. sg. masc. NP headed by vīrám, the audience would be likely to assume that the new series of grammatically matching adjectives are also qualifiers of vīrám, esp. since this type of syntactic dependence between verses is not uncommon in the RV. It is only when we arrive at the middle of the final pāda that we encounter tvā́m and discover that the accusatives of this verse refer to Soma, not to the hero he gives us in 22.

Ge accounts for the curious hapax bhareṣu-jā́- ‘born at raids’ by the fact that soma is especially offered before battle. This is probably correct, though the semantics could be tighter. Scar essentially accepts this explanation and cites III.51.8 (of soma) jātám … mahé bhárāya, though he explores some other possibilities as well.


## 23
In the phrase devéna … mánasā we again confront a noun (devá-) that seems to be used adjectivally (see vs. 14 above). I have half given in to this temptation, with “god(like).” The verb ā́tanat in c poses some difficulties in interpretation. Surprisingly, none of the standard tr. who discuss the phrase notes that the same lexeme (ā́√tan) appears in the previous verse (22c) in the same metrical position and in a common, almost clichéd́ usage. I think that ā́tanat here is a slangy expression, deliberately constrasting with the high-style cosmic-description usage of ā́tatantha in 22. I take the subject to be the wealth (or share of wealth) of b, rather than the mánas- of a, as Ge (/WG) take it, nor would I following Re in taking it as an impersonal construction.

It is not entirely clear who the “both” are in d: Ge singers and patrons, Re men and gods.

Ge supplies ‘path’ with prá cikitsā (“sei … der Pfadfinder”) on the basis of IV.47.20. This is possible, and might even be supported by the panthā́m in vs. 1, since prá cikitsā seems to form a slight ring with prá cikitaḥ in 1a. However, the verb does not need an object, in my opinion; the desiderative here can express a general intention to be alertly perceptive.
