+++
title = "092"

+++
Dawn As indicated in the publ. intro., vss. 1-4 and 5-8 appear to be parallel hymns, the first with multiple Dawns, the second with just one.


## 01
In pāda a my tr. differs slightly from the standard ones. I suggest that the dawns have transformed themselves into a beacon, while in the standard interpr. they have created/manufactured a beacon for themselves.

In b following Proferes 2003 (JAOS 123, pp. 330-31), I suggest, on the basis of the fuller expression in the parallel verse 5c, that their “beam” is being anointed like the sacrificial post (sváru-) at a ritual.

In c the poet exploits the syntactic ambiguity of the middle participle niṣkṛṇvāná-. In the frame he takes it as a reflexive, “presenting themselves,” but in the simile it is transitive “presenting arms.” The middle voice is still justified, however, because the weapons belong to the subjects of the participle.


## 03
The standard tr. are in agreement that árcanti only means “they sing” here and that the meaning ‘shine’ for this verb stem is dubious. This judgment seems short- sighted and unresponsive to the poetics of this hymn, and even if ‘shine’ is not the normal sense of árca-, the nominal derivatives like arcí(s)- ‘ray, flame’ (see arcís- in 5a) would allow a ‘shine’ sense under the proper circumstances. And these are the proper circumstances. This verse-initial verb, following on two verses describing the color, brightness, and beams of the dawns, would most naturally be interpreted with a ‘shine’ sense. The simile that follows, involving women at work, would then cause the audience to rethink this assumption, producing the interpretation ‘sing’, with the women singing work songs at their labors. But ‘sing’ makes little sense for the frame of the passage: do dawns ‘sing’? While ‘shine’ makes little sense for the simile: do working women ‘shine’? As in 1c the poet uses the ambiguity of the verbal pivot to craft two incompatible but verbally impeccable pictures, but this time he relies not on syntactic ambiguity as in 1c but synonymity -- a pun on the verbal root underlying the verb form. The pun may be even cleverer than so far presented. Although the primary sense of árcanti for the dawns should be ‘shine’, it is possible that there is a secondary sense ‘sing’, in that birds begin to sing at dawn and the ritual recitation also begins at that time. Similarly, although ‘sing’ should be the primary sense for the women in the simile, they may also be said to shine if they are glistening with sweat from their labors. (Recall the old expression “men sweat, but women ‘glow.’”) It should be noted that Ludwig thought the verb was “doppelsinnig” (see Ge n. 3a).

In terms of the publ. tr. (and other standard tr.), the simile particle ná is late, since the simile is assumed to start with nā́rīḥ. However, it is possible that nā́rīḥ characterizes the Dawns, and the simile consists only of apáso ná viṣṭíbhiḥ. In that case, the chanting workers could be men: an alt. tr. “The ladies chant [/shine] like workers at their labors.” Pace Gr and Lub, áha should be taken not as the particle, but as short neut. pl.

to áhar / áhan- ‘day’, with víśvā; cf. the well-attested expression áhā víśvā.


## 04
bárjaha- in b is a hapax, but related to dual barjahyè in AV XI.8.14 in a list of body parts, found between the ribs and the sides. Whitney/Lanman tr. ‘nipples’ there.

The consensus tr. ‘udder’ seems reasonable, esp. on the assumption that usrā́‘ruddy’ designates a cow. However, the purport of the simile is a little unclear. Since cows don’t wear clothes, their udders are not covered to begin with and uncovering is unnecessary. Ge suggests that the simile is proleptic: Dawn’s breast becomes as visible as a cow’s full udder, but this interpretation requires that the verb (‘uncovers’) that should mediate between frame and simile has been semantically elided.

The simile in d is similarly “off,” since cows don’t have the capacity to open their own pens. Macdonell (Hymns from the Rigveda, 1922) tr. “as when cows break from their stalls,” which makes more sense, but again misrepresents the pivotal verb.

The apparently wrong sandhi āvar támaḥ is, as has long been known, an ex. of degemination in context: āvar represents the older 3rd sg. root aor. *āvart. See Old, Prol. 424 n. 1, AiG I.304-5, 336.

## 05
As noted before, vs. 5 seems to match vs. 1 and begin a new hymn parallel to vss. 1-4, but adapted for a single dawn, not the multiples in vs. 1. The return of the words bhānú- ‘beam’ and √añj ‘anoint’ (1b) is particularly salient, as also √śri (2d), √arc (3a), and péśas- (4a).

The poet produces yet another complication of simile structure in cd. The Daughter of Heaven in d is clearly the subject of the clause, but the simile occupying c has a participle in the masc. nom. sg., añján, which cannot modify the grammatical subject. We must here supply a masculine ritual officiant, who is propping up and anointing the sacrificial post, as Dawn props up and anoints her beam. (Note that bhānúm served as object of both verbs in the earlier parts of the hymn: 1b bhānúm añjate, 2d bhānúm … aśiśrayuḥ.) The two distinct objects in simile and frame are mediated by the word péśas-, which is appropriate to both. Dawn has just donned her own péśāṃsi in 4a, but péśas- can also be used of ritual paraphernalia -- e.g., the pressing stones, which are called adhvarásya péśaḥ at VII.42.1.


## 06
vayúnā kṛṇoti reprises ákran … vayúnāni in 2c.

chándaḥ is somewhat problematic. Gr takes it as a masc. nom. sg. to a them.

adj. chánda-, with the developed sense “der Gefallende, Schmeichler oder Buhle,” and this tack is followed by the standard tr. (incl. the publ. one). But the only other supposed occurrence of this stem, in VIII.7.36, I take to the much better established s-stem neut. chándas- ‘metrical vs.’. However, that solution is not available here, at least as far as I can see, and so I reluctantly follow the standard solution, without much faith in its correctness. It does not help this interpr. that Dawn is being compared to a masc. being, esp. since smiling is almost always a feminine action.

Redupl. ajīgaḥ must be a transitive redupl. aor. beside jā̆rayati ‘causes to awaken’. Cf. I.113.4-6: uṣā́ajīgar bhúvanāni víśvā. I supply ‘us’ as obj. here, on the basis of the 1st pl. subj. in pāda a.


## 07
Note the etymological, though no longer semantic, relationship between sūnṛ́tānām (a) and nṛvátaḥ (c).

## 07-08
Contra Gr, áśva-budhya- cannot mean ‘durch Rosse bemerkenswerth’ with a gerundive to √budh, among other things because of the bahuvrīhi accent. Rather it belongs with áśva-budhna- ‘having a foundation of horses’, by way of *-budhnya-, an analysis that goes back to Aufrecht. All 3 occurrences of this stem (I.92.7-8, 121.14) qualify wealth or prizes. On the related hapax áśva-budhna- see comm. ad X.8.3.


## 08
‘Forelock’ for pravarga- may seem slightly flippant, but I wanted to capture the ‘twist’ sense of prá √vṛj, in contrast to the anodyne ‘having slaves at the front’ found in the other tr.

The final bṛhántam of d obviously refers back to the rayím so carefully detailed in ab, but is separated from that phrase by a considerable amount of material. Rather than making it a long-delayed part of that NP I have taken it as a pseudo-goal with vibhā́si, with vā́ja-prasūtā giving grounds for that goal.

## 08-09
vibhā́si (8c) and ví bhāti (9b) should have been rendered with the same English verb, either “radiate” or “shine.” I would now change the publ. tr., to ‘radiate’ in both cases.


## 09
Unfortunately it is not possible to render the three fronted forms of víśva- (pādas a, c, d) in non-awkward English.

cákṣuḥ in b can be either nom. or acc. Most tr. take it as the latter, with Dawn facing either the eye(s) of, presumably, humans (so Ge [/WG], Re) or the eye of the sun (so Macdonell [Hymns from the Rigveda], Maurer). The latter is unlikely on pragmatic grounds: although the eye of the sun is a standard trope in the RV (see in fact 11d), the sun rises after dawn, and Dawn surely wouldn’t be looking behind her, to the east. The former is certainly possible, but I prefer to take cákṣuḥ as nominative, referring to Dawn as an eye, since she has just been said to oversee (abhicákṣyā) all creatures.

I’m not entirely sure what pāda d refers to, but perhaps it means that by dawning she has stimulated ritual speech and therefore “finds” it.


## 12
This last verse of the trimeter portion of the hymn plays more tricks with simile structure. In pāda a prathānā́functions like niṣkṛṇvānā́in 1c; that is, it has both reflexive and transitive values. In the frame it is reflexive (“spreading herself”), in my view, though Ge, Re, Macd., Maurer all supply “rays” as the object, on no contextual grounds. (However, Ge does allow for the reflexive possibility in his notes 12a, 1c.) In the simile paśū́n is the object; the assumed subject might be “cowherd” or the like (so tentatively Re). But the simile is quite appropriate to Dawn for two reasons: first, it is often said that livestock go out to pasture at dawn and return to the fold at night; second, the rays of Dawn are often referred to as cows (see in fact vs. 2 above), and though I don’t think the stem paśú- is so used, it inhabits the same semantic space as the more usual terms that participate in this metaphor.

The second simile, síndhur ná kṣódaḥ in b, is taken by Ge, Re, Macd., Maurer with the verb of b, vy àśvait. Because this verb ‘whitened’ is intransitive, this requires either taking kṣódaḥ adverbially (Re “comme le fleuve (en son) remous”) or construing síndhuḥ … kṣódaḥ as a loose compound (Ge “wie die Stromflot”).

Although either is possible, the syntactic difficulties disappear if the simile falls within the verbal domain of prathānā́, “like a river spreading its surge.” Given this poet’s particular delight in manipulating similes, it is entirely in character to end this section of the hymn with a triple play.

WG interpret the similes more or less as I do.

Pāda c is structurally parallel with 11c, using the same verb mī ‘diminish, belittle’, though here in the negative (11c praminatī́, 12c áminatī), both playing off āminānā́in 10c. The relationship between 11c and 12c is particularly close, with the human and the divine playing off each other: 11c praminatī́manuṣyā́yugā́ni, 12c áminatī daívyāni vratā́ni.


## 14
The tr. “rich in … / richly…” implies that there is an etymological connection between gomati, áśvāvati and revát, which of course there is not. But “possessing cows and horses” seems too flat.


## 15
The hí + imperative followed by áthā + imperative is the same structure as I.10.3; see the commentary thereon.


## 16
√yā is the usual verb that governs vártis- (I.34.4, I.116.18, etc. etc.), and I supply a form of it here.

The publ. tr. implies that sámanasā is a vocative, but, by its accent, it’s a nominative and would better be tr. “as like-minded ones.”


## 17
Gautama’s penchant for clever exploitation of syntactic possibilties returns in this verse, after a series of unremarkable Uṣṇih verses (13-16). The verb in b, cakráthuḥ, by my interpretation takes two different types of predicates and exhibits slightly different root meanings: in pāda a “make your call to heaven,” that is, make the call reach heaven; in b “make, i.e., create, light.” I am in agreement with the standard tr. of pāda b, but diverge from them in a, where Ge (/WG) supply a separate verb (“erhebt”) to govern ślókam and interpret ā́diváḥ temporally (“zu dieser Stunde des Tages”), not spatially. Although ā́diváḥ is sometimes used temporally (e.g., in the expression trír ā́diváḥ), I take the ā́here in the meaning “all the way to” (Gr’s “Praep. mit folgendem Abl. … bis an, bis hin (räumlich)”). This usage of ā́was prepared for in the immediately preceding vs., 16a asmád ā́“all the way to us” (though in opposite order). For a closely parallel expression, in a Dawn hymn, cf.

III.61.4 ā́ntād [i.e., ā́ántād] diváḥ ... ā́prthivy ̥ ā́ḥ “all the way to the end of heaven and of earth.” For the ślóka- reaching heaven, cf. I.83.6, 190.4, and for ślókam as object of √kṛ, IV.53.3.
