+++
title = "093"

+++
Agni and Soma


## 01
The expression in d bhávatam … máyaḥ echoes the compound in the final verse of the immediately preceding hymn mahobhúvā (I.92.18) -- both dual, though applying to different divine pairs, the Aśvins (I.92.18) and Agni and Soma (here). It is possible that this final hymn of the Gautama sequence, with its unique dedication to Agni and Soma (see publ. intro.), was attached just here because of the duplication of phraseology. This connection would be clearer in the publ. tr. if they were tr. in the same way. I would therefore change “become refreshment” to “become joy” in this verse.


## 03
On the case frame of √dāś here, see comm. ad VI.16.31.

## 04
As noted in the publ. intro., Bṛsaya, with his very non-Indo-Aryan name, and the destruction of his offspring are found elsewhere only in VI.61.3, a hymn devoted to Sarasvatī. The theft of the provender (avasá-) from the niggard (paṇí-) is also found in that hymn, in vs. 1. The connection between the two hymns to different gods, found in different parts of the Saṃhitā, is not clear to me, but the strong similarity of the passages at least that Bṛṣaya is a paṇí-.


## 05
Pāda b contains an inverse vāyav indraś ca construction: agníś ca soma.


## 07
The three imperatives in b, vītáṃ háryatam … juṣéthām, all belong to roots that ordinarily take accusatives, yet all must be construed with the fronted gen. havíṣaḥ prásthitasya in pāda a. I don’t quite understand the case syntax, but assume that these three verbs have been lumped together generically as verbs of consumption and enjoyment, for which gen. complements are often possible.

In c bhūtám can be either imperative or injunctive and is taken as injunctive in the published translation (as also by Ge and Re). However, since the immediately preceding hymn (I.92.15) contains the clausal diptych hí + imperative, followed by áthā + imperative, exactly matching the structure here, I now think it would be better to interpret bhūtám as impv. here as well: “Become providers …, then establish …” (So WG.) An imperative interpretation also works better with the three abrupt imperatives that precede in b. For further disc. see comm. ad VII.99.3.


## 08
saparyā́t in b echoes saparyáti in 2b, but displays the more usual case frame: acc. (god) + instr. (means of service). The instance in 2b takes acc. (means of service) + dat. (god), which is only otherwise found at X.37.1. The occurrence in this verse thus functions as a species of poetic repair.


## 09
The purport of the final pāda isn’t clear to me, but it may indirectly comment on the unusual nature of the joint dedication of the hymn to these two gods.


## 10
dā́śati echoes dā́śāt in 3b.

## 10-11
2nd du. dīdayatam (10c) and jujoṣatam (11b) are somewhat problematic forms. They belong to redupl. thematic stems; other forms to these stems are subjunctives to the perfect. However, they have secondary endings, and the act. 2nd and 3rd du. subjunctive endings should be primary. Lub identifies them as impvs. (Gr also jujoṣatam); Kü (35) treats them as “hybrids” -- morphologically belonging to the subjunctive but functioning as imperatives. They differ from some other secondarily thematized pf. impvs. in having full grade of the root syllable, like the subjunctive (versus zero-graade in pīpyatam √pi, √vāvrdhásva √vṛdh, etc. -- but cf. pipráyasva √prī). In the publ. tr. they are treated as subjunctives (“you will shine,” “you will enjoy”), but they would might be better rendered as imperatives. For further disc. of such forms, see my forthcoming article on the perfect imperative. ## 094 Agni


## 01
BR corrected sám mahema to sám ahema ‘we would bind together’ to √nah, an emendation accepted by Gr, Ge, Old (tentatively), KEWA I.153. Although I also accepted it in Jamison 1983: 87, I now follow Gotō (1987: 243; accepted in EWA s.v.) in seeing it as a form of √mah ‘bring about’, etymologically separate from √mah ‘magnify’. Although I do not like multiplying entities, Gotō’s etymological connections look reasonable; an interpretation with ‘make great’ is difficult; and a thematic pres. or aor. stem aha- to √nah does not exist and the zero-grade (<*nh̥ ) that would have to underlie it is not otherwise found to √nah.


## 02
yásmai √yaj presents the classic parasmaipada configuration: “sacrifice for someone else,” but āyájase is resolutely middle. I do not have a good explanation for this beyond the fact that the functional distinction between act. yájati and mid. yájate is not well developed in the RV, esp. with preverb ā́, and also that Agni, the subject, is essentially sacrificing to himself.

Although act. sā́dhati can be transitive (and WG so tr. it), it also has intransitive/absolute uses (cf. the same tag in VI.70.3). Moreover, in this hymn sādháyati (3a, 4c) serves as the transitive counterpart; the poet seems to have constructed an -ati /-áyati Grundverb/Kaus. relationship.


## 03
A choppy series of clauses, five in the first three pādas, with only the last dependent in any way on another.


## 05
gopā́(ḥ) in pāda a can be either sg. or pl. All the standard tr. take it as the former, referring to Agni, but this makes grammatical difficulties. Ge interprets the following asya as a word-haplology for *asy *asyá, thereby getting the 2nd sg. copula but gratuitously accenting the pronoun. Old reads *asy for asya and suggests accenting *cáranti. Re takes viśā́ṃ gopā́(ḥ) as a 3rd sg. expression (“Agni est …”) and seems to leave the following text alone. But all such tr. must introduce an accent on whatever word they think follows the short initial clause, since, as it stands, two unaccented words, asya caranti, would open that clause. These difficulties can be avoided by interpreting gopā́ḥ as plural, subject of caranti and coreferential with jantávaḥ. Pl. gopā́- is elsewhere used of Agni’s sidekicks, presumably his flames, in VI.8.7. Though it is true that this same expression viśā́ṃ gopā́(ḥ) is found two hymns later (I.96.4) as an undoubted singular referring to Agni, the grammatical complications resulting from taking it as a singular here outweigh that argument for me.

Most tr. take the two-footed and four-footed as appositional to jantávaḥ and therefore as those who roam by night. This is contrary to the usual RVic vision of the creatures settling down at night. Agni’s flames make more sense as the roamers, evoking the flickering firelight that provides nightly illumination. The flames are called “herdsmen” because people and animals gather around the fire then, like a flock. This interpretation does raise the question of how to construe the nom. case of that expression dvipác ca yád utá cátuṣpat. I take it as a definitional relative clause expanding on viśā́m (so also Old). The ca … utá is a mix of two “both … and” constructions: X ca Y ca and utá X utá Y, with the first half of the conjoined NP fronted around the subordinating yád. This construction is very similar to 9b dūré vā yé ánti vā ké cid, complete with the fronted first element.

The etymological relationship between citráḥ and praketáḥ in c is not easily rendered in English.


## 10
All standard tr. take b vṛṣabhásyeva te rávaḥ as the main cl. to the yád cl.

beginning in a, while I take it as a part of that yád cl. There is no way to tell, since the second cl. lacks a verb whose accent or lack thereof would settle the matter.

There are also no semantic implications; I weakly prefer mine because of the fairly emphatic ā́d ‘then, just after that’ beginning the second hemistich.

All tr. take vanínaḥ as ‘trees’ (lit. ‘possessing wood’). This is doubtless the primary sense here, since this sequence of vss. describes a forest fire, but ‘winners’ is also possible, since the metaphorical context is that of a chariot race; see esp. 10a, 11c.


## 11
I supply ‘makes’ on the basis of 9c sugáṃ kṛdhi, though strictly speaking “that is an easy way” is perfectly acceptable.

tāvaká-, the vṛddhi derivative of the genitive of the 2nd ps. pronoun, enlarged with -ka-, is a striking form, though exactly what special effect it is aiming at is unclear. For the use of -ka- in pronominal derivatives, see Jamison 2009 (IIJ 52). As discussed there, the -ka- tends to signal a lower register or slangy tone.


## 12
Most tr. take Mitra and Varuṇa as the objects of dhā́yase: approx. “Agni is for the suckling of Mitra and Varuṇa.” But Agni is the one more likely in need of suckling (that is, feeding the fire); cf., e.g., II.5.7. In particular, in the next hymn, I.95.1, Agni is the object of the transitive/causative dhāpayete. I therefore take the gen. mitrásya váruṇasya as dependent on héḷaḥ in b, parallel to marútāṃ. héḷa(s)- is characteristic of Varuṇa (cf. I.24.14, VII.84.2; in VII.62.4 Mitra is included).

avayātā́m is the problem in the second pāda. Most tr. take it as a 3rd sg.

imperative (e.g., Re “qu’il exorcise”), but if so, it must be a middle root pres.

imperative, and there are no middle forms to this root √yā (as opposed to √yā ‘implore’). There is also the problem that the form should not be accented on the stem but on the preverb (*áva yātām; see Ge n. 12b). Lub appears to take it as a gen. pl. of the act. part. to the root pres., but in the absence of a tr. it is hard to know how he would interpret it in context. Best to follow Old (who follows BR) in emending to

*avayātā́, the nom. sg. agent noun. Re is tempted by this reading, save for the fact
that with the acc. complement héḷaḥ we should expect the accent ávayātā. However, the “rule” about the case of complements to agent nouns is broken so often that this objection is not cogent. The final -m could have been acquired from the following marútām (so Old), and since √yā ‘drive’ is a characteristic Marut verb and a genuine example of the gen. pl. part. yātā́m is used of the Maruts in the refrain V.55.1-9, it may have been rhetorically natural to transform the agent noun into this participle.


## 13
Both a and b turn on interpreting one word as both an appellative and a proper name: mitráḥ in a, vásuḥ in b, though they occupy different places in the parallel structures.

## 15-16
The meter here changes to Triṣṭubh, and the intra-hymnic refrain is dropped. The 2nd hemistich of vs. 16 contains the first example in the Saṃhitā of the Kutsa refrain.


## 15
Contra standard tr., I do not take anāgástvam as the obj. of dádāśaḥ, since √dāś seldom takes an object that is not a god, and when it does, it is a ritual offering.

Instead I take it as belonging to a parallel nominal clause, still in the domain of yásmai.

The final phrase that is the ostensible main clause, té syāma “might we be they,” violates number agreement: pl. té cannot properly pick up sg. yásmai. This is a variant of a common tag and feels tacked on.


## 16
Because sá with 2nd ps. reference is restricted by rule to imperatives (see Jamison 1992 [HS 105]), ab must be a single clause, pace Ge.
