+++
title = "095"

+++
Agni


## 01
Ge suggests that the sun is referred to in c, Agni in d. But it seems more likely that Agni is the referent of both (or at least the first referent: since Agni = Sun is a common identification, there may be secondary association), and the point is simply that fire looks different in the daylight from at night.


## 03
The riddles in this verse have given rise to much more speculation than can be covered here. In the first hemistich the major question is whether the three births of pāda a (trī́ṇi jā́nā) are matched by three birth locations in b or only two. That there are three locatives (samudré … diví … apsú) might support the first view; that there are only two ékam’s the second. Despite their polarized positions in the pāda, I believe that samudré … apsú refer to one place of birth, diví to another. X.45.3, where samudré … apsú is one place of kindling (pāda a), diváḥ … ū́dhan a second (b), and a third is referred to in cd, supports the two-locale view. This then allows the third birth to be the ritual kindling described in the first vss. of the hymn, while very tentatively we might identify the birth in waters as that of Apāṃ Napāt and that in heaven as that of the sun. The three births can also refer to the three ritual fires, and that notion is taken up obliquely in the second half of the verse, in my opinion.

The second hemistich describes the carrying of the kindled fire to the east end of the ritual ground, to become the Āhavanīya fire (not so called in the RV, but clearly referred to often in the text). This pacing out of the ritual ground also establishes the other ordered elements in the ritual, hence the VPs of pāda d. Gr and Old both read *pradíśam for prá díśam, as also in IV.29.3. I am not certain that that change is necessary here, though interrupting the pū́rvam ánu … díśam phrase with the preverb is somewhat disturbing (though note that prá immediately follows the caesura).


## 04
As indicated in the publ. intro., this vs. describes the kindling of the fire in typically enigmatic fashion, with multiple referents possible for each entity. (See the various tr. and comm. for disc.) It also contains in pāda b a version of the beloved paradox in which the child gives birth to his parents, though in this particular case I am uncertain what exactly is meant. The janayata in 4b picks up the janayanta in 2a, but with the subject and object reversed: in 2a the ten (fingers) begat the infant (fire); here the calf (fire) begets his mothers. Note that, while janayanta in 2a is a standard, formal -anta replacement (see my “Voice fluctuation in the Rig Veda: Medial 3rd plural -anta in active paradigms,” IIJ 21 ([1979] 146-69), janayata here seems to be a real middle: the mothers Agni begets are his own. For further disc., see comm. on the near-identical expression in IX.95.1.On the basis of the echoing of 2a, I assume that the mothers here are the fingers, though waters are also a popular suggestion -- one that does not fit the ritual context, in my opinion. The hard-working women in c are probably also the fingers, though kindling sticks are also possible, esp. on the basis of 5b.

svadhā́(-van)- is a signature word of this part of the hymn: 1c, 4b, 4d.


## 05
The hymn began with unnamed dual feminines attending to the young fire; this verse also contains unnamed dual feminines in the same role. But the identities of the two pairs are different: Night and Dawn in 1, the world-halves in 5cd, 6a.

Note the word play of pratīcī́… práti, with slightly different meanings.

## 05-06
The caus. (práti) joṣayete in 5d, 6a literally means “they two cause (him) to take pleasure (in themselves),” but this tr. seems too heavy, esp. in adjacent pādas.


## 06
The position of simile-marking ná is aberrant, preceding the simile’s noun méne and following the verb. Since the full simile is bhadré … ná méne, it seems that this syntagm was distracted in some fashion, with the verb placed in its middle. On méne see I.62.7.

The etymological figure in c, dákṣāṇāṃ dákṣapatiḥ “skill-lord of skills,” then participates in a phonological figure with semantically distinct dakṣiṇatáḥ “from the right (/south)” in d.


## 07
I take the first half-verse as a description of fire both sending its flames upwards and stretching out horizontally. Most tr. interpret yatate in b as transitive (e.g., Ge “er eifert beide Heeresreihen an”), but the medial forms of this pres. stem are intransitive or reflexive. I instead take ubhé sícau as an acc. of extent and assume that it refers to the seams between the two world-halves found in vss. 5-6. With these two halves, heaven and earth, meeting at the horizon, as it were, the seams between them would stretch horizontally.

The “new clothes” he leaves for his mothers in d are probably the ashes that fall on the kindling wood as he burns it.


## 08
The first three pādas of this verse sounds very somian: the cows [=milk] and the waters of b are the standard ritual substances mixed with soma in the IXth Maṇḍala; the beginning of a, tveṣáṃ rūpáṃ kṛṇute, is also found in a soma hymn, IX.71.8; and √mṛj ‘wipe, groom’ in c is a signature soma verb. This may be an example of the covert equation of the two ritual gods, Agni and Soma. Pāda a is easily interpreted in an Agni context; b makes more difficulties: the cows can here be the ghee poured into the fire (which could cause the creation of an “even higher” form in a), but the waters would obviously have a diminishing effect on the fire if it actually “mingles” with them. Ge (n. 8b) suggests that the vedi is being sprinkled with water, but that’s not what the text says. I think better to assume that this is an incompletely adapted somian description.

Pāda c has caused interpretational difficulties, in particular because of the apparent equation of the poet (kavíḥ) and the insight (dhī́ḥ), both nominative and both apparent subjects of marmṛjyate. Ge takes them as conjoined nouns with suppressed conjunction, “the poet (and) his thought,” which are both tending to the Unterlage of Agni. This is not a bad solution, but it assumes that the kaví- is the human poet. Since Agni was identified as a “great poet” (mahā́n kavíḥ) in 4d, it’s desirable to maintain this identification if at all possible. Another solution is to take dhī́ḥ as a separate nominal clause, as Re does (“il est la Vision-poétique”). He takes the referent of both kavíḥ and dhī́ḥ to be Agni. WG seem to take dhī́ḥ as the object of the verb, though without comment. This is presumably inspired by the fact that acc. pl. dhiyáḥ does elsewhere serve as object to marmṛjyáte (IX.47.4). However, making dhī́ḥ into an acc. pl. is grammatically difficult (though, I suppose, not impossible).

My solution involves reading the intensive marmṛjyate simultaneously in two syntactically different ways, both of which are paralleled elsewhere in the RV. The stem marmṛjyáte is one of the new-style -yáte intensives, which have medial inflection and passive accent even if they have active semantics and pattern with active stems in their averbo. See, for example, IX.47.4 just cited. (On this type and its origin, see Jamison 1983 [MSS 42: 41-73].) Thus, the poet can be stroking the budhnám in this transitive interpretation, like the many active forms of this root including the act. athem. intensive mármṛj-. But several instances of medial marmṛjyá- have the passive value the morphology implies (e.g., IX.62.13 marmṛjyámāna āyúbhiḥ, of soma), and I take dhī́ḥ as the subject of the verb read this time as a passive. This syntactic pun might be clearer in the publ. tr. if the same word had been used for both readings; better might be “… keeps stroking … is being stroked,” though ‘groom’ is actually better with the insight as subject.

On the syntax and sense of d, see comm. ad X.11.8.

## 09
Ge (/WG) assume that pāda a treats the Paryagnikaraṇa or the ritual act of circling around an object with a firebrand, but jráyaḥ ‘expanse, expansion’ seems to me rather to depict the horizontal spread of the fire out from its original kindling place.


## 10
In pāda a srótaḥ can be either nominative, as appositive to the underlying subject Agni, or accusative, an object parallel to gātúm ūrmím. I chose the second alternative, contra Ge / Re, but either is possible and the meaning is virtually identical.


## 11
revát in b may be either adverbial (as I’ve taken it) or the object, with supplied noun, of ví bhāhi (so, e.g., Ge “Nun strahle … reiches (Gut) aus”). Again either is possible and the effect is essentially the same.
