+++
title = "096"

+++
Agni The first verses of this hymn connect Agni with the semi-divine ancestors and culture heroes of the Ārya: Āyu, Manu, Vivasvant (vs. 2), Bharata (vs. 3), Mātariśvan (vs. 4).


## 01
Most tr. interpret mitrám … sādhan as “they conclude an alliance” (so Re; Ge “Freundschaft”), but since mitrá- is so often a descriptor of Agni as the go-between between gods and men, I assume that Agni is the referent here as well. So also Old SBE.


## 02
This verse attributes primal creative power to Agni first in the ritual realm (ab), then in the cosmic realm (c). Ge (/WG) supply a different verb in c (“bescheint”), presumably because Agni is not usually credited with cosmogonic powers. But there is no contextual support for a new verb here, and in parallel clauses containing only one verb the default interpretation is to supply the same verb with the second clause. Given how much generative power is ascribed to the Vedic sacrifice, it is not surprising that Agni’s ability to engender Manu’s people, that is, those who sacrifice like Manu, can then be extended to his ability to beget the major cosmic features -- esp. as in this enterprise he is partially identified with the sun.

Note that in 4c he is explicitly named as “the begetter of the two worlds” (janitā́ ródasyoḥ) as well as “the finder of the sun” (svarvíd).


## 03
On the Bharata fire as “the focus of worship of multiple ārya clans,” see Proferes 2007: 37.

Though sṛprá- receives various tr., it must be related to sarpís- ‘melted butter’. See EWA s.v. sarpíṣ-; it has nothing to do with √sṛp ‘creep’.


## 04
Contrary to the standard tr., I take pāda a as containing a separate predication: in his capacity as Mātariśvan he ensures prosperity, while as Sun-finder he finds the way.

## 07
The full integration of the refrain into the syntactic structure of the verse is signalled by the shift from nominative reference to Agni to accusative, clear first in kṣā́m in b, since sádanam in a is neuter and could be in either case -- the common use of a morphologically ambiguous form as pivot.


## 08
With the refrain having finally been integrated into the verse in 7, it is abruptly dropped and its final and most salient word, draviṇodā́- explodes in vs. 8.

Though sánara- is a hapax, ‘having superior men’ seems a fairly safe bet, esp.

given semantically parallel vīrávant- in the next pāda. We might of course prefer

*sā́nara- given the init. laryngeal of the ‘man’ word, but in a nonce creation the
phonological history of the 2nd member would no longer be available.
