+++
title = "097"

+++
Agni The grammatically incomplete refrain of this hymn (ápa naḥ śóśucad aghám “blazing away the bad for us”) is introduced first as the first pāda of this hymn and then repeated as 1c. In that verse, the refrain’s participial construction is integrated into the verse structure, modifying the subject of the main verb śuśugdhi in b. This integration is not found again until vs. 6 and continues thereafter till the end of the hymn (vss. 7-8). However, the semantic distance between the verse proper and the refrain narrows as the hymn progresses. In vss. 2-3 there is no explicit mention of Agni, but in vss. 4-5 he appears, as enclitic pronoun + voc. (te agne) in 4 and gen. (agnéḥ) in 5, though neither is in the appropriate case to match the refrain.


## 01
It does not seem worthwhile to try to replicate the difference between the two reduplicated forms, the intensive participle (śośucat) and the perfect imperative (śuśugdhi) in tr. — Re’s tr. of the inten. part., “écartant-par-ton-éclat-puissant,” is a cautionary example of why. WG’s “immer wieder wegflammend” is somewhat less clunky but still gets wearisome in repetition.

## 03-05
These three middle verses, before the refrain becomes reintegrated into the verse, begin identically: prá yát, though the sense of yád in 3-4 differs from that in 5.


## 03
The referent of bhándiṣṭha eṣām “the most fortunate one of these” is not clear.

However, since he is conjoined with “our patrons” and patrons are often conjoined with “us” (as in the next verse), referring to the poet-performers (explicitly II.2.12 stotā́raḥ … sūráyaś ca), it is likely a singer or poet, perhaps even this very poet, referring to himself in the 3rd ps.
