+++
title = "100"

+++
Indra


## 02
In c, the presumed main clause to the relative clauses of ab, I have supplied a verb of motion (“should come”), but it might be better, with Ge and Re, simply to take c as the anticipatory qualifier of the subject (índraḥ) of the refrain in d.

The svébhiḥ of c is positioned between two other masc. pl. instr. and could perhaps be taken with both, though I have tr. it only with évaiḥ because svébhir évaiḥ appears to be a fixed expression: I.62.8, VIII.8.13, VIII.97.3, X.67.11.


## 03
Pāda a with its simile is interpreted variously, with the differences primarily dependent on the construal of the participle dúghānāḥ. On the basis of III.31.10 páyaḥ pratnásya rétaso dúghānāḥ “milking out the milk of their age-old semen,” I take the participle to be transitive and supply as object acc. páyaḥ, on which gen. rétasaḥ is dependent. Since these are the only two occurrences of the stem dúghāna- (as opposed to dúhāna-, etc.) and they share the word rétas-, it seems best to interpret them in the same way. Ge, however, though adducing III.31.10, takes dúghānāḥ as passive, “wie die gemolkenen (Ströme) des Himmelssamens” (sim. Re).

Both Ge and Re also take diváḥ as dependent on rétasaḥ, while I take it as parallel to yásya, both dependent on pánthāsaḥ. The parallel expression in vs. 2 yásya … sū́ryasyeva yā́maḥ “whose course, like that of the sun…” favors my interpr. of diváḥ, though the passages adduced by Ge. (V.17.3, IX.74.1) do show that diváḥ can also qualify rétas-.

Determining the syntactic structure here requires figuring out what image in being depicted. We can begin with the gender paradox that figures prominently in any interpretation: the milk(ing) and the semen. I do not think this can be separated from Indra’s “male powers” (paúmsyebhiḥ) in c, and therefore think, contra most other interpr., that it is Indra’s “paths” that are producing the semen-as-milk. Most interpr. avoid this difficult image by taking dúghānāḥ entirely as part of the simile (the milked-out [streams]), with the property shared by the frame (Indra’s paths) and the simile only the anodyne verb yánti ‘go’. I freely admit that the image produced by my interpr. is, to say the least, not straightforward, but it can be made intelligible and it produces a richer semantics than the alternatives. In vss. 2 and 3 the trajectory of Indra’s journeys is depicted as cosmic: his “course” (yā́maḥ) in 2 is like that of the sun, his “paths” (páthāsaḥ) like those of heaven in 3. (See also his ‘routes’ in 4c.) I therefore see these journeys as visually inscribed in the sky, almost like contrails (however anachronistic that image is for the Vedic period). The cosmic equivalent of these paths of Indras are likely the clouds, which produce rain. Now the refrain of this hymn emphasizes Indra’s connection with the Maruts, and the Maruts are, among other things, the gods associated with the thunderstorm and the monsoon and are closely associated with the production of rain. So, Indra’s journey across the sky with the Maruts can also be seen as producing rain, figuratively called semen because of the Indra’s intensely male character. His “paths” on this journey are compared to the clouds, whose visual “paths” as they move across the sky are deeply familiar and which are the quintessential producers of rain.


## 04
In b sán is one of the (fairly few) examples of the nominative of the pres.

part. to √as that is not concessive (“although being ...”). The phrase sákhibhiḥ sákhā sán is, as Ge points out (n. 4b), structurally identical to I.76.5 kavíbhiḥ kavíḥ sán, where the sán also lacks concessive force.

## 04-05
The pattern of instrumentals set in vs. 4 -- “X with the X-es,” that is, “X among the X-es” -- appears to continue in 5a and c, but the instrumentals there are used differently.


## 05
The participial phrase śravasyā̀ni tū́rvan has a close parallel in VIII.74.10c yásya śrávāṃsi tū́rvatha. I translate the latter as “whose claims to fame you bring to triumph.” Given the similarities I would change the tr. here to “along with the nestmates bringing to triumph (deeds) worthy of fame.”


## 06
The general opinion is that samádana- is simply an extension of samád- ‘battle’; Mayrhofer (EWA s.v. samád-) suggests that it’s a blend of samád- and samáraṇa- ‘clash, battle’. I consider it rather a blend (with suffixal extension) of samád- and máda- ‘exhilaration, elation’, hence ‘battle-elation’ or, in Re’s felicitous tr. ‘l'ivresse-du-combat’. In a nicely balanced expression, just as Indra reduces the battle-fury of the enemy (manyu-mī́ḥ) he raises the battle-elation of those fighting with him. This notion is continued in the next verse, where in pāda a the Maruts cause Indra to enjoy the battle.

Ge and Re tr. sanat as a modal here (but not the repeated examples in vs. 18).

The form of course cannot be a subjunctive, given the augmented thematic forms that belong to this paradigm (ásanat, etc.), and though injunctives can sometimes be modal, there is no contextual reason for such an interpretation.


## 07
The abstract ūtí- ‘help’ is here personified, representing the Maruts. Cf.


## 09
where the identification of ūtáyaḥ and marútaḥ is explicit.

karúṇa- is found only here in the RV; neither here nor in its very few other occurrences in early Vedic (AV 1x, TS 1x) does it exhibit any semantic kinship with later karuṇa- ‘pitiful’, karuṇā ‘pity’, though Mayrhofer (EWA s.v.) makes a valiant effort to connect the meanings.


## 08
The apparent 3rd pl. med. verb apsanta is difficult. Ge simply refuses to translate. Old suggests a connection with √sap but without conviction. Re and WG (though both without disc.) must take it as a desiderative to √āp ‘reach, obtain’ (“… cherchent à gagner,” “… wollen … erreichen”). But, though the standard desid. to this root, ī́psati, is not attested until the AV, the lack of reduplication and the short root vowel make the stem apsa- an unlikely desid. (This analysis is also rejected by Ge in n. 8a.) I tentatively suggest that it belongs to the putative root √bhas ‘breathe’, which Thieme (Gramm. Kat. 539) suggests underlies the various compounds in -psu-, as well as Grk. ψυχή (see EWA s.vv. psu- and bhas2 ) and that it means ‘inspire’. It would then be the imperfect of a root pres. (or possibly a root aor.). Though we might expect a weak form of the middle ending, *apsata, this may well be an -anta replacement for act. -an of the type identified and described in Jamison 1979 (IIJ 21).

Old rejects a derivation from √bhas, but presumably referring to the other √bhas ‘bite’.


## 09
The standard tr., also Old and Tichy (1995: 42), take sáṃgṛbhītā as the nom. sg. of an agentive -tar- stem, parallel to sánitā in pāda c, a form that should have fullgrade in the root syllable, *sáṃgrabhītā. I see no reason to reject the past participle it appears to be, in order to assume a wrongly formed alternative. Although RVic poets often make use of morphological parallelism, it is not a compositional requirement; in fact, they often take pleasure in expressing semantically parallel notions in morphologically dissimilar garb (see a nice example in 6a above, not to mention instr.

savyéna, loc. dakṣiṇé in this same hemistich). The verb yamati of pāda a can easily be read with b as well, and sáṃgṛbhītā also modifies the neut. pl. kṛtā́ni with no grammatical difficulty.


## 10
On grā́ma- as ‘horde, roving band’ see comm. ad X.27.19.


## 11
The verb samájāti lacks an overt object; the standard tr. supply ‘booty’.

This lexeme sometimes takes an acc. expressing the prize one wins (e.g., cows in I.33.3), but other times the enemy one defeats (e.g., VII.32.7), and I see no way to decide here.

Note how (saṃ)ájā(ti) echoes jā(míbhir) … ájā(mibhir).


## 12
The hapax camrīṣá- is taken by the standard tr. as a personal name. This tactic may be safe, but it ignores the word’s similarity to several others, particularly the hapax camríṣ- in I.56.1, a word usually rendered as ‘ladle’. Old, ad I.56.1, makes the offhand suggestion that our camrīṣá- is related to camara- ‘yak’, a word not attested until the gṛhya sūtras. Although ‘yak’ might work in our passage, the gap in attestation and the morphological differences make this connection quite shaky.

More promising are several words found in the RV for soma cup/beaker: camasáand camū́-, as well as the root cam ‘sip, slurp’ (see Gotō 1987: 136). camrīṣá (and camríṣ-) may be secondarily built to a *cam-ra- derived from this root (for the suffixes -īṣá- and -íṣ- see AiG II.2.462-63 and 364-67 respectively) and thus derivationally parallel to cam-ū́- and cam-asá-. I therefore take camrīṣá- as belonging to the same semantic sphere as camasá- and camū́- and as the designation of a large cup or beaker. The problem that then arises is why Indra would be compared to such a thing; this aberrant simile may be responsible for the resistance to connecting camrīṣá- with the other cam- words. But this is only an apparent problem. The point of comparison is Indra’s vastness (śávasā), the capaciousness with which he encompasses the peoples and natural features of the world (see also 14ab). An exactly parallel image is found in I.61.9, where Indra is called “a reverberant tankard” (svarír ámatraḥ).


## 13
Most tr. take a and b as separate clauses, to avoid direct comparison of the mace (vájraḥ) with the bellowing (raváthaḥ), but I consider this another example of the condensed and deliberately off-balance syntax of this hymn: the mace that roars is compared directly to the similar sound emanating from heaven; in other words, the verb krandati in the frame is transformed into the noun raváthaḥ in the simile.


## 14
Having described the vastness of Indra’s power throughout the hymn, the poet now implicitly attributes the same vastness to his own hymn (ukthám) by juxtaposing it with Indra’s mā́nam ‘measure’, which encompasses the two worlds.

With Old I take mā́nam ukthám as “coordinated and asyndetic.”


## 17
The first hemistich appears to contain a pun on the patronymic of the poets named in cd, vārṣāgirā́ḥ -- with vṛ́ṣṇe in a, corresponding to the 1st compound member, and (abhí) gṛṇanti in b, to the root √gṝ ‘sing, greet’ found in the 2nd. The pun supports the derivation of vārṣagirá- from *vṛṣā-gír- ‘having a bullish song’ (so Gr) rather than from *varṣā-gír- ‘welcoming the rain’, as suggested by Scar (112) and endorsed by Mayrhofer (Personnamen, 82-83). The semantics of the proposed bull-compound seem superior to the proposed rain-compound, and the pun provides further evidence in its favor.

