+++
title = "101"

+++
Indra


## 01
Supply púraḥ with fem. kṛṣṇágarbhāḥ in b. So, explicitly, Old, but standard tr. follow.


## 02
The adj. aśúṣa- almost always occurs with śúṣṇa- (6 of its 7 occurrences: II.14.5, 19.6; IV.16.2; VI.20.4, 31.3, and here) and is a textbook example of a phonological figure. It is generally taken as a derivative of √aś i ‘eat’, meaning ‘gefrässig’ (standard tr., as well as Gr, AiG II.2.491, EWA s.v. aś i ) -- hence my ‘insatiable’, which is meant to produce a similar phonetic figure. I do wonder, though, if it’s not a derivative of √śvas ‘snort, pant’, which would make it also an etymological figure with śúṣṇa-, used proleptically to mean “(wrenched him down) (to become) breathless.” The phrase is almost always the object of a verb of violence, as here, and the proleptic adjective fits these contexts. For similar accent on a negated -a-stem compound, cf. akṣára- ‘imperishable’, ajára- ‘unaging’, adábha- ‘undeceptive’. Vs. 5c has a similar proleptic phrase, dásyūm̐r ádharān “(brought) the Dasyus low.”


## 03
Pāda a lacks a verb. Tr. supply variously: Ge “sich fügen,” Re “ont assigné,” WG “folgen.” I supply a form of √vṛdh ‘strengthen, increase’ on the basis of formulaically similar VIII.15.8 táva dyaúr indra paúṃsyam, prthiv ̥ ī́vardhati śrávaḥ, and other passages where paúṃsyam is obj. of √vrdh ̥ (I.155.3, VIII.6.31).


## 04
For the putative root √ār ‘recognize’ (< ‘recognize as an Ārya’?), see comments ad VIII.16.6 as well as Old (Noten) on this vs. ### 06
The nonce form jigyúbhiḥ to a supposed stem jigyú- is surely an attempt at an instr. pl. of the pf. part., which is well attested (jigīvā́n, jigyúṣ-), but whose instr.

pl. ought to be the monstrous*jigivádbhiḥ or (improperly using the prevocalic weak stem) *jigyúrbhiḥ or *jigyū́bhiḥ.


## 07
For the ring that connects this last Jagatī vs. with vs. 1, see publ. intro.

For the buried pun involving prth̥ ú jráyaḥ and the referent of yóṣā, Rodasī, see comm. ad I.168.7.


## 08
Ge and Re take mādáyāse only with b and supply the copula with a. The strict parallelism of the two clauses favors taking the verb of b with both, as I do, but the question may be whether Indra can reach exhilaration in heaven or can only do so at a human soma offering.


## 10
The referent of the dual dhéne “two streams” is not clear to me. Ge takes it as ‘lips’ (< ‘the sucking ones’; see ad I.2.3), but in no other passage is ‘lips’ a possibility. Bloomfield (JAOS 46) suggests it is an elliptical dual, for prayers and libations, expressed by dhénāḥ and dhā́rāḥ respectively in III.1.9, but this relies on an outdated interpretation of dhénā- (see comm. ad I.2.3). H.-P. Schmidt (Fs.

Nyberg) also considers it an elliptical dual, but is himself somewhat elliptical about what the ellipsis would be -- it seems that he considers it both literal (streams of milk) and figurative (streams of song). But RVic poets elsewhere do not resort to the dual to express a literal/metaphorical split. Re takes it as two streams of soma (without identifying which these would be), and WG as two milk-streams (again unidentified). I am inclined to assume that it has been attracted into the dual from the more regular pl. dhénāḥ by the immediately preceding śípre ‘two lips’, given the strict parallelism in syntax and phonology in the two clauses in this pāda: ví ṣyasva śípre ví sṛjasva dhéne, although the existence of another dual dhéne in V.30.9 in an obscure context, may weaken this attraction hypothesis.

