+++
title = "102"

+++
Indra


## 01
As indicated in the publ. intro., I interpret the first half-verse very differently from the standard tr. The three major deviations from the ordinary interpretations are the following: 1) I take te in pāda a as referring to the poet, who is also the subj. of the 1st ps. verb prá bhare. This is the most radical of the departures and requires the most special pleading. 2) Rather than the loc. sg. of neut. stotrá- ‘praise song’ (a loc. not found elsewhere in the RV), I take stotré as the dat. sg. of the agent noun stotár- ‘praiser’, coreferential with te in a. This dat. is very common in the RV. 3) I take the first two words of b (asyá stotré) with the main cl. in a, starting the rel. cl. with dhiṣáṇā. This accords better with the placement patterns of yá- subordinators, which ordinarily do not follow more than one constituent.

As for the first departure, as I have pointed out elsewhere (see comm. on I.70.10), the 2nd sg. middle forms of the impv. (prá) bharasva/bhárasva (I.79.10, VII.88.1) are specialized for the self-address of the poet. Here, with the middle prá bhare I think the poet is speaking in the 1st ps. but addressing himself in the 2nd. I do have to admit that prá √bhr̥+ DAT. otherwise has the divinity in the dative and so the te in 2nd position in the verse would immediately be interpreted as referring to Indra -

- and, I have to argue, only as the verse unfolded would the referent be reinterpreted
as the poet. Despite the complications of my interpretation, it solves the difficulties that arise from the standard interpr. First, that interpr. must take the maháḥ as coreferential with te (e.g., Re “à toi (qui es) grand”), but this makes the whole phrase genitival, and, as noted, the prá √bhṛ construction takes a dative (of the many exx., cf. I.143.1 prá … dhītím agnáye, … bhare). Then a referent must be supplied for the asyá opening pāda b; most supply “the singer.” (Under my interpretation, the genitives maháḥ … asyá are construed together and refer to Indra, while te … stotré is the datival phrase.) And the problems I already mentioned, that stotré is otherwise only the dative of the agent noun and that yád comes too late to govern the whole b pāda, also remain in the standard tr.

But what does it mean, in my interpretation, when the poet says “I present to you this thought,” with both “I” and “you” referring to himself. As I suggest in the publ. intro., the poet is announcing that he has finished composing the hymn, which can now be recited to the god at the ritual performance, also by himself (the poet). A slightly attenuated alternative would be to take te as referring to a different member of the larger group of ritual performers, who is charged with reciting the hymn that “I” have just composed.


## 02
The phrase dyā́vākṣā́mā pṛthivī́is striking because pṛthivī́‘earth’ either doubles the less common ‘earth’ word kṣā́mā in the du. dvandva or else serves as the epithet (‘the broad’) it historically was. Indeed because pṛthivī́is grammatically ambiguous (sg. or du.), it could modify both heaven and earth, or it could stand as a second elliptical du. referring to both. The same phrase is found in III.8.8 and, with - bhū́mī rather than kṣā́mā, in X.65.4.

I believe that there is a closer connection between the two halves of the verse than the standard tr. seem to. In my opinion the sun and moon roam alternately in order to provide constant illumination, so that we can see Indra’s “wondrous form lovely to see” (darśatáṃ vápuḥ) and therefore put trust in him, that is, in his existence. Remember that a constant source of worried speculation in the RV is whether Indra exists or not -- a worry that is regularly alleviated by his epiphany on our ritual ground. Here the mere sight of his form will allay our worries and allow us to trust that he exists. Ge attributes the actions of cd just to the fact that Indra is the creator of sun and moon, while Re has us looking at the sky.


## 03
Re takes c with d as a single clause, but I follow Ge (/WG) in supplying ‘help’ from ab as the verb of c. Passages like I.176.5 ājā́u ... prā́vaḥ... vājínam support this latter interpr.


## 05
hávamānā(ḥ) is one of the uncommon, but not vanishingly rare examples of a pres. part. functioning as the main verb of a clause. See also 103.4 below.

Given the fronted full pronoun asmā́kam in c and its contrast with the various peoples in ab, more emphasis should have been placed on “our” in the publ. tr.


## 06
I tr. amita- as ‘matchless’ rather than ‘immeasurable’ because of its etym.

connection with pratimā́na- ‘match’ (6c, 8a), amātrá- ‘matchless’ (7c).

The Pp. reads akalpáḥ in c, and following this reading has led to very “free” (so Old) tr. of the word and interpr. of the syntax (e.g., Ge “Durch seine Stärke macht Indra ein Gegengewicht unmöglich”; Re is even freer), where “(macht) unmöglich” for akalpá- seems distinctly odd and the syntactic relation between it and pratimā́nam is loose at best. The difficulties disappear if we instead read loc. akalpé.

As Old points out, by accent the word should be a bahuvrīhi. The one example of kálpa- in the RV seems to refer to arrangements, ritual or martial (IX.9.7: ávā kálpeṣu naḥ pumas, támāṃsi soma yódhyā “help us in our arrangements, o male; the shades of darkness must be fought”), and a bahuvrīhi “without arrangement/order” modifying an underlying ‘battle’-word (perhaps khaja- ‘tumult’ extracted from immediately preceding khajaṃkaráḥ) makes perfect sense in context.

This leaves an equational sentence índraḥ … pratimā́nam ójasā “by his strength Indra is the match,” and we need only supply the specification of what he is the match for. I sc. ‘all’ on the basis of II.12.9c, also describing Indra: yó víśvasya pratimā́nam babhūva. However, esp. in conjunction with 8ab, it might instead be the earth, or heaven and earth. Cf. I.52.13 (also of Indra) tvám bhuvaḥ pratimā́nam pṛthivyā́ḥ (also 12); X.111.5 índro diváḥ pratimā́nam pṛthivyā́ḥ.


## 07
As in 2b we find an original epithet of the earth, mahī́‘the great one’, which comes to be used as a straight designation of it, doubling a word that may also refer to the earth, dhiṣáṇā. This combination also occurs elsewhere (III.31.13, X.96.10); the former passage is an esp. close parallel to this one, in that mahī́… dhiṣáṇā sets Indra on the attack. With Kü (224: “Dich ... hat die Dhiṣaṇā entflammt”) I therefore take titviṣe here as transitive, though in its other occurrences it is not. For another passage in which the earth aids Indra in his heroic deeds, see IV.16.7b prā́vat te vájram pṛthivī́…


## 08
Contra most tr., I prefer to take ab as separate clauses, rather than as anticipating bhúvanam in c.

The difference between triviṣṭi-dhā́tu- and tri-dhā́tu- (used of bhū́ma in IV.42.4) is not clear to me. The stem triviṣṭí- on its own (IV.6.4, 15.2) qualifies Agni’s ritual actions as performed “with triple toil” (√viṣ ‘be active, labor’), but that sense doesn’t work here. As far as I can see, it’s a way of indicating that the divisions each have three divisions of their own, but the semantic pathway to this value is unclear.


## 09
The standard tr. take upamanyú- as a PN. Mayrhofer (Personenname) voices skepticism, however, and I see no reason not to take it as an adjective qualifying the bard (kārú-). Though manyú- ‘battle fury’ can be a negative quality, it often is not so viewed (esp. when it belongs to the gods), and the passionate energy it implies would be a good trait for a poet.

The impv. kṛṇotu in d should be read (with the standard tr.) with both c and d, with slightly different values: in c it has a straight “make X Y” sense, while in d it participates in the idiom puráḥ √kṛ ‘make (i.e., put) in front’.


## 10
In b the singular loc. ājā́appears to be modified by two loc. plurals árbheṣu and mahátsu (so Old, Ge, Re); cf. I.81.1 mahátsu ājíṣūtém árbhe with a different imbalance of number. WG take the plurals separate from the singular (“im Wettkampf um kleine (Dinge) und um grosse”) (see their note). This is possible but unnecessary.

