+++
title = "103"

+++
Indra


## 01
On the interpr. of this verse, see publ. intro. Although my interpr. generally follows Ge et al., I take the first two pādas as referring disjunctively to the two locations of Indra’s power (not just to the heavenly one), an idea that is more straightforwardly expressed in c, which I consider grammatically connected to ab.

For the notion in d of a ketú- linking heaven and earth, see III.55.2 and VII.9.1. Despite its position I take iva as marking the following ketú- as a simile.


## 02
The presence of the shadowy Rauhiṇa here (otherwise only II.12.12) is an intrusion in this Vṛtra-oriented verse. The verb that governs him, ví √bhid ‘split apart’, returns in the next verse with ‘strongholds” as its object. The distraction of verb and preverb with object in the middle (ábhinad rauhiṇáṃ ví) is almost iconic for the splitting apart. For a potentially similar ex. see V.30.7.


## 03
The iconic splitting of verb and preverb in 2c is complemented here in b by the polarized positioning of the NP “Dāsa strongholds,” the object of vibhindán, at the beginning and end of the pāda: #púraḥ … dā́sīḥ#, while the preverb+verb are univerbated in the participle (as against 2c).

Ge (/WG) take śraddádhāna ójaḥ as transitive-reflexive, “trusting in his own power,” but as Old argues, śrád √dhā, a signature word of this set of hymns, expresses the trust that people have in Indra, and the medial participle should therefore be taken as a passive (so also Re). For the other occurrences of śrád √dhā that support this interpr., see vs. 5 in this hymn (structurally paired with 3; see publ.

intro.), as well as I.102.2, 104.6-7.


## 04
The syntax and purport of this verse are somewhat murky, and my interpretation differs from the various other standard ones (though it is closest to Re).

I will only present mine here, without cataloguing the differences from the others.

First, I take tád ūcúṣe as a separate clause, with a new clause beginning in the middle of pāda a with mā́nuṣemā́yugā́ni, which I take as an acc. of extent of time, as it is several times elsewhere (e.g., II.2.2).

The rest of the verse concerns the epithets or “names” Indra has and, in part, how he acquires them: maghávan- ‘bounteous’ in b, vajrín- ‘mace-bearer’ in c, and sūnúḥ (śávasaḥ) ‘son (of strength)’ in d. On Indra’s acquisition of a sequence of names, see also VIII.80. I take c as containing the predication of the main clause, with the pres. part. upaprayán functioning as the main verb (see I.102.5 above).

The referent of tád in the first clause is unclear. Though it may be nā́ma, as most tr. think, I’m inclined to take it as an internal reference to the hymn that the poet is presenting to him.

In d the expected epithet “son of strength” is truncated, lacking the śávasaḥ, but the phonologically and derivationally parallel śrávase that immediately follows sūnúḥ would evoke it.

On this verse as an omphalos, see publ. intr.


## 07
For the “deep-structure pun” in pāda b, see the publ. intro. and Jamison 1982/83 and 2007: 110-12. That the action in this clause is not to be taken literally is, I think, signalled by the iva in the main clause in pāda a, which introduces the heroic deed (vīryàm) supposedly depicted in b. My “as it were” renders the iva.

In c Ge takes the wives (pátnīḥ) as the wives of the gods, but in this Vṛtra context it makes more sense to take them as the (fem.) waters whom Indra had just released. Recall that in the great Indra-Vṛtra hymn I.32 (as well as in V.30.5, VIII.97.18), the waters are called dāsápatnīḥ (vs. 11), “whose husband was a dāsa” (that is, Vṛtra). This might be clearer if the publ. tr. read “His wives.” The interpretation of the final part of this pāda, váyaś ca, is disputed. Ge (/WG) and Re take it as an acc. of váyas- conjoined with tvā (“dir … und deiner Kraft”). However, already Sāy considered it the nom. pl. of ví- ‘bird’, which is equally possible grammatically, and I have adopted this interpr. (Old seems tacitly to accept this interpretation, by citing X.80.5, which also contains birds.) Sāy’s suggested referent is the Maruts, which makes good sense. The two groups on site at the Vṛtra battle and able to give encouragement and praise to Indra then were the waters and the Maruts, who, in many accounts of the myth, provided Indra with moral and tactical support.


## 08
kúyava- ‘bringing bad harvest’ is ordinarily an epithet of Śuṣṇa, and I so take it here even though it is separated from śúṣṇam by another PN. I ascribe this position to the fact that kúyava- always appears after the caesura. However, in the next hymn (104.3) Kuyava seems to be an independent personage, or rather there is no overt mention of Śuṣṇa -- so perhaps he should be accorded an independent existence here as well (with the standard tr.).

