+++
title = "104"

+++
Indra


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., s u vānó nā́rvā in b contains a triple pun, since the participle s u vānáḥ can be read in three different ways: 1) as nom. sg. to the adj.

svāná- ‘sounding’ (√svan ‘sound’)(so Old, Re, WG); 2) as athem. med. part. to √sū ‘impel’, used passively (so Ge); 3) as athem. med. part. to √su ‘press’, also used passively (mentioned by Ge in n. 1b). In this last case the simile would compare Indra seating himself on the ritual ground to soma placed at the soma press. The diction in the rest of this hemistich is quite similar to that found in soma hymns. Cf., e.g., IX.70.7 ā́yóniṃ sómaḥ súkrtḁ ṃ ní ṣīdati, with yóni-, a form of √kṛ characterizing it, and the verb ní √sad. In the publ. tr. only the first of these is given, because including a set of bracketed alternatives -- "[/ like a steed having been impelled [/ like (soma) the steed being pressed]" -- seemed disruptive and distracting.

Pāda b contains the word váyaḥ, which raises the same question as in 103.7: is this the plural to ví- ‘bird’ or the neuter sg. s-stem váyas- ‘vitality, vigor’? Neither of them is an entirely natural object to vimúcyā ‘having released’ in this context. Ge (/WG) opt for the latter, Old and Re for the birds. In the publ. tr. I treat it as a pun, but I am not certain what either phrase would represent.

In d váhīyasaḥ is of course a comparative, but, again, so rendering it would be awkward.


## 02
Unlike the standard tr. I take the two acc. plurals in b, tā́n … ádhvanaḥ, separately, with the first referring to the ‘men’ (náraḥ) of pāda a. One might object that since they “have come” (guḥ) to him in that pāda, he has no need to go to them in the next, but, at least in English, “go to for help” is tantamount to “ask for help” and need not involve any actual travel on the part of the men. And in any case he would need to join them at the place of battle. I.71.9, which contains the phrase ádhvanaḥ sadhá éti without tā́n, may support me.

For the pf. opt. jagamyāt, see Jamison 2009 (East and West); as exhaustively demonstrated there, the pf. opt. has no special “perfect” value and here means simply “should go.” The publ. tr. reflects the emendation of ścamnan to *śamnan, suggested by Gr and argued for in Jamison 1983: 103 n. 62. I am now less certain about this emendation than I was then, being more sympathetic to Old’s questioning how this corruption could have arisen. On the other hand, the Aves. gerundive scąϑβa- (V.13.40), adduced by Ge as a cognate to a supposed root √ścam, provides no support for a separate etymon of this shape, since it is, with Insler, better attributed to the root *skand ‘break’, well attested in Avestan and elsewhere in Iranian. For details see Jamison 1983 loc. cit.


## 03
For my general interpr. of this verse see publ. intro. I will not discuss the various other interpretations in detail here or repeat what I said in the intro. I will point out that most tr. take the subject of both a and b to be the Śiphā river in 4, but this assumes that a and b are essentially repetitions of each other, which would constitute an unartful duplication in a very artful hymn. Since pādas cd contain dual feminines, it makes more sense to take ab as an implicit “the one … the other” construction, with the two subjects the same as the duals in cd. One problem with this interpr. is that the verb áva … bharate in pāda a lacks an overt object; I suggest in the intro. that it might be defilement or pollution that is also removed ritually by the avabhṛthá bath at the end of the classic Vedic sacrifice.

In d we find a periphrastic passive construction: haté … syātām “may the two be smashed.” Though this periphrasis is somewhat unusual, even a stray thought of what the 3rd du. middle opt. of the passive of √han would be (*hanyeyātām) may explain the substitution. According to Macdonell (VG), such forms are not attested in Vedic.


## 04
Likewise consult the publ. intro. for my interpr. of this verse.

In b prá … tirate, whose regular object is ā́yus- ‘lifetime’ (which I supply here), plays off the name Āyu in the previous pāda. With Old and WG I supply ‘dawns’ with pū́rvābhiḥ, on the basis of V.48.2, adduced by Old.

I supply Sarasvatī in c, because the only other occurrence of vīrápatnī (VI.49.7) refers to Sarasvatī.


## 05
Again, consult the publ. intro. As noted there, I think the unidentified female in b is Dawn, who leads the Ārya forces across the river(s) and against the Dasyu.

The other standard tr. take her rather as Saramā, Indra’s canine sidekick, on the fragile basis of III.31.6: the only point of contact between the two passages being the rather generic jānatī́gāt “recognizing, she went.” I see no reason to introduce Saramā here; Dawn has been anticipated by the apparent reference to the dawns in 4b (pū́rvābhiḥ), and the revealing (ádarśi -- a standard item of Uṣas vocabulary) of the Dasyu’s streambed/strategy could easily happen at dawn.

In d niṣṣapín- is a hapax, but ‘without care, careless’ (√sap ‘serve, care for’) makes sense.


## 07
The śrád √dhā lexeme is repeated here from the immediately preceding pāda (6d; cf. also I.103.3, 5). Curiously the announced “trust” seems to be undercut by manye “I think.” The phrase te asmai expressing the recipient of the trust requires some comment. Ge seems to take te as a dative, parallel to mahatá indriyā́ya in 6d, and asmai adverbially (“dafür”). But 6d also contains a te, which must be the genitive limiting the dat. phrase, and such an interpretation fits better here, with te dependent on asmai. What is the referent of asmai, whose referent should already be present in the discourse because of the lack of accent on asmai? The easiest interpretation is that it simply picks up indriyā́ya of 6d (so Re), but again, as in 3ab, this would seem an unartful duplication. Although my interpr. requires taking into account a longer stretch of discourse, it avoids the repetitive scenario. In I.103.1 Indra is credited with indriyá- in two locations, heaven and earth, and I think the dual nature of this indriyá- is what is at issue here: the heavenly one in 6d, the one right here (hence the near-deictic asmai) in 7a. So although asmai picks up the indriyā́ya of 6d, it also refers to a different aspect of this referent.

Hoffmann (1967: 53, followed by WG) tentatively suggests taking cd as a single clause. This avoids the need to supply a verb in a, but the “unprepared womb” (Hoffmann’s “an unbereiteter Stätte”) of c does not seem to have much to do semantically with d.

The object phrase váya āsutím in d, in conjunction with the dat. part.

kṣúdhyadbhyaḥ ‘hungering’, invites an interpretation of the pair as “food and drink” (Ge “stärkende Speise und Trank”; Hoffmann just “Speise und Trank”; WG “Nahrung und Trank”). But the abstract nature of váyas- should be respected, and I also doubt that āsutí- is just any drink, rather than referring to the soma pressing. As for what it all means -- I would suggest that cd be interpreted in the context of the rest of the hymn, particularly the outer framework depicting Indra’s aid to the Ārya in conflict. They are here asking him not to drop them into battle without proper means (“into an unprepared womb”); the d pāda then expresses what they need: vital energy, that is, the physical and mental vigor required for combat, and the soma pressing, that is, the ritual means to attract Indra and secure his aid. Vs. 9 then issues the invitation to the soma drinking.


## 08
This verse details various possible bad outcomes if they do not manage to secure his aid. As indicated in the publ. intro., I take the “eggs” (āṇḍā́) and “cups” (pā́trā) as slangy references to male and female genitalia, or in the latter case perhaps better ‘wombs’. I tr. -jānuṣāṇi loosely ‘contents’, but if the “cups” are wombs, then ‘progeny, offspring, brood’ would work.

