+++
title = "105"

+++
All Gods For the structure and meaning of the hymn as a whole see the publ. intro. as well as Jamison 2007: 82-85. In what follows here I will comment only on the details of particular verses.


## 01
Most tr. take suparṇáḥ in b as referring to the moon (candrámāḥ) in a, but in fact when suparṇá- refers to a heavenly body, it is always the sun. In keeping with the depiction of cosmic and earthly order at the beginning of the hymn, the regular alternation of the journeys of sun and moon opens the verse.

Most tr. take vidyutaḥ as referring not to the lightning flashes the word usually denotes, but to stars -- a departure that is simply incomprehensible to me.

The point of this verse seems fairly clear: three different sources of light in heaven are mentioned: moon, sun, and lightning. The alternation and the courses of sun and moon are predictable and regular, but that of the lightning is not -- as “they do not find your track” announces.

As stated in the publ. intro., I think the refrain is calling on Heaven and Earth to bear witness to the poet’s musings. The double genitive (or dat.-gen.) me asyá, with accented demonstrative, contrasts with te asmai in the last hymn (by the same poet), I.104.7a. In that passage I take unaccented asmai as picking up a referent already in the discourse, indriyá- in 6d (in accord with the usual distribution of the accented and unaccented oblique forms of the demonstrative). Here I take it as referring to a referent not yet in the discourse, the poet’s speech, again in accord with the usual distribution. Ge (/WG) oddly tr. as if it were a loc. (“in solcher Lage” / “in dieser Lage”; sim. Scar). Re takes it as coreferential with me: “moi tel (que je suis).” Old (ZDMG 61.826 [KlSch.257]) is closest to my interpr. For a somewhat similar expression see II.32.1ab, also X.10.5 in the Yama/Yamī hymn, in which Yama asserts that Heaven and Earth know “this” about them: véda nāv asyá prthivī́utá dyaúḥ.


## 02
Although pāda a lacks a verb, the parallel VIII.79.5 arthíno yánti céd ártham suggests a form of ‘go’.

The rest of the verse depicts sex between a married couple, a particularly important activity in maintaining earthly order and continuity. The mutual action, expressed by the middle dual tuñjā́te, probably refers to the expressing of semen, as in d, although the sexual juices of both husband and wife might be meant. In d either the husband or the wife may be the subject of duhe, depending in part on which root the gerund paridā́ya is assigned to: √dā ‘give’ (with pári ‘deliver, surrender’) or √dā ‘bind’. I favor a pun.


## 03
The first half-verse expresses fears about cosmic order, the second about earthly order as maintained by the sacrifice. The verb in b, áva pādi, also picks up the sex/procreation theme of 2cd, in that áva √pad is an idiom specialized for miscarriage (Jamison, Hyenas, 203-4).


## 04
Most tr. take avamám as modifying yajñám, but I take it as referring to the addressee, namely Agni (more clearly identified by his messenger role in b, dūtáḥ), in the usual double acc. construction with √pṛch. For Agni as avamá- see IV.1.5 sá tváṃ no agne 'vamó bhavotī́. The poet asks Agni about the fate of the sacrifice/hymn (the “truth,” ṛtám) when it has been offered: where does it go and does anyone get and keep it (in heaven). He wants Agni to answer, because Agni, as the messenger, has access to both worlds.


## 05
Just as Agni was located in his realm, as the nearest one, in vs. 4, here the gods’ location is given before they are asked their questions. The poet now worries about what happens to his “truth” once it disappears from his sight and enters the realm of the gods -- is his “truth” theirs? Where did the offering he dispatched to them end up? Note the number discrepancy in triṣú … rocané. Though it is possible to separate the two words (so WG) “in the luminous realm, in the three (worlds),” this seems unnec., esp. in light of expressions like I.102.8 trī́ṇi rocanā́, V.69.1 trī́rocanā́.

Better to assume a truncated rocané(ṣu).


## 06
The formation of dharṇasí- is unclear; AiG II.237 classifies it as having the almost unparalleled suffix -así-, and if it is formed to √dhṛ, as seems likely, the intrusive -n- is another problem (though cf. RV hapax dharṇí-). The -n- could perhaps be gotten from an extreme reduction of the -man-stem(s) dharmán- / dhárman-, but the rest is hard to generate.

The function of the word in its pāda is also unclear, as there is no obvious neut. for it to modify. (This adj. is otherwise always masc. and generally modifies soma, which does not help here.) I take the two syntactically parallel pādas a and b as each incomplete, to be completed by the other. In other words, I supply neut.

cakṣaṇam from b in a, and the neut. adj. dharṇasí from a in b.

The publ. tr. fails to tr. vaḥ in a, so modify the tr. to “Is your (vision) of truth steadfast?” This helps solve one of the small puzzles of the verse: given Varuṇa in b and Aryaman in c, we might expect Mitra in a -- but instead we have “you,” as in 5c, referring to the gods in general. As for the larger meaning of the questions, it may be that the poet is asking whether rt̥á is always the same (= pūrvyám r̥tám of 4c and pratnā́... ā́hutiḥ of 5d) or whether the gods change the rules on us.


## 07
I take the force of purā́+ PRES as past progressive / habitual: “was always speaking, used to speak.” Since the verse contrasts the previous behavior of the speaker (a good ritualist, a hard-working poet) with his current mentally unhinged state, I take tám mā as “this (same) me” -- -- identifying the new careworn me with the old unfazed me. However, the nearly rhyming 8a (see below) may have had something to do with the tám here.

Note that ādhíyaḥ occupies the same metrical position as dūḍhíyaḥ in 6d.


## 08
Pāda a is almost a rhyme form with 7c tám mā viyanti ādhíyaḥ / 8a sám mā tapanti abhitaḥ, and 8c ví adanti mā́dhíyaḥ cleverly picks up viyanti ādhíyaḥ of 7c in a different metrical form (post-caesura trimeter, instead of dimeter).

Unlike the standard tr., I take the ribs (párśavaḥ) as a second simile, not marked with a simile particle (unless also covered by the preceding iva) because in the hymn in general the poet seems to express a “higher” distress than a backache -- instead a questioning of his previous mode of existence and his religious beliefs. That pṛṣṭyāmayī́‘having a stitch in his side’ in 18d is also in a simile gives further support to the simile interpr. here.

## 09-10
As noted in the publ. intro., these verses are the omphalos and are marked, as often, by responsion and numerology. They seem to express the poet’s vision of his connection with his distant ancestor Trita Āptya and also his vision of (somewhat unclear) cosmic phenomena.


## 09
Various referents have been suggested for the seven reins. I tentatively take them as the seven seers (note the phonological echo between raśmáyah and ṛ́ṣayaḥ), which would allow a connection to be established both with the poetic tradition and, if the seven seers are already equated with the stars in the Big Dipper (in the Great Bear) as they are later, with that astronomical structure. That the next verse also presents what appears to be an astronomical image supports this interpr. Moreover the phrase tátrā me nā́bhir ā́tatā “to there my umbilical cord is stretched” recalls the idiom “tie navel to navel” (sám / ā́√dā), which asserts a family connection between the earthly poet and divine or semi-divine figures and elements in heaven. See comm. ad I.139.1.

The verb ‘rasps’ (rebhati) may convey the sound of old man's voice, as would be appropriate for an ancestor.


## 10
I have no idea what the exact referent of the “five oxen” is, but given their stationing in the middle of heaven and their apparent retrograde motion, it seems that an astronomical body (a constellation?) is referred to. Ge (/WG) take ní vāvṛtuḥ as “sind … verschwunden,” but ní √vṛt ordinarily means ‘turn back / home’, of bovines, and given that the subject is oxen, albeit metaphorical ones, this idiom works fine in the passage.


## 11
I am completely baffled about what this verse actually describes, although an astronomical reference is very likely. The many clashing interpretations of the verse do not inspire confidence in any of them. I will simply point out that we seem invited to identify the suparṇā́ḥ here with the ukṣáṇaḥ of 10a on the basis of the repetition of the phrase mádhye (…) diváḥ and the semantic match between tasthúḥ “they stand” (10b) and āsate “they sit” (11a), though the sg. suparṇáḥ in vs. 1 should also be recalled.

## 13-14
I do not know why 13cd and 14ab are virtually identical. Perhaps it shows that the poet/sacrificer can now make the ritual happen. The yakṣi of the 13d is a praiṣa of sorts, and then the poet somewhat triumphantly reports that his command worked.

## 12-15
This set of verses forms a small internal ring: 12 and 15 contain ṛtám and návyam / návyaḥ (though not to the same stem: návya- in 12, the comparative návyas- in 15, both neut. sg.), while 13-14 contain the responsive sattó (…) manuṣvád ā́, devā́n … vidúṣtaraḥ.


## 16
Contains echoes of a number of previous vss. First, the asaú yáḥ opening recalls the amī́yé openings of the two omphalos vss. (9-10), as well as the the amī́yé of 5a, which anticipates the omphalos.

The “Ādityan path” (with one of the very rare instances of ādityá- used adjectivally), which is not to be overstepped (ná … atikráme), recalls exactly 6cd … aryamṇáḥ … pathā́, áti krāmema “Along the path of Aryaman might we pass beyond [/step over] …” The path theme is also found in 11c and later in 18b.

The pravā́cyam of b repeats the proclamation theme that has also been prominent in the hymn: pravā́cyam in 10c (an omphalos vs.), supravācanam (12b).


## 17
This verse, which provides Ge with his “Trita im Brunnen” interpretation, does not seem to me to fit into the rest of the hymn, though Trita is found in 9cd in a context much more in harmony with the rest. In the next hymn, I.106.6, it’s Kutsa the poet who find himself in the same plight and calls upon Indra for help. The situation fits I.106 much better than I.105, and I wonder if it has been adapted from I.106.


## 18
On the destabilizing effect of this verse on the structure of the hymn, see publ. intro.

The pāda-final position of hí in b is quite curious.

