+++
title = "108"

+++
Indra and Agni


## 01
The image of the chariot looking upon the creatures is a slightly odd one.

Elsewhere (VII.61.1, X.85.18) almost identical pādas are used of the sun, and it may be that Indra and Agni’s chariot here is identified with the sun, though such an identification would be unusual for these gods. Bl (RR) thinks rather that the poet “has borrowed and applied with a rather frenzied metaphor” the image of VII.61.1. It is worth quoting his characteristically acerbic comment on the image: “The students of the Rig-Veda are steeped in the experience of its bold, often grotesque figures of speech, so that even a chariot that looks down from heaven excites no unusual emotion.”


## 03
The signature word of this vs. is sadhryàñc- / sadhrīcīná- ‘joint(ly), conjoined’, which occurs prominently in the first three pādas. The final pāda is dense with phonological and etymological play: vṛ́ṣṇaḥ … vṛṣaṇā́vṛṣethām.

Ge (explicitly) and Re / Klein (DGRV I.373) / WG (all implicitly) take vṛtrahaṇā in b as a predicate vocative (so, “you two, conjoined, are Vṛtra-smashers”).

I would prefer this interpretation, but think that the lack of accent should be taken seriously. Moreover, given the repetition of sadhryàñc- / sadhrīcīná- just noted, it may be that the conjunction of Indra and Agni is what is being highlighted, not their Vṛtra-smashing.

## 03-04
As noted in the publ. intro., vs. 3 attributes Indra’s characteristic deed (Vṛtra-smashing) to both gods, while vs. 4 attributes Agni’s characteristic ritual behavior to both.


## 04
Ge (/WG) construes the instr. phrase of pāda c with ānajānā́of pāda a (thus, “being anointed with soma”). Since pāda b intervenes, depicting two further ritual actions, I consider the syntactic connection of a and c unlikely, although I am sympathetic to the desire to find something to construe the instr. tīvraíḥ sómaiḥ páriṣiktebhiḥ with. I take that phrase rather as a loose circumstantial instrumental, almost equivalent to a loc. absolute.

Another reason not to take this instr. with ‘being anointed’ is that soma is an unlikely anointing medium for Agni, since it is more likely to quench the fire than to make it blaze up. An unexpressed ‘ghee’ is the likely medium in a.

This argument leads indirectly to an issue that all comm. (Ge, Old, Re, WG, Kü [p. 577]) raise: the actions of the first 3 pādas should be performed for the two gods, not by them. Much energy is expended in these comments in trying to make the gods into recipients, with the unexpressed agents being priests (e.g., Old’s quotation of Benfey’s tr. of pāda b “für welche der Opferlöffel und das Barhis ausgebreitet ist” [my italics]). This energy seems to me misplaced and the grammatical interpretation over-fussy. One of Agni’s standard roles is that of priest, and the actions ascribed to him (and Indra) here fall squarely within this role. Since Indra is identified with Agni, he is just along for the ride, as it were -- just as Agni was in the preceding vs. as Vṛtra-smasher. Though it may seem a bit strange to have the gods already present on the ritual ground, performing the preliminaries to the sacrifice in abc, but, in pāda d, driving to the sacrifice, this merely switches the viewpoint to Indra’s perspective: he always drives to the sacrifice; Agni is always already there. Since the two gods are identified here, we see the characteristic actions of each separately, but ascribed simultaneously to both.


## 05
I read cakrathuḥ of a also with b, though in a different sense. Ideally for this sense (‘assumed, made your own’) the verb of b would have been med. cakrāthe.

The referents of tébhiḥ in d are syntactically the neut. yā́(ni) phrases in abc, but it doesn’t make much sense to “drink with” those particular referents. It would be possible to tr. tébhiḥ more heavily as “because of these” or the like, but I think the answer is simpler: rhetorical patterning trumps semantics. The poet is leading up to the loosely attached refrain of vss. 6-12, whose last pāda is identical to 5d but with áthā rather than tébhiḥ; the tébhiḥ here serves as a transition between the earlier verses, where the d pāda is integrated into the verse and the refrain-marked verses to come. It is grammatically connected to but semantically estranged from the first three pādas of 5.


## 06
See the publ. intro. for the place of this vs. in the structure of the hymn.

The “choosing” of pāda a reinforces the priestly roles of Agni (and Indra) in the preceding vs., since the sacrificer’s choosing of the priests is one of the first actions of the sacrifice -- particularly common is choosing Agni as Hotar.

The lexeme ví √hvā means ‘vie in invoking’, generally referring to our competition with other sacrificers in attempting to bring the gods, esp. Indra, to our sacrifice. This is precisely the sense that it has here, in my view. With W. E. Hale (Asuras 84-85), I take ásuraiḥ as referring to other human ‘lords’, in competition with us for the attention of the gods. Given the almost complete absence from the RV of the Asuras as a semi-divine group hostile to the Devas (for which see Hale passim, also Jamison [Staal Ged.]), and given the standard use of ví √hvā for competition between mortals, I cannot follow the near-universal assumption that the later Asuras are present in this passage. The competitors that the poet is thinking of may well be the brahmin and king in 7b and the various named groups in 8ab.

The phrasing of pāda c is unusual, and the interpretation depends crucially on one’s interpretation of śraddhā́. As I have discussed elsewhere (1996: 176-84), I take this resonant term to mean ‘trust’, particularly the trust between the parties involved in a hospitality relationship (of which the sacrifice is a most important and fraught subtype). Here the trust (śraddhā́m) of the 1st ps. speaker that his choosing will bear fruit and his competitive invocation will be successful comes true (satyā́m) and serves as a concretized goal of the gods’ journey that demonstrates that the trust was not misplaced. satyá- is almost a proleptic adjective here. Most of the standard tr.

approximate this interpr; Re’s is closest to mine.

The hí in the refrain fragment ā́hí yātám (through vs. 12) is difficult to account for under its usual functional headings. I have tentatively taken it as emphatic (a cop-out, I realize) and tr. it as “yes!” I am not convinced by Hettrich’s treatment (Hypotaxe 376, 379-80) ascribing its use to a conditional structure.


## 08
For the named peoples in ab as the sacrificers with whom the poet is competing in vs. 6, see comments on that vs. The two-pāda refrain of the rest of the hymn has finally taken shape here, out of partial phrases found earlier. Note also that the beginning of the c pāda (átaḥ) and that of the d pāda (áthā) are phonologically very close.

## 09-10
I do not see the purpose of two almost identical vss., but with the relative positions of the various earths reversed. Re calls it a “renversement formulaire, d’un type exceptionel” (EVP XIV.122).


## 11
The locations in pāda a are appropriate to both gods, but those in b are distinctly odd, esp. for Indra. An almost identical pāda is found also in I.91.4, of the domains of soma, where all three terms are fitting, and in I.59.3 of the locations of goods over which Agni presides. A similar listing but without the mountains is found in III.22.2 of Agni (yád óṣadhīṣv apsv ā̀…), which again is apt for Agni. One has the feeling that the poet is trying to multiply the “wherever you are” verses and is not too scrupulous about his sources.

