+++
title = "109"

+++
Indra and Agni


## 01
The kinship theme of the first hemistich is continued in pāda c, with prámati- ‘solicitude’, since this abstract noun is regularly identified with the father -- e.g., I.31.10 tvám agne prámatis tvám pitā́si naḥ. See further disc. ad I.71.7.

## 01-02
These two vss. are parallel in structure, with an initial hí clause with a 1st sg. augmented verb of perception (‘see’, ‘hear’), with kinship terms in the second pāda, and in the last pāda a 1st sg. verb of production (‘fashion’, ‘beget’) with a verbal product as obj. (‘thought’, ‘praise’).


## 02
The standard word for son-in-law is simply jā́mātar-; the ví- is presumably a disparaging prefix (see Ge’s n. 2a), here rendered by “no-count.” śyālá- is found only here in the RV, but is reasonably well attested in later texts and has good MIA correspondents.


## 03
The context of this verse is clearly the soma sacrifice, but there is no general agreement on the identity (/-ties) of the participants. I am inclined to see the pl. bulls as the pressing stones, which are then renumbered as dual in the last pāda. Pressing stones are called bulls, are yoked, have reins, and are plural in pressing-stone hymns (for all these, see, e.g., X.94, esp. vss. 6-8). But it is also possible that the bulls here are the priests guiding the stones. I find highly unlikely Old’s view that the two stones in d are Indra and Agni.


## 04
In the ritual actions depicted in pāda d, apsú most naturally goes with ā́ dhāvatam and mádhunā with pṛṅktám. Old insists that this must be the interpr., and all standard tr. follow him one way or the other. However, both the word order and, more importantly, the accent on pṛṅktám make that impossible, if we take the text seriously. The poet must have meant the ritual reversal.


## 05
The first hemistich echoes 2ab, with a 1st sg. past tense of √śru, a dual pronominal obj. referring to Indra and Agni, of which a compared adjective (comparative / superlative) is predicated. See also Watkins 1995: 187.

In d I read with Old (and the standard tr.) prácarṣaṇī; see also Thieme (KlSch 252). This requires no change to the Saṃhitā text, but only to the Pp., which analyses the sequence as two words. The next pāda begins prá carṣaníbhyaḥ, which definitely consists of two words, which could easily have led to the Pp. separation.


## 07
I do not entirely understand the purport of the second half-verse. Ge compares VII.76.4, which shows some similarities and which refers to the forefathers finding the light of the dawn cows in the Vala cave. Much closer by is vs. 12 of the last hymn (I.108), in which Indra and Agni are urged to become exhilarated at sun rise in the middle of heaven. One way or another this must be a reference to the dawn sacrifice.

