+++
title = "110"

+++
Ṛbhus


## 01
As Ge points out, the mention of the All Gods (viśvádevya-) marks the ritual reference as the Third Pressing, which is dedicated to the All Gods and in which the Ṛbhus have their share. This suggests that the repeated stretching in pāda a need not refer only to the periodic nature of Vedic sacrifice over the ritual year, but also perhaps to the repeated rites of the Soma pressing day. Since the theme of the “leftover” is prominent in the Third Pressing (see Jamison 1996: 129-32), “being stretched out again” fits this context.


## 02
As indicated in the publ. intro., the wandering Ṛbhus seem here to be compared to the poet and his ilk, tramp craftsmen in search of skilled work -- as Ge already suggests. (For more on itinerant priests and poets, esp. the Prātaritvan, see Jamison 1996: 184-89.) In pāda b ápākāḥ is universally interpreted as ‘westward’, derived from ápāñc-, contrasted with immediately following prā́ñcaḥ ‘facing eastward’. So, e.g., Ge “Als ihr … westwärts, ostwärts weiter zoget.” Although the direction words frequently co-occur, one might expect the stem formations here to be parallel, that is, using a form of ápāñc- rather than a derivative. Cf., e.g., prā́g ápāg údāk (III.53.11, VIII.4.1=VIII.65.1). Moreover, the Ṛbhus’ journey seems to be purposeful and directed, given the two prá forms (… prá … aítana … prā́ñcaḥ) and the fact that they reach a goal. I take ápāka- instead as a privative form of pā́ka- ‘callow, simple(ton)’, hence ‘not simple; clever, shrewd’; cf. ámūra- ‘not stupid, no fool’ to mūrá- ‘stupid’.

The tone of the locution máma ké cid āpáyaḥ is somewhat hard to read; it is reminiscent of V.52.12 té me ké cin ná tāyávaḥ. The effect seems to be approximative -- “some kind of X,” “more or less like X” -- and slightly slangy. The referent of the máma is the 1st ps. speaker of vs. 1, contra Re, who takes the phrase as the direct speech of (one of?) the Ṛbhus.


## 03
ā́suvat ‘impelled’ is of course a pun on Savitar, its subject.

The final pāda is parallel to 2a: … prá yád ichánta aítana / … yác chravayánta aítana, each with a pres. part. combined with the main verb aítana.

What exactly is happening in 3d is unclear, since Agohya is a shadowy figure in Ṛbhu mythology. In Ṛbhu hymns they sleep in his house (I.161.11, IV.33.7); the most similar passage to ours is I.161.13, where the Rbhus ̥ after their sleep ask him ágohya ká idáṃ no abūbudhat “O Agohya, who has awakened us here/now?” In our passage the mirror-image action seems to be depicted -- they're making him heed, that is, waking him up. I do not know what to do with this observation, however.


## 04
I do not understand why the Ṛbhus are called vāghát- here, since this term is ordinarily used of ritual officiants (see comm. ad I.3.5) and the Ṛbhus only indirectly participate in ritual. Ge tr. “die fahrende (?) Sänger,” but he provides no support for the itinerant part of the tr.

As Ge points out, sū́ra-cakṣas- is characteristic of gods; in I.89.7 it is used almost as a definition of such. So it may well here be an ancillary indication that the Ṛbhus achieved divine status.


## 05
úpastutā in the Saṃhitā text is universally taken, flg. the Pp., as the nom. pl.

of the past part., úpastutāḥ. I take it rather as the loc. sg. of úpastuti- ‘praiseinvocation’. It doesn’t make sense to me that, after having been praised, they would be “crying in want” and seeking (further?) fame, whereas if they lack praise at the praise invocation, their seeking fame is understandable. Loc. sg. -ā to -i-stems is found only interior in the pāda as here, but almost always before consonants.

However, AiG III.152 counts 9 occurrences before -u-/-ū-, as here.

Ge and Re take upamám as the obj. of nā́dhamānāḥ, but that stem is never transitive (as Re admits), and it appears in the preceding hymn (I.109.3) in clear intransitive usage. I take the adj. with śrávaḥ in d. It would also be possible to take it as an adverb: “in utmost need.” WG construe it with the cup in b; this seems the least likely possibility, since the miraculous deed of the Ṛbhus is depicted only in the first hemistich, quite separately their quest for fame in the second.


## 06
The conceptual basis for the common trope of “pouring prayers” is made clear here by the simile “like ghee with a ladle.” Because of its lack of accent asya cannot modify pitúḥ and it should have a referent already present in the discourse. The referent is generally taken as the cup of 5 and its father as Tvaṣṭar. I do not have anything better to offer.

Ge’s tr. of c seems very loose and somewhat puzzling: “… die die Pünktlichkeit seines Vaters erreichten ...” He seems to be taking taraṇitvā́as neut. pl.

rather than instr. sg. (like taraṇitvéna in 4a) and imposing a meaning “erreichten” on saściré that stretches the semantics of that stem. Re makes a good case for the instr.

interpretation, and supplies an acc. “(l’exemple)” that allows the usual ‘follow’ sense for the verb. My tr. is similar.

vā́ja- in d is a low-key pun on the name of one of the Ṛbhus.


## 07
In my interpr. the individuation of the Ṛbhus continues in ab, though not with their usual names.

Note the switch in number between the opening of 6d ṛbhávo vā́jam (pl. - sg.) and that of 7b ṛbhúr vā́jebhiḥ (sg. - pl.).

In b the instr. pls. vā́jebhir vásubhiḥ are ordinarily taken as proper names and instr. of accompaniment. I instead take them as defining the quality for which the Ṛbhu gets designated ‘good one’ and ‘giver’. My tr. also assumes a chiastic structure in vā́jebhir vásubhiḥ vásur dadíḥ, with the first instr. construed with the last nom. sg.

and the middle two terms belonging together.

The analysis of pṛtsutí- is debated (see, e.g., Re EVP XIII.108; AiG II.2.640 §473aβA.; III.73, §29b; II.1 Nachtr. 67). On the one hand, it appears to be a compound consisting of the root noun pṛ́t- and a primary -ti-stem, probably to √sū ‘impel’ (with shortening, like sú-ṣuti to the other root √sū ‘give birth’). On the other, since the root noun pṛ́t- is only attested in the loc. pl. pṛtsú (though the root is also found in the derivatives pṛ́tanā-, etc.), pṛtsutí- appears to be a secondary -tí- stem anomalously built to a case form. This seems to be the current standard view.

However, it seems entirely possible to me that we are dealing with a haplology of

*pṛtsu-sutí- (or -sūtí-), and my tr. reflects this analysis.


## 09
Again the standard tr. take vájebhiḥ as a proper name.

