+++
title = "112"

+++
Aśvins On the structure of the hymn, see the publ. intro. The challenging verses are the first four. I will not comment on the many obscure mythic fragments that constitute the Aśvins’ various rescues, nor attempt to etymologize the many personal names.


## 01
pūrvácitti- is variously interpreted and much discussed: see the long notes of Ge and Re ad loc., as well as Old, KlSch 1152-56 (=NG 1916). The stem always occurs in the dat. and displays (quasi-)infinitival usage. Although it would be possible to take it as “(for me/us) to think first (of them)” and in the first pāda of a hymn this would be easily interpretable as a ritual reference, I consider it to have the opposite value: “(for them) to think first (of me/us).” Kutsa repeatedly calls on Heaven and Earth to be witness to his speech in the refrain of I.105: vittám me asyá rodasī. Cf. also X.35.1 mahī́dyā́vāprthiv ̥ ī́cetatām ápaḥ “Let great Heaven and Earth take cognizance of (our) work.” For further on pūrvácittaye see comm. ad IX.99.5.

The stem iṣṭí- is a perennial problem, since it can belong to several different roots: √iṣ ‘desire, seek’, √iṣ ‘send, impel’, or √yaj ‘sacrifice’. Ge (n. 1b) takes it here to an intransitive iṣ ‘rasch, gern willig kommen, eilen’, though his tr. ‘sich beeilen’ might seem to connect it with a reflexive sense of ‘send, impel’. By isolating iṣṭáye from the acc. gharmám, he then needs to supply another verb to govern that acc., namely “(zu kochen).” Old (KlSch 282-84 [=ZDMG 62 (1908)]), however, gives good reasons to connect our iṣṭáye with ‘seek’, though his interpr. of this pāda differs somewhat from mine. So also Re (see his n.). WG opt for ‘send’.


## 02
This verse is very dense and has been subject(ed) to a variety of interpretations, the details of which can’t be laid out here. The first hemistich depicts gifts or some other desirable things mounting the chariot of the Aśvins to be given.

The gifts are qualified as subhárāḥ ‘easy to carry (away?)’ and ‘inexhaustible’ (asaścatáḥ); the latter word generally qualifies ‘streams’, objects that are not ordinarily capable of mounting anything. This already odd image (of gifts [implicitly compared to streams] performing the mounting) is made odder by the simile in b, which compares the chariot to something eloquent (vacasám) for thinking (mántave).

It is of course not unusual for a verbal product (a hymn vel sim.) to be compared to a chariot, but the semantic distance traversed in this hemistich is quite far. This outré simile referring to the chariot may anticipate 4c below.

I wonder if the hapax thematic vacasá- (in acc. vacasám) is wrongly accented for *vacásam, which could be an internally derived possessive adj. to the neut. s-stem vácas- ‘speech’. Although this putative *vacás- ‘having speech, eloquent’ would likewise be a hapax, it would belong to a standard derivational type. BR (and Monier-Williams) take just this word as a derivative of √vañc ‘move waveringly’, which certainly would better fit a chariot. But the following the following mántave strongly favors a derivative of √vac, given the common conjunction of thought and speech.

The final phrase of c, kárman iṣṭáye echoes that of 1b yā́man iṣṭáye, and the two forms of iṣṭáye should therefore be interpreted in the same way. I take dhíyaḥ ‘insights’ as the object of the seeking and supply “(us)” as the subject of the infinitive.

Others tr., with different interpretations of iṣṭáye, have taken different routes.


## 03
The phrase divyásya praśā́sane can be read in (at least) two different ways: either the Aśvins are “in command” of the divine (that is, they command the divine) or “at the command” of the divine (that is, the divine gives them the command). I follow Ge in taking it as the latter; he cleverly suggests that this shows the Aśvins in their proper position between gods and men -- in other words, they are middle management.


## 04
As discussed in the publ. intro., this verse seems to display extended double reference between three gods associated with the morning pressing and the Aśvins’ chariot, an association produced by shared epithets, though I must admit that there are many loose ends in this interpretation. See also Re’s n.

In pāda a párijman- ‘earth-encircler’ is a standard epithet of their chariot (I.20.3, IV.45.1, X.39.1, X.41.1, IV.3.6)(and, in the dual, of the Aśvins themselves: I.46.14, X.106.3). In a verse in an Aśvin hymn in which this is the first real word, it is hard to imagine that an audience would not first think of their chariot. However, the term also qualifies the Wind (e.g., VII.40.6, II.38.2), and the rest of pāda a, tánayasya majmánā, fits a divinity better than a chariot.

In its other three occurrences dvimātár- ‘having two mothers’ refers to Agni, as produced by the two kindling sticks. It is somewhat difficult to see how this word could refer to the chariot, unless the Aśvins are configured as two mothers. On the other hand the phrase dhūrṣú taráṇayaḥ, like our tūrṣú taráṇiḥ, is found in an Aśvin hymn (VII.6.78) qualifying their horses in a verse also containing their chariot. (Cf.

also taráṇi- twice in another Aśvin hymn [IV.45.5, 7], but used of a priest, probably Agni.) Note also that tūrṣú not only plays on the dhūrṣú in the passage just cited, but also phonologically matches the ū ṣú of this hymn’s refrain.

In c vicakṣaná- ‘wide-gazing’ is otherwise esp. found as an epithet of Soma, though occasionally of other gods. As a qualifier of a chariot, it could mean ‘conspicuous’ (< ‘widely seen’). What it would mean for either Soma or the chariot to be ‘of triple thought’ (trimántu-) is not clear to me. The word is a hapax, but it should be interpreted along with the mántave of 2b, where the word is connected with an image (however attenuated) of a chariot. It’s worth keeping in mind that the Aśvins’ chariot is characterized as having three of everything in I.34.2, 9, 12, and its three wheels are mentioned elsewhere. As for a potential connection with Soma, the ‘three’ of course suggests the three soma pressings, though exactly what the -mántuwould have to do with them isn’t clear to me. Perhaps more likely is the three types of ritual speech deployed in the soma sacrifice.

Note that there is an implicit numerical ordering of the subjects of the three pādas: (párijman = 1), dvimātár-, trimántu-.

In sum, although the vocabulary of this verse has tantalizing resonances with other passages and although I am fairly certain there is a pervasive double meaning, I do not feel I (or anyone else) has entirely “cracked” this verse. The tack taken by Ge (/WG) of simply taking Parijman, Dvimātar, and Trimantu as PNs is the easy way out but does not advance the interpretation.


## 05
In “rasping Rebha” (rebhá-) I have incorporated the gloss into the name. The word occurs in the next hymn (I.113.17) in its lexical meaning.


## 06
On ā́raṇa- see comm. on VIII.70.8.


## 09
The adjs. mádhumantam ásaścatam might better be tr. proleptically: “you revived the river (so that it was) honied and inexhaustible.” Ge (/WG) simply supply a verb in pāda a: “(machtet).” Note the phonetic echo in śrutáryaṃ náryam.


## 10
atharvī́- as ‘den Weg verfolgend’ from Hoffmann (see EWA I.805 and Scar 496-97). Ge’s “pfeilschnelle (?)” is distinctly odd, and I don’t know the basis for his interpr.


## 11
Kakṣīvant is the next poet in the collection after Kutsa. He’s explicitly identified as an Auśija in I.18.1 and by implication in I.119.9, 122.4-5. What the merchant (vaṇíj-) is doing here I have no idea.


## 15
On the lexeme medial ví √pā ‘extract by drinking, separate fluids by drinking’ see disc. ad VII.22.4. Why this lexeme is used here of an ant (or someone so called) isn’t clear. Perhaps it reflects a folk belief or observation about the eating/drinking habits of ants. Popular Science Monthly (of May 1877) reports that “Some species—such, for instance, as the small brown garden ant—ascend bushes in search of aphides. The ant then taps the aphis gently with her antennæ, and the aphis emits a drop of sweet fluid, which the ant drinks.” This could possibly be considered extraction. And a more recent article (Smithsonian.com, Aug. 16, 2012) has photographs of transparent Indian ants whose abdomens change color depending on the color of what they drink. The photographs of the ants’ mouth parts attempting to penetrate drops of colored water could also be viewed as extraction.


## 16
Śyumarśmi in the publ. tr. is a typo for Śyumaraśmi.


## 17
Note the phonological play in páṭharvā jáṭharasya. Because of its accent, Ge (/WG) take jáṭhara- as an adjectival deriv. of jaṭhára- ‘belly’, hence ‘paunchy’ (supposedly of his wagon). But I think it likely that its accent simply follows its phonological twin páṭharvā, which immediately precedes (see also Old). The only possible indication of the independent existence of jáṭhara- is jáṭhala- in I.182.6.


## 18
The problem of the sg. voc. aṅgiraḥ is treated by Old.

The verb niraṇyáthaḥ is also problematic; in fact Ge declines to tr. it. Re suggests that it might be a corruption of *ni(r)-riṇīthaḥ to nír √rī ‘let flow, let escape’, but the corruption involved would have to be fairly massive and would be unmotivated. Old sees it as a denom. to a form derived from √ran ‘take pleasure’.

WG tr. “ihr … innerlich Freude habt,” following Gotō 1987: 258 n. 582, who accepts Gr’s connection with √ran ‘take pleasure’, though he attributes the accentuation not to a passive stem raṇyá- (as Gr does, despite the active ending) but to a shift from the standard pres. stem ráṇya- by association with denominatives like turaṇyá- (or perhaps to its being a denominative itself). This analysis is accepted by Kulikov (Vedic -ya-presents, pp. 605-5), with further discussion. Although a connection with √ran makes more sense than Re’s suggestion, it does not make much sense in context -- or rather, although the tr. is harmless and not jarring, it has nothing to do with the Vala myth treated in the following pāda. It is also the case that √ran does not otherwise occur with ní and forms of this root are also almost always construed with a source from which the pleasure is derived. By contrast, my tr. follows a suggestion of Brereton’s that it is haplologized from *nirayaṇa-yá- ‘seek/find a way out'. Despite the further machinery required, this interpr. makes more sense in the Vala myth context.


## 20
The problem in these obscure fragments of tales is to decide which of the words are PNs and which are adjs. In c Ge takes the three fem. acc. as separate names, but I prefer to take omiyā́vatīm and subhárām as proleptic adjectives, since both stems are found earlier in the hymn in full lexical usage (omyā́vantam 7b, subhárā(ḥ) 2a). Sim. Scar (p. 639), Remmer (Frauennamen, p. 85).


## 21
Pāda c presents a major disruption of the pattern that has monotonously structured this hymn since vs. 5; this disruption may signal the approaching end of the hymn. Unlike every c-pāda in the hymn (starting indeed with vs. 1) save for the immediately preceding one, the pāda doesn’t begin with yā́bhiḥ (11c doesn’t actually begin with yā́bhiḥ, but it is found within the pāda). Moreover the verb bharathaḥ is not accented and therefore cannot be in even a notional relative clause, despite the yád that immediately follows it. Curiously, most interpr. ignore or explain away these deviations. Ge. tr. as a “wenn” clause and considers yád “Attraktion für yā́bhiḥ” (attraction to what he doesn’t say). Old ascribes yád for yā́bhiḥ to metrical needs and wishes to accent bharathaḥ, because switching to a main clause is “recht unwahrscheinlich.” Since the poet clearly had no problem maintaining his template in verse after verse, I find it impossible to believe that the departures from this structure here are not deliberate -- a kind of putting on the brakes before the end, just as the full template took awhile to take shape at the beginning of the hymn. More recent tr. reflect the verse’s structure better: WG make c a parenthetical clause (though, oddly, repeating the “attraction” explan. in the n.); Scar (p. 444) also treats the clause as parenthetical.

The formally ambiguous saráḍbhyaḥ is taken by Ge (/WG) as dative, but given real-world knowledge -- bees produce honey and don’t need it brought to them

-- it surely makes better sense as an ablative (so also Lü., Scar.), in what looks almost
like an izafe construction: yát saráḍbhyaḥ.


## 24
To avoid vegetative confusion, ‘fruitful’ would be better tr. as ‘profitable’ (ápnasvatīm). See ápnaḥ in the next hymn (I.113.9d).

Ge tr. adyūtyé as “wo nicht der Würfel entscheidet”; this is certainly possible, but I think it more likely refers to a situation dire enough that we don’t want to take chances.

