+++
title = "113"

+++
Dawn


## 01
Ge suggests, probably correctly, that b concerns Agni.

Though most tr., explicitly or implicitly, take Night as subj. of c as well as d, it makes more sense to me for Dawn and Night to be contrastive subjects of the final two pādas, with Dawn going forth as Night cedes her place. The balanced contrast is brought out strongly in the next two vss.


## 04
Ge and Re take citrā́as the subj. of ví … āvaḥ, not of áceti, but the phonological and etymological figure áceti citrā́and the position of the preverb ví in tmesis (surely initial in its syntagm) make this unlikely.


## 05
The form ābhogáya (thus in sandhi) has been much discussed. With Old I take it as a loc. ābhogáye to the same stem (whatever its source) as ābhogáyam in a previous Kutsa hymn, I.110.2. I do not think it is a dative, either in infinitival use or as a dat. obj. parallel to rāyé of the infinitival iṣṭáye.


## 06
Ge takes ártham iva as a real simile, containing a pun on ártha- (though he does not call attention to it): “um (an sein Geschäft) wie nach einem Reiseziel zu gehen,” with ártha- ‘business’ in the frame and ‘goal’ in the simile. This is clever and may well be right. In my publ. tr. I take iva as a sort of indefinitizer: “whatever his goal.” WG by contrast seem to take it as a definitizer: “um just zum Ziel zu gehen,” which seems an odd use of iva.

The standard tr. construe c with d and the phrase vísadṛśā jīvitā́as object of abhipracákṣe (e.g., Re “Afins qu’ils considèrent les (modes d’) existence divers, l’Aurore a éveillé toutes les créatures”). I am skeptical of the syntax, because the dpāda is a refrain. Although in some refrain hymns, the refrain is sometimes integrated into the verse as a whole, this refrain does not seem to work that way.

Moreover, the sense conveyed seems contrary to what preceded it: the creatures in 5-6ab seems single-mindedly intent on their own particular goals, not open to contemplating different “lifestyles.” I therefore take c as an independent clause, summarizing 5-6ab: different people have different aims. This requires taking neut.

jīvitā́as ‘living beings’, rather than ‘modes of living’. I would prefer that it was not neut., but cf. neut. bhúvanāni (in the refrain and often elsewhere) ‘creatures’. jīvitáis found only once elsewhere in the RV in IV.54.2, where it seems to mean ‘lives’.

## 07-13
These verses have a surprising density of forms of ví √vas ‘dawn forth’ (7b, d, 8c, 9b, 10b [2x], 11b, 12d, 13a, b, c), whereas vss. 1-6 lack any such forms -- though there’s a teasing echo in 4b ví … āvaḥ ‘She opened, uncovered’, belonging, however, to √vṛ. See also comments on vs. 14.


## 10
As noted in the publ. intro., this is the most challenging verse of the hymn.

Note the phonetic figure kíyāti(y) ā́yát samáyā bhávāti, which may help account for the unusual lengthening in kíyāti (for expected kíyati, which is the Pp.

reading). The only other occurrence of this loc. (II.30.1) is also followed by ā́, though the figure stops there. See AiG III.256 for various alternative explanations of the long ā.

The crucial term for the interpr. of the verse is the instr. adverbial samáyā, which is universally taken as ‘in the middle’ in its various occurrences, presumably from something like “with the same (on both sides).” But this doesn’t really make sense here: since today’s Dawn is precisely in the middle between the former ones and the ones to come, at what point she will be there is not a question we need to ask.

A different interpr. of the word arises from examining all the occurrences in context.

Every passage crucially contains the preverb/particle ví (save for VII.66.15, where víśvam takes its place):


> ví vṛtrásya samáyā pāṣyā̀rujaḥ
ví síndhavaḥ samáyā sasrur ádrim


> kíyāty ā́yát samáyā bhávāti yā́vyūṣúr yā́ś ca nūnáṃ vyuchā́n


> I.163.3ási sùmena samáyā vípṛktaḥ
> I.166.9ákṣo vaś cakrā́samáyā ví vāvṛte
> VII.66.15 śīrṣṇáḥ-śīrṣṇo jágatas tasthúṣas pátiṃ samáyā víśvam ā́rájaḥ
> IX.75.4 rómāṇy ávyā samáyā ví dhāvati
> IX.85.5 vy àvyáyaṃ samáyā vā́ram arṣasi

Since ví ‘apart’ and sám ‘together’ are oppositional preverbs that frequently work formulaically with each other, samáyā seems to partake more in the semantics of sám than of samá- ‘same’ and to mean ‘altogether’, ‘all at once’, or ‘together with’. I take it in the last meaning here: the question being asked is when the current Dawn will be (re)joined with her sister Dawns, both preceding and following her.


## 11
With Gr (et al.) I take praticákṣyā as the gerundive; cf. I.124.8.


## 12
Pāda b contains complex phonetic echoes: sumnāvárī sūnṛ́tā īráyantī, with repeated su/ū as well as mirror-image árī / īrá mediated by ṛ́; the n in each word and the final ī of the first and third could be added.

In c the phrase bíbhratī devávītim is somewhat puzzling; devávīti- generally refers to humans’ ‘pursuit of the gods’, that is, the fervent invitation to the gods to partake of our sacrifice. It should not, therefore, be something that Dawn “brings,” as she brings prizes, for example. I therefore take the fem. part. bíbhratī in its birth sense: she bears / brings to birth our pursuit of the gods by waking us up to initiate this pursuit. Cf. a similar birth context in 19d.


## 13
Note that in this verse a single Dawn subsumes the various temporal dawns of the surrounding vss.


## 14
This verse plays on the lexeme ví √vas that dominated vss. 7-13. The verse begins with the preverb ví, setting up the expectation that a form of √vas will follow.

But instead the pāda ends with adyaut, a near synonym. The next pāda does end with āvaḥ, which matches (vy) ā̀vaḥ of 13b but belongs instead to the root √vṛ ‘(un)cover’.

The verb is here construed with pāda-initial ápa, but the dominant preverb ví is implied by the immediate preceding word (de)vī́(devy ā̀vah). Cf. also remarks on 4b ví … āvaḥ ‘She opened, uncovered’ above.


## 15
Another in the series of ví SHINE verbs is found in d vy àśvait, whose ví is reinforced by the pāda-initial vi in vibhātīnā́m.

Note also the chiastic phonetic figure in b: citráṃ ketúṃ kṛṇute cekitānā; the distribution of i and u vowels is also chiastic, but skips the verb. This is also a triple etymological figure, of course (minus kṛṇute).


## 17
Ge and Re take the singer, the subject of ab, as the human singer, which in turn requires them to interpret the mid. part. stávānaḥ, which is overwhelmingly passive in value, as having active meaning. I (and independently WG) take the referent in ab to be Agni (so already, tentatively, Old). This not only allows stávānaḥ to be interpreted in its usual fashion, but also fits the rest of the lexicon. Agni is regularly called váhni- in his standard role as conveyor of the oblation, and he is also called ‘hoarse-voiced’ because he crackles (cf. I.127.10, VI.3.6, VI.11.3).


## 18
My interpr. of the 2nd hemistich differs in several respects from the standard.

In d I take aśvadā́(ḥ) ‘giving horses’ as acc. pl. fem. with the dawns (so also Re, Scar), not nom. sg. masc. with the soma-presser. Although the latter is possible (and aśvadā́- is elsewhere used of mortal patrons), it seems here to belong with the characterizations of the dawns in pāda a: gómatīḥ … sárvavīrā(ḥ). Note that Dawn is addressed as aśva-sūnrt̥ e ‘liberal with horses’ in V.79.1-10.

More radical is my interpr. of pāda c, which is much discussed (see elaborate notes of Old, Ge, and Re; also Scar 66-67, somewhat differently 202, 617). Most take the simile vāyór iva to refer to the surging up of gifts as swiftly as the wind; in other words the unexpressed common quality is the speed with which the gifts come.

I think rather that the hapax udarká- refers to the ‘raising’ of the litany that accompanies the distribution of the dakṣiṇās at the Morning Pressing. (Cf. udṛ́c- RV 2x “when the chant is raised.”) And this litany is compared to the one accompanying the first offering of the Morning Pressing to Vāyu. Note that personified sūnṛ̥́tā is closely associated with Vāyu in the two nearby Vāyu hymns I.134.1 and I.135.7.

That it is not the physical aspect of wind that is at issue is suggested by the use of vāyú- not vā́ta-, as Re points out.

