+++
title = "114"

+++
Rudra By RVic standards this hymn is almost laughably simple and elementary, very different from Kutsa’s usual products.

There is much repetition and chaining of vocabulary in this hymn: kṣayádvīra- is prominent at the beg. (1-3, + 10), with vīra- reprised in 3 and 8. See also śám 1, 2; aśyāma 2-3; sumatí 3, 4, 9 + sumnāyán 3, sumná 9, 10; ní hvayāmahe 4-5 [havāmahe 8]; námasā 2, 5 + námaḥ 11; tvéṣam 4-5; kapardín- 1, 5; mrḍ̥ á 2, 6, 10 + mrḍ̥ ayátama 9; toká- tánaya- 6, 8; havíḥ 3, havíṣmant- 8; rā́sva 6, 9; pitár marútām 6, 9; vrṇ̥ imahe 4, 9; āré 4, 10; śárma √yam 5, 10). The first 5 vss. are also marked by 1st pl. verbs.


## 02
The weak pf. form (ā)yejé is anomalous in two regards: it does not agree with the standard weak pf. īj- and it produces a bad cadence here. The form is found twice elsewhere in the RV: āyejé in X.63.7 where Manu is also the subj. and the form is in the same (bad) metrical slot - the two passages seem to be connected - and VI.36.2 with the preverbs ánu prá and in an acceptable metrical slot. The weak pf.

stem īj is not found with preceding preverb. The forms are disc. at length by Kü (391-92) with ample citation of previous lit. Schindler considers īj the older form, to the laryngeal-initial root (PIE*Hia̯ ǵ) with reduplication *Hi-Hij-́ , in contrast to *ia̯ - initial roots, which redupl. *ia̯ -iC. For Schindler the yej forms are metrically driven replacements and serve to avoid the coalescence of the vowel of the preverb + īj, esp.

in the cadence. (Neither he nor Kü seems to recognize that the yej forms produce bad cadences, a problem that undercuts the arguments that both of them use to explain their appearance in this context.) Kü by contrast questions Schindler’s posited distinction in redupl. between initial laryngeal roots *Hia̯ C and glide-initial *ia̯ C, since the development of super-weak forms of the type ūcúr to √vac happens to roots without initial laryngeals, only glides. Kü argues that whether or not the root had a preceding initial laryngeal the redupl. to a *(H)i/̯u̯aC root was originally always

*(H)i/̯ua̯ -. The u/i-type redupl. developed by analogy to *(H)ai/̯uC̯ - roots. Therefore
īj is an inner-Vedic development, not an archaism per Schindler. Yet - even though he thinks yej shows the older reduplication pattern - he still allows the possibility that it’s a new formation nonetheless. Kü’s disc. is ultimately indecisive.

As for the metrical problem, Ludwig and Arnold want to emend to *āyajé, of somewhat dubious morphological provenance. I very tentatively suggest another possibility, that in this preverb-verb combination the underlying form was *ā (H)i(H)ij-ai, with the i-reduplication becoming a glide between ā and the redupl.

syllable, which was then originally short: *āyijé. The drawback to this explanation (or one of them) is that there is no obvious source for the -ej that was substituted at some point in the redaction.


## 03
Note the cognate acc. in juhavāma … háviḥ.


## 04
vaṅkú- is variously interpreted and etymologized; see EWA s.v. In this passage Ge takes it as ‘den fliegenden’ with ?, Re sim. (‘volant’ without ?); WG refuse to tr., but mention the common gloss ‘krumm’ in their n. Assuming (with most) that it belongs to √vañc ‘go crookedly, meander’, I take it here as ‘meandering’ à ‘wandering’, characterizing an itinerant poet. See ā́cara in the previous vs. (3c), which suggests such wandering. For a different specialization of the root meaning, see I.51.11.


## 05
Note the rhyming figure śárma várma chardír.


## 06
With Klein (DGRV I.190) I take ca in c as conjoining the two impvs. in polarized position in the hemistich: #rā́sva ca … mṛḷa# in an X ca … Y construction.


## 07
“wee little one” reflects the suffixation of the (sometimes) diminutive -ká- to árbha-, which already means ‘small’.


## 08
The bahuvrīhi áriṣta-vīra- ‘possessing heroes who cannot be harmed’ in 3d is echoed by vīrā́n mā … vadhīḥ “Don’t smite our heroes,” with the cmpd evoked by rīriṣaḥ ‘don’t harm’, which ends the preceding pāda. I suggest that the pattern of pāda-init. mā́found through all of vs. 7 and the 1st half of 8 is broken here so that rīriṣah / vīrā́n can be juxtaposed.

The final pāda of the vs. also recalls vs. 3, in a somewhat sly way: 3d ends juhavāma te havíḥ “We will pour you an oblation,” with an etymological figure as noted above. Compare 8d havíṣmantaḥ … tvā havāmahe, also with a form of havísand a 1st pl. verb, which, despite its superficial similarity to juhavāma, belongs to the separate root √hū, hvā ‘call’, which has been amply represented in the hymn by the alternative pres. stem hvayāmahe (4b, 5b).

The adv. sádam ‘always’ is almost always followed by íd, which seems to add no special nuance.


## 10
The standard tr. supply ‘weapon’ with goghnám … pūruṣaghnám, and this is certainly possible. I supply ‘anger’ (héḷas-) because of the similarity of this clause (āré te goghnám utá pūruṣaghnám to 4c āré asmád daívyaṃ héḷo asyatu.

On neut. dvibárhāḥ see comm. ad VII.24.2.

