+++
title = "115"

+++
Sūrya For a more confident interpr. of the enigmatic verses 4-5 than is found in the publ. tr., see comments on those vss. below.


## 02
The image of men stretching their yokes across may refer in part, as Ge suggests, to the beginning of the “Tagewerk des Landmanns.” But as most interpr.

mention, it surely also (or, in my opinion, primarily) is a reference to the beginning of the morning sacrifice: the root √tan ‘stretch’ is regularly used of the sacrifice (probably because of the “stretching out” of the sacrificial ground by carrying the offering fire to the east). That the men are characterized as “seeking the gods” (devayántaḥ) supports a sacrificial interpr.


## 03
For étagva- see comm. on VIII.70.7.

## 04-05
As indicated in the publ. intro., although at the time I was not certain what these verses depict, I was (and remain) skeptical of the notion that the two hemistichs refer to the so-called day-sun and night-sun respectively, as Ge (/WG in part) and Re take it. Among other things, I find it unlikely that the unequivocal proclamation of the Sun’s supremacy that begins this verse (tát sū́ryasya devatváṃ tán mahitvám “This is the Sun's divinity, this his greatness”) would pertain to what these scholars see in 4d: the rather ignominious bundling up of the Sun in Night’s garment to sneak him back across the sky to rise again the next day. I now feel I have a much clearer understanding of what is going on in these verses -- I think I have cracked their code

-- and it all refers to the rising sun. I will lay it out below.


## 04
Pāda b fairly clear refers to Night interrupting her weaving of darkness and gathering up her work when the Sun hitches up his horses for his morning journey. I take Night to be the subject of sáṃ jabhāra, not the Sun (as do Ge, Re, Maurer), based on the similarity to II.38.4 púnaḥ sám avyad vítataṃ váyantī, madhyā́kártor ny àdhāc chákma dhī́raḥ “Once again the weaver has wrapped up what was stretched out; in the middle of his work the mindful (worker) has set down his craft,” where the weaver is the one who wraps up his own work.

I would now likely connect c with b, rather than only with d: “in the middle of (her) work (Night) has gathered together what was stretched out, when he (=Sun) has yoked his tawny horses from their seat.” This would more clearly explain what the divinity and greatness of the Sun consist of and sketch a cause-and-effect relationship between the sun’s beginning his journey and Night’s breaking off her work.

This leaves pāda d. As noted above, Ge and Re think Night covers the sun with her dark garment and turns him into the night sun (see Ge’s n.: “Die Nacht hüllt jetzt den Sūrya in ihr Gewand, d. h. in Dunkel; sie macht die Tages- zur Nachtsonne.”) However, the actual wording of the Sanskrit text doesn’t work particularly well in this night-sun scenario: stretching the garment for him is not the same as wrapping him in it. Still, on the surface it works even less well in my scenario in which only the day-sun is depicted in this verse. Others take this pāda as I do, as continuing the depiction of sunrise, but have not produced convincing ways to make the Sanskrit work that way. Maurer tr. “then upon herself Night spreads her garment,” with the comment (p. 174) “she puts the garment she has woven upon herself, thus removing it from the world and allowing the light of the sun to take its place.” This would solve the problem, but “herself” must render simásmai, which must be masc. (or neut)., not fem. (though see Ge’s suggested way out of this difficulty in his n. 5 to his n. 4d: that simásmai stands for a reflexive like ātmán- and is therefore masc.). WG also believe that this verse concerns only the morning sun.

See disc. in the notes, though I am puzzled by how the disc. and the tr. relate. Their interpr. of d seems to me to fall short.

In my view Night’s stretching her garment for him is in part a gesture of submission: she recognizes the sun’s ascendancy (both literally and conceptually) and removes her black garment and spreads it out for him to pass over, to indicate that she yields to his superior power. (Fortunately she doesn’t have Clytemnestra tendencies.) But this image also depicts a real-world phenomenon, that of the sun rising through morning mist or dark clouds clustering at the horizon. These can be seen as the remnants of the darkness of Night, the garment she has discarded at the place on the edge of the visible world where the sun first emerges. The pāda begins with ā́d ‘just after that’ -- namely, just after he has yoked his horses from their seat, the beginning of his journey -- suggesting that this is the first moment of sunrise.


## 05
This verse (esp. cd) works better in the day-sun / night-sun model than vs. 4, but I am still skeptical about that interpr. and can provide one that allows the verse to confine itself to sunrise. I am especially dubious about the version of the day-sun / night-sun model promulgated by Ge (/WG), Re -- that the two surfaces of the sun are Mitra (bright) and Varuṇa (dark) respectively -- since this interpretation is likely anachronistic as it rests on a later Vedic conception of the two deities. Freed from that model, I take the genitives mitrásya váruṇasya of pāda a as dependent not on rūpám in b with most tr., but with abhicákṣe, following Maurer’s rendering of the syntax, hence my “for Mitra and Varuṇa to see.” This interpr. may be syntactically problematic, as we would expect a dative subject -- and do find a dative subject with this infinitive, even several times in Kutsa’s oeuvre (I.102.2 asmé sūryācandramásābhicákṣe “for us to see the sun and moon”; I.113.6 dabhrám páśyadbhya urviyā́vicákṣe “for (even) those who see (only) a little to gaze out widely”). The case discrepancy troubles me, but I must assume that, given that infinitives are verbal nouns, nominal rection prevailed here. It might better be translated “for the sight of M+V.” This interpretation fits the verse better conceptually and makes a nice thematic ring with 1b, which contains the common trope of the sun as the eye of Mitra and Varuṇa, using the word cákṣuḥ, derivationally related to (abhi-)cákṣe. The expression in our vs. is ambiguous; it could be turning the notion of sight on its head

-- M+V are seeing the sun, not seeing by means of him -- or, more likely, intends the
same idea as “the eye of M+V” in 1b, “so that M+V can see (the world).” The position of anyád … anyád in cd requires that they be definite and in a “the one … the other” relationship (so all tr.). The gleaming surface of c fits well into my scenario -- it is another image of the bright eye of M+V depicted in ab. I think it is called anantá- ‘unbounded’ to represent the fact that it is not possible (certainly not advisable) to look at the bright sun in the sky and see its outline, its edge. But the complementary black surface of pāda d seems, on first thought, to impose the nightsun image. However, it is easily interpretable within the framework provided by the other troublesome d-pāda, 4d. As I just argued, the garment that Night stretches for the sun in 4d is her discarded black raiment that lingers at the horizon as mist and clouds. When the sun rises through clouds, it can seem almost dark, certainly in comparison to an unclouded sun, and its outline is clearly visible, as opposed to the anantá- surface of the bright sun in pāda c. At such an occluded sunrise, individual bright rays can shoot out of the clouds. In our passage these would be the harítaḥ ‘tawny horses’ that are jointly bringing him (sám bharanti), the same harítaḥ he hitched up in 4c before beginning his journey through the mists of 4d.

Thus we can construct a consistent and convincingly naturalistic interpr. of these two verses as referring only to sunrise, without the dubious baggage of the “night-sun.” The second of the two verses, which is the last real verse of the hymn, also forms a ring with vs. 1: not only is the sun identified as the eye/sight of Mitra and Varuṇa (1b, 5a), but the “brilliant face” (citrám … ánīkam) of 1a is reprised by the “gleaming surface” (rúśat … pā́jaḥ) of 5c.

[I.116-20 JPB]

