+++
title = "121"

+++
Indra or the All Gods This is a very problematic hymn, and both the publ. tr. and this comm. are tentative and tenuous on many points. There are some quirks that reappear throughout the hymn: a remarkable no. of pāda-final góḥ (2b, 2d, 7b, 9a) - is this some sort of hidden encoding? It’s also part of a pattern of favoring pāda-final monosyllables (vrā́m 2c, rā́ṭ 3a, dyū́n 3b, 7c, dyā́m 3d, vaḥ 4d, nṝ́n 12a, 13a, dā́t 12c

- and, flg. Hoffmann, daḥ 10d). Also a fondness for pári and prá, the former esp. in
opaque contexts.


## 01
Ge (/WG) take pāda a as a separate clause and consider pā́tram ‘cup, vessel’ a metaphorical designation of Indra (“Ist er wohl das rechte Gefäss für solch gottergebene Männer?”). With Old I consider this to be an anachronistic application of the much later sense of ‘cup, bowl’ to mean ‘appropriate recipient’. (It is true that Indra is referred to as a ‘tankard’ [I.61.9] and a ‘beaker’ [I.100.12] elsewhere, but in those cases it is his capacious size that is at issue.) Old and Re both avoid the Indra = cup interpretation by supplying a verb (different verbs in each case). I see no reason to supply a verb, since pā́tram can be an acc. goal with turaṇyán (see X.61.11 for another acc. of goal with the same stem), a possibility also allowed by Old.

On nṝ́n as gen. pl. see AiG III.211-12.


## 02
Ge and Re take náro as the nom. sg. of a thematic form of the ‘man’ stem, a nom. sg. that is otherwise not found in the RV (save possibly in svàrṇara-) and only very sparingly in the rest of Vedic (see AiG III.212). I follow Gr, Old, and WG in taking it as a gen. sg. of the athematic ‘man’ stem, even though the other two occurrences registered by Gr are better taken as nom. pl. It replaces expected *nur (cf. Aves. nərəš). It is parallel here to góḥ, and this gen. expression characterizes the type of dráviṇa- that Indra is providing as a prize. Since dráviṇa- is a derivative of √dru ‘run’, it really is ‘moveable wealth’, and both cattle and men would qualify.

The pair náro góḥ is echoed by the more conventional expression cátuṣpade … dvipā́de in 3d, which also contains the qualifier náryāya.

The opening ṛbhúr vā́jāya contains the names of two of the three Ṛbhus, though the words are not so used here.

As indicated in the publ. intro., the second hemistich is much discussed, and I will not treat other interpretations in detail. It depicts a buffalo (mahiṣá-) gazing after (and probably longing after) three females, or, in my interpr., one female in three different shapes. These shapes are three standard female roles, arranged chronologically: marriageable girl (according to my interpr. of vrā́- as ‘chooser’; see comm. VIII.2.6), wife/consort (ménā- < ‘exchange token’; see comm. I.62.7), and mother. The mahiṣá- is Indra, as often; this word also evokes the term for the chief wife of a king, máhiṣī-, thus indirectly adding another female role. I identify the female referent of all three as Dawn. Kakṣīvant calls Dawn “begetter of cows” (gávāṃ jánitrī) in nearby I.124.5, like our mātáraṃ góḥ, and also compares her to a vrā́- in I.124.8. Since Dawn is always depicted in motion, “gaze after (a retreating figure)” is an appropriate verb. (Cf. IV.18.3 where Indra anu √cakṣ his mother who is going away: parāyatī́m mātáram ánv acaṣṭa.) If the referent is Dawn, then the horse whose consort she is is probably the sun. For Dawn and the horse = sun, see VII.77.3.

The term svajā́- ‘self-created’ has two applications in the passage. On the one hand, it characterizes the vrā́- particularly. Since she is a ‘chooser’, the female protagonist of a svayaṃvara (self-choice) marriage, she is ‘self-created’ because she is not being given to someone by someone else, but is doing it herself. If marriage is the equivalent of upanayana and second birth for women, then she’s her own parent.

On the other hand, it can characterize all the role transformations she undergoes in cd, loosely “(re)creating herself as …” For further on vrā́- and this passage in general, see Jamison 2003 (Fs. H.-P. Schmidt) pp. 45-47, also X.111.3.


## 03
In the publ. tr. this verse is couched in the English future because I took two of the three verbs in the verse (nákṣat and tastámbhat) as subjunctives and the third (tákṣat) as an injunctive but a rhyme form to nákṣat, each of them beginning a hemistich. I considered the verse a continuation of the prospective questions in vs. 1.

about Indra’s coming to the sacrifice. I have now accepted the view of Narten (Sig.Aor. 160; see also Hoffmann Injunk. 144) that nákṣat is instead an injunctive to the thematic stem of the enlarged root √nakṣ. This then seems to strand tastámbhat as a lone subjunctive in this sequence; Kü (575) labels it a subjunctive in preterital context. However, the passage may originally have had the indic. pf. *tastámbha, and tasthámbhat may have picked up a final dental from the initial of the following word: tastámbhad dyā́m# to match preceding nákṣat and tákṣat. Since dyā́m begins with a cluster, the meter is unaffected by a reading *tastámbha dyā́m. The cadence is terrible (four heavy syllables), but the only thing that would improve it is reading

*tastabha(d), with a zero-grade root syllable appropriate neither to the indicative nor
to the subjunctive.

Revising my understanding of the morphology requires revising the translation as well. I would now take the whole verse in the past: “The surpassing king came through the days to the age-old call of the clans of the Aṅgirases for the ruddy (cows). He fashioned the mace, his team-mate; he propped up heaven for the sake of the two-footed and four-footed belonging to men.” The verse then provides a reassuring model in the past for Indra’s hoped-for activity in the present. Note that nákṣat picks up the aor. ā́naṭ (approximately) from 1c and tastámbha(t) the aor.

stámbhīt of 2a.

Ge takes aruṇī́ḥ as nom. sg. fem., appositive to rā́ṭ, which must then be fem.

and mean ‘queen’ (“die Morgenröte, die Königin”). Both of these are grammatically possible: rā́ṭ must be fem. in V.46.8; aruṇī́ḥ must be nom. sg. in IV.1.16, 14.3. But this leaves the apparent masc. nom. sg. adj. turáḥ without a head. I therefore take aruṇī́ḥ as acc. pl., loosely construed with hávam. See Old. The ruddy ones are presumably the cows imprisoned in the Vala cave, who reappear (with a different color term, usríya-) in vs. 4.


## 04
Unlike the standard tr. I take c with ab rather than with d. I also take the subject of that pāda, the referent of trikakúb ‘three-humped’, as the herd, not Indra with most tr. The problem is the verb, nivártat. On the surface it is the only active form to the quite well-attested them. pres. vártate. It could be taken as an oppositional transitive active built (however temporarily) to the intransitive middle.

Since ní √vṛt generally means ‘turn back’ (of bovines), it could mean ‘(make) turn back’, with Indra as subject (called trikakúb). The problem is that this doesn’t make a lot of sense in context. He has just released them (or so I take ab); why then at their “forward surge” (prasárge) would he make them reverse direction? What I think the pāda depicts is the cows milling around in cow-like fashion and beginning to move, but something stops or confuses them, turning them back (pāda c), and Indra has to step in and show them the way out (pādas ab, d). A (partial) solution to this difficulty was seen by Hoffmann (Aufs. II, 590), who identifies several forms as belonging to an intransitive root aorist to √vṛt, to which this would be the subjunctive, rather than belonging to the them. pres. stem. Since the forms are intransitive, this solves my valency problem, but the subjunctive causes some difficulties. Hoffman takes pāda c as a purpose clause “Damit er beim Losrennen (der Kühe) als Spitzentier zurückkehre,” but why, again, would Indra turn back? To make it fit my scenario, with the herd as subject, I need to read it as a past prospective. Indra got them on the way to truth when they were going to / would have turned back. I would slightly amend my tr. to “when the three-humped (herd) was going to turn back in its forward surge.” There is another possible conceptual solution, also utilizing Hoffmann’s intransitive root aorist subjunctive. As already noted, ní √vṛt means ‘turn back’ of bovines -- see the extraordinary concentration of this lexeme in X.19, a hymn urging the cows to return. If we assume that once the cows trapped in the Vala cave are released, they will return home (which would be expressed by ní √vrṭ), then nivártat is compatible with prasárge: “so that the three-humped (herd) will return (home) in its forward surge.” In d I take ápa … vaḥ in two slightly different senses with two different objects: ‘uncover’ with drúhaḥ ‘deceits’ and ‘unclose’ (= ‘open’) with dúraḥ ‘doors’ (note the phonological similarity of the two objects). Unlike many tr. I therefore do not take drúhaḥ as gen. dependent on dúraḥ; I also consider mā́nuṣasya as a gen. of benefit rather than construing it with drúhaḥ (for both, cf. Re’s “les portes du Mal humain”).


## 05
Under this elaborate disguise, the verse is simply about soma and Indra’s possession of it. The parents are, acdg. to most, Heaven and Earth.


## 06
Another verse about soma.

Note the position of ná in the simile, where it is placed after the two-word DET+NOUN phrase (asyā́uṣásaḥ) rather than after the first word. I do not know if this placement is by rule; it might be worth looking for other examples with this configuration. In fact, see I.129.1g with imā́ṃ vā́caṃ ná.

The syntax is somewhat clotted in the 2nd hemistich. With Ge I take yébhiḥ as standing for *yád ebhíḥ vel sim., since there is no masc. pl. referent in the main clause. Ge (/WG) and Re construe the instr. without further verbal support (Ge “mit Hilfe der ihren Schweiss opfernden (Priester)”). I supply ‘being impelled’ to account for the instr.; such expressions are relatively common in soma hymns; cf. IX.30.2 = 107.26 índur hiyānáḥ sotṛ́bhiḥ, etc. For sweat as an oblation, see Jamison 2015 (“Avestan xṣ̌uuīd-: A Relic of Indo-Iranian Ritual Vocabulary,” BAI 25).

The siñcán of d causes some conceptual problems. Active forms of this very common stem are transitive (‘pour x’), but if the subject remains the drop (índuḥ), a passive ‘being poured’ would seem to make more sense. However, this attribution of agency to the drop -- to pour himself, as it were -- fits with the general tendency to animatize soma and attribute exceptional powers to him.

WG take jaráṇā as a nom. sg. fem., an abstract “Langlebigkeit,” conceived of as a goddess, as opposed to its standard interpr. as a neut. pl. adj. modifying dhā́ma and essentially identical to differently accented jaraṇá- ‘old’ (Ge, Re, though not Gr).

For WG this goddess is the one who pours with the spoon and reaches the seat. This is clever but runs into difficulties. First, forms to √jṛ generally convey a negative sense of ‘age’ -- not ‘long life’. And it interferes with a standard soma trope, of the pressed soma going to / reaching his “domains,” which is straightforwardly present here as long as índuḥ remains the subject. And as far as I know, there is no other evidence for this goddess.


## 07
Another very obscure verse with multiple competing interpretations. I will only discuss my own. As indicated in the publ. intro. I think the larger point of the verse is that Indra’s presence alone is sufficient for an effective sacrifice, even if the standard ritual trappings (like the wood for the fire) are absent. This rests in part on very different interpr. of the individual lexical items, esp. in pāda a.

To start there, the hapax vanádhiti- is interpr. by Ge (/WG), Scar (57), going back to Sāy, as an axe, the Holzmacherin, in part because of the phonological play with a standard word for ‘axe’ svádhiti-. I follow Gr (Old, Re, Schmidt B+I 147) in taking it rather as the pile of wood for the kindling of the ritual fire, formed like vásu-dhiti- ‘treasure chamber, depository of goods’; cf. also mitrá-dhiti- in the adjacent hymn (I.120.9). The verb in this clause, apasyā́t, is universally considered a subjunctive to a denom. stem apas-yá- ‘be active’ (a stem that would appear only here, though there are related nominal forms); I interpret it rather as the optative of ápa √as ‘be’ (hence apa-syā́t) ‘be away, be distant’. True, this lexeme is not common -- I have found only one other RVic example (X.83.5) -- but it would be easy to create, with additive semantics, and semantically parallel ápa √bhū is better established.

There is no agreement on the sense of pāda b or even its syntactic status: because it lacks an overt verb, it is not clear whether it continues the subordinate clause of pāda or functions as the main clause. (With Ge et al., I assume it is the main clause, since otherwise the verse consists only of subordinate clauses.) It is generally assumed that a finite verb should be supplied with pári; I supply the inoffensive ‘go’.

My interpr. of the pāda is, on the other hand, rather bold -- there seems no other choice with pādas like these. I take the cowpens (ródhanā góḥ) as a reference to the ritual ground or to the vessels containing the milk to be mixed with soma or perhaps to places where animals are kept for sacrifice. The “sun” that goes around them is either Agni performing the paryagnikaraṇa, the circling around ritual objects or sacrificial animals (the latter might make more sense with cowpens), or Soma circling through the purifying filter. Both Agni and Soma are frequently identified with the sun.

But the mediating image for pāda b is the radiant Indra of pāda c. When Indra (such is my identification of the subj. of the 2nd sg. prabhā́si) shines forth, there is no need of wood for the fire (pāda a). He can stand in for the ritual fire and/or the gleaming soma and bring the sacrifice to a successful conclusion by himself, as it were.

My identification of Indra as the subj. of c makes him unavailable to be the referent of the datives in d, as Ge, Re take them. In my view, the poet Kakṣīvant is a better candidate (see WG, who suggest “Sippenführer,” so at least not a god). For one thing, if the curious hapax cmpd ánarviś- contains the (pseudo-)loc. ánar- to ánas- ‘cart’, it seems unlikely that this would qualify anyone directly associated with Indra -- the cart is not a warrior’s vehicle -- while on the other hand the Pajras, Kakṣīvant’s clan (cf., e.g., I.116.7, 117.6), are ánasvant- ‘possessing carts / wagons’ (or, more accurately, compared to people who are ánasvant-) in I.126.5. Although turá- was used of Indra in 3b and would here be applied to Kakṣīvant, this poet would surely not mind getting a little reflected divine glory. Note, in passing, the phonetic echo in ánarviśe paś u viṣe.


## 08
The major puzzle in this verse is the grammatical identity of its first word, aṣṭā́. Ge takes as the agent noun to √aś ‘attain’, which is not otherwise attested (and for which we should expect full grade *naṣṭár-), while Old, Re, Scar (602), WG take it as ‘eight’ (which of course requires some clever manoeuvering with its head noun, dual hárī). I follow Sāy, Gr in taking it as the ppl. to √(n)aś.

On the sense of vātā́pya- see comm. ad IX.93.5. The scansion of this stem is unclear: HvN give it as vā̃tā́pyam, that is, presumably, vāatā́pyam, Arnold (p. 294) vaatā́pyam (with short first vowel), but Old vātaā́pyam. Ad IX.93.5 he also suggests vātā́piyam (which wouldn’t work here), pronouncing the scansion favored by HvN the least likely. Gr also goes for -piya-.

I.121.9-13: Hoffmann (Inj. 191 and n. 157) transl. and comments on these mythological verses.


## 09
The puzzle in this verse is what is happening to the cow (góḥ) -- which depends on what case the word is in and on the interpretation of the VP práti vartayaḥ … áśmānam. If the VP is taken as hostile (“turn the stone against X”), góḥ is difficult to fit in, since as a gen.-abl. it can’t easily be a target. See the standard tr., plus Hoffmann (Inj. 191), for various attempts to wrestle with this possibility.

However, the VP can instead mean “roll the stone back,” with góḥ an ablative “from the cow” and the action depicted a friendly and helpful one. I consider this to be a variant of the Vala myth, referring to the opening of the cave. The problem is that the Vala myth does not ordinarily intersect with the Śuṣṇa story, which occupies the 2nd hemistich, but, as indicated in the publ. intro., the two myths are woven together in this part of the hymn.

Another problem is the present tense pariyā́si of d, in a hymn otherwise couched in the mythological past. In conjunction with anantá- ‘endless’, I suggest that the present is used here to express a past continuative ‘kept Xing’.


## 10
The sequence of tense/mood in this verse is somewhat puzzling, with an impv. in the first hemistich (asya, pāda b) followed by a 2nd sg. impf. (ā́-adar, so Pp.) or injunctive (ā́-dar, so Hoffmann, Inj. 191). This discrepancy must be why Ge puts the first hemistich in quotation marks, though he doesn’t explain who is speaking.

In my opinion the first hemistich concerns the Vala myth: the word phaligá- ‘bolt’ is associated with the Vala myth in two of its three other occurrences (I.62.4, IV.50.5), once of the Vṛtra myth (VIII.32.25), never of Śuṣṇa. However, if this is the Vala myth it is somewhat puzzling why the sun is entering the dark, since the Vala myth is usually set at dawn. Perhaps this refers to a version in which the sun is also trapped in the Vala cave.

I supply ‘fold’ in the temporal abl. expression in pāda a, since I would expect an acc. of goal, and pā́thas- ‘fold’ is common with ápi √i (I.162.2, II.3.9, III.8.9, VII.47.3). On the other hand, perhaps the abl.(/gen.) támasaḥ is simply by attraction to the abl. infinitive ápīteḥ.

As noted earlier, ā́daḥ is analyzed by Hoffmann as an injunctive in mythological context. Note also that it probably belongs to √dṛ ‘tear’, not √dā, despite ā́do to the latter root in 8a. However, it could technically be underlyingly identical to ā́do, and that pāda also contains a diváḥ. In that case it would mean “you took …”


## 11
Hoffmann (191 n. 157) insists that ánu … madatām must be an impv. This interpr. is of course possible, but I do not see its necessity. He also interprets siṣvapaḥ as a subjunctive. This is also possible, esp. because the other two forms to this redupl. aor. are athematic (síṣvap). However, again it is not necessary, since redupl. aorists are overwhelmingly thematic, and old athematic ones get thematized (cf. augmented ádīdharat beside dīdhar).

I have no idea why it’s worth mentioning that Heaven and Earth have no wheels, a seemingly obvious fact, unless to contrast them with Etaśa and the Sun’s wheel in 13b.

In d the easiest thing to do with acc. varā́hum ‘boar’ is to take it as an appositive to vṛtrám (much earlier in the hemistich). But the problem, of course, is that Vṛtra isn’t a boar but a cobra (/serpent). Indra’s boar opponent is Emuṣa, and that may be the referent. (See I.61.6-7, where the Vṛtra and Emuṣa myths are told in two successive verses.) However, given that the Śuṣṇa myth is related here in the two preceding verses (9-10), I think that Śuṣṇa may be the referent. He does, after all, snort (e.g., I.54.5 śvasanásya … śúṣṇasya).


## 12
Pāda a contains two ambiguous forms: yā́n, which can be either acc. pl.

masc. of the rel. pronoun or pres. act. part., nom. sg. masc., to the root pres. of √yā ‘drive’; ávaḥ, which can be either the 2nd sg. injunc. act. of the them. pres. to √av ‘help’ or the acc. sg. neut. of ávas- ‘aid, help’. If we take yā́n as a rel. pron., there is the problem that there is no referent for it in the main clause (save for the Wind’s horses, which are not likely). Despite the majority of tr., I therefore take it as the participle, with the consequence that ávaḥ is a noun, serving as acc. of goal, rather than a finite verb. (Its accent would be a problem in a non-relative clause.) As it turns out, there are no injunctives to the thematic present of this root: we find either augm.

ā́vaḥ (etc.) or subj. ávāḥ (etc.); this is an additional, if weak, argument for not taking it as a finite verb.

The adj. mandínam ‘exhilarating’ in c seems semantically far enough from its apparent referent, vajrám in d, that Ge supplies a verb “(trink)” to produce a new clause and allow mandínam to qualify the expected soma (see the same adj. in 8c).

This is unnecessary. Uśanā Kāvya’s major job is to give Indra the mace (see also V.34.2) and for Indra to reach exhilaration in his company (I.51.11). In our passage it seems as if these are conflated, and the vajra itself is what provides the exhilaration (= the energy to kill Vṛtra bez. Śuṣṇa).


## 13
I take nṝ́n as a gen. pl. (see 1a) in beneficial sense.

For nā́yám see comm. on VIII.2.28 and Jamison (Hock Fs.).

In c rathyàḥ could simply mean ‘charioteers’, a parallel gift to the prizes (vā́jān). So WG.


## 15
The root affiliation of sám … varanta is disputed. Most take it as belonging to √vṛ ‘choose’ (Ge, Re [apparently, see below], WG); I follow Gr and Lub in assigning it to √vṛ ‘cover’. Although it is difficult to judge, there are more clear root aor. subjunctive middle forms to ‘cover’ than to ‘choose’ (though cf. I.140.13 where varanta does belong to ‘choose’ and takes íṣam as object). Moreover, sám does not appear to be found with ‘choose’, but is at least marginally attested with ‘cover’ (cf.

VIII.17.7 and X.16.7).

The other question about this verb is what is its subject. Ge takes íṣaḥ as the acc. pl. obj. and supplies the singers or rich patrons as subj. (sim. WG): “Sie bitten sich alle Genüsse (als Lohn) aus.” Inserting a 3rd ps. subject is a bit awkward in a verse in which the human petitioners are otherwise in the 1st ps. (a asmát, c naḥ, d syāma). Re takes íṣaḥ as the subject, in one of his finer sleights of hand: “Puissent les jouissances-rituelles affluer (-comme-par-choix!),” where the supposed root verb appears only in the parenthesis and the Sanskrit justification for “affluer” is entirely unclear. I take íṣaḥ as the subject, with ‘us’ supplied as object: “completely cover (us)” expresses the abundance of refreshments Indra will provide.

