+++
title = "122"

+++
All Gods


## 01
On pā́ntam see Old’s lengthy n. ad loc. The stem pā́nt(a)-, generally read with distracted root syllable, occurs 8x in the RV. As Old demonstrates, there are most likely two different stems involved: a them. noun pā́nta- ‘drink’ and the act.

part. of the root aor. of √pā ‘drink’. The noun is the more common (6x), while the part. is most likely found only in vs. 4 of this same hymn (du. pā́ntā) and as nom. pl.

in IX.98.8 (q.v.). This distribution of forms is found in Lub, with the part. listed under √pā (‘drink’) and the nom. stem pā́nta- separate.

The construction of the second hemistich is much discussed, including the function of the instrumentals. See esp. Old and Re.

In this context “the lord (ásura-) of heaven” is most likely Rudra (see also Hale, Asuras, 75), who is also the gapped object of the verb astoṣi: his heroes are his sons, the Maruts mentioned in d.

On iṣudhyā́and the related verb, see comm. ad I.128.6 and my forthcoming “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.” In light of my reconsideration of the word family of iṣudhyá- in that article, I now interpr. this vs. somewhat differently from the publ. tr. Instead of taking ródasyoḥ as the target of the aiming expressed by iṣudhyā́(“as if aiming at the two world-halves”), I now take iṣudhyā́as an independent instrumental adverb of manner, with a dependent “praise” understood: “… as if by the aiming (of an arrow of praise).” The simile particle iva, which here, unusually, does not mark an explicit simile, draws attention to the underlying metaphor of the aiming of praise. This image is especially appropriate for Rudra, a god of course famous as an archer, and the Maruts, who are depicted in


## 10
ástāra íṣuṃ dadhire gábhastyoḥ as “archers taking arrows in their fists.” As for ródasyoḥ, I take it as semi-parallel to diváḥ in c, with the two locations positioned at the beginning and end of the hemistich. Just as Rudra is the “lord of heaven” (diváḥ … ásurasya), the Maruts are associated with the midspace defined by the two world-halves, not to mention their association with their consort Rodasī -- so this is also a pun. I would now tr. the hemistich as “I have praised (him) along with the heroes of the lord of heaven; (I have praised) the Maruts of the two world-halvesas if by the aiming (of an arrow of praise).”


## 02
The root affiliation of vyùta- is disputed. WG (flg. Rau) take it to √vā ‘weave’ and tr. ‘geflochten’; so also Gr. and (ultimately) Re (though he vacillates in his n.). Most other tr. to ví √yu ‘separate’. My ‘cast-off’ comes via ‘separate, i.e., set aside, get rid of’. Re’s “serti (d’étoiles)” (sertir =‘to set’, of jewels) does not seem to have much to do with ‘weave’, but supplying “with stars” (stṛ́bhiḥ) as a play on starī́ḥ is clever enough to make his interpr. appealing, though I do not in the end accept it. A bejeweled Night does not fit well with her being starī́- ‘barren’: the contrast is as usual between dazzlingly beautiful Dawn and dreary dark Night. Cf. the black garment Night spreads at the horizon for the Sun in I.115.4. Night does get her chance at ornaments in the one hymn addressed to her, X.127.


## 03
The 2nd member of the cmpd vasarhā́is taken by Gr and Re as -hán-, hence ‘striking at dawn’, but a connection with √hā ‘change position, move’ makes more sense (so Ge [/WG], tentatively Scar 700). Wind does regularly rise at dawn, but it is hard to conceive that it smites then. This probably requires us to take the underlying form as -hā́s, contra the Pp. The 1st member vasar- is only attested here, as a variant to the (likewise secondary) locatival uṣar. See Lundquist 2014 (25th UCLA IE Conf., Proceedings). The somewhat better attested vanar- ‘in the wood’, also found as 1st cmpd member, may have provided the model for the shape of vasar-.

Ge (/WG) construe apā́m with vṛ́ṣanvān as “der Fuhrmann [coachman, teamster] der Gewässer,” while I follow Re in tentatively supplying ‘child’ with gen. apā́m on the basis of the next verse, which contains nápātam apā́m. Note that elsewhere in the hymn (12b / 13a) an incomplete expression (dáśatayasya) is repaired by the fuller form (dáśatayasya dhāséḥ). I don’t see how ‘possessing bulls’ would develop to ‘coachman’. In any case, neither of the alternatives makes much sense as a designation of the wind; I do not know why he would be a coachman of the waters, but I also don’t understand why he’d be the child of the waters -- perhaps because of the association of wind with rain or because wind blowing over open water is very perceptible? (For another interpr., see Keydana, Inf., 315 n. 126 “der Besitzer der Wasserhengste [water-stallions],” which seems to split the difference between the ‘bull[s]/male[s]’ of the nom. and the fem. waters in a way not exactly sanctioned by grammar.) The curious dual dvandva indrāparvatā ‘Indra and Mountain’ is found 3x in the RV (I.132.6, III.53.1 as well as here), always in the voc. I interpret the ‘mountain’ as a reference to Indra’s vájra-. For other passages with the vájra- as ‘mountain’, see VI.22.6 and VII.104.19, as well as Re, EVP XVI.117 (ad VII.104.19).


## 04
The first hemistich is structured like vs. 2, with a nom. subject of a purpose infinitive.

The root √śvit is a Dawn word (see I.92.12, 113.15, 124.11, the last in a nearby Kakṣīvant hymn); I wonder if śvetanā́- is feminine because it's evoking Dawn as the brightener.

Despite their similarity, with most tr. I take pā́ntam in 1a and pā́ntā here as belonging to separate stems, the first to pā́nta- ‘drink’, the second to the act. part. to the root aor. of √pā ‘drink’ (see disc. above ad v. 1). Immediately preceding vyántā can be the clue to its participial identity; for the sequence see I.153.4 (of Mitra and Varuṇa) vītám pātám páyasā … The second hemistich with prá vaḥ … kṛṇudhvam echoes 1ab prá vaḥ … bharadhvam, though in vs. 1 the verb is further distanced from the clause opening.

rāspiná- is a hopeless hapax, surely related to the likewise hopeless hapax rāspirá- in V.43.14, a passage that also contains a mother (mātúṣ padé) and āyóḥ, though not in the same configuration or meaning as here. Ge (/WG) wisely fail to tr.

Re: ‘fougueux’ (fiery, ardent), or, in his notes, ‘bouillant’ (boiling), though without serious argumentation. (For other possibilities see KEWA s.v.; AiG III.215.) Although it is foolhardy even to sketch derivational possibilites, I will toss out several, with no conviction. My tentative tr. ‘abundant’(?) depends on a possible deformation of reasonably well-attested virapśín- ‘id.’ (beside virapśá- ‘abundance’) (derived in turn from vīra-p(a)śu-, in a well-known and generally accepted etym.).

The initial ví-, perceived as a preverb, could be lopped off, and the unusual internal cluster -pś- metathesized and normalized to -sp-, whose order of segments and sibilant type are both more phonologically natural. The apparent vṛddhi might be like that of mā́hina- though they are differently accented. To account for rāspirá- we must assume that rāspiná- was analyzed as containing a -ná-suffix, for which -ráwas substituted for no discernible reason. Another even less good possibility, which partly goes back to Bollensen (ZDMG 22; see KEWA s.v., AiG III.215), starts from the fact that in context both rāspiná- and rāspirá- could use an extra syllable. The first member could be analyzed as a y-less genitive *rāás to rayí- / rāy- ‘wealth’, compounded with a form of √pi ‘swell’. (Note that rāyás regularly shows -s sandhi in syntagms before p: esp. rāyás póṣam, but cf. also rāyás pūrdhi.) However, our current understanding of the historical morphology of the ‘wealth’ word makes it well-nigh impossible to get such a -y-less form (since rāyás < *raHi-̯as) without a series of arbitrarily constructed analogies. Thus, the second possibility is essentially ruled out, and, insofar as I think it’s worth even thinking about an etymology here, I favor the deformation from virapśín-.

I do not know what role Āyu is playing here, as is often the case with this figure.


## 05
Again the first hemistich has a predicated infinitive, like 2ab, 4ab. In fact the structure is identical to that in 4: auśijó huvádhyai# (4b, 5a). But otherwise the verse is difficult to comprehend (as Ge says in n. 5, “Voll dunkler Beziehungen”), and tr.

differ considerably. I will not treat them in detail.

The object(s) of huvádhyai should first be sorted out: the two acc. ruvaṇyúm and sáṃsam. Are the two coreferential and what are their referent(s)? ruvaṇyú- is a hapax but clearly derived from the denom. (/deverb.?) stem ruvaṇya- (also a hapax) and ultimate from the root √ru ‘bellow, roar’. Ge (/WG) takes ruvaṇyúm as a qualifier of śáṃsam, which he treats as a PN (“den lauten Śaṃsa”), perhaps standing for Nāraśaṃsa. This is not impossible, but given the mysterious āyóḥ in 4d and auśijáḥ in both 4b and 5a, I am reminded the phrase uśíjaḥ śáṃsam āyóḥ (IV.6.11, V.3.4). In both passages we (SWJ and JPB respectively) take śáṃsam āyóḥ “the laud of Āyu” as a designation of Agni; in both we take the form uśíjaḥ as the nom. pl.

designation of a type of priest, who do homage to Agni under this name. Note also that II.31.6 contains śáṃsam uśíjām, with the Āyus featuring in the next verse (II.31.7b) as makers of hymns. I therefore think that śáṃsam in this verse should be combined with the mysterious āyóḥ at the end of the previous verse into a putative underlying phrase *śáṃsam āyóḥ, referring to Agni, modified by ruvaṇyúm.

Incomplete phrases straddling verse divisions are found in vss. 3-4 and 12-13 (though in those instances the complete phrase appears in the 2nd vs.); see comm. above on vs. 3. I would thus change the text of the publ. tr. to “It is for (Kakṣīvant), son of Uśij, to call the bellower, the ‘Laud (of Āyu)’ [=Agni], for you.” Agni can be characterized as ‘bellowing, roaring’ because of the crackling of his flames. The “you” are the priests (etc.) on whose behalf Kakṣīvant is acting. Agni was ritually presented in the previous hemistich (4c) under a different epithet, and his “mothers” (the kindling sticks) in 4d. A “roaring” Agni would come into being following the kindling about to take place in 4d. An invocation to Agni’s comrades ends this verse (5d). The context thus favors Agni.

The next problem is ghóṣeva. Ge (/WG) takes this as the fem. PN Ghoṣā, the erstwhile spinster, found in a nearby Kakṣīvant hymn (I.117.7) where the Aśvins bestowed a husband on her, as well as in the famous sequence of hymns X.39-41 attributed to her (with the patronymic Kākṣīvatī) and her son. Despite the close connection of Kakṣīvant with this Ghoṣā, I doubt that she figures in the strictly liturgical context here, and those who think she does must assume that Arjuna is the name of her acquired husband, for which there is no evidence. I take the form rather as the old instr. ghóṣā to the masc. common noun ghóṣa- ‘shout, cry’, though I admit the simile seems a bit lame. Re’s grammatical interpr. is the same as mine; his tr.

“semblable à une rumeur (de guerre)” is less lame, but even less supported.

náṃśé occurs twice in the RV, here and in 12b in this hymn, both times preceded by a genitive. There seems no reason not to take it, with Gr etc., as the loc. sg. to a stem náṃśa- ‘at/on the attainment’ construed with the gen. As for árjunasya, lit. ‘silver(y)’, I suggest that it refers to soma; cf. ṛjīṣín- ‘possessing the silvery drink [=soma]’ (so Thieme), with the Caland form ṛji- to this same etymon. Unfortunately árjuna- doesn’t elsewhere characterize soma. Nonetheless, the fact that the other occurrence of náṃśe (12b) takes a genitive that also probably refers to soma gives some support to this interpr.

The initial prá in c, echoing those in 1a and 4c, suggests that this hemistich has a structure parallel to those two. Hence my “(put him) forward”; other tr. supply other material to complete the clause. The meter of this pāda is deficient, lacking three syllables. Various restorations have been suggested (see Old, Prol. 113 n. 1 [=Engl. tr. 133 n. 3]; HvN metrical notes ad loc.). Old (Prol.) suggests an impv. like arcata or gāyata, noting the structural similarity to 4c, but in the Noten he suggests that the metrical irregularity of Kakṣīvant’s I.120 might indicate that the text here is correctly transmitted and that the meter must be taken as is. It is certainly difficult to see how a trisyllabic verb form would have simply got dropped here.

I do not understand how Pūṣan comes to be named in this august divine company, and I wonder if the abbreviated meter of this pāda has something to do with the dedicand: the only hymns addressed solely to Pūṣan in the RV, VI.53-58, consist entirely of dimeter hymns save for the last. The 8-syllable pāda here might signal his more humble stature.

vasútāti- is another word that occurs in the RV only here and in vs. 12 of this same hymn. Its formation is of course transparent, but its meaning is less so. Most take it as a true abstract to vásu- ‘good(s)’, but with a slight twist to ‘generosity’ (Freigebigkeit). But the lexeme ácha √vac seems to be a technical ritual term for ‘invite’ (cf. áchokti- and the later priestly title acchāvāka-) with gods as the object.

Gr suggests the meaning ‘Schaar der Guten, d.h. der Götter’ for the occurrence in vs. 12 (but not this one), which I have adopted for both instances. It would be equiv. to devátāti- ‘assemblage/conclave of gods’. The pāda would then refer to the group of divinities that Agni regularly conveys to the sacrifice.


## 06
This last verse before the dānastuti is free of the manifold difficulties that clot the first five verses of the hymn, but it is not devoid of Kakṣīvant’s poetic flourishes. Note first the play on √śru ‘hear’, which reaches a climax in pāda c: śrótu naḥ śróturatiḥ suśrotuḥ. What is particularly clever here is that though the pāda contains three forms śrótu, the first is completely different from the second two: it is the 3rd sg. act. root aor. impv., while the other two belong to the nominal stem śrótuand are 1st and 2nd compound members respectively. The pāda has only 10 syllables, with a likely rest after śrótu naḥ, which would call attention to the phonological identity / morphological difference.

The phrase viśvátaḥ sīm occurs 5x in the RV; I have discussed this formula at length elsewhere (“Rigvedic viśvátaḥ sīm, or why syntax needs poetics”, Mír Curad, Fs. C. Watkins [edd. J. Jasanoff, H.C. Melchert, and L. Oliver], 1998, pp. 291-300).

The two occurrences in Kakṣīvant’s oeuvre (I.116.20 and here) ring changes on the basic formula in his usual deft and unexpected ways. I will not reproduce the entire discussion, but summarize the main points. Four of the five passages (all but this one) concern the theme “surrounding,” marked by pári + VERB. In three of these (all but the two Kakṣīvant examples) the object is the two worlds / heaven and earth. In  I.20 it is the subject (the Aśvins), not the object, that is dual. In other words, Kakṣīvant has transformed the underlying formula by transferring the abstract grammatical category DUAL from one of the arguments of the verb to the other.

This analysis of I.116.20 is necessary to understand the more attenuated -- and more radical -- instantiation of the formula found in our verse here. As in I.116.20 the DUAL that is inherent in the formula surfaces on the subject, here Mitra and Varuṇa, but the “surrounding” motif is not present, except in viśvátaḥ ‘on all sides’ itself, which seems to have no semantic connection with the rest of its clause. Why is it here? Because it is crossed with a different formula through surface phonological similarity. Consider the word sádane in the same pāda, which has connections with another RVic formula. The phrase “in the seat of Vivasvant” occurs five times in the RV (I.53.1, III.34.7, III.51.3, X.12.7, X.75.1), twice as pāda-final sádane vivásvataḥ# (I.53.1, X.75.1). This provides an almost perfect phonological scrambling of our pāda ending.(In fact, according to Oldenberg [Noten, ad loc.], Ludwig suggested emending viśvátaḥ to vivasvataḥ [no accent given].) sádane vivásvataḥ# sádane viśvátaḥ sīm# Thus our phrase may have been employed in order to evoke the other formula, which is a kenning for “der Opferplatz," so Geldner ad I.53.1. Thus Kakṣīvant deftly marries the grammatical deep structure (the dual) of the viśvátaḥ sīm formula with the surface phonology of sádane vivásvataḥ in a way that allows the semantics of both to be alluded to. (Perhaps an appreciation of the formulaic manipulations involved here would have led Bloomfield (RR) to reconsider his assessment of this verse with its “hysterical repetition of the root śru” as “secondary clap-trap.”) I do not understand why the Sindhu is esp. gifted with hearing.


## 07
The transition between the All God portion of the hymn and the dānastuti is eased by verbal repetition: Mitra and Varuṇa, who were the last gods invoked (6ab), are again called on here, though in opposite order and not in a dvandva but in individual vocatives (varuṇa mitra versus 6a mitrāvaruṇā). Independent rātíḥ picks up the 2nd cmpd member in śrótu-rātiḥ (6c) and the PN śrutáratha- (7c) also echoes śrótu-rātiḥ.

The locc. pajré / śrutárathe priyárathe mark these men as givers, which makes some trouble, since Kakṣīvant’s family seems to be called Pajra (quite possibly in the next verse and in I.126.4-5) and Kakṣīvant himself pajriyá- (I.116.7, 117.6, 120.5). Nonetheless, grammar can’t be gainsaid, and they must be patrons here. See Ge’s n. 7bc for attempts to reconcile the discrepancies.

## 07-08
The passively used 3rd sg. stuṣé (7a), stuṣe (8a) contrast in function with the great majority of stuṣé / stuṣe forms, which are 1st sg. and “active” in sense (“I (will) praise”). This rare usage may be mediated through the perception of the accented forms as infinitives; see disc. ad X.22.1.


## 08
See Old on this vs. I follow him in taking cd as a single rel. cl. hanging off Nahus in b, rather than a rel. cl. / main cl. structure. The uncertainty about the relationships of the various named patrons makes any interpr. tentative. See publ.

intro.


## 09
This cautionary example of what happens to men who cheat the gods of proper offerings is clearly meant to warn stingy patrons.

Note the echo between the openings of b #apó and d #ā́pa, which are entirely distinct grammatically. As for the latter, as Kü also notes, various forms of the perfect of √āp have presential value.


## 10
Ge refuses to tr. dáṃsujūta-. Re “ayant été mû (comme) par miracle,” clearly connecting it with dáṃsas- ‘wondrous power’, etc.; my tr. makes the same connection. The stem dáṃsu- is probably also found in dáṃsu-patni- (IV.19.7), though this is disputed. WG tr. dáṃsujūta- “als Heimkehrer,” with the 1st member the loc. pl. of dám- ‘house’ -- so, more literally, ‘in die Häuser eilend’. This is clever, and the two independent uses of dáṃsu, both nearby (I.134.4, 141.4), do seem to be that loc. pl. However, jūta- means ‘sped, spurred on’ and the fairly numerous compds in which it occurs have a 1st member that provides impetus (cf., e.g., vā́tajūta- ‘wind-sped’); ‘sped into the house’ sounds more like an act of cowardice or retreat than of triumph.

bāḷhasṛ́tvā in c is even more problematic (though Ge does tr. it: “geht er [yāti] festes Ganges”). Independent sṛ̥́tvan- means ‘running, streaming’; bāḷha- means ‘thick, squeezed’, to √baṃh. Although it would of course be possible to attenuate that meaning to ‘firm, powerful’, I think that Kakṣīvant, by using this unusual compound, and esp. the unusual 1st member, had something more precise in mind than a firm stride -- esp. in a dānastuti, where slang is most at home. I have therefore used the Engl. idiom ‘pumped up’ (approximating the ‘squeezed, dense’ sense of the Skt.), which is defined by an online dict. (http://www.thefreedictionary.com) as “tense with excitement and enthusiasm as from a rush of adrenaline,” with the following example: "we were really pumped up for the race."


## 11
The dual part. gmántā of pāda a does not match the pl. impv. śrótā of b nor the pl. voc. rājānaḥ in the same pāda. Drawing the distinction did not seem worth it in the publ. tr. -- which would have to be something like “as you two go …, (do all of you) hear …” The number discrepancy is generally (and in my opinion correctly) interpreted as first a reference to Mitra and Varuṇa and then to the Ādityas as a group. M+V were prominent earlier (vss. 6-7, 9; see also 15c, the final vs.) and in fact in vs. 7 ushered in the dānastuti. The plural phrase in b is used precisely of the three principal Ādityas, including explicitly M+V, in X.93.5: té ghā rā́jāno amṛ́tasya mandrā́, aryamā́mitró váruṇaḥ … This parallel also shows that Scar’s clever idea (171, followed by WG) to construe amṛ́tasya with the verb śrótā cannot be correct.

In c Old takes the hapaxes nabhojū́- and niravá- in full lexical value, rather than as PN, and, at least acdg. to Mayr. (PN, svv.), this remains a live possibility.

However, in the dānastuti context names are more likely, though they can be speaking names. That -jū- echoes -jūta- in 10a and -ravá- echoes ruvaṇyú- in 5a (assuming an analysis ni-ravá- with Old, rather than nir-avá- with Gr) is presumably no accident: puns on personal names are a standard RVic poetic device.


## 12
My interpr. differs from most (though it is closest to Old’s). There are two major reasons for the different interpr. in pāda a: 1) most take dhāma as part of the rel. cl., but this is impossible because the verb is unaccented; 2) most take śárdham as a reference to the Marut troop. This is, of course, its standard use, but in this hymn it should first be interpreted in conjunction with śárdhastara- ‘more forceful’ in 10b, where it qualifies an unnamed patron. Here we want to establish our patron (sūrí-) as such a force. In my interpr. the rel. cl. is a nominal cl. consisting only of yásya sūréḥ, in which *vayám (or *smás[i]) can be supplied (from the 1st pl. inherent in dhāma), as an expression of possession: “of which patron (we) [are],” i.e., “who is (our) patron.” Cf. the type VIII.92.32 tvám asmā́kaṃ táva smasi “you are ours; we are yours.” The speakers in b are the poet(s) and priest(s). The gen. dáśastayasya ‘tenfold’ must be interpreted in light of the fuller expression dáśastayasya dhāséḥ in 13a “tenfold gush,” probably a kenning for soma, though there is no agreement on its sense. The fact that the fuller expression serves as a complement of the verb mándāmahe, a standard soma verb, in 13a supports this identification. The ‘tenfold’ characterization is not clear; Old plausibly suggests that it refers to the number of servings to be divided among that number of priests.

Ge (/WG) and possibly Re take cd as a resumption of the direct speech of pāda a. This is not impossible, but the 3rd persons of c and d have no clear referents in a.

I take dyumnā́ni in c as a fronted object of sanvantu in d, more or less following Old. This technically makes yéṣu … rārán appear to be an embedded rel.

cl., which I’m afraid I will just have to live with.

As indicated in the comm. to vs. 5, I take vasútāti- here as a reference to the collectivity of good ones, namely gods. I then take the pl. víśve opening the next pāda as referring also to the gods. In this Viśve Devāḥ hymn, the poet cleverly makes reference to them here in this off-kilter expression, with devā́ḥ suppressed and anticipated by the sg. vasútāti-. (The full expression is found in 3d.) My only reservation about this interpr. is that in a dānastuti it should be mortals who are doing the winning, and certainly the phrase prabhṛthéśu vā́jam “the victory prize in the forays” fits a mortal context better. I might then modify my tr. to remove the bracketed “[=gods]” and leave the identity of the subject open. It may in fact be that the two objects dyumnā́ni and vā́jam will be won by gods and mortals respectively, and víśve refers to both, hence “let all (the gods) win the brilliant things in which the assemblage of good ones takes pleasure, and let all (the mortals) win the victory prize at the forays.”


## 13
On the phrasal repair of 12b dáśatayasya by dáśastayasya dhāséḥ see comm. vss. 3, 5, and 12.

The “twice five” in pāda b may be the fingers, as I suggest (almost the default identification in a RVic ritual context), or the number of priests, indirectly conveyed by the tenfold soma of 12b and 13a. Ge (/WG) takes the “twice five” as directly characterizing ánnā: the twice five foods.

Ge (/WG) and Re take iṣṭā́śvaḥ and iṣṭáraśmiḥ as PNs of patrons. (Actually Re omits the first, presumably inadvertently.) I also take them as referring to patrons but with full lexical value: the one who has “desirable horses” and “desirable reins” [latter probably a stand-in for “chariots”] to offer. That “those showing mastery” (īśānā́saḥ) are patrons is strongly suggested by I.141.3, where that participle modifies sūráyaḥ ‘patrons’. The Saṃhitā text táruṣa is analyzed by the Pp. as táruṣaḥ, which could be a gen. with īśānā́saḥ (so Gr, Re, WG) or nom. pl. (so Ge). Old suggests that it could also be read as dat. táruṣe, against the Pp., which is how I take it. I then interpr. nṝ́n as referring not to the singers (so Ge et al.) but to still other patrons with whom they are competing to provide the best recompense to the singers.


## 14
As is recognized by all, the flood (árṇaḥ) is the herd of gift cows, whose constant turbulent motion must have suggested the metaphor. Accentless maṇigrīvam Old considers a “monstrosity” due to faulty transmission. It must be a bahuvrīhi like immediately preceding híraṇyakarṇam, and I now wonder if the phrase híraṇyakarṇam maṇigrīvam actually represents a dvandva consisting of two bahuvrīhis (‘possessing golden ears and ornamented necks’), which could account for the single accent. The geminate m across the compound boundary (-karṇam maṇi-) might have been redactionally introduced from *-karṇa-maṇi-). The first members of the two compounds híraṇya- and maṇi- are the constituents of the phrase híraṇyena maṇínā in I.33.8, on which see my extensive discussion in “A Golden Amulet in Vedic and Avestan” (Ged. H. P. Schmidt).

Pāda b is repeated verbatim from 3d, but because it has an object (the flood) it has a slightly different sense from there.

The reason for the doubled ā́in c is not clear to me.

cākantu is taken, plausibly, as haplologized from *cākanantu. See, most recently, Kü (131).


## 15
In the publ. tr., there should be a comma after “victorious.” What verb to supply in ab seems up to the interpreter.

I do not understand the image in syū́ma-gabhasti- ‘with hands as its guiding rope’.

