+++
title = "123"

+++
Dawn After the almost impenetrable last two hymns, the Dawn series comes as a welcome relief, though it does not lack puzzles or Kakṣīvant’s characteristic flourishes. Note also the prevalence of āmreḍitas and similar expressions (gr̥háṃgrham ̥ , divé-dive, śáśvat, and ágram-agram all in vs. 4; then ékaikā in 8 at long remove, bhadrám-bhadram in 13).


## 01
Against the Pp (and standard tr.) I read dat. dákṣiṇāyāi rather than gen. -āyāḥ.

If it’s a gen., it has to be construed with ráthaḥ “the chariot of the priestly gift.” The identification of the chariot and the dakṣiṇā in 5d supports neither of these interpr.


## 02
The vs. begins and ends with pū́rva- (pū́rvā … pūrvá(hūtau)), a very tight species of ring composition.

punarbhū́- here seems to lack its later technical sense (a remarried widow) and have only its literal meaning ‘come into being again’.


## 04
The hapax ahanā́is difficult. Gr connects it with (áhar /) áhan- ‘day’. Ge tr.

‘unverwüstliche’ (indestructible); he does not comment, but judging from the tr. I assume he takes it from a negated derivative of √han ‘smite’. Old tentatively suggests a connection with √ah ‘say’, though he doesn’t gloss the result (for perhaps obvious reasons). Re ‘lascive’ with caution, connecting it possibly with āhanás- ‘swollen, lusty’ (usually of soma). WG refuse to tr. but suggest in the n. an adverbial derivation of the particle áha ‘certainly’. My tr. rests on the possibility that it represents *máhanā, with the initial m lost after the final m of the preceding word: gṛháṃ-gṛham ahanā́… This would make for better meter; otherwise there are four consecutive light syllables, spanning the (early) caesura, and Arnold (194) deems × - ⏑ ⏑ an “occasional” (that is, relatively rare) pattern of the trimeter opening. But what would such *mahanā́represent? I suggest that it should be grouped with the trisyllabic form mah·nā́(IV.2.1, X.6.7 [possibly; see comm. ad loc.]); this appears to be a variant of mahinā́, the longer version of the instr. sg. to mahimán-, whose shorter version is the very common disyllabic mahnā́. The medial -a- here would result from matching the second vowel of mahánt-, mahá-, mahás-/máhas-, as well as the combining form mahā-. Or it might actually reflect a different syllabification of the inherited instr. *maǵH-mn-aH as * maǵH-m̥n-aH, with the suffixal m vocalized between two consonants, rather than the preceding laryngeal.


## 05
The final phrase dákṣinayā ráthena with two instr. identifies the dakṣiṇā and the chariot, unlike either of the proposed readings in 1a (see comm. there). Gr, followed (perhaps surprisingly) by Old, suggests reading *dákṣiṇāyā(ḥ) here, with the gen. supposedly found in 1a. Old ascribes the change to attraction to the instr.

ráthena. The proposed emendation would do no violence to the meter (and would in fact produce a somewhat more common break), but since the text is easily comprehensible as transmitted, I see no reason to emend.


## 07
The du. parikṣítoḥ is universally taken (Ge [/WG], Re, Old, Scar [p. 96]) as referring to Heaven and Earth (e.g., Ge “das Dunkel der beiden umgebenden (Welten)”). In favor of this interpr. is the fact that the two other occurrences of the form do refer to H+E (III.7.1, X.65.8). However, I prefer to take it as referring to the pair already in the discourse, Night and Dawn. The cycling and circling movements of these two are highlighted in 7ab (and note pári yanti in 8d of the pl. Dawns). I also do not understand what “the darkness of H+E” would refer to, whereas Dawn’s role in hiding the darkness of night is well known. There is also a weak syntactic argument in favor of my interpr. Definite anyá- forms ordinarily take 2nd position (see Jamison 1997, Fs. Beekes); note the position of the two anyád in pāda a, each after the fronted preverb in its clause. (The anyā́ḥ in 11d belongs to the “(all) the other” construction, which is positioned differently.) If parikṣitóḥ is loosely connected with what follows, anyā́here follows the first real word of the clause támaḥ; otherwise it appears late.


## 08
I take pári yanti in two different senses, one with each pāda of the hemistich: in c the verb describes the literal circuit of the thirty days whereas in d it is used in the metaphorical sense ‘encompass’, hence ‘achieve’. The two pādas also contrast the series of dawns needed to add up to the thirty-day cycle (c) with what each one of them accomplishes in a single day (d).


## 09
I think ná in c does double duty: first and primarily as the negative with mināti, but also as a simile marker following yóṣā. The rest of the simile (niṣkṛtám ācárantī) follows in the next pāda. For yóṣā explicitly in a similar simile see VI.75.4 té ācárantī sámaneva yóṣā “The two …, like a maiden faring forth to (festive) gatherings.”


## 11
In the publ. tr. “auspicious one” sounds like a vocative, which it is not.

Perhaps better “as the/an auspicious one.”


## 12
Likewise “easy to invoke,” which is not a voc. either. Better “as one easy to invoke.”

