+++
title = "124"

+++
Dawn

## 02-03
áminatī (2a) and ná … mināti (3d)(cf. also ná mināti I.123.9) receive different tr. here both because they have different objects and because áminatī is contrastively paired with praminatī́(2b).


## 04
My interpr. follows that of Thieme (KZ 79 [1965] -- KlSch 214-27), cited also in the publ. intro.; for doubts, esp. about the interpr. of pāda b, see Scar 272-73.


## 05
The hapax aptyá- is connected by Gr, Old, and, tentatively, EWA (s.v. ánapta-) with ‘water’. Ge leaves it untr.; WG as ‘äussere’ without comment. I follow Re’s tentative suggestion ‘inaccessible au vol’ (to √pat), with perhaps more enthusiasm than he shows for it.


## 07
On the female figures here, see publ. intro. Though most interpr. (see recently Scar [463], WG) see only a male figure in the simile in b (a charioteer seeking prizes), I find it unlikely that the middle simile of three, the two outer of which depict striking female types, would compare Dawn only to a male. As indicated in the publ. intro., I think it is a double entendre, with not only the prizeseeking male competitor on his chariot seat but also a prostitute displaying herself on a platform or stage for money (or whatever counted for money in that period).

## 07-08
suvā́śā(ḥ) in 7c is neatly echoed by svásā opening 8a.


## 08
As indicated in the publ. intro., I believe that this verse continues the series of female portraits, this time with two vignettes of the svayaṃvara (‘self-choice’) marriage.

On the basis of I.113.1, Ge suggests persuasively that the subj. of pāda a is Night and her older sister is Dawn. Nonetheless, I take the subj. of b to be Dawn, who is going away from Night. The crucial word in b is praticákṣyă/ā (latter Pp.), which can be either a gerund (-ă) or a gerundive (-ā). Most (though not Old) take it as the latter, as I do, but with the sense “to be seen again” (e.g., Ge “die man wiedersehen soll”), that is, as one who will return. But this is not the standard meaning of práti √cakṣ, which simply means ‘gaze upon’. Here I think “to be gazed upon” represents the display motif of the svayaṃvara marriage: before the girl exercises her choice among the assembled suitors, she enters the arena (vel sim.) and is announced and displayed for all to see (for disc. see esp. Jamison 1999 [Penelope] and for this passage in general Jamison 2003 [Fs. H.-P. Schmidt], pp. 42-44).

The choosing maidens (vrā́ḥ) of the same marriage type are the topic of pāda d.


## 12
The “one being at home” (amā́sánt-) may contrast implicitly with the “Early-coming” one (prātarítvan-) who forms the subject of the 1st half of the next hymn (I.125). In that hymn the Prātaritvan engages in dialogue with a person who is probably a householder, that is, in the words of our verse, one being at home.

This vs. is identical to VI.64.6; for further comm. see there.

