+++
title = "125"

+++
(The Early-coming one.) Svayana's Dānastuti For a sustained treatment of the “early-coming one” (prātáritvan-) see Jamison, Sac.Wife 184-89.


## 02
The first three pādas of this verse are in the standard high Rigvedic register and present the unsurprising themes of prosperity and reciprocity, but the fourth pāda violently wrenches the verse in an unexpected direction. The placidly happy relationship between host and guest depicted in vss. 1 and 2abc takes a sinister and coercive turn, but what precisely that turn consists of is partly obscured by the fact that pāda d contains two hapaxes (mukṣī́jā- and pádi-) and a very rare lexeme (úd √sā/si, otherwise only AV VI.112.2-3). What is clear is that the host derives great benefit from the visit of the early-coming one if he forces him to stay -- “ties him up” in fact.

A simile adds precision to this picture, or it would if we understood it: mukṣī́jayeva pádim “(binds you up) like a pádi with a mukṣī́jā-.” Ge tr. “wie den Vogel in der Schlinge,” which certainly yields sense though it is essentially contextually inspired guesswork. (In content it is reminiscent of the clearer III.45.1 “Let no one hold you down, as men using snares do a bird.”) I have tried pushing it further, though with no confidence in the correctness of my speculations.

I treated mukṣī́jā- elsewhere (Ged. Cowgill, 1987, pp. 89-91). I suggested there that the word is a deformation of muṣká- ‘testicle’ and that Kakṣīvant is making a play on his own name (which may itself mean ‘having a crotch’), esp. the -kṣī, with this deformation -- as he does elsewhere in his oeuvre. Taking this further, the -jāmay be the root noun to √jani , a root noun very common as a 2nd compound member (see the numerous exx. in Scar. 132-53). Those compounds are invariably accented on the -jā́-; I would attribute the accent here to the poet’s play on his name kakṣī́vant-.

But what would this baroque confection mukṣī́jā- mean? If it literally means ‘originating from/at the testicles’, it could refer to a loin cloth, a strip of cloth that covers the genitals -- a thong -- and as a long strip of material it could be used to bind or tie up an animal.

My interpr. of pádi- rests on even less evidence. I suggest, very tentatively, that it comes from a MIA form *pṛdi-, related to the Iranian forms borrowed into Greek as πάρδαλις, etc., as well as to Skt. pṛdāku-. In earlier lit. this word was said to mean ‘leopard, panther, tiger’ only in lexical texts, while its earlier occurrences mean ‘spotted snake’; see EWA, KEWA s.v. Mayrhofer attributes the later lexical meaning to borrowing from Iranian. But it clearly refers to a large wild feline in AVP II.18.1, since it is parallel to siṃha-‘lion’ and vyāghra- ‘tiger’; see Zehnder, Atharvaveda-Paippalāda, Buch 2, p. 59. In keeping with the racy tone in these two hymns, it could also be a pun on √pr̥d 'fart' (though this root is not attested in Vedic [see EWA s.v. pard], its representation in the younger language and in Iranian, incl.

Avestan, suggests that it was known to Vedic speakers), and the desire to make the pun would have led K. to use an otherwise obscure word for wild animal here. Given the discrepancy in morphology (no forms of the shape *pṛdi- are attested in any relevant language) and the chronological gap, this gossamer hypothesis probably should be discarded -- but there is nothing stronger to take its place (and it gave me the opportunity to use the English word ‘pard’).


## 03
iṣṭéḥ putrám “the son of my seeking” picks up the immediately preceding part. ichán ‘seeking’ to the same root and means essentially the product of my successful search.

Indra is the likely recipient of the soma in c and the strengthening in d, but the epithet kṣayádvīra- (8x) is never applied to Indra, rather usually to Rudra (5x). But Rudra is highly unlikely to be the target here.


## 04
The two conjoined phrases ījānáṃ ca yakṣyámānaṃ ca (b) and pṛṇántaṃ ca pápuriṃ ca (c) have the same referent, and their syntactic parallelism invites a completely parallel interpretation of their verbal semantics. But the pairs are not morphologically parallel: the first phrase consists of a perfect part. and a future part., the second of a present part. and a reduplicated -i-stem adj. In the publ. tr. I render pápuri- as preterital (“who … has granted”), but following Grestenberger (JAOS 113.2 [2013]) I now see such forms as imperfectives, often with habitual or iterative sense; unfortunately in this context the conjoined phrase then seems almost pleonastic, though perhaps “the one who grants and keeps granting” would work.

I would also slightly alter the tr. of the phrase in b to “the one who has sacrificed and will sacrifice,” to make the parallelism of the two phrases in bc clearer and also to rule out a reading in which the two participles in b have different referents.


## 06
The dakṣiṇā (priestly gift, more literally gift-cow) theme comes to the fore here.

I supply ‘bounties’ (rā́dhāṃsi) with citrā́‘bright’ on the basis of the cmpd citrá-rādhas- and the numerous occurrences of the phrase citrá- rā́dhas-.


## 07
I do not entirely understand pāda c, which must contrast with d. I assume the referents of téṣām are the generous patrons of ab, who are distinguished from the ápṛṇantam ‘non-granter’ of d. This non-granter is to be entirely engulfed (abhí sám √i) by śókāḥ. The stem śóka- and the various forms of the root to which it belongs (√śuc) otherwise refers to blazing flames in the RV, but in later Skt. it has come to mean ‘pain, affliction’. I think that both senses are present here, hence my portmanteau tr. “flames of pain.” The flames in this pāda may help in interpreting the previous one. One of the uses of paridhí- ‘enclosure’ is for the “enclosing sticks” placed around the Āhavanīya fire (already X.90.15 and common in ritual lit.). If the non-giver is being surrounded by flames in d, the givers in c deserve a different and benign enclosure (anyáḥ … paridhíḥ … káś cid), not the paridhí- that ordinarily surrounds the fire. Its nature remains unspecified: both the initial position of anyáand the final káś cid mark the referent as indefinite.

