+++
title = "126"

+++
Kakṣīvant's Dānastuti


## 01
Negated ámanda- ‘not feeble’ contains the adj. manda- ‘stupid, lazy’, which is otherwise not attested until the Up. and epic. The audience’s first interpr. of ámandān would be as a form of √ma(n)d ‘exhilarate’, though obviously manda- ‘stupid’ must have existed in everyday speech to allow it to be used here. As with śóka- in the last verse of the preceding hymn (I.125.7), Kakṣīvant is availing himself of words/meanings belonging to a different register to spice up the discourse. The prominent placing of ámandān as the initial word of the hymn calls further attention to this stylistic departure.


## 02
The root √nādh ‘(cry/be) in distress’ is often used of people in dire straits (see, e.g., in Kakṣīvant’s I.118.10); here the king’s distress comes not from danger but from want of fame. There may be a touch of humor in this overdramatization of his plight, though see I.110.5 where the Ṛbhus cry out in want at an invocation, likewise seeking fame (śráva ichámānāḥ, exactly as in our 1d).

The patron-poet reciprocal bargain is managed with striking economy here: the king seeks fame in 1d, the poet receives many goods in 2abc, and the desired fame is dispatched to heaven in 2d.


## 03
The temporal expression abhipitvé áhnām is universally taken as a reference to evening. In the RV dakṣiṇās are distributed at the morning sacrifice (hence their association with Dawn), though in classical śrauta ritual the time has changed to the midday rite. Perhaps Kakṣīvant knows an alternative practice, or he’s slyly indicating that the largesse was so enormous that it took all day to distribute. I favor the latter.


## 05
Having employed a no-nonsense style in listing the gifts he acquired in vss.

2-4 (for a similar detour into straightforwardness, see the expression of his desires in I.121.14-15), Kakṣīvant returns to his tricks in the last vss. of this hymn.

Since I discuss this verses at length in Jamison 2003 (Fs. H.-P. Schmidt) pp.

47-51, I will not repeat the details here. The first hemistich is reasonably intelligible and continues the listing of gifts. It’s notable that the amount that Kakṣīvant managed to acquire “for you” (vaḥ) is a small fraction of his own haul. One question is who the “you” are: I take them as the Pajras, his kin, who cleaned up with him in 4d and are mentioned again in 5d, though in the 3rd ps.

As I point out in the loc. cit., the elaborate simile in cd seems typed as a wedding scene by the telling words ánasvant- ‘possessing carts’ and vrā́- ‘female chooser’. The cart (ánas-) is the wedding vehicle par excellence and hardly appears in the RV except in conjunction with females, particularly in marriage context, and, as I argue in that art., vrā́- is the designation for a girl exercising her choice at a svayaṃvara marriage. The image presented in the simile is of well-connected young men traveling to svayaṃvaras in hopes of acquiring a bride (that is, being chosen by a bride) of acceptable family and clan. I therefore take the vrā́ḥ phrase as acc. pl., not nom. with most interpr. and take the simile as beginning with subándhavaḥ.


## 06
On the meaning ‘smell’ for the intensive jáṅgahe see Lubotsky (JAOS 117 [1997]: 562-63 [rev. of Schaeffer, Intensiv]); Griffiths and Lubotsky (JAOS 119 [1999]: 480-81). The word kaśīkā- is found only here. If it refers to a mongoose (or perhaps the related civet cat), the naturalistic description makes sense, as Lubotsky (JAOS 117) argues: squeezed on the back, mongooses release a musky odor. (This is characteristic of both sexes at least of civet cats, though Lubotsky seems to think it is only true of males mongooses.) As I have argued elsewhere (Ged. Cowgill, 1987, p.

89), this hapax may appear in this passage because Kakṣīvant is making another play on his own name (see above, comm. I.125.2).

The second hemistich appears to be a fairly graphic depiction of sexual intercourse and, like other such passages, is difficult to interpret because of the obscurity of the vocabulary and the slangy style. The difficulties here reside primarily in the hapax yā́durī and the near hapax yā́śu-. The rest -- dádāti máhyam … bhojyā̀śatā́-- is relatively straightforward: “She gives me 100 …” I differ from the standard tr. in taking bhojyā̀not as acc. pl. neut. ‘pleasures’, but as a fem. sg.

gerundive. Although we would expect the accentuation *bhójyā, the suffixal accent here may be a redactional change to follow bhojyā̀in nearby I.128.5 after our passage was no longer understood. I take this gerundive as belonging to both roots √bhuj ‘enjoy’ and ‘bend, coil’: the woman in question is to be coiled around (in sex) and thus to be enjoyed.

As for yā́śu- this word appears a few other times in compounds: budbudáyāśu- (X.155.4), where it seems to refer to ejaculations (as insubstantial as) bubbles; fem. suyā́śutarā (X.86.6), where Indrāṇī boasts about herself -- I tr. “gives better sex” -- and ayāśú- (AV VIII.6.15) as an epithet of hideous minor demons tormenting pregnant women, where Whitney plausibly but tentatively tr. ‘impotent’.

I take it to mean something like ‘ejaculation’, which I’ve rendered as ‘spurts’ to avoid a clinical tone.

yā́durī- appears to belong to the marginal root √yād ‘unite’ (see EWA s.v. YĀD); I render the nominal here by ‘fusing’.

As often, I think the presence of these rare words serves more than one purpose — in this case to produce an encoded pun on the root √yabh ‘fuck’. Note the repetition of yā’s, starting with yā́in b, but taking off in cd: … (mah)ya yā́(durī) yā́(śūnāṃ bhojí)yā … This repetition of the initial of the root might have the same effect as the English expression “the f-word,” and it also gives the impression of a stutterer saying “ya … ya … ya …” while the bh eludes him -- until he reaches bh(ojyā̀) and finally achieves the whole word.


## 07
This is presumably the speech of the woman whose charms were described in vs. 6. I have tr. it with what I consider appropriate vulgarity.

In pāda a úpopa ‘nearer’ and párā ‘away’ might seem to be preverbs that would cancel each other out, but here their conjunction perhaps invites the interpr.

that she's asking for ever more intimate contact (úpopa) with parts that are usually off limits (párā).

Ge (/WG) take dabhrā́ṇi manyathāḥ to mean “think that (my hair) is meager” vel sim., with the hair borrowed from the second hemistich. I think rather that dabhrá- √man means ‘belittle, think little of’, but that dabhrā́ṇi should also be read as the object of that compound verb. This latter dabhrā́ṇi I take as a euphemism for her private parts (‘little things’), in the way that priyā́‘dear things’ is used by Indrāṇī in X.86.5 to refer to the same. (The contexts -- explicit female boasting about sex -- are similar, not to mention rare.) I thus take dabhrā́ṇi twice.

Although it is clear why a ewe, even a little ewe (avikā́), would be a fine example of a hairy female, I have no idea why Gandharī ewes would be especially hairy. Cold climate, one assumes.


## 127-139
Hymns of Paruchepa Daivodāsi This sequence of hymns, composed primarily in Atyaṣṭi meter, is one of my favorite collections in the RV. The elaborate meter showcases the patterned repetitions, echoes, and variations that are one of the specialties of Rigvedic poets.

The meter is configured as 12 12 8 / 8 8 / 12 8, generally with exact repetition, rhyme, or some kind of controlled variation between pāda b + c and f + g. This series is the only sustained set of Atyaṣṭi hymns in the RV; to Paruchepa’s son (/descendant) Anānata Pāruchepi is attributed the short Soma hymn IX.111.

