+++
title = "127"

+++
Agni


## 01
The patterned connections of the 8-syllable pādas to their preceding pādas are detailed in the publ. intro. to this hymn group.


## 02
Although “earth-encircling heaven” fits easily into our modern cosmology, I don’t know what is meant by this in a Vedic cosmological context. This problem clearly troubles both Ge and Re, who both supply the sun to do the circling, with heaven as the object (Re: “Lui qui circule autour (de l’aire) comme (le soleil autour du) ciel”). Although I understand the impetus, these interpr. introduce too much extra machinery into a simple two-word simile.

Agni was compared to a vípra- in 1c and then addressed as one in 2b. In 2c we invoke Agni with our own vípra-s, with víprebhiḥ occuping the same position as vípram in 1c. This type of implicit identification between Agni and his mortal worshipers is also found in 2a, where we sacrificers (yájamānāḥ) invoke him as best sacrificer (yájiṣṭham).

2f is a relative clause that lacks a verb; the verb ([pra-]ávanti vel sim.) can be supplied from the verb in the 8-syllable tag (2g), which contains the impv. prā́vantu with the same subj. (víśaḥ ‘clans’). The g-pāda also adds an infinitival dat. to this verbal complex, indicating what the clans help Indra to do. Constructing the verb in 2f from the one in 2g is not a matter of simple gapping, because imperatives cannot appear in relative clauses. Ge supplies a different verb in f (huldigen) from that in g (ermutigen), but this ignores the patterned interplay characteristic of the 8-syllable pādas with what precedes them.


## 03
This verse is richly studded with problems. One of the lesser ones is the referent and grammatical identity of purū́in the first pāda. Gr classifies it with singular (presumably NA neut.) forms; Ge. takes it as an adv. ‘gar sehr’; WG as instr.

sg. (?) with ójasā (“mit ohnehin viel … Körperkraft”). On the basis of the sequence (3d) vīḷú cid, (4a) dṛḷhā́cid, (4f) sthirā́cid (also with ójasā), all containing neuters, most plural, I take purū́as the neut. pl. it appears to be (so also Re: “qui brille en maint endroit”). Each instance of cid ‘even’ in this sequence emphasizes the formidable targets Agni is exercising his will upon. Unfortunately this value of cid is not so much in evidence in our phrase purū́cid … dī́dyānaḥ because ‘shining’ (at least as expressed with the root √dī) is not ordinarily a forceful or hostile act. I have therefore (reluctantly) not rendered the cid here, though I feel I have missed something, since the phrasal parallelism is otherwise so clear. Perhaps dī́dyānaḥ has something of the sense of similar forms of √śuc ‘blaze (against)’: so “shining (against) even the many with his radiant might.” Pāda b and its tag-pāda c contains a śleṣa, whose correct interpretation goes back at least to Benfey (see Ge’s n. 3c). As indicated in the publ. intro. to I.127-139, druhaṃtaráḥ has two possible analyses: druhaṃ-tará- ‘overcoming deceit’ or druhantara- ‘better at striking wood’. The first is appropriate to the first instance of the word, but in c the presence of paraśúḥ ‘ax’ forces the ‘wood’ interpr.

The verb of de, śrúvat, is the problem in that clause. Wh (Roots) takes it as a (zero-grade) 1st class pres. to √sru ‘flow’, but √sru has no such zero-gr. formations (and there’s the problem of the initial sibliant of course). Gr puts it with a root √śru ‘zerinnen, zergehen’ (separate from √śru ‘hear’), but the formations he assigns to said “root” are a hodgepodge (and see Old on the likely nonexistence of the root). Re (flg. Cardona, see Re’s n.) takes it to √śru ‘hear’, but this requires supplying the verb of destruction (by his interpr. ‘fall’) required by the context, with the perception verb that is actually found in the passage superfluous: “on les entend (tomber) …” (The same root assignment seems to underlie the WG tr., though with a different overall interpr., which I confess I don’t understand.) Even if the semantics worked better, there are no such stems to √śru ‘hear’. Ge attributes it to √śṝ ‘crush’, which is reasonable on both semantic and textual grounds; see esp. the parallel he cites X.89.6 śṛṇā́ti vīḷú rujáti sthirā́ṇi, with very similar phraseology. Unfortunately I can see no way to get a stem śrúva- from śṝ. Old questioningly suggests a connection with √ru ‘break’, but needless to say the initial ś can’t simply be omitted. I dare to suggest yet another root: √srīv ‘abort’. Although some forms of this root (caus. srevayet [KS], RVic part. sreváyant-; aor. asrāvīt [JB]; pres. srīvyati [AB]) have an initial dental sibilant, others have the palatal: AV śrīvayāmi, MS śrīvayeyuḥ, śrevuka-. (On the forms, see Narten [Sig.Aor.] 282-83. Jamison [áya-] 145.) Such phonetic fluctuation is not surprising in a root that presumably was at least partially tabooed. Although a stem śrúva- or srúva- is not otherwise found to this root, the spotty attestation to this root in general makes its isolation unsurprising. The stem would probably be a zerograde thematic injunctive (aor. or pres.?), though a root subjunctive can’t be ruled out (though less likely in context). The loss of the i ̯/ i would follow the same pattern as √dīv / d(y)ū, √sīv / s(y)ū, via *sRi ̯uH à *sRuH. I do not understand the accent, however. As for ‘abortion’ in this context of destruction, see, inter alia, the use of the caus. part. sreváyant- in VII.18.8, the Battle of the Ten Kings; possibly also áva √sru in nearby I.129.6.

The final two pādas (fg) of this verse also present their share of difficulties.

We can begin with the final word of each pāda, nā́yate in the Saṃhitā text. The Pp.

(followed by HvN) analyses this as ná ayate, but this produces a very bad cadence: we should expect a heavy syllable as the first syllable of the verb. This is easily remedied, without emending the Saṃhitā text, by ā́yate (i.e., prev. ā́+ ayate). This analysis was also tentatively suggested by Gotō (1st cl., 92 n. 10).

Most tr. (and Old) take the point of yamate nā́yate to be that though Agni is victorious, he doesn’t go further: he stays in his hearth. See, e.g., Re “'(Bien que) triomphant, il tient (les rènes), il ne va pas (plus loin).” But the preverb níḥ ‘forth’ (with √sah only here and in the root noun niṣṣáh-) seems to presuppose motion (hence my ‘going forth to conquer’), and certainly most treatments of Agni victorious depict him laying waste to his surroundings, as in the immediately preceding two pādas and in the following verse (4). The notion that Agni is suddenly showing self-restraint here seems contrary to the message of the context. I therefore take yamate as meaning not ‘hold himself back’, but ‘hold/keep his place’ (against counterattack) and ā́yate (/ayate) as a quasi-passive ‘be moved’. Medial forms of √i are rare enough that a consistent meaning to such a stem is hard to determine, and though some forms of áyate probably belong to a thematized stem (so Gotō, 92ff.), the parallelism with the root aor. subj. yamate here strongly suggests that our form is also a subjunctive (to the root pres. éti) and thus further separated from the thematic indicative forms. I therefore think that the somewhat idiosyncratic meaning I have attributed to the form is plausible, esp. as a negated semantic twin to yamate.

The final problem in the verse is the cmpd. instr. sg. dhanvāsáhā. This is almost universally (Gr, Old, Ge, Re, Scar 603) interpreted as ‘conquering with a bow’ (dhánvan-), which interpr. generally requires an additional personage to be supplied, generally Rudra. Gotō (1st cl., 92, n. 10) seems to favor this interpr., but also suggests the possibility that the first member is dhánvan- ‘Land’: “auf dem das Land ersiegenden [Weg],” with the whole pāda meaning that Agni will not go further and burn the land. WG have adopted this latter interpr. (though the ‘bow’ interpr. is referred to in the n.): “Auf dem trockenen Land ersiegenden (Weg) eilt er nicht hierher.” I am also convinced that dhánvan- ‘wasteland’ is the correct interpr. of the 1st member. Given that the ‘tree’ theme is prominent in this verse and a ‘bow’ theme lacking, a reference to another landscape feature fits the context better. There is the problem that cmpds with -sáh- are ordinarily adjectives modifying animates (see the numerous exx. in Scar.), and my tr. assumes an abstract sense or at the very least an instr. manner adverb (“in/with his wasteland-conquering [manner]”). Despite this slight difficulty, this solution seems more economical than inserting Rudra into a context that has no other allusion to him.

I.127.3-4: In the publ. tr. ójasā in 3a and 4f should have been tr. the same, rather than ‘might’ and ‘strength’ respectively.


## 04
I generate the subject “(the pious man),” i.e., dāśvā́n, from its verb dāṣṭi.


## 05
After the respite of vs. 4, this verse returns to puns and word plays in full force. The syntax of this verse is complicated enough without unintended ambiguity in the English. In the pub. tr. “This fortifying power of his might we acquire …” ‘might’ is a modal verb (“might we acquire”), not an abstract noun (*“his might”).

In my opinion the hapax dívātarāt in bc is a śleṣa somewhat like druhaṃtaráḥ in 3bc, again utilizing the echo pāda (c) to instantiate a 2nd value for a word found in both pādas. Most take the word as a nonce substantivization of the adverb dívā by the addition of the comparative suffix found also in the preceding sudárśataraḥ ‘more beautiful’ (see AiG II.2.608; Re n. ad loc.). I agree that this is one reading, but I also think that -tara- can be a thematic nominal to √tṝ ‘cross over’ (cf. tára- etc.), and that the whole compound can mean ‘traversing [the sky] by day’ as a descriptor of the sun. For a similarly formed rhyme word, also referring to the sun, cf. divākará- ‘day-maker’ (AV+).

The hapax áprāyuṣe in c also poses difficulties. On the one hand, it is very similar to áprāyu- (3x) ‘unremitting, not faltering’, which most deriv from prá √yu; Old and Re opt for this analysis (Re “à (l’homme qui veille) infatigable”). However, I am persuaded by Ge’s pointing out (n. 5) the unity of theme provided by áprāyuṣe (c) … ā́yuḥ (d) … ajárāḥ (fg), if áprāyuṣe contains the ‘lifetime’ word. However, I do not think either Ge’s “ohne zu altern” or WG’s “zum Nichtverschwinden der Lebenskraft” is the correct analysis. Rather I think the word evokes the common idiom ā́yuḥ pra √tṝ ‘lengthen lifetime’ and refers to a man whose lifetime has not yet been lengthened. Note that the √tṝ part of the idiom can be pulled out of dívātara- (a 3rd sense for this compound). Agni is called viśvā́yu- ‘providing/affording all lifetimes’ in the next hymn (I.128.8) and is also regularly asked to lengthen (prá √tṝ ) our lifespan (e.g., I.94.16, VIII.44.30). I now also believe that áprāyu- also contains the ‘lifetime’ word (the less well-attested ā́yu- beside ā́yus-); see comm. ad V.80.3.

In the next pāda Agni’s own lifespan (that is, his immortality, more explicit in fg) is a model for our own: it provides a handhold (grábhaṇavat) or, as we would say, “a leg up” for the man hoping to have his lifespan extended.

I don’t quite understand bhaktám ábhaktaṃ vā. It is probably an implicitly temporal expression: the help that has already been apportioned and the rest that has not yet been apportioned (but will be, we hope).


## 06
The verse has an extra pāda (h), which serves as the tag-pāda to g. Given the difficulties in the verse, the extra pāda just provides more occasion for bewilderment.

The hapax iṣṭáni- in the paired pādas bc has been variously interpreted. Gr takes it to (n)is + √stan ‘thunder’ (‘thunder’ explicitly rejected by Old). Ge does not comment but his tr. ‘sich ausbreitend’ suggests a derivation from √tan ‘stretch’; his tr. is echoed by Re (‘s’étendant’), though in his n. he suggests that the first element is the zero-grade root noun to √yaj ‘sacrifice’, encouraged by Old. The currently prevailing interpr. is probably Hoffmann’s (reported in KEWA, EWA) ‘spreading nourishment’, found in WG. This is certainly possible; however, I favor √stan ‘thunder’, despite Old’s disapproval, but with the preverb ví. The Saṃhitā text reads … urvárāsviṣṭánir (b) / ā́rtanāsviṣṭániḥi (c), but both loc. plurals require metrical distraction: urvárās u viṣṭánir (etc.). The Pp. reads urvárāsu / iṣtániḥ (etc.), but nothing prevents reading urvárāsu / viṣtániḥ from the distracted -s(u)vi- sequence. Although vi √stan is not found until very late, it would not be a difficult idiom to create, esp.

given the widespread ví √dyut ‘flash forth as lightning’ in the same pragmatic sphere.

The thunder would thematically continue the noise of the first pāda and the association with the Maruts, storm gods.

Pāda c contains a 2nd hapax, ā́rtanāsu, which both Ge and WG refuse to tr.

(though see WG n. for a different suggestion) and Old, having offered a few suggestions, refuses to analyze. Re tr. “les terres steriles” but without comment (though the tr. probably stems from Gr’s ‘übel, öde, Misernten bringend’). My own suggestion is quite speculative, but in this situation there seems no other choice. The pāda is a syllable short; HvN in fact divide up the first vowel, reading ā́ártanāsu, but a stem ártanā- does us no more good than ā́rtanā-. I suggest supplying the syllable nir to open the pāda (and the word, hence *nirā́rtanāsu); this nir can be generated from the final syllable of the preceding pāda (iṣṭán)nir, or rather we can imagine a haplology: iṣṭánir, *nirā́rtanāsu. This posited stem *nirā́rtanā- would belong to nír √ṛ, most prominent in the well-attested nírṛti- ‘chaos, disorder, dissolution’. The loc. pl. pairing in bc would then contrast the productive (ápnasvant-) fields/meadows with their negative counterpart, disorderly and useless.

Note the alliteration in d: ā́dad dhavyā́ny ādadír, followed by ádha beginning f (as well as ā́d beginning 5d).

As Ge points out (n. 6d), ā́dat can be the impf. to √ad ‘eat’ as well as belonging to ā́√dā ‘take’, though he doesn’t incorporate this pun into his tr. Agni as the eater of oblations is of course a common trope.

hárṣato hṛ́ṣīvataḥ in f is a nice etymological figure, though in the context of this hymn barely deserving mention.

Most tr. take the náraḥ of h as ordinary, human men, but I think it refers rather to the Maruts. śubhé (and śúbh- in general) is one of their signature words; cf., e.g., I.88.2 śubhé kám yānti and, with náraḥ referring to them, V.52.8 … té śubhé náraḥ. The mention of the Maruts here would form a ring with their appearance in pāda a.


## 07
Most take kīstá- in pāda as a PN, a further specification of the Bhṛgus, and this is a tempting way to avoid dealing with the word. However, it is more difficult to take it as a PN in its only other appearance in the RV (and indeed anywhere) at VI.67.10. I therefore follow the interpr. going back at least to Sāy, ‘praiser’. EWA has a reasonably plausible scenario for getting it as a hypersanskritization of a MIA form of *kīrtha-, beside kīrtí- ‘praise’, etc.

I take mathnántaḥ in c as a pun on √math ‘steal’ (referring to the Bhṛgus’ theft of fire; see Narten, KlSch. 23-24) and ‘churn, rub’, a common word for the production of the fire on the ritual ground.

The identity of the “dear coverings” is not clear. Ge suggest, for example, that they are what keep Agni within the kindling sticks, WG that they are everything a fire burning in a field would incorporate in itself. Since Agni is identified as the holder (dharṇí-) of goods in e, I wonder if the coverings are the enclosure itself -- though what this means physically I’m not sure.

On the isolated precative vaniṣīṣṭa see Narten (SigAor. 236-37), who points out that its object is also a hapax and considers it an “Augenblicksbildung des Dichters.” The “wise one” (médhira-) is probably Agni himself, as often, and the med. form of the verb would support this identification.


## 08
This verse begins straightforwardly enough but its syntax deteriorates (or gets more convoluted) towards the end.

The three-member cmpd. satyágirvāhas- in c is implicitly analyzed by Ge as satyágir-vāhas- (“ihn den wahrhafte Reden anziehen”; sim. WG), but, on the one hand, gírvāhas- is an established bahuvrīhi (8x; “whose vehicle is songs” -- that is, the god [Indra] who is conveyed to the sacrifice by the songs dedicated to him) and, on the other, satyá- never modifies gír- as far as I can tell. Old (SBE) tr. “who truly art carried by prayers as by a vehicle,” with the correct internal structure, in my opinion. My “trusty” for satyá- may be pushing the term a bit, but the idea is that the song-vehicle is real and so a trustworthy conveyance.

The ca in f is generally rendered ‘also’, and it is one of only three examples (out of approx. 1100) of ca to which Klein (DGRV I.212-13) attributes that value.

None of the examples is strong, and all can be interpreted with functional values more commonly found with ca. In this case I think amī́ca víśve amṛ́tāsaḥ is conjoined with a gapped vayám ‘we’, as in exx. like VII.88.3 ā́yád ruhā́va váruṇaś ca nā́vam “When [I] and Varuṇa boarded the boat …,” though with pl. rather than sg.

1st ps. gapping. The 1st ps. pl. is found in the opening verb of the verse havāmahe, and although some pādas intervene, that main verb still has domain over the whole verse (save for the last pāda), with ef a rel. cl. attached to that main clause. True, the verb in this rel. clause must also be supplied. I suggest a medial form of √dhā, meaning ‘acquire’; see in fact dhīmahi in this meaning in 5a -- all that is needed is an accent.

For the identical VP váyas- + med. √dhā in this same hymn cycle, cf. I.136.2 áthā dadhāte … váyaḥ “then they two [=Mitra and Varuṇa] acquire vigor,” and for a 1st pl.

in this collocation (including the instr.) see II.23.10 tváyā vayám uttamáṃ dhīmahe váyaḥ “Through you might we acquire the utmost vigor.” In nearby I.141.13 (though not a Paruchepa hymn) amī́ca is overtly conjoined with vayám, as I suggest is covertly the case here: amī́ca yé maghávāno vayáṃ ca “those who are our patrons and we (ourselves) …” As for pāda g, which also lacks a verb, my publ. tr. assumes an active imperatival form of the same root √dhā, addressed to Agni. Agni quite regularly participates in such collocations; in this case the verb might well be the imperativally used root aor. injunctive dhāḥ or else the redupl. pres. impv. dhehi. This short pāda blends two constructions: “set oblations among LOC” and “establish vigor for DAT,” both with √dhā. For the first, with Agni as subject, see, e.g., V.14.1 havyā́devéṣu no dadhat; for the second, likewise with Agni as subject, see, e.g., II.4.9 smát sūríbhyo gṛṇaté tád váyo dhāḥ “establish this vigor for the singer along with his patrons.” Since in our passage the recipients of the váyas- have already been identified in the previous pāda ([us] and all the immortals), the dative recipient with the second construction need not be specified. A more literal tr. of my understanding of this pāda might then be “(place) the oblations among the gods and (establish) vigor,” but this seemed too clotted for the publ. tr.

The trick of this tag-pāda then is that the final ā́váyaḥ is twice the object of an unexpressed form of the root √dhā, but with two different valences. Unusually for tag-pādas, g is not syntactically parallel to f.


## 09
The hapax splv. sáhantama- does not require the positing (with Gr) of an otherwise unattested n-stem sáhan-. A nonce derivation from the pres. part. sáhant- (with simplification of the cluster sáhan(t)-tama-, with AiG II.2.597, etc.) is certainly possible, and the full grade with nasal might have been constructed as a partial match for its parallels śuṣmíntama- and dyumníntama-.

I.127.9-10: The ends of both a-pādas are variants of each other: 9a … sáhasā sáhantamaḥ, 10a … sáhasā sáhasvate, each following a metrical rest.


## 10
The first three pādas are an esp. nice example of the syntactic complementarity between the tag-pāda c and what precedes. The subject and the verb are withheld until c (stómaḥ and babhūtu respectively), with the preverb determining the verbal lexeme (prá) and the possessive pronoun limiting the praise (vaḥ) found in the first pāda -- and the recipient agnáye the only thing held in common between ab and c. Thus neither ab nor c is complete in itself: their elements need to be intermingled to produce the full sense. The name of the recipient is also held until the end of the two-pāda opening, though prepared for by a series of datives.

Schaeffer (Inten. 114) argues persuasively that the intens. joguve is “lokaldistributiv” with the loc. phrase víśvāsu kṣā́su “in all lands.”


## 11
The latter part of this verse shows a nice phonological pattern, with the initial words in the pāda being c mahó, d máhi, f máhi, but g máthīr. The first three all belong of course to the mah (‘great’) family, but the last is a verb form whose apparent near match with the two preceding máhi belies its independent grammatical identity.

There is probably also a phonological impetus for the use of sácanas- instead of the much more common sajóṣas- in b: sácanās better matches sucetúnā.

In de most tr. (including me) take máhi … nas kṛdhi, saṃcákṣe … as an infinitive phrase, “make us regard (something) great.” Keydana (Infin. 342) allows this possibility, but also raises the possibility of an adjunct usage: “make something great for us, for seeing.” Although I recognize that the latter is not excluded, I think the infinitive reading is the more likely -- on the basis of the other dative phrase in e, bhujé asyaí. The final position of asyaí here is odd, and in fact the use of it at all is odd, given that an unadorned bhujé ends 8b and its tag-pāda 8c. I think that we have a demonstrative adj. with bhujé in this verse in order to anchor bhujé as a noun and to distinguish it from the immediately preceding dative, also built to a root noun, but in infinitival function. In other words, the asyaí serves to polarize the grammatical functions of two identically formed nominals.

In máthīḥ I see the same pun on the two roots √math as was found in 7c. Here the plundering sense is appropriate to the simile ugró ná śávasā “like a mighty (warrior) with vast power,” while the churn sense is attached to Agni as fire the substance. Although the ritual fire is churned (passively), we can imagine Agni using the same means that produced him (churning) to produce something for us. (So, more or less, Ge.) Narten (KlSch 24; followed apparently by WG) feels that máthīḥ here can only have the ‘rob’ sense, because only fire can be the obj. of the ‘churn’ sense, but this opinion displays, at least in my view, the often deficient poetic and imaginative sense of the Erlangen school.

