+++
title = "128"

+++
Agni


## 01
The phrase mánuṣo dhárīmaṇi is variously rendered. Re takes it as an infinitive (“pour être porté par l’Homme”); Gr and Old (SBE) interpret it in an abstract or ethical fashion (“nach altem Brauch”; “in Manu’s firm law”; sim.

Brereton in his survey of dhárman-). Hoffmann (Inj. 121, fld by WG) as ‘hands’. But given the emphasis in the verse on the activity on the ritual ground (bc) and indeed the fire’s placement on said ground (fg), Ge’s “im (Feuer)behälter des Manu” seems the most likely interpr. -- rendered by me as “the foundation of Manu,” making reference to the fact that Manu was the first sacrificer and so every subsequent ritual ground can be ascribed to him. See 7a mā́nuṣe vṛjáne ‘in the ritual enclosure belonging to Manu’ for another association between Manu and a physical location on the ritual ground.

As usual the line between human priests and Agni as priest is blurred in bc.

Agni is regularly identified as an uśíj- (I.60.4, etc.) but uśíjaḥ in the plural are humans.

“In the footprint of refreshment” (iḷás padé) is a standard kenning for the ritual ground or, more narrowly, the place where oblations are offered; a similar expression is found in Old Avestan, at Y. 50.8.


## 02
My interpr. of ápi √vat roughly follows Tichy’s (Die Spr. 26 [1980]: 3-5, esp. n. 8 [= KlSch 108-10]) ‘mit etw. (Akk.) bekannt, vertaut sein’ (contra Thieme’s Fs. Weller)—though perhaps with a bit more oomph.

I construe ṛtásya pathā́in b with yajñasā́dham in a, flg. Lü (Var. 463) -- contra most interpr., who take it as roughly parallel to the other instr. expressions in b. It is true that there is some distance between the two expressions I put together, and Ge also cites two parallels where ṛtásya pathā́is adjacent to námasā. However, in both those instances the two instrumentals are better taken with different parts of the verse, and since Lü’s interpr. yields richer sense, I maintain it here.


## 03
The standard tr. (as well as Scar. 110-11) take -gír- in muhurgī́r to √gṝ ‘sing’, rather than, with Gr, to √gṝ ‘swallow’. This is certainly possible, though “‘plötzlich, augenblichlich willkommen geheissen’ (?)” (Scar 110; sim. WG) does not have much to do with what proceeds or follows in the verse. I prefer to keep Gr’s ‘auf einmal verschlingend’. The expression completes the description of Agni’s journey in the preceding pāda. The speed of his journey around the world, completed in a single day, is conveyed by the image of “swallowing up” the route instantly -- similar expressions are found in English. EWA (s.vv. GARI1 , GARI2 ) is uncertain of the root affiliation.


## 04
The part. iṣūyánt- in d is generally tr. ‘shooting arrows’ (though cf. Re’s “qui cherche la jouissance-rituelle”; sim. Old SBE [but not Noten]), but shooting arrows seems out of place in this context, even with Ge’s suggestion (n. 4d) that the priest is compared to a shooter because his words are arrows. Although I maintain the connection with ‘arrow’, I think it means simply ‘go (straight) like an arrow’, readily translatable into the English idiom ‘straight-arrow’, namely a person of utmost rectitude.


## 05
A complex vs., esp. in its earlier parts, with a variety of tr. I will treat only my own. But first a few textual adjustments. In b I read (with most interpr., going back to Ludwig; see Old and Ge’s n. 5b) agné ráveṇa rather than Pp. agnér áveṇa.

Note also that the sandhi between b and c has been wrongly resolved by HvN into bhojíye / a… rather than bhojíyā / i… (here Pp. is correct). And the first word of c has the wrong sibilant in the HvN text: it’s correctly iṣirā́ya, not iśirā́ya.

Also in b I take the simile as consisting only of marútāṃ ná rather than including bhojyā̀. This genitive modifies ráveṇa and is parallel to agné(r). The roaring of Agni is being compared to the roaring of the Maruts, personifications of the thunderstorm. This syntactic distribution is found in Old SBE, but subsequent tr.

have not followed him.

I take the bhojyā̀as nominative and the subject of an intrans./passive use of med. pṛñcáte, a usage found elsewhere. However, it is not impossible that this med.

form is transitive -- cf. ā́… pṛcīmahi in the next hymn (I.129.7) -- in which case I would supply ‘priests’ as subj.: “(The priests) infuse the (offering-)foods into his forces.” In pāda a I take táviṣīṣu ‘forces’ as a reference to Agni’s flames. Although táviṣī- ordinarily belong to Indra, see, e.g., III.3.5, 26.4 for táviṣībhiḥ in conjunction with Agni.

I tentatively take Indra as the referent for iṣirā́ya in c, as he is addressed as iṣira in the first vs. of the next hymn (I.129.1) and is several times the referent of this stem elsewhere. But I do not insist on this identification.

The ca in de is problematic, and this problem is connected with the question of the affiliation of vásūnām. Ge (fld. by Klein, DGRV I.234) takes ca as a clausal conjunction and supplies a 2nd verb “(beschenkt)” in d, parallel to ínvati in c. This requires that vásūnām be construed with majmánā (“mit einer Fülle von Gütern”).

But majmánā does not take a genitive of specification but only of possession and in any case its contexts favor ‘might’ over ‘abundance’. Several times it appears parallel with krátvā (including nearby I.141.6, 143.2) in the collocation “with resolve and with might,” as it would here, though at some remove (see krátvā in pāda a).

Forms of vásu- regularly occur with forms of √dā ‘give’, however, and so the most natural collocation here would be dā́nam … vásūnām “the giving of goods.” But what, then, to do with the ca? I think the clue is to be found in X.50.7 vásūnāṃ ca vásunaś ca dāváne “for the giving of goods and of good”; in other words, I think the vásūnāṃ ca in our passage is a truncated formula, with vásunaś ca gapped. But the omitted sg. vásu- is immediately inserted in the first pāda of the next verse (6a) and the number-neutralized stem occurs three times in vs. 8: vásudhitim (8a), vasūyávaḥ (8f, g). Note also that a different form of vásu appears to be gapped in 6ab. The poet slyly sets the vásu- agenda in 5de by introducing it with an off-balance expression that requires repair. For a similarly problematic ca involving (in my opinion) gapping, see the previous hymn, I.127.8 and disc. there.

The phrase śáṃsād aghā́t corresponds to the well-attested bahuvrīhi agháśaṃsa- ‘possessing evil speech’, found in the next hymn (I.129.6).


## 06
With Ge, Re, and Old I supply an acc. pl. vásū(ni) as obj. of dadhe, on the basis of IX.18.4 vásūni hástayor dadhé (cf. also X.54.5). The gapping of a form of vásu- here, accepted by most, corresponds nicely to the gapping of the same stem I suggest for the previous vs. Thieme (Unters.), fld. by WG, instead take dadhe as passive: the fire “is taken in the hand” (of the priest, so Th). This seems pragmatically unlikely: although firebrands are ritually carried about under certain circumstances, picking up the entire ritual fire (as víhāyāḥ and aratíḥ seem to imply) would be risky and painful. Moreover, the rest of the verse depicts the good things that Agni does for people, and taking goods in his hand fits this context.

The rarely attested verbal stem iṣudhyá-, here in the part. iṣudhyaté, has a counterpart in Old Avestan, išūidiiāmahī 3x in the Yasna Haptaŋhāiti, which exists alongside a noun išud-. The form is carefully discussed by Narten (YH 159-61), who accepts Humbach’s etymology (Gathas 1959, II, ad Y 31.14; repeated 2nd ed. 1991): išud- is a compound of iš- ‘nourishment’ and the zero-grade of *√vadh ‘lead’, to which root noun compound a denom. is built meaning ‘strengthen’. (For a rehearsal of the history of this scholarship, see Scar 63.) I am not convinced. I prefer to see it (couched in Vedic terms for the moment) as a compound of íṣu- ‘arrow’ and √dhā ‘place’. That lexeme is specialized in the meaning ‘aim’ and is a well-attested metaphor for the “aiming” of a praise-hymn towards the divine recipient; cf. IX.69.1 íṣur ná dhánvan práti dhīyate matíḥ “Like an arrow on a bow, my thought is aimed.” (For the affinity of íṣu- and √dhā cf. also I.64.10 ástāra íṣuṃ dadhire gábhastayoḥ “The archers have taken their arrows in their fists” and the cmpd. iṣu-dhí- ‘quiver’.) Such an analysis works also for the Avestan forms, since Avestan has both the ‘arrow’ word and the verb, and I see no reason why it could not be reconstructed for Indo-Iranian. An ‘arrow’ derivation works extremely well in our passage because iṣudhyaté echoes iṣūyaté (‘going straight like an arrow’) in vs. 4, likewise ending the d-pāda, likewise a denominative participial dat. of benefit. For extensive and updated disc. see my forthcoming “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.” The 2nd person of pf. óhiṣe is puzzling in a verse, and a hymn, in which the god is otherwise entirely referred to in the 3rd ps. (see the surrounding verbs in this vs.: dadhe (a), śiśrathat (bc), ṛṇvati (fg) -- with pāda f esp. entirely parallel to de with 2nd ps. óhiṣe). I think it must be a transposition of the phrase found in VIII.19.1 devatrā́havyám óhire “They have carried the oblation among the gods.” The expected 3rd sg. pf. óhe would not fit the meter here.

Though pādas f and g share both a subject (Agni) and a verb (ví) ṛṇvati they seem semantically somewhat at odds. This semantic disparity is, however, ameliorated by the fact that their objects, vā́ram and dvā́rā respectively, are phonologically very close, which similarity was already pointed out by Re.


## 07
jénya- is of unclear formation (see EWA s.v.), and opinion is generally split between a derivation from √jan ‘be born’ (e.g., Gr ‘edel’) and √ji ‘win’ (e.g., WG ‘siegreich’), with EWA tentatively opting for the latter. In contrast, I find that a meaning ‘noble’ vel sim. better fits most passages and consider it a pseudo-gerundive to √jan, built to the zero-grade formant jā- (cf. in this hymn jāyata 1a, ájāyata 4f, g), with the semantic development ‘(worthy) to be born, noble, thoroughbred’; its use with inanimate vásu (e.g., the cmpd. jenyā-vasu- ‘having noble goods’) is simply an extension comparable to English “noble metals” (vs. base metals).

