+++
title = "129"

+++
Indra This hymn is particularly studded with indefinite expressions: pṛ́tanāsu kā́su cid 2a, 4d, káṃ cid 3b, káyasya cid 5a; later in the hymn rátham kám cid 10d, anyám ... kám cid 10f.


## 01
Pādas de show two different constructions with √kṛ ‘make’. On the one hand, abhíṣṭaye káraḥ is a periphrastic caus. “make to prevail,” with abhíṣṭaye parallel to the infinitival medhásātaye ‘to gain wisdom’ in 1a; on the other hand, káraḥ … vājínam is a predicate adj. construction “make (it=chariot) a prize-winner.” Separating the two constructions is the embedded tag váśaś ca “if you wish,” with subordinating ca (see Klein DGRV I.250). Though subordinate clauses are almost never embedded, this functions as a parenthetical like later manye ‘methinks’ and it also intervenes between two clauses.

Most tr. supply the chariot as subj. of f, but this makes difficulties with the acc. of g, since, by the conventions of Atyaṣṭi meter, f and g should form a syntactic unity. I assume instead that sá here refers to Indra in the 2nd ps. and an imperative should be supplied to make a classic “sa figé” construction (see Jamison 1992); note that the next vs. begins with a stripped-down version of the same construction: sá śrudhi “Listen!” As to what imperative to supply, I generate it out of the participial voc. tūtujāna ‘o thruster’ to the root √tuj. Alternatively, it could be generated from the verb found in bc prá (…) náyasi, hence “lead forth.” In g the word order of imā́ṃ vā́caṃ ná makes difficulties. If imā́ṃ vā́cam is a simile, then we might expect the order *imā́ṃ ná vā́cam. However, note I.121.6 asyā́ uṣáso ná discussed above, also with deictic + noun followed by the simile marker, so it may be that the placement is by rule (though this requires more investigation).

Note also that in 5b of this hymn the ná follows a clear two-word simile (without deictic), similarly, if I’m correct, 8g and 5g (cf. also 130.2, 9). Another factor that may have helped determine the placement of ná here is that f ends (tūtujā)na vedhásām and g ná vedhásām, so the displacment of the simile particle would facilitate the echo pattern. Alternatively we might separate imā́m and vā́cam and take the former as part of the frame “(thrust forward) this one like speech.” If “this one” refers to the chariot, we must then assume gender attraction from *imám. WG’s tr.

reflects a separation analysis, but with imā́m also representing vā́cam: “… dieses (Wort) wie das Wort der Vertrauenswürdigen.”


## 02
The exact semantic relationship between the noun dákṣa- ‘skill’ and the related (pseudo-)gerundive dakṣā̀yya- is unclear and may be somewhat fluid. Here ‘besought, approached for skill’ seems to fit the context better than ‘to be skillfully served’ vel sim. (e.g., Re’s “(apte) à être servi-efficacement”). See disc. I.91.3.

The cmpd bhára-hūti-, here tr. as ‘battle cry’, actually contains part of the quoted cry as its first member: “the cry ‘carry (the day)’.” That is, I interpr. bháraas derived from the impv. bhára with omitted object. For the analytic version of this expression see V.29.8 … víśve ahvanta devā́, bháram índrāya yád áhiṃ jaghā́na “all the gods called “bhara” to Indra when he smashed the serpent.” Pādas de show nicely balanced alliteration, śūraiḥ s ú vaḥ sanitā ... viprair vā́jam, with responsion between yáḥ / yó, -aiḥ /-air, and the final -itā / -utā.

The verb iradhanta and nearby inf. irádhyai (I.134.2) are the only two forms showing the formant iradh. I connect them with √ṛdh (/rādh) ‘succeed, bring to success’, though the morphological details escape me.

In g the simile marker ná is superficially positioned as in 1g, after the first two words of the pāda, but in this case the placement is correct, since the simile only begins with the second word, átyam.


## 03
What “swell the bullish skin” means isn’t clear. Ge suggests that it refers to Indra giving in abundance. I interpr. it in conjunction with the phrase in the next hymn, I.130.8, mánave … tvácaṃ kṛṣṇā́m arandhayat “he made the black skin [=barbarians] subject to Manu.” If “black skin” is characteristic of our enemies, I suggest that the successfully swollen “bullish skin” refers to us, primed for battle.

My “(in that)” introducing c follows Ge: some sort of subordination is required to account for the verbal accent on parivṛṇákṣi, since otherwise *pári vṛṇakṣi would be expected.

The placement of utá ‘and’ in d is peculiar, since it precedes a series of concatenated datives lasting through pāda g. See Klein DGRV I.357-58, though he can only describe, not explain, this effect.


## 04
Both abc and de are constructed pleonastically. In a(bc) the phrase uśmasīṣṭáye (i.e., uśmasi iṣṭáye) “we wish to seek” is semantically but not etymologically pleonastic (roots √vaś and √iṣ respectively), while in cd ūtáyé, ‘vā (i.e., ūtáye, ávā) “help to help” is both. When in fg we encounter the etymological figure stárate stṛṇóṣi (… stṛṇóṣi), we expect another pleonasm, but here of course the etymologically related words do not duplicate each other functionally because they have different subjects, though they do essentially mean the same thing: “(he) will (not) lay (you) low (whom) you lay low.” Because of this structural pattern in the verse, I do not follow Ge’s (and others’) attempts to mitigate the pleonasm of abc (e.g., Ge “Wir wünschen, dass … Indra … gern komme”).

The vaḥ in a is difficult to render in tr. I take it as the usual offhand address to the patrons on whose behalf we, the ritual officiants, perform all our actions. Because of the awkwardness I omitted it in the publ. tr., esp. since the benefit to 1st ps. “us” is so heavily emphasized by fronted full genitive asmā́kam (also in d). These fronted pronouns were also impossible to render in that position without violence to the English.

The positioning of yám in fg is worth a brief note. In f it appears immediately after the first word of its clause, stṛṇóṣi, a standard position. This happens also to be the last word of its clause. In the tag pāda g stṛṇóṣi yám takes the same position as in f, but since more material has been added at the front, the yám is now out of position.


## 05
I borrow śátru- ‘rival’ from 4fg to construe with the indefinite káyasya cid; cf. VIII.25.15 … vanúṣaḥ … abhímātiṃ káyasya cid “the arrogance of every zealot.” The phrase téjiṣṭhābhir aráṇibhiḥ “with piercingly hot kindling sticks” appears in Paruchepa’s I.127.4, which suggests that this phrase must constitute the simile and the ná is displaced to the right as in 1g. (WG try to avoid this difficulty by construing téjiṣṭhābhiḥ first with ūtíbhiḥ, but the nearby parallel makes that unlikely.) The relation between d and e is not clear. Ge makes e part of the yáthā clause, but purā́seems to call for a past tense and mányase is a present. Moreover, as Old points out, yáthā purā́is a common self-contained tag. The problem, though, is that mányase is accented. Old suggests that it is accented because the clause is by its nature a Nebensatz. The publ. tr. should probably have signaled this by “(in that)” vel sim.

What is going on in f is unclear, since, as Ge points out, Pūru is depicted in a positive light in other nearby Paruchepa passages (I.130.7, 131.4). He suggests supplying énāṃsi with víśvāni, flg. Sāy, thus “carry away all (the guilts) from Pūru.” But this won’t work with g (as it should in the Atyaṣṭi template), because the guilt would be coming to us. Perhaps the poet is urging Indra to redistribute the goods of the patron (Pūru) to us.

This verse is one of the very few places in the Atyaṣṭi series in which the strict verbal repetition at the end of fg is breached (see also the next vs.). Here váhniḥ should be final in the pāda, but has been displaced by no ácha. I have no real explanation for this, save for the fact that when no ácha are adjacent they go last (I.165.3, III.35.1, IV.34.10), but this hardly seems a sufficient reason.

The g pāda is a syllable too short. I suggest that the simile particle ná has been haplologized in the sequence āsā́váhnir *ná no ácha. The descriptor āsā́váhni- (X.115.3) or more usually váhni- āsā́(I.76.4, VI.11.2, VI.19.9) ‘conveyor by mouth’ is otherwise used of Agni, which makes ritual sense; here, without the simile particle, it would have to be applied to Indra, which does not (hence Ge’s diluted “Wortführer”). If I am correct, this is another example of a displaced ná simile marker; of course in this case āsā́váhniḥ would be a quasi-compound ‘conveyor-bymouth’.


## 06
The vs. begins a little oddly with a solemn proclamation to a drop (índave), but in my opinion this is actually indirectly evoking the word-play, esp. common in Maṇḍala IX, between índu- ‘drop’ and índra-, the more natural addressee here. The transition between drop and Indra is effected by the beginning of the next pāda, hávyo ná. I take hávya- as a pun; though the occurrences of this stem are overwhelmingly associated with the root √hū, hvā ‘invoke’, hence ‘to be invoked’, it could technically also be built to the root √hu ‘pour’, hence ‘to be poured’ (see the differently accented but identically formed havyá- ‘oblation’). I read hávyaḥ with both meanings here, with ‘to be invoked’ in the simile and referring to Indra and ‘to be poured’ directly referring to the drop. Both Indra and the drop stimulate the verbal skills of the poet. I see no reason to assume that the referent is Bhaga, pace Ge, Re (and tentatively Old). The rakṣohán- ‘demon-smasher’ in c may be, as often, soma, but is more likely Indra, given hantā́pāpásya rakṣásaḥ and rakṣoháṇam, both of Indra, in vs. 11.

The repeated final verb réjati (bc) is nicely echoed in e by (vadhaí)r ajeta.

The cmpd. aghá-śamṣa- finds its analytical parallel in I.128.5 śáṃsād aghā́t.

The lexeme áva √sru, lit. ‘flow down’, appears only here (fg) in the RV; I suggest that it may idiomatically mean ‘be miscarried, aborted’, and the kṣudrám ‘speck’ in g is the embryo/fetus. For abortion in a hostile context in this group of hymns, see I.127.3, at least acdg. to my interpretation.

Like the last verse, this one, quite unusually, disrupts the strict final repetition of the fg pādas, with áva sravet opening f, but distracted to áva … sravet in g. I again have no explanation for this.


## 07
The pun on hávya- in 6b is continued by the same double meaning in hótrā-, a stem that by most accounts does belong both to √hū and √hu. (The standard tr.

only render it by ‘oblation’ here, however.) The fem. citántī-, which looks like a participle to a 6th cl. pres. or (so Wh Rts.) a root aor., is formally isolated and requires metrical distraction. Gr suggests (on no particular basis) emending to *cetáyantyā, but how would such a corruption arise? WG’s *citáyantyā is more plausible but perhaps unnecessary. Lowe (Participles 289) takes it as a Caland adjective beside citrá-, but this also seems unnecessary.

The part. sántam in c at first seems pleonastic; it does not have its regular concessive value. But it was most likely included here in order to indicate which noun the adj. raṇvám modifies. By itself raṇvám could qualify either rayím or survī́ryam in b, but sántam identifies it as a masc. and therefore belonging to rayím, since suvī́ryam is neut. (WG’s use of suvī́ryam as an adj. with rayím in bc is contrary to the usage of this stem elsewhere.)


## 08
With the repeated prá-pra I supply a form of the copula for the idiom prá √as ‘be preeminent’.

Note the common use of instr. pl. adj. (here sváyaśobhiḥ) with (apparent) sg.

pāda-final ūtī́. This interpr. seems preferable to WG, who supply “gods” with the pl.

adj. and take ūtī́separately.

As in 4a this clause contains both a full 1st pl. pronoun (asmé) and the enclitic 2nd pl. vaḥ. As there, I think the 2nd ps. referent is the patrons, in addition to the 1st ps.

ritual officiants, but, once again, a tr. “be preeminent among us for you” seems clumsy, and I did not render the vaḥ in the publ. tr.

I take the fem. subject of d-g to be personified durmatí-, with Ge. Others, going back to Sāy, take it to be the jūrṇí- of g (see Ge n. 8d), but I think that belongs to a simile.

The opening of d, svayáṃ sā́echoes that of 6d svayáṃ só.

Ge refuses to tr. vakṣati and feels that it cannot belong either to √vah or to √vakṣ. I take it with √vakṣ / ukṣ ‘grow’, as a malformed nonce subjunctive to úkṣa- / ukṣá- (or preferably a derivationally prior, unattested root formation).

In g I take ná as both the simile marker and the negative. (This is rather like the haplology of *ná no I posited for 5g.) “Like a firebrand … she will not …” If I am correct this is yet another example of the ná simile marker displaced to the right.

## 09-10
Note identical openings to these two vss: tváṃ na indra rāyā́…, with the final word of the pādas showing very close phonological patterning: párīṇasā / tárūṣasā The standard tr. construe e with fg, such that rátham of e is the referent of anyám in f. But this seriously violates the structure of Atyaṣṭi, where de always constitute a unit. Moreover, “another chariot than us” would be a strange expression; we expect the anyám to refer to an animate opponent in such a construction, esp. if it is “intending harm” (rírikṣantam). I therefore generate a verbal form ‘help’ from the agent noun voc. ávitar that ends d: √av + rátham is found elsewhere (I.102.3, 112.12, etc.).


## 11
I do not understand the participle sán in c. It does not have concessive force, nor does it serve (like sántam 7c) to anchor an unclear gender assignment. It may convey something like “since you are a god / in your capacity as god,” though this hardly seems necessary to express of Indra, whose divinity isn’t in question here.

