+++
title = "130"

+++
Indra


## 01
After my reconsideration of nā́yám (see disc. ad VIII.2.28), I would delete “to the landing site” from the publ. tr.

In c the simile marker iva seems to be displaced to the right, like ná several times in I.129 (1b, 5b, 5g, 8g). Such placement seems to be characteristic of Paruchepa.


## 02
áhā víśveha in g (repeated in 9g) appears to show the same displaced simile particle found elsewhere in the Paruchepa hymns; see disc. ad I.129.1.


## 03
Nice phonetic figure in d vrajám vajrī́(ga)vām iva.


## 04
In f the standard tr. take vanínaḥ as an acc. pl., the object of ní vṛścasi in the frame, parallel to acc. vṛksám in the simile. But after all the build-up earlier in the verse towards the smashing of Vṛtra, I find it hard to believe that Indra is just cutting down trees here, and the doubling of ‘tree’ in vṛkṣám vanínaḥ seems lame (“like a carpenter a tree, you cut down wooden things [=trees]”). Instead I take vanínaḥ as gen. sg. referring collectively to a forest (the thing that has wood) and supply Vṛtra / the serpent as object in the frame. Both vṛtrám and áhim are found elsewhere as obj.

of vṛśca- (though, I admit, not with ní, but usually with ví).


## 05
For itá ūtī́ḥ see comm. VIII.99.7.


## 06
Pādas bc show one of the only alterations of syntax and conceptual structure between ab and its tag-pāda c in the Atyaṣṭi corpus. The Āyus fashioned speech for you (te) in ab, but fashioned you (tvā́m) in c. The rest of the verse is then applicable to both speech and you.

One of the rare scramblings of the ends of the fg pādas, which are ordinarily identical. Here the last two words get flipped: f sātáye dhánā / g dhánāni sātáye. For other such instances (though not so neatly structured) see I.129.5, 6. The flip in g here allows it to match the opening of 7g víśvā dhánāni …


## 07
Note in pāda a … púro … pūráve# and see I.131.4.


## 08
Following Ge, I read tatṛṣāṇám in both simile and frame. In the simile it is the dried material that feeds the fire; in the frame the thirsty or greedy.

The PN arśasānám in g neatly matches tatṛṣāṇám in the same position in f.


## 09
As indicated in the publ. intro., this verse, which treats Indra’s theft of the sun’s wheel and his visit to Uśanā Kāvya, is quite opaque. The first pāda straightforwardly announces the mythical deed at issue, but things disintegrate after that.

The next two pādas (bc) introduce a theft of speech and a figure identified as aruṇá- (‘ruddy’) that are not elsewhere associated with the myth. However, since the verb muṣāyá- ‘steal’ and the temporal expression prapitvé are found in other accounts of the myth (I.175.4, IV.30.4, VI.31.3 and IV.16.12, VI.31.3 respectively), these pādas must contain at least some covert reference to the myth. However, I treat them as parenthetical because pādas de seem to follow directly from a, and the present tense muṣāyati does not fit well with the injunctive prá vṛhat of a and the plupf. ájagan in e.

Pādas de depict Indra’s journey to Uśanā’s dwelling, an incident associated elsewhere with the wheel-theft narrative. First, note that initial īśāná(ḥ) in c is echoed by init. uśánā in d. I have treated the peculiar morphology of uśánā at length (Jamison 2007 Fs. Jasanoff) and concluded that the stem is essentially uninflected and that it is therefore possible to take uśánā here, with Ge, as an acc. of goal (or as gen. with a gapped ‘house’), however odd such interpr. may seem at first. Esp. in later Skt. Uśanā is seldom found without his patronymic kāvyá-, and in the RV even when the patronymic is absent there is often an indirect reference to it. Here that is found in the voc. kave, addressed to Indra, which ends pāda e; #uśánā and kave# thus occupy polarized positions in this two-pāda unit.

I have even less idea of what fg really mean than the rest of the verse. The repeated word turváṇiḥ usually means ‘surpassing, victorious’ -- see nearby I.128.3 -

- but this sense does not fit this passage well, esp. with the acc. sumnā́ni. I have
therefore taken turváṇi- as expressing a simple motion sense, but have no confidence in the correctness of this interpr. (and in fact fairly strong confidence in its error).

