+++
title = "131"

+++
Indra The hymn contains a concentration of intensive forms: ánamnata 1a, kárikrat 3f, carkiran 5a, saniṣṇata 5fg. This parade of intensives may express the prolonged and continuous struggle of the Ārya to subdue their rivals and gain territory with the constantly sought help of Indra.


## 01
A form of índra- is positioned at the beginnning of all structurally significant pādas (a, b, d, f) in Atyaṣṭi.

The intens. ánamnata in my opinion expresses habitual action. Schaeffer suggests that it is a “Hin- und Her-” or “Auf- und Ab-” motion, but I don’t see the dignified and stately Heaven and Earth bobbing up and down.


## 02
Pādas de contain what we would call a mixed metaphor: “we would place you at our chariot-pole like a boat.” In a RVic context this does not seem a solecism, but simply an example of the usual piling of image upon image.

I am uncertain of the value of the part. citáyantaḥ in f. In keeping with the zero-grade root syllable it should mean ‘appear’ or ‘perceive’, but the case frame makes these interpr. hard to impose. In the publ. tr. I take it as a double I/T (in the term used in my 1983 book) ‘make (Indra) take notice’, that is, ‘cause to perceive’, but I am disturbed by the mismatch of the formal and the functional: in this meaning it should be full-grade cetáya- and there is no easy way to explain a redactional change to zero-grade. (Ge, Re tr. ‘auszeichnen’, ‘distinguent’ respectively, but this doesn’t conform to any standard meaning of citáya- or cetáya-. WG take it as an intrans., “wir glänzenden Nachkommen des Āyu,” which respects the formal shape but leaves the rest of the pāda without a syntactic skeleton.) Since it has the same value that I ascribe to īkṣáyat in the next hymn (I.132.5), it may be that citáyant- here adapted the sense of īkṣáya-, since they both have apparent zero-grade stems.

Another problem with this final sequence is the function and position of ná in f. It should mark índram as the compared term in a simile (“… like Indra”), but since Indra should be the target of sacrifice and praise, deflecting him to the simile is unlikely and leaves us without a corresponding term in the frame. I am loosely taking ná as having domain over the whole pāda, which implicitly compares us (the subject of dhīmahi in e) with the Āyus, though this is not how simile marking generally works -- and will also not work if “we” are identical to the Āyus rather than compared to them. The mention of the Āyus in the preceding hymn, I.130.6, and in


## 03
(also Paruchepa) allows but does not require this identification. In sum, the interpr. of fg is quite uncertain.


## 03
Although the general semantic range of the root-noun cmpd niḥsṛ́jaḥ in bc is fairly clear -- it refers to the releasing of the cows enclosed in the cowpen -- its grammatical identity is not. It can be either a transitive nom. pl., as I take it in the publ. tr. (so also tentatively Old and, it seems, Re, Narten [SigAor. 266-67]), or a gen. or abl. infinitive (so Scar, WG). In a sense it scarcely matters.

I follow Narten (Sig.Aor. 266-67) in taking sákṣanta(ḥ) [-aḥ so Pp., not -e] to √sah ‘conquer, be victorious’ rather than √sac ‘accompany’ (so Gr; Ge’s and Re’s tr.

do not easily reflect either root). WG take it as a type of desiderative with -s-formant, but also to √sah. Support for this root affiliation comes from sāsahānáḥ in the next verse, likewise opening the c-pāda.

Note the paired opposition of the two verbs ví √taṃs ‘yank (apart /) back and forth’ and sám √ūh ‘shove together’, with complementary subj./obj. pairs: people (yank) Indra / Indra (shoves) people. The point is that the opposing forces fight over having Indra on their side, each trying to pull him to its side, while Indra sets the two sides to fighting by pushing them together.

Again I take the intens. āvíṣ kárikrat as expressing habitual or continuous action: Indra is always showing off his mace.


## 04
Note the word play across the pāda boundary of a-b: pūrávaḥ, púro. The same play is found in I.130.7a … púro … pūráve#, though not so neatly juxtaposed.

In d tám is somewhat curiously positioned; it may have been displaced to allow the verb śā́sas to take initial position in order to echo sāsahānáḥ, which opens the previous pāda.


## 05
I take kāráṃ √kṛ in d as an expression from gambling: lit. “to do (the decisive) deed,” “to make ‘game’,” that is, “to win.” See kāráṃ √hvā in V.29.8.


## 06
I take the final juṣéta hí of pāda a as a parenthetical remark, contrary to the standard tr. The rest of the verse (as well as the preceding verse) addresses Indra in the 2nd ps.; moreover, the position of hí is most easily explained if juṣéta opens the clause, and a gen. complement with √juṣ, as suggested by Gr, would be (almost?) unprecedented. The standard tr. (Ge, Re, WG) take asyā́uṣásaḥ as a temporal expression “on/during this dawn here,” but supposed exx. of this usage elsewhere are not convincing. The collocation in fg … asyá vedhásaḥ … śrudhi … is structurally identical to asyā́uṣásaḥ … bodhi, a parallelism that supports my interpr.

If, as I believe, asyā́uṣásaḥ is to be construed with bodhi in b, the first term in b, arkásya, can serve as transition, since this word means both ‘chant’ and ‘ray’; as ‘ray’ it would group with uṣásaḥ, as ‘chant’ with havíṣaḥ ‘oblation’, linking the coming of dawn with the dawn sacrifice.


## 07
The standard tr. take the yó no aghāyáti clause as the only obj. of jahí in d (“smash [him] who wishes us ill”). This may be correct, but I have opted for the “(X and) which Y” construction.

