+++
title = "132"

+++
Indra


## 01
In the publ. tr. I treat the first member of the three-member cmpd índratvotāḥ as if it were a voc., since the lit. “aided by you, Indra” seems clumsy.

The verb ádhi vocā could also be a 1st sg. subj., but with most tr. I take it as 2nd sg. impv.; “I” am a less likely advocate for the presser than Indra is.

With Ge I consider ví cayema bháre kṛtám (f) a gambling expression; for another such expression see the previous hymn, I.131.5d.


## 02
Pādas abc consist entirely of four locative expressions (with their genitives); this heavily signposted syntactic pattern allows (/forces) the first word of d, áhan(n) to be interpreted as the loc. sg. of áhar ‘day’ rather than the 2nd/3rd sg. root impf. of √han, which otherwise would be strongly favored in an Indra context. (Note that the identical opening, áhann índro, is found at IV.28.3, with the verb.) The locatives in 1d, f also reinforce the loc. reading, esp. asmín áhani (1d). I don’t know exactly what to call this poetic trick -- it is aggressively a non-pun.

āprá- in a is a hapax, and there is no consensus on its meaning or derivation; see EWA s.v. I am inclined to follow Ge (etc.)’s connection with āprī́- (a noun that doesn't occur in the RV, though the verbal syntagm does) with a meaning ‘propitiator’ vel sim. This fits its dependence on vákmani ‘at the speech’ and may also thematically echo ádhi vocā ‘advocate, speak on behalf of’ in 1e. It could indeed refer to the reciter of Āprī hymns. The other leading etymological candidate is ā́√pṛ ‘fill’ (so WG; see Old), but “the filler” seems to have less connection with speaking than “the propitiator.” The way the reflexive adj. svásmin works in bc is a little tricky: “of X, at his very own anointing.” On the basis of I.134.2 I follow Ge in taking krāṇásya as passive and referring to the soma. Thus in bc we find the anointing (áñjasi) of the two primary ritual substances, fire (b) and soma (c). Alternatively, if it seems desirable to keep the referent the same in the two pādas, one can follow Re, WG in taking krāṇá- as “active,” referring to Agni.

The use of ‘head’ (śíras-/śīrṣán-) to refer to an individual person is not, as far as I know, otherwise found in the RV, though the semantic dev. is obvious and precedented in English.


## 03
A very opaque verse, which has received multiple interpretations. I will discuss only my own, very tentative, one here.

I take pāda a as the announcement to Indra of the “pleasurable offering” (práyaḥ) currently set out for him at this sacrifice (asmín yajñé 1f); see nearby I.134.1, 135.4 for similar usage of práyas-. This glittering offering reminds the poet of a previous one (pratnáthā). I take the next two pādas (bc) as describing this previous one; the relative locative yásmin yajñé is a temporal expression that picks up the temporal pratnáthā.

The crux in bc is the pair vā́ram (b), vā́r (c). Since the former is an obj. of ákṛṇvata and the latter a (possible) subj. of ási, an analysis as a masc. (or at least gendered) root noun suggests itself, but such a noun has at best a precarious existence (see Schindler WurNom s.v.). Nonetheless, I think it must be posited here; the other solutions, which include taking the two forms to two separate stems (see, e.g., Gr, Lub) or decomposing them into vā + a… (Hoffmann apud Schindler, WG), do too much violence to the patterns of Atyaṣṭi meter. With Ge and Re in their separate ways (“Schirmer(?)” “protecteur”) I take the form to √vṛ ‘cover’ and tr.

‘shield’ (as in X.93.3). In b this noun in the acc. is in apposition to unexpressed tvā ‘you’, i.e., Indra -- which is the first obj. to a double acc. √kṛ construction ‘make X into Y’. (For Indra as a home, see 5fg. For kṣáya- in a metaphorical sense, see the next hymn, I.133.7a.) In the tag-pāda the construction has been switched from acc. to nom., and the 2nd sg. ref. is now overt (asi ‘you are’). A nom. vā́r conforms to this case switch; however, since kṣáya- is masc., we should expect *kṣáyaḥ here. I explain the anomaly by the pressures of Atyaṣṭi, which requires strict identity between the finals of b and c; kṣáyam is simply repeated from b or made an honorary neut. for the occasion. It is possible to avoid this problem by assuming that vā́r- has verbal rection (so implicitly Ge “der Schirmer(?) des Hauses”; see also Schindler WurNom), but this introduces further complications, and I prefer the double acc. interpr. anyway.

If bc refers to a time in the distant past when Indra was made into our protector, d may then call for the restatement of this fact at the current ritual (depicted in pāda a by my interpr.) The expression nū́itthā́te pūrváthā ca pravā́cyam “Now in the current way and in the earlier one it is to be proclaimed of you” in 4a supports my interpr of the larger stucture of this verse, namely that it concerns the conceptual intersection of the current ritual and the previous one and that what has been said before needs to be restated at the current sacrifice. Note also that, though the form of √vac, voceḥ in this case, now has the preverb ví, the sequence vocer ádha, with the adv. ádha, echoes ádhi vocā in 1e.

In e I take raśmíbhiḥ as a temporal expression “with the rays (of the sun),” identifying the time as dawn, as is very common. The standard tr. take it as an instr.

of the means of seeing; this is not impossible, but seems less idiomatic. See further ad I.135.3.

I don’t quite know what to do with ánu in f, but given the other difficulties in the verse, this is a minor problem.


## 05
For īkṣáyat see Jamison 1983: 123. It has the same double I/T value I also ascribe to citáyanta(ḥ) in I.131.2f.

In de I take bā́dhe as an infinitive with tásmai [=Indra] as subj. and ā́yuḥ prajā́vat as obj. This requires √bādh to have a positive value (‘thrust [s.th. good] towards [s.o.]’), rather than the usual negative ‘thrust away, repel’, but see I.61.2 for a similar positive sense.


## 06
The dual dvandva indrā-parvatā ‘Indra and Mountain’ raises the question of the identity of ‘Mountain’; as in III.53.1 I think it is a designation of Indra’s mace (vájra). That the mace shows up in the instr. in the same pāda as the dual verb that has Indra and Parvata as implicit subj. (c vájreṇa … hatam) does not, I think, rule out this interpr.: as “Mountain” the mace is animatized; in the instrumental it is an inanimate instrument.

The tám of pāda a is an anticipatory placeholder for táṃ-tam íd in b, c.

Re and WG take chantsat (√chand) in d as meaning ‘appear’: “there will appear a gáhanam for him …” -- that is, ‘come into view, take shape’. But though ‘appear’ in modern European lgs. can cover that sense, the ‘appear’ sense of √chand is generally ‘have the appearance of, look like’. Ge’s interpr. is more complex: he takes the vájra- to be the underlying subject, which to the fugitive will look like a gáhanam. This interpr. represents the sense of √chand better, but at the cost of producing something close to nonsense, at least as I tried to understand it. I instead use the developed sense ‘be pleasing’ of √chand: the point is that once Indra and Parvata start smiting him, even falling into an abyss will be preferable.

