+++
title = "133"

+++
Indra


## 01
The popular, Atharvan-like character of the first hymn of this composite (see publ. intro.) (vss. 1-5) is partly signalled by the two l-forms in this verse: abhivlágya and vailasthāná-. Both forms are found only in this hymn. The first belongs to the putative root √vlag, confined to this hymn (this gerund 1c, 2a; nominal abhivlaṅga4b); the second, in the variants vailasthānaká- and mahā́vailastha-, appears also in 3c, d. Neither has an agreed-upon etymology. For √vlag EWA suggests a connection with √vṛj ‘twist’. I see it rather as an l-form of √vraj ‘proceed, advance upon’, which in several of its (few) occurrences also appears with abhí. The nasal in abhivlaṅgamight be a problem, but roots ending in -j are prone to secondary nasals (√raj, rañj ‘color’, √saj, sañj ‘hang’, probably √svaj, svañj ‘embrace’).

As for vaila(-sthana-), it also has been subjected to multiple etymologies (see disc. WG ad loc.). I take it as an l-form of vṛddhied vīrá- ‘hero’; the vṛddhied r-form is found in vaíra(-deya-) (V.61.8) ‘(payment) of wergeld’. The ‘place of vaira-/vaila’ would be ‘the place of heroes or heroism’, i.e., the battlefield.

Note the juxtaposition across pāda-boundary of ṛténa ‘with truth’ and drúhaḥ ‘deceits’. I take anindrā́ḥ as implicitly contrastive with mahī́ḥ: though the lies may be great, they lack Indra and therefore lack ultimate power.


## 02
vaṭūrín- (/mahā́vaṭūrin-) in cd is an impossible hapax, and the wisest course (taken by Ge, WG) is not to tr. it. (Re tries out éperonné ‘spurred on’, with no indication of where he got it.) Unwisely I tender both a tr. (‘overcoming obstacles’) and an etymology, though more in a spirit of adventure than with any confidence that they are correct. I start with the idiom vṛtrá- √tṝ ‘overcome obstacle(s)’, found, e.g., in the fairly well-attested neut. noun vṛtratū́rya- and adj. vṛtratúr-. A hypothetical Middle Indic form to an underlying *vṛtratū/ur- would be *vaṭṭa-tū/ur- (since dentals following original *ṛ often undergo retroflexion: see von Hinüber, Mittelindisch2 165). This could then undergo haplology to *vaṭṭū/ur- and then simplification of the cluster (though we might expect *vāṭū/ur-) to the form to which an -in-suffix was affixed. This is more machinery than should be deployed to explain a hapax, but the explanation falls (loosely) within the realm of possibility -- and a MIA source would fit with the other words in the hymn belonging to a lower or aberrant register. Still it would probably be more sensible to follow Kuiper (see EWA s.v.) in taking it as a non-Indo-Aryan word.

Even leaving aside vaṭūrin-, the verse doen’t make a lot of sense: what does it mean for Indra to cut off heads with his foot?


## 03
In an unpubl. paper Arlo Griffiths argues that armaká- means ‘mudflat’.

Note the -ka- forms, vailasthānaká- and armaká- (2x) -- pleonastic -ka- often being a sign of colloquial register (see Jamison, -ka-). Since diminutivization (or diminishment/belittling) is one of the apparent nuances of the -ka-suffix, it is somewhat amusing that we find “diminutivized” vailasthānaké beside mahā́vailasthe.


## 04
I have tr. the fem. gen. pl. rel. yā́sām as ‘when’, to make the structure of subord. cl. (ab) - main cl. (cd) work better. However it is possible (and perhaps preferable) to take the yā́sām cl. as simply continuing vs. 3: “Smash down the troop of those witches … of which (witches) you scattered afar thrice fifty.” 4cd would then be an independent sentence.

Who the subject of cd is depends on what the verb manāyati means. Ge takes the subj. as a generic, or at least unidentified, “er”: “das merkt er sich fein von dir.” Re thinks the subj. is one of the witches, but like Ge he takes manāya- to mean something like ‘pay attention, note, understand’. The verb is an obvious denom. to manā́-, which is interpr. by some as ‘Andacht’ (prayer, reverence) (see EWA s.v. MAN1 ), with the verb then meaning ‘andächtig sein’ (be reverent towards)(so WG here, again with a generic subject, “man”). But since I interpret manā́as ‘zeal’, for me the verb means ‘display zeal’, with the implicit subj. Indra’s deed, represented by the neut. pronouns tát (c) and takát (d).

Pronominal -ka-forms, like takát, are an extreme sign of colloquial register -- or rather of the poets overtly signalling their conscious deployment of this register.


## 05
This last verse of the colloquially bloodthirsty first hymn of the composite pulls out all the stops with striking interlocking phonetic figures in ab: #piśaṅga ...

\#piśā́cim ... and (piśáṅg)abhrṣṭ̥ im ambhr̥ṇám# ... (s)ám mr̥ṇa# The latter sequence helps explain why we have another impossible hapax: ambhṛṇá-; as often, difficult words appear in contexts that play on their phonological shape. Again, wisdom would suggest leaving it untr. or at least tr. with a vague contextually generated term like ‘monstrous’, but I have had the temerity to suggest another very shaky etymology. I suggest that this is a colloquial deriv. of the lexeme ánu √bhṛ, a euphemistic idiom that refers to sexual assault and penetration -- e.g., in the cosmic incest myth (X.61.5). See comm. ad I.88.6 and Jamison 1981 (“A Vedic sexual pun: ástobhayat, anubhartrī, and RV I.88.6,” Acta Orientalia 42 [1981] 55- 63). The initial am would represent an apocopated form of the preverb ánu, a change that fits the register in the rest of the hymn. My ‘ballsy’ is an attempt to capture the slangy irreverence. Since Piśācas are later associated with sexual misconduct towards women -- at least on the basis of the Paiśāca “marriage” (e.g., MDŚ III.34), which involves taking advantage of a maiden who is asleep, intoxicated, or disordered -- a sexual interpr. of the adjective qualifying the Piśāci here would be entirely fitting. The same idiom, with an even more MIA cast, may be found in AirĀr ambhaṇa- ‘Bauch der Laute’ (belly of the lute); as discussed in my 1981 paper, the vīnā bears some resemblance to male genitalia and jokes about its shape are still current in South Asia.


## 06
Although the adverb avár ‘downward’ occurs only here, beside more common avás, it is probably not the result of secondary alteration of avás-, since it has an Old Aves. correspondent auuarə̄(Y. 29.11).

The accent on dādṛhí must be owing to its juxtaposition with immediately following śrudhí.

ápūruṣaghna- is universally taken as ‘not smashing men’, and this is certainly possible. However, since the focus of this composite hymn is on Indra’s destruction of various demonic beings, I think an interpr. ‘smashing non-men’ fits better. The context remains violent, so remarking on Indra’s forebearance towards men would break the martial mood.

