+++
title = "135"

+++
Vāyu

## 01-03
The fronted forms of tvám (etc.) found in I.134.4-6 continue here, though not as densely: 1d, 2a, d, 3d.


## 01
Unaccented niyutvate in bc appears to be a voc. to an otherwise unattested -istem niyutvati-, whose formation would be morphologically peculiar (a secondary -istem built to a -vant-stem?!). It must be a nonce manipulation of the standard -vantstem niyútvant-. As Re points out, vocatives in -pate may have had some influence in producing this rhyme form. Since Vāyu is almost the only referent of niyútvant-, it is highly unlikely that the form represents a dative to the -vant-stem that lost its accent for some reason.


## 02
On váha vāyo niyúto yāhy asmayúḥ see disc. ad VII.90.1.


## 03
As indicated in the publ. intro., this hymn is divided into tṛcas and each tṛca was probably originally a single hymn. This then is the final verse of 1-3, and it exhibits very heavy ring-composition: 3b … úpa yāhi vītáye reprises 1a úpa no yāhi vītáye almost exactly, and 3ab … niyúdbhiḥ śatínibhiḥ … sahasrínibhiḥ … echoes 1bc sahásreṇa niyútā … śatínībhiḥ. Note also 3d távāyám bhāgáḥ …, which is identical to the beginning of 2d.

As discussed ad I.134.3, the expression here, sáraśmiḥ sū́rye sácā “accompanying the reins [=rays] when the sun (rises)” seems to me a fuller version of the temporal expression raśmíṣu (/raśmíbhiḥ) “at/with the reins=rays.” See also I.137.2e sākáṃ sū́ryasya raśmíbhiḥ “simultaneous with the reins=rays of the sun.”

## 04-06
As indicated in the publ. intro., this tṛca is constructed in parallel to 1-3, but addressed to the two gods Vāyu and Indra rather than Vāyu alone. I will not call attention to the pervasively parallel phraseology: a simple skimming of the two sets of verses will amply demonstrate it.


## 04
The vā́yav índraś ca construction here unfolds over two pādas.


## 07
Here the vā́yav índraś ca construction is stretched from a to c, and in f the sequence índraś ca yāthaḥ (lit. “and Indra, you two drive”) presupposes a 2nd ps. sg.

to produce the conjoined subject. This latter construction further attenuates the vā́yav índraś ca construction.

Note the little figure sasató … śáśvato.


## 08
As indicated in the publ. intro., I have no idea what the figtree represents here. Some of the verse seems anagrammatic for vāyú-: the repeated jāyávo (bc) and yávo (d).

The accent on súvate in d must result from juxtaposition with pácyate.


## 09
The references here are also murky, but I am inclined to see the plural referents as both Maruts and soma drinks. In favor of the Maruts: 1) they are called bāhv-òjas -in VIII.20.6; 2) they are sometimes called ukṣán- (e.g., V.52.3); 3) the non-waning cows of 8ef are also found in the Marut hymn V.55.5 ná vo dasrā úpa dasyanti dhenávaḥ; 4) they fly (e.g. V.59.7), and they're associated with the shaking of mountains and the flowing of rivers (flying in the river could be rain); 5) approaching the figtree in 8b might be like V.54.12, where they “shake the gleaming berry (píppalam)” -- the pippala is supposed to be a fig.

nadī́is one of the rare loc. sg.s to a vṛkī́-fem.; see sarasī́in VIII.103.2, gaurī́ in IX.12.3, and AiG III.170.

