+++
title = "139"

+++
All Gods

## 01-02
For the sense of these vss., see publ. intro.


## 01
The pass. aor. saṃdā́yi is taken by Gr (etc.) to √dā ‘tie’, surely correctly.

But there are several other occurrences of this lexeme sám √dā that also appear to express the same idiom, but, with different morphological realizations, are generally assigned to √dā ‘give’ (though see, e.g., Kü 244). The idiom, in its fullest expression, is sám √dā nā́bhim [ACC] nā́bhā(u) [LOC] ‘tie navel to navel’, that is, to assert a family connection (often between gods or semidivine figures like seers and us humans. In the passive the first navel is of course in the nom. - a nom. that is gapped in this passage. Another ex. of the idiom is found in IV.44.5, also passive, this time with the loc. gapped (or substituted for by a prn.): sáṃ yád dadé nā́bhiḥ pūrvyā́vām “because (our) ancient umbilical tie is attached to you (or, to your [navel]),” of the Aśvins. Instead of sám the preverb can be ā́: see IX.10.8 with the fullest form of the idiom, containing both case forms of ‘navel’: nā́bhā nā́bhiṃ na ā́dade “he has bound his navel to our navel.” Also IX.79.4 diví te nā́bhā paramó yá ādadé “It was in heaven, to its navel, that your highest (navel) was bound.” (This last tr. is different from the publ. one; see comm. ad IX.79.4 for the alteration and the difficulties in the passage.) Another ex. of the idiom is probably found in the noun saṃdadí- in IX.99.7, though the telltale navel is absent. See disc. there. The other occurrence of saṃdadíin II.39.7 even more attenuated, but still expresses the sense of attachment. A variant of the idiom, ā́√tan nā́bhim LOC is found in I.105.9; see comm. there.


## 02
With Ge (etc.) I supply ‘throne’ with hiraṇyáyam in e on the basis of V.62.8.


## 03
The part. āśrāváyanta(ḥ) is best taken as predicated, substituting for a main verb. The standard tr. supply a finite verb (“invite” vel sim.), but this seems unnecessary.

This form also participates in a fine example of case disharmony in a simile (in the sense of Jamison 1982): śrāváya-/śraváya- can mean both “cause to be heard” and “cause to hear.” In the simile (pāda b) it takes ślókam as obj. and means “cause to be heard”; in the frame (pāda a) it takes yuvā́m and means “cause to hear,” while in the tag-pāda (c) it likewise takes yuvā́m but also a 2nd acc. havyā́, with the meaning “cause X to hear (about) Y.” With Ge I supply “of the pressing stone” with ślókam on the basis of 10e ślókam ádreḥ.

Unlike the standard tr. I supply “chariot” as the obj. of anuśā́satā and take rájaḥ as an acc. of extent.


## 07
On the difficulties of interpr. of this verse, see publ. intro.

In f Ge and Re take aryamā́as subject of duhre and are then at pains to assemble enough other personnel to count, at least conceptually, as a plural with pl.

verb duhre. (Cf. Re “Aryaman (ainsi que) l'officiant (et autres) l'ont traite-à-fond.”) But not only does this not work grammatically but it does not make sense: since the gods gave the cow to the Aṅgirases (de), surely they are the ones who have milked her dry. Although major syntactic breaks in the middle of pādas are rare, in this case we must take sg. aryamā́as starting a new sentence (so also WG). Note that pāda a also seems to have a syntactic break after śṛṇuhi, though it is less jarring because the subject of the next clause remains the same.

As for the sense, I am quite baffled. The Aṅgirases seem to have mistreated the cow, or at least gotten everything they can out of her. But Aryaman also has knowledge, and perhaps use, of her. I suggest very tentatively that since Aryaman is associated with the householder’s fire and with hospitality rites, this may be an early and oblique reference to a division between what will later be known as śrauta rites and gṛhya rites. But I have no confidence in this.


## 08
On asmád abhí see comm. ad V.33.3.

The standard tr. supply ‘word’ (vácaḥ Ge n. 8a) as the neut. sg. subject with yád … citrám … in de, but a singular form of paúṃsya- in ab is more easily supplied from context, and deeds can easily “resound” by semantic transference.

I interpr. the structure of d-g differently from the standard interpr., which take tád as the antecedent both of the yád clause in de (yád … ghóṣāt …) and the one in f, yác ca duṣṭáram, echoed by g. By this interpr. the two yád clauses are overtly conjoined (yád … yác ca) around the main clause referent (tád), with the 2nd embedded in the main cl. before the verb didhṛtā́in the echo pāda. Klein explicitly accounts for this disruption of structure by asserting that the yác ca clause “has been postposed in pāda c because its required repetition in d provides a coherent punaḥpadam” [he must mean f and g respectively]. This seems like a bit of a cop out to me - it wouldn’t be “required” to be repeated if it hadn’t ended up in that position in the first place, for other reasons. Contrary to this analysis, I take f(g) as containing an “X and which Y” (tád … yác ca) construction of the familiar type, with two different referents. The X is also further specified by the preposed rel. cl. in de (yád vaḥ … ámartyam), but the yád clause in de and the one in f (echoed by g) are entirely unconnected and have different referents. The placement of the yác ca clause and the ca seem to me strong evidence for my interpretation.

As for the referent of yác ca duṣṭáram (fg), I supply dyumnám also from context (b dyumnā́ni); cf. also III.37.10 dyumnáṃ dadhiṣva duṣṭáram.


## 10
The praiṣa quoted at the beginning of this verse, matching the one opening the hymn, situates this verse in the ritual here and now, and such a context gives clues for the solution of some of the difficulties. Because the context is the soma sacrifice (the praügaśastra is part of the morning soma pressing; see also the pressing stone in e), I follow Ge in taking vanínaḥ as the gen. sg. of ‘wooden’ (rather than as the nom. pl. of a putative vanín- ‘winning’, with Re). The ‘wooden’ is the wooden cup and by extension its contents: soma. This interpr. in turn makes it unnec. to take vanta as a haplology of 3rd pl. *vananta (see Old). The bulls of b are likewise interpretable in a ritual context as the soma drinks.

Pāda f contains an incomprehensible hapax araríndāni, which, as so often, may have been stimulated by the phonological context: ádhārayadararindāni. Given the construction of the tag-pāda g it should refer to something compatible with sádmāni ‘seats’. My ‘fittings’ is only a placeholder, loosely implying a connection with √ṛ ‘fit together’ (also in ará- ‘wheel-spoke’, etc.) and inspired by the (presumably entirely accidental) echo of ἀραρίσκω. What -ind- would be under this analysis is utterly unclear.

