+++
title = "140"

+++
Agni


## 01
The referent of dhāsí- ordinarily ‘wellspring’ (see comm. I.62.3), which is identified here as Agni’s yóni- ‘womb’, is unclear. In VIII.43.7, 29 and III.7.3 (also perhaps III.7.1) the dhāsí- is the plants (=firewood) to be “eaten,” i.e., burned, by the fire, hence the source (‘wellspring’) of the fire’s growth. Since whatever it is here can be carried (prá bharā), firewood makes sense, and this interpr. is supported by the fact that the plants that Agni burns are an important theme in this hymn (vss. 2ab, 6-8). Though in I.122.13, a passage adduced by WG, I render dhāsí- as ‘gush’ (developing a different aspect of ‘wellspring, fountain’; cf. also VI.67.6), that sense does not work well here because it must be identified with the yóni- and capable of being carried.


## 02
I take trivṛ́t as a qualifier of ánnam ‘food’ (so also Re, Old [SBE], Sāy, WG); however, I am not sure what tripartition of food is meant. Ge in his n. (2a) suggests wood, ghee, and soma (more or less flg. Sāy), but because the next pāda concerns only the plant food that Agni has eaten and that regenerates in a year, I am reluctant to divide the focus. It is also possible to take trivṛ́t as an adverb, as Ge does (“… eilt dreifältig …”), but this merely transfers the problem.

In the second hemistich “the one / the other” are easier to identify. Pāda c concerns the ritual fire, while d treats the wild fire, each represented by a characteristic animal: in c the “thoroughbred bull” (jényo vṛ́ṣā), which, despite its power, is a domesticated beast, while the (wild) elephant (vāraṇáḥ) of d rampages in the forest.

I don’t understand the position of ī: ī(m) and sīm generally occupy Wackernagel’s position. In this case it may mark jagdhám as a notional relative clause, as in my tr. “what was eaten,” though the following word púnaḥ unfortunately must be construed with the main verb vāvṛdhe.

In c the initial position of anyásya violates my rule (1997, Fs. Beekes) for definite anyá- placement, but anyéna in d is correctly positioned.


## 03
The middle voice of tarete, fairly rare for forms of √tṝ, is responsible for my “move athwart each other,” against a more standard “hasten towards” or the like. It is also a reasonable representation of the movement of the kindling sticks rubbing against each other.

On √dhvaṃs see comm. ad IV.19.7.

Both sā́cya and kúpaya- are hapaxes, though the likely root affiliation of the former with √sac ‘accompany, attend upon’ makes its interpr. easier. With AiG II.2.793, 798, I take it to be a gerundive to this root. As for kúpaya-, I find it hard to separate it from the root √kup ‘quiver, quake’, despite the unclarity of its formation (suffix? accent?), and find the alternative analysis as ku-paya(s?)- (most recently, tentatively WG) unlikely.

várdhanam pitúḥ “the increaser of his father” is one of the RVic poet’s beloved paradoxes. The priest generates the ritual fire and is therefore its father, but the well-tended fire in turn produces prosperity and increase for the ritual officiants.


## 04
The thrust of this vs. is a pile-up of adjectives describing Agni’s flamehorses, set within a frame consisting of the verb úpa yujyante “they are harnessed,” postponed until the final pāda, and a dative of benefit occurring in the first: mánave mānavasyaté.

mānavasyaté is found only here, and both its sense and its formation are unclear. It is generally rendered as if it were a denominative (Ge ‘dem Menschenfreundlichen’, Re ‘agissant en homme’), but this would assume a -yáformation built to a vṛddhi-derivative pseudo-s-stem *mānavas- (beside mānavá-, loosely like mánus- beside mánu-). I instead interpret it as a (pseudo-)future participle in -syánt- built to the common vṛddhi deriv. mānava-. The future suffix reinforces the sense of the vṛddhi deriv. ‘descending from Manu’ by emphasizing the fact that (some of) these descendants are still to come. (If such a derivation seems too radical, it could be mediated by a denom. *mānava-yá- + -syánt-, which underwent haplology.) asamaná- means lit. something like ‘not together, not gathered’; ‘breaking ranks’ seems a dynamic tr. of the underlying concept (Re ‘allant en sens divers’).

(See also VII.5.3.) It thus forms a semantic pair with mumukṣvàḥ ‘seeking to break free’ in a. I do not follow Ge (/WG) in their derivation from the extended meaning of sámana- as ‘battle’, hence (Ge) ‘ohne Kampf’.

Note the phonetic figure opening the vs.: mumukṣvò mánave mānavasyaté.


## 05
The vs. contains three “intensive” participles: kárikrataḥ, mármṛśat, and nā́nadat. All three, in my opinion, express repetitive or repeated action. In particular kárikrataḥ, in my tr. ‘making and remaking’, nicely reflects the constantly changing shape of the smoke rising from the raging flames.

I take mahī́m ‘great’ (fem.) separately from avánim and referring to the earth; by this interpr. the whole earth serves as Agni’s course (‘stream bed’).

## 06-08
This trio of verses treats the union (by burning) of the hyper-masculine Agni/fire and the plants (feminine). This must be the “der erotische Grundton” of the hymn that Ge mentions in his intro. This sexual union leads to the death of the plants (8b) and their regrowth and transformation into a different form (7cd, 8). Or so is my interpr.; acdg. to some, the flames are sometimes the referents, rather than the plants.

This proposed split reference seems to me to break the thematic unity of the verses and the climax in 8 of the death and renewed life of the females who unite with Agni.


## 06
The concentration of intensives continues in this verse: námnate (a), róruvat (b), davidhāva (d).

The ‘bending’ of pāda a of course describes the flickering motion of the flames.

Because of the theme mentioned ad vss. 6-8, of the bodily transformation of the plants by burning, I take tanvàs in c as referring to the bodies of the plants, not, with most tr., that of Agni.

I don’t entirely understand the position of ca in c. Klein (DGRV I.222-23, 259-60) suggests that it has been bumped by the participle opening the clause and pāda. It is certainly the case that ca could not immediately follow that first word without metrical distress: five-syllable ojāyámānaḥ entirely fills the opening, and since the caesura cannot precede an enclitic, placing ca after the participle would result in an opening of 6.


## 07
The idiom punar √vṛdh ‘grow again’ recurs from 2b, again referring to the plants immolated by the fire (at least in my opinion; others take the subject to be the flames). Here their regeneration is linked with their contact or merger with divinity.

The final pāda is variously interpreted. I take the plants still to be the subject and the form “different from their parents” refers to their burned residue as ash and cinders, as opposed to the branches and leaves that were fed to the fire. But if pitróḥ is taken as a loc., the referent may be different; some take it as referring to Heaven and Earth (Sāy, Old [SBE], WG).


## 08
Again there is a difference of opinion as to referent. With Old (SBE) I take the plants once again as the subjects of pāda a (so, partly, WG), contra Sāy, Ge, Re, Kü (419), who interpret them as flames.


## 09
The hapax tuvigrá- in b is generally interpr. as having a thematized form of √gṝ ‘swallow’ as 2nd member, hence ‘powerfully swallowing’ vel sim. But to a seṭ root we should probably expect *-gira- (like -tír-: -tira-; (-)túr-: túra-). I follow instead a suggestion of Insler’s, that it represents a haplologized *tuvi-vigrá- ‘powerfully spirited’.

With most, I take śyénī as the fem. of the color term śyetá-, rather than, with Ge, as the fem. of śyená- ‘falcon’ (Adlerweibchen). Among other things, we would probably expect the fem. of ‘falcon’ to have vṛkī́- inflection, like vṛkī́- itself and siṃhī́- ‘lioness’ to siṃhá- ‘lion’; it should therefore have suffixal accent, and in this sandhi context the nom. sg. should have come out as *śyenī́ḥ. Moreover there is no obvious role for a female falcon in context. The white trail of ash here contrasts nicely with the black furrows (kṛṣṇásīta-) the fire creates in 4b.


## 10
I read pāda b with cd, contrary to the standard tr., which take it as independent. I might, however, replace the tr. of ádha as ‘then’ with ‘and’ or the like.

The first word of c, avā́s i ya, is generally taken as the gerund to áva √as lit.

‘throw down’. I am dubious about this interpr., since that lexeme is not found elsewhere in the RV or, acdg. to Monier Williams, anywhere else in Sanskrit. I therefore derive it rather from áva √sā / si ‘let loose, unhitch’, despite the formal difficulties. The idiom is used regularly for letting loose horses, to which Agni’s flames are compared here, and see X.61.20, where Agni is the subject of áva syati, a verse that contains vocabulary that resonates here: dvivartaní- and śíśu-. The problem is that we should expect avasā́ya with full-grade root and root accent (cf. I.104.1) or possibly *avasi yà (this zero-gr. form is recorded in Whitney’s Roots). I can only explain the accented long vowel in avā́s i ya as arising from confusion produced by augmented forms (cf. ávāsuḥ ‘they unhitched’ I.179.2).

I take the śíśumatīḥ ‘(females) possessing young’ to be Agni’s flames; they have young because flames beget more flames as they spread.

I take d as a paradox: the fire is in constant circling motion (parijárbhurāṇaḥ), but still produces a protective encirclement like armor.


## 11
Most take the expression in b to mean “let it be dearer to you than a dear thought”; this seems to me nonsensical or at least rhetorically weak. I suggest that there is a pun on priyá-, which can mean both ‘dear’ and ‘own’. Here the poet suggests that his composed thought will be dearer to Agni than anything the god himself might produce.


## 12
See publ. intro. for speculation on the “foot” of the boat.

Ge suggests persuasively that “chariot and house” are used metaphorically for (times of) war and peace.


## 13
The problem in this verse is to determine which pādas go together. Ge and Re construe ab and cd together, but this leads to a gender problem: the subj. of cd should be fem. pl. aruṇyàḥ in d, but c contains a nom. pl. masc. part. yántaḥ. (Old [SBE] suggests that this form is corrupt because of the metrical problems in the pāda; he treats these at length in Noten, but does not seem to favor emendation of the participle.) The problem is not entirely solved by taking c with (a)b, as Old (SBE) and I do, but it becomes somewhat attenuated by the variety of possible subjects: Agni (m.), Heaven and Earth (dyā́vā-kṣā́mā, dual dvandva, whose gender is listed by Gr. as fem., but there are no diagnostic passages), the rivers (síndhu-, sometimes fem., sometimes masc. [see common acc. pl. síndhūn]) -- with masc. prevailing either because masc. is the default in such gender clashes or because síndhavaḥ is the closest subject to yántaḥ. WG also take d with the nominatives of b, by somehow taking aruṇyàḥ as a temporal expression “bei den (Morgen)röten,” but one would expect a loc. for this meaning (as opposed to the extent of time in the temporal dīrghā́hā “through the long days” of c).

