+++
title = "141"

+++
Agni See published intro. for discussion of enjambement and other special effects in this hymn.


## 01
Most tr. take the subj. of úpa hvarate to be the same as that of sā́dhate, namely the thought (matíḥ), and therefore must take the subord. cl. as concessive (more or less “even if / although it moves crookedly, it goes straight …”). However, I take Agni as the subj. of úpa hvarate, which expresses the usual crooked motion of fire, and the īm in this clause as standing for matíḥ, the subj. of the main clause and the goal of úpa hvarate. (īm and sīm almost always have real accusative reference; see Jamison 2002, Fs. Cardona, and īm in 3a and 3c below.) The verbs do of course contrast -- the zigzaging motion of the fire as opposed to the straight path of the poetic thought -- but this is the result of the different natures of their two subjects, which are acting in tandem for the success of the sacrifice. That hvārá- is used of Agni in 7b supports taking him as subj. of hvárate here. However, see comment in


## 04
below.

Most tr. take the streams of truth (ṛtásya dhénā(ḥ)) as acc. pl. and the object of anayanta, and supply various subjects: e.g., Ge “wise ones” (dhī́rāḥ), largely on the basis of V.45.10, which has dhī́rāḥ as subj. of anayanta. Since that passage in a Viśve Devāḥ hymn has no other points of contact with ours, I see no reason to supply an otherwise unrepresented subject here and to bump the possible surface subj., fem.

pl. dhénāḥ, into the acc. I would adduce rather I.148.3 (also Dīrghatamas), where Agni is the obj. of prá … nayanta, as I think he is here. It is true that I.146.4 has dhī́rāsaḥ … kaváyaḥ “clever poets,” who guide (nayanti) Agni’s step (padám), which would give a nearer parallel for the dhī́rāḥ supplied here by Ge (who oddly doesn't cite this nearby passage), but the phrase “streams of truth,” that is, true poetic formulations, seems to me just another way to refer to “clever poets” and actually supports taking the fem. pl. expression as the subj. and Agni as obj.


## 02
This verse concerns the three forms of Agni, with “form” expressed by neut.

vápuḥ in a, which should be supplied with dvitī́yam in b and tṛtī́yam in c. (Contra Ge [/WG], who take vápuḥ as an adjective and the ordinals as adverbs. Since vápuṣe is clearly nominal in 1a, an adjectival usage in the following vs. would be surprising, esp. as there are, in my opinion, no certain exx. of adjectival vápus-.) In a I take pṛkṣáḥ as the gen. sg. of pṛ́kṣ-, rather than the nom. sg. of pṛkṣá- (so Gr, Old [SBE], Ge, WG) or acc. pl. of pṛ́kṣ- (so Re). It is a descriptive or qualifying gen.: the “wondrous form of nourishment.” It is not entirely clear what this phrase refers to, but I would suggest that it is the plants, which are often said to contain the fire in embryonic form (thus wondrously). In this form he is “abounding in food” both because the plants feed the fire and because plants supply nourishment to the living world. Such a qualifying gen. is also found in vṛṣabhásya in c acdg. to my interpr. (but not those of others). The root noun pṛ́kṣ- is probably found also in pṛkṣúdh- in vs. 4 below, qualifying plants (vīrúdhaḥ), which supports my interpr.

here.

The second wondrous form is the fire in the waters, which has come to be identified with Apām Napāt. The “sevenfold-kindly (saptáśivāsu) mothers” must be the seven streams. The compound is oddly formed, and Gr, inter alia, suggests reading *saptá *śivā́su, an unnecessary emendation, particularly if we maintain the compound reading of dáśapramatim in d (see immed. below).

The third form of fire, presented in cd, appears to be the ritual fire produced by the kindling sticks wielded by the fingers, which are characterized, as so often, as “young women” (yóṣaṇaḥ). The cmpd. dáśapramatim ‘having ten(fold) forethought’ suffers from the same formational oddity as saptáśivāsu and has been even more eagerly emended to *dáśa *prámatim (see, e.g., Old, Noten, who keeps saptáśivāsu as a cmpd but supports emending the other to two words). The dáśa, liberated from the compound, would qualify the fingers, as often. However, in my opinion we must keep either both compounds or neither, and since the cmpds are the more difficult readings and Dīrghatamas is a tricky poet, I see no reason to emend.

Note that janayanta in b rhymes with anayanta in 1d in the same metrical position.


## 03
This verse describes several mystical and, probably, mythical productions of fire, couched in the present (clear pres. mathāyáti in d, which suggests that the injunc.

kránta in b has the same temporal value). I do not completely understand either of the scenarios, esp. fire’s hiding in the mixing vessel in cd.

Ge’s suggestion that the first hemistich deals with Agni in the waters is supported by the parallel passages he adduces, and so it may continue the theme of 2b.

In d mathāyáti is entirely ambiguous between ‘churns, rubs’ (Old [SBE] ‘produces … by attrition’, Ge ‘ausreibt’) and ‘steals’ (Re, WG), and both are appropriate: ‘churns’ would continue the theme of fire-production, but ‘steals’ would refer to Mātariśvan’s theft of fire from heaven. No doubt both are meant, and there is both a mythical and a ritual application of the passage. Cf. I.148.1 máthīt … mātariśvā.


## 04
This vs. concerns the production of fire by the friction of the two kindling sticks.

His “highest father” (pitúḥ paramā́t) is probably Heaven (Dyaus Pitar), as most take it; it also contrasts with the “depth” (budhnā́t) that is his source in 3a. The pāda-final pári is probably not to be construed with the verb (prá) nīyate, though pári is common with √nī, but, as often, governs the abl. (pitúḥ paramā́t), despite the intercalation of the verb between the abl. phrase and this postposition.

The hapax pṛkṣúdh- in b is variously explained. E.g., Old (Noten) suggests that it is modeled on the immediately following vīrúdh- and also śurúdh-. In the published tr. I followed Humbach’s explanation (Gathas [1st ed. 1958] II.28; accepted by Narten, YH p. 161), which takes -udh as a zero-grade root noun belonging to widespread PIE *√uedh ̯ ‘convey’, otherwise unattested in Indo-Aryan. But I now no longer believe that etymology (see my forthcoming art. “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise”), and I would now follow Old’s suggestion. Note the progression and phonetic play in the pāda: ā́pṛkṣudho vīrúdho dáṃsu rohati. I would also slightly change the published tr. from “nourishmentbringing” to “nourishing.” On dáṃsu see I.134.4. As noted there, I take it as a loc. pl. to the root noun dám- ‘house’ (so Old [SBE], tentatively Ge, WG), rather than as an adverbial deriv.

of √daṃs ‘be wondrous’ (Gr, Re). Here it presumably refers to the domestic fire established in the house(s); since words for ‘house’ in the plural often refer to only a single domestic establishment (presumably because it is made up of several buildings), “in the house” rather than the publ. “in the houses” is also possible.

Pāda c contains a curiously doubled yád in a single clause (ubhā́yád asya janúṣaṃ yád ínvataḥ), which has attracted little attention. Old (SBE) notes it but makes no attempt to explain it, and otherwise the standard tr. (including mine) do not reflect or mention it. The exception is WG, who take the pāda as a kind of stuttering set of false starts: “Wenn die beiden seine Geburt -- wenn (sie überhaupt) -- antreiben.” This seems to be the only way to represent what the text has, since it is impossible to manufacture a separate clause dependent on the second yád. But since both clauses in the WG rendering share subject, object, and verb, and the adverbial addition “überhaupt” reflects nothing in the Skt., it may be just as well to pass over the doubling in silence, assuming that the second yád comes from the occasional tendency for the relatively pronoun to immediately precede a pāda-final verb. Cf., e.g., for this verb stem, I.55.4d kṣémeṇa dhénām maghávā yád ínvati (also V.28.2c, VIII.13.32c … yám ínvasi).

Pāda d contains an augmented impf. abhavat, which contrasts with the presents nīyáte (a), róhati (b), and ínvataḥ (c), esp. since it begins ā́d íd “just after that,” which suggests that the past tense action of d should follow the actions of the earlier part of the verse. Most tr. (Old [SBE], Ge, Re, WG) take c and d together, separate from ab, which produces a jarring sequence of tense: “when they spur on …, then he became …” I connect c rather with ab and indeed with vs. 3 and start a new syntactic sequence with 4d, which is continued by the preterital expressions ā́d íd + ā́viśat in 5a, ví vāvrdhe ̥ in 5b, and áruhat in 5c. Although this is not a complete solution, in that the ā́d íd “just after that” of 4d and 5a begs for a sequentially prior preterite, it keeps the disharmonious sequence of tenses from inhabiting the same sentence. This division is also compatible with the syntactic enjambement characteristic of the hymn.


## 05
The mothers (mātṝ́ḥ) of pāda a contrast with the father (pitúḥ) of 4a.

The standard tr. take ví vāvṛdhe in b as the verb of a rel. cl. begun by yā́su in a.

The problem is that vāvṛdhe is not accented. Ge suggests that it lacks accent because the rel. pronoun is in a different pāda, but this separation does not pose problems elsewhere (cf., simply within this hymn, 3ab nír yád …, … kránta, 3cd yád …, … mathāyáti, 6cd … yád …, … véti); Old is in favor of emending to vivāvṛdhé. Taking the text as given, I construe the rel. clause with yā́su as a nominal locational clause; similarly (but independently) WG with a different distribution of elements. It is true that there are several yā́su √vrdh̥ passages; cf. esp. II.13.1 … apáḥ … ā́viśad yā́su várdhate “he [=Indra] entered the waters, within whom he grows strong” (cf. V.44.1), but I think we must take the lack of verbal accent more seriously than these few phraseological parallels.

Again, contrary to most, I attach c to ab and take d separately, on the basis of the distribution of verb tenses.


## 06
Another instance of ā́d íd, which seems, in this hymn, to mark the progress of the ritual.

With bhágam iva papṛcā́nāsaḥ in b compare bhágam … papṛcāsi in 11b. The difference of voice is significant: in 6b the mortal officiants “(en)gorge themselves (med.) with/on good fortune” while in 11 Agni engorges (i.e., swells)(act.) good fortune for us.” The similarity of these striking expressions makes it unlikely that bhágam in 6b is primarily the goal/object of ṛñjate, as Ge, Re, WG take it.

The phrase mártaṃ śáṃsam may be a de-compounded version of nárāśáṃsawith lexical substitution. Note that nárāśáṃsa- is found in the next hymn, the Āprī hymn I.142.3. See also devā́nāṃ śā́ṃsam in 11d of this hymn. The double object of véti -- devā́n and mártaṃ śáṃsam -- is a zeugma of sorts, made possible by the fact that √vī can take both animate and inanimate objects.


## 07
I take this entire verse as dependent on vs. 6. It is full of rare and unclear words, but the pile-up of descriptors of the violently moving fire is exhilarating.

In b hvārá- (to √hvar ‘move crookedly, twist’; cf. hvárate in 1c) is taken by Ge and Re as ‘bird’, but I am persuaded by Roth’s suggestion, enshrined in Gr (and see Old [Noten]), that the referent is a snake -- the creature of “twisting/serpentine motion.” The quality held in common between the hvārá and fire is vákva-, derived from the root √vañc ‘undulate, curl, meander’, and the image is that of fire winding its way through the dried-up plants that serve as its fuel. From this tr. it is clear that I take jaráṇā as jaráṇāḥ, with the Pp., and as an acc. pl. fem. ‘old (things = plants’). Gr.

identifies it as an instr. sg., and this interpr. is followed by others (most recently by WG), but the sandhi situation, with -ā before a- essentially excludes it (though see Old [Noten] who finds it barely possible).

The sense of ánākṛta- is likewise unclear, though its formation is transparent.

The tr. of Old (SBE “whom it is not possible to drive to a place”; sim. Noten), Ge (“ohne Antrieb”), Re (“sans y avoir été poussé”) seem to reflect a sense of the common idiom ā́√kṛ ‘bring here’ extended to ‘push/force (here)’, with the ‘here’ elided. However, in his n. 7b, Ge adduces PB XXIII.13.4.5, which concerns wild animals that are anākṛta-. Caland tr. ‘unfostered’, but I see another possible extension of ‘brought here’, namely ‘kept here’ à ‘confined’, with its negative then ‘unconfined’. This certainly fits the PB passage and also matches Sāy’s gloss anivāritaḥ (Ge’s tr. ‘ungehemmt’).

The second hemistich is entirely couched in the gen., save for the loc. pátman ‘flight’ off which all those genitives hang. I construe pátman with ánākṛtaḥ in b.

Although ‘flight’ may seem to support the ‘bird’ interpr. of hvārá- in b, note that hvārá- is in a simile syntactically independent of the rest of the sentence; moreover, Dīrghatamas hardly feels constrained to confine himself to one image at a time.

dakṣúṣaḥ is a pseudo-perfect-participle, like the pseudo-desiderative-adjective dákṣu- (II.4.4) to √dah ‘burn’. Both are hapaxes.

On -jaṃhas- see comm. ad VI.12.2 and VI.3.5.

vyàdhvan- can contain either ví ‘without’ or ví ‘through, wide(ly)’ (so also Old [SBE], Re). I have opted for the latter, but others (Ge ‘wegelosen Flug’, WG ‘Wegelosen’) for the former. Either would work, though the phrase rája ā́seems to me to express extent of space and to favor my interpr.


## 08
What quality of a chariot is expressed by the ppl. yātá- to √yā ‘drive’ is unclear. Because of the phrase “made by dexterous (men),” which seems to refer to the chariot as object rather than to its current situation, I suggest that it’s a particular type of chariot, perhaps one made for long journeys. But it is also possible that it refers to the current situation, in which case it could mean “like a driven chariot” (i.e., one that is speeding).

Pāda c is full of difficulties, esp. the unaccented dakṣi and the semantically anomalous sūráyaḥ ‘patrons’. There is also the question whether the pāda is syntactically independent or forms a clause with d. With Ge (but contra most other interpr.) I take cd together. Otherwise pāda c would be a nominal clause of some sort, but the introductory ā́d (recalling ā́d íd of 5a, 6a) seems to call for a dynamic verb.

As for the “black patrons” I take this to be, as it were, a two-part phrase: “black” first refers to the plumes of smoke, picking up kṛṣṇájaṃhas- ‘having black plumage’ in 7c; the clouds of smoke surrounding the fire are then implicitly likened to the sacrificial patrons who would gather around the ritual fire.

What then to do with dakṣi? Two main solutions are found in the lit.: it is a 2nd sg. impv. (or si-imperative) to √dah ‘burn’ as it is in II.1.10 (Re), or it is a voc. of a nominal stem of unclear formation likewise built to √dah (Old, WG). Ge refuses to tr.

and AiG II.1.408 floats both possibilities. The first (impv.) has the merit of matching an actual existing form, but otherwise has little to recommend it. In particular, if it forms a parenthetical independent clause it should be accented. The second (voc.) does not create syntactic problems but leaves the question of the morphology unresolved. I do not favor either of them, because either one requires 2nd ps.

reference, which I think would violate the structure of the hymn. As noted in the publ.

intro., the first 8 verses are couched entirely in the 3rd person describing the fire and entirely lack the word agní-; both the 2nd ps. and agní- are forcefully introduced at the beginning of vs. 9 (tváyā hy àgne), and this 2nd ps. address prevails in the next three vss. (9-11). I find it difficult to believe that the wily Dīrghatamas would spoil his schematic division by introducing a muddled 2nd person in vs. 8. Moreover, the asya in 8c surely has Agni as its referent, which should probably preclude a 2nd ps.

reference to him in the same pāda. Unfortunately I do not have an acceptable solution to dakṣi, however. With the others I take it as an unclearly formed nominal derivative of √dah, but as the 1st member of a tatpuruṣa with sūrí-, hence ‘the patron(s) of the burning one’, but this is a solution of desperation and carries no conviction.

The grammar of d is scarcely less contorted than that of c. The verb īṣate belongs to a clear thematic stem and should therefore of course be 3rd sg., but the apparent subject, váyaḥ, is ordinarily a nom. pl. ‘birds’ to the stem ví-. To make the grammar work, it needs to be interpreted as a neut. s-stem collective in the nom. sg.

(‘bird flesh, poultry’; cf. Re’s ‘la gent-ailée’), a formation that is found later (already AV) but not otherwise in the RV. Moreover, if pāda c is to be construed with d, its pl.

subj. kṛṣṇā́saḥ … sūráyaḥ also clashes in number with the verb īṣate. My somewhat uneasy solution to this is to assume that váyaḥ here has been reinterpreted as a singular collective and, as the noun closest to the verb, has determined the number of the verb. But since váyaḥ refers to the collectivity of birds, the pl. kṛṣṇā́saḥ … sūráyaḥ can match it in sense and therefore function as subj. of īṣate as well.

(Another possible solution is to assume that īṣate has been assimilated to the athematic formations of similar shape, ī́rte, ī́rate and, esp., the near rhyme ī́ṣṭe, ī́śate, with 3rd plural in -ate. This does not seem impossible to me, esp. since their 1st sgs. in

-e would coincide.)
The publ. tr. reflects a double reading of initial śū́rasya ‘of a champion’ with partial emendation to *sū́ryasya / sū́raḥ ‘of the sun’ in its 2nd reading. In my view, the juxtaposition across pāda boundary of sūráyaḥ and śū́rasya was designed to bring to mind a third term, the sun, sharing its initial with sūráyah, its gen. case with śū́rasya, and its -ūr- with both. Though the patrons might shrink from the attack of a champion, birds are more likely to shrink from the flaring of the sun, either retreating from its heat or avoiding flying too high and therefore too near it. This double reading helps unify the two-part NP of c, the black (plumes) = patrons, and takes us back to the flight of the bird Agni in 7cd.


## 09
After the extravagances of the last few vss., this vs. brings us back to earth and opens the last section of the hymn, addressing Agni and praising his benefits.

The morphological and phraseological parallelism of vibhúḥ (c) and paribhū́ḥ (d) are difficult to convey in tr. On the basis of the viśváthā ‘everywhere’ with the former and the passages containing víśvā (…) paribhū́- (I.91.19, II.24.11, III.3.10), I have supplied ‘everything’ with the latter (so also Ge, WG; sim. Old [SBE]).

As in I.37.9 I construe ánu with preceding sīm “following them.”


## 10
dhīmahi in d is probably has a slight double meaning: we want to acquire Agni like good fortune, but in the technical ritual sense we want to install / establish him. For the technical sense see dádhānaḥ in 13b.

There is also a pun on bhága-, both ‘good fortune’ and the name of the god, a pun continued in the next vs. ### 11
Ge (also Kü 306) takes pāda a separately from b and supplies ‘give’, but this seems entirely unnecessary.

For bhágam √pṛc, see comments ad 6b. bhága- also participates in a nexus with the previous verse: in 10d it appears in a simile, but here it has been promoted to the “real” object to which other entities are compared. In the first hemistich the common noun usage of the stem is dominant, but in the 2nd it is the god Bhaga.

Contrary to Ge (/WG/Kü) but with Old (SBE) and Re, I take dámūnasam as an adj. with rayím rather than as an independent nominal referring to the master of the house (Ge ‘Hausgebieter’).

Note devā́nāṃ śáṃsam here matching mártaṃ śáṃsam in 6d. As there, the object of the verb yámati here involves a zeugma, of animates (the races of gods and men) and the inanimate laud of the gods.

The last clausal tag in d, ṛtá ā́ca sukrátuḥ could simply be taken as a nominal sentence with copula to be supplied (“and he is of good resolve in truth” vel sim.).

However, I supply a passive form of √yam (presumably ppl. yatáḥ) corresponding to the act. subj. yámati of c. Cf., for ṛtá ā́, VI.7.1 r̥tá ā́jātám “born in truth” and, for yatá- + LOC, VIII.92.7 víśvāsu gīrṣv ā́yatam “held in place amidst all your hymns” (also V.44.9). I recognize that this extra material may be unnecessary, however. On the other hand, see comm. on I.144.3 for possible support.


## 12
The acc. goals in d, vāmáṃ suvitáṃ vásyaḥ, may be a triplet (with vāmám and suvitám separate; so Ge, Re, WG); it is not easy to tell and has little effect on sense.

The hapax splv. néṣatama-, to the unattested a-stem *néṣa-, is generally taken as agentive (‘best leader[s]’; e.g., Ge “mit den besten Führen”), but I see no reason for this. The expression seems parallel to II.23.4 sunītíbhir nayasi "you guide with good guidance," X.63.13 náyathā sunītíbhiḥ, where agentive readings are out. (Note that in both passages the abstract is in the plural, as here.) Moreover, since Agni is doing the leading, he would not need additional leaders (though WG suggest that they are the horses in pāda a). In any case note the ring with anayanta in 1d.


## 13
The arkaíḥ of pāda a can refer both to the chants of the ritual participants and to Agni’s flames, though only the first sense is registered by most tr. In the second sense the instr. is not an agentive/instrumental phrase with passive ástāvi, but an instr. of accompaniment/description.

The “further forward” (pratarám) of b presumably refers to the installation of the new Āhavanīya fire, carried towards the east. The dádhānaḥ of this pāda forms a ring with dhāyi of 1a.

In cd the mixed 3rd and 1st ps. pl. subject amī́ca yé maghávāno vayáṃ ca “both those who are our bounteous (patrons) and we (ourselves)” takes a 3rd pl. verb, níṣ ṭatanyuḥ. I take níḥ with the frame (“extend outward”) and áti with the simile (“extend beyond”).

