+++
title = "142"

+++
Āprī


## 04
mátiḥ … vacyáte “the thought is twisting its way” gives potential support to the interpretation of úpa hvarate in the previous hymn I.141.1 as having matíḥ as its subj. (contrary to my view), but the other considerations raised ad loc. weigh more strongly for me. As for vacyáte, the “passive” accentuation of this apparently intrans.

verb of motion is treated at length by Kulikov (-ya-presents, pp. 218-23), who acknowledges the standard functional interpr. of this pres. but attempts (rather too ingeniously in my view) to take it as originally passive (“is being directed towards you” in his tr.). Since √vañc seems to me to express precisely non-direct(ed) action, this interpr. does not capture the sense. I do not have a good explanation of the suffix accent, beyond noting that there are other non-passive medial -yá- formations, most notably mriyáte ‘dies’, that have failed to retract the accent.


## 05
Ge (/WG) treat this verse as containing an anacoluthon, with the plural pres.

part. stṛṇānā́saḥ modifying the 1st singular pres. vṛñjé: “(We) strewing …, I twist …” This seems unnecessary to me. I take the participle as predicated in a main clause, with the vṛñjé clause parallel: “They … are strewing the ritual grass; I twist (the grass) …” Although predicated present participles are much rarer than their past participle equivalents, they are not non-existent: the commentary so far as identified a fair number of examples that can be so interpr. and whose alternative interpretations are forced.

On turī́pa-, whose sense is fairly clear but whose etymology is not, see EWA s.v. purú vā́ram is emended by most to the bahuvrīhi puruvā́ram ‘having many choice things’, but there seems no reason not to accept the text as given. (The odd Pp.

reading vā áram can be ignored.)

