+++
title = "143"

+++
Agni I.143.2, 4: The two examples of majmánā (2c, 4b), both characterizing Agni (in my opinion), should have been rendered in the same way in the publ. tr., rather than as by “might” and “greatness” respectively.


## 03
The bahuvrīhi bhā́tvakṣasaḥ in c is generally taken as a gen. sg., modifying Agni, who is amply represented by genitives in b and in the two forms of asyá in a. I prefer to take it as a nom. pl. modifying the beams (bhānávaḥ) that remain the subject of the sentence. However, either interpr. is possible.

The rest of pāda c presents other difficulties: it contains two apparent nominatives, sg. aktúḥ and pl. síndhavaḥ, both apparently part of the same simile.

Moreover the prep./prev. áti has nothing to govern or construe with. Old allows an emendation to acc. pl. *aktū́n, producing the prep. phrase áti *aktū́n “across the nights,” which produces good sense. Ge refines this by suggesting that there is really a word haplology from *áty aktúm aktúr, with aktúr and síndhavaḥ forming what he calls elsewhere a loose karmadhāraya, tr. “gleich dem Farbenspiel der Flüsse” (sim.

Re “comme la surface-ointe (des) fleuves”). Since both also render the haplologized

*aktúm/aktū́n as ‘night(s)’, they are also silently assuming a pun on aktú-, both ‘night’
and a derivative of √añj ‘anoint, adorn’. My interpr. also assumes a haplology of

*aktū́n (or aktúm), in order to account for the áti, which several times appears with
an acc. of a word for ‘night’ (VI.4.5 … áty ety aktū́n; cf. also áty aktúbhiḥ with instr.

I.36.16; with acc. pl. kṣapáḥ VIII.26.3, X.77.2). For aktúḥ, however, I suggest very tentatively that we are dealing with a gen. sg. to a (pseudo-)-(t)ar-stem to the ‘night’ word (see Nomen in idg. Lex. 505 for a few apparent r-stem forms elsewhere) -- hence, “the rivers of the night.” If this morphological suggestion seems too radical, the “loose karmadhāraya” interpr. of two nominatives might produce the same effect.

In any case, the expression is reminiscent of the curious phrase aktúr apā́m “the ‘night’ of the waters” in II.30.1.


## 05
senā́- can mean either ‘weapon’ or ‘army’. Despite the publ. tr. (and most other tr.), ‘weapon’ might work better with aśániḥ ‘missile’ than ‘army’.


## 06
The verb āvárat in b is morphologically problematic. Given the context, its root affiliation is surely to √vṛ ‘choose’ rather than to √vṛ ‘obstruct, hinder’ (despite nearby várāya [5a] belonging to the latter). But forms to √vṛ ‘choose’ are overwhelmingly medial -- save for a tiny collection of forms resembling this one, with the preverb ā́, full-grade of the root, an apparent thematic vowel (which is more likely the subjunctive marker), and act. endings: āváraḥ VIII.13.21, 19.30. In the publ. tr. I render both as “you (will) choose,” but it is possible that “you (will) grant” would be better. The answer depends on what gave rise to these active forms. By one scenario we might view them as contrastive actives generated to the middle, specifically the middle root aorist found in a few forms like (ā́…) ava ri (IV.55.5). In that case the complementary reciprocal active sense to medial ‘chose’ would be ‘grant’. However, this is another possible pathway to the act. forms, suggested by Dīrghatamas’s own usage. In I.140.13 the final VP is íṣaṃ váram ... varanta, which I tr. “they will choose refreshment as their boon (for us?).” varanta is a well-formed 3rd pl. med. subj. to the root aorist; however, because of its -anta ending it could have been interpr. as an -anta replacment to an active form (*varan) of the same meaning (for -anta replacements see Jamison 1979 [IIJ 21]). On this interpr., further act.

forms could have been generated to this supposed act. stem. Although this explanation might work best for the form in this hymn (as opposed to those in VIII) because it is also a Dīrghatamas product, the problem is that our form here pretty clearly means ‘grant’ not ‘choose’, as the scenario would suggest. (Unless of course varanta in I.140.13 actually does mean ‘grant’, which is not impossible.) In short, these forms are morphologically puzzling and their meaning(s) not entirely clear.


## 08
With most interpr., I take unaccented iṣṭe at the end of c, also found at the end of its pāda in VI.8.7, as a voc. to a -ti-stem, built to √iṣ ‘seek’. Although such a form and usage is unusual, Ge’s suggestion, that it is truncated from *iṣtébhiḥ (Ge ‘lieben’), seems less likely. See Old’s scathing criticism of the same emendation ad VI.8.7 in ZDMG 55.296 (=KlSch. 755).

