+++
title = "144"

+++
Agni


## 03
This verse contains a number of elements reminiscent of I.140 and I.141.

E.g., Agni’s wondrous form (vápuḥ) is found also in 141.1, 2; the repeated transverse movement of the kindling sticks, expressed by the intensive part. vitáritratā here, echoes tarete in 140.3; and bhága- reprises the numerous exx. of that stem in 141 (6b, 10d, 11b). The opening of c, ā́d īm, reminds us of the ritual-ordering expression ā́d íd in 140 (4d, 5a, 6a; cf. simply ā́d in 8c). The īm in our pāda c is functionless; that is, there is no possible acc. role it can fill in its clause, and it may have been substituted for *íd because of the 2nd position īm opening the next two verses (4a yád īm, 5a tám īm).

I differ from the standard tr. in my interpr. of the rest of cd. The others divide the two clauses at the pāda boundary, with sám asmád ā́belonging with the rest of c.

This would of course be the default syntactic division. However, this assumes that sám is construed with hávyaḥ ‘to be invoked’. But √hū is not otherwise combined with sám, and moreover preverbs should be univerbated with gerundives (e.g., vihávya- II.18.7). To my mind, the material beginning with sám asmád ā́belongs with d, and the sám that opens it is repeated right before the verb in d (sám ayaṃsta).

This repetition indicates a complicated structure, and, in my opinion, the whole also bears a complicated relationship to 141.11. The repeated sám signals two different uses of the verb sám ayaṃsta. The first is transitive, with ‘reins’ as object (vóḷhur ná raśmī́n “… (as if) holding firm the reins of a draught-horse”), and it matches the similar expression in 141.11 raśmī́ṃ̐r iva yó yámati “who will hold [them] fast like reins,” though with a different voice, tense stem, and mood of √yam. The voice difference is crucial, because act. yámati in 141.11 can only be transitive, whereas med. ayaṃsta admits both transitive (as in the simile here) and passive interpretations; for the latter, see nearby I.136.2 pánthā ṛtásya sám ayaṃsta raśmíbhiḥ. And that is what I think is found in the frame of this passage: Agni, who is compared to a chariot-driver actively holding the reins in the simile, is in turn held by us in the frame, with a rare but not unprecedented abl. agent asmád ā́with the passive sense of ayaṃsta. In other words, this is another example of case disharmony in similes of the type discussed in my 1982 article (IIJ 24). Taking ayaṃsta as passive in the frame also avoids the problem of the lack of second object parallel to ‘reins’, which the various tr. struggle with and mostly deal with by supplying ‘reins’ a second time.

Now recall that in 141.11 I wanted to see a similar passive value in the final tag ṛtá ā́ca sukrátuḥ “and (who himself), of good resolve, (is held fast) in truth.” To achieve this, I had to supply (that is, invent) a passive form of √yam, namely the ppl.

yatáḥ to contrast with act. transitive yámati. But in 144.3, because of the dual value of ayaṃsta, both transitive and passive, it is not necessary to supply anything, but simply to read the verb twice, once each with each occurrence of sám. I therefore think that 144.3 reinforces my interpr. of 141.11 and that, in turn, 141.11 supports my double reading of 144.3.

Note that Old in SBE follows the syntactic division at pāda boundary in our 3cd, but in the Noten explicitly changes his view, taking asmád ā́with what follows as I do. I cannot follow his interpr. thereof, however: “Agni lenkt die Fahrt zu uns hin.”

## 03-04
The pair sávayasā ‘of the same vigor’ in these two verses have been variously identified: Sāy, Old (SBE, by implication), Hotar and Adhvaryu; Ge, Re, the two arms of the fire churner. I think it rather to be the two kindling sticks. As noted above, the dual participle in vitáritratā 3b here reminds us of the dual verb tarete in I.140.3, whose subj. is, by consensus, the two kindling sticks. In that same passage they are described as sakṣítā ‘sharing the same abode’, which matches samāné yónā … sámokasā “in the same womb … sharing the same dwelling” in our 4b.


## 04
The phrase dívā ná náktam is universally taken as “by night as by day” (that is, “always,” as Sāy points out), with a very extended sense of the simile marker ná. I take ná rather as the homonymous negative: “by day, not by night.” This would reflect the simple fact that the ritual fire is kindled only in the morning and draw attention to the oddity of this practice, since in everyday terms fire is more needed and desired at night, for light and warmth. The position of ná allows either interpr.: it is in expected 2nd position for a simile, but in my interpr. it immediately precedes the word it negates, which is standard when ná is not a sentential negation, but negates a single word in a clause.

I render the verb in this clause as preterital, in keeping with the Pp. reading yúvā ajani. However, to match the presential saparyátaḥ of pāda a and the generality of the statement about his birth it would be possible to read (without emending the Saṃhitā text) yuvā jani, with an injunctive, which could have presential/timeless sense: “he is born …”


## 05
vríś- is a hapax, but the generally accepted meaning ‘finger’ seems well supported by context. Though suggested etymological connections do not enforce this sense, they do allow it. See EWA II.597 and lit. referred to there.

In 5d I have followed the Pp. and tr. augmented adhita; however, as in 4c the sequence návādhita could be read návā dhita with injunc., which would have presential/timeless value to match the presents hinvanti (a), havāmahe (b), and ṛṇvati (c). Although no other unaug. dhita forms occur, there is no reason it should not exist.


## 06
Opinion is divided over whether the two females of cd are Heaven and Earth or Night and Dawn. On the one hand, the heavenly and earthly realms of ab seem to favor the former pair; on the other, Heaven and Earth are not easily movable and would find it difficult to come physically to the ritual ground. (On this issue see Jamison, Staal Mem. Vol., 2016].) Night and Dawn might make better sense, in that the kindling of the ritual fire occurs at their temporal intersection and so they might appear to be both present at that moment. For such a sentiment see I.146.3. vákvarī ‘surging, undulating’ is also a more likely epithet of Night and Dawn (with their changing light) than of Heaven and Earth. Remember Agni’s beams churning “like the rivers of the night” in the immed. preceding hymn I.143.3.

