+++
title = "145"

+++
Agni


## 01
I take the two occurrences of īyate in b as passives to √yā ‘implore, beseech’ (with putative underlying accent īyáte)(so also WG), not to ī́yate ‘speeds’ as most do.

This echoes tám pṛchata “ask him!” that opens the verse and the two forms of √pṛch opening vs. 2.

As recognized by all, sā́nv … is difficult. Since a feminine subject is pretty much excluded, I interpr. sā́as sá ā́(already floated as a poss. by Old [Noten]). In this clause, repeating immediately preceding īyate, ā́and nú add locational and temporal specificity. (The publ. tr. might make this clearer with “he is here and now implored.”) Although I think the primary sense of iṣṭáyaḥ is ‘wishes’ (nicely contrasting with praśíṣaḥ ‘commands’), the secondary sense ‘offerings’ (to √yaj) can also be present. Although that sense is rare and usually associated with root-accented íṣṭi-, puns often ignore accent, and moreover, since root-accent is secondary in this class and spreading in Vedic (see Lundquist, -ti-stems), it is likely that there existed an old (*)iṣṭí- ‘offering’ that underwent accent retraction in the course of time.


## 02
In b yád can be the neut. sg. acc. object of ágrabhīt (so most tr.), rather than a subordinating ‘since’ as I take it. Either is possible, and there is little appreciable difference between them. If it is an acc. obj., we must supply a dummy obj. to pṛchati in the main clause: “he does not ask about (that) which he has grasped …” As in English (“… ask about what he has grasped …”) this dummy obj. can be easily gapped.

In d Ge, Re, WG take the subj. to be an unidentified other man (Re “(tout homme)”), not Agni, as Old and I do. The question in part rides on asyá. Those favoring a change of subject may have done so in part because they wished to avoid having asyá be coreferential with the subject. However, this is a non-issue: there are abundant exx. of such coreferential constructions; a reflexive pronominal/adjective isn’t required. On the other hand, they may be correct in this passage, in that b opens with an overt reflexive expression svéna … mánasā “with his own mind” marking Agni as subj. of the verb in that clause, and so asyá might be used contrastively, to mark the referent of the pronoun and the subject of sacate as different. On balance, though, I consider Agni still to be the subject, in part because the focus is so relentlessly on him otherwise.

I would, however, change the “resolve” of the publ. tr. to something more in keeping with the rest of the verse, perhaps “intellect, mental force.”


## 03
The identity of the ‘mares’ (árvatīḥ) is unclear; it should simply be a ritually related entity of fem. gender used in the plural, which leaves the field pretty wide open (hymns, prayers, ghee streams, etc.). It is unlikely to be the ladles (juhvàḥ) though they are feminine and plural, because the tám … tám construction invites two different subjects, like the tásmin … tásmin constr. in 1c.

Apropos of -praiṣa in c, Ge (fld by WG) claims that this does not refer to the technical ritual sense of praiṣa- found in the later ritual. I would disagree. The word clearly is meant to mean something different from praśíṣ-, also ‘command’ (though to a different root entirely), in 1c, and this verse (3) is quite ritual-centric. See further at I.180.6


## 04
As indicated in the publ. intro., this vs. seems meant to illustrate the secret knowledge that we are begging Agni to impart. It clearly concerns (some of) Agni’s actions at the ritual in conjunction with other being(s), but, in the usual fashion of such RVic riddling descriptions, the identity of the referents is left blank and the verbs are not sufficiently precise to define the actions. The publ. tr. gives some tentative identifications, and others are suggested by other tr.; I will not go further here.


## 05
As noted in the publ. intro. this vs. forms a ring with vs. 1 (so already Ge n.

5cd). Note also that vy àbravīd vayúnā … “he has declared the (ritual) patterns …” recalls vayúnā návādhita “he has established the new (ritual) patterns” in the preceding hymn (I.144.5).

The īm of pāda has no function, that is, no possible accusative reading. See īm in I.144.3 (though that had a possible explanation).

Because of the position of hí in d, contra the standard tr. I do not think that agnír vidvā́n should be construed with this last part of the verse (ṛtacíd dhí satyáḥ), despite the pāda break that seems to put them together. Rather the hí clause explains why Agni is knowledgeable and can provide the answers requested so forcefully at the beginning of the hymn.

