+++
title = "146"

+++
Agni


## 01
The “three” and “seven” have received various identifications; mostly likely for the “three” in my opinion are the three sacrificial fires, for the “seven” perhaps the priests or, as a generic number, his flames.

Most (explicitly Old [SBE], Re) take Agni’s two parents to be Heaven and Earth, and certainly some cosmic resonance may be secondarily meant. But the repeated focus on the fire-churning sticks in the birth of Agni in Dīrghatamas’s oeuvre (see reff. in publ. intro.) and the fact that the expression pitrór upásthe is used elsewhere of Agni’s birthplace in the kindling sticks (most clearly III.5.8, VI.7.5) make it likely that they are meant here as well. If so, this provides a solution for the two gen. sg. pres. participles in c, cárato dhruvásya. Instead of supplying yet more cosmic entities here (e.g., Old “and of whatever moves or is firm”), I take the two gen. singulars as specifying the two entities making up the pair in the dual gen. pitróḥ “of the two parents [lit. fathers]” in b, with one kindling stick held firm and the other moving across it to produce friction. I take the asya in c as referring to Agni; because it is unaccented, it should be used pronominally not adjectivally (despite WG “… dieses Gehenden”), and it should refer to something already in the discourse (as Agni is).


## 02
This verse seems to transition from narrow reference to the growth of the kindled fire at the kindling sticks to an enlarged frame involving Heaven and Earth. I take the dual ene in pāda a as referring still to the kindling sticks of vs. 1, but as Agni stands up in b, he reaches further -- putting his feet down on the back “of the broad one” (urvyā́ḥ), a clear reference to ‘earth’, and licking the udder, presumably of heaven -- thus filling the intermediate space between them.


## 03
This verse has another unidentified dual as subject, here almost surely Night and Dawn (cf. also I.144.6), although a simultaneous reference to the kindling sticks cannot (and should not) be excluded.

The contrastive saṃcárantī / ví carataḥ is hard to capture in tr.


## 04
Pāda c is universally taken as a reference to Agni’s flight, his hiding himself in the waters, and the gods’ discovery and recovery of him there. I find this unlikely, but I do not have a better idea.

nṛ́̄n at the end of d is problematic. Ge takes it as a truncated gen. pl., hence “the sun of men,” but I would prefer to avoid such grammatical inventions. Sāy takes it as a dat. (nṝn nṛbhyaḥ), and Old (SBE and ZDMG 55: 286-88 [=KlSch 745-47]), with a delicate adjustment of that interpr., states that ṇṝ́n can “stand for” different cases, in this instance the dative, though it is an acc. pl. in form. This interpr. makes it functionally parallel to ebhyaḥ, hence Old’s (SBE) “He the Sun became visible to them, to the men.” I would prefer to keep it functionally the acc. pl. it appears to be formally, and I therefore construe it as a goal with sū́ryaḥ “the sun towards men.” The syntax of this interpr. is pretty dubious, however.

