+++
title = "147"

+++
Agni


## 01
All other tr. take dadāsúḥ as preterital (e.g., Ge “... haben … aufgewartet”), but Kü (243) interprets this pf. stem as having presential meaning with an implication of past action (“präsentische Bedeutung mit Implikation einer vergangen Handlung”), and I take both this verb and injunc. raṇáyanta in d as presential, establishing the ritual situation as so often in Dīrghatamas’s hymns. The present moment continues in vs. 2.


## 02
Ge (/WG) and Re take tanvàm in d as a reflexive pronoun and tr. “I extol myself” (e.g., Re “(étant) ton laudateur, (c’est en fait) moi-même (que) je loue.”) Although I accept this as a secondary reading, I think the primary sense of tanvàm must be ‘body’ here, namely the body of Agni. Such is Sāy’s interpr., followed by Old (SBE). The expression seems just a variant of V.28.4 ágne vánde táva śríyam “O Agni, I extol your glory”; moreover, tanvàm is found in a number of Agni passages referring to ritual procedures done on/to the body of the fire (e.g., III.18.4, VI.11.2, VII.8.5).


## 03
In this vs. (which is also repeated as IV.4.13, where it is transparently secondary; see comm. there) the masc. pl. rel. yé seems to have a referent in the main cl. expressed by a form of the sá/tám prn., as would be expected: acc. tā́n sukṛ́taḥ “those of good (ritual) action.” The publ. tr. reflects this apparently transparent relative / antecedent relationship: Agni’s protectors are themselves protected by Agni.

However, the problem is that the sukṛ̥́taḥ would normally be the sacrificers, not Agni’s protectors (pāyávaḥ), who should be helping Agni to protect the sukṛ́taḥ.

Hence the move by Ge and Re to supply a parenthetical “with them” in the main cl.: “your protectors who guarded …, (with them) he guarded those of good action.” The instr. pl. pāyúbhiḥ is elsewhere used in constr. with an impv. ‘protect!’ addressed to Agni (I.31.12, 95.9, 143.8). In contrast to Ge and Re, Old (Noten) argues for interpreting the syntax as it stands, and the renderings of WG and Kü (412) also do not supply an instr. in the main clause. I am of two minds; on the one hand, a rendering with supplied instr. seems to reflect the usual RVic situation better, but, on the other, syntactically the yé … tā́n construction is unimpeachable and the poet may have been aiming to express something slightly out of the ordinary. In the end I’ll let the publ. tr. stand, but with some question.

The juxtaposition of impf. arakṣan in the rel. cl. and rarákṣa in the main cl. is striking and begs for some functional differentiation. Kü (412) tr. “schützten” and “geschützt hat” respectively but doesn’t otherwise discuss. The action of the rel. cl.

took place in the (semi-)mythological past while the main cl. may refer to the ritual near-past with present relevance.


## 05
On the curious and isolated form dhāyīḥ see my disc. in Jamison 1999 (dheyām, Ged. Schindler, 174-75), contra Hoffmann (Injunk., 63-64), who takes it as reformed from a passive aor. (*dhāyi). In brief, I take it instead as a 3rd sg. act.

precative that has been “precativized” from a 2nd sg. root aor. opt *dhāyās. (For details consult the original article.)

