+++
title = "148"

+++
Agni


## 01
As in I.141.3 the homonymous roots √math ‘steal’ and ‘churn’ probably both contribute to this passage, with the former in mythological, the latter in ritual context.

The identity of the second member of the hapax cmpd. viśvā́psu- here and in the apparently related viśvápsu- (3x) is disputed. The explanation now current (accepted by Mayrhofer, EWA s.v. psu- and reflected in WG’s tr.) is Thieme’s derivation (Gram.Kat. 539) from √bhas ‘breathe’, hence ‘ganz aus Atemhauch bestehend’. However, this sense does not fit the passages very well, and for these compounds I therefore prefer Re’s derivation from vásu- (EVP 3.29, 12.107-8), despite Thieme’s criticisms and the phonological difficulties. Dīrghatamas seems to play with this word: note the scrambling in pāda d vápuṣe, and in his I.162.22 viśvápúṣam ‘all prospering’ seems another variant. Somewhat more tenuous, note that the companion qualifier here, viśvádevyam twice elsewhere appears with pūṣán-, once also in I.162., vs. 3 (also X..92.13).


## 02
Kü (239), WG take mánma as the subj. of dadabhanta (Kü: “Den Spender werden wirklich nicht schädigen die Gedichte”). This avoids having to invent an unidentified set of beings inimical to Agni, but raises the question of why anyone would think that mánma, which are generally benign and positively related to the ritual, would harm Agni. (See, e.g., the mánma in I.151.6-8, also a Dīrghatamas hymn.) I don’t think it’s a question of “sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt me” -- a very non-Vedic sentiment.


## 04
The expression in pāda a, “dissolve with his fangs,” sounds odd, but since Agni’s fangs are surely his flames, the image is less contorted than it first seems.


## 05
Contra the Pp., Gr, and all standard tr., I read reṣaṇā́and take it as a cognate instr. with reṣáyanti, rather than reading reṣaṇā́ḥ and interpreting it as a nom. pl. The instr. possibility was suggested by Re in a note, though he follows the standard interpr. in his tr. There is no crucial difference between the two interpretations, however.

