+++
title = "149"

+++
Agni


## 02
As noted in the publ. intro., the name Agni does not appear in this hymn, and in the earlier verses there is some ambiguity as to who the referent is. E.g, in 1c the stones (ádrayaḥ) might suggest Soma. In this vs. also there seems to be dual reference to Agni and Soma, esp. in the compound jīvápītasargaḥ (already unusual for having three members, a rarity in the RV). The middle term -pīta- can belong either to √pā ‘drink’ or √pyā ‘swell’. In the former case the cmpd means ‘whose surge is drunk by living beings’ vel sim. and should refer to Soma (and most emphatically not to Agni, if ‘drink’ means what it usually does -- though “to ‘drink’ smoke” is an idiom in certain languages); in the latter ‘whose surge is swelled by living beings’ and should refer to Agni, whose flames are fanned by the priests (though Soma would also be possible). Most interpr. (Gr, Old [SBE], Ge, WG) opt only for the ‘drunk’ interpr. without fully explaining how the word can qualify Agni.

Old (Noten) has second thoughts and suggests instead ‘swell’, which Re also goes for.

I think the poet intended the ambiguity.

Pāda c, however, might seem to tip the referential scales towards Agni: fire can easily be envisioned as running forward (with its spreading flames) while not moving from its original place of kindling. This is not an appropriate image for soma, which is always on the run after its pressing -- flowing towards the milk it will be mixed with and towards the cups from which it will be drunk. But the “remain fixed” interpr. depends on śiśrīta having a root affiliation with √śri ‘prop, fix’. So, inter alia, Gr and Kü (528), who takes it as a pf. mid. opt. to √śri (as do I and WG). However, other interpr. assign it to √śrī ‘mix, etc.’ (Old [SBE] ‘has ripened’, Ge ‘gemischt(?) wird’) or an unprecedented verbal form beside root noun śrī, hence √śrī ‘être beau’ (Re ‘resplendit’). Narten (“Ved. śrīṇā́ti …,” 281 = KlSch 351) is uncertain which root to assign it to, though her tentative tr. (“angelehnt bleiben dürfte”) reflects a √śri affiliation. In any case, if śiśrīta could belong to śrī ‘mix, prepare’, it could easily apply to Soma (“was mixed/prepared in his womb”), since Soma is regularly the object of forms built to this root. The poet may well have meant this ambiguity, which my publ. tr. does not reflect. I would therefore tentatively emend the tr. to “would still remain fixed [/was prepared] in his womb.” Note the phonetic figure sasrāṇáḥ śiśrīta, with redupl. + r-cluster involving two different sibilants.


## 03
nā́rmiṇīm in pāda a is a hapax. Ge and Re take it as a place name qualifying púram ‘stronghold’: Ge “die Burg Nārmiṇī.” This is of course a safe choice, but the fact that the pāda lacks a syllable and that each of the other pādas contains a simile marked by ná invite a reading ná ármiṇīm “the/an ármiṇī- like a stronghold.” This possibility was already noted by Old (SBE). I suggested that it is derived from arma(ká)- ‘flatland’ (see also Gr s.v. nā́rmin-); the same deriv. must underlie WG “der wie auf eine verödete Palisade leuchtete,” with the meaning ‘ruined place’ attributed by some to arma(ká)-. If such a derivation is accepted, a few questions arise. First, -in-stems are always accented on that suffix, as are the -ī-stems that serve as their feminines (cf. garbhínī- ‘pregnant’). Hence we should expect ná

*armíṇīm. This might be easily solved by assuming the second accent was lost when
nā́rmíṇīm was re-interpreted as a single word. The second question is why we need a feminine in the first place. There are several possibilities: 1) *armíṇī refers to something inherently feminine; 2) it has been “attracted” into the fem. by fem. púrin the simile; 3) púraṃ ná *armíṇīm is to be interpr. as a single unit (with WG) “illuminated as if (illuminating) an armín- stronghold.” If *armín- does mean ‘having flatland, low-lying’ or the like, the third possibility is not likely, because of the discrepancy in meanings (strongholds/fortresses presumably generally have commanding sites) -- though other proposed senses of the word might be more compatible with ‘stronghold’.

Although problems remain with nā́rmiṇīm, like many hapaxes it participates in phonetic play: note b nā́rvā, read ná árvā and 2a narā́m ná r-.


## 05
The annunciatory ayáṃ sá hótā “here he is, the Hotar …” opening the verse is a typical final-verse signal of the epiphany of a god. Because Agni is on the ritual ground already, he doesn’t usually have an epiphany, but this phrase may indicate here the first sight of the kindled fire. The effect is particularly noticeable here because vs. 5 repeats some of the key portions of vs. 4: (4 … dvijánmā …, víśvā … / hótā …; 5 … hótā … dvijánmā, víśvā).

