+++
title = "151"

+++
Mitra and Varuṇa The publ. intro. gives a conspectus of the hymn, esp. the difficult first 5 vss.


## 01
For the ritual application of the various portions of this vs. see publ. intro.

Most tr. take góṣu and also perhaps apsú as the desired objects of battle (e.g., Ge “(im Kampf) um die Rinder”), but these seem to me to refer rather to the accoutrements of the soma sacrifice. The cows and the waters reappear in ritual context (at least in my view) in 4d and 5b respectively.

The standard tr. also supply a verb with pāda d, but this seems unnecessary.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., I consider the birth described here to be that of Agni (as throughout the rest of Dīrghatamas’s corpus and esp. in vs. 1 of this hymn), not of Mitra and Varuṇa (with the standard tr.). I construe the Wackernagelpositioned vām with dákṣase in b. This dákṣas- is then the referent of īm in c.

I also take c as subordinated to d (with Re), not ab (with the others). That both c and d have 2nd du. pres. verbs (bhárathaḥ … vīthaḥ) is suggestive, and the present in c does not work very well with the mythological past in ab.


## 04
The voc. asura with short final probably stands for the expected dual asurā (so read in the Pp. and accepted by the standard tr. and AiG III.53), though it is barely possible that only Varuṇa (or Mitra) is addressed. The numerous duals (ṛ́tāvānau, ghoṣathaḥ, yuvám, yuñjāthe) make this unlikely.

I consider the dákṣam in c to be Mitra and Varuṇa’s (like the dákṣas- of vs. 3) and take divó bṛhatáḥ as an abl. of source: √yuj + abl. ‘yoke from’ is a fairly common idiom.

Re takes apáḥ in d as ‘labor’ (“l’oeuvre (sacrée)”), but the accent is of course wrong. Moreover, as indicated in comm. to vs. 1, the waters here make a pair with the cows of 5b, both as ritual substances.


## 05
The standard tr. take mahī́in pāda a as a loc sg. (Ge ‘auf Erden’). Since loc. sg. -ī is extremely rare, I prefer to take it as the du. nom./acc. it appears to be, referring to the two world halves (see ródasī in 1c) in an unmarked simile.

In b the root noun tújaḥ is grammaticaly ambiguous; with Gr, Ge, WG, Schindler (RtNoun) I take it as nom. pl., against Re (gen. sg.). (Old considers both nom. and acc. pl., without deciding.) The image, in my view, is of a herd of cows milling around in confusion on the ritual ground, but not raising dust as a real herd would do -- because, after all, the “cows” are really milk.

In cd, following Re’s interpr., I see reference to the times of the three soma pressings. With Re I tr. uparátāti as zenith, referring to the sun’s position at the Midday Pressing; ā́nimrúcaḥ is an abl. with ā́“until its setting,” referring to the Third (or evening) Pressing. Unlike Re I do not take uṣásaḥ as ‘à l’aurore’ (as if a loc. sg.), but rather as an acc. of extent of time, “through the dawns,” though an abl. sg.

with the preceding ā́(Ge “(bis) zum Morgen”) might be possible -- in any case, a ref.

to the Morning Pressing.

On takvavī́- see also I.134.5. The stem occurs also in X.91.2, which is perhaps the passage in which the ‘bird’ sense is the clearest. Although ‘swoopingly/swiftly pursuing’ need not have a bird as its referent, and in our passage here the standard tr.

take it as simply a pursuer (presumably human; e.g., Ge [/WG] Verfolger), I am inclined to take it as a bird of prey rather than simply a hunter, because taktá (and other √tak forms) seem to be used esp. of birds and beasts considered to be like them; see comm. ad IX.32.4. In our passage the point of comparison between the cows in the frame and the takvavī́- has to be the crying out (sváranti), which fits the sharp squawking of birds of prey, but not the general behavior of human hunters.


## 06
Pāda-final gātúm árcathaḥ seems to echo likewise pāda-final gātúm árcata in 2c, but in fact, at least according to me and the other standard tr., the similarity is misleading. In our passage gātúm is surely the object of du. pres. árcathaḥ, but in 2c gā́túm is better taken as the object of the preceding verb vidatam, and árcata in sandhi before utá, which opens the next pāda, is better taken as having the underlying form árcate (so Pp.), the dat. sg. act. participle, rather than du. injunc. árcataḥ, which is technically possible. This teasing but false superimposibility seems the opposite of “poetic repair” -- “poetic breakage” perhaps?


## 07
vīthó adhvarám exactly matches vītho adhvarám in 3d (save for the accent).

Here, unlike the false identity in vs. 6 just discussed, the phrases have identical sense and reference.

In b the nominatives kavíḥ and hótā seem each appropriate to one part of the rest of the pāda: the poet to manmasā́dhanaḥ and the Hotar-priest to yájati. Re’s tr., with his trademark verbosity, makes this division of labor explicit.


## 08
I take b with c, rather than with a as do the standard tr., since “the yoking of mind,” whatever it may precisely mean, harmonizes better with the thought, songs, and mind of the rest of the verse than with the more physical manifestation of the sacrifice in pāda a. As for the meaning of the phrase, I assume that it is part of the larger conceptual complex likening the sacrifice and its various elements to a chariot and its associated elements. The yoking or harnessing of mind refers to embarking on concentrated and deliberate mental effort for the sake of the sacrifice. Cf. Mitra and Varuṇa’s yoking of their skill in 4cd.

“Yoking of mind” actually contains the pl. práyuktiṣu, but the pl. form is probably the result of a mechanical metrical adjustment: mánaso ná práyukti (shortvowel instr.) is found at pāda end in X.30.1 in a Triṣṭubh cadence, and this phrase was converted into a Jagatī cadence here by the addition of -su. The other two occurrences of the stem práyukti- are likewise pāda-final in Triṣṭubh and end in -ti(ḥ).

One of these, … ná práyuktiḥ, is found two hymns after this one, in I.153.2, where I (so also Re) take the phrase as abbreviated from *mánaso ná práyukti-, as here.


## 09
The voc. nárā in b was carelessly omitted in the publ. tr. Insert “o superior men.”3 In c the phrase dyā́vó ’habhiḥ is rendered “the days with their daytimes” by all standard tr. However, although there are undeniable instances of pl. dyā́vaḥ meaning ‘days’ (e.g., VI.24.7, 38.4) and áhabhiḥ is suggestive, I prefer ‘heavens’, which is the more common meaning of nom. dyā́vaḥ. I.130.10 áhobhir iva dyaúḥ, with the nom. sg., where ‘heaven’ is the only possible interpr., supports ‘heavens’ here. The context of our passage gives no help either way: dyā́vaḥ is conjoined with síndhavaḥ ‘rivers’, which would not seem to form a natural class either with ‘heavens’ or with ‘days’ (though see Klein, DGRV 2.144 for other exx. of ‘heaven’ conjoined with waters of some sort), and the statements “the heavens have not attained your divinity” and “the days have not attained your divinity” are almost equally puzzling -- though I’d give the edge of sense of the former.

