+++
title = "152"

+++
Mitra and Varuṇa


## 01
Ge (/WG) take the “garments of fat” to be rain, though WG consider a reference to a libation also possible. Given the ritual focus of the previous and following hymns, and esp. I.151.8a yuvā́ṃ yajñaíḥ prathamā́góbhir añjate “They anoint you first with sacrifices and with cows,” I take the garments of fat to be the oblations offered to them.

Pāda b is likewise unclear, in part because the sense of mántu- is not entirely understood: seen comm. ad IX.73.6. Assuming ‘counsels’ is a reasonable rendering, I think the point is that M+V provide us with an unending stream of good advice.


## 02
On the basis of acíttam bráhma in 5c, I tentatively supply bráhma as the referent of etád here, which is the object of ví ciketat, and of tȧd in 3b, the object of ciketa. The web of neut. sg. + √cit is tight in these vss.; note also that our bráhma is touted as the ultimate weapon in the last hemistich of the hymn (7c). Pādas a and b in this verse are implicitly contrastive, so the referent of etád should be something that harmonizes with mántra-, but it cannot be mántra- itself, because that word is masc.

Neut. bráhman- fills the bill.

The gen. pl. eṣām could be dependent on tváḥ ‘many a one’ (so Ge [/WG]), rather than on etád (Old, Re, me). In either case the referent is not clear. If it limits etád, as I think (based partly on tád vām 3b; so Old), then it may refer to the gods, esp. Mitra and Varuṇa, or to mortal poets inspired by the gods, in contrast to the hapless ‘scorners of the gods’ (devanídaḥ) in d. If it is dependent on tváḥ I assume it refers to the general run of clueless mortals. As argued in the publ. intro., I take ab to mean that, whether or not it is comprehensible to ordinary people, speech properly pronounced by poets comes true.

Whether the four-edged and three-edged weapons have precise referents is not clear. Old and Ge [/WG] state that cáturaśri- is used of the vájra- in IV.22.2; this is actually conjecture and probably false. The bahuvrīhi cáturaśri- is used without a head noun in IV.22.2a, as the object of the part. ásyan ‘hurling’ (or ‘shooting’). The next verse contains a form of vájra- (3c), but the context is not a direct restatement of 2a; in other words, the two words need not have anything to do with each other.

Closer to the occurrence of cáturaśri- in 2a is áśman- ‘stone’ in 1d (i.e., the pāda immediately before). Since stones can be hurled (cf. I.172.2 āré áśmā yám ásyatha) and I know of no passage where the vajra is, if cáturaśri- has any clear referent in IV.22.2, it is probably the stone, not the mace. It is perhaps worth noting that IV.22.1c contains a string of words referring to ritual speech: bráhma stómam … ukthā́, which suggests at least an indirect connection between ritual speech and the four-edged weapon, as here. This leaves the three-edged weapon. Does it have a precise reference (say, a trident associated with non-divinities) or is the poet simply expressing the truism that higher numbers beat lower ones and four edges is better than three?


## 03
See the publ. intro. for my view of the structure of this verse. I do not believe that the four pādas need to fit into a consistent cosmological scheme, as other tr. seem to, and in particular I do not think that cd refers to the morning sun or the like.

The accent on píparti in d probably results from its being in an antithetical construction with ní tārīt, though antithetical accent generally arises when the verbs are directly adjacent.


## 04
The description of the Sun’s garments in c uses two technical weaving terms, one of very limited distribution. ví √tan describes the stretching out of a piece of (unfinished) cloth on the loom for weaving; the very rare root √prajj refers to the ‘abbrechen’, ‘abschliessen’ of the finished garment (EWA s.v. PRAJJ, flg. Hoffmann, Fs. Knobloch = Aufs. 813ff.; Rau, Weben, 18), that is, presumably, the removal from the loom and tidying up of the completed fabric. The garments (or fabrics) that the Sun is wearing here are therefore not completed. Ge renders ánavapṛgṇā very loosely, as ‘endless’ (“ohne Ende”) and further interprets the garment without end as time (die Zeit); WG’s tr. is scarcely more precise (“nicht abgeschlossen”) and in their n. they follow Ge’s time interpretation. But it is hardly likely that such an outré form to a root confined to technical usage (and found in the RV only here) would be used for such a simple concept, which could easily have been expressed by anantá-. Re’s “denués de franges” (without fringe) at least reflects the textile associations of the word (which Ge’s and WG’s do not), but otherwise seems somewhat bizarre. The poet must have something very particular in mind: the Sun’s garment is unfinished, still stretched on the loom. But what visual image corresponds to this bit of weaving lore? I am not certain but suggest that the sun is rising through mist (the garments, or better fabric) stretched along the horizon, and the ragged edges of this mist look like the unfinished edges of fabric still on a loom. For a similar image see I.115.4 and my comm. thereon.

This interpretation helps explain the first half of the verse, in which we see the Sun when he is going forth (pāda a: prayántam) but not when he is settling down near (b: upanipádyamānam) -- near to the maidens presumably (a: kanī́nām), who are, also presumably, the Dawns. I think we need to read these participles in reverse chronological order. The settling down near the maidens happens before the visible rising of the sun, the going forth. The Sun is nestled cozily (and erotically) with the maidens below or at the horizon, and the ragged fabric provides a welcome veil of modesty over their activities.


## 05
The first hemistich is taken universally as a reference to the Sun, and my publ. tr. follows this understanding. However, this identification may not be very strong: although, as Ge says, the Sun is sometimes imagined as a horse, sometimes as a chariot, it can scarcely be thought to whinny (kánikradat) -- this detail must simply be attached because of the horse image -- and the ‘high’ or ‘arched’ back (ūrdhvásānu-) may be appropriate to the path of the sun across the sky but does not fit the round shape of the actual heavenly body. Nonetheless, I don’t have a better idea.

In the publ. tr. the rendering of acíttam in c should be “(Though it) cannot be comprehended …” not “(Though it cannot be) comprehended …,” since the negation is plainly there. This should be corrected also in the first line of the intro. I do not understand the unusual accent (rather than expected *ácitta-). AiG II.1.226 cites a few other examples (e.g., amṛ́ta-) but gives no explanation.

In the publ. tr. “their ordinance” does not sufficiently make clear that it’s the ordinance of Mitra and Varuṇa (as in 4d mitrásya váruṇasya dhā́ma), not that of the youths.


## 06
The son of Mamatā is, of course, Dīrghatamas, our poet.

In my view, the verse is describing the feeding of the fire with streams of ghee, the milk-cows (dhenávaḥ) of pāda a; the “same udder” (sásmin ū́dhan) is the fire place. Ge (/WG) see the cows instead as the rains and give a more cosmic spin to the whole verse. But pāda c esp. supports a ritual interpr., as does the instr. ‘by mouth’ (āsā́) in d, so characteristic of the ritual Agni.

For my transitive interpr. of brahma-prī́- ‘pleasing x with the formulation’ (contra ‘loving the formulation’ or ‘friend of the formulation’ of all others, including Scar [338]), see comm. on I.83.2. In that passage the transitive value is strongly favored by context; here, given Agni’s usual middle-man role as both sacrificer and sacrificed to, it is less clear. I could accept ‘loving the formulation, pleased by the formulation’ here.

In d the literal sense of á-diti- ‘boundless(ness)’ works well with the main verb uruṣyet ‘he should make broad space’. What, if anything, the goddess Aditi is doing here is unclear to me. Ge suggests that the sense vacillates between the goddess and the abstract noun, with the goddess the obj. of avívāsan ‘seeking to win’ and the abstraction of uruṣyet. This seems reasonable: because Agni’s mouth is the conduit of the oblations to the gods, “seeking to win” the goddess “with his mouth” would mean attracting her to the sacrifice to consume the oblation by means of his mouth (/flames), while the abstract sense of the word expresses our own wish for boundlessness or freedom. I would now emend the publ. tr. accordingly to “Seeking to attract Aditi with his mouth, he should make broad space for boundlessness.” Note that Aditi is identified with a milk-cow in I.153.3 below, a hymn with many verbal and ritual ties to I.151-52. There Aditi the cow herself swells (pīpā́ya dhenúr áditiḥ), while the cows in this passage cause Agni to swell (pīpayan).

For a quite different interpr. of the vs., see JPB’s Ṛgvedic Ādityas, pp. 200-1.


## 07
The first hemistich, inviting Mitra and Varuṇa to come here and partake of our oblation, seems like a fuller and more straightforward version of 6d āsā́vívāsann áditim just discussed, with the 1st ps. poet substituting for Agni as the enticer of the gods.

In cd the two fronted asmā́kam have somewhat different uses, which are not sufficiently reflected in the published tr. In c the formulation (bráhma) is one produced by us -- ‘ours’ in that sense. But in d we should be the recipients of the heavenly rain; we do not produce it. Ge (/WG) and Re convey the difference more clearly. I would slightly emend the publ. tr. of d to “for us should be …,” supplying a copula with its optative value borrowed from precative sahyā́ḥ in c.

