+++
title = "153"

+++
Mitra and Varuṇa This brief hymn reprises a number of the ritual tropes found in the preceding two hymns, I.151-52.


## 01
In the second hemistich the clause beginning ádha yád raises some syntactic/interpretational issues. The standard interpr. (also incl. Klein DGRV II.127) assume that yád stands here for yébhiḥ, rendering the clause, in Klein’s tr., “and (with) what(ever) they bear among us for you with their (poetic) thoughts, (just) as the Adhvaryu's (do).” Besides arbitrarily modifying the relative marker, this interpr.

also requires supplying a 3rd pl. subj. for bháranti different from adhvaryávaḥ. I prefer to keep yád as a subordinating conjunction and read ná as having domain over the whole clause, not just adhvaryávaḥ. Although I am unhappy with this stretching of the function of ná, the other alternations seem to me more radical. For a similar use of ná (in my interpr.), see I.131.2fg and comment thereon. What Adhvaryus bear to a god is soma (II.14.1 ádhvaryavo bháraténdrāya sómam; cf. I.135.3).

I do however now note that bháranti with unidentified subject is found in I.151.7, where they bring songs (gíraḥ) along with thought (mánmanā) to the gods.

Given the verbal connections among these three hymns (I.151-53), I may need to rethink the interpr. here along the lines of the standard tr: “They bring you (songs) along with insights (dhītíbhiḥ), as Adhvaryus (do soma).”


## 02
As discussed ad I.151.8, I take ná práyuktiḥ (-ir in sandhi) as short for mánaso ná práyukti-, as in that passage and X.30.1. I would in fact now go further and suggest that the nom. sg. práyuktir here is a redactional change for práyukti, the short-vowel instr. found at VI.11.1, X.30.1, and I would change the publ. tr. to “as if

*with the yoking up (of mind).” The form would have been changed to match the two
other nom. sg.s to -ti-stems in this hemistich, prástutir and suvṛktíḥ (both given in their sandhi forms), and it would also avoid hiatus over the pāda boundary.

As for dhā́ma, I take it, as I do in I.152.4d, as an accusative of respect: “following/with regard to the ordinance.” This verse has another reminiscence of the preceding Mitra and Varuṇa hymns in pāda c: the Hotar here anoints (anákti) Mitra and Varuṇa as an unidentified plural set of ritual officiants do in I.151.8 (yuvā́m … añjate), the same verse containing the yoking of mind.


## 03
As noted ad I.152.6, that verse contains both milk-cows (dhenávaḥ) and Aditi, though not identified with each other as here. In that verse the cows cause swelling, rather than swelling themselves. Nevertheless, I see thematic connections between the passages. áditi- ‘boundlessness’ (with one reading of the word in I.152.6d) perhaps qualifies the swelling milk-cow here: she swells without limit for the good sacrificer. Again, an emended tr. might read *“The milk-cow swells as boundlessness for …” All the standard tr. take ṛtā́ya as an adj. qualifying the jána- (e.g., Ge “für die rechtwandelnden Mann”), but adjectival uses of ṛtá- are rare to non-existent and the conjunction of an abstraction and an animate being is not rare. Cf. in one of the associated hymns, I.151.3 yád īm ṛtā́ya bháratho yád árvate, where the double yád shows that two entities are in question (“for truth and for the steed”). Again, in I.151.6a ā́vām ṛtā́ya keśínīr anūṣata, where the dat. ṛtā́ya is universally interpr. as the abstract ṛtá-.

The standard tr. take d as a continuation of c, whose referent is still the man who gives offerings first met in b. Since this man is clearly human, it seems awkward to compare him to a human Hotar (mā́nuṣo ná hótā). I take d separately, with the initial sá signaling here a new, nominal clause, whose referent is Agni. The simile then makes sense, because Agni, though a god, regularly plays the role of Hotar at the sacrifice (and could in fact be the Hotar in 2c). Agni is elsewhere qualified as rātáhavya- (I.31.13, IV.7.7.), as are other gods (V.43.6, VII.35.1, VII.69.6), so this epithet does not require a human referent.


## 04
The med. 3rd pl. pīpayanta here echoes act. 3rd pl. pīpayan in I.152.6b and both are transitive: the form in our vs. is simply an -anta replacement/variant of the usual type. Both have cows as (partial) subjects (dhenávaḥ and gā́vaḥ respectively), but in I.152.6 the cows are, in my view, the streams of ghee swelling the fire, while here the cows and waters are the usual additions to the soma drink. Agni is not absent, however, at least in my view: the lord of the house in c is probably Agni, and his position as ‘foremost’ (pūrvyáḥ) refers to his placement to the east as the Āhavanīya fire.

In d the naked vītám can be fleshed out by comparison with I.151.3 vītho adhvarám, despite Ge’s “Bekommet Lust” and Re’s “Goûtez”; WG’s “Verfolgt!” at least reproduces the same verb they use for vīthaḥ in I.151.3.

