+++
title = "155"

+++
Viṣṇu and Indra


## 01
2nd pl. vaḥ is one of those vague oblique references to the ritual personnel, here something like “on your own behalf.” Because such a throw-away Sanskrit word requires such a heavy English tr., I omitted it in the publ. tr.

pā́ntam here belongs to the nominal stem pā́nta- ‘drink’; see comm. ad I.122.1.

As Ge points out, loc. sā́nuni and instr. árvatā show case disharmony between frame and simile, in this case presumably because instr. árvatā is idiomatic. This is one of the few instances in the RV referring to horseback riding.


## 02
The Pp. interprets sutapā́as sutapā́ḥ, hence a nom. sg., and this interpr. is accepted by Re and WG. However, Ge argues persuasively for du. sutapā́, and I follow him. The others must invent a mysterious soma-drinker who gives wide space and freedom to Viṣṇu and Indra; as indicated in the publ. intro. I assume that the clash (samáraṇam) in pāda a is what opens up the space.

The stem uruṣyá-, the verb ending both b and d, must be read in two different senses (as recognized by all tr.); ‘go wide’ is a useful English idiom for an arrow or other missile missing its target.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., the sense of these enigmatic paradoxes is not clear, as so often when family relationships and implied incest are in question. The females who “strengthen his great masculine nature” are left unidentified, but in some sense this scarcely matters: the point is that feminine beings strengthen his masculine nature and shortly thereafter there’s semen in play. The dual mātárā can (and probably does) stand for the two parents and is so tr. by all; however, it is more piquant for the two mothers to enjoy the semen presumably of their son, and the mother word contrasts with the father in c. For other contextually appropriate use of the dual parental designations, see Dīrghatamas’s I.159.2-3.

In c it might be better if “names” were in parentheses: although nā́ma in d can be either sg. or pl. (and is the former in conjunction with flg. tṛtī́yam), it can’t be dual, as the pair of adj. ávaram páram “lower and higher” might require.


## 04
With Ge (/WG) I take the pronominal āmreḍita tád-tad as emphatic rather than distributive, despite the identical pāda in X.23.5, where I opt for a distributive sense because of context.


## 06
vyáti- from *vi-yati- (√yam), flg. Re.

Re takes vimímānaḥ in d as reflexive ‘se mesurant’, and Ge’s ‘sich richtend’ is close. Since med. forms of (ví) √mā are regularly transitive (cf. vimamé rájāṃsi in the previous hymn, I.154.1b, sim. I.154.3cd), I would supply an object here. In the publ. tr. I tentatively suggest “the realms,” as in 154.1, but given the contents of this verse I would now supply “the year.”

