+++
title = "156"

+++
Viṣṇu


## 03
The Pp. reads vidá here, the 2nd pl. act. pf., though vidé or indeed vidáḥ would be equally possible in this sandhi situation. Old says we’re not obliged to read vidé, and the standard tr. follow the Pp. The cross-pāda sandhi -a ṛ- suggested by the Pp is impeccable. As Dieter Gunkel points out to me (pc 11/5/15) “’underlying’ /-e ṛ- /, /-a ṛ-/, and /-as ṛ-/ are all transmitted as <-a ṛ-> in the saṃhitā text. Where the hemistich boundary intervenes, as here, they are also metrically identical, and therefore identical in the restored text. I gathered examples of /-a ṛ-/ at hemistich boundary from the first four books and found these: 1.15.12ab, 1.68.4ab, 1.116.23b, 1.152.3cd, 2.35.8ab, 3.14.” Nonetheless, against the Pp. I opt for the 3rd sg. mid. vidé, which is common in this phrase (yáthā vidé).

The standard tr. interpr. pipartana in fairly generic ways: Ge “ihn heget,” Re “comblez (le de louanges)” (taking it to √pṝ ‘fill’), WG “den … fördert.” In the context of the birth motif found in pāda c as well as in 2c, I take the verb as more precise and idiomatic: the usual ‘carry (to the far shore)’ narrowed to ‘carry to term’ of birth. The same sense is found in VI.48.5 (a passage adduced by Ge) gárbham ṛtásya píprati of Agni’s birth.

nā́ma in c is ambiguous as to number (sg. or pl.), but is taken by all standard tr., I think correctly, as plural. Given that Viṣṇu is being identified with a number of gods in this hymn, he has multiple names, and this middle verse gives the clue to this trick of the hymn.


## 04
The publ. tr. “does … follows” should be corrected to “follow.” I don’t know why Varuṇa, the Aśvins, and the Maruts -- gods that don’t usually interact -- appear together as followers of Viṣṇu’s krátu-. Syntactically it is mildly interesting that a singular nom. (váruṇaḥ) and a dual nom. (aśvínā) together form the subject of a plural verb (sacanta). By simple addition this is what we would expect, but verb agreement often is governed by more local rules.

I do not understand the second hemistich either. Part of the problem is the cmpd. ahar-víd- ‘knowing (or finding) the days’. I interpret it in light of the last verse of the previous hymn, I.155.6, concerning Viṣṇu’s apparent control over the days of the year. Since Viṣṇu is several times in this hymn (including in this vs.) called védhas- ‘ritual expert’ (2a, 4b, 5c), the reference may be rather to knowing the ritual day, as in I.2.2. But others see pāda d as depicting the Vala myth, and WG interpr. aharvíd- in this Vala context: “das Tageslicht zu finden.”


## 05
The lexeme ā́√vī unusually takes a dat. inf. with dat. subj. as complement (sacáthāya … índrāya), at least by my interpr. Despite the superficial similarity to X.6.2 (ā́yó vivā́ya sakhyā́sakhibhyaḥ), the two passages have very different syntax.

[I.157-58 JPB]


## 159-60
On the structural near identity of these two hymns see the publ. intro. to I.160.

