+++
title = "159"

+++
Heaven and Earth Alliteration is especially prominent in this hymn: e.g., 2ab ... manye ... máno, mātúr máhi; 3a sūnávaḥ s u ápasaḥ sudáṃsaso; 3d putrásya pāthaḥ padám; 4c návyaṃ-navyaṃ tántum ... tanvate.


## 01
prá √bhūṣ is found only here (though cf. úpa-pra √bhūṣ in III.55.1 and ánu prá √bhūṣ in IX.29.1) and the meaning of √bhūṣ in all its manifestations is notoriously slippery. My tr. here is somewhat illegitimate: I generally tr. the lexemes in III.55.1 as ‘tend to’, ‘attend upon’; my ‘tender’ here (a verb that has nothing to do synchronically with ‘(at)tend’) is a pun on the English. Nonetheless, something like it seems called for here: busy oneself with something to present and bring it forward.


## 03
The identity of these sons as the gods is clear from deváputre in 1c: ‘the two [=Heaven and Earth] having the gods as sons’.

The referent of the son in d is disputed. Sāy (followed by WG) takes it as the sun, on the basis of I.160.1; Ge as “jedes lebende Geschöpf”; Re as the human son. I suggest rather that it is Agni. In 2 of the other 3 occurrences of ádvayāvin- it modifies hótar- (III.2.15, VII.56.18), and in at least one (III.2.15) it's clearly Agni.

It's also the case that Agni is frequently associated with padá-. The hemistich may convey that Heaven and Earth protect the general world of reality (c) and the specific world of the ritual (d). I think it esp. unlikely that it is the Sun here, because of the complementary relationship between I.159 and I.160, with the latter being the realm of the Sun. See publ. intro. to I.160.


## 05
As Ge notes (n. 5ab), the first hemistich is reminscent of the Gāyatrī mantra (III.62.10), with our pāda a tád (rā́dho adya) savitúr váreṇyam an expanded version of III.62.10a tát savitúr váreṇyam and our b devásya … manāmahe perhaps meant as a partial paraphrase of III.62.10b … devásya dhīmahi, with a misanalysis of dhīmahi as belonging to √dhī ‘think’, rather than being the root aor. med. opt. of √dhā ‘place’ —hence the subj. manāmahe ‘we will think about’. This may provide significant evidence of the status and interpr. of the Gāyatrī mantra at this early period.

