+++
title = "160"

+++
Heaven and Earth


## 01
It is striking that the Sun, by most interpr., is called a poet (kaví-).


## 02
Old suggests emending sudhṛ́ṣṭame ‘boldest’ to *sudŕṣṭame ‘loveliest to see’, but this not only seems unnecessary but weakens the striking image. The girls, dressed in their best by their father, presumably to attract potential husbands, seem to be on public display -- a very bold move for previously sheltered damsels.


## 03
Note the alliteration in ab … putráḥ pita róḥ pavítravān, punā́ti … The standard tr. take śukrám páyaḥ as two entities, “semen (and) milk,” against my “blazing milk.” I do not know of any passages in the RV where śukrámust mean ‘semen’; it is overwhelmingly adjectival, and I prefer to render it so here.

The “blazing milk” that the Sun milks is presumbly sunlight. I take the asya here as referring to the Sun and thus coreferential with the subject of the sentence. As discussed ad I.145.2, overt reflexive forms are not required in this syntactic situation.

By contrast Ge thinks asya refers to Heaven and Earth (/the cow and the bull), but conceived of as a single person and hence represented by a singular pronoun. Re takes asya as referring only to the bull.


## 04
Ge and, apparently, Re (but not WG) take ānṛce not to √ṛc ‘chant, praise’, but to a different root ‘hold’ (with sám ‘hold together’). (See also Old’s disc., though he ultimately opts for ‘praise’.) But as Kü says (106), such recourse to “eine sonst unbekannte Wurzel” is not helpful. Though Ge claims that in context ‘chant, praise’ is excluded, in the context of the whole verse it works fine, as Old points out. That the first verbal form in the next verse is gṛṇāné ‘being sung’ (though modifying Heaven and Earth, not the Sun) supports this interpr., esp. since ānṛce and gṛṇāne are near anagrams.

[I.161 JPB]

