+++
title = "162"

+++
Praise of a horse (Aśvastuti)


## 01
Although the collection of gods serving as witnesses in ab seems somewhat random, the same set recurs in V.41.2, as Ge points out. The reason for their association there is no clearer than here.

Pāda d, pravakṣyā́maḥ (vidathé) vīryā̀ṇi, is a variant on the famous opening of I.32, the great Indra hymn, índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi právocam. The gen. índrasya of I.32.1 is matched by the long gen. phrase in our c: (yád) vājíno devájātasya sápteḥ “of the prize-winning, god-born race-horse.” For another variant on this phrase in Dīrghatamas’s oeuvre, see I.154.1. It is striking here that vīryā̀ṇi ‘heroic/manly’ deeds are attributed to a horse; the establishment of “personhood” for the horse, discussed in the publ. intro., begins here in the very first verse.


## 02
It may not be clear in the publ. tr. that it is the horse that is bedecked (prā́vṛtasya), not the goat.

viśvárūpa- modifying the goat in c is taken by most as a bland color term (Ge/WG ‘allfarbig’, Doniger ‘dappled’), but, esp. because in the next vs. (3b) the goat is called viśvádevya-, I think the qualifier is meant to convey more meaning: perhaps to indicate that the goat stands for all the other animals (which, as disc. in the publ. intro., are literally tied up for sacrifice in the later versions of the Aśvamedha), hence my “representing all forms.”


## 03
It is appropriate that the goat, if it “represents all forms” (see disc. of the previous vs.), should belong to all the gods. That it should also be “Pūṣan’s portion” (pūṣṇó bhāgáḥ, 3b and 4c) probably follows from the fact that Pūṣan “has goats for horses” (ajā́śva-: 5x, always of Pūṣan) and is generally associated with goats.

As for Tvaṣṭar’s involvement, Ge (sim. WG) simply says that Tvaṣṭar is the creator esp. of animals, but I think there is a tighter connection. Tvaṣṭar is a required presence in the Āprī hymns, the litanies that accompany the animal sacrifice. The verse devoted to him in each hymn occurs immediately before the “Lord of the Forest,” namely the stake to which the sacrificial animal is tied, releases the animal for sacrifice. Just before that, Tvaṣṭar both produces life (e.g., II.3.9, III.4.9-VII.2.9) and assists at the sacrifice (V.5.9), escorting the sacrificial animal to the gods (X.70.9) or at least pointing the way (II.3.9). Most strikingly Tvaṣṭar is once called viśvárūpa- (I.13.10) and several times enacts that epithet dramatically: I.188.9 tváṣṭā rūpā́ṇi hí prabhúḥ paśū́n víśvān samānajé “Because preeminent Tvaṣṭar anointed all the beasts (with) their forms”; X.110.9 rūpaír ápiṃśad bhúvanāni víśvā “he adorned all the creatures with their forms.” In our verse Tvaṣṭar stimulates/quickens the goat immediately before its sacrifice and indeed for its sacrifice, and that goat has just been characterized as viśvárūpa-. Thus Tvaṣṭar’s constant appearance in the Āprī hymns shows that this god has a defined role in the animal sacrifice, and that role, somewhat paradoxically, involves both giving life and setting the stage for taking it away by sacrifice. This is less of a paradox in the conceptual context of the animal sacrifice: as noted in the publ. intro., a good deal of this hymn is devoted to reconstituting the sacrificed horse and endowing it with life-breath. Tvaṣṭar thus has a role in both, and we see it here first in connection with the goat that represents all creatures. Tvaṣṭar recurs in vs. 19 below.


## 05
The list of priests contains the hapax ā́vayā(ḥ), whose derivation and meaning are unclear. For suggestions and disc. see, e.g., Old, Ge, Re. I tentatively favor a connection with áva √yā ‘propitiate, expiate’, but the form presents grave difficulties for that analysis. For one thing, we should expect a root-noun cmpd.

(*)avayā́- with short initial vowel and accent on the root -- and in fact we get just that form in I.173.12. See detailed disc. by Scar (404-7, with our form treated in n. 565).

However, it can be pointed out that this lexeme is mutilated elsewhere -- e.g., in nearby I.165.15 (but Agastya, not Dīrghatamas), where vayā́m is better read ‘vayā́m (i.e., avayā́m), which sandhi form its position after tanvè would allow. Thus, the connection with áva √yā reflected in the publ. tr. is quite insecure, and it may be best to follow Old in accepting the traditional analysis as ā́-vayas-, rendering it ‘whose life force is (right) here’. This avoids the formal difficulties, but I don’t see what kind of priest this would be.

There is a mild disconnect between the two hemistichs: the first half is a list entirely in the nominative, but the second contains a 2nd pl. impv. ā́pṛṇadhvam, whose 2nd ps. subjects should be the nominatives of ab.


## 06
The list of personnel involved in the sacrifice here includes some apparently marginal and humble roles, perhaps to implicate the largest possible group in the potential blood-guilt of the sacrifice.

I render the utó in d with ‘also’; this is also Klein’s tr., though his disc. of the passage seems to seek a straight conjunctive role (DGRV I.448-49). See the same expression in 12d.


## 07
I analyse prā́gāt as pra-ágāt, rather than Pp. prá agāt -- in other words with an accented verb, which is in a non overtly marked subordinate clause, with adhāyi in the main clause. I then supply the same verb again in b. This may seem over-tricky, but it avoids taking smát … mánma as a parenthesis and ties together the two ritual actions, the procession of the horse and the production of the poem.


## 08
The exact referents of these pieces of horse tackle are not clear.

Pāda d contains a nice ex. of a neut. pl. subj. with sg. verb.


## 12
I do not believe that bhikṣā́- has yet developed the later ubiquitous sense ‘alms’ and tr. it here with full desiderative sense, contra Ge (/WG) “ein Fleischalmosen.”


## 14
The -ana-suffix on the nominals in pāda a marks them as transitive/causative in sense; I take these neut. singulars as referring to the tack that produce the various movements of the horse.


## 15
On abhí vikta see comm. ad X.27.1.


## 16
The placement of árvantam amid the pieces of tackle associated with him seems strange at first, but in fact it can be seen as iconic: these various items hold him, and so he’s surrounded by them. It’s also clever that the various things are in the neuter, and so it is not till the verb appears (ā́yāmayanti at the very end of the vs.) that it becomes clear that they are the subjects of the verb and therefore nominative, while árvantam is clearly accusative.


## 17
The first hemistich is one of the few places in the RV that depicts horses being ridden (see also I.155.1, 163.2 -- though for an alternative for the latter see comm. ad loc. -- 163.9): both sādé lit. ‘in the seat’, here tr. ‘in riding’, and the mention of goading with a heel require a rider physically on a horse.

I follow the general interpr. of śū́kṛta- as containing a syllable śū́used to urge on horses, hence my “come on, come on.” Although Google tells me that “chirrup” and “tchick” are so used (in English, or whatever we might call it), I judged that such a tr. would simply sow confusion.

The three disfavored ways of goading a horse -- heel, whip, and excessive śū́- making -- are not parallel, or rather heel and whip go together and śū́is something else, and they are therefore summed up with useful vagueness by sárvā tā́“all these” in d. The vagueness is also useful because none of the three is a particular suitable object for sūdayāmi ‘I make sweet’, even in its most attenuated sense (Ge “… mache ich … wieder gut”).

The neut. pl. tā́in the simile in c is more mysterious. hávis- ‘oblation’ is a standard obj. of sūdáya-, but it is coopted here by the gen. háviṣaḥ. I have nonetheless supplied ‘oblations’ as the referent of tā́. Ge supplies “die Fehler” on grounds of contextual sense only. He also cites Mah. as explaining tā́as “nur Füllwort” -- an explanation I’d like to be able to use more often!


## 18
The preverb sám ‘together’ in sám eti may seem an odd choice in a verse concerning cutting the horse apart. However, it sets up a contrastive pairing with ví śasta ‘cut apart / carve up’ at the end of the 2nd hemistich, and it also anticipates (or promises) the rejoining of the parts of the horse that ends the hymn.

As it turns out, horses have 36 ribs, not 34. Max Müller noted this in 1875 and got a potential explanation from T. H. Huxley -- that it may be that they’re cutting the rib cartilage and they don’t cut the last two ribs in order to keep the carcass together: [http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Popular_Science_Monthly/Volume_7/June_1875/A_C urious_Question_of_Horses'_Ribs]


## 19
In d I didn’t tr. píṇḍānām as a partitive gen. because the English got too fussy. Ge thinks that the píṇḍa- are rice balls, but this seems anachronistically to reflect later ritual use of the word.


## 20
The caus. redupl. aor. ā́tiṣṭhipat is tr. by most as ‘cause enduring pain’ vel sim., which is far from the lit. meaning of the lexeme. The caus. to ā́√sthā sometimes means ‘make stand still’, and I think that sense is in play here. The horse is about to go on a journey (apiyántam ‘going along’ in pāda a; more fully described in 21b), but various mishaps can keep that journey from happening and make the horse stop.

