+++
title = "163"

+++
Praise of a horse (Aśvastuti) Krick translates and comments extensively on this hymn (307-11), though with a particular point of view.


## 01
The tr. of púrīṣa- as ‘fertile ground’ is an adaptation of Krick’s (Feuergrundung, 101 n. 253). The basic meaning is ‘fullness, fulfillment’, but it can indicate fruitful, loose rich earth, bottom land, as well as overflowing fullness.

‘Fertile ground’ provides a nice semantic bridge between the abstract sense and the younger meaning ‘dung’.

I follow Re in taking pāda c as containing two de-composed bahuvrīhis at least functionally. Though Re generally overuses this explanation, in this case we have almost documentary proof, in that 9a contains both a real bahuvrīhi and a decomposed expression like this one in parallel: híraṇyaśṛṅgó ‘yo asya pā́dā “having golden horns, his feet copper.” In our pāda c the expressions are technically nominal sentences with possessive value, with the possessive pronoun te to be supplied from pāda d: “(your) wings (those) of a falcon, (your) forelegs (those) of an antelope.” But these are tantamount to bahuvrīhis and go more smoothly into English that way.


## 02
I do not pretend to understand the myth or myths here; for an attempt see Krick 307 and nn. 794-95. I would point out, however, that stylistically this vs. is reminiscent of the famous vs. in the wedding hymn about the previous bridegrooms of the bride in question. In both, four separate beings act, each segregated in a single pāda, and it has some of the same vocabulary (note prathamáḥ, gandharváḥ, and tritáḥ/tṛtī́yaḥ both ‘third’): X.85.40 sómaḥ prathamó vivide, gandharvó vivida úttaraḥ / tṛtī́yo agníṣ te pátis, turī́yas te manuṣyajā́ḥ “Soma acquired (you) first; the Gandharva acquired (you) next. / Agni was your third husband. The fourth was human-born.” I do not know what, if anything, to do with these similarities.

Krick supplies a chariot for the horse to be yoked to in pāda a and for Indra to mount in b, but see 9d, where Indra clearly mounts the horse.


## 03
Again, I do not understand the mythology here. It is worth noting, though, that in vs. 2 the various divinities acted on the horse (or such is the likely object, though unexpressed), whereas here the horse (addressed in the voc.) is identified with the (same) divinities. He is here identified with Yama (a) and Trita (b), while in 2a he was given by Yama and yoked by Trita. The third identification is with Āditya (3a), most likely the sun. Of the three remaining characters in vs. 2 (Indra, Gandharva, and the sun), the last is the most likely, and of course Āditya is a later name for the sun.

On the meaning of samáyā see comm. ad I.113.10. The abrupt separation from Soma is another puzzling feature, but I suggest that we have here the generally later identification of Soma with the Moon, found already in the wedding hymn already cited (X.85.1-5), which would make sense (well, some sense) if the horse is being identified with the Sun. Krick (308 and n. 797) very different: “Du bist mit Soma zur Hälfte durchgemischt,” which depends on her view concerning the relationship between soma and the horse. But, inter alia, her tr. depends on what I consider a wrong interpr. of samáyā.

From context alone the “three (kinship) bonds in heaven” could be identified with the trio in ab: Yama, Āditya, and Trita. The Sun of course is associated with heaven, and Yama’s realm of the dead is also placed in heaven (see the funeral hymn X.14.8). What Trita’s connection with heaven might be I don’t know: Trita is a shadowy figure in the RV.

## 05-07
Note the apaśyam ‘I saw’ in all three verses (5c, 6c, 7a): the poet bears witness to his sight of various mystical visions of the horse.


## 05
As in I.162.14 I take the -ana-nominals here (avamā́rjana- and nidhā́na-) as having trans./caus. value.


## 06
As indicated in the publ. intro. to both I.162 and I.163, I take ā́tman- in these hymns as referring to the lifebreath of the horse, as opposed to his sacrificed body; see I.162.20--21. Although ā́tman- can mean ‘self’ in the RV and sometimes perhaps even ‘body’, the contrast between the horse’s ā́tman- and his tanū́- (see I.162.20ab) seems to exclude those meanings here, pace Ge’s “dein eigenes Selbst” and WG’s “Rumpf.”


## 07
There are multiple conflicting interpretations of the personnel and import of this verse; I will not add another.

Pāda d raises several questions: 1) is óṣadhīḥ to be construed with grásiṣṭḥaḥ (so, e.g., Ge, Doniger, and me) or with ajīgaḥ, 2) who is the referent of grásiṣṭhaḥ, and 3) what person is ajīgaḥ. I take the plants with the splv. (For acc. rection with - iṣṭha- forms, cf., e.g., VI.37.5 vṛtráṃ hániṣṭhaḥ.) Within the RVic domain of discourse, the greatest devourer of plants is likely fire/Agni, the answer, therefore, to 2). With that identification in place, I take ajīgaḥ as 3rd sg. For an opposite interpr. on all 3 counts, cf. Krick’s “… dann wahrlich hast du, der Gefrässigste, die Pflanzen erweckt (verschlungen?).” The subject is the horse=sun, addressed in the 2nd ps. She takes the verb as suggesting a 2ndary pun on √gṝ ‘swallow’, and considers the larger sense to be that the rising sun (in spring) awakes the plant world to new life, and is at the same time their “Fresser.” This builds a lot of superstructure into the vs. In my opinion, the pāda simply expresses the conceit that the kindling of the ritual fire causes the sun to rise; assuming, with Krick et al, that “you” is the horse=sun, it can be the object of ajīgaḥ, with Agni as the subj.


## 08
The preverb ánu is insistently repeated in this verse: twice each in a and b, once each in c and d. The first hemistich lacks a verb, but this can easily be supplied from īyuḥ (√i ‘go’) in c; d then varies this pattern with a different verb mamire (√mā ‘measure’) to be supplied with ánu.


## 09
On the syntax of pāda a, see comm. on 1c.

Against the Pp (and all standard tr., as well as Krick) I take the sandhi form ávara as standing for loc. sg. ávare, not nom. sg. ávaraḥ. Although ávara- is a pronominal adjective, and several instances of ávare are nom. pl., there are also several that are undeniably loc. sg. (II.9.3, 24.11). Taking it as a nom. sg. requires attributing lesser powers to Indra, which strikes me as pragmatically unlikely (cf., e.g., Old “geringer (an Schnelle) war Indra”). My interpretation identifies the horse/sun-bird with Indra and situates him in a lower realm (the midspace, presumably).


## 10
This difficult vs. has been subject to numerous interpretations. Mine is guided by Thieme’s (Gs Nyberg = Kl Schr (II) 829-30), who sees this as a description of the V-shaped formation of geese in flight (of which Google Images supplies many pictures, including bar-headed geese flying to/from their wintering grounds in India). The “nose” is the lead goose and therefore a particularly crucial figure, the śū́ra- ‘champion, hero’ of the cmpd. śū́ranas- ‘having a hero as a nose’ (an analysis that goes back to Bloomfield, RR 150; Bl’s other analyses there are less compelling). sílika-madhayama- has a hapax as first member; if Th’s interpr.

(‘hollow space’) and etymological connection (with sirā́- ‘vein’) are accepted, the cmpd. means ‘having a hollow space in the middle’, which accurately describes the V-formation. The other problematic bahuvrīhi is īrmā́nta-. Th. takes īrmá- as ‘foreleg, thigh’, not īrmá- ‘quiet, at rest’. The ‘foreleg’ sense is found in the AV (X.10.21), and Aves. ar(ə)ma- ‘arm’ appears to be cognate (so EWA s.v.). The sense of the cmpd, ‘having (fore)legs as its edges’, must reflect the fact that, looked at straight on, the V-formation (roughly an isoceles triangle) can look like a stick-figure human from the waist down, with the legs being the two equal sides, meeting at the tip, which is equivalent to the waist.

The verb in d, ā́kṣisuḥ, is generally taken as an isolated -siṣ-aor. to √naś ‘attain’ (so Gr, Narten 160; Wh Roots puts it under √akṣ as -iṣ-aor., but takes √akṣ as a secondary root form from √aś). This is certainly possible, but I prefer to analyze it as an isolated (and nonce) -siṣ-aor. to √aj ‘drive’, which would then take a cognate acc. ájmam, hence ‘have driven their drive’.


## 11
I take caranti as aux. with járbhurāṇā(ḥ), but it could be an independent verb: “they wander (while) flickering” (e.g., Ge “… bewegen sie sich auf und ab hüpfend”).


## 13
I don’t understand the point and syntactic status of the (pseudo-)izafe construction paramám yát sadhástham, and I therefore left out the yád in the publ. tr.

It may simply be a relative clause “what is his highest seat” with the main verb fronted around it.

I take júṣṭatamo hí as a parenthetical explanatory clause, which would account for the unusual position of the hí.

[I.164-65 JPB]
