+++
title = "165"

+++
[I.165 Indra and Maruts (misc. comments by SJ to JPB tr.) This hymn is full of somewhat “off” forms, some of them unique to the hymn

-- yujmahe (5c), ūgrá- (6c, 10c), cyavam (10d) -- a few confined to this hymn and
one or a few other passages -- vadhīm (8a), kariṣyā́(9d). It is not clear to me whether these are the result of faulty transmission or of the poet’s manipulation of form, though I incline towards the latter explanation, given Agastya’s characteristic selfconscious artfulness. In either case the clustering of these anomalies in a single hymn makes it unlikely in each individual case that they belong to the systematic grammar of Vedic or reflect deep archaisms or old sound changes, as has been suggested for several of them. For further remarks see the individual discussions below.

The trajectory of the hymn might be seen as the battle of the lexicon: words pass back and forth between the two speaking parties, with twists in their usage and with terms that seem to belong to one of the parties appropriated by, or devalued by, the other. Among the most important words are éka- ‘alone, only’ and the multiple forms of √kṛ ‘do’. Note esp. the extraordinary concentration of √kṛ in the middle of the hymn: 7a cakartha, 7c kṛṇávāmā, 8d cakara, 9c kariṣyā́kṛṇuhí, 10b kṛṇávai, 11b cakrá, including two of the rarest pf. forms, 1st sg. cakara and 2nd pl. cakrá.


## 01
I’d be inclined to take samānyā́not as an adv. (‘altogether’) as in the publ. tr., but as a fem. instr. sg. forming part of the phrase káyā śubhā́, hence “with what joint/common beauty?” -- with the sense “what’s their joint insignia? how shall I recognize them?” Note that samāná- is differently formed from the two preceding phonologically similar adjectives sávayasaḥ sánīḷāḥ, which do match each other.

Note also following sám m... The adj. samāná- returns in 7b in a charged context.

JPB’s tr. cleverly reads étāsaḥ twice, once as the nom. pl. ‘antelopes’, once as the nom. pl. of the ppl. ā́-ita- ‘come here’.

In d śúṣṃam may be adverbial as JPB takes it (‘explosively’), but it may be a real obj. of árcanti (“chant their explosive power”). I’m inclined to follow the latter course, because śúṣma- must be a real noun in 4b. But in this case I interpr. it as an Inhaltsakk., further specifying the chant (*“chant their chant” à “chant their explosive force”) not the object of their praise as Ge, for example, does: “preisen den Kampfmut” (sim. WG).


## 02
I’m not certain that the 2nd hemistich is an embedded quotation, pace JPB.


## 04
The act. forms iyarti, etc., are usually transitive, but Old cites a few passages with the intrans. value that must also be present here.

Although various tr. (e.g., WG) take ukthā́as acc. pl. and supply subjects for the pl. verbs ā́śāsate and práti haryanti (men and gods respectively, WG), taking it as nom. pl. not only avoids the need to cast around for unexpressed subjects but also captures Indra’s extreme egotism: even the hymns long for him, or so he thinks.


## 05
yujmahe is a famous crux: though it should belong to the well-attested root aor. (seen presumably in part. yujānā́ḥ in pāda a), it has a primary ending and therefore looks like a pres. formation. It has received a plethora of explanations. Ge calls it a non-reduplicated perfect (“Perf. ohne Redupl.”); Whitney (Rts.) simply allows for a root pres. for a few forms, incl. this one, in addition to the standard root aor. Probably the currently prevailing interpr. is Hoffmann’s (MSS 2 [1952/1957]: 130-31 =Aufs. II: 366), that it shows dissimilatory loss of the first nasal from

*yuñjmahe belonging to the nasal-infix pres. Although this explanation has a
plausible foundation (as opposed to Ge’s motiveless non-redupl. pf.), the coexistence of yujmahe with yujāná- in the same verse, and the general trickiness of Agastya’s poetry, incline me to a nonce, contextual explanation. The oddly placed nú ‘now’ (though see 9a) immediately following the verb form and ending the pāda seems Agastya’s signal that he’s twisted and tweaked the aorist to his own ends -- a temporary present. Thanks to JL for assembling the relevant lit. and for illuminating disc.

## 05-06
Indra seizes the Maruts’ assertion of independent power (svadhā́- 5d) by taxing them with the absence of (their exercise of) that power (6a) at a crucial moment. Another skirmish in the battle of the lexicon.


## 06
I do not understand the length in ūgrá- here and 10c. Lubotsky (2000 [“Vedic root vṛ …,” Indoarisch, Iranisch und die Indogermanistik]: 320 n. 16) attributes it to compensatory lengthening from *hí uHgrás, after laryngeal metathesis from *hi Hugrás, but I find the proposed metathesis counterintuitive (despite the other exx. he adduces); one would rather expect the laryngeal to remain where it is as a hiatus-filler. Moreover, assuming that this remained as a synchronic rule in the RV is quite hard to accept.

Indra adroitly manipulates the wording here to contrast his own solitary state with the Maruts’ collectivity: … mā́m ékaṃ samádhatta “… me alone together you…”


## 07
In vs. 5 the Maruts spoke literally of yoking their teams to bring them for the journey, but in this vs. the same root √yuj is used metaphorically, in the gerundive yújya-, to indicate the Maruts’ powers that were available to be yoked/deployed by Indra, though he didn’t. Note also the adj. samāná- ‘common, joint’ (repeated from 1b) referring to the powers shared by the Maruts, in contrast to Indra’s constant lone state.

The question in this vs. is whose krátu- do the Maruts plan to follow. Acdg. to the JPB tr., it is Indra’s, but the tr. can’t stand exactly as given for syntactic reasons.

Because marutaḥ is unaccented, either krátvā has to belong to the yád clause or marutaḥ has to belong to the main cl. But the publ. tr. assigns marutaḥ to the dependent cl. and krátvā to the main cl: “we shall do many things in accordance with your purpose, o most powerful Indra, when we, o fellow Maruts, shall wish it.” Following the two syntactically licensed alternatives above, we must rather tr. either “We shall do many things, o most powerful Indra, when, o Maruts, we shall wish it in accordance with our/your will.” Or “We shall do many things, o most powerful Indra, in accordance with your/our will, o Maruts, when we shall wish it.” krátvā is perfectly placed for maximum ambiguity, between Indra and the Maruts. Taking it with the main cl. (the 2nd alternative tr. just given) favors an interpr. of Indra’s will; taking it with the subord. cl. (the 1st alternative) favors the Maruts’ will. That, I think, is the correct interpr. The Maruts contrast Indra’s actions, which were performed with the Maruts’ standing by on the scene, with their own prospective actions, which will depend on their own intention, not Indra’s design or timetable.

The dueling vocatives in d, índra and marutaḥ, are notable, esp. because they encase the word krátvā whose crucial ambiguity we have just discussed. Since we must assume that the 1st

-ps. speaker is a Marut or Maruts, the pl. vocative to the
group is of course striking -- though well within the limits of poetic self-address we find elsewhere in the text (see disc. in my "Poetic Self-Reference in the Rig Veda and the Persona of Zarathustra,” Fs. Skjaervø, 2009). In this case I imagine a “spokesMarut” who takes the lead in addressing Indra but also turns to his own group for a chorus of affirmation (of the type, “right, guys?!”).


## 08
Injunctive 1st sg. vádhīm belongs to the root aor. stem of this seṭ root, whose well-attested 2nd and 3rd sg. are (á)vadhīs, (á)vadhīt. The 1st sg. should be *vadham, which is nowhere attested. The -ī- has simply been imported from the 2nd/3rd sg.; vádhīm is attested once elsewhere in the RV, in the late hymn X.28.7.

The juxtaposition of maruta indriyéṇa recalls the immediately preceding (7d) índra … marutaḥ.

Pāda-final viśváścandrāḥ produces an irregular cadence of four heavy syllables; three of the remaining four occurrences of the stem occur in the same position (though once in dimeter vs.) and have the same effect. As is often remarked, the cmpd. would be metrically regular if the 2nd member were the related -candra, hence *viśvácandrāḥ with the light 2nd syllable appropriate to a Triṣṭubh cadence.

The same problem afflicts the other cmpds of -ścandra- (áśva-, svá-, hári- and puru-, su-), which either show up in metrically indifferent positions or positions in which a light 2nd syllable would be favored (besides Triṣṭubh cadence, also right after an opening of 4, where a break ̆- - is distinctly bad). There are no forms where the meter is improved by reading -ścandra-. Although the obvious solution is simply to read *-candra-, I am puzzled as to how the -ścandra- forms won out. The duplicate pair ścandrá- / candrá- are for the most part in complementary distribution, with candrá- an independent adj. and 1st cmpd member and ścandrá- 2nd cmpd member (after vowel); ścandrá- appears 3x uncompounded, but in these cases it is in a sequence that functions like a quasi-cmpd (purú ścandrám III.31.15, pṛthú ścandrám IV.2.13, and possibly ádhi ścandrám VIII.65.11). So viśvá-ścandra- has the expected alternant, though in almost all cases a metrically unfavorable one. Must we reckon with a replacement of the originally correct -ścandra- by *-candra-, yielding a metrically usable form, and then redactional restoration of the -ścandra-? This hypothesis seems over-complex, but I don’t have a better one. In any case the poet seems to be toying with the form: the next pāda (8d) contains the offending sequence śc, though split across a word boundary (apáś cakara), and in 12c a candrá- compd., candrá-varṇā(ḥ) occupies the same pāda-final slot. Its initial also participates in the śc sequence: marutaś candrá-, so that the first member is effectively *ścandrá-.


## 09
The form kariṣyā́is problematic for several reasons. Despite its sandhi position before k, it seems best to assume it represents 2nd sg. kariṣyā́s out of sandhi, even though kariṣyā́ḥ would be the proper sandhi form in this context. (The Pp.

simply reads kariṣyā́like the Saṃhitā text, but the standard tr. and comm [e.g., Old, going back to BR] take it as 2nd sg.) Moreover, this form must be a subjunctive to the future stem, an unusual morphological combination at best (but see Whitney, Gr.

§938). Reading the transmitted kariṣyā́won’t help: that would simply be a 1st sg. subj.

to the future, or perhaps a 2nd sg. imperative to the future, neither of which is any better morphologically. The other long-shot possibility is to assume it’s an unusual gerundive formation in -iṣyá- in the neut. nom.-acc. pl., yielding “what things are to be done …” (so Sāy.). AiG II.2.368 mentions this possibility but prefers the subjunctive interpr.


## 10
In most tr. the rel. cl. of pāda b seems loosely construed with the main clause of pāda a, with the yā́referring to an unexpressed acc. of respect in the main cl.: “Let my force be far-reaching with regard to (those things), which I will do …” However, the vertical parallelism of 9d, 10b, and 10d suggests a different syntactic arrangement 9d yā́ni [kari]ṣyā́kṛṇuhí … 10b yā́nú [dadhṛ]ṣvā́n kṛṇávai … 10d yā́ni Not only do these pādas match phonologically as in the display above, but 9d and 10d show the same syntactic structure: a preposed rel. cl. introduced by an acc. pl.

referring to deeds and a verb governing it referring to the doing of the deeds (yā́ni

*kariṣyāḥ; yā́ni cyavam), followed by a main clause where the doer of the rel. clause
is also subject: kṛṇuhí, īśē. I suggest 10b should be interpr. in the same general pattern. Indra says “Which (deeds) (I am) bold (to do), I will do.” In other words, pāda b contains two clauses, not one, and is independent of the preceding pāda.

The 1st sg. cyavam is the only non-causative active form to this root.

Hoffmann (Injunk. 247-48) takes it as a subjunctive, an ersatz for the unenlarged 1st sg. subj. ending -ā. I agree that the form has been tampered with, but would suggest that what really underlies the form may be medial subjunctive 1st sg. *cyavai, which should have yielded *cyavā in this sandhi position. The -m serves as a pleonastic hiatus filler (perhaps originally -m̐). An alternative that would work better phonologically is to assume a 1st sg. indicative *cyave, not a subjunctive. This would yield *cyava in sandhi, to which the -m could be added without adjusting the vowel length. Since the verb in the main cl., īśe, is likewise present indicative (as opposed to impv. kṛṇuhí in 9d and subjunctive kṛṇávai in 10b), an indicative in the subord. cl.

would match.


## 11
The final pāda of this vs. brings the vocabulary into reciprocal alignment and thus signals that harmony has been restored: sákhye sákhāyas tanvè tanū́bhiḥ.


## 12
The med. part. dádhānāḥ is generally tr. ‘receiving’, as the middle voice of √dhā often is, and interpr. to mean that the Maruts also get fame as part of Indra’s reflected glory (see práti … rocamānā(ḥ) in a). But in this charged context of tributes given and received, I think it likely that it is ambiguous. Indra is both graciously yielding the Maruts some glory, but he is also reminding them that they have just produced praise for him (vs. 11) and will presumably continue to do so. In this second sense it could be tr. “setting out praise (for me)” with the middle voice reflecting the mutually intertwined relationship between Indra and the Maruts.

With most interpr. I take ánedyaḥ as a nom. sg. m. implicitly modifying an unexpressed gaṇáḥ ‘troop’, a construcio ad sensum with the pl. dádhānāḥ. I would like to find some way to ally it with nédīyas- ‘nearer’, as a neut. sg. modifying śrávaḥ, but this seems beyond the realm of possibility.

The saṃcákṣyā of the Saṃhitā text is read saṃcakṣya by the Pp. and taken as a gerund, an interpr. followed by Old inter alia. The meaning would be “having looked upon (me)” vel sim. Gr (fld. by Ge [WG], etc., incl. the publ. tr.) takes it as a gerundive, whose pausal form would be saṃcákṣyāḥ. Both forms are possible. I do not have a strong feeling either way.

On -ś candrá- see disc. ad 8c.

Note the pāda-final nūnám, reminiscent of nú in 5c and 9a.


## 13
The reciprocal lexical harmony of sákhīn … sakhāyaḥ recalls that found in 11d sákhye sákhāyaḥ, but there is a small mystery: the voc. pl. sakhāyaḥ surely refers to the Maruts, but who are the plural expressed by sákhīn? We would expect a singular referring to Indra. It seems unlikely to be the priests plus/minus Indra because the speaker is a singular (note me in d, the sg. inter. prn. káḥ in the rhetorical question in pāda a, and the sg. poet in vs. 14). I take that speaker to be Agastya (contra the publ. tr., which identifies him as the narrator). Perhaps a pl. maiestatis for Indra? If návedā(ḥ) belongs to the s-stem návedas-, it should be nom. m. singular here, in disagreement with the plural subj. of bhūta. Gr’s solution is to set up a them.

stem náveda- for just this passage, which would allow a plural interpr. To avoid this ad hoc multiplication of stems, we can assume the same type of constructio ad sensum invoked for ánedyaḥ in the immed. preceding vs. (12b)(so Old), with the sg.

referring collectively to the Marut troop. Cf. also the parallel passage IV.23.4 devó bhuvan návedā ma ṛtā́nām, with a legitimate singular; the post-caesura portions of the pādas are identical. On the origin of návedas- from a false segmentation of -tana védas- see Schindler, Fs. Knobloch, 1985.


## 14
The first hemistich of this vs. is quite problematic; see Old’s long disc. The problems lie in the verbs (or apparent verbs). The pf. cakré in b only makes sense in this context if it is construed with the preverb ā́in pāda a: ā́√kṛ ‘make (to come) here, bring here’. By contrast, the verbal stem duvasyá- is never otherwise construed with ā́, even though it appears to be here. Moreover, the recipient of the friendship offered by the verb duvasyá- is always in the accusative, not the apparent dat. duváse here. (Note also that the suffix-accented duvás- appears only here and in nearby I.168.3. It seems to show the regular possessive sense of s-stem adjectives built to sstem neuters by accent shift: hence dúvas- ‘friendship’ à duvás- ‘possessing friendship, friend’.) The best solution seems to me Roth’s suggested emendation of duvasyā́d to *duvasyā́, instr. of an abstract in -yā́, an emendation endorsed by Old.

Hence I would alter the publ. tr. to “When/Since the wisdom of the son of Māna has brought us here with friendship, like a bard to a friend” vel sim. The emendation only requires de-gemination of the -d d- and has no effect on the meter; the addition of a -d might have been encouraged by the repetitive phonological pattern in a (which I will represent with false word division): yádduvas yā́(d)duvás(e). Note also the dental geminate in vartta in c, where the double -tt- may have been restored etymologically (since Rtt and Rt generally fall together). Although there is no nominal stem *duvasyā́-, there is the variant duvoyā́-, showing external sandhi (see AiG I.343), also appearing as in instr. (V.36.6, perhaps not coincidentally in an Indra hymn in a vs. addressed to the Maruts).


## 15
As noted in the publ. intro., the tr. assumes underlying avayā́m (‘vayā́m in sandhi) ‘propitiation’. This does not require emendation to the Saṃhitā text, since the word appears after vowel-final tanvé.]

