+++
title = "166"

+++
Maruts


## 01
It may not be sufficiently clear in the publ. tr. that “the beacon of the bull” refers to the Maruts themselves. They are presumably Indra’s “beacon” because they are regularly his comrades and they are of glittering appearance -- a little bit like Rudolph the Red-nosed Reindeer.

The pair “kindling” and “battle” in cd may not seem to form a natural class, but they probably represent two aspects of the Maruts’ naturalistic identity as the thunderstorm: the lightning may be the kindling and the thunder the clash of battle.

Note the phonological echoes in aidhéva..., yudhéva...; similarly tuviṣvaṇo...

taviṣā́ni.


## 03
The simile hitā́iva is compared by Ge and Re with a similar expression in IV.57.1, with the meaning “good (friends)” (Ge “wie gute (Freunde)”) or, more technically, “like contracted (allies)” (see the bahuvrīhi hitá-mitra-). This doesn’t mean much in the context here. WG are somewhat skeptical, but simply tr. literally “wie die Hingesetzten” without explaining what that might mean here. Both the Ge/Re and the WG tr. assume a ppl. to √dhā ‘set, establish’. I take it rather to √hi ‘impel’ (as does Gr) and assume that the underlying subject is horses and that the image is of horses led out to piss before contests. See esp. I.64.6 (also a Marut hymn) átyaṃ ná mihé ví nayanti vājínam “They lead (their horse) out to piss like a prizeseeking steed” (also cf. II.34.13, IX.74.4). This image fits well with the sprinkling here.


## 05
I previously (1983: 61) took nadayanta as intransitive “they roared and made the mountains stir …”, but I now accept a transitive value.


## 06
áriṣṭagrāmāḥ is a bahuvrīhi, but the tr. ‘having an invulnerable band’ seemed too heavy.

On krívis- see comm. to I.30.1, where I suggest a relationship with kravís- ‘raw, bloody flesh’ as a re-formed -i-stem to the underlying root krū < *kruH. A number of other interpr. have been made.

I supply “(a path)” as obj. of rádati because words for ‘path, way’ are frequently obj. of this verb (e.g., VII.87.1 rádat patháḥ; also II.30.2, V.10.1, V.80.3, VI.30.3, VII.47.4, VII.60.4, X.75.2).

In my reading the structure of pāda d is quite complex and intricate and differs from the standard. Both Ge and Re supply ‘waters’ as the obj. of riṇā́ti in the frame (see also Old), since waters are several times elsewhere the obj. of √rī. (WG take paśváḥ as obj. of both simile and frame.) I prefer to find the object nearer at hand, namely trees, based on vánaspati(ḥ) in the previous vs. (5c). In another passage trees liquefy at the Maruts’ assault: V.58.6 … riṇaté vánāni, and a transitive version of this phrase is found with Agni as subj. at V.41.10 ní riṇāti vánā (cf. I.127.4).

As for the simile, Ge takes barháṇā as fem. nom. sg. with súdhitā (“wie der beharrliche Eifer …”), but barháṇā, which is fairly well attested, is otherwise only an instr. sg. used adverbially (so rendered by both Re and WG). Like Re and WG I take didyút (fem.) of c as the referent of súdhitā ‘well-placed’, but didyút- in a slightly different sense: not as a thrown missile but as a sharp-pointed thing used as a goad. The verb riṇā́ti is held constant between simile and frame, but again it has different senses in the two structures: in the simile it does not mean ‘liquefy, dissolve, i.e., destroy’, but ‘make to flow, i.e., to cause to move’, a more appropriate meaning with paśváḥ ‘livestock’ as object.


## 07
The rendering of alātṛṇá- as ‘restless’ follows the suggestion of Hoffmann’s (‘unruhig’) registered in KEWA III.807 and EWA s.v., derived from √rā ‘be at rest’.

The word is found elsewhere only in III.30.10, of Vala. In neither passage does ‘unquiet, restless’ fit the context terribly well, but in neither is it excluded. Kuiper (Aryans, 84-85, in part restating his 1955 Fs. Kirfel views) objects to Hoffmann’s explanation and suggests instead the meaning ‘irresistible’ for our passage and ‘not offering resistance’ for III.30.10. (On a side note, these two meanings, reflecting passive ‘not (to be) resisted’ and active ‘not resisting’ senses respectively, do not seem to me derivationally compatible and should not be found in a single word.) He considers it to be a substrate borrowing and thinks it’s not realistic to expect it to have an etymology. Kuiper has some good points: as was just noted, the meaning produced by the Hoffmann etymology is not a perfect fit contextually and the morphology is somewhat dubious. However, I do not see confidently proposing two incompatible meanings for a single word (with the one suggested for this passage not particularly compelling in context) while forswearing any attempt at etymology.

Better to leave it untranslated in that case.

Pādas c and d are in reverse logical order. The contents of the chant that the Maruts chant (c) must be the deeds of Indra, which they are said to know (d); the knowledge logically precedes the verbal expression of it.


## 08
As pointed out, e.g., by Ge, śáṃsāt in d must stand for *aghā́d śáṃsāt “from evil utterance,” borrowing the aghā́t of pāda a (and cf. the bahuvrīhi agháśaṃsa- ‘of evil speech’, referring to the utterer thereof). It may well be (with Ge, etc.) that śáṃsāt should likewise be supplied in a, but “guard from evil,” without the addition of “utterance,” is also perfectly acceptable.


## 09
Ge and Re make taviṣā́ṇi part of the frame, not the simile. This actually does not alter the sense very much, since they still read mithaspṛ́dhyā with taviṣā́ṇi in an “as if” construction. Given the structure of the hemistich and the need for something for mithaspṛ́dhyā to modify, I prefer to take it with the simile. My only reservation about putting taviṣā́ṇi in the simile is that the Maruts’ taviṣā́ṇi are mentioned in 1d.

More crucial is the grammatical identity and function of mithaspṛ́dhyā (so Pp.). Old follows BR in taking this not as a gerundive but as a gerund, but, strikingly, neither suggests a tr. for it. Since a simile consisting of a gerund would be highly unusual (unprecedented, I think, though I haven’t checked the entire RV), a neut. pl.

gerundive agreeing with taviṣā́ṇi makes more grammatical sense. But what meaning is being conveyed? I think the point is that there are so many good things on the chariot that one can’t single out just one: like opposing forces (taviṣā́ṇi) they contend with each other as rivals to be the best and most desirable. The sentiment is similar to VII.26.4 mithastúra ūtáyo yásya pūrvī́ḥ “whose many forms of help compete for the lead,” meaning that they are all eager to be the most helpful.

The loc. sg. prápatheṣu is taken by all standard tr. as “on (your) journeys” (vel sim.), agreeing with the endpoint of Gr’s def. ‘in die Ferne führender Weg, Reise in die Ferne, Reise’, which seems to me to follow a slippery path indeed. I interpr. the stem prápatha- (4x) rather as lit. ‘the path forward’, but figuratively as ‘vanguard’. The -in-stem superlative prapathíntama-, found nearby at I.173.7, then means ‘most in the vanguard’ (/’most forward on the path’), used of Indra there and VI.31.5 (the 3rd occurrence, at VIII.1.30, is a PN). Although the difference between ‘journey’ and ‘vanguard’ is not crucial in our passage here, the two non-PN occurrences of prapathíntama- both refer to Indra, with I.173.7 specifically to Indra as warrior, and ‘most in the vanguard’ works much better than Re’s “toi qui (vas) les grands chemins par excellence” or WG’s “der am meisten auf dem Weg bist.” Ge’s “der am meisten auf der Kriegsfahrt” seems to recognize this. For prápatheṣu here I’d be inclined to emend my publ. tr. to “on the paths forward,” because of the plural.

What is going on in d depends on the interpr. of samáyā, for which see comm. ad I.113.10. Most take it to mean ‘in the middle’ vel sim.; this certainly produces an acceptable image, since the axle is between the two wheels. But as discussed ad I.113.10, the totality of passages containing samáyā suggest a meaning ‘altogether, all at once, at the same time’, and in all these passages it contrasts with a form of ví (as here). The image I see here is somewhat more complex than the standard one, namely that through the action of the axle the wheels, though separate, turn at the same time. This is close to the kind of paradox much loved by RVic poets. This interpr. requires medial vāvṛte to be transitive (rather than intransitive-reflexive, pace most tr. and also Kü 464), but the self-involved nature of the action (the axle is turning its own wheels, as it were) makes this unproblematic. Potentially more troubling is that by this interpr. cakrā́should be dual acc., and the stem cakrá- is neuter, whose dual should be (and several times is) cakré. However, in at least one passage, VIII.5.29, we have a clear masculine dual: ubhā́cakrā́hiraṇyáyā “both your wheels are golden” (note the ‘both’ ubhā́), which would match the form here.

Alternatively, we could take cakrā́as neut. plural, assuming four wheels -- and though this would technically require two axles, “the axle” as a mechanical marvel could stand for both. (Rather like saying “the internal-combustion engine powers most of the cars on the highway,” even though every car has its own.)


## 10
The adj. rabhasá- ordinarily characterizes action (‘violent, frenzied’), but here must have a visual aspect. So also III.31.12. Such synaesthesia is not uncommon in the RV.

In d all standard tr. supply ‘they’ [=Maruts] as subject of (vy ánu) dhire, with śríyaḥ as object (e.g., Ge “… haben sie ihre Herrlichkeiten entfaltet”). This amounts to a change of person, for these same tr. identify the many good things of a-c as ‘yours’ [=Maruts], following similar statements in vs. 9 with vaḥ (a, cd). Though there are no overt 2nd ps. pronouns in vs. 10, the voc. marutaḥ in pāda shows that 2nd ps. reference continues in this verse. Rather than changing person in d, I see another ex. of case disharmony between frame and simile, which is facilitated by the middle voice of dhire. The simile váyo ná pakṣā́n “like birds their wings” uses the middle in transitive but self-involved sense, but, in my reading, in the frame dhire is intransitive, with śríyaḥ as subject. I must admit, however, that the person switches to 3rd in vs. 11, so that a switch here in the last pāda of 10 is not impossible. I prefer my interpr., with constant 2nd ps. in vs. 10, both because -- all things being equal -- it’s best to keep verses self-contained and, more important, because Agastya likes doing tricky things with similes.


## 11
I have not rendered the yé in b because in this verb-less string of nominal qualifiers it is difficult to decide where the relative clause ends and the main clause begins. (Both Re and WG take d as the main cl.; Ge seems to take it as cd, insofar as I can interpret his punctuation.) Alternatively, the whole vs. could be a relative clause hanging off vs. 10, or more specifically 10d. This structure would support the change of person in 10d seen by most tr., as opposed to my interpr., for which see immed. above.


## 12
This vs. has ties to earlier parts of the hymn. The opening tád vaḥ … mahitvanám “this is your greatness” echoes 1ab tán nú vocāma … mahitvám. There it was their previous (pū́rvam) greatness; this vs. presumably brings this greatness into the present time.

Pāda b seems a paraphrase of 7a anavabhrárādhasaḥ ‘whose gifts are not withdrawn’.

The connection between the main clause and the relative clause in cd is somewhat loose: as a correlative to the rel. cl. jánāya yásmai “for whatever person” we would expect tám, not tád, which must refer to the gift, not the recipient of it.


## 13
I take cd as a concrete example of the statement in ab, that the Maruts’ connection with the older generation arises from their favoring its “laud” (śáṃsam -- note that this positively viewed śáṃsa- contrasts with the evil śáṃsa- of 8d). Manu is of course a member of the older generation, and because of his “insight” (ayā́dhiyā́) the Maruts favor him and show themselves to him with all their wondrous qualities.


## 14
The relations among the clauses in this vs. might be problematic, primarily because of an apparent gender mismatch: párīṇas- ‘abundance’, which in the instr.

párīṇasā goes with the rel. yéna in the rel. clause occupying ab, would be the most likely referent of both yád in the parallel rel. clause of c and tád in the main clause of d. And in fact that is how I (and the other standard tr.) take it. However, párīṇas- is said to be masculine and yád/tád are of course neuter -- an obstacle that Old for his part considers too large to be overcome. However, the noun is most likely neuter.

This is what we’d expect of a stem built with suffix -nas-, and the only diagnostic form for a masc. is acc. sg. párīṇasam in III.24.5. Otherwise the forms are singular obliques, esp. in the collocation rāyā́párīṇasā “with wealth in profusion” (4x), and hence ambiguous as to gender. The masc. acc. sg. is most probably a nonce form created to match its usual formulaic partner, masc. rayí-, in the phrase rayíṃ vīrávantam párīṇasam. See AiG II.2.738 and EWA s.v. Substantially the same argument is made by Lubotsky (“Avestan xv arǝnah-: The Etymology and Concept, 1998, 483).

abhī́ṣṭim in d is analyzed by the Pp. as abhí íṣṭim, as might be expected. Since (vanishingly rare) root-accented íṣṭi- is derived from √yaj and means ‘sacrifice’, the standard tr. exert a good deal of effort to introduce this sacrifice into their interpretation, somewhat embarassingly in a pāda that already contains ebhír yajñébhiḥ “with these sacrifices.” Cf. Re’s rather overblown “puissé-je l'obtenir grâce aux sacrifices que voici, pour (que vous soyez présents à mon) oblation” (the “l’” in “l’obtenir” is the párīṇas-). I take it rather to iṣṭí- ‘desire’, in a phrase abhí

*iṣtím “to my desire, to my liking’. Either the annealed sandhi form *abhī́ṣtíṃ lost its
2nd accent redactionally, or the accent retraction that was ultimately to affect all -tistems (see Lundquist, -ti-stems) was already spreading to this stem, producing the occasional íṣṭi- ‘desire’.


## 15
This signature verse of Agastya’s Indra/Marut hymns appears in I.165.15, 166.15, 167.11, and 168.10, but not in all of his Triṣṭubh hymns even to Indra. The tr.

of I.165.15 (JPB) differs somewhat from the others (SWJ). JPB interprets mānyá- as a patronymic to a PN mā́na-, while I take it as an adj. ‘respectful’ derived from mā́na- ‘respect’. It is possible that both are meant.

Both tr. follow Old in reading ‘vayā́m ‘propitiation’ (SWJ) / ‘reconciliation’ (JPB) for vayā́m. This requires no emendation to the Saṃhitā text, only to the Pp. My tr. should, however, have an asterisk before ‘propitiation’ in all three cases.

