+++
title = "167"

+++
Maruts


## 02
What noun to supply with jyéṣṭhebhiḥ … bṛháddivaiḥ is an open question.

Ge confesses to uncertainty in his n. 2b, but implicitly supplies “help(s)” from pāda a in his tr. However, the disjunctive vā ‘or’ would seem to exclude this solution, unless it’s signaling a contrast between the Maruts’ “help(s)” and those stemming from heaven, which seems unlikely. Klein (DGRV II.157) suggest “riches” (a suggestion that goes back to Sāy), in part on the basis of rayím ... jyéṣṭham in VIII.46.19; see also IV.29.5 brhḁ́ ddivasya rā́yaḥ, adduced by Ge. The fact that “help(s)” and “riches” both appear in vs. 1 (a and c) supports this view.

My tr. of cd differs from the standard ones and follows Jamison 1983: 84. I take dhanáyanta as transitive, a straightforward ex. of -anta replacement (see Jamison 1979). This involves taking niyútaḥ as accusative, not nominative, pl. and paramā́ḥ as modifying the unexpressed Maruts, subjects of the verb. The standard tr.

“when their furthest/highest teams are running …” is certainly acceptable, however.

## 03-07
Hoffmann (Injunk., 194-97) translates and comments on these verses.


## 03
For the punning and diametrically opposed, negative and positive readings of this vs. mediated by sabhā́vatī, see the publ. intro. Rodasī is depiced both as fit for the sabhā (gaming hall) like a young woman who goes there in secret [=whore], but also fit for the sabhā (assembly) like speech to be publicly uttered there (cf. the sabhéyo vípraḥ “the inspired poet appropriate to the sabhā in II.24.13). For the association between the sabhā and licentious sexual activity, see Falk (Bruderschaft, 90-92).

Ge (/Hoffmann, WG) take úparā … ṛṣṭíḥ as the lower part of the spear and consider the shared characteristic between simile and frame to be híraṇyanirṇik ‘garbed in gold’, presumably referring to the decorated hilt or handle of the spear.

But I take úparā as meaning ‘nearer, very close’ (so approx. Re) and the point of comparison is how close Rodasī is to the Maruts (“to whom she has been joined, positioned well”: mimyákṣa yéṣu súdhitā) -- as close as their spear, which is attached to their shoulders: cf. I.64.4 áṃseṣv eṣāṃ ní mimṛkṣur ṛṣṭáyaḥ “On their shoulders spears have rubbed.” (The verbs mimyákṣa and mimṛkṣuḥ belong to different roots, but echo each other phonetically.) The standard tr. take mánuṣaḥ as gen. sg., dependent on yóṣā, whereas I see it as acc. pl. Either is of course grammatically possible.

Hoffmann (194-95, fld. by WG) sees sáṃ vā́k as a new, separate clause (“Dabei ist die Vāc.”). Although I don’t entirely understand the position and function of sám, I do not think making these last two words into an abrupt appendage works well.


## 04
The polarized positive/negative treatment of Rodasī continues in the first half of this vs., in my interpr. With Hoffmann (/WG) I take pāda a as separate from b and supply a verb of motion with párā ‘away’. In b, in my interpr. only, the fem.

instr. sādhāraṇyā́‘common’ refers both to the fact that Rodasī is held by them in common and that this type of relationship leaves her open to the charge that she is no better than a whore. (As noted in the publ. intro., even Draupadī in the Mahābhārata sometimes receives this insult because she is the common wife of all the Pāṇḍavas.) The 2nd hemistich puns on the name Rodasī (once again, this is only my interpr; others see it very differently), providing us with a grammatical problem. The form found in the text, rodasī́, should by accent be the name of the Maruts’ consort, but as a singular -ī-stem, it should be nominative, a grammatical identity that does not fit the context well. Old takes it as an instr. Ge suggests that the word here is flexionslos, which conveniently allows him to construe it as an acc. with ápa nudanta (so also Re, without comment on the morphology). Hoffmann (fld. by WG) suggests it’s an elliptical dual, standing for Rodasī and Vāc. I instead think it is a grammatical compromise that enables a pun -- a compromise between dual *ródasī, the standard word for the two world halves (so accented) and sg. *rodasī́m, the acc. sg. of the personal name. In other words, the rodasī́we have in the text is a formal compromise: the right form for the dual worlds but the wrong accent; the right accent for the singular woman but the wrong case form. This is where the pun comes in, depending on a further implied pun on the ná that opens the line. On the one hand it is the negative, to be read with the personal name: “did not push Rodasī away” (so most tr.); on the other hand it is the simile marker, to be read with the two worlds: “as they did push apart the two world halves.” This refers to the cosmogonic deed, generally attributed to Indra, of separating the two world halves to create living space between them. The ná is of course in the wrong position for the simile marker, but I think Agastya relies on his audience to actualize his plays on words with hints like this. The full version of this very condensed expression would be ná *rodasī́(m) [/ródasī] ná “not Rodasī like the two world halves.

In the next pāda both Rodasī and the two world halves are then the objects of a (quasi-)infinitival vṛ́dham (again, my interpr. differs from others’). Cf. the similar expression in I.85.1c ródasī hí marútaś cakriré vr̥dhé “the Maruts made the two world halves grow strong,” with a clear dative infinitive in periphrastic causative usage. The only other ex. of acc. vṛ́dham in III.16.2 also has infinitival value and even has the Maruts as subj.


## 05
This vs. depicts a svayaṃvara (self-choice) marriage likened to the mythological prototype of the svayaṃvara, that of Sūryā. The identification of the two female figures is underlined by the echo between asurí yā ‘her ladyship’ (pāda, referring to Rodasī) and ā́sūr i yā (opening pāda c, naming Sūryā).

jóṣat is an aor. subjunctive. As the first word of the verse, it introduces the “choice” theme. I take jóṣad yád as a type of politeness formula “if X will be pleased to …,” archaic English “an it please …” Note that dat. sacádhyai ‘to accompany’ is complementary to dat. sakhyā́ya ‘for companionship’ in 4d and of course etymologically related. The complementarity extends to the implied subjects: in 4d the Maruts are taking steps to produce companionship; in 5a it is Rodasī who decides to accompany them.

The bahuvrīhi nṛmáṇas- usually means ‘manly minded’ and so it is interpr.

here by most (Ge [/Hoffmann/WG] ‘mannhaftgesinnt’; Re ‘l’âme virile’). But though she does display a fair amount of gumption, I find this an odd characterization of the very feminine Rodasī. In this context I take it rather as ‘having her mind on (the) men’ (that is, the Maruts, who are regularly called nṛ́-). See vṛ́ṣamaṇas- in 7c.

Pāda c presents the crucial moment in the RV svayaṃvara, the bride’s mounting the chariot of the groom (see Jamison 2001, Fs. Parpola). On a possible preterital tr. of ā́… gāt see comm. on the next vs. ### 06
The decisive moment of mounting is repeated immediately in this verse, in the causative ā́sthāpayanta. The -anta form can be simply an -anta replacement of act. -an of the usual type (Jamison 1979), but it might also be semantically justified: “They cause(d) her to mount (their own chariot).” As Hoffmann points out, ā́sthāpayanta need not be read as impf. ā́ asthāpayanta with the Pp., but can be an injunctive ā́sthāpayanta. The publ. tr. has preterital “caused … to mount.,” and I still think that is correct, though a general present could provide an easy transition to the here-and-now of the ritual found in cd.

My reason for preferring the preterital reading has to do with my view of the structure of the middle section of the hymn: vss. 3-6ab treat the mythological relationship between Rodasī and the Maruts, while 6cd-7 bring Rodasī and the Maruts into the ritual present. I see vidátheṣu in 6b as the pivot: on the one hand it echoes vidathyā̀in 3d and provides ring-compositional closure to the mythological section of the hymn; on the other hand it looks forward to the ritual present 6cd.

Since the chariot mounting of 6a is part of the mythological past, a preterital (or timeless) tr. fits it better. (It might also be better to tr. the injunc. ā́… gāt in 5c in the same preterital fashion.) In the publ. tr. I take śubhé with the preceding pāda: “mount for beauty,” since śúbh- is very commonly used in Marut hymns to refer to their journey (cf., e.g.,


## 02
śubhé kám yānti …). However, the juxtaposition of the first two words in III.26.4 śubhé sámmiślāḥ pṛ́ṣatīr ayukṣata is suggestive of a connection here between śubhé and nímiślām (though in the publ. tr. of III.26.4 śubhé is not construed with sámmiślāḥ but with ayukṣata). Still I remain inclined towards my “mount for beauty,” because I think nímiślām refers to Rodasī’s intimate connection with the Maruts, which was emphasized at the very beginning of the mythological section, 3a mimyákṣa yéṣu …, hence my “commingling (with them).” As was just noted, I take 6ab as the end of the little Rodasī myth and 6cd as the beginning of the section treating the current ritual. I therefore (contra the standard tr.) take cd as dependent on 7, not on 6ab.


## 07
For my tr. of vṛ́ṣamaṇas- see disc. of nṛmáṇas- in 5b.

Ge suggests that the greatness of the Maruts (pāda b) is demonstrated by the fact that Rodasī happily brings along their other lovers without jealousy. This seems like an interpretational male fantasy to me (though I realize that our poet is also male and therefore likely prone to the same fantasy). I have a much soberer and less entertaining interpr. based in ritual. In the plural, jánī- is regularly used of the wives of the gods, esp. in regard to their attendance at certain rituals. They are ordinarily brought by Tvaṣṭar, but here Rodasī, one of their own, as it were, seems to stand in as their chaperon and cicerone. In the Ṛtugraha offerings (the “sequential cups”), in which a fixed order of gods receives oblations, the offering to the Maruts is followed immediately by one to Tvaṣṭar along with the wives of the gods; see I.15.2-3, II.36.2-3 (II.36.3d tváṣṭar devébhir jánibhiḥ sumádgaṇaḥ). Thus, given the temporal proximity of the oblations made to them at this ritual, one might expect to find both the Maruts and the wives of the gods together on the ritual ground.

I do not understand the force of cid in d, and in fact I think it’s been automatically imported from the passages containing sthirā́cid where the adj. is a neut. pl. and the point is that our hero (whoever it happens to be) has destroyed various items “even though they are firm/hard” (I.127.4, IV.7.10, VIII.20.1). In other words, I do not think it has a function here.


## 08
Because the verb in pāda a, pā́nti, is plural, not dual, at least one additional subject is needed in addition to du. mitrā́váruṇā. The obvious one to supply is their partner Aryaman, who appears in the next pāda.

In d Old, Ge, Re, and WG identify dā́tivāraḥ ‘wish-granting’ as the mortal sacrificer, although, as they all acknowledge, the other two occurrences of this stem modify the Maruts (III.51.9, V.58.2) and therefore the Maruts should be presumed to be the default referent here as well. I see no reason to contravene this expectation. In V.58.2 the adjective is singular, modifying gaṇá- ‘flock’, a regular cover term for the Maruts, and I have supplied gaṇá- here as well. I also consider d to be an unsignaled dependent clause “(when),” indicating the circumstances under which the unstirrable things stir (c), viz. when the Maruts get strong. The verb would have accent in any case because it is initial in its pāda. I do not, however, understand the īm in d, which has no referent, since vāvṛdhé is intransitive (pace Gr). Taking the Maruts as the subj.

of vāvṛdhé also fits nicely with 9, which treats the “swelling strength” (śávas-) of the Maruts.


## 10
ṛbhukṣā́in d may refer to the Maruts collectively, as I’ve taken it, or to Indra, already mentioned in ab. Re suggests both possibilities, though he goes for Indra in his tr. (as do Ge, WG). It is true that singular ṛbhukṣā́ḥ generally refers to Indra, while it is plural ṛbhukṣánaḥ that qualifies the Maruts (VIII.7.9, 12, etc.). As in 8d I’m taking interpreting the singular as collective referring to the Marut flock. If the referent is taken as Indra, the tr. should be altered to “the Ṛbhu-master of the superior men,” which seems a bit awkward.


## 11
See comm. ad I.166.15.

