+++
title = "168"

+++
Maruts


## 01
Ge takes b as parenthetical. Although I agree that the 1st sg. subject of cd is also the subj. of pāda a, I think it less awkward to take pāda a as a nominal sentence, given the sheer amount of material that intervenes between it and the verb in d, vavṛtyām.

tuturváṇi- is a hapax, but it can hardly be anything but a pleonastically redupl.

form of turváṇi- (8x)(though it should be admitted that this latter stem is used only of gods). The redupl. form is sometimes credited with a desiderative sense (‘zu erlangen strebend’ versus turváṇi- ‘siegreich’, etc.: Gr; ‘zu gewinnen strebend’ versus turváṇi- ‘überwältigend’: AiG II.2.906, reproduced in EWA s.v. TŪRV; ‘cherche à l’emporter’: Re), but I see no contextual or morphological justification for this.

WG’s iterative/repetitive “immer wieder überwältigend” is probably closer to the mark, and it would fit with the repetitive ritual actions indicated by the āmreḍitas yajñā́-yajñā and dhíyam-dhiyam. I would be inclined to emend the publ. tr. to “(am I) ever victorious” or “continually victorious.” I do not understand Ge’s ‘zuvorkommend’.

The position of u in b is somewhat surprising. Klein (DGRV II.10 n. 16) groups it with a set of passages in which u appears as the penultimate word (or “word”) in its pāda after -ā and classifies it here as “expletive,” whatever that is meant to convey. Closest in configuration is VII.68.4 … devayā́u ádriḥ#.

The standard (and I think correct) interpr. of devayā́(ḥ) here is that it is fem.

pl., agreeing with the implicit plurality of the (sg.) āmreḍita dhíyaṃ-dhiyam -- an interesting syntactic constructio ad sensum.


## 02
For the image in pāda a see the publ. intro.

The point of the simile in the final pāda is somewhat obscure. The frame -- “to be extolled by the mouth” (āsā́… vándyāsaḥ) -- is unimpeachable, referring to the poet’s oral praise, but why would gods be compared to cows and/or oxen for this quality? Surely the Maruts are inherently more praiseworthy than cows! Ge suggests that it’s like the praise of bovines at work (like the horses in I.27.1, though this passage does not seem similar); WG tr. “(sie sind) die Kühe mit dem Mund, wie die zu lobenden Jungstiere” and suggest that such cows are esp. sichtlich. This interpr.

loses the connection with the poet’s praise “by mouth” and, at least to me, doesn’t make much sense as a way to refer to particularly visible cows. I suggest that there’s an imperfect pun here on vándya-, which is phonologically close to bándhya- ‘to be bound’ (not found in the RV or, acdg. to Wh Rts, till epic, but easy enough to generate, and the stem occurs in the name of the anūbandhyā cow, a fixture in śrauta ritual, already in the BYV Saṃhitās). The simile would then pivot on the verbal pun, not on the visual image, with “by mouth” used in two different senses with vándyaand *bandhya-. In the latter case, it evokes a halter, the assemblage of straps that go behind the animal’s ears, across the jaws, and around the muzzle, to enable it to be led. The “bound” image adds another layer of meaning to the verse, suggesting under the surface that we can exert control over the Maruts, bind them to us, by praising them.

One small issue is whether gā́vaḥ … ukṣánaḥ is a single compound NP or two different entities. Ge suggests the possibility of the former in his n. 2d, though his tr.

does not reflect it. The position of the simile particle would be slightly better if this were the case, though my tr. doesn’t reflect it either, mostly because “bovine oxen” doesn’t work well in English -- or probably in Sanskrit.


## 03
The first hemistich has a nice chaining of similes, as Ge persuasively shows.

The Maruts are compared to soma drinks -- not, probably, for any quality proper to physical soma, but because, like friends, soma drinks are thought to “sit in the heart” (cf., e.g., I.179.5 … sómam ... hrts̥ ú pītám ... and other passages adduced by Ge in n.

3ab). So the Maruts are “like soma drinks” only because soma drinks are themselves “like friends”; the first simile is mediated by the second. Within the first simile is embedded another metaphor describing the soma drinks “whose stalks are satiated” (tṛptā́ṃśavaḥ), referring to the originally dry stalks which swell when soaked in water (preparatory to pressing them). The result is a very dense set of nested imagery.

In c Kü (418) takes the rambhínī as a person with a crutch and WG as an old man with a cane or staff. Although VIII.45.20 tvā rambháṃ ná jívrayo, rarabhmā́...

“Like elderly ones a staff, we have grasped onto you” shows that rambhám can have such a meaning, the feminine rambhínī requires a feminine referent in the simile, and


## 03
in the preceding hymn, with Rodasī cozying up to the Maruts like their spear (úparā ná ṛṣṭíḥ), supplies the thematic parallel. That the spear is found in the two following vss. (4d, 5a) in this hymn also supports supplying it here.

kṛtí- is a hapax, but it is generally agreed that it means ‘dagger, knife’, derived from √kṛt ‘cut’.


## 04
I supply ‘horses’ as subj. of a and obj. of b. Ge (/WG) take codata in b as intransitive/absolute/reflexive [it is somewhat difficult to tell from the tr.] ‘treibt selbst … an’, but this verb otherwise takes an obj., and if it were reflexive we would expect middle voice. Re supplies the same obj. as I do.

I interpr. tmánā in its full lexical sense ‘with breath’, as sometimes elsewhere (see also 5b). The “breath” of the Maruts would of course be the storm winds.

However, it is certainly possible that it simply means ‘by yourselves’, as in the standard interpr. I then take káśayā as an implied simile matching tmánā, since the whip is not usually associated with the Maruts, but with the Aśvins. However, in


## 03
ihéva śrṇ̥ va eṣāṃ, káśā hásteṣu …, the Maruts do have a whip, so an alternative tr. could be “spur them on with your own breath as whip” or “spur them on by yourselves with a whip.” The use of tmánā with a clearly marked simile in 5b may lend support to my interpr. of káśayā as an unmarked simile here.

The qualifier “dustless” (aréṇavaḥ), in combination with codata ‘spur on’ (b) and acucyavuḥ ‘have made stir’ (c), evokes the common notion that dust gets stirred up by violent activity (see, e.g., I.56.4=IV.17.13, IV.42.5). It is thus a paradox: although the Maruts set many things in motion, they themselves remain unaffected by this movement and therefore dustless.


## 05
Another vs. displaying Agastya’s tricky manipulation of double readings.

The standard tr. (but cf. Scar. 127) take vaḥ as the obj. of réjati (“who sets you atremble?”), but this seems semantically unlikely to me. The Maruts are always the initiators and causers of violent motion, as is esp. emphasized in these vss. (4-6); no one external to them is likely to have the power to make them tremble. (This seems to be implicitly recognized in Re’s supplied modal: “qui (donc pourrait) vous faire trembler au dedans …?”) I instead construe vaḥ with antár (“among you”). The question “who among you?” is a variant on the occasional rhetorical attempt to differentiate among the Maruts. Ge (/WG) and Re take the antár as the locus of the Maruts’ trembling (“within”; see Re’s tr. cited above). Rather than taking vaḥ as the obj. of the verb, I supply dṛḷhā́ni ‘fixed places’ from 4d as obj. of réjati; dhánva, extracted from the cmpd. dhanvacyútaḥ in c would be equally possible. Scar’s (127) tr. is similar to mine, but he takes réjati as absolute (“Wer aus eurer Mitte … bewirkt … das Beben …”). This is also possible. Scar also takes tmánā as “durch seinen Hauch” as I do, contra the standard reflexive interpr.

The simile shows (or implies) a different syntactic configuration from the frame, as Ge also points out (n. 5b), reflected also in Re’s tr. Although the frame has a transitive verb réjati (possibly, with Scar, in absolute usage), the simile assumes an intransitive form of the same verb stem; cf., e.g., III.31.3 agnír jajñe juhvā̀ réjamānaḥ “Agni was born quivering with his tongue,” with the tongue as here. I read antár also with the simile (so also Ge), governing hánvā, interpreted as dual (du.

also Old, Ge, Re; WG take as instr. sg., which is morphologically more satisfying but produces an image that makes no sense to me).

The third pāda continues Agastya’s crafty syntactic slippage between simile and frame. I take the gen. pl. iṣā́m as parallel to the 1st cmpd member dhanva- in dhanva-cyút- ‘stirring the wastelands, stirrer of the wastelands’. The simile would then be an analytic (i.e., de-compounded) *iṣā́ṃ cyút- ‘stirrer of refreshments’ parallel to the synthetic rt. noun cmpd. dhanva-cyút-. ‘Refreshments’ here probably refer to rain. For the root √cyu in this sense, see V.53.6 diváḥ kóśam ácucyavuḥ “The [=Maruts] have stirred the bucket of heaven,” and for íṣ- as rain, e.g., V.68.5 vṛṣṭídyāvā rītyā̀pā, iṣás pátī … (of Mitra and Varuṇa as lords of rain). This analysis allows the loc. yā́mani (like more common yā́man) to refer as usual to the Maruts’ journey. Ge (/WG) and Scar take yā́mani as part of the simile, resulting in a very unlikely image: Ge “wie bei der Ankunft der Speisen,” with the shaking produced by the Maruts compared to that produced by a herd of cattle or by the wagons bringing in the harvest! (Re’s rendering is close to mine.) The point of the last pāda is probably that the Maruts set many in motion, just as the Sun (or in this case, his stand-in, the Sun’s horse) sends people to their tasks on his daily appearance. The common property between simile and frame is purupraíṣa-. Although in I.145.3 praíṣa- in this cmpd seems to have the technical sense ‘ritual command’ common in later Vedic, I do not see that sense here, since neither the Maruts nor Etaśa issues such commands. Re unaccountably takes the second member as passive: “vous qui êtes multiplement incités.”


## 06
Ge (/WG) take c with ab, with d independent, while Re configures the vs. as I do. There are no implications either way.

The publ. tr. doesn’t render the ā́‘here’ with the verb in the rel. cl. āyayá. The point is that they have arrived here despite the vastness of the space in which they were driving, but “in which you have driven here” doesn’t work in English.

The frame and the simile in c do not agree in number: sg. sáṃhitam, pl.

vithurā́-iva. The number difference has a semantic function; the entity that the Maruts are stirring is solid and a unity, hence hard to move, but they make it shake as if it were comprised of a number of small unconnected pieces that are easily set in motion. Although vithurá- is a deriv. of √vyath and does not contain the preverb ví, its initial syllable plays off the sám in sáṃhitam, in the common contrastive pairing sám ‘together’: ví ‘apart’. The real preverb ví opens the next pāda.

Ge (n. 6d) makes heavier weather of pāda d than seems necessary to me. I think the “turbulent flood” (tveṣám arṇavám) is simply the dusky realm (rájas-) of pāda a, i.e., the midspace in which the Maruts often find themselves. It is a turbulent flood because of the storms the Maruts are producing. The stone (ádri-) need not be a feature of the landscape (Fels, with Ge/WG), but a weapon of some kind, as often.


## 07
Ge’s n. 7 summarizes the gist of this verse, that what the Maruts bring is both disruptive and welcome. Their gift is rain (vṛṣṭí-, which never surfaces but accounts for the fem. adjectives throughout the verse), but it is accompanied by the violence of the storm. The positive/negative pairings are found in the first hemistich; the second one is only positive and ends by indirectly comparing the gift to the Maruts’ own consort Rodasī.

The curiously formed hapax fem. pípiṣvatī is best explained, with Old, as based on the perfect part. to √pi ‘swell’, pīpivā́ṃs-, fem. pipyúṣī, crossed with a - vant-stem to match ámavatī svàrvatī in pāda a. Despite the tricky morphological manipulation required, I prefer this to the easier derivation from √piṣ ‘crush’, assumed by Ge’s ‘zerschmetternd’ (with ?), fld. by WG., and Re’s ‘pulvérisant’. Gr (flg. BR) takes it as built to a desiderative to √pi, but there are no desiderative forms to this root, whereas the pf. part. is quite well attested, esp. in the fem.

The last pāda has formulaic echoes that identify the female referent in the simile as Rodasī. There are only two other occurrences of fem. asuryā̀-, one in VII.96.1 referring to Sarasvatī (wrongly classified by Gr with the neut. noun), one in the hymn immediately preceding this one, I.167.5, where it refers to Rodasī.

Similarly the bahuvrīhi pṛthujráyī ‘possessing broad expanse’ brings to mind another passage adduced by Ge, I.101.7 rudrébhir yóṣā tanute prth̥ ú jráyaḥ “Along with the Rudras [=Marut], the maiden [=Rodasī] stretches her broad expanse.” Although it might seem somewhat unflattering to attribute “broad expanse” to a lovely young maiden (esp. to us moderns; the ancients obviously had different canons of beauty), I think this is a buried pun. The two world halves (ródasī) do have this quality, and it has simply been transferred from that dual common noun to the fem. sg. rodasī.

jáñjatī has only one relative, jañjanābhávant- in VIII.43.8, where it modifies Agni and must mean something like ‘flickering’. On its formation see Hoffmann (IF 60, 1952 = Aufs. p. 40). Here ‘scintillating’ captures the feminine quality better.


## 08
The identity of the subj. of udīráyanti in b is left undefined. Re takes it as the rivers of pāda a, WG as the Maruts, and Ge leaves it undefined (“diese”). Although my publ. tr. likewise uses a noncommittal pronoun, I am inclined to think it is the rivers because of the úd ‘up’, contrasting with the áva ‘down’ qualifying the action of the lightning in c. The noise the rivers make would be the roaring resulting from streams swollen by rainfall, hence the qualifier abhíyam ‘coming from clouds” for their speech.

In d I take yádī as standing for yád ī, with acc. ī referring to the earth.


## 09
This is the final vs. of the hymn, since vs. 10 is repeated from I.165.15, etc.

The svadhā́- in d forms a slight ring with 2a svajā́ḥ svátavasaḥ.


## 10
As just noted, this vs. is identical to I.165.15, tr. by JPB. See comm. ad I.166.15.

