+++
title = "169"

+++
Indra


## 01
A difficult vs. to construe, esp. the first hemistich. In general I follow Old’s somewhat bold interpr. He points out that pādas a and b are quite parallel, with pāda a #maháś cid … yatáḥ matched by b #maháś cid … tyájasaḥ. He then suggests that the parallelism would be furthered if pāda-final -tár-stem agent noun varūtā́(b) were matched by a similar formation at the end of a, which is possible if we read *etā́ (agent noun to √i ‘go’) rather than etā́n. The final n of the transmitted form would have been acquired from the pāda-initial nasal maháḥ that immediately follows.

Hence my “the one who goes,” which should properly be asterisked in the publ. tr. I have supplied “(before),” to allow it to be construed with the abl. phrase beginning maháḥ. Old sim.: “Selbst eines grossen Gehenden Gänger (d.h. Ueberholer oder dgl.) bist du.” As for the abl. phrase, I assume the referent is the Marut gaṇá- (flock). I also note the bad cadence and tentatively emend yatáḥ ‘going’ to *yātáḥ ‘driving’, although keeping the transmitted form would not appreciably alter my interpr.

semantically. Although Old’s (and my) interpr. requires changing the text, the standard interpr. need to supply extra material and/or juggle the supposed pronoun etā́n, which lacks an obvious referent, and since Old’s way builds on the parallel structures in the verse, I think the textual alteration is worth it.

What to do with marútām in c is the next question. Ge (see n. 1c) construes it with both vedhaḥ and cikitā́n (“Du Meister der Marut, der (sie) kennt”), Re and WG with the latter. However, neither vedhás- nor cikitvā́ṃs- ordinarily shows up with a complement -- though the passage adduced by Ge, I.156.4 mā́rutasya vedhásaḥ with vṛddhi adj., gives me pause, and in the publ. intro. to I.156 I entertain the possibility of a syntagm vedho marútām here. Since all three tr. then construe this gen. pl. also with sumnā́, the only reason to attach it to either or both of the other two words would be its position in the same pāda, which doesn’t seem to me sufficient.

None of the standard tr. renders naḥ in c (though see Tichy [-tar-, p. 192], who does), but the sense of the first clause in cd must be “win the Maruts’ favors for us.” This makes the second clause, “for they [=favors] are dearest to you,” a bit puzzling. Why would Indra, who has been quite disdainful of the Maruts in this hymn cycle, find their favors esp. dear? And if he does, why would he be willing to win them for others? I do not know how to resolve these questions on the basis of the transmitted text, which has verse-final préṣṭḥā, which must therefore be a neut. pl.

(or fem. nom. sg.). I would point out, however, that two hymns before (I.167.10a) we find the phrase vayám adyéndrasya préṣṭḥā, with préṣṭḥā pāda-final, but standing for masc. pl. préṣṭḥāḥ before a voiced sound. It is therefore possible that préṣṭḥā has been adapted from there, without adjusting the sandhi and that it could therefore mean “for they [=Maruts] are dearest to you.” Unfortunately, though this makes better sense, it doesn’t make complete sense, since Indra and the Maruts are depicted as still at loggerheads in this hymn. Perhaps préṣṭḥa- here reflects one of the senses of priyá-, viz. ‘one’s own’. The Maruts would be “most your own” because they have been, and will be again, Indra’s posse. If te in 2a should be rendered as I take it, “your (Maruts),” this provides support for the “most your own” interpr. here.


## 02
Just as the standard tr. do not notice naḥ in 1c, they are also silent on te in 2a.

I tr. “your (Maruts)”; it could also be a dat. with áyujran “they have hitched themselves up for you.” But the point is that Indra is a party to the action one way or the other.

The simplest way to construe cd is to take hā́samānā as a predicated pres. part.

(so Ge), but it is possible with Re to supply a verb (“va,” in his case) or with WG to take it as a nominal clause of possession (“Den Marut gehört Kampfaktion …”).


## 03
Both Ge and Re in different ways separate ṛṣṭí- from the well-attested ‘spear’ word and simply invent an otherwise non-existent stem (Ge ‘Hoheit’, Re ‘exploit’).

Ge justifies this by saying that ‘spear’ doesn’t make sense in context (never a strong argument in RV interpretation, since so many contexts don’t) and that Indra never otherwise has a spear. (Re’s EVP XVII, where the tr. is found, has no notes, so his reasons are lost to us.) Ge then interprets ṛṣṭí- as a v-less form of vṛṣṭí- in I.52.5, 14 of the same meaning (in his opinion, though not others’). Even if Ge’s derivation were more solidly grounded, the presence of ‘spear’ in the preceding two hymns (I.167.3, I.168.4, 5), once with the same verb as here (I.167.3ab mimyákṣa … ṛṣṭíḥ; 169.3a ámyak … ṛṣṭíḥ), makes a separation from ‘spear’ extremely unlikely (as WG recognize). As to what Indra’s spear might be here, I suggest that “fixing a spear” is like planting a flag: it means staking a claim with a physical symbol of power or authority, and Indra has in this way asserted his claim to the sacrifice, despite the Maruts’ counter-claims, symbolized by the (cloud) mass they are sending this way.

Another possibility: although I sternly resist nature-mythology explanations in general (and Indra’s “thunderbolt” in particular), in this context, with the stormproducing Maruts, it may be that a little conceptual flexibility is called for. In I.168.4 the Maruts are credited with lightning as their spears (ṛṣṭividyutaḥ), and in our vs. it is possible that, while the Maruts speed the clouds in b, Indra wields a spear of lightning.

The precise application of cd to ab is unclear. It seems to present two realworld analogues -- one involving fire, the other (in a simile dependent on the first) water -- to the mythological situation in ab, but what do these analogues contribute to interpreting what precedes? Before tackling that question, we must first decide what cd actually means. Ge and Old both take dádhati as a 3rd pl. indic., which requires finding a plural subj. Ge supplies priests and relegates the fire to a simile, presumably marked by cid (which Ge takes a simile marker on a number of occasions, though I do not think it can function that way). Old tries other strategies.

But taking dádhati as a short-vowel 3rd sg. subjunctive allows agníḥ to be subject without problem (so also WG). The point of both the fire and the water examples seems to be that these uncontrollable natural substances can produce unexpectedly positive results and that, though both substances ordinarily destroy matter, sometimes they create it. The “waters make an island” image is perhaps the easier one: when waters wash away large amounts of soil and other material upstream, this material often silts up downstream, forming islands in the river’s delta (as in the Bay of Bengal -- not that the RVic geographic horizon extends that far). It is almost a magical process -- dry land created from flowing liquid -- and provides an appealingly striking paradox. As for the fire image, fire burning in brushwood must be implicitly contrasted here with the normal ritual fire, and the former is potentially destructive. I’m not sure how it makes pleasurable offerings (usually associated with the ritual), perhaps by roasting foodstuffs that happen to be in its path. It’s worth noting that in II.4.7 fire “scorching the brushwood” also “sweetens the ground,” another positive outcome: agníḥ śocíṣmām̐atasā́ni uṣṇán … asvadayan ná bhū́ma.

What does this have to do with Indra and the Maruts? Perhaps in this verse addressed to Indra (note te in a), the poet is suggesting to him that despite their unruly natures the Maruts might turn out to have something to contribute to Indra.


## 04
The instr. dákṣiṇayā seems to be what we might call an instr. of material or specification; it expresses what the abstract ‘present’ (rātí-) consists of. Despite the position of the simile marker iva, I (and all the standard tr.) take ójiṣṭhayā as belonging in the simile. Such configurations are found elsewhere, in addition to the far more common 2nd position of the simile marker.

As Ge also saw, the frame and the simile pivoting on pīpayanta have different syntactic constructions. In the frame stútaḥ is the subj. of an intrans. (or possibly reflexive) verb (“the praises swell / swell themselves”), whereas, since stánam is masc., it must be the obj. of a trans. use of pīpayanta (“[they] make the breast swell”).

This clash is an example of the larger phenomenon of case disharmony in similes, treated at length in Jamison 1982 (IIJ 24); this particular passage is discussed pp.

263-64, where the syntactic properties of the verbal stem pīpaya- are also noted. I did not identify there the likely subj. of the transitive use in the frame, but flg. a suggestion of Dieter Gunkel’s, in the publ. tr. I supply gift-cows, adapted from the sg.

dákṣiṇayā in b. There is another case disharmony in this same simile, with instr.

vā́jaiḥ corresponding roughly to gen. mádhvaḥ in the simile.


## 05
This vs. expresses the poet’s willingness to let Indra supersede the Maruts if he provides sufficient wealth. The Maruts used to be the leaders, but now leadership passes to Indra, by indirection: the poet ascribes the leadership to his riches. (The cynical might think this ascription is not merely metaphorical.) As Ge points out, the poet is essentially apologizing to the Maruts and hoping (pāda c) that they will excuse his defection.

The iva in d is unusual in occurring after the verb gātuyánti. Ge tr. it more or less as I do. Re seems to ignore it, as do WG (unless this is what their “just” in “die … just den Weg wiesen,” though “just” [precisely] would seem to convey a sense opposite to the approximative iva). It might be possible to consider iva displaced to the left as sometimes, to be read with devā́ḥ (“like gods”), but this seems unlikely, given that the Maruts are gods.


## 06
The question in the first hemistich is what to do with maháḥ. Ge must take it as an acc. construed with yatasva: “vergleiche dich mit [come to terms with] den Grossen ...” But this pushes the sense and syntax of medial √yat, which generally refers to physical placement (an interpr. encouraged by the seat [sádane] here) and never otherwise takes an acc. Re takes it as adverbial, while WG maintain Ge’s acc. pl. but read it with nṝ́n in the previous pāda (“den … grossen Männern”), starting a new clause with pā́rthive. I take it as gen. sg., referring to the Marut flock, as in 1a.

Alternatively it could refer to Agni and the earthly seat could be the ritual ground.

On pṛthubudhná-, lit. ‘broad based’, see Thieme’s brief remarks (Fremdling, p. 63 with n. 1). As he points out, it should not refer to the antelopes’ broad Untergestell (with Ge), since antelopes are not particularly bulky, but rather to the large amount of ground they cover. I take ‘base’ as equivalent to ‘stride’, somewhat like English ‘wheelbase’.


## 07
The various gen. pl. adjectives in ab can modify either the antelopes or the Maruts; with Ge I take them all with the Maruts. Despite the placement of ghorā́ṇām and ayā́sām flanking étānām, both those adjectives are used of the Maruts in nearby


## 04
belonging to this same hymn complex.

I do not know what the debtor (ṛṇāván-) is doing here.


## 08
The instr. phrase stávānebhiḥ … devaíḥ can express both agent (as in the publ. tr.) and accompaniment; that is, Indra is praised both by the Maruts and along with them.

[I.170-71 JPB]

