+++
title = "173"

+++
Indra The beginning of the hymn is characterized by pāda-initial injunctives in -at (1a gā́yat, 2a árcat, 3a nákṣat, 3b bhárat, 3c krándat; note also non-initial ruvád 3c and carat 3d). It is not surprising that this assemblage attracted the attention of Hoffmann, who tr. the first three vss. (Injunc., 143-44). The function of these forms is of course underdefined; I render them as simple general presents, more or less with Hoffmann (“die generalle Beschreibung eines Opfers”), sim. Ge. By contrast, Re takes them all as modal (“qu’il chante …,” etc.).

Another verbal pattern is the repetition of forms of the root √bhṛ: 2c bhárate, 3b bhárat, 4b bharante, 6d bhárti. In this case the poet seems to want to display how many different idiomatic meanings he can find in this root.


## 01
IH suggests tr. gā́yat and árcāma as Engl. progressives: “he is singing .. we are chanting.” He points out that the (implied) presential nature of the nominal cl. of c and the future-referring final clause that depends on it in d support this interpr.

The standard tr. take véḥ as a nom. sg. In Ge’s tr., however, the bird seems to be compared to the sāman, not the singer: “Er stimme den Gesang an, der hervorschiesst wie ein Vogel.” So also Re, it seems. Hoffmann (/WG) make the more natural (and grammatically correct) comparison with the singer. Although it requires some extra machinery, I prefer to take véḥ as gen. sg. I think Ge is on the right track, that the comparison is not the rather banal one between singer and bird, but the quality of “bursting forth” (nabhanyàm) characteristic of bird song, a natural effusion.

If this is the comparison meant, then only a gen. will work, dependent either on sā́ma read a second time or on a different word for (bird) song to be supplied.

The obj. of árcāma must be neut., which unfortunately excludes the cognate arká- (m.). Any neut. word for verbal product will do (vácas-, bráhman-, etc.).

The pf. part. vāvṛdhānám would be better tr. “that has grown strong.” I would thus now tr. ab as “He is singing the sāman that is bursting out like (the song of) a bird; we are chant this (chant) that has grown strong …” The syntax of cd is ambiguous; c can be an independent nominal cl., with d dependent on it (so Ge, Re, and me) or the two can be read together as a single subordinate cl. (so Hoffmann [/WG]), with the subordinating conjunction yád postponed until pāda d. This is not impossible, since pāda c is a single NP, but it seems a bit awkward. I prefer the two-clause solution.


## 02
An intricate verse, in which Indra both officiates as a singer at the sacrifice and receives the sacrifice as his due. In pāda a Indra as bull is, by the standard accounts, the subject, chanting along with the hard-laboring human priests (for svédu-havya-, see Jamison 2015, BAI 25) and, in his fervor, eager to out-sing (áti … juguryā́t) them. This is the only occurrence of áti with this root, but it can hardly mean anything else.

The Hotar in pāda c is most likely not Indra, but Agni, as in the next verse.

This identification makes it easier to interpret the last pāda, where Indra, here called a “young blood” (máryaḥ), supports “the pair,” who are likely (Ge’s parallels are apposite here) the two priests Udgātar (the likely subj. of gā́yat in 1a) and Hotar (2c).

## 03-04
The -at injunctive pattern noted above comes to a climax in vs. 3, with 5 such verbs. The next -at form, jújoṣat, pāda-initial in 4c, is a subjunctive. The change in mood, while keeping the formal expression -at the same, is surely deliberate.


## 03
As Ge hints (n. 3a), the first pāda depicts the paryagnikaraṇa, a ritual episode that involves carrying a firebrand around various objects. In the animal sacrifice the objects include the animals to be sacrificed. On the basis of passages like IX.97.1cd (… páry eti …mitéva sádma paśumā́nti hótā “as the Hotar goes around the fixed seats provided with [sacrificial] animals”), the fixed seats are the places where the sacrificial animals are tied. The fixed seats here (sádma mitā́) must be the same things, and the circling around is conveyed by pári … yán, which rather nicely encircles the seats in the word order.

The problematic pāda is the second one. All the standard tr. take śarád- as a gen. sg. in the sense of ‘autumn’, not ‘year’, with gárbha- metaphorical for ‘fruit, product’; cf., e.g., Ge’s “die herbstliche Frucht der Erde” or Hoffmann’s grammatically more punctilious “die Frucht des Herbstes der Erde.” This echo of a harvest-home festival strikes me as extremely incongruous. Although śrauta ritual does have a “first-fruits” ritual (Āgrayaṇa Iṣṭi, on which see, e.g., Keith, Relig. and Philos., 323-24; Hillebrandt, Rituallit., 119-20), it is a minor, gṛhya-like rite and quite marginal, and I am not aware of any mention of it in the RV, which tends to confine itself to the far grander Soma sacrifice. I take śarádaḥ as an acc. pl. in the ‘year’ sense, expressing extent of time (“for years”), as it almost always does elsewhere. What then does the pāda refer to? In ritual context gárbha- almost always refers to Agni, either when just about to be kindled (and thus still in the womb of the wood) or just kindled -- though occasionally to Soma. The referent here is most likely Agni. The phrase bhárad gárbham probably has two senses. On the one hand, it is an idiom meaning ‘be pregnant’, and the acc. extent of time śarádaḥ is appropriate to this sense: “(s/he) carried/carries the embryo for years.” Cf. V.2.2 pūrvī́r hí gárbhaḥ śarádo vavárdha “For the embryo grew for many years,” in a clear pregnancy context. The question then is who is the subject; I suggest the Earth, whose embryo it probably is (see below). On the other, this can refer to a particular ritual moment, when the Āhavanīya fire is taken out of the Gārhapatya and carried to the east to be set down (puróhita-) as the offering fire. In this reading the śarádaḥ may refer to the regular repetition of the ritual year after year, and the subject would be the priest, perhaps the human Hotar.

What I don’t understand in this pāda are the preverb/adposition/adverb ā́and the relevance of the earth (gen./abl. pṛthivyā́ḥ). The most likely explanation of ā́is that it is simply a preverb with bhárat, displaced to a position after the VP because the pattern of -at injunctives in this hymn imposes pāda-initial position on bhárat. In that case the publ. tr. should be slightly emended to “He bears the embryo … here …” This seems to be the solution of Ge and Hoffmann [/WG], the latter two with clear “herbei,” though no one comments on it. However it is possible that ā́should be construed with śarádaḥ or even pṛthivyā́ḥ, though I do not see a way to make that work. As for pṛthivyā́ḥ, I take it as a gen. with gárbham “embryo of the earth,” though Agni is usually called the embryo of the plants or of the waters. Perhaps Agni is the embryo of the earth because the plants in which he is immanent are themselves products of the earth. As noted above, in the pregnancy reading of bhárad gárbham I take the unexpressed subj. to be the Earth herself. In the ritual reading “embryo of the earth” may signal the fact that the new Āhavanīya fire is being transported in a clay pot.

In c Ge and Re identify the horse neighing while being led as Agni; this would fit nicely with my hypothesis that b depicts the carrying of the Āhavanīya fire to the east, though neither of them takes b that way. Ge also identifies the bellowing cow of c as the Speech (vā́k) of d, which seems reasonable.


## 04
Old begins his n. on this verse with the cheerful comment “Wohl hoffnungslos,” and it is well to bear this in mind. The difficulties are located in the first pāda, which is seriously deficient in syllables (at best 9, probably 8), has a bad cadence, and contains a hapax á/ā́ṣatarā at which all tr. and comm. throw up their hands. The line is probably corrupt, and my attempts to fix it should be read with skepticism. The meter can be ameliorated by assuming a haplology of acc. pl. kárma adjacent to the identical verb, 1st pl. karma: tā́<kárma> karma (or tā́karma <kárma>). [I now see that a similar haplology is proposed by WG in the n. to this passage.] (For a less dramatic proposed haplology in Agastya’s oeuvre, see comm. ad I.180.3.) If we detach á/ā́ṣatarā from sandhi with the preceding word (contra HvN’s karmā́ṣatarā), the line would have eleven syllables, though it still would have an irreparably bad cadence.

As for á/ā́ṣatarā, the only (more or less) clear thing about it is that it is a comparative in -tara-, probably agreeing with tā́. Ge [/WG] refuses to tr. it -- though in their n. WG render the passage tentatively as “Diese (Opfer)werke haben wir für ihn (gerade) zu den gesprenkelteren (bunter) gemacht.” I do not understand what they are doing with áṣatarā, though the rest of the tr. reflects the haplology proposal above. Re tr. “plus forts,” but without a note his reasons for this are lost; in his introduction to AiG I (p. 59) he comments that the word is “sans doute corrompu.” AiG I.239 tr. ‘annehmbarer’ without further explanation and floats the possibility of “nicht rein ai. Ursprungs,” a suggestion that Kuiper takes as fact (Aryans, 25).

Mayrhofer refuses to speculate. I suggest, very tentatively, that it may be a dissimilated form of *ā́ṣṭa-tara- ‘more obtainable’, built to the ppl. aṣṭa- to √(n)aś + ā́. The initial long vowel in my reconstruction is contra the Pp., but the preverb ā́is necessary to account for the initial accent and it is also the case that the ppl. to √(n)aś does not seem to appear uncompounded in Vedic.

If this gossamer suggestion is correct, then the first two pādas outline a twostep strategy: we have first perfomed the easier ritual requirements in a, but more concentrated attention is needed, and in b those fixated on the gods advance the ritual activities. The second half-verse predicts that Indra will look favorably on these efforts and will come to our ritual.


## 05
In its contexts sátvan- clearly refers to a successful warrior, but it is of course a possessive -van-stem to the neut. pres. part. to √as ‘be’, whose participle, lit.

‘being’, often has the extended sense ‘actually being’ à ‘real’. I take the semantic dev. of sátvan- to be a slangy ‘having the real stuff’, ‘the real thing’. Cf. the similar Engl. expression “the right stuff,” the title of a novel by Tom Wolfe (and the movie based on it) about the astronauts in the space program. For another conjunction of śū́ra- and sánt- see 7a below.

Where to put maghávā is a minor question, since word order could support grouping it with śū́raḥ (Ge, WG), separating it from both śū́raḥ and ratheṣṭḥā́ḥ (Re), or grouping it with ratheṣṭhā́ḥ (me). What I am now certain of is that making maghávā the primary focus of the rel. cl., with ratheṣṭhā́ḥ an adjunct, as I do in the publ. tr. (“who is a benefactor, standing upon his chariot”), is wrong, since the parallel relative clauses name Indra in various combat roles. I would now change my tr. to “who is a bounteous chariot-fighter” or “who is a chariot-fighter, a benefactor.” The acc. pl. pf. part. vavavrúṣaḥ simply shows perseveration of the redupl.

syllable (so also Kü p. 456) for expected *va-vr-uṣ-. The additional reduplicating syllable may have been added because the root syllable is swallowed up in the weak stem of the participle.


## 06
Pāda-final bhū́mā with long -ā must nonetheless be sg., as Old points out.


## 07
For -ín-stem superlative prapathíntama-, found also in VI.31.5, and prápatha- (4x, incl. nearby I.166.9), to which it is built, see comm. ad I.166.9.

Pāda c is problematic. The standard tr. take kṣonī́ḥ as subject, but this is grammatically problematic: kṣoní/ī́- is fem., but the subj. of c is the most likely referent of masc. yé in d. The gender disagreement disturbs both Ge and Old; the best solution they can come up with is a constructio ad sensum. I therefore take kṣoṇī́ḥ as acc. pl. The problem then is the absence of a verb -- a problem also for those who take kṣoṇī́ḥ as nom. Ge uses the infinitive paritaṃsayádhyai from b, but I am reluctant to assume that kind of enjambement. Both Re and WG seem to do without a verb, allowing pāda c to dribble off unfulfilled into the rel. cl. of d. I supply a verb like ‘direct, send’, with no confidence in its correctness. As for the subj., I take it to be the warriors referred to by samátsu … satā́m in pāda a, although Old considers this gekünstelt. If, on the other hand, kṣoṇī́ḥ is the subj., I would tr. “the battle cries [=opposing sides] (call out) to Indra …” Ge takes sūríṃ cid as a simile, with cid as the simile marker. As I’ve said elsewhere, I don’t believe that cid ever has that function, a view in which I am joined by Old, I’m happy to say. (See his remarks on this passage.) The point here is rather that the people call upon Indra as a fighter in battle, but also call him a patron when he distributes the prizes won in battle: he fills both roles.


## 08
Ge’s assessment that the vs. refers to the mixing of soma with water (a) and milk (b) seems correct. As often in soma contexts, the rhetoric is high-flown and the real-world references indirect.

The āsú of b must anticipate the cow(s) of c; it is presumably accented because its referent has not yet appeared in the discourse.

Both Ge and Re endow the gerundive jóṣyā with caus. pass. value ‘to be satisfied’ (“Jede zu befriedigende Kuh,” “Toute vache propre à être satisfaite”), but even the “causative” joṣáyate doesn’t have this value, but simply means ‘enjoys’.

The cows are surely there for Indra to enjoy them, not for him to labor to give them enjoyment.

Note that the idiom ánu √mad ‘applaud’ found in anumádanti in 7d is broken down into its components, with mádanti in our pāda b and ánu in c.

My tr. of dhiṣā́follows that of Pinault given orally at the Vedic Workshop at Univ. Texas, 2007.


## 09
The yáthā purpose clauses of this vs. are to be roughly construed with the initial evā́of 8a.

Inspired by Ge, I read instr. ena in two different ways, as accompaniment in pāda a and as indirect agent in b.

Note also the decomposed narā́ṃ ná śáṃsaiḥ (also 10a) recalling nárā-śáṃsa-.

For further disc. of these expressions see comm. ad II.34.6 and VI.24.2.

The curious hapax vandane-ṣṭhā́- ‘standing on praise’ must be a play on the phonologically similar, likewise hapax vandhure-ṣṭhā́- ‘standing on the chariot box’ (III.43.1), which is modeled on the venerable rathe-ṣṭhā́- ‘standing on the chariot’, two forms of which appear earlier in this hymn (4d, 5b).

The part. náyamāna(ḥ) is identical to the form in 3c, but there the part. is clearly passive, and here such a reading is well-nigh impossible to impose. WG’s tr.

has a self-beneficial meaning, “indem er (seine) Preissprüche mit sich führt,” but even that seems contextually difficult -- although I guess any praises Indra “leads” are ultimately for him. For leading song, see gāthā-nī́- (I.190.1 [also Agastya],VIII.92.2), the latter also of Indra.


## 10
The vs. describes the competition between rival sides (either in battle or in ritual or both) to secure Indra for their side. I take it as depicting much the same situation as in vs. 7 (esp. 7b), where Indra is the object of a tug-of-war (paritaṃsayádhyai). I therefore interpr. Indra also as the target. of madhyāyúvaḥ ‘seeking (one) in the middle’ in 10d, contra Ge (/WG) for whom Agastya is the middle-man, the mediator.

My interpr. of the vs. requires some rearrangement of the elements, most particularly the phrase narā́ṃ ná śáṃsaiḥ, which I construe with the simile in c -- parallel to yajñaíḥ in the frame in d. Although this displacement may seem radical, neither Ge’s “Im Wetteifer geratend wie durch das Lob der Herren …” (sim. WG) nor Re’s “(Soyons) en rivalité comme par l’effet des paroles-qualifiantes des seigneurs …” makes any sense to me.

This passage is one of the comparatively few where a real modal value of the subjunctive might be preferable to the expectant future: “let/may Indra be ours,” rather than the publ. tr. “Indra will be ours.” Perhaps adjusting the English to “shall be ours” will do the trick. The subjunctive may express the speakers’ certainty that their sacrifices will be successful and exercise control over Indra’s actions. This seems to be the point of the next vs. ### 11
As indicated in the publ. intr., the syntax of this vs. mimics the meandering attributed to the finally successful sacrifice and the long road that brings a man home.

One of the striking features of the word order (at least in my interpr. and Ge’s) is that índram behaves almost like a Wackernagel’s Law clitic, in taking modified 2nd position in pāda a, though it is to be construed with ókaḥ … ā́kṛṇoti in cd. One factor that might impede that interpr. is that, as Old points out, the finite verb kṛṇoti in d is not accented, despite the hí in pāda a. Old feels that the end of the verse is no longer governed by hí. I would suggest rather that the rambling road the vs. has traveled from its beginning, including two complex similes, led the poet to forget or dismiss the hí with which he began.

I take juhurāṇá- to √hvṛ / hru ‘go crookedly, go astray’ (with Ge and Re, as well as Gr), rather than with √hṛ ‘be angry’ with Insler (JAOS 88, 1968), apparently followed by WG: “wenn es (das Opfer) auch erzürnt im Denken Umwege macht.” The parallel participle pariyán ‘going around, meandering’ supports this identification, and it is somewhat difficult to imagine why/how a sacrifice would be (or make) angry. Agastya uses the same participle in the same sense in I.189.1.


## 12
The first pāda, beginning with a mā́prohibitive, lacks a verb, but something like “(get) us (involved) / (drag) us (into)” is likely. Perhaps Agastya delicately omitted it to avoid insulting Indra too explicitly.

On avayā́ḥ and the verse in general see also Scar’s extensive disc. (404-6, esp.

406).


## 13
Pāda b could also be “find the way for us” (so Ge [/WG]). On the multivalence of vidaḥ see comm. ad I.42.7-9 and IX.20.3.

