+++
title = "174"

+++
Indra


## 01
All the standard tr. (also, e.g., Schlerath, Königtum 143, Hale Asura- 70, Oberlies ReligRV II.177) construe the rel. cl. yé ca devā́(ḥ) loosely (very loosely) with rā́jā (e.g., Ge “Du, Indra, bist der König über alle Götter,” which entails not only assuming that rā́jā can govern such a clause, but also ignoring the ca). Within the same general interpr. framework WG do try to account for the ca: “… der König über (alle), auch die die Götter sind.” This can all be avoided by interpr. the rel. cl. as part of the familiar syntagm “X and which Y,” but in an inverse version with the conjoined rel. cl. first (rather like the inverse Vāyav Indraś ca construction with the ca constituent first ): yé ca devā́ḥ, … nṝ́n. Re, fld by Klein (DGRV I.127), does interpret it as an “X and which Y construction,” but supplies a gen. “of mortals” with rā́jā: “… le roi (des hommes) et de (ceux) qui (sont) les dieux.” This is unnec.

because rákṣā can govern the conjoined NP. It is accented because it opens the pāda.

Another intricate “X and which Y” construction is found in vs. 3 (by my interpr).

WG unaccountably take rákṣā absolutely and construe nṝ́n with pāhí, which is ungrammatical because pāhí is accented; its object (asmā́n) follows.

Notice the openings of cd, #tváṃ sát(patir) …, #tváṃ sat(yó) …


## 02
The derivation of the 2nd sg. verb dánaḥ is unclear. Most (see EWA s.v. DAMI ) associate it one way or another with √dam ‘tame, subdue’ -- beginning with Sāy.’s gloss adamayaḥ. Old and Ge suggest that there is a by-root dan beside dam; Re (GLV 81) concurs that it belongs to a “fausse racine,” probably generated from athematic forms where the root-final would have been followed by an ending beginning with a dental (type 2nd-3rd sg. ágan to √gam). Bloomfield (153) suggests it’s a nonce blending of √dam and √han. I wonder if it is not the detritus of the expected 9th cl. pres. *damnā́ti, which would be cognate with nasal presents elsewhere in Indo-European and is the stem underlying attested damāyá- (< *d(a)mn-H-yé/ó-) and damanya-. In our 2nd sg. injunc., expected *damnā́s, the interior nasal cluster could have been simplified and the whole remodeled as a thematic form (unfortunately requiring also accent retraction). In fact, *damnā́ti might not be the expected form; a reconstructed *dm-ne-H-ti without restoration of a full-grade root syllable should yield *danā́ti, which would have lost its obvious root connection with √dam and could without too much difficulty be remodeled to the thematic stem we appear to have. The 9th class ramṇā́ti would have pursued a different remodeling path.

In a n. WG suggest an unlikely deriv. from √dā ‘divide’, with an *-énonominal suffix, hence “Der ist Abtrenner des nachlässig redenden Stammes,” taking the nominals as gen. sg. rather than acc. pl. (as is grammatically possible). The only advantage I see to this is that it works better with the ostensible 3rd sg. dárt in b, but there are other ways to handle that form.

As was just noted, the verb of b, pāda-final dart (√dṛ), appears to be a 3rd sg., in an otherwise 2nd sg. vs. It also ends in a (more or less) illicit cluster (-rt, with nonradical -t). With Old I assume that the original form was *daḥ (< *dar <*dar-s). A final -t was falsely restored, possibly redactionally, on the basis of the identical pāda in VI.20.10c, where the 3rd sg. is appropriate and the sandhi situation favors the retention of the -t.

Note the phonetic play in #rṇ̥ ór ... árṇā(ḥ)#.

Purukutsa is chronologically out of place here. Elsewhere he is a semihistorical figure, the father of Trasadasyu and a contemporary of Sudās, so Vrtra ̥ should be out of his league and his time period. But he does figure in VI.20.10, immediately after the pāda identical to our b: VI.20.10d hán dā́sīḥ purukútsāya śikṣan “He [=Indra] smote the Dāsa (clans), doing his best for Purukutsa,” where the action described can be contemporary (or in the immediate past) and therefore chronologically possible. I think it likely that Purukutsa has been imported from VI.20.10 to anticipate the more properly mythological Kutsa in vs. 5. These two agreements with VI.20.10 support each other and are good evidence for the dependence of our vs. on that vs. ### 03
Ge suggests that the śū́ra- in śū́rapatnīḥ ‘whose lord is a champion’ is Indra himself, which seems correct.

Ge (/WG) takes vṛ́taḥ … dyā́ṃ ca as the conjoined obj. of ájā ‘drive’; the two objects are then picked up by yébhiḥ (Ge: “Führe die Heere … und den Himmel, mit denen …”). The problem (besides the question of whether it’s possible or desirable to drive heaven anywhere) is that vṛ́taḥ is fem. pl. and dyā́m is masc. sg., and yébhiḥ is neither one. I follow Old’s interpr., also adopted by Re, that sees an “X and which Y” constr. -- with the twist that the ca does not follow the rel. prn. (as in yé ca devā́ḥ in 1a), but precedes it, with another part of the rel. cl. fronted around it (dyā́ṃ ca yébhiḥ).

By either interpr. the rel. cl. lacks a verb. Old, Re, and I supply ‘gain, conquer’ with heaven as obj. (And in keeping with the constant theme of these Agastya hymns, I assume the referent of yébhiḥ is the Maruts; Old simply “die Leute”; Re doesn’t specify.) Ge [/WG] “verbündet bist,” which seems kind of lame.

Initial rákṣo in c is Pragṛhya in the Pp., presumably 2nd sg. impv. rákṣa + u.

The standard tr. take aśúṣaṃ tū́rvayānam as two PNs, but I see no reason to.

As noted in the comm. ad I.101.2, aśúṣa- is otherwise only used of the demon Śuṣṇa, but this strong association surely results from their phonetic similarity. Semantically it fits Agni quite well. As for tū́rvayāna- it is sometimes a PN (e.g., I.53.10), but its first member must be based on the verb stem tū́rvati ‘go in triumph’ vel sim., and the literal sense of the compound is appropriate for Agni. See the very similar analytic phrase VI.15.5 tū́rvan ná yā́man “like the one going in triumph on his course,” where Agni is the referent.

There is difference of opinion on how the simile works in d. Flg. Old, Re, and the line of least resistance, I resupply the verb rákṣa from c, maintaining Indra as subj., compared to a lion. Ge (/WG) take the subj. as Agni and then must supply another verb, not available in the context. This seems like too much machinery to me, since the pāda is readily interpretable on the syntactic pattern in c.


## 04
Ge takes ab as a direct quote (uttered by unidentified speakers). He presumably does this because of the difference in tense/mood (subjunctive vs. injunctive) and person (2nd vs. 3rd) between ab and cd. But since such switches are common in the RV, the direct speech does not seem necessary or contextually supported.


## 05
One of the few “future imperatives” in the RV: vṛhatāt in c, following váha in pāda a. Ge and Re also supply an impv. in b (“lenke,” “attele”), but this pāda makes a fine nominal clause (so also Hoffmann, Inj., 190).


## 06
This vs. joins Indra’s overwhelming aggressive power with the moral force of the three principal Ādityas. Those who offend against the strictures of the Ādityas get utterly destroyed by Indra, in a partnership that one might expect to be more prominent in the RV; X.89.9, adduced by Old, shows the same cooperative enterprise in clearer form.

I take the pf. part. jaghanvā́n here as the equivalent of a pluperfect (in the English grammatical sense), a past anterior, since there are no finite forms with that function.

The standard tr. take both mitréru- and codá- as PNs. This is certainly the easy, and tempting, way out. But both can be (and in my opinion should be) given lexical weight. The easier one is codá-, a transparent derivative of √cud ‘bestir, incite’. Gr’s interpr. of the compound (< Roth), that codá- ‘inciting, goading’ is used of soma, makes good sense in context, since Indra performs his feats of strength under the influence of soma.

As for mitréru-, my interpr. is based on, but modifies, Old’s suggested mitrāī́ru- “die Mitra (zur Rache ihrer Treulosigkeit) in Bewegung setzen.” He seems to envision the god Mitra being sent to punish the disloyal, but those who send Mitra to effect this punishment should be on the side of good, not subject to Indra’s smiting as here. I take mitra- here as the common noun ‘ally” and the -īr(u)- as expressing a hostile dispatching of their erstwhile allies. Both those who dishonor their alliances in this way and those who lack piety (ádāsūn, b) violate the norms of Ārya society that are overseen by the Ādityas.

Although of the trio of principal Ādityas only Aryaman is named in this vs., Mitra lurks in the compound just discussed. Varuṇa, unnamed, is present along with Mitra in the dual pronoun ayóḥ (in sácāyóḥ). Although the Pp reads āyóḥ and Ge accepts this reading (though see his n. 6c), I follow Old’s alternative analysis (so also Re, WG) and his identification of the two as Mitra and Varuṇa. I assume that “saw before them Aryaman with those two” implies that the evil-doers have a vision of the three Ādityas sitting in judgment (vel sim.) before Indra destroys them.

śūrtá- presumably belongs with śṛṇā́ti, etc., though the vocalism is surprising; we would expect *śīrta-, like AV śīṛṇá-. [Add ref. to Clayton, when there is one.]


## 07
As often in a mythological context, kaví- by itself seems to refer to Uśanā Kāvya. The previous mention (vs. 5) of Kutsa, often associated with UK, supports this assumption.

arkásātau probably has a double sense. In the ritual context the arká- are the chants (see nearby I.176.5), but in the mythological context supplied by vs. 5 (esp. c), it can be the rays of the sun. So VI.26.3, which contains both UK and Kutsa.

“Making earth a pillow” is surely a euphemism for sending him to “his eternal rest,” “putting him to sleep” among other such sayings. The “woeful womb” of d is a similar expression. Both remind us of 4a “they will now lie in the same womb,” clearly also referring to the grave.

Ge tentatively takes the referent of fem. “three” (tisráḥ) as rivers, and he is followed by Re and WG. Although this identification handles the gender and the fact that the adj. dā́nucitra- (3x) is once used of waters (V.31.6), it runs into the problem that the canonical number of rivers is seven, not three. It is rather the divisions of the world/earth that are regularly triadic; cf. fem. tisráḥ prthiv ̥ ī́ḥ (I.34.8), tisró bhū́mīḥ (II.27.8). Although “bright with drops” may not be the most natural way of referring to the three worlds, I think the numerology trumps the adjective -- which could, in fact, mean ‘bright with gifts’, not ‘drops’.

Ge takes the loc. mṛdhí as parallel to loc. duryoṇé (“in ein böses Nest, in Missachtung”), and as so often he is followed by Re and WG; all of them also take kúyavācam as a PN. But given mṛdhrávācaḥ ‘of scornful speech’ in 2a, it seems better to give kúyavāc- lexical value and construe it with mṛdhí.


## 08
There is much disagreement about the first hemistich because of the uncertain grammatical identity of several forms as well as a sandhi problem in pāda a and a hapax in b. Let us begin with the sandhi problem. The clear neut. pl. sánā tā́ “those old (things [=deeds?])” that opens the verse seems rhetorically paired with návyā ‘new’ towards the end of the pāda, but in its sandhi situation, before vowelinitial ā́guḥ, návyā should underlyingly end in -āḥ, a masc. nom. pl. or fem. nom./acc. pl. (so Pp). Most standard tr. try to reflect this sandhi one way or another: Ge takes the ref. to be nábhaḥ in b, which he takes as a fem. pl. root noun nábh-. But “These are your old (deeds). New (clouds) have come” is, with all due respect to Ge, absurd.

Old takes both sáhaḥ and nábhaḥ of b (with better semantics than ‘clouds’ -- viz., “neue Siege und Berstungen”) as the referent of návyā(ḥ), though he does show some sympathy with Gr’s suggestion that návyā is the neut. pl. we want, in hiatus. Re supplies “hymns” with návyā(ḥ) … nábhaḥ, which has no contextual support. Only WG, at least by implication, allow the neut. pl. interpr.: “Alt sind diese deine (Heldentaten), o Indra. Neue sind (gerade) (hinzu)gekommen.” I think this is the only sensible way to interpret the passage: rhetorical patterning outweighs sandhi. The same hiatus of návyā before a vowel is found in V.29.15 yā́… návyā ákarma, where two vss. before (V.29.13) yā́… návyā kṛṇávaḥ essentially guarantees the neut. pl.

interpr.

The fem. pl. interpr. of návyā(ḥ) is even less likely if sáhaḥ and/or nábhaḥ are not taken as fem. pl. root nouns. As already noted, Old does so take them, and Ge has the same analysis of nábhaḥ, but not sáhaḥ, which he appears to take as a 2nd sg. verb in imperatival usage. Re takes nábhaḥ as a fem. pl. adj. and sáhaḥ as the neut. sg. of the s-stem; for WG sáhaḥ is a nom. pl. fem. to a root noun and nábhaḥ a gen. sg., also to a root noun, dependent on áviraṇāya. The lack of agreement on basic grammatical identity almost reminds us of the interpretive chaos created by the Old Avestan Gāthas. For my part I take both sáhaḥ and nábhaḥ as 2nd sg. injunctives -- sáhas as the only act. finite form of the thematic stem sáha- (though cf. part. sáhant-), which is fairly well attested in the middle; nábhaḥ as the act. transitive corresponding to med. intransitive 3rd pl. impv. nábhantām “let them burst,” found esp. in the famous Nābhāka refrain (VIII.39-42). The fact that the next two pādas (8c, 8d) open with 2nd sg. injunctives (bhinát and nanámaḥ respectively) and that I.173 is characterized by pāda-initial 3rd sg. injunctives (see comm. above) supports the verbal interpr.

As for the rest of pāda b, I supply ‘strongholds’ (púraḥ) from pāda c with pūrvī́ḥ, as in, e.g., I.63.2, II.14.6. The hapax áviraṇa- I take as containing ráṇa- ‘joy’ / ‘battle’, with both meanings in play in the cmpd. The form contains both the privative a- and what I consider a pleonastic ví, both meaning ‘without’. Although these elements might be expected to cancel each other out (“not without joy/battle”), I think the ví is included to allow a buried pun on avī́ra-, suggesting “for their unmanning” in addition to “for lack of joy / for non-battle [=end of battle].” The godless are supplied from the 2nd hemistich.

After the travails of ab, the rest of the verse is fairly straightforward. I supply víśaḥ ‘clans’ with ádevīḥ on the basis of the occurrence of this expression elsewhere (e.g., VI.49.15) and take bhídaḥ (which, unlike the two -aḥ forms in b, I do interpr as the acc. pl. of a root noun) as a kind of proleptic cognate acc. with bhinát: “split … into smithereens.” I would in fact now substitute this more colorful expression for the publ. tr. “split into pieces.”


## 09
This vs. is identical to VI.20.12. This connection, in addition to the identical pāda I.174.2b=VI.20.10c establishes a relationship between the two hymns that makes the dependence of dart in our 2b on the one in VI.20.10c more likely.

The apparent -si impv. betrays its origins as an s-aor. subjunctive by appearing here in a subordinate clause, where impvs. are not licit.

