+++
title = "176"

+++
Indra


## 01
Pāda b contains a pleasing if elementary figure índram indo vṛ́ṣā viśa.

śátrum opening d is neatly positioned so that it can serve as obj. both to invasi and to vindasi; note that these verbs rhyme and their root syllables are almost mirror images of each other.


## 02
The syntax of the simile in cd is surprisingly intricate. First, though ánu svadhā́m [/svadhā́m ánu] is a common syntagm (“following / in accord with (one’s) independent will,” e.g., I.33.11, 88.6, 165.5), the two words are not to be construed together here (sim. V.34.1). However, their common association probably accounts for the displacement of the rel. yám to the right of svadhā́even though ánu governs yám. Further, though yávam ‘grain’ in the simile logically matches svadhā́in the frame (at least in my interpr.), they are in different cases: nom. and acc. respectively (yáva- is masc. and must be acc.). The acc. is due to the fact that yáva- is several times obj. of √kṛṣ ‘plough’ (I.23.15, VIII.22.6). Thus, though, given the way Sanskrit similes work (with the verb held constant and the nominal elements matched), yávashould be nominative, the presence of the part. cárkṛṣat ‘ploughing’ has attracted it into the acc. appropriate to the obj. of that verb. The various tr. treat this difficult construction in various ways, but mostly bleach or manipulate the meaning of the pass. upyáte in ways that seem illegitimate to me -- starting with Gr, who glosses ánu … upyáte first as ‘sich jemandem nachwerfen’ but then waters this down to ‘nachgehen, nacheilen’. Ge’s “dem die Svadhā nachzieht” essentially follows Gr’s lead, an interpr. that makes nonsense of the simile (“wie der pflügende Stier der Gerste”), since the animal ploughing does not follow the sown grain but necessarily precedes it. (Without a ploughed furrow, there’s no place to sow.) WG give upyáte its due lexical value, but this again twists the simile into semantic knots: as with Ge’s interpr. the nom. bull (vṛ́ṣā) is made parallel to nom. svadhā́in syntactically satisfactory fashion, but this means that the bull is being sown, which is not at all semantically satisfactory: “dem hinterher die Svadhā gesät wird, wie der Stier der die Gerste pflügt.” Only Re seems to manage both syntax and sense, though his tr.

introduces considerable machinery: “lui derrière qui (sa propre) autonomie est semée comme (on fait en) labourant (le champ d’) orge, (lui que est) le dieu mâle.” What the hemistich is conveying is another issue. I do not understand how svadhā́- can be strewn. The picture evoked by the simile is of a powerful bull (not the usual plough-animal -- ideally they are more docile) pulling a plough, with lavish amounts of grain being scattered in the resulting furrow. It could be that the svadhā́- refers to the autonomous power of others, which gives way to (/is strewn down after) the progress of Indra the bull. Or his own svadhā́- is metaphorically sown to bear fruit in due course. But neither of these explanations do I find convincing.


## 03
On the specific nuance of spāśáyasva, with the root variant spaś (versus paś, so common in páśyati) and middle voice (again, versus páśyati), see Jamison (-áya-, 167).


## 04
I take sūríś cid ohate as logically concessive, with this value signaled by cid, although I would prefer an accented verb.


## 05
This vs. has elicited an extraordinary amount of discussion and disagreement, which cannot be fully rehearsed here. I will only sketch my own interpr., which is closest to Old’s. I take the ā́vaḥ that opens the verse as the verb of the main clause and the only surface word of that clause. The obj. ‘him’ (*tám), referent of the following rel. prn., has been gapped, exactly as in 3c. The cmpd. sānuṣák in b I analyze as sā́nu-ṣác- (rather than sa-ānuṣák- with Gr and others); it is a reference to soma, which famously grows in the mountains. For detailed disc. of the cmpd and the passage see Scar (594), though I cannot follow his suggestion that the 2nd member belongs to √sañj ‘hang’ and refers to a quiver ‘hanging on the back’.

In d the publ. tr. “helped him to prizes” goes a little too fluently into English.

The loc. vā́jeṣu might better be taken as the usual truncated loc. absol. “when prizes (were at stake).” Most other tr. take c with ab, with d separate, whereas I attach c to d. There is no way to tell, but I think the contrast set up here is between the ritual (signalled by the loc. arkéṣu “at the chants”), where Indra will receive what he wants (soma), and the contest (ājaú), where Indra’s client will do so.

