+++
title = "178"

+++
Indra


## 01
The crucial word śruṣṭí- is ambiguous: it may refer to the attentive hearing Indra gives to our praises and desires or to the obedience (based on our “attentive hearing”) that we have shown towards Indra. The publ. tr. reflects the first possibility, but I think both may be meant, though Indra’s role as a hearer in 3b may support the first interpr. The other exx. of śruṣṭí- are not clearly diagnostic.

Ge takes “us” (naḥ) as the implicit obj. of maháyantam (“der uns gross macht”), but maháya- ordinarily takes a god (indeed ordinarily Indra) as obj., and most tr. so render it.

For the difficult phrase páry ā́pa āyóḥ, see publ. intro. It is variously rendered in the standard tr.


## 02
See publ. intro. for the mismatch in b between the dual subj. svásārā and the pl. verb kṛṇávanta, with the possible semantic explanations given there (multiple days and nights or multiple fingers on the two hands). It’s also worth noting that the verb we expect, the middle 3rd dual athematic subjunctive, may not have been thoroughly anchored in the poets’ Sprachgefühl, since relatively few such forms are attested to any stem type. We should expect *kṛṇávaite (or -ete), which is not found, though we once get kṛṇvaíte (VI.25.4) with the wrong grade of the suffix. In the absence of a firmly established form in this slot in the paradigm, the poet may have opted to fall back on a more familiar and easily generated one, the 3rd pl.

Gr assigns aveṣan to a separate root √viṣ ‘sich ergiessen’, not to the wellattested √viṣ ‘labor’. This division is tentatively accepted by Mayrhofer (EWA s.v. VEṢ), argued for by Narten (s-aor., 245), and accepted by Gotō (1st class, 299). The tr.

of both Ge and WG reflect this analysis, though Re’s does not. Since ‘labor, toil’ works fine for the three forms that Gr assigns to this other root (nearby I.181.6 and VIII.75.11 in addition to this one) and for the one added by Narten (X.114.1), I see no reason to make the separation.

Ge unaccountably tr. sakhyā́váyaś ca as instr. The reasons he gives (n. 2d) seem insufficient, esp. as a conjoined acc. phrase makes perfect sense.


## 03
For the odd position of ca see Klein DGRV I.75.

