+++
title = "179"

+++
Agastya and Lopāmudrā


## 01
The first hemistich contains a predicated perfect participle śaśramāṇā́.

## 01-02
The final pādas of these two verses depict a neatly contrasting sexual conjunction, with the males serving as subject of the first version and the wives the second. The pādas are almost identical (an effect difficult to convey in English), with only the initial preverb in tmesis and the form of ‘bulls’ differing, since the form of “wives,” though acc. in 1d and nom. in 2d, is the same: 1d ápy ū nú pátnīr vṛ́ṣaṇo jagamyuḥ 2d sám ū nú pátnīr vṛ́ṣabhir jagamyuḥ Both seem to convey a legalistic prescriptive force. See disc. ad X.10.3.


## 03
I take the first two of the three 1st du. subjunctives (b abhy áśnavāva, c jáyāva, d abhy ájāva) as hortatory, with the third, in a subordinate clause, as future in value.

Pāda d has been variously interpreted. The major issue is what (if anything) is the object of abhy ájāva, a problem made slightly more acute by the fact that abhí is not otherwise found with √aj until the ŚB (see Ge n. 3cd), making it likely that it owes its abhí to the parallel verb in 3b, abhy áśnavāva. Thieme’s solution (Gedichte 76) is the most radical: he makes the duals samyáñcā mithunaú the object: “wenn wir die beiden [Heer-]Hälften dem gleichen Ziel entgegenführen,” seeing Agastya and Lopāmudrā as leading two different wings of a metaphorical army. This is not impossible, but the fact that the duals are so appropriate to be the dual subject makes assigning them elsewhere seem somewhat perverse. Other tr. suggest other objects: Ge, on the basis of ŚB II.3.3.16, supplies ‘ship’, Re (and WG) ‘chariot’ (WG ‘Rennwagen’). Re tentatively specifies “le char de la vie?”; I would suggest rather the chariot of the sacrifice, given that that image is extremely common and that Agastya seems to be trying to redirect Lopāmudrā’s energy into ritual pursuits.

However, I’m not sure that any object needs to be supplied; the publ. tr. reflects an absolute usage ‘drive on’. Another small issue is the sense of mithunaú. For Insler (Vedic mith, 165), it is used contrastively with samyáñcā: “if we, who are now opposed, shall race on in harmony.” But the standard use of mithunaú to refer to the complementary oppositional halves of a pair, esp. a married couple, makes this otherwise appealing reading less likely.


## 04
As noted in the publ. intro., with the Anukramaṇī and Sāyaṇa as well as Thieme, I take Agastya as the speaker of this vs., contra the standard modern assignment to Lopāmudrā (Ge, Re, Doniger, WG). The question is of some importance, because it determines the identity of the “me” whom desire has overcome. I see the verse as expressing Agastya’s sudden surrender to his own latent and then aroused sexual desire; others must see Lopāmudrā as continuing to assert her desire as in vss. 1-2 to the chaste Agastya. But in that case I don’t see how the sex would have taken place, since Agastya was unwaveringly against it in vs. 3.

Certainly assigning it to Agastya makes for a more psychologically complex portrait.

Crucial to the interpr. that assigns the verse to Lopāmudrā is the syntactic function of the gen. phrase nádasya … rudhatáḥ and the meaning of the part.

rudhánt-. In the Lopāmudrā-speaker view the genitive is an objective genitive: “lust for the náda- rudhánt- has come to me [=Lopāmudrā].” The participle then belongs to √rudh ‘obstruct’ and refers either to Agastya’s ascetic self-control by withholding his semen (Ge flg. Sāy, Doniger) or to his warding off the importunate advances of his wife (WG). In the Agastya-speaker view the genitive is subjective and the participle belongs to √rudh ‘grow, mount’. Although Re claims that ‘grow’ is “faiblement attesté” for rudh, “feebly” isn’t “not,” and in any case the attestation is more robust than Re seems to recognize. With the ‘grow, mount’ meaning, nádasya … rudhatáḥ is a pun: the mounting bull (nadá-) and the growing reed (likewise nadá-), with the latter a metaphor for the penis. For a somewhat indecisive disc. of the possible meanings of the phrase see Old.


## 05
As Thieme points out, the last pāda, “for of many desires is mortal man,” bears the mark of a popular saying, with the l-form pulu- in place of standard puru- ‘many’ in pulu-kā́maḥ. pulu- is found only once elsewhere in the RV, in pulv-agháin the Vṛṣākapi hymn (X.86.22), which also belongs to a more vernacular register.

