+++
title = "180"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
Contra Ge (/WG) I supply ‘honey’ as the obj. of pruṣāyan on the basis of IV.43.5 … mádhu vām pruṣāyan, etc.; it can be recovered contextually from pāda d.


## 02
This is a difficult verse to construe, primarily because of the anomalous yád that ends pāda a. It cannot (or should not) mark that pāda as a subordinate clause because the verb nakṣathaḥ is unaccented. But if it is taken as marking what immediately follows as a subordinate clause, this is awkward at best, because the gen. phrase of b should simply specify the gen. átyasya in a. The Ge (/WG) solution is to supply an acc. goal for nakṣathaḥ (“Schnelligkeit”), which is picked up by the yád and the following genitive phrase: “reach (the speed) of the steed, which (speed) (is) of the …” Old suggests that the yád that should subordinate pāda d has simply been stuck in early at the end of pāda a for metrical reasons -- an unlikely tyro’s error for a skilled poet like Agastya and an interpretational hypothesis that essentially tells us that all bets are off in Rigvedic syntax. This is not a worthy representative of Old’s usual acumen. Re suggests either the Ge solution or an anticipation of the yád of c.

There is a much simpler solution, which avoids these syntactic contortions and also avoids the need to supply an acc. goal with nakṣathaḥ or to allow áva √nakṣ to take a goal in the genitive. The solution is to take yád (/yát) as the substantivized neuter NA sg. of the present participle to √i ‘go’ (‘going’ à ‘movement’); for a similar interpr. see āyát in III.55.8 and also vs. 3c below. It is the goal of the verb, and the genitives of ab are dependent on it; there is then no syntactic break between the pādas.

Contra Ge, I do not think that the first member of vípatman- is ví- ‘bird’, but, with Gr, etc., the preverb ví-. The lexeme ví √pat is found elsewhere, incl. in an Agastya hymn I.168.6.

Ge (sim. Gr, WG) suggests that the referent of the genitives is the Sonnenrosse or Dadhikrāvan. This does not fit spatially with the áva ‘down’ of áva nakṣathaḥ. I think rather of the ritual fire: Agni is often compared to an átya-; ‘of wide flight’ would well describe the movements of the newly kindled fire; although I could not identify an unambiguous example of nárya- referring to Agni, ‘belong to men, manly’ is a reasonable description of his role; as is práyajyu- ‘foremost at the sacrifice’, which is applied to Agni at III.6.2. Reference to the ritual fire also makes sense in the context of the second hemistich where Dawn escorts the Aśvins to the sacrifice and a ritual officiant (to be supplied) solemnly invokes (ī́ṭṭe) them. The root √īḍ is essentially restricted to such ritual situations.


## 03
The construction of this vs. is, if anything, even more challenging than the previous one, at least in its second half. As noted in the publ. intro., the first half concerns the favorite paradox of the “cooked” milk coming from the raw cow. My only deviation from the standard tr. is to take account of the odd position of áva in b, which I take to signal a transition from a general statement about the paradoxical nature of milk to a particular statement about the ritual situation. I re-supply adhattam with áva, but here it refers to the deposit of the ritual milk down on the ritual ground.

The problems lie in the 2nd hemistich, and the knottiest one is posed by the apparent mismatch between the case of the simile and its supposed correspondent in the frame. To allow Ge’s tr. to represent the standard, he takes yád in c as a neut. acc. referring to the milk of the previous hemistich and functioning as obj. to yajāte in d (roughly, “which (milk) the oblation-offerer sacrifices to you”). But the milk is also compared to the undoubted nominative phrase hvāró ná śúciḥ -- a discrepancy he attributes to “Der Nom. statt Akk. im Vergleich,” a false explanation that I hope I dispatched for good in my 1982 IIJ article on case disharmony in RVic similes (and which Thieme [KlSch 79-80 n. 4 = 1951: 8-9] also excoriates him for, though without an adequate alternative solution in my view). Another problem posed by this interpr. (even for those who deal with the simile in another way) is that it requires ‘milk’ to be the obj. of yájate with vām then an oblique case, but √yaj (without preverb) almost always takes an acc. of the divinity and an oblique case (generally instr.) of the offering substance. (Gr gives templates with acc. of the offering, but the passages supposedly conforming to them are few and far between.) Again, a more radical approach to the text can eliminate the problems without compromising the grammar. I suggest that yájate in d is not the verb of the rel. clause introduced by yád in c, but starts a new cl., consisting only of yájate havíṣmān -- a simple statement ending a complex verse. The verb is accented because it opens its clause. What precedes in cd is a nominal clause, with ‘milk’ as subject. It is possible to assume that there is no verb at all but a gapped copula, but I actually think that there is a haplologized present participle *yát following the rel. prn. yád (hence yád

*yád), again, as in vs. 2a, the neut. N/A pres. participle of √i ‘go’. Assuming a
haplologized monosyllable here fixes the meter, making a 10-syllable line into a proper Triṣṭubh, with an opening of 5 and a fine break and cadence. Hence, the milk “which (yád) is going (*yát) within (antár) the wooden cups (vanínaḥ).” With milk as a nominative subject, the nominative simile is grammatically impeccable, without (in the mode of Thieme [/WG]) having to apply it to the havíṣmān, which does not work well. I believe that the “blazing twisting” entity is an image of a snake, but refers to the snaking flames of fire, going into the woods. Thus vanínaḥ is read with both frame and simile. In the publ. tr. “is (now) going” should be marked with an asterisk.


## 04
This vs. also presents a number of difficulties. The easiest to deal with is avṛṇītam, the 2nd du. active imperfect, to the 9th class pres. to √vṛ ‘choose’, which is otherwise only middle. We should hypothetically expect middle *avṛṇāthām, but in fact, acdg. to Macdonell, no athematic present in Vedic attests such a form, whatever the present class. The 2nd /3rd ps. middle dual forms seem to have been avoided. and this active nonce form is probably modeled on 3rd singular medial impf. avṛṇīta, which is fairly common and occurs a number of times in just this metrical position, after an opening of 5 in trimeter verse. Ge (p. 258 n. 3) attributes the active voice to the fact that the Aśvins are choosing on behalf of someone else; this is an ingenious suggestion and merits consideration, but I think the formal problems tipped the balance.

The real crux in this vs. is eṣé, which has received almost as many analyses as there are RVic interpretors. For some of the various suggestions see Old ad loc., Ge’s n. 4ab, Re ÉVP XVI ad loc., Scar (60-61), Keydana (Inf. 236 n. 135); there is no space (and I have no patience) to discuss them all here. I take it as a dat. inf. to √iṣ ‘send’ + ā́, built directly to the root. This root identification may be supported by vs. 6 of the next hymn, I.181.6b pūrvī́r íṣaḥ … mádhva iṣṇán “sending many refreshing drinks of honey,” with similar sense.

I take the simile apó ná kṣódaḥ as obj. of this inf., parallel to the gharma drink that the Aśvins are sending here. With Gr, I take apáḥ as one of the rare sg. forms of áp- ‘water’, preserved here in what is almost a deconstructed compound. For the gen. with kṣódaḥ cf. I.112.12 kṣódasā-udnáḥ “with a gush of water.” As for the 2nd hemistich, against the standard interpr. (incl. Old), I take cd as a single clause. I supply “refreshing drinks” (íṣaḥ) as subj. of práti yanti with mádhvaḥ dependent on it (not a nom. pl., per Gr), on the basis of the phrase cited above from


## 06
with íṣaḥ … mádhvaḥ. The goal of práti yanti is vām in pāda c. I take páśvaiṣṭī with the simile, despite the pāda break and position of the simile particle: ráthyeva cakrā́is a fixed phrase with the iva firmly planted within (cf. X.10.7-8, 89.2, 117.5). As for the form, the Pp reads nom. sg. -iṣṭiḥ (apparently fld by Ge, WG, Scar); Gr suggests rather du. -iṣṭī. I also read -iṣṭī, but interpr. it as an instr. sg. or even as one of the rare loc. sg. -ī to -i-stems (see AiG III.155). The parallel stem gáviṣṭi- is primarily attested in the loc., though its sg. is the more orthodox gáviṣṭau (pl. gáviṣṭiṣu).


## 05
Yet another near impossible verse.

The standard tr. take gór óheṇa as a phrase (e.g., Ge “durch Anpreisung der Kuh(milch)”). This interpr. is favored by the adjacency of the two words and even more by the retroflexion in óheṇa, which must be triggered by the final -r or gór and speaks for a close syntactic bond. Nonetheless, in the publ. tr. I construe góḥ with dānā́ya (“for the giving of a cow”), in part because pāda d (in my interpr.) identifies the poet as lacking cattle and in part because “by praise of the cow” doesn’t make much sense as a way to attract the Aśvins. However, the close sandhi of gór óheṇa gives me pause, and I might change the publ. tr. to “With a laud of the cow might I turn you here for giving.” Thieme gives a complex, sensitive, and in many way appealing treatment of this vs. in KZ 92 (1978): 40-42. In the first hemistich he takes dānā́ya as ambiguous, between “for (our) giving (to you)” and “for (your) giving (to us).” The ambiguity is also reflected in his double reading of góróheṇa: with a division gó róheṇa (already suggested by Pischel), this can mean “by the rising of the milk” and refer to the boiling up of the milk offered to the Aśvins in the Pravargya ritual. With a division gór óheṇa it simply means “mit dem Ruf eines Rinde” and refers to the loud cry with which Bhujyu summoned the Aśvins. Given Agastya’s seemingly limitless verbal trickery, Thieme’s suggested double readings are certainly possible, though I wonder if gór óheṇa needs to be confined to the simile, rather than referring to the cry with which we attract the Aśvins.

The second hemistich is more contested. Most tr. take kṣoṇī́as dual acc, which it of course can be, with the fem. adj. mā́hinā the subject and wanting a referent: e.g., Ge (/WG) ‘help’ (ūtíḥ). I instead follow Thieme (and in fact Gr) in taking kṣoṇī́here as nom. sg., and I read mā́hinā in two ways, as nom. sg. with kṣoṇī́ and dual acc. with vām (Thieme only the latter). Thieme also takes all of the 2nd hemistich as referring to the story of Bhujyu, the Aśvins’ client whom they saved from the sea. This allows him to take apáḥ as ablative sg.: “a cry from the water,” where Bhujyu was languishing. I believe the Bhujyu reference is confined to pāda b, though Agastya’s extensive treatment of the story in nearby I.182.5-7 gives me pause and might lead me to reconsider. Meanwhile I take apáḥ in c as gen. sg., as in 4b. Note the similarity between 4b apó ná kṣódaḥ and 5c apáḥ kṣoṇī́. In my interpr., pāda c is parenthetical, describing the noise that attends the Aśvins’ journey, produced both by their quick progress in the chariot and by the cries of us ritualists seeking to bring them to us. I then take d as a return to the 1st sg. speaker of a(b) and supply the verb from pāda a, ā́… vavṛtīya “might I turn you here.” My interpr.

depends crucially on Thieme’s ingenious (and to me convincing) analysis of ákṣu- as ‘without cattle’, formed in opposition to kṣumánt- ‘having cattle’, and containing an underlying *p(a)śu-. (See EWA s.v. ákṣu2 ; Mayrhofer accepts this analysis.) The standard tr. are founded on ákṣu- ‘net’, found several times in the AV; Thieme allows the possibility of a second reading with the ‘net’ word, which seems a bit stretched.


## 06
As noted in the publ. intro., I take the 2nd hemistich as a punning depiction of the poet’s patron, anchored by two adjacent and rhyming verbs that have double readings, préṣad véṣad. The former is generally taken as the s-aor. subj. to √prī ‘please’ (Wh Rts, Gr, Narten [176], as well as the standard tr.), but it could also be assigned to prá √iṣ ‘send forth’ (pace Re, who explicitly rejects this analysis) and refer to the praiṣa- ‘ritual prompt’, a technical term in the later ritual but already reflected in the RV, at least in my view (cf. purupraíṣa- I.145.3 and comm. ad loc.). I think that both readings are present. Those who assign the form to √prī interpret it as an unusual intransitive / reflexive (“becomes pleased, pleases himself”), in contrast to the standard transitive use of the active forms of this root. But this is unnecessary.

The subject is the ritual patron (sūrí-), whose function is to distribute largesse to the poet and priests. It is used without object here to enable both the √prī and the prá √iṣ senses to be actualized. The same goes for the next verb véṣat. This latter verb is generally taken also as an s-aor. subjunctive, to √vī ‘pursue’ (e.g., Gr, Narten [246], as well as the standard tr.), and I agree that this is one of its readings. But I would also take it as an injunc. to √viṣ ‘toil’, two forms of which are found nearby (I.178.2, 181.6). The two injunctive forms “gives the prompt and toils” express activities strictly limited to ritual performance; the two subjunctives “will please and will pursue” remain tied to the ritual but express its larger goals: “will please (the poet and priests) and will pursue (the gods).” Pāda d expresses the redistribution of goods that characterizes the Vedic ritual system. The patron acquires goods, hence the ā́… dade ‘has taken’; in this case the vā́ja- ‘prize’ must be the ‘abundance’ (púraṃdhi-) sent by the Aśvins in b. The gods give these goods in response to the praises produced by the poets. The patron then distributes these acquisitions to his clients, here the ritual functionaries who prompted the gods’ gifts in the first place. There are several possible grammatical analyses of mahé, but the dominant mahé is the dat. sg. to the athematic stem máh-.

Given the patronage situation depicted, I take it as short for mahé *rā́dhase “for great (generosity),” as in I.139.6, II.41.6=VI.45.27, VIII.2.29, 24.10, 45.24, 64.12, 93.16.


## 07
The nonce verbal form vipanyā́mahe has attracted a remarkable amount of discussion; for a detailed and clear summary see Kulikov (-ya-presents, 143-46), though his passive/reciprocal interpr. I cannot follow. Insofar as there has been a standard analysis of it, it has been as a passive to √pan ‘admire’ (Wh Rts, reflected in Ge’s tr.), but other root associations and morphological analyses abound, which I will not discuss further. It belongs with a group of other, better-attested formations: fem. noun vipanyā́- and adj. vipanyú-, which I take as ‘admiration’ and ‘seeking/expressing admiration’ respectively. (This point was made forcefully by Thieme in Fs. Risch [1986: 165-66], though I do not follow his ultimately etymology.) (For a similar system, cf. vasūyá-(ti), vasūyā́-, vasūyú-.) I take vipanyā́mahe as a denominative -yá-verb associated with these nominal forms, derived from the root √pan (in my view); it is transitive in value and takes vām as object. With Thieme (an analysis fld. by subsequent interpr. Kulikov WG), I take the last part of pāda b, ví paṇír hitā́vān, as a separate nominal clause, but unlike these interpr. I take it as the main clause attached to the causal clause beginning in pāda a.

The phonological play of vipan(yā́mahe) ví paṇ(ír) clearly contributed to the word choice here, as Kulikov also notes. As for the sense of this hemistich, it simply rephrases the purport of vs. 6: because we singers are doing our job in the ritual economy by praising the gods, our patron is being generous to us and cannot be labeled a ‘niggard’.

## 07-08
The poet then turns to the Aśvins’ part in this system and in 7cd presents another causal clause, parallel to the one in ab. Note the parallel openings 7a vayáṃ cid dhí and 7c ádhā cid dhí. This subordinated causal expression continues into vs. 8, with another parallel causal clause occupying 8ab and introduced in a similar way: 8a yuvā́ṃ cid dhí. In my, admittedly complex, interpr. of these verses, the 1st plural singers of 7ab modulate into the single (3rd ps.) singer Agastya in 8cd; this modulation is eased by not naming him until we reach the triumphant main clause of 8cd, where he boasts of the great wealth he has acquired from his poetry -- just like the singers of 7ab. And the transition from 1st ps. singers to 3rd ps. singer is enabled by omitting both subj. and verb in 8ab, where a human ritualist or ritualists should be the agents (see below) but where the ps. and no. of any verb would be problematically telltale.

The series of causal clauses begins by highlighting the Aśvins’ benevolent participation in the ritual system (7cd) and then the complementary activity of the priest in summoning them to the sacrifice and offering to them first (8ab) -- before coming to the logical conclusion in 8cd: that Agastya has achieved his just reward and is himself acclaimed among men.

With the standard tr. I take anindyā in 7c as a predicted voc., with c and d separate clauses, as the double hí suggests.


## 08
Based on my interpr. of the structure of vss. 7-8, I supply Agastya as the subject of 8ab, which not only lacks an overt subject but also an overt verb, for the reasons sketched above. Ge supplies “(opferte er),” WG “(ruft man an)”; I favor something like the latter (my ‘summons’), on the somewhat fragile basis that yuvā́m is fairly frequently the obj. of √hū ‘call, summon’ (cf., e.g., I.47.4=VIII.5.17 yuvā́ṃ havante aśvinā).

Curiously enough prá does not appear with verbal forms of √sru ‘flow’, but the preverb probably indexes the ritual fact that Aśvins receive their offering at the Morning Pressing, the ritual event that leads off the soma offerings of the day.

vírudra- is a hapax and difficult (but what is not in this hymn?), but with Ge, etc., I take it as a bahuvrīhi ‘having Rudra (or rather the Rudras=Maruts) away’, referring to soma. As Ge hints (n. 8b), this probably is a reference to the Agastya - Indra - Marut cycle that forms such a dramatic part of Agastya’s oeuvre. It would refer in part simply to the fact that this is the Morning Pressing, and the Maruts receive their soma at the Midday Pressing. But also more specifically to the fact that whether the Maruts should have any part in the soma sacrifice and whether in particular they should have a share in Indra’s part were fraughtly disputed in those hymns. Agastya is in effect pointing out that there was never any question of the Aśvins having to share with the Maruts. (That by some accounts the Aśvins only got included in the soma sacrifice belatedly might make this a question that would exercise them.) The actual form, vírudra-, is reminiscent of the nominal clause ví paṇíḥ … “the niggard is away” in 7b.

Pāda c is fairly straightforward, and it is worth noting that prá √śaṃs here is used of a human (though not a king, unfortunately), reflecting what I think is its original domain. There is some debate about the value of citayat, which belongs to the functionally malleable stem citáya-. But in the absence of anything that could serve as an object, I take it as the intransitive it regularly is, ‘appear, be conspicuous’.

As for sahásraiḥ, everywhere else where it’s clear, this instr. pl. refers to cows or other countable forms of wealth (so also WG in n.), and I take it as indicating the reason for Agastya’s perceived prominence.

Yet another hapax troubles us: kā́rādhunī. Both Ge and WG refuse to tr. it.

But given the other intractable problems in this hymn, it seems one of the lesser issues. The 2nd member -dhuni- is surely dhúni- ‘noisy’ or probably, substantivized ‘noise, tumult’. It also seems reasonably possible to connect kā́rā- to kārú- ‘bard’ and assign it a tenative meaning ‘praise-song’ (so also EWA s.v. kārú-, citing also AiG II.2, etc.). The form in the text (with probable but not certain -ī final, so Pp.) can be an instr. sg. The remaining problem is the accent, which should make the cmpd a bahuvrīhi, a grammatical identity at odds with my tr. “with a tumult of praise-songs.” AiG II.1.221 simply says it has abnormal accent, and with nothing better to offer, I will simply allow Wackernagel the last word on that subject. I take this simile with what precedes (“proclaimed as if with …”) rather than what follows (“is conspicuous by thousands as if by …”). Its position would allow either, despite the pāda break.


## 09
The phrase sūríbhya utá vā is elliptical. Klein (DGRV II.171) suggests supplying ‘singers’, while I prefer ‘us’. Either is possible. Passages like sūríbhya gṛṇaté (II.4.9, VI.4.8) favor Klein, while those like V.16.5 yé vayáṃ yé ca sūráyaḥ favor my solution. The explicit 1st pl. in the next pāda (syāma) tips the balance in my opinion.


## 10
On the thematic and punning ring composition of this vs. with vs. 1, see the publ. intro.

In the finale of b, suvitā́ya návyam, návyam is at least superficially adverbial and works well in that guise. However it’s worth nothing that suvitā́ya návyase with two datives is found in Jagatī cadence in III.2.13, V.11.1, VI.71.3, IX.82.5, and I imagine that ours is simply adjusted to the demands of Triṣṭubh (though we should of course expect návyaḥ if this involved simple truncation).

