+++
title = "181"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
The 2nd du (un)ninītháḥ, with primary ending, is formally problematic. It is tentatively assigned to a redupl. pres. by Whitney, but there is otherwise no evidence for such a pres., while the pf. is well established. Macdonell (oddly) calls it a pf.

subjunctive, but the mood sign of the subjunctive is absent. It can’t be an example of simple avoidance of a paradigmatically shaky form, as in the case of *avṛṇāthām in the preceding hymn (I.180.4), because the expected pf. indic. ninyathuḥ is actually attested, with the same preverb (úd) and the Aśvins also as subject (I.116.8, 24). Kü suggests (280-81) that the form is aiming to be an injunctive (that is, I assume, an unaugmented pluperfect) meant to be distinguished from a putative imperative

*ninītám with 2ndary ending, and therefore it takes a primary ending (a solution
endorsed by WG). This seems needlessly complex and, pace Hoffmann (Injunc., 111), I find the notion that an injunctive would adopt primary endings for this purpose somewhat bizarre, since secondary endings are what define the injunctive. A simpler solution is to assume the form is a nonce present generated to ambiguous perfect forms like opt. ninīyāt (2x).

How to construe the genitives iṣā́ṃ rayīṇā́m and apā́m is another problem. I take them as parallel partitive genitives, roughly flg. Old, rather than taking the former pair as dependent on préṣṭḥau and the latter as a pseudo-ablative as Ge does.


## 03
The adjectival descriptor of the chariot ahampūrváḥ is transparently derived from a nominal clause “I am in front / I’m ahead,” however unlikely this may be as the utterance of a chariot.

The second hemistich consists entirely of a nominal relative clause referring to the chariot, with two vocatives, the phrasal vṛ́ṣṇa sthātārā “you mounters of the bull” in initial position and dhiṣṇi yā near the end. The latter is commonly used of the Aśvins (see, e.g., I.182.1c, 2a, in the next hymn). Here the voc. is followed by the rel.

pronoun yáḥ, which ends the clause. This is a remarkably odd position for a rel.

pronoun, and since this supposed rel. cl. consists of nominative qualifiers of the subject of the main clause, ráthaḥ, it need not have been a relative clause at all: the whole of the vs. could simply be a main clause. I think the yáḥ got stuck pleonastically on the end of this pāda to provide a monosyllable to make a Triṣṭubh cadence. (Cf. VI.63.6, a Triṣṭubh that ends dhiṣṇi yā vām, likewise with a final monosyllable.) No harm is done by this last-ditch conversion of the string of epithets in cd into a nominal rel. clause, but it is a metrically driven afterthought in my opinion. It should certainly not be taken as a standard ex. of rel. cl. word order.

The phrase mánaso jávīyān is an analytic version of manojū́- in 2c, there applied to the horses, not the chariot.


## 04
Yet another troublesome dual verb form: avāvaśītām. It is generally agreed (Wh Rts, Ge [more or less], Re, WG, Schaeffer [179-82], Kü [486-88]) that it belongs to the root √vāś ‘bellow’. (Gr assigns it to both √vaś ‘wish’ and √vāś without comment; for reff. to further lit. on this form see Schaeffer 181-82, Kü 487- 88.) But forms to that redupl. stem are overwhelmingly middle, while this form is active. Whether it is assigned to the intensive (Schaef.) or the pluperfect (Kü), we should expect a medial 3rd du. with secondary ending. However, as was already noted with regard to avṛṇītam in the immediately preceding hymn (I.180.4), athematic 2nd and 3rd medial duals are simply not attested, and in that case the 2nd du. active form was substituted. I think the same thing happened here, and there is therefore no reason to construct specifically active semantics for this form, as do WG.

Ge (fld. by Re and WG) supplies putráḥ with c as well as d and also takes súmakha- as a PN, hence “(the son) of Sumakha.” These two decisions lead to the interpretation that one of the Aśvins is of human origin, the other divine. So, most clearly, Re: “Dissociation inattendue des Aśvins, l’un d’origine humaine, l’autre divine.” This is a major and unnecessary interpretive leap, and based on dubious though not impossible analyses of two details: there is no syntactic or rhetorical reason to supply putráḥ in c, and súmakha- is ordinarily an epithet of gods; acdg. to Mayrhofer (PN 102) this is the only possible passage in which it would be a personal name and would refer to a human, not a god. Although this vs. does, unusually, distinguish between the two Aśvins, I see no reason to ascribe human origin to one of them on the basis of this passage, which is more naturally interpreted in another fashion. It should be noted that Ge expresses some doubt about his interpr. in his n.

4c.


## 05
nicerú- is a hapax (though cf. céru- VIII.61.7). It almost surely belongs to √ci ‘observe, discern’, with Debrunner (AiG II.860), despite Mayrhofer’s doubts (EWA s.v. céru-). The Aśvins are themselves called nícetar- in nearby I.184.2.

The 2nd member rūpa- in piśáṅga-rūpa- seems pleonastic, but it perhaps should have been rendered in tr., ‘whose form is tawny’, vel sim.

Pāda c causes several problems, both in grammar and in interpretation. To start with the latter, anyásya is universally taken as referring to one of the two Aśvins, as the paired anyáḥ-s of 4ab do. However, as noted in the publ. intro., I think the referent of this stem has shifted. Both Aśvins together are referred to in the first hemistich of 5, with the dual pronoun vām. They are contrasted with a new “the other” in c, who can only be Indra: the presence of the two fallow bays (hárī) guarantees his presence, since these horses are uniquely Indra’s.

The grammatical problem is the apparent number disharmony between the dual hárī, if taken as the subject, and the pl. verb pīpáyanta; the accent of this verb is also potentially problematic. The standard interpr. construe the pāda in this way (cf. Ge “Die beiden Falben … sind … geschwellt”; so also Old, WG). The accent on a main cl. verb is attributed to the anyá- (… anyá-) construction (so Ge, n. 5), though he expresses some concern that in fact there’s only one anyá-. While it is true that the first of two clauses in a double anyá- construction generally has an accented verb (e.g., I.164.20, II.40.4-5, VI.68.3), this is not universal (cf., e.g., VI.57.2), and it is not the case with single anyá-. But the real problem is that a plural verb should not have a dual subject. Both these difficulties can be avoided if we supply a (dual) form of √gam in c, generated from the precative gamyāḥ ending b, and start a new clause with pīpáyanta, which then owes its accent to its clause-initial position. The plural subject of this verb then includes both Indra’s pair of fallow bays (c) and the Aśvins’ tawny lead horse (a). (Ge [n. 5] somewhat similarly suggests that pīpáyanta is pl.

because the kakuhá- of 5a is also thought of [gedacht wird], but my suggestion allows a grammatical solution, not merely a notional one.) The adjective opening the next pāda would apply to all three horses and serve as a further plural specification of the group. Although the Pp. reads du. -ā́, in sandhi it can as well be pl. -āḥ. The stem of this adjective is uncertain. Sāy., followed by Müller, reads mathnā́; Aufrecht, mathrā́. This is one of the relatively few variant manuscript readings in the RV; see Müller vol. I, p. 62, Aufr. vol. II, p. iv., and Old ad loc. On the basis of mathrā́in VIII.46.23, Old opts for mathrā́. This seems reasonable, though in terms of sense which suffix we choose matters little, since either form would most likely belong to √manth ‘churn, stir, shake’; used of horses, I take it to mean ‘agitated, excitable, skittish’.

I supply a participle of a verb of motion with ví, which governs rájāṃsi. The two parts of this phrase are separated by the intrusive voc. aśvinā. See 7b below.


## 06
This vs. is quite parallel to vs. 5: it begins prá vām, with a verb of motion in the 2nd pāda to be construed with prá (gamyāh and carati respectively); the 3rd pādas are identical save for their first word, X anyásya pīpáyanta vā́jaiḥ. I therefore construe the vs. as I did vs. 5 with “lead horse” the subj. of ab, Indra the referent of anyásya in c, and a new clause beginning with pīpáyanta. That the subj. of d is plural gives support to my suggestion that 5d also contains a plural not a dual.

śarádvant- ‘having autumns/years’ in pāda a is a hapax, but presumably means ‘having (many) years’ -- thus ‘experienced’, of the lead horse.

As was noted ad I.178.2, I do not believe that we need a separate root √viṣ ‘sich ergiessen’ for three passages, including this one; ‘toil, labor’ works for all the passages. My ‘roil’ here, besides conveniently rhyming with ‘toil’, is meant to express the physical motion of the waters at work.


## 07
I do not understand why the song would be flowing ‘in three parts’ (/’threefold’; tredhá), nor is the meaning and referent of loc. bāḷhé clear. But comparison with tribarhíṣi sádasi “on the seat with three (layers) of barhis” in the next vs., 8b, may help. Assuming bāḷhá- belongs to √baṃh ‘be/make thick, firm’, we can assign bāḷhá- the sense ‘thickened, plumped up’ and suggest that bāḷhé refers to the barhis, which has been plumped up invitingly, like a sofa cushion, for the gods to sit on, with its three layers ensuring a soft seat. As for tredhā́I now think it qualifies not the song, as in the publ. tr., but the seat, and would now tr. “… flowing to the (ritual grass) plumped up threefold/in three parts.” As in 5d the two parts of this phrase bāḷhé tredhā́are separated by the intrusive voc. aśvinā.


## 08
The gen. phrase rúśato vápsasaḥ is standardly taken as the PN (Ruśant Vapsas) of the singer. As often when a PN explanation is offered, this is a convenient way of evading an unclear word or phrase. But rúśant- is a very well-attested adj.

with a clear sense ‘gleaming, bright’ and does not otherwise form part of a PN. This leaves vápsas-, which I take as ‘wasp’ both here and in VIII.45.5 (girā́vápso, which I divide as girā́vápso, contra Pp.; see disc. in EWA s.v. vápsas-). The resultant “gleaming wasp” is, in my opinion, a description of fire; rúśant- is not infrequently a descriptor of fire, and ‘wasp’ would refer to the random movements of flames and/or the “sting” produced by flying sparks hitting skin. At least acdg. to the internet, one of the most common species of wasp in South Asia is Ropalidia marginata (often called the Indian wasp), a type of paper wasp that is remarkably flame-red in color, and, in YouTube videos, a cluster of such wasps on top of their nest looks rather like a flickering fire. Its sting is quite painful. Its “song” in this passage would either be the sound of the crackling fire compared to the buzzing of the wasps or else simply the hymn recited at the ritual fire.

The publ. tr. careless omits the vām; I would emend the tr. to “this very song … swells for you …” The second hemistich concerns the soma, in my view, though Ge and Re both take the bullish cloud as an image of generosity and WG as morning mist. I take this phrase as referring to the soma swollen with water after its soaking; this image is then given both a real-world and a ritual sense, playing on two senses of gór ná séke.

In the real-world image the bull is depicted as sexually aroused (swollen) in mating with a cow, lit. “at the insemination of a cow.” The root √sic frequently takes rétas- ‘semen’ as obj., and this is a shorthand way of expressing “at the pouring out (of semen) into a cow,” vel sim. But in the ritual image, “at the pouring out of the cow” refers to the pouring of milk and its mixing with the soma, a very common image that is regularly sexualized.


## 09
This vs. seems to be trying to aggregate as many divinities into the final summons as possible, and it does so rather awkwardly. On the basis of I.117.19 áthā yuvā́m íd ahvayat púraṃdhiḥ “P. called upon just you two [=Aśvins],” I take púraṃdhiḥ here as the separate (female) figure, rather than as an qualifier of Pūṣan like Ge. Also on the basis of that passage I supply ‘summoned’ (generatable from huvé in c) rather than making this part of the b clause with the verb jarate -- though very little depends on one or the other decision.

In c gṛṇānáḥ must be, quite unusually, transitive: it is ordinarily passive. I think the transitive value for this medial participle was induced by its etymological relationship with transitive jarate in b, mediated by the medial participle to that pres.

stem, which also takes the singer, not the besung, as subj. See the very similar passage VI.62.1 aśvínā huve járamāṇo arkaíḥ “I call upon the Aśvins, singing with my chants.”

