+++
title = "182"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
On ā́√bhūṣ with vayúna- see VIII.66.8 The first hemistich addresses the ritual performers in the plural, as they make final preparations for the sacrifice. Ge (fld. by WG) takes phrase rátho vṛ́ṣaṇvān “the chariot has its bulls” as referring to the Aśvins’ chariot, which is presumably hitched up and on its way. This is certainly possible, but I think the chariot may rather refer to the sacrifice, as so often, and “its bulls” may be the Aśvins, who have arrived and so the sacrifice can be set in motion, or they could be the priests or even the paraphernalia of the prepared sacrifice. However, I have to admit that the next vs. focuses on the Aśvins’ chariot (2cd) and their skill as charioteers (2b), so Ge’s interpr. may be correct.

Ge takes mádatā in b as transitive, with the Aśvins, under the guise of the various duals in cd, as obj. But máda- is rarely if ever transitive, and it seems best to take cd as containing an annunciatory phrase pointing to the Aśvins’ presence (or soon-to-be presence) at our ritual.

The hapax viśpálāvasū is presumably a bahuvrīhi, like vājínīvasu- ‘having prize-winning mares as goods’, though Ge tr. as a tatpuruṣa, ‘die Gönner der Viśpalā’. WG’s “mit (der Rennstute) Viśpalā als (ihrem) Gut” reflects the compound type better and may well be correct. However, the cmpd must allude to the story (or wisp of a story), found mostly in Kakṣīvant’s oeuvre, about Viśpalā and the Aśvins: Viśpalā is a mare whose legbone the Aśvins stick back together so she can win a race.

The most relevant passage for interpreting this cmpd may be I.112.10 yā́bhir viśpálāṃ dhanasā́m atharvyàṃ sahásramīḷha ājā́v ájinvatam “with which you revived Viśpalā, to pursue the way, to gain the stakes in the contest with a thousand battle-prizes.” (Cf. also I.116.15, 117.11, 188.8; X.39.8.) From these references to Viśpalā it does not appear that she belonged to the Aśvins (was their “Gut”), but rather was benefited -- healed -- by them in order that she could herself win goods in the contest. Hence my more convoluted tr. “who provided the goods to (the mare) Viśpalā.” The idea in our passage is presumably that they made it possible for her to race and therefore to get the goods, so a lot is concentrated in that single cmpd.

## 02-03
The two 2nd dual middles, vahethe (2c) and āsāthe (3a), would both be better metrically with light 2nd syllables. On this phenomenon, see Arnole 129-30. A number of 2nd and 3rd dual middle forms invite this shortening. I do not understand it historically since Aves. has the ā in the athematic forms and the equivalent of e in the thematic ones (-aēte,- ōiϑe).


## 02
The two cmpds índratamā and marúttamā, superlative in form, are generally taken to mean ‘most similar to Indra / the Maruts’ (Gr, Ge, WG). I suppose that is their ultimate purport, but I think the effect is stronger: the Aśvins are said to possess the qualities of those gods in an even higher degree than those gods themselves do.

Idiomatic English would use the comparative: “more Indra than Indra” (or, in a wellknown colloquial expression, at least in my childhood, “more Catholic than the Pope”).


## 03
The sense of pāda a would be better conveyed by “what are you doing there?” The main cl. kím āsāthe lacks an expressed antecedent to jáno yáḥ in the following rel. cl., but it is not difficult to supply.


## 05
The story of Bhujyu, son of Tugra, is treated in I.116.3-5, also a Kakṣīvant composition. (See also Agastya’s mention of it in nearby I.180.5.) Bhujyu was abandoned by his father in the middle of the trackless sea; the Aśvins make a boat for him and bring him home. Just as here, the boat(s) is(/are) described in I.116.3 as ātmanvánt- and in I.116.4 as having wings. The former is generally tr. as ‘breathing’ (atmend, WG) or ‘possessing a soul’ (beseelt, Gr, Ge). I wonder rather if the ‘body, trunk’ sense of ātmán- is at issue here, and it refers to a boat with a cockpit or hollowed-out well for sitting, rather than a flat raft. The “paunchy” (if that’s what it means and if it refers to the boats) in 6c would support this interpr. The wings would then be sails. (The latter is an easy transfer; e.g., in English sailing downwind with the mainsail on one side and the jib on the other is referred to as “wing and wing.”) Of course, I am not denying that the Aśvin-made vessel did actually fly (see pāda d), but I do suggest that there’s a germ of realia in the description -- and that a boat with a body makes more sense than a boat with a soul.

With most interpr. I take supaptanī́as an instr. sg. to a fem. nomen act.; see Old’s exx. of similar phrases with a verb and su-compounded cognate instr. It is perhaps worthy of note that the new-style weak pf. pet- coexists here with the old style redupl. -papt-.


## 06
The construction and meaning of the last two words of pāda c, jáṭhalasya júṣṭā(h), are uncertain. Ge (/WG) and Re construe the gen. with júṣṭā(ḥ), though Re readily admits that júṣṭa- never elsewhere takes a genitive. He does not comment on the meaning or reference of jáṭhala-, but Ge (/WG) takes it as referring to the “bauchig (Wagen)” of the Aśvins; Ge further comments, “Die Schiffe trugen den grossen Wagen der Aśvin oftmals über das Meer.” This conjures up a ridiculous image, of four ships towing a bulbous wagon across the water like a water-skier or a barge -- a wagon that, moreover, we have no evidence for either in this hymn or in the other passages concerning Bhujyu. (In the fullest treatment, I.116.3-5, the Aśvins carry him with their ships [naubhíḥ, 3a] after Bhujyu has mounted a ship [nā́vam ātasthivā́ṃsam]. There are no wagons, bulbous or otherwise.) And further, not only the case frame with júṣṭā but its sense would be very peculiar; Ge tr. “die des bauchigen (Wagens) gewohnt sind” (not the usual sense of júṣṭa-), WG “die dem bauchigen (Wagen) angenehm sind.” What would it mean for the ships to be “used to” or “agreeable to” a wagon? (Ge tries to get out of this difficulty by setting up a veritable towing service, operating “oftmals.”) This can all be avoided by separating the two words and interpr. jáṭhalasya as a genitive of description, ‘of paunchy (shape)’, applicable to the boats, which, as noted with regard to 5b, would support an interpr. of ātmanvánt- there as ‘possessing a body’. The one to whom the ships are júṣṭa- ‘agreeable, welcome’ is then Bhujyu, who had been floundering in the sea and would surely be cheered at the sight of them.


## 07
With Gr, etc. (incl. Scar, p. 648) I take níṣṭhita- to √sthā + nís, not ní.

Ge seems to take paryáṣasvajat either as contrary-to-fact in a rhetorical question or as a true anterior pluperfect, but as Kü points out (591-92), the pf. of √sva(ñ)j is presential, so the pluperfect is simply a past tense. The form is anomalous in several respects. First, it has a retroflexed initial, despite following -a-, but this is easily accounted for: the verb is always accompanied by the preverb pári, and the retroflexion has simply been carried over into this environment. (This is the only place where the verbal form doesn’t immediately follow the preverb.) The root is also otherwise middle in inflection: pres. pári ṣvajate (5x, beside 1x act. pariṣvájat VI.60.10, q.v.), pf. pári ṣasvaje (4x). But our plupf. is active; it also has apparent thematic inflection (expect *áṣasvak). These two morphological features are highly reminiscent of the aduhat-type actives built to old t-less middle presents of the type duhé, with expected t-less imperfect *aduha, remarked with the act. -t ending - so brilliantly analyzed by Wackernagel long ago. It seems that the pf. ending of ṣasvaje was analyzed as (if) a primary ending, with a corresponding secondary -a, which then required remarking.

parṇā́has a double reading: in the frame ‘leaves’ (of the rescuing tree in ab), in the simile ‘feathers’, as Ge (n. 7c) points out.

The mṛgá- seems to be specifically a wild bird, like its Avestan cognate mərəγa-.

Ge tr. śrómatāya kám as “(euch) zum Ruhme”; that is, the Aśvins will accrue fame from their rescue of Bhujyu. This is certainly possible, and the stem śrómatadoes mean ‘fame’ once elsewhere (cf. VIII.66.9), though it usually means, by my interpr., ‘attentive hearing’ (VI.19.10, VII.24.5). Here also I take it to mean ‘hearing’: ‘for hearing’, that is, for the story to be heard. WG tr. “zur Gehorsamkeit” and in the n. specify that it is Bhujyu who should be obedient. Since as far as I now Bhujyu hadn’t been disobedient, and certainly not to the Aśvins, I don’t understand the interpr., esp. as śrómata- doesn’t elsewhere mean ‘obedience’.

