+++
title = "183"

+++
Aśvins


## 02
Given its position, I do not think that ánu is a preverb in tmesis with tíṣṭhathaḥ (with Gr and apparently Ge [/WG]), since such preverbs usually move to a metrical boundary (or directly after the verb). Re suggests that we should supply vratā́ni, after ánu vratā́ni in 3b, but doesn’t provide a tr. or give any indication of what the whole would mean. However, I think his instinct is correct, that ánu implicitly governs an acc. with the meaning “following/according to X.” The X is, in my view, to be found in krátu-mant- ‘having resolve’; the construction is a blend of this possessive adj. and an underlying ánu *krátum (cf. VIII.63.5, though the phrase is not as common as I’d expected). Pāda-final pṛkṣé is infinitival, like iṣayádhyai in 3c.


## 04
The first hemistich shows a nice phonological progression (noted also by Re): the zero-grade vṛk of the wolf and she-wolf (vṛ́ko … vṛkī́r) in pāda a develops into the full-grade vark of the etymologically and grammatically unrelated impv.

varktam in b, which is followed by the rhyming impv. dhaktam. In the 2nd hemistich the lexeme ní √dhā ‘deposit’ appears both as the verbal adj. ppl. níhita(ḥ) and the noun nidhí-.


## 05
I agree with Ge that ná and iva in 5c mark a single simile, not two as WG tr.

it.


## 06
“We have crossed to the further shore of this darkness” announces the end of the night and the beginning of the early morning ritual, to which the Aśvins come.

Given the well-established idiom práti √dhā ‘aim (a praise-hymn like an arrow), I would now slightly change the tr. of b to “a praise-hymn has been aimed at you,” particularly in light of VII.73.1 práti stómaṃ devayánto dádhānāḥ “aiming our praise song as we seek the gods.” The pādas preceding these two expressions, I.183.6a and VII.73.1a, are identical. For further disc. of the ‘aim’ idiom see my forthcoming “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.”

