+++
title = "184"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
Just as the voc. aśvinā breaks up the phrase rájāṃsi … ví in I.181.4 and bāḷhé … tredhā́in I.181.7, the phrase divó nápātā referring to the Aśvins breaks up aryáḥ … sudā́starāya, but more radically, since a pāda boundary intervenes.


## 02
The form éṣṭā is generally taken as the ppl. to √iṣ ‘wish, desire’ + ā́(so Ge [/WG], Re; e.g., Ge ‘herbeigewünscht’). This is not impossible, but it should be noted that √iṣ ‘desire’ is not otherwise attested with ā́in the RV. I prefer the interpr.

of Gr, fld. by Pirart (Les Nāsatya I: 385), which assigns it to √yaj ‘sacrifice’. The lexeme ā́√yaj is quite common and means ‘bring here/attract by sacrifice’, which fits the passage well.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. is rather puzzling. In the first hemistich the simile involving arrow-makers seems to have little to do with the content of the frame regarding the bridal procession of Sūryā. Nonetheless I think the two activities are related and, rather than supplying a verb ‘came’ to govern vahatúṃ sūryā́yāḥ, with Ge (/WG), I follow Old’s interpr. (with Re). Old pulls the verb ‘make’ out of the root-noun cmpd. iṣu-kṛ́tā ‘arrow-makers’ and supplies a transitive form of the root to govern vahatúm: “… wie zwei Pfeilverfertiger (den Pfeil zum Glückschuss zubereiten, bereitet ihr) o zwei Nāsatyas, als Götter die Brautfahrt der Sūryā.” This interpr. is supported by the fact that forms of √kṛ regularly govern vahatúm: VII.1.17 ubhā́kṛṇvánto vahatū́…; X.17.1 tváṣṭā duhitré vahatúṃ kṛṇoti; X.85.14 syonám pátye vahatúṃ kṛṇusva; cf. also X.32.3 puṃsá íd bhadró vahatúḥ páriṣkṛtaḥ with a ppl. The connection of these two semantically ill-assorted activities, arrow-making and bridal-procession-making, is facilitated by two features of the passage. On the one hand, iṣu-kṛ́t- is reminiscent of íṣ √kṛ ‘make ready, set right’, with the pseudopreverb íṣ-. On the other, śriyé can be read in slightly different senses with simile and frame. As Old points out, Pischel already compared X.95.3 íṣur ná śriyé with our śriyé … iṣukṛ́tā. (Though I should point out that I read gen. śriyaḥ contra Pp. in X.95.3, the association remains.) In our passage the Aśvins are compared with those who make arrows “for glory” (in battle vel sim.), whereas they ready the bridal procession “for beauty” -- both senses being within the normal range of the multivalent śrī́-. I would therefore now add to the publ. tr. “… (make ready) the bridal procession of Sūryā for beauty.” The second hemistich is more problematic. Ge (/WG) takes c and d as separate clauses and in c Ge reads apsú twice, once as the location of the action of the verb (“Es schweben … auf dem Wasser”) and once with jātā́ḥ (“die Wassergeborenen”). Ge (/WG) then takes d as a nominal clause, “Abgenutzt sind die Joche wie die des reichen Varuṇa.” Such a statement seems not only like an utter non sequitur (what do Varuṇa’s worn-out yokes have to do with the Aśvins or their horses?), but also puzzling on its own (what are Varuṇa’s yokes, worn out or otherwise?). Moreover, as Ge, etc., point out, there is evidence from parallel passages that c and d belong together, since jūrṇá- appears in an uncannily similar passage about the Aśvins’ journey: I.46.3 vacyánte vāṃ kakuhā́so, jūrṇā́yām ádhi viṣṭápi “Your lead (animals) twist and turn upon the (sea’s) broken surface.” Thieme (rev. of Lüders, Varuṇa I [ZDMG 101 (1951): 411 n. 2 = Kl. Sch. 646 n. 2]) produces a tr. that puts the two pādas together: “in Sprüngen gehn eure ...

Spitzentiere, die in den Wassern des vielfachen (reichen?) Varuṇa (d.h. im himmlischen Meere) geborenen, über die gleichsam gealtertem (d.h. von Rissen durchfurchten und deshalb unwegsamen) Joche (=d.h. Wegstrecken von der Länge je eines Vorspannes … ).” Though I do not follow it in all regards (he construes váruṇasya with apsú), his interpr. is considerably more convincing than the twoclause solution. He takes yugā́not as ‘yokes’, but as “Wegstrecken von der Länge je eines Vorspannes” (rather like yójana-), hence the surface on which the horses vacyánte. The ‘worn’ (jūrṇā́) surfaces of Varuṇa are then, with Old, the waves of the sea, here called Varuṇa, after the association of that god with water, which is prominent later but already present in the RV.


## 04
Unaccented mādhvī is of course a dual voc. addressed to the Aśvins, but given its proximity to fem. nom. sg. rātíḥ ‘gift’, it seems possible that it was meant to evoke also an accented mā́dhvī modifying this word. (However, Re points out that the fem. of mádhu- is generally identical to the masc. in the RV.)

