+++
title = "185"

+++
Heaven and Earth


## 02
As noted in the publ. intro., I consider the embryo here to be the sun, but various other identifications have been proposed.


## 03
The them. adj. anarvá- is clearly derived from the well-attested bahuvrīhi - n-stem anarván- (cf. also the thematized anarváṇa-). The neut. NA to the n-stem should be *anarvá, which is not found. In two instances in which it should modify a neut. acc. (I.37.1, VI.48.15) we find instead the masc. anarvā́ṇam, an adjustment probably meant to make the form more transparent (see comm. on those two passages). As for the supposed them. stem anarvá-, in two of the occurrences listed by Gr. the referents are neut. (cakrám I.164.2, dātrám here). In both passages the neut. NA anarvám comes at the end of an odd pāda before an even pāda beginning with a consonant. I think it is at least arguable that the original reading in both cases was *anarvá, the expected neut. to the n-stem, which was redactionally altered to a thematic acc. The alternation has no metrical consequences. As for the other two forms that Gr lists to the them. stem, both (II.40.6, VII.40.4) qualify Aditi in the nom. sg. and have the form anarvā́. I suggest that both actually belong to the n-stem, whose nom. sg. has exactly that form, and that they are fem., but do not exhibit the fem. derivational suffix -ī (expect *anarváṇī-?).


## 04
The lexeme ánu √as is fairly uncommon, but Agastya uses it twice elsewhere (I.167.10, I.182.8); the rather more common ánu √bhū can mean ‘be devoted to’ (< ‘follow’), and that seems to be the sense here.

Most interpr. take átapyamāne as ‘free from suffering’, but the more literal meaning of √tap ‘be hot, scorch’ seems appropriate in the solar context I see here.

In “the pair among the gods” (ubhé devā́nām), referring to Heaven and Earth, ubhé ‘pair’ is dual, while in “along with the pairs among the days” (ubháyebhir áhnām) ‘pairs’ (ubháyebhiḥ) is plural. This is presumably because Heaven and Earth are a unique pair, whereas the two day-halves, Day and Night, are recurrent and can be thought of as multiple pairs -- though the dual can also be used of them, as in áhanī in 1d.


## 09
Ge (/WG) take ūtī́as dual nom. (WG “beide Hilfen”), but Ge allows the possibility of an instr. and Re takes it as instr., as do I. I think it likely that Heaven and Earth have resurfaced here, in anticipation of their appearance in vss. 10-11, and they are the subj. of sacetām.

