+++
title = "186"

+++
All Gods As noted in the publ. intro., the hymn is knit together by a shifting pattern of repeated initial preverbs and particles: 1a / 2a ā́(with ápi 1c), úpa 4a, which morphs into utá 5a, 6a, 7a, 8a -- the last 3 with utá na īm -- followed by prá 9a, 9b, 10a, 10b (which was anticipated by pṛ́... 8c. For the prá-s note 9a prá nú, 9b prá yu(...), 10 prá ū, 10b pra pū(...). Vs. 11 falls outside the picture. The repeated utá-s of vss. 5-8 reinforce the frequent additive quality of Viśve Devāḥ hymns.

## 01-03
The c-pādas of all three verses consist of a yáthā purpose clause with subjunctive.


## 01
This vs. signals the dedicands of the hymn obliquely: viśvā́naraḥ ‘belonging to all men’ in b evokes its opposite number “all gods,” esp. since the sg. deváḥ occurs later in the same pāda. ‘All’ appears again in d, but with a different referent, ‘world’ (víśvaṃ jágat ‘the whole moving world’). The gods are presumably the addressees of pāda c, but only under the designation ‘youths’ (yuvānaḥ).

The initial ápi of c is somewhat puzzling. Ge (/WG) render it ‘auch’, which is harmless. Re takes it “au sense de abhí” (on what grounds?), as a perfectivizing preverb (again, on what grounds?). I am inclined to take it as a locational ‘nearby’, construed loosely with naḥ, despite the distance between the two words.

In d manīṣā́can be nom. or instr. I follow Ge in taking it as the former, while Re and WG take it as the latter, with Re taking Savitar as implied subject and WG víśvaṃ jágat. There is general agreement that a verb ‘come’ should be supplied in d.


## 03
On pāda c see Thieme, Fremdling, 36-37, and his revised interpr., Mitra and Aryaman, 66, which I follow here. Ge’s “dessen Name in Ehren steht” (sim. Thieme [Fremdling], Klein [DGRV I.228], WG) for sukīrtí- cannot be correct, because sukīrtí- is otherwise a noun.


## 04
The standard tr. make rather heavy weather of pāda b, where the simile sudúgheva dhenúḥ is nominative, but uṣā́sānáktā, the most likely comparandum, makes most sense as the acc. goal of éṣe in pāda a. (Note in passing that HvN’s accentless eṣe is simply wrong.) The simile “like an easily milked cow” should not apply to the 1st ps. subj. of that verb. To deal with the apparent case mismatch (and to avoid the specious explanation “nominative for accusative in simile”), most interpr.

take b as a parenthetical nominal sentence (e.g., Ge “-- Nacht und Morgen sind wie eine gutmelke Kuh --”; so also Re, Janert [Dhāsi, 29], Narten [Yasna H., 122], WG).

But this seems unnecessary: this is a repeated pāda, found also in VII.2.6, where the dual uṣā́sānáktā is nominative. Since that form is ambiguous, it can be adapted here to an accusative environment, without bothering to adjust the case of the simile. So Bloomfield (ad I.186.4, anticipated by Old).

In cd note the chiastic pairs of sám … ví / ví … sá(m): samāné … vimímānaḥ …, víṣurūpe … sásmin …


## 05
The standard tr. (Ge, Re, WG) take the root aor. injunc. kaḥ as modal (e.g., Ge “soll … bereiten”); Hoffmann doesn’t treat this passage. Although I do not think that kaḥ regularly shows such value, formulaic considerations suggest it does here: the phrase máyas √kṛ occurs at the end of a Jagatī pāda as máyas karat (subjunctive: I.89.3, V.46.4, VIII.18.7, X.64.1), once máyas kṛdhi (impv.: I.114.2). Truncating it to fit a Triṣṭubh cadence here would yield monosyllabic kaḥ, which may maintain modal value because of its association with the true modals in Jagatī cadences.


## 06
The end of b, abhipitvé sajóṣāḥ, is a sort of mash-up of 1d and 2b, and ā́ gantu echoes ā́… gamantu of 2a.


## 07
The cmpd. áśva-yoga-, bahuvrīhi by accent, is somewhat peculiar; it might be closest to the type vájra-bāhu- ‘having an arm that has a mace (in it)’, hence ‘having a yoke that has horses (attached to it)’?


## 08
I take -senā- here and in 9d as ‘weapon’, not ‘army’ (contra the standard interp.), because I think ‘weapon’ works better in 9d with the simile in 9c. However, ‘army’ (that is, warrior band vel sim.) is certainly not excluded.

Given the sequence vṛddhásenāḥ … pṛ́ṣadaśvāso ‘vánayo ná ráthāḥ, opening with two bahuvrīhis, the last term avánayo ná ráthāḥ looks very like a decomposed bahuvrīhi *aváni-ratha- ‘having chariots (like) streams’. Curiously, though Re is usually quick to suggest such an interpr., he does not mention such a possibility in his notes.


## 11
The dī́dhiti- ‘visionary hymn’ of this vs. makes a thematic ring with the manīṣā́- ‘inspired thought’ of 1d.

