+++
title = "187"

+++
Food and Drink


## 01
This vs. is classified as Anuṣṭubgarbhā (5 8 / 8 8), the only such vs. in the RV. The first 5 syllables (pitúṃ nú stoṣam “Now I shall praise food”) are almost like a heading or title; without that pāda the vs. would be a straight Gāyatrī like the following one (and also vss. 4, 8-10), though it would lack a verb to govern the acc. in b.

The suffix-accented masc. dharmán- is rare and confined to the late RV, as opposed to the common neut. dhárman-. Here ‘supporter, upholder’ would be a more accurate tr. than ‘support’.

I take víparva- here as proleptic: the result of Trita’s shaking of Vṛtra is that his joints go apart. Gr takes the ví- instead as privative (‘gelenklos’), which could make sense for a snake. But the passages adduced by Ge, like VIII.6.13 ví vr̥trám parvaśó ruján “breaking V. apart joint by joint,” demonstrate that Vṛtra is conceived of as having joints, which can be parted.


## 02
On metrically bad vavṛmahe, see Kü (459) and comm. ad VI.4.7.


## 05
For the interpr. of this vs., see publ. intro.


## 07
On the idiom áram √gam DAT, see comm. ad X.9.3.


## 08
pariṃśám is a hapax, and as Mayr. points out, its proximity to phonologically similar āriśāmahe suggests that it’s an Augenblicksbildung, perhaps as a blend of pári and áṃśa- ‘portion’.


## 10
My tr. of the hapax udārathí- follows a suggestion registered in EWA s.v. udārá- for lack of anything better. Ge refuses to tr.; WG ‘erregend’ takes Sāy.’s gloss into account.

