+++
title = "188"

+++
Āprī The beginning of this hymn is preoccupied with “thousands” (1b, 2c, 3c, 4b).


## 02
dádhat is grammatically ambiguous. With most tr. I take it as a masc. nom. sg. act. part. to the redupl. pres., but it could also be a (short-vowel) subjunctive to the same stem (so Old [SBE]). There are no implications either way.

I.188.6-7, 9: These three vss. all contain hí in their first clause, which I render as causal, contra the standard tr.


## 09
The double acc. rūpā́ṇi … paśū́n víśvān poses some difficulties. Ge construes rūpā́ṇi with prabhúḥ (“der die Formen bemeistert”). But I know of no other passages in which prabhú- governs an acc., and prabhvī́ḥ in 5a would discourage such an interpr. in any case. X.110, the Āprī hymn most like this one, has in the corresponding vs. rūpaír ápiṃśad bhúvanāni víśvā, with an instr. of rūpá-. In both cases I think the rūpá- further specifies the primary object, in this case “all the beasts”: it is their forms he is anointing.

The logical sequence in this vs. is broken in Ge’s tr. because of his use of abstract vocab. for concrete notions: “hat … fertiggemacht” for samānajé ‘anointed’ and “Gedeihen” for sphātím ‘fat’. Surely the point is that the addressee of c (probably Agni or the Hotar, with Ge) is urged to win the fat that Tvaṣṭar used to anoint the beasts -- however conceptually transformed such fat may be.


## 10
“of the gods” in the publ. tr. would be better rendered “for the gods.”


## 11
As in vs. 9, symbolic anointing, here by means of a chant or song, is still represented as physical: Agni “shines” because of it, presumably gleaming from the conceptual fat. I take gāyatréṇa as referring specifically to the Gāyatrī meter (in which this hymn is composed), though it may merely be ‘song’, as Ge (/WG) take it.

