+++
title = "189"

+++
Agni


## 01
The dat. rāyé with √nī may go too easily into English as a goal, “lead to wealth”; ‘for wealth’ might be more faithful to the case form. However, I do not subscribe to WG’s interpr. of supáthā as a neut. pl. goal (“zu den Orten, wo gute Wege sind”), which seems awk. and unnec. when an instr. sg. works well and is paralleled elsewhere.

(víśvāni) vayúnāni vidvā́n is a standard phrase, used esp. of Agni (I.72.7, III.5.6, VI.15.10, X.122.2), referring presumably to his deep knowledge of the ritual as the god most enmeshed in ritual.

I take juhurāṇá- to √hvṛ / hru ‘go crookedly, go astray’ (with Ge and Re, as well as Gr), rather than with √hṛ ‘be angry’ with Insler (JAOS 88, 1968), apparently followed by WG (“den zürnenden Frevel”). The contrast between the easy path in pāda a and the énas- that goes crookedly/astray in c supports this ascription, as does abhihrút- in 6d. Agastya uses the same participle in I.173.11, where its affinity to √hvṛ rather than √hṛ is even clearer.


## 02
Pāda c provides a fine parallel to “A mighty fortress is our god.” The word order is somewhat unusual, in that we might expect naḥ to take Wackernagel’s position in the pāda as a whole; instead it seems to have taken up a version of that position in the post-caesura phrase bahulā́na urvī́, which simply modifies the nom. sg. pū́ḥ that begins the pāda. There might be several reasons for this. For one thing ca occupies that position, but this is not a particularly compelling suggestion because the function and positioning of that ca are somewhat puzzling. Klein (DGRV I.220 n.

81) suggests that it connects pū́ḥ … bhávā with the clause earlier in the vs. whose verb is pārayā. I would suggest rather that it is an inverse ca conjoining the two predicate nominatives construed with bhávā, i.e., pū́ḥ and śáṃ yóḥ. (This would, among other things, eliminate another ex. of supposed sentential or clausal ca, ascribing to it its more usual role as conjoiner of nominals.) It may also be that the alliteration in the phrase pū́ḥ … pṛthvī́would stand out more starkly without naḥ in between, but that should apply to ca as well.


## 03
The verb in b, abhy ámanta, is accented; though there is no overt subordinator, I take pāda b as a purpose clause dependent on pāda a. That the obj. of yuyodhi in a, ámīvā(ḥ) ‘afflictions’, forms an etymological figure with the verb in b supports a close relationship between the pādas. ámanta is best taken as a subjunctive, to the seṭ root pres. amīti and as an -anta replacement for act. *-an of the usual type in this otherwise act. verbal system (Jamison IIJ 21 [1979] 150). This avoids imposing an interpr. as a reciprocal middle, as noted as an alternative by WG with ref. to Hoffmann and Dunkel, although the WG tr. does not reflect it.

The 2nd hemistich lacks a verb. I supply kaḥ; the idiom púnar √kṛ ‘make new, renew’ is fairly common (see Gr., s.v. púnar, 2), and see also Agastya’s I.174.7 kṣā́m … kaḥ, with the same object as here though with a very different sense. The publ. tr.

should signal the lack of verb by a device like “Re(new) …” or “(Make) new …”


## 04
It is not clear what (if anything) utá is conjoining. Klein (DGRV I.371) says there’s an ellipsis of the verb in the 2nd clause, but he doesn't say what verb. I am reluctant to add semantics to utá of the type ‘even’, ‘also’, ‘especially’, as Re and Ge do in their different ways. In the publ. tr. the pf. part. śuśukvā́n is translated (“and when you blaze …”) as if it contrasted with an unexpressed different activity of Agni’s. I might now be inclined to take it as an implicitly subordinated circumstantial clause to be construed with the prohibitives of cd: “and when you blaze …, let not …” However, the tr. “when you …” obscures the fact that the verbal notion is expressed by a nom. sg. participle, which should (and does not) modify the subject of the mā́ clause(s) in cd. However, note that Agni is the subj. of the mā́clauses that occupy all of vs. 5.


## 07
The ví with vidvā́n picks up the ví that both opens and closes the preceding verse (ví … yaṃsat / viṣpáṭ), linking this verse to the apparently different topic that precedes it. This provides a clue for the referent of tā́n … ubháyān “those both.” Ge (/WG) take the both to refer to the two time periods mentioned in this verse, prapitvé and abhipitvé, but, on the basis of the larger context, with Old (SBE) and Re I think it refers to good and bad men, or more narrowly to sacificers and non-sacrificers.

Agni’s eagerness for the sacrifice is expressed by pāda b, where he pursues (véṣi) the sons of Manu, i.e., the sacrificers, at the earlier mealtime, and his satisfaction as the sacrifice proceeds by the gerundive śā́syaḥ ‘to be directed/instructed, tractable’.

In b Ge (/WG) supply ‘nourishment’ (die Nahrung) as object of véṣi with mánuṣaḥ as gen. sg., but this seems unnecessary.

There is no consensus about the meaning or etymology of the word akrá- (5x), generally a descriptor of Agni; see EWA s.v. Gr glosses ‘Herrzeichen, Banner’, but since it is once called navajā́- ‘new-born’ (IV.6.3), an animal (or at least a living thing) is more likely. Since several of the contexts refer to the kindling of the fire, it seems likely to be a young animal, an identification that navajā́- of course favors.

And marmṛjénya- ‘to be groomed’ in our passage suggests a horse, since the root √mṛj generally takes a horse or something so conceived as its object. Hence the tr.

‘foal’.

Despite the position of ná, uśígbhiḥ is unlikely to form part of the simile.

