+++
title = "190"

+++
Bṛhaspati For the hymn as a whole, see H.-P. Schmidt, Bṛhaspati und Indra (1968), 72- 77 and passim.


## 01
The main cl. verb vardhayā is entirely ambiguous between 2nd sg. imperative and 1st sg. subjunctive. With Re and Schmidt (B+I) I opt for the 1st sg. subj., while Gr, Ge, and WG take it as 2nd sg. impv. There are no implications either way.


## 04
There are a number of syntactic questions and problems in this verse. To begin with, in pāda a the sequence divī́yate could be resolved as either diví īyate (so Gr, Pp.) or diví ī́yate. In the latter case, with accented verb, we could have a subordination without an overt subordinator. I have chosen to interpret it so, contra the standard tr. and interpr. (though with Scar 371 n. 516), because the other likely connections between pādas a and b favor this closer nexus.

The next questions arise because of the opening of pāda b, átyo ná yaṃsat.

The simile goes semantically most naturally with the preceding pāda, “like a steed, it speeds …,” but the lack of accent on yaṃsat makes that impossible because this verb would then be initial in its clause. The situation is complicated by the fact that yaṃsat exactly replicates yaṃsat in 3b, where it governs ślókam in the accusative, whereas here a nominative ślókaḥ is subject of the preceding pāda and in order to get it to be object of yaṃsat here, the subject has to change and an unexpressed acc. *ślókam be supplied. Moreover, the steed in the opening of b is a very likely object of yaṃsat, but is in the wrong case. There are several (ad hoc) ways to handle this problem. The first is simply to interpret the text as given, with the steed compared to the subject of yaṃsat, who is probably Bṛhaspati. This is in fact the interpr. of the standard tr., though each one needs to supply material and adjust interpr. in order to make it work semantically. I do not find these various makeshifts satisfactory. In order to confront the semantic problems noted above, it is possible to assume that the verb in 4b was originally really accented *yámṣat, which lost its accent redactionally because of yaṃsat in the preceding verse. This would allow the tr. “When his signal-call speeds in heaven and on earth like a steed, he will control it [=signal call/steed],” with the simile taken with pāda a and a new clause beginning with *yáṃsat. This may be the simplest solution, though it is not exactly the one in the publ. tr. Instead there I (more or less) follow the suggestion sketched out by Old and discussed in more detail by Scar (371 and n. 516), whereby átyo ná stands for *átyaṃ ná; Old explains the nom. as attraction to the preceding pāda. Scar seems to endorse Old’s attraction hypothesis, but his tr. is more complex (and essentially identical to mine), in that he reads the simile both as nom. with pāda a and (in brackets) as acc. with pāda b. Although this may seem over-fussy, it addresses both the syntactic and the semantic problems.

The second hemistich presents a more conventional type of double reading, whereby the word hetáyaḥ is taken to belong both to the simile and to the frame, which its position in the pāda facilitates. In the frame hetí- has its common meaning ‘missile, lance’, a development from the general ‘impel’ meaning of √hi; there is a further metaphorical development here: the missiles of Bṛhaspati are his words. In the simile, with the gen. mṛgā́ṇām, the hetí- are the charges or drives of the wild beasts, using a more abstract or etymological sense of the -tí-stem. This double interpr. is found in Old, Re, and Scar; it seems significantly more satisfying that Ge’s notion (fld by WG) that takes mṛgā́ṇām as a datival gen. -- the missiles/weapons for the wild beasts -- which requires that the two genitives mṛgā́ṇām and bṛ́haspáteḥ be non-parallel.

With Scar I take the ca in c as coordinating cd with a.

I do not understand exactly what yakṣa-bhṛ́t- in b refers to, nor do I understand why the heavens are áhimāya-. For the latter, one can recall that in V.40.6, 8 the māyā́ḥ of Svarbhānu hide the sun and that in my extensive treatment of the Svarbhānu myth (Ravenous Hyenas, 1991) I interpret those māyā́ḥ as the swirling clouds of smoke issuing from Agni. So here the “serpentine wiles” that the heavens possess might be the clouds of smoke from the ritual fire produced at the same time as Bṛhaspati’s ritual signal call (though áhimāya- when applied to the gods would have to have a different sense). This further suggests that the wondrous apparitions (yakṣá-) that Bṛhaspati brings are other marvelous sights associated with the sacrificial performance. But these are just guesses.


## 05
The standard tr. take pajrā́ḥ as a PN, as it can be elsewhere, but there seems no reason to drag in Kakṣīvant’s kin for vilification, and I prefer taking it as a simple descriptor.

The hapax usriká- is a nice example of a -ka-suffixed form in slangy and deprecatory context. See my article on -ka- (IIJ 52, 2009).

There is disharmony in number between the two hemistichs: the relative cl. in the plural describing the evil rivals is picked up by dat. singular dūḍhyè.

The accent on cáyase is probably due to the following íd, which does condition verbal accent -- though in fewer passages than listed by Gr (s.v. íd 5), since many of his exx. are pāda-initial. It can also be noted here that the verb immediately follows a pāda-initial voc. and is contrastive with ánu dadāsi in c, either of which would also favor verbal accent.


## 06
In b the point is presumably that an ally who is constantly solicited by everyone around is likely to change sides without warning.

With Old, Re, and Schmidt (B+I) I supply ‘cows’ with ápīvṛtā(ḥ), while Ge (/WG) opt for ‘doors’. Since they all take the Aṅgirases as the implied subject, both interpr. refer to the Vala myth.


## 07
The bahuvrīhi ródha-cakra-, lit. ‘having their banks as wheels’, may seem slightly jarring, and Ge (/WG) attenuate the sense to “die die Ufer entlang rollen.” But cakrá- is definitely the noun ‘wheel’ (all the way back into PIE), not a transparent derivative of a verbal root meaning ‘roll’, and I think the cmpd must be taken in its literal sense. (So also Re: “ayant pour roues les hautes-rives.”) The point of comparison must be not the speed or movement of the chariot but its physical configuration, with the wheels defining the outer limits of the vehicle as seen from above or behind and rising above the bottom of its body, just as river banks do the river.

A different watery image is found in the 2nd hemistich. With Ge I take táraḥ here as a ford (like the etymologically related tīrthá-, both to √tṝ ‘cross, pass,’ etc.) or perhaps more generally a means of crossing (water). Bṛhaspati, likened to a bird of prey, keeps his eye on both the ford and the (deeper) waters -- presumably watching for fish to swim into the shallow water of the ford, so they can be snatched close to the surface. This image is highly reminiscent of the feeding behavior of water birds like cranes, egrets, and herons, whose preternatural stillness and singleminded vigilance as they stand in shallow water waiting for prey, followed by a swift but graceful lunge with their beaks, can only impress the observer and could well provide a model for the “knowing Bṛhaspati” and his sharp eyes depicted here. (For those who haven’t had the pleasure of seeing this in the wild, there are numerous YouTube videos.) Such birds are found in the appropriate geographical areas of NW India/Pakistan, and since gṛ́dhra- lit. means ‘greedy’, it need not specifically designate a vulture, pace Ge (/WG), Schmidt (‘Geier’), and Re (‘vautour’).

ā́paḥ here must be acc. pl., one of the handful of examples of the spread of the nom. pl. to acc. function in this stem.


## 08
The standard tr. take deváḥ as a predicate nominative (vel sim.) with dhāyi (e.g., Re “… a été installé (comme) dieu”). This may be correct, but it does assume that Bṛhaspati only secondarily came to be considered as, or was made into, a deva (so, e.g., Ge n. 2d). Following H.-P. Schmidt’s hypothesis that bṛ́haspáti- was originally an epithet of, and aspect of, Indra, it would be possible to interpret this passage as referring to the moment when Bṛhaspati emerged as a deva in his own right; on the other hand, since Indra is most definitely a deva from the beginning, a particular aspect of him should not require promotion to deva-status. It should be noted that Schmidt explicitly disputes the standard interp. (B+I, 75-77) and tr. deváḥ as a simple descriptor: “So wird der grosse, machtgeborene, mächtige B., der Stier, der Gott eingesetzt.” I follow Schmidt.

