+++
title = "191"

+++
Against poisonous animals Because of the popular character of this hymn and the idiomatic specificity of the entities mentioned, much of the vocabulary is obscure. I will not discuss the supposed real-world identifications or etymological speculations for each lexical item. Reasonably up-to-date treatments of the sec. lit. are available in EWA, s.vv.


## 01
I do not understand the double íti of pāda c. But I assume that the “two” in this pāda refers to the two differently identified káṅkata- in ab, the one that is not (really) a káṅkata and the one that is a true (satīna-) káṅkata-. These are then reidentified as plúṣi-.

For the accent of adṛ́ṣta- see AiG II.1.226 and Nachtr. p. 66.


## 02
The feminine nemesis is not identified. As Ge notes (n. 2), Sāy. suggests it’s the healing plant, Henry both the plant and dawn.


## 03
I take kúśara- as containing the pejorative ku-prefix (as in kú-yava- ‘(bringing) bad harvest’) and a play on the preceding word śará-.

The three vṛddhi derivatives, sairyá-, mauñjá-, and vairiṇá-, I interpret flg.

Sāy.’s suggestion for the last two, namely that they refer to the adṛ́ṣta- bugs found on those particular grasses. Many of the most annoying biting insects lurk in tall grass waiting for their victims to present unshielded ankles and calves -- in the US chiggers, fleas, and ticks come to mind.


## 04
This vs. seems an attempt at sympathetic magic: animals, both domestic and wild, and humans (symbolized by their lights, presumably their fires) are all settling down for the night (though the time period is not explicit), and so should the bugs.

As anyone who’s ever been outside in a buggy place after dark knows, this magic is not necessarily going to work -- though it’s true that some types of bugs are active at dusk and then stop.


## 05
This vs. does seem to refer to such insects, those that become active at twilight when the wind drops. For example, although there are numerous types of mosquitoes and different species have different feeding patterns, it seems (from a quick Google search) that most species feed at dawn and dusk and a few hours into the dark.


## 06
It is unclear to me why the bugs are being credited with such a grand pedigree. Perhaps to indicate that they are ubiquitous in the space between earth and heaven? Sāy. suggests this vs. and the next are addressed to snakes, but there seems no reason why adṛ́ṣta- would change its referent. As I noted in the publ. intro., the impulse to demand that a troublesome unswattable bug settle down long enough to be squashed is likely to be universal.

## 08-09
The rising of the sun may reflect the fact, mentioned above, that many bugs feed at twilight (dawn and dusk), and sunrise portends the end of the (pre-)dawn feeding frenzy.


## 10
As noted in the publ. intro., the second part of the hymn begins here, but it clearly pivots on the sun, which figured in the two preceding vss.

My interpr. of this much discussed vs. is presented in the publ. intro., but in compressed fashion. As noted there, I think this has to do with the separation of noxious liquid from beneficial liquid, a feat ascribed in natural terms to the sun and in mythological terms to Indra. When “I fasten the poison on the sun” (pāda a), I am counting on the purificatory power of the sun to neutralize or banish the poison. This ritualistic action is matched in pāda b by fastening the skin onto the house of the surā-possessor. Surā is an alcoholic beverage of some sort (generally tr.

‘Branntwein’, ‘brandy’, et sim., though, acdg. to James McHugh [p.c.], it is unlikely that the technology of distilling was known to Vedic India, so probably some sort of beer; see now McHugh forthcoming [JAOS], “The Ancient Indian Alcoholic Drink Called Surā: Vedic Evidence”) and a universally condemned evil twin to soma, though it gets used in some śrauta rituals, particularly the Sautrāmaṇī. The appearance of the surā-possessor (súrāvant-) in b is owing to two factors: on the one hand, as just noted, surā is a taboo drink and is therefore equivalent to the poison (viṣá-) in pāda a. On the other, the word súrā- is phonologically reminiscent of ‘sun’ sū́rya- in pāda a.

The natural/ritual action depicted in the first pāda is, in my interpr., matched by the mythological action of the second pāda. I therefore do not take pāda b as a simile (as Ge does), but as a parallel action -- the attachment of a skin (dṛ́ti-) full of poison/surā on the house of the surā-possessor, who, in my view, is Indra, who appears by epithet in pāda e. (Though Ge and others tentatively identify hariṣṭhā́- as the sun god, the ‘mounter of the fallow bays’ can only be Indra.) Later Vedic has a cmpd. surā-dṛti- ‘surā-skin’, found in PB XIV.11.26 and JB III.229. Both passages concern the vipānam of a liquid; vi √pā, lit. ‘drink apart’, is used for the separation of two kinds of liquids that have been mixed together (or separation of a liquid from something containing it); see comm. ad VII.22.4. In the late RV and later, this lexeme is specialized for the Sautrāmaṇī ritual, whose mythological foundation is the healing of Indra by the Aśvins and Sarasvatī, after he had drunk too much soma.

They make him drink surā, which was mixed with soma (perhaps the soma he had already drunk), and he performs the feat of separating the two liquids. This myth is already present in X.131.4-5 with precisely this detail. When in pāda b here we fashion the skin of poison onto Indra the surā-drinker’s house, we are implicitly asking him to perform the same feat for us. The refrain (found in vss. 10-13, pādas c-f) makes it clear that he has succeeded. At least in my interpr., it is said that Indra has put the poison far in the distance (e) and the honeyed (plant?) has made honey (quite possibly soma, as often)(f): the two liquids have been separated and are separate, with the good one available to us. The result is that the mythological model, Indra, will not die (c) -- nor will we (d) -- and the poison with which we began has been rendered ineffective.


## 11
The extraordinary density of -ka-suffixed forms begins here and lasts till the end of the hymn. That little birds eat the poison and destroy it may reflect the fact that many birds eat noxious insects without harm to them and with benefit to us. But the insects may no longer be the subject of this part of the hymn.


## 12
Sāy. suggests that the “little sparks” (viṣpuliṅgaká-) are little sparrows.

This makes sense not only because of the birds in vss. 11 and 14, but because of the visual effect of flocks of small birds feeding: esp. when they are in bushes or underbrush they can burst up, out, and around at random almost like sparks. The viṣor course also recalls viṣá- ‘poison’. I do not understand why there are 21 of them, save for the fact that thrice seven is a satisfying number. Similar numbers are found in the next two vss.


## 13
The “tormentors” (/harmers, destroyers) of poison, the hapax gen. pl.

rópuṣīṇām, are feminine. The referent is entirely unclear, but the removers of poison in the next vs. are all feminine as well.

## 15-16
The -ka- suffix is particularly prominent in these vss, appearing not only on the designation of the bug (kuṣumbhakáḥ, 2x), but also on the pronominal adj.

iyattakáḥ (‘such a one’), the pronoun takám, and the participle pravartamānakáḥ.

The word for ‘scorpion’, vṛ́ścika- only appears in that form, but appears to contain the -ka- suffix as well, very common in words for noxious insects (see my “-kasuffix,” IIJ 52 [2009]: 318).