+++
title = "05"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., the hapax denom. tilvilāyádhvam is the most notable feature of this hymn. This verb is clearly built to the adj. tílvila-, found in V.62.7, where it appears to mean something like ‘fertile’: bhadré kṣétre nímitā tílvile vā “(the pillar) fixed in the good or ___ field/land.” Note not only the l-s, but the rhyming til-vil-, a word-formation tactic not otherwise found in standard Vedic; the standard assumption is that it is a non-Indo-Aryan word (see, e.g., Kuiper, Aryans 14). The standard interpr. take it as a (presumably more specific) synonym to bhadrá-, though of course the vā ‘or’ construction could identify it as a contrast or even opposite to bhadrá-. If the word belongs to the agricultural sphere (as kṣétra- ‘field’ suggests), a non-IAr origin makes sense. It is sometimes connected (see EWA s.v.) with tilá- (AV+) ‘sesame’, which also lacks an IAr etym. The word tílvila- is found in later Vedic; most of the occurrences are in similar passages in the gṛhya sūtras for the erection of a housepost and are clearly dependent on RV V.62.7 (e.g., ĀśGS 2.8.16, ŚāṅkhGS 3.3.1), but a ŚB passage seems to place it in the ‘fruitful, fertile, rich’ sphere. The passage concerns a cow let out to wander; whichever direction she goes will predict what will happen to the sacrificer. ŚB IV.5.8.11 yádi  105 pratī́cīyā́d íbhyatilvila iva dhā́nyatilvilo bhaviṣyatī́ti vidyāt (Eggeling) “If she goes westwards, let him know that he will be rich in dependants and crops.”