+++
title = "02"

+++
Ge takes both vibhā́vā and cakṣáṇiḥ as transitive: “Er ist unser Erleuchter wie der Erheller am Morgen.” But well-attested vibhā́van- does not elsewhere take an object or an objective gen. (on X.8.4 see comm. ad loc. [once it exists]). By contrast, cakṣáṇi- is a hapax and so its value is more up-in-the-air. AiG II.2.207 takes it as an agent noun ‘Erheller’ and explains it (p. 208) as a nominalization of an infinitive in - áni; in our passage cakṣáṇir ná “als Anzeiger” is said to rest on *cakṣáṇi ná “wie um anzuzeigen.” But this is not how RVic similes work, and further a class of -áni infinitives is marginal at best (see most recently Keydana, Infinitive im Ṛgveda pp.

190-96). I take it as an intrans. ‘sighting, vision’ -- AiG II.2.207 lists action nouns as one of the two standard values for -ani-nominals -- to harmonize in sense with vibhā́vā, though other interpr. are not excluded. Old suggests ‘Beschauer’, sim. Re.

The tr. of védya- is in accord with my usual interpr. of this stem as ‘to be acquired’ (see comm. ad II.2.3) and my understanding of the original meaning of the epithet jātávedas- (in d here) as ‘having (all) beings as possessions’. However, ‘to be known’, found in the standard tr., would certainly be possible here.

Note that the phrasal verb cáno √dhā ‘take delight’ takes an acc. obj. vandā́ru, as is standard.

In the 2nd hemistich it is uncertain (but not terribly important) which of the nominatives is the predicate with bhū́t. It is more difficult to attribute the usual change of state sense ‘become/became’ to bhū́t; Hoffmann’s interpretation (p. 136) as a general statement about Agni seems reasonable. Indeed, I might be tempted to emend my ‘has been’ to ‘is’, to match the presential injunctive cáno dhāt in the preceding hemistich. The presence of this unnecessary bhū́t may well be accounted for by the figure in which it participates: uṣarbhúd bhū́d, which pleasingly has near rhyme forms from two different roots.

The collocation uṣarbhúd- átithi- recurs in VI.15.1.

