+++
title = "03"

+++
The first hemistich treats the billowing smoke and bright flames of physical fire. The kernel of the first pāda, … yásya panáyanti ábhvam, is almost identical to II.4.5 ā́ yán me ábhvaṃ vanádaḥ pánanta “The formless mass [=smoke] of the woodeater which they (first) marvelled at.” Cf. comm. ad loc. In that verse also the next step for Agni is to become bright. In our vs. I supply ‘mortals’ from 2c as subj.

of panáyanta, but undefined ‘they’ is also possible.

The problem in pāda a is dyā́vo ná. We might like this to be genitive sg., allowing it to be parallel to yásya and depend on ábhvam: “whose formless mass they marvel at like that *of heaven.” But there is no way that dyā́vaḥ can be a genitive, and in any case it is also not at all clear that heaven is shaped like a formless mass. Old (ZDMG 55.291 = KlSch 750) attempts to rescue this interpr. by assuming anacoluthon and mixture between the two constructions “Agni has ábhvam like the heavens” and “they admire A's ábhvam,” but besides being overtricky, in both instances ‘heaven’ should be genitive, since Skt. lacks a ‘have’ verb and uses GEN X for such values. (He does not push this interpr. in the Noten.) Taking dyā́vaḥ as the nom. pl. it must be, Ge and Re assume that dyā́vaḥ ná belongs with the second pāda, as a simile with the verb vaste -- so Ge “Er … kleidet sich wie die Himmel in Glanz.” Although this makes sense, it is syntactically impossible, at least as far as I can see: it requires fronting the simile around the entire relative clause, a major violation of standard RVic syntax. My own interpr. takes both the morphology and the syntax seriously: given the structure of the pāda, nom. pl. dyā́vaḥ should be being compared to the subject of panáyanti. In fact, this is possible semantically as well: the heavens can marvel at Agni’s smoke that is billowing all the way up there. As often, assuming what the meaning of a RVic passage should be has led interpreters to distort the grammar to get to that meaning and has prevented them from reflecting on what the poet meant in producing a non-hackneyed image.

The 2nd hemistich presents its own problems, primarily because of missing or unspecified arguments to the verb. In c ví … inóti lacks an overt object. Ge supplies “Schätze” and interprets the phrase in positive fashion. He reasonably cites as parallels, both from the immediately following hymn, VI.5.3 … inoṣi … vásūni and

