+++
title = "05"

+++
The first half of this vs. is fairly straightforward; the second bristles with nearly insoluble difficulties.

The adverbial nítikti ‘sharply’ presumably refers to haste -- as in Engl. “look sharp!” meaning “hurry!” Alternatively it could refer to the shape of flames, with their apparent sharp edges.

In b rā́ṣṭrī is somewhat surprising, whether it is applied to vāyúḥ ‘wind’ (so Ge) or to Agni (publ. tr.), since it is fem. and both of those are masc. (pace Debrunner, who suggests, implausibly, in AiG II.2.407 that vāyú- might in this passage be “ausnahmsweise Fem.”). Gr simply lists this occurrence as a separate stem rā́ṣṭrī masc., next to the same stem identified as fem. It unfortunately cannot be the nom. sg. of an -in-stem ‘possessing a kingdom (rāṣṭrá-)’ because it should then be accented *rāṣṭrī́. This -ī-stem occurs twice elsewhere referring to Vāc and therefore is clearly fem., as we would expect. In our passage I think it has been employed as an imperfect pun with (unexpressed) rā́trī- ‘night’ to evoke that stem in this passage concerning Agni’s dominance of the nights (aktū́n), here expressed by a distinct stem aktú-.

The image is that of a triumphant king marching across territory. Cf. the similar sentiment in VI.9.1, again part of this Agni cycle, … ná rā́ jā / ávātiraj jyótiṣāgnís támāṃsi “(Agni) like a king suppressed the dark shades with his light” and IV.4.1 (also of Agni) yāhí rā́ jeva ámavām̐íbhena “Drive like an aggressive king with his entourage.” The relevance of the wind is unclear to me, except perhaps to indicate the speed of Agni’s progress.

As noted above, the 2nd hemistich is a mess. So Old (ZDMG 55.291-92) “Der dritte Pāda ist schwierig und ein s i c h e r e s Resultat wohl unerreichbar.” Interpr.

therefore differ significantly, and I cannot treat the details of all. As already noted by Old, some help is given by semi-parallel passages containing √tṝ + árātīḥ: IX.96.15 átyo ná vājī́táratī́d árātīḥ “(he,) like a prize-winning steed, outstrips hostilities” (also with a horse in the simile, as here); III.24.1 duṣṭáras tárann árātīḥ “hard to overcome, but overcoming hostilities”; and, in this Agni cycle, VI.16.27 táranto aryó árātīḥ “overcoming the hostilities of the stranger.” Similar to this last passage is VIII.60.12 táranto aryá ādíśaḥ “overcoming the aims of the stranger.” These parallels suggest that the frame of the passage is árātīḥ √tṝ. The superimposability of the last two passages further suggests that árātīḥ and ādíśām in our passage should be equated, since acc. plurals of both serve as obj. of tárantaḥ in the same formula, and that ā́díshere has negative connotations, unlike some other occurrences of this stem. Of course, the difference in case between them here (acc. pl. árātīḥ versus gen. pl.

ādíśāṃ) makes the equation tricky, but I think that, in juxtaposing these two negatively viewed objects, the poet has demoted one (ādíś-) to a dependent genitive.

(That is, rather than having “may we outstrip hostilities (and) (ill-)intentions,” we have “may we outstrip the hosilities of (ill-)intentions.”) The remaining problem in pāda c — and it is a major one — is what to do with the truncated relative clause introduced by yás te. Old (ZDMG 55.292, reprised in Noten) considers numerous possibilities, none of which he seems particularly enamoured of, and Ge, Re, Gonda (VedLit. 236), Hoffmann (Fs. Thieme [1980] =Aufs. III.753-54), Scar (708), etc., add more. A number of interpr. take the rel.

construction as embedded between the verb tūryā́ma and its object árātīḥ, sometimes by introducing an otherwise unidentified new actor, sometimes by emending yás to

*yā́s to allow it to refer to one of the fem. pl. ā́díśām or árātīḥ. I would of course
prefer to avoid such embedding on principle, and in fact each attempt to produce such an interpr. runs into further difficulties, which require emendation (of the rel.

pronoun or of gen. ādíśām), highly unusual case usage, or supplying significant amounts of material — or a combination of the three. So embedding does not produce an otherwise clean syntactic or semantic result. I will not rehearse the details of all these ultimately unsatisfactory proposals, but simply present my own (also ultimately unsatisfactory, I’m afraid). I take tūryā́ma yáḥ to be an improper relative construction “… we who …”, with disharmony in number between the 1st pl. verb and the sg. rel. prn.; the sg. yáḥ would have been imported from/enforced by the numerous rel. cl. in this Agni cycle beginning yás te and referring to the pious mortal and his ritual service to Agni. Similar 2nd position rel. are VI.2.4 ṛ́dhād yás te …, 2.5 samídhā yás te …, and there are also a number of pāda-initial exx. of yás te: VI.1.9, 5.5, 13.4, 15.11. Thus, although the overall structure of the sentence in cd is couched as (1st) plural, the template of the “pious mortal” defining relative clause would impose a singular in that construction. (Note that the person is unspecified, since the rel. cl. lacks a verb.) In the publ. tr. I supply a verb “serve,” but I would now omit the verb, with the rel. cl. only nominal yás te “who is/are yours” or “who is/are for you.” The main-clause verb tūryā́ma would have been fronted around this minimal clause.

We come finally to the simile of pāda d, which again has inspired numerous interpr., which again I will leave undiscussed. The particular issues are 1) the precise sense and reference of (pari)hrút-, 2) the grammatical identity of hrútaḥ and pátataḥ, which could both be either gen.-abl. sg. or acc. pl., 3) whether those last two should be construed separately or together, 4) whether √pat can mean ‘fall’ at this period. I answer 4) with a negative, though Ge’s and Scar’s interpr. depend on that sense. I also follow Hoffmann in seeing the simile as depicting a race and racecourse, though I think -hrút- refers to the curves of the racetrack and the curving course of the racehorse. I take both hrútaḥ and pátataḥ as acc. pl., but in separate syntagms: pátataḥ is the obj. of tūryā́ma in the simile and refers to the competing horses “flying” around the course -- thus corresponding to árātīḥ in the frame -- while hrútaḥ is construed with parihrút as an etymological figure and has no direct correspondent in the frame. For the other occurrence of the root noun hrút-, where it likewise refers to real life curves, see comm. ad IX.61.27.

