+++
title = "07"

+++
This vs. has a number of metrical problems or peculiarities. In pāda a the caesura unusually splits the splv. suffix from its base: mandrá-tamam; pāda b has an unusual opening (on which see below). Pāda c is, at least by the Pp. analysis, not only a syllable short (hence HvN’s rest at 5), but has a bad cadence for a Triṣṭubh; for possible solutions, see disc. below. Pāda d also has a bad cadence, but a different one and not easy to fix.

Instr. arkaśokaíḥ unites the instrumentals arkaíḥ of 6a and the śocísā of 6d. I take it as a pun, with arka- representing both ‘ray’ and ‘chant’, both of which meanings are found for this stem in nearby passages: in the immediately preceding vs. 6a it means ‘ray’ and refers to the similarity of Agni’s rays to those of the sun; in the next hymn VI.5.5 it appears in a sequence of ritual items, adjacent to uktaíḥ, and must refer to priestly chants. In our passage “ray-flames” are attributed to Agni, “chant-flames” to “us.” In b, as noted above, the first word vavṛmáhe is metrically bad: a heavy 2nd syllable would be preferable, as it would in the other 4 occurrences of this 1st pl. pf., as well as in 2nd sg. vavṛṣé. Kü (459) plausibly suggests that the original reading of this form was *vuvūrmáhe, as we would expect for this seṭ root, which was redactionally changed, as aniṭ forms crept into this root. Note the echo -máhe máhi.

The accent on śróṣi is somewhat troubling, as it is very unlikely to begin a clause. One could construct such a meaning: “Since we have chosen you … as a great thing for us, listen, o Agni!” But the most natural way to construe the sequence is … naḥ śróṣi “listen to us” (cf., e.g., I.133.6, VI.26.1 (…) śrudhī́naḥ, etc.), as Old (ZDMG 55.292) also points out -- which in turn requires that immediately preceding máhi be part of that clause to host the enclitic naḥ. Old (ZDMG 55.292-93 and Noten) suggests rather that śróṣi is still under the domain of hí, but this seems unlikely, since it would involve an asyndetic conjoining of a preterital perfect and a si-impv. (/subjunctive). I suggest that the accent was supplied redactionally on the basis of párṣi in the next vs. (8b) and, especially, ghóṣi in the next hymn (VI.5.6d), both in the same metrical position and receiving their accents honestly.

śróṣi is also the only attestation of this si-imperative, an isolated formation beside the very well-attested root aorist. In particular, there are no s-aor. subjunctive forms of the type that regularly support the si-impv. I do not entirely understand how or why it was formed, but, given the tight formulaic relationships between the hymns in this Agni cycle, I suggest it may have been based on semantically identical and rhyming ghóṣi in VI.5.6; as was discussed above, it is possible that the accent of śróṣi is owing to the same source. However, MLW reminds me that “s-forms of k'leu are very wide spread in Indo-European (Lith. klausyti, TB. klyaus· and there might even be an exact match for śróṣi in Messapic klaohi. Cf. also srauṣat. Nonetheless, I still favor an internal Skt. explanation.

As already noted, pāda c is both metrically deficient and afflicted with a bad cadence. Old (both ZDMG 55.293 and Noten) suggests restoring devátātā, as in 1a, also pāda final. Though this would fix both metrical problems and would also make contextual sense, I do not understand how such a corruption could have arisen. I prefer, and have adopted, Ge’s suggestion (n. 7cd) to read vāyúm beginning pāda d as vā āyúm, with vā going with the previous pāda. devátā appears several times in a Triṣṭubh cadence followed by a monosyllable (IV.44.2, 58.10, VII.85.3) -- so … devátā vā# would be a fine pāda-end -- and the vā can easily conjoin the two instr.

śávasā devátā. The reanalysis of vā āyúm to vāyúm can have been based on pādainitial vāyúr in 5b. Agni is called Āyu on a number of occasions (see, e.g., I.31.11, X.20.7, and Gr s.v. āyú- def. 2). Although Ge’s idea seems eminently sensible to me, it is passed over in silence by Re. An asterisk should be inserted before “Āyu” in the publ. tr.

I do not see any way to improve the cadence in d. The splv. nṛ́tama- is not suitable for the cadence of any Rigvedic meter, though it also appears there in VI.33.3.