+++
title = "+165"

+++
165
Indra and the Maruts
Indra (1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10–12), the Maruts (3, 5, 7, 9), and Agastya (13–15) 15 verses: triṣṭubh
R̥gveda I.165, 170, and 171 together tell a story in which Indra and the Maruts  argue over their rights to a sacrifice offered by the sage Agastya. In the absence of  a full, contemporary narrative, it is difficult to reconstruct the events of this story.  Apparently Agastya’s sacrifice was originally intended for the Maruts. Indra arrived  at the place of the sacrifice first, however, and complained that nothing was being  given to him (170). Agastya, frightened by the god (cf. 171.4), then gave the sacri
fice to Indra. At this point the Maruts arrived expecting that the sacrifice would be  offered to them. Agastya tried to appease the Maruts (171), who were understandably  angry that the sacrifice had gone to Indra. Indra and the Maruts then confront one  another (165), and each side asserts its power and worthiness to receive the sacrifice.  Ultimately, however, the Maruts concede Indra’s superiority (165.9), and Indra and  the Maruts become reconciled with one another (vs. 11) and share the sacrifice. At the  very end of the hymn the poet states one of the reasons that he recalls this story: he  hopes to be reconciled to the gods, just as the Maruts were reconciled to Indra. Stanley Insler has proposed the attractive theory that this group of hymns  forms a small Aindramāruta epic, whose purpose was to justify a ritual change  that occurred during the time of the poet. In the classical Vedic ritual the Midday  Pressing is dedicated to Indra along with the Maruts, but for much of the core  R̥gveda the Midday Pressing belongs to Indra alone. This narrative tells how the  Maruts also came to share the soma along with Indra.
In verse 9d we read kariṣyā́ḥ with Oldenberg and others, and in verse 15c we read  ’vayā́m, also with Oldenberg.