+++
title = "08"

+++
This vs. is more complex than it first appears, at least in my interpr. The dominant reading is the one given by Ge: the simile in c matches the frame in a, with b parenthetic. Nearby III.52.3bc [=IV.32.16bc] is nearly identical with minor morphological variation in the frame: joṣáyāse gíraś ca naḥ / vadhūyúr iva yóṣaṇām.

This interpr. is undeniable. However, I think the intervening b pāda can also be seen as a target of the simile, but in a syntactically twisted way. The object of the verb avā ‘help’ is the NOUN + PARTICIPLE phrase (in reverse order) vāyayántam … dhíyam “the insight seeking the prize,” which, extracted from its role as object and presented as a simple clause, would represent “the insight (nom.) seeks the prize (acc.),” with subject/object syntactic relations. Thus reconfigured, the phrase in b would match the simile in c: “our insight seeks the prize, as a bride-seeking man (seeks) a maiden.” The syntactic transformation of one of the parts of the structural pair from clause into acc. participial phrase does not disrupt their functional and semantic matching -- it rather shows again the pleasure that RVic poets get from off-kilter correspondences.

(See, e.g., the simile/frame pair at the end of the previous hymn, III.61.7d with comm. above.) This secondary reading presents another twist. In the dominant reading the subj. of the impv. juṣasva is a (male) god, the obj. a hymn (gír-), a word feminine in gender. These genders match those of the simile: the subj. a bride-seeking male, the obj. a maiden. But when we consider the underlying clause in b, the genders are reversed: the insight (dhī́-) is feminine; she is the seeker, not the sought, while the prize (vā́ja-) she seeks is a masc. noun.

