+++
title = "01"

+++
The impv. píba is accented, though it is located mid-clause. There is no obvious reason for this. Old suggests weakly (ZDMG 60: 736) that it is an emphatic accent, but this is of course a circular argument: any verb bearing an unexpected accent can be called emphatic. I find the accent esp. disturbing because the identical phrase, minus the initial voc. índra, is found without accented impv. elsewhere: \#sómam somapate piba# (V.40.1=VIII.21.3) versus our #índra sómaṃ somapate píbemám#. There are several possible contributing factors. First, three pādas at the beginning of this hymn begin with accented píbā (2b, 3d, 5b), and our form may have had its accent added redactionally. However, I think that píba has special status and can be accented in positions that strict syntactic rules would not allow. (This is rather like Old’s “emphatic” argument, except that I limit the effect to a single verb form.) See esp. I.15.1, II.37.1-3 and comm. there. The unsanctioned accent may arise partly because píba ‘drink!’ is a particularly rousing verb in RVic discourse. It also often occurs in non-initial position when it nonetheless legitimately has accent -- after init. vocatives (e.g. índra píba III.36.2, etc.) or at the beginning of a clause after another short clause (or clauses) (e.g., VIII.4.8 tū́yam éhi drávā píba “Come here swiftly! Run! Drink!”), and this may have led to the sense that it can be accented in non-initial position in general. I also note in Lub’s conspectus that unaccented piba generally occupies either final position in its pāda or second position, while accented píba, besides being common and expected in initial position, tends to avoid both those positions except when 2nd position follows an initial voc. (as in III.36.2, etc.) or final position opens a new clause (as in VIII.4.8). Note that if this distribution holds, the “identical” phrases I cite at the beginning of this comment are not the same after all, because unaccented piba is pāda-final and our accented píba is followed by another element. However, there are a few counterexamples with pāda-final pibȧ not beginning a new clause (e.g., VIII.4.3, 65.5). One can speculate on why 2nd and final position would favor the unaccented verb while full medial favors the accented form: namely, that 2nd position is of course Wackernagel’s position, where enclitics typically migrate, and, assuming a basic SOV underlying order, absolute final position is the default position for unaccented main-clause verbs. Still, the full medial position where we find accented main-clause píba does not otherwise favor or impose accent on other verbs that appear there, so if this hypothesis holds, it is only for this special verb.

Ge rather charmingly suggests that praprúthya represents “brr machend” to stop the horses. Although “whoa” would be the equivalent English word/vocal gesture, given the object ‘lips’ (śípre), I wonder if it’s the “horse training voice command” (gleaned on the internet) called “smooching” -- defined as “kissing sound with lips used to ask a horse to move on or up a gait.” I rather like the idea of Indra smooching to his fallow bays.

