+++
title = "14"

+++
The standard tr. (see also Kü 186) take the two verbs vivéṣa and jajā́na as parallel in the yád clause, with mā obj. of the first and possibly of the 2nd. I prefer to take vivéṣa as the main clause verb, followed by the yád clause, whose (sole) verb is jajā́na. vivéṣa then owes its accent to its initial position in the pāda. This interpr.

allows mā to take a more natural place, and it also saves us from positing a personal object to vivéṣa, which otherwise is not so construed. (Note that Kü’s second tr. of this passage [p. 502] is entirely different from his first: he distributes the clauses as I do, but takes vivéṣa as first sg.) And what does it all mean? In my view the dhiṣáṇā ‘holy place’ is here the ritual ground, and she is credited with the “birth” of the poet qua poet. After this birth, the poet can produce the praise of Indra that he is credited with in pāda b, and this in turn leads to the good results in pāda c.

Pāda c contains two different subordinators, yátra ‘where, when’ and yáthā ‘so that’, with a single verb, subjunctive pīparat. Ge’s explan., that we simply have a doubling of relatives, seems to me the best account; this is reflected, more or less, by Old’s “wo (und) wie …,” though Old goes on to suggest a complex crossing of two different constructions, which seems over-elaborate. In the publ. tr. I have rendered yátra as a temporal adv. (“at that time”) with no subordinating force, since I think yáthā expresses purpose and controls the subjunctive.

Rather than taking áṃhasaḥ as an ablative, with most others, I supply pārám ‘far shore’, a word related to pā́rya- in pāda b and to the verb pīpárat itself, and found in this context elsewhere; cf. II.33.3 párṣi ṇaḥ pārám áṃhasaḥ. Here as well áṃhasaḥ is then a gen. dependent on *pārám. Although it unfortunately involves a breach of the pāda boundary, I also take nāvéva with the preceding pāda, because this simile is almost entirely limited to passages containing verbal forms to √pṛ (I.46.7, 97.7, 99.1, V.4.9, 25.9, VIII.16.11, 18.17, IX.70.10). I also find it hard to imagine Indra traveling by boat, even metaphorically.

