+++
title = "Adhyāya II, Kaṇḍikā 2"

+++
## 01
1. On the full moon day of Āśvayuja the Āśvayujī ceremony (is performed).

## 02
2 [^1] . Having adorned the house, having bathed and put on clean garments, they should pour out a mess of cooked food for Paśupati, and should sacrifice it with (the formula), To Paśupati, to Śiva, to Śaṃkara, to Pṛṣātaka svāhā!'

## 03
3. He should sacrifice with his joined hands a mixture of curds and butter (pṛṣātaka) with (the formula), 'May what is deficient be made full to me; may what is full not decay to me. To Pṛṣātaka svāhā!'

## 04
4 [^2] . 'United with the seasons, united with the manners, united with Indra and Agni, svāhā!

'United with the seasons, united with the manners, united with the Viśve devās, svāhā!

'United with the seasons, united with the manners, united with Heaven and Earth, svāhā!' - with (these formulas) a mess of cooked food is offered at the

Āgrayaṇa sacrifice by one who has set up the (sacred Śrauta) fires.

## 05
5. Also by one who has not set up the (Śrauta) fires (the same offering is performed) in the (sacred) domestic fire.



[^1]:  2, 2. 'The plural "They should sacrifice it" means, that while the sacrifice is performed by the householder, his sons and the other persons belonging to the house should touch him.' Nārāyaṇa.

[^2]:  The Āgrayaṇa sacrifice, which is offered when the sacrificer is going to partake of the first-fruits of the harvest, is treated of, with relation to a sacrificer who keeps the Śrauta fires, in the Śrauta-sūtra II, q. This Sūtra in my opinion should be understood as a supplementary addition to that chapter. Nārāyaṇa refers the rule here given to the case of any incident or danger (āpad) which prevents the sacrificer from performing the ceremony in its fuller form, as prescribed in the Śrauta-sūtra.