+++
title = "Adhyāya II, Kaṇḍikā 5"

+++
## 01
1. On the following day the Anvaṣṭakya (i.e. the ceremony following the Aṣṭakā, is performed).

## 02
2 [^1] . Having prepared (a portion) of that same meat, having established the fire on a surface inclined towards the south, having fenced it in, and made a door on the north side of the enclosure, having strewn round (the fire) three times sacrificial grass with its roots, without tossing it, turning the left side towards the fire, he should put down the things to be offered, boiled rice, boiled rice with sesamum seeds, rice-milk, meal-pap with curds, and meal-pap with honey.

## 03
3 [^2] . (The ceremony should be performed) according to the ritual of the Piṇḍapitṛyajña.

## 04
4 [^3] . Having sacrificed (of those sorts of food) with the exception of the meal-pap with honey, let him give (lumps of those substances) to the Fathers.

## 05
5. And to (their) wives, with the addition of rum and the scum of boiled rice.

## 06
6. Some (place the lumps to be offered) into pits, into two or into six:

## 07
7. In those situated to the east he should give (the offerings) to the Fathers.

## 08
8. In those to the west, to the wives.

## 09
9 [^4] . Thereby the ceremony celebrated in the rainy season on the Māgha day, in the dark fortnight after the full moon of Prauṣṭhapada (has been declared).

## 10
10 [^5] . And thus he should offer (a celebration like the Anvaṣṭakya) to the Fathers every month, observing uneven numbers (i.e. selecting a day with an uneven number, inviting an uneven number of Brāhmaṇas, &c.).

## 11
11. He should give food at least to nine (Brāhmaṇas),

## 12
12. Or to an uneven number;

## 13
13 [^6] . To an even number on auspicious occasions or on the performance of meritorious deeds (such as the consecration of ponds, &c.);

## 14
14. To an uneven number on other (occasions).

## 15
15 [^7] . The rite is performed from left to right. Barley is to be used instead of sesamum.



[^1]:  5, 2. The meat is that of the animal killed on the Aṣṭakā day; see chap. 4, 53.

[^2]:  This ritual is given in the Śrauta-sūtra II, 6 seq.

[^3]:  He sacrifices the two oblations prescribed in the Śrauta-sūtra II, 6, 12, to Soma pitṛmat and to Agni kavyavāhana.

[^4]:  Comp. the note on Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya III, 13, 1.

[^5]:  Comp. Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya IV, 1, 1.

[^6]:  Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya IV, 4, 4.

[^7]:  Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya IV, 4, 6. 9.