+++
title = "Adhyāya II, Kaṇḍikā 8"

+++
## 01
1. Now he should examine the ground in the following ways.

## 02
2. He should dig a pit knee-deep and fill it again with the same earth (which he has taken out of it).

## 03
3. If (the earth) reaches out (of the pit, the ground is) excellent; if it is level, (it is) of middle quality; if it does not fill (the pit, it is) to be rejected.

## 04
4. After sunset he should fill (the pit) with water and leave it so through the night.

## 05
5. If (in the morning) there is water in it, (the ground is) excellent; if it is moist, (it is) of middle quality; if it is dry, (it is) to be rejected.

## 06
6. White (ground), of sweet taste, with sand on the surface, (should be elected) by a Brāhmaṇa.

## 07
7. Red (ground) for a Kṣatriya.

## 08
8. Yellow (ground) for a Vaiśya.

## 09
9. He should draw a thousand furrows on it and should have it measured off as quadrangular, with equal sides to each (of the four) directions;

## 10
10. Or as an oblong quadrangle.

## 11
11 [^1] . With a Śamī branch or an Udumbara branch he sprinkles it (with water), going thrice round it, so that his right side is turned towards it, reciting the Śantātīya hymn.

## 12
12. And (so he does again three times) pouring out water without interruption, with the three verses, 'O waters, ye are wholesome' (Rig-veda X, 9, 1 seqq.).

## 13
13 [^2] . In the interstices between the bamboo staffs he should have the (single) rooms constructed.

## 14
14. Into the pits in which the posts are to stand, he should have an Avakā, i.e. (the water-plant called) Śīpāla put down; then fire will not befall him: thus it is understood (in the Śruti).

## 15
15 [^3] . Having put (that plant) into the pit in which the middle-post is to stand, he should spread (on it) eastward-pointed and northward-pointed Kuśa grass and should sprinkle (on that grass) water into which rice and barley have been thrown, with (the words), 'To the steady one, the earth-demon, svāhā!'

## 16
16 [^4] . He then should, when (the middle-post) is being erected, recite over it (the two verses), 'Stand here, fixed in the ground, prosperous, long-lasting (?), standing amid prosperity. May the malevolent ones not attain thee!

'To thee (may) the young child (come), to thee the calf . . .; to thee (may) the cup of Parisrut (come); (to thee) may they come with pots of curds.'



[^1]:  8, 11. The hymn of which all verses (except a few) commence with, and frequently contain, the word śam (Rig-veda VII, 35).

[^2]:  The bamboo staffs (vaṃśa) rest on the chief posts (sthūṇā); see chap. 9, 1. 2.

[^3]:  Comp. chap. 1, 4.

[^4]:  Comp. Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya III, 3, 1 and the note there. How stāmirāvatīm should be corrected and translated is quite uncertain. Instead of poṣasva Prof. Stenzler proposes to read poṣasya, as Śāṅkhāyana has; I have adopted this correction. - In the second verse jāyatāṃ saha seems to be corrupt; comp. my note on Śāṅkhāyana III, 2, 9. Instead of pariśritaḥ we should read, as Śāṅkhāyana, Pāraskara, and the Atharva-veda (III, 12, 7) have, parisrutaḥ.