+++
title = "Adhyāya II, Kaṇḍikā 9"

+++
## 01
1. (Over) the bamboo staff, when it is put on (the middle-post, he recites the hemistich),

## 02
2. 'Rightly ascend the post, O staff, bestowing on us long life henceforward.'

## 03
3. On four stones, on which Dūrvā grass has been spread, he should establish the water-barrel with (the words), 'Arise on the earth' - 

## 04
4 [^1] . Or with (the verse), 'The Araṅgara sounds, three times bound with the strap. It praises the welfare; may it drive away ill.'

## 05
5. He then should pour water into it with (the verse), 'Hither may king Varuṇa come with the plentiful (waters); at this place may he stay contented; bringing welfare, dropping ghee may they lie down together with Mitra.'

## 06
6 [^2] . He then 'appeases' it (in the following way).

## 07
7 [^3] . He puts gold into water into which rice and barley have been thrown, and (with that water) he sprinkles it three times, going round it with his right side turned towards it, with the Śantātīya hymn.

## 08
8 [^4] . And (so he does again three times) pouring out water without interruption, with the three verses, 'O waters, ye are wholesome' (Rig-veda X, 9, I seqq.).

## 09
9 [^5] . In the middle of the house he should cook a mess of food, sacrifice (therefrom) with the four verses, 'Vāstoṣpati, accept us' (Rig-veda VII, 54, 1 seqq.), verse by verse, should prepare food, should give to the Brāhmaṇas to eat, and should cause them to say, 'Lucky is the ground! Lucky is the ground!'



[^1]:  9, 4. The meaning of Araṅgara is unknown to me; it seems to be a musical instrument. Comp. Atharva-veda XX, 135, 13.

[^2]:  The ground on which the house is to be built.

[^3]:  On the Śantātīya hymn, see above, chap. 8, Ir.

[^4]:  This Sūtra is identical with chap. 8, 12.

[^5]:  Comp. above, chap. 3, 13.