+++
title = "+002"

+++
2 (622)
Indra (1–40), Vibhindu’s Dānastuti (41–42)
Medhātithi Kāṇva and Priyamedha Āṅgirasa (1–40), Medhātithi Kāṇva (41–42) 42 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 28, arranged in trcas. ̥
As noted above, this hymn has considerably more verses than the preceding one,  and is therefore apparently out of sequence. The discrepancy in length between  the two hymns is one reason Oldenberg suggests that VIII.1 may have lost verses in  transmission. (See the introduction to the preceding hymn.)
As indicated by the Anukramaṇī, the majority of the hymn is devoted to Indra, with  the final verses a dānastuti; however, despite the Anukramaṇī’s division, the dānastuti  must begin with verse 40, not 41, both because of the tr̥ca division and on grounds  of content and tone. In the Indra portion the focus remains almost exclusively on the  preparation of soma in its various forms, and the hope that Indra will come to our  sacrifice, drink of our soma, and reward us. As often in such hymns, there is a journey  component (esp. vss. 19, 26–28), and underlying the calls to Indra to journey to our  sacrifice is the worry that Indra will stay away from our sacrifice because of anger or  the appeals of other sacrificers (vss. 5–6, 19–20). There are also some slight indications  that the hymn is concerned with a ritual innovation being introduced in some of the  R̥gvedic clans, the Third Pressing, which takes place in the evening and involves soma  mixed with milk. There are two occurrences of the word ā́śir “milk-mixture” (vss. 10,  11; see also 9b [ā́śir is also found twice in VIII.31, which also seems to contain refer ences to Third Pressing]), and verse 18 seems to imply that the gods themselves are not  satisfied with a soma sacrifice that ends with the Midday Pressing. The emphasis on  the number three (esp. vss. 7–9, 21) may also support this interpretation, as may the  hope expressed that Indra will not spend his evening away from us (vs. 20).
Aside from the thematic unity of some of the tr̥cas (e.g., vss. 7–9 on the three  types of soma), this long first section of the hymn has little apparent structure, and  it is also notable for its lack of mythological reference (beyond a few token men tions of Vr̥tra, vss. 26, 31, 36). But throughout this section there are unusual simi les (e.g., vss. 6, 12, 17, 19, 20) and turns of phrase, including some untranslatable  grammatical and lexical puns (as in vs. 3). The loose texture and the lightness and  transparency of the meter also help to make it an appealing piece.
The dānastuti (vss. 40–42) is, as often, hard to interpret. In verse 40 the actor  seems still to be Indra, who in the guise of a ram had some sort of interaction with  Medhyātithi: the language here is unclear, and although there are various treatments  of Medhātithi (sic) and Indra as ram in the Brāhmaṇa literature, these seem desper
ate attempts to make sense of the fleeting and mysterious reference here. Though it

appears to be Indra who is addressed in a subordinate clause in the 2nd person in  verse 40, the 2nd person reference has shifted in verse 41 to Vibindhu, apparently  the human patron. Perhaps Indra’s generosity is being superimposed on this human  patron. The final verse, 42, like the final verse of the dānastuti in VIII.1 (vs. 34), con
cludes the hymn with a sexual innuendo: two “daughters of joy” (a phrase that goes  neatly into French as filles de joie “prostitutes”) have also been given to the poet.  These may indeed be two women, but since they are called “milk-strong,” it is quite  possible that the poet is referring to the two breasts of one woman. If so, this verse  responds directly to VIII.1.34, where the woman of the poet praises his member, and  recalls IV.32.22-24, with a likewise disguised reference to the breasts of a woman  given to the poet in payment for his verse.