+++
title = "06"

+++
The second hemistich has a few complications. We can start with the utá vā: what is it conjoining? Ge and Re seem to take it as conjoining the vocc. rudrāḥ and ágne, and Klein (DGRV II.170) explicitly follows this interpr., though giving no other exx. of conjoined vocatives. But esp. given the various choices of place given in ab, conjoined by vā, the more natural reading is to assume it offers another alternative to átaḥ ‘from there’ in c; the most natural of those choices would be “or (from) here.” WG, by contrast, recognize that a choice of locations is what is probably meant, but have to supply the 2nd alternative complete: “von da aus … oder (von wo ihr euch) auch nun (befindet).” My solution may be too tricky to be acceptable, but I think the ‘here’ is implicit in the asya/asyá. First, note that the cross-pāda sandhi … asyā́gne … is compatible with either an unaccented or an accented gen. sg. pronoun. The Pp. takes it as the former, but if it is to be construed with havíṣaḥ in the next pāda, as the standard tr. (incl. the publ. tr.) take it, as an adjective it should be accented (asyá). I do think it has an adjectival role with havíṣaḥ, but I also think this near-deictic is a substitute for an adverb of place like ihá or itás, and the possibility of non-accentuation is an indirect indication that it can also be taken independently of havíṣaḥ to express the potential location of the Rudras here and now on the ritual ground with Agni. I would slightly adjust the tr. to “from there, o Rudras, or (here and) now, o Agni, be cognizant …” The awkwardness of folding Agni into the Maruts’ actions is also on view in the next vs. I do not understand the presence of the future impv. vittā́t. Perhaps with Sāy. (… āgacchateti śeṣaḥ), we should supply a verb of motion that implicitly precedes the action of vittā́t: “from there (come here and) take cognizance …” The following hymn, V.61, gives some support to this scenario. In V.61.17 Night is ordered to carry off the speaker’s hymns to his patron, with an ordinary impv. párā vaha, while the flg. vs. contains a future impv. vocatāt (V.61.18) ordering her to speak for him once she gets there. It may also be that the future impv. was used here for convenience because the future impv. neutralizes number (also person, but that’s irrelevant here) and thus can be applicable both to the plural Rudras and the singular Agni. It’s accented because it follows an extrasentential voc. and therefore counts as being pāda-initial.

The standard tr. take yád as the neut. rel. prn. with havíṣ- as antecedent (“… the oblation that we sacrifice”), but √yaj never takes the offering as object, but rather the god who is the recipient. I therefore prefer to take yád as the subordinating conj.
