+++
title = "+045"

+++
45 (665)  
Indra (except 1: Agni and Indra)  
Triśoka Kāṇva  
42 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥  
The hymn begins and ends with a tr̥ca marked by a refrain (vss. 1–3 and 40–42). The  tr̥ca division can otherwise be faint, and in several instances seems to contravene  groupings of verse by content (see esp. vss. 36–39). The Anukramaṇī attributes the  hymn to a certain Triśoka, but this name has probably been plucked from verse 30.  
The first two verses establish a ritual mise-en-scène, but we quickly move into the  martial and competitive mode that prevails in most of the rest of this long hymn. Familiar chords are struck: Indra is exhorted to destroy enemies in various fero cious ways (e.g., vs. 8) and to parcel out their goods to us (e.g., vs. 15), to drink our  soma and aid our efforts (e.g., vs. 14), and to give us rich gifts (e.g., vs. 12), and he  is praised for his past deeds (see esp. vss. 25–30).  
But the hymn also has several unusual features. The poet expresses a remarkable  degree of apprehension about the exercise of Indra’s powers and fear that they may  be turned against him and his comrades. Although a certain amount of such senti ment (as in the beginning of vs. 10) is not rare in Indra hymns, the sequence of verses  31–35, which begins with a plea to Indra not to do what he has in mind and seeks  to accomplish, a sharp reversal of the usual request, depicts men in fear of being  Indra’s targets—or perhaps even just of witnessing his terrifying hyper-power (see  vss. 32, 35)—and begging for his mercy. Already in verse 19 they expressed worry  about their shaky relationship with Indra, and the poet speaks of their “offenses”  in verse 34, a term more at home in an Ādityan context.  
Even more striking are two snatches of dialogue, which bookend the hymn: the  first two verses of the second tr̥ca (vss. 4–5) and the first two verses of the penul timate tr̥ca (vss. 37–38). In the first pair the just-born Indra takes up a bow and  asks his mother about potential enemies, and she replies with what appears to be a  proverbial expression assuring him of his ultimate victory. (This scene has a close  parallel in VIII.77.1–2.) In verses 37–38 it seems (the verses are quite obscure and  uncontextualized) that Indra and the Maruts exchange slangy insults: in 37 Indra  reproaches the Maruts (not named but identified by one of their epithets) for not  honoring their partnership by even thinking of abandoning him, while they reply in  38 by suggesting that he should have thought of that before, when he was hogging  the soma. The unspoken context is the well-known episode when all the gods but the  Maruts abandon Indra before the Vr̥tra battle (see, e.g., VIII.96.7, using some of  the same vocabulary), and the Maruts later demand from Indra a share in the soma  sacrifice because they stood by him (see especially the dialogue hymn I.165). This  intriguingly deracinated exchange seems to have been suggested to the poet by verse  36, in which he himself hopes not to be deprived of a comrade. If Indra himself  could find himself deserted by his friends, how much more conceivable such a situa tion is for a mere mortal. This theme of comradeship was announced in the refrain  to the first tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) and arises several times elsewhere in the hymn (vss. 16, 18).  
Though the hymn does not have a clear structure—and its length would have  made such a structure difficult to apprehend in a performance situation—the  themes and concerns that keep surfacing give some sense of unity, and the two little  dialogues at the two ends of the hymn grab the attention.  