+++
title = "V1"

+++


 

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

Page 15, note 1. The pole of Indian carts is itself firmly bound with thongs.

P. 27, paragraph 10. Read,--Vāj. S. I, 15 b; I, 15 c.

P. 28, par. 12, and note 2. The Kāṇva text has the correct order of castes: 'tāny etāni catvāri vāca ehīti brāhmaṇasyāgahy ādraveti rājanyasya ca vaiśyasya cādhāveti śūdrasya.'

P. 47, par. 1. The Taitt. S. (II, 6, 6) has a somewhat different version of this legend:--Agni had three elder brothers. While carrying the oblations to the gods, they perished. Agni was afraid, 'In like manner this one will meet with destruction (ārtim ārishyati).' He concealed himself. He entered the waters. The gods wished to find him. A fish betrayed him. He cursed it, 'May (people) kill thee by whatever means they can devise (dhiyā-dhiyā), who hast betrayed me!' Hence they kill the fish by whatever means they can devise, for he is accursed. They found him, and said to him, 'Come back to us and carry our oblation!' He said, 'I will ask a boon: whatever portion of the taken (ghee) shall fall outside the enclosing-sticks, before it is offered, that shall be my brothers' portion!' Hence whatever portion of the taken (ghee) falls outside the enclosing-sticks, that is their portion: with that he satisfies them.

P. 47, par. 2. The Kāṇva text reads,--'They followed Indra even as now-a-days also a Brahman follows a Kshatriya blessing him (āsaṁsamāno ’nucarati).'

P. 85, par. 6. Read,--for this represents the fringe (of the Sacrificer's nether garment), and it is on the right side that the fringe (is tucked in) . . . . for the fringe also is covered (by being tucked in). Cf. below to p. 368.

P. 118, line 18. Read,--'Thine' instead of 'Your.'

P. 164, par. 2. Professor Delbrück, Syntaktische Forschungen II, p. 118, translates, 'And from the mouth which had been drinking surā, the sparrow sprang: hence the latter sings so merrily, for indeed he sings so merrily as if it had drank surā.' Differently, however, ibid. III, p. 64.

P. 175, par. 1. Compare also the corresponding legend in Taitt. Br. I, 6, 7, 4:--Indra, having slain Vr̥tra, went to the farthest distance, thinking 'I have committed a sin (aparādham, ? I have missed him).' He said, 'Who will find this out?' The Maruts said, 'We will choose a boon, then we shall know: let the first offering be made to us!' They sported on him (Vr̥tra), &c. (According to Sāyaṇa, on Taitt. S. I, 8, 4, Indra flees from fear and says, within the Marut's hearing, 'Is Vr̥tra dead or not? Who will go near him and find it out?' &c.)

P. 183, par. 1. According to Sāyaṇa, on Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3, 10, it was the Soma-plant (soma-vallī) that was carried off by Gāyatrī devatā, and one of its leaves (parṇa) was broken off, and on falling to the ground became a palāśa tree. See also Taitt. S. VI, 1, 6; Śat. Br. III, 2, 4, 1 seq.; Weber, Ind. Stud. II, 312 seq.

P. 184, note 4. Add,--Compare Max Müller, Hist. of Anc. Sansk. Lit., p. 352.

P. 206, par. 19. Correct,--'Bhāllaveya' (also II, 1, 4, 6).

P. 288, note 2. On the etymology of nakshatra, see also Max Müller, Rig-veda-Saṁhitā IV, p. lxvi note.

P. 310, pars. 8-9. Correct,--'And whichever (of the Asuras) they (the gods) slew, he indeed remained the same (viz. alive). In consequence of this the gods were left inferior.'

P. 313, par. 20. The paragraph should have been rendered thus:--To Aruṇa Aupaveśi his kinsmen said, 'Thou art advanced in years: establish thou the fires!' He replied, 'Thereby ye tell me, "keep silence!" he who has established his fires must not speak an untruth, and only by not speaking at all one speaks no untruth: to that extent the service (of the consecrated fire) consists in truth.' Similarly the Kāṇva text,--aruṇaṁ haupaveśiṁ jñātaya ūcuc sthaviro vā asy agnī ādhatsveti.--sa hovāca tan maitad brūtha vācaṁyama evaidhīti ma brūtheti na by agni ādhāya mr̥shā vaden no vācā vadato ’mr̥shodyam asti tasmād u satyam eva vivadishet. See Delbrück, Syntaktische Forschungen III, p. 29.

P. 368, par. 24. Read,--He (the Sacrificer) then pulls down the tuck of his nether garment) and performs obeisance. Cf. p. 435, note 2.

 

 

 

 

