+++
title = "V4"

+++


 

CORRECTIONS.

Page 66, 1. 11, and note 1. The Catushṭoma is such an arrangement of the Stotras of a Soma-sacrifice in which the Stomas (or hymn-forms) employed increase successively by four syllables. See notes on XI, 5, 2, 9; XIII, 3, 1, 4 (sic!).

P. 279, line 7. Perhaps this passage had better be translated thus,--And he who, without having performed these (rites), should officiate even for another person in the performance of any other sacrifices . . .

P. 296, l. 3 from bottom. Read,--Upavasatha.

P. 394-98, paragraphs 4-9; 11. Read,--repels recurrent death.

      ,, l. 5 from bottom. Read,--tasyāhutayaś (!).

PART III.

Introduction, page xii, line 27. Read,--paśubandha.

P. xvi, l. 11 of notes. After--Śyaita-sāman, add (II, 161-2).

P. xviii, l. 23. In Sat. Br. V, 5, 3, 4, the Shoḍaśin is distinctly mentioned as forming part of the Keśavapanīya Atirātra.

P. xviii, l. 4 of notes. Read,--'form' instead of 'from.'

P. xxv, note. Add,--So also Sat. Br. V, 3, 4, 12; 4, 3, 2.

P. 38, l. 1. Read,--Vājaprasavīya.

P. 62, l. 22. Read,--(as it undoubtedly does in V, 4, 3, 18; as well as savyashṭḥā, in Atharva-v. VIII, 8, 23).

   ,, end of note. Add,--In Sat. Br. V, 4, 3, 23, saṁgrahītr̥ certainly means charioteer.'

P. 113, l. 8. The chant here alluded to is the first (or Hotr̥'s) Pr̥shṭḥa-stotra, for which see part ii, p. 339. The Abhishecanīya being, however, performed on the Ukthya, not on the Agnishṭoma, model, this stotra, on the present occasion, consists of the Br̥hat-sāman (see Introduction, pp. xvi, note 2; xxvi).

P. 136, l. 4. Read,--Barhishadaḥ.

P. 140, last line of text. For 'Āraṇi' read 'Āruṇi.'

P. 169, l. 18. Read,--'Those kindling-sticks . . . .

P. 171, l. 2. Read,--Āshāḍḥi.

P. 203, l. 10. Read,--'vāk' (voice).

P. 265, note 2. In the passage of the Ait. Br. referred to, the Vishuvat day is the central day of an Ekaviṁśarātra, or twenty-one days' performance.

P. 352, l. 10. Read,--'sand' for seed.'

P. 360, note 1. Add,--See also VIII, 7, 3, 19, where that thread is identified with the wind.

P. 363, note 1. The reference is wrong; for the real Satya-sāman. see part iv, p. 145, note a.

P. 67, l. 24. In the opposite direction, i.e. in the direction away from us.

P. 369, note 1. The reference is wrong; for the real tetra-sāman, see part iv, p. 145, note 1.

P. 379, l. 10. Read,--the breath serves everything here.

   „    l. 20. For this Sāman, based on the word 'bhūs,' see part iv, p. 145, note 1.

P. 404, l. 15. Read,--having pre-eminently endowed the man with power, he sets him up. Cf. VIII, 7, 2, 3.

P. 415, l. 4. Read,--XIII, 53.

 

 

 

 

 

 

