+++
title = "V5"

+++


 

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

Page 13, paragraphs 7, 8. We have probably to translate--the gods were created on its reaching heaven,--they were created on its entering this earth.

P. 45, par. 33, lines 6, 11. Read,--in the balance.

P. 60, l. 19. Read,--Adhvaryu.

P. 76, note 3. Read,--offering of a pap to Aditi.

P. 91, par. 4, l. 4. Read,--did we, by one of a hundred Ukthyas, dispel the darkness.

P. 107, par. 10, ll. 2, 3. Read,--form of the bull.

P. 109, note 3. Add,--Cf. also Hillebrandt, 'Varuṇa and Mitra,' p. 68 seq.

P. 130, par. 9, ll. 2, 3. Read,.--'The divine thought protect thee, not man's thought!'

P. 136, par. 6, l. 2. Under him:--Harisvāmin explains 'anu' by 'anvābhakta,' 'participating after him,' cf. XIII, 5, 4, 24.

P. 149, note 1. The commentary takes 'pr̥shṭḥyapratishṭḥite' in the sense of 'established on the pr̥shṭḥya,'--inasmuch as, in the first half of the year, he begins each month with the Abhiplava, and ends with the Pr̥shṭḥya, which is the stronger (balavattara, cf. XII, 2, 2, 16), and therefore 'ātmapratishṭḥita.'

P. 155, note 2. The MS. of the commentary is corrupt--āṅ-pūrvasyākriyate satariṇādayaḥ śaḥ bhadrāgamam vaccḥasthāne evādhikshipayati na pradeśāntara āvartata ity arthaḥ.

P. 279, note 1, l. 3 from below. Read,--'four-eyed' dog.

P. 334, note 1. 'Utsanna' probably means 'detached'; cf. II, 5, 2, 48.

P. 397, par. 6, l. 3. For whence, read,--and then.

PART IV.

P. 20, par. 5, l. 5. Read,--skin.

P. 25, note 1, l. 4. Read,--on the retaḥsic range.

P. 48, par. 5, l. 4. Read Nabhas and Nabhasya.

P. 58, par. 4, l. 5. Read,--the seventh.

P. 103, par. 11. After 'sake,' add,--'The Sākvara and Raivata sāmans for stability in the air!' for by the Sākvara and Raivata sāmans it is indeed established in the air.

P. 108, l. 8. Read,--Pūrvacitti.

P. 163, l. 3. Read,--of seven seasons.

P. 168, note 4. Delete,--According to . . . referred to.

P. 170, pars. 6-8. Read,--circumambulates.

P. 192, par. 5, l. 2. Read,--irresistible warrior.

P. 223, par. 2, l. 3. Read,--shower of wealth.

P. 295, l. 1. Instead of, then,--read, thereby.

P. 312, par. 18, l. 9. Read,--exceeds this universe.

P. 313, l. 2. Read,--nor does he exceed this universe.

P. 325, par. 14. Read,--There are these five fingers (and toes) each consisting of four parts.

Note 1. Delete,--that being the simplest kind of Soma-sacrifice.--Sāyaṇa indeed must mean--all Soma and other sacrifices, down to the Agnihotra;--hardly, all sacrifices concluding with the Agnihotra.

P. 337, note 2. Read,--'moving in front,' or 'previous performance.'

P 352, par. 23, l. 2. Read,--thousand Br̥hatīs.

P. 389, l. 9. Perhaps we ought to translate--that (gold man), indeed, is the end, the self, of everything here (or, of this universe). Cf. J. Muir, Orig. Sansk. Texts, vol. v, p. 389.

Par. 16, l. 2. Read,--they ascend to where desires have vanished.

P. 393, par. 1, l. 4. Read,--Jana Śārkarākshya.

 

 

 

 

 

