+++
title = "04"

+++
The first hemistich has a repetitive structure inside a chiastic frame. The opening ayáṃ sá yáḥ is balanced by ayáṃ sáḥ at the end of b; we might perhaps expect *yó ayáṃ sáḥ in fact. The single verb ákṛṇot, inside this frame, does for both objects, which are responsive: morphologically identical and near-rhyming acc. varimā́ṇam … varṣmā́ṇam, each with a dependent gen. belonging to a matched semantic pair, pṛthivyā́ḥ … diváḥ.

Pāda c is problematic. It lacks a verb, so it is impossible to know for sure what relations are envisioned among the ill-assorted lexical items; the real-world referents of pīyū́ṣam ‘beestings’ and tisṛ́ṣu pravátsu “on/in the three slopes” are uncertain; it is not even clear whether it should be grouped with ab or with d. Ge groups it loosely with d, renders pīyū́ṣam as “Seim” and tisṛ́ṣu pravátsu as “in die drei Strömen,” and supplies “hat … geschaffen” as the verb. I am not sure what he’s trying to convey, and pravát- does not straightforwardly mean ‘stream’, but ‘slope’ or ‘plunge’. The publ. tr. takes c with ab, supplying ákṛṇot from there, but I am now doubtful about this, in part on the basis of IX.109.6 divó dhartā́si śukráḥ pīyū́ṣah “You, the gleaming beestings, are the supporter of heaven,” where soma is identified as pīyū́ṣa- and identified as an upholder (dhartár-), reminiscent of our d sómo dādhāra. As for tisṛ́ṣu pravátsu, I wonder if this is shorthand for “pravát- plus two” as expressed in VII.50.4 praváto niváta udvátaḥ “(from) the slope, the depth, and the height”—possibly referring to the three worlds, which all appear in this verse: heaven and earth in ab, the midspace in d. Perhaps the idea is that Soma placed or supports the distillation of himself, his liquid essence, in all three worlds. If this is so, a form of √dhṛ borrowed from d would work better than √kṛ from ab.

I also now realize that the preterital tr. of dādhāra in d, matching that of Ge (“hat … befestigt”), is wrong, since, as Kü points out, the pf. of √dhṛ is always presential.

Putting this all together, I would alter the tr. of cd to “this one (upholds) his ‘beestings’ in the three “slopes” (=worlds); Soma upholds the broad midspace,” with absolutely no certainty about the rendering of c.

