+++
title = "09"

+++
The vs. contains three phonologically similar splvs., stationed at pāda edge: \#váriṣṭhe ... #váhiṣṭhayoḥ ... / ... várṣiṣṭhām#. This is somewhat reminiscent of the phonological/morphological figure in 4ab varimā́ṇam … varṣmā́ṇam, esp. since váriṣṭhe and várṣiṣṭhām belong to the same roots as the two forms in 4.

In b the HvN text should read śatāvann. This voc. is variously interpr. (see Old for some reff.), but I follow Ge, and implicitly the Pp., in taking it as (metrically) lengthened *śata-van, to a -van-stem, contra Gr’s śata-ava(n)t-, with the pres. part.

of √av ‘help’. This śatā-van- would be a byform of better attested śatá-vant-. It needs to belong to a -van- rather than a -vant- stem because otherwise the expected voc. would be -vas. But we find -vant- and -van- stems side-by-side, notably in maghávan(t)-. Debrunner (AiG II.2, most clearly p. 904, citing this passage) argues that -vant-stems are “sachlich” while -van-stems are “persönlich,” which would work for śatávant- versus our śatāvan-, but not, obviously, for maghávan(t)-.

The tr. of d is disputed. Ge takes rā́yaḥ as nom. pl. (as it generally is) and the subj. of the sg. verb tārīt: “nicht sollen die Reichtümer eines hohen Herren die unseren überbieten.” This requires that the sg. verb take a masc. pl. subj. While the neut. pl. + sg. verb construction is fairly rare, but attested and inherited, I do not know of masculine pl. equivalents. Old (ZDMG 54: 170) thinks the incongruity of number is the result of the adjustment to the formulaic nature of rā́yo aryáḥ, tr.

“mögen uns nicht die Kargen den Reichtum überwinden,” with aryáḥ nom. pl. of arí-

-- in other words a different masc. pl. subj. with sg. verb. Thieme (Fremdling, 56-57)
makes appropriately short work of both of these proposals, but I find his own solution puzzling: “Möge nicht überholen unsere Reichtümer [der] des Fremdlings.” Since he adamantly rejects the masc. pl. + sg. verb interpr., all I can figure is that he’s generating a singular *rayíḥ to serve as subject (represented by his bracketed [der]), but there is no support for this and it seems an artifice of convenience. No doubt mine does, too: like Thieme I take rā́yaḥ as acc. pl., as it sometimes is (though rāyáḥ would be expected), and for sg. subj. I supply íṣ- ‘refreshment’ from the previous pāda. I also interpr. the verb tārīt not as hostile ‘overcome’ but as a plain verb of motion ‘cross over to’; cf. usages like átāriṣma támasaḥ pā́ram asyá “we have crossed over to the far shore of this darkness” (I.92.6 = I.183-84.6, VII.73.1).

The point is that the refreshment we’ve begged Indra for should not fall into enemy hands. As discussed esp. ad IV.48.1 and VI.14.3, 20.1, I take the phrase rā́yo aryáḥ “riches of the stranger” as referring to manpower.

