+++
title = "25"

+++
The verb abhy àyaṣṭa is problematic, at least in my view. It is supposed to be the 3rd sg. mid. root aor. to √yaj ‘sacrifice’. The form is morphologically impeccable, but 1) abhí is not found with √yaj anywhere else in the RV, or indeed in Vedic; 2) for √yaj ‘sacrifice to’ to take an acc. of humans, rather than the standard gods, is skirting blasphemy. In this passage it is said to mean ‘honor’, but it is hard to see how the ubiquitous root √yaj could be so bleached, nor why the addition of the preverb abhí would effect this change. The publ. tr. “has reached towards” reflects a different analysis. I suggest that it actually belongs to the root aor. of √(n)aś ‘reach, attain’, which does appear fairly regularly with abhí. A putative injunc. in this lexeme, *abh(í)y aṣṭa, could have produced a segmentation *abhí-yaṣṭa, and in turn an augmented form abhí ayaṣṭa could have been generated to it. The sense of the passage might be similar to the current (annoying) English idiom “reach out to,” meaning “proactively contact in a positive way,” and refer to the Sārñjaya’s transfer of goods to the Bharadvāja poets. However, I recognize that it is generally preferable not to posit such a morphological misunderstanding and reformation, and also that my semantic substitution isn’t altogether compelling. MLW suggests an alternative etymology, connecting it to yáśas- ‘glory’, etc. and taking it as a med. root formation meaning ‘made famous, ennobled, glorified’. Both the morphology and the root semantics would work, though I am somewhat skeptical that a middle formation of that sort would have transitive-factitive sense.
