+++
title = "04"

+++
There are several ways to configure the syntax of this vs. The first question is whether the genitives in pāda a should be construed with the verb of b. But since ámanmahi takes an acc. (nā́ma) in b, this seems unlikely (though Maurer does it that way), and the standard tr. (including mine) supply in pāda a a form of √kṝ ‘pay tribute’, which has dominated the hymn so far (1ab, 2a, 3a) and consistently takes the gen. (The aor. ákārīt in the preceding vs. [3a], or rather the 1st pl. equivalent, seems the obvious form to supply.) The question then arises what the relationship between pādas a and b is. Ge seems to take pāda a as the main cl. and b as dependent on it (“… da wir …”), presumably subordinated by the yád ending pāda a. Re seems to follow this interpr., though with some French curlicues of his own. This type of structure, with one clause ending right before the final monosyllable of a pāda and the next beginning with that monosyllable and continuing through the next pāda, strikes me as an unprecedented, or at least exceedingly rare, clause configuration. If one of these clauses is subordinated to the other, it should be the other way around, with pāda-final yád marking what precedes as a subordinate clause and b as the main clause. (Note that although yád is preceded by a lot of material, it all belongs to a single NP.) In this account the accent on ámanmahi would be due to its pāda-initial position. This is the way WG take it. My interpr. differs from both of these in making both clauses in the first hemistich subordinate to cd, expressing a temporal progression: after we have celebrated (aor.?) and brought to mind (aor.), then we call upon (pres.).

The relationship between the genitives in a, which are simply strung together without internal structure (dadhikrā́vṇa iṣá ūrjó maháḥ), is clarified in the next hymn (IV.40.2d), where it is said that Dadhikrā(van) gave birth to íṣ- and ū́rj-.

