+++
title = "01"

+++
Note the unaccented asmin in pāda a, referring to Soma, who is the default referent even without a previous mention in the hymn.

The vs. contains three similes, each of which presents at least some interpretational challenges to the audience. The first two are in ab and match the frame “the thoughts contend over him” (… asmin … spárdhante dhíyaḥ), which preumably refers to the thoughts produced by poets at different and competing rituals (see Ober I.407 and n. 64). The second simile, in b, is the easier to interpret: “like clans over the sun” (sū́rye ná víśaḥ). Like the competing thoughts that each seek to appropriate Soma, different clans all seek to secure their place in the sun, a symbol, acdg. to Ober (I.457), of Leben and Lebenskraft, of Lebensraum.

The first simile, vājínīva śúbhaḥ, reads slightly askew. It should mean “as adornments (contend over) a prizewinner” - but what would that really mean? The passages adduced by Ge in n. 1a are not helpful, and no one else that I know of attempts to elucidate it. I think the poet has deliberately misdirected us. To begin with, although the loc. vājíni appears to match asmin in the frame as the object of contention, I think that may not be the case or may not only be the case. The vs. begins with ádhi, which therefore appears to be in tmesis with spárdhante in b, but there is only one other instance of ádhi √spṛdh in the RV (VI.34.1, where - I must admit - it seems to have the sense attributed to our passage: ‘contend over’ with loc. índre as the object of contention). The word ádhi is more often an adposition, most commonly with the loc., and so I think it is here. Although ádhi is separated from vājíni, what intervenes is Wackernagel’s position material: subordinating yád, which frequently takes 2nd position, and the enclitic asmin, which would lean upon it. So effectively ádhi … vājíni can be a prepositional phrase interrupted by the interpolation of those two Wackernagel’s position words. Under this interpr. the prizewinner is no longer the object of contention but the locus of it. Now as to śúbhaḥ: this root noun is quite well attested (over 40 occurrences, incl. the common voc. śubhás páti-), but only two attestations are plural - our passage and V.54.11, which describes the many appurenances and adornments found on the Maruts and their equipage, incl. pāda b vákṣassu rukmā́maruto ráthe śúbhaḥ “ your breasts brilliants, o Maruts, on your chariot charms” (per the publ. tr.). The śúbhaḥ here are ornaments of some sort, quite possibly sparkly or otherwise eye-catching, that jazz up the chariot to which they’re affixed. I suggest that our loc. (ádhi …) vājíni fulfills the same function as ráthe in V.54.11, and that the śúbhaḥ in our passage are not vying over or for the prizewinner, but, located on him, they are vying with each other to best catch the eye of observers.

The phrase that opens the 2nd hemistich, apó vṛṇānáḥ “choosing the waters,” is a little odd. The waters are surely the ubiquitous waters for mixing found regularly in IX, but why would Soma “choose” them? In a soma context we would expect rather apó *vasānáḥ “clothing himself in the waters”; this exact phrase opens the pāda in IX.78.1, 86.40, 96.13, 107.4, 18, 26, and with acc. sg. of the participle IX.16.2, 109.21. I suggest that our poet is knowingly playing on this standard formula, using a different root but identical formation to throw the expression offkilter. Note that vásāna- (nom. pl.) is found in the same metrical position in 4c. The identical expression, apó vṛṇānáḥ, is, however, found in V.48.1; on this opaque passage see comm. ad loc. Interpretation of the third simile in the vs. is complicated by the fact that it is unclear which part of the clause to construe it with. The frame consists of an acc. mánma ‘thought’ (à ‘poem’), which is compared to vrajáṃ ná paśuvárdhanāya “a stable for raising livestock.” But where these acc. expressions fit in the sentence is disputed: Ge (see n. 1d; also Tichy, dvitā́222 = KlSch 213) takes mánma as a second obj. with vṛṇānáḥ. But the simile then makes little sense: although Soma might well “choose a thought,” choosing a stable is a different proposition. By this interpr. the domain of the comparison would only be the acc. mánma; it could not fit with the verb (despite Tichy’s odd “wie (man) eine Hürde … [wählt]”). Although such similes, detached from the syntax of the rest of the clause, do exist, syntactic integration, esp. of non-nominative similes, is more usual and desirable. By contrast, Old takes the acc. as the obj. (or semi-obj.) of pavate. This latter suggestion seems particularly unlikely, given the stereotyped used of pavate in IX, and Old’s rendering shows how he struggles to make it work: “er verwirklicht durch sein Sichreinigen das m˚, wie (man) einen Stall …(reinigt).” Differing from both these interpr., following a remark of Re’s in his n. (“mánma dépendant librement de kavīyán …”), which is not entirely reflected in his tr., I take it with the act. denom. part. kavīyán.

The stem kavīyá- occurs only twice in the RV (and nowhere else), once as an act.

part. (here), once as a middle part. kavīyámāna- in I.164.18. Nothing therefore forbids us from assuming a direct obj. with the act. form, as I have done here. The content of the simile, which compares the building of a stable or livestock enclosure to the composing of a poem, rests on the commonality often asserted in the RV between physical and mental craftsmanship and thus fits nicely with the verb.

