+++
title = "03"

+++
This vs. does not contain a main cl., simply a subord. yád cl. in ab, extended by a participial expression in cd. The vs. can depend either on the previous vs. or the following one - or (though in my view less likely) the part. bhū́ṣan in c can be the predicate of the main cl.

The cadence of pāda a is bad; Gr suggests reading subj. *bharāte, which would fix the problem, but as Old comments, this is “natürlich ganz unsicher” - esp.

since both the opening and the break are likewise irregular (see HvN metrical comm. ad loc.).

Note the emphatic return of the poet, with kavíḥ kā́vyā in pāda a picking up kavīyán in 1a.

Pāda b and the simile it contains raise some problems. First, the nom. subject śū́ro ná ráthaḥ. The stem śū́ra- is of course a masc. noun ‘champion’, here juxtaposed with another such noun, rátha- ‘chariot’. Re renders them as distinct subjects: “tel un héros, (tel) un char-de-guerre,” but I think a blended “champion chariot” works better. The phrase also presents another possibility, which Old flirts with but ultimately dismisses: śū́raḥ is phonologically almost identical to sū́raḥ, the gen. sg. of svàr- ‘sun’, and the “chariot of the Sun” (sū́raḥ […] rátha-) is found elsewhere (I.50.9 [see comm. ad loc.], V.31.11; also sū́raḥ […] cakrám “(chariot-)wheel of the Sun” I.174.5, VI.56.3). Although I do not propose emending śū́raḥ to *sū́raḥ, I do think that phrase is lurking in the background, esp. given the presence of the sun in 2b (svar-[víde]) and, if I’m correct, also 2a.

Assuming this double reading of the subject of the simile helps interpr. the rest of pāda b. Ge and Re take bhúvanāni víśvā “all the worlds” as belonging to the frame, as a parallel obj. to kā́vyā in pāda a (e.g., “Quand le (soma) poète porte autour de lui les pouvoirs-poétiques (et) tous les mondes …”). This leaves the acc. slot of the simile unfilled: Re leaves it blank, while Ge supplies “(die Feinde?).” I instead put bhúvanāni víśvā in the simile, matching kā́vyā in the frame. This interpr. is facilitated by the “chariot of the *Sun” reading that I think is implied here, since the Sun’s daily chariot journey across the heaven puts all worlds in his jurisdiction.

Soma’s journey across the ritual ground gives him the same kind of control over poetic skill and its products, both his own and those of the officiants. It may also be that “all the worlds” can secondarily be re-read into the frame. The bhúvanāni that stretched out for sun-finding Soma in 2b (presumably both the cosmic worlds and the worlds of the ritual ground) fall into this control in 3ab.

As pointed out by Old inter alia, in c the transmitted mártāya is best emended to *márti yāya, since a four-syllable reading is called for.

The dual focus on the cosmic and the ritual continues in c, where Soma exerts himself “among the gods” (that is, in his cosmic dimension) on behalf of glory for the mortal, presumably the priest or poet. The expression (yáśo) *mártyāya bhū́ṣan# may play off amṛ́tāya bhū́ṣan# (III.25.2, 34.2) “exerting oneself for the immortal (one).” The rt. noun cmpd puru-bhū́(-tama)- is otherwise used of the Aśvins (4x); I interpr. it to mean ‘appearing in many places’ (see comm. ad IV.44.4). The apparent loc. pl. occurrence here has been variously and only tentatively interpr.; see Ge, Re, Ober (II.229), Scar (362). Given the context, in a participial clause headed by bhū́ṣan, I suggest that our purubhū́ṣu does not in fact belong to puru-bhū́- but rather to an otherwise unattested puru-*bhū́ṣ- -- hence *puru-bhū́ṣ-ṣu, with the geminate sibilant simplified to -ṣ-. Although a root noun to the secondary root √bhūṣ is not found elsewhere, it would not be difficult to generate in this context.

