+++
title = "03"

+++
This is the middle vs. of the hymn and (comparatively) more complex than the rest. As in 2ab, the first two pādas end with morphologically parallel formations, the accusatives hári-dhāyasam (a) and hári-varpasam, both with -s-stems as 2nd member and hári- as 1st . The standard tr. obscure this parallelism by giving them quite different interpr., with hári- in the first cmpd serving as apparent obj. to dhāyas- (Ge “der den Goldigen nährt,” sim. Re and WG; also Gr), while the second cmpd is rendered as a straight bahuvrīhi. By this interpr., in the first cmpd. hárirefers to soma (so Gr, Re) or soma or the sun (Ge [/WG]), while the hári- in the 2nd is simply a term of color or material. Given the structure of this vs. and the parallel structure in vs. 2, I think the two cmpds should be interpr. in a similar manner and that the “golden nourishment” of heaven would be the sunlight. However, I do concede that in other X-dhāyas- cmpds the 1st member may be the recipient of the nourishment (e.g., arí-dhāyas- ‘having nourishment for the stranger’, kārú-dhāyas- ‘having nourishment for the bard’), and so I would consider a tr. ‘having nourishment for the golden’, though I think this is the less likely possibility. In c I assume a clause break after ádhārayat and take the rest of cd as a nominal cl. with bhójanam as subj. For a similar constr. with bhójanam cf. VII.68.5 citráṃ ha yád vām bhójanaṃ nv ásti.

The poet has cleverly managed to gather the root √dhṛ into the pervasive verbal play of the hymn, by stationing the dual form háritoḥ in a sandhi position where its initial surfaces as dh, hence ádhārayad dháritor. This dh repetition resonates with (hári-)dhāyas- in pāda a. Meanwhile in c the double dh-alliteration of the first two words is matched by double bh-alliteration in bhū́ri bhójanam.

