+++
title = "05"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., the insistently golden vajra of vs. 4 (háritam … ā́yudham … vájram … hárim) is transformed into a silvery one (árjunaṃ, vájram), but keeps the har phonology in the participle haryántam ‘gladdening’, also modifying the vajra. A different color-type term, śukrá- ‘gleaming, bright’ is also used of the accoutrements of the weapon; the instr. pl. śukraíḥ is again a surprise: we would expect háribhiḥ.

And in fact we get two forms of the latter in the last hemistich. In one of them the poet uses the sandhi trick he employed in 3c to produce an initial dh: (ápāvṛṇod) dháribhiḥ, which allows the sequence dháribhiḥ ádribhiḥ to read as a virtual anagram.

This last half-verse introduces Vala-myth phraseology (ápāvṛṇot, úd gā́ḥ … ājata) in a hymn that otherwise lacks any mythic references. This Vala theme seems particularly out of place because the soma and the vajra play little or no role in the Vala myth but are strongly associated with the Vṛtra myth. I am uncertain of the identity of the háribhiḥ who participate in the driving up of the cows in d. Ge and Re confidently supply ‘horses’, and that is of course the default interpr. of this form in an Indra context. But Indra’s horses are not actors in the Vala myth elsewhere, as far as I can remember. His helpers in the Vala myth are the Aṅgirases, so perhaps they qualify as golden here. Or perhaps it refers to the golden lights of the dawns and is an instr. of accompaniment with gā́ḥ (“drove up the cows along with the golden [dawn lights]”).