+++
title = "01"

+++
jyók cid atti gárbho yád ácyutam “For a long time the embryo eats just what is immovable.” Re supplies a different verb in a from the one he supplies in b: “(tu ébranles) … comme le bétail (dévore) …” But this violates the structure of the RVic simile.

The problem in the 2nd hemistich is the form dhā́mā. Gr, fld. by Lub, interprets it as a 1st pl. root aor. injunctive, but though a 1st person would work in some hymns, there seems to be no personal intrusion in this one -- nor can I figure out how a 1st pl. “we establish(ed)” would fit here. Both Ge and Re take it as a neut.

pl. to dhā́man- and therefore the subject of vṛścánti. However, this requires an interpr.

of dhā́man- -- Ge “Kräfte,” Re “pouvoirs-d’état” (whatever that means) -- that I do not think is possible for this word, and, in any case, can “powers” hew? On the basis of VI.6.1 (also in this cycle) vṛścádvana- ‘wood-hewing’ (the compounded version of our vánā vṛścánti), which modifies Agni, I think that the subject of vṛścánti must be Agni, or rather some parts of Agni, since a plural is required. I therefore take śíkvasaḥ as a nom. pl., not gen. sg. (with Ge, Re), referring to Agni’s flames or his various embodiments. This leaves dhā́mā stranded; I take it as an annunciatory main clause with yád as the definitional relative clause: “(this is your) principle, that …” My tr. assumes a neut. singular dhā́mā, allowed by Wackernagel (AiG III.272), Old (ZDMG 55: 280 = KlSch 739), etc. It would also be possible to tr. as a plural: “(these are your) principles, that …” A different possibility is enabled by Ge’s suggested alternative tr. of dhā́mā (n. 9c) as “Erscheinungsformen,” which is more palatable than his “Kräfte.” If we allow the meaning of dhā́man- to stretch to this extent, we could tr. cd “when the forms of you, the dexterous one, hew the woods,” with śíkvasaḥ a genitive with te. Nonetheless, I still prefer the publ. tr.

