+++
title = "04"

+++
The problematic form in this vs. is the first word ṛ́dhat. It clearly belongs with the root aor. attested primarily in the opt. (ṛdhyā́ma, etc.) but also found once in the participle ṛdhánt-, with expected suffixal accent. It is the root accent that distinguishes the form here. Old (ZDMG 55.279 = KlSch 738; also Noten) suggests that it is a neut. part. used adverbially, with accent shift (*ṛdhát à ṛ́dhat) -- claiming that adverbial accent shift can go either way, simply marking an oppositional formation. But the standard exx. (dravát to drávati) involve a rightward shift, and in any case the whole notion of adverbial accent shift has recently been called into question (see Emily Barth’s Cornell diss.). Re considers both possibilities and opts finally for the adverb, while Ge takes it as a finite form. I prefer to take it as an aor.

subjunctive (see also Lub, Concordance, where it is so identified) parallel to śaśámate. Although I cannot entirely explain the zero-grade root syllable for expected full-grade *árdhat (though see below), I can suggest a local explanation for the (supposedly) unexpected root accent. The next hymn contains the hapax verbalgoverning cmpd. ṛdhád-vāra- ‘bringing wishes to success’. Whatever the original grammatical identity of the 1st members of this fairly common cmpd. type, synchronically they appear to be neut. sg. participles in -át with accent consistently on the suffix (type bharád-vāja- [in fact, the name of the poet of this hymn and of the VIth Maṇḍala in general], dhārayát-kavi-, etc.; see AiG II.1.317-20), and the verbal stems from which they are derived regularly are accented one syllable to the left. So, for the examples just given, 1st class pres. bhárati, -áya-formation dhāráyati, etc. I would therefore suggest that our poet, who had ṛdhát-vāra- in his repertoire, backformed the root-accented finite form ṛ́dhat on this model. A possibly simpler alternative is to begin with a hypothetical root aorist paradigm, whose injunctive act.

sg. *árdham, *árd/t, *árd/t should have full grade and root accent and whose subjunctive should likewise have both: *árdhā(ni), *árdhas(i), *árdhat(i) (cf. injunc.

kár and subj. kárati, e.g.). As it happens, the root aor. of √ṛdh is attested only in forms where we expect zero-grade root and suffixal accent, but the starred forms just given are the paradigmatically expected act. sg. forms. Under this explanation, the root accent of subjunctive *ṛ́dhat is not the problem; its zero grade is. And we can explain that either by the influence (at time of composition or of redaction) of ṛdhádvāra- in VI.3.2 or by the absence of other attested full-grade verbal forms to this root (though cf. gerundive árdhya-) and consequent generalization of the zero-grade. Of the two explanations just given, I mildly favor the first - in part because the poet Bharadvāja would have been acutely aware of the accentual properties of his name.

A minor support for the interpr. of ṛ́dhat as finite subjunctive, not adverbially used participle is provided by formulaics. As Re sketches, √ṛdh can take yajñám as object; cf. X.110.2 mánmāni dhībhír utá yajñám r̥ndhán “bringing the thoughts and the sacrifice to fulfillment through his visionary thoughts.” The VP yajñám √ṛdh “bring sacrifice to fulfillment” can be seen as a variant of simplex √yaj ‘sacrifice’, and √yaj and √śam form a conjoined pair for our poet in nearby hymns: VI.1.9 só agne īje śaśame ca márto “O Agni, that mortal has sacrificed and ritually labored” and VI.3.2 (the same vs. that contains ṛdhádvāra-) ījé yajñébhiḥ śaśamé śámībhiḥ “he has sacrificed with sacrifices, he has labored with ritual labors.” X.110.2 quoted above also suggests that, despite the pāda break, dhiyā́in our passage is better construed with ṛ́dhat as in the publ. tr. than with śaśamate with, e.g., Ge “… (und) mit Andacht den Dienst versieht.” Note the sandhi ūtī́ṣá, with retroflexion despite the lack of a close syntactic connection, as well as the unusual position of ordinarily pāda-init. sá. An incomplete collection of relevant passages shows that this retroflexion of non-initial sá in ruki contexts is standard but not invariable: IV.26.4 prá sú ṣá ..., VI.2.4 ūtī́ṣá ..., VI.14.1 bhásan nú ṣá ..., VI.20.5 urú ṣá …, VII.104.10 ní ṣá ..., VIII.20.16 abhí ṣá ..., IX.73.8 trī́ṣá ..., IX.79.3 ... arír hí ṣá. But I.64.13 prá nū́sá ..., without ruki.



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/002/04-05.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>