+++
title = "06"

+++
Just as in VI.1.2 there is a nom. sg. masc. pres. part. sán without any obvious concessive value; unlike VI.1.2 there is no metrical explanation available. The close sandhi in the phrase diví ṣán might seem to give us a clue -- that the two words should be read as a constituent and are the equivalent of a circumstantial clause: constituency could account for the ruki. This is responsible for my tr. “when it is in heaven” (sim. Ge), instead of construing diví with ā́tataḥ like Re (“s’étendant au ciel”). However, assembling the retroflexion data both for sán/sát in a ruki environment and for diví with following s- weakens this hypothesis. In the former case sán/sád generally doesn’t exhibit retroflexion; see III.9.2 dūré sán, IV.15.1 vājī́ sán, IV.27.1 nú sán, VIII.43.9 gárbhe sán (though the first and third phrases are constituents); V.44.3 sacate sád, VI.27.2 máde sád + niṣádi sát + vividre sád, X.129.1 nó sád. However, there is retroflexion in II.41.10 abhī́ṣád; ánti ṣád IV.5.10, VIII.73.1 (though the two forms don't form a syntactic constituent in any of these passages) and in IX.61.10 diví ṣád (almost exactly our phrase). In other words, the data are equivocal. On the other hand, the loc. diví regularly retroflexes the initial sof forms of √as, as here: I.108.11 diví ṣṭhó [dual verb], V.2.10 diví ṣantu, V.60.6 diví ṣṭhá, VI.33.5 diví ṣyāma, and the just cited IX.61.10 (cf. also VI.52.13 dyávi ṣṭha), though it does not retroflex other initial s-s; cf. I.125.6 diví sū́ryasya, V.27.6 = V.85.2 diví sū́ryam, V.35.8 diví stómam, VIII.56.5 diví sū́ryo, X.75.3 diví svanó, X.85.1 diví sómo. It thus appears that the retroflexion of ṣán here is an automatic product of a rule that induces ruki in s-initial forms of the verb ‘to be’ after diví and does not give information -- or at least high-quality information -- about constituency.

I have no idea why √as should exhibit this behavior; it cannot be due to (lack of) accent, since several of the ruki-ed forms are accented (including the one here).

MLW comments: “But maybe it was despite its accent somehow a clitic just as there are accented 2nd pos. clit. This reminds me of the loss of s in Old Latin comedy which is especially well attested before the verb ‘to be’.”

