+++
title = "07"

+++
The 2nd hemistich presents some interpretational problems, generated by the standard assumption that jū́rya- belongs to √jṛ ‘be/get old’. Not only is the expression “delightful like an aged one in his stronghold” odd, but such interpr.

require bleaching out the gerundive value of jū́rya- (esp. unlikely given that it’s parallel to trayayā́yyaḥ in d and ī́ḍyaḥ in a). Cf., e.g., Ge’s “behaglich [cozy, snug] wie ein Greis in seiner Burg,” which also pushes raṇvá- into a meaning otherwise unknown to it. Re’s “joyeux, tel un vieil (homme) dans la forteresse” maintains the meaning of raṇvá-, but the connection between it and the simile seems strained. Old (ZDMG 55: 279 = KlSch 738) cleverly suggests that there’s a crisscross word order, with the son of the simile in d appropriate to the adj. in c and vice versa: so something like (he doesn’t actually translate) “delightful like a son, to be protected like an old man in his stronghold.” But this is an ad hoc response to dissatisfaction with the apparent pragmatics of the passage.

These problems can be solved in twofold fashion. 1) I take raṇváḥ as a pun, a word common to both similes. In both cases it applies to Agni, but in two different senses. 2) This reinterpretation is enabled by a different analysis of jū́rya-. I take it to the root √jvar ‘burn, flame’, showing the same zero-grade as in jūrṇí- ‘firebrand’ (<*jvṛH-C, with loss of -v- before ū/u, as in urú- < *vṛH-u). I can see no possible formal objection to this analysis, despite the apparently universal insistence that jū́rya- must belong to √jṛ.

Starting with these assumptions, we can take the two gerundives, jū́ryaḥ in c and trayayā́yyah in d, as the predicates of their respective pādas (as ī́ḍyaḥ is of pāda a). One of the drawbacks to the standard interpr. is that this syntactic parallelism is broken. In c the picture is of an battle-eager (warrior) (for a similar usage of raṇvásee X.115.4 and remember that ráṇa- means both ‘joy’ and ‘battle’) who is to be enflamed / set blazing; in the simile jū́rya- is metaphorical, but of course the word is literally applicable to Agni the fire, who is the upameya, the target of the simile. One minor problem with this interpr. is that the simile marker iva is in the wrong position: we would expect to find it after raṇvá-. But there are enough displaced simile markers in the RV that this positioning is not a major obstacle.

When applied to the simile in d, raṇvá- has its more usual meaning ‘delightful, bringing delight’, which is appropriate to the son and helps explain the desire to protect him. Here the publ. tr. adds “to the home” to “a son who brings delight.” I made this addition because I think there’s a buried pun. On the one hand, in c raṇváḥ purí (“battle-lusty warrior in a fortress”) construes a locative with the subject (acdg. to my view of the constituency) and we might expect a similar loc. in the corresponding expression; on the other, raṇvá- in its meaning ‘delightful’ is often a descriptor of a home or construed with a loc. of ‘home’. Cf. I.69.4-5 raṇvó duroṇé “bringing joy to the house,” precisely of Agni. It may be that pūrí can be directly applied to the simile in d and in that context means ‘home’ -- though I doubt it: RVic púr- does not have domestic associations. Instead I think that raṇvá- in the “protected son” context evokes duroṇé, and this subsurface evocation is realized in the next verse by the phonologically similar loc. dróṇe ‘wood(en) cup’. The unexpected and unusual use of dróṇa- in that vs. (for which see comm. ad loc.) suggests that it may have been deployed there in order to play on the unexpressed (*)duroṇé here. This may seem overclever; in that case the tr. could stop short at “to be protected like a son who brings delight.” In any case, it would probably better to put “to the home” in parens.

A last comment on the hemistich: I have tr. cd in the opposite order, so that the domestic half (d) immediately adjoins the “dear guest” of b. This is not necessary, but given that my interpr. of c involves a radical rethinking of the standard view, it seemed best to make the new reading easier to assimilate.

The gerundive of d, trayayā́yi ya-, is a hapax and a striking formation -- in the first instance, just because of the rhythmic rollout of -VyV- sequences. With regard to its derivation, as Debrunner points out (AiG II.2.285-86), it seems to pattern with

-ā́yya- gerundives built to -áya-stems: panayā́yya-, mahayā́yya-, spṛhayā́yya-.

However, there is no such verb stem *trayáya-. Debrunner adds the parenthetical remark “von v. Präs. trāya-,” but of course in that case we should expect *trāyā́yya-.

Both the short root vowel and the extra -ya- remain unexplained by that derivation. I have only the wispiest gestures towards an explanation. For √trā we would probably expect an -áya-formation *trāpaya-; however, it might have followed the model of √pā and √pyā with a -y-hiatus filler instead (pāyáyati and pyāyáyati [AV+] respectively), hence *trāyáyati. We might then invoke the tendency of roots with the shape CRā to shorten their root vowel in the p-causative, type jñapayati and, specifically with Crā root, śrapáyati (both AV+). For disc. see my 1983 monograph on the -áya-formations, pp. 208-11. So one might posit such a shortening to the differently formed causative to a CRā root *trayáyati, which could serve as base for our trayayā́yya- here (encouraged by the short root vowels of the -áya-stem -ā́yyagerundives quoted above). But the chain of assumptions and unattested forms seems too long, and we might instead just attribute trayayā́yi ya- to a poet’s whimsical multiplication of -ya-s -- his version of tra-la-la. MLW suggests: “From i-extended form of *terh1- 'rub' (Lat. trivi, etc.), with double sense ‘to be rubbed’, i.e., caressed, and also referring to the fire drill?” This is an appealing suggestion, but the lack of other representatives of this root in IIr. might disfavor it.

