+++
title = "08"

+++
The voc. ágne was omitted in the publ. tr. I would insert “o Agni” after “purpose.” Note that the first hemistich begins with krátvā and ends with kṛ́tvi yaḥ.

This vs. displays the same verbal intricacy as the immediately preceding vs. 7.

As also in vs. 7 the first hemistich is less complex than the second, but that doesn’t mean it lacks puzzles. The principal question is the root affiliation of ajyáse. With Ge, I take it as a pun, as passive to both √añj ‘anoint’ and √aj ‘drive’ (Old opts for √aj, Re for √añj)—a pun that we also find frequently in Maṇḍala IX. The primary connection is presumably to √añj: the ritual fire is “anointed” with the offering butter; cf. the nearby occurrences of the ppl. aktá- ‘anointed’ (VI.4.6, 5.6). But the loc. dróṇe casts a shadow on the clarity of this association. Though the stem dróṇais doubtless a deriv. of dā́ru-/drú- ‘wood’ (see EWA s.v.), it doesn’t refer to wood as a general material, much less to firewood. It is specialized as the (wooden) cup for soma; the stem is mostly limited to the Soma Maṇḍala, but even in its two other occurrences in VI (37.2, 44.20) it refers to the soma cup. Therefore, if we want to take dróṇe ajyáse here to mean something like “(the fire located) on the (fire-)wood is anointed,” we must take dróṇe as a specialized stand-in for váne or the like (see the passages assembled by Ge in n. 8a; cf. also druṣádvā ‘sitting on the wood’ in the next hymn, VI.3.5), whose meaning has been twisted. This unusual substitution pushes us in two directions. On the one hand, if dróṇe here is meant to evoke duroṇé ‘at home’ in the previous vs. (7cd), we can explain its unusual employment here and the twisting of its referent from wooden cup to wood -- and even take it as gesturing to ‘home’ here as well, ‘home’ being Agni’s fireplace as well as the home of the sacrificer. On the other hand, since the soma after its purification is regularly driven into its containers, we can take ajyáse also to √aj ‘drive’ and see the common identification of the two ritual substances, fire and soma, that pervades much of the RV. One of the characteristic ritual actions performed on Soma would here be attributed to Agni. The simile in b, vājī́ná ‘like a prize-seeker’ works with either verb, since horses are both anointed and driven. Moreover, both vājín- and kṛ́tvyaare regularly used of soma -- further strengthening the Agni/Soma connection sketched in pāda a.

The similes in the next two pādas cause further problems. In c the first question is the case of svadhā́. Ge and Old favor nom., Re and I instr. If svadhā́is nom., the series of similes with Agni as implicit subject and upameya is disrupted.

The next issue is what is meant by a párijmā … gáyaḥ. Both Ge and Re take it as some sort of mobile home (e.g., Ge “ein fahrender Hausstand”). Although in a pastoral society like that of the RV such a notion is not as comic as it might at first seem — and although fire is frequently depicted as burning across the land — I do not think that that is the image meant there. Note first that gáya- is several times associated with the preverb pári (esp. pári √pā VI.71.3, X.66.3, though as an object not a subject, I have to admit). And from its literal sense ‘earth-encircling’, párijman- can develop the sense ‘encircling, encompassing’. That is the sense I see here, with the domestic deity Agni compared to the extended family that embraces everything belonging to it -- a likely reference to the ritual fire as the joint possession and symbol of the Ārya clans.

The second simile depends on the meaning of hvāryá-. This stem must belong to the root √hvṛ ‘go crookedly’. Ge thinks it refers to a bird, which has little to recommend it since there’s already a horse in the passage; others (Re, Th [KlSch 78]) to the meandering or zig-zag movement of the fire (e.g., Re “(il va) zigzaguant …”). I prefer to take it as a gerundive (despite the accent, which is unusual for such a formation) and indeed one to an underlying causative. My further assumption is that the “young steed” of the simile is being trained, by being run in circles (around someone in the middle holding a rope attached to the horse -- a standard part of horse training today it seems from images and videos conjured up by Google -- and recall the Mitanni horse-training tablets with their numbers of ‘turns’ [vartana]). Although √hvṛ often refers to more random motion, it implicitly contrasts with motion in a straight line, which a circle is not. The advantages to this interpr. are 1) it would refer to something that the ritual fire actually does or is made to do: the Paryagnikaraṇa or the circling of the sacrificial animal (and associated paraphernalia) with a firebrand; 2) it would implicitly pick up párijmā from the beginning of the hemistich, with a more literal sense of ‘encircle, encompass’ than in pāda c. If this latter suggestion is correct, as in 7cd the first word of pāda c, párijmā, would be applicable to the similes in both c and d with slightly different senses, just like raṇváḥ in 7c.

