+++
title = "1 The Exposition of the Soma Sacrifce"

+++
## 01
He makes a hall with beams pointing east. The gods and men divided the quarters, the gods (obtained) the eastern, the Pitrs the southern, men the western, the Rudras the northern. In that he makes a hall with beams pointing east, the sacrificer approaches the world of the gods. He covers it over, for the world of the gods is hidden from the world of men. 'It is not easy', they say, 'to go from this world; for who knows if he is in yonder world or not.' He makes at the corners apertures [1], for the winning of both worlds. He shaves his hair and beard, he trims his nails. The hair and the beard are dead and impure skin, and by thus destroying the dead and impure skin he becomes fit for the sacrifice and approaches the sacrifice. The Angirases going to the world of heaven placed in the waters consecration and penance. He bathes in the waters; verily visibly he secures consecration and penance. He bathes at a ford, for at a ford did they place (consecration and penance); he bathes at a ford [2]; verily he becomes a ford for his fellows. He sips water; verily he becomes pure within. He consecrates him with a garment; the linen garment has Soma for its deity. He who consecrates himself approaches Soma as his deity. He says, 'Thou art the body of Soma; guard my body.' He approaches his own deity; verily also he invokes this blessing. (Of the garment) the place where the border is belongs to Agni, the wind-guard to Vayu, the fringe to the Pitrs, the foreedge to the plants [3], the warp to the Adityas, the woof to the All-gods, the meshes to the Naksatras. The garment is thus connected with all the gods; in that he consecrates him with the garment, verily with all the gods he consecrates him. Man has breath without; his eating is his breath, he eats; verily he consecrates himself with breath. He becomes satiated. As great as is his breath, with it he approaches the sacrifice. Ghee pertains to the gods, sour cream to the Pitrs, well-seasoned butter to men [4], fresh butter is connected with all the gods; verily in anointing with fresh butter he satisfies all the gods. The man who is consecrated has fallen from this world and yet not gone to the world of the gods; fresh butter is as it were midway; therefore he anoints with fresh butter, along the hair, with a Yajus, for destruction. Indra slew Vrtra; his eyeball fell away; it became collyrium. When he anoints, verily he takes away the eye of his enemy. He anoints his right eye first [5], for men anoint the left first. He does not rub (the ointment) on, for men rub (the ointment) on. Five times he anoints; the Pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he obtains the sacrifice. He anoints a limited number of times, for men anoint an unlimited number of times. He anoints with (a stalk) which has a tuft, for men anoint with (a stalk) which has no tuft; (verily he anoints them) for discrimination. If he were to anoint with (a stalk) having no tuft, he would be as it were a thunder bolt. He anoints with one which has a tuft, for friendship [6]. Indra slew Vrtra, he died upon the waters. Of the waters what was fit for sacrifice, pure, and divine, that went out of the waters, and became Darbha grass. In that he purifies (the sacrificer) with bunches of Darbha grass, verily he purifies him with the waters which are fit for sacrifice, pure, and divine. He purifies (him) with two (stalks); verily he purifies him by days and nights. He purifies (him) with three (stalks); three are these worlds; verily he purifies him by these worlds. He purifies (him) with five stalks [7]; the Pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he purifies him by the sacrifice. He purifies (him) with six (stalks); six are the seasons; verily he purifies him by the seasons. He purifies (him) with seven (stalks); seven are the metres; verily he purifies him by the metres. He purifies (him) with nine (stalks); nine are the breaths in man; verily he purifies him along with his breaths. He purifies (him) with twenty-one (stalks); there are ten fingers and ten toes, and the body is the twenty
  
first; he thus completely purifies the man [8]. He says, 'Let the lord of thought purify thee'; the mind is the lord of thought; verily by the mind he purifies him. He says, 'Let the lord of speech purify thee'; verily by speech he purifies him. He says, 'Let the god Savitr purify thee'; verily being instigated by Savitr, he purifies him. He says, 'O lord of the purifier, with thy purifier, for whatsoever I purify myself, that may I have strength to accomplish.' Verily does he invoke this blessing.
## 02
All the gods who purified themselves for the sacrifice waxed great. He who knowing thus purifies himself for the sacrifice waxes great. Having purified him without he makes him go within. Verily having purified him in the world of men, he leads him forward purified to the world of the gods. 'He is not consecrated by one oblation ', they say; verily he offers four with the dipping-ladle for consecration; the fifth he offers with the offering-ladle; the Pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice. 'To the purpose, to the impulse, to Agni, [1] hail!' he says, for with purpose does a man employ the sacrifice, planning to sacrifice. 'To wisdom, to thought, to Agni, hail!' he says, for by wisdom and thought man approaches the sacrifice. 'To Sarasvati, to Pusan, to Agni, hail! 'he says. Sarasvati is speech, Pusan the earth;. verily with speech and the earth he performs the sacrifice. 'O ye divine, vast, all-soothing waters', he says. The waters of the rain [2] are the divine, vast, all-soothing waters; if he said not that praise, the divine waters would descend in anger on this world. He says, 'O ye divine, vast, all-soothing waters.' Verily he makes them soothing for this world; accordingly being soothed they approach this world. 'Heaven and earth', he says, for the sacrifice is in heaven and earth. 'Wide atmosphere', he says, for the sacrifice is in the atmosphere. 'May Brhaspati rejoice in our oblation' [3], he says. Brhaspati is the holy power (Brahman) of the gods; verily by the holy power he wins this sacrifice for him. If he were to say vidheh then he would stumble on the sacrificial post; he says vrdhatu; verily he avoids the sacrificial post. Prajapati created the sacrifice. Being created it went away. It crushed the Yajus, it crushed the Saman; the Rc raised it; in that the Rc raised (it), hence the elevating offering has the name. With a Rc [4] he sacrifices, to support the sacrifice. 'It was the Anustubh among the metres which supported it', they say. Therefore he sacrifices with an Anustubh, to support the sacrifice. 'It was the twelve "calf-binders" which supported it', they say. Therefore with twelve those who know the 'calf-binders', consecrate. This Rc is an Anustubh; the Anustubh is speech; in that he consecrates him with this Rc, he consecrates him with the whole of speech. 'Let every (man) of the god who leads ', he says. By that (the Rc) is connected with Savitr. '(Let every) man choose the companionship' [5], he says. By that (the Rc) has the Pitrs for its deity.' 'Every man prayeth for wealth', he says. By that (the Rc) is connected with the All-gods. 'Let him choose glory that he may prosper', he says. By that (the Rc) is connected with Pusan. This Rc indeed is connected with all the gods. In that he consecrates with this Rc, he consecrates him with all the gods. The first quarter verse is of seven syllables; the other three are of eight syllables. The three approach the eight; the four the eight. Because it has eight syllables [6] it is a Gayatri. Because it has eleven syllables it is a Tristubh. Because it has twelve syllables, it is a Jagati. This Rc indeed is all the metres. In that he consecrates him with this Rc, he consecrates him with all the metres. The first quarter verse is of seven syllables; the Çakvari is of seven syllables, the Çakvari is cattle; verily he wins cattle. The first quarter-verse is defective by one syllable. Therefore men live on what of speech is defective. He offers with a full (verse) to win Prajapati; full as it were is Prajapati. He offers with a defective (verse), for the creation of offspring, for from what is defective Prajapati created offspring.
## 03
The Rc and the Saman, unwilling to remain with the gods for the sacrifice, taking the form of a black antelope departed and remained away. The (gods) reflected, 'He whom they shall resort to will become all this world.' They called to them, and they depositing their might in day and night came up to them. This is the colour of the Rc, the white of the skin of the black antelope; the black is the colour of the Saman. 'Ye are images of the Rc and Saman', he says; verily he wins the Rc and the Saman [1]. The white of the black antelope skin is the colour of the day, the black of the night.
  
Whatever is imbued in those two, he wins. He consecrates (him) with a black antelope skin. The black antelope skin is the form of the holy power; verily he consecrates him with the holy power. 'O god, this prayer of him who imploreth', he says. That is according to the text. The man who is consecrated is a foetus; the clothing is the caul; be covers. Therefore [2] foetuses are born covered (with the caul). He should not uncover before the purchasing of the Soma. If he were to uncover before the purchasing of the Soma, the foetuses of offspring would be liable to miscarriage. He uncovers when the Soma has been purchased; verily he is born. It is also as when one uncovers to a superior. The Angirases going to the world of heaven divided their strength. What was left over became Çara grass; Çara grass is strength. In that the girdle is of Çara grass [3], he wins strength. He girds it in the middle; verily he gives him strength in the middle. Therefore in the middle men enjoy strength. The part of man above the navel is pure, that below is impure. In that he girds him in the middle he discriminates between the pure and impure parts. Indra hurled his thunderbolt against Vrtra; it divided into three parts; one-third the wooden sword, one-third the chariot, and one-third the sacrificial post [4]. The internal arrows which were split (aśiryanta) became Çara grass, and that is why Çara grass is so called. The thunderbolt is Çara grass; hunger indeed is the foe of man. In that the girdle is of Çara grass, he clearly drives away the enemy hunger from the middle (of man's body). It is threefold. The breath is threefold; verily he places the threefold breath in the middle of the sacrificer. It is broad, for the discrimination of the strands. He consecrates the sacrificer with a girdle, with a yoke his wife, for the sake of offspring [5]. The sacrifice reflected on the gift (to the priests). He had intercourse with her. Indra perceived this and reflected, 'He who will be born from this union will be this world.' He entered her; from her verily was Indra born; he reflected, 'He who hence other than I will be born will be this world'. Stroking her womb he split it, she became barren after birth, and that is the origin of the (cow) which is barren after birth [6]. He wrapped it (the yoni) in his hand, he deposited it among the wild beasts, it became the horn of the black antelope. 'Thou art the birthplace of Indra; harm me not', (with these words) he hands the horn of the black antelope. Verily he makes the sacrifice united with the womb, the gift with the womb, Indra with the womb, for union with the womb. 'For ploughing thee, for good crops', he says. Therefore plants grow up without ploughing. 'For those of good fruits thee, for the plants', he says. Therefore plants bear fruit. If he were to scratch himself with his hand [7] his offspring would be liable to the itch; if he were to smile, they would become naked. He scratches himself with the horn of the black antelope and smiles, holding it for the protection of his offspring. He should not let go the horn of the black antelope before the bringing of the gifts (to the priests). If he were to let go the horn of the black antelope before the bringing of the gifts, the womb of his offspring will be liable to miscarriage. When the gifts have been brought, he casts away the horn of the black antelope in the pit. The pit is the womb of the sacrificer; the horn of the black antelope is the womb; verily he places womb in womb, that the sacrificer may have a womb.
## 04
Speech went away from the gods, not being willing to serve for the sacrifice. She entered the trees. It is the voice of the trees, the voice that is heard in the drum, the lute, and the flute. In that he offers the staff of the initiated, he wins speech. The (staff) is of Udumbara wood; the, Udumbara is strength; verily he wins strength. It is level with his mouth; verily from the mouth (downwards) he wins strength for him. Therefore from the mouth they enjoy strength [1]. After the buying of the Soma he hands the staff to the Maitravaruna (priest). For the Maitravaruna first assigns to the priests their utterance, and the priests plant it in the sacrificer. 'Hail! with my mind the sacrifice', he says; for man approaches the sacrifice with his mind. 'Hail! from heaven and earth', he says; for the sacrifice is in heaven and earth. 'Hail! from the broad atmosphere', he says; for the sacrifice is in the atmosphere. 'Hail! from the wind the sacrifice I grasp', he says [2]. The sacrifice is he who blows here; verily he clearly wins him. He clenches his fist; he restrains his speech, for the support of the sacrifice. 'This Brahman has consecrated himself', he says thrice in a whisper; verily he proclaims him to the gods. Thrice aloud (he says it); verily he proclaims him to both gods and men. He should not utter speech until the Naksatras appear. If he were to utter speech before the Naksatras appear, he would divide the sacrifice [3]. When the Naksatras have arisen, be utters speech, 'Prepare the fast food.' The consecrated is bound by a vow of sacrifice; verily with regard to the sacrifice does he
  
utter speech. Should he utter speech, he should then repeat a Rc addressed to Visnu. Visnu is the sacrifice; verily he unites the sacrifice with the sacrifice. 'The thought divine we meditate', he says. Thus he makes smooth the sacrifice. 'May it guide us safely according as we will', he says. Verily he wins the dawn [4]. The theologians say, 'Should an offering be made in the house of one who is consecrated, or should an offering not be made?' The man who is consecrated is the oblation, and if he were to sacrifice he would offer a part of the sacrificer; if he were not to sacrifice, then he would omit a joint of the sacrifice. 'The gods, mind born, mind using', he says. The gods, mind born, mind using, are the breaths; verily in them he sacrifices secretly, and the sacrifice is both offered as it were and yet not offered. Now the Raksases are fain to hurt him who is consecrated while he sleeps. Agni [5] indeed is the slayer of the Raksases. 'O Agni, be thou wakeful. Let us be glad', he says; verily having made Agni his guardian, for the smiting away of the Raksases, he sleeps. Now, if a man who is consecrated sleeps, he does something that as it were is contrary to his vow. I Thou, O Agni, art the guardian of vows', he says. Agni indeed is among the gods the guardian of vows; verily he causes him to take up his vow again. 'Among the gods and men', he says for he, being a god [6], is (guardian of vows) among men. 'Thou art to be invoked at our sacrifices', he says; for him they invoke at the sacrifices. Now power and the gods depart from the man who is consecrated when he is asleep. 'All the gods have surrounded me', he says; verily he unites him with both power and the gods. If he were not to utter that formula (Yajus), so many cattle would be as he might consecrate himself for. 'O Soma, give so much [7] and bear more hither', he says; verily he obtains innumerable cattle. 'Thou art gold; be for my enjoyment', he says; verily he takes each according to its deity. He says, 'To Vayu thee, to Varuna thee!' If he did not so specify them, he would put the gifts out of correspondence with the deities, and would be brought low to the deities. Because he thus specifies them, he puts the gifts in correspondence with the deities, and is not brought low to the deities. 'O divine waters, son of the waters', he says. 'That divine part of yours, which is pure and fit for the sacrifice, may I not step upon', that he says in effect. 'The unbroken web of earth may I follow', he says; verily making a bridge he crosses over.
## 05
The gods, having fixed up a place of sacrifice, could not distinguish the quarters. They ran up to one another, (saying) 'By thee shall we distinguish them, by thee.' They fixed upon Aditi, (saying, 'By thee shall we distinguish them.' She said, 'Let me choose a guerdon. Let the opening oblation in the sacrifice be mine, and the concluding oblation be mine.' Therefore the opening oblation of the sacrifice belongs to Aditi, and the concluding oblation belongs to Aditi. He offers to five gods; there are five quarters, (and so it serves) for the distinction of the quarters [1]. Now the Pankti is of five elements, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice. They made sacrifice to Pathya Svasti. The eastern quarter they distinguished by her, by Agni the southern, by Soma the western, by Savitr the northern, by Aditi the zenith. He offers to Pathya Svasti; verily he distinguishes the eastern quarter. Having offered to Pathya Svasti, he offers to Agni and Soma. Agni and Soma indeed are the eyes of the sacrificer; verily he sees with them [2]. Having offered to Agni and Soma, he offers to Savitr; verily on the instigation of Savitr he sees. Having offered to Savitr, he offers to Aditi; Aditi indeed is this (earth); verily taking his stand on it he sees. Having offered to Aditi, he repeats the verse to the Maruts. The Maruts are the subjects of the gods. As the subjects of the gods are in harmony, so he brings the human subjects into harmony.' In that he repeats the verse to the Maruts, it is to bring subjects into harmony. The theologians say, 'The opening oblation should be performed with a fore-offering, but without an after-offering; the concluding oblation should be performed with all after-offering [3], but without a fore-offering.' These are the fore-offerings, and these the after-offerings, and this is the course of the sacrifice. This is not to be followed. The fore offerings are the self; the after-offerings the offspring. If he were to omit the fore-offerings, he would omit the self; if he were to omits the after-offerings, he would omit offspring. In so far as the whole of the sacrifice is not performed, in so far does the sacrifice come to ruin, and the sacrificer comes to ruin along with the sacrifice [4]. Verily the opening oblation should be performed with both fore- and after-offerings, and the concluding oblation should be performed both with fore- and after offerings. He does not omit the self, nor offspring; the sacrifice does not come to ruin, nor the sacrificer. He offers the concluding oblation in the scrapings of the opening oblation; this is the
  
course of the sacrifice. Now if he were to make the Yajya verses of the opening libation the Yajya verses of the concluding libation, he would mount to the other world away from this, and would be liable to die. The Puronuvakya verses of the opening libation should be made the Yajya verses of the concluding libation; verily he finds support in this world.
## 06
Kadru and Suparni had a dispute (for the stake of) each other's form. Kadru defeated Suparni. She said, 'In the third heaven from here is the Soma; fetch it, and by it buy your release.' Kadru is this (earth), Suparni yonder (heaven), the descendants of Suparni the metres. She said, 'For this do parents rear children; "in the third heaven from here is the Soma; fetch it, and by it buy your release" [1], so has Kadru said to me.' The Jagati flew up, of fourteen syllables, but returned without obtaining it; it lost two syllables, but returned with the (sacrificial) animals and consecration. Therefore the Jagati is the richest in cattle of the metres, and consecration waits upon a man who is rich in cattle. The Tristubh flew up, of thirteen syllables, but returned without obtaining it; it lost two syllables, but returned with the (sacrificial) gifts [2] and penance. Therefore in the world of the Tristubh, the midday oblation, the gifts are brought. 'That in truth is penance', they say, 'if a man gives his wealth.' The Gayatri flew up, of four syllables, together with a female goat with light. Then the goat won (Soma) for her, and so the goat has the name. The Gayatri brought back the Soma and the four syllables, and so became of eight syllables. The theologians say [3], 'For what reason is it that the Gayatri, the smallest of the metres, holds the forefront of the sacrifice?' Because it brought down the Soma, it held the forefront of the sacrifice; therefore it is the most glorious (of the metres). By the feet it grasped two of the oblations, and by the mouth one. The one it grasped by the mouth it sucked; therefore two oblations are made of the pure Soma, the morning and midday oblations; therefore at the third oblation they pour out the dregs of the Soma; for they regard it as sucked as it were [4]. He removes any admixture so that it may be pure; verily also he makes ready it (the rjisa). When the Soma was being borne away, the Gandharva Viśvavasu stole it. It was for three nights stolen; therefore after purchase the Soma is kept for three nights. The gods said, 'The Gandharvas love women; let us redeem it with a woman.' They made speech unto a woman of one year old, and with her redeemed it. She adopted the form of a deer and ran away from the Gandharvas [5] that was the origin of the deer. The gods said, 'She has run from you; she comes not to us; let us both summon her.' The Gandharvas uttered a spell, the gods sang, she went to the gods as they sang. Therefore women love one who sings; enamoured are women of him who thus knows. So if there is in a family one person who knows thus, men give their daughters in wedlock to that family, even if there be other (wooers) in plenty [6]. He buys Soma with a (cow) one year old; verily he buys it with the whole of speech. Therefore men utter speech when one year old. He buys with a cow which has no horns, small ears, is not one-eyed or lame, and has not seven hooves; verily he buys it with all. If he were to buy it with a white cow, the sacrificer would become leprous. If he were to buy with a black one, it would be a funeral cow, and the sacrificer would be likely to die. If with one of both colours, it would be one sacred to Vrtrahan, and he would either overcome his foe or his foe him. He buys with a ruddy, yellow-eyed one. This is the form of Soma; verily he buys it with its own deity.
## 07
That became gold. Therefore they purify gold forth from the waters. The theologians say, 'How is it that offspring are produced through that which is boneless, and yet are born with bones?' Because he offers the gold, placing it in the ghee, therefore are offspring produced, through that which is boneless, and yet are born with bones. The ghee is Agni's loved abode, the gold, is radiance. 'This is thy body, O pure one. This is thy splendour', he says; verily he unites Agni with his radiance and his body [1]; verily also he makes him ready. If he were to deposit (the gold) without fastening it on, then the foetuses of offspring would be liable to miscarriage. He deposits it fastening it on, to secure the foetuses. He fastens it so that it cannot be untied, for the production of offspring. The cow with which the Soma is bought is speech. 'Thou art the strong', he says; for what he strengthens in his mind, that he expresses in speech. 'Grasped by mind', he says; for by mind is speech grasped.
  
'Acceptable to Visnu he says [2]. Visnu is the sacrifice; verily be makes her accept able to the sacrifice. 'Through the impulse of thee, of true impulse', he says; verily he wins speech which is impelled by Savitr. As each part is performed, the Raksases are fain to injure the sacrifice; the path of Agni and Surya is one which the Raksases cannot injure. 'I have mounted the eye of the sun, the pupil of the eye of Agni', he says. He mounts the path which is not injured by the Raksases [3]. The cow with which the Soma is bought is speech. 'Thou art thought, thou art mind', he says; verily he instructs her. Therefore children are born instructed. 'Thou art thought', he says, for what one thinks in the mind one expresses in speech. 'Thou art mind', he says; for what one grasps by the mind one performs. 'Thou art meditation', he says; for what one meditates with the mind one expresses in speech [4]. 'Thou art the gift (to the priests)', he says; for (the cow) is the gift. 'Thou art of the sacrifice', he says; verily he makes her fit for the sacrifice. 'Thou art of kingly power', he says, for she is of kingly power. 'Thou art Aditi, double-headed', he says. In that to Aditi belong the opening and the concluding oblations of the sacrifices, therefore does he say that. If (the cow) were not bound, she would be unrestrained; if she were bound by the foot, she would be the funeral cow, and the sacrificer would be likely to perish [5]. If she were held by the ears, she would belong to Vrtrahan, and the sacrificer would oppress another, or another would oppress him. 'May Mitra bind thee by the foot', he says. Mitra is the auspicious one of the gods; verily with his help he binds her by the foot. 'May Pusan guard the ways', he says. Pusan is this (earth); verily he makes her lady of this (earth), for the gaining thereof. 'For Indra the guardian!' he says; verily he makes Indra her guardian [6]. 'May thy mother approve, thy father', he says; verily he buys with her approved. 'Go, O goddess, to the god', he says; for she is a goddess, and Soma is a god. 'To Indra Soma', he says; for the Soma is borne to Indra. If he were not to say that text, the cow with which the Soma is bought would go away. 'May Rudra guide thee hither', he says. Rudra is the harsh [7] one of the gods; verily he places him below her, for guiding hither. He does as it were a harsh thing when he recites that (text) of Rudra's. 'In the path of Mitra', he says, for soothing. He buys indeed by speech when he buys by the cow with which the Soma is bought. Hail! Return with Soma as thy comrade, with wealth', he says, verily having purchased by means of speech, he restores speech to himself. The speech of him who knows thus is not likely to fail.
## 08
He follows six steps. Speech does not speak beyond the sixth day. He wins speech in the size in which she is found in the path of the year. He offers in the seventh footprint. The Çakvari has seven feet, the Çakvari is cattle; verily he wins cattle. There are seven domesticated animals, and seven wild; there are seven metres to win both sets of animals. 'Thou art a Vasvi, thou art a Rudra', he says; verily thus by her form he expounds her greatness [1]. 'May Brhaspati make thee rejoice in happiness', he says. Brhaspati is the holy power of the gods; verily by means of the holy power be wins cattle for him. 'May Rudra with the Vasus be favourable to thee', he says, for the sake of protection. 'I pour thee on the head of the earth, on the place of sacrifice', he says; for the place of sacrifice is the head of the earth. 'On the abode of the offering', he says; for the foot of the cow by which the Soma is bought is the abode of the offering. 'Rich in ghee; hail!' [2], he says. Because it was from her foot that ghee was pressed out, he says thus. If the Adhvaryu were to offer a libation where there were no fire, the Adhvaryu would become blind, and the Raksases would destroy the sacrifice. He offers after putting down the gold; verily he offers in that which has fire, the Adhvaryu does not become blind, and the Raksases. do not destroy the sacrifice. As each part is performed, the Raksases are fain to injure the sacrifice. 'The Raksas is enclosed, the evil spirits are enclosed', he says, for the smiting away of the Raksases [3]. 'Thus I cut the necks of the Raksas'; 'Who hateth us and whom we hate', he says. There are two persons, one whom he hates and one who hates him; verily successively he cuts their necks. The foot of the cow with which the Soma is bought is cattle; he pours (the dust of the footprint) so far as it is mixed with the ghee; verily he wins cattle. (Saying) 'Ours be wealth', he pours it; verily the Adhvaryu [4] does not deprive himself of cattle. Saying 'Thine be wealth', he hands it to the sacrificer, and so bestows wealth on the sacrificer. Saying 'Thine be wealth', (the sacrificer hands it) to his wife. For a wife is the half of oneself, and to do so is as it were to deposit it in one's house. 'Let me attend on thee with Tvastr's aid', he says. Tvastr is the maker of the forms of offspring, of pairings; verily he places form in cattle. For this world the

## 09
The theologians say, 'Should the Soma be clarified or not?' Soma indeed is the king of plants; whatever falls upon it is swallowed by it. If be were to clarify it, it would be as when one expels from the mouth what has been swallowed; if he were not to clarify it, it would be as when something falls upon the eye and moves to and fro; the Adhvaryu would be hungry, the sacrificer would be hungry. 'O Soma-seller, purify the Soma', he should say; so whether it be the one [1] or the other '. he involves the Soma-seller in both (faults), and therefore the Soma-seller is hungry. Aruna Aupaveśi said, 'At the buying of the Soma I win the third pressing.' He measures (the Soma) on the skin of beasts verily he wins cattle, for cattle are the third pressing. If he desire of a man, 'May he be without cattle', he should measure it for him on the rough side. The rough side indeed is not connected with cattle; verily he becomes without cattle. If he desire of a man, 'May he be rich in cattle' [2], he should measure for him on the hairy side. That indeed is the form of cattle; verily by the form he obtains cattle for him; verily he becomes rich in cattle. He buys it at the end of the waters; verily he buys it with its sap. 'Thou art a home dweller', he says; verily he makes it at home. 'Thy libation is bright', he says; for bright is its libation. He advances (for it) with a cart; verily he advances to its mightiness. He advances with a cart [3], therefore what lives on the level is to be borne by a cart. Where, however, they bear it on their heads, therefore what lives on the hill is to be borne on the head. With a verse, 'That god, Savitr', in the Atichandas metre he measures. The Atichandas is all the metres; verily with all the metres he measures it. The Atichandas is the highest of the metres. In that he measures with a verse in the Atichandas metre, he makes it the highest of its peers. With each (finger) separately [4] he measures; verily he measures it with each fresh in turn; therefore the fingers have various strengths. He presses down the thumb on them all; therefore it has equal strength with the other fingers; therefore all it accompanies. If he were to measure with all (the fingers), the fingers would grow united; with each separately he measures; therefore they grow separate. He measures five times with the Yajus. The Pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice. (He measures) five times in silence [5]. They make up ten. The Viraj has ten syllables, the Viraj is food; verily by the Viraj he wins proper food. In that he measures with the Yajus, he wins the past; in that he measures in silence, the future. Now if there were only so much Soma as that which he measures, there would be enough for the sacrificer only, and not also for the priests in the Sadas. With the words, 'For offspring thee!' he draws (the cloth for the Soma) together; verily he makes the priests in the Sadas share in it; with a garment he ties it up; the garment is connected with all the gods [6]; verily he unites it with all the gods, the Soma is cattle; (with the words) 'For expiration thee', he ties it; verily he confers expiration upon cattle. (With the words) 'For cross-breathing thee', he looses it; verily he confers cross-breathing upon cattle; therefore the vital breaths do not desert a sleeper.
## 10
If he were to barter (it) in response (to the words), 'Let me buy with one-sixteenth (of the cow) from thee, with one-eighth', he would make the Soma not worth a cow, the sacrificer not worth a cow, the Adhvaryu not, worth a cow, but he would not depreciate the mightiness of the cow. 'With a cow let me buy from thee', verily he should say; verily he makes the Soma worth a cow, the sacrificer worth
### a
cow, the Adhvaryu worth a cow, yet still he does not depreciate the mightiness of the cow. He buys (it) with a she-goat; verily he buys it full of fervour; he buys (it) with gold; verily he buys it bright [1]; he buys (it) with a milch cow; verily he buys it with milk for the mixing: he buys (it) with a bull; verily he buys it with Indra; he buys (it) with a draught ox, the draught ox is the bearer; verily by the bearer he buys the bearer of the sacrifice; he buys with two as a pair, to win a pair; he buys with a garment, the garment is connected with all the gods; verily he buys it for all the gods. These,, make up ten. The Viraj has ten syllables, the Viraj is food; verily by the Viraj he wins proper food [2]. 'Thou art the bodily form of penance, Prajapati's kind', he says, verily the Adhvaryu
  
makes atonement to the cattle, that he may not be cut off. He attains prosperity, be obtains cattle who knows thus. 'The bright with the bright for thee I buy', he says that is according to the text. The gods retook by force the gold where with they purchased the Soma, saying, 'Who shall barter brilliance?' The gold by which [3] he buys the Soma he should retake by force; verily he bestows brilliance upon himself. 'Ours be light, darkness be on the Soma seller', he says; verily he places light in the sacrificer, and bestows darkness on the Soma-seller. If he were to strike (the Soma seller) without inter twining (the flock of wool), then the serpents would bite during that year. 'Thus do I intertwine the necks of the biting serpents', he says; the serpents do not bite that year, he pierces the Soma-seller with darkness. 'O Svana [4], Bhraja', he says; they indeed in yonder world guarded the Soma; from them they grasped the Soma; if he were not to indicate to them those that serve as the price of Soma, he would not have purchased the Soma, and they would not guard the Sonia for him in yonder world. In that he indicates to them those that serve as the price of Soma, he really purchases the Soma, and they guard the Soma for him in yonder world.
## 11
The Soma when bought and tied up is connected with Varuna. Come as a friend to us, creating firm friendships', he says, for atonement. Enter the right thigh of Indra', he says; the gods placed the Soma which they purchased in the right thigh of Indra; now the sacrificer is Indra; therefore he says thus. 'With life, with fair life', he says; verily seizing the gods [1] he rises up. 'Fare along the wide atmosphere', he says; for Soma has the atmosphere for its deity. 'Thou art the seat of Aditi. Sit on the seat of Aditi', he says; that is according to the text. He severs it indeed when he makes what is connected with Varuna connected with Mitra; he sets it down with a verse addressed to Varuna; verily he unites it with its own deity. He covers it round with a garment, the garment is connected with all the gods; verily with all [2] the gods he unites it, and thus (it serves) for the smiting away of the Raksases. 'He hath stretched the atmosphere within the woods', he says; for within the woods he stretched the atmosphere. 'Strength in horses', he says; for (he placed) strength in horses. 'Milk in kine', he says; for (he placed) milk in kine. 'Skill in the heart', he says; for (he placed) skill in the heart. 'Varuna, Agni in dwellings', he says; for Varuna (placed) Agni in dwellings. 'The sun in the sky' [3], he says; for (he placed) the sun in the sky. 'The Soma in the hill', he says; the hills are the pressing-stones; he places the Soma in them, who sacrifices; therefore he says thus. 'Thee, all knowing god' with this verse addressed to Surya he fastens the black antelope skin, to smite away the Raksases. 'Come hither, O ye oxen, strong to bear the yoke', he says; that is according to the text. 'Move forward, O lord of the world', he says; for he is the lord of creatures [4]; 'to all thy stations', be says; for he moves forward to all his stations. 'Let no opponent find thee', he says; since the Gandharva Viśvavasu stole the Soma when it was being carried below, he says that, to prevent its being stolen. 'Thou art the good luck of the sacrificer', he says; verily thus the sacrificer grasps the sacrifice, that it be not interrupted. The Soma when bought and tied up indeed approaches the sacrificer in the shape of Varuna [5]. 'Honour to the radiance of Mitra and Varuna', he says, for atonement. They bring forward this Soma, it rests with Agni, they in uniting overpower the sacrificer. Now the consecrated person has for long been holding himself ready for the sacrifice. In that he offers an animal to Agni and Soma, that is a buying-off of himself; therefore of it he should not eat; for as it were it is a buying-off of a man. Or rather they say, 'By Agni and Soma Indra slew Vrtra'. In that he offers an animal to Agni and Soma, it slays hostile things for him; therefore he should eat of it. He honours it with a verse addressed to Varuna; verily he honours it with its own deity.
