+++
title = "2 The Exposition of the Soma Sacrifice (continued)"

+++
## 01
If he should offer hospitality after unyoking both (the oxen), he would break up the sacrifice. If (he should offer) before he has unyoked both, it would be as when hospitality is offered to one who has
  
not yet arrived. One ox is unyoked, one ox is not unyoked; then he offers hospitality, for the continuance of the sacrifice. The wife (of the sacrificer) holds on (to the cart); for the wife is mistress of the household gear; verily he offers what is approved by the wife. The share of the wife in the sacrifice makes a pair; so the wife also [1] grasps the sacrifice that it may not be interrupted. With whatever retinue the king comes, to all of them hospitality is offered; the metres are the retinue of King Soma. 'Thou art the hospitality of Agni. For Visnu thee!' he says; thus he offers (hospitality) to the Gayatri. 'Thou art the hospitality of Soma. 'For Visnu thee!' he says; thus he offers (hospitality) to the Tristubh. 'Thou art the hospitality of the stranger. For Visnu thee!' he says; thus he offers (hospitality) to the Jagati [2]. 'For Agni thee, giver of wealth, for Visnu thee!' he says; thus he offers (hospitality) to the Anustubh. 'For the eagle, bringer of the Soma, thee, for Visnu thee!' he says; thus he offers (hospitality) to the Gayatri. He offers five times. The Pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice. The theologians say, 'For what reason is the Gayatri offered to on either side of the offering of hospitality?' Because the Gayatri brought the Soma down [3]; therefore is it offered to on both sides of hospitality, before and after. Hospitality is the head of the sacrifice, the sacrificial cake is offered on nine potsherds, therefore the head has nine apertures. The sacrificial cake is offered on nine potsherds. The three sets of three potsherds are commensurate with the Trivrt Stoma, the Trivrt is brilliance; verily he places brilliance in the head of the sacrifice. The sacrificial cake is offered on nine potsherds. The three sets of three potsherds are commensurate with the threefold breath, the breath is threefold [4]; verily in order he places the threefold breath in the head of the sacrifice. Now the Saccharum spontaneum shoots are the eyelashes of Prajapati, and his lids are pieces of sugar-cane. In that the strew is of Saccharum spontaneum and the dividing-stakes of sugar-cane, verily he brings together the eye of Prajapati. Now the libations made by the gods the Asuras tore and ate. The gods saw the Gmelina arborea tree. (Thinking) 'It is fit for work; by it one can perform work', they made the enclosing sticks of Gmelina arborea wood [5], and by them they smote away the Raksases. In that the enclosing-sticks are made of Gmelina arborea wood, it is for the smiting away of the Raksases. He makes them touch, that the Raksases may not go through them. He does not place one in front, for the sun which rises in front smites away the Raksases. He places the kindling-sticks erect; verily from above he smites away the Raksases; (he places one) with a Yajus, the other in silence, to make a pair. He places two; the sacrifice has two feet; (verily they serve) for support. The theologians say [6], 'There are both Agni and Soma here; why is hospitality offered to Soma and not to Agni?' In that having kindled fire he places it on the fire, by that verily is hospitality offered to Agni. Or rather they say, 'Agni is all the gods.' In that he kindles fire after placing the oblation, he thus produces all the gods for the oblation when it has been placed.
## 02
The gods and the Asuras were in conflict. The gods fell out among themselves. Being unwilling to accept one another's pre-eminence, they separated in five bodies, Agni with the Vasus, Soma with the Rudras, Indra with the Maruts, Varuna with the Adityas, Brhaspati with the All-gods. They reflected, 'Our foes, the Asuras, we are profiting in that we are falling out among ourselves; let us remove (from us) and deposit together those bodies which are dear to us; from these shall he depart who [1] first of us is hostile to another.' Therefore of those who perform the Tanunaptra rite he who first is hostile goes to destruction. In that he divides up the Tanunaptra, (it serves) for the overcoming of the foe; he himself prospers, his foe is defeated. He divides five times; for five times did they divide. Then again the Pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice. 'For him who rusheth on I seize thee', he says; he who rushes on is the breath [2]; verily he delights the breath. 'For him who rusheth around', he says; he who rushes around is the mind; verily he delights the mind. 'For Tanunaptra', he says; for they divided up these bodies. 'For the mighty', he says; for they divided them up for strength. 'For the greatest in strength', he says; for they divided up the greatest part of themselves. 'Thou art unsurmounted, the unsurmountable', he says; for that is unsurmounted and unsurmountable. 'The force of the gods' [3], be says; for that is the force of the gods. 'Guarding from imprecations, impervious to imprecations', he says; for that guards from imprecations and is impervious to imprecations. 'May the lord of consecration approve my consecration', he says; that is according to the text. The gods making the ghee a weapon smote
  
Soma; now they come near the Soma as it were, when they perform the Tanunaptra. 'May thy every shoot, O god Soma, swell', be says. Whatever [4] of it becomes spoiled' or is lost, that he purifies by it. 'May Indra swell for thee; do thou swell for Indra', he says; verily he makes to swell both Indra and Soma. 'Make thy comrades to .swell with wealth and skill', he says. The priests are his comrades; verily he makes them to swell. 'With good fortune may I accomplish thy pressing, O god Soma' [5], he says; verily he invokes this blessing (on himself). Those who make the Soma to swell fall away from this world, for the Soma when made to swell has the atmosphere as its deity. 'Desired are riches exceedingly, for food, for prosperity', he says; verily by paying homage to heaven and earth they find support in this world. The gods and the Asuras were in conflict. The gods in fear entered Agni; therefore they say, 'Agni is all the gods'. They [6], making Agni their protection, overcame the Asuras. Now he as it were enters Agni who undergoes the intermediate consecration, (and it serves) for the overcoming of his foes; he prospers himself, his foe is overcome. He protects himself by the consecration, his offspring by the intermediate consecration. The girdle he makes tighter; for his offspring are closer to him than himself. He drinks warm milk, and rubs himself with bubbling water; for fire is extinguished by cold, (and these serve) for kindling. 'Thy dread form, O Agni', he says; verily with its own deity he consumes the hot milk, for unity, for atonement.
## 03
The Asuras had three citadels; the lowest was of iron, then there was one of silver, then one of gold. The gods could not conquer them; they sought to conquer them by siege; therefore they say--both those who know thus and those who do not--'By siege they conquer great citadels.' They made ready an arrow, Agni as the point, Soma as the socket, Visnu as the shaft. They said, 'Who shall shoot it?' [1] 'Rudra', they said, 'Rudra is cruel, let him shoot it.' He said, 'Let me choose a boon; let me be overlord of animals.' Therefore is Rudra overlord of animals. Rudra let it go; it cleft the three citadels and drove the Asuras away from these worlds. The observance of the Upasads is for the driving away of foes. One should not offer another libation in front; if be were to offer another libation in front [2], he would make something else the beginning. He sprinkles clarified butter with the dipping-ladle to proclaim the sacrifice. He makes the offering after crossing over without coming back; verily he drives away his foes from these worlds so that they come not back. Then returning he offers the Upasad libation; verily having driven away his foes from these worlds and having conquered he mounts upon the world of his foes. Now the gods by the Upasads which they performed in the morning drove away the Asuras from the day, by the Upasads (performed) in the evening (they drove away the Asuras) from the night. In that both morning and evening Upasads [3] are performed, the sacrificer drives away his foes from day and night. The Yajyas used in the morning should be made Puronuvakyas at night, for variety. He performs three Upasads, these worlds are three; verily he delights these worlds; they together make six, the seasons are six; verily he delights the seasons. He performs twelve at an Ahina Soma sacrifice, the year consists of twelve months; verily he de lights the year. They make twenty-four [4], the half-months number twenty four; verily he delights the half-months. He should perform an awl-shaped intermediate consecration who wishes, 'May there be prosperity for me in this world', (that is) one to begin with, then two, then three, then four; this indeed is the awl-shaped intermediate consecration; verily there is prosperity for him in this world. He should perform an intermediate consecration broader at the top than below who wishes, 'May there be prosperity for me in yonder world', (that is) four to begin with, then three, then two, then one; this indeed is the intermediate consecration broader at the top than below; verily there is prosperity for him in yonder world.
## 04
They go to the world of heaven who perform the Upasads. Of them he who takes out (a little food) is left behind; one must take out carefully, (thinking) 'I have not taken out anything.' He who is left behind wearied among those who go on their own mission sticks behind and lives at (home). Therefore after once taking out, one should not take out a second time. One should take out of curd, that is the symbol of cattle; verily by the symbol he wins cattle [1]. The sacrifice went away from
  
the gods in the form of Visnu, and entered the earth. The gods sought him grasping hands. Indra passed over him. He said, 'Who has passed over me?' 'I am he who smites in the stronghold; who art thou?' 'I am he who brings from the stronghold.' He said, 'Thou art called he who smites in the stronghold. Now a boar, stealer of the good, [2] keeps the wealth of the Asuras which is to be won beyond the seven hills. Him smite, if thou art he who smites in the stronghold.' He plucked out a bunch of Darbha grass, pierced the seven hills, and smote him. He said, 'Thou art called he who brings from the stronghold; bring him.' So the sacrifice bore off the sacrifice for them; in that they won the wealth of the Asuras which was to be won (védyam), that alone is the reason why the Vedi is so called. The Asuras [3] indeed at first owned the earth, the gods had so much as one seated can espy. The gods said, 'May we also have a share in the earth?' 'How much shall we give you?' 'Give us as much as this Salavrki can thrice run round.' Indra taking the form of a Salavrki thrice ran round on all sides the earth. So they won the earth, and in that they won it therefore is the Vedi so called [4]. All this earth is the Vedi, but they measure off and sacrifice on so much as they deem they can use. The back cross-line is thirty feet, the eastern line is thirty-six feet, the front cross-line is twenty-four feet. These make up tens; the Viraj has ten syllables; the Viraj is food; verily by the Viraj he wins food. He digs up (the earth); verily he digs away whatever in it is impure. He digs up; therefore the plants perish. He spreads the sacrificial strew; therefore the plants again revive. He spreads over the strew the upper strew. The strew is the people; the upper strew is the sacrificer; verily he makes the sacrificer higher than the man who does not sacrifice; therefore the sacrificer is higher than the man who does not sacrifice.
## 05
If a weak man take up a burden, he breaks up into pieces. If there were twelve Upasads in the one day rite, and three in the Ahina, the sacrifice would be upset. There are three Upasads in the one day rite, twelve in the Ahina, to preserve the strength of the sacrifice; thus it is in order. One teat (of the cow) is used for a child, for that is fortunate. So he takes one teat for his milk drink, then two, then three, then four. That [1] is the razor-edged drink by which he drives away his foes when born and repels them when about to be born; verily also with the smaller he approaches the greater. He takes the four teats first for his drink, then three, then two, then one. That is the drink called 'of a beatific back', full of fervour, and of heavenly character; verily also is he propagated with children and cattle. Gruel is the drink of the Rajanya; gruel is as it were harsh; the Rajanya is as it were harsh [2], it is the symbol of the thunderbolt, (and serves) for success. Curds (is the drink) of the Vaiśya, it is the symbol of the sacrifice of cooked food, (and serves) for prosperity. Milk (is the drink) of the Brahman, the Brahman is brilliance, milk is brilliance; verily by brilliance he endows himself with brilliance and milk. Again by milk foetuses grow; the man who is consecrated is as it were a foetus; in that milk is his drink, verily thus he causes himself to grow. Manu was wont thrice to take drink, the Asuras twice, the gods once [3]. Morning, midday, evening, were the times of Manu's drinking, the symbol of the sacrifice of cooked food, (serving) for prosperity. Morning and evening were those of the Asuras, without a middle, a symbol of hunger; thence were they overcome. Midday and midnight were those of the gods; thence they prospered and went to the world of heaven. Now with regard to his drinking at midday and at midnight, it is in the middle that people feed themselves; verily he places strength in the middle of himself, for the overcoming of his foes. He prospers himself [4], his foe is overcome. Now the man who is consecrated is a foetus, the consecration-shed is the womb (in which he is). If the man who is consecrated were to leave the consecration-shed, it would be as when a foetus falls from the womb. He must not leave, to guard himself. The fire here is a tiger to guard the house. Therefore if the man who is consecrated were to leave (the shed), he would be likely to spring up and slay him. He must not leave, to protect himself. He lies on the right side; that is the abode of the sacrifice; verily he lies in his own abode. He lies turned towards the fire; verily he lies turned towards the gods and the sacrifice.
## 06
On a place of sacrifice where the sacrifice faces the east should he make him to sacrifice for whom he wishes, 'May the higher sacrifice condescend to him, may he gain the world of heaven.' That is
  
the place of sacrifice where the sacrifice faces the east, where the Hotr as be recites the Prataranuvaka gazes upon the fire, water, and the sun. To him the higher sacrifice condescends, he gains the world of heaven. On a contiguous (aptá) place of sacrifice should he make him to sacrifice who has foes. He should make it touch the road or a pit so that neither a wagon nor a chariot can go between [1]. That is a contiguous place of sacrifice. He conquers (apnoti) his foe, his foe conquers him not. On a place of sacrifice which is elevated in one place he should make him to sacrifice who desires cattle. The Angirases produced cattle from a place of sacrifice elevated in one place. It should be elevated between the seat and the oblation-holders. That is a place of sacrifice elevated in one place; verily he becomes possessed of cattle. On a place of sacrifice which is elevated in three places should he make him to sacrifice who desires heaven. The Angirases went to the world of heaven from a place of sacrifice elevated in three places. It should be elevated between the Ahavaniya fire and the oblation holder [2], between the oblation-holder and the seat, and between the seat and the Garhapatya fire. That is a place of sacrifice elevated in three places; verily he goes to the world of heaven. On a place of sacrifice which is firm should he make him to sacrifice who desires support. That is a place of sacrifice which is firm, which is level on all sides; verily he finds, support. Where diverse plants are intertwined, there should he make him sacrifice who desires cattle. That is the form of cattle; verily by the form he wins cattle for him [3]; verily be becomes possessed of cattle. On a place of sacrifice seized by destruction should he make him to sacrifice for whom he desires, 'May I cause his sacrifice to be seized by destruction.' That is a place of sacrifice seized by destruction where there is a bare patch of level ground; verily he causes his sacrifice to be seized by destruction. On a place of sacrifice which is distinctly marked should he cause him to sacrifice regarding whom they have doubts as to (admitting him to) common meals or to marriage. It should be sloping east of the Ahavaniya and west of the Garhapatya. That is a place of sacrifice which is distinctly marked, be is distinguished from his evil foe, they doubt not of him for common meal or wedding. On a place of sacrifice which is artificial should he make him sacrifice who desires wealth. Man must be made; verily he prospers.
## 07
The high altar taking the form of a lioness went away and remained between the two parties. The gods reflected, 'Whichever of the two she joins, they will become this.' They called to her; she said, 'Let me choose a boon; through me shall ye obtain all your desires, but the oblation shall come to me before (it comes to) the fire.' Therefore do they besprinkle the high altar before (they sprinkle) the fire, for that was its chosen boon. He measures (it) round with the yoke-pin [1], that is its measure; verily also by what is fitting he wins what is fitting. 'Thou art the abode of riches (vitta) for me', he says, for being found (vitta) she helped them; thou art the resort of the afflicted for me', he says, for she helped them in affliction; 'protect me when in want', he says, for she protected them when in want; 'protect me when afflicted', he says, for she protected them when afflicted. 'May Agni, named Nabhas, know (thee) [2], O Agni Angiras', (with these words) he thrice strokes with (the wooden sword); verily he wins the fires that are in these worlds. He strokes in silence for the fourth time, verily he wins that which is not indicated. 'Thou art a lioness; thou art a buffalo', he says, for it (the high altar) taking the form of a lioness went away and remained between the two parties. 'Extend wide; let the lord of the sacrifice extend wide for thee', he says; verily he enriches the sacrificer with offspring and cattle. 'Thou art firm' [3], (with these words) he strikes (the earth) together, for firmness. 'Be pure for the gods; be bright for the gods', (with these words) he moistens it and scatters (sand) on it, for purity. 'May the cry of Indra guard thee in front with the Vasus', be says; verily be sprinkles it from the quarters. 'Since the high altar has gone to the gods, here must we conquer' (thought) the Asuras, and with bolts ready they advanced on the gods. Them the cry of Indra with the Vasus repelled in front [4]; the swift of mind with the Pitrs on the right, the wise one with the Rudras behind, and Viśvakarman with the Adityas on the left. In that he sprinkles the high altar, verily thus does the sacrificer repel his foes from the quarters. Indra gave the Yatis to the Salavrkas; them they ate on the right of the high altar. Whatever is left of the sprinkling waters he should pour on the right of the high altar; whatever cruel is there that he appeases thereby. He should think of whomever he hates; verily he brings affliction upon him.

## 08
The high altar said, 'Through me ye shall obtain all your desires.' The gods desired, 'Let us overcome the Asuras our foes.' They sacrificed (with the words),'Thou art a lioness, overcoming rivals; hail!' They over came the Asuras, their foes. Having overcome the Asuras, their foes, they felt desire, 'May we obtain offspring.' They sacrificed (with the words), 'Thou art a lioness, bestowing fair offspring, hail!' They obtained offspring. They having obtained offspring [1] felt desire, 'May we obtain cattle.' They sacrificed (with the words), 'Thou art a lioness, bestowing increase of wealth; hail!' They obtained cattle. Having obtained cattle, they felt desire, 'May we obtain support.' They sacrificed (with the words), 'Thou art a lioness, winning (the favour of) the Adityas; hail!' They found support here. Having found support here, they felt desire, 'May we approach the deities for blessings.' They sacrificed (with the words), 'Thou art a lioness; bring the gods to the pious [2] sacrificer; hail!' They approached the deities for blessings. He sprinkles five times; the Pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice. He sprinkles transversely; therefore cattle move their limbs transversely, for support. 'For beings thee!' (with these words) he takes up the ladle; of the gods that are that is the share; verily he therewith delights them. He puts round the enclosing-sticks of Butea frondosa, for the holding apart of these worlds [3]. Agni had three elder brothers. They perished when carrying the offering to the gods. Agni was afraid, 'This one here will come to ruin.' He went away. The (night) he spent among the trees was with the Butea frondosa: the (night) among the plants was with the Sugandhitejana; the (night) among the cattle was between the horns of a ram. The gods sought to start him forth. They found him, and said to him [4],' Return to us; bear the offering for us.' He said, 'Let me choose a boon. Whatever of the offering when taken up falls outside the enclosing sticks, let that be the portion of my brothers.' Therefore whatever of the offering when taken up falls outside the enclosing-sticks, that is their portion; verily therewith be delights them. He reflected, 'My brothers of old perished because they had bones. I will shatter bones.' The bones he shattered became the Buteafrondosa, the flesh which died on them bdellium. In that he brings together these paraphernalia, verily thus be brings Agni together. 'Thou art the rubble of Agni', he says, for the paraphernalia are the rubble of Agni. Or rather they say, 'These enclosing-sticks of Buteafrondosa which lie around are in truth his brothers.'
## 09
He loosens the knot; verily he sets them free from the noose of Varuna; verily he makes them fit for the sacrifice. Having sacrificed with a verse to Savitr, he brings forward the oblation-holders; verily on the instigation of Savitr he brings them forward. The axle which is tied on both sides is Varuna of evil speech; if it were to creak, it would creak against the house of the sacrificer. 'With fair voice, O god, do thou address the dwelling', he says; the dwelling is the house; (verily it serves) for atonement. The wife (of the sacrificer) [1] anoints (them), for the wife is every one's friend, for friendship. The share of the wife in the sacrifice makes a pair; verily also the wife grasps the sacrifice that it may not be interrupted. Now the Raksases following in its track seek to injure the sacrifice; he makes a libation in the two tracks with Rc verses addressed to Visnu. The sacrifice is Visnu; verily he drives away the Raksases from the sacrifice. If the Adhvaryu were to pour the libation in (a place) without fire, the Adhvaryu would become blind, the Raksases would injure the sacrifice [2]. He puts gold down on it before making the libation; verily he makes the libation in that which has fire; the Adhvaryu does not become blind, the Raksases do not injure the sacrifice. 'Come ye two forward, ordaining the offering', he says; verily he makes them go to the world of heaven. 'There rejoice on the height of the earth ', he says, for the place of sacrifice is the height of the earth. Now the oblation-holder is the head of the sacrifice. 'From the sky, O Visnu, or from the earth' [3], with this Rc verse which contains a blessing he strikes in the prop of the southern oblation-holder; verily the sacrificer at the beginning of the sacrifice wins blessings. Now Danda Aupara split by the Vasat call the axle of the third oblation-holder; the third cover put on the oblation-holder (serves) to make up the third oblation-holder, The oblation-holder is the head of the sacrifice. 'Thou art the forehead of Visnu: thou art the back of Visnu', he says. Therefore so often is the head divided. 'Thou art the string of Visnu; thou art the fixed point of Visnu', he says, for the
  
oblation-holder is connected with Visnu as its deity. Now the knot which he first ties, if he were not to unloose it, the Adhvaryu would perish from suppression of urine; therefore it must be unloosed.
## 10
'On the impulse of the god Savitr', (with these words) he takes up the spade, for impelling. 'With the arms of the Aśvins he says, for the Aśvins were the priests of the gods. 'With the hands of Pusan', be for restraint. Now the spade is as it were a bolt; 'Thou art the spade; thou art the, woman', he says, to appease it. Now, as each part is performed, the Raksases seek to injure the sacrifice; 'The Raksas is encompassed, the evil spirits are encompassed', he says, to smite away the Raksases [1]. 'Here do I cut off the neck of the Raksas, who hateth us, and whom we hate', he says; there are two people, he whom he hates and he who hates him; verily straightway he cuts their necks. 'To sky thee, to atmosphere thee, to earth thee!' he says; verily he anoints it for these worlds. He anoints from the top downwards; therefore [2] men live on strength from the top downwards. Now he does a cruel deed in that he digs; he pours down water, for atonement. He pours down (water) mixed with barley; barley is strength, the Udumbara is strength; verily he unites strength with strength. (The post) is of Udumbara wood of the height of the sacrificer. As great as is the sacrificer, so much strength does he put in it. 'Thou art the seat of the Pitrs', (with these words) he spreads the strew, for what is dug in has the Pitrs for its deity [3]. If he were to set it up without strewing, it would be dug in and have the Pitrs for its deity; he sets it up after strewing; verily he sets it up in this (earth), and makes it firm-rooted.' 'Support the sky, fill the atmosphere', he says, for the distinction of these worlds. 'May Dyutana Maruta set thee up', he says; Dyutana Maruta was wont to set up the Udumbara (post) of the gods; verily [4] by him he sets this (post) up. 'Thee that art winner of Brahmans, winner of nobles', he says; that is according to the text. 'With ghee, O sky and earth, be filled', (with these words) he sacrifices on the Udumbara (post); verily with moisture he anoints sky and earth. He makes it run right to the end; verily completely does he anoint the sacrificer with brilliance. 'Thou art of Indra', (with these words) he puts down the covering, for the seat has Indra as its deity. 'The shade of all folk', he says, for the seat is the shade of all folk. (A roof of) nine coverings [5] should he fix for one who desires brilliance, commensurate with the Trivrt Stoma; the Trivrt is brilliance; verily he becomes brilliant; one of eleven coverings (he should fix) for one who desires power; the Tristubh has eleven syllables, the Tristubh is power; verily he becomes powerful. (A roof of) fifteen coverings (he should fix) for one who has foes; the thunderbolt is fifteenfold; (verily it serves) for the overcoming of foes. (A roof of) seventeen coverings (he should fix) for one who desires offspring- Prajapati is sixteenfold. (verily it serves) to gain Prajapati. (A roof of) twenty-one coverings (he should fix) for one who desires support; the Ekavinśa is the support of the Stomas; (verily it serves) for support. The Sadas is the stomach, the Udumbara is strength, in the middle he fixes (the post) of Udumbara wood; verily he places strength in the midst of offspring; therefore [6] in the middle they enjoy strength. In the world of the sacrificer are the southern coverings, in that of his foe are the northern; he makes the southern the higher; verily he makes the sacrificer higher than the man who does not sacrifice; therefore the sacrificer is higher than the man who does not sacrifice. He fills up the crevices, for distinction; therefore people depend on the forest. 'May our songs, O lover of song', he says; that is according to the text. 'Thou art the string of Indra;. thou art the fixed point of Indra', he says; for the Sadas has Indra for its deity. Now the knot which he first ties, if he were not to unloose it, the Adhvaryu would perish through suppression of urine; therefore it must be unloosed.
## 11
The oblation-holder is the head of the sacrifice, the sounding holes are the vital airs. They are dug in the oblation-holder; therefore. the vital airs are in the head. They are dug below; therefore the vital airs are below the head. 'I dig those which slay the Raksas, which slay the spell, and which are of Visnu', he says, for the sounding-holes have Visnu for their deity. The Asuras in retreat dug in spells against the vital airs of the gods; they found them at the distance of an arm; therefore they are dug an arm's length deep. 'Here do I cast out the spell [1] which an equal or an unequal hath buried', he says; there are two sorts of men, the equal and the unequal; verily whatever spell they dig against
  
him he thus casts out. He unites them; therefore the vital airs are united within. He does not combine them; therefore the vital airs are not combined. He pours water over; therefore the vital airs are moist within. (The water) he pours is mixed with barley [2]; barley is strength, the sounding-holes are the vital airs; verily he places strength in the vital airs. He spreads over the strew; therefore the vital airs are hairy within. He besprinkles (the holes) with butter; butter is brilliance, the sounding-holes are the vital airs; verily he places brilliance in the vital airs. The pressing-boards are the jaws of the sacrifice; he does not join them, for the jaws are not joined; or rather at a long Soma sacrifice they should be joined, for firmness. The oblation-holder is the head of the sacrifice [3], the sounding-holes are the vital airs, the pressing-boards the jaws, the skin the tongue, the pressing-stones the teeth the Ahavaniya the mouth, the high altar the nose, the Sadas the stomach. When he eats with his tongue on his teeth, (the food) goes to the mouth; when it goes to the mouth, then it goes to the stomach, therefore they press (the juice) with the pressing-stones on the oblation-holder over the skin, sacrifice in the Ahavaniya, retire towards the west, and consume (the Soma) in the Sadas. He who knows the milking of the Viraj in the mouth of the sacrifice milks her; the Viraj is this (cow), the skin is its hide, the pressing-boards its udder, the sounding-holes its teats, the pressing-stones its calves, the priests the milkers, Soma the milk. He, who knows thus, milks her.
