+++
title = "3 The Exposition of the Soma Sacrifice (continued)"

+++
## 01
From the pit he scatters (earth) on the altars; the pit is the birthplace of the sacrifice; (verily it serves) to unite the sacrifice with its birthplace. The gods lost by conquest the sacrifice; they won it again from the Agnidh's altar; the Agnidh's altar is the invincible part of the sacrifice. In that he draws off the altar fires from that of the Agnidh, he renews the sacrifice from the invincible part of it. Conquered as it were they go who creep to the Bahispavamana (Stotra) when the Bahispavamana has been sung [1], he says, 'Agnidh, draw off the fires, spread the strew, make ready the sacrificial cake.' Verily having re-won the sacrifice they keep renewing it. At two pressings he draws off by means of embers, at the third with (flaming) splinters, to give it glory verily he completes it. The altars guarded the Soma in yonder world they took away the Soma from them; they followed it and surrounded it. He who knows thus [2] wins an attendant. They were deprived of the Soma drink; they besought the gods for the Soma drink; the gods said to them, 'Take two names each; then shall ye gain it, or not.' Then the altars became fires (also); therefore a Brahman who has two names is likely to prosper. Those which came nearest gained the Soma drink viz. the Ahavaniya, the Agnidh's altar, the Hotr's, and the Marjaliya; therefore they sacrifice on them. He leaves them out in uttering the cry for sacrifice, for [3] they were deprived of the Soma drink. The gods drove away the Asuras who were in front by the sacrifices which they offered on the eastern side, and the Asuras who were behind by those which they offered on the western side. Soma libations are offered in the east, seated to the west he besprinkles the altars; verily from behind and from in front the sacrificer smites away his enemies; therefore offspring are engendered behind, and are brought forth in front [4]. The altars are the breaths; if the Adhvaryu were to go past the altars to the west, he would mingle the breaths, he would be liable to die. The Hotr is the navel of the sacrifice; the expiration is above the navel, the inspiration is below; if the Adhvaryu were to go past the Hotr to the west, he would place the expiration in the inspiration, he would be liable to die. The Adhvaryu should not accompany the song; the Adhvaryu's strength is his voice; if the Adhvaryu were to accompany the song, he would confer his voice on the Udgatr [5], and his voice would fail. The theologians say, 'The Adhvaryu should not go beyond the Sadas to the west before the Soma offering is completed. Then how is he to go to offer the sacrifices in the southern fire? Because that is the end of the fires. But how are the gods to know whether it is the end or not?' He goes round the Agnidh's altar to the north and offers the sacrifices in the southern fire; verily he does not mingle the breaths. Some of the altars are besprinkled, some not; those which he besprinkles he delights; those which he does not besprinkle he delights by indicating them.

## 02
The Vaisarjana offerings are made for the world of heaven. He offers in the Garhapatya with two verses; the sacrificer has two feet; (verily it serves) for support. He offers in the Agnidh's fire; verily he approaches the atmosphere; he offers in the Ahavaniya; verily he makes him go to the world of heaven. The Raksases sought to harm the gods as they were going to the world of heaven; they smote away the Raksases through Soma, the king, and making themselves active went to the world of heaven, to prevent the Raksases seizing them. The Soma is ready at hand; so he offers [1] the Vaisarjanas, to smite away the Raksases. 'Thou, O Soma, brought about by ourselves', he says, for he is the one who brings about by himself; 'from hostility brought about by others', he says, for the Raksases are brought about by others; 'thou art the giver of wide protection', he says; in effect he says, 'give us wide (protection).' 'May the active one gladly partake of the ghee', he says; verily he makes the sacrificer active and causes him to go to the world of heaven, to prevent the Raksases seizing him. They take up the Soma [2], the pressing-stones, the cups for Vayu, the wooden trough; they lead forth the wife (of the sacrificer), they make the carts move along with them; verily whatever is his he goes with it to the world of heaven. He offers in the Agnidh's fire with a verse containing the word 'lead', for leading to the world of heaven. He places on the Agnidh's altar the pressing-stones, the cups for Vayu, and the wooden trough, for they take it away from them; if he were to put it with them, it would become spoiled. He makes it go forward with a verse addressed to Soma; verily by means of its own [3] divinity he makes it go forward. 'Thou art the seat of Aditi; do thou sit on the seat of Aditi', he says; that is according to the text. Hitherto the sacrificer has guarded the Soma. 'This, O god Savitr, is the Soma of you (gods)', he says; verily instigated by Savitr, he hands it over to the gods. 'Thou, O Soma, god to the gods, hast thou gone', he says, for it being a god [4] goes to the gods. 'I here, man to men', he says, for he being a man goes to men. If he were not to say that formula, the sacrificer would be without offspring or cattle. 'With offspring, with increase of wealth', he says; verily he abides in this world with offspring and with cattle. 'Homage to the gods', he says, for homage is the due of the gods; 'svadhá' to the Pitrs', be says, for the svadhá call is the due of the Pitrs [5]. 'Here (may) I (be free) from Varuna's noose', he says; verily he is freed from Varuna's noose. 'O Agni, lord of vows,' (he says). 'One should recover one's former body', they say, 'for who knows if the richer, when his will is accomplished will restore it or not.' The pressing-stones are the troop of thieves of King Soma; him, who knowing thus, places the pressing-stones on the Agnidh's altar, the troop of thieves finds not.
## 03
Having sacrificed with a verse addressed to Visnu, he approaches the post. The post has Visnu for its deity; verily he approaches it with its own deity. 'I have passed by others, I have not approached others', he says, for he passes by others, and does not approach others. I have found thee nearer than the farther, farther than the near', he says, for he finds it nearer than the farther, farther than the near. 'I welcome thee that art of Visnu, for the sacrifice to the gods' [1], he says, for he welcomes it for the sacrifice to the gods. 'Let the god Savitr anoint thee with honey', he says; verily he anoints it with glory. 'O plant, guard it; O axe, harm it not', he says; the axe is the thunderbolt; (verily it serves) for atonement. The brilliance of the tree which fears the axe falls away with the first chip; the first chip which falls he should take up; verily he takes it up with its brilliance [2]. These worlds are afraid of the falling forward of the tree. 'With thy top graze not the sky, with thy middle harm not the atmosphere', he says; verily he makes it tender for these worlds. 'O tree, grow with a hundred shoots', (with these words) he sacrifices on the stump; therefore many (shoots) spring up from the stump of trees. 'May we grow with a thousand shoots', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. He should cut it so that it will not touch the axle [3]. If he were to cut it so that it would touch the axle, the cattle of the sacrificer would be liable to perish. If he desire of any one, 'May he be without support', he should cut for him a branch; this among trees is not supported; verily he is without support. If he desire of any one, 'May he be without cattle', he should cut for him (a post) without leaves and with a withered top; this among trees is without cattle; verily he becomes without cattle. If he desire of any one, 'May he be rich in cattle', he should cut for him one with many leaves and many branches; this [4] among trees is rich in cattle; verily he becomes rich in

## 04
'To earth thee! To atmosphere thee! To sky thee!' he says; verily for these worlds he anoints it. He anoints from the foot upwards, for upwards as it were is the world of heaven. Cruel as it were is that which he does when he digs; he pours water over, for expiation he pours (water) mixed with barley; barley is strength. The post is of the height of the sacrificer. As great as is the sacrificer, so much strength does he put in it [1]. 'Thou art the seat of the Pitrs', (with these words) he spreads the strew, for what is dug in has the Pitrs for its deity.' If he were to set it up without strewing, it would be dug in and have the Pitrs for its deity; he sets it up after strewing; verily he sets it up in this (earth). He throws down the splinter of the post; verily he sets it up with its glory. 'Thee to the plants with fair berries', (with these words) he fixes on the top [2] therefore at the top plants bear fruit. He anoints it, butter is glory. The corner near the fire is of the same height as the sacrificer; in that he anoints the corner near the fire, he anoints with brilliance the sacrificer. He anoints it to the end; verily completely does he anoint the sacrificer with brilliance. He rubs it all around; verily he places brilliance in him completely. 'Support the sky, fill the atmosphere, with thy base make firm the earth', he says, for the separation of these worlds. With a verse addressed to Visnu [3] he arranges it; the post has Visnu for its deity; verily he arranges it with its own deity. He arranges it with two (verses); the sacrificer has two feet; (verily it serves) for support. If he desire of a man, 'May I deprive him of brilliance, of the deities, of power', he should move the corner near the fire to one side or the other of the Ahavaniya; verily he deprives him of brilliance, of the deities, of power. If he desire of a man, 'May I unite him with brilliance, with the deities, with power' [4], he should set up for him the corner (of the post) near the fire in a line with the Ahavaniya; verily he unites him with brilliance, with the deities, with power. Thee that art winner of Brahmans, winner of nobles', he says that is according to the text. He winds round (the grass); the girdle is strength, the post is of the same height as the sacrificer; verily he unites the sacrificer with strength. He winds (it) round at the level of the navel; verily at the level of the navel he bestows upon him strength; therefore at the level of the navel men enjoy strength. If he desire of a man, 'May I deprive him of strength' [5], he should put (it) on either upwards or downwards; verily he deprives him of strength. If he desire, 'May Parjanya rain', he should put it on downwards, verily he brings down rain; if he desire, 'May Parjanya not rain', he should put it on upwards; verily he holds up rain. What is dug in belongs to the Pitrs, what is above the part dug in up to the girdle belongs to men, the girdle belongs to the plants [6], what is above the girdle up to the top to the All-gods, the top to Indra, the rest to the Sadhyas. The post is connected with all the gods; verily in setting up the post he delights all the gods. By means of the sacrifice the gods went to the world of heaven; they reflected, 'Men will equal us'; they blocked the way by the post and went to the world of heaven; the Rsis discerned that (world) by means of the post, and that is why it is called post [7]. In that be sets up the post, (it is) to discern the world of heaven. He puts (it) up to the east (of the fire), for before the sacrifice it is
  
proclaimed, for what is not proclaimed is that of which when it is passed men say, 'This should have been done.' The Sadhya gods despised the sacrifice; the sacrifice touched them not; what was superabundant in the sacrifice touched them. The superabundant part of the sacrifice is the producing of fire and casting it on the fire; the superabundant part [8] of the post is the part above the top; that is their share; verily by it he delights them. The gods when the Soma sacrifice was complete cast the offering-spoons (into the fire) and the post; they reflected, 'Here we are making a disturbance of the sacrifice', they saw a ransom in the bunch of grass for the offering-spoons, in the chip for the post. When the Soma sacrifice is complete he casts (in the fire) the bunch of grass, he offers the chip, to avoid disturbing the sacrifice.
## 05
The Sadhya gods were in this world and nothing else living. They offered Agni as a sacrifice to Agni, for they found nothing else to offer; thence indeed these creatures were born; in that he casts the fire on the fire after producing it, (it serves for) the propagation of offspring. Now the fire is Rudra, the beast the sacrificer; if he were to produce the fire after offering the beast, he would place the sacrificer in the power of Rudra [1], and he would be liable to die. Or rather they say, 'All the gods are the fire, the beast the offering'. In that he produces the fire after offering the beast, he brings forth all the gods for the offering which is made ready. The fire should be produced, after bringing up (the beast). The offering is then neither finished nor not begun. 'Thou art the birthplace of Agni', he says, for that is the birthplace of Agni. 'Ye are the two male ones', he says, for they are the two male ones [2]. 'Thou art Urvaśi, thou art Ayu', he says, to make a pair. 'Anointed with ghee do ye produce a male', he says, for they produce a male who (produce) Agni. 'Be born with the Gayatri metre', he says; verily he produces him with the metres. 'Recite for Agni as he is being produced', he says; he recites a verse to Savitr; verily, instigated by Savitr he produces him. 'Recite for him who is born' [3], 'For him who is being cast forward recite', he says; verily as each part is performed he completes him. He recites all Gayatri verses; Agni has the Gayatri as his metre; verily he unites him with his own metre. The fire is in front; having produced fire he casts it forward; the two uniting overpower the sacrificer; 'Be of one mind with us', he says, to appease (them). He offers after casting (the fire) forward; verily he gives him food on birth; he offers with melted butter; the melted butter is the dear home of Agni; verily he unites him with his dear home, and also with brilliance.
## 06
'For food thee!' (with these words) he takes up the strew, for he who sacrifices strives (icháte) as it were. 'Thou art the impeller', he says, for he brings them up. 'To the gods the servants of the gods have come', he says, for being the servants of the gods they go to the gods. 'The priests, the eager ones', he says; the priests are the priests, the eager ones, therefore he says thus. 'O Brhaspati, guard wealth' [1], he says; Brhaspati is the holy power (Brahman) of the gods; verily by the holy power he wins cattle for him. 'Let thy oblations taste sweet', be says; verily he makes them sweet. 'O god Tvastr, make pleasant our possessions', he says; Tvastr is the form-maker of the pairings of cattle; verily he places form in cattle. 'Stay, ye wealthy ones', he says; the wealthy ones are cattle; verily he makes cattle abide for him. 'On the impulse of god Savitr' [2], (with these words) he takes up the rope, for instigation. 'With the arms of the Aśvins', he says, for the Aśvins were the Adhvaryus of the gods. 'With the hands of Pusan', he says, for restraining. 'O offering to the gods, I seize thee with the noose of sacred order', he says; sacred order is truth; verily with truth which is sacred order he seizes it. He winds (the rope) round transversely, for they fasten a (beast) for killing in front; (verily it serves) for distinction. 'Fear not men', (with these words) he fastens it, for security. 'For the waters [3] thee, for the plants thee I sprinkle', be says, for from the waters, from the plants, the beast is born. 'Thou art a drinker of the waters', he says, for he is a drinker of the waters who is offered in sacrifice. 'O ye divine waters, make it palatable, a very palatable offering for the gods', he says; verily he makes it palatable. From above he sprinkles (it); verily he makes it pure from above; he makes it drink; verily within he makes it pure; from below he besprinkles (it); verily all over he makes it pure.

## 07
By means of Agni as Hotr the gods defeated the Asuras. Recite for Agni as he is kindled', he says, for the overcoming of foes. He recites seventeen kindling-verses; Prajapati is seventeenfold; (verily it serves) to win Prajapati. He recites seventeen; there are twelve months and seven seasons, that is the year; offspring are born in the course of the year; (verily it serves) for the propagation of offspring. The gods, after reciting the kindling-verses, could not discern the sacrifice; Prajapati silently performed [1] the libation of ghee; then did the gods discern the sacrifice; in that silently he performs the libation of ghee, (it serves) for the revelation of the sacrifice. The sacrifice was with the Asuras; the gods took it by the silent offering; in that silently he performs the libation of ghee, he takes away the sacrifice of his foe. He rubs the enclosing-sticks; verily he purifies them. Thrice each he rubs them, for the sacrifice is thrice repeated; also (it serves) to smite away the Raksases. They make up twelve; the year has twelve [2] months; verily he delights the year, verily also he endows him with the year, for the gaining of the world of heaven. The libation of ghee is the head of the sacrifice, the fire is all the gods; in that he performs the libation of ghee, verily the sacrificer at the beginning of the sacrifice wins all the gods. The libation of ghee is the head of the sacrifice, the beast is the body; having performed the libation of ghee he anoints the beast; verily on the body of the sacrifice [3] he places the head. 'Let thy breath be united with the wind', he says; the breath has the wind for its deity; verily he offers its breath in the wind. 'Thy limbs with the sacrificers, the lord of the sacrifice with his prayer', he says; verily he causes the lord of the sacrifice to obtain its blessing. Viśvarupa, Tvastr's son, vomited over the beast from above; therefore they do not cut off (portions) from the beast above; in that he anoints the beast from above, verily he makes it pure [4]. He chooses the priests, verily he chooses the metres, he chooses seven; there are seven tame animals, seven wild; there are seven metres, (and so it serves) to win both. He offers eleven fore sacrifices; ten are the vital airs of the beast, the body is the eleventh; verily his fore-offerings are of the same size as the beast. One (of them) lies around the omentum; verily the body lies around the body. The axe is a thunderbolt, the splinter of the sacrificial post is a thunderbolt, the gods by making a thunderbolt of the ghee smote Soma. 'Anointed with ghee, do ye guard the beast', he says; verily, overpowering it by means of the thunderbolt, he offers it.
## 08
He encircles (it) with fire; verily he makes it completely offered, that nothing may be lost, for that which falls of the oblation is (thus) not lost. He encircles (it) with fire thrice, for the sacrifice is thrice repeated; also (it serves) to smite away the Raksases. The theologians say, 'Should the beast be grasped hold of, or not?' Now the beast is led to death; if he were to grasp hold of it, the sacrificer would be likely to die. Or rather they say, 'The beast is led to the world of heaven' [1]; if he were not to grasp hold of it, the sacrificer would be bereft of the world of heaven. He grasps hold (of it) by means of the omentum-forks; that is as it were neither grasped nor yet not grasped. 'Give directions, O Hotr, for making ready the oblations to the gods', he says, for an act that is directed is carried out. 'Ye wealthy ones, do ye kindly resort to the lord of the sacrifice', he says; that is according to the text. With the fire he goes in front, to smite away the Raksases. 'Guard from contact with earth', (with these words) he casts down the strew [2], that nothing may be lost, for that which falls on the strew is not lost; verily also he places it on the strew. The Adhvaryu turns away from the beast as it is slaughtered; verily he conceals himself from cattle, that he may not be cut off. He attains fortune, and obtains cattle who knows thus. The wife is led forward from the back place; 'Homage to thee, O extended one', he says; the extended are the rays of the sun [3]; verily he pays homage to them. 'Come forward, irresistible', he says; the resisting is the foe; (verily it serves) to beat away the foe. 'Along the stream of ghee, with offspring, with increase of wealth', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. 'O ye waters, goddesses, purifying', he says; that is according to the text.
## 09

When the beast is offered in sacrifice, pain seizes its vital airs. 'Let thy speech swell, let thy breath swell' he says; verily he removes the pain from the vital airs. From the vital airs the pain enters the earth; (with the words) 'Hail to the and night!' he pours it down; verily he removes the pain of the earth by day and night. 'O plant, protect him', 'O axe, harm him not', he says; the axe is a thunderbolt [1]; (verily it serves) for atonement. He cuts from the sides, for men cut from the middle; be cuts crossways, for men cut along; for distinction. 'Thou art the share of the Raksases ', (with these words) he casts the strew, having anointed it on the thick part; verily with the blood he propitiates the Raksases. 'This Raksas here I lead to the lowest darkness, who hateth us and whom we hate', he says; there are two (kinds of) persons, he whom he [2] hates and he who hates him; both these he leads to the lowest darkness.' 'For food (isé) thee!' (with these words) he draws out the omentum, for he who sacrifices strives as it were. If he were to pierce (it), Rudra would be likely to slay his cattle; if he were not to pierce (it), it would not be fixed; with one he pierces, with the other not, for support. 'In ghee, O sky and earth, be covered', he says; verily with fat he anoints sky and earth. 'Uncut [3] with wealth of heroes (give us) riches', he says; that is according to the text. Now cruel as it were is what he does when he draws out the omentum. 'Fare along the broad atmosphere', he says, for atonement. Now he who grasps hold of the beast as it is led to death falls away from this world; he takes again hold of the omentum-forks; verily he finds support in this world. With the fire he goes in front, to smite away the Raksases; verily also with the oblation he follows the deities [4]. He should not pass over the last of the embers; if he were to pass over the last of the embers, he would despise the deities. 'O Vayu, taste the drops', he says; therefore the drops are produced separately. The omentum is the chief part of cattle, the strew the chief of plants; verily he unites the chief with the chief; verily also in the plants he establishes cattle. 'Give directions for the Svaha cries', he says [5], for the completion of the sacrifice. The speckled butter is the expiration and inspiration of cattle, the omentum is the body; having poured butter on the speckled ghee,' he pours on the omentum; verily in the body of cattle he deposits expiration and inspiration. 'Hail! Go to Urdhvanabhas, the offspring of the Maruts', he says; Urdhvanabhas, the offspring of the Maruts, used to cast forward the omentum-forks of the gods; verily through him he casts them forward. He casts them forward in opposite directions; therefore expiration and inspiration are in opposite directions.
## 10
Having offered in sacrifice the beast, he strews over (it) a cake, verily he sacrifices it with its sap. Having performed the rite with the omentum, he performs with the cake; the cake is strength; verily he places strength in the midst of cattle; verily also he closes the cut in the beast. Having made offering of the speckled ghee, he thrice asks, 'Is the oblation cooked, Çamitr?' for the gods found truth in three (cookings). He who says what is not cooked is cooked (is burdened) with sin. The speckled butter is the expiration and the inspiration of cattle [1]; when the beast is offered the body comes into the heart; in that he sprinkles the heart with speckled ghee, he thus places expiration and inspiration in the body of cattle. By means of the beast the gods went to the world of heaven. They reflected, 'Men will mount after us.' They cut off its head and made its sap stream forth; it became the Praksa (tree); that is the nature of the Praksa. In that there is a branch of the Praksa above the strew, so he cuts off from the victim when it has its sap [2]. As the beast is borne along the Raksases follow after it; he takes it between the sacrificial post and the Ahavaniya, to smite away the Raksases. When the beast is offered its mind departs. 'Recite to Manota, for the oblation which is being divided', he says verily he secures its mind. He cuts off eleven portions; ten are the vital airs of the beast, the body is the eleventh, he cuts off as much as is the size of the beast [3]. First he makes a portion of the heart, then of the tongue, then of the breast: what he conceives with the heart, that he says with the tongue; what he says with the tongue, that he utters from the breast. That is the order in the case of the beast. If he cuts off thus and then cuts from the rest at will, still the cutting off from that animal has been made in order. In the middle he makes a portion of the intestines, for breath is in the middle; he makes a portion of the upper part [4], for breath is in the upper part; whether he does one, or the other, there is variation in both cases. A Brahman on birth is born with a threefold debt, of pupilship to the Rsis, of sacrifice to the gods, of offspring to the Pitrs. He is freed from his debt who has a son, is a sacrificer, and who has lived as a pupil: this (debt) he
  
performs (ávadayate) by these cuttings off', and that is why the cuttings-off (avadána) have their name. The gods and the Asuras were in conflict. The gods said to Agni, 'With thee as our hero let us overcome the Asuras' [5]. He said, 'Let me choose a boon; let me have a choice part of the beast.' He chose that choice part (of the beast), the shoulder from the fore part, the intestines from the middle, the hip from the hind part. Then the gods prospered, the Asuras were defeated; in that he makes portions of three members it is for the overcoming of his foe; he prospers himself, his foe is defeated. He cuts off transversely; therefore cattle move forward their limbs transversely, for support.
## 11
He covers the dipping-spoons with fat; cattle are distinguished by fat; verily he bestows on cattle their distinguishing mark. He covers (them) after putting (the fat) on the soup; the soup is the sap of cattle; verily he bestows sap upon cattle. He stirs the oblation of fat with the rib; the rib is the middle of cattle, the fat is the sap of cattle; in that he stirs the oblation of fat with the rib, he places sap in the middle of cattle. Now they kill [1] the beast when they dispose of it; the expiration has Indra for its deity, the inspiration has Indra also. 'May Indra's expiration be set in every limb', he says; verily he bestows expiration and inspiration upon cattle. 'O god Tvastr, let much be united for thee', he says; for cattle have Tvastr as their deity. 'When ye that are various become of one form', he says; for they being various become then of one form. 'Over thee as thou goest among the gods [2] for help let thy comrades and thy father and mother rejoice', he says; verily he makes him, approved by his mother and his father, go to the world of heaven. With a half-verse be offers the oblation of fat; the half-verse is yonder (sky) and the half-verse is this (earth); verily with sap he adorns both. He offers to the quarters; verily with sap he adorns the quarters; verily from the quarters he wins strength and sap. The speckled butter is the expiration and the inspiration of cattle; cattle have the lord of the forest [3] for their deity; in that having made offering of the speckled butter he says, 'Recite for the lord of the forest, give directions for the lord of the forest', he bestows expiration and inspiration upon cattle. Of each he divides the divided pieces; there fore cattle have various forms. He moistens (it) with soup; soup is the sap of cattle; verily he bestows sap upon cattle. He invokes the Ida; the Ida is cattle; verily he invokes cattle. Four times he invokes [4], for cattle have four feet. If he desire of a man, 'May he have no cattle', he should take for him (a piece) without fat; cattle are distinguished by fat; verily by means of their distinctive mark he deprives him of cattle, and he has no cattle. If he desire of a man, 'May he have cattle', he should take for him (a piece) with fat; cattle are distinguished by fat; verily by means of their distinctive mark he wins cattle for him, and he has cattle. Prajapati created the sacrifice; he first created the butter [5], in the middle the beast, last the speckled butter; therefore the fore-sacrifices are performed with butter, the beast (is offered) in the middle, and the after-sacrifices with speckled butter. Therefore that is mixed as it were, for it was created last. He offers eleven after-sacrifices; ten are the vital airs of the beast, the body is the eleventh; he offers as many after-sacrifices as is the size of the beast. Now they kill the beast when they dispose of it; the speckled butter is the expiration and the inspiration of cattle; in that he per forms the after-sacrifices with speckled butter, verily he bestows expiration and inspiration upon cattle.
