+++
title = "07"

+++
The consensus that soma is covered (sáṃvṛtaḥ) with milk is surely correct; this is simply a different way of expressing the mixing of the two substances that is such a common trope in the soma maṇḍala, where it is often said that soma is clothed in cows (/milk). But the simile presents difficulties. For both Old and Ge a coveredup person (presumably male) is going to women/wives (Ge “soll … wie ein Verhülter zu Frauen schleichen”). Neither of them makes any comment on this bizarre image. I prefer to follow Caland-Henry’s interpretation (cited and rejected by Old): “voilé comme des femmes [qui vont au rendez-vous].” There is evidence elsewhere in the RV of women going to trysts (e.g., X.40.2), and the abhisārikā, a woman going secretly to her lover, often depicted as veiled or disguised, is, of course, a standard figure in the later literary and visual arts traditions. (Perhaps the untethered abhí in this pāda refers to this idiom, although it must be admittted that neither √sṛ or √sṛp appears with abhí in the RV.) There are a few grammatical difficulties to address. First, sáṃvṛtaḥ is masculine and singular, whereas the corresponding women are feminine and plural, but sáṃvṛtaḥ refers to soma in the frame, and the later rules about grammatical agreement between elements in the frame and the simile simply do not hold in the RV. More serious is the fact that the nom. pl. of jáni- is normally jánayaḥ. However, the asigmatic nom. sg. jánī in IV.52.1 shows that a long ī-stem jánī- had been extracted from the ambiguous forms acc. pl. jánīs and gen. pl. jánīnām (cf. AIG III.144).

