+++
title = "08"

+++
8. The chariot and the furniture in the house are the father's (share). [^7] 


[^7]:  The translation given above agrees with what I now recognise to be Haradatta's explanation, and with Colebrooke, Mitākṣarā, Chap. I, Sect. iii, Par. 6. Both the P. U. and Mr. U. MSS. of the Ujjvalā read rathaḥ pituraṃśo gṛhe yatparibhāṇḍam upakaraṇam pīṭhādi tadapi, 'the chariot (is) the father's share; the furniture which (is) in the house, that also.' To this reading Mahādeva's Ujjvalā on the Hiraṇyakeśi Sūtra points likewise, which gives pītur antaḥ. The N. U. MS. of the Ujjvalā, according to which p. 135 I made the translation given in the Appendix to West and Bühler's Digest (1st edition), leaves out the word aṃśaḥ, and therefore makes it necessary to combine this Sūtra, with the preceding one, and to translate, 'The father's chariot and the furniture in the house (are) also (the share of the eldest).' This latter translation agrees nearly with that given by Colebrooke, Digest, Book V, Text xlviii, where this and the preceding Sūtra have been joined; but the chariot is not mentioned. A further variation in the interpretation of this Sūtra occurs in Colebrooke's Digest, Book V, Text lxxxix, and Mitākṣarā, loc. cit., where the words 'the furniture in the house' are joined with Sūtra 9, and the furniture is declared to be the wife's share. Considering that Sūtra 9 is again quoted in Colebrooke's Digest, Book V, Text cccclxxii, and is not joined with the latter part of Sūtra 8, it is not too much to say that Jagannātha has not shown any greater accuracy than his brethren usually do.
