+++
title = "07"

+++
The “seven tongues” (saptá juhvàḥ) are somewhat puzzling, or rather the phrase has several possible interpretations. Re takes it as a “pré-bahuvrīhi” (probably better expressed as “de-composed” bahuvrīhi), referring to the priests “having seven offering ladles” (juhū́- meaning both ‘tongue’ and ‘ladle’); it is, of course, also possible to take the ladles as subject without reference to an underlying bahuvrīhi (so Old SBE, Ge), since inanimate things often have agency in the RV. But the other meaning ‘tongue’ could also be meant literally (either in a de-composed bahuvrīhi or not): (priests having) seven tongues, that is seven voices devoted to praising Agni.

See Ge’s n. (also WG). This interpretation would make the first pāda semantically parallel with the second, where ‘cantors’ (vāghátaḥ) is the subject. And I will add another, more distant possibility, but one that makes better sense of the ‘seven’ - viz., the seven rivers or streams. The seven rivers are credited with giving birth to and nourishing Agni in a mystical passage in III.1.3-6, where they are also identified as seven vā́ṇīḥ ‘voices’ (III.1.6d). Seven is a number especially characteristic of rivers, and since rivers are often said to be noisy (indeed the word nadī́- ‘river’ is derived from the root √nad ‘roar), calling the rivers “seven tongues” here would fit semantically. In the end I don’t think that choosing one of these possibilities and eliminating the others is the right strategy; the phrase is meant to be multivalent, evoking a number of features of the ritual context.
