+++
title = "04"

+++
Pāda b fairly clear refers to Night interrupting her weaving of darkness and gathering up her work when the Sun hitches up his horses for his morning journey. I take Night to be the subject of sáṃ jabhāra, not the Sun (as do Ge, Re, Maurer), based on the similarity to II.38.4 púnaḥ sám avyad vítataṃ váyantī, madhyā́kártor ny àdhāc chákma dhī́raḥ “Once again the weaver has wrapped up what was stretched out; in the middle of his work the mindful (worker) has set down his craft,” where the weaver is the one who wraps up his own work.

I would now likely connect c with b, rather than only with d: “in the middle of (her) work (Night) has gathered together what was stretched out, when he (=Sun) has yoked his tawny horses from their seat.” This would more clearly explain what the divinity and greatness of the Sun consist of and sketch a cause-and-effect relationship between the sun’s beginning his journey and Night’s breaking off her work.

This leaves pāda d. As noted above, Ge and Re think Night covers the sun with her dark garment and turns him into the night sun (see Ge’s n.: “Die Nacht hüllt jetzt den Sūrya in ihr Gewand, d. h. in Dunkel; sie macht die Tages- zur Nachtsonne.”) However, the actual wording of the Sanskrit text doesn’t work particularly well in this night-sun scenario: stretching the garment for him is not the same as wrapping him in it. Still, on the surface it works even less well in my scenario in which only the day-sun is depicted in this verse. Others take this pāda as I do, as continuing the depiction of sunrise, but have not produced convincing ways to make the Sanskrit work that way. Maurer tr. “then upon herself Night spreads her garment,” with the comment (p. 174) “she puts the garment she has woven upon herself, thus removing it from the world and allowing the light of the sun to take its place.” This would solve the problem, but “herself” must render simásmai, which must be masc. (or neut)., not fem. (though see Ge’s suggested way out of this difficulty in his n. 5 to his n. 4d: that simásmai stands for a reflexive like ātmán- and is therefore masc.). WG also believe that this verse concerns only the morning sun.

See disc. in the notes, though I am puzzled by how the disc. and the tr. relate. Their interpr. of d seems to me to fall short.

In my view Night’s stretching her garment for him is in part a gesture of submission: she recognizes the sun’s ascendancy (both literally and conceptually) and removes her black garment and spreads it out for him to pass over, to indicate that she yields to his superior power. (Fortunately she doesn’t have Clytemnestra tendencies.) But this image also depicts a real-world phenomenon, that of the sun rising through morning mist or dark clouds clustering at the horizon. These can be seen as the remnants of the darkness of Night, the garment she has discarded at the place on the edge of the visible world where the sun first emerges. The pāda begins with ā́d ‘just after that’ -- namely, just after he has yoked his horses from their seat, the beginning of his journey -- suggesting that this is the first moment of sunrise.

