+++
title = "05"

+++
This verse (esp. cd) works better in the day-sun / night-sun model than vs. 4, but I am still skeptical about that interpr. and can provide one that allows the verse to confine itself to sunrise. I am especially dubious about the version of the day-sun / night-sun model promulgated by Ge (/WG), Re -- that the two surfaces of the sun are Mitra (bright) and Varuṇa (dark) respectively -- since this interpretation is likely anachronistic as it rests on a later Vedic conception of the two deities. Freed from that model, I take the genitives mitrásya váruṇasya of pāda a as dependent not on rūpám in b with most tr., but with abhicákṣe, following Maurer’s rendering of the syntax, hence my “for Mitra and Varuṇa to see.” This interpr. may be syntactically problematic, as we would expect a dative subject -- and do find a dative subject with this infinitive, even several times in Kutsa’s oeuvre (I.102.2 asmé sūryācandramásābhicákṣe “for us to see the sun and moon”; I.113.6 dabhrám páśyadbhya urviyā́vicákṣe “for (even) those who see (only) a little to gaze out widely”). The case discrepancy troubles me, but I must assume that, given that infinitives are verbal nouns, nominal rection prevailed here. It might better be translated “for the sight of M+V.” This interpretation fits the verse better conceptually and makes a nice thematic ring with 1b, which contains the common trope of the sun as the eye of Mitra and Varuṇa, using the word cákṣuḥ, derivationally related to (abhi-)cákṣe. The expression in our vs. is ambiguous; it could be turning the notion of sight on its head

-- M+V are seeing the sun, not seeing by means of him -- or, more likely, intends the
same idea as “the eye of M+V” in 1b, “so that M+V can see (the world).” The position of anyád … anyád in cd requires that they be definite and in a “the one … the other” relationship (so all tr.). The gleaming surface of c fits well into my scenario -- it is another image of the bright eye of M+V depicted in ab. I think it is called anantá- ‘unbounded’ to represent the fact that it is not possible (certainly not advisable) to look at the bright sun in the sky and see its outline, its edge. But the complementary black surface of pāda d seems, on first thought, to impose the nightsun image. However, it is easily interpretable within the framework provided by the other troublesome d-pāda, 4d. As I just argued, the garment that Night stretches for the sun in 4d is her discarded black raiment that lingers at the horizon as mist and clouds. When the sun rises through clouds, it can seem almost dark, certainly in comparison to an unclouded sun, and its outline is clearly visible, as opposed to the anantá- surface of the bright sun in pāda c. At such an occluded sunrise, individual bright rays can shoot out of the clouds. In our passage these would be the harítaḥ ‘tawny horses’ that are jointly bringing him (sám bharanti), the same harítaḥ he hitched up in 4c before beginning his journey through the mists of 4d.

Thus we can construct a consistent and convincingly naturalistic interpr. of these two verses as referring only to sunrise, without the dubious baggage of the “night-sun.” The second of the two verses, which is the last real verse of the hymn, also forms a ring with vs. 1: not only is the sun identified as the eye/sight of Mitra and Varuṇa (1b, 5a), but the “brilliant face” (citrám … ánīkam) of 1a is reprised by the “gleaming surface” (rúśat … pā́jaḥ) of 5c.

[I.116-20 JPB]
