+++
title = "09"

+++
The first hemistich is metrically problematic. HvN put the pāda break after saptā́śvaḥ and distract sū́ryo, yātu, and saptā́śvaḥ; their 2nd pāda, beginning kṣétram, has a caesura after 3 (though see their n.). It is also possible to take kṣétram as the last word of pāda a (see Schmidt’s layout, p. 178) and to restrict the distraction to a single word, either sū́ryaḥ or saptā́śvaḥ, though this produces a bad cadence. In that case I would suggest that the 2nd pāda orig. began *yád yád; reading *yád yád asya produces an opening of 4 and, with post-caesura urviyā́dīrgayāthé, makes a fine Triṣṭubh. The 2nd (or 1st) yád would be the neut. sg. N/A participle to √i.

Even if this possible emendation is not accepted, it is still possible to take yád as the neut. participle, not the subordinator: this interpr. is represented in my tr. by “stretching” and by the lack of a relative cl. With double yád the tr. would read “to the tract of land which is stretching widely at (the end of) his long course.” The 2nd hemistich contains a pres. injunctive, patayat, and a pf. [/redupl. pres.] subjunctive dīdayat. In the publ. tr. they are both rendered as imperatives, matching the pattern set by yātu in pāda a. I now think that this interpr. lacks refinement and should be altered. The vs. in general concerns the coincidence between the sunrise and the ritual activities of the dawn sacrifice. We hope for the sunrise (hence the impv.), which is in fact realized in the next vs. By contrast, the ritual activities in the 2nd hemistich are under our (=priests’) control and can therefore simply be described.

Exactly what the referents of the falcon (c) and the young poet (d) are is disputed (see the various interpr., incl. those that do not consider them ritual referents at all [notably Lü 329-31]). Starting with d, yúvan- kaví- is frequently an epithet of Agni and √dī is a typical Agni verb, so it seems likely that this is a reference to the kindling of the fire at the dawn ritual. Although “going among the cows” sounds more like soma (mixing with milk), the cows here can be the ghee oblations poured into the fire, which will cause it to flame more brightly. If d refers to Agni, then c is likely to refer to Soma; certainly the ándhas- ‘stalk’ is Soma vocabulary, and the falcon is Soma’s vehicle in the Somaraub. What exactly is going on eludes me, however. As for the tense/mood distinction between patayat and dīdayat, it may be that the distinction is illusory: one of them was simply brought into superficial harmony with the other, so that both end in -ayat, though they should be inj. and subj.

respectively. Or it may be that the injunc. is followed by a subj. to indicate that the 2nd action follows the first (“the falcon flies to the stalk; the young poet will shine …”).

