+++
title = "10"

+++
Several items in this vs. present choices of interpr., none of which are strongly either favored or disfavored.

The first issue is hitáḥ: as often in this maṇḍala (cf. comm. ad IX.1.2, 44.2, etc.), it could belong either to √dhā or to √hi. The presence of a verb form belonging undeniably to the latter, hinvānáḥ in c, cuts both ways, as the poet could either be reinforcing the sense by duplicate forms of the same root or making a pun utilizing two different roots. In a similar situation in IX.44.2, with hitáḥ … hinve, I opted to take both to √hi (though not with any emphatic feeling about it), while here I take hitá- to √dhā, as a pun (again, not emphatically). The deciding factor here for me is the deictic demon. ayám ‘right here’, which may point to the current location of the soma, expressed by ‘established, placed’. Re also takes it to √dhā, but Ge to √hi.

The other uncertainty in the vs. is how to construe ā́pyam bṛhát “lofty friendship”: is it the complement of cetati or of hinvānáḥ -- which brings up the further question of the function of the latter participle. Med. hinváte, etc., can either take an obj. or be passive; in particular the part. hinvāná- is about evenly split. For a nearby pass. form, see, e.g., IX.64.9; for a nearby transitive form, see IX.63.7 hinvānó mā́nuṣīr apáḥ. Both Ge and Re take it as tr.

here (e.g., “die hohe Freundschaft zur eile treibend”), while I have chosen to take it as passive and to construe the acc. with cetati, on the grounds that I don’t know what it would mean to “impel friendship” (though such an image is well within the potential range of a RVic poet). Gotō (1st class, 139) takes it as I do.

