+++
title = "15"

+++
girā́jātáḥ “born on a mountain” is in the first instance a phrasal variant of giriṣṭhā́ḥ ‘mountain-abiding’ in 4b, with girā́showing the i-stem loc. in -ā regular before consonants (see, e.g., Lanman, Noun Inflect, 385). This interpr. is followed by Ge and Re in their tr. (see also Ober II.13). However, girā́can also be, as Old and Ge (n. 15a) point out, the instr. sg. of gír- ‘hymn’; in fact Gr puts it there. The alt. given in the publ. tr. “[/begotten by a hymn]” reflects this other possible analysis; that soma is produced to the accompaniment of hymns would make this statement true in ritual logic. It is also possible that girā́‘by a hymn’ could be construed with stutáḥ ‘praised’ later in the pāda. And to make things even more complex, stutáḥ might also evoke sutáḥ ‘pressed’.

The pass. dhīyate in b might weakly support taking hitáḥ in 10a to √dhā as well.

Pāda c is the third instantiation (always in the c pāda) of the image comparing soma installed in the wooden cups to a bird on a yóni-: 4c śyenó ná yónim ā́sadat, 8c sī́dan yónā váneṣv ā́, our 15c vír yónā vasatā́v iva - and cf. in the preceding hymn IX.61.21c sī́dañ chyenó ná yónim ā́. Judging from the position of ivain our vs., both the bird and the yónihave become so much part of the identity of soma that only the ‘nest’ (vasatí-) is considered part of the simile proper - though we must keep in mind the multiple disturbances in the position of simile particles in Maṇḍala IX as disc. passim above.
