+++
title = "16"

+++
Ge and Re take cáṣṭe here as ‘appears’, but this sense is otherwise not found for this stem, and I see no reason why the gods are not seeing by means of the illumination (dyumná-) that Agni provides. (Ge allows for the possibility of ‘sieht’ in n. 16a.) It is the same illumination that we wish to acquire, in order to become the best path-finders (gātuvíttama-), presumably since it’s impossible to find one’s way in the dark. My interpr. of vidhemahi reflects this desire for acquistion and differs from the standard rendering ‘honor, do reverence to’ (so Ge/Re). My interpr. depends first on the analysis of √vidh as historically derived from ví √dhā ‘divide, ritually distribute’ (see EWA II.555-56) and further on the observation that our form is the only real medial form to this secondary root (vidhanta in III.3.1 is an -anta replacement).

While act. vidhéma, etc., means “may we distribute ritual shares (à do honor to),” the contrastive middle can mean “may we receive ritual shares” -- much like the functional distribution of bhájati / bhájate. It might be argued that we should not take the middle form seriously because vidhemahi has been artificially created to produce an iambic cadence out of a Triṣṭubh cadence, given that act. vidhema is most commonly final in Triṣṭubh pādas. But in I.36.2 and I.114.2 the enclitic te serves this purpose: … vidhema te #, a solution that would have been available here.

There is some phonetic play between the pāda-final (gātu-)víttamā(ḥ) and vidhemahi.

