+++
title = "24"

+++
Merge me with luster, Agni, with offspring, with long life.
The gods should know this (hymn?) of mine; Indra should know it
along with the seers.
As Oldenberg (1888: 225) observes, I.24–30, the Śunaḥśepa hymns, like the preced ing Medhātithi hymns (I 12–23), generally follow the organization of the hymns of  Maṇḍala VIII. He argues that irregularities in the placement of I.25, 27, and 30 can  be explained if these hymns are composites of several hymns.
The story of Śunaḥśepa, the putative poet of these hymns, appears in Aitareya  Brāhmaṇa VII 13–18 and Śāṅkhāyana Śrauta Sūtra XV 17–27. According to the  story, King Hariścandra had begged Varuṇa for a son and promised that if Varuṇa  gave him one, he would sacrifice his son to the god. A boy, Rohita, was born to  Hariścandra, but the king managed to delay the sacrifice of his son until Rohita  reached adulthood. When the king could no longer avoid the inevitable sacrifice,  he told Rohita that he was to be sacrificed to Varuṇa. But Rohita refused to be the  sacrificial victim and departed the kingdom. As a result Hariścandra was struck by  dropsy in punishment for not performing the sacrifice.
In his travels Rohita eventually came upon a poor brahmin named Ajīgarta, who  sold his son Śunaḥśepa to Rohita to be a substitute sacrificial victim. Rohita returned  with Śunaḥśepa and Varuṇa accepted the substitution of Śunaḥśepa for Rohita. But  when Śunaḥśepa was bound to the stake and was about to be killed, he appealed to  the gods by reciting I.24.1 to Prajāpati, the god Ka (cf. 1a kásya “of which (god)?”  and 1c káḥ “who?”), 24.2 to Agni, 24.3–5 to Savitar, 24.6–15 and I.25 to Varuṇa,  I.26 and 27.1–12 to Agni, 27.13 to the All Gods, I.29 and 30.1–16 to Indra, 30.17–19  to the Aśvins, and 30.20–22 to Dawn. Each time Śunaḥśepa recited a verse, one of  his bonds was loosened and Hariścandra’s belly became smaller. With the last verse  Śunaḥśepa was free of his bonds and Hariścandra was free of disease. Although I.24 refers directly to Śunaḥśepa and to his rescue by Varuṇa, the story  of Śunaḥśepa in the form in which it told in the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa does not fully  correspond to that at the basis of any of the hymns in this collection. Probably  closer to the R̥gvedic version is that alluded to in the Yajurveda. Taittirīya Saṃhitā
V 2.1.3 and Kāṭhaka Saṃhitā XIX 11 say simply that Śunaḥśepa had been seized by  Varuṇa but then rescued himself from Varuṇa’s bonds.