+++
title = "+023"

+++
23  
Various Gods (Vāyu 1, Indra and Vāyu 2–3, Mitra and Varuṇa  4–6, Indra Marutvant 7–9, All Gods 10–12, Pūsan 13–15, Waters ̣ 16–23ab, Agni 23cd–24)  
Medhātithi Kāṇva  
24 verses: gāyatrī, except puraüṣṇih 19, anuṣṭubh 20, 22–24, pratiṣṭhā 21, arranged  in tr̥cas  
Although the principles of hymn arrangement strongly suggest that this twenty four-verse hymn is a composite, consisting of eight individual tr̥cas, the situation  is quite different from the previous hymn, I.22, where the collection was dictated  merely and mechanically by the number of verses in each segment, without a par ticular ritual application. Here the separate tr̥cas follow the order of a structured  recitation in the Morning Pressing, later called the Praügaśastra. Other instances  of this litany are found in R̥gveda I.2–3 and II.41, and to some extent I.139; for a  detailed discussion of the Praügaśastra see the introduction to I.2.  
This hymn varies somewhat from the standard Praügaśastra, which has the fol lowing divinities in the following order: Vāyu (1), Indra-Vāyu (2), Mitra-Varuṇa  (3), Aśvins (4), Indra (5), the All Gods (6), Sarasvatī (7). This hymn lacks the Aśvins  in position 4, but in position 5 Indra, instead of being alone, is accompanied by the  Maruts, and though the following tr̥ca (vss. 10–12) is ascribed by the Anukramaṇī to  the All Gods, it is dominated by the Maruts. Since offering to Indra with the Maruts  is made only in the Midday Pressing, and to the Aśvins in the Morning Pressing,  perhaps this version of the litany is shifting its focus to the Midday Pressing and to  the ritual innovation that extended offering to the Maruts, rather than just Indra,  at that pressing. (See further discussion in the introduction to I.165.) Pūṣan is also  added after the All Gods (position 6), and instead of the divine river Sarasvatī in  position 7 we find the functionally similar Waters.  
The first three verses to the waters (16–18) bring the Praügaśastra proper to an  end. The last six verses (19–24) are a supplement, in a somewhat Atharvan style,  treating the waters as healers and removers of transgressions. These functions of  the waters bring to mind the “Final Bath” or avabhr̥tha in classical śrauta ritual,  in which the sacrificer and his wife wash each other at the conclusion of the sacri  
fice, and these verses may have been included in this hymn in order to encompass  the entire soma-pressing day, from the first offering to Vāyu to the final cleansing.  The middle four verses of this sequence (20–23) are also found in a hymn to the  waters, X.9.6–9, and the introductory and final verses here (19 and 24) may have  been added to create two triplets for this tr̥ca hymn.  
As in other of Medhātithi’s hymns, the actual contents are fairly simplistic,  consisting primarily of invocations to the various gods and invitations to the  soma-drinking. Perhaps the most interesting sequence is the tr̥ca to Pūṣan (vss.  13–15), who finds the hidden king and is urged to drive him here “like lost live  
stock.” Most commentators identify this king as Soma, but the thematics and  phraseology—particularly the notion of finding and returning a hidden deity—are much more characteristic of Agni, and we have interpreted these verses in that way.  Whether the king is Agni or Soma, however, it is not clear what this snatch of myth  is doing here in this hymn, though Pūṣan’s ability to locate lost cows is proverbial.  