+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Having then stridden the Vishṇu strides, and reverentially stood by (the fire) with the Vātsapra [^egg_496] (hymn), after the sun has set, he in the first place throws out the ashes (from the fire-pan). For at that (former) time he regales him (Agni) with that food, those kindling-sticks; and the foul part of that eaten food sinks to the bottom as ashes. He now clears him thereof, and infuses speech into him [^egg_497], thus freed from foulness. Having infused speech, he puts on a kindling-stick,--and thereby regales him with food for the night,--with, 'Night for night bearing unremittingly [^egg_498]'--the meaning of this has been told: he prays for that same security and wellbeing for the night; and whatsoever he puts on 'thereafter by night, that he puts on as a libation offered to him [^egg_499].

[^egg_496]: 261:1 See VI, 7, 4, 1 seq.

[^egg_497]: 261:2 Or, sets free the speech in him.

[^egg_498]: 261:3 See above, VI, 6, 3, 8.

[^egg_499]: 261:4 Lit. 'made into a libation for him.'

## 02
2. And in the morning, when the sun has risen, he in the first place throws out the ashes. For at that (former) time he regales him with that food, that kindling-stick; and the foul part of that eaten food which he puts on during the night sinks to the

bottom as ashes. He now clears him thereof, and infuses speech into him thus freed from foulness. Having infused speech, he puts on a kindling-stick,--and thereby regales him with food for the day--with, 'Day by day bearing unremittingly;'--the meaning of this has been told: he prays for that same security and well-being for the day; and whatsoever he puts on thereafter by day, that he puts on as a libation offered to him.

## 03
3. Verily, day and night passing on come up to a year, and the year is everything here: he prays for that security and well-being for a succession of days.

## 04
4. And when they give him (the Sacrificer) the fast-milk, he puts on a kindling-stick, after dipping it into the fast-milk. Some, however, say, 'Let him not dip it into the fast-milk: he would be offering a libation, and it would be improper were one who is initiated to offer a libation.'

## 05
5. Let him nevertheless dip it in, for that (Āhavanīya fire) is his (the Sacrificer's) divine body, and this (real body of his) is his human one. Now were he not to dip it in, he would not be satisfying that divine body of his; but when he clips it in, he does so satisfy that divine body. And in that it is a kindling-stick, it is not a libation; and in that it is dipped into the fast-milk, it is food, for the fast-milk is food.

## 06
6. And having put on the kindling-stick, he drinks the fast-milk; for that (fire) is his divine body, and this (body of his) is the human one; and the gods (come) first, and then men: hence he drinks the fast-milk after putting the kindling-stick on (the fire).

## 07
7. [He puts it on, with Vāj. S. XI, 83] 'O

 Lord of food; give us of thy food!'--that is, 'O Lord of viands, give us of thy viands!'--'of the pain-allaying, strengthening'--that is, 'of the hunger-allaying, strengthening (food),'--'Onward, onward lead thou the giver!'--the giver, doubtless, is the Sacrificer: thus, 'Onward lead thou the Sacrificer!'--'Give us sustenance for the two-footed and the four-footed!'--he thereby asks a blessing. Now as to the expiation in case of (the fire-pan being) broken which, he said, would be explained 'in a subsequent chapter [^egg_500].'

[^egg_500]: 263:1 See VI, 5, 2, 22.

## 08
8. If the fire-pan were to break, let him pour that (fire in the pan) into any such unbroken, new pot with a wide mouth as there may be; for the pan which is broken indeed suffers injury, but uninjured is this deity (Agni): 'Uninjured I will bear him in the uninjured!' so he thinks. Into that (pot) he first throws a potsherd of the (broken) pan, and thus he (Agni) is not deprived of that womb of his.

## 09
9. He then takes the (remaining [^egg_501]) clay, and having pounded both the (broken) pan and that remainder, and mixed it, he makes a (new) pan in the very same way, without using any formula, quite silently. Having baked it, he pours (the fire) over. The expiation in this case is one of performance only. Having again thrown that potsherd into the (new) pan, and pounded both the (temporary) pan and the remaining clay, and mixed it, he lays it aside for expiation.

[^egg_501]: 263:2 See VI, 5, 3, 7.

## 10
10. And if the fire in the pan (Ukhya Agni) were to go out, it is doubtless to the Gārhapatya that it goes, for from the Gārhapatya it has been taken. Having then taken it out of the Gārhapatya eastwards (to the place of the Āhavanīya), and put fuel on it, let him

put the fire-pan on it in the same way (as before), without using any formula, quite silently. When the fire rises up to it,--

## 11
11. He performs two expiations. For it is for (the obtainment of) all his wishes that he makes up that (fire); and whatever part of his wishes is here cut off when the fire goes out, that he thereby joins together and heals. He performs both expiations, that of the (Soma) sacrifice and that of the fire-altar,--first that of the sacrifice, then that of the fire-altar: the significance of this has been explained [^egg_502].

[^egg_502]: 264:1 See VI, 6, 1, 3 seq.

## 12
12. Having cut out with a kindling-stick some of the butter, he offers sitting a libation, with (Vāg;. S. XII, 4,), 'To Viśvakarman, hail!' Then stepping near he puts the kindling-stick on the fire, with (Vāj. S. XII, 44), 'Again the Ādityas, the Rudras, the Vasus may kindle thee, again the Brahmans with sacrifices, O bringer of good things!'--that is, 'May those deities again kindle thee!'--'With ghee make thou grow thy body, let the wishes of the Sacrificer be true!'--that is, 'With ghee indeed make thou grow thy body, and for whatever wishes the Sacrificer makes up a fire, may they all come true!'

## 13
13. And if the Gārhapatya fire were to go out, it is doubtless to the churning-sticks that it goes, for from the churning-sticks it has been taken. Having churned it out with the churning-sticks, and put fuel on it, he performs two expiations.

## 14
14. And if the Āhavanīya fire were to go out whilst the pressing (of Soma) proceeds, it is doubtless to the Gārhapatya that it goes, for from the Gārhapatya it has been taken. Having taken it straightway

eastward from the Gārhapatya, and put fuel on it, he performs two expiations: whatever (kind of Soma) sacrifice may be (performed) at the time, the expiation of that sacrifice he should perform; and of like kind is the expiation of the fire-altar.

## 15
15. And if the Āgnīdhrīya fire were to go out, it is doubtless to the Gārhapatya that it goes, for from the Gārhapatya it has been taken. Having taken it from the Gārhapatya eastward along the north of the Sadas, and put fuel on it, he performs two expiations. And if the Gārhapatya were to go out, the meaning (procedure) of that has been explained.

