+++
title = "04"

+++
Another difficult verse, though it is clear that it alludes to the theft of fire by Mātariśvan in the first hemistich. This theft is expressed through word play: the verse begins máthīt, which can mean either ‘churn, rub’ (to produce fire) or ‘steal’.

In this Agni context, esp. given vs. 1, which concerns the churning of fire, ‘churn’ would be the most likely reading - and so it is tr. by Ge, Old (SBE), and Proferes (2007: 31). But the name Mātariśvan ends the pāda, and this mythological allusion would tip the balance towards ‘steal’ (so Re, WG).

The real problem comes in the middle of that pāda: the ppl. víbhṛtaḥ. This form should mean ‘dispersed’ or ‘carried away’, and grammatically it should modify mātaríśvā. However, sense would require it instead to qualify fire, the underlying direct object in the clause; fire is often carried away and dispersed in various locations. Cf. ví … bharanta in the preceding hymn I.70.10 and discussion there, as well as the passages adduced by Old SBE, n. to vs. 4. There is no solution that satisfies both sense and syntax. Ge suggests it's a transferred epithet, from Agni to Mātariśvan; this seems a description of the problem, not a solution. Old suggests simply displacing it rightward to read it with the assumed subj. of pāda b, namely Agni (“When Mātariśvan had produced him by attrition, he …, who was brought to many places, has come to every house”), and WG apparently follow. But this kind of extraction from one clause and insertion in another is not syntactically possible in my opinion, esp. given that in its clause it is placed between the acc. referring to Agni (īm) and the nom. mātaríśvā, so that its grammatical affiliation is emphasized. Narten reports a clever suggestion of Hoffmann’s, that the ví- is really ‘bird’, and the form means ‘carried by a bird’ (“Das vedische Verbum math,” n. 38 [=KlSch p. 23 n. 38]), but Mātariśvan should no more be carried by a bird than be dispersed. In the end the least jarring rendering is Re’s “s’étant transporté çà et là,” presumably referring to Mātariśvan’s journey. My “borne away” reflects a similar notion, and I also toyed with the possibility that “carried away” may have the same extended meaning as the English idiom, namely, “overcome with excitement.” No doubt Parāśara recognized the trap he was setting, forcing the audience to find a way to interpret víbhṛtaḥ with Mātariśvan rather than with the far more natural Agni.

As noted above, the subject of the next pāda must be Agni, established “in every house” (cf. V.11.4, X.91.2). Because of the accent on bhū́t, the clause must be parallel to pāda a and is not the main clause, which is introduced by ā́d īm in c.

On the second half of the verse see Proferes 2007: 30-31. Agni’s role as messenger is of course well known: he travels between gods and men, heaven and earth. This regular route may be prefigured here by Mātariśvan’s theft in a, for elsewhere it is clear that M. stole fire from heaven (e.g., I.93.6). It is also said that M.

bestowed the stolen fire on Bhṛgu (see nearby I.60.1), and so the epithet bhṛ́gavāna-, whatever its morphology, is apposite. What is unfamiliar is the simile, in which Agni serves as messenger as if for a more powerful king. According to Proferes, Agni is here “depicted … as the symbol of the presence of a leader’s authority within each household.” I’m not sure, because Agni’s dūtá role involves traveling, not staying put. I am inclined to think the simile was generated simply from dūtyàm and is not meant to apply directly to Agni and his relationship to royal power.

