+++
title = "06"

+++
This verse returns us to the ritual here-and-now and is considerably easier to interpret than the scraps of mythology in the previous two verses. Still, there are a few puzzles.

The verb ví bhāti ‘radiates widely’ is surprising, since its subject must be the mortal worshiper, even though Agni (or occasionally Dawn) is ordinarily the subject of this common verb. Old (SBE, repeated in Noten) suggests emending it to ví dhāti ‘worships’ (in Old’s tr.). (I sometimes get the feeling that in the Noten Old felt the need to stick with emendations he’d suggested in his far more free-wheeling SBE tr., even though in his later years he was otherwise very reluctant to emend.) But a metaphorical sense of ‘radiate’ works fine in the passage, as Ge points out, citing parallels like VI.5.5, also of a mortal worshiper. And this would be an instance like víbhṛtaḥ in 4 in which the most natural referent of a word is not the grammatically supported one. Old (SBE and Noten) also proposes to read dat. uśaté in b, or rather suggests that the underlying form in sandhi was a dat. uśatá, since the spellings uśató ánu and uśaté ánu “belong to the inventions of Vedic grammarians” (SBE n. 2 to vs. 6). This is certainly possible, but a gen. form uśató would reflect what we might call the “proleptic” use of the genitive for dative to express indirect object: the reverence was offered to you and so it is now yours. This colonization of the dative by the genitive is very common both in Vedic and in Classical Sanskrit, and already here it may reflect the weakening of the dative case that led to its disappearance in MIA. I certainly see no reason to take the transmitted uśató as acc. pl. with dyū́n, as Old (Noten) and Ge (n. to 6b) tentatively suggest.

