+++
title = "07"

+++
The second hemistich consists of two contrasting halves: in c the speaker complains that his (“our”) vitality (váyaḥ), the same vitality that Agni was said to increase in 6c, is not to be seen throughout his kinsmen; this leaves Agni as the sole figure who will find solicitude (prámati-) for him among the gods. Put thus, the passage does not make much sense in English. It relies on the close relationship between ‘solicitude’ and kinship (see esp. I.31.9-10, I.108.1, X.23.7, also adduced by Ge) in the RV. The word prámati- denotes the kind of care and concern a father shows for his children (or sons) and is regularly associated with, and indeed identified with, the pitár- ‘father’ (see, e.g., I.31.9, 10, 14, 16) and secondarily with the kin-group; cf. X.23.7 vidmā́hí te prámatiṃ deva jāmivát “for we know your (fatherly) solicitude, o god, like that of kin.” Since in our passage the jāmí- has proved disappointing, the poet turns to Agni for satisfaction. The question then is what is the relationship between vitality and solicitude, which seem conceptually distant. This is less clear, but the connection is also found in the prámati-heavy I.31 already cited; cf. I.31.10ab tvám agne prámatis tvám pitā́si nas, tváṃ vayaskṛ́t táva jāmáyo vayám “You, Agni, are (fatherly) solicitude, you a father to us. You are creator of vitality; we are your kin.” In the immediately preceding verse (I.31.9) Agni is also called tanūkṛ́t- ‘body-creator’. The balanced pairing of tanūkṛ́t- and vayaskṛ́t- in a paternal context suggests that in producing children the father creates both the physical body and the intangible essence of life that together make up a living being - ‘life-force’ might be a reasonable rendering of váyas - and the father’s prámati- seems to be the catalyst that brings them together. Moreover, at least on the evidence of our passage, váyas- seems to be something that can be shared by the kingroup, but in this case is not, and in such circumstances if one cannot rely on the shared vitality of his relatives, he must look only to his father and his father’s solicitude. For another association of vitality and the father in Parāśara’s work, see I.73.1.

The publ. tr. does not convey this very well. In c I would replace “is not widely perceptible” with “is not widely evident” or “does not appear throughout.” I also question my supplying an object (vitality) with cikitvā́n; I now think this simply characterizes Agni as the perceptive one or indicates that he perceives the situation as a whole. The same word cikitvā́n does seem to take an object in 5b, however. Against the Pp. I prefer to take vidā́as a lengthened 2nd sg. imperative rather than subj. vidā́s, though there are no real implications either way.

