+++
title = "+115"

+++
115 (941)
Agni
Upastuta Vārṣṭihavya
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 8, śakvarī 9
This hymn mixes dense and syntactically contorted descriptions of Agni in his nat ural and ritual aspects with simple declarations of praise of the same god, such that  the hymn gives the impression of ending several different times. For example, verse  5 appears to fit the type of a hymn-ending summary verse, calling on the god for  aid, but it interrupts the two most complex verses (vss. 4, 6) characterizing Agni as  fire, which appear to belong together, however unclear some of the details are. The  last three verses of the hymn (7–9), each in a different meter, provide three alterna tive endings to the hymn, each with overt signals of a final summary verse: verse 7  (in the same meter as the first six verses) evā́...stave “thus he is praised”; verse 8 ...  íti tvā ... vandate ... vā́k “so does the speech extol you”; and verse 9 íti tvā ...avocan “so have they proclaimed you.” It is difficult to know what to do with this overabun dance of finales.
The descriptive verses (1–4, 6) repay attention, with bold images and multiple  puns (e.g., druṣád in verse 3, literally “wood-sitting,” which is equally applicable  to Agni sitting on firewood and to the two associated similes: a bird sitting in  a tree and the soma-drop sitting in the wooden cup). As noted above, verses 4  and 6 are especially complex, and they have been variously interpreted. In our  view these two verses concern Agni and his flames. In verse 4 he is surrounded  by his flames, cleverly compared both to the very active winds and to immovable  mountains, and they urge him, here identified, as sometimes elsewhere, as Trita,  to mount an expedition. But in verse 6 his own flame concedes to his superior  power, even as he seeks food in inhospitable places. But other interpretations are  certainly possible.1584 X.115