+++
title = "01"

+++
On the pattern set in motion by vāja-sā́tama-, see ad vs. 12.

On sahásra-bharṇas- see comm. ad IX.60.2.

In the rt. noun cmpd vibhvā-sáham Ge, Re, and Scar (609-10) take vibhvā- as a PN, that of one of the Ṛbhus, and also interpr. this PN as having only an indirect relationship to the 2nd member. The cmpd modifies rayím (also in its other occurrence in V.10.7), and they render the phrase “wealth that surpasses that of Vibhvan” - in other words with the actual 1st member implicitly a gen. dependent on a supplied ‘wealth’ that is the implicit 1st member (suggesting a phrase *rayi-sáhaṃ rayím - a similar cmpd. rayi-ṣā́h- does exist). Scar also suggests an alternative analysis: “unter den vorzüglichen [Schätzen] siegreich,” that is, “der beste Schatz,” as well as an even more elaborate analysis by way of the phrase vibhvataṣṭá- rayí- in IV.36.5 (based on Ge’s nn. to V.10.7, IV.36.5), in which they see the Ṛbhu PN as well (but see my comm. ad V.58.4). All of this seems to me a result of over-thinking the cmpd. First of all, I think we would do well to leave the Ṛbhus out of this: they have almost no presence in the IXth Maṇḍala, and taking vibhvā- here as a PN seems to complicate rather than simplify the interpr. of the cmpd. The stem víbhvan- is attested as an adj. meaning ‘extensive, distinguished’, and I see no reason why that meaning can’t fit this cmpd. in a more direct way than Ge/Re/Scar envision: it can either mean ‘overcoming/prevailing over (even) distinguished (wealth)’ or (more likely in my view) ‘overcoming/vanquishing (even) the distinguished (person/people)’ - that is, we want wealth so overwhelming that we can dominate our rivals.

It is possible that vibhvā- does signal a pun on the Ṛbhu PN, but only as a secondary reading. One of the other Ṛbhus is named Vāja, and vāja- is the 1st member of a different rt. noun cmpd in this vs., also with a root meaning ‘win’ in the same semantic sphere as √sah: vāja-sā́tama- ‘best at winning prizes’. No one to my knowledge suggests that vāja- in that cmpd has the primary reading ‘PN, one of the Ṛbhus’, but vāja- may have enabled a pun on vibhvā-. In fact, it’s worth noting that, as Scar points out (609 n. 875), vibhvāsáham gives a bad cadence, and *vibhū-ṣáham (as in vibhū́-vasu- ‘having distinguished goods’) would be better. So perhaps that 1st member *vibhū- was altered to vibhvā- to allow this punning reading.
