+++
title = "02-03"

+++
These two vss. share vocab. and structure. Both begin pári ṣyá s(u)vānáḥ, and both have a pāda-final akṣāḥ (2d, 3a), in addition to índuḥ (2c, 3b), dhā́rā(bhiḥ) (2d, 3c). The meter in both vss. shows some disturbance, esp. in 2d and 3a, and there are several different ways to resolve these disturbances. The HvN solutions as represented by their restorations do not seem to be the most satisfactory ones. As just noted, the initial pādas of both vss. begin in the same way, but though in 2a HvN read the med. part. svānáḥ with contracted root syllable, in 3a they read suvānáḥ. It seems unlikely that in this patterned repetition in successive vss. the participles would have different metrical realizations; moreover, as Gr points out, that participle, which is quite common, is always elsewhere read svānáḥ. A further consideration is that by their reading 3a has a disfavored cadence: (su)vānó akṣāḥ (- ⏑ - x, with shortening of o in hiatus), rather than the more usual iambic cadence of dimeter vs. As for 2d they read med. part. hiyānáḥ; this part. appears both with and without contracted root syllable: hyānáḥ is found, for ex., in IX.86.3. Given contracted svānáḥ in 2a and (contra HvN) 3a, contraction better fits the contextual pattern. And as in 3a their reading also produces a disfavored cadence, (dhā)rābhir akṣāḥ (again - ⏑ - x). The most likely solution is given by Arnold (metrical comm., as well as p. 99 §151 (i)) and Old: distracted akṣãḥ, which provides the right no. of syllables even with the contracted participles and also fixes the cadence.

