+++
title = "08"

+++
This vs. presents a number of small interrelated difficulties. We can start with pā́ntaḥ. As was discussed ad I.122.1 (q.v.), forms of the shape pā́nt(a)- belong to two different stems; the better attested is the them. noun pā́nta- ‘drink’, but there are two exx. of the act. root aor. part. to √pā ‘drink’, at I.122.4 and in our passage here. Both stems often show distraction of the root syll., and that scansion is required here. The participle is pl.; the question then is what case it’s in. Ge takes it as a voc., coreferential with vaḥ in pāda a, with dakṣasā́dhanam the subj. of both the main cl. in ab and the rel. cl. in cd, or so I read his tr.: “Denn durch seine Gunst wird euch, ihr Trinkenden, ein kraftwirkendes Mittel, der den freigebigen Herren hohen Ruhm verschafft.” However, this is syntactically impossible: if dakṣasā́dhanam is the subj.

of ab, it must be neut., in which case it cannot be the antecedent of masc. yáḥ in c. It is also somewhat perverse not to construe dakṣasā́dhanam, which always refers to soma (IX.25.1, 27.2, 101.15, 104.3), as the obj. of pā́ntaḥ. Re’s tr. suffers from a different syntactic solecism. Like Ge, he takes pā́ntaḥ as coreferential with vaḥ, but, it seems, as a modifier of vaḥ and therefore an acc. or even dat. pl.: “Pour vous en effet qui buvez (ce soma) réalisateur de la force-agissante …” The problems in both interpr. arise from their assumption that pā́ntaḥ must qualify vaḥ one way or another. But the most likely referent for the part. is “all the gods” of 7c, around which Soma circled with his máda- just previously, as was clearly seen (in his usual way) by Old: “(die Götter, v. 7), den dakṣasā́dhana trinkend.” If we detach pā́ntaḥ from vaḥ, things go more smoothly. I take pā́ntaḥ as a predicated participle with the gods as supplied subj.: “(the gods) are drinking …” So then, what to do with vaḥ? This has two possible solutions, neither of which is flawless, but both of which are better than the knots Ge and Re tie themselves in to construe it with pā́ntaḥ. In the publ. tr. I take it as referring to the poets/ritualists generally (as so often) and construe it with the rel. cl. in cd, in particular with sūríṣu “among (your) patrons.” Old’s solution is similar, though he actually takes pāda a as part of the rel. cl. beginning in c, which I would prefer not to.

So my publ. solution is to take vaḥ as being in a sort of extreme Wackernagel’s position, leapfroging two pādas (and the main cl.) to reach its host. This seems a little extreme, but at least the main cl. is syntactically sketchy - consisting of a predicted aor. participle. A different solution is suggested by the meter of pāda a, which lacks a syllable. Old suggests reading asi yá, and Gr also lists it with this scansion. But this distracted form, if it exists at all, is extremely rare, and I think we should avoid positing it if possible. The lack of a syllable and the problem of vaḥ (vo in sandhi) may well be connected. I suggest that the pāda hasn’t been properly transmitted and vo is the remnant of something else entirely, though unfortunately I don’t have any suggestions for what might have fallen out. The transmitted vo may have been modeled on vām in the next vs. One remaining problem with ab: if asyá refers to Soma in the gen. (“with his help”), what about acc. dakṣasā́dhanam, which as I just said is always used of soma.

I suggest that the máda- ‘exhilarating drink’ of 7d is the referent for this adj., substituting for soma. But in fact there is no real problem even if both the gen. and the acc. refer to Soma/soma.

The 2nd hemistich is considerably more straightforward, though there is one place where I differ from the standard tr. Both Ge and Re take svár as nom., with the simile turning on haryatáḥ: “delightful like the sun” (e.g., “wie die Sonne begehrt”).

I instead take haryatáḥ as an independent modifier of Soma and svár as acc., parallel to śrávo bṛhát, as obj. of dadhé. This is another instantiation of the formula “place the sun (in heaven),” of which I saw a disguised ex. in the preceding hymn, IX.97.38.

See comm. there and my 2010 Fs. Melchert article (this passage and the formula disc. pp. 163-64).

Note that since svàr may invoke sū́rya-, there may be indirect phonetic play between sūríṣu ‘in the patrons’ and the ‘sun’ word.

