+++
title = "11"

+++
There is considerable phonological play, esp. in the 2nd hemistich - apaprothantaḥ … prātáḥ … ápracetasaḥ, but anticipated by ab pratnā́saḥ … pavitre … The root √pruth uncompounded simply means ‘snort’; it is ápa that licenses the acc. The rt. noun cmpd huraś-cít- is found once elsewhere, in I.42.3, where the context is more diagnostic than this one. There it is parallel to paripanthínam muṣīvā́ṇam “highwayman (and) robber.” The 1st member huras- belongs to the root √hvṛ ‘go crookedly’ (see, e.g., EWA s.v. híruk). As often (and not only in Skt.), ‘crooked’ has moral implications; here the enemies to be banished are those who actively know/perceive the ways to go wrong as well as those who simply lack perception (ápracetasaḥ). Since both cmpds contain a form of √cit, it would have been better to capture this etymological play in the tr. - perhaps “those who discern the crooked ways and those who lack discernment.” Scar (123) in his disc. of this passage somehow convinces himself that the form must modify the soma drinks and is therefore not acc. pl. (as it is usually taken) but nom. pl. I don’t follow his semantic reasoning, but it did, by chance, suggest another possibility to me.

Elsewhere in IX forms of √hvṛ can refer to the curly wool on the sheep’s fleece filter and the crooked path the soma must follow across the filter. So here I suggest that the morphologically ambiguous huraścítaḥ can be both nom. pl. and acc. pl. As the former, it means ‘knowing/perceiving the crooked ways (of the filter)’ and refer to the clever navigation of the soma drinks. As acc. pl. it refers to those who know morally crooked ways and deserve to be banished. I would represent this, somewhat awkwardly, in a revised tr. “discerning the crooked ways (of the filter), snorting away into the distance those who discern crooked ways and those without discernment.” Of course, since huraścítaḥ can serve for either, the Skt. lacks the clumsiness necessary to spell out the different Engl. readings.

