+++
title = "12"

+++
The hymn ends with two pāda-final cmpds whose first member is vā́ja- (vā́ja-gandhi yam [c], vā́ja-pasti yam [d]), just as its first pāda ends with the same (save for accent): 1a vāja-sā́tamam - thus producing a satisfying ring encompassing the whole poem.

This rhetorical pattern, the pressure to produce matching 1st member vā́jacompds, accounts for some disturbance in the cmpd formation in 12c. The cmpd in 1a is a standard rt. noun type (in the splv.). The cmpd in 12d, vā́ja-pasti ya-‘having a house with prizes in it’, is likewise properly formed: it is a bahuvrīhi of the type of vájra-bāhu-, vájra-hasta ‘having an arm/hand with a mace in it’. With this same 2nd member, see áśva-pastya-, vīrá-pastya- ‘having a house with horses/heroes in it’.

But the hapax vā́ja-gandhi ya- in c is a different matter. Here the 2nd member appears to be a gerundive to the root √gadh ‘seize, secure, hold fast’, though the independent gerundive to that root is gádhi ya- (see below). No other forms of the root have a nasal, and the source of it is unclear, since the etymology is likewise unclear (see EWA s.v. GADH and below). It is worth pointing out that without the nasal the cmpd (and the pāda) would end with 4 light syllables (*vājagadhi yam) due to the distraction of the cluster -dhy-, and the influence of a similarly shaped root with similar meaning, √ba(n)dh ‘bind’, might account for a nonce nasal insertion for metrical purposes.

Despite the difference in shape, it is quite clear that independent gádhya- and our -gandhya- are essentially identical, because the former is found primarily as a modifier of vā́ja- in the phrase ‘prize(s) to be seized’ (IV.16.11, 16, VI.10.6, 26.2).

Only in IV.38.4 does it appear without vā́ja-, but in the same type of context. So our cmpd. replicates this phrase, though with an intrusive nasal in the root syllable.

Before going further, I should note the interpr. of the word(s) that prevails throughout Ge’s tr. and to some extent Re’s. For all attestations of the phrase vā́jagádhya- Ge tr. “die deckenhohe Beute [/Gewinn]”; for the attestation of gádhyā in IV.38.4 without vā́ja- “bis an die Wagendecke reichende (Beute)”; and for our cmpd “der wagenhohe Lohn bringt.” Re in VI.10.6 (EVP XIII ad loc.) “un prix-de-victoire emplissant le chariot” (though just “les butins” in IV.38.4 [EVP XV.162]); our cmpd.

“qui a une charge de prix.” To my knowledge Ge never explains how he came to this narrowly precise rendering, ‘reaching to the top/roof of a cart’, but Re (ad VI.10.6; XIII.131) provides us with the source for it, namely the word gadhā found in late Vedic (ŚSū) referring to some part of a cart, possibly the roof (see Sparreboom, Chariots, p. 123, with lit.). The connection seems to have been suggested in passing by Caland. See in contrast EWA s.v. gadhā-, where Mayr. comments “Schwerlich zu GADH.” Given the large chronological gap in attestation between the supposed derivative (gádhya- RV) and its supposed base noun (gadhā- Sū) and the not entirely compelling semantics, I think we can safely drop this interpr., despite its somewhat puzzling hold on Ge, and interpr. the forms as gerundives, as above.

But we must now confront the issue of the cmpd type. By accent vā́jagandhya- is a bahuvrīhi. Given the independent phrase “prize(s) to be seized/secured” consisting of the same two elements, we should expect the sense of the bahuvrīhi to be “possessing prizes to be secured,” as in the publ. tr. “whose prizes are to be secured.” But the order of the elements seems opposite to what we would expect: the 2nd member of a bv should be a noun; if there is an adj., verbal or not, it should be the 1st member. Hence we expect *gádya-vāja-. Ge seems to ignore the problem (see his tr. above), as does Gr (‘dessen Gaben zu ergreifen, festzuhalten sind’). But others try to press the cmpd into a more orthodox bv mode. See Re’s “who has a load of prizes,” turning gandhya- into a makeshift noun; differently, but responding to the same problem, Scar (457) “dessen Beute in Siegespreisen besteht (?),” interpr. gadhya as the noun Beute, developed from ‘was es festzuhalten, zu ergreifen gilt’ (n. 647). This scrupulousness about the cmpd. type is praiseworthy, but in this case I think it is misplaced. The rhetorical pattern I noted above - the ring compositional use of vā́ja- cmpds at the beginning and end of the hymn - has imposed itself, allowing a technically improper nonce bahuvrīhi to be formed with its elements in the wrong order. The cmpd with which it’s paired in this final hemistich of the hymn, vā́ja-pasti yam, has the same shape: vā́ja-Xi yam, and though they are different types of bahuvrīhis and the 2nd member -pastyā̀- is in fact a noun, they appear superficially to be exactly parallel formations.

The formation of the hapax vā́ja-gandhi ya- may have been aided by the fact that “proper” bahuvrīhis with corresponding elements are rare to non-existent. That is, examples of bahuvrīhis of the shape GRDV + NOUN are surprisingly difficult to find (at least surprising to me), though bahuvrīhis with verbal adjective 1st members are common - when the verbal adj. is a ppl. Cmpds like sutá-soma- ‘having pressed soma’, vṛktá-barhis- ‘having twisted ritual grass, vṛddhá-śavas- ‘having increased power’ are ubiquitous and easily formed, but a search through Gr for bahuvrīhis with gerundive 1st members came up short. The only such cmpds I found are the hapax avāryá-kratu- ‘possessing unobstructable resolve’ (VIII.92.8), with a negated grdv., and váreṇya-kratu- ‘whose resolve is worthy to be chosen’ (VIII.43.12) - save for an-avadyá-rūpa- ‘possessing faultless form’ (X.68.3) with the lexicalized negated grdv. avadyá- ‘fault’.