+++
title = "04"

+++
The description of the Sun’s garments in c uses two technical weaving terms, one of very limited distribution. ví √tan describes the stretching out of a piece of (unfinished) cloth on the loom for weaving; the very rare root √prajj refers to the ‘abbrechen’, ‘abschliessen’ of the finished garment (EWA s.v. PRAJJ, flg. Hoffmann, Fs. Knobloch = Aufs. 813ff.; Rau, Weben, 18), that is, presumably, the removal from the loom and tidying up of the completed fabric. The garments (or fabrics) that the Sun is wearing here are therefore not completed. Ge renders ánavapṛgṇā very loosely, as ‘endless’ (“ohne Ende”) and further interprets the garment without end as time (die Zeit); WG’s tr. is scarcely more precise (“nicht abgeschlossen”) and in their n. they follow Ge’s time interpretation. But it is hardly likely that such an outré form to a root confined to technical usage (and found in the RV only here) would be used for such a simple concept, which could easily have been expressed by anantá-. Re’s “denués de franges” (without fringe) at least reflects the textile associations of the word (which Ge’s and WG’s do not), but otherwise seems somewhat bizarre. The poet must have something very particular in mind: the Sun’s garment is unfinished, still stretched on the loom. But what visual image corresponds to this bit of weaving lore? I am not certain but suggest that the sun is rising through mist (the garments, or better fabric) stretched along the horizon, and the ragged edges of this mist look like the unfinished edges of fabric still on a loom. For a similar image see I.115.4 and my comm. thereon.

This interpretation helps explain the first half of the verse, in which we see the Sun when he is going forth (pāda a: prayántam) but not when he is settling down near (b: upanipádyamānam) -- near to the maidens presumably (a: kanī́nām), who are, also presumably, the Dawns. I think we need to read these participles in reverse chronological order. The settling down near the maidens happens before the visible rising of the sun, the going forth. The Sun is nestled cozily (and erotically) with the maidens below or at the horizon, and the ragged fabric provides a welcome veil of modesty over their activities.

