+++
title = "01"

+++
A bit of a mess, but very clever, once decoded.

For the first hemistich two features of interpretation are crucial: 1) I read

*avatásya ‘of the well’ instead of áva tásya, a reading already suggested by Gr (s.v. áva). The ‘well’ word appears in the last verse of the preceding hymn (55.8c) and so belongs to Savya’s diction. 2) The simile / frame structure of ab involves a disharmony, with the verb to be interpreted in two different senses. In the frame, prá … úd ayaṃsta, with the medial s-aorist to √yam ‘hold’, has a fairly literal meaning: ‘raised forth for himself’. The object is the “many dippers” (pū́rvīḥ … camríṣaḥ) of the well (*avatásya). (In the publ. tr. “this” should probably be replaced by “the,” since tásya is by my reading no longer there.) The word camríṣ- is found only here, but it appears to be related esp. to camrīṣá- (I.100.12), apparently ‘beaker’, and the ‘cup’ words (camasá-, camū́-) specialized for the serving of soma. The well is of soma; in X.101.5-7 the preparation of soma is likened to raising water from a well. In the simile (pāda b) the verb is used reflexively: the horse “raises himself up and forward” to (mount) the mare, a pretty good representation of equine copulation. The acc. yóṣām in the simile is not parallel to the acc. pū́rvīḥ … camríṣaḥ of the frame: the latter is a direct object, while the former is a goal. The excitement of the mounting stallion is implicitly transferred to Indra’s excitement at the many drinks of soma in store for him.

In c I take dákṣam … hiraṇyáyam “golden skill” as a descriptor of soma: golden because of its color, skill because drinking it gives Indra the ability to do battle. It is a bit like calling alcoholic drinks “Dutch courage.” (In the next vs. Indra is, or has become, the “lord of skill.”) The verb pāyayate is a lovely example of a reflexive double I/T (in the terminology of my 1983 book): “he causes himself to drink X,” with the appropriate middle voice. It is hard to know what (if anything) to supply with mahé. I supply kárman- ‘deed’, whose only appearance in the RV is in the preceding verse (55.3), Ge (/WG) “Kraft,” while Re takes mahé as standing for an abstract, “pour (sa) grand(eur).” Any of these is possible; none is highly favored over the others.

In d “ingenious” may not be the happiest tr. of ṛ́bhvas- as applied to an inanimate thing. The word refers to craft or skill, and Re’s “habile(ment construit)” may be the point.

