+++
title = "01"

+++
Although the Saṃhitā form āvo in pāda a (Pp. āvaḥ) is assigned to √vṛ ‘cover’ by Gr, it clearly belongs to √vas ‘shine, dawn’. See, e.g., AiG I.335. It is rightly glossed by Sāy. with vyaucchat. Both roots occur regularly with the preverb ví as here (‘dawn widely’ / ‘uncover’) and both are regularly found in dawn contexts.

Here ví … āvas explicitly contrasts with ápa … āvar (√vṛ) ‘uncovered’ in c.

The latter form makes a bad Triṣṭubh cadence: … āvar ájuṣṭam#, where we would expect -var to be a heavy syllable. Old (Prol. 424 n. 1) persuasively suggests that this apparent light syllable may actually represent *āvarr (from original 3rd sg.

*āvart), with the same doubling of final resonant before initial vowel that we find in -
nn from older *-nt. He suggests the same for kar (IX.92.5) and abibhar (X.69.10), both of which would be metrically better as *-arr. 97 āv- is something of a signature of this vs.: āvo …, āviṣ(kṛṇvānā́) … / āvar, reinforced by numerous other a-/ā-initial words: ā́gāt / ápa … ájuṣṭam, áṅgirastamā … ajīgaḥ.

The ‘truth’ (ṛténa) of Dawn must refer to her conforming to the standard patterns of the cosmos by dawning every day and indeed her embodiment of these patterns, since the regular alternation of night and day is the most salient sign of cosmic laws. The word here contrasts with drúhaḥ ‘deceits’ in c.

Corey Barnes (class, 12/15) pointed out the repeating pattern (drúh)as táma … (ájuṣ)tam, á(ṅgir)astamā, which showcases ‘darkness’.

In d I take pathyā̀as standing for acc. pl. pathyā̀ḥ in harmony with the Pp. and the standard views. Scar (137 and n. 191) tentatively suggests taking it rather as an instr. pathyā̀(“gegen den Text”), modelled on pathyā̀(jánānām) in nearby VII.79.1, where either instr. sg. -ā̀or acc. pl. -ā̀ḥ is possible. Although “awaken the paths” with the acc. pl. is not an entirely straightforward expression, his instr. interpr. not only goes against the text but also requires supplying an obj. (“der Menschen”), and in addition “awaken (the men) along the path” doesn’t appreciably improve the sense.

(Were they sleeping by the roadside?) I assume that “awaken the paths” is shorthand for “filling the paths with (newly awakened) people moving hither and thither and thereby making the paths lively.” An instr. in VII.79.1 fits the context better.

