+++
title = "08"

+++
As Schaefer points out (p. 162), the intens. bobhavīti construed with an āmreḍita rūpáṃ-rūpam must signal repetitive function (“Gestalt um Gestalt”).

In c I read diváḥ twice: once as ‘day’ with tríḥ in the meaning “three times a day” (cf. nearby III.56.5, 6 trír ā́diváḥ, also X.95.5 tríḥ … áhnaḥ), once as ‘heaven’ with following pári “from heaven.” The latter reading, adopted by Sāy., is rejected by Old and Ge (n. 8c) because we should expect the close sandhi divás pári. This argument is subject to criticism on two grounds. First, I think the double reading of diváḥ would preclude close sandhi for one of the readings. Moreover, none of the other cited exx. of divás pári is broken over the caesura as here. As Mark Hale has discussed at length, close sandhi of NOUN + POSTPOSITION is blocked at the caesura.

See “Preliminaries to the Study of the Relationship between Syntax and Sandhi in Rigvedic Sanskrit,” Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft 51, pp. 77-96, 1990; this view is cited here after the 1995 draft, Wackernagel’s Law in the Language of the RV, pp. 38-50.

The ritual situation in the 2nd hemistich is puzzling for several reasons. First, Indra’s appearance at the sacrifice “three times a day” is what we expect, since there are three soma pressings. Then why is he characterized as ánṛtupāḥ ‘drinking out of season’? Ge (/WG) gets out of this bind by supplying a parenthetical “(oder)”: he either comes three times a day or drinks unseasonably. This works, but the “or” is of course a complete invention. More problematic is the fact that Indra is drinking unseasonably at all. In this same Indra cycle he has been apostrophized as ṛtupāḥ (voc., III.47.3). The apparent breaking of the ritual rules here is esp. striking because he is called ṛṭā́van- ‘possessing the truth, truthful’ at the same time, made more striking because this is the only place in the RV where ṛtā́van- qualifies Indra.

Lüders (Varuṇa II, 547-48) suggests that ṛtā́van- is used here only as word play with ánṛtupā́-, since Indra has essentially no connection with ṛtá- (“dass er zum Ṛta so gut wie keine Beziehung hat,” p. 548). But this seems unlikely, esp. given that the unnegated expression ṛtupā́ṛtā́vā in the same metrical position is used of Agni in this same maṇḍala (III.20.4). Some point is being made, that Indra can be ṛtā́van- despite his un-rule-governed behavior.

I think the clues to a solution are found in the first half of the verse, where Indra is depicted as constantly shape-shifting and enveloping himself in māyā́ḥ.

Perhaps Indra is impersonating other gods through the various rūpa-s he assumes, and his unseasonable drinking involves his taking their places in the rota (ṛtú-) of soma-recipients (the Ṛtugraha treated in I.15 and II.36-37). What then are “his own mantras” (svaír mántraiḥ), which accompany the unseasonable drinking? Lüders (p.

548) suggests that when he drinks outside of the three pressings he has to recite his own mantras. Though this is clever, I do not think it is correct, nor do I follow my own published tr. “by (the power of) his own (magic) spells” -- though I do think the mantras may be semantically linked to māyā́ḥ here. But my current thinking is that the phrase should be tr. “with their own mantras,” referring to the mantras appropriate to the gods whose forms he has appropriated and whose turns he takes in the drinking. As to how he can be called ṛtā́van- when his behavior seems not to be precisely aboveboard, perhaps he has gained the epithet from the gods whose identities he’s stealing: Agni, Tvaṣṭar, and Mitra and Varuṇa, all called ṛtā́vanelsewhere in the RV, all occur in the Ṛtugraha sequence (I.15; II.36-37). Or perhaps the epithet alludes to Indra’s most enduring adoption of another identity, that of Bṛhaspati. Though Bṛhaspati is called ṛtā́van- only once in the RV as far as I am aware (VI.73.1), the role of ṛtá- in association with Bṛhaspati in the Vala myth is very significant; see, e.g., Lüders p. 549. Or perhaps we can simply say that Indra’s “truth” -- his inherent nature -- is his ability to assume other forms and act out of turn and impose his will without following rules.

III.53.9-10: The use of somewhat inappropriate epithets continues in these vss. The subject of 9ab, the “great seer” (mahā́m̐ṛ́ṣiḥ) is Viśvāmitra, mentioned by name in c.

A mortal, he is described as ‘god-begotten’ (devajā́-) and ‘god-sped’ (devájūta-) but ‘possessing a man’s sight’ (nṛcákṣas-); the last is also used of the Kuśikas, Viśvāmitra’s family, in the next vs. Curiously it is the epithet with nṛ- ‘man’ that appears to be misapplied, not those with devá- ‘god’: the stem nṛ-cákṣas- is found approximately 40 times in the RV, and in all other occurrences (with the possible exception of the next hymn, III.54.6) it qualifies a god, who either has his (divine) gaze on men or attracts the gaze of men. Thus, the status of Viśvāmitra and his kin is implicitly raised by receiving a descriptor usually used of gods. That the Kuśikas drink soma with the gods in 10cd is a sign of this enhanced status. What the adj.

means here is unclear to me: is it that they too attract the gaze (and thus admiration) of other men, or that they, despite possessing only a man’s sight, still manage feats sufficient to match the gods, esp. Viśvāmitra’s stopping the rivers in full flood?

