+++
title = "10"

+++
The publ. tr. does not recognize or render the idiom ví √pā, found generally in the middle, for which see also comm. ad VII.22.3. As is indicated there, in later Vedic and already in late RV, the idiom is specialized for the separation of surā from another liquid in the Sautrāmaṇī ritual, but earlier can refer more generally to the extraction (“drinking out”) of a liquid from another source, e.g., by the pressing stones in IV.16.3 and VII.22.3. What the idiom is doing here is less clear to me. Ge (n. 10d / WG) thinks this is a reference to the (much later) notion that haṃsas can separate liquids and so it belongs with the Sautrāmaṇī passages -- the haṃsa being found in pāda a, though only in a simile unrelated to drinking. I think this unlikely. It may simply be that the pressing stones are involved: the Kuśikas may be “drinking out” the soma by means of the pressing stones found in pāda a (ádribhiḥ).

However, it is also possible that the ví represents the cross-species aspect of the drinking party: the mortal Kuśikas are urged to drink along with the gods, but the gathering may be segregated. So perhaps a tr. “drink apart, along with the gods”; such a notion seems to underlie Re’s “Buvez séparément avec les dieux.” It would contrast with a true symposium expressed by sám √pā also in the middle (see IV.35.7, 9) and in fact might allude to that idiom, given the well-known polarization of ví and sám. Another possibility is Sāy’s parasparavyatihāreṇa ‘by mutual interchange, alternately’. I am weakly inclined towards the pressing stone interpretation, though also somewhat drawn to the cross-species one. And I would also point out the resonance of the preverb ví with viśvā́mitraḥ (9c) and viprāḥ (10c).

