+++
title = "15-16"

+++
As indicated in the publ. intro., the subject of these two vss. is the mysterious feminine sasarparī́-, which has been interpr. as differently as “Kriegstrompete” (BR, fld. by Gr), “Sangesgeweise” of the Viśvāmitras (Ge), and Vāc (Anukramaṇī, Sāy.). The interpr. of these vss. has been further complicated by the later tradition that sees them as concerning the supposed rivalry between Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha, for which I see no evidence at all in the RV.

Although I do not think all the puzzles are ultimately solvable, some clues can get us some distance. First, sasarparī́- is a vṛkī-type fem., and as Debrunner points out (AiG II.2.369), the major use of this inflectional type is for female beings (human and animal). This lends some credence to the opinion that the sasarparī́- is a cow of some sort (e.g., Re “La (vache) Sasarparī”). That vs. 14 concerns the ritually worthless cows of the Kīkaṭas would also support a contrast with an eminently worthy cow found among us. Second, these two vss. sound rather like a dānastuti (see jamádagnidatta- in 15b and yā́m me palastijamadagnáyo dadúḥ in 16d), and since the next part of the hymn goes off in a completely different direction, this could serve as a hymn-capping dānastuti for what precedes. Cf. I.126.2, a dānastuti hymn, where, after Kakṣīvant is given cows, he stretches the king's unaging fame to heaven: diví śrávo ‘járam ā́tatāna, highly reminiscent of our 2nd hemistich … tatāna, śrávo devéṣv amṛ́tam ajuryám.

Even if this sketch of the function of the vss. and of Sasarparī is accepted (a big if), it remains to analyze the word. I consider it a portmanteau pun. On the one hand it is a kind of anagram for the intensive of √sṛp ‘creep’, found in the RV only as the hapax adj. sarīsṛpá- (X.162.3), which I tr. ‘squirming’. On the other hand, it is also phonologically reminiscent of sabar-dúgha-, -duh- ‘sap-yielding’, of milk cows

-- two occurrences of which are found in nearby III.55 (vss. 12, 16) qualifying Night
and Dawn, one of whom bellows (mimāya as here) in vs. 13. (Acdg. to Griffith, Gr associates Sasarparī with Sabardughā, though this is not registered in the dictionary.) Just as the Sasarparī brings fame in 16, so does a sabardúh- in VI.48.12-13 “milk out immortal fame” (śrávò ‘mṛtyu dhúkṣata). Another possible association is sarpís- ‘melted butter’, adduced by Mayrhofer as a possible relative of sasarparī́- (EWA s.v. sarpís-). My tr. “squirming, sappy (cow called) Sasarparī” reflects my sense that all of these words have contributed to the designation sasarparī́- and these contributions are positive: sabardúgha- and sarpís- reflect the fecundity and richness associated with juice and fat, sarīsṛpa- the uncontainable vitality of a squirming young animal.

Needless to say, this is highly speculative and does not rest on properly chaste etymological principles, but it is difficult to see what could with regard to this maddening but phonologically delectable word.

The next question to ask is why Sasarparī “banishes neglect” (ámatim bā́dhamānā). Again this phrase supports the notion that the referent of sasarparī́- is a cow. In I.53.4 and X.42.10 ámati- is overcome by cows; the word is paired with hunger (kṣúdh-) in VIII.66.14, X.42.10, and X.43.3. Hunger and neglect can be combatted with cows and their nourishing products, and one of the combatants is Sasarparī.

