+++
title = "23"

+++
In my opinion, at least the first half of this vs. continues the sentiment of vs. 22: the enemy is powerless, despite bluff and bluster. In pāda a older translations supply an unidentified subject (“he”) for cikite, but the medial perfect of √cit is always pass.-intrans. and with Kü (176) I take the verb as an impersonal passive with an oblique subj. in the genitive; cf. I.51.7 táva vájraś cikite with the subject in the more normal nom. The point here is that the opponent’s missile (sā́yaka-) is so inconsequential as not to attract or deserve notice.

In b the first problem is the hapax lodhá-, which is universally taken as a red animal of some sort, a horse (Ge, Re), fox (Gr), or goat (Old, tentatively EWA). My quite different tr. ‘clod’ assumes (again, very tentatively) an association with a loose set of words for lump, clod, etc.: loṭṭha (Pkt., etc. =Vedic loṣṭá-, perhaps by hypersanskritization) (Turner 11157), *lottha / *lodda / *loddha (Tu. 11137), *luṭṭa (Tu 11077). The point would then be that “they” (whoever they are) lead (to sacrifice?) a lump of earth or the like, thinking that it’s an actual (sacrificial?) beast.

This situation reminds us of the chariot race of Mudgala and Mudgalānī (X.102) in which a block of wood is yoked with a bull, and the oddly assorted pair still wins the race (X.102.8-9). It might also remind us of X.28.9 in which an earth clod (logá-, not too distant phonologically) splits a stone. The other morphological fact of note in this pāda is that páśu is neut. and initially accented (versus the ubiquitous masc. paśú-).

This may be a deep archaism, matching Lat. pecu, Goth. faihu (cf. AiG II.1.20, II.2.474), or it may be a nonce attempt to de-animatize the word in this peculiar context.

Like vs. 22 and 23a, 23b describes an undesirable situation exactly contrary to what was aimed at: having mistaken a lump for a sacrificial animal, the actors will surely not get the results they wanted -- although X.102.8-9 and X.28.9 may point to success in unlikely circumstances. But the second hemistich depicts situations in which, though a mistake was possible, it was not made: they don’t set a bad horse (ávājin-) to race with a good one; they don’t put a donkey before the horses. The question is whether the subjects of the three 3rd pl. verbs (nayanti b, hāsayanti c, nayanti again d) are the same, or are the deluded weaklings of ab being contrasted with more clear-headed and successful actors in cd? Common sense suggests the latter, but the morphologically identical sequence of verbs with no overt subject or change of subject the former (as Old points out). I cannot make up my mind, esp.

because the following vs. muddies the waters even further.

Given the interpretational difficulties, the grammatical identity of áśvān is a minor problem. In the publ. tr. I take it as acc. pl. áśvān, but the Pp. interprets it as abl. áśvāt, with the final -n in sandhi before the nasal of nayanti. Either is possible (“lead before the horses” / “lead before the horse”), and given the uncertainty of meaning, there is no obvious way to choose. The abl. is supposed to be construed with puráḥ, but in fact ABL. + puráḥ is not a robust construction.

