+++
title = "24"

+++
The good sense / bad sense problem continues, or returns, here. The sons of Bharata are ceremonially presented to us, with the here-and-now deictic imé. And we know from vs. 12 that the Bharata people (bhā́rata- jána-) are our people. But here they (or the subjects of the three 3rd pl. verbs: cikituḥ b, hinvánti c, pári ṇayanti d) seem to make the same bad choices that were visible in vss. 22-23, esp. 23b. The continuation of the 3rd pl. verbs invites us to make the Bharatas subjects also in vs. 22.

Is this a jokey anti-dānastuti? Are the “bad choices” I just mentioned meant to show that even if they do stupid things, they will still beat the incompetents depicted in vs. 22? Or that bad choices can still sometimes unaccountably lead to good? I am baffled.

The mealtime prapitvá- is well attested in the RV, but apapitvá- is found only here. Both Ge and Re take the words in some kind of figurative sense (e.g., Re apapitvá- ‘la retraite’, prapitvá- ‘l’élan-en-avant’), but since the -pitvá- compounds are otherwise only used of meals and the times of day associated with them, it seems best to maintain that sense here; so WG ‘die Nachessenzeit’, ‘die Voressenzeit’. In its contrast with pra here, I take apa as meaning ‘leaving the meal, post-prandial’ and therefore ‘non-meal’. My interpr. is influenced by my sense that the lesser choice is the one being made in each case in this vs. In c the standard tr. take ná as a simile marker: “they incite their own horse like an alien one.” But given the paired negative clauses in 23cd and the undoubted negative (or at least undoubted by the standard tr.) in the immediately preceding pāda (24b), where the ná takes the same position as in c, the pattern seems to impose another negative here. Under either interpr. the action is not a very smart one: spurring your own horse like an alien one should presumably mean that you don’t spur it at all.

The accentuation of jyā̀- in the bahuvrīhi jyā̀-vāja-, against simplex jyā́-, is attributed to the shift to initial accent in some other bahuvrīhis: AiG II.1.293 with Nachtr. 81. The standard tr. avoid the problem of the sense of this cmpd by attributing to -vāja- a sense it doesn’t otherwise have: Ge (WG; cf. Gr) Schnelligkeit, Re la force. But vā́ja- means ‘prize’ and bahuvrīhis with it as 2nd member ‘having X as prize’. I here assume that winning only a bowstring (minus the bow) would not be a glorious outcome.

<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/03/052/21-24.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>