+++
title = "04"

+++
I follow Ge (as well as Th Fremdling, Oberlies I.344, etc.) in rendering suvasaná- as ‘good dwelling’, against some potentially good arguments to the contrary. The stem is attested only once elsewhere, IX.97.50 in the phrase vástrā suvasanā́ni, where it clearly refers to good garments (√vas ‘wear, clothe’), and the base of our cmpd, vásana- (a hapax), likewise only means clothing. Citing these words, as well as vastra-dā́- ‘giving garments’ (V.42.8; like our phrase suvasanásya dātṝ́n), Re holds firm to “donateurs de bonne vêture” (so also Gr). But sátpatīn ‘lords of settlements’ in the preceding pāda supports a ‘dwelling’ interpr., and it would be easy to form such a deriv. to the well-attested root √vas ‘dwell’. (Note that the derivatives that would support the ‘clothing’ sense are found in that sense only once apiece, so do not seem well established enough to block such a formation.) Ge construes diváḥ with nṝ́n and take kṣáyataḥ absolutely: “die mächtigen Herrn des Himmels.” As in vs. 2, Re seems to have changed his mind (a phenomenon I know well; witness this comm.) between the comm. fascicle (EVP IV) and the tr.

fascicle (EVP V): in the former he comments of kṣáyataḥ “emploi absolu,” but in the latter tr. “seigneurs résidants du ciel,” with diváḥ dependent on the participle. He evidently assigns the participle to ‘dwell’, though the participle of the root pres. to that root is only kṣiyánt-, while kṣáyant- belongs to kṣáya- ‘rule over’. (Curiously he correctly interpr. the finite kṣáyatha in 7c as “vous régnez.”) Ge (etc.) must base their interpr. on the existence of the phrase divó náraḥ / nṝ́n, but though this collocation is attested elsewhere (e.g., V.54.10, VI.2.3, VI.2.11=14.6), it is not a particularly common expression, and √kṣi ‘rule over’ regularly takes a genitive, incl. in 7c víśvasya hí kṣáyatha “for you rule over all,” a phrase Re in fact cites in his comm. ### 05
This vs. consists primarily of a string of vocatives, plus a couple of 2nd pl.

impvs., so in one way it is quite straightforward. However, the accentual behavior of the vs., and particularly the vocc., is peculiar. The first pāda consists only of vocatives: two double names (Father Heaven, Mother Earth) and a single adjective (by word order belonging to the latter, but it is a root noun cmpd and its voc. is indifferent to gender). Each word in the pāda is accented (with voc. accent): dyaùṣ pítaḥ pṛ́thivi mā́tar ádhruk. The first three words of the next pāda are likewise vocatives: a name plus epithet and a different (pl.) name. Only the first of these is accented: ágne bhrātar vasavaḥ. The next word is an impv. mṛḷátā, and it is accented after the extrasentential voc. phrase (cf. comm. ad VI.50.11, where this was floated as a possibility to explain an unusually accented verb [the same verb in fact], though rejected). The third pāda also begins with three vocatives, one a two-word phrase, one an individual name, with only the first accented: víśva ādityā adite. I am completely puzzled as to why the first pāda differs from the next two. Old is also puzzled: “Behandlung der Vokativakzente befremdet, aber wir haben kein Recht zu rühren.” The content of the vs. is otherwise banal. As Re points out, víśva ādityāḥ is a stand-in for víśve devāḥ.

