+++
title = "10"

+++
Judging from the repeated té and the u that follows the 2nd one (strikingly in the middle of a pāda), we should be dealing with two parallel clauses, one nominal, one verbal. The accent on náyanti shows that the 2nd clause is in the domain of the hí in pāda a. Ge renders as two clauses, but does not seem to keep the 2nd in the hí domain; Re ignores the té u and tr. as a single clause. There does not appear to be a main clause in the vs., unless we want to construe cd as a nominal main cl. (“they are of good rule …”).

sukṣatrá- reprises the same word in 4c, and as noted ad vs. 3, ṛtá-dhītimatches ádabdha-dhīti in 3c. The two are part of the supportive ring around the omphalos vss. 6-7.

Once again we meet the trio Varuṇa, Mitra, Agni (see comm. on vs. 3, and previous vss. noted there), but Aryaman is nowhere in the vicinity and Aditi only in a rather random list in the next vs. (11).

Consonant with the focus on truth in this hymn, pāda d is framed by the words ṛtá- and satyá-, the former as first member of a cmpd, the latter as last member. As was just noted, ṛtá-dhīti- is a well-formed bahuvrīhi with a parallel already in the hymn. But vakma-rā́ja-satya- is distinctly peculiar. For one thing, it has three members, which is unusual for the RV. But more striking is the final member satya-, whose relation to the prior (complex) member vakma-rā́ja(n)- is unclear. (Curiously, AiG doesn’t touch this cmpd.) Its only possible parallel is the even stranger ṛtá-jāta- satya-, with both ṛtá- and satyá-, in IV.51.7 (see comm. ad loc.). Gr glosses “dem Lenker der Gebete treu oder willfährig.” Ge treats as two separate words “'die beredten Könige, die wahrhaften,” without commenting on this disjunction (or does he think it’s a dvandva?), though he cites Sāy. as interpr. “wahrhaftig gegen die Herren der Rede d.h. die Sänger,” which is also reflected in Gr.’s gloss. Old’s “in Wahrheit Könige der Rede” and Re’s “qui sont vraiment les rois de la parole (sacrale)” are in essential agreement, and the publ. tr. follows them -- though I feel as though we’re all missing something.

