+++
title = "12"

+++
As disc. in the publ. intro., this is the final vs. of the first hymn in this composite group and as such summarizes the just-concluded hymn and asks for divine favor, naming the poet, or rather his family.

The grammatical identity and the use of náṃśi is uncertain. Gr labels it as an aor. (also Wh Rts), 1st sg. middle, and this interpr. is reflected in Ge’s and Re’s tr. -- though both add a modal feature (“möchte ich …,” “je voudrais …”) that would again be somewhat unusual for an injunctive. Lub also groups it with the root aor.

and calls it an injunc. but with ? (By contrast Hoffmann won’t commit to an analysis [219].) In one sense a finite aor. is the most likely interpr., but if so, we must explain the accent on what appears to be a non-initial main-clause verb. The hemistich would also switch from 1st ps. in this pāda to 3rd ps. in the rest of the vs. (bhā́radvājaḥ … yāti …), and though RVic discourse is certainly capable of that, it’s one more anomaly. The publ. tr. follows Old’s preference for Ludwig’s interpr. of the form as an infinitive. In either case (finite form or infin.) it is, as Old says, “auffallend gebildet.” I take it as a loc. inf. with a purpose function, though I realize that this is ad hoc.

In the context of later śrauta ritual, the application of hotā́and yájamānaḥ to the same individual would be strange. But the ritual roles so distinct in middle Vedic śrauta texts are by no means clearly parceled out in the RV, and in particular yájamāna- does not usually identify a particular ritual role but acts as an attributive participle, as I think it does here.

