+++
title = "13"

+++
This first vs. of the extra material has various lexical ties to the first hymn: vṛjinám: 2c vṛjinā́; satpate: 4a sátpatīn; ripúm: 7d ripúḥ, which might help explain why it (and the following two vss.) were attached here.

Ge attaches daviṣṭhám asya satpate to ab and begins a new cl. with kṛdhī́: “Schaffe gute Fahrt.” I assume that one of his motivations is the accent on kṛdhī́, which appears to be in the middle of a pāda. And he may feel that making “easy passage” (sugám) for a criminal would be contrary to expectation. However, he seems to ignore the asya -- at least I find nothing in his tr. that corresponds to it. The accentual problem can be easily resolved: the three vss. 13-15 seem to have an 8 8 / 8 4 structure, rather than 8 8 / 12. On this analysis of the meter, kṛdhī́starts a new pāda and should be accented. In vs. 14 vṛ́ko hí ṣáḥ is a new clause and nicely fits a separate pāda, and in vs. 15 gopā́amā́is also syntactically separate.

Vs. 15 also supports my interpr. in another way: kártā naḥ … sugám “make good passage for us” is syntactically parallel to my interpr. of 13 … asya … kṛdhī́ sugám “make good passage for him,” with naḥ corresponding to asya. As for making good passage for a criminal, the point is to get him as far away as fast as possible, and good passage will accomplish this faster than bad.

(Re’s interpr. is overly complex; though he does find space for the asya, he does not deal with the accented verb. I won’t treat it further here.)

