+++
title = "05"

+++
I construe both svā́hā and stómasya with úpaśrutī, although they are in different pādas. (Ge takes svā́hā as an independent mini-clause and construes stómasya with voc. vardhanā.) Although várdhana- regularly does take the genitive, I am reluctant to take stómasya with it because we might expect the gen. to lose its accent in a vocative phrase (although this loss is of course not invariable, as Old points out). úpaśruti- also takes the gen. (see I.10.3), and since svā́hā is indeclinable, it can also be dependent on úpaśruti-, at least as I see it. Old also floats the possibility that stómasya goes with úpaśrutī, though he seems to favor a connection with várdhanā.

It is not clear whose dhītí- ‘insights’ are in question in c. Ge takes them as the Aśvins’, and the fact that kavī ‘poets’ qualifies them directly adjacent to dhītíbhiḥ would support this view. However, in 19cd the dhītíbhiḥ definitely belong to the (human) poet, and this also seems to be the case with suvṛktíbhiḥ in 3b (on the basis of 22ab), as well as dhībhíḥ and stómebhiḥ in 7cd. In general the unrelenting point of this hymn is that the Aśvins are supposed to come here at our producing various verbal products for their delectation. I take the instr. in these cases to be instrumentals of cause.

With prá in d I supply another verb of motion. Judging from his tr. Ge must take the verb to be supplied as prá √as ‘be outstanding’: “Ihr … (seid) an Gedanken … voraus.” This is not impossible, but this is a journey hymn and not much else happens, esp. in this section: we offer praise; they come.

