+++
title = "19"

+++
As indicated in the publ. intro., I interpret this verse as containing a riddle (a-c) and its answer (d), an interpretation at odds with Ge (flg. Sāy), who takes all of the verse until its last word as part of a single description of Indra. His rendering of d, “der Vṛtratöter ist (jedem) anderen gewachsen, so sagen sie” is grammatically impossible because āhuḥ ought then to be accented; prátī́d anyám āhuḥ must be a separate clause (as Old also takes it, though with implausible semantics). In my interpretation the first three pādas present several different descriptions of Indra’s characteristics and activities. Although these descriptions are fairly transparent, they do not name Indra, whereas the first two words of pāda d, sá vṛtrahā́, names him by his standing epithet and serves as answer to the implicit riddle posed by the first three pādas. Although this interpretation is more complex than Ge’s, it allows us to account for the odd finale of d and especially for the anyám, which by my rules (Fs. Beekes, 1997) should have a definite reading, “the other.” I take this “other” to be the poser of the riddle, and the unidentified speakers of d triumphantly respond to him with the solution. That the first two words of the final two verses of the tṛca (and the hymn) repeat sá vṛtrahā́of 19d, followed by the actual name of the god, lends support to my interpretation of vs. 19.

I tr. loc. sutéṣu in a as if it were a genitive; “enjoyer at the pressings” would be possible, but just a little less parsable in English.

I am somewhat puzzled by the simile of b: yó áheva revā́n. Ge takes the áhā (so Pp.) as the comparandum with Indra and revā́n as the shared quality (“der wie die (neuen) Tage prangend ist”), but revánt- doesn’t mean ‘resplendent’; rather, as a derivative of rayí-‘ wealth’, it means ‘rich, wealthy’. Moreover, in similes, áhā, marked by iva, several times precedes the actual comparandum and serves as adverbial qualifier - e.g., I.130.2 áhā víśveva sū́ryam “like the sun through all the days” (cf. also áheva in VI.61.9), and so I interpret it here, though I admit it is still not a compelling image.

In c the Saṃhitā text reads náryápāṃsi (as also in I.85.9), with five syllables, suggesting a word separation nári ápāṃsi and so analyzed by Pp. (followed by Aufrecht and HvN). But this must represent, one way or another, the collocation náryā + ápāṃsi, found in opposite order even in this same tṛca (21c ápāṃsi náryā; see also IV.19.10, as well as ápāṃsi … náryāṇi VII.21.4; also the bahuvrīhi náryāpas- in nearby VIII.93.1). Grassmann suggests reading *náryā́pāṃsi, as does Old (ad I.85.9)(see also Macdonell Vedic Reader ad I.85.9), and this “slight emendation” (Macdonell’s words) not only fixes the morphology but also restores a more standard break ( ̮ ̮ _ ) for the three shorts ( ̮ ̮ ̮) found (though the latter break is by no means uncommon). However, Lubotsky apparently takes nári here as the loc. to the noun nṛ́- (the náryápāṃsi passages would contain the only locatives to this stem in the RV), and Ge adduces the somewhat parallel case of vṛ́śṇi … śávaḥ (V.35.4, VIII.3.10), vṛ́śṇi paúṃsyam (VIII.7.23). Like our nári ápāṃsi / ápāṃsi náryā, the former collocation exists alongside one with a properly formed -iyaadjective, vṛ́ṣṇ(i)yaṃ śávaḥ (VIII.3.8 [same hymn as one of the truncated occurrences], VIII.51.10 IX.64.2). But the easy fix available to the nári ápāṃsi case (lengthening the vowel of ápāṃsi) is not available for the vṛ́ṣṇi examples.

I do not know quite what to do with all this. The vṛ́ṣṇi case looks to me like an artificial truncation that nonetheless was original to the text, while I’m inclined to see nári as a redactional change, perhaps on the model of vṛ́ṣṇi. I am thus willing to follow Gr, Old, and Macdonell in emending to *náryā́pāṃsi. However, these are, to say the least, quite subjective criteria, and I am not at all convinced these views are correct. It is nonetheless possible to sketch a possible but problematic scenario for these developments. The two examples of vṛ́śṇi te śávaḥ are nominal clauses. Cf. ## 10
tád indra vṛ́ṣṇi te śávaḥ, rendered in the publ. tr. “that is your bullish vast power, Indra,” with vṛ́ṣṇi nominally a neut. sg. to an otherwise non-existent i-stem adj. But it might be possible instead to take it as the loc. sg. of vṛ́ṣan-, with vṛ́ṣṇi … śávaḥ “the power is in the bull.” Though in a cursory look I have found no śávaḥ + LOC. constructions in the RV, other abstract words for power do figure in such syntagms (including in our hymn, VIII.96.3). See, e.g., V.33.6 papṛkṣéṇyam indra tvé hí ójaḥ, nṛmṇā́ni ca … “For, Indra, in you are strength to be nurtured and manly powers.” There are two fundamental problems with this suggestion: 1) the zero-grade loc. -ni to -an-stems is not found in the RV; we find only full-grade -ani; 2) it is hard to construe the te, since the bull and 2nd ps. Indra are coreferential. “This power of yours is in (you,) the bull” is awkward and unlikely. A bolder hypothesis - bolder than I would venture - would link these two problems and reconstruct an underlying syntagm *vṛ́ṣaṇi śávaḥ with full-grade loc. and no enclitic pronoun. When the posited vṛ́ṣaṇi reduced to vṛ́ṣṇi (perhaps because of association with adjectival vṛ́ṣṇ(i)ya-), te was introduced to maintain the metrical shape. There are no other attested examples of the loc. sg. of vṛ́ṣan- in the RV to support the trisyllabic reading. In any case, in this scenario the old loc. would be reinterpreted as an endingless adjectival or adverbial element in this collocation, alternating with syntactically impeccable vṛ́ṣṇ(i)yaṃ śávaḥ. With this set up, we can get nári on this model: vṛ́ṣṇ(i)yaṃ śávaḥ : vṛ́śṇi … śávaḥ ápāṃsi náryā : nári ápāṃsi I believe this development was redactional rather than found in the ur-text. First because vṛ́śṇi … śávaḥ is a plausible neut. sg. phrase, but with the pl. ápāṃsi an endingless nári is more difficult. Moreover, an abstract quality located in a being (like “strength is in the bull”) is a much more likely notion than “labors are in the man.” And the metrical evidence strongly favors an original *náryā́pāṃsi, though it does not entirely rule out the short vowel.

But I lay out this scenario very skeptically, primarily because of the wrong grade in the posited loc. sg. Here I would point out that the same trouble would afflict any attempt to explain vṛ́ṣṇ(i)ya- as a thematic descasuative derivative from a locative by pointing to the two synchronically alternating syntagms here. Such a derivation for *-(i)yo-possessive adjectives in general has been proposed (see Balles, Sprache 39 [1997 (2000)] 141-67, cited from Meier-Brügger, Indo-European Linguistics, 283-84, for which ref. I thank JL). I do not believe that the last word has been said about this issue.

