+++
title = "13"

+++
The pāda-initial position of anyásyā(ḥ) strongly suggests that it is indefinite (‘another’, not ‘the other’), contra the standard tr. Since definite anyá- … anyá- (“the one … the other”) is correctly positioned in 11b, 15b, and 17ab, I think we should take the contrastive positioning seriously and connect this phraseology with 4c, which also contains initial anyá- (anyā́vatsám bhárati kṣéti mātā́“Another bears the calf; the mother rests peacefully.”). In that passage the “mother” of the fire, the lower kindling stick, rested, while the upper kindling stick, identified as “another,” carried the infant fire. Here the situation is reversed: the anyā́- form refers to the mother of the calf/fire, which is now being licked by a different feminine entity -- in this case, in my opinion, the ghee oblation. A second pairing also imposes itself, however: in vs. 12 we had a different feminine duo: Night and Dawn. Their proximity in 12 invites an alternative reading of 13a, underscoring the temporal transition, with Night functioning as the mother of the fire, but Dawn taking over, tending it and bellowing over it. This latter interpr. seems to be continued in the next vs. (14ab).

I confess that I do not entirely understand the purport of pāda b (nor, as far as I can see, does anyone else). The hemistich is found identically also in X.27.14cd, though given the virtual impenetrability of that hymn, this doesn’t help much. Contra Ge (/Gr, etc.), I do not think bhū́- here is ‘world’, nor that the instr. expression káyā bhuvā́means “in welcher Welt” (see Old for objection to this tr.). Instead I take bhū́- as ‘form’ or (with Old, etc.) ‘existence-form’, with the phrase meaning “in what shape or guise.” I suspect that the pāda asks how the surrogate mother/cow, who took over from the fire’s mother in pāda a, will deliver nourishment (symbolized by her udder) to the infant fire. The answer may be given in pāda c: it is “the milk of truth” (ṛtásya … páyas-), which we might further translate into “the milk of correct ritual speech.”

