+++
title = "16"

+++
The miraculous milkers in this vs. are taken by all standard tr. as rain clouds, flg. one of Sāy.’s suggestions (the other being the heavenly regions). In context this interpr. seems perverse. The verse forms part of a tight little section (beginning with vs. 11) concerning Night and Dawn and their nourishing of the infant ritual fire. Our vs. esp. echoes vs. 12: dhenávaḥ … sabardúghāḥ … ápradugdhāḥ “milk-cows, sap-yielding, not milked out” is the equivalent in the plural of 12ab dhenū́, sabardúghe dhāpayete “the two milk-cows, sap-yielding, give suck” in the dual. I find it highly unlikely that the vocabulary here repeated from 12 would refer to entirely different entities (clouds), which, moreover, have no connection with the dawn ritual depicted here. Instead, in the course of this section the joint nurturing activity of Night and Dawn (11-12) has given way to the dominance of Dawn over Night (13ab, 14ab), and though both Night and Dawn are present in vs. 15, one of them (Night) is hidden (15b). This trend accords with the natural phenomenon: at dawn, light dissipates darkness. In our vs. 16 the plural cows either represent the Dawns in general -- the plural of Dawn being often interchangeable with the singular -- or the beams of light, the “dawn cows,” of a single Dawn. The expression “becoming new ever again” (pāda c návyā-navyā yuvatáyo bhávantīḥ) might favor the former possibility, since it reminds us of the daily parade of ever-new youthful Dawns. My identification of the cows with the dawns here admittedly leaves the noisiness (“let them be noisy,” ā́… dhunayantām) unexplained. I would suggest either that there is also a reference to the crackling of the fire wood as the ritual fire is kindled at dawn, or that it refers to the general noise attendant on dawn as the various creatures awake, including real cows mooing to be milked. Note that already in vs. 13a Dawn (in my interpr.) ‘lows’ (mimāya) over the infant fire. I think we can safely banish the putative rain clouds.

