+++
title = "17"

+++
As indicated in the publ. intro. I consider this vs. to be transitional between the fire-kindling vss. and the arrival of Indra at the sacrifice. I therefore think that the reference is ambiguous. In the publ. intro. I suggested a trio of possible referents: Agni, Soma, and Indra. I now think it is only Agni and Indra and that Agni is the sole referent in ab, with transition from Agni to Indra in c.

This opinion is very different from the standard, which takes Parjanya as the subject here (flg. on the supposed rain cloud vs.). The issue is further complicated by the fact that in the next hymn (III.56.3) yet another being, possibly Tvaṣṭar or Tvaṣṭar’s son, is described as retodhā́vṛṣabháḥ “a bull, depositor of semen,” which matches our vṛṣabháḥ … ní dadhāti rétaḥ. Although I must concede that Parjanya is described with the same phrase as III.56.3 in VII.101.6 and is said to deposit semen also in V.83.1, such designations are not exclusive to Parjanya. In I.128.3 it is Agni who is … réto vṛṣabháḥ kánikradad, dádhad rétaḥ kánikradat “a bull ever-roaring, depositing his semen’ (with √krand, rather than √ru, ‘roar’), and I think Agni is the referent here as well. I do not entirely understand the two herds of cows, but suggest that it may have to do with the embryonic doctrine of the cycle of waters that is later developed in the Upaniṣads, whereby rain falls from heaven and causes plants to grow; the plants, as fuel, produce/give birth to the fire, whose smoke goes to heaven and becomes clouds from which the rain falls, and the cycle begins again. Our passage may have an abbreviated form of this: the bull Agni is roaring (that is, crackling as fire) among one set of cows (plants as firewood); the smoke goes to heaven and the rain (his semen) falls to earth and produces plants (the other herd).

Note vs. 5 much earlier in the hymn, where it is said of the plants “Having (him) within, (though) unimpregnated they give birth to (him).” The transition from Agni to Indra occurs in pāda c, in my interpr. Both Agni and Indra can be called kṣápāvant- (/kṣapā́vant-) ‘earth-protector’, indeed simultaneously. (See X.29.1 and my “Śleṣa in the Rig Veda?” [Fs. Gerow], 163-64.) Indeed this epithet is even more flexible: as I discussed in the Gerow Fs., the first element may be either kṣá(m) ‘earth’ or kṣáp- ‘night’. (For the possible morphological analyses, see the loc. cit.) Under the latter analysis, the epithet would be appropriate only for Agni, but under the former to both Agni and Indra, so the first word in c may slip from clear reference to Agni to double reference. The following two words, bhága- and rā́jan-, are also used in the RV of both Agni and Indra, though ‘king’ is more common for Indra than Agni. The transition is complete.

