+++
title = "02"

+++
Here the verb in a, vāsáyathaḥ, is accented because it follows the extrasentential voc. índrāsomā and therefore effectively begins the vs. The first hemistich describes dawn and the sunrise in the pres. tense as repeated daily events. The 2nd hemistich by contrast recounts the original separation of Heaven and Earth. The 2nd verb in this hemistich, the augmented impf. áprathatam (d), clearly locates the action in the past. The previous verb, skambháthuḥ (c), is formally anomalous. It is generally identified as a non-reduplicated pf. (so explicitly Gr; listed with the pf. by Whitney [Roots], Macdonell [VGS]; by implication Re) because of its clear 3rd du. pf. ending. But in addition to its lack of redupl., its full-gr. root syllable is unexpected. Kü treats the form in some detail (574), both functionally and formally. Since in the end he decides it is not built to the pf. stem, he begins by trying to deny that it has past value, despite the following augmented impf., suggesting rather that it can have “generell-zeitlos” sense. This (in his view) opens the door to taking it as an injunctive, probably to a root aorist. It then owes its pf.- type ending to analogic spread from the equally non-reduplicated 3rd pl. skambhur (X.65.4), whose ending could belong to the pf. or, possibly, to an aorist. Since the conceptual structure of the vs., with the actions of ab contrasting with those of cd, imposes (in my view) a preterital sense on skambháthuḥ, I am not persuaded by Kü’s general/timeless interpr. But, on the other hand, I don’t need to be: Kü is still under the sway of the Hoffmannian interpr. of the injunctive, but this straitjacket of a linguistically implausible verbal “category” should not limit our readings of this maximally unmarked form-type, and there is, in my view, abundant evidence for injunctives used as straight preterites. I am therefore willing to accept that skambháthuḥ (and skambhuḥ) somehow reflect an aorist, which the root otherwise lacks, and a root aorist might be expected beside the nasal pres. skabhnā́ti, as Kü points out. He provides what seems to me an overly complex analogic explanation for the full-grade root syllable, which can simply result from a formal match with the immediately following cognate instr. skámbhanena. (It might be noted that a putative

*skabháthuḥ with zero-grade root syllable would produce a slightly better break.) What I don’t understand -- and Kü doesn’t mention -- is why the verb is accented. It
is right in the middle of its clause, preceded by a tonic preverb and a tonic object, so the explanations for the accents of vividáthuḥ (1c) and vāsáyathaḥ (2a) are not applicable. Perhaps it acquired its accent redactionally because the reasons for the accents of those two verbs were no longer clear.

