+++
title = "17"

+++
Pāda b is difficult. Ge (/WG) construe the two locatives in b, kásmiñ cid and muhuké, together, which would of course be the default interpr. However, this leads Ge to render muhuká- as ‘Schlachtgeschrei’, a tr. for which there is no support: its closest etymological relative, adverbial múhur, only means ‘suddenly, in an instant’. (WG’s “in irgendeinem plötzlichen Vorfall” at least imposes less content and sticks closer semantically to múhur and company.) In the publ. tr. I separate the two locatives, taking muhuké as a simple temporal and construing the indefinite kásmiñ cid with the gen. pl. jánānām. This interpr. was in part prompted by the need to have something for antár to govern: antár does not take the genitive, so a direct connection with jánānām (“among the peoples”) is out, but it regularly takes the locative. Hence my “among some one of the peoples”: since jána- can refer to a group of persons who make up a people, it doesn't have to be a single individual, hence my “some one” rather than “someone.” (Cf. also V.74.2 kásmin … jáne.) However, I recognize that this interpr. is both artificial and awkward, and (somewhat in the spirit of WG) I have cast about for an interpr. of muhuké, which should literally mean ‘instantaneous’, that both reflects its etymology and yet allows it to refer to a conflict and be plausibly construed with jánānām. The Engl. word ‘skirmish’ (“an episode of irregular or unpremeditated conflict”) comes close. I would thus revise my tr. of ab to “If a sharp missile will fly within some sudden skirmish of the peoples, o champion, ...”

