+++
title = "02"

+++
On pāṣī́- see comm. ad I.56.6, the only other occurrence of this stem. In both instances it is dual and seems to refer to a twinned body part. Under this analysis in this passage the body part is metaphorical, referring to the two “jaws” of the soma press, a metaphor also found in the later ritual literature. See Ge (n. 2a) on this interpr., also fld. by Re.

The syntax of the vs. as a whole is very puzzling, and the publ. tr. differs from the way Ge/Re (also Klein DGRV II.128-29) configure its parts - though I recognize the problem inherent in my old interpr. The overarching question that will govern how the details are interpr. is what to do with pāda b. In particular, is ábhakta the verb of the main cl., with immed. flg. yád gúhā padám a self-contained nominal rel.

cl. dependent on the main cl, or is ábhakta part of the yád cl., with postposed subordinator yád? Either of these is syntactically possible; Ge/Re opt for the former, I for the latter. Cf. for the former Re’s “Entre les deux machoires de T., (le soma) a eu part au séjour (qui est) dans la cachette.” Ge’s tr. simply elides the yád: “In des Trita Kinnladen (?) hat er seine geheime Stufe erreicht.” There are several problems with this interpr. First (and perhaps least problematic): úpa at the beg. of the vs. then appears to be a preverb in tmesis with ábhakta, but úpa √bhaj is not found anywhere else, either in the RV or elsewhere in Skt. (to judge from MonWms). For a small set of passages incl. this one, Gr allows for úpa with following loc. in the sense “bei, auf,” and this is probably the way to go if one accepts the Ge/Re configuration—to take úpa as a preposition, rather than positing an otherwise unattested lexeme úpa √bhaj. For my interpr. of úpa in the publ. tr., see below.

The sense that must be attributed to ábhakta (usually ‘have a share, share in’) under their interpr. is stretched. Ge simply tr. “hat ... erreicht,” which is hard to reconcile with the normal usages of the root. In this he follows Gr: “6) me. einen Ort oder Gegenstand [A.] erreichen, hingelangen,” but Gr assigns this contextually generated usage to this passage alone. Re’s “a eu part au séjour” is attentive to the meaning of the root, but what does the tr. actually mean? Then there is the question of what to do with the rest of the verse after these 1st two pādas, which in Ge/Re/Klein’s various renderings gets loosely attached to what precedes with no logical or syntactic connection. Cf., e.g., Klein’s tr. of the whole vs.: “In the two stones of Trita (Soma) has taken for himself a place (of refuge) which is hidden, together (with) the seven orders of the worship, and dear." My publ. interpr. starts with the other configuration of pāda b sketched above, that the pāda is a syntactic unit, a subord. cl. marked by yád with ábhakta as its verb.

I further take ábhakta … padám to be an instance of the rare idiom PATH + √bhaj (med.) ‘take to the path’, found in VII.39.1 bhejā́te … pánthām, VII.18.16 bhejé pathó vartaním; see comm. ad VII.18.16. Taking padá- as ‘track’, we arrive at a tr.

of b “when he took to the hidden track” - meaning, in my view, when Soma set out on his journey of ritual preparation after being pressed.

As for verse-initial úpa, elsewhere in IX it's almost always used with a verb of motion (usually √yā) with acc. goal: cf. esp. the repeated phrase GEN úpa yāti niṣkrtám̥ “he goes the rendezvous with X.” I therefore supply a verb of motion here, with the goal reached only at the end of the vs. in acc. priyám “his own dear (place/domain [perhaps supply dhā́ma]).” The intermediate instr. phrase yajñásya saptá dhā́mabhiḥ is, by this interpr., an instr. of extent of space and indicates the course of his journey, “through the seven domains of the sacrifice.” The 4-syllable extension ádha priyám, like ádha dvitā́in vs. 1, puts some syntactic distance between priyám and the rest of the vs. Here it might help indicate the arduous nature of the journey and the achievement of arriving at the goal, as my “now right to his own dear (place)” is meant to convey.

This interpr. seems to me to provide a more satisfactory account of the vs. than the other alternative. However, it has one major drawback: the yád clause of b is embedded within the main clause, which occupies pādas a, c (/d). If I follow this interpr., there is no way of avoiding this violation of standard practice, whereas in the Ge/Re/Klein interpr. yád gúhā padám is a nominal cl., which is permitted internally. Weighing the two alternatives, I still find myself inclined to my own, though I don’t have an explanation for the problematic embedding. That there appears to be a parenthetic inserted clause in the next vs. may indicate that this hymn is somewhat more lax about the combination of syntactic units than we usually meet with.

