+++
title = "02"

+++
All the standard tr. take the rel. cl. of pāda a (cakṛmā́yáṃ vayám te “[the womb] which we have made for you”) as the frame for the simile in b, with “we” matching the eager wife (jā́yā … uśatī́) and “you” (Agni) matching the husband. Old (SBE) goes so far as to supply “marriage-bed” as the match for the womb: “… as a well-dressed loving wife (prepares the marriage-bed) for her husband.” This is one possible reading, but I don’t think it is the only (or even the dominant) one; in fact, I think the simile can be matched to four different entities in the verse.

Let us begin by noting that pāda b, the self-contained simile, is found three times elsewhere (I.124.7 of Dawn, X.71.4 of Vāc, and X.91.13 of praise [suṣṭutí-] seeking Agni), in all cases of females or of entities conceived as female. An obvious “entity conceived as female” is found in the nominal main clause of pāda a, ayáṃ yóniḥ “here is the womb”: the womb, though grammatically masc., is a female accoutrement and can be matched with the wife in the simile in b. This “womb” (=fireplace) is well prepared (“richly dressed” suvā́sāḥ) and ready to receive Agni as her husband. For womb = wife, cf. III.53.4 jāyéd … séd u yóniḥ “The wife -- just she is the womb.” But suvā́sāḥ elsewhere occurs in the same pāda with párivītaḥ (found in our pāda c): III.8.4a yúvā suvā́ sāḥ párivīta ā́ gāt “As a youth, richly dressed, engirded, he has come here.” Although the referent there is the sacrifical post, the vocabulary is also appropriate to Agni. Therefore it could be the Agni of c who is like a wife, eager for her husband identified with the womb in pāda a -- a gender reversal that would appeal to the Rigvedic poets. (Note that the standard reading, where “we” the ritualists match the wife, also requires some gender reversal.) Finally let us consider pāda d. The subj. of d is fem., expressed by imā́u te … pratīcī́h “these facing you.” Ge (/WG) supply “Frauen,” but in n. 2d Ge suggests gíraḥ (inter alia); Re supplies “louanges.” I think gíraḥ must be correct: there are a number of imā́u tvā/te … gíraḥ passages (e.g. VI.45.25, 28, VII.18.3, VIII.3.3), and Ge/Re adduce V.12.1 for gir- as well: gíram bhare vr̥ṣabhā́ ya pratīcī ́ m. As was noted above, in 2 of its 4 occurrences the “eager wife” simile has speech/praise as its comparandum, so in fact that simile in our b works best with the hymns in d: these hymns face towards you, like an eager wife to(wards) her husband.

Bloomfield discusses the simile at length ad I.124.7. He is rather sour about our passage: the construction is “very loose indeed”; “the metaphor limps decidedly.” Contra Bl I consider the deployment of the simile here as an example of the poet’s extreme cleverness, with the simile applicable to every single entity in the vs. To reflect the polyvalent status of the simile, the publ. tr. should probably be changed to “(It is / we are / you are / they are) like …,” though this would be very clumsy.

As for párivīta- ‘enveloped’ in c, the question is what Agni is enveloped in. It could be the paridhi sticks that surround the ritual fire (see, e.g., Ge ad I.128.1, endorsed for that passage by Thieme [Unters. 19]); WG suggest dawn’s light or hymns; Old (SBE) offerings and prayers. It’s useful to note that párivīta- occurs twice with the loc. of yóni-: once in an Agni hymn X.46.6 párivīto yónau sīdad antáḥ (note √sad here as well) and once in the riddle hymn I.164.32 sá mātúr yónā párivīto antáḥ, so that the two concepts seem to be connected (“enveloped within the womb”).

This could fit the paridhi sticks forming a border of the fireplace conceived as a womb. It might also refer to the kindling sticks, within which fire is hidden until he is ignited (/born), hence also his womb. There is another important parallel in nearby  1.7 ananté antáḥ párivīta ā́gāt “enveloped within the limitless, he has come here”; see comm. there. On the multiple meanings of párivīta- in Agni context, see Thieme (Unters., 19-20).

Modern tr. (almost) universally take the voc. svapāka- as ‘having a lovely backside’ vel sim., related to ápāñc- ‘turned backwards’ and here implicitly contrasting with pratīcī́ḥ ‘turned towards, facing’. The one exception is Old, who in SBE (1897) tr. “O most skilful one,” an interpr. that he swiftly disavowed (ZDMG 55 [1901]: 301 [=KlSch. 760]) as “nicht zu denken” -- without admitting he had in fact thought it previously. Nonetheless, I think this is a more appealing interpr. than the current standard. I take it as built to a negated á-pāka- ‘not naïve, not callow’ to pā́ka- ‘naïve, callow, simple’ -- like ámūra- ‘not stupid’: mūrá- ‘stupid’. ámūra- is found three times in the Agni hymns of this maṇḍala (IV.4.12, 6.2, 11.5), always of Agni. The semantically similar ádṛpita- ‘undistracted’ in the next pāda (3a) supports this interpr. There are two other occurrences of svápāka- (VI.11.4, 12.2), both analyzed by the Pp as sú ápāka- (both adduced by Old, SBE), both modifying Agni.

In neither case does a “having a lovely backside” impose (or even suggest) itself, and I propose to include them under this stem.
