+++
title = "03"

+++
Ge takes the voc. vedhaḥ as the poet’s self-address, which is certainly possible; he is commanding himself to recite (śaṃsa). This does not solve the question of the person of the verb īḷé in d. Although this form is universally rendered (incl. in the publ. tr) as a 3rd sg. (and analyzed, because of its accent, as the only perfect form to this root, against root pres. ī́ḷe, ī́ṭṭe; see Kü 122), it could of course also be a 1st sg. pf., with sótā an appositive to the underlying 1st ps. subj. (“I the presser”). Since the surrounding vss. (2 and 4) have explicit 1st persons (though pl.), I would be inclined to emend the publ. tr. to “whom I, the presser, invoke …” Pāda d plays on the standard Rigvedic notion that the soma-pressing stones are very noisy and that their noise is like that of the priestly recitation and singing happening at the same time. The question here is which of the three terms in the phrase grā́veva sótā madhuṣút belongs to the simile and which to the frame. On the basis of X.64.15 grā́vevā yátra madhuṣúd ucyáte bṛhát, I take grā́vā … madhuṣút “the honey-pressing (pressing) stone” as a discontinuous simile, with the frame represented by sótā in between. Ge, Re, WG, Kü (122), and Scar (615) take the simile to be grā́veva sótā and the frame madhuṣút; Old (SBE) confines the simile to grā́vā with the frame sótā madhuṣút. Either of these configurations avoids a discontinuous simile, but such similes are not rare and the phraseology of X.64.15 supports my analysis. Little rests on it, however.

