+++
title = "06"

+++
Note that all four pādas rhyme: agne# (a), śubhaṃyé# (b), kṣé# (c), nṛghné (d); also 7ab pūṣṇé# … havirdé#, an unusual effect in RVic verse.

The so-called “double stem” vṛdhasāná- is morphologically anomalous, but belongs to a fairly large group of stems with apparent middle part. in -asāná-. This is not the place to treat the origin of these stems at length, but, with Insler (KZ 82 [1968]), I think the starting point is sahasāná- (5x, 4x of Agni) ‘displaying might’, which he takes as a metathesized form of a pf. mid. part. *sasahāná-, beside sāsahāná- (1x) and the younger type sehāná- (3x). This metathesis was reinforced by the very common s-stem sáhas-, and several other -asāná-stems have s-stems alongside (śavasāná-: śávas-, rabhasāná-: rábhas-, jrayasāná-: jráyas-) and fall into the same general semantic field of strength, power, or violent action (though not one of the best attested, mandasāná- ‘becoming exhilarated’ nor, e.g., dhiyasāná- [2x]).

There is unfortunately no neut. s-stem *vṛ́dhas-, though there is a single attestation of an infinitival dat. vṛdháse with suffixal accent. See also disc. of vṛdhasnú- ad IV.2.3.

Pāda c is problematic, both metrically (it lacks a syllable) and grammatically: this is the only place in the RV where nā́satya- appears in the sg., not the du., and the identity of pāda-final kṣé is disputed. The metrical problem and the kṣé problem can be easily solved together if we adopt the suggestion of Hoffmann registered in Schindler (Root nouns, s.v. kṣā́-) that kṣé is a haplologized form of datival inf. *yakṣé ‘to appear’ in the environment (nā́sati )yāya [ya]kṣé. (Note that yakṣám ‘apparition’ appears in 13a.) This interpr. is also reflected in WG’s rendering, and one way or other it goes back to Ludwig; see Old (SBE, Noten). The publ. tr. should have an asterisk before “to appear.” As for sg. nā́satyāya, although this analysis is emphatically rejected by both Old (Noten) and Debrunner (AiG II.2.136), I have adopted Henry’s old suggestion that the form is a vṛddhi adj. of appurtanance whose vṛddhi is invisible because the base already has initial-syllable vṛddhi. We would of course expect the accent to shift to the final syllable (AiG II.2.133ff.), hence *nāsatyá-, but the dominance of the initially accented noun could have altered the accent, possibly redactionally. I supply ‘chariot’ in this dat. expression, since the Aśvins’ chariot is esp. prominent and párijman- modifies their chariot elsewhere (I.20.3, X.41.1). Cf. esp. I.20.3 tákṣan nā́satyābhyām párijmanaṃ sukháṃ rátham “They fashioned the earth-circling wellnaved chariot for the Nāsatyas.”



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/04/003/05-08.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>