+++
title = "09"

+++
Re (explicitly) and Ge (implicitly) supply as the verb of ab voḷhám ‘convey’ from 10c. This is not impossible, and the duplication of some vocabulary (9a gómatīr íṣa(ḥ): 10 gómantam … rayím … áśvāvatir íṣaḥ) may favor it. But the two verses belong to different tṛcas, a fact that should disfavor such automatic filling in the blanks. I in fact think that ab can be construed with c. That pāda asks the gods to “unfasten” the paths (ví patháḥ … sitam), in other words, to make the way clear, for winning (sātáye). The dat. infinitive sātáye frequently takes an accusative of what is to be won (among many exx., cf., e.g., IX.88.2 purū́ṇi sātáye vásūni). I see no reason why the accusatives of ab cannot be the object of this infinitive; with the acc. in b, sātī́ḥ, we would have not only a cognate accusative construction, but one involving two forms of the same stem. Alternatively the accusatives in ab could serve as objects of ví … sitam, thus parallel to patháḥ. Cf. VIII.23.29, where both accusatives found here are the objects of ápā vṛdhi ‘uncover’, semantically similar to ví … sitam: VIII.23.29bc tváṃ no gómatīr íṣaḥ / mahó rāyáḥ sātím agne ápā vṛdhi “Uncover for us refreshments consisting of cows and the winning of great wealth, o Agni.” Hence in our passage “(Unfasten) refreshments and winnings; unfasten the paths for winning.” See further disc. ad vs. 21 below, which lends additional support to the 2nd alternative.

The epithet aharvíd- (4x, twice in this hymn) can contain either √vid ‘know’ or √vid ‘find’. Ge (and Gr) opt for the former, with Ge generalizing it to ‘Zeitkenner’.

Scar (480-81) considers either possible, though his tr. reflect the former. In I.2.2 and I.156.4 I choose ‘know’, because both passages seem to involve knowledge of the ritual day, but esp. in the latter I recognize the possibility of ‘find’. (See comm. thereon.) By contrast the publ. tr. of this hymn has ‘find’ for both occurrences. I do not feel strongly either way, but since this hymn begins with the Aśvins accompanying Dawn (vss. 1-2) and the immediately preceding vs. (8) has a mention of their traversing the nights, I mildly favor ‘find’, expressing the Aśvins’ advent in the early morning, bringing the daylight with them. Note also svarvidā ‘finders of the sun’ of the Aśvins in nearby VIII.8.7. This latter well-attested cmpd. seems universally to be analysed as containing ‘find’, not ‘know’; cf. Scar 491-92.

