+++
title = "03"

+++
It is appropriate that the goat, if it “represents all forms” (see disc. of the previous vs.), should belong to all the gods. That it should also be “Pūṣan’s portion” (pūṣṇó bhāgáḥ, 3b and 4c) probably follows from the fact that Pūṣan “has goats for horses” (ajā́śva-: 5x, always of Pūṣan) and is generally associated with goats.

As for Tvaṣṭar’s involvement, Ge (sim. WG) simply says that Tvaṣṭar is the creator esp. of animals, but I think there is a tighter connection. Tvaṣṭar is a required presence in the Āprī hymns, the litanies that accompany the animal sacrifice. The verse devoted to him in each hymn occurs immediately before the “Lord of the Forest,” namely the stake to which the sacrificial animal is tied, releases the animal for sacrifice. Just before that, Tvaṣṭar both produces life (e.g., II.3.9, III.4.9-VII.2.9) and assists at the sacrifice (V.5.9), escorting the sacrificial animal to the gods (X.70.9) or at least pointing the way (II.3.9). Most strikingly Tvaṣṭar is once called viśvárūpa- (I.13.10) and several times enacts that epithet dramatically: I.188.9 tváṣṭā rūpā́ṇi hí prabhúḥ paśū́n víśvān samānajé “Because preeminent Tvaṣṭar anointed all the beasts (with) their forms”; X.110.9 rūpaír ápiṃśad bhúvanāni víśvā “he adorned all the creatures with their forms.” In our verse Tvaṣṭar stimulates/quickens the goat immediately before its sacrifice and indeed for its sacrifice, and that goat has just been characterized as viśvárūpa-. Thus Tvaṣṭar’s constant appearance in the Āprī hymns shows that this god has a defined role in the animal sacrifice, and that role, somewhat paradoxically, involves both giving life and setting the stage for taking it away by sacrifice. This is less of a paradox in the conceptual context of the animal sacrifice: as noted in the publ. intro., a good deal of this hymn is devoted to reconstituting the sacrificed horse and endowing it with life-breath. Tvaṣṭar thus has a role in both, and we see it here first in connection with the goat that represents all creatures. Tvaṣṭar recurs in vs. 19 below.

