+++
title = "09"

+++
Pāda b, pávamāna vídharmaṇi, is found three times (here, IX.4.9, and IX.100.7) in three different syntactic contexts, so this has to be the constituency: the voc. plus the loc. Re takes the ‘speech’ (vā́cam) from pāda a as the implicit subject of vídharmaṇi (“pour qu’elle se répande au loin”), but because speech is lacking in the other occurrences of the pāda, this cannot be correct. Most helpful for the interpr. is the fuller expression in IX.86.30 (also adduced by Ober II.152) tvám pavítre rájaso vídharmaṇi ... pavamāna pūyase “You, selfpurifying soma, are purified in the filter, in the spreading expanse of space ...,” where the spread of the soma liquid across the fleece filter is compared to the spread (probably of light) in cosmic space (rájas-).

The simile in the third pāda, ákrān devó ná sū́ryaḥ “you have roared like the Sungod,” is abrupt in its imagery, in that roaring is not the first quality we associate with the sun. There are several ways to account for the phraseology. In Old’s view (fld by Lü 258), the shared quality of Soma and Sun is not expressed by the verb, which is independent of the simile. This independence would be comparable to that found in the preceding hymn, IX.63.13, where the same simile (sómo devó ná sū́ryaḥ) is found, with a different but equally incompatible verb phrase ádribhiḥ … sutáḥ “pressed by stones,” which is certainly not true of the Sun. This is the easiest solution. Ge (n. 9c) suggests rather that it’s a condensed comparison to the Sun’s horse (sim. Ober I.224). In my view, Old’s interpr. is strictly correct, but I think the poet, by juxtaposing the simile with an apparently inappropriate verb, is forcing the striking image of a roaring Sun, which both works as a kind of synaesthesia (the intense brightness of the sun is experienced as intense noise) and imposes a third intermediate term, a horse or bull, to which both the Sun and Soma are compared.
