+++
title = "07"

+++
This vs. continues the overabundance of sá from the last vs., esp. in the 2nd hemistich, with initial sá and post-caesura sá in c and initial sá in d, in addition to the one opening the vs. Each of these sá is associated with a different instr. phrase or phrases. The one in the first hemistich has the capacious bipartite majmánā … ámartyena nā́mnā embedded in a full clause with the verb prá sarsre; the two in pāda c occur only with instrumentals (dyumnéna in the opening and the conjoined śávasotá rāyā́after the caesura); the one in d has only a single instr. (vīryèṇa) but is part of a clause again, though with a pred. adj. sámokaḥ, not a finite verb. Since the structure of this vs. is like that of vs. 6, the question again arises as to where to attach c (or the two parts of c). Flg. Ge I take all of c with d, construing all the instrumentals with sámokaḥ ‘at home (with)’. But I now see that, because the structures in c are minimal, it could as well go with ab (or the first half with ab, the second with d). This would produce alternative translations “Through his greatness and his immortal name he extended himself, (and also) through his brilliance and his power and wealth. He is at home with heroism.” or even “Through his greatness and his immortal name he extended himself, (and also) through his brilliance; he is at home with power and wealth and with heroism.” (This last, with the first part of c leaning backward and the 2nd leaning forward, would mimic my interpr. of vs. 6.) Again I do not see a way to decide the question, but I think it’s worth noting how the poet has cleverly constructed pāda c so that it is ambig.

