+++
title = "09"

+++
udā́vatā is read udávatā by the Pp. and is generally considered the instr. of the pres. act. part. of úd √av ‘help’, with metrical lengthening (so explicitly Lub), a lengthening that is unmotivated. It is also the case that úd is not especially common with √av, though I concede that the six passages I’m aware of make this an established usage. I also find it surprising that there is no preverb with tiṣṭha in the expression in b, rátham … tiṣṭha “mount the chariot,” since this expression is almost always found with preverb, generally ā́, also ádhi. I therefore wonder if the initial string in pāda a is actually concealing the preverb(s), in tmesis: ud-ā́, followed by the uncompounded pres. part. ávatā. This analysis is responsible for my tr. “up and mount …” I realize, however, that a number of objections can be raised. The combination ud-ā́doesn’t otherwise occur with √sthā, but I would point out that both occur with that root individually. Two further potential problems: 1) two preverbs next to each other in tmesis, rather than the usual single one. I confess I do not know of other examples. 2) the accentuation: the accented vowels of ā́and ávatā would coalesce, resulting in a single udātta -- this is unproblematic -- but the lack of accent on ud looms larger. Here I rely on Macdonell’s observation (VGS, p. 469) that when ā́is immediately preceded by another preverb, ā́alone has the accent. In Macdonell’s formulation this applies (only) to these sequences when compounded with verbs; I would here extend that to the same sequence in tmesis. This may be too much machinery to deploy simply in order to account for the surprising, supposed metrical lengthening of udā́vatā and the surprising lack of preverb with tiṣṭha, but it seems worth considering. Alternatively, it could be that udā́vatā is a cmpded pres. part., but cmpded not only with úd, but also ā́. This is the solution of Rivelex (I.541), and it may be the best compromise, though ā́is not otherwise found with √av, as far as I know. (I have not been able to find the ā́+√av claimed by Rivelex in the head note on p. 538, and in the claimed prá ā́passage (VIII.23.2), ā́is a postposition, as is more or less admitted p. 543 n. 1.) The ca in the instr. phrase in pāda a seems pleonastic, and if it is implicitly connecting the two adj. modifying tvákṣasā, viz. ávatā (or udā́vatā) and pányasā (Klein DGRV I.71 “aiding and wondrous”), they seem ill-assorted semantically. I wonder if it is meant to connect the first ADJ.-NOUN pair with a 2nd, with gapping of the noun modified by pányasā (“with your helpful energy and ever more admirable X”). But there is no standard pányas- NOUN formula, so I will not pursue this.

In d Old (Noten) and Ge assume that the māyā́ḥ are negative magical wiles that belong to Indra’s opponents. A negative valuation of māyā́- is of course common, and is clear in the nearby passage VI.22.9, where a pāda almost identical to our c, urging Indra to take his mace in hand, precedes one in which he is urged to destroy māyā́ḥ (VI.22.9cd dhiṣvá vájraṃ dákṣiṇa indra háste, víśvā ajurya dayase ví māyā́ḥ) -

- though see comm. ad loc: a secondary positive reading is also possible. This
parallel is an important piece of evidence for both Old’s and Ge’s assessment of māyā́ḥ here. However, this reasonable interpr. ignores one major factor in our passage: the verb abhí prá manda. This lexeme occurs a number of times elsewhere (V.4.1, VII.33.1, VIII.12.13, 93.19), and it is always otherwise positive: act.

‘exhilarate’, mid. ‘become exhilarated’. A negative interpr. of māyā́ḥ requires a serious distortion of the meaning of the verb (e.g., Old’s ‘verwirren’, adopted from BR), whereas assuming the māyā́ḥ belong to Indra allows it to have a small extension of its usual sense: ‘exhilarate’ à ‘stimulate’. Just as soma exhilarates and stimulates Indra for the Vṛtra-smashing, so does Indra exhilarate and stimulate his own powers.

Old in fact previously (ZDMG 55.323) made a good case that the māyā́ḥ are Indra’s, third in a list of his Kampfmittel that includes the chariot of b and the mace of c, and he suggested a tr. “Setze deine Wunderkräfte in freudige Erregung” very much like mine. He attributes his change of heart in the Noten to VI.22.9 just cited and to his consideration of “Der Gesamteindruck des Auftretens von māyā́ḥ in den Indraliedern.” But, in fact, he overlooked one very crucial occurrence, in this very hymn: in vs. 12 Indra himself is called purumāyá- ‘having many magical powers’ (cf. also nearby VI.21.2 and 22.1 in this same Indra cycle, also III.51.4). This seems to me clinching evidence against the Ge/Old interpr. of our d: Indra has many māyā́- and he deploys them to achieve his ends. (Gotō [1st Kl., 236 n. 521] finds the passage puzzling, but does try to reconcile it with the usage of the verb, not entirely successfully.)

