+++
title = "13"

+++
This vs. is structurally reminiscent of vs. 8. Like there, we have a clause occupying the first pāda (both ending in bhū́t/bhūt, as it happens), with (most of) b belonging to a different but radically incomplete clause, containing a marooned set of accusative PNs whose fate at the hands of Indra is well known. Pāda c continues with other accusative victims of Indra, but also provides a verb to govern them. In both vss. the names in the b clause have a well-known and quite specific outcome at Indra’s hands: Cumuri and Dhuni in 8b were put to sleep by Indra, to weaken them for a death blow administered by someone else; as for our vs., acdg. to I.53.10 Indra made Kutsa, Āyu, and Atithigva subject (arandhanāyaḥ) to Tūrvayāṇa, who also appears by name in our pāda d. In both 8b and 13b the publ. tr. follows the same strategy: co-opting the verb in c (vṛṇák in 8, ní śiśāḥ in 13) to govern not only the accusatives in its own pāda but also those in pāda b. This is syntactically a bit more complex in our vs. because b is a relative clause (with yád) so the unaccented verb of c cannot be applied to it directly. I still think this is the correct strategy in 8 and probably also here as well, but the presence of dat. asmai in b along with its likely referent tū́rvayāṇam in d makes me wonder if Ge (n. 13b) may be right in simply supplying the verb found in the very phrase in I.53.10 tvám asmai kútsam atithigvám āyúm, … arandhanāyaḥ, despite the isolation of that passage and its distance from ours. (Alternatively we could use árdayaḥ, which governs the same three names in VIII.53.2, but there is no dat. there; and it is likewise isolated and distant.) Old (both ZDMG 55.323 and Noten) is also in favor of supplying such a verb. Note in passing that unaccented asyai in our b presupposes a referent already in the discourse, so it must be anticipating tū́rvayāṇam in d. For Tūrvayāṇa cf. the simile tū́rvan ná yā́man in nearby VI.15.5 with disc. ad loc. 