+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Now once on a time the gods, while performing sacrifice, were afraid of an attack from the Asura-Rakshas. They said, 'Who of us shall sit on the south side; we will then enter upon the sacrifice on the north side in a place free from danger and injury.'

## 02
2. They said, 'He who is the strongest of us, let him sit on the south side; we will then enter upon the sacrifice on the north side in a place free from danger and injury.'

## 03
3. They said, 'Verily, Indra is the strongest of us: let Indra sit on the south side; we will then enter upon the sacrifice on the north side in a place free from danger and injury.'

## 04
4. They said to Indra, 'Verily, thou art the strongest of us: sit thou on the south side; we will then enter upon the sacrifice on the north side in a place free from danger and injury.'

## 05
5. He said, 'What will be my reward then?'--'The office of Brāhmaṇācḥaṁsin shall be thine, the

 Brahmasāman [^fn_1006] shall be thine!'--Hence one elects the Brāhmaṇācḥaṁsin with, 'Indra is the Brahman, by virtue of the Brahmaship!' for to Indra belongs this (office). Indra sat on the south side, and they entered upon the sacrifice on the north side in a place free from danger and injury. Therefore let him who is the strongest sit on the south side, and let them then enter upon the sacrifice on the north side in a place free from danger and injury. Now he, forsooth, who is the most learned of Brāhmans, is the strongest of them; and as now any one is (able to become) a (superintendent) Brahman [^fn_1007]--nay, does he not sit still?--therefore whosoever is the strongest

[^fn_1006]: 434:1 That is, the Sāman which supplies the text for the Stotra chanted in connection with the Brāhmaṇācḥaṁsin's Sastra, and forming the Stotriya verse of the latter. Thus, at the midday savana, the (Pr̥shṭḥa) Stotra of that priest usually consists of the Naudhasa-sāman (Sāma-veda II, 35-36), if the Rathantara-sāman (Sāma-vela II, 30-31) is used for the Hotr̥'s Stotra; but, if the Br̥hat-sāman (ib. II, 159-160) is used for the latter, then the Śyaita-sāman (II, 161-2) is used as the Brahma-sāman. See p. 339, note 2. The reason, however, why special mention is made of the Brāhmaṇācḥaṁsin in this place, probably is that at the Gavām ayana the Brahma-sāman is treated in a peculiar way. For, while on 142 days of the first half of the year,--viz. on the Caturviṁśa, on all (6 × 23) Ābhiplavika days and on the three Svara-sāman days,--one and the same tune, the Abhīvarta-sāman, is to be used day by day, but each time with a different pragātha stanza (thus the pragātha S. V. II, 35-36, usually chanted to the Naudhasa tune, being on this occasion chanted to the Abhīvarta tune); on the corresponding days of the second half of the year, one and the same stanza, 'Indra kratuṁ na ā bhara' (S. V. II, 806-7), is to be used day by day, but with different tunes (six such being given in the Calc. ed. vol. iv, pp. 529-34). Tāṇḍya Br. IV, 3, 1 seq.

[^fn_1007]: 434:2 According to XII, 6, I, 40 only priests of the Vasishṭḥa family could become Brahmans, or superintendent priests, in olden times; because they alone knew the Somabhāga mantras; but now every one learns them, and can therefore become a Brahman.

of them, let him sit on the south side, and let them then enter upon the sacrifice on the north side in a place free from danger and injury. Hence Brāhmans sit on the south side (of the vedi), and they enter upon the sacrifice on the north side in a place free from danger and injury.

## 06
6. When (the Prastotr̥) says, 'Brahman, we will chant, O Praśāstar!' then the Brahman mutters (Vāj.. S. II, 12), 'This thy sacrifice, O divine Savitar, have they announced unto Br̥haspati (the lord of prayer), the Brahman [^fn_1008]: therefore speed the sacrifice, speed the lord of the sacrifice, speed me [^fn_1009]!--Praise ye at the impulse (prasava) of Savitr̥!' The significance is the same (as before) [^fn_1010]. With this (text) must probably enter upon (the chant).

[^fn_1008]: 435:1 Mahīdhara interprets, 'This sacrifice, O divine Savitar, they announce to thee and to Br̥haspati, the Brahman.' Perhaps the correct meaning (though not that assumed by the Brāhmaṇa) is, 'This sacrifice they announce to thee as the Br̥haspati, the Brahman!' and similarly the mantra in the next paragraph.

[^fn_1009]: 435:2 The Kāṇva text adds here the verse Vāj. S. II, 13; see Śat. Br. I, 7, 4, 22, with the same various reading 'gyotir.'

[^fn_1010]: 435:3 See I, 7, 4, 21. Asau nvaivaitasya yajusho bandhur ya evāsau darśapūrṇamāsayoḥ; Kāṇva text.

## 07
7. But one may also enter upon it with, 'O divine Savitar; this, O Br̥haspati, forwards!' Therewith he hastes to Savitr̥ for his impulsion, for he is the impeller (prasavitr̥) of the gods; and 'O Br̥haspati, forwards!' he says, because Br̥haspati is the Brahman of the gods,--thus he announces it to him who is the Brahman of the gods: therefore he says, 'O Br̥haspati, forwards [^fn_1011]!'

[^fn_1011]: 435:4 On 'pra' see part i, p. 301 note.

## 08
8. The Maitrāvaruṇa then mutters, 'Impelled

by the divine Savitr̥, acceptable to Mitra and Varuṇa!' Therewith he hastes to Savitr̥ for his impulsion, for he is the impeller of the gods; and 'acceptable to Mitra and Varuṇa' he says, because Mitra and Varuṇa are the deities of the Maitrāvaruṇa (Praśāstr̥),--thus he announces it to those who are the deities of the Maitrāvaruṇa: therefore he says, 'acceptable to Mitra and Varuṇa.'

