+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Now the consecration-ceremony [^fn_1018] (for the sacrificial session) is a sitting down, is a session (sattra): hence they say of them, 'they sit.' And when thereafter they perform the sacrifice, then they (under)go; then he, who is the leader, leads: hence they say of them, 'they (under)go [^fn_1019].'

[^fn_1018]: For the Dīkshā see  seq. In the Kāṇva text I have found nothing corresponding to the present Brāhmaṇa.

[^fn_1019]: That is to say, the verb 'i' (to go; more especially its compound upa-i, to undergo, go through, undertake) is used of sacrificial performances in the Sattra lasting for twelve (pressing) days and upward, to distinguish the latter from the ahīna-sacrifices, lasting for from two to twelve (pressing) days.

## 02
2. The consecration-ceremony, then, is a sitting down, it is a session, it is an (under)going, it is the (under)going of a session. And when afterwards, having reached the end of the sacrifice, they rise, that is 'the rising:' hence they say of them, 'They have risen.' So much, then, for preliminary remark.

## 03
3. Now those who are about to consecrate themselves settle (the time and place) between them. If they intend to construct a fire-altar, they take up their (ordinary sacrificial) fires on churning-sticks [^fn_1020] and betake themselves together to where they are about to perform the animal offering to Prajāpati. Having churned (the fire), and put fire-wood on, they take out the Āhavanīya fire, and perform that animal offering to Prajāpati.

[^fn_1020]: That is to say, they hold their churning-sticks to the fires to get warm; see part i, p. 396, note 1.

## 04
4. Its head they keep [^fn_1021]. If their consecration does not fall upon that same day (of the animal offering), then, taking up the fires (again) on the churning-sticks, they disperse to their several (homes) and perform the (daily) offerings.

[^fn_1021]: The head of the victim (or victims, see VI, 2, 1 seq.) will have to be put in the bottom layer of the fire-altar, to impart stability to the latter.

## 05
5. But if their consecration falls upon that same day, then, taking up the fires (again) on the churning-sticks, they betake themselves to where they intend to perform the consecration-ceremony. The Gr̥hapati [^fn_1022] churns (his fire) first somewhere about the centre of the hall; and one half of the others settle down south and one half north of him. Having

[^fn_1022]: See , note . At a Sattra the Gr̥hapati, as well as all the other r̥tvig, should be a Brahman; Kāty. I, 6, 13-16.

churned (their fires), and put on fire-wood, they take one fire-brand each and betake themselves together to the Gr̥hapati's Gārhapatya fire. Having taken out the Āhavanīya from the Gr̥hapati's Gārhapatya, they perform the consecration-ceremony. They have one and the same Āhavanīya, but different Gārhapatyas, during the consecration and the Upasads [^fn_1023].

[^fn_1023]: At Sattras there are usually twelve Upasad days. See , note . Ait. Br. IV, 24 enjoins twelve days for the Dīkshā and as many for the Upasads of the Dvādaśāha. Kāty. XII, 1, 19; 2, 14 gives no special rule regarding the duration of the Dīkshā, but enjoins twelve Upasads. See also Lāṭy. III, 3, 27; Āśv. VI, 1, 2.

## 06
6. Then, on whatever day their purchase (of Soma-plants) takes place, on that day he raises the Gārhapatya hearth; and on the Upavasatha day [^fn_1024] the dhishṇya hearths for the others. At the time of the Vaisarjina [^fn_1025] offerings, the wives come forward together and they (the sacrificers) abandon those other (Gārhapatya) fires [^fn_1026]. As soon as the Vaisarjina offering has been performed,--

[^fn_1024]: The day before the first pressing day.

[^fn_1025]: See  seq.

[^fn_1026]: Or, those minor (? western) fires, viz. they extinguish those south and north of the Gr̥hapati's Gārhapatya; or (optionally) also the latter, it being again supplied by the fire-brand from the Sālādvārya fire. Cf. Kāty. XII, 1, 25-26.

## 07
7. He leads forward the king (Soma). That Āgnīdhrīya fire has just been taken up on the support [^fn_1027], when they take one fire-brand each (from the fire at the hall-door) and disperse to their several dhishṇya hearths: 'They who do so,' said Yājñavalkya, 'slay with those fire-brands of theirs.' This now is one way.

[^fn_1027]: See  seq.

## 08
8. Then there is this second. Having taken up their fires on churning-sticks, they betake themselves to where they intend to perform the animal offering to Prajāpati. Having churned (the fire), and put on (fire-wood), they take out the Āhavanīya and perform that animal offering to Prajāpati.

## 09
9. Its head they keep. If their consecration does not fall upon the same day, then, taking up the fires (again) on the churning-sticks, they disperse to their several (homes), and perform (the ordinary) offerings.

## 10
10. But if their consecration falls upon the same day, then, taking up the fires (again) on the churning-sticks, they betake themselves to where they intend to perform the consecration-ceremony. The Gr̥hapati churns first, and then the others churn, seated round about him, and throw each the (fire) produced by him on the Gr̥hapati's Gārhapatya. Having taken out the Āhavanīya from the Gr̥hapati's Gārhapatya, they perform the Dīkshā. Theirs is the same Āhavanīya and the same Gārhapatya during the consecration and the Upasads.

## 11
11. Then, on whatever day their purchase (of Soma-plants) takes place, on that day he piles up the Gārhapatya hearth, and on the Upavasatha day the dhishṇya hearths for the others. At the time of the Vaisarjina offerings the wives come forward together; they (the sacrificers) abandon that (common Gārhapatya) fire. As soon as the Vaisarjina offering has taken place,--

## 12
12. He leads forward the king. That Āgnīdhrīya fire has just been taken up on the support, when they take one fire-brand each and disperse to their several dhishṇya hearths. But those who do it thus, raise

up strife, and strife comes upon them; they become contentious, and, moreover, strife comes upon that community where they sacrifice. This is the second way.

## 13
13. Then there is this third. They commune with each other over the Gr̥hapati's churning-sticks,--'What fire shall be produced therefrom, be that ours in common! what we shall gain by this sacrifice, by this animal offering, be that ours in common! In common be our good work! whosoever shall do evil, be that his alone!' Having thus spoken, the Gr̥hapati first takes up (the fire on the churning-sticks) for himself, then he takes it up for the others, or they take it [^fn_1028] up for themselves. They betake themselves to where they intend to perform the animal offering to Prajāpati. Having churned (the fire) and put on (fire-wood), they take out the Āhavanīya and perform that animal offering to Prajāpati.

[^fn_1028]: Or, according to Kāty. XII, 2, 8-9, each takes up two fires, viz. his own and that of the Gr̥hapati.

## 14
14. Its head they keep. If their consecration does not fall on the same day, then, taking up (again) the fires on the churning-sticks, they disperse to their several (homes), and perform (the ordinary) offerings.

## 15
15. But if their consecration falls on the same day, they commune with each other over the Gr̥hapati's churning-sticks,--'What fire shall be produced therefrom, be that ours in common! what we shall gain by this sacrifice, by this session, be that ours in common! In common be our good work! Whosoever shall do evil, be that his alone!' Having thus spoken, the Gr̥hapati first takes up (the fire) on the churning-sticks for himself, then he takes it up for

the others, or they take it up for themselves. They betake themselves to where they intend to perform the consecration-ceremony. Having churned (the fire) and put on (fire-wood), they take out the Āhavanīya and perform the consecration-ceremony. Theirs is the same Āhavanīya and the same Gārhapatya during the consecration and the Upasads.

## 16
16. And on whatever day their purchase (of Soma-plants) takes place, on that day he piles up the Gārhapatya hearth, and on the Upavasatha day the dhishṇya hearths for the others. At the time of the Vaisarjina offerings the wives come forward together; and they (the sacrificers) abandon that (Gārhapatya) fire. As soon as the Vaisarjina offering has been performed,

## 17
17. He leads forward the king. That Āgnīdhrīya fire has just been taken up on the support, when they take one fire-brand each and disperse to their several dhishṇya hearths. Thus is this done, and not (left) undone. The reason why they have different dhishṇyas, is that there may be wider space for moving about; and why they have different puroḍāśas [^fn_1029], is that more sacrificial food may be left over for completeness.

[^fn_1029]: The usual Savanīya-puroḍāśas () are to be offered separately on each fire.

## 18
18. Now then the sacrificial session is explained, whereby the gods quickly drove out evil, and gained the supreme authority which they now wield: having one Gr̥hapati, one puroḍāśa, one dhishṇya, they quickly drove out mischief and quickly were born again. And in like manner will these (sacrificers), by having one Gr̥hapati, one puroḍāśa, one dhishṇya, quickly drive out evil and be born again.

## 19
19. Now, in that former case, there is a hall with the roof-beams running from south to north [^sbe2678.htmfn_1030],--that is human practice. There are one and the same Āhavanīya, and different Gārhapatyas--that is dissimilar. On the Gr̥hapati's Gārhapatya they perform the Patnīsaṁyājas with the tail (of the victim), and the others sit offering in response with ghee--that is dissimilar:

## 20
20. But here there is a hall with the roof-beams running from west to east [^sbe2678.htmfn_1031]: that is as with the gods. There are the same Āhavanīya, the same Gārhapatya, and the same Āgnīdhrīya: thus this sacrificial session is successful, even as the one day's Soma-sacrifice was successful, there is no failure for it. Its course is one and the same in everything except the dhishṇyas.

