+++
title = "07"

+++
(Saying,) “Feel me up—keep going further. Don’t belittle my “little  things [=private parts].  
I am entirely hairy, like a little ewe of the Gandhāris.”  
Hymns I.127–139 are attributed to Paruchepa Daivodāsi. This poet is especially  fond of the long and elaborate atyaṣṭi meter, consisting of seven pādas, generally  arranged in three groups: 12 12 8 / 8 8 / 12 8. The eight-syllable pādas that end the  first and third “lines” (that is, pādas c and g) generally ring changes on the pāda  that precedes, by repetition of the last word(s), by lexical substitution of synonyms,  or by syntactic complementarity. A simple example of the first is I.127.1c, which  repeats the epithet jātávedasam, which also ended 1b. Lexical substitution is found  in 1g, where sarpíṣaḥ “of the melted butter” replaces ghr̥tásya “of the ghee” in 1f.  Sometimes the “rhyme” pāda contributes material necessary to complete the syntax  established in the preceding pāda. See I.127.2fg, where the rhyme pāda g provides  the verb that must be supplied in the relative clause in pāda f. There are more com plex relationships as well, including what will later be called śleṣas, with a word  or construction having two possible and incompatible readings. A nice example is  I.127.3bc, where the form druhaṃtaráḥ can be analyzed either as druhaṃ-tará “over  
coming deceit” or dru-hantara “better at striking wood,” the former prevailing in  pāda b and the latter, because of the simile “like an axe,” in pāda c. This patterned  variation creates a pleasing effect. (In our translation the three groups of pādas are  separated into three lines, and the rhyme pādas c and g are set off by dashes.)  
Paruchepa is also fond of rare words, sometimes phonetic deformations of  parallel words in the same verse, puns, and contorted syntactic constructions, and  many of the puzzles in his hymns have not been completely solved. But Geldner’s  judgment of his poetry—“wortreich, aber gedankenarm” (rich in words, but poor in  thoughts)—seems harsh and unjustified. These poems are difficult to work through,  but their verbal artistry and intricacy seem to us to provide a more than sufficient  reward.  