+++
title = "+126"

+++
126
Kaksı̣vant’s Da ̄ ̄nastuti
Kakṣīvant Dairghatamasa
7 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 6–7
Kakṣīvant’s last hymn is, to be idiomatic, a humdinger. It details in extravagant  terms the gifts that King Svanaya Bhāvya presented to him, in return for the  fame the poet could bestow on him (see esp. vss. 1d and 2d). The first five verses  list the gifts, especially the (not quite believable) numbers of livestock, given  to Kakṣīvant and his family, the Pajras. The last of these verses (5) ends with  an elaborate simile, not all the details of which are clear, comparing the Pajras  seeking fame with noblemen seeking brides by attending maidens’ Svayaṃvaras  (bridal self-choice ceremonies) with their carts. (The word “cart” [ánas] is spe cialized in the R̥gveda for the vehicle that conveys the bride home.) The phrase  “(the Pajras) sought fame” (5d) provides a ring with the first verse (1d), where  the king, Kakṣīvant’s patron, is “seeking fame,” and brings the dānastuti proper  to a close.
The final two verses (6–7) provide an erotic, indeed rather obscene, appendix,  with a vignette of the poet and one of the girls he received as part of his gift.  Already in verse 3 “ten chariots carrying brides” were mentioned as part of his  loot, and the simile about Svayaṃvaras in verse 5 also helps set up the erotic  atmosphere. Besides the striking simile of a mongoose (kaśīkā, a playful variant  of the poet’s name Kakṣīvant) as sexual partner, verse 6 contains a number of  hapaxes and entirely unclear lexical items, which may well involve phonological  deformation to play on taboo words. (The second half of the verse appears to  allow the word yabh “fuck” to be assembled from parts of several words.) It is a  pity that we understand it as little as we do. The last verse (7) contains the osten sible and crudely seductive speech of the woman herself. Kakṣīvant has indeed  gone out with a bang.