+++
title = "01"

+++
A difficult vs. to construe, esp. the first hemistich. In general I follow Old’s somewhat bold interpr. He points out that pādas a and b are quite parallel, with pāda a #maháś cid … yatáḥ matched by b #maháś cid … tyájasaḥ. He then suggests that the parallelism would be furthered if pāda-final -tár-stem agent noun varūtā́(b) were matched by a similar formation at the end of a, which is possible if we read *etā́ (agent noun to √i ‘go’) rather than etā́n. The final n of the transmitted form would have been acquired from the pāda-initial nasal maháḥ that immediately follows.

Hence my “the one who goes,” which should properly be asterisked in the publ. tr. I have supplied “(before),” to allow it to be construed with the abl. phrase beginning maháḥ. Old sim.: “Selbst eines grossen Gehenden Gänger (d.h. Ueberholer oder dgl.) bist du.” As for the abl. phrase, I assume the referent is the Marut gaṇá- (flock). I also note the bad cadence and tentatively emend yatáḥ ‘going’ to *yātáḥ ‘driving’, although keeping the transmitted form would not appreciably alter my interpr.

semantically. Although Old’s (and my) interpr. requires changing the text, the standard interpr. need to supply extra material and/or juggle the supposed pronoun etā́n, which lacks an obvious referent, and since Old’s way builds on the parallel structures in the verse, I think the textual alteration is worth it.

What to do with marútām in c is the next question. Ge (see n. 1c) construes it with both vedhaḥ and cikitā́n (“Du Meister der Marut, der (sie) kennt”), Re and WG with the latter. However, neither vedhás- nor cikitvā́ṃs- ordinarily shows up with a complement -- though the passage adduced by Ge, I.156.4 mā́rutasya vedhásaḥ with vṛddhi adj., gives me pause, and in the publ. intro. to I.156 I entertain the possibility of a syntagm vedho marútām here. Since all three tr. then construe this gen. pl. also with sumnā́, the only reason to attach it to either or both of the other two words would be its position in the same pāda, which doesn’t seem to me sufficient.

None of the standard tr. renders naḥ in c (though see Tichy [-tar-, p. 192], who does), but the sense of the first clause in cd must be “win the Maruts’ favors for us.” This makes the second clause, “for they [=favors] are dearest to you,” a bit puzzling. Why would Indra, who has been quite disdainful of the Maruts in this hymn cycle, find their favors esp. dear? And if he does, why would he be willing to win them for others? I do not know how to resolve these questions on the basis of the transmitted text, which has verse-final préṣṭḥā, which must therefore be a neut. pl.

(or fem. nom. sg.). I would point out, however, that two hymns before (I.167.10a) we find the phrase vayám adyéndrasya préṣṭḥā, with préṣṭḥā pāda-final, but standing for masc. pl. préṣṭḥāḥ before a voiced sound. It is therefore possible that préṣṭḥā has been adapted from there, without adjusting the sandhi and that it could therefore mean “for they [=Maruts] are dearest to you.” Unfortunately, though this makes better sense, it doesn’t make complete sense, since Indra and the Maruts are depicted as still at loggerheads in this hymn. Perhaps préṣṭḥa- here reflects one of the senses of priyá-, viz. ‘one’s own’. The Maruts would be “most your own” because they have been, and will be again, Indra’s posse. If te in 2a should be rendered as I take it, “your (Maruts),” this provides support for the “most your own” interpr. here.

