+++
title = "03"

+++
Both Ge and Re in different ways separate ṛṣṭí- from the well-attested ‘spear’ word and simply invent an otherwise non-existent stem (Ge ‘Hoheit’, Re ‘exploit’).

Ge justifies this by saying that ‘spear’ doesn’t make sense in context (never a strong argument in RV interpretation, since so many contexts don’t) and that Indra never otherwise has a spear. (Re’s EVP XVII, where the tr. is found, has no notes, so his reasons are lost to us.) Ge then interprets ṛṣṭí- as a v-less form of vṛṣṭí- in I.52.5, 14 of the same meaning (in his opinion, though not others’). Even if Ge’s derivation were more solidly grounded, the presence of ‘spear’ in the preceding two hymns (I.167.3, I.168.4, 5), once with the same verb as here (I.167.3ab mimyákṣa … ṛṣṭíḥ; 169.3a ámyak … ṛṣṭíḥ), makes a separation from ‘spear’ extremely unlikely (as WG recognize). As to what Indra’s spear might be here, I suggest that “fixing a spear” is like planting a flag: it means staking a claim with a physical symbol of power or authority, and Indra has in this way asserted his claim to the sacrifice, despite the Maruts’ counter-claims, symbolized by the (cloud) mass they are sending this way.

Another possibility: although I sternly resist nature-mythology explanations in general (and Indra’s “thunderbolt” in particular), in this context, with the stormproducing Maruts, it may be that a little conceptual flexibility is called for. In I.168.4 the Maruts are credited with lightning as their spears (ṛṣṭividyutaḥ), and in our vs. it is possible that, while the Maruts speed the clouds in b, Indra wields a spear of lightning.

The precise application of cd to ab is unclear. It seems to present two realworld analogues -- one involving fire, the other (in a simile dependent on the first) water -- to the mythological situation in ab, but what do these analogues contribute to interpreting what precedes? Before tackling that question, we must first decide what cd actually means. Ge and Old both take dádhati as a 3rd pl. indic., which requires finding a plural subj. Ge supplies priests and relegates the fire to a simile, presumably marked by cid (which Ge takes a simile marker on a number of occasions, though I do not think it can function that way). Old tries other strategies.

But taking dádhati as a short-vowel 3rd sg. subjunctive allows agníḥ to be subject without problem (so also WG). The point of both the fire and the water examples seems to be that these uncontrollable natural substances can produce unexpectedly positive results and that, though both substances ordinarily destroy matter, sometimes they create it. The “waters make an island” image is perhaps the easier one: when waters wash away large amounts of soil and other material upstream, this material often silts up downstream, forming islands in the river’s delta (as in the Bay of Bengal -- not that the RVic geographic horizon extends that far). It is almost a magical process -- dry land created from flowing liquid -- and provides an appealingly striking paradox. As for the fire image, fire burning in brushwood must be implicitly contrasted here with the normal ritual fire, and the former is potentially destructive. I’m not sure how it makes pleasurable offerings (usually associated with the ritual), perhaps by roasting foodstuffs that happen to be in its path. It’s worth noting that in II.4.7 fire “scorching the brushwood” also “sweetens the ground,” another positive outcome: agníḥ śocíṣmām̐atasā́ni uṣṇán … asvadayan ná bhū́ma.

What does this have to do with Indra and the Maruts? Perhaps in this verse addressed to Indra (note te in a), the poet is suggesting to him that despite their unruly natures the Maruts might turn out to have something to contribute to Indra.

