+++
title = "05"

+++
The construction of this vs. is very problematic and has been much discussed (see, e.g., Old’s long consideration). In the end my interpr. is closest, but not identical, to Re’s, though perhaps not arrived at by the same means.

To deal with the easiest issue first, pace Gr and Ge I do not construe ánu … dadhe together. For one thing ánu √dhā barely exists; moreover a preverb in tmesis is unlikely to move to the end of the preceding pāda (so also Re). Rather, it surely governs preceding immediately ráthān, like similarly pāda-final ródasī ánu in 6c. It can be further noted that ánu is a signature word of this hymn, occurring 6x: 2c, 5a, 6c, 10c, 11c, 16c. With ánu otherwise assigned, the simplex verb dadhe ‘I take my place’ is then easily construed with the purpose dat. mudé.

The real problem in the verse is what to do with pāda c. The easy sense that Ge extracts from it (“die wie die Himmel (Tage) mit Regen kommen”) makes a hash of the grammar. Assuming that he means dyā́vaḥ to be compared with the chariots, with the point of comparison found in the part. ‘coming’ (yatī́ḥ), 1) dyā́vah must be taken as an acc., which is simply impossible; or 2) the alternative to 1) is to assume the whole simile has reverted to the nominative, something that doesn’t happen in RV, as I long ago demonstrated (“Case disharmony…”) though Ge asserts it here (his n. 5c referring to his n. to I.180.3d); 3) the fem. part. yatī́ḥ should modify masc. ráthān or else, by attraction, dyā́vaḥ, which latter is only fem. in the meaning ‘heaven’, not ‘day’.

A way to a solution (or partial solution) comes from recognizing that the fem.

pl. part. yatī́ḥ regularly modifies ‘waters’; cf. ā́paḥ ná pravátā yatī́ḥ VIII.6.34 = 13.8 = IX.24.2, ā́po ádṛśram āyatī́ḥ X.30.13, apā́m árthaṃ yatī́nām. It is therefore quite likely, esp. in this rainy context, that ‘waters’ is gapped here, solving the gender problem -- and also the case problem, because, adding another nominal element to the syntagm allows dyā́vaḥ to take its expected nominative role and respond to the acc. represented by (apó) yatī́ḥ. Re’s tr. reflects this: “comme les cieux (agréent les eaux), qui vont avec la pluie.” The question is then what is the mediating verb? Re’s ‘agréent’ makes sense, but he doesn’t explain where he got it. I think it is possible to generate it from the datival mudé of b, either by simply switching emphasis from the finite verb dadhe to its infinitval complement or, in a trickier move, reading mudé a 2nd time, but this time as a 1st sg. mid. to a root present: √mud has a hapax med. root opt. mudīmahi, and though it is generally classified as a root aor., a root pres. is certainly not excluded. It is worth noting that this opt. is construed with the preverb ánu (VIII.1.14 ánu stómam mudhīmahi). Assuming this lexeme in our c would simplify the rendering of the simile. I therefore suggest a slight alteration to the published translation, to “(I delighting/delight) like the heavens (in the waters) when they come with their rain.” See also disc. ad 10c, which in some ways repairs this problematic passage.

