+++
title = "10"

+++
In some ways this vs. is both a variant and a repair of vs. 5. Like that vs. it begins with an acc. phrase referring to the Maruts’ chariots. Following (ánu) them come the rains: ánu prá yanti vṛṣṭáyaḥ, a variant of 5c vṛṣṭī́… yatī́r iva “(fem. pl. ) coming with their rain,” where I supplied ‘waters’ as the referent of the participle.

The syntax is somewhat different, but the elements are there. In this passage the relationship between the metaphor and the natural world is drawn more clearly: the chariots and the flock of Maruts represent thunder and lightning (see below), which are regularly followed by rain.

While a, c may function as repair, the phrase in b, … gaṇám mā́rutam návyasīnām, introduces a new poetic complication. It is found identically in V.58.1, where it is even more troublesome. The problem is what to supply with gen. pl. fem.

návyasīnām. Ge and Re, rather bizarrely, choose to supply Maruts -- e.g., Ge “der … marutische Schar der neuesten (Marut).” This not only contravenes the unmistakable gender of návyasīnām, but it produces an awkward and clunky pleonastic expression.

It is also unclear to me who the “newer” or “newest” (latter both Ge and Re) Maruts would be: it is generally emphasized that the Maruts are indistinguishable and “there is no last one” (V.58.5). Nonetheless the view that návyasīnām refers to the Maruts is well entrenched. There is no masc. gen. pl. comparative attested in Vedic, and both Lanman (Noun Inflec. 515) and Macd (VG 234) state that the fem. form is used instead in these two passages “in agreement with marútām” (Macd, as if gen. pl.

marútām were actually in the passage), due to “metrical exigencies” (again Macd, but same view expressed by Lanman). The metrical argument is strikingly weak: although neither a putative masc. gen. pl. *návyasām nor *návīyasām built to the alternative comparative stem would fit this exact metrical slot even with distraction of the gen. pl. ending (as here), neither form would have any trouble fitting into other parts of a Vedic metrical line, and it’s difficult to believe that a poet like Śyāvāśva would set his heart on putting a comparative just here and then seriously distort the grammar to shove it in. (Sāy., it should be noted, does not supply Maruts, but still ignores the gender of návyasīnām by glossing it with the grammatically ambiguous nūtanānām and then connecting that gen. pl. with ráthānām in pāda a.) WG have the merit of supplying a fem., namely ‘rains’, borrowed from the vṛṣṭáyaḥ of c. But this again seems pleonastic: why would the rains follow the rains, and indeed why would the (temporally unmarked) rains follow the newer rains? I start by considering what is regularly called ‘newer’. To this there is a ready answer: hymns, songs, formulations, thoughts, etc. -- the standard verbal products celebrated in RVic discourse, several of which are fem. In fact, note that in the next vs. (53.11) two such words are prominently positioned at the ends of pādas: suśastíbhiḥ (11b) ‘good chants’ and dhītíbhiḥ (11c) ‘poetic thoughts’, both of which are elsewhere modified by návyasī-: VIII.5.25 návyasībhiḥ suśastíbhiḥ; I.143.1 ... návyasīṃ dhītím.

I therefore propose that we should supply such a word with návyasīnām in 10b. (In the publ. tr. it is ‘hymns’.) But this produces an odd locution, “the Marut flock of newer (hymns),” with semantically ill-assorted elements joined -- or so it seems at first glance. But remember that the poet is depicting a metaphorical thunderstorm: the rains, undisguised, come last, but I think we have both thunder and lightning earlier in the vs.: the flock is tveṣám ‘glittering’ (though, I must admit, the word sometimes just means ‘turbulent’: see vā́ta-tviṣ- ‘turbulent as the wind’ in the next hymn, V.54.3), which can represent the lightning. And the flock also consists of “hymns,” which in this context can be the regular booming of thunder claps.

