+++
title = "04"

+++
The initial sequence in this vs. várdhantīm can, uncontroversially, consist of the 3rd pl. act. pres. várdhanti and the enclitic pronoun īm, as the Pp. and all subsequent analyses take it. I wonder, however, if it should not be analyzed like nearby I.67.4 vidántīm (q.v.; also a Parāśara hymn), where I segment the sequence as vidánt īm, with the old secondary ending *-ant preserved because it was misanalyzed as -ánti + īm. In I.67.4 there is stronger motivation to accept my reanalysis because vidá- is otherwise only an aorist stem and should not have indicative forms with primary endings. Here, of course, várdha- is a present stem and várdhanti would be perfectly at home. Nonetheless, the first four vss. of this hymn treat the disappearance of Agni and his concealment in the waters and are couched in the past

-- note esp. ánu guḥ ‘they followed’ in 3a, the vs. paired with this one. I would
therefore tentatively emend the published tr. to “the waters strengthened the lovely child.” For this and other such passages (esp. I.65.4 and I.85.11), see my “Hidden in Plain Sight: Some Older Verb Endings in the Rig Veda” in a forthcoming festschrift.

It is unclear with what part of the sentence the instr. panvā́ should be construed. I take it with the verb várdhant(i) (though I do not go as far as Old, who suggests that the phrase is equivalent to panáyanti), while Ge (/WG) and Re, in slightly different ways, take it with súśiśvim. The stem is a hapax and there is no obvious way to decide the matter, though the passages Re adduces for his instr. of characterization (IX.85.11, 86.31 śíśum .. pánipnatam and III.1.13 apā́ṃ gárbham … pániṣṭhaṃ jātám) may tip the scales in his direction. So I might modify the publ. tr. to “The waters strengthen(ed) the lovely child in his wonder” or (see below) “… strengthen(ed) the one growing well with/in wonder,” though construing it with várdhant(i) still seems to yield more sense.

The matter is made more difficult by the fact that súśiśvi- is also a hapax. It is generally taken as an adj. “schön wachsend” (ultimately to √śū ‘swell’), and this is certainly possible. But because of śíśvā, instr. of śíśu- ‘child’, in 10c, I follow Old (SBE, “the fine child”) and Re (“le beau Nouveau-né”) in taking it as a noun.

