+++
title = "05"

+++
FIFTH CHAPTER. (The Agnihotram. On the Duties of the Brahma Priest). 

26. (The Agnihotram. When the Sacrificer has to Order his Priest to Bring Fire to the Ahavaniya. The Sixteen Parts of the Agnihotram.) 

The Agnihotri says to his Adhvaryu, " Take from ” (here the Gārha patya fire) the Ahavaniya fire.” Thus he says at evening ; for what good he was doing during the day, all that is taken away (together with [864] the fire and brought) eastwards and put in safety. If he says at morning time, "Take from (here) the Ahavaniya,” then he takes with him all the good he was doing during the night (brings it) eastwards and puts it in safety. The Ahavaniya fire is the sacrifice (sacrificial fire); the Ahavaniya is the heaven-world. He who has this knowledge, places the heaven-world (the real heaven) in the heaven-world, which (is represented by) the sacrifice alone. Who knows the Agnihotram which belongs to all gods, which consists of sixteen parts, and is placed among cattle, is successful by means of it. 

What in it (the offering of which the Agnihotram consists) is of the cow (such as milk) belongs to Rudra. What is joined to the calf, belongs to Vayu. What is being milked, belongs to the Aśving. What has been milked, belongs to Soma. What is put on the fire to boil, belongs to Varuṇa. What bubbles up (in boiling) belongs to Paṣan. What is dripping down, belongs to the Maruts. What has bubbles, belongs to Viśvedevas. The cream (of the milk) gathered, belongs to Mitra. What 

1 The Agnihotram is a burnt offering of fresh milk, brought every day, twice during the whole term of life. Before a Brahman can take upon himself to bring the Agnihotram, he has to establish the three sacred fires, Garhapatya, Dakṣina and Ahavaniya. This cere. mony is called Agnyādhôna. The performers of these daily oblations are called "Agni hotris". They alone are entitled to bring the Istis and Soma sacrifices. There are, up to this day, Agnihotris in the Dekkhan, who way be regarded as the true followers of the ancient Vedic religion, 

248 

en 

{alls out of the pot), belongs to Heaven and Earth. What turns up (in boiling), belongs to Savitar. What is seized (and placed in the vessel). belongs to Viṣnu. What is placed (on the Vedi) belongs to Brihaspati. The first offering is Agni's, the latter portion is Prajapati's, the offering itself (chief portion) belongs to Indra. This is the Agnihotram, belonging to all gods, which comprises sixteen parts. 

27. (How the priest has to make good certain casualties which may happen when the Agnihotram is offered.) 

If the cow of an Agnihotri - which is joined to her calf, sits down during the time of being milked, what is the penance for it ? He shall repeat over it this (365) mantra. “Why dost thou sit down out of fear? From this grant us safety! Protect all our cattle! Praise to Rudra the giver!” (By repeating the following mantra) he should raise her up." The divine Aditi (cow) rose, and put long life in the sacrifice, she who provides Indra, Mitra and Varuṇa with their (respective) shares (in the sacrifice)." Or he may hold on her udder and mouth a vessel filled with water and give her (the cow) then to a Brahman, 

This is another Prayaschitta (penance). 

If the cow of an Agnihotri, which is joined to her calf, cries during the time of being milked, how is this to be atoned for? If she cries out of hunger, to indicate to the sacrificer what she is in need of, then he shall give her more food in order to appease her. For food is appeasing. The mantra sūyavasad bhagavatt (1, 164, 40) is to be repeated. This is the Prayaschitta. 

If the cow of an Agnihotri which is joined to her calf moves during the time of being milked, what is the Prayaschitta ? Should she in mov ing spill (some milk) then he shall stroke her, and whisper (the following words), “ What of the milk might have fallen to the ground to-day, what "might have gone to the herbs, what to the waters ---may this milk be in ' my houses, (my) cow, (my) calves, and in me." He shall then bring a burnt offering with what has remained, if it be sufficient for making the burnt offering (Homa). 

Should all in the vessel have been spilt (by the moving of the cow) then he shall call another cow, milk her and bring the burnt offering with that milk, and sacrifice it. It is to be offered alone in faith.s 

? The cow herself is called Agnihotri. 

> The meaning of the sentence : Meda gre graad is: this (substitute) is to be offered (completely) even including the sraddha. This is the formula : XT TETA (i.e.) " Iofor (this) in faith (as a believing ono)." 

249 

[366] This is the Prāyaschitta. He who with such a knowledge offers the Agnihotram, has (only) offerings in readiness (which are fit) and has (consequently) all (accepted by the gods). 

28. (On the Meaning of the Agnihotram, if Performed in Perfect Faith. It 

represents Dakṣiṇā. The Aśvina Sastra, Mahavrata, and Agnicha yana are hinted at in it.) 

That Aditya (the sun) is his (the Agnihotri's) sacrificial post, the earth is his altar, the herbs are his Barbis (seat of grass), the trees are his fuel, the waters his sprinkling vessels, the directions the wooden sticks laid round about (the hearth). If anything belonging to the Agnihotri should be destoryed, or if he should die, or if he should be deprived of it, then he should receive all this in the other world, placed, as it were, on the Barbis (sacrificial litter). And the man who, having this know ledge, performs the Agnihotram, will actually obtain (all this). 

He brings as Dakṣiṇa (donation) both gods and men mutually, and everything (the whole world). By his evening offering he presents men to the gods, and the whole world. For men, if being fast asleep without shelter, as lt were, are offered as gifts to the gods. By the morning offering he presents the gods as gifts to men, and the whole world. The gods, after having understood the intention (of men that the gods should serve them) make efforts (to do it), saying “ I will do it, I will go." What world a man, who has presented all this property to the gods, might gain, the same world gains he who, with this kaowledge, performs the Agnihotram. 

By offering the evening oblation to Agni, the Agnihotri commences the Aśvina Sastra (which [367] commences with a verse addressed to *Agai). By using the term vāch, 2. e., speech (when taking out the Agnihotram) he makes a (pratigara), i. e., response (just as is done at the repetition of a Sastra). 

By (thus) repeating every day “ Vāch," the Aśvina Sastra " is recited by Agni at night, for him who, having this knowledge, brings the Agni. hotram. 

* The Aśvina sastra is required at the commencement of the Gavám ayanam, when making Atirātra. See 4, 17-11. The author of our Brāhmana here tries to find out some resemblance between the performance of the evening Agnihotram and the Aśvina sas tra. He finds it in the circumstance, that this offering belongs to Agni, and the Aspina Sastra commences with a verse addressed to Agai (4,7). Having thus obtained the commencement of the sastra, he must find out also the pratigara or response which belongs to every Sastra. This ho discovers in the formula : vache tua notre, which the Agnihotri repeats as often as the offering is taken out for being sacrificed, 

250 

By offering the morning oblation to Âditya, he commences the Maha vrata o ceremony. By using (a term equivalent to) prāna, i. e., life (when eating the remainder of the Agnihotram) he makes a pratigara (also). By (thus) repeating every day the word "food " (life), the Mahāvrata (Sas tram) is recited by Aditya at day for him who, with this knowledge, per forms the Agnihotram. 

The Agnihotrī has to perform during the year 720 evening offerings and also 720 morning offerings, just as many bricks (1440) marked by sacrificial formulas as are required at the Gavam ayanam. He who with such a knowledge brings the Agnihotram, has the sacrifice performed with a Sattra (868] lasting all the year (and) with Agni Chitya (the hearth constructed at the Chayana ceremony). 

29, (Whether the Morning Oblation of the Agnihotrê is to be offered Before ore 

After Sunrise. Vriṣaśuṣma, the son of Vatavata, the son of Jātukarna, said, “We shall tell this to the gods, that they perform now the Agnihotram, which was brought on both days (on the evening of the preceding, and the morning of the following, day) only every other day." And a girl, who was possessed by a Gandharva, spoke thus, " We shall tell it to the Pitaras (ancestors), that the Agnihotram which was performed on both days, is now performed every other day." 

The 'Agnihotram performed every other day is performed at evening after sunset, and at morning before sunrise. The Agnihotram performed · on both days is performed at evening after sunset, and at morning after sunrise. Therefore, the Agnihotram is to be offered after sunrise. For · he who offers the Agnihotram before sunset, reaches in the twenty fourth year the Gayatri world, but if he brings it after sunrise, in the 

This concludes the Gavam ayanan See the note to 4, 12, The resemblance between the Mahávrata and the morning Agnistoma is found by our author in the following points : The morning Agnihotram belongs to Âditya, and the Niękevalya Sastra of the Mahā vrata commences with a mantra addressed to the same deity. The Pratigara he finds in the mantra, annam payo reto smásu, which the Agnihotri repeats as often as he eats the remainder of his offering. 

• At each Atirá tra of the Gavām ayanam, the so-called Ohayana ceremony takes place. This consists in the construction of the Uttara Vedi (the northern altar) in the shape of an eagle. About 1440 bricks are required for this structure, each being conse orated with a separate Yajus mantra. This altar represents the universe. A tortoise is buried alive in it, and a living frog carried round it and afterwards turned out. The fire kindled on this new altar is the Agni Chitya. To him are the oblations of flesh and Soma to be given. · The whole ceremony is performed by the Adhvaryu alono. 

251 twelfth. When he brings the Agnihotram before sunrise during two years, then he has actually sacrificed during one year only. But if he sacrifices after sunrise, then he completes the yearly amount of offerings in one year. Therefore (869) the Agnihotram is to be brought after sunrise. He who sacrifices after sunget at evening, and after sun rise in the morning, brings the offering in the lustre of the day-night (Ahorātra). For the night receives light from Agni, and the day from the sun (Aditya). By means of this light the day is illuminated. Therefore he who sacrifices after sunrise, performs the sacrifice only in the light of Ahorātra (that is, he receives the light only once, instead of twice, the offering brought before sunrise belonging to the night, and being illumi -pated by Agni, not by Aditya). 

30. (Several Stanzas Quoted Regarding the Necessity to bring the Agnihotram 

After Sunrise). 

• Day and night are the two wheels of the year. By means of both, he passes the year. He who sacrifices before sunrise, goes by one wheel, as it were, only. But he who sacrifices after suprise, is going through the year with both wheels, as it were, and reaches his destination soon. There is a sacrificial Gāthā (stanza) which runs as follows: 

“All that was, and will be, is connected with the two Sāmans, Brihat and Rathantaram, and subsists through them. The wise man, after baping 

established the sacred hearths (the Agnihotri), shall bring a different * sacrifice at day, and a different one at night (i. e., devoted to different "deities)." 

The night belongs to the Rathantaram, the day to the Brihat. · Agni is the Rathantaram, Aditya the Brihat. Both these deities cause him to go to the heaven-world, to the place of splendour (bradhna), who with this knowledge sacrifices (the Agnihotram) after sunrise. Thence it is to be sacrificed after sunrise. Regarding this, there is a sacrificial Gāthe chanted, which runs as follows: 

“Just as a man who drives with one pack-horse (870) only without " purchasing another one, act all those men who bring the Agnihotram "" before sunrise." . For all beings whatever follow this deity (Aditya) when he stretches (the arms at sunrise and sunset). He who has this knowledge, is followed by this deity, after whom all follows, and he follows her, For this Aditya252 

is the "one guest" who lives among those who bring the sacrifice after sunrise. Concerning this there is a Gatha (stanza, which runs as fol. lows); 

“He who has stolen lotus fibres, and does not receive (even) one guest k on the evening, will charge with this guilt the not guilty, and take off the * guilt from the guilty." 

This Aditya is the "one guest" (ekātithih) he is it"who lives among the sacrificers.” The man who (371] thinking, it is enough of the Agnihotram, does not sacrifice, to this deity (Aditya), shuts him out from being his guest. Therefore this deity, if shut out, shuts such an Agnihotri out from both this world and that one. 

Therefore he who thinks, it is enough of the Agnihotram, may nevertheless bring sacrifices. Thence they say, a guest who comes at evening is not to be sent away. It happened that once a learned man, Janaśruteya, a resident of a town (a Nagari), said to an Aikadaśakṣa, a descendant of Marutantu, "We recognise from the children, whether one brings the Agnihotram with or without the proper knowledge." Aikāda Hākṣa had as many children as are required to fill a kingdom. Just 28 many children will he obtain who brings the Agnihotram after sunrise. 

NUNUN 

a farks on this rather obscure ste 

Erre terraceastai garante 

31. (The Agnihotram is to be offered After Sunrise). In rising, the sun joins his rays to the Abavaniya fire. Who, therefore, sacrifices before sunrise, is like a female giving her breast to an unborn 

'Sayaṇa makes the following remarks on this rather obscure stanza : 

पुरा कदाचित्सप्तर्षीणां संवादप्रसंगे कश्चित्पुरुषो बिसस्तैन्य लक्षणमपवादं प्राप्य तत्परिहारार्थमृषी सामने शपथं चकार । तदीयशपथोक्तिरूपेयं गाथा बिसानि पद्ममूलानि तेषामपहर्ता प्रत्यवायपरंपरा प्राप्नोतु ॥ पापरहिते पुरुष बिसविषयमपवादं कृतवतो यः प्रत्यवायः पापिनः पुरुषस्य संबंधी पापं स्वीकुर्वतो यः प्रत्यवायः सायंकाले गृहे समागच्छत एवातिथेवैदेशिकस्यापरोधने यः प्रत्यवायः सेयं प्रत्यवायपरंपरा बिसस्तैन्ये सति मम भूयादित्येवं शपधः । अक्षरार्थस्तु अप्रसिद्धो माशः पुरुष स्तेनश्चोरो भूत्वा बिसान्यपजहार चेत् स पुमान् भनेनस पापरहितं पुरुषं श्रोत्रियं एनसा प्रोमिश 

सार पापेनाभिशंसनमपवादं कुर्यात् । तथेष स बिसापहारसायंकाले गृहे समागतं एकातिथिमपरुणद्धि भोजनमदत्वा निःसारयेत् ॥ 

The stealing of bisāni, i.e., lotus obres, from tank appears to have been a great offence in ancient times. Not to receive one guest (at least) on the evening was consi dered as equally wicked. The man who has committed such crimes will, in order to clear himself from all guilt, charge an innocent man with it. The forms abhišastāt and apaharat have evidently the sense of a future tense, as is the case in other instances also. The stanza in question appears to be very old, and was hardly intelligible even to the author of oar Brdhmaṇam. He means by ekátithiḥ "the one guest," the sun, which, according to the context, cannot bave been the original genser. 

253 

child, or a cow giving her udder to an unborn calf. But he who sacrifices after sunrise is like a female giving her breast to a child which is born, or like a cow giving her udder to a calf which is born. The Agnihotram being thus offered to him (Sürya), he (Sūrya) gives to the Agnihotri in return, food in both worlds, in this one and that one. He who brings the Agnihotram before sunrise, is like such an one who throws food before a man or an elephant, who do not stretch forth their hands foot caring for it). But he who sacrifices after sunrise, is like such an one who throws food before a man or an elephant who stretch forth their hands. He who has this knowledge, and sacrifices after sunrise, lifts up with this hand (Aditya's hand) his sacrifice, and puts it down [872] in the heaven-world. Therefore the sacrifice is to be brought after sunrise. 

When rising, the sun brings all beings into motion (pranayati). Therefore be is called prána (breath). The offerings of him who, knowing this, sacrifices after sunrise, are well stored up in this prāna (Aditya). Therefore it is to be sacrificed after sunrise. 

That man is speaking the truth, who in the evening after sunset, and in the morning after sunrise, brings his offering. He commences the evening sacrifice by the words, " Bhur, Bhuvah, Svar, Om! Agni is Light, Light is Agni;" and the morning sacrifice by “Bhūr, Bhuvah, Svar, Om! Sun is Light, Light is Şun." The truth-speaking man offers thus in truth, when he brings his sacrifice after sunrise. Therefore it must be sacrificed after sunrise. This is well expressed in a sacrificial stanza which is chanted. 

“Those who sacrifice before sunrise tell every morning an “ untruth; for, if celebrating the Agnihotram at night which ought to be * celebrated at day, they say, Sun is Light, but then they have no light 

" (for the sun has not risen)." 

82. (On the Creation of the World. The Origin of the Vedas and the Sacred 

Words. The Penances for Mistakes committed at a Sacrifice.) Prajapati had the desire of creating beings and multiplying himself. He underwent (consequently) austerities. Having finished them, he created these worlds, viz., earth, air and heaven. He heated them(with the lustre of his mind, pursuing a course of austerities); three lights were produced: Agni from the earth, Vāyu from the air, and Aditya from heaven. He heated them again, in consequence of which the three Vedas were produced. The Rigveda came from Agni, the Yayurveda from 

254 

Tāyu, and the Sāmaveda from Aditya. Ho heated these Vedas, [8781 in consequence of which three luminaries arose, viz., Bhūr came from the Rigveda, Bhuvah from the Yajurveda, and Svar from the Sāmaveda. He heated these luminaries again, and three sounds came out of them ā, u and m. By putting them together, he made the syllable om. There fore he (the priest) repeats "Om! Om!," for Om is the heaven-world, and Om is that one who burns (Aditya). 

Prajapati spread the sacrifice (extending it), took it, and sacrificed with it. By means of the Rich (Rigveda), he performed the duties of the Hotar; by means of the Yajus, those of the Adhvaryu; and by means of the Saman, those of the Udgātar. Out of the splendour (seed) which is inherent in this three-fold knowledge (the three Vedas), he made the Brahma essence. 

Prajapati offered then the sacrifice to the gods. The gods spread it, took it, and sacrificed with it, and did just as Prajapati had done (regarding the office of the Hotar, &c). The gods said to Prajāpati, “If a mistake has been committed in the Rik, or in the Yajus, or in the Saman in our sacrifice, or in consequence of ignorance, or of a general misfortune, what is the atonement for it?" Prajāpati answered, " When you commit a mistake in the Rik, you shall sacrifice in the Gárha patya, saying Bhuh. When you commit one in the Yajus, then you shall sacrifice in the Agnidhriya fire or (in the absence of it, as is the case) in the Havis offerings, 10 in the cooking fire (Dakṣiṇa Agni) saying, Bhuvah. When a mistake is committed in the Saman, then it is to be sacrificed in the Abavanīya fire by saying, Svar. When a mistake has been committed out of ignorance, or in consequence of a general [374] mishap, then you shall sacrifice in the Ahavaniya fire, reciting all three words, Bhůh, Bhuvah, Svar. These three " great words” (vyāhriti) are like nooses to tie together the Vedas. It is just like joining one thing to another, one link to another link, like the stringing of anything made of leather, or of any other thing, and connecting that which was disconnected, that one puts together by means of these great words all that was isolated in the sacrifice. These Vyabrītis are the general Prāyaschitta (penance); thence the penances (for mistakes ) at a sacrifice are to be made with them. 

& It is regarded as a person. "This is used only in the Soma sacrifices. 20 Such as the Darsapürnamasa iṣti, Chāturmāsya isti, &c, 

255 

33. 

and mind. Dy there are both the three 

(On the Office of the Brahma Priest. He ought to remain Silent during all 

the Principal Ceremonies.) The great sages (mahavadah) ask, "When the duties of a Hotar are performed by the Rik, those of the Adhvaryus by the Yajus, and those of the Udgātar by the Saman, and the three-fold science is thus properly carried into effect by the several (priests employed), by what means then are the duties of the Brahmā priest performed ?" To this one should answer, “This is done just by means of this three-fold science." 

He who blows (Vāyu) is the sacrifice. He has two roads, viz., speech and mind. By their means (speech and mind), the sacrifice is performed. In the sacrifice there are both, speech and mind, required. By means of speech the three priests of the three-fold science perform one part (assigned to Vach); but the Brahmā priest performs his duty by the mind only. Some Brahmā priests, after having muttered the Stomabhā gas 11 when all arrangements have been made for [875] the repetition of the Prātaranuváka (the morning prayer) sit down, and speak (without performing any of the ceremonies). 

Respecting this (the silence on the part of the Brahmā priests); a Brah man;who saw a Brahmā priest at the Prātaranuvāka talk, said (once) "they (the priests and the sacrificer) have made one-half of this sacrifice to disappear." Just as a man who walks with one foot only, or a carriage which has one wheel only, falls to the ground, in the same manner the sacrifice falls to the ground (bhreṣan nyeti), and if the sacrifice has fallen, the sacrificer falls after it too (if the Brahmā priests talk during the time they ought to be silent). Therefore the Brahmā priest should; after the order for repeating the Prā taranuvāka has been given, refrain from speaking till the oblations from the Upāmáu and Antaryāma (Grahas) are over. After the order for chanting the Pavamāna Stotra has been given (he ought also to refrain from speaking) till the last verse (of the Stotra) is done. And [376] again, he should during, the chanting of the (other) Stotras, and the repeating of the Sastras, refrain from speaking, till the Vaṣatkāra (at the end of the Yājyā verse of the Sastra) is pronounced. Likewise, as a man walking on both his legs, 

11 The Stomabhāgas are certain Yajus-like mantras which are to be found in tho Brahmanas of the Samaveda only (not in the Yajus or Rigveda). Each of these mantras consists of four parts: (a) To what the Stoma is like, such as a cord, a joint, &c.; (b) To what it is devoted or joined; (c) An order to the Stoma to favour the object to 

256 

and a carriage going on both its wheels, does not suffer any injury, in the same way such a sacrifice (if performed in this manner), does not suffer any injury, nor the sacrificer either, if the sacrifice be not injured. 

34. (On the Work done by the Brahma. He Permits the Chanters to Chant) 

They say, When the sacrificer has the reward (dakṣına) given to the Adhvaryu, he thinks,“ this priest has seized with his hands my Grahas (Soma cups), he has walked for me, he has sacrificed for me." And when he has the reward given to the Udgātar, he thinks, "he has sung for me ; " and when he has the reward given to the Hotar, he thinks, " this priest has spoken for me the Anuvākyās, and the Yājyās, and repeated the Sastras." But on account of what work done is the Brahmā priest to receive his reward ? Shall he receive 12 the reward, thinks the sacrificer, without having done any work whatever ? Yes, he receives it for his medi cal attendance upon the sacrifice, for the Brahmā is the physician of the sacrifice (which is regarded as a man). Because of the Brahmā priest performing his priestly function with the Brahma, which is the quintessa ence of the metres. He does one-half of the work, for he was at the head of the other priests, and the others (Adhvaryu, Hotar, Udgatar) do the other half. (The Brahmā priests tell if any mistake has been commit. [877] ted in the sacrifice, and perform the Prāyaschittas, as described above.)13 which it is joined; (d) An order to the chanters to chant the Stoma by the permission of Savitar in honour of Brihaspati. The last (fourth) part is in all the stomabhagya mantras the same, I give here some of these mantras, which are all to be found in the Tāndya Brahmanam (1, 8-9). They commence : 

1 (a) ffhTMA () para car (c) qui para (d) fanga acetad 2 (a) sfarra (6) car (c) forza (d) 3 (a) palarie (6) feat ceny (cfara fora (d) 4 (a) abah (b) Arafata (c) graft fra d 5 (a) faevatske (6) cea ca (c) a do. The proper meaning of the repetition of these and similar mantras by the Brahmā prieste is, to bring the chant (8toma), which is about to be performed, into contact with the external world, with day, night, air, rains the gods, and secure the favour of all these powers and beings. 

12 In the original, narata, which is to be taken in the sense of a future. 

** I have not translated the passage regarding the Prayaschitta to be performed by the Brahma priest if any mistake has been committed ; for it is only a repetition from 5, 92, 

The Prastotar13 says, after the order for chanting the Stotram has been given, "O Brahmā, we shall now chant, our commander ! " The Brahmā then shall say at the morning libation, "Bhūr ! filled with the thought of Indra, ye may sing !" and at the evening libation, [878] he says, "Svar! filled with the thought of Indra, ye may sing." 

At the time of the Ukthya or Atirātra sacrifice, all the three great words, Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Svar are required. If the Brahmā says, “Filled with the thought of Indra, ye may sing," this means, that the sacrifice is Indra's, for Indra is the deity of the sacrifice. By the words, "filled with the thought of Indra," the Brahmā priest connects the Udgitha (the principal part of the chant) with Indra. This saying of the Brahmā means, "Do not leave Indra; filled with him, ye may sing." Thus he tells them. 

HRONO 

14 The announcement of the Prastotar, that the chanters are ready to perform their chant, as well as the orders to do so given by the Brahma and Maitrāvaruṇa, are contained in fall in the Ašval, dr. S. (5,2), and in the Sank, Sr. 8, (6,8). I here give the text from the Aśv. S. : ब्रह्मन् स्तोष्यामः प्रशास्तरिति स्तोत्रायातिसर्जितावतिसृजतो भूरिन्द्रवन्तः सवितृप्रसूता इति जपित्वा स्तुध्वमिति ब्रह्मा प्रातःसवने भुव इति माध्यन्दिने स्वरिति तृतीयसवने भूभवः स्वरिन्द्रवन्तः सवितृप्र. सूता इत्यूर्वमानिमारुतात् । स्तुतदेवेन सवित्रा प्रसूता ऋतं च सत्यं च बदत । आयुष्मत्य ऋचो मा गात तनू पात्साम्न श्रो३मिति जपिल्वा मैत्रावरुणः स्तुध्वमित्युच्चैः॥ (When the Prastotar calls) “ Brahmā, we shall chant, О commander !" then the two priests (the Brahma and Maitrāvarupa) whose daty it is to allow (the chanters to sing) give their permission. The Brahmā, after having first mattered the words *bhūr, be ye filled with Indra, created by Savitar (or permitted by Savitar)," at the morning libation, says, "chant;" at the midday libation he uses, instead of bhür, bhuvah ; and at the evening libation, svar (the remainder of the Japa being the same). Before all the Stotras which follow the Agnimăruta sastra (which concludes the Sastras of the Agnistoma), that is to say, at the Ukthya, Solasī, Atirātra sacrifices, &c., the Brahmā mutters all the three great words (bhir, bhuvaḥ, svaḥ along with the remainder of the formula) at the same time. The Maitrāvaruṇa, after having mattered, “ Speak what is right and true, ye who are created by Savitar, the god to whose honour praises are chanted, do not lose the sacred verses (chanted by you) which are life, may he protect both bodies of the Saman (the verses and the tune) Om !" says aloud" chant!" 