+++
title = "01"

+++
This vs. plays on the ambiguity of reference of the noun nṛ́-, which can refer both to superior (mortal) men and to gods. It also cleverly but uninsistently identifies the sacrifice as the meeting place of men and gods, the nṛṣádana- ‘seat of men’ who come from / belong to both heaven and earth (diváḥ … pṛthivyā́ḥ) -- though see Ge’s n. 1a for other, in my opinion less likely, possibilities. The náraḥ in pāda b, however, seem only to be men proper, that is mortals, who seek the gods at the sacrificial common ground. 123 In c sunvé is one of the rare exx. of a singular verb with neut. pl. subj. (here sávanāni), a construction that is of course supported by comparative evidence. Gr interprets the verb rather as a 1st sg. transitive. This is not impossible -- and note the 1st pl. verb in 2a -- but sunve is otherwise passive, with 3rd pl. sunviré likewise passive.

In d the verb gáman (in sandhi) could represent either 3rd pl. gáman or 3rd sg.

gámat, but both the context, with Indra mentioned in the preceding pāda, and the parallel I.178.2d gáman na índraḥ sakhyā́váyaś ca support the 3rd sg.

The pāda is also marked by case disharmony: dat. mádāya and acc. váyaś ca appear to be joint complements of gámat, conjoined by ca. Such case disharmony is rare in ca collocations (see Klein DGRV I.56-57), but at least in this example poses no obstacle to understanding: the dat. expresses purpose, the acc. goal. Although neither Klein nor I find the construction problematic, Re supplies a second verb to govern váyaḥ (“obtenir”), and HPS interprets the acc. as an Inhaltsakk.

A more problematic issue, at least for me, is the position of ca, unmentioned by any one, incl. Klein. The standard tr./interpr. take the 2nd term of the conjoined NP to be prathamáṃ váyaḥ “first vitality/youth,” but we should then expect the ca to follow prathamám, the first word of the second member. Although such positioning is not an unbreakable rule, it is remarkably regular. To avoid the problem I take prathamám as an adverb here, as I do in the parallel I.83.4 (prathamám … váyaḥ without a ca), cited by Old and Re, for which see comm. ad loc. 