+++
title = "06"

+++
The construction of the vs. is uncertain in several regards, which center on the 2nd hemistich. The first is whether neut. sáhaḥ belongs in the rel. cl. or not; the position of rel. yásya is compatible with either answer. I take it as an independent qualifier of acc. bṛ́haspátim in b, hence an acc.: Bṛhaspati is identified with the abstract noun ‘strength / force’ itself. I therefore assume that the rel. cl. begins with yásya. This also seems to be the Ge solution. The sense of Re’s tr. is similar, but he puts sáhaḥ in the, or a, rel. cl. as a nominative -- taking c as containing two nominal rel. clauses: “lui dont la force-dominante (est réelle, dont) le séjour-commun (est) noir.” HPS makes sáhaḥ the subject of an equational rel. cl.: “dessen Gewalt eine schwarze Stätte ist.” Since I think it more likely that Bṛhaspati is identified as strength itself than that his seat is, I find Schmidt’s interpr. less likely, though it does have the merit of not inserting a syntactic break in the middle of a pāda. If Bṛhaspati is identified with sáhaḥ here (as I think), Schmidt’s claim that Bṛhaspati is identified with Agni in this hymn -- an identification esp. clear in this vs. (see publ. intro.) -- is strenthened, since Agni is so often called “son of strength” (sūnú- sáhasaḥ, e.g., in this maṇḍala VII.1.21, 22, 3.8, etc.). 125 A more interesting question is what to do with d. The pl. vásānāḥ is universally, and plausibly, taken as referring to to the horses of ab: in pāda they are called ‘ruddy’ (aruṣā́saḥ); in d they “clothe themselves in ruddy form” (rūpám aruṣám). The question then is whether d is simply a continuation of the main cl. in ab, the part. vásānāḥ modifying áśvāḥ in pāda a, with the rel. cl. of c embedded in it.

This is perfectly possible and seems to be the standard interpr. Although we prefer to avoid interpr. with embedded relatives, once again the rel. cl. in this instance is nominal (whichever finer grained interpr. we follow), and nominal relatives are systematic exceptions to this rule. However, I prefer to take d as a continuation of the rel. cl. introduced by yásya, with oppositional nominal expressions, contrasting Bṛhaspati’s dark seat with his horses which take on “ruddy form.” This interpr.

allows the ‘ruddy’ in d to be more than a pleonastic repetition of the same word in pāda a and gives more punch to the nī́lavat sadhástham of c by making it part of a contrastive pair. If this interpr. is correct, the part. vásānāḥ would be predicated.

Ge (n. 6bc) notes the word play between semantically and etymologically distinct saha- (b) and sáhaḥ (c). In fact the play is more tightly constructed than he indicates, with the chiastic figure saha-vā́ho vahanti / sáhaḥ, with the hemistich boundary isolating the semantically non-conforming word.

