+++
title = "07"

+++
It is difficult to wring a causal sense out of hí here. The vs. continues the depiction of Bṛhaspati as Agni: the hundred feathers of the preening bird are the flames dipping and rising much like the action of preening; the golden axe or axes are likewise flames; while the descriptions in cd are focused on the role of Agni in the ritual.

On śundhyú- see comm. ad V.52.9.

I would now be inclined to tr. the bahuvrīhi híraṇya-vāśīḥ (for the inflection see AiG II.2.408) as implicitly pl. (‘having golden axes’, rather than the publ.

‘having a golden axe’ flg. Ge/Re) because it seems to refer to Agni’s flames. HPS tr.

“mit hundert goldenen Äxten bewaffnete” without comment; he seems to have silently transferred the śatá- from śatá-patraḥ in pāda a, presumably an oversight.

svāvesá- is somewhat difficult and disputed. HPS specifically rejects Velankar’s “easy of approach” and Re’s “d’accueil favorable”; Schmidt’s “mit seinem gute Eintritt” is closer to Ge’s “bringt Glück mit seinem Eingang.” HPS (p.

66) suggests that svāveśá ṛṣváḥ simply evokes the image of a fire flaring up, but I don’t see what ‘entrance’ has to do with that. I take it as ‘providing good/easy entrance’; here this would refer to the entry of the libations into the offering fire, an interpretation that is in harmony with d, which concerns the subject’s superior ability to provide āsutí-, the ‘pressed drink’, to his comrades, presumably the gods who consume the oblations through Agni as their mouth.

