+++
title = "15"

+++
You, o Soma, confer vitality on us on all sides; you, as finder of the sun,  possessing the eye of men—enter us.
You, o drop, along with your help—protect us from behind and also  from in front.
Vālakhilya Hymns
The following eleven hymns (VIII.49–59) are known as the Vālakhilya hymns.  These are apocryphal or, in Geldner’s felicitous description, “half-apocryphal”  (halbapokryph). A  number of khilāni or apocrypha were transmitted in the  R̥gvedic tradition, but only these eleven (or, in some other reported recensions,  somewhat fewer) were inserted into and transmitted within the R̥gveda Saṃhitā
itself, as well as in the khilāni collections. Moreover, these eleven were trans mitted with accents and were treated in the Padapāṭha, the Anukramaṇī (save  for the tenth, VIII.58), and so forth, though they were not commented on by  Sāyaṇa in his R̥gvedic commentary. In our R̥gveda recension, the Śākalya, they  were inserted between the sixth and seventh anuvākas of VIII, though they are  reported to appear elsewhere in other recensions, not always in a single group.  The Grassmann numbers, 1018–1028, reflect the status of these hymns as addi tions to the original saṃhitā.
The text of these hymns is in general less well transmitted than the rest of  the R̥gveda, and the hymns themselves sometimes have the air of a school exer cise. Notable in this connection is the fact that the first eight hymns proceed in  pairs, each pair dedicated to the same divinity (except for a few verses in the  third pair, VIII.53–54) and containing the same number of verses in the same  meter (except for a few verses in the last pair, VIII.55–56). Moreover, the first  pair (VIII.49–50) and, to a much lesser extent, the second pair (VIII.51–52)  follow the same model, verse by verse, often using identical or near identical  vocabulary but varying grammar, or else employing transparent lexical sub
stitution but keeping the grammar the same, and one can imagine that the  two hymns represent separate realizations of a set pedagogical task. However,  whatever the reason for their coupling, the pairs afford us interesting insights  into the composition of R̥gvedic hymns. For this reason, as well as the fact  that puzzles in one hymn of the pair are sometimes illuminated by the parallel  passages in the other, we will comment on the first two sets of paired hymns  together.