+++
title = "03"

+++
Pāda a with its simile is interpreted variously, with the differences primarily dependent on the construal of the participle dúghānāḥ. On the basis of III.31.10 páyaḥ pratnásya rétaso dúghānāḥ “milking out the milk of their age-old semen,” I take the participle to be transitive and supply as object acc. páyaḥ, on which gen. rétasaḥ is dependent. Since these are the only two occurrences of the stem dúghāna- (as opposed to dúhāna-, etc.) and they share the word rétas-, it seems best to interpret them in the same way. Ge, however, though adducing III.31.10, takes dúghānāḥ as passive, “wie die gemolkenen (Ströme) des Himmelssamens” (sim. Re).

Both Ge and Re also take diváḥ as dependent on rétasaḥ, while I take it as parallel to yásya, both dependent on pánthāsaḥ. The parallel expression in vs. 2 yásya … sū́ryasyeva yā́maḥ “whose course, like that of the sun…” favors my interpr. of diváḥ, though the passages adduced by Ge. (V.17.3, IX.74.1) do show that diváḥ can also qualify rétas-.

Determining the syntactic structure here requires figuring out what image in being depicted. We can begin with the gender paradox that figures prominently in any interpretation: the milk(ing) and the semen. I do not think this can be separated from Indra’s “male powers” (paúmsyebhiḥ) in c, and therefore think, contra most other interpr., that it is Indra’s “paths” that are producing the semen-as-milk. Most interpr. avoid this difficult image by taking dúghānāḥ entirely as part of the simile (the milked-out [streams]), with the property shared by the frame (Indra’s paths) and the simile only the anodyne verb yánti ‘go’. I freely admit that the image produced by my interpr. is, to say the least, not straightforward, but it can be made intelligible and it produces a richer semantics than the alternatives. In vss. 2 and 3 the trajectory of Indra’s journeys is depicted as cosmic: his “course” (yā́maḥ) in 2 is like that of the sun, his “paths” (páthāsaḥ) like those of heaven in 3. (See also his ‘routes’ in 4c.) I therefore see these journeys as visually inscribed in the sky, almost like contrails (however anachronistic that image is for the Vedic period). The cosmic equivalent of these paths of Indras are likely the clouds, which produce rain. Now the refrain of this hymn emphasizes Indra’s connection with the Maruts, and the Maruts are, among other things, the gods associated with the thunderstorm and the monsoon and are closely associated with the production of rain. So, Indra’s journey across the sky with the Maruts can also be seen as producing rain, figuratively called semen because of the Indra’s intensely male character. His “paths” on this journey are compared to the clouds, whose visual “paths” as they move across the sky are deeply familiar and which are the quintessential producers of rain.

