+++
title = "01"

+++
Note that the first word of the hymn is vaiśvānará-.

Old (SBE), Ge, and WG all take bṛhád bhā́ḥ as the obj. of dāśema with the dat. agnáye phrase the indirect obj. (e.g., Old “How may we … offer mighty light to … Agni”). I am dubious about this for two reasons, one practical and one grammatical.

First, why would we need to confer light on Agni -- does he not already have it? I suppose “lofty light” might refer to the sun and our ability to make the sun rise by kindling the ritual fire, but the phrase refers to Agni’s own light elsewhere (e.g., VIII.23.5, X.3.1). Or conferring such light upon him might simply mean kindling him. More telling is the grammatical argument: although there are a few other √dāś passages with acc. of something conferred (though normally a ritual offering of some sort; cf. I.71.6 [námaḥ], I.93.3 [havíṣkṛtim]), the overwhelming number of passages have simply a dative of the honoree sometimes with instrumental of what is conferred. Alternatively and considerably less often, the verb can take an acc. of the honoree; cf. the very similar V.41.16 kathā́dāśema námasā sudā́nūn … marútaḥ “How might we serve the Maruts of good drops with reverence?” I therefore think √dāś is participating in two syntactic frames here, 1st with dat. agnáye, then with acc. bṛhád bhā́ḥ, both as the object of honor and service. Re in his n. suggests that bṛhád bhā́ḥ is a “pré-bahuvrīhi,” but in his tr. treats it as an appositive “Haut éclat” going with the 2nd hemistich and modifying the underlying subj. Agni there.

The usual obj. of √stambh is dyā́m ‘heaven’, which is the obj. expected (and supplied) in the frame. The obj. in the simile, ródhas- ‘bulwark’, may have been chosen because it is phonologically reminiscent of ródasī ‘two world-halves’, another way to refer to the cosmic masses. This word serves as obj. to √stambh a number of times with the preverb ví (‘prop apart’), e.g. VI.8.3 (another Vaiśvānara hymn) with Agni as subj.: vy àstabhnād ródasī.

