+++
title = "05"

+++
The stem mitá-dru- (5x) makes formal difficulties. If its 2nd member is a root noun belonging to √dru ‘run’, it should of course have the shape *-drut-; root-noun cmpds also typically have accent on the root noun. Because of the former problem, Scar (243-44) interprets -drú- in raghu-drú- as a -u-stem deriv. of √drā ‘run’. The context here, however, suggests at least a folk-etymological connection with √dru ‘run’, since pāda c opens with a finite form of that root: drávanty asya vājíno ná śókāḥ “His flames run like prize-winners,” which seems like a parallel expression to pāda a mitádrur eti “mitádru he goes.” (Note that in two of the five mitádru- passages the adj. modifies vājínaḥ [VII.38.7, X.64.6].) Several factors may contribute to the anomalous shape of the compound. First, the rhyming mitá-jñu- ‘having fixed/firm knees’, where -jñu- is not a root noun but the reduced form of jā́nu- ‘knee’. Second, there is of course a noun parallel in formation to jā́nu-/jñú-, namely dáru-/drú- ‘wood’. The reduced form is found as 2nd member in at least one cmpd., su-drú- ‘(having) good wood’. It is possible that the existence of this homonymous form might have overridden the rule that added -t- to root nouns ending in short resonants.

It is even possible that mitá-dru- actually contains the ‘wood’ word -- or at least that such a pun could be actualized: the cmpd could mean ‘having wood fixed (in it)’ referring to the fire. At least the three singular occurrences of the stem all refer to Agni (at least in my view), though the two plurals do not. Assuming that at least one reading of the cmpd contains a (pseudo-)root noun to √dru, the question then remains what the first member mitá- belongs to. The default assumption is √mi ‘fix’ as in mitájñu-, but my tr. reflects a deriv. from √mā ‘measure’.

