+++
title = "07"

+++
The first pāda contains three words not otherwise found in the RV: sā́tur jánitor ávāri. Only the first is troublesome: though only occurring here, ávāri is clearly the passive aor. to √vṛ ‘obstruct’ (see váranta in 6c), and the abl. inf. jánitoḥ is structurally transparent and is also found post-RV. The hapax sā́tuḥ is a different matter, however. Neither its root affiliation nor its grammatical identity is clear. Gr takes it as a -tu-stem to √sani ‘win, gain’, with the meaning ‘der empfangende Mutterleib’, but the semantic extension envisioned is quite fantastic, and we should in any event expect a full-grade *sánitu- (note immed. following jánitu- to the rhyming seṭ root). Ge tr. “Natur” (with ?) and suggests, rather wildly, that it’s derived from a root √sā = as, an idea that must underlie Re’s “l'être,” though he cannily does not comment. Old (SBE) tr. “mother,” but does not venture an etymology. Mayrhofer (KEWA s.v. sā́tuḥ) summarizes the speculation but does not adjudicate. WG have proposed a different solution, that it’s a -tu-stem to √sā ‘bind’, and tr. “Von dessen Erzeugung das Anfesseln nicht abgehalten worden ist,” noting that Agni must be controlled after he is born. Although the morphology works better than the other suggestions, the meaning proposed seems rather contorted.

I have a more radical proposal -- that the phonological complex should be divided into sā́+ ā́/átur. The former is the feminine pronoun, picking up fem. tanū́- found in the loc. tanvī̀in the preceding pāda (6d). Although the pronoun would not be in its standard init. position, it’s worth noting that the position of fem. sā́is more variable than that of sá and also that both the neg. ná and the rel. prn. yásya might be expected to be fronted. As for the proposed second part, there are several possibilities. In my opinion the most likely is that it is the gen. sg. of a -tar-stem built to √ad ‘eat’, *ád-tar- > *át-tar-, showing the same reduction of the internal cluster as in (átri-/) atrín- ‘devouring’ (at least by the etym. I favor). (The reduction would most probably take place in weak forms with the suffixal shape -tr- [e.g., instr. *ád- tr-ā > *át-tr-ā >*átrā] and spread to the gen./abl.) For textual support cf. X.79.4 jā́yamāno mātárā gárbho atti “while being born, the embryo eats his two mothers [=kindling sticks],” a description of Agni’s birth, as here. Less likely, but not completely impossible, is an analysis as the gen. sg. of the Indo-Iranian *ā́tar- ‘fire’ (Aves. ātar-) treated as a -tar-stem. (By Stanley Insler’s very attractive, and unfortunately unpublished, etymology, the same word is also preserved in mātaríśvan-, whose initial m is owing to missegmentation.) I am not entirely sure what pāda b contributes to the meaning -- perhaps the point is that the kindling sticks have kept seeking to produce fire and therefore his birth, depicted in pāda a, has taken place without a hitch. Note that this is the only occurrence in the RV of the full dual dvandva mātárā-pitárā.

