+++
title = "09"

+++
As indicated in the publ. intro., this verse, which treats Indra’s theft of the sun’s wheel and his visit to Uśanā Kāvya, is quite opaque. The first pāda straightforwardly announces the mythical deed at issue, but things disintegrate after that.

The next two pādas (bc) introduce a theft of speech and a figure identified as aruṇá- (‘ruddy’) that are not elsewhere associated with the myth. However, since the verb muṣāyá- ‘steal’ and the temporal expression prapitvé are found in other accounts of the myth (I.175.4, IV.30.4, VI.31.3 and IV.16.12, VI.31.3 respectively), these pādas must contain at least some covert reference to the myth. However, I treat them as parenthetical because pādas de seem to follow directly from a, and the present tense muṣāyati does not fit well with the injunctive prá vṛhat of a and the plupf. ájagan in e.

Pādas de depict Indra’s journey to Uśanā’s dwelling, an incident associated elsewhere with the wheel-theft narrative. First, note that initial īśāná(ḥ) in c is echoed by init. uśánā in d. I have treated the peculiar morphology of uśánā at length (Jamison 2007 Fs. Jasanoff) and concluded that the stem is essentially uninflected and that it is therefore possible to take uśánā here, with Ge, as an acc. of goal (or as gen. with a gapped ‘house’), however odd such interpr. may seem at first. Esp. in later Skt. Uśanā is seldom found without his patronymic kāvyá-, and in the RV even when the patronymic is absent there is often an indirect reference to it. Here that is found in the voc. kave, addressed to Indra, which ends pāda e; #uśánā and kave# thus occupy polarized positions in this two-pāda unit.

I have even less idea of what fg really mean than the rest of the verse. The repeated word turváṇiḥ usually means ‘surpassing, victorious’ -- see nearby I.128.3 -

- but this sense does not fit this passage well, esp. with the acc. sumnā́ni. I have
therefore taken turváṇi- as expressing a simple motion sense, but have no confidence in the correctness of this interpr. (and in fact fairly strong confidence in its error).
