+++
title = "02"

+++
This vs. sits somewhat oddly in a soma hymn, and its subject, and indeed its general aim, are not clear until the 3rd pāda.

It begins with a fem. instr. demonst. ayā́without expressed referent, and as Re points out, a number of fem. referents are possible. However, the verb that begins c, stávai ‘I will praise’, makes dhī́- ‘insightful thought’ (or some other reference to a verbal product) quite likely, and the phrase ayā́dhiyā́is in fact fairly common (I.166.13, V.45.11 [2x] [in the hymn adjacent to Avatsāra’s V.44 though V.45 is not attributed to him], VI.71.6, VIII.13.8, 93.17). The supplying of dhī́- here is supported by the contrastive cmpd dūḍhī́- ‘having bad insight’ in the next vs. (3b). On the basis of the Avestan parallel, fem. instr. vācā́‘with speech’ is also a possibility; see below.

Between ayā́and stávai, however, is an image of conflict and contest, with the nom. verbal noun nijaghníḥ ‘slamming down’, the instr. ójasā ‘with strength’, and the loc. phrase rathasaṃgé dháne hité “when chariots clash and a prize is set” - all contributing to a picture of violence seemingly inappropriate to a ritual context. It would be most applicable to Indra, who is the usual subj. of ní √han (e.g., VII.18.18 ní jahi vájram indra), or perhaps to a militant Soma. So the 1st ps. verb stávai ‘I will praise’ that opens the next pāda is a surprise: it is instead the inoffensive poet who has been assimilated to an aggressive warrior or contestant, and it is his act of praising that is implicitly compared to smiting down a rival on the field of conflict. Again Avastsāra seems to have deliberately misled us.

However, the situation is more complex. Ge (n. 2a) tellingly cites a strikingly similar Avestan passage from the Hom Yašt, Y 10.2 uparǝmciṭ tē hauuanǝm / vaca upa.staomi huxratuuō / yahmi niγne narš aojaŋha “The upper (part of the) mortar I praise with speech, o you of good insight [=Haoma], in which it [=haoma] is pounded down with the strength of a man.” This passage clearly refers to the pressing of the haoma, using the lexeme ni √gan, exact cognate to our ní √han, and also contains the instr. aojaŋha ‘with strength’, identical to our ójasā, as well as the 1st sg. verb ‘I praise’ (staomi to the same root as our 1st sg.

stávai) and an instr. of speech vaca (instead of our proposed *dhiyā́, though in fact fem.

instr. vācā́could fit in our passage just as well). This Avestan parallel must indirectly provide the solution to our puzzle: why is the mild-mannered priest-poet depicted in a scene of such violence? Because the pressing of soma is inherently an act of violence. Our b pāda provides a metaphorical scenario of contest, but nijaghnír ójasā in pāda a simply describes, with the same vocabulary as the Avestan passage, the powerful pounding of the soma stalks.

To enhance this interpr., ‘pounding down’ would be better than ‘slamming down’ for nijaghníḥ.

