+++
title = "03"

+++
On ū́dhar / ū́dhan- as ‘cold’, beside the homonym ‘udder’, see comm. ad VIII.2.12. Note the phonological echo at the end of pādas a and c: ū́dhani# / ūhati#.

There is considerably more phonological play in the 2nd hemistich: tatanúṣṭim ūhati, tanū́śubhram, enclosed within unbroken a's: ápāpa śakráś ... maghávā yáḥ kavāsakháḥ. This phonological pattern may help account for some of the difficulties of interpr. this hemistich. Before addressing the three hapaxes in cd, tatanúṣtim, tanū́śubhram, and kávāsakhaḥ, note that the āmreḍited preverb ápa-apa (that is, ápāpa) superficially reads as a stem ‘not evil’. I doubt if that is accidental, esp. since doubled preverbs are quite rare; we will return to it below.

The first two of the hapaxes form the object of ápa … ūhati. The lexeme ápa √ūh means ‘pull away’. It is used of the extended penis in cosmic incest in X.61.5; more to the point, in AV XVIII.2.57 it is used of a garment that is to be removed (… vā́saḥ … ápaitád ūha yád ihā́bibhaḥ purā́). A garment could well be described as tanū́śubhra- ‘resplendent on the body’; cf. I.85.3 tanū́ṣu śubhrā́ḥ of the Maruts’ ornaments. I therefore supply ‘garment’ as the obj. here. (For a possible variant of this see disc. below.) Ge refuses to tr. or discuss tatanúṣṭi-; AiG is entirely silent on it; Old is noncommittal. Nonetheless, the formation of tatanúṣṭi- looks fairly transparent, if quite unprecedented. As WG also suggest, it appears to be a -ti- abstract built to the weak grade of the pf. part. to √tan ‘stretch’. WG gloss ‘die Sich-ausgebreitet-haben-schaft’, which in their interpr. is then also applicable to someone who has this quality. They thus assume a personal object for ápa ūhati, a dandy (Geck): “den, der sich ausgebreitet hat … den Geck.” I’m not sure what a “sich ausgebreitet” person would be, and there are other reasons to prefer supplying ‘garment’ or something similar as the referent of these two acc. First, there is the AV passage just cited, where ‘garment’ is the obj. of ápa √ūh. Second, garments are objects of √tan elsewhere (I.115.4, 134.4; X.106.1). And third, a personal object requires the meaning of ápa √ūh to be seriously attenuated (WG’s abschieben: ‘push away, get rid of’). I therefore take ‘spread-out-ness’ to be a quality attributed to a garment or garmentlike object. However, this analysis causes problems of its own. For one thing, why not simply use the pf. part. alone to qualify the underlying ‘garment’? Forming a derivational monstrosity -- a -ti-abstract based on a pf. part. -- and then turning this stem into a possessive adj. seem a tremendous amount of bother to go to when the participle by itself would convey the sense. Further, the standard words for garment are neut. (vā́sas-, vástra-), and tatanúṣṭim must be masc. (see the adj. tanū́śubhram agreeing with it). A proper neut. sg. adj. built to a -ti-stem should end in -ti (though as far as I can tell, there are no exx. in the RV), so if tatanúṣṭim is an adj., it is in the wrong gender for the posited noun it modifies. On the other hand, if we try to take tatanúṣṭim simply as the -ti-abstract, not an adj. based on it, the masc. gender of the qualifier tanū́śubhram clashes, since -ti-abstracts are fem. I have only an ad hoc answer to these problems: assuming the form is an adj. whose underlying referent is neut., the bare neut. -ti ending may have seemed anomalous and a more orthodox looking acc. substituted for it, encouraged also by the fact that the next word begins with a vowel and an inserted -m would avoid the hiatus. Meter would be unaffected, and tanū́śubhram can of course be neut. instead of masc. But I do not find this explanation compelling, and a different possibility is discussed below.

I have discussed the third hapax, kavāsakhá-, in some detail in Fs. Jasanoff (2007: 163), reviving the old, but generally now rejected, analysis of the first member as the old nom. sg. of kaví- matching the Aves. nom. sg. kauuā with its hysterokinetic inflection. That this inflectional type may be preserved here may be signalled by the 2nd member -sakháḥ, whose inflection remains hysterokinetic in Vedic and whose nom. sg. is ordinarily sákhā. The current standard interpr. of kavāhere assigns it to a stem (*)kava- ‘humiliating, degrading’ (see EWA s.v. kavatnú-).

So, e.g., Ge’s rendering of the cmpd as ‘falsch Freund’, with some semantic weakening.

How one analyses the cmpd. depends on what one thinks is going on in the hemistich in general. The first question is who is the referent of the cmpd.? It is found in a two-word nominal rel. cl. yáḥ kavāsakháḥ. Both Ge and WG take its antecendent to be the obj. of the verb ápa … ūhati (e.g., WG “… den Keck, der die Genossen geringschätzt”), but as was just discussed, it is not at all certain (and in my opinion unlikely) that the object of that verb is a person. Moreover, word order -- an often helpful, though of course not sturdily reliable guide in the RV -- favors Indra as referent: the verse ends … maghávā yáḥ kavāsakháḥ.

If my analysis is correct -- that the cmpd. contains kaví- ‘poet’ and that it characterizes Indra -- how can I fit it together with the rest of the vs.? I think the cmpd. has a double sense. On the one hand, the kavā part refers to Uśanā Kāvya, who figures in vs. 2. In fact, note that in 2d uśánā appears in its usual position, immediately after the caesura following an opening of 5. If we superimpose 3d over 2d, kavā- would immediately follow uśánā: [x x x x x / uśánā kavā(-sakha)], the composite yielding a simulacrum of his full name. And of course, as vs. 2 shows, Indra and Uśanā are partners and companions. Uśanā is referred to as kavíelsewhere, with kaví- a substitute for his patronymic; see, e.g., IV.16.3, 26.1.

But the other sense I see here is more sinister and requires considering vs. 3 in connection with the flg. verse. Vs. 4 is a curious, counter-intuitive, and indeed dispiriting vs.: even if Indra kills all your relatives, he still expects you to continue to offer to him. The usual comforting notion in the RV -- that Indra will do well by you if you do well by him, while the non-offerer will get badly treated -- is overturned here. Indra can act cavalierly and arbitrarily to ruin your life no matter how devotedly you serve him. I think the same unsettling idea is presented in vs. 3.

Though the standard interpr. of vs. 3 (see, e.g., Ge’s n. 3cd) is that the first hemistich depicts the pious man happily rewarded, while cd shows the impious one getting his just deserts, I take the whole vs. as referring to the ups and downs of the pious somapresser. First, his labors pay off: he becomes dyumā́n ‘heaven-bright’. But in the second half Indra snatches away this brightness, which is spread across him like a garment, “resplendent on his body” (tanū́śubhra-), an appropriate characterization of such brightness. In this reading kavāśakháḥ is ironic; Indra was indeed a companion and partner of the poet, until he wasn’t.

If this interpr. is correct, it may help explain the use of the peculiar formation tatanúṣṭi- discussed at length above. In pāda b the lucky soma-presser is dyu-mánt-, lit. ‘possessing dyu-‘. And by my analysis, it is this purported dyu- that is resplendent on his body. But the well-attested possessive adj. dyu-mánt- has become lexically separated from div-/ dyu- ‘heaven’; there is no independent dyu- ‘brightness’ that can become the property of a person. (The root noun dyút- is rare without preverb and means yet again something different.) It may be that “spreading-ness” is an attempt to capture the quality of heavenly light without having a firm grammatical base, an identifiable independent noun, to found it on. One of the standard tropes using the root √tan is light or a source of light spreading through heaven and other cosmic realms; cf., e.g., X.88.3 of Sūrya yó bhānúnā pṛthivī́ṃ dyā́ṃ utémā́m, ātatā́na ródasī antárikṣam. And so tatanúṣṭi- may embody this whole complex of heavenly light spreading across the man’s body as if through heaven. By this analysis the tatanúṣṭiis not a garment, as I first suggested, but like a garment.

Another piece of evidence may support my view of cd as expressing the undeserved and capricious reversal of fortune of the soma-presser who was riding high in ab. Remember that cd begins with the double preverb ápāpa, which could also be the voc. of an adj. ‘not-evil’. I suggest that this is a despairing address to the soma-presser of ab: “o un-evil [/blameless] one, see what can happen to you anyway.”

