+++
title = "04"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro. and in the disc. of vs. 4 immediately above, the sense of this vs. -- which seems surprisingly clear -- is hard to square with our usual notions of Rigvedic reciprocal responsibilities, for the vs. states that Indra can kill all your relatives and still demand your offerings, with no attempt even to deny or distance himself from what he did. Ge and Old pass over this unsettling doctrine in silence; WG suggest that the vs. shows that Indra doesn’t fear a blood feud (Blutrache), but this seems to let Indra off too easily. There is no sign of the reciprocity that “blood feud” implies: the hapless man whose relatives have been slaughtered does not seem to have done anything injurious to Indra, nor did his dead relatives -- at least as far as the vs. allows us to see. The killings appear to be the arbitrary acts of a powerful god just because he can. It may be no accident that Indra is called śakrá- ‘able’ here and in 3cd, where he also arbitrarily exerted his power.

(Of course, śakrá- is a common epithet of Indra in the RV and later, and I would not suggest that it is always used with this nuance -- only that our poet exploited the literal sense of the word.) The fact that the word kílbiṣa- is used of Indra’s deed supports the view that what he did was simply wrong; see publ. intro.

I take práyata- in its usual sense, referring to offerings or bounties ‘held forth’ or ‘presented’. Cf. nearby V.30.12 práyatā maghā́ni, X.15.12 práyatā havī́ṃṣi, etc. I cannot get anything else out of this sentence than that Indra still wants the aggrieved man to keep making giving him oblations. WG tr. “Darreichungen,” but suggest in their n. that it refers to “Reparations-, Satisfaktionszahlungen.” But what right would Indra have to seek reparations when he was the one who inflicted the damage? yataṃkará- is a hapax, and the identity of neither of its parts is as sure as the standard interpr. take them. Gr suggests yataṃ belongs to the ppl. of √yam, therefore morphologically identical to the immediately preceding (prá-)yatā, but this analysis is rejected, rightly in my view, by Ge and WG, who take it (the former implicitly, the latter explicitly) as the acc. sg. of a root noun to √yat, found also in the cmpd saṃyát- in 9c. Although the uncompounded root noun is not found elsewhere and it is not mentioned by Schindler in his Root Noun diss. or Scar in his disc. of √yat (403-4), I think this must be the correct analysis, with the noun meaning ‘(proper) arrangement’ or the like. The publ. tr. ‘arranger’ reflects this analysis of yataṃ, while taking 2nd member -kará- from √kṛ, hence ‘make arrangements’ à ‘arranger’. I now think this interpr. of the 2nd member is wrong. This pāda-final compound matches final ākaráḥ of the next pāda, which, construed with preceding vásvaḥ, means ‘distributor of goods’. This -kará- does not belong to √kṛ, however, but to √kṝ, kir ‘scatter’, which occurs with ā́in just this phrase: cf. IX.81.3 ā́naḥ … kirā vásu “scatter/distribute goods to us.” This strongly suggests that the parallel cmpd yataṃkará- contains the same form, which leads to a sense ‘scattering the arrangement’ -- viz., destroying it, blowing it to smithereens and scattering the resulting particles. This accurately reflects what Indra has done in this vs. -- violating the arrangement between men and gods -- worship and offerings in return for protection, aid, and material goods -- by smiting the family of his devotee, though he still provides goods. I would therefore change the publ. tr. from ‘the arranger’ to ‘scattering/destroying the arrangement’.

