+++
title = "07"

+++
The lexeme sám √aj is used elsewhere of ‘driving together’ cattle (I.33.3); here the bhójanam of the niggard is presumably livestock. Though paṇéḥ here is used oppositionally to dāśúṣe in b (see Ge’s n. 7ab), the word also summons up Indra’s opponents, the Paṇis, who stole his cows -- so stealing them back (muṣé) is only justice.

The syntax of c is quite challenging. Let us begin with víśva ā́purú. The phrase purú víśva- appears to be an idiom, or at least is found twice in the RV, meaning “all the many”: I.191.9 purú víśvāni “all the many (bugs),” VII.62.1 purú víśvā jánima “all the many tribes.” Here, however, the words are in opposite order, with the preverb/adposition ā́intervening, and the referent is singular (víśva[ḥ] … jánaḥ). Nonetheless, I think the locutions are essentially the same, though I tr. “each and every” to capture the singular number.

I do not know what to do with ā́. It is possible that it is a preverb with dhriyate, but 1) though ā́is found with √dhṛ, it is not common, and 2) preverbs in tmesis generally move to metrical or syntactic boundaries, and ā́is not so placed here. The standard interpr. do not comment on it. I have no solution.

The last issue is the use of caná. Ge (/WG) take it as neg. ‘nicht einmal’ (not even). The sense of the clause, acdg. to them, is that a people that has provoked Indra’s anger can’t hole up for a long time even in a place that’s hard to penetrate.

Thus by their interpr. durgá- is a desirable, fortress-like location for the offending people, but they can’t hold onto it. But durgá- is always otherwise an undesirable place, where no one wants to be -- where we wish Indra to send our enemies (VII.25.2) but from which we want to be rescued. I therefore think that the point of this clause is that Indra’s antagonists get confined to such a place and therefore caná does not have a negative sense here. Twice loc. durgé is followed by cid ‘even’ (VIII.27.18, 93.10), and durgé caná here may be a variant of this usage. Although he unfortunately does not discuss this passage, Klein’s general disc. of caná (DGRV I.285-92) as essentially borrowing negative value from the negative contexts in which it’s ordinarily found allows for an original underlying positive value ‘even’.

The publ. tr. should be slightly altered to “Even in a (place) …,” though I’m not sure what sense ‘even’ adds -- perhaps that not only are the people confined but they are confined in a really nasty place.

