+++
title = "07"

+++
Ge and Re take the simile in c to be ā́po ná makṣū́(Ge: “rasch wie das Wasser”), but makṣū́is an adverb, and so the simile would not be well formed. Re deals with this problem by supplying a participle, “(agissant) promptement comme les eaux.” I take makṣū́rather with the imperatival clause that follows: sumatír bhavā naḥ. It is worth noting that makṣū́is almost always initial, and if we detach the simile ā́po ná it could be so here as well.

So what quality of Soma’s is being compared to that of the waters? I take it to be sahásrāpsāḥ, which opens pāda b, a word whose meaning is not transparent. Sāy. glosses it pururūpaḥ ‘having many forms’, which is featureless enough to qualify almost anything; Ge and Re follow him. But ápsas- means ‘breast’, and the cmpd dīrghā́psas- (I.122.15), modifying a chariot, is generally rendered by ‘having a long front’ - presumably a long forward projection. Our cmpd is rendered in EWA [s.v. ápsas-] as ‘tausendfrontig’, but it is hard to conjure up a such a picture, particularly with reference to soma, much less the waters. More promising is the context in which the two independent forms of ápsas- (I.124.7, V.80.6) are found. (The third form usually grouped here, found in VIII.45.5 girā́v ápsaḥ, is better segmented as girā́ vápsaḥ; see comm. ad loc.) Both passages have a female as subject, with the VP ní riṇīte ápsaḥ “she lets her breast spill over,” describing a young woman (/Dawn) displaying her charms. Here the breast is conceptually a liquid, and it seems to refer to the pliant flesh, breast tissue, that spills out of her garment (a metaphor alive in 21st c. US). Starting from this picture of a liquid or liquified breast, I suggest that - apsas- in our cmpd. refers to forward projections, esp. those that could appear in a liquid - in short, ripples - which fits both the waters and the soma reasonably well.

The final simile of the vs., “like a sacrifice that conquers in battle” (pṛtanāṣā́ṇ ná yajñáḥ) is unusual; the other 8 occurrences of the cmpd. pṛtanāṣā́h- qualify gods, the qualities of gods, or a hero. However, the purport of the simile is not difficult to construct: if we mortals perform the sacrifice correctly, it will attract and gratify the gods, particularly Indra, who will provide the divine aid needed to prevail in battle.

Note that pṛtanāṣā́ṭ forms a ring with bhuriṣā́ṭ in 2a.

The retroflex initial of -ṣā́h- in this cmpd is the result of the assimilation of -sto the retroflex final in the nom. sg. -ṣā́ṭ; see Schindler (Rt. Nouns p. 48): 5 of the 9 forms of this cmpd are nom. sg. The retroflex is then spread throughout the paradigm (acc. sg. 3x, gen. sg. 1x) and also into the deriv. pṛtanāṣā́ya- (III.37.1). On the variable length of the root syllable in the oblique (-ṣā́ham 1x, -ṣáham, -as 3x), see Scar (612-13).

