+++
title = "+060"

+++
60 (576)
Mitra and Varuṇa
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
12 verses: triṣṭubh
The opening four verses describe the rising Sun, who watches over the good and  evil that people do. As such, he is the agent of Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman,  since they are the gods whose central character is to govern the actions of mor tals. In verses 3–4 the poet blends the offerings that rise to the gods at dawn with  the antelopes of the Sun that carry him aloft. These antelopes are “rich in ghee”  (vs. 3), as the offerings would be. In verse 4 the “strengthening, honeyed ones”  are primarily the offerings given to Mitra and Varuṇa, but juxtaposed to the  Sun’s ascent and to the description of his antelopes, they also become reflections  of these antelopes, lifting the Sun to the heaven. In 4cd the Ādityas clear a path  for the Sun, and this image leads to the principal theme of the succeeding verses  and of the hymn itself—the ability of the Ādityas to lead even through difficult  circumstances. The Ādityas keep away those who oppose the truths they embody  (vs. 5), and they guide even those who may not understand their truths (vss. 6–7).  The “unwinking, perceptive ones” in 7a might be the gods themselves, although  they could also be the spies of Mitra and Varuṇa, who are described in similar  ways (cf. VII.61.3, 5) and who would be present both in heaven and on earth (cf.  VI.61.3).
If there is benefit in following the Ādityas, there is also danger in not doing so.  The poet warns of the anger of the Ādityas (vs. 8), the hostility of Aryaman (vs.  9), the secret attack they can bring, and the hidden strength they possess (vs. 10).  All this leaves the poet and his people “trembling” (vs. 10) before them. The sense  of danger, either from those who do not follow the ways of the Ādityas or from  not following those ways, is strongly articulated in the second half of the hymn.  It is also here that the hymn designates Sudās, the king, as the special recipient of  the Ādityas’ protection and mercy (vss. 8, 9). This may point toward a time in  which the king and his people were trying to find and to establish a settlement  after the normal period of migration and battle, a time that might well be one of  particular peril.