+++
title = "12"

+++
The first hemistich of this vs. is structured exactly like the more expansive 10a-c above: with a vocative soma in the 1st pāda and a following 3rd ps.

verb (pipye), which owes its 3rd ps. to attraction to the simile surrounding it, síndhur ná … árṇasā. Ge (n. 12b) explicitly attributes the 3rd ps. pipye to “Attraktion an den Vergleich,” though he keeps the 2nd and 3rd ps. strictly separate in vs. 10. The 2nd ps. in the publ. tr., “you have swollen forth,” should, strictly speaking, be in parens.

Ge and Re make heavier weather of the 2nd hemistich than I think nec. or desirable. Because they strictly break the syntax at the end of b, they need to find something to do with the instr. phrase that opens c, aṃśóḥ páyasā, which then leads them to interpr. jā́gṛviḥ as (unprecedentedly) transitive, which then leads them to supply an obj. for it - way too much machinery for something that can be far more simply interpr. The impetus for all this, the instr. phrase in c, can easily be taken as part of the simile/frame construction starting in b, with páyasā corresponding to árṇasā in the simile.

Now, as to their transitive jā́gṛvi-. To be fair, it is not only the instr. phrase at the beginning of the pāda but also the apparent ineptness of the simile madiró ná jā́gṛviḥ that lead them to their baroque interpr. The problem with the simile is that it seems to be a straight description of Soma, not a simile: the apparent meaning “wakeful like an exhilarating drink” or “like a wakeful exhilarating drink” is a fine literal (or as literal as we get in the RV) characterization of soma. Both madirá- and jā́gṛvi- regularly modify Soma, the latter even in vs. 6 in this same hymn. As Ge says (n. 12c), “ná als Vergleichswort macht Schwierigkeit.” And so both scholars search for ways to make this a real simile, which requires both words to be given senses they don’t ordinarily have. They take madirá- as referring to alcohol or some inebriating drink other than soma - even though it is never so used in the RV. And then, though jā́gṛvi- only means ‘wakeful’ in the RV as far as I can tell, including in vs. 6, they take it as expressing the effect that this other drink has on its drinkers: making wakeful, invigorating. And this all adds up to “Avec le lait de ta tige, toi (qui rends l’homme) vif comme (fait l’alcool) enivrant …” / “Mit der Milch des Stengels munter (machend) wie der berauschende (Branntwein) …” Although I realize that the simile is awkwardly comparing soma with a standard description of itself, the cure suggested by Ge/Re seems worse than the disease. I have several, not particularly satisfying suggestions for why we get a simile here. It may be that it is part of a simile chain: soma compared to a river, which in turn is compared to soma.

See VII.103.7ab (the frog hymn), where the frogs are compared to brahmins, who are in turn compared to frogs. Or else the animatized Soma the god is compared to soma the drink. But in any case, I prefer to accept the simile at face value, however clumsy, rather than erecting a fantastic superstructure by reinterpretating standard somic descriptors.
