+++
title = "14"

+++
While vs. 13 has a relatively perspicuous structure -- a single transitive yád clause whose final pāda is a simile matching the acc. direct object -- vs. 14 is a structural mess. Its first pāda is another simile in the acc. matching the direct object of vs. 13; it is followed by a yádi (or *yád ī; see below) clause (b), which may or may not contain a verb, followed by a rel. cl. (cd) introduced by yé, containing another simile referring to the same direct object but now in the nom. By now the original referent is quite distant, and it is not entirely clear which parts belong to the simile, which to the frame.

Pāda b is esp. problematic, mostly because of the ambiguity of the phrase ánu ṣváṇi, in which sváni has been identified variously as a noun or as a verb. The preponderance of opinion favors the former: Whitney (§390b, though see Roots, where he lists it, with ?, as an aor.), Gr (though he allows for the other poss.), Ge, Lub. On the other hand, Old, flg. BR, considers it a verb form, a passive aorist.

Wackernagel (AiG III.23) is uncertain. The noun-faction is further divided by what stem they assign it to: neut. -i-stem (Gr, Lub), root noun in -an- (Wh, and presumably Ge, since he tr. it as a loc. “im Getöse”). If it is a noun (‘sound’, vel sim.), a verb needs to be supplied with ánu, but this of course would pose no problem. I am always reluctant to oppose Old, and in this particular case there is strong objective evidence that he is correct, namely the close sandhi effect that retroflexes ṣ after ánu. A collection of all s-forms after ánu produces remarkably clear-cut results: ánu only retroflexes following verb forms, never nominal forms.

Although it may seem overkill to list all the examples, the collection may be useful for other purposes: ánu + VERB: I.167.10 [=182.8, III.39.8] ánu ṣyāt, I.185.4 ánu ṣyāma, V.73.4 ánu ṣṭáve, VIII.3.8 ánu ṣṭuvanti. There is only one verbal form without retroflexion: IV.4.2 ánu sprś̥ a.

ánu + NOMINAL (etc.): I.33.11 [=I.88.6, 176.2, III.51.11, IV.33.6, 52.6, VII.56.13, VIII.88.5] ánu svadhā́m, I.80.1 (etc.) ánu svarā́jyam, I.121.3 ánu svajā́m, I.134.1 ánu sūnṛ́tā, I.191.15 ánu saṃvátaḥ, III.7.6 [=V.59.1, IX.63.6] ánu svám, III.33.3 ánu saṃcárantī, III.35.8 ánu svā́ḥ, IV.40.4 ánu saṃtávītvat, IV.45.6 ánu svadháyā, V.32.10 ánu svadhā́vne, V.34.1 ánu svadhāmitā, VI.25.8 ánu sáho, VII.7.2 [X.14.2] ánu svā́ḥ, VII.31.7 ánu svadhā́varī, VIII.4.8 ánu spighyàm, VIII.6.38 ánu suvānā́sa, IX.103.5 ánu svadhā́ḥ, X.17.11 ánu saṃcárantam, X.17.11 ánu saptá, X.56.3 ánu satyā́, X.103.6 ánu sám.

Among the nominals it is striking how many begin with sv- as in our case.

I can see only one possible conclusion, that Old must be right, this is a 3rd sg.

passive (or rather, intransitive) aor., and we need to supply a subject. Old suggests chariot, which seems reasonable. As he points out, the RV has a bahuvrīhi svanádratha- lit. ‘having a sounding chariot’ (though prob. used as a PN), and a chariot sounding “following the roar (of the horses)” makes sense. II.4.6 vā́r ṇá pathā́ ráthyeva svānīt “like water along a path, like chariot (wheels) he has sounded” provides a parallel not only for the sounding chariot, but also for the rushing, sounding rivers in the simile of pāda a.

A few other loose ends in pāda b: I interpr. yádi as *yád ī “when it,” with shortening of ī before the cluster kl. A condition ‘if’ doesn’t make sense. As for that cluster, klóśa- is the only -l-form to √kruś ‘cry out’. Is this racetrack slang? Pāda c compares the steeds circling the race course to birds (of prey) circling over the raw flesh of a dead animal (a striking image). Ge considers the loc. gávi to be the correspondent of ā́miṣi in the simile: the cow is the prize over which the horses circle (“die wie die Vögel um das Aas, so um die Kuh(herde) kreisen”). The publ. tr. by contrast takes gávi as a piece of horse tack, the reins or something else made of leather, and construes it with gṛbhītā́ḥ. I now favor Ge’s interpr., which is more striking and which also conforms to the loc. of the stake found several times in this hymn. I would amend the tr. to “who, like birds over raw flesh, keep circling (the race course) over the bovine (prize), being held firm in your two arms …”