+++
title = "04"

+++
Another difficult vs., esp. the end of pāda a: áyā nú, which has provoked much disc. (see esp. Old). I consider it a śleṣa. Central to my approach is the assumption that there’s a clause break before these two words in either reading. On the one hand, I have adopted von Bradke’s clever idea (op. cit., 121), that áyā nú is direct speech, with áyā the 1st sg. pres. subjunctive to √i ‘go’ followed by the temporal particle nú in expected clause-2nd position. This is the collective announcement of the Maruts, “who do not retreat from their birth”: “I will go now.” They are eager to exit the womb (or udder). We might of course expect a plural verb, but Marut reference always vacillates between pl. and collective sg. (see in fact the immediately preceding vs. 3), and this exact expression echoes that of Indra in the narrative of his unnatural birth in IV.18.2 nā́hám áto nír ayā “I will not go from here,” a narrative that might well have been familiar to all.

The other reading of áyā is the more generally accepted one, though I think other interpr. have missed a crucial detail. It is generally taken as the instr. sg. fem.

of the ayám prn. (back to Max Müller; see Ge n. 4a). But this form is ordinarily accented on the final, ayā́. Initial accent on the oblique forms of this pronominal stem is restricted to emphatic usage in pāda-initial position (cf. the variant usage of, e.g., ásya, asyá, and asya). Those like Ge and Re who take it as this instr. but construe it with the rest of pāda a must wave away the accent (or ignore it, as Re does). For such interpr. cf. “Die nicht vor der Geburt auf diese Art zurückscheuen …”; “… devant un naissance de la sorte” (my italics). However, init. accent is perfectly at home if we assume a clause break before áyā, an assumption supported by the position of nú, which overwhelmingly takes 2nd or modified 2nd position. I think it emphatically announces the way the birth really happened -- and given the unnaturalness of the birth (being “milked out” of their mother), emphasis is certainly called for.

Either of these interpr. seems to require that the yád in c actually have domain over b as well (though there might be a way out of that if one were sufficiently ingenious), but given the syntactic tangle the vs. is already in and the looseness of the relativization elsewhere in this hymn) (see a similar problem in the next vs., 5b, this does not seem to me too much of a problem.

In b it is not clear to me what flaws the Maruts needed to purify; Ge (n. 4b) suggests it’s the unnatural pregnancy and birth, and he may well be right.

Gr (and Lub) assign ukṣámānāḥ to √ukṣ ‘sprinkle’, but ‘grow’ seems more likely (so also Ge, Re).

Our problematic expression may have spawned the two ánu forms (in c and d) from áyā nú. The first is in the familiar expression ánu jóṣam (II.21.3, etc.) “according to / at pleasure”; the latter I construe with tanvàm (cf. I.147.4 ánu mrk̥ ṣīṣta tanvàm, with similar discontinuity). Neither √vakṣ / ukṣ nor √mṛc otherwise ánu.

