+++
title = "05"

+++
This last vs. of the birth saga does not let up on obscurity, and my interpr.

differs in part from those of others, though there is general agreement on the point of the vs.; see, e.g., Ge (n. 5): that the Maruts got no milk from their mother, but undeterred, they quickly became the Maruts we know, with their shared name and their tumultuous behavior. It is striking that the vs. also identifies the Maruts with Pṛśni verbally. Not only is the same construction used for their names (1b, 5b; see next para.), but within the vs. both Pṛśni (a) and the Maruts (c) are called ayā́s- ‘irrepressible’ (with this adj. regularly used of the Maruts elsewhere), and sudā́nu- ‘of good drops/gifts’, a standing epithet of the Maruts, is applied to Pṛśni in d (see Ge’s n. 5d) The vs. is also linked ring compositionally with vs. 1. In 1b it is asserted that the two udders referred to in 1c and d — the latter being Pṛśni’s udder, which will produce the Maruts as milk — “own the same name ‘milker’” (samānáṃ nā́ma dhenú pátyamānam), while in 5b the Maruts after birth assume their (shared) name “Marut”: ā́nā́ma dhṛṣṇú mā́rutaṃ dádhānāḥ -- note, inter alia, the echo of dhenú in dhṛṣṇú. Note also 1c / 5a LOC doháse: in 1c the other (=non-Pṛśni) udder constantly gives milk (doháse) to mortals (márteṣu), while here in 5a Pṛśni does not give milk (ná … doháse) to the Maruts (yéṣu) even right after birth -- even though she milked them out of that very udder.

The vs. also has repeated phonological play with ayā́(a), ayā́so (c), (áv)a yāsad (d), picking up the problematic áyā of 4a.

In addition to its other problems, the vs. is metrically troubled, with a bad cadence in a and 9 syllables in c.

Both Ge and Old (and also von Bradke) take makṣū́with the b pāda, which requires the rel. cl. of pāda a to be embedded, but I think it goes rather with its own pāda, indicating that even right after their birth Pṛśni deprived them of milk (sim.

Re). I then take the yé of c to have domain over b as well -- the same aberrant relative placement as suggested for 4bc.

The hapax stauná- is, as Re says, “ininterprétable” (which does not stop him from trying). Ge suggests reading *astaunāḥ (with abhinihita sandhi after yé in the Saṃhitā text), deriving it from √stu and tr. ‘ohne Lob(?)’. Although this has the merit of connecting it to a known root and without phonological disturbance, I find Re’s tr. “sans être inertes” (without comm. on the etym., but perhaps based on von Bradke’s “Sie stehen nicht still”) more appealing in context, since it would provide a satisfying contrast with ayā́saḥ: in Re’s tr., “eux qui, sans être inertes, (sont bien au contraire) inlassables.” I am also struck by the echo pointed out by von Bradke, with our staunā́matched by (ta)sthau ná in the next vs., 6d. As often, contextual poetics may have led to the choice of an enigmatic word. My own extremely speculative interpr. (“like posts”) is that it is related to sthū́ṇā- ‘pillar’, which is well anchored in Iranian (YAves. stū̆na-, stunā-, OP stūnā-, as well as Middle and Mod. Iranian) and found also widely in MIA and NIA (Pā, Pkt thūṇā, etc.). This suggestion requires the perhaps counter-intuitive assumption that the aspiration in sthū́ṇā is secondary, perhaps based on the MIA form (where initial *st would of course develop into th); the unmotivated retroflex ṇ in the Vedic form might give some support to that hypothesis. And secondary (if it is secondary) association with √sthā ‘stand’ would also encourage an aspirated initial. Another wrinkle is that it may have trisyllabic scansion (so Gr), but that is further than I can go. For a similarly impenetrable form in this maṇḍala with the same phonological profile, see staulā́in VI.44.7 and comm. ad loc. The last problem in the vs. (or at least the last one I will tackle) is in d: does nū́cid here mean ‘even now’ or ‘never’. Ge, Re, and von Bradke opt for the latter; Scar (405) gives a choice of both. Although these two choices seem starkly oppositional, they may amount to the same thing with the subjunctive áva yāsat: even now she is trying to appease them, and she never will be able to.

