+++
title = "02"

+++
The image in 1cd is repeated with variation in 2ab. The fem. sg. subj. of 1d has been replaced by the fem. pl., easily interpr. as plural Dawns, as often. The verb is held constant, though the root aor. atnata substitutes for the pres. vitanóti. The waters/rays of light that the Dawn spread out in 1cd are now characterized as forming a pattern or tracery across the dusky realm (víśvam ā́rájaḥ) that also figured in 1cd. The spreading performed by the Dawns is done “along the same course” (samānyā́vṛtáyā) by my interpretation -- that is, the same course that the successive Dawns follow day after day. I do not understand why their pattern of light is “herostrengthening” (vīrá-vakṣaṇa-). Perhaps this is simply a reference to the usual trope that dawn rouses all people to undertake their daily labors.

The adjective may also prepare for the more human-oriented 2nd hemistich, in which the pious man seems to do battle with time itself, embodied by the ever advancing dawns. The interpr. of the hemistich is complicated by the shifting senses of the words ápara- and pū́rva-. If these have temporal reference here, the sense would have to be that the man repels later dawns, while lengthening his life with earlier ones (so in fact both Ge and Re). But this does not accord with Rigvedic conceptions of time: there is no preventing the dawning of each new day; even a hero cannot contravene the cosmic laws of time. It would also be somewhat odd to say that a man lengthens his life with past dawns; this would seem to indicate that he has no future, unless he can fight off the dawns to come. It therefore seems preferable to follow Old (also fld by WG), who takes the two adjectives as spatial: ápara- ‘behind, to the west’, pū́rva- ‘in front, to the east’. With these values in play, the man sends each new day behind him -- the dawn facing backwards as she passes from east to west -- and piles up his future with the dawns in front of him, to come.

This vs. is full of alliteration and sound play, esp. in pāda c: a: tā́atnata vayúnaṃ vīrávakṣaṇam / c: ápo ápācīr áparā ápejate (noted also by Watkins, Dragon 109) / d: prá pū́rvābhis.
