+++
title = "06"

+++
in this maṇḍala). If it is Indra, the loc. does not have to refer to the goal of a brandished weapon, but can simply be a type of loc. absolute: “when the māyín- (is there),” that is, when Indra attends the sacrifice.

The doubled preverb ā́, found both at the beginning of the hemistich and directly before the verb, seems to be a case of mere repetition. The second hemistich also contains a temporal expression, saṃvartáyanto ví ca vartayann áhā “rolling up the days, they unroll them (again).” The idiom sám/ví √vṛt is used of rolling up or out hides (cárma, VI.8.3, VIII.6.5), and this action is then metaphorically applied to darkness (támas-)(cf., e.g., V.31.3). The rolling up and out of darkness is thus a way of expressing the alternations of darkness and light, night and day -- in other words, a more poetic instantiation of the phrase in pāda a ahanyèbhir aktúbhiḥ. The problem is how to connect this fairly straightforward expression to pāda c, if it is connected. Although it is an easy assumption that cd has a subord. clause / main clause structure (so Ge and Re ), it is possible to take c as attached to the first hemistich and d independent (so WG and me). The next question is whether the pl. subject of pracáran and that of ví ca vartayan are coreferential, and if so, who are they? and whose “own house” (své dáme) do they enter? The latter question is easier to answer: (své) dáme is almost always Agni’s. I therefore think that yásya also refers to Agni, and this is indirect evidence for my identification of Agni as subj. of ā́jigharti. But who enters Agni’s house “by the hundred” (śatám) and rolls up and unrolls the days? In the publ. tr. I tentatively identify the subj. as “dawns,” with full awareness that this is grammatically problematic: the pres. part.

vartáyantaḥ in d is masc., and so the only way to make this work is to assume that dawns are the subj. of c, but the subj. of d reverts to a generic masc. I suggested the dawns as subj. because they are the standard regulators of time (for this see VII.79.2, 80.1 with sám √vṛt and ví √vṛt respectively). Others (explicitly WG) suggest the gods or some subset thereof, but the gods don’t really have the role of causing the alternation of days and nights. I must leave the identity of the subject uncertain, although I am still inclined to think that it is at least an indirect ref. to the dawns.

I do not understand the function of vā in c; JSK does not discuss this passage.

As for the ca in d, I think it contrastively conjoins the preverbs sam and ví, even though the morphological formations to which these preverbs are attached are not parallel.

