+++
title = "04"

+++
A difficult vs. with multiple interpretations, which I will not treat in detail.

The difficulties of the vs. arise in part from the fact that it can apply to both the ritual fire and the sun. Note that in contrast to the first three vss. the word agní- does not appear in this vs., which absence licenses the double reference. This double reference begins, and is least obscure, in the first pāda, where the entity in question (tám) grows “in the airy realm (as/and) in his own house”: “his own house” is clearly a reference to Agni as the fire in every house (see also 11c), but “in the airy realm” can refer both to the strengthening of the sun’s light after it rises and to the smoke and flames of fire rising in the air. Note that there is no simile marker here: the fire is not compared to the sun or vice versa; they are identified.

The second pāda uses the technical ritual term ā́√dhā ‘establish’ (used of the ceremonial establishment of the ritual fire), but it is also used less technically here for the placement of both fire and sun on their respective paths. Loc. hvāré ‘on a meandering (course)’ can refer to the unpredictable motion of fire and its products (smoke/flames). How this word can apply to the sun is less clear, since the sun’s course is certainly not unpredictable. However, derivatives of the root √hvṛ can refer to curves, and the sun’s trajectory up, across, and down the sky can be seen as a curving path. (This second sense should have been registered in the publ. tr.) I should say that I explicitly do not think that it refers to a snake here (pace Old [SBE], WG), although the interpr. is tempting due to the similarity of the lexicon and imagery in this vs. to I.141.7, where hvārá- refers to Agni as a twisting snake. Such an identification here would require emendation to acc. *hvārám, which Old was willing to accept in SBE and still defends in the Noten, but which does not conform to our current restrained attitude towards RVic emendation (in part due to Old). I also do not think that candrám in the simile refers to the moon (as Thieme [KlSch 78] and WG do).

In c ‘son’ is universally supplied with patarám ‘flying, winged’ (e.g., Ge “den geflügelten (Sohn?) der Pṛśni”). But Pṛśni’s son(s) are the Maruts; Agni never seems to be so identified. The closest any interpreter can come is X.189.1, where a gaúḥ pṛ̥́śniḥ ‘dappled cow’ may, or may not, refer to the fire, but there is no parental engagement there. The gen. pṛ́śnyāḥ (as here; on the ending see comm. ad 7b) is elsewhere construed only with ‘udder’ (ū́dhar-, II.34.2, 10; cf. also IV.3.10) or ‘milk’ (páyaḥ, VI.48.22); though it is true that the alternative gen. pṛ́śneḥ is found with ‘sons’ (pṛ́śneḥ putrā́(ḥ), V.58.5), these are the Maruts, as expected. Since the only other attestations of pṛ́śnyāḥ in II limit ‘udder’, I supply that word here. Although “the flying (udder) of Pṛśni” sounds comical, I take it to refer to a rain cloud, as also apparently in II.34. The fire and the sun are thus implicitly compared to this third entity. I read citáyantam in two senses, ‘appearing’ and ‘perceiving, observing’ (cf. citayat in the immediately following vs.), with the former sense here.

The other sense of citáyantam governs the rest of the vs.; the instr. akṣábhiḥ ‘with eyes’ signals the ‘perceive’ value, as is reflected in all the standard tr.

(although WG take the participle as a double tr. ‘make perceive’, which is not supported by the zero-grade root syllable [expect *cetáyantam]). We are not home free, however, for the simile, pāthó ná payúm, gives trouble. The problem is pātháḥ.

If we try to take it to as acc. to neut. pā́thas- ‘pen, fold’, which would work semantically (“observing … as a protector (does) a fold”), the accent is wrong; if we try to take it as gen. of pánth- ‘path’, which also works semantically (“like the protector of a path”), the length of the first vowel is wrong. Lub tries to avoid this Scylla and Charybdis situation by identifying it as a 2nd du. pres. to √pā ‘protect’, but this makes more difficulties: who are the two subjects? (perhaps he means the two races, but they are in 3rd ps. ref.), and the placement of the ná is badly wrong. In the end I follow the ad hoc solution set out by Old (Noten): a gen. of the ‘path’ word makes most sense, and it may owe its anomalous long vowel to phonological attraction to pāyúm in the same syntagm along with some conflation with pā́thas-.

