+++
title = "05"

+++
The apparent fem. loc. pl. vṛdhasānā́su to the irregular participial stem vṛdhasāná- ‘growing, having grown’ is generally taken as referring to the plants among which the fire is blazing, on the basis of X.92.1 ... śuṣkāsu háriṇīṣu járbhurat, with járbhurat ‘flickering, quivering’ as here. However, plants do not ‘grow’ when they are burned -- quite the contrary -- and I’m not at all sure that √vṛdh ‘grow, increase, strengthen’ is used of plant growth: we may be misled by translation language. Instead on the basis of IV.3.6 dhíṣṇyāsu vr̥dhasānó agne “growing in the holy places [=hearths], o Agni,” I interpret vṛdhasānā́su as representing vṛdhasāná(ḥ) āsu, with masc. nom. sg. + fem. pronominal loc. and irregular sandhi of -aḥ ā-. There are only three occurrences of the stem vṛdhasāná-; in addition to IV.3.6 and our example here, the other one, at VI.12.3, is also nom. sg. referring to Agni. One potential problem with this suggestion is that, since the hearths have not been previously mentioned, we might expect accented āsú. However, a number of occurrences of unaccented āsu lack clear referents in the preceding discourse (e.g., I.95.5, III.55.9, VIII.41.7).

Like citáyantam in 4cd, citayat in d has two different readings: with the preceding phrase dyaúr ná stṛ́bhiḥ it means ‘appear’, while with the following ródasī ánu (echoing jánasī ubhé ánu in 4d) it means ‘perceive’. The functional split is clearer in this vs. than in 4cd and could be considered a species of poetic repair, or at least “poetic reinforcement.” See also vs. 10 below.
