+++
title = "029"

+++
Indra As noted in the publ. intro., the hymn is punctuated by expressions of somadrinking, each slightly different and generally found in the 2nd half of an even pāda: 2b ... papivā́ṃsaṃ sutásya 3b ... sómasya súṣutasya peyāḥ 3d ... papivā́m índro asya [rhyming with 2b] 5b ... somapéyam [cf. 3b] [7d sutám pibat ... sómam] 8b ... somyā́pā́ḥ 11d ... ápibaḥ sómam asya


## 01
I follow Brereton (Ādityas, 165-66), who in turn followed Thieme (Mitra and Aryaman, 78-77), in taking aryamā́not as nom. sg. masc. (as it is normally and as taken by the standard tr.), but as acc. pl. neut. construed with trī́(like trī́rocanā́in the next pāda). Against Thieme’s “three hospitalities,” Brereton plausibly suggests that in this context the three aryamā́must refer to “what governs the ritual,” perhaps the three soma-pressings or the three fires.

Pāda-initial trī́, found here in a and b, recurs in 7c, 8a, b (also non-initial in 7b).

In c pūtá-dakṣa- (/pūtá-dakṣas-) is ordinarily Ādityan vocabulary (though used of the Maruts also in VIII.94.7, 10). Ge (/WG) supply the Ādityas as the subj. of dhārayanta in b and of course take Aryaman as the subject of pāda a. By contrast, I think the Maruts are subjects of all three pādas -- but they are identified with the Ādityas throughout, as the use of pūtádakṣa-, ordinarily a qualifier of the Ādityas, makes clear.


## 02
Ge (/WG) take abhí yád áhim han as subordinate to ā́datta vájram in the same pāda. Although this fits the metrical scheme slightly better, it makes some trouble with the logical sequence of events (“he took the mace when he smashed the serpent,” almost implying that the smashing occurred first). It works better as subordinate to the main clause of d.

The word order áhim hán and the lack of augment on the verb scrambles the standard formula, producing almost a syncopated effect, which is repaired in 3d.


## 03
Ge (/WG) take havyám as the subj. of ávindat: “the oblation found the cows for Manu.” This interpr. accounts for the accent on ávindat, which would be generated by hí. But it is otherwise bizarre: gā́ḥ √vid ‘find the cows’ is a standard formula in the Vala myth, and the subject of the verb is always Indra or his agent(s)/companion(s) (e.g., Aṅgirases I.62.2, Saramā V.45.7, 8); for Indra himself cf., e.g., I.101.5, II.19.3, VIII.96.17, and in a variant of the formula in the next hymn

## 04
vidó gavā́m ūrvám. I know of no passages in which the oblation is credited with finding the cows, and in fact soma plays far less of a role in the successful outcome of the Vala myth than in that of the Vṛtra myth (though see 12a below). I therefore take tád dhí havyám as a nominal sentence completing b, with a clause break in the middle of c. I attribute the accent on ávindat to contrast with the immediately following verb áhan, which opens the next pāda. This hymn in fact shows a penchant for pāda-internal clause breaks: cf. in the immediately preceding vs. 2c, as well as 8d, 9d, 11d, 13b, all except the last right after the caesura as here.


## 04
For Indra enwrapped in the earth, cf. I.173.6 sáṃ vivya índro vrjána ̥ ṃ ná bhū́ma “Indra has enwrapped himself in the earth like a girth.” Cf. also his wearing the earth III.32.11, VIII.4.8. Although here the enwrapping seems presented as a handicap, esp. given the cid, in the just cited passages the images seem rather to emphasize Indra’s vastness.

As noted also by Ge, Schaeffer, and WG, jígartim … apajárgurāṇaḥ is a word play, but the words presumably belong to different roots. The first is universally assigned to √gṝ ‘swallow’, but the root affiliation of the second is disputed. Ge and EWA (s.v. GARī p. 470) assign it to a √gṝ ‘hold out’, but I follow Schaeffer (Intens., 116-22) in taking it to √gṝ ‘greet, extol’, with the negative sense contributed by the preverb ápa. So also WG and Oberlies (Relig. I.401). See also nearby apagū́rya (V.32.6).

The etymological separation of jígartim and apajárgurāṇaḥ invites further scrutiny of the hapax jígartim. As noted above, this word is generally grouped with √gṝ ‘swallow’ and interpreted as an agent noun ‘swallower’ (my ‘gulper’). However, with apajárgurāṇaḥ off the table, there is no particular contextual support for this interpr., though it is certainly semantically acceptable. Far more troubling are the serious formal problems. For one thing, -ti- is by no means an agent-noun suffix; it normally of course forms feminine abstracts, though AiG II.2.636-37 does register a number of such stems that have been reanalyzed “zur Bez. der persönlichen Träger des Verbalbegriffs zu verwenden.” Debrunner himself identifies our form as a 3rd sg.

verb form inflected as a -ti-stem (AiG II.2.638), but this interpr. has nothing to recommend it. Not only is such a morphological transfer not a feature of the RV, but there is also no such verb stem available to be nominalized. The root √gṝ ‘swallow’ does not have a redupl. pres. or in fact any redupl. stem save for the pf. jagāra and the intensive subj. jalgulas (I.28.1); the single form of the redupl. aor. ajīgar (I.163.7) supposedly belonging to this root (see Gr, and Whit. Roots) actually belongs with the other forms of this stem to the root √gṝ ‘awaken’, and we just discussed intens. part. járgurāṇa- above. It is, further, a seṭ root; it’s hard to know what its pre-C full grade should be in a redupl. pres. formation since there are no parallel formations to roots in -ṝ that I know of (*jígarīti? cf. VS galgalīti and EWA s.vv. GARI2 , GAL), but presumably not simply gar. In short, neither the nominal morphology nor the root formation of jígarti- is easily accounted for under the standard hypothesis, but I have nothing better to substitute. I therefore retain the rendering in the publ. tr., though with full awareness of its fragility. My thanks to Veronique Kremmer, who drew my attention to jígarti- and its many problems and discussed the issues at length with me.


## 06
Indra’s two actions in this vs. are expressed by injunctives (vivṛścát b, bādhata d), as in the preceding vs. (kaḥ 5d), but the middle verb, árcanti in c, is emphatically present. The configuration here, #árcantī́ndram marútaḥ, matches that of 1c #árcanti tvā marútaḥ. See Hoffmann (Injunk. 165) on this vs., who seems to think the “timeless, mentioning” function of the injunctive can be so distant from a real preterite that it can drag in present indicatives. I would attribute it rather to the attempt in this hymn to associate the heroic deeds of the past with the activities of the present sacrificers. It is also barely possible that the text originally read

*árcantíndram, that is, *árcant índram with the underlying 3rd pl. ending -nt
preserved before vowel, but later reint. as pres. -nti after -nt regularly became -nn.

The -í- could then have been lengthened, as if a sandhi product of árcanti índram, with no metrical consequences. The change would have been facilitated by the model of likewise pāda-initial árcanti in 1c, as well as arcanti in 12b. Still, on balance I find this unlikely. Other examples of preserved -nt because of early misparsing as -nti occur before the enclitic pronoun īm, and the result in either case would be -ntīm. See disc. ad I.67.4, etc.

## 07
On neut. pl. mahiṣā́in conjunction with the numerical expression trī́śatā́ni see Old. Note the alternative phrasing with gen. pl. in 8a trī́… śatā́mahiṣā́ṇām.

## 08
Gr and Ge [/WG] take both ághaḥ and ápāḥ as 3rd sg. Since ághas belongs to the root pres. to √ghas, either 2nd or 3rd sg. is grammatically possible. But for ápāḥ to be 3rd sg., an s-aor. stem ápās- has to be posited, for which there is no other support save for a med. pāsta in a mā́-prohibitive in the AV (XII.3.43). Nevertheless, Narten does set up such a stem (Sig.Aor. 168). I see no reason to do so; the presence of nom. sg. maghávā, adduced as evidence by Narten, is not sufficient, since nom. sg.

appositives to 2nd sg. subjects are common. Also common is abrupt shifting between 2nd and 3rd ps., found already in this hymn between vss. 1 and 2, 4 and 5, 5 and 6. In our vs. we must assume that a shift happens between the hemistichs, given the 3rd sg.

jaghā́na in 8d, but this is hardly unprecedented -- and note that it returns abruptly to 2nd ps. in vs. 9. I therefore prefer to interpret 8ab as couched in the 2nd sg., as in the publ. tr. But if a 3rd sg. reading of ápāḥ is really desirable, I would prefer to consider the -s ending a local analogy to the precative peyāḥ at the end of 3b, reinforced by the ambig. parallel ághaḥ, rather than setting up an s-aorist stem to account for a single form.

I follow Ge in taking both kārám and bháram as the direct speech expression of a victory cry. The former is appropriate to gaming contexts, while the latter is at home in battles. Our ahvanta … bháram has a compositional equivalent bhára-hūti-, for which see comm. ad I.129.2; for kārám √kṛ, see I.131.5. It may be convenient to assemble here some passages containing both bhára- and kārá- (or derivatives): I.l12.1 yā́bhir [ūtíbhiḥ] bháre kārám áṃśāya jínvathaḥ; VIII.66.1 (likewise an Indra hymn): (índram ... ūtáye/ ....../) huvé bháram ná kāríṇam; IX.16.5 mahé bhárāya kāríṇaḥ; IX.14.1 kāráṃ bíbhrat puruspṛ́ham. See also Wackernagel KlSch. 340ff.


## 09
On uśánā as an indeclinable, see my 2007 “Vedic Uśanā Kāvya and Avestan Kauui Usan: On the Morphology of the Names” (Fs. Jasanoff).

On the basis of other mentions of this myth, 2nd du. áyātam must conceal a Vāyav Indraś ca type construction, with the other subject, beside voc. indra, being Kutsa. Cf. nearby dual dvandva indrā-kutsā (V.31.9). The gapping of Kutsa in the first half of the verse is repaired by cd saráthaṃ yayātha, kútsena, with the same root √yā as in áyātam. I do not understand the change in tense stem.


## 10
In the publ. tr. I take kútsāya primarily with pāda a, though syntactically and metrically it should go with b. I would now emend the tr. to “the other you made into wide space for Kutsa to drive” or “… for Kutsa for driving.” I’m not sure how a wheel can become a wide space -- what sounds like a kind of highway -- but the addition of Kutsa doesn’t make it any less comprehensible.

I take anā́saḥ ‘mouthless’ as proleptic, describing the state of the Dasyus after Indra has finished crushing them (sim. to I.32.6 *anā́ḥ pipiṣe), while Ge [/WG] take it as a standing characteristic of the Dasyus (“mouthless Dasyus”). There is no way to tell.


## 11
The etym. fig. pácan paktī́ḥ is also a proleptic expression of sorts, “cooking (food, so that it is) cooked,” though since paktí- is not an adj./participle, but a noun identifying a type of food, the parallel isn’t exact. For other exx. of paktí- √pac, see IV.24.7, VII.32.8.


## 12
This vs. brings the third repetition of arcanti (1c, 6c [or árcan(t); see above]; cf. ā́rcan 2b).

I don’t quite understand the double cid construction in cd, where even one cid seems somewhat superfluous. Ge (/WG) take it as concessive and logically to be construed with apidhā́navantam (“the cowpen, although it had a cover” [Ge: “obwohl verschlossen,” sim. WG]). This is possible, though I don’t like the position of cid, and I would also note that #gávyaṃ cid ūrvám is also found in VII.90.4, where a concessive value is harder to wring out.


## 13
Gr, Ge (/WG), and Klein (DGRV I.219) interp. pári √car as ‘serve’.

Although this sense is found in later Vedic, the RVic instances of this lexeme only have the literal meaning ‘go around’ (e.g., III.7.2) with the developed sense ‘encompass’. (I.127.9 comes closest to ‘serve’, but the ‘surround’ sense is dominant.) Interpreting pári carāṇi here as ‘serve’ requires the part. vidvā́n to take an obj.

(“knowing your heroic deeds …”), but pāda-final vidvā́n is almost always used absolutely. Moreover áparītaḥ (pári √i) in the next vs. continues the thought of conceptual circumscription. Ge (/WG) and Klein divide the vs. syntactically into ab / cd, with the rel. cl. of c expressing the obj. of d. By contrast I think the lexical parallelism and the conjunction co [=ca u] of … yā́cakártha / yā́co … kṛṇávaḥ of bc mark those relative clauses as tightly conjoined, and I take them as subordinate to pāda a. Further, the last pāda préd u tā́te vidátheṣu bravāma strikes me as a self-contained (pseudo- )refrain, reminiscent of the Gṛtsamāda refrain in II: bṛhád vadema vidáthe suvī́rāḥ (II.1.16d etc.).


## 14
This vs. is structured somewhat like vs. 13, with (a) etā́víśvā cakṛvā́n corresponding to (13b) (vīryā̀) … yā́cakártha, though with pf. participle not rel. cl., and (c) yā́cid nú … kṛṇávaḥ corresponding even more closely to (13c) yā́co nú … kṛṇávaḥ. I would therefore now slightly emend the publ. tr. to reflect this parallelism more closely: “By your nature you cannot be circumscribed in heroism -- you, Indra, (as one) having done all these many (deeds) (as well as) those (deeds) that you will do even now in your daring. There exists no one to obstruct this power of yours.” In other words I take pādas a and c as parallel adjunct expressions, with b as their joint main clause, and d (like 13d) independent. Note that d has no overt referent for yā́in c. The English is awkward, but this structure corresponds better to the Skt.


## 15
On the sandhi in návyā ákarma see Old.
