+++
title = "030"

+++
Indra There are a number of paired repetitions of words and phrases in earlier and later parts of the hymn, but not enough to define an omphalos: e.g., -senaḥ# 3d / sénāḥ# 9b; X Y cakrṣ̥ e 4a / X Y cakre 9a; yudháye 4b / 9d; áśmānam cid 4c / 8c; gávām ... usríyānām 4d / 11d.


## 01
Despite the distance between them and the syntagms in between, I take rāyā́ and ūtī́as parallel polarized instr. to be construed primarily with gántā. Ge and WG differently, though also differently from each other.

It is tempting to interpr gántā in d as a periphrastic future, a temptation yielded to in the publ. tr.

## 01-02
Note the reciprocal ‘seeking’ (ichán) of Indra (1c) and his devotee (2b).


## 02
WG take sasvár as ‘in sleep’, against the standard interpr. ‘in secret’, arguing that the latter does not make sense with bubudhānā́ḥ in d. But pāda d is not directly associated with pāda a, which, with b, compares the poet’s pursuit of Indra to the stealthy tracking behavior of a hunter. Moreover, the other three exx. of sasvár(tā) (in a tight knot in VII.58.5, 59.7, 60.10) clearly mean ‘in secret’, as opposed to ‘in the open’ (cf. the contrast in VII.58.5 with āvír ‘openly’). It is true that the standard etymology of sasvár takes it from √sas ‘sleep’ (see EWA s.v. SAS), but the semantic development to ‘in secret’ isn’t difficult to imagine -- esp. if Skt. √sas, which violates standard root structure constraints, was onomatopoetic for the shushing/hushing verbal gesture (English “shh,” etc.). From “keep quiet” to “keep secret” is a short step. Although √sas is clearly an inherited root, with cognates in Avestan and Anatolian, the onomatopoetic interpr. could be regularly (re-)actualized by association with the (near-universal?) living “shh” interjection.

The position of anyā́n in b should, by my rules, make it definite (“the others”).

Though both Ge and WG render it as indefinite, there is no reason why it can’t be definite: the poet consults with his priestly/poetic colleagues or with those “who know” (vidváṃs-) Their answer, referring to “we men,” suggests that it is a defined group, quite possibly the priests performing the morning ritual. The action that qualifies them for attaining Indra -- waking up (early) -- is surely not simply reflecting a general sentiment like “the early bird gets the worm,” but refers to Indra’s attendance at the morning pressing; cf., e.g., IV.35.7 prātáḥ sutám apibo haryaśva “Early in the morning you drank the pressed (soma), you of the fallow bays.”


## 03
The syntax in the first hemistich is a little rough. yā́te kṛtā́ni in pāda a appears to be an embedded relative clause, a construction that is rare to non-existent in the RV. Its position between the preverb and the verb of the main cl. (prá … brávāma) makes it difficult to interpret it any other way. The fact that it is a nominal clause, an NP serving as direct object, may make the embedding seem less of a syntactic violation. (Note that Ge simply ignores the rel. prn.) The main verb brávāma is accented because it is effectively in pāda-initial position: the initial accented voc. índra is extra-clausal.

The second rel. clause yā́ni no jújoṣaḥ “which of ours you will enjoy” appears to be parallel to the embedded NP, but it is a little skewed semantically. Indra should not enjoy his deeds, but rather enjoy hearing our recital of them (see Ge “die du von uns gern hören wirst” [my italics], with ‘hear’ silently supplied). Alternatively it would be possible to assume that the 2nd rel. is (covertly) conjoined to the first and refers to different deeds, “(and) which (deeds) of ours you will enjoy” -- but it is hardly likely that Indra cares about what we do (besides pressing soma), so this interpr. is pragmatically blocked. WG supply “(in) unseren (Worten)” as the antecedent to the second rel. prn., such that what Indra will enjoy is our words, not his deeds (“(in) unseren (Worten), an welchen du Freude hast”); this seems to me to deploy too much machinery to repair what is simply a somewhat loose expression.

It would be technically possible to take the first hemistich as consisting only of relative clauses, with the main clause represented by c with an unexpressed resumptive “(those deeds)”: “Which deeds of yours we shall now proclaim at the pressing, which you will enjoy, (those deeds) he will learn ...” The accent on brávāma would then be because it is in a dependent clause. Although this interpr.

would save us from an embedded relative (see above), the rhetoric of the 1st hemistich, with prá nú vayám … brávāma reminiscent of I.32.1 índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi prá vocam and similar passages, strongly suggests an annunciatory declaration rather than a subordination.

## 04
Ge (/WG) assume that c, like d, refers to the opening of the Vala cave. They therefore either take didyuto ví ‘flashed forth’ as a stand in for ‘broke/split apart’ (Ge, flg. Sāy.’s vyabhinaḥ) or disjoin didyutaḥ from ví and supply another verb with the preverb (or so I understand WG’s “… blitzend, zer(sprengt)”). But c and d do not have to refer to a single feat: a and b do not, and the recital of kṛtā́ni promised in 3ab covers a number of different deeds in the vss. to come. Moreover, though áśman- ‘stone’ can refer to the Vala cave, it has a number of other possible referents (see 8c where Namuci’s head is equated/compared with an áśman-), including Indra’s own weapon. Cf. IV.22.1 yó áśmānaṃ śávasā bíbhrad éti “who [=Indra] keeps bearing the stone with his power,” with the śávasā found also here. Since √dyut is very commonly found with ví (including the common and lexicalized root-noun cmpd.

vidyút- ‘lightning’) and since one of the sites to which a preverb in tmesis moves is directly after its verb (and here also adjoining a metrical boundary), it seems very likely that preverb and verb belong together -- and have their normal sense. In my interpr. this lexeme incorporates a simile: ‘cause to flash like lightning’ / ‘cause to lightning’ (unfortunately English does not have such a verb). In other words, with his power Indra can make even the dull and homely material stone flash like a lightning bolt.


## 05
The Pp. interprets paramá as nom. sg. m. paramáḥ, and Ge (/WG) follow suit. I prefer the equally possible reading paramé, on the basis of several ‘born’ passages with this expression. Cf., e.g., I.143.2 sá jā́yamānaḥ paramé vyòman (though the subj. is Agni there).

In my view cid often takes Wackernagel’s Law position, even when it seems to limit a different word in the clause. Hence my “even the gods,” though devā́(ḥ) is at the end of the pāda. Its positioning there may be to take advantage of its adjacency to víśvā(ḥ) across the pāda boundary. Although the latter is fem. and must modify acc. pl. apáḥ ‘waters’, its position evokes the common locution “all the gods / the All Gods.” In fact, the expression “all the waters” is vanishingly rare — besides this passage I have found only VII.95.1 — and so “all” belongs more naturally with the immediately preceding “gods” than with its grammatical partner.

Note the switch from 2nd ps. ref. to Indra (rel. cl. 5ab) to 3rd ps. ref. (main cl.

5c, new cl. 5d).


## 06
Referent shift continues: 2nd ps. in ab, 3rd in cd.


## 07
There are several uncertainties in this vs. As often the function and syntactic affiliation of janúṣā are unclear. I construe it with mṛ́dhaḥ, but Ge and WG (in different ways) take it with Indra. This is also possible.

The participial phrase dā́nam ínvan “stimulating giving” seems oddly embedded in the distracted VP ví ṣú mṛ́dhaḥ … áhan “you hewed apart the negligent ones.” The positioning between the preverb and its verb in tmesis may be a kind of iconic reflection of the separation sense of the preverb (‘apart’). For a similar ex. see I.103.2. On the participial phrase see further below.

I have been puzzled by the phrase gávā … saṃcakānáḥ, though I think I now see a solution (see below). For one thing, √kā [/kan] is not otherwise found with sám (anywhere in Sanskrit, at least judging from Monier-Williams); for another, this root is not construed with the instr. (pace Gr, whose supposed exx. should all be interpr.

otherwise). And finally I cannot think of a (solitary) cow that figures prominently in Indra mythology, either as a companion (as I took it in the publ. tr.) or as a source of enjoyment. Ge remarks (n. 7a) that Indra gives abundantly as long as he is “im Genuss der erbeuteten Kühe.” I suppose this is possible but it assumes a fairly extensive backstory. Like me, Kü (143) takes the cow as comitative: “mit Rindvieh … dich zusammenwünschend.” I was happy to have company in this tr., but I frankly didn’t understand what either his or mine is actually meant to express. WG also seem to have a comitative reading, which is similarly opaque: “du erpicht darauf wirst, mit dem Rind beisammen zu sein.” On reconsideration of the passage I now see a possible solution. It is striking that gávā is the only apparent occurrence of the instr. sg. to this stem in the RV. In context it appears directly before maghavan. I now think the original form may have been gen. pl. *gávām, with simplification of the double -m m-. The meter is unaffected, and a gen. pl. would fit the sense much better, as I will now show. This hymn contains four other examples of this very gen. pl. (4d, 11d, 12b, 13b), as well as nom. pl. gā́vaḥ (10a). The examples in 12 and 13 are in a dānastuti, but the others refer to the cows that Indra freed from the Vala cave (and are in the same metrical position as our form). I see two possible ways to construe my putative *gávām. Since forms of √kā can take the genitive as a source of enjoyment (e.g., X.54.16 dráviṇasaḥ), it may go with saṃcakānáḥ: “enjoying the cows,” referring to Indra’s pleasure in his deed and its products. But in vs. 11 Indra, having drunk soma, púnar gávām adadād usríyāṇām “gave again of the ruddy cows.” This seems to refer to a redistribution on the ritual ground of the cows that Indra had freed. Bringing together 11d gávām adadāt with 7ab dā́nam ínvan … *gávām, I am inclined to think that the cows are the content of the gift and would now alter the tr. to “setting in motion the gift *of cows” vel sim. Under this interpr. saṃcakānáḥ is used without complement: “taking pleasure, enjoying yourself” (for a similar absolute use of this participle, see IV.16.15 and Kü 143). Thus the hemistich contains a brief précis of the myth: Indra hews apart those who block his freeing of the cows [I would now probably change my rendering of mṛ̥́dhaḥ as ‘negligent’ here], which allows him to set in motion the ultimate giving away of the freed cows, and he thoroughly (sám) enjoys the whole process. The occurrences of gávām in the dānastuti (esp. 12b gávāṃ catvā́ri dádataḥ sahásrā) simply replicate the mythic model provided by Indra’s generous sharing out of the freed cows.

I am not certain what pāda d is conveying. How is it that Indra’s setting Namuci’s head to rolling involves “seeking a way for Manu”? Unfortunately we can glean too little about Namuci from the RV (where he is mentioned only 9x) to know what threat he posed that required Indra to kill him. On the other hand, judging from the usual troubles caused by Dāsas and, particularly, from vs. 9 (see publ. intro.), these foes stand in the way of Ārya movement into new territory. Thus Indra by eliminating Namuci would open the way for Manu and the rest of the advancing Ārya.


## 08
Though this vs. follows thematically on vs. 7, it seems disjointed and has given rise to much discussion (see esp. Old and his skepticism about Ge’s interpr.; Bl RR) and incompatible interpretations, which I will not treat in detail further here.

The first question that arises is who is the 1st

-ps. speaker in pāda a. Ge
suggests that it is Namuci himself, a suggestion rejected by both Old and Bl. I think the root aor. ákṛthāḥ is the clue. It is rare that the aorist, esp. the root aorist, is used as a narrative tense, esp. to a root well outfitted with other preterital possibilities. I take pāda a as a parenthetical interruption of the Namuci story, prompted by the last pāda of vs. 7, esp. the mention of Manu. With Old I take “me” as referring to the present-day priest, and in my view he is asserting his ancestral and vocational connection with the primal priest and representative Ārya, Manu. The speaker suggests that Indra’s current partnership with him (“for you have made me your yokemate” with the aorist of the recent past) is evidence of Indra’s active concern for his ancestor Manu in the mythological past. After this interruption ā́d íd functions as a resumptive expression, returning us to and carrying on the story of the myth narrated in 7cd.

In 8c the referent of the “whizzing stone” (áśmānam … svaryàm) is disputed.

I very much doubt that it is a mountain, despite the occurrence of the same expression in V.56.4, where it definitely is a mountain, and despite Old’s championing of this identification. I think it more likely that the phrase resonates with I.32.2 vájraṃ svaryàm, where svaryà- refers to Indra’s mace. Namuci’s whirling head is being compared to a weapon whirling through the air and making a whizzing sound.

The “rolling, whirling” image is carried further in the next pāda, with the simile “(rolling forth) like two wheels.” The simile makes fine sense with vártamāna-, but what are the two world-halves (ródasī) doing there? As it turns out, though it may seem counter-intuitive in real-world terms, the two worlds (under various designations) are regularly associated with the root √vṛt (cf., e.g., V.43.2, VI.8.3, VII.80.1, VIII.6.5). In some of these passages the rolling out of the two worlds is part of a cosmogonic exercise; in some it refers to the visual (re- )appearance of differentiated earth and sky at dawn.

I have no idea what the Maruts are doing here.


## 09
For women as weapons see not only I.104.3 mentioned in the publ. intro. but also X.27.10 and disc. ad loc. For my interpretation of the sense of this vs., see publ. intro. I am tolerably certain about my reading of the first hemistich, but pāda c is more challenging and has given rise to some curious interpretations. Ge tr. “denn er hatte darunter seine zwei Frauenbrüste entdeckt,” commenting (perplexingly, at least to me) “Die beiden Milchbrüste für seine beiden Frauen” (n. 9c). (One would assume there would be four in all, at any rate.) Old thinks the two dhéne refer to the two liquids in the Namuci myth and ultimately (see his ref. to his own NGGW 1893 art. [=KlSch.

635ff.]) to the Sautrāmaṇī ritual and its two separate oblations, milk and surā.

Schmidt (Ged. Nyberg), more or less flg. Bloomfield, suggests that Indra recognizes two streams within himself, songs and libations, but this linkage of the literal and metaphorical through an elliptical dual seems quite unlikely. WG’s “Darunter aber hat er dessen beide Ströme erblickt” is literally close to mine, but they provide no guidance on what they mean by “his two streams.” My own tr. (“distinguished both his [=Dāsa’s?] streams”) is also not as informative as it might be. One problem is the meaning of the lexeme antár √khyā.

To √khyā ‘see’ antár should add the sense of either ‘look within’ or ‘distinguish between’. The similarly formed antár √paś seems to have both these meanings: ‘look within’ in I.132.3 and ‘distinguish between’ in II.27.3. (In the latter passage JPB tr.

‘look within’, but I consider that the less likely sense in context.) In the only other occurrence of antár √khyā, I.81.9, I tr. ‘detect’ (flg. Ge’s ‘endecken’ for this passage, V.30.9), a sense that can be somewhat tenuously derived from ‘look within a mass of stuff — and visually locate’. It’s also possible in that passage, which concerns the possessions of the impious, which Indra is supposed to bring to us, that he is distinguishing between those possessions and the ones that belong to deserving people and should stay put. In our passage here we might in the first instance think that ‘distinguish between’ would be a promising candidate, given the dual object. But I don’t think Indra is supposed to be seeing a difference between the two streams, but rather perceiving that they are just streams and therefore not formidable weapons -- thus encouraging his advance to fighting in pāda d. I am tempted to emend the publ.

tr. to “detected/recognized both of his (weapons) as (just) streams.” Though the weapons (ā́yudhāni) were plural in pāda a, I think that is a general statement about turning women into weapons, whereas pāda c concerns the particular situation Indra confronts, the two barrier rivers -- the same situation as in I.104.3, which also contains two troublesome rivers.

V.30.12, 14: The Anukr. takes ṛṇaṃcayá- as the PN of the king, and the standard interpr. follow this, incl. the publ. tr. I now wonder if it is at least a speaking name - and perhaps not a name at all but a descriptor: “requiting debts.” The royal patron who distributes largesse to poets and priests at a sacrifice is, from the point of view of the ritual economy, requiting his debts to them, who attracted the gods to the sacrifice and entertained them, leading them to grant tangible and intangible rewards to the patron.

## 13-14
The two pāda-final sequences páritakmyāyāḥ (13d) and páritakmyā yā́m̐ (14a) in adjacent pādas are puzzling. The publ. tr. reflects emendations of both forms to loc. sg. páritakmyāyām. This loc. occurs 6x, always pāda-final, including in the next hymn, V.31.11 -- by far the most common form to this stem. Moreover, VI.24.9d is identical to 14d, save for having the loc. páritakmyāyām -- a variation that Bl (RVReps) finds “baffling.” The arguments in favor of emendation are the dominance of the loc. sg. and its appearance both in the next hymn and in the otherwise identical pāda in VI.24.9. However, these arguments cut both ways: it is difficult to understand how these forms would have become mangled - especially given the dominance of that same loc. sg. It cannot be claimed that the redactors misunderstood the forms because they had never seen their like. I therefore now feel that we must accept that the forms were in the urtext, deliberately produced by the poet, who was playing games with this well-known pāda-final temporal expression. I still believe that the intent of both forms is the same as the loc., but that the loc. has been deliberately altered, in two different ways, conditioned by the immediate context.

In 13d aktór vyùṣṭau páritakmyāyāḥ the form has been given a genitive ending to conform, superficially, to the gen. aktóḥ. Gr takes it to an adjectival stem (páritakmya-, which doesn’t exist) as a modifier of aktóḥ, which, as Old points out, would then have to be fem. here, rather than its normal masc. Old suggests it might be a gen. of time, though he prefers to supply rā́tryāḥ or to have it depend on vyùṣṭau.

I consider this over-thinking: the poet gives us the loc. form we expect, right up to the very last segment (-ḥ rather than -m) and then springs the surprise, capitalizing on the superficial resemblance to the gen. sg. áktoḥ.

In 14a aúchat sā́rā́trī páritakmyā yā́m̐the final syllable of the loc. has been truncated and given an accent. The anunāsika can be taken as hiatus-breaking nasalization of a final -ā́before ṛ; this is the standard interpr. (see esp. Old, Noten, with ref. to Prol.). This yields the nom. sg. fem. rel. prn., which allows an interpr. as a nominal rel. clause páritakmyā yā́, which specifies immediately preceding sā́rā́trī.

A pāda-final rel. pronoun and the resulting nominal rel. clause (“… the night, which is páritakmyā”) would be highly unusual, but as a poetic trick involving resegmentation of a well-known form it shows a proto-śleṣa sensibility.

The fact that the poet alters the expected form in two different ways in succeeding pādas should alert us to the fact that he is playing verbal tricks, secure in the knowledge that his audience would expect and interpret both as underlyingly locatival. For a different manipulation of the stem, see comm. ad I.31.6. In any case the publ. tr. should have an * before “at its final turn” in both instances.


## 14
The primary reading of ajyámānaḥ is surely “being driven,” as the standard interpr. have it. But it could also be the passive of √añj ‘anoint’ and inhabit the same semantic realm as “well-ornamented with thousands of cows” in 13ab: he would be anointed with prize cows.


## 15
The idiom ā́√dā ‘take’ is ordinarily in the middle, whereas ā́dāma here is active. I consider this active form a secondary formation based on the (pseudo- )active ā́dat ‘took’, for which see comm. ad V.32.8.
