+++
title = "031"

+++
Indra

## 01
Against the Pp., which reads vy ùnoti, and despite Old’s objections, I read ví yunoti, that is, ví yunoti ‘keeps separate’ -- an idea that goes back to Wh’s Roots (s.v. √u)(see also Old’s other reff.) and is accepted by EWA (s.v. YAV2 ); see also Gotō IIJ 31 (1988) -- even though this 5th class pres. is not otherwise attested to this root. Note the same lexeme, ví √yu, in the immed. preceding hymn, V.30.10 … gā́vaḥ … vatsaír víyutā yád ā́san “since the cows were separated from their calves.” This interpr. is, not surprisingly, reflected in WG’s tr., but not Ge’s ‘mustert’ (survey, inspect, further glossed in n. 1c as “er wählt den rechten Wagen aus”), whose root affiliation is not clear to me.

This verb seems to work slightly differently in simile and frame. In the simile the herdsman is separating flocks, sorting them on some principle or other (sheep from goats? flock belonging to A from that belong to B? young animals from older? etc.). In the frame I supply rátham as object (from 1a) and, as I see it, Indra keeps his chariot separate from the other chariots in the race or chariot drive in order to be first, a position reflected in pāda d. WG slightly different: Indra drives the other, opposing chariots apart.


## 02
WG take píśāṅga- in the cmpd píśāṅga-rāti- as referring to the color of cows (“Gabe rötlichbraune (Kühe)”), whereas I follow Gr, Ge in taking it as a reference to gold. Either is possible, and it is true that the adj. qualifies other animals -- a dog (VII.55.2), horses (I.88.2, V.57.4) -- though not cows. Nothing rides on the choice.


## 03
Ge and WG take sáhaḥ as the only subj. of ájaniṣṭa, while I take sáhaḥ as an appositive qualifying the unexpressed subj. índraḥ. Again the difference is minor, but I favor my interpr. because the birth of Indra and the prodigous feats he performs immediately thereafter are frequent topics in the RV.

## 05-06
Vs. 5 is syntactically problematic, in that it has two subordinate clauses, one marked by yád in pāda a and one marked by yé in pāda c, but no obvious main clause. The rel. cl. beginning in c must extend through d, which contains the accented imperfect ávartanta, but the extent of the yád clause is unclear. It must go as far as the end of pāda a because of the accented subjunctive árcān, but the status of b is in question. Since the vs. otherwise lacks a main clause, Ge and WG make b the nominal main clause, e.g., Ge “…, da waren die Presssteine, die Aditi einverstanden.” This is possible, but seems conceptually weak, and both Ge and WG fail to render the subjunctive value of the verb in the yád clause -- Ge silently changing it into a preterite (“anstimmten”) and WG using a simple pres. (“singen”).

But I think the subjunctive should be taken seriously, esp. given its contrast with the impf. ávartanta in d. My solution is to assume the main clause is postponed till vs. 6, whose first pāda contains the familiar annunciatory pseudo-subjunctive prá … vocam “I shall proclaim.” Thus, vss. 5-6 depict a ritual situation in which the noise of the pressing stones is, as so often, configured as ritual speech (see, e.g., vs. 12c vádan grā́vā in this same hymn), to which the poet responds in vs. 6. I now think that vṛ́ṣaṇaḥ in pāda a is not a separate subject (“the bulls and the pressing stones” of the publ. tr.), but instead qualifies the stones (“the bullish pressing stones”; for pressing stones as bulls, see, e.g., III.42.6, VI.44.20), and I would change the tr. to “When for you the bull, o Indra, the bullish pressing stones will chant a chant …” Sāy., cited approvingly by Ge in n. 5a, identifies the bulls of pāda a as the Maruts, and WG also accept this identification, but again the subjunctive makes difficulties: the actions of the Maruts should not be prospective, but located in the mythic past (hence, presumably, Ge’s switch to the preterite).

So the skeleton of the sentence spread over two vss. is “When the pressing stones will chant a chant to you, I will proclaim your deeds.” A few loose ends remain in vs. 5. The presence of Aditi in b at first takes one aback, but as Ge points out (n. 5b), soma is said elsewhere to be prepared “in the lap of Aditi,” so her proximity to the pressing stones is a ritual given. I take áditiḥ sajóṣāḥ as a separate mini-constituent, with the nom. sg. of the -s-stem adjective serving for the fem. as well as the masc., as usual. The second hemistich detours into a conceit -- involving an unexpressed comparison of the pressing stones with deadly wheel rims that have crushed the enemy; cf. a similar passage in X.27.6 ádhy ū nv èṣu vavṛtyuḥ “The wheel rims should now roll over them.” In part the conceit responds to the chariot-focused theme of this hymn, esp. the chariot conflict depicted in vs. 11; in part it highlights the pressing stones’ demon-killing power, found, e.g., in X.76.4.

The subjunctive vibhárā(ḥ) in the yád clause is potentially troublesome for my interpr. of árcān in 5a, for it seems to refer to past, cosmogonic deed(s) of Indra’s -- the separation of the two world halves and the winning of water for mankind (two events not usually connected). This surprising usage of the subjunctive is noted by Delbrück (AiSyn 322: subjunctive where we expect the indicative of a narrative tense). Old is undisturbed by the subjunctive and points to 5a as similar, which is exactly what I would prefer to point away from; see my explanation of árcān above.

Hoffmann (244-45) classifies it as “Konjunktiv in präteritalem Sachverhalt” and suggests that the subjunctive in its prospective use can take on a timeless sense (“… einen ausserzeitlichen Sinn annehmen kann”). Ge simply translates it as a preterite (trenntest) without comment, but WG take the subjunctive seriously here (though not in 5a): “… dass du … trennen und … gewinnen willst,” without further comment. I do not have an entirely satisfactory answer, but I think the yád clause must be evaluated in the context of what precedes: 6ab announces that I will proclaim Indra’s previous deeds (pū́rvāṇi káraṇāni) and “the current ones which you have done” (nū́tanā … yā́cakártha). This latter expression, which is found identically in VII.98.5, seems temporally incoherent: if they are his current deeds, he should not have already done them; yā́cakártha should limit only the first phrase, pū́rvāṇi káraṇāni. A fuller expression of this proclamation announcement, with the time of action correctly sorted, is found in nearby V.29.13 vīryā̀… yā́cakártha / yā́co nú návyā kṛṇávaḥ “The heroic deeds that you have done and the new ones that you will do,” with the perfect cakártha qualifying the deeds already done and the subjunctive kṛṇávaḥ the new ones. Immediately afterwards it is said prá … tā́… bravāma “we shall proclaim these,” like our prá … vocam. I think we should interpret our 6cd in the light of V.29.13. The rel. clause yā́cakártha should, properly speaking, limit only the pū́rvāṇi, while the nū́tanā ‘current (deeds)’ are further specified by a single example (or perhaps two), expressed by the yád clause in cd using the subjunctive. A problem remains: as noted above, the separation of the two worlds is one of Indra’s standard cosmogonic deeds as is, in the Vṛtra myth, his winning of the waters. We should expect these to be classified among the pū́rvāṇi. But of course one of the reasons for celebrating older, mythic deeds is to persuade / compel the god to perform these deeds again in the present for our benefit, and we can interpret the yád

+ SUBJUNCTIVE clause here in that way. The separation of the two world halves is, on a smaller scale, accomplished every morning when dawn reveals the horizon where the darkness had kept earth and sky undifferentiated. And winning waters is something that needs to be repeated at least yearly. The subjunctive here indicates that our focus is on the re-creation of these older deeds, not simply on celebrating their original performance. In this context mánave ‘for Manu’ would have the extended sense ‘for mankind’.

## 07-08
The recital of Indra’s deeds now reverts to the past tense, to a series of insistently augmented imperfects: 7b ámimīthāḥ, 7c agṛbhṇāḥ, 7d asedhaḥ, 8b áramayaḥ, 8c ayātam, ávahaḥ. (In 8d the Pp. reads unaug. áranta, but in its sandhi situation [uśánā́ranta] it could as easily be ā́ranta; the accent should be on the augment because it’s in a subordinate cl., but ā + áranta would come out this way.

Either way, it’s not an imperfect, but either a plupf. or a root aor., but this is a minor quibble.) However, note that this series is introduced by 7a tád ín nú te káraṇam “Just this now is your deed,” where the current situation (nú) remains in the forefront of the poet’s mind.

With Ge (and contra WG, who suggest Śuṣṇa), I take the strong one (ugrám) in c as Uśanā. This is the usual, if wispy, account of Indra and Kutsa’s journey to Uśanā’s house for advice before the Śuṣṇa battle; cf. X.22.6.

The 2nd sg. ávaho ha kútsam “you (sg.) conveyed Kutsa,” following immediately on the 2nd du. ayātam “you two drove,” seems a quick correction or explanation. The 2nd du. ayātam may have seemed to suggest an equality and mutuality between Indra and Kutsa that might have seemed insulting to Indra’s divinity and greater power -- though the return of vām in d and the dual dvandva índrākutsā and dual verbs of vs. 9 show that the attempt to reestablish hierarchy was momentary.


## 09
I take this as the direct address of Uśanā to Indra and Kutsa, with his advice and encouragement before they take on Śuṣṇa. In b both Ge and WG have complex and fanciful interpretations of the phrase ápi kárṇe. In VIII.97.12 the same expression seems to indicate close, intimate contact -- perhaps close enough to whisper into someone’s ear. In my interpr. Uśanā is recapping their journey to him, suggesting that they should come close enough to hear his intimate counsel.

Although of apparently identical (thematic) formation, dhámathaḥ and varathaḥ are modally distinct, the first being an indicative present, the second a subjunctive. Although it is tempting to take them both as subjunctives (as WG do), the stem dháma- is robustly enough supplied with diagnostic forms (a number of augmented 2nd/3rd sg.) that it would be hard for a poet to mistake the morphology. I therefore assume there is a reason for the distinction in mood. Perhaps dhámathaḥ presents a successful attack on Śuṣṇa as a given (though it has not yet happened), and this success will have the further happy effect stated in d.


## 10
Ge supplies a separate verb (“Lenke”) in pāda a, but this seems unnecessary, since the subj. of b, the sage poet (kavíḥ) can have gone (ajagan) to the horses of a as goal. The identity of the kaví- isn’t made clear, but I think the best candidate is Indra.

In I.121.12 he is urged to mount (tíṣṭhā) the easily yoked (horses) of the wind (vā́tasya suyújaḥ, as here), while in I.130.9, addressed as kave, Indra went (ájagan) to Uśanā, just as here. Indra is also said to be ‘seeking help’ (avasyú-) in IV.16.11 in connection with the same story, also as here. In other words, all the phraseology points to Indra as subject, with the sly twist that he is called kaví-, which evokes the patronymic of one of the other participants, Uśanā Kāvya, who is also on many occasions referred to as kaví-.

The plupf. ajagan may have anterior sense here. Kü (159) allows a value of “fernere Vergangenheit” in this passage.


## 11
The mixture of tenses and moods in this vs. is at first glance bewildering, but I think the uses can be sorted out. We get, in order, a root aor. subj. (karat b), a pres. injunc. (bhárat c), a pres. indic. (riṇāti c), and a future (saniṣyati d), as well as a pf. part. (jūjuvā́ṃsam b) and a redupl. pres. part. (dádhat d). The vs. seems to be a sort of “color commentary,” recounting the chariot race or contest with vivid immediacy. The first hemistich, as I see it, contains a general prediction of what is going to happen. Since karat is a subjunctive expressing prospective action, the perf.

part., generally used to express anteriority, does so here, but as a present action/state (“[now] speeding”) anterior to the future expectation of karat (rather than a past anterior as is usual). The second hemistich lays out in sequence a past action (bhárat ‘bore’), a present action (sáṃ riṇāti ‘restores’), and a future one (saniṣyati ‘will gain’), with the participial (puró dádhat ‘putting in front’) reprising what has gone before. Beyond this I cannot go, as I still do not understand what happens in the Etaśa and sun’s chariot passages. The perplexing nature of this fragmentary myth can be seen in the diametrically opposed translations it receives, with WG exactly reversing the change in position of the chariot in b (from behind to in front, contra Ge and me: from in front to behind). I cannot judge which is right.

Adding to the uncertainty is the lexeme sám √ri, which occurs in the RV only here and three times in I.117 (4, 11, 19) of miraculous repairs of the Aśvins. Since √ri means ‘let flow, dissolve’, I take sám as a preverb that both implicitly reverses that action and expresses unity: ‘put back together’ à ‘restore’.

This is the last vs. before the return to the here-and-now, and the verbal fireworks may mark a poetic climax. ## 032 Indra As indicated in the publ. intro., although this hymn focuses on the Vṛtra myth, the standard formulaic encapsulation of that myth -- áhann áhim “he/you slew the serpent” -- does not appear in it. Instead there are formulaic transformations in the early verses: 1d áva (dānaváṃ) han / 2cd áhim …, jaghanvā́n ... (the closest to the standard formula, involving only morphological transformation of the verb) / 3b (mṛgásya vádhar) jaghāna / 4d ní jaghāna (śúṣṇam).


## 01
Old is disturbed by aramṇāḥ ‘brought to peace / to a stop’, when we would expect Indra to releasing the waters to flow. I’m not sure this is a problem: since the floods were hard pressed (badbadhānā́n), Indra could be soothing and quieting the tormented waters. Cf. also in the previous hymn V.31.8 apáḥ … áramayaḥ “you brought the waters to rest,” the same sentiment with the same root. However, it could also be an example of alluding to a sub-surface word by the overt use of its opposite, like bodháya- for *svāpáya in I.103.7; see comm. ad loc. In other words, aramṇāḥ could be signaling ‘set in motion’ by opposition to its literal sense ‘bring to a stop’.

In any case the expected action is expressed later in the vs.: d sṛjó ví dhā́rā(h) “you set loose the streams,” in a species of poetic repair. See also comm. on vs. 2.

Note the stylistic quirk of post-verbal preverb in ásrjo ̥ [/sṛjó] ví OBJ (pādas a, d) versus ví … váḥ (c) and áva … han (d). The latter VP also contains a phonetic figure in áva dānavám.

In c the usual placement of the rel. pronoun after at most one constituent is precariously observed (if at all), and in any case the yád is descriptively found deep in its clause. However, its placement (almost) conforms to the letter of the law: the voc. indra is extraclausal for these purposes, and mahā́ntam … párvatam though heavy is a single constituent. It’s the ví that may tip the balance towards noncompliance. On the other hand, the configuration PREV yá- VERB is so standard that this may determine the position of yád here.

Technically speaking the opening clause of d may be part of the dependent clause in c (“when you pried apart … (and) set loose …”), with áva dānaváṃ han the sole main clause, but since in Vṛtra narratives there’s usually a cause-and-effect relationship between opening the mountain and letting the waters flow, I think the publ. tr. is the better choice.


## 02
The first hemistich redeploys vocab. from the 1st vs.: 1) The two members of the NP útsān … badbadhānā́n in pāda a were both found in 1ab, but not in the same constituent. 2) áraṃhaḥ ‘you sent speeding’ in b rhymes with aramṇāḥ in 1b and is its antonym. This antonymic pairing might support the suggestion floated just above, that áramṇāḥ is meant to evoke its semantic opposite.

The function of the instr. ṛṭúbhiḥ is unclear. I take it as an instr. of extent of time with the part. badbadhānā́n (so approx. also Ge; see his n. 2a, though I doubt that a ref. to menses is involved: útsa- is one of the few masculine nouns for water and water sources, so if the poet wanted to make that sort of reference, he could have his pick of fem. nouns). WG take the instr. with the main verb (“sent speeding”), with the sense that after their release the waters now flow regularly (“Du liessest die … Quellen nach geregelten Zeitabläufen … auslaufen”). This is certainly possible, though I somewhat favor the former because ṛṭúbhiḥ is nestled in the middle of the NP útsān … badbadhānā́n.

The form ū́dhaḥ is contextually problematic. Formally it is the well-attested nom./acc. ū́dhar, but I find it difficult to construe an acc. in this sentence. As an acc., it should be the obj. of áraṃhaḥ ‘sent speeding’, but the udder of the mountain should not be subject to such an action, whereas it makes perfect sense as a locatival expression. Both Ge and WG tr. as an acc. obj., but don’t explain what they think is actually happening. I am inclined to take the form as a nonce locative, though I recognize the strong arguments against this: 1) ū́dhar is very well anchored as a nom./acc.; 2) this r/n stem has two reasonably well-attested locatives already, ū́dhan and ū́dhani. Nonetheless, I wonder if ū́dhar could have been taken as belonging with the sporadic -ar locatives like vanar ‘in the wood’, uṣar ‘at dawn’ (though the presence of undoubted neut. acc. vádhar in the next vs. [3b] might make this harder).

It might be worth noting that ū́dhan(i) is confined to pāda end (except one late Xth book ex.), whereas ū́dhar here is medial. Alternatively, and on second thought, if we take ‘udder’ as referring to the contents of an udder, namely milk, it is possible to interpret it as the acc. it appears to be. For a somewhat similar use of ū́dhaḥ as ‘milk’, see IV.1.19. I would therefore suggest an alt. tr. by deleting the parenthetical “(in?)” and adding a comma after “seasons”: “you … sent speeding the wellsprings that had been hard pressed through the seasons, the udder [=milk] of the mountain.” The ppl. práyuta- is variously rendered: Gr ‘achtlos, sorglos’, Ge ‘nachlässig’ (careless, negligent), WG “(alle und alles) verscheuchend” (scaring away). However in all its occurrences it seems to mean ‘spread out, dispersed’. There are four attestations in the RV. Two passages involve cows wandering without a herdsman (III.57.1, X.27.8); in the third (III.55.4) Agni has been dispersed into various hearths and lies spread out at a distance (śáye … práyutaḥ), very much like here (práyutaṃ śáyānam). Since this root √yu means ‘separate, keep apart’, my suggested meaning is closer to the root meaning than the suggestion registered above. It is also possible that it does mean ‘scattered, dispersed’ here, if it is interpreted proleptically: after having been smashed, the various parts of the serpent’s body lie spread across some distance. A similar picture is given in I.32.7 purutrā́vṛtró aśayad vyàstaḥ “Vr̥tra lay there, flung apart in many pieces,” with a form of √śi as here. I would then suggest an alternative tr. “having smashed the serpent (so it was) lying dispersed.”

## 02-03
An etymological sequence -- táviṣīm (2d), táviṣībhiḥ (3b), távyān (3d) -- that also builds to a climax, from singular ‘(a) power’ to plural ‘powers’ to the comparative ‘more powerful’, all associated with Indra.

The sequence of vs.-init. t(i)yá- cid ‘that very one’ discussed in the publ. intro.

begins in 3a with t(i)yásya cid (and continues with t(i)yáṃ cid in 4a, 5a, 6a, 8a). Note that it follows distracted vs.-init. t(u)vám in 2a and second-position cid in 2c: combining the two produces, by variation, t(i)yáṃ cid. That cid in 2c follows áhim ‘serpent’ provides the referent for the t(i)yá- forms to follow. The sequence comes to a temporary close in vs. 6, with táṃ cid opening pāda c a variant of t(i)yáṃ cid opening 6a. There is then a brief revival of the phrase in 8a, after skipping a vs. ### 03
In c ékaḥ … apratíḥ “alone (and) unopposable” applies to (the unnamed) Vṛtra, but these two words appear elsewhere similarly juxtaposed but applied to opposing referents: IV.17.19 bhū́rīṇy éko apratī́ni hanti “alone he smashes the many unopposable things” and VIII.90.5 tváṃ vr̥trā́ṇi haṃsy apratī́ny éka íd “You, alone, smash the unopposable obstacles.” This is another example of this hymn taking standard phraseology and turning it on its head. Note that an almost identical phrase, ékaḥ … ápratītaḥ (again with the two words in the same case with the same referent), is applied to Indra in 9b in the triumphant announcement of his universal superiority (see publ. intro.). Though Vṛtra thought (mányamānaḥ) he had these qualities in our 3c, Indra possesses them for real -- as shown by the phraseological transfer from the one to the other.


## 04
The major problem in this vs. is the identity and syntactic affiliation of the gen. pl. eṣām. The standard opinion, found in Ge, Scar (100), and WG, takes it as referring to the gods and construed with svadháyā. There are several arguments against this. First, the gods are never mentioned or even alluded to elsewhere in the hymn (though goddess(es) are found in 9c and 10a). Second, though svadháyā √mad is a remarkably common locution (I.64.4, 108.12, 154.4; III.4.7=7.8; VII.47.3; X.14.3, 7, 15.4, 124.8), svadháyā never has a dependent gen. in those passages. The standard opinion is also hard-pressed to make sense out of the phrase. Ge takes svadhā́- here as ‘Lebenselement’ and further glosses this as water, but even if “reveling in the Lebenselement/water of the gods” were a possible tr. of this phrase, it is a notion that seems foreign to the Vṛtra myth. Scar and WG have a more reasonable interpr. -- that Vṛtra is reveling in what actually belongs by nature to the gods, that is, as WG say in their n., “Der Dämon usurpiert die Natur der Götter.” But this still requires conjuring up the gods out of thin air and assuming that the audience could do so too, on the basis of an unemphatic, unaccented gen. pl. pronoun. And again the image produced is not a standard part of the Vṛtra myth.

My solution starts, appropriately, by seeking a referent in the context; dānavásya in the 2nd hemistich seems a reasonable choice. Although dānavá- never appears in the plural in the RV, this stem (related to dā́nu-, the name of Vṛtra’s mother, which I consider a backformation from the demonic ethnonym; see comm. ad I.32.9) names “eine Dämonen-Klasse,” as Mayrhofer remarks (EWA s.v. dā́nu-), and fluctuation between sg. and pl. can happen in such cases (as with the Maruts, plural, versus the Marut flock, singular). The pl. is found in the AV (AVŚ IV.24.2 [with vs. 1 referring to Indra as vṛtrahán-), X.6.10; AVP IV.39.3 [≅AVŚ IV.24.2], VII.12.8, XVI.43.2) and elsewhere in early Vedic as well as later (esp. epic) Skt.;, and the corresponding Avestan dānauua-, also the name of an inimical group, is found in the pl. in Yt. 5.73 and 13.37-38. In the latter it is associated with vǝrǝϑra- (vǝrǝϑrǝm dānunąm). It therefore seems likely that even in the RV dānavá- is not simply a designation of Vṛtra but of the class of beings to which he belongs, and the absence of the plural in the RV is either due to accident or a desire to concentrate on the arch-Dānava, Vṛtra. The gen. here may be construed either with t(i)yáṃ cid (“this one of theirs”) or be a free-floating indication of appurtenance, as the publ. tr. takes it.

Or indeed, because eṣām is in (modified) Wackernagel’s position, it could have originated with any of the descriptors of Vṛtra found later in the verse.

With svadháyā freed from its supposed genitive dependent, the phrase svadháyā mádantam now makes sense in a Vṛtra context. He is “drunk on his own power” on the basis of his faulty assessment of this power presented in 3c. The locution recalls a similar one in the great Indra-Vṛtra hymn I.32, where in 6a Vṛtra is described as ayoddhéva durmádaḥ “like a non-warrior badly drunk” (lit. ‘having bad intoxication’), foolishly challenging a far more powerful opponent. (I use ‘drunk’ in both instances, instead of our more usual ‘exhilarated’, because it better captures in English the state of mind of the one so affected.) The sense of vṛ́ṣa-prabharmā is secured by 5c prábhṛtā mádasya “at the proffering of the invigorating (soma)” -- hence, as Gr takes it (sim. WG, Scar, and me), “dem der kräftige (Soma) vorgesetzt ist.” This also makes sense in context -- Indra needs to receive the soma before smashing Vṛtra -- and is reinforced by the usual sense of the lexeme prá √bhṛ ‘bring forward, present’. However, Ge renders it “wie ein Bulle angreifend (?),” and I was tempted somewhat in this direction, to ‘having the bearing/deportment of a bull’; prá √bhṛ can, esp. in the middle, mean ‘display, present oneself’. I think both possibilities are latent in this word, and we can view the anchoring 5c prábhṛtā mádasya as another example of poetic repair -- or perhaps a poetic thumb on the scales, pressing the choice of one of the options over the other. It is then itself somewhat undercut by 7c vájrasya prábhṛtau “at the proffering of the mace.” In c note the echo … -prabharmā … bhā́maṃ.

The last word of this vs. is śúṣṇam. Generally, of course, this is the name of a different opponent of Indra’s, and a number of tr. take it so here. But I think it has its etymological sense ‘snorter’ (√śvas ‘snort’; cf. EWA s.v.). Our poet is once again toying with us: withholding the real name of the opponent in this hymn, Vṛtra, he is falsely offering a different possibility here.


## 05
Unlike 4a where I separate the identically positioned enclitic gen. from the following instr., I do take asya here with krátubhiḥ, which, unlike svadháyā, is frequently found with a gen. With Ge I think the referent is Indra (contra WG, who take it to be Vṛtra-Śuṣṇa).

I take níṣattam as proleptic, depicting Vṛtra’s position after the action of ní jaghāna in the immediately preceding pāda (4d). With Ge I consider 5a essentially a continuation of 4d and supply the same verb.

In b I supply ‘thinking himself’ with amarmáṇaḥ on the basis of 3c and of the almost identical III.32.4cd … viveda, amarmáṇo mányamānasya márma. The verb in b, vidát, is accented because of the following íd (see Gr s.v. íd 5, though there are fewer clear examples than he presents, since many of them are also pāda-initial). The Indra-reference shifts from 3rd to 2nd between the first and second hemistich, but this is scarcely novel.


## 06
Though Gr refuses to tr., katpayám seems to contain the pejorative kaprefix; see EWA s.v. ká1 , p. 285.

For ápa √gṝ ‘taunt’ see comm. ad V.29.4. As Oberlies (Relig. I.401) points out, this gerund depicts a pre-battle boasting/insulting match -- trash talk (needless to say, this last is not Oberlies’s formulation).

What to do with uccaíḥ is unclear. Most take it with the gerund apagū́rya; so Ge “hoch ausholend,” with his interpr. of the gerund as belonging to a √gṝ ‘hold out’; with the assignment to ápa √gṝ ‘insult’, Schaeffer “nachdem er laut Schmähreden geführt hat”; Oberlies “nachdem er ihn [zuvor] mit lauter Stimme geschmäht hatte”; WG “indem er ihn von oben herab verspottete.” The Schaeffer / Oberlies interpr. of the adverb as ‘loud’ is appealing, but uccā́is always positional in the RV. The WG interpr. recognizes this fact, but insulting from above seems an odd activity. I take it rather with jaghāna. A fatal blow is more likely to come from above than a taunt, and it is notable how often in the hymn it is emphasized that Vṛtra was smashed down: 1d áva … han, 4d ní jaghāna, 5a níṣattam, 7d adhamám, 8d ní … āvṛnak. To depict Indra as correspondingly acting above provides the thematic complement. Note also úd … índraḥ … vádhar yámiṣṭa (“… held up …”) in the next hemistich, 7ab.


## 07
vádhar appears here in the same metrical position as in 3b. There the weapon was Vṛtra’s (which Indra struck away), while here it is Indra’s. Another example of vocab. first used of Vṛtra reassigned to Indra -- like ékaḥ … apratíḥ in 3a and the similar expression in 9a. Indeed, ápratītam appears here in b, characterizing Indra’s weapon, which is ‘might’ itself (sáhaḥ). The use of sáhaḥ as an appositive here supports my view of the same usage of this word in V.31.3 (contra Ge [/WG]). There it characterizes Indra himself. It is even possible that sáho ápratītam here is nominative and an appositive to índraḥ, rather than an acc. and appositive to vádhar, though the juxtaposition of the two terms in b makes that unlikely. In any case note the similarity in phrasing: 31.3a # úd yát sáhaḥ ... 32.7ab # úd yád ... sáhaḥ; the verbs in these clauses are also rhyming: 31.3 ájaniṣṭa, 32.7 yámiṣṭa.

As noted ad vs. 4, the poetic repair effected by prábhṛtā mádasya in 5c is somewhat muddied by 7c vájrasya prábhṛtau. What exactly this latter phrase means is not clear. I doubt that Ge’s “im Schlag mit der Keule” is correct, since ‘strike’ is not a standard sense of prá √bhṛ (the closest we get is ‘bear down on’). WG’s “beim Vorführen des Vajra” is similar to my “at the proffering of the mace” (‘proffer’ having been chosen to match the tr. of this lexeme in 4c and 5c). The English idiom “present arms” is a direct correspondent, though the action in the English phrase is a gesture of respect, not (as here) of intimidation. The point of both úd … vádhar yámiṣṭa “held up his weapon” and vájrasya prábhṛtau seems to be to show Vṛtra the unbeatable power of the vájra-. See also the mahatā́vadhéna in 8c.

## 08
The verb ā́dat ‘took’ is superficially active, though the idiom ā́√dā ‘take’ is ordinarily middle. As was seen already by Wackernagel, the form must be a remarked form of the older 3rd sg. middle root aor. The underlying form would be *ā́da, which can represent either an old -t-less 3rd sg. mid. ending (as in impf. *áduha à áduha+t) or, more likely, the simplification by degemination of an old *ā́d+ta with an originally -t-full ending. Of course this preform should have yielded *ā́tta, but the fact that all other forms of the root aor. have a single d- (ádāt, etc.) could have induced the geminate to simplify (in this metrically non-diagnostic position after ā) and restore the d of the root. (Kü [Stativ 50-51] bases the -d-form on 3rd pl. ā́diran*.) In any case the t-less *ā́da would have been activized like the t-less middle imperfects of the áduhat type. The resulting “active” stem could spread elsewhere; cf.

1st pl. ā́dāma in nearby V.30.15. For disc. and previous lit. see Kü ref. above. The form is very differently explained by Old, who assigns it to ā √dṛ ‘tear out’ by way of the sandhi form *ā́daḥ (< 2nd/3rd sg. *ā́dar) and what seems to me a somewhat sketchy remarking with -t (as if 2nd sg. = *ā́das, so 3rd sg. should = *ā́dat?). The morphological machinery required seems too complex for its purpose, to avoid a slightly aberrant use of ā́√dā, and since ā́√dṛ doesn’t take personal objects (Old finds one late ex.), its usage here would be aberrant as well. Ge assigns it to ā́√dā, as do WG (with ref. to Kü, Stativ).

For the third time in the hymn, Vṛtra is described as śáyānam ‘lying’, each time in the same pāda-final position (2c, 6a, 8a), and pāda-final níṣattam (5a) ‘sunk, lit. sitting, down’ may be a sort of semantic pun on this positional characterization. In I.32, the Indra-Vṛtra hymn with clear phraseological and thematic parallels to this one, √śi ‘lie’ is also Vṛtra’s signature verb, esp. describing his position after his defeat, rather than before, as here.

Ge suggests that árṇam is an anticipatory haplology (not his term) for

*arṇapám ‘drinking the flood’, immediately before madhupám. He is followed by
Scar (313 n. 444) and WG. I see no reason to accept this. The stem árṇa- exists; the stem *arṇapá- (/-pā́-) does not. More importantly, Vṛtra is known for confining the waters, not drinking them. As was just noted, √śi ‘lie’ is a defining verb for Vṛtra in both I.32 and this hymn. In the former he lies there as the released waters stream over him (I.32.8ab … amuyā́śáyānam, … áti yanty ā́paḥ; cf. also 8d, 10). Here, in complementary fashion, he is depicted as lying over them before his defeat.

Although most take atrá- as a PN, I still prefer the older derivation (see, e.g., Gr) from √ad ‘eat’ with simplification of the geminate (*at-trá-), pace EWA s.v. átri-. It does not have to have anything to do with the seer Atri (átri-), but átrin- ‘voracious’ is, in my opinion, derivationally connected.


## 09
As noted in the publ. intro., the question káḥ … varāte “who can obstruct …?” covertly introduces Vṛtra, the defeated enemy who remained unnamed in the first 8 vss., by way of the verb built to the root √vṛ ‘obstruct’ that furnishes Vṛtra’s transparent name. The implicit answer is “no one, since Obstacle himself could not.”

## 10
The devī́svádhitiḥ in pāda a is much disputed, and for good reason. The stem svádhiti- means ‘axe, hatchet’, but the presence of such an implement here is puzzling. Ge, flg. Sāy., wants to take this instance of the stem as independent and equivalent to svadhā́- ‘autonomous power’. Given the occurrence of svadhā́- in 4a and the derived possessive adj. svadhā́van- in pāda d of this same vs., it is hard not to suspect some connection. On the other hand, svádhiti- ‘axe’ is too well established for that sense not to be the first reading, or at least to intrude, and, furthermore, pāda a is twinned with b, which also contains a thing not a quality (and is also a pun).

I therefore think we are dealing with a pun. On the one hand, even the “heavenly hatchet,” which sounds like a formidable weapon, bows to powerful Indra.

The hatchet’s submission to Indra is a measure of his might and may also put this weapon into his hands. There may even be another intertextual reference to I.32, as Teigo Onishi suggested to me. In I.32.5c Vṛtra lies “like branches hewn apart by an axe” (skándhāṃsīva kúliśenā vívṛkṇā). Though this is a simile, not a direct reference to the narrative, and though a different word for axe, kúliśa-, is used, this imagery may be a common trope in the Vṛtra story. As for the reading “the goddess Autonomous Power,” the phonological similarity and possible identical formation of svádhiti and svadhā́- (with sva- looking like a first cmpd member in both, and -dhiresembling -dhā́-, with connection to √dhā at least possible [the etymology of svádhiti- is “nicht klar” acdg. to EWA s.v.]) make such a reading very easy in this context.

As just noted, pāda b also seems to contain a pun. The way (gātú-) yields to Indra, but, acdg. to the Anukramaṇī, Gātu Ātreya is also the poet of this hymn -- though since only this one hymn in the RV is attributed to him, the name may have been plucked from this context.

This vs. contains another example of the transfer of vocabulary from Vṛtra to Indra. As we saw, in 4a Vṛtra was intoxicated by (his false assumption about) his autonomous power (svadháyā mádantam), but here it is Indra who possesses autonomous power (svadhā́van-) for real. With svádhiti in pāda a also (partly) expressing Indra’s acquisition of this power, his triumph is complete. This sets the stage for the transition to the last two verses, where the poet announces his own contact with Indra’s fame and what that will mean for his own good fortune.


## 11
I think that this vs. is structured by the implicit contrast between jātá- and náviṣṭha-, both used of Indra, but I seem to be alone in this (though see Gr’s lapidary comment s.v. náviṣṭha). Ge (/WG) take náviṣṭham as adverbial (Ge “aufs neue,” WG “zum letzten Mal”). This is certainly possible, but if it is taken as modifying Indra, the sense becomes more complex and interesting. In the first hemistich “I” announce the famous stable Indra of myth and authority, born (jātám) for these roles and continuously occupying them, but in the second hemistich it is the Indra of the ritual who’s the focus -- the Indra who is newly brought to every new ritual and whose epiphany is like a new creation every time, caused by the ritual actions themselves.

## 12
I take maghā́as object of both yātáyantam and dádatam; it is neatly positioned between the two participles. Ge renders ṛtuthā́yātáyantam as “dass du pünktlich vergilst” (repay, requite), but this is not a standard meaning of √yat. WG’s “dass du … die (verdiente) Stellung verschaffst” is closer to the sense of the root, but lacks the obj. one expects with an -áya-transitive. A locution very close to my interpr.

is found in IX.39.2 jánāya yātáyann íṣaḥ “arranging the refreshments for the people.” Contra Old, who assigns garhate to √grabh, I take it to √gṛh ‘complain’; see EWA s.v. GARH and esp. Hoffmann “Vedisch grh̥ 'klagen” (MSS 14 [1959]: 35-38 = Aufs. 439-41) cited there. There is likely a phonological play between this verb and jagṛbhre in the previous, twinned, verse.


## 33-34
Indra These two hymns attributed to Saṃvaraṇa Prājāpatya are full of puzzles, many insoluble.
