+++
title = "033"

+++
Indra Although the general outline of this hymn is pretty straightforward, it is full of interpretational problems and grammatical and syntactic obscurities, and the meter is very messy.


## 01
The first hemistich begins and ends with an etymological figure: #máhi mahé … taváse átavyān#. The taváse also repeats the same form from the preceding pāda.

I supply śrávaḥ ‘praise’ with máhi, since this is a frequent collocation. Sim.

Ge, though Kü (258) and WG take it as adverbial.

With Ge (/WG uncertainly) I reluctantly interpr. pāda-final nṝ́n as a gen. pl.

(or standing for a gen. pl.), as is sometimes necessary. Old interpr. it rather as a dat. pl., which I don’t understand.

With Ge I construe itthā́with taváse; I assume it adds strengthening to that repeated word. Kü (258) instead takes it as an expression of the method of praise: “auf diese Weise,” so apparently also WG, though muted (“also”).

In the 2nd hemistich the referent of asmai is at issue. The standard view (Ge, Old, WG) is that it refers to the singer, the “not so strong” I. In Ge’s interpr. this involves rendering asmai sumatím … cikéta as “der … diesem (Sänger) seine Gunst zugedacht hat.” That sumatí- could refer to Indra’s benevolence is easy, but ‘zudenken’ as an interpr. of cikéta is hard. This pf. stem ordinarily means either ‘take note of’ or ‘appear as’ (latter generally middle). WG give the pf. its usual meaning but this leaves asmai without much to do in the clause. By contrast, I take Indra as the referent of asmai. It is not rare for enclitic forms of this pronoun to refer to the subject: a reflexive is not necessary. Under this interpr. sumatí- has its common meaning ‘good thought’ = poem, and Indra takes cognizance of this sumatí-, which is “for him.” Cf. VII.31.10 prácetase prá sumatíṃ krṇ̥ udhvam where the sumatí- of the poets is intended for a god (Indra, in fact) in the dative who is characterized as prá √cit.

## 02
The (pseudo-)participle dhiyasāná- clearly patterns with dīdhi ye in 1a, hence my complementary ‘being conjured up’. I take it to mean that Indra’s epiphany at the sacrifice is brought about by our chants (arkaíḥ), that his appearance there is literally “thought up” by our thoughts. This notion is close to what is found in the previous hymn V.32.11 (at least by my interpr.), that every sacrifice brings a “newest Indra,” that the Indra of the sacrificial epiphany is newly created by sacrificial activity every time. The standard interpr. of dhiyasāná- by Ge [/WG] is more pedestrian: Indra becomes attentive (“aufmerksam geworden”) through our hymns. The other occurrence of the stem, in X.32.1, in my opinion fits my interpr., but to be honest neither passage is absolutely clear. As for the stem itself, dhiyasāná- does not pattern with the majority of -asāná- stems discussed ad IV.3.6, and I do not have a satisfactory account of it.

The sá tvám phrase does not conform to my rules for the use of sá with 2nd ps.

reference (see my “Sá figé”), and I likewise can’t account for it.

The yā́(ḥ) beginning the 2nd hemistich is problematic. If it is a rel. prn. it has to be a fem. pl., and there is no obvious referent in the context (hárīṇām in b belonging to a masc. stem hári-). Therefore with Ge (/WG) and, very cautiously, Old, I take it as a verb form, belonging to √yā ‘drive’. (Note the past part. yātā́ḥ in 5b.) Because it is followed by two subjunctives, vákṣaḥ and sakṣi (the latter a “siimperative” derived from a subjunctive), I take yā́(ḥ) as subjunctive as well. Indeed, if it is read yāah, the extra syllable would fix the meter of this pāda -- but since the hymn is full of metrical disturbances, this is not a strong argument. Neither Ge nor WG indicates how they interpr. the morphology, but both tr. as an imperative, as they do the two following verbs.

Both Ge and WG take aryáḥ and jánān as parallel acc. pl., while I make aryáḥ a gen. sg. dependent on jánān. There is no way to tell; Thieme (Fremdl., 11 n. 2) refuses to deal with the passage at all.


## 03
The sense of the first hemistich -- that by reciting the (yoking-)formulation we will do our part to ensure that your (Indra’s) horses will be yoked -- is fairly clear, but the syntax is messy. First, it’s couched as a triple negative construction: “it is not that X will not happen because of not-Y,” which already puts it on the edge of parsability. The parsing problem is slightly increased by the fact that the content of the negative “that” clause is expressed through a periphrasis involving a negated participle+copula (áyuktāsaḥ … ásan “will be/remain unyoked”). Then, the position of yád is utterly non-standard, being found deep in the clause, after several different constituents, right before the final word. I tried various ways to produce a conforming subordinate clause from the text, but failed. The publ. tr. “if it's for lack of a (yoking) formulation” (as if abrahmátā yád were a separate embedded clausette) gives the appearance of (almost) succeeding, but it doesn’t accurately represent the text (though I still think it might represent the purport of this odd word order). A more accurate tr. would be “Since these horses …. because of a lack …,” as the dependent clause for the main clause in cd. I remain disturbed by the structure of this dep. cl. A separate problem is the abhí asmád in pāda a. The abhí is stranded in the middle of the pāda (though immed. after the caesura) and in any case has no verb from which it could have been separated in tmesis. In the absence of anything else to do with it, the default option seems to be to construe it with asmád, and this phrase has long (see Old’s reff.) been compared to I.139.8 asmád abhí, likewise in the middle of the pāda though in opposite order. The problem is that abhí as a preposition seems otherwise only to take the acc. Nonetheless, connecting the two seems the best bet, with a meaning such as “with regard to us” or, better reflecting the ablative, my “because of us.” So Old, WG. Cf. also Humbach et al. (Gāthās… and the Other Old Avestan Texts, II.118), ad Y 35.5 (Yasna Haptaŋhaiti) ahmaṭ hiiaṭ aibī, a phrase meaning (in his view) “which is with us,” with which he compares both our passage and I.139.8. However, Narten (YH, 271-72), fld. by Hinze (Zoroastrian Liturgy, 77-78), interprets this three-word phrase, occurring twice in the YH (Y 35.5, 40.1), as containing a postposition aibī governing the neut. acc. hiiaṭ not the abl.

ahmaṭ, with the whole meaning “from us towards which,” thus “as far as we are concerned” (Hintze, 78).


## 04
Another troubled vs., though the first hemistich is more transparent than the second. The first thing to notice is that the accent on cakártha in b indicates that b must still be under the domain of yád in pāda a, as parallel dependent clauses. Ge (/WG) attempt to make initial purū́a single-word main clause on which they both depend (“Viel ist, was …”). This assumes that purū́is a neut. sg. here. Although the existence of a neut. sg. in -ū is standard doctrine (see Lanman, Noun Inflec., 406-7, AiG III.145, etc.), this grammatical truism rests primarily on Gr’s identification of twelve forms of purū́as sg. (see Lanman and AiG), but in only one instance, the late X.94.5, does this seem the likely interpr. (There is also one form of urū́and, for Lanmann, two of míthū, which is better taken as an adv.) I do not therefore think that

-ū is a possible neut. sg. ending, except, perhaps, in X.94.5. Here the most obvious
way to construe purū́is with pāda-final neut. pl. ukthā́, the subject of sánti. The attempt to impose a singular interpr. on purū́, as antecedent for the following relative clause with plural subject, yields the awkward rendering of Ge: “Viel ist, was deine Preislieder sind” with mismatch of number (WG more elaborate, but not less clumsy).

For b the only adjustment is to carry purū́over from pāda a and supply a term like kṛtā́ṇi or kármāṇi, easily generated from cakártha: “many are (the deeds) you have done …” The 2nd hemistich is more problematic. The first question is how to relate pāda c and d. Ge takes them as parallel independent clauses with the same verb tatakṣé, while WG takes it as a single cl. (also Kü 207). With Ge I take them as two clauses and agree that they share a verb, but think that c is a dependent clause still under the control of yád in pāda a and parallel to ab, with d the main clause resuming them all.

A related issue is the apparent change of person from 2nd sg. address to Indra in ab and (supposed) 3rd sg. reference to him in cd. The only evidence for this 3rd ps.

reference is the verb tatakṣé, which is one of only two medial forms of this pf. in the RV. It has no obvious medial value here, and in fact the presence of a dat. of benefit (sū́ryāya) eliminates one possible way of accounting for the middle form. (Kü [207] suggests a “Bedeutungskomponente” ‘(auch) in seinem eigenen Interesse’, which seems a bit desperate.) The puzzle of the middle is somewhat reduced if we interpret the form as second sg. mid. The presumed preform *tatakṣ-ṣé would surely come out as our tatakṣé, and it would make sense to substitute this nonce middle form for the non-transparent active 2nd sg., which should be *tatákṣ-tha à *tataktha -- whereas the active 3rd sg. tatákṣa is non-problematic and indeed well attested. So the supposed change of person and the middle form can be accounted for by the same explanation.

After confronting these formal issues, there remains the very knotty problem of what the hemistich is expressing, and part of this depends on whether the relations between Indra and Sūrya here are friendly or hostile: elsewhere they are sometimes one, sometimes the other. (Here I think they are friendly.) A syntactic questions is whether nā́ma is the only object of tatakṣé or if the clause in c (if it is a separate clause) has a different object. Ge opts for the former choice, I for the latter, and I also think that the verb is used in different senses in c and d, positive in c, negative in d.

In c I supply purū́again from a and tentatively supply ‘paths’ as the object, bringing to mind the various passages in which a god (usually Varuṇa) makes or digs out paths for the sun to follow through the sky -- e.g., I.24.8 urúṃ hí rā́jā váruṇaś cakā́ra, sū́ryāya pánthām ánvetavā́u, VII.87.1 rádat pathó váruṇo sū́ryāya. In one late passage (X.111.3) it is Indra who is named as pathikṛ́t sū́ryāya “pathmaker for the sun.” It’s also worth noting that, leaving aside this one, 5 of the other 10 occurrences of the dat. sū́ryāya occur in a path-making context. Though, admittedly, I have no parallels using the root √takṣ ‘fashion, carve’, it seems in the right general semantic range. As for ókasi své this can refer either to Indra’s or to Sūrya’s “own home,” since both of them inhabit the same celestial realms; I favor the Sun’s.

As for d, as is recognized by all, the similarly phrased X.23.2 áva kṣnaumi dā́sasya nā́ma cit must be compared. In that passage Indra says “I whet down even the name of the barbarian,” in my tr. Though this passage is the obvious comparandum, it is hardly transparent in itself or in its bearing on our passage, and in fact I think the two passages are less close semantically than their joint isolation invites us to think. In X.23.2 Indra seems to be boasting about his victory over the Dāsa, which is so complete that even his name is obliterated or at least violently ground down. But √takṣ generally refers to creating something by carving off bits or fashioning in some other way. Perhaps here it means that Indra, just by fighting (and presumably defeating) the Dāsa, has still made the latter’s name conspicuous, as if by carving it into a surface. (Or perhaps, closer to X.23.2, Indra has obliterated the Dāsa’s name as if by gouging it out of a surface.) But either of these interpr. raises a crucial question: what would it mean literally to carve a name into (or gouge it out of) a surface before the existence of writing?! In any case I think that the contrastive positive/negative use of √takṣ in c and d makes the verb sit uneasily in both and poses special challenges to the audience to decode the metaphor in each pāda.

As should be obvious, I do not consider my interpr. of this vs. or most of its part settled and sure. I also don’t understand the sequence of ideas. As indicated in the publ. intro., I think that the first pāda, positing many hymns for Indra, may refer to the existence of competing (Ārya) sacrifices. The second pāda cites his activities as a warrior on earth; the dat. “for the cow” may either mean that Indra has fought in order to obtain cows (for the Ārya warriors he is fighting beside) or that he has won meadows for (the Āryas’) cows to graze in -- in either case advancing the Ārya cause.

In contrast c sets out his beneficial cosmic activity -- keeping the sun on track (if my interpr. of the details of the pāda is correct), which in turn is beneficial to mankind.

In at least the first two cases I think there’s an implicit Ārya presence, which contrasts with the explicit Dāsa in d.


## 05
What constitutes the predicate in ab is disputed. Flg. Old and the model of VII.30.4, I take ab as constituting an “X and which Y” construction, with doubled “and which Y” (more accurately schematized as “X and which Y and (which) Z”).

The predication is simply te “of you, yours,” an assertion of possession. It is predicated of us (vayám té) as well as “which men” (yé ca náraḥ) and “(which) chariots” (… ca ráthāḥ) -- literally “we and which men and (which) chariots are yours.” Both of the latter two are further characterized in b, the men by a participial phrase (śárdho jajñānā́ḥ “having been born as a troop”), the chariots by a simple participle (yātā́ḥ ‘driven, driving’). WG seem to follow this interpr. as well, though with some filigree in the middle that seems over-elaborate. Klein (DGRV I.49 n. 10) sets out the schema as above and tr. sim. (I.196). Ge by contrast takes the predication to be śárdho jajñānā́ḥ, applied to both us and the men, with the chariots left hanging: essentially “we and the man are born as your troop, and the chariots.” Besides the syntactic isolation of the chariots in Ge’s rendering, it also unduly extends the reference of śárdho jajñānā́ḥ. The “men” of pāda a must be, as often, the Maruts, and it is only they who “have been born as a troop,” not also us. The word gaṇá- is almost exclusive to the Maruts, and the birth of the Maruts is a common topic (e.g., I.64.2, 4).

The phrase rátho ná yātáḥ appears in I.141.8. See comm. there, where I suggest that a yātá- rátha- is a particular kind of chariot, perhaps one meant for long journeys, rather than referring to the current state of motion of any specific chariot(s).

The problem with pāda c is the clash between the voc. ahiśuṣma and the 3rd sg.

verb jagamyāt with its nom. subj. sátvā. The stem sátvan- in the sg. is almost always used of Indra, and in this context -- a hymn dedicated to Indra and both praising his powers and begging him to deploy them on our behalf -- it is difficult to imagine that we would then express a wish that some indefinite or at least unidentified warrior should come our way instead (as in Ge’s “Uns möge … ein Krieger kommen”; WG almost identical). Surely Indra is the warrior we want! This would require a shift from 2nd to 3rd ps. ref. between ab and cd, but this is not problematic. What is problematic is the voc., which should also refer to Indra. Gr solves this by positing a bahuvr. ahiśuṣma-sátvan- ‘whose warriors have a serpent’s hiss’ (‘dessen Helden wie Schlangen zischen’). Unfortunately the accent is definitively against this interpr.

I have no neat solution, but am firm in my belief that the sátvā is Indra. For a similar vocative/nominative cross, see vasavānaḥ in the next vs. (6a); these two problems may be connected.

I take the simile in d as an elaborate pun, playing on the double sense of the three members, bhága-, hávya-, and prabhṛthá-. The first can be both the name of the god Fortune and a common noun ‘portion’; hávya- can belong to √hū, hvā ‘call’ or √hu ‘pour, offer’; pra √bhṛ can refer either to the presentation of arms (and the carrying off of booty) in a hostile situation or to the presentation of offerings at a sacrifice. Cf. the double sense of prá √bhṛ in nearby V.32.4-5, 7 and comm. there.

The first meanings just given for the three items coalesce into one simile, the second ones in another.


## 06
The first question about this vs. is the structure of the first hemistich. The standard interpr. (Ge, WG, also Old, Klein [DGRV I.263-64]; see also Kulikov -yapres., 580) takes the two pādas as separate clauses with ca conjoining them. There are several problems with this division: 1) ca is not comfortably at home as clauseconjoiner and usually conjoins NPs; 2) with nṛmṇā́ni in the domain of the 2nd clause, it must be the obj. of the participle (or pseudo-participle; see below) nṛtámānaḥ, but non-causative forms of √nṛt ‘dance’ are never transitive. Both difficulties disappear if we take nṛmṇā́ni ca as conjoined with immediately preceding ójaḥ as joint subject of the first clause in the hemistich (so also Lowe, 251; see below). The phonological play between nṛmṇā́ni and nṛtámāṇaḥ may account for the postponing of nṛmṇā́ni till the second pāda, inserting a pāda break between the two conjoined nouns. This phonologically driven positioning may also help account for the very late positon of hí. The loc. prn. tvé ordinarily takes initial position in its clause/verse line, and hí would be expected to follow in Wackernagel’s position. But the whole structure may have been shifted rightwards to allow nṛmṇā́ni to neighbor nṛtámāṇaḥ.

nṛtámāṇa- presents difficulties of its own, even after its supposed object has been eliminated. This participle is the only occurrence of the supposed them. aor. (or 6th cl. pres.) in all of Sanskrit. Although, since all forms of this root are poorly attested in the RV, this is not necessarily problematic on its own, the -ya-present (1x in RV) does continue post-RV (see Kulikov, Vedic -ya-presents, 578-80), and moreover all other verb forms to this root in Vedic are active. Lowe (Participles in Rigvedic Sanskrit, 250-51) suggests that it is an artificial form based on the wellattested splv. nṛ́tama- ‘most manly, most heroic’. This is an attractive hypothesis -- among other things, Indra is frequently called nṛ́tama-; the word regularly appears in immediate post-caesura position, as nṛtámāṇaḥ does here; and it would be playing not merely phonologically but also etymologically with nṛmṇā́ni. Lowe (p. 152) tr.

“being the most heroic,” reflecting its nonce jury-rigged participial form. I do think, however, that the form also consciously references √nṛt ‘dance’. Indra is regularly called a nṛtú- ‘dancer, prancer’, and note the pun involving nṛ́- ‘man’ in VI.63.5 nárā nṛtū (of the Aśvins). I would therefore modify the publ. tr. to “As the most manly [/ the prancing] immortal …” In c rayím must be fem., as occasionally elsewhere, given the fem. adj. énīm. The stem vásavāna- ‘possessing goods, winning goods’ (?) is attested 5x, once as an unaccented voc. sg. vasavāna (X.22.15), otherwise accented and with orthodox -a-stem forms, incl. nom. sg. vásavānaḥ (I.174.1). The form here looks of course like a nom. sg. but lacks accent. Gr calls it “fälschlich unbetont”; Lub. gives it an accent and a rightward star (vásavāno*). This seems the best course; I think an attempt to assign it to different stem (perhaps an aberrant -as stem) is too elaborate, esp. in this hymn with numerous “off” forms: see esp. the voc. ahiśuṣma for expected nom. in 5c. The publ. tr. pays more attention to the lack of accent and tr. as voc.; it would be equally possible to weigh the nom. sg. ending more heavily and tr. it as an appositive subject: “as winner of goods, give us dappled wealth.” Despite the tr.

“winner of goods,” I do not think the stem contains a form of √van but is rather a pseudo-participle (another one, but athematic) built to vásu- ‘good(s)’. Elsewhere I render it ‘goods-lord’ and the like.

In d prá … stuṣe dā́nam “I will start up the praise for the gift” is an analytic expansion of the noun dānastuti, which, however, is not attested in Vedic or, it seems, anywhere else in Sanskrit lit., though the term is in common use in Vedic scholarship.

The last three (or possibly four) vss. in this hymn constitute such a dānastuti, and the poet seems to signalling that it is coming up. In the publ. tr. I identify the arítuvimaghá- as Indra; I now would be more circumspect, since I now think the phrase applies both to Indra and to the patrons praised in vss. (7 or) 8-10. See also aryáḥ in 9d.


## 07
This vs. provides a transition between the praise-hymn proper and the dānastuti. On the one hand, it straightforwardly makes requests of Indra, as hymnfinal vss. tend to do, and it begins with evā́, a frequent introducer of the final summary vs., but it also turns its attention in cd to those who facilitate the sacrifice, i.e., the patrons. The participle dádataḥ ‘giving’ that characterizes them is telling. Ge suggests that the dānastuti begins with 7c and notes that like 7c the vss. of the dānastuti begin with utá.

The meter of the first hemistich is badly mangled. Old blames the poet “dessen Formgefühl unzweifelhaft schwach war.” But it may be a good strategy to mark the new section with a metrical jolt. Curiously the vs. is mostly free of the verbal knots that bedevil the earlier parts of the hymn.

Ge suggests plausibly that the “skin of the honey” is the skin on which the soma is prepared.

## 08-10
As just noted, 7c begins with utá as do vss. 8-10, but those vss. of the dānastuti proper are further unified, all beginning utá tyé mā.


## 08
It is unclear whether the horses in ab and those in c are the same or different.

In the publ. tr. they are treated as the same; the standard tr. take them as separate groups. The two occurrences of mā (a, c) may support the standard view, in which case vahantu needs to be supplied in the first hemistich (so Ge, etc.). I take saśce in pass. sense: “I am followed/accompanied.” Ge (/WG, also Klein I.425) take it to mean “be in agreement with,” but I do not know of other occurrences of √sac with this meaning. (Ge’s overelaborate set of explanatory glosses in n. 8d and n. 2 to that n. may attest to his discomfort with it.) The ‘intentions” by which I am attended are G’s intentions to give; see the expansion on krátu- in 9b. I think the point is not that the poet thinks it’s a good idea for G. to give horses to him (that is, agrees with G), but that G’s intentions to give are the poet’s escorts, as it were. (One is reminded of the curious beings known as rātiṣā́c- ‘Giftescort’.) Indeed these “intentions” may be the actual horses given; see 9b where the “bounties” produced by such intention are also actualized as horses.


## 09
In pāda a the publ. tr. reads “And (let) these (convey me)”; the “me” should not be in parens.

The bahuvrīhi krátvāmagha- is curiously formed, with instr. krátvā as its first member, and the publ. tr. “the bounty of his intentions” oversimplifies its structure in order to avoid impossibly awkward English: a full tr. of b would be “(the horses displaying/constituting) the bounty (produced) by his intention at the time of giving in[/of] the ceremony.” In other words, the horses that the poet receives possess (that is, embody) Mārutāśva’s bounty effected by his intention (to give). See 8d.

Ge takes vidáthasya as a PN, the patron whose patronymic is Mārutāśva, and Mayrhofer (PN s.v.) seems to agree. But there seems no reason not to interpr. it as an example of the well-attested common noun ‘ceremony (of distribution)’, esp. since it fits this context so well. WG do not follow Ge.

The part. dádānaḥ appears to be the predicate of this clause. Though rare, med. forms of √dā without ā́seem to mean ‘give of oneself / one’s own goods’. See also IX.52.3.

I don’t entirely understand d. ānūkám is a hapax, but I follow Old in taking it as an adverbial meaning something like ‘afterwards’; so apparently also WG. Ge, fld.

by Klein (I.425), takes it as the obj. of ārcat, as ‘last (song)’. See Ge’s n. 9d.

The standard interpr. (Ge [/WG], Old, Klein I.425) take aryáḥ as nom. sg., referring to Cyavatāna of c, and Thieme (Fremdl. 85) also thinks it’s probably nom. sg., but declines to discuss the passage because of the obscurity of ānūkám. But a patron like Cyavatāna should not be chanting or singing; that is the province of the poet-priests he is patronizing. Moreover, aryáḥ echoes gen. sg. aryáḥ in 6d, which announced the dānastuti to come, and I think the form should be interpr. in the same way in the absence of evidence to the contrary. In 9d I think that the gift of the arí- is still in question (as in 6d). The unnamed poet praised (‘sang’ ārcat) his gift for the wonder (vápuṣe) of it -- of its over-the-top munificence.


## 10
As in 9a “me” should be removed from parens.

The notion of enclosure in cd puns on the name of the Poet Saṃvaraṇa ‘entirely enclosing’ vel sim.
