+++
title = "034"

+++
Indra

## 01
A personified (/divinized) form of Svadhā ‘autonomous power’ is found in this set of hymns; cf. the apparent ref. to her also in V.32.10.


## 02
The overall structure of the vs. is the first issue to address. The first hemistich begins with a rel. clause (in a) with accented verb ápiprata; the second pāda begins with another accented verb, ámandata, which can owe its accent either to its pāda-initial position or to being part of the rel. cl. of pāda a. I choose the former interpr., making b into the main cl. of the vs. (so also Hoffmann, Injunk., 244). Ge and WG choose the second, with ab containing two parallel rel. clauses. Since the 2nd hemistich consists of a dep. cl. beginning with yád in c, with its accented verb yámat in d, this leaves the vs. without a main cl. WG remedy this by providing a main cl.

frame “Zur Stelle (war er) …” This posited main clause consists entirely of the preverb ā́that begins pāda a (see their n.), a slender reed indeed. Offhand I cannot think of any other examples where a preverb by itself constitutes a clause. This interpr. is esp. unlikely because ā́is an extremely common preverb with √pṛ / prā ‘fill’, and its default interpr. here is as a preverb in tmesis with ápiprata.

This structural question is connected with the problem of yámat in the yád cl.

of the 2nd hemistich. This form should be a subjunctive to the root aor., but it is difficult to construe it as such, viewed in conjunction with the augmented imperfects of ab. In order to hold onto the subjunctive interpr., Hoffmann (Injunk., 244) takes cd as a purpose cl. (“Der Freigebige … berauschte sich …. auf dass ihm … Uśanā … die tausendspitzige Waffe reiche”), but Indra doesn’t drink soma so that Uśanā will give him a weapon, but does so at the same time and occasion when Uśanā gives him the weapon (see, e.g., I.121.12). WG’s “Zur Stelle (war er)” is obviously designed to provide a better pragmatic foundation for the purpose cl. (see their n.), but I have just treated the weakness of their interpr. I therefore think that yámat here has to be a nonce injunction with preterital value, rather than the subjunctive it appears to be.

The pivotal form that allowed this reanalysis is 3rd pl. yaman. This form is morphologically ambiguous: it could be a subjunctive or an injunctive. Although those forms are normally differentiated by the grade of the root (e.g., subj. gáman versus injunc. gmán), a zero-grade injunc. *imán is too radical and would be blocked.

In fact, yaman, which occurs 4x (once as a rep.), is only found in mā́prohibitives and therefore must be an injunc. in every case. To this form, which could also be injunc.

to a thematic stem, a 3rd sg. thematic-type injunc. yámat can be backformed.

On them. ápiprata see Narten 1969 = Kl. Sch. 108-24, esp. 109, 121-24.


## 03
On ū́dhar / ū́dhan- as ‘cold’, beside the homonym ‘udder’, see comm. ad VIII.2.12. Note the phonological echo at the end of pādas a and c: ū́dhani# / ūhati#.

There is considerably more phonological play in the 2nd hemistich: tatanúṣṭim ūhati, tanū́śubhram, enclosed within unbroken a's: ápāpa śakráś ... maghávā yáḥ kavāsakháḥ. This phonological pattern may help account for some of the difficulties of interpr. this hemistich. Before addressing the three hapaxes in cd, tatanúṣtim, tanū́śubhram, and kávāsakhaḥ, note that the āmreḍited preverb ápa-apa (that is, ápāpa) superficially reads as a stem ‘not evil’. I doubt if that is accidental, esp. since doubled preverbs are quite rare; we will return to it below.

The first two of the hapaxes form the object of ápa … ūhati. The lexeme ápa √ūh means ‘pull away’. It is used of the extended penis in cosmic incest in X.61.5; more to the point, in AV XVIII.2.57 it is used of a garment that is to be removed (… vā́saḥ … ápaitád ūha yád ihā́bibhaḥ purā́). A garment could well be described as tanū́śubhra- ‘resplendent on the body’; cf. I.85.3 tanū́ṣu śubhrā́ḥ of the Maruts’ ornaments. I therefore supply ‘garment’ as the obj. here. (For a possible variant of this see disc. below.) Ge refuses to tr. or discuss tatanúṣṭi-; AiG is entirely silent on it; Old is noncommittal. Nonetheless, the formation of tatanúṣṭi- looks fairly transparent, if quite unprecedented. As WG also suggest, it appears to be a -ti- abstract built to the weak grade of the pf. part. to √tan ‘stretch’. WG gloss ‘die Sich-ausgebreitet-haben-schaft’, which in their interpr. is then also applicable to someone who has this quality. They thus assume a personal object for ápa ūhati, a dandy (Geck): “den, der sich ausgebreitet hat … den Geck.” I’m not sure what a “sich ausgebreitet” person would be, and there are other reasons to prefer supplying ‘garment’ or something similar as the referent of these two acc. First, there is the AV passage just cited, where ‘garment’ is the obj. of ápa √ūh. Second, garments are objects of √tan elsewhere (I.115.4, 134.4; X.106.1). And third, a personal object requires the meaning of ápa √ūh to be seriously attenuated (WG’s abschieben: ‘push away, get rid of’). I therefore take ‘spread-out-ness’ to be a quality attributed to a garment or garmentlike object. However, this analysis causes problems of its own. For one thing, why not simply use the pf. part. alone to qualify the underlying ‘garment’? Forming a derivational monstrosity -- a -ti-abstract based on a pf. part. -- and then turning this stem into a possessive adj. seem a tremendous amount of bother to go to when the participle by itself would convey the sense. Further, the standard words for garment are neut. (vā́sas-, vástra-), and tatanúṣṭim must be masc. (see the adj. tanū́śubhram agreeing with it). A proper neut. sg. adj. built to a -ti-stem should end in -ti (though as far as I can tell, there are no exx. in the RV), so if tatanúṣṭim is an adj., it is in the wrong gender for the posited noun it modifies. On the other hand, if we try to take tatanúṣṭim simply as the -ti-abstract, not an adj. based on it, the masc. gender of the qualifier tanū́śubhram clashes, since -ti-abstracts are fem. I have only an ad hoc answer to these problems: assuming the form is an adj. whose underlying referent is neut., the bare neut. -ti ending may have seemed anomalous and a more orthodox looking acc. substituted for it, encouraged also by the fact that the next word begins with a vowel and an inserted -m would avoid the hiatus. Meter would be unaffected, and tanū́śubhram can of course be neut. instead of masc. But I do not find this explanation compelling, and a different possibility is discussed below.

I have discussed the third hapax, kavāsakhá-, in some detail in Fs. Jasanoff (2007: 163), reviving the old, but generally now rejected, analysis of the first member as the old nom. sg. of kaví- matching the Aves. nom. sg. kauuā with its hysterokinetic inflection. That this inflectional type may be preserved here may be signalled by the 2nd member -sakháḥ, whose inflection remains hysterokinetic in Vedic and whose nom. sg. is ordinarily sákhā. The current standard interpr. of kavāhere assigns it to a stem (*)kava- ‘humiliating, degrading’ (see EWA s.v. kavatnú-).

So, e.g., Ge’s rendering of the cmpd as ‘falsch Freund’, with some semantic weakening.

How one analyses the cmpd. depends on what one thinks is going on in the hemistich in general. The first question is who is the referent of the cmpd.? It is found in a two-word nominal rel. cl. yáḥ kavāsakháḥ. Both Ge and WG take its antecendent to be the obj. of the verb ápa … ūhati (e.g., WG “… den Keck, der die Genossen geringschätzt”), but as was just discussed, it is not at all certain (and in my opinion unlikely) that the object of that verb is a person. Moreover, word order -- an often helpful, though of course not sturdily reliable guide in the RV -- favors Indra as referent: the verse ends … maghávā yáḥ kavāsakháḥ.

If my analysis is correct -- that the cmpd. contains kaví- ‘poet’ and that it characterizes Indra -- how can I fit it together with the rest of the vs.? I think the cmpd. has a double sense. On the one hand, the kavā part refers to Uśanā Kāvya, who figures in vs. 2. In fact, note that in 2d uśánā appears in its usual position, immediately after the caesura following an opening of 5. If we superimpose 3d over 2d, kavā- would immediately follow uśánā: [x x x x x / uśánā kavā(-sakha)], the composite yielding a simulacrum of his full name. And of course, as vs. 2 shows, Indra and Uśanā are partners and companions. Uśanā is referred to as kavíelsewhere, with kaví- a substitute for his patronymic; see, e.g., IV.16.3, 26.1.

But the other sense I see here is more sinister and requires considering vs. 3 in connection with the flg. verse. Vs. 4 is a curious, counter-intuitive, and indeed dispiriting vs.: even if Indra kills all your relatives, he still expects you to continue to offer to him. The usual comforting notion in the RV -- that Indra will do well by you if you do well by him, while the non-offerer will get badly treated -- is overturned here. Indra can act cavalierly and arbitrarily to ruin your life no matter how devotedly you serve him. I think the same unsettling idea is presented in vs. 3.

Though the standard interpr. of vs. 3 (see, e.g., Ge’s n. 3cd) is that the first hemistich depicts the pious man happily rewarded, while cd shows the impious one getting his just deserts, I take the whole vs. as referring to the ups and downs of the pious somapresser. First, his labors pay off: he becomes dyumā́n ‘heaven-bright’. But in the second half Indra snatches away this brightness, which is spread across him like a garment, “resplendent on his body” (tanū́śubhra-), an appropriate characterization of such brightness. In this reading kavāśakháḥ is ironic; Indra was indeed a companion and partner of the poet, until he wasn’t.

If this interpr. is correct, it may help explain the use of the peculiar formation tatanúṣṭi- discussed at length above. In pāda b the lucky soma-presser is dyu-mánt-, lit. ‘possessing dyu-‘. And by my analysis, it is this purported dyu- that is resplendent on his body. But the well-attested possessive adj. dyu-mánt- has become lexically separated from div-/ dyu- ‘heaven’; there is no independent dyu- ‘brightness’ that can become the property of a person. (The root noun dyút- is rare without preverb and means yet again something different.) It may be that “spreading-ness” is an attempt to capture the quality of heavenly light without having a firm grammatical base, an identifiable independent noun, to found it on. One of the standard tropes using the root √tan is light or a source of light spreading through heaven and other cosmic realms; cf., e.g., X.88.3 of Sūrya yó bhānúnā pṛthivī́ṃ dyā́ṃ utémā́m, ātatā́na ródasī antárikṣam. And so tatanúṣṭi- may embody this whole complex of heavenly light spreading across the man’s body as if through heaven. By this analysis the tatanúṣṭiis not a garment, as I first suggested, but like a garment.

Another piece of evidence may support my view of cd as expressing the undeserved and capricious reversal of fortune of the soma-presser who was riding high in ab. Remember that cd begins with the double preverb ápāpa, which could also be the voc. of an adj. ‘not-evil’. I suggest that this is a despairing address to the soma-presser of ab: “o un-evil [/blameless] one, see what can happen to you anyway.”


## 04
As noted in the publ. intro. and in the disc. of vs. 4 immediately above, the sense of this vs. -- which seems surprisingly clear -- is hard to square with our usual notions of Rigvedic reciprocal responsibilities, for the vs. states that Indra can kill all your relatives and still demand your offerings, with no attempt even to deny or distance himself from what he did. Ge and Old pass over this unsettling doctrine in silence; WG suggest that the vs. shows that Indra doesn’t fear a blood feud (Blutrache), but this seems to let Indra off too easily. There is no sign of the reciprocity that “blood feud” implies: the hapless man whose relatives have been slaughtered does not seem to have done anything injurious to Indra, nor did his dead relatives -- at least as far as the vs. allows us to see. The killings appear to be the arbitrary acts of a powerful god just because he can. It may be no accident that Indra is called śakrá- ‘able’ here and in 3cd, where he also arbitrarily exerted his power.

(Of course, śakrá- is a common epithet of Indra in the RV and later, and I would not suggest that it is always used with this nuance -- only that our poet exploited the literal sense of the word.) The fact that the word kílbiṣa- is used of Indra’s deed supports the view that what he did was simply wrong; see publ. intro.

I take práyata- in its usual sense, referring to offerings or bounties ‘held forth’ or ‘presented’. Cf. nearby V.30.12 práyatā maghā́ni, X.15.12 práyatā havī́ṃṣi, etc. I cannot get anything else out of this sentence than that Indra still wants the aggrieved man to keep making giving him oblations. WG tr. “Darreichungen,” but suggest in their n. that it refers to “Reparations-, Satisfaktionszahlungen.” But what right would Indra have to seek reparations when he was the one who inflicted the damage? yataṃkará- is a hapax, and the identity of neither of its parts is as sure as the standard interpr. take them. Gr suggests yataṃ belongs to the ppl. of √yam, therefore morphologically identical to the immediately preceding (prá-)yatā, but this analysis is rejected, rightly in my view, by Ge and WG, who take it (the former implicitly, the latter explicitly) as the acc. sg. of a root noun to √yat, found also in the cmpd saṃyát- in 9c. Although the uncompounded root noun is not found elsewhere and it is not mentioned by Schindler in his Root Noun diss. or Scar in his disc. of √yat (403-4), I think this must be the correct analysis, with the noun meaning ‘(proper) arrangement’ or the like. The publ. tr. ‘arranger’ reflects this analysis of yataṃ, while taking 2nd member -kará- from √kṛ, hence ‘make arrangements’ à ‘arranger’. I now think this interpr. of the 2nd member is wrong. This pāda-final compound matches final ākaráḥ of the next pāda, which, construed with preceding vásvaḥ, means ‘distributor of goods’. This -kará- does not belong to √kṛ, however, but to √kṝ, kir ‘scatter’, which occurs with ā́in just this phrase: cf. IX.81.3 ā́naḥ … kirā vásu “scatter/distribute goods to us.” This strongly suggests that the parallel cmpd yataṃkará- contains the same form, which leads to a sense ‘scattering the arrangement’ -- viz., destroying it, blowing it to smithereens and scattering the resulting particles. This accurately reflects what Indra has done in this vs. -- violating the arrangement between men and gods -- worship and offerings in return for protection, aid, and material goods -- by smiting the family of his devotee, though he still provides goods. I would therefore change the publ. tr. from ‘the arranger’ to ‘scattering/destroying the arrangement’.


## 05
The usual arrangement beween Indra and mortals is re-established in this vs., where Indra’s punishment comes only to the stingy and the non-worshipper, and the pious man gets rewarded.

There is a difference of opinion about the sense of pāda a, because of different interpr. of the acc. inf. ārábham and of the numerical expressions. Ge takes ārábham as ‘sich verbinden’ and the expressions of numbers as referring to people or gods -- the sense being that Indra doesn’t want to team up with others because he’s strong enough on his own. But ā́√rabh does not have that meaning, but only ‘to grasp, grab hold of’. WG also take the numbers as personal: “Nicht wünscht er mit fünf, mit zehn (Leuten) das Erraffen (von Beute),” which I confess I don’t understand. Is the intent that he wants to pile up his booty all by himself? By contrast, I take the numbers as referring to the means of grasping the offerings/goods -- either by the number of gifts (=in increments of five or ten) or by handfuls: one (=five fingers) or two (=ten fingers) -- and he doesn’t want to acquire the goods in such trifling installments.

In c the question is the function of amuyā́. I cannot identify a part of the WG tr. that represents amuyā́. Ge’s interpr. is minimalistic: íd amuyā́“nur so,” which Klein (II.160) helpfully expands to “only in that circumstance (viz. when a wealthy person does not have soma pressed for him).” This may well be right. However, I compare X.135.2 cárantam pāpáyāmuyā́“going along yonder evil way.” In our passage this may refer to highway robbery: the offending non-presser gets robbed as he makes his way along the road. Or it may be metaphorical: if the non-presser continues to pursue this behavior he’ll be punished.


## 06
There is puzzling agreement about the meaning of the hapax cakramāsajá-.

The standard interpr. run counter to the clear structure of the cmpd: a tatpuruṣa with the first member the acc. sg. of cakrá- ‘wheel’ (the acc. blocking hiatus before a vocalic 2nd member) and the 2nd derived from ā́√sa(ñ)j. The lexeme ā́√sa(ñ)j means ‘attach, affix, hang’ (I.191.10, X.124.7); yet this cmpd is universally interpr. as meaning ‘impeding/stopping the wheel’ (Gr, Ge, AiG II.1.183, EWA s.v. SAÑJ) or, acdg. to WG, ‘die Wagen bremsend’ with cakra- as pars pro toto. I do not understand this consensus that the verbal portion should be given a meaning not found with the verb itself, particularly since the context does not impose it. (Sāy.’s gloss rathacakrasyāsañjayitā does not seem to be responsible for it either.) Only WG attempt to trace a semantic pathway to the meaning attributed to āsajá-, but it is not persuasive. I suppose all these interpr. are thinking of the myth in which Indra tears the wheel off the sun’s chariot, but there is no other indication in context that this myth is at issue -- and tearing off and stopping are quite different actions. Given these objections, I prefer to stick with the standard meaning of ā́√sa(ñ)j and assume 1) that it refers to the restoration of the sun’s wheel mentioned in regard to Etaśa in nearby V.31.11, or 2) that is refers to an incident in an unknown story, or 3) that it refers to some pre-batttle preparation or battle tactic. I prefer the first.


## 07
The lexeme sám √aj is used elsewhere of ‘driving together’ cattle (I.33.3); here the bhójanam of the niggard is presumably livestock. Though paṇéḥ here is used oppositionally to dāśúṣe in b (see Ge’s n. 7ab), the word also summons up Indra’s opponents, the Paṇis, who stole his cows -- so stealing them back (muṣé) is only justice.

The syntax of c is quite challenging. Let us begin with víśva ā́purú. The phrase purú víśva- appears to be an idiom, or at least is found twice in the RV, meaning “all the many”: I.191.9 purú víśvāni “all the many (bugs),” VII.62.1 purú víśvā jánima “all the many tribes.” Here, however, the words are in opposite order, with the preverb/adposition ā́intervening, and the referent is singular (víśva[ḥ] … jánaḥ). Nonetheless, I think the locutions are essentially the same, though I tr. “each and every” to capture the singular number.

I do not know what to do with ā́. It is possible that it is a preverb with dhriyate, but 1) though ā́is found with √dhṛ, it is not common, and 2) preverbs in tmesis generally move to metrical or syntactic boundaries, and ā́is not so placed here. The standard interpr. do not comment on it. I have no solution.

The last issue is the use of caná. Ge (/WG) take it as neg. ‘nicht einmal’ (not even). The sense of the clause, acdg. to them, is that a people that has provoked Indra’s anger can’t hole up for a long time even in a place that’s hard to penetrate.

Thus by their interpr. durgá- is a desirable, fortress-like location for the offending people, but they can’t hold onto it. But durgá- is always otherwise an undesirable place, where no one wants to be -- where we wish Indra to send our enemies (VII.25.2) but from which we want to be rescued. I therefore think that the point of this clause is that Indra’s antagonists get confined to such a place and therefore caná does not have a negative sense here. Twice loc. durgé is followed by cid ‘even’ (VIII.27.18, 93.10), and durgé caná here may be a variant of this usage. Although he unfortunately does not discuss this passage, Klein’s general disc. of caná (DGRV I.285-92) as essentially borrowing negative value from the negative contexts in which it’s ordinarily found allows for an original underlying positive value ‘even’.

The publ. tr. should be slightly altered to “Even in a (place) …,” though I’m not sure what sense ‘even’ adds -- perhaps that not only are the people confined but they are confined in a really nasty place.


## 08
The identity of the verb ávet in b is disputed. Gr takes it as an opt. to √av ‘help’; Old rejects that analysis but suggests that either √vid ‘know’ or √vī ‘pursue’ is possible. Ge and WG (see also Oberlies RdV I.535) opt for √vid and take the rest of the ab as indirect discourse controlled by this verb (“when he found out that …”).

This is possible, but I find it hard to integrate subordinate yád clause in ab (with plupf.) with the hí cl. of c (with root aor.) and the main cl. of d (with pres. indic.). I find that the sequence of tense works better if ab is a separate unit, with subord. yád cl. in a and main clause in b (ávet accented because pāda-initial). Then c is the causal grounds for the main cl. in d and expresses immed. past.

My analysis requires supplying a verb in pāda a, linked to the preverb sám (which by the other interpr. must be construed with √vid, a combination not found with ‘know’, though it is with √vid ‘find’). A good candidate for a verb to supply is given by sámṛti- ‘clash’ in 6a, and verbal forms to this idiom (sám √ṛ) are fairly common. Cf. VII.25.1 … yát samáranta sénāḥ “when armies clash together.” My analysis also depends on a different analysis of ávet, which I assign to √vī ‘pursue’.

Note véti opening 4c.

The def. anyám ‘the one’ in c, referring to one of the two opponents in ab, more or less demands a responsive ‘the other’, as Ge and I supply in d.

Old questions the existence of the stem pravepanín-, suggesting that pravepanī́is an adverbial instr. to a pravepanī́- (fld. by WG). I don’t see that a stem pravepanī́- is appreciably better than an -ín-stem and follow the older analysis.


## 09
The sense of saṃyát- ‘continuous(ly)’, root noun cmpd. to √yat (see yataṃin 4c and disc. there), must have developed from ‘taking their places together, one after the other’. For further disc. of the stem, see comm. ad IX.86.15.
