+++
title = "035"

+++
Indra


## 03
ābhū́bhiḥ ‘ready at hand’ lacks an overt referent. I supply ‘(forms) of help’ from context -- ávas- is the signature word of this part of the hymn. Ge takes it as a nominalized ‘Kräfte’, though he suggests the Maruts as an alternative referent in n.

3d; WG personified ‘helpers’.


## 04
The syntactic boundaries do not coincide with the pāda boundary in ab -- a welcome syncopation in this otherwise simple hymn. The hemistich is divided into three clauses: vṛ́ṣā hy ási / rā́dhase jajñiṣé / vṛ́ṣṇi te śávaḥ, but the pāda boundary breaks the second into two one-word halves. It might be possible to fold the third proposed clause into the second (“you were born as bullish strength”), if we were willing to be cavalier about the position of te and indeed its presence (“you were born as your bullish strength”?), but the nominal clause in VIII.3.10 tád indra vṛ́ṣṇi te śávaḥ supports the analysis as a separate unit, if more support be needed. On the anomalous form vṛ́ṣṇi (for expected vṛ́śn(y)am), see comm. ad VIII.96.19.

satrāhám is a neut. sg. qualifying paúṃsyam. It looks like a them. neut. and is in fact classified under satrāha- in Gr and Lub (see also Scar 697). Nonetheless, it belongs with the class of root noun cmpds with -hán-. The neut. sg. of such a stem should probably be *-ha (like nā́ma to nā́man-, assuming radical -n-stems work like, or get assimilated to, derived -n-stems). I might tentatively suggest that the final -m was first inserted (as anunāsika) to avoid the hiatus *satrāhá indra and then reinterp.

as a them. neut. ending (see also Lanman, Noun inflection 478, AiG III.239). But it is the case that such nasalizations are rare within pādas and almost always concern long

-ā (see Old, Prol. 469-72). Moreover, the similarly formed neut. vṛtrahám in
VI.48.21 precedes a consonant with the -m making position.


## 05
Ge takes adrivaḥ as ‘du Herr des Presssteins’, but in context a stone as weapon seems more likely (so WG ‘du mit den Schleudersteinen’, flg. Gr).

I interpr. sarvarathā́as an adverbial accompaniment to the victim whom Indra runs over: “(him), chariot and all.” It is not clear from Ge’s “mit ganz Wagenzug” whose chariot he thinks it is, but WG take it to be Indra’s chariot, interpr. sarva- in its stronger lexical sense ‘hale, healthy’: “… so, dass dein Wagen heil bleibt.” This purpose-clause reading attributes more, and more unambiguous, structure to this single word than I think it can properly bear, and I also don’t understand the intended sense: should Indra endeavor to keep the victim’s blood from splashing his wheels or his body from making dents?


## 06
Note the phonol. figure pūrvī́ṣu pūrv(i)yám, though the words belong to diff.

stems. The referent of fem. pūrvī́ṣu is not clear. Gr suggests ājíṣu from 7b, and this seems to have met general acceptance (Ge, with ?; WG; Bloomfield RReps, 256), even though ājí- is actually masc., a fact no one remarks on. (Gr cites a single. fem.

form, in I.116.15, but nothing in that passage signals that gender.) We could, of course, suggest a different word for ‘battle’ with fem. gender, like pṛ́tanā or samád-; there is weak support for both (/either) of these because they both are construed in the loc. pl. with ugrá-, which is also found here: ugrám … samátsu in an oft-repeated pāda (III.30.22, etc.); VII.56.23 ugráḥ pṛ́tanāsu, VIII.61.12, 70.4 ugrám (…) pṛ́tanāsu. An entirely different referent is also possible: ‘peoples’ comes to mind, picking up the jánāsaḥ of pāda b, with several different possible fem. stems as substitute: kṣití- from 2c or the developed sense of carṣaṇí-, extractable from 1c (cf. III.43.2 pūrvī́ḥ … carṣaṇī́ḥ) or víś- (cf. VII.31.10 víśaḥ pūrvī́ḥ).


## 07
This vs. has a riddle structure: the accusative qualifiers pile up until their referent, the chariot (rátham) is given at the very end, immediately preceded by the verb (avā) on which the preceding accusatives depend. It proved difficult to capture this effect in tr.

sayā́van- means ‘drive along with’ (the useful German ‘mitfahren’, for which there is no precise English equivalent). It is ordinarily either construed with an instr. of the fellow traveller or is in the instr. qualifying the fellow traveller(s). Here there is no such overt expression, but we can assume it is Indra.


## 08
The structure of ab mimics that of 7, which has (a) #asmā́kam … / (d) … avā rátham#, while 8 has (a) #asmā́kam … (b) #rátham avā .... Another verbal expression is inserted within this structure in pāda a: éhi naḥ. Ge tr. as two separate clauses, silently postponing the asmā́kam to the second one (“komm zu uns, begünstige unseren Wagen”). WG take éhi naḥ as an insertion: “Unserem -- Indra, komm her zu uns! -- (unserem) Wagen hilf …” This interpr. seems possible -- save for the position of the voc. indra, which is unaccented and precedes éhi naḥ so cannot belong to that phrase. (A slightly altered tr. would be “Ours, Indra -- come to us! -- (our) chariot …”) By contrast I take éhi … avā as a pseudo-serial verb construction (“come help”), though I admit that the naḥ might be problematic for that interpr.

Ge (/WG) take both diví as ‘today’, but outside of diví pāryé ‘on the decisive day’, a phrase characteristic primarily of VI and VII, diví always refers to heaven, as far as I can tell. ‘Heaven’ makes fine sense here, and cf. the similar expression


## 02
... stómam manāmahe ... divispṛ́śaḥ “we shall conceive a praise-song (for Agni), who touches the sky.”
