+++
title = "036"

+++
Indra


## 01
The publ. tr. takes the phrase vásūnām … dā́mano rayīṇā́m as nested genitives (vásūnām and rayīṇā́m depending on dā́manaḥ), whose head noun is dā́tum.

Both Ge and WG break up the nouns into two phrases (though in different ways), with WG taking the verb cíketat in two different ways (pf. subj. / plupf. injunc.) with two different complements: “… der auf das Schenken von Gütern [i.e., vásūnām … dā́tum] achten soll, weil er sich ja auf die Schenkung von Schätzen [i.e., dā́mano rayīṇā́m] versteht.” This is more elegant than my pile-up of gifts and may well be right, though I’m not sure there’s sufficient signalling of the double meaning.


## 02
The simile in ab depends on the double meaning of the root √ruh, which means both ‘climb, mount’ and ‘grow’. It also hinges on two different senses of sóma-, as the prepared ritual drink and the plant from which it is extracted.

In cd there is mismatch in number between the simile in the singular and the frame in the plural, whose number is emphasized by víśve ‘all’. The point of the simile is that the person “driving his steeds” would be verbally urging them on to greater speed.


## 03
The slightly “off” nature of the similes in this hymn continues here. In ab the point of comparison between the rolling wheel and the poet’s mind is the trembling (vepate). The cause of the trembling -- fear -- is applicable only to the mind, not the wheel.

As disc. in the publ. intro., ráthād ádhi “from the chariot” is a curious phrase, and the standard treatments struggle with it. Both Ge and Old think that the singer is expressing a wish for a chariot, but it is hard to see how to make that work syntactically. WG (in n.) suggest that it’s either Indra’s chariot or that it represents the poet’s hymn, but neither of these fits the context well. As indicated in the publ.

intro., I think this is a punning allusion to the poet’s patron Śruta-ratha (lit. ‘having a famous chariot’), praised in the dānastuti in vs. 6. In this scenario the hemistichinitial ablative, referring to the patron, is linked to the hemistich-final word purūvásuḥ, referring to the poet. Though Ge (/WG) take this as a PN, giving it its full lexical meaning (‘having many goods’) makes the verse work better. The singer praises Indra on behalf of his patron Śrutaratha, in order to become “One of many goods” -- from/because of (Śruta)ratha. As Mayrhofer points out (PN, s.v. purūvásu- ), purūvásu is synonymous with Prabhūvasu, the name of the poet acdg. to the Anukramaṇī, so the vs. puns both on the name of the poet and on that of the patron.

This might be clearer in the publ. tr. if it were reordered: “Surely the singer will now praise you … (to become) one possessing many goods from the (Famous-)chariot?


## 04
The semantically complementary expressions referring to giving with the left and right hands have different morphological realizations: instr. savyéna and the hapax adv. dakṣiṇít. The latter is, of course, anomalously formed; it appears also in the cmpd. pradakṣiṇít (6x), which may be the basis here as well -- note immediately preceding prá. Thieme (KZ 69 [1951] = KlSch 71) suggests that it’s a cmpd with the root noun to √i ‘go’ (with the expected empty -t stem final); others that it contains the relic of a PIE instr. ending in -t/d. For a full disc. see Scar (42-44). Since the first is not straightforward functionally (“going to the right” is not its sense) and the second depends on a highly dubious morphological reconstruction, I withhold judgment on the source of the form, but see ubhayāhastí (or -ī̇) in V.39.1 below. The lack of morphological parallelism in this passage is not surprising, since the hymn tends towards slightly skewed expressions.


## 05
I take cd as a single clause (contra Ge [/WG]), because the sá with 2nd ps. ref.

that opens c is easily explained if it’s construed with the imperatival 2nd sg. injunctive dhāḥ at the end of d, but would otherwise be anomalous. See my “sa figé.” Strictly speaking, vṛ́ṣakrato is of course a voc. In the publ. tr. I render it as nom., because of the parallelism vṛ́ṣā vṛ́ṣarathaḥ … vṛ́ṣakrato vṛ́ṣā, with 2 nom. vṛ́ṣā adjoining 2 bahuvrīhis with vṛ́ṣa- as 1st member.


## 06
The sudden intrusion of the Maruts here is somewhat puzzling, but final vss.

often open out to a wider set of gods.
