+++
title = "037"

+++
Indra


## 01
As was noted in the publ. intro., the first pāda of this first hymn attributed to Atri provides the clue to the solution of the mythical puzzle posed by the narrative in Atri’s V.40.5-9 in which Svarbhānu (svàrbhānu-) pierces the sun with darkness and Atri restores the sun to heaven. The name Svarbhānu means ‘having the radiance of the sun’, and here Agni aligns himself “with the radiance of the sun” (bhānúnā … sū́ryasya). As I demonstrated at length in my book The Ravenous Hyenas and the Wounded Sun, Svarbhānu is simply an epithet of Agni, who inflicted the wound on the sun for cause (cosmic incest). This pāda signals the underlying connection of Agni and Svarbhānu with a minimum of fuss.

The dawns are ‘non-neglectful’ (ámṛdhra-) because they never fail to appear every morning.


## 02
Both Ge and WG take jarāte as ‘be awake’, even though Gotō himself (1st Klasse, 151 and 154) identifies this particular attestation of jára- as ambig. between ‘be awake’ and ‘sing’. Although both meanings are probably present, I think ‘sing’ is the primary one. The subject’s yoked pressing stones speak (grā́vāṇaḥ … vadanti) in the next pāda (2c), and throughout the RV there is generally an equivalence between the noise of the pressing stones and the speech/singing of the priests. See in particular in the immediately preceding hymn, V.36.4 grā́veva jaritā́… íyarti vā́cam “Like a pressing stone, the singer raises his voice,” with the agent noun belonging to the same root.

On the Adhvaryu’s trip to the river to fetch water on the morning of the pressing day, see Ge’s n. 2c.


## 03
See the disc. of this vs. as omphalos and riddle in the publ. intro. As indicated there, I identify the bride as Dawn and the husband as the Sun, while the dominant opinion (see Ge [/WG]) is rather Speech and Indra. The latter is certainly not excluded, and the fact that the stem iṣirá-, used to qualify the speech of the pressing stones in 2c, also characterizes the wife in 3b may give some support to that view. Cf. also IX.84.4 vā́cam iṣirā́m uṣarbúdham “the vigorous speech awakening at dawn.” Still, the Dawn/Sun interpr. follows naturally from the dawn ritual setting in the first two vss., and the long journey in d would refer to the daily trip across the sky.

As also noted in the publ. intro. śravasyād ráthaḥ “the chariot will seek fame” recalls the name of the patron in the immed. preceding hymn, V.36.6, Śrutaratha, which was also punned on in V.36.3.

With Ge I take purū́sahásrā as a measure of distance and pári vartayāte as intrans./reflex., based on its middle form. This is disputed by WG, who take the verb as transitive (but “affektive” [whatever that means], the value that accounts for its middle form). They supply ‘men’ as the referent of purū́sahásrā. The idea is that the noise of Indra’s chariot will cause many thousands of them to turn around and look at it. I suppose this is not impossible, but again it requires supplying much more than is found in the context: a huge crowd of people and the presupposition that “cause to turn” implies “turn to look.”


## 04
“Whose comrades are cows” (gósakhāyam) modifying soma refers of course to the milk mixture added to soma to make it less unpalatable. (It is somewhat surprising that sóma- is also called tīvrá- ‘sharp’ in the same pāda, since this is usually of unmixed soma.) But the gó- ‘cow’ of this cmpd provides a clever transition to the next pāda. Pāda c contains a verb (ā́…) ájati ‘drives’, which ordinarily takes an object -- and indeed frequently that object is cows: e.g., I.83.5 ā́ gā́ājat, V.2.5 ā́jāti paśváḥ. I therefore supply ‘cows’ as the object in c, extracted from a different use of the ‘cow’ word in b. This then produces a reference to the Vala myth, with the satvanaíḥ ‘warriors’ representing the Aṅgirases as elsewhere (cf. III.39.5, also nearby V.34.8 for association with cattle raiding). Thus pāda c depicts the king protected by Indra as performing a Vala-like deed (ā́satvanaír ájati) as well as the/a Vṛtra slaying (hánti vṛtrám), ascribing (equivalents of) the two signature deeds of Indra to this earthly king. Neither Ge nor WG make much sense of the ájati clause.

The accent on ájati is contrastive with the adjacent hánti.

Both Ge and WG take kṣitī́ḥ with kṣéti (“er bleibt in seinen Sitzen” and “weilt sicher in seinem Reich” respectively; see also Oberlies Relig. RV I.441, II.171-72), but √kṣi ‘dwell’ without preverb does not otherwise take the acc., whereas √puṣ ‘prosper, thrive’ can take a personal acc., and so I construe kṣitī́ḥ with púṣyan. In my interpr. the poet juxtaposes the cognate words (kṣéti kṣitī́ḥ), but separates them syntactically.


## 05
The pāda-framing #kṣéti … púṣyan# of 4d recur adjacent at the beginning of 5a #púṣyāt kṣéme in different morphological form; kṣéme ‘peace(ful dwelling) is also paired with its opposite yóga- ‘hitching up, war’, with two contrastive clauses framed by the subjunctives #puṣyāt … bhavāti# predicting success in both peace and war.

The war theme is further developed in the following pāda. I take ubhé vṛ́tau saṃyatī́as an implicitly subordinated clause with pres. part. as main verb (an interpr.

that WG come close to as an alternative considered in their n.). It would be possible to take this phrase as acc. obj. of sáṃ jayāti (so Ge, WG, Oberlies [Relig. RV II.172]), but it doesn’t make sense that the king would conquer both clashing forces, when one of them is likely his own. Rather I think the point is that Indra will favor him over the opponent and therefore his side will prevail. See V.34.8, where Indra links himself to one of two opposing troops and helps his clients win.
