+++
title = "038"

+++
Indra For the general contents, see disc. in publ. intro. WG interpr. it as plea to Indra for rain -- a purpose that I find very hard to discern and that results in farfetched interpr. of details.


## 01
The first hemistich is somewhat awk., with (by my interpr. and Ge’s) a genitive phrase uróḥ … rā́dhasaḥ “of your broad largess” dependent on an almost synonymous nom. phrase vibhvī́rātíḥ “extensive giving.” WG apparently take the first not as gen., but as abl., indicating the source of the giving: “Von deiner … weitreichenden Gunst aus entfaltet sich die Gabe.” This seems like a good idea and mitigates the awkwardness. I would then change the publ. tr. to “Your extensive giving (comes) from your broad generosity.”

## 02
As in several instances in the last few hymns, WG impose extra structure on the first hemistich that is not supported by the phraseology. They supply a verb to govern śravā́yyam, which then forms the foundation for a 2nd subordinate cl.

consisting of íṣam … dadhiṣé: “Was du … Ruhmvolles (zustande gebracht), dass du dir die Labung … verschafft hast.” In their introduction to the hymn they explain what lies behind this interpr., adding even further unsupported assumptions. The ‘praiseworthy’ thing that Indra accomplished was his action of freeing the life-giving liquid (íṣ-), which they presumably take both as the waters imprisoned by Vṛtra and (proto-)rain. But they give no justification for dividing ab into two clauses, separating the apparently parallel objects śravā́yyam and íṣam, and providing a verb to govern the first that cannot be generated from context or formulaics. It is worth pointing out that śravā́yya- is never used of a deed or action and most often modifies rayí- ‘wealth’ or vā́ja- ‘prize’. Although I can’t see any obstacle to qualifying a deed as śravā́yya-, there are no familiar phrases containing that notion that would come to mind when encountering an undefined śravā́yya-. Though I confess I can’t identify the referent(s) here, I find the WG interpr. implausible and forced. For further on this vs. see comm. ad V.39.2 below.


## 03
The WG interpr. becomes even more forced in this vs., which is summarized in their intro. by “Die Maruts lassen es regnen,” despite the absence of any reference to the Maruts or any verb for ‘rain’ -- the operative word for ‘rain’ is supposed to be the adverbial instr. mehánā generally taken as ‘in profusion’. The single word śúṣmāsaḥ is supposed to incorporate “Sturm, Drang, Blitz,” and the Maruts are supposed to be the other half of the dual expression ubhā́devāú “both you gods” -- that is, Indra and the Maruts -- a highly unlikely use of the dual. The distortion of the text to fit the interpretational preconceptions goes much too far.

To stay closer to the actual wording, the question is how to distribute the various pādas in relation to each other. Ge takes ab as the subject of a clause whose object is in c, though with an unexpressed verb: “Deine Kräfte … (bringen) beide Götter zur Übermacht.” I prefer to take ab as an extension of vs. 2, adding another quality of Indra’s (his tempestuous force) that extends itself along with fame. Then the two gods of c can be the subject of rājathaḥ in d, with abhíṣṭaye an infinitival complement. A similar interpr. is given by Scar (598), who takes ab as a nominal clause, “Die ungestümen Kräfte, die dir [sind, sind] in Menge [vorhanden] und gehorchen deinem Willen,” and cd more or less as I do.

As for who the other god is, besides Indra -- Old refuses to speculate, saying it’s an unknown ritual situation. Ge suggests Varuṇa, and this seems the likeliest possibility. Dual forms of √rāj generally have Varuṇa as one half of the subject, the other usually being Mitra; cf., e.g., in this maṇḍala V.63.2, 7. But VII.83.5, a hymn to Indra and Varuṇa, the verb has those two as subject: yuváṃ hí vásva ubháyasya rā́jathaḥ “For you two rule over goods of both sorts.”

## 04
The brief excursion into the dual in vs. 3 is over, and Indra is the sole subject again.

The first hemistich is again syntactically incomplete. The standard interpr.

construe the genitive phrase asyá kásya cid dákṣasya táva loosely with nṛmṇám (e.g., Ge “von welcher deiner Geisteskraft es auch sei, … bring uns Mut”). This is possible, but I prefer to take ab as an extension of 3cd (as 3ab was to 2cd), supplying ‘rule’ to govern the genitives, using slightly different senses of ‘rule’.


## 05
I tr. slightly differently from the standard, supplying another form of syāma for ab, rather than making the whole vs. into a single cl. The difference is trifling.

Notice that abhíṣtibhiḥ echoes abhíṣṭaye in 3c.

WG suggest that this vs. is a joke: asking Indra to be in his śárman (‘protection, shelter’; German ‘Schirm’) is like asking to be under his umbrella (Regenschirm). This is a joke that may work in German but seems to have little to do with Sanskrit, which, as far as I know, does not have the concept of a rain-repelling umbrella. Shelters of that physical type are more likely used against the sun, and certainly I know of no use of śárman- in a rain context.
