+++
title = "039"

+++
Indra As was noted in the publ. intro., this hymn is twinned with V.38 in Vālakhilya fashion, though it does not give as much help as it might in interpreting the previous hymn.


## 01
The poet re-uses mehánā from V.38.3 and rā́dhaḥ from V.38.1, as well as adrivaḥ (though that voc. is quite common in this run of hymns). Because of their commitment to mehánā as ‘rain’ in 38.3, WG are forced to insert rain here, though the context is hardly favorable.

The Pp. reads ubhayāhastí with short -í, which is assigned to an -i-stem by Gr, as a neut. modifying rā́dhaḥ, though he also suggests that it might be read -ī́, as the masc. nom. sg. of an -ín-stem. The latter works better morphologically than the former: hastín- is well attested and well formed, whereas there is no straight -i-stem hastí- and no easy mechanism for producing one -- though a nonce back-formation from the well-formed adj. -hasti ya- might be possible. See esp. ubhayāhasti yā́vásu in I.81.7. (A neut. to the -ín-stem would likewise probably come out as -í, and this may be an easier solution). I nonetheless tentatively suggest that ubhayāhastí here (if that is the reading) might be compared with the problematic dakṣiṇít ‘with the right (hand)’ in nearby V.36.4, which appears in the same kind of context, concerns hands, and has a problematic suffixal short -i-, followed there by a morphologically mysterious dental final.


## 02
Although this vs. is lexically and syntactically quite distinct from V.38.2, they seem to share a thematic core. First, note that váreṇi yam at the end of pāda a is positioned identically to śravā́yi yam in 38a, with the same type of formation and roughly the same meaning, and both are introduced by yád ‘which’ at the beginning of their pādas. Here the adj. clearly designates some good thing that Indra should bring us; recall that śravā́yi ya- also usually refers to wealth of some sort. In the second half-verse Indra’s limitless capacity for giving is expressed in a vivid image -

- Indra as unbounded ocean -- while in 38.2cd the unidentified praiseworthy thing
spreads itself out longest, also an image of unbounded expanse. The means of expressing the concept are quite different, but the concept itself seems the same.


## 03
I take ab as nominal rel. clause with a predicated grdv. prarā́dhyam, while Ge (/WG) simply take it as a nom. cl. (“what is your thought…”). My tr. should be modified slightly to make it clear that the ásti is accented: “Which thought of yours, famed and lofty, eager to give, is to [/should] be realized, with it …” In cd both Ge and WG separate the two pādas and supply a second verb (or, as far as I can tell, a 2nd exemplar of the overt verb ā́darṣi in different usage). I interpr. ā́darṣi as taking a double acc. in a condensed expression: “split X for (its contents) Y.” The lexeme ā́√dṛ can take as obj. either the container or the contained; for a similar double acc. with both see III.30.21 ā́no gotrā́dardṛhi … gā́ḥ “Split open the cowpens for the cows.”


## 04
Ge [/WG] take the enclitic vaḥ exclusively with pāda a where it is located (Ge: “Euren Freigebigsten der Freigebigen…”). In light of the next vs., I think that it refers to the Atris, who strengthen Indra with their words in 5, and that they are the subject of the infinitival dat. práśastaye in c. It has migrated to Wackernagel’s position in the larger clause (as often), which accounts for its distance from práśastaye.

As I have discussed elsewhere (e.g., Ṛgveda between Two Worlds, Chap. 4, esp. 146-48), the genre of práśasti- and the verbal lexeme prá √śaṃs are associated with the praise of kings already in the RV; praśasti is the standard term for royal panegyric in later Sanskrit and MIA. Note that here the term is used for Indra as king (pāda b rā́jānāṃ carṣaṇīnā́m).

With the standard interpr., I supply a verb of calling in c.

In d Ge takes pūrvī́bhiḥ … gíraḥ as co-referential, with gíraḥ acc. rather than instr. metri causa. This seems too tricky as well as unnec. With most (incl. Gr, Old, and WG) I supply práśasti- with pūrvī́bhiḥ (cf., e.g., VI.45.3 pūrvī́ḥ … práśastayaḥ).

WG in their n. suggest that pūrvī́bhiḥ is a “predicative instr” to gíraḥ, a construction that I don’t understand and that also seems unnec. Why not an instr. of accompaniment -- hymns along with eulogies? If I am correct that práśasti is a specialized verbal product already in the RV, the differentiation between it and gírhere would be perfectly understandable.


## 05
The distinction between verbal products continues here, with kā́vyaṃ vácaḥ ‘poet’s/poetic speech’, ukthám ‘solemn word’, bráhman- ‘sacred formulation’, and gíraḥ ‘hymns’ all offered to Indra. For the connection between práśasti- (here, 4cd) and kaví-, kā́vya- see ṚV between Two Worlds cited above. ## 040 Indra and Svarbhānu The hymn given as V.40 consists of two metrically and, more important, thematically ill-assorted pieces, vss. 1-4 and 5-9. The first three vss., in Uṣṇih, are a banal celebration of the word vṛ́ṣan- ‘bull’ addressed to Indra. The fourth is in Triṣṭubh and does not contain any form of the word vṛ́ṣan- (though see vṛṣabhá- in 4a), but the thematic connection is clear and it climaxes with the appearance of Indra at the Midday Pressing. The second part, vss. 5-9, is the exquisitely crafted account of the Svarbhānu myth, which on its own constitutes a perfectly balanced omphalos hymn. Metrically it consists of two framing vss. in Anuṣṭubh (5, 9), with the three internal vss. (6-8) in Triṣṭubh. Further evidence of the omphalos structure: the two outer vss. are multiforms of each other; the middle verse (7) is the only direct speech; the immediately surrounding vss. (6, 8) both mention Atri in the sg., both deal with the māyā́of Svarbhānu, and have complementary vocab.: diváḥ / diví, sū́ryam /sū́ryasya, gūḍhám /aghukṣat, bráhmaṇā / brahmā́.

All of the evidence points to a pair of originally independent hymns, which were later redactionally combined, and this hypothesis also fits their position in the maṇḍala. At four vss., the first part (V.40.1-4) would be the appropriate length to follow on the five-vs. V.39 as an independent Indra hymn, in accordance with the usual principles of Saṃhitā arrangement. The Indra cycle of V would come to an end there; the seams between cycles are where later Anhangslieder get inserted, and V.40.5-9 can be such an Anhangslied, with no original connection to 1-4 at all.

Although Indra has a bit part in the Svarbhānu saga (see 6ab, possibly 7c), the story is otherwise independent.

The idea that the two parts of V.40 were originally two separate hymns has a long scholarly history, going back at least to Bergaigne and Lanman, who both thought the division was rather 1-3 / 4-9. See Old, Proleg. 198 and, in detail, Noten ad loc. In the Noten Old seriously considers the possibility that the two parts formed an originally unitary hymn, primarily on the basis of V.78, which he sees as having a similar bipartite structure. I think this is unlikely: V.78 falls into three parts, not two, and in our hymn the Svarbhānu portion is far more intricately structured than anything in V.78. Nonetheless, it is possible that the two separate hymns were joined into V.40 on the model of V.78. For a possible reason for the introduction of the Svarbhānu account just here, see below ad vs. 4.

I treated the Svarbhānu portion at great length in my 1991 Ravenous Hyenas in conjunction with the brāhmaṇa prose versions of the myth, and I will not repeat all the details found there. In Hyenas (264-67) I identify Svarbhānu, the piercer of the Sun, as Agni, who is frequently said to have the bhānú- (‘radiance’) of the sun. For support for this identification see disc. there, as well as comm. ad V.37.1 above.

## 01-03
In the refrain (1-3cd) the pl. ‘bulls’ (vṛ́ṣabhiḥ) accompanying Indra were identified with the Maruts already by Sāyaṇa. Since this section culminates in the Midday Pressing (4d), this identification makes sense, since that pressing is shared by Indra and the Maruts.

## 04
In Hyenas (pp. 249-51) I suggest that the Svarbhānu section is introduced after this vs., because there are several connections between the Midday Pressing and the Svarbhānu story. In later śrauta ritual a descendant of Atri (an Ātreya) is given gold at the Midday Pressing of the Aśvamedha. The gold is clearly a symbol of the sun (as often), and the Svarbhānu story is often told in brāhmaṇa prose texts to justify this ritual action. There is also a disguised ritual reenactment of the freeing of the sun (also symbolized by gold) at the Midday Pressing. The suggested connection still seems to me reasonable, but I was more inclined in that book to accept V.40 as a unitary hymn, not a secondary composite. I now think that the independent Svarbhānu hymn was slipped in here at the end of the Indra cycle because of the mention of the Midday Pressing in the final vs. of the originally separate hymn, now V.40.1-4.


## 05
On vs. 5 as a variant of vs. 9, see Hyenas 140-41.


## 06
On the “fourth formulation,” see Hyenas 251-60.

The “circling magic spells” (māyā́ḥ … vártamānāḥ) of Svarbhānu are the plumes of Agni’s smoke rising to heaven and obscuring the Sun’s light (Hyenas 271- 73).

ápavratena ‘against commandment’ is generally taken to refer to the darkness deployed by Svarbhānu, but I argue (Hyenas 297-300) that it actually refers to the Sun’s original action, incest with his daughter, that led to his punishment by Agni Svarbhānu.


## 07
On this speech of the Sun’s, see Hyenas 281-88.

This vs. is usually taken as evidence for the “eclipse” theory of the Svarbhānu story, which aligns it with the later Rāhu myth in which Rāhu swallows the sun. But there is no other evidence for this connection in Vedic, and ‘swallow’ can be accounted for by inner-Vedic parallels. See the cited disc. in Hyenas.

Although Atri is usually considered the addressee of the entire vs., for reasons having to do with the Vāyav Indraś ca construction in cd, I suggest (Hyenas 284-86) that Indra is the referent of the 2nd ps. in c, conjoined with Varuṇa in d.
