+++
title = "041"

+++
All Gods As noted in the publ. intro., the hymn consists of verses dedicated to a sequence of gods, both major and minor, seemingly unordered. The full list consists of 1 Mitra and Varuṇa / 2 Mitra, Varuṇa, Āyu, Indra, Maruts, Rudra / 3 Aśvins, Rudra / 4 Trita, Wind, Agni, Pūṣan, Bhaga / 5 Maruts / 6 Vāyu / 7 Night and Dawn / 8 Men (Maruts?), Lord of the Dwelling Place, Tvaṣṭar, trees, plants, Holy Place / 9 Mountains, Āptya / 10 Trita, Apām Napāt, Agni / 11 Maruts, Bhaga, waters, plants, woods, mountains / 12 Agni, Waters / 13 Maruts / 14 Indra (maybe) / 15 Shielding Goddess, Rasā / 16 Maruts, Ahi Budhnya / 17 gods / 18 gods, goddess / 19-20 Iḍā, Urvaśī. The Maruts regularly recur in this sequence, and though, as noted in the publ.

intro., there is little Marut imagery (though perhaps more vocab. than I recognized at the time), if there is focus in this hymn, it is probably the Maruts, who dominate much of the rest of the maṇḍala after the All God hymns.


## 01
The conjunction vā ‘or’ dominates this vs.: there are 4 overt occurrences (twice in b, once each in c and d), as well as covert encodings, beginning with vā(m mitr)āv(aruṇ)āv (the latter two inverted) in pāda a and ending with the last word of the vs., vā́(jān). The end of the 2nd pāda, vā dé, with two monosyllables that, inverted, produce dévā(ḥ) (though with wrong accent for *devā́ḥ), draws further attention to vā.

As noted in the intro., the prominence of vā may establish a theme of choice or alternatives appropriate to the mass of gods mentioned in the rest of the hymn, and vā also echoes the last syllable of the phrase víśve devā́ḥ “All Gods,” to whom the hymn is dedicated.

Given the plethora of vā-s and the absence of any finite verb, save for intrusive trā́sīthām in c, it is not surprising that interpretations of the structure and syntax of the vs. are all over the map. In addition to the standard tr. (Ge, Re [EVP IV, V], WG), see also Old, Lü (Varuṇa 585-86), Schindler (Root nouns, 24-25), Klein (II.203-4), Scar (581), Keydana (Inf. 155 n. 142). I will not rehearse them all here.

Like many of these interpr., I take the three vā-s of bc as defining a tripartite structure of roughly parallel entities. I then assume that the vā of d is situated on a higher level of structure and is contrasting abc with a new clause inaugurated in d.

The two clauses (abc and d) are separated by the independent interjection trāsīthāṃ naḥ closing c. As Ge points out (n. 1c), trāsīthāṃ naḥ has a similar role elsewhere (IV.55.1, VII.71.2); IV.55.1 is especially similar, since it is in the first vs. of an All God hymn that begins kó vaḥ (like kó nú vām here), with Mitra and Varuṇa as the subjects of trā́sīthām.

My interpr. of the larger structure rests on taking dé at the end of b as an infin.

(with many, but not all) and assuming that the poet has exploited the voice neutrality of infinitives to give it passive value in abc (“[is] to be given”) and active value in d (“[is] to give”). This further assumes that káḥ refers to the (mortal) recipient in abc and, resupplied in d, to one of the gods. With these assumptions in place, the case relations in the two syntactically distinct parts of the vs. fall into place: the nom. káḥ … ṛtāyán “who, performing the truth …” of pāda a is the mortal worshiper and recipient of the gods’ largess; his counterpart in d is the dat. yajñāyaté. The vām of pāda a is to be interpr. two different ways: in the first part it expresses the divine beneficiaries of the mortal’s service; resupplied in d, it should be construed with likewise resupplied káḥ (or better kataráḥ) “which of you two?” The tripartite vā structure of bc details the three sources of gifts that may be given to the worshiper: heaven, earth, and the ritual ground. They are subtly unparallel: ‘heaven’ is a straight noun, either in abl. (as in the publ. tr.) or gen.; earth is represented by a deriv. adj. ‘earthly’ in the gen. (pā́rthivasya). It is a partitive gen., and if diváḥ … máhaḥ is gen., it too is partitive. If it’s an abl., it expresses the source.

The third term, “at the seat of truth” (ṛtásya … sádasi), expresses the place where the gift is to be given. Scar supplies ‘at the seat’ for all three terms. This is not impossible, but the poet seems to be aiming for slightly skewed and off-balance phraseology, and three different types of expressions for three parallel terms would suit his purposes admirably.

In the new structure of d, with active value of the infinitive dé, vā́jān is its object. The last grammatically unparallel functional parallel is yajñāyaté … paśuṣó ná. Assuming that it is a gen. sg. (Old and Re take it as acc. pl.), paśuṣáḥ ‘of one who wins cattle’ is in some sense parallel to yajñāyaté ‘for the one who sacrifices’, in that the vā́jān (‘prizes’) come to both. But paśuṣáḥ is a gen. dependent on vā́jān, while yajñāyaté is the indirect object with the infin. dé.


## 02
After the cat’s cradle of vs. 1, this vs. comes as a welcome relief -- or at least in its first half, which consists of a list of gods in the nom. and a verb they can all serve as subject to. With 6 gods (and an epithet -- or 7 gods if ṛbhukṣā́is taken separately) to fit into 22 syllables, the poet can’t get into too much trouble.

The 2nd hemistich is slightly more complex. It consists of an elliptical vā rel.

cl.: “or (in those) who …,” with the gapped ‘those’ parallel to enclitic naḥ in pāda a.

The final word sajóṣāḥ I take as referring to the gods; the stem(s) sajóṣa(s)- is generally used of gods (see sajóṣāḥ in 4b), and note that their verb juṣanta ends the first hemistich. But, with the standard tr., it may refer to the mortals providing the gods’ praise.


## 03
I take the passively used inf. huvádhyai with a gapped agent “by the priests” vel sim., to match the implicit 2nd pl. subj. of prá … bharadhvam in the 2nd hemistich.

The use of a passive inf. in the 1st half, contrasting with an active usage (though not an inf. here) in the 2nd half, recalls the structure of vs. 1. In our vs. there is a switch of 2nd ps. reference from the (two) gods in ab to the (pl.) mortal officiants in cd.

The use of the derived adj. ráthya- ‘belonging to the chariot’ rather than its base noun rátha- recalls pā́rthivasya in 1c substituting for a form of the noun pṛthivī́-.

Ge (flg. Sāy.) identifies the “lord of heaven” (divó ásura-) as Rudra, on the basis of parallels (see his n. 3c).


## 04
The parade of ill-assorted divinities and semi-divinities continues. The sequence is made more muddled by the fact that Trita is always a shadowy figure, who is probably (but not certainly) the same as Āptya in vs. 9 (Āptya being Trita’s usual patronymic) and Trita in 10 and who is probably (but not certainly) the referent of pāda a here: “the heavenly victor with Kaṇva as Hotar.” If he is the referent of pāda a, it is slightly odd that he is both qualified as ‘heavenly’ (divyáḥ) and said to be ‘from heaven’ (diváḥ, pāda b). It might be best, with Ge (/WG) to take diváḥ as the place-from-which of all the figures mentioned; however, Wind and Agni are normally associated with the midspace and the earth respectively, and Pūṣan and Bhaga are not particularly heavenly deities. It’s worth noting that divyá- continues the poet’s habit of using deriv. -ya-adjectives in place of (or perhaps here beside) their nominals, and so the doubling divyá- / diváḥ might not be so odd after all.

I do not know exactly what to do with prá initial in the vs., but it is noteworthy that it fits into a sequence of prá-initial expressions, where the preverb is in tmesis, beginning with 3d prá … bharadhvam and continuing with 5a prá … bharadhvam again and 6a prá … kṛṇudhvam (followed by initial prá in 6b and 7b).

In our vs. there is no finite verb to construe it with in tmesis, but note the loc. prabhṛthé in c. My assumption is that vs.-initial prá simply reinforces prabhṛthé in a vs. sandwiched between two full prá … bharadhvam expressions. It could also be construed with jagmuḥ in d, though one might expect a more prominent, metricalboundary-adjoining jagmuḥ in that case.

The loc. prabhṛthé and the acc. ājím both serve as goal with jagmuḥ -- another ex. of the poet’s penchant for slightly off-balance parallels.


## 05
The first hemistich consists of a syntactically “active” 2nd pl. verb (‘present!’ prá … bharadhvam, though it is morphologically middle) paired with a passive (‘should be produced’ dadhīta) without overt agent, structurally similar to vs. 3 with a passive infinitive (huvádhyai) without agent and the same “active” 2nd pl. prá … bharadhvam. This structure is further reminiscent of vs. 1 with passive and act. uses of the same infinitive dé.

In this vs. it is not altogether clear who the 2nd pl. subject of prá bharadhvam is. Ge thinks this is about the dakṣiṇā and suggests as subj. either the Opferveranstalter or the Maruts. I don’t see the dakṣiṇā connection, and given the reciprocal relationship between gods and men depicted already in the hymn (vss. 1 and 3), in the next vs. (6) with dhiyé dhuḥ playing off dadhīta dhī́ḥ in our 5b, and elsewhere, I think it likely that the 2nd pl. addressees here are the (All) Gods in general, who are asked to provide tangible wealth in exchange for the praise embodied in the dhī́- ‘visionary thought’ produced by the poets. The use of the exact same verb prá bharadhvam in 3 and 5, with opposite but complementary subjects (priest-poets / gods), is a neat reversal.

The standard tr. take auśijásya as a PN and construe it with hótā. This is not impossible, but since, as we’ve seen, the poet is fond of using -ya-deriv. adjectives for nouns, I think it more likely that it stands for uśij- ‘(type of) priest’ in the pl.

Assuming as usual, that the Hotar is Agni, who mediates between men and gods, it is reasonable that he would be pleased both by the activities of this priestly group and by those of the gods, represented by the Maruts. For the association of Hotar and auśijá- see also IV.21.6-7, though that passage is exceptionally opaque.

The vs. contains several instances of phonological and morphological play. In b the pāda-final phrase dadhīta dhī́ḥ shows tight phonological similarity though the two words belong to different roots. The same play is found in the next vs. (6d), likewise pāda-final, in dhiyé dhuḥ -- same noun dhī́-, verb to the same root √dhā -- though the phonological relationship is not as tight. In 5b dadhīta dhī́ḥ yields a very bad Triṣṭubh cadence, whereas 6d dhiyé dhuḥ provides a completely orthodox cadence. This may be an example of metrical poetic repair, where the metrical violation of the first calls attention to the phrase, which is satisfactorily resolved in the next vs. In the second hemistich we find # (suś)éva éva(ir) ... # (y)é va évā, evoking (d)eva- again. Pāda d lacks a syllable. It is tempting to emend the opening to yé *vā va évā, given the prominence of vā in the hymn -- as Old also suggests. But this emended sequence makes less sense and also disturbs its phonological echo of pāda c.

It should also be noted that yé va évā is also found in 13a in a different metrical position and cf. also scrambled evayā́in 16b. If *vā were to be inserted, the tr. could be changed to “is well disposed because of the ways of the … Priests or (those) which are the ways of you powerful ones, o Maruts.”


## 06
There are again a number of ways to construe this vs., and I will concentrate on my own. Given the alternation I see in this hymn between the actions of gods and men, I think (with most) that the 2nd pl. subj. of prá … kṛṇudhvam is back to the mortal ritual officiants (as in 3cd), rather than the gods (as in 5a). I also take prá kṛṇudhvam to be the verb of all of abc, reinforced by prá opening b. This further means that the nominatives of c (iṣudhyáva ṛtasā́paḥ) refer to the mortals and the púraṃdhīḥ is acc. pl., not nom. as many take it. Crucial to this interpr. is the parallel cited by Old, X.64.7 prá vo vā́yuṃ rathayújaṃ púraṃdhiṃ, stómaiḥ krṇ̥ udhvam sakhyā́ya pūṣáṇam. “Set in front with your praises Vāyu, who hitches up the chariot, Plenitude, (and) Pūṣan for partnership,” with clear acc. púraṃdhim a parallel obj.

with vā́yuṃ rathayújam (as here) to prá … kṛṇudhvam.

I then take d as displaying the usual reciprocity found elsewhere in the hymn, but with a grammatical twist. The last set of divine beings honored by mortals, the acc. object púraṃdhi- of c, are, in my opinion, the unexpressed subjects of d and participate in a grammatical play. The noun púraṃdhi- is fem., though it is at most the animatization of an abstract ‘plenitude, abundance’. Furthermore, it looks synchronically like a cmpd. with a form of √dhā, even though that is not the current standard etym. (cf. EWA s.v.). I therefore think that the pl. obj. púraṃdhīḥ of pāda c, reconfigured as subjects of d, are depicted as explicitly female -- as ‘good wives’ (vásvīḥ … pátnīḥ) -- and serve as subject to a form of √dhā (dhuḥ) folketymologically extracted from púraṃdhi-. The unexpressed obj. is then (missegmented) *púram *‘plenty’. As was discussed ad vs. 5, dhuḥ also participates in a figure with dhiyé that reverses dadhīta dhī́ḥ in 5d.

I do not entirely understand the position of ā́, which appears to be a preverb with dhuḥ (so Gr), but appears to have been moved in tmesis to a position adjacent neither to a metrical boundary nor to a syntactic one (though this would be easier to argue). It may have been flipped (from a putative *dhiyé ā́dhuḥ) to allow the figure just discussed (dhiyé dhuḥ picking up 5b dadhīta dhī́ḥ).

On iṣudhyú-, see comm. ad I.128.6 and my forthcoming article “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.”


## 07
The hymn contains three exx. of éṣe (5b, 7a, 8d). Though Lub classifies them all as locc. to the thematic stem éṣa-, I follow the standard tr. in taking the one in this vs. as a 1st sg. pres., while the other two are locc. in the phrase rāyá éṣe “in the quest for wealth.” The parallel for 7a cited by Ge, I.186.4 úpa va éṣe … uṣā́sānáktā, seems to clinch this interpr., and the next vs. (8), beginning abhí vo arce, also PREV vaḥ 1st - sg. VERB, reinforces it. In d I read ā́hā not ā́hā (a change only in the Pp. not the Saṃhitā text), and analyze this sequence as ā́+ áhā, the neut. pl. of ‘day’. This is one of only two supposed exx. of the particle ha with long vowel; the other one (IV.31.5) also follows ā́and is susceptible to the same analysis. See disc. there.


## 08
Ge takes nṛ́̄n as gen. pl. rather than acc., but this is unnec. The stem nṛ́- is regularly used of gods, esp. the Maruts, so there is no reason that they cannot be addressees here (so Re, WG).

The standard tr. take dhányā sajóṣā dhiṣáṇā as nom. sg. and parenthetic; e.g., Ge “—einverstanden ist die reichmachende Dhiṣaṇā—” But the instr. sg. in -ā to fem.

-ā-stems is still quite common in the RV, and that is how I construe the phrase here.


## 09
svaítu- in b is a hapax. Following a tentative suggestion of Ge’s (n. 9b), I take it as a vṛddhi form related to Aves. xv aētu- ‘family’, pace Narten (YH 266 n. 59), who, however, does not give reasons for her rejection of the association (though it’s true that we should really expect a thematic *svaitava- or the like). I confess, however, that my rendering of ab is merely a guess (as, it seems, are the other divergent tr.). I don’t know why the mountains should be associated with our production of offspring; the sexual connotation WG suggest in their n., that mountains are felsenhart and knotig, seems farfetched. My own tentative suggestion is that the progeny here belong to the mountains, not to us, and refer to the material goods originating from mountains that we will enjoy: see I.55.3 párvataṃ ná bhójase “like a mountain to be enjoyed” and Ge’s parallels adduced there; also passages like VII.37.8 ā́rā́yo yantu párvatasya rātaú “let the riches of the mountain come here at (the time for) giving”; II.24.2 vásumantam .. párvatam “the goods-filled mountain.” If I am correct, the simile, in which the mountains are said to be vásavo ná vīrā́ḥ “like good heroes” may be a bit of a pun, with vásavaḥ actually referring to the material goods of the mountains. To make my interpr. clearer, I might slightly emend the tr. to “to thrust out their progeny for us.” The alternative etym. of svaítu- found in Gr, favored by Narten, and represented in the tr. of Re and WG analyses it as svá-etu- ‘having their own going’, which seems singularly inappropriate. It is regularly emphasized that mountains can’t be moved — except when they’re in fear of some greater force (like the Maruts) — so “going” should not be one of their properities. It could refer to the myth of the winged mountains (the wings then clipped by Indra), but this does not seem the context for a reference to this myth. WG attenuate the sense to a figurative “die ein Eigenleben führen,” which avoids the mountain-movement problem, but essentially denies the force of the etymology. By contrast, a reference to ‘family’ fits comfortably with the production of progeny.

I don’t know what Āptya is doing here, either. Again, the sexual connotation suggested in WG’s n. is invisible to me. It does seem likely that he is the same figure as Trita in 10b, since both are associated with the production of praise. Trita in 4b is less clearly tied in. Note śáṃsaṃ náryaḥ, which reminds of nárā-śáṃsa- (though they don’t belong to the same syntagm here) and also continues the poet’s fondness for -yaderivatives.


## 10
WG take Trita as the persona of the 1st ps. speaker of astoṣi (“ich, als Trita …”), whereas I follow Ge and Re in supplying a 3rd ps. form of √stu for b.

The form etárī is, of course, problematic, but is most likely a loc. sg.; for disc.

see Tichy (-tar-stems, 59-61). It is found only here and in VI.12.4, in the same pādafinal phrase etárī ná śūṣaíḥ. In our passage there is some phonetic justification for the form (though not in VI.12.4); note the ni/ri sylls: gr̥nīté agnir etárī ... / ... ní riṇāti.


## 12
This vs. presents a number of difficulties. The first is the easiest solved: who is the referent of ab? Although this is almost universally taken to be the Wind, I think it is more likely Agni. Only Agni is called ūrjā́m páti- “lord of nourishments” (otherwise only in the voc. ūrjām pate), also ūrjó nápāt “child of nourishment.” Given this exclusive identification, it seems unlikely that the audience would assign a different referent, esp. since ūrjā́m pátiḥ is the first epithet encountered and sets the frame of reference; the others only show up in pāda b. Moreover, though párijman- ‘earth-circling’ is used of the Wind, it also refers to other entities, including, fairly often, Agni (VI.2.8, VI.13.2, VII.13.3, I.127.2, III.2.9). The other descriptor in b, iṣirá- ‘vigorous’, is applied to a variety of beings and things, including the Wind, but also Agni (III.2.14, 5.4). The only activity posited of the subject of this hemistich is nábhas tárīyān (for which see below), which is also applicable to either.

The pāda-final sá in pāda a is quite unusual. A cursory glance through Lub for parallels yields only II.35.1, III.13.3, (VII.86.6 sā́), IX.71.8, IX.79.3, X.108.4 (a careful search might produce a few more). All of these exx. are either rhetorically contrastive, or sá takes its proper position in a new clause. Although it is possible that the sá here also begins a new, purely nominal clause with b, this seems clumsy. I have a quite speculative suggestion about it, linking it with the immediately following nábhas tárīyān. The standard — and quite persuasive — interpr. of this phrase is “quicker than a cloud,” but this imposes an abl. sg. interpr. on nábhaḥ, which should then belong to a root noun nábh- ‘cloud’, beside the standard s-stem nábhas-. This root noun does not otherwise exist: the supposed root noun nábh- (glossed ‘Zerspalter, Zerbrecher’ by Gr) in I.174.8 is more likely a verb (see comm. ad loc.). And in any case we should expect an accent *nabhás. Re’s suggestion that nábhas is simply haplology for *nábhasas is probably correct, but I suggest that it left a trace of its vanished final -as in the pāda-final sá immediately preceding — a tangible sign of the effects of speed: the final syllable got cut off and left behind.

The second hemistich is very puzzling and has given rise to very different and incompatible interpr. (WG being esp. distant from the rest). Mine more or less follows Old (or one of his alternatives), who discusses the passage with his customary acuity; I will not discuss other renderings in detail. I am not at all certain that mine (/Old’s) is correct, however. The framework of the passage compares the waters, subjects of the verb, with fortifications (púraḥ), the point of comparison being their resplendant appearance (śubhrá-). So far also Ge; Re also follows this structure, but floats the possibility that púr- can mean ‘corps’, which would be convenient but is of course unsupported. With Old and Ge (we now lose Re, who takes d as a separate clause with the ladles as subj.), the fortifications are those of a mountain (ádreḥ), and this mountain is characterized as pári … babṛhāṇá- ‘enclosing’ (pári √bṛh has this meaning in the Brāh.). Although we would not ordinarily expect tmesis of a participle, esp. a part. in an oblique case, the tmesis here is iconic: the enclosed object is located between preverb and participle. This object is srúcaḥ ‘offering ladles’. Now of course in a literal interpr. a mountain enclosing a bunch of ladles sounds very odd, Old cleverly suggests that the ladles stand for cows -- living ladles, as it were, from which ghee comes as it does from the offering ladles. These cows are then the cows trapped within the Vala cave. The hemistich thus starts jointly in the physical world and on the ritual grounds, since the listening waters are probably both “real” natural waters and the waters standing by for the soma sacrifice.

It then moves, via the simile, to the natural world (mountain fortifications) and the world of myth (the Vala cave), and back to the ritual ground, with the enclosed ladles.

If this interpr. is correct, it is a very condensed and clever expression.


## 13
Another opaque vs., whose difficulties begin with the first word vidā́. This is taken as the 2nd pl. pf. by Gr, Ge, WG. (Re unaccountably takes it as a 1st sg. ‘Je sais …’, without comment -- presumably a careless error for véda.) I follow Old in taking it as the instr. of the root noun to the same root.

The phrase yé va évā(ḥ) recurs from 5d though in a different metrical position.

Here as there it refers to the “ways” (évāḥ) of the Maruts (so Ge, Re, flg. Sāy., contra Old’s tentative Ādityas) -- the ways which by our knowledge (vidā́) we are in a position to proclaim (brávāma), presumably in the form of a hymn, for which we expect reward (vā́ryaṃ dádhānāḥ “acquiring what is choice”) -- just as in vs. 5 a visionary thought (dhī́ḥ) was to be produced in return for wealth (rāyá éṣe ávase “for help in the quest for wealth”). The part. dádhānāḥ has almost a purpose function, and to make the reciprocal action clearer I might emend the tr. from “as we acquire” to “while acquiring …” or even “for acquiring.” The first sticking point in the second hemistich is caná. This is universally taken as negative (as caná generally is). However, in this case I think that it is simply equivalent to ca ná (so also Klein I: 289-91 with n. 8) and that the ná here is serving as the simile-marking particle, not the negative. váyaḥ is often used in a simile at the beginning of a pāda: I count 7 #váyo ná passages, incl. V.59.7 in this maṇḍala, where it’s the Maruts who are compared to birds (cf. also I.87.2 #váya iva marutaḥ) — though I do have to admit that 2 #váyaś caná passages (I.24.6, 155.5) contain the negative.

Therefore, contra all the standard tr./interpr., I take the subject of cd not as ‘birds’ (váyaḥ), but as the Maruts compared to birds (like V.59.7, I.87.2). The adj.

subhū́- ‘of good essence’ is regularly used of the Maruts in this maṇḍala (V.55.3, 59.3, 87.3) and would identify them as the referent to an alert audience. In this 2nd half-vs. we make good on our promise to proclaim the ways of the Maruts -- this exploit is one of these ways.

Unfortunately exactly what that exploit involves is unclear. That the Maruts should come down like birds is unproblematic: they regularly fly through the midspace and come down to interact with mortals, generally at the ritual. But the target of their descent, expressed in pāda d, has no parallels, as far as I can find. In my interpr. the mortal (mártam) to whom they come is in distress and receives their help. Unlike the standard tr. I take the hapax root noun instr. kṣubhā́as characterizing the Maruts’ movements (fluttering like birds), not the state of the mortal, which is expressed by ánuyataṃ vadhasnaíḥ “held/controlled by murderous weapons.” I assume that he is under attack by hostile forces and requires the Maruts’ assistance to free him.

The phonological play with va/ā that we noted earlier in the hymn (particularly vss. 1, 5) has returned here: … yé va evā́, brávāma ...vā́ryaṃ ...

váya(ḥ) ... subhvà(ḥ) ... vadhasnaíḥ — which draws attention to the thematic connection between this vs. and vs. 5.


## 14
Since Indra is several times called súmakha-, I assume he is the referent here -- though nothing much depends on it in this generic vs. and both Ge and Re take it to be the sacrificer or the patron of the sacrifice.

WG suggest that candrā́grā(ḥ) modifies both ‘days’ and ‘hymns’; this is a good idea, with ‘gold, gleam’ used in two slightly different senses. The days begin with the gleaming of the golden sun, while the hymns offered to the gods are metaphorically tipped with the gold given by the gods in response to praise.

In d udā́is generally taken as the instr. sg. of a root noun ‘water’ (so, e.g., Gr and all the standard tr., though Ge hesitates), beside the more common oblique nstem instr. udnā́. However, I follow Schindler (Root nouns, 12-13), who argues that it is better taken as the nom./acc. pl. to the same -n-stem.

The somewhat curious expression abhíṣātā árṇāḥ “conquered floods” finds its formulaic match in nearby V.50.4 árṇā … sánitā ‘winner of the floods’; this may well be a general reference to the progress of the Ārya into the Punjab, winning territory river by river. Ge cites as parallel I.131.5 té anyā́m-anyāṃ nadyàm saniṣnata “They kept winning one river after another.”


## 15
The action in pāda a is a positive one: the speaker is assured to make it to old age. See 17de and disc. there, as well as X.59.4, which will be disc. further below.

The construction in b, which expresses the agent of ní dhāyi, is complex. Its underlying model is the “X and which Y” construction, but it is inverted, with the rel.

cl. member first: “(by her) who is … and by the protectors.” Moreover, it contains both vā and ca. As Klein says (II.174-75), “the construction should most likely be viewed as a conjunctive anacoluthon in which the poet begins by intending alternative conjunction and finishes with an additive sequence. Within each member the conjunction occupies its normal enclitic position: (várūtrī vā śakrā yā́) (pāyúbhiś ca).” On ṛjuvániḥ see Scar 467-68. Note that this form produces a bad cadence.

On the connection between cd and vss. 19-20 see disc. below.


## 16
As does upamātivániḥ in 16e. On this form and on the meter of both -vániḥ forms, see Scar 467. On úpamāti- see comm. ad VIII.40.9.

The opening of the vs., kathā́dāśema, echoes 11a kathā́… bravāma. In both cases the object of our action is the Maruts. Another echo is found in evayā́(ḥ), which is a scrambling of yé va évā(ḥ) of 5d and 13a (though yé and -yā(ḥ) are completely different grammatically), in both cases of the Maruts. The sequence in our pāda b, evayā́marútaḥ “the Maruts traveling their ways,” is also matched by the punctuating exclamation evayā́marut found in every vs. of the Anhangslied to the Maruts that ends this maṇḍala (V.87.1-9, tr. there “Maruts on the march”).


## 17
As noted in the publ. intro., vss. 16-17, in a different meter from what precedes (and follows), seem to provide a summary of the preceding hymn, esp. 17, with its self-conscious internal quote íti cin nú “in just these (words) now.” See Janert (Dhāsi, pp. 16-17), who argues this position in some detail.

All the standard tr. (as well as Janert, 42) agree in taking d and e as separate clauses and supplying a verb for c. All consider the clauses contrastive: in d I hope to be granted a pleasant or benevolent dhāsí- for my body, while in e I express the wish that Nirṛti should swallow my old age. But this is directly contrary to what was said in 15ab, where the securing of his old age was an occasion for celebration by the poet.

It is true that two different words for ‘old age’ are involved: jarimán- in 15, jarā́- in 17, but these words do not contrast semantically elsewhere as far as I can see (cf. X.32.5, 8, which contains jarā́- followed by jarimán-) (even though Re remarks “noter l’opposition”). An important parallel is provided by X.59.4 dyúbhir hitó jarimā́sū́no astu, parātaráṃ sú nírṛtir jihītām “Throughout the days let our old age be secured for us. -- Let Dissolution move herself further away.” There old age is ‘secured’ (hitáḥ) as it was in our 15a jarimā́ní dhāyi (both to √dhā), and Dissolution (nírṛtiḥ) is urged to move away. (It should be admitted that that pāda is a refrain to the first three vss. of X.59 and so not necessarily as closely tied to the preceding pāda as it might be.) I therefore doubt that in our vs. the poet is hoping that Dissolution will swallow the old age that he (and other poets) elsewhere want to keep safe.

Instead I think de is the expression of his fear that if he fails to win the gods (abc) Dissolution will succeed in depriving him of his wished-for old age. I have pushed átrā perhaps a bit too much -- to ‘otherwise’; I would prefer a ‘lest’ (néd) clause or even a mā́clause, but néd, which becomes well developed in Vedic prose, barely exists in the RV and the poet may have been casting about for a way to express this modality. A further piece of evidence in favor of my interpr. is the word dhāsí.

Although this word often means ‘well-spring’ or ‘source’ (see comm. ad I.62.3, 140.1), in some cases it seems to mean ‘place, depository’ and be associated with (/derived, at least synchronically, from) √dhā. Here the dhāsí- seems to be the nominalization of ní dhāyi in 15 (cf. hitáḥ in X.58.4) — that is, the place in which old age is securely held. I therefore take it as coreferential with jarā́m in e. ### 18-20 If, as suggested above, 16-17 are the finale of the hymn proper, these 3 (or 2 ¼) were tacked on. They certainly lack the complications of the rest of the hymn. The dominance of female figures is striking.


## 18
Despite the word order, I follow Janert (contra the standard tr.) in construing pāda-final góḥ with íṣam, rather than with immediately preceding śásā, which saves us from determining what the recitation or instruction of the cow is.

## 19-20
The single pāda of 20 simply continues vs. 19 thematically and syntactically, as Old points out. They constitute a single vs. The signature word of the beginning of the hymn, vā, returns in force: urváśī vā ...urváśī vā brhaddi ̥ vā́... ūrṇvānā́. Note also urváśī ... urváśī ... abhyūrṇvānā́...

ūrjavyàsya.

This vs. sequence seems inspired by 15cd. Vs. 15 has a similar focus on female figures, and 15c #síṣaktu mātā́mahī́rasā́naḥ is echoed by 20a #síṣaktu naḥ, whose subject is likewise a female. The ‘mother’ mātā́of 15c is matched slightly earlier in this vs. sequence, in 19a, and there she is accompanied by rivers (smán nadī́bhiḥ 19b), even as the mother of 15c is identified as the river Rasā.

In fact 19-20 depict a matriarchal lineage of sorts, as Ge points out (n. 19bc).

Besides Iḍā, explicitly “the mother of the flock” (yūthásya mātā́) here, there is Urvaśī, twice: 19b and 19c. I am not entirely sure what to make of this doubling. I doubt that two different Urvaśīs are meant, rather the familiar Urvaśī in two different guises (so Ge). In 19b she is associated with rivers. This reminds us of the attendance of her fellow Apsarases and of the rivers on the birth of Urvaśī’s son in X.95.6-7, with Urvaśī herself qualified as ‘watery’ (ápyā in X.95.10b) and her son as “born from the water” (jániṣṭo apáḥ, X.95.10c). Urvaśī Bṛhaddivā (‘of lofty heaven’; on the accent bṛhaddivā́- see AiG II.1.109, 120) in 19c may refer to a return to her residence in heaven after breaking with Purūravas (not, however, mentioned in X.95). In any case, Urvaśī’s son is named Āyu; his paternal grandmother is Iḍā, the mother of Purūravas (addresed as aiḍa in X.95.18), so the title ‘mother’ given to Iḍā in 19a has another resonance. Because of Urvaśī’s relationship to Āyu, with Ge and Re I supply ‘mother’ in 19d and 20a to govern the various genitives. Thus with Iḍā, Urvaśī, and Āyu we have a three-generational family.

I am uncertain what to do with ūravyàsya in 20 (PN or not), and I also do not know what abhyūrṇvāṇā́in 19d is conveying.
