+++
title = "042"

+++
All Gods As noted in the publ. intro., like V.41 this hymn enumerates a number of divine dedicands with no apparent ordering, save for the middle vss. (7-9), where Bṛhaspati dominates. The list includes 1 Varuṇa, Mitra, Bhaga, Aditi, Aryaman / 2 Aditi, Mitra and Varuṇa / 3 Savitar / 4 Indra / 5 Bhaga, Savitar, Aṃśa, Vāja, and Puraṃdhi / 6 Indra / 7-8 (-9) Brhaspati ̥ / 10 Maruts / 11 Rudra / 12 Sarasvatī, Brhaddiv ̥ ā, Rākā / 13 Tvaṣṭar (+ Viśvarūpa?) / 14 Parjanya / 15 Maruts / 16 Earth (etc.) / 17 gods / 18 Aśvins. Note no Agni, unless he's hidden in 1cd. The hymn is much more straightforward, and less interesting, than V.41, but provides a relaxing interlude in the overheated rhetoric of the All God hymns of V.


## 01
As Ge (etc.) point out, átūrtapanthāḥ is the clue to the identification of the referent of cd, since this epithet only occurs once elsewhere in the RV, in X.64.5, where it is explicitly used of Aryaman. In that passage he is also qualified as saptáhotā ‘having 7 Hotrars’, like páñcahotā here. And of course Aryaman makes sense in this highly Ādityan context. Nonetheless, I think pāda c (pṛ́ṣadyoniḥ páñcahotā) flirts with a different identification -- of Agni -- before sealing that of Aryaman by átūrtapanthāḥ in d. Agni could plausibly have a womb of dappled (ghee) (pṛ́ṣadyoni-), similar to ghṛtáyoni- ‘having a womb of ghee’ used of Agni in V.8.6, as Ge points out (n. 1cd), and of course Agni is both associated with Hotars and is the Hotar par excellence himself. Since, as noted above, Agni is not otherwise found in this hymn, the poet may have gestured towards him covertly in 1c.


## 02
This vs. is quite straightforward until we reach pāda d, where the nom. ahám ‘I’ demands a verb that isn’t there. Keeping in mind the theme of divine/human reciprocity that runs through the last hymn and the rest of this one and employing our usual method of attempting to supply missing material from context, it seems best to supply a form of práti √grabh complementary to práti … jagṛbhyāt in a with Aditi as subject. The poet wishes to grasp the bráhman- produced by the gods (c) in order to turn it into praise (stóma-) for the gods (a). This reciprocal relationship may be signaled by the first word in the vs. práti ‘in return, in response’.

The other question in d is what to do with the untethered locc. mitré varuṇé. I have followed Ge in loosely construing them with mayobhú ‘joy itself’, even though this stem does not elsewhere take a loc. Ge (n. 2d) cites a series of parallels with locc.

mitré váruṇe that seem to have similarly loose beneficial value.


## 03
Note the distinction in no. between the two 2nd ps. impvs. in ab: sg. úd īraya and pl. unátta. As commonly, the sg. is probably a self-addressed by the poet to himself; that his object is “the best poet of poets” (kavítamaṃ kavīnā́m) simply emphasizes the closed loop of reciprocity. The pl. impv. is presumably addressed to his fellow celebrants, in this case the priests charged with the physical activity (the Adhvaryu and his helpers, quite possibly). The pl. impv. unátta has a strong stem form where we properly expect weak, but the expected form *und-ta à *untta à (probably simplified to) *unta would have been difficult to parse.


## 04
Ge thinks it’s our mánas- that’s at issue, but context makes it more likely to be Indra’s (so also Re and WG).

Pāda c is a minor variant of 2c and in fact makes clear what the structure of 2c is and where the rel. cl. begins. A minor example of syntactic repair.

## 05
In pāda a it is unclear with what noun to construe gen. rāyáḥ. Ge and Re take it with savitā́(Ge: “der Zuweiser … des Reichtums”), while WG seem to agree with me in taking it with áṃśa(ḥ). Since Savitar is a far more defined divine being with a name that, though having the literal sense ‘impeller’, is normally used just as a name, I think Aṃśa, whose animatization is fairly shaky, is more likely to be used in a literal abstract value and construed with a gen. of the same type.

The problematic form in the vs. is saṃjítaḥ. Properly speaking, this should either be an abl./gen. sg. or a nom./acc. pl. of the root noun cmpd saṃjít- ‘complete victor’. Gr analyzes it as gen. sg., modifying vṛtrásya, as, apparently, does Re, while Ge and WG take it as nom. pl., presumably applicable to all the gods listed singly before. All construe the gen. pl. dhánānām with it (e.g., Ge “die Erbeuter der Schätze”), but this leaves vṛtrásya stranded, since it would be perverse to attribute the victory over Vṛtra to Bhaga, Savitar, and Aṃśa in addition to Indra. Therefore all the standard tr. supply sg. *hantā́(vel sim.) as an appositive to Indra, to govern vṛtrásya. I consider this unnec. Our pāda seems to be based on a much-repeated pāda, couched in the acc. sg., in the Triṣṭubh refrain vs. of the Viśvāmitras’ Indra hymns: III.30.22 (etc.) ghnántaṃ vṛtṛā́ṇi saṃjítaṃ dhánānām. I consider our pāda a nonce adaptation of the orig. pāda, construed as if orig. saṃjítam belonged to a them. stem -

- in other words saṃjítaḥ is a thematic back-formation, nom. singular, that allows the
formula to remain metrical. The last part of 7b, with sg. sanitā́raṃ dhánānām, gives some support to this interpr., and note that Indra alone is called jiṣṇú- ‘victor’ in the next vs. (6a). Of course, it must be admitted that in III.30.22 vṛtrā́ṇi is the obj. of a form of √han and so supplying such a form here (as the standard tr. do) also gets some support. But vṛtrá- has been transformed from acc. (pl.) to gen. (sg.) in our passage and should be parallel to dhánānām.


## 07
The splv. śámbhaviṣṭha- recalls śáṃtama- in 1a. Both stems are reasonably well attested, though śáṃtama- has the edge. They do not seem to be consistently distinguished in usage, but śáṃtama- seems more common qualifying inanimates while śámbhaviṣṭha- and its base śambhú-/-ū́- are more common with animates. Such is the case in this hymn, where śáṃtamā in 1a modifies ‘hymn’ (gī́ḥ) and śámbhaviṣṭhaḥ in 7c modifies Bṛhaspati. Nonetheless, the tr. of the two forms should be harmonized.


## 08
The standard tr. (incl. also Schmidt, B+I 84 and Scar 202) take ab as a separate nominal cl. The difference is trivial.

Less trivial is the difference between my rendering of the last part of d and that of all the others. They take subhágās téṣu rā́yaḥ as the nominal main clause to the rel. cl. (yé aśvadā́ḥ …) that occupies the rest of the hemistich. Cf., e.g., Ge “denen gehören die beglückenden Reichtümer.” In contrast I take subhágāḥ with the rel. cl., qualifying the givers, and rā́yaḥ as acc. pl. in the main cl., and in the main cl.

I supply a verb ‘confer’ (vel sim.) extracted from ratnadhéyam in 7a. In favor of the standard tr. are the facts that by accent rā́yaḥ is better analyzed as nom. than acc. (though acc. pl. so accented are not rare) and that no verb need be supplied. Although I am usually reluctant to supply material, in this case there are countervailing factors.

First, with the exception of one late passage (X.140.5), subhága-, which is quite well-attested, is only used of animate beings, not of wealth or the like. Moreover, the standard rendering leaves Bṛhaspati with little to do. The givers are “accompanied by your help” (távotíbhiḥ), but otherwise seem to do quite nicely on their own -- whereas we might expect him to be acting on their material behalf by giving to them, just as in the next vs. he is asked to strip the niggardly of their possessions and do worse by other anti-ritualists. By my interpr. the vs. expresses the usual Rigvedic trickle-down theory of material redistribution: the gods give goods to the patrons of the sacrifice (kings, etc.), who then confer them on the priests and poets.


## 09
The stilted nominal syntax with dummy verb √kṛ + acc. masc. abstract (visarmā́ṇaṃ kṛṇuhi, lit. “make dissipation”), which together govern a neut. acc. vittám, must result from the lack of a transitive pres. to √sṛ ‘flow, run’ -- pace Narten (“Ai. sṛ …” 1969: 83 and n. 16 [=KlSch 130 and n. 16]), who characterizes several forms of ví √sṛ as “transitiv,” though the acc. expresses the goal/place-throughwhich, not a real transitive object.

The expression prasavé vāvṛdhānā́n is not entirely clear and is variously rendered — Ge “'die im Befehl gross sind,” Re “qui (se croyant) renforcés pour la compétition,” Schmidt (B+I 85) “bei (unserer) Regsamkeit wachsen,” WG “obwohl sie in ihrem Unterfangen erstarkt sind” — differing primarily in what prasavá- is taken to mean. By my interpr. these foes, who violate all the norms of Ārya society by refusing to participate in reciprocal exchange, by acting contrary to vratá- (the chains of command that structure Ārya society), and by hating the verbal formulations that express the Ārya view of the cosmos and their place in it, nonetheless show their strength on the attack, the forward thrust. All the tr. reflect this notion one way or another: the regretable strength of the enemies despite their antisocial behavior.


## 10
This vs. continues the theme of the impious foe, though the divine ally the poet calls on to destroy the foe has changed from Bṛhaspati to the Maruts. Here (pāda a) the enemy chooses to praise demons (rakṣásaḥ) when gods (deva-) are being invited to the ritual and (c) mocks the ritual labor of the devotee. Because of the strong association of sweat with ritual labor in the RV (see my “Avestan xšuuīd: A Relic of Indo-Iranian Ritual Vocabulary,” Bulletin of the Asia Institute 25 [2011 (2015),] and for √śam ‘labor’ with √svid ‘sweat’ I.86.8), I assume that the enemy himself is engaging in (what we hope will be fruitless) ritual in pāda d, perhaps in service of the demons, not the gods (cf. pāda a). In post-RVic texts the Asuras would probably serve as the polar opposition to the gods, not the Rakṣasas, an indirect piece of evidence for the well-known fact that the Asura-Deva opposition almost entirely postdates the RV.

In the publ. tr. óhate in pāda a is tr. as an indicative (‘whoever lauds’), but it should really be a subjunctive (“whoever will laud”), both on the basis of the morphology (it belongs to a root pres., whose 3rd plural is also óhate) and of the parallel subjunctives in the passage, cd yáḥ … nindāt, … karate.


## 11
One of the striking passages in which the same divinity, in this case Rudra, is called both devá- and ásura- (námobhir devám ásuraṃ duvasya “with acts of reverence offer friendship to the god, the lord”), strong evidence that the strict division and eternal enmity between Devas and Asuras in later texts has not yet developed.


## 12
The grammar of this vs. is quite straightforward; what difficulty it presents lies in the uncertain and permeable boundary between PNs and common noun/adjectives. In b vibhvataṣṭā́ḥ, modifying the rivers, is universally taken as containing the PN Vibhvan, hence ‘fashioned by Vibhvan’. Since the referents of pāda a are the Ṛbhus and Vibhvan is the name of an Ṛbhu, this makes some contextual sense. However, fashioning a river seems beyond even the Ṛbhus’ expertise, and, further, in VI.61.13 Sarasvatī, a river after all, is vibhváne kr̥tā́“made for wide extension / wide ranging.” I think that sense is meant here as well, and there is simply some sly play on the Ṛbhu’s name.

I am less certain about what to do with bṛhaddivā́in c. In the immediately preceding hymn (V.41.19) I take the same form as an attributive adjective with urváśī: Urvaśī Bṛhaddivā “Urvaśī of lofty heaven.” Here it could likewise be attributive to Sarasvatī or it could be a separate goddess. See Klein (I.328-29, 337) on this mild dilemma. If Bṛhaddivā is a distinct entity, she is featureless, so there is little at stake here.


## 13
The phrase návyasīṃ jā́yamānam “the newer (hymn), being born,” with comparative of ‘new’ and the pres. participle seems designed to refer to the current hymn in the process of composition.

Tvaṣṭar is both the possessor and producer of “all forms” (cf. I.13.10 tváṣṭāram … viśvárūpam) and the father of a being called Viśvarūpa (likewise viśvárūpa- ‘possessing all forms’ (cf. II.11.19, X.8.9 tvāṣṭrá- viśvárūpa- with the patronymic tvāṣṭrá-). In one sense the second hemistich seems to be an attempt to reconcile these two aspects: Tvaṣṭar as a lone creator god, the fashioner of all forms, “(ex)changing his forms” (rūpā́minānáḥ) as sole agent -- but doing so “bulging (?) in the body of his daughter” (āhanā́duhitúr vakṣánāsu)(if that’s what it means), which introduces a sexual (indeed incestuous) element that would be appropriate to the fathering of a son. On the one hand, we seem to have a model of primitive embryology, with the fetus changing and developing within its mother’s womb; on the other hand, the half-vs. mirrors the later Sanskrit notion that the father enters the body of the mother and is reborn as the son. Unlike the incest of Dyaus and of Prajāpati, the story of Tvaṣṭar’s incest (if that’s what this is) is otherwise muted and not securely attested elsewhere.

The meaning and etymology of the s-stem āhanás- are deeply uncertain. In context it seems to mean ‘swollen, bulging, luxuriant, lubricious’. As for the etym. see EWA s.v. and, for a recent etymological attempt, Kulikov in the Lubotsky Fs.

(2018). The word has gained a certain notoriety in IEist discourse because it is argued that it preserves the old suffixal accent of s-stem bahuvrīhis (see Stüber, sstems [2002] 27, 189). However, it is dangerous to pin the reconstruction of a whole category on a word whose meaning, structure, and etymology are radically uncertain.

For disc. of the word, as well as demolition of the accentual theory it is supposed to support, see JL “αἰνοπαθής.” On vakṣáṇā- ‘belly’ as a pl. tantum, see comm. ad X.27.16.

## 14-16
This trio of vss. echoes vs. 1 and ring-compositionally seems to bring the hymn to a close, with the single pāda of 17 and the final vs. 18 tacked on (and indeed the 2nd hemistich of 16: see below). The template is prá [HYMN, etc.] [GOD] nūnám aśyāḥ, realized in 1ab as “May the hymn (gī́ḥ) now reach Varuṇa (etc.).” In 14ab we again have all the elements, while 15ab omits the initial preverb prá in favor of úd immediately preceding the verb and omits nūnám entirely and 16ab reinstates prá but still lacks nūnám: 1ab prá … váruṇam (etc.)… gī́r … nūnám aśyāḥ 14ab prá suṣṭutíḥ … iḷás pátim … nūnám aśyāḥ 15ab eṣá stómo mā́rutaṃ śárdhaḥ (etc.)… úd aśyāḥ 16ab praíṣá stómaḥ pṛthivī́m (etc.) … aśyāḥ The impression given by this sequence of syntactic and lexical parallels -- that this is the finale of the hymn -- is supported by the fact that the rest of the hymn, 16cd-18, is repeated as15cd-17 in the next hymn, V.43.


## 14
Despite the position of prá, opening a pāda that ends with the part.

ukṣámāṇaḥ, I take the prá not with that participle but with immediately preceding pāda-final íyarti. For one thing, prá is found elsewhere with íyar- while it is not with √ukṣ, and in addition tmesis of preverb + participle is fairly uncommon (though certainly not unheard of). Ge and Re seem to follow the other route, taking it as license to interpr. íyarti as intrans. or at least objectless (Ge ‘heraufzieht’, Re ‘s’avance’). But íyar- is otherwise always transitive, and though we would prefer the two world halves not to be in motion, the point here is that Parjanya’s thunderstorm is powerful enough to shake them. WG’s interpr. is like mine.
