+++
title = "043"

+++
All Gods This listing impulse so evident in the last two hymns (V.41-42) is less pronounced here, though a variety of gods receive praise -- with Agni especially prominent, as indicated in the publ. intro.: 2 Heaven and Earth, 3 Vāyu, 5 Indra, 6 Aramati, Agni, 7 Gharma pot, 8 Aśvins, 9 Pūṣan and Vāyu, 10 Maruts, 11 Sarasvatī, 12 Brhaspati ̥ as Agni, 13 Agni?, 14 Agni?, 15 Agni, Earth.

## 01
On mahó rāyé see comm. ad IV.31.11. Again the publ. tr. carelessly follows Ge’s tr., which takes the two forms together, as if they were an adjective-noun syntagm despite the difference in case. I would now take maháḥ adverbially with Old.

See further ad VI.1.2.

The seven lofty and joy-bringing feminine beings (bṛhatī́ḥ saptá … mayobhúvaḥ) in cd, the target of our invocation, are not further specified. I have supplied ‘cows’ on the basis of ab and IX.86.25, which contains saptá dhenávaḥ, but this is by no means certain. See other suggestions in Ge’s n. 1. The problem is that there is no reason for the cows to number exactly seven; either ‘seven’ is, as Oberlies (Rel. RV II.74) suggests, simply an indication of totality, or some more standard group of seven, like the rivers, is being referred to (either via the image of cows or directly).


## 03
The subject of the impv. in c must also be Vāyu, because he regularly receives the first drink of soma.


## 04
In b the agent noun śamitár- most naturally belongs with the forms of √śam referring to ritual labor. See, e.g., in the preceding hymn V.42.10 śámīṃ śaśamānásya “the (ritual) labor of the one laboring.” However, already in the Aśvamedha hymn of the RV it has acquired the euphemistic meaning ‘queller’, that is, slaughterer, of the sacrificial beast; cf. I.162.9-10, as well as the simile in V.85.1 ví yó jaghā́na śamitéva cárma “who like a butcher a hide split apart …” in this maṇḍala. I think it likely that both senses are meant here; in post-RVic ritual texts Soma is regularly presented as a sacrificial victim.

In the 2nd hemistich Ge and WG (cf. also Old) take c and d as separate clauses, utilizing the verb duduhe for both and supplying a priest (Ge: Adhvaryu) as subj. of c.

The reason is nom. sugábhastiḥ lit. ‘having good fists’, which must otherwise modify aṃśú- ‘plant’. With Re, in the publ. tr. I take cd as a single clause with sugábhastiḥ … aṃśúḥ a single NP, assuming that ‘having good fists’ of the soma plant means that the plant has received good handling from the fists of its preparer. (Re, by contrast, tr.

“aux beaux rameaux,” with gábhasti- referring metaphorically to the growth habits of the plant.) I now think my interpr. pushes the bahuvrīhi further than it should go, so I would now emend the tr. to “(The priest,) having good fists, has milked out the sap of the honey that dwells on the mountain; the plant has milked out its own shimmering, pure (sap).” It is likely that the verb underlying pāda c should be active (perhaps *dudoha); when middle forms like duduhe take an object, the subject is usually a cow or cow-substitute (as here) producing milk from itself.


## 07
On the position of this vs. in the hymn and its significance, see publ. intro. If the vs. is an omphalos, it may focus attention on the mysteries of the Pravargya ritual.

The vs. is structured as a riddle, with the referent of yám (pāda a) withheld till d, with three similes and several technical references to ritual activities in between.

The first simile (pāda a) is oddly structured, in that one expects something to be compared to the unidentified acc. yám but there is no overt acc. expressed. Instead we must supply this acc., as the most likely object of the participle pratháyantaḥ ‘spreading’ (transitive), which, in default of the acc. obj. itself, carries the simile particle ná. The object to be supplied is barhíḥ ‘ritual grass’, which at every ritual is spread as a seat for the visiting gods. Generally the verb in the expression “spread (barhis)” is √stṛ ‘strew’, not √prath, but, as Old points out, √prath can also be used, generally for the intransitive sense “(barhis) spreads” (V.5.4, X.70.4, etc.). The object of transitive √prath is generally something much more prominent, like ‘earth’.

It may be that √prath was used here to give a cosmic resonance, but it may also be partly ascribed to the alliteration in the vs.: prathayanto ... víprā, vapā́vantam ...

tápantaḥ / pitúr ná putrá upási práyiṣṭha(ḥ). The barhis is also sometimes anointed; cf. II.3.4 barhíḥ … ghṛténāktám. Thus, the absent barhíḥ is at the intersection of the two ritual verbs ‘spread’ and ‘anoint’, and supplies the missing point of comparison in the simile “They anoint ‘which one’ (yám) like X.” The poet is inviting his audience to solve for two variables -- the identity of the focus of the vs. expressed by the rel. prn. yám and the object to which it is compared, but he makes the second riddle easier by providing two verbs that could govern it. The overlap of the two produces the answer.

The next simile, in b, targets a different ritual substance to compare with the still unidentified yám. This time an accusative does appear on the surface, but it in the form of an associated adjective, vapā́vantam ‘possessing the/an omentum.” In classical śrauta ritual the omentum (vapā́) is the first and probably the most important part of the sacrificial animal to be dealt with; after the death of the animal, the omentum is removed and heated on two different fires, first preliminarily singed on the Śamitar’s fire (NB: see vs. 4 and comm. thereon), then cooked on the Āhavanīya fire (see my Hyenas, pp. 104-5). Here we can assume that what is identified as ‘possessing an omentum’ is the sacrificial animal (an identification supported by the occurrence of vapā́vantam in ŚB XIII.7.1.9), which itself is cooked on the fire. Sacrificial animals are also anointed; see IV.6.3 paśvó anakti in a hymn that treats the animal sacrifice in some detail. Once again, the incompletely identified target of the simile is at the intersection of two ritual actions: ‘heat’ and ‘anoint’. In this case the similarly unidentified yám, the gharma pot, is also subject to both these actions in the Pravargya ritual.

The third simile, in pāda c, is the only one with all its parts, and is also the only one without a ritual reference. It is a version of a standard trope.


## 08
The last pāda is difficult, primarily because of dhúram. This would ordinarily be the acc. of the root noun dhúr- ‘chariot pole’, and indeed that is how I take it. Ge interprets it rather as an acc. infinitive (‘festzuhalten’) to √dhṛ. But that aniṭ root has no seṭ forms in dhur- (unless dhúr- ‘chariot pole’ itself; so Whitney Roots, but see now standard alternative etymology in Schindler, Rt nouns, and EWA, both s.v.).

WG’s semantic interpr. (‘zur Sicherung’) is similar to Ge’s, though derivationally distinct: they see it as a secondary abstract(ion) from the ‘chariot pole’ word. Either of these analyses eases the interpr. of the pāda. But given the chariot-part vocab. in the rest of the pāda (āṇí- ‘axle-pin, peg’, nā́bhi- ‘wheel-nave’), it seems highly unlikely that a standard word for a part of the chariot would in just this context not be so used -- and cf. sudhúr- ‘amenable to the chariot pole’ a few vss. back (5c). I think dhúram has to be an unmarked simile, an acc. goal parallel to nidhím. The Aśvins are asked to go to the nidhí- as draft animals come tamely to the dhúr-, then to enter it as the pin enters the nave.

I supply ‘honey’ with nidhím on the basis of the phrase nidhí- mádhūnām used twice in Aśvin hymns with sim. vocab.: I.183.4 ayáṃ vām bhagó níhita iyáṃ gī́r, dásrāv imé vām nidháyo mádhūnām “Here is the portion deposited for you, here the hymn, o wondrous ones, and here the deposits of honey for you” / III.58.5 éhá yātam pathíbhir devayā́nair, dásrāv imé vāṃ nidháyo mádhūnām “Travel here along the paths leading to the gods. Wondrous ones, these stores of honey belong to you two.” Since 'honey' is thematic in the previous parts of this hymn (1b, 2c, 3a, d, 4c, 6c), supplying it here (esp. in Aśvin context) is easy.


## 09
The function of utá in the pāda-final phrase utá tmán is unclear. Klein (I.347, 349) treats it as an example of an X Y utá construction (suggesting several diff.

possibilities), but does not consider the positional tendency of tmán(ā) or the dossier of rhetorically similar phrases. Both tmán and tmánā have a distinct preference for pāda-final position, with a word consisting of two light syllables preceding as here -- frequently iva, also úpa, etc. As a parallel to our passage, cf. esp. IX.88.3 … draviṇodā́iva tmán. I'm inclined to think that utá is in fact empty here (though perhaps orig. adapted from places where it made sense) and Klein's piecemeal attempts to make sense of the various passages misplaced. Here the utá was perhaps slotted in because iva was inappropriate. One can also keep in mind that -a tmánrecalls (and replicates metrically) ātmán-. Re’s characterization of utá tmán as “type de clausule inert” seems close to my “empty.”


## 10
The instr. pl.s nā́mabhiḥ and rūpébhiḥ identically positioned in pādas a and b seem both to refer to individuated Maruts and also to make reference to the concept later to be called nāmarūpa ‘name and form’ referring to the pairing of words and things differentiating the separate entities of creation. This unusual distinguishing of individual Maruts is then countered by the insistent repetition of víśve ‘all’ referring to them as an undifferentiated class in pāda d. In that pāda I take the first víśve as voc. pl. with marutaḥ (accented because pāda-initial) and the 2nd as a nom. with the verb, but this grammatical separation may not be nec. if the two víśve-s are there to match ‘names’ and ‘forms’ respectively. Viśve Marutaḥ also semi-equates them with the Viśve Devāḥ.


## 13
In d tridhā́tu-śṛṅga- ‘having tripartite horns’ may refer to the three hearths, though see the tripartite cows (tridhā́tavaḥ … gā́vaḥ), probably of Agni, in nearby V.47.4.


## 14
On rāspirá- see comm. ad I.122.4.

## 15
Both Re and WG take pāda a as a separate nominal clause. This is certainly possible, and an alternative tr. of the hemistich could be “to you, the lofty one, there (belongs) lofty vigor, Agni. The … (priestly) pairs attend upon (you).”
