+++
title = "044"

+++
All Gods On the manifold difficulties of this hymn and a possible framework in which to interpret them (as a hymn simultaneously applicable to Agni and Soma), see publ.

intro.


## 01
Save for the fronted pronoun tám, this hymn opens with a remarkable series of universalizing adverbs, identically formed with -(á-)thā suffix and linking the current ritual situation (the final one in the series, imáthā ‘in this way here’, a hapax) to that of every time and place: pratnáthā pūrváthā viśváthā. This may give us a foretaste of the poet’s laying bare the underlying identity of the two central ritual substances, fire and soma, and of the service accorded them in the sacrifice.

The poet then, in my opinion, produces a red herring: most of the descriptors found in this vs. could apply to Indra -- esp. āśúṃ jáyantam; cf. āśúṃ jétāram of Indra in VIII.99.7. And most interpreters fall into this trap: as Ge says in his n. 1, “all commentators” identify tám as Indra -- incl. Ge himself, Re, and Old (WG forego referents). However, both Agni and Soma receive these or similar descriptors elsewhere. Agni and Soma are both located on the ritual grass (Agni: III.14.2, etc.; Soma: I.16.6, etc.); both are called svarvíd- (more often than Indra; Agni: III.3.5, 10, etc.; Soma: VIII.48.15, etc.), jyéṣṭha- (Agni: I.127.2, etc.; Soma: IX.66.16, etc.), and āśú- (Agni: IV.7.4, etc.; Soma: IX.56.1, etc.). Soma is qualified as jáyant- (I.91.21, etc.), and though Agni is not modified by this participle, he is the subject of verbal forms of √ji (e.g., VI.4.4). All of these are, of course, fairly generic characterizations; the point here is that nothing requires us to leap to the conclusion that Indra is the referent.

Another way to approach the question of the referent of tám is to consider what referent is appropriate as an obj. to dohase ‘you will milk’ -- which first may require us to identify the subj. of this 2nd sg. verb (by most lights: Re takes it as a sigmatic 1st sg., which seems unnec. and doesn’t fit the semantic profile of -se 1st singulars). With Sāy. and Ge., I take it as the self-address of the poet, who will perform his milking task ‘with song’ (girā́). The middle of √duh generally takes milk (either real or metaphorical) as its object, and both Agni and Soma can be conceived of as milk products -- the churning of the fire sticks and the pressing of the soma plant both involve physical actions not unlike milking and what is produced is a fluid or something (fire) that behaves rather like one. Indra is not entirely excluded, however; he could be configured as a cow, “milked” with a praise hymn for him to produce goods. However, as I just said, the milk itself, rather than the cow, is the typical obj. of medial √duh, and so the substances fire and/or soma are more likely referents.

Let us now turn to pāda d. This also contains a 2nd sg. med. present, várdhase, in a relative clause whose rel. prn., fem. loc. pl. yā́su, has no possible referent in the rest of the vs. Before turning to that problem, I will first say that I do not consider the 2nd sg. subj. of várdhase to be the same as that of dohase. Instead I think we have switched to the unidentified god/ritual substance referred to by the acc. sg. in the rest of the vs. Although this introduces an interpretational complication, I would point out that in the next vs. (2cd), the god/substance definitely appears in the 2nd person, and note also 8b, which contain a similarly structured rel. cl. … yā́su nā́ma te#, where the 2nd ps. refers to the god/substance. And, most important, the rel. cl. of 1d shows a closer affinity to Agni and Soma than the generic epithets in the rest of the vs. But first we must identify a possible referent or referents for the fem. yā́su.

The standard ploy, which I think is basically correct, is to supply a fem. pl. obj. to jáyantam ‘winning’ -- generally ‘cows’ (Ge, Re, WG). Old suggests rather ‘waters’, which Ge argues against (n. 1d). Certainly both ‘cows’ and ‘waters’ (both fem. pl.) occur as objects to √ji -- and I see no reason to choose between the two; in fact the reason for not specifying either one is to allow both to be understood, under the neutralizing rel. prn. yā́su. Both Agni and Soma have connections to both cows and waters: Agni is nourished by the streams of ghee (a milk product) poured into the fire, and in a well-known myth he ran away and entered the waters. Soma is mixed with cows’ milk, as is endlessly emphasized in the IXth Maṇḍala, and before soma is pressed, it is soaked in water to swell the stalks. A third possible fem. pl. referent connected with Agni is plants, in which he is invisible and inherent until kindled. Let us consider some passages whose phraseology resembles our own. In II.13.1 ...

apáḥ ... ā́viśad yā́su várdhate Soma, unnamed, “entered the waters among which he grows strong.” (Note the nearly identical rel. cl.) For Agni cf. I.95.5 ... vardhate ...

āsu “he grows strong among/in them” (here prob. = plants); I.141.5 ā́d ín mātṝ́r ā́viśad yā́su ... ví vāvrdhe ̥ “Just after that he entered into his mothers, within whom ....

he grew widely” (again prob. plants; note that vāvṛdhe, as transmitted without accent, is not part of the rel. cl. If the transmitted form is correct). The connection of a fem.

loc. pl. and a form of √vṛdh in these passages is striking, and it is Agni and Soma who participate in this phraseology.

Thus, in my opinion, by the end of the vs. the poet has narrowed down the possible referents and set up the rhetorical situation that will dominate the rest of the hymn: an unidentified masc. sg. referent, who can be simultaneously Agni and Soma, and a set of fem. pl. attendants, likewise unidentified, who are connected to the masculine figure.


## 02
The first hemistich of this vs. contains those same personnel, again without overt identification, and with the further complication that there is no finite verb until pāda c. Pāda a contains fem. plurals, at least partly in a relative clause (here nom. pl.

yā́ḥ, versus loc. yā́su in 1d); pāda b has an unidentified masc. sg. as subject. This is the same configuration as 1d. Again I think the duo Agni / Soma is lurking under the masc. sg., and the fem. pl. refers to phenomena associated with each. In addition I take the gen. kakúbhām (a fem. cons. stem) in b as the referent of the fem. rel. prn.

yā́ḥ in a, rather than attempting to construe it one way or another with acodáte, as most interpr. do. Most take Agni as the referent of the masc. sg.; I think this is correct, but doesn’t go far enough. Certainly Agni is an appropriate referent for virócamānaḥ ‘shining forth’, as he is elsewhere (e.g., I.95.2), and the lovely fem. pl. entities of pāda a can easily be his flames (or, in my scenario, the tips [kakúbh-] of his flames).

Their collectivity can be identified as “the sun of the lower realm” (úparasya … svàḥ). (I see no reason, with Ge [and, at least in tr., with Re] to take svàr here as gen., referring to Agni.) But the same phraeseology can also be applied to Soma. Although nowhere near as commonly as Agni, Soma can also serve as subj. of √ruc (e.g., IX.11.1 dhā́rā sutásya rocate), and the streams of soma are often compared to the rays of the sun (usually with masc. raśmí-, but cf. fem. tvíṣīḥ … sū́ryasya “the glitterings of the sun” IX.71.9). Moreover, pāda c, whose subj. is most likely the same as that in b, is almost identical to IX.73.8a ṛtásya gopā́ná dábhāya sukrátuḥ of Soma, which strongly invites a Soma identification here.

Another problem is acodáte in b. This form looks like a dat. sg. to a negated participle, but the accent is wrong (expect *ácodate), a discrepancy that leads Lowe (Participles in RV, 274 n. 81) to reject this interpr., in favor of a t-stem acodát-. I’m not at all sure that in this hymn one can make arguments of the type “can’t be X because of some grammatical feature that usually holds,” and in any case Lowe does not seem to suggest a different case/no. interpr. or different semantics. For further disc. of the accent see AiG II.1.216 and Old ad loc. Because I construe kakúbhām elsewhere, I supply rā́dhaḥ ‘largesse’ as the obj. of this apparent part., since rā́dhasis frequently the obj. of √cud. The idea would be that the ritual fire and ritual soma shine for the generous and stingy alike. However, the supplied obj. may not be nec., and the sense would be something like “for the unrousing / unstirring one.” In d I borrow hitáḥ from 3d (see also dhā́yi in 8c), producing “was (set/placed) in truth,” but the pāda can certainly be interpr. simply with the pf. āsa “was in truth.” I take “your name” (nā́ma te) to refer to both Agni and Soma.


## 03
Some of the challenges of this vs can be approached by noting the series of phonetic plays it contains: sacate sác ca dhā́tu ca / dhā́tu ca, áriṣṭagātuḥ / sá hótā sahobháriḥ / sahobháriḥ … barhír.

Let us begin with the first. The curious double ca phrase sác ca dhā́tu ca is difficult to render on its own. On the surface it appears to form part of a conjoined NP with the subj. havíḥ ‘oblation’, but its ill-assorted nature comes out in tr. like Ge’s “die Opferspende und das Seiende und das Element (?).” Moreover, though dhā́tu- does not otherwise occur uncompounded in the RV, after the RV it is masc., while this form must be neut, which would be anomalous if it is a noun here. Ge suggests (n. 3a) emending to the bahuvrīhi saptádhātu ‘having 7 parts’ (RV 3x), though this is not reflected in his tr. As a bv the neut. gender would be proper, as a modifier of havís-. Re suggests rather that sác ca dhā́tu “resolves” an old cmpd.

*sad-dhā́tu, tr. “et (sa) foundation est réelle.” I am in accord with his rendering but
analyze the underlying form differently: I take sác ca as a play on MIA sacca-, the Middle Indic product of satyá-. (That Middle Indic phonological developments are already to be found even in the RV family books needs no further demonstration.) The whole sequence gestures towards a bahuvrīhi *sacca-dhātu-, whose neut. gender would be appropriate. Note that very similar satyá-dharman- (RV 5x) is found at


## 02
[in this VD seq] and V.63.1, the only attestations in the family books. The putative first member sacca here is then provided with an alternative Sanskritic analysis, sác [i.e., sȧt] ca -- I’m not suggesting an emendation here, but a word play.

The second ca connects the underlying bahuvrīhi to the noun it modifies, havíḥ, hence an underlying sequence havíḥ … *saccá-dhātu ca. I further suggest that this word play is actualized in a different word in the first word of the pāda, átyam, which rhymes with satyá- (save for accent).

As just noted, pāda b participates in a number of phonetic plays: -gātuḥ echoes dhā́tu in pāda; sá hó(tā) anticipates immediately following saho(bháriḥ), and

-bháriḥ is a scrambling of barhír in the next pāda. This last is particularly worth
noting because -bhári- is a Vedic hapax (Whitney, Rts., lists it as RV.C., and its only RV occurrence is here) of somewhat unusual formation (see AiG II.2.295). It is clearly a contextually inspired nonce here and should be given no weight in considering i-stem morphology.

The last lexical problem in the vs. is visrúhā in d, otherwise found only in VI.7.6. Gr glosses ‘Strom’ and connects it with √sru ‘flow’, which is phonologically impossible (where would the -h come from?). Ge tr. ‘Arm’, which is just a contextually inspired rendering, as far as I can see. Re tr. ‘flamme’ (fld. by Kellens, Noms rac. 82-83), though ad VI.7.6 (EVP XIII.127-28) he floats (only to reject) the possibility that it is a variant of vīrúdh- (‘sprout, shoot, growth’) on the basis of the similarity between VI.7.6 and II.35.8, which contains a form of vīrúdh-. This suggestion fits with Sāy.’s gloss oṣadhi- ‘plant’ (for this passage; in VI.7.6 Sāy. glosses the pl. visruhaḥ as nadyaś ca gaṅgādyāḥ “rivers, Gaṅgā, etc.’). The word has received the most attention from Scar, first in his Root noun book (464-65) and then in the n. to V.44.3 in WG (in which Scar is responsible for Maṇḍala V). In the former Scar pronounces visrúh- “ganz unklar,” echoed by the somewhat less pessimistic “unklar” in WG, where he tr. “Reisig und Zweigen” and suggests it’s derived from *vi-sr-u- ‘sich weit erstreckend’, contaminated with -rúdh-, -rúh-, with the result reminiscent of vīrúdh-. I also believe that the word is in the semantic realm of plant growth and that it should be connected with √ru(d)h ‘grow’; this is esp. clear in VI.7.6, which contains a verbal form of that root: vayā́iva ruruhuḥ saptá visrúhaḥ.

However, I do not think that √sru or √sṛ needs to be brought in, at least directly.

Instead I attribute the extraneous -s- to a sort of analogical backformation involving the preverbs ví, ní, and nís, starting from the form vīrúdh- cited above. Although the lengthening of the preverb ví in that form results from the initial laryngeal of the etymon of √rudh (see EWA s.v. RODH), it appears synchronically to result from the sandhi form of a byform *vis before r-, just as there is a nís beside ní (with different meanings in that case of course). In particular note the form nīrohá- in a TS mantra repeated 3x (III.5.2.5, IV.4.1.3, V.3.6.3 sam̐rohò ’si nīrohò ’si), which could be derived either from ni+√ruh (cf. Keith’s tr. ‘descender’) with the same lengthening as in vīrúdh- or from nis+ruh (so Viśva Bandhu). I therefore explain our visrúh- as a learned (and/or playful) but false “restoration” of the putative *vis- underlying vīrú(d)h-. It is here that √sru may have played a part, by facilitating a false segmentation of vis-rúh- into vi-srúh- (on the basis of the phonological similarity of the roots) and thus blocking the application of morpheme-boundary sandhi between

*-s and r-. I tr. ‘outgrowth’. On a separate but related note, I do not think we need to
emend the form to gen. pl. *visrúhāṃ, an idea that goes back to Sāy., tempted Old inter alia, and is accepted by Scar in WG.

Having dealt with the details of this vs. piecemeal, we should now consider whether it too can be applied to both Agni and Soma, and the answer is yes. átya- is regularly used of both in passages too numerous to cite. Though Hotar is an esp.

characteristic role of Agni’s, Soma is also compared to a Hotar sometimes (IX.92.2, 6, etc.). Both are called both vṛ́ṣan- and śíśu-. We have already noted their positioning on the barhis ad 1b. Both are called yúvan-. The ‘outgrowth’ can be the flames of Agni and the traces of the spreading of the soma juice on the filter, often depicted on IX. However, it does seem that Soma is never qualified as ájara- ‘unaging’ -- a minor lack. The vs. situates both substances on the ritual ground at the moment of the offering.


## 04
My interpr. of both the syntax and the referents of this vs. generally differs from those of others. I will not undertake a detailed disc. of these differences.

However, I will note that Ge (n. 4) suggests that both Agni and Soma may be the topic of the vs., in agreement with my general thesis.

In my opinion, a new element enters the ritual scene here, namely ritual speech, referred to by the unidentified eté of pāda a. Given the masc. pl. pronoun, the exact referent must be masc. -- perhaps stómāḥ ‘praises’ (cf. nearby V.42.15 eṣá stómaḥ …, 16 praíṣá stómaḥ in the same All God cycle, reminscent of our prá va eté …). These praises are conceived of as horses, which are easy to yoke (a: suyújaḥ) and directed by easily controlled reins (c: suyántubhiḥ … abhī́śubhiḥ). As Ge points out (n. 4c with reff.), the reins of priests are their speeches, an association that makes the identification of ‘praises’ as the subject of pāda a all the more likely. The 2nd ps.

enclitic vaḥ refers in my view to the priests who are launching/driving the praisehorses. The prá … yā̐man “forth on the course/journey” invites a verb of motion to be supplied, perhaps a form of √sṛ, suggested by prasársrāṇaḥ beginning the 2nd hemistich of the previous vs. (3c).

The other question confronting us in pāda a is the identity of the datival inf.

iṣṭáye, which is of course multiply ambiguous: it could belong to √iṣ ‘seek, desire’, √iṣ ‘send’, or √yaj ‘sacrifice’ (on this issue, see Old, ZDMG 62: 473-78 = KlSch 282-87). With Old, I take it to the first, but I also think it takes an acc. goal/obj., and that that acc. is the fem. acc. phrase in b, nī́cīḥ … yamyà ṛtāvṛ́dhaḥ. Old also takes this phrase as acc., though he supplies a different verb to govern it; the other interpr.

take the phrase as nom. and the subject of an independent nominal clause. With Ge (n.

4b) I take the downward-facing twinned sisters to be both the streams of ghee offered into the ritual fire and the streams of water with which soma is rinsed (the milk streams with which soma is mixed could also be in play). The praises’ seeking of these streams expresses the union of verbal and physical activity in the sacrifice, with the hymns accompanying the pouring of the liquid into/onto the ritual substance. The dat. prn. amúṣmai I take as the goal of this pouring: the fire and the soma respectively. The use of the comparatively rare distal deictic asaú is noteworthy, since this stem generally refers to the upward or heavenly world or items located there, esp. the sun (for the sun, cf., e.g., I.105.3, 191.9, VIII.12.30). Yet here the streams are going ‘downward’ towards it. This paradox can be resolved by recalling the phrase in 2a úparasya … svàḥ “the sun of the lower realm,” which made reference to well-known conceptions of Agni and of Soma. Agni is frequently considered the earthly counterpart of the heavenly sun, since both blaze brightly and they also make their appearance at the same time (dawn) of the ritual day. Soma, likewise, is often compared to or identified with the sun because of its bright gleam, and there are both a heavenly Soma and his earthly counterpart depicted in the IXth Maṇḍala. Here, in my opinion, amúṣmai makes implicit reference to the heavenly Sun [=Fire] and heavenly Soma, while depicting the ritual activity centered on their earthly embodiments, thus erasing the distance between heaven and earth and the distinction between the entities found therein.

Pāda d, which I take as a separate clause, brings its own set of problems, not least with the always enigmatic word krívi- (on which see also comm. ad I.30.1).

First, however, note the phonological echo of b amúṣmai / d muṣāyati, though this does not help with the interpr. As for krívi-, I take it here as a conflation of two putative stems. On the one hand, at least once (I.30.1) krívi- seems to refer to a race horse (there compared with Indra). Since the intertwined Agni/Soma figure in this hymn was just referred to as a steed (átya-) in 3a, krívi- here seems to be picking up that joint referent. Ge [n. 4d] makes the same identification of átya- with krívi-, and he also suggests that the pāda expresses the entry of the butter offerings into the fire and/or the streams of water in the soma. I think he is correct as far as he goes, but I think there is a third referent, the poet who is responsible for the praises I suggest are the subject of pāda a. In this case krívi- can be seen as a hyper-Sanskritization of kaví- (as if from *kṛvi-) with the ri that interchanges with ṛ in words like kṛ́mi-/krími- ‘worm’ (cf. AiG I.33 and Nachtr. 19, 21), aided of course by the krívi- already referring to Agni/Soma. See also disc. ad 9c below.

What does it mean that this krívi- “steals (their) names”? Here Old’s suggestion is surely correct for the Agni/Soma krívi- (for Old, only Soma): that the streams (of ghee/water) lose their identities when they merge into Agni/Soma, and the result is simply called fire/soma. As for the poet whom I consider the third referent of krívi-, he may “steal their names” by using them in his poetry, or perhaps by referring to them but not naming them, as he does in this vs. (and throughout the hymn).


## 05
As usual in this hymn, this vs. swarms with difficulties (Re calls it “une suite de cruces”), but it continues to depict a relation between a singular masc. entity and a group of feminines. I see this as the thread that leads us through the labyrinth of this hymn. Note also that, as in vs. 3, there are phonetic figures: ab: saṃjárbhurāṇas tárubhiḥ ... susváruḥ / sutegṛ́bham ... cittágarbhāsu (with mirror-image su). The instr. tárubhiḥ in pāda a is a hapax, obviously built to a stem táru-. Both Ge and Re both take it as ‘tree’, which is tempting given the following vayākín- ‘twiggy’. But II.39.3 járbhurāṇā tárobhiḥ, with the instr. pl. to the better-attested sstem built to √tṝ ‘endure, etc.’, suggests that táru- is more likely connected to that root (see on this point EWA I.630). However, I confess that my tr. “quivering with your powers of endurance” conveys little sense. I think the instr. here may do little more than reinforce the intensive (that is, frequentative) value of the participle: the subject keeps quivering with continued force (“staying power”).

As usual, I think the subj. of the participle saṃjárbhurāṇaḥ is simultaneously Agni and Soma. Agni is elsewhere subject of this intensive (e.g., II.10.5), clearly with reference to his flickering flames. The semantic connection with Soma is not as strong, and Soma is nowhere the subject of this verb, but the scintillating, undulating waves of soma are a common trope in Maṇḍala IX.

Both these substances are aiming towards the vayākín-. The most sensible interpr. of that word is as an -ín-possessive built to an unattested diminutive *vayāká- ‘little branch, twig’ to vayā́- ‘branch’, hence ‘twiggy’ (see Scar’s n. in WG, referring to his treatment in Rt Noun Cmpds). For Agni this twiggy substance can be brushwood or kindling; the association with Soma is again less straightforward, but it can either refer to the twigs of the soma plant itself or, more likely in my opinion, refer metaphorically to the tufts of wool on the sheep’s fleece filter that catch the impurities in the pressed soma juice. This suggestion is supported by the cmpd modifying it, sute-gŕbh- ‘grasping at the pressing’. If the vayākín- is the fleece filter, it most definitely ‘grasps’ the solids that accidentally end up in the pressed juice. For Agni, ‘grasping at the pressing’ is less clear, but the firewood may seem to hold onto the fire burning in it, and the ritual fire burns during the soma pressing.

The rest of the first hemistich consists of cittágarbhāsu susváruḥ. The standard interpr. all analyze the latter word as containing sváru- ‘(sacrificial) post’ (though note that Gr does not provide a gloss for it). Although this analysis works formally, it does not fit easily into the vs. semantically. I am inclined instead to take it as containing a form of √svar ‘sound’; cf. svará- (2x, unfortunately with different accent), svarí-, etc. Ge (n. 5b) in fact suggests an alternate tr. ‘schön tönend’ (vaguely following Sāy.). -sváru- would show the same conversion to a u-stem as the hapax táru- in pāda a and perhaps follows that word in accent as well. The noisemaking capacities of both Agnia and Soma are well known.

On cittágarbha- ‘visibly pregnant’ see Ge’s n. 5b and the TB passage cited there. These females would be, in the Agni realm, the pieces of firewood, which are frequently depicted as having an embryonic Agni inside; for Soma most likely the waters in which the soma plant is soaked, swelling him as their embryo, or perhaps the cows whose milk is mixed with him.

I follow Old (ZDMG 62 [=KlSch 284 n.1]) in taking dhāravākéṣu as referring to a particular ritual moment, the litanies or recitations when the streams of the oblation are offered, but the equational metaphorical interpr. “recitations (like) streams” found in most tr. is also possible. The voc. ṛju-gātha ‘whose song is straight’ is somewhat puzzling. I think it is best illuminated by II.26.1 rj̥úr íc cháṃsaḥ, a phrase I take as a decomposed bahuvrīhi (see comm. ad loc.) meaning ‘whose laud is straight on target’. I would now slightly alter the tr. here to ‘whose song is straight on target’ to make the voc. a little less opaque.

The last pāda is surprisingly straightforward, at least for this hymn. The subject of várdhasva is once again Agni/Soma, who derive their strength from their wives (pátnī), the plants/firewood and waters/cows’ milk respectively.


## 06
As I pointed out in the publ. intro., the first pāda is both a cruel joke -- insisting on the utter transparency of the subject of the hymn -- and a claim on the poet’s part that his verbal formulations about the subject are in complete conformity with the underlying reality, however obscure they may at first seem.

My interpr. of the rest of this vs. differs significantly in both syntax and semantics from the standard ones, which I will not treat in detail. I take pāda b as having an unexpressed masc. sg. obj., with cd further characterizing that obj. The object is simultaneously Agni and Soma, and it is in this pāda that the identification of the two is most clearly expressed in the hymn (until the last 2 vss.). The unidentified subj. ‘they’ -- most likely the poets and/or priests -- put together / unite the one (of Agni and Soma) with the other, his counterpart or ‘shadow’ (chāyā́-). As the two central deified ritual elements, they are mirror images of each other. The union takes place in the waters (apsú) for several reasons. Both Soma and Agni have significant presence in the waters -- Soma of course through the ritual use of waters both to swell the dessicated soma plant and to rinse it, Agni in two mythological guises, both as Apāṃ Napāt and as the runaway ritual fire that hid in the waters.

Moreover, it is also the case that water reflects and was indeed probably the only reflective material readily at hand in this period, so the uniting of one substance and its conceptual equivalent as visual reflections of each other would most naturally take place in water.

The clearest part of pāda c is the cmpd. uru-ṣā́m ‘winning wideness’, which I take as a modifier of the unexpressed masc. sg. obj. of b (that is, Agni/Soma). (Since the 2nd member is the rt. noun sā́-, the cmpd can be masc.) I take the other accusatives in cd, mahī́m, urú jráyaḥ, and sáhaḥ with its modifiers, as objects of an underlying form of √sani /sā, extracted from uru-ṣā́-. For a similar play between a root noun cmpd with 1st member obj. and an independent acc. obj., see VIII.1.2 and comm. thereon. Although this syntactic interpr. may seem over-tricky (to others, not to me), it saves us from positing an extraneous creation myth as Ge and Re do. In my interpr. the various objects won are well within the powers of Agni and Soma to deliver to us. Note that Agni is once called urujráyas- (V.8.6, in this maṇḍala) and both Agni (III.5.8, V.24.3 [this maṇḍ.], X.176.4, etc.) and Soma (I.91.15) can be subj.

of the verb uruṣyá- ‘make wideness’.


## 07
Again my interpr. differs markedly from those of others. Again I think the unexpressed subj. of the whole vs. is Agni/Soma, not the sun (sū́ryaḥ) with most others. The nom. sū́ryaḥ is instead used to characterize both, since both Agni and Soma can be identified with the sun; that is, each is (equivalent to) the sun in his own way. Cf. “the sun of the lower realm” in 2a with reference to phenomena related to both Agni and Soma.

In pāda a I take the two adj. ágruḥ ‘unmarried’ and jánivān ‘possessing wife/wives’ as expressing two stages in the development of Agni/Soma, rather than as paradoxically simultaneous with Ge and Re (WG interpr. resembles mine). The position of vaí supports an interpr. with two clauses. In the first stage Agni/Soma pursues females/wives; cf. VII.96.4 janīyánto nv ágravaḥ “bachelors in search of wives.” Again we have unidentified (and here unexpressed) plural females -- in Agni’s case I surmise they are the plants that supply firewood and/or the streams of ghee poured in the fire; in Soma’s the cows, with whose milk he is mixed, or even the waters that swell him. Once Agni and Soma have “married” these females and are jánivān ‘possessed of wives’, each can use the extra power acquired from these females to best his rivals. In this second clause I supply a second verb, perhaps a form of √tṝ, because √vī does not otherwise occur with áti, whereas tuturyāma+áti is found in the next hymn (V.45.11).

In cd I take the verb vanavat in two senses, negative and positive, both well represented for this stem. With the obj. ghraṃsám ‘heat’, the verb has the sense ‘win’ = ‘vanquish’, as in nearby V.29.9 ávanor ha śúṣṇam “you combatted / vanquished Śuṣṇa”; with the obj. śárma ‘shelter’, ‘win’ = ‘gain’. I take rákṣantam as a qualifier of śárma (more or less; see below), with the participle itself taking the obj. gáyam (“shelter … protecting our patrimony”). In taking gáyam as obj. of rákṣantam I am flg. Old, who cites as parallel I.74.2 árakṣad dāśúṣe gáyam, which seems pretty conclusive to me. There are also two passages (VI.71.3/X.66.3) in which gáyam is the object of the semantically parallel verb pári √pā ‘protect all round’ (e.g., X.66.3 ... pári pāhi no gáyam); note pári immed. flg. rákṣantam here. By contrast, Ge, Re, WG all take gáyam as an immed. object of vanavat, modified by rákṣantam, which itself governs ghraṃsám (cf., e.g., Re “Qu’il nous assure une demeure protégeant de toutes parts de (son) ardeur …”). This interpr. not only ignores the √rakṣ + gáyam parallel, but also requires a significant attenuation of the meaning of √van (see Re’s n. on the pāda), and I also don’t know of parallel uses of √rakṣ meaning ‘guard against / from’. Against this we must balance one clear defect in my interpr., that śárman- is neut. and the part. rákṣantam is masc. To account for the gender discrepancy I would suggest that the immediate referent of rákṣantam is not śárma, but a different, underlying, masc. noun to which śárma is an appositive -- perhaps kṣáyam ‘peaceful dwelling’, as in I.133.7 vanóti … kṣáyam. Or it might be enough to invoke the distance between rákṣantam and śárma in the hemistich, which might account for the gender mismatch. (I prefer the former, grammatically blameless, possibility. In this case the tr. might be slightly changed to “will win (peaceful dwelling) as shelter for us, protecting (our) patrimony on all sides.”)


## 08
Old’s stark statement about this vs., “Ich wage keine Erklärung,” is somewhat lowering to the spirit. Nonetheless, I think some sense can be wrung from it. As I said in the publ. intro., I think a new figure enters the scene at this, the midpoint of the hymn -- namely the poet, learning and perfecting his craft -- and in my opinion he is the subject of the vs., though Agni and Soma are still very much present.

By my interpr. the unnamed would-be poet “pursues/proceeds towards/practices” (carati) “the older (/superior) sonority of the seers” (jyā́yāṃsam … ṛṣisvarám), that is, he imitates and aspires to the sound of the legendary poet-seers who preceded him. He does so by means of asyá yatúnasya ketúnā “by the beacon of this yatúna.” Unfortunately yatúna- is a hapax, and there is no agreement on its meaning or etym. (see, e.g., EWA s.v.). However, we can approach the sense of this phrase from several angles. The most promising of these, in my opinion, is the recognition that the phrase yajñásya ketú- “beacon of the sacrifice” is a very common expression in the RV (I.96.16, I.113.19, etc. etc., incl. in this maṇḍala V.11.1).

Moreover, both Agni and Soma are identified as yajñásya ketú-; Agni: the three passages just cited, plus I.1127.6, III.11.3, etc.; Soma: IX.86.7. I take yatúna- as a nonce substitute for yajñá-, with vaguely similar phonology, built to √yat ‘arrange’.

(This is the root affiliation suggested by most [cf., e.g., AiG II.2.485].) Unfortunately this root does not seem to be generally used in ritual context, but a generalized abstract ‘arrangement’ can stand in for the more specific ‘sacrifice’. This hapax yatúna- echoes immed. following instr. ketúnā (though obviously the morphology is different) and also reminds us of the two unexpected -u-stems in 5: táru- and -sváru-.

Putting all this together, I would claim that the poet is pursuing the model of the previous poets by means of the beacon of the sacrifice (/‘arrangement’), and that this beacon is actually the usual amalgam of Agni and Soma, who, as we just saw, can be so called. In other words, the shimmering leaders of the sacrifice, the two ritual substances fire and soma, provide the (en)light(enment) as the poet follows the progress of the sacrifice as it leads him to his poetic goal.

Unlike most interpr. I take the loc. rel. cl. ending b (yā́su nā́ma te) as parallel to the one beginning c (yā́dṛ́śmin dhā́yi), also with a loc. expression. Both remind us of 2d … ṛtá āsa nā́ma te; besides the identical final nā́ma te, note the echo between yā́su and āsa. The fem. loc. yā́su refers to the now familiar mix of fem. plurals -- waters, cows [=milk], streams of ghee -- with the possible addition of fem. words for mental and verbal products: insights, hymns, etc. In any case the poet finds the jyā́yāṃsam … ṛṣisvarám he is looking for at the place where the names of Agni and Soma have been set -- that is, at the heart of the sacrifice. I take the referent of tám to be ṛṣisvára- of b. To find it he needs not only the beacon provided by Agni/Soma but also his own industry (apasyā́-).

The final pāda reiterates that the poet must rely on himself: he must make the journey to poetic mastery by himself, and if he does, he will get it (that is, the poetry) right. The phrasal verb áraṃ karat of course reminds us of alaṃkāra, the later technical term for poetic ornament. Cf. already in the RV VII.29.3 kā́te asty áraṃkrti̥ ḥ sūktaíḥ for a connection between hymns and proper preparation. (Contrary to the standard tr., I do not think that yá u svayáṃ váhate has anything to do with marriage and bringing the bride home.)

## 09
In my interpr., the first half of this vs. depicts the offering of ritual oblations, while the second one connects the poet, whom we first met in the previous vs., with this ritual activity.

The fem. phrase āsām … agrimā́“the foremost (fem.) of these (fem.)” must refer yet again to the females we’ve met before: waters, cows, streams of ghee, as was just noted above. In pāda a the first such female goes down into the ocean (samudrám); this could be the ocean of soma as often or the undulating flames of the ritual fire (see I.71.7 where the offerings entering the fire are compared to streams entering a samudrá-). In pāda b the word sávana- ‘pressing’ limits the reference to soma, but throughout the hymn we have seen phraseology that is more appropriate to one of the gods than to the other (generally, in fact, in favor of Agni). That b is a clear soma pāda does not, in my opinion, invalidate the general interpr. of the hymn as applicable simultaneously to the two gods. It is also worth noting in passing that sávana-, which occurs approx. 100x in the RV, is found only once in the IXth Maṇḍala.

Why it is necessary to state that the pressing is not harmed when the female enters it is not clear. Perhaps it is meant as understatement: it is not only not harmed, but is positively benefitted. Or perhaps there is a whiff of the fear of contamination caused by females.

Pāda c brings us another impenetrable hapax, kravaṇá-. The first thing to notice, perhaps, is that it rhymes with sávana- (though it does not match it in accent).

As with the hapax yatúna- in 8a beside ketúnā, one of the contributors to the formation of the hapax may be phonological echo. There is, as usual, no consensus on the etym. or sense of the word; Ge and Re (inter alia) take it as a PN -- a convenient strategy, but in a hymn that contains no other PNs (at least in my opinion) an unlikely solution. WG take it as ‘Opferschlächter’, related to kravís-, a suggestion mentioned but not endorsed by Old (see also EWA s.v.). My own tentative suggestion has no better support. I consider it, like krívi- in 4d, to be another phonologically scrambled encoding of the word kaví-, here perhaps crossed with a form of √kṛ, hence my tr. ‘working poet’. (A putative participial -āṇá- might have been remodeled under pressure from sávana- in b.) Although I will not attempt a spirited defense of this despairing attempt, it does have certain points in its favor.

First, if kriví- in 4d and kravaṇá- here are both deformations of kaví-, which itself appears in 7b, we have a little ring of references to the poet in the midsection of this hymn. More important, reference to a poet in 9c fits well with the subordinate clause in 9d. Just at the time when oblation is made and the soma is prepared (9ab), the poet who is not intimidated (“his heart does not tremble”) finds the poetic expression (matí-) that connects him to the purified ritual substances soma and fire. (Though pūtá- almost always refers to soma and never to fire directly, other forms derived from the root √pū, like pāvaká-, are standard qualifiers of Agni.) If I am correct that vs. 8 depicts an apprentice or neophyte poet embarking on his journey to poetic mastery, then 9cd shows him achieving his first success at a climactic moment in the sacrifice, which provides inspiration to his undaunted heart.

## 10
Ge and Re deal with the difficulties of this vs. by taking all (or almost all) the genitives as PN, a solution going back to Sāy.: (Ge) Kṣatra, Manasa, Yajata, Sadhri, and Avatsāra, to which Re adds Evāvada. (Note that the Anukr. ascribes this hymn to one Avatsāra Kāśyapa, but this is, in my opinion, based on a later misunderstanding of this vs.) Since all of these forms, on the one hand, either are, or bear a strong resemblance to, real words in the language and, on the other, are not used as names elsewhere, the Ge/Re PN strategy seems like an evasion of responsibility. It is to the credit of WG that this makeshift is not resorted to; all these forms are given full lexical weight. And the WG interpr. of ab is not too distant from mine, in that they take the subject to be a/the poet, who has some connection to the cítti- of the figures mentioned in the gen. (WG: “Denn er is es [ein Ṛṣi?] durch die Einsichten dessen …”), though our treatments of the genitives differ.

My interpr. of the relation between sá and cíttibhiḥ calls upon the ‘bond’ (bándhanī) of 9d, where the poet found the thought that binds him to the ritual substances soma and fire. I think 10ab elaborates on this notion, by ascribing the insights to Soma and Agni themselves.

The second set of genitives, evāvadásya yajatásya sádhreḥ in pāda b, by my interpr. refer to Agni and Soma simultaneously. Both Agni and Soma are elsewhere described as yajatá- ‘worthy of the sacrifice’ (Agni, e.g., I.128.8; Soma, e.g., IX.86.14). Assuming that the hapax evāvadá- has the sense ‘speaking thus’ it transparently presents, it can apply to both Agni and Soma because both substances are often said to speak or sound: for Agni cf., e.g., VI.4.4, 13.6; for Soma cf. esp.

IX.113.4, 6. As for sádhreḥ, the obvious connection with sadhryàñc- ‘directed towards the same goal’ is affirmed by Gr, AiG II.2.154, EWA s.v sadhrī́m, etc. It is the morphology that is puzzling, made more complex by the fact that it should be trisyllabic with a short penultimate, hence *sádhriyaḥ? (so approx. Gr). (HvN simply pronounce the pāda as having 11 syllables, but since this would be a metrical irregularity in a Jagatī hymn and since there is no independent stem *sádhri- to which sádhreḥ would obviously belong, it seems better to perform the metrical distraction.) I have no answer for the morphology or for the accent, but given the morphological flexibility in the rest of this hymn, this is not surprising.) The “same goal” that Agni/Soma are aiming at is the eloquence that the poet is also seeking to harness.

I take this second set of genitives, referring to Agni/Soma, as dependent on, not parallel to, the first pair of genitives, kṣatrásya manasásya. My “mental lordship” refers to the mastery those two gods have of the poetry and the insights that produce it. The adj. manasá- is a hapax, but it fits a common pattern of deriving suffixaccented thematic adjectives to s-stems; cf., e.g., vacasá- ‘eloquent’ to vácas- ‘speech’ and AiG II.2.136.

The second hemistich takes advantage of the double meaning of ráṇa- and its derivatives (ráṇa- ‘joy / battle’, raṇvá- ‘delightful / battle-lusty’, etc.). I take the referent of the pl. ráṇvabhiḥ to be poems (or perhaps the ‘insights’ cítti- of pāda a).

As warriors fighting alongside us they allow us to win the prize (spṛṇavāma …  vā́jam), but as poems they are also delightful or joy-bringing. That winning the prize requires wisdom, not just brute strength, is expressed by vidúṣā cid árdhyam “to be brought to success only by the wise,” a signal that it is insights or their products, poems, that are being deployed.

It remains to identify “the stealthy one” (avatsārá-), assuming as I do that it is not a PN. As I just noted, not only do Ge and Re (but not WG) take it as a PN, but the Anukramaṇī ascribes this hymn to Avatsāra Kāśyapa, who is also purported to be the Soma hymns IX.53-60, a group of short Gāyatrī hymns with no obvious connection to V.44. It seems obvious to connect the word with the lexeme áva √tsar and the root √tsar ‘creep’ more generally. The root is poorly attested, and áva √tsar only occurs once (I.71.5 in the notorious heavenly incest story). Agni is once the subject of √tsar (I.145.4), and the occurrence of áva √tsar is found in an Agni hymn (though not with Agni as subject). Soma is never subject of this verb, but its rarity makes this unsurprising. Both Agni and Soma can be conceived of as creeping or stealthy because of their slow and gradual movements -- Agni as the fire slowly catches in the kindling, Soma as the juice spreads across the filter.


## 11
If it is possible for this hymn to get more obscure, it does so in this vs. (Note that Old simply gives up in vss. 11-13.) Nonetheless, I think a consistent interpr. can be constructed and one that fits well with the increasing pace of the depiction of the ritual in the last few vss. The theme that unifies the vs. is that of ritual binding and unbinding -- conveyed by the words áditi-, which I take as the abstract ‘unboundedness’ not the name of the goddess, kakṣyà- ‘girding’, and viṣā́na- ‘unharnessing’.

The first half of pāda a (śyená āsām áditiḥ) refers to the pre-ritual situation.

While Soma is still a falcon, swooping about in freedom before the sacrifice begins, he is/represents freedom also for the classes of females we keep encountering: waters, cows, hymns. Neither the waters nor the cows (=milk) have taken on their ritual roles, and the words have not yet been pressed into service as ritual speech. (It’s important to note that Soma himself is often called a śyená- in IX; the bird is not simply the conveyor of the stolen soma.) In the second half of pāda a (kakṣyò mádaḥ) Soma has been transformed into the máda-, the exhilarating ritual drink, and that change in turn brings about the girding of the female entities in question. They are hitched up in their various ritual roles, and the sacrifice begins. This ritual commencement is both for the benefit of and involves the active participation of the two gods, Soma and Agni. It is thus that I interpret the genitives in pāda b (viśvávārasya yajatásya māyínaḥ (note the recurrence of yajatásya from 10b), also referring, in my opinion, to Agni/Soma.

(Once again both Ge and Re take all three genitives as PNs; once again WG do not.) In pāda c I take the priests as the subject of arthayanti ‘cause to seek as goal’.

They are now directing the ritual proceedings. The first object of arthayanti is unexpressed, in my view: it is the female ritual elements, waters, milk, hymns. The priests send them to their ritual tasks, the waters and the cows’ milk to soma, the hymns to Soma and Agni. The two gods are here represented by the āmreḍita anyám- anyam ‘the one, the other; one after the other’. So far in the hymn the two gods have been fused into one, verbally speaking; here the āmreḍita is an intermediate step towards separating them, a step that allows for the introduction of a third god, Indra, in the next vs. In pāda d the priests realize that with the mobilization of all the elements of the ritual performance -- the soma, the ritual fire, the waters, milk, and hymns -- the climax of the sacrifice has been reached. The unharnessing of these elements can take place because all that remains is for the prepared soma to be drunk. This sets the stage for the premier soma-drinker, Indra, to appear on the scene, which he does in the next vs. The parallel forms viṣā́ṇam paripā́nam are both best taken as -ana-nouns to -ā́-roots, although Gr identifies the first as a root participle. Cf. AiG II.2.193.


## 12
As I just said, I think this vs. represents the epiphany of Indra, come to drink the just-prepared soma. Although, in keeping with the practice of the hymn, he is not named, the presence of a new actor in the hymn is strongly signaled by the verb phrase in pāda a: ví dvíṣo vadhīt: Indra is almost always the subject of verb forms to the root √vadh. Although the subject of pāda a is also called yajatá-, a word used in the two preceding vss. (10b, 11b) of Agni/Soma (in my opinion), ‘worthy of the sacrifice’ is a generic descriptor of gods, is used elsewhere of Indra (e.g., II.14.10), and can be so applied here. And ‘always giving’ (sadāpṛṇa, though a hapax, is a good description of Indra -- or at least as we wish him to be.

In b Ge and Re take the three words bāhuvṛktáḥ śrutavít táryaḥ as PNs yet again. I think they are all further qualifications of Indra. The first depicts the physical actions of the priest, who by the ritual activities performed by their arms (bāhú-), “twist” Indra to the ritual ground. (For the use of √vṛj to refer to bringing a god to one’s ritual, see VIII.76.1.) There is also a sly echo of the common bahuvrīhi vṛktábarhis- ‘having twisted ritual grass’, a ritual action that would indeed by performed by the priests’ arms. Indra is also easily qualified as śruta-víd- ‘finding [/knowing] what is heard (=praise)’. The third term táryaḥ, a hapax, is more difficult. It may simply be a -ya- deriv. to √tṝ (see WG “der Überwinder [?]”), though this isn’t terribly satisfying morphologically. I tentatively take it as a primary comparative to √tṝ, with the short suffixal form -yas- rather than -īyas- (tárīyas- 1x in nearby V.41.12); cf. návyas- / návīyas-. In that case it would be an adverbially used neut.

(‘surpassingly’) and the predicate is the vaḥ sácā “(is in) partnership with you.” For another predicated pāda-final ENC + sácā see VIII.92.29 ádhā cid indra me sácā “And so, Indra, (you are) in partnership with me.” The second hemistich begins with an explicitly marked dual ubhā́… várā, separated by a nom. sg. sá. Here we have the triad that has just, in this vs., interrupted the fused identification of Agni and Soma. With Indra represented by sá, the two other gods are for the first time in the hymn separated into a grammatical pair (though see the forerunner anyám-anyam in 11c), rather than sharing grammatically singular descriptors applicable to each. (For ubhā́… várā referring to animate beings, see X.85.9, where the two are the Aśvins -- though in that case várameans ‘wooer’.) Indra “comes in response” (práty eti) to these two, i.e., to the ritual fire where offerings will be made to him and to his own ritual drink. The second verb bhā́ti ‘is radiant’ is not a typical Indraic verb, but pāda d with its reference to the gaṇá- ‘troop, throng’ easily brings the rhetoric back to Indra and his close ties with the Maruts, so often identified as a gaṇá-. The lexeme prá √yā, found here in suprayā́van- ‘driving forth easily’, is also particularly associated with the Maruts; cf. III.29.15 marútām iva prayā́ḥ, and verbal instantiations like I.37.14 prá yāta, also I.165.13, V.53.12, 58.6. I've supplied 'chariots' because rátha- several times used in a simile with pra √yā (IV.19.5, VII.74.6, IX.69.9).


## 13
As indicated in the publ. intro., in this last real vs. of the hymn I think the poet, who has been learning his trade, is extravagantly celebrated as the figure on whom the whole sacrifice depends and the representative of various sacrificial personnel and equipment. By contrast, Ge and Re once again opt for a PN, this time Sutambhara whom they consider to be the patron of the sacrifice. I take sutambharáas the transparent cmpd it appears to be, conforming to the model of other -bharátatpuruṣas (cf., with acc. 1st member, puṣṭim-bhará-, vājam-bhará-, etc.) For the underlying syntagm see VIII.66.7 sutám bhara, where the subject is a priest or similar figure (also IX.6.6 sutám bhárāya). I construe the gen. yájamānasya with the 1st member sutam, though it could also be a gen. of benefit (‘for the sacrificer’) and loosely construed with the whole cmpd. I do not think it is dependent on sátpatiḥ, pace Ge, Re, and WG.

The 2nd pāda identifies the poet with the source (the cow’s udder, ū́dhaḥ) and distributor (the ladle or scoop, udáñcanaḥ) of all poetic visions (víśvāsām … dhiyā́m), which are here equated with ghee oblations. (For ud √añc meaning ‘turn / scoop up’, see V.83.8, AV X.29.8, etc.; in AB and ŚB udañcana- is a 'dipping vessel'.) The conflation of poems with liquid offerings we have already met before in this hymn, though it is only here that the dhī́- is explicitly referred to.

In c the Pp and the standard interpr. take dhenū́as the sandhi form of nom. sg.

dhenús before r-. This is of course perfectly possible; however, I take the form as given, as the dual nom./acc. of the same stem. By this interpr. the poet who was the subj. of ab remains the subj. here, with the -bhará- of the cmpd in pāda a extracted and converted into a finite injunctive bhárat. Who are the two milk-cows he bears? It is of course tempting to identify them as Agni and Soma, the pair that has been hiding in this hymn all along. And in part I think that is the correct answer: the poet, whose verbal formulations are the foundation of the sacrifice, thereby supports the two ritual substances (/gods) that provide the material realization of the sacrifice.

Agni and Soma would be called dhenū́because of the benefits they provide through sacrifice. But dual dhenū́is several times used of Heaven and Earth (of the other four occurrences, at last III.6.4, IV.23.10), so that the poet through his sacrificial labors may be supporting the whole cosmos. Moreover, the milk of Heaven and Earth has a special connection with poetry. Cf. the curious passage I.22.14 táyor íd ghrtávat páy ̥ o, víprā rihanti dhītíbhiḥ “The inspired poets lick the ghee-filled milk of this very pair [=Heaven and Earth; see vs. 13] with their poetic insights,” though the meaning of this vs. is obscure (see comm. ad loc.). In any case their milk is brought to perfection (śiśriye) in the rest of the pāda.

Contra Narten (1987: 281) and Kümmel (p. 528), who follows her, in the publ. tr. I take this med. pf. as passive, contrasting with the act. trans. aśiśrayuḥ (2x). However, it is possible that the verb is transitive, as they take it, and the poet remains as subj.: “he brings/has brought their milk to perfection.” This might be preferable, in that it emphasizes the poet’s control over the sacrifice and its cosmic resonances.

The final pāda of the vs., and thus of the hymn, brings us back, abruptly and somewhat reductively, to the poet’s training: “pay attention to your teacher; don’t nod off or go wool-gathering.” The lexemes ánu √brū and ádhi √i belong to pedagogical vocabulary (for the latter see Apālā VIII.91.3 and comm. ad loc.). The final phrase ná svapán “not the one who sleeps” provides a transition to the final two responsive verses with their insistently repested jāgāra ‘is/stays awake’.

## 14-15
As was just noted, the final ná svapán of 13d provides a segue into this two-verse appendix with its 6 occurrences of jāgāra ‘is/stays awake’. The two vss.

are strictly responsive -- so strictly responsive that the replacement of yó in abc by agnír produces an awkward set of 12-syllable lines with Triṣṭubh cadence, an awkwardness surely meant to call attention to their tight twinning. The vs. pair is structured as a riddle + solution, though, given what we have just waded through, not a very challenging puzzle. The focus seems to be on Agni, since he is the solution to the riddle; the balance of the two ritual substances found in the rest of the hymn (if I am correct) thus appears to be disturbed. But I do not think that this means that Agni is the sole subject of the hymn, as Scar suggests in his final comment (in WG).

Rather the final word is found in the last pāda of both vss., the direct address of Soma to Agni (tám ayám sóma āha “to him does this Soma say”): távāhám asmi sakhyé nyòkaḥ “I am at home in fellowship with you.” It is the fellowship of Agni and Soma, intimately joined here and identified by name, though neither of them was named previously in the hymn, that we are left with and that allows us to revisit the many obscurities that preceded this statement.
