+++
title = "045"

+++
All Gods On the structure of the hymn and the grammatical patterning that supports that structure, see publ. intro. Note that this patterning imposes presential renderings of the injunctives in the first three vss.


## 01
The Pp. interprets vidā́as vidā́ḥ, and this interpr. is followed by Sāy., Gr, Ge, Re (EVP XVI.107), and WG inter alia. It has the merit of providing a verb form for the opening pāda, but the 2nd sg. subjunctive it appears to be does not fit well in context. I prefer to take it as instr. sg. of the root noun víd- (vidā́against the Pp.), as tentatively suggested by Old and, in different ways, adopted by Lüders (Varuṇa 325), Thieme (rev. of Lüders, ZDMG 101 (1951) 417 [=KlSch 652]), Schmidt (B+I 175- 76), and Hoffmann (Inj. 173-74). My interp. follows Hoffmann in particular in taking pāda b as parenthetical, with the singular verb appropriate to pāda a postponed until ápāvṛta in pāda c. I far prefer this solution to allowing the sg. part. viṣiyán in pāda a to be construed with the pl. phrase arcíno guḥ in b, with Lü et al. The sg. subj.

of a,c is most likely the sun.

In b arcín- is interpr. either as ‘having chant, singing’ (by most) or ‘having rays, bright’. Again with Hoffmann, I prefer the latter. Hoffmann (174 n. 125) suggests supplying ketú- ‘beam’, regularly associated with the dawns, and this seems contextually appropriate.

Pāda c contains another -ín-stem, this time a hapax, vrajín- ‘possessing enclosures’, in the fem. acc. pl.. Gr, Ge, Hoffmann, and WG take the referent to be ‘cows’, but the usual obj. of ápa √vṛ is the cow-enclosure (often the base of vrajín-, namely vrajá-) or the doors thereto, and ‘door’ is also fem. This noun, dúraḥ, is found in the next pāda as the obj. of the nearly identical lexeme ví … āvaḥ. In taking ‘doors’ as obj. also of ápāvṛta I am in agreement with Lü, Thieme, and Schmidt.

With Hoffmann and against the Pp. I take ápāvṛta as an injunc. ápā + vṛta.

The verb of d, ví … āvaḥ, is undeniably augmented, however; I take it as a summary comment on the description found in the rest of the vs. See Hoffmann’s disc. 174-75.


## 02
On ámati- see comm. ad I.73.2.

The problematic pāda is c. The rivers who are its subject are not, in my opinion, either real-world rivers (so, it seems, Ge) or the heavenly streams so beloved of Lü. Rather, to fit the context, they must be, metaphorically, the outpourings of light at dawn, which are so intense that they threaten to destabilize the world with their floods -- a threat countered by the solidity of Heaven described in pāda d. The two bahuvrīhis in c, dhánv-arṇasaḥ … khā́do-arṇāḥ, have been much discussed. Noteworthy first is the fact that they have (almost) the same final member: if both cmpds are nom. pl. the 2nd members are -arṇas- and -arṇa- respectively.

Thieme rejects the variation in stem, taking both as containing -arṇas-, which requires the 2nd form to be nom. singular. In his interpr. the many rivers described by dhánvarṇasaḥ have joined into one, modified by singular khā́doarṇāḥ. It is a clever solution, but rather over-clever and in fact unnecessary. Both árṇas- and árṇa- exist independently, and the plural built to a cmpd. with árṇas- as final member (that is, - arṇasaḥ) would not fit a Triṣṭubh cadence, while one built to the parallel stem -arṇadoes nicely, as if truncated from a Jagatī cadence with -arṇasaḥ (see such a cadence in I.182.7).

What then do the cmpds mean? Again, a variety of interpr. have been suggested. I take dhánv-arṇas- as an equational bv., ‘whose floods are dhánu-’. A dhánu- appears to be a high flat plain or steppe; two of its five occurrences in the RV are characterized as bṛhatī́- ‘lofty’. In our context I think it refers to what we often call a “wall of water,” a mass of oncoming water far above flood stage, perhaps already flooding over the banks and across the adjacent land. As for khā́do-arṇāḥ, it should mean something like ‘whose floods are a biting/devouring’; in this case, I think Ge (flg. Sāy.) is correct that the rivers are devouring their banks, eating away at the solid ground. The sturdy pillar of heaven in d provides a bulwark against this featureless undulating torrent of light.

## 03
This vs. describes dawn as happening in response to and as a result of the hymn recited at this very moment (hence asmaí) at the dawn sacrifice. The two heavy dative phrases, polarized at both ends of the first hemistich, asmā́ukthā́ya and janúṣe pūrvyā́ya, have different functions in the clause. The gaping mountain is an allusion to the opening of the Vala cave, metaphorically applied to the advent of dawn from the night darkness.

In the second hemistich, in c “heaven achieves success” must, in my view, allude to the successful emergence of dawn’s light from the heavenly realm. This is contrasted with d, where an unnamed plural subject is desiring to win the earth (āvívasantaḥ … bhū́ma) -- in my opinion, this refers to the fact that features on the earth come only slowly to visual definition at dawn, even as the light comes streaming out of the sky. The unknown subjects are probably the poets responsible for “this hymn here” (asmā́ukthā́ya) in pāda a; they must continue their verbal efforts, “exhaust themselves” (dasayanta), in order to bring the earth into focus.

Supplying ‘poets’ as subj. generally follows Hoffmann, who thinks esp. of the Aṅgirases (174 n. 126), contra Ge, who takes bhū́ma as subj. (sim. Lü). On dasayanta, see my -áya-Formations, p. 59. Some take the verb rather to √daṃs ‘work wonders’; see esp. Thieme (loc. cit., n. 7), fld. by Schmidt, WG. This cannot be excluded, but I find the ‘exhaust’ meaning more poetic compelling.


## 04
The vaḥ in Wackernagel’s position can be construed in a number of different ways. I take it as the poet’s address to his colleagues to praise and importune the two gods. Since the next two vss. (5-6) consist of 1st pl. exhortations to proceed with the sacrifice and achieve effective ritual poetry, my interpr. fits the larger context well.

Ge also seems to assume the referents are human, but are rather the potential beneficiaries of the poet’s own plea to the gods (sim. WG). By contrast Schmidt (and less clearly Lü) take it as direct address to the gods; Schmidt “… wollen wir jetzt euch, Indra und Agni, zur Hilfe rufen.” Given the number discrepancy between pl.

vaḥ and the dual dvandva índrā … agnī́, this seems unlikely. Note also that the noninitial accent on agnī́precludes a voc. interpr. of the dvandva, though that alone would not prevent vaḥ from referring to them.

I do not understand the intrusion of the Maruts here. They are not gods of the dawn sacrifice, nor are they associated with the Vala myth or with the Aṅgirases.

Perhaps their prominence elsewhere in the Vth Maṇḍala (esp. V.52-61) is responsible for their brief appearance here, prompted by the mention of Indra. They are presumably not only the objects of yájanti but also of āvívasantaḥ: “winning” them would involve persuading them to come to our sacrifice.

## 05-06
As noted in the publ. intro., these two vss. form an omphalos and are structurally parallel, with the poet addressing his priest-poet colleagues with hortatory subjunctives. The immediacy of the vss. and the sacrificial context of the hymn make this a more likely scenario than Sāy.’s suggestion that the Aṅgirases are speaking these vss. For strenuous arguments against Sāy.’s interpr., see Lü p. 327.

## 05
As suggested already by Ge (n. 5b) and, independently, Thieme (ZDMG 95 [1941] 82-83 [=KlSch. 7-8]) and accepted by all subsequent tr., a better reading is obtained by segmenting duchúnām inavāma, against Pp. duchúnā minavāma. This requires no emendation to the Saṃhitā text.


## 06
Unlike the first hortatory vs., this second one is not entirely tied to the hereand-now; rather it provides three separate historical/mythological models for the effective poetic vision (dhī́-) that we are aiming to create now (pāda a). The first model (b) appears to be a variant of the Vala myth so prominent in the rest of the hymn, but those in c and d are obscure.

In b the first question is the grammatical identity of yā́. It is generally taken as nom. sg. fem., but Old suggests that it might alternatively be a (short) instr. sg. fem.

In the former case the referent of yā́would be the dhī́- of pāda a, which would be the subj. of ṛṇuta and identified with the “mother of the cow” (mātā́… góḥ); in the latter it would be parallel to the two instr. sg. fem. yáyā opening c and d. I favor the second interpr.; although the former is not impossible, I find the syntactic parallelism a stronger argument, and yā́could owe its abbreviated form to being displaced from initial position by the preverb ápa. If the instr. interpr. is correct, this leaves the subj.

of ṛṇuta and referent of “mother of the cow” open. Old and Ge both consider it to be Uṣas. Again, this is not impossible, but I think it may be Saramā, whose finding of the cows is treated in vss. 7-8 -- though Dawn as “mother of cows” (gávām mātā́) is found in vs. 2 and is also a strong candidate.

Ge remarks apopos of pāda c “sonst unbekannte Sage” (see also Lü, p. 329), and it is likely that we will not get further than that. Ad VII.99.4 Old tentatively suggests that the name of a Dāsa, vṛṣaśiprá, that occurs in that passage might have something to do with our viśiśiprá-, but even if so (and it’s certainly possible), this is a deadend, since all we know of Vṛṣaśipra is that he’s a Dāsa and killed by Indra and Viṣṇu. Like the Maruts in 4d, the fleeting intrusion of Manu here is unexpected and unexplained.

Even more so the “wandering merchant” (vaṇíg vaṅkúḥ) of d. On vaṅkú- see comm. ad I.51.11 and, esp., I.114.4. Although the standard rendering is ‘flying’ (see, e.g., Ge, Schmidt), its derivation from √vañc ‘move crookedly, meander’ makes ‘meandering, wandering’ more likely. In I.114.4 it modifies kaví-. I suggest there that it refers to an itinerant poet, and merchants are at least as likely as poets to be itinerant, following a meandering course as they peddle their goods. But who this particular merchant is meant to be and how and why he needs a dhī́- to attain his pū́rīṣa- remain unclear. If I had Dumézilian tendencies, I might suggest a trifunctional interpr.: pāda b = 1st function, c = 2nd function, and d = 3rd function (at least the latter two might work -- 1st

-function b is a bit of a stretch). But even if this
interpr. were persuasive, it doesn’t explain what the material is doing in this hymn at this point.

## 07-08
Here the mythic model of the dawn accompanying the dawn ritual, the opening of the Vala cave through the verbal efforts of the Aṅgirases, is spelled out. Note the variant versions of the phrase “Saramā found the cows”: 7c sarámā gā́avindat, with augmented imperfect; 8d sarámā vidad gā́ḥ, with aor. injunctive (per Pp.) or aor. indicative (sarámāvidad, with augmented avidat is a possible reading). For Hoffmann’s interpr. of this vs. pair see Injunk. 164-65.


## 07
Note that 3 of the 4 verbs are augmented (ánūnot, ā́rcan, avindat), the 4th a preterital pf. (cakāra).


## 08
The subordinator yád comes quite late (2nd position pāda b) in the subordinate clause presumably occupying the first hemistich, and it is preceded not only by the subj. (víśve) but by a heavy temporal loc. expression (asyā́vyúṣi mā́hināyāḥ) -- in violation of standard RVic subordinator placement. This anomaly may have led WG to take pāda a as a nominal main clause: “Sie alle (waren) … (zugegen).” I am sympathetic, but think the clause division is unnecessarily radical.

It is possible that b is a conversion into a subordinate clause of IV.3.11b sám áṅgiraso navanta góbhiḥ with pāda a acting as a preposed afterthought.

The 2nd hemistich brings another syntactic problem: in c the Pp. interprets útsa (before a vowel) as nom. -aḥ, a grammatical ident. that in turn requires that c be an independent clause. The Pp. reading is defended by Old and fld. by many, incl. Ge, Hoffmann (Injunk. 165), WG. With Lü (385 n. 2; fld. by Schmidt p. 177, Janert p.

10) I prefer the loc. útse, parallel to paramé sadhásthe, and defining the place where Saramā found the cows in d.


## 09
The first hemistich is metrically problematic. HvN put the pāda break after saptā́śvaḥ and distract sū́ryo, yātu, and saptā́śvaḥ; their 2nd pāda, beginning kṣétram, has a caesura after 3 (though see their n.). It is also possible to take kṣétram as the last word of pāda a (see Schmidt’s layout, p. 178) and to restrict the distraction to a single word, either sū́ryaḥ or saptā́śvaḥ, though this produces a bad cadence. In that case I would suggest that the 2nd pāda orig. began *yád yád; reading *yád yád asya produces an opening of 4 and, with post-caesura urviyā́dīrgayāthé, makes a fine Triṣṭubh. The 2nd (or 1st) yád would be the neut. sg. N/A participle to √i.

Even if this possible emendation is not accepted, it is still possible to take yád as the neut. participle, not the subordinator: this interpr. is represented in my tr. by “stretching” and by the lack of a relative cl. With double yád the tr. would read “to the tract of land which is stretching widely at (the end of) his long course.” The 2nd hemistich contains a pres. injunctive, patayat, and a pf. [/redupl. pres.] subjunctive dīdayat. In the publ. tr. they are both rendered as imperatives, matching the pattern set by yātu in pāda a. I now think that this interpr. lacks refinement and should be altered. The vs. in general concerns the coincidence between the sunrise and the ritual activities of the dawn sacrifice. We hope for the sunrise (hence the impv.), which is in fact realized in the next vs. By contrast, the ritual activities in the 2nd hemistich are under our (=priests’) control and can therefore simply be described.

Exactly what the referents of the falcon (c) and the young poet (d) are is disputed (see the various interpr., incl. those that do not consider them ritual referents at all [notably Lü 329-31]). Starting with d, yúvan- kaví- is frequently an epithet of Agni and √dī is a typical Agni verb, so it seems likely that this is a reference to the kindling of the fire at the dawn ritual. Although “going among the cows” sounds more like soma (mixing with milk), the cows here can be the ghee oblations poured into the fire, which will cause it to flame more brightly. If d refers to Agni, then c is likely to refer to Soma; certainly the ándhas- ‘stalk’ is Soma vocabulary, and the falcon is Soma’s vehicle in the Somaraub. What exactly is going on eludes me, however. As for the tense/mood distinction between patayat and dīdayat, it may be that the distinction is illusory: one of them was simply brought into superficial harmony with the other, so that both end in -ayat, though they should be inj. and subj.

respectively. Or it may be that the injunc. is followed by a subj. to indicate that the 2nd action follows the first (“the falcon flies to the stalk; the young poet will shine …”).


## 10
The structure of this vs. matches that of the last one: the first half describes a cosmic event outside of human control; the second ascribes control to the ritualists.

What is striking is that the same event is treated in both halves: the rising of the sun.

In ab the Sun has agency; he yoked his own horses and mounted the sky. But in c it is the priest-poets (“the wise” dhī́rāḥ) who guide him, through the waters that stand still for this progress, “giving heed” (āśṛṇvantī́ḥ) presumably to the poets’ words. (I owe the germ of this interpr. to Dieter Gunkel [p.c.].)


## 11
Most interpr. construe apsú with dadhiṣe and tr. the latter as ‘you have placed’, hence “you have placed your dhī́in the waters.” But med. forms of √dhā generally mean ‘acquire, assume’, and furthermore the standard interpr. is either nonsensical or requires a substantial backstory -- such as Old’s “[ein] Zauber für Wiedererscheinen der Sonne nach langen Regengüssen.” I follow Ge in taking apsú with svarṣā́m “das … die Sonne im Wasser gewinnt”; the sun was manifestly in the water(s) in the immediately preceding vs. -- however metaphorically we wish to interpret those waters (I would take them as the floods of dawn light we encountered in vs. 2). Thus “winning the sun in the waters” is simply an expression for causing the sun to rise at dawn. For further disc. on the place of this vs. in the hymn, see publ.

intro.

The number discrepancy between 2nd pl. vaḥ and 2nd sg. dadhiṣe is easily accounted for in the same general manner as the vaḥ in vs. 4 (see comm. thereon): dadhiṣe is the poet’s self-address to himself, while vaḥ is addressed to his colleagues.

As in vss. 5-6, these two distinct 2nd ps. references are joined in a joint 1st pl. in cd (syāma … tuturyāma).
