+++
title = "046"

+++
All Gods On my hypothesis concerning the reason for this hymn, viz., support for the ritual innovation of the Patnī, see publ. intro. Save for the final two vss. devoted to the wives of the gods, there seems no rationale for the deities included or excluded from the enumerative vss. or for the repetition of some and not others.

## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., this preliminary vs., preceding the apparently unconnected series of enumerative vss. calling on various gods, esp. female divinities and the wives of the gods, sets up the scenario: in pāda a the poet-sacrificer has yoked himself to the chariot pole (dhúr-) along with his wife, the recently introduced ritual Patnī, an image found elsewhere for the same pairing. Since dhúr- is feminine, the remaining feminines in this vs. (b tā́m … pratáranīm avasyúvam, c: asyāḥ) can refer both to the chariot pole and to the Patnī. In b the feminine obj. is said to be “furthering (the sacrifice)”; though the default obj. of prá √tṝ is ā́yus- ‘lifetime’, yajñám can also serve as obj.: cf., e.g., III.17.2 yajñám prá tira. (On avasyúvam see comm. ad vs. 7 below. One might also note that, while ‘seeking help’ makes sense in context, esp. when read with vs. 7, this word could also be taken as a phonological scrambling of ā̛yus-.) In c the speaker asserts that he does not wish to revert to the old ways or be released from the yoked pairing. In other words, he has accepted the ritual innovation of the Patnī.

Most interpr. take patháḥ as gen. sg. with vidvā́n. Since that pf. part. is generally used absolutely (“[as] knowing one”), I take patháḥ rather as acc. pl. extent of space with néṣati. For a clear acc. of the path with néṣa- see I.91.1 tváṃ rájiṣṭham ánu neṣi pánthām.


## 02
Among this group of mainly male divinities we find the Wives (gnā́ḥ, a word only used for the Wives of the Gods in the RV) and Sarasvatī in the 2nd hemistich.

The first pāda consists only of vocatives, each accented since there is no inherently accented word preceding. In b the accent on mā́ruta (modifying pādainitial śárdhaḥ) is surprising, however, since it follows the verbal lexeme prá yanta with accent on the preverb, and the following voc. viṣṇo lacks accent following utá.

Notice the coincidence of verbal endings for two different person / number / voice combinations: yanta 2nd pl. act. impv. √yam; juṣanta 3rd pl. med. injunc. √juṣ.


## 03
The previous vs. consisted of vocatives in ab and nominatives in cd. Here we find accusatives, with the governing verb huvé postponed until the beginning of the 2nd hemistich. The first four divinities in vss. 2 and 3 are the same, but the four individual vocc. ágna índra váruṇa mítra of 2a are arranged in 3a in two dual dvandvas indrāgnī́and mitrā́váruṇā, in opposite order. The Maruts, Viṣṇu, Pūṣan, and Bhaga (bhága-) are also repeated from vs. 2. Otherwise the emphasis is on divinized natural elements. As for female divinities, we find Aditi immediately after her offspring Mitra and Varuṇa, as well as the waters (apáḥ).

Unfortunately the repetition of bhága- is obscured in the publ. tr. by its rendering as “Fortune” in 3d, though both 2d and 6c call him Bhaga. “Fortune” in 3 should therefore be changed to “Bhaga.”


## 04
In pāda a asrídhaḥ is clearly pl., though it occurs in dual context (utá … víṣṇur utá vā́to asrídhaḥ). There seem to be 3 possibilities: 1) it also modifies the gods in pāda b, the Treasure-giver (draviṇodā́ḥ) and Soma; 2) it refers to the gods in general, as in I.3.9 víśve devā́so asrídhaḥ; 3) it refers to goddesses or the trio of goddesses so denominated in I.13.9 íḷā sárasvatī mahī́tisró devī́r mayobhúvaḥ / … asrídhaḥ (note mayobhúvaḥ like máyas karat in our pāda b). There is no clear way to choose, and it scarcely seems to matter. I would of course prefer the third possibility, since it involves a female presence in this vs., but the support for this possibility is not strong.

The vs. contains the 3rd mention of Viṣṇu and the 2nd of the Aśvins; the other divinities are newly named.


## 05
The Maruts recur for the third time (the 2nd time in the corporate entity, the Marutian troop [mā́rutaṃ śárdhaḥ]), as does Pūṣan, with Bṛhaspati substituting for the Brahmaṇaspati in 3c. Varuṇa and Mitra also make their 3rd appearance, this time with their regular companion Aryaman, rather than the Aditi of 3a.


## 06
The mountains of 3b reappear here; the waters, their companions in 3b, are replaced by the rivers (nadyàḥ), also feminine of course. Bhaga also recurs from 2d and 3d. It seems significant that Aditi is the last divinity named before the “wives” vss.


## 07
The help for which the wives of the gods are insistently entreated (avantu naḥ, prā́vantu naḥ) reminds us of the adj. qualifying the chariot pole / Sacrificer’s Wife in 1b, avasyúvam ‘seeking help’ and provides a type of ring.

With Ge and WG, I take tujáye as referring specifically to the propagation of children, a function appropriate to the wives of the gods, against Re’s insistence that it refers to the production of inspiration (though in his long n. he admits that there is “une certaine association entre túj et la notion de procréer”).


## 08
This last vs. is in a diff. meter and also shows some metrical irregularities (see HvN notes). It seems tacked on, to allow an enumeration of the gods’ wives in question, most of whom (save for Indrāṇī) have a very shadowy existence. It is also not clear whether aśvínī and rā́ṭ refer to a single individual or two.

The last phrase, yá ṛtúr jánīnām “which is the regular season for women,” is somewhat puzzling, made more so by the fact that there is no overt referent in the main clause for the yáḥ, since the verb vyántu lacks an object (also in pāda a). I follow Ge (flg. Sāy.) in taking this as a reference to the patnīsaṃyāja offering (or its forerunner), and I therefore supply ‘offering’ as obj. for vyántu (havís-, etc., is a common, though not invariable, obj. to this root). The rel. cl. is then also a pun: it refers not only to this offering, which is the ritual “time/season” allotted to women, but probably also to their menstrual periods, since ṛtú- is regularly so used later. For a similar pun, using the adj. ṛtvíyāvatī-, see VIII.12.10, 80.7.
