+++
title = "047"

+++
All Gods

## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., I take the subj. of this riddling vs. to be manīṣā́ ‘poetic inspiration’, but until this word appears (end of pāda c), the vs. both invites an identification of the subject with Dawn and makes that impossible. The nom. sg.

participles prayuñjatī́and bodháyantī are characteristic Dawn vocabulary, but Dawn is also regularly identified as “the daughter of heaven,” which phrase is here in the genitive: diváḥ … duhitúḥ. It is her “great mother” (mahī́mātā́) who is the grammatical subj.

My interpr. generally follows that of Old. Others (Ge, Re, WG) seek to make Dawn subj. at least of the first hemistich and are thus forced into awkward interpretations of the phraseology and into division of the vs. into two clauses.

Assuming (with Old and me) that manīṣā́is the subj. of the whole vs., the point would seem to be that the inspiration that produces the poetry of the early morning ritual has the power to beget even Dawn herself -- the usual semi-hubristic boast by the poets that even the cosmos is regulated by the ritual performance and the poetry recited there. The phrase “(coming) from the fathers” (by my interpr.; some others take pitṛ́bhyaḥ as dative) reflects the transmission of the poetic tradition from older generations to younger ones. For manīṣā́‘constantly calling’ (jóhuvānā), see VII.24.2 jóhuvatī manīṣā́, also adduced by Old.


## 02
Again I take the vs. as having one referent, while Ge, Re, and WG split it into two sentences with two different subjects. In my view, the intent is again to mislead -- that is, in this riddle hymn, to suggest one referent to the audience and then spring a different one on them towards the end of the verse, in this case the very last word pánthāḥ ‘paths’. These are presumably the paths that connect heaven and earth and enable the gods to come to the sacrifice and the sacrificial offerings to make their way to heaven. Although paths are not ordinarily credited with much agency -- and the descriptions in the first hemistich attribute bustling activity to their referents -- the lively traffic between heaven and earth can spill over onto the paths that bear this traffic.

tádapaḥ is most likely adverbial here (so already Gr), though Ge suggests it is nom. pl. “mit Abfall der Endung,” for which there is no motivation.

The “nave of the immortal one” (amṛ́tasya nā́bhim) can refer both to the ritual ground and to the height of heaven, again suggesting the connection between those places that is established by the paths.

For anantá- see disc. ad vs. 4.

For the formula viśvátaḥ sīm pári and the unusual placement of sīm, see my “Rigvedic viśvátaḥ sīṃ, Or, Why Syntax Needs Poetics” (1998, Fs. Watkins).


## 03
In this riddle vs. the referent is not explicitly named, and in fact an initially bewildering set of incompatible identifications comes pouring out: a bull, the sea, a bird, a stone. But all of them are possible aspects of the sun (for similar vocab. see IX.83.3), and esp. in the 2nd hemistich the position specified (“in the middle of heaven”) and the actions depicted point strongly to the sun -- a referent generally agreed upon by interpreters. The “womb of the age-old father” (pū́rvasya yónim pitúḥ) is a gender-bending, though understated, paradox. It is likely that the sun’s age-old father is Heaven (Dyaus Pitā) -- on the parental relationship of Heaven and Earth to Sūrya, see esp. I.160 -- in which case the womb is probably (lower-case) heaven, the place through which the sun travels. In the next pāda he is unambiguously situated there: mádhye divó níhitaḥ, so at least in this instance one of the side-riddles of the vs. is solved almost as soon as it is posed.


## 04
As often elsewhere in the RV, numerology begets obscurity. Nonetheless, the most likely referent here is Agni. As Ge points out, the four and the ten in the 1st hemistich may well refer to the four priests (so already Sāy.) or the four arms of the two main priests, the ten, as often, to the fingers. The “bearing” by the four might refer to the transport of the new Āhavanīya to the east end of the ritual ground and the depositing there (hence the “rest”); the ten (fingers) are making offering into the fire (“giving it suck”), to cause it to flare up. Hence the balanced opposition of rest and motion in ab.

The threefold cows of pāda c are puzzling, but three is of course a number closely associated with Agni: the three ritual fires, his three births (e.g., X.45.1), the three pressings, etc. For Agni’s triads, cf. X.45.2 (right after the three births just referred to) vidmā́te agne tredhā́trayā́ṇi “we know your threefold triads” (also VIII.39.9 for his three domains). See also tridhā́tu-śṛṅga- ‘having tripartite horns’ of Agni in nearby V.43.13, where it may refer to the three hearths - not candidates for our tripartite cows, I’m afraid. For these threefold cows Sāy (see Ge n. 4c; so also Re) suggests sun’s rays, WG milk-streams, but ‘threefold’ is not a standard characterization of either set. Note also tridhā́tubhir áruṣībhiḥ “with threefold ruddy (cows)” in IX.111.2, where the phrase refers to accoutrements of Soma, and Soma is a possible, if somewhat unlikely, referent for this vs. as well: the ten (fingers) are a common trope in the soma maṇḍala, referring to the priests pressing and preparing the drink. Pāda a is harder to apply to soma, beyond the generic notion of four priests.

The circling threefold cows could, I suppose, be the streams of the heavenly soma.

Still, Agni seems a better, though not perfect, candidate.

Pāda d, with diváḥ … ántān# “the ends of heaven,” echoes 3d rájasaḥ … ántau# “the two ends of the airy realm,” and both contrast with the “endless” (anantā́saḥ) paths of 2cd. The dual in 3d points to a straight trajectory from one end to the other, reinforced by the verb ví cakrame ‘he strode’ (though it’s not in the same clause with the ends): the sun’s journey across the sky from one horizon to the other. The plural in 4d is more diffuse, as is the verb caranti pári “they wander/circle around.” The phrase divó ánta- [pl.] “the ends of heaven” is quite common, but I am not sure what the plural conveys -- that there are numerous divisions of heaven, each with its own boundaries? that heaven is effectively end-less (like the anantá- paths of 2) because there are always more ends? In any case the sun’s purposeful trip from one place to another in vs. 3 seems contrasted with the more comprehensive travels of the subject of caranti in 4d. Is that subject the threefold cows of 4c? If so, many of the possible triads suggested above are eliminated. Save for the ‘threefold’ (and, I guess, the cows), Agni’s plumes of smoke would make the most sense in d. But I confess bafflement.

## 04-05
Note the parallel openings of 4a catvā́ra īm bibhrati … and 5c dvé yád īm bibhṛtáḥ … But this parallelism gains complexity from the fact that √bhṛ is used in two different senses: in 4 it means ‘carry’, but in 6 it refers to the bearing of children.


## 05
The opening idáṃ vápur nivácanam “Here is the wonder, the enigma” announces this vs. as potentially even more obscure than what precedes. Each of the three following pādas is presented as a paradox, but the contents do not seem significantly more enigmatic than the rest of the hymn; in fact, the explicit paradoxes point the way to their solution.

The first -- the rivers move, but the waters stay -- seems unconnected to the themes of the hymn, simply presenting a wonder of the natural world: no matter how much the rivers flow, there is always water in them (see Ge n. 5b). The verb cáranti repeats that of 4d (and see cárase in 4b), but does not echo its meaning there.

The second hemistich does continue the ritual and cosmic focus of the rest of the hymn (see the parallel openings of 4a and 5c cited just above). It treats the surrogate parentage of an unidentified figure. Ge (n. 5cd) suggests that this figure can be both Agni and the sun, with two different mother-substitutes referred to depending on the original identification of īm. In Ge’s view, Sūrya’s “real” mother is Dawn, but the two other females who bear him are Heaven and Earth; for Agni, the kindling stick is the mother, but the two other females are Night and Dawn. In both cases the two have different places of birth, but form a twin pair. Although I am not overwhelmingly convinced by Ge’s identifications, I do not have better ones. Of his two suggestions, Agni seems significantly more likely than the sun. The sole passage he cites as evidence for Dawn as the sun’s mother (VII.63.3) does not seem to me to say that, and of course Dawn is more commonly his lover. The evidence for Night and Dawn as Agni’s surrogate mothers is much more robust; the two passages he cites (I.95.1, 96.5) both depict the two giving suck to Agni using the same verb as found here (4b), though not in this vs. : I.95.1 anyā́nyā vatsám úpa dhāpayete; I.96.5 náktoṣā́sā … dhāpáyete śíśum ékam.


## 06
This is the last real vs. of the hymn, preceding the meta-reference to the hymn itself and wishes for its efficacy (vs. 7).

In the first hemistich the subj. of ví tanvate appears to me to be the poets/ ritualists; I am not sure of the identity of asmai, but given its lack of accent, it should be someone already present in the discourse -- probably the īm of 5c, which, as was just discussed, can be either/both Agni or/and, less likely, Sūrya. Pāda b continues the motherhood theme of 5cd. With Re, I consider the mothers here to be an unmarked simile: the production of ritual poetry by the poets is implicitly compared to the weaving of baby clothes by mothers.

The “paths of heaven” of vs. 2 return in the phrase divás pathā́(6d) “along the path of heaven” (note the close sandhi). Who the referents are and what is going on in the 2nd hemistich are unclear, made more so by the grammatical multivalence of the principal actors in the 2nd hemistich: vṛ́ṣaṇaḥ can be nom. pl. or, less likely, acc. pl. (or, even less likely though the solution of most [Ge, Re, WG], gen. sg.: the gen. sg. is otherwise vṛ́ṣṇas and, as far as I know, never read trisyllabically); vadhvàḥ can be nom. pl. (Ge, Re, WG), acc. pl., or gen. sg.; the part. módamānāḥ can be nom. pl.

masc. or fem. or acc. pl. fem. Ge in his Nachtr. does confront the morphological problem of vṛ́ṣanaḥ, suggesting that it’s an irregular gen. sg., but he also provides an alternative transl., with vṛ́ṣanaḥ as nom. pl., that my own tr. follows. In this interpr., acdg. to Ge., the gods are the bulls on their way to unite with their wives, “die Dichtungen der Sänger.” Assuming that the referents of vadhvàḥ are the dhíyaḥ of pāda a, the sexual union of these thoughts and the gods for whom they’re composed seems plausible (in a RVic universe). The only question is who is going to whom, and the two-way street of Vedic ritual allows movement in either direction: the hymns going to heaven to unite with the gods, or the gods coming from heaven to the ritual ground to unite with the hymns. I have gone for the latter. See disc. of the paths ad vs. 2.

With Old I take upaprakṣé as loc. to a them. stem upaprakṣáIf this interpr. of the vs. is correct, it provides the hymn with a thematic ring compositional structure. The first two vss. provide the materials that will return in vs. 6. Vs. 1 introduces the inspired thought coming from heaven and established at the sacrifice, thus linking the divine and human worlds, and vs. 2 sketches the highway linking these two worlds, the encircling paths. In vs. 6 the inspired thought of vs. 1 is represented by the dhíyaḥ (insightful thoughts) produced by the unnamed priests (ab), and these thoughts are configured as the new brides of the bullish gods who have utilized the paths of vs. 2 to come to the sacrifice and unite with them. The interior vss. present the sun (vs. 3) but concentrate on the ritual fire (vss. 4-5). Given the emphasis on the ritual and its connection to heaven, I’m not quite sure why the sun intrudes in 3—perhaps its journey across the sky is compared or contrasted with the journey between heaven and earth we find elsewhere in the hymn.
