+++
title = "048"

+++
All Gods


## 01
My interpr. follows that of Old in most particulars, but is also informed by my view that the hymn as a whole is a Dawn hymn (see publ. intro.). I therefore think that in the 1st hemistich the dative recipient of the poets’ compositions is Agni, not, per Old, Varuṇa, nor, per Re, Indra. (Ge and WG do not identify the recipient.) Although the descriptors in b are not strongly typical of Agni, the “own dear foundation” (priyā́ya dhā́m(a)ne) in pāda a would be appropriate for the establishment of the offering fire at the beginning of the morning sacrifice.

With Old I take the subject of cd, identified as feminine by nom. māyínī, as Dawn, and I also follow him in considering the hapax āmenyá- as dissimilated from

*āmemyá-, a thematic nominal deriv. of the intens. to √mī ‘(ex)change’, formed like
vitarturá-, ādardirá-, as he suggests. Modifying rájas- ‘(dusky) realm’, it would express the constantly changing color of the sky at dawn, and is comparable to the intens. part. in I.96.5 náktoṣā́sā várṇam āmém(i)yāne “Night and Dawn, ever exchanging their color,” as Old also points out. Whatever the etymology of māyā́- (whose possessive deriv. māyínī closes the vs.) -- I favor Thieme’s connection with √mī ‘(ex)change’, which, however, is rejected by Mayrhofer (EWA s.v.) -- the polarized initial and final words of the hemistich, #āmenyásya ... māyínī#, provide a phonological and, if Thieme is correct, an etymological frame for the hemistich.

And what happens within that frame? In my view the image is that of dawn in a partly cloudy sky. The conceit is that the rays of Dawn spreading across the cloudy sky look like streams of water -- water that Dawn has appropriated from the cloud (“choosing the waters in the dark cloud” abhrá ām̐apó vṛṇānā́). Since the image makes sense with the transmitted apáḥ ‘waters’, I see no reason to follow Old (and partly WG) in assuming it stands for *ápaḥ ‘work’. The same phrase “choosing the waters” is also found in IX.94.1, though in a very different context. I explain it there as a deliberate poetic deformation of the common expression apó vasāná- “clothing oneself in the waters.”


## 02
The image in 1cd is repeated with variation in 2ab. The fem. sg. subj. of 1d has been replaced by the fem. pl., easily interpr. as plural Dawns, as often. The verb is held constant, though the root aor. atnata substitutes for the pres. vitanóti. The waters/rays of light that the Dawn spread out in 1cd are now characterized as forming a pattern or tracery across the dusky realm (víśvam ā́rájaḥ) that also figured in 1cd. The spreading performed by the Dawns is done “along the same course” (samānyā́vṛtáyā) by my interpretation -- that is, the same course that the successive Dawns follow day after day. I do not understand why their pattern of light is “herostrengthening” (vīrá-vakṣaṇa-). Perhaps this is simply a reference to the usual trope that dawn rouses all people to undertake their daily labors.

The adjective may also prepare for the more human-oriented 2nd hemistich, in which the pious man seems to do battle with time itself, embodied by the ever advancing dawns. The interpr. of the hemistich is complicated by the shifting senses of the words ápara- and pū́rva-. If these have temporal reference here, the sense would have to be that the man repels later dawns, while lengthening his life with earlier ones (so in fact both Ge and Re). But this does not accord with Rigvedic conceptions of time: there is no preventing the dawning of each new day; even a hero cannot contravene the cosmic laws of time. It would also be somewhat odd to say that a man lengthens his life with past dawns; this would seem to indicate that he has no future, unless he can fight off the dawns to come. It therefore seems preferable to follow Old (also fld by WG), who takes the two adjectives as spatial: ápara- ‘behind, to the west’, pū́rva- ‘in front, to the east’. With these values in play, the man sends each new day behind him -- the dawn facing backwards as she passes from east to west -- and piles up his future with the dawns in front of him, to come.

This vs. is full of alliteration and sound play, esp. in pāda c: a: tā́atnata vayúnaṃ vīrávakṣaṇam / c: ápo ápācīr áparā ápejate (noted also by Watkins, Dragon 109) / d: prá pū́rvābhis.

## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. is the hardest in the hymn and, as the middle vs., serves as an omphalos. It contains several temporal expressions and thus continues the theme of the passage of time found in the 2nd half of vs. 2, but the rest is rather unclear. My rendering is tentative and also differs considerably from those of others, the details of which cannot be fully covered here.

Already in pāda a the alternation of days and nights is alluded to with the polarized expression ahanyèbhir aktúbhiḥ. Although the adjectival form of ahanyàseems to invite an interpr. whereby the word modifies the adjacent instr. pl.

grā́vabhiḥ, the result, “with the daily pressing stones” (Ge “mit den täglichen Presssteinen”), doesn’t make sense, and I prefer to follow Re in considering it “une variante probable de áhabhir aktúbhiḥ.” Cf. áhobhiḥ ... aktúbhiḥ X.14.9 and, with lexical substitution, dyúbhir aktúbhiḥ (I.34.8, I.112.25, III.31.16).

A more serious problem is figuring out what action is being performed in the first hemistich. In literal terms, the subject, whoever it is, sprinkles the/a superior mace, along with or by means of the pressing stones. Assuming we take the verb ā́ jigharti seriously -- unlike Ge and Re, who tr. contextually (‘schleudert’ and ‘brandit’ respectively), with Ge suggesting a possible derivation from √hṛ not √ghṛ -- the action is difficult to interpret, whoever the subject is. Why would one ‘sprinkle’ a mace? Old, flg. Bergaigne, suggests that the mace is really soma, but although we might think this would get us out of the difficulty, in fact the object of (ā́) √ghṛ is never the liquid sprinkled, but the object that is sprinkled with it.

Working backward from vss. 4-5, which have pretty clear references to Agni, I take Agni as the subject of ā́jigharti here. He prepares the mace by “sprinkling” it with his sparks, a sort of final or symbolic forging, while the soma produced by the pressing stones is sprinkled on the weapon at the same time. The two acts of sprinkling make the weapon ritually fit for use. (Agni’s ‘streaming’ rītí- is found in 4a—another configuration of Agni as a liquid or as controlling liquid.) Under this interpr. the three apparently anomalous forms of ā́√ghṛ in the RV, here and in IV.17.14 and X.6.4, can be given a unified interpr. All three have Agni as subj. (in my view), and in all three Agni “sprinkles” an object with his sparks. See comm. on the two other passages.

The loc. māyíni is a separate problem. The standard view is that it refers to an enemy at whom the vajra is wielded, hence tr. like Ge’s “… schleudert er die beste Keule auf den Zauberischen,” which, as we saw, requires the verb ā́jigharti to be semantically twisted. But the near rhyme māyínī at the end of vs. 1 refers to a positively viewed figure (in my interpr.), the goddess Dawn, and I suggest that māyíni here, which occurs in the same prominent hemistich-final position, also identifies a positive figure -- in fact, Indra. Indra is called māyín- in VIII.76.1 and his māyā́- are often referred to (see the passages listed by Grassmann, s.v., including


## 06
in this maṇḍala). If it is Indra, the loc. does not have to refer to the goal of a brandished weapon, but can simply be a type of loc. absolute: “when the māyín- (is there),” that is, when Indra attends the sacrifice.

The doubled preverb ā́, found both at the beginning of the hemistich and directly before the verb, seems to be a case of mere repetition. The second hemistich also contains a temporal expression, saṃvartáyanto ví ca vartayann áhā “rolling up the days, they unroll them (again).” The idiom sám/ví √vṛt is used of rolling up or out hides (cárma, VI.8.3, VIII.6.5), and this action is then metaphorically applied to darkness (támas-)(cf., e.g., V.31.3). The rolling up and out of darkness is thus a way of expressing the alternations of darkness and light, night and day -- in other words, a more poetic instantiation of the phrase in pāda a ahanyèbhir aktúbhiḥ. The problem is how to connect this fairly straightforward expression to pāda c, if it is connected. Although it is an easy assumption that cd has a subord. clause / main clause structure (so Ge and Re ), it is possible to take c as attached to the first hemistich and d independent (so WG and me). The next question is whether the pl. subject of pracáran and that of ví ca vartayan are coreferential, and if so, who are they? and whose “own house” (své dáme) do they enter? The latter question is easier to answer: (své) dáme is almost always Agni’s. I therefore think that yásya also refers to Agni, and this is indirect evidence for my identification of Agni as subj. of ā́jigharti. But who enters Agni’s house “by the hundred” (śatám) and rolls up and unrolls the days? In the publ. tr. I tentatively identify the subj. as “dawns,” with full awareness that this is grammatically problematic: the pres. part.

vartáyantaḥ in d is masc., and so the only way to make this work is to assume that dawns are the subj. of c, but the subj. of d reverts to a generic masc. I suggested the dawns as subj. because they are the standard regulators of time (for this see VII.79.2, 80.1 with sám √vṛt and ví √vṛt respectively). Others (explicitly WG) suggest the gods or some subset thereof, but the gods don’t really have the role of causing the alternation of days and nights. I must leave the identity of the subject uncertain, although I am still inclined to think that it is at least an indirect ref. to the dawns.

I do not understand the function of vā in c; JSK does not discuss this passage.

As for the ca in d, I think it contrastively conjoins the preverbs sam and ví, even though the morphological formations to which these preverbs are attached are not parallel.


## 04
This vs. is characterized by words regularly (though not exclusively) associated with Agni: ánīka- ‘face’, várpas- ‘form’, rátnam √dhā ‘establish a treasure’. This vocabulary gives support to my suggestion that Agni is also the subject of vs. 3, esp. since the asya in pāda a (and b) should refer to something already present in the discourse.

As for the tā́m … rītím paraśór iva, most comm. appositely compare V.7.8 prá svádhitīva rī́yate “(Agni) streams forth like an ax.” I consider the rītím to continue the liquid imagery of 3b. The abstract rītí- in its 4 other occurrences is either construed with the gen. pl. apā́m (VI.13.1, IX.108.10) or implicitly with other liquid vocabulary; cf. also the cmpd. rītyā̀p- (2x). The attempts by most interpr. to impose a different sense (e.g., Re ‘l’élan-destructeur’) on this transparent deriv. of √rī ‘flow’ seem to stem from discomfort with the image, and esp. the simile of the ax.

But the arc of sparks that sprinkle the mace in 3b (by my interpr.) would look like a stream, and anyone who has ever watched a person swing an ax (properly) would recognize the image: the fluent movement in a stream-like curve. (There are numerous You-tube videos.) For bhárahūti- see comm. ad I.129.2, V.29.8.

Ge, flg. Gr., reverses 4cd and 5ab. I do not see the necessity for this. It puts the two forms of (-)ánīka- in the same vs. and continues the description of Agni begun in 4ab, but leaving the hemistichs in their transmitted order certainly causes less thematic disruption than most changes of topic in the RV.


## 05
Ge emends váruṇo to áruṇo ‘the reddish one’, but this seems completely unnecessary. Although putting people in their places (generally jána- √yat) is ordinarily Mitra’s duty not Varuṇa’s, these closely linked gods trade off qualities.

That there is no simile marker is not surprising; gods are often equated directly with other gods when they perform the others’ functions. See, e.g., the series of identifications of Agni with other gods in II.1.
