+++
title = "049"

+++
All Gods


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., the first hemistich seems to pick up the last one of the previous hymn (48.5cd), where Bhaga and Savitar are identified as the givers of desirable things. Āyu is always a somewhat mysterious figure in the RV, and in this case it is difficult to tell whether the gen. āyóḥ dependent on rátnam (also in 2d) is in possessive or indirect object use -- that is, are the two gods distributing treasure to Āyu or Āyu’s treasure to others. Ge seems to opt for the former, Re and WG the latter. In this case, the end of the last hymn may be helpful: V.48.5cd ná tasya vidma … yáto bhágaḥ savitā́dā́ti vā́ryam “We do not know that from which Bhaga and Savitar will give what is choice.” The ablatival yátaḥ ‘from which’ indicates the source from which they will acquire what they then distribute. If 49.1 is in some way responsive to this, āyóḥ should likewise indicate the source not the recipient of the treasure.

In the 2nd hemistich I tr. the vocc. narā purubhujā … aśvinā as if acc., to avoid extra fuss.


## 02
The standard tr. construe vidvā́n with prayā́ṇam ásurasya (e.g., Ge “'Der Ausfahrt des Asura gewärtig,” with a slightly odd rendering of vidvā́n, perhaps because he construes it with práti?). But pāda-final vidvā́n, which is quite common, is generally used absolutely, without an object (and tmesis would be unusual, though not unprecedented, with a participle). The absolute usage would be reinforced by likewise pāda-final vijānán ‘discerning’ in c; the two participles define the subject as a sagacious and perceptive poet/sacrificer.

The referent of the acc. sg. adj. jyéṣṭham is entirely ambiguous: it can be neut.

and modify rátnam or masc. and modify vibhájantam. Since jyéṣṭha- ‘distinguished, pre-eminent’ is used of both animates and inanimates, there is no way to tell -- and the decision hardly matters. More interesting is the ca in d, which must link the phrase jyéṣṭham … rátnaṃ vibhájantam āyóḥ, which refers to Bhaga (see 1b), with a gapped Savitar, who, though present in pāda b and conjoined with Bhaga in 1ab, is not found in the clause in 2cd. See Klein DGRV 127.


## 03
The hapax adatrayā́is universally taken as an adverbial instr. built to a fem.

*adatrā- with the meaning ‘ohne Geschenk empfangen zu haben’ (Gr), ‘ohne ein
(Gegen)geschenk zu verlangen’ (Ge), ‘nicht geschenkweise’ (AiG III.76), etc. But the morphology rests on very little (there is no independent fem. -ā stem), and, so interpreted, the word is also hard to make sense of. If it means ‘in a nongiving/distributing fashion’, it is immediately contradicted by the statement that the gods do distribute good things (dayate vā́ryāṇi). To make it work somewhat better, most interpr. sneak in the notion of counter-gift: that is, the gods distribute good things without expectation of getting something in return. But this hardly fits the Vedic conceptual universe any better. Gods don’t selflessly hand out “free gifts”; they expect praise and oblations in return. This is, after all, the reciprocal arrangement that the whole RV rests on! I therefore suggest an entirely different analysis of the word, as adatra-yā́-, a root noun cmpd. with √yā ‘travel, drive’ as 2nd member, hence ‘traveling to those (so far) without gifts’. The accent is correct for such a cmpd. We need a nom. sg. with underlying final -s, but *-yā́s in sandhi would yield the -yā́found in the passage, so only the Pp. would need emendation. The cmpd.

would refer to the standard journey of gods to the sacrifice, bringing goods to distribute to the sacrificers; note the presence of the same root √yā in prayā́ṇam ‘advance’ in the preceding vs. 2a, referring to the same advent of the god(s) at the sacrifice.

As noted in the publ. intro., the vs. seems to refer to the distribution of dakṣiṇās, a ritual event that in RVic times happened at the dawn sacrifice (as here: vásta usráḥ), not at the Midday Pressing as in classical śrauta ritual.

This phrase vásta usráḥ is found 3 other times, all pāda final, with the other three occurrences (IV.25.2, VII.69.5, VIII.46.26; cf. also VI.3.6 vasta usrā́ḥ) containing usrā́ḥ. Although Gr classifies vásta as the 3rd sg. med. pres. of √vas ‘wear’ (that is, pausal form váste; so Pp.), it is clear from the phraseology that it must belong with √vas ‘dawn’, and is most likely a form of the loc. to vástu- ‘dawning’; see AiG III.153-54 with lit. cited there. I do not entirely understand the mechanism that produced the form we have, and in fact several different pathways have been suggested. Wackernagel simply attributes it to shortening of -ā in *vástā usr… <

*vástāvusr…, but I find the shortening hard to motivate. Others (e.g., Oldenberg)
suggest that it rests on a u-stem loc. sg. *-av / -o, which would yield the sequence directly, but at the cost of positing an alternative loc. sg. ending with little or no support.


## 04
The standard tr. supply a verb (such as ‘grant’) in pāda a, but this seems unnecessary. The clause can be an equational expression; gods are called upon to be várūtham ‘defense’ elsewhere: cf. I.59.8 bhávā várūthaṃ grṇ̥ até ... (Agni); sim.

VII.32.7 (Indra), VIII.67.3.

## 05
There is no overt referent in the main clause (c) for the yé in ab, but ‘they’ (namely the poet/sacrificers) are clearly to be the beneficiaries of the good actions in c, who, in d, appear in the 1st ps.
