+++
title = "050"

+++
All Gods As often, the poet embellishes a fairly simple message by playing with personal reference, cycling through all three persons in very short compass. See the disc. in the publ. intro. as well as more details in the comm. on individual vss. below.


## 01
The vs. (and hymn) opens cleverly: the 1st two words are víśvo devásya, and until we encounter the genitive ending on the 2nd word, we expect the “every god” that would be appropriate to an All God hymn. Instead, the 2nd pāda opens with the real referent of víśvaḥ, namely the polar opposite of ‘god’, mártaḥ ‘mortal’.

On iṣudhyati see comm. ad I.128.6 and my forthcoming article “Vedic iṣudhyáand Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.” In the course of re-examining the members of this word family, I have somewhat changed my interpr. of this passage. In the publ. tr. I take “wealth” as the target or goal of iṣudhyati ‘aims at’; however, insofar as the Vedic and Avestan verbs express the target, it is in the acc. (see VIII.69.2), and it is the divine recipient of praise, not the desired countergift to the praise. The Pp. interpr. rāyá as dat. rāyé, which is neither the desired case nor the desired goal. It would be possible to read it as acc. pl. rāyáḥ ‘riches’, which could be an acc. goal (“everyone desires riches”), but since this still deviates from the preferred expression with iṣudhyá-, I now prefer to supply “god Leader” as the goal, with dat. rāyé expression what we hope for in return: “Everyone aims (praise) (at god Leader) for wealth.” Pādas b and d both contain a 3rd sg. mid. to √vṛ ‘choose’, in the same metrical position and with the same metrical shape: root aor. vurīta and 9th cl. pres. vṛṇīta.

The first is clearly an optative, though it has a somewhat unexpected shape and is quite rare (only twice in the RV); its unusual root syllable (vur < *uṛ̯H; expect *ur as in part. urāṇá-) is found elsewhere only in hotṛ-vū́rya- (2x, with pre-C outcome).

The second, vṛṇīta, is formally ambiguous: it can be an optative parallel to vurīta, as I have taken it (so also at least Re), or simply an injunctive. I would suggest that the poet first deploys the rare but unambiguously optative vurīta to set the modal tone and then uses the more common vṛṇīta as its morphological parallel. But it would of course be possible to argue that the poet wishes to contrast the two modalities; so I interpr. Ge.


## 02
As discussed in the publ. intro., this vs. effects a transition from the undefined 3rd ps. sg. “every mortal” (víśvaḥ … mártaḥ) of vs. 1 to a 1st ps. pl.

referring to us. This has been definitively accomplished by pāda d, which opens with the finite 1st pl. sácemahi ‘may we be accompanied’, but earlier in the vs. this plural is carried by the insistent masc. nom. pl. pronominal forms té … yé … té … té. These forms invite a 3rd plural reading (“they … who … they … they”): although the sá/tám pronoun is capable of having both 1st and 2nd ps. reference, 3rd ps. is the default. The first 3 pādas of the vs. cleverly avoid forcing the reference by using predicated dative infinitives (anuśáse … āpṛ́ce), which leave the person unfixed, rather than finite verbs, which would force such a reading of the person. The poet draws attention to his syntactic modulation through the singsong effect of té te de(va) …, yé ca … / té (rāyā́) té (hí āpṛ́)ce, sáce(mahi) saca(thíyaiḥ).

The syntax is further complicated by the parenthetical expression embedded in pāda c, té hy ā̀pṛ́ce.

The thematic continuity with vs. 1, despite the fancy referential footwork, is emphasized by d sácemahi sacathyaìḥ, which echoes sakhyám in 1b.


## 03
The reference-shifting game continues here and also pulls in some polarized lexical choices. The 1st pl. of vs. 2 becomes the 2nd pl. of the impv. in 3b daśasyata ‘[you all,] show favor’, but a trace of the 1st pl. is left in the enclitic naḥ ‘our, for us’ in 3a. This is the familiar scenario whereby the poet addresses his fellow officiants in the 2nd pl., urging them to do something on behalf of ‘us’ -- with ‘you’ and ‘us’ coreferential but distinguished pragmatically.

Although the identity of the addressees -- the officiants -- and the recipients of their favor -- the gods and their wives -- is ultimately clear, the lexicon complicates this interpr. The verb daśasyá- generally has a god or gods as its subj. and a mortal (vel sim.) as its obj., often naḥ (e.g., VI.11.6 daśasyā́naḥ purvaṇīka hotaḥ “Be favorable to us, o Hotar of many faces [=Agni]”). Here we must reverse the verbal arguments. The 1st object in the 1st pāda, nṝ́n is ambiguous: although it of course means ‘man’ (or ‘superior man’), it is frequently used of gods as well as mortals; it would be possible to interpr. naḥ … nṝ́n as ‘us men’, rather than taking naḥ as a genitive (as I and the standard interpr. do). What helps clinch the divine reference is the 2nd acc. in that pāda, átithīn ‘guests’. This is the only pl. form of this stem in the RV; the sg. forms are exclusively used of Agni, thus skewing the word towards the divine, and of course the model of the sacrifice as guest-reception for the visiting gods is always conceptually present.

The presence of the gods’ wives, pátnīḥ, in b may allude to the shadowy “God Leader” (devá- netár-) who opens (vss. 1-2) and closes (vs. 5) this hymn, since an agent noun to the same root √nī ‘lead’, namely néṣṭar-, is the leader of the wives of the gods and, later, of the sacrificer’s wife in classical śrauta ritual.


## 04
This vs. is quite obscure, but seems metaphorically to depict the soma sacrifice. The problems are, as usual, conpounded by the fact that the two (or one?) principal actor(s) are not identified. Interpr. of the vs. differ, and I will not discuss them all in detail.

In the first hemistich I take the draft animal (váhniḥ … paśúḥ) to be soma, as often; the adj. dróṇya- ‘belonging to/seeking the dróṇa’ seems to clinch this, since dróṇa is always the soma cup. The action depicted is the standard flowing of the soma towards and into the soma vessels, regularly conceived as a (male) animal running (here √dru) to a goal. The verb dudrávat is a pf. subj.; as I have established elsewhere (García Ramón Fs.), pf. subjunctives are simply subjunctives in value, with a future (not a future perfect) sense.

I take the 2nd hemistich as the main clause construed with the dependent yátra clause in ab. Its predicate is the agent noun sánitā lit. ‘winner’. Because of the futurevalue subjunctive in the dep. clause, sánitā looks to me like a good prospect for a periphrastic future use of the agent noun (so, it seems, Ge; contra Tichy, 229: “Wo sich … beeilen wird, gewinnt …” [my italics]).

The subject in cd is, in my opinion, Indra. The adj. nṛmáṇas- ‘manly minded’ is used most often of him, and of course it is Indra for whom the soma is destined.

vīrá-pastya- is a hapax, but it seems a bahuvrīhi of the type vájra-bāhu- ‘having an arm with a mace in it’, hence ‘having a house with heroes in it’, presumably referring to both divine and mortal warriors that Indra can muster in battle -- his household.

The first two words in the last pāda, árṇā dhī́reva, are problematic, the 2nd more than the first. For árṇā we must assume a neuter substantivization (‘flood[s]’) of the adj. árṇa- ‘flooding, undulating’, here in the pl. Given its sandhi position it could in principle instead represent árṇās, a feminine substantivization; since árṇaseveral times modifies fem. áp- ‘waters’, this might work better -- but it makes it harder to explain the difficult dhī́rā, which is most easily taken also as a neut. pl.

These floods are surely the floods of soma that are racing in the first half-verse.

As just noted, the simile dhī́reva [= dhīrā / iva] is problematic. It is tempting to take it as dhī́raḥ with irregular sandhi (so Roth; see Old), but this is of course not a legitimate interpretational technique. It is also tempting to leave it untranslated, as Ge does. Sāy. takes it as a fem. nom. sg., but who would this wise woman be? Ge considers the possibility of an instr. sg., but not seriously enough to tr. it so.

Reluctantly, with a similarly reluctant Old, I take it as a neut. pl., meaning ‘wise (thoughts)’. This is unsatisfying because the adj. dhī́ra- otherwise only refers to animates. There are partial parallels for √san with thoughts/wisdom as obj., e.g., IX.9.9 sánā medhā́m, X.143.3 síṣāsataṃ dhíyaḥ, but not with dhī́ra-. A possibly more promising interpr. is suggested by Re, who points out that the only other neut. form of dhī́ra- is found with janū́ṃṣi ‘races’ in VII.86.1; this also seems to underlie Tichy’s “wie verständige (Wesen).” I would now emend the publ. tr. to “… like the wise (races).” This isn’t a great deal better, but it at least deals with the problem of animate/inanimate.


## 05
As all comm. remark, the meter in pāda b is flawed. Curiously enough, the other two occurrences of ráthaspátiḥ (in the closely related X.64.10, 93.7) are also found in metrically wanting pādas—each missing a syllable— as Old notes. The metrical problem may (or may not) be connected with the morphological anomaly in this cmpd.: the 1st member ráthas- to the extremely well-attested thematic stem rátha-. We would of course expect *rátha-páti-, but the problem with this form emerges immediately on constructing it: 4 light syllables. On this form and similarly anomalous hapax ṛtas-pati- (VIII.26.21; voc., so unaccented) see Wackernagel’s rather elliptical treatment (AiG II.1.241, 246-67), where he classifies the two forms with gen. páti- cmpds, without explaining how he analyzes the -as forms morphologically. I would suggest that the putative, metrically difficult form with stem as first member was “fixed” by analogy to the common genitival -páti- cmpds to athematic noun stems (or opaque ones), most esp. bṛ́haspáti-, which is very common and phonologically similar. However, this does not address the metrical problem. Arnold (101) suggests reading *ráthasas, which fixes the meter but at the high cost of inventing an s-stem to rátha-, which makes no sense derivationally (rightly rejected by Old). Old attributes the metrical disturbance to “laxe metrische Praxis,” which is, at best, a description, not an explanation. I do not think ráthasrepresents an archaic gen. form—all the less so since it’s not clear that the form was correctly transmitted. In any case, Old considers the ráthaspáti- a divine being of some sort; the “Lord of the Chariot” here joins another very marginal figure, God Leader. ráthaspáti- is found with Bhaga elsewhere (X.64.10, 93.7), and such an association would fit the emphasis on ‘wealth’ (rayí-) in b and c.

The forms iṣastútaḥ and devastútaḥ in d and e can either be nom. pl. root noun agentive cmpds or acc. pl. tatpuruṣa action nouns (both with 2nd member -stú-t-); see Scar 636-7. Although most interpr. (Ge, Re, WG) opt for the former, I have chosen the latter, on the basis of a number of passages in V where a praise song (vel sim.) is the obj. of manāmahe: V.13.2 agné stómam manāmahe, V.35.8 diví stómam manāmahe, V.66.3 ... suṣṭutím ... stómair manāmahe; also VII.82.10 devásya ślókaṃ savitúr manāmahe.
