+++
title = "051"

+++
All Gods On the structure of this composite hymn, see publ. intro. It is bland and featureless throughout, reminding us that there must have been a lot of mediocre Rigvedic poets and/or ritual occasions that did not require (or pay for) the best of what the poets had to offer.


## 01
The eponymous phrase víśvaiḥ … devaíḥ opens successive pādas here (b, c), but the adj. is in fact more narrowly construed with immediately following ū́mebhiḥ.

This is rather like (or, rather, opposite to) the manipulation of the phrase in vs. 1 of the preceding hymn (50.1).


## 03
On the basis of VIII.38.7 prātaryā́vabhiḥ ... devébhiḥ I construe those two instr. most closely together.


## 04
On the loc. camū́see AiG III.188.

V.51.5-10: These next 6 vss. are in Uṣṇih, divided into 3 (vss. 5-7) and 3 (vss. 8-10) by their refrains: abhí práyaḥ# of 5-7 and the full-pāda ā́yāhy agne atrivát suté raṇa of 8-10. In fact vss. 8-10 are rigidly -- and boringly -- structured, with each of the first two pādas containing a form of sajū́ḥ ‘jointly’ and as many god-name instrumentals as can be fit in.

## 05
This vs. begins the second hymn in this conglomeration. Note that it repeats pāda-final havyádātaye from 1c, and the infinitive at the end of its first pāda, vītáye, rhymes with pītáye at the end of 1a.

## 11-15
Considered by Old to be an Anhang even to this set of appended hymns.

Its lexical hero is svastí-, a form of which appears in every pāda between 11a and 15a. The poet seems to be trying to show how many different syntactic constructions he can plug svastí- into. Unfortunately this is not sufficient to hold our attention.


## 11
anarváṇaḥ receives far more attention than I think it deserves. See esp. Old.

However, now see the abundant references to my own comments on the various anarvá(n)(a)- stems in the lexical commentary index.


## 12
My tr. of ab differs from the standard, which take bhúvanasya yás pátiḥ as a rel. cl. limiting sómam. Since the acc. of the god name seems to correlate with “call upon for well-being (svastáye),” and the rel. cl. is preceded by svastí, which is found as acc. in the “establish/mete out well-being,” I supply “mete out” here and take the rel. cl. as the subject without overt antecedent.


## 12
Bṛhaspati’s “whole flock” (bv. sárva-gaṇa-) may refer to the Aṅgirases. In any case note sárva- rather than the older víśva-, esp. notable in a Viśve Devāḥ hymn (though víśve devā́ḥ opens the next vs.).
