+++
title = "052"

+++
Maruts The pattern of the mention of the Maruts’ name in this hymn is worth noting: it might be called a “versified paradigm” (à la I.1) with a hole in it. The various oblique forms of the plural stem marút- are densely clustered at the beginning of the hymn: instr. marúdbhiḥ (1b), gen. marútām (3c), loc. marútsu (4a), dat. marúdbhyaḥ (5d), and acc. marútaḥ (6d) -- each oblique case represented (if abl. is lumped with dat.), each once only. In addition there are three forms of the vṛddhied mā́rutam in the neut. acc. sg. later in the hymn (8a, 13c, 14a). However, though these gods are frequently referred to in the nom. pl. in the hymn, beginning with yé in 1c, and once in the voc. (dhṛṣṇavaḥ 14c), there are no forms of the nom. marútaḥ or the voc. márutaḥ / marutaḥ, although these are the most common forms of this stem in the RV. After the paradigm has been established in the early part of the hymn (1-6), there are no further occurrences of the simple stem in the 11 remaining vss. (7-17), only the three vṛddhi forms. I don’t know what, if anything, to make of this, but it does not seem by chance.

On the responsions and ring-compositional structure of vss. 1-5, see the publ.

intro. and my “Poetic ‘Repair’ in the Rig Veda” (2006: 133-36), as well as The Rigveda between Two Worlds (2007: 112-13). The responsions and the versified paradigm are most likely related; as I argue in “Poetic ‘Repair’” the instr. in the phrase árcā marúdbhiḥ … in vs. 1 is somewhat anomalous, but it is “repaired” by the substitution of the expected dat. in 5d … arcā marúdbhyaḥ. To summarize those discussions briefly, in a hymn devoted to the Maruts, beginning with the selfexhortation of the poet “chant forth,” we might expect the Maruts to be the recipients (dat.) of the chant, not, as it seems, fellow-chanters (instr.) with the human poet. But putting them in the instr. emphasizes an important part of their profile, that they are also known to chant, a feature that is alluded to by the hemistich-final adj. ṛ́kvabhiḥ ‘possessing the chant’. Thus the beginning of the hymn seems concerned with the Maruts’ contrastive and mediating functional roles as expressed by the oblique cases of the paradigm.


## 01
On the somewhat anomalous expression in the first hemistich, see reff. given just above.

The 2nd hemistich is also syntactically somewhat compromised. Forms of uncompounded √mad that mean ‘take pleasure in / enjoy’ seldom if ever (possibly VII.49.4) take the acc. (as also noted by Re), in preference to instr., gen., or loc.; yet mádanti here seems to take acc. śrávaḥ as obj. It might be possible to extract ánu from the cmpd anuṣvadhám ‘according to their own nature’ and construe it with mádanti, since ánu √mad ‘cheer on’ does take an acc. -- but a personal acc., not the neut. inanimate ‘fame’ that it would govern here. So an unresolvable syntactic tension has been set up. I think the tension reflects the double role of the Maruts already encountered in pāda b. As recipients of Śyāvāśva’s praise chant, they would “take pleasure in their fame,” but as participants in the chanting they would “cheer on” the fame of other(s).

Ge and Re seem to take adroghám as an adv., a possibility also mentioned by WG. However, the other apparent adv. form has initial accent (ádrogham VIII.60.4), and furthermore the existence of a bahuvrīhi ádrogha-vāc- (2x) and the syntagm adroghá- vácas- (III.14.6) support a collocation with semantically similar śrávas-.


## 02
It is not clear why the rel. cl. of ab contains sánti, as the clause seems a simple equational one (“since they are comrades”), and such clauses generally lack an overt copula. Ge takes dhṛṣṇuyā́as a predication with sánti, as, it seems, do WG.

This is in principle appealing, but given that we get untethered adv. dhṛṣnuyā́in the previous and following vss. (1a, 4b) and a similar equational (rel.) cl. in 13ab (yé … kaváyaḥ sánti “who are poets,” it does not seem compelling.

Ge takes dhṛṣadvínaḥ as acc. pl. with śáśvataḥ, but he seems isolated in this interpr., starting from Sāy., who takes it as the nom. pl. that otherwise universally prevails.


## 03
As Ge points out, the verb áti √skand ‘spring across/beyond’ is reminiscent of ádhi √skand, which refers to sexual mounting. He supplies a parenthetical “(auf die Kühe)” in the simile (so also Re), and I would now also do so: “they spring across the nights, as streaming bulls spring (upon cows).” The meaning ‘night’ for the rare and etymologically unclear (see EWA s.v.; also WG n., with more confidence in the etym.) śárvarī- seems established by later Vedic and MIA evidence, but I do not know why the word appears in this passage. A fem. word for night is necessary to make the implicit sexual pun work, but the better attested rā́trī- is of course also fem. It somewhat responds phonologically to likewise pāda-final śáśvataḥ in 3b, and it therefore might form a web, along with syand(rā́saḥ) … ṣkand(anti) earlier in the hemistich -- but the phonological connections seem too slight. Maybe Śyāvāśva just likes words that begin with his initial.

I am not certain what image is being conveyed. Ge suggests that the Maruts’ storms calm down at night and then take on renewed energy in the morning, but the two passages he adduces don’t seem to support that interpr. Moreover, ‘spring across/beyond’ seems to me the opposite of what Ge envisions: it’s a vigorous action not a relaxation into tranquility. I tentatively suggest that it refers to the fact that thunderstorms (or, rather, the associated lightning flashes) are especially visible at night and appear to streak across the dark sky.


## 05
This is the vs. in which the problematic instr. of 1b is resolved -- “repaired” -

- but, as discussed in my 2006 paper, the poet produces a new conundrum, though
this one can be, as it were, pre-repaired. The obj. yajñám ‘sacrifice’ is unexpected with the verb prá … arcā ‘chant forth’; we expect a verbal product as object. But the yajñám here is picking up the conjoined phrase stómaṃ yajñáṃ ca of 4b, whose stómam would be an appropriate obj. of prá … arcā.


## 06
This vs. is in Paṅkti; that is, it contains five 8-syllable pādas rather than the four of Anuṣṭubh, otherwise the meter of the hymn until the end, where the final two vss. are also in Paṅkti. Here the slight shift in meter seems to mark a boundary: on the one hand it brings the versified paradigm to a close, with the acc. marútaḥ in d; on the other it announces the advent of the gods with their storms and inaugurates the descriptive passages that dominate the remainder of the hymn.

The first pāda lacks a verb; Ge makes a valiant effort to construe asṛkṣata of b with pāda a as well, in two different senses (see his n. 6; ‘… sind … herangesprengt’ for a, ‘haben … geschleudert’ for b), but the former would be a unique sense for ā́ √sṛj. Gr also invents a unique sense ‘decorate X with Y’ to allow the two pādas to be construed as a single construction. To avoid such ad hoc contrivances it seems best to follow Old in supplying a verb of motion with the insistent ā́in pāda a.

The adj. that begins pāda b, ṛśvā́(ḥ), can be either acc. pl. fem. modifying ṛṣṭī́ḥ ‘spears’ (so Gr, apparently also WG) or nom. pl. masc. modifying nára(ḥ) ‘men’.

The pāda break preceding it might favor the former interpr., but 13a, where the Maruts are definitely called ṛṣvā́(ḥ), favors the latter, esp. since the Maruts are also ṛṣvá- elsewhere (e.g., I.64.2). Note that in 13a the adj. is also followed by ‘spear’, but safely bound in a cmpd: ṛṣvā́ṛṣṭívidyutaḥ; this bahuvrīhi ‘whose spears are lightning flashes’ combines the independent words ṛṣṭī́ḥ and vidyútaḥ of our vs. (pādas b and c respectively) and enforces their identity. This resolution in 13a of the ambiguity of 6ab can be seen as another example of “repair.” Partly because the poet seems to be drawing attention to the phrase by resolving it in 13a I am now inclined to take ṛṣvā́(ḥ) in 6b with both of its possible referents and emend the tr. to “the lofty men have launched their spears aloft.” It would be one of the reasonably many examples where a grammatically ambiguous descripter is positioned exactly between its two possible referents.

The hapax fem. part. jájjhatīḥ ‘giggling’ is, of course, phonologically quite striking. As discussed by Hoffmann (Aufs. 306 and n. 3 = KZ 83 [1969]), the form is based on the redupl. pres. to √has ‘laugh’ with a Middle Indic (“dialectal”) development of the cluster *gh-s (rather than the expected -kṣ- found in the masc.

part. to the same redupl. pres. jákṣat- in I.33.7). The use of such a phonologically exotic word is reminiscent of the equally exotic akhkhalī- in the frog hymn (VII.103.3). The latter, as Thieme has convincingly argued, is an importation from pedagogical discourse, conducted for young boys in a preform of Middle Indic. Our form here seems adopted from vernacular “women’s language” and brings a whiff of family life: little girls running after their brothers or parents with little-girl giggles -- a life that would, of course, be conducted in a vernacular (pre-) Middle Indic.

Pāda e has several parallels, given by Ge in his n. 6e. The question in our passage is whether diváḥ is gen., as I’ve taken it (so also Ge and somewhat differently Re), or abl. (“The radiance arose ... from heaven”; so WG). The parallels cut both ways: V.25.8 svānó arta tmánā divaḥ and VII.34.7 úd asya śúṣmād bhānúr nā́rta seem to favor an abl. interpr., but IV.1.17 úd devyā́uṣáso bhānúr arta a genitive. In the end, I don’t think the choice materially affects the sense of the passage: whether the radiance is ‘of heaven’ or ‘from heaven’ the result is pretty much the same.


## 07
This vs. consists of a single rel. cl. (yé … yé) with no main cl. It is most probably preposed to vs. 8 with its correlative the neut. sg. śárdho mā́rutam “the Marut troop,” despite the mismatch in number and gender. The end of vs. 6 has no reference to the Maruts, and, as I noted above, it serves as a boundary vs. The same structure with number disharmony envisaged here across pāda boundary (7a yé …, b yé … // 8a śárdho mā́rutam …) is found, more clearly, within a vs. in 13: 13a yé … / 13c tám … mā́rutaṃ gaṇám …, perhaps another example of repair.

The usual tripartite division of the cosmos (earth, midspace, heaven) is here complicated by the intrusion of a fourth, “the precinct of the rivers” (vṛjánanadī́nām). Re also notes this, but suggests that c does nothing but “enjoliver” (embellish) a -- that is, that the rivers are a variant of the earth. In a basic sense he is correct, but I would add that what we have here may be the clash of two formulaic expressions of contrastive geographic totality -- the standard tripartite model and one, barely attested, in which a nearer or lower vṛjána- is contrasted with something more distant. Cf. esp. I.101.8 (with mention of the Maruts) yád vā marutvaḥ paramé sadhásthe, yád vāvamé vrjáne m ̥ ādayasva, a bipartite phrase where a seat (sadhásthaas here) that is paramá- ‘high/distant’ is contrasted with avamé vṛjáne ‘lowest/nearest enclosure’; a vṛjána- is similarly ávare in II.24.11. Thus, though pāda c may refer to the same general geographical location as a, namely earth, it also evokes a paired, rather than tripartite, contrast like that in I.101.8 just cited.

The pf. injunc. 3rd pl. vāvṛdhánta (see Kü 471) is attested several times elsewhere and manifestly belongs to a redupl. stem. It is worth noting, however, that the poet seems to be playing with its long reduplication. The vā is positioned exactly where we would expect vā ‘or’ to be (Wackernagel’s position: #yé vāvṛdhánta …), anticipating the two vā’s in pādas c and d, also in Wackernagel’s position. I am not suggesting a re-segmentation as vā vṛdhánta, simply pointing to Śyāvāśva’s penchant for verbal play and for making single forms do double duty. To extend this analysis, note the beginning of pāda b, ya urā́v …, with ā́v that could be taken as a metathesis of vā.

## 08-09
I don't understand the force of utá sma, which opens 8c and 9a, with utá opening 9c. Klein (DGRV I.416-17) says that they introduce parallel statements about the Maruts and represent “concatenation across the stanza-boundary,” halfway between intrastanzaic and interstanzaic usage. But the role of sma, whatever it may be, seems downplayed in this description.


## 08
Ge takes syandrā́(ḥ) as acc. pl. fem. and supplies antelopes as the obj. of yujata. This is not impossible, but syandrā́(ḥ) was already used of the Maruts in 3a (cf. also V.87.3).


## 09
The phrase páruṣṇyām ū́rṇā vasata is similar to IV.22.2 páruṣṇīm uṣámāṇa ū́rṇām, but while in the latter páruṣṇīm modifies ‘wool’, here it must be a loc. sg.

The ‘wool’ in both passages is best understood as a metaphor for ‘foam’. The stem páruṣṇī- is the fem. corresponding to paruṣá- ‘gray’. It is also a river name, presumably so called because it is covered with grayish foam. For disc. see Old, Hoffmann (Aufs. 333-35 [=Die Sprache 1974]). The mediating image in this picture is provided by śundhyávaḥ; I follow Thieme (KZ 79 [1965] = Kl Sch. 219ff.) in interpr. this form as ‘preening [waterbird]’ (to √śudh ‘clean’). As pointed out in the publ. intro., the density of imagery is remarkable: the Maruts swathed in clouds (not explicitly mentioned) are compared to birds in a river covered with foam, with the foam (again not explicit) characterized as wool.

The instr. sg. pavyā́to the masc. stem paví- shows the older -ā ending, which becomes limited to fem. -i-stems when the masc./ neut. adopt -inā.


## 10
The first half-vs. consists of fanciful names of the individual Maruts (never otherwise named), summed up with the instr. phrase etébhiḥ … nā́mabhiḥ “with these names” in c. The rest of the second hemistich is unclear, however, primarily because the formal identity and meaning of ohate are disputed. The former issue is the easier to solve: though Gr identifies the verb as a 3rd sg. and Re hesitates, it must be a 3rd pl. to the root pres. (of √oh/uh) (see EWA s.v. OH and esp. Narten [Kl Sch.

98-100 =1969]). The basis for considering it a 3rd sg. is the Pp’s interpr. of viṣṭārá as nom. sg. viṣṭāráḥ, but a loc. sg. in -é is equally possible. It is highly unlikely that ohate would be 3rd singular in 10d but 3rd plural in 11a, b, as Gr, for ex., takes them.

The questions then are who is the subj. and how does the verb fit with the rest of the material in the half-verse. Most interpr. take yajñám as the obj. and tr. “praise the sacrifice,” with either the Maruts or unidentified priests/poets as subj. This is not impossible, but given the two ohate in the next vs., which lack objects (unless yajñám is supplied, so, e.g., Gr), I prefer to seek a consistent interpr. of the verb forms. The root is used on a number of occasions as a passive ‘be lauded’ / reflexive ‘vaunt oneself’ (cf., e.g., V.30.6, VIII.5.39). Here I take the Maruts as subject and the names in ab to be the verbal content of the Maruts’ vaunt. (Note that the threefold repetition of ohate here is matched by the three occurrences of vocanta in vs. 16, also with the Maruts as subj.) Under this interpr. the dat. máhyam, which is problematic in most interpr., expresses the verbal recipient of the boast. This leaves yajñám viṣṭāré. For most interpr. the latter word characterizes the Maruts as they come to the sacrifice -- e.g., Ge ‘in breiter Schar’. Again, not impossible. However, the root √stṛ ‘strew’ is almost always closely associated with the ritual, esp. with the strewing of the barhis, and I suggest that viṣṭāré is a infinitival locative that takes verbal rection, hence “at the bestrewing of the sacrifice.” However, I realize that this interpr. has some problems: -stāré is an unlikely infinitival form, and √stṛ doesn’t elsewhere take yajñám as object. Moreover, one nominal form of ví √stṛ, namely viṣṭíraḥ in II.13.10, does seem to have spatial force (JPB ‘far-flung’). I don’t have a good solution.


## 11
My interpr. of this vs. follows from that of 10 and diverges from those of others. By my interpr. the nom. plurals are further names the Maruts call themselves, shown most clearly by the íti ending pāda c. Most interpr. take c with d, syntactically and semantically divorced from ab -- e.g., Klein (DGRV II.102-3, closely flg. Ge) “(And) the men proclaim it (as worthy) and (their) teams proclaim (it so), and wondrous (are their) forms, worthy of being seen, (of whom they say,) “(They are) from the distance.” But the ádhā’s that open pādas a, b, and c impose, or at least beg for, a parallel interpr. of the three pādas, esp. with the íti closing the last, and the parenthetical “(of whom they say)” is ad hoc, generated only from the íti of c.

One of the problems not mentioned by the standard interpr. is the intrusive ní in pāda a. The verb √uh does not otherwise occur with this preverb, and since ohate is surrounded by identical forms without preverb (10d, 11b) it seems unlikely that only the middle one would have the preverb. It might be loosely inspired by the ni in niyúta(ḥ) in b, but Śyāvāśva does not seem the type of poet to throw in verbal fragments without function. I suggest rather that it continues but varies the naming pattern of 10ab with PREV-pathi-, here with the ní a very minimalist predication of náraḥ “men down.”


## 12
This vs. bristles with difficulties. The first to present itself is the hapax kubhanyú-. There are several competing interpr. of this word, though Ge refuses to tr.

it at all. Re tr. “voués à un rite communiel,” which he derives from Benveniste (BSL 52 [1956] 11-12 [not yet seen by me]), who connected it with Ossetic material: see KEWA III.676; the Ossetic connection was disputed by Szemerényi; see KEWA ref.

and EWA s.v., and seems in principle farfetched. Another, going back to Neisser (see EWA s.v.) and followed by Scar (640) and WG, is ‘yelling, shouting’, from √bhan ‘speak’, with the pejorative prefix ku-. (Remmer [Frauennamen, p. 48] also follows this basic analysis, but takes the ku- in positive sense: “welche Redner!” hence “wortgewaltig.”) More likely is an analysis stemming ultimately from Sāy.’s udakecchavaḥ (see Ge’s n. 12a “Wasser wünschend”). Ge cites similarly formed udanyávaḥ ‘water seeking’ in nearby V.54.2, 57.1 (latter also has an útsa- ‘wellspring’ as here). The Kubhā river also figures in this Marut cycle, in the next hymn V.53.9 in a list of river names. A derived adj. *kubhā-yú- ‘seeking the Kubhā’ can easily have been formed. Given the common interchange of -ā-yá/ú- and -anyá/ú- derivatives (type vṛṣāyá-, vṛṣaṇyá-), *kubhāyú- could have been reformed as kubhanyú-, esp. under the influence of udanyú-; see also iṣaṇyata in 14d. Here it can mean either ‘seeking the Kubhā River’ or ‘seeking water’ more generally. Since their goal in the following pāda is a wellspring (útsam), seeking some sort of water source makes good sense in the passage.

The meaning of the word kīrí(n)- is disputed, with the two leading contenders ‘bard’ and ‘weak, poor’. The former, the only sense given by Gr, seems to be currently in the ascendancy after eclipse -- e.g., KEWA glosses it only as ‘gering, niedrig, arm’, but EWA as ‘Dichter, Lobsänger’, with ‘weak’ banished to the small print -- perhaps because it is easier to etymologize (√kṝ ‘celebrate’). But the contexts, esp. the fact that it is regularly followed by cid ‘even’ and often refers to a person receiving divine aid despite his condition, favor the latter. See also my brief disc. in Hyenas (251-52). The sense ‘weak, poor’ fits our context less well, since the Maruts are powerful and outfitted with enough bling to make them rich. But if ‘weak’ can be interpreted as ‘lightweight, light on their feet’, it can work: the Maruts are dancing to the wellspring. Another issue is the status of the stem kīrín- to which this form is assigned. The only other forms possibly belonging to this stem are 3 instr. sg. kīríṇā (I.100.9, V.4.10, 40.8), but they can also of course belong to the reasonably wellattested simple i-stem kīrí-. Mehendale (“Two Vedic Notes: (1) kīrín?” BSOAS 1974: 670-71) attempts to eliminate the -ín-stem entirely by analyzing our form as instr. sg. kīríṇā + u, with u replacing the usual cid, and this interpr. is tentatively followed by WG. But u is hardly equivalent to cid and it is highly unlikely to be placed here, in the middle of a pāda and a clause. Our understanding of Rigvedic particle usage has advanced considerably since 1974. If we want to eliminate, or limit, kīrín-, it should first be noted that of the three instr. sgs., two are in Maṇḍala V (V.4.10, 40.8), and so it is possible that the poets of V reinterpr. kīríṇā as belonging to an -ín-stem; there are no unambig. exx. of the plain i-stem kīrí- in V. Certainly there is no possessive sense associated with the putative kīrín- forms as far as I can see.

The 2nd hemistich also presents difficulties: how to construe the indefinite expression ké cid, why the Maruts are compared to/identified with thieves, and whether c and d form a single expression or two. These questions have been addressed in various ways in the standard transl.; I will treat only my own. My rendering assumes that c and d are separate clauses (contra the standard view) depicting a two-step process. For c I start with the fact that what thieves mostly do in the RV is hide. I assume that the Maruts are likened to thieves because on their first approach, enveloped in clouds perhaps, they are indistinct and unidentifiable; this is also conveyed by the indefinite ké cin ná “like who knows who.” (I do not take ké cid directly with tāyávaḥ, but interpr. them as two different ways of referring to the stealthy Maruts, again against most interpr.) In d the Maruts suddenly flash out (āsan dṛśí tviṣé “came to glitter in my sight”) as the storm, or specifically the lightning. As they become visible in this way, it also becomes clear that they are ‘helpers’ (ū́māḥ); as usual, the assumption behind this is that the storm, though violent, brings fructifying rain -- rain which is previewed in the first hemistich, where the Maruts seek water and prance to the wellspring, while chanting in rhythm, presumably a reference to thunder.


## 13
On the phrase ṛṣvā́ṛṣṭívidyutaḥ see disc. ad vs. 6; for the number disharmony in yé … tám see disc. ad vs. 7; for the seemingly unnecessary copula sánti see disc. ad vs. 2 as well as immediately below.

This vs. serves as another boundary. The Maruts of the thunderstorm, dominating the middle of this hymn, are reconfigured as ritualists, appropriate guests and participants at our sacrifice. The ritual context now takes over for the rest of the hymn. This thematic transition may help explain the sánti. In pāda a the Maruts are still lofty ones with spears of lightning -- untamed forces of nature -- but in b they are asserted to be poets and ritual adepts (kaváyaḥ … vedhásaḥ). Perhaps the sánti marks the two forms in b as predicate nouns in an equational sentence (X IS Y), where X and Y belong to very different domains.

The address or, as seems likely, self-address to the seer (rṣe) returns us to the very beginning of the hymn, with Śyāvāśva’s clear self-address in 1ab.


## 14
The self-address of 13c seems important enough to repeat here in pāda with minimal variation, though the syntactic function of the acc. mā́rutam gaṇám is different and the rest of the vs. much less clear.

The first hemistich lacks a verb; the parameters of what to supply are set by the nominal arguments in a -- the seer is commanded (/commands himself) to [DO SOMETHING] to(ward) (ácha) the Marut flock -- and further limited by the simile in b, with the nom. maiden (yoṣáṇā) roughly corresponding to the seer and the acc. friend/ally (mitrám) to the Maruts. I have supplied ‘approach’, others ‘invite, address, turn’, etc., all more or less acceptable.

The question then is what the simile in b is conveying. Most of the renderings attribute bolder action to the maiden than I think gently bred Vedic girls would ordinarily undertake (see esp. Klein, DGRV II.183-84: “… like a maiden entices a friend”). My solution is to read dānā́twice in two different morphological interpr.

First, with the standard interpr., as the instr. sg. of ‘gift’ (on the possible stems, see EWA s.v. dāná-). But also as a root aor. mid. participle in the nom. sg. fem. with passive value. Although such a participle is not recognized by the standard grammars, it is exactly the form we would expect and fits the gift-marriage model perfectly. The mitrá- to whom she is given is presumably her spouse; on mitrá- in a wedding context see X.27.12 and my “The Rigvedic Svayaṃvara” (Fs. Parpola 2001), 309-13.

The final word of b, yoṣáṇā, is anomalously accented (vs. standard yóṣaṇā).

See below comm. ad 15b for a possible explanation. The second hemistich seems to be presented as a disjunctive alternative to the first, introduced by vā. The “or” does not make much sense; it is tempting to follow Re’s judgment: “vā irrationnel.” But Klein (II.184) may have rightly divined the rationale: “the poet first beseeches the Rishi to entice the Maruts to the worship, but then, as an alternative, appeals directly to the Maruts themselves to come.” I would tweak this slightly by suggesting that the action to which 14cd is presented as an alternative is not 14ab, but rather 13cd, of which 14a(b) is a variant. The ṛṣi orders himself to stop the Maruts with a song (13cd) but then suggests to them that they initiate the journey themselves (14cd).

The voc. dhṛṣṇavaḥ addressed to the Maruts again reminds us of the beginning of the hymn, with dhṛṣṇuyā́(1a, 2b, 4b) and dhṛṣadvínaḥ (2c).


## 15
This vs. is a variant of 14, with the parts somewhat differently distributed.

The phrase devā́m̐áchā in b resembles ácha … mā́rutaṃ gaṇám in 14a, and it therefore seems prudent and economical to supply the same verb as in 14a.

Although in 14ab dānā́belonged to the same syntagm as ácha … mā́rutaṃ gaṇám, here it is construed with a different part of the sentence, with the opt. saceta ‘would/might/could keep company’. In 14 the poet was offering a gift to the Maruts; here he “keeps company with a gift” -- that is, receives it -- bestowed by the Maruts.

The situation is the standard reciprocal exchange of praise and worship for the gods for material benefits from the gods. The givers are first identified as sūrí-s ‘patrons’ (c), and one could think of the human patrons often so called, but pāda d makes it clear that the Maruts are meant, and the identification of the sūráyaḥ with the Maruts is even clearer in 16b.

The two instr. in d are off balance: yā́maśrutebhiḥ ‘famed on/by their course/journey’ modifies the Maruts, but, pace Gr, Ge, and WG, añjíbhiḥ should not, because añjí- is only a noun ‘unguent, adornment’ (see in the next hymn V.53.4), not the adj. their tr. require. Re recognizes the problem and suggests that it is an “instrumental of identification”: “en tant que (porteurs d’) ornements.” I think rather that yā́ma- and añjíbhiḥ are functionally parallel, both to be construed with śrutá-, but one in a cmpd and one in an independent syntagm. For similar interplay between cmpd member and independent word, see comm. ad VIII.1.2.

The real problem in this vs. is vakṣáṇā. In the publ. tr. I follow Ge and Re in taking it as an acc. pl. of vakṣáṇā ‘udder’, but of course this stem is fem. and the acc. pl. form here should be vakṣáṇāḥ. Ge (n. 15b) casually suggests that it is exceptionally neuter or else a mistake for vakṣáṇāḥ, Re that it’s a “nt. insolite.” Others provide different morphological analysis: Gr sets up a special stem vakṣáṇā ‘Darbringung’ and must take it as a nom. sg.; Old suggests emending the accent to

*vákṣaṇā, allowing it to belong to the stem vákṣaṇa- ‘strengthening’ and takes it as a
neut. nom. pl. (“wie zu den Göttern die Stärkungen”); WG maintain the ‘udder’ analysis but take it as a nom. sg.: “Der … (wendet) sich den göttlichen (Maruts) zu wie ein Schlauch (der gefüllt sein will).” This last is the most ingenious and does the least violence to the morphology / repertoire of stems, but the image is an odd one, to say the least. My explanation, admittedly rather weak, starts from the similar patterning of vss. 14 and 15: 1) the ácha + acc. gods noted above (though ácha differently positioned), in each case requiring a verb to be supplied; 2) dānā́(beg. of 14b/15c); 3) the parallel endings of the b pādas: 14b … ná yoṣánā / 15c … ná vakṣánā. The final word of each of these pādas is problematic: yoṣáṇā has the wrong accent, vakṣáṇā has the wrong ending. I suggest that the words were mutually adjusted to each other, either in composition or redactionally. Oldenberg already suggested (in his n. 2) that yoṣáṇā might owe its accent to vakṣáṇā, but the suggestion was halfhearted since he really wanted to emend the accent of vakṣáṇā to *vákṣaṇā, as I just noted. However, this seems the best explanation of the accent of yoṣáṇā, and conversely this allows us also to assume that acc. pl. *vakṣáṇāḥ lost its -ḥ to match yoṣánā. Although this may seem no different from Ge’s and Re’s arbitrary conferral of neut. gender, my explanation is contextually tied and has some possibility of being correct.


## 16
This Paṅkti vs. is the last real vs. of the hymn, since 17 (also Paṅkti) is a dānastuti. It begins with prá, just as vs. 1 did, and continues with the insistent repetion of the verb of speech vocanta (pādas b, c, e). The vs. is also reminiscent of repeated ohate ‘vaunt themselves’ in 10-11; as there, the recipient of the Maruts’ speech here is “me.” The structure of the vs. would be clearer if the tr. read “Those who proclaimed … they proclaimed P. their mother, then they proclaimed their father …” On iṣmín- see comm. ad I.87.6.


## 17
By all standard interpr. the Maruts are the subjects of this dānastuti, but it is worth noting that they are not named -- and so it is possible that a set of human patrons, assimilated to the Maruts and thus endowed with their prestige, are the actual donors praised.

Note the etymological chaining between the subj. of 16e śíkvasaḥ and 17a śākínaḥ, both deriv. from √śak. This could be evidence of the identity of the subjects (Maruts both), or it could be another way of conferring Marut qualities on the human patrons.

The unbalanced āmreḍita ékam-ekā is curiously formed. AiG III.395 suggests that the pl. ekā has been attracted to the following śatā́, whose attribute it is. It also seems an attempt, utilizing both sg. ékam and pl. ekā, to express the awkward distributive, of one hundred per each of seven Maruts, producing a total of plural hundreds.
