+++
title = "053"

+++
Maruts For the complex metrical structure of the hymn, see publ. intro. Despite the numerous different names for the meters, with few meters repeated in adjacent vss., they are all combinations of 8- and 12-syllable pādas, and so the hymns is metrically more harmonious than the long list of meters implies.

## 01
Like V.52.14 in the immediately preceding hymn, this vs. contains a vā ‘or’ whose disjunctive alternatives do not seem parallel. While it is true that both alternatives are questions beginning with káḥ ‘who’, the questions seem ill-matched.

Re’s assessment here is “illogisme de vā́[sic -- he prints it with accent].” Perhaps the point is that if no one knows as far back as the Maruts’ birth, there may still be someone who has had long association with them and their habits.


## 02
In b kathā́yayuḥ could be resolved as kathā́ā́yayuḥ “how did they drive here?” This interpr. might be favored by āyayúḥ in 3a, although it is disfavored by prá yayuḥ in 12b.

The sandhi form āpáya at the end of c is universally interpr. as the nom. pl.

āpáyaḥ, referring to the Maruts; it could, however, be just as easily dat. sg. āpáye and refer to the good giver (sudā́se) immediately preceding. In fact, I think it should be read as both, as reflected in the publ. tr. This double reading is favored by the way the vs. is structured, a striking pattern discovered by Natalie Operstein (in class, early 2000s). In general in this verse syntactic constituency is alternating and interlocked -- that is, constituents have the pattern X Y X’ Y’, etc. So, pāda a: ā́ rátheṣu  etā́n tasthúṣaḥ with the acc. pl. etā́n … tasthúṣaḥ interrupted by the loc. pl. rátheṣu, which is governed by ā́preceding the acc. pl. The pattern is similar in cd: kásmai sudā́se íḍābhir sahá sasruḥ ánv vr̥ṣṭáyaḥ āpáya The datives kásmai … sudā́se form a constituent, interrupted by the 3rd pl. verb sasruḥ, whose preverb ánu follows the dat. sudā́se and whose overt subj., nom. pl.

vṛṣṭáyaḥ itself interrupts the postpositional phrase íḍābhiḥ … sahá. In this configuration āpáya is not definitively paired: it could go with dat. sudā́se, separated from it by the prev. ánu, or with the nom. pl. vṛṣṭáyaḥ, likewise separated from it by a single word, instr. ídābhiḥ. Note also that it is the final word of a 12-syllable pāda, in a verse whose other pādas are 8-syllables, so it is metrically almost isolated and could almost (not quite -- it’s only 3 syllables) attach itself to d rather than c. Since āpí- ‘friend’ is an inherently receiprocal word, its double application is especially appropriate.


## 03
The referent of té in the opening phrase té ma āhuḥ “They say to me” is not entirely clear. It is universally taken as the Maruts, and that is probably correct.

Among other things it is reminiscent of the Maruts’ proclamations “to me” in the previous hymn: 52.10 … máhyam … ohate and 52.16 … me … vócanta. However, it is possible that the subj. is instead unidentified human associates of the poet. This would avoid the awkwardness of having the Maruts refer to themselves in the 3rd ps.: “They say to me, ‘When you see them [expect “us”], praise.’” In pāda a note the figure āhur yá āyayúr. As Re points out, yá āyayuḥ … máde is the implicit answer to kathā́yayuḥ in 1b. The two instr. in b dyúbhir víbhiḥ have provoked more commentary than they probably deserve. Ge (fld by WG) takes the former as referring to daybreak and the birds are then the birds that start stirring at that time. This is not impossible, but dyúbhiḥ (incl. úpa dyúbhiḥ VIII.40.8) generally means ‘through the days, day after day’, and that is fine here. The Maruts would then fly “with the birds” because they come through the midspace, where birds are at home.


## 04
The vs. consists entirely of a nominal rel. cl. without verb, presumably hanging off vs. 3.

The problematic form is the hapax śrāyā́(Pp. śrāyā́ḥ). It is generally taken as a nom. pl. thematic deriv. of √śri, so ‘resting in’, attenuated by some to ‘provided with’ (with loc.). I cannot find particular fault with this analysis, save for its banality and the unclear source of the root-syllable ā. I am inclined instead to take it as an instr. sg. (śrāyā́, equally possible in this sandhi situation) to a derivative of √śrī, parallel to śriyā́, which is regularly used of the Maruts. But I confess I do not know why śriyā́wouldn’t have been used instead or exactly what the derivational mechanism would be, incl. again the source of the vṛddhi.


## 05
The construction of this vs. is very problematic and has been much discussed (see, e.g., Old’s long consideration). In the end my interpr. is closest, but not identical, to Re’s, though perhaps not arrived at by the same means.

To deal with the easiest issue first, pace Gr and Ge I do not construe ánu … dadhe together. For one thing ánu √dhā barely exists; moreover a preverb in tmesis is unlikely to move to the end of the preceding pāda (so also Re). Rather, it surely governs preceding immediately ráthān, like similarly pāda-final ródasī ánu in 6c. It can be further noted that ánu is a signature word of this hymn, occurring 6x: 2c, 5a, 6c, 10c, 11c, 16c. With ánu otherwise assigned, the simplex verb dadhe ‘I take my place’ is then easily construed with the purpose dat. mudé.

The real problem in the verse is what to do with pāda c. The easy sense that Ge extracts from it (“die wie die Himmel (Tage) mit Regen kommen”) makes a hash of the grammar. Assuming that he means dyā́vaḥ to be compared with the chariots, with the point of comparison found in the part. ‘coming’ (yatī́ḥ), 1) dyā́vah must be taken as an acc., which is simply impossible; or 2) the alternative to 1) is to assume the whole simile has reverted to the nominative, something that doesn’t happen in RV, as I long ago demonstrated (“Case disharmony…”) though Ge asserts it here (his n. 5c referring to his n. to I.180.3d); 3) the fem. part. yatī́ḥ should modify masc. ráthān or else, by attraction, dyā́vaḥ, which latter is only fem. in the meaning ‘heaven’, not ‘day’.

A way to a solution (or partial solution) comes from recognizing that the fem.

pl. part. yatī́ḥ regularly modifies ‘waters’; cf. ā́paḥ ná pravátā yatī́ḥ VIII.6.34 = 13.8 = IX.24.2, ā́po ádṛśram āyatī́ḥ X.30.13, apā́m árthaṃ yatī́nām. It is therefore quite likely, esp. in this rainy context, that ‘waters’ is gapped here, solving the gender problem -- and also the case problem, because, adding another nominal element to the syntagm allows dyā́vaḥ to take its expected nominative role and respond to the acc. represented by (apó) yatī́ḥ. Re’s tr. reflects this: “comme les cieux (agréent les eaux), qui vont avec la pluie.” The question is then what is the mediating verb? Re’s ‘agréent’ makes sense, but he doesn’t explain where he got it. I think it is possible to generate it from the datival mudé of b, either by simply switching emphasis from the finite verb dadhe to its infinitval complement or, in a trickier move, reading mudé a 2nd time, but this time as a 1st sg. mid. to a root present: √mud has a hapax med. root opt. mudīmahi, and though it is generally classified as a root aor., a root pres. is certainly not excluded. It is worth noting that this opt. is construed with the preverb ánu (VIII.1.14 ánu stómam mudhīmahi). Assuming this lexeme in our c would simplify the rendering of the simile. I therefore suggest a slight alteration to the published translation, to “(I delighting/delight) like the heavens (in the waters) when they come with their rain.” See also disc. ad 10c, which in some ways repairs this problematic passage.


## 06
As noted by most comm., masc. acc. sg. yám, presumably modifying kóśam, has no referent in the main cl. Such “improper” relativization is not rare in the RV.

ánu at the end of c can also, secondarily, be read with d: ánu, dhánvanā.


## 07
In c I construe ádhvanaḥ as an abl. with syannā́(ḥ) rather than a gen. with vimócane. The effective difference is trivial, but the image seems more dynamic if the horses, unhitched, rush off into the roadside pastures (perhaps in pursuit of the “dappled females,” though if the latter are antelopes, this would lead to species crossbreeding).


## 08
The abl. parāvátaḥ is somewhat odd with mā́va sthāta “don’t stay away”; we would expect loc. parāváti, which is quite well-attested. It may be that parāvátaḥ has simply been harmonized with the ablatives in ab: divá(ḥ) … antárikṣād amā́t.

However, it’s also possible to take mā́va sthāta in c as a parenthetical exclamation and parāvátaḥ as a continuation of the abl. phrase of ab: “Drive hither, Maruts, from heaven, from the midspace, from nearby -- don’t stay away! -- and from a distance.” This might also explain the unusual pāda-final utá of b. I therefore offer this as an alternative to the publ. tr.

There is also the question of what the lexeme áva √sthā means here.

Generally it means ‘descend’, often into a river or the like (see Re ad loc.). But that doesn’t make sense here: if the Maruts are to come here from heaven or the midspace, as they are invited to in ab, they will have to descend. If we take the áva seriously, perhaps the idea is that the Maruts shouldn’t perform their descent somewhere else than here-- at a distance -- perhaps into the rivers named in the next vs. But this seems overly complex.

## 08-09
Note the phonological modulation of #ā́... (8a) to #mā́va...(8c) to #mā́vo (9a) / mā́vaḥ (9bc). The vaḥ then migrates to the end of 9d.

## 10
In some ways this vs. is both a variant and a repair of vs. 5. Like that vs. it begins with an acc. phrase referring to the Maruts’ chariots. Following (ánu) them come the rains: ánu prá yanti vṛṣṭáyaḥ, a variant of 5c vṛṣṭī́… yatī́r iva “(fem. pl. ) coming with their rain,” where I supplied ‘waters’ as the referent of the participle.

The syntax is somewhat different, but the elements are there. In this passage the relationship between the metaphor and the natural world is drawn more clearly: the chariots and the flock of Maruts represent thunder and lightning (see below), which are regularly followed by rain.

While a, c may function as repair, the phrase in b, … gaṇám mā́rutam návyasīnām, introduces a new poetic complication. It is found identically in V.58.1, where it is even more troublesome. The problem is what to supply with gen. pl. fem.

návyasīnām. Ge and Re, rather bizarrely, choose to supply Maruts -- e.g., Ge “der … marutische Schar der neuesten (Marut).” This not only contravenes the unmistakable gender of návyasīnām, but it produces an awkward and clunky pleonastic expression.

It is also unclear to me who the “newer” or “newest” (latter both Ge and Re) Maruts would be: it is generally emphasized that the Maruts are indistinguishable and “there is no last one” (V.58.5). Nonetheless the view that návyasīnām refers to the Maruts is well entrenched. There is no masc. gen. pl. comparative attested in Vedic, and both Lanman (Noun Inflec. 515) and Macd (VG 234) state that the fem. form is used instead in these two passages “in agreement with marútām” (Macd, as if gen. pl.

marútām were actually in the passage), due to “metrical exigencies” (again Macd, but same view expressed by Lanman). The metrical argument is strikingly weak: although neither a putative masc. gen. pl. *návyasām nor *návīyasām built to the alternative comparative stem would fit this exact metrical slot even with distraction of the gen. pl. ending (as here), neither form would have any trouble fitting into other parts of a Vedic metrical line, and it’s difficult to believe that a poet like Śyāvāśva would set his heart on putting a comparative just here and then seriously distort the grammar to shove it in. (Sāy., it should be noted, does not supply Maruts, but still ignores the gender of návyasīnām by glossing it with the grammatically ambiguous nūtanānām and then connecting that gen. pl. with ráthānām in pāda a.) WG have the merit of supplying a fem., namely ‘rains’, borrowed from the vṛṣṭáyaḥ of c. But this again seems pleonastic: why would the rains follow the rains, and indeed why would the (temporally unmarked) rains follow the newer rains? I start by considering what is regularly called ‘newer’. To this there is a ready answer: hymns, songs, formulations, thoughts, etc. -- the standard verbal products celebrated in RVic discourse, several of which are fem. In fact, note that in the next vs. (53.11) two such words are prominently positioned at the ends of pādas: suśastíbhiḥ (11b) ‘good chants’ and dhītíbhiḥ (11c) ‘poetic thoughts’, both of which are elsewhere modified by návyasī-: VIII.5.25 návyasībhiḥ suśastíbhiḥ; I.143.1 ... návyasīṃ dhītím.

I therefore propose that we should supply such a word with návyasīnām in 10b. (In the publ. tr. it is ‘hymns’.) But this produces an odd locution, “the Marut flock of newer (hymns),” with semantically ill-assorted elements joined -- or so it seems at first glance. But remember that the poet is depicting a metaphorical thunderstorm: the rains, undisguised, come last, but I think we have both thunder and lightning earlier in the vs.: the flock is tveṣám ‘glittering’ (though, I must admit, the word sometimes just means ‘turbulent’: see vā́ta-tviṣ- ‘turbulent as the wind’ in the next hymn, V.54.3), which can represent the lightning. And the flock also consists of “hymns,” which in this context can be the regular booming of thunder claps.


## 11
The Maruts’ thunder-hymns are then met with our reciprocal offered praise hymns.

In pāda a va eṣām is taken by all standard tr. as a doubled gen. pl., essentially “of these you,” though not so tr. I think rather that eṣām refers to the chariots, and vaḥ is the gen. dependent on the whole NP śárdhaṃ-śardham … eṣām, which simply reprises 10a táṃ vaḥ śárdhaṃ ráthānām, with gen. pl. of the chariots.


## 12
The question kásmai … prá yayuḥ “to whom have they driven” returns us to the questions in vs. 2: kathā́yayuḥ / kásmai sasruḥ “How have they driven? To whom have they flowed?” The referent of kásmai in 2, the “good giver” (sudā́se), is further specified here as “one who has given an oblation” (rātáhavyāya), though with different roots ‘give’. This ring-compositional reprise brings to a close the descriptive portion of the hymn, and the poet turns to requests.


## 13
With the standard tr. I take yéna in pāda as referring to enā́yā́mena in the previous vs. (12c).

I tr. dhānyà- lit., ‘related to grain (dhānā́), as ‘granular’, because I think it refers both to the raindrops, shaped like grain, and the actual grain that results from the rain.

I.57.1 rā́dho víśvā́yu suggests that viśvā́yu belongs to what precedes, rather than to saúbhagam as Ge and Re take it.


## 14
The standard tr. take usrí as having temporal domain over the whole of pāda c: “when it rains, the waters at dawn are luck, lifetime, and medicine.” I don’t see any way to tell, and in fact I don’t see why dawn should limit any of these predicates.


## 16
Unaccented asya should not modify stuvatáḥ as WG take it. Better the solutions of Ge and Re, esp. the latter, who separate these two genitives, with Re supplying “Marut troop” with asya.
