+++
title = "054"

+++
Maruts


## 01
The first word of the hymn is prá, as it was in V.52, the first of Śyāvāśva’s Marut hymns. It would at first appear to be in tmesis with anajā in b (so Gr and see Re’s bizarre tr. “je veux lancer-avec-onction”), but √añj does not otherwise appear with prá. I think it rather belongs with the last word of the vs., arcata. The syntagm prá √arc is quite common and, more to the point, began the first hymn in this cycle: V.52.1ab prá …, árcā. The rest of our vs., from śárdhāya to dyumnáśravase, is set into this celebratory frame.

anajā is the 1st sg. act. nasal infix pres. subjunctive, as all the standard tr. take it, pace its assignment to the pf. by Gr, Wh, Macd.

My tr. of gharmastúbh- ‘with the rhythm of the gharma-pot’ sounds like a bahuvrīhi, which it is not. Better would be ‘chanting rhymically (like) the gharmapot’ (cf. chandastúbh- in nearby V.52.12). The point of comparison, as is noted by most comm., is the regular bubbling of the gharma-pot.

My “sacrificing on the back of heaven” agrees with Ge and Re in taking diváḥ as limiting the first member of pṛṣṭhayájvane. Old allows both this and a syntagm divá ā́“from heaven,” while WG follow Old’s 2nd alternative and suggest that the Maruts are sacrificing on the back of the earth (to be supplied). It is difficult to make a judgment here.


## 02
Like the 1st vs. this one begins with prá. Also like the first vs. the first hemistich of this one is dense with cmpds, here describing the Maruts’ chariots.

The repetition of párijrayaḥ at the end of both hemistichs seems a bit clunky and perhaps especially so because, if the forms are nom. plurals (as generally taken), the supposed stem pári-jri- is ill-formed: we expect an empty final -t- on what looks like a root noun in short resonant. This supposed stem párijri- occurs once outside of this hymn, also pāda-final, also as apparent nom. pl. of the Maruts (I.64.5), and the root noun -jri- is also supposed to be found in urujrí- twice, again as nom./voc. pl.

urujráyaḥ (accented VIII.70.4, unaccented voc. VII.39.3, the only form not pādafinal). Thus all attested forms of the supposed -jri- stem are in the shape -jrayaḥ (accented or not). The 2nd cmpd exists beside an s-stem bahuvrīhi urujráyas- (twice in acc. sg. -asam), and a simplex neut. s-stem jráyas- is well attested (approx. 15x), with Aves. and OP cognates zraiiah- and drayah- respectively. All of this makes the stem -jri- seem very fishy. Debrunner (AiG II.2.44) explains the forms, which, as we saw, all end in -ayas, as haplologies from *-ayasas, making ref. to Wackernagel’s AiG III.80, which presents other possible haplologies to -s-stem *-asas forms.

Though I am leery of systematic haplologies, I think this has a reasonable chance of being right, esp. in this pāda-final position. However, in our passage I think there is another contributing factor. Ge (n. 2ab) adduces two passages containing jráyas-: X.92.5 pariyánn úru jráyaḥ (IX.68.2, not cited by Ge, is identical) and I.95.9 urú te jráyas páry eti, with pári (+ VERB OF MOTION) collocated with the -s-stem jráyas-. In


## 02
párijrayaḥ seems almost like a univerbation of a prepositional/adverbial phrase pári *jráyaḥ “around the (broad) expanse.” It is even possible that one of the forms in this vs. is meant to represent the adverbial phrase -- so, possibly, ab “forth (go your chariots) around the expanse,” referring to the Maruts’ circling the earth or the midspace -- while the other is a nom. pl. (by old haplology), to be rendered as in the publ. tr.: “the waters swirling in their stream bed.” This would alleviate the clunkiness of the repetition, which would then be only apparent. As Ge. remarks (n. 2c), “Trita's Beziehung zu den Marut ist dunkel.” Trita is associated with the Maruts also in II.34.10, 14. In vs. 10 of that hymn Trita seems to be associated with making noise, as here; that is as far as I can get.


## 03
Pāda-final parvatacyút- returns here (from 1b) but in a different form: nom. pl. -aḥ rather than dat. sg. -e.


## 04
The vs. sets up pairs of antitheses: nights/days (a), midspace/dusky realms (b), with the third only indirectly implied: fields [=dry land]/ *water [via boats] (c).

The īm that interrupts the simile nā́vaḥ … yathā in c is superficially puzzling, but I think it is related to the implication just noted: it stands for the acc. ‘waters’ in the full realization of the phrase “like boats (through waters).” It is also worthy of note that the cadences of pādas c and d are phonologically similar, esp. at beginning and end, though they achieve this through very different grammatical means: … nā́va īṃ yathā # … nā́ha riṣyatha #.


## 05
Note the phonetic echoes: (mahi)t(v)aná(m) … (ta)tāna … (é)tā ná … (áyā)tanā.

I take “greatness” (or “heroism [and] greatness”) to be the unexpressed subj.

of tatāna in b, rather than yójanam with Ge. The latter is an acc. of extent of space, and the phrase #dīrghám … yójanam# is iconically positioned to express the distance traversed.

In the second hemistich contra Ge and Re I take c as a separate nominal main clause, with d a temporal dependent cl. This allows the yád to be properly positioned, rather than occurring deep in the dependent cl. (The WG treatment is similar to mine.) The shared characteristic in the simile in c, ‘having ungraspable brilliance’ (ágṛbhītaśocis-), presumably refers to the combination of speed and timidity that characterizes antelopes, deer, and their ilk and makes them hard to catch. If we were to speculate more narrowly, the ‘brilliance’ might refer either to the conspicuous white spots on the coat of the chital deer or the white sides, underbelly, interior legs, and hindquarters of the blackbuck -- both species that seem native to the right location.

The puzzle in d is the phrase ánaśvadām … girím “the non-horse-giving mountain.” In order to approach it, we might first tackle the verb that governs it, ny áyātanā. The lexeme ní √yā is generally hostile; cf. nearby V.42.10 (also of the Maruts) yá óhate rakṣáso devávītāv / acakrébhis tám maruto ní yāta “Who(ever) will laud the demons at the invitation to the gods, run him over/down, Maruts, with your wheel-less (chariots).” In our passage the sense seems to be that the Maruts trample down or overrun a mountain whose behavior deserves it. But what is a non-horsegiving mountain? On the one hand, it may simply refer to a stingy mountain, comparable to a stingy patron, contrasted to aśvadā́- ‘horse-giving’ used of generous patrons elsewhere. But still, why horses? Mountains can be the source of nourishment and wealth; cf. I.65.5 gírir ná bhújma “a source of benefit like a mountain” (also VIII.50.2 and comm. ad I.55.3). But mountainous terrain is not particularly friendly to horses, which are most at home in open, relatively flat grasslands. I therefore wonder if the operable segmentation of the cmpd is anaśvadā́- ‘giving non-horses’ (rather than an-aśvadā- ‘not giving horses’). This might then be an oblique reference to the Vala myth and the mountain that yields up cows (that is, non-horses). However, since the Maruts are not generally associated with the Vala myth, this may be farfetched. The safest interpr. is Old’s deflection, that the phrase is “auf unbekannte Erzählung anspielend.”


## 06
My interpr. follows that of Narten (Sig.Aor. 195-96), with the first pāda consisting of the yád clause, the 2nd the main cl. Both Ge and Re take the first part of pāda a as the main cl., with the dependent clause starting with yád. Although yád is better positioned in their interpr. than in Narten’s, they must make arṇasám an obj.

of móṣathā (in unconvincing fashion) and the sequence of tense/mood is badly off: aug. aor. ábhrāji … aor. subjunctive móṣathā, lit., “it has flashed when you will steal …” Ge simply renders the subjunctive as a preterite, while Re’s parenthesis in “vous dérob(i)ez” is masterfully evasive even for him.

As I just said, I am not happy with the position of yád in Narten’s/my interpr., since it follows both the verb and part of the subject (plus a voc., but that doesn’t count). There is another possibility, that yád functions here as a sort of izafe, connecting śárdhaḥ and arṇasám: “the troop, which is a flood.” In this case ábhrāji would be a main-cl. verb, and the two pādas, a and b, would be syntactically unconnected: “The troop that is a flood has flashed; you will plunder …” arṇasá- is a hapax. Narten takes it as an adjectival deriv. of árṇas- ‘flood’, but it could have been (re-)substantivized as ‘flood’.

The point of comparison in b between the Maruts and the caterpillar is that violent storms also strip the leaves off trees.

The sequence vṛkṣáṃ kap(anéva) is oddly reminiscent of Vṛṣākapi, the randy monkey in X.86, but this must be accidental.

In the publ. tr. the voc. sajoṣasaḥ is not rendered as a voc., since the Engl.

would be awkward.

The s-aor. subj. neṣathā ‘you will lead’ is particularly appropriate to the obj.

arámati-, the personified feminine Proper Thinking, since the verb √nī, esp. in sigmatic forms, becomes specialized for leading females in ritual settings; cf. the priestly title Neṣṭar. Although néṣṭar- probably owes its -ṣ- to crossing of the agent noun nétar- with Tvaṣṭar (tváṣṭar-), who is also associated with ritual females (see EWA s.v. néṣṭar-), its apparent coincidence with the neṣ of the s-aor. could spread the semantics.


## 07
In d the sequence ṛ́ṣiṃ vā must have been fronted around the rel. yám, since the phrase as a whole ṛ́ṣiṃ vā yáṃ rā́jānaṃ vā does not mean “either the seer or which king” but “which seer or king” -- or even better “which one, whether seer or king.” I take the thematic stem súṣūda- as ultimately deriving from a pf. subjunctive, despite accent. In this particular form, the 2nd pl. indic. pf. *súṣūda, with the rarely occuring 2nd pl. act. pf. ending -a, would have simply been extended by the prim.

ending.


## 08
In the cmpd. grāmajít- the 1st member could have either an acc. or an instr.

relationship with the root noun. Both would be possible: ‘conquering roving band’ (so Gr, Ge, Re, Thieme [M+A 81]) or ‘conquering with/in roving bands’. Although in such root noun cmpds an acc. relationship is more common, indeed also among cmpds in -jít-, I follow Scarlatta’s preferred interpr. (156) found also in his tr. (=WG), although the acc. interpr. is hardly excluded. The parallel I.100.10 grā́mebhiḥ sánitā, cited by Re, is suggestive.

My interpr. of b follows Thieme (M+A 81), esp. of aryamáṇaḥ, which he takes as “hospitable ones (hospitable householders who refresh the stranger).” Others take it as a pregnant pl. referring to “(Mitra, Varuṇa, and) Aryaman.” The dep. cl. in c, yád inā́so ásvaran, can be construed either with what precedes or what follows, but sits uneasily with either because of its augmented ásvaran, which doesn’t match the pres. indic. pínvanti (c) or undanti (d). I chose to connect it with d, as thunder before rain.


## 09
dyaúḥ is clearly fem. here, given the adj. pravátvatī, but this gender choice must be conditioned by its standard formulaic partner, fem. pṛthivī́, in the preceding pāda, modified by the same adj. in the same position.

The nom. pl. jīrádānavaḥ ‘having lively drops’ in d must modify the mountains (párvatāḥ), but in the immed. preceding hymn it is found in the voc. of the Maruts (V.53.6, in the same metrical pos.; cf. also I.34.4 a nom. pl. of the Maruts in the same position). There are no grounds for emending the text by deleting the accent and making it into a voc. (which would also entail a switch from 3rd to 2nd ps. ref.); how would it have acquired the accent here? Rather it must be word play: mountains produce torrents of water when it rains.


## 10
The s-stem adj. sá-bharas- (so accented in X.101.3, though it is an accentless voc. here), tr. here ‘of equal gravity’, is a bahuvrīhi with the lit. sense ‘having the same burden / weight’, with the same -bharas- as in viśvá-bharas- ‘bringing all’, i.e., lit. ‘having/bringing all burdens’ in IV.1.19.

s u varṇaraḥ at the end of pāda a picks up náraḥ at the end of 8a and 10b and asvaran at the end of 8c.


## 12
Note the repetition of ágṛbhīta-śociṣ- from 5c; this cmpd is found only once elsewhere in the RV (VIII.23.1, of Agni).

The first hemistich is discussed in some detail by Thieme (Fremd. 68-70), whose interpr. I basically follow. I would add that the (heavenly) brilliance that cannot be grasped by the Ārya on earth is shaken down as rain by the Maruts.

There are two basic interpr. of c, depending on what the subject of sám acyanta is taken to be. For Ge the subj. is the Maruts, with vṛjánā the grammatical obj. referring to their girthbands: they are girding themselves for battle. WG’s interpr. also takes the reference to be to the Maruts, but with vṛjánā as the subj. referring to the closing of the ranks (Reihe) of the Maruts, again before some warlike manoeuvre on their part. In both these interpr. the referent of the subj. of sám acyanta and átitviṣanta is the same: the Maruts. With Re I instead consider the verbs to have different subjects: the subj. of sám acyanta, vṛjánā, refers to the circles or communities of the Ārya, while the Maruts are the subj. of átitviṣanta. I think the two hemistichs contrast the Maruts’ effects on the Ārya communities: in ab the Maruts bring them the welcome rain they cannot get themselves, but in cd they cling together during the violence of the Maruts’ storm. (I cannot decide which strain Kü’s tr. (224) follows, though WG’s paraphrase of it in their n. leans towards the Re/JB side.)


## 13
The verb in d, rāranta, presents difficulties both morphologically and semantically. Formally it has received a variety of analyses: Gr classifies it (impossibly) with √radh ‘subdue’; as Old notes, in context it would best belong to √rā ‘give’, but it is hard to make this work formally. Given the long redupl.

characteristic of the pf. to √ran ‘enjoy’, the form most likely belongs there. Lub.

classifies it as a med. (3rd sg.) injunc. to that root, but there are no other med. forms to this stem or indeed to the root (raṇáyanta being an -anta replacement). I think we are therefore stuck with the formally most likely analysis, given by Kü, as 2nd pl. pf.

impv., with (as often) irregular full grade (see also Ge n. 13d). This poses problems semantically. It should mean ‘enjoy’, with the Maruts as subject. The gapped obj. is qualified by sahasrín- ‘possessing/in thousands’; as Re points out, this is a stable epithet of rayí- ‘wealth’. And this is the problem: the Maruts have just given us wealth; we should be the ones enjoying it. Gods never enjoy wealth -- they distribute it. Ge suggests in his n. that the thousandfold wealth they enjoy is “in Gestalt von Opfern,” which is certainly a good try (probably the best available). Old tries to make the verb into what looks like a reflexive causative: “macht [den Reichtum] bei uns sich erfreuen” -- that is, the Maruts should make the wealth be happy to stay by us. WG go one step further in the causativization process: “(An diesem Reichtum) … macht, dass man sich hier bei uns daran freue … am tausendfachen.” But these last two attempts to separate the Maruts from the enjoyment are unconvincing, because no other forms to this stem show this causative tendency. I think we must stick with the meaning imposed by parallel forms (so also Re) and deal, perhaps as Ge does, with the Maruts enjoying riches.


## 14
The problematic wealth of 13d reappears in 14a as the obj. of a gapped verb whose subj. is the Maruts, but in this case we can borrow the verb from the next pāda, avatha ‘you aid’. Ge unaccountably supplies a verb (“gewähret”) that matches neither what precedes nor what follows.

The pāda-final words in the first hemistich, … spārhávīram# and … sā́mavipram# are phonologically similar. This partial match may help explain the odd hapax sā́mavipra-. Although my tr. ‘inspired in his melody’ is structurally similar to the other standard renderings (e.g., Re ‘inspiré par la mélodie-sacreé’), the cmpd should not mean that. For one thing the 2nd member vípra- is almost never used adjectivally (pace Gr), but almost always as a noun referring to a type of poet.

Moreover, the accent strong suggests a bahuvrīhi. A literal rendering of such a bahuvrīhi would be something like ‘whose inspired poet is the melody’ or ‘whose inspired poet has the melody’ (latter like vájra-bāhu- ‘having an arm that has a mace (in it)’), which do not work as descriptors of a seer. I wonder if the phonological play just noted didn’t flip the order of the cmpd members, and the underlying form would be *vípra-sāman- ‘having the melody of an inspired poet’. Exact parallels are vípramanman- ‘having the thought of an inspired poet / having inspired thought’ in VI.39.1, where it modifies kaví-, and vípra-vacas- ‘having the speech of an inspired poet / having inspired speech’ in VIII.61.8.
