+++
title = "055"

+++
Maruts


## 01
The question about práyajyu- is how technically it is meant; I here follow Re.

The first hemistich recalls vs. 11 in the previous hymn, esp. in the bahuvrīhi rukmá-vakṣas- ‘with brilliants on their breasts’ (lit. ‘having breasts with brillants on them’, of the vájra-bāhu- type), which matches the nominal phrase V.54.11b vákṣassu rukmā́, but also in bhrā́jad-ṛṣti- ‘having glinting spears’, whose members are distributed differently in 54.11a áṃseṣu … ṛṣṭáyaḥ and b agníbhājasaḥ.

The idiom śúbham √yā is used of the Maruts elsewhere, in nearby V.57.2 as well as I.23.11; cf. also the cmpds śubhaṃ-yā́(van)-. My “drove in beauty” is of course a conscious echo of Byron’s “She walks in beauty, like the night.” A different kind of English resonance would be offered by “gone to glory.”


## 02
The verb ví rājatha can mean either ‘shine forth’ or ‘reign over’; both fit the context and the subject, though given pāda a “you assumed your power,” perhaps ‘rule’ has the edge. The root noun cmpd virā́j- seems confined to the ‘rule’ sense, when it does not refer to the meter by that name.


## 04
I take ābhūṣéṇya- as a quasi-desiderative gerundive, parallel to didṛkṣénya- ‘desirable to be seen’ -- hence ‘desirable to become’ à ‘to be emulated’. However it may simply mean ‘to be attended upon’.

The utá introducing the impv. in c is awkwardly rendered as ‘and’. Klein (DGRV I.454) says it means rather ‘therefore’, which works better in English.

However, ‘therefore’ for utá does not have much support (3 passages cited by Klein out of over 750) or a clear path of development, and a closer look at the context does not yield a causal “X, therefore Y” interpr. It is possible that the morphologically ambiguous dadhātana is not an imperative but an injunctive, which would yield a more acceptable pendant “and you establish us in immortality.” And it is also possible that the utá here loosely matches the other 3rd-pāda utá-s in 2c, 7c, while anticipating 5a #úd.
