+++
title = "056"

+++
Maruts

## 01
Ge (/WG) supply “bring,” an impv. addressed to Agni, in the first hemistich.

There seems no particularly reason to do so, since the acc. phrase of ab can be construed with áva hvaye in c. Perhaps it’s on the basis of the ā́in pāda a, but this is in the wrong position to be a gapped preverb. I don’t actually know what ā́is doing, but note that in the ring-compositional expressions in vss. 8-9, the ‘call’ verb is construed with ā́.


## 02
The question in this vs. is who is the 2nd sg. referent of mányase (a), te (c), and vardha (d). Acdg. to Sāy. it is still Agni, but Ge suggests alternatively that it could be the self-address of the poet, a view shared by Re. (WG think Agni, but with a very peculiar tr. of pāda a). I think poetic self-address is excluded because of the me in b: the poet is unlikely to refer to himself as “you (sg.)” and “me” in successive pādas (and then back to “you”), so Agni is the more likely. The point must be that both Agni and the poet want the same thing -- for the Maruts to come to the sacrifice.

The identification of you as Agni requires that he possess/produce hávana- ‘calls’ in c. This can refer to the crackling of the fire. Alternatively, flg. Gr, hávana- could belong to √hu and mean ‘oblations’, but pace Gr none of the occurrences he adduces need to have that meaning.


## 03
The gender politics of this vs. would not bear modern scrutiny: the idea seems to be that the Earth enjoys rough sex because she gets nice presents. But it is a powerful image.

The poss. adj. mīḷhúṣmant- occurs twice in the RV; the other form is found in VI.50.12, where it is masc. and seems barely distinct from mīḷhvás- ‘giving rewards, generous’. Here in this fem. form the possessive value of -mant- does have force, assuming the correctness of Ge’s and Re’s interpr. as ‘possessing a generous (man/lord/spouse)’. WG take it rather as ‘Soldatenbraut’, interpr. mīḷhvás- as ‘one who has mīḷhá-’ (booty, etc) and further suggesting that the woman in question was part of the spoils of war. This is appealing in some ways, but it does not fit well with the last word of the hymn, mīḷhuṣī́.

As Ge points out (n. 3a), párāhatā may have two senses -- simply ‘beaten aside’ by the onslaught of the Maruts and ‘(sexually) penetrated’, for which sense he cites ŚB XI.5.1.1 vaitaséna daṇḍéna hatāt [sic, not Ge’s hatā], the ŚB paraphrase of Urvaśī’s … mā … śnathayo vaitaséna (X.95.5) “you pierced me with your rod.”


## 04
ní √ri means ‘make flow’, hence ‘liquefy, dissolve’. In I.127.4 the very similar sthirā́cid ánnā ní riṇāti ójasā has ‘sturdy foods’ as obj., but since Agni is the subject, the food is presumably wood of some sort. In nearby V.58.6 a middle intrans.

of √ri (though without preverb) takes trees as subj.: riṇaté vánāni “the trees dissolve.” I therefore supply them as obj. here.

What then does the simile in b have to do with this? Even unruly oxen are unlikely to dissolve trees. Because the images don’t easily harmonize, I now think that the simile in b should go with the 2nd hemistich: unruly oxen can cause the ground to shake. This is somewhat difficult to convey in tr. -- I might rearrange it to “like oxen averse to the yoke / they shake …” The phrase gā́vaḥ … durdhúraḥ echoes dudhró gaúḥ of 3d phonologically, even though the adjectives are entirely unrelated.

As often Ge takes cid in c as a simile marker, a function for which there is no good evidence.


## 05
Ge takes the impv. út tiṣṭha as another self-address of the poet; again the presence of a 1st ps. sg. in the vs. (hvaye in d) makes that unlikely. I think it is directed rather at Agni, like the direct addresses in vss. 1 and 2. For the same impv.

cf. IV.4.4 úd agne tiṣṭha (sim. VIII.23.5): the ritual fire is blazing up while the Maruts are called to the sacrifice. In this case Agni may be commanded to rise up with praises (stómaiḥ) -- praises like his calls in 2c. Alternatively, there may be a clause break after the impv., with a new clause beginning with nūnám and continuing to the end of the vs. (This division was suggested by Natalie Operstein in class in the early 2000s.) The praises will then be those produced by the 1st ps. poet who is the subj. of hvaye at the end of the vs. In b sámukṣita- can hardly be separated from nearby V.55.3 sākám ukṣitā́ḥ, and V.57.8 brhád uk ̥ ṣámāṇāḥ also supports the root etym. to √vakṣ/ukṣ ‘be(come) strong’, against Gr’s conection with √ukṣ ‘sprinkle’.


## 06
As Bl (RVReps) and Ge point out, this vs. appears to have been constructed from textual blocks found in I.14.12 and I.134.3. Our pāda a yuṅgdhváṃ hy áruṣī ráthe is identical to I.14.12a except for the sg. impv. yukṣvā́hí rather than our pl.

yuṅgdhvám hí. If our pāda is modeled on I.14.12 (or a similar source) it could explain both the hí with no obvious function and the sg. chariot ráthe for the plural Maruts; this mismatch in number is repaired in the next pāda yuṅgdhvám rátheṣu rohítaḥ.

This latter pāda has no close parallels in the RV, though I.14.12b ends with rohítaḥ, which is a further obj. to yukṣvā́in pāda a (I.14.12b haríto deva rohítaḥ) and so may be a distant source. Our 2nd hemistich yuṅgdhváṃ hárī ajirā́dhurí vóḷhave, váhiṣṭhā dhurí vóḷhave closely follows I.134.3bc vāyū́ráthe ajirā́dhurí vóḷhave, váhiṣṭhā dhurí vóḷhave (whose pāda a contains the ‘yoke’ verb: vāyúr yuṅkte …). What I don’t understand is why Śyāvāśva has made these clumsy adaptations just to produce a vs. that in context is just treading water -- there’s no need for a yoking vs. here.

Note that váhiṣṭhā vóḷhave “the two best pullers to pull” is an etymological figure, with both words built to √vah, though it is not at all transparent. Perhaps this is what attracted Śyāvāśva.


## 07
Whatever the reason for the previous vs., syá vājy àruṣaḥ “this reddish race horse here” contrasts with the áruṣī(ḥ) ‘reddish (mares)’ in 6a. Although in the publ.

tr. I identified the referent as Agni (and I still think he is a possible secondary referent), I now accept the view of Sāy., Ge, and Re that it is the Beipferd of the Maruts (see the parallels adduced by Ge in n. 7a); otherwise the 2nd half of the vs. makes little sense. The mā́prohibitive in c contains what looks like a root aor. subjunctive karat.

Flg. Wackernagel (Fs. Jacobi), Hoffmann (Injunk. 55-56; see also 92) explains this potentially embarrassing form as the injunctive to a thematized root aor., which thematization began from the ambiguous 1st sg. ákaram. He (somewhat disingenuously) notes that outside of mā́clauses the kara- forms are otherwise only subjunctives, and he further suggests that his two exx. are found in idiomatic expressions that belong to the Volkssprache, which could explain the earlier thematization (cf. also Aufs. II.344 n. 2). (His other ex. of mā́… karat in VIII.2.20 I explain differently, as not belonging to the mā́clause at all. See comm. ad loc.) Hoffmann’s thematic aor. explan. has been apparently accepted by Lub, who classifies the two forms identified thus by Hoffmann under “A-AOR.inj.” I am generally dubious, because the root aor. of √kṛ is so well entrenched in the RV and the -a-forms are otherwise found in clear subjunctive usage. However, I am somewhat sympathetic to the “idiomatic” explanation, esp. combined with a metrical observation: the injunc. kaḥ expected here is found almost entirely at the end of Triṣṭubh pādas, but would not work here at the end of a Jagatī pāda. Nonce thematization, esp. perhaps in a low-register expression, would be a quick fix.

WG produce a curious hybrid of prohibitive and subjunctive: “Nicht soll und wird er … (euch) langsam machen” (my italics). I do not understand the explanation given in the n., or at least do not understand what sort of grammatical category is envisioned: “Uns scheint ein expekativer oder voluntativer Konjunktiv deutlich mitzuschwingen: >(Auf keinen Fall erwarten wir), dass er euch langsam mache< bzw.

>Dass er euch ja nicht langsame mache!< This clearly builds on Tichy’s analysis of
the function of the subjunctive as “expectation,” but I do not understand how the subjunctive would interact with the mā́.

## 08-09
These two vss. essentially duplicate each other The main verbs of the two vss., ā́huvāmahe (8b) and ā́huve (9b) resonate with the verb in the 1st vs. (ā́…) áva hvaye.

The battered-woman Earth who received presents (mīḷhúṣmatī) in 3ab is balanced here by the glorious Rodasī, standing in apparently equality with the Maruts, dispensing presents herself (8c suráṇāni bíbhratī, 9d mīḷhuṣī́). I see no merit on flg.

Ge’s acceptance of Sāy.’s interpr. of mīḷhuṣī́as the name of the wife of Rudra.


## 57-58
Maruts As Old (Proleg. 204-5) points out these two hymns are parallel and share a final vs. He attributes their position at the beginning of the four 8-vs. Marut hymns to this twinning. Otherwise V.58, in Triṣṭubh, should follow V.59, in Jagatī.
