+++
title = "057"

+++
Maruts


## 03
After dyā́m in pāda a we expect *pṛthivī́m, but get phonologically similar párvatān instead. This disappointed expectation is “repaired” in pāda c, where pṛthivī́m appears as the obj. of a different but semantically similar verb.

## 06
The pf. that ends the vs., pipiśe, produces a bad cadence that would be fixed by a heavy redupl. syllable. The metrical problem is not mentioned by Old or Kü; HvN note it but do not suggest a solution. I wonder if it is for intens. *pepiśe; the act.

intens. is found once in the late RV, while the middle begins to be attested in the AV, with a sense not appreciably different from non-intens. forms. Of course, the t-less ending -e would have to be accounted for, but several 3rd sg, med. intensives have such an ending; see Schaefer 44. Of course, this might all be more trouble than it’s worth for a metrical violation.


## 07
The sentiment in pāda c is somewhat puzzling, though the grammar is straightforward: práśastim naḥ kṛṇuta rudriyāsaḥ. This should mean “make a eulogy for us, o Rudras,” with the VP práśastim √kṛ. Though the three other occurrences of this VP, in I.113.19, 181.1, and II.41.16, do conform to expectations, taking it that way here would reverse the sacrificial bargain. As detailed in the first hemistich, the Maruts have given us bountiful riches of all sorts; in return we should be producing a práśasti- for them -- not they for us. In fact, of course, it is never the gods’ job to produce praise for humans. In order to make sense of the phrase, I have pushed the sense of √kṛ from ‘make’ to ‘make good’ -- that is, act such that the praise we are giving you is true. (You have given us many things; do it again.) Re’s “faites nous (aujourd’hui une récompense digne du) panégyrique” is similar, despite the overstuffed parenthesis. There is another, less likely, alternative. As I have argued elsewhere (RV between Two Worlds, pp. 146-48), even in the RV the práśasti- was probably a genre of praise appropriate to kings and only secondarily applied to gods.

It might be that the poet is asking the Maruts to render his patron and king deserving of his [=poet’s] práśasti-, either by redistributing the wealth that they showered on the king or by the king’s performing some worthy feat. But this seems overly complex and far less likely, and since práśasti-s in the RV are often directed at gods, it is unnecessary.


## 08
The vs. consists almost entirely of accented vocatives. Only the last phrase bṛhád ukṣámāṇāḥ escapes the voc. and that probably because accent conversion would be tricky.

The juxtaposition (across hemistich boundary) of ṛ́ta-jñāḥ and sátya-śrutaḥ is striking -- and in my opinion telling with regard to the difference between ṛtá- and sátya-, both often tr. ‘truth’. Here ṛtá- is something one knows, but sátya- is something one hears. In my view ṛtá- is the immanent truth -- the principles and relations that lie underpin the world as we know it -- while sátya- is the realized truth.

In some contexts this can be simply palpable reality, but here I think it refers to how ṛtá- is realized verbally, in the formulations of poets, available to be heard.
