+++
title = "058"

+++
Maruts

## 01
On the phrase … gaṇám mā́rutaṃ návyasīnām with its problematic fem. gen. pl. návyasīnām, see the extensive disc. ad V.53.10.

There is complete fungibility between the collective sg. gaṇám mā́rutam “Marutian flock” and the plural yé in the 2nd hemistich referring to the individual Maruts, which picks up gaṇám mā́rutam by sense though not strictly by grammar.

The eṣām at the end of pāda a seems clumsily pleonastic, however. It must refer also to the pl. Maruts and depend on the acc. gaṇám (“the flock of them”), doubling the vṛddhi deriv. mā́rutam. It should not be construed with the fem. návyasīnām.

āśvàśva- shows phonological play, as well as being a buried etymological pun, if the old connection between āśú- and áśva- holds. It is also a kind of anagram for the poet’s name śyāvā́śva-. Note that both words must be distracted to 4 syllables (āśú-aśva and śyāvá-aśva respectively).

The sequence utéśire is entirely ambiguous between utá īśire and utá ī́śire.

The Pp. reads the unaccented verb, but the utá suggests that the verb is conjoined with váhante and belongs to the rel. cl. and should therefore be accented.


## 02
In my opinion the same switch in number happens in this vs. as in the preceding one, exactly in the same way -- with yé in c picking up gaṇám in the first hemistich. The standard tr. take the rel. cl. of c with d: the pl. yé matches the number of its putative antecedent nṝ́n in d exactly. Although connecting with c thus appears to be the easier syntactic course, the exact parallelism between 1abc and 2abc makes that structure more appealing, and in addition the pāda-init. impv. vándasva in d seems to be marking a syntactic break.

The first hemistich, which consists entirely of an acc. phrase, obviously simply continues vs. 1, skipping back over the rel. cl. in 1cd to the gaṇám phrase in 1ab.

The bv dhúni-vrata- ‘possessing a turbulent commandment’ has, at first glance, a curious sense, but the point is that, as the thunderstorm, the Maruts’ job -- their vratá -- is to be noisy, boisterous, and tumultuous.

The orig. s-stem máyas- has become a frozen, synchronically uninflected form in the RV. Therefore, the accent shift that makes possessive adjectives out of many neut. s-stems (type yáśas- ‘glory’ à yaśás- ‘glorious’) was probably not an available derivational strategy -- hence the somewhat clumsy cmpd with bhū́-.

The phrase mayo(-bhúvaḥ) … ámitāḥ appears to be an etymological play but of course is not.

It’s worthy of note that the vs. contains 3 nominal forms with 1st member ending in -i, all with different explanations: dhúni-vrata- (a regular -i-stem; AiG II.2.296), the mysteriously formed (at least to me) dā́ti-vāra-, and tuvi-rā́dhas- (Caland compounding -i-). To which we might add mahitvā́and the immediately preceding ámitā(ḥ) with mirror-image phonology.


## 03
The enclitic 2nd pl. vaḥ in pāda a must refer to the assemblage of ritual celebrants and its referent is not the same as the 2nd ps. ref. to the Maruts in the 2nd hemistich (voc. marutaḥ, impv. juṣadhvam, vocc. kavayo yuvānaḥ). As JL observed, pāda d has only one accented syllable (the first word etám).

The voc. phrase that ends it, kavayo yuvānaḥ, recurs in the final vs., 8c [=V.57.8c], but with voc. accent because it is in a string of such vocc.: kávayo yúvānaḥ. As noted ad V.57.8, that verse consists almost entirely of accented vocc., so the poet seems to be playing with extremes of syntactically driven accent here.


## 04
The wrong sandhi in d yuṣmád sádaśvo is found in both Aufr. and HvN, but the Max Müller ed. has the correct yuṣmát. So, a copying error going back to Aufr., presumably generated from the yuṣmád beginning c.

The sense of írya- is disputed, and it has no secure etym. (see EWA s.v. írin-).

Schlerath (Königtum) suggests that it’s a deriv. of írā- ‘refreshing drink’, meaning ‘Nass spendend’, and this suggestion has been adopted by Oberlies (RdR II.178).

However, this does not work in all passages, nor with írin- (V.87.3) if that is related.

It seems best to follow the old standard gloss ‘regsam, rührig’, etc., and the posited connection to √ṛ ‘arise’, etc. (see EWA loc. cit.).

There are two approaches to the interpr. of vibhva-taṣṭá-. One assumes that the first member is a PN, the name of one of the Ṛbhus (so Re, WG). One of the occurrences of the cmpd is in a Ṛbhu hymn, IV.36.5, in a vs. with both a form of the word ṛbhú- and the name of another Ṛbhu, vā́ja-. There the PN interpr. seems correct or at least a pun. However, in the other passages, III.49.1, V.42.12, and this one, all lacking a strong Ṛbhu presence, it seems best to see a more general meaning. Ge seems to follow this course (here and III.49.1, though not V.42.12) but his “vollendeten” doesn’t give much hint as to how he interprets the first member.

The hapax sád-aśva- appears to be the only RVic cmpd with the first member sa(n)t- -- assuming, with most, that sát-pati- contains a reduced form of sádas- ‘seat’ (see EWA s.v.). I take it as semantically related to the derived adj. sátvan-, of warriors ‘the real thing’. So ‘(having) true horses’ in the sense of “good men and true”; English “trusty” works well. We might have expected s(u)váśva- ‘having good horses’ parallel to suvī́ra- at the end of the pāda, but perhaps the poet wanted to vary the expression.

## 05-07
Sustained phonetic play, esp. with p and r/ṛ, in prá-pra (5b), pṛ́śneḥ putrā́(ḥ) (5c), prā́yāsiṣṭa pṛ́ṣatībhiḥ (6a), práthiṣṭa … pṛthivī́(7a).


## 05
Note the phonetic play on initial a and final ā́: arā́... ácaramā́áheva ...

ákavā́.

The syntactic break in the middle of pāda a, after ivéd, and the enjambment across the pāda boundary, with áheva in pāda a the subj. of the verb prá-pra jāyante in b, give the sense of unstoppable motion that the similes also provide.

Flg. Hoffmann (Aufs. II.413 [=MSS 10 (1957) 61-62]), WG and Re (though Re rather mutedly) take ákavā(ḥ) as meaning that the Maruts do not become reduced in power, and Ge’s rather vague ‘vollkommen’ is in the same realm, though obviously without the benefit of Hoffmann’s disc. I prefer to take the adj. as outerdirected -- ‘not stingy, unstinting’ rather than inner-directed ‘not retracting’. The VP sváyā matyā́… sám mimikṣuḥ “They have equipped themselves with their own poetic thought” seems implicitly to contrast with the opening of the previous hymn, V.57.1 iyáṃ vo asmát … matíḥ “This poetic thought from us for you.” This should remind us that the Maruts are both recipients and producers of praise poetry. See the disc. of the opening of this Marut cycle, V.52, where much is made of this dual role. A number of tr. take matí- as the equivalent of ‘will’ or ‘intention’ (van Bradke [Fs. Roth (1893) 119] Will, Ge, Kü [386] Absicht, WG Antrieb), but this stretches the meaning of this word unacceptably. In any case the locution must harmonize with the very similar one in I.165.1 adduced also by Ge: káyā śubhā́… marútaḥ sám mimikṣuḥ / káyā matī.


## 06
Although the adjacency of pṛ́ṣatībhir áśvaiḥ might seem to lend credence to the supposed shifting gender of áśva- ‘horse’ due to the clear fem. form of the preceding adj., it is better to follow the standard tr. in taking the two words as separate, with the fem. refering to dappled antelopes or simply dappled mares that serve as the horses for the Maruts’ chariot.

Pāda c is cleverly constructed: ā́paḥ ‘waters’ would be a perfectly acceptable subject of the following verb riṇaté ‘flow, dissolve’, but it is “bound” to kṣódante with the accent on riṇaté making the syntactic break clear. But the real subject of riṇaté, vánāni ‘trees’, is a much less appropriate subj. than what preceded.

VIII.7.26, adduced by Ge, makes it clear that Heaven is roaring with fear, but the roaring must also represent thunder.

## 06-07
The final word of vs. 6 is dyaúḥ, while pṛthivī́appears in the 1st pāda of 7, implicitly linking this standard pair, although they are contextually separate.


## 07
The first hemistich has distinct sexual overtones, with the Earth spreading herself to receive the Maruts’ “embryo” -- though it is more decorously phrased than V.56.3.

It is difficult to get a causal reading from hí in c. It cannot be connected with the preceding pāda, and the action of c seems irrelevant to d, so connection with the following pāda seems unlikely. I have settled for the craven ‘certainly’.


## 08
See comm. above on the identical vs., V.57.8. Although it is a repeated vs., it fits nicely into this hymn: 1) ámṛtā ṛ́tajñāḥ has ring-compositional relationship with 1d amṛ́tasya svarā́jaḥ; note the twisted phonetic relationship between svarā́jaḥ and ṛ́tajñāḥ. 2) Pāda c: the accented voc. kávayo yúvānaḥ repairs the unaccented identical phrase in 3d. Perhaps this internal quotation is responsible for the metrical problem, 10 syls. with rest after caesura.
