+++
title = "059"

+++
Maruts


## 01
As was indicated in the publ. intro., the referent of the ‘spy’ (spáṭ) is unclear.

Ge suggests a number of possibilities, none compelling; WG take it as the singer. Most bizarrely, Old interprets the word as an interjection. I think it possible that it is the sun. One clue is the repetition of the phrase suvitā́ya dāváne “to give good faring,” which is used of the Maruts in 4d. I therefore think the ‘spy’ must be a being that can function in the same way as the Maruts and provide the same type of benefit. The sun is elsewhere called a spy (X.35.8), provides light for creatures to move about, and appears before and, more importantly, after a storm.

Part of the solution to the foregoing question depends on another problem in the first pāda, the interpr. of the 3rd sg. verb (prá …) akran. It is regularly assigned to √krand ‘roar’ (so, e.g., Gr, Lub), and the standard tr. all interpr. it so. But this interpr.

is by no means universal: both Wh (Rts) and Macdonell instead assign it to √kram ‘stride’. (Old, again bizarrely, takes it to √kṛ.) Narten sides with the √krand contingent (Sig. Aor. 99 n. 254), though without argument, simply asserting “… kann nicht … zum Wz.-Aor. von kram gestellt werden.” On the one hand, of course, the argument against √kram is obvious: it is a seṭ root -- its 3rd sg. root aor. should be, and in fact is, ákramīt. But there are countervailing arguments. √krand is found with the preverb prá in the RV only in IX.77.1 and, at least acdg. to MonWms., nowhere else in Skt., whereas prá √kram is common. Vs. 4d, containing the other occurrence of suvitā́ya dāváne, also contains a verb of movement (at least acdg. to me and Ge), prá bharadhve ‘press forward’; moreover, suvitā́ya elsewhere in the RV regularly appears with verbs of motion (cf., e.g., nearby V.57.1 suvitā́ya gantana), whereas it does not fit easily with verbs of proclaiming (though cf. VIII.27.10 prá ṇaḥ pū́rvasmai suvitā́ya vocata). As for the morphological problem, from the fairly common (9x) 3rd pl. root aor. (á)kramuḥ, an aniṭ-type kran could easily be backformed. If the verb does belong with √kram and the spy therefore strides forth, rather than roars forth, an entity like the sun makes good sense.

The pāda-initial árcā exactly matches pāda-init. árcā in the opening vs. of the opening hymn in the Marut cycle, V.52.1. As there, so here, we can read the preverb prá with that verb, borrowing it either from the vs. initial form or from the third word in the 2nd pāda. In fact this 2nd prá can be read as a preverb in tmesis either with árcā or with final bhare (or both), and in the former case, it could be interpr. as having moved to the end of its clause árcā divé prá right before the caesura with an opening of 5, rather than being the first word of the 2nd clause prá pṛthivyā́ṛtám bhare right after the caesura with an opening of 4. In other words, prá is ambiguously positioned both syntactically and metrically.

Another ambiguous form is táruṣanta (in sandhi) in c, which can be resolved either as finite 3rd pl. med. táruṣante (so Pp, Gr, etc.) or an act. pres. part. masc. pl.

táruṣantaḥ. In the first instance it owes its accent to its clause-init. position; in the latter, because it’s a participle. Since this stem has exactly 3 forms in all of Skt. -- this one, an active taruṣema, and a med. 3rd pl. (-anta replacement?) taruṣanta, there is no way to tell, though, since taruṣanta could also belong to an underlyingly active stem, I’m somewhat inclined towards the act. part.


## 02
The publ. interpr. of d follows Thieme (Untersuchungen, p. 39). WG draw attention to Th’s revised interpr., in Kl. Sch. II.998-99 (and 834), in which he takes mahé as a dual and vidathé as a final dative: “sie halten inne, um den Regen zu verteilen,” closely followed by WG “… haben zwischen den zwei Grossen (Himmel und Erde) zur Verteilung (des Regens).” Some of this seems worth adopting.

Because of the antár a dual interpr. of mahé is attractive, but rather than separating vidáthe from mahé syntactically (the interposition of the caesura, invoked by Thieme and WG, does not seem sufficient reason) and making it a dative (though the stem is otherwise only thematic and a dat. should be excluded), it seems best to return to Old’s suggestion that mahé vidáthe is a dual acc. phrase, as it is in VIII.39.1. I would then emend the tr. to “the men have taken their places between the two great divisions [=Heaven and Earth].” This is in fact where the Maruts as thunderstorm are positioned -- in the midspace.


## 03
The various tr. configure these four similes somewhat differently; I won’t comment in detail on these versions. The most puzzling one is the first, in great part because it is not clear what the Maruts’ horn would be -- perhaps the superstructure of their helmets? or their lightning bolts? (Sāy. takes it as their turban.) Ge suggests that it has a double meaning, horn and Selbstgefühl, but we still need some physical aspect of the Maruts that could be compared to cowhorns, so the second abstract sense doesn’t help much.

Most interpr. take sū́ryo ná cákṣuḥ either as a mistake for gen. sū́raḥ (so Gr, e.g.) or as a decomposed bahuvrīhi, both yielding “like the eye of the sun.” I see no reason to adopt either interpr. The suggested phrase, with a proper gen., is found in 5d sū́ryasya cákṣuḥ (and, of course, elsewhere) in the same metrical position. If Śyāvāśva had wanted to say that here, he would have. Instead he must be comparing the Maruts’ eye to the sun, with both in the nom. Since sū́ryasya cákṣuḥ is a fairly common expression, its appearance in vs. 5 can be seen as poetic repair of the double nom. in our vs. In my view the quality held in common by sun and eye is the light emitted in the journey through space, but this depends on one’s interpr. of visárjane.

Ge gives it a later sense not otherwise found in the RV (Aufhören ‘stopping’, sim.

WG Schwinden); Re takes it as ‘expansion’. I see it as a variant of ví √sṛ ‘stream/run/spread through’. Cf. rájaso visāré I.79.1, used of Agni compared to the sun. In fact, we might consider the two phrases to be variants of each other; both are pāda final, with I.79.1 in a dimeter (hence iambic) cadence, while ours provides a Jagatī cadence.


## 04
Pāda b succinctly summarizes the special skills of the Maruts, which lie in their ability both to produce praise poetry and to perform hypermasculine feats.

The sandhi of kás kā́vyā is irregular, but connected to similar irregular sandhis before kaví- elsewhere. See comm. ad VII.18.2.


## 05
The simile in pāda a requires a hidden term of comparison. The “reddish horses” (áśvāḥ … aruṣā́saḥ) must be, covertly, the flames of a fire; that is why they have the same lineage, because they all flare up from the same source. I doubt that the poet was telling us that all red horses have the same bloodlines! The two middle similes (b, c) seem redundantly phrased, in that in each case one of the terms applied to the subject also provides the verb: prayúdhaḥ prá … yuyudhuḥ (b), suvṛ́dho vāvṛdhuḥ (c). I do not understand the stylistic point of this redundancy, but since it’s repeated in adjacent pādas it must be deliberate.

I also don’t understand the utá in b, placed between preverb and verb (prótá yuyudhuḥ) and with nothing obvious to conjoin. Klein (DGRV I.373-74) takes it as conjoining b with a, but gives no explanation for its position, whose extreme rarity he notes.

Another anomaly in b is the metrical shape of the verb, in pāda-final position: yuyudhuḥ would be far better read *yūyudhuḥ. Although no forms of this poorly attested perfect is transmitted with long reduplication, it’s worth noting the hapax redupl. i-stem yū́yudhi- (X.149.4), a variant of yúyudhi- (2x).


## 07
This vs. contains several syntactic ambiguities of not much moment. The rel.

prn. yé in the 1st hemistich can in principle be picked up either áśvāsaḥ ‘horses’ or eṣām ‘of them [=Maruts]’, and in fact either the horses or the Maruts could easily be compared to birds. I don’t see any way to decide, though it’s true that the default ref.

of any masc. pl. in a Marut hymn is the Maruts.

In b bṛhatáḥ can in principle be acc. pl., gen. sg., or abl. sg., so that it could technically modify any of the three nouns in that pāda: acc. pl. ántān, gen. sg. diváḥ, or abl. sg. sā́nunaḥ, and it is found with both diváḥ and snóḥ (alt. form of sā́nunaḥ) elsewhere. With the standard tr., I take it with ‘back’. Flg. Ge and Re, I assume that the ‘back’ is heaven’s -- and in fact the gen. diváḥ could be read both with ántān and with sā́nunaḥ, between which it is positioned. WG suggest rather that it’s the back of the earth, namely the mountains, and this is worth considering. If they’re coming from the mountain, it may explain why/how they have stirred the nabhanú- of the mountain. Still, the clear phrase diváḥ … sā́nu in the next hymn (V.60.3b) favors ‘heaven’.

On nabhanú- see comm. ad IV.19.7.


## 08
The second clause of pāda a, áditir vītáye naḥ, is underspecified and has been variously interpr. Since vītáye is frequently used in stereotyped passages of gods ‘pursuing’ the oblation, often with a verb of motion, I supply this context here. For parallels, cf., e.g., VIII.20.10 havyā́no vītáye gata.

The nom. pl. demon. eté is pāda-final, which seems an odd position for such a pronoun. But a glance at Lub’s Concordance shows that eté is found in just that place fairly commonly -- e.g., in the next hymn, V.60.5a.
