+++
title = "060"

+++
Maruts


## 01
The opening of the hymn, ī́ḷe agním, is a flipping of the opening of the first hymn in the RV, I.1.1 agním īḷe, but this phrase, in both orders, is found a number of times in the RV. However, it’s worth noting that this is the only other place where it opens a hymn. This is the only occurrence of the ppl. prasattá- ‘seated to the fore/in front’, and it here seems a substitute for the standard puróhita- ‘placed in front’, of Agni as the offering fire on the ritual ground. If ī́ḷe agním is a conscious evocation of RV I.1.1 (or a templatic Agni hymn), then prasattáḥ could be evoking the third word of I.1.1 (agním īḷe) puróhitam.

However, the gambling phrase that follows goes off in a very different direction; as is recognized by all standard tr., the phrase ví cayat kṛtám is dicing vocabulary. For the VP see I.132.1 and Falk (1986, Bruderschaft und Würfelspiel, pp.

126-28).


## 02
The parallelism between the two loc. phrases pṛ̥ṣatīṣu śrutā́su (a) and sukhéṣu … rátheṣu (b) seems clear, but this entails that the Maruts are mounted both on their horses and on their chariots. This is a price that most tr. are willing to pay, but Re avoids it at the price of the parallelism, by attaching the dappled females to the chariots: “… qui sont montés sur les chars aisés conduit par les (antilopes) tachetées.” Since the Maruts are clearly astride horses in the next hymn, V.61.3, I think we can have them there here as well.

The person changes between hemistichs from 3rd (ab: yé tasthúḥ) in the rel. cl.

to 2nd (cd: voc. ugrāḥ … vaḥ) in the main cl.. This is hardly unusual in the RV. The standard tr. register this anacoluthon in various ways, WG most sharply, by supplying a main cl. for ab: “(Sie sind es), die …” and separating the two hemistichs into two sentences. This seems unnec.

## 02-03
Note the concatenation: 2d … párvataś cit# // 3a #párvataś cit … The two vss. also hold the verb rejate/rejata steady (2d, 3b, though in slightly different metrical position, both post-caesura, with one pres. and the other injunc.), but in the first instance it’s earth (pṛthivī́) that trembles and in the 2nd (the back of) heaven (diváḥ, initial in its pāda like pṛthivī́). So the standard pair heaven/earth are contrasted and identically positioned, but they are grammatically non-parallel. There is also a repetition of ‘fear’, though again in different forms -- nominal bhiyā́in 2c, pf. bibhāya in 3c, both pāda-final. This kind of patterned and varied repetition may not reach the heights of poetic art, but it is a pleasing demonstration of the way a RVic poet infuses freshness into the clichéś that are his bread-and-butter.


## 04
The “marks of greatness” of the publ. tr. follows Re’s “signes-de-grandeur”; máhāṃsi must refer to something that can be visible on their bodies.


## 05
The standard tr. (all ultimately deriving from Sāy.) take Rudra and Pṛśni as the joint subj. of a verb to be supplied (“prepared,” vel sim.), with sudínā as obj. (e.g., Ge “Ihr … Vater … (und) … Pṛśni (haben) den Marut schöne Tage (bereitet)”). This seems unnec. The first part of this hemistich (through pṛ́śniḥ) seems simply to define the Maruts’ parentage: pitā́… rudráḥ is answered by pṛ́śniḥ; no ‘mother’ is necessary, because her role as their mother is virtually her only function in the RV and because the bahuvr. pṛ́śni-mātar- ‘having P. as their mother’, modifying the Maruts, is used three times by Śyāvāśva in this cycle (V.57.2, 3, 59.6). As for sudínā, it is used several times in the kind of nominal cl. envisioned in the publ. tr.; cf. IV.4.7 víśvéd asmai sudínā … “All (days) (will be) day-bright for him”; VII.11.2 áhāny asmai sudínā bhavanti “for him the days become bright shining,” both with dat. as here.

The epithet sudúghā used of Pṛśni may be somewhat ironically meant. At least in VI.66 it is said that Pṛśni only once produced milk (vs. 1), that is, she milked out her sons the Maruts, but that she did not give milk to them (vs. 5).


## 06
The second hemistich has a few complications. We can start with the utá vā: what is it conjoining? Ge and Re seem to take it as conjoining the vocc. rudrāḥ and ágne, and Klein (DGRV II.170) explicitly follows this interpr., though giving no other exx. of conjoined vocatives. But esp. given the various choices of place given in ab, conjoined by vā, the more natural reading is to assume it offers another alternative to átaḥ ‘from there’ in c; the most natural of those choices would be “or (from) here.” WG, by contrast, recognize that a choice of locations is what is probably meant, but have to supply the 2nd alternative complete: “von da aus … oder (von wo ihr euch) auch nun (befindet).” My solution may be too tricky to be acceptable, but I think the ‘here’ is implicit in the asya/asyá. First, note that the cross-pāda sandhi … asyā́gne … is compatible with either an unaccented or an accented gen. sg. pronoun. The Pp. takes it as the former, but if it is to be construed with havíṣaḥ in the next pāda, as the standard tr. (incl. the publ. tr.) take it, as an adjective it should be accented (asyá). I do think it has an adjectival role with havíṣaḥ, but I also think this near-deictic is a substitute for an adverb of place like ihá or itás, and the possibility of non-accentuation is an indirect indication that it can also be taken independently of havíṣaḥ to express the potential location of the Rudras here and now on the ritual ground with Agni. I would slightly adjust the tr. to “from there, o Rudras, or (here and) now, o Agni, be cognizant …” The awkwardness of folding Agni into the Maruts’ actions is also on view in the next vs. I do not understand the presence of the future impv. vittā́t. Perhaps with Sāy. (… āgacchateti śeṣaḥ), we should supply a verb of motion that implicitly precedes the action of vittā́t: “from there (come here and) take cognizance …” The following hymn, V.61, gives some support to this scenario. In V.61.17 Night is ordered to carry off the speaker’s hymns to his patron, with an ordinary impv. párā vaha, while the flg. vs. contains a future impv. vocatāt (V.61.18) ordering her to speak for him once she gets there. It may also be that the future impv. was used here for convenience because the future impv. neutralizes number (also person, but that’s irrelevant here) and thus can be applicable both to the plural Rudras and the singular Agni. It’s accented because it follows an extrasentential voc. and therefore counts as being pāda-initial.

The standard tr. take yád as the neut. rel. prn. with havíṣ- as antecedent (“… the oblation that we sacrifice”), but √yaj never takes the offering as object, but rather the god who is the recipient. I therefore prefer to take yád as the subordinating conj.

## 07
The first pāda, agníś ca yán maruto viśvavedasaḥ, is a particularly complex ex. of a reverse vā́yav índraś ca construction, with the subordinator yád placed, in modified Wackernagel’s Position, after the first term and a voc. adj. attached to the second. This sequence of three vss. (6-8) contains three different versions of the awkward pairing of singular and plural entities in a voc. phrase: vs. 6 with its independent non-adjacent vocc. rudrāḥ … ágne, this vā́yav índraś ca construction, and 8a ágne marúdbhiḥ with an instr. of accompaniment. Note that the adj.

viśvavedasaḥ, which, since it’s voc., should technically only modify the Maruts, is more commonly applied to Agni in the RV, and so he should probably be included in its domain.

The problematic epithet ríśādas- has already been discussed; see comm. ad I.2.7. As indicated there, the publ. tr. weakly favors Th’s ‘caring for the stranger’ over Hoffmann’s ‘fastidious’. The original meaning is difficult to get to, because by either etymology (or any other one) the word would by this time be entirely opaque and, with no synchronic lexical anchoring, it would have been free to float semantically and get attached to other words secondarily. It is often used of the Ādityas, both collectively and individually, for whom ‘caring for the stranger’ is a quite congenial reading. But it is also, as here, often used of the Maruts, where it is not so good a fit. But generally when it is applied to the Maruts, it is either with reference to their benevolent and generous aspect (as here, where they are viśvavedasaḥ ‘affording all possessions’ and are urged vāmáṃ dhatta “establish a thing of value”) or is found nearby occurrences with the Ādityas (so here and V.61.16, with Mitra and/or Varuṇa V.64.1, 66.1, 67.2; cf. also I.186.8 riśā́daso mitrayújaḥ) or both (cf. Agni, the Ādityas, and the Maruts all as both viśvávedasaḥ and riśādasaḥ in VIII.27.4).


## 08
The publ. tr. takes āyúbhiḥ in c as a PN (as often), thus identifying a separate group of co-soma-drinkers. The standard tr. take the instr. phrase in c as a further characterization of the Maruts, with āyú- as ‘langlebig’ (Ge, WG), ‘vigilants’ (Re). I now think this is the better course and would emend the tr. to “along with the pure, lively ones who set all in motion.”
