+++
title = "061"

+++
Maruts For the structure of this hymn and its place in the series, see publ. intro.

Although there is an itihāsa in the Bṛhaddevatā (V.50) that supposedly recounts the circumstances of Śyāvāśva’s composition, it was clearly constructed secondarily and fancifully on the basis of the Rigvedic text (see both Old and Ge).


## 01
Note the doubly marked superlative śréṣṭhatama- (also I.113.12), which therefore ought to be rendered as “the most fairest.” It must be nom., not voc., because of its accent, since in a standard voc. phrase it would be unaccented flg.

unaccented naraḥ.

It is somewhat notable that the Maruts are referred to éka-ekaḥ “one by one,” since they are usually not differentiated at all. ### 01-02 These two vss. contain a fairly high percentage of the total number of RVic 2nd pl. active pfs., with the poorly characterized ending -a on the weak stem: āyayá (1b), śeka, yaya (2b). Macd. (VG p. 358) lists only twelve forms in all of Vedic (some of which have more than one token) of the 2nd pl. act. pf., and one of these (anāha) is better interpr. otherwise (see comm. ad VIII.48.5).


## 02
kathā́can be read thus or as kathā́ā́, with the same preverb as in the univerbated āyayá in the rel. cl. of 1b. The Pp. does not read the preverb. It is possible that the variation between kathám in the first question of the pāda and kathā́ is meant to enable the preverb reading, and the publ. tr. reflects that.

With Ge and Re I assume a gapped kvà in c and in 3a. WG simply take them as questions without an explicit interrogative (“Ist ein Sattel auf einem Rücken …?” etc.). The difference is unimportant rhetorically.


## 03
For this vs. see publ. intro.; as pointed out there, the simile in c can either refer to sex or to childbirth.

It is interesting that sakthā́ni is plural. Although there are plural ‘men’ (náraḥ) and therefore twice as many thighs as men, in Classical Sanskrit it is my impression that the dual would ordinarily be used in such a situation, where a number of men each spread their two thighs. RV seems more flexible.

## 03-04
The final word of vs. 3 is jánayaḥ, while the final word of the 1st hemistich of 4 is (bhadra-)jānayaḥ, showing the standard distribution of the ‘wife’ word, with simplex jáni- and jāni- as 2nd cmpd. member. The distrib. here is complicated by the fact that 3c … ná jánayaḥ produces an unusual cadence of four shorts, which

*jā́nayaḥ would easily repair. But since the long-vowel variant never shows up as a
simplex, we should presumably resist the temptation to emend.


## 04
The 2nd pl. impv. etana shows an unexpected full-grade root syllable in the Saṃhitā text, but is read with metrically problematic but morphologically “correct” zero-grade in the Pp (itana). Of course, such full-grade 2nd pl. impvs. are found elsewhere, but in this case I wonder if it’s a secondary extraction from forms cmpded with the preverb ā́, as in V.87.8, also a Marut hymn, with pāda-final étana. See also disc. ad VI.42.2.


## 05
As noted in the publ. intro., the standard tr. (now incl. WG) take sánat as meaning ‘gave’ (Ge schenkte, Re a donné, WG geschenkt hat), not ‘gained’; Indeed Re claims that the stem sána- means ‘give’ in dānastutis, but provides no parallels. I have found none in any of the occurrences of this stem, but by contrast quite a number of exx. of sána- in dānastutis with the expected meaning ‘gain’ (I.126.3, V.30.14; VIII.25.22, 24; 46.22, 29; 68.17; X.62.11). Note, however, the honorable exception of Klein (DGRV I.431) “That one has obtained [my italics] a herd consisting of horses …”; Grassmann likewise gives the verb in this passage its standard meaning ‘erlangen’. The only possible reason I can imagine that this array of skilled philologists resolutely turned their backs on the very clear evidence of the semantics of this root is that they couldn’t imagine that a female could have won or gained these prizes -- though, as noted in the publ. intro., it would be just as anomalous for a female to give them. If I am right that the woman in question is a favored concubine, or even the Favorite Wife (Vāvātā) of later Vedic ritual, of Śyāvāśva’s royal patron, then he may have indulged her with a little gift at the time of the general distribution of bounty. She does, after all, perform services for him, as pāda d shows.

śatā́vayam is almost universally interpr. as ‘consisting of a hundred (/hundreds of) sheep’, with the 2nd member derived from ávi- (so Gr, Ge, Re, Klein; also AiG II.2.140 and II.1 Nachtr. 34), and certainly sheep fit nicely into a sequence with horses and cows. WG demur, suggesting that such a cmpd should rather be

*śatāvya- and proposing an alternate analysis on the model of cátur-vaya- ‘fourfold’
(2x) -- hence “livestock in horses and cows a hundred fold.” However, the -vaya- of cátur-vaya- is not otherwise found in such cmpds and has no obvious source (see AiG II.2.906), and the long final vowel of the first member śatā́- would not be quite as easily explained (though stems like śatā́magha- and śatāvant- also show unetymological long vowels). I do think WG’s point is well-taken that *avaya- is an unlikely deriv. to ávi-, esp. since that stem shows “closed” inflection, but -vaya- ‘- fold’ has its own problems. I suggest rather that the cmpd orig. contained the wellattested deriv. avyáya- ‘sheep-y, ovine’ (hence *śatāvyaya-), which has undergone haplology of the first y. Note that there's a lot of phononological play in these vss.

(sibilants and v's, with a's), inspired by the poet's name Śyāva-aśva: 5a sā́áśvi yam ...

b śatā́vayam ... c śyāvá-aśva [or HvN’s śyāvāśu va] ... 6a śáśī́ yasī ... b … vásyasī, which could have contributed to the deformation of the underlying cmpd. I would therefore keep the older meaning, but with a different analysis of the 2nd member.

Note also that the end of c, (-stut)āya yā́, is nearly identical to the ends of 1b āyayá and 2b (kath)ā́yaya.

## 06-08
As indicated in the publ. tr., I consider these vss. a digression reflecting on the character of women in general, motivated by the introduction of the winning woman in vs. 5.


## 06
The comparative śáśīyas- is attested only twice in the RV, here and in IV.32.3. Though they have different senses in the two passages (‘more reliable’ here, ‘more numerous’ there, at least by my interpr.), the semantic dev. from the positive śáśvant- ‘regularly recurring, in unbroken sequence, each and every’ to the two senses of the comp. is fairly straightforward. Here, regularly recurring > constant > reliable. In VIII.1.34 this development takes a sexual turn, with a śáśvatī nā́rī being one who is “ever ready” for sex (in my interpr.), and a sexual nuance is not ruled out in our passage either -- though here the emphasis is on her dependable qualities compared to the unsatisfactory man.

## 07
The relativization is loose, at least in the Eng. rendering. Literally it should be “More reliable than a man is a woman who discerns the thirsting one …,” etc.

The lexeme ví √jñā means ‘discern, recognize’, and a full rendering of the implication of these VPS would be something like “who recognizes (that a particular man) is famished …” -- the idea presumably being that, having recognized their plights, she then sees to them, each in his own need. I have folded this two-step process into ‘pay attention to’. If she does see to the needs of each, the third in the series kāmínam ‘the desirous / lusting one’ again introduces the sexual: she feeds, clothes, and has sex with the three in turn, at least by my interpr. The standard tr.

have a tendency to attenuate the third term -- e.g., Klein (DGRV I.432) “the one desiring (aid)” -- but in this saucy hymn I think sex is never far from the surface. I do have to admit, however, that kāmín- is not otherwise used of sexual desire, but has a more general application, incl. to the Maruts in this same cycle (V.53.16).


## 08
On vaíradeya-, lit. ‘what is to be given for a man/hero’, as Wergeld or blood money, see Roth (ZDMG 41: 672-76) and Macdonell-Keith Vedic Index s.v. vaira.

Another indirect ref. to the same phenomenon is found in II.32.4 vīráṃ śatádāyam “a hero (for whom) a hundred (cows) are to be given.” In our case the person in question is hardly worth the name ‘man’ and would be better off dead than alive, since his relatives would still receive the standard recompense for a vīrá, whatever his personal failings had been. It is telling that he is called a paṇí- ‘niggard’, a reminder to Śyāvāśva’s patron that stinginess is a grave flaw.


## 09
On this vs. see publ. intro. As detailed there, I take the vs. as an elaborate pun. On the one hand a young woman (yuvatíḥ) is narrating the course of a race (or perhaps the progress of the horses that are to be given to the poet as his prize) to the poet -- thus the word vartaní- ‘course, track’ in b and the two chestnut (horses) (róhitā) in c. (Note also that śyāvá- is not only the short form of the poet’s name but also, more usually, a horse color term.) But a more intimate scene is signalled by her low voice (√rap is ordinarily used of murmuring or muttering; see the esp. telling passage in the Yama/Yamī hymn X.10.4, where it is contrasted with √vad), her use of a nickname “Dusky” (śyāvá-), and esp. the pf. part. mamandúṣī ‘having intoxicated, beguiled, seduced’ (I follow Kü [366-67] in taking the pf. as transitive and supplying ‘me’ as its obj.). And the whole vs. can be read as a description of sexual intercourse. The ‘course’ would be the course of the sex act, and the two ruddy ones in c can be any paired female body parts; given the use of the same verb ví √yam here as in 3b, where men spread their thighs, they may be thighs, but the labia and breasts are also possible. Both Ge and Re take the dat. purumīḷhā́ya in c as a PN and therefore not coreferential with śyāvā́ya in b. But it makes more sense to interpr. purumīḷhá- in its full lexical sense ‘having many rewards’ (so also WG), describing the poet (víprāya in d) who has received his dakṣiṇā from his patron and who is in fact Śyāvāśva -- and implying that part of this dakṣiṇā is the seductive woman in this very vs. On Purumīḍha in later Vedic see comm. on the next vs. As a number of others have noted (e.g., Hoffmann, Injunk. 150), though the Pp. reads arapat, the actual form may be the injunctive rapat; the Pp’s augment is not realized metrically or in the transmitted text. This doesn’t affect the interpr. one way or the other. Though Gr lists práti as a preverb with rapat, this lexeme is not otherwise found (in all of Skt., if Mon-Wms is to be believed), and given the distance between the two words and what would be an unusual position for a preverb in tmesis (pāda-initial but in the pāda after the verb), I think it unlikely that they are to be construed together. I take práti as adverbial, reinforcing the intimacy of the scene, hence my ‘face to face’.


## 10
My interpr. of the dānastuti vs. proper differs from the standard, which has in my opinion been unduly affected by the later Vedic rationalization of the passage.

Both JB (I.151) and PB (XIII.7.12) briefly narrate a tale in which Purumīḍha and Taranta figure as the two sons of Vaidadaśvi, but as we just saw, purumīḷhá- is better taken in its literal sense. I also take tarantá- not as a PN but in lexical value. In either case it is likely a thematization of the pres. participle tárant- (cf. AiG II.2.211), showing the same accent shift as AV jīvantá- from jī́vant-, and it should mean ‘overcoming, victorious’ à ‘victor’. By contrast I do think vaídadaśvi- is a PN, but a speaking name, as the vṛddhi deriv. of *vidád-aśva- ‘finding / acquiring horses’ (cf. vidád-vasu-), an appropriate name for a patron. It is worth noting that both names Śyāvāśva and Vaidadaśvi have Iranian counterparts; see Mayrhofer Personennamen s.vv.

How to distribute yáḥ and yáthā and whether to interpr. the latter as a subordinator or a simile marker are the syntactic problems in this vs., and diff. tr.

have diff. solutions. I take yáḥ as marking a generalizing rel. cl. (‘whoever …’) and yáthā as a simile marker, with c a nominal cl. functioning as the main clause to ab.

The verb in b, dádat is a short-vowel subjunctive (“whoever will give …”) but can also be interpr. as a thematized injunc., which in turn can be read with Vaiśvadaśvi (“as V. did”). If I had had the courage of my convictions, “did” would not be in parens. in the publ. tr.


## 11
As indicated in the publ. intro., this vs. marks the beginning of the second, more conventional hymn in this composite, at least in my analysis.

Technically speaking ‘horses’ should be in parens.

It is not clear if īm has its usual acc. function: it could anticipate mádhu in b, though that seems somewhat distant and that participial phrase is otherwise fully contained in b; it could function as a reflexive marker (“drive themselves”); or it may be one of the rare instances of functionless īm.

I have silently depluralized śrávāṃsi, since ‘fames’ is not English. Perhaps the point here is that each Marut has his own śrávas, though, since they are seldom distinguished, this may be overthinking it.


## 12
This vs. has produced more consternation than it deserves, because of the reluctance of many interpr. to allow yéṣām to be coreferential with the subj. of vibhrā́jante. In these interpr., if the subj. of that verb is the Maruts, then another referent for yéṣām must be found; if yéṣām refers to the Maruts, then another subj. of the verb must be found. See Old’s lengthy disc., which includes the differing suggestions of numerous scholars (incl. also interpr. yéṣām as *yé eṣām) but doesn’t reach firm conclusions. Of modern interpr., Re takes yéṣām as the Maruts and makes ródasī the subj. of the verb: “les Deux Mondes brillent au loin”; in a fractured sense this goes back to Max Müller’s tr. in SBE 32, but Müller emended the verb to

*bhrā́jate and took ródasī as sg., whereas Re mentions no such emendation and
seems to be taking ródasī as dual, which will certainly not work grammatically with a pl. verb. WG seem to have accepted the *yé eṣām interpr. Ge, surprisingly, is more relaxed and allows coreference under the rubric of “der reflexive Gebrauch des Relativs,” which seems perfectly plausible to me: they flash with their own splendour.

The “bright ornament” of c is the sun: rukmá- is so used elsewhere in clearer context (VI.51.1, VII.63.4).


## 13
I have taken the two negated adjectives at the end of b and c, ánedyaḥ and ápratiṣkutaḥ, as predicated, in contrast to all the standard tr. There is, of course, no way to tell.


## 15
Whose dhī́- is it? Ge, Re, and WG all assume it is the mortal’s (e.g., Ge “Ihr … führet den Sterblichen recht nach seinem Sinn”), but the placement of the phrase itthā́dhiyā́right after praṇetā́raḥ and at some distance from mártam at least weakly suggests that it is the Maruts’s. Since, as I have had occasion to remark many times, the Maruts sometimes have the role of verbal praisers and sometimes are the recipients of the same, I think both readings are possible and the poet may have wanted it to remain ambiguous. Tichy’s tr. (-tar-stems, 300-301) seems to attribute the dhī́- to the Maruts or at least remains neutral: “Ihr bringt den Menschen vorwärts … recht mit Bedacht.” Note that in the cmpd yāma-hūti- it is the Maruts’ journeys (yā́ma-, 1st member) but the mortal’s invocations (-hūti-, 2nd member).

## 17-19
As noted in the publ. intro., the patron’s name Rathavīti (‘pursuit of the chariot’?) in 18, 19 is punned upon. In 17 (before he is explicitly mentioned, though the patronymic Dārbhya would presumably evoke him) Night is asked to carry the hymns “like a charioteer” (rathī́r iva); in 18 the 2nd cmpd. member -vīti- is derived from the same root √vī ‘pursue’ that supplies the verb ápa veti ‘goes off track’.


## 17
I do not understand why the goddess Night acts as the intermediary between the poet and his patron; see Ge’s n. 17-19, which doesn’t seem to me entirely satisfactory.


## 18
The Rathavīti phrase is in the loc.; the publ. tr. renders it as if the addressee, which is technically incorrect. It is either a loc. absol. without participle or a “chez/bei” expression: “speak for me thus when R. (is present) / at R’s.” Since the net result is the same, I have kept the easier-to-parse addressee tr.


## 19
Ge and Re take gómatīḥ as a ref. to the Gomatī river; WG to “cow-rich lands.” I think it’s likely a pun, and I supply víśaḥ ‘clans’ for one half of the pun.

[V.62-78 JPB]
