+++
title = "079"

+++
Dawn The meter of this hymn is Paṅkti, with five 8-syllable pādas. The fifth in all vss. is the refrain, a voc. phrase sújāte aśvasūnṛte “o well-born lady, liberal with horses,” which is essentially detachable. So the hymn comes across as standard Anuṣṭubh, with an appended and superfluous refrain. As indicated in the publ. tr., the contents are for the most part uninspired, contrary to most Dawn hymns, though closer inspection reveals more intricate patterns than a superficial reading turned up.

## 01-03
These three vss. follow the same pattern: Dawn is urged to repeat for us now a previous action she performed in the presence of and for the benefit of a previous patron. The name Satyaśravas Vāyya appears in all three vss. (The Anukr.

attributes the hymn to Satyaśravas Ātreya, but as Ge points out [n. 1d] he is surely the patron, not the poet.) Curiously in vss. 1 and 3 Satyaśravas Vāyya is identified as the previous patron, while in vs. 2 he is the current patron and the previous patron has a different name. This chronological slippage is somewhat confusing -- and is emphasized by having identical clauses differing only in the tense/mood of the verb and the demonstrative vs. relative pronoun: 2cd sā́vy ùcha sáhīyasi, satyaśravasi vāyyé 3cd yó vyaúchaḥ sáhīyasi, satyaśravasi vāyyé The insistence on this generous patron of the past has a purpose: there is a parallel insistence on the patrons of today in the rest of the hymn. Although only Dawn is addressed, the poet is clearly sending a message to the patrons, to generously redistribute the wealth that Dawn will bestow on them, on the model of Satyaśravas.


## 01
The phrase mahé … rāyé divítmatī is very reminiscent of IV.31.11 mahó rāyé divítmate, with an adverbial maháḥ but a dat. divítmate modifying rāyé. See comm. ad loc. It seems likely that our fem. divítmatī is a nonce adaptation to the fem.

context. As for divítmant-, I now tentatively accept the analysis of divít- as containing the root noun -i-t- and would alter the tr. to “as one coming from heaven” or “as heaven-sent one.”

## 02-03
Is the comparative ‘mightier’ (sáhīyas-) used to assert that Satyaśravas Vāyya is mightier than Sunītha Śaucadratha? The Pp. reads accented ví even directly before accented aúchaḥ (2b, 3c), where we might expect univerbation and loss of accent on the preverb. The Saṃhitā text is of course ambiguous.

sā́with the 2nd ps. impv. ucha simply shows the common use of the sá/tám prn.

with 2nd ps. impvs.; see my 1992 “Vedic ‘sá figé’: An inherited sentence connective?” Elaborate semantic/functional interpr., like Re’s “de la même manière, dans les mêmes conditions (heureuses)” (EVP 3, ad loc.) or WG’s yā́… sā́… “welche du … als solche du” are unnec.


## 03
yó beginning pāda c represents yā́+ u (note Pp. yó íti), but the apparent masc.

form causes a momentary stir.


## 04
With the standard tr. I take cd as the main cl. corresponding to the rel. cl. in ab, despite the lack of a resumptive pronoun and of a verb. The pattern established in the first 3 vss. of alternating rel. and main clauses makes this interpr. likely, even though the subjects have changed.

Contra Ge, who takes ab as referring to the singers and cd to the patrons, I think both hemistichs refer to the singers. So also Re and WG, an interpr. that goes back to Sāy. (see Ge’s n. 4). Here the circulation of wealth appears to be a two-way transaction: the poets praise Dawn and receive bounties. How that happens is laid out in the next few vss., which complicate the two-way model.


## 05
The two-party sketch in vs. 4 gives way to a three-party model: when Dawn gives them the go-ahead, as it were, the patrons, who have not yet been mentioned in the hymn as a class, bestow bounties on the poets.

This vs. presents some difficulties, not least the referent(s) of the various plurals and their grammatical identity. With most, I take the gaṇā́ḥ to be the priest/poets who were also the subj. of the preceding vs. and who greeted Dawn with praise in 4ab. The first hemistich of this vs. expresses the potential reciprocity for this praise: Dawn considers its producers worthy to be given bounties, the same bounties referred to in 5c.

I part company with the standard tr. in the 2nd hemistich. Most take the subj.

here to be the patrons, who either physically surround the priest/poets (so I read Old) while giving to them or have succeeded (using a sense of pári √dhā [‘conclude’ not found till later]) in giving, finished giving to them (Ge, Re, WG). By contrast I consider the subject still to be the priest/poets. They surround the patrons, who are giving to them. dádataḥ is of course grammatically ambiguous: I take it as acc. pl., while the rest interpr. it as nom. pl. The use of the word gaṇá- ‘throng’ to refer to the poets in ab helps explain the surprisingly physical verb ‘surround’ in cd: the picture is of the over-eager (váṣṭi-) ritual recipients almost ganging up on the patrons.

## 06-07
Here the patrons, who have properly compensated the priest/poets, receive their own reward from Dawn. Interestingly it is not material, but rather yáśas- ‘glory’

-- though glory consisting of heroes (vīrávat), meaning, narrowly, sons, but also men belonging to our side who will perform well in warfare and acquire battle glory. The
emphasis on non-material rewards for the patrons continues in vs. 7 with “lofty brilliance and glory” (dyumna̐bṛhád yáśaḥ), while the poets receive material gifts, rā́dhāṃsi áśvyā gavyā́“benefits consisting of horses and cows.” For a similar split between material rewards for the singers and non-material ones for the patrons see V.86.6, where the patrons get “lofty fame” (śrávo bṛhát) and the singers get wealth and refreshment (rayím … íṣam).


## 08
The two-party model returns here, with Dawn bringing the gifts directly to the priest/poets.


## 09
The last vs. before the summary vs., this one brings the hymn ringcompositionally back to its beginning with its opening impv. vy ùcha ‘dawn forth’, a lexeme found 4x in vss. 2-3 (2b, 2c, 3b, 3c).

As noted in the publ. intro., this prohibition and its striking simile are the most notable features of this hymn. The mā́clause contains a present injunctive, not an aorist. Hoffmann (79) explains it as an inhibitive, not a prohibitive -- his standard explanation for the use of present injunctives in such contexts. Although IH has demonstrated that this explanation of the use of pres. injunctives with mā́doesn’t hold -- they are generally used when an aor. injunc. is not available -- in this case, Hoffmann’s analysis may be correct. There is a perfectly fine root aor. to √tan and it in fact occurs once with mā́(I.91.23), so we may need to seek a functional explanation somewhat in the manner of Hoffmann’s. On the other hand and after further thought, I wonder if the pres. stem is used in this context in order to express a durative prohibitive, rather than an inhibitive. That is, starting now, when you dawn, don’t dawdle at your work. She’s just been ordered to dawn, which makes the start time now, not in the past, but the poet fears that once she starts she’s going to draw it out longer than she should. It shouldn’t be inhibitive in KH’s sense, because that would mean she’s already started the work. On still another hand, however, since this is functionally the final vs., which refers back to the beginning of the hymn, perhaps the poet is saying that Dawn has been at work since that beginning and should finish it up.

It is difficult not to take sū́raḥ as a nom. sg. to a thematic stem (so, e.g., Ge and Re), although many occurrences of sū́raḥ are better interpr. as gen. sg. to svàr- -- incl. in this same sequence sū́ro arcíṣā in VIII.7.36. WG take it as a gen., but then must identify a different subj. for tápāti, leading them to introduce Varuṇa and a superstructure of explanation that seems over-elaborate. As indicated in the publ.

intro., I think the point of contact is the assumption that thieves work at night and if the sun rises on them, they will be caught out.


## 10
pramī́yase is variously rendered, but ‘diminish’ or the like fits both the root and the context. Thieme’s principled insistence on ‘tauschen, täuschen’ (ZDMG 41 [1941] 107-8 = KlSch 32-33) produces an unconvincing interpr., requiring further shoring up: “… die du … nicht getäuscht wirst (= du, deren Absicht zu schenken nicht vereitelt wird).” That Dawn does not diminish in cd harmonizes with the increase in gifts that the poet urges in ab.

The dat. stotṛ́bhyaḥ may be construed with uchántī rather than pramī́yase, thus “dawning for the praisers, you do not diminish” (so Re, Th), but this would have no appreciable effect.
