+++
title = "080"

+++
Dawn As noted in the publ. intro., every vs. but the first begins with eṣā́‘she, this one here’.


## 01
In contrast to the relentless nominative representation of Dawn in the rest of the hymn, this 1st vs. begins with 3 full pādas of accusative describing her.


## 03
I previously accepted the standard view that áprāyu- is a root noun compound derived from prá √yu (√yu 2 ‘keep away’) and is essentially a variant of áprayuchant- (cf., e.g., EWA s.v. YAV2 , p. 404 with lit.). There are, of course, two formal problems with this analysis: the long ā of the preverb, which, notably, is not found in áprayuchant-, and the lack of the empty -t- suffixed to root nouns ending in short resonants (cf. dveṣo-yú-t- to this same root). It should also be noted that the Pp.

analyzes áprāyu as ápra-āyu (also in I.89.1); although the Pp. is not always a reliable guide, its evidence should be considered. The issue has recently been discussed in detail by Scar (439-40), who in the end rejects the prá √yu interpr. in favor of a bahuvrīhi with ā́yu- ‘youth, lifespan’, a neut. noun that is less well-attested than both the neut. ā́yus- ‘id.’ and the derived adj. āyú- ‘lively’. The semantics of this cmpd.

are a little tricky: Vedic people always pray to have their lifetimes lengthened, using the preverb prá (generally with √tṝ), so *prā́yu- should mean ‘having a lengthened lifetime’, a good thing, and áprāyu- the reverse, hence a bad thing. However, Scar suggests ‘nicht alternd, ewig jung’, a good thing. Although it’s somewhat disturbing that the usually positive collocation of prá and ā́yu(s)- remains positive when negated, Scar’s reconstruction of the semantic development seems plausible. A further development from ‘ever young’ à ‘lively’ à ‘not slacking, unremitting’ can be envisioned -- esp. if, as I think likely, the word ceased to be transparent and got partially captured by prá √yu and its negated adj. áprayuchant- (a scenario also sketched by Scar). Note áprayuchan nearby in V.82.8. Though I do not feel that the publ. translations of áprāyu- need to be altered, my analysis of the form now starts in a very different place. A somewhat different value is proposed for áprāyuṣ- in I.127.5, but starting with the same basic elements; see comm. ad loc. ## 081
Savitar The hymn falls into three symmetrical sections (vss. 1-2, 3, 4-5) based generally on their verse/pāda-initial elements, but these sections do not correspond to thematic divisions. The first section, vss. 1-2, is marked by ví. Though the first pāda of vs. 1 lacks ví, the repetition is insistent starting with pāda b víprā víprasya ...

vipaścítaḥ, followed by hemistich-initial ví in 1c ví, 2a víśvā, 2c ví along with other, internal vi’s: 1c vayunāvíd, 2a kavíḥ# / 2b prásāvīd ... dvipáde / 2d ví rājati#. The ví may play on the middle syllable of the god’s name savitár-, and it also ties him to the vípra- he is identified with in 1b. Given that the next hymn (V.82) plays on the first syllable of his name (su/sav) and the root from which it’s derived, it may not be farfetched to suggest that this section focuses on the 2nd syllable.

Both hemistichs of the next vs. begin with the rel. prn. (3a yásya, 3c yáḥ), a relatively low-energy repetition between the vi’s of vss. 1-2 and the utá’s of 4-5. In these last two vss. the repetition of utá explodes: every pāda save for the last (5d) begins with utá, seven occurrences in all. Beside these patterns of repetitions, it is striking that the first and last pādas of the hymn do not participate; the last pāda serves as an extra-hymnic summary pāda.

The name Savitar is found once in each vs. ### 01
With Ge I take vipaścítaḥ as nom. pl. qualifying the (human) vípra-s, who attend to the inspiration of “the lofty inspired poet,” namely Savitar (sim., but not ident., WG). By contrast, Gr, Re, Th (Unters. 21) take vipaścítaḥ as gen. sg., modifying Savitar. The latter interpr. requires that the gen. phrase víprasya bṛható vipáścitaḥ is dependent on mána utá … dhíyaḥ in the previous pāda. In other words, the poets hitch up the mind and insights of Savitar, not their own. This would not be impossible but is less likely in the context of Vedic poetic composition, and the middle voice of yuñjate suggests that the objects of the verb are the poets’ own.

The word páriṣṭutiḥ is a hapax, and the lexeme pari √stu is otherwise only late and rare. I do not know exactly what it refers to, but it is likely a technical ritual term.

## 02-03
Just as Savitar follows the lead (prayā́ṇam) of Dawn in 2d, the other gods follow his lead (also prayā́ṇam) in 3a. The masc. rel. prn. yásya beginning 3 makes it clear that the referent has changed -- which is not clear from the English.


## 03
The publ. tr. takes instr. ójasā as belonging to the gods, whereas the standard interpr. assign this ójas- to Savitar. Although there is no way to tell from the Skt., I think “with/through his power” is the better choice, esp. given the parallel instr.

mahitvanā́in d, which is definitely Savitar’s. I would so emend the tr.

The second hemistich at first appears quite straightforward syntactically, but the syntax clashes with what we expect the sense to be -- and on further inspection the syntax turns out to be skewed, too. I’m afraid that in the publ. tr. this has produced regrettable incoherence. Looking at the syntax first, we seem to find a textbook case of a relative / correlative construction: yáḥ … sá …, with an accented verb in the rel. cl. vimamé, hence “who measured out the earthly (ones), he …” But there is a problem, because the direct object of the rel. cl., pā́rthivāni, should be completed by rájāṃsi, which is technically in the main clause beginning with sá.

This does not bother Ge or Re, who tr. the two acc. pls. together in the rel. cl. (e.g., Ge “der die irdischen Räume durchmessen hat …”). WG by contrast do notice the problem and tr. pā́rthivāni in the rel. cl. and rájāṃsi in the main cl. and supply all the missing parts in each cl.: “(er), der die irdischen (Räume) durchmessen hat, er ist Etaśa, der … die (irdischen) Räume (durchmessen hat) …,” which is similar to my publ. tr. -- though a bit more coherent -- but also a bit clumsier. The publ. tr. assumes that the 2nd set of spaces are ‘heavenly’; cf. IV.53.3 ā́prā rájāmsi divyā́ni pā́rthivā “(Savitar) has filled the heavenly and earthly spaces.” The semantic problem is posed by the phrase sá étaśaḥ smack in the middle and apparently starting the main clause, coreferential with the yáḥ in the rel. cl., which we all had good reason to think was referring to Savitar. One solution has been to take étaśa- as an adj., ‘dappled’ vel sim (so Sāy.: etavarṇaḥ śubhraḥ śobhamānaḥ) or ‘hastening’ (so Gr, though not for this passage). But most take it as the PN Etaśa, the famous, if often enigmatic, horse of the sun. Following that tactic, as far as I can see we must take it as an identification or a simile, with Savitar equivalent to Etaśa -- not as a complete change of subject.

There are two ways I can see to do this -- 1) take sá étaśaḥ as a parenthetical interjection within the relative clause, which otherwise occupies all of cd: “Who measured out the earthly spaces -- he is Etaśa! -- with his greatness -- god Savitar …” or 2) to keep the rel./corr. structure but fold étaśaḥ in as unmarked identification / simile: “Who measured out the earthly (spaces), he, (like/as) Etaśa, measured out the (heavenly) spaces with his greatness: god Savitar.” I prefer the latter, because it allows us to supply ‘heavenly’ in the main clause, and surely the point of contact between Savitar and Etaśa in this context is that Etaśa crosses the heaven daily, “measuring it out,” as he pulls the sun’s chariot. Etaśa as a measurer of earthly spaces makes little sense. I would therefore emend the publ. tr. to the 2nd alternative.

That Savitar is identified with Etaśa in one of his aspects may be supported by the explicit identifications with other figures in the next two vss.: mitró bhavasi (4d), pūṣā́bhavasi (5b).

## 04-05
4b and 5d are entirely parallel in structure: 4b utá mitró bhavasi deva dhármabhiḥ 5d utá pūṣā́bhavasi deva yā́mabhiḥ This strict parallelism should extend to the two final instr. pls. -- that is, Savitar should become the god in question by virtue of a quality/entity held in common and expressed in the instr. I therefore think it unlikely that dhármabhiḥ is the vague “nach deinen Eigenschaften” of Ge or “par (tes) dispositions-naturelles” of Re; it needs to refer to an actual thing, like Pūṣan’s journeys. In the publ. tr. I render it as ‘supports’ (sim. WG “durch deine Unterstützungen”), keeping in mind that Savitar often holds up his arms, which may function as literal supports. But it may rather be something like ‘institutes, ordinances’, referring to the regulation of time and activity that Savitar performs.
