+++
title = "082"

+++
Savitar As noted in the publ. intro. as well as just above ad V.81, this hymn contains numerous verbal and nominal forms of the root √sū ‘impel’, whose agent noun ‘Impeller’ Savitar is grammatically. Every vs. in the hymn contains a form of the name savitár-, but play on the root doesn’t start till vs. 3. There are eight such forms, with a concentration on the impv. in the middle: pres. subj. suvā́ti (3b), aor. injunc.

sāvīḥ (4b), pres. impv. suva (4c, 5b, 5c), them. loc. savé (6b), them. acc. (satyá)savam (7c), with a return to the original pres. subj. suvā́ti (9c). Starting with vs. 3, only vs. 8 lacks such a form -- but s u vā(dhīr) with distracted suvā fits phonologically, though not etymologically. We might also note that the first two vss., which lack the punning root forms, do contain forms that might be considered phonological precursors: 1c sarva(-dhā́tamam), 2a sváyaśastaram, 2c svarāj i yam.

With so much concentration on form in this hymn, we should not be surprised that the content is not particularly stimulating.


## 01
As Re points out, this vs. is reminiscent of the Gāyatrī mantra, III.62.10.

Putting them side-by-side, it is difficult not to assume that one of them (presumably this one) is a deliberately fractured version of the other: III.62.10 tát savitúr váreṇyam, bhárgo devásya dhīmahi dhíyo yó naḥ pracodáyāt


## 01
tát savitúr vṛṇīmahe, vayáṃ devásya bhójanam śréṣṭham sarvadhā́tamam, túram bhágasya dhīmahi Note esp. the first pādas, whose 1st 2 words are identical and whose last words both belong to √vṝ ‘choose’. In the 2nd pāda devásya is identically positioned, and the phrase bhárgaḥ … dhīmahi is echoed by our pāda d bhágasya dhīmahi, but with a diff. noun (bhága-, not bhárgas-). The remainders of the vss. diverge, but the tone is certainly set by pāda a and the similarities of b/d. It is difficult to know what to make of this -- whether the Gāyatrī mantra had already achieved some sort of local fame that lent itself to parodic imitation or whether the similarities are just the result of the usual formulaic underlayer (though there are no other vss. that begin tát savitúr). It’s also somewhat striking (and could be used as an argument either way) that the vs. in our hymn is not a Gāyatrī but an Anuṣṭubh -- and it is the only Anuṣṭubh in a Gāyatrī hymn. If III.62.10 was already known as the (or a) Gāyatrī mantra, our poet could be slyly tweaking that reputation. Or this can all be my post-hoc invention.


## 08
With regard to áprayuchan see disc. of áprāyu- ad V.80.3.

## 08-09
There are no overt main clauses in these last two vss., whose vs.-init. rel.

prns. yáḥ hang off the accs. in vs. 7, but it is possible that the vs.-final savitā́(or in 8 deváḥ savitā́) in both cases constitutes a de facto main cl.


## 09
A further question concerns the last clause of 9c, prá ca suvā́ti savitā́. Ge (fld.

by Klein [DGRV I.248 n. 93, 251]) takes cá as subordinating, tr. ‘wenn’, thus producing a dependent clause dependent on another dependent clause “who …, when he …” (Re has a fussy interpr. involving an ellipse that I find puzzling.) I see no reason for Ge’s interpr., but take the ca as conjoining the two clauses ab and c (or their verbs). The accent on suvā́ti is already accounted for by its presence in a rel. cl., and I think it more likely that the poet would end the hymn with a ringing announcement of what Savitar is going to do rather than a conditional uncertainty about whether he’s going to do it.

The phrase āśrāváyati ślókena is technically an etymological figure, somewhat obscured by the l-form of ślóka- and its highly lexicalized state.
