+++
title = "083"

+++
Parjanya


## 01
The verb dadhāti can be read with both rétaḥ and gárbham, the latter in the idiom gárbham √dhā ‘impregnate’, found again in 7a.


## 02
This vs. quickly modulates from the physical to the moral, with Parjanya the scourge not only of the trees but of demons and evil-doers.


## 03
We might expect *rathī́r iva here, to the vṛkī́-stem rathī́-, but the ending -ī́ must belong instead to the -ín-stem rathín-, which does have an independent existence. See Old ad loc. I take the whip in the simile to be lightning; both a whip and a lightning flash are slender, fast, unpredictable, and have a non-straight trajectory. The flash of lightning would also do the revealing in pāda b. Note also that thunder is covered in pāda c and rain in b and d, so lightning is what’s otherwise absent.

“Rain-bearing cloud” (varṣyàṃ nábhaḥ) in d seems like a quick and a bit halfhearted poetic repair of “rain-bearing messengers” (dūtā́n … varṣyā̀n) in b. The two pādas hold the verb kṛṇute constant.


## 05
Note the unusual geminate in nánnamīti, dissimilated from *námnamīti.

In pāda b the question is whether the scene is set during the thunderstorm, with frightened quivering livestock, or afterwards, as they gambol in new growth.

Pāda a speaks for the former, c for the latter. Ge (and, it seems, WG) opt for the latter, while I favor the former, though without strong grounds.

The first three pādas of this vs. begin with yásya; the fourth does not, but ends with a close phonological match, yacha.


## 06
The default referent of ásuraḥ pitā́naḥ “the lord, our father” here is of course Parjanya, since this is a Parjanya hymn and the subject is urged to pour out water (cf., e.g., Hale, Asura, 46-47). However, I wonder if this is not rather a reference to Dyaus Pitar, or at least an identification of Parjanya with Dyaus Pitar.

For Heaven as pitár- ásura-, see X.124.3 as well as disc. and other related passages in my “The Divine Revolution of RV X.124” (Ged. Staal, 2016), 294, and of course Zeus famously ‘rains’ in Greek.

## 07-08
These two vss. ring changes in the oppositional pair úd ‘up and ní ‘down’: 7c ní añcam, 7d udváto nipādā́ḥ, 8a úd acā ní ṣiñca. Note that 7b udanvátā might seem to belong with this sequence, but udan- there is the ‘water’ word.

## 08
Hoffmann’s positing (Aufs. I.164 = KZ 79 [1965]) of a separate root √añc ‘scoop, draw (water)’ seems unnec., at least for this passage.
