+++
title = "084"

+++
Earth For a discussion of this hymn as an implicit riddle, see my “A Sanskrit Riddle in Three Movements: Rig Veda V.84,” in Beyond Hatti: A Tribute to Gary Beckman, ed. Billie Jean Collins and Piotr Michalowski, 2013, pp. 155-58. Its placement immediately after the Parjanya hymn, to which it is attached as a kind of pendant, is important. Note also that all three standard words for ‘earth’ are found in the hymn: pṛthivī́(1b), bhū́mi- (1c), and kṣám- (3b), though in different cases and usages. The riddling middle vs. lacks such a word.


## 01
The exclamation with which the hymn opens, báḍ, has a very un-Indo-Aryan shape, with a plain b and an unmotivated retroflex ḍ. This ḍ becomes ḷ before words beginning with a vowel, showing the standard Ṛgvedic intervocalic change -- which, interestingly, operates across word boundary here and in the 7 other passages in which báḍ is followed by a vowel; in VIII.101.11 it becomes ṇ before a nasal, in VIII.101.12 a ṭ before s. In 4 of its occurrences, incl. this one, it is immediately followed by itthā́; the combined sense of the two particles escapes me. The nonSanskritic phonology of báḍ suggests that there is a colloquial flavor to the word, but it is hard to capture exactly what that is -- esp. as the rest of the vs. doesn’t show markedly low register features.

Note the phonetic figures párvatānām# … pṛthivi# (ab), #prá … pravatvati# (c), and #mahnā́… mahini# (d), all positioned at pāda boundaries and all involving a fem. voc. as the 2nd word. The first two pairs of course also play off each other.

This first verse presents an unsurprising picture of the earth, weighed down by mountains whose slopes define her and providing support for the life that flourishes upon her. This vs. serves as scene-setter and contrast to vs. 2.


## 02
vicāriṇi is generally taken as ‘far-wandering’ vel sim. (e.g., Ge ‘du Wandelbare’), but cf. X.173.2, where the mountain to which the newly installed king is compared is ávicācaliḥ ‘unwavering’; remember also that earth is said to ‘bob up and down’ (nánnamīti) during the thunderstorm in the preceding hymn (V.83.5).

This is the riddle vs.: the puzzle involves positing a number of qualities of the earth that don’t appear to be characteristic of her -- quite unlike the first vs. -- and implicitly asking under what circumstances these unlikely attributes would be true of the earth. who is not explicitly named. In this vs. she is addressed as a ‘wobbler’ (vicāriṇi), she is associated with nights (aktúbhiḥ), she is said to “fling moisure forward” (perúm ásyasi), and she is silvery (arjuni). Neither the unsteady actions nor the silver color and association with night are earth-like.

As Thieme already suggested (Gedichte, 58), the nights can represent the darkness of monsoon clouds and her wobbling results from the thunderstorm. She is also ‘silvery’ with rain, which she ‘flings’ in the forms of streams and rivulets down her slopes, the slopes mentioned in verse 1.


## 03
The first half of this verse restores to us the familiar steady, sturdy Earth of vs. 1, while the second half identifies the special circumstances that held in vs. 2.

Because it is made up of two subordinate clauses, it must be attached to the previous verse and the 2nd person referent must be the same. This verse, with its straightforward diction and balanced construction, provides the answer to those dullards in the audience who failed to solve the implicit challenge of vs. 2.

The standard tr. all supply a verb for vidyútaḥ -- e.g., WG “wenn … die Blitze (blitzen) …” -- but I don’t see why the lightning bolts can’t ‘rain’ -- in particularly violent thunderstorms lightning flashes can seem to come as thick and fast as raindrops.

Note that ‘earth’ is reunited with her usual formulaic companion ‘heaven’ in the final pāda of the hymn. It should be kept in mind that this is the only hymn dedicated only to Earth in the RV, instead of to Heaven and Earth.

[V.85 JPB]
