+++
title = "086"

+++
Indra and Agni The hymn begins with the voc. dual dvandva índrāgnī, and a form of that cmpd is found in 2d, 4b, 6a; vss. 3 and 5, which lack the cmpd., begin with dual pronouns (táyoḥ and tā́respectively), while dual forms of both the demonst. and the rel. pronoun are also common elsewhere in the hymn.


## 01
The 2nd hemistich is a little tricky. As noted in the publ. intro. it seems to concern the Vala myth, though with Trita as hero -- an odd substitution in a hymn at least half dedicated to Indra. Moreover, there’s a functional slippage in the accusatives with the verb prá √bhid ‘split (forth)’. The first acc., neut. pl. dṛḷḥā́, is of course very common, used of fastnesses or strongholds (which usually get split or otherwise breached). The standard interpr. (Gr, Old, Ge, Re) take it with dyumnā́ (e.g., Old “feste Herrlichkeiten”), but this is an uneasy collocation. The dyumnā́ should be the brilliant things desired to be obtained; they are more likely to be held within strongholds than to be strongholds themselves, and the consistent use of dṛḷhá- as ‘fastness, stronghold’ makes it unlikely that it can here refer to the thing held rather than what holds it within. I assume that prá √bhid can take a double acc.: ‘split X (to release) forth Y’, with X the container and Y the contained. Old is quite dismissive of a variant on this explanation, but I do not see the objection -- particularly as whatever vā́ṇīḥ refers to, it is more likely to be the contained than the container. As for vā́ṇī-, this stem usually refers to music or voices. Ge’s tentative suggestion, that these are the voices of the cows released from the Vala cave, makes the most contextual sense -- even though, as Ge points out, the word is not otherwise used of animal noises. On the other hand, as he also points out, it is used of rivers, so that application to non-human sounds that are comparable to a choir of human voices is possible. That vā́ṇī- is also sometimes used of the choir that encourages Indra in a Vala context (e.g., III.30.10) might add an additional resonance to the usage here, but I do not think it is the primary reading.


## 02
The publ. tr. starts the vs. in the 2nd ps. (“you two who”) and ends in the 3rd ps. (“these two”). This does not represent the text entirely fairly, because the grammatical person is entirely unclear until the last pāda, which contains an acc. dual dvandva and a 3rd ps. dual acc. prn. (tā́) and a 1st ps. pl. verb. Until pāda d Indra and Agni are represented only by the insistent rel. du. yā́(a, b, c). The vs. could therefore be couched entirely in the 3rd ps. (“the two who …”), as the standard tr. do. I stand by my modulatory tr. because, based on vs. 1 with its voc. dual dvandva and 2nd du. verb ávathaḥ, we start vs. 2 assuming the 2nd ps. context carries over, and nothing disturbs that assumption until the very end of the vs. ### 02-04
Vs. 3 is the middle vs. of the hymn, since vs. 6 is in a different meter and is an extra-hymnic summary vs. It has the marks of an omphalos, esp. semantic and syntactic obscurity. The real difficulties lie in the central 3cd along with 4a, which is verbally related to 3cd by the problematic eṣ-forms (see below). The omphalos is framed, in classic omphalos fashion, by indrāgnī́(tā́) havāmahe in 2d and 4b.


## 03
3cd has elicited much disc.; see esp. the lengthy treatment of it by Old, with several different possible tr. supplied, Ge’s n. 3cd, and a fairly detailed disc. in WG’s n. Among the problems are 1) what is the referent of the ‘wood(en)’ in instr. drúṇā; 2) who is the subj. of the verb and is it his hands (gábhastyoḥ) that are in question; 3) what is gávām construed with; 4) what case is vṛtraghná, that is, what is its pausal form? I will begin with 3): flg. Ge (n. 3cd), I supply a loc. *éṣe to govern gávām “(in the quest) for cattle.” This is supported by éṣate in this pāda, éṣe ráthānām “in the quest for chariots” in the next pāda (4a) likewise with gen., and X.48.9 gávām éṣe.

As Ge suggests, *éṣe éṣate may have been simplified by a sort of word-haplology. As for 4), the underlying form of vṛtraghná — contra the Pp and most interpr., who take it as dat. vṛtraghné, I think it is a genitive (vṛtraghnáḥ), dependent on gábhastyoḥ -- a possibility floated but ultimately rejected by Old. A parallel passage with a weapon (in fact, a didyút; see our 3b) being wielded in the arms of a man is found in VII.25.1 pátāti didyún náryasya bāhóḥ. A dat. does not make much sense here because ā́√īṣ doesn’t ordinarily take a dative, nor does práti, so we are left with no way to fit a dat. *vṛtraghné into the existing syntax of the sentence, save as a free-floating dat. of
benefit. (Re, curiously, seems to take it as a loc. “chez Vṛtrahaṇ” [sic the retroflex ṇ].

This seems to go back to an idea of Hillebrandt’s that it belongs to an otherwise unattested thematic stem; see Old. This has nothing to recommend it.) In answer to 2), if I am thus correct that the hands are those of Indra, it seems likely that he is also the subject of éṣate. Otherwise the subject is an unidentified other party or (so most interpr.) is the missile (didyút) of pāda b. What then to do with drúṇā? This is the most problematic of the problems. Most interpr. take it as the handle of the didyút (which, acdg. to WG, might be a sort of Vedic boomerang). In VIII.96.11 and IX.98.2, the same instr. seems to refer to a wooden paddle or the like. A similar wooden implement, usable as a weapon, may be meant here -- though it seems a come-down for vajra-wielding Indra. More likely it is equipment esp. suitable for cattle herding -- a prod or goad, and this would account for Indra’s trading in his usual weapon for something more appropriate to a quest for cows. Of course, since soma is usually poured into wooden cups, this may also depict Indra with a wooden soma cup in his hands, preparing to drink before he goes out on his quest. I might emend the publ. tr. to “With the wooden (goad / soma-cup) in the hands …” I am not at all certain of the correctness of any of these answers to the questions posed above. Nor do I have any explanation for práti, beyond pointing out that 4c begins with rhyming pátī. And, most especially, I don’t understand why this cramped and obscure half-verse is found in this otherwise rather anodyne hymn.


## 04
As noted above, the éṣe + GEN. here helps explain 3cd. It is also integrated into the omphalos-framing (semi)repeated pāda indragnī́havāmahe. Most standard tr., however, render éṣe here not as ‘in quest of, in pursuit of’, but as ‘rush, run, course’ (e.g., Ge “im Rennen der Wagen,” Re “pour la course de chars”, WG “anlässlich eines Wagenrennens”), implicitly accepting Gr’s separation of éṣa- into two stems ‘das Hineilen, Eilen’ and ‘Aufsuchen, Begehren’. éṣe + GEN. is found three times elsewhere in V -- V.41.5, 8 (both rāyá éṣe “in quest of wealth”) and this very pāda in V.66.3 -- and it seems uneconomical to give these similar syntagms in the same maṇḍala two entirely different meanings. Old (ZDMG 62: 477-78 [=KlSch 286-87]) makes similar points, arguments accepted by Bl (RReps ad V.66.3).


## 05
The verb puró dadhe gives a more Agni-esque cast to the vs. than the more Indraic vss. that have preceded.

The standard tr. separate c and d into two clauses, but I think the two expressions are meant to be balanced against each other. The idea seems to be that though (cid) the two gods deserve portions (árhantā), I have set them out as if they theselves were portions (áṃśā-iva), prizes for a prize-winning steed. What it means to “set them out” I don’t know. It’s worth noting that √arh regularly takes pītím ‘drink(ing), share of drink’ as object (e.g., V.51.6), so the reciprocal notion would be familiar to the audience.


## 06
havyá, so accented, is generally ‘oblation’, as opposed to hávya- ‘invocation’.

However, in this case it is difficult not to see a pun, with the hymn just completed counting both as an oblation (“like ghee …,” pāda c) and an invocation, accompanying the physical oblation. The pun is further enabled by the adj. śūṣyà- ‘forceful’, which in its other two occurrences (I.54.3, VII.66.1) modifies types of speech (vácas- and stóma- respectively).

This pun may help explain the curious expression “like ghee purified by stones” (ghṛtáṃ ná pūtám ádribhiḥ). The problem of course is that it is soma, not ghee, that is purified by stones. It is very doubtful that stones could play a role in preparing melted butter (pity the poor cow), and although the root √pū is occasionally used of ghṛtá- (e.g., VI.10.2 and esp. the very similar VIII.12.4 ghṛtáṃ ná pūtám adrivaḥ) -- and consider the English term for ghee, “clarified butter” -- it is overwhelming characteristic of soma. The standard tr. deal with the disharmony in this simile by separating it into two -- e.g., Ge “durch die Presssteine (gepresst), wie Schmalz geklärt.” By contrast, I think the ill-assorted technology in the simile was deliberately introduced, to match the same punning lack of fit in the frame, where the forceful/noisy havyá- has been poured (áhāvi): the jarring “ghee pressed by stones” calls attention to the more subtle mismatch in the frame. We might almost call this ritual synaesthesia.
