+++
title = "087"

+++
Maruts Re nicely characterizes this hymn (in his comm. on vs. 5) “l'hymne est fait de débris empruntés au cycle ancien des M.” Certainly there is a sense that the vss. are constructed of loosely connected phrases, which may well be connected with the unusual meter.

As disc. in the publ. intro., the final word of the 2nd pāda of each vs., evayā́marut, appears to be an exclamatory internal refrain without syntactic connection to the rest of the vs. Ge by contrast takes it in each case as forming a nominal sentence with unexpressed Viṣṇu (usually, but see below): “(Viṣṇu is der) mit dem die Marut gern kommen.” But though Viṣṇu is surprisingly prominent in this hymn, I don’t think he outranks the Maruts, and the formation of evayā́marut is too peculiar to be folded into a conventional (if invisible) nominal clause. Though sg., I think it must refer to the Maruts, who, after all, appear in the collective sg. in the rest of the vs. (pādas cde) as a troop (śárdha-). For the phrase on which this is built, see V.41.16 evayā́marutaḥ.


## 01
The grammatical identity of girijā́(in sandhi) ‘moutain-born’ is problematic (see Old’s disc.). The Pp. takes it as girijā́ḥ, which could be nom. pl. fem. (so Gr and Re) and modify ‘thoughts’, but this makes little sense: the thoughts in question are surely home-grown, as it were, not outsourced from a mountain. (Though Old’s offhand suggestion that the cmpd might mean “in der Rede geboren,” with otherwise unattested loc. sg. of gír- ‘hymn’, is worth considering as a second punning reading, suitable for ‘thoughts’. See girā́in 3a.) girijā́ḥ could likewise be nom. sg. masc. and refer to Viṣṇu. This is the basis for Ge’s first Satzparenthese “-- er ist der Berggeborene, mit dem die Marut gern kommen --” and he is followed by Scar (136).

But switching the ref. to Viṣṇu from dative (… mahé … víṣṇave, marútvate) to nominative in the middle of a pāda right at the end of the dative phrase is highly unlikely. Although the morphology doesn’t entirely work, I think it must be a dative.

The problem of course is that the dat. to this -ā́-root noun should be underlying

*girijé, which should appear in sandhi as girijá, not -jā́, as here. It should be noted,
however, that datives in -é to root nouns in -ā́- are exceedingly rare (see Macd., Vedic Gr. p. 252; AiG III.125), and beside them exist infinitives in -aí to roots in -ā (Macd. loc cit.; AiG III.129) like pratikhyaí, vayo-dhaí. Esp. in this sandhi situation, I see no reason why this extended dat. sg. would not have been available even to a non-infinitive. In favor of a dat. referring to Viṣṇu is the very similar passage I.154.3 prá víṣṇave śūṣám etu mánma, girikṣíta urugāyā́ya vṛ́ṣṇe, with the semantically corresponding dat. root-noun cmpd. girikṣíte ‘mountain-dwelling’ in a lengthy dat. phrase referring to Viṣṇu and prá … etu mánma matching our matáyo yantu almost exactly. (Curiously WG tr. girijā́as if a dat. parallel to marútvate “… zum grossen Viṣṇu, der in Begleitung der Maruts ist, der in den Bergen geboren ist,” but Scar, who was responsible for this vol. of WG, seems to hold onto the nom. sg. interpr. in his n. -- though the n. is a bit incoherent.) The hapax cmpd bhandád-iṣṭi- is variously rendered. Both Ge and WG (latter flg. Gotō, 1st pres. cl., 224) interpr. -iṣṭi- as “sacrifice” (hence Ge’s ‘opferliebend’, WG ‘deren Opferungen erfreuen’). But -iṣṭi- is far more often ‘desire, quest, seeking’ than ‘sacrifice’ in the RV, and notice the concentration of such forms of √iṣ in the previous hymn (V.86.3, 4, at least by my interpr.). As Lowe points out (Participles, 270-71), bhandát- and its ilk result from reanalysis of governing cmpds, producing pseudo-act. participles to roots without an active paradigm (like √bhand, which is otherwise only middle). The cmpd is exactly parallel to rhyming krandád-iṣṭi- (X.100.2), whose interpr. also varies. Although both cmpds have the look of governing cmpds, neither √bhand nor √krand is transitive; I therefore think we have more or less standard bahuvrīhi semantics ‘having a fortunate quest’ and ‘having a roaring quest’ respectively, whose English I have adjusted to something more palatable.

The adjectivally accented taváse beginning d points up the nominally accented rhyming śávase at the end of e. With Re I think the Maruts are being equated with śávas- itself, but it would be possible to take śávase as a separate purpose dative ‘for strength’ (with or without távase).

On dhúni-vrata- see comm. ad V.58.2.


## 02
This vs. is quite loosely constructed. To begin with, the rel. cl. of ab has no obvious main clause, though the two yé’s do, of course, refer to the Maruts, who show up in the voc. in c. The rel. cl. could also hang off vs. 1, with pl. yé picking up the collective sg. śárdha- in 1cde.

The next question is what belongs with each yé. The easiest solution and the one taken by the standard tr. (as well as Klein DGRV I.118) is to take the first as a nominal cl. yé jātā́mahinā́and the 2nd as containing the accented verb prá … bruváte.

But there are several factors against this. For one thing the prá that begins the 2nd pāda is actually a repeat of the one that begins the vs. (#prá yé jātā́ḥ … yé ca …, prá … bruváte …); that is, the first prá seems to have been extracted from the second yé clause and fronted around the first, which may well be a violation of RVic clause structure and at best is highly unusual. If we take prá …, prá … bruváte … as the verb for both yé clauses, as I do, it is considerably less problematic. Moreover, the yé … yé ca construction is far more at home in expressing complementary pairs (see Klein I.115-16) than in conjoining coreferential entities with semantically unconnected predicates, as the standard tr. requires (e.g., Klein 118: “Who were born with greatness and who now themselves proclaim (their might) with knowledge.”). In my interpr. the yé … yé ca construction expresses two types of Marut birth, “born/produced by might” and “self(-produced/born),” with the svayám signalling the 2nd type. The Maruts are called svajā́ḥ in I.168.2; cf. also I.64.4 sākáṃ jajñire svadháyā … “They [=Maruts] were born all at once by their own power.” I see only two arguments against my interpr.: 1) the nú in the second yé clause, which might mark a chronological progression (as in Klein’s tr. [also WG]; Ge and Re both ignore the nú, and it’s certainly true that nú need not be temporal); 2) the apparently required underlying assumption that there are two groups of Maruts. As to that, I don’t think the complementary pairing needs to indicate that there are two distinct groups of Maruts sorted by their means of birth, but rather that we can view their births in different ways.

The next question is how to construe prá … bruváte. Ge and WG both take it as reflexive “announce themselves,” but prá √brū is not elsewhere reflex./pass., even in the middle. Re supplies as object “leur naissance,” which can be justified, but I prefer Klein’s “their might.” The resonant word śávas- is found on either side of this phrase, at the ends of 1e and 2c and is the focus of 2cde, and prá √brū elsewhere takes such objects (indriyám I.55.4, bálāni X.54.2).

The rest of the vs. consists, in my opinion (flg. Re), of two parallel clauses, each beginning with instr. of respect, followed by tád and a gen. referring to the Maruts (2nd ps. in c, 3rd in d), and, as predicate, a negated form of √dhṛṣ ‘dare (against), assail’. The tád is specified as śávas- in the first clause, which identification carries over into the second: krátvā tád vo (maruto) nā́dhṛ́ṣe śávaḥ dānā́mahnā́ tád eṣām ádhṛṣṭāso (nā́drayaḥ) This striking parallelism makes the interpr. of Ge and WG unlikely: they take krátvā as the weapon that someone might try to use, unsuccessfully, against the Maruts’ śávas-, whereas dānā́mahnā́they take as instr. of respect. Actually, Ge’s treatment is more complicated: his tr. reflects the interpr. I just paraphrased (“Diese eure Macht ist nicht durch Einsicht zu erzwingen”), but in his n. 2c-e he describes the three instr.

as parallel: “Der Sinn ist jedenfalls, dass keiner wagt, es ihnen an Umsicht, Freigebigkeit und Grösse gleichzutun.” As Ge points out (n. 2e), masc. pl. ádhṛṣṭāsaḥ has been attracted to the number and gender of the simile (ádrayaḥ); it is still specifying śávaḥ in the frame.

It’s also worth noting that pādas c and d both contain ná in sandhi with a following vowel in quite similar phonological sequences: nā́dhṛ́ṣe … nā́drayaḥ. The first ná is the negative (matched by a- in ádhṛṣṭāsaḥ in the next pāda); the 2nd is the simile marker.


## 03
Like vs. 2 this vs. begins with several relative clauses (yé pāda a, yéṣām c), with no clear main clause.

The first pāda of this vs. is syntactically straightforward, but we might wonder why the Maruts are heard “through a/their hymn.” In answer, there is the fact, often referred to above, that the Maruts are singers as well as sung-to. Further, in this context their “hymn” may be a metaphorical reference to thunder. It is also possible that it is a pun, as indicated in the publ. tr. and also implicitly by Scar (537), with the

-ā variant form of the i-stem loc. sg. of girí-. (Interestingly Scar’s alternative “mit
einem Lied (/im Gebirge)” in the root noun book is not reflected in his tr. in WG, which limits itself to “mit ihrem Lied.”) Of course, such a loc. sg. would be wrongly positioned: it is the -au loc. sg. form that is overwhelmingly found at pāda end (see, e.g., Lanman, Noun Infl., p. 385), but as a secondary punning reading the “wrong” form could be acceptable, esp. as it precedes a consonant, as most forms of loc. sg. -ā do. Thus the Maruts would be heard “on a mountain” -- as their storm often is.

The hapax nom. sg. írī is problematic formally and semantically. In this sandhi sit. the long ī final can only belong to a devī-type -ī stem or an -in-stem. It is usually cited as the latter (e.g., Gr, EWA), but this analysis seems excluded formally because -ín-stems are always suffix-accented. An underlying -in-stem is emphatically denied by AiG II.2.328 (“Die Barytona v. írī … gehören nicht hierher”; see also Old’s serious doubts). Debrunner (AiG II.2.407-8) seems to favor (if “favoring” means sticking it in that section but then calling it “ganz unklar”) a masc.

devī-type -ī-stem, but of course such stems are rare and problematic in all their occurrences. Nothing in the passage actually excludes an analysis as a feminine -īstem, but who would such a feminine be? The other question of course is what is it derived from and what does it mean. I follow the line of least resistance that has been fld. by a number of others and connect it with írya-, which is better attested though not much clearer, and is found in another Marut hymn in V, V.58.4; see comm. ad loc. If the basic sense is something like ‘energetic’, the form of írya- in V.58.4 is positive in sense, while írī is negative.

I do not understand the pāda-final ā́. Assuming that ī́ṣte belongs to √īś, that root does not otherwise appear with ā́(or any other preverb). It’s worth noting that ī́ṣṭe here is the only t-full 3rd sg.; the usual and very well-attested 3rd sg. is, of course, ī́śe. We might try to connect the form with √īṣ or √iṣ, but neither is promising formally or semantically.

The last pāda, prá syandrā́so dhúnīnām, confronts us with a lexical conundrum: it contains two plurals, one nom., one gen., both of which are good Marut words. For the Maruts as syandrá- see V.52.3, 8; for dhúni- see dhúni-vratain this hymn (1e) and V.58.2, as well as the simplex adj. in numerous passages (e.g., V.60.7). So which one modifies the (unexpressed) Maruts, and what should we do with the other? The poet seems to be messing with our minds: we encounter the first, syandrā́saḥ, and understandably assume it refers to the Maruts, then come to the second, dhúni-, which is an even more characteristic Marut word, and have to readjust. Ge supplies ‘chariots’ (Wagen, sim. WG Fahrzeuge) with the nominative, and the publ. tr. tentatively follows that. Re manages to make both words refer to the Maruts, “(dieux) bruyants qui rapides (vont) de l’avant,” breezily remarking “il n’est pas indispensable de sous-entendre <<les chars>>.” But, though I’m sympathetic to his intuition that both words should refer to the Maruts, the grammatical difference is unambiguous. In Max Müller’s tr. of this hymn (SBE 32), he tr. “the rushing chariots of these roaring Maruts come forth” and notes that “chariot” was Oldenberg’s suggestion (presumably in their consultation on the SBE translations; the suggestion is not registered in the Noten). One of the problems with supplying ‘chariots’ is the preceding pāda (d), also in the nom. pl., which seems clearly to describe the Maruts.

If syandrā́saḥ does not refer to the Maruts but to their chariots, we must either assume that the flashing entities in d are also chariots or put an unsignalled break between the two pādas. The publ. tr. essentially does the latter, but it is unsatisfactory.

Ge does the former, which isn’t satisfactory either, and WG stir the pot even further by supplying ‘weapons’ as the comparandum in d.


## 04
The “common seat” (samānásmāt sádasaḥ) is presumably one shared by Viṣṇu and the Maruts and is also presumably the same as the sadhástha- in the previous vs. (3c) -- perhaps the midspace? The standard interpr. (incl. mine) also assume the same seat (or a similar place) is the referent of svā́t ‘from his own’ in pāda c. For other exx. of the idiom √yuj + ABL. ‘yoke from’ with ‘seat’ in the abl., see Old.

Similar to áyukta tmánā is V.52.8 prá ... yujata tmánā; in the latter passage the verb is used absolutely, without expressed obj. That is possible here too, though it is also possible, and indeed more likely, to take víṣpardhaso vímahasaḥ in d as the obj. (so also Re and WG), referring to horses, an interpr. that saves supplying a verb to govern that phrase, as Ge does (“lenkt”). (See Max Müuler’s solution below.) It should be noted, however, that neither of these adjectives is otherwise used of horses: víṣpardhas- is found twice elsewhere, once of human contenders (I.173.10), once of, apparently, flames (VIII.23.2); vímahas- is only attested once elsewhere, in I.86.1 of the Maruts. Max Müller in the SBE 32 tr. takes the two adj. as a voc. phrase addressed to the Maruts. This seems unlikely in the middle of a sentence devoted to Viṣṇu and only turning to the Maruts in its last word, nṛ́bhiḥ, and so a ‘horse’ interpr.

seems the best course.

The publ. tr. renders ádhi ṣṇúbhiḥ as “upon the (mountains’) backs,” but in accord with the standard sense of this phrase (e.g., V.60.7) and in harmony with the standard tr. I would now alter this to “along the (mountains’) backs.” This complicates the rendering of the rest of the clause, because there is no verb of motion, just ‘yoke’. Both Re and WG supply an expression to provide this motion: Re “(pour courir) à travers les hauteurs” and WG “(zur Ausfahrt) über die (Berg-)Rücken.” Reluctantly I would join them and supply something like “(to travel) along …” The standard explanation of śévṛdha- as a haplology of *śéva-vṛdha- (already Gr, endorsed by AiG I.279, tentatively also by EWA s.v. śéva-) seems correct, but this does not settle its sense. Cmpds in -vṛdha- have a range of senses, both transitive and intransitive, and of relationships to their 1st member, and none of the quite varied contexts in which śévṛdha- appears is sufficiently diagnostic. Several of them apply to Agni as the ritual fire just kindled (X.46.3, X.61.20 [the latter accented śevavṛdhá- ]); once (I.54.11) it is used of ‘brilliance’ (dyumná-) and once (III.16.2) of ‘riches’ (rā́yaḥ). The preponderance of the evidence, esp. the two “fire just born” passages, seems to point to an intransitive/passive reading of -vṛdha- and an instr. reading of śé(va)-, hence ‘growing strong through kindness/benevolence’. Although an intrans. reading of the publ. tr.’s “strengthening with kindness’ is possible, this English expression is more likely to be read as transitive, and I would therefore alter the tr. to the clearer ‘growing strong …’ What this descriptor means in our passage is entirely unclear to me -- that the Maruts are treating Viṣṇu well and he thrives?


## 05
Note the chiastic phonetic figure that begins the vs.: svanó ná vo.

The caus. injunc. rejayat needs an obj. I supply ‘earth’ on the basis of intrans.

rejate passages with bhū́mi-, pṛthivī́, et sim. as subj., but any standard cosmic feature will do (Re ‘l’univers’, WG ‘alles’).

Pace Gr, ṛñjáta is better analyzed as a 3rd pl. mid. athem. form than a 2nd pl.

act. them. All the standard tr. follow the 3rd pl. mid. interpr.

The source of sthā́raśman- is disputed. First note that this peculiar form can be partially motivated contextually: 6c begins sthā́tāro, so there was some incentive to begin our pāda with a word of similar shape. We can begin by dismissing the odd Pp analysis of this cmpd, sthāḥ’raśman-. It is difficult to know what this is meant to represent. AiG II.1.316 and II.2.9 take sthā́- simply as the cmpded root or root noun, which would be a highly unusual cmpd. type. Bloomfield (RVReps ad loc.) suggests that it’s “a kind of haplology” from sth(ir)ā́raśmānaḥ, with sthirá- ‘firm’ as 1st member (note Sāy.’s gloss sthiraraśmayo), and this is accepted by Ge (n. 5d). It is not clear where the long ā- of his posited sth(ir)ā́- would come from, however; is he thinking of a nom. pl. syntagm *sthirā́raśmā́naḥ, with univerbation and loss of the noun’s accent? Moreover, in the Nachtr. to AiG II.1.316 [=Nachtr. 87] Debrunner points out that haplology of Bl’s posited form should produce *sthirā̆śman- (undoubtedly why Bl calls it “a kind of haplology”). Re proposes a 1st member adj.

*sthāmán- ‘bien en place’ or ‘solide’, internally derived from the noun sthā́man-
‘station, standing place’, but this requires several more steps derivationally and semantically, and the haplology (if that’s what he sees it as) would involve loss over an intermediate syllable and loss of a heavy consonant-final syllable, both of which are problematic: sthāmán-raśman-. Certainly sthirá- makes the most sense semantically, but, as noted above, Bl’s haplology runs into formal difficulties.

However, if we begin with my observation that 6c #sthā́tāro makes a sthā opening desirable, an irregular reduction of *sthirá-raśman- may be the best option. In fact if we operate with a slightly different form of the 1st member, the development may be easier to explain. I suggest positing a reduced form of sthirá-, namely *sthrá-, showing the same -irV- ∼ -rV- alternation as índra- ∼ *índira- (metrically guaranteed, but not transmitted in the Saṃhitā; cf. AiG I.55) and the 3rd pl. med. pf. endings -ire and -re (AiG I.23). *sthrá- would thus show the loss of an apparent svarabhakti vowel, rather than the insertion of one. The posited cmpd *sthrá-raśman- would then undergo liquid dissimilation, not haplology. This still doesn’t explain the long ā́-, but the parallel sthā́tāraḥ might help there.


## 06
Note #sthā́tāraḥ … sthana#.

This vs. reprises some of what came before. The focus on śávas- earlier in the hymn (1e, 2cde) is emphatically revived with ab … vṛddhaśavasaḥ … śávaḥ; the hapax epithet suśukvan- in the nom. pl.. suśúkvānaḥ in 3b is cleverly echoed by the pf. part. śuśukvā́ṃsaḥ, where the redupl. śu- matches the prefix su-; and the simile in 3d agnáyo ná svávidyutaḥ appears in reverse order (and a different shared quality) in śuśukvā́ṃso ná-agnáyaḥ. There is also a local repetition of tveṣá- in 6b, echoing the same stem in the same position in 5b.


## 07
This vs., too, reprises earlier material: there is a 3rd “fires” simile, this time marked with yathā, not ná, and extended over the pāda boundary (agnáyo yathā, tuvidyumnā́ḥ); avantu in b echoes avatu in 6b in the same metrical position; the ‘seat’ returns for the third time (pāda c), with yet a different word: sádman- versus 3c sadhástha- and 4b sádas-.

The last two pādas present several problems. One is how to reconcile yéṣām and śárdhāṃsi, which are presumably coreferential and refer to the Maruts. Simplest is to accept Ge’s “der reflexive Gebrauch des Relativs” (n. 7d); cf., e.g., V.61.12 and comm. thereon. The publ. tr. does not render yéṣām literally, but as “when … of them,” for the sake of English, since “at whose drives” is awkward in context.

The causal connection between the journey of the Maruts (d) and the spreading out of the earth (c) is clear in V.58.7, also adduced by Ge: prátiṣṭha yā́man prthiv ̥ ī́cid eṣām “Even the Earth has spread herself at their journey,” but pāda c cannot be brought into the domain of the relative in d (though Old tries) because of the lack of accent on the verb paprathe in c. Instead d and e must together make a circumstantial clause dependent on c. With Ge and Re I supply a verb of motion ‘ap(proach)’; this can be partly generated from the ā́in c, though that ā́is primarily a postposition with the loc. and is not in the right place for a preverb in tmesis. The étana in the next vs. (8a) may support the supplying of a verb of motion here.

The next question in de is the grammatical analysis and reference of maháḥ, which presents us with entirely too many possibilities: abl./gen. sg or nom./acc. pl. of máh-, nom. sg. of mahá-, adv. mahás. On the basis of the gen. phrase in the next vs., 8c víṣṇor maháḥ (cf. also 1a mahé … víṣṇave), I take it as gen. sg. and supply Viṣṇu: the Marut troops are here said to be Viṣṇu’s. This more or less follows Ge; Re takes maháḥ as adv., WG as nom. sg. See also Old’s disc.

The final problem is the bahuvrīhi ádbhuta-enas-, which is found once elsewhere (VIII.67.7). The problem is to find some plausible overlap between the senses of the two members and a plausible reason why whatever is so constructed should apply to the Maruts. The standard sense of énas- is ‘offense, transgression, outrage’; ádbhuta- is famously problematic, but probably the most widely accepted analysis currently is as a negated form of √dabh ‘deceive, trick, harm’ (see EWA s.v.), hence ‘infallible, unerring’, shading (probably because of loss of transparency) into ‘wonderful, astonishing’. Put these together and you get the highly unconvincing ‘having infallible offenses’ or the like -- not a good epithet for a favored group of gods. Clearly something has to give, and in most interpr. it’s the semantic integrity of the parts; e.g., Re decides that énas- here preserves an earlier sense, derived from its relationship to inóti and means ‘élan’, yielding a cmpd “à l'élan extraordinaire,” which fits smoothly into the context by virtue of suppressing the semantics of both cmpd members. In the other occurrence of the cmpd in VIII.67.7 I take it as applying to the Ādityas (most others see it as a gen. sg.) and meaning ‘whom (others’) offenses cannot mislead’. That is, the stripped-down sense is ‘possessing unmisleading/misleadable offenses’, but the offenses are committed by others and the Ādityas are not tricked by them. This may provide more tricky structure than a bahuvrīhi can quite manage, but it does preserve the lexical senses of both members.

It may mean this here as well -- the Maruts are not more trickable than the Ādityas -- and I propose that as an alternate tr. But the publ. tr. takes a different route, with the sense ‘harm’ for √dabh, hence ‘whose offenses are beyond harm’ -- meaning, perhaps, that the violence and turmoil attendant on the Maruts’ stormy passage on the one hand leave no lasting damage and on the other cannot be held against the Maruts. They are not moral lapses.

Note the figure in c: pṛthú paprathe … pā́rthivam, which is both phonological and etymological


## 08
The first word in the vs. adveṣáḥ must be adverbial; it of course resonates with the 2nd to last word in the vs., dvéṣāṃsi.

The construction of the gen. (or possibly, in principle, abl.) phrase víṣṇor maháḥ isn’t entirely clear. Old is insistent that it belongs with the voc. samanyavaḥ, hence “of equal fervor with Viṣṇu,” but this adj. is not otherwise construed with a third party but indicates that those so described are equally fervent with each other.

Moreover, the genitive is not the most likely case for the proposed meaning, and we might also expect the gen. phrase to lose its accent or take vocative accent if it were part of the vocative phrase. The standard tr. take the gen. as simply identifying the Maruts as “Viṣṇu’s,” and this may well be the best way to do it. The publ. tr.

construes it with smát ‘together with’ at the beginning of d, as Gr also indicates. The genitive case is problematic, however: smát takes the instr. Further, as Ge points out, rather than smát we should expect *asmát, the 1st pl. abl. prn. to be construed with yuyotana … ápa dvéṣāṃsi “keep hatreds away from us”; see parallels cited by Ge in n. 8d. Unfortunately asmát does not work metrically. WG cleverly suggest that the end of c and the beg. of d, underlyingly *yuyotanā̆ *asmát, were combined in sandhi as *yuyotanāsmát and then decoupled first into *yuyotanā, smát and then, with shortening of the variable final vowel of the impv., to the transmitted yuyotana, smát.

The instr. daṃsánā must belong with the simile: cf. VIII.101.2 tā́bāhútā ná daṃsánā ratharyataḥ “With their wondrous skill as if with their arms they drive their chariot,” also adduced by Ge.


## 09
The first two pādas of this vs. are essentially variants on the first two pādas of the previous vs., with 8a gātum étana corresponding to 9a gántā and śrótā hávam identically opening both b pādas. The adverbial adveṣáḥ ‘without hatred’ in 8a is matched by arakṣáḥ ‘undemonically’ in 9b, though the adv. has been moved to the second cl. (With Re I take it as an adv.; Gr takes it as an adj. with hávam, which requires him to identify only this occurrences of háva- as a neut.; WG see it as a nominative in a stand-alone nominal sentence. The patterning of vss. 8-9 just laid out makes the adverbial interpr. the strongest one.) The final word of pāda, suśámi, makes both metrical and morphological trouble. The pāda is short a syllable (11, not 12) and the cadence is bad even for a Triṣṭubh, with a light penultimate syllable. Gr proposes to fix the first of these problems by reading suśámiyā, but though this gets us 12 syllables, it makes the cadence worse -- not to mention that there’s no reason why the textual change would have occurred. Old proposes to read suśámī, matching the other two instr.

occurrences of this stem; the same phenomenon is found with the simplex, where an instr. śámi with short final occurs at the end of the pāda, while śámī is found pādainternal. Since in our passage the next pāda begins with a cons. cluster, the original length of the final vowel would be obscured anyway. However, this suggestion does nothing to fix the cadence or the deficient syllable. See also the disc. in WG; in the WG tr. they take it as a neut. acc., but the disc. in the n. is more equivocal. I have no solution. Of course, those who wish to see laryngeals effects would argue that the problematic short penultimate could be explained by the fact that √śam is a seṭ root and the root syllable would originally have been heavy (*śamH in a bastardized notation).

The rest of the vs. is more opaque, or rather it is difficult to reconcile the simile in c with the directive to the Maruts in de. The problem is similar to the one posed by ádbhuta-enas- -- that the two parts of the expression are semantically disharmonious. The wish expressed to the Maruts is that they should be durdhártu-, which should mean ‘difficult to maintain or uphold’ or, extending the sense of √dhṛ a bit, ‘difficult to restrain’. This works pretty well in the directive: the Maruts should not hold back from punishing someone who insults one of us. The gen./abl. nidáḥ is not the ideal case, but it may well refer back to the same form in 6d té na uruṣyatā nidáḥ “deliver us from insult,” with a highly condensed expression. In the publ. tr. I have tr. the form in 9e as “at an insult” rather than “from an insult,” because “difficult to restrain from an insult” sounds as if the Maruts are itching to insult us.

The question is -- why are they like ancient mountains (jyéṣṭhāso ná párvatāsaḥ) when they are acting thus? As a class of objects, mountains are among the least likely to need restraining: they are fixed and stable. Ge gets out of this problem by supplying, out of whole cloth, a different quality that the Maruts and the mountains have in common, the parenthetical “(ragend),” but there is no basis for this. WG take jyéṣṭḥa- itself as the point of comparison (despite the fact that it should really be part of the simile proper) and push its sense: “sehr mächtig wie die Berge.” I think the clue to the solution is the location of these mountains, vyòman ‘in distant heaven’.

There are of course no mountains in heaven, at least in the usual Vedic cosmological picture -- but there used to be: the winged mountains that flew around until Indra clipped their wings. The splv. jyéṣṭhāsaḥ ‘most ancient’ may refer to this primal, unclipped state. Although this interpr. may seem farfetched, I think it best accounts for the odd expression -- and this may be Re’s view too, based on his tr. “comme de très puissantes montagnes (qui circuleraient) dans l'espace” (he has no disc.). Note in any case that the mountains here recall the mountain(s) in vs. 1 (girijā́-) and possibly vs. 3; the agreement in sense with vs. 1 provides another example of non-lexical ring composition.