+++
title = "46"

+++
46. The Veda declares, 'Therefore women are considered to be destitute of strength and of a portion.' [^39] 


[^39]:  Colebrooke V, Dig. CXXXI. The text is in great confusion. The Dekhan and Gujarāt MSS., except K., read, na dāyaṃ nirindriyā hyadāyāś ca striyo matā iti srutiḥ; K. has, tasmāt[n]nirindriyā hy. st. m. i. śru. || tasmāt striyo nirindriyā adāyādīr api pāpāt; while M. and the I. O. copy of the commentary have, tasmānnirindriyā adāyāś ca striyo matā iti śrutiḥ [sūtiḥ, M.] The Telugu copy is mutilated, and reads nādayantiriti srutiḥ. Though the reading of the Dekhan MSS. is supported by Mitramiśra Vīramitrodaya, fol. 209, p. I, 1. 3, it is certainly not the original one, for there is no verb by which the accusative 'dāyam' is governed. Mitramiśra's attempt to make it depend on 'arhati' in the verse quoted in Sūtra 45 is futile, because, according to the usage of the Sūtrakāras, a Sūtra may be completed by a verb taken frost another original aphorism of the author, but cannot be connecter with a portion of a quotation taken from some other work. This same principle, of course, applies not only to Sūtras, but to the writings of all other authors, whether Indian or European. The reading of K., M., and of the I. O. copy of the commentary is not open to the objection just mentioned, and therefore preferable. But it seems to me highly probable that, nevertheless, it is not p. 232 quite genuine; for the word 'tasmāt,' with which it begins, is not required, because its sense is already expressed by the following hi,' and because the Sūtra apparently contains half an Anuṣṭubh Śloka, which the insertion of tasmāt destroys. It is also easy to see how it came to be inserted. Every Yajurvedī who read the passage would be reminded of the analogous passage of the Taittirīya Saṃhitā VI, 5, 8, 2, 'tasmāt striyo nirindriyā adāyādīr api pāpāt puṃsaḥ upastitaram,' which in K. has actually been inserted after our Sūtra. In the Vedic Mantra 'tasmāt' is required, and is certainly the genuine reading. Hence it seems to have been transferred into Baudhāyana's text, possibly by the mistake of some scribe who, according to the habit of his kind, took a marginal reference to the beginning of the Vedic passage for a correction of the text. In my opinion it must be thrown out. The sense of the half verse remains exactly the same. It corresponds to Manu IX, 18. According to Govindasvāmin and others its object is to show that women are incapable of inheriting, and the word dāya, 'portion,' must be taken in the sense of 'a share of the inheritance.' For a full discussion of this point, I refer to the Introductory Note on Book I, Chapter II, Sect. 14 of West and Miller's Digest of H. L. C., third edition.
