+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. He then lays down the Vaiśvadevī (All-gods’ bricks). For this second layer is that one which the Aśvins at that time laid down for them (the gods); and by laying it down they became everything here whatsoever there is here.

## 02
2. The gods spake, 'The Aśvins have become everything here: think ye upon this as to how we also may share in it!' They said, 'Meditate ye (cit)!' whereby, no doubt, they meant to say, Seek ye a layer (citi)! seek ye in what way we also may share in it!' whilst meditating, they saw these Vaiśvadevī (All-gods’) bricks.

## 03
3. They said, 'The Aśvins have become everything here: with the help of the Aśvins let us lay down (bricks) along with the Aśvins’ layer!' With the help of the Aśvins they accordingly laid down (bricks) along with the Aśvins’ layer, whence they call this the Aśvins’ layer. Hence the end of these (bricks) is the same as that of the former ones; for they laid them down with the help of the Aśvins along with the Aśvins’ layer.

## 04
4. And, again, as to why he lays down the

 All-gods’ (bricks). These indeed are those same All-gods who saw this second layer, and who came nigh with that life-sap: it is them he thereby bestows, that is, all these creatures. He lays them down in the range of the Retaḥsic; for the Retaḥsic are these two (heaven and earth): within these two (worlds) he thus places creatures; whence there are creatures within these two (worlds). He places (bricks) on every side: he thus places creatures everywhere, whence there are creatures everywhere. He places them alongside of the regional ones [^egg_85]: he thus places creatures in the regions (quarters); whence there are creatures in all the (four) quarters.

[^egg_85]: 31:1 The Āśvinī (or Diśyā) bricks were placed in a circle round the centre, at the distance of a foot from where the central brick (Svayamātr̥ṇṇā) was placed in the first layer,--that is to say, in the third place from the centre. They were, moreover, placed in the second space (or at the distance of half a foot) from the two spines, see p. 23, note 1. The five Vaiśvadevīs are then placed alongside of the Āśvinīs, so as to fill up the 'first spaces,' that is to say, to lie on the spines themselves; each of the two half-foot bricks laid down in the south being, as it were, halved by the spine.

## 05
5. And, again, as to why he lays down the All-gods’ (bricks). When Prajāpati had become relaxed, all creatures went forth from the midst of him, from that birth-place of theirs. When that (central part) of his body had been restored, they entered him.

## 06
6. Now the Prajāpati who become relaxed is this very Agni (fire-altar) that is now being built up; and the creatures who went forth from the midst of him are these same All-gods’ bricks; and when he lays these down, he causes those creatures, which went forth from the midst of him, to enter him. In the range of the Retaḥsic (he places the Vaiśvadevī bricks), for the Retaḥsic are the ribs, and the ribs

are the middle: he thus causes the creatures to enter him in the very middle. He places them on all sides: on all sides he thus causes the creatures to enter him.

## 07
7. And, again, as to why he lays down the Vaiśvadevī (bricks). At that time, when that (part) of his body had been restored, Prajāpati desired, 'May I create creatures, may I be reproduced!' Having entered into union with the seasons, the waters, the vital airs, the year, and the Aśvins, he produced these creatures; and in like manner does this Sacrificer, by entering into union with those deities, now produce these creatures. Hence with all (of these bricks, the word) sajush ('in union with') recurs.

## 08
8. [He lays down the Vaiśvadevī bricks, with Vāj. S. XIV, 7], 'In union with the seasons,'--he thereby produced the seasons, and having entered into union with the seasons he produced (creatures);--'in union with the ranges,'--the ranges, doubtless, are the waters, for by water everything is ranged (distributed or produced) here: having entered into union with the waters he produced (creatures);--'in union with the gods,'--he thereby produced the gods,--those who are called 'gods [^egg_86];'--'in union with the life-sustaining gods,'--the life-sustaining gods, doubtless, are the vital airs, for by the vital airs everything living here is sustained; or, the life-sustaining gods are the metres, for by the metres (sacred writ) everything living is sustained here; having entered into union with the vital airs he produced creatures;--

[^egg_86]: 32:1 Lit. what they (viz. the Vedic hymns, according to the commentator) call gods:--Yat kiṁcid ity eva vedavādā ācakshate.

 'for Agni Vaiśvānara,'--Agni Vaiśvānara ('belonging to all men'), doubtless, is the year: having entered into union with the year he produced creatures;--'May the Aśvins, the Adhvaryus, settle thee here!'--having entered into union with the Aśvins he produced creatures.

## 09
9. 'In union with the Vasus,' he says on the right side: he thereby produced the Vasus;--'in union with the Rudras,' he says at the back: he thereby produced the Rudras;--'in union with the Ādityas,' he says on the left side: he thereby produced the Ādityas;--'in union with the All-gods,' he says upwards: he thereby produced the All-gods. These (bricks) have the same beginning and end, but are different in the middle: as to their having the same beginning and end, it is because having become united with the deities in front and behind, he produced creatures; and as to their being different in the middle, it is that each time he produced different creatures from within him.

