+++
title = "02"

+++
Note pāda-initial sátvā (a) and satyó (c).

The first hapax we encounter is an easy one to account for (almost as though the poet was breaking us in slowly): bhariṣá- ‘seeking plunder’ is modeled on immed.

flg. gaviṣá-; so Old, flg. AiG II.1.65. I think that iṣáḥ in the next pāda is also felt as part of this series, although it has a different grammatical analysis and function.

The very puzzling rhyming pāda-final duvanyasát (a) and turaṇyasát (b), also both hapaxes, have to be considered together, and the latter needs first to be put in context with likewise pāda-final turaṇyatáḥ (gen. sg. part., 3a) and turaṇyati (3rd sg.

pres., 4a), both of which also have Dadhikrā as subject. Clearly the poet wanted to position this signature word (see also 38.7c and comm. thereon) in the same place in all 3 pādas, but since our verse is couched in the nom. sg., the grammatical form of the part. would be turaṇyán, which would not fit (and a finite form would be out of place, since the pāda already has a finite verb). He needs another syllable -- a point also made by Scar (565). How exactly does he get it? Unfortunately I don’t have an altogether satisfactory answer, but I am tolerably certain that the standard answer given -- that this is a root-noun cmpd with final member from √sad -- is dead wrong.

It is true that vs. 5 has an impressive array of -sád- compounds, but their first members are actual places, and, in the phrases in which they’re embedded, sitting makes sense (e.g., 5b “a Hotar sitting at the vedi”). (For the function of these cmpds in the hymn, see comm. ad vs. 5.) Here the horse is on a dizzying breakneck run -- “sitting” in or among anything is exactly opposite to the spirit of the vs., no matter how attenuated “sit” might have become in the cmpd. And the supposed first member, turaṇya-, is simply not a place to sit. So the various tr. offered -- Gr ‘in Raschheit wohnend’, Ge ‘der unter den Spitzenführern sitzt’, Re ‘qui siège parmi ceux qui foncent-en-avant’, Scar ‘unter die Vordringenden, Eifrigen, Eilenden setzend’, WG ‘der unter den Durchsetzenden Sitzende’ -- despite the worthiness of their attempts, simply sound silly and significantly slow the onrush of this wonderful verbal picture.

My own suggestion begins with the class of -asāná- participles or pseudo-participles like sahasāná- (on which see comm. ad IV.3.6). I suggest that our poet was familiar with such forms (of which there are quite a few in IV; cf. nearby mandasānā́ḥ IV.34.10, IV.35.6, etc.) and that he created an active participle on the model of these apparent middles: mandāná- : mandasāná- :: turaṇyánt- à *turaṇyasánt-. Note that the accent matches that of the -asāná- forms; note also that act. turaṇyasát fits a Triṣṭubh cadence, while a med. *turaṇyasāná- would not. (The mandasāná- forms just cited are pāda-final in Jagatī.) Why -sát? I would argue that it is the neuter in adverbial usage; an original nom. sg. masc. in -sán may have been readjusted to match the -sád- cmpds in vs. 5, but I am certain its origin was verbal.

Now what about duvanyasát? First, it is clear that the -anyasát part is completely dependent on turaṇyasát. As we just saw, the latter belongs to a tight-knit turaṇyá- set, but there is no *duvanyá-. The form is almost universally taken as a - sád- cmpd. based on dúvas- ‘friendship’, similar to the denon. duvasyáti ‘offers friendship, gives friendly reception to’. Scar (566) explicitly presents it as a crossing of duvasyá- with turaṇyá-, “was bei der Experimentierfreude des Dichters von 4.40 akzeptable scheint.” The whole cmpd is then rendered ‘der unter den Bevorzugten … sitzt’ (Ge), ‘qui siège parmi les privilégiés’ (Re), ‘unter die, denen Ehrung zuteil wird, setzend’(?) (Scar), ‘unter den Huldigenden Sitzende’ (WG). Such an interpr.

requires pushing the semantics of dúvas- and its relatives rather further than seems reasonable, while a more lit. ‘sitting among friends/those who offer friendship’ would be a somewhat comical description of a racehorse. Further it suffers from the “sit” problem identified also for turaṇyasát: the horse is galloping at top speed, not sitting in the bleachers with the grandees. I therefore reject the connection with dúvas- and take my cue from Gr’s (ignored) interpr, ‘in der Ferne weilend’, ‘dessen Wesen es ist, in die Ferne zu dringen’ -- in other words to associate the first member with dūrá- ‘far’, with a thematized zero-grade duv-a- beside pre-consonantal dū-rá- (and pre-vocalic full-grades dávīyas-, daviṣṭha). A similar derivation must account for duvasanā́saḥ ‘going the distance’, vel sim. (e.g., Re ‘fonçant-au-loin, WG ‘sich … entfernend’), in IV.6.10 (note, also in Maṇḍala IV), whose connection with dūrá-, etc., is generally agreed upon, though its morphology is unclear and also owes something to nearby forms. See comm. ad loc. It should be noted that Re in EVP 13 (1964) in his comm. to IV.6.10 suggests that our duvanyasát contains the ‘far’ word: ‘qui demeure loin (en arrière)’ and is oppositional to turaṇyasát ‘qui (va) rapidement (en avant)’, but in EVP 15 (1966), which contains his tr. and comm. to IV.40, he has substituted the tr. given above. Pāda c produces a new set of problems, though happily much less intractable than those just discussed. Though dravá- is found only here in the RV (but common later), its derivation and meaning are straightforward. The next word, dravará-, is a hapax, but transparently generated to the preceding dravá-. It may simply have the suffix -ara- (so AiG II.2.215) like semantically similar patará- ‘flying’ (RV 3x), but I wonder, given the missing syllable in this pāda, described by HvN as “a rest at the 5th place” (that is, directly before dravará-), whether dravará- is meant to remind us of an allegro form of a compative in -tara-, slurred in rapid speech (though the accent would be wrong). Finally, another hapax, pataṃgará-, owes its -rá- to preceding dravará-, added to the well-established stem pataṃgá- (the aforementioned patará- may also have played a part).
