+++
title = "03"

+++
THIRD CHAPTER (The Molâbhiseko or Grand Inaugurution Cervui'ney of Indra.) 

12. (The Elevation of Indra to the Royalty over the Gods. His Throne-scat. 

By what blantrus ke Ascended it. The Gods Proclaim him as King by mentioning all his Titles.) 

Now follows the great inauguration (mahabhişcka) of Indra. The gods, headed by Prajapati, said to one another (pointing with their hands to Indra) : “ This one is among the gods the most vigorous, most strong, most valiant, most perfect, who carries best out any work (to be done). Let us iostal him to the kingship over us).” They all consented to (515) perform just this ceremony (mahâbhişeka) on Indra. They brought for him that throne-seat, which is called the Rik-formed. They made the Brihat and Rathantara verses its two forelegs, the Vairûpa and Vairâja verses its hind-legs, the Sakvara and Raivata (verses) its, top boards,'the Náudhasa and Kaleya its side-boards. The Rik verses were made the threads of the texture which went lengthwise, the Samans were the threads which went crossways, the Yajus verses the intervals in the texture. They made (the goddess of) Glory its covering, and (the goddess of) Fortune its pillow, Savitar and Brilaspati were holding its two fore legs, Váyu and Pûşan the two hind-legs, Mitra and Varuņa the two top-boards, the Asvins the two side-boards. 

Indra then ascended the throne-seat, addressing it thus: "May the Vasus ascend thee with the Gâyatrî metre, with the Trivsit Stoma, withi the Rathautara Sâma. After them I then asceud for obtaining universal sovereignty. May the Rudras ascend thee with the Triştubh metre, the fifteen-fold Stoma, and the Brihat Sâma. After them then I ascend for obtaining increase of enjoyment. May the Adityas ascend thee with the Jagatî metre, the seventeen-fold Stoma, and the Vairûpa Sâma. After them I ascend for obtaining independent rule. May the Viśve Devål ascend thee with the Anustubh metre, the tirenty-one-fold Stoma, and the Vaira ja Sâma. After them I ascend for obtaining distinguished i ule. May the divine Sådhyâs and Aplyas ascend thee with the Pankti metre, the Tyinava (twenty-seven-fold) Stoma, and the Sâkvara Såma. After them I ascend for obtaining royal power. May the divine Marutas and 

? It was composed of all the sacred mantras of the Rigveda. On tho difcrcnt Sawans mentioned here, seo the notes on page 282. 

355 

Angiras ascend thee with the Atichandas metre, the thirty-three-fold Stoma, and the Raivata Sâma. After (516] tliem, then, I ascend for obtaining the fulfilment of the highest desires for becoming a great king, for supreme mastership, independence, and a long residence. By these words, one should ascend the throne-seat. 

After Indra had seated himself on this throne-seat, the Visre Devâh said to him, " Indra cannot achieve any feat if he is not everywhere publicly proclaimed? (as bero); but if he be thus proclaimed, he can do so." They then consented to do so, and consequently, turning towards Indra, cried aloud (calling him by all his titles.) 

The gods bestowed on him (Indra), by proclaiming him as "univer sal ruler," universal rule; by proclaiming him as "enjoyer (of plea sures)," they made him father (of pleasures); by proclaiming him as "inde pendent ruler," thoy granted him independence of rule; by proclaiming him as " distinguished king," they conferred on him royal distinction ; by proclaiming him “king," they made him father of kings; by calling bim“ one who has attained the highest desires," they granted him fulfil ment of the highest desires. 

(The gods then continued proclaiming his heroic virtues in the following manner): “ The Kşattra is born; the Kşattriya is born ; the supreme master of the whole creation is born ; the devourer of the (hostile) tribes is born; the destroyer of the hostile castles is born; the slayer of the Asuras is born; the protector of the Brahma is born ; the protector of the religion is born." 

After (his royal dignity) was thus proclaimed, Prajapati, when being just about performing the inauguration ceremcny, recited over him (consecrated him with the following mantra : 

13. [517](The Mantras by which Indra was Consecrated. The was Installed by Prajapati.) 

“Varuna, the faithful, sat down in his premises--for obtaining. universal rule, enjoyment of pleasures), independence, distinction as sovereign, fulfilment of the highest desires-be, the wise, &c.," (1, 25, 10). Prajapati, standing in front of Indra who was sitting on the throne seat, turned his face to the west, and, after having put on his head a gold leaf, sprinkled him with the moist branch of an Udumbara, together with that of a Palasa troe, reciting the three Rik verses, imá âpah sivatama, 

2 The term is anabhyutkrusta. 

am 

356 

i e., these most happy waters, &c. (Ait. Br. 8, 7); and the Yajus verse, derasya trâ (Vîjasan. Sanh. 1, 10. Ait Br. 8, 1); and the great words, bhúr, bhuvah, svar. 

14. 

Indra Inaugurated by Various Deities in the Various Directions to the 

Kingship, becomes Universal Ruler. The Vasavas then inaugurated him (Indra) in the eastern direction, during thirty-one days, by these three Rik verses, the Yajus verse, and the great words (all just mentioned), for the sake of obtaining universal sovereignty. Hence all kings of eastern nations, in the eastern regions, aie inaugurated to universal sovereignty, and called samraj, i.e., uni versal sovereign, after this precedent made once by the gods. 

Then the Rudras inaugurated Indra in the southern region, during thirty-one days, with the three Rik verses, the Yajus and the great words (just mentioned), for obtaining enjoyment (of pleasures). Hence all kings of living creatures (chiefly beasts) in the southern region are inaugurated for the enjoyment (of pleasures) and called . bloja, i.e., enjoyer. * [518] Then the divine Adityas inaugurated him in the western region, during thirty-one days, with those three Rik verses, that Yajus verse, and those great words, for obtaining independent rule. Hence all kings of the Nichyas and Apåchyas in the western countries, are inau gurated to independent rule, and called "independent rulers." 

Then the Visve Devâh inaugurated him during thirty-one days, in the northern region, by those three Rik verses, &c. for distinguished rule. Hence all people living in northern countries beyond the Himalaya, such as the Uttarakurûs, Uttaramadras, are inaugurated for living with out a king (vairajyam), and called Virâj,3 i.e. without king. 

Then the divine Sadhyas and Aptyas inaugurated Indra, during - thirty-one days, in the middle region, which is a firmly established foot ing (the immovable centre) to the kingship (râjya). Hence the kings of the Kurúpañchâlas, with the Vasas and Usinaras, are inaugurated to kingship, and called Kings (rdja). . To this word two meanings can be given : 1 (without king;) 2 a very distinguished king. In this passage, we must take it in the first meaning; for here are janapadal, 2.e, people in opposition to the king mentioned, as abhişikta, i.e., inaugurated, whilst in all other passages of this chapter, we find instead of them, the rájánah or kings. 

357 

Then the divine Marutas and Angiras inaugurated him, during thirty one days, in the upper (urdhva) region, for attaining fulfilment of the highest wishes, the position of a great king, of a supreme ruler, of an independant king, and long duration of his rule. 

Indra thus became, by means of this great inauguration ceremony, possessed of the power of obtaining anything wished for, as had been only the prerogative of Prajapati.' He conquered in all the various ways [519] of possible conquest, and won all people. He obtained the leader ship, precedence, and supremacy over all gods. After having conquered the position of a samråj (universal ruler), &c., he became in this world self-existing (svayambhún), an independent ruler, immortal, and, in the heaven-world, after having attained all desires wished for, he became immortal (also). 

