+++
title = "06"

+++
The noun rebhá- is generally tr. ‘singer’ and the root √ribh from which it is derived, ‘sing’. However, as I discussed in “On Translating the Rig Veda” (2000, Proceedings of UCLA IE conf.) and again in the Intro. to the publ. tr. (p. 78), the limited number of attestations of the verbal root and the variety of contexts in which it is found suggest that its meaning is more specific than ‘sing’. That the sound of √ribh can be compared to that made by birds of prey (IX.97.57) or by ungreased wood on a wagon (TS VII.1.1.3) suggests something on the lines of ‘squawk, squeak, rasp’ -- a hoarse or husky voice quality that would perhaps not be surprising in a middle-aged man in antiquity, esp. one who spent a lot of time huddled over fires.

The verb with which rebháḥ is construed in this passage, rārapīti, is likewise usually rendered in very general fashion, as ‘speak, praise’ or the like. But again it seems to have a more specific sense: ‘mutter, murmur’ vel sim. (see EWA and, e.g., Schaefter, Intens., both s.v. rap). So the anodyne tr. of Ge “Wie ein Bard ruft er … laut” and Re “comme un barde … il parle-puissamment” (both ascribing real intensive sense to rārapiti rather than the more likely frequentative) can be replaced with something both more pointed and more appropriate to Agni, who is the referent here: “like a hoarse-voiced (singer) he keeps muttering (=crackling) with his flame.” The phrase práti vasta usrā́ḥ should be read with accented vásta, an old correction, endorsed by Oldenberg inter alia. Cf. pāda-final vásta usrā́ḥ at IV.25.2, VII.69.5, VIII.46.26. The erasure of accent here may be redactional, based on the verb vaste in the next hymn, VI.4.3b. It should be noted, however, that Re interpr.

vasta as a finite verb form to √vas ‘wear’ (“Comme un barde, il se revêt des aurores”), and he is followed by Lub. That the exact phrase, but with accent, occurs 3x elsewhere makes this interpr. unlikely. There remains, however, the question of what the underlying form is. The Pp analyzes it as vaste, but Old prefers -o (both here and for the other occurrences of the phrase), a loc. to vástu-. On -o (from -au) as u-stem loc., see AiG III.153-54. As for usrā́ḥ, in this phrase it appears to be an anomalous gen. sg. to the notional stem usr-, whose gen. sg. also appears as usráḥ (III.58.4, possibly also VI.12.4, but see comm. there). See AiG III.213. The long-vowel -ā́ḥ ending seems to be the result of “feminizing” the form; cf. loc. sg. usrā́m in X.6.5 (on the pattern of devy-ā́s, devy-ā́m). Alternatively, since in all four instances of vásta usrā́ḥ, usrā́ḥ is at the end of the pāda, the length may be redactional for *usráḥ, since the forms would be metrically equivalent. We should also bring into the mix II.39.3 … práti vásta usrā, with an unaccented dual voc. usrā referring to the Aśvins, and perhaps IV.45.5 usrā́jarante práti vástor aśvínā, where the usrā́may be again be a dual modifying the Aśvins (so Ge, implicitly Pp.) or a masc. nom. pl. (usrā́ḥ out of sandhi) modifying the fires that ended the preceding pāda - or another gen. sg. usrā́ḥ to be construed with práti vástoḥ.

Although práti is not found in the other 3 exx. of the phrase, práti vástor is attested in II.39.3, IV.45.5, X.189.3, so it is likely to form part of the phrase here.

Given its position, it would be difficult to take it as a preverb with rārapīti, esp. since √rap isn’t otherwise construed with práti; see comm. ad V.61.9.

As noted previously, pāda b is metrically bad, with caesura after 3 and a bad cadence mitrámahaḥ, where we should have a heavy penult.

The īm in Wackernagel’s position in pāda a is, in my opinion, a long-distance anticipation of the īm in c, and both are placeholders for nṝ́n at the end of c and d.

This might be clearer if the publ. tr. read “he keeps muttering to them.” The second hemistich consists of a pair of parallel relative clauses with no overt verb. It also, quite unusually, shows verbatim repetition after the caesura: x x x x / aruṣó yó divā́nṝ́n. Such tag repetitions are far more characteristic of short echo pādas in meters like Atyaṣṭi, and even in those meters there tends to be some patterned variation. I don’t know what function this repetition serves here. I would attribute it to the poet’s flagging imagination, except the rest of the hymn bursts with imagination.

There have been various solutions to the lack of verb in these relative clauses.

Old, fld. by Re, supplies ‘protects’ (√pā). There’s nothing wrong with this -- it provides a verb to govern acc. pl. nṝ́n, and “protect men” is a relatively common predicate, as Old points out. But there’s nothing in the context that imposes this addition; the closest we can come is pā́si in 1d. Ge takes these as nominal clauses -- “der bei Nacht, der am Tage das rötliche (Ross) der Männer ist” -- which saves him from supplying an unmotivated verb, but requires nṛ́̄n to be a gen. pl., which I think we should avoid if at all possible. The simplest solution, at least as far as I can see, is simply to continue the verb of the first hemistich, rārapīti. The īm of 6a, echoed by īm in c, may suggest that the clauses follow the same template, and as noted above, īm in 6a is easiest to explain if it anticipates nṛ́̄n in the relative clauses. Needless to say, when a verb needs to be supplied in the RV, a silent iteration of a verb in a previous nearby pāda or verse is often the best choice. And in this case the intensive (=frequentative) form of rārapīti in b may be reflected iconically in the implied repetition of Agni’s muttering in the rest of the verb. The next two vss. provide some further support for this suggestion. In 7ab an intensive in the relative clause of pāda is matched by an intensive to the same root in pāda b, and in 8a supplying an intensive in the rel. cl. to match the one in the main clause of b also makes sense.

Although I still think the 2nd half of this vs. is clumsy, it may be clumsy apurpose.

