+++
title = "07"

+++
More or less with Ge (fld. also by Re), I supply a word for sound or noise as the subj. of pāda a; see Ge’s parallels cited in his n. 7a. They opt for ‘voice’, while I favor something generated from the two verbs in this hemistich, both derived from √nu ‘roar’, e.g., nāvá- ‘roar(ing)’.

The two verbs themselves require comment, návīnot and nūnot, both pādafinal. First, note that the accent on the first but not the second requires that pāda b must be the main clause to pāda a. The stems of the two verbs are similar but not identical; both have heavy or intensive redupl. and appear to mean pretty much the same thing. návīnot is clearly an intensive to √nu (or √nū? see EWA s.v.); the stem is attested once elsewhere in the RV (VII.87.2), though the better-attested intens.

stem is ánono/u-. The other verb nūnot, which is also attested once elsewhere (V.45.7), is less clear morphologically. Wh classifies it as a redupl. aor., and Schaeffer (Intens. p. 147) also attempts to argue for this identification. There are two problems with taking it as a redupl. aor. First, there is no causative attested to this root — nāvayati is only found in the Skt. lexica, not independently in text, at least acdg. to Whitney (Rts) — but a redupl. aor. of this shape should be secondarily generated to a causative. Second, a redupl. aor. should have transitive/causative value, but neither occurrence of nūnot has this sense, and in our passage it is difficult to see how to construct such a contrastive value for nūnot in opposition to návīnot. They seem to be used in identical fashion. Schaeffer in fact does try to claim that nūnot has factitive-transitive value, translating návīnot as “brüllt” and nūnot as “Gebrüll erregt.” But “Gebrüll erregt” is a translational sleight of hand -- simply a phrasal paraphrase of “brüllt,” enabled by German (similarly in English “shouted” / “raised a shout”).

There is no acc. obj. in the Skt.; the noun “Gebrüll” is a dummy noun. I therefore think we should take them both as intensives with the same meaning. I do not understand the reduplication vowel of nūnot; metrically *nonot would have been equivalent and could belong to the better attested intensive stem cited above -- though it should be noted that the attested 3rd sg. to that stem is a (pseudo?) seṭ nónavīti, so the secondary form might be expected to be *nonavīt. All of this is made more complicated by the metrical irregulariy of pāda b, which has only 10 syllables.

However, (oṣa)dhīṣu nūnot provides a fine cadence to this line, while repeating navīnot from pāda a would yield enough syllables but a bad cadence, (oṣadhī)ṣu navīnot, and the hypothetical *nonavīt would also produce a bad cadence.

rukṣá- is a hapax. It is generally taken as a nom. sg. -as out of sandhi with a meaning ‘shining’, derived from √ruc. So Gr, Ge, EWA s.v., etc. This is perfectly possible, harmless, and not very interesting. I favor the more daring hypothesis: that it is a loc. in -e out of sandhi and belongs to a *rukṣá- ‘tree’, found also in the widespread MIA rukkha- ‘tree’ (Pāli, Pkts.), which is probably a metathesis of vṛkṣá- ‘id.’ (see EWA s.v. vṛkṣá-). So also Re. In this context it could be indirectly alluding to its source by its position after vṛ́ṣā, which is phonologically close to vṛkṣá-. The second hemistich presents its own difficulties. A crucial problem is the apparent lack of a verb. Ge and Re supply ‘fill’ (e.g., “Himmel und Erde mit Gut (erfüllt)”). I follow Old’s suggestion (ZDMG 55.290=KlSch 749; not very enthusiastically alluded to in the Noten) that we should emend dáṃ in d to tán (root aor. injunctive to ā́√tan ‘stretch’). As he points out, this lexeme with ródasī (vel sim.) as object/goal, often Agni as subject, and an instr. is quite common, esp. in this set of hymns (VI.1.11, 4.6, 6.6 [recall how tight the phraseology is in this Agni cycle]); cf., e.g., ā́yás tatántha ródasī ví bhāsā́. Although I strenuously resist emendation ordinarily, the echo of IV.19.7 dáṃsupatnīḥ might have led to the change here. (On that form see comm. ad loc.) In any case, pace the Pp. (see also Lubotsky s.v. dám-), I think it unlikely that the sequence contains the accented monosyllable dáṃ followed by an accented supátnīḥ. Inter alia, the root noun dám- outside of the cmpd dámpati- and esp. the archaic gen. dán in the phrase pátir dan are confined to Maṇḍalas I and X. If the emendation of dáṃ to *tán seems too radical (and I’m inclined now to think it is), I would read *dáṃsupatnīḥ with one accent, supply a verb, and tr. “… (fills) with goods the two worlds, who (thus) have (in him) a wondrous husband.” In c I take the participle yán with both the simile and the frame.

Note the return of √dhraj (dhrájasā) and pátman (pátmanā) from 5cd.

