+++
title = "08"

+++
The first three pādas of this verse sounds very somian: the cows [=milk] and the waters of b are the standard ritual substances mixed with soma in the IXth Maṇḍala; the beginning of a, tveṣáṃ rūpáṃ kṛṇute, is also found in a soma hymn, IX.71.8; and √mṛj ‘wipe, groom’ in c is a signature soma verb. This may be an example of the covert equation of the two ritual gods, Agni and Soma. Pāda a is easily interpreted in an Agni context; b makes more difficulties: the cows can here be the ghee poured into the fire (which could cause the creation of an “even higher” form in a), but the waters would obviously have a diminishing effect on the fire if it actually “mingles” with them. Ge (n. 8b) suggests that the vedi is being sprinkled with water, but that’s not what the text says. I think better to assume that this is an incompletely adapted somian description.

Pāda c has caused interpretational difficulties, in particular because of the apparent equation of the poet (kavíḥ) and the insight (dhī́ḥ), both nominative and both apparent subjects of marmṛjyate. Ge takes them as conjoined nouns with suppressed conjunction, “the poet (and) his thought,” which are both tending to the Unterlage of Agni. This is not a bad solution, but it assumes that the kaví- is the human poet. Since Agni was identified as a “great poet” (mahā́n kavíḥ) in 4d, it’s desirable to maintain this identification if at all possible. Another solution is to take dhī́ḥ as a separate nominal clause, as Re does (“il est la Vision-poétique”). He takes the referent of both kavíḥ and dhī́ḥ to be Agni. WG seem to take dhī́ḥ as the object of the verb, though without comment. This is presumably inspired by the fact that acc. pl. dhiyáḥ does elsewhere serve as object to marmṛjyáte (IX.47.4). However, making dhī́ḥ into an acc. pl. is grammatically difficult (though, I suppose, not impossible).

My solution involves reading the intensive marmṛjyate simultaneously in two syntactically different ways, both of which are paralleled elsewhere in the RV. The stem marmṛjyáte is one of the new-style -yáte intensives, which have medial inflection and passive accent even if they have active semantics and pattern with active stems in their averbo. See, for example, IX.47.4 just cited. (On this type and its origin, see Jamison 1983 [MSS 42: 41-73].) Thus, the poet can be stroking the budhnám in this transitive interpretation, like the many active forms of this root including the act. athem. intensive mármṛj-. But several instances of medial marmṛjyá- have the passive value the morphology implies (e.g., IX.62.13 marmṛjyámāna āyúbhiḥ, of soma), and I take dhī́ḥ as the subject of the verb read this time as a passive. This syntactic pun might be clearer in the publ. tr. if the same word had been used for both readings; better might be “… keeps stroking … is being stroked,” though ‘groom’ is actually better with the insight as subject.

On the syntax and sense of d, see comm. ad X.11.8.
