+++
title = "03"

+++
THIRD CHAPTER. 

(The hymns for lifting the Chamasa (Soma cups).. The Praşthita Yâjyds 

of the seven Llotars concluding this ceremony. The two different kinds of Hotars. Explanation of some apparent anomalies in the perforo mances of the minor Hotris. The Jagati hymns for Indra. The concluding verses of the minor Hotri-priests. On a peculiarity in the Sastras of the Achchháváha.) 

(The number of verses which the Hotar has to repeat at the time of the 

Soma cups being lifted at the three libations.) When at the morning libation the Soma cups are lifted and filled he (the Maitrâvaruņa) recites the hymn de toa vahantu harayal (1, 116 the several verses of which contain the words vrisan (inale), pita (drunk), suta (squeezed), mad (drunk), are complete in their form and are addressed to Indra, for [393] the sacrifice is Indra's. He repeats Gayatris ; for Gayatri is the metre of the morning liabation. At the morning libation he recites nine verses only; one less (than ten). For the semen is poured in to a place made narrow (nyúna). At the midday libation he repeats ten verses ; for the semen which was poured in a narrow place grows very large, after having reached the centre of the woman's body. At the evening libátion he repeats nine* verses, one less than ten) ; for from a narrow place (represented by the third libation) men are born. If he recites these hymns complete, than he makes the sacrificer bring forth the embryo of his (spiritual body) begotten in the sacrifice, which is the womb of the gods. 

Some recite every time only seven verses at the morning, midday and evening libations, asserting that there must be as many Paronuvâkyâs as there are Yajyâs. Seven (Hotři priests) having their faces turned (towards the fire) receite the Yajgás, and pronounce Vauşat! Now they assert that those (seven verses) are the Puronuvâkyâs of these (seven 

They are the hymn, asavi devam gorichikam (76 21). * They are the hymn, ihopayáta savaso (4,37). 

400 

Yajyas) ; but the Hotar ought not to do so (to recite only seven verses.) For in this way they spoil the semen of the sacrificer, and conseqnently the sacrificer himself. 

The Maiträvaruņa carries in this way the sacrificer, for the sacrificer is the hynin, by means of nine verses from this world to the airy region; but by means of ten be carries him further on to that (heaven) world ; for the airy region is the oldest ; from that world he takes him by means of nine verses up to the celestial world. Those who recite (895) only seven verses, do not wish to raise the sacrificer to heaven, Therefore the hymns are to be recited complete onlys, 

10. 

(On the Prasthita Yajydse of the Hotars at the morning libation.) 

Some one (a theologian) has asked, When the sacrifice is Indra's, why do only two, the Hotar and Brâhmanâchhamsi, at the morning libation, for the Soma drops which are in readiness, repeat Yâjyâs where Indra's very name is mentioned, the Yájyâ of the Hotar being idam te somyam madhu (8, 54,8), that of the Brâhmaņâchchhamsi, indra tva vrişabham vayam (3, 40, 1)? 

When the other (priests) repeat verses addressed to different deities, how do they concern Indra ? For the Yajyâ of the Maitrâvaruņa is mitran vayam havâmahe (1, 23, 4), "we invoke Mitra ;' but in its words varunam somapitaye iie. "we call Varuņa to the Soma beverage;" there is an allu sion to Indra ; for whatever word refers to "drinking", hints at Indra. and pleases him. 

The Yâjyâ of the Potar is, Maruto yasa hi kşaye (1, 86, 1); its words sa sugopâtamo janah i.e. " he is the best protector," allude to Indra"; for Indra is the gopå, which is a characteristic of Indra. Thus he pleases Indra. 

The Yâjyâ of the Neştar is, agne patnér ind vaha (1, 22, 9); in its words, tvaştáram somapitaye, (895) there is an allusion to Indra; 

3 The hymns mentioned for the morning and evening libations contain cach nine, that mentioned for the midday libation ten verses, 

4 These Yåjyás are at each libation seven in number, and repated successively by tho so called 'seven Hotars' (Hotar, Maitråvaruga, Brāhmaṇachchhamsi, Potar, Nestar Agnidhra, and Achchhâvâka) when the Chamasa Adhvaryu or cup-bearers, are holding up the cups filled with some. As often as one of them has repeated his Yajyâ, libations from seven cups are thrown at the same time in the fire. The rest is to be drank by them. 

for Indra is Tvastar, which is a characteristic of Indra. Thus he pleases him. 

The Yajyâ of the Agnidhra is, Uksånndya (8, 43, 11); in its words Soma prişthaya vedhase, there is an allusion to Indra; for Indra is Vedhâs (striker, beater) which is a characteristic of Indra. Thus he pleases him. 

The verse of the Achchhâvâka, which is directly addressed to Indra, is complete, viz: prataryavabhir (8, 38, 7), (for in the last part of it there is the term Indrågnt). Thus all these verses refer to Indra. Though there are different deities mentioned (in them) (such as Mitra, Varuņa, &c.) the sacrificer does not satisfy other deities (alone). The verses being in the Gayatri metre, and this being sacred to Agni, sacrificer gains, by means of these verses, the favour of three deities, i. e. Indra, the nånâdevatâs or disferent deities, and Agni. 

11. (The hymn to be repeated over the Soma cups being lifted, and the Pras thita Yájyâs at the midday libation.) 

At the midday libation, when the Soma cups are being lifted, the Hotar repeats, Asdvi devam gorichikam (7, 21.1.). This hymn contains the words, vrişan, pita, suta, mad; its verses are complete in form and addressed to Indra. For the sacrifice belongs to Indra. The verses are in the Triştubh metre; for this metre is appropriate to the midday libation. They say, if the term mad "to be drunk" is only appropriate to the third libation, why do they recite such verses (containing this term) at the midday libation as Anuvâkyâs and Yâjyâs? The gods get drunk, as it were, at the midday libation, and are then consequently at the third libation in a state of [896] complete drunkenness. Thence he repeats verses contain ing the term mad as Anuvâkyâs and Yâjyâs at the midday libation. . 

At the midday libation all the priests repeat Yâjyâs addressed to Indra by his very name (for the Soma drops) which are in readiness. Some (the Hotar, Maitrâvaruņa, and Brâhmanâchchhamsi) make the Yajyas with verses containing (besides the name of Indra) the words, abhi trid. So the Hotar repeats, pibd somam abhi yan ugra tarda (6, 17, 1); the Maitrâvaruņa, sa im pahi ya pigishi (6, 17, 2); and the Brahman âchhamsi, evâ pâhi pratnatha (6, 17,3). 

The Yâjyâ of the Potar is, arvâng ehi somakaman (1, 104, 9). The Yajyâ of the Neşțar is, tacâ yam somas tvam (3, 35, 6). The Yâjyâ of the Achchhâvâka iş, indraya somah pra divo vidânâ (3, 36, 2). The Yajya of the Agnidhra is, âpúrnô asya kalasah sváha (3, 32, 15). 

Those three verses contain forms of the verb trid (Lat, trudere) "to injuro, to kill,"? with the proposition abhi. 

270 

Among these verses there are those containing the words abhi trid. For Indra once did conquer at the morning libation; but by means of these verses he broke down the barriers and made himself master (abhi trinat) of the midday libation. Thence these verses. 

12. (The hymn and the Prasthita Yajyás at the evening libation.) 

At the third libation the Hotar repeats at the time when the Soma cups are being lifted, the hymn ihopayâta savasó napatah (4, 35, 1). Its verses which are complete in form, are addressed to Indra, and belong to the Ribhus, contain the words vrişan, pita, (397) suta mad. They ask, Why is the Pavamana Stotra at the evening libation called Arbhava, though they do not sing Ribhu verses? (The answer is) Prajapati, the father, when transforming the Ribhus who were mortals, into immortals. gave them a share in the evening libation. Thence they do not sing Ribhu verses, but they call the Pavamâna Stotra Arbhava 

One (great Rişi) asked about the application of metres, viz, for what reason does he use the Triştubh metre at the third libation, whilst the appropriate metre for this libation is Jagati, as well as the Gâyatri that for the morning, and the Triştubh for the midday libation? One ought to say (in reply), At the third libation the Soma juice is done ; but if they use a sparkling ( śukriyam) metre as the Trişțubh, the juice of which is not done, then they provide the (third) libation with juice (liquor). Then he makes Indra participate in this libation also. One says, Why. since the third libation belongs to Indra and the Ribhus, and the Hotar alone makes the Yâjyâs for the Soma which are in readiness (prasthita) with an Indra-Ribhu verse, at the third libation, do the other Hotri priests use verses addressed to various other deities for their Yajyâs ? In the Yajyâ of the Hotar, ribhubhir vajadbhiḥ samukşitan (not in the Rigveda) the Ribhus are mentioned, but in the Yâjyâs of the other priests they are only hinted at. 

The Maitrâvaruņa repeats, indravaruna sutapåvimam sutam (6, 68, 10); in the words, yuvo ratho adhvaram devavitaye, there is a plurality (in the words devavitaye=devànám vitaye, i.e. for the enjoyment of the gods) which is a characteristic of the Ribhus. 

The Brahmanâchchhamsi repeats the verse, indraścha somam pibatam (4, 50, 10); in its words, visantu indavah, i. e." may the drops come," a (898) plurality is expressed, which is a characteristic of the Ribhus. 

271 

The Yajyâ of the Potar is, & vo vahantu saptayo (1, 85, 6); in its words, raghu atvanah prajigáta bâhubhir there is a plurality (these three words are in the plural) expressed, which is the characteristic of the Ribbus. 

The Yajya of the Neştar is, ameva nah suhava (2, 36, 3), in it the word gantana "go ye!" expresses a plurality. 

The Yâjyâ of the Achchhâvâka is, indravişnu pibatan madhvo (6, 69, 7); its words, à vậm amdhômsi madirant expresses a plurality, 

The Yâjyâ of the Agnidhra is, imam stoman arhate (1, 94, 1); in its words ratham iva sarmahemâ (this is first person plural) there is a plurality expressed. 

In this way all these verses become Aindra-Arbhavah. By repeating verses being (apparently) addressed to various deities, he pleases other deities (also), save Indra and the Ribhus. They are the conquerors of the jagat i. c. world ; therefore the Jagatî metre is required for the evening libation, to inake it successful. 

18. (On the relationship of those Hotars who have to repeat a Sastra to those who have none. How the Sastras of the minor Hotri-priests are supplied, at the evening libation.) 

Some one asks, Some of the duties of the Hotri-priests being performed without Sastra, some with Sastra, how are then all these ceremonies (as it (899) should be) provided with their respective Sastras, and consequent ly equal and complete ? (The answer is) They call the performance (i.e: the repetition of Yêjyâs) of those (Hotris) who like the Potar, Nestar, and Agnidhra, have no Sastra (to repeat) Hotrà (also), on account of their reciting their (respective) verses along with the other Hotri-priests, such as the Hotar, Maitrâvaruņa &c. who repeat proper Sastras). In this way they are equal. But in the fact that some Hotri-priests perform their duties with Sastras, others without Sastras, lies their inequality. Thus (both kinds of Hotri performances) become provided with Sastras, equalised and successful (for the Yâjyâs of all seven Hotri-priests are repeated one after the other).. 

Besides the Hotar only the Maiträvaruna, Brahmanachhamsi, and Achhâvâka repeat Shastras ; the others, such as the potar, &c. do not do it. But the former ropeat them at the Agnishtoma, only at the morning and midday libations,272 

14 

Now the Hotri-priests (Maitrâvaruņa, Brahmanâchchhamsi, Achchhê Vâka) repeat Sastras at the morning and midday libations only, in what way is this duty performed at the third libation ? One ought to answer, in this way, that they (these three priests just mentioned) repeat at the mid day libation two hymns each. Some one may ask, In what way do the Hotri-priests (who properly speaking repeat one Sastra only) repeat two Sastras, as many as the chief) Hotar? does ? One ought to answer, Their Yâjyâs are addressed to two deities. 

14. 1400) (How the Sastras of the Agnîdhra, Potar and Neştar are supplied. On the two Praişas to the Potar and Neştar. On the additional verse of the Achchhavaka. How the Praişa formula, hotâ yakşat, is applicable to the Potar, Neştar, and Agnidhra. The Prazşa for the chanters. The Praisa for the Achchhâvâka. On the inequality of the the deities of the Sastras and Stotriyas of the evening libation.) 

Some one asks further. If there are the performances of three Hotri priests only provided with a Sastra, how are these Sastras supplied for the performances of the others (the three remaining Lotri-priests) ? (The answer is) The Ajyam is the Sastra for the Yâjyâ repeated by the Agnidhra; the Marutvatiya that one for the Potar's Yâjyâ; the Vais vadevam that one for the Neştar's. These Yâjyâs have the characteristic sign of the respective Sastra.' 

Some one asks further, If the other Hotri-priests are requested only once (to repeat their Sastras), why are the Potar and Nestar requested twice ? 

(Regarding this the following story is reported). At the time when the Gâyatri having assumed the shape of an eagle, abstracted the Soma (from heaven), Indra (out of anger) cut off from these (three) Hotsi-priests (Agnidhra, Potar and Neştar) their Sastras, and transferred them to the Hotar, saying, "Do not call me, you are quite ignorant of it.” The gods said, “Let us give more strength to the performances of these two Hotri-priests (Potar and Neşțar) through Speech (by requesting them once 

* The Agoîdhra addresses the Yâjyâ to Agni, to whom the Ajya sastra belongs ; the Potar to the Marutas, to whom the Marutyatîya sastra belongs, and the Nestar to the Visvedevas, to whom the Vaišvadeva Sastra belongs. 

* The Hotar repeats at the morning libation the Ajya and Pra-uga Sastra, at the midday libation the Marutvatiya and Niskevalya sastra, and at the third libation the Vaišvadeva and Agnimâruta sastra. 

The Agnidhra addresses the Yajya to Agni, to whom the Ajya sastra belongs; the Potar to the Marutas, to whom the Marutvatiya sastra belongs, and the Nestar to my the Viśvedevas, to whom the Vaišvadeva Şastra belongs. 

(401) more than the others). Thence come the two requests (for Neştar and Potar). The performance of the Agnidhra was strengthened by one additional verse to his Yâjyâ; therefore his Yâjyâs are supernumerary by one verse. 

Some one asks, When the Maitrâ varuņa calls upon the Hotar by the words, “ may the Hotar repeat the Yajya ! may the Hotar repeat the Yajya !" why does he call upon those who are no Hotras, but only the repeaters of Hotfi verses, by the same words, "may the Hotar repeat the Yâjyên ?" (The answer is) The Hotar is life, and all the (other) sacrifi cial priests are life also. The meaning (of the formula “may the Hotar repeat his Yâjya," is) "may the life repeat the Yâjyâ, may the life repeat the Yâjyå !" 

If some one asks further, Are there requests for the Udgâtri priests (to chant)? One should answer, Yes, there are. For if all (the priests) are ordered to do their respective duties, then the Maiträvaruņa, after having muttered with a low voice (a mantra), says, “praise ye !"8 These are the summons for the Udgâtsi priests. 

Some one asks, Has the Achchhâvâka any preference (to the other priests) ? The answer is, Yes, he has ; for the Adhvaryu says to him, " Achchhåvaka, speak what you have to speak (and no more) !" 

Some one asks, Why are at the evening libation the Stotriya and Anurûpa verses addressed to Agni, whilst the Maiträvaruņa at that time repeats an Indra-Varuņa Sastra? (The answer is) The Devas turned the Asuras out of the Sastras by means of Agni as their mouth. 

Therefore the Stotriya and Anurûpa are addressed to Agni. 

(402) Some one asks, Why are both the Stotriya and Anurûpa of the singers devoted to Indra at the evening libation, whilst the Sastram repeat ed by the Brâhmanâchchhamsi is addressed to Indra and Brihaspati, and that of the Achchhâvâka to Indra and Vişnu? (The answer is) Indra turned the Asuras out from the Sastras (of which they had got hold) and defeated them. He said to the Devas, "Which (from among you) follows me ?," They said, “T, I,10 (we will follow)," and thus the Devas fellowed. But on account of Indra having first defeated (the Asuras) the Stotriya and Anurûpa of the singers (they precede the Shastram) are addressed to Indra. And on account of the other deities having said, “I, I, (will follow)" and (actually) followed, both the Brâhmanâchhamsi and Achchhậ Vâka repeated hymns addressed to several deities. 

* See note to 5, 34. 

That is, is there anything exceptional to be seen in the performance of his duties ? This refers to the peculiar praisa given to him, which is mentioned in the contexto See also Ašv, Sr. S, 5, 7. 

10 Višņu and Brihaspati. 

274 

15. (On the Jagati hymns addressed to Indra at the evening libation. On the hymn of the Achchhâváka. The concluding verses of the Maitråvaruna Brahmanâchchhause, and Achchhäváka. The last four syllables of the last Sastra of the Soma day to be repeated twice.) 

Some one asks further, For what reason do they repeat at the comi mencement of the evening libation hymns addressed to Indra, and composed in the Jagatî metre, whereas the evening libation belongs to the Višvedevas ? (The answer is) Having got hold of Indra (arabhya having commenced with him) by means of these (hymns), they proceed to act, being sure of success). The Jagatî metre is used because the evening libation belongs to the Jagatî, implying a desire for this world (Jagat); and any metre (403) which is used after this commencement) becomes related to the Jagati (jagat) if, at the beginning of the evening libation, hymns in the Jagati metre are repeated which are addressed to Indra. 

At the end of the Sastra) the Achchhâvâka repeats a hymn in the Tristubh metre, samvam karmanâ (6, 69, 1.) The word karma (ceremony) alludes only to the praise of drinking (the Soma)." In the words sam işâ the word işå means food; it (serves) for obtaining food (by means of this mantra.) (By the words of the last pada) " both (Indra and Visnu) carry us through on safe paths,” he pronounces every day's something relating to welfare. 

Some one asks, Why do they conclude the evening libation by Triş tubhs, if properly the Jagati metre should be used at it ? Triştubh is strength; (by repeating at the end Trişțubhs) the priests (who are at the Sattras the sacrificers themselve) get finally possessed of strength. 

The concluding verses of the Maitrâvaruņa is, iyam Indram Varunam (7, 84, 5.) That of the Brâhmaņâchhamsi is, Brihaspatir na paripâtu (10, 42, 11.) That of the Achchhâvâka is, ubhâ jigyathur (6, 69, 8.) For "both (Indra and Vişnu) had been victorious jigyathuḥ, i. e., they bad not sustained any defeat, neither of them was defeated ”18 

11 The word alluded to is, panayya, which is traced to a root pan=pan to praise ; but it hardly can mean praising" in general. It refers, as Sâyana justly reparks, to the ** drinking of the Soma juice.” In the fifth verse of the bymn in question, we have the word panaya yyri, which is the same as panayyu, where the words indravişú tat panaya yyan van evidently mean, “this is your praise for having drunk the Soma," 

12 The hymn is to be repeated every day on the Soma sacrifices which last for several days, 

18 This is a paraphrase by the author of the Brahmanam of the first half of the verso 6, 89, 8 (ubha jägyathur.) it differs little from the original, and retains most of the terms 

275 

[404] In the words indraś cha Vişno yat apaspridhetħamle (there is hinted) that Indra and Vişnu fought with the Asuras. After they had defeated them, they said to them, "Let us divide!" The Asuras accepted the offer. Indra then said, "All through which Vişnu makes his three steps is ours, the other part is yours." Then Indra stepped through these (three worlds), then over the Vedas, and (lastly) over Vâch. 

They ask, What is meant by the “sahasram,"16 a thousand ? One should say in reply, these worlds, the Vedas, and Vâch. The Achebbâvâ.com ka repeats twice the (fast) word arrayetham, i.e., “you both (Indra and Vişnu) strode," at the Oktbya sacrifice; for the part (repeated) by the Achhâvâka, is the last in it; whereas at the Agniştoma and Atirâ trai the Hotar (repeats twice the four last syllables of his Sastra); for (tho part recited by him) is in these (405) saerifices, the last. At the Solasi there it is questionable whether or not (the last four syllables) are to be repeated twice. They say, He ought to repeat them twice, for why should he repeat them twice on the other days, and not on this one ? Therefore, he should repeat them twice (also at the Soļasl.) 

18. (Why the Achchhäváha at the end of his Silpa-Sastra does not recite 

verses addressed to Naråsariasan.) Some one further asks, Why does the Achhâvâ ka at the end, in his. Silpas, recite verses not addressed to Narâšansa at the third lībation, although this libation belongs to Narâšansa ? The Narâšaosa part repre sents the change (of the semen into the human form); for the semen be comes by and by somewhat changed that which then has undergone the of the verse without giving any substitute for them. This shows, that many verses and turns of speech in the mantras were perfectly intelligible to the author of the Brahmam. nas. The only difference of the paraphrase from the original is the substitution of tayoh for enoh, which is an uncommon dual form (gen.) of a demonstrative form ; one ought to expect enayoh. 

14 This is the second half of the last verse of 6,69,8, which concludes the bymr repeated by the schchhâvâka. The author of the Bräbmapam explains it also by reporting a story to which he thinks the contents of this latter half allude. However he does not quite overlook the meaning of several terms ; apaspridhetam he explains by uyudhate, "they two have fought," and vyairayethâm by vichakrame, she stepped through." The meaning of these words is certainly correct; but the grammatieal strueture is misunderstood by our author ; atrayetham is taken by him as a singular, thongh it is a dual, for it refers to both Indra and Vişna, and not to Vişnu alone. 

15 In the last pada of the last verse abiiri jugyathur. There the words tredha sahasram vi tad arrayetham mean " ye both strode thrice through this thousand" The thousand** refers to the booty they made in the battle, or perhaps to tho“ thousand cows" given 28 Peward at great sacrifices 

210 

change becomes the pra jâiam (the proper form.):Or the Narâšaro sum is a soft and loose motre, as it were ; and the Achchhâvâka is the last reciter; therefore (it cannot be used), for (the priests think) We must put the end in a firm place for obtaining stability. Therefore the Achha vâka does not repeat at the end, in his Silpas, verses referring to Nara samsa."? 

[406] 

