+++
title = "02"

+++
2. [^2]  He makes her turn round, from left to right, so that she faces the west, and recites over her (the following texts),


[^2]:  The words, agreṇa dakṣiṇam aṃsam . . . abhyāvartya, evidently have the same meaning which is expressed elsewhere (Śāṅkhāyana p. 190 II, 3, 2), dakṣiṇam bāhum anvāvṛtya. With the first Mantra comp. Ṛg-veda X, 85, 44; Pāraskara I, 4, 16; with the second, Ṛg-veda, loc. cit., 37; Pāraskara, loc. cit.; with the following ones, Ṛg-veda X, 85, 40. 41. 45; Pāraskara I, 4, 16; 6, 3, &c.

'With no evil eye, not bringing death to thy husband, bring luck to the cattle, be full of joy and vigour. Give birth to living children, give birth to heroes, be friendly. Bring us luck, to men and animals.

'Thus, Pūṣan, lead her to us, the highly blessed one, into whom men pour forth their sperm, yā na ūrū uśatī visrayātai (read, viśrayātai), yasyām uśantaḥ praharema śepam.

'Soma has acquired thee first (as his wife); after him the Gandharva has acquired thee. Thy third husband is Agni; the fourth am I, thy human husband.

'Soma has given her to the Gandharva; the Gandharva has given her to Agni. Agni gives me cattle and children, and thee besides.

'This am I, that art thou; the heaven I, the earth thou; the Sāman I, the Ṛc thou. Come! Let us join together. Let us unite our sperm that we may generate a male child, a son, for the sake of the increase of wealth, of blessed offspring, of strength.

'Bountiful Indra, bless this woman with sons and with a happy lot. Give her ten sons; let her husband be the eleventh.'
