+++
title = "01"

+++
I confess to being somewhat puzzled by the first half vs., beginning with the identity of the 2nd ps. subject. My assumption is that it is the priest setting out the offering for Indra, not Indra himself, who is the 3rd ps. subject in cd. Pāda b (“being united with help”) would then express the priest’s receiving of Indra’s help, though the expression seems a little odd. The only similar passage I can find is V.42.8 távotíbhiḥ sácamānāḥ … “being accompanied by your help,” of the ritual patrons. It might instead be possible to take b with cd, modifying Indra “being at one with his (own) help.” The dvandva śáśvac-chaśvat in b matching suté-sute in c might weakly support such an interpr. (contra the standard tr. as well as my publ. tr.).

Unfortunately the pres. yā́date is not well enough attested to allow us to determine its usual subjects; of its 5 occurrences, 3 involve rivers uniting with the sea (as in 7a in this hymn).

The other question in this half-verse is how exactly to construe sātáye dhāḥ.

The standard tr. take prábhṛtim as the subj. of an active infinitive sātáye -- perhaps most clearly in Keydana (Infinitive, 317 n. 132) “Mach, dass diese Darbringung siege,” taking Indra as the subject of dhāḥ (contra my identification of the priest as subj.). But I doubt that the prábhṛti- itself is the agent of winning. My publ. tr. takes sātáye as a passive, with (perhaps) Indra the implied agent: the offering is to be won by him. This interpr. may be supported by 2c prayamyámānān práti ṣū́gṛbhāya “Grasp at (the drinks) being offered,” with prá √yam expressing the same notion as prá √bhṛ in 1a and Indra’s gaining control of them in both passages. It might also be possible that sātáye is not being used as a real infinitive, and the phrase should be tr.

“set this offering here for (our) gain” -- that is, when Indra takes the offering set out by the priest, there will be general gain for all of us but neither the offering nor Indra is the agent of an infinitival use of this dative. (This seems to be close to the WG interpr.)

