+++
title = "06"

+++
On prasaváṃ yáthā see disc. of dravád yáthā ad III.35.2. In b the problem is the simile rathyèva -- more precisely what the nominal in that sequence represents. The Pp. resolves it, not surprisingly, as rathyā̀. Gr takes this as an instr. to rathī́- ‘charioteer’; Ge also takes it as an instr. but to a stem rathyā̀- ‘Fahrstrasse’ (see Old, ZDMG 61 [1907] 831-32 = Kl.Sch.262-63). Old himself (so apparently also Re) favors a nom. pl. rathyàḥ with double application of sandhi. This is possible (see similar possible situation in III.35.3), but I wonder if it does not reflect the du. rathyā̀it appears to be. This hemistich reads like a brief reprise of Viśvāmitra and the rivers (III.33). For one thing, the past tenses (impf. áyan a, pf.

jagmuḥ b) don’t make much sense if the point of the half-vs. is simply to serve as the standard of comparison for Indra’s width (pāda c), whereas the past tense does work in a brief re-narration of the situation in III.33. The word prasavá- here also echoes III.33, which contains 4 occurrences of that stem. And III.33.2 contains an undoubted example of the dual rathyā̀also marked as a simile in a similar context: áchā samudráṃ rathyèva yāthaḥ “you two drive like two charioteers to the sea,” referring to the two rivers, the Vipāś and the Śutudrī. The mixture of numbers, with pl. rivers in the frame and du. charioteers in the simile, is not surprising; even in III.33 the dual reference to these rivers soon gives way to plural. This mythic snatch having been told, the sea, so filled, is available to be compared, unfavorably, to Indra. Kü (77, 156, fld. by WG) also takes it as du, but as referring to two chariot horses. If the form is accepted as a dual here, it will have to be detached from rathyèva in VII.95.1, which see comm. ad loc. 

<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/03/036/06-08.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>