+++
title = "07"

+++
The standard tr. take pāda a as a simile, with the rivers compared to the priests of cd. I instead take the rivers as referring to the soma-purifying waters and consider b the predicate to a, with the pres. part. bhárantaḥ substituting for the main verb. At least in the transmitted text their simile would be unmarked, though most interpreters manipulate the text to produce a marker. Bl (RRs ad loc., referring to an earlier art. of his) suggests emending to samudré ná as in the otherwise identical pāda VI.19.5, a suggestion seemingly endorsed by Old and fld. by WG. However, the instr. ūtíbhiḥ with yā́damānaḥ in 1b supports the instr. reading of samudréṇa here, and in 4 of its 5 occurrences yā́damāna- is construed with an instr. This suggests that VI.19.5 has altered the formula, rather than vice versa. Ge follows a different path to a simile marker, haplology of samudréṇa *ná. Since the text makes sense as is, I see no reason to change it.

The verse contains two parallel morphological word-plays: bhárantaḥ … bharítraiḥ and punanti … pavítraiḥ, each containing a neuter -tra- instrument noun.

The latter, pavítra- lit. ‘instrument for purifying’, is of course very well attested in the RV, referring to the soma-purifying filters, but bharítra- is a hapax, obviously generated to match pavítra-, including the -i-liaison vowel appropriate only to the seṭ root √pū, not to aniṭ √bhṛ. It is tr. ‘arm’ by all (going back to the Naigh.), but milking with the arms doesn’t make sense in either life or metaphor. I think it means rather ‘hand’ and participates in a different word-play within its pāda: an ‘instrument for carrying’ can easily be a hand, and so it is synonymous with hásta- ‘hand’ found in the immediately preceding word hastín- ‘hand-ed’. There is a further implied verbal twist, at least with my interpr. of ab: the rivers don't have hands but carry anyway, while the priests do have hands but use their carrying appendages for something else. I’m afraid the publ. tr. needed to be quite heavy-handed to convey the deftness of this little play.

