+++
title = "01"

+++
The problem in this vs. is rathyèva in c. Contextually the most obvious interpr. is as a nom. sg. fem., subject of yāti, but assuming the correctness of the Pp.

reading, rathyā̀iva (and there is no other viable alternative), it is difficult to find a way to get there morphologically. If it belongs to the vṛkī-inflected rathī́- ‘charioteer’, the nom. sg. should of course be rathī́s. Gr assigns it to this stem, but as an instr. sg., but who would this other charioteer in the instr. be? Ge/Re also interpr.

as an instr., but to a stem rathyā̀- ‘Fahrstrasse’ / ‘une route-carrosable’. See Ge’s somewhat opaque comm. in the 4th vol. of his tr. (p. 252, col. 3, ad II.4.6b) and Old’s more illuminating one, interpreting a previous, but similar formulation of Ge’s (ZDMG 61 [1907] 831-32 = Kl.Sch.262-63). Old himself prefers an interpr. as an acc. pl. rathyàḥ with double application of sandhi (to nom./acc. pl. *rathyàs iva).

Here the acc. pl. would presumably be parallel to “all the other waters” that Sarasvatī pushes ahead of her, but the simile would ill fit the passage. (Old does not transl.) The sequence rathyèva occurs several times elsewhere: II.39.2, 3, III.33.2, 36.6, VII.39.1. In all but III.36.6, rathyā̀is clearly the correct dual nom./acc. to the vṛkīstem, and in III.36.6 I interpret it also as a dual (contra most interpr.), for reasons given in the comm. ad loc. But here that solution, wedding morphology and sense, will not work. My ad hoc and admittedly entirely unsatisfactory “solution” here is to take it as a nonce fem. nom. sg. in -ā, perhaps based on asuryā̀(also nom. sg. fem.) in the 1st vs. of the next hymn (VII.96.1), also of Sarasvatī. The hymns are twinned and can be read against each other.

