+++
title = "Praśna IV, Adhyāya 3"

+++
## 01
1. We will explain the (secret) penances which are not prescribed (by others, but by the offender himself, and) particularly what shall be done in (case) faults (have been committed) by men who, with concentrated minds, (are) intent (on the performance of their duties). [^1] 

## 02
2. (Such a man) may sip water, (in order to atone) for all mortal sins, reciting the syllable Om and all the Vyāhṛtis. [^2] 

## 03
3. When he sips water the first time, he gladdens the Rig-veda, the second time the Yajur-veda, the third time the Sāma-veda. [^3] 

## 04
4. When he wipes (his lips) the first time, he gladdens the Atharva-veda, the second time the Itihāsas and Purāṇas.

## 05
5. When he sprinkles water on the right hand, the feet, the head, the heart, the nostrils, the eyes, the ears, and the navel, he gladdens the trees and herbs and all deities. Therefore he is freed from all sin by sipping water.

## 06
6. Or let him offer in the fire eight pieces of sacred fuel, reciting (the following) eight (texts): 'Thou art the expiation of sin committed by the gods, Svāhā;' 'Thou art the expiation of sin committed by men, Svāhā;' 'Thou art the expiation of sin committed by the manes, Svāhā;' 'Thou art the expiation of sin committed by myself, Svāhā;' 'Thou art the expiation of the sift which we have committed either by day or by night, Svāhā;" Thou art the expiation of the sin which we have committed either sleeping or waking, Svāhā;' 'Thou art the expiation of the sin which we have committed either intentionally or unintentionally, Svāhā;' Thou art the expiation of every sin, Svāhā.' [^4] 

## 07
7. When he has offered (these eight oblations) he will be freed from all guilt.

## 08
8. Now they quote also (the following verse): 'The Aghamarshaṇa, the Devakṛta, the Suddhavatīs, the Taratsamās, the Kūṣmāṇḍīs, the Pāvamānīs, the Virājās, the Mṛtyulāṅgala, the Durgā (Sāvitrī), the Vyāhṛtis, and the Rudras (are texts) which are very efficacious for effacing sin.' [^5] 



[^1]:  3. Vasiṣṭha XXV, 1-2. The whole Adhyāya is left out in the Dekhan MSS., including K. The omission may have been caused by the circumstance that the initial verses of Adhyāyas 3 and are identical.

[^2]:  Gautama XXV, 9; Vasiṣṭha XXV, 4.

[^3]:  -5. See the rules for sipping water, given above, I, 5, 8, 19-26.

[^4]:  Gautama XXV, 10. The Mantras occur Taitt. Āraṇyaka X, 59.

[^5]:  Viṣṇu LVI, 3, and note; Vasiṣṭha XXVIII, 10-15.