+++
title = "Praśna IV, Adhyāya 7"

+++
## 01
1. The wishes of a Brāhmaṇa who has left off evil deeds and is (ever) engaged in holy works are fulfilled even without (the practice of) restraints. [^1] 

## 02
2. Upright Brāhmaṇas quickly accomplish whatever they wish in their hearts, if they are purified by honest actions.

## 03
3. Thus a wise man should practise those restraints until he has purified his bodily frame.

## 04
4. He who has been purified by those restraints should, after fasting three (days and) nights, begin the performance of that sacred rite through which he wishes to gain the fulfilment of his desires,

## 05
5. (Reciting) the Kṣāpavitra, the Sahasrākṣa, the Mṛgāra, the two Jaṇas (called) Aṃhomuc, the Pāvamanīs, the Kūṣmāṇḍīs, and the Ṛcas, addressed to Vaiśvānara, [^2] 

## 06
6. (And) offering with (each of) these (Mantras) boiled rice and clarified butter during seven days, in the morning, at midday, and in the evening, keeping a rigid silence, living on food fit for a sacrifice, restraining his senses and his actions,

## 07
7. He is freed from all crimes, even mortal sins, after looking on a cross-road at a pot filled with water, (and reciting the text), 'Siṃhe me manyuḥ.'

## 08
8. He is freed from the multitude of sins, committed unintentionally in old age, in youth, and in infancy, and even from those belonging to former births;

## 09
9. After feeding at the end (of the seven days) Brāhmaṇas with milk and rice, well. mixed with butter, and distributing to them after their dinner cows, land, sesamum, and gold,

## 10
10. A Brāhmaṇa becomes internally pure, his guilt being consumed like fuel, and fit for the performance of rites which secure the fulfilment of wishes and of rites like the kindling of the sacred fire.



[^1]:  7. Yantrāṇi, 'restraints,' i.e. Kṛcchras, the fasts, and other practices described in the preceding chapters.

[^2]:  According to Govinda the Kṣāpavitra, or as the Dekhan MSS. read, Kṣmāpavitra, occurs in the Sūtrapāṭha of the Taittirīyas, consists of six verses, and begins 'Agne naya.' The text meant must be similar to Taitt. Saṃhitā I, t, 14, 3. The Sahasrākṣa is the Puruṣasūkta. The Mṛgāra consists of the Yājyānuvākyās of the Mṛgāreṣṭi, Taitt. Saṃhitā IV, 7, t5. The two Jaṇas called Aṃhomuc are found Taitt. Saṃhitā II, 3, 13, 1, 'yā vām indrāvaruṇau' and 'yo vām indrāvaruṇau: The verses addressed to Agni Vaiśvānara are the first eight of Taitt. Saṃhitā I, 5, 11.