+++
title = "Praśna IV, Adhyāya 8"

+++
## 01
1. He who, through excessive greed or carelessness, performs this rite for others, is tainted by sin, and peṛṣes like one who has swallowed poison.

## 02
2. A Brāhmaṇa who performs this rite for his teacher, his father, his mother, or for himself is resplendent like the sun. Therefore this rite may be performed for those (persons).

## 03
3. Ka (Prajāpati) purified by means of this rite the god with a thousand eyes (Sahasrākṣa), Fire, Wind, the Sun, Soma, Yama, and other lords of the gods.

## 04
4. Whatever there is in these three worlds, famed as possessing a holy name, Brāhmaṇas and the rest, (all) that was produced by Ka through this rite of sanctification.

## 05
5. This sin-destroying secret of Prajāpati was first produced; thereafter thousands of purificatory rites .came into existence. [^1] 

## 06
6. He who performs those eight Gaṇahomas on the (first) day of the year, of a half-year, of a season, or of a fortnight, sanctifies ten ancestors and ten descendants of his line;

## 07
7. And, while still on earth, he is known to the gods in heaven as a holy man, and (after death) that virtuous man rejoices for a very long time in heaven like a god.

## 08
8. If a Brāhmaṇa is unable to offer those eight Gaṇahomas, let him offer one; thereby his guilt is effaced.

## 09
9. He, also, whose sons or pupils offer those eight Gaṇahomas, is freed from his sin which is bought off by his having instructed (them).

## 10
10. Through a desire of removing one's guilt one even may cause (these oblations) to be offered by men who have been engaged for money, in case oneself is unable (to do it); a man need not torment himself. [^2] 

## 11
11. Even among the virtuous a distribution of wealth is made (for the success) of holy rites; some-times a man who is free from debt is (thereby) freed from guilt.

## 12,
12, Liberated according to this rule from the ocean of guilt and debt, he considers himself pure and able to successfully perform the sacred rites.

## 13
13. But in the case of that pure mortal who, freed from all sin and debts, begins the sacred rites, they will succeed without any effort.

## 14
14. Let him daily (study and) teach this holy (rule) of Prajāpati, which the sage has proclaimed, let him remember it or hear it. (By doing that) he is freed from all guilt and will be exalted in Brahman's world.

## 15
15. Let him mutter during twelve days those sacred texts through which he wishes to accomplish (his desires), eating once (a day) at night boiled rice with clarified butter, with milk, or with sour milk.

## 16
16. (Let him offer) ten times a burnt oblation and sprinkle clarified butter. (That is) the preliminary worship (which must be performed) when one desires to accomplish one's objects through those sacred texts.



[^1]:  8. I.e. those mentioned V, 7, 5.

[^2]:  The meaning is that in case a wealthy man is unable to bear 'the restraints,' he may hire others to perform the Homas. Though the hired performer will be guilty of a serious offence (Sūtra 1), the person who causes them to be performed will derive benefit from them.