+++
title = "+014"

+++
14 (840)
Yama, etc.
Yama Vaivasvata
16 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 13–14, 16 and br̥hatī 15
This is the first of the funeral hymns, and it is dedicated for the most part to Yama,  the first to die and the king of the world of the dead, where the forefathers dwell  and to which a newly dead person makes his way along the pitr̥yā́na or “way of the  forefathers.” Because he was the first to die, Yama discovered this path and blazed  the trail, as it were, to the pleasant, well-watered (vs. 9) pasture-land (vs. 2).
The hymn falls into three parts. Verses 1–6 offer praise to Yama as the pathfinder  to the ancestral world (vss. 1–2) and then invite him to attend our sacrifice along with others, both gods and ancestors—suggesting implicitly that the pitr̥yā́na is  a two-way street. It is also noteworthy that, though the gods and the forefathers  respond to slightly different variants of the ritual cry (vs. 3: svā́hā for the gods  versus svadhā́ for the forefathers), the mechanisms for the sacrifice to gods and fore
fathers are presented as more or less identical in this section and in verses 13–16,  and in particular Yama is offered soma. See also the next hymn, X.15. Verses 7–12 concern not this age-old death but a recent one. A newly dead man  is addressed and urged to follow the same path, to join Yama and the ancestors in  highest heaven and even to reunite with the body from which he has been temporar ily separated (vss. 7–8). Potential troublemakers along the way are dismissed (vs. 9),  and the dead man is escorted by the two formidable guardian dogs of Yama (vss.  10–12).
The last four verses (13–16) are in dimeter meter (save for 15c), instead of the  triṣṭubh of the rest of the hymn. The first three are simple exhortations to perform  sacrifice to Yama; the final verse (16) is by contrast quite opaque, with some of  the typical marks of obscurity: unidentified referents (pādas a and b), numerology  (pāda b), and manipulation of names of meters (pāda c). In particular, pāda b pres
ents us with six broad feminine entities and one lofty neuter one. (The contrasting  grammatical genders so obvious in the Sanskrit are not easily rendered in transla tion.) The six broad feminines are generally considered to be worlds or realms (on  the basis of VI.47.3, which, however, doesn’t have an overt referent either), and the  lofty neuter some other superior type of space. Given the extreme uncertainty of  the referents, the syntax (should pāda b be construed with pāda a, or with cd, or,  as we have done, connected neither to what precedes nor what follows?), and the  reason for the presence of this verse as the finale of this hymn, we have chosen to  leave the meaning open.