+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. Now, then, as to the taking down of the ashes (to the water [^egg_548]). Now, the gods at that time threw out the ashes (from the pan). They said, 'If we make this, such as it is, part of our own self, we shall become mortal carcases, not freed from sin; and if we cast it away, we shall put outside of Agni what therein is of Agni's nature: find ye out in what manner we shall do this!'--They said, 'Meditate ye (cit)!' whereby, indeed, they said, 'Seek ye a layer (or altar, citi). Seek ye in what manner we shall do this!'

[^egg_548]: 293:1 The ashes removed from the 'ukhā' or fire-pan are put in a bag made of leaves of some sacred tree, and are then thrown into the water in two portions. As they are floating on the water, a small portion is taken from them again with the little finger and put in the pan.
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. While meditating, they saw this,--'Let us take it down to the water; for the water is the foundation of this universe: having settled it on that wherein is the foundation of this universe, we shall reproduce from out of the water what there is of Agni's nature in this (heap of ashes).' They then took it down to (and threw it into) the water; and in like manner does this (Sacrificer) now take it down to the water.
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. [Vāj. S. XII, 35] 'O divine waters, receive ye these ashes, and put them in a soft and fragrant place!'--that, being consumed (matter), has run its course (is useless): regarding that he says, 'Put it in, the most fragrant place!'--'May

the wives, wedded to a good lord, bow down to him,'--the wives, doubtless, are the waters, for from the waters this universe is produced; and in Agni the waters have indeed a good lord;--'bear it on the waters, even as a mother (bears) her son!'--that is, 'as a mother would bear her son on her lap, so bear ye this!'
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. [Vāj. S. XII, 36; R̥k S. VIII, 43, 9] 'In the waters, O Agni, is thy seat,'--that is, 'in the waters, O Agni, is thy womb; as such thou clingest to the plants,'--for he does indeed cling to (love) the plants,--'being in (their) womb thou art born again,'--when he is in the womb he is indeed born again,--[Vāj. S. XII, 37] 'Thou art the child of the herbs, the child of the trees, the child of all that is, O Agni, thou art the child of the waters;'--he thus makes him (Agni) the child of this entire (universe).
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. With three (verses) he throws (the ashes into the water),--threefold is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, by so much he thus throws them down. First with one (prayer), and then with two; or first with two, and then with one,--but at two separate times he throws them down: he thus throws them down by means of the two-footed animals.
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. He then takes some (of the ashes) therefrom: he thereby reproduces from the waters what there is of Agni's nature in that (heap of ashes). [He takes it] with that (nameless or little finger), for with that (finger) medicine is prepared: it is with that one he thus puts him (Agni) together. [Vāj. S. XII, 38-41] 'Having settled [^egg_549] in the womb, as

[^egg_549]: 294:1 'Pra-sad' (= pra-āp, Mahīdhara) seems here really to have the  meaning of 'abhiprasad' or 'anuprasad,' as the accusative can scarcely be taken along with 'āsadaḥ.'

ashes, in the waters, and the earth, O Agni,'--by his ashes he is, indeed, settled in the womb, that is, both in the waters and in the earth;--'having united with the mothers, thou hast again, brightly shining, seated thee;'--that is, 'Having joined thy mothers, thou, the shining one, hast again seated thyself (in thy home).'--'Having again seated thee in thy seat, the waters and the earth, O Agni, thou liest in her (the earth, or pan) most happy, as in a mother's lap.'--'Return again with sustenance, again, O Agni, with food and life; guard us again from trouble!--With wealth return, O Agni, overflow with the all-feeding stream on every side!'--that is, 'With all this return thou to me!'
</details>

##  07
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

7. With four (verses) he takes (some of the ashes);--he thereby supplies him (Agni) with four-footed animals; and animals being food, it is with food he thus supplies him. With three (verses) he takes (the ashes) down (to the water),--that makes seven, for of seven layers consists the fire-altar [^egg_550], seven seasons are a year, and the year is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, so great does this become.

[^egg_550]: 295:1 See p. 249, note 3.
</details>

##  08
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

8. Having taken some of the ashes, and returned, he throws it into the fire-pan, and stands by (the fire) worshipping it; for when he throws Agni into the water he does what is improper; he now makes amends to him so that he may not injure him. With two (verses) relating to Agni (he worships),--for it is to Agni that he makes amends,--and with such

as contain (the verb) 'budh' (to attend to, awake), in order that Agni may attend to this speech of his.
</details>

##  09
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

9. [Vāj. S. XII, 42-3; R̥k S. I, 147, 2; II, 6, 4] 'Attend thou to this word of mine, O youngest!'--that is, 'attend to this word of mine, O youngest!'--'put forth most plentifully, O faithful one!'--that is, 'put forth most abundantly, O faithful one!'--'this one revileth thee, and that one singeth thy praises,'--that is, 'one (man) reviles thee, and another sings thy praises;'--'reverently I revere thy body, O Agni!'--that is, 'I, thy reverer, revere thy body, O Agni!'--'Be thou a munificent patron of offerings, O lord of wealth, the bestower of wealth, keep off from us the haters!' this he says in order that he may keep off haters from him. With two (verses) he worships the fire, a Gāyatrī and a Trishṭubh verse: the significance of this has been explained.
</details>

##  10
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

10. These make nine (verses),--there are nine regions [^egg_551], and Agni is the regions; nine vital airs, and Agni is the vital airs: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, so great does this become.

[^egg_551]: 296:1 Viz. the four cardinal points, and the four intermediate points, of the compass, and the upper region. To these paragraph 12 adds, as a tenth, the lower region.
</details>

##  11
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

11. He then performs two expiations; for it is for (the obtainment of) all his desires that he sets up that (fire);--thus whatever part of his desires is here cut off when the fire is thrown into the water, that he thereby joins together and restores. He performs both expiations which (are performed) when the fire has gone out [^egg_552]: the significance of this has been explained.

[^egg_552]: 296:2 VI, 6, 4, 10 seq.
</details>

##  12
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

12. This makes ten (performances),--the Virāj consists of ten syllables, and Agni is the Virāj [^egg_553]; there are ten regions, and Agni is the regions; ten vital airs, and Agni is the vital airs: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, so great does this become.

[^egg_553]: 297:1 That is, the wide-shining, or wide-ruling one.
</details>