+++
title = "04"

+++
Both abc and de are constructed pleonastically. In a(bc) the phrase uśmasīṣṭáye (i.e., uśmasi iṣṭáye) “we wish to seek” is semantically but not etymologically pleonastic (roots √vaś and √iṣ respectively), while in cd ūtáyé, ‘vā (i.e., ūtáye, ávā) “help to help” is both. When in fg we encounter the etymological figure stárate stṛṇóṣi (… stṛṇóṣi), we expect another pleonasm, but here of course the etymologically related words do not duplicate each other functionally because they have different subjects, though they do essentially mean the same thing: “(he) will (not) lay (you) low (whom) you lay low.” Because of this structural pattern in the verse, I do not follow Ge’s (and others’) attempts to mitigate the pleonasm of abc (e.g., Ge “Wir wünschen, dass … Indra … gern komme”).

The vaḥ in a is difficult to render in tr. I take it as the usual offhand address to the patrons on whose behalf we, the ritual officiants, perform all our actions. Because of the awkwardness I omitted it in the publ. tr., esp. since the benefit to 1st ps. “us” is so heavily emphasized by fronted full genitive asmā́kam (also in d). These fronted pronouns were also impossible to render in that position without violence to the English.

The positioning of yám in fg is worth a brief note. In f it appears immediately after the first word of its clause, stṛṇóṣi, a standard position. This happens also to be the last word of its clause. In the tag pāda g stṛṇóṣi yám takes the same position as in f, but since more material has been added at the front, the yám is now out of position.

