+++
title = "06"

+++
The purport of this verse is something of a puzzle. I think the point is that the journey undertaken by Indra in vs. 4 has finally brought him here, with both his battle-lust and his equipment on full display, in order to drink soma with the ritualists (including the “I” of the speaker). Cf. nearby IV.29.2, where Indra presents himself in a non-intimidating way (or so he thinks) and “becomes exhilarated along with the heroes who have pressed the soma.” Here his arrival is at sunrise, and “I” have a share in the soma along with Indra at that time. In order to make sense of 6c, we need to understand/supply ábhakṣi from 5c (as Ge [/WG] do also). Although Klein (DGRV II.129) thinks the two ádha’s in c have different functions, the pointed parallel structure of that short pāda -- ádha LOC ádha LOC -- makes that conclusion quite unlikely in its strong form -- though I think it is the case that the formal parallelism conceals a functional distinction (different from the one suggested by Klein). The question is how to construe the locatives, and it is here that the sácā in 5c comes into play. As I noted apropos of that pāda, the sácā there seems just to signal that the loc. sū́rye is a functional loc. absol. In our pāda c there is no sácā, but I think it should be understood. On the one hand, it again (silently) marks sū́rye as a loc. absol.; however, with índre I suggest it has lexical value (as it likely has in the two occurrences of tvé sácā in the next hymn [IV.32.3c, 4a]), indicating that “I” take my share in Indra’s company. What I am suggesting is that a non-overt sácā, supplied on the basis of its occurrence in the previous vs., has two different functions in a single pāda, a pāda whose structure suggests that its parts should be rigidly parallel. This is not sufficiently conveyed by the published tr. -- I am not sure that English is up to conveying it -- which I would now emend to “(I have taken my share) now in (company with) you, now in (company with) the sun (i.e., at sunrise).”


<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/04/030/04-06.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>