+++
title = "07-08"

+++
My interpr. of the structural relationship of these two vss. and of the internal structure of vs. 8 differs considerably from the standard. Because of the parallelism of the openings of these vss., both with utá smā, I think that there should be two parallel clauses. But vs. 7 is a hí clauses with accented verb (āhúḥ), whereas the only verb in vs. 8 is maṃhase in pāda c. I am also puzzled by the pári in 8a, which is difficult to construe with the rest. There is no pári √maṃh elsewhere, and pári is in any case not situated where we would expect a preverb in tmesis. WG tr.

valiantly “du schenkst … ringsum,” which works in a pinch but I find it unsatisfying.

I suggest instead that pāda a contains an abbreviated form of a common formula containing both pári and sádyaḥ and a verb of motion. Cf. in IV: nearby IV.33.1 pári dyā́ṃ sadyó apáso babhūvuḥ; IV.45.7 yéna sadyáḥ pári rájāṃsi yātháḥ; IV.51.5 pariprayāthá bhúvanāni sadyáḥ. And elsewhere, e.g., I.115.3 pári dyā́vāprthiv ̥ ī́yanti sadyáḥ; I.123.8 ékaikā krátum pári yanti sadyáḥ; I.128.3 évena sadyáḥ páry eti pā́rthivam; III.58.8 pári dyā́vāprthiv ̥ ī́yāti sadyáḥ; V.47.4 diváś caranti pári sadyó ántān; VII.5.7 vāyúr ná pā́thaḥ pári pāsi sadyáḥ; VII.75.4 páñca kṣitī́ḥ pári sadyó jigāti. Given the remarkable number of such collocations, I find it difficult to believe that our poet is not evoking this formula. Since much of this hymn concerns Indra’s journey, it would be contextually appropriate. That vs. 9 asserts that no hindrances can obstruct Indra supports the journey theme. Then, by my interpr., pādas bc constitute the main clause for vss. 7-8.

