+++
title = "11"

+++
The publ. tr. rather carelessly followed Ge’s “zu grossem, glanzvollem Besitz,” but maháḥ is of course not a dat. like rāyé divítmate. It should either be rendered as a gen./abl. of máh-, hence “for the heavenly wealth of/from a/the great one” (so, e.g., tentatively Scar 45), or as the adv. maháḥ (see esp. Old, Kl. Schr. 729- 30 [=ZDMG (1901): 270-71] on mahó rāyé), hence “greatly for heavenly wealth.” As Old points out, this phrase is very similar to V.79.1 mahé … rāyé divítmatī, with a real dative mahé. The purport of the two expressions is probably the same. I would now follow Old’s adverbial interpr. Indeed this very phrase is found a number of times: IV.31.11, V.15.5, 43.1, VIII.23.16, X.61.22, 76.2, and in all cases the maháḥ should be interpr. as adverbial, though the less punctilious “for great wealth” probably captures the intended sense just as well.

The tr. of divítmate also needs to be revised. I now tentatively accept the analysis of divít- and its deriv. divítmant- as div-ít-, a root noun cmpd containing the root √i ‘go, come’. The word is rendered inconsistently in the publ. tr., as ‘heavenbound’ in I.26.2, ‘heavenly’ here and X.76.6 (though adjacent divít- is tr. ‘heavenbound’), and ‘heaven-bright’ in V.79.1. This inconsistency reflects the weakness of both standard analyses of this formation, either as an -it-stem with a marginal suffix or as a cmpd. Neither explan. is particularly compelling. For the former, see, e.g., AiG II.2.322, Re EVP 3.78-79 [ad V.79.1]; for the latter, e.g., Thieme (ZDMG 1961.100 = KlSch 176), AiG II.2.935 (Nachtr.), EWA s.v. dyáv- (p. 750), and extensive disc. by Scar (44-46). The idea goes back at least to Wackernagel (Sb. Berl.

1918; see Re op cit.). In this particular case, since the wealth is presumably coming from heaven, not going there, a lit. tr. would be “greatly for wealth coming from heaven,” but “… for heaven-sent wealth” would be more idiomatic. The -mantsuffix seems pleonastic, as AiG II.2.877-78 points out, since the hapax divít- and divítmant- appear both to be adjectives in the same meaning and are found adjacent to each other in the same case in the one passage in which divít- is found (X.76.6).

The reason for -mant- rather than -vant- is likewise unclear (see AiG II.2.882, 891).