+++
title = "24"

+++
The voc. ādure is a hapax, and there is no agreement about whether it is a PN or an attributive adj. and whether it is addressed to a deity (possibly Indra) or a human (possibly a patron). Nor does it seem likely that any definitive answers can be obtained, given the stark paucity of evidence. I have therefore tr. it as a PN as the line of least resistance, and I think it quite unlikely that it is addressed to Indra: would relatively low-level gods be giving things to Indra, and do gods ever receive, rather than give, vāmá-? I tentatively assume that it is the name of the/a patron.

Although this vs. is not technically a dānastuti, it occupies the position in the hymn where a dānastuti would be found, with mention of the human patron, and in opening out to a range of (mostly minor) gods, the mention of a mortal would not be amiss.

On the hapax kárūḷatī see EWA s.v. ## 031
Indra According to Old the hymn is in tṛcas, but Ge asserts that it consists of 3 verse pairs and 3 tṛcas. Ge concedes that vss. 1-3 occur as a unit in SV, VS, and AV, but argues that the content and form of the verses speak for a different division: vss. 1-2 are questions, vss. 3-4 both begin with the same word, and vss. 5-6 concern the relation between Indra and Sūrya. After this verse, again on formal and thematic grounds, he considers the rest tṛcas. Despite these considerations, Old’s view seems correct. That both 3 and 4 begin with abhí (used in two different senses) is scarcely remarkable; note the verbal concatenation between tṛcas in the next hymn, IV.32.3-4.

Moreover, vs. 3 fits more comfortably with the preceding vss.: The question “with what help?” (káyā … ūtī́) posed in vs. 1 is answered in vs. 3 with the assertion that Indra will be our “helper with help” (avitā́… ūtíbhiḥ), a satisfying finale to a tṛca.

Vss. 5-6 do indeed involve Indra and Sūrya, but vs. 4 provides the lead-in to Indra’s journey continued in vs. 5.

