+++
title = "001"

+++
1 (192)
Agni
Gr̥tsamada Bhārgava Śaunaka, originally Āṅgirasa Śaunahotra
16 verses: jagatī
This hymn is structured as a series of identifications—of the god Agni with priests,  other gods, kin/social relations, qualities, body parts, and so on, with the identifica tion mediated by the quality held in common.
Although the equations may at first seem randomly ordered, in fact they fol low a logical progression. The first ones (vs. 2) identify Agni with human priests.  (Priestly identifications are also found extensively in II.5. And for the relationship  between particular priests and particular gods, see also the R̥tugraha hymns I.15,  II.36–37.) In the next five verses (3–7) the variety of functions Agni discharges  invite identification with a series of gods. Verses 8–9 then set Agni in the web of  human relationships, of varying degrees of close kinship. We return to the divine (or  semi-divine) world in verses 10–11, but the identifications here link him especially  to ritual activity (the R̥bhus in vs. 10, who are associated with the Third Pressing  and who achieved divinity by their ritual feats; the female divinities in vs. 11, who  are regularly mentioned in the Āprī hymns) and prepare for the last section of the  hymn (vss. 12–14). The R̥bhu verse (10) also contains an elaborate pun, while the  identification of Agni with three female divinities in verse 11 would surely provoke  attention in the audience. Agni’s own ritual service, especially to the gods, provides  the subject of verses 12–14. The last pāda of this last section (14d) provides a ring  with the first verse (1d): “you were born blazing” (jajñiṣe śúciḥ 14d), reprising “you  are born blazing” (jāyase śúciḥ 1d), in both cases with a mention of the plants as his  source. This neat ring, which closes the series of individual identifications, sets the  stage for the climactic verse 15 (before the refrain of 16), which proclaims Agni’s  complete superiority throughout heaven and earth.
The identifications are themselves structured by an extraordinary density of rhe torical repetition. Of the sixteen verses, the first fourteen begin with a form of the  2nd-person singular pronoun tvám “you,” followed by the vocative agne “o Agni.”  In fact fifty-four pādas out of fifty-six open with a 2nd-person singular pronoun,  in addition to other pronominal forms scattered in non-initial position. For exam ple, there are seven forms of tvám in the first verse alone. The fifteenth verse (and  the last before the refrain) begins, as usual, with tvám, but the vocative ágne is  postponed till the opening of the second pāda—distracting the formula. As often,  rhetorical patterns established earlier in a hymn are varied as the hymn comes to  a close, and the change of pattern here draws attention to the climactic contents  of verse 15 discussed just above. Though the rhetorical tool, repetition, is a blunt  instrument, its effects are powerful.
This rhetorical pattern is especially striking because so many of the pronominal  forms are nominatives and therefore unnecessary, since pronominal subjects need  not be expressed in Sanskrit. Though some of these nominatives occur in equational sentences (cf. tvám agníd r̥tāyatáḥ “you [are] the Agnidh of the one who follows  truth”) where a pronominal forms is often used in place of a copula, a surprising  number of these equational sentences also employ a 2nd-person singular copula (asi [e.g., 3a, 5d] or equivalent), rendering a pronominal subject unnecessary. For further
discussion see Jamison (2007: 59–60). Poetics, not grammar, is the driving factor. The effect of this incantatory repetition of “you, Agni,” taking place in front  of the sacrificial fire on the ritual ground, combined with the sweep of equations  identifying Agni with what comes to seem like everything on earth and in heaven,  is to concentrate all of the cosmos into this small space, the sacrifical ground, and  this single entity, the sacrificial fire—indeed making the sacrificial microcosm  the equivalent of the macrocosm. The ordering of the identifications—starting  and ending at the sacrifice, but in between ranging through both the divine and  human realms—models the centrality of the sacrifice and of its focus, the sacred  fire. It is a powerful beginning to the maṇḍala and to the Family Books in general.
## 1
You, Agni, (are born) throughout the days, you who are eager to blaze  here; you (are born) from the waters, you from the stone,
you from the trees, you from the plants, you, men-lord of men, are born  blazing.
## 2
Yours, Agni, is the office of Hotar; yours that of Potar in its turn; yours  that of Neṣṭar; you are the Agnidh [=Fire-Kindler] of the one who
follows truth.
Yours is the office of Praśāstar; you act as Adhvaryu; you are both the  Brahman-priest and the houselord in our home.
## 3
You, Agni, as bull of beings, are Indra; you, wide-going, worthy of  homage, are Viṣṇu.
You, o lord of the sacred formulation, finder of wealth, are the Brahman  [=Formulator]; you, o Apportioner, are accompanied by Plenitude.
## 4
You, Agni, whose commandments are steadfast, are King Varuṇa; you,  wondrous to be invoked, become Mitra.
You, as the lord of settlements who (offers) a common meal, are
Aryaman; you, apportioning at the ritual distribution, o god, are
Aṃśa [/Share].
## 5
You, Agni, (giving wealth) rich in heroes to the one who does honor, are  Tvaṣṭar—yours is kinship, o you accompanied by the Wives (of the  Gods) and possessing Mitra’s might—
You have given (wealth) rich in horses as the impeller of swift (horses)  [=Child of the Waters]. You of many goods are the troop of men
[=Maruts].
## 6
You, Agni, as lord of great heaven, are Rudra; you, as the troop of  Maruts, are master of strengthening nourishment [=rain].
You, as luck for livestock, drive with the ruddy winds (as horses); you, as  Pūṣan, protect the ones doing honor, in your own person.

## 7
You, Agni, are Wealth-Giver to the preparer (of the offering); you, as  the conferrer of treasure, are god Savitar.
You, lord of men, as Bhaga [/Fortune] are master of goods; you are a  protector in the house of him who has done you honor.
## 8
Toward you, Agni, as clanlord in the house do the clans stretch out  straight—toward you, the king, easy to find.
You, lovely-faced one, are lord over all; you are the counter(part) to  thousands, hundreds, tens.
## 9
To you, Agni, as father, (do) men (approach) with their desires—to you,  for brotherhood, (do they approach) with their (ritual) labor, you  who are bright in body.
You become the son of him who has done you honor; you as
affectionate comrade—protect (him) from assault.
## 10
You, Agni, as [R̥bhu/] the craftsman at hand, are to be rendered  homage; you are master of the cattle-rich prize [/Vāja], of wealth. You radiate widely [/(are) Vibhvan]: burn through to giving! You seek  to carve up and to stretch out the sacrifice.
## 11
You, god Agni, are Aditi for the pious; you, as Hotrā Bhāratī, are  strengthened by song.
You are Iḍā, bestowing a hundred winters in return for skill; you, o lord  of goods, as obstacle-smasher, are Sarasvatī.
## 12
You, Agni, when well kept, are highest vigor. In your coveted color  there are beauties in sight.
You are the prize, furthering and lofty; you are wealth, ample, broad on  all sides.
## 13
You, Agni, did the Ādityas make their mouth; you did the pure ones  make their tongue, o poet.
You do the Gift-Escorts escort in the ceremonies; in you do the gods  eat the poured oblation.
## 14
O Agni, through your mouth do all the undeceptive immortals, the  gods, eat the oblation poured into you.
With you the mortals sweeten their pressed drink. You, as embryo of  the plants, were born blazing.
## 15
You are both equal and a counter(part) to these by your might, and, o  Agni, well-born god, you surpass them,
since your strengthening nourishment here extends in its greatness  through heaven and earth, through both world-halves.
## 16
The patrons—those who dispatch to the praisers a gift tipped with cows  and ornamented with horses, o Agni—
lead both us and them forth to a better state. – May we speak loftily at  the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes. 