+++
title = "002"

+++
2 (193) Agni
Gr̥tsamada
13 verses: jagatī
The solar aspects of fire are emphasized, with a number of comparisons to and  identifications with the sun, some of which are obscure and enigmatic (e.g., vs.  4). The twin themes of the whole hymn are encapsulated in the first verse: Agni  installed in the ritual ground, performing the role of Hotar, and receiving oblations  and hymns; Agni as the earthly counterpart of the blazing sun.
The hymn falls into two nearly equal parts. The first five verses are primarily  descriptive, with Agni generally referred to in the 3rd person; verses 6–12 (13 is  repeated from II.1.16) consist primarily of requests, addressed to Agni in the 2nd  person. The first half establishes Agni’s cosmic role, mediating between and watch
ing over the heavenly and earthly realms and maintaining his position through the  regular temporal alternations (for the latter, see esp. vs. 2). With Agni’s cosmic dom inance thus affirmed, the second half seeks to utilize these wider powers of his to  enhance our own position in the cosmos. See, for example, verse 9, where the poet  describes his poetic vision (dhī́) taking its place among the immortals in heaven, and  verse 10, where he compares the brilliance of his own people with the sun, the same  sun with which Agni is identified earlier.
There is also an emphasis on Agni perceiving and being perceived, enhanced  by a pun in the Sanskrit on the verb citaya, which can mean both “appear, be per ceived” and “perceive,” sometimes simultaneously (vss. 4, 5, 10).
Stylistically the hymn seems designed deliberately to contrast with the preceding  one (II.1). In that hymn Agni is identified with various beings and elements, whereas  in this one, especially in the first half, Agni is compared to such third parties: the  simile is the dominant figure. It is striking that II.1, by contrast, contains not a  single simile.
## 1
With sacrifice increase Jātavedas; sacrifice to Agni with oblation, with  song at length
when he is kindled—(Agni) receiving pleasurable offerings, possessing  solar glory, the heaven-ruling Hotar, sitting at the chariot-pole in the  (ritual) enclosures.
## 2
Toward you have the nights and the dawns bellowed, o Agni, like  milk-cows in good pastures to their calf.
As the spoked wheel of heaven [=sun] (does) through the human (life-) spans, through the successive nights you shine, o you of many favors. 3. Him of wondrous power have the gods fitted down at the base of the airy  realm [=on earth], as their spoked wheel of heaven and earth—
Agni with his flaming flame—like a chariot worthy to be acquired, to be  proclaimed like an envoy (installed) among the settled peoples.404 II.2
## 4
Him, growing in the airy realm (as) in his own house, very bright like  gold, they have set on a meandering (course),
appearing (like) the flying (udder) of Pr̥śni [=cloud], observing with his  eyes along (the whole length of) both races [=gods and men], like the  protector of a path [?].
## 5
As Hotar let him encompass the whole ceremony. Toward him do the  sons of Manu stretch out, with oblations and with song.
Golden-lipped, growing on these (hearths), quivering, appearing like  heaven with its stars, he perceives along (the whole length of) the two  world-halves.
## 6
When you have been kindled, (shine) richly for our well-being; even  after you are entirely extinguished, shine wealth upon us.
Turn the two world-halves toward here, for our easy progress, o god  Agni, (for them) to seek out the oblations of Manu.
## 7
Give us, Agni, lofty (prizes), give (prizes) in thousands. Open up the  prize like a door, for (it) to be famed.
Turn heaven and earth eastward with a sacred formulation. Like the  blazing sun, you have made the dawns flash forth.
## 8
On being kindled through (all) the dawns and the nights, like the sun he  has shone with red radiance.
With the libations of Manu he conducts good ceremonies—the king of  the clans, the guest dear to Āyu.
## 9
In this way, o foremost Agni, (hymnic) vision swells for us among the  immortals dwelling in lofty heaven through the human (lifespans)— (a vision like) a cow giving milk to the bard in the (ritual) enclosures,  (bringing) by herself multiform (prizes) in hundreds at her
impulsion.
## 10
May we, o Agni, by our steed get in sight of (wealth) in good heroes, or  by our sacred formulation distinguish ourselves beyond (other) men. Let our brilliance blaze upward among the five peoples like the sun,  difficult to surpass.
## 11
O mighty one, become the one for us to proclaim—(as him) in whom  the well-born patrons find nourishment,
whom the prize-winners approach to sacrifice, o Agni, as you shine  amid (our) own offspring in (your) own house.
## 12
May we both, the praisers and the patrons, be in your protection, o  Agni Jātavedas.
Over goods and wealth—much glittering, very abundant, consisting of  offspring and good descendants—exert your control for us.
## 13
The patrons—those who dispatch to the praisers a gift tipped with cows  and ornamented with horses, o Agni—
lead both us and them forth to a better state. – May we speak loftily at  the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes. 
