+++
title = "003"

+++
3 (194)
Āprı̄
Gr̥tsamada
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 7
This is one of the ten so-called Āprī hymns in the R̥gveda, a litany recited at the  animal sacrifice: the subjects of the verses appear in a fixed order, each signaled by a  key word (italicized in the following translation), though the exact wording of each  differs from hymn to hymn. This type of flexible composition around a set of fixed  themes and terms in a fixed order may give us some insight into R̥gvedic compo
sitional techniques. This version is somewhat fuller and verbally richer than most,  encouraged by the relatively capacious measures of triṣṭubh meter. For a minimalist  version, see I.13.
## 01
Agni, kindled, deposited on the earth, has stood up facing all beings. The pure, very wise Hotar from olden days—let Agni the god sacrifice to  the gods, (himself) deserving (it).
## 02
Narāśaṃsa, who anoints, counter(part) to the foundations (of the  earth) and to the three heavens with his greatness, he of lovely
flames,
with his ghee-sprinkling mind wetting the oblation—at the head of the  sacrifice let him anoint the gods altogether.
## 03
Solemnly invoked by (our) mind, o Agni, deserving (it), sacrifice today to  the gods for us in front of the descendant of Manu.
Convey here the unstirrable troop of the Maruts. You men, sacrifice to  Indra who sits on the ritual grass.
## 04
O divine Ritual Grass—growing strong, affording good heroes, having a  lovely burden [=the gods], strewn on this altar here for wealth.
Good ones, sit here on it, which is anointed with ghee—all you gods,  Ādityas, worthy of the sacrifice.
## 05
Let them gape open widely—the Divine Doors, easy to approach—when  invoked with reverences.
Expansive, let the unaging ones spread forth, purifying their own “color”  [=people] (so that it is) glorious, rich in heroes.
## 06
Strengthened of old for us, Dawn and Night, like happy weavers on target  at their labors,
jointly interweaving the stretched thread, the ornament of the sacrifice— the good milk-cows rich in milk.
## 07
The first two Divine Hotars, more knowing, more wondrous, together  will sacrifice rightly with their chant.
Sacrificing to the gods according to the proper season, they jointly
anoint them on the navel of the earth, on the three backs (of the fires). 8. Sarasvatī, who sends our poetic thought to its target, divine Iḍā, Bhāratī outstripping all—

let the three goddesses, having sat down on this ritual grass here, with  their own power protect (its?) unbroken shelter.
## 09
Of tawny form, of good support [/easy to bear], conferring vigor, a  hero desirous of the gods is born because of (Tvastar’s?/the gods’?)
attentive listening—
let Tvaṣṭar unbind (our) navel and release the offspring to us. Then let  (the sacrificial victim) go into the pen of the gods.
## 10
The Lord of the Forest [=sacrificial post] stands by on releasing (the  victim). Agni will sweeten the oblation with his poetic thoughts.
Let him who knows (the way) lead the thrice-anointed one—(let) the  divine Butcher (lead) the oblation up to the gods.
## 11
Ghee is attached (to him); ghee is his womb. He is propped in ghee, and  ghee is his foundation.
In accord with your own power convey (the gods) hither; invigorate
yourself. O bull, you will convey the oblation, prepared with the
svāhā-call.