+++
title = "004"

+++
4 (195)
Agni
Somāhuti Bhārgava
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn first concerns itself with the installation of the ritual fire (vss. 1–3). There  follows a naturalistic description, rich in metaphor and simile, of a fire first catching  and then flaming up (vss. 4–7). The hymn ends with two verses requesting benefits  for the Gr̥tsamada clan (8–9). Oblique references to the myth of the recovery of the  vanished fire in verses 2 and 9 provide the hymn with a larger ring-like structure.
## 1
I call for you upon the one of good brilliance, on Agni, the guest of the  clans, who receives well-twisted (hymns), who receives very pleasurable  offerings,
who, like an envoy, has become desirable to install as god among the  god-directed people, as Jātavedas.
## 2
This one here—having done honor (to him) in the seat of the waters— once again the Bhr̥gus have installed among the clans of Āyu.
Let him surmount all the worlds—Agni, the spoked wheel of the gods  whose horses are lively.
## 3
Agni have the gods installed among the clans stemming from Manu,  their own dear one, as those desiring to dwell peacefully (install)
an envoy.
He will shine toward the nights desirous (of him), he whose skill is to be  besought for the one rich in gifts in (his own) house. 4. His thriving, like one’s own, brings delight; delightful is his whole  appearance when he is being urged on, about to burn.
He who is flicking his tongue hither and yon among the plants, like a  steed at a chariot he keeps twitching his tail.
## 5
The formless mass [=smoke] of the wood-eater that they (first) marveled  at to me, (that) color he changed as if for the fire-priests:
he is (now) perceived in delight with his bright light, he who, having  grown old, in an instant has become young.
## 6
Who, (eating) wood like one athirst, shines here; like water along a path,  like chariot (wheels) he has sounded.
Having a black road, red-hot, he appears bringing delight, smiling like  heaven with its clouds [=his clouds of smoke].
## 7
He who has spread out, burning the broad (earth), like livestock without  a herdsman he goes seeking his own way.
Agni, enflamed, scorching the brushwood, with his black wayward
course, has “sweetened,” as it were, the ground.
## 8
Now, upon consideration of your previous help, a prayerful thought has  been proclaimed to you at the third rite:
o Agni, grant to us a prize of an array of heroes, a lofty cattle-rich one,  and wealth in good descendants.
## 9
So that with you, o Agni, the Gr̥tsamadas, gaining (the one deposited) in  secret [=Agni], might surmount those below,
(the Gr̥tsamadas) possessing good heroes and overcoming hostility—(so)  establish this vital energy for the singer along with his patrons.