+++
title = "005"

+++
5 (196) Agni
Somāhuti Bhārgava
8 verses: anuṣṭubh
As in II.1 we find an enumeration of various priestly functions/titles, but the identi fications are more strictly tied to the ritual than in the former hymn, and each priest  receives a verse of his own. Only in the last verse (8) does Agni appear as himself,
without a separate priestly identity, to ensure the entire success of the sacrifice. In verses 5–6 the references are somewhat obscure, but the ritual situation  depicted seems to be the offering of melted butter into the fire; the butter offerings  are identified as females, under the leadership of Agni as Neṣṭar, the priest who  leads the Sacrificer’s Wife in the later śrauta ritual. The referent of the “three” of  verse 5 is quite obscure, though it must be feminine in gender. It is perhaps the “three  watery maidens” associated with the sacrifice in III.56.5 and the three “women god desses,” also associated with water, who desire to provide food to Apām Napāt in  II.35.5: their watery nature may explain Agni’s preference for the buttery sisters.

Their number of three may allude to the trio of goddesses in the Āprī hymns (see,  e.g., II.3.8), Sarasvatī, Iḍā, and Bhāratī.
The hymn provides valuable evidence for the technical details and the personnel  and their duties of R̥gvedic ritual, which, though sharing much terminology and  many procedures, nonetheless differs from the later, very well-documented, classical  śrauta ritual of middle Vedic times.
## 1
As Hotar he has just been born, conspicuous, as a father to help his  fathers [=priests],
displaying noble goods. May we be able to control his prize-winning  (horses [=flames]).
## 2
He to whom the seven reins are stretched—to the leader of the
sacrifice—
he, like Manu, (sets in motion) the heavenly eighth one—as Potar he sets  in motion all this.
## 3
Or, when he has run after it, he will speak sacred formulations [bráhmāṇi]  and pursue this (office of Brahman-priest):
he has encompassed all poetic skills, like a felly a wheel.
## 4
Because simultaneously with his flame the flaming one has been born as  Praśāstar by virtue of his will,
the knowing one [=Agni] grows like (tree) branches, following his own  firm commandments.
## 5
The lively milk-cows [=butter offerings] follow the “color” [=flame] of  him (when he is) Neṣṭar.
Surely the sisters [=streams of ghee] who have come here are (more) to  his taste than the three ([watery] goddesses?)?
## 6
When the sister, bearing the ghee of the mother, has approached him, at the arrival of these, he, as Adhvaryu, is delighted, as grain is by rain. 7. Let him, as R̥tvij, make himself R̥tvij, to suckle himself.
Praise and sacrifice have we given. Then fittingly may we win (their
reward).
## 8
So that the knowing one [=Agni] will make (it) fitting for all those (gods)  worthy of the sacrifice,
this, o Agni, (should be) here in you—the sacrifice which we have
performed.