+++
title = "006"

+++
6 (197)
Agni
Somāhuti Bhārgava
8 verses: gāyatrī
There is nothing particularly striking in this hymn, which treats the usual themes  of our ritual service to Agni and the rewards we expect in turn. But it is deftly done and economically expressed in the short gāyatrī meter, with patterned repetitions  perceptible even in translation (see, e.g., vss. 1, 3, 5). The final two verses present  the common image of Agni as envoy and messenger between the human and divine  worlds.
## 01
This kindling stick of mine here, o Agni, this reverence may you long for, and these songs—hear them well.
## 02
With this (song) we would do honor to you, o Agni, child of
nourishment, seeker of horses—
with this well-said (hymn), o well-born one.
## 03
You who have a longing for songs (we would serve) with songs; you  seeking chattels, o chattel-giver,
we would serve, ourselves seeking service.
## 04
Become our bounteous patron, o lord of goods who gives goods. Keep hatreds away from us.
## 05
Do you (give) us rain from heaven; do you (give) us an unassailable prize; do you (give) us refreshments in the thousands.
## 06
To the one reverently invoking, to the one seeking help, o youngest  messenger,
o Hotar most deserving the sacrifice, come here at our song.
## 07
For, o Agni, sage poet, as the one who knows, you speed between both  breeds [=human and divine]
as messenger—like one serving both his own people and their allies.
## 08
As the one who knows, you will please (the gods) here, and, o observant  one, you will sacrifice to them in due order,
and you will sit here on this ritual grass.