+++
title = "007"

+++
7 (198)
Agni
Somāhuti Bhārgava
6 verses: gāyatrī
In this short hymn Agni is twice (vss. 1 and 5)  identified as a Bhārata, “son of  Bharata” or “belonging to the Bharata lineage,” a name and designation that  becomes very prominent in later times and, of course, furnishes the name of the  great epic, the Mahābhārata. The family is less prominent in the R̥gveda, but is  mentioned in telling passages in Maṇḍalas III, VI, and VII; the Bhārata fire is  mentioned in several other passages like the ones in this hymn. As Proferes argues  (2007:  36–37), Agni is often identified with the tribal king, and “the most com
monly mentioned tribal fire is that of the Bharata,” which is “specifically linked  to the military power of the tribe.” Although that theme is not insistent here, the  hostilities and hatreds mentioned in verses 2–3 against which Agni’s aid is besought  evoke this idea.

The hymn also illustrates, more clearly than usual, the poetic use of the meta phorical extension of ritual practices. In verse 4 the fire is “bepoured” (ā́hutaḥ) with  streams of melted butter, a standard ritual action, which therefore would arouse no  special interest in the audience; in verse 5 it is also “bepoured”—the same adjective  in the same position in the verse—but with entities considerably less liquid: vari ous bovines, expressed in technical stock-breeding language, which serve as animal  sacrifices in the later śrauta ritual. The audience would certainly take note of this  clash of concepts and metaphorically extend either the adjective (from “bepoured”  to “offered to”) or the offerings (not the cows, but their product, the ghee). What is  unusual in this hymn is that verse 4 explicitly provides the normal template against  which verse 5 must be interpreted. Ordinarily we encounter only the off-balance  expression, and must ourselves summon the normal one from the formulaic and  conceptual stock held in common by the audience.
## 1
Youngest Agni, belonging to the Bharatas, bear hither the best brilliant  wealth,
craved by many, o good one.
## 2
Let hostility of god and mortal not gain mastery over us.
Rescue us from it and from hatred.
## 3
And with you may we, as if across watery streams,
plunge across all hatreds.
## 4
O pure Agni, to be extolled, blazing you shine out loftily,
when you are bepoured with ghee(-stream)s.
## 5
You, o Agni belonging to the Bharatas, are “bepoured” [=offered to]  with our mated cows, with bulls,
with eight-footed [=pregnant] (cows).
## 6
His food is wood, his potion melted butter—the primordial Hotar  worthy to be chosen,
son of strength, infallible.