+++
title = "008"

+++
8 (199)
Agni
Gr̥tsamada
6 verses: gāyatrī
A simple hymn in many ways, but with a small twist. The mention of the seer and  poet Atri in verse 5 is surprising: Atri is the poet of the Vth Maṇḍala and is oth erwise not found in II. However, in the immediately preceding verse the appar ently innocent simile “like the sun with its radiance” (svàr ṇá bhānúnā) encodes a  reference to a famous myth in which Atri rescues the sun from a supposed demon  Svarbhānu. As I have argued (Jamison 1991: 264–67), Svarbhānu is actually Agni,  and therefore this little hymn makes sly reference to the myth of the Sun, wounded  by Agni (because of the Sun’s incest with his own daughter) and healed by Atri. 1. As a prize-seeker (praises) his chariots, now praise the yoke(d teams)  of Agni,
the most glorious one, who grants rewards,
## 2
Who offers good guidance to the one doing pious work, himself unaging  but aging the other,
whose countenance is lovely when he is bepoured,
## 3
Who with his beauty is proclaimed in the houses at evening and at dawn, whose commandment is not confounded,
## 4
Who, like the sun with its radiance, shines forth bright with his flame, anointing himself with his own unaging (flames).
## 5
Atri and Agni, (each) according to his own sovereignty, have the solemn  pronouncements strengthened.
He has laid on himself all beauties.
## 6
May we be accompanied by the help of Agni, of Indra, of Soma, of (all)  the gods—
not suffering harm. May we surmount those who do battle.