+++
title = "009"

+++
9 (200)
Agni
Gr̥tsamada
6 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins with a 3rd-person past-time reference to the installation of Agni,  and seems also to refer obliquely to the myth of Agni’s disappearance and recovery  by the gods. After verse 1 it switches to the 2nd person and present/future time, with  standard praise of Agni and prayers for benefits from him.
## 1
(As) Hotar, once found, he sat down in the Hotar’s seat, glittering,  shining, very skillful,
giving forethought to his unfalsifiable commandments, the best one  bringing a thousand (goods), flame-tongued Agni.
## 2
You are the messenger, and you are our protector afar; you, bull, are our  leader to a better (state).
O Agni, for the prolonging of our progeny and of our own selves,
become, as you shine, a herdsman who does not stay away.
## 3
We would do honor to you, Agni, in your highest birth; we would do  honor with praises in your seat below.
The womb from which you arose, I sacrifice to that. The oblations have  been poured forth into you, when kindled.
## 4
O Agni, perform sacrifice yourself with an oblation, as superior
sacrificer. With attentive hearing greet giving and generosity,
for you are the wealth-lord of wealth, you the minder of brilliant
speech.

## 5
As you are born day after day, wondrous one, your goods of both types  are not exhausted:
Agni, make the singer rich in cattle; make him lord of wealth in good  descendants.
## 6
With your visage here, (be) easy to find, the sacrificer to the gods who  best brings them to sacrifice with blessing.
Undeceivable herdsman and our protector afar, o Agni, brilliantly and  richly shine for us.