+++
title = "010"

+++
10 (201)
Agni
Gr̥tsamada
6 verses: triṣṭubh
This last hymn in the brief Gr̥tsamada Agni cycle is defined by a ring: the first word  (johū́traḥ “invoked on every side”) is echoed by the last word (johavīmi “I constantly  invoke”), and there are a number of word plays throughout the hymn. The hymn’s  structure defines as an omphalos verse 3, especially the second half, which contains  the opaque hapax śíriṇāyām, here tentatively rendered as “(birth-)canal.” Verse 3,  the mysterious center of the poem, describes the creation of fire in terms of human  conception and birth and expresses the paradox that such a powerful force can  be invisibly confined in the inert wood. The last verse (6) contains a pun, “with  a tongue seeking speech,” applicable to both Agni and the poet: for Agni it is the  flame as tongue, seeking the poet’s praise hymn; for the poet, it is his own tongue,  seeking efficacious wording for the same hymn.
## 1
Agni is invoked first on every side like a father, when he is kindled by  Manu in the footprint of refreshment,
dressing himself in beauty, immortal and discriminating, frequently to be  groomed and worthy of fame: he is the prize-winning (steed).
## 2
May he please hear my call—Agni of bright radiance—along with all my  songs—he immortal and discriminating.
Two dark brown horses convey his chariot, or two red ones. And two  ruddy ones certainly he has made his (team), he who is dispersed in
many places.
## 3
In her with (legs) agape [=kindling sticks] they engendered him whose  birth is easy. Agni becomes the embryo in the (women) of many
ornaments [=logs].
In (the birth-)canal [?] also he dwells by night, (though) because of his  powers he cannot be confined, the discerning one.
## 4
I sprinkle Agni with an oblation, with ghee, as he abides peacefully  facing all the creatures, (and he then) takes on (this) appearance: broad across, lofty in his vigor,  most voluminous through his foods [=wood], overpowering.
## 5
Him who faces out in all directions do I sprinkle: with an undemonic  spirit may he enjoy it.
(Though) he has the beauty of a young blood and questing “color”  [=flame], Agni is not to be touched when he is quivering with
his body.
## 6
May you please recognize (your) share, (though you can) display your  might at will. With you as messenger may we speak like Manu.
Agni, without deficiency, mixing with honey, with (my/his) tongue
seeking speech, do I, winning prizes, continually invoke.