+++
title = "011"

+++
11 (202) Indra
Gr̥tsamada
21 verses: virāṭsthānā triṣṭubh, except triṣṭubh 21
Judging from its frequent references to the winds, this Indra hymn was composed  to accompany the day’s first soma-pressing, which anciently belonged especially to  Indra and Vāyu, the Wind. It is also a good example of the complexity of R̥gvedic  poetry. The poet uses ellipses and ambiguous reference to suggest the union of  the acts of the accompanying ritual and the action of the myth. In verse 3, for  example, the “resplendent” (śubhrá) ones who run to the wind are the Maruts, the  gods who so often accompany Indra. But the adjective “resplendent” is also used of  soma, and therefore the verse carries a second, suggested meaning that the offering  of soma goes to the Wind, who receives the soma along with Indra. Or again, in  verses 7–8, it appears at first as though the mountain described there is one of the  mountains settled by Indra when he made the world habitable. But this mountain is  described in odd ways: it does not falter; it bellows with its mothers; and it roars— descriptions that force a reconsideration of its identity. Elsewhere these epithets  characterize the fire, which is “settled” by priests on the sacrificial area. Thus, the  creative actions of the god and the ritual actions of the priests are placed in parallel  and made reflexes of one another. For a detailed analysis of this hymn, which seeks  to demonstrate its double reference to myth and ritual, see Brereton (1985).
## 1
Hear our summons, Indra! Intend us no harm! We would be those to be  given good things by you.
For these nourishments, like flowing rivers, strengthen you in their quest  for good things.
## 2
You let loose the great (waters), Indra, which you swelled—the many  (waters) surrounded by the serpent [=Vr̥tra], o champion.
You cut down the Dāsa [=Vr̥tra], even though he thought he was
immortal, when you became strong through the hymns.414 II.11
## 3
(Delight) now in just these hymns in which you delight, o champion,  and in Rudrian praise songs, Indra.
These (waters), in which you are finding exhilaration, run forth just to  you as the resplendent ones (run forth) to the Wind [=Vāyu].
## 4
Now (that we) are strengthening your resplendent explosiveness, are  placing in your arms your resplendent mace,
resplendent are you, Indra, as you have become strong among us.  Along with the sun, you should overcome the Dāsa clans.
## 5
The one placed in hiding, the hidden one hiding amid the waters, the  wily one dwelling under cover
and blocking the waters and the heaven—(that) serpent you smashed by  your heroic deed, o champion.
## 6
Now I shall praise your ancient, great deeds, Indra, and we shall praise  your present deeds.
I shall praise the eager mace in your arms. I shall praise your fallow  bays, twin beacons of the sun.
## 7
Now your two fallow bays, competing for the prize, Indra, have cried  out their cry, dripping with ghee.
The land has spread out equally in all directions. Even the mountain,  which was about to run, has come to rest.
## 8
The mountain, never faltering, has been set down. Bellowing with its  mothers, it roared.
Making their voice strong to the furthest distance, they [=priests  or Maruts?] spread out the vein [=the sap-rich soma stalk or a
watercourse?] that was impelled by Indra.
## 9
Indra kicked away wily Vr̥tra, lying upon the great river.
The two worlds trembled in fear before the mace of him, the bull  roaring and roaring again.
## 10
The mace of him, the bull, bellowed again and again when (Indra), the  ally of Manu, was about to grind down (Vr̥tra), the enemy of Manu. He brought low the wiles of the wily son of Dānu, when he had drunk  of the pressed soma.
## 11
Drink and drink the soma, o Indra, our champion! Let the exhilarating  soma-pressings exhilarate you.
As they fill your cheeks, let them strengthen you. When properly  pressed among the Paura, (the soma) has helped Indra.
## 12
We inspired poets have abided by you, Indra. Serving according to the  truth, we would gain insight.
Seeking your help, we would create for ourselves a proclamation of your  praise. On this very day, we would be those to be given wealth by you. 13. Indra, might we be those of yours who are accompanied by your help,  since, seeking your help, we make your nourishment strong.
Grant us the most explosive wealth in which we will delight, o god— that consisting of heroic men. 14. Grant us peaceful dwelling. Grant us alliance. Grant us a Marutian  warrior band, o Indra.
And they who jointly are finding exhilaration—(those) Winds drink the  first offering.
## 15
Now let just those (soma juices) pursue you—those among whom  (you) are becoming exhilarated. Steadfastly drink our soma to your  satisfaction, Indra.
(Be) near to us in battles, o surpassing one. You have strengthened
heaven through lofty chants.
## 16
Now just those lofty ones [=priests], who will try to win your favor, o  you surpassing one, either by their hymns
or in strewing the ritual grass that provides (you) a dwelling place, have  come to the prize, helped just by you, Indra.
## 17
Now, finding exhilaration among just these powerful (soma drops),  o champion, drink the soma among the Trikadrukas [=the
Maruts?], Indra,
again and again shaking out (the soma) in your beard, becoming
pleased. Travel to the soma-drinking with your two fallow bays.
## 18
Take to yourself the vast power, o champion, by which you cut down  Vr̥tra, the son of Dānu, that son of a spider!
You uncovered the light for the Ārya; the Dasyu has been set down to  the left, Indra.
## 19
We would win!—we who by your help are overcoming all rivals, the  Dasyus along with the Ārya.
That was for us: that you made Viśvarūpa, son of Tvaṣṭar, submit to  Trita, one of your circle of companions.
## 20
Having grown strong on this, Trita’s exhilarating (soma) that was being  pressed, he laid low Arbuda.
He rolled (Namuci’s head) like the sun its wheel. Together with the
Aṅgirases, Indra split the Vala cave.
## 21
Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as  its milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.