+++
title = "012"

+++
12 (203)
Indra
Gr̥tsamada
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This is one of the better known and most widely anthologized hymns to Indra. Its  distinctive rhetorical mark is its refrain, “he, o peoples, is Indra.” The “peoples”

(jána) refer to the Vedic peoples, and the hymn repeatedly returns to Indra’s past  victories over non-Vedic beings with the promise of future victories.
The hymn portrays Indra as a successful warrior. It begins with his origin (vs.  1) and then refers to his great deeds through which the world was created and made  inhabitable (vss. 2–3). The poet then announces Indra’s victory over Dāsas, Dasyus,  and other enemies and his aid for his worshippers and allies (vss. 4–10). Toward the  end of the hymn, the poet mentions Indra’s famous victories over his demonized,  if not quite demonic, enemies (vss. 11–12). Then he returns to Indra’s rule over the  cosmos (vs. 13) and his help for those now making ritual offerings to him (vss. 14–15).
One verse that has attracted particular attention is verse 5, which says that there  are some who wonder where Indra is and who declare that Indra “does not exist.”  These appear to be Vedic people who question Indra’s power and who, in deny ing Indra and refusing to perform the rituals, approximate the Dāsas, whom Indra  defeats (vs. 4). The poet insists that they should be aware of Indra as the “terrify ing” (ghorá) one and trust in him. At the end, in 15b, after recounting his great  exploits, the poet himself confidently asserts that Indra is indeed real. The reality  of Indra may signify not only his existence as a powerful god, but more especially  his actual presence at the poet’s sacrifice.
## 01
Who, even when just born, was the foremost thinker, the god who by his  own will tended to the gods,
before whose explosiveness the world-halves trembled in fear because of  the greatness of his manliness – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 02
Who made firm the wavering earth, who settled the quaking mountains, who gave the midspace wider measure, who propped up the heaven – he,  o peoples, is Indra.
## 03
Who, having smashed the serpent, let flow the seven rivers, who drove  away the cattle by uncovering Vala,
who produced the fire between two stones, gathering the winnings in  contests – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 04
By whom all these exploits have been done: who has put the Dāsa tribe  below and hidden away,
who, has taken the riches of the stranger, as a winning gambling
champion does the wager – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 05
The terrifying one about whom they always ask, “Where is he?”—and  they say of him, “He does not exist!”—
he diminishes the riches of the stranger like the stakes. Put trust in him!  – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 06
Who is the invigorator of the enfeebled, who of the starving, who of the  formulator of hymns, of the weak one needing help,
who with fair lips is the helper of the one who has yoked the pressing  stones, of him with soma pressed – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 07
Under whose direction are the horses, under whose the cows, under  whose the nomadic bands, and under whose all the chariots, who has given birth to the sun and who to the dawn, who is the guide  of the waters – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 08
Whom the two war-cries, clashing together, call upon in rivalry—the  enemies on both sides, here and over there—
even the two who have mounted the same chariot [=the chariot-warrior  and charioteer] call on him separately – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 09
Without whom peoples do not win, whom they call upon for help as  they fight,
who has become a match for everyone, who is the mover of the
immovable – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 10
Who has struck with his arrow those constantly creating for themselves  great guilt, the unthinking ones,
who does not concede arrogance to the arrogant man, who is the
smasher of the Dasyu – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 11
Who in the fortieth autumn discovered Śambara dwelling in the  mountains,
who smashed the serpent displaying its strength, the son of Dānu,
(thereby) lying (dead) – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 12
The mighty seven-reined bull who let loose the seven rivers to flow, who, with his mace in his arms, kicked away the son of Rohiṇī as he  was ascending to heaven – he, o peoples, is Indra.
## 13
Even heaven and earth bow to him; even the mountains fear his  explosiveness.
The soma-drinker who is renowned as the one bearing the mace in
his arms, as the one bearing the mace in his hands – he, o peoples,
is Indra.
## 14
Who helps through his help the one pressing soma, the one cooking (an  offering), the one praising, the one laboring,
whose is the strengthening formulation, is the soma, is this gift – he, o  peoples, is Indra.
## 15
You who rip free the prize of victory for the one pressing, the one  cooking, even before a stubborn (foe)—you are certainly real!
We (will be) dear to you throughout all the days, Indra. Having good  heroes, we would announce the ritual distribution.