+++
title = "013"

+++
13 (204)
Indra
Gr̥tsamada
13 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 13
The opening verses of this hymn leave the subject often unstated and often unclear  in part because, as in the preceding hymns, there is often a double reference to ritual  acts and either mythical or natural events. Thus, while details remain uncertain,

the first verses describe the soma sacrifice, seen as a creation of Indra. This ritual  context is established in verse 1, in which the subject is likely the soma or the soma  plant. The birth of the soma plant occurs in its proper time of year, and therefore its  mother is the r̥tú, its “season.” However, the soma is also born at the proper ritual  moment, and therefore its mother is also r̥tú, which can also refer to the “ritual  sequence.” Then in verse 2, again without naming him, the poet introduces Indra— or apparently does so—through associating Indra’s release of the waters with the  flowing, soma-bearing waters of the rite.
Verses 3–4 describe the acts of the ritual, although in 4b, the identity of several  of the actors is not certain. The one “who comes” could be soma or Indra or even  the fire (as Geldner suggests with a different interpretation of the ellipsis). The poet  turns to Indra’s heroic deeds in verse 5—although the waters which he released  connect these deeds to the ritual—and then in verse 6, to an explicit description of  Indra’s ritual acts. Verse 7 poses a number of interpretive difficulties, but in pāda a,  the “flowering and fruitful” might be plants generally or the soma plants; in pāda b,  the streams might be waters or specifically ritual waters; and in pāda d, the ūrvá, the  “containers,” might refer to the oceans as containers of water in a cosmic register  or the containers of soma in a ritual one.
Verses 8–12 mention other of Indra’s deeds. In verse 9 Geldner suggests that  Indra bound his enemies by a magically induced sleep and thus by that “which has  no ropes.” See also II.15.9, where Indra conquers his enemies by putting them to  sleep. Verse 12, returning to the conjunction of heroic and ritual deed and to the  theme of rivers and waters, may speak not (or not only) of Indra’s rescue of a per
son who was blind and lame, but of Indra’s role in producing the soma hidden in  the plant before it is pressed out (cf. II.15.7).
## 1
His mother is the season. From her, as soon as he was born, he [=soma]  entered among the waters, in whom he grows strong.
Then he became a voluptuous woman, swelling with milk. The plant’s  first beestings—that one is worthy of hymns.
## 2
Toward a single goal they [=the waters] come, bringing milk throughout.  They bring forth sustenance for him [=Indra?] who is all mother’s milk  (for us).
The downward sloping (watercourses) share the same road to flow along.  You, who did these things first, are worthy of hymns.
## 3
One [=the Hotar] accompanies what he gives with his speech. Another  [=the Adhvaryu] hastens at his work, changing the forms (of
the soma).
He [=soma] withstands all the blows of another [=the pressing stone].  You, the one who did these things first, are worthy of hymns.
## 4
They [=the priests] sit, apportioning prosperity to their children [=their  fires], apportioning, like wealth, the back (of the fire?) as it arches
forth to him [=the soma?] who comes. Insatiable, he [=the fire] eats the food of his father [=the priest] with his  teeth. You, the one who did these things first, are worthy of hymns.
## 5
Then you made the earth to see heaven—you, who cleared the paths of  the streams, o smasher of the serpent.
The gods gave birth to you, the god, by their praise songs, like a
winning horse by waters. You are worthy of hymns.
## 6
You, who distribute sustenance and increase, have milked the dry [=the  soma plant] together with its honey [=the soma] out of the wet
[=rain].
You have hidden a treasure [=soma] in Vivasvant [=the sun]. You alone  are the master of everything. You are worthy of hymns.
## 7
You, who established separately the flowering and fruitful (plants)  according to the foundation (of each) and the streams at their
division;
and you, who gave birth to the unequalled flashings of heaven; you, the  wide one surrounding the containers—you are worthy of hymns.
## 8
You, who, in order to strike down Pr̥kṣa and Dāsaveśa, conveyed the  son of Nr̥mara together with his goods
to the impregnable mouth of the Ūrjayantī (River) and who even today  (would do likewise); you, who do many deeds—you are worthy
of hymns.
## 9
Or when you helped him, the hard-driving one—at whose obedience  (to you), though he was alone, you bound his hundred times ten
(enemies) all at once—
you tied up the Dasyus for Dabhīti in what has no ropes, and you
belonged to him who ritually pursues you well. You are worthy
of hymns.
## 10
All things that obstruct have conceded that manliness is his. They have  set themselves as the stakes for the successful gambler.
You propped up the six far-flung (spaces), and you were on every
side of the five sights [=the visible directions] and beyond. You are
worthy of hymns.
## 11
Your heroism, o hero, is good to proclaim: that by your resolve alone  you take possession of goods.
The vigor (belonging to you, who are) born steadfast and possessing  strength, is preeminent. All the things that you have done—(for
these) you, Indra, are worthy of hymns.
## 12
You halted the course of the Sarapas (River) for Turvīti and Vayya  to cross.
You led him up who was sunk down and shunned, making famed the  blind one and the lame. You are worthy of hymns.
## 13
Make your aim to give that gift to us, o good one—your store of goods  is great—

the bright (gift), o Indra, through which you will seek fame throughout  the days. – May we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in
possession of good heroes.