+++
title = "014"

+++
14 (205)
Indra
Gr̥tsamada
12 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is a surprisingly straightforward summons to the Adhvaryu priests  to offer the soma and a catalogue of the heroic deeds that have earned Indra the  offerings. Verse 7 is particularly interesting since Kutsa (or Purukutsa), Āyu, and  Atithigva Divodāsa are normally allies rather than enemies of Indra as they are  here. Elsewhere (I.53.10 and VI.18.13), however, Indra appears as an ally of the  little-known ruler named Tūrvayāṇa and helps him defeat these three.
## 1
Adhvaryus! Bring the soma to Indra. With the tankards, pour here the  exhilarating stalk,
because the hero is ever desirous of his drink. Offer to the bull: he wishes  just that.
## 2
Adhvaryus! Who struck, like a tree with a spear, Vr̥tra, who had enclosed  the waters,
to him bring this (soma) since he desires it. This Indra deserves to drink it. 3. Adhvaryus! Who struck Dr̥bhīka and who drove up the cattle—for he  had opened the cave—
to him (bring) this (soma), (rushing swiftly) like the wind within the  midspace. Cover Indra with the soma juices, as a fast horse (is
covered) with blankets (after a race).
## 4
Adhvaryus! Who smashed Uraṇa, who had stretched forth his nine and  ninety arms,
and who pressed Arbuda down to the depth—urge Indra onward at the  bringing of soma.
## 5
Adhvaryus! Who struck Aśna, who the voracious Śuṣṇa, who the cobra  [=Vr̥tra],
who Pipru and Namuci, who Rudhikrā—to Indra offer of the
soma plant.
## 6
Adhvaryus! Who split the hundred, the many fortresses of Śambara as  with a stone,
and who scattered afar the hundred, the thousand (warriors) of Varcin— to him bring soma.
## 7
Adhvaryus! Who, having struck them, scattered here the hundred, the  thousand on the lap of the earth, and slung down the heroes of Kutsa, Āyu, and Atithigva—to him
bring soma.
## 8
Adhvaryus! What you will desire, o men, you will attain that with Indra,  by bearing (offerings) in obedience.
Bring what is purified by your hand to the one who is famed. To Indra  offer soma, o you eager to sacrifice.
## 9
Adhvaryus! Act in obedience to him! Lead upward in the wood [=the  soma cup] what is purified downward in the wood [=the soma vat]!
Being pleased, he has bellowed toward your handiwork. To Indra offer  the exhilarating soma.
## 10
Adhvaryus! Like the udder of a cow with milk, fill Indra the Provider  with soma juices.
I know of him; this has been brought home to me: the one worthy of  the sacrifice takes notice of him who strives to give more.
## 11
Adhvaryus! Who is king of the heavenly good, who of the land’s  earthly good,
fill Indra with soma juices, like a granary with barley. Let that be
your labor.
## 12
Make your aim to give that gift to us, o good one—your store of goods  is great—
the bright (gift), o Indra, through which you will seek fame throughout  the days. – May we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in
possession of good heroes.