+++
title = "015"

+++
15 (206)
Indra
Gr̥tsamada
10 verses: triṣṭubh
As the hymn announces at the beginning, this is a proclamation of Indra’s great  deeds, a fact that is underlined in the refrain, “Indra did these things.” With some  exceptions, the deeds are straightforwardly described. In verse 5, as Geldner  remarks, the reference is to the story of Turvaśa and Yadu and that of Turvīti  and Vayya, whom Indra rescued from the waters. They were “non-bathers”  because they could not swim through the roaring waters, but Indra held back the  strong currents so that they could cross. The story in verse 6a that Indra made  the síndhu, the Indus (or perhaps simply “the river”), flow backward is otherwise  unknown. The story that Indra fought and defeated Dawn in 6c is mentioned  elsewhere (cf. esp. IV.30.8–11), but it is unclear who the “unswift” males and  “swift” females in 6c might be and why they are described as “hewn apart.” In  verse 7, as in II.13.12, the verse may conceal Indra’s ritual act of bringing forth  the soma. In support of this interpretation are the echoes of ritual acts also in

preceding verses, such as the references to the ritual seats and possibly the laying  out of the ritual ground (in vs. 3) and bathing (in vs. 5). Or verse 7 may allude  to Indra’s cosmogonic acts. Verse 8 refers to the Vala story, in which Indra splits  the cave and freed the cattle for the Aṅgirases. In 9c, the description of an elderly  man (cf. VIII.45.20) or infirm man who finds riches despite his ailments may  simply underline Dabhīti’s unexpected success.
## 1
Now I shall proclaim the great deeds of him the great one, the real acts  of the real one.
He drank of the pressed soma among the Trikadrukas [=the Maruts?].  In its exhilaration Indra smashed the serpent.
## 2
He propped up lofty heaven on (the midspace) that has no pole. He filled  the two world-halves and the midspace.
He held the earth fast and spread it out. – In soma’s exhilaration Indra  did these things.
## 3
Like (ritual) seats, he fixed (the rivers) eastward with his measuring  rods: by his mace, he drilled out channels for the rivers;
by his choice, he released them along paths stretching far away. – In
soma’s exhilaration Indra did these things.
## 4
Having surrounded the raiders against Dabhīti, he burned their every  weapon in the kindled fire.
He brought him together with cows, horses, and chariots. – In soma’s  exhilaration Indra did these things.
## 5
He stopped the great, tumultuous (river) from going. He made the  non-bathers cross over safely.
Having risen from this bath, they set out toward wealth. – In soma’s  exhilaration Indra did these things.
## 6
By his greatness he made the Sindhu to flow northward, and with his  mace he completely crushed the ox cart of Dawn,
while hewing apart the unswift ones by the swift ones. – In soma’s
exhilaration Indra did these things.
## 7
Knowing the maidens’ concealment (of him but) becoming manifest, he  stood up—he who was shunned:
the lame one stood firm; the blind one looked afar. – In soma’s
exhilaration Indra did these things.
## 8
Being sung by the Aṅgirases, he split the cave. He broke apart the  fortifications of the mountain
and cleared their fashioned obstructions. – In soma’s exhilaration Indra  did these things.
## 9
Having scattered sleep on Cumuri and Dhuni, you smashed the Dasyu  and helped Dabhīti.
Though leaning on a staff, he found gold there. – In soma’s exhilaration  Indra did these things. 10. Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as  its milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.