+++
title = "016"

+++
16 (207) Indra
Gr̥tsamada
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 9
The hymn begins with an announcement of the sacrifice to Indra, whose greatness  and strength entitle him to it. The middle verses of this hymn (vss. 4–6) present  Indra as the bull of the sacrifice and indeed describe all the other principal constitu ents of the sacrifice also as bulls. The portrayal of Indra as a bull in these verses  contrasts with that in verse 8, in which Indra is compared to a cow. However, this  image of Indra as a cow sets up the final verse (9). In this verse, which is also the  final verse of II.15–20, the poet compares the dakṣiṇā, or priestly gift he hopes to  receive, to a generous cow.
## 1
I carry forward your good praise, like an oblation into a fire being  kindled, for him who is the most preeminent of beings:
we call upon Indra for help—himself unaging but causing to age, a
full-grown youth from of old.
## 2
Lofty Indra, without whom there is nothing, in him all facets of a hero  are gathered:
in his belly he carries the soma, in his body great strength, in his hand a  mace, and in his head resolve.
## 3
Your Indrian power cannot be encompassed by the twin battle cries  [=heaven and earth], nor can your chariot by the seas and the
mountains, o Indra.
No one is equal to your mace when with your swift (horses) you fly
through many leagues.
## 4
Since all carry their resolve to him, the one worthy of the sacrifice, the  daring one, to the bull following (that resolve),
(so), as a bull who knows more, perform the sacrifice for yourself with  the oblation: drink the soma, Indra, by means of the bull [=Agni], by  means of his radiance.
## 5
The vat of the bull [=soma], the wave of honey, purifies itself for the bull  [=Indra], whose food is the bull, to drink it.
The two Adhvaryus are bulls, and the pressing stones are bulls. They  press soma the bull for the bull.424 II.17
## 6
Your mace is a bull and your chariot is a bull. Your two fallow bays are  bulls, and your weapons are bulls.
O bull, you are the master of the bull that is the exhilarating drink.
Indra, take your fill of the bull soma.
## 7
Within the assembly, (I send) forth to you my eloquent (formulation),  like a boat, and through my poetic formulation I travel daringly
among the soma-pressings.
He will be aware of this speech of ours, will he not? We will draw upon  Indra as upon a wellspring for what is good.
## 8
Before distress (strikes), turn here toward us, like a cow, milk-swollen  from the pasture, toward her calf.
At once we would happily unite with your favors, o you of a hundred  resolves, like bulls with their wives.
## 9
Now should the generous priestly reward yield your boon for the singer  as its milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.