+++
title = "017"

+++
17 (208) Indra
Gr̥tsamada
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 8–9
This hymn encourages Indra to show the power that he showed at the beginning— both his beginning and the beginning of the world. There are several references to  Indra’s youth: the time when he received his mace from his father, Tvaṣṭar (vs. 6),  and when he obtained his first nurture (vs. 2). The first nurture may refer to the first  soma offering in the rite and also to the first soma Indra ever drank. His origins are  also the origins of the world, and the hymn catalogues his great, creative deeds: he  established heaven and earth and settled the mountains (vs. 5), he opened the cave  to release the cattle (vs. 1), he defeated Vr̥tra (vs. 6), and he sent the waters flow
ing (vss. 3, 5). The poet calls upon Indra to give sustenance to him just as he has  received sustenance (vss. 7, 8) and to give to him a measure of wealth just as Indra  showed the measure of his power in creating the world (vs. 7).
Striking is pāda 6b, which says that Tvaṣṭar made Indra’s mace “from every  race,” meaning from both gods and mortals, and “out of his knowledge,” per haps his knowledge of all creatures (cf. IV.42.3, cited by Geldner although to  make a different point) or alternatively, “out of their possessions.” That is to  say, the weapon by which Indra performs his great deeds draws on the totality  of humans and gods for its power. Oldenberg observed that the juxtaposition  of the words janúṣo védas (“race. . . knowledge [/possession]”) recalls the epithet Jātavedas, which describes Agni as the continuous presence throughout the sacri ficial day and the guarantor of the continuity of the human lineage. Perhaps this  constitutes an oblique reference to the totality of gods and mortals that becomes  Indra’s weapon.
## 1
As did the Aṅgirases, chant this new (chant) to him, so that his explosive  powers rise up as in ancient times
when, through his strength and in the exhilaration of soma, he razed all  the firmly fixed cow pens, enclosed on every side.
## 2
Let him (once again) become the one who, showing the measure of his  power, crossed beyond greatness to obtain the first nurture.
The champion, who girded his body in battles, fastened heaven in its  greatness on his head.
## 3
Then you did the first, great heroic deed, when, at its beginning, you  roused your explosive power through the poetic formulation.
Spurred by the chariot-rider with his fallow bay horses, the lively
(waters) flow forth separately toward the same goal.
## 4
Then he who grew strong over all the worlds by his greatness, acting as  their master, projecting his youthful vitality,
after that, (becoming a) draft-horse, he spanned the two world-halves  with light; upon sewing up the bilious shades of darkness, he wrapped  them all together.
## 5
Through his power, he fixed firmly the mountains sliding forward, and he  made the labor of the waters to be sliding downward.
He made fast the all-nurturing earth, and by his wiles he propped up the  heaven (to keep it) from falling.
## 6
That was fit for him, for his two arms—what his father made from every  race and out of his knowledge—
that mace by which he, with mighty roar, smashed the worm and twisted  it down to lie upon the earth.
## 7
Like a woman aging at home, remaining with her parents, from our  common ritual seat, I beg you to be our Fortune.
Make a visible sign, give us a measure, and bring it here. Give a portion  to me myself by which you will show your readiness to give.
## 8
We would call upon you, Indra, to be our sustainer. You are the giver,  Indra, of labors and of victory’s prizes.
Help us, Indra, with your shimmering help! Indra, you bull, make us  better!
## 9
Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as its  milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May we  speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
