+++
title = "018"

+++
18 (209)
Indra
Gr̥tsamada
9 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn centers on Indra’s chariot, which, the poet hopes, will carry Indra to his  sacrifice and not to the sacrifice of any of his rivals (vss. 3, 7). Indra’s chariot is also  the sacrifice itself. According to Sāyaṇa, its four yokes are the four soma-pressing  stones; the three whips are the three pitches used in recitation; the seven reins are  the seven meters; and—the least likely of Sāyaṇa’s identifications—the ten oars are  the ten planets “that rescue from evil beings” (etymologizing arítra “oar” as ari “enemy” + trā “rescue”) or the ten Camasādhvaryus. In a lengthy note Witzel and  Gotō suggest other possibilities for such numbers. With regard to the world, three  may be the three worlds or the three positions of the sun, four the four directions,  seven the seven rivers, and so on. In relation to the sacrifice, three might be the  three sacrificial fires or the three soma cups, four (or four times four) the number  of priests, seven the three (fires, cups) plus the four (priests) or the seven priests  mentioned in II.5.2, ten the seven (priests) plus the three (fires, cups) or ten fingers,  ten fires, ten soma vessels, et cetera. All that said, however, the specific identifica tions are less important than the possibility of finding many identifications and the  generally increasing numbers (4, 3, 7, 10). These project a picture of the chariot as  encompassing all aspects of the sacrifice and of the world.
Verse 2 begins with another enumeration. Here the first, second, and third might  be the three soma offerings of the sacrificial day or the three fires of the sacrificial  ground. The second half of verse 2 turns to a key moment in the sacrifice, the birth  of Agni out of the fire-kindling stick. The newly born Agni keeps company with  “the others,” but once again who or what these others are is unclear: they might be  the sacrificial fires, the sacrificial offerings, the gods, or even other priests. From  verse 3 the poet’s attention turns especially to Indra’s chariot-horses, whose number  progressively increases from two (vss. 3, 4)  to a hundred (vs. 6). This increasing  number suggests that these horses might correspond to an aspect of the sacrifice  that carries Indra to the sacrificial area. For the poet there are few greater attrac tions for Indra than the ritual recitations, and therefore these horses may be the  words of these recitations, which like these horses multiply as the hymn is recited.  Note that śaténa “with a hundred” is the hundredth word of the hymn. Once again,  however, the multiplication of horses is also an indication of the fluidity of this  hymn’s numerology and another signal that Indra’s chariot comprehends the whole  of the sacrifice and the world.
## 01
Early in the morning a new, victorious chariot is yoked up with four  yokes, three whips, and seven reins.
Having ten oars, the sun-winning (chariot) belonging to the sons of
Manu becomes swift through our wishes and thoughts. 2. He is fit for him [=Indra] for the first time, for the second, for the third— he the Hotar of Manu [=Agni].
Some [=priests] give birth (to him [=Agni]), the infant of another [=aráṇi fem., the fire-kindling stick], and he keeps company with the others— he the noble bull.
## 03
Now I shall yoke the two fallow bays to Indra’s chariot by a new,  well-spoken speech in order that he come.
Let other sacrificers—for inspired poets are many—not stop you
in this.
## 04
With your two fallow bays, Indra, journey here, with your four and with  your six, when you are summoned,
with your eight and your ten, to the soma-drinking. Here is the pressed  soma, generous one: do not disdain it.
## 05
Journey here, right nearby, with your twenty and your thirty, yoking up  with your forty fallow bays,
with your fifty pulling your good chariot, Indra, with your sixty and  your seventy, to the soma-drinking.
## 06
Journey here, right nearby, with your eighty and your ninety, being  conveyed by your hundred fallow bays,
for here is your soma among the Śunahotras, Indra, which has been  poured all around seeking you for your exhilaration.
## 07
Journey here to my poetic formulation, Indra. Put all the pairs of fallow  bays on the yoke-pole of the chariot,
for you have become the one to be competitively summoned in many  places. In this soma-pressing, you warrior, find your exhilaration.
## 08
No one will keep my companionship away from Indra. The priestly gift  should yield its milk to us.
In his preeminent protection and in his hand, we would be those having  victory in our every advance.
## 09
Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as its  milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.