+++
title = "019"

+++
19 (210)
Indra
Gr̥tsamada
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn invokes Indra in his many roles as a warrior. It begins with Indra’s great est deed, the destruction of Vr̥tra (vss. 2–4). Although the Vr̥tra story concerns

principally the release of the waters, verses 4–5 connect it also with the release of  the sun, which takes place “in a single day.” This may be a reference to the ritual  day, since the Morning Pressing may be connected with the release of the dawns  and the Midday Pressing with the release of the waters, or it may reflect the ten
dency elsewhere to fold the release of light into the effects of the Indra’s victory  over Vr̥tra (cf. I.32.4). The poet then evokes Indra’s help for Kutsa and Divodāsa  (vs. 6) before announcing that the Gr̥tsamadas, in exchange for their offerings, also  deserve Indra’s support in overcoming their enemies.
The hymn is dominated by racing imagery that describes both divine and human  action. This imagery is reflected in Indra’s deeds: the waters “charge forth” after  Indra destroyed Vr̥tra (vs. 2), and Indra’s horse Etaśa won wealth like the prize in  a race (vs. 5). But it is reflected also in mortals’ efforts: men contend to win the sun  (vs. 4d), and the sacrificers strive to win as if in a race (vs. 7).
## 1
The drinking of this plant for exhilaration has begun, o men of inspired  thought, (the drinking) of the delightful soma-pressing,
at which Indra, having grown strong (thereby) from of old, has found a  home, as have the men creating the poetic formulations.
## 2
Becoming exhilarated from this honey, Indra with the mace in his hand  hewed apart the serpent blocking the flood,
so that the rivers’ pleasing offerings (of water) charged forth like birds  toward rich fields.
## 3
That great Indra, smasher of the serpent, roused the flood of waters  forth toward the sea.
He gave birth to the sun and found the cattle. He perfected the patterns  of the days through the night.
## 4
And he—(though) many and impregnable are (the obstacles) for Manu— serves his servant: he smashes Vr̥tra [/Obstacle]—
he who in a single day became the unshakeable one for the men
contending to win the sun.
## 5
Receiving praise, the god Indra ceded the sun to the soma-pressing  mortal,
when, doing service (to him), Etaśa bore him fault-concealing wealth like  a share (of a stake).
## 6
In a single day, he subdued the voracious, barley-destroying Śuṣṇa for the  charioteer Kutsa,
and Indra razed the ninety and nine fortifications of Śambara for Divodāsa. 7. So we have sent to you our recitation, Indra. Like those seeking fame,  racing by themselves for victory’s prize,
we would obtain the sevenfold (prize), panting after it. You will bend the  weapon of the godless reviler.
## 8
So the Gr̥tsamadas have fashioned their thought for you, o champion,  and the (ritual) patterns, like those seeking help. Those creating the formulations, Indra, would obtain anew refreshment  and nourishment, a good dwelling place, and your good favor.
## 9
Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as its  milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.