+++
title = "020"

+++
20 (211)
Indra
Gr̥tsamada
9 verses: triṣṭubh, except virāḍrūpā 3
This hymn contains a number of metrical peculiarities: verses 2c, 8b, and possibly  6d are one syllable short. On the other hand, the name “Indra”—and the poet  draws attention to the name in verse 6—is clearly disyllabic only in the first and in  the final verse. Everywhere else, a trisyllabic pronunciation will restore the meter.  Again, the poet emphasizes this since in verses 2a, 3a, and 4a the vocative indra,  nominative índraḥ, and accusative índram, all in the same metrical position, can be  recited trisyllabically. There is also a double sandhi contraction in verse 2b, where  abhiṣṭipā́ḥ asi* > abhiṣṭipā́si. Verse 2b contains a śleṣa, in which the same word can  function in two different roles, since tvā́vataḥ “such as you” can be both a genitive  singular with “good favor” and an accusative plural modifying “men.” Verse 2a  has ūtī́ for ūtíbhiḥ. None of these forms is unprecedented in the R̥gveda, but the  persistent and deliberate use of such semi-irregularities suggests that the poet has a  particular purpose in employing them. Perhaps he wished to call special attention  to the inspired thinking and insight (vss. 1, 2), the praises and lauds (vss. 3, 4, 5,  7), and the poetic formulations (vss. 4, 5) of the poet by using words that would in  some way call attention to themselves. It is these words that Indra “makes power ful” (vss. 5, 7).
The hymn ends by contrasting the poets and their people, whom Indra helps,  to the Dāsas and Dasyus, whom he defeats. Again, there may be a suggestion that  what differentiates the fates of the poets and their enemies is precisely the mastery  that the former have over words.
The mythical references in 5cd are obscure, but they may have something to do  with the conquest of darkness by light. If so, then they anticipate Indra’s victory  over the Dāsa fortresses “with their dark wombs” (vs. 7).
## 01
We bring forward vitality for you, Indra—know of us!—as one seeking  victory’s prize (brings forward) a chariot,
as marveling we reflect through our inspired thinking and seek to obtain  (both) the good favor of one such as you and men (such as you).

## 02
You, Indra, with your help are by your dominance the protector of us,  the people devoted to you.
You are the forceful guardian of the pious man, who, possessed of right  insight, attains you.
## 03
Let that youth, Indra, who is invoked on every side, be for us a
benevolent companion and protector of our men—
he who with his help will lead forth the one reciting lauds, the one
laboring, the one cooking and singing praises.
## 04
I shall praise him—Indra—I shall sing to him, alongside whom long ago  they grew strong and exulted.
Being implored, he carries to success the desire for the good thing, (that  desire) of the present Āyu creating (these) poetic formulations.
## 05
Having found pleasure in the hymns of the Aṅgirases, Indra made their  formulations powerful, sending them along their way.
Robbing the dawns by means of the sun, receiving praise, he has pierced  the primordial (establishments) even of the Devourer.
## 06
The god famed as Indra by name, he the most wondrous, rose upright  for Manu.
The able, independent one carried away the Dāsa Arśasāna’s very
own head.
## 07
Smasher of Vr̥tra, splitter of fortresses, Indra razed the Dāsa (fortresses)  with their dark wombs.
He gave birth to the earth and the waters for Manu. In every way he  makes the sacrificer’s laud powerful.
## 08
In every way might was conceded by the gods to him, to Indra, at the  winning of the flood.
When they put his mace in his arms, after smashing the Dasyu he
trampled their metal fortresses.
## 09
Now should the generous priestly gift yield your boon for the singer as its  milk, Indra.
Exert yourself for the praise singers. Let fortune not pass us by. – May  we speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good
heroes.