+++
title = "021"

+++
21 (212)
Indra
Gr̥tsamada
6 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 6
In its first three verses the hymn announces the various offerings to Indra: the soma,  the homage, and the proclamation of Indra’s heroic deeds. The god merits these  because of his overwhelming power to defeat any who stand in his way and to win whatever he wishes. In verses 4–5, the poet recalls the Vala story, in which Indra and  his priestly allies obtained the cattle and the dawns through the hymns that both the  priests and Indra recite. He ends with an appeal that his people will find the intel lectual ability that will allow them both to continue to implore the gods successfully  and to gain the wealth and safety that will flow from that ability.
## 1
To him winning everything: winning the stakes, winning the sun; to him  winning in every way, winning men, winning fields;
to him winning horses, winning cattle, winning waters; to Indra, worthy  of the sacrifice, bring his beloved soma.
## 2
To him dominating, breaking, conquering, to the never-overpowered,  overpowering adept;
to him, the powerfully spirited draft-horse, impossible to surpass; to him  overpowering in every way—to Indra speak homage.
## 3
He, overpowering in every way, consuming the peoples, and
overpowering the peoples; he, the fighter rousing to action, grown
strong at his pleasure;
he, punishing opposition, overcoming, and acknowledged among the  clans—I shall proclaim Indra’s heroic deeds that he has done.
## 4
The bull who cannot be pushed aside, the deadly blow against those  raging; the deep and lofty one, whose verbal craft is unequalled;
spurring on the weak, piercing, firmly set and wide—Indra, whose
sacrifice is good, gives birth to the dawns and the sun.
## 5
By means of the sacrifice, the fire-priests of inspired thinking, crossing  the waters, found for themselves a way, sending forth their insights.
By their cry and assembly, seeking help (they obtained) cows; sending  forth (their insights) to Indra, they obtained goods.
## 6
Indra, grant to us the best goods, the perception that belongs to
(sacrificial) skill, and the possession of a good share,
as well as a prospering of our riches, freedom from harm for our bodies,  sweetness of our speech, and the blessing of good days for our days.