+++
title = "022"

+++
22 (213) Indra
Gr̥tsamada
4 verses: aṣṭi 1, atiśakvarī 2–3, atiśakvarī or aṣṭi 4
The theme of the hymn is the bond between Indra and the soma, which enables  Indra to perform “his great deed,” the destruction of the serpent, the “worm,”  Vr̥tra. The god Soma ever accompanies the god Indra, and the refrain running  through the first three verses emphasizes their connection by referring to Soma  as índu, “(soma-)drop,” echoing the name “Indra.” By describing both Soma and

Indra as “real” (satyá), the poet reminds his hearers that just as soma was real when  it was prepared by the gods for Indra before he destroyed Vr̥tra, so also it is real now  in the present sacrifice, as is Indra himself.
## 1
Among the Trikadrukas [=the Maruts?], the buffalo, snorting mightily, drank to his satisfaction the barley-mixed soma pressed by Viṣṇu, (as  much) as he wished.
It exhilarated the great and broad one to do his great deed.
– The god attends upon the god—the real Indu upon the real Indra.
## 2
Then through his power, the fiery one dominated the worm in battle. By his greatness, he filled the two world-halves and grew stronger.
He received the other in his belly, and there was more (soma) left over. – The god attends upon the god—the real Indu upon the real Indra.
## 3
Born at once with resolve, at once with power, you increased—
you, grown strong at once with heroic powers, overpowering the
scorners, and knowing no boundaries,
you, the giver of bounty to him who sings praises, (the giver of) the
desirable good.
– The god attends upon the god—the real Indu upon the real Indra.
## 4
This manly deed of yours, o dancing Indra, the foremost work done  by you, is to be proclaimed early in the day—
that by the power of a god you let life flow forward by letting the waters  flow.
He will overcome every godless one by his strength. He of a hundred  resolves will find nourishment; he will find refreshment.