+++
title = "023"

+++
23 (214)
Br̥haspati
Gr̥tsamada
19 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 15, 19
The relation between the god Br̥haspati and Indra is fluid within the R̥gveda. As  Schmidt (1968) has demonstrated, bŕ̥haspáti and bráhmanas páti “lord of the sacred  formulation” are usually names of Indra in the context of the Vala myth. At times,  however, Br̥haspati emerges as an independent deity, though closely linked to Indra.  Here the poet once describes Br̥haspati as the “yokemate” of Indra (vs. 18), but  beyond this statement, there is otherwise little to distinguish Indra and Br̥haspati.
Framing the hymn’s description of Br̥haspati are overt references to the Vala  myth, in which Indra as Br̥haspati leads the Aṅgirases and, by the power of their  song, opens the cave that releases the cattle and dawns (vss. 2, 3, 18). The interme diate verses expand the theme of the power of the verbal formulation, of which  Br̥haspati is the master. It is by means of knowledge of the truth that Br̥haspati and the poet, who possesses mastery of the truth through Br̥haspati, are able to  overcome their enemies. They defeat scorners (vs. 8), slighters (vs. 13), chatterers  (vs. 14), and speakers of ill (vs. 10). They overcome those who hate the real for mulations of the truth (vs. 4), who lay snares (vs. 6), and who are deceitful (vss. 5,  16, 17). Perhaps because of his powerful speech, Br̥haspati’s mouth even “snaps  at” the poet’s enemies (vs. 9). At least in some instances, the rivals of the poet are  rival sacrificers. At best, however, these know the words to recite, but not the truth  that produces the songs or that lies behind them (vs. 16). Through the truth and the  truth formulations, the poet and his people are freed from distress (vs. 4), hostility  (vss. 5, 9), and injury (vss. 7, 8, 12) and instead prosper (vss. 10, 15).
## 1
We call upon you, the troop-lord of troops, the most famous poet  of poets,
the preeminent king of sacred formulations, o lord of the sacred
formulation. Hearing us, sit down upon your seat together with your help. 2. Even the prescient gods attained their sacrificial portion from you, lordly  Br̥haspati.
As the great sun is (the begetter) of ruddy dawn through its light, you are  the very begetter of all formulations.
## 3
Having pressed away evasive chatter and darkness, you mount truth’s  light-bearing chariot,
which terrifies, which vanquishes enemies, o Br̥haspati, and which
smashes demons, splits cowpens, and finds the sun.
## 4
You guide with good guidance, and you rescue the man who will do  (ritual) service for you. Distress will not reach him.
Confounding his fury, you are the scorcher of him who hates the sacred  formulation. Br̥haspati, great is that greatness of yours.
## 5
Neither distress nor difficulty from anywhere overcomes him, nor  hostilities nor the duplicitous ones.
You press away all that harms from him whom you protect as his good  herdsman, o lord of the sacred formulation.
## 6
You are our herdsman, creating paths and seeing afar. We are awake to  your command with our thoughts.
Br̥haspati, let grasping disaster, rightfully his, grind to pieces him who  sets a snare for us.
## 7
Or if a hostile mortal, a lone wolf, is about to injure us who are without  offense,
Br̥haspati, turn him away from our path. Make an easy way for this our  pursuit of the gods.
## 8
We call upon you as the rescuer of our bodies, as our defender who  inclines toward us, o deliverer.
Br̥haspati, lay low those who scorn the gods. Let evil-doers not gain  higher favor.434 II.23
## 9
Through you growing very strong, o lord of the sacred formulation,  we would receive the eagerly sought goods belonging to the sons  of Manu.
The hostilities that loom over us from afar or hard by—snap at these,  (now) profitless.
## 10
Through you, o Br̥haspati, we would receive the utmost vigor—you, our  providing, winning yokemate.
Let not the speaker of ill, trying to deceive, be master of us. As  speakers of good, we would advance through our thoughts.
## 11
You are a bull unable to be pushed aside, going toward a challenge,  scorcher of his rival and overwhelming in battles,
the real redeemer of debts, o lord of the sacred formulation, and the  tamer even of the powerful one, excited to tough resistance.
## 12
Who, through his godless thinking, intends harm and, thinking himself  powerful in his commands, tries to smash us—
o Br̥haspati, let his deadly weapon not reach us and let us thwart the  fury of the evil-doer who vaunts himself.
## 13
Who is to be invoked in raids and to be approached with reverence, who  goes among the prizes of victory and wins every stake,
Br̥haspati has ripped apart all the stranger’s slights that strive to  deceive, like (enemies’) chariots.
## 14
With your sharpest scorching, scorch the demons who have put you of  manifest heroism to scorn.
Reveal that of yours which will be worthy of a hymn. Shake evasive  chatter to pieces, Br̥haspati.
## 15
Br̥haspati! That which will be worth more than what belongs to the  stranger, (that which) will radiate among the peoples with brilliance  and purpose,
and that which will shine by means of your power, o you born through  the truth—set that shimmering possession among us.
## 16
(Give) us not to thieves, the cheats, lurking in the track of deceit, who  have become greedy for our supplies
and (who) declare the crushing power of the gods (but set it) aside  in their heart. Br̥haspati, they do not know (anything) beyond the  sāman-chant (itself).
## 17
Since the sage Tvaṣṭar gave birth to you from all beings and from each  sāman-chant,
so then (you), as the lord of the sacred formulation, are the collector  of debts and redeemer of debts, and the smasher of deceit in your  upholding of the great truth.
## 18
The mountain gaped open for (their) glory to be yours when, Aṅgiras,  you set loose the cowpen of cows.
With Indra as your yokemate, Br̥haspati, you forced out the flood of  waters, enclosed by darkness. 19. Lord of the sacred formulation, become the guide of this hymn and  give life to our lineage.
All that is fortunate which the gods aid. – May we speak loftily at the  ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.