+++
title = "024"

+++
24 (215)
Brhaspati ̥
Gr̥tsamada
16 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 12, 16
As Schmidt (1968: 230–37) points out in his translation and extensive analysis of this  hymn, the poet frames his hymn with references to the Vala myth in verses 2–7 and  14. The poet does expand the scope of the myth, however, since the cave contains  not only cattle (vss. 3, 14), but also the sun (vss. 3, 9) and honey and water (vs. 4). In  verses 3 and 14 the cows likely refer also to the dawns. Inside of this frame, the poet  describes the present, in which Br̥haspati inspires the sacrificial hymns and receives  the sacrificial offerings. These present events are partly blended with mythical ones.  In verse 8, for example, the present hymns created by Br̥haspati are his arrows, but  this description of words as arrows recalls the ancient heroic deeds of Br̥haspati and  Indra. More explicitly, in verse 9cd Br̥haspati’s victory causes the sun to blaze, which  echoes the release of the dawns in the Vala myth. And in verse 10 both gods and  humans receive nourishment through the ritual offerings and the goods won by him.
This blending of the mythic and the present may also occur in the opening verses  of the hymn. Where later verses refer to the present but echo the past, in verses 2–7  the overtly mythic events occasionally suggest present ritual acts. In verse 4 the cis tern “containing streams of honey,” which Br̥haspati opens and from which all living  beings drink, recalls the ritual cups with their soma-honey. Priests are the heroes of  the battle in verses 6 and 7, and again this recalls the present ritual action of priests.  Such double reference may contribute to the obscurity of the most difficult verse in  the hymn, verse 5. A number of interpreters, such as Witzel and Gotō, understand  pādas ab to mean that from ancient times “these beings,” either the waters or the  cattle, were destined to come forth, but for a long time the door was shut on them.  That is to say, the basic reference is to the Vala myth, as in its surrounding verses.  On one level, this interpretation is surely right: there likely is a reference to the Vala  myth. At the same time, the poet’s extraordinary obscurity suggests that he may have  more in mind, and indeed pāda a explicitly connects past and present. The verse may  suggest the idea that what has happened in the past happens again, and therefore the  action of Br̥haspati is again necessary to free the cattle or the waters.
## 01
Help this offering, since you are its master—with this new, great song we  would make the ritual distribution—
and, Br̥haspati, bring our thought to success, so that your companion  [=Indra], who grants rewards to us, will be praised.

## 02
Who bent down by his power the things that had to be bent and split  apart the things of Śambara by his fury,
the lord of the sacred formulation moved the immovable forward, and  he entered into and throughout the mountain filled with goods.
## 03
That had to be done by the foremost god of gods: what was firm  became loose, what was hard became pliant.
He drove up the cattle; he split the cave by the sacred formulation. He  hid the darkness and made the sun visible.
## 04
The cistern with its mouth of stone, containing streams of honey, which  the lord of the sacred formulation drilled out by his power—
from that all those who see the sun have drunk. Copiously and all at  once, they poured out the water-filled well.
## 05
All those beings of long ago, whoever they be, are to come to be  (again). Through months and years they [=hinderers] block the  doors for all of you.
The two [=the sun and moon], not lining up (next to each other), move  to one (pattern) or the other, to the patterns (of light and dark) that  the lord of the sacred formulation has made.
## 06
These knowing (poets), who, upon reaching (there), reached the Paṇis’  most distant treasury, hidden away,
after observing the (Paṇis’) untruths again, went up to enter there from  where they came.
## 07
The truth-possessing poets, after observing the (Paṇis’) untruths again,  from there mounted the great paths.
They (mounted) the fire, fanned by arms, within the stone. It [=the fire]  is not one foreign (to them), for they left it behind.
## 08
The lord of the sacred formulation with his swift bow whose string is  truth—where he wishes, there he reaches.
To him belong the straight-flying arrows [=the hymns] with which he  shoots—(arrows) to be seen, drawing the gaze of men, and whose  womb is the ear.
## 09
Placed to the fore, he who leads together and leads apart, he who is well  praised—he is the lord of the sacred formulation in battle.
When the penetrating one bears away the prize and the stakes through  his thinking, just then does the blazing sun blaze at will.
## 10
Far-going and fore-going is the first (gift) of him who gives  abundantly. The things easily found by Br̥haspati are to be realized. These are the things won by the intent seer, the prize-winner, through  whom both races [=gods and humans], their clans, find satisfaction. 11. Far-going everywhere within the lower settlement [=among humans],  you, who are great and joy-bringing, increase in power—
the god spreads out widely before the gods; the lord of the sacred  formulation encompasses all those things. 12. All that is real belongs just to you two, o generous ones. Even the waters  do not confound your commandment.
O Indra, o lord of the sacred formulation, do you two come here to our  offering, like two prize-winning yokemates to their food.
## 13
Also the swiftest draft-horses obey him. In the public hall the inspired  poet bears away the stakes through his thinking.
Hating the hard and collecting the debt according to his will is he, the  lord of the sacred formulation, the prizewinner in the contest.
## 14
The battle-fury of the lord of the sacred formulation, who will do the  great deed, became real according to his will:
He who drove the cattle up also distributed them to heaven. Like a
great stream, (the stream of cattle) ran in separate ways through
his power.
## 15
O lord of the sacred formulation, may we be the charioteers of easily  controlled, vigorous wealth throughout all our days.
Mix heroes among heroes for us, when, being the master through my  formulation, you pursue my call.
## 16
O lord of the sacred formulation, become the guide of this hymn and  give life to our lineage.
All that is fortunate which the gods aid. – May we speak loftily at the  ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.