+++
title = "025"

+++
25 (216)
Brahmaṇaspati
Gr̥tsamada
5 verses: jagatī
The focus of this hymn is identified in the refrain found in all five verses: the  mortal who is in the favor of Brahmaṇaspati, the lord of the sacred formula tion. The first three-quarters of each verse then specifies the ways in which this  mortal thrives, especially in winning battles and besting his enemies. The first  hemistich of the first verse makes it clear that the fortunate man in question  has won the favor of Brahmaṇaspati by ritual activity, and especially by mak ing his own sacred formulations (bráhman), though the ritual context is not  mentioned again.
## 1
Kindling the fire, he will win against those who seek to win. Just he by  whom the sacred formulations are made and by whom the oblations  are bestowed will swell with strength.
With his offspring he keeps extending himself beyond the offspring (of  others)—whomever the lord of the sacred formulation makes his own  yokemate.

## 2
With his heroes he will win against the heroes who seek to win. With his  cows he will expand his wealth. He (thus) attends to himself,
and his progeny and posterity increase—whomever the lord of the sacred  formulation makes his own yokemate.
## 3
Vehement like a river in its surge, with his might he asserts his will over  those who seek to act with balls, like a bull over castrated steers.
Like the onslaught of fire he is not to be obstructed—whomever the lord  of the sacred formulation makes his own yokemate.
## 4
The heavenly (waters), never drying up, stream to him. As the first, he  goes with his warriors to (the contests for) cows.
Having power that cannot be blunted, he strikes with might—whomever  the lord of the sacred formulation makes his own yokemate.
## 5
Just to him do all the rivers roar. They have provided many unbroken  shelters.
In the favor of the gods, having good fortune, he blazes forth—whomever  the lord of the sacred formulation makes his own yokemate.