+++
title = "026"

+++
26 (217) Brahmaṇaspati
Gr̥tsamada
4 verses: jagatī
The subject of this hymn is very similar to that of the preceding (II.25)—the ways  in which a mortal favored by Brahmaṇaspati will prosper—and the same phrase  “he will win against those who seek to win” (vanavad vanuṣyatáḥ) found in the first  pāda of each hymn signals their relationship. However, II.26 lacks the refrain found  in II.25, and it also varies the 3rd-person description of the favored mortal with a  2nd-person address to the same mortal in verse 2. The series of abrupt imperatives  in that verse enlivens the hymn.
Unlike II.25, where the importance of ritual activity is established in the first  half-verse but not mentioned again, this hymn constantly emphasizes the power  that the performance of the sacrifice gives to the sacrificer, in contrast to the impi ous man, who is weaker by nature, even if he is a good warrior.
## 1
Just he *whose laud is straight (on target) will win against those who  seek to win. Just he who is devoted to the gods will dominate the one  not devoted to the gods.
Just he who pursues (his ritual duties) well will win against the one
difficult to surpass in battles. As sacrificer, he will apportion out the  sustenance of the non-sacrificer.
## 2
Perform the sacrifice for yourself, hero. Pursue those who display their  zeal. Set your mind well on the overcoming of obstacles. Make offering so that you will have good fortune. We choose the help of  the lord of the sacred formulation.
## 3
Just he with his people, he with his clan, he with his race, he with his sons  bears away the prize of victory, the spoils, with his superior men,
who, with a mind of trust (in ritual hospitality), seeks to attract the  father of the gods, the lord of the sacred formulation, with his
oblation.
## 4
Whoever has done honor to him with ghee-drenched oblations, that one  does the lord of the sacred formulation lead to the fore.
He makes a wide place for him from narrow straits; he protects him from  harm—the unerring one who creates a wide place for him even from  narrow straits.