+++
title = "027"

+++
27 (218)
Ādityas
Grtsamada or K ̥ ūrma Gārtsamada
17 verses: triṣṭubh
The first part of the hymn (vss. 1–7) calls on the Ādityas for protection against  all sorts of dangers encountered during journeys to settlements and between  settlements. They have the power to protect because they are gods who govern  the world and the heavens according to the truth, which defines the order and  nature of things as they are and ought to be (vss. 8–10). The poet then returns  once more to the theme of a journey protected by the Ādityas and looks forward  to his finding a place to settle, a place of good pasturage (vs. 13) and a place  that is open and secure (vs. 14). The poet insists that he is worthy of the Ādityas’  protection: like the gods themselves (vss. 2, 9), he is śúci “gleaming, pure” (vs.  13), free of any taint. And if he has committed any offense, he begs the Ādityas’  mercy (vs. 14)  and hopes that he would never fall to the punishments of the  Ādityas (vs. 16). The meaning of verse 15cd is not quite clear. The two dwelling  places mentioned there could be heaven and earth, to which pādas ab refer, or  possibly, as Geldner suggests, to opposing sides from whose conflict the poet  hopes to benefit.
## 1
These ghee-backed songs I pour out to the Ādityas, kings from of old,  with my tongue (as offering ladle).
Let each one hear us: Mitra, Aryaman, and Bhaga, mighty-born Varuṇa,  Dakṣa, and Aṃśa.
## 2
Today, they of common resolve—Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuṇa—will  enjoy this praise song of mine—
they, the gleaming Ādityas, pure as a stream (of soma) and free of
crookedness, disgrace, or injury.

## 3
These broad and deep Ādityas, undeceivable but ready to deceive (the  deceitful), having many eyes,
see within the crooked and the straight. Everything is in front of the  kings, even the farthest things.
## 4
The Ādityas sustain what moves and what stands still—(these) gods, the  herdsmen of the whole living world,
they of far-reaching care, guarding their lordship, possessing the truth,  and collecting debts.
## 5
Might I know this help of yours, o Ādityas, which even in time of fear is  joy, o Aryaman.
Under the leadership of you all, o Mitra and Varuṇa, might I avoid  difficulties like clefts in the earth.
## 6
Since easy is your path, o Aryaman, Mitra, and Varuṇa—harmless to  men and leading straight—
therefore speak in our defense, Ādityas. Offer us protection impossible  to smash on any side.
## 7
Let Aditi, whose sons are kings, and Aryaman help us cross beyond  hostilities by easy (paths).
We would draw near to the lofty protection of Mitra and Varuṇa, as  those with many heroes and free of injury.
## 8
They uphold the three earths and the three heavens. Three are their  commandments within the ritual distribution.
By truth is your greatness great, Ādityas. That is dear (to you), o  Aryaman, Mitra, and Varuṇa.
## 9
They uphold the three heavenly realms of light—(themselves) golden,  gleaming, and pure as a stream (of soma).
(They are) unsleeping, unwinking, undeceivable, and widely proclaimed  for the straightforward mortal.
## 10
You are the king of all, Varuṇa, both gods and mortals, o lord. Give us a hundred autumns to gaze far. We would reach the secure  lifetimes of former times.
## 11
I see far neither to the right nor to the left, neither forward nor behind,  Ādityas.
Be it in naïveté or in wisdom, you good ones, led by you, might I attain  the light free from fear.
## 12
Who has served the kings leading by truth [=the Ādityas] and whom  they—and his own prosperity—make strong,
he travels by chariot as the foremost man of wealth, proclaimed at the  ritual distributions as the giver of goods.
## 13
Gleaming and undeceivable, he dwells near waters that provide good  pasturage, with his own vigor strengthened and with his good heroes. Neither from near nor from afar do any strike down the man who  comes to be under the leadership of the Ādityas. 14. O Aditi, Mitra, and Varuṇa, have mercy if we have committed any  offense against you.
Might I reach the broad light that is free of fear, Indra. Let the long  darkness (of death) not reach us.
## 15
Both (heaven and earth) jointly make heaven’s rain swell for him: (he  is) Subhaga, the “Man of Good Fortune,” by name, the one who
thrives.
Conquering both dwelling places, he drives amid the battles. Both sides  are straightforward for him.
## 16
O Ādityas, worthy of the sacrifice, your wiles that are ready for the  deceitful one, your unbound fetters ready for the cheat—
like a horseman, might I travel in my chariot beyond these! Might we  never be harmed under your wide protection!
## 17
Let me not find the lack of a dear benefactor, of a friend with many  gifts, o Varuṇa.
Let me not stand down from wealth easy to control, o king. – May we  speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.