+++
title = "028"

+++
28 (219)
Varuṇa Gr̥tsamada or Kūrma Gārtsamada
11 verses: triṣṭubh
This is the only hymn to Varuṇa alone in Maṇḍala II, but it resembles the famous  Varuṇa hymns of book VII (86–89), especially in its confessional tone and its plea  to escape punishment from the god. The ellipses in the first verse point to Varuṇa’s  double role in this hymn. “This belonging to the Āditya sage poet” is in the first  instance the hymn itself that is being recited for the god. The poet hopes that  his hymn will dominate all things, or, perhaps better, be dominant over all other  hymns. At the same time, “this” is also the god’s own commandment, which the  poet describes in the hymn and which dominates everything in the world. Varuṇa’s  function as a speaker is underscored by the description of him as a kaví “sage poet”  since a kaví is one who knows and who speaks, and as mandrá “pleasing,” which  frequently characterizes the Hotar priest, who recites the hymns. Verse 2 carries for ward the argument, mentioning both the commandment of the god and the insights  of the poet. The poet calls upon Varuṇa to keep him safe from various threats (vss.  3, 6, 10), interspersing his petition with pleas not to fall victim to the punishment  from the god for his misdeeds (vss. 5, 7, 9). Toward the end of the hymn, the poet  once again calls attention both to his own speech and also to the commandment  spoken by the god (vs. 8), thus returning to the initial theme of the hymn.
## 1
Let this belonging to the Āditya sage poet, the independent king,  dominate all existing things in its greatness—

(this belonging to) the god who excels as the pleasing one for the  sacrifice. I beg good renown of abundant Varuṇa.
## 2
Might we be possessed of good fortune under your commandment,  since with great attention we have recited your praises, Varuṇa,
(now) at the approach of the cattle-rich dawns, since we are awakening  like fires throughout the days.
## 3
Might we be under the protection of you, who bring many heroes, who  receive wide praise, o Varuṇa, our leader.
O undeceivable sons of Aditi, indulge us to be yoked (with you), o gods. 4. As their distributor, the Āditya sent them gushing forth: the rivers move  to the truth of Varuṇa.
These do not weary, nor are they unharnessed. Like birds they have  flown swiftly on their earth-encircling course.
## 5
Loosen my offense from me like a halter. We would succeed in reaching  the wellspring of your truth, Varuṇa.
Let my thread not be cut as I weave my insight. Let not the full measure  of my work be broken before its season.
## 6
Unfasten fear from me, o Varuṇa! Hold me close, o truth-possessing,  universal king!
Like a rope from a calf, untie confining straits (from me), for I cannot  be away from you even for the blink of an eye.
## 7
(Strike) us not with your deadly weapons, o Varuṇa, which, in your  hunt (for him), injure the one who commits an offense, o lord!
Let us not go from light into foreign lands! Loosen our lapses for us  to live!
## 8
Before, Varuṇa, and also now, and in the future, we will speak our  homage to you, o you who are mighty-born,
for on you, as on a mountain, there rest immovable commandments, o  you who are difficult to deceive.
## 9
Send my debts far away and (other) things done by me. Let me not  suffer for what was done by another, o king.
Surely many more dawns have not yet dawned: direct us, Varuṇa, (in  order to be) alive at them.
## 10
If in a dream one who is yoked with me or who is my companion  speaks a frightening thing to me, who become fearful, o king,
or if a thief or a wolf tries to deceive us—protect us from (all) that,  Varuṇa.
## 11
Let me not find the lack of a dear benefactor, of a friend with many  gifts, o Varuṇa.
Let me not descend from wealth easy to control, o king. – May we  speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes. 