+++
title = "029"

+++
29 (220)
All Gods
Grtsamada or K ̥ ūrma Gārtsamada
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet calls on various gods, especially the Ādityas, for protection from perils,  some vividly imagined, and for forgiveness for his previous offenses. The poet does  not seem entirely confident that his prayers will be answered.
## 1
You vigorous Ādityas of steadfast commandments, put at a distance from  me my offense, as a woman who gives birth in secret (does her baby). You who listen, Varuṇa, Mitra, (other) gods—knowing what is favorable,  I call to you for aid.
## 2
You, gods, are solicitude; you are strength; you—keep hatreds far away. As apportioners, be indulgent and be merciful to us, both today and for  the future.
## 3
What shall we do now with your future (friendship), what, good ones,  with your old friendship?
You—Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aditi, Indra and the Maruts—establish
well-being for us.
## 4
Hail, gods: only you are our friends. Be merciful to me who am in need. Let our chariot not come to be without you when it is travelling in the  middle (of battle/a journey?); let us not become weary while we have  friends like you.
## 5
I alone have perpetrated a great offense against you, for which you have  chastised me, like a father (his son, who is) a gambler.
In the distance (be) your fetters, in the distance evils, o gods; do not seize  me in my son, like a bird.
## 6
Become inclined our way today, you who are worthy of the sacrifice.  Being fearful, I would fasten onto your heart.
Rescue us, gods, from the “rubbing out” of the wolf; rescue us from  falling into the pit, you who are worthy of the sacrifice.
## 7
Let me not find the lack of a dear benefactor, of a friend with many gifts,  o Varuṇa.
Let me not stand down from wealth easy to control, o king. – May we  speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.444 II.30