+++
title = "030"

+++
30 (221)
Indra (1–5, 7, 8cd, 10), Indra and Soma (6), Sarasvatı̄ (8ab), Br̥haspati (9), Maruts (11) Gr̥tsamada
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 11
Despite the number and variety of divine dedicands in the Anukramaṇī ascrip tion reproduced above, this is essentially an All God hymn, dominated by Indra. It  appears between two All God hymns, although in its number of verses (eleven), it  is out of order, since both II.29 and II.31 have seven verses. There is no easy way to  adjust this discrepancy.
The first part of the hymn (vss. 1–3) presents, however obliquely, the story of  the Indra–Vr̥tra battle, but it leads up to the battle with a timeless or contemporary  image. It describes the current daily rushing of waters (waters implicitly identified,  as commonly, with the dawns), and then asks when the waters first began to surge.  The unexpressed answer is—only when they were released after Indra’s defeat of  Vr̥tra. Verse 2 has been interpreted in multiple ways, and many difficulties remain.  Interestingly, it contains the first and almost the only example of a conditional verb  in Vedic, and the isolation of this grammatical form makes the interpretation of the  verse more difficult. In the tentative interpretation given here, the verse concerns an  unidentified figure (possibly Sūrya, who is sometimes an opponent of Indra), who  was planning to give aid to Vr̥tra in the battle (pāda a), but (pāda b) his plan was  detected and announced by an unidentified female figure (possibly Earth, possibly  Indra’s mother) to yet another unidentified figure (possibly Indra), thus foiling the  plan. The verse pivots in pāda c, which can have reference both to the mythological  past—the free flowing of the waters after their release on the killing of Vr̥tra and  their creation of paths for Indra—and to the timeless daily round—the continual  (re-)creation of paths for the sun by the dawns, since the formula in 2c is also some times used exactly of this situation. Thus the second half of verse 2 returns us to the  timeless daily realm of verse 1 and the double interpretation of waters and dawns.  The third and last verse about the Vr̥tra battle (vs. 3) is much more straightforward,  and may have been designed to resolve for the audience what the topic of the first  two, obscurely phrased, verses was.
The rest of the hymn begs the gods, particularly Indra but, as the hymn pro gresses, other gods, to use the same powers that led to victory in the Vr̥tra battle to  combat the poet’s enemies. The importance of sacrifice in winning the gods’ favor  is emphasized in verses 6–7.
The hymn contains some striking expressions, for instance the “night” of the  waters in verse 1: the image evoked may be a naturalistic one, that waters in full  flow can appear dark, but with the identification waters = dawns the image can  also describe the progress from night/darkness to dawn. Note also that the phrase  “every day” defines the hymn as a ring composition, though it has different lexi
cal realizations in verse 1 (áhar-ahar) and as the last word of the last verse 11  (divé-dive). 1. For the god who creates truth, for Savitar, for Indra who smashes the  serpent, the waters do not stay still.
Day after day the “night” of the waters drives on. How long ago was  their first surging?
## 02
The one [=Sūrya?] who was going to carry the gear here for Vr̥tra—the  mother [Earth? Indra’s mother?] announced him to the knowing one  [=Indra?].
Excavating the paths for him [=Indra/Sūrya] at their pleasure, the
boisterous ones [=dawns as waters] go every day to their goal.
## 03
For he took his stand, erect, in the midspace. Then he bore his
murderous weapon down toward Vr̥tra.
Clothing himself in mist, he [=Vr̥tra] ran up to him. Having sharp
weapons Indra conquered his rival.
## 04
O Br̥haspati, with searing heat, as if with a stone, pierce the heroes of  the (rival) lord, with their wolfish gait.
Just as you also smote boldly before, so smite our rival, o Indra.
## 05
Hurl down from heaven the stone on high, with which you, exulting (in  soma), will rub out your rival.
After that go halves with us in the winning of progeny, of abundant  descendants, and of cattle, o Indra.
## 06
For you two rip away the resolve (of him) whom you combat, but you  are stimulators of (even) a feeble man who performs sacrifice.
You, Indra and Soma—help us. In this fearful place create wide space. 7. It will not tire nor weary me, and there will be no flagging. We will not  say, “Don’t press soma (for him [=Indra],)”
(Indra,) who will grant to me, who will give, who will be attentive, who  will approach me with cows, as I press it.
## 08
You, Sarasvatī—help us. As a bold one accompanied by the Maruts,  conquer the rivals.
Even this vaunting one, the bull of the Śaṇḍikas, displaying his power,  does Indra smash.
## 09
Whoever, distant or (near), wishes to harm us, on catching sight of him,  pierce him with a sharp (weapon).
Br̥haspati, with your weapons conquer the rivals. Deliver to deceit him  who does harm, o king.
## 10
With our warriors, our champions, o champion, do the manly deeds  that are yours to be done.
For a long time they have been “besmoked” [=befuddled]. Having
smashed them, bring their goods to us here.
## 11
Seeking favor, I address this Marutian troop for you with a hymn, with  reverence I address the divine folk,
so that we will attain wealth consisting of hale heroes, bringing
descendants in its train, worthy of fame from day to day.
