+++
title = "031"

+++
31 (222)
All Gods
Gr̥tsamada
7 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 7
The common identification of the sacrifice, and particularly the praise hymn at the  sacrifice, with a chariot in a race is the backgrounded theme of this hymn, which  becomes foregrounded in the final verse. The controlling chariot image in turn gives  rise to other comparisons, as when in verse 1 charioteers sitting on the wooden  chariot are compared with birds sitting in trees.
The word “those seeking fame” (śravasyávaḥ) defines the hymn as a ring compo sition, as it occurs in both the initial and final verses, and the middle verses, 3–5, all  open with utá syá [/tyá] “and this,” a cluster that marks a simple omphalos. Though  most of the hymn is relatively straightforward, the end of the final omphalos verse,  5d, is difficult and has elicited several different interpretations.
The designation “all gods” as the dedicand of the hymn is quite accurate: a wide  variety of gods and divinized powers are addressed in the hymn and begged for help.
## 01
Help the chariot belonging to us, o Mitra and Varuṇa, in partnership  with the Ādityas, Rudras, and Vasus,
when those seeking fame, excited, sitting on/in wood, fly forth like birds  from their dwelling.
## 02
Then help out our chariot, you gods of one accord, as it seeks prizes  among the clans,
when the swift ones, crossing through the airy realm with their strides,  keep trampling on the back of the earth with their forefeet.
## 03
And this Indra, belonging to all domains, of good resolve, with the  Marutian troop of heaven
will stand beside our chariot with help that keeps the wolf away, for great  gain, to win the prizes.
## 04
And this god, the conqueror of the world, Tvaṣṭar, in concert with the  Wives (of the Gods), will speed the chariot—
Iḍā, Bhaga, Br̥haddivā, and Rodasī; Pūṣan, Plenitude—and the Aśvins as  husbands.
## 05
And these two well-portioned goddesses of opposite appearance, Dawn  and Night, also speeders of moving creatures, (will speed the chariot), when, (o Heaven and) Earth, I will praise you two with a newer speech,  I possessing triple vigor to strew vigor as the underlayer for the still (world). 6. And we want a laud for you like that of the fire-priests. Ahi Budhnya,  Aja Ekapad, and
Trita, the Master of the R̥bhus, and Savitar take delight, also the Child of the  Waters who impels the swift (horses), through (our) thought and labor.
## 07
I want these (words) raised up for you, o you who are worthy of the  sacrifice. The Āyus fashioned (them) together into a newer (hymn). Seeking fame, desiring the prize, like a chariot span might they attain the  visionary thought.