+++
title = "032"

+++
32 (223)
Various Gods
Gr̥tsamada
8 verses: jagatī 1–5, anuṣṭubh 6–8
This is a composite hymn, whose structure is not entirely clear. The first three verses  seem to belong together, addressing first Heaven and Earth (vs. 1)  and then an  unidentified male divinity (2–3), while the remaining five verses are addressed to  various female divinities who are especially concerned with childbirth. However,  the metrical structure does not accord with the conceptual structure, as the meter  divides the hymn into verses 1–5 and 6–8.
## 01
O Heaven and Earth, become the helpers of this speech for me, who am  acting according to truth and seeking to gain.
You two whose lifetime is extended do I, seeking goods, greatly install  here in front, when you are approached with praise.
## 02
Let secret swindles not deceive us on the day of Āyu [=offering day?]. Do  not make us subject to these misfortunes.
Do not keep us far away from your companionship. Know this
(speech?) of ours. With a mind seeking favor we beseech you for this. 3. With a mind without anger bring here your attentive hearing, a swelling  cow who gives milk, inexhaustible.
With steps [/(verses measured) in feet] and with speech I impel you, the  swift prize-winner, through all the days, o much invoked one.
## 04
Rākā who is good to invoke I invoke with good praise. Let her of good  portion hear us; let her attend (to us) in person.
Let her stitch her work with a needle that cannot be broken. Let her give  a hero with a hundred shares who is worthy of hymns.
## 05
O Rākā, your benevolent thoughts, well-ornamented, with which you  give goods to the pious one—
with those approach us today, benevolently, granting thousandfold
thriving, you of good portion.
## 06
O Sinīvalī with broad braids, you who are sister of the gods,
enjoy the oblation that is poured. Allot offspring to us, goddess.
## 07
She who has lovely arms, lovely fingers, bearing easily, bearing amply, to her, mistress of the clan, to Sinīvalī, pour an oblation.
## 08
Guṅgū, Sinīvalī, Rākā, Sarasvatī—
(on them and) on Indrāṇī I have called for help and on Varuṇānī for  well-being.
