+++
title = "033"

+++
33 (224)
Rudra
Gr̥tsamada
15 verses: triṣṭubh
Although under his transferred epithet Śiva (“kindly one”), Rudra has a grand  career ahead of him in post-Vedic Hinduism, his role in Vedic, especially early  Vedic, is relatively restrained. Only three complete R̥gvedic hymns are dedi cated to him (I.114 and VII.46, in addition to this one, as well as two hymns  conjointly dedicated to Rudra and Soma, I.43 and VI.74). He is known espe cially as the father of the Maruts, and he has a dual nature: on the one hand,  he is prone to anger and quick to dispatch his weapons, especially his arrows,  at those who enrage him; on the other, he is a provider of healing remedies and  of good luck.
The major part of this hymn is devoted to begging the god Rudra for his indul gence and his healing powers, but it also nervously expresses the hope that his venge ful assaults will be directed elsewhere. The dual nature of Rudra as both healer and  avenger is thus on display, and his parentage of the Maruts begins the hymn (vs.  1) and is mentioned several times in the course of it.
## 01
Let your favor come here, o father of the Maruts. Do not keep us away  from the sight of the sun.
The hero on horseback should be indulgent. Might we be further
propagated through our offspring, Rudra.
## 02
Through the remedies given by you that bring best luck, Rudra, might  I reach a hundred winters.
Banish hatred away from us, very far away, distress away, and afflictions  away, widely scattered.
## 03
In glory you are the most glorious of anyone born, Rudra, the most  powerful of the powerful, o you with the mace in your arms.
Take us across to the far shore of distress, to well-being. Keep away all  assaults of malady.
## 04
Let us not anger you, Rudra, through our acts of reverence, nor through  poor praise, nor through an invocation shared (with other gods),
o bull.
Set up our heroes with your remedies: I hear that you are the best healer  of healers.
## 05
Whoever invokes him with invocations and offerings, (thinking,) “With  my praises might I cut off Rudra as my own exclusive portion,”
to the zeal (of this person) let the red-brown one with powerful lips
[=Rudra] not subordinate us—(Rudra) being tender-hearted and easy  to invoke. 6. The bull, in the company of the Maruts, roused me up when I was in  need, with his more energetic vitality.
Free of malady, might I reach (this), like shade during the heat: might  I attract here the favor of Rudra.
## 07
Where, o Rudra, is that merciful hand of yours, which is a healing  remedy,
the bearer away of malady that comes from the gods? You should now  be indulgent toward me, o bull.
## 08
To the red-brown, bright-faced bull, I rouse forth greatly a great good  praise hymn.
I shall do reverence to the sparkling one with acts of reverence. We sing  the turbulent name of Rudra.
## 09
With sturdy limbs, the mighty red-brown one of many forms has  adorned himself with gleaming golden (ornaments).
From Rudra, who is master over the abundant living world, lordly
power will surely not be distant.
## 10
Worthily you bear the arrows and the bow and worthily the sacrificial  neck ornament of all forms.
Worthily you parcel out the whole formless void. Surely there exists  nothing more powerful than you, Rudra.
## 11
Praise the famed youth, sitting upon the high seat, the mighty one,  pouncing like a terrifying wild beast.
Being praised, have mercy on the singer, Rudra. Let your weapons cast  down another than us.
## 12
Even a little boy bows in response to his approving father as he  approaches, o Rudra.
I will hymn the giver of much, the master of settlements. Praised,
bestow on us your remedies.
## 13
Your gleaming remedies, o bullish Maruts, which bring best luck, which  are joy itself,
which our father Manu chose—those of Rudra’s do I want as luck and  lifetime.
## 14
Might Rudra’s lance avoid us. The hostile thought of the turbulent one,  though great, shall go around us.
Slacken the taut (bows) for our bounteous (patrons). Be merciful to our  progeny and posterity, o munificent one.
## 15
You red-brown bull, constantly visible—(let it be) so, that you do not  become angry, o god, and you do not smite.
Hearing our calls, be aware of us here, Rudra. – May we speak loftily at  the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.
