+++
title = "034"

+++
34 (225) Maruts
Gr̥tsamada
15 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 15
Following immediately on a hymn dedicated to the Maruts’ father Rudra, this hymn  describes the Maruts, with the extravagant and imaginative phraseology typically  used of them, as the thunderstorm, while urging them to come to the singer’s sac rifice. About midway through the hymn (starting in vss. 6–7), the focus shifts to the  benefits the Maruts can provide the singer, in inspiring his hymn, protecting him  against enemies, and offering gifts. The naturalistic description remains, however;  note, for example, the sequential imagery in verse 13, which proceeds from thunder,  through lightning and rain, to the post-storm clearing and rainbow.
The hymn also contains a reference (vs. 2) to the enigmatic and sometimes para doxical parentage and birth of the Maruts from Pr̥śni and Rudra. The motif of the  cow, especially the milk-cow with her swollen udder, runs through the hymn (e.g., vss.  1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12), with reference sequentially or simultaneously to dawns, clouds,  the sacrificer’s soma-pressings, and the Maruts’ gift to him. This multivalent image  helps to unify the hymn as it moves from naturalistic description to ritual entreaty.
## 1
Wooers of the gushing streams, the Maruts of audacious power, like wild  beasts fearsome through their forces, provided with chant,
blazing like fires, possessing the silvery drink, blowing a whirlwind—they  unclosed the cows.
## 2
Like the heavens with their stars they appeared with their spangles. They  flashed forth like the rains from the storm clouds,
when Rudra was begotten for you as the blazing bullish (semen [=rain?])  in the udder of Pr̥śni, o you Maruts with brilliants on your breasts.
## 3
They sprinkle their horses, like steeds at contests. With [=at the impetus  of] the “ears” of the reed(-whip) they speed with the swift ones.
You of the golden lips, Maruts, constantly setting (them [=lips])
aquiver—you drive to fortifying nourishment with your dappled
mares, o you of equal spirit.
## 4
The ones with lively drops have waxed strong, to fortify all the creatures  or for alliance (with them) always.
With their dappled horses, with their unreceding generosity, they sit at  the chariot-pole like the straight-flying (birds) on the traceries (of the  branches?).
## 5
(Come here) with your enflaming [?] milk-cows with teeming udders  [=clouds?], along unbesmirched paths, o you with glinting spears—
like geese to good pastures come here for the exhilaration of the honey,  you Maruts of equal spirit.
## 6
(Come) here to our sacred formulations, you Maruts of equal spirit;  like Narāśaṃsa [/him who receives men’s praise = Agni?] come to our  pressings. Make (them) swell like a mare, a milk-cow in her udder. Make for the  singer a visionary thought that has prizes as its ornament.
## 7
Give us, o Maruts, a prizewinner (attached) to a chariot, a sacred  formulation that attains its object, conspicuous day after day.
(Give) refreshment to the praisers; to the bard in the (ritual)
enclosures (give) as his gain wisdom and invulnerable might
difficult to surpass.
## 8
When the Maruts with brilliants on their breasts yoke their own horses  to the chariots for good fortune—they of good drops [/gifts]—
as a milk-cow in good pastures swells for her young, they (swell) great  refreshment for the person who has bestowed oblations.
## 9
The cheating mortal who set us among wolves— o Maruts, good ones,  protect (us) from his harm;
roll over him with your searing wheel. O Rudras, strike down the
murderous weapon of the one who lacks proper pronouncements.
## 10
This bright course of yours, Maruts, appears ever more brightly, when  the close friends have milked the udder of Pr̥śni,
or when (they have set) Trita [/the third (heaven)] to scorning (as does)  a roarer [=thunder], (set him) to aging (as do) those who age, you
undeceivable sons of Rudra.
## 11
Those great Maruts, travelling their ways, do we invoke for you at your  ritual offering for quick Viṣṇu.
With offering spoons extended, creating sacred formulations, we
implore the prominent ones of golden hue for generosity worthy to  be proclaimed.
## 12
The Daśagvas were the first to conduct the sacrifice. Let them rouse us  at the brightenings of dawn.
As Dawn with her ruddy (beams) uncloses the nights, (so did
they unclose the cows) with the greatly blazing light flooding
with cows.
## 13
With their cries [=thunder], with their ornaments like (Dawn’s) ruddy  (beams), the Rudras have grown strong in the seats of truth.
Pissing downward in a steed’s shape, they have assumed their much  gleaming, well-bedizened hue.
## 14
While one [=poet?] is imploring them for a great defense, for help, we  hymn them with this reverence right here—
they whom he [=poet?] will cause to roll down here with their wheel  for aid, as Trita [/the third one] (brought here) five Hotars for
dominance.
## 15
That with which you carry the feeble one across difficult straits, with  which you free your celebrant from scorn,
that is nearby—that help of yours, o Maruts. May your benevolence  come here like a bellowing (cow).
