+++
title = "035"

+++
35 (226)
Apām Napāt (Child of the Waters)
Gr̥tsamada
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This is the only R̥gvedic hymn devoted to the divinity Apām Napāt “Child of the  Waters,” though he is mentioned on a number of occasions elsewhere in the text.  This divine name is also found identically in Avestan, but in the R̥gveda it is in the  course of becoming an epithet of Agni. In this hymn we see aspects both of the  identification with and assimilation to Agni and of the original independent divinity.
After an opening (vss. 1–2) in which the poet in the 1st person offers his praise  to the divinity, the heart of the hymn (3–11) describes his birth, care, and feeding  by women, who at least in the early verses are the Waters, in sometimes enigmatic  phrasing.
The fiery aspect of Apām Napāt is introduced gradually in the hymn, first by the  use of vocabulary regularly but not exclusively used elsewhere of Agni, for exam ple the “shining” words (vss. 3–4); as the hymn continues, vocabulary and imagery  point more and more strongly to fire, for example the twigs and plants in verse 8,  the emphasis on golden color in verses 9–10. But it is not until the second half of  verse 11 that unambiguous reference to physical fire is found (the verb “kindle” as  well as the identification of ghee as his food—though ghee first made its appear ance in verse 4). It is doubtless no accident that the first half of verse 11 announces  Apām Napāt as his “secret name”: this explicit reference confirms that the poem  heretofore has been framed as a riddle or enigma, for which “Apām Napāt” is the  solution. (Verse 13 also codes the same distinction between the originally separate  identities of Apām Napāt and Agni, by connecting the name Apām Napāt with “the  body of another,” namely Agni.)
After the climactic verse 11, the hymn then takes a more ritual turn, and the  1st-person ritualist of verse 1 returns in verse 12. In this ritualistic section, the para dox of Apām Napāt being nurtured by the waters and his double, Agni, being nur tured by the fire-tenders is resolved (or the images are superimposed) by having the  waters bring ghee to him.
## 1
I, seeking prizes, have set loose my eloquence. The offspring of the rivers  should take delight in my hymns.
The Child of the Waters who impels swift (horses)—surely he will make  them well-ornamented? For he will savor (them).
## 2
This well-crafted spell we would speak to him from our heart. Surely he  will take cognizance of it?
The Child of the Waters, our compatriot, with the greatness of his lordly  power begat all beings.
## 3
Some come together; others go directly (to the sea): (but) it is the same  vessel that the rivers fill. The gleaming, shining Child of the Waters do the gleaming waters
surround.
## 4
The youth do the youthful waters, (though) unsmiling, circle around  while they groom him.
With his gleaming, dexterous (flames) he shines richly for us, (though)  without fuel, with his garment of ghee, in the waters.
## 5
To him, the unfaltering god, do the three women goddesses desire to  provide food.
For he keeps stretching himself out in the waters as if toward (just)
“made” [=deflowered] women. He sucks the beestings of those who  give birth for the first time.
## 6
Here is the birth of the horse and of this sun [=Agni?]. From deceit,  from harm—from the infusion (of them)—protect the patrons.
Neither hostilities nor untruths shall reach him in the “raw”
fortifications, him who is not to be forgotten (though) far away.
## 7
Whoever has a good-milking cow in his own house, he swells his own  power; he eats food of good essence.
The Child of the Waters, being nourished within the waters, radiates  widely to give goods to the one who honors him.
## 8
He who in the waters, truthful and inexhaustible, radiates far and wide  with his heavenly gleaming—
the other entities are propagated just as twigs of him, and the plants  propagate themselves through their progeny.
## 9
Because the Child of the Waters has mounted the lap of those who are  sloping, (himself) erect, clothing himself in the lightning flash,
as they carry his preeminent greatness, the golden-hued exuberant
maidens circle around him.
## 10
Golden-formed, he has a golden appearance—the Child of the
Waters—and he is also golden-hued,
(coming) out of a golden womb when he sits down (on the ritual
ground). The givers of gold give food to him.
## 11
This his face and his dear secret name grow strong—(the name) of the  Child of the Waters—
whom the youthful women together kindle just so: golden-hued ghee is  food for him.
## 12
To him, the closest comrade of many, we would do honor with
sacrifices, with reverence, with oblations.
I groom his back; I seek to provide (him) with wood-shavings. I provide  (him) with food; I extol (him) with verses.
## 13
As bull he begat the embryo in these (waters). As infant he sucks them;  they lick him.
The Child of the Waters, whose color never fades, has toiled here as if  with the body of another.454 II.36
## 14
Him standing in this highest footprint here, shining always along  unbesmirched (paths)—
the waters bringing ghee as food to the Child (of the Waters), the
exuberant maidens fly encircling (him) with themselves as his cloaks. 15. I have proffered a good dwelling-place to the people, o Agni, and I have  proffered a well-twisted (hymn) to the bounteous ones.
All that is fortunate which the gods aid. – May we speak loftily at the  ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.