+++
title = "036"

+++
36 (227)
Sequential Deities ( for the R̥tugrahas)
Gr̥tsamada
6 verses: jagatī
This hymn concerns a particular set of ritual offerings (R̥tugrahas “sequential  cups”) made to a prescribed set of gods in a fixed order, and, with the following  hymn, II.37, provides the complete set, which is also found in the single hymn I.15.  As was clearly seen already by Oldenberg (1888: 193), II.36–37 in fact themselves  form a single hymn, not only because of their shared ritual content but also because  at six verses apiece, they violate the rule of maṇḍala organization, whereby hymns  within a single group contain descending number of verses. II.36–37 fall between  a hymn of fifteen verses and one of eleven; when combined, their twelve verses fit  perfectly in the sequence.
Each verse identifies a different god (or groups of gods) and the priest whose  duty it is to make the offering. Several of the verses are structured as riddles, with  the name of the god either suppressed or postponed until near the end; the audi ence would have had no trouble solving these riddles, since the vocabulary and the  actions are stereotyped for each god. (Our solutions to such riddles are given at the  end of the verses in question.) Nonetheless, II.36–37 show rhetorical ambitions  almost entirely absent from the bare-bones and poetically inert I.15.
In this hymn Indra is honored twice (vss. 1 and 5) but by two different priests,  and in the second instance it is probably Indra in the guise of Br̥haspati. In both  these verses the exhilarating drink soma, Indra’s special potion, is also referred to in  a riddling fashion. For further discussion of the ritual and its litany, see I.15.
## 1
Being impelled for you, it has clothed itself in cows, in waters; the men  have milked it with the stones through the sheep(’s wool).
At “Hail!,” o Indra, drink from the Hotar’s cup the soma poured out  when the vaṣaṭ-cry is made—you who first have dominion over it.
## 2
Commingling with sacrifices, with your dappled (mares), with your  spears, resplendent on your journey and in your ornaments, and dear, having sat on the ritual grass, you sons of Bharata, drink soma from the  Potar’s cup, you men of heaven [=Maruts].
## 3
As if to home, come to us here, all you of easy call; then sit on the ritual  grass and take pleasure.
Then, o Tvaṣṭar, become exhilarated on the stalk, having delighted in the  call, flocking with the divine ones, (namely) the Wives (of the Gods). 4. Convey the gods hither, you inspired poet, and perform sacrifice.  Willingly, o Hotar, sit down in your three wombs.
Receive the somian honey that has been set forth. Drink from the
Agnīdh’s cup. Reach satiety from your portion. [=Agni]
## 5
This one here strengthens the manly powers of your body; as might, as  strength it was laid in your arms (already) on a distant day.
For you it is pressed, bounteous one, for you it is borne here—you, drink  it to satiety from the Brahman’s cup. [=Indra/Br̥haspati]
## 6
You two, enjoy the sacrifice; take heed of my call. The Hotar is seated,  following the ancient invitations [/nivids].
Homage goes to you two kings to turn (you) hither. From the Praśāstar’s  cup drink the somian honey. [=Mitra and Varuṇa]