+++
title = "037"

+++
37 (228)
Sequential Deities ( for the R̥tugrahas)
Gr̥tsamada
6 verses: jagatī
See the remarks on the previous hymn, as well as I.15.7–10. In that latter hymn,  as in this one, four verses are devoted to the offerings to the shadowy figure of the  Wealth-Giver (Draviṇodā); these verses may be there merely to bring the number  of offerings to twelve, to correspond with the secondary interpretation of r̥tú as  season, and hence to match the number of offerings to the months of the year, as  discussed in the introduction to I.15.
## 01
Become exhilarated on the stalk, from the Hotar’s cup at your pleasure.  O Adhvaryu, he desires a full outpouring.
Bring this to him. Such is the desire of the giver. The soma from the  Hotar’s cup, o Wealth-Giver—drink it at your turns.
## 02
The one I invoked previously, him I invoke right now. Just he is to be  invoked, who owns the name “Giver.”
The somian honey has been set forth by the Adhvaryus. The soma from  the Potar’s cup, o Wealth-Giver—drink it at your turns.
## 03
Let your draft-animals become fat, with which you go speeding.
Allowing no harm to befall, make yourself firm, o lord of the forest  [=chariot].

Having drawn it to you, bold one, having greeted it: the soma from the  Neṣṭar’s cup, o Wealth-Giver—drink it at your turns.
## 04
He has drunk from the Hotar’s cup, and from the Potar’s he has become  exhilarated, and from the Neṣṭar’s he has enjoyed the pleasurable
offering set out.
The fourth cup, indestructible and immortal, let the Wealth-Giver,
descendant of the Wealth-Giver, drink.
## 05
You two, today yoke your coursing, man-conveying chariot in our  direction: here is your unhitching.
Mix the oblations with honey. Come hither! Then drink the soma, you  who possess prizewinning mares. [=Aśvins]
## 06
Enjoy the kindling, Agni; enjoy the oblation; enjoy the sacred
formulation stemming from your people; enjoy the lovely praise.
With all (the gods?), good one, eagerly make all the great gods eagerly  drink the oblation in their turn.