+++
title = "038"

+++
38 (229)
Savitar
Gr̥tsamada
11 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is typically, and in our view rightly, identified as an evening hymn, in  which Savitar quiets the world for the night. The hymn is closely analyzed by Falk  (1988), who argues that the occasion of the hymn is the evening of the summer sol stice, which marked the beginning of the rainy season. According to Falk, in the sec ond millennium bce on this night the Milky Way rose from the horizon at dusk. The  arc of the Milky Way, he says, was pictured as the outstretched arms of Savitar. Be
that as it may, most of the images in the hymn are applicable to evening in general. The first six verses present a lovely series of images of the quiet and rest that  evening brings to the natural and the human world—almost ironically because the  daily round of busy movement ceases at the “impulsion” of the “Impeller” (the  literal meaning of Savitar). In the following two verses (7–8), Savitar’s ability to  bring each creature to its home place at night is extended: he also has assigned to  all categories of creatures their proper position in the natural world. The remainder  of the hymn celebrates the power of Savitar even over the gods (vs. 9) and asks for  his gifts (10–11). The latter verse makes reference to Savitar’s distribution of beings  to their separate realms by asking for gifts from heaven, the waters, and the earth.  Savitar’s apportioning of benefits in these last verses return us to the theme of the  first verse (1cd), which announced his gifts to gods and to the mortal sacrificer.
## 1
God Savitar has stood up to impel again as always—the draft-horse  whose work this is— for now he distributes treasure to the gods, and he has also given a
share in well-being to him whose oblations are worth pursuing.
## 2
Because the god, erect and with broad hands, extends his arms for all  to obey,
even the waters are submissive to his commandment and even this wind  here rests in its circling.
## 3
Even the one who drives with swift (horses) will now unhitch. He has  brought to rest even the wanderer from his travelling.
He has held in check the greed even of the snake-stickers [?]. Following  the commandment of Savitar, “Release” [=Evening] has come.
## 4
Once again the weaver has wrapped up what was stretched out; in the  middle of his work the mindful (worker) has set down his craft.
Having pulled himself together, he [=Savitar] has stood up. He has
always kept the seasons separate. As Proper Thinking, god Savitar
has come.
## 5
The domestic blaze of fire is dispersed prominently throughout the  houses, one for each, for (each one’s) whole lifetime.
The mother has set out the best portion for her son, according to his  intention, which has been aroused by Savitar.
## 6
(Whatever) was dispersed seeking gain has been gathered together.  Desire for home has arisen in all who roam.
Each and every one has come, abandoning unfinished work, following  the commandment of the divine Savitar.
## 7
The watery (race) has been placed by you among the waters; the wild  beasts have been dispersed throughout the wastelands, as their share; the forests are for birds. No one violates these commandments of god  Savitar.
## 8
As far as (Savitar’s) benefit extends, Varuṇa (has come) to his watery  womb, restlessly darting about at (every) blink (of the eye).
Every mortal creature, (every) domestic beast has come to its pen.
Savitar has distributed the races according to their stations.
## 9
Whose commandment neither Indra nor Varuṇa, neither Mitra nor  Aryaman, nor Rudra violates,
nor do hostile powers—for well-being I call him here with homage: god  Savitar.
## 10
As (we) arouse Fortune, Insight, and Plenitude—Praise of Men, the  husband of the Wives, should help us—
might we be dear to god Savitar at the approach of a desirable thing  and at the gathering of riches.
## 11
That desirable benefit given by you has come to us from heaven, from  the waters, from earth,
(a benefit) that will become weal for your praisers and your friend, the  singer whose recitations extend widely, o Savitar.
