+++
title = "039"

+++
39 (230)
Aśvins
Gr̥tsamada
8 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet of this hymn takes quite an original approach in matching every descrip tion of the Aśvins with a simile. He avoids the monotony that might otherwise  result both by the cleverness of his similes and by the occasional pun, in which  a descriptive word fits the object in the simile in one meaning but the target, the  Aśvins, in another. In verse 2, for example, jáneṣu “in the presence of the people” or  “peoples” refers to witnesses at a wedding in the simile, but in the target phrase they  are the tribes who perceive the united resolve of the Aśvins. Or again, in verse 7a,  within the simile the word śaktí probably refers to a “spear,” but in the target it is the  “power” of the Aśvins. In 7b, the rájāṃsi are all the spaces gathered between heaven  and earth in the simile, but regions given by the Aśvins, through which the poet and  his people can wander, in the target phrase. In verse 1, jarethe, here translated “you  awaken,” could equally well mean “you sing,” especially since the pressing stones  elsewhere are said to “sing.”
Another feature of the hymn is that the poet often describes the Aśvins as vari ously beneficial for one’s tanū́, one’s “body” or simply “oneself.” Normally we might  take the word as a reflexive, but the poet compares the Aśvins to various limbs and  makes direct reference to bodies, so we have kept the stronger reference to the body  in the translation.
In verse 7—the last verse of the poem proper since verse 8 is a signature verse  standing outside it—there is a final simile. This is the only one in which the object is  not in the dual and not compared to the Aśvins. Rather the object, an axe, is in the  singular and compared to “these songs” chanted for the Aśvins. This twist at the  end thus breaks the pattern of the hymn and marks its conclusion.
## 01
Like pressing stones, you two awaken to just this purpose: like vultures  toward a tree, (you awaken to go) toward what provides hidden
treasures (of honey);
like formulators, you recite hymns at the ritual distribution; like messengers,  you, serving your people, are to be called upon in many places.
## 02
Journeying early in the morning like heroes in chariots, like twin goats  you follow what you choose;
(Beautifying your bodies) like exchange-wives beautifying their bodies,  like a married couple (in the presence of the people) you find (a
common) resolve in the presence of the peoples.
## 03
Like the horns (of a butting animal), come in front toward us, darting  like hooves endowed with staying power.
Like cakravāka-geese (reuniting) at every dawn, o you ruddy ones,
journey this way like chariot-drivers, o able ones. 4. Like boats, take us across—like yokes, like wheel naves, like a wheel’s  cross-pieces, like its outer-pieces, (take) us (across).
Allowing no injury to our bodies like dogs, like amulets [?] protect us  from collapse.
## 05
Never growing old like winds, (forming a single) current like rivers,  (endowed) with sight like eyes, journey here this way.
Becoming the best blessing for the body like hands, like feet, lead us  toward the better thing.
## 06
Speaking honey for the mouth like lips, swell like breasts in order that  we live.
Guardians of our body like noses, like ears be good hearers for us.
## 07
Like hands (clasping a spear), clasping power for us, herd together spaces  for us as heaven and earth (herd together the airy spaces).
Sharpen these songs that are seeking you, Aśvins, like an axe with a  whetstone.
## 08
The Gr̥tsamadas have made these that strengthen you, Aśvins—the holy  formulations and the praise song.
Having delighted in them, drive nearby, you two superior men. – May we  speak loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.