+++
title = "040"

+++
40 (231)
Soma and Pūsaṇ
Gr̥tsamada
6 verses: triṣṭubh
Soma and Pūṣan are addressed jointly in just this one hymn, and it is difficult to see  what brings them together here. The last three verses of this six-verse hymn contrast  their functions; in the first three they act jointly, but these actions are not particu larly characteristic of either of the two.
## 01
O Soma and Pūṣan, you, the two begetters of riches, begetters of heaven,  begetters of earth,
born as the herdsmen of every living thing, did the gods make as the  navel of the immortal.
## 02
These two gods here, as they were being born, did (the gods) enjoy. These  two hid the unenjoyable shades of darkness.
For these two, for Soma and Pūṣan, Indra begot the cooked [=milk]  within the raw, within the ruddy ones [=cows].
## 03
O Soma and Pūṣan, the chariot [=sacrifice?] with seven wheels and five  reins that measures out the airy realm but does not speed everyone,
rolling in various directions, being yoked with mind, that do you
quicken, you bulls.

## 04
The one made his seat in heaven high above; the other on earth and in  the midspace.
Let those two unleash for us thriving of wealth that brings many rewards  and many cattle; let them unloose the navel for us.
## 05
The one begat all living things; the other goes along watching over  everything.
Soma and Pūṣan, give help to my insight. With you two would we win all  battles.
## 06
Let Pūṣan quicken insight, he who speeds everyone. Let Soma, the  master of wealth, establish wealth.
Let the goddess Aditi, who is without assault, help us. – May we speak  loftily at the ritual distribution, in possession of good heroes.