+++
title = "041"

+++
41 (232)
Various Gods
Gr̥tsamada
21 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 16–17, and br̥hatī 18, arranged in trcas ̥
This is a composite hymn:  its composite nature is clear from its position in the  maṇḍala, for with twenty-one verses it is far longer than the preceding hymn, which  contains six. The hymn has been assembled from the three-verse units known as  tr̥cas. It is also of mixed meter, though gāyatrī prevails for most of the hymn (vss.  1–15 and 19–21).
Nonetheless, with the exception of the final three verses (19–21), the hymn forms  a ritual unity, treating in order the gods addressed in a structured recitation form ing part of the Morning Pressing, which is found also in later Vedic śrauta ritual,  known as the Praügaśastra. Other instantiations of this recitation in the Ṛgveda are  found in I.2–3 (see remarks there) and I.23. The order of divinities is Vāyu (1–2),  Indra-Vāyu (3), Mitra-Varuṇa (4–6), Aśvins (7–9), Indra (10–12), the All Gods (13– 15), Sarasvatī (16–18). The last three verses (19–21) are, according to Oldenberg  (1888: 197 and n. 4), an independent tr̥ca, relating to the carts holding the oblation  (havirdhāna carts), that was mistakenly incorporated into the hymn. Even if this last  tr̥ca was a late addition, it is worth noting that the first and last verses of the hymn  end with the word sómapītaye “for soma-drinking,” forming at least a nominal ring.
## 01
O Vāyu, the chariots in thousands that are yours—with them come here, you with your teams, for soma-drinking.
## 02
You with your teams, Vāyu, come here. This clear (soma) has been held  out to you.
You are wont to come to the house of the presser.
## 03
Of the clear (soma) today and of the one mixed with milk, with its  teams, o Indra and Vāyu—
drive here and drink it, men! 4. Here is the soma pressed for you, o Mitra and Varuṇa, who are strong  through truth.
Heed just my call here.
## 05
The two kings without deceit—in the highest, steadfast seat
with its thousand pillars they sit.
## 06
These two sovereign kings, whose potion is ghee, Ādityas, the lords of  the drop,
accompany him who does not go astray.
## 07
Nāsatyas, Aśvins, drive (your circuit) bringing cows, bringing horses, your circuit protective of men, o Rudras,
## 08
So that no distant mortal nor one close by will dare against (you), you  of bullish goods—
(and no) defaming cheat.
## 09
Aśvins, convey to us here wealth of tawny aspect
that finds a wide realm, o holy ones.
## 10
Indra, certainly, will drive away great fear as it looms,
for he is steadfast, boundless.
## 11
And if Indra will have mercy on us, no evil will reach us from behind. There will be good for us in front.
## 12
Indra will make (us) without fear from all the regions round about. He is the one who conquers rivals—the boundless one.
## 13
All you gods, come here; hear this call of mine.
Sit down here on this ritual grass.
## 14
The sharp and the honeyed invigorating (soma) are here for you among  the Śunahotras.
Drink this desirable (drink).
## 15
Having Indra as chief, the Maruts as troop, and the gifts of Pūṣan,  o gods,
all of you, hear my call.
## 16
O best mother, best river, best goddess, Sarasvatī—
we are like ones unlauded: make a laud for us, mother.
## 17
In you, the goddess, are all lifetimes fixed, o Sarasvatī.
Become exhilarated among the Śunahotras. Allot offspring to us,
goddess.
## 18
Enjoy these sacred formulations here, o Sarasvatī rich in
prize-winning mares,
the thoughts dear to the gods that the Gr̥tsamadas pour for you,
truthful one.
## 19
Let the two advance who are beneficial to the sacrifice. Just you two we  choose here
and Agni, the conveyor of the oblation.
462 II.42–43
## 20
Let Heaven and Earth today hold fast this effective, heaven-touching sacrifice of ours among the gods.
## 21
Let the gods, deserving the sacrifice, sit in the lap of you two who are  without deceit,
here today for the soma-drinking.