+++
title = "Gods"

+++
The maṇḍala has ten hymns in the Agni series, including one Āprī hymn  (II.3), and twelve in the Indra series (II.11–22). Among the latter is one of the  best-known Indra hymns, II.12, with its famous refrain, “he, o peoples, is Indra.” +++(5)+++ Characteristically, Gr̥tsamada connects the heroic deeds of Indra to the acts of the  ritual, so that the ritual practice becomes the guarantee that Indra will again perform his great deeds. Following the Indra series are four hymns to Brahmaṇaspati  or Br̥haspati, the “lord of the sacred formulation” (II.23–26). In the first of these,  Brahmaṇaspati or Br̥haspati appears as both a priestly companion of Indra and as  Indra himself in his role as a priest-king, and in the second, Br̥haspati is Indra. Both  refer to the Vala myth, in which Indra and his accompanying priests release the cattle by the power of the formulated truth. After two hymns, one to the Ādityas (II.27)  and one to Varuṇa, the foremost of the Ādityas (II.28), there are a series of hymns  to the All Gods (II.29, 31) or to various gods (II.30, 32). The last of these is a composite hymn in two different meters, honoring minor deities, including four female  deities concerned with childbirth. Most of the remaining hymns of the maṇḍala  are single hymns to other deities.
 
Noteworthy among them are II.33, one of only  three hymns in the R̥gveda to Rudra, II.35, the only hymn in the R̥gveda dedicated  to Apām Napāt, the “Child of the Waters,” and II.38, a hymn to Savitar that shows  his role as the god of the evening who brings the world to rest. The final two hymns,  II.42 and 43, are hymns to omen-birds, asking them to cry only auspicious cries and  comparing their auspicious cries to the words and chants of the poets.