+++
title = "10"

+++
This vs. is rhetorically pleasing, though unremarkable in content. It opens with three cmpds with su- as first member, all in the realm of appearance (at least as I interpret the sequence) suprátīkaṃ suḍṛ́śaṃ s(u)váñcam. The next pāda juxtaposes a negated form of the pf. part. of √vid with a comparative built to the same stem (though different allomorph), ávidvāṃso vidúṣṭaram, picked up by a third form to this participle, vidvā́n, at the end of the next pāda -- which itself participates in an alliterative sequence víśvā vayúnāni vidvā́n.

svàñc- of course patterns and inflects with the -añc- stems, generally built to preverbs/adverbs in the meaning of ‘directed’ (e.g., údañc- ‘directed upward’), and in 2 of its 6 occurrences (IV.6.9, VII.56.16) the context favors the sense ‘welldirected’ (VI.58.4 is unclear). But here, as well as in similar adjectival sequences in VII.10.3 and in IX.73.7, it appears with words referring to seeing or appearance, and I suggest that this usage preserves a semantic relic of the ‘eye’ word (*h3eku̯ ) that, according to most, is one contributor to the blend that produces the hybrid suffix - añc- (see, e.g., AiG III.230). I therefore render it in these contexts as ‘of lovely outlook’ (contra Ge’s ‘schön von … Bewegung’). Re’s ‘de belle allure’ avoids the directional sense and may reflect an analysis similar to mine, but he does not comment. A zero-grade of the ‘eye’ word is also buried in prátīka-, also found in our sequence (suprátīka-), and in ánīka, which contributes svanīka- in 16a (for both see EWA s.vv.).

Although pāda-final vidvā́n is generally used absolutely, here it must take an object, vayúnāni.

The clear s-aor. subj. yakṣat in c invites a subjunctive reading of vocat in the next pāda, though it is of course injunctive. Nonetheless, modal readings are quite common for this stem.

