+++
title = "14"

+++
The first pāda is a 13-syllable Triṣṭubh; as Old notes (ZDMG 55.313 and Noten), it would be possible to delete init. ágne without affecting sense, but on the other hand it is difficult to see why it would have been secondarily appended.

In pāda a it is unclear how to construe viśáḥ. Note first that by accent it must be abl./gen. sg., not acc. pl. (víśaḥ). Ge (see n. 14ab) takes it as a second gen. with following voc. hotaḥ, but in that case we would expect viśáḥ to lose its accent in the voc. phrase (as adhvaryasya has), and, further, viśó hótar- is not a standard title, as far as I can find. It might be possible to supply *páti- “(lord) of the clan,” matching gṛhápatiḥ in the previous vs. (13a), next to hótā; cf. viśpátiḥ in 8d. However, I think the most likely solution is similar to the one also proposed for 1c -- to supply havyám as the object of véḥ in b (see havyā́in d), with viśáḥ dependent on havyám. Recall that the poet’s name is Vītahavya, and he seems to like concealed puns on his name.

As a support for their connection, note that the two phonologically similar words viśáḥ and véṣ take the same position in their respective pādas. Re’s solution is somewhat similar to mine, with viśáḥ dependent on an object supplied for véḥ, but his proposed object is “la fonction du messager” and he makes adhvarasya a parallel gen. to viśáḥ ignoring its lack of accent. His supplied obj. dūtyā̀ni is certainly conceivable: he adduces IV.7.8 vér adhvarásya dūtyā̀ni … But to my mind the pun on the name of the poet weighs more heavily.

In pāda b there is close sandhi in the sequence véṣ ṭ(u)vám; the reason for this is unclear, esp. since by all standard interpr. (incl. mine) t(u)vám belongs to a new clause -- the parenthetical one marked by hí -- and so there is a particularly sharp syntactic boundary between them.

In c mahinā́fits semantically much better in the subordinate yád clause than in the main clause (and is so taken by the standard interpr.), but it seems to be positioned too far to the left, with another element interposed before the subordinator: … mahinā́ví yád bhū́ḥ. I attribute this word order disturbance to the same factor that caused trouble in 1c: like janúṣā, mahinā́only occurs immediately after the caesura in trimeter vs. Given this constraint, the only possible adjustment to produce the expected sequence would be an ordering mahinā́*yád ví, which would put the subordinator in the correct 2nd position of its clause but produce a bad Triṣṭubh cadence (- - ⏑ ×). A somewhat similar situation is found in II.1.15c pṛkṣó yád átra mahinā́ví te bhúvat, where mahinā́causes some distortion in word order, though the placement of the subordinator is not affected.

With Lüders (438) I take ṛtā́as neut. acc. pl. and supply ‘hymns’ (Lieder), rather than taking it as an instr. sg.; this interpr. is supported by VII.39.1 ṛtám … yajāti, with the neut. sg. acc. Note the phonetic interplay of v, h, and y in d havyā́vaha yaviṣṭha yā́…

