+++
title = "04"

+++
Unlike the standard tr. I take c with ab rather than with d. I also take the subject of that pāda, the referent of trikakúb ‘three-humped’, as the herd, not Indra with most tr. The problem is the verb, nivártat. On the surface it is the only active form to the quite well-attested them. pres. vártate. It could be taken as an oppositional transitive active built (however temporarily) to the intransitive middle.

Since ní √vṛt generally means ‘turn back’ (of bovines), it could mean ‘(make) turn back’, with Indra as subject (called trikakúb). The problem is that this doesn’t make a lot of sense in context. He has just released them (or so I take ab); why then at their “forward surge” (prasárge) would he make them reverse direction? What I think the pāda depicts is the cows milling around in cow-like fashion and beginning to move, but something stops or confuses them, turning them back (pāda c), and Indra has to step in and show them the way out (pādas ab, d). A (partial) solution to this difficulty was seen by Hoffmann (Aufs. II, 590), who identifies several forms as belonging to an intransitive root aorist to √vṛt, to which this would be the subjunctive, rather than belonging to the them. pres. stem. Since the forms are intransitive, this solves my valency problem, but the subjunctive causes some difficulties. Hoffman takes pāda c as a purpose clause “Damit er beim Losrennen (der Kühe) als Spitzentier zurückkehre,” but why, again, would Indra turn back? To make it fit my scenario, with the herd as subject, I need to read it as a past prospective. Indra got them on the way to truth when they were going to / would have turned back. I would slightly amend my tr. to “when the three-humped (herd) was going to turn back in its forward surge.” There is another possible conceptual solution, also utilizing Hoffmann’s intransitive root aorist subjunctive. As already noted, ní √vṛt means ‘turn back’ of bovines -- see the extraordinary concentration of this lexeme in X.19, a hymn urging the cows to return. If we assume that once the cows trapped in the Vala cave are released, they will return home (which would be expressed by ní √vrṭ), then nivártat is compatible with prasárge: “so that the three-humped (herd) will return (home) in its forward surge.” In d I take ápa … vaḥ in two slightly different senses with two different objects: ‘uncover’ with drúhaḥ ‘deceits’ and ‘unclose’ (= ‘open’) with dúraḥ ‘doors’ (note the phonological similarity of the two objects). Unlike many tr. I therefore do not take drúhaḥ as gen. dependent on dúraḥ; I also consider mā́nuṣasya as a gen. of benefit rather than construing it with drúhaḥ (for both, cf. Re’s “les portes du Mal humain”).

