+++
title = "06"

+++
Another verse about soma.

Note the position of ná in the simile, where it is placed after the two-word DET+NOUN phrase (asyā́uṣásaḥ) rather than after the first word. I do not know if this placement is by rule; it might be worth looking for other examples with this configuration. In fact, see I.129.1g with imā́ṃ vā́caṃ ná.

The syntax is somewhat clotted in the 2nd hemistich. With Ge I take yébhiḥ as standing for *yád ebhíḥ vel sim., since there is no masc. pl. referent in the main clause. Ge (/WG) and Re construe the instr. without further verbal support (Ge “mit Hilfe der ihren Schweiss opfernden (Priester)”). I supply ‘being impelled’ to account for the instr.; such expressions are relatively common in soma hymns; cf. IX.30.2 = 107.26 índur hiyānáḥ sotṛ́bhiḥ, etc. For sweat as an oblation, see Jamison 2015 (“Avestan xṣ̌uuīd-: A Relic of Indo-Iranian Ritual Vocabulary,” BAI 25).

The siñcán of d causes some conceptual problems. Active forms of this very common stem are transitive (‘pour x’), but if the subject remains the drop (índuḥ), a passive ‘being poured’ would seem to make more sense. However, this attribution of agency to the drop -- to pour himself, as it were -- fits with the general tendency to animatize soma and attribute exceptional powers to him.

WG take jaráṇā as a nom. sg. fem., an abstract “Langlebigkeit,” conceived of as a goddess, as opposed to its standard interpr. as a neut. pl. adj. modifying dhā́ma and essentially identical to differently accented jaraṇá- ‘old’ (Ge, Re, though not Gr).

For WG this goddess is the one who pours with the spoon and reaches the seat. This is clever but runs into difficulties. First, forms to √jṛ generally convey a negative sense of ‘age’ -- not ‘long life’. And it interferes with a standard soma trope, of the pressed soma going to / reaching his “domains,” which is straightforwardly present here as long as índuḥ remains the subject. And as far as I know, there is no other evidence for this goddess.

