+++
title = "07"

+++
Another very obscure verse with multiple competing interpretations. I will only discuss my own. As indicated in the publ. intro. I think the larger point of the verse is that Indra’s presence alone is sufficient for an effective sacrifice, even if the standard ritual trappings (like the wood for the fire) are absent. This rests in part on very different interpr. of the individual lexical items, esp. in pāda a.

To start there, the hapax vanádhiti- is interpr. by Ge (/WG), Scar (57), going back to Sāy, as an axe, the Holzmacherin, in part because of the phonological play with a standard word for ‘axe’ svádhiti-. I follow Gr (Old, Re, Schmidt B+I 147) in taking it rather as the pile of wood for the kindling of the ritual fire, formed like vásu-dhiti- ‘treasure chamber, depository of goods’; cf. also mitrá-dhiti- in the adjacent hymn (I.120.9). The verb in this clause, apasyā́t, is universally considered a subjunctive to a denom. stem apas-yá- ‘be active’ (a stem that would appear only here, though there are related nominal forms); I interpret it rather as the optative of ápa √as ‘be’ (hence apa-syā́t) ‘be away, be distant’. True, this lexeme is not common -- I have found only one other RVic example (X.83.5) -- but it would be easy to create, with additive semantics, and semantically parallel ápa √bhū is better established.

There is no agreement on the sense of pāda b or even its syntactic status: because it lacks an overt verb, it is not clear whether it continues the subordinate clause of pāda or functions as the main clause. (With Ge et al., I assume it is the main clause, since otherwise the verse consists only of subordinate clauses.) It is generally assumed that a finite verb should be supplied with pári; I supply the inoffensive ‘go’.

My interpr. of the pāda is, on the other hand, rather bold -- there seems no other choice with pādas like these. I take the cowpens (ródhanā góḥ) as a reference to the ritual ground or to the vessels containing the milk to be mixed with soma or perhaps to places where animals are kept for sacrifice. The “sun” that goes around them is either Agni performing the paryagnikaraṇa, the circling around ritual objects or sacrificial animals (the latter might make more sense with cowpens), or Soma circling through the purifying filter. Both Agni and Soma are frequently identified with the sun.

But the mediating image for pāda b is the radiant Indra of pāda c. When Indra (such is my identification of the subj. of the 2nd sg. prabhā́si) shines forth, there is no need of wood for the fire (pāda a). He can stand in for the ritual fire and/or the gleaming soma and bring the sacrifice to a successful conclusion by himself, as it were.

My identification of Indra as the subj. of c makes him unavailable to be the referent of the datives in d, as Ge, Re take them. In my view, the poet Kakṣīvant is a better candidate (see WG, who suggest “Sippenführer,” so at least not a god). For one thing, if the curious hapax cmpd ánarviś- contains the (pseudo-)loc. ánar- to ánas- ‘cart’, it seems unlikely that this would qualify anyone directly associated with Indra -- the cart is not a warrior’s vehicle -- while on the other hand the Pajras, Kakṣīvant’s clan (cf., e.g., I.116.7, 117.6), are ánasvant- ‘possessing carts / wagons’ (or, more accurately, compared to people who are ánasvant-) in I.126.5. Although turá- was used of Indra in 3b and would here be applied to Kakṣīvant, this poet would surely not mind getting a little reflected divine glory. Note, in passing, the phonetic echo in ánarviśe paś u viṣe.

