+++
title = "01"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., the “ask” in this hymn comes at the beginning, not the end as is more usual. It is also excessively convoluted in syntax and phraseology. (My interpr. of the vs. is in great part guided by Th [Fremdl. 58] and to a certain extent Ge., though as far as I can see Ge simply fails to tr. parts of it.) The actual referent of the definitional rel. cl. that occupies the first hemistich is not encountered until the second word of pāda b (rayíḥ), preceded by a discontinuous simile dyaúr ná … bhū́ma “like heaven the earth,” whose first part has been fronted around the rel. prn. yáḥ, and by a verb in tmesis, abhí … tasthaú “surmounts,” whose preverb is stationed after the caesura in pāda a and whose verb form proper opens pāda b. And this is only the beginning! A first paraphrase of the first hemistich would be “as heaven (surmounts) the earth, the wealth that surmounts …,” with “wealth” corresponding grammatically and functionally to “heaven.” This first stab makes it immediately clear that we need an acc. obj. in the frame to correspond to bhū́ma in the simile, something that wealth can “surmount.” One acc. is obvious: jánān at the end of the hemistich. But what do we do with aryáḥ at the end of the first pāda? Old (ZDMG 54.169-70) takes it as an acc. pl., tr. “wie die Himmel über der Erde (sollen) die Schätze über den Geizigen (erhaben sein).” However, there is a reasonably well-attested phrase rā́yo aryáḥ “the riches of the stranger” (IV.48.1, VI.14.3, VI.47.9, and esp. VI.36.5; cf. also VI.1.5 and comm. on all those passages). In VI.36.5 it is found in exactly this context: dyaúr ná bhū́mābhí rā́yo aryáḥ “Like heaven over the earth, sur(mount) the riches of the stranger,” with rā́yo aryáḥ an object phrase exactly parallel to bhū́ma in the simile. It therefore seems best here to assume a gapping of acc. pl. rā́yaḥ, whose presence is suggested by the nom. rayíḥ, with aryáḥ a gen. as elsewhere. Hence “wealth that surmounts (the wealth/riches) of the stranger …” And what does this “wealth of the stranger” consist of? In all cases it seems to refer to manpower, not to material wealth, and our passage makes this clear by further specifying it as jánān ‘people(s)’.

As if the poet hadn’t misled us enough already with the intertwining of constituents and gapping of a crucial word, he also plants a false cue. The word bhū́ma is of course the acc. sg. to the neut. n-stem bhū́man-, as shown esp. by the parallel VI.36.5. But in its position directly after the preverb abhí, it looks mighty like a verb -- and could almost (but only almost) be the 1st pl. root aor. bhūma, though with wrong accent (expect *bhūmá, a form not found in the RV). The lexeme abhí √bhū is close in meaning to the abhí √sthā we have here (whose verbal part has been postponed till the 2nd pāda), and given its sandhi form the rel. prn. yá (underlying yáḥ) could equally be underlying yé, which could match the number of the putative 1st pl. verb form (“we who surmount …”). Of course, as just noted, the accent on bhū́ma is wrong, and we would further expect abhí to lose its own accent and univerbate with an immediately following verb in a rel. clause. But I nonetheless think that the poet meant for his audience to follow this false trail, however briefly.

After this tangled beginning, the second hemistich is completely straightforward: the acc. tám picks up the rel. cl. couched in the nom., with the implicit referent “wealth,” modified by three acc. OBJ+VERBAL NOMINAL cmpds, all objects of “give” (daddhí). This is the last time in the hymn that Indra is asked to give us anything; the only other appeal to Indra is in 10a, where we pray to “win anew.” Almost all of the rest of the hymn treats previous heroic deeds of Indra, though it should be noted that many of these are presented in the injunctive, and the notoriously slippery usage of the injunctive may leave the possibility of current application open.

