+++
title = "04"

+++
I read the instr. plurals opening the two hemistichs (śataíḥ 4a, vadhaíḥ 4c) “vertically” -- that is, as a single NP distributed over two clauses. This seems to be Ge’s solution too: “Durch hundert (Streiche) …; durch (deine) Streiche …”; so also Old ZDMG 55.326. The fact that a form of √pad needs to be read in pāda c, matching apadran in pāda a supports this interpr. It would, however, be possible to interpr. śataíḥ as “by the hundreds,” referring to the felled Paṇis. So Kü (424).

In the publ. tr. I took the beneficiary of Indra’s actions in pāda b to be a single person, “the ten-armed poet” (dáśoṇaye kaváye)(so Ge), and since dáśoṇi- recurs in 8a apparently qualifying vetasú-, I considered this to be a reference to this shadowy Vetasu. But I now think this identification is incorrect or at least misleading. When the word kaví- is found in an Indra / Kutsa / Śuṣṇa context it always (in my current view) refers to Uśanā Kāvya, and I believe that to be the case here — strengthened by the fact that the other two occurrences of arká-sāti- (I.174.7, VI.26.3) are found with kaví- in the Kutsa / Śuṣṇa myth, where the word must surely refer to Uśanā Kāvya. (Old makes the same point, ZDMG 55.326-27.) I therefore now think that “for the poet” means “for Uśanā Kāvya,” and “for the ten-armed” is likely a reference to a different person, identified as Vetasu in vs. 8. (Old considers the additional possibility that dáśoṇi- is an epithet of UK, but seems to favor the separation into two individuals.) On the basis of 8a and Ge’s disc. there (n. 8), it further seems likely, or at least possible, that vetasú- in 8 refers to Kutsa, and therefore in our 4b the two datives refer to Kutsa and UK. I would therefore now alter the tr. to “for the sake of the ten-armed one [=Kutsa?] and of the poet [=Uśanā Kāvya].” My tr. of dáśoṇi- in this vs. and in 8a reflects the current consensus, endorsed by Mayr (EWA s.v. oṇí- “offenbar ‘Arm’”), that oṇí- means ‘arm’ (as opposed to Gr’s ‘Schutz’ and ‘Mutterbrust’), but I think that this interpr. might be ripe for revisiting. The passages are not particularly diagnostic -- the most important evidence is the fact that the stem is generally dual -- and it lacks a clear etymology (though it’s sometimes connected with √av ‘help’). There is also the question of the cmpd. sandhi: if dáśoṇi- consists of dáśa + oṇí-, it should of course come out as

*dáśauṇi-. The -o- has been accounted for (see EWA s.v. oṇí- [p.c from J. Schindler], Mayr PN s.v. dáśoniya-) by invoking TS I.2.6.1, where the widely attested mantra
abhí tyáṃ deváṃ savitā́ram oṇyòḥ kavíkratum (AV VII.14.1, etc.) instead contains ūṇyòḥ. The ū- initial would indeed yield the proper sandhi result, but given the otherwise overwhelming attestation of oṇyòḥ in the mantra, the TS variant does not have much support. Since at present I don’t have a better solution, I stick with ‘tenarmed’, but consider it quite dubious.

That arká-sāti means ‘winning of the (sun’s) rays’ is strongly suggested by sū́ryasya sātaú in the next vs. (5d), though, as Old points out (ZDMG 55.327), it could in addition mean ‘winning of the chants’.

I don’t understand pāda d, but I would point out that another “insatiable Śuṣṇa” passage also has a mention of mealtime: IV.16.12 kútsāya śúṣṇam aśúṣaṃ ní barhīḥ, prapitvé áhnaḥ kúyavaṃ sahásrā “For Kutsa you laid low insatiable Śuṣṇa, who brings bad harvest, with his thousands, before the day's first meal.” Perhaps the point is that despite his voraciousness, Śuṣṇa is deprived of his meal by Indra’s timely blow. In that case the subj. of arirecīt … prá here is Indra, who leaves nothing for Śuṣṇa.



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/020/04-05.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>