+++
title = "08"

+++
This vs. is made difficult both by our very sketchy knowledge of the personnel and the myth and by the syntax. Both Old (ZDMG 55.328-29) and Ge (n.

8) devote considerable space to disc. of it. The vs. seems to pun on PNs in a way discouragingly similar to VII.18, the very obscure account of the Ten Kings battle.

The nearby vs. VI.26.4 is of some help in the interpr. of this one, as is X.49.4.

My approach to the vs. partly follows Ge’s, but differs in several important ways. Like Ge (who adopted it from Baunack; see his n. 8), I supply a verb of speaking to introduce the second hemistich, which we both take as the direct speech of Indra. (By contrast Old construes úpa sṛjā in d as the verb governing the acc. in ab, but given the distribution of the rest of the elements in the vs., esp. the preverb ā́ opening pāda c, this seems unlikely.) But rather than taking the acc. PNs in ab as the addressees of this speech as Ge does, I construe them (loosely) with the hapax bahuvrīhi svabhiṣṭí-sumnaḥ ‘having/showing the favor of his dominance’, with Vetasu [=Kutsa?] and Tuji as the recipient of this favor. The intens. adj. tū́tuji- ‘thrusting’, found elsewhere modifying a whirlwind (bhṛ́mi- IV.32.2) and a chariot (X.35.6), punningly points to Tuji, who is found in nearby VI.26.4 in the company of Vetasu and Tugra, as here. (In that vs. there is also redupl., but it is located on the verb: tváṃ tújim … tūtoḥ “you strengthened Tuji.”) In that vs. Indra strikes down Tugra for Vetasu (VI.26.4c tváṃ túgraṃ vetasáve sácāhan). I think the same situation is depicted here in cd, though less violently, with Vetasu(-Kutsa) referred to by the adj. dyótana- ‘brilliant, flashing’ expressing a dat. of benefit. In this connection Baunack’s adducing (see Ge’s n. 8c) of I.63.3 kutsā́ya dyumaté “for heaven-bright Kutsa,” another dat. of benefit in the Śuṣṇa myth, is apposite. Ge (also Gr, Mayr PN) takes dyótanāya as a PN, but no such person Dyotana is found elsewhere, and in its other two occurrences (I.123.4, VIII.29.2) the stem is an adj. with the expected etymological meaning.

The next question is íbham. This is pretty much universally interp. as a PN, referring to another enemy of Indra. This is in part based on X.49.4, where Tugra and one Smadibha are made subject to Kutsa (and the Vetasus [pl.] and Tuji are also found). Old, for ex., considers Ibha here simply a shortening of Smadibha, and the context of the word in our pāda certainly supports a pun on the latter name: (ā́ túgraṃ śá)śvad íbham …; cf. X.49.4 (túgraṃ kútsāya) smádibham, with the last syllable of the adverb śáśvad a close match for the 1st syllable of the PN in X.49.4 (if it is indeed a PN). But íbha- is elsewhere in the RV a common noun meaning ‘retinue’ or ‘vassal’ (the common denominator being the inferior position vis-à-vis someone in power); cf. also the MIA evidence, such as Pāli ibbha. And ‘vassal’ would be an appropriate word for someone made subject to another -- hence my tr. of the phrase śáśvad íbham as “perpetual vassal,” referring to Tugra.

Finally, we must deal with the verbal expressions at the end of the vs., úpa śṛjā iyádhyai. The first question is what form sṛjā represents out of sandhi. The Pp.

reads sṛja, that is, a 2nd sg. act. impv., with lengthening of the final vowel in the Saṃhitā text. But of course in that case the normal outcome in sandhi should be coalescence into *sṛjeyádhyai. After some agonizing, Old accepts the Pp interpr.

(though he also flirts with a 2nd sg. subj. sṛjāḥ), but Ge (n. 8) opts instead for Baunack’s suggestion, that the underlying form is sṛjai, i.e., a 1st sg. middle subjunctive (so also Lub, though with !). This is the interpr. I have also adopted.

Although the 6th cl. pres. sṛja- is predominately active, there are a few middle forms; the pf. is about evenly divided between active and middle forms in transitive usage (including several 1st pl. sasṛjmáhe with úpa), and there are two 1st sg. s-aor. forms ásṛkṣi with úpa in trans. usage. Taking the form as a 1st sg. also entails the directspeech interpr. of Baunack/Ge. (It's worth noting as an aside that Sāy. simply glosses upa sṛja with upāsṛjat, apparently untroubled by matters of sandhi and grammatical identity; this was followed by Gr [Tr.], though unmentioned in the Wö.) As Old points out (ZDMG 55.328), the lexeme úpa √sṛj is often used of releasing / dispatching calves to their mother, and this must account for the simile mātúr ná. Although this idiom is generally benevolent, it also emphasizes the hierarchical dependency of the young on their mother, and this would be appropriate for the vassal Tugra’s subordinate position with regard to Kutsa.

I take the inf. iyádhyai to √i ‘go’, or more particularly to the stem ī́yate ‘speeds’ (√i or √yā), rather than to √yā ‘implore, beg’ with Lub. It simply completes the action of the main verb “release/depatch them to go …” The preverb ā́beginning the 2nd hemistich is more likely to go with this inf. than with úpa srjai (pace Gr, also Ge, who thinks [n. 8c] it could go with either one), simply because we’d otherwise expect the order úpa+ā́(cf. VIII.27.11 úpa … ā́m̐, ásṛkṣi …).

After all this, the alterations of the publ. tr. would be minimal: “Indra showed the favor of his dominance to Vetasu [=Kutsa?] of the ten tricks and ten arms and to the thrusting (Tuji), (saying) ‘Tugra as perpetual vassal for brilliant (Vetasu=Kutsa?) shall I dispatch, like (calves) to their mother, to speed (to him).’”

