+++
title = "11"

+++
Pāda c contains one of the three instances of the gerundive anudéya- in the RV and the only masc. form -- a form called by Ge “ganz unsicher.” This gerundive belongs to the lexeme ánu √dā ‘hand over, concede’ discussed above, ad vs. 2. I have discussed one of the fem. forms anudéyī in the difficult hymn X.135 at length (“The Earliest Evidence for the Inborn Debts of a Brahmin: A New Interpretation of Ṛgveda X.135.” Journal asiatique 302.2 [2014]: 245-57). In that article I established that the idiom ánu √dā can be further narrowed in certain contexts to mean ‘forgive/acquit a debt’; and the debt in question can be referred to with the gerund anudéya-, -ī, as (the debt) ‘to be acquited’. In X.135.5-6 this debt is actually a reference to the inborn debts of a Brahman, which he must pay off during his lifetime, one of which is the need to provide his ancestors with (grand)sons. As argued in that article (255-56), I think the same sense can be seen in our passage. To cite from the article: “The second half of this verse seems to allude to a complex intergenerational relationship in which Indra intervenes. The god hands over a grandson (nápāt-) to his grandfather (mahé pitré), a transaction that sounds like a man's fulfillment of his debt to his ancestors by fathering a son, thereby providing them with a grandson. This grandson is said to be anudéya-. I would suggest that the grandson here serves as the concrete manifestation of the debt that is to be acquitted, and the technical term anudéya- is therefore applied to him. If I am correct, this is another, though more muted, piece of evidence for the existence of the notion of a man's inborn debt in the Rig Veda.”

