+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Prajāpati poured forth the life-sap of the horse (aśva-medha) [^fn_710]. When poured forth, it went straight away from him and spread itself over the regions. The gods went in quest of it. By means of offerings (ishṭi) they followed it up, by offerings they searched for it, and by offerings they found it. And when he performs ishṭis, the Sacrificer thereby searches for the horse (aśva) meet for sacrifice [^fn_711] (medhya).

[^fn_710]: 284:1 Or, as it might also be translated. Prajāpati produced (created) the Aśvamedha.

[^fn_711]: 284:2 Or, for the horse full of life-sap; or, simply, the sacrificial horse.

## 02
2. They (the ishṭis [^fn_712]) belong to Savitr̥; for Savitr̥ is this (earth): if any one hides himself thereon, if any one goes elsewhere [^fn_713], it is on this

[^fn_712]: 284:3 Viz. three oblations of cakes on twelve kapālas to Savitr̥ Prasavitr̥, Savitr̥ Āsavitr̥; and Savitr̥ Satyaprasava respectively. For particulars see XIII, 4, 2, 6 seqq.

[^fn_713]: 284:4 Harisvāmin seems to take this in the sense of 'who moves about elsewhere (in another sphere),' and mentions, as an instance, a bird which flies in (? up into) the air--pakshyādir antarikshe gaccḥati--but is ultimately caught on earth.

 (earth) that they find him; for no one (creature), whether walking erect or horizontally (like an animal), is able to go beyond it. Their belonging to Savitr̥ thus is in order to find the horse.

## 03
3. Concerning this they say, 'Surely the horse disappears when it goes straight away; for they do not turn (drive) it back [^fn_714].' Now when he performs the Dhr̥ti offerings [^fn_715] in the evening--dhr̥ti (keeping) meaning peaceful dwelling, and the night also meaning peaceful dwelling--it is by means of peaceful dwelling that he keeps it; whence both men and beasts rest peacefully at night. And when he performs offerings in the morning, he seeks that (horse); whence it is in daytime that one goes to seek for what is lost. And again when he offers the Dhr̥tis in the evening, and the (Savitr̥) ishṭis in the morning, it is security of possession the Sacrificer thereby brings about, whence security of possession is brought about for the subjects where this sacrifice is performed.

[^fn_714]: 285:1 See XIII, 4, 2, 16.

[^fn_715]: 285:2 The four Dhr̥tis are performed on the Āhavanīya after sunset on the first day; cf. XIII, 4, 3, 5. For the four formulas used with these oblations ('here is joy,' &c.), see XIII, 1, 6, 2.

