+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. But, indeed, distinction, royal sway, departs from him who performs the horse-sacrifice; and when a man attains to distinction, the lute is played to him. Two Brāhmaṇical lute-players sing (and play) for a year; for that--to wit, the lute--is a form (attribute) of distinction: it is distinction they thus confer upon him.
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. Concerning this they say, ‘Were both to be Brāhmaṇas who sing, noble rank (or political power) would depart from him; for he--to wit, a Brāhmaṇa--is a form of the priestly office; and the nobility takes no delight in the priestly office (or priesthood).
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. ‘And were both to be Rājanyas (nobles), spiritual lustre would depart from him; for he--to wit, the Rājanya--is a form of noble rank, and spiritual lustre takes no delight in noble rank.' One of those who sing is a Brāhmaṇa, and the other a Rājanya; for the Brāhmaṇa means priestly office, and the Rājanya noble rank: thus his distinction (social position) comes to be guarded on either side by the priesthood and the nobility.
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. Concerning this they say, ‘Were both to sing by day, his distinction would be apt to fall away from him: for that--to wit, the day--is a form of the priestly dignity; and when the king chooses he may oppress (despoil) the Brāhmaṇa, but he will fare the worse (or, become the poorer) for it.
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. 'And if both (were to sing) at night, spiritual lustre would fall away from him; for that--to wit, the night--is a form of the nobility, and spiritual lustre takes no delight in the nobility.' The Brāhmaṇa sings by day [^egg_716], and the Rājanya at night [^egg_717]; and thus, indeed, his distinction comes to be guarded on either side by the priesthood and the nobility [^egg_718].

[^egg_716]: 286:1 Viz. at the fore-offerings of the three cake-offerings (ishṭis) to Savitr̥; whilst staying in the south part of the sacrificial ground.

[^egg_717]: 286:2 Viz. during the performance of the Dhr̥tis after sunset.

[^egg_718]: 286:3 The 'iti' at the end belongs to the following paragraph.
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. 'Such sacrifices he offered,--such gifts he gave!' such (are the topics about which) the

 Brāhmaṇa sings [^egg_719]; for to the Brāhmaṇa belongs the fulfilment of wishes [^sbe44079.htmegg_720]: it is with the fulfilment of wishes he (the Brāhmaṇa) thus endows him (the Sacrificer). 'Such war he waged,--such battle he won!' such (are the topics about which) the Rājanya sings; for the battle is the Rājanya's strength: it is with strength he thus endows him. Three stanzas the one sings, and three stanzas the other, they amount to six,--six seasons make up a year: he thus establishes (the Sacrificer) in the seasons, in the year. To both of them he presents a hundred; for man has a life of a hundred (years), and a hundred energies: it is vitality and energy, vital power, he confers upon him.

[^egg_719]: 287:1 Cf. XIII, 4, 2, 8.
</details>