+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Prajāpati poured forth the life-sap of the horse [^egg_733]. When poured forth, it weighed down the r̥c (hymn-verse) and the sāman (hymn-tune). The Vaiśvadeva (offerings) upheld that (Aśvamedha): thus, when he offers the Vaiśvadevas, it is for the upholding of the Aśvamedha.

[^egg_733]: 292:2 See p. 289, note 1. It is here taken to be represented by the Yajus:--aśvamedhaṁ yajurātmakavigrahavantaṁ sr̥shṭavān, Harisv.--the larger number of sacrificial formulas used at the performances being too heavy for the recited and chanted texts.

## 02
2. With (Vāj. S. XXII, 20), 'To Ka hail! To the Who hail! To the Whoever hail!' he makes the one relating to Prajāpati the first (or chief one), and thus upholds (the Aśvamedha) by means of the deities with Prajāpati as their chief.

## 03
3. 'Hail, meditation (we give) unto him meditated upon! Hail, the mind unto the Lord of creatures! Hail, thought unto him, the known [^egg_734]!' what the mystic sense of the former (utterances [^egg_735]) was that it is here.

[^egg_734]: 292:3 Mahīdhara takes 'ādhim ādhītāya' in the sense of 'ādhānaṁ prāptāya' (who has obtained a consecrated fire); and 'manaḥ prajātaye' in the sense of 'manasi vartamānāya p.' (to P. who is in our mind); and 'cittaṁ vijñātāya' in the sense of 'sarveshāṁ cittasākshiṇe' (to the witness, or knower, of all men's thoughts).

[^egg_735]: 292:4 Harisvāmin probably is right in supplying 'vyāhr̥tīnām;' though possibly 'devatānām' (deities) may be understood.

## 04
4. 'To Aditi hail! To Aditi, the mighty, hail! To Aditi, the most merciful, hail!' Aditi, doubtless, is this (earth): it is by her that he upholds it.

## 05
5. 'To Sarasvatī hail! To Sarasvatī, the pure, hail! To Sarasvatī, the great, hail!' Sarasvatī, doubtless, is speech: by speech he thus upholds it.

## 06
6. 'To Pūshan hail! To Pūshan, the protector of travellers, hail! To Pūshan, the watcher of men, hail!' Pūshan, doubtless, is cattle: by means of cattle he thus upholds it.

## 07
7. 'To Tvashṭr̥ hail! To Tvashṭr̥, the seminal, hail! To Tvashṭr̥, the multiform hail!' Tvashṭr̥, doubtless, is the fashioner of the couples of animals: by means of forms he thus upholds it.

## 08
8. 'To Vishṇu hail! To Vishṇu, the protector of what grows [^egg_736], hail! To Vishṇu, the bald [^egg_737], hail!' Vishṇu, doubtless, is the sacrifice: by sacrifice he thus upholds it. With (Vāj. XXII, 21), 'Let every mortal espouse the friendship of the divine guide, . . . [^egg_738],' he offers last of all a full (-spoon)-oblation; for the full-offering is this (earth): he thus finally establishes himself on this (earth).

[^egg_736]: 293:1 The meaning of 'nibhūyapa' is doubtful; Mahīdhara explains it by 'nitarām bhūtvā matsyādyavatāraṁ kr̥tvā pāti.' Perhaps it may mean 'condescending protector,' though one expects a direct object with 'pa.'

[^egg_737]: 293:2 The word 'śipivishṭa,' as applied to Vishṇu, is likewise of doubtful meaning. The native dictionaries assign both the meaning 'bald' and 'leprous' (or, affected with skin-disease) to it; whilst the first part 'śipi' is taken variously by commentators as meaning 'cattle,' or 'ray,' or 'water,' or 'living being.'

[^egg_738]: 293:3 See III, 1, 4, 18; VI, 6, 1, 21; and p. 294, note 1.

