+++
title = "04"

+++
The verb in the first pāda, ánu gṛbhṇāti, is generally rendered with an anodyne ‘greet’ (Macdonell, Maurer, Doniger; sim. Re ‘salue’), ‘support’ (unterstützt, Ge), or is given a specifically ritual interpr. (Thieme, Gedichte). But the lexeme has a straightforward literal sense ‘grasp in following, grasp from behind’, and this literal meaning exactly describes the posture of frog mating (“amplexus”), with the male grasping the female around her middle with his forefeet (sometimes facilitated by so-called “nuptial pads” developed during the mating season). Since once achieved, this posture is held for long periods—hours, days, even weeks or months—it would be visually salient to any Vedic bard outdoors during the rainy season, which is also the frog mating season. The only potential problem with my interpr. is that the obj. of the verb is masc. anyám. However, the expression here anyó anyám “the one … the other” is already stereotypical in the RV for any mutual activity and will soon be frozen as the adverb anyonyam ‘mutually’. Moreover it is not impossible that the original text had a fem. *anyā́m (anyó *anyā́m ánu gṛbhṇāti enoḥ): four-syllable openings almost always have a heavy fourth syllable (see Arnold, 136 188), whereas the transmitted text has a light one. Thus *anyā́m could have been changed redactionally to anyám on the basis of the later adverb.

Note the phonetic echo … ámandiṣātām / maṇḍū́kaḥ.

The intens. kániṣkan in c, ‘hopped and hopped, continually hopped’, is a nice description of the apparently random and chaotic “scramble competition” of male frogs seeking partners.

