+++
title = "09"

+++
The year-long preparation for the Pravargya rite is again emphasized here in the first three pādas.

In b the ná is potentially ambiguous. The first reading is no doubt the negative: the ritualists/frogs do not fail to observe the proper ritual calendar. The VP ná (…) (prá) minanti is quite common (e.g., II.24.12, III.28.4, X.10.5). But ná could also be a simile marker in the phrase náro ná, for, after all, the subjects are frogs, compared to men. Since ná occupies the fifth syllable of the pāda, either reading is compatible with its position: an early caesura, followed by ná, for the negative reading; a late caesura, preceded by ná, for the simile.

The final pāda of the vs. is the ritual climax: the gharmá-drinks, heated on the fire, bubble up and overflow their vessel, as milk does when it’s been left too long on the stove. The “obtain their own release” (aśnuvate visargám, note the middle verb), a phrase rendered rather generically by many tr. (e.g., Doniger “the hot fires come to an end”; Maurer “the heated receptacles get emptied out”), is in my view a rendering of the dramatic moment when the bubbling mass boils over. I further suggest that its analogue in the natural world is the female frog’s release of her masses of eggs (up to 2000+ in some species), which are fertilized by the male as they are released - which must be a visually striking event. It may also refer to the practice of some frogs of making a “foam nest” in which to deposit the eggs, liquid albumen whipped up by the frog’s hind legs into a “dense light foam” -- a process that also might appear like milk boiling over.

