+++
title = "+095"

+++
95 (921)  
Purūravas and Urvaśı̄  
Dialogue between Purūravas Aiḍa and Urvaśī  
18 verses: triṣṭubh  
This very famous and much-discussed hymn contains the dialogue between the  Apsaras Urvaśī and her discarded mortal husband Purūravas. He accosts her on her  journey (presumably back to her fellow Apsarases) and demands that they discuss  what went wrong with their marriage (vs. 1). He reminisces about her beauty (vs.  3) and her good wifely ways (vs. 4), while she impatiently dismisses him (vs. 2) and  provides her own view of her service as wife (vs. 5). The next verses (6–11) primarily  concern the crowd of Apsarases who attended Urvaśī when she gave birth to her  and Purūravas’s son Āyu. Purūravas evinces some jealousy about (as well as some  physical attraction to) these females with whom he competed for Urvaśī’s attention  and to whom she is returning, while Urvaśī here implies that Purūravas should have  his mind on more manly matters than love, such as military protection (esp. vss. 7  and 11; see also the ironic vocative “hero” in 5).  
Urvaśī attempts to dismiss Purūravas again (vs. 11). He tries another tack to keep  her from leaving: how can she separate him from his loving son (vs. 12)—to which she  briskly replies that she’ll send him the kid, chillingly referred to in the neuter, back to  him (vs. 12). The second half of this verse forms a ring with the second half of verse  2, her first speech: she seems thus to be trying to bring the conversation to a close.  But Purūravas raises the stakes: with masterfully expressed self-pity he then suggests  that he may disappear or die (and won’t she be sorry then...?, vs. 14). Urvaśī wearily  talks him out of it (vss. 15–16). He tries one more time (vs. 17), using a grander and  more solemn linguistic register. The hymn ends with a somewhat enigmatic summary  verse (18) containing the gods’ address to Purūravas at the end of this affair. Because  Purūravas’s connection with the immortal Apsaras (note that Apsarases are called  “immortal” in vs. 9) was severed and his son was returned to him, the mortal, he is  bound to death, and his offspring will relate to the gods as mortals do, by sacrifice.  But he will nonetheless later receive a joyous afterlife in heaven. (It is noteworthy that  this is the only occurrence of the word svargá “heaven” in the R̥gveda.)  
One of the many extraordinary features of this brief masterpiece is the way  it replicates the shifting emotional logic, the abrupt changes of tone and subject,  and the twisting of the other’s words characteristic of a genuine marital quarrel of  whatever era and culture, while presenting us with pictures of great beauty, however  difficult the language is to interpret in many places. It is also uncompromising in its  depiction of a resolute and hard-hearted female, unmoved by the abject pleas and  emotional blackmail of her former lover who is still in love with her, anxious to  return to her carefree life with her fellow Apsarases, and happy enough to abandon  her child in order to get free.  
There are several well-known later versions of this story. The Śatapatha  Brāhmaṇa XI.5.1 embeds many of the R̥gvedic verses into a prose narrative, which seems to have misunderstood, deliberately or not, several of the crucial verses. And  one of the three surviving plays of the great Classical Sanskrit poet Kālidāsa is a  much expanded treatment of the pair’s love affair. No subsequent version can toler ate the radical portrait of the emotionally detached Urvaśī found in the R̥gveda; in  all cases the separation of the former lovers is not the result of the female’s decision,  but of a curse. In the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, a creative misreading of verse 3—involv ing bleating pet lambs tied to a bedpost, a thunderstorm, and the provision that  Urvaśī never see Purūravas naked—results in Urvaśī’s disappearance. In Kālidāsa’s  play the curse has no connection to anything in the R̥gvedic hymn: a love-besotted  Urvaśī brings it on herself by uttering her beloved Purūravas’s name at the wrong  time. (In both versions the portrayal of Purūravas does retain his own passion for  Urvaśī; in fact in Kālidāsa’s play he goes mad after she disappears and asks birds,  beasts, and trees, in the late Middle Indo-Aryan language variety Apabhraṃśa,  about her whereabouts.) It is an interesting commentary on the changing fortunes  of female figures that the hard edges of the R̥gvedic Urvaśī must be softened to  make her acceptable in later literature.  