+++
title = "04"

+++
This vs. contains a number of puzzles, though the general purport -- the success of Dadhikrā in battles and raids -- is clear.

gádhya- elsewhere (3x) modifies vā́ja- ‘prize’, but that precise word can’t be supplied here, because it is masc. and gádhyā must be neut. pl. Nonetheless, battle spoils or the like must be meant. Ge’s rendering of gádhya- as “bis an die Wagendecke reichende (Beute)” must rest on the later (sūtra) gadhā ‘Verdeck des Lastwagens’ (see EWA s.v.), but given the chronological gap and the fact that EWA considers the etym. of gadhā unklar, this seems unnecessary. Ge is consistent: the other occurrences of gádhya- he tr. ‘deckenhohe’.

I take cárati … gáchan as a periphrasis, “keeps going,” though the standard tr.

take the two verbal forms separately. There is no way to tell. The problematic form in this pāda is sánutaraḥ, about which there is no consensus even on what part of speech it represents. The uncertainty can be seen acutely in Mayrhofer’s changing approach to it. In KEWA (s.v. sanutáḥ) he tentatively decides to follow AiG II.2.596, 608, 698 in taking it as a comparative built to the verb stem sanóti, meaning ‘mehr gewinnend’ (an interpr. that goes back, one way or the other, to Sāy.). But in EWA (s.v. sanutár) he has changed his mind, attaching it rather to the adv. sanutár ‘away’, attributing its aberrant form to reinterpretation by this late poet, and citing Tichy (Nom. agen. 58-59), who suggests it’s a comparative to the adv. Both Ge and Re derive it from √san ‘win’, though in different ways: Ge’s tr. (“als bester Gewinner”) seems to reflect the comparative interpr. favored by Sāy. and AiG (though transposed into the superlative); Re (“gagnant”) explicitly suggests that it stands for *sánutra-, formed like tárutra-, an interpr. that Gr also gestures towards. Old favors a connection with the adv. sanutár, as do WG (flg. Tichy), tr. “immer ferner wandelt.” My tr. reflects an analysis as comparative agent noun to √san (“as one better at winning”), but I do not feel strongly about it. In fact, I would probably now emend my tr. to “keeps going further in (the contests for) cows”: the contrast between his hemming in the booty in a and himself going further in b would be thematically nice, and if I am correct about the meaning of d, the expansion of the horse’s wanderings further and further would be appropriate to what is expressed in d. But I am not certain that this question can be decided.

My interpr. of āvírṛjīkaḥ rests on Thieme’s (Unt. p. 40, n. 2): 'an dem der Schaum hervortritt’. This image responds to pruṣitápsum in 2c.

vidáthā nicíkyat recurs in AV V.20.12.

The last pāda is the most baffling of all. The second part of it, páry ā́pa āyóḥ, is also found at I.178.1 (q.v.). The major question is the identity of ā́paḥ: is it a form of √āp ‘reach, acquire’, whether verbal or nominal (so Ge, WG); is it a derivative of ápas- ‘work’ (so Gr, Re; dubious EWA s.v. ápas-); or is it the nom. pl. of áp- ‘water’, used as an acc. (Old, Thieme, WG possibly [in n.])? I follow Thieme’s interpr.

(Unters. 40-41), which sees “the waters of Āyu” as an expression referring to land habitable because it is well watered. If this phrase is essentially locational, then one might expect the preceding tiró aratím to be as well: “across the aratí-.” Unfortunately, though Thieme’s general interpr. of aratí- I find persuasive, his tr. of this phrase “schneller als die Räder [seines Wagens]” is problematic, because I do not see how tiráḥ can mean ‘faster’. It is always otherwise a preposition/adverb. I therefore think Dadhikrā is being depicted as crossing the aratí and racing around “the waters of Āyu.” These two locational phrases may refer to the ritual ground, as Old suggests: the horse runs across the fire on the ritual ground and around the water vessels used for the sacrifice. Or, my preference, it can refer to the territory of the Ārya, which the horse traverses and thus, as it were, claims for his owner (much as the Aśvamedha horse does in his year-long pre-sacificial ramble). What aratí- would stand for in this scenario isn’t entirely clear to me -- but since aratí- can mean ‘spoked wheel, circlet, circle’, I would tentatively suggest that the horse runs across a notional circle of land belonging to / claimed by / aspired to by the Ārya and then around the periphery of this circle to enclose it as Ārya possession. I would therefore now emend my tr. to “across the circle (of Ārya land), around the waters of Āyu.”

