+++
title = "03"

+++
The other standard translations take tarpayethām as a self-beneficial reflexive “satisfy yourselves” with anukāmám referring to the gods’ desire (e.g., Ge “freuet euch nach Herzenslust”; Re “Rassasiez-vous à votre gré”), but this doesn’t make sense. The whole hymnic context depicts Indra and Varuṇa as givers, not takers, and it’s not clear to me that gods ever desire wealth, per se. It is much more likely that the poet is asking the gods to grant us wealth, and that the kā́ma is the mortals’, not the gods’. For further discussion, with a strikingly parallel usage, see Jamison 1983: 140-41 and esp. n. 73, though I would not now emend the text to ánu kā́mam, as I suggested there. Curiously, though Ge translates the verb as a reflexive, he goes to elaborate pains to interpret the whole phrase as urging the gods to give us their wealth, in other words much the same meaning as I favor.

In b rāyá ā́is ambiguous as to case; it could be either dat. rā́ye or abl./gen. rā́yas (so Pp.). Ge takes it as a gen., construed with anukāmám, but rā́ya ā́is a fairly well-established expression (e.g., I.81.7, III.56.6) and the rā́ya seems too distant from anukāmám to be naturally construed with it. Most other tr. seems to favor the dat. (see esp. disc. of Old ad loc, also Re.), but I weakly favor an abl. reading “from (your) wealth.” A further question is what noun to supply with nédiṣṭham ‘closest’ or what else to do with it. Ge suggests ‘wealth’ in a note; Re seems to take the word as adverbial (“de la manière la plus proche,” whatever that means). My supplied “friendship” is based on two occurrences of ā́pyam (VII.15.1, VIII.73.6) and one of āpím ‘friend’ with nédiṣṭham. Esp. telling is VIII.73.6 nédiṣṭhaṃ yāmy ā́pyam “I beseech (you two) for closest friendship,” with the same verb as here.

