+++
title = "THE FIRST SOMA-DAY (AGNISHTOMA)xa0[^egg_743]."

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. Prajāpati assigned the sacrifices to the gods; the Aśvamedha he kept for himself. The gods

said to him, 'Surely, this--to wit, the Aśvamedha--is a sacrifice: let us have a share in that also.' He contrived these Anna-homas (food-oblations) for them: thus when he performs the Annahomas, it is the gods he thereby gratifies.
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. With ghee he makes offering, for ghee is fiery mettle: by means of fiery mettle he thus lays fiery mettle into him (the horse and Sacrificer). With ghee he offers; for that--to wit, ghee--is the gods’ favourite resource: it is thus with their favourite resource he supplies them.
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. With parched groats he makes offering; for that--to wit, parched groats--are a form of the gods [^egg_744]: it is the gods he thus gratifies.

[^egg_744]: 296:1 Viz., according to the commentary, because of the (particles of) groats being connected with each other.
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. With grain he makes offering; for this--to wit, grain--is a form of the days and nights [^egg_745]: it is the days and nights he thus gratifies.

[^egg_745]: 296:2 The commentary does not explain this comparison. It would seem to suit better the parched grain.
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. With parched grain he makes offering; for this--to wit, parched grain--is a form of the Nakshatras [^egg_746] (lunar asterisms): it is the Nakshatras

[^egg_746]: 296:3 Viz. on account of the capability (samarthatvāt) of the (raw) grains; but whether this is meant to refer to their power of germinating and growing is not explained.

he thus gratifies. He offers whilst mentioning names, with (Vāj. XXII, 23-33), 'To the in- (and out-) breathing hail! to the off-breathing hail [^egg_747]!' . . . he thus gratifies them by mentioning their names. [Vāj. S. XXII, 34], 'To one hail! to two hail! . . . to a hundred hail! to a hundred and one hail!' He offers in the proper order: in the proper order he thus gratifies them (the gods). He performs oblations successively increasing by one [^egg_748], for single, indeed, is heaven: singly he thus causes him (the Sacrificer) to reach heaven. Straight away [^egg_749] he offers in order to the winning of heaven; for straight away, as it were, is heaven.

[^egg_747]: 297:1 These eleven anuvākas consist of altogether 149 such short dedicatory formulas--addressed to the vital airs, the regions, the waters, wind, fire, &c.--each ending with 'svāhā (hail).' These are followed, in anuvāka 34, by formulas addressed to the cardinal numbers from 1 to 101; succeeded by two formulas addressed to the dawn and to heaven respectively,--all of these again ending with 'svāhā.' The Annahomas themselves, offered by the Adhvaryu's assistant, the Pratiprasthātr̥, are not, however, limited to any number; but their performance is to be continued throughout the night in such a way that each of the four three-hours’ watches of the night is to be taken up with as many oblations of one of the four kinds of offering materials--in the order in which they are enumerated in the text--as can be got into the space of three hours. The formulas addressed to the cardinal numbers--(which are on no account to extend beyond 101)--are apparently supposed amply to suffice to fill up the time till dawn, when the Adhvaryu makes an oblation of ghee to the Dawn, followed by one to Heaven (or the realm of light) after sunrise.

[^egg_748]: 297:2 That is, in offering with the formulas addressed to the cardinal numbers.

[^egg_749]: 297:3 That is to say, without repeating any formula, or commencing again from the beginning, when the whole series is exhausted.
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. But, verily, he who offers the oblations straight

away [^egg_750], is liable to fall (pass) right away. He does not go beyond a hundred and one: were he to go beyond a hundred and one, he would deprive the Sacrificer of his vital power. He offers a hundred and one, for man has a life of a hundred (years), and his own self is the one hundred and first: he thus establishes himself in a self (or body), in vital power. With 'To the Dawn hail! to Heaven hail!' he offers the two last oblations; for the dawn is the night, and heaven (the realm of light) is the day: it is day and night he thus gratifies.

[^egg_750]: 298:1 That is, without stopping.
</details>

##  07
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

7. As to this they say, 'Were he to offer both either by day or by night, he would confound day and night with one another [^egg_751].' With 'To the Dawn hail!' he offers before the sun has risen, and with 'To Heaven hail' when it has risen, to avoid confusion between day and night.

[^egg_751]: 298:2 There is no 'iti' here; and the quotation, therefore, may perhaps extend to the end of the paragraph.
</details>