+++
title = "01"

+++
The first hemistich of this vs. (and thus of the hymn) contains a compact summary of Rigvedic poetic economy, with the god Indra both the focus of the poets’ praise songs and the source of inspiration for them. This is expressed in two antithetical pādas, conjoined by double ca, with the oppositional preverbs sám and ví opening the pādas and two 3rd pl. verbs of motion providing the verbal expression: jagmúḥ and yanti. The first of these is accented, the 2nd not, even though the two pādas are coordinate, as the double ca-s show. The accent of jagmúḥ can be accounted for by the principle that accents the first of two explicitly contrastive verb forms, though usually such verbs are adjacent or nearly adjacent. Klein’s (DGRV I.167) of contrastive double ca constructions has several such passages, with the 1st verb accented; e.g., I.123.12 párā ca yánti púnar ā́ca yanti. Our passage is unusual only in having more matter between the verbs. Note how very parallel the pādas are: PREV ca 2ND-SG-PRN VERB, with the pre-verbal loc. tvé and abl. tvát carrying their own contrastive weight.

Another ex. of phrasal echoes among the Indra hymns in this cycle: purā́ nūnáṃ ca “previously and now” plays off against nūnám … aparā́ya ca “now and for the future” in the immediately preceding hymn (VI.33.5). See also possibly VI.35.5.

The Saṃhitā prevocalic form stutáya is universally read/interpr. as underlying nom. pl. -aḥ, beginning with the Pp. (also Gr, Ge, Lub, Kü 584), but HvN unaccountably restore -e, which must simply be a lapse.

The dvandva ukthārkā́(to be distracted to uktha-arkā́) is most likely a neut.

pl., serving as another subject of the verb paspṛdhre, not a dual masc., which is harder to fit into the syntax of the clause -- though plural dvandvas are far rarer than dual dvandvas in early Vedic. This is one of the earliest exx. See Whitney Gr.

§1255e; Macd VG §265; VGS p. 269; AiG II.1.38, 156. The 2nd member arká- is itself masc. when independent. The cmpd. deviates from dvandva orthodoxy in other ways: it has only one accent, and at least in this metrical context the first member ends in short -a and is probably in stem form (or else show shortening in hiatus).

