+++
title = "04-05"

+++
The identical openings of these two vss., ásmā etád, pick up the last clause of vs. 3, śáṃ tád asmai, and invite the two phrases to be interpr. as separate clauses, with śám to be supplied from 3d, as both Old and Ge point out.

My interpr. of the rest of ab is generally inspired by Ge.

The form mimikṣá is interpr. by the Pp. as mimikṣáḥ, though mimikṣé is also possible and is a strong alternative. In the former case, it would be an adj. built to the verbal stem mimikṣ-, parallel to adj. mimikṣú-; in the latter a 3rd sg. mid. pf. The pf.

interpr. is followed by Gr and Kü (386), though Kü (n. 690) does allow the possibility of the thematic adj. as an alternative. AiG (II.2.86) and Lub take it as an adj., and Old and Ge consider both possibilities, but favor the Pp. reading. I too take it as an adj., in part on grounds of syntactic parallelism: 4ab and 5ab are quite parallel. They both begin with the ásmā etád clause discussed above; then a ritual feature (soma sómaḥ / praise hymn stotrám ) is announced as in/for Indra (índre / índrāya), with the verbal notion connecting the offering and the god expressed by an augmented passive aor. (ny àyāmi / avāci) in the latter part of b. If we have a finite verb mimikṣé in the early part of b, it chops the pāda into two clauses and destroys the parallel structure (a point made somewhat differently by Old). Moreover, the simile in 4a divy àrcéva māsā́(with diví parallel to índre; see also Old) works better if construed with ny àyāmi than with mimikṣé, but given the word order it would have to belong to the mimikṣé clause if mimikṣá stands for that verb.

As for the just-mentioned simile, I am entirely persuaded by the gist of Ge’s suggestion (n. 4ab) that māsā́should signal an elliptical dual sū́ryā-mā́sā ‘sun and moon’, the two heavenly bodies set in heaven, as soma is set in Indra. However, he deals rather wispily with the stumbling block to this interpr., namely the accentuation of māsā́, proper to the instr. sg., instead of the expected dual mā́sā. Judging from his lapidary treatment, he would by preference read (that is, emend to) du. *mā́sā directly, with arcā́also du. Hence his tr. “wie (Sonne und) Mond, die beiden Strahlenden.” But if māsā́must be maintained, he would interpr. (see n. 4ab) arcéva as containing *arcáḥ, the nom. sg. to an otherwise unattested them. stem arcá- and exhibiting irregular sandhi, and māsā́as an instr. of accompaniment, rather like the expression in X.138.4 māséva sū́ryaḥ, in which māséva presumably conceals the instr. māsā́construed with nom. sg. sū́ryaḥ: “like the sun with the moon,” that is, “the sun and the moon.” I would very much like to rescue Ge’s interpr. based on an elliptical dual, an interpr. reflected in the publ tr., because I think it has to be fundamentally correct in context. But it is going to be challenging. I would prefer not to emend māsā́, and I also do not think that excavating arcáḥ irregularly from arcéva is the way to go. My flimsy alternative proposal (though followed by Old; see below) is that arcéva contains the nom. sg. of a fem. -ā́stem arcā́- (found in the Br., in a different sense) ‘shining/beaming one’ à ‘sun’. Old, flg. Ludwig, in fact also opts for a nom. arcā́‘der Glanz’, though he connects this Glanz with the moon: “wie zum Himmel der Glanz vom Monde (gelenkt wird).” For the connection of the sun with forms belonging to √arc, see V.79.9, VIII.7.36 sū́ro arcíṣā, and of course it is regularly said that the sun is set/placed diví ‘in heaven’ (e.g., XV.85.2 diví sū́ryam adadhāt “when he placed the sun in heaven”; see disc. in my 2010 Fs. Melchert article on the “Placer of the Sun”). I suggest that this stem arcā́- is found only here because it was mobilized to contrast with -arkā́‘hymns’ at the end of 1d. I would now alter the tr. to “the soma has been set firmly in Indra, like the shining one [=the sun] along with the moon in heaven.” Note that an instr. of accompaniment is used with a nom. in lieu of a coordinate expression in the 2nd hemistich: hávanāni yajñaíḥ “our invocations along with our sacrifices” = “our invocations and sacrifices.” Note that under this interpr., the supposed root noun árc- would no longer exist, since this stem rests only on this form in all of Skt., supposedly the instr. arc-ā́.

In fact, the existence of this root noun was already denied by Schindler in his 1972 diss. (s.v.), because of its full grade, and he rehearses the various alternative proposals, including Hoffmann’s (oral) suggestion that arcā́is the loc. to arcí-, a stem that has the merit of existing, though it is hard to fit it semantically into this passage. The actual root noun to √arc/ṛc ‘shine/sing’ is of course ṛ́c- ‘verse’, which gives our text its name.

In c the phrase (abhí) sáṃ yád ā́paḥ “when the waters con(verge) (on him)” reminds us of the opening of the hymn, where songs converge on Indra. I do not pretend to understand the construction of cd. Indra is obviously the unexpressed object of vāvṛdhuḥ (cf. 3b índram … vardháyantīḥ) and the comparandum for the simile that opens the hemistich, jánaṃ ná dhánvan “like a man in the desert,” but the verbless yád clause seems rather casually embedded and with the yád unusually positioned after two preverbs (unless abhí should be taken only with somewhat distant preceding jánam).

