+++
title = "4"

+++
## 1 The placing of the fire in the fire-pan.
1. The taking up of the spade
2. The obtaining of the clay
3. The digging up of the clay
4. The taking of the clay
5. The fashioning of the pan
6. The preparing of the pan
7. The Samidheni verses with the offering of five victims 8. The Apri verses for the fire sacrifices
9. The kindling of the fire in the pan
10. The carrying of the fire
11. The Mantras for the offerings at the Vaiśvadeva,
## 2 The preparation of the ground for the fire
1. The placing of the fire-pan on the throne
2. The adoration of the fire
3. The taking of the fire to the place of piling
4. The piling of the Garhapatya
5. The ploughing of the earth for the Ahavaniya
6. The sowing of the earth
7. The casting of lumps of earth
8. The depositing of the gold plate
9. The depositing of the naturally perforated brick, &c. 10. The placing of the heads of the victims
11. The Mantras for the offerings at the Varunapraghksas.
## 3 The five layers of bricks
1. The Apasya bricks of the first layer
2. The Pranabhrt bricks of the first layer
3. The Apanabhrt bricks of the first layer
4. The Aśvini bricks of the second layer
5. The Vayasya bricks of the second layer
6. The naturally perforated and other bricks of the third layer 7. The Brhati bricks of the third layer
8. The Aksnayastomiya bricks of the fourth layer
9. The Aksnayastomiya bricks of the fourth layer
10. The Srsti bricks of the fourth layer
11. The Vyusti bricks of the fourth layer

12. The Asapatna and other bricks of the fifth layer 13. The Mantras for the offerings at the Sakamedhas

## 4 The fifth layer of bricks
1. The Stomabhaga bricks
2. The Nakasad bricks
8. The Pañcacoda bricks
4. The Metre bricks
5. The Sayuj bricks
6. The Viśvajyotis bricks
7. The Bhuyaskrt bricks
8. The Indratanu bricks
9. The Yajñatanu bricks
10. The Naksatra bricks
11. The seasonal bricks
12. The Mahaprstha Mantras in the horse sacrifice
## 5 The offerings to Rudra
1. The appeasing of Rudra
2. The double offering of homage to Rudra 3. The double offering of homage to Rudra 4. The double offering of homage to Rudra 5. The single offering of homage to Rudra
6. The single offering of homage to Rudra
7. The single offering of homage to Rudra
8. The single offering of homage to Rudra
9. The single offering of homage to Rudra
10. Reverses to Rudra
11. Rc and Yajus verses to Rudra

## 6 The preparation of the fire
1. The besprinkling and dragging over
2. The offering to Viśvakarman
3. The leading forth of the fire
4. The Apratiratha hymn
5. The placing of the fire
   The horse sacrifice, iv. 6. 6-9
6. The equipment of the sacrificer
7. Verses in praise of the steed
8. Verses in praise of the steed
9. Verses in praise of the steed

## 7 The piling of the fire (continued)
1. The Vasor Dhara offerings
2. The Vasor Dhara offerings
3. The Vasor Dhara offerings
4. The Vasor Dhara offerings
5. The Vasor Dhara offerings
6. The Ardhendrani formulae
7. The Vasor Dhara offerings
8. The Vasor Dhara offerings
9. The Vasor Dhara offerings

11. The Vasor Dhara offerings
12. The Vajaprasaviya offering
13. The yoking of the fire
14. The Vihavya bricks
15. The Mantras for the Mrgaresti of the horse sacrifice### 5