+++
title = "Praśna II, Paṭala 8, Khaṇḍa 20"

+++
## 01
1. At every monthly Śrāddha he shall use, in whatever manner he may be able, one droṇa of sesamum. [^1] 

## 02
2. And he shall feed Brāhmaṇas endowed with all (good qualities), and they shall not give the fragments (of the food) to a person who does not possess the same good qualities (as the Brāhmaṇas).

## 03
3. He who desires prosperity shall fast in the half of the year when the sun goes to the north, under the constellation Tiṣya, in the first half of the month, for (a day and) a night at least, prepare a Sthālīpāka-offering, offer burnt-oblations to Kubera (the god of riches), feed a Brāhmaṇa with that (food prepared for the Sthālīpāka) mixed with clarified butter, and make him wish prosperity with (a Mantra) implying prosperity. [^2] 

## 04
4. This (rite he shall repeat) daily until the next Tiṣya(-day).

## 05
5. On the second (Tiṣya-day and during the second month he shall feed) two (Brāhmaṇas).

## 06
6. On the third (Tiṣya-day and during the third month he shall feed) three (Brāhmaṇas).

## 07
7. In this manner (the Tiṣya-rite is to be performed) for a year, with a (monthly) increase (of the number of Brāhmaṇas fed).}

## 08
8. (Thus) he obtains great prosperity.

## 09
9. But the fasting takes place on the first (Tiṣya-day) only.

## 10
10. He shall avoid to eat those things which have lost their strength (as butter-milk, curds, and whey).

## 11
11. He shall avoid to tread on ashes or husks of grain. [^3] 

## 12
12. To wash one foot with the other, or to place one foot on the other,

## 13
13. And to swing his feet,

## 14
14. And to place one leg crosswise over the knee (of the other),

## 15
15. And to make his nails

## 16
16. Or to make (his finger-joints) crack without a (good) reason, [^4] 

## 17
17. And all other (acts) which they blame.

## 18
18. And let him acquire money in all ways that are lawful.

## 19
19. And let him spend money on worthy (persons or objects). [^5] 

## 20
20. And let him not give anything to an unworthy (person), of whom he does not stand in fear.

## 21
21. And let him conciliate men (by gifts or kindness).

## 22
22. And he may enjoy the pleasures which are not forbidden by the holy law.

## 23
23. (Acting) thus he conquers both worlds.



[^1]:  20. A droṇa equals 128 seers or śeras. The latter is variously reckoned at 1-3 lbs.

[^2]:  The reason why the constellation Tiṣya has been chosen for this rite seems to be that Tiṣya has another name, Puṣya, i.e. 'prosperous'. This sacrifice is to begin on the Tiṣya-day of the month called Taiṣa or Pauṣa (December-January), and to continue for one year.

[^3]:  Manu IV, 7 8.

[^4]:  'Good reasons for cracking the joints are fatigue or rheumatism.'--Haradatta.

[^5]:  Manu XI, 6, and passim.