+++
title = "001"

+++
1 (355)
Agni
Budha Ātreya and Gaviṣṭhira Ātreya
12 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn describes the kindling and birth of Agni in the morning rite. In the  middle section of the hymn, the poet links verses by repeating an image from the  second hemistich in the opening hemistich of the next verse. So in 4d and 5a Agni  as a horse is born “at the beginning of days,” although in verse 4 this may be Agni  as the sun, while in verse 5 Agni is clearly the sacrificial fire. Note the difference in  color: the horse is “gleaming” or “white” in verse 4, but “ruddy” in verse 5. The  poet almost repeats 5d in 6a, except that he has shifted the tense in 6d to a more dis
tant past indicating the passage of time between the verses. More loosely, in 6c Agni  is a sage poet (kaví) and in 7a an “inspired” poet (vípra). In 7d the priests “groom”  (mr̥janti) Agni, imagined as a horse, and in 8a “fit to be groomed, he is groomed”  (mārjālyò mr̥jyate). In 8d Agni is ahead (prá √as) of other fires and in 9a he goes  ahead (prá √i) of other sacrificers. Though a common metaphor, the image of Agni as a horse or a chariot-driver  is treated with originality. Most strikingly, in verse 3, instead of the priests awaken ing Agni, Agni awakens the hymn, “the bridle” (raśanā́) of the horse that pulls the  chariot, the sacrifice itself, while the dakṣiṇā, the sacrificial reward to the priests, is  the horse. The end of the verse shifts to the metaphor of Agni as a growing child.  The word for “tongues” of flame, juhū́, can also mean a sacrificial ladle, and this  ambiguity is the basis for the ellipsis of the noun.
## 1
Agni has awakened by the kindling wood of the peoples in response to  Dawn, approaching like a milk-cow.
Like young (birds) rising toward a branch, his radiant beams leap forth  to heaven’s vault.
## 2
The Hotar has awakened to sacrifice to the gods. Benevolent Agni has  stood tall in the early morning.
As he is kindled, his brightening face has become visible. The great god  has become free from darkness.
## 3
When he has awakened the bridle [=the hymn] of the (priestly) troop,  blazing Agni is anointed with blazing cows [=milk].
Then Reward is harnessed, racing toward the prize. Tall, with his tongues  he suckled upon her [=the Ladle], who is stretched out.
## 4
Toward Agni the thoughts of those seeking the gods converge, like eyes  upon the sun.
When Dawn and Night, differing in color, give birth to him, the
gleaming prizewinning steed is born at the beginning of days.
## 5
Since the thoroughbred has been born at the beginning of days—the  ruddy one has been laid upon the laid wood—
laying seven treasures in every house, Agni has taken his seat as the  Hotar, the superior sacrificer.
## 6
Agni took his seat as the Hotar, the superior sacrificer, in the lap of his  mother, in the wide, sweet-smelling place [=the altar]—
he, the young poet, outstanding among many, truth-possessing, the  maintainer of the peoples, and kindled in their midst.
## 7
Now they summon forth this inspired one bringing success in the rites,  Agni the Hotar, with their acts of reverence.
They groom with ghee their own prizewinning steed, who stretches
through the two world-halves by truth.
## 8
Fit to be groomed, he is groomed in his own (house) as master of the  house, praised by poets, our kind guest.
A bull of a thousand horns and having its power, o Agni, you are ahead  of all the other (fires) by your strength.
## 9
At once, Agni, you go ahead beyond the other (sacrificers), for him to  whom you have become manifest as the most beloved,
as one to be summoned, to be marveled at, far radiant, the dear guest of  the clans of the sons of Manu.

## 10
To you, o youngest Agni, the peoples bring tribute from near and far. Attend to the favor of the most fortunate (sacrificer)! Lofty and great is  your propitious shelter, o Agni.
## 11
Today mount your radiant chariot, o radiant Agni, that is shared with  the (gods), fit recipients of sacrifice.
Knowing the paths, convey the gods here across the wide midspace for  them to consume the offerings.
## 12
We have spoken an extolling speech to the wise poet, the
bull-strong bull.
With reverence Gaviṣṭhira has rested his praise song in Agni, as if
resting the wide-spreading golden disk in heaven.