+++
title = "002"

+++
2 (356)
Agni
Kumāra Ātreya or Vr̥śa Jāna or both
12 verses: triṣṭubh, except śakvarī 12
Geldner provides a long introduction to this hymn and concludes that it deals with  the disappearance of the fire-god Agni as if he were a household or ritual fire that  has suddenly gone out or a newly churned or kindled fire that does not emerge.  More specifically, we suggest, it may have been composed as a prāyaścitti or expia
tion for a sacrificial fire that has gone out as offerings were poured into it and to  accompany a rite of restoring the fire.
In verses 1–2 the hidden child is Agni. The young mother (vs. 1) and wet nurse  (vs. 2) could be the firewood (samídh fem.) that keeps the fire hidden, and the chief  wife, the máhiṣī, who gave birth to Agni, may be a fire-churning stick (aráṇī fem.).  Yet in verse 1 the poet assures himself that Agni will emerge and take his ritual  place to the east as he usually does. The poet sees Agni far away from his place  in the rite (vss. 3–4), but who is this Agni? Is he other fires, or, as we think more  likely, the sun, moving from the east toward the west? Verse 5 offers syntactic chal
lenges—the masculine yéṣām and the sense of ná ... cid—but the cattle or bulls of  Agni that it mentions may be the flames (arká or arcí masc.?) that the poets hopes  the god will drive to the sacrificial place. Agni should find release from the powers  who would deny the fire to the poet and his peoples (vs. 6), and thus should release  the sacrificers from whatever limits them (vs. 7). However, Agni has departed the  sacrificial place in anger—a fact that one of the gods, perhaps Indra or Varuṇa  or conceivably even Agni himself, has made plain. But Indra knows where Agni  is and has guided the sacrificers so that they may recover him (vs. 8). Ultimately,  nothing can keep Agni from the sacrificers, as the presence of Agni as the sun in  heaven shows (vss. 9–10), and he will honor the command of the gods to help the  sacrificer (vs. 12).
Geldner also summarizes a narrative later connected to this hymn, mentioned  in Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa XIII 3.12, Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa III 94, Br̥haddevatā V 12–23 and given also by Sāyaṇa. According to the version of the Br̥haddevatā, King  Tryaruṇa was riding in a chariot driven by his purohita Vr̥śa Jāna. A brahmin boy  was killed by the chariot, and the king blamed the purohita. Vr̥śa brought the boy  back to life, but then stormed away in anger because of the king’s accusation. When  the purohita departed, however, so did the fury of the king’s sacrificial fire and with  it the ability of the fire to cook the oblations. Therefore the king went to Vr̥śa and  persuaded him to return as his purohita and to restore the fire’s fury. When he came  back, Vr̥śa found that a Piśācī woman in the king’s house had taken the fury of the  king’s fire. But by reciting V.2.9 Vr̥śa caused the fury to return and to burn the Piśācī woman. As Geldner rightly concludes, this story draws on elements of the hymn,  but the hymn is surely not based on it.
## 01
In secret the young mother carries the child who is swaddled; she does  not give him to his father.
His face is not one that changes (its face): the peoples see it in front, set  down in the circle of spokes.
## 02
Young woman, who is this child whom you carry as his wet nurse? The  chief wife has given birth to him,
for the embryo grew strong through many autumns, and I saw him
(newly) born, when his mother bore him.
## 03
I saw him with golden teeth and flaming color far away from his  homeland, showing the measure of his weapons,
as I gave to him my immortal (soma) without impurity. What can those  without Indra, without recitations, do to me?
## 04
I saw him moving from his homeland into the distance, going in beauty  in many ways like a herd (moving) together.
They did not keep hold of him. Because he has been born, the young  women become gray.
## 05
Who will keep my little young blood separate from the cattle, which have  never had a stranger as their herdsman?
They who have kept hold of him, let them release him. The watchful one  will drive the animals to us.
## 06
Hostilities have set down the king of dwellings, the dwelling place of the  peoples, among mortals.
Let the formulations of Atri release him. Let them who scorn become  those to be scorned.
## 07
You loosed even Śunaḥśepa, who was bound, from his thousand (bonds),  from the sacrificial post, since he exhausted himself (in sacrifice).
So unloose the fetters from us, o Agni, watchful Hotar, after having  taken your seat here.
## 08
Because, becoming angry, you had gone from me, the protector of the  commandments of the gods announced (that) to me.
Because the knowing Indra has kept you in his sights, instructed by him  have I come here, o Agni.664 V.3
## 09
Agni radiates in all directions with a lofty light. He makes visible all  things by his greatness.
He overpowers ungodly guiles and those of evil ways. He sharpens his  horns to pierce through the demonic.
## 10
And in heaven let there be the roars of Agni with their sharp weapons  to smash the demonic.
Even in his elation his (furious) radiance breaks forth. Ungodly
evasions will not hinder him.
## 11
This praise song for you, o you who are powerfully born, have I, the  inspired poet, fashioned as a clever artisan (fashions) a chariot.
If, Agni, you will gladly receive that very (song), o god, thereby we
would win the waters together with the sun.
## 12
“The bull of powerful neck, having become full-grown, will drive  together unchallenged the possessions of the stranger,”
thus the immortals have spoken to this Agni here. He will offer
protection to Manu bearing ritual grass; he will offer protection to
Manu bearing offerings.