+++
title = "003"

+++
3 (357) Agni
Vasuśruta Ātreya
12 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn opens with identifications of Agni with the Ādityas—Varuṇa and  Mitra in verse 1 and Aryaman and Mitra in verse 2. The reason for these identi fications is not immediately clear, and indeed in various ways the poet also mar shals the presence of other gods: Indra in verse 1, the Maruts, Viṣṇu, and Rudra  in verse 3, and all the gods again in verse 1. After invoking the presence of the  gods, the poet then describes the installation of the sacrificial fire (vss. 4–5). In  verses 6–7 he asks that the presence of the sacrificial fire also mark the presence  of Agni’s help against those who are offending against his people and himself.  He mentions evil speech (vs. 7) and curses brought against its speaker (vss. 7,  12)  and also against thieves and cheats (vs. 11)  threatening him. He therefore  asks the god for rescue (vs. 9). This concern explains the prominence of the  Ādityas at the beginning of the hymn, since they are the gods who oversee social  relations among humans and therefore can protect against people who seek to  harm others.
## 1
You, o Agni, are Varuṇa when you are born. You become Mitra when  you are kindled.
In you are the all the gods, o son of strength. You are Indra for the pious  mortal.
## 2
You become Aryaman when you belong to young girls (at marriage). You  bear a secret name, o you of independent will. They anoint (you as) Mitra with cows [=milk/butter], like a
well-established (ally), when you make the lord and lady of the
household to be of one mind.
## 3
For your splendor the Maruts groomed themselves, o Rudra, when you  came to beloved, shimmering birth.
The track of Viṣṇu that was set down as the highest, by that you protect  the secret name of the cows.
## 4
By the splendor of you (who are lovely to see), the gods are lovely to  see, o god. Receiving many things for themselves, they serve the
immortal one.
The fire-priests have seated Agni as the Hotar of Manu, giving homage  to him as the “Recitation of Āyu.”
## 5
No ancient Hotar was a better sacrificer than you, o Agni. There is no  one higher in poetic arts, o you of independent will.
One belonging to the clan of which you will become a guest will
vanquish mortals through the sacrifice, o god.
## 6
Helped by you, o Agni, we would vanquish mortals—we, striving after  goods and awakening with our offering;
we, in the competition and in the ritual distributions of the days; we,  with our wealth, o son of strength.
## 7
The one who will bring offense or blame against us—all of you: set evil  upon him, the speaker of evil.
O watchful Agni, smash this curse (of him) who harms us with
duplicity.
## 8
At the dawning of this (dawn), o god, the ancients, making you their  messenger, offered you sacrifice with oblations,
when, o Agni, you speed amid the gathering of riches as the god being  kindled by mortals and by the good (gods).
## 9
Fight! since you know how. Rescue your father [=the priest], who  considers himself your son, o son of strength!
Watchful one, when will you look toward us? O Agni, when will you,  perceiving the truth, take your place?
## 10
Your father sets many names (on you) as he sings praises, good one, if  you will find pleasure in this.
Desiring this, Agni will gain (divine) favor (for us) with the strength of  a god, having become full grown, will he not?
## 11
Certainly, o youngest Agni, carry the singer beyond all difficulties. Thieves have appeared and cheating peoples. Devious ones of unknown  intention have come.
## 12
These pleas have come toward you, or rather this very offense has been  spoken to (you), the good one.
Having become full grown, this Agni here will not betray us to the curse  nor to him doing harm.
