+++
title = "004"

+++
4 (358) Agni
Vasuśruta Ātreya
11 verses: triṣṭubh
In this hymn the poet sets forth what we—the poet and the other sacrificers—will  do and receive within the frame of what Agni, typically addressed in the 2nd  person, will accomplish. The poet draws attention to “we” and “you” by front ing the personal pronouns and using their non-enclitic forms. He announces this  strategy in the first verse, which begins with tvā́m “you,” and then the following  verses largely describe Agni as the sacrificial fire, who conveys the oblations to  the gods (vs. 2) and the gods to the oblations (vs. 4). Verses 5 and especially 6, the  omphalos verse, mark a thematic movement from the sacrificial fire that serves  the gods to the fire that mortals serve and that serves mortals. In verse 7 the first  word of each pāda and in verse 8 the first word of each hemistich is “we” or “us.”  Enclitic and non-enclitic forms of the 1st-person plural pronoun also occur in  verses 9 and 10, and in verse 10 the poet personalizes the verse even more deeply  by using 1st-person singular verbs:  jóhavīmi “I repeatedly invoke” and aśyām
“may I attain.” The last verse abandons the 1st person altogether, instead refer ring to the recipient of Agni’s favor as “he,” and with tvám “you” in the first  pāda, it returns to the initial focus on Agni.
## 1
In you, o Agni, goods-lord of goods, I find elation at the rites, o king. Through you we would win victory’s prize, racing to the prize. We would  prevail against the battle-charges of mortals.
## 2
Conveying our oblations, unaging Agni is our father, the one
far-reaching, far-radiant, and lovely to see among us.
Illuminate fully the refreshments of a well-run household. Mete out full  measures of fame in our direction.
## 3
The poet of the clans, the clanlord of the (clans) of the sons of Manu,  blazing, purifying, ghee-backed Agni—
him have you all installed as the Hotar knowing all things. He will win  desirable rewards among the gods.
## 4
Take pleasure, o Agni, along with the libation, aligning with the rays of  the sun.
Take pleasure in our kindling wood, o Jātavedas, and convey the gods  here to eat the oblations.
## 5
As the pleasing lord of the house and the guest in the home, journey to  this our sacrifice since you are the knowing one.
Having smashed to pieces all attacks, o Agni, bring here the sustenance  of those challenging us.
## 6
With your weapon send the Dasyu into hiding, while creating vigor for  your own body,
and thus protect us when the prize is at stake, o Agni, best of men, since  you bring the gods safely across, o child of strength. 7. We would do you honor, o Agni, with our recitations; we, with our  oblations, o pure one of auspicious flame.
For us speed wealth that fulfills all wishes; for us grant all goods.
## 8
Take pleasure in our rite, o Agni, son of strength with three abodes, and  in our oblation.
May we be those acting rightly toward the gods. Protect us by your
shelter with its three defenses.
## 9
Carry us across all difficult depths and difficult ways, o Jātavedas, as if  across a river by a boat.
O Agni, being sung with reverence as if by Atri, become the helper of  our bodies.
## 10
Thinking with a simple heart, I, a mortal, who repeatedly invoke you,  an immortal—
among us grant glory, o Jātavedas. May I attain immortality through  offspring, o Agni.
## 11
For whom you will make a wide, comfortable place, o Jātavedas, since  he acts rightly toward you, o Agni,
he will attain a wealth of horses, sons, heroes, and cattle for his
well-being.