+++
title = "005"

+++
5 (359)
Āprı̄
Vasuśruta Ātreya
11 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn follows the usual sequence of the Āprī litany, although it omits the normal  explicit reference to the barhis, the ritual grass, in verse 4. Until the very end of the  hymn, the poet uses the imperative except in verse 2, which has the subjunctive, and  in verse 6, in which he announces that he is beseeching Evening and Dawn but does  not directly state what he wishes to occur. However, he implies a request for strength  by calling the two deities vayovŕ̥dh “increasing vigor.” The last verse, however, shows  a decided shift that is signaled by the complete absence of a verb. Through the repeti tion of the ritual call svā́hā, the verse marks the moment at which the priest makes  the offering that should culminate or accomplish all the things urged before.
## 01
To the well-kindled flame offer sharp ghee,
to Agni Jātavedas.
## 02
The undeceivable Narāśaṃsa will sweeten this sacrifice,
for he is the poet with honey in his hands.
## 03
When invoked, o Agni, convey here dear shimmering Indra
with his easy running chariots, to help us.
## 04
Having the softness of wool, spread widely, (o ritual grass): the chants  have cried out to you.
Be here to win gain for us, beautiful one.

## 05
Divine doors, gape open, giving easy access to help us.
Fill the sacrifice, further and further.
## 06
The two of beautiful appearance, increasing vigor, the young mothers  of truth,
Evening and Dawn—them we beseech.
## 07
On the wind’s flight let the two divine Hotars of Manu, being invoked, come to this our sacrifice.
## 08
Iḍā, Sarasvatī, and Mahī, the three goddesses who are joy itself— let them, unfailing, sit upon the ritual grass.
## 09
Tvaṣṭar, come here as the kind one, far-ranging in the prosperity (you  bring), and in your own person
help us at every sacrifice.
## 10
Where you know, o Lord of the Forest, to be the hidden names of the gods, there make our oblations go.
## 11
Svāhā to Agni and to Varuṇa, svāhā to Indra and to the Maruts, svāhā to the gods—the offering!