+++
title = "006"

+++
6 (360)
Agni
Vasuśruta Ātreya
10 verses: paṅkti
The hymn is dominated by references to prizewinning horses. In verse 3 Agni gives  the prizewinner, which may be Agni himself. In pāda d of the verse, therefore, the  one who “journeys to what is valued” is Agni both as a god retrieving the reward  for the sacrificers and as a metaphoric horse racing to the prize. Again in verse 7  Agni’s flames are horses and the prize toward which they strive is cattle, first men
tioned in verse 1, along with horses. Allusion to horses is indirect in verse 10, but in  10ab the priests “guide” Agni—assuming with Geldner and Renou that ajuryamur is haplology for ajuryáṃ yamur—as they might guide a horse. Then in d they hope  for an “abundance of heroes and this abundance of swift horses.” There are various  possible explanations for why the poet speaks of tyád “this” abundance. One is that  there is a comparison between the horses they hope to gain and Agni’s flames imag ined as horses. If so, then “this abundance” would mean an abundance of horses  equivalent to the present abundance of flames.
## 01
I think of Agni, who is the good one, to whom milk-cows go home, swift chargers (go) home, and our own prizewinners (go) home.
– Bring refreshment for the praise singers.
## 02
He is Agni, who is sung as the good one, whom the milk-cows approach  together,
the fast-running chargers (approach) together, and well-born patrons  (approach) together.
– Bring refreshment for the praise singers. 3. Since Agni, who belongs to all domains, gives the prizewinner [=Agni?]  to the clan,
(since) Agni (gives the prizewinner) that is very ready for wealth, when  pleased, he journeys to what is valued.
– Bring refreshment for the praise singers.
## 04
Agni, here would we kindle your brilliant and unaging (flame), o god, so that this your kindling stick, admired more, will shine in heaven.
– Bring here refreshment for the praise singers.
## 05
Agni, for you the offering is poured here, accompanied by our verse, o  lord of the glistening flame,
beautifully shimmering, wondrous clanlord, and conveyor of oblations. – Bring refreshment for the praise singers.
## 06
And these fires are at the forefront among fires. They foster everything  of value.
They hasten it; they speed it; they drive it onward in proper order.
– Bring refreshment for the praise singers.
## 07
These flames of yours, o Agni, are greatly arrogant prizewinners, which, by the soaring of their hooves, dart toward the double
enclosures of the cows.
– Bring refreshment for the praise singers.
## 08
Agni, bring the new ones here to us, the praise singers—(those)  refreshments and good settlements.
We would be those who have recited verses, those having you as our  messenger in every house.
– Bring refreshment for the praise singers.
## 09
O you who are beautifully shimmering, you make the two spoonsful of  melted butter ready within your mouth,
and so you should fill us (with plenty) at our hymns, o lord of
vast power.
– Bring refreshment for the praise singers.
## 10
Thus they *have guided the *unaging Agni with songs and sacrifices in  proper order.
He will grant to us an abundance of heroes and this abundance of swift  horses.
– Bring refreshment for the praise singers.