+++
title = "007"

+++
7 (361) Agni
Iṣa Ātreya
10 verses: anuṣtubh, except paṅkti 10
At the beginning (vss. 1–3) the poet repeats the word sám “together” alone or in  compounds. The first pāda draws particular attention to the word with its repetition

of sa(m): sákhāyaḥ sáṃ vaḥ samyáñcam. In the middle verses (4, 5, 7, 8) sám is  echoed by the particle smā/sma “again,” or more exactly “as always.” The last verse  (10) is in a different meter, and, marked by its opening íti “with these words,” it  stands outside of the main body of the poem. The real concluding verse, therefore,  is verse 9, in which sám is echoed again, this time by śám “luck.” The one verse  in which neither sám nor one of its echo words occurs (6) is actually a dependent  clause that is completed by verses 7–8. The sound repetitions thematically link the  union (sám) of both the priests and the offerings, the return of Agni (sma/smā), and  finally the good luck (śám) that the sacrifice will bring to Agni and the benefit that  Agni will bring to both gods and humans.
As mentioned above, the poet extends a statement across three verses (6–8).  This highly unusual construction marks the climax of the hymn, which describes  the moment when Agni “streams forth.” Indeed, the extended statement even  iconically suggests the extension of the sacrificial fire as it creeps throughout  the wood. However, this strategy creates challenging syntax: verse 6 is a relative  clause describing Agni, verse 7 a causal clause that explains how it is that Agni is  a homeland for Āyu and his descendants, and verse 8 concludes with the appear
ance of Agni.
Finally, one philological explanation:  in verse 7 we read ákṣitam rather than  ā́kṣitam with the Padapāṭha.
## 1
O companions, (unite) together your united refreshment and praise  to Agni,
to the highest (dweller) of the dwellings, to the child of nourishment  endowed with strength,
## 2
At the encounter together with whom, wherever it be, delighting men  [=priests] (unite) in the session of men [=the sacrifice]
and whom even the worthy (gods) kindle and our folk bring to birth. 3. When we get together the refreshments and together the oblations of the  sons of Manu,
he for his part has taken the rein of truth with the vast power of his  brilliance.
## 4
Again he makes a beacon here, even during the night, for him who is  far away,
when he, the pure one, again diminishes the lords of the forest (into ash),  himself unaging.
## 5
In whose service they again pour down their sweat upon his paths, they have mounted this land of his own noble birth like the backs (of  horses).
## 6
The much coveted one whom the mortal finds in order that he suckle  everyone [=both gods and mortals],
(the one who is) the sweetening of foods and also the homeland for Āyu, 7. Because like a mower, he again mows the uninhabitable wasteland like a  grazing animal— he of golden beard and blazing teeth, the craftsman whose might is  never blunted—
## 8
Him his mother bore bearing easily, when she successfully obtained the  good fortune (of Agni’s birth),
(for the sacrificer), for whom, as for Atri, blazing (Agni) again streams  forth like an axe.
## 9
(For the sacrificer), who is luck for you so that you suckle (everyone), o  Agni, o you having butter as your soma-drink,
establish brilliance and fame here among these mortals, (establish)
insight here.
## 10
With just these words, I take the battle-fury of Adhrij, the (sacrificial)  animal given by you.
Then, o Agni, Atri should overpower the Dasyus, who never give; Iṣa  should overpower men [=other sacrificers].