+++
title = "008"

+++
8 (362) Agni
Iṣa Ātreya
7 verses: jagatī
The poet begins each verse with the object phrase tvā́m agne “you, o Agni,” except  verse 5, which subtly breaks the pattern by beginning tvám agne, with the nomina tive subject pronoun instead of the accusative. Thematically the hymn emphasizes  the roles of Agni as the fire of the household, of the clan, and of the clans col lectively. The poet remembers that the ancestors kindled Agni (vss. 1–2), that their  descendants, the present clans, continue to do so now (vs. 3), and that through Agni  they gain sustenance (vs. 5).
## 1
You, o Agni, did the truth-seekers kindle—the ancients (kindled) the  ancient one—for your help, o you made with strength,
(you) the much-glittering, all-nurturing one worthy of the sacrifice, the  desirable master of the household, lord of the house.
## 2
You, o Agni, did they seat as the first guest of the clan, as the lord of the  house with blazing hair,
with lofty beacon and many forms, winning back the stakes, offering  good protection and good help, striving to bring (mortals) to old age. 3. You, o Agni, do the clans of Manu’s sons invoke as the one knowing  priestly offices, discriminating, and best granting treasures,
being in hiding yet visible to all, o you who bring good fortune,
resounding mightily, sacrificing well, and having ghee as your
splendor.
## 4
You, o Agni, the steadfast one, have we always approached with homage,  singing with our songs.

Being kindled, find pleasure in our (songs), o Aṅgiras—(you) a god (in  those) of a mortal—with a glorious (fire?), with your bright lights.
## 5
You, o Agni, with your many forms establish vitality for every clan in  your ancient way, o you much praised.
By your strength you rule over many foods. When you have flared, that  flare of yours is not to be challenged.
## 6
You, o Agni, o youngest one, did the gods make their messenger, the  conveyor of the oblations, when you were kindled.
They have established you of wide expanse, having your birthplace in  ghee, anointed (with ghee), as the flaring eye that propels thought.
## 7
You, o Agni, anointed with ghee from of old, have those seeking your  favor kindled with good kindling.
Having become fully grown and increased by the plants, you spread over  the earthly expanses.