+++
title = "009"

+++
9 (363)
Agni
Gaya Ātreya
7 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 5
The poet has taken special pains to link one verse to the next. Verses 2–3 form a  single statement with two relative clauses joined by the marked conjunction utá.  Verses 3–4 both begin with the same words utá sma “And...again,” and verse 5 also  begins with a similar and conjunctive ádha sma “Then...again.” The final pāda  also begins with utá, but sounds almost like an afterthought. Its seeming superflu
ity calls attention to it as an addition and thereby also to the serial concatenation  across the hymn’s verses.
Less clear is the purpose that such concatenation serves. One possibility is that  this structure is a verbal icon of various kinds of ritual strings. Thus it might reflect  the poet’s request in the first verse that Agni “convey our oblations in proper order.”  That is, the connection of verses one to another might anticipate the connected  sequence of offerings made into the fire. Or it might reflect the convergences of sacri
fices, sacrificial rewards, and sacrificial participants at the rite, all mentioned in verse  2, or the union of Agni’s flames, amplified by the image of metals smelted together in  verse 5. Or it might even indicate the alliance between gods and humans signified by  the appearance of Agni as Mitra, the god of alliances, in verse 6. Or all of the above.
## 01
You, Agni, a god, do mortals summon, bearing offerings.
I think you to be Jātavedas: convey our oblations in proper order.
## 02
Agni is the Hotar of the dwelling rich in gifts, in which the ritual grass is  twisted,
upon whom sacrifices converge and the prizes and seekers of fame
(converge); 3. And to whom the churning stick has again given birth like a new calf— Agni, the supporter of the clans of the sons of Manu, performing
good rites.
## 04
And like a son of twisting (snakes) you are again hard to grasp,
you, who are the consumer of much wood, o Agni, like a grazing animal  in a pasture (consuming much grass).
## 05
Then he whose smoky flames all together join together—
when Trita in heaven blows upon him like a blower [=smelter] (of
metals), he becomes sharp as if at the blowing (of bellows).
## 06
By your help, o Agni, and through my proclamations of (Agni as) Mitra,  would I—
would we cross over difficulties of mortals, as those repelling hatred do. 7. Let our men (be) dominant over wealth, o Agni. Bring that here, o  strong one!
He makes us dwell in peace; he makes us thrive; he comes in order (for  us) to gain the prize of victory. And let him be present to strengthen  us in battles.