+++
title = "010"

+++
10 (364)
Agni
Gaya Ātreya
7 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 4, 7
Oldenberg (1897: 390) remarks that this hymn “seems to stand parallel with” the  preceding hymn, which is attributed to the same poet. The hymn comprises a direct  and energetic plea for wealth both for those chanting praise songs and for their  patrons, their sūrís, explicitly mentioned in verses 3 and 6. In verse 3 it is not clear  whether “patrons” and “men” refer to patrons and priests or whether “men” is in  apposition to patrons, and then in verse 4, whether those beautifying the songs are  patrons or priests or both. If both, which we think most likely, then the “gifts of  horses” could refer to actual horses that patrons bring and metaphoric horses, the  songs that priests offer.
The hymn is marked by repeated pointing at Agni as the one who can and  should bring this wealth. So verses 2, 3, and 7 all begin with a 2nd-person pronoun  followed immediately by an address to Agni: “You, o Agni!” In verse 2 there is  a progression from Agni’s will to sacrifice, to his skill to do so, and finally to his  “effective action” in performing the rite, at which point he becomes “worthy of the  sacrifice,” that is, both worthy to perform his priest’s role and worthy to receive  offerings as a god.
## 1
O Agni, who are never poor, bring here the most powerful
brilliance to us.
With wealth and abundance, cut a path to victory’s prize for us.674 V.11
## 2
You, o undeceiving Agni! By your will, by your readiness of skill for us, and by your effective action—upon you has lordliness mounted—you  are worthy of the sacrifice, like Mitra.
## 3
You, o Agni! Increase for us the household and prosperity of these, our patrons (and) our men, who have obtained rewards through
praise songs,
## 4
Who with their gifts of horses, o shimmering Agni, beautify songs  for you—
(these) men, spirited with high spirits, whose acclaim (rises) more loftily  even than heaven. In person he [=Agni] attends (to them).
## 5
These flashing flames of yours, o Agni, go boldly,
like earth-encircling lightning bolts, their sound like a chariot chasing  the prize of victory.
## 6
Now, (bring us wealth) to help us, o Agni, and to give to the zealous one, and for our patrons to pass safely through all regions.
## 7
You, o Agni, o Aṅgiras, having been praised and being praised, bring us wealth that overwhelms the wide-reaching one, for your praisers and for  us to praise (you), o Hotar. And be present for us to grow strong in
battles.