+++
title = "011"

+++
11 (365)
Agni
Sutambhara Ātreya
6 verses: jagatī
As in the previous hymn, there is an energetic pointing to Agni, who is insistently  named at the beginning of each pāda in verse 4 and addressed in the 2nd person at  the beginning of 5abc and 6a, d. There is also an emphasis on Agni’s expanse: his  radiance (vs. 1) and his smoke (vs. 3) touch heaven; he is a visible beacon (vss. 2,  3); he is present in every household (vs. 4); he is filled with vast power (śávas, vs.  5); and he even extends backward in time all the way to the first man, Vivasvant  (vs. 3). The description of Agni as shining for the Bharatas (vs. 1) may explain why  there is this emphasis on his expanse. The Agni of this hymn may be the tribal  fire of the Bharatas, and therefore the poet wishes to emphasize Agni’s presence  among all the people of the Bharatas and the extent of the Bharatas’ territory  or power.
## 1
The herdsman of the people has been born, the awakened, well-skilled  Agni, for a new safe passage.
His face covered with ghee, blazing (Agni) radiates brilliantly for the  Bharatas with lofty (radiance) that touches heaven.
## 2
As the beacon of their sacrifice, as the foremost one placed to the fore,  men have kindled Agni in his threefold abode. On the same chariot with Indra and the gods, he of strong resolve sits  down on the ritual grass as Hotar to perform the sacrifice.
## 3
Though ungroomed, you are born blazing in your two mothers [=the  fire-churning sticks]. As the delighting poet of Vivasvant, you rose up. They made you grow strong with ghee, o (ghee-)anointed Agni. Your  smoke became a beacon, resting upon heaven.
## 4
Let Agni successfully pursue our sacrifice. Agni do men distribute in  every house.
Agni became their messenger, conveying the oblations. Choosing Agni,  they choose him who possesses a poet’s purpose.
## 5
For you, Agni, let this most honey-filled speech, for you let this inspired  thinking be a joy for your heart.
You do the songs fill with vast power, like great streams the river [=the  Sindhu], and (you) do they make strong.
## 6
You, Agni, did the Aṅgirases find, though you were hidden in secret,  resting in every piece of wood.
Being churned, you are born to great strength. You they call the child of  strength, o Aṅgiras.