+++
title = "012"

+++
12 (366) Agni
Sutambhara Ātreya
6 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn repeatedly asserts that the poet is speaking the truth (r̥tá), and therefore,  since Agni himself speaks the truth (vs. 3) and attends to the truth (vs. 2), he should  attend to the poet and grant his wishes. In verse 5 the poet contrasts himself and  his truth-speaking with those who were apparently once his allies, whose words  and whose attacks against him are now twisted and false. The questions in 4bcd  are ironic, for in fact Agni offers no protection to a lying cheat. Pāda 4a might also  be taken ironically or not: the bonds (bándhana) could be the bonds of friendship  with Agni—in its other two R̥gvedic attestations the word means “connection” in  a neutral or positive sense—or they could be the fetters that the poet clearly hopes  are the cheat’s reward.
## 1
Forth to lofty Agni, worthy of the sacrifice, to the bull of truth, the lord,  do (I bring) my thought,
well purified in my mouth at the sacrifice like ghee (in Agni’s mouth);  I bring (forth) my song to be face-to-face with the bull.
## 2
O you attentive to the truth, attend to just the truth. Bore through to the  many streams of truth.
I do not (serve) the sorcerer by strength nor by duplicity; I serve the  truth of the flame-red bull.

## 3
In what fashion, o Agni, do you, speaking the truth according to the  truth, become aware of our newer speech?
The god who is rites-guardian of the rites’ sequence knows of me; I do  not (know) a lord other than him, the winner of wealth here.
## 4
What bonds do you have for the cheat, Agni? What brilliant protectors  will keep winning gain (for him)?
Which ones protect the wellspring of untruth, o Agni? What herdsmen  are there for false speech?
## 5
These inconstant companions of yours, Agni, though they used to be  kind, have become unkind.
These have injured themselves by their words, speaking twisted things  against him who goes straight.
## 6
The one who summons you to the sacrifice with homage, o Agni, protects  the truth of the flame-red bull.
For him let there come a dwelling place, wide and bringing success, (and  also) the posterity of Nahuṣa, who is spreading in every direction.