+++
title = "015"

+++
15 (369)
Agni
Dharuṇa Āṅgirasa
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Elizarenkova (1995: 152) calls dharúṇa “support” the “magic word” of this hymn,  since this word is repeated and echoed by other derivatives of √dhR̥or by similar  sounding words. By attributing the hymn to Dharuṇa, the Anukramaṇī implies that  the poet is playing on his name, although it is likely that the Anukramaṇī derives the  name of the poet from the repetition of this word. The purpose of this repetition of  dharúṇa is to underscore the role of Agni as the “supporter of wealth, the support  of goods” (vs. 1). The name of Agni is postponed to the very end of the line of this  first verse and then is never mentioned again, although echoing Agni the next to last  word of the hymn is the name of Atri.

The rest of the hymn presents a number of linguistic and exegetical problems,  and this translation accepts the minor emendation in verse 4c of jarase to járase proposed by Oldenberg. The second verse is particularly mysterious and the trans lation does not fully unravel it. Geldner suggests that the unnamed subjects are  the Aṅgirases, ancient singers, who established the truth as the foundation of the  sacrifice in heaven and who, together with their “born” sons, attained the “unborn”  Ādityas or the gods generally. We offer another view in the translation. In this inter pretation, the subjects are priests, who by the truth of their words support the truth  that is the rightly performed sacrifice, which itself is a support, the support of the  gods. The priests support the sacrifice by placing it on its support, the heavenly ideal  of the sacrifice. In doing so they also support the gods, who gather at the earthly  sacrifice, the foundation of heaven. In this way the priests attained the unborn gods  by means of their sacrificial fires that have been “born.” To be sure, like much else  in this verse, the identification of those “born” is uncertain, but note that the bodies  of Agni, the different sacrificial fires, are mentioned in verse 3 and that also in this  verse the ancient Agni, this time in the singular, is “newly born.”
In verse 5, as Geldner rightly notes, the image is from racing. The beckoning  prize of victory maintains the diminishing strength of the racer. In the sacrificial  context the prize may be Agni’s reward, the offerings of melted butter that revive  the flagging fire. Thus according to the latter half of the verse, the fire hides within  the wood, but after it is revived, it appears again majestically.
## 1
I bring forth my song to the ritual master and poet worth finding, to the  glorious ancient one.
Seated in ghee is the very kind lord, the supporter of wealth, the support  of goods, Agni.
## 2
By truth they [=the priests] support truth, the support, on the powerful  (support) of the sacrifice in the highest heaven,
and (support) the superior men [=the gods], who have sat down on the  support at the foundation of heaven—they who have attained the ones  unborn by those born.
## 3
They stretch out the bodies (of Agni), which keep away confinement, and  great vitality, hard to surpass, for the ancient one.
Though newly born, he would cross the boundaries (of the fireplace), but  all around they hem him in, who is like a raging lion.
## 4
When, spreading, like a mother you carry more and more peoples to be  suckled and to see,
and when *you awaken, acquiring more and more vitality, you go all  around with varying forms in your single person.
## 5
Now let the prize of victory protect the limit of your strength as you give  as your milk broad support for wealth.
Hiding your track like a thief, then appearing greatly for wealth, you  have rescued Atri.