+++
title = "016"

+++
16 (370)
Agni
Pūru Ātreya
5 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 5
This and the following hymn are attributed to the same poet, and indeed the two  hymns show many parallels: they have the same meter and the same number of  verses, and their concluding pāda is identical. Geldner notes that this hymn, like  many of the Agni hymns of this maṇḍala, uses rare and affected expressions.  Certainly the syntax in this hymn is challenging, especially in verses 3–4, whose  complex construction marks the climax of the hymn. The two verses describe the  point at which Agni is burning most brightly. At that moment he has become the  powerful ally and benefactor of the sacrificers, and at that moment Agni shines  beyond both heaven and earth.
Both in these verses and elsewhere in the hymn the poet emphasizes the alliance  among Agni, the priests, and their patrons. In verse 1, for example, the expression  mitráṃ ná compares Agni to Mitra, the god of alliances, and simultaneously com pares him to a mitrá, an ally. The first is the primary sense, as it is elsewhere, here  especially because the hymn refers to Bhaga, another of the Ādityas, in verse 2.
## 01
Because there is lofty vitality for radiance, chant to the god Agni, whom mortals have installed to the fore, like Mitra, with their
proclamations.
## 02
Because he is the Hotar of the peoples in the arms of skill throughout  the days,
Agni allots the oblation in the proper sequence, like Bhaga a wish.
## 03
At our praise of this generous one and in our companionship with him  full-flamed,
our mightily roaring compatriot, in whom all (beings) have placed
unbridled strength—
## 04
For then, o Agni, (you are) ready to give abundant heroes to these (your  companions)—
the two world-halves do not encompass him, though youthful, nor his fame. 5. Now come to us! Being sung, o Agni, bring here a desirable reward to us and our patrons, who together will receive well-being.
– And be present to strengthen us in battles.