+++
title = "017"

+++
17 (371)
Agni
Pūru Ātreya
5 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 5
A striking image in this hymn is that of the mouth—the mouth of Agni, who  receives the offerings, and the mouth of the priest, who recites the hymns. The poet associates or even identifies these mouths in verse 2 by using ásya “of this one,” to  refer to either Agni or the priest, and in verse 5, where the mouth is equally that of  Agni and that of the priest. The poet insists on these two mouths because they are  the means by which the patron of the sacrifice can think himself glorious (vs. 2). In  verse 3, however, the poet refers only to the mouth of Agni and shifts to a sexual  image. The “thrust” could be the thrust of the poet’s song or it could be the thrust  of the fire-churning. Because it carries a sexual connotation, line c then describes  the semen of Agni that gives birth to lofty flames.
## 01
Here, o god, by his sacrifices the mortal (should summon) the mightier  one for help;
Pūru should summon Agni to give help, when a good rite has been
performed.
## 02
Since, by reason of the mouth of this one [=both Agni and the poet], o  distributor [=sacrificer], you think yourself to have greater glory for  yourself,
(you should summon) him, the vault of heaven with his shimmering  blaze, the delighting one beyond inspired thinking.
## 03
Surely it is by the mouth and flame of this one, who is hitched up by  thrust and song,
by whose semen, like that of heaven, flames blaze aloft,
## 04
And it is by the will of this one—discerning, wondrous—that there are  good things here on the chariot [=the sacrifice].
So then Agni is proclaimed as the one to be invoked among all the clans. 5. Since the desirable reward is now just ours, our patrons follow after the  mouth (of Agni and the poet).
O child of nourishment, protect us that we prevail. Be capable that we  have well-being.
– And be present to strengthen us in battles.