+++
title = "018"

+++
18 (372) Agni
Mr̥ktavāhas Dvita Ātreya
5 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 5
This hymn is a dānastuti, a praise of generous patrons. Renou calls it a dānastuti for  the whole preceding sequence of hymns. Dvita, who calls himself, perhaps jokingly,  mr̥ktávāhas “him of the broken vehicle,” summons Agni to reward Dvita’s patrons.  Agni should give them fame, although this fame is also partly and directly created  by the hymn itself. They deserve this reward because they have generously given  Dvita a gift of many horses (vss. 3, 5). The hymn praises Dvita as well, if indirectly,  when it mentions the “brilliant insight” of the singer (vs. 4), which because of him  exists among the patrons. 1. Early in the morning much beloved Agni, guest of the clan, should be  praised,
the immortal who rejoices at all the oblations among mortals.
## 2
Your own skill is at the ready for Dvita of the broken vehicle.
He receives the (soma-)drop in proper sequence even as your praise  singer, o immortal one.
## 3
For you do I summon him of long-lived blaze with a song for (you)  generous ones,
whose chariot speeds away undamaged, o giver of horses,
## 4
Or among whom is brilliant insight, who protect the recitations in (the  singer’s) mouth.
The ritual grass has been strewn near him [=Agni] of sun-like majesty,  and they have wrapped themselves in fame.
## 5
For those who have given me fifty horses for our joint praise,
for the generous men, o Agni, make bright and great fame, lofty (fame)  filled with men, o immortal one.