+++
title = "021"

+++
21 (375) Agni
Sasa Ātreya
4 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 4
The name of the poet is extracted from sasá “grain” in verse 4, which sticks out  as an unusual word in an unusual context. The poet, whatever his name might be,  pairs and links similar-sounding words and expressions. The last line of the first  verse devā́n devayaté yaja (1d) is echoed in the first line of the last verse deváṃ
vo devayajyáyā (4a). He fronts accented forms of the 2nd-person pronoun at the  beginning of 2a (tvám) and 3a (tvā́m), both to be read disyllabically, as is normal for  tvám but not for tvā́m. These repetitions are thematically the more significant since  the poet emphasizes the 2nd-person address to Agni and his role as a god (vss. 3,  4) sacrificing to the gods. But there are other repetitions as well. For example verse  3 links su- and uṣ-sounds: mā́nuṣe ...súprīta ...srúcas...ānuṣák sújāta sárpirāsute.
## 1
Like Manu, we would install you. Like Manu, we would kindle you. O Agni, Aṅgiras—like Manu, sacrifice to the gods for the one seeking  the gods,
## 2
For, o Agni, it is you who, well-pleased, are kindled among the people  descended from Manu.
The sacrificial ladles go to you in their proper order, o you, the well-born  one whose drink is melted butter.
## 3
It is you whom all the gods, as one, have made their messenger.
Waiting upon you, o poet, they invoke you, a god, in the sacrifices.
## 4
The mortal should invoke for all of you the god Agni with sacrifice to  the gods.
O blazing one, shine when you are kindled. Take your seat upon the  womb of truth. Take your seat upon the womb of grain.684 V.22–23