+++
title = "025"

+++
25 (379)
Agni
The Vasūyava Ātreyas
9 verses: anuṣṭubh, arranged in trcas ̥
The attribution of this hymn to the Vasūyavas is likely based on verse 9, in which the  poet calls himself and his people vasūyávaḥ “those seeking goods.” As Oldenberg

(1897) notes, the hymn is divided into three tr̥cas. This organization would explain  its position in the Ātreya Agni collection. A hymn of three tr̥cas can follow a hymn  of four verses in the proper sequence in which hymns with a fewer number of  either verses or strophes follow hymns with a greater number of verses or stro
phes. However, Oldenberg (1888: 188) also suggests that V.25–28 may be an added  supplement to the Agni collection.
In the first tr̥ca Agni is apparently first becoming present (vs. 2) and has begun  to shine (vs. 3). Then in the second (vss. 4–6) the presence of Agni explodes, and  the poet marks the force of Agni by constantly repeating his name at the beginning  of every hemistich except one (5cd). In the final tr̥ca (vss. 7–9) the poet turns not so  much to the sight of Agni as the sound of Agni. His louder and louder crackling  is reflected in the words of the sacrifice and the other sounds of the sacrifice, nota
bly the sounds of the pressing stones that pound the soma, which are themselves  regularly connected to the chants and recitations of the rite. The danger of tr̥cas,  especially when the strophes are as thematically distinct as they are in this hymn, is  that the hymn itself may seem to break into blocks. This poet uses ring composi
tion to unify the poem and to underscore its ultimate purpose. In 1d he says that  Agni parṣati dviṣáḥ “will bring to safety from hatred,” and again in 9cd, at the end  of the hymn, that sá no víśvā áti dvíṣaḥ / párṣat “he will bring us to safety across all  hatreds.” While the two phrases obviously echo one another, note that the poet has  not quite repeated himself. Most especially his first assertion seems to be a general  one: Agni is the one who brings to safety. But in the last, Agni is the one who brings  us to safety, applying Agni’s more general power to himself and his people.
## 1
Here for you all I sing to the god Agni for his help. He is the one good  for us.
The son of (dawn’s) rays will give; the possessor of truth will bring to  safety from hatred.
## 2
For he is really present—the one whom even the ancients kindled, whom  even the gods—
he the very Hotar of gladdening tongue, who brings radiant goods
through his bright light.
## 3
By your best insight and most excellent favor toward us,
o Agni, shine on us riches by reason of our well-plaited words, o you  who are worthy to be chosen.
## 4
Agni is king among the gods and Agni among mortals when he enters  (among them).
Agni is the conveyor of oblations for us. Serve Agni with your insights. 5. Agni gives to the pious man an excellent son of very mighty fame and of  very mighty formulations,
one who cannot be overcome and who brings fame to his lord.
## 6
Agni gives the lord of settlements who prevails in battle with his men; Agni (gives) the fast-running charger, the unvanquished victor. 7. What best conveys (offerings), that is for Agni. Chant (your chant) aloft,  o you of far-radiant goods.
Like a buffalo-cow wealth (arises) from you; victory’s prizes arise
from you.
## 8
Your flames are brilliant: (they resound) as the pressing stone
resounds aloft,
and just like thunder from heaven your roar has arisen by itself.
## 9
Thus, seeking goods, we have celebrated Agni who acts with strength. He of strong resolve will bring us to safety across all hatreds, as if by  a boat.