+++
title = "026"

+++
26 (230)
Agni
The Vasūyava Ātreyas
9 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
Like the preceding hymn, this hymn comprises three tr̥cas. It draws on repeated  pādas, especially although not exclusively in the final pādas of verses: 1c = VI.16.2c  and VIII.102.16c; 2c = VII.16.4b; 4c = V.20.3a, VIII.60.1b, and X.21.1b; 5c = I.12.4c  and VIII.44.14c; 7c = V.22.2b; and 9c = I.39.5d. Geldner provides a complete list of  the repetitions. As such, it is reminiscent of the assemblages that constitute the kin
dling verses in several priestly families (see V.28 below). The first two tr̥cas (vss. 1–3,  4–6) are a direct address to Agni to assume his role as the one who conveys obla tions to the gods and perfects the ritual. In the third tr̥ca (vss. 7–9) the poet turns to  his fellow priests, telling them to install the fire, prepare the seat for the gods, and  perform the rites in order, and then in the final verse, with the fire now blazing and  the priests performing their roles, he invites various gods, perhaps representing the  All Gods, to take their seats.
## 01
O purifying Agni, with your radiance and with your gladdening
tongue, o god,
convey the gods hither and sacrifice.
## 02
O you with ghee-covered back, o you of shimmering radiance, we beg  you of sunlike appearance:
convey the gods hither to pursue (our oblations).
## 03
O poet, we would kindle you, the brilliant one whose oblations are worth  pursuing,
the lofty one in the rite, o Agni.
## 04
O Agni, come with all the gods for the giving of oblations.
We choose you as our Hotar.
## 05
Convey an abundance of heroes to the sacrificer pressing soma, o Agni! Sit here on our ritual grass along with the gods!

## 06
Being kindled, o thousand-conquering Agni, you prosper the (ritual)  foundations
as the praiseworthy messenger of the gods.
## 07
Install Agni Jātavedas, who conveys the oblations, the youngest (Agni), as god and priest.
## 08
Let the sacrifice go forth in proper sequence today as that which best  encompasses the gods.
Strew the sacred grass (for the gods) to sit.
## 09
Let the Maruts, the Aśvins, and Mitra and Varuṇa sit here upon this, let the gods with their whole clan.