+++
title = "028"

+++
28 (382)
Agni
Viśvavārā Ātreyī
6 verses: triṣṭubh 1, 3, jagatī 2, anuṣṭubh 4, gāyatrī 5, 6, arranged in trcas ̥
The Anukramaṇī attributes this hymn to a female poet, but her name is extracted from  viśvávārā “bringing all desirable things” in 1c, which describes the sacrificial ladle. One of the striking features of this hymn is its use of four different meters in  its six verses. As that metrical variation suggests, the hymn is not a unified com position but rather a collection of verses from the Atri tradition, brought together  as sāmidhenī verses to accompany the kindling of fire. There are similar com posite sāmidhenī hymns in the collections of the Viśvāmitras (III.27) and of the  Bharadvājas (VI.16). As Proferes (2003: 10) notes, these hymns are three of the four  hymns used by both the Śāṅkhāyana and Āśvalāyana traditions for the compilation  of the sāmidhenī verses used in the classical Vedic rites.
Even though the hymn is a compilation, the tr̥ca form does reflect its structure.  The first three verses urge Agni to show himself as he comes into flame. In 1cd the  description sounds as though it might refer to the dawn (in 1b), but at the end the  subject is revealed to be the ghee-filled ladle, or perhaps it is both the ghee-filled

ladle and the ghee-filled dawn that move forward, the first to the east, the second  toward the west. The second tr̥ca (4–6) begins with a praise of the fire in full blaze  and an invocation to him to take on the task of bringing the oblations to the gods.
## 1
Kindled, Agni has lifted his flame to heaven. Facing the dawn, he  radiates widely.
Forward she goes with our homage, bringing all desirable things,
summoning the gods with the oblation—she, the ghee-filled (ladle).
## 2
When you are being kindled, you rule over what is immortal. For  well-being you accompany him who prepares the oblation.
He acquires all material wealth whom you urge onward, and he sets his  hospitality in front, o Agni.
## 3
O Agni, show yourself off for the sake of great good fortune. Let your  brilliance be very high.
Let our united household be easy to control. Surmount the great powers  of those who act as our rivals.
## 4
I extol the glory of you, kindled and greatly exalted, o Agni.
You are the bull of brilliance. You are kindled in the rites.
## 5
When you are kindled, o Agni of poured offerings, sacrifice to the gods,  o you of good rites,
for you are the conveyor of oblations.
## 6
Pour an offering to Agni and seek his friendship as the rite goes forth. Choose him as the conveyor of oblations.