+++
title = "029"

+++
29 (383) Indra
Gaurivīti Śāktya
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn consists primarily of a recital of Indra’s great deeds, with special atten tion to the Vr̥tra saga and the Maruts’ role in it (vss. 1–4, 6–9). Interspersed are  verses devoted to two much less understood myths, Indra’s conflict with the Sun in  an apparent chariot race (vss. 5, 9–10) and his journey with Kutsa to Uśanā’s house  and the defeat of Śuṣṇa (vs. 9), myths that often appear together and show narrative  connections. There are as well brief mentions of other exploits of Indra, including  the Vala myth (vs. 12). The story of the Sun’s chariot and the Kutsa/Uśanā complex  are particular preoccupations of the Indra hymns of Maṇḍala V, although the refer ences to them (Sun’s chariot V.31.11, Kutsa/Uśanā V.31.7–10) do not help to clarify  the details as much as we would like.
The poet several times (vss. 1, 3, 7) mentions Manu, the first Ārya man and sac rificer, in connection with the mythic past. This emphasis on Manu, the theoretical  ancestor of the current sacrificers, is presumably meant to associate those current sacrificers with the participants and supporters of Indra in his previous deeds, in  order to gain a portion of reflected glory. As often, the hymn sometimes narrates  the myths as if in present time (see esp. vss. 1, 6, 12, all three using the same verb  “they chant” [árcanti]). This again is a strategy serving the same purpose, here by  specifically identifying the present singers with both the Maruts and the Aṅgirases.
The hymn is also structured by recurrent soma-drinking phrases, each slightly  different, almost always in the second half of an even pāda (see 2b, 3b, 3d, 5b, 7d,  8b, 11d), a pattern that provides a sort of rhythmic theme-and-variations.
It ends with three verses (13–15) in which the poet refers globally to the amaz ing range of Indra’s deeds past and future, and in the final verse offers him his own  well-crafted poems. Only one word in this verse, vasūyúḥ “seeking goods,” out of  the whole hymn, hints that the poet would like something in return.
## 1
They uphold the three customs [=rituals of the soma-pressing day] at  Manu’s attendance on the gods and the three heavenly realms of light. The Maruts of refined skill chant to you. You are their wise seer, Indra. 2. When the Maruts chanted to him after he became exhilarated, to Indra  who had drunk of the pressed soma,
he took up the mace. When he (had) smashed the serpent, he released the  exuberant waters to flow.
## 3
And—you formulators, you Maruts—Indra should drink of this  well-pressed soma of mine,
for this is his oblation: he found the cows for Manu; Indra smashed the  serpent, having drunk of it.
## 4
After that he propped the two world-halves wide apart; even while  enwrapped, he set the wild beast to fearing.
Repeatedly taunting the gulper, Indra smashed the snorting Dānava back  and down.
## 5
Then according to your will, o bounteous one, all the gods conceded the  soma-drinking to you,
when you put the flying golden mares of the Sun behind, though they  were in front, in (the presence of) Etaśa.
## 6
When the bounteous one hews apart his [=Vr̥tra’s] nine and ninety coils  at one blow with his mace,
the Maruts chant to Indra at the seat (of conflict). With speech in
triṣṭubh meter he thrusts heaven (away from earth).
## 7
As a comrade for a comrade, Agni straightaway cooked three hundred  buffalo in accord with his [=Indra’s] will.
Indra drank the pressed soma of Manu, three lakes worth at one blow,  for the Vr̥tra-smashing.
## 8
When you the bounteous devoured the flesh of three hundred buffaloes  and drank three somian lakes,
all the gods called “Carry (the day)!” to Indra as (a gambler calls)
“Game!,” when he smashed the serpent.

## 9
When, Indra, (you and Kutsa) drove to the home of Uśanā with the  mighty, speeding horses,
as combatant you drove there on the same chariot with Kutsa, with the  gods. You combated Śuṣṇa.
## 10
You tore off the one wheel of the Sun for Kutsa; the other you made  into wide space for driving.
You crushed the Dasyus mouthless with your murderous weapon; you  wrenched those of slighting speech down into a woeful womb.
## 11
The praises of Gaurivīti strengthened you. You made Pipru subject to  Vaidathina.
R̥jiśvan brought you here for companionship, cooking cooked foods  (for you). You drank his soma.
## 12
The Navagvas, the Daśagvas [=Aṅgirases], having pressed soma, chant  to Indra with chants.
Just that cowpen with its covering [=Vala cave]—just that have the men,  having ritually labored, opened up.
## 13
How shall I, (though) knowing them, now encompass your heroic deeds  that you have done, o bounteous one,
and the new ones that you will do, strongest one? We will proclaim
these (deeds) of yours at the ceremonies.
## 14
Having done all these many (deeds), Indra, by your nature you cannot  be circumscribed in heroism.
As for those (deeds) you will do even now in your daring, possessor of  the mace—there exists no one to obstruct this power of yours.
## 15
O Indra, enjoy the sacred formulations being made, the new ones we  have made for you, strongest one.
Like garments, lovely and well made, like a chariot have I fashioned  them—I the clever artisan, seeking goods.