+++
title = "030"

+++
30 (384)
Indra
Babhru Ātreya
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn follows a fairly straightforward chronological trajectory. The poet  begins by wondering where Indra is (vs. 1), locates him on the way to the sacrifice  (vs. 2), and promises the god to recite his deeds at the ceremony (vs. 3). This recital  occupies the middle of the hymn (vss. 4–10), ending (vs. 11) with a return to the  ritual setting, where Indra, pleased by the soma, bestows cows. This mythic model  provides a smooth transition to the last four verses (12–15), the poet’s dānastuti,  praising his patrons the Ruśamas and their king, R̥ṇaṃcaya (lit., “he who requites  his debts”), for their gift to him of four thousand cows, plus a piece of ritual equip ment, a pot. The poet names himself in verse 14. The recital of Indra’s deeds touches on the Vala myth (vs. 4), the Vr̥tra myth (vss.  5–6), and the defeat of Namuci (vss. 7–8). The intriguing mention of the Dāsa “who  made women his weapons” (vs. 9) is unfortunately more opaque; however, it may  be connected with an equally opaque verse, I.104.3. In our view both passages refer  to rivers controlled by the Ārya’s consistent, and perhaps indigenous, opponents,  thus serving as a barrier to Ārya progress. The words “river” and “stream” (dhénā)  are feminine in gender, and so these are the female “weapons” of 9a. Once Indra  has recognized that the “weapons” are mere (female) streams, he leads the charge  against the Dāsa foe. The cows captured in this raid may be referred to in verse 10,  the same cows that Indra distributes in verse 11.
## 01
Where is this hero? Who has seen Indra of the well-naved chariot  speeding with his two fallow bays,
the mace-bearer, who, seeking one who has pressed the soma, will come  to that home, when he is much invoked, with wealth, with help?
## 02
I spotted his track in secret; I followed the powerful track of the one who  laid it down, seeking him.
I asked the others, and they said to me, “We men might attain Indra,  since we have wakened (early).”
## 03
We shall now proclaim at the pressing the deeds that are yours, Indra,  which you will enjoy (hearing) from us.
He will learn who does not know, and he will hear who does know: “This  bounteous one is traveling here fully armed.”
## 04
You made your mind steadfast when you were just born, Indra; even  alone you pursue the many for battle.
You made even a stone flash like lightning through your vast power; you  found the pen of the ruddy cows.
## 05
When you were born far away in the farthest (realm), bearing a name  famous afar,
from then on even the gods feared Indra. He conquered all the waters,  those whose husband [=Vr̥tra] was a Dāsa.
## 06
Just for you do these friendly Maruts chant the chant, press the stalk. The serpent vaunting himself, lying on the waters—Indra will overcome  the tricky one with tricks.
## 07
You hewed apart those negligent by nature, stimulating giving, o  bounteous one, taking pleasure along with the cow,
at the time when you caused the head of the Dāsa Namuci to roll,
seeking an (open) way for Manu—
## 08
For you have made me your yokemate, Indra—just afterward stealing the  head of the Dāsa Namuci,
which was rolling, (like?) a whizzing stone, like the two world-halves  (that roll) forth like two wheels, for the Maruts.
## 09
Because the Dāsa made women his weapons, what can they do to me?  His armies lack strength.694 V.31
Since he [=Indra] distinguished both his [=the Dāsa’s?] streams,
therefore Indra advanced on the Dasyu to fight.
## 10
Together the cows then lowed on every side, since they were here, there,  and everywhere separated from their calves.
Along with his powerful (men) Indra drove them together, when the  well-pressed soma drinks exhilarated him.
## 11
When the soma drinks rinsed by Babhru exhilarated him, the bull set up  a bellowing among the (ritual) seats.
The stronghold-splitting Indra, having drunk of it, gave again of the  ruddy cows.
## 12
The Ruśamas have done this auspicious thing, o Agni, in giving four  thousand cows.
The proffered bounties of R̥ṇaṃcaya, most manly of men, we have
accepted.
## 13
The Ruśamas send me home well-ornamented with thousands of cows,  o Agni.
The sharp (soma-drinks, when) pressed, exhilarated Indra at the early  brightening of the night, at its final turn.
## 14
(When) that night brightened at its final turn, at (the hands of)
R̥ṇaṃcaya, king of the Ruśamas,
like a steed quick in competition, being driven [/anointed], Babhru won  four thousand (cows).
## 15
Four thousand bovine livestock have we accepted from the Ruśamas. Also the gharma pot, which was heated for the Pravargya rite, the one  made of copper, that too have we inspired poets taken.