+++
title = "031"

+++
31 (385) Indra
Avasyu Ātreya
13 verses: triṣṭubh
Like the previous Indra hymns in this maṇḍala, this hymn provides a survey  of Indra’s great deeds, with the ritual context for this recital made explicit  in verses 5–6 and Indra’s journey to the sacrifice sketched in verses 1–2. The  recital itself is fragmentary and mosaic-like, with glittering vignettes from  various myths juxtaposed unordered. This fragmented nature is enhanced by  abrupt switches between the past and the present/future (see, e.g., vss. 6, 11).  The stories of the chariot of the Sun (vs. 11)  and of Kutsa and Uśanā (vss.  7–10) encountered in V.29 recur here, vivid but enigmatic. The ritual context  returns in the final two verses, with Indra’s arrival at the sacrifice (12) and  prayers for Indra’s help (13). 1. Indra makes an easy slope for his chariot, the prize-seeking one, which  the bounteous one has mounted.
Like a herdsman separating the flocks of livestock, he keeps (his
chariot) separate (from the others). Invulnerable, he drives as the first  to seek winnings.
## 2
Run hither, you of the fallow bays; do not lose the track. You of tawny  [=golden] gifts, accompany us,
for there exists nothing better than you, Indra: you have provided even  those lacking the brideprice with wives.
## 3
When he was born as might from might, Indra displayed all his Indrian  powers.
He impelled forth the good milkers (who were) within the cave; he pried  apart the darkness, which was rolled up in a ball, with light.
## 4
The Anu people fashioned a chariot for your horse; Tvaṣṭar (fashioned)  the brilliant mace, o much invoked one.
The formulators, magnifying Indra with their chants, strengthened him  to smash the serpent.
## 5
When for you the bull, o Indra, the bulls and the pressing stones will  chant a chant, with Aditi in concord—
the (pressing stones like) wheel-rims which, (even) without horses,
without chariots, but impelled by Indra, rolled over the Dasyus—
## 6
I will proclaim your previous deeds, proclaim the current ones that you  have done, bounteous one,
when, potent one, you will pull apart both world-halves, winning the  waters, bright in drops, for Manu.
## 7
Just this now is your deed, wondrous poet: that smashing the serpent,  you measured out your strength there.
Even Śuṣṇa’s magic arts you enveloped; on your way to the ritual meal  you repelled the Dasyus.
## 8
You brought the waters, the good milkers, to rest for Yadu and Turvaśa,  (when you were their) transport, Indra.
You two drove to the strong one [=Uśanā]—that is, you conveyed
Kutsa—when the gods encountered you two along with Uśanā.
## 9
[Uśanā:] “O Indra and Kutsa, let the steeds convey you two, traveling  by chariot, right here close to our face [/lit. ear].
You two blow him [=Śuṣṇa?] out of the water, out of his seat; (by doing  this) you two will keep the dark shadows away from the heart of the  bounteous one.”
## 10
It was just this sage poet [=Indra?] who had gone, seeking help, to the  yoked horses of the Wind, so easy to yoke.
All the Maruts were your partners then, Indra; their sacred
formulations strengthened your power.

## 11
The very chariot of the Sun, (which is) in front, at the decisive turning  he will put behind, (though) it is speeding.
Etaśa [=the Sun’s horse] bore the wheel; he restores it. Putting (the
chariot?) in front (again?), he will gain our intention.
## 12
This Indra has come here to look about, o peoples, seeking a partner  who has pressed the soma.
The pressing stone, speaking, will be carried down to the altar—the  stone whose nimble (action) the Adhvaryus attend to.
## 13
Those who take pleasure [/are dear (to you)], they shall take pleasure  now [/shall be dear]. The mortals, o immortal one—let them not
encounter constraint.
Cherish the worshipful ones and place strength among these your
peoples, among whom may we be.