+++
title = "032"

+++
32 (386)
Indra
Gātu Ātreya
12 verses: triṣṭubh
In contrast to the bricolage of the previous hymn, this hymn concentrates on a  single myth, the Vr̥tra battle, occupying verses 1–8 and providing one of the most  sustained accounts of this story outside of I.32. But this poet avoids using the stan dard formulae associated with that narrative, instead ringing changes on the nor mal phraseology (especially the áhann áhim formula: “you/he smashed the serpent,”  which does not appear as such in this hymn). Considerable attention is paid to  Indra’s opponent, but interestingly the word vr̥trá is never used. Instead he is identi fied several times as Dānava (descendant of Dānu, who is called Vr̥tra’s mother in  I.32.9, or a member of the demonic Dānu tribe) and once called śúṣṇa, usually the  name of a different foe of Indra (see, e.g., nearby V.29.9), but here probably used in  its etymological sense, “hisser.” But mostly he is nameless, a state emphasized by the  emphatic, repeated, verse-initial forms of t(i)yá- cid “that very one” (vss. 3, 4, 5, 6,  8), a sort of empty and open-ended deictic that attracts a series of shifting descrip tors of horror. The emphasis on darkness (vss. 4, 5, 6), fog (vs. 4), and emptiness (vs.  7) also suggests an indistinct enemy that lacks proper definition.
After this depiction of Indra’s great victory over the multifarious monster, it  comes as no surprise that in the next verses (9–11) Indra’s power is universally  acknowledged by cosmic forces and mortals alike. Verse 9 opens with the ques tion “who can obstruct him?”—using the verb varāte, belonging to the same root  and having the same semantics as the suppressed name Vr̥tra “obstruction.” The  question thus carries with it an implied conditional—“who can obstruct him if  Obstruction itself cannot?”—with the implicit answer obviously “no one.” The last  verse turns, as often, to the benefits Indra can bestow on the poet, ending with a perhaps teasing rhetorical question, paraphrasable as: “Do (other) poets complain  about your gifts?”
## 1
You violently split the wellspring; you reamed out its apertures. You  brought to peace the floods, which had been hard pressed.
When, Indra, you pried apart the great mountain, you set loose the  streams; you smashed down the Dānava.
## 2
You, o mace-bearer, sent speeding the wellsprings that had been hard  pressed through the seasons (in?) the udder of the mountain.
Having smashed the very serpent lying spread out for some distance,  strong Indra, you assumed your power.
## 3
With his powers Indra smashed away the weapon of that very one, the  great wild beast,
who was thinking himself unopposable even on his own. But then there  was born one more powerful than he.
## 4
That very one—drunk on his own power, belonging to them [=the  Dānavas], child of the fog, grown very strong, emerging from
darkness,
the Wrath of the Dānavas—(it was) the hisser [/Śuṣṇa] that the
mace-bearer smashed down with his mace, he who receives the
proffered bullish (soma) offering.
## 5
That very one (he smashed down), (so he became) sunk down in accord  with his [=Indra’s] intentions. He found just that vulnerable place of  him (who thought himself) invulnerable,
when at the proffering of the invigorating (soma) you consigned him  who sought battle to darkness, (as if) to a secure house, o you of good  dominion.
## 6
That very one, lying just so, horribly swollen, having grown strong in the  sunless darkness,
just him did the bull Indra, invigorated on the pressed (soma), smash  from above, after taunting him.
## 7
When Indra held up to the great Dānava his weapon, which was
unopposable might itself,
when at the proffering of the mace he outwitted him, he made him the  lowest of all creation.
## 8
The strong one [=Indra] mightily took that very one—the honey-drinker  lying on the flood, the insatiable cavity,
the footless devourer with slighting speech; with a great murderous
weapon he wrenched him down into a woeful womb.
## 9
Who can obstruct his tempestuousness, his power? Alone, unopposable,  he bears away riches.
Even these two goddesses [=the two world-halves] now bend (away) from  fear of his expansion, of Indra’s strength.

## 10
The heavenly hatchet [/the goddess Autonomous Power] bends down to  him; to Indra a way [/Gātu = poet’s name] yields itself, like an eager  (wife).
When he joins his whole strength with them, the settled peoples incline  themselves to the one of autonomous power.
## 11
I hear of you as born the sole master of settlements, belonging to the  five peoples, glorious among the peoples,
(while) my hopes have grabbed (always) for the newest Indra, calling on  him (every) evening and dawn.
## 12
For thus I hear of you as arranging the bounties in the proper season  and as giving them to inspired poets.
Do the formulators, your comrades, complain, who have deposited
their desire with you, Indra?