+++
title = "033"

+++
33 (387)
Indra
Saṃvaraṇa Prājāpatya
10 verses: triṣṭubh
The structure of this hymn is relatively straightforward. It begins (vs. 1) with  the poet’s praise of Indra, presented as an inducement to the god to come to his  sacrifice, followed (vss. 2–3) by the usual tropes of a “journey” hymn, includ ing the yoking of Indra’s horses. The poet recognizes that there are competing  sacrifices (vs. 4a), but continues to urge Indra to choose to come to his (vs. 5).  There follow two verses (6–7) asking for gifts from Indra. The hymn ends with  a three-verse dānastuti (8–10), praising the gift of horses from a number of dif ferent patrons.
## 01
I conjure up a great (praise) for the great, powerful one among superior  men, for Indra so very powerful—I who am not so powerful—
he who, praised among the people as battle-ready, takes note of the good  thought (directed) toward him at the prize-winning.
## 02
You, Indra, being conjured up by our chants, have fixed the yoking thong  for the fallow bays, you bull.
You will drive here just so, following your pleasure, bounteous one. You  will bring (good things); you will be victorious over the peoples of the  stranger.
## 03
These (horses) of yours (will) not (remain) unyoked because of us [i.e.,  because of our failure], lofty Indra, if it’s for lack of a (yoking)
formulation.
Mount on the chariot with mace in hand. You with the good horses will  hold your own rein, o god. 4. Just as there are many hymns that exist for you, Indra, and many  are (the deeds) you have done for the cow, when fighting over the
meadows,
(and many [the paths]?) you carved out also for the sun in your [/his]  own home, as bull you (have carved out) even the names of the Dāsa  in the contests.
## 05
We are yours, Indra—as are the superior men born as a troop
[=Maruts?] and the driving-chariots.
As a consummate warrior he [=Indra] should come here to us, o you  with the serpent’s hiss—dear, like Bhaga to be invoked at our forays  [/dear like a portion to be offered at our (ritual) presentations].
## 06
For, Indra, in you are strength to be nurtured and manly powers. As  prancing immortal,
give us dappled wealth, you winner of goods. I will start up the praise  for the gift of the powerfully bounteous stranger.
## 07
So, help us, Indra, with your help. Protect the singers, the bards, o  champion.
And please those giving the skin of the dear, well-pressed honey at the  winning of prizes.
## 08
And these gold-bedecked (horses) of my patron, Paurukutsya
Trasadasyu, when they are given—
let his ten white ones convey me. I am attended by the intentions of  Gairikṣita.
## 09
And (let) these (convey me)—the ruddy (horses) of Mārutāśva, the  bounty of his intentions at the giving of the distribution,
(when) Cyavatāna was giving a thousand of his own to me. Afterward  (the singer) sang as if to marvel (at the gift) of the stranger [=Indra]. 10. And (let) these (convey me)—the enjoyable (horses) of Dhvanya  Lakṣmaṇya, the very bright ones having being marshaled.
Through the greatness of his wealth the proffered (horses) have come,  like cows to the cowpen, (to the enclosure) of the seer Saṃvaraṇa.