+++
title = "034"

+++
34 (388) Indra
Saṃvaraṇa Prājāpatya
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 9
The first three verses of this hymn urge sacrificers to make offerings to Indra and  promise them a return on this investment of ritual energy, and the preoccupation  throughout most of the hymn is the contrast between the generous and the stingy  and their respective fates (see esp. vss. 5–7). There is a hostile and dangerous edge to

much of the rhetoric: the punishments Indra metes out to non-givers are described  with gusto.
But the most curious feature of the hymn is verse 4, where Indra, depicted as  the killer of the father, mother, and brother of an apparently blameless man, not  only feels no remorse (“he does not shrink from his offense”), but expects to receive  offerings from his victim. The word “offense” used here is a rare and charged one  (kílbiṣa): the uncompounded form is found only here in the R̥gveda, and the four  other (compounded) occurrences of it are in late hymns in Maṇḍala X. Our passage  here seems a foreshadowing of a theme in Indra mythology that becomes highly  developed in the middle Vedic period, that of Indra’s offenses or misdeeds, cata logued as a set of kilbiṣāṇi (see Jamison 1991: 64–68), with Indra as the figure of  a warrior run amuck. But the theme seems out of place in the context here, save  perhaps for Indra’s excessively aggressive behavior toward the stingy in other verses.  (The stingy deserve this treatment, however, in the ritual calculus of the R̥gveda; the  man violently deprived of his kin does not.)
The hymn ends with what appears to be a truncated dānastuti (vs. 9): the poet  praises his apparent patron Āgniveśi Śatri, but no gifts are mentioned.
## 1
Autonomous power, unaging, solar, immeasurable, speeds after him, the  wondrous, whose rival has not been born.
Press, cook for the one whose vehicle is the sacred formulation; set more  (offerings) out for the one praised by many.
## 2
He who filled his belly with soma, the bounteous one, drew exhilaration  from the honey, the stalk,
when Uśanā, possessing the great weapon, held the thousand-spiked  weapon (out to him), to smash the wild beast.
## 3
Whoever presses soma for him in the heat or whoever in the cold, he  certainly becomes heaven-bright.
The able one, the bounteous one who is partner to the poet (/Kavi
[Uśanā]), snatches off the extended (garment), resplendent on
his body.
## 4
The man whose father the able one has smashed, whose mother, whose  brother—he [=Indra] does not shrink (even) from him.
Rather, he actually pursues his offerings; the arranger, the distributor of  goods does not shrink from his offense.
## 5
He does not wish to grasp (the offerings) (only) by fives or tens. He  does not keep company with a man who doesn’t press (soma), even a  prosperous one.
He either despoils (him as he goes) along the way, or the tumultuous one  smashes (him). But he gives to the god-seeker a share in the pen full of  cattle.
## 6
Very energetic in the clash, affixing the wheel (to the chariot?), he is  antagonistic to the non-presser, but strengthener of the presser. Indra is the dominator of all, spreading fear; the Ārya leads the Dāsa as  he wishes.
## 7
He drives together the sustenance of the niggard, to steal it, but he shares  out liberal goods to the pious.
In a (place) of no exit there is held firmly each and every people that has  antagonized his power.
## 8
When the two wealthy peoples with all their troops (clashed) together,  Indra the bounteous pursued (them) in the (battles for) resplendent  cattle.
Since the shaker has made one of them his yokemate, he drives up for  himself the bovine (wealth) (of the other)—the tumultuous one along  with his warriors.
## 9
The thousand-winning Āgniveśi Śatri will I sing, the measure and the  beacon for the stranger, o Agni.
For him the waters will swell continuously; in him let there be lordly  power aggressive and ardent.