+++
title = "035"

+++
35 (389)
Indra
Prabhūvasu Āṅgirasa
8 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 8
A simple hymn calling on Indra for help, the word that provides the outer skeleton  of the hymn: forms of the root “help” (√av) as noun or verb are found in the first  three verses and the last two (7–8). The interior verses (4–6) simply provide conven tional praise of Indra’s powers.
## 1
Your resolve to help that best brings success, Indra, bring that here— the resolve that conquers the territories for us, a winner difficult to
surpass in the (contests for) prizes.
## 2
Whether you have four, Indra, or you have three, o champion,
or five settlements (for you to help)—bring this same help to us now. 3. We summon hither the help worthy to be chosen, the help of you, the  most bullish one,
for you were born with the speed of a bull, Indra, victorious with your  (forms of help) ready at hand.
## 4
For you are a bull; for benefit you were born; bullish is your power. Your daring mind has its own dominion; your masculine nature smites  entirely.
## 5
You, Indra, possessor of the stone—run down the mortal who acts  the foe,
chariot and all, you lord of power who possess a hundred resolves.

## 6
Just you, best smasher of obstacles, do the peoples, when they have  twisted their ritual grass,
call on for the winning of prizes—you the strong, foremost among the  many (peoples) [/in the many (battles)].
## 7
Our chariot, Indra—help it, the one difficult to surpass, driving in front  in the contests,
driving together (with you?) whenever the stakes (are set), seeking prizes. 8. Our chariot, Indra—come help it along with Plenitude.
We would establish desirable fame for ourselves in heaven, strongest one;  we will conceive a praise (poem) (to reach) to heaven.