+++
title = "036"

+++
36 (390) Indra
Prabhūvasu Āṅgirasa
6 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 3
Like the preceding hymn, attributed to the same poet, this one keeps its focus on  Indra, but is less predictable in its phraseology. The first four verses deploy a series  of similes characterizing Indra, the soma, and the singer(s). Verse 5 plays heav ily with the word “bull” (vŕ̥ṣan) for Indra and his accoutrements, a device that  returns more insistently in the first four verses of V.40. The final verse (6) is a short  dānastuti to the patron Śrutaratha (“[Having a] Famous Chariot”), whose name  may have inspired the wheel and chariot imagery of verse 3: the phrase “from the  chariot” in that verse is somewhat puzzling on the surface, but if it slyly expresses  the hope that the singer will become one “possessing many goods from (Famous)  Chariot,” it may be a prefiguring of the dānastuti.
## 1
He will come here—Indra, who will be attentive to the giving of the gift  of goods and riches.
Like a buffalo roaming the wasteplaces, thirsting, let him desirously  drink the milked plant.
## 2
Soma mounts your jaws, your lips, you champion, possessor of the  fallow bays, as the soma plant grows on the back of a mountain.
Like one driving his steeds, we all would cheer you on with hymns, o  much-invoked king.
## 3
Like a wheel set rolling my mind trembles with fear of neglect, o
much-invoked possessor of the stone.
Surely the singer will now praise you from the chariot, o
ever-strengthening bounteous one—(so he will become) one
possessing many goods?
## 4
This singer, like a pressing stone, raises his voice high to you, Indra,  panting after (you). With your left hand, bounteous possessor of the fallow bays, hold forth  wealth, and hold it forth right-handed: do not lose track.
## 5
Let bullish heaven strengthen you, the bull; as bull you travel with your  two bullish fallow bays.
As bull with a bullish chariot, well-lipped one, as bull with bullish will,  you of the mace, set us up in loot.
## 6
He who, possessing prizewinning mares, has allotted (to me) two  prizewinning chestnuts accompanied by three hundred (cows?),
to him, the youth, let the settled peoples together do homage, to
Śrutaratha, o Maruts, in friendship.