+++
title = "037"

+++
37 (391)
Indra
Atri Bhauma
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Two verses devoted to the activities of the dawn sacrifice open the hymn; the last  two verses (4–5) describe the successes of the king whose sacrifice Indra attends,  with the king’s actions assimilated to Indra’s great deeds (Vala and Vr̥tra, both 4cd).  The middle verse (3) is a sort of riddle and serves, therefore, as a mild omphalos: the  bride in question may be Speech, as the beloved of Indra (as some have suggested),  or perhaps Dawn. The husband may be Indra, or the Sun. (We favor the Dawn/Sun  interpretation, which is in keeping with the dawn-ritual context.)
There are two pieces of onomastic verbal play that look outside the hymn  proper. In verse 3c the phrase “his chariot will seek fame” (śravasyād ráthaḥ) recalls  the name of the patron Śruta-ratha, whose praise ended the previous hymn (V.36.6).  And the phrase “with the radiance of the sun” (bhānúnā ...sū́ryasya) in the first  pāda of the hymn (1a), describing Agni, is actually the solution to the story of  Svar-bhānu (“[Having] the Sun’s Radiance”) told in V.40.5–9. It is especially appro
priate to find this answer given at the beginning of this hymn here, as it is the first in  a series of hymns attributed to Atri, among which is V.40.
## 1
He [=Agni] aligns himself with the radiance of the sun, being bepoured,  with ghee on his back, of lovely outlook.
The non-neglectful dawns will shine forth to him [=sacrificer] who says  “Let us press (soma) for Indra.”
## 2
With his fire kindled and his ritual grass spread, he will win; with his  pressing stones yoked and his soma pressed, he will sing;
whose pressing stones speak vigorously, he will go, as Adhvaryu, down  to the river with an oblation.
## 3
Here she goes, a bride seeking a husband who will take her home as  vigorous chief wife.704 V.38
His chariot will seek fame here and will sound loudly here; it will roll  itself for many thousand (leagues).
## 4
That king does not falter, by whom Indra drinks the sharp soma whose  comrades are cows.
He drives (the cows) here with his warriors, he smashes Vr̥tra; he
dwells peacefully, prospering the settled peoples, bearing the name
“Well-portioned.”
## 5
He will prosper in peace, and he will prevail at the hitching up (for  war); (when) the two opponents are clashing together, he will entirely  conquer;
he will become dear to the Sun, dear to Agni—the one who with pressed  soma will do ritual service to Indra.