+++
title = "038"

+++
38 (392)
Indra
Atri Bhauma
5 verses: anuṣṭubh
Geldner, the most authoritative twentieth-century translator of the R̥gveda, pro nounced this hymn empty of content (“inhaltslos”). This judgment does not seem  entirely fair, but the hymn is characterized by a certain lack of syntactic coherence,  as well as an overabundance of elaborate vocatives addressed to Indra. It is not  clear who the second god is in verse 3, though he is possibly Varuṇa; otherwise the  hymn only makes reference to Indra.
The hymn is in some ways a twin to the following one, sharing vocabulary  and thematics, but the second hymn provides only limited help in interpreting  this one.
## 01
Extensive is the giving of your broad largesse, o Indra of a hundred  resolves.
So make ready to give to us brilliant things, you of good lordship who  govern all domains.
## 02
What praiseworthy thing you appropriate as your nourishment,
strongest Indra,
that spreads itself as having the longest fame, difficult to surpass, o you  of golden hue—
## 03
(As do) your tempests, which serve your will in profusion, o possessor of  the stone.
Both you gods rule over both heaven and earth to dominate them.
## 04
And (you rule) over this skill of yours, whatever it may be, for us, o  Vr̥tra-smasher.
Bring manly power here to us: you are manly minded toward us.
## 05
Now through these dominating forces of yours (may we be) in your  shelter.
May we be provided with a good herdsman, o Indra of a hundred
resolves; may we be provided with a good herdsman, o champion.