+++
title = "040"

+++
40 (394)
Indra and the Myth of Svarbhānu [Anukramaṇı: Indra ̄ 1–4, Sūrya 5, Atri 6–9]
Atri Bhauma
9 verses: uṣṇih 1–3, triṣṭubh 4, anuṣṭubh 5, 9, triṣṭubh 6–8
This hymn falls into two parts. It opens with four verses praising Indra in his bull ish aspect, with hypnotic repetition of the word vŕ̥ṣan “bull.” The remainder (vss.  5–9) contains an allusive account of the myth of Svarbhānu, who “pierces the Sun  with darkness,” and the Sun’s rescue by the seer Atri, a myth much treated in middle  Vedic literature. For extensive discussion of the myth and this R̥gvedic version of it,  see Jamison (1991: Part II, pp. 131–303).

The myth makes sense once the identity of the mysterious enemy of the Sun is  solved: Svarbhānu, literally “he who possesses the radiance of the sun,” is actu ally the Sun’s earthly counterpart, the god Agni. He punished the Sun for the lat ter’s incestuous intercourse with his daughter (not mentioned in this hymn, but  frequently found elsewhere), but because of the importance of sunlight for the  maintenance of the world, the Sun had to be restored by the seer Atri (also the  supposed poet of this hymn) through ritual means. The physical manifestations of  the Sun’s punishment betray his attacker’s identity: “pierced with darkness” refers  to sunspots, dark spots on the sun as if burnt by fire, and the enveloping darkness  of smoke is depicted in verse 6.
Note that the Svarbhānu portion (5–9) is a perfect omphalos hymn. The two  outer verses (5, 9) are multiforms of each other and in a different meter from the  verses in between; the middle verse (7) is the only direct speech; the intermediate vss.  (6, 8) both mention Atri in the singular, both deal with the māyā́ (“magic spells”) of  Svarbhānu, and both have complementary vocabulary: diváḥ/diví, sū́ryam/sū́ryasya,  gūḷhám/aghukṣat, bráhmaṇā/brahmā́.
## 01
Drive hither. Drink the soma pressed with stones, you lord of soma— bullish Indra, with your bulls, best smasher of obstacles.
## 02
Bullish is the pressing stone, bullish the exhilarating drink, bullish this  pressed soma here.
Bullish Indra, with your bulls, best smasher of obstacles.
## 03
Bullish I call upon you, the bullish, o possessor of the mace, with your  bright help.
Bullish Indra, with your bulls, best smasher of Vr̥tra.
## 04
Possessor of the soma-dregs, possessor of the mace, the bull overcoming  the powerful, the tempestuous king, smasher of Vr̥tra, soma-drinker— having yoked them, he will come hither with his two fallow bays. Indra  will become exhilarated at the Midday Pressing.
## 05
When, o Sun, Svarbhānu Āsura pierced you with darkness,
like a befuddled man not knowing the territory did the living beings  perceive.
## 06
Then, o Indra, when you smashed down from heaven the circling magic  spells of Svarbhānu,
Atri with the fourth formulation found the sun, hidden by darkness  because of (an act) contrary to commandment.
## 07
[The Sun:] “O Atri, let him not, deceived by jealousy and fear, swallow  me, who am one of yours.
You are an ally whose bounty is real; do you and King Varuṇa help
me here.”
## 08
The possessor of the sacred formulation [=Atri], having yoked the  pressing stones, serving the gods with plain reverence, doing his
utmost, Atri placed the eye of the sun in heaven. He hid away the magic spells of  Svarbhānu.
## 09
Which sun Svarbhānu Āsura pierced with darkness,
that one the Atris found, for no others were able.
The following series of hymns to the All Gods / All the Gods (V.41–51) contains  some of the most complex and difficult poetry in the R̥gveda (along with some rest fully more straightforward hymns), including the hymn that Geldner called “the  hardest hymn in the R̥gveda” (“das schwierigste Lied des R̥V”), V.44. Although the  placement of this series within the Saṃhitā was dictated by the strict and mechani cal rules of numerical arrangement discussed before (see Intro. pp. 10–11), it is  sometimes difficult for us not to view this set of hymns as a type of omphalos in  the larger structure of the R̥gveda. They are found in more or less the middle of  Maṇḍala V (which has 87 hymns), which is more or less the middle maṇḍala of  the Family Books (II–VII—keeping in mind that, though V is preceded by three  maṇḍalas and followed by two, the preceding maṇḍalas are shorter: II–IV contain  163 hymns, VI–VII 179, remarkably close to equivalence). Just as the omphalos  verse in a hymn contains the enigma, the mysterious message of the hymn, so we  could view these All God hymns as the mystical center of the older R̥gveda.