+++
title = "041"

+++
41 (395)
All Gods
Atri Bhauma
20 verses: triṣṭubh, except atijagatī 16–17, ekapadā virāj 20
This hymn is quite intricate on the verbal level, though in paraphrase and in  translation it may seem to lack interest. Every verse (but 17) names at least one  divinity—many verses have several—chosen from among both the most promi nent gods of the Vedic pantheon (e.g., Mitra and Varuṇa in vs. 1) and distinctly  marginal figures like Āptya (vs. 9). There does not seem to be any one dominant  god or set of gods: though the Maruts are mentioned more than any other gods  (vss. 2, 5, 11, 13, 16), there is little particularly Marutian vocabulary or imagery.  (It might be remembered, however, that the longest series of Marut hymns in the  R̥gveda, the Śyāvāśva hymns of remarkable poetic quality, immediately follow the  All God hymns in this maṇḍala [V.52–61]). The content of the hymn as a whole  seldom deviates from invitations to the sacrifice with promises of offerings, and  prayers for divine gifts in return. Verses 16–17 are in a different meter and seem to  be bringing the hymn to a close, especially 17, in which, as often, the poet makes  a meta-reference to the hymn just concluded. If this is so, verses 18–20 are an  afterthought.
The seemingly unordered series of gods who receive the honor of a verse (or part  thereof) may exemplify a covert theme of choice or alternatives, underlined by the

use of the simple conjunction “or” (vā) as the verbal “hero” of the beginning of the  hymn (vss. 1–3, returning at the end, vss. 15, 19).
Unfortunately other pieces of verbal play are essentially untranslatable, like  the unusual sequence of two monosyllables at the end of the first half-verse of  verse 1:... vā dé (“or...to be given”), which, scrambled, produces the target of the  hymn: devā(ḥ) “gods.”
## 1
Which one now, performing the truth for you two, Mitra and Varuṇa, is  to be given (a good thing) from great heaven or one stemming from
the earth
or (one) at the seat of truth [=ritual ground]—you two should protect  us—or which of you two (is ready) to give prizes to the sacrificer like  the prizes for one who wins cattle?
## 2
They—Mitra, Varuṇa, Aryaman, Āyu, Indra lord of the R̥bhus, and the  Maruts—shall take pleasure in us,
or (in those) who with reverences provide a well-plaited (hymn), a praise  for Rudra who gives rewards—(they, the gods) in joint enjoyment.
## 3
You two Aśvins, driving quickest on the flight of the wind, in the  flourishing of your chariotry, are to be summoned hither.
Or (you priests), present a thought to the lord of heaven [=Rudra], like  (soma) stalks to the worshipful.
## 4
The heavenly victor with Kaṇva as Hotar, (i.e.,) Trita from heaven, and  the Wind, and Agni in joint enjoyment,
Pūṣan, and all-nourishing Bhaga have come to the (ritual) presentation  like those with swiftest horses to a contest.
## 5
Present your wealth of yoked horses; for help in the quest for wealth a  visionary thought should be produced.
The Hotar [=Agni] is well disposed because of the ways of (the company  of) fire-priests, which are (also?) the ways of you powerful ones, o
Maruts.
## 6
Set Vāyu, who hitches up the chariot, in front; in front the god, the  inspired admirer, with your chants—
(you,) aiming (straight), serving the truth, (set in front) the creators of  plenty. Let them, (like?) good wives, create (plenty) here (in exchange)  for our visionary thought.
## 7
I hasten to the two young maidens of heaven with your praiseworthy  fortifying (hymns), with conspicuous chants.
Night and Dawn, like ones who know all, through the days convey the  sacrifice here for the mortal.
## 8
I chant for you to the men granting prosperity, to the Lord of the  Dwelling-Place, to Tvaṣṭar, as I give;
with reverences (I chant) to the trees, the plants, along with the rich Holy  Place, in the quest for wealth. 9. Let the mountains behave like family, to thrust out progeny for us— they who are like good heroes.
Āptya, admired, always worthy of our sacrifice, the manly one, will  strengthen our laud in preeminence.
## 10
I have praised the embryo of the terrestrial bull, (as) Trita (has praised)  the Child of the Waters with a well-twisted (hymn).
Agni is sung with fortifying (hymns) like (a horse) at running.
Flame-haired, he liquefies the trees.
## 11
How shall we speak to the great Rudrian (troop) [=Maruts]; what (shall  we say) to observant Bhaga, for wealth?
Let the waters and the plants help us, and Heaven, the woods, and the  mountains whose hair is trees.
## 12
Let him hear our hymns—the lord of nourishments; he [=Agni] is the  vigorous encircler, passing more quickly than a cloud.
Let them hear—the Waters, resplendent like the fortifications of a
mountain that encloses the offering ladles [=cows].
## 13
Just by our knowledge, o great ones [=Maruts], we shall say which are  your ways, wondrous ones, as we acquire what is choice.
And like birds, those of good essence [=Maruts] swoop down here
in pursuit with their fluttering to the mortal held by murderous
weapons.
## 14
I will call on the heavenly and earthly breeds and on the waters for the  good battler (/very bounteous one) [=Indra].
Let the days increase and the hymns tipped with gold; let the waters, the  conquered floods increase.
## 15
Step after step old age has been secured for me, either (by her) who is  the able Shielding Goddess or by the protectors.
Let the mother, the great Rasā, accompany us along with our patrons,  she with hands outstretched, with winnings outstretched.
## 16
How might we ritually serve with reverence those of good drops,  the Maruts traveling their ways, at the invitation—the Maruts of
advancing fame, at the invitation?
Let Ahi Budhnya not set us up to suffer harm. For us let there be
winnings at the distribution (of prizes).
## 17
In just these words now, for the sake of offspring along with cattle, the  mortal (seeks to) win you, o gods—the mortal (seeks to) win you
here, o gods.
Otherwise Dissolution might swallow the secure depository beneficial  to this body, my own old age.
## 18
Might we obtain that favor of yours, o gods, good ones, the nourishing  refreshment of the cow, through (this) recitation.
That gracious goddess of good drops [/gifts] should come toward us at  a run, for our welfare.

## 19
Let Iḍā, mother of the flock, greet us, or let Urvaśī, along with the  rivers.
Or Urvaśī Br̥haddivā, being sung, covering herself, (mother) of the
(ritual) presentation, mother of Āyu,
## 20
Of the nourishing prosperity [/of the prosperity of Ūrjavya]—let her  accompany us.