+++
title = "042"

+++
42 (396)
All Gods
Atri Bhauma
18 verses: triṣṭubh, except ekapadā virāj 17
Like the last hymn, this one enumerates a number of different gods to whom we  direct our praise, beginning, as V.41 did, with Mitra and Varuṇa, and the concern,  as in that hymn, is generally the ritual exchange of mortal praise for immortal gifts.  Or such is the structure of the opening (vss. 1–6) and concluding (vss. 11–18) sec
tions of the hymn. In the middle (vss. 7–10) Br̥haspati (in vs. 10 with the Maruts)  is called upon to be generous to generous patrons but to unleash destructive power  against stingy patrons and non-sacrificers. As Hanns-Peter Schmidt has noted,  these hostile actions are uncharacteristic of Br̥haspati but typical of Indra, just  as the association of Indra with the sacred formulation in verse 4 would be more  expected of Br̥haspati than Indra. He therefore argues (1968:  84–86) that verses  4–10 form a unity in this hymn, with Br̥haspati serving as an epithet of Indra.
Although the gods in the enumerative verses are often named, some verses  are riddles, describing the god without naming him (1cd, 6, 13, 14) or naming  him only in the second half of the verse (3, 11). Such puzzles are common in All  God hymns.
At the end of the hymn (vss. 14–17) the poet expresses the hope that his praise  should reach in all directions, to all three worlds, creating wide space for him and  his companions (in the final single-pāda verse 17). (Verse 18 is adopted from Aśvin  hymns later in the maṇḍala [V.76.5, 77.5], perhaps to introduce the Aśvins, who are  otherwise unmentioned, into this All God hymn.)
## 01
May the most availing hymn now reach Varuṇa with its visionary power;  may it reach Mitra, Bhaga, Aditi.
Let him hear it—the lord whose womb is the dappled (cow/ghee), who  has five Hotars, whose path cannot be transgressed, who is joy itself  [=Aryaman].
## 02
May Aditi grab hold of my praise, like a mother the beloved son of  her heart.
The dear sacred formulation that has been established by the gods, that  is joy itself to Mitra and Varuṇa—may I (grab hold of it). 3. Rouse the best poet of poets. Wet him with honey, with ghee.
He—god Savitar—will propel to us the golden goods that have been  held forth and set out.
## 04
Through your thought, Indra, join us with cows, with patrons, with  well-being, o possessor of the fallow bays—
and with the sacred formulation established by the gods, with the favor  of the gods who are worthy of the sacrifice.
## 05
God Bhaga, Savitar, Share of Wealth [/Aṃśa], Indra, the complete  victor over Vr̥tra and riches,
the lord of the R̥bhus, Vāja [=a R̥bhu], and Plenitude—let the powerful  immortals aid us.
## 06
We will proclaim the deeds of the one accompanied by the Maruts  [=Indra], unopposable, victorious, unaging.
None previous to you, bounteous one, nor later, nor anyone at all right  now has achieved your manly power.
## 07
Praise the first conferring of treasure; (praise) Br̥haspati, the winner of  riches,
who, the most wealful for him who chants and praises, will come here,  with many goods, to the one who repeatedly invokes (him).
## 08
O Br̥haspati, the bounteous ones accompanied by your help, who are  invulnerable and possessing good heroes,
who are givers of horses or givers of cows, who are givers of garments,  the well-portioned ones [=patrons]—on them (confer) riches.
## 09
Dissipate the possessions of those who benefit by our hymns without giving. Those violating the commandments, grown strong at forward thrusting,  the haters of the sacred formulation—keep them away from the sun. 10. Whoever lauds the demons at the invitation to the gods, run him over,  Maruts, with your wheel-less (chariots).
Whoever will scorn the labor of the one who labors for you, he will  render his own desires empty when he sweats (at ritual labor).
## 11
Praise him, who has the good arrow and the good bow, who holds sway  over every healing remedy.
Sacrifice to Rudra for great benevolence; with acts of reverence offer  friendship to the god, the lord.
## 12
The masters of the house, the workmen who have good hands
[=R̥bhus?], the wives of the bull, the rivers fashioned for wide
extension,
Sarasvatī, Br̥haddivā, and Rākā—let the resplendent ones, showing
favor, create a wide realm (for us).
## 13
I present to the great one who grants good shelter [=Tvaṣṭar] wisdom  (in the form of) a hymn just newly being born,
to him who, bulging [?] in the belly of his daughter, changing his forms  [=Tvaṣṭar as father of Viśvarūpa?], made this (world? form?) for us.

## 14
May our lovely praise now reach to the thundering, bellowing lord of  refreshment [=Parjanya], o singer—
to him who, rich in clouds, rich in water, sets in motion the two
world-halves with his lightning, as he sprinkles them.
## 15
May this praise reach up to the Marutian troop, to the youthful sons  of Rudra.
Desire calls me to wealth with well-being. Praise the unruly ones with  dappled horses.
## 16
May this praise reach to earth, to the midspace, to the trees, to the  plants, for wealth.
Let every god be easy for me to invoke. Let Mother Earth not set us in  disfavor.
## 17
May we come to be in broad unconstricted (space), o gods.
## 18
May we come together with the present help of the Aśvins, which is joy  itself and provides good guidance.
Here to us bring wealth and here heroes, you two immortals, and here  all that brings good fortune.