+++
title = "043"

+++
43 (397)
All Gods
Atri Bhauma
17 verses: triṣṭubh, except ekapadā virāj 16
Like many All God hymns, this one enumerates in individual verses divinities deserv ing praise, and the emphasis is on the ritual and the gods’ presence at and participa tion in it. There is perhaps more detail about ritual performance than in many such  hymns (see, e.g., vss. 1, 3–7), and this focus on the ritual is observable in two other  features of the hymn. On the one hand, the god Agni dominates the last part of  the hymn (vss. 12–15), under the name/epithet Br̥haspati in verse 12, unnamed but  clearly identified by his characteristics in verse 13, called Āyu in verse 14, and finally  named in verse 15ab. Such concentration on deified ritual fire in an All God hymn is  somewhat surprising. Further, the middle verse of this hymn (excluding the repeated  verses at the end), verse 7, is directed not toward a god but a ritual implement, the  gharma pot, used in the Pravargya ritual and often the focus of priestly speculation.
## 01
Let the milk-cows, swift to their tasks, not neglectful, come close to us  here with their milk, their honey.
For great wealth, the inspired poet, the singer keeps invoking the seven  lofty (cows [=rivers?]), who are joy itself.
## 02
With lovely praise, with reverence Heaven and Earth are to be turned  hither—they who are not neglectful with regard to the prize-contest. The Father, the Mother who has honeyed speech and good hands—let  the two glorious ones aid us in every bout. 3. Adhvaryus—having made the honeyed (drinks), present the pure dear  (soma) to Vāyu.
Like the Hotar, drink first of this honey of ours, god; we have given it  to you for your exhilaration.
## 04
The ten fingers and the two arms hitch up the stone—the two arms with  good hands that are the laboring priests [/quellers] of soma.
The plant, well(-handled by) the fists, has milked out the sap of honey  that dwells on the mountain, shimmering and pure.
## 05
The soma has been pressed for you who have enjoyed (it)—for will and  skill, for lofty exhilaration.
Indra, bring nearby the two dear fallow bays, those amenable to the  chariot-pole at the yoking to your chariot, when you are being
invoked.
## 06
Hither to us, in agreement (with her), (bring) great Devotion [/Aramati],  lady goddess, on whom the oblation is bestowed with reverence,
the lofty knower of truth—for the exhilarating drink of honey, bring  her hither, Agni, along the paths the gods travel.
## 07
The one which the inspired poets anoint, like (the ritual grass) as they  spread it, heating it with fire like (the offering of the sacrificial
animal) with its omentum:
the truth-(sing)ing gharma (drink/pot) has been set here on the fire like  the dearest son on the lap of his father.
## 08
Let the great, lofty, most availing hymn come like a messenger to invoke  the Aśvins.
(O Aśvins,) joy itself, drive nearby on the same chariot; go to the
treasury (of honey) as if to the chariot-pole, like the axle-pin into the  wheel-nave.
## 09
I have shown forth an expression of reverence to the very strong,  powerful Pūṣan and to Vāyu,
who are impellers of thoughts by reason of their bounty and
treasure-givers of the prize in their own nature.
## 10
Convey all the Maruts according to their (individual) names, according  to their (individual) forms, o Jātavedas, when you are invoked.
The sacrifice, the hymns, and the lovely praise of the singer—all you  Maruts, all come (to these) with your help.
## 11
Hither to us from lofty heaven, from the mountain let Sarasvatī,  deserving the sacrifice, come to the sacrifice.
Let the goddess, having enjoyed our call, turning toward the ghee, listen  willingly to our capable speech.
## 12
Here on the seat make him sit—the ritual adept, dark-backed, lofty  Br̥haspati (as Agni).
Sitting on his womb, shining here in the house, golden-colored,
reddish—(him) may we serve.714 V.44
## 13
The enduring one belonging to lofty heaven, the bestower—let him  come with all his succors when he is invoked—
clothing himself in his wives, the plants, not neglectful, a bull with
tripartite horn, conferring vigor [=Agni].
## 14
In the highest, gleaming footstep of the mother of Āyu [=Urvaśī] the  admiring abundant [?] ones have come.
With their oblations bestowed with reverence, they groom the beloved  child [=Agni] in his dwelling place, like the Āyus.
## 15
Lofty vigor for lofty you, Agni, do those rivalrous (priestly) pairs, who  reach old age through their insight, pursue.
Let every god be easy for me to invoke. Let Mother Earth not set us in  disfavor.
## 16
May we come to be in broad unconstricted (space), o gods.
## 17
May we come together with the present help of the Aśvins, which is joy  itself and provides good guidance.
Here to us bring wealth and here heroes, you two immortals, and here  all that brings good fortune.