+++
title = "044"

+++
44 (398)
All Gods
Avatsāra Kāśyapa, etc.
15 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 14–15
As noted above, Geldner considers this the hardest hymn in the R̥gveda (“das  schwierigste Lied des R̥V”), and a judgment very like this is shared by other schol ars (e.g., Oldenberg, who deems most of it “uncertain or hopeless” [“meist fraglich  oder hoffnungslos”]). Although in our opinion there are numerous contenders for  “hardest hymn” in the R̥gveda (X.106, for example, some of which appears to be
written in unbreakable code), this one is certainly near the top of any such list. The difficulties are found in every aspect of the hymn, beginning with the fact  that the divine subject(s) of the various verses of the heart of the hymn are never  identified. Then there are lexical problems:  a number of rare words or hapaxes;  morphological problems, including unusual inflectional and derivational morphol ogy; syntactic problems such as frequent lack of verbs, unclear referents, unclear  syntactic roles, and so on—not to mention a general lack of superficial coherence,  both between verses and within verses. For all these reasons, the translation given is  provisional in general and in many details.
Nonetheless, it is possible to form a hypothesis about what the hymn is “about,”  and this hypothesis allows one to interpret many of the ambiguities within this  framework. Our translation reflects this hypothesis, and in a number of places  bracketed identifications have been inserted to guide readers—though we have tried  to keep these to a minimum, to avoid too much clutter in the poetry itself, which despite its frequent lack of clarity possesses, in our opinion, both power and beauty,  and to allow readers to produce their own interpretations of the hymn. To be brief, the hypothesis with which we operate is that each verse is applicable  to both Agni and Soma, the two crucial deified ritual substances, and therefore  many of the verbal contortions are the result of attempting to produce phraseology  that is meaningful for each god simultaneously. (This hypothesis is adumbrated by  Geldner in his introduction to the hymn, where he suggests that some verses can be  read with intentional double reference to Agni and Soma, though he clearly does  not consider the whole hymn in this light.) The final two verses (14–15), in a differ ent meter and almost mechanically responsive to each other, mention both Soma  and Agni, and may be intended as an implicit answer to the riddle posed by the  rest of the hymn. In any case, if our hypothesis is correct, the poem is the forerun ner of the much later kāvya tours de force in which, for example, the plots of the  Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa are narrated at the same time.
The Soma/Agni simultaneity is especially prominent in the first part of the hymn.  Toward the middle of the hymn (starting around vs. 8) another theme emerges, that  of the poet learning his craft, seeking true speech. What unites the two themes is  the sense that poetic inspiration comes from the ritual itself and from the mysteries  of the identification of the two most important ritual substances, so that the poet  gains his verbal mastery as the sacrifice progresses. But it is also the case that the  sacrifice needs his poetry in order to be properly carried through, and so the poetic  skill the poet gains from his contemplation of the mysteries of the sacrifice is put to  use immediately in the next verses (9–11), and the result always desired by R̥gvedic  sacrificers, the epiphany of Indra on the sacrificial ground, is achieved in verse 12.  Because of his contribution to the success of the sacrifice, the poet is lauded in the  last verse (13) before the responsive solution to the riddle as the foundation of the  whole sacrifice. Thus, the hymn is both a static meditation on a central sacrificial  mystery and a roughly chronological progression through the sacrifice.
One of the enigmatic features of the hymn found throughout the hymn is the  regular presence of unidentified feminine plurals (vss. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11), espe cially intriguing in verse 7. Identifying the likely referent(s) for these feminines as  the hymn unfolds shows the developing complexity of the hymnic universe of dis course. In the earlier part of the hymn the feminines most probably refer, in the  realm of Agni, to the streams of ghee offered into Agni (and also perhaps to the plants  he burns)—while, in the realm of Soma, to the waters that swell the soma stalks  and to the cows’ milk mixed with the pressed soma. As the figure of the poet joins  the hymn, the feminines can have a third set of referents, the insights that provide  him with poetic inspiration and the words/songs that result from them. (All of the  underlying nouns in all three referential systems are feminine in gender and con ceptually female.) This complex web of reference is beautifully (or dauntingly) on  display in verse 11. In our reading of this verse all three sets of feminines are not  bound, that is, not in use, when the soma is being brought to the ritual and the sacri fice has not yet started. But when soma the plant is made into soma the exhilarating

drink, all three sets of feminines are hitched up: the poet’s words are recited, the  streams of milk approach the pressed soma, and the streams of ghee are poured  into the fire. The priests direct the various females to their appropriate goals, and at  the end of the ritual they are “unhitched.”
As an aside, we might mention what appears to be a sly joke, located in almost  the middle of the hymn (minus the final riddle-solving verses): in 6a, after five verses  of exhausting enigmas with many more to come, the poet says, “Just as he appears,  so is he said (to be)”—an assertion about the transparent clarity of the subject that  the frustrated audience may view with bitter irony. However, it is of course not  merely a joke, for the poet’s task is to find the hidden mystical truths of the universe  and express them in true words, in bráhman. No matter how superficially baffling,  the bráhman captures how “it really is,” and so the poet asserts here.
Although numerous puzzles remain in the hymn, we hope to have shown that  it is far from “hopeless.” It can be read as a consistent unity (though the unity we  see may not be the only possible one), and, as so often with complex hymns in the  R̥gveda, it is a meditation not only on the ritual but also on poetic craft.
## 1
Him—in the primordial way, in the earlier way, in every way, in this way  here—(him who is) preeminence (itself), who sits on the ritual grass
and finds the sun,
him facing toward (our) community will you milk out with song, the swift  one conquering (the cows? the waters?), among whom you grow strong. 2. Lovely to be seen for beauty are those (tips [of flame/soma streams]),  which are the sun of the lower (realm). (As the possessor) of (those)  tips who shines forth (even) for the one who doesn’t impel (largesse), you are a good herdsman, not for deceiving, o strong-willed one. Far  beyond the trickeries of magic your name was (set) in truth.
## 3
The steed does the oblation follow (and) its [=oblation’s] elements are  true; the Hotar who goes without harm brings might.
Always stretching out along the ritual grass, the bullish child, the
unaging youth is placed in the middle with his outgrowth.
## 4
These (hymns?) of yours, easy to yoke, (go) forth on their course to seek  the twinned sisters [= butter offerings/waters], strong through truth,  that (go) downward toward yonder one [=Agni/Soma],
with reins easy to control, directing everything. Krivi [=Agni/Soma/the  poet (<kavi)?] steals (their) names [=butter offerings/waters?] at their  precipitous fall.
## 5
Quivering with your powers of endurance (toward) the one covered  with little “twigs” that grasps (you) at the pressing [=firewood/sheep’s  fleece?], resounding among the clearly pregnant (females [=plants/
waters/cows]),
you beautify yourself at the recitations for the streams, o you with a  straight song. Wax strong over the wives, (you who are) alive in the
ceremony. 6. Just as he appears, so is he said (to be): They united (him) with his  effective shadow in the waters—
(him) who wins wideness for us—(wins) the great (earth), the broad  expanse, and lofty immovable might that brings good heroes.
## 7
(When) unwed, he pursues (women); once he has wives, he truly  out(strips) (all) contenders with a mind that seeks conflict—(as) the  sun, the sage poet.
He with his goods near at hand will vanquish the (sun’s) heat and will  win shelter for us, which protects (our) patrimony on all sides.
## 8
He [=poet] pursues the older sonority of the seers by means of (you  [=Agni/Soma]), the beacon of this arrangement [=sacrifice]. Among  which (females [=waters/cows/insights]) your name (is),
in whatever (place) it has been set, he will find it [=sonority of the seers]  through his industry. He who makes the journey by himself, he will
get it right.
## 9
The foremost of these (females) has stepped down into the ocean (of  soma). The pressing is not harmed into which she is guided.
Here the heart of the working poet [?] does not tremble, where the
thought is found that is his bond to the purified (soma/fire).
## 10
For he (has a bond) with the insights of the mental lordship of the  one deserving the sacrifice, who speaks just so and aims toward the
same goal.
With the delightful (poems) [/lusty (warriors)] of the stealthy one we  shall win the most expansive prize, to be brought to success only by  the wise.
## 11
(While still) a falcon, (soma) is unboundedness for these (females  [=poems/waters/cows]); (when it becomes) the exhilarating drink, it  is their girding—for the one deserving the sacrifice, provided with all  desirable things, master of artifice.
They [=priests] make (the females) set their goal to go to one after the  other (of Soma and Agni) in turn. They know (that) unharnessing
and drinking in rounds (are) at hand.
## 12
The one worthy of the sacrifice, always granting, has smashed away  hatreds. “Twisted” (here) by the arms [=activity (of you, the priests)],  finding (the praise) that is heard, he is surpassingly in partnership
with you.
He [=Indra] comes in response to both the choice ones [=Agni and
Soma], and he is radiant when he has a share in the troop [=Maruts]  with their (chariots?) that drive forth easily.
## 13
Bearing the pressed (soma) of the sacrificer, master of the settlements,  he [=poet] is the udder, the ladle of all visionary thoughts.
He bears the (two) milk-cows [=Heaven and Earth, or Agni and Soma];  the milk, full of sap, has been brought to perfection. The one who
recites following (his teacher), he learns, not the one who sleeps.

## 14
Who stays awake, him the verses desire; who stays awake, to him go the  melodies.
Who stays awake, to him does this Soma say: “I am at home in
fellowship with you.”
## 15
Agni stays awake: him the verses desire. Agni stays awake: to him go the  melodies.
Agni stays awake: to him does this Soma say, “I am at home in
fellowship with you.”