+++
title = "045"

+++
45 (399)
All Gods
Sadāpr̥ṇa Ātreya
11 verses: triṣṭubh
A lovely hymn, both narrating the opening of the Vala cave by the power of the  Aṅgirases’ poetic speech and welcoming the dawn of a new day and the sunrise on  that mythic model. The hymn begins (vss. 1–3) with a description of sunrise, with  no overt mention of the myth, though it clearly lurks in the background. The poet is  concerned to apply the mythic model to the current sacrificial situation. He initiates  the ritual in verse 4, and then in the two, paired, middle verses in the hymn (5–6),  an omphalos, he exhorts his priestly comrades to achieve the poetic vision (dhī́)  that has served others well in the past. The particular past he has in mind becomes  clear in the following two verses (7–8), which depict the opening of the Vala cave  and the Aṅgirases’ role in it. The next two verses first pray that the Sun will come up  (9) and then announce that he has arisen (10). The exhortations in verses 5–6 have  worked! In the last verse (11) the poet (addressing himself, as well as his priestly  colleagues) exults over this success: “the poetic vision that wins the sun,” the same  one that the Aṅgirases possessed, has now been acquired, and it will bring welfare  to the community. It is noteworthy that Indra, the usual hero of the Vala myth, is  not mentioned in connection with it (though he does make an appearance in vs. 4);  presumably the poet wishes to identify himself and his priestly comrades with the  chorus of Indra’s associates, the Aṅgirases, rather than with the god.
A brief grammatical digression is necessary here in order to show the particular  artfulness of this hymn. As noted, the first three verses already describe, in some  detail, the dawn and the sunrise, and so it might be thought that the sunrise in  verse 10 is an anticlimax. But a remarkable fact about the first three verses is that  the description of the sunrise there is couched almost entirely in the verb form  known as the injunctive, which has no overt marker of tense. Although its default  interpretation is past tense, it can be used also to depict “timeless” events. (Since  English lacks such a verbal category, we have used the present tense here.) The sun rise in verses 1–3 is both the mythic model of the Vala-Aṅgiras narrative and, more  important, the ideal sunrise to which the poet aspires. In contrast to the insistent injunctives in these verses, when today’s sunrise, the successful result of the sacri ficers’ and poet’s efforts, is depicted in verse 10, all four verb forms have the overt  marker of past tense, the so-called augment, making it clear that the sunrise there  has indeed (just) occurred. Another example of R̥gvedic poets’ sensitivity to gram matical categories and their ingenious deployment of them.
## 1
Through knowledge unloosing the stone of heaven with hymns—the  shining (beacons) of the approaching dawn come (out of it)—
he uncloses (the doors) to the enclosures: the Sun comes up. The god has  opened up the doors belonging to the sons of Manu.
## 2
The Sun unlooses his beauty like an ensign; the mother of the cows  [=Dawn], recognizing (the way), comes here from the pen.
The rivers (of light) have floods (broad and high) like plains, have  floods that chew (their banks). Heaven becomes firm like a
well-fixed pillar.
## 3
In response to this hymn here the womb of the mountain (gapes open)  for the primordial birth of the great ones [=dawns].
The mountain gapes open; heaven achieves success; desiring to win the  earth, they [=poets/Aṅgirases] exhaust themselves.
## 4
With well-spoken words pleasing to the gods, Indra and Agni are now to  be called upon by you for help,
for with solemn speeches sage poets of good sacrifice who desire to win  always sacrifice to the Maruts.
## 5
Come on now! Today let us become possessed of good poetic vision. Let  us send misfortune forth a wide way away.
Let us put hatreds aside in the distance; let us go forward to the
sacrificer.
## 6
Come on! Comrades, let us create (the same) poetic vision with which the  mother opened the enclosure of the cow,
with which Manu conquered Viśiśipra, with which the wandering
merchant reached the overflowing source (of goods?).
## 7
The (pressing) stone, guided by the hand, bellowed there, the stone along  with which the Navagvas sang for ten months.
Saramā, going after the truth, found the cows; the Aṅgiras made all  things real.
## 8
When all the Aṅgirases roared along with the cows at the brightening of  this great (dawn),
at the fountainhead of them [=cows], in the highest seat, Saramā found  the cows along the path of truth.
## 9
Let the Sun drive here with his seven horses to the tract of land
stretching widely at (the end of) his long course.
Let the quick falcon fly to the stalk and the youthful poet shine as he  goes among the cows.

## 10
The Sun has mounted the gleaming flood, now that he has yoked his  golden, straight-backed (horses).
Like a boat through the water the wise ones guided him; the waters,
giving heed, stood still nearby.
## 11
You have acquired the poetic vision that wins the sun in the waters, with  which the Navagvas passed ten months.
Through this vision may we be those who have gods as our herdsmen;  through this vision may we pass beyond constraint.