+++
title = "046"

+++
46 (400)
All Gods
Pratikṣatra Ātreya
8 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 2, 8
Renou pronounces this hymn “banal,” and certainly the long enumeration of divin ities, listed with little or no characterization or action, does not engage the audience  in the same way that the intricacies of the previous All God hymns in this maṇḍala  do. However, there are two features of note in the hymn, and these features have, in  our view, a covert connection. The hymn ends with two verses praising the Wives  of the Gods in general and particular gods’ wives by title: Indrāṇī, Agnāyī (wife of  Agni), Aśvinī, Varuṇānī (vs. 8); the Wives (of the Gods) are also mentioned in verse  2, and other goddesses are also featured in the hymn: Sarasvatī (vs. 2), Aditi (vss. 3,  6), the Waters (vs. 3), the Rivers (vs. 6). The second feature is that the first verse is  very different from the rest—the invocation of divinities only begins in verse 2. In  verse 1 the 1st-person poet-sacrificer describes himself as hitched to a chariot-pole  and, despite the effort involved, does not wish to be released from this yoking.
Now it is certainly possible that the yoking image only refers to the poet-sacrificer’s  usual tasks at the sacrifice. However, in conjunction with the emphasis on the gods’  wives (pátnīḥ) later in the hymn, we suggest that what this hymn is ever so delicately  concerning itself with is an important and controversial innovation: the introduc
tion of the Sacrificer’s Wife (pátnī) as a necessary participant in the ritual. As has  been argued elsewhere (Jamison 2011, forthcoming a and b), though the Sacrificer’s  Wife is a fixture already in early middle Vedic ritual (see Jamison 1996a), there is  no evidence for her participation in early R̥gvedic ritual. The introduction of the  Sacrificer’s Wife in the middle to late R̥gveda (presumably beginning with only one  or a few priestly circles) seems to have been, understandably, controversial, and  though it is not referred to directly in the text, there are covert arguments, pro  and con, in a number of hymns. One of the important images of the new ritual  pairing of Sacrificer and Wife is that of a pair of draft-animals jointly yoked to a  chariot-pole (e.g., VIII.33.18, X.102.10), pulling the sacrifice together, though with  the husband maintaining a slight edge in strength and effort. It seems quite possible  that this image is found in verse 1: the male yoked to the pole, pulling a feminine referent (the chariot-pole, which is grammatically feminine, but also secondarily the  wife), and with no desire to return to the old state of affairs. The last word in this  verse, neṣati “he will lead,” reminds of the priestly title, Neṣṭar “Leader,” the priest  whose duty it is to lead the Sacrificer’s Wife around the sacrificial ground in later  śrauta ritual; he is already marginally represented in the R̥gveda as a leader of the  Wives of the Gods (see especially I.15.3).
If this scenario is correct—that verse 1 represents an argument in favor of the  new model of sacrifice including the Sacrificer’s Wife—then the lists of gods that  follow might be a form of insurance. Every possible divinity is called upon to wit ness and give tacit approval to the innovation. And the Wives of the Gods, who  provide the divine model for the Sacrificer’s Wife, are called on especially insistently  to come to the sacrifice and provide their help and support.
## 01
I, a knowing one, have yoked myself like a courser to the chariot-pole;  I draw it [/her=ritual wife], which [/who] furthers (the sacrifice?) while  seeking help.
I do not desire to be released from it [/her], nor to turn back here  again. The knowing one who goes in front will lead straight along  the paths.
## 02
O Agni, Indra, Varuṇa, Mitra, (All?) Gods, o Marutian troop and  Viṣṇu—provide!
Both of the Aśvins, Rudra, and the Wives (of the Gods), Pūṣan, Bhaga,  Sarasvatī shall enjoy themselves.
## 03
Indra and Agni, Mitra and Varuṇa, Aditi, the Sun, Earth, Heaven, the  Maruts, the Mountains, the Waters—
I call on (and on) Viṣṇu, Pūṣan, Brahmaṇaspati, also on Fortune, Laud,  Savitar, for help.
## 04
And may Viṣṇu and Wind—the unfailing ones—the Treasure-Giver and  Soma create joy for us.
And may the R̥bhus and Aśvins, and Tvaṣṭar and Vibhvan, consent to  wealth for us.
## 05
And may there come to us here this Marutian troop, dwelling in heaven,  worthy of the sacrifice, to sit on the ritual grass.
May Br̥haspati and Pūṣan provide to us shelter for defense, and Varuṇa,  Mitra, and Aryaman.
## 06
And may these mountains, receiving good praises, and the very bright  rivers be (there) for our protection.
May Bhaga, the apportioner, come here with capacity (and) help. Let  Aditi of broad extent hear my call.
## 07
The Wives of the Gods—let them willingly help us; let them help us to  propagate, to win prizes.
(You) who belong to the earth, (you) who (live) under the commandment  of the waters, you goddesses, receiving good invocations, give
shelter to us.

## 08
And let the ladies, the Wives of the Gods pursue (the offering)—Indra’s  wife, Agni’s wife, the Aśvins’ queen.
Let Rodasī and Varuṇa’s wife pay heed. Let the goddesses pursue (the  offering), which is the regular season for women.