+++
title = "047"

+++
47 (401)
All Gods
Pratiratha Ātreya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
Each verse in this short hymn presents a riddle: a description of a god or divine force  whose name is withheld till late in the verse (1, 2) or suppressed entirely (3–6). This is  not an uncommon tactic in All God hymns—a particularly deft example is VIII.29.  This hymn presents several twists on this device. First, the characterizations seem regu
larly intended to mislead. For example, verse 1 has a feminine subject, and given the  actions ascribed to her, the audience would expect the subject to be Dawn. But instead  it is (Poetic) Inspiration (manīṣā́), here identified as the mother of Dawn (presumably  because early-morning ritual poetry awakens Dawn and impels her to appear). Again,  the attributes of the subject in verse 2 suggest Agni’s flames, but the actual referent,  the last word of the verse, is “Paths.” Second, the riddles get harder as the hymn pro
gresses. As was already noted, in verses 1 and 2 the solution is given, but thereafter it is  not. In verse 3 the solution is fairly obvious by the end of the verse, but in verse 4 it is  less so. Verse 5 announces itself as an enigma, and it seems to have double application  to both the Sun and Agni. There is no agreed upon solution for verse 6.
Although this observation is unconnected to the riddle structure just discussed,  each verse (but 5) has a form of div/dyu “heaven” (mostly diváḥ) (vs. 5 has d(u)vé “two,” which is phonologically close). The final pāda of the hymn is an “homage to  Heaven.” Although this homage was not prepared thematically in the hymn, it was  prepared verbally, by the repetition of the stem in various syntactic and semantic  contexts.
## 01
Hitching up, she comes from heaven, she who is called the great mother  of the Daughter (of Heaven [=Dawn]), waking (men),
seeking to win, the youthful one, (coming) from the fathers, constantly  calling in the seat (of the sacrifice)—(she is) Inspiration.
## 02
The nimble ones, hastening at their work, having mounted the nave of  the immortal one,
the endless, broad ones encircle heaven and earth on all sides—(they are)  the Paths.
## 03
(He is) a bull, the sea, a reddish eagle (that) entered the womb of the  age-old father.
The dappled stone deposited in the middle of heaven strode across (the  sky); he protects the two ends of the airy realm: (the Sun). 4. Four bear him, affording rest; ten give the infant suck, for (him to) move. Threefold are his highest cows; they circle around the ends of heaven in a  single day: (Agni?).
## 05
Here is the wonder, the enigma, people: that the rivers move, but the  waters stay,
that two, other than his mother, bear him—the two were born hither and  yon but are twins, of the same lineage: (Sun and Agni).
## 06
They stretch out their insightful thoughts, their (ritual) labors (as warp)  for him; the mothers weave garments for their child.
The bulls, delighting in coupling, go to their wives along the path of  heaven.
## 07
Let this, o Mitra and Varuṇa, let this (hymn), o Agni, be luck and  lifetime for us; let it be recited here.
Might we obtain a fording place and firm standing. Homage to Heaven,  the lofty seat.