+++
title = "048"

+++
48 (402) All Gods
Pratibhānu Ātreya
5 verses: jagatī
Another enigmatic hymn, made more baffling (as in a number of All God hymns in  Maṇḍala V) by the lack of named referents for the descriptive phrases. There is cer tainly no consensus among scholars about these referents or about the purpose and  structure of the hymn; indeed, a number of scholars consider this a “fragment.” We  find this unlikely, however. The fact that the most difficult verse by far is the middle  one (3) suggests that this is an omphalos hymn, and moreover the final pāda (of vs.  5) is typical of a hymn ending.
In our opinion the hymn is appropriate to an early-morning ritual, and the two  main referents are Dawn (/Dawns) and Agni. It begins with a typical rhetorical ques tion: what poem to compose for the establishment of the ritual fire at dawn? The  second half of verse 1 and first half of verse 2 present striking images of dawn  (/dawns) breaking, ending verse 2 with a standard meditation on the aging that  every new day brings to mortals. This thought is continued in verse 3, though the  focus passes to Agni, who day after day at the ritual prepares the mace for Indra  when Indra is present at the sacrifice, while the recurrent dawns mark the passage of  time. Agni as the ritual fire remains the subject of the remainder of the hymn (vss.  4–5), with his identity becoming clearer and clearer.
## 1
What shall we compose for the self-ruling, self-glorious great one  [=Agni?] for his own dear establishment,
when the mistress of artifice [=Dawn?], choosing the waters in the dark  cloud of the variegated dusky realm, stretches them forth.724 V.49
## 2
They [=Dawns] have spread their hero-strengthening tracery along the  same course through the whole dusky realm.
A man devoted to the gods drives away the backward-facing (dawns)  ever behind (him), and lengthens (his life) with those in front.
## 3
Along with the pressing stones, through (the periods) of the day and  through the nights, he [=Agni?] sprinkles [=prepares] the best mace,  when the master of artifice [=Indra?] (is there)—
while into his own [=Agni’s] house (the Dawns?) proceed by the
hundred: rolling up the days, they unroll them (again).
## 4
I have looked upon this stream(ing) of his [=Agni], like (the swing) of an  axe; I have looked upon his face, for the enjoyment of his form,
when concurrently he establishes a treasure like a dwelling place
abounding in food for the clan whose cry is “carry (the day).”
## 5
The four-faced one stretches with his tongue out straight, wearing  pleasing (garb), putting the stranger in place (as) Varuna (does).
We do not know, because of our human state, that (source?) from which  Bhaga and Savitar will give what is choice.