+++
title = "049"

+++
49 (403)
All Gods
Pratibha Ātreya
5 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 5
This hymn picks up where the previous hymn ended, with the gods Savitar  (“Impeller”) and Bhaga (“Fortune”) and their bounty to mortals. These two gods  are the topic of verses 1 and 2 here, and the first four (of five) verses concern the dis tribution of treasures to men, with a widening circle of gods responsible for these  gifts. The context (as vs. 3 makes especially clear) is the distribution of dakṣiṇās  (priestly gifts) at the early-morning ritual. Verse 5 asks for more general blessings  than just wealth, but in its references to the “formless void” and to “wide space,”  it also seems to depict dawn, which creates visible and articulated space from  formlessness.
## 1
I hasten toward god Savitar for you today, and toward Bhaga who  apportions the treasure of Āyu.
I would also turn hither you two superior men, who bring many
enjoyments—seeking companionship with you, o Aśvins, day
after day.
## 2
In response to the advance of the lord, as a knowing one offer friendship  to god Savitar with hymns.
A discerning one should call on (him) with reverence and on the
preeminent one who apportions the treasure of Āyu. 3. Traveling to those lacking gifts, (each god) distributes valuables—Pūṣan,  Bhaga, Aditi—at the dawning of the ruddy (Dawn).
Indra, Viṣṇu, Varuṇa, Mitra, Agni—the wondrous ones beget lucky days. 4. Then Savitar without assault is our defense, then the nurturing rivers  follow suit,
when, as Hotar of the ceremony, I call upon (them). May we be lords of  wealth, with prizes as our treasure.
## 5
Those who have presented such great reverence to the good ones, who  possess well-spoken speech for Mitra and Varuṇa,
let the formless void go away (from them); make a wider space (for
them). With the aid of Heaven and Earth may we rejoice.