+++
title = "050"

+++
50 (404)
All Gods
Svastyātreya Ātreya
5 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 5
This little hymn is surprisingly beset by difficulties, especially of syntax, reference,  and meter. A particularly intricate set of syntactic constructions modulates from  the singular “everyman” of verse 1, through an indefinite plural 3rd person, also  representing men in general (“they” 2ab), to an identification of those indefinite  men with “us” (2cd)—all of whom desire wealth and the companionship of the  god “Leader,” identified by the later tradition with Savitar (whom we met in V.49),  though this identification is not necessary.
The scene shifts to the sacrifice in the next two verses (3–4), and the “we” of verse  2 becomes the “you” in verse 3, exhorted to do honor to the gods and their wives  as guests at the sacrifice. The identities remain off-balance, however: the verb used  for “honor” is one whose subject is usually a god and whose object a mortal, so  role reversal is implied. And the gods are not identified as “gods,” but rather called  “men”—using the word nŕ̥, which refers to especially elite, noble, or worthy men, and  is often elsewhere applied to gods. Verse 4 depicts the mythic model of the soma sacri fice, with Indra invigorated by soma to be a winner. This leads us back to god Leader  and prayers for wealth and well-being in response to our ritual offerings (vs. 5).
## 01
Every mortal would choose the companionship of the god Leader. Every one aims at wealth and would choose brilliance, in order to thrive. 2. They are yours, god Leader, as are the ones who (set out) to mimic them. As those—for they are to be infused (with good things)—may we be  accompanied by wealth, by (other) desirable accompaniments.
## 03
Therefore, (all of you,) show favor here to the superior men [=gods] as  our guests, also to their wives.
Let the repeller repel into the distance anything standing in the path and  (all) hatreds.

## 04
When the harnessed draft-animal will run, the beast seeking the wooden  cup [=soma],
the manly minded one [=Indra], with a dwelling full of heroes, (will) win  the floods, like wise (thoughts?).
## 05
This Lord of the Chariot is yours, god Leader. Luck (be) Wealth— luck (be) for wealth, luck for well-being! Let us conceive praise songs as  refreshment; let us conceive praise songs for the gods.