+++
title = "051"

+++
51 (405) All Gods
Svastyātreya Ātreya
15 verses: gāyatrī 1–4, uṣṇih 5–10, jagatī or triṣṭubh 11–13, anuṣṭubh 14–15
The last of the All God hymns in Maṇḍala V, this hymn is far too long (fifteen  verses) for the position it holds, after a series of five-verse hymns. It is also not  unified metrically. It likely originally consisted of separate hymns, verses 1–4, 5–7,  8–10, with 11–15 as a later addition.
Both in content and form, all the segments are simple, predictable, and closely  tied to the soma-drinking of various gods, especially those appropriate to the morn ing soma-pressing. This collection of strictly liturgical verses provides a curious  finale to the highly wrought, intellectually challenging, and deeply serious All God  hymns in this collection.
## 1
O Agni, to drink of the pressed (soma), come here with all your helpers, with the gods, for the giving of oblations.
## 2
(All of) you whose insights are truth, whose ordinances are real, come  here to the ceremony.
Drink with the tongue of Agni.
## 3
You comrade, inspired poet—come here with the inspired poets, the  early-traveling
gods, to drink the soma.
## 4
Here is the soma, pressed in the cup, poured around in the basin— the one dear to Indra, to Vāyu.
## 5
Vāyu, relishing (them), drive hither to pursue (the oblations), for the  giving of oblations.
Drink of the pressed stalk to your satisfaction.
## 6
Vāyu and Indra, you have the right to the drinking of these pressed  (soma drinks).
You flawless ones, relish them to your satisfaction.
## 7
The pressed soma drinks mixed with curds are for Indra and for Vāyu. Like rivers to the deep, they go to satisfaction.
## 8
Jointly with all the gods, jointly with the Aśvins, with Dawn,
drive hither, Agni. Take pleasure in the pressed soma, as (you did) at Atri’s. 9. Jointly with Mitra and Varuṇa, jointly with Soma, with Viṣṇu,
drive hither, Agni. Take pleasure in the pressed soma, as (you did) at  Atri’s.
## 10
Jointly with the Ādityas, with the Vasus, jointly with Indra, with Vāyu, drive hither, Agni. Take pleasure in the pressed soma, as (you did) at  Atri’s.
## 11
Well-being let the Aśvins, let Fortune mete out to us; well-being let the  goddess Aditi, let the unassailable ones.
Well-being let lord Pūṣan establish for us; well-being let Heaven and  Earth, with kind attention.
## 12
For well-being we shall call upon Vāyu, on Soma; well-being (let him  mete out) who is lord of creation.
On Br̥haspati with his whole flock (we shall call) for well-being. For  well-being let the Ādityas be there for us.
## 13
Let all the gods be there for us today, for well-being; let Vaiśvānara,  Vasu, Agni (be there) for well-being.
Let the gods, the R̥bhus give aid for (our) well-being. With well-being  let Rudra protect us from constraint.
## 14
Well-being, o Mitra and Varuṇa, well-being, o rich Path.
Well-being for us (let) Indra and Agni—well-being, o Aditi, make
for us.
## 15
With well-being we would follow along our path, like the Sun and  the Moon.
May we meet up with one who gives in return, who does not smite, with  one who knows.
Maṇḍala V contains the largest collection of Marut hymns in the R̥gveda,  V.52–61, plus V.87. The ten sequential hymns, 52–61, attributed to Śyāvāśva  Ātreya, are poetry of the highest order—inventive, exuberant, and beautifully  crafted—and they capture both aspects of the Maruts:  their social existence  as a sort of Männerbund, a group of young, handsome, high-spirited war
riors, and their naturalistic existence as personifications of the monsoon/thun derstorm—without losing sight of their divinity and the benefits they provide  to men.