+++
title = "052"

+++
52 (406)
Maruts
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
17 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 6, 16–17
As befits the first hymn in this Marut cycle, the poet Śyāvāśva addresses himself  with an exhortation to praise the Maruts in the first pāda of the first verse. He then

describes them in a general fashion and asserts their right to the sacrifice, in a short  ring-compositional introduction (vss. 1–5). (For the responsions of verses 1 and 5  as an example of “poetic repair,” see Jamison 2006.)
The next section of the hymn (vss. 6–13) depicts the Maruts as the gods of the  thunderstorm in a series of vivid images and also fancifully assigns individual  names to them (vss. 10–11)—the Maruts are otherwise undifferentiated—ending  with another exhortation to the poet to praise them (vs. 13cd). In the last few verses  (14–17) ritual honor is given to the Maruts, and they respond with gifts. The last  verse (17) resembles a dānastuti, but with the Maruts, rather than humans, as the  donors to the poet; they were already identified as “patrons” (sūrí) in the two pre
ceding verses (15–16).
The density of imagery throughout is remarkable; we will give just one example,  from verse 9. There the Maruts are said to “clothe themselves in wool in the Paruṣṇī River.” The “wool” must stand for foam, off-white and fluffy like newly shorn wool.  But the river foam is yet another metaphorical substitute for something else, namely  clouds, which the Maruts as storm gods would be clothed in—all of this conveyed  in an economical half-verse.
## 01
Śyāvāśva, chant forth boldly—along with the Maruts possessing chants, who rejoice in [/cheer on] undisguised fame according to their own
nature, those worthy of the sacrifice.
## 02
For they are comrades of steadfast strength—boldly.
Bold on their drive, by themselves they protect each and every one.
## 03
They, like streaming bulls, spring across the nights.
Then the Maruts’ might in heaven and earth we ponder.
## 04
Among the Maruts we would establish your praise and
sacrifice—boldly—
who all, through human (life)spans, protect the mortal from harm.
## 05
The deserving ones possessing good drops [/gifts], men who are not  half-strength,
to the Maruts of heaven chant forth—(chant) a sacrifice for those worthy  of the sacrifice.
## 06
(Arrived) here with brilliants, here with battle, the lofty men have  launched their spears.
Following them (came) the lightning flashes—following the Maruts like  giggling (girls). The radiance of heaven has arrived by itself.
## 07
Those who have grown strong as earthlings, who in the broad midspace, or in the precinct of the rivers, or in the seat of great heaven—
## 08
Exalt the Marut troop, of real strength, ingenious.
The men, streaming, hitch up by themselves for beauty.
## 09
And they clothe themselves in wool [=foam] in the Paruṣṇī (River)—they  (like) preening water-birds—
and with the wheel-rim of their chariots they split the stone with force. 10. “On the Path,” “Off the Path,” “Within the Path,” “Along the Path”— with these names they vaunt themselves to me at the bestrewing of the  sacrifice.
## 11
Then they vaunt themselves as “men (come) down”; then they vaunt  themselves as “teams”;
then as “those from afar.” Their bright forms are worthy to be seen.
## 12
Chanting in rhythm, seeking water, (like) light-weights they pranced to  the wellspring.
They (seemed indistinct) to me like who knows who, like thieves
(concealed), but the helpers (then) came to glitter in my sight.
## 13
Which lofty ones, whose spears are lightning flashes, are (also) sage  poets, ritual adepts—
to this Marut flock, o seer, do homage and bring it to a halt with song. 14. To the Marut flock, o seer, (approach) with a gift, as a maiden being  given (in marriage) (approaches) her ally [=spouse?].
Or from heaven do you, bold ones, praised with poetic thoughts, speed  with strength.
## 15
Now (a man) paying mind to them, (who approaches) to the gods as if  to udders,
he would keep company with a gift, through (the auspices of) the
patrons famed on the course [=Maruts] and by their unguents.
## 16
Those who proclaimed the cow to me on my seeking (their) lineage, the  patrons called Pr̥śni their mother,
then they called their father arrow-possessing Rudra—(they) the
skillful ones.
## 17
Seven upon seven the able ones gave me hundreds, one (hundred) each. At the Yamunā (River) a famous thing—I swept up bounty in cattle;  swept down bounty in horses.