+++
title = "053"

+++
53 (407) Maruts
Śyāvāsva Ātreya
16 verses: kakubh 1, br̥hatī 2, anuṣṭubh 3, puraüṣṇih 4, kakubh 5, satobr̥hatī 6–7,  gāyatrī 8, satobr̥hatī 9, kakubh 10–11, gāyatrī 12, satobr̥hatī 13–14, kakubh 15,  satobr̥hatī 16
A metrically complex hymn, though there is no reason to consider it a composite.  The internal groupings, mostly two-verse units, follow those suggested by Oldenberg  (1888: 106–8). The hymn mingles descriptions of and wishes for the Maruts’ jour ney here with descriptions of the storm and the desirable rain the Maruts bring,  and indeed the Maruts and the rains are sometimes identified, sometimes modulate  from one to the other.

The hymn opens (vss. 1–2), as often, with questions—what is the origin of  Maruts and where have they gone? The Maruts themselves answer, indirectly, in  verse 3, and demand praise, which is forthcoming in verse 4. The description of a  storm follows (vss. 5–7), and the Maruts are urged to come here with their rains  (vss. 8–11). The poet returns in verses 12–13 to the question raised at the begin
ning: to what sacrificer have the Maruts gone? The hope is of course that they have  come or will come to us, and the blessings we wish to receive are detailed in the final  verses (14–16.)
## 1
Who knows their birth? Or, who was previously in the graces of the  Maruts,
when they yoked their own spotted (female antelopes)?
## 2
Those mounted on their chariots—who heard (them)? How did
they drive?
Toward what good giver, (what) friend, did they flow along (as) friends,  (as) rains (flow) with their refreshments?
## 3
They say to me—those who drove hither through the days along with the  birds, in exuberance,
the men, unblemished young bloods: “When you see them here,
praise them!”
## 4
Who in their unguents, who in their axes have their own radiance—and  in their garlands, in their brilliants, in their spangles,
with splendor in their chariots, in their bows.
## 5
It is following your chariots (when they come) that I take my place for  delight, you Maruts of lively drops [/lively gifts],
(I delighting) like the heavens (following the waters) when they come  with their rain.
## 6
When the men of good drops [/gifts] have stirred the bucket of heaven  here for the one doing pious work,
they send the thunder(storm) surging out along the two world-halves;  along the wasteplaces come the rains.
## 7
The rivers, having bored with their gush through the dusky realm, have  flowed forth like milk-cows,
like horses that have streamed from the road at their unharnessing, when  the dappled females turn aside.
## 8
Drive hither, Maruts, from heaven, from the midspace, and from  nearby.
Do not stay away at a distance.
## 9
Let not the Rasā (River), the Anitabhā, the Kubhā, the Krumu, let not  the Sindhu bring you to a halt.
Let not the overflowing Sarayu hem you around. On us alone let your  favor be. 10. Your troop of chariots, the glittering Marut flock of newer (“hymns”  [=thunderclaps])
do the rains come following after.
## 11
Your every troop of these (chariots), every swarm, every flock, with  good chants
we would stride after, with poetic thoughts.
## 12
To what well-born one, who had given an oblation, have they driven  forth today
along this course—the Maruts?
## 13
—Along which (course) you convey the imperishable granular seed to  offspring and descendants.
Establish for us what we implore you for: generosity through our whole  lifetime and good fortune.
## 14
May we cross over beyond scorners through your blessings, having left  behind imperfection and hostilities.
When it rains, the waters are luck and lifetime; at dawn they are
medicine. May we be together with (them/you), o Maruts.
## 15
Well provided with gods and with heroes in every way will that
mortal be
whom you protect, o men, o Maruts. May we be those (mortals).
## 16
Praise the benefactors of the praiser on the journey of this (flock). They  will take pleasure as cows do in a pasture.
Invoke them as they go, like old comrades. With song sing (to) those  who desire it.