+++
title = "054"

+++
54 (408)
Maruts
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
15 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 14
One of the most intensely descriptive of the Marut hymns, with shifting images  of the violent thunderstorms and welcome rain that they provoke. There is no  particular progress or development in the hymn, just the succession of exuberant  descriptions. The last three verses (13–15) shift to prayers for the Maruts’ gifts  and help.
## 01
Forth—for the Marut troop with its own radiance I will anoint this  speech, for (the troop) shaking the mountains,
for (the troop) with the rhythm of the gharma pot, sacrificing on the  back of heaven, of heaven-bright fame—sing (forth) their great
manliness.

## 02
Forth, o Maruts, (go) your forceful, water-seeking, vigor-increasing,  horse-yoked, swirling (chariots?).
They join with lightning; Trita [/the third (heaven)] bellows. The waters  resound, swirling in their streambed.
## 03
With lightning as their might and stones as their missiles, the superior  men, the Maruts, turbulent as the wind, shaking the mountains, (though) just with a desire to give water, roll hailstones in an instant— (they) with thundering onslaught, violent, overpowering.
## 04
Through the nights, o Rudras, through the days, you skillful ones,  through the midspace, through the dusky realms, you shakers,
through the fields when you drive, like boats (through the water)— through (all these places) of difficult going, o Maruts, you never  suffer harm.
## 05
This is your heroism, your greatness, o Maruts: it stretches across a long  wagon-trek [=measure of distance], like the sun.
(You are) like antelopes on your journey, with ungraspable brilliance,  when you have overrun the mountain that does not give horses
[/gives non-horses (=cows?)].
## 06
When the heaving troop has flashed, o Maruts, you will plunder the tree  like a caterpillar, you (ritual) adepts.
Then in concert you will lead Proper Thinking [/Aramati] to us along  an easy way, like the eye (of the sun? of the traveler himself?)
(leading) the traveler.
## 07
He is not conquered, o Maruts, nor is he slain, nor does he fail, nor  waver, nor suffer harm,
nor do his riches give out, nor his help—the seer or the king whom you  will “sweeten.”
## 08
The Maruts have teams (of horses) like men who conquer in  roving bands; they have (water) skins [=clouds] like hospitable
(householders):
they swell the wellspring. When the strong ones have sounded, they  inundate the earth with the stalk of honey.
## 09
This earth slopes gently for the Maruts; heaven becomes gently sloping  for them when they go forth;
the paths of the midspace slope gently; gently slope the mountains of  lively drops.
## 10
While—you Maruts of equal gravity, you sunlike men, you men of  heaven—you become exhilarated when the sun has risen,
your horses certainly never slacken as they run. In a single day you  reach the far limit of this road.
## 11
On your shoulders spears, on your feet spangles; on your breasts  brilliants, o Maruts, on your chariot charms.
Lightning bolts with the flash of fire in your fists, golden (helmet-)lips  stretched out on your heads. 12. The vault whose brilliance is ungraspable for the stranger do you,  Maruts, shake for the gleaming fig [=rain].
The communities huddle together when (the Maruts) have grown
turbulent. The truth seekers sound an extended cry.
## 13
May we be the charioteers of the vigorous wealth given by you,  discriminating Maruts,
which does not stay away (from us), any more than Tiṣya [=Dog Star]  from heaven. By us enjoy (wealth) in thousands, Maruts.
## 14
You, Maruts, (aid) our wealth consisting of coveted heroes; you aid the  seer inspired in his melody.
You (establish) a charger and a prize for Bharata; you establish a king  with attentive hearing.
## 15
For this treasure I beseech you, you of immediate aid, by which we will  extend (our control) over men like the sun.
Take pleasure, Maruts, in this speech of mine, by whose enduring
power may we pass through a hundred winters.