+++
title = "055"

+++
55 (409) Maruts
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
10 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 10
The first nine of the ten verses in this hymn end with a refrain, “as they drove in  beauty their chariots rolled along,” which sets the theme of the hymn. Rather than  focusing on the thunderstorm and its accompanying rain (mentioned only inciden tally in vs. 5), as in the last few Marut hymns, this one primarily concerns their  journey through the midspace. The hymn ends with a few verses (9–10) of invitation  to the sacrifice and prayers for benefits.
## 1
The Maruts, worshiped at the forefront of the sacrifice, with glinting  spears and brilliants on their breasts, assumed their lofty vigor.
They speed with their horses, swift but easy to control. – As they drove  in beauty their chariots rolled along.
## 2
You yourselves assumed your power, as you know (how). Loftily, you  great ones, widely do you reign [/shine forth].
And through the midspace they measured themselves with their
strength. – As they drove in beauty their chariots rolled along.
## 3
Born all at once, good in essence, grown all at once, just for splendor the  men increased even further,
shining forth like the rays of the sun. – As they drove in beauty their  chariots rolled along.
## 4
Your greatness is to be emulated, o Maruts; the sight of you is desirable  to see like the sighting of the sun.734 V.56
And establish us in immortality. – As they drove in beauty their
chariots rolled along.
## 5
You raise (water) from the sea, o Maruts; you make the rain rain, you  overflowing ones.
Your milk-cows do not wear out, you wondrous ones. – As they drove  in beauty their chariots rolled along.
## 6
When you have yoked your dappled (mares as) horses to the
chariot-poles and you have fastened on your golden cloaks,
all rival contenders do you disperse, o Maruts. – As they drove in
beauty their chariots rolled along.
## 7
Not the mountains, not the rivers obstruct you. Where you have set  your attention, Maruts, you go just to that.
And around heaven and earth you drive. – As they drove in beauty their  chariots rolled along.
## 8
What previously, Maruts, and what now—what is spoken and what is  recited,
of all that you become cognizant. – As they drove in beauty their
chariots rolled along.
## 9
Be merciful to us, Maruts; do not slay us. To us spread out ample  shelter.
Give study to our praise song, our fellowship. – As they drove in beauty  their chariots rolled along.
## 10
Do you lead us to a better (state), away from dire straits, Maruts, when  you are being hymned.
Enjoy our oblation-giving, you who deserve the sacrifice. May we be  lords of riches.