+++
title = "056"

+++
56 (410) Maruts
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
9 verses: br̥hatī, except satobr̥hatī 3, 7
Unlike the previous Marut hymns, this one introduces—and indeed begins with— other personnel besides the Maruts. The first word in the hymn is a vocative  addressed to the god Agni, and he (or perhaps the poet) is addressed elsewhere in  the hymn (vss. 2, 5). The Earth appears in verse 3 as a literally battered woman, a  remarkable image, and this female figure anticipates that of Rodasī, frequent com panion and consort of the Maruts, in verses 8–9.
The poet repeatedly calls the Maruts to come here: the forms “I call,” “we call,”  and “calls” frame and punctuate the hymn (vss. 1, 2, 5, 8, 9), while the invocation of  Agni at the beginning and the description of Agni in verse 7 establish the sacrifice as  the goal of their journey. But it is the verses describing the journey itself (especially  3–4) that are the most memorable part of this hymn. 1. O Agni—the vaunting flock, emblazoned with brilliants, with unguents, the clans of the Maruts I call down here today, even from the luminous  realm of heaven.
## 2
Just as you [=Agni? poet?] conceive with your heart, in the same way my  hopes have gone.
Those who will come closest to your calls, strengthen them of fearsome  appearance.
## 3
Like (a woman) with a generous (lover), Earth, beaten aside (by your  onslaught) [/sexually penetrated], being ecstatic, (seems to) recede
from us.
Like a bear is your strenuous onslaught, o Maruts, fearsome like a
headstrong ox.
## 4
Those who liquefy (the trees) with their strength, at will, like oxen averse  to the yoke,
even the reverberant stone, the mountain, the peak do they shake on  their journeys.
## 5
Rise up(, o Agni? poet?)—now with praises for these who have grown  strong together.
I call the (flock) of the Maruts, best of many, which no one can
precede—(call the flock) like a swarm of cows.
## 6
Yoke your reddish (mares) to your chariot; yoke the chestnuts to your  chariots.
Yoke the two nimble fallow bays to the chariot-pole, to pull—the two  best pullers to the chariot-pole, to pull.
## 7
And this reddish racehorse here [=Agni], powerfully noisy, has been set  here to be seen.
Let him not make you too long on your journeys, o Maruts: spur him  forth on the chariots.
## 8
The Marutian chariot, seeking fame, do we now call here,
on which there stands, bearing great delights, Rodasī in company with  the Maruts.
## 9
This troop of yours, beauty on the chariot, vibrant, inviting admiration  do I call here,
in which the noble, well-portioned (Rodasī) shows her greatness, the  generous one in company with the Maruts.