+++
title = "057"

+++
57 (411) Maruts
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
8 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 7–8
Like the immediately preceding hymn, this one introduces other personnel besides  the Maruts, though not ones tied specifically to the sacrifice. The hymn begins by

addressing the Maruts by their father’s name, “o Rudras,” a vocative that returns  in verse 7. Their mother Pr̥śni also figures in the hymn, in verses 2 and 3. The first  verse also describes them as “accompanied by Indra” (índravantaḥ). It is notable  how rarely Indra is mentioned in hymns dedicated to the Maruts, even though  they are his sidekicks and supporters from an Indraic point of view. In the whole  Marut cycle in Maṇḍala V this is the only appearance of Indra, and it is tellingly  phrased: Indra is himself treated as a sidekick, demoted into a possessive adjec
tive: “possessing/accompanied by Indra.” It is ordinarily the Maruts who have this  grammatically subordinated role:  the adjective marútvant (“possessing/accompa nied by the Maruts”) is very common and regularly modifies Indra.
In this hymn, then, the Maruts are defined first by their parentage and their  companion. The other elements that define them are their attributes, both physi cal and mental, lists of which are given in verses 2, 4, 5, and 6, constituting a  virtual iconography of the Maruts in verbal form. This listing modulates imper ceptibly into the beginning of verse 7, a list of goods possessed by the Maruts  that they have give to the singers, a subtle way of moving to the requests of the  final verses (7–8).
The vivid description characteristic of Marut hymns is not absent here. See espe cially verses 2–3, with the Maruts as the storm.
## 1
O Rudras—accompanied by Indra, of one accord, with your golden  chariots, come here for good faring.
Here is a poetic thought from us for you to yearn toward, like the
wellspring of heaven for a thirsty man seeking water.
## 2
You with your axes, your spears, your inspired thoughts, with your good  bows, your arrows, your quivers,
you possess good horses, good chariots, you whose mother is Pr̥śni.
Possessing good weapons, you drive in beauty, Maruts.
## 3
You shake heaven and the mountains for goods for the pious. The trees  duck down with fear at your journey.
You make the earth quake, you whose mother is Pr̥śni, when, o powerful  ones, you have yoked the dappled (mares) for beauty.
## 4
The Maruts—having the wind’s turbulence and a cloak of rain, quite  alike in appearance like twins, well-ornamented,
having tawny horses and ruddy horses, unblemished, projecting power,  wide like heaven in their greatness.
## 5
Possessed of many droplets [/banners], of unguents, of good drops,  whose appearance is turbulent, whose gifts are not withdrawn,
noble by birth, with brilliants on their breasts, chant(er)s of heaven, they  share an immortal name.
## 6
Spears are on your shoulders, Maruts; might, strength, power placed in  your arms.
Manly forces on your heads, weapons on your chariots. All splendor has  been emblazoned on your bodies. 7. Rich in cows, in horses, in chariots, in good heroes, in gold—(such)  largesse you have given to us, Maruts.
Make good our eulogy, Rudras. Might I have a share in your divine help. 8. – Hail, Maruts, superior men! Be merciful to us—o you of great bounty,  immortal, knowing the (immanent) truth,
hearing the realized (truth) [=poetic formulations], sage poets, youths,  belonging to the lofty mountains, loftily growing.