+++
title = "058"

+++
58 (412)
Maruts
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Another pleasing Marut hymn with the typical mixture of storm imagery (see esp.  vss. 6–7) and portrayal of a wild but beneficial Männerbund. In this latter capacity,  the Maruts are seen as the source of various earthly counterparts (vs. 4). Another  common theme, the lack of distinction among the various members of the band, is  also mentioned (vs. 5). As in V.56.3 a sexual relationship between the Maruts and  the Earth is depicted (vs. 7), though without the shock value of the earlier passage.
## 1
Now will I praise this (flock) full of power, their Marutian flock of newer  (hymns [=thunderclaps]),
those possessing swift horses who drive themselves impetuously and who  as self-rulers are masters of the immortal—
## 2
The turbulent, powerful flock with bangles on their hands, of boisterous  commandment, masters of artifice, granting wishes,
who are joy itself, immeasurable in their greatness. O poet, extol the  powerfully generous men.
## 3
Let the water-conveyors come here to you today, all the Maruts who  speed the rain.
This fire which is kindled here, o Maruts, enjoy it, you sage poets, youths. 4. You beget for the people a take-charge king, fashioned for distinction,  you who deserve the sacrifice.
From you comes the fist-fighter, quick with his arms, from you the one  of trusty horses and good heroes, o Maruts.
## 5
Just like wheel-spokes, there is no last one; like the days they keep  arising, not stingy with their mighty powers.
The sons of Pr̥śni, highest, wildest—the Maruts have equipped
themselves with their own poetic thought.
## 6
When you have driven forth with your dappled mares, your horses, with  your chariots with their firm wheel-rims, o Maruts,
the waters surge; the trees dissolve; let the ruddy bull, the Heaven,
roar down.

## 7
Even the Earth has spread herself at their journey. Like a husband an  embryo, they have implanted their own strength (in the earth).
Certainly they have yoked the winds as horses to their yoke-pole; they  have made their own sweat into rain—the Rudras.
## 8
– Hail, Maruts, superior men! Be merciful to us—o you of great bounty,  immortal, knowing the (immanent) truth,
hearing the realized (truth) [=poetic formulations], sage poets, youths,  belonging to the lofty mountains, loftily growing.