+++
title = "059"

+++
59 (413) Maruts
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
8 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 8
This hymn is constructed around a series of similes and metaphors, some of which  (see esp. 3a) push the boundaries of similarity and require a mental leap from the  audience, while in others (e.g., 3d) the near identity between the two entities com pared renders the simile-marking almost redundant. The hymn’s subject, as usual,  is the power of the Maruts on their travels, power manifested both as the storm  and as a warriors’ onslaught. The puzzles in this hymn begin with its opening: no  entirely satisfactory referent for the “scout” or “spy” of 1a has been found, though  many have been suggested.
## 1
Your scout has stridden forth, to give good faring. I will chant to heaven.  I proffer my truth [=hymn] to the earth.
They sprinkle the horses, passing through the dusky realm. They let their  own radiance slacken with floods (of rain).
## 2
In fear of their onslaught the Earth trembles. Like a loaded boat she  streams, going a wayward course.
They who, visible from afar, are conspicuous on their travels, the men  have taken their places amid the great rite of distribution.
## 3
(Your) horn, like (those) of cows, stands tallest for splendor; (your) eye is  like the sun in his surging through the dusky realm.
Like steeds of good quality, you are pleasing. Like young bloods, you are  conspicuous for splendor, o men.
## 4
Who can reach up to the great things of you great ones? Who to your  poetic skills, Maruts, who to your manly deeds?
You set the earth to quivering like a dustmote, when you press forward,  to give good faring.
## 5
Like reddish horses [=flames of fire] they are of the same lineage, like  champions in the vanguard, they have fought in advance.
Like very strong young bloods, the men have grown strong. They
confound the eye of the sun with their rains. 6. They, bursting forth with no oldest one, no youngest, no middle, have  grown forth in their greatness.
Noble by birth, having Pr̥śni as mother, young bloods of heaven—come  here to us.
## 7
They who, like birds in formation, have flown with their strength to the  ends of heaven from (heaven’s) lofty back—
their horses, as both (races [=human and divine]) know, have stirred  forth the spurting (waters) of the mountain.
## 8
Let heaven bellow, let Aditi (come) to pursue our (oblations). Let the  dawns, bright with drops, take their places together.
These have stirred the heavenly bucket hither—o seer—the Maruts,  (sons) of Rudra, being hymned.