+++
title = "060"

+++
60 (414)
Maruts
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
8 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 7–8
Like V.56, this hymn begins with an invocation of Agni, the ritual fire, who is also  conspicuously addressed along with the Maruts in each of the last three verses  (6–8). The prominence of Agni identifies the Maruts’ journey to and participation  in the sacrifice as the goal of the hymn. Their journey itself provokes the usual  cosmic reactions—fear and trembling (vss. 2–3)—and the dazzling beauty of the  Maruts also receives its usual expression (vs. 4). Verse 5 provides an almost domes
tic picture of their parentage. Notable also is the dicing imagery in verse 1.
## 01
I solemnly invoke helpful Agni with reverences. Seated in front, he will  pull out a perfect (“hand” of dice) for us.
I press forward as if with chariots seeking prizes. With respectful
circumambulation (of Agni) might I bring to fulfillment the praise of  the Maruts.
## 02
Those who have mounted on the famed dappled mares, on the well-naved  chariots—the Rudras, the Maruts—
even the trees duck down with fear of you, powerful ones. Even the earth  trembles, even the mountain.
## 03
Even the mountain, grown great, has fear; even the back of heaven  trembles at your roar.
When you are at play, o Maruts, equipped with spears, you run toward a  single goal like the waters.
## 04
Just like wooers coming from wealth, with golden (ornaments) they have  emblazoned their bodies through their own powers.
For splendor the very splendid ones, powerful on their chariots, all
together have furnished themselves marks of greatness on their bodies.

## 05
Without an oldest one, without a youngest, these brothers have grown  strong together for good fortune.
Their father (was) the youth, the skillful Rudra, and Pr̥śni their
good-milking (mother); day-bright (are the days) for the Maruts.
## 06
If you are in the highest heaven, o Maruts, or in the middle one, or if you  are in the lowest one, you of good fortune,
from there, o Rudras, or you now, o Agni, be cognizant of this oblation  of ours, when we will perform sacrifice.
## 07
O Maruts, affording all possessions, and Agni too—when you (Maruts)  drive yourselves from higher heaven along (its) backs,
exulting, boisterous—(all) you who have care for the stranger, establish a  thing of value for the sacrificer who presses soma.
## 08
O Agni, with the Maruts, the versifiers in their beauty, drink the soma,  you exulting along with those who are splendor in a flock,
along with the pure Āyus who set all in motion, o Vaiśvānara, along with  your age-old beacon.