+++
title = "061"

+++
61 (415)
Maruts
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
19 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 5 and satobr̥hatī 9
With its nineteen verses, this hymn is out of place by the normal rules of arrange ment of the saṃhitā. It also falls into several sections on thematic grounds (vss. 1–4,  5–10, 11–16, 17–19). However, at least the first half (1–10) displays the cleverness  and sly humor of Śyāvāśva, who names himself directly in verse 5 and punningly  in verse 9, and perhaps represents a jeu d’esprit of the poet, appended to the more  solemn Marut hymns that precede it. Note that Śyāvāśva names himself only in the  first of those hymns (V.52.1) and in this last one.
The Maruts are the clear subject of verses 1–4 and 11–16, and each of these sec tions is followed by a dānastuti, or verses culminating in a dānastuti: 10 and 17–19.  We therefore suggest that we are dealing here with two originally separate hymns,  1–10 and 11–19, and that the first at least bears clear marks of Śyāvāśva’s authorship.
Since the second of these is less interesting than the first, we will discuss it first  here. The six verses (11–16) treating the Maruts are fairly conventional. Verse 17  serves as a transition to the dānastuti, addressed, oddly, to the goddess Night, who  is urged to carry the poet’s hymns to his patron, called Dārbhya here, and Rathavīti  in the following two verses. Both parts of the latter name are punned upon: ratha
“chariot” in verse 17 (“like a charioteer”), -vīti “pursuit” in verse 18 in the verb form  (ápa) veti “go off track,” and he is praised for his generosity in general terms (19). The first hymn is a much less staid affair. The four opening verses to the Maruts  begin with questions about the Maruts and then in increasing detail about their horses and horse-tackle. And in verses 2c and 3b the Maruts are depicted as riding  horseback (one of the very few pieces of evidence for this activity in the R̥gveda); in  verse 2 the reference is unremarkable, but in verse 3 the men’s posture on the horse  reminds the poet of women spreading their thighs in sex (or possibly childbirth,  though this seems less likely). From this point on the hymn takes a sexually sug
gestive turn. In verse 4 the Maruts are sent off with “lucky women,” and we move  abruptly into the second section of the hymn.
That section ends with a real dānastuti verse (10) in praise of a patron named  Vaidadaśvi. We might expect the four preceding verses (5–9) to form part of the  dānastuti as well, and there are prominent dānastuti-like elements in them, but they  also subvert the dānastuti model or provide a counter model—not least because they  concern a woman and profess the unorthodox opinion that women can be superior  to men. Verse 5 introduces an unidentified woman who “gains” the sorts of things  poets usually receive in dānastutis, using the root for “gain” (san) that is standard in  such contexts. (The notion that a woman would be in such a position is so unusual  that most translators simply translate the word as if it means “give”—though a  woman who gives livestock is no more standard a figure than one who gains it.)  From the second half of the verse it is clear that she must be the favored consort  (perhaps even the “Favorite Wife” of later Vedic ritual) of Śyāvāśva’s patron. The  poet then seems to reflect (vss. 6–8) on the qualities of women in general, in contrast  to men, allowing that some women may actually be better than men, especially men  of bad character—and among those especially a stingy man (vss. 6, 8), who doesn’t  deserve to be called a man except in the technical matter of blood money (vs. 8). The  tone in these verses is colloquial and conversational. After this seeming digression,  with the subtle hint to his patron about the perils of stinginess, we return in verse 9  to a flesh-and-blood woman, who is working her wiles on the poet, who calls himself  “Dusky” (śyāva). The verse is an elaborate pun: on the one hand she is narrating the  course of a race, and the “two chestnuts” in the second half of the verse can be two  horses given to the poet, “straining forward” to win. But the tone is very intimate;  the “course” may be the progress of sexual intercourse between the girl and the poet,  and the second half of the verse, using the same verb (ví √yam “spread apart”) as in  the first sexually suggestive passage in verse 4, can describe the “spreading apart” of  two female body parts. The girl in verse 9 thus appears to be part of the “gift” that  Śyāvāśva received for his poem, and the complex set of double meanings in this verse  are certainly a worthy “praise of this gift.” Is the girl in this verse the same as the one  in verse 5? Śyāvāśva seems to imply this, but we will never know for sure.
## 01
Who are you, men, the fairest ones, who one by one have driven here from the farthest distance?
## 02
Where are your horses, where your reins? How have you been able? How  have you driven here?
(Where is) the seat on their back, the bridle at their nostrils?

## 03
(Where) the whip on their haunch? The men have spread apart their  thighs (on horseback),
like wives at the making of sons.
## 04
Go forth, heroes, you young bloods with lucky women,
so that you will be hot as fire.
## 05
She gains livestock in horses and cows and (livestock) consisting of a  hundred sheep—
the one who keeps plumping up her arm as a pillow for the hero praised  by Śyāvāśva.
## 06
Now a woman can be more reliable, better than a man
if he’s estranged from the gods, ungenerous—
## 07
While she pays attention to a famished man, or to a thirsting one, or to  one who has desires [/lust],
and sets her own mind upon the gods.
## 08
And some other guy, a niggard not deserving praise, (may be) called  a “man,”
but he is only equivalent (to a man) in the matter of wergeld.
## 09
But a young woman, having beguiled (me), whispered the course to me,  “Dusky” [=Śyāvāśva], face to face.
The two chestnuts spread apart [/strained forward] for the
much-rewarded one, for the inspired poet of lasting glory—
## 10
Whoever will give me a hundred milk-cows as Vaidadaśvi (did), (he is) like a victor in his munificence.
## 11
(The Maruts), who drive themselves with their swift horses, drinking the  exhilarating honey,
here they have acquired their fame.
## 12
With whose splendor they flash through the two world-halves on their  chariots, like the bright ornament in heaven above.
## 13
This youthful Marutian flock with its glittering chariot is not to be  scorned;
charging to beauty it is unrepulsable.
## 14
Who now knows about them, where the shakers are reaching elation, those born of truth, unblemished?
## 15
You, who seek admiration, are those who lead the mortal forth with an  insight right to the point,
are those who listen to his invocations on your journey.
## 16
You who care for the stranger—roll here to us desirable, greatly  shimmering goods,
you who deserve the sacrifice.
## 17
This praise of mine, o Night, carry off to Dārbhya,
(my) hymns (carry away) like a charioteer, o goddess. 18. And then speak for me thus to Rathavīti who has pressed the soma: “My desire does not go off track.”
## 19
This Rathavīti dwells in peace, a bounteous patron throughout the  cow-rich (clans) [/along the Gomatī River],
set back among the mountains.