+++
title = "062"

+++
62 (416) Mitra and Varuṇa
Śrutavid Ātreya
9 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn calls on Mitra and Varuṇa for rain, as 3cd makes clear. Their ability  to send the rain is connected with their kingship, and the poet suggests that con nection in several images. The gods’ throne sits “within the libations” (vss. 5, 6),  which not only are the oblations made to them but also signify the rainwater. The  banner that increases through their commandment (vs. 5)  is the banner “of the  ruler” (cf. V.69.1), and here the rain is the emblem of their kingship. Their rule is  strong, supported by a thousand pillars (vs. 6), but the pillar of their throne is also  the lightning (vs. 7ab) that accompanies the rain, and its foundation is in land that  yields plants (vs. 7c).
Framing the rain, which is the subject of verses 2–7, is the sun (vss. 1, 8). The first  verse remains mysterious. The first hemistich places Mitra and Varuṇa’s “enduring  truth” in the night sky or in any case, in that place where “they,” most likely the  gods generally, unhitch Sūrya’s horses to let them pasture during the night. Yet even  before dawn the poet’s vision allows him to see “that One,” the sun, and together  with the sun, the hidden truth of the two gods. The sun may also be the “single  felly” mentioned in 2d, and if so, the verse looks forward the appearance of the sun  after the rain. After the invocations to the gods for rain, the sun returns to the poem  once again, this time visible to all at dawn and closely associated with the golden  throne of Mitra and Varuṇa.
## 1
Your enduring truth is hidden by truth, there where they unhitch the  horses of the sun.
Ten times a hundred [=rays of the sun?] stand together: I saw that One,  the most splendid of the lovely forms of the gods.
## 2
That is surely your greatness, Mitra and Varuṇa: while standing at rest,  they have given milk throughout the days.
You two swell all the pasture’s streams of milk. The single felly has
turned here after you two.
## 3
You upheld the earth and heaven, o you two kings, Mitra and Varuṇa, by  your great powers.
Make the plants grow! Swell the cows! Send the rain gushing down, o  you of lively waters!744 V.63
## 4
Let the horses in good harness convey you here. Let them with guided  reins come near to this place.
A cloak of ghee whirls along after you. From of old, rivers flow near. 5. Guarding (the commandment) that increases your famed, broad banner,  as if guarding the ritual grass with a yajus-recitation,
you sit upon the throne amid the libations, o Mitra and Varuṇa of firm  skill, receiving homage.
## 6
You are the two far-protectors with unbloodied hands for him who  performs rituals well, whom you two safeguard, Varuṇa, amid the
libations.
Never becoming angry, you two kings together bear a
thousand-pillared rule.
## 7
Metal cloaked in gold, its [=the throne’s] pillar flashes in heaven like a  horsewhip,
anchored in the good or fruitful land. We would win honey upon your  throne.
## 8
You two mount the throne possessing golden color at the break of dawn,  (the throne) possessing a metal pillar at the rising of the sun,
o Mitra and Varuṇa. From there you observe guiltlessness and guilt.
## 9
Your very stout, unbroken protection, which is not to be pierced, o you  herdsmen of the living world, bringing good waters—
with that help us, Mitra and Varuṇa. Seeking to win, may we be
victorious.