+++
title = "063"

+++
63 (417)
Mitra and Varuṇa
Arcanānas Ātreya
7 verses: jagatī
Like the previous hymn to Mitra and Varuṇa, this hymn is also a plea for monsoon  rains. It gives a vivid picture of the monsoons with their thunder and lightning (vss.  5, 6) and the coming of the rain (esp. vss. 1, 4). The poet uses sound repetition,  perhaps in imitation of echoing thunder or recurring lightning or perhaps simply  as a demonstration of his poetic ability:  2d...-vī ví caranti..., 3b... vícarṣanī,  3c citrébhir..., 4b carati citrám..., 5c ... citrā́ ví caranti..., 6b... citrā́m vadati  tvíṣī-..., and 7d...-vi cítryam.... Also across 3ab samrā́jā ugrā́ vr̥ṣabhā́ divás pátī,  pr̥thivyā́ mitrā́váruṇā vícarṣaṇī, the two lines have exactly the same metrical struc ture and repeated vowels in the same syllables.
The hymn several times refers to the māyā́, the “cunning” of Mitra and Varuṇa  (vss. 3, 4, 6, 7), which in its first and last attestations is described as the “cunning of  a lord (ásura)” (vss. 3, 7), thus connecting Mitra and Varuṇa’s ability to control the  rain by their cunning with their kingship. They are likewise twice called “sovereign kings” (samrā́j) (vss. 2, 3). The prefix sám- “together,” signifying their unifying rule,  contrasts with the repeated prefix ví- “apart,” which indicates the diverse things over  which they hold sovereignty. This theme is announced in 2ab, where they are called  samrā́jau over the world vidáthe “in its division.”
Also translated and discussed in Brereton (1981: 104–6).
## 01
O herdsmen of the truth, o you whose nature holds true, you two stand  upon your chariot in the most distant heaven.
For him whom you two help here, Mitra and Varuṇa, the rain swells rich  in honey from heaven.
## 02
As sovereign kings, you two of sunlike appearance rule over this living  world in its division, o Mitra and Varuṇa.
We implore the gift that is rain, that is immortality. Thunder ranges  through Heaven and Earth.
## 03
Sovereign kings, powerful bulls, and lords of heaven and of earth, Mitra  and Varuṇa, who know no boundaries—
you two approach the roar with shimmering clouds. You make heaven  rain by the cunning of a lord.
## 04
Mitra and Varuṇa, your cunning rests upon heaven. The sun, your light,  moves as a shimmering weapon.
You hide it in heaven by cloud and by rain. O Parjanya, the honeyed  drops are arising.
## 05
The Maruts harness their easy-running chariot for beauty, like a  champion on cattle raids, o Mitra and Varuṇa.
Thunder ranges through the shimmering air. O sovereign kings, sprinkle  us with milk from heaven.
## 06
O Mitra and Varuṇa, Parjanya speaks his refreshment-bringing word,  shimmering and shattering.
The Maruts clothe themselves in clouds by your cunning. Make heaven  rain, ruddy and spotless.
## 07
According to your nature, o Mitra and Varuṇa who perceive inspired  words, you two guard your commandments by the cunning of a lord. By truth you rule over the whole living world. You place the sun here in  heaven as your shimmering chariot.