+++
title = "064"

+++
64 (418) Mitra and Varuṇa
Arcanānas Ātreya
7 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 7
As often, the central verse of the hymn is its most enigmatic. The poet condenses  this verse so that a number of interpretations are possible, all of them applicable to

the situation. The word upamá, here translated “closest,” might also mean “best.”  Indeed, most translators choose the latter interpretation, but in the verses lead ing up to this one, the poet constantly emphasizes the intimacy of Mitra and  Varuṇa: In their arms they gather “the realm of solar glory” (vs. 1), which is likely  both the celestial realm and the realm of the sacrifice. They stretch forth their arms  to the sacrificers, who call on their affection (vs. 2). The sacrificers are accompanied  by the protection of Mitra, “who never does injury” (vs. 3). In verse 4 the poet  brings something close to the gods, although he does not state clearly what it is.  In the more obvious reading it might be the sacrificial offerings and the sacrificial  recitations. But it might also be gifts to the priests, or the inhabitants in the patrons’  dwellings, or the talent and learning that the priests bring to the ritual performance.  In short, it might be everything that is part of the sacrifice or even part of the lives  of the patrons and priests.
In the final verses this theme of the closeness of Mitra and Varuṇa to the sac rificers is expressed through a number of different strategies. The simile in 7cd is  particularly striking. It turns on two homophonous present stems dhāva, one of  which means “run” and the other “rinse, cleanse,” with the shift from one to the  other signaled by the change from “feet” to “hands.” This word play maintains the  sense of closeness of the sacrificers and the gods, since “cleanse” refers to a typical  priestly action, while “run” is the desired action of the gods. That theme continues  in verses 4 and 5, in which the poet invites Varuṇa and Mitra to the dwelling of  generous patrons, which is also the gods’ “seat” or “abode” (vs. 5). And verse 6a  begins yuváṃ naḥ “you two for us,” setting the 2nd- and 1st-person pronouns next  to one another.
## 1
With our verse we summon for you all Mitra and Varuṇa, who cares for  the stranger,
who, like corrals, have encompassed the realm of solar glory in their  two arms.
## 2
Let these two arms stretch forth with kind attention to him who chants, for again and again, in all places of the earth, I call on your benevolent  affection.
## 3
That I might now reach the way, I would travel by the path of Mitra. They go together with the protection of him [=Mitra] who is dear, who  never does injury.
## 4
Mitra and Varuṇa, with my verse I would set closest to you two
what is in the dwelling of generous patrons and what serves praise
singers to contend over.
## 5
O Mitra, (you) and Varuṇa—(come) here for us with your bright lights,  here into your seat,
into their own dwelling, (that) of the generous patrons, for your partners  to grow strong.
## 6
For us, among whom you two maintain your dominion (here) and aloft,  o Varuṇa— for us make wide space to win the prize for the sake of wealth and
well-being.
## 7
While (Dawn) with her shining cattle is breaking at the (sacrifice) under  divine dominion,
do you two worthy of the sacrifice run to me here by foot, as if
(cleansing by hand) soma pressed by priests with skilled hands, o you  two superior men, as you maintain Arcanānas.