+++
title = "065"

+++
65 (419)
Mitra and Varuṇa
Rātahavya Ātreya
6 verses: anuṣṭubh, except paṅkti 6
The poet begins by invoking himself as the “perceptive” poet (vss. 1–2), who then  speaks on behalf of the sacrificers (vs. 3). The basic theme of the hymn is the  request that Mitra and Varuṇa help create a peaceful dwelling place that is broad  and secure for people and animals during the period that the tribe is settled. While  the poet addresses both Mitra and Varuṇa, his principal address is to Mitra: Mitra  alone is mentioned in verse 4, in verse 5 Varuṇa appears only as the complement  of Mitra, and in verse 6 Varuṇa’s presence is merely implied in the dual personal  pronoun. Mitra is the god of alliances, and the reason for the focus on Mitra here  is that the poet particularly wants people to occupy their proper places (vs. 6) by  honoring their agreements with one another. The verb √yat “arrange” in this verse  is elsewhere associated with the action of Mitra, who governs peoples through the  pacts and alliances made among them.
The word mitrá can refer not only to the god Mitra but also to a mitrá, an ally,  and the poet makes use of this ambiguity in verse 4. The god Mitra wins a dwelling  free from threat or constraint through the power of divinely sanctioned alliances,  and therefore one who is a true ally, who embodies the principles of the god of alli
ances, also wins such a dwelling. The connection between the god Mitra and the  human ally is further suggested by verse 3, in which Mitra and Varuṇa are invoked  to give out the prizes of victory, and verse 4, in which the person in a parallel fash ion distributes offerings.
## 01
He who is perceptive has strong resolve. Let him speak among the gods  for us—
he whose songs beautiful Varuṇa or Mitra longs for.
## 02
Since these two are kings of most glorious luster and farthest fame, they are lords of the settlement, who grow through the truth and possess  the truth, among every people.
## 03
Imploring you for help, I address you two ancient ones together:
“Through your good perception, with your good horses, (race) toward  the prizes of victory to give them out.”

## 04
Mitra [/an ally] then wins a broad way for peaceful dwelling, even out of  narrow straits,
since the favor of triumphant Mitra belongs to him who distributes
offerings.
## 05
Blameless, helped by you, we would be completely within the most  extensive help
of Mitra, whose complement is Varuṇa.
## 06
The two of you, o Mitra, arrange this people and lead them together. Do not overlook the generous one nor us seers. Give us wide space under  your protection.