+++
title = "067"

+++
67 (421)
Mitra and Varuṇa
Yajata Ātreya
5 verses: anuṣṭubh
This hymn emphasizes the multiplicity of the Ādityas, which the hymn connects  with their presence in multiple places and their lordship among different peoples  (vss. 2, 4). It invokes the Ādityas in the first verse and then Varuṇa, Mitra, and  Aryaman; in verse 2 just Varuṇa and Mitra, and then in verse 3 Varuṇa, Mitra, and  Aryaman once again. The climax comes in the last verse, which suggests that all  the forms of the Ādityas culminate in Mitra or Varuṇa—or, rather, in the two of  them together. We offer this interpretation tentatively since the key lines are 5ab. As  the parenthetical insertions in our translation indicate, it is not clear precisely how  these lines should be construed.
## 01
Yes indeed! It is just so, o god: the appointed place is worthy of the  sacrifice and lofty, o Ādityas,
o Varuṇa and Mitra, o Aryaman. You two have achieved the highest  lordship.
## 02
O Varuṇa and Mitra, when you two take your seat upon the golden womb, as maintainers of the separate peoples, offer your favor, o you caring for  the stranger.
## 03
Because all of them—Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman—know all things, they follow their commandments like tracks. They protect the mortal  from harm.
## 04
For they are real, touching the truth and truth-possessing among every  people;
they are those leading well, giving good drops [/gifts], and making a wide  space even from narrow straits.
## 05
Now which of you two, (which) of (all your) forms, o Mitra—or (is it)  Varuṇa?—is not praised?
Thus our thought hastens to you two; from the Atris a thought hastens.