+++
title = "073"

+++
73 (427)
Aśvins
Paura Ātreya
10 verses: anuṣṭubh
The central theme of the hymn is the journey of the Aśvins:  their journey that  encompasses the whole world and their journey to the poet’s sacrifice. Geldner754 V.73
describes this hymn as strophic, consisting of five paired verses; this structure  expresses the thematic division of the hymn.
Verses 1–2 describe the Aśvins as moving somewhere, possibly near or possibly  far, but in any case the poet invites them to travel here to his sacrifice. Since the poet  has begun with a reference to journeys of the Aśvins, it is not surprising that he then  turns to a description of their wonderful chariot. According to the interpretation  we offer here, one wheel of that chariot is the sacrificial fire (vs. 3). Behind this sym
bolism is likely the recurrent representation of the sacrifice as a chariot, particularly  as the Aśvins’ chariot. The other wheel of their chariot is the sun (vs. 4). Running  on these two wheels the Aśvins both range over the whole world and are present at  the sacrifice.
Verses 5–6 are connected by the theme of heat, and as in the case of the two  wheels, one form of heat is cosmic, the other form ritual. In verse 5 Sūryā, the  daughter of the Sun, mounts the chariot of the Aśvins, which drives onward ahead  of the rising, burning sun. In verse 6 what is called gharmá “hot” is either the  Pravargya pot, in which the milk for the Aśvins is heated, or the hot milk itself.  While verse 5 refers primarily to the sun and verse 6 to the Pravargya rite, there is  also a secondary, implied reference to the ritual in verse 5 and to the sun in verse  6. The motif of Sūryā’s mounting the Aśvins’ chariot is always a courtship or wed ding image. Here in verse 5 she may be brought as bride to Soma (cf. X.85), who is,  of course, at the center of the rite.
Because the interpretation of 8ab is uncertain, the connection between verses  7–8 is less clear than in the other pairs of verses. In verse 7 the horse thunders as  he brings the Aśvins to the rite at the invitation of Atri, who may be not the Atri  of legend but his present or future descendant. In verse 8ab the subject is sup
pressed, and various interpreters have suggested various possibilities: the Aśvins’  honeyed whip (Geldner), the hymn (Sāyaṇa, Geldner, cf. VIII.6.43), a cow (Pirart  2001: 243–44, cf. II.16.8). It could even be the “thundering” of the lead horse from  the previous verse. We have left the identification unclear, although a reference to  the hymn (dhī́) in one way or another appears to us likely. The balance between the  Aśvins’ presence in the cosmos and in the rite is repeated in 8cd, which describes the  Aśvins’ journey across the seas and the ritual offerings made to them.
The concluding verses then restate the theme of the Aśvins’ journey throughout  the world and explicitly connect that journey to the ritual, since they compare the  hymns that bring the Aśvins to chariots.
## 01
Whether today you two are far distant, whether close by, o Aśvins, or whether—o you who bring many enjoyments many times—
(you are) in the midspace, come here.
## 02
Here are these two who appear most often, bringing their many
wondrous powers.
With longing for space, I beseech the pair who are not poor. I call upon  the two most powerful ones to give enjoyment. 3. You maintain at rest your chariot’s one wheel [=the sacrificial fire], the  marvel to be marveled at.
With the other (wheel) [=the sun?] you fly around the generations of  the descendants of Nahuṣa and the airy regions by your greatness.
## 04
And that is accomplished by this (chariot) of yours—(that act) of yours  which is praised throughout all (generations):
Born separately, faultless, you two together have come to kinship
with us.
## 05
When Sūryā mounts your ever swift-running chariot,
your ruddy birds keep its [=the sun’s] glowing heat from burning.
## 06
O you men, Atri will be attentive to you two with his good thought and  attention,
when he scurries toward your faultless hot(-vessel) with his mouth, o  Nāsatyas.
## 07
Your powerful lead horse is moving. Its thundering is heard on its  journeys,
o Aśvins, when Atri will turn it here along with your wondrous powers,  you men.
## 08
The one that swells with honey follows you two closely, o you
honey-seeking Rudras.
When you two will cross beyond the seas, they [=priests] bring cooked  foods to you.
## 09
It is really true, o Aśvins: they call you joy itself.
On their journey these two are the most often summoned on the
journey; here on their journey they are the most merciful.
## 10
Let these strengthening formulations for the Aśvins be most
luck-bringing—
these that we fashion like chariots. We have spoken lofty reverence.