+++
title = "074"

+++
74 (428)
Aśvins
Paura Ātreya
10 verses: anuṣṭubh
The hymn opens with the poet wondering where the Aśvins can be (vs. 1). Are they  with another people (vs. 2)? Or to whom are they traveling (vs. 3)? The poet wishes  them to come to Atri—as in the last hymn, the poet himself (vs. 1)—and to seek  out his poetic formulations (vs. 3), not those of others. Several verses later, the poet  returns once more to beg the Aśvins’ attention (vs. 6), to ask again whose inspired  poetry and sacrifices have attracted the Aśvins (vs. 7), and to urge them to come  to him (vss. 8–10). The last verse of the hymn echoes the first: verse 1 asks where the Aśvins are (kū́ ṣṭhaḥ) and whether they will hear the poet (śravathaḥ); verse 10  addresses them wherever they are (kárhi cid) and anticipates that they will hear  him (śuśrūyā́tam). Also, in the first verse the poet addresses the Aśvins as manāvasū “whose goods are zeal”—that is, as those who bring vigor and passion to sacrifi cers—and vr̥ṣaṇvasū “whose goods are bull-like,” but in the last he speaks not of  goods that the Aśvins bring but rather of the “good benefits” (vásvīḥ ... bhújaḥ) the  Aśvins will receive, thus reversing the beneficiaries of the goods.
How the internal verses set within this frame are connected to the rest of the  hymn is not clear. They tell how the Aśvins rescued Paura from real or metaphorical  waters (vs. 4) and Cyavāna from old age and impotence (vs. 5). The story of Paura,  whom the Anukramaṇī identifies as the poet of the hymn, is told elliptically. There  is a cryptic etymological play on Paura’s name in 4ab that suggests that Paura had  lost the prosperity that was his by right, or at least by name, but that he was restored  to “muchness” by the Aśvins. Unfortunately, the meaning of paurá is not secure  and therefore neither is this interpretation. This word play on paurá is set within  a causal hí-clause, which normally would be dependent but here apparently is not,  and it is then followed by an incomplete dependent clause, which lacks both subject  and verb. The abstract dative gr̥bhītátātaye “for captivity” suggests supplying a verb  derived from √gr̥bh “capture”—“they capture him” or the like—but this interpreta tion is not at all secure. Is the fragmented syntax an icon of the desperate situation  that the Aśvins were able to redress?
## 1
Where in heaven are you today, o divine Aśvins whose goods are zeal? Will you hear this, o you whose goods are bull-like? Atri is trying to  win you.
## 2
Where are these two? Where are they famed—the Nāsatyas, the two gods  in heaven?
Among what people do you take your place? Which of you two is in  company with rivers?
## 3
To whom do you journey? To whom do you come? Toward whom do you  harness your chariot?
In whose formulations do you delight? We wish you to seek (ours).
## 4
For you two bring to life even Paura, who was swimming in the waters,  for the sake of “muchness” (paurá), o (you who are) “Muchness”
itself,
when him for captivity, like a lion in the track of deceit...
## 5
You remove the covering like a cloak from Cyavāna, who had
become old;
as a youth—since you two made him so again—he meets the desire of  his wife.
## 6
Because your praise singer is here and we have in our sights (to see) your  splendor,
now hear me and come with help, o you whose goods are prizewinners. 7. Which of the many mortals has won you two today for himself? Which inspired poet, o you conveyed by inspiration? Who with his
sacrifices, you whose goods are prizewinners?
## 8
Let your chariot, fastest traveling of chariots, travel here, Aśvins, even across the many (regions), as it seeks us—(it is) the praise song  among mortals here.
## 9
Let our celebration of you be our luck, o honey-seekers.
Like a pair of falcons fly this way with your birds, o discerning ones. 10. Aśvins, when you should hear this call anywhere,
good benefits are yours and nourishments nourish you.