+++
title = "076"

+++
76 (430)
Aśvins
Atri Bhauma
5 verses: triṣṭubh
In the later ritual the Hotar recites this hymn in the evening as the Adhvaryu and  his assistants fan the fire to heat the Pravargya vessel. Verse 1 refers directly to the  hot milk oblation offered to the Aśvins in the Pravargya ritual, but, as Houben  (2000: 10) observes, the hymn itself indicates the dawn as the time of its recitation.  Time is a central theme of the hymn: it is now that the Aśvins are praised (vs. 2),  and at present the oblation is extended to the Aśvins (vs. 3). The Aśvins should  respond to the praise and the offering because they come at all times, both day and  night (vss. 2, 3). Because of the present offering and the ever-presence of the Aśvins,  the poet hopes for the Aśvins’ “present help” (vs. 5).
Although perhaps not as strongly, the poet puts a similar emphasis on place.  The Aśvins should “journey here” (vs. 1, 3), where they are praised (vs. 2), for this  is their place, home, house, and dwelling (vs. 4). The result is that wealth and good  fortune will be here (vs. 5). 1. Agni shines toward the face of Dawn. The words of inspired poets,  traveling to the gods, have arisen.
Now, o you two charioteers, directed this way, journey here toward this  hot-(vessel) swelling (with milk), Aśvins.
## 2
The best who come, they do not compromise the (offering) prepared (for  them). Near and now the Aśvins are praised with songs here
as the best who come with help by day and at the evening mealtime, in  response to trouble and as the best luck for the pious man.
## 3
And journey here at the ingathering of cattle and at the early morning of  the day, at midday and at the rising of the sun, and
by day and at night with your most luck-bringing help. Does the drink  not right now stretch to the Aśvins?
## 4
For from of old this is your place, your home. This is your house, Aśvins,  this your dwelling.
Journey here to us from lofty heaven and mountain, here from the
waters, carrying refreshment and nourishment.
## 5
– May we come together with the present help of the Aśvins, which is joy  itself and provides good guidance.
Here to us bring wealth and here heroes, you two immortals, and here all  that brings good fortune.