+++
title = "077"

+++
77 (431) Aśvins
Atri Bhauma
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Like the preceding one, this hymn is attributed to Atri, and shares with it the same  meter and same final verse. The hymn refers to the Aśvins in the third person in every  verse except the central one (3), when the poet turns to the Aśvins and addresses  them directly, describing to them the chariot that brings them to his sacrifice. The  description of the chariot compares or even identifies this chariot with the sacrifice,  since “golden-skinned, honey-colored, ghee-backed, and carrying nourishments”  can easily describe the sacrificial fire.
The time of the Aśvins’ arrival is the particular concern of the poet. They  are the gods prātaryā́vaṇā “who journey in the early morning,” and the poet  insists that his hymn and offerings are given at the right time. They are not  given too early when it is still dark, for the evening is the wrong time to make  the offerings (vs. 2ab)—although whether it is the wrong time in general or the  wrong time for the Aśvins in particular is unsure. Likewise, unlike others he  does not make his offerings too late, after dawn has already broken (2cd). The  “ungenerous vulture” in 1cd is probably a sacrificer who gave too few offerings  too late.

## 1
Sacrifice to the first ones, the two who journey in the early morning.  They will drink before the ungenerous vulture [=rival sacrificer].
Since the Aśvins receive the sacrifice in the early morning, the poets  proclaim them as those who receive the first portion.
## 2
Sacrifice to them in the early morning, urge on the Aśvins: there is no  (sacrifice) in the evening, (when it is) displeasing for it to travel to the gods. And it is the other one, not us, who sacrifices when dawn has (already)  come: the earlier the sacrificer, the greater his gain.
## 3
Golden-skinned, honey-colored, ghee-backed, and carrying
nourishments, your chariot turns here,
swift as thought and fleet as the wind, by which you journey beyond all  difficult ways, o Aśvins.
## 4
Who has toiled most for the Nāsatyas and will give the most pleasing  (offering) at the distribution of food,
he carries his offspring across by his labors. He would ever pass beyond  those who do not raise their radiance on high.
## 5
– May we come together with the present help of the Aśvins, which is joy  itself and provides good guidance.
Here to us bring wealth and here heroes, you two immortals, and here all  that brings good fortune.