+++
title = "078"

+++
78 (432)
Aśvins
Saptavadhri Ātreya
9 verses: uṣṇih 1–3, triṣṭubh 4, anuṣṭubh 5–9
In the normal arrangement, hymns of more verses precede those of fewer verses, but  this hymn of nine verses follows hymns of five, a discrepancy that suggests that this  hymn is either a later addition to the collection or a composite, created of originally  separate hymns, or both. Formally and thematically it appears to be a composite. It  uses three different meters, unevenly divided among its verses. The first three verses,  which invite the Aśvins to the soma-pressing, are all in the same meter, begin with  an invocation to the Aśvins, and have a common refrain. They thus form a coherent  piece. The last three verses, likewise in the same meter, are an incantation to facilitate  childbirth at the proper time. Verse 7 apparently addresses the father of the child,  verse 8 the child himself, and verse 9 the Aśvins or whatever other powers might  help the childbirth. As Pirart (2001: 330–31) notes, this incantation has parallels at  Atharvaveda Śaunaka I.11.6 and Vājasaneyisaṃhitā Mādhyaṃdina VIII.28.
The middle three verses provide a transition from the invocation in verses 1–3  to the incantation in verses 7–9. Verse 4, which alone is in triṣṭubh meter, continues  to ask the Aśvins to come, but they are to come not to attend the soma rite but  to bring help, as they did when they rescued Atri. Atri’s situation, stuck within  the earth cleft and unable to come out, is compared to that of a woman in need, probably a woman in a difficult pregnancy whose child does not come out. Then  verses 5–6 likewise compare the situation of Saptavadhri. He too is stuck and needs  to be set free by the Aśvins, and his release is similarly compared to the opening of  the womb so that a child may be born. The details of Saptavadhri’s difficulty and  even Saptavadhri’s identity are unclear—he appears to be Atri in X.39.9 but else
where he is a different seer. According to Sāyaṇa he was trapped in small wooden  casket from which the Aśvins set him free, but this narrative is likely a commentarial  invention.
The entrapment of these seers, already compared in the telling to the situation  of a woman in labor, not only introduce the incantation in the last verses, but also  provide paradigmatic narratives for the birth of the child. As the Aśvins released  these seers, so they will release the child from the body of his mother.
## 1
O Aśvins, come here! O Nāsatyas, do not lose the track!
– Like wild geese, fly here to the soma-pressings.
## 2
O Aśvins, like antelopes, like buffaloes searching after pasturage, like wild geese, fly here to the soma-pressings.
## 3
O Aśvins, whose goods are prizewinners, take pleasure in our sacrifice to  your liking.
– Like wild geese, fly here to the soma-pressings.
## 4
As when Atri, sinking down into the earth cleft, called upon you again  and again, like a young woman in need (at childbirth),
now by the very speed of a falcon, come here, Aśvins, with your most  luck-bringing (help).
## 5
O tree, spread apart, like the womb of a woman about to give birth. Hear my call, Aśvins, and free Saptavadhri.
## 6
For the seer Saptavadhri, who is fearful and in need,
o Aśvins, you bend the tree together and apart by your cunning.
## 7
As the wind sways a lotus-pond in every direction,
so let your unborn child stir. Let him in his tenth month come out.
## 8
As the wind, as the forest, as the ocean stirs,
so you in your tenth month—descend together with the afterbirth.
## 9
Having lain for ten months within his mother, let the boy
come out, alive and unharmed—alive from his living mother.