+++
title = "080"

+++
80 (434)
Dawn
Satyaśravas Ātreya
6 verses: triṣṭibh
Although this hymn is attributed to the same poet as V.79 by the Anukramaṇī, it is  entirely different in tone. Dawn’s association with wealth is mentioned in verse 3,  but the focus is first on her journey (vss. 1–3) and then, in the second half of this  brief hymn (vss. 4–6), on the beauty of her body as it is slowly revealed in the grow
ing light, in images of delicate sensuality.
Each verse but the first begins with the emphatic pronoun eṣā́ “she,” and there is  no doubt that “she” is all that matters in the hymn.
## 1
The lofty one whose course is brilliant, who is truthful through her truth,  whose breath is ruddy, who is widely radiant,
goddess Dawn who brings the sun here—in response to her do the
inspired poets awaken with their poetic thoughts.
## 2
She, worthy to be seen, awakening the people, making the paths easy to  travel, drives in the vanguard
with a lofty chariot, herself lofty, setting all in motion. Dawn extends her  light in the vanguard of the days.
## 3
She, after hitching up with her ruddy cows, without fail has produced her  wealth unremittingly.
Blazing paths for good passage, the goddess, praised by many, bringing  all valuables, radiates widely.
## 4
She, the dappled one, becomes doubly exalted as she reveals her body in  the east.
She follows along the path of truth, straight to the goal. Like one who  knows the way, she does not confound the directions.
## 5
She, like a beauty who knows her own body, has stood up erect like a  bather for us to see.
Thrusting away hatred and the shades of darkness, Dawn, the Daughter  of Heaven, has come here with her light.
## 6
She, the Daughter of Heaven, facing toward men, lets her breast spill  over like a fortunate young wife,
disclosing desirable things to the pious. The young woman has created  light once again, as before.764 V.81–82