+++
title = "081"

+++
81 (435)
Savitar
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
5 verses: jagatī
The Anukramaṇī attributes both this and the next hymn, also to Savitar, to Śyāvāśva,  the poet of the Marut cycle in this maṇḍala, and indeed the poet names himself at  the end of the last verse (5). However, the subject of Savitar does not seem to have  inspired him to the same poetic heights as the Maruts did. The hymn depicts Savitar  as a power in the cosmos (especially vss. 2–5), but also as a poet and distributor of  benefits to mortals (1–2ab).
## 1
They hitch up their mind and they hitch up their insights—the inspired  poets attentive to the poetic inspiration of the lofty inspired poet.
He distributes the ritual offerings as the only one who knows the
patterns. Great is the encircling praise of Savitar.
## 2
The sage poet fastens all forms upon himself. He has impelled benefit to  the two-footed and the four-footed.
He has looked out across the firmament—Savitar worthy to be chosen.  He rules following the lead of Dawn.
## 3
Whose lead the others have followed: the gods (following) the might of  the god with their power;
who measured out the earthly (spaces)—he, the steed [/Etaśa], (also)  measured out the (heavenly) spaces with his greatness: god Savitar.
## 4
And you travel, Savitar, through the three luminous realms, and you are  at home with the rays of the sun.
And you encircle the night on both sides, and you become Mitra [/an  ally], o god, through your supports.
## 5
And you are master over impulsion, just you alone, and you become  Pūṣan through your journeys.
And you rule over all this world here. Śyāvāśva has achieved his praise  for you, Savitar.