+++
title = "082"

+++
82 (436) Savitar
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
9 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 1, arranged in trcas ̥
Structuring this hymn is an insistent pun on the name of Savitar (“the Impeller”)  derived from the root sū “impel”: there are eight separate verbal and nominal forms  of this root in the hymn. Savitar is also identified as the Apportioner (Bhaga), who  often elsewhere appears as a separate divinity though regularly associated with  Savitar, and what he is urged to impel is, for the most part, a good portion for us. 1. This we choose of Savitar’s: the sustenance of the god—
the Apportioner’s best vanquishing power, which best confers
wholeness—(that) would we acquire.
## 2
For of this Savitar here—his own very self-glorious self-sovereignty they do not confound in any way.
## 3
Because he, Savitar the Apportioner, will impel treasures to the pious, we beg him for the brilliant portion.
## 4
Today, god Savitar, you have impelled to us a good portion consisting of  offspring.
Impel away the bad dream.
## 5
All difficulties impel away, god Savitar.
What is beneficial, that impel here to us.
## 6
(If we are) without offense to Aditi, at the impulsion of god Savitar might we acquire all things of value.
## 7
With our hymns we choose today the one with all the gods in his charge,  the lord of settlements,
whose impulsion comes true: Savitar.
## 8
Who goes in front of both these two day-halves unremittingly
and with good intentions: god Savitar.
## 9
Who makes all these creatures hearken with his signal-call
and will impel (them) forth: Savitar.