+++
title = "083"

+++
83 (437)
Parjanya
Atri Bhauma
10 verses: triṣṭubh 1, 5–8, 10, jagatī 2–4, anuṣṭubh 9
Parjanya (“Thunder”) is the subject of only three hymns in the R̥gveda. This lovely  hymn, much translated, is reminiscent of the Marut hymns in this maṇḍala, though  not ascribed to the same poet. (The Maruts are addressed here in vs. 6.) Vivid images  of the power of the thunderstorm are mingled with expressions of thanks for the  fructifying effects of the accompanying rains, depicted as sexual in nature. In the last  verse the poet describes all the good Parjanya has done, but gently urges him to desist.
## 01
Address the powerful one with these hymns. Praise Parjanya. With  reverence seek to entice him here.
The constantly roaring bull of lively drops deposits his semen as embryo  in the plants.
## 02
He smashes apart the trees and also smashes the demons. All creation  fears him who has the mighty weapon.
And (even) the blameless one shrinks from the one of bullish powers,  when Parjanya, thundering, smashes those who do ill.

## 03
Like a charioteer lashing out at his horses with a whip, he reveals his  rain-bearing messengers.
From afar the thunderings of the lion rise up, when Parjanya produces  his rain-bearing cloud.
## 04
The winds blow forth; the lightning bolts fly. The plants shoot up; the  sun swells.
Refreshment arises for all creation, when Parjanya aids the earth with  his semen.
## 05
At whose commandment the earth bobs up and down, at whose  commandment the hoofed (livestock) quivers,
at whose commandment the plants take on all forms—you, Parjanya— extend to us great shelter.
## 06
Grant us rain from heaven, o Maruts; make the streams of the bullish  stallion swell forth.
(Parjanya,) come nearby with this thundering, pouring down the waters  as the lord, our father.
## 07
Roar! Thunder! Set an embryo! Fly around with your water-bearing  chariot.
Drag the water-skin unleashed, facing downward. Let uplands and
lowlands become alike.
## 08
The great bucket—turn it up, pour it down. Let the brooks, unleashed,  flow forward.
Inundate Heaven and Earth with ghee. Let there be a good watering  hole for the prized cows.
## 09
When, o Parjanya, constantly roaring, thundering you smash those who  do ill,
all of this here, whatever is on the earth, rejoices in response.
## 10
You have rained rain: (now) hold it back. You have made the
wastelands able to be traversed.
You have begotten the plants for nourishment, and you have found
(this?) inspired thought for the creatures.