+++
title = "084"

+++
84 (438)
Earth
Atri Bhauma
3 verses: anuṣṭubh
This tiny hymn is attributed to the same poet as the preceding hymn to Parjanya  and complements that hymn. The poem is a sort of riddle: the first verse establishes  that Earth is the addressee, and in the next verse the address to a feminine being  (the word “earth” is feminine in gender and conceived of as female) continues. But  none of the characteristics mentioned in that verse seem particularly Earth-like. She is addressed as oscillating and silvery; she is associated with the nights; she “flings”  moisture. The riddle is—under what circumstances could Earth be so described?  The answer: under the darkness of the monsoon clouds, when thunder causes her  to shake (thus “oscillating”; see V.83.5) and she is “silvery” with rain, which she  “flings” in the forms of streams and rivulets down her slopes, mentioned in verse  1. This solution was adumbrated by Thieme (1964: 58) and is discussed further in  Jamison (2013).
If the audience doesn’t solve the riddle in verse 2, verse 3 provides the answer.
## 01
Yes indeed! (It is) just so: you bear the pressure of the mountains,  o Earth,
as you bring the ground to life with your greatness, o gently sloping  great one.
## 02
Praises sound in response to you, oscillating lady, through the nights, as you fling the swelling moisture forward like a (horse) neighing for a  prize, silvery one—
## 03
You who, steadfast yourself, keep fast the trees all across the earth by  your strength,
when the lightning bolts of the dark cloud and the rains from heaven  rain for you.