+++
title = "085"

+++
85 (439)
Varuṇa
Atri Bhauma
8 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is often admired and translated because of its grand vision of Varuṇa  as a creator god (vss. 1–6) and as a god who forgives the faults of human beings  (vss. 7–8). But what is the connection between these two sides of Varuṇa? The poet  joins the two functions of Varuṇa formally by the repetition of the accented preverb  ví-, meaning “out,” “apart,” or the like. In fashioning the world and sustaining life,  Varuṇa “split apart” (ví ...jaghā́na, 1c), “stretched out” (ví ...tatāna, 2a), “soaks”  (vy ùnatti, 3d), and “measured out” (ví mamé, 5d). All this leads up to the plea that  Varuṇa “unbind” (ví ṣya, 8c) the wrongs that people commit. With their sense of  opening up and freeing, the verbal compounds with ví- create not only a verbal con nection between Varuṇa’s cosmogonic and redemptive acts, but a logical one as well.  On the cosmological plane Varuṇa spread out the world beneath the sun (vs. 1cd),  stretched out the midspace (vs. 2ab), and lets loose the rain (vss. 3–4) and the rivers  (vs. 6). Analogously, on the moral plane he loosens the fetters that people’s evildoing  would otherwise create (vs. 8). Thus the hymn is dominated by the name of Varuṇa,  which occurs in every verse except one (vs. 6) and the preverb ví-. Even where these do  not appear, the poet echoes váruṇa and ví- throughout the hymn by repeating words

containing -v- and, especially, beginning with v-, for example, váneṣu and vā́jam opening 2a and 2b, téna víśvasya and yávaṃ ná vr̥ṣṭír ví at the beginning of 3c and  3d, váruṇo váṣṭi in 4b, vasata and vīrā́ḥ in 4c and 4d, and so forth.
In all of this, verse 6 is anomalous, since it does not mention Varuṇa by name and  does not contain ví- or even a word beginning with v-. It is generally more difficult to  explain why something does not occur than why something does, but the position and  content of the verse suggest possible reasons for these omissions. First, the verse may  be marked, albeit by absence, because it is the transitional verse from the cosmologi
cal themes of the first part of the hymn to the redemptive one of the last two verses.  Second, the theme of the verse is the mystery of the god. Its center is the paradox in  6cd that the “sea”—whatever body of water is meant by that—never fills despite the  waters flooding into it. The opening line of the verse mentions Varuṇa’s māyā́, his  “cunning,” and calls him the kavítama, “the foremost sage poet,” the one who best  knows and best articulates what he knows. The poet may have suppressed overt men
tion of Varuṇa’s name to indicate the impenetrability of his power and mind.
## 1
Chant forth to the sovereign king a lofty and deep formulation, dear to  famed Varuṇa,
who, like a butcher an animal hide, split apart the earth to form an
underlayer for the sun.
## 2
He stretched out the midspace upon the trees, the prize of victory in the  steeds, the milk in the ruddy (cows);
Varuṇa placed resolve in hearts, fire in waters, the sun in heaven, and  soma on the stone.
## 3
Varuṇa has poured out the cask with its opening below upon the two  world-halves and the midspace.
By this he is king of the whole living world. Like rain the barley, he
soaks the land.
## 4
He soaks the land, the earth, and heaven. When Varuṇa wishes milk to  flow, then surely it does:
the mountains cloak themselves with the rain cloud; showing their
might, the heroes [=the Maruts?] let themselves loose.
## 5
I proclaim this great cunning of the lordly, famed Varuṇa,
who, standing in the midspace as if with a measuring rod, measured out  earth with the sun.
## 6
And now no one defies this great cunning of the foremost sage poet,  the god:
that the mottled streams, pouring out, do not fill the single sea
with water.
## 7
O Varuṇa, the offense that we have committed against any partner, be he  one by alliance or one by custom, or against a brother,
or against a neighbor—whether native or foreign—o Varuṇa,
loosen that. 8. If (we have cheated) as gamblers cheat in a dice game, whether overtly or  whether we are unaware,
unbind all these things (so they will be) like loose things, o god. Then  would we be dear to you, Varuṇa.