+++
title = "086"

+++
86 (440)
Indra and Agni
Atri Bhauma
6 verses: anuṣṭubh, except virāṭpūrvā 6
Although Agni and Indra separately receive the largest number of R̥gvedic hymns  of any of the gods, they have little to do with each other conceptually or ritu ally, and the relatively few hymns they share (eleven in all) tend either to be banal,  boiler-plate hymns without much content, or else ones favoring one or the other of  the gods. There are elements of both types in this hymn. On the one hand, Indra  and Agni are invoked as a pair through much of the hymn with fairly all-purpose  phraseology. On the other, the two exploits described (in 1cd and the very difficult  3cd, the middle of the hymn) are Indraic: the first a clear reference to the Vala myth,  though with Trita, not Indra, as hero; the second a reference to the Vr̥tra myth, with  some curious features, especially the unidentified wooden object.
## 01
Indra and Agni, the mortal whom you both help in the prize-contests, that one splits open even the fastnesses to (reach) their brilliant
(contents), as Trita (did) the voices (of the cows? of the rivers?).
## 02
You two who are difficult to surpass in battles, who are worthy of fame  at the prize-contests,
who sur(mount) the five domains—these two, Indra and Agni, we
invoke.
## 03
Vehement is the force of those two bounteous ones, sharp their missile. With the wooden (weapon?) in the hands of the Vr̥tra-smasher he
[=Vr̥tra-smashing Indra] goes questing (in his quest) for cattle.
## 04
In our quest for chariots we call upon you two, Indra and Agni,
the two lords of powerful generosity, the knowing ones who most long  for hymns.
## 05
The two, growing strong through the days, the two gods undeceptive to  the mortal,
just these two do I set in front, the two gods like portions for a steed,  though themselves deserving (portions).
## 06
Thus to Indra and Agni this forceful oblation [/invocation] has been  offered, like ghee purified by stones.
You two, fix lofty fame fast in the patrons, wealth in the singers—fix  refreshment in the singers.
