+++
title = "087"

+++
87 (441)
Maruts
Evayāmarut Ātreya
9 verses: atijagatī
This final hymn of Maṇḍala V is clearly an addition to the original collection, and  it is composed in an unusual lyric meter found only in this hymn and a few scat tered verses in the rest of the saṃhitā, consisting of five pādas arranged in two  half-verses: 12 12 / 12 8 8. (It is convenient here to place the final two pādas on  a separate verse line.) The end of the first hemistich of each verse is marked by  the unusual formation evayā́marut, which serves as an internal refrain, syntacti cally unconnected to the rest of the verse. This word is aberrantly formed, and  our translation reflects what we consider its intent, rather than a literal value. (The  Anukramaṇī names Evayāmarut as the poet of this hymn, but the name is obvi ously secondarily derived from the refrain. We would not be surprised if Śyāvāśva  was responsible for this playful Marut hymn.) Indeed, the syntax is lax in a number  of verses, which appear to be constructed of metrical phrases with internal syntac tic unity but loosely strung together.
In terms of content the most striking feature is the close association between the  god Viṣṇu and the Maruts. The Maruts are mentioned with Viṣṇu in other places  in the R̥gveda, but not in such a sustained fashion as here. The thematic connection  between them is not entirely clear, but Viṣṇu’s famous three strides from earth to  heaven, via the midspace, do remind us of the ever-journeying Maruts, who gener
ally inhabit the midspace but are found also both in heaven and on earth.
## 01
Let your thoughts go forth to mighty, mountain-born Viṣṇu,
accompanied by the Maruts—Maruts on the march—
to the troop worshiped at the beginning of the sacrifice, well-spangled, powerful, fortunate in their quest, of boisterous commandment, (who  are) strength (itself).
## 02
Who—(both) those produced by might and those self(-produced)— proclaim (their strength) with their know-how—Maruts on
the march—
with regard to your will—its strength, o Maruts, is not to be assailed; with regard to their giving, their might—that (strength) is like
unassailable mountains.
## 03
Who are heard from lofty heaven through a hymn [/on the mountain],  beautifully blazing, good in their essence—Maruts on the march—
in whose seat no meddler holds sway—
flashing out by themselves like fires—(the chariots?) of the boisterous  ones (go) forth streaming.
## 04
The wide-striding one [=Viṣṇu] has stridden forth from the great
common seat—Maruts on the march.
When from his own (seat) upon the (mountains’) backs he has hitched  up by himself the competitors of extensive might, he goes, growing strong with
kindness, with the superior men.
## 05
Vehement like your roar, the driving turbulent forceful bull [=Viṣṇu] sets  (the earth) atremble—Maruts on the march—
with whom the victorious self-luminous ones stretch out straight—
the golden ones possessing taut reins, good weapons, arrows.
## 06
Your might has no further shore, o you whose strength has grown. Let  your turbulent strength be of aid—Maruts on the march—
for, in the sight of all, you are firm-mounted (charioteers) in the
onslaught.
Deliver us from insult, (you who are) like blazing fires.
## 07
Let these Rudras, good battlers, like fires powerfully brilliant, be of aid— Maruts on the march.
Long and broad the earthly seat spreads out,
when at the drives of them, whose offenses are beyond harm, the troops  of great (Viṣṇu) ap(proach).
## 08
Without hatred, come on your way to us here, Maruts. Hear the call of  the singer—Maruts on the march.
O you of equal spirit, along with great Viṣṇu,
like charioteers with wondrous skill, keep hatreds far away in the
distance.
## 09
Come to our sacrifice, you worthy of the sacrifice, with its good labor.  Hear the call in undemonic (spirit)—Maruts on the march.
Like the most ancient mountains in distant heaven,
you, o discerning ones, should be difficult to restrain at an insult to this  one [=singer].