+++
title = "Gods"

+++
The Atris and their associates address a broader range of deities in their hymns  than do many of the other poetic families. The distribution is as follows:  Agni  (1–28), Indra (29–40), the All Gods (41–51), the Maruts (52–61), Mitra and Varuṇa  (62–72), the Aśvins (73–78), Dawn (79–80), Savitar (81–82), Parjanya (83), Earth  (84), Varuṇa (85), Indra and Agni (86), and the Maruts (87). 

The last hymn, which  returns to the Maruts, is an addition to the original collection and unusual in a  number of respects. Metrically it is in a long lyric meter, and thematically it features  an unusual pairing of the Maruts with Viṣṇu.

The Atri Maṇḍala contains a noteworthy collection of hymns to the All Gods  (41–51). A number of these feature riddles and verbal play, but none is as challenging as V.44, which Geldner called the most difficult hymn in the R̥gveda.+++(5)+++ The hymn  does not name the god or gods it praises, but the very last verse mentions Agni and  Soma, leaving the hearer to divine what the rest of the hymn is about. Complicating  that task are lexical, syntactic, and morphological puzzles, ellipses without obvious resolution, and, above all, a likely dual reference that points to the mystery at the  heart of the hymn.

The Marut cycle attributed to Śyāvāśva Ātreya (52–61) contains the longest  sequence of hymns dedicated to these gods in the R̥gveda and is a remarkably exciting and satisfying achievement. Other hymns of note include two  hymns to gods of the natural world, V.80 to Dawn and V.83 to Parjanya, the  Thunderstorm. The first is the most famous and certainly one of the most beautiful of the hymns to Dawn in the R̥gveda, famed for its sensual portrayal of  Dawn as a beautiful woman revealing herself to men. The latter is an energetic  picture of the storm god, roaring loudly and flooding the earth. The rains are a  constant theme in a number of the strongest hymns in this collection+++(4)+++, including  V.54, which vividly describes the Maruts and the storms they bring, and V.63,  which rumbles repeated sounds in its praise of Mitra and Varuṇa as masters  of the monsoons. The single hymn to Varuṇa in this collection, V.85, presents  both a grand vision of the god as the creator of the world and a more intimate  one of Varuṇa as a god who can forgive offenses and free people from them.  In general, the Atri poets were at their best in describing natural phenomena,  especially thunderstorms, which they both fervently desire and fear because of  their power.