+++
title = "C Imagery, Metaphors, and Similes"

+++
The R̥gveda is rich in imagery: the procedures of sacrifice, the exploits of the gods,  the activities of men, and the elements and functioning of the cosmos are constantly presented in images of something else, images based on similarity and parallelism. 

## Similie
On the formal level by far the most common way of expressing these images  is in a simile—the most common poetic device in the R̥gveda, as it is in Classical  Sanskrit poetry. Although to Indologists the dominance of the simile may seem too  predictable to be worth noting, in fact this is one of the features of R̥gvedic style  that looks forward to the classical era, and seems to represent something of a break  from the stylistic parameters of the poetic tradition from which R̥gvedic practice  emerged. The Avesta contains very few similes—none in the Old Avestan Gāthās  to which the R̥gveda is otherwise so akin—and the so-called “Homeric simile” of  ancient Greek epic, with its elaborately imagined world expressed in verb phrases,  is structurally very different from the Sanskrit simile.+++(5)+++ 

Both in Vedic and in Classical Sanskrit poetry the simile is essentially nominal: that is, in a syntactic structure nominal elements are compared with each other,  while the verb is held constant.+++(4)+++ An English example would be “Indra attacked  the enemy, like a lion a sheep,” where the verb “attack” serves for both frame and  simile, while Indra=lion and enemy=sheep provide the comparisons. In a case language like Sanskrit both “Indra” and “lion” will be coded as nominative case, and  “enemy” and “sheep” as accusative. Neither Vedic nor Classical Sanskrit regularly  has similes of the type “Indra attacked the enemy, as a lion devours a sheep,” with  two different clauses constituting the comparison and a difference in verb. 

The  “like” of the English example has overt expression in Sanskrit as well: by iva or ná in the R̥gveda, and just iva in Classical Sanskrit. For further on the structure of the  simile and the ways that R̥gvedic poets exploit it, see Jamison (1982). 

## Bandhus
Although the simile is ubiquitous in the R̥gveda, it is not the only vehicle of  imagery in the text. Implicit identifications of disparate elements are another inescapable stylistic feature, and, as was discussed above, regularly recurring identifications (bandhus)—the fire as sun, the chariot as sacrifice, and so forth—provide the  conceptual structure of the Vedic cosmos. Thus, poetic style coincides here with  the shared notions of the world that shape “the Vedic mind.” 

However, in making identifications the poets do not confine themselves to these shared and stable  associations, but often make bold and superficially puzzling equations. Decoding  the shared features that allow such equations to be made is one of the intellectual  challenges that the poets posed to their own audience and that engages us, and  often eludes us, to this day. 

## War imagery
Although the poetic foundation on which the R̥gveda rests was an ancient one,  the imagery of its poems comes from the immediate world of its poets. As already  remarked, the R̥gveda is fundamentally a collection for the soma rite in which Indra  is the principal deity.+++(5)+++ Indra is a warrior, and therefore images of battle, war, contest, and conflict provide the background for a great many R̥gvedic hymns. In the  IXth book, for example, the ritual process of creating soma can represent a war  campaign by King Soma. The dripping of soma as it is pressed is the beginning of  Soma’s attack or raid. The flow of soma over the woolen filter and into the soma  vessels is the destruction of Soma’s enemies. With the mixing of soma with milk,  Soma wins cows and other goods and distributes them to his subjects, who are the  sacrificers (cf. Oberlies 1999: 167–206). 

Other items associated with war and periods of mobilization also loom large in  the poems, perhaps none more than the chariot.+++(5)+++ The chariot was one of the most  visible cultural symbols of the Āryas, for it was likely unique to them among the  peoples of ancient South Asia, and it was critical to their success in battle and their  mobility. In R̥gvedic poetry the chariot becomes the hymn that travels to the gods  or the sacrifice that brings the gods (II.18.1). When they perform the ritual or compose the hymns, priests become the fashioners of the chariot (I.61.4, V.2.11), and  just as a chariot brings booty from war or a winning chariot the prize of a race, the  sacrifice carries goods from the gods to humans (X.53.7). In I.129.1 Indra is asked  to lead a chariot that is both an actual, racing chariot and a metaphorical chariot,  the sacrifice. The chariot is also the vehicle of the gods, by which they come to the  sacrifice. Distinctive animals pull the chariots of different gods: the two fallow bay  horses of Indra, the dappled mares of the Maruts, the mares of the Sun, the ruddy  cattle of Dawn, the goats of Pūṣan. 

More abstractly, the imagery of war is also implicit in the frequent symbols of  expansion and confinement. This imagery is most evident in the principal Indra  stories. Vr̥tra represents what hinders and blocks, and when Indra kills Vr̥tra, he  shows himself to be the power that can destroy any other obstacles to life and prosperity. The Vala cave enclosed and entrapped the cattle, and Indra must break open Vala to free the cows, the dawns, and the light. 

## Pastorial imagery
Finding open and well-watered pasture lands was essential for the Āryas, since their cattle, horses, and other livestock  depended on them. The second half of IX.113 is a poetic vision of heaven, where  there is “inexhaustible light” (7) and “youthfully exuberant waters” (8), where one  moves “following one’s desire” (9), and where there is “independence and satisfaction” (10). It is the heavenly vision of a pastoral people, longing for a place of  freedom and abundance. 

### Cows
Pastoral imagery dominates R̥gvedic poetry at many turns. Cows are everywhere, especially as the symbols and substance of wealth. The attention of the gods,  which will bring rewards to humans, is a cow (II.32.3), and rain is milk from heaven  (V.63.5). In II.34.8 the Maruts are compared to a cow, since they “swell” with rain,  the way cows swell with milk. In VI.45.7 Indra, as the god who inspires poetic  formulations, is a cow whose milk is the hymns. Or again, in VIII.1.10 Indra is  both the milker of the cow and the cow whose milk is “refreshment” for sacrificers.  Speech is a cow that gives the forms of speech as her milk in VIII.110.10, and in  X.64.12 the insight that the gods have given the poet should swell like a cow with  milk. VI.48.11–13 combines several images of the cow, beginning with an actual  cow, whose milk is the milk that is mixed with soma but including also the cow that  represents poetic inspiration and prosperity. In X.133.7 prosperity brought by the  gods is a cow giving her milk “in a thousand streams.” The dawns, which are linked  with the dakṣiṇā, the sacrificial reward, and with riches more generally, are cows  (IV.1.16, 52.2–4). 

### Bull and buffalo
While the poets have particular fondness for cows, male animals too figure significantly in the hymns. Bulls and buffaloes embody strength and virility, and therefore  they represent mighty gods, potent sacrifice, and strong men. Agni is a bull with a  strong neck (V.2.12), horns (V.1.8), and a powerful bellow (X.8.1). In V.40.1–4 the  bull-like pressing stone and bull-like soma are prepared so that the bull Indra will  join together with his bulls, the Maruts. Indra is “the bull overcoming the power ful, the tempestuous king, smasher of Vr̥tra, soma-drinker” (vs. 4). Parjanya, the  Thunderstorm, roars like a bull (V.83.1), has the powers of bull (vs. 2), and pours  his fertilizing streams as a “bullish stallion” (vs. 6). Indeed, anything associated with  their ideal of masculinity is likely to be bull-like for the R̥gvedic poets. 

### Horse
The cultural role of horses—racehorses and warhorses—was obviously central  to the Āryas and, as a result, so was their poetic role. Agni is praised like a steed  (III.22.1), for he is a horse that brings rewards (I.27.1). When he is kindled, he is  a hungry horse, which breaks free of his enclosure (VII.3.2). Soma is a racehorse  groomed by the fingers of the priests and running over the woolen filter (IX.6.3,  5; cf. 13.6). The waters too are like racehorses that should run forever (IV.3.12).  A sacrificer harnesses himself to the sacrifice like a horse (V.46.1), and the sacrifice  is brought to success like a horse (IV.10.1). The significance of the horse is perhaps  most obvious in the Dadhikrāvan hymns, IV.38–40. Dadhikrāvan was likely the  actual horse of King Trasadasyu, but Dadhikrāvan also represents the rule of the  Pūrus, the tribe to whom Trasadasyu belonged, and the sun, which can represent the king. Similarly, in X.178, Tārkṣya is a protective deity of chariot drivers and  perhaps a deified racehorse himself. 

## Wild animals
Although the poets are focused on pastoral life and the herd animals they  know best, wild animals also occasionally appear in R̥gvedic hymns (see Jamison  2008b). Birds are frequently mentioned (I.164.21; X.80.5, 123.6), especially since  the gods fly like birds (I.166.10). Unlike other birds, the falcon is not only fast but  also can be trained. Mythologically the falcon is particularly significant, since it  brought the soma from heaven to Manu (IX.48.4, IV.26–27). 

The wolf is a recurring symbol of lurking danger (I.42.2, 105.11, 18, 120.7; II.28.10), as is the snake  (VII.38.7). The most dangerous creature of all is Vr̥tra, who is a gigantic cobra  (I.32). 

More benignly, the inseparable Aśvins are compared to a pair of cakravāka ducks (II.39.3), and in I.64 the Maruts are not only bulls and buffaloes, but they  also roar like lions and devour trees like elephants. Perhaps the broadest array of  animals appears in X.28, which is built around various animal fables (also Jamison  2008b). 

## Human pursuits
Various human pursuits play significant roles in poetic imagery. The poets frequently mention weaving (e.g., I.115.4), which is similar to the intricate patterns  of hymn composition and sacrifice (VI.9.2–3, X.101.2, 130). This is an inherited  Indo-European trope. Given the pastoral symbolism elsewhere, it is not surprising  that cattle-tending is a major source of poetic imagery. Indra is like a herdsman  who separates his flocks from those of others (V.31.1; cf. VI.19.3). The poet too  can be a herdsman driving his praise to Indra (VI.49.12). Or we have the reverse  image: in VII.18.10 enemies run helter-skelter like cows without a herdsman. 

In  addition to animal husbandry, the Āryas also raised crops, such as barley, but agricultural imagery does not figure much in the R̥gvedic poetry. Again, the reason  may be the connection of the soma rite to Indra and to the period of mobilization (yóga).+++(5)+++ In the period of settlement (kṣéma), agriculture would have had a  larger role. 
