+++
title = "D Riddles"

+++
Much of the R̥gveda is enigmatic, not only because of our distance from the time  of its creation, but also because the poets meant it to be enigmatic. They valued  knowledge, especially the knowledge of the hidden connections (the bandhus discussed above) between the visible world, the divine world, and the realm of ritual.+++(5)+++  They embedded that knowledge in hymns that were stylistically tight and elliptical,  expressively oblique, and lexically resonant. As a result, many hymns of the R̥gveda  can appear to us as riddles. However, there are also hymns purposefully composed  to cloak their subjects or to withhold them until late in the hymn.+++(5)+++ In the later Veda  the ability to solve the riddles they pose became a formalized demonstration of the  knowledge of the priests taking part in the sacrifice. In the R̥gveda the riddle hymns  challenged the interpretive ability of their hearers and demonstrated the cleverness  of their poets.

One kind of riddle hymn is represented by V.47. Through its first six verses, it  describes various deities but does not name them. The descriptions point toward  various gods, but never so plainly that hearers could be sure of their interpretations.  At the very end of the hymn, in its last verse, the poet twists his strategy and in the  very first pāda names the gods he addresses, gods who may or may not be among  those he described earlier. The clarity of that last verse throws into greater relief  the difficulty of the preceding verses. 

The poet of VIII.29 uses exactly the reverse  strategy. This is a list hymn, in which each of its verses identifies a god or gods by  attributes or behavior, but not by name. In this hymn, however, the identity of the  gods it describes is not mysterious at all—or is not until the last verse. At that point,  when the confidence of hearers to interpret the hymn would be greatest, the poet  presents a real riddle, in which the identity of the subject is not at all clear. 

In III.55  the riddle of the identity of the gods described in its verses points toward an even  deeper mystery. This mystery is laid out in its refrain: it is that the many gods share  a single lordship (asuratvám ékam). 

Other poets treat the sacrifice as a mystery. In X.114 the poet describes the constituents of the sacrifice in symbols that make the identification of those constituents difficult or impossible. It leaves the sense that the sacrifice can be penetrated  only so far, that it is beyond full understanding, except, perhaps, for poets who create such hymns. Another characteristic of X.114 is that each of its verses contains  a number—small numbers at the beginning (2, 3, 4, 1), larger numbers toward the  end, and an ironic plural of the word for “one,” éke “such ones,” in the last verse.  

Other hymns employ numerical riddles, in which a number is key to their solution,  if there is a solution. One of the most obscure hymns in the R̥gveda is X.27. Verse  15 describes the convergence of numbered groups of heroes, none of whom are  identified. There are seven who come from the south, eight from the north, nine  from the west, and ten from the east, but we are left to puzzle about the significance  of these numbers and directions.+++(4)+++ 

Perhaps the most famous riddle hymn in the R̥gveda is I.164, a very long poem  (52 verses, one of the longest hymns in the R̥gveda) that moves in different directions as it unfolds. The hymn makes both implicit and explicit reference to Vedic ritual, including rites other than the soma ritual. In referring to these rites, the  hymn suggests hidden links between ritual objects and acts, realities and processes  of the natural world, and constituents and functions of the human body. These  hidden connections continue to be hidden, for while we can see the general pattern  of the hymn, the interpretation of its specific elements often remains difficult, and  many competing solutions have been offered. This is, of course, often the case with  these riddle hymns. 
