+++
title = "03"

+++
In two of its four occurrences víbhṛtra- means something like ‘dispersed’, but that makes no sense here. The third occurrence is similar to ours, however: I.95.2 … janayanta gárbham … víbhṛtram. In both these instances it seems to be an idiomatic expression for children of an age to be carried around, in I.95.2 of the newborn fire. In our passage both Ge’s “die Tragekinder” and Re’s “des fils (en âge) d’être portés” seem on the money. Since Eng. lacks a useful expression (or means to make one) like Tragekind, my tr. is an attempt to convey the sense in brief and also to capture the implied locus of the children in our passage. In the simile they are said to be sitting on their mother (acc. mātáram), but in the frame the corresponding term is loc. sā́nau ‘on the back’, and I suggest that the mother’s back is implied in the simile as well. The difference between acc. mātáram and loc. sā́nau is a fairly trivial example of the “case disharmony in similes” discussed in detail in my 1982 IIJ article of the same name. 72 In b the gods are urged to take their seats (devā́saḥ … sadantu) on the barhis.

The action ordered is of course unremarkable and repeated numerous times in the RV, but in the context of this sequence of hymns it can be considered a “repair.” In the preceding hymn, in VII.42.5, Night and Dawn are given the same command, also in the 3rd ps., also in the thematic aor. (náktā … sadatām uṣā́sā). As was noted there, this produces an unusual image; 43.3 replaces and thus repairs it with the familiar one.

In c the problem is that neither of the fem. adjectives -- nom. viśvā́cī or acc. vidathyā̀m -- modifies an expressed noun, and the referential possibilites are wide open. Ge follows Sāy. by taking the nom. as the sacrificial ladle and the acc. as the flame, though in his n. (3c) he suggests that ‘speech’ would be possible for both. Re follows Th. (Unters. 49) in taking over devátāt- from d as the acc., tr. “(la troupe des dieux) arrivant au sacrifice,” while maintaining the ladle as the nom. (One might think that the gods might find this an odd and messy welcome!) Old thinks the nom. is definitely the ladle, but suggests various possibilities for the acc. On the basis of I.167.3 vidathyā̀… vā́k, I take the acc. as speech, with the anointing metaphorical: the ladle pours the butter offering into the ritual fire as ritual speech is recited. There is precedent for this metaphor: cf. I.61.5 arkám … sám añje and I.64.1 gíraḥ sám añje with ‘chant’ and ‘hymns’, respectively, as object of ‘anoint’.

