+++
title = "04"

+++
The isolated form sīṣapanta is hard to assess. By form it appears to belong to a redupl. aor., but no other forms to such a stem are attested and, more to the point, there is no securely attested -áya-transitive. I cannot evaluate sāpáyant- in TB II.4.6.5, which is evidently the Brāhmaṇa form Whitney lists, with ?, in Roots s.v. √sap, but even if it belongs to the same root, it is attested too late to provide a basis on which to generate an associated redupl. aor. in the RV. Nonetheless, I see no choice but to take sīṣapanta as a redupl. aor. and to assume an unattested *sāpáyati for early Vedic. What then does sīṣapanta mean? In my 1983 -áya- monograph (p.

219) I assert that it has intrans./reflex. sense, is not connected with a causative, and that it is based on nearby sápante (VII.38.5) (without specifiying how), but I no longer believe that. Nor, despite the temptation of the -anta ending, do I believe it’s an -anta replacement. Rather I would now take it as a reflexive transitive ‘serve themselves’ (or, since that English idiom is too colloquial, ‘do service to themselves’). The basis for this is expressed in the next pāda: the gods do their own milking (dúhānāḥ), producing the “streams of truth,” presumably the praise hymns, by their own actions -- thus serving themselves. See Lüders (473, 475), who argues for “stream of truth” as Kultlied and (475) interprets this hemistich essentially as I do.

This may be a variant on the notion that the gods are the ultimate source of the hymns that praise them because they provide the inspired thoughts to the poets, or it may be that the sheer arrival of the gods at the ritual ground provides the impetus for the “milking” of the hymns.

Both Ge and Re take the 2nd hemistich as a single cl., with máhaḥ as goal of ā́ gantana. Ge further takes máhas- as “Feier” (celebration), while Re’s “manifestation-de-grandeur” is closer to the root sense of the word. But I see no 73 reason not to take this neut. s-stem in the standard sense ‘greatness’ and construe pāda c as an independent nominal cl., as in the publ. tr.

In d sámanasaḥ ‘of the same mind’ replicates the same word in 2b and provides a bit of a ring. Note that in 2 the referents are the human officiants, whereas here it is the gods, who are thus implicitly equated -- and equation facilitated by the similar structures: the two words are in identical metrical positions and both follow a 2nd pl. impv., with sámanasaḥ modifying the 2nd ps. subj. Although ‘of the same mind’ in the first instance means that all members of each group have the same mind, the repetition may imply that the human officiants of vs. 2 and the attending gods of vs. 4 also share the same thoughts.