+++
title = "10"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., the second part of the hymn begins here, but it clearly pivots on the sun, which figured in the two preceding vss.

My interpr. of this much discussed vs. is presented in the publ. intro., but in compressed fashion. As noted there, I think this has to do with the separation of noxious liquid from beneficial liquid, a feat ascribed in natural terms to the sun and in mythological terms to Indra. When “I fasten the poison on the sun” (pāda a), I am counting on the purificatory power of the sun to neutralize or banish the poison. This ritualistic action is matched in pāda b by fastening the skin onto the house of the surā-possessor. Surā is an alcoholic beverage of some sort (generally tr.

‘Branntwein’, ‘brandy’, et sim., though, acdg. to James McHugh [p.c.], it is unlikely that the technology of distilling was known to Vedic India, so probably some sort of beer; see now McHugh forthcoming [JAOS], “The Ancient Indian Alcoholic Drink Called Surā: Vedic Evidence”) and a universally condemned evil twin to soma, though it gets used in some śrauta rituals, particularly the Sautrāmaṇī. The appearance of the surā-possessor (súrāvant-) in b is owing to two factors: on the one hand, as just noted, surā is a taboo drink and is therefore equivalent to the poison (viṣá-) in pāda a. On the other, the word súrā- is phonologically reminiscent of ‘sun’ sū́rya- in pāda a.

The natural/ritual action depicted in the first pāda is, in my interpr., matched by the mythological action of the second pāda. I therefore do not take pāda b as a simile (as Ge does), but as a parallel action -- the attachment of a skin (dṛ́ti-) full of poison/surā on the house of the surā-possessor, who, in my view, is Indra, who appears by epithet in pāda e. (Though Ge and others tentatively identify hariṣṭhā́- as the sun god, the ‘mounter of the fallow bays’ can only be Indra.) Later Vedic has a cmpd. surā-dṛti- ‘surā-skin’, found in PB XIV.11.26 and JB III.229. Both passages concern the vipānam of a liquid; vi √pā, lit. ‘drink apart’, is used for the separation of two kinds of liquids that have been mixed together (or separation of a liquid from something containing it); see comm. ad VII.22.4. In the late RV and later, this lexeme is specialized for the Sautrāmaṇī ritual, whose mythological foundation is the healing of Indra by the Aśvins and Sarasvatī, after he had drunk too much soma.

They make him drink surā, which was mixed with soma (perhaps the soma he had already drunk), and he performs the feat of separating the two liquids. This myth is already present in X.131.4-5 with precisely this detail. When in pāda b here we fashion the skin of poison onto Indra the surā-drinker’s house, we are implicitly asking him to perform the same feat for us. The refrain (found in vss. 10-13, pādas c-f) makes it clear that he has succeeded. At least in my interpr., it is said that Indra has put the poison far in the distance (e) and the honeyed (plant?) has made honey (quite possibly soma, as often)(f): the two liquids have been separated and are separate, with the good one available to us. The result is that the mythological model, Indra, will not die (c) -- nor will we (d) -- and the poison with which we began has been rendered ineffective.

