+++
title = "Praśna I, Paṭala 1, Khaṇḍa 2"

+++
## 01
1. For as many years as there are uninitiated persons, reckoning (one year) for each ancestor (and the person to be initiated himself),

## 02
2. (They should bathe daily reciting) the seven [^1]  Pāvamānīs, beginning with 'If near or far,' the Yajuṣpavitra, ('May the waters, the mothers purify us,' &c.) the Sāmapavitra, ('With what help assists,' &c.), and the Āṅgirasapavitra ('A swan, dwelling in purity'),

## 03
3. Or also reciting the Vyāhṛtis (om, bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ, suvaḥ).

## 04
4. After that (such a person) may be taught (the Veda).

## 05
5. But those whose great-grandfather's (grandfather's and father's) initiation is not remembered, are called 'burial-grounds.'

## 06
6. Intercourse, dining, and intermarriage with them should be avoided. For them, if they like, the (following) penance (is prescribed). (Such a man) shall keep for twelve years the rules prescribed for a student who is studying the three Vedas. Afterwards he may be initiated. Then he shall bathe, reciting the Pāvamānīs and the other (texts mentioned above, I, 1, 2, 2).

## 07
7. Then he may be instructed in the duties of a householder.

## 08
8. He shall not be taught (the whole Veda), but only the sacred formulas required for the domestic ceremonies.

## 09
9. When he has finished this (study of the Gṛhya-mantras), he may be initiated (after having performed the penance prescribed) for the first neglect (I, 1, 1, 28).

## 10
10. Afterwards (everything is performed) as in the case of a regular initiation. [^2]  He who has been initiated shall dwell as a religious student in the house of his teacher, [^3] 

## 12
12. For forty-eight years (if he learns all the four Vedas), [^4] 

## 13
13. (Or) a quarter less (i.e. for thirty-six years),

## 14
14. (Or) less by half (i.e. for twenty-four years),

## 15
15. (Or) three quarters less (i.e. for twelve years),

## 16
16. Twelve years (should be) the shortest time (for his residence with his teacher). [^5] 

## 17
17. A student who studies the sacred science shall not dwell with anybody else (than his teacher). [^6] 

## 18
18. Now (follow) the rules for the studentship.

## 19
19. He shall obey his teacher, except (when ordered to commit) crimes which cause loss of caste. [^7] 

## 20
20. He shall do what is serviceable to his teacher, he shall not contradict him. [^8] 

## 21
21. He shall always occupy a couch or seat lower (than that of his teacher). [^9] 

## 22
22. He shall not eat food offered (at a sacrifice to the gods or the Manes),

## 23
23. Nor pungent condiments, salt, honey, or meat. [^10] 

## 24
24. He shall not sleep in the day-time.

## 25
25. He shall not use perfumes. [^11] 

## 26
26. He shall preserve chastity. [^12] 

## 27
27. He shall not embellish himself (by using ointments and the like). [^13] 

## 28
28. He shall not wash his body (with hot water for pleasure).

## 29
29. But, if it is soiled by unclean things, he shall clean it (with earth or water), in a place where he is not seen by a Guru. [^14] 

## 30
30. Let him not sport in the water whilst bathing; let him swim (motionless) like a stick. [^15] 

## 31
31. He shall wear all his hair tied in one braid. [^16] 

## 32
32. Or let him make a braid of the lock on the crown of the head, and shave the rest of the hair.

## 33
33. The girdle of a Brāhmaṇa shall be made of Muñja grass, and consist of three strings; if possible, (the strings) should be twisted to the right. [^17] 

## 34
34. A bowstring (should be the girdle) of a Kṣatriya,

## 35
35. Or a string of Muñja grass in which pieces of iron have been tied.

## 36
36. A wool thread (shall be the girdle) of a Vaiśya,

## 37
37. Or a rope used for yoking the oxen to the plough, or a stringy made of Tamala-bark.

## 38
38. The staff worn by a Brāhmaṇa should be made of Palāśa wood, that of a Kṣatriya of a branch of the Banian tree, which grows downwards, that of a Vaiśya of Bādara or Udumbara wood. Some declare, without any reference to caste, that the staff of a student should be made of the wood of a tree (that is fit to be used at the sacrifice). [^18] 

## 39
39. (He shall wear) a cloth (to cover his nakedness). [^19] 

## 40
40. (It shall be made) of hemp for a Brāhmaṇa, of flax (for a Kṣatriya), of the skin of a (clean) animal (for a Vaiśya). [^20] 

## 41
41. Some declare that the (upper) garment (of a Brāhmaṇa) should be dyed with red Lodh, [^21] 



[^1]:  2. The seven Pāvamānīs are seven verses which occur Rig veda IX, 67, 21-27. Yajuṣpavitra = Taitt. Saṃh. I, 2, 1, 1. The Sāmapavitra is found Sāma-veda I, 2, 2, 3, 5. Āṅgirasapavitra = Ṛj-veda IV, 40, 5.

[^2]:  The commentator observes that for those whose great-great-grandfather or remoter ancestors were not initiated, no penance is prescribed, and that it must be fixed by those who know the law.

[^3]:  Manu II, 164.

[^4]:  Manu III, 1, and Yājñ. I, 36; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 125.

[^5]:  The commentator declares that in Manu III, 1, the expression until he has learnt it,' must be understood in this sense, that the pupil may leave his teacher, if he has learnt the Veda, after twelve years' study, never before. But compare also Āśv. Gṛ. Sū. I, 22, 3.

[^6]:  The commentator states that this rule refers only to a temporary, not to a professed student (naiṣṭhika). He also gives an entirely different explanation to the Sūtra, which, according to some, means, 'A student who learns the sacred science shall not fast in order to obtain heaven.' This rendering also is admissible, as the word para may mean either a 'stranger' or 'heaven' and upavāsa, 'dwelling' or 'fasting.'

[^7]:  Regarding the crimes which cause loss of caste (patanīya), see below, I, 7, 21, 7.

[^8]:  Manu II, 108, and Yājñ. I, 27.

[^9]:  Manu II, 108, 198; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 123 and 124.

[^10]:  Regarding the meaning of kṣāra, 'pungent condiments,' see Haradatta on II, 6, 15, 15. Other commentators explain the term differently.--Manu II, 177; Yājñ. I, 33; and Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 123. Āśv. Gṛ. Sū. I, 22, 2.

[^11]:  Manu II, 177; Yājñ. I, 33.

[^12]:  Manu II, 180.

[^13]:  Manu II, 178; Yājñ. I, 33.

[^14]:  'Here, in the section on the teacher, the word guru designates the father and the rest also.'--Haradatta.

[^15]:  Another version of the first portion of this Sūtra, proposed by Haradatta, is, 'Let him not, whilst bathing, clean himself (with bathing powder or the like).' Another commentator takes Sūtra 28 as a prohibition of the daily bath or washing generally ordained for Brāhmaṇas, and refers Sūtra 29. to the naimittika snāna or 'bathing on certain occasions,' and takes Sūtra 30 as a restriction of the latter.

[^16]:  Manu II, 2 19.

[^17]:  Manu II, 42-44; Yājñ. I, 29; Āśv. Gṛ. Sū. I, 19, 12; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 23.

[^18]:  Manu II, 45; Yājñ. I, 29; Āśv. Gṛ. Sū. I, 19, 13; 20, 1; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 23.

[^19]:  The word forms a Sūtra by itself, in order to show that every one must wear this cloth.

[^20]:  Manu II, 41. 'Clean' means here and everywhere else, if applied to animals or things,' fit to be used at the sacrifice.'

[^21]:  Āśv. Gṛ. Sū. I, 19, 11; Weber, Ind. Stud X, 22.