+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. Now when it is said, that the gods, by means of the Sākamedha -offerings, slew Vr̥tra and gained that supreme authority which they now wield,--it is rather by means of all the Seasonal sacrifices that the gods slew Vr̥tra; it is by all of them that they gained that supreme authority which they now wield.
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. They spake, 'With what king, with what leader [^egg_1004] shall we fight?' Agni spake, 'With me for your king, with me for your leader!' With Agni for their king, with Agni for their leader, they gained four months; and with the Brahman (sacerdotium) and the threefold science they encompassed them.

[^egg_1004]: 449:1 Anīka (? 'van-guard'), cf. V, 3, 1, 1 'senāyāḥ senānīr anīkam:' II, 5, 3, 2.
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. They spake, 'With what king, with what leader shall we fight?' Varuṇa spake, 'With me for your king, with me for your leader!' With Varuṇa for their king, with Varuṇa for their leader, they gained other four months; and with the Brahman and the threefold science they encompassed them.
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. They spake, 'With what king, with what leader shall we fight?' Indra spake, 'With me for your king, with me for your leader!' With Indra for their king, with Indra for their leader, they gained other four months; and with the Brahman and the threefold science they encompassed them.
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. And, accordingly, when he performs the Vaiśvadeva, he thereby gains four months, with Agni for his king, with Agni for his leader. Then (in shaving) are used a porcupine's quill spotted in three places, and a copper razor; that three-spotted porcupine's quill resembles the threefold science, and the copper razor resembles the Brahman; for the Brahman is fire, and fire is of reddish (lohita) colour: hence a copper (loha) razor is used. Therewith he has (his head) shaved all round [^egg_1005]; and thus he (the Adhvaryu) encompasses him with the Brahman and the threefold science.

[^egg_1005]: 450:1 See p. 448, note 1.
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. And when he performs the Varuṇapraghāsa offerings, he thereby gains other four months, with Varuṇa for his king, with Varuṇa for his leader. Then a three-spotted quill of a porcupine and a copper razor are used, wherewith he has himself shaved all round; and thus he (the priest) encompasses him with the Brahman and the threefold science.
</details>

##  07
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

7. And when he performs the Sākamedha offerings, he thereby gains other four months, with Indra for his king, with Indra for his leader. Then a three-spotted quill of a porcupine and a copper razor are used, wherewith he has himself shaved; and thus he (the priest) encompasses him with the Brahman and the threefold science.
</details>

##  08
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

8. And when he performs the Vaiśvadeva, then he becomes Agni, and attains to union with Agni and to co-existence in his world. And when he performs the Varuṇapraghāsa offerings, then he becomes Varuṇa, and attains to union with Varuṇa

and to co-existence in his world. And when he performs the Sākamedha offerings, then he becomes Indra, and attains to union with Indra and to coexistence in his world [^egg_1006].

[^egg_1006]: 451:1 The Kāṇva text adds: And when he performs the Śunāsīrīya, then he becomes Vāyu, and attains to union with Vāyu and to co-existence in his world.
</details>

##  09
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

9. And in whatever season he goes to yonder world, that season passes him on to the next season, and that season again passes him on to the next season,--he who performs the Seasonal sacrifices reaches the highest place, the supreme goal. Wherefore it is said, 'They find not him that offereth the Seasonal offerings, for verily he goeth unto the highest place, to the supreme goal [^egg_1007].'

[^egg_1007]: 451:2 The Kāṇva text has: In whatever season the performer of Seasonal offerings goes to yonder world, that season passes him on to the next season, and that next one to the next one,--him the seasons, by transmission, make thus attain to the highest station, to the highest world. Wherefore is it said, 'They find not him that offereth the Seasonal offerings, for he conquereth the highest world, the highest conquest (paramaṁ hy eva lokam paramāṁ jitim jayatīti).'
</details>