+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Now, when the Adhvaryu here steps up and says, 'The Gharma is aglow,' they step up and revere it (the Mahāvīra) with the Avakāśa [^fn_1243]; but the 'avakāśa' are the vital airs: it is thus the vital airs he lays into it. Six of them [^fn_1244] step up to it, for six in number are these vital airs in the head: it is these he thus lays into it.

[^fn_1243]: 469:1 Avakāśa (looks, or possibly, apertures) is the technical designation of the verses Vāj. S. XXXVII, 14-20 a.

[^fn_1244]: 469:2 Viz. the Sacrificer and the priests with the exception of the Prastotr̥.

## 02
2. [Vāj. S. XXXVII, 14,] 'The child of the gods,'--the child (garbha) of the gods, in truth, is he that shines yonder, for he holds (grabh) everything here, and by him everything here is held; and the Pravargya also is that (sun): it is him he thus gratifies, and therefore he says, 'The child of the gods.'

## 03
3. 'The father of thoughts,'--for he (the sun) is indeed the father of thoughts;--'the lord of creatures,'--for he is indeed the lord of creatures.

## 04
4. 'The god hath united with the god Savitr̥,'--for the god (the Mahāvīra) has indeed united with the god Savitr̥ (the sun);--'with Sūrya he shineth,'--for (equally) with Sūrya (the sun) he has indeed shone.

## 05
5. [Vāj. S. XXXVII, 15,] 'Agni hath united with Agni,'--for Agni (fire) has indeed united with Agni;--'with the divine Savitr̥,'--for with the divine Savitr̥ he has indeed united;--'with Sūrya

he hath shone,'--for with Sūrya he has indeed shone.

## 06
6. 'Hail! Agni hath united with his heat,'--for Agni has indeed united with his heat; the call of hail he places first, and the deity last: the significance of this is the same as before;--'with the divine Savitr̥,'--for with the divine Savitr̥ he has indeed united;--'with Sūrya he hath shed light,'--for with Sūrya he has indeed shed light.

## 07
7. These, then, are three 'avakāśa,'--for there are three vital airs, the in (and out)-breathing, the up-breathing, and the through-breathing: it is thereby that he lays it (the vital air) into him.

## 08
8. [Vāj. S. XXXVII, 16,] 'The sustainer of the sky, and of heat upon earth, shineth forth,'--for as the sustainer of the sky, and of heat on earth, that (sun, and Mahāvīra) indeed shines forth;--'the divine sustainer of the gods, he, the immortal, born of heat,'--for he is indeed the divine sustainer of the gods, the immortal one, born of heat;--'grant unto us speech, devoted to the gods!'--speech doubtless is worship: he thus means to say thereby, 'bestow upon us worship whereby we shall please the gods!'

## 09
9. [Vāj. S. XXXVII, 17; R̥g-v. I, 164, 31; X, 177, 3,] 'I beheld the guardian, the never-resting [^fn_1245],'--he who shines yonder is indeed the guardian, for he guards everything here; and he does not lie down to rest: therefore he says, 'I beheld the guardian, the never-resting;'--

[^fn_1245]: 470:1 Or, as Mahīdhara and Sāyaṇa take it, the never-falling.

## 10,
10, 'Wandering on paths hither and thither,'--for he indeed wanders hither and thither on the divine [^fn_1246] paths;--'arraying himself in the gathering and the radiating,'--for he indeed arrays himself in the gathering (converging) and the radiating regions, or rays;--'he moveth to and fro within the spheres,'--for again and again he wanders moving within these worlds.

[^fn_1246]: 471:1 One might expect 'daívaiḥ pathíbhiḥ' or 'devaíḥ pathíbhiḥ,' which Mahīdhara explains by 'devamārgaiḥ.'

## 11
11. [Vāj. S. XXXVII, 18,] 'O lord of all worlds, O lord of all thought, O lord of all speech, O lord of every speech!' that is, 'O lord of all this (universe);'--'Thou art heard by the gods, O god Gharma, as a god, guard thou the gods!' in this there is nothing hidden, so to speak.

## 12
12. 'Give thy countenance hereafter to the divine feast of you two,'--it is with regard to the two Aśvins that he says this, for it was the Aśvins that then restored the head of the sacrifice: it is them he thus pleases, and therefore he says, 'Give thy countenance hereafter to the divine feast of you two.'

## 13
13. 'Honey to the two lovers of honey! honey to the two longing for honey!'--for Dadhyañc the Ātharvaṇa indeed told them (the Aśvins) the Brāhmaṇa called Madhu (honey), and this is their dear resource: it is by means of that (dear resource) of theirs that he approaches them, and therefore he says, 'Honey to the two lovers of honey! honey to the two longing for honey!'

## 14
14. [Vāj. S. XXXVII, 19,] 'To the heart

 (I consecrate) thee, to the mind thee, to the sky thee, to the sun thee: going upwards take thou the sacrifice to the gods in heaven!' in this there is nothing hidden, so to speak.

## 15
15. [Vāj. S. XXXVII, 20,] 'Thou art our father: be thou our father!'--for he who shines yonder is indeed the father, and the Pravargya is that (sun): it is him he thus gratifies, and therefore he says, 'Thou art our father: be thou our father!'--'Reverence be unto thee: injure me not!'--it is a blessing he thereby invokes.

## 16
16. Thereupon he uncovers the head of the (Sacrificer's) wife, and makes her say whilst she is looking at the Mahāvīra, 'Together with Tvashṭr̥ will we serve thee: (bestow thou sons and cattle upon me! bestow thou offspring upon us! may I remain unscathed together with my husband!)'--the Pravargya (m.) is a male, and the wife is a female: a productive pair is thus produced.

## 17
17. And, verily, whosoever either teaches, or partakes of, this (Pravargya) enters that life, and that light: the observance thereof is the same as at the creation [^fn_1247].

[^fn_1247]: 472:1 See p. 458, note 1.

