+++
title = "02"

+++
As I interpr. it, the first hemistich presents us with a causal hí clause followed by an imperatival non-sequitur. What is immediately striking is that it is emphasized that Indra is dwelling in peace and domestic harmony -- not always the first picture of Indra we conjure up -- in a hymn that is about to become very very martial. In the imperatival clause of b, he is also identified as a wise kaví, again not a militant role for Indra. Perhaps the connection between the causal hí clause and the imperatival ones that follow is that Indra has the leisure to pay due attention to our hymns and reward our poetic offerings (which, as a kaví, he has the connoisseurship to appreciate) with aid and material goods.

The interpr. just given assumes that áva opening b and piśā́opening c are both imperatives. Both of these identifications have been questioned. Some (e.g., Lub) take áva as the preverb (Gr by implication, since he does not list it under √av), but both Ge and Old (the latter after some hesitation) interpr. it as an impv. to √av ‘help’.

As for piśā́, Gr takes it as the instr. of a root noun, but most subsequent interpr. as the impv. to an otherwise unattested them. aor. to √piś ‘adorn, ornament’ (see, e.g., Old, Ge, Schindler [Rt. Noun], Lub). Our form could well be a thematic substitute for a form of the root aor., found once in the part. piśāná-, since the expected root aor.

impv. should be the quite opaque *pīḍhí.

As indicated ad I.71.10, I do not have an independent view about the morphology of vidúṣ, which occurs in the same phrase in both passages (abhí vidúṣ kavíḥ sán). I do think that it is a nom. sg. (with Old), not a haplologized acc. pl. as Ge takes it (see his n. 10b ad I.71.10). (Debrunner [AiG II.2.471] seems weakly to assign it to a -u-stem [but possibly to -uṣ- instead] and interpr. as a nom. sg., while Wackernagel [AiG III.300, which publication of course long predates II.2] accepts Ge’s acc. pl.) To me the form looks as if it is a truncated form of the weak form of the pf. part. vidvā́ṃs-, though it could of course belong to a u-stem vidú- instead -- but whether it is archaic or innovative I wouldn’t venture to say. It is also curious that in neither passage is the pres. part. sán concessive, though that is the usual function of the nom. forms of this participle. However, here the sán is by my interpr.

in tmesis with abhí, which opens the repeated phrase, in the sense ‘be preeminent’ (so also Ge), even though participles in tmesis are rare.

The apparent close sandhi with following kavíḥ that vidúṣ exhibits seems to me not to support the haplology explanation, though the sandhi issue is complex.

Mark Hale (in “Preliminaries to the Study of the Relationship between Syntax and Sandhi in Rigvedic Sanskrit” [MSS 51, 1990], as well as the unpubl. Wackernagel’s Law: Phonology and Syntax in the Rigveda [1995], 33-36) insightfully discusses the general problem of irregular sandhi of -s before k-. The great majority of the examples occur before forms of √kṛ, and Hale plausibly accounts for this phenomenon by pointing out that kṛ has an s-mobile doublet √skṛ and that the unusual -s sandhi outcomes can result from the doubled -s s- that would be underlying. The single example of such a result before the PN káṇva- can also be so explained, since we have a synchronic doublet -skaṇva. However, Hale’s invocation of the s-mobile explanation for the exx. before kaví- is not supported by internal evidence for a *skaví- or by solid evidence of s-mobile cognates outside of Indic, and I therefore think the kaví- examples require a different explanation -- though I don’t know what that is. We should first note that they form a more limited set than Hale’s presentation (1995: 36 n. 28) makes clear. The two vidúṣ kavíḥ passages are identical, and paś́uṣ kavíḥ occurs in our same hymn (8d) and is most likely responsive to the earlier example; vásuṣ kavíḥ (I.79.5) is nearby vidúṣ kavíḥ in I.71.10 (though admittedly not attributed to the same poet) and could be based upon it. brahmaṇas kave (VI.16.30) is in a voc. phrase where close sandhi effects are at home; cf. the very similar brahmaṇas pate (I.18.3). Of Hale’s collection, this leaves V.59.4 kás kā́vyā [sic, not Hale’s kāvyāḥ] and ṛtás kavíḥ (VIII.60.5). The latter is problematic for a different reason: it contains one of only two exx. of a masc. ṛtá-; the other is in the same phrase (IX.62.30) but with standard sandhi ṛtáḥ kavíḥ. In fact most occurrences of kaví- (kā́vya-, etc.) preceded by -s do show the standard visarga (e.g., among the many, I.76.5 kavíbhiḥ kavíḥ). I don’t know what to make of all this. I am inclined to think that the irregular sandhi originated in the morphologically problematic phrases vidúṣ kavíḥ and ṛtás kavíḥ and is a dark reflection of their troubled morphology. It then had a very limited spread. But since I don’t understand what the morphology is or how this could affect the sandhi, this is not much of a theory! In any case, the poet of this hymn seems to showcase this sandhi anomaly, by not only including the two - uṣ ka- examples (2b, 8d), but also adding the correct āśúś canéd (9b) and close sandhi rāradhuṣ ṭe (18a); cf. also suṣupuḥ ṣáṭ (14b).

The cows and horses attributed to Indra in 1c reappear here in c as his ornamental gifts to us.

