+++
title = "08"

+++
Both this vs. and the following one concern the Paruṣṇī river, known from elsewhere in the RV and later. In the 2nd pāda the VP ví jagṛbhre páruṣṇīm, lit. “they grasped apart the P.,” is generally taken to mean ‘divert’ the course of the river (so already Gr, also Ge; Schmidt slightly differently ‘divided’). The lexeme ví √grabh occurs only once in the RV, but this seems a reasonable interpr. -- though I’m not 5 exactly sure how this feat of engineering would be accomplished. Perhaps so many bodies accumulated in the river that it either had to flow around them (hence Schmidt’s ‘divided’) or switch its course altogether. The use of the middle jagṛbhre might support the former interpr.: they themselves [i.e., their own bodies] parted the river. One is reminded of Iliad 21.205ff., where Achilles drives his enemies towards the Scamander river, which berates and then fights with Achilles for filling the river with corpses.

In the preceding pāda áditi- is also sometimes taken to be a river (Ge n. 8a, Schmidt), but this seems much less likely to me. Aditi is, of course, a well-known goddess, and her miscarriage is also a well-known mythological incident, in the narrative of the sequence of her twin births ending with one miscarriage and one live baby -- found already in the RV (see the clear passage X.72.8). It therefore seems wiser not to make her capriciously into a landscape feature, but to start with the mythological facts that might match the VP áditiṃ srevayántaḥ “making Aditi abort.” Now, as is often related in middle Vedic texts, when the eighth embryo of Aditi aborts, it becomes first the discarded Mārtāṇḍa (‘stemming from a dead egg’), but is then fixed up and becomes Vivasvant, a name for the sun (see my Hyenas, pp. 204-8; this identification is already implicit in the RV, pace Hoffmann). I wonder if “causing Aditi to abort” refers to her aborted son, the sun, and in this case, by metaphor, to an eclipse of the sun -- or at least something that could pass for one. If the dust of a pitched battle got thick enough it could rise to blot out the sun’s rays temporarily. Rising dust is often elsewhere a sign of intense fighting in the RV, and flights of arrows so thick that they obscure the sun are a feature of battles in the epics (e.g., MBh IV.53.26, 31). This loss of light could render the combatants acetás- (b), lit. ‘without perception’ in b.

The durādhyàḥ ‘ill-intentioned ones’ are probably the same faction as those referred to, probably sarcastically, as ‘kindly’ (śivā́saḥ in the previous vs., 7b).

Apparently alone of all tr. and comm., I do not have an opinion about who the personnel are in cd. See the various suggestions, esp. those of Schmidt and Witzel.

As for cā́yamāna-, I assign it the intrans./pass. sense ‘being perceived as, appearing as’, rather than, e.g., Schmidt’s “receiving due respect.” Gotō’s interpr. (1st Kl. 137) is closer to mine, but he considers it reflexive: “sich als ... betrachtend, sich für ... haltend.” He does not tr. this passage (or the other participial form in X.94.14).

Whoever the subject is -- Schmidt and Witzel think it’s Vasiṣṭha, the purohita of Turvaśa, but I remain agnostic -- in my view this kavi has been felled, at least temporarily, and therefore gives the impression of being a paśú-, in this case a sacrificial, or already sacrificed, animal. Note the main verb aśayat (√śi ‘lie’), which is the signature verb describing the slain Vṛtra in I.32. Note paśúṣ kavíḥ, which shows the same sandhi before kavíḥ as vidúṣ kavíḥ in 2b; see disc. there.

