+++
title = "11"

+++
The king who is the subj. of ab may be Sudās (so Ge, flg. Sāy.) or Indra, who appears by name in d, or Sudās identified with Indra. Given the ringcompositional structure discussed ad vs. 10, I favor either Indra or Sudās=Indra. 8 The relationship between the simile of c and the first hemistich is intricate and partly unclear. The first hemistich portrays the destruction by a king of a large force belonging to an otherwise unknown pair (the Vaikarṇas), using the aniṭ root ní √stṛ (root aor. ny ástaḥ) ‘strew down’ found also in other hostile encounters (e.g., II.11.20). Pāda c by contrast sketches a ritual incident in a simile, but the simile is slightly “off” for several reasons. For one thing, the predicate phrase sádman … barhíḥ “the ritual grass on the seat” suggests that the verb to govern it should also be ‘strew down’, though in its seṭ form (cf., e.g., VII.43.2 stṛṇītá barhíḥ). The actual verb of the simile, ní śiśāti ‘whets down’, is far less appropriate to its object, and we must assume a metaphorical use of this verb in the simile -- a piling of figurative language on figurative language, made all the more peculiar by the fact that the verb of b would be better suited to the simile of c and vice versa. (Recall also that [ní] √śā is the signature verb of this hymn; see comm. ad vs. 6.) It is almost as if the simile had been turned inside out or the two clauses had swapped out verbs. Also disturbing the simile is the fact that the subject of the clause, which, as agent of a verb governing ritual grass, should be a priest or ritual functionary, is identified as dasmá- ‘wondrous, wonder-worker’, an adj. otherwise only applied to gods, esp. Indra (e.g., in nearby VII.22.8). So it too seems more at home in the main clause of ab than in the simile of c, an association made stronger by the fact that dasmá- several times occurs with rā́jan- in a simile (IX.82.1 rā́jeva dasmáḥ, X.43.2 rā́jeva dasma) and rā́jā is the subject of ab. The interconnections become even more tangled when we consider the 2nd of those just-cited similes: X.43.2 rā́jeva dasma ní ṣadó 'dhi barhíṣi “Like a king, wondrous one [=Indra], sit down upon the ritual grass,” which contains the grass and the root √sad ‘sit’, but there realized as a verb rather than as the loc. nominal sádman.

