+++
title = "20"

+++
Ge takes pū́rvāḥ … nū́tnāḥ as qualifying sumatáyaḥ … rā́yaḥ: “Deine Gnaden und deine Reichtümer, die frühere und die neuesten, sind nicht vollständig aufzuzählen, so wenig wie die Morgenröten.” I prefer to take them with uṣásaḥ, for several reasons. First, the word order, with uṣásaḥ nestled between the two temporal adjectives, favors this interpr. Also my interpr. allows the ná … ná … ná sequence to be entirely negative, rather than requiring the last to be a simile marker. Moreover, the contrast between former and current dawn(s) is a standard trope in the RV, with pū́rva- qualifying dawn in a number of passages. And finally morphology is against it: Ge would need to explain why a fem. nom. pl. pū́rvāḥ, rather than the masc. pū́rve, was used to modify a mixed feminine (sumatáyaḥ) and masculine (rā́yaḥ) NP; 12 ordinarily the default would be masc., esp. in this case where the masc. is closer to the adjectives. (He could of course invoke the supposed occasional use of rayí-, rāyas feminine, but these exx. are vanishingly rare, if they exist at all.) I take the whole dawn phrase as an acc. of extent of time. It would be possible to assign the temporal adjectives to uṣásaḥ but interpr. that phrase as a simile in the nom., as Scar (167) does: “Nicht sind deine Gnaden, nicht deine Gaben zu überschauen, genausowenig wie die vergangenen und jetzigen Morgenröten.” I still prefer mine, since Scar’s interpr. again requires the third ná to be a simile marker, even though it does avoid the problems raised by taking the temporal adjectives with the NP in pāda a.

In c dévaka- is a lovely ex. of the use of the -ka- suffix both in a pejorative sense and as signal of a lower register. Edgerton’s (-ka-suffix, 43) tr. is rather nice: “the wretched little fellow who thought himself a godling.” The form mānyamāná- is of course peculiar, though its source is clear: it is a vṛddhi deriv. of the middle part. mányamāna- ‘think oneself to be …’ Although Ge takes it separately from dévaka- as two distinct pejorative epithets (“…den Götzen, den Dünkling”), I find it hard not to think that the participial usage is not still present and that dévaka- is the de facto predicate nominative. The vṛddhi is perhaps used to turn the typical subject of this participle into a category characterized by blind arrogance (“the type of blowhard who would think himself …”) -- well captured by Edgerton’s tr.

The verb in d, bhet (√bhid), recalls the enemy Bheda targeted by Indra in vss.

18-19.

