+++
title = "21"

+++
The sense of the first pāda is disputed, primarily because it is unclear how to construe the abl. gṛhā́t. Old discusses at length without a definite decision; Ge has his own idiosyncratic view: that in this context, with the abl. gṛhā́t, prá √mad means ‘to go on a pilgrimage’ (“die … von Hause fortgepilgert waren”), a bizarre interpr.

(rejected by Old), which he connects to abhí … pramandúḥ in VII.33.1, where his pilgrimage interpr. seems equally odd. The phraseology here needs to be considered in the context of similar expressions, not only VII.33.1, but also VIII.61.9 sá prá mamandat tvāyā́and vs. 12d in this hymn tvāyánto yé ámadann ánu tvā (and consider the immediately preceding pāda 12c vṛṇānā́átra sakhyā́ya sakhyám, which resonantes with our c ná te … sakhyám mṛṣanta). Because of their proximity in the same hymn, I think vs. 12 needs to be weighted more heavily than the other passages, despite the difference in preverb (ánu there versus prá here). That vs. states that the men devoted to Indra cheered him on -- in other words, Indra was the recipient of an overt expression of their devotion -- and in turn they acquired a partnership with him.

I now think that prá … ámamaduḥ in this vs. should also be transitive, with Indra as the object. Perhaps by haplology *tvā tvāyā́. I would therefore alter the publ. tr. to “… who exhilarated (you) in devotion to you,” with a different type of overt expression of devotion, here the soma. Pāda c then indicates that by doing so they did not neglect the responsibilities of their side of the partnership and (d) happy days ensue as a result. Interpreting prá … ámamaduḥ here as transitive also has the merit 13 of matching the use of abhí … pramandúḥ in VII.33.1, where there is an overt object mā. The similar expression in VIII.61.9 is more equivocal; see disc. there.

This reappraisal of the verbal complex does not, however, solve the ablative problem. My proposed solution, already found in the publ. tr., is quite simple: the individuals named in pāda b (who include Vasiṣṭha) are relatives, “from the (same) house” -- a use of ‘house’ similar to that in expressions like “the House of Atreus.” Under this interpr., there is no physical movement out of or location away from an actual dwelling. As this is the only abl. form of gṛhá- in the RV, it is difficult to know if such an idiomatic usage is possible, but given that the verb in its clause is not a verb of motion and cannot be made one without damage to its normal semantics, this seems like a reasonable alternative.

bhojá- ‘provider, benefactor’ is used of Indra elsewhere on a number of occasions (e.g., VI.23.9), but it is also used explicitly of a human sūrí- ‘patron’ in VIII.70.13, as well as being repeated densely in X.107.8-11, the hymn devoted to the dakṣiṇā and the bhoja-s who give it. So I suggest in our vs. that its appliication to Indra in c is an attempt to transfer the epithet to the sūri-s in d.

