+++
title = "11"

+++
11. Therefore he should sedulously beget offspring, [^3] 


[^3]:  M. and K. add to this Sūtra, ātmanaḥ phalalābhāya, 'in order to gain a reward for himself.' The same two MSS., further, insert the following Sūtras: tasmāt putraṃ cotpādyātmānam evotpādayatīti | vijñāyate cātmā vai putranāmāsīti | evaṃ dvitīya ātmā jīvatā draṣṭavyo yaḥ putram utpādayati | sa tathā bhavati | tasmān nātmā kvacid akṣetra utsraṣṭavyaḥ | ātmānam avamanyate hi | yathātmānam utpādayati sa tathā bhavati | tasmād ādita eva kṣetram anvicchet sarvavarṇe saṃskṛtam upadeśena | tasmin dārasaṃyoge prajām utpādayed || 'Therefore (they say) that he who begets a son produces even his own self; and it is declared in the Veda, "Thou art self, called a son." Thus he who begets a son will see, during his lifetime, a second self. He becomes like him. Therefore one's own self must not be begotten on an unworthy female. For (he who does that) despises himself. He becomes even so, as he produces himself. Therefore (every man), each in his own caste, should first look out for a female who has been sanctified according to the injunction (of the sacred texts). Taking her to be his wedded wife, he shall beget a son.' It is possible that this passage really belongs to Baudhāyana, for it is written in the usual style of our Sūtra, and the last word of this passage as well as of Sūtra 11, as given in the Dekhan MSS., is utpādayet. But it is not absolutely required by the context, and the commentary too omits it.
