+++
title = "05"

+++
This verse contains two minor disharmonies: 1) the recipients of the praise song are in the dat. in pāda a (mitrā́ya … aryamṇé) but the loc. in cd (váruṇe … rā́jasu); 2) the verb is 2nd plural (prá … gāyata) but paired with a vocative in the singular, the hapax ṛtāvasaḥ. Ge separates the vs. into abc and d, supplying a verb (“(trage) … vor”) with the former. This solves the number problem, by isolating the plural verb in a separate clause, but not the case problem. Moreover, since the hymn is composed in pragāthas, I would prefer to construe the doubled prá in a with the impv. gāyata in d, for a meta-pun on the name of the verse pairing. Chopping the verse into two clauses is not appealing, particularly since it only addresses one of the disharmonies, in my opinion the lesser one.

As for ṛtāvaso, Re suggests that ṛtāvasu [sic] is a simple variant of ṛtā́van- (or, better formulated, voc. ṛtāvaso is a simple variant of voc. ṛtāvaḥ (/-vo) to the stem ṛtā́van-). This seems somewhat convincing. As a 2nd member of bahuvrīhis of the shape X-vasu-, the noun vásu- can become semantically bleached, from ‘having X as goods’ to ‘rich in X’ and even further to just ‘having X’. Cf. the pair vibhā́van- / vibhā́vasu-. The Vedic voc. in -vas to -van-stems makes the singular vocatives even more similar; to the just-cited pair, compare vibhāvo [before vd. sounds] and vibhāvaso, with the latter offering a convenient way to generate a Jagatī/iambic cadence from a Triṣṭubh. This does not solve our number problem, however; it is unfortunately altogether too artificial to suggest that a singular vocative to the -vanstem, ṛtāvaḥ (<-vas), was reinterpreted as belonging to a real s-stem and a plural voc. in *-vasas (/-vaso) was built to it. The existence of clearly singular vibhā-vaso (4x) beside singular vibhāvo (1x) shows that the morphology was still intact. I would point out, however, that there is no way to produce a plural voc. to either the -vanstem or the -vasu- stem that will fit in a cadence, either Triṣṭubh or Jagatī: ṛtāvānaḥ and ṛtāvasavaḥ are both out. It is therefore possible that the hapax ṛtāvaso was a quick-and-dirty fix for the metrical problem. Or else it represents the not rare situation of a poet addressing himself in the singular but his fellow singers in the plural. I would also point out that vásu occurs pāda-final in the next verse (6a) and du.

voc. vājinīvasū pāda-final in 8b. Ge, by the way, tr. ṛtāvaso as a PN (though allowing for the lexical value in his n.); this doesn’t help one way or the other and can, I think, be dismissed.

I do not understand the change in case from dat. to loc. either. The verb √gā (+/- prá) elsewhere takes only dat., never loc., as far as I know. It might be possible to take the locatives as functionally different from the datives -- “chez or bei Varuṇa (and) the kings.” But since Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman are an almost inseparable trio and Mitra and Aryaman are in the dative in pāda a, it is highly unlikely that Varuṇa would be functionally separate from them in this verse. And it is insulting to the grammatical knowledge of our poet even to suggest that váruṇe owes its ending to a superficial matching with aryamṇé two pādas before, particularly since rā́jasu with a non-rhyming loc. ending follows soon after. I think the poet changed cases just because he thought he could and craved a bit of novelty. For another tricky problem of case, see 8ab below.
