+++
title = "08"

+++
The apparent doubling of the du. pronouns vām … yuvā́bhyām is complicated by the fact that at least the second one violates the usual case frame of the verb. Pāda a contains the verb hávāmahe and an undoubted acc. obj., the inanimate rātím ‘giving’, as well as an animate pronoun vām, which could be acc., gen., or dat. This 2nd du enclitic is matched by tonic 2nd du yuvā́bhyām in pāda b, which can be instr. or dat. (Note in passing that Macdonell [VGS, p. 105; VG p. 300] only allows instr. for this form, but there is at least one undoubted dat. example elsewhere, I.109.4, as well as several of nearly identical yuvábhyām. Cf. AiG III.464, which points out that the older instr. form was yuvā́, which is preserved in cmpds like yuvā́-datta.) The only case intersection between vām and yuvā́bhyām is dative, but there is no standard case-frame idiom with √hvā with the structure “call for (s.o. dat.) for (s.th. acc).” Gr classifies the passage under his no. 8, “etwas [A] erbitten,” thus eliding the pronoun(s) entirely under this rubric, though in the lemma he cites it as rātím vām, including the enclitic but not the more intractable tonic form. Ge. takes vām as gen., and declares in his n. 8ab that yuvā́bhyām is also “in Sinn des Gen.,” which would be convenient but is remarkably cavalier about morphology. A further complication is that pāda b is a repeated pāda (=VIII.5.3 -- not registered in Bloomfield’s Rig-Veda Repetitions). The case value of yuvā́bhyām in VIII.5.3 isn’t entirely clear, but the context is probably compatible with a dative, but not with either instr. or gen. -- an acc. might be the best.

I confess I don’t entirely know what to make of this. There are no standard uses of √hvā that take a personal dative, though inanimate datives abound. I am inclined to take pāda a as containing a double acc. (with vām in acc. function): “call you two for giving.” The yuvā́bhyām in the next pāda could be the result of repeating this short pāda from elsewhere without integrating it into the syntactic frame of the rest, or show the case variation (what we might call “case creep”) observed also in vs. 5, with the poet inventing an idiom “call for s.o. (dat.)” based on other verbs of speaking, like √vac, which can take either acc. or dat. of the addressee. Another slight oddity in the first pāda is the characterization of the gods’ giving as arakṣás- ‘undemonic’. I have softened this somewhat to ‘without animus’; Ge tr. ‘ohne Falsch’, which seems more distant from the literal sense of the stem.

