+++
title = "14"

+++
This difficult and enigmatic vs. is found in slightly variant form in the AV in the mystical skambha hymn X.8.3, is repeated in other Vedic texts, and receives an explanation in ŚB II.5.1.4-5. The interpr. of the verse in this context here has been influenced by its later deployments, esp. the ŚB exegesis — in my opinion misleadingly. The ŚB takes it to refer to the passing of generations or races, expressed by the prajā́ḥ … tisráḥ of pāda a, and this basic understanding is reproduced by Ge and by Re (Hymnes spéculatifs 165, though of AV X.8.3, not the RVic passage). Old sensibly disdains tr. and explanation (“Erklärung dieser Mystik versuche ich nicht.”).

I think the vs. must be taken within its RVic context, which is ritualistic; it is paired in its pragātha with vs. 13, a depiction of the butter offering. Although in the first 3 pādas the wording is obscure, the final pāda seems to suggest the solution to the mystery, in that its first word pávamānaḥ ‘self-purifying’ can hardly refer to anything but soma. (It is probably not an accident that in the reuse of this verse in the AV pāda d is quite different [hárito háriṇīr ā́viveśa] and does not contain the telltale word.) The identity of the harítaḥ is less secure. In the publ. tr. I follow Ge in supply ‘flames’, but this is ritually problematic: soma doesn’t seem to be offered into the fire. Maṇḍala IX twice refers to haríto dáśa “ten tawny ones” (IX.63.9, 69.9), which appear to be the fingers of the ritual officiant. I would now emend the translation to “has entered within the tawny (fingers),” pointing out that “with the ten arms” of 13d may refer to the same phenomenon.

Guided by the clinching word pávamānaḥ in pāda d, an interpr. grounded in soma ritual fits pāda a very well. The most important clue is the compound VP atyā́yam īyuḥ “have made their traversal”; the lexeme áti √i ‘go across’ is regularly used of soma’s trip across the filter (IX.85.9 pávitram áty eti, etc.). The three prajā́ḥ can be the three soma pressings (or perhaps the soma for the first three soma cups); soma drinks are called prajā́divyásya rétasaḥ “the offspring of the heavenly semen” in IX.86.28, a hymn that contains several passages (IX.86.14, 39, 45) in which soma is “fitted into among the worlds/creatures” (bhúvaneṣv árpitaḥ), similarly to our pāda c bhúvaneṣv antáḥ.

The relevance of pāda b to the soma theme is less clear to me. By my rules, anyā́ḥ should be definite “the others” (contrary to the standard rendering “others”) and contrastive to the three offspring of pāda a. I am not sure what “the others” would be (though presumably some other set of soma drinks), nor what “settling down around the chant” would involve. As for pāda c, I’ve already pointed out soma’s position bhúvaneṣu elsewhere, and the towering quality of cosmic soma is also emphasized elsewhere.

I do not feel I have solved all the problems with this verse, but the lexical clues of pādas a and d seem to me to anchor it in a soma context, with this ritual context reinforced by its pragātha twin.

