+++
title = "+048"

+++
48 (489)
Agni (1–10), Maruts (11–12, 20–21), Maruts or
Liṅgoktadevatās (13–15), Pūsan (16–19), Maruts or Heaven and ̣ Earth or Pr̥sni (22) ́
Śaṃyu Bārhaspatya
22 verses: various lyric meters, arranged for the most part in pragāthas
Another curious hymn, made up of apparently disparate sections and composed  in a variety of different lyric meters. The headnote above reproduces the dedicands  suggested by the Anukramaṇī, but they do not exactly fit the contents of the hymn.  The first ten verses, dedicated to Agni, seem a conventional Agni hymn, the curios
ity being that it is not placed among the other Agni hymns. It is also metrically the  most stable portion of the hymn, with paired pragātha verses alternating br̥hatī and  satobrḥatī, save for verses 6–8, where each verse has an extra eight-syllable pāda at  the end.
The next three verses (11–13) offer an odd interlude: the priestly associates of the  poet are ordered to drive a cow nearby, who will give milk for the Maruts. Although  the Anukramaṇī identifies the Maruts as the dedicands of these verses, they seem  incidental. The focus is on the cow—whether as a metaphor for Bharadvāja’s poetic  inspiration, as a real cow meant to provide the milk to mix with soma in the ongoing  sacrifice, or as both. This cow is reminiscent of the apparent cow in the extremely  enigmatic verses of the Viśvāmitra family hymn (III.53.15–16), a hymn that occu
pies a similar place in its maṇḍala.
Pūṣan is the subject of verses 14–19, the heart of the hymn. As Geldner points  out, the Bharadvājas have a special relationship with Pūṣan: Maṇḍala VI contains the only series of hymns devoted to that god (VI.53–58). The first two verses of  this section (14–15) present a solemn, formal praise of Pūṣan, who is compared to  the great Vedic gods in his various qualities, despite his usual rustic and relatively  lowly status. The two verses clearly form a pragātha, though the second of them  (vs. 15) has five pādas (12 12 12 8 8) rather than the expected satobr̥hatī (12 8 12 8).  After these two straightforward verses, notable only for the hyperbolic encomium  of this minor divinity, there follow three verses (16–18) containing a remarkable,  intimate address to Pūṣan, whispered into his ear (see 16ab), some of which, espe cially verse 17, is close to unintelligible. The translation of that verse given here is  extremely provisional; what is clear is that the style and syntax are informal, and  the poet probably uses idioms and popular sayings current in colloquial speech.  Moreover, since it is whispered to Pūṣan, it should be unintelligible to us. The final  verse devoted to Pūṣan (19), though it remains a 2nd-person address, returns to the  high, formal style of the first two (14–15) and is in br̥hatī. It should be noted that  the three intimate verses have the same metrical structure as the three verses about  the cow (11–13) and share with those verses a certain idiomatic register. Each con sists of a sequence of kakubh (8 12 8: vss. 11, 16), satobr̥hatī (12 8 12 8: vss. 12, 17),  and puraüṣṇih (12 8 8: vss. 13, 18).
The final three verses (20–22) are dedicated to the Maruts. The first two form  another pragātha (20 in the expected br̥hatī, 22 with an extra eight-syllable pāda at  the end, like the extended satobr̥hatīs of vss. 6 and 8), while the final verse (22) is in  anuṣṭubh. The reason for their position here is unclear. The final verse is enigmatic,  as verses referring the Maruts’ mother Pr̥śni and their birth often are (cf. II.34.2  and especially nearby VI.66.1), and the hymn, having presented us with a number  of puzzles along the way, ends with a final one.