+++
title = "06"

+++
My interpr. follows that of Narten (Sig.Aor. 195-96), with the first pāda consisting of the yád clause, the 2nd the main cl. Both Ge and Re take the first part of pāda a as the main cl., with the dependent clause starting with yád. Although yád is better positioned in their interpr. than in Narten’s, they must make arṇasám an obj.

of móṣathā (in unconvincing fashion) and the sequence of tense/mood is badly off: aug. aor. ábhrāji … aor. subjunctive móṣathā, lit., “it has flashed when you will steal …” Ge simply renders the subjunctive as a preterite, while Re’s parenthesis in “vous dérob(i)ez” is masterfully evasive even for him.

As I just said, I am not happy with the position of yád in Narten’s/my interpr., since it follows both the verb and part of the subject (plus a voc., but that doesn’t count). There is another possibility, that yád functions here as a sort of izafe, connecting śárdhaḥ and arṇasám: “the troop, which is a flood.” In this case ábhrāji would be a main-cl. verb, and the two pādas, a and b, would be syntactically unconnected: “The troop that is a flood has flashed; you will plunder …” arṇasá- is a hapax. Narten takes it as an adjectival deriv. of árṇas- ‘flood’, but it could have been (re-)substantivized as ‘flood’.

The point of comparison in b between the Maruts and the caterpillar is that violent storms also strip the leaves off trees.

The sequence vṛkṣáṃ kap(anéva) is oddly reminiscent of Vṛṣākapi, the randy monkey in X.86, but this must be accidental.

In the publ. tr. the voc. sajoṣasaḥ is not rendered as a voc., since the Engl.

would be awkward.

The s-aor. subj. neṣathā ‘you will lead’ is particularly appropriate to the obj.

arámati-, the personified feminine Proper Thinking, since the verb √nī, esp. in sigmatic forms, becomes specialized for leading females in ritual settings; cf. the priestly title Neṣṭar. Although néṣṭar- probably owes its -ṣ- to crossing of the agent noun nétar- with Tvaṣṭar (tváṣṭar-), who is also associated with ritual females (see EWA s.v. néṣṭar-), its apparent coincidence with the neṣ of the s-aor. could spread the semantics.

