+++
title = "02"

+++
The deriv. -bharṇas- in sahásra-bharṇas- is somewhat puzzling: it is difficult to see what motivated its formation and indeed to fix its meaning. It is found 4x (once as a repetition), only in IX, always in the acc. sg. occupying the last 6 syllables of a dimeter line (here, IX.64.25 [=98.1], 64.26), modifying Soma (here), vā́c- (IX.64.25, 26), rayí- (IX.98.1), though the referent never appears in the pāda with the adj. and so the adj. is loosely connected with its referent at best. Here it is obviously meant to match sahásra-cakṣas- ‘having a thousand eyes’ in the same metrical position in the preceding pāda, and for this reason I think it possible that this passage is the locus for its creation. But the match is not very good: though both are -as-stems, the suffixes (-nas- versus -as-) aren’t superimposable.

The semantic match is also quite imperfect: whatever -bharṇas- means, it is certainly not a body part like cákṣas-. Since many nominal derivatives of √bhṛ fall in the semantic domain of ‘present, offering’ and such a meaning fits a ritual context, that seems a safe bet and would work with rayí-, though it fits vā́c- somewhat less well. With a confidence whose basis is not clear, Re rejects the notion of ‘offrande’ and asserts that “le suffix -nas- fait décider pour «bénefice (qu’on tire du culte sômique)»,” for reasons he fails to give. Ge by contrast tr. “Tausendaufwiegenden” with a question mark, which he then glosses (n. 2b) with “Tausendwertigen.” Insofar as the suffix -nas- tells us anything (and the -n- is not there just to supply the heavy syllable that a straight -as-stem sahásra-*bharas- would lack), it suggests a meaning in the realm of “stuff,” material substance, esp. with regard to substances of value: cf. rékṇas- ‘inheritance, legacy’, dráviṇas- ‘material goods, chattels’, ápnas- ‘property’, all with Aves. cognates - so that ‘bringing a thousand (material) presents’ would fit reasonably in this group. AiG II.2.738 glosses -bharṇas- with ‘Darbringung’ and considers it probably inherited, despite the lack of non-Indic correspondents. Given its extremely limited distribution, indeed the strong possibility that it was originally created in one passage, I consider inheritance unlikely; rather, it was probably formed as a near nonce on the basis of the inherited words just cited.

IX,60.2-3: Here the chaining is slightly inexact: 2c áti vā́ram / 3a áti vā́rān, each followed by a verbal form of √pū.

