+++
title = "008"

+++
Sacrificial Post On the structure of this hymn, see the publ. intro.


## 01
Note the future impv. dhattāt.


## 04
Kane (HDŚ II.1.269) suggests that the image in this vs. is that of a young boy, well dressed and encircled with his sacred thread (yúvā suvā́sāḥ párivītaḥ), at his Upanayana, whom they “lead up” (ún nayanti), in an idiom close to the úpa √nī of the Upanayana. Acdg. to Kane, several gṛhya sūtras employ this mantra in the Upanayana.


## 06
There is number disharmony between the 2nd plural enclitic vaḥ (a) and the voc. singular vánaspate (b).The simplest way to account for this is to assume that the voc. has simply been repeated from the 1st vs. of the hymn (1b) in this 1st vs. of the 2nd (half of the) hymn, which switches its subject from a singular post to plural posts.

Or Lord of the Forest may refer to the forest itself or a single tree that produces multiple posts.


## 08
The rarer dual dvandva dyā́vā-kṣā́mā substitutes for the more common dyā́vā-pṛthivī́, with pṛthivī́, perhaps in its lit. meaning ‘broad one’, pleonastically following the dvandva.


## 10
Contrary to the standard tr., I think there is a change of subject in the 2nd half-verse. Rather than calling on the posts to help us, we turn again to the gods, who are the likely subject of avantu, just as they were in 8c. The types of help we ask them for are distinct but complementary: help for our sacrifice in 8c, help in battle and competition in 10d, a theme introduced by the vihavá- ‘competing invocation’ in 10c. The vā of 10c signals this disjunction and the return of the gods as subject.

Although Klein (DGRV II.203) suggests reading vā here as if for vaí, given that the hymn contains several loosely construed vā-s (1d, 6b), this does not seem like a good idea.

[III.9-29 JPB]
