+++
title = "030"

+++
Indra As noted in the publ. intro., the hymn is characterized by hapaxes and very rare words, often with affective suffixes, and unusual phonology. These words include dhā́yuḥ (7a), gehyà- (7b), kúṇāru- (8b), píyāru- (8c), alātṛṇá- (10a), yāmakośá- (15a), salalū́ka- (17c).

## 01
The desid. títikṣante used to be assigned to √tij ‘sharpen’ (e.g., Wh Rts, Gr), but has for quite awhile been taken to √tyaj ‘abandon’ instead. See EWA s.v. TEJ and TYAJ, Gotō (1st cl., 165-66 n. 268), and in some detail Heenen (Desid. 59-60 and 147-48). Curiously WG render it as (if) an intensive to √tij: “Sie schärfen (sich) immer wieder (gegen) …,” despite Gotō’s own published views to the contrary. (In the WG tr., acdg. to the title pg., Maṇḍala III is Witzel’s responsibility, however, which may account for the discrepancy.) The desiderative stem has the idiomatic sense ‘endure, support’, and the semantic channel from (putatively) ‘desire to abandon’ to this idiom is not entirely clear. I am not convinced by the suggestions of either Gotō or Heenen (59-60). Instead, I think the middle voice is the key: if we assume a reflexive ‘abandon oneself to’, ‘give oneself over to’, it is not difficult to imagine this development.

The sense of the final pāda depends on the meaning of praketáḥ, and like many derivatives of √cit this word is slippery. In my view, it means both ‘sign’ and ‘insight’ (that is, it reflects both the ‘appear’ and ‘perceive’ values of √cit). In this particular passage I take it in the former value; the point is that Indra is showing no sign of his presence or imminent arrival, and so we are subject to abuse from our rivals. For a similar usage cf. II.17.7, where the poet beseeches Indra for good fortune, and then demands kṛdhí praketám “make a visible sign,” further asking for him to bring the good fortune here. In X.104.6 Indra is himself called the adhvarásya praketáḥ “the visible sign of the ceremony.” Ge interpr. the word as Losung (‘motto, watchword, password’), which is, I suppose, possible, but I don’t understand what it would mean here; Re as “le signe-pré(monitoire),” which is somewhat opaque to me, but seems closer to my interpr than Ge’s; Old as “Helle” (light, brightness). WG take it as an agent noun: “Wahrnehmer.”

## 02-03
The next two vss. develop the theme sounded in pāda d of vs. 1.: Indra’s absence. In vs. 2 we point out that for Indra nothing is very far away, so he could, and should, easily come here, where the sacrifice is invitingly set out for him. In vs. 3 we provide a flattering description of Indra’s great powers and then plaintively ask where these powers are now.


## 03
The 2nd member of tuvikūrmí-, an epithet of Indra, is generally now derived from the seṭ root √cari , a derivation already found in AiG I.24, 141, 152 -- hence my ‘powerfully ranging’. See EWA s.v. tuvikūrmí-. The older deriv. from √kṛ (e.g., Gr., Wh Rts; explicitly rejected by AiG II.2.776) is nonetheless still reflected in the standard tr.: Ge “der Tatenreiche,” Re (with hesitation) “aux actes (?) puissants,” WG “der mächtig Wirkende” -- even though AiG I (1896) predates all of them by a good margin, well over a century in the case of WG! There is number incongruence between the neut. sg. yád of the rel. clause and neut. pl. tyā́… vīryā̀ṇi. The yád is, as it were, an anticipatory collective: “what(ever) you did … where are those deeds?”

## 04
As has often been pointed out, the redupl. pres. to √han, jíghnate, almost always takes plural objects, and so, at least in this formation, reduplication seems correlated with repetitive action. This semantic nuance is strengthened here by the syntactic construction, with the redupl. pres. in the participle (jíghnamānaḥ) construed with a quasi-auxiliary cárasi. (Cf. 14b below.) Although cárasi does have lexical meaning (‘you range/roam/wander’), the lexical value is weak enough here that the verb can seem to be a marker of the progressive present: “you go about / keep / are (constantly) smashing.” On the other hand, it is possible that √car in its lexical value may be resonating with tuvikūrmí- ‘powerfully ranging’ in 3b (see comm. there). However, it is hard to know whether that root connection would still be perceived by the contemporary audience -- it certainly has escaped most of the modern audience -- given the phonological distance between the two words and the fact that tuvikūrmí- is simply an epithet of Indra and its own lexical value may have become attenuated.

There is a faint phonological echo between vṛtrā́in b and vratā́(ya) in d, which occupy the same metrical position.


## 05
I am not certain how to construe śrávobhiḥ. The publ. tr. takes it with the voc. puruhūta: “much invoked with acclamations.” But I am not entirely happy about construing a full noun with a voc. that ordinarily stands alone (as in, e.g., 7d, 8a). Ge tr. “rühmlich,” which seems designed to be as untethered to the sentence as possible.

Re takes it with the speaking of pāda b: “… seul avec tes remons tu as parlé (un langage) ferme,” but I don’t understand what that means; WG like Re, except tr. “mit Ruhmes(taten),” which again I don’t follow.

I have given the idiom dṛḷhám √vad a mildly slangy turn (similarly in X.48.6); the collocation of a verb of speaking and an adverb referring to a physical quality seems to invite it. “Speak firmly” would be a more neutral rendering than “talk tough,” but pāda d, which describes heaven and earth as a mere “handful” for Indra, also seems to belong to a vivid and informal register.

The participial phrase vṛtrahā́sán contains, unusually, a non-concessive nominative of the pres. part. of √as ‘be’. It seems here to be definitional and to pick up and summarize 4b éko vṛtrā́cárasi jíghnamānaḥ “you alone range about [/keep] smashing obstacles.” As discussed immed. above, the redupl. pres. part. combined with a quasi-auxiliary depicts this as repetitive, indeed habitual, action -- and the ékaḥ indicates that only Indra engages in it. Our phrase here, vṛtrahā́sán, comes to the appropriate conclusion: since you and you alone keep smashing obstacles, you are The Obstacle-Smasher, par excellence.


## 06
Sāy. supplies ‘chariot’ as the subj. of pāda a, and in this he is followed by the standard tr. as well as Old. Although this is perfectly harmless and certainly possible, I do not understand why supplying a subject not found in the context is desirable, much less necessary. I admit that it would allow us to use the etu of prá … etu in b as the gapped verb with the prá of a, but Rigvedic poetic syntax is flexible enough to allow a 2nd ps. substitution in such a gapped phrase (prá … *ihi, anticipating prá … etu). The fact that 2b has a similar phrase with Indra as the 2nd sg.

supplied subject -- ā́tú prá yāhi … háribhyām -- also supports my assumption that the default subject is Indra.

Unfortunately the voc. indra in 6a was omitted in the publ. tr. The pāda should read “(Come) forth along an easy slope with your two fallow bays, o Indra.”


## 07
dhā́yuḥ is a hapax. The stem is generally listed as dhā́yu- (so Gr) and would therefore have to be a masc. nom. sg. here, but the standard tr. render it as obj. of ádadhāḥ. This interpr. requires it to be a neut. -us-stem, which is easily possible (see, e.g., Old). Old suggests that it belongs to √dhā and that dhā́yur ádadhāḥ is an etymological figure like ábhaktam … bhajate in b. I prefer the analysis suggested in AiG II.2.470 linking it to √dhā(y) ‘suckle, nourish’, thus a neut. -us-stem exactly parallel to neut. dhā́yas- ‘nourishment’. This analysis seems to be reflected in Re’s “tu as accordé la satisfaction-nourricière,” though Re’s (in)famous hyphenated portmanteaus are capacious enough to include many possibilities.

I am not entirely sure what pāda b is about: is this a legal issue, having to do with what is held in common? or with what hasn't (yet) been divided by inheritance? Or is it simply that nobody has distributed the goods yet? X.112.10d, adduced by Ge, is similar: ábhakte cid ā́bhajā rāyé asmā́n, but that pāda follows one in which Indra is urged to do battle and so the most likely interpr. there is that we are asking for a share in the as-yet-undivided spoils of war. Here, however, the goods are specifically identified as gehyà- ‘belonging to the household’. This is the only occurrence of this stem in the RV; it is found in AVP (VI.14.8, VII. 11.3; see Arlo Griffiths ed. and tr.) and later, and gehá- ‘house’, from which it is derived, first occurs in VS. The etymology of gehá- is quite unclear (cf. EWA s.v.), as is its relationship to synonymous gṛhá-. The former is quite widespread in MIA, beginning already in Aśoka, but it cannot be simply a Middle Indic form of gṛhá- at least acdg. to the standard sound laws (pace older accounts such as AiG I.39), though it is quite possible that it has guṇa in an adj. derived from MIA gihi(n) ‘householder’ (<*gṛhin- ), (a-)giha-. In any event it seems likely that the word was imported into Vedic from MIA and that the use of this unusual stem here signals a particular social or legal institution for which we have no other evidence.


## 08
This vs. contains two difficult words, kúṇāru- (b) and píyāru- (c). It is surely no accident that they appear pāda-final in successive pādas and are rhyme forms. The former is a hapax (though the vs. is repeated in the VS [Mā XVIII.69, Kā XX.5.2]). It has been glossed ‘lame in the arm’ on the basis of a supposed connection with Ep, Cl kuṇi- ‘id.’ (cf., e.g., AiG II.2.288, KEWA s.v. kuṇiḥ, EWA s.v. kuṇāru-). But the chronological and morphological distance between the two words speaks against this connection, as does the fact that kuṇi- is likely a Dravidian borrowing (see KEWA).

Moreover, since Vṛtra is a snake and is specifically called ‘handless’ here, it is unlikely that he would have an arm to be lame in. Wiser heads generally take it as a PN (so the standard tr., as well as Mayrhofer PN [though with ?]). However, this cautious course is not very satisfactory either. The enemy is most definitely Vṛtra: his name appears in c, his mother’s (Dānu) in a. Why would he be called by a different name, esp. one that never appears elsewhere? Unfortunately I do not have a strong alternative. However, I would point to kúṇapa-, which means something like ‘carrion, corpse’ (AVŚ XI.9.10, 10.10.4, 8; MS IV.9.19; ≅ kuṇapá- TS XI.2.10.2, where human and equine kuṇapá-s are distinguished) on which various nasty critters are invited to feed, and to various later forms of (-t)kuṇa- referring to various bugs (cf. Kuiper [Aryans passim], Turner [CDIAL s.vv. kúṇapa-, kuṇa-], and Pāli mankuna-). On the basis of these shaky parallels I suggest that kúṇāru- means something like ‘vermin’ or perhaps even ‘corpse’. It owes its pejorative -āru-suffix to píyāru-; cf. also śarā́ru- in X.86.9, which I tr. ‘noxious creature’. Of course, ku- is a common pejorative prefix as well. Perhaps the word is simply constructed of pejorative affixes with a hiatus-breaking ṇ! Or -- a better possibility -- it may represent *ku-nara-āru- ‘ill-manly’, with haplology and MIA retroflexion of the nasal. My point here is not to claim any of these suggestions as definitive, but to show that this completely opaque word resonates with other words in several different directions and therefore assuming a lexical meaning rather than taking it as a PN is the better course. However, in the publ. tr. ‘vermin’ should be followed by a question mark.

The 2nd difficult word, píyāru-, is by comparison much simpler. It must be derived from √pī ‘sneer, taunt’, whose pres. pī́yati is attested 3x already in the RV. It contains the same pejorative -āru-suffix as kúṇāru-, śarā́ru- -- though it should be noted that not all -āru-suffixed words are pejorative: vandā́ru- is quite positive, and the mysterious hapax jábāru- (IV.5.7) is at worst neutral but probably positive.


## 09
The pf. of √sad is generally intrans.(/reflex.) ‘sat (oneself) down’, but in several instances must be trans. ‘set down’, as it is here. See Kü 542-43.

There is no agreement on the meaning of the adj. sāmaná-, found in the RV only here and in the wedding hymn (X.85.11). Gr ‘gemeinschaftlich’ (fld. by WG), Ge ‘gütige (?)’, Re ‘abondante’ (but in EVP XVI, ad X.85.11, he suggests that in our passage it means ‘attelée-avec’ with which ‘heaven’ should be supplied), AiG II.2.136 ‘reich’. I suggest that it’s a vṛddhi deriv. of sámana- ‘gathering’, meaning ‘related to the gathering/aggregate’, hence ‘whole’. This does not work so well in X.85.11, but there there is a pun on -sā́man- ‘tune’, and the word seems simply to mean ‘together’ vel sim.


## 10
On alātṛṇá- see comm. ad I.166.7. In this passage though ‘unquiet’ does not seem a normal feature of Vala, it can be applied proleptically, characterizing its opening up in fear of Indra’s blow.

Note the phonetic figure in ab: alā.. vala … vrajo ... vy āra, with -tṛṇ- … - ndr- nestled in the 1st pāda; the d pāda also has phonetic rep.: prāvan vāniḥ.

The standard tr. all supply the Maruts with vā́ṇīḥ ‘choir’. But as Schmidt (B+I 141) points out, the Maruts do not ordinarily participate in the Vala myth; it is the Aṅgirases who are Indra’s back-up band. See III.31.4ff.

## 11
Pāda a begins with an elementary numerical figure: éko dvé “the one the two,” subject and object of ā́paprau respectively, both of which are identified in the 2nd pāda. The juxtaposition of the two numbers is responsible for my tr. éka- as ‘the one’, rather than ‘alone’ as elsewhere in the hymn (vss. 4, 5).

Because of the voc. śūra, at least pāda d (and probably also c) shows a switch to 2nd ps. from the 3rd ps. of ab. Since there are no verbs in cd, at least one needs to be supplied. Most tr. (Ge [/WG], Klein [DGRV I.442], Scar [431]) take c and d as separate clauses, supplying impvs. “come” and “bring” respectively. This is possible, but I follow Re in taking cd as a single clause -- though do not follow his interpr. of iṣáḥ as a verb (‘envoie’, presumably to √iṣ ‘send’).

All tr., incl. Re, take samīké as “in battle” (or, closer to the root sense in my opinion, Scar “Treffen”). Although this noun generally has the meaning ‘encounter’, it is a straightforward derivative of samyác- ‘united, conjoined’, and here I take it to refer to the “join” of Heaven and Earth, which would define the midspace. Note that pāda-final samīké matches pāda-final du. samīcī́in a, referring to Heaven and Earth.

I supply ‘bring’ as the verb of cd, with sayújaḥ … vā́jān as obj. There are several possible interpr of iṣáḥ. As just noted, Re takes it as a verb. Assuming (with everyone else) that it belongs to the root noun íṣ-, there are two possible analyses, as gen. (/abl.) sg. or nom./acc. pl., although in the latter case we would prefer it to be accented íṣaḥ (cf. the acc. pl. íṣaḥ in 18b). Both Klein and Scar take it as acc. pl.; I agree with Ge (/WG) in construing it as gen. sg. with rathī́ḥ.


## 12
The grammar of ab is so straightforward that it is easy to overlook how odd the statement is. It is not surprising that the sun does not confound the quarters or directions (díśaḥ); after all, the layout of the cosmos is not likely to be altered by the sun as it passes through. But what does it mean that these same díśaḥ are prasūtā́ḥ every day by Indra? The ppl. can only belong either to √sū ‘propel’ or √sū ‘give birth’, far more likely the former (pace WG, who seem to take it to the latter): only the former is found with prá and in fact 9d contains an exactly parallel expression, tváyā … prásūtāḥ “propelled by you.” Ge tr. “vom Falbenlenker bestimmten,” but ‘determined, fixed, set’ seems the exactly opposite of what prá √sū ordinarily means, including in nearby 9d. Such a meaning makes more sense of this vs. but at the expense of arbitrarily assigning a unique meaning to this rather common lexeme. If we take the idiom seriously, the hemistich seems to be saying that while the sun respects the placement of the parts of the cosmos, Indra pushes them around in some fashion, remaking or reconfiguring the cosmos daily. I simply do not understand this; I must be missing something. Perhaps Indra arranges the díśaḥ every day in a slightly new way for the sun’s road? The sun is presumably the subj. of ā́naṭ; so the standard tr.

The cmpd háryaśvaprasūta- technically has three members -- that is a 2nd member ppl. (prásūta-) whose 1st member is itself a cmpd. This would be somewhat unusual for the RV, where cmpd size is quite limited. But the bv. háry-aśva- is so frozen as an epithet of Indra that it was probably not fully perceived as a cmpd. Cf.

the exactly equivalent índra-prasūta- (1x). Ge (/WG) seems to interpr. ádhvanaḥ as acc. pl. (“Wenn sie ihre Wege vollendet hat”). Because I am not at all certain that √naś can be used that way with an acc., I take ádhvanaḥ as gen. sg., with a supplied ‘end’; cf. V.54.10 ádhvanaḥ pārám aśnutha with the same root. So apparently also Re.

áśvaiḥ is an instr. of separation with vimócanam.


## 14
On vakṣáṇā- ‘belly’ (here tr. ‘udder’ perhaps misleadingly) as a pl. tantum, see comm. ad X.27.16.

carati bíbhratī is another instance of quasi-auxiliary √car + pres. part. (also to a redupl. pres.); cf. 4b. Here, carati seems to have more lexical value than in vs. 4.


## 15
The sense of the hapax yāmakośá- is unclear. Ge takes it as traveling trunks: “Die Reisetruhen sind bereit”; sim. Old. But the image of Indra standing by overseeing the loading of his luggage verges on the absurd. Old suggests rather that it is we who have come with empty suitcases, hoping Indra will fill them. Re takes yāma- to √yā ‘beseech’ rather than √yā ‘drive, travel’, yielding “les vases de la prière.” Since there is no comm. in EVP XVII, we will never know what he meant by that; it is certainly not transparent. My tr. “journey-bucket” is meant as a slangy term for chariot (‘bucket’ can be so used in English for an old or badly maintained car); certainly the use of kóśa- ‘bucket, cask’ to refer to (a part of) a chariot is clear from VIII.20.8, 22.9. WG’s “Wagenkörbe” is similar.

I also think that the chariots in question belong to the enemies mentioned in cd; this might account for the slangy designation of their vehicles -- rather like referring to a rival’s car as a jalopy. In any case it would seem odd to command Indra to stand fast and them immediately get on a chariot and go traveling.


## 16
The standard tr. all take the ghóṣa- to be emanating from the foes, but the instr. amítraiḥ with śṛṇve should make it an agent of the hearing (“is heard by …”) not a source of the sound. Ge’s (/WG’s) “von” and Re’s supplied “(faite) d’ennemis” show their need to overrule the syntax. I see no reason why it should not be Indra’s battle-cry, striking fear in all who hear it.


## 17
salalū́ka- is yet another peculiar word that brings our interpr. to a standstill.

The current standard interpr. is “indulgence, patience” vel sim. (Ge [/WG] “Nachsicht”). I do not understand where such a meaning would come from.

Mayrhofer (KEWA s.v.) suggests √sṛ in the meaning ‘sich erstrecken’, but the semantic channel from one to the other seems blocked to me. Although a deriv. from √sṛ seems likely, a more literal sense of that root, ‘run, flow’, provides better sense.

(The older interpr. of the word was ‘zerflossen’ or ‘umherschweifend’ [Gr, etc.].) Both the l’s and the affective -ū́ka-suffix suggest a slangy or low-register word -- hence my “send scooting.” Gr suggests a preform *salsalū́ka-, presumably because - ū́ka- is often added to intensively reduplicated stems (see AiG II.2.498)(cf. jāgarū́kaIII.54.7). This seems possible (though not, of course, necessary), and “send scooting” is also meant to reflect an intensive/iterative sense. Note that salalū́kam phonologically resembles sahámūlam in pāda a (in almost the same metrical position), which may help account for the presence of salalū́kam in the vs. and could also have facilitated a dissimilation from *salsalū́kam.


## 18
It is difficult to know how to construe the first pāda of this vs. I take it as a nominal main clause expressing the purpose of the subordinate clause in b. Ge (/WG) as a parallel subordinate clause with pāda b, for which a verb (ausziehst ‘set out for’) must be supplied -- all dependent on pāda c. Re as part of a single subord. cl.

introduced by yád in b, also all dependent on c. Each of these solutions has drawbacks. Mine requires nothing to be supplied (Re’s supplies less than Ge’s), and it also avoids two problems produced by Re’s interpr: a worrisomely late position of yád and an untethered ca in the middle of pāda a. But mine comes with a certain awkwardness of expression and an ill-assorted conjoined pair (“for well-being and with horses”).

However the various interpr. of ab differ, they all agree in taking āsátsi as the verb in the subor. cl. introduced by yád, thus showing the older non-imperatival (that is, subjunctive) value of the so-called “-si imperative.”


## 19
Gr analyses dhīmahi as passive, but this is rightly rejected by all standard tr.: the numerous other examples of this form are all transitive. What then should we supply as object? I take the line of least resistance, importing bhágam from the preceding pāda. I take the b pāda to mean that we hope to take the portion Indra brings us now and put it together with the superfluity of his previous gifts (and those to come) (deṣṇásya … prareké). Ge (sim. WG) does not construe these two nouns together, but takes deṣṇásya as a partitive genitive, supplying the obj. of dhīmahi (“Wir möchten von deiner Gabe etwas auf Vorrat zurücklegen”), while Re takes the verb as reflexive: “puissions nous nous placer …” The Pp. and all standard analyses take ūrvá as underlying nom. ūrváḥ; I, however, take it as loc. ūrvé. Though Ge and Re tr. the word as ‘sea’, it really refers to the container, in this case the sea-basin, and so logically what stretches out is not the container itself but the liquid in the container. (WG tr. Behälter, but keep it as nom.)


## 20
The conjoined verbs in ab, mandayā … papráthaś ca, are in different moods, imperative and subjunctive respectively. Or so it seems: in the sandhi context mandayā góbhiḥ the apparent impv. mandayā could represent subjunctive *mandayās.

However, I don’t think this is necessary; impv. and subj. are both future-oriented moods, and in fact in this passage the pairing functions as a sort of covert conditional: “(if) you invigorate it, it will spread.” Kü (321), fld by WG, construes candrávatā rā́dhasā with the 2nd verb, but both the accent on papráthaḥ and the position of the ca make it clear that papráthaḥ must begin a new clause.


## 21
Schaeffer (136) sees no particular repetitive function in the well-attested intensive dárdar-; she considers it simply lexicalized. Therefore my “keep breaking open” may impose a semantic nuance that does not belong to this stem. However, at the very least it takes pl. objects here (gotrā́, gā́ḥ), so it could be considered “objektsdistributiv” (for which term see Schaeffer 86-87).
