+++
title = "031"

+++
Indra As indicated in the publ. intro., the hymn presents multiple difficulties, esp.

in its first three vss. I will not attempt to represent the many conflicting interpr. of these vss., but simply lay out some parts of my own and point to some of the many puzzles that remain. As also noted in the publ. intro., I think the cosmic incest theme imposed on these vss. by others is faint at best, and also think that the ritual occasion depicted is not the original generation of the ritual fire but the removal of the Āhavanīya fire from the Gārhapatya.

In the publ. intro. I say that Indra is not named in the narrative of the Vala myth until vs. 11, but this is false: the last word of the 1st verse of the Vala treatment, 4d, is índraḥ. He is also named in the last vs. of the Vala section, 11b -- thus producing a satisfying ring.

Vss. 3 to the end are tr. and discussed by H.-P. Schmidt in Bṛhaspati und Indra (pp. 166-75).


## 01
The female line of descent implied in the 1st pāda, duhitúr naptyàm “the (grand)daughter of the daughter,” is striking. As noted already, I believe that this kinship succession refers to the production of the offering fire (Āhavanīya) from the householder’s fire (Gārhapatya) and the removal to the east of the former. Obviously, however, this can’t refer directly to the fires, because agní- is masc.; it is rather, I think, a reference to the hearths, which word (dhiṣánā- in some uses) is fem. The conveyor (váhniḥ) who has come (gāt) is the fire itself (often called váhni-), which has made the journey from the Gārhapatya hearth to the Āhavanīya hearth. The offering is being made there by the father (pitā́), whom I take as the priest. I do not see allusion to the cosmic incest of Heaven and his daughter, in part because it is difficult to identify who the granddaughter would be. (See Old.) The ritual identifications of váhni- = Agni and pitā́= priest are pretty standard; it is the identity of the females that causes dispute.


## 02
I do not see sufficient evidence in this vs. for the legalistic interpr. having to do with inheritance rights advanced by Old and Ge (fld. by WG). Again, my interpr.

involving the two fireplaces is at least thinkable, though there are a number of loose ends (in everyone’s interpr). In the first pāda in my interpr. the fire that has been taken out of the Gārhapatya leaves nothing behind. The two other occurrence of āraik have womb as obj. + a dative (as if it were our pāda b): I.113.1 evā́rā́try uṣáse yónim āraik “so night has left behind the womb for dawn” and I.124.8, which even has a sister: svásā svásre jyā́yasyai yónim āraik “The (one) sister has left the natal place to her older sister.” In both the idea seems to be that one has vacated the space for the other -- not left as legacy, as the legalistic inheritance interpr. requires.

Problematic for my interpr. is the fact that rikthám should be the equivalent of the womb itself (the fireplace), not the detritus that the fire might leave in it. Moreover, the two hearths that had been daughter and granddaughter now become sisters -- but a certain fluidity in modeling kinship relations would not be surprising.

In b the site of the new fire, the Āhavanīya, is the womb of this new fire and “the repository of the winner” (the winner being the fire itself).

The second half-verse is fairly clear (for this hymn) in its description of the churning of the fire: the mothers are the fingers, the two good workers are the two kindling sticks. See the fire-churning passage with kindling sticks in nearby III.29.1.

The yádī opening the second half-verse is better taken as yád ī, with the enclitic pronoun. See 6a below.


## 03
In the first pāda the instr. juhvā̀can be read simultaneously as “with his tongue,” construed with réjamānaḥ and referring to the flame(s) of the fire, and as “by the offering-spoon,” construed with jajñe and indicating that the ghee poured from the spoon “begets” the fire by making it flame up.

The second pāda is likewise ambiguous and initiates the transition to the Indra-Aṅgiras-Vala myth portion of the hymn. The “sons of the great ruddy one” (mahás putrā́m̐aruṣásya) can be the flames of the fire, that is, of Agni himself -- and the infinitival prayákṣe ‘to display’ is esp. appropriate to this interpr. But they can also be, as they are identified by most commentators, the Aṅgirases, the sons of Heaven, who will figure in the Vala myth about to be related, but who are also associated with Agni, who is sometimes called áṅgirastama- (e.g., I.75.2; see Macd, Vedic Myth. 143). The “birth of these” (jātám eṣām) in c can likewise refer to both the flames and the Aṅgirases. Indra’s appearance in d strengthens the Aṅgiras reading and provides a transition to the next portion of the hymn.

The lexeme prá √yakṣ has been variously interpreted. For ‘display’ see Gotō (1st class, 153 and n. 572), EWA s.v. Curiously WG tr. it as if to √yaj ‘sacrifice’, despite Gotō’s own disc. just cited -- though the other possibility is suggested in the n.


## 04
Pādas a and c contain feminine plural nom./acc. forms: jaítrīḥ and jānatī́ḥ … uṣā́saḥ respectively. Although the default assumption would be that they are coreferential and both refer to the Dawns, the familiar plot line of the Vala myth suggests rather that they identify two different subjects: the (unexpressed) Aṅgirases in ab, the (expressed) Dawns in c. (So Ge, Re, Schmidt [B+I, 167]; Old agrees that the Aṅgirases should be supplied as subj. in a, but takes jaítrīḥ as obj. [presumably alongside clear acc. spṛdhānám], while WG take the Dawns as subj. of a, but supply the Aṅgirases as subj. of b.) The Aṅgirases are Indra’s back-up band in the Vala myth, as noted above ad III.30.10, and would be expected to accompany him, as pāda a depicts, while the Dawns are still confined within the Vala cave and only in c recognize Indra’s song and come out of the cave. The problem for an Aṅgiras reading of pāda a is of course the fem. gender of jaítrīḥ. Here it is probably best to follow Sāy. in supply víśaḥ ‘clans’ (so Ge, etc.); cf. I.121.3 viśā́m áṅgirasām.

However, note that the Aṅgirases are referred to by the fem. pl. vā́ṇīḥ ‘choir’ in the preceding hymn, III.30.10, and that noun could be supplied here. The cows of d are surely the dawns, as often; Indra becomes their páti-, a word meaning both ‘lord’ and ‘husband’. On the naming of Indra here, see the intro.

remarks above.


## 05
The Aṅgirases, now presumably in the masc. (though both dhī́rāḥ [a] and víprāḥ [b] are technically ambiguous), remain the implicit subjects of abc, with Indra, also unnamed, taking this role in d. The cows, also not identified, are represented in pāda a by the fem. pl. part. satī́ḥ. In fact, though these identifications are fairly easy to make for those familiar with the story, they remain covert, and, further, both b and d have unidentified objects as well. In b Ge (/WG) tr. áhinvan without object; I have supplied the cows (so apparently also Lü [Varuṇa 510-11], Schmidt [B+I 167]), while Re’s parenthetic “(l’)” in “(l’)incitèrent” presumably refers to Indra.

In d there is an expressed object, but it is merely a 3rd ps. pronoun, which is, furthermore, ambiguous in sandhi: tā́in tā́námasā can represent either neut. pl. tā́or fem. pl. tā́ḥ. The Pp. opts for the former, a decision endorsed by Old. The issue is further complicated by the fact that the form could be construed with either (or both) of two verbal forms, part. prajānán or pf. ā́viveśa. Old takes tā́to refer vaguely to things that Indra knows and construes it with prajānán; sim. Re: “sachant ces choses.” Ge [/WG], contra Pp., restores tā́ḥ, which he takes to refer to pl. pathyā̀ḥ, generated from pathyā̀m in c. My tr. is closer to Schmidt and to Lü, in restoring tā́ḥ (like Ge), but assuming its referent to be the cows, into whose company Indra enters. With Lü and Schmidt, I also take prajānán as having an implicit object inspired by pathyā̀m in c, but prajānán is generally used absolutely to mean “knowing (the way)” and so a form of pathyā̀- need not be supplied. The publ. tr. should have parentheses: “knowing (the way).”


## 06
Ge (/WG) interpret ab as a direct quotation from the gods, for reasons that are unclear to me. Although an immediate past reading might help account for the injunctive aorists vidát (a) and kaḥ (b), in fact the second hemistich also contains two injunctives, nayat (c) and gāt (d), the latter of which is also an aorist. So there is no clear grammatical distinction between the two half-verses, and the subject (Saramā) also remains the same throughout (by most interpr.), with all four pādas focusing on the same narrative. Other interpreters (Re, Lü, Schmidt) ignore this odd decision of Ge’s.

In a yádī should be read yád ī; see 2c above.

In b pā́thaḥ ordinarily means ‘fold, pen’, but here refers to the herd confined in the fold: the shift from container to contained is a common one in semantic change.

ákṣarāṇām in c most likely has double reference, both to the cows that are being released from the Vala cave and the syllables of the Aṅgirases’ song that effects that release.

Ge makes the point (n. 6d) that ráva- in this context otherwise only refers to the Aṅgirases’s song; this leads him to switch the subject to Uṣas, as the first out of the cave, coming in response to the sound of the Aṅgirases. This seems, on the one hand, over-finicky -- why introduce another female character in the middle of a vs. without signaling it? -- and, on the other, rather deaf to the possibility of multiple meanings that always lurks in RVic discourse. One of the points of the Vala myth in general seems to me the mirroring of sounds: the song that releases the cows and their joyous counter-mooing in response -- an obvious place for a poet to allow a single word to do double duty. This same double reference is found in the preceding pāda in ákṣarāṇām. Schmidt (B+I 167) also takes the ráva- to be that of Indra and the Aṅgirases and in fact makes Uṣas the subject of the whole 2nd hemistich. I do not see the need for this.


## 07
Note that all pādas begin with 3rd sg. preterite verbs: a ágachat, b ásūdayat, c sasā́na, d (modified initial pos.) áthābhavat (which most likely represents átha abhavat, though áthā bhavat is possible). All but the perfect in c are augmented imperfects; this contrasts markedly with vs. 6, which, as was just noted, contains four 3rd sg. injunctives, three of them aorists. Three of the four pādas of vs. 7 also end with nom. sg. masc. pres. participles: a sakhīyán, c makhasyán, d árcan.

Pāda b configures the release of the cows from the Vala cave as a birth, but a birth overlaid with metaphor (“brought to sweetness”).

In c the standard tr. (save for Re and Klein, DGRV II.67) take makhasyá- as ‘being generous’ vel sim. But in all three occurrences of this verb stem (here and IX.61.27, 101.5) the ‘do battle’ sense is primary. Since it co-occurs with sasā́na ‘won’ in this pāda, the ‘battle’ sense seems esp. appropriate. So Re “comportant-encombattant.” For further on makhá- see comm. ad I.18.9.

My tr. of d, áthābhavad áṅgirasāḥ sadyó árcan, differs in an important way from the standard. In my opinion it states that Indra became an Aṅgiras as soon as he sang; the others that the Aṅgiras [=Indra] right away became a singer (e.g., Ge “Da ward sogleich der Aṅgiras zum Lobsänger”). On the one hand, I’m not certain that √bhū + pres. part. can yield this sort of predication, esp. with the pres. part. standing in, in effect, for an agent noun. So -- a syntactic argument, though I have not examined the evidence in detail. Another syntactic/lexical argument: sadyáḥ + participle is frequently used to indicate the circumstances under which the action of the main verb takes place. This is esp. common with sadyó jātáḥ “just born” / sadyó jajñānáḥ “having just been born” -- e.g., the next hymn, III.32.9 sadyó yáj jātó ápibo ha sómam (≅10) “Just born, you drank the soma” (and cf. III.29.3). But the prevailing interpr. here requires the sadyáḥ to go with the main verb, despite its position directly before the participle -- e.g., Klein “And then did the Aṅgiras straightway become a singer.” And finally a semantic objection: the proposed tr.

seems to me thematically backwards. Indra joins the category of the Aṅgirases because he joins them in song, which is their principal function in this myth; he is not an Aṅgiras by nature who happens to start singing. (This point is made, more or less, by Schmidt [173], despite his contrary tr.)

## 07-08
Given the thematic weight the part. árcan carries (see comm. immed.

above) and given that it occupies pāda-final position in 7d and 8c, it should have been tr. the same way in these two vss. I would emend the publ. tr. to ‘chanting’ in 7d, or else 8c to ‘singing’ and arkaíḥ in 9b, 11b to ‘songs’. The instr. arkaíḥ reappears in pāda-final position in 11b.


## 08
Ge (/WG) take this vs. as a quotation of the Aṅgirases’ praise-song of Indra.

I do not see why. The vs. seems to follow easily from the preceding one, and in fact at the end of vs. 7 it’s Indra who’s singing (/chanting), not the Aṅgirases. We might expect such a quotation to be signposted in some way. I do not consider the 1st pl.

enclitic naḥ in c to be a sufficient signal.

The presence of Śuṣṇa in b is a bit puzzling, since the smiting of Śuṣṇa is not part of the Vala myth. Perhaps with Schmidt (173) he is mentioned because Indra is uncontestably Śuṣṇa’s killer, and this extra-mythic (or extra-Vala myth) association makes it clear that the unnamed subject of this vs. must indeed be Indra.

The standard tr. take c as a separate clause from d and supply a verb of motion with prá (e.g., Ge “[ging] … voran”). This is certainly possible, but cd can also be read as a single clause (so Schmidt, 168), since prá is frequent with √muc.

This interpr. allows, but does not enforce, a coreferential interpr. of naḥ (c) and sákhīn (d), as in my tr. (flg. Schmidt).

What calumny? Ge (n. 8d) suggests the dishonor because of the loss of the herd.


## 09
Ge’s suggestion that this vs. concerns the Aṅgirases’ Sattra, a months-long ritual, seems completely convincing. Note the verb sedur ‘they sat’ in pāda a and the nominal sádanam ‘sitting’ in c. I am less convinced by his interpr. of c (fld. by Re, WG), that this Sattra is frequently (bhū́ri) repeated now, though I admit that both the hic-et-nunc prn. idám and the particle nú might support his view. I prefer Lü’s interpr.

(Varuṇa, 511, fld. by Schmidt 168), who takes bhū́ri as ‘long’ and the hemistich as a further description of the Aṅgirases’ Sattra in the Vala myth.

My interpr. of d (based on Lü and Schmidt) deviates further from Ge (Re, WG). All of the latter take yéna … ṛténa as coreferential and the equivalent of …

*ṛtáṃ, yéna -- that is, *ṛtám in the main cl. as antecedent to yéna. The main cl. *ṛtám
would be an appositive to sádanam “the Session, (that is,) the ṛtá by which they …” However, I separate the two instr. in d and take the antecedent of yéna to be sádanam (“the Session by which …”), leaving ṛténa to mean ‘by/through truth’ as so often.

They also take māsā́n as the obj. of ásiṣāsan (“they sought to win the months”), but this acc. pl. can easily be an acc. of extent of time (again, as so often), and the true object of their desire to win can be supplied as the cows.


## 10
What “the milk of the age-old semen” means is unclear to me. Ge suggests that they’re milking their old cows, but the rhetoric seems rather overblown just to express that. Lü (620-21, fld. by Schmidt 168) identifies the semen as ṛtá- and the milk as the Kultlied of the Aṅgirases. This may well be, but nothing imposes this explanation, and Schmidt in fact worries briefly (173) that logically the Aṅgirases should already have their Kultlied since they should have used it to free these very cows. On niṣṭhā́- ‘outstanding’ see Old, Scar (648-49). The word must be derived from nís √sthā, not ní √sthā and in fact goes literally into English as ‘stand out’, with the same idiomatic meaning. In addition to two occurrences of the simplex (this and IX.110.9), it is found in several compounds: karma-niṣṭhā́- X.80.1 a hero who stands out through his work, puruniṣṭhā́- V.1.6 (of Agni), VIII.2.9 ‘standing out among many’ of soma. Ge (unaccountably) takes it as ‘Verteilung’ (fld. by Re, Lü 528-29, Schmidt 168), an interpr. about which Old comments rather acidly. Old’s own interpr.

is essentially reproduced here and was also adopted by WG.

Note the partial responsion between ghóṣa in c and góṣu in d, in the same metrical position.


## 11
My interpr. of the first hemistich differs from the standard; I take it as consisting of two separate clauses, each identifying Indra in one of his most important mythic roles -- in the Vṛtra-slaying and in the freeing of the Vala cows -- along with his associates in those enterprises, the Maruts and the Aṅgirases respectively. It is important to note that this naming of Indra, in conjunction with the first appearance of his name in 4b (see comm. there and in the intro. remarks), frames the treatment of the Vala myth, and, by mentioning Vṛtra, it also sets the stage for the opening out of this hymn to treat other exploits of Indra.

Others take vṛtrahā́in pāda a simply as an auxiliary epithet of Indra in this account of the Vala myth, but I do not think that Vṛtrahan would be so promiment in a treatment of the Vala myth, and I also cannot otherwise account for the séd u in the middle of pāda a without assuming that a new clause begins there. (Lü [517] gets out of this difficulty by accepting Ludwig’s emendation to a bahuvrīhi svéduhavyaiḥ ‘having sweating oblations’ [=Aṅgirases], but though this is ingenious, esp. as sweat figures in the same myth in X.67.6-7 as Ge points out, it requires too much alteration for a sequence that can make sense on its own.) In the first brief clause, vṛtrahā́is the predicate, and jātébhiḥ refers to the Maruts, who are well known for being ‘born (together)’ (e.g., V.55.3 sākáṃ jātā́ḥ). Ge suggests, but rejects, an emendation here to sajātébhiḥ (for transmitted sá jātébhiḥ), an idea also of Alsdorf’s (see Schmidt 169); I would modify that by proposing haplology from sá *sajātébhiḥ. The rest of ab concerns the Vala myth, which has been the subject of the past seven vss. The myth is readily identifiable by the VP úd usríyā asṛjat “sent the ruddy (cows) surging up” and by the arkaíḥ, repeated from 9a. Since the chants in 9a clearly belonged to the Aṅgirases, there need not be any even oblique reference to the Aṅgirases here: the bare arkaíḥ will be enough.


## 12
The first pāda contains two datives, pitré and the prn. asmai. Because of its lack of accent, asmai cannot be a demonst. adj. with pitré. Ge gets out of the difficulty by interpr. pitré as a simile, which allows asmai to be independently construed, but this depends on his frequent assumption that cid can be a simile marker, a role I do not think it can have. Instead I give the VP cakruḥ sádanam a double reading: acdg. to the first the Aṅgirases perform a Sattra for their father (see 9c), but in the 2nd they also prepare for him a literal seat. Because cakruḥ sádanam participates in two clauses, each can have an independent dative, though in my opinion the datives are coreferential.

It is unclear what the referent of the object in b is, described as máhi tvíṣīmat “great and turbulent.” Ge, flg. Sāy, takes it as a further reference to the seat, Re the all-purpose “quelque chose,” Schmidt the eye of the sun, WG sim. the sun-god. My own candidate is the pā́thaḥ of 6b, also described as máhi there. In vs. 6 the word is used to indicate the herd, which is contained in the fold (see comm. there); here I think it is the container, the fold or pen, itself -- representing the cosmic space and also the ritual ground. When they survey it they see that this space needs organizing, which they proceed to do -- by propping apart Heaven and Earth (a deed usually ascribed to Indra) and preparing and propping up a seat for Indra. They thus make the whole cosmos into Indra’s ritual ground, and in the next vs. (13ab) Earth herself serves as the emplacement allowing Indra to pierce Vṛtra.

The position of the hí is somewhat anomalous: since the whole b pāda forms a single clause, we would expect the hí in Wackernagel’s position. However, there is a general tendency when a preverb precedes its verb late in the clause for hí to intervene between them, as here: … ví hí khyan#. More specifically, 1) when there's a hí in a clause containing a verbal form of √khyā, it always immediately precedes the verb -- sometimes in normal Wack. pos. (e.g., I.81.9), sometimes not (as here and, e.g., VI.15.15). 2) With one exception, all injunc. forms of √khyā are preceded either by hí or by a preverb ending in -i, which prob. led to a sense that √khyā should be so preceded. Note also in this passage the phonetic echoes #máhi … vi hí khyan#, which also resonates with pāda d … ví minvan#. It is perhaps worth noting in this connection how many pādas in this hymn begin with máhi or mahī́: 3d, 4b, 6b, 12b, 13a, 14a, 14c, 15a (esp. clustered here); cf. also mahás 3b, mahā́n 3c, 18d. I assume that a pāda opening *máhi hí would be avoided; in any case there are none in the RV.

In d most tr. take the sun as the referent of the object. I instead supply the seat.

The root √mi often takes ‘seat’ as obj.: not our sádanam admittedly, but sádmanII.15.3 (with ví), X.20.5, I.173.3, IX.97.1, sā́dana- X.18.13. This is a fairly large percentage of the attested forms of the verb, and since ‘seat’ is already present in this vs., it is easily supplied here.


## 13
I take yádi here as a shortened form of yád *ī with enclitic pronoun (as in 2c and 6a), though it unfortunately appears before a word beginning with a single consonant. An “if” makes no sense here, and it is also desirable to have an acc. pron.

in this pāda to serve as obj. of dhā́t and subj. of the infinitival śiśnáthe. This putative

*ī may anticipate and double the heavy acc. phrase of b, assuming that the latter
refers to Indra.

As noted just above, Earth herself serves as the foundation from which Indra can launch his attack. Our passage is very similar to I.102.7 ... tvā dhiṣáṇā titviṣe mahy, ádhā vrtr̥ ā́ṇi jighnase ... “The great (Earth), the Holy Place has sparked you ….

So you keep smashing obstacles ...,” with the same mahī́… dhiṣáṇā as here and even a form of √tviṣ, like tvíṣīmat in 12b; cf. also VI.19.2 índram evá dhiṣáṇā sātáye dhāt “The Holy Place positioned just Indra for winning,” with √dhā + inf. as here. The same √dhā + inf. construction is found in 19d below: svàś ca naḥ … sātáye dhāḥ “and set us up to win the sun.” Although Gr assigns the hapax śíśnathe to a them. stem śiśnátha-, as Old clearly states we expect a datival infinitive here, and so it more likely belongs to an athem. stem śiśnáth-; cf. abhiśnáth-.

Re takes b as describing Vṛtra, Schmidt Indra; Ge’s tr. is not clear, though Schmidt (169 n.) claims it’s to Vṛtra. I follow Schmidt in assigning the phrase to Indra, though the poet may have intended its referent to be ambiguous, indicating that the opponents are almost evenly balanced.

I follow the current standard view (represented already by Ge and Re) that ánutta- is the ppl. to the lexeme ánu √dā ‘concede’; Schmidt and WG follow the older deriv. from √nud ‘push’, hence ‘unpushable’ vel sim.


## 14
Because vaśmi is unaccented, the first pāda would be more accurately tr. “I long for your companionship ….” since vaśmi cannot begin a clause. I tr. as I did to capture the parallelism of pādas a #máhi … sakhyám and c #máhi stótram, as well as 15a máhi kṣétram.


## 15
Ge takes nṛ́bhiḥ as the agent with the part. dī́dyānaḥ (“von den Männern entflammt (?)”), but this participle never elsewhere takes an agent. Better an instr. of accompaniment, with most other tr. That Indra is described as shining may be connected to the fact that three of the four things he generates shine too: the sun, the dawn, and fire. There is some disagreement about who the men are: the Aṅgirases or the Maruts. Given the general prominence of the Vala myth earlier in the hymn, but the more recent concentration on the Vṛtra myth, I imagine the ambiguity is intentional and both sets of Indra’s helpers are to be thought of.


## 16
My interpr. of this vs. differs significantly from the standard, beginning with the disposition of the pādas. Most take abc together, with d as a separate clause, while I divide the vs. into two hemistichs, which express parallel notions. In ab, in mythological time, Indra sends the waters surging; this is the standard happy denouement of the Vṛtra myth. In cd priests (even perhaps the Aṅgirases) impel another collection of liquid, the streams of soma -- the ritual equivalent of Indra’s cosmogonic release of the waters. Although the standard interpr. tacks pāda c onto ab, as describing the waters, it contains vocabulary that is strongly associated with soma: mádhu- ‘honey, sweet’, √pū ‘purify’, and pavítra- ‘filter’, and I cannot offhand think of another instance in which waters are said to be purified, though they are purifying.

In ab note the return of several lexical items: vibhū́- (13b) and sadhryàñc- (6b). The cid ‘also’ also links this vs. with a previous part of the hymn, namely 11b where Indra sends surging another group of fem. entities (ruddy [cows]): úd usríyā asṛjad índro arkaíḥ.

I do not understand why Indra is called dámūnāḥ ‘master of the house’. The word is generally an epithet of Agni (understandably), and there is nothing in this passage that seems to me to link Indra to the domestic sphere. In c mádhvaḥ is taken by most as fem. acc. pl. (by Schmidt as masc. nom. pl.).

Several exx. of this form are analyzed by Gr as either masc. nom. pl. or fem.

nom./acc. pl. However, none of these supposed examples is convincing, and it is best to take it here as the gen. sg. it usually is. It then needs a head noun. Old adduces nearby III.36.7 mádhvaḥ punanti dhā́rayā pavítraiḥ “they purify it in a stream of honey with purifying filters,” which is very similar to our pāda c. I therefore supply, with Old, a form of dhā́rā- ‘stream’ upon which gen. mádhvaḥ depends. The precise form I supply is acc. pl. dhā́rāḥ, modified by the (fem. acc.) part. punānā́ḥ and coreferential with dhánutrīḥ ‘runners’ at the end of the vs. The conceit in the phrase hinvanti … dhánutrīḥ is that the priests are spurring on the streams of soma (like) horses. As for the subj. of hinvanti, I take it as (the current) priests (as in the sim.

passage III.36.7 just quoted; also III.46.5, where Adhvaryus are the subj. of hinvanti).

It could also be, with Re, the Aṅgirases, who have been operating as priests in the Sattra depicted earlier.

Ge (/WG) take kavíbhiḥ as an adjective with pavítraiḥ (Ge: “mit geistigen Filtern”), but in my opinion there are no adjectival uses of kaví-. Instead it is used as a defining appositive (poets as filters), as I take it, sim. Re, or it is a separate agent with punānā́ḥ (“being purified by poets with filters”), with Schmidt (170).


## 17
As Ge points out, pāda a is very similar to IV.48.3 ánu kr̥ṣṇé vásudhitī, yemā́te viśvápeśasā “The two black treasure chambers [=Night and Dawn], with all their ornaments, have directed themselves after each other in turn.” Bloomfield (RR ad III.31.17) cleverly comments, “The words kr̥ṣṇé and vásudhitī are both dvandva ekaçeṣa 'black (Night) and (Uṣas)' is a way of saying náktoṣā́sā; conversely 'treasuregiving (Morn) and black (Night)' is uṣā́sānáktā.” “The magnanimity of the sun” is a slightly surprising expression. Is it that the sun makes the succession of Night and Dawn possible by his transit across the sky, and this is considered generous on his part? Or is it an indirect reference to the distribution of the dakṣiṇā at dawn. A related, but opposite, sentiment is found in VII.81.4 uchántī yā́krṇ̥ óṣi maṃhánā mahi, prakhyaí devi svàr dr̥śé “You who in dawning make through your magnanimity the sun to be visible for seeing,” with the magnanimity credited to Dawn.

The only other occurrence of pl. ṛjipyá- (II.34.4) is at least indirectly used of the Maruts; the standard tr. all assume they are the referents of cd, which seems correct. Here they seem to be functioning as priests, attempting to bring Indra to a sacrifice.


## 18
Note the alliteration in b (… viśvā́yur vṛṣabhó vayodhā́ḥ) and the rather elementary etymological figure in d (mahā́n mahī́bhiḥ); although sakhyébhiḥ śivébhiḥ is neither the one nor the other, it seems to function as a bridge between the two.


## 19
Pāda b, návyaṃ kṛṇomi … purājā́m “I make new (the hymn) born of old,” is about as succinct a summary of the RVic poetic enterprise as we can find in the text: the poets’ focus on ever new expressions based on traditional techniques and themes. In this particular case, Ge suggests that purājá- refers to the Preislied of the Aṅgirases, about which we heard in vss. 7-8.

On the √dhā + inf. construction, see vs. 13 above.

## 19-20
Note the echo of 19d #s ú vaś ca naḥ in 20b s u vastí naḥ.


## 20
The mists are probably in part metaphorical -- menacing threats and mental darkness -- but may also refer physically to morning mists, which are clearing as the dawn sacrifice begins. Note also that pāda-initial míhaḥ is a mirror image of máhi, which opens so many pādas in this hymn (see comm. ad 12b).


## 21
I follow Schaeffer (Intens., 133-34) in taking the medial intens. dédiṣṭe in the meaning ‘display (one’s own X)’ -- hence my different tr. of ádediṣṭa (a) ‘has put on display’ and diśámānaḥ ‘allotting’.

I interpr. b as having a more complex construction than the standard interpr.

The trouble is the antár phrase: when antár governs the acc., it is only used with dual (or plurals conceived as duals -- jātā́n ubháyān [IV.2.2], e.g.), but kṛṣṇā́n has no overt partner here. I suggest that it is an elliptical plural-for-dual: “black (nights) and (bright days)”; cf. VIII.41.10 śvetā́n ... kr̥ṣṇā́n used for days and nights. The elliptical kṛṣṇé used of Night and Dawn in 17a would support this, and in 20a the clearing of the mists at daybreak (if I’m right) might provide the other half of this elliptical duality. If this is correct, Indra comes between (antáḥ … gāt) the nights and days with the entities appearing in the instr. (aruṣaíḥ dhā́mabhiḥ). aruṣá- ‘ruddy’ can of course be used of Dawn and her various associates, esp. her “cows”; dhā́man- is a frustratingly multivalent word, but here I think it means ‘manifestation’ vel sim, and the phrase refers to the dawns, who of course come temporally between night and full day.

The positioning of ca in d is somewhat disturbing, but I see no other way to explain it than Klein’s (DGRV I.225, II.102 n. 28): it conjoins the first and second half-verses, but takes Wackernagel’s position in the 2nd pāda of the 2nd half-verse “following an intervening participial phrase.” svā́ḥ ‘his own’ is in a very prominent position, as the last word in the last real vs. of the hymn (before the refrain, vs. 22). Why it should be emphasized that the doors that Indra opens are his own I do not know, beyond the fact that anything belonging to Indra is highly noteworthy. But I would point out that svā́ḥ may be a pun on s ú vaś (s ú vaḥ in pause) ‘sun’ initial in 19d (though unfortunately svā́ḥ is not distracted here as it so often is).
