+++
title = "032"

+++
Indra


## 01
The impv. píba is accented, though it is located mid-clause. There is no obvious reason for this. Old suggests weakly (ZDMG 60: 736) that it is an emphatic accent, but this is of course a circular argument: any verb bearing an unexpected accent can be called emphatic. I find the accent esp. disturbing because the identical phrase, minus the initial voc. índra, is found without accented impv. elsewhere: \#sómam somapate piba# (V.40.1=VIII.21.3) versus our #índra sómaṃ somapate píbemám#. There are several possible contributing factors. First, three pādas at the beginning of this hymn begin with accented píbā (2b, 3d, 5b), and our form may have had its accent added redactionally. However, I think that píba has special status and can be accented in positions that strict syntactic rules would not allow. (This is rather like Old’s “emphatic” argument, except that I limit the effect to a single verb form.) See esp. I.15.1, II.37.1-3 and comm. there. The unsanctioned accent may arise partly because píba ‘drink!’ is a particularly rousing verb in RVic discourse. It also often occurs in non-initial position when it nonetheless legitimately has accent -- after init. vocatives (e.g. índra píba III.36.2, etc.) or at the beginning of a clause after another short clause (or clauses) (e.g., VIII.4.8 tū́yam éhi drávā píba “Come here swiftly! Run! Drink!”), and this may have led to the sense that it can be accented in non-initial position in general. I also note in Lub’s conspectus that unaccented piba generally occupies either final position in its pāda or second position, while accented píba, besides being common and expected in initial position, tends to avoid both those positions except when 2nd position follows an initial voc. (as in III.36.2, etc.) or final position opens a new clause (as in VIII.4.8). Note that if this distribution holds, the “identical” phrases I cite at the beginning of this comment are not the same after all, because unaccented piba is pāda-final and our accented píba is followed by another element. However, there are a few counterexamples with pāda-final pibȧ not beginning a new clause (e.g., VIII.4.3, 65.5). One can speculate on why 2nd and final position would favor the unaccented verb while full medial favors the accented form: namely, that 2nd position is of course Wackernagel’s position, where enclitics typically migrate, and, assuming a basic SOV underlying order, absolute final position is the default position for unaccented main-clause verbs. Still, the full medial position where we find accented main-clause píba does not otherwise favor or impose accent on other verbs that appear there, so if this hypothesis holds, it is only for this special verb.

Ge rather charmingly suggests that praprúthya represents “brr machend” to stop the horses. Although “whoa” would be the equivalent English word/vocal gesture, given the object ‘lips’ (śípre), I wonder if it’s the “horse training voice command” (gleaned on the internet) called “smooching” -- defined as “kissing sound with lips used to ask a horse to move on or up a gait.” I rather like the idea of Indra smooching to his fallow bays.


## 04
Ge (and in part Re) take mádhumat as referring to speech (“… wurden beredt in süssen (Worten)”), but though mádhumant- occurs several times with vácas- and the noun vípra- ‘inspired poet’ demonstrates that √vip ‘become inspired’ can have a strong verbal component, still the focus of this hymn is soma -- and the default referent of mádhumant- ‘honeyed’ is soma. Here the underlying word must be neut. (which sóma- of course is not), but the neut. sávana- ‘pressing’ is found elsewhere with this adj. (cf. X.112.7 mádhumattamāni … sávanā), and sávana- is found three times in the first five vss. of this hymn (1b, 3c, 5a). Note the insistent repetition of ma in pāda d (amarmáṇo mányamānasya márma), anticipated by mádhumad in a and marútaḥ in b, and continued by the first word in 5a manuṣvád. This phonetic figure may be signaling the Maruts’ name. See also vs. 7.


## 05
The rendering of vavṛtsva in the publ. tr. (“let yourself be turned hither”), a sort of passive reflexive, now seems over-elaborate to me; I would substitute “be turned.” The other examples of this mid. pf. impv. seem more straightforwardly simply “turn” or “turn yourself,” but if yajñaíḥ has true instrumental force, a passive rendering is more natural. Possible, however, is Re’s “grâce à (nos) sacrifices.” The referent of saraṇyúbhiḥ is not totally clear. Sāy. (fld. by Re) suggests the Maruts, while Ge adds horses or waves as possibilities. The other ex. of a plural to this stem (also instr.) in I.62.4 is in a clear Vala context, with the Navagvas and Daśagvas in the same vs., which would suggest the Aṅgirases -- but, although the Vala myth and the Aṅgirases were prominent in the preceding hymn III.31, they are not found in this hymn, which is dominated by the Maruts and which mentions only the Vṛtra myth (here and in the following vs.). I therefore think it likely that Sāy. was correct. Note that saraṇyú- … sisarṣi is an etym. figure, continued by sártavaí in the next vs. (6b).

The rendering of the phrase apó árṇā as “the flooding waters” in the publ tr.

assumes an emendation to fem. pl. árṇāḥ, with Gr and numerous others (see Old), contra the Pp and not reflecting the expected sandhi of such a form, which should be árṇāḥ. As Old points out, the emendation is not nec.: árṇā could easily be a neut. pl.

to the thematic stem árṇa-. In this case the tr. would better read “the waters, the floods.”


## 06
This vs. appears to have no main clause. I take it as loosely attached to the preceding vs., while Ge attaches it to the next one. Old (fld. by WG) disputes the Nebensatz analysis, pointing first to the odd doubly accented Pp. analysis of prā́sṛjaḥ as prá ásṛjaḥ: if the verb is accented, we would expect univerbation with the preverb and loss of the preverb accent. He instead suggests that yád is to be construed with the participial phrase vṛtráṃ jaghanvā́n, as if it contained the finite verb jagántha -- a mixed construction. I am in general reluctant to allow a subordinating conjunction to have domain over a participle, and in this particular case this assumption would further require bits of the main clause and the subordinate clause to be interwoven in a fashion unprecedented (as far as I know) even in RVic syntax: the major part of the subordinate clause would be plunked down between the object of the main verb, apáḥ, and that verb (prā́sṛjat), and the 2nd half verse would consist of NPs modifying the object of the subordinate clause but following the end of the main clause. I do admit that the position of yád dha in pāda a suggests a close relation with the participial phrase, but I do not consider that position sufficient to override the arguments against that analysis.

The vs. contains several nice oppositions: śáyānam … cáratā “(him) lying (still) with (your) moving (weapon)” and the etymological devī́r ádevam “the goddesses, godless …” In addition note the etymological pun: vṛtrám … vavrivā́ṃsam.


## 07
The ma- phonetic figure that dominated 4d returns in this vs.: cd … mamátur …, … mahimā́nam mamā́te. This figure is reinforced by the first words of pāda a, yájāma ín námasā, and the uninterrupted sequence of -am acc. singulars in ab: … vṛddhám índram, bṛhántam ṛṣvám ajáram yúvānam. Although a side-effect of the grammar, it is my impression that a skilled RVic poet would break the monotony of such a string -- unless it served some other poetic purpose, here to provide the mirror-image -am to ma- and perhaps to evoke the Maruts.

The two forms of the perfect to √mā ‘measure’ in the 2nd hemistich, act.

mamátuḥ and med. mamā́te, share the same subj. and obj., with the 1st clause positive and the second negated. Clearly the poet is playing with two different senses of √mā.

Gr, Ge, and Old neatly convert the word play to “messen” (‘measure’) versus “ermessen” (‘gauge, grasp, realize’)(or so I understand them). My “measure” / “measure up to” is a similar attempt whose purport is close to Kü (378) and WG: “sich messen.”


## 09
The juxtaposition of adroghá- ‘undeceptive’ and satyá- ‘real, true’ is also found in III.14.6 adroghéṇa vácasā satyám.

The standard tr. take pādas a and b together, with cd separate. I think it makes more sense to take b with cd, as supplying the reason (Indra’s early soma drinking) that he couldn’t be obstructed.

The standard tr. also take dyā́vaḥ as ‘days’, whereas the publ. tr. agrees with Hoffmann (Injunk. 242) in tr. ‘heavens’. The problem, as I saw it then, was its cooccurrence with áhā likewise ‘days’, which led to awkward duplication. However, I have now rethought this; the series of temporal expressions in this hemistich (áhā, mā́sāḥ śaradaḥ) invites a temporal reading of dyā́vaḥ as well and makes “heavens” seem out of place. In X.7.4. and 12.4 the two stems also co-occur and I tr. “daytimes and days.” I would now substitute that tr. here as well.

varanta here and in 16b is formally ambiguous; it can be either an injunctive or a subjunctive to the root aor. (see Hoffmann 239-40); Hoffmann takes it as a subjunctive. It does not work terribly well as either one; in both passages I tr. it as a preterital modal (“could obstruct”), but this interpr. is not firmly based in the morphology. I sense that in this vs. and the next the poet is struggling to express a verbal category that isn’t found in the Skt. verbal system, namely anteriority: modal anteriority here, temporal anteriority in 10cd.


## 10
As just noted, this vs. contains an apparent attempt to express anteriority: the pluperfect ā́viveśīḥ seems to function like an English pluperfect (rather than the standard Vedic plupf., a past tense to a presential perfect), to express an action that happened before the action of the main verb, an interpr. more or less endorsed by Kü (500).

## 11
The standard tr. (save for Hoffmann, Injunk. 100, sim. to my interpr.) take … sphigyā̀kṣā́m ávasthāḥ as “you covered/ clothed the earth with your hip,” but the medial root pres. to √vas means ‘wear’ and takes an acc. of the garment rather than an acc. of the entity being clothed (the construction found with vāsáya-). See the similar ex. at VIII.4.8 and the comm. there, as well as the similar sentiment found in I.173.6, where Indra wears Heaven and Earth as various accessories. The point of course is to emphasize Indra’s vast size by making Earth (and Heaven) seem puny in comparison. A similar point was made in vs. 7d, as well as in the immediately preceding pāda 11c.


## 12
yajñá- is the focus of this vs., with 5 occurrences of it or a transparent deriv.

I take várdhanaḥ as the predicate of pāda b as well as pāda a (“the meal is also your strengthener”); the standard tr. take b as an independent nominal clause with priyáḥ as its predicate (“the meal is dear to you”). There is no way to tell for certain; the absence of te in b gives some support to my interpr., but that support is undeniably weak. The difference between the two tr. is also not large and has no effects on the interpr. of the rest of the vs. The second hemistich expresses the reciprocity of the sacrificial enterprise, neatly shown by the balanced verb forms to the same root √av ‘aid, help’: impv. ava (c), impf. āvat (d). But the reciprocity is curiously indirect: Indra is asked to aid the sacrifice (rather than the sacrificer[s]), and the sacrifice aided Indra’s mace (not Indra himself). In both clauses the direct object is an inanimate entity standing in for an animate one, and in the second clause the subject is inanimate as well. Only Indra is animate and capable of acting.

The nom. sg. pres. part. sán ‘being’ is not used concessively (“although being …”) as it normally is. I think it may have the same force as it does in III.30.5, a “definitional” one: Indra is by definition the one deserving of / derivationally associated with the sacrifice, and therefore he is the one who should aid it.


## 13
The reciprocity expressed by complementary verbal forms to √av found in the 2nd half of the last vs. is here wrapped up in one word, the instr. ávasā, which I tr.

twice: I use the aid provided by the sacrifice (cf. 12d) to bring Indra here with his aid (cf. 12c). In Ge’s tr. it is only Indra’s aid, but he allows for the other possibility in n.

13a. Re and WG also associate it only with Indra. Given the balanced expression of 12cd, I think it is meant to have a double reading.


## 14
The standard tr. (see also Kü 186) take the two verbs vivéṣa and jajā́na as parallel in the yád clause, with mā obj. of the first and possibly of the 2nd. I prefer to take vivéṣa as the main clause verb, followed by the yád clause, whose (sole) verb is jajā́na. vivéṣa then owes its accent to its initial position in the pāda. This interpr.

allows mā to take a more natural place, and it also saves us from positing a personal object to vivéṣa, which otherwise is not so construed. (Note that Kü’s second tr. of this passage [p. 502] is entirely different from his first: he distributes the clauses as I do, but takes vivéṣa as first sg.) And what does it all mean? In my view the dhiṣáṇā ‘holy place’ is here the ritual ground, and she is credited with the “birth” of the poet qua poet. After this birth, the poet can produce the praise of Indra that he is credited with in pāda b, and this in turn leads to the good results in pāda c.

Pāda c contains two different subordinators, yátra ‘where, when’ and yáthā ‘so that’, with a single verb, subjunctive pīparat. Ge’s explan., that we simply have a doubling of relatives, seems to me the best account; this is reflected, more or less, by Old’s “wo (und) wie …,” though Old goes on to suggest a complex crossing of two different constructions, which seems over-elaborate. In the publ. tr. I have rendered yátra as a temporal adv. (“at that time”) with no subordinating force, since I think yáthā expresses purpose and controls the subjunctive.

Rather than taking áṃhasaḥ as an ablative, with most others, I supply pārám ‘far shore’, a word related to pā́rya- in pāda b and to the verb pīpárat itself, and found in this context elsewhere; cf. II.33.3 párṣi ṇaḥ pārám áṃhasaḥ. Here as well áṃhasaḥ is then a gen. dependent on *pārám. Although it unfortunately involves a breach of the pāda boundary, I also take nāvéva with the preceding pāda, because this simile is almost entirely limited to passages containing verbal forms to √pṛ (I.46.7, 97.7, 99.1, V.4.9, 25.9, VIII.16.11, 18.17, IX.70.10). I also find it hard to imagine Indra traveling by boat, even metaphorically.


## 15
The agent noun séktar-, which forms an etymological figure with sisice, presumably refers to a habitual or practiced ‘pourer’. So Tichy (-tar-stems, 159, fld.

by Kü 570). I have taken kóśam as the obj. in the simile rather than the frame, contra the standard tr., though it could certainly go in the frame or in both without appreciably affecting the sense.

The pf. form lacks retroflexion on its root initial, as does one of the other two forms of this pf. in the RV (sisicuḥ II.24.4), as opposed to expected siṣicatuḥ in VIII.33.13. I have no explanation for the lack of retroflexion.


## 16
On varanta see comm. ad vs. 9.

Ge (fld. by WG) takes sákhibhyaḥ as a dat. of benefit, but I think it more likely that it’s an ablative with agentival force. See Re, who simply tr. it as an agent.

The mythological episode is surely the Aṅgirases’ energetic help to Indra in the breaking of Vala.
