+++
title = "033"

+++
Viśvāmitra and the Rivers


## 02
índreṣite echoes víṣite in 1b, though they belong to two different roots: √iṣ ‘impel’ and √sā ‘tie’ respectively. The basis for calling the rivers índreṣite is given in 6ab.

In c ūrmíbhiḥ can be construed with both participles, samārāṇé ‘clashing together’ and pínvamāne ‘swelling’, between which it is positioned.

Although by my rule (“Vedic anyá- ‘another, the other' …”; Fs. Beekes 1997, 111-18), forms of anyá- found initial in the pāda should be indefinite (‘another’) not definite as here, the anyó‘nyam (“the one … the other”) construction works differently.


## 04
The reference of the rivers switches from dual to plural here and remains so (save for two singulars in 10cd). There is no obvious reason for this change, though it may reflect the fact that when the two rivers merge into each other they form a third.


## 05
Ge renders voc. ṛ́tāvarīḥ as ‘ihr Immerfliessenden’ without comment. But this is simply the fem. stem to the possessive ṛtā́van- ‘possessing ṛtá-’, which he elsewhere tr. “gesetzestreuen” (e.g., I.160.1, III.54.4) et sim.

In 5c avasyú- ‘seeking help’ answers the question posed by the rivers in 4c kiṃyú- ‘seeking what?’ and in the same position in the vs. ### 06
In this vs. the rivers indirectly respond to Viśvāmitra’s command “Stop!” (rámadhvam) in the previous vs. (5a), by asserting that they flow because of the efforts of and at the pleasure of the gods: Indra dug their channels and, by smashing Vṛtra, removed the barrier to their movement; Savitar led them and they flow at his impulsion. Without explicitly refusing Viśvāmitra’s request, they make it plain that they won’t comply by stopping.

The stem prasavá- ‘forward thrust, impulsion’ occurs here for the third time in this hymn (2a, 4c, 6d; see also 11c) and is here associated with its etymological divinity Savitar, the Impeller.


## 07
This is the central vs. of the hymn; in it Viśvāmitra practices the kind of praise poetry that the rivers will ask him to reproduce in perpetuity in vs. 8, couched in high formal style. In fact it can be seen as a variant of the opening of the great Indra hymn I.32.1: índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi prá vocaṃ, yā́ni cakā́ra … Here we have the gerundive pravā́cyam for prá vocam, vīryàm matching vīryā̀ṇi, índrasya as in I.32, and the nominalization kárma for the pf. cakā́ra. The serpent, the mace, and the signature verb √han are then found in the rest of b and in c, as they are in I.32.1. As Watkins points out (Dragon, 309), here the verb √han has been displaced from its standard formulaic role, with áhim as object, to an adjacent part of the myth. Watkins also points out (86 n. 2) that there is “a veritable constellation of inherited words and roots relating to poetry in this passage” (apropos vss. 7-8).

Note the etymological and phonetic figure ā́yan … áyanam in d.


## 08
Though med. juṣáte overwhelmingly means ‘enjoy’, the addition of the preverb práti sometimes yields a transitive ‘favor in return, in response’ with personal obj. See disc. ad IX.92.1.


## 10
Although the two rivers refer to themselves collectively in the 1st pl. in ab, the second hemistich consists of two contrasting statements in the 1st sg., each presumably made by one of the rivers. This balanced contrast accounts for the accent on the 2nd verb śaśvacaí.

## 11
As in the immediately preceding hymn III.32.9-10, the poet here seems to be trying to express verbal nuances that are not coded systematically in the Vedic verbal system, in particular another variety of anteriority. Here the sequence of moods is unusual: pres. optative in the subord. cl. (saṃtáreyuḥ), pres. subjunctive in the main cl. (árṣāt). With the optative he seems to be aiming at a future perfect (“will/would have crossed”) whose prospective action precedes that of the main verb, namely the subjunctive referring to future time. Although I have not examined the entire RV with this in mind, these experiments in anteriority seem confined to -- or at least especially pronounced in -- the work of this poet. Note also that the poet makes no attempt to generate an opt. to the pf. tatāra or to use the already existing pf. opt.

tuturyā́- (RV 5x). This provides further evidence, if more were needed, against Dahl’s claim that the pf. opt. denotes “epistemic possibility and anterior aspect” (Time, Tense and Aspect, p. 402 and in general pp. 392-402). If this were a stable function of the pf. opt., surely Viśvāmitra would have availed himself of that formation.

The vs. reprises much of the vocabulary from earlier in the hymn: iṣitá índrajūtaḥ is an elaboration on índreṣita- in 2a; the oft-repeated prasavá- returns again in the expression prasaváḥ sárgataktaḥ repeated from 4c.


## 12
The prospective action expressed by the opt. saṃtáreyuḥ in 11a is announced as completed by the aor. átāriṣuḥ … sám ‘they have crossed’, and the poet urges the rivers to flow again with a sequence of imperatives, elaborating on the subj. árṣāt in 11c.


## 13
Hoffmann (Injunk, 93 n. 184) thinks the first impv. is concessive: “Mag eure Welle an die śamyās schlagen, die Geschirre lasst frei” -- this may well be, but a little hard to tell given our lack of teamster texts.
