+++
title = "034"

+++
Indra


## 01
Gotō (1st class, 173-74) posits a separate root √di ‘destroy’ to account for 5 occurrences of dáyate ordinarily taken to mean ‘divide’ with the other occurrences of dáyate. (The forms in question are found in III.34.1, IV.7.10, VI.6.5, 22.9, and X.80.2.) He is followed by Lub and (at least in this passage and IV.7.10) WG. I see no reason to split the present into two and posit a second root; ví dayate ‘divide into pieces, fragment’ is simply another of the vivid images of destruction that RVic poets gloried in.


## 02
I have tr. the nominal phrase asi … pūrvayā́vā, which comes out rather stiffly in English (“you are the fore-traveler”), into a smoother verbal expression.

## 03
The first two pādas of this vs. are rhetorically parallel, consisting of an etymological figure of augmented verb plus some part of the object (vṛtrám avṛṇot a, māyínām amināt b), ending with a bv. formed with -nīti- ‘leading, control’.

This interpr. of vyàṃsa- follows Schmidt (KZ 78 [1963]); see EWA s.v. áṃsa-.

In the second half-verse the subject takes an odd turn: after mention of Indra’s iconic deed (besides the explicit mention of Vṛtra in a, see the echoes of the great Indra hymn I.32 in b māyínām amināt [I.32.4 māyínām ámināḥ prótá māyā́ḥ] and c áhan vyàṃsam [I.32.5 áhan … vyàṃsam]), there is an abrupt switch to Agni phraseology. The same phrase uśádhag váneṣu “burning at will in the woods” (?) is used of Agni in the Agni hymn III.6.7; cf. also uśádhag vánāni also of Agni in the Agni hymn VII.7.2. The final pāda concerns the appearance of visible entities from the night, which also better fits an Agni context. For this reason I see a syntactic break in the middle of pāda c and take uśádhag váneṣu with d, contra the standard tr.

On the curious and problematic word uśádhak- see Scar (197-99) at length.

On dhénā- ‘milk-stream’ see comm. ad I.2.3 and Schmidt (Gs. Nyberg).

Schmidt there suggests that the referent in this pāda is the dawns emerging out of the dark of the night. This occurs of course at the same time as the kindling of the ritual fire and would account for the shift in diction to Agni phraseology. This image can then be secondarily applied to Indra bringing the dawn cows out of the nocturnal darkness of the Vala cave.


## 04
The phonetic echo of uśádhag (3c) in uśígbhiḥ (4b) reinforces both the thematic connection between these two vss. -- Indra’s production of light -- and the superimposition of Agni traits on Indra. As Schmidt (B+I 59) points out, the Uśijpriests, ordinarily associated with Agni, sometimes substitute for the Aṅgirases in the Vala myth, but we should also note that it is esp. in Maṇḍala III that Agni is himself identified as an Uśij (III.2.4; 3.7,8; 11.2, 27.10); note also the Uśij-priests attending on him in III.2.9, 15.3.


## 05
The metaphorical use of viveśa ‘entered’ + an action (‘thrusts’) reminds me of the somewhat slangy English “get into” for “become enthusiastic about / energetically do (some action).” The stem barháṇā- otherwise only appears as an adverbial instr. ‘mightily’, and I am tempted to take it so here (as WG seem to do), rather than as the acc. pl.

assumed in the publ. tr. However, the sandhi context is against this interpr.; note Old’s tart “Gewiss nicht barháṇā Adverb (Hiatus!).” As Ge points out, the referent of fem. gen. pl. āsām must be dhíyaḥ ‘insights’.

For insights having bright color or hue, see the passages adduced by him (n. 5d): I.143.7 śukrávarṇām dhíyam and III.39.2, where dhī́- wears silver garments. The várṇam here plays off áryam várṇam in 9d.


## 06
Another etymological figure appears in c: vṛjánena vṛjinā́n “… the bent ones [i.e., morally twisted or corrupt] with his band [i.e., his circle of helpers bent around him],” both derived from √vṛj ‘twist’, though the semantic connection is somewhat less obvious than in the etymological figures in 3ab.

There is another, thematic connection between vss. 3 and 6. As there, Indra here achieves his victory first with his comrades (śárdha- 3a), then with his tricks (that is, by “out-tricking” [amināt] with his shape-shifting abilities, várpa- 3b). In such cases his overwhelming strength might be almost superfluous -- hence my parenthetical “(though).” Note that abhíbhūti- (abhí √bhū) is a different lexical realization of abhiṣṭí- in 4b (if to abhí √as, as is the common opinion; cf. EWA s.v.).


## 08
The intense concentration on the root √san ‘win’ noted in the publ. intro.

and the concomitant s-alliteration begin here.


## 09
The slightly awkward tr. “of many benefits” for purubhójasam, modifying the cow in d, is meant to capture its etymological relationship with bhógam in c.

The contrastive pairing of dásyu- and ā́rya- is striking here.


## 10
I do not see any semantic/functional difference between the imperfect asanot in a and b and the insistent pf. sasā́na of vss. 8-9, though we might assume that the poet made the choice apurpose. Both Ge and Re render the forms in the same way (as do I); WG tr. sasā́na as ‘er hat erlangt’ and asanot as ‘gewann’. Although I find the idea of rendering the two different grammatical forms differently appealing, I’m not sure that losing the root connection is worth it.
