+++
title = "035"

+++
Indra


## 01
The first pāda is somewhat oddly expressed: Indra is urged to mount the horses yoked to the chariot, but not only is horseback riding very rare in the RV, but no one is likely to mount a horse being used to pull a vehicle. This must be an awkwardly expanded version of the usual “mount the chariot” (see 4c below).

The niyút- ‘team’ is generally associated with, indeed belongs to, Vāyu, who is regularly called niyútvant- ‘possessing niyúts’. However, the word is sometimes used in a reciprocal value: just as Vāyu and Indra drive to us with their niyúts, so do our niyúts, the ‘teams’ of poetic thoughts, drive in return to the gods, in passages where niyút- is parallel to words for ‘thought, hymn’, etc. Cf., e.g., I.134.2, 135.2, VI.35.3, 47.14, VII.23.4, 90.1, X.26.1. It is therefore not nec., with Bloomfield (RVReps ad loc.) to assume that “niyúto is for niyúdbhiḥ.”


## 02
The most natural reading of yáthā in c is as a subordinator in a purpose clause (‘so that’) with the subjunctive ā́vahātaḥ in d, and this is how the standard tr.

take it. But there is a major stumbling block: the verb is unaccented. Old seems willing to emend to an accented verb; Ge suggests that if the unaccented verb is bothersome, assume an ellipsis in c. I have, in somewhat ad hoc fashion, taken yáthā as a sort of simile marker with dravát. I am not entirely satisfied with this solution, but it does more or less fit category 4) in Gr’s lemma yáthā, and I am quite reluctant to put an unaccented verb into a subordinate clause. A similar phrase in the next hymn, where yáthā marks a localized comparison, gives support to the interpr. here; see III.36.6 prasaváṇ yáthā “like a shot” (tr. similarly by all standard tr.).


## 03
Medial nayasva is one of the relatively few middle forms to this pres. stem.

It is presumably used here because Indra is leading his own horses.

The crux in this vs. is the hapax cmpd. tapuṣpā́-. Gr glosses it ‘warmes trinkend’, perhaps referring to the gharma drink; in this he is tentatively fld by Mayrhofer (EWA s.v. tápuṣ-). But this -us-stem, tápus-, refers only to heat, generally menacing scorching heat, and in any case the horses shouldn’t be drinking the gharma drink (or probably any hot drink at all). The word is discussed by Scar (305-6), who offers several possible interpr. The interpr. is made more difficult by the uncertain grammatical identity of the form. It appears in sandhi as tapuṣpṓtém, is taken by the Pp. as tapuḥ’pā́, and is generally analyzed as a dual, modifying the bullish (horses) -- so Ge, Re, Scar, WG. However, Ge suggests in n. 3a that the form could represent irregular sandhi for tapuṣpā(ḥ) utá (that is, a double application of sandhi, first losing the final -s before vowel and then coalescing the vowels) and therefore be a nom. sg., modifying Indra. I have adopted this solution; it doesn't make much sense for the horses themselves to be doing the protecting, but Indra’s protective role would fit with the impv. ava ‘help’ in the next pāda.

In the last pāda Indra is urged to eat the roasted grains (addhi dhānā́ḥ). The same grains are prepared for the horses to eat in vs. 7: it seems somewhat surprising that Indra and his horses receive the same fodder, as it were -- though calling the horses Indra’s “comrades in joint revelry” in the next vs. (4b) suggests that they consume the offered meal together. I also don't understand why the grains should be “of the same appearance every day.” This phrase is essentially repeated in III.52.8, which also contains 5 occurrences of dhānā- (or deriv.). Perhaps the point is that we unfailingly make the same offering to Indra daily; he needn’t worry that we will substitute inferior food.


## 04
The double etymological figure in pāda a is almost awkwardly heavy: bráhmaṇā te brahmayújā yunajmi, an awkwardness necessarily reflected in the tr.


## 07
All the clauses in this vs. are nominal sentences with past participle as predicate (stīrṇám, sutáḥ a, kṛtā́ḥ b, rātā́ḥ d). It is therefore misleading to tr. the last as “are given” (versus “has been strewn,” etc.) as in the publ. tr. I would change to “have been given.”


## 08
prajānán vidvā́n repeats 4d. The particular relevance of this phrase in either vs. isn’t clear to me.


## 09
Kü (477-80) discusses the stem vāvaś- at length, rejecting the usual connection with √vaś ‘desire, want’ and assigning it instead to √vāś ‘bellow’. (WG follow this interpr. in our passage; Lub still assigns this form to √vaś.) Kü’s morphological arguments -- lack of u-redupl. and of root ablaut -- are strong.

However, although I would concede that the form was derivationally original only to √vāś, I would argue that once a stem vāvaś-, built to √vāś ‘bellow’, became established, it was available to “migrate” to √vaś ‘desire’, especially because the shortening of the root syllable in this metrically driven formation makes the form look more like √vaś than √vāś. Although the meanings of the two roots might seem so far apart that it would be hard to confuse one for the other, in fact the usual context of √vāś forms narrows the semantic gap considerably: cattle bellow because they want something. Kü allows for the possibility of semantic overlap as well.


## 10
The occurrence of 2nd sg. act. pres. impv. píba and aor. impv. pāhi, both to √pā ‘drink’, in a disjunctive vā construction should give us a good opportunity to discern the functional distinction between the imperatives to these two tense-aspect stems, esp. since, as far as I can see, both imperatives would fit either of the metrical slots occupied. I have in fact tr. as if there is a functional difference: ‘drink’ versus ‘take a drink’, but I am not at all convinced that this is correct. Cf. the disc. of the positional tendencies of píba ad III.32.1 and note that the same pāda opening índra píba is found in the next hymn, III.36.2d. However, the same sequence of pres. and aor. to √pā is found in III.36.3, so it may well be meaningful. (The standard tr.

render píba and pāhi identically here.) I take práyatam in c with yajñám in d, contra the standard tr.
