+++
title = "036"

+++
Indra


## 01
I confess to being somewhat puzzled by the first half vs., beginning with the identity of the 2nd ps. subject. My assumption is that it is the priest setting out the offering for Indra, not Indra himself, who is the 3rd ps. subject in cd. Pāda b (“being united with help”) would then express the priest’s receiving of Indra’s help, though the expression seems a little odd. The only similar passage I can find is V.42.8 távotíbhiḥ sácamānāḥ … “being accompanied by your help,” of the ritual patrons. It might instead be possible to take b with cd, modifying Indra “being at one with his (own) help.” The dvandva śáśvac-chaśvat in b matching suté-sute in c might weakly support such an interpr. (contra the standard tr. as well as my publ. tr.).

Unfortunately the pres. yā́date is not well enough attested to allow us to determine its usual subjects; of its 5 occurrences, 3 involve rivers uniting with the sea (as in 7a in this hymn).

The other question in this half-verse is how exactly to construe sātáye dhāḥ.

The standard tr. take prábhṛtim as the subj. of an active infinitive sātáye -- perhaps most clearly in Keydana (Infinitive, 317 n. 132) “Mach, dass diese Darbringung siege,” taking Indra as the subject of dhāḥ (contra my identification of the priest as subj.). But I doubt that the prábhṛti- itself is the agent of winning. My publ. tr. takes sātáye as a passive, with (perhaps) Indra the implied agent: the offering is to be won by him. This interpr. may be supported by 2c prayamyámānān práti ṣū́gṛbhāya “Grasp at (the drinks) being offered,” with prá √yam expressing the same notion as prá √bhṛ in 1a and Indra’s gaining control of them in both passages. It might also be possible that sātáye is not being used as a real infinitive, and the phrase should be tr.

“set this offering here for (our) gain” -- that is, when Indra takes the offering set out by the priest, there will be general gain for all of us but neither the offering nor Indra is the agent of an infinitival use of this dative. (This seems to be close to the WG interpr.)


## 02
vídānāḥ is another -- very clear -- example of a tense-stem participle serving as predicate. Pace Gr (fld. by Re) it most likely belongs to ‘know’ rather than ‘find’.


## 03
Both the pres. and the aor. stems of √pā ‘drink’ occur here, as in III.35.10.

The situation is in fact even a bit more complex: as in III.35.10 both stems deploy imperatives here, píba opening pāda a, pāhi in d, but the latter is also in a complex diptych with the impf. ápibaḥ (“just as you drank [ápibaḥ] …, so [take a] drink [pāhi] today …”). As in III.35.10 I have translated as if there is still an aspectual difference between the two stems, but I am not certain this is the case.


## 04
Indra in pāda a is identified with a large drinking vessel, in this vs. that emphasizes his size and capacity.

The b pāda begins and ends with etymologically related words: ugrám (adj.) and ójaḥ (noun), though each is part of a different NP.

As Kü demonstrates (503-6), the pf. of √vyac is always presential.


## 05
The vs. begins with the two words that began the first two pādas of the last vs.: 4ab mahā́m̐…, ugráṃ; 5a mahā́m̐ugró.

Ge (/WG, Scar [209]) take samā́cakre in b as transitive and supply ‘cows’ as object, from c. Although it is true that the middle pf. of √kṛ is generally transitive, in this context, parallel to intrans. vāvṛdhe in pāda a, a nonce passive value can be imagined. In fact see (in this same maṇḍala) III.1.8 vṛ́ṣā yátra vāvr̥dhé kā́vyena “where the bull has grown strong through our poetic craft,” of which this pāda seems to be a variant, with the vāvṛdhe there anticipated in our previous pāda. Cf. Re “il s’est empli … de pourvoir-poétique,” also intransitive. (Ge suggests this possibility in his n. 5b.) Scar (209-10) makes heavier weather of vājadā́(ḥ) then seems necessary. He points out that the cows shouldn’t be giving prizes, which is logically true enough, but surely the point is that Indra is so generous that even the prizes he gives, the cows, give prizes of their own (the trickle-down gift economy). Their gifts are presumably, on the one hand, milk products and, on the other, new calves.

## 06-08
The next three vss. ring changes on the theme of large bodies of water and large containers of soma.


## 06
On prasaváṃ yáthā see disc. of dravád yáthā ad III.35.2. In b the problem is the simile rathyèva -- more precisely what the nominal in that sequence represents. The Pp. resolves it, not surprisingly, as rathyā̀. Gr takes this as an instr. to rathī́- ‘charioteer’; Ge also takes it as an instr. but to a stem rathyā̀- ‘Fahrstrasse’ (see Old, ZDMG 61 [1907] 831-32 = Kl.Sch.262-63). Old himself (so apparently also Re) favors a nom. pl. rathyàḥ with double application of sandhi. This is possible (see similar possible situation in III.35.3), but I wonder if it does not reflect the du. rathyā̀it appears to be. This hemistich reads like a brief reprise of Viśvāmitra and the rivers (III.33). For one thing, the past tenses (impf. áyan a, pf.

jagmuḥ b) don’t make much sense if the point of the half-vs. is simply to serve as the standard of comparison for Indra’s width (pāda c), whereas the past tense does work in a brief re-narration of the situation in III.33. The word prasavá- here also echoes III.33, which contains 4 occurrences of that stem. And III.33.2 contains an undoubted example of the dual rathyā̀also marked as a simile in a similar context: áchā samudráṃ rathyèva yāthaḥ “you two drive like two charioteers to the sea,” referring to the two rivers, the Vipāś and the Śutudrī. The mixture of numbers, with pl. rivers in the frame and du. charioteers in the simile, is not surprising; even in III.33 the dual reference to these rivers soon gives way to plural. This mythic snatch having been told, the sea, so filled, is available to be compared, unfavorably, to Indra. Kü (77, 156, fld. by WG) also takes it as du, but as referring to two chariot horses. If the form is accepted as a dual here, it will have to be detached from rathyèva in VII.95.1, which see comm. ad loc. 
## 07
The standard tr. take pāda a as a simile, with the rivers compared to the priests of cd. I instead take the rivers as referring to the soma-purifying waters and consider b the predicate to a, with the pres. part. bhárantaḥ substituting for the main verb. At least in the transmitted text their simile would be unmarked, though most interpreters manipulate the text to produce a marker. Bl (RRs ad loc., referring to an earlier art. of his) suggests emending to samudré ná as in the otherwise identical pāda VI.19.5, a suggestion seemingly endorsed by Old and fld. by WG. However, the instr. ūtíbhiḥ with yā́damānaḥ in 1b supports the instr. reading of samudréṇa here, and in 4 of its 5 occurrences yā́damāna- is construed with an instr. This suggests that VI.19.5 has altered the formula, rather than vice versa. Ge follows a different path to a simile marker, haplology of samudréṇa *ná. Since the text makes sense as is, I see no reason to change it.

The verse contains two parallel morphological word-plays: bhárantaḥ … bharítraiḥ and punanti … pavítraiḥ, each containing a neuter -tra- instrument noun.

The latter, pavítra- lit. ‘instrument for purifying’, is of course very well attested in the RV, referring to the soma-purifying filters, but bharítra- is a hapax, obviously generated to match pavítra-, including the -i-liaison vowel appropriate only to the seṭ root √pū, not to aniṭ √bhṛ. It is tr. ‘arm’ by all (going back to the Naigh.), but milking with the arms doesn’t make sense in either life or metaphor. I think it means rather ‘hand’ and participates in a different word-play within its pāda: an ‘instrument for carrying’ can easily be a hand, and so it is synonymous with hásta- ‘hand’ found in the immediately preceding word hastín- ‘hand-ed’. There is a further implied verbal twist, at least with my interpr. of ab: the rivers don't have hands but carry anyway, while the priests do have hands but use their carrying appendages for something else. I’m afraid the publ. tr. needed to be quite heavy-handed to convey the deftness of this little play.


## 08
On kukṣí- as ‘cheek’, not ‘belly’, see Jamison 1987 (Ged. Cowgill).

As Ge also comments, the chronological sequence of pāda d seems reversed, assuming (as I generally do) that the perfect participle regularly expresses anteriority: Indra drank the soma before smashing Vṛtra. The primary VP here, avṛṇīta sómam is found in the great Indra hymn I.32.3, but with a different opening (vṛṣāyámāṇaḥ).


## 09
Most tr. take Indra as the implied obj. of mā́kiḥ … pári ṣṭhāt, thus displacing etát into an adverbial role (Ge/WG ‘dabei’). This is possible, but I take it as anticipating dátram in c.

On the form of dátra- see comm. ad IV.17.6.

## 09-10
Note that the vocabulary of the beginning of the hymn is being turned around reciprocally at the end: bhara (9a) and prá yandhi (9d, 10a) are imperatives addressed to Indra, urging him to bring/offer things to us, whereas in 1a prábhṛtim (at least in my interpr.) and 2c prayamyámānān the same lexical expressions refer to things we offer to Indra. Other ring compositional echoes are the dhāḥ + datival infinitive (1a sātáye dhāḥ and 10c jīváse dhāḥ) and the stem śáśvat- (1b, 10d).
