+++
title = "038"

+++
Indra In addition to the usual tr., it is worth consulting Re’s alternative tr. in his Hymnes spéculatifs (29-31 + nn.), in addition to his later one in EVP XVII.

My interpr. both in detail and in overall outline differs significantly from others, but it is internally consistent and attempts to fit the many puzzling details into an overall schema. That this sometimes requires making interpretive leaps is a price I’m willing to pay. I lay out and support my choices in the comments on individual vss., though I do not chart every deviation from the various other tr. and defend them against those tr.


## 01
The 1st sg. pf. dīdhayā is taken by all as a straight indicative; the Pp. reads dīdhaya with short final vowel. My tr. “I ponder” reflects this analysis (Kü [257-60] having demonstrated that the indic. pf. of this root is always presential). However, I now wonder if this form could be a subjunctive with the unextended 1st sg. subj.

ending -ā. Although lengthened forms of the indic. pf. ending -a do exist (e.g., védā 9x), they are relatively uncommon. And a subjunctive “I shall ponder …” would open this speculative hymn nicely.

The standard tr. take priyā́ṇi … párāṇi as coreferential (e.g., Old “die fernsten, lieben (Dinge, Ereignisse)”). I prefer to take the two as contrastive, the nearby familiar things dear to the poet and far-away matters almost beyond his ken -- with the intensive (i.e., frequentative) part. mármṛśat conveying the restless activity of his mind. Realizing that he needs the steadying hand of poetic tradition to help control his racing but fertile thoughts, in d he expresses his desire for poets belonging to that tradition to give a full account of what he is seeing -- though he does not deny that he himself has wisdom.


## 02
As I see the movement of the verse, in pāda a the poet sets himself to question the older generations of poets about their creative activity. Pāda b concerns this activity in the past and identifies mánas- ‘mind’ as the foundation (√dhṛ) for the creative act. (I might now alter the tr. to make this clearer, to “making their minds the foundation.”) In cd we turn to the present time and to the poet (te) (who addressed himself in a); the praṇī̀- in c (on which see further below) are the products or models derived from the creative activity in b. In d it is made clear that these precedents, actively sought by the current poet’s mind, rest on the dhárman- ‘foundation’ not only of the mental activity of the former poets but also of his own mind.

The first technical issue in this vs. is whether pṛcha + ACC. here means “ask X” or “ask about X” (in German terms “fragen” vs. “fragen nach”); both uses of the accusative are possible with √pṛch. Related to this question is what jánimā means in this context: ‘births’, ‘generations’, ‘races’? With Ge and Klein (DGRV I.453-54), I take jánimā kavīnā́m to be the personages addressed, not (with Old, Re, Hoffmann [Inj. 225], Scar [276, 288], WG) the topic of the question. The poet is widening his range of interlocutors from the current poets (1d) to the long series of generations, back to the poets who themselves participated in the creation (2b).

With all modern tr./comm, I take takṣata as a med. 3rd pl. middle to the athematic present to √takṣ, rather than a 2nd pl. act. of the thematic stem, as Gr classifies it. I have added the self-beneficial “for themselves” to the tr. because, though the root √takṣ is abundantly attested, this appears to be the only middle form in the RV. In keeping with my larger interpr. of the hymn as concerning two creations, the second of which was the product of poets conjuring up the differentiated cosmos by their verbal powers, I think the medial takṣata here signals the intimate engagement of the poets in the act of creation and the interpenetration of the things created and the creators themselves. Note also that our current poet lays some claim to this primal act by calling himself in 1a a táṣṭar- ‘craftsman, fashioner’, the agent noun to the root √takṣ, which supplies the verb of creation in 2b.

The root-noun cmpd. praṇī́- is found only here in the RV, but the lexeme prá √nī, lit. ‘lead forth’, is very common as a verb form and in other cmpds. The word here has received a not particularly instructive variety of renderings, which I will not repeat. I think it means ‘precedent’ -- that is, the work of creation engaged in by the kavis of old provides the model for the current poet. This seems a reasonable semantic extension of ‘leading forth’. The precedents keep “growing stronger / increasing” both because the elements of creation keep proliferating and because the current poet becomes more familiar with them and adept at employing them.

In the last pāda these precedents that the poet has sought with his mind take up their position in his mind, ready to serve for his own creative endeavors. The older generations of poets were called “firm in mind, holding their minds firm” (or, see above, “making their minds the foundation”)(manodhṛ́t-) in b; it is fitting that their models, which he “sought with his mind” (mánovāta-), should now in turn take up their position on his own mind’s support (dhármaṇi). On the basis of the cmpd.

manodhṛ́t- in b I supply ‘mind’ as the possessor of dhárman-. Most tr. (Ge, Re [twice], Hoffmann [Inj. 225], Klein DGRV I.453-54) interpr. the loc. dhármaṇi as a rather vague adverbial (Ge, Hoff “in rechter Weise,” sim. Klein). I think it needs to be interpr. in full locatival sense; Scar (276) and WG in separate ways do give it a locatival interpr. but their tr. do not reflect its connection with manodhṛ́t- in b.


## 03
Before addressing the question of what pādas a and b have to do with each other thematically, we must first consider the small technical issue of the placement of utá at the beginning of pāda b. Since pāda a contains a participle (dádhānāḥ) and pāda b a main verb (sám añjan), it is unlikely that utá is conjoining the two pādas.

Instead, with Klein (DGRV I.396-97), I think it is probably conjoining this hemistich with the preceding vs., with utá displaced to the beginning of pāda b after the participial phrase in a. This is very reminiscent of III.31.21, in this same Indra series, where the same explanation accounts for a rightward displacment of ca into the beginning of the second pāda of the clause.

As indicated in the publ. intro., I think this vs. describes the role of the poets in the second creation. It fleshes out the laconic takṣata dyā́m “They crafted heaven” in 2b. But what are they depositing in pāda a, and why? The first question can be restated as -- what should be supplied with gúhyā? The most common nouns appearing with that adjective are nā́man- ‘name’ and padá- ‘traces, track’; either of these could work here because both can be used of the esoteric verbal production of the poets. “Secret names” would refer to the act of creation that involves dividing and naming the inchoate mass of material pre-creation; “secret traces” would refer to the esoteric poetry more generally. Here they seem to have pooled and deployed these secret elements, to use in their poetic ornamentation -- that is, in their detailed elaboration -- of the originally undifferentiated matter of the two worlds. Note that the participle is middle: it is their own names/traces that are in play.

In both Hymnes spéc. (1956) and EVP XVII (1969) Re tr. sám añjan as “ont consacré,” as an allusion to royal unction. The dat. kṣatrā́ya ‘for dominion’ makes this a tempting idea, though sám √añj is not a standard technical term in the royal consecration. I certainly think this is a secondary meaning of this pāda, but in keeping with the rest of the hymn, I think the primary meaning must be creation through poetic elaboration. Since royal consecration does in fact make the person in question a new entity, the king, it can be conceptualized as a creation as well.

The 2nd half-verse is more clearly concerned with creation. The root √mā ‘measure’ is of course regularly used in this connection, and as I said in the publ.

intro., the separation of the two worlds in d is a standard cosmogonic image. Ge’s interpr. of c is rather aberrant and in part dependent on a passage in the PB, and his interpr. has not become the standard. Because of the accent on mamiré, I have supplied ‘when’ with the first half of pāda c, though the accent may simply result from the adjacency of the two verbs mamiré and yemúḥ.

The verb in d, antáḥ … dhuḥ, is not a standard expression for ‘separate’ and in fact might be expected to mean ‘place between’. WG tr. in that way, supplying “Luftraum” (antárikṣa-): “Zwischen die beiden … (Welten) setzten sie (den Luftraum) …” This is a clever solution and it may be the original sense of the lexeme, which, however, I believe has evolved to mean, without an object, ‘place apart’, that is, separate by putting something in between.

I take dhā́yase as belonging to √dhā ‘suckle, nourish’, like the rest of the occurrences of this -as-stem. Re (EVP), Kü (395), and WG all follow this root assignment, but Ge and Re (Hymnes spéc.) take it to √dhā ‘place’: “damit sie (die Herrschaft) ausüben” and “pour qu’ils se tiennent stables,” respectively. The separation of the two worlds is often presented as a boon for humans, so the ‘nourish’ interpr. seems more fitting, and the usual analysis of dhā́yas- supports it.


## 04
As noted in the publ. intro., I believe that this vs. turns to the first creation, before the poets’ intervention that was presented in vss. 2-3. It is appropriate that the entities described here are unidentified, for this is the time before the poets brought their verbal skills to bear. The central figure in this vs. is introduced merely by an acc. participle (ātíṣṭhantam ‘mounting’). The form makes it clear that the referent is masculine and singular, but no other information is given; there is not even a pronoun. Likewise the subj. of the verb pári … abhūṣan ‘they tended’ is given only as víśve ‘all’. Again we know the gender (masc.) and the number (pl.), but not the identity: poets (from vs. 2)? gods (the frequent default referent of víśve)? Rather than suggesting referents for these two entities as the standard tr. do, I think we should accept that the lack of referential clues is deliberate.

Certainly it continues through the verse, though some details accumulate. In b the ‘mounting’ entity of pāda a is now presumably the subject. He wears beauties (śríyo vásānaḥ) and is self-luminous (svárociḥ); these descriptions begin to narrow the field, but not enough. (The only other occurrence of svároci- modifies the Maruts, who are not likely to be in question here. And a number of different gods acquire śrī́- .) In c he is identified as both a bull (or bullish one, vṛ́ṣan-) and a lord (ásura-), neither particularly diagnostic, and the pāda claims to provide us with his “great name” (mahát … nā́ma). Indeed d seems at first to give us that name: viśvárūpaḥ.

But the joke is on us, for not only is viśvárūpa- not a name but an epithet, but its literal meaning tells us that the lack of a single identifiable referent in this verse is the point. The word means “having all forms,” and so the entity we’ve been chasing through the vs. is in fact protean and cannot be pinned down to a single identity.

He/it is creation before differentiation. (For a similar figure in a similarly mystical hymn in this maṇḍala, see III.56.3, where the androgynous figure is also called both a bull and viśvárūpa.) The final pāda forms a tight ring with the first, in that the verb ā́√sthā returns, and this time we get some indication of what he is mounting. But even this further specification falls short: it is simply amṛ́tāni, a neut. pl. adjective with multiple possible referents. This repetition makes the unfolding creation seem somewhat circular, but also incremental, in that new details accumulate, if slowly. But what seems to me an important clue has generally been ignored in the standard interpr. I find it impossible to believe that the repetition of ā́√sthā was not deliberate, but all the standard tr. (save in part for Re, Hymnes spéc, though he fell in line in EVP) render the two occurrences quite differently: the first literally (‘mount’), but the second with the idiomatic meaning ‘assume’, with Ge and WG supplying ‘names’ with the adj. ‘immortal’ (Ge “… hat er unsterbliche (Namen) angenommen”). There are two obvious things wrong with this interpr: 1) the lexeme ā́√sthā is extremely common and I know of no passage where it means ‘assume’; 2) translating it thus completely ignores the intra-vs. repetition, which at least to me is extraordinarily salient: the first word of the vs. is ā́tiṣṭḥantam, the last tasthau. I therefore assume that the pf. in d also means ‘mount’ and that the referent of the pl. ‘immortal’ is deliberately unspecified, but is something one could stand on -- in this case probably ‘worlds’ or some kind of solid ‘things’. Cf. VIII.52.7 (Vālakh.) ā́tasthāv amṛ́taṃ diví “[it] has mounted to the immortal (world?) in heaven” and (with adhí √sthā) I.35.6 amṛ́tā́dhi tasthuḥ “they have taken their place on his immortal (foundations?).” The specification of a place to stand on enlarges the cosmic picture. Consider also 9c below with tasthúṣo vírūpā “of him surmounting the various forms,” with √sthā and

-rūpa-.


## 05
The unidentified creature in vs. 4, finally identified as a bull or as bullish (vṛ́ṣan- 4c), returns in this vs., with a slightly different ‘bull’ designation (vṛṣabhá-).

Here it is depicted as androgynous: though masc. in gender and called a bull, it gives birth (ásūta). Androgyny is a powerful signal of the lack of differentiation I have been discussing, since perhaps the fundamental, universal binary contrast is male : female.

The bull’s act of birth results in the desired differentiation that characterizes creation. This is expressed both by ‘many’ (pūrvī́ḥ) in b and, indirectly, by the address to the two sons of heaven (dívo napātā) in cd. These two then seem to establish control over what has been created in the earliest time (pradívaḥ ‘from olden days’) and therefore implicitly preside over time.

I would now be inclined to interpr. pāda b as an expression of possession, “His are these many proliferating riches.” Cf. VI.3.3, also IV.23.8. However, the context is not definitive.

I interpr. and construe vidáthasya in c differently from most, who take it with dhībhíḥ, with the interpr. further complicated by variant renderings of vidátha- (Ge “im Geiste der Weisheit”; Re [EVP] “grâce aux visions-poétiques de la cérémonie”; WG “mit den Einsichten der (Beute-)Verteilung”). None of these makes a lot of sense to me, and therefore, despite the adjacency of vidáthasya and dhībhíḥ, I construe the former instead with kṣatrám “dominion of/over the (cosmic) division.” On this sense of vidátha- see comm. ad VIII.39.1: though the word generally refers to the ceremonial distribution of wealth and then to the ceremony where this happens, it can also refer to other types of division, including the parts of the cosmos. It may be somewhat more daring to assume that kṣatrá- can take a genitive of what is ruled over -- I do not now have parallels -- but keep in mind that the root √kṣā from which kṣatrá- is derived regularly takes such a genitive. If my interpr. is correct, the vidátha- refers to the cosmic divisions produced by the 1st creation.

As noted in the publ. intro., a number of referents have been suggested for the two sons of heaven, and as I also said there, I think this is missing the point. We remain in the realm of the 1st creation where entities may begin to proliferate but they are still not named. I suggested there that the two may be the two world halves (note that kṣatrá- was associated with them in vs. 3b and see 8c below), but it is also quite possible that the focus should be on the “two,” not on who exactly the two are: the first splitting of the primal unity.


## 06
The first half of vs. 6 simply expands on vs. 5. The same two kings have as their sphere of activity an increasing number (“three, many, all” trī́ṇi … purū́ṇi … víśvāni) of “seats,” that is (in my opinion), separated places, in the cosmic division (vidáthe) also repeated from vs. 5. Note that the same verb pári √bhūṣ ‘tend to’ returns from 4a, where ‘all’ was the subject, not the object as here. In the 2nd hemistich the poet, who has been absent since vs. 2, returns, with his mind (mánasā), and sees the whole of creation in detail (or so I surmise), down to the wind-haired Gandharvas -- all subject to the commandment of the two kings.


## 07
This vs. summarizes both creations. The first is dealt with glancingly in the first pāda. I take the neut. prn. tád ‘this’ as a reference to the not-yet-differentiated proto-creation, which belonged to and arose from the androgynous bovine of 5a, here explicitly identified first as masculine (asya: since this pronoun is unaccented, it does not modify what follows but functions as an autonomous pronoun), then as both bull (vṛṣabhásya, as in 5a) and milk-cow (dhenóḥ). This is the first appearance of any explicit feminine principle in this hymn.

The rest of the vs. concerns the second creation, with the original unitary tád divided and fitted out with names and forms. Note the return of the creation verb √mā ‘measure’, with ā́… mamire (b) and ní … mamire (d) echoing sám … mamire in 3c. The curious phrase sákmyaṃ góḥ has caused some puzzlement among interpr.

Although by formation the hapax sákmya- appears to be a neut. abstract derived from √sac ‘accompany’, the standard tr. (Ge, Re, WG) take the phrase as the equivalent of an animate creature, remarking that the companion of the cow must be the bull. But this not only ignores the abstract nature of sákmya- but also assumes that góḥ here refers narrowly to a female bovine, though the stem is regularly used as a cover term for bovines of both sexes. I take the phrase as meaning “the fellowship of the cow” (or better, though more awkwardly, “the fellowship of the bovine”) as a poetic description of what was depicted in pāda a, the joint activity of the bull-and-cow and its product. This undifferentiated creation is then measured out into individual parts and equipped with names. The subject of ā́… mamire in b is not identified, but I assume it is the same māyínaḥ as the subject of ní … mamire in d, whom I take to be the age-old poets we met in vss. 2-3.

Just as pāda b refers to the individual names, so does d refer to forms: the classical pairing of name-and-form (nāmarūpa) is thus distributed across the vs., as Ge already pointed out (n. 7b). I take asmin here as referring to the creation (it), rather than to a putative ‘him’ (as most tr. do). In the course of their creative activity the poets assume various powers (pāda c) to enable their individualizing work.


## 08
As was indicated in the publ. intro., this vs. is in certain ways a rephrasing of vs. 7, but updated, as it were, to the present day. The vs. begins exactly as vs. 7 did: tád ín nv àsya, followed by a genitive specifying the identity of the asya (vṛṣábhasya 7a, savitúḥ 8a), a signal that vs. 8 is a second version of the immediately preceding vs. Hence, by my interpr., savitár- is the equivalent of the original creator, the bull-cow of 5a and 7a. I therefore do not think that this refers to the god Savitar, but is rather to be taken in its literal sense as “the impeller.” Or rather, since b = VII.38.1b (a Savitar vs.), the poet is identifying Savitar in his most generic sense with the Ur-creator, the one who “set in motion / impelled” the creation.

The poet disclaims any part in that original creation (nákir me), and the firmly fixed golden emblem of b seems to me to represent the static, undifferentiated result of the first creation. It reminds us of the hiraṇyagarbha of X.121, another image of undifferentiated creation.

But in cd (at least in my view -- the interpretations vary quite a lot) the poet identifies himself with the poets of old (of 7bcd). In c most tr. supply a verb, with the ródasī phrase as its object. I think, by contrast, that this is a nominal sentence with ródasī as subject. The two world-halves are credited with a role in the second creation, the same role they may play in 5cd (see comm. there): they set everything in motion. But they do so through the stimulus of a suṣtutí-, a ‘good praise-hymn’, and I take this praise-hymn to be the product of the 1st ps. poet, who disavowed a role in the first creation in 8a, but takes credit for contributing to the second creation in 8c.

The puzzling pāda to me is d, and my publ. tr. is opaque even to me. I have now rethought it and will propose here a modified tr. and interpr. First, I suggest returning to Gr’s grammatical analysis of vavre as a 1st sg., not a 3rd sg. (as all subsequent tr. have taken it, incl. my publ. tr.). I take the pāda now as the current poet’s boast, asserting his place in the poetic lineage. The lexeme ápi √vṛ means ‘swaddle, cover over’, as the simile of the woman and her children (one reading of jánimāni here) makes clear. But such a meaning can both be protective and somewhat arrogant or threatening. To understand the sense of the frame here, we need to go back to 2a, where the tremulous poet asked the previous generations (jánimā) of poets about their creative acts. I think these same poetic generations are what’s referred to here, but here our newly confident poet “covers” them -- on the one hand, in a protective sense, like the young woman swaddling her children. He protects their legacy by continuing it. But ‘cover over’ can also mean ‘conceal’, and in this sense the poet boasts that he will (or has?) become more skilled than they and cover up their achievements with his own. I would therefore retranslate the pāda as “I have covered over / swaddled the (poetic) generations like a young woman her children.”


## 09
As discussed in the publ. intro., I take this vs. as showing both contributors to the second creation -- the two (world-halves) from 8c and the masters of artifice (mayínaḥ) from 7d -- bearing witness to our poet’s new skill. In the first half of the verse the two (world-halves) begin by bringing to success the first creation of “the age-old great one” (pratnásya … maháḥ). I supply the equivalent of tád in pāda a, picked up by yád at the end of the pāda and further specified by daívī svastíḥ beginning b. The standard tr. instead take a and b as separate clauses, with daívī svastíḥ somewhat loosely construed with b.

In c the sequence gopā́jihvasya is variously interpr. Ge (/WG), Re (Hymnes spéc.), and at least partially Old read it as two words, the first nom. gopā́, the 2nd emended to jīvásya (Ge, WG) or jagatas (Re; he gives no accent, but it should be jágatas) -- attaching pāda c to b and taking d as a separate clause. I see no reason in this case to go against the Pp, which considers the form a cmpd, much less to emend the text so severely. Instead I take the two apparent genitives in c (gopā́jihvasya tasthúṣaḥ) as referring to the current poet: he boasts that his tongue is a herdsman -- that is, it marshals words -- and that he surmounts the various forms (vírūpā) -- that is, he has (verbal) control over the differentiated forms of the second creation. The poet has achieved his vocation. For the tongue, see vs. 3 of the following hymn (III.39.3b), where the poem, the hymnic vision, “mounts the tip of (the poet’s) tongue.” A form of the root √sthā is also found in the same pāda.
