+++
title = "039"

+++
Indra Though nowhere near as obscure as the previous hymn, the first three vss. of this one also portray poetic craft and, especially, poetic inspiration.

Morphological parallelism and lexical repetitions dominate the rest of the hymn.


## 01
√vañc means ‘move crookedly, meander’, but encompasses a number of different types of such motion, including circular or wave-like motion. Here I think it refers, rather charmingly, to a bending, curling movement made in order to come out of a small opening. (English ‘scrunch’ might be accurate, but is also inelegant.) The poet’s heart is thus configured as a smallish container from which his thought must gracefully exit -- a characteristically female gesture perhaps. I very much doubt that she is galloping, à la WG.

The publ. tr. should be altered to “when being recited” to reflect the present participle and to match the identical phrase in 2b.


## 02
Ge (/WG), Scar (142) take diváḥ as temporal (“noch vor Tag geboren”).

This is possible and would fit with the jā́gṛviḥ ‘wakeful’ and, perhaps, with the silvery garments of c (if they refer to dawn). Nonetheless, with Re (see also Ge’s n.

2a, where he suggests that the spatial interpr. is better), I take it as spatial “from heaven.” The vs. contrasts the immediate presence of the dhī́(séyám asmé “this one right here in us”) with her origin as a product of age-old divine and ancestral inspiration (sanajā́pítryā), and diváś cid … pūrvyā́seems to me to participate in this balanced contrast.


## 03
The first pāda of this vs. is a definitional truism: the cmpd. serving as subject, yama-sū́ḥ ‘twin-bearing’, is split into its component parts in the VP, yamā́… asūta ‘bore twins’. The question is who are the twins. Given the context, I find Old’s suggestion (fld. by Re) that this is a metaphor for speech production and that the twins are, perhaps, the verse (ṛ́c-) and sāman more plausible than Ge’s interpr. (flg.

Sāy.) that the twins are the Aśvins and the birth-giver is Uṣas. I take the mother to be the dhī́- who was the subject of the previous vs.; note that dhī́ḥ is the last word of vs. 2.

Since I take the same noun to be subject of b, pátat emerges as a problem, since it is presumably a neut. nom./acc. act. participle but qualifies the action of the proposed fem. subj. Given the tendency for neut. NA forms to be used adverbially, I so interpr. it here (as Re also seems to: “en volant”), rather than (with Ge [/WG]) introducing neut. mánaḥ ‘mind’ here for it to modify. This hemistich echoes some of the vocabulary and themes found in the previous hymn. asūta in pāda a matches ásūta in III.38.5a, and note that the apparent product of this birth is also a dual in III.38.5c. As noted ad III.38.9c, both the tongue and the mounting in that pāda are found in our 3b. I do not think the same events and entities are referred to in these passages, but they do seem to have a similar view of the relation between poetic speech and creation.

The standard tr. interpr. c as meaning that the pair just born associate with some kind of generic beauty (Ge “Schönheit,” Re “les formes-de-la-beauté”), but vápūṃṣi are esp. associated with Agni in Maṇḍala III, where he assumes or bears these wondrous forms (cf., e.g., III.1.8, 18.5, 55.9, 57.3; though admittedly he is not the only entity that has such forms). I think the vápūṃṣi of Agni are at issue here, and the pair -- verse and sāman -- accompany them as the ritual speech being recited when the ritual fire is blazing.

Unfortunately the verse-and-sāman interpr. does not fit as well in pāda d, where we might wish the dual “smashers of darkness” to be endowed with light one way or another. The only other occurrence of this stem modifies Agni, and Agni is several times subj. of the phrase támaḥ √han (V.14.4, VIII.43.34). This phrase once has a dual subj. (VI.72.1 víśvā támāṃsy ahatam), but the subj. there is Indra and Soma, whom we surely do not want to introduce here. It is worth noting that the Aśvins, the subjects here acdg. to Ge et al., are not found as subj. of this expression.

Since I think there is good support for the verse-and-sāman interpr. in the rest of the vs., I would argue that these forms of ritual speech are called smashers of darkness because of their role in the dawn sacrifice.


## 04
The next part of the hymn seems driven by the rhetoric of morphology, both parallelisms and contrasts. In this vs. note the heavy -i/anā-vant- forms mā́hināvān and daṃsánāvān stationed at the end of successive pādas (c, d), which are followed by dákṣiṇāvān at the end of 6d and the neut. barháṇāvat at the end of 8d.

Pādas a and c contain what appear to be matching sequences that conceal morphological differences: \#(nákir) eṣāṃ ninditā́… \#(índra) eṣāṃ dr̥ṃhitā́… The two -itā́forms are respectively an agent noun (ninditā́) and a neut. pl. ppl.

(dṛṃhitā́), though the two eṣām have the same grammatical identity and referent and the first word in each pāda is the subject.


## 05
The interweaving of lexicon and morphology continues in this vs. Pāda a contains two forms of the same stem: sákhā … sákhibhiḥ, and the instr. pl. is found four more times in the vs. (adjacent návagvaiḥ, b sátvabhiḥ, c daśábhir dáśagvaiḥ the last pair with their own etymological play). Pāda-final dáśagvaiḥ also parallels návagvaiḥ ending pāda a, and sátvabhiḥ of b is more subtly connected with satyám beginning c.

On abhijñú- see Scar (344-45).

## 06
The 2nd hemistich has intensely alliterative (partially) etymological figures: gúhā hitáṃ gúhyaṃ gūḷhám apsú, háste dadhe dákṣiṇe dákṣiṇāvān. The first half is more restrained but note the morphological pair padvát … śaphávat and the repetition of viveda from 5d.

The phrase náme goḥ is puzzling; Ge refuses to tr. náme. Old suggests ‘Sichneigen’, which is essentially literal and not very helpful; Re ‘domaine’, which makes sense but is not clearly related to its supposed etymon; WG “beim Zuteilen der Kuh,” also without accounting for the semantic development (or assuming a derivation from the separate PIE root *nem, as in Greek νέμω ‘distribute’?). Like Old I also take it literally, as the loc. sg. of a thematic noun to √nam ‘bend, bow’, but suggest that “the bend of the cow” is some sort of homely spatial metaphor drawn from knowledge of cow anatomy indicating a hidden or protected place. English ‘oxbow’ for a U-shaped configuration of a river is a similar application of pasturage terminology to physical space. Cf. also ukṣṇó rándhram (VIII.7.26) “the loins of the ox,” which I also think is a way of referring to the Vala cave. See comm. ad loc. 
## 07
The IXth class vṛṇīta in pāda a is ambiguous: it can be either injunctive or optative; the standard tr. take it as the former, expressing straight past time. I instead interpr. it as optative, primarily because of the parallelism with 8a, where the light chosen in 7a, “should suffuse the two world-halves” with opt. ánu ṣyāt (note also syāma in 7b, 8b). However, the ambiguity of vṛṇīta allows it serve as pivot between the past-time narration of vss. 4-6 and the expressed wishes of 7-8.

The rendering of purutámasya in the publ. tr. makes it seem to qualify the hymns, not the bard. The tr. could be slightly emended to “… of the bard, who is the latest of many.”


## 08
Pāda b seems to pose an almost deliberate syntactic challenge. The adverbial āré ‘at a distance’ is normally construed with an ablative, as in 7b āré syāma duritā́t, but in 8b we have the same phrase but with the noun in the genitive: āré syāma duritásya bhū́reḥ. Or so it is taken by everyone, including me. But I now wonder if the ambiguous form bhū́reḥ, which could be genitive or ablative, is in fact the latter and is not modifying duritásya but rather governing it: “May we be at a distance from an abundance of difficulty.”
