+++
title = "040"

+++
Indra

## 01-02
The difference, if any, between pāhi (1c) and píba (2c) is as usual not clear. See disc. ad III.35.10. If we are looking for ways to distinguish them, ā́vṛṣasva “drench yourself in it,” immediately following píba in 2c, might support a more durative interpr. of the pres. impv., as perhaps would the adj. tā́tṛpi- if it has intensive semantics ‘ever satisfying’.


## 03
The adj. dhitā́van- is not entirely clear. It is a possessive -van-stem to the ppl.

dhitá- (√dhā); as Debrunner points out (AiG II.2.560), it unusually preserves the dh- that is found in this ppl. only as 2nd member of a cmpd or under certain sandhi conditions. The final has been lengthened as is normal in these stems: in the RV only maghávan- has a short final vowel before the -van-suffix. Cf. also the numerous -āvant-formations in the previous hymn (III.39.4, 6, 8). But what does it mean? The form occurs only here and in III.27.2, modifying Agni. Gr (flg. BR) glosses it as ‘gabenreich’, Ge “der das Erwartete (?) bringt,” whose connection to √dhā I don’t understand. Both Re’s “pourvu (d’offrandes) présentées” and WG’s “das Vorrat habend” may be closer to the mark. But what is most characteristically hitá- at the sacrifice is the ritual fire, ā́√dhā being the technical term of establishing that fire, and I therefore suggest that the sacrifice with its fires established is at issue here.

Some support for this interpr. may come from the last phrase stavāna viśpate “o you who are praised as clan-lord.” The epithet viśpáti- is ordinarily used of Agni, so Indra is here being praised as Agni, and it is Agni who both is and oversees the ritual fires.


## 05
This is the first vs. that doesn’t begin with voc. índra; the voc. surfaces only in the middle of b, an unprominent position. But its place is somewhat taken by phonologically similar índavaḥ at the end of the vs., and initial índra reappears in 6c.


## 07
Contra Old and WG, I agree with Ge and Re that vanínaḥ is the ‘wooden’ word and is not a derivative of √van ‘win’. The focus in this hymn is very narrowly on the ritual situation.


## 08
This is the only vs. in the hymn without a form of índra- (7 of the 8 of those forms being vocatives, the lone exception índram in 7b). Here voc. vṛtrahan is substituted.

## 08-09
On the “magic square” of these vss., see publ. intro. Vs. 9 actually seems to be covering the logical possibility that Indra might not be either far or near but somewhere in between, and in that case the exhortation in vs. 8 to come from nearby or far away might not work.
