+++
title = "043"

+++
Indra The publ. tr. attempts to convey the density and distribution of the many words for ‘here’, ‘nearby’, ‘close’.


## 01
The standard tr. take úpa barhíḥ with the next pāda (“call you to the ritual grass”); Sāy. agrees with my version (see Ge’s n. 1c). There is no principled way to decide, and very little depends on it.

It is not easily possible to register the pun of havya(vā́haḥ) ‘oblation’ (to √hu ‘pour’) and havante (to √hvā ‘call’).

## 04
The reference to Indra changes from 2nd ps. in ab to 3rd in cd. It would be possible to attach ab to the preceding vs., which also has Indra in 2nd ps., and take cd as a new sentence. But the fact that both ab and cd have subjunctives (váhātaḥ and śṛṇavat) suggests that the two clauses go together.

Because of the accent on váhātaḥ, the ca is likely subordinating, as in fact the standard tr. (and I) take it. However, the sequence ā́ca (…) √vah shows unexpected accent on the verb form elsewhere (I.74.6, X.110.1), so it is possible that ab is a main clause with the verbal accent produced by this curious formulaic usage; see comm. ad I.74.6.


## 05
2nd ps. reference to Indra returns here, in kuvíd clauses otherwise parallel to the one in 4cd with 3rd ps. ref.

Ge (fld. by WG and by me) takes the pf. part. papivā́ṃsam as expressing the cause of Indra’s action.

The transmitted Saṃhitā text ma ṛ́ṣim must be read contracted, as márṣim (so HvN) to achieve a Triṣṭubh line; the Pp. correctly analyzes this sandhi sequence as mā ṛ́ṣim.


## 06
The final word of this vs., mūrā́ḥ, is generally taken as distinct from mūrá- ‘stupid, foolish’ and as an acc. pl. fem. with ā́tāḥ (e.g., Ge “die verschlossenen (?) Töre”). I follow Old’s final suggestion that it belongs to the normal stem mūrá- and refers to the horses; English “dumb beast” is a reasonable analogue.
