+++
title = "044"

+++
Indra On the extended pun in this hymn, see publ. intro.


## 02
The two pāda-final -áya-causatives, arcayaḥ (a) and arocayaḥ (b), are also near phonological matches.


## 03
This is the middle vs. of the hymn and (comparatively) more complex than the rest. As in 2ab, the first two pādas end with morphologically parallel formations, the accusatives hári-dhāyasam (a) and hári-varpasam, both with -s-stems as 2nd member and hári- as 1st . The standard tr. obscure this parallelism by giving them quite different interpr., with hári- in the first cmpd serving as apparent obj. to dhāyas- (Ge “der den Goldigen nährt,” sim. Re and WG; also Gr), while the second cmpd is rendered as a straight bahuvrīhi. By this interpr., in the first cmpd. hárirefers to soma (so Gr, Re) or soma or the sun (Ge [/WG]), while the hári- in the 2nd is simply a term of color or material. Given the structure of this vs. and the parallel structure in vs. 2, I think the two cmpds should be interpr. in a similar manner and that the “golden nourishment” of heaven would be the sunlight. However, I do concede that in other X-dhāyas- cmpds the 1st member may be the recipient of the nourishment (e.g., arí-dhāyas- ‘having nourishment for the stranger’, kārú-dhāyas- ‘having nourishment for the bard’), and so I would consider a tr. ‘having nourishment for the golden’, though I think this is the less likely possibility. In c I assume a clause break after ádhārayat and take the rest of cd as a nominal cl. with bhójanam as subj. For a similar constr. with bhójanam cf. VII.68.5 citráṃ ha yád vām bhójanaṃ nv ásti.

The poet has cleverly managed to gather the root √dhṛ into the pervasive verbal play of the hymn, by stationing the dual form háritoḥ in a sandhi position where its initial surfaces as dh, hence ádhārayad dháritor. This dh repetition resonates with (hári-)dhāyas- in pāda a. Meanwhile in c the double dh-alliteration of the first two words is matched by double bh-alliteration in bhū́ri bhójanam.


## 04
Pāda-final rócanam (b) echoes pāda-final arocayaḥ (2b) symmetrically around the central vs., as well as rhyming with pāda-final bhójanam in 3c.


## 05
As noted in the publ. intro., the insistently golden vajra of vs. 4 (háritam … ā́yudham … vájram … hárim) is transformed into a silvery one (árjunaṃ, vájram), but keeps the har phonology in the participle haryántam ‘gladdening’, also modifying the vajra. A different color-type term, śukrá- ‘gleaming, bright’ is also used of the accoutrements of the weapon; the instr. pl. śukraíḥ is again a surprise: we would expect háribhiḥ.

And in fact we get two forms of the latter in the last hemistich. In one of them the poet uses the sandhi trick he employed in 3c to produce an initial dh: (ápāvṛṇod) dháribhiḥ, which allows the sequence dháribhiḥ ádribhiḥ to read as a virtual anagram.

This last half-verse introduces Vala-myth phraseology (ápāvṛṇot, úd gā́ḥ … ājata) in a hymn that otherwise lacks any mythic references. This Vala theme seems particularly out of place because the soma and the vajra play little or no role in the Vala myth but are strongly associated with the Vṛtra myth. I am uncertain of the identity of the háribhiḥ who participate in the driving up of the cows in d. Ge and Re confidently supply ‘horses’, and that is of course the default interpr. of this form in an Indra context. But Indra’s horses are not actors in the Vala myth elsewhere, as far as I can remember. His helpers in the Vala myth are the Aṅgirases, so perhaps they qualify as golden here. Or perhaps it refers to the golden lights of the dawns and is an instr. of accompaniment with gā́ḥ (“drove up the cows along with the golden [dawn lights]”).
