+++
title = "045"

+++
Indra


## 01
Although I use the Engl. word ‘gladdening’ here as in the last hymn, the repetition is misleading. The Skt. word here tr. is mandrá-, whereas in the last hymn it was haryatá-.

The simile concerning the bird and the snare is reminiscent of the much more obscure image in I.125.2, in which an animal of some kind seems to be bound up and captured.


## 02
In the string of agentive phrases that entirely make up this vs. the poet manages a certain variety of syntactic patterns: standard tatpuruṣa with 1st member obj. (vṛtrakhā́dá-), tatpuruṣa with accusative 1st member (valaṃrujá- [note that without the acc. marker it would be a metrically unfavorable four light syllables]), agent noun with genitive (pāda bc, 4x with 3 separate agent noun types: purā́ṃ darmá-, apā́m ajá-, sthā́tar- ráthasya, háryor abhisvará-), agent noun with acc. (dṛḷhā́… ārujá-). The relentless repetition of nom. sg. agent phrases makes it quite certain that the Pp. loc. sg. reading abhisvaré should instead be taken as nom. sg. -aḥ, with Old. All standard tr. agree. The only argument against this that I can see is that háryor abhisvaráḥ would be the second GEN + simple -á-stem agent phrase (after apā́m ajáḥ in b), and if the poet was serious about producing the phraseological variety I have just catalogued he might have avoided a repetition by couching this phrase in the loc. (“at the calling of the two fallow bays”). The only other occurrence of abhisvará- is in the loc. (-e in sandhi, also pāda-final) and means ‘call’, not ‘caller’ (X.117.8). Still, I do not think this arg. is strong enough to counter-balance the pressure of the nom. sg. sequence.


## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., this is the middle vs. of the hymn, and it contains four similes, which are interlocked in interesting ways. In the first halfverse both similes target krátum ‘resolve, will’. In the first the term held in common (gambhirā́n ‘deep’) has been attracted in number to the upamāna (udadhī́n ‘pools’), though the position of the iva probably shows that ‘deep’ lies outside the simile proper (gambhirā́m̐udadhī́m̐iva, krátum …). This simile is not dependent on the verb, while the second one (krátum puṣyasi gā́iva “you foster it like cows”) requires the fosterage of the verb puṣyasi for the comparison to make sense. That is, Indra’s will is like cows only in that he cultivates it and helps it prosper, whereas it is “deep” regardless of any verb that might govern it.

The second hemistich contains two parallel similes, both bipartite, with a nom. pl. referring to entities that reach an acc. goal: cows / pasturage, brooks / lake. The first, the bovine one, seems generated from the cow simile of pāda b, esp. as the adj.

sugopá- (c) contains the same gó- as gā́ḥ in b. The interesting thing about this halfverse is that the frame, the upameya, is not expressed at all. There is neither an overt nom. of the entity(/-ies) in motion nor an acc. goal -- simply the simile marker iva.

The comparison is wide open. Sāy. suggests that soma drinks are the subj. to be supplied, and he is followed by the standard tr. (and Old). Old suggests that the goal is either “you” (=Indra) or his krátu-; Re shares his uncertainty, while Ge (/WG) supply “dich.” Although it is true that āśata takes soma drinks as subject in other passages (see Ge’s n. 3cd), this hymn does not otherwise mention soma, and I am wary of supplying it out of nowhere. I prefer to take krátu- as subj., either in the pl.

(‘resolves’ as in the publ. tr.) or, as Ge. suggests in n. 3cd, as a sg., with the verb attracted to the number of the subjects of the two similes. And I take āśata in a different sense in the frame than in the similes -- without expressed goal as “reach fulfillment, achieved (their goal),” although I recognize that the overwhelming number of occurrences of this verb do have expressed goal.

## 04
The simile in b is not clear, in great part because práti √jñā appears to be employed in some technical sense that we have no handle on. The lexeme is not common in Vedic and seems to mean ‘greet, welcome’ (or perhaps just ‘recognize, acknowledge’) in the Vāstoṣpati hymn, VII.54.1, and in other texts ‘acknowledge, respond’ vel sim. In post-Vedic Skt. it means ‘promise’ or the like. Since áṃśa- ‘portion’ may also have a technical or legal sense, this phrase may belong to a stratum of language that we have no access to at this period. My feeling is that it has to do with the acceptance or rejection of something offered, as prati √grah signals acceptance of a properly given gift (see Sac. Wife 199-201). But I cannot get further than that.


## 05
The first hemistich contains three forms with sva- ‘self’: svayúḥ … svarā́ṭ … sváyaśastaraḥ, and the second hemistich opens sá v-, with a scrambling of the phonetic elements. Other patterning is seen in the comparative sváyaśastaraḥ ending the first hemistich and the superlative suśrávastamaḥ ending the 2nd, both built to -asstems and compounded with the phonological variants sva- and su-.

smáddiṣṭi- occurs 4x in the RV. It is a cmpd. of smád- ‘altogether, together with’ and the -ti-abstract of √diś ‘direct, assign, allot’, and as Ge says (n. 5b), it appears to be a technical term in dānastutis. In its other three occurrences (VI.63.9, VII.18.23, X.62.10) it modifies the gift, while here it qualifies the giver, Indra. As Old points out, medial √diś is used of the allotting of gifts in V.36.6, and such a sense seems to fit here as well. For further see Old’s detailed disc.

The splv. suśrávastamaḥ is rendered by the standard tr. (Ge, Re, WG) as ‘best listener’. Since it is built to the noun śrávas- ‘fame’ rather than directly to the root √śru, I find this meaning unlikely. In some other passages the word simply means ‘most famous, having the best good fame’ (e.g., VIII.13.2). Here because of the involvement of ‘us’ (naḥ), I take it as ‘receiving the best good fame’, i.e., with ‘fame’ being the praises we offer him. In only one passage does ‘best hearer’ seem a likely interpr., and there that meaning is induced by the presence of the verb śṛṇuṣvá: I.131.7 śṛṇuṣvá suśrávastamaḥ “listen (to us) as the one who listens best.”
