+++
title = "048"

+++
Indra


## 01
Though Gr classifies prábhartum as an infinitive, and Old’s and WG’s tr.

seem (indirectly) to reflect this analysis (“dass man ihm darbrachte …”), the form seems to be simply a -tu-abstract (somewhat concretized)(so tr. Ge and Re). As is well known, the -tum form that serves as the only infinitive in Classical Sanskrit is hardly found in early Vedic. Macd. (VG §586b) registers only five in the RV (not including this one) and an equal number in the AV. prábhartu- here seems more or less equivalent to prábhṛti- or prábharman-, though the -u-stem datives bhártave (IX.97.50) and ápabhartavaí (X.14.2) are infinitival.

Notice the near rhyming openings to the two half-verses, a: #sadyó h(a), c: \#sādhóḥ.


## 02
It is appropriate that the “beestings” (pīyū́ṣa-), that is, the colostrum or first milk, should be given to the new-born Indra.

The preverb pári in pāda a is presumably to be construed with ā́siñcat in b, a verb with which it is frequently found. I do not understand the position of this pári, in the middle of the pāda, right after the caesura but breaking up the NP mātā́… yóṣā jánitrī.


## 03
It is not clear who the “others” (anyā́n) are whom he keeps away, but the medial pf. in the next pāda (cakre) implicitly claims that he did the great things (mahā́ni; cf. vīryā̀ṇi … mahā́ni in III.36.1cd) by himself, that is, without the help of others.

## 03-04
I assume that purudhá-pratīka- in 3d refers to Indra’s shape-shifting powers; the cmpd seems to be “unpacked” in 4b “he made this body as he wished” (yathāvaśáṃ tanvàṃ cakra eṣáḥ).

These two vss. are noteworthy for containing 3 gerunds, upasthā́ya, abhibhū́ya, and āmúṣyā. The quest of the poet(s) of the Indra hymns in III to find a way to express anteriority (see disc. ad III.32.9-10, 33.11) is successful at least in this passage.
