+++
title = "049"

+++
Indra


## 01
The first word śáṃsā is read śáṃsa by the Pp., i.e., as a 2nd sg. impv. This is quite possible, of course, and is the interpr. of Ge (/WG) and Old. With Re I take it as a 1st sg. subjunctive because this is more in keeping with the 1st ps. diction in annunciatory initial praise vss. like I.32.1 índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi prá vocam, but nothing depends on the analysis either way.


## 02
The 2nd hemistich is universally tr. (save for Scar, 656) as a single rel. clause, but amināt is unaccented and so d must be a separate clause.

In c the standard tr. (incl. also Scar) construe the instr. pl. śūṣaíḥ with instr. pl.

sátvabhiḥ (e.g., Ge “mit seinen mutigen Streitern”). This of course would be the default assumption. However, in almost every occurrence of the stem śūṣá-, including all the other examples of the instr. pl., it refers to hymns or praises, whether with a limiting noun or not. I therefore separate it from the other instr. in the pāda and take it as having its usual referent. The poet claims that Indra’s strength is at least partially dependent on our strengthening praises.


## 04
The ppl. pṛṣṭá- ‘asked (about)’ is a little odd. Ge tr. ‘gesucht’, which would make it less odd, but I don’t think √prach means that. It may be referring to the fact that Indra’s existence and whereabouts are often questioned in the RV.

In b Ge and WG take the simile to be rátho ná vāyúḥ. This of course conforms well to the structure of the pāda and of similes in general, but it has the undesirable consequence of requiring rátha-, a word whose meaning is about as well known as any in the RV, to stand not for ‘chariot’ but for ‘chariot-warrior’ (vel sim.; cf. Ge’s Wagenheld). I therefore, somewhat reluctantly, follow Re. in taking the simile to be ūrdhvó, rátho ná “erect like a chariot.” Re then takes vāyúḥ as a (pseudo-)genitive: “(se tenant) droit comme le char (de) Vāyu,” which is unacceptable for this clear nominative. I instead take vāyúḥ as the beginning of another, unmarked simile. Cf.

IX.88.3 vāyúr ná yó niyútvān, with simile marker.
