+++
title = "050"

+++
Indra


## 02
On dheyuḥ and related forms, see my “… dheyām revisited” (Ged. Schindler, 1999).


## 03
The first hemistich poses some difficulties: the subject is not expressed, and it is not clear what it should be; there is an abundance of acc. sg. masculines, not all of which are coreferential; the root affiliation of dhā́yase is disputed; the value of gṛṇānā́ḥ is unclear.

To begin with the last, which has implication for some of the other questions: the standard tr. take gṛṇānā́ḥ as transitive, with Indra as object. But of the over 50 examples of this middle participle, only one other occurrence is transitive, I.181.9, where this value was induced by contextual pressure (see comm. ad loc.). I therefore take it as passive here as well.

If it is passive, then the missing subject must be something capable of being praised. Gr takes the subject to be the horses of vs. 2; since they were the overt subject of a form of √dhā in 2c (dheyuḥ) and would be the subj. of another one here (dadhire), this makes implicit sense. And it is possible that they might be praised or sung. However, the question is whether the horses can be thought to establish or deposit soma, as 2a requires. Priests would make more sense for this action (so Re), but priests would not ordinarily be praised -- hence the anomalous transitive interpr.

of gṛṇānā́ḥ by most tr. In the end I would opt for the horses, but not very happily -- the contextual arguments pull in opposite directions.

Now, as for the accusatives: mimikṣúm ... supārám, índram, I agree with the standard tr. that the first refers to soma, seeking to be mixed with milk, and of course that the last, índram, is separate from it. The question is where supārám belongs. The standard tr., in different ways, take it with soma. Since in all its singular occurrences the word refers to Indra, I take it with índram here as well.

The final question is the root affiliation and value of dhā́yase. The standard tr.

all take it to √dhā ‘place’, construed with jyaíṣṭhyāya and with Indra as implicit subj.

(e.g., Ge “dass er [=Indra] die Oberhoheit ausübe”). However, all clear cases of dhā́yas-, which mostly appears in the dat., belong to √dhā ‘suckle, nourish’ (incl. at nearby III.38.3 [though see the minority opinion discussed in comm. ad loc.]). I take it as such here, with índram as its object (thereby avoiding the necessity to construe this acc. with either dadhire or gṛṇānā́ḥ). The procuring of soma to nourish Indra is a logical progression -- though I’m still concerned that the horses might be the agents.

## 04-05
On the sequence of two repeated vss. see publ. intro.
