+++
title = "051"

+++
Indra ### 01-02 These two vss. have the same structure: pādas acd are just accusatives qualifying the acc. índram in b, and the b pādas are essentially the same, with nom. pl.

gíraḥ + a verb that governs the accusatives. Though vs. 3 breaks the syntax, Indra still appears first by name in pāda b.


## 02
The standard tr. take arṇavám as an unmarked simile, serving as goal to the verb in b: “my songs go to Indra, as if to the sea [Ge “(wie) zu dem Meere,” Re “(tel) un océan,” WG more accurately but less persuasively “(wie) zu wallender Flut”].

The word is therefore only indirectly associated with Indra: they are both goals but need have nothing else in common. But given the parallelism in structure of vss. 1 and 2, I am reluctant to break the pattern of accusatives characterizing Indra by introducing this syntactic disjunction, and further the simile only makes good sense if arṇavá- really is a sea or the like, not an undulating flood. I think instead that Indra is directly described as a flood, the flood itself being characterized as śākín- ‘possessing powers’.

The water-crossing mentioned here may simply be a reference to Indra’s general leadership in crossing rivers and gaining new territory, but it may more specifically point to the famous crossing of King Sudās dramatized in III.33 and referred to again in III.53.9, even though the poet Viśvāmitra, not Indra, is the major actor there. The crossing is mentioned again in 9a.


## 03
Although panasyate might make more sense if tr. “expresses admiration,” the other occurrences of this denom. stem and the related adj. panasyú- all mean ‘attract/invite admiration’. Here the poet is hoping for a good reception from the recipient of his hymns, which he indeed receives in pādas b and c. I have tr. the loc. phrase ākaré vásoḥ as if ablative, to make the sense clearer. It could have been rendered “… seeks admiration at (the hands of) him …”


## 04
Though this vs. begins a new tṛca in a different meter, it partially restores the syntactic structure of vss. 1-2: the first pāda presents Indra in the acc., the second one directs praises to him. Note also that nṛṇā́m … nṛ́tamam picks up náram of 2a.

The structure is somewhat complicated by the fact that both (unnamed) Indra in pāda a and the (unnamed) subjects of the impv. arcatā in b are addressed in the 2nd ps.

This leads both Ge and Re to separate the two pādas: Ge pronounces pāda a an anacoluthon or ellipsis, while Re supplies “(je te chante).” This fastidiouness seems unnecessary to me: the two referents of the 2nd persons are in different grammatical numbers and unlikely to be confused with each other for other reasons, and in a ritual situation both should be present (“at the seat of Vivasvant,” 3c) and could both be directly addressed. The two instrumentals in pāda a (gīrbhír ukthaíḥ) also go better with the verb in b; cf., e.g., VI.22.1 índraṃ táṃ gīrbhír abhy àrca ābhíḥ.

Pāda d consists of two clauses, the nominal námo asya and the short verbèd clause pradíva éka īśe, and so, contra Gr’s suggestion (s.v. īś, col. 236, #8), the verb doesn’t take an acc. here. For supposed exx. of √īś with the acc., see comm. ad VII.32.18.

## 05
The stem niṣṣídh- and related forms are difficult (see, inter alia, Scar 596- 97). As Scar points out, there is no obvious direct way to connect it with either √sādh ‘succeed’ or √sidh ‘repel’, and neither of these roots appears with níḥ in the RV (though the latter does in post-RVic texts, but without relevant meaning; see Gotō, 1st Kl., 328). On the other hand, the semantic range of the word itself in context is relatively clear. It usually refers to something offered by inferiors to superiors.

Ge’s Tribut (see his brief disc. in n. 5b) works pretty well. If we want to connect it to the root √sādh ‘succeed, realize, reach the goal’, it may be seen as the material representation of the fulfillment (this is the √sādh part) of an obligation, and the níḥ ‘forth’ may reflect the proffering of these material goods.

I supply ‘streams’ with jīráyaḥ on the basis of the other occurrence of this pl.

in II.17.3 prá jīráyaḥ sisrate … as well as the well-attested jīrá-dānu- ‘possessing lively drops’. There is general agreement in the standard tr. that jīrí- refers to flowing water.


## 06
Note the chiasmic structure túbhyam bráhmāṇi gíraḥ … túbhyam.

Ge persuasively identifies ávaso nū́tanasya as a genitive of quality.


## 07
This vs. contains yet another implicit contrast between the aor. and pres. of √pā ‘drink’: pāhi … yáthā … ápibaḥ. See comm. ad III.35.10, 36.3, 40.1-2, and 47.3.

It is not clear whether a contrast is also meant between the acc. sómam with pāhi (also 8a) and the (potentially partitive) genitive sutásya with ápibaḥ and, if so, whether it is signaling some sort of aspectual distinction.

The verb ā́vivāsanti lacks an object here, though it usually is construed with one. Ge (/WG) interpret it as ‘invite’ (presumably supplying ‘you’), while Re supplies the gods as object. I think the object slot has been intentionally left blank: with Indra’s guidance and in his shelter they hope to win whatever they fancy, hence my somewhat awk. tr. “seek their win.” Oberlies (Rel.RV I.403) suggests that this is a poetic contest, but I don’t see any evidence of this beyond the plural.

Given the usual rendering of kaví- elsewhere in the publ. tr., I would change the tr. here to ‘sage poets’ or just ‘poets’.


## 08
The connection between the two hemistichs in this vs. is not clear. The first unambiguously presents the here-and-now of the sacrifice, with an impv. and the adv.

ihá ‘here’, while the second harks back to Indra’s primordial birth and the gods’ attendance on it, expressed by an augmented imperf. (ábhūṣan). There is no way to reconcile the temporal disjunction directly, so I have adopted Ge’s makeshift: supplying “(wie damals),” though there is no overt representation of my “as” (or his “wie damals”). There does not seem to be much semantic connection between the two halves either, unless we, the pressers and offerers, are being identified with the gods who served Indra at his birth.

## 09
The abrupt temporal shifts continue in this vs., exacerbated by shifts in person. The poet first addresses the Maruts in the 2nd ps. and asserts something about Indra in the present time (or so I [and the other standard tr.] take the nominal sentence without overt copula). In pāda b the Maruts are then referred to in the 3rd ps.

-- though they are not named in this pāda, the other two occurrences of dā́ti-vararefer to them, and ánu √mad is a signature verb of theirs -- and in the past, in the
augmented impf. ámandan. (Though the Saṃhitā text transmits ‘mandan, the augment is metrically guaranteed.) This pāda seems an aside, reminding the audience of the Maruts’ previous involvement with Indra. The vs. then shifts to the present time again, with the Maruts remaining in the 3rd ps., as potential drinking companions for Indra.

In 6c Indra was urged to become “a friend of present help”; what that present help was/should be is spelled out here, a friend “at the water-crossing.” For watercrossing see comm. ad vs. 2 above. It is presumably not directly related to the Maruts’ applause in pāda b, for they provide material and moral support at the Vṛtrasmashing, not in crossing waters.

III.51.9-10. Note that pibatu takes an acc. in 9cd, but a gen. in 10c, as with ápibaḥ in 7b.


## 10
The first two pādas of this vs. are variously translated. The problems are 1) the referent of idám and 2) the absence of a verb. My interpr. is closest to Ge’s. If the referent of idám is the soma, we need only find a synonym for soma that is neuter; sávanam fits the bill and is elsewhere modified by sutá-, as it can be here. As for the verb, I assume a form of √as: the idiom ánu √as means ‘be at hand’.
