+++
title = "052"

+++
Indra


## 02
pacatyà- occurs only here; it does not seem to have any gerundival sense, nor does its base pacatá-, though -ata-adjectives often do (darśatá- ‘sightly’, not just ‘seen’); see AiG II.2.168. I assume pacatyà- is a nonce creation to provide an extra syllable here in the versified recipe. And perhaps pacatá- was fashioned as a clearer alternative past participle to pakvá-, which can of course also mean ‘ripe’, though it’s quite commonly applied to cooked food.


## 03
The accent of ghásaḥ is unexpected, but it presumably results from its juxtaposition with immed. following joṣáyāse, which can owe its accent to its pādainitial position. Although ca can be subordinating (‘if’) and induce verbal accent, that doesn't seem to be its function here.


## 08
The phrase vīrátama- nṛṇā́m ‘most virile of men’ is a variant of the fairly common formula nṛṇā́ṃ nṛ́tama- ‘most manly of men’, an occurrence of which is found in the preceding hymn, III.51.4. This vs. is repeated at IV.32.16. ## 053 Indra, etc.


## 01
The curious dual dvandva indrā-parvatā ‘o Indra and Mountain’, only in the vocative and therefore unaccented, occurs 3x: I.122.3, 132.6, and here. As discussed ad I.122.3 and 132.6, I believe that the ‘mountain’ is Indra’s vájra-.


## 02
The verb in pāda b, yakṣi, is simply an injunctive 1st sg. s-aor. to √yaj, but it is rendered as a future/modal in all the standard tr. (including this one). This value seems also found in the identical form in X.52.5, though not in X.4.1. (Gr’s ex. in VI.16.8 is better taken as a 2nd-sg. act. -si impv.) I don’t know why this particular form should have this value, save for the general functional flexibility of the injunctive. But perhaps the fact that the formally identical 2nd sg. act. -si impv. is so common and (as an old s-aor. subjunctive) is used in both imperatival and subjunctive-future value may have allowed that value to spill over onto its formal twin.


## 03
The 1st dual subjunctive (śáṃsāva) coupled with a sg. voc. (adhvaryo) is a rough and ready way to express a 1st ps. inclusive. This type of construction contrasts with the 1st ps. exclusive found in phrases like VII.88.3 ā́yád ruhā́va váruṇaś ca nā́vam “When we two, Varuṇa and I, mounted the boat …” with a nominative explicitly conjoined with ca to an implicit ahám.

The injunctive bhūt in d must also, like yakṣi in 2b, be modal/prospective or even imperatival, since the áthā ca indicates that it temporally and/or logically follows the impv. sīda in c.


## 04
The dismissal of Indra and the sending him off home comes rather early in this hymnlet; he just got here (vs. 1) and at that point we urged him to stay put (vs. 2).

Vs. 3 seems to depict the sacrifice proper, and the remaining 3 vss. of this portion of the hymn (vss. 4-6) are an extended farewell. In this vs. the poet seems to be reassuring Indra that if he goes home, he still won’t miss out on anything here: we’ll send Agni to fetch him whenever we press soma.


## 05
párā yāhi “drive away” comes awfully soon after 2a mā́párā gāḥ “don’t go away.” The genitive phrase vājíno rā́sabhasya is ambiguous: does it refer to two animals or one? Re opts for the former: “… du (cheval) gagnant-du-prix (et) de l’âne.” But the same phrase in I.34.9 makes it likely that the two words belong together as the designation of a single animal. So Ge (/WG).

## 06-07
See the publ. intro. for the thematic and lexical connections between these two vss., despite their belonging to different sections of the hymn. See there also for the connection of vs. 7 with III.31, via the identification of the current poet with the Aṅgirases, ur-sacrificers and givers of dakṣiṇās (on which see Ge’s n. 7a).

## 08
As Schaefer points out (p. 162), the intens. bobhavīti construed with an āmreḍita rūpáṃ-rūpam must signal repetitive function (“Gestalt um Gestalt”).

In c I read diváḥ twice: once as ‘day’ with tríḥ in the meaning “three times a day” (cf. nearby III.56.5, 6 trír ā́diváḥ, also X.95.5 tríḥ … áhnaḥ), once as ‘heaven’ with following pári “from heaven.” The latter reading, adopted by Sāy., is rejected by Old and Ge (n. 8c) because we should expect the close sandhi divás pári. This argument is subject to criticism on two grounds. First, I think the double reading of diváḥ would preclude close sandhi for one of the readings. Moreover, none of the other cited exx. of divás pári is broken over the caesura as here. As Mark Hale has discussed at length, close sandhi of NOUN + POSTPOSITION is blocked at the caesura.

See “Preliminaries to the Study of the Relationship between Syntax and Sandhi in Rigvedic Sanskrit,” Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft 51, pp. 77-96, 1990; this view is cited here after the 1995 draft, Wackernagel’s Law in the Language of the RV, pp. 38-50.

The ritual situation in the 2nd hemistich is puzzling for several reasons. First, Indra’s appearance at the sacrifice “three times a day” is what we expect, since there are three soma pressings. Then why is he characterized as ánṛtupāḥ ‘drinking out of season’? Ge (/WG) gets out of this bind by supplying a parenthetical “(oder)”: he either comes three times a day or drinks unseasonably. This works, but the “or” is of course a complete invention. More problematic is the fact that Indra is drinking unseasonably at all. In this same Indra cycle he has been apostrophized as ṛtupāḥ (voc., III.47.3). The apparent breaking of the ritual rules here is esp. striking because he is called ṛṭā́van- ‘possessing the truth, truthful’ at the same time, made more striking because this is the only place in the RV where ṛtā́van- qualifies Indra.

Lüders (Varuṇa II, 547-48) suggests that ṛtā́van- is used here only as word play with ánṛtupā́-, since Indra has essentially no connection with ṛtá- (“dass er zum Ṛta so gut wie keine Beziehung hat,” p. 548). But this seems unlikely, esp. given that the unnegated expression ṛtupā́ṛtā́vā in the same metrical position is used of Agni in this same maṇḍala (III.20.4). Some point is being made, that Indra can be ṛtā́van- despite his un-rule-governed behavior.

I think the clues to a solution are found in the first half of the verse, where Indra is depicted as constantly shape-shifting and enveloping himself in māyā́ḥ.

Perhaps Indra is impersonating other gods through the various rūpa-s he assumes, and his unseasonable drinking involves his taking their places in the rota (ṛtú-) of soma-recipients (the Ṛtugraha treated in I.15 and II.36-37). What then are “his own mantras” (svaír mántraiḥ), which accompany the unseasonable drinking? Lüders (p.

548) suggests that when he drinks outside of the three pressings he has to recite his own mantras. Though this is clever, I do not think it is correct, nor do I follow my own published tr. “by (the power of) his own (magic) spells” -- though I do think the mantras may be semantically linked to māyā́ḥ here. But my current thinking is that the phrase should be tr. “with their own mantras,” referring to the mantras appropriate to the gods whose forms he has appropriated and whose turns he takes in the drinking. As to how he can be called ṛtā́van- when his behavior seems not to be precisely aboveboard, perhaps he has gained the epithet from the gods whose identities he’s stealing: Agni, Tvaṣṭar, and Mitra and Varuṇa, all called ṛtā́vanelsewhere in the RV, all occur in the Ṛtugraha sequence (I.15; II.36-37). Or perhaps the epithet alludes to Indra’s most enduring adoption of another identity, that of Bṛhaspati. Though Bṛhaspati is called ṛtā́van- only once in the RV as far as I am aware (VI.73.1), the role of ṛtá- in association with Bṛhaspati in the Vala myth is very significant; see, e.g., Lüders p. 549. Or perhaps we can simply say that Indra’s “truth” -- his inherent nature -- is his ability to assume other forms and act out of turn and impose his will without following rules.

III.53.9-10: The use of somewhat inappropriate epithets continues in these vss. The subject of 9ab, the “great seer” (mahā́m̐ṛ́ṣiḥ) is Viśvāmitra, mentioned by name in c.

A mortal, he is described as ‘god-begotten’ (devajā́-) and ‘god-sped’ (devájūta-) but ‘possessing a man’s sight’ (nṛcákṣas-); the last is also used of the Kuśikas, Viśvāmitra’s family, in the next vs. Curiously it is the epithet with nṛ- ‘man’ that appears to be misapplied, not those with devá- ‘god’: the stem nṛ-cákṣas- is found approximately 40 times in the RV, and in all other occurrences (with the possible exception of the next hymn, III.54.6) it qualifies a god, who either has his (divine) gaze on men or attracts the gaze of men. Thus, the status of Viśvāmitra and his kin is implicitly raised by receiving a descriptor usually used of gods. That the Kuśikas drink soma with the gods in 10cd is a sign of this enhanced status. What the adj.

means here is unclear to me: is it that they too attract the gaze (and thus admiration) of other men, or that they, despite possessing only a man’s sight, still manage feats sufficient to match the gods, esp. Viśvāmitra’s stopping the rivers in full flood?


## 10
The publ. tr. does not recognize or render the idiom ví √pā, found generally in the middle, for which see also comm. ad VII.22.3. As is indicated there, in later Vedic and already in late RV, the idiom is specialized for the separation of surā from another liquid in the Sautrāmaṇī ritual, but earlier can refer more generally to the extraction (“drinking out”) of a liquid from another source, e.g., by the pressing stones in IV.16.3 and VII.22.3. What the idiom is doing here is less clear to me. Ge (n. 10d / WG) thinks this is a reference to the (much later) notion that haṃsas can separate liquids and so it belongs with the Sautrāmaṇī passages -- the haṃsa being found in pāda a, though only in a simile unrelated to drinking. I think this unlikely. It may simply be that the pressing stones are involved: the Kuśikas may be “drinking out” the soma by means of the pressing stones found in pāda a (ádribhiḥ).

However, it is also possible that the ví represents the cross-species aspect of the drinking party: the mortal Kuśikas are urged to drink along with the gods, but the gathering may be segregated. So perhaps a tr. “drink apart, along with the gods”; such a notion seems to underlie Re’s “Buvez séparément avec les dieux.” It would contrast with a true symposium expressed by sám √pā also in the middle (see IV.35.7, 9) and in fact might allude to that idiom, given the well-known polarization of ví and sám. Another possibility is Sāy’s parasparavyatihāreṇa ‘by mutual interchange, alternately’. I am weakly inclined towards the pressing stone interpretation, though also somewhat drawn to the cross-species one. And I would also point out the resonance of the preverb ví with viśvā́mitraḥ (9c) and viprāḥ (10c).


## 11
This vs. is supposed to depict the Aśvamedha of King Sudās, and the releasing of the horse in b and the smiting of obstacles in all directions in c, followed by a sacrifice in d, certainly support this interpr.

cetáyadhvam is variously rendered, but most generally as ‘pay attention’ vel sim. I instead take this middle full-grade -áya-formation as a reflexive transitive “make yourselves known” based on the ‘make perceive’ sense of cetáya-. Re’s alternative “faites vous remarquer” is closest to mine.

As Watkins points out (Dragon, p. 208), although this form of the intens. of √han has a singular object (somewhat unusually), it is “serially plural,” in that the vṛtrám is located in one cardinal direction after another; see also Schaeffer 204-5.


## 12
The first hemistich, couched in the 1st ps., consists only of a rel. clause, which breaks off. The “I” is clearly Viśvāmitra, whose name opens the hemistich and whose protective bráhman- is mentioned there -- making it very likely that pādas ab constitute this bráhman-, though it’s not quite clear what is protective about this truncated utterance.

The plupf. átuṣṭavam should not exist, at least in my opinion, since the two forms of the indicative pf. tuṣṭuvúḥ (VIII.6.12, 18) also appear to have preterital value. However, the contexts in VIII.6 do not guarantee that value -- it is possible that they are presential “they praise” (see comm. ad VIII.6.12). The existence of a pf.

subj. tuṣṭávat at VIII.98.16 also suggests that the indicative pf. is, or originally was, presential. The only other pf. forms in the RV, the act. part. tuṣṭuváṃs- (3x) and mid.

part. tuṣṭuvāná- (1x) are generally tr. as preterital, but again context does not dictate this rendering.


## 13
The tr. of the last pāda might better begin “Just he will make …” to reflect the íd.

## 15-16
As indicated in the publ. intro., the subject of these two vss. is the mysterious feminine sasarparī́-, which has been interpr. as differently as “Kriegstrompete” (BR, fld. by Gr), “Sangesgeweise” of the Viśvāmitras (Ge), and Vāc (Anukramaṇī, Sāy.). The interpr. of these vss. has been further complicated by the later tradition that sees them as concerning the supposed rivalry between Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha, for which I see no evidence at all in the RV.

Although I do not think all the puzzles are ultimately solvable, some clues can get us some distance. First, sasarparī́- is a vṛkī-type fem., and as Debrunner points out (AiG II.2.369), the major use of this inflectional type is for female beings (human and animal). This lends some credence to the opinion that the sasarparī́- is a cow of some sort (e.g., Re “La (vache) Sasarparī”). That vs. 14 concerns the ritually worthless cows of the Kīkaṭas would also support a contrast with an eminently worthy cow found among us. Second, these two vss. sound rather like a dānastuti (see jamádagnidatta- in 15b and yā́m me palastijamadagnáyo dadúḥ in 16d), and since the next part of the hymn goes off in a completely different direction, this could serve as a hymn-capping dānastuti for what precedes. Cf. I.126.2, a dānastuti hymn, where, after Kakṣīvant is given cows, he stretches the king's unaging fame to heaven: diví śrávo ‘járam ā́tatāna, highly reminiscent of our 2nd hemistich … tatāna, śrávo devéṣv amṛ́tam ajuryám.

Even if this sketch of the function of the vss. and of Sasarparī is accepted (a big if), it remains to analyze the word. I consider it a portmanteau pun. On the one hand it is a kind of anagram for the intensive of √sṛp ‘creep’, found in the RV only as the hapax adj. sarīsṛpá- (X.162.3), which I tr. ‘squirming’. On the other hand, it is also phonologically reminiscent of sabar-dúgha-, -duh- ‘sap-yielding’, of milk cows

-- two occurrences of which are found in nearby III.55 (vss. 12, 16) qualifying Night
and Dawn, one of whom bellows (mimāya as here) in vs. 13. (Acdg. to Griffith, Gr associates Sasarparī with Sabardughā, though this is not registered in the dictionary.) Just as the Sasarparī brings fame in 16, so does a sabardúh- in VI.48.12-13 “milk out immortal fame” (śrávò ‘mṛtyu dhúkṣata). Another possible association is sarpís- ‘melted butter’, adduced by Mayrhofer as a possible relative of sasarparī́- (EWA s.v. sarpís-). My tr. “squirming, sappy (cow called) Sasarparī” reflects my sense that all of these words have contributed to the designation sasarparī́- and these contributions are positive: sabardúgha- and sarpís- reflect the fecundity and richness associated with juice and fat, sarīsṛpa- the uncontainable vitality of a squirming young animal.

Needless to say, this is highly speculative and does not rest on properly chaste etymological principles, but it is difficult to see what could with regard to this maddening but phonologically delectable word.

The next question to ask is why Sasarparī “banishes neglect” (ámatim bā́dhamānā). Again this phrase supports the notion that the referent of sasarparī́- is a cow. In I.53.4 and X.42.10 ámati- is overcome by cows; the word is paired with hunger (kṣúdh-) in VIII.66.14, X.42.10, and X.43.3. Hunger and neglect can be combatted with cows and their nourishing products, and one of the combatants is Sasarparī.


## 16
Besides the continuing problem of sasarparī́-, the other difficulty is the hapax pakṣyā̀in c. Gr takes it as ‘aus Monatshälften bestehend’ (flg. BR), Ge (/WG) ‘auf meiner Seite stehend’, Re as ‘ailée’ or ‘prenant parti (pour moi)’. The publ. tr.

strikes out on its own (though closest to Re’s first alternative). It involves reading sā́pakṣyā̀against the Pp (but involving no change in the Saṃhitā text), to be divided sā́apakṣyā̀. The latter would be the instr. of a nominal abstract in - i yā- (see AiG II.2.840), a rare but attested type built primarily to -a-stems. Here potentially to apakṣá- ‘wingless’ (cf. AV XI.5.21), hence ‘winglessness’. What might this bizarre confection have to do with the passage? The rather flimsy connection is via the daughter of the Sun (sū́ryasya duhitā́in 15c) and a possible reference to Dawn in 16c: the same phrase návyam ā́yur dádhānā is used of Dawn in VII.80.2). (Like) the former, Sasarparī has stretched the Kuśikas’ fame to the gods; (like) the latter, she has brought fame to all the five peoples. These feats might be expected to require special forms of transport, such as wings, if the agent is not a supernatural traveler like Dawn or the Sun’s Daughter. But Sasarparī is a cow, hence wingless.

I realize how fragile -- and potentially ludicrous -- this suggestion is, however, and it might be better to play it safe with something like ‘on my side’.


## 17
As noted in the publ. intro., this verse and the rest of this little section are reminiscent of the final vs. of III.33.13, against disaster on a journey, specifically there a river crossing.

The hapax pātalyè is entirely unclear, besides being a dual referring to some part of the chariot.

On the thematic medial stem dáda- in the sense ‘hold, keep safe’, see Gotō (1st Class, 171-72, flg. Wackernagel).


## 19
On abhí vyayasva see comm. ad VII.33.4. I assume ‘engird’ refers to the ends of the axle being embedded in the wheel hub.

The loc. spandané is generally taken as a third type of wood (besides khadiráand śiṃśápā-), but while the other two words are standard designations of trees, spandaná- is ordinarily not, but rather refers to a type of motion -- jerking or kicking.

I take it to refer here to the elasticity or flexibility of Dalbergia sissoo (śiṃsapā-), a quality it has (at least acdg. to the internet).


## 20
On the problematic ā́vasā́ā́(Saṃhitā) / ā́ava’saí ā́(Pp.), see detailed disc.

by Scar (576-77), who lays out the various phonological and morphological possibilities. As he points out, the reading of Holland van Nooten, ā́ávasā ā́, with accent on the first a (possible on the basis of the Saṃhitā text) and deaccentuation of the final ā of the noun (contra both Saṃhitā and Pp), makes no sense (and does not conform to the transmitted text). The nominal form between the two ā́’s is by most accounts a root noun cmpd of √sā + áva. The question is what the case form is. I follow Whitney (§971a) and Old in reading -ās, contra the Pp., interpreting it (with Whitney and Old) as an irregular abl. sg. to this root noun cmpd. (expect *avasás) in infinitival usage. The parallelism in the hemistich supports this interpr., but see the other possibilities offered by Scar.

## 21-24
As noted in the publ. intro., these vss. are traditionally taken as depicting the rivalry between Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha, but I see no sign of this here; certainly Vasiṣṭha is not mentioned. The verbal link is supposed to be VII.104.16 adhamás padīṣṭa “let him fall lowest,” a curse uttered in a Vasiṣṭha hymn that echoes our 21c ádharaḥ sás padīṣṭa. But in neither case is the opponent named, and there is no reason to assume that Vasiṣṭha directs this at Viśvāmitra or vice versa.

The first vs. of this sequence (21) is quite straightforward; vs. 22 is more complex, but I feel fairly confident in its interpr. But vss. 23-24 are very difficult, and my interpr. is correspondingly quite provisional.

## 22
With Old, I reject the interpr. of cid in abc as a simile particle (contra Sāy and Ge); in all three cases the cid can be interpreted in its usual ‘even, even though, just’ sense. However, I differ from Old on the purport of the vs. He thinks it describes concrete events, possibly as a “Beschreibung von Zauberhandlungen,” while I think it contains two figurative descriptions of the impotence of the enemy -- in this I am closer to Ge’s notion of similes than to Old. I also find myself in the odd position of being in general agreement with Griffith’s interpr. (based on Ludwig’s).

Each hemistich describes an action involving great effort and drama that produces trivial and insubstantial results. In ab an ax is thoroughly heated, but this formidable weapon only cuts off the blossom of a silk cotton tree. (That silk cotton tree flowers are a vivid red might remind the audience of the real blood that might have been shed by a blazing hot ax.) In cd a pot, also heated, is boiling (yéṣantī), indeed has boiled over (práyastā), but all it produces is foam.


## 23
In my opinion, at least the first half of this vs. continues the sentiment of vs. 22: the enemy is powerless, despite bluff and bluster. In pāda a older translations supply an unidentified subject (“he”) for cikite, but the medial perfect of √cit is always pass.-intrans. and with Kü (176) I take the verb as an impersonal passive with an oblique subj. in the genitive; cf. I.51.7 táva vájraś cikite with the subject in the more normal nom. The point here is that the opponent’s missile (sā́yaka-) is so inconsequential as not to attract or deserve notice.

In b the first problem is the hapax lodhá-, which is universally taken as a red animal of some sort, a horse (Ge, Re), fox (Gr), or goat (Old, tentatively EWA). My quite different tr. ‘clod’ assumes (again, very tentatively) an association with a loose set of words for lump, clod, etc.: loṭṭha (Pkt., etc. =Vedic loṣṭá-, perhaps by hypersanskritization) (Turner 11157), *lottha / *lodda / *loddha (Tu. 11137), *luṭṭa (Tu 11077). The point would then be that “they” (whoever they are) lead (to sacrifice?) a lump of earth or the like, thinking that it’s an actual (sacrificial?) beast.

This situation reminds us of the chariot race of Mudgala and Mudgalānī (X.102) in which a block of wood is yoked with a bull, and the oddly assorted pair still wins the race (X.102.8-9). It might also remind us of X.28.9 in which an earth clod (logá-, not too distant phonologically) splits a stone. The other morphological fact of note in this pāda is that páśu is neut. and initially accented (versus the ubiquitous masc. paśú-).

This may be a deep archaism, matching Lat. pecu, Goth. faihu (cf. AiG II.1.20, II.2.474), or it may be a nonce attempt to de-animatize the word in this peculiar context.

Like vs. 22 and 23a, 23b describes an undesirable situation exactly contrary to what was aimed at: having mistaken a lump for a sacrificial animal, the actors will surely not get the results they wanted -- although X.102.8-9 and X.28.9 may point to success in unlikely circumstances. But the second hemistich depicts situations in which, though a mistake was possible, it was not made: they don’t set a bad horse (ávājin-) to race with a good one; they don’t put a donkey before the horses. The question is whether the subjects of the three 3rd pl. verbs (nayanti b, hāsayanti c, nayanti again d) are the same, or are the deluded weaklings of ab being contrasted with more clear-headed and successful actors in cd? Common sense suggests the latter, but the morphologically identical sequence of verbs with no overt subject or change of subject the former (as Old points out). I cannot make up my mind, esp.

because the following vs. muddies the waters even further.

Given the interpretational difficulties, the grammatical identity of áśvān is a minor problem. In the publ. tr. I take it as acc. pl. áśvān, but the Pp. interprets it as abl. áśvāt, with the final -n in sandhi before the nasal of nayanti. Either is possible (“lead before the horses” / “lead before the horse”), and given the uncertainty of meaning, there is no obvious way to choose. The abl. is supposed to be construed with puráḥ, but in fact ABL. + puráḥ is not a robust construction.


## 24
The good sense / bad sense problem continues, or returns, here. The sons of Bharata are ceremonially presented to us, with the here-and-now deictic imé. And we know from vs. 12 that the Bharata people (bhā́rata- jána-) are our people. But here they (or the subjects of the three 3rd pl. verbs: cikituḥ b, hinvánti c, pári ṇayanti d) seem to make the same bad choices that were visible in vss. 22-23, esp. 23b. The continuation of the 3rd pl. verbs invites us to make the Bharatas subjects also in vs. 22.

Is this a jokey anti-dānastuti? Are the “bad choices” I just mentioned meant to show that even if they do stupid things, they will still beat the incompetents depicted in vs. 22? Or that bad choices can still sometimes unaccountably lead to good? I am baffled.

The mealtime prapitvá- is well attested in the RV, but apapitvá- is found only here. Both Ge and Re take the words in some kind of figurative sense (e.g., Re apapitvá- ‘la retraite’, prapitvá- ‘l’élan-en-avant’), but since the -pitvá- compounds are otherwise only used of meals and the times of day associated with them, it seems best to maintain that sense here; so WG ‘die Nachessenzeit’, ‘die Voressenzeit’. In its contrast with pra here, I take apa as meaning ‘leaving the meal, post-prandial’ and therefore ‘non-meal’. My interpr. is influenced by my sense that the lesser choice is the one being made in each case in this vs. In c the standard tr. take ná as a simile marker: “they incite their own horse like an alien one.” But given the paired negative clauses in 23cd and the undoubted negative (or at least undoubted by the standard tr.) in the immediately preceding pāda (24b), where the ná takes the same position as in c, the pattern seems to impose another negative here. Under either interpr. the action is not a very smart one: spurring your own horse like an alien one should presumably mean that you don’t spur it at all.

The accentuation of jyā̀- in the bahuvrīhi jyā̀-vāja-, against simplex jyā́-, is attributed to the shift to initial accent in some other bahuvrīhis: AiG II.1.293 with Nachtr. 81. The standard tr. avoid the problem of the sense of this cmpd by attributing to -vāja- a sense it doesn’t otherwise have: Ge (WG; cf. Gr) Schnelligkeit, Re la force. But vā́ja- means ‘prize’ and bahuvrīhis with it as 2nd member ‘having X as prize’. I here assume that winning only a bowstring (minus the bow) would not be a glorious outcome.
