+++
title = "054"

+++
All Gods

## 01
All four pādas contain a distracted - i ya- form immediately after an early caesura.

The expression “listen with his … faces” is somewhat comic, though clearly domestic and heavenly “faces” refer to Agni’s aspects in those two places.


## 02
With Ge (/WG) I supply “to those two” in b, to provide both a goal for icháñ carati and an antecedent for yáyoḥ in c.

III.54.3-4: The co-occurrence of ṛtá- and satyá- in these two vss. (3a, 4b) is striking.

In keeping with my estimation of the difference in meaning between the two, I tr. the first as ‘truth’ and the latter as ‘real(ity)’. In both cases here the sense of satyá- is close to the English idiom “come true,” that is, “become real.” In 3a the poet is asking that the cosmic truth(s) associated with Heaven and Earth be realized in our own sphere, that H+E put themselves out, as it were, for our benefit. 4ab also concerns the truth(s) associated with H+E -- hence the adj. ṛ́tāvarī ‘truthful’ -- and the older poets, in finding these two entities that possess their own truth(s), spoke words (presumably about and in praise of H+E) that both reflected the reality of those truths and that also came true (satyavā́caḥ). This vs. esp. emphasizes the poets’ process of discovery of the truths about H+E.

As Re points out, the vs. contrasts the priests or poets in ab with the warriors in cd.


## 05
The first pāda is also found in the famous cosmogonic (or anti-cosmogonic) hymn X.129, as 6a. The final pāda of that hymn, X.129.7d, ends with an incomplete sentence “or if he does not know …?” (yádi vā ná véda). Though all the standard tr.

of this vs. here find a way to incorporate our 5d into the syntax of the verse, I by contrast think the same trailing off into uncertainty is found here as in X.129.7. The lower seats of the gods in heaven can be seen, but not the ones in the higher realms.

We can only discover so much. As for grammar, I take the yā́of d as a neut. pl.

referring to sádāṃsi in c (so also Re, though with a slightly different interpr. of the rest). Ge (/WG) instead take it as a fem. nom. sg. referring to the pathyā̀in b, with c as parenthetical. I do not entirely understand the vratéṣu in d. The hidden commandments may be the laws that govern the further reaches of the cosmos.


## 06
On the somewhat anomalous use of nṛcákṣas- here see comm. ad III.53.9.

The first pāda of this vs. seems to imply that, though the higher seats of the gods are not generally visible (5d), a kaví-, despite having only a man’s sight, has been able to see (abhí … acaṣṭa) Heaven and Earth whole, and that he is cognizant of the crucial paradox about them --- that they are joined but still distinct -- a paradox treated in the rest of the vs. and the following one (7).

The interpr. of b is hampered by the hapax víghṛte. On the surface it appears to belong to the root √ghṛ ‘sprinkle’, but it is difficult to make this yield immediate sense. It appears to serve the same function as víyute ‘separated’ in the next vs. (7a), and it has therefore been suggested that -ghṛta- actually belong to the root √hṛ ‘take’ or is a byform thereof (see, e.g., KEWA III.578). My publ. tr. reflects a tacit acceptance of such a view (or at least a willingness not to probe it too deeply), but I now wonder (without full conviction) whether in the context of mádantī ‘becoming exhilarated’ a sense that connects víghṛte to √ghṛ ‘sprinkle’ might be possible: “sprinkled separately but becoming exhilarated (together).” In any event I take it as a dual fem. acc. (with Ge [/WG]), not, with Re, a loc. sg. with yónā.

My tr. also depends on assuming that the exhilarating is happening jointly, in contrast to whatever type of separation is indicated by the ví-prefixed ppl. -- the same contrast between unity and separation found in cd. The place where this is happening in b, “the womb of truth” (ṛtásya yónā), may refer to two different places, the ritual ground (as so often) and, perhaps, the distant invisible seats referred to in 5d.


## 07
The -ū́ka-stem jāgarū́ka- in b is found only here in Vedic. I wonder if it owes its -ka-suffix to the femininized context of c, where H+E are identified as “sisters and young women” (svásārā yuvatī́) despite their oppositely gendered names.

On -ka- in women’s language, see my “Women’s Language in the Rig Veda?” (Gd.

Elizarenkova, 2008) and “Sociolinguistic Remarks on the Indo-Iranian *-ka-Suffix: A Marker of Colloquial Register” (IIJ 53 [2009]).

Note the virtual mirror image of víyute (a) and yuvatī́(c).

I do not understand the use of ā́d u here. Ordinarily this old ablative has a fairly strong temporal (“just after that”) or logical (“because of that”) sense, but since c has a concessive force (“although being …”), it is difficult to get ā́d to have logical force, and the fact of being sisters but called different names does not seem to have a temporal dimension. It reminds of the ca … ā́d in 11cd, but there ā́d easily expresses a standard temporal sense. It is possible, but extremely speculative, that the ā́d does reflect some sort of cosmic temporality: H+E, originally joined together, had a single identity and gender, but after the cosmogonic separation they received different, and genderedly oppositional, names. The monism of the next vs. (8cd) might (barely) support such an idea; note that “the One” there is neut. (ékam).

The standard interpr. (see Ge, etc.) of mithunā́ni nā́ma is that their names are of different genders when they are given separate names, with dyaúḥ generally masc.

and pṛthivī́fem. But they are also paired sisters, with the fem. du. designation ródasī.

This seems correct, and the publ. tr. should probably have reflected this sense of mithuná- better. I am somewhat puzzled by why the names are in the plural, however.


## 08
The notion of the pair of H+E, separate but unified, is, in the 2nd hemistich, replaced by an even starker contrast, the One (ékam, neut. as noted in comm. to previous vs.), which controls the Many, with the Many first configured as oppositional pairs in the neuter: the moving and the fixed (éjad dhruvám), the walking/roaming and the flying (cárad patatrí). ékam is found at the end of its pāda, just as it is in the refrain to the next hymn (III.55).

## 09
On the meaning of this vs. see publ. intro. It is the final vs. of the hymnwithin-the hymn, vss. 2-9 dedicated to Heaven and Earth. The 1st ps. poet reappears here; he is first found in vs. 2, the beginning of this self-contained portion, and has been absent since, though he may be related to the 3rd ps. kaví- in vs. 6.

As indicated in the publ. intro., I think this vs. has a double meaning, aided by the double readings of two items in it: ádhi √i, which means both ‘go upon’ (literally) and ‘study’ (‘go over’, figuratively), and the unnamed dyaúḥ, present both as the divinity Heaven alluded to in the phrase in b “great father, begetter” (gen. maháḥ pitúr janitúḥ; for this as a designation of dyaúḥ cf., e.g., I.164.33 dyaúr me pitā́janitā́) and as heaven the place, suggested by the locational adv. yátra ‘where’ in c, introducing the place where the gods take their stand. The poet is both studying the ancient cosmic mysteries he has been attempting to understand in the previous vss.

(esp. 5-6) and is embarking on the path that leads to the place where the gods are established, beyond the ken of mortals. Recall the question in 5b “What is the pathway that leads to the gods?” (devā́m̐áchā pathyā̀kā́sám eti), a question followed by the statement that only the lower seats of the gods are visible. Here purāṇám in pāda a can qualify ‘path’ -- not the fem. pathyā̀in 5b but the more familiar masc.

pánthā-, qualified as purāṇá- in IV.18.1 (cf. also purāṇám ókaḥ ‘ancient home’ in nearby III.58.6, referring to the Aśvins’ dwelling, presumably also heaven). The gods are themselves on a separate path (pathí vyùte d) in the same place, at least by my interpr. Despite their different representations in the (written) Saṃhitā text and in the Pp., vyùta- here and víyuta- in 7a must be the same form, ppl. to ví √yu; in recitation they would be identical. The verb unoti to the supposed root √u to which vyùta- is sometimes referred (see, e.g., Ge n. 9d) is actually also a form of √yu, in the sequence vyùnoti in V.31.1, also meaning ‘separates’. Cf. EWA II.503.


## 10
This vs. forms a sort of ring with vs. 1, enclosing the Heaven and Earth hymnlet of vss. 2-9. Like vs. 1 it begins with imám followed by a word for hymn (1a imám … śūṣám, 10a imáṃ stómam), and with 1cd it contains a verb form of √śru ‘hear’ with god(s) as subject (10b).

On ṛdūdára- see EWA s.v. ARD, though he is somewhat cagey about its formation. I assume the 2nd member is udára- ‘belly’, with the literal sense ‘moistbellied’ being equivalent to our ‘tender-hearted’. This assumes a bahuvrīhi with an adjectival first member of the form ṛdu-, a shape (disyllabic adj. ending in -i- or -u-) that often triggers (or is at least associated with) 2nd member accent in bahuvrīhis (see AiG II.1.296ff.).


## 11
The first hemistich is either a syntactic fragment -- a long NP in the nominative establishing the topic -- or pátyamānaḥ is a predicated pres. part. (The publ. tr. takes it as the former.) In c ca appears to be subordinating, given the accent on the verb áśreḥ. I would now be inclined to delete the “and” in the publ. tr. and remove the parens.

from “when.”

## 14
I am not entirely certain why “victorious Bhaga” is brought in here in a simile in this Viṣṇu vs. I suppose that our praises are making a triumphal procession to Viṣṇu, and the mention of Bhaga may suggest our hope that these praises will be met with a satisfactory portion of goods in return. See 21c below.

In cd it is tempting (see, e.g., Old) to make mardhanti the verb of the rel. cl.

beginning with yásya, which otherwise lacks a verb and appears truncated. But mardhanti is stubbornly unaccented. Construing yásya pūrvī́ḥ as a relativized expression of possession, we can assume that it asserts that Viṣṇu has a large female entourage; these females are further characterized in the independent clause in d as “generatrices” (jánitrīḥ), for which “mothers-to-be” seemed a more acceptable English rendering, who attend on him and do not neglect him. What this is all about escapes me, though Viṣṇu is associated with the wives of the gods in I.156.2.


## 15
The standard tr. construe the instr. víśvair vīryaìḥ as the object of pátyamānaḥ (“being master of all vīryá-), but when pátya- takes an object, it is in the acc., including once in this hymn: 8c patyate víśvam. In the only other passage in which Gr identifies the verb stem as taking an instr., VI.13.4, I take the instr. as here, as expressing the means by which the subject displays his mastery.


## 16
The first half-vs. treats the kinship we share with the Aśvins, a theme occasionally touched on elsewhere (e.g., VIII.73.12 adduced by Ge). The grammatical problem in the hemistich is the (pseudo-)root noun cmpd. bandhupṛ́ch-, which has been interpr. both actively (“asking about [their] kinship”: Gr, Ge [/WG], Lü 526, Scar 328-29) and passively (“asked about [their] kinship”: Re). I have followed the Re path, on the assumption that it is more likely that humans are asking the Aśvins about it than that the Aśvins are wondering about it themselves. But in general I prefer root noun compounds to have active meaning, and it is possible that the majority position is the correct one. It does not seem to have too much effect on the interpr. of the rest.


## 17
There is phraseological connection between the first pāda of this vs. and the previous vs.: cā́ru nā́ma “dear name” repeats verbatim the end of 16b, and though they are etymologically unrelated, kavayaḥ in 17a echoes ákavaiḥ in 16d.

The first half of the verse most likely refers to the Ṛbhus, though they are not named until c. The “dear name” of these unnamed subjects is probably “gods,” the predicative voc. devā(ḥ) in b. The Ṛbhus were not originally divine, but achieved the status of gods because of their wondrous acts in the sacrifice. So to be addressed as “gods” by Indra is precious to them indeed.

The second half-vs. consists of a pāda (c) with a sg. nom. (sákhā) referring to Indra, accompanied by a pl. instr. (ṛbhúbhiḥ) and no verb, followed by one (d) with a 2nd pl. impv. (takṣatā). It is tempting to construe the two pādas together, with a mixture of constructions: the sg. nom. + instr. serving as the equivalent of a pl. subj.

to the verb in d, but I have kept strictly to the grammar, as do the standard tr.

## 18
Ge (/WG) takes pl. yajñíyāsaḥ as predicated of aryamā́… áditiḥ with pāda a simply a nominal clause; this is strictly impossible, since the predicate adj. should be dual. Ge explains the plural on the grounds that the poet is thinking of the other Ādityas. This is possible, but I prefer to take yajñíyāsaḥ as a third term referring to an unspecified set of other gods (quite possibly the rest of the Ādityas), and all three terms as the subj. of pl. yuyóta in c. (So also Re.) The naḥ in pāda a then simply anticipates the same form in c, and b is parenthetical.

## 19-20
The call to the gods to hear us, found first in vs. 1, returns here at almost the end of the hymn (19c, 20a, 20c). Note that in 19c the verb is sg. (śṛṇótu) with a series of sg. subjects (and one pl., ā́paḥ, in the middle), while in 20a it is pl.

(śṛṇvantu) with a grammatically pl. subj. In 20c a sg. nom. with an instr. pl. of accompaniment (rather like the construction I suggested in 17c) takes a sg. verb, which suggests that my suggestion for 17c is incorrect.


## 21
The standard tr. take bhágaḥ as the subj. of mṛdhyā(ḥ) in c; e.g., Ge “Bhaga [das Glück] möge in meiner Freundschaft nicht fehlen, o Agni.” With such a 3rd ps. subj., this requires mṛdhyāḥ to be a precative (Re calls it a “pseudo-précatif” for some reason) rather than a straight 2nd sg. opt. This is, of course, not impossible.

But the desire expressed here, that Agni make sure that Bhaga does the right thing, does not seem the usual type of prayer addressed to gods in the RV. I take pāda c as consisting of two clauses, the first nominal, the 2nd, addressed to Agni, consisting only of a negative and a verb (cf. for this construction with this verb, ná mardhanti in 14d above), with Agni the subj. I take bhágaḥ as a common noun in the publ. tr.; alternatively it might mean “(May) Bhaga (be) in partnership with me.” The final word of the vs., the gen. purukṣóḥ ‘consisting in much livestock’, is a bahuvrīhi variant of the phrase bhū́ri paśváḥ ‘abundance of livestock’, likewise ending its vs. in 15d.


## 22
Old is disturbed by tā́m̐in c and suggests emending pṛtsú tā́m̐to pṛtsutā́, loc. sg. of pṛtsutí-. Because of the peculiar mid-pāda position of tā́n, I favor this suggestion though it requires erasing one accent.
