+++
title = "055"

+++
All Gods As noted in the published introduction, this hymn is notable for its refrain, “great is the one and only lordship of the gods” (mahád devā́nām asuratvám ékam), with its juxtaposition of devá- and ásura-.


## 01
The perfect in b, ví jajñe, is entirely ambiguous between √jan and √jñā, and I think it likely that both are meant. In this context there is not too much difference between a syllable being born and being discerned. The “track of the cow” is presumably here the ritual ground, and the reference is to the ritual speech of the dawn sacrifice. Re astutely notes the juxtaposition of akṣára- and padá-, reinforcing the speech theme, even though padá- has the sense of ‘track, footprint’ here. See padáin the next vs. (2b) for a possible reference to speech.

The standard tr. all supply a first-person subject in c, with a verb like “I proclaim.” No one but Old attempts to justify this addition, and his attempt is halfhearted. I instead take c as continuing b and take the underlying form of prabhū́ṣan to be prabhū́ṣat, neut. nom./acc. sg., before a following nasal, against the Pp. The participle modifies akṣáram in b. In my interpr. the “syllable” (that is, the essence of speech) attends to the gods’ commandments, perhaps by giving them imperishable verbal form. I also suggest that the “great syllable” is actually the refrain found in d; note that mahā́t in b takes the same position as it does in the refrain. The refrain may also be the most important of the gods’ vratas; see also 6c.


## 02
For juhuranta see comm. ad I.43.8; I take the form to √hvṛ ‘go crookedly’, not √hṛ ‘anger, be angry’. The point here is that the gods and the ancestors, who themselves know the path/word, should not keep us from following this same ritual cursus. There is no question of anger that I can see.

The standard interpr., that c refers to the beacon of the kindled ritual fire visible between heaven and earth, is surely correct. This kindled fire is referred to more straightforwardly in the next vs., 3c sámiddhe agnaú.


## 03
The flying, scattered desires of the poet here and his turn, in a ritual context, to the old ways of doing things reminds us of the opening of III.38, a hymn about the development of a poetic vocation within the age-old tradition, esp. III.38.1cd. In this connection it’s worth noting that our refrain, mahád devā́nām asuratvám ékam, finds an echo in III.38.4c mahát tád vṛ́ṣṇo ásurasya nā́ma “Great is that name of the bull, the lord.” Ge also appositely adduces VI.9.6, also about a poet’s training and his selfconscious assumption of the mantle of tradition, with his inspiration deriving from the ritual fire.

The ṛtá- that we wish to speak may again be the refrain that follows immediately.


## 04
The ví … purutrā́of the preceding vs. (3a) returns here, though with the preverb bound to a ppl. (víbhṛtaḥ); the phrase is contrasted with samāná- to express the theme of unity and diversity in balance. The “common king” is of course Agni, and the image is both of this single god being found on many different ritual grounds and of the ritual fire on any particular ritual ground being divided into three.

With Ge, I assume that the pair in c is the kindling sticks. Cf. III.31.2d and X.27.14b, esp. tasthaú mātā́“the mother stands still,” comparable to our kṣéti mātā́ “the mother rests peacefully.” The epithet ‘having two mothers’ (dvimātár-) used of Agni in 6a and 7a is a reference to the paired kindling sticks.


## 05
As is generally acknowledged, the feminine plurals in the first hemistich refer to plants; the idea is the common paradox that fire is covertly present in all plants because overt fire is produced from wood. Here the three types of plants must be 1) ‘older’ (pū́rvā-) = woody and easily burned, 2) ‘later’ (áparā-) = still green and obviously growing and fire grows up with them, 3) tender (táruṇī-) = sprouting ones, which are hard to burn, but he's in them already anyway. Most tr. take sadyáḥ with Agni, not the new-born plants -- e.g., Re “est d'un coup au dedans des (plantes) nouvelle(-ment) nées” -- but sadyáḥ is strongly associated with forms of √jan, esp. in III (e.g., III.5.8 sadyó jātáḥ; sim. III.32.9, 10; 48.1), in the sense of “just born.” The covert presence of fire is the topic of the paradox in c: he is always within the plants (antárvatīḥ) even though they have not been impregnated (ápravītāḥ) sexually.


## 06
There seems to be a consensus that the phrase śayúḥ parástāt in pāda a refers to a form of Agni in the other world, that is, to the sun in some manifestation (see esp. Ge n. 6ab). This seems to me entirely unnecessary and a cosmic intrusion in a sustained description that is otherwise entirely focused on the ritual fire (vss. 1-9).

Instead the hemistich seems to contrast the fire that was immanent and motionless (śayúḥ) in the plants, as described in vs. 5, released after birth and roaming restlessly, as a newly kindled fire does. The depiction of his resting place as ‘far away’ (parástāt) may seem exaggerated if only plants are involved, but conceptually, and to a certain extent physically (since the kindling wood has to have been gathered from somewhere), it seems to me appropriate.


## 07
Pāda b is a elaboration on and corrective of 6b. It is not the whole fire that wanders untethered, only the top of it (ágram), while the base stays put on the hearth.

Most tr. take ágram as an acc. with ánu; I follow Re (who in turn follows Bergaigne) in taking it as the neut. nom. subj.

The accent on cárati is contrastive with the immediately following kṣéti, which opens a new clause.


## 08
This verse contains quite oblique phraseology. The first half-verse appears to describe the increasingly aggressive ritual fire after it has been kindled. I take āyát as the neut. pres. part. to √i + ā́‘come’, substantivized to mean ‘approach, advent’, and I supply a gen. ‘of him’, which is parallel to the gen. simile in pāda a. The growing fire is compared to a fighter involved in close combat. I have rendered pratīcī́nam, lit. ‘turned outward, opposite, face to face’, as the slangy ‘right in your face’ to convey the belligerent nearness of the fire’s approach.

The c pāda is likewise hard to interpret. As Ge notes, the lexeme antár √car is generally used for the journey between earth and heaven undertaken by Agni, the messenger or “go-between” for the earthly and heavenly realms. This usage is found in fact in the very next vs., 9b, where Agni is clearly the subject and is journeying through the space between heaven and earth -- as well as in numerous other passages (see esp. X.4.2). As Ge also points out, in I.173.3 it is ‘Speech’ (vā́k) who plays this role. Similarly, in our passage ‘thought’ (matí-) -- i.e., as often, thought that has taken shape as ritual speech -- is the subject and undertakes the role of messenger. As for the tribute of the cow (niṣṣídhaṃ góḥ), with Ge I take this as referring to the bovine product that serves as oblation, namely ghee. Thus, ritual speech makes the swift journey to the gods in heaven from the ritual ground, bringing the news of the oblation or serving as its envoy. On niṣṣídh- see comm. ad III.51.5.


## 09
In pāda a the “gray messenger” is Agni, gray because of his ash; I take the fem. pl. āsu as referring to the plants (see vs. 5) that provide the fuel that feeds Agni’s flames. The fire “bears down on them” (/ “keeps pursuing them”; ní veveti) as it spreads over the firewood. (A reference to his hearths is also possible, but I think less likely.) In contrast to the earthly spread of the fire depicted in pāda a, b shows it rising towards heaven in its messenger role. I take rocanéna as an instr. of extent of space, rather than referring to Agni’s own luminosity with the standard tr. However, taking it in the latter way would not appreciably alter the sense of the pāda.

The publ. tr. is somewhat misleading, in having ‘bearing’ for both ní veveti in a and bíbhrat in c, though of course English ‘bear’ has entirely different senses in the two idioms.


## 10
This verse continues the theme of vss. 8-9, Agni’s role as go-between. Its point is to show us that Agni as messenger reaches to the highest places in heaven, those defined by the endpoint of Viṣṇu’s famous striding. But the introduction of Viṣṇu also initiates the transition from the exclusive focus on Agni and his kindling.

Note the alliteration: (go)pā́ḥ paramaṃ pāti pā́thaḥ, priyā́…


## 11
The yád in pāda c has no obvious function. JSK (I.136) interprets the pāda as containing an “X and which Y” construction (“the dusky one and [the one] who is ruddy”), with yád instead of yā́by attraction to the anyád of b. Although this is a tempting way to account for the yád, in addition to the wrong gender the rel. is wrongly positioned: we should expect *yád/yā́ca áruṣī. Ge’s suggestion, that this contains the izafe-like [not Ge’s term] yád that attaches appositives in Vedic prose, may be correct. It’s also worth noting that the structure of c is identical to 12a mātā́ ca yátra duhitā́ca dhenū́, with two nom. singulars conjoined by double ca, a yasubordinator between them, and a dual nom. at the end of the pāda referring jointly to the two singulars. So it is possible that the yád of 11c comes from the model of 12a, where yátra has function.


## 12
With Ge I interpret this fem. pairing to be Night and Dawn, who in the previous vs. were identified as sisters. They jointly nurse the infant fire at the early morning sacrifice; the reference is probably to twilight, the transition between Night and Dawn. Re prefers to identify them as Heaven and Earth, but this requires him to interpret Heaven as a female, and it also makes less ritual sense. On the other hand, the same fem. dual samīcī́is used in vs. 12 of Heaven and Earth.

## 13
The pāda-initial position of anyásyā(ḥ) strongly suggests that it is indefinite (‘another’, not ‘the other’), contra the standard tr. Since definite anyá- … anyá- (“the one … the other”) is correctly positioned in 11b, 15b, and 17ab, I think we should take the contrastive positioning seriously and connect this phraseology with 4c, which also contains initial anyá- (anyā́vatsám bhárati kṣéti mātā́“Another bears the calf; the mother rests peacefully.”). In that passage the “mother” of the fire, the lower kindling stick, rested, while the upper kindling stick, identified as “another,” carried the infant fire. Here the situation is reversed: the anyā́- form refers to the mother of the calf/fire, which is now being licked by a different feminine entity -- in this case, in my opinion, the ghee oblation. A second pairing also imposes itself, however: in vs. 12 we had a different feminine duo: Night and Dawn. Their proximity in 12 invites an alternative reading of 13a, underscoring the temporal transition, with Night functioning as the mother of the fire, but Dawn taking over, tending it and bellowing over it. This latter interpr. seems to be continued in the next vs. (14ab).

I confess that I do not entirely understand the purport of pāda b (nor, as far as I can see, does anyone else). The hemistich is found identically also in X.27.14cd, though given the virtual impenetrability of that hymn, this doesn’t help much. Contra Ge (/Gr, etc.), I do not think bhū́- here is ‘world’, nor that the instr. expression káyā bhuvā́means “in welcher Welt” (see Old for objection to this tr.). Instead I take bhū́- as ‘form’ or (with Old, etc.) ‘existence-form’, with the phrase meaning “in what shape or guise.” I suspect that the pāda asks how the surrogate mother/cow, who took over from the fire’s mother in pāda a, will deliver nourishment (symbolized by her udder) to the infant fire. The answer may be given in pāda c: it is “the milk of truth” (ṛtásya … páyas-), which we might further translate into “the milk of correct ritual speech.”


## 14
Ge (/WG) takes pádyā as merely a locational ‘unten’, contrasting with ūrdhvā́at the beginning of the next pāda. It seems unlikely that a formation with so much lexical content would be used in so colorless a manner, esp. given the deployment of padá-forms elsewhere in the hymn (padé iva níhite beginning the next vs. [15a], padé góḥ 1b, padajṇā́ḥ 2b). The “feet” of Dawn are presumably, in naturalistic terms, the light of dawn nearest to the horizon; shining through morning mists it will take on various shapes and colors. (Lü [617 n. 3] suggests that the various shapes and forms are vegetation on the earth, which is also worth considering.) But in mytho-ritual terms, if Dawn is the cow nurturing the young fire in 13b (as well as pāda b in this vs.), the “wondrous forms” (vápūṃṣi) she clothes herself in and the “many shapes” she possesses (pururū́pā) are the forms and colors of the fire over which she stands. That the scene is set on the ritual ground is suggested by pāda c, where “I” roam across “the seat of truth” (ṛtásya sádma), which I take as a reference to seat of the ritual. Ge (/WG), however, interpret the pāda as simply meaning “I wander ‘im Geiste’” -- I think because of the vidvā́n ‘knowing’, though that word usually refers to knowledge of the ritual or to cosmic knowledge related to the religio-ritual system. With Ge (/WG) I take pururū́pā as fem. nom. sg.; however, it can equally be neut. acc. pl. (with Gr and Re) modifying vápūṃṣi. The choice actually has almost no effect on the sense of the pāda.

## 14-15
The publ. tr. is somewhat misleading, in that vápūṃṣi in 14a is tr. as “wondrous forms” and dasmé in 15a as “the wondrous one.” I might substitute “marvellous forms” for the first, to avoid the impression of an etymological connection.


## 15
This vs. seems to continue the theme of Night and Dawn. The anyád … anyád construction of pāda b echoes that in 11b, where Night and Dawn were first introduced, and in fact our pāda b, with one hidden and one visible, paraphrases 11b, with one shining and the other black, and forms a small ring.

Moreover, the two “set down within the wondrous one” echoes 12c ṛtásya té sádasy īḷe antáḥ “I reverently invoke the two within the seat of truth.” I take dasmáto refer to the ritual fire/ritual ground, and one of the marvels is that two such large entities (Night and Dawn) can fit into something so small.

The vs. also recycles various thematically significant lexical items: padá- (see comm. ad 14); nihité echoing ní dadhe (13b); antár (12c and passim: 2c, 5b, 5c, 8c, 9b, 12c; antár is in a sense the signature word of this hymn); anyád … anyád 11b.

The ‘pathway’ (pathyā̀) takes us back to III.54.5 where a question about “the pathway leading to the gods” (devā́m̐áchā pathyā̀) initiated the mysteries that have dogged us ever since.


## 16
The miraculous milkers in this vs. are taken by all standard tr. as rain clouds, flg. one of Sāy.’s suggestions (the other being the heavenly regions). In context this interpr. seems perverse. The verse forms part of a tight little section (beginning with vs. 11) concerning Night and Dawn and their nourishing of the infant ritual fire. Our vs. esp. echoes vs. 12: dhenávaḥ … sabardúghāḥ … ápradugdhāḥ “milk-cows, sap-yielding, not milked out” is the equivalent in the plural of 12ab dhenū́, sabardúghe dhāpayete “the two milk-cows, sap-yielding, give suck” in the dual. I find it highly unlikely that the vocabulary here repeated from 12 would refer to entirely different entities (clouds), which, moreover, have no connection with the dawn ritual depicted here. Instead, in the course of this section the joint nurturing activity of Night and Dawn (11-12) has given way to the dominance of Dawn over Night (13ab, 14ab), and though both Night and Dawn are present in vs. 15, one of them (Night) is hidden (15b). This trend accords with the natural phenomenon: at dawn, light dissipates darkness. In our vs. 16 the plural cows either represent the Dawns in general -- the plural of Dawn being often interchangeable with the singular -- or the beams of light, the “dawn cows,” of a single Dawn. The expression “becoming new ever again” (pāda c návyā-navyā yuvatáyo bhávantīḥ) might favor the former possibility, since it reminds us of the daily parade of ever-new youthful Dawns. My identification of the cows with the dawns here admittedly leaves the noisiness (“let them be noisy,” ā́… dhunayantām) unexplained. I would suggest either that there is also a reference to the crackling of the fire wood as the ritual fire is kindled at dawn, or that it refers to the general noise attendant on dawn as the various creatures awake, including real cows mooing to be milked. Note that already in vs. 13a Dawn (in my interpr.) ‘lows’ (mimāya) over the infant fire. I think we can safely banish the putative rain clouds.


## 17
As indicated in the publ. intro. I consider this vs. to be transitional between the fire-kindling vss. and the arrival of Indra at the sacrifice. I therefore think that the reference is ambiguous. In the publ. intro. I suggested a trio of possible referents: Agni, Soma, and Indra. I now think it is only Agni and Indra and that Agni is the sole referent in ab, with transition from Agni to Indra in c.

This opinion is very different from the standard, which takes Parjanya as the subject here (flg. on the supposed rain cloud vs.). The issue is further complicated by the fact that in the next hymn (III.56.3) yet another being, possibly Tvaṣṭar or Tvaṣṭar’s son, is described as retodhā́vṛṣabháḥ “a bull, depositor of semen,” which matches our vṛṣabháḥ … ní dadhāti rétaḥ. Although I must concede that Parjanya is described with the same phrase as III.56.3 in VII.101.6 and is said to deposit semen also in V.83.1, such designations are not exclusive to Parjanya. In I.128.3 it is Agni who is … réto vṛṣabháḥ kánikradad, dádhad rétaḥ kánikradat “a bull ever-roaring, depositing his semen’ (with √krand, rather than √ru, ‘roar’), and I think Agni is the referent here as well. I do not entirely understand the two herds of cows, but suggest that it may have to do with the embryonic doctrine of the cycle of waters that is later developed in the Upaniṣads, whereby rain falls from heaven and causes plants to grow; the plants, as fuel, produce/give birth to the fire, whose smoke goes to heaven and becomes clouds from which the rain falls, and the cycle begins again. Our passage may have an abbreviated form of this: the bull Agni is roaring (that is, crackling as fire) among one set of cows (plants as firewood); the smoke goes to heaven and the rain (his semen) falls to earth and produces plants (the other herd).

Note vs. 5 much earlier in the hymn, where it is said of the plants “Having (him) within, (though) unimpregnated they give birth to (him).” The transition from Agni to Indra occurs in pāda c, in my interpr. Both Agni and Indra can be called kṣápāvant- (/kṣapā́vant-) ‘earth-protector’, indeed simultaneously. (See X.29.1 and my “Śleṣa in the Rig Veda?” [Fs. Gerow], 163-64.) Indeed this epithet is even more flexible: as I discussed in the Gerow Fs., the first element may be either kṣá(m) ‘earth’ or kṣáp- ‘night’. (For the possible morphological analyses, see the loc. cit.) Under the latter analysis, the epithet would be appropriate only for Agni, but under the former to both Agni and Indra, so the first word in c may slip from clear reference to Agni to double reference. The following two words, bhága- and rā́jan-, are also used in the RV of both Agni and Indra, though ‘king’ is more common for Indra than Agni. The transition is complete.


## 18
In my interpr. this vs. announces the arrival of Indra with a splendid team of horses. This new topic is signaled by prá nú vocāma beginning pāda b. The exact arrangement of the six and five isn’t clear to me. Re suggests that the double nú indicates that there are two separate clauses here. He may be right (“now there is an abundance of horses of the hero; we will proclaim (it) now”), though the difference in sense is slight.

## 19-21
I’m not sure why Tvaṣṭar appears here. The previous vs., with the arrival of Indra at the sacrifice, may mark the end of the ritualistic vss. that dominated the hymn up till now. The few remaining vss. then celebrate the prosperity and abundance that our good relationship with the gods, via the sacrifice, will produce: teeming life provided by Tvaṣṭar (19), goods filling the two worlds provided by Indra (20), peace provided by Agni (21), and the inanimate earthly supports for all this prosperity, which provide their gifts to Indra (22).


## 19
It is striking that pāda a is reused in the famous Yama-Yamī dialogue hymn (X.10.5b), where Yamī claims that Tvaṣṭar made them a married couple in the womb. I do not think there is an echo of that story here; the point of intersection is simply the association of Tvaṣṭar with conception, pregnancy, and birth (cf., e.g., X.184).

Acdg. to the standard interpr. (Ge [/WG], Re; cf. Klein DGRV I.218, Kü 314), prajā́ḥ is to be construed with pupóṣa, on the basis of X.170.1 prajā́ḥ pupoṣa purudhā́… This is not impossible, but it seems unnecessary, esp. as the latter hymn is quite late. It also implies that purudhā́should also be construed with pupóṣa, but this is impossible because jajāna is unaccented. It is also unlikely that prajā́ḥ and purudhā́should be separated, given purudhā́prajā́vān in the next hymn (III.56.3b).

At best we can take prajā́ḥ purudhā́with both verbs: “thrives with regard to offspring in great quantity and has begotten them [=offspring in great quantity]” or perhaps “thrives with regard to offspring and has begotten them [=offspring] in great quantity.” Such an interpr., with an acc. of respect and a fundamentally intransitive verb, follows that of Kü (314). I do not believe that pupóṣa here can have the transitive/causative sense that the other tr. ascribe to it (e.g., Re “a fait fleurir les créatures”).


## 20
I assume that the subject of this vs. is Indra. One of his standard cosmogonic deeds involves the creation and separation of the two worlds, the separation here implied by the material crammed between them. Indra is of course commonly identified as a vīrá-; he also “finds goods” (e.g., II.13.11, VIII.61.5), though so do other gods as well as mortals.


## 21
The first three pādas here are almost identical to I.73.3abc, where Agni is definitely the referent. For disc. of some of the detail, see comm. there.
