+++
title = "056"

+++
All Gods I will not attempt to further identify the referents in these enigmatic vss.

beyond the sketchy suggestions given in the publ. intr. Ample disc. can be found in the standard tr. As in many such mystical hymns, the grammar is mostly quite straightforward; it’s the purport that remains cloaked in obscurity.


## 01
The standard tr. take b as obj. of minanti in a, which is certainly possible, while I take it as a separate nominal clause. The choice has no real implications.

In c I take ródasī as subj. of the infin. nináme in d, along with párvatā(ḥ), but the standard tr. (also Thieme, ZDMG 95: 90) supply a different infinitive in c, generated from minanti in a. So, e.g., Ge “Weder die Zauberkundigen noch die Weisen schmälern … / Nicht sind Himmel und Erde … (zu schmälern) …” I do not see the need for supplying additional material. The only possible semantic arguments might be 1) that the two worlds would not be subject to being bowed down (but I don’t see why), or 2) that vedyā́- wouldn’t be capable of performing something physical (like bowing down) but only mental/moral (like transgressing), but such an action seems well within normal limits for the Vedic conceptual universe. Another possible way to construe pāda c is to take ródasī as another subject of minanti: “nor do the two worlds transgress the commandments.” This has the merit of not supplying anything, but makes vedyā́bhiḥ harder to incorporate. Old suggests this possibility as well as supplying nináme; he does not suggest supplying a different infinitive in c.

The word vedyā́- can be either positive or negative depending on context.

Here it must be the latter; cf. also VII.21.5.


## 02
WG suggest that átyā(ḥ) is a hapax related to ánta- ‘border, edge’, ántya-, tr.

‘Begrenzungen’. Since no other forms show such a putative zero-grade, since ántyais not found in the RV, since the stem átya- is well attested, and since there is no metrical advantage to reducing an *antyā(ḥ) here to átyā(ḥ), this suggestion doesn’t merit adopting. In a hymn of this nature, the females might as well be steeds as boundaries. For other attempts to reinterp. átyā(ḥ) see those rejected by Old and another given by Ge (n. 2c).


## 03
On the basis of tváṣṭā … viśvárūpaḥ in the preceding hymn (III.55.19) I take the subj. here to be Tvaṣṭar. Since Tvaṣṭar has a large role in the shaping and begetting of offspring, the identification makes sense in this context.

As Ge (et al.) points out, the deriv. pājasyà- at the beginning of the Bṛhad Āraṇyaka Up. (ŚBM X.6.4.1) in the list of the body parts of the sacrificial horse seems to refer to the underbelly: dyaúṣ prṣṭḥ ̥ ám antárikṣam udáraṃ prthiv ̥ ī́pājasyàm díśaḥ pārśvé ... “heaven its back, midspace its belly, earth the underbelly, directions its flanks …,” which accounts for the standard tr. here ‘having three bellies’.

However, here in this passage with polarized gender and a sexual tone, I think it should also contrast explicitly with tryudhā́(better *tryūdhā; see Old, who explains the shortening on the basis of following purudhá) ‘having three udders’. On a fourlegged animal the underbelly would be the part that sags behind the ribcage, where on a female paśu the udder would be. The corresponding male body part located there would be the groin, hence my tr. The image is the common one of the ur- creator as androgynous. See III.38.4-7, a deeply enigmatic hymn in this same maṇḍala, where the creator is also both a bull and viśvárūpa-.

In c I suggest that patyate may be ambiguous between ‘be master’ and ‘be husband’ (on the basis of páti-, which of course means both) because of the sexual activity in d.


## 04
I have no suggestions for the identity of the singular referent of a, cd (though the waters call to mind Indra), nor for the reason of what seems the intrusive b.


## 05
On this vs. see Thieme, Untersuchung 43-44 and 47-48. He is responsible for the second interpr. of vidátheṣu in b. See also vidátha- in III.38.5-6, a passage already adduced above ad vs. 3, and comm. thereon: ‘cosmic division’ seems the most likely interpr. of the stem there.

The three watery maidens in c may be evaluated in conjunction with II.5.5, also with the three (apparently watery) women who nourish Apām Napāt in II.35.5, and perhaps with the three goddesses of the Āprī hymns (Sarasvatī, Idā, and Bharatī).

Who they are here and what they are doing are unclear to me.

In d pátyamānāḥ ‘acting the master’ may be a sly joke, since it has females as its subj. and it was just used (3c) for the hyper-virile inseminator.


## 06
The emphasis on the day here is striking. Two different ‘day’ words get used: #trír ā́divaḥ …, divé-dive … trír no áhnaḥ#, with the two parallel expressions polarized at the beg. and end of the hemistich. For another poss. passage with both words, cf. IX.86.19 and comm. thereon, where the possible semantic difference between the two words is explored.


## 07
Schaefer (196-97) nicely points out that the “intensive” (i.e., frequentative) soṣavīti is the verbal equivalent of the āmreḍitas in 6cd (see comm. above) with the simple verb suva.

I am not certain what to do with pāda b. The standard tr. take Mitra-Varuṇa as parallel subjects with those in c, with the main verb in d. This is certainly possible, but conceptually it seems a bit odd. Do Mitra and Varuṇa want things from other gods? would they beg for such a gift? Also Savitar is regularly híraṇyapāṇi- (as in III.54.11), so the -pāṇi- adj. here (supāṇī́) would associate M+V with him.
