+++
title = "061"

+++
Dawn


## 01
In the publ. tr. “with a rich prize” is slightly misleading, since it represents only vā́jena, but “prize-giver with a prize” sounded flat.

“Young woman from of old” (purāṇī́… yuvatíḥ) reflects the usual paradox that Dawn is both new every day and the same every day from the beginning of time.

She is “Plenitude” (púraṃdhiḥ) because she distributes the priestly gifts at the dawn sacrifice.


## 03
The hapax caranīyámāna- seems an elaborate way to express what might as easily have been simply cárant-. Re tr. ‘traçant la marche’ and comments that it has “valeur durative-technique par rapport au simple cárantī.” My ‘making progress’ also attempts to differentiate it from the simple pres. to √car and to indicate its denominative origins.

## 04
The puzzle in this vs. is the image in pāda a, áva syū́meva cinvatī́. Some factors that contribute to this puzzle: 1) áva √ci is not otherwise found in Vedic. (In epic/classical Skt. it means ‘gather’.) 2) áva need not be construed with cinvatī́, but could go with yā́ti, esp. since tmesis in participles is considerably rarer than in finite verbs. 3) There are several roots √ci. 4) The referent of syū́man- isn’t clear.

To begin with the last, most interpr. locate syū́man- in the realm of sewing and garments. Ge tr. “die die Naht auszieht” (“who undoes/rips out a seam”), sim.

Old “… die Naht auftrennend,” Re “défaisant le fil.” Old suggest that it is the seam that holds the darkness(es) together. Sāy. goes further, in suggesting that it refers to a garment (vastram), which Dawn takes off. WG’s “Wie eine (Frau) den Gurt ablegend” may also reflect this image, though their n. vacillates between sewing and equestrian interpr. The problem with all of these attempts is that, in its few occurrences, syū́man- is otherwise used of horse tackle, esp. of reins; cf. the PN syū́ma-raśmi- (“*Band-Bridle” Mayrhofer, PersNam s.v.) and the cmpds syū́ma-gabhasti- (I.122.15 ‘with hands as its guiding rope’), syūma-gṛ́bh- (VI.36.2 ‘pulling at the reins’), as well as instr. syū́manā (I.113.17), all in horse/chariot contexts. Despite its derivation from √sīv ‘sew’, it therefore seems unlikely that only here in the RV would it refer to garment construction. And, although Dawn as a female might in principle be connected with sewing (if that was Vedic women’s work), in fact she is usually not, whereas her travels are a standard theme; note, e.g., her chariot in 2b, her horses in 2c, and her driving (yāti) in this vs. We must then turn to the verb. If we use the later ‘gather’ sense for áva √ci, the simile might mean “gathering up the reins (preparatory to setting out on a journey).” A similar idea, though not related to horses, seems to be reflected in Ge’s alternative given in n. 4a: “Wie (die Hausfrau), die das Halfterband (den Tieren) abnimmt (um sie auf die Weide zu treiben),” relating it thematically to svásarasya pátnī “mistress of good pasture” in the next pāda. I prefer to compare the lexeme áva √tan ‘unstring, slacken’ of bowstrings (e.g., AV VI.42.1 áva jyā́m iva dhánvano manyúṃ tanomi te hṛdáḥ “Like a bowstring from a bow, I make slack the fury from your heart”; RVic exx. similar but without an explicit bowstring). The image is of Dawn letting the reins go slack to give the horses their head. Curiously, Griffith’s tr.

is similar, “letting her reins drop downward,” though he thinks it refers to her sending down rays of light. If this interpr. is correct, I assume that it belongs to the root √ci ‘pile’, with a highly developed idiomatic sense. In fact combinations of √ci

+ PREVERB tend to show fairly extreme idiomaticity.

Arnold (Ved. Met., 300) suggests reading uṣā́ā́yāti for simple uṣā́yāti, which would yield an 11-syl. line. Old is tempted but seems to favor the transmitted reading; Re, however, is convinced. HvN reject it without explan. (“a rest at the 5th place seems preferable”). I would follow Arnold and Re, and therefore the publ. tr.

should be emended to “drives here.” Pāda d is taken by Ge and Re (and me) as containing one of the relatively rare RVic occurrences of ā́+ following abl. in the meaning ‘all the way to’. The source of this counterintuitive use of the abl. can be seen in passages like this, where ‘all the way to’ and ‘all the way from’ are essentially identical in sense: the light of dawn stretches throughout the midspace, and the directionality (from/to heaven/earth) is irrelevant.


## 05
The standard tr. supply a form of √vac (Ge specifically vivakmi, invoking áchā vivakmi in nearby III.57.4a) in pāda a, which is then taken as a separate clause: “I (call) to Dawn for you …” Although I resisted this in the publ. tr., I now see its merits, in accounting for the preverb áchā, the double vaḥ (pādas a and b), and the acc. case of Dawn. I would therefore emend the tr. to “(I invite) for you the goddess Dawn, radiating widely; proffer your well-twisted (hymn) (to her) with reverence.” The standard tr. (also Lü 73, Kü 430) take rocanā́as a fem. nom. sg., in order, as Ge says (n. 5d), to allow prá … ruruce to have its expected intrans. sense. But well-attested rocaná- is otherwise only neut. (X.189.3 adduced by Ge, etc., as another ex. of a fem. should be otherwise explained), and in the pl. it regularly refers to the luminous realms. I would prefer not to create a separate stem to apply to a single example, esp. because the default interpr. of the form would be neut. pl. There is a simple solution that allows the neut. pl. analysis to be preserved without imperiling the intransitivity of ruruce -- to interpr. the neut. pl. as an acc. of extent, as often. The publ. tr. reflects this.


## 06
The phrase arkaír abodhi has double sense, since arká- can mean both ‘chant’ and ‘ray’ and abodhi both ‘has (been) awakened’ and ‘has been perceived’.

The ambiguity nicely captures the ritual situation: we ritualists (wish to) believe that the natural world is set in motion and controlled by our ritual activity (in this case chanting that makes Dawn awaken and dawn), but the ritual is itself set in motion by phenomena in the natural world, in this case the appearance of the first light of dawn.


## 07
This vs. offers a surprising number of small puzzles. The first is how to construe uṣásām iṣaṇyán. Most take gen. pl. uṣásām as the obj. of the participle, despite its unexpected case. (Others, like Pischel and Lü [for details see Lü 596-97], simply label uṣásām an acc. -- convenient but unconvincing.) I supply ‘cows’ (gā́s) as obj. on the basis of III.50.3 (in this maṇḍala) sám … gā́iṣaṇya and IX.96.8. That the bull (vṛ́ṣā) in the next pāda is the subject of ‘drive’ invites a bovine object. The cows, as often, can be the rays of the Dawn (the “dawn cows”). They are driven “on the foundation of truth” (ṛtásya budhné), that is, the earth and more specifically the ritual ground.

The bull doing the driving is, in my view, the sun, which follows dawn and could therefore be conceived as driving the rays of dawn before him. His “entering the two world halves” is, of course, his rising above the horizon.

The standard tr. take candréva in d to mean “like gold,” but if the reference is to the precious metal, it should be candrám iva, as they all acknowledge. With Gr and Old I instead take it as the fem. nom. sg. it appears to be, referring to Dawn. But who/what is the subj. of the frame? Most tr. take it to be the sun, who spreads his radiance (bhānúm) far and wide. This is certainly possible, but it leaves the māyā́of Mitra and Varuṇa announced in c rather orphaned. I therefore prefer to take māyā́as the subject of ví dadhe, in intransitive usage (“the magic power spreads/is spread”); the syntax of this frame is contrasted with the transitive but self-involved ví dadhe in the simile: “as shimmering (Dawn) has spread her own radiance,” with bhānúm belonging to the simile. This kind of syntactic disharmony is commonly exploited in similes, as I have discussed at length elsewhere ("Case disharmony in RVic similes", IIJ 24 [1982] 251-71).
