+++
title = "062"

+++
Various gods


## 01
For the sense of this complex vs. and its relation to the rest of the hymn, see publ. intro. The point of the verse appears be that our hymns, however frenetic (a), are no longer effective (b), and therefore the activity of Indra and Varuṇa on behalf of their partners [=us] is in abeyance (cd).

With the standard tr. I supply ‘hymns’ with the opening imā́(ḥ): imā́gíraḥ is pretty common.

The praise hymns to Indra and Varuṇa appear to be whirlwinds (bhṛmáyaḥ) to us, but they cannot be ‘thrust/brandished’ (ná tújyā(ḥ)) by the devotees of the gods -- that is, they have lost their oomph, their energy, and therefore their effectiveness. For the connection between bhṛmí- and √tuj, cf. IV.32.2 bhṛ́miś cid ghāsi tū́tujiḥ “You are a whirlwind, constantly lunging” of Indra. For the connection of hymns with √tuj, cf. V.17.3 tujā́girā́. Despite its position, ná in b should be the negative, not the simile marker. See Old.

On sína- see comm. ad II.30.2.

I take sma as indicating habitual action.


## 02
In ab the combination of an intensive (johavīti) and two superlatives (purutámaḥ and śaśvattamám) gets its point across!


## 03
The “Shielding Goddesses” (pl.) appear here and in VII.34.22. In both cases they are associated with śaraṇá- ‘shelter’. A singular várūtrī- also occurs 4x, once (I.22.10) in association with hótrā bhā́ratī as here. Beyond their/her protective role, the várūtrī appear(s) to be featureless.


## 05
Ge (/WG) take ā́cake as 3rd sg. (Ge: “Er liebt unbeugsame Kraft”). This is certainly possible, but Schmidt (B+I, 131) makes good arguments for flg. Sāy and Gr in taking it as 1st sg.; see also Re (EVP XVI, ad loc.).

## 05-06
Vs. 6 is entirely couched in the acc. and picks up from 5ab, where the acc. phrase is obj. of namasyata; 5c is a parenthetical intrusion.


## 07
Ge suggests in his notes that this vs. could be a single clause, essentially “This praise-hymn is recited to you by us,” with te (a) and túbhyam (c) tautological.

This is possible, but it seems rhetorically unlikely.

## 08
This vs. is more complex than it first appears, at least in my interpr. The dominant reading is the one given by Ge: the simile in c matches the frame in a, with b parenthetic. Nearby III.52.3bc [=IV.32.16bc] is nearly identical with minor morphological variation in the frame: joṣáyāse gíraś ca naḥ / vadhūyúr iva yóṣaṇām.

This interpr. is undeniable. However, I think the intervening b pāda can also be seen as a target of the simile, but in a syntactically twisted way. The object of the verb avā ‘help’ is the NOUN + PARTICIPLE phrase (in reverse order) vāyayántam … dhíyam “the insight seeking the prize,” which, extracted from its role as object and presented as a simple clause, would represent “the insight (nom.) seeks the prize (acc.),” with subject/object syntactic relations. Thus reconfigured, the phrase in b would match the simile in c: “our insight seeks the prize, as a bride-seeking man (seeks) a maiden.” The syntactic transformation of one of the parts of the structural pair from clause into acc. participial phrase does not disrupt their functional and semantic matching -- it rather shows again the pleasure that RVic poets get from off-kilter correspondences.

(See, e.g., the simile/frame pair at the end of the previous hymn, III.61.7d with comm. above.) This secondary reading presents another twist. In the dominant reading the subj. of the impv. juṣasva is a (male) god, the obj. a hymn (gír-), a word feminine in gender. These genders match those of the simile: the subj. a bride-seeking male, the obj. a maiden. But when we consider the underlying clause in b, the genders are reversed: the insight (dhī́-) is feminine; she is the seeker, not the sought, while the prize (vā́ja-) she seeks is a masc. noun.


## 09
The usual sharp polarity between the preverbs ví and sám is emphasized by keeping the verb constant (páśyati) and explicitly conjoining the two verb complexes with ca. My “looks at all creatures separately and sees them whole” is meant to capture the contrast of the two preverbs in idiomatic Engl.

## 10-12
All three vss. in this tṛca contain déva- (…) savitár- (or vice versa).


## 10
And here, buried in this not particularly noteworthy hymn, is the Gāyatrī mantra, which is itself not particularly noteworthy on its own terms.

Note the play on dhīmahi / dhíyaḥ juxtaposed across the hemistich boundary, belonging to different roots.


## 11
I take púraṃdhyā as an instr. of accompaniment, not (with Ge [/WG]) an instr. of means.


## 17
The sense of the splv. instr. pl. drā́ghiṣṭhābhiḥ is unclear. This is the only occurrence of the superlative in the RV, and neither dīrghá- nor the cmpv.

drāghīyas- occurs in the instr. pl. The standard interpr., that the splv. here is temporal (Gr ‘in längster Dauer’), seems reasonable, but not assured.