+++
title = "05"

+++
nicerú- is a hapax (though cf. céru- VIII.61.7). It almost surely belongs to √ci ‘observe, discern’, with Debrunner (AiG II.860), despite Mayrhofer’s doubts (EWA s.v. céru-). The Aśvins are themselves called nícetar- in nearby I.184.2.

The 2nd member rūpa- in piśáṅga-rūpa- seems pleonastic, but it perhaps should have been rendered in tr., ‘whose form is tawny’, vel sim.

Pāda c causes several problems, both in grammar and in interpretation. To start with the latter, anyásya is universally taken as referring to one of the two Aśvins, as the paired anyáḥ-s of 4ab do. However, as noted in the publ. intro., I think the referent of this stem has shifted. Both Aśvins together are referred to in the first hemistich of 5, with the dual pronoun vām. They are contrasted with a new “the other” in c, who can only be Indra: the presence of the two fallow bays (hárī) guarantees his presence, since these horses are uniquely Indra’s.

The grammatical problem is the apparent number disharmony between the dual hárī, if taken as the subject, and the pl. verb pīpáyanta; the accent of this verb is also potentially problematic. The standard interpr. construe the pāda in this way (cf. Ge “Die beiden Falben … sind … geschwellt”; so also Old, WG). The accent on a main cl. verb is attributed to the anyá- (… anyá-) construction (so Ge, n. 5), though he expresses some concern that in fact there’s only one anyá-. While it is true that the first of two clauses in a double anyá- construction generally has an accented verb (e.g., I.164.20, II.40.4-5, VI.68.3), this is not universal (cf., e.g., VI.57.2), and it is not the case with single anyá-. But the real problem is that a plural verb should not have a dual subject. Both these difficulties can be avoided if we supply a (dual) form of √gam in c, generated from the precative gamyāḥ ending b, and start a new clause with pīpáyanta, which then owes its accent to its clause-initial position. The plural subject of this verb then includes both Indra’s pair of fallow bays (c) and the Aśvins’ tawny lead horse (a). (Ge [n. 5] somewhat similarly suggests that pīpáyanta is pl.

because the kakuhá- of 5a is also thought of [gedacht wird], but my suggestion allows a grammatical solution, not merely a notional one.) The adjective opening the next pāda would apply to all three horses and serve as a further plural specification of the group. Although the Pp. reads du. -ā́, in sandhi it can as well be pl. -āḥ. The stem of this adjective is uncertain. Sāy., followed by Müller, reads mathnā́; Aufrecht, mathrā́. This is one of the relatively few variant manuscript readings in the RV; see Müller vol. I, p. 62, Aufr. vol. II, p. iv., and Old ad loc. On the basis of mathrā́in VIII.46.23, Old opts for mathrā́. This seems reasonable, though in terms of sense which suffix we choose matters little, since either form would most likely belong to √manth ‘churn, stir, shake’; used of horses, I take it to mean ‘agitated, excitable, skittish’.

I supply a participle of a verb of motion with ví, which governs rájāṃsi. The two parts of this phrase are separated by the intrusive voc. aśvinā. See 7b below.

