+++
title = "08"

+++
The gen. phrase rúśato vápsasaḥ is standardly taken as the PN (Ruśant Vapsas) of the singer. As often when a PN explanation is offered, this is a convenient way of evading an unclear word or phrase. But rúśant- is a very well-attested adj.

with a clear sense ‘gleaming, bright’ and does not otherwise form part of a PN. This leaves vápsas-, which I take as ‘wasp’ both here and in VIII.45.5 (girā́vápso, which I divide as girā́vápso, contra Pp.; see disc. in EWA s.v. vápsas-). The resultant “gleaming wasp” is, in my opinion, a description of fire; rúśant- is not infrequently a descriptor of fire, and ‘wasp’ would refer to the random movements of flames and/or the “sting” produced by flying sparks hitting skin. At least acdg. to the internet, one of the most common species of wasp in South Asia is Ropalidia marginata (often called the Indian wasp), a type of paper wasp that is remarkably flame-red in color, and, in YouTube videos, a cluster of such wasps on top of their nest looks rather like a flickering fire. Its sting is quite painful. Its “song” in this passage would either be the sound of the crackling fire compared to the buzzing of the wasps or else simply the hymn recited at the ritual fire.

The publ. tr. careless omits the vām; I would emend the tr. to “this very song … swells for you …” The second hemistich concerns the soma, in my view, though Ge and Re both take the bullish cloud as an image of generosity and WG as morning mist. I take this phrase as referring to the soma swollen with water after its soaking; this image is then given both a real-world and a ritual sense, playing on two senses of gór ná séke.

In the real-world image the bull is depicted as sexually aroused (swollen) in mating with a cow, lit. “at the insemination of a cow.” The root √sic frequently takes rétas- ‘semen’ as obj., and this is a shorthand way of expressing “at the pouring out (of semen) into a cow,” vel sim. But in the ritual image, “at the pouring out of the cow” refers to the pouring of milk and its mixing with the soma, a very common image that is regularly sexualized.

