+++
title = "05"

+++
This vs. presents minor problems of syntax and the uncertain fit of certain lexical items. In the first pāda it is not clear what the pravátaḥ are that Indra regularly gains for his devotee. The stem pravát- generally refers to a slope or sloping course. Ge takes it as an abstract Vorsprung (lead or advantage), Re as a course, Tichy (Nom.ag. 307) as “die schnellen Wege” (with !). I think the clue is found in nearby VII.32.27 VII.32.27 tváyā vayám pravátaḥ śáśvatīr apò 'ti śúra tarāmasi “with you let us cross over the (river-)courses one after another, cross over the waters, o champion.” Here as well the reference seems to be to Indra’s aiding us in gaining new lands by crossing river after river. 57 As for pāda b, all three just-named scholars take dhībhíḥ as part of the main clause found in pāda a and embed the first part of b within this frame. Cf., e.g., Ge’s “Du gewinnst selbst … den Vorsprung ab nach den Absichten, mit denen du (etwas) unternimmst.” But, though convenient, this kind of embedding is foreign to RVic sentence structure. Instead I think we must take the rel. prn. yā́bhiḥ as coreferential with pravátaḥ in the main cl. (pravát- being, of course, fem.). The instr. of pravátgenerally expresses extent: ‘along the slope (etc.)’ (e.g., VIII.5.37=13.8=IX.24.2 ā́po ná pravátā yatī́ḥ “like waters going along a slope”), and so here I assume that Indra accomplishes his work (víveṣaḥ), that is, assures victory for us, along the rivercourses that are being fought for. The other instr. fem. in this hemistich, dhībhíḥ, is then independent of yā́bhiḥ and part of the rel. cl. that yā́bhiḥ introduces, and I take it in the same sense as the instr. matíbhiḥ in 2d and dhiyā́in 6c: “in accord with [thought/vision].” The success of Indra’s activities on our behalf is announced in c and his help duly noted. The number mismatch in the instr. phrase yújyābhir ūtī́is common in Triṣṭubh cadences containing inst. ūtí-, truncated from iambic cadences (dimeter / Jagatī) of the type … víśvābhir ūtíbhiḥ (I.23.6 etc., etc.). See further disc. ad VI.10.5.

