+++
title = "07"

+++
The sense and syntax of this vs. are extremely challenging. My interpr.

differs from those of the other standard tr. I will not treat these in detail, but will note two important points of difference. I do not think that Indra is the referent of yám in pāda a (as, e.g., Old does), and I do not think that tribandhú- in c is a PN, much less a reference to Vasiṣṭha (see, e.g., Ge, Mayr PN s.v.).

My sense of the structure of the vs. is that the two outer pādas (a, d), which match by virtue of being relative clauses introduced by yám, go together, with the referent of the yám the same in each: a mortal man beset by difficulties. These relative clauses depict the same unfortunate situation, the dissolution and isolation of this man. The two inner pādas (b, c) are the main clause (or a subordinate and a main clause in b and c respectively) and present Indra as the antidote and refuge for the unfortunate mortal. This complicates the clause relations but has the virtue of making sense (some sense, anyway). Many details remain to be discussed, however. 58 In pāda a the VP (abhí yám … ī́se) is puzzling: √īś does not otherwise occur with abhí, and it is found overwhelmingly with a genitive, not an accusative complement. (For disc. of other possible acc. exx. cited by Gr., see comm. ad VII.32.18. Commenting on this passage, Re suggests that √īś appears with the acc. only when it is a pronoun, but this is not borne out by the distribution; among other things, there are plenty of pronominal genitives with √īś.) Here the clue to the usage is provided by a passage in the next hymn (cited by Old), VII.38.4 abhí yáṃ devy áditir gṛṇā́ti, which has the identical structure, save for a different named goddess (also a -ti-abstract) and a different verb, gṛṇā́ti (against our abhí yáṃ devy nírṛtiś cid ī́śe). The root √gṝ regularly takes both abhí and the acc. In VII.38.4 the one referred to by yám is benevolently greeted by the benevolent goddess Aditi; our passage seems to have been constructed as a deliberate contrast to this happy scene, with the malevolent goddess Nirṛti extending her sway to an unfortunate mortal. (The passages differ in one notable way, however: in VII.48.4 the referent of yám is the god Savitar.) The pairing of the two passages accounts for the unexpected preverb and unexpected accusative with ī́śe in our passage.

The middle pādas referring to Indra (in my view) present the god as a sort of venerable figure with whom the beleaguered man of pāda a (and d) can take refuge.

Indra’s venerable status results from the years that have accumulated for him, as pāda b indicates, and in c the subject (who, in my opinion, is the mortal man referred to by the rel. pronouns in a and d) approaches Indra because of the god’s attainment of age. That old age is presented as a positive feature of Indra also gives the mortal reassurance that his own aging can likewise be positive.

As already noted, I do not follow the almost universal interpr. of the hapax tribandhú- as a PN nor the further identification of that PN with Vasiṣṭha. Instead I take it as the bahuvrīhi it is in full lexical value: ‘having three bonds’, with the bonds referring to kinship as bándhu- does so often. I further think that this is a reference to the three-generations model so prevalent later: a man with both father and son (or perhaps, as later, father, grandfather, and great-grandfather), ensuring the continuity of the male line and, esp. later, the śrāddha offerings to the ancestors. Although this theme is not prominent in the RV, it can be discerned indirectly in several passages; see X.135 (and my article “The Earliest Evidence for the Inborn Debts of a Brahmin: A New Interpretation of Ṛgveda X.135,” Journal asiatique 302.2 [2014]: 245-57) and VI.20.11 (also discussed in that article, as well as comm. ad loc.). A man who had achieved the tribandhú state would be well along in years, and his approach to a similarly aging Indra would be appropriate. In fact, the depiction of Indra at this stage of life in this vs. contrasts strongly with the usual representation of Indra as young and virile. Note that tribandhú- may form a faint ring with tripṛṣṭhá- ‘threebacked’ in 1c.

In d we return to the afflictions visited on our unhappy man -- this time by (other) mortals. Thus a and d show him as the target of a divinity (the devī́Nirṛti, a) and men (mártāḥ, d), with Indra as the literal intercessor. Both Ge and Re tr. the clear subjunctive kṛṇávanta in d as a preterite (“beraubt haben,” “ont rendu”), but there is no justification for this and neither provides one. Exactly what the other 59 mortals will or would do isn’t entirely clear to me, and it depends in great part on how we interpret -veśa- in the compd ásvaveśa-. In V.85.7, containing an array of apparently non-kin relationships, JPB tr. ‘neighbor’; in IV.3.13, again in a set of calibrated relationships, I do so as well, though in X.49.5 I render it as ‘vassal’. Here, if I am correct about the sense of tribandhú-, -veśa- should refer to a relationship outside the close family line. The sense would be: when mortals deprive him of his non-blood (or less closely related) associates (pāda d), he still has his tight paternal lineage (tribandhú- pāda c). My ‘clansmen’ could be correct (based on the usual sense of víś-), but ‘neighbor’ or even ‘vassal’ (or Re’s ‘clientèle’) could, too. I do not think Ge’s Anhang fits, however.

