+++
title = "01"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., I consider it significant that the repeated phrase sám asvaran never has an overt subject, allowing for double ref.: the soma streams roaring as they cross the filter and the priest-poets accompanying this journey with hymns. I therefore would reject the various subjects supplied here by various tr.

I interpr. drapsásya dhámataḥ as a species of gen. absol., though it could be dependent on one of the implicit subjects of the verb, namely the soma streams.

I am not entirely sure what b is telling us. In the immediately preceding hymn (IX.72.6) as well as elsewhere in IX, the “womb of truth” (ṛtásya yóni-) is the place where the soma and the milk mix; the verb sám aranta “have joined together” invites us to interpr. this as expressing that mixture here as well. If so, then what are the “ties of lineage” (nā́bhayaḥ)? I would tentatively suggest that it refers to the ultimate kinship of cow and bull (that is, of milk and soma). This may be supported by a passage in the next hymn, IX.74.4, where soma, after this mixture, is referred to as “the navel of truth” (ṛtásya nā́bhiḥ). It is also possible that it’s a reference to the unexpressed double subject that “sounded in unison” in the preceding pāda - that is, the roaring soma streams and the singing poets. Their “ties of lineage” would be based on their joint vocalization, and they meet and join together on the part of the ritual ground where the soma is readied for offering to the gods. Others of course have different opinions: for Ge it’s gods and men, for Lü (234-35, fld. by Re) the heavenly and earthly soma.

In c, acdg. to Ge and Re, the ásura created (cakre) for himself three heads, either (Ge; see also WEHale 79) so he could seize the soma (probably; see Ge’s n. 1 cd) or (Re) so he could be more easily seized. By contrast, I interpr. cakra ārábhe as a periphrastic caus.: “made/caused his three heads to be seized,” with the ásura- = Soma, as also in the next hymn, IX.74.7; note also his asuryàṃ várṇam in nearby IX.71.2. It would help, of course, to know what the “three heads” are, but I suggest that since mūrdhán- is often a ‘peak’, it may be the same as Soma’s three backs (see the bahuvr. tripṛṣṭḥá- twice nearby in IX.71.7 and 75.3). As for these expressions of triplication, see the speculations ad IX.70.8. Whatever the identity of the heads, I think the point is that, after the various stages of preparation, Soma is making himself available for ritual use, allowing himself to be “seized” and distributed into the cups. This interpr. is supported by 3d, which contains the acc. inf. ārábham, matching ārábhe here.

In d note satyásya opening the pāda, which contrasts with ṛtásya in the same position in b. Although I am given pause by IX.89.2 r̥tásya nā́vam (like our satyásya nā́vaḥ), I think the two genitives must be interpr. differently. I suggest that it is Soma who is satyá- here: ‘trusty’ as in the publ. tr., or even ‘really present’, referring to the prepared soma on the ritual ground. Sāy’s notion that the boats are the soma cups is quite plausible, though Ge (n. 1d) prefers the hymns.
