+++
title = "02"

+++
The neut. pls. of ab, priyā́ṇi kā́vyā, víśvā offer several different possibilities for construal. The publ. tr. takes priyā́ṇi kā́vyā in pāda a separately from víśvā in b, with the former the goal of abhí … arṣati and the latter the obj. of cákṣāṇaḥ. The oft-repeated pāda abhí víśvāni kā́vyā (IX.23.1, 62.25, 63.25, 66.1), identical to our pāda a with priyā́ṇi substituting for víśvāni, supports my interpr. of the phrase in our pāda a as goal. As for the interpr. of víśvā in b as obj. of cákṣāṇaḥ, this rests on slightly shakier grounds: the víśvāni in the repeated pāda might suggest that our víśvā belongs with pāda a, and it is also not clear that the participle cákṣāṇa- when uncompounded can take an obj. On the one hand we have cmpded praticákṣāṇa- with obj. in IX.85.12 víśvā rūpā́praticákṣānaḥ “gazing upon all his forms” (cf. II.40.5 with abhí and víśvam); on the other, in I.128.3 uncmpded cákṣāṇa- is used absolutely (cf. also X.74.2). I am therefore open to the possibility that all three neut.

pls. serve as goal, producing an alt. tr. “towards all the dear (products) of poetic skill does he rush, being observant.” However, I am tolerably certain that both Ge and Re are wrong, in their different ways. Ge takes the whole acc. phrase as obj. of cákṣāṇaḥ (“auf alle lieben Dichterwerke achtend”), thus ignoring the evidence of the repeated pāda and opting for the participle as the governing element, despite the uncertainty of its ability to take objects. Re seems to take abhí in tmesis with the part. cákṣāṇa-, not with arṣati, thus taking the acc. phrase with abhí, as the repeated pāda strongly supports, but making abhí the preverb to √cakṣ: “Regardant en direction de tous les arts-poétique.” But, though abhí does occur regularly with √cakṣ, it is also extremely common with √ṛṣ, esp. in IX. Since tmesis of preverb and participle is quite rare, given a choice between construing a preverb in tmesis with a participle or with a finite verb, the latter must be preferred unless there are serious semantic drawbacks.

