+++
title = "09"

+++
This verse is the most baffling in the hymn, both for its contents and for its connection to the rest of the hymn. Ge has a very busy interpretation (followed by WG) that involves the Aṅgirases and the Ādityas separating themselves from the earth and contending to reach heaven. His interpr. rests on scraps of later mythology, and it is very difficult for me to see where he finds contending parties in the passage, much less the signs that would identify them as Aṅgirases and Ādityas. It also requires an unlikely reading of ví √sthā as ‘separate’, rather than the usual ‘spread out’ (as Re points out). All in all, the interpretation requires a superstructure that the verse cannot support, and examining the passage without the presuppositions Ge brings to it yields a very different picture. Unfortunately, however, the picture isn’t appreciably clearer.

I think that the verse continues the theme of the original discovery of the hidden “tracks” of ritual performance: having discovered them (see 6ab), the subjects of 9ab, the gods most likely, perform the required ritual actions, which lead both to offspring and to “immortality.” The second hemistich is considerably more difficult, but I tentatively suggest that it also depicts a primal sacrifice. The “stretching” of the ritual ground in an ordinary sacrifice, that is, the laying out of its boundaries and the positioning of the offering fire, is here expressed in cosmic terms: the earth herself spreads out to provide the ritual ground; she does this through the actions of her sons, the ritual participants. And she then “suckles the bird.” Most take the bird as Agni, whatever else they do with the verse, and the suckling, that is, the tending of the ritual fire with wood and oblations, would work fine in this scenario. Re thinks rather the sun, and again the sun as cosmic representative of the ritual fire is thinkable.

I will now treat some of the elements of the verse in more detail. Although svapatyá- can be substantivized to mean “good descendants,” it is originally and more commonly an adjective, and even when a head noun is absent, it can be supplied. In this case I interpret the word in the same way as VII.91.3c víśvén náraḥ svapatyā́ni cakruḥ “The men have done all (ritual actions) bringing good descendants.” Here the governing verb is “mount” (ā́… tasthuḥ), which I take as metaphorical for ‘embark on’. With the journey theme of pāda b, the (actions of) the sacrifice can be conceived of as a chariot, as so often in the RV.

The yé of ab is picked up by the “great sons” of cd (mahádbhiḥ … putraíḥ).

These can be the offspring produced by the ritual in pāda a or, more likely in my opinion, the performers of those actions - the gods or, perhaps more narrowly, the Ādityas - who are responsible for the cosmic sacrifice in which their mother, the earth herself, spreads out as the ritual ground. I would slightly alter the publ. tr. to “by means of her sons … the earth …” Keep in mind that the gods are the sons of Heaven and Earth (cf. the bahuvrīhi in the dual devá-putre ‘having the gods as sons’), so Earth is their mother. I am inclined against restricting the subject to the Ādityas. I think rather that mother Earth is called Aditi because Aditi is an archetypal mother, but her sons are all the gods, not just the Ādityas. The next verse (10b) simply refers to the immortals, in what seems to be a continuation of this narrative, and the default subject throughout seems to be the gods in general.

Note that “to suckle the bird” (dhā́yase véḥ) is a paradox that would be recognized by any reasonably alert observer of nature (as the Vedic people certainly were), in that birds aren’t mammals and don’t suckle. The sense of dhā́yase can of course be bleached to something like Old’s (SBE) “for the refreshment of the bird,” but I prefer to think this paradox was meant to be savored, along with the paradox of the sons bringing about the action of their mother.

