+++
title = "10"

+++
The first half of the verse may return to the Tānunāptra theme. Although I would prefer a middle verb rather than active ní dadhuḥ, the first pāda could depict the joint deposit of their shared śrī́in the ritual fire (cf. the echo of níhitā in 6b), while the second pāda continues the cosmogonic theme of the previous verse. I confess, however, that the very parallel I.73.4c ádhi dyumnáṃ ní dadhur bhū́ry asmin gives me pause. Either I need to interpret that as also a Tānunāptra passage or delete the reflexive implication here. Because of the active verb, I am inclined to change my Tānunāptra interpretation and tr. simply “they deposited dear splendor in him,” although since cā́ru- can have a quasi-reflexive sense ‘own dear’, it may be possible to interpret the two passages differently.

As for the second hemistich, the rivers of pāda c are most likely the oblations poured into the fire. The referent of the fem. pl. nī́cīḥ … áruṣīḥ is less clear, and in fact most tr. (Ge, Old SBE, Re, WG) take the two feminines separately, with one nom., the other the acc. object of prá … ajānan. I think rather that the two words belong together as subj. and refer again to the oblations. The lexeme prá √jñā does not otherwise take an object, but just means ‘know the way, think ahead’. As underlying referent of the feminine adjectives I would supply dhā́rā ‘stream’ vel sim.; ‘downward facing’ certainly applies to the oblations, though ‘ruddy’ is more difficult. However, fem. áruṣī- can be used of cows; since the ghee poured into the fire is a product of cows, it can be so described, even though ghee is of course not ruddy itself.