+++
title = "+101"

+++
101 (710)  
Various Gods: Mitra and Varuṇa (1–5c), Ādityas  (5d-6), Aśvins (7–8), Vāyu (9–10), Sūrya (11–12), Uṣas (or Praise of  the Sun’s Radiance) (13), Pavamāna (14), Cow (15–16)  
Jamadagni Bhārgava  
16 verses: br̥hatī 1, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13; satobr̥hatī 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12; gāyatrī 3; triṣṭubh 14–16,  arranged (for the most part) in pragāthas.  
As the above summary of the deities and the meters demonstrates, this hymn is  structurally quite complex, and indeed it may consist of several original hymns.  (See Oldenberg 1888: 218 n. 1.) The divisions we see are somewhat at variance with  the Anukramaṇī’s analysis. The first six verses appear to belong together, with two  pragāthas (vss. 1–4) to Mitra and Varuṇa and a third (vss. 5–6) expanding to include  the Ādityas in general, the three best known (Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman) named  and the rest subsumed under the title “kings.” The focus is on the gods’ journey to  the sacrifice and the praise presented to them there, save for the second pragātha  (vss. 3–4), which gives a notable description of Mitra and Varuṇa’s missile and the  threat it poses.  
There follow a pragātha to the Aśvins (vss. 7–8) and one to Vāyu (vss. 9–10),  focused even more strongly on their journeys to the sacrifice. The following pragātha  to the Sun (vss. 11–12) contains some of the most flat-footed verses in the R̥gveda;  it is hard to tell whether the poet’s inspiration gave out, or if there is some deeper  purpose that escapes the modern reader.  
In our opinion the praise of divinities stops here, and the remainder of the hymn  (vss. 13–16) depicts the ritual moment. In verse 13 an oblation of butter or some  other milk product is poured into the fire by the priests; verse 14 (the most difficult  verse in the hymn) appears to concern the offering of soma. The final two verses  (15–16) exalt the cow, who appeared briefly in verse 13, in the most extravagant  terms, as kin to major groups of gods, source of immortality, and a goddess asso  
ciated with speech. This association (vs. 16) reminds us of the somewhat intrusive  presence of the goddess Speech as a milk-cow at the end of the immediately preced ing hymn (VIII.100.10–11).  