+++
title = "11"

+++
O gods, the eleven of you who are in heaven, the eleven who are on  the earth,  
the eleven who dwell in the waters in their greatness—(all) of you, gods,  take pleasure in this sacrifice here.  
Hymns I.140–164 are attributed to Dīrghatamas, the son of Ucatha, who calls himself  Māmateya, the son of Mamatā, in I.147.3, 152.6, and 158.6. The name Dīrghatamas  means the one “of long darkness.” The Br̥haddevatā IV.14–15 (Macdonell) explains  that he received this name because he was born blind, and the poet himself refers to  his blindness in I.147.3. According to the Br̥haddevatā his sight was later restored  by the gods. His name is also an appropriate reflection of the difficulty of many of  his hymns. His affection for word play, symbolic language, syntactic anomaly, and  ambiguous reference makes his hymns distinctive, original, and often highly elusive.  He is one of the most challenging, but at the same time one of the most interesting  poets of the R̥gveda.  
His hymns also present an unusual sequence of divinities. The list begins con ventionally enough with I.140–150, which are dedicated to Agni, but the ordinar ily expected series to Indra is missing. Instead 151–153 are to Mitra and Varuṇa,  154–156 to Viṣṇu or to Viṣṇu and Indra, 157–158 to the Aśvins, 159–160 to Heaven  and Earth, and 161 to the R̥bhus. Then 162 and 163 are praises of the sacrificial  horse, and 164, the climax of the collection, is a very long and very puzzling riddle  hymn, which explores the mysteries of several Vedic rites. The second Aśvin hymn,  I.158, is of particular interest because it is ostensibly an autobiographical hymn,  composed when the poet was an old man and on the verge of being pushed aside.  Partly on the basis of this hymn Br̥haddevatā IV.21–25 gives a second legend that  his servants tried to drown Dīrghatamas. But he floated downstream and was res cued in Aṅga where he married and then gave birth to the poet Kakṣīvant.  