+++
title = "01"

+++
As was pointed out in the publ. intro., two parallel governing compounds, sanádrayiḥ 'gaining wealth' (1a) and maṃhayád-rayiḥ 'readying wealth' (5c), open and close the hymn. The former also resonates with the adjacent expression across the pāda boundary, bhárad vā́jam. This phrase cannot help but remind us of the personal name bharádvāja-, which is of course in form also a governing cmpd. This stem is primarily confined to Maṇḍala VI, which is attributed to this ṛṣi and his family, but it would surely be known throughout RVic circles. Note also that some vss. and hymns in IX are attributed by the Anukramaṇī to Bharadvāja or a Bhāradvāja: Bharadvāja IX.67.1-3, Vasu Bhāradvāja IX.80-82, Ṛjiśvan Bhāradvāja IX.98 (jointly with Ambarīṣa Vārṣāṅgira), 108.6-7.

The grammatical identify of the bhárat part of this phrase can be questioned. The standard view (Gr, Ge, Re, Lub, KH [Injunk. 123], Lowe [Partic. 281]) is that it is a 3rd sg.

injunc., with Soma as its subj. This requires a shift of ps. from 3rd (ab) to 2nd (c), given the 2nd sg. impv. arṣa in c. Of course such switches, even within a vs., are common. But it is made somewhat more difficult by the preverb pári, which opens the vs. and would most naturally be construed with arṣa, a point also made by Old. Of the numerous pári √ṛṣ passages in IX, cf., e.g., IX.69.2 … pári vā́ram arṣati. By contrast pári is barely attested with √bhṛ and then only with middle forms, as far as I can see. If pári (in a) is in tmesis with arṣa (in c), a finite verb in between (that is, putative bhárat in b) would have to be parenthetic at best. Re’s attempt to have it both ways (“pári porte sur arṣa … à travers bhárat”) simply shows the desperation required. I therefore follow Old, as well as AiG II.2.164, in taking bhárat as a form of the pres. part. bhárant-. Both Old and AiG consider it a neut. sg. (which it is of course in form) used adverbially, but as Old acutely remarks, an adverb taking an object is problematic. I would analyze it slightly differently: in order to produce a phrase modeled on the cmpd bharád-vāja- (AiG also evokes the PN here), the poet used the weak (neut.) form to stand for the nom. sg. masc. (expected *bháran). In this he would be supported by the well-attested nom. sg. of the redupl. pres. bíbharti, namely bíbhrat built to the weak stem of the participle, which serves for both masc. and neut.

Maṇḍala IX contains several occurrences of this form; cf. for the phraseology here IX.44.1 … bíbhrad arṣasi. I also find suggestive the two exx. of bíbhrad vájram (VI.20.9, 23.1) “bearing the mace,” with vájram a phonological multiform of vā́jam; since these are both in the Bharadvāja maṇḍala, they are likely meant to evoke that name. See comm. ad VI.20.9.

