+++
title = "02"

+++
The apparent 2nd ps. / 3rd ps. switch recurs in more acute form here. The vs. opens with 2nd ps. táva, which surely refers to Soma, but the finite verb in this single-clause vs. is (apparently) yā̛t, a 3rd sg. One solution is to substitute a slightly different subj. in place of Soma - so Ge, flg. Sāy., who suggests rásaḥ ‘sap’ (sim. Ober. II.231). Another is simply to ignore the problem, as Re and the publ. tr. do. I don’t have a solution (beyond the just mentioned avoidance of the issue), but I somehow think that the isolated and minimalist yāt, the only supposed injunctive to this well-attested root pres., is perhaps the artificial result of formulaic cut-and-paste. As Ge (2c) points out, our pāda sahásradhāro yāt tánā is reminiscent of IX.34.1 (prá svānó) dhā́rayā tánā, and in fact tánā quite often follows -ā. If our pāda was somehow based on one containing the very well-attested instr. dhāráyā, but with the substitution of the nom. bahuvrīhi sahásra-dhāra-, the final -yā of the underlying instr. would get detached: x x x *dhāráyā tánā à sahásradhāro *yā tánā, and then this truncated form could have been given morphological identity by extruding (geminating) a t from the initial of tánā (*yā tánā à yāt tánā), with no metrical implications. On geminations and degeminations in the RV, see my several forthcoming articles. However, even I find this explanation overly tricky, and it also deprives the vs. of a verb (though arṣa could be supplied from the preceding vs.), so I do not push this possibility strongly.

