+++
title = "03"

+++
As discussed in the publ. intro., in the middle of a hymn of utmost simplicity and banality, this vs. -- or a single pāda, c -- is utterly baffling and has given rise to competing interpr. This pāda contains two color terms, bradhná- ‘coppery’ and babhrú- ‘brown’, and a hapax mām̐ścatóḥ (or better maṃ̐ścatóḥ; see Old): bradhnám mām̐ścatór váruṇasya babhrúm. Most comm. assume that the two color terms refer to horses (see, e.g., Ge n. 3c, also Old), because of the presence of Dadhikrā and because color terms often designate horses. (Cf., e.g., Re “au (coursier) couleur-fauve de Mitra, au (coursier) brun de Varuṇa.”) But the introduction of two extraneous horses seems unlikely to me, in a hymn that barely strays from the dawn ritual context.

The old and once widespread interpr. of māṃ̐ścatú-/ maṃ̐ścatóḥ is as a cmpd.

‘chasing/hiding the moon’, with a form of ‘moon’ still containing an internal nasal and the 2nd member built to √cat ‘hide’ (for lit. see, e.g., AiG III.250, EWA s.v. māṃścatú-) -- though this interpr. has generally been replaced by agnosticism about both meaning and deriv. because of the problematic details of the derivation and the uncertainty of the passages containing this forms and the related ones (see below).

The form in our passage is generally assumed to be a gen. sg. to a -u-stem. The identification of the supposed referent given in Re’s tr., “Mitra,” also has a long history (see, e.g., Old, Ge’s n. 3c with lit.) and is due in part to the presence of apparently parallel gen. váruṇasya and in part to a chain of semantic assumptions: if māṃścatú- means ‘chasing the moon’, then it can refer to the sun, and the sun in turn can stand for Mitra (see EWA s.v.). But this chain, esp. the last link, is not strong, though the apparent parallelism with váruṇasya is admittedly stronger.

Assessing the cmpd is somewhat aided (but not all that much) by the existence of two related words mām̐ścatvá- and mā́m̐ścatva-, in two nearby vss. in the Soma Maṇḍala, IX.97.52, 54 in the same tṛca. Vs. 52 also contains bradhná-.

Though the exact sense of the two vss. is obscure, the context is the usual self- 74 purification of soma, with the soma drop in 52 addressed directly and the bradhná- “also there, sped like the wind” (bradhnáś cid átra vā́to ná jūtáḥ). I tentatively identify bradhnáḥ there as the sun or the ritual fire at the dawn sacrifice, and take māṃ̐ścatvé in the same vs. as a temporal loc. If bradhná- is the sun, that body is copper-colored only at dawn and at sunset; a temporal loc. of māṃ̐ścatvá-, if it means ‘hiding/chasing the moon’, would mean ‘at the time of the hiding of the moon, viz.

dawn’, a time appropriate to the ritual content of the vs. Returning to VII.44.3 with this ritual context in mind, I suggest that the same elements of the ritual are represented here: the coppery bradhná- is the sun, or perhaps the fire (I favor the sun, because the sun is well known as Varuṇa’s spy); the brown babhrú- is the soma, as often (IX.11.4, 31.5, etc.). And in my analysis māṃ̐ścatoḥ is not a gen. to a -u-stem, but rather a loc. du. to a root noun *māṃ̐ś-cát- and, as in my interpr. of IX.97.52, is a temporal loc. “at the two twilights.” Of course, we should expect this loc. du. to be accented *māṃ̐ś-cátoḥ, but the non-transparency of the stem could have led it to be reanalysed as a -u-stem gen. parallel to váruṇasya. Although the cmpd in its literal meaning would only be appropriate to morning twilight, it came to be applied to both.

As for mām̐ścatvá- / mā́m̐ścatva-, I suggest that they are -tva-stem derivatives of this root noun, with simplification of the geminate *mām̐ścat-tva-.

Riccardo Ginevra has recently called my belated attention to Pinault’s 2008 treatment of this same word (“About the Slaying of Soma: Uncovering the Rigvedic Witness,” Ged. Elizarenkova, 353-88). In this extensive and exceedingly careful treatment with comprehensive treatment of the earlier lit., Pinault seriously disputes all previous analyses of the cmpd (esp. 360-64), including the one I maintain above.

His most telling objection to that analysis is that the Indo-Iranian paradigm of the ‘moon’ word has no trace of the nasal found in other IE languages, since it has been vocalized in the weak forms of the paradigm and generalized from there (362-63). In order to connect mā̆ṃś- with the ‘moon’ word, we must assume that the nasal was preserved in just this form under exceptional phonological circumstances because of the obscurity of the formation. Although I recognize the hazards in this assumption, I am still willing to take the risk. I cannot endorse Pinault’s own suggestion, that the first member is the ‘flesh’ word, the second member was borrowed from a non-IndoAryan language “of the Nūristāni type” (383), and the cmpd means ‘flesh-cutting’ and refers to a disguised myth of the killing of soma. The first hypothesis (‘flesh’) is certainly possible, but the other two, esp. the second (inter alia, he gives no etymon or even source language for this borrowing), seem significantly less plausible than the isolated preservation of the nasal in ‘moon’.

Although I would hardly claim that my analysis of the cmpd or of the passage in general is airtight, it does provide an interpr. of the pāda that better fits the hymn: two more divinities (Sūrya and Soma) that the poet is calling upon (úpa bruve pāda b), rather than a couple of irrelevant race horses.