+++
title = "03"

+++
This middle vs. (the final vs., 6, opens out to other gods and is essentially extrahymnic) expresses the particular intercession we want Savitar to make for us and also admits to possible offenses committed by us that make this intercession necessary. The vs. also has a few disharmonies, unlike the smooth vss. that make up most of the rest of the hymn.

The first question is how to interpr. yád. If it is taken as a neut. rel. prn.

(‘what’), this leaves the main cl. of cd without a referent for this rel. If (with the standard tr.) it is taken as a general subordinating conjunction (‘when, if’), this leaves the verb cakṛmā́without an obj. Ge just barrels through, tr. the verb as “gesüdigt haben” without comm.; Re and WG supply parenthetical objects (“une faute,” “ein Vergehen”). Given ánāgas- in d and IV.12.3 yád … ácittibhiś cakṛmā́kác cid ā́gaḥ, ā́gaḥ would be the appropriate obj. to supply if this syntactic path is chosen. I am therefore inclined now to emend the publ. tr. to “If we have committed an offense …” The other question has to do with the verb suvatāt in d. First, why a future impv.? There is no prior impv. whose action it follows. (For a similarly unsupported fut. impv. see nearby rákṣatāt IV.50.2.) Moreover, the VP doesn't make sense: … naḥ … suvatād ánāgasaḥ should mean (as I tr. it) “impel us to be without offense,” but how would Savitar’s impulsion render us offenseless? The standard tr. simply fudge the verb: Ge “so sollst du … bestimmen, dass wir daran schuldlos sind”; Re “veuille … nous en rendre innocents” (which he then further glossses “veuille nous susciter = nous faire sortir (de l’état de péché, en sorte d’apparaître) innocents” [one of Re’s finer parentheses]); WG “… sollst du … uns daran für schuldlos erklären.” But none of these is a standard (or even non-standard) use of √sū, and since forms of this verb are found in vss. 2, 4-6 with its normal sense (at least in my opinion; see below), we can’t simply impose a new interpr. for contextual convenience.

I have two remarks on this. First, it is striking that in what is otherwise a pretty simple hymn, it is in the vs. most significant to the human audience that we encounter little issues in the words themselves. I think this is a sign that the poet wants his audience to slow down, to really pay attention, and the way he gets this accomplished is by tossing little obstacles in our path, requiring us to turn the phrases around in our heads until we get a satisfactory sense. We could generalize this observation to RVic poetry as a whole: one of the (many) reasons it is so difficult is that the poet assumes that an audience that has to do a lot of the work will really engage with the poetry, will get deeper into its meaning. The second remark has to do with what we get if we reflect further on why the poet use a form of √sū here. In this hymn and the last (IV.53), not to mention most other Savitar hymns, Savitar’s control over all the parts of the cosmos and, especially, of the alternating movement and rest of living beings (cf. esp. IV.53.3, 6) is powerfully asserted and associated with the verb (√sū) that supplies his name. Impelling us to be without offense is simply a specialized version of this: his special power of √sū enables him to push all the elements (including weak humans) back into cosmic balance.

