+++
title = "02"

+++
The identity of the “two mothers/parents of the poets” (mātárā … kavīnā́m) has been much discussed; see esp. Old, as well as Ge (n. 2ab) and Schmidt (B+I 151).

The two leading candidate pairs are Heaven + Earth (/the two World Halves) and Heaven + Dawn, but only the former seems at all likely to me. Dawn and Heaven are not a stable pairing and therefore would be unlikely to be referred to by the pregnant dual mātárā, whereas this dual is regularly used of Heaven and Earth. Cf. esp.

IX.75.4 prarocáyan ródasī mātárā śúciḥ [/ IX.85.12 prā́rūrucad …], where ródasī ‘the two World Halves’ is explicitly present and where the verb is a lexical variant of our ávāsayat ‘caused to shine’.

Why they are considered “the parents of poets” is not clear. If it isn’t simply that Heaven and Earth provide everyone the conditions for existence and therefore count as universal parents (which seems rather lame), perhaps they become parents of poets when Indra makes them shine with the sun, calling forth the poetic effusions at the dawn sacrifice. The tenuousness of the parental connection has led to suggestions for other ways to construe kavīnā́m. Ge suggests that the clause is a blend of two senses: Heaven and Earth are the referents of the dual, and they are simply named as parents without indication of their offspring, but the poet also wanted to refer to Dawn as the (single) mother of the Aṅgirases, and so the gen. pl.

kavīnā́m belongs only to this putative expression (mātáram kavīnā́m). This seems overly complex, and in addition I know of no evidence that Uṣas was the mother of the Aṅgirases. Old suggests that kavīnā́m could be construed as genitval agent with gṛṇānáḥ, but since that participle is in a different clause, that solution is out. Perhaps the best, if we don’t want to construe it with mātárā, is Sāy.’s, to take kavīnā́m as the equivalent of a dative of benefit (aṅgirasām arthāya).

The part. vāvaśānáḥ in c has generally been ascribed to √vaś ‘want, be eager (for)’: so Gr and Lub, as well as the tr. ‘begierig’ of Ge and Schmidt. However, Kü has argued (478-80) that all forms of the perfect stem vāvaś- actually belong to √vāś ‘bellow’, not √vaś -- though he sneaks some of the semantics of the latter into his glosses ‘brüllen sehnsüchtig’ (etc.). Although I do not want to eliminate the pf. to √vaś in so absolute a way as Kü, in this passage at least I think the participle embodies a pun and, moreover, the primary sense is ‘bellowing’, not ‘being eager’.

The central narrative of the Vala myth has Indra vocalizing in concert with the Aṅgirases (“the very attentive versifiers”) in order to break open the cave and release the cows. No doubt he was “eager” to accomplish this, but it is the noise-making that is the focus of the myth. In this vs. we get a double view of Indra: he is both hymned (gṛṇānáḥ b) presumably by the Aṅgirases and also sings (/bellows) along with them, with two complementary participles, both modifying Indra and stationed at the end of adjacent pādas. The cooperation of Indra and the Aṅgirases is emphasized in the next vs. ### 03
On mitájñu- see Scar 344; it is used here in a context very similar to abhijñú in III.39.5, which also concerns Indra and the Aṅgirases at the winning of cattle and contains parallel phraseology: sákhā ha yátra sákhibhiḥ … abhijñú … gā́anugmán “When the comrade with his comrades the Navagvas, the warriors, from their crouch followed after the cows.” The ‘knee’ cmpds presumably describe the stance of the warrior-poets in this conflict, at least in these two passages. However, in VII.95.4, a hymn to Sarasvatī, it describes the position of “reverential ones” (namasyà-) imploring the goddess in prayer, and though there is a martial portion of VII.82.4, where another example of the stem occurs, the form in question is found in the part of the vs. that describes invocations made in peace time. The final instance of the word, in III.59.3, is too generic to pin down. Thus, it seems that a posture with “fixed knees” may be adopted in various circumstances, including that of prayer.

The second hemistich contains a series of balanced etymological figures: púraḥ purohā́sákhibhiḥ sakhīyán, … kavíbhiḥ kavíḥ sán. I am somewhat puzzled by the nom. sg. pres. part. sán, which is usually concessive, but which should not have that function here. The use of sán is esp. surprising because it breaks the parallelism of the two rhyming post-caesura phrases in cd: … sákhibhiḥ sakhīyán, … kavíbhiḥ kavíḥ sán. We should expect rather *kavīyán, matching sakhīyán, and in fact the stem kavīyánt- does exist (IX.94.1 kavīyán, also in pāda-final position). Perhaps an exact match would have been considered too sing-songy, and the near-match phonologically of -íḥ sán with -īyán suggested the figure without insisting on it. Or else the poet wanted to emphasize that Indra is indeed a poet, in addition to his usual roles as victorious warrior and first comrade among comrades. In the latter case, the phrase might be tr. “being himself a poet along with poets.”

