+++
title = "04"

+++
Pāda b is also found at IV.22.3b, where it is a part of an independent nominal clause. However, here it fits well within the larger clause structure, whose main verb is prá yāhi at the end of the vs. Cf., e.g., VIII.2.19 ó ṣú prá yāhi vā́jebhiḥ, with the vā́jebhiḥ of our b. The fact that this pāda is a self-contained repetition aids in the interpr. of the surrounding pādas a and c, both of which contain fem. instr. pls., nīvyā̀bhiḥ and puruvī́rābhiḥ respectively. Although two masc. instr. pls. intervene, vā́jebhiḥ and śúṣmaiḥ, they can be sequestered in the ready-made pāda b, and the two feminines of a, c can be construed together.

Although Gr interpr. the hapax nīvyā̀bhiḥ as belonging to a fem. noun nīvyā̀-, most subsequent interpr. take it as an adj. If both nīvyā̀bhiḥ and puruvī́rābhiḥ are adjectives, we need to determine the underlying referent that they modify. As just noted, the first of these instr. is a hapax, but puruvī́ra- occurs 9x in the RV; in 6 of these occurrences it modifies rayí- ‘wealth’ (IV.44.6, VI.6.7, 22.3, 49.15, VIII.71.6, X.167.1), including 3x in VI. Given the marked predominance of this collocation, the most likely referent for puruvī́ra- in our passage is also rayí-. Now rayí- is ordinarily masc., but there are occasional fem. usages, and although I have tried to whittle down their number (see comm. ad VI.8.5), it cannot be reduced to zero. One occurrence of puruvī́ra- is a clear fem. modifying rayí-: X.167.1 rayím puruvī́rām. I therefore supply a form of ‘wealth, riches’ here, with fem. gender, as referent for both fem. adjectives. It may be that the feminine was chosen here to signal that these instr. pls.

do not modify the masc. instr. pl.s in b.

This now brings us to the meaning and affiliation of the hapax nīvyà-. This is generally and fairly plausibly connected with nīví- ‘loincloth’ or undergarment of some sort, first attested in the AV and found also in the VS and early Vedic prose.

The developed meaning of our adj. is supposed to be ‘(something) to be wrapped and carried in a nīví-’. Cf. Ge’s “mit in den Schurz gebundenen (Geschenken?)”; Old more expansively suggests that Indra could knot into his loin cloth a host of strong sons. He compares nīvibhāryà- ‘to be carried/worn in the nīví- in AV(Ś) VIII.6.20 (=AVP XVI.81.1), which is certainly suggestive. However, this interpr. encounters a practical difficulty: just how much can be carried in a loincloth? Even Indra, whose garments are presumably more capacious than ours, would probably not be able to fit into his underwear the extravagant amount of gifts we generally ask him for. The images that come to mind — at least to my mind — are of a hobo’s bundle at the end of his stick and of a stork delivering a baby in a cloth sling (presumably a diaper?) hanging from its beak, both of which have limited carrying space. The AV passage containing nīvibhāryà- simply confirms this. Found in a hymn “To guard a pregnant woman from demons” (in Whitney’s title), the verse in question concerns possible miscarriage (áva √pad lit. ‘fall down’, but a standard idiom for miscarriage) and recommends that the pregnant woman carry/wear two remedies in her nīví-: VIII.6.20bcd yád dhitáṃ mā́va pādi tát / gárbhaṃ ta ugraú rakṣatāṃ bheṣajaú nīvibhāryā̀“What has been deposited [=embryo], let that not ‘fall down’; let the two powerful remedies to be worn/carried in your nīvi protect your embryo.” This obviously involves inserting into the garment some sort of prophylactic of modest enough size that it could be reasonably worn on an everyday basis -- not taking off the garment and stuffing it full of goodies.

The publ. tr. maintains the connection with nīví-, or rather with √vyā ‘envelop’, which at least some take as the root at issue (see Gr, also [critical] disc. in KEWA s.v. nīvíḥ; the morphology is admitted difficult, and EWA casually suggests a connection to ní √yu ‘join’ [perhaps anticipated by Ge’s invocation, n. 4a, of niyút-], which does not seem a better alternative, as it would require an unprecedented alternate syllabification of the zero-grade of √yu to *iv). The publ. tr. ‘to clothe (him)’ rests on the metaphor of clothing as wealth. Cf. nearby VI.35.1 kadā́stómaṃ vāsayo ‘sya rāyā́“When will you clothe his praise-song with wealth?” However, I now see that I brushed aside problems of both form and function: the root √vyā does not distract its initial cluster, but both meter and accent require a reading nivíyā-; if the form is meant to be a gerundive, it should be passive in function, a usage not reflected in the translation; vowel-final preverbs do not lengthen before √vyā; ní is not found with √vyā in the RV. I now suggest that the form belongs to a different root entirely: √vī ‘pursue’. This root is found with ní in the RV, though only in the intensive (see Schaeffer, 190-91), in a usage I tr. ‘bear down on’, though here it could mean something more like ‘track down’ or simply ‘pursue’. Among the many objects that forms of √vī take, riches and the like are found (e.g., in this maṇḍala

