+++
title = "05"

+++
The bridge between 4d and 5a has already been noted, as well as the change of scene. However, I think the competition visible in vss. 3-4, as well as in vss. 6-7, continues here by other, sacrificial, means. To get Indra on their side in battle, the men must perform not only a correct sacrifice, but a better sacrifice. One puzzling feature of this vs. is the presence of pf. optatives in pādas b and c. As I have discussed elsewhere (2008 “Women’s Language in the RV” [Ged. Elizarenkova], 2009 “Where Are All the Optatives” [East and West]), the pf. opt. has a curious distribution and, to some extent, a particular sociolinguistic profile, and it is not clear what riricyāt (b) and ví papṛcyāt (c) are doing sandwiched between a pres. (yajante, a) and a presential perfect (jujoṣa, d), esp. because the four pādas are otherwise unified by the opening ā́d íd. What sets bc off from a,d is the fact that the subjects in b and c are ritual offerings, paktíḥ ‘cooked food’ and sómaḥ respectively, as opposed to the personal subjects (at least in my interpr.) of a and d. What optative function do these verbs express (and do they express the same one): necessity (‘should’), potentiality, more certain (‘would’) or less certain (‘might’), possibility (‘could’), or desire (also ‘would’)? My surmise is that the vs. depicts the beginning and end points of the successful sacrifice that one of the groups of competitors mounts. Pāda a contains a general description of the sacrifice and implies its start. In d the unnamed subject, in my opinion Indra, shows that the sacrifice has been successful by enjoying the offered soma (the bull, vṛṣabhám). The pādas in between describe the qualities of the better sacrifice that our side performs, in contrast to our opponents, and I interpr. the optatives as expressing near-certain possibility. I therefore take riricyāt in b as meaning ‘would leave behind, succeed’ not in a temporal sense (the cooked food is the next course after the offering cake) but in an evaluative one: cooked food is just better than a puroḷāś-. (This seems generally agreed by interpr.; see esp. Ge’s n. 5b.) (Note however that the puroḷāś- was probably not eliminated but supplemented, since the successful sacrificer not only cooks cooked food for Indra in 7b but also roasts grains.) Even more important is the mere presence of soma in c. The pāda implies that the other side consists of non-pressers (ásuṣvīn), who therefore cannot offer soma to Indra. Soma is our trump card and leaves our competitors out in the cold, as it were.

(Notice that the non-pressers contrast with the súṣvi- in 2d. For súṣvi-/ásuṣvi- as well as paktí, see also the next hymn IV.25.6-7.) My tr. of d differs in an important way from Ge (/WG). They take yájadhyai as an infinitive complement to jujoṣa with vṛṣabhám as object, though with two different interpretations. Ge’s “dann beliebt man einen Stier zu opfern” (so also Keydana, Inf., p. 289, with disc.) assumes that the vṛṣabhá- is a sacrificed animal.

WG correctly point out that √yaj does not take an acc. of the offering but of the god who receives the offering and therefore take vṛṣabhá- as referring to Indra. The subj.

in either case must be an unidentified priest or the like. In my view, by contrast, Indra is the unnamed subj., who receives pleasure from the ‘bull’ soma -- note that vṛṣabhá- is an epithet of soma, as well as of Indra and other gods. The yájadhyai is a purpose inf. without object, as it generally is (cf., nearby IV.21.5 íyarti vā́caṃ janáyan yájadhyai “(who) raises his speech, giving birth to it in order to carry out the sacrifice”).

As Old notes, there are 3 forms of √ric in this hymn, all pf.: pf. part.

ririkvāṃsaḥ (3b), pf. opt. riricyāt here, and a plupf. (probably) arirecīt (9c). They are all somewhat marked in form and have different contextual meanings. Old remarks “der Dichter liebte dies Verb.” Certainly he seems to be making a point with it.


<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/04/024/04-05.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>