+++
title = "06"

+++
With Ge, Re, and Old I supply an acc. pl. vásū(ni) as obj. of dadhe, on the basis of IX.18.4 vásūni hástayor dadhé (cf. also X.54.5). The gapping of a form of vásu- here, accepted by most, corresponds nicely to the gapping of the same stem I suggest for the previous vs. Thieme (Unters.), fld. by WG, instead take dadhe as passive: the fire “is taken in the hand” (of the priest, so Th). This seems pragmatically unlikely: although firebrands are ritually carried about under certain circumstances, picking up the entire ritual fire (as víhāyāḥ and aratíḥ seem to imply) would be risky and painful. Moreover, the rest of the verse depicts the good things that Agni does for people, and taking goods in his hand fits this context.

The rarely attested verbal stem iṣudhyá-, here in the part. iṣudhyaté, has a counterpart in Old Avestan, išūidiiāmahī 3x in the Yasna Haptaŋhāiti, which exists alongside a noun išud-. The form is carefully discussed by Narten (YH 159-61), who accepts Humbach’s etymology (Gathas 1959, II, ad Y 31.14; repeated 2nd ed. 1991): išud- is a compound of iš- ‘nourishment’ and the zero-grade of *√vadh ‘lead’, to which root noun compound a denom. is built meaning ‘strengthen’. (For a rehearsal of the history of this scholarship, see Scar 63.) I am not convinced. I prefer to see it (couched in Vedic terms for the moment) as a compound of íṣu- ‘arrow’ and √dhā ‘place’. That lexeme is specialized in the meaning ‘aim’ and is a well-attested metaphor for the “aiming” of a praise-hymn towards the divine recipient; cf. IX.69.1 íṣur ná dhánvan práti dhīyate matíḥ “Like an arrow on a bow, my thought is aimed.” (For the affinity of íṣu- and √dhā cf. also I.64.10 ástāra íṣuṃ dadhire gábhastayoḥ “The archers have taken their arrows in their fists” and the cmpd. iṣu-dhí- ‘quiver’.) Such an analysis works also for the Avestan forms, since Avestan has both the ‘arrow’ word and the verb, and I see no reason why it could not be reconstructed for Indo-Iranian. An ‘arrow’ derivation works extremely well in our passage because iṣudhyaté echoes iṣūyaté (‘going straight like an arrow’) in vs. 4, likewise ending the d-pāda, likewise a denominative participial dat. of benefit. For extensive and updated disc. see my forthcoming “Vedic iṣudhyá- and Old Avestan išud-, išūidiia-: The Aim of Praise.” The 2nd person of pf. óhiṣe is puzzling in a verse, and a hymn, in which the god is otherwise entirely referred to in the 3rd ps. (see the surrounding verbs in this vs.: dadhe (a), śiśrathat (bc), ṛṇvati (fg) -- with pāda f esp. entirely parallel to de with 2nd ps. óhiṣe). I think it must be a transposition of the phrase found in VIII.19.1 devatrā́havyám óhire “They have carried the oblation among the gods.” The expected 3rd sg. pf. óhe would not fit the meter here.

Though pādas f and g share both a subject (Agni) and a verb (ví) ṛṇvati they seem semantically somewhat at odds. This semantic disparity is, however, ameliorated by the fact that their objects, vā́ram and dvā́rā respectively, are phonologically very close, which similarity was already pointed out by Re.

