+++
title = "03"

+++
Pāda a is syntactically disturbing, in that it seems to have a clear embedded rel. cl.: ánv éko vadati yád dádāti tád, with tád the referent in the main cl.

corresponding to yád in the dependent cl. (“ … that which he gives” -- so the standard tr. incl. JPB’s). Since such constructions seem strongly disallowed in RV, such a bald example would be striking and in fact begs for a different interpr. The interpr. of this pāda is made more difficult by the fact that the lexeme ánu √vad is found only here in the RV and it is not entirely clear what action is being performed.

If Sāy/Ge (et al.) are correct in identifying the first ékaḥ as the Hotar and the second as the Adhvaryu, a possible solution emerges. The Hotar should not in fact be “giving” anything; his job is to recite in accompaniment (an activity well conveyed by ánu √vad) to the ritual actions. It is the Adhvaryu who gives, that is, who actually makes the physical offering. Assuming that this division of labor already obtains in the RV, it seems likely to me that yád dádāti begins a new sentence and is a preposed rel. with the main cl. … éka īyate. I would tentatively tr. the hemistich “One follows along with this speech. the (other) one hastens when he gives that [=soma/oblation], changing its forms, having that as his work.” If yád is rather taken as the neut. rel.

pron., the tr. can be modified to “What he gives, he hastens to that, having that as his work …” My working assumption is that the independent tád is coreferential with the tád in the cmpd tád-apas-.

