+++
title = "07"

+++
dā́na- in b is almost universally taken as ‘pasture’ (Weide) or ‘earth’ (Re ‘sur terre’), a meaning attributed to dā́na- only in this passage. The interpr. goes back, one way or the other, to Sāy: upalūyante sasyāny atreti dānaṃ kṣetram. His remark “grain is cut there” implies a connection with √dā ‘reap, mow’ (EWA’s DĀ2 ). His gloss ‘field’ (dānaṃ kṣetram) is repeated thereafter, most influentially in BR, though they seem to derive the word from √dā ‘divide’ (EWA’s DĀ4 ); subsequent adoptors of the gloss do not bother to comment on the etymology. Sāy’s implied derivation from √dā ‘reap’ is appealing. There are several clear exx. of the root pres. of this root in the RV (grouped under Gr’s 2. dā), as well as nominal derivatives (see EWA s.v. DĀ2 ). The reference in this vs. to the establishment of flowering and fruitful plants would have helped preserve a lexical item specific to agriculture, even though it is homonymous with the more common dā́na- ‘gift’ (and see differently accented dānā́ya ‘to give, for giving’ in 13a).

I wonder, however, about the concrete locational sense that Sāy gives it; it might make more sense as an abstract ‘in their reaping’. The vs. seems to depict Indra as the orderer of the cosmos, with the solemn etymological figure dhármaṇā … ádhārayaḥ “you established by your establishment” (or without English cognate expression, “you established by your ordinance”). (I would not follow JPB’s attribution of the dhárman- to the plants: “according to the foundation (of each).”) Most of the hemistich would then show Indra creating the various plants in their crucial function, to be harvested. (The presence of ádhi might be counter-evidence to my interpr., in that it generally has a locational sense, but I’m not certain that this is enough to derail it.) I further think that the last bit of the hemistich, vy àvánīr ádhārayaḥ, is a somewhat separate expression. That is, I read ádhārayaḥ without preverb with the “plants” segment in pāda a / first part of b (thus not flg. JPB’s “established separately the flowering and fruitful (plants)”), and restrict ví … ádhārayaḥ to the streams of the end of b; its position after the caesura in b favors this syntactic separation. If this interpr. is correct, the problematic dā́ne may require further analysis, for in addition to ‘in their reaping’ for the first part of the hemistich (to √dā ‘reap’) it could also be taken as a derivative of √dā ‘divide’, as JPB does: ‘in their division’. It is ideally positioned to be read with both.

I would thus tr. the hemistich “You who established by your ordinance the flowering and fruitful (plants) in their reaping (and) established the (various) streams separately in their division.” Indra’s division of undifferentiated water into separate streams would be part of his fructifying project -- bringing life-giving water to the various terrestrial regions.

Having created the relevant features of the earth -- plants and streams -- in ab, Indra then turns to a particular heavenly feature, the didyút-s. What exactly is meant here isn’t clear. The stem didyút-, like its near-twin didyú-, generally means ‘missile, dart’, but often a missile sent flying from heaven by a god (cf., e.g., VII.46.3 [Rudra] yā́te didyúd ávasṛṣṭā divás pári “which missile of yours shot downward from heaven …”). As Mayrhofer points out (EWA s.v. didyú-), didyút- has probably been remodeled after √dyot or vidyút- ‘lightning’ (I’d favor the latter). And often it seems to have a naturalistic aspect, as lightning (or the dreaded ‘thunderbolt’ of oldfashioned Vedic exegesis). Here the naturalistic reading seems esp. prominent, and I suggest that ásama- ‘unequalled’ may also have the sense ‘unequal’ -- that is, jagged and asymmetrical, zigzaging like lightning.

The last difficulty of this challenging verse is the first part of d, urúr ūrvā́m̐ abhítaḥ. Ge (/WG) and the publ. tr. take this as an independent nominal clause (e.g., JPB: “you, the wide one surrounding the containers”). Given the cosmogonic cast of the rest of the vs., I would follow Re, who takes ūrvā́n as a 2nd object of ájanaḥ in c: “(qui,) vaste (toi-même, as engendré) les mers tout autours.” Although ūrvá-, lit.

‘container’, generally refers to cow-pens and the like in the RV, Re’s ‘seas’ (as particularly large containers) seems correct here; cf. the same usage, also in Maṇḍala II, in II.35.3, where the rivers all fill “the same ūrvá-” (samānám ūrváṃ nadyàḥ pṛṇanti). I would thus tr. cd “and who begot the unequal(led) flashing missiles of heaven (and) the ‘containers’ [=seas] all about, (you) the wide one.” The juxtaposition urúr ūrvā́n is a play on words; the two are not etymologically related, at least by most lights.

What is striking about this vs. is that, unlike the usual cosmogonic vss., which refer to large generic parts of creation (heaven, earth, etc.), this one highlights particular idiosyncratic aspects of the grand cosmic divisions.

