+++
title = "13"

+++
The last puzzle in the hymn is found in pāda c and also involves fame. We have just urged Indra to to give us a rā́dhaḥ (‘gift, benefit’) in the first hemistich. In c we find the phrase yác citráṃ śravasyā́(ḥ). Since citrá- very frequently modifies rā́dhaḥ, it seems natural to supply the recently mentioned rā́dhaḥ here. But then what is Indra doing? yác citrám appears to be the obj. of śravasyā́(ḥ). But this denom. doesn’t otherwise take an object (IV.42.2 cited by Gr is to be otherwise interpr.), and even if it did, the phrase would have to mean “which bright (gift) you will seek as fame,” which doesn’t seem to make sense. Ge essentially tr. it this way (“… eine ansehnliche (Lohngabe) … in der du … deinen Ruhm suchen”), but I don’t see why Indra would be looking for his fame in that direction. JPB avoids the syntactic difficulty by tr. as if yác citrám were an instr.: “the bright gift through which you will seek fame” (my italics), but this still requires the gift to be something that would provide Indra with fame. Re’s tendency to supply masses of material to smoothe over the rough places is on full display here: “ce qui est éclatant, veuille le donner-pardésir de-renom” (so hyphenated). WG seem to have arrived at a novel solution, apparently separating citrám from its usual formulaic partner rā́dhas and supplying śrávas- ‘fame’ -- or so I interpret “damit du … deinen ansehnlichen Ruhm suchen mögest.” However, as far as I can tell, śrávas- is never modified by citrá-, and context favors rā́dhas- as referent. I have no solution. The least unsatisfactory may be to assume that, in our self-serving way, we are telling Indra that giving us a good gift will bring him fame (better than heroic deeds? see 11ab) -- and in some sense it will, since we celebrate his generosity with hymns providing lasting śrávas-.