+++
title = "07"

+++
There is a syntactic problem in cd that is ignored by all tr. as far as I can see, though Old treats it briefly (ZDMG 61 [1907]: 829 = KlSch p. 260; see below): the fem. gen. pl. demonstr. āsām is unaccented. Oblique forms of the ayám demonstrative are unaccented when used pronominally, but accented when used adjectivally. The two accented forms of āsā́m appear with NPs, pū́rvāsām … svásṝṇām “previous sisters” I.124.9 and viśā́m .. ábhayānām “fearless clans” X.92.14, and unaccented āsām (25x) is always pronominal (for VII.34.10 and X.75.4 see disc.

ad loc.) Yet all interpr. of our passage construe āsām with rayīṇā́m (e.g., Ge [/WG] “der Herr dieser Reichtümer,” Re “le maître de ces richesses”). This produces another anomaly: rayí- is overwhelmingly masculine and should not be modified by a feminine demonstrative. (On supposed fem. rayí- in I.66.1 belonging to this group of hymns, see disc. ad loc. It need not be, and in my opinion is not, feminine there either.) Although it introduces some complexity, I therefore think that āsām “of these” must stand for a different feminine noun also construed with páti-. The problem then is what noun? It should already be present in the discourse, since unaccented forms of ayám are anaphoric, but there are no obvious candidates - indeed, no candidates at all if we limit ourselves to overt feminine plurals in the previous verses of this hymn.

However, an underlying feminine referent can be generated from the context. I see two possibilities. 1) From ápatya- ‘progeny’ in the phrase mánor ápatye we can generate the synonym, fem. prajā́- ‘offspring’ - note their juxtaposition in I.179.6 prajā́m ápatyam. The gen. pl. of prajā́- does not occur in Vedic (indeed no gen. pl. to a root noun in -ā does; see Macdonell VG), presumably because it should be prajā́m and identical to the acc. sg. (though with possible distracted 2nd syllable). By this interpretation Agni would essentially be prajā́-pati. 2) More likely, in my view: the underlying noun is víś- ‘clan’. Although no direct reference to clans is made in the hymn, as I point out in the publ. intro. and argue in more detail elsewhere (Jamison Klein Fs., 2016; see above), the repeated víśve ‘all’ triggers a pun with víś- in this set of hymns (see esp. I.70.4) and so would be present in the minds of the poet and his audience. Agni is regularly called viśā́m páti- and viśpáti-, sometimes at the same time - e.g., III.13.5 hótāraṃ viśpátiṃ viśā́m, which also contains hótar-, as also here. The mention of Manu might also have triggered the association; cf., e.g., V.4.3 viśā́ṃ kavíṃ viśpátim mā́nuṣīnām “the poet of the clans, the clanlord of the (clans) of the sons of Manu.” If this solution seems too fussy, it is possible to follow Old’s explanation of the lack of accentuation (see ref. above): that āsām does not modify rayīṇā́m but anticipates it (“he is the master of them, of the riches”), while being anaphoric to sg. rayím in 6d. This does not eliminate the gender issue, however, and also seems over-tricky. The eṣām … víśveṣām … devā́nām of vs. 2 makes some problems for my interpretation here, but see discussion there.

