+++
title = "02"

+++
The gen. phrase dákṣasya bibhyúṣaḥ is troublesome, as it is not clear who or what it refers to or what its syntactic function is. Old interpr. it as a “dativischer Gen.,” though he gives no tr. But Ge seems to take it as a gen. absolute: “während der Entschlossene Furcht hatte.” In either case dákṣa- seems to be taken as an adj.

qualifying a human and this fearful human is taken to be one on our side, aided either directly (datival gen.) or indirectly (gen. abs.) by fearless Indra. In this passage the single ‘skillful’ (or ‘determined’: Ge’s ‘entschlossen’) person would presumably be the soma-presser (súṣvi-) of ab, and this is not impossible. However, although there are a few undoubted exx. of adjectival dákṣa- ‘skillful’ (e.g., I.51.2 dákṣāsa ṛbhávaḥ), in most clear exx. the stem is a masc. abstract ‘skill, abillity’, and in doubtful cases I prefer to seek such a meaning. Here I suggest that the “fearful skill” belongs to Indra’s enemies, the dásyūn of d, and depicts their fading confidence in their skill or ability to counter Indra. Under this interpr. it can either be a gen. abs. with Ge (though this construction is rare at any stage and is supposed not to exist before Vedic prose; see Delbrück, AIS 389-90) or is a gen. of quality (although this construction is also marginal) with dásyūn “the Dasyus of frightened skill.” The publ.

tr. represents an absolute interpr.; the gen. of quality might be a better analysis, but is difficult to render in Engl., as the tr. just given shows (better “of daunted/craven skill,” but this would lose the etymological figure). (Kü’s [336] tr. avoids the problem, but unfortunately only by an unusual grammatical lapse on his part: he explicitly identifies bibhyúṣaḥ as acc. pl., which it could be, but tr. the phrase dákṣasya bibhyúṣaḥ as a single NP [“für den Geschickten die sich fürchtenden”] apparently failing to remember that dákṣasya requires the whole phrase to be gen. sg.

He takes this supposed acc. pl. as parallel to śárdhataḥ, which he separates from dásyūn and takes as another qualifier of those aided by Indra. His full tr. is “Oder wenn du für den Geschickten die sich fürchtenden furchtlos unterwarfst für den Kühnen, Indra, die Dasyus.” The misparsing of dákṣasya excludes this tr.)
