+++
title = "08"

+++
As in III.41.6 (=VI.45.27) mandasvā is not accented despite following hí; see comm. ad III.41.6. I have no explanation (nor does Old, despite his ref. to himself). It can be noted that in all three passages the hí occurs in 3rd position, after the verb (all three identically sá mandasvā hí), but this position is not sufficient to explain the lack of accent, since hí elsewhere occurs after its accented verb (e.g., I.2.4 índavo vām uśánti hí# ; cf., e.g., I.105.18, 131.6, III.14.5, 26.8, VII.3.3, 23.5, 59.5, VIII.21.18, IX.85.2, X.30.12, 34.11). Note esp. I.189.6, IX.49.4, X.68.7, where hí is in 3rd position after the verb as here. Since hí often appears after initial accented verbs -- for 2nd sg. med. impvs. like mandasvā see the numerous exx. of #yukṣvā́hí (I.10.3, etc.) -- it might be possible to construct a scenario wherein when such an impv. is displaced from initial position by the pronoun sá, it loses its accent by some sort of syntactic analogy. But I find this unlikely: RVic poets are quite sensitive to their accent rules.

Pāda c lacks a verb, but the close parallelism of b and c (prá […] imé) and the semantic connection of the two nom. pl.s yajñā́saḥ and hávāsaḥ impose aśnuvantu from b.

In c the 1st pl. prn. asmé, which could be either dat. or loc., doesn’t work very well as either. Ge tr. “von uns,” which makes contextual sense but ill fits either possible case form. The publ. tr. takes it as loc., though the tr. is awkward.

I don’t know why the modal temperature has been raised, as it were, by precative yamyāḥ in d -- though it is the case that there are no 3rd sg. root aor. impvs. attested to √yam, perhaps because a putative *yaṃtu or *yantu would coincide with the much more common 3rd pl. root pres. impv. to √i ‘go’.

