+++
title = "10"

+++
I would slightly change the tr. of the loc. absol. to ‘has been pressed’ or ‘was pressed’ to accord better with the immediate past of the hymn-summary verb astāvi.

Klein (DGRV I.442-43) interpr. maghónaḥ as acc. pl. (“the liberal ones”), which it could be morphologically, but √kṣi ‘rule over’ always takes the gen. (Gr gives one passage with supposed acc., V.37.4, but it belongs to the etymologically separate root √kṣi ‘dwell’, and in any case in that passage I do not construe the acc. with that verb.) The utá in c is troubling: it does not seem to conjoin anything and it seems randomly positioned in the pāda. Klein groups it with a small set of passages where he thinks utá means ‘(and) also, as well’, and he suggests that it focuses on the immediately preceding word jaritré ‘singer’, who will also receive patronage from Indra, in addition to the soma-presser in 9d. I find this unpersuasive, though I don’t have an altogether better solution. One possibility is that we should supply the nom. sg. corresponding to gen. sg. maghónaḥ of b, namely *maghávā, and utá would conjoin this supplied noun with sūríḥ. This would change the tr. to “so that he will be (liberal [/a benefactor]) and a patron to the singer.” A slightly different solution, but still with the supplied *maghávā, would be to take utá as starting a new clause, with sūríḥ qualifying Indra, yielding a tr. “so that he [=the liberal mortal of b] will be (liberal) to the singer, and Indra (will be) a patron and giver of wealth …” Indra is called a sūrí- in this Indra cycle (VI.29.5=37.5) and elsewhere. This second suggestion is probably less disruptive to the syntax than the first one, but I weakly favor the first because sūrí- is more often used of human patrons than of gods.