+++
title = "06"

+++
The verb āvárat in b is morphologically problematic. Given the context, its root affiliation is surely to √vṛ ‘choose’ rather than to √vṛ ‘obstruct, hinder’ (despite nearby várāya [5a] belonging to the latter). But forms to √vṛ ‘choose’ are overwhelmingly medial -- save for a tiny collection of forms resembling this one, with the preverb ā́, full-grade of the root, an apparent thematic vowel (which is more likely the subjunctive marker), and act. endings: āváraḥ VIII.13.21, 19.30. In the publ. tr. I render both as “you (will) choose,” but it is possible that “you (will) grant” would be better. The answer depends on what gave rise to these active forms. By one scenario we might view them as contrastive actives generated to the middle, specifically the middle root aorist found in a few forms like (ā́…) ava ri (IV.55.5). In that case the complementary reciprocal active sense to medial ‘chose’ would be ‘grant’. However, this is another possible pathway to the act. forms, suggested by Dīrghatamas’s own usage. In I.140.13 the final VP is íṣaṃ váram ... varanta, which I tr. “they will choose refreshment as their boon (for us?).” varanta is a well-formed 3rd pl. med. subj. to the root aorist; however, because of its -anta ending it could have been interpr. as an -anta replacment to an active form (*varan) of the same meaning (for -anta replacements see Jamison 1979 [IIJ 21]). On this interpr., further act.

forms could have been generated to this supposed act. stem. Although this explanation might work best for the form in this hymn (as opposed to those in VIII) because it is also a Dīrghatamas product, the problem is that our form here pretty clearly means ‘grant’ not ‘choose’, as the scenario would suggest. (Unless of course varanta in I.140.13 actually does mean ‘grant’, which is not impossible.) In short, these forms are morphologically puzzling and their meaning(s) not entirely clear.

