+++
title = "10"

+++
The medial 1st pl. s-aor. opt. vaṃsīmáhi contrasts with the active 1st pl. saor. subjunctive váṃsāma in 8c, but the medial optative must have been modeled on the rhyme form maṃsīmáhi in the same metrical position in 7d. The “rest” following vaṃsīmáhi may call attention to the verb by isolating it metrically.

Besides this echo, note also nṛvát, which replicates nṛvát in 1a, and vāmám recalling vāmásya in 5b, while the gen. vásvaḥ is in slight discord with the differently formed gen. vásunaḥ in 5b.

I tr. śrómatebhiḥ as ‘attentions’, that is, the attentive hearing(s) that Indra gives to men’s words. For similar use of śrómata- in a somewhat clearer context see VII.40.5.

The referent of the “both kinds of good[s]” in c is not clear, at least from immediate context. In the very similar passage VII.82.4 īśānā́vásva ubháyasya, it seems to refer to goods belonging to war and peace; similarly in the next hymn, VII.83.5 yuváṃ hí vásva ubháyasya rā́jathaḥ, where a reference to war and peace -- or perhaps to the goods of enemies and of allies -- is likely. In II.9.5 the referent of ubháyam … vasavyàm is also open-ended, but Re’s suggestion there that it’s livestock and offspring is perhaps the most satisfactory. In our passage the nearest contrastive pair is jāmī́m̐r ájāmīn “kin and non-kin” in 8c, so perhaps “both kinds of good[s]” refers to the goods belonging to these two groups whom we hope vanquish in battle. Note vṛtrā́ṇy ubháyāni “both kinds of obstacles” in 13c, which Ge, persuasively, takes as referring to the “kin and non-kin” of 8d. MLW suggests another possibility: “movable and immovable,” which has a fine Indo-European pedigree.

The acc. obj. phrase in d, rátnam máhi sthūrám bṛhántam, contains an apparent gender clash: rátna- is neut., as is máhi; sthūrám can be either neut. or masc., while bṛhántam must be masc. It is tempting to correlate the two genders with the two kinds of goods in pāda c: a “great treasure” (neut.) and “substantial lofty X” (masc.). This might be possible: sthūrá- bṛhánt- qualifies masc. rayí- in IV.21.4 sthūrásya rāyó bṛható yá ī́śe (and cf. X.156.3 ā́gne sthūráṃ rayím bhara), and bṛhánt- not infrequently modifies rayí- (cf., e.g., VI.6.7). Thus, we could assume an underlying *rayím for the last two adjectives, yielding a tr. “grant a great treasure (and) substantial lofty (wealth).” This might be supported by rāyā́… bṛhatā́in the last pāda of the hymn (13d). Nonetheless, this seems unduly artificial, and I would prefer to assume that at the end of this acc. phrase, encouraged by ambig. sthūrám, bṛhántam has simply taken its accustomed pāda-final place in Triṣṭubh. As reported by Old (ZDMG 55.325 and Noten), Ludwig suggested substituting (that is, emending) rayím for máhi, a suggestion roundly rejected by Old, who simply says (Noten) that masc. bṛhántam is construed with neut. rátnam.

