+++
title = "05"

+++
In pāda a it is unclear with what noun to construe gen. rāyáḥ. Ge and Re take it with savitā́(Ge: “der Zuweiser … des Reichtums”), while WG seem to agree with me in taking it with áṃśa(ḥ). Since Savitar is a far more defined divine being with a name that, though having the literal sense ‘impeller’, is normally used just as a name, I think Aṃśa, whose animatization is fairly shaky, is more likely to be used in a literal abstract value and construed with a gen. of the same type.

The problematic form in the vs. is saṃjítaḥ. Properly speaking, this should either be an abl./gen. sg. or a nom./acc. pl. of the root noun cmpd saṃjít- ‘complete victor’. Gr analyzes it as gen. sg., modifying vṛtrásya, as, apparently, does Re, while Ge and WG take it as nom. pl., presumably applicable to all the gods listed singly before. All construe the gen. pl. dhánānām with it (e.g., Ge “die Erbeuter der Schätze”), but this leaves vṛtrásya stranded, since it would be perverse to attribute the victory over Vṛtra to Bhaga, Savitar, and Aṃśa in addition to Indra. Therefore all the standard tr. supply sg. *hantā́(vel sim.) as an appositive to Indra, to govern vṛtrásya. I consider this unnec. Our pāda seems to be based on a much-repeated pāda, couched in the acc. sg., in the Triṣṭubh refrain vs. of the Viśvāmitras’ Indra hymns: III.30.22 (etc.) ghnántaṃ vṛtṛā́ṇi saṃjítaṃ dhánānām. I consider our pāda a nonce adaptation of the orig. pāda, construed as if orig. saṃjítam belonged to a them. stem -

- in other words saṃjítaḥ is a thematic back-formation, nom. singular, that allows the
formula to remain metrical. The last part of 7b, with sg. sanitā́raṃ dhánānām, gives some support to this interpr., and note that Indra alone is called jiṣṇú- ‘victor’ in the next vs. (6a). Of course, it must be admitted that in III.30.22 vṛtrā́ṇi is the obj. of a form of √han and so supplying such a form here (as the standard tr. do) also gets some support. But vṛtrá- has been transformed from acc. (pl.) to gen. (sg.) in our passage and should be parallel to dhánānām.

