+++
title = "03"

+++
As Ge hints (n. 3a), the first pāda depicts the paryagnikaraṇa, a ritual episode that involves carrying a firebrand around various objects. In the animal sacrifice the objects include the animals to be sacrificed. On the basis of passages like IX.97.1cd (… páry eti …mitéva sádma paśumā́nti hótā “as the Hotar goes around the fixed seats provided with [sacrificial] animals”), the fixed seats are the places where the sacrificial animals are tied. The fixed seats here (sádma mitā́) must be the same things, and the circling around is conveyed by pári … yán, which rather nicely encircles the seats in the word order.

The problematic pāda is the second one. All the standard tr. take śarád- as a gen. sg. in the sense of ‘autumn’, not ‘year’, with gárbha- metaphorical for ‘fruit, product’; cf., e.g., Ge’s “die herbstliche Frucht der Erde” or Hoffmann’s grammatically more punctilious “die Frucht des Herbstes der Erde.” This echo of a harvest-home festival strikes me as extremely incongruous. Although śrauta ritual does have a “first-fruits” ritual (Āgrayaṇa Iṣṭi, on which see, e.g., Keith, Relig. and Philos., 323-24; Hillebrandt, Rituallit., 119-20), it is a minor, gṛhya-like rite and quite marginal, and I am not aware of any mention of it in the RV, which tends to confine itself to the far grander Soma sacrifice. I take śarádaḥ as an acc. pl. in the ‘year’ sense, expressing extent of time (“for years”), as it almost always does elsewhere. What then does the pāda refer to? In ritual context gárbha- almost always refers to Agni, either when just about to be kindled (and thus still in the womb of the wood) or just kindled -- though occasionally to Soma. The referent here is most likely Agni. The phrase bhárad gárbham probably has two senses. On the one hand, it is an idiom meaning ‘be pregnant’, and the acc. extent of time śarádaḥ is appropriate to this sense: “(s/he) carried/carries the embryo for years.” Cf. V.2.2 pūrvī́r hí gárbhaḥ śarádo vavárdha “For the embryo grew for many years,” in a clear pregnancy context. The question then is who is the subject; I suggest the Earth, whose embryo it probably is (see below). On the other, this can refer to a particular ritual moment, when the Āhavanīya fire is taken out of the Gārhapatya and carried to the east to be set down (puróhita-) as the offering fire. In this reading the śarádaḥ may refer to the regular repetition of the ritual year after year, and the subject would be the priest, perhaps the human Hotar.

What I don’t understand in this pāda are the preverb/adposition/adverb ā́and the relevance of the earth (gen./abl. pṛthivyā́ḥ). The most likely explanation of ā́is that it is simply a preverb with bhárat, displaced to a position after the VP because the pattern of -at injunctives in this hymn imposes pāda-initial position on bhárat. In that case the publ. tr. should be slightly emended to “He bears the embryo … here …” This seems to be the solution of Ge and Hoffmann [/WG], the latter two with clear “herbei,” though no one comments on it. However it is possible that ā́should be construed with śarádaḥ or even pṛthivyā́ḥ, though I do not see a way to make that work. As for pṛthivyā́ḥ, I take it as a gen. with gárbham “embryo of the earth,” though Agni is usually called the embryo of the plants or of the waters. Perhaps Agni is the embryo of the earth because the plants in which he is immanent are themselves products of the earth. As noted above, in the pregnancy reading of bhárad gárbham I take the unexpressed subj. to be the Earth herself. In the ritual reading “embryo of the earth” may signal the fact that the new Āhavanīya fire is being transported in a clay pot.

In c Ge and Re identify the horse neighing while being led as Agni; this would fit nicely with my hypothesis that b depicts the carrying of the Āhavanīya fire to the east, though neither of them takes b that way. Ge also identifies the bellowing cow of c as the Speech (vā́k) of d, which seems reasonable.

