+++
title = "04"

+++
Old begins his n. on this verse with the cheerful comment “Wohl hoffnungslos,” and it is well to bear this in mind. The difficulties are located in the first pāda, which is seriously deficient in syllables (at best 9, probably 8), has a bad cadence, and contains a hapax á/ā́ṣatarā at which all tr. and comm. throw up their hands. The line is probably corrupt, and my attempts to fix it should be read with skepticism. The meter can be ameliorated by assuming a haplology of acc. pl. kárma adjacent to the identical verb, 1st pl. karma: tā́<kárma> karma (or tā́karma <kárma>). [I now see that a similar haplology is proposed by WG in the n. to this passage.] (For a less dramatic proposed haplology in Agastya’s oeuvre, see comm. ad I.180.3.) If we detach á/ā́ṣatarā from sandhi with the preceding word (contra HvN’s karmā́ṣatarā), the line would have eleven syllables, though it still would have an irreparably bad cadence.

As for á/ā́ṣatarā, the only (more or less) clear thing about it is that it is a comparative in -tara-, probably agreeing with tā́. Ge [/WG] refuses to tr. it -- though in their n. WG render the passage tentatively as “Diese (Opfer)werke haben wir für ihn (gerade) zu den gesprenkelteren (bunter) gemacht.” I do not understand what they are doing with áṣatarā, though the rest of the tr. reflects the haplology proposal above. Re tr. “plus forts,” but without a note his reasons for this are lost; in his introduction to AiG I (p. 59) he comments that the word is “sans doute corrompu.” AiG I.239 tr. ‘annehmbarer’ without further explanation and floats the possibility of “nicht rein ai. Ursprungs,” a suggestion that Kuiper takes as fact (Aryans, 25).

Mayrhofer refuses to speculate. I suggest, very tentatively, that it may be a dissimilated form of *ā́ṣṭa-tara- ‘more obtainable’, built to the ppl. aṣṭa- to √(n)aś + ā́. The initial long vowel in my reconstruction is contra the Pp., but the preverb ā́is necessary to account for the initial accent and it is also the case that the ppl. to √(n)aś does not seem to appear uncompounded in Vedic.

If this gossamer suggestion is correct, then the first two pādas outline a twostep strategy: we have first perfomed the easier ritual requirements in a, but more concentrated attention is needed, and in b those fixated on the gods advance the ritual activities. The second half-verse predicts that Indra will look favorably on these efforts and will come to our ritual.

