+++
title = "10"

+++
The vs. describes the competition between rival sides (either in battle or in ritual or both) to secure Indra for their side. I take it as depicting much the same situation as in vs. 7 (esp. 7b), where Indra is the object of a tug-of-war (paritaṃsayádhyai). I therefore interpr. Indra also as the target. of madhyāyúvaḥ ‘seeking (one) in the middle’ in 10d, contra Ge (/WG) for whom Agastya is the middle-man, the mediator.

My interpr. of the vs. requires some rearrangement of the elements, most particularly the phrase narā́ṃ ná śáṃsaiḥ, which I construe with the simile in c -- parallel to yajñaíḥ in the frame in d. Although this displacement may seem radical, neither Ge’s “Im Wetteifer geratend wie durch das Lob der Herren …” (sim. WG) nor Re’s “(Soyons) en rivalité comme par l’effet des paroles-qualifiantes des seigneurs …” makes any sense to me.

This passage is one of the comparatively few where a real modal value of the subjunctive might be preferable to the expectant future: “let/may Indra be ours,” rather than the publ. tr. “Indra will be ours.” Perhaps adjusting the English to “shall be ours” will do the trick. The subjunctive may express the speakers’ certainty that their sacrifices will be successful and exercise control over Indra’s actions. This seems to be the point of the next vs. ### 11
As indicated in the publ. intr., the syntax of this vs. mimics the meandering attributed to the finally successful sacrifice and the long road that brings a man home.

One of the striking features of the word order (at least in my interpr. and Ge’s) is that índram behaves almost like a Wackernagel’s Law clitic, in taking modified 2nd position in pāda a, though it is to be construed with ókaḥ … ā́kṛṇoti in cd. One factor that might impede that interpr. is that, as Old points out, the finite verb kṛṇoti in d is not accented, despite the hí in pāda a. Old feels that the end of the verse is no longer governed by hí. I would suggest rather that the rambling road the vs. has traveled from its beginning, including two complex similes, led the poet to forget or dismiss the hí with which he began.

I take juhurāṇá- to √hvṛ / hru ‘go crookedly, go astray’ (with Ge and Re, as well as Gr), rather than with √hṛ ‘be angry’ with Insler (JAOS 88, 1968), apparently followed by WG: “wenn es (das Opfer) auch erzürnt im Denken Umwege macht.” The parallel participle pariyán ‘going around, meandering’ supports this identification, and it is somewhat difficult to imagine why/how a sacrifice would be (or make) angry. Agastya uses the same participle in the same sense in I.189.1.

