+++
title = "03"

+++
In pāda a I take maghávadbhyaḥ as referring to our human patrons, because I take the Maruts as subj. of the 2nd pl. impv.: dadhāta. However given the connections between 3ab and 6ab (for which see below), where maghónām refers to the Maruts, it is quite possible that the subj. of the impv. is the poet’s fellow priests and the Maruts are the referent of maghávadbhyaḥ.

The simile in c causes some interpretational problems. Both Old (ad VI.50.10) and Re suggest interpr. that violate the structure of the RVic simile, and I think both treatments are wrong; Ge’s treatment is more possible, though it differs from my own. All three take jantúm as part of the simile with gató nā́dhvā (= ná ádhvā), roughly for both “as a travelled road leads (the) people on,” while I take jantúm in the frame.

The RVic simile is only nominal; when a verb is involved it is shared by simile and frame. Both Old and Re take c as entirely simile, with its own independent verb (ví tirāti), and d as a loosely (Old) or more tightly (Re) connected frame, with its own verb (prá … tireta). Old explicitly argues (ad VI.50.10) that ná can sometimes be a quasi-clausal simile marker, and he tr. “Der gegangene Weg vergleichsweise mag einen Menschen vorwärts bringen: so bringt auch uns verwärts.” After examining all the similes in the RV (see my “Case disharmony in RVic similes.” IIJ 24 [1982] 251-71), I would vigorously contest his characterization of ná. Re’s tr.

has a more conventional simile/frame relationship, but still violates the shared verb rule: “Comme le chemin parcouru fait passer l’homme outre, qu’elle nous pousse (plus) avant …” (The subject of d, “elle,” seems to refer to the suṣṭutí- in b.) Although the structural violation in Re’s tr. would be mitigated by the fact that the two verbs belong to the same verb stem, tirá-, they have different preverbs (ví and prá), and therefore different senses, and are also in different moods (subj. and opt.).

Ge’s rendering, “Wie ein zurückgelegter Weg der Leute, so möge es (uns) zum Ziele führen,” respects the simile structure, with the subject in the frame (“es”) presumably referring to the good praise in b (see Re also), but the sense seems off. If the praise is to bring anyone or -thing across, it should be the Maruts (brought to our sacrifice), not us. Still I would be willing to consider a variation of Ge’s interpr., with the praise as subj. in the frame, but the Maruts as obj.: “As a road when it’s travelled (does) people, (the good praise) will bring the (Maruts) across.” 92 However, I think it likely that the focus in this 2nd hemistich has shifted to the help that the Maruts will give us when they have enjoyed our praise (see the thrice repeated yuṣmótaḥ ‘aided by you’ in the next vs., 4abc). In particular, pāda d prá ṇá spārhā́bhir ūtíbhis tireta is almost identical to VII.84.3 prá ṇá spārhā́bhir ūtíbhis tiretam, addressed to Indra and Varuṇa. In the latter passage, tiretam must be a 2nd du.

active opt. with Indra and Varuṇa as subj. In other words, in that passage gods are the subject. In our passage tireta is ambiguous: it can be a 2nd pl. act. opt. or a 3rd sg. mid.

opt., and different factors pull in different directions. The parallel in VII.84.3 suggests we have gods, namely the Maruts, as subject here too, and the easiest way to do that is take it as a 2nd pl. A passage in the preceding hymn, VII.57.5 prá vā́jebhis tirata puṣyáse naḥ “Further us with prizes for our thriving,” with 2nd pl. act. impv. to the same stem, also supports this interpr. This is the analysis of Gr, and it is also responsible for Old’s “So bringt …” On the other hand, the clear 3rd sg. tirāti in c invites a 3rd sg. interpr. also of tireta, and the following hymn contains the idioms we have here, prá √tṝ and ví √tṝ, there with a single instance of the verb stem in the 3rd sg. middle positioned between the preverbs: VII.59.2 prá sá kṣáyaṃ tirate ví mahī́r íṣaḥ “He furthers his dwelling place, ex(tends) his great refreshments.” Re and Ge both opt for the 3rd sg. middle interpr., but the subject they each (seem to) provide is the good praise of b, a far cry from the gods we expect as subject of the expression found in d. My interpr. of cd solves both problems, though, admittedly, not in the most elegant fashion. I supply ‘flock’ (gaṇá-; see 1a) as the subj. of both ví tirāti and prá … tireta. We thus have a singular subject that will allow tireta to harmonize with tirāti and the divine subject that will allow d to harmonize with VII.84.3.

