+++
title = "01"

+++
The desid. títikṣante used to be assigned to √tij ‘sharpen’ (e.g., Wh Rts, Gr), but has for quite awhile been taken to √tyaj ‘abandon’ instead. See EWA s.v. TEJ and TYAJ, Gotō (1st cl., 165-66 n. 268), and in some detail Heenen (Desid. 59-60 and 147-48). Curiously WG render it as (if) an intensive to √tij: “Sie schärfen (sich) immer wieder (gegen) …,” despite Gotō’s own published views to the contrary. (In the WG tr., acdg. to the title pg., Maṇḍala III is Witzel’s responsibility, however, which may account for the discrepancy.) The desiderative stem has the idiomatic sense ‘endure, support’, and the semantic channel from (putatively) ‘desire to abandon’ to this idiom is not entirely clear. I am not convinced by the suggestions of either Gotō or Heenen (59-60). Instead, I think the middle voice is the key: if we assume a reflexive ‘abandon oneself to’, ‘give oneself over to’, it is not difficult to imagine this development.

The sense of the final pāda depends on the meaning of praketáḥ, and like many derivatives of √cit this word is slippery. In my view, it means both ‘sign’ and ‘insight’ (that is, it reflects both the ‘appear’ and ‘perceive’ values of √cit). In this particular passage I take it in the former value; the point is that Indra is showing no sign of his presence or imminent arrival, and so we are subject to abuse from our rivals. For a similar usage cf. II.17.7, where the poet beseeches Indra for good fortune, and then demands kṛdhí praketám “make a visible sign,” further asking for him to bring the good fortune here. In X.104.6 Indra is himself called the adhvarásya praketáḥ “the visible sign of the ceremony.” Ge interpr. the word as Losung (‘motto, watchword, password’), which is, I suppose, possible, but I don’t understand what it would mean here; Re as “le signe-pré(monitoire),” which is somewhat opaque to me, but seems closer to my interpr than Ge’s; Old as “Helle” (light, brightness). WG take it as an agent noun: “Wahrnehmer.”
