+++
title = "07"

+++
dhā́yuḥ is a hapax. The stem is generally listed as dhā́yu- (so Gr) and would therefore have to be a masc. nom. sg. here, but the standard tr. render it as obj. of ádadhāḥ. This interpr. requires it to be a neut. -us-stem, which is easily possible (see, e.g., Old). Old suggests that it belongs to √dhā and that dhā́yur ádadhāḥ is an etymological figure like ábhaktam … bhajate in b. I prefer the analysis suggested in AiG II.2.470 linking it to √dhā(y) ‘suckle, nourish’, thus a neut. -us-stem exactly parallel to neut. dhā́yas- ‘nourishment’. This analysis seems to be reflected in Re’s “tu as accordé la satisfaction-nourricière,” though Re’s (in)famous hyphenated portmanteaus are capacious enough to include many possibilities.

I am not entirely sure what pāda b is about: is this a legal issue, having to do with what is held in common? or with what hasn't (yet) been divided by inheritance? Or is it simply that nobody has distributed the goods yet? X.112.10d, adduced by Ge, is similar: ábhakte cid ā́bhajā rāyé asmā́n, but that pāda follows one in which Indra is urged to do battle and so the most likely interpr. there is that we are asking for a share in the as-yet-undivided spoils of war. Here, however, the goods are specifically identified as gehyà- ‘belonging to the household’. This is the only occurrence of this stem in the RV; it is found in AVP (VI.14.8, VII. 11.3; see Arlo Griffiths ed. and tr.) and later, and gehá- ‘house’, from which it is derived, first occurs in VS. The etymology of gehá- is quite unclear (cf. EWA s.v.), as is its relationship to synonymous gṛhá-. The former is quite widespread in MIA, beginning already in Aśoka, but it cannot be simply a Middle Indic form of gṛhá- at least acdg. to the standard sound laws (pace older accounts such as AiG I.39), though it is quite possible that it has guṇa in an adj. derived from MIA gihi(n) ‘householder’ (<*gṛhin- ), (a-)giha-. In any event it seems likely that the word was imported into Vedic from MIA and that the use of this unusual stem here signals a particular social or legal institution for which we have no other evidence.

