+++
title = "08"

+++
This vs. contains two difficult words, kúṇāru- (b) and píyāru- (c). It is surely no accident that they appear pāda-final in successive pādas and are rhyme forms. The former is a hapax (though the vs. is repeated in the VS [Mā XVIII.69, Kā XX.5.2]). It has been glossed ‘lame in the arm’ on the basis of a supposed connection with Ep, Cl kuṇi- ‘id.’ (cf., e.g., AiG II.2.288, KEWA s.v. kuṇiḥ, EWA s.v. kuṇāru-). But the chronological and morphological distance between the two words speaks against this connection, as does the fact that kuṇi- is likely a Dravidian borrowing (see KEWA).

Moreover, since Vṛtra is a snake and is specifically called ‘handless’ here, it is unlikely that he would have an arm to be lame in. Wiser heads generally take it as a PN (so the standard tr., as well as Mayrhofer PN [though with ?]). However, this cautious course is not very satisfactory either. The enemy is most definitely Vṛtra: his name appears in c, his mother’s (Dānu) in a. Why would he be called by a different name, esp. one that never appears elsewhere? Unfortunately I do not have a strong alternative. However, I would point to kúṇapa-, which means something like ‘carrion, corpse’ (AVŚ XI.9.10, 10.10.4, 8; MS IV.9.19; ≅ kuṇapá- TS XI.2.10.2, where human and equine kuṇapá-s are distinguished) on which various nasty critters are invited to feed, and to various later forms of (-t)kuṇa- referring to various bugs (cf. Kuiper [Aryans passim], Turner [CDIAL s.vv. kúṇapa-, kuṇa-], and Pāli mankuna-). On the basis of these shaky parallels I suggest that kúṇāru- means something like ‘vermin’ or perhaps even ‘corpse’. It owes its pejorative -āru-suffix to píyāru-; cf. also śarā́ru- in X.86.9, which I tr. ‘noxious creature’. Of course, ku- is a common pejorative prefix as well. Perhaps the word is simply constructed of pejorative affixes with a hiatus-breaking ṇ! Or -- a better possibility -- it may represent *ku-nara-āru- ‘ill-manly’, with haplology and MIA retroflexion of the nasal. My point here is not to claim any of these suggestions as definitive, but to show that this completely opaque word resonates with other words in several different directions and therefore assuming a lexical meaning rather than taking it as a PN is the better course. However, in the publ. tr. ‘vermin’ should be followed by a question mark.

The 2nd difficult word, píyāru-, is by comparison much simpler. It must be derived from √pī ‘sneer, taunt’, whose pres. pī́yati is attested 3x already in the RV. It contains the same pejorative -āru-suffix as kúṇāru-, śarā́ru- -- though it should be noted that not all -āru-suffixed words are pejorative: vandā́ru- is quite positive, and the mysterious hapax jábāru- (IV.5.7) is at worst neutral but probably positive.

