+++
title = "18"

+++
In a hymn of rare clarity, this verse provides a sudden stumbling block.

Re’s comment, “Galamatias [gibberish] en dānastuti,” does not provoke optimism.

My interpr. is very far from the standard ones. The problems arise from the grammatical and semantic interpr. of suṣāmáṇi and of the hapax cikitvánā and the construal of sacate and of túbhyam.

The differently accented suṣā́man- is a PN, and both Ge and Re take suṣāmáni as such here (so also Mayr. PN) -- Ge as a nom. (“eine der rätselhaften Nominativeformen auf i”) and Re, more sensibly, as a loc. Because of the accent difference and because a PN does nothing for us, I prefer Gr’s suggestion that it has real lexical value (‘good melody’ or ‘having good melody’), though I confess I do not understand why it would have this particular accent. It modifies loc. śárman: a “shelter made of good melody” would either be the protective power of the sung portion of the rite or the protection given by the “singing” fire (see vs. 9 above, with Agni’s hymns).

As for cikitvánā, most interpr. take it as an instr. modifying kétena and derived in some way from √cit. Old takes it as a deformation of the instr. of the pf.

part. cikitúṣā, which is metrically impossible in the cadence; others set up a nonce stem cikitván-. By contrast I think cikitvánā should be divided into two words: cikit vánā. The first belongs to the stem cikít- ‘perceptive, observant’ (4x) found only otherwise in the nom. sg. (likewise cikít), twice of Agni (VIII.102.2, X.3.1). This would be its vocative, differing only in its lack of accent. What remains is vánā, which can be the neut. pl. of vána- ‘(piece of) wood’ (see 15a above), which is found here in a possessive constr. with dat. túbhyam. In external sandhi we should, of course, have expected *cikid vána, but I think the multiple exx. of cikitvā́n, cikitvas, etc., could have produced a redactional change, once voc. cikit was no longer clearly understood. (In the publ. tr. an asterisk should precede “O perceptive Agni” as well as “pieces of wood.”) Taking túbhyam as part of an independent clause solves another problem in the other interpr., for there is no good way to construe it with pāda a. Ge must take it as an honorary gen. with śárman (“in deiner Obhut”), but though the dative can express possession in predicative usage, I do not think this is possible in attributive usage. Re construes it instead with sacate, “(le poète) t'obéit,” positing what I consider an unprecedented case frame (dat. only) and meaning for sácate. (The parallel he adduces, V.43.15, is to be taken differently, and in fact Re does not tr. it in parallel fashion himself.) With túbhyam belonging to another clause, sacate is free to be construed with the instr., as it regularly is. The instr. in question is kéta- ‘will, intention’, which is regularly governed by ánu √i ‘follow’ (IV.26.2, etc.), semantically very close to ‘keep company with, be accompanied by’; cf. also keta-sáp- (V.38.3) ‘serving the will’.

Ge renders iṣaṇyáyā as ‘nach Wunsch’, hence presumably to √iṣ ‘desire’, but it seems arbitrary to separate it from the verb stem iṣaṇyá- ‘send, impel, drive’.

