+++
title = "05"

+++
In b Ge takes rā́yaḥ as subject and supplies the same stem as obj., on which gen. sg. aryáḥ is dependent, while apparently supplying a form of the same root √sthā (or √as) with abhí as I do: “Wie der Himmel über der Erde, so (sollen) die Reichtümer sich über die (der) hohen Herren (erheben)” (sim. Thieme, Fremd. 59).

The publ. tr. is different, in taking rā́yaḥ as an acc. despite the accent (expect *rāyáḥ, but the nom. form is sometimes found for the acc.) and supplying Indra as subject of a supplied impv. to abhí √sthā (/as): “Like heaven over the earth, sur(mount) the riches of the stranger.” However, I now see that Ge must be correct, because the expression here has to be interpr. alongside similar phrasing elsewhere in this Indra cycle: VI.20.1 dyaúr ná … abhí bhū́ma aryás, tasthaú ráyiḥ …, which I tr. “wealth … surmounts (the wealth) of the stranger, … as heaven does the earth.” This passage contains the same two-term simile dyaúr ná (…) bhū́ma, the same NP ráyi- aryáḥ, and the same preverb abhí. However, it is more explicit, in having an overt finite verb tastháu, and, most important, in having an undeniable nominative ráyiḥ, which must correspond to dyaúḥ in the simile. The publ. tr. of our passage should therefore be altered to “Like heaven over the earth, let (our) riches sur(mount) (those) of the stranger.” Ge takes cakānáḥ in c as passive: “auf dass du … bei uns beliebt seiest.” But the pf. cake, including its fairly frequent participle cakāná-, is always “active” in sense: ‘take pleasure, desire’; cf. Kü 142-43. In the publ. tr. I moved the instr. śávasā immediately preceding the part. to be construed with the 2nd part. cékitānaḥ, as a parallel to váyasā (“showing yourself with your strength and your vigor …”). I am now uncertain about this because of two similar passages: V.3.10 … sáhasā cakānáḥ with an s-stem instr. as here and VII.27.1 … śávasaś cakānáḥ with a gen. of the same s-stem as here, both immediately preceding cakānáḥ as here. Although I still don’t think śávasā should be construed directly with cakānáḥ as the source of enjoyment, I now think it probably should remain in the larger participial phrase: “so that you with your strength will keep finding enjoyment in us …”