+++
title = "B Date and Cultural Context of the R̥gveda"

+++
As was mentioned above, the R̥gveda is part of the long tradition of Indo-European  praise poetry, composed and performed orally and deploying inherited set verbal  formulae, on which the poets also ring changes. Thus, whatever date(s) we assign  to the actual composition of the particular hymns found in the text, the temporal  horizon of the R̥gveda stretches a good deal further back, in that the poetic techniques and even some of its precise verbal realizations go back many centuries, even  millennia. 

The dating of the R̥gveda has been and is likely to remain a matter of contention  and reconsideration because as yet little has been uncovered in the material record  or in the hymns themselves that allows us to date the period of the R̥gvedic hymns.  One attempt at dating begins with an absence. Since the R̥gveda does not mention  iron but does mention other kinds of metal, it is likely a pre–Iron Age, Bronze Age  text. The dates at which iron appears in the archaeological record in South Asia  differ in different parts of the subcontinent. For the northwest, which comprises  the geographic horizon of the R̥gveda, iron began to be manufactured around  1200–1000 bce. The R̥gvedic hymns, therefore, would have to have been composed  no later than this period. However, iron is attested in the Atharvaveda. While the  R̥gveda is older than the Atharvaveda, there is no basis for assuming a substantial  gap in time between the end of the R̥gvedic period and the Atharvaveda. Therefore  the date of the latest portions of the R̥gveda is not likely to be very much earlier that  1200–1000 bce. It is also likely that the period of the composition of R̥gvedic hymns  did not extend more than several centuries before this terminus ad quem. Witzel (in  Jamison and Witzel 1992: 2 n. 2) has noted that the poets and kings mentioned in  the anukramaṇīs (indices) and in the hymns themselves comprise perhaps five or six  generations. Generously rounding these numbers, we can then place the period of  the composition of the R̥gvedic hymns sometime within the period 1400–1000 bce or, even more approximately, within the second half of the second millennium bce.  At best these dates encompass only the hymns of the R̥gveda as we have them. The  poetic conventions on which the R̥gveda was built are very much older, extending  back to the Indo-Iranian period with roots into the Indo-European period. The  R̥gveda is only the surface of a very deep tradition. 

While the date of the R̥gveda remains problematic, the hymns provide informa tion that helps identify the geographic area in which the hymns were composed.  Above all, the rivers mentioned in the text help establish the place of the R̥gveda.  These rivers range from the Kabul and Kurram rivers in present-day Afghanistan  to the Ganges in the east. Its center is the greater Punjab, the region of the Indus  and its major tributaries. Following the likely internal chronology of the R̥gveda,  geographic references in the text suggest a movement from the northwest toward  the east. Thus while the earliest parts of the R̥gveda were likely composed in the  northwest, in the latest parts of the text the area has extended further into the  subcontinent, and its center has shifted toward Kurukṣetra, roughly the area of the  modern state of Haryana.

One of the reasons that the R̥gveda is difficult to date is that there is no material  evidence that we can clearly associate with the people who composed the R̥gveda,  the people who called themselves Āryas. Nor would we expect very much material  evidence, since the hymns make no mention of any permanent religious structures  or enduring settlements. The Āryas formed instead a semi-nomadic pastoralist  society, in which seasons of settlement alternated with seasons of migration. This  migration likely contributed to the extension of the culture into new areas. The  period of movement was also the season of conflict in the competition for land and  the season of cattle-raiding, especially for younger males eager to acquire assets on  which to establish their own livelihood. Cattle were the primary source of wealth,  although the hymns also mention sheep, buffaloes, goats, and camels. Horses too  were essential and prized, since they enabled the Āryas’ mobility and contributed  to their success in battle. Although the economy was fundamentally pastoral, the  Āryas practiced some agriculture during the times of settlement; one hymn (IV.57)  specifically celebrates agricultural divinities, and the plow is occasionally men tioned. The hymns refer to yáva “barley” or “field grain,” which was used both for  food and in the rituals. The R̥gveda does not attest rice cultivation. 

In addition to the absence of material remains, another difficulty in describing the cultural context of the R̥gveda is that its hymns depict only a part of the  religion and society at the period.+++(5)+++ First, the R̥gveda represents the continuation of  an elite tradition also attested in the Avesta and therefore quite ancient. As such,  it reflects the religious practice only of the upper strata of Ārya society. Second, it  is primarily a collection of liturgical hymns for use in the soma sacrifice, surely the  most prestigious ritual of the period but still only one kind of ritual, representing  a particular and limited set of religious concerns. Finally, the soma sacrifices were  sponsored and performed by socially elite men, and they reflected the religious concerns of these men. The text did not directly address the religious lives of women  or of other social classes nor indeed even other aspects of the religious lives of elite  males. Thus, while the R̥gveda is a sizable text and from it we can derive a great  deal of information about the soma rite and about those who participated in it,  we are still dealing only with a segment of Ārya religion and society. However, we  can gather information on non-elite concerns and on the daily life and pursuits of  the elite incidentally, often through similes or imagery modeling ritual elements  and procedures or through the crediting of gods with activities also appropriate to  humans, such as warfare.+++(5)+++ 

Indirectly, we can also get some information about other aspects of religion.  First, although the soma rite was primarily focused on the god Indra, already in  the R̥gvedic period it had begun to incorporate the worship of gods around whom  independent ritual traditions existed. So, for example, the Aśvins were worshiped  already during the Indo-Iranian period and in the Pravargya rite, which is not a  soma ritual. But already in the R̥gvedic period the Aśvins were recipients of soma,  and by the time of the later Veda the Pravargya rite had been incorporated into  the soma tradition. Moreover, especially in book X, there are hymns that address a variety of religious interests separate from those of the soma rite. There are funeral  (X.14–16) and wedding (X.85) hymns. There are hymns against cowives (X.145),  against rivals (X.166), against witchcraft (X.155), against miscarriage (X.162), and  against disease (X.161, 163). There are hymns for the safety of cattle (X.169), for  conception (X.183), and for successful birth (X.184). In short the R̥gveda already  attests rites that address domestic and individual issues principally associated with  the Atharvaveda. These hymns point to substantial ritual activity outside of the  soma rituals.+++(5)+++ 
