+++
title = "C Social and Political Organization"

+++
The R̥gveda is the product of an elite segment of society, and it no doubt reflects  only a small part of even elite religious life.+++(4)+++ For example, the life-cycle rituals that  are so important in the late Vedic period, chronicled in the gr̥hya sūtras, are only  tangentially treated in the R̥gveda, and we get only glimpses of the dharmic prescriptions that later ordered daily life, as preserved in the dharma sūtras of the  late Vedic period and the dharma śāstras that followed them. The religious beliefs  and practices of the non-elite are completely absent from the text, except perhaps  in obscure and slighting references to practices that do not conform to R̥gvedic  standards. 

Outside of the religious sphere we have almost no direct evidence of social or  political organization and very little information about how people, ordinary or  elite, spent their days. We learn a little about the various trades plied by members  of society, mostly by way of incidental similes or poetic images. Most of what we  learn in this sphere is about stock-raising, since the cow and the bull are both such  powerful symbols in the poetry. We also learn a bit about the leisure pursuits of the  elite, especially dicing and horse racing. 

All of this is to say that it is unwise to use the evidence of the hymns uncriti cally to speculate on Vedic society. Not only does the text concern a very small  percentage of the population, but even in that population its focus is very narrow.  Moreover, everything we learn is shaped by the pragmatic purpose of the hymns as  well as by the poetic sensibilities of their composers. Nonetheless, we can venture  some very general remarks about social organization. 

## Varṇa
There is no evidence in the R̥gveda for an elaborate, much-subdivided, and over arching caste system such as pertains in classical Hinduism. There is some evidence  in the late R̥gveda for the fourfold division of society into varṇas, the large social  classes so prominent in the later legal texts. But even this system seems to be embryonic in the R̥gveda and, both then and later, a social ideal rather than a social reality. The clearest evidence for it is found in the so-called Puruṣasūkta or “Hymn of  the Man” (X.90), in which the body parts of the Ur-man correspond to the four  varṇas, hierarchically arranged (vs. 12): the brahmin is his mouth, the kṣatriya (there called rājanya) his arms, the vaiśya his thighs, and the śūdra is produced from his  feet. But this hymn is generally considered to have been a quite late addition to the  text, perhaps to provide a charter myth for the varṇa system after it had taken more  definite shape. 

Otherwise, the late R̥gveda provides some evidence for the beginnings of a formal contrast between brahmaṇic and kṣatriyan powers; for example,  in the final verses of VIII.36 and VIII.37, which are identical save for bráhmāṇi “priestly formulations” in VIII.36.7 and kṣatrā́ṇi “lordly powers” in VIII.37.7; the  hymn preceding this pair contains a tr̥ca (VIII.35.16–18), in which each of the three  verses calls for blessings appropriate to one of the three upper varṇas (though they  are not named as such).+++(4)+++ 

### Kings and Poets
The rest of the R̥gveda does attest to a division of labor and complementary and  reciprocal relationship between rā́jan “kings” (whatever form this kingship took at  this period) and the poets and priests who performed their sacrifices and composed  the accompanying poetry (as well as the secular royal encomia whose existence we  can posit though we have no direct evidence for them [see Jamison 2007: chap. 4,  esp. 146–48]). This poet–patron relationship is especially on view in the dānastutis  that were already discussed above. 


The status and pursuits of the “producers” or  vaiśyas are barely and glancingly alluded to in the text, primarily in similes and  the like. 

## Women
We might here spare a few words for the creatures who are otherwise invisible in  the social and political structures, namely women. As is quite common for ancient  societies, we don’t know much, but the few female figures that appear in the text  tend to be quite vivid. Given their general absence from the R̥gveda, females appear  disproportionately as speakers in dialogue hymns—both divine and semi-divine figures such as Indrāṇī, wife of Indra (X.86) and the Apsaras Urvaśī, once married to  the mortal Purūravas (X.95), or human or semi-human women such as Lopāmudrā,  wife of the legendary seer Agastya (I.179), or Yamī, the first (almost) mortal with  her twin Yama (X.10). The females in these hymns are quite outspoken, usually  about sex, and their male conversation partners tend to look weak and helpless in  comparison. For possible linguistic features of women’s speech as represented in the  R̥gveda, see Jamison (2008a, 2009b, 2009c). 

But none of these female speakers is depicted as a real, contemporary woman,  and what we know of that class is extremely limited. Beautiful sexy women are  sometimes recorded by the poet as a particularly appealing feature of the gift celebrated in his dānastuti, and Dawn is often compared to everyday women—either  good, eager wives or not-so-good, eager courtesans. One must make allowance for  male fantasy at this period, as in so many others. 

Mothers are tenderly described,  but in generic fashion, and we also learn something about the contracting and solemnizing of marriage, both in the wedding hymn (X.85) and in the numerous mentions of the wedding of Sūryā, daughter of the Sun, which appears to have been  of a Svayaṃvara (“self-choice”) type, familiar from later Sanskrit literature, particularly the weddings of Damayantī and Nala and of Draupadī and the Paṇḍava  brothers in the Mahābhārata.

The Anukramaṇī attributes a few hymns to females, for example XIII.91 to Apālā Ātreyī and X.39–40 to Ghoṣā Kākṣīvatī, but these ascriptions are derived from the  personnel depicted in the hymn itself. There is no reason to assume that the poet  was female in these cases. A particularly egregious example is the attribution of the  very interesting X.109 to Juhū Brahmajāyā, or “Sacrificial Ladle, Wife of Brahma [/ the brahmin],” based on the appearance of both those terms in the text.+++(4)+++ 

Although there is no real evidence for female poets, there is evidence in the late  R̥gveda for women in a ritual role, that is, as Sacrificer’s Wife (patnī). This is a standard  and required role in the classical śrauta ritual of the middle Vedic period (discussed  extensively in Jamison 1996a), and it appears to be a ritual innovation, much dis 
puted, in the late R̥gveda (see discussion in Jamison 2011 and forthcoming a and b). 