+++
title = "03"

+++
As usual, the enclitic vaḥ ‘for you’ refers to the priestly colleagues of the poet on whose behalf he acts; as is also usual, the Engl. tr. has to be heavier and more prominent than the recessive 2nd position accentless vaḥ.

The second hemistich contains, in my view, a double ca construction conjoining two clauses, in which the first verb, dadhiré, is accented (and the 2nd, vardhat, is not). Klein (DGRV I.176-77) notes that the whole could be interpr. “as a sentential X ca Y ca construction” (as I do), but favors separating the functions of the two ca-s, taking the first ca as conjoining the two nouns in the sequence bráhmā ca gíraḥ, while he allows (DGRV I.226-27) that the 2nd ca is a clausal conjunction. This seems like a desperate makeshift to avoid the (to me, at least) obvious connection between the two ca-s— esp. as it requires that in bráhmā ca gíraḥ the usual X Y ca construction be replaced by the much less usual inversion, Y ca X (or in Klein’s parlance, X ca Y: DGRV I.169ff.). (According to Klein [DGRV I.51 and 169], there are 464 occurrences of X Y ca and 45 of X ca Y -- a factor of 10.) In my opinion, the accented dadhiré is an example of the usual type of contrastive verb accent, and the ca … ca construction is a hyped version of “both … and,” viz., “not only … but also.” In d ádhi vardhat is syntactically somewhat problematic. It lacks an overt acc. obj., even though active forms of várdha- (and other stems to this root) are overwhelmingly transitive -- a value reinforced by no less than 4 pāda-initial occurrences of transitive active várdha- in the very next vs. (4a + b várdhāt, 4c várdha, 4d várdhān), all with Indra as explicit or implied object! It is inconceivable to me that Indra is not meant as the object in 3d as well, despite locative índre in this pāda, but I seem to be alone it that view. Note Ge’s intransitive “'... möge an Indra stark werden,” fld. by Klein (177) “will find strength in Indra.” Gotō (1st Klasse, 291) sees the problem, but suggests that “we” are the gapped object: “'...macht [uns?] bei Indra stark.” In my opinion, the aberrant loc. is conditioned by ádhi, which when independent often takes a loc. (see Gr, s.v. ádhi, p. 45, nos. 13-17). ádhi √vṛdh is found only here, and once in the middle (IX.75.1), in all of Skt. acdg. to MonWms.

My “puts strength in Indra” reflects the transitive periphrasis I see in this lexeme.

The syntactically clearer forms of act. várdha- in the next vs. can be viewed as a type of poetic repair.

