+++
title = "+002"

+++
2 (518)  
Āprı̄  
Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi  
11 verses: triṣṭubh  
This Āprī hymn offers several original images and turns of phrase, even as it follows  the prescribed sequence of invocations. In verse 2cd the gods who sweeten the offer ings are probably the assembly of the deities and divine objects who are invoked in  the hymn. Two similes complicate the second half of verse 5. The priests open the  doors so that the chariot, probably the sacrifice itself, can pass into the realm of the  gods. In 5cd with their oblations of ghee the priests anoint the many doors that lead  to the gods. In pāda c the doors are compared to cows licking a calf. We have sug gested that the “divine chariot,” the sacrifice, corresponds to the calf and that the  ghee-offerings at the Prayājas, the “fore-offerings,” are the “licks.” It is not entirely  clear why the doors are compared to unmarried girls in pāda d. The ritual situation  to which the verse refers, however, is explained by I.124.8, which describes anointed  brides-to-be who about to choose a husband (vrā́) at the assemblies (sámana) that  include prospective grooms. The two similes are united by the representation of  the dúraḥ, which are grammatically feminine, as females: mothers and brides. And  finally, rather unusually, verse 7 identifies the two divine Hotars, who are not actu ally named, each as Agni Jātavedas. The phrasing suggests that this verse may be  a reversal of V.9.1–2. In V.9.1c the poet says mánye tvā jātávedasam “I think you884 VII.2  
[=Agni] to be Jātavedas,” and then in 2a, he calls Agni a Hotar. Alternatively, the  form jātávedasā could be an elliptical dual, as Geldner suggests, in which one of the  pair is Agni Jātavedas and the other the “inspired praise poet.”  
The conclusion of the hymn, verses 8–11, is identical to III.4.8–11, so either  the Viśvāmitra Āprī hymn has borrowed from this Vasiṣṭha hymn or vice versa.  Presumably the first part of the hymn was enough to make each of the two hymns  sufficiently unique to its gotra.  