+++
title = "07"

+++
The two compounds in pāda a, suvivṛ́taṃ sunirájam, do not occur elsewhere and are grammatically and interpretively ambiguous. The semantic reference of the two words is clear — the easy opening (ví √vṛ) of the Vala cave and the easy driving out (nir √aj) of the cows, using the standard lexemes for those actions — but 1) what are their stems? and 2) assuming they are adjectival, what do they modify? Gr/Lub analyse them as -a-stems -- also AiG II.1, though AiG II.2 takes sunirájam as belonging to an a-stem (p. 86) but suvivṛ́tam to a root noun (p. 43) [and Hauschild’s Index to AiG lists them both as root nouns, somewhat emphatically] -- while, e.g., Old and Scar take both as root nouns. There is another formal anomaly: the pāda they form, suvivṛ́taṃ sunirájam, has only one internal heavy syllable, the final syllable of the first word, where the initial consonant of the second makes position. A very unusual metrical line. Arnold (VM 125-26, 290) suggests the possibility of reading suvīvṛ́tam on the basis of the lengthening of the final vowels of the preverbs ápi, abhí, pári, etc., before forms of √vṛ. Thanks to ET for pointing this out.

As to their reference, the general approach has been to take them as modifying an unexpressed índram, supplying the whole structure of 6a (tám … īmahe “we beseech him”) or some similar verb phrase to provide a grammatically acceptable referent for the two forms in 7a. But this solution is not very satisfying: Indra appears in the 3rd ps. nominative in 6c and as 2nd ps. vocative and subject of impv. in 7bcd, so extracting an acc. from a pāda in the past seems arbitrary. Scar suggests that the two words might instead modify yáśaḥ in b, which has the merit of providing a referent close by; however, this would technically eliminate the possibility that the two are root nouns, since yáśaḥ is neut. and presumably nom., and if the two words in pāda a are root nouns, they can only be acc. sg. I am nonetheless attracted by this solution (and would therefore be open to the -a-stem interpretation), with the possible modification that the two might actually be nouns (“the easy opening …, the easy driving …”) that specify the glory (yáśaḥ) of b. I have not troubled myself to figure out how the accent and other details of the formation would work, however.

On the possible double sense of tvā́dātam in b, see publ. intro.

