+++
title = "01"

+++
The first three pādas of this vs. begin with prá ‘forth’ and seem to express the dynamic beginning of the sacrifice. None of the three verbs (√nakṣ, √vī, √nū) is commonly found with prá, so the use of the preverb here seems situational -- that is, the three prá √X are not standard lexemes; rather, the poet has attached prá to all three to emphasize that all parts of the sacrifice are setting at once.

krandanú- is a hapax, built with the rare suffix -anú- (AiG II.2.210). Of the very few other such stems, one -- nadanú- ‘roar’ (1x, also nadanú-mant- 1x) -- belongs to the same semantic field, and another -- nabhanú- ‘spurting’ (1x, also nabhanū́- 1x) -- belongs to the same root as the genitive qualifier of our form nabhanyà- ‘inclined to / about to burst out’. I think it likely that this roar refers to all the sonic parts of the sacrifice: the just kindled fire (for agní- as subject of √krand, cf. e.g., X.45.4), the soma (often the subject of √krand in IX), the hymns (cf. VII.20.9, with stóma- as subj.)., and most likely also the pressing stones that appear in d.

The cows “swimming in water” in c presumably stand in for the milk to mix with the soma, though the exact ritual reference is unclear. In the soma sacrifice it is the soma that undergoes a water bath (see IX.106.8 where udaprút- modifies the soma drops), not the milk.

The verb yujyā́tām in d requires some discussion. On the surface, the form is a 3rd du. act. opt. root aor., and this is how Ge and Re render it and how Gr and Lub classify it. Old, however, points out that the pressing stones are usually yoked (in the passive) rather than yoking something else (in the active). He wishes to take it instead as built to the passive stem yujyá-, but the question then is what the form is meant to be. Old himself favors a passive injunctive: though this should have the form *yujyetām, he suggests that the rarity of such forms might have generated the “wrong” form on the analogy of athematic 3rd du. med. injunctives/imperfects in - ātām. He also floats the possibility of a subjunctive, though that should have the primary ending (expect *yujyāte, I suppose, not at this period the *yujyaite of the grammars). Although the publ. tr. reflects Old’s view that the context favors a passive, I now believe that the act. opt. analysis of Ge/Re, etc., with péśaḥ ‘ornament’, referring to the soma, as object, is correct. The passage, and the verb, would play with the standard passive expression (pressing stones are yoked), but take them as agents of the yoking. I would therefore now emend the tr. to “The two pressing stones should yoke the ornament of the ceremony.”

