+++
title = "03"

+++
This verse is richly studded with problems. One of the lesser ones is the referent and grammatical identity of purū́in the first pāda. Gr classifies it with singular (presumably NA neut.) forms; Ge. takes it as an adv. ‘gar sehr’; WG as instr.

sg. (?) with ójasā (“mit ohnehin viel … Körperkraft”). On the basis of the sequence (3d) vīḷú cid, (4a) dṛḷhā́cid, (4f) sthirā́cid (also with ójasā), all containing neuters, most plural, I take purū́as the neut. pl. it appears to be (so also Re: “qui brille en maint endroit”). Each instance of cid ‘even’ in this sequence emphasizes the formidable targets Agni is exercising his will upon. Unfortunately this value of cid is not so much in evidence in our phrase purū́cid … dī́dyānaḥ because ‘shining’ (at least as expressed with the root √dī) is not ordinarily a forceful or hostile act. I have therefore (reluctantly) not rendered the cid here, though I feel I have missed something, since the phrasal parallelism is otherwise so clear. Perhaps dī́dyānaḥ has something of the sense of similar forms of √śuc ‘blaze (against)’: so “shining (against) even the many with his radiant might.” Pāda b and its tag-pāda c contains a śleṣa, whose correct interpretation goes back at least to Benfey (see Ge’s n. 3c). As indicated in the publ. intro. to I.127-139, druhaṃtaráḥ has two possible analyses: druhaṃ-tará- ‘overcoming deceit’ or druhantara- ‘better at striking wood’. The first is appropriate to the first instance of the word, but in c the presence of paraśúḥ ‘ax’ forces the ‘wood’ interpr.

The verb of de, śrúvat, is the problem in that clause. Wh (Roots) takes it as a (zero-grade) 1st class pres. to √sru ‘flow’, but √sru has no such zero-gr. formations (and there’s the problem of the initial sibliant of course). Gr puts it with a root √śru ‘zerinnen, zergehen’ (separate from √śru ‘hear’), but the formations he assigns to said “root” are a hodgepodge (and see Old on the likely nonexistence of the root). Re (flg. Cardona, see Re’s n.) takes it to √śru ‘hear’, but this requires supplying the verb of destruction (by his interpr. ‘fall’) required by the context, with the perception verb that is actually found in the passage superfluous: “on les entend (tomber) …” (The same root assignment seems to underlie the WG tr., though with a different overall interpr., which I confess I don’t understand.) Even if the semantics worked better, there are no such stems to √śru ‘hear’. Ge attributes it to √śṝ ‘crush’, which is reasonable on both semantic and textual grounds; see esp. the parallel he cites X.89.6 śṛṇā́ti vīḷú rujáti sthirā́ṇi, with very similar phraseology. Unfortunately I can see no way to get a stem śrúva- from śṝ. Old questioningly suggests a connection with √ru ‘break’, but needless to say the initial ś can’t simply be omitted. I dare to suggest yet another root: √srīv ‘abort’. Although some forms of this root (caus. srevayet [KS], RVic part. sreváyant-; aor. asrāvīt [JB]; pres. srīvyati [AB]) have an initial dental sibilant, others have the palatal: AV śrīvayāmi, MS śrīvayeyuḥ, śrevuka-. (On the forms, see Narten [Sig.Aor.] 282-83. Jamison [áya-] 145.) Such phonetic fluctuation is not surprising in a root that presumably was at least partially tabooed. Although a stem śrúva- or srúva- is not otherwise found to this root, the spotty attestation to this root in general makes its isolation unsurprising. The stem would probably be a zerograde thematic injunctive (aor. or pres.?), though a root subjunctive can’t be ruled out (though less likely in context). The loss of the i ̯/ i would follow the same pattern as √dīv / d(y)ū, √sīv / s(y)ū, via *sRi ̯uH à *sRuH. I do not understand the accent, however. As for ‘abortion’ in this context of destruction, see, inter alia, the use of the caus. part. sreváyant- in VII.18.8, the Battle of the Ten Kings; possibly also áva √sru in nearby I.129.6.

The final two pādas (fg) of this verse also present their share of difficulties.

We can begin with the final word of each pāda, nā́yate in the Saṃhitā text. The Pp.

(followed by HvN) analyses this as ná ayate, but this produces a very bad cadence: we should expect a heavy syllable as the first syllable of the verb. This is easily remedied, without emending the Saṃhitā text, by ā́yate (i.e., prev. ā́+ ayate). This analysis was also tentatively suggested by Gotō (1st cl., 92 n. 10).

Most tr. (and Old) take the point of yamate nā́yate to be that though Agni is victorious, he doesn’t go further: he stays in his hearth. See, e.g., Re “'(Bien que) triomphant, il tient (les rènes), il ne va pas (plus loin).” But the preverb níḥ ‘forth’ (with √sah only here and in the root noun niṣṣáh-) seems to presuppose motion (hence my ‘going forth to conquer’), and certainly most treatments of Agni victorious depict him laying waste to his surroundings, as in the immediately preceding two pādas and in the following verse (4). The notion that Agni is suddenly showing self-restraint here seems contrary to the message of the context. I therefore take yamate as meaning not ‘hold himself back’, but ‘hold/keep his place’ (against counterattack) and ā́yate (/ayate) as a quasi-passive ‘be moved’. Medial forms of √i are rare enough that a consistent meaning to such a stem is hard to determine, and though some forms of áyate probably belong to a thematized stem (so Gotō, 92ff.), the parallelism with the root aor. subj. yamate here strongly suggests that our form is also a subjunctive (to the root pres. éti) and thus further separated from the thematic indicative forms. I therefore think that the somewhat idiosyncratic meaning I have attributed to the form is plausible, esp. as a negated semantic twin to yamate.

The final problem in the verse is the cmpd. instr. sg. dhanvāsáhā. This is almost universally (Gr, Old, Ge, Re, Scar 603) interpreted as ‘conquering with a bow’ (dhánvan-), which interpr. generally requires an additional personage to be supplied, generally Rudra. Gotō (1st cl., 92, n. 10) seems to favor this interpr., but also suggests the possibility that the first member is dhánvan- ‘Land’: “auf dem das Land ersiegenden [Weg],” with the whole pāda meaning that Agni will not go further and burn the land. WG have adopted this latter interpr. (though the ‘bow’ interpr. is referred to in the n.): “Auf dem trockenen Land ersiegenden (Weg) eilt er nicht hierher.” I am also convinced that dhánvan- ‘wasteland’ is the correct interpr. of the 1st member. Given that the ‘tree’ theme is prominent in this verse and a ‘bow’ theme lacking, a reference to another landscape feature fits the context better. There is the problem that cmpds with -sáh- are ordinarily adjectives modifying animates (see the numerous exx. in Scar.), and my tr. assumes an abstract sense or at the very least an instr. manner adverb (“in/with his wasteland-conquering [manner]”). Despite this slight difficulty, this solution seems more economical than inserting Rudra into a context that has no other allusion to him.

I.127.3-4: In the publ. tr. ójasā in 3a and 4f should have been tr. the same, rather than ‘might’ and ‘strength’ respectively.

