+++
title = "05"

+++
After the respite of vs. 4, this verse returns to puns and word plays in full force. The syntax of this verse is complicated enough without unintended ambiguity in the English. In the pub. tr. “This fortifying power of his might we acquire …” ‘might’ is a modal verb (“might we acquire”), not an abstract noun (*“his might”).

In my opinion the hapax dívātarāt in bc is a śleṣa somewhat like druhaṃtaráḥ in 3bc, again utilizing the echo pāda (c) to instantiate a 2nd value for a word found in both pādas. Most take the word as a nonce substantivization of the adverb dívā by the addition of the comparative suffix found also in the preceding sudárśataraḥ ‘more beautiful’ (see AiG II.2.608; Re n. ad loc.). I agree that this is one reading, but I also think that -tara- can be a thematic nominal to √tṝ ‘cross over’ (cf. tára- etc.), and that the whole compound can mean ‘traversing [the sky] by day’ as a descriptor of the sun. For a similarly formed rhyme word, also referring to the sun, cf. divākará- ‘day-maker’ (AV+).

The hapax áprāyuṣe in c also poses difficulties. On the one hand, it is very similar to áprāyu- (3x) ‘unremitting, not faltering’, which most deriv from prá √yu; Old and Re opt for this analysis (Re “à (l’homme qui veille) infatigable”). However, I am persuaded by Ge’s pointing out (n. 5) the unity of theme provided by áprāyuṣe (c) … ā́yuḥ (d) … ajárāḥ (fg), if áprāyuṣe contains the ‘lifetime’ word. However, I do not think either Ge’s “ohne zu altern” or WG’s “zum Nichtverschwinden der Lebenskraft” is the correct analysis. Rather I think the word evokes the common idiom ā́yuḥ pra √tṝ ‘lengthen lifetime’ and refers to a man whose lifetime has not yet been lengthened. Note that the √tṝ part of the idiom can be pulled out of dívātara- (a 3rd sense for this compound). Agni is called viśvā́yu- ‘providing/affording all lifetimes’ in the next hymn (I.128.8) and is also regularly asked to lengthen (prá √tṝ ) our lifespan (e.g., I.94.16, VIII.44.30). I now also believe that áprāyu- also contains the ‘lifetime’ word (the less well-attested ā́yu- beside ā́yus-); see comm. ad V.80.3.

In the next pāda Agni’s own lifespan (that is, his immortality, more explicit in fg) is a model for our own: it provides a handhold (grábhaṇavat) or, as we would say, “a leg up” for the man hoping to have his lifespan extended.

I don’t quite understand bhaktám ábhaktaṃ vā. It is probably an implicitly temporal expression: the help that has already been apportioned and the rest that has not yet been apportioned (but will be, we hope).

