+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. The metres, forsooth, are the (draught) cattle of the gods. Even as harnessed cattle here on earth

draw for men, so do the harnessed metres draw the sacrifice for the gods. And whenever the metres gratified the gods, then the gods gratified the metres. Now it has been previous to this, that the harnessed metres have drawn the sacrifice to the gods, that they have gratified them [^fn_858]:

[^fn_858]: 370:1 See I, 8, 2, 8; the translation has been amended in accordance with Professor Whitney's suggestions, American Journal of Philology, III, p. 406.

## 02
2. He now draws the Hāriyojana [^fn_859] graha--the Hāriyojana being the metres--it is the metres he thereby gratifies: this is why he draws the Hāriyojana graha.

[^fn_859]: 370:2 That is, referring to the 'hari-yojana,' or (Indra's) team of bay steeds.

## 03
3. He draws it as an additional (libation); since

he draws it when he (the Hotr̥) pronounces the 'All-hail and blessing [^fn_860].' For there are here the gods, and the metres in addition to them; and there are men, and beasts in addition to them: therefore he draws it as an additional one.

[^fn_860]: 371:1 For the Śam-yos, see part i, p. 254, note. The pronunciation of that formula takes place after the offering proper is completed.

## 04
4. He draws it in the Droṇakalaśa. Now Soma was Vr̥tra. When the gods slew him, his head rolled off [^fn_861]: it became the Droṇakalaśa. Thereinto flowed together so much of the juice as it could hold [^fn_862]; that was in excess; and so is this graha in excess: he thus puts the excess. to the excess,--therefore he draws it in the Droṇakalaśa.

[^fn_861]: 371:2 ? Or burst (udvavarta), as the St. Petersburg Dictionary takes it. The Kāṇva text reads.--Vr̥tro vai soma āsīt taṁ yatra devāḥ pātreshu vyagr̥hṇata tasya mūrdhno (!) vyavartta sa droṇakalaśo ’bhavat.

[^fn_862]: 371:3 Yāvān vā yāvān vā rasaḥ, (? some indeterminate quantity of the juice:) Cf. IV, 4, 5, 13.

## 05
5. He draws it without a puroruc-formula, for he draws it for the metres; and in that he draws it for the metres, even thereby that (graha) of his becomes supplied with a puroruc: therefore he draws it without a puroruc.

## 06
6. He now draws it from that (Āgrayaṇa graha) with (Vāj. S. VIII, it), 'Thou art taken with a support: of bay colour art thou, meet for the team of bay steeds,--thee to the pair of bay steeds!' Now, the two bay horses are the R̥c and Sāman: it is for the R̥c and Sāman that he draws it.

## 07
7. He then pours parched grain into it with, 'Ye are the bays’ grains, united with the Soma for

 Indra!' Whatever metres there are, both measured and unmeasured, they all thereby drink (of the Soma [^fn_863]).

[^fn_863]: 372:1 The text might also be taken in the sense of 'Whatever metre there is, both measured and unmeasured, all that he thereby consumes.' The libation is, however, taken out for the metres or cattle, represented by the grain.

## 08
8. For this (libation) the Unnetr̥ [^fn_864] calls for the Śraushaṭ;--for the Unnetr̥ is in excess (additional), since he does not call for the Śraushaṭ for any other (libation); and this libation also is in excess: thus he puts the excess to the excess,--therefore the Unnetr̥ calls for the Śraushaṭ.

[^fn_864]: 372:2 Instead of the Āgnīdhra, see I, 5, 2, 16, with note.

## 09
9. Placing (the Droṇakalaśa) on his head, he calls for the Śraushaṭ,--for this (vessel) is his (Soma's) head. He first says (to the Maitrāvaruṇa), 'Recite (the invitatory prayer) for the Soma-draughts with grains!' Having called for the Śraushaṭ, he says, 'Prompt (the Hotr̥ to pronounce the offering prayer on) the Soma-draughts with grain brought forward [^fn_865]!' and offers as the Vashaṭ and Anuvashaṭ are uttered. They then divide the grain between them for the sake of the Soma-draught.

[^fn_865]: 372:3 Regarding 'prasthitam,' see p. 198, note 3.

## 10
10. Now some take the Droṇakalaśa over to the Hotr̥, on the ground that 'the draught belongs to the utterer of the Vashaṭ.' But let him not do it thus; for the other draughts are (taken by the respective priests) according to the camasa cups, but this one is in excess: therefore there is a draught in it for all of them,--for this reason they divide the grain between them for the sake of the Soma-draught.

## 11
11. They must not bite them with their teeth,--for these (grains) mean cattle,--thinking 'lest we should do aught to crush our cattle!' They only drink it in with their breath [^fn_866], with (Vā,;. S. VIII, 12), 'What horse-winning, what cow-winning draught is thine [^fn_867];' for they are cattle: therefore he says, 'what horse-winning, what cow-winning draught is thine;'--'Of that draught, offered with Yajus, praised by chants [^fn_868],'--for Yajus-prayers have indeed been offered, and chants have been chanted;--'sung by hymns,'--for songs (śastras) have been sung;--'Of the invited [^fn_869] do I drink, invited,'--for invited, he now drinks of the invited.

[^fn_866]: 373:1 They are only to smell the grains steeped in the Soma-juice.

[^fn_867]: 373:2 The Kāṇva recension adds, 'O divine Soma!'

[^fn_868]: 373:3 Lit., having Yajus offered, and chants chanted for it.

[^fn_869]: 373:4 ? I.e. 'that to which I am invited.'

## 12
12. They must not throw them into the fire, lest they offer remains (of offerings) in the fire. They rather throw them on the high altar: thus they are not excluded from the sacrifice.

## 13
13. Thereupon they touch the vessels filled (with water [^fn_870]) which some call Apsushomāḥ (Soma-draughts in water). For even as a yoked (animal) draws, so

[^fn_870]: 373:5 That is, the ten Camasins touch their respective camasa cups, filled with water and placed in the proper order from south to north, behind the pit (kātvāla), after putting fresh kuśa stalks on them. Those priests who have no cups of their own touch the cups of those with whom they are most nearly connected, viz. the four Adhvaryus that of the Neshṭr̥ the Udgātr̥'s assistants that of their principal, the Grāvastut that of the Hotr̥. Thereupon they touch their faces and betake themselves to the Āgnīdhra fire-house, to partake of sour milk. Then follow, on the Gārhapatya (at the front hall door), the Patnīsaṁyājas of the cakes of the animal offering, followed by the Samishṭayajus, See also Lāṭy. Śr. II, 11, 16 seq.

do they who perform the priestly duties. But the yoked (animal) galls or scratches itself; and water is a means of soothing, a medicine: thus wherever in this (sacrifice) they gall or scratch themselves--water being a means of soothing--they soothe by that means of soothing, water; they heal it by water. This is why they touch the vessels filled (with water).

## 14
14. They touch them with (Vāj. S. VIII, 14), 'With lustre, with sap, with bodies [^fn_871] have we united,--with the happy spirit: may Tvashṭr̥, the dispenser of boons, grant us riches, and may he smooth what was injured in our body!' thus they heal what was torn.

[^fn_871]: 374:1 See I, 9, 3, 6. Cf. Atharva-veda VI, 53, 3. The Tāṇḍya Br. I, 3, 9 reads 'saṁ tapobhiḥ' (with fervour).

## 15
15. They then touch their faces. There is a twofold reason why they touch their faces;--water, forsooth, is the elixir of immortality: it is with the elixir of immortality that they thus touch themselves. And, moreover, they thus deposit that holy work into their own self: therefore they touch their faces.

