+++
title = "00"

+++
31 (265)
Indra
Kuśika Aiṣīrathi or Viśvāmitra Gāthina
22 verses: triṣṭubh
This dense and often puzzling hymn has given rise to much discussion. The heart  of the hymn (vss. 4–11 and passim throughout the rest of the hymn) provides one

of the fullest accounts in the R̥gveda of the Vala myth and especially of Indra and  the Aṅgirases as they besiege the Vala cave and seek to free the cows within by  means of song and ritual activity. Since the cows of the Vala myth are often used as  symbols of the dawns, the hymn also celebrates the coming of dawn and its ritual  manifestations, including the distribution of priestly gifts (dakṣiṇā), which occurs  at the early-morning ritual.
Perhaps the most striking part of the hymn, however, is found in the first three  verses, which are often taken as depicting the production of the ritual fire as an alle gory of cosmic incest. Although there are certainly hints of an incestuous liaison,  the relationships among the various kinship terms here are not at all clear, and in  our opinion the ritual references to the production of fire so dominate the picture  and distort the underlying sexual configurations that it is a mistake to seek too  literal a mythological reading. The translation of the first two verses, especially, is  provisional. Our identifications of the personae with various ritual elements differ  from those of other scholars (who also differ among themselves), but in our opinion  the ritual reference here is not to the initial production of ritual fire, but rather the  transformation, through removal to the east, of the undifferentiated ritual fire into  the new offering fire, an action well known from the later ritual literature, where  the new fire with its eastern hearth is called the Āhavanīya and the older one in the  west the Gārhapatya. If this particular ritual procedure was an innovation in the  R̥gveda or pre-R̥gveda, as we suspect, a mystical and riddling presentation of it like  this would not be surprising.
The connection between this opening description of the birth of Agni and the  following treatment of the Vala myth may not be superficially obvious, but it is the  theme of dawn that unites them: fire is kindled at dawn, and the release of the Vala  cows is regularly likened to the breaking of dawn.
It is notable that neither Indra nor the Aṅgirases are named for most of the recital  of the Vala myth, though they are referred to constantly. Indeed the plural Aṅgirases  is not found in the mythic section, only the singular (vs. 7) referring to Indra. Indra  is named, but not until verse 11, the exact center of the hymn (minus the refrain,  vs. 22) and the standard locus for mysteries and their solutions. However, various  epithets, associates, and exploits of Indra that uniquely identify him and that are  irrelevant to the Vala myth have foreshadowed this naming: Saramā, Indra’s dog, in  verse 6; his opponent Śuṣṇa in verse 8; and the Vr̥tra-smashing earlier in verse 11.  After the first naming of Indra in verse 11 the hymn broadens its view to include a  range of Indra’s cosmogonic deeds, especially the separation of Heaven and Earth  and the smashing of Vr̥tra.
The hymn returns to the ritual here-and-now starting around verse 17, and the  theme of dawn, appropriate both to the fire-kindling verses 1–3 and the extensive  treatment of the Vala myth, prompts the requests for Indra’ liberality to be mani fested in the early-morning dakṣiṇā, with the dispensing of gifts compared to the  outpouring of cows from the opened Vala cave.