+++
title = "01"

+++
The first pāda poses difficulties if dákṣiṇā is taken as a nom., with Sāy, Old, and apparently Re, requiring the hemistich to be chopped up into very small clauses and across the pāda boundary (acdg. to Old, ā́dákṣiṇā sṛjyate / śuṣmy ā̀sádam, véti / druháḥ rakṣásaḥ pāti jā́gṛviḥ) and soma not to be the subj. of passive ā́… sṛjyate, against standard phraseology. The syntactic difficulty disappears if, with Ge, we take dákṣiṇā as an instr., leaving soma as the subject throughout. This leaves us with the question of what is meant; since dákṣiṇā is not otherwise found in IX (though dákṣiṇāvant- occurs once, IX.98.10), we are on our own. I suggest that, since dákṣiṇās are distributed at the Morning Pressing, this is a reference to that ritual moment.

Once again there is a question of Soma’s nirṇíj- as in recent hymns (see comm. ad IX.69.4-5, 70.1). The phrasing here—nábhas páya, upastíre camvòḥ …— is esp. reminiscent of IX.69.5d upastáraṇaṃ camvòr nabhasmáyam “… an underlayer made of cloud in the two cups” and makes it quite likely that “cloud (and) milk” (that is, cloud = milk) are the underlayer here as well. In his tr. Ge makes them both to be both the headdress (opaśám) and the underlayer and in n. 1cd suggests that the milk is the headdress and the cloud the underlayer. But, as Old points out, the close sandhi of nábhas páyaḥ speaks against separating them syntactically, and opaśá- can simply be construed with kṛṇute without a second object; cf. VIII.14.5 cakrāṇá opaśáṃ diví “making himself a headdress in heaven” (though Old thinks this passage is not typical). My tr. is closest to Re’s; Old’s notion that the poet heaped up all the items he had to mention higgledy piggledy (not his term), without sorting them, seems unlikely.

