+++
title = "07"

+++
A complex vs. esp. in the 2nd hemistich.

In the publ. tr. I take pāda a as a nominal sentence with párā as predicate: “far away is …” I now think a verb of motion, almost surely from √i, should be supplied: “Away (goes) the ruddy poet …” The lexeme párā √i is matched by parāyatī(ḥ) in pāda c, by my analysis (for which see below). The reference is once again to Soma’s journey from the filter to the rendezvous with the milk.

“Three-backed” (tripṛṣṭha-) is probably to be interpr. like tridhā́tu in nearby IX.70.8. Pace Lü (708-9) I very much doubt it refers to his threefold heavenly Soma.

Pāda c lacks a syllable, which is not easily recovered. This simply adds uncertainty to an already problematic pāda. The subject is yátiḥ, taken by all (incl.

me) as a -ti-stem deriv. to √yam ‘hold, control’. It should in origin be a fem. abstract ‘control’ vel sim., but like other exx. of the formation has acquired a personal agentive sense (on which transference see AiG II.2.637) - hence my ‘marshall’ (for awk. ‘holder-fast, controller’).

More puzzling is parāyátī (Saṃhitā), beginning with what its underlying form is. The Pp gives parāyátiḥ, which is accepted by all the standard interpr., but also possible in this sandhi context would be parāyátī and parāyátīḥ. The standard view is that the form is composed of parā and the selfsame -ti-abstract -yáti- that immediately precedes it and that it also is a nom. sg. masc. referring to Soma - hence Ge’s “abseits lenkend(?),” Re’s “poussant en arrière,” etc. But the lexeme párā √yam doesn’t exist in the RV - or anywhere else for that matter. What does exist, and fairly commonly, is párā √i ‘go away, depart’. In fact in the pres. part. it is used once of the Dawns, the same Dawns who appear in our pāda d: I.113.8 parāyatīnā́m ánu eti pā́thaḥ “She [=current Dawn] follows the troop of those who go away [=previous Dawns].” I suggest here that we have an acc. pl. fem. pres. part. It should be accented

*parāyatī́s, but it is not difficult to imagine that its accent could have been retracted
redactionally to match preceding yátiḥ. This pres. part. then modifies pūrvī́r uṣásaḥ in the following pāda and is part of the simile rebhó ná in that pāda. I take rebhá- ‘hoarse-voiced (singer)’ (on which gloss see comm. ad VI.3.6) here as referring to Agni as often (incl. I.113.17, in the hymn just cited). Like Agni, Soma ‘radiates’ (ví rājati). With Lü (708) and Gotō (1st cl., 268 n. 612) I take the verb to √rāj ‘shine’, not, with Gr, Ge, Re, to √rāj ‘rule’.

