+++
title = "04"

+++
Pāda c presents interpretational difficulties, particularly if ṛté is taken as the loc. sg. of ṛtá- ‘truth’ with most interpr. The problem in that case is not merely ṛté but also how it relates to madhyamaváh-. None of the suggested tr. seems satisfactory to me, and though Old discusses the passage at some length, he ultimately suggests with some despair that madhyama-váh- is an unknown technical term in Fahrkunst. Given the unconvincing solutions suggested by others, I am inclined towards Re’s quite different interpr.: he takes ṛté as the postposition/adv.

‘without’ and construes it with vaḥ. Old had already argued against the “without” interpr., on the grounds that there is no ablative and that ṛté bhūt occurs also at pāda end in VI.67.8 (where, however, I interpr. it as I do here). And, though vaḥ is not technically an ablative enclitic, it is fairly all-purpose in terms of case. Its distance from ṛté can be attributed to its taking Wackernagel’s position. With a “without” interpr. the rest of the pāda falls out: we do not wish for our chariot to be without you; madhyama-váh- then specifies where the chariot is traveling, possibly “in the middle of its journey” or “in the middle of a battle.” (Though I enthusiastically adopt Re’s analysis of ṛté, I am not at all convinced by his interpr. of this compound: he thinks madhyama- refers to a middling number of draft animals.) If the vaḥ … ṛté interpr. is rejected, the negative concept that prompts the mā́prohibitive must rest in the cmpd. madhyama-váh- and specifically in the 1st member madhyama-. Old lays out some possibilities, crisply summarized by Scar (475). I would assume in this case that ‘middle’ refers to a middling or less than full effort or a position in the middle, rather than at the forefront. So I would consider an alternative translation “let your chariot not be traveling in a middling way / in the middle (of the pack) with regard to truth.” Although most X-váh- cmpds mean ‘drawing/conveying X’ (e.g., the lexicalized anaḍváh- ‘ox’ < ‘pulling a wagon’; indra-váh- ‘conveying Indra’), I don’t see how to get a direct obj. interpr. out of maddyama-.

