+++
title = "10"

+++
Most interpret gāyatrá-vepas- with a trans./caus. sense of vepas- (Gr ‘zu Gesängen anregend’, Ge ‘die die Sänger beredt macht’, Scar [69] sim.), but neither independently or in compounds does vépas- have this sense; it simply means ‘trembling excitation, excitement’. Moreover the usage of gāyatrá- nearby in this hymn (7d, 8a) indicates that Indra (who is the referent of gāyatrá-vepasam, though in the guise of a cow) is the recipient of the songs, not their inciter. Presumably his pleasure in them will induce him to be a “good milker” by giving largesse to the singers, but at least in this passage he does not seem to be giving inspiration to the singers in the form of songs.

Trisyllabic án i yām in c is problematic, distinguished from anyá- ‘other’ both by accent and by trisyllabic reading. Nonetheless Ge (reluctantly, see his n.) tr. it as if it belonged to that stem: “eine andere [zweite]…” Old by contrast derives it from á-ni-ya- ‘nicht niedergehend, nicht (in Unglück) hineingeratend’. (I assume that he meant the final portion to be analyzed as the root √i ‘go’, with thematic vowel, but he doesn’t specify.) Both Gr and Scar (69) extend this semantically to ‘nicht versiegend’ (not drying up), which pushes the limit in my view. Its only other occurrence is in VIII.27.11, in a less diagnostic context but one that is at least compatible with a bovine referent. My own analysis of this word is admittedly quite shaky. I take it as a back formation of sorts from ánīka-‘forefront’ and meaning "belonging to the forefront, lead(-cow)'. Dawn is regularly called ánīka- and the word is sometimes used of her cows (e.g., I.124.11 yuṅkté gávām aruṇā́nām ánīkam “She yokes the forefront of the ruddy cows”). A couple of not very strong models can be adduced: samanīká- ‘encounter’ / samanyà- ‘appropriate to the encounter’, dṛ́śīka- ‘appearance’/ dṛ́ś i ya- ‘to be seen’. However, I am aware of the weakness of this analysis, and only produce it because other analyses are equally weak; Old’s is certainly thinkable, though not with the explicit extension to ‘not running dry’ made by others.

