+++
title = "+110"

+++
110 (822)
Soma Pavamāna
Tryaruṇa and Trasadasyu
12 verses: pipīlikamadhyā 1–3, ūrdhvabr̥hatī 4–9, virāj 10–12, arranged in trcas ̥
This hymn is made up of verses in three rare meters; in fact verses 4–9 are the only  ones in all of the R̥gveda in this meter (consisting of verses of three pādas of twelve  syllables each), and the first three verses are the only pipīlikamadhyā stanzas in the  R̥gveda with this syllable count (12 8 12). (The meter’s name means “ant-middled,”  because a short pāda is sandwiched between two longer ones.) Despite the hetero
geneity of the meters, there is evidence that the hymn is a conceptual unity, par ticularly in the signs of ring composition: the last two verses (11–12) echo the first  two. “The one who gains the prize” (11c) matches “to gain the prize” in 1a; the two  forms of the root sah “vanquish” in verse 12 (a and c) recall the “vanquisher” in 1b;  the “difficult plunges” in 12b are the negative counterpart of Soma’s plunge in 2c.  Internally we may note that the begetting of the sun in verse 3, at the end of the first  tr̥ca (3a, with its initial verb ájījanaḥ) is immediately reprised in 4a, in a new meter,  again with the fronted verb ájījanaḥ.
The hymn also echoes some of the vocabulary and phraseology of the preceding  hymn, X.109, whose metrical simplicity is in marked contrast to this hymn. Both  hymns begin almost identically, though adjusted by the addition of particles for the  metrical difference: IX.109.1a pári prá dhanva and 110.1a páry ū ṣú prá dhanva ...,  both meaning “run forth and around.” The rare word pīyū́ṣa “beestings, first-milk,”  which makes two appearances in 109 (vss. 3, 6), recurs in 110.8, qualified as “the  beestings of heaven” (diváḥ pīyū́ṣam) like the “heavenly beestings” of 109.3 (divyáḥ
pīyū́ṣaḥ).
In content the first three and the last three (10–12) verses are fairly straight forward, and, especially the last three verses, are concerned with the earthly soma  of the ritual, though also celebrating his great powers in confronting enemies and  obstacles. A hint of the cosmic soma comes in verse 3, in the aforementioned beget ting of the sun, though in this verse this action is linked with Soma’s ritual progress.  The middle six verses (4–9), in an otherwise unattested meter, are more difficult  and treat the interaction and blurred boundaries between earthly, ritual soma and cosmic soma. The gods’ yearning for soma (see esp. vs. 6) and the primal prepara tion of soma (see esp. vss. 7–8) are described, and the final verse of this group (vs.  9) declares Soma’s universal power.