+++
title = "001"

+++
Agni I do not understand the emphasis on Varuṇa in the early parts of the hymn (vss. 2-5; see also 18d), since the Vala myth and the unnamed Aṅgirases in the later parts of the hymn have no obvious conceptual connection with Varuṇa and the Ādityas (see also Aditi in 20a).


## 01
Hymn-introductory hí is difficult to render. It does not have its normal causal sense, though perhaps in this position hí is meant to explain why the hymn is recited following a particular ritual action. It is noteworthy that the first hymn of Maṇḍala VI (also, of course, to Agni) opens in exactly the same way: tváṃ hí agne.

With Ge (/WG) I take pādas def as the direct address of the gods to mortals, with the speech introduced by íti krátvā in c. (This idea goes back to Bergaigne; see Old SBE ad loc.) Rejecting this interpr., Old labors mightily to explain away the apparent 2nd pl. actives yajata and janata as voc. and 3rd pl. middle respectively. (In this he follows Sāy.) Re tries in addition to make yajata also a 3rd pl. mid. (see also Gonda [Vedic Literature, 228], whose tr. renders both forms as 3rd plurals). Although yajata could actually be a voc., 3rd pl. middles in -ata to thematic stems are morphologically impossible, no matter how metrically unfavorable -anta would be.

Ge’s direct speech interpr. solves these grammatical problems and also makes sense of the íti in c.

The poet plays with ā/a and the oppositional pair mártya- / devá- in de, with chiastic #ámartyam … mártyeṣv ā́# in d, and devám ā́devam opening e. (See also devā́so devám opening 1b.)


## 02
As Arnold (VedMetre, 300) suggests (so also Old, HvN), deleting agne in pāda a and reading vavṛtsu va (as in 3a) yields a fine Jagatī line.


## 03
The injunc. vidaḥ is functionally multivalent, but usually interpr. as an impv.

(so Ge, Re, though not WG). On this form see comm. ad I.42.7-9 and IX.20.3. I would now allow an alternative translation as impv.: “find grace …” The final pāda (g) is a combination of the opening of c (asmábhyam dasma) and the ending of f (śáṃ kṛdhi).


## 04
My “may you please placate” is meant to capture the precative (áva) yāsisīṣṭhāḥ of the siṣ-aorist to √yā. Note the dissimilation (if that’s what it is) of the middle sibilant from expected rukified ṣ to plain s.

Note the phonetic figure straddling the hemistich boundary: b yāsisīṣṭhāḥ / c yájiṣṭhaḥ.

In 4c, likewise 6b, HvN note the caesura after three (4c yájiṣṭho váhnitamaḥ, 6b devásya citrátamā). I wonder if the splv. suffix -tama- here is semi-detachable for metrical purposes, yielding an opening of 5 in both cases.

## 05
The idiom áva √yā ‘placate, appease’ found in 4b finds a close variant in 5c áva yakṣva ‘placate through sacrifice’ to áva √yaj. Though belonging to different roots, they are phonologically and semantically similar. Another such variant is found in d vīhí mṛḷīkám “pursue his grace,” which echoes 3d mṛḷīkám … vidaḥ “you (will) find grace” -- again two different roots (vī and vid) but phonologically and semantically similar.


## 06
Because of the position of ná (ghṛtáṃ ná taptám) I follow Ge in taking śúci as the shared quality between simile and frame and therefore “attracted” to the neut.

of the simile, though we would expect a fem. modifying the gapped saṃdṛ́ś-.

The distracted reading ághni (yāyāḥ) ‘inviolable [cow]’ at the end of pāda c echoes agní-, the divinity of the hymn.


## 07
I take santi satyā́here as an etym. figure, a phrasal verb meaning “come into existence” (“come [to be] true”), rather than taking santi as copula and satyā́as a simple adj. with most tr. For one thing, pres. tense forms of √as in main clauses are usually existentials, not copulas; for another trís should mean ‘three times’, not ‘three’ or ‘threefold’ as a copular reading seems to require (e.g., Ge “Dreifach sind diese seine höchsten wahren (Geburten) …”). See also satyám astu in 18d. I am not sure which three occasions are being referred to, but possibly to the production of the three ritual fires -- though esp. given the word paramá- ‘highest’, it could be a cosmic reference.

I do not know what “enveloped within the limitless” (ananté antáḥ párivītaḥ) refers to. It may be the dense swirling smoke, lacking clear boundaries, that surrounds a fire, or it may be the unborn Agni’s concealment in the kindling sticks -- though it’s hard to see how they would be anantá-. It is also possible that this is a reference to the paridhi sticks that surround the ritual fire (see comm. ad IV.3.2 below); they would be “endless” because a circle has no end. Note the phonological play of (an)anté antáḥ, despite their different etymological affiliations.

In d the standard tr. take ari yáḥ as nom. sg. to the thematic stem aryá- (e.g., Ge ‘Herr’). I follow Thieme (Fremdling, 77-78) in interpr. it as gen. sg. to arí-.

Among other things, as Gr points out, this would be the only ex. of aryá- with distraction, while arí- does have a few other distracted forms. There is no compelling formulaic evidence either way, but V.34.9 ketúm aryáḥ “the beacon for the stranger,” adduced by Thieme, resembles our passage thematically.


## 08
In b the caesura appears to coincide with a compound seam (#hótā híraṇya/ratho …), as HvN also note. This is reminiscent of the proposed caesuras in 4c and 6b, before the splv. suffix -tama. See also 19b.

The first cmpd member ráṃsu- is taken by Schindler (Rt Nns, 40) as the loc. pl. to a root noun rán- ‘Freude’, an analysis accepted by Mayrhofer (EWA s.v. RAṆ).

## 09
I follow Ge (n. 9a) in giving mánuṣaḥ a double reading, acc. pl. obj. of cetayan and gen. sg. dependent on yajñábandhuḥ. Note that it is neatly positioned between those two words.

I think yajñábandhuḥ has a more specific sense than simply ‘Opfergenosse’.

Rather, Agni is literally our ‘tie’ (bándhu-) to the primal sacrifice instituted by Manu because he has always been present, always the same, at every sacrifice since then.

The referent of asya in c is taken as the mortal (márta-) in d by Ge (implicitly also Re), as Agni by WG. Either is possible, both grammatically and contextually.

There is no requirement that a possessive coreferential with the subject be expressed by a reflexive (svásya in this case), and though, technically speaking, an unaccented oblique form of ayám should have an antecedent, the close proximity of mártasya and the fact that the subject of the preceding verb (nayanti), though pl., is clearly mortal would make asya = mortal unproblematic. And given the ritual intimacy of Agni and his worshipper(s), the house belongs to both.

Note the phonological echo in sā́dhan (c) and sadhanitvám (d), even though they are semantically unconnected. As for the latter, I now favor the alternative deriv.

proposed by Scar (291), from a base *sadhaní- ‘Teilhaber am gemeinsam Schatz, Teilgaber, Genosse’ in turn built to sa-dhána- (ŚB) ‘gemeinsamer Schatz’ -- rather than as a derivative of the [/a] root-noun cmpd sadha-nī́-, with shortening of the root vowel before -tvá- (so AiG II.2.715). See sadhanyàm in X.50.3. In fact some or all of the three forms assigned to the root-noun cmpd by Gr (IV.4.14, VI.51.3, X.93.5) may also belong rather to Gr’s stem sadhanyà-. (Both Lub and Scar assign all four forms [that is, incl. X.50.3] to the sadhanī́-, though, as just noted, Scar considers the alternative analysis.) The problem with the root-noun analysis is that the semantic connection between √nī ‘lead’ and the apparent sense of the derivative is quite attenuated. It is, however, the case here that two finite forms of √nī (nayanti 9b, nayatu 10a) flank sadhanitvám, so there may be at least a secondary connection perceived.

## 10-18
Hoffmann tr. and comments on these vss. in Injunktiv (pp. 175-78).


## 10
In b I follow Hoffmann (Injunk., 175) in taking the rel. clause as devábhaktaṃ yád asya, rather than just yád asya with the standard tr. The sense doesn’t differ markedly.

More difficult is the configuration of cd. All the standard interpr. (incl.

Hoffmann), save for Old (both SBE and Noten), take final ukṣan as the voc. sg. of ukṣán- ‘ox’, referring to Agni. I prefer, with Old, to take ukṣan as a 3rd pl. injunc.

main-clause verb (√ukṣ ‘sprinkle’), with the subj. the immortals of c. The image is of the gods first creating the treasure and then bringing it to life like a watered plant. In favor of the majority interpr, I must concede, is the common idiom satyám √kṛ ‘make real’, which would in fact complement my interpr. of santi satyā́in 7a, but I find a voc. address to Agni in the middle of 3rd ps. reff. to him (10ab, 11, not to mention vss. 6-9) awkward. Re refers to “l’étrangeté d’un tel Voc.,” despite explicitly rejecting Old’s finite verb interpr. And what is the treasure? A slightly different phrase rátnam … dyúbhaktam (rather than devábhaktam as here) returns in vs. 18, where it seems to refer to the light of Dawn in the form of the cows released from the Vala cave; here I think it may be the light of the newly kindled ritual fire -- and of course the lights of Dawn and the fire of the dawn ritual can be superimposed upon and identified with each other. If the light of the new fire is the primary referent in this vs., ukṣan ‘sprinkled’ may refer to sprinkling ghee on the fire, which action would cause it to blaze up. The next vs. (11), which describes the birth of Agni, fits this interpr.


## 11
The vs. treats the birth of the ritual fire on earth, with the second hemistich describing the amorphous shape and constant motion of physical fire. That it has neither foot nor head (apā́d aśīrṣā́) presumably refers to the lack of consistent vertical definition of a flickering fire; “concealing its two ends” (guhámāno ántā) is reminiscent of 7c “enveloped within the limitless” (ananté antáḥ párivītaḥ), and the explanations suggested there may apply here. In addition, the “two ends” may be the non-existent foot and head just referred to.

## 11-12
The repeated phrase “in the nest of the bull” (vṛṣabhásya nīḷé, 11d, 12b) is somewhat opaque, but I think Ge is basically right, that the vṛṣabhá- is Agni (not, with Hoffmann, heaven). His nest is, in my opinion, the ritual ground; its designation also as the “womb of truth” (ṛtásya yóni-, 12b) supports this identification. I find WG’s n. on this phrase incomprehensible, though it seems to follow Hoffmann in part.


## 12
I am in agreement with most of the standard interpr. that the referent of the subj. of ab is the troop of Aṅgirases, expressed by the neut. s-stem śárdhaḥ (pace Gr, who takes it as a thematic masc. nom. sg., referring to Agni, sim. Schmidt [B+I, 43 n.

21]), though this word generally refers to the Marut troop.

I part company with these interpr. with regard to the referent of c, however.

Most take this string of nom. sg. masc. adj. as further descriptors of the Aṅgiras troop, while I think they refer to Agni. Agni and his births are referred to as spārháearlier in the hymn (6d, 7b); in 8c he is described as vapuṣyò vibhā́vā exactly as here.

The recycling of this characterizing vocabulary seems to me a clue that the subject has changed here from the first half of the vs: it would be perverse to repeat this phraseology with a referent other than the original Agni. Note also that yúvan- ‘young’ is regularly used of Agni, and in the context of his birth the word is esp. apt.

I take this nominal clause (/subclause) as annunciatory of the gapped object of d.

Ge, Re, and Old (SBE) take janayanta in d as intrans. ‘be born’ (e.g., Ge “Dem Bullen wurden die sieben Freunde geboren”), but this medial form is a standard ex. of -anta replacement of the undercharacterized act. -an and is therefore transitive. See my “Voice fluctuation in the Rig Veda: Medial 3rd plural -anta in active paradigms,” IIJ 21 (1979) 146-69. It is correctly interpr. by Hoffmann (Injunk., 176) and WG. The form is an injunctive, contra the Pp.; so already Gr; see Old (Noten), Hoffmann. The “seven dear ones” (saptá priyā́saḥ) are most likely the Aṅgirases, here referred to in the plural rather than the collective neut. sg. in pāda a. III.31.5 contains “seven inspired poets” (saptá víprāḥ) in a clear Aṅgiras/Vala context. It is also possible that the phrase refers to the Aṅgirases’ music, since saptá vā́ṇīḥ ‘seven voices’ is a common phrase. The adj. priyā́saḥ could be either masc. or fem.


## 13
This is the first of the Vala myth vss. As noted in the publ. intro., the actors throughout must be the Aṅgirases, but they are never named.

The curious phrase ṛtám āśuṣānā́ḥ “panting over the truth” occurs three times in IV.1-2 (also 2.14, 16). It expresses the energy and effort of the Aṅgirases in singing the true song that opened the Vala cave and freed the cows. See Lü (514-15).

The med. part. huvāná- is ordinarily passive in value; pace Gr, only VII.30.3 is clearly trans. I therefore take huvānā́ḥ here as fem. acc. pl. modifying uṣásaḥ in passive sense. The standard interpr. is masc. nom. pl. in trans. value, ‘calling to’.

This would of course make just as much sense; my choice is based on the usage of the preponderance of occurrences of the stem.


## 14
Med. marmṛjata is most likely reflexive, as I and most other interpr. take it, though Sāy. and Re supply Agni as object. Although the reflex. interpr. seems a little thin -- splitting stone is dirty work, so they had to clean themselves up -- Agni is out of place in this Vala context and there is no other obvious candidate to be object.

Moreover, the middle voice suggests a reflexive sense.

The referent of anyé in b is not clear to me. By my placement rules (see “Vedic anyá- 'another, the other': syntactic disambiguation,” Sound law and analogy, Fs. Beekes [ed. A. Lubotsky], 1997, pp. 111-18), it must be definite (“the others”).

Most tr. take it as indefinite, though Hoffmann tr. it as definite and implicitly contrastive with the unspecified subject of pāda a: “Die (einen) … Die anderen von ihnen …” I think this approach is the correct one, though I don’t think we need or want the group of Aṅgirases to be split into moieties. Instead, in my view, the contrastive groups are the primordial singers, the Aṅgirases, and their modern counterparts, the poets and singers of the current ritual. The injunctive ví vocan would allow a presential interpr. (“they proclaim …”) with current singers as subj.

instead of or in addition to the preterital one in the publ. tr.

In c we return to the Aṅgirases, whose singing opens the Vala cave -- hence “they sang the decisive act.” Most tr. take kārá- as a victory song of some sort (the exception is WG: “… singen sie auf das Schaffen,” where kārá- is the subject of the song. But I think the expression is more radical: as so often in the RV, our poet wants to emphasize the power of words to make things happen, the connection between song (the cause) and the act, the splitting of the rock (effect).

The hapax cmpd. paśváyantra- is puzzling in formation and sense, although the parts it is based on are relatively clear. The 1st member is paśu- ‘livestock’ or a derivative thereof, the 2nd is or contains yantrá- ‘binding rope’. The interpr. comes down to deciding which is the lesser of two evils: positing an otherwise unattested extended stem paśvá- beside paśú- but a relatively conventional bahuvrīhi ‘having binding ropes for the livestock’ or rejecting the extended stem but ending up with an anomalously formed and accented bahuvrīhi. Old argues strenuously for the former, with the rather cumbersome tr. “in ihren Vorrichtungen zum Festhalten … das Vieh haltend,” and some version of this analysis is followed by Hoffmann and WG. Ge and Re (the latter with some hesitation) opt for the latter, with Ge suggesting a reverse bahuvrīhi (for ayantra-paśu-). (He cagily fails to accent it.) In the end I swallow some version of the second analysis, primarily because I find it unlikely that such a common word as paśú- would display an unnecessary extended stem in just this place in all of Sanskrit, particularly because there’s little metrical advantage to it here. However, I do not follow Ge’s reverse bahuvrīhi interpr. (roughly, “having livestock loosed from the binding ropes”), but assume that it is the Aṅgirases who lack yantra-s to bind the cattle and do so with song instead. (This interpr. goes back to Bergaigne; see Old SBE ad loc.) That some form of verbal expression could serve as a yantrá- is shown by the cmpd. ślóka-yantra- (IX.73.6) ‘having ślokas as binding ropes’. Unfortunately I do not see how to make this explanation work formally, particularly with regard to accent, esp. as there exists a differently accented privative cmpd. ayantrá- in X.46.6. I leave it at this, unsatisfactorily.

In terms of the structure of the vs., I now think the odd pādas (a, c) refer to the Aṅgirases and the even ones (b, d) to the current singers. I would therefore slightly modify the published tr., which presents pāda d as if it were the direct speech -- the song -- of the Aṅgirases described in c. I now think d is what the other, current poets were said to proclaim in b.


## 15
The hapax dṛdhrá- is plausibly explained by Hoffmann (reported in EWA s.v.) as a crossing of a redupl. nominal*dadhrá- (√dhṛ) and the ppl. dṛḍha (√dṛh), the latter found in the second hemistich (15c).


## 16
In the publ. tr. prathamám in the phrase té manvata prathamáṃ nā́ma is rendered as an adj. with nā́ma (“the first name”). On the basis of VI.1.a tvám … prathamó manótā “you (were) the first minder” I think it possible (but not certain) that prathamám here is an adverb: “they first brought to mind the name …” The agent noun manótar- is built to the verb stem manu- found in our passage, and prathamám may qualify the action of ‘bringing to mind’ rather than the name brought to mind.

A comma should be inserted in the publ. tr. after “(The cows)” in pāda c.

On vrā́- see comm. ad VIII.2.16 and Jamison 2003 (= “Vedic vrā́: evidence for the svayaṃvara in the Rig Veda?” in Paitimāna: Essays in Iranian, IndoEuropean, and Indian Studies in Honor of Hanns-Peter Schmidt, vols. 1-2 [ed.

Siamak Adhami], 2003, pp. 39-56).

Because of its accentuation yaśásā should be adjectival; the question is what head noun to supply. Flg. Lü (Varuṇa, 521, also fld. by Hoffmann, WG), I supply ‘name’, which appears in pāda a and appears to be the topic of the rest of the vs. Ge and Old prefer ‘milk’, but this is contextually less likely.

## 17
On néśat as a replacement for an original thematic redupl. aor. with radical zero-grade (expected *na-nś-a-), with the vocalism of the first syllable replaced by that of the weak perfect, see KH, Injunk. 64-65.

On dúdhita-, a qualifier of darkness, see EWA s.v., with ref. to Schindler (1967), who separates it from dudhrá-, etc., and adduces possible Germanic and Toch. color-term cognates.


## 18
I interpr. the “treasure apportioned by heaven” (rátnam … dyúbhaktam) to be in the first instance cows (as in I.73.6), those released from the Vala cave, but the cows conceived of as dawns and therefore as light, including the light of the newly kindled ritual fire. See vs. 10 above, with rátnam … devábhaktam. This buried “light” motif works well with the houses in pāda c, where the ritual fire is at home (see vss.

9, 11 above), and provides an easy transition to the invocation of Agni in the next vs. The subj. of dhārayanta in b I take as the gods in c (with Old, SBE, Hoffmann, WG), rather than taking c as a separate nominal cl. (Ge, Re). Note the chiastic morphological figure in c, allowing alliteration between the nom./loc. pairs: víśve víśvāsu dúryāsu devā́(ḥ).

In d I supply the treasure (in the form of light) as the subj. of satyám astu (so also Hoffmann). This VP should be interpr. in the context of santi satyā́in 7a. See comm. there.


## 19
In b HvN note a caesura after 3; I wonder instead whether the caesura comes at the cmpd seam (#hótāraṃ viśvá/bharasaṃ …), a solution they themselves suggest for 8b, where the caesura would otherwise come after 2. See also 4c, 6b.

On the cmpd viśvá-bharas- see comm. ad V.54.10.

The general opinion is surely correct, that the “gleaming udder of the cows” (śúcy ū́dhaḥ … gávām) stands for the cows’ milk, which is compared to the soma stalk, itself standing for soma. But I think that the udder also stands for the Vala cave, which contained the cows. The root √tṛd ‘drill’ is used for breaching the Vala cave in VI.17.1, 3, X.74.4. Ge finds the subj. of atṛṇat unclear, but surely Agni makes the most sense (not the sacrificer, per Sāy.). In his ritual role, Agni causes the dawn to dawn and therefore opens up the Vala cave on a daily basis. And at the same time he brings the outpouring of ghee (in the sacrifice) and the morning dakṣiṇā and other products of the cow.

The two soma-related terms aṃśú- and ándhas- are difficult to define and to distinguish from each, esp. since both can be used in place of soma itself. However, insofar as it’s possible to tell, they seem to refer to (parts of) the physical plant soma, rather than its product, the juice also called soma. As far as I know, this is the only passage in which the two terms occur together, with gen. aṃśóḥ dependent on acc. ándhaḥ, which suggests that ándhas- is a part of the aṃśú-. This surmise supports the interpr. given by EWA s.vv. (with lit.) that the aṃśú- is the plant and ándhas- is the plant’s stalk. The use of both terms to refer loosely to the soma drink is similar to the use of ‘grape’ or ‘vine’ to refer to wine. I do not understand the position of ná. With the other standard interpr. I tr. it as if it qualifies the verb it immediately follows (“he drilled, seemingly …”; Ge “er zapfte gleichsam …,” etc.), but this is simply not a regular RVic usage: similes are always nominal. I would like to connect it with the double usage of ū́dhaḥ just discussed, but I’m not sure how. I wonder if the 2nd reading of ū́dhaḥ as equivalent to the Vala cave hints at a simile like vrajám … gávām iva “like a pen of cows” (I.130.3; cf. I.10.7, IV.20.8, etc.). This would allow us to tr. the phrase “He drilled the gleaming udder of the cows [=milk] like the ‘udder’ [=pen/Vala] of the cows,” which would restore ná to its normal function of marking nominal similes.


## 20
Within the balanced phrases of the first hemistich -- víśveṣām áditir yajñíyānām, víśveṣām átithir mā́nuṣāṇām -- the nearly identical nominatives áditir and átithir make rhetorical sense. But why Agni is called, or identified as, Aditi (or boundlessness or innocence, if it is used as a common noun) is unclear. Since Aditi is the archetypal divine mother, perhaps Agni is being credited with a maternal relation to the gods, as a deliberate paradoxical foil to vs. 1, where the gods install Agni and are his de facto parents, and to the other accounts of his birth in this hymn. It is also the case that Agni is closely associated with Varuṇa, a son of Aditi, early in the hymn (vss. 2, 3, 4, 5, also 18), though in vs. 2 it is explicitly stated that Agni is Varuṇa’s younger brother, certainly not his mother. For a different wordplay involving áditisee IV.2.11 in the next hymn.
