+++
title = "002"

+++
Agni


## 01
There seem to be deliberate echoes in this vs. of the 1st vs. of the preceding hymn (IV.1.1) -- esp. pāda b devó devéṣu aratír nidhā́yi corresponding to IV.1.1b devā́so devám aratíṃ nyeriré; also IV.2.1a … mártyeṣv amṛ́taḥ and IV.1.1f ámartyam … mártyeṣv ā́. The first pāda is identical to I.77.1c, which continues (I.77.1d) with hótā yájiṣṭhaḥ … as in our pāda c.

On trisyllabic mahnā́(restored as *mahinā́by HvN, though as *mahanā́by Gr; see also Old Noten), see comm. ad I.123.4.

With Old (Noten, not SBE; also Re; Keydana, Infinitive im Ṛgveda, 54), I take īrayádhyai as a causative inf. in passive construction, “to be roused,” rather than Ge’s intransitive “um … zu fahren” or WG’s transitive reflexive “um sich … in Bewegung zu setzen.” Note 7b átithim udīrat “will raise (you) up (as) guest.”


## 03
The two rhyme words vṛdhasnū́and ghṛtásnū clearly form a rhetorical pair, though they have different origins and grammatical analyses, as their different accents show. ghṛtásnu- is generally taken as a bahuvrīhi with the reduced form of sā́nu- ‘back’ as 2nd member. See Old ad loc. and ad I.16.2, and cf., with a different designation of the same body part, ghṛtá-pṛṣṭha-. However, this cmpd. has a complex relationship with the differently accented ghṛtasnú- as well as ghṛta-snā́- ‘bathed in ghee’. See Scar (661-62). As for vṛdhasnú-, Gr takes it as a root-noun cmpd, with snú- for snā, and glosses ‘Segen triefend’; Scar (662) more or less follows this analysis, though he proposes several different morphological pathways. Debrunner (AiG II.2.930), a bit confusingly, takes it as a “Nachbildung” to ghṛtásnu- though containing a suffix - asnu- (sim. Old SBE). (Debrunner does not gloss it; Old ‘mighty’.) WG seem to take it as containing the same ‘back’ as ghṛtá-snu-, tr. ‘von hochgewachsenem Rücken’. I agree with the general sense that vṛdhasnú- has to have been influenced by ghṛtásnu-, hence my parenthetic ‘strong(-backed)’, but it cannot have been formed in direct parallel because of the accent. I think it should be evaluated in the context of another nearby form belonging to √vṛdh, viz. the irregular (pseudo-)participle vṛdhasāná- in IV.3.6, a stem that occurs 3x in the RV. Since that stem was part of our poet’s repertoire, I think it possible that he could create a reduced form of the “suffix” - sāná- (intermediately *-sná-, just as -snu- is reduced from sā́nu-) with further adjustment of the final vowel to match ghṛtásnu-.

The instr. mánasā must go with jáviṣṭhā given the close relationship between the root √jū and mánas- (cmpds máno-javas-, etc.) throughout the RV; the question is only how to construe the instr. with the splv. I take it as an instr. of quality, rather like Re’s “les plus rapides par rapport à la pensée (même).” Flg. Sāy., Ge tr. the phrase as if it were a comparative with an abl.: “… schneller als den Gedanken,” which certainly makes sense but airbrushes the grammar. WG seem to take mánasā as a dual acc. (“die beiden schnellesten Denkorgane des Ṛta”), which is grammatically impossible for neut. mánas- (expect *mánasī). Masc. du. -as-stems do have the ending -ā, but if the word here is meant to be masc., it should either be in a cmpd. (type su-mánas-) or show accent shift to a derived poss. adj. *manás- ‘having mind’, which is not attested. Others (Lü 454, Scar 662) simply detach mánasā from jáviṣṭhā and tr. it elsewhere in the clause, but the formulaics speak strongly against that.

In the second hemistich the 2nd sg. verb īyase and the 2nd pl. acc. prn. yuṣmā́n comes awkwardly into English (“you [sg.] speed between you [pl.] and …”), but neatly signals Agni’s natal affiliation with one of the two sides for which he acts as go-between. See also 1a mártyeṣv amṛ́taḥ, 10b devó mártyasya, where Agni’s divinity is juxtaposed with his mortal worshiper(s).

Contra Old (SBE and Noten) and Ge, I see no reason to take mártān (or, as Old wants to read, *mártām) here as gen. pl. It is perfectly interpretable as an acc. pl.

appositive to víśaḥ. However, the same form in 11b is a somewhat harder case; see comm. there, as well as nṝ́n in vs. 15.


## 04
Unaccented gen. pl. eṣām must refer back to yuṣmā́n … devā́n “you gods” in 3d; evidently the poet only wants a selection of them to be brought to the sacrifice.


## 05
The qualifier ‘long’ (dīrgháḥ) of wealth in d means, of course, ‘long-lasting’ (just as dīrgháṃ támaḥ [I.32.10, etc.] refers to “long(-lasting) darkness”). However, since it is implicitly contrasted here with ‘broad’ (pṛthu-budhná- ‘having a broad base’), it is clear that the image is one of physical dimensions, not merely temporal ones. And, at least for me, “long darkness” is a more striking verbal formulation than “long-lasting darkness.”


## 06
Having described in the previous vs. what a (properly performed) sacrifice can get us, the poet now tells us what we have to do to perform this sacrifice properly.

On the pf. subjunctives here, see my 2016 “The Vedic Perfect Subjunctive and the Value of Modal Forms to Tense/Aspect Stems” (Fs. J L. García Ramón], with disc. of the pf. subjunctives in this verse as well as the pres. and aor.

subjunctives in vss. 7-9. There I specifically dispute Kü’s interpr. (340, also 212, 595) of the pf. subj. as functioning “zur Bezeichnung der vollendeten Handlung für den generellen Fall” (i.e., “… gebracht hat,” etc.).


## 07
As he often does, Ge takes cid as a simile marker, but I do not think that is a possible function of cid, and certainly in this case there is no need to interpret ánniyate as a simile: Agni is regularly depicted as a greedy eater.

Contra Gr, all standard modern tr. and comm. take niśíṣat (so Pp.; niśíṣan is also phonologically possible, though morphologically unlikely) as belonging to √śā ‘sharpen’ (common with ní), not √śās ‘instruct’ (not found with ní). There are formulaic parallels with clear forms of ní √śā; see Ge’s n. 7b and esp. VII.3.5c. With Old it seems best to emend to *niśíśat. He takes it as a short-vowel subj. to the redupl.

pres. śíśāti. So also Hoffmann (Aufs. II, 445-46 n. 14). This is certainly possible, but it could also be a masc. nom. sg. act. part. to this same redupl. pres. Both a finite 3rd sg. in a rel. cl. and a part. would be accented on the stem (not the preverb) as here, and either form is contextually possible. It can simply belong3 to the string of subjunctives in this passage that express ritual service. But note pāda a of the previous vs. (6a), which has a subj. and a part. (jabhárat siṣvidānáḥ); one could argue that in this sequence of vss. there is no more than one finite verb per pāda, though that is not a particular telling argument.


## 08
Because the loc. phrase své dáma ā́“in his own house” in c does not seem to fit the equine simile there, in the publ. tr. I took it implicitly with ab. However, cf.

I.143.4 agníṃ táṃ gīrbhír hinuhi svá ā́dáme “urge Agni on with songs here in his own home,” with a form of √hi and the same loc. phrase. If the hapax hemyā́-vant- is derived from √hi (so Old, SBE and Noten, generally now accepted) and means something like ‘possessing/receiving impulsion, much impelled’, the spurring or impulsion may refer to hymns and be happening in Agni’s own home. So an alternative tr. might be “receiving the spurring (of hymns) in your own house, like a horse you will carry …” The separation of hemyā́vān from the simile áśvo ná invites but does not require reading hemyā́vān primarily with the frame, not the simile.


## 09
rāyā́… ví yoṣat shows the well-known instr. of separation.


## 10
rárāṇaḥ in b is clearly the middle part. to √rā ‘give’. This form appears frequently in this metrical position with just that meaning (e.g., in the preceding hymn IV.1.5c). However, given the 2nd sg. subj. jújoṣaḥ ‘you will enjoy’ at the end of the preceding pāda, I think it likely that there is a secondary association with the near synonym √ran ‘enjoy, take pleasure’ and that rárāṇaḥ could be loosely interpr. also as a 2nd sg. pf. subj. with irregularly strengthened root syllable and wrong accent (contrasting with the properly formed pf. subj. rāráṇas, -at, etc.).

Ge unaccountably interprets hótrā in c as the Goddess of the Offering found in the Āprī hymns rather than as a common noun meaning ‘offering’, an interpr. that severs c from the rest of the verse.

Pāda d is a clear relative clause (yásya), though both Ge and Re render it as an independent clause. Their tactic is understandable because pāda c, the only main cl.

in the vs., has no overt antecedent for the rel. prn. in d. We must supply a ‘his’ with hótrā to produce the connection between c and d.

The identity of “we strengtheners” is a bit puzzling. The stem vṛdhágenerally refers to a god or gods who strengthen their worshipers. In X.147.3 it is used of sūrí-s, human ‘patrons’, but patrons should not be the 1st ps. speakers in Rigvedic discourse -- rather it should be those who receive their patronage, i.e., the poets. I assume here it must refer to the group of ritual officiants, including the poet himself, and the person they are strengthening is the Yajamāna (or what will become the Yajamāna in later Vedic ritual).


## 11
Note the phonetic figure in a, with the repetition of ci, followed by vi, which is then doubled by vi(dvā́n): cíttim ácittiṃ cinavad ví vidvā́n.

On vītá- see comm. ad IX.97.17.

It is tempting here to take mártān here as a short genitive plural (see 3d above), as Ge and Re do. However, in X.89.3 ví yáḥ pṛṣṭhéva jánimāni aryá, índraś cikā́ya … “who has distinguished the races of the stranger, like the (straight and crooked) backs (of horses),” the clear acc. pl. jánimāni ‘races, peoples’ suggests that semantically similar mártān here can be the obj. of ví √ci.

I see no reason to supply a verb in c (like Ge); it can be easily construed with d.

The pair dítim … áditim in d recalls the cíttim ácittim that opens the vs. The standard interpr. take dítim áditim as a positive/negated pair, understandably. But this requires one of the words to be positively valued and one negatively valued (not necessarily corresponding to the privative form). The problem is that each of the verbs that govern these accusatives (√rā ‘give’, uruṣyá- ‘make wide space, deliver’) ordinarily takes positively valued objects. Attempts to give uruṣyá- a negative sense (e.g., Old SBE “keep off Aditi”) founder on the large number of positive cases. I therefore think that dítim áditim are not in an etymological relationship but are actually a pun. díti- is the ‘giving’ goddess and derived from √dā ‘give’. For this etymological relationship see VII.15.12 dítiś ca dāti vā́ryam “And Diti gives a thing of value.” áditi- by contrast is both the familiar goddess Aditi and the common noun ‘boundlessness’ (derived from √dā ‘bind’). Each of these is the object of an appropriate verb: a different root meaning ‘give’ for díti- ‘giving’, a verb meaning ‘make space’ for áditi- ‘boundlessness’. For a different wordplay with áditi- see previous hymn, IV.1.20.


## 12
I take paḍbhíḥ in this vs. as belonging to a root noun páś-, meaning ‘with the eyes’, flg. Oldenberg (SBE [1897]) and Schindler (Wurzelnomen, 31). (However, Oldenberg silently retracted this view in his short piece on paḍbhíḥ some ten years later [ZDMG 63 (1909): 300-302 [=KlsSch 316-18].) As Schindler points out, other hapaxes occur in etymological figures like our paḍbhíḥ paśyeḥ. All other exx. of paḍbhíḥ belong to pád- ‘foot’, including the one two vss. later (IV.2.14). Although such close proximity of identical forms might appear to weigh against assigning them to two different stems, esp. since one of the stems would be a hapax, their contexts seem designed to disambiguate: vs. 12 contains the etym. fig., while 14 juxtaposes the word with another body part frequently paired with it: paḍbhír hástebhiḥ “with feet (and) hands.”


## 14
The vs. modulates from the 1st pl. of the subordinate clause in the first hemistich (yád vayám … cakṛmā́) to the 3rd pl. of the main clause of d (yemuḥ sudhyàḥ) via the simile in c (ráthaṃ ná krántaḥ). The simile could belong either to the subord. cl. or the main cl. and is grammatically and semantically appropriate to either the 1st or the 3rd ps. subject of either.

On ṛtám āśuṣānā́ḥ see comm. ad IV.1.13.


## 15
For the third time in this hymn a pāda-final acc. pl. might more comfortably be interpreted as a gen. pl. -- here nṝ́n. In the cases of mártān in 3d and 11b we saw that the acc. pl. reading was easily possible and an abbreviated (or re-formed) gen. pl.

interpr. was unnecessary. Here an acc. pl. interpr. seems more difficult, though perhaps not impossible. If it is a gen. pl. the tr. would be “as the foremost ritual adepts of/among men,” and most interpr. implicitly or explicitly accept this analysis.

(See also disc. in AiG III.119 and Old, ZDMG 55: 285-89 [=KlSch 744-78], though Old in the Noten favors a nominative pl. analysis, also by preference ZDMG 55: 287 [=KlSch 746].) Certainly nṛ́̄n appears to be more multivalent in the RV than other acc. pl., and, though reluctant, I cannot rule out a gen. pl. However, I think it is possible that nṛ́̄n is a rough acc. of goal (“born to men”) or respect (“ritual adepts with respect to men”).

Interestingly, here “we” aspire to a complete set of parents: Mother Dawn, Father Heaven. Generally in the RV a single parent will do in any particular rhetorical situation.


## 16
On ṛtám āśuṣānā́ḥ see comm. ad IV.1.13.

This vs. has double temporal reference, to the Aṅgirases of long ago using sacred speech to split the Vala cave and release the cows and to the current priests, who imitate the speech of the Aṅgirases in order to release the dawns from darkness.

The failure to realize the double reference to both the opening of Vala and the beginning of the current dawn sacrifice has caused interpretational difficulties. To begin with, śúci in c has been puzzled over. Old (SBE) attempted to make it a fem. adj. modifying dī́dhitim, but in the Noten opts rather for an adverbial neut.

Most other tr. interpr. it as an abstract ‘Klarheit’ vel sim. (Ge, Re, Scar [530], sim.

Schmidt [B+I 43-44]), while WG take it as the modifier of ṛtám in the preceding pāda. I do not know of other exx. of śúci- in abstract value; I interpr. it rather in conjunction with the phrase śúcy ū́dhaḥ … gávām “the gleaming/blazing udder of cows” in the preceding hymn (IV.1.19). As noted in the comm. there, I take this as a ref. to the Vala cave. But this “blazing (udder)” can also refer to the current sacrifice, with the newly kindled fire at its focus. The priests approach this with their sacred speech to set the ritual in motion and achieve dī́dhitim ‘visionary power’.

I think pāda c is appropriate for both the ancient Aṅgirases and the presentday ritualists, and so I would modify the publ. tr. somewhat. The verb ayan is a subjunctive to the root present of √i and therefore primarily applicable to the ritualists and the actions they will now perform. But I also think that it’s possible to interpr. it as a backformed injunctive to the same root present. Since augmented imperfects to stems beginning with a vowel always have lengthened augment (here, well-attested 3rd pl. āyan ‘they went’), it would be possible to form an injunctive by “subtracting” the augment a-, producing ayan, rather than the more proper yan (found only in III.4.5). By such an interpr. the Aṅgirases could also be subjects of the verb: they came (inj.) to the gleaming/blazingVala cave (represented by śúci), and the priests will come (subj.) to the gleaming/blazing place of sacrifice.

The Pp. reads kṣā́mā in d as kṣā́ma, and most interpr. (save for WG) follow the Pp. and take this form as a singular, tr. “splitting the earth” -- as a reference only to the Vala myth (even though it is not the earth that gets split in that myth). But I think we should take the Saṃhitā form seriously, as the elliptical dual it appears to be, extracted from the dual dvandva dyā́vā-kṣā́mā. The phrase “splitting (heaven and) earth” would refer to the visual experience of dawn, when the appearance of the dawn light at the horizon seems to split sky from earth, allowing the light to flood in through the resulting slit.


## 17
And yet again we have a form that would be best interpr. as a genitive pl., but formally is not -- devā́or devā́ḥ [so Pp.] in devā́jánimā (cf. devā́nām … jánima [or jánimā] in the next vs., 18b). It would be possible to interpr. devā́ḥ as nominative subj. in the simile (“as the gods do metal”); on the other hand, reading devā́, some have taken it as a neut. pl. adj. with jánimā. Here, however, I think a gen. pl. interpr.

is the correct one, but the poet is playing a little trick: the sequence ná devā́is to be flipped to *devā́na à devā́nā(ṃ). The occurrence of the expected phrase in the next vs. would be an example of immediate poetic repair (see my 2003 “Poetic 'Repair' in the Rig Veda”).

The standard tr. take śucántaḥ as transitive, with agním as obj., but as most comment, verb forms to this root are otherwise intransitive; see esp. identical śucántaḥ in nearby 15d. It seems better to interpr. agním as the obj. of vavṛdhántaḥ along with índram; there is no obstacle to such an interpr. On the secondary present stem seen in the participle vavṛdhánt- here, cf. Kü (471).


## 18
This vs. closes the mythological section of the hymn and is so positioned to seem as if it ought to be the denouement of the Vala myth. But it seems, at least to me, to have no connection with that myth or, indeed, with anything else in this hymn.

I remain baffled by it, and my comments here will be only on matters of detail.

Ge (/WG) take the subj. of ab to be the leader of the Aṅgirases, possibly Bṛhaspati. I follow Old (Noten) and Re in taking Agni as 3rd ps. subj., though he is also addressed with the voc. ugra. In this vs. the discrepancy in person is the least of our problems. My rather weak reason for preferring Agni as subj. is the fact that the hymn, dedicated to Agni, is drawing to a close, and the final two vss. (19-20) are explicitly Agni vss. I see nothing in the vs. to suggest that any Aṅgiras is involved, save for the herds of livestock that remind us of the Vala myth -- but they are in a simile.

Ge takes ā́√khyā as meaning ‘count’, but as Re points out, this sense is not found earlier than the ŚB. A parallel passage shows a clear word for ‘watch over, look at’: VII.60.3 sáṃ yó yūthéva jánimāni cáṣṭe, which supports ‘watch over’ for the verb here. That passage also suggests that the jánima in b is the obj. of ā́… akhyat and corresponds to yūthā́in the simile (similar Old, Noten). I therefore take the yád in b to be a neut. sg. referring to jánima rather than the subordinating conj. (‘when, since’) of the standard tr. -- and I also follow the Pp in taking sg. jánima as the underlying form in the sandhi conglomeration jánimā́nti, rather than pl. jánimā as assumed by others. (The jánimā of 17b does give me pause, however.) With Old I supply ‘pasture’ with kṣumáti in pāda, rather than taking it as a personal designation (Viehbesitzer, maître du bétail), though not much depends on it. In my (/Old’s) reading, it would refer to the ritual ground. Old’s paraphrase of the first hemistich in the Noten is “… dass Agni … vor sich die Götterscharen erblickte wie Viehherden auf der Weides des Opfers.” His interpr. of the passage informed mine.

As to what the “nearby” race of gods consists of, I have no idea -- perhaps the gods that come to the sacrifice. Recall that in vss. 3-4 the poet asked Agni to bring (only) a selection of gods to the sacrifice.

The second half-vs. is even more puzzling than the first, because there seems no reason to introduce Urvaśī and her retinue (pl. urvaśī́ḥ) and her son Āyu. I supply jánima with mártānām rather than construing this gen. independently as most others do; the parallelism of the passage supports this.


## 19
The augmented 3rd pl. avasran is listed as an aor. to √vas ‘shine’ by Whitney (Rts) and Gr and so tr. by Old (SBE), Re, and (somewhat attenuated) Ge. I take it rather as an impf. to the root pres. of √vas ‘wear’ (so listed by Lub., so interpr., more or less, by Kü, Stativ, 97-98); WG take it also to ‘wear’, but as an ingressive aorist. Since the root already has a root present and there are no other forms to a root aorist, this seems to multiply entities unnecessarily. What does it mean for the dawns to wear/clothe themselves in truth? Perhaps either that they are greeted by a (truly formulated) hymn that serves as their garment or that by dawning they display the truth of the orderly functioning cosmos as their clothing. Although I think that avasran belongs properly to √vas ‘wear’, this of course does not mean that there is not a pun on √vas ‘dawn, shine’.
