+++
title = "003"

+++
Agni


## 01
I render vs.-final kṛṇudhvam twice -- once with vs.-initial ā́in the meaning ‘make = kindle’, rather than with most tr. ‘bring here’, and once with the quasiinfinitival dat. ávase.

It is not entirely clear why Agni is identified as Rudra here. The word is most likely to be construed with the gen. adhvarásya as “the Rudra of the/your ceremony,” on the basis of I.114.4 rudráṃ yajñasā́dham “Rudra bringing the sacrifice to success” and III.2.5 (also of Agni) rudráṃ yajñā́nāṃ sā́dhadiṣṭim “the Rudra of the sacrifices, bringing success to the offerings.” Perhaps the point of comparison is Rudra’s healing powers and, esp. here, his ability to ward off threats of all sorts, in this case the “unexpected thundering” (tanayitnór acíttāt) of pāda c.

ródasyoḥ can be either gen. (with most tr.) or loc. (so publ. tr.). There is little riding on the choice.

As most interpr. take it, “unexpected thundering” is probably a reference to all sorts of unforeseen dangers, rather than specifically of a sudden storm.


## 02
All the standard tr. take the rel. cl. of pāda a (cakṛmā́yáṃ vayám te “[the womb] which we have made for you”) as the frame for the simile in b, with “we” matching the eager wife (jā́yā … uśatī́) and “you” (Agni) matching the husband. Old (SBE) goes so far as to supply “marriage-bed” as the match for the womb: “… as a well-dressed loving wife (prepares the marriage-bed) for her husband.” This is one possible reading, but I don’t think it is the only (or even the dominant) one; in fact, I think the simile can be matched to four different entities in the verse.

Let us begin by noting that pāda b, the self-contained simile, is found three times elsewhere (I.124.7 of Dawn, X.71.4 of Vāc, and X.91.13 of praise [suṣṭutí-] seeking Agni), in all cases of females or of entities conceived as female. An obvious “entity conceived as female” is found in the nominal main clause of pāda a, ayáṃ yóniḥ “here is the womb”: the womb, though grammatically masc., is a female accoutrement and can be matched with the wife in the simile in b. This “womb” (=fireplace) is well prepared (“richly dressed” suvā́sāḥ) and ready to receive Agni as her husband. For womb = wife, cf. III.53.4 jāyéd … séd u yóniḥ “The wife -- just she is the womb.” But suvā́sāḥ elsewhere occurs in the same pāda with párivītaḥ (found in our pāda c): III.8.4a yúvā suvā́ sāḥ párivīta ā́ gāt “As a youth, richly dressed, engirded, he has come here.” Although the referent there is the sacrifical post, the vocabulary is also appropriate to Agni. Therefore it could be the Agni of c who is like a wife, eager for her husband identified with the womb in pāda a -- a gender reversal that would appeal to the Rigvedic poets. (Note that the standard reading, where “we” the ritualists match the wife, also requires some gender reversal.) Finally let us consider pāda d. The subj. of d is fem., expressed by imā́u te … pratīcī́h “these facing you.” Ge (/WG) supply “Frauen,” but in n. 2d Ge suggests gíraḥ (inter alia); Re supplies “louanges.” I think gíraḥ must be correct: there are a number of imā́u tvā/te … gíraḥ passages (e.g. VI.45.25, 28, VII.18.3, VIII.3.3), and Ge/Re adduce V.12.1 for gir- as well: gíram bhare vr̥ṣabhā́ ya pratīcī ́ m. As was noted above, in 2 of its 4 occurrences the “eager wife” simile has speech/praise as its comparandum, so in fact that simile in our b works best with the hymns in d: these hymns face towards you, like an eager wife to(wards) her husband.

Bloomfield discusses the simile at length ad I.124.7. He is rather sour about our passage: the construction is “very loose indeed”; “the metaphor limps decidedly.” Contra Bl I consider the deployment of the simile here as an example of the poet’s extreme cleverness, with the simile applicable to every single entity in the vs. To reflect the polyvalent status of the simile, the publ. tr. should probably be changed to “(It is / we are / you are / they are) like …,” though this would be very clumsy.

As for párivīta- ‘enveloped’ in c, the question is what Agni is enveloped in. It could be the paridhi sticks that surround the ritual fire (see, e.g., Ge ad I.128.1, endorsed for that passage by Thieme [Unters. 19]); WG suggest dawn’s light or hymns; Old (SBE) offerings and prayers. It’s useful to note that párivīta- occurs twice with the loc. of yóni-: once in an Agni hymn X.46.6 párivīto yónau sīdad antáḥ (note √sad here as well) and once in the riddle hymn I.164.32 sá mātúr yónā párivīto antáḥ, so that the two concepts seem to be connected (“enveloped within the womb”).

This could fit the paridhi sticks forming a border of the fireplace conceived as a womb. It might also refer to the kindling sticks, within which fire is hidden until he is ignited (/born), hence also his womb. There is another important parallel in nearby  1.7 ananté antáḥ párivīta ā́gāt “enveloped within the limitless, he has come here”; see comm. there. On the multiple meanings of párivīta- in Agni context, see Thieme (Unters., 19-20).

Modern tr. (almost) universally take the voc. svapāka- as ‘having a lovely backside’ vel sim., related to ápāñc- ‘turned backwards’ and here implicitly contrasting with pratīcī́ḥ ‘turned towards, facing’. The one exception is Old, who in SBE (1897) tr. “O most skilful one,” an interpr. that he swiftly disavowed (ZDMG 55 [1901]: 301 [=KlSch. 760]) as “nicht zu denken” -- without admitting he had in fact thought it previously. Nonetheless, I think this is a more appealing interpr. than the current standard. I take it as built to a negated á-pāka- ‘not naïve, not callow’ to pā́ka- ‘naïve, callow, simple’ -- like ámūra- ‘not stupid’: mūrá- ‘stupid’. ámūra- is found three times in the Agni hymns of this maṇḍala (IV.4.12, 6.2, 11.5), always of Agni. The semantically similar ádṛpita- ‘undistracted’ in the next pāda (3a) supports this interpr. There are two other occurrences of svápāka- (VI.11.4, 12.2), both analyzed by the Pp as sú ápāka- (both adduced by Old, SBE), both modifying Agni.

In neither case does a “having a lovely backside” impose (or even suggest) itself, and I propose to include them under this stem.

## 03
Ge takes the voc. vedhaḥ as the poet’s self-address, which is certainly possible; he is commanding himself to recite (śaṃsa). This does not solve the question of the person of the verb īḷé in d. Although this form is universally rendered (incl. in the publ. tr) as a 3rd sg. (and analyzed, because of its accent, as the only perfect form to this root, against root pres. ī́ḷe, ī́ṭṭe; see Kü 122), it could of course also be a 1st sg. pf., with sótā an appositive to the underlying 1st ps. subj. (“I the presser”). Since the surrounding vss. (2 and 4) have explicit 1st persons (though pl.), I would be inclined to emend the publ. tr. to “whom I, the presser, invoke …” Pāda d plays on the standard Rigvedic notion that the soma-pressing stones are very noisy and that their noise is like that of the priestly recitation and singing happening at the same time. The question here is which of the three terms in the phrase grā́veva sótā madhuṣút belongs to the simile and which to the frame. On the basis of X.64.15 grā́vevā yátra madhuṣúd ucyáte bṛhát, I take grā́vā … madhuṣút “the honey-pressing (pressing) stone” as a discontinuous simile, with the frame represented by sótā in between. Ge, Re, WG, Kü (122), and Scar (615) take the simile to be grā́veva sótā and the frame madhuṣút; Old (SBE) confines the simile to grā́vā with the frame sótā madhuṣút. Either of these configurations avoids a discontinuous simile, but such similes are not rare and the phraseology of X.64.15 supports my analysis. Little rests on it, however.


## 04
My “at least” for cid follows Ge (“wenigstens”). This somewhat testy note seems to introduce the next part of the hymn, with its anxious or annoyed questions to Agni about his relationship to the sacrificers and how he will represent it to the other gods.

The śámī- and the ṛtá- here presumably refer to the complementary physical and verbal aspects of the sacrifice. On ṛtá- as “Kultlied” in this and similar passages, see Lü (esp. 442-43).

## 05-08
The list of gods to whom Agni will tattle on us follows a certain pattern.

Vs. 5 contains the standard great trio of Ādityas, Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman, as well as a minor Āditya, Bhaga ‘Fortune’, who is, however, important for our welfare.

Although we might have expected the Sun here, because he serves as the Ādityas’ eye, observing our offenses, we have instead Heaven and Earth, which frame the cosmos. In vs. 6 the nearer gods of the midspace, particularly Vāta ‘wind’ and the Aśvins, are featured. Rudra appears in both 6 and 7; I don’t quite understand why, but recall first that Agni was identified as Rudra in vs. 1 and may be also in 10d (see also 14b). Moreover, in 6 the punishing aspect of Rudra is emphasized (‘mansmiting’, nṛhán-), while in 7 he is paired and/or contrasted with the benevolent Pūṣan under the ambiguous epithet súmakha-, which means both ‘good combatant’ and ‘very generous’, so his effects on human life are emphasized and he counts as a nearer god, who in fact is the giver of the oblation (havirdā́-). In the 2nd half of 7 Viṣṇu and his three strides return us to the contemplation of the whole cosmos, and vs. 8 functions ring-compositionally with vs. 5: we have the Sun we expected (and didn’t get) in 5, with Aditi standing in for the Ādityas in 5, and heaven (though probably the place, not the deity) is the final goal.


## 05
The last pāda would be more accurately rendered “What to Aryaman, what to Fortune?”


## 06
Note that all four pādas rhyme: agne# (a), śubhaṃyé# (b), kṣé# (c), nṛghné (d); also 7ab pūṣṇé# … havirdé#, an unusual effect in RVic verse.

The so-called “double stem” vṛdhasāná- is morphologically anomalous, but belongs to a fairly large group of stems with apparent middle part. in -asāná-. This is not the place to treat the origin of these stems at length, but, with Insler (KZ 82 [1968]), I think the starting point is sahasāná- (5x, 4x of Agni) ‘displaying might’, which he takes as a metathesized form of a pf. mid. part. *sasahāná-, beside sāsahāná- (1x) and the younger type sehāná- (3x). This metathesis was reinforced by the very common s-stem sáhas-, and several other -asāná-stems have s-stems alongside (śavasāná-: śávas-, rabhasāná-: rábhas-, jrayasāná-: jráyas-) and fall into the same general semantic field of strength, power, or violent action (though not one of the best attested, mandasāná- ‘becoming exhilarated’ nor, e.g., dhiyasāná- [2x]).

There is unfortunately no neut. s-stem *vṛ́dhas-, though there is a single attestation of an infinitival dat. vṛdháse with suffixal accent. See also disc. of vṛdhasnú- ad IV.2.3.

Pāda c is problematic, both metrically (it lacks a syllable) and grammatically: this is the only place in the RV where nā́satya- appears in the sg., not the du., and the identity of pāda-final kṣé is disputed. The metrical problem and the kṣé problem can be easily solved together if we adopt the suggestion of Hoffmann registered in Schindler (Root nouns, s.v. kṣā́-) that kṣé is a haplologized form of datival inf. *yakṣé ‘to appear’ in the environment (nā́sati )yāya [ya]kṣé. (Note that yakṣám ‘apparition’ appears in 13a.) This interpr. is also reflected in WG’s rendering, and one way or other it goes back to Ludwig; see Old (SBE, Noten). The publ. tr. should have an asterisk before “to appear.” As for sg. nā́satyāya, although this analysis is emphatically rejected by both Old (Noten) and Debrunner (AiG II.2.136), I have adopted Henry’s old suggestion that the form is a vṛddhi adj. of appurtanance whose vṛddhi is invisible because the base already has initial-syllable vṛddhi. We would of course expect the accent to shift to the final syllable (AiG II.2.133ff.), hence *nāsatyá-, but the dominance of the initially accented noun could have altered the accent, possibly redactionally. I supply ‘chariot’ in this dat. expression, since the Aśvins’ chariot is esp. prominent and párijman- modifies their chariot elsewhere (I.20.3, X.41.1). Cf. esp. I.20.3 tákṣan nā́satyābhyām párijmanaṃ sukháṃ rátham “They fashioned the earth-circling wellnaved chariot for the Nāsatyas.”


## 07
On the benevolent Rudra see comm. ad vss. 5-8. It is not clear why or how Rudra is the giver of the oblation. Old (see also WG’s n.) suggests that it is in his capacity as paśupati-: he provides the beast for sacrifice. This is possible: though he is not so called in the RV (where the word is not found), this epithet is applied to him in AV (e.g., XI.2.28) and VS (e.g., XXVI.28).

In c rétaḥ ‘semen’ is somewhat surprising, esp. if it is to be construed as the object of brávaḥ -- so much so that Gr (tr., not Wö.) suggested emendation to répaḥ ‘stain’, an emendation accepted by Old (SBE, Noten) and Lü (622) and maintained tentatively by Scar (214). Re keeps the transmitted form but interprets it as a way of referring to negative speech: “Quelle semence (de blâme dirais-tu) …?” But in a culture so fixated on fertility, semen is basically always a positive concept. Important is the fact noted by Ge (n. 7c) that Viṣṇu is elsewhere the protector of semen (cf., e.g., VII.36.9 víṣṇuṃ niṣiktapā́m “Viṣṇu, protector of the poured-out [semen]”). In his n.

(and contra his tr.) Re suggests an alternative interpr. of rétaḥ here as a truncated

*retodhe (cf. retodhā́- 5x) or *retode (Re does not accent either proposed form). This
seems the correct solution, with the -de extracted from havirdé, which ended the preceding pāda.

In d Re suggests that śárave bṛhatyaí is the “état pré-compositionnel” of a bahuvrīhi *bṛhatśarave (no accent provided and no application of sandhi), whose referent is Rudra. Although the arrow is surely Rudra’s as all standard interpr.

recognize, there is no reason to substitute the god for his symbolic accoutrement. Just as Agni can speak to the chariot of the Aśvins (6c, by my interpr.), he can also speak to Rudra’s arrow.

Ge (n. 7d) points out the contrast between Viṣṇu as creator (c) and Rudra as destroyer (d).


## 08
Although it is tempting to take ṛtā́ya as an adj. modifying śárdhāya (so, e.g., Ge “der rechtwandelnden Schar,” sim. WG, Old SBE), the stem ṛtá- is overwhelmingly a neut. noun. It is possible, with Re, to take it as an appositive with the Marut troop: “Ordre (incarné)” or, with Lü (623), as a separate entity to whom Agni’s speech is directed, but I think it more likely that it is a dative of purpose, like (ya)kṣé in 6d, havirdé in 7b: “for truth,” that is, for the Maruts to attain or ascertain the truth.

The masc. (/neut.) turā́ya cannot modify fem. áditaye (pace Old SBE). Ge supplies “heaven”; WG suggest the sun. With Re I opt tentatively for Indra, who is frequently modified by this adj. and who is otherwise absent from this fairly comprehensive list of important gods (see Ge n. 8c). Brereton (Ādityas, 205-6) instead thinks turā́ya represents an Āditya, probably Varuṇa, and takes áditaye not as the name of the goddess but as a common noun ‘innocence’, with the dative phrase meaning “for the mighty one (=Varuṇa) to (ascertain our) innocence.” This assertion of innocence at the end of a series of questions about potential blame would set the stage for the request that Agni make our sacrifice succeed (pāda d). This suggestion is appealing, but I am not convinced that áditi- ever means ‘innocence’, and further in this sequence the purpose datives are only pāda-final, which áditaye is not.

Pāda d poses some syntactic challenges. The first is that sā́dhā, by all accounts a 2nd sg. act. impv. to √sādh, has no expressed obj., though act. forms of this root are fundamentally tr. (but sometimes, esp. in the participle, used in absolute sense “assuring success”; cf. nearby IV.1.9). I supply dhíyam ‘thought’ vel sim. as the object, since forms of dhī́- or other words for thought/prayer are regularly construed with √sādh. The other problem is what to construe gen./abl. diváḥ with. (It cannot be acc. pl. because of the accent.) The standard solution has been to take it with cikitvā́n (e.g., Ge “der du den Himmel kennst”), but as Re points out, cikitvā́n is never otherwise construed with a gen. His solution is to supply an obj. for sā́dhā on which diváḥ is dependent: “Mène droit au but (les affaires) du ciel.” My interpr.

requires a slight emendation, from sā́dhā diváḥ to *sā́dhā́diváḥ -- that is, sā́dha ā́ diváḥ, with ā́+ ABL in the meaning “all the way to.” Cf. I.92.17 yaú … ślókam ā́ diváḥ … cakráthuḥ “you two who made your signal-call (reach) all the way to heaven”; sim. III.61.4. See comm. ad locc. An asterisk should be inserted before “all the way.”

## 09-12
Each of these vss. begins with the resonant and charged instr. ṛténa ‘by truth’, the usual introduction to a truth formulation. Each of the vss. does seem to express a mystical truth about the ritual or its mythic background. There is no obvious connection to the group of vss. that precede (the question vss. of 4cd-8), but if I am correct that we should supply ‘thought’ or ‘thoughts’ in 8cd, where we ask Agni to send them all the way to heaven, it may not be fanciful to think that vss. 9-12 are these very thoughts.


## 09
This vs. expresses the beloved paradox about cows and milk, that the cow is “raw” but her milk “cooked” (that is, ready to consume), and further that a black cow can still give white milk. These paradoxes describe in the first instance the production of the ritual offering, the milk that will produce the ghee to be poured into the ritual fire. But it may also (esp. the 2nd hemistich) characterize the transition from the night (black cow) to dawn (the gleaming milk) at the dawn sacrifice; see Janert (Dhāsi, 29ff.).

The standard interpr. (save for WG) take ṛténa as the agent with the ppl.

níyatam (e.g., Re “L’Ordre a été fixé par l’Ordre (même)”). Because the flg. 3 vss.

also begin with ṛténa, interpreting the first one outside of the pattern established by the rest seems misguided, esp. given the usual function of initial ṛténa (see comm. above on vss. 9-12).

I take the ṛtám that I reverently invoke (īḍe) to represent the paradoxes just discussed -- the mystical truth of the cow’s nature -- and I interpr. ā́góḥ as an ablative phrase, referring to the source of this truth. Most take góḥ as a gen., but this makes ā́hard to construe. (The phrase ā́góḥ occurs 3x elsewhere, always pāda final, twice in this maṇḍala [IV.22.4, 23.6] and once in X [X.100.12]; nowhere is it clear.) At least acdg. to Old (SBE) and Ge, the ṛtám is actually a reference to the milk. I am skeptical.

On dhāsí- see comm. ad I.62.3, 140.1.

The hapax jā́marya- is opaque; see EWA s.v. My tr. follows Janert’s analysis (Dhāsi, 33ff.), that it is a secondary derivative to jām-ara- “die die Nachkommen Nährende.” Ge’s suggestion (n. 9d) that it is related to YAves. zǝmar ‘on/in the earth’ (in zǝmar-gūz-), hence ‘earthly’ (versus heavenly milk = rain), fits the passage less well.


## 10
This 2nd vs. in the truth-formulation sequence both continues the mystical description of the dawn sacrifice and presents another paradox. With regard to the sacrifice, the milk produced in vs. 9 becomes the butter oblation poured on the sacrificial fire, as Ge discusses. Ge’s explanation of the phrase páyasā pṛṣṭhyèna lit.

“the milk belonging to the back” is ingenious and (to me) convincing: it is the milk on the top (the image is of a four-legged animal), i.e., the cream, which is made into butter. With the offering of the butter, the fire flames up -- allowing it to go about “conferring vigor” (vayodhā́-) in c.

Pāda c also inaugurates the paradox that is most clearly expressed in d. Agni is characterized as áspandamāna- in c. As Ge points out (n. 10c), √spand ‘kick, lunge, jerk’ is only used in Vedic of cows when they are being milked, so Agni is both bull (vṛṣabhá- [a], vṛ́ṣan- [d]) and cow. This paradoxical double identity is sharpened in d, where Agni is identified not only as a bull but as Pṛśni, the cow who is the mother of the Maruts, and he is the subj. of the quintessential “cow” verb √duh ‘milk’ and acts on the quintessential cow body part ū́dhar- ‘udder’. The substance s/he produces from this udder is śukrám, a word that can refer not only to ‘gleaming’ milk, but is also used to refer to semen. A similar gender-bending milking scenario involving Pṛśni and Rudra, the Maruts’ father, is found in II.34.2; see that passage and the comm. thereon. Here Agni may be being identified with Rudra; see the AgniRudra equation in vs. 1 and also the focus on Rudra in the “question” vss. (6d, 7b, 7d). There are a number of passages in the Agni hymns of IV that should be brought into the conversation, though unfortunately what they have to say is obscure: see the “gleaming udder” (śúcy ū́dhaḥ) in IV.1.19 and a neut. entity (quite possibly her udder) belonging to Pṛśni in IV.5.7, 10.

What -- if anything -- this refers to naturalistically is unclear. The tendency among interpr. has been to take it as a reference to rain (see Ge n. 10d) or to some other celestial phenomenon (Lü 390), but I find Bloomfield’s suggestion (RR 213) more appropriate to the passage, that the fire, blazing up, “shoots out his flames from his bright udder; he, a bull, is thereby -- mirabile dictu -- also a pṛ̥çni, the heavenly, yielding cow, par excellence.” Bl also suggests that śukrá- here mean ‘semen’, with a zeugma of duduhe: “As a bull he hath spurted semen, as a Pṛ̥çni cow he hath milked his udder.”


## 11
The third truth-formulation vs. sets up the Vala myth as the model for the coming of dawn: just as the Aṅgirases breached the Vala cave and let loose the cows, so the human sacrificers break Dawn out of her confinement by kindling the ritual fire. This is the third step in the depiction of the morning ritual. As noted elsewhere (see esp. the publ. intro to Maṇḍala IV and to IV.1), the Vala myth and the Aṅgirases play an outsize role in the Agni cycle of IV.

Despite the injunctives of pāda a (vy àsan) and c (pári ṣadan), I am tempted, with Gr, to read anavanta in b, to produce 11 syllables. (Consider the augmented impf. in d, abhavat.) Old (Noten) considers this restoration possible but not necessary. Hoffmann (Injunk., 209) gives a typical treatment of the vs. in his interpretational system, assuming an injunc. navanta in b.


## 12
The ritual application of this final ṛténa vs. is less clear than for the first three. It may simply refer to the waters used at the first soma pressing. Or the ritual aspect may be muted, and the point is to make room for the Vṛtra myth next to the Vala myth in vs. 11. However, the opt. dadhanyuḥ seems to reflect a movement from what has happened (the injunctives and preterite indicative of the last few vss.) to what should now happen, which suggests that there should be a ritual application.

The athem. mid. part. -stubhāná- is isolated, beside the act. them. 1st cl. pres.

stóbhati, and it is therefore impossible to determine its exact value -- including whether it is passive (so, e.g., Old [SBE], Ge, Re) or not. Gotō (1st cl., 332 and n.

808) argues against such a value, on the basis of the intrans. sense of the root, and I have followed him in the non-passive assessment. My tr. “beat a tattoo” reflects my sense that √stubh is associated esp. with rhythm. As for sárga-, lit. ‘surge, gush’, it can refer to the instant when the surge is released, hence here the start of a race.


## 13
This vs. is very difficult. As I see it, the point of the vs. is to demand that Agni not track down and punish the speaker for the transgressions of others, esp.

others who are close to the speaker and could be mistaken for him. In the first hemistich this notion is expressed by GEN yakṣá- “the specter/apparition of X,” where yakṣá- could perhaps best be rendered as Doppelgänger.

The first problem one encounters is kásya and the puzzle of how an interrogative would interact with the prohibitive mā́. The standard solution is to treat kásya as an indefinite, without the usual particle (cid, caná) to mark this value -- e.g., Re “… de qui (que ce soit).” But when the negative ná is used, the indefinite ‘no one, nothing’ always has the particle. I propose instead to read *akásya ‘of (a) nobody’.

With an accent like that of akútra ‘nowhere’, this interpr. does not require emending the Saṃhitā text (which would read mā́kásya), only the Pp., and the same stem is found three times elsewhere in the same context, at least by my interpr.: V.70.4 mā́ kásya (in a passage very similar to this one), mā́kásya in VII.94.8, and I.120.8 mā́ kásmai, parallel to mā́kútrā where the Pp. analyzes the first as mā́kásmai but the 2nd as mā́akútra. The apparent presence of mā́-akútra in this last passage reinforces my interpr. of mā́kásya / kásmai as also containing a privative a-. It might be argued that nákis, nákīm (the former of which is very common) and mā́kis, mā́kīm lack the indefinitizing particle, but all these forms show univerbation and loss of the accent on the 2nd element.

The form huráḥ has been variously analyzed. Old (etc) takes it as an adv., and Ge (etc.) as the gen. of a root noun. (For detailed disc. see Scar [123], who vacillates.) I follow the latter view, but see it not as an abstract but as a personal gen. referring to one of the transgressors. (This seems to be the WG interpr., too.) In d Old suggests emending dákṣam to yakṣám (matching the same form in pāda a and found elsewhere with bhujema), but it is hard to see how this error could have arisen. I think rather that dákṣa- is used here ironically or sarcastically.

On mā́with the apparent opt. bhujema, see Hoffmann (Injunk., 95-97), who explains this grammatical anomaly (found several times) as a misinterpr. of expressions with the dat. inf. bhujé.


## 14
Once again in this hymn Agni seems to be indirectly identified with Rudra, here by the use of the adj. súmakha-, used explicitly of Rudra in 7b. The ambiguity of this word works well here also.


## 15
Vs. 3 also contains forms of both mánman- and śastí-.

On sám √jṛ see Gotō (1st cl., 154-55), who considers the two instances of this lexeme (also in the next hymn, IV.4.8) an individual use of this poet, in the meaning ‘be welcome’ [willkommen sein]. In both cases it has a verbal product of the poet as subj. (śastí- here, gír- IV.4.8). My ‘bring harmony’ is meant to capture the ‘sing’ feature of the root √jṛ. Perhaps ‘be harmonious’ would have been better. For further disc. see ad IV.4.8 below.


## 16
On this vs., see publ. intro.
