+++
title = "004"

+++
Agni the Demon-Smasher


## 01
The repetition of the same word, prásitim, in a and c without any obvious difference in usage or sense (Re says they are “légèrement” distinct) seems uncharacteristically clumsy for a Vedic poet, which in turn makes it tempting to identify something that does distinguish them. Although he does not tr. them differently (nor does anyone else), Ge suggests in his n. 1a that prásiti- represents the coalescence of two words, one derived from √sā, si ‘bind’ (‘Fanggarn’, a hunting net) and the other ‘Laut, Ansturm’, related to prásita- (IV.27.4, X.77.5) ‘shot forth’.

The latter provides the usual meaning of prásiti- ‘onslaught’ vel sim., and the word is now usually considered to belong to PIE *seh1(i)̯ ‘loslassen’ (cf. LIV2 1.*seh1(i)̯ n. 2; EWA s.v.) and to be related to sā́yaka- ‘missile’. For disc. of some of the occurrences of prásiti- see Hoffmann (Aufs. 417-18 [=MSS 10, 1957]); curiously Hoffmann only notes the second occurrence of the word in this vs., not the first. Ge’s suggestion that the word has two sources opens the possibility of accounting for the poet’s seemingly awkward repetition here, if in fact he’s using two different words prásiti- (or, to him, possibly two different sense of one word; for this cf. sumatí in 6a, 8a below). That the prásiti- in pāda a is ‘broad’ (pṛthvī-), while the ánu ‘along’ in c suggests that it is long and thin there might be a clue. I tentatively suggest that the first occurrence refers to a deployed hunting net -- broad so as to trap as many animals as possible (or to make it difficult for any animal to avoid it) and comparable to an advancing sheet or wall of flame. The second one would then have the usual sense of ‘onslaught, forward dash’. Unfortunately altering the tr. to allows for these two separate meanings would lose the identity of the forms in this suggested pun.

Pace Ge, íbha- means ‘entourage, retinue’ not ‘elephant’ in Vedic, a meaning reinforced by the Middle Indic derivatives. See EWA s.v. On drūṇāṇá- as belonging to √drū ‘cut down, mow’ see Hoffmann (Aufs. 414-21) and EWA s.v. DRAVI .

Pāda c seems to go more naturally with b than with d, as most take it.


## 02
Since √spṛś does not otherwise occur with ánu in the RV or, per MonierWilliams, in all of Skt., I supply an object with this preposition -- either the flames of pāda a or, perhaps preferably, the prásitim construed with ánu in 1c.

Most interpr. take pataṃgā́n as an unmarked simile, e.g. Ge “(gleich) Vögeln.” My interpr. requires supplying an unparalleled noun but avoids the need for a simile particle.

## 02-04
Note the preverb chaining: 2d ví sṛja, 3a práti … ví sṛja, 4b práti.


## 03
Ge. renders d “keiner soll es wagen, dich irrezuführen,” but vyáthiḥ ‘veering course’ is simply a description of the usual behavior of fire, amply described in vss.

1-2.


## 04
As Ge suggests in his n. 4a, ā́tanuṣva could reflect the common idiom ā́√tan ‘draw/stretch (the bow [dhánus-, dhánvan-])’. Given that Agni is identified as a ‘shooter’ (ástā) in 1c and that bows are the presumed object of a different form of √tan in the next vs. (5c, see there), this seems quite possible, though I think the primary reading is simply the reflexive ‘stretch yourself out’; cf. 1a for Agni’s making himself broad.


## 05
The standard tr. supply ‘powers’ with daívyāni, and this certainly could make sense. However, no word meaning ‘power’ occurs with pl. daívya- (I must admit that sáhas- occurs several times with the sg.) nor as obj. of āvíṣ √kṛ ‘make manifest’.

Since we expect something visual as the obj. of such a verb and since the hymn so far has concerned the shape-shifting of Agni, I tentatively supply ‘forms’ -- though ‘powers’ is not excluded contextually.

The adj. sthirá- ‘taut, firm’, esp. when obj. of áva √tan, presupposes ‘bows’ as its head noun; cf. the bahuvrīhi sthirá-dhanvan- (VII.46.1) and phrases like VIII.20.12 sthirā́dhánvāni.

The more usual interpr. of cmpds with final root noun is OBJ + TRANS. VERB, and this seems to be the sense of many of the fairly numerous cmpds in -jū- (e.g., vasū-jū́- ‘speeding goods’), though Scar (166-77) hesitates in several cases.

However, in yātu-jū́- the final member must be read passively with agentive 1st member: ‘incited by sorcerers’, as VII.21.5, adduced by both Ge and Scar (173), definitively shows: ná yātáva indra jūjuvur naḥ “Sorcerers do not incite us, Indra.” On the number disharmony in the obj. phrase in d, jāmím ájāmim … śátrūn, see comm. ad VI.44.17.


## 06
The 2nd hemistich has been variously interpr. Most recently WG take the neut.

pls. víśvāni … sudínāni … dyumnā́ni as subjs. of the sg. verb dyaut, in the wellknown, inherited, but relatively rare constr. of neut. pl. + sg. verb (“Zu ihm strahlen alle …”). Re takes all of the half-verse through aryáḥ as nominal sentences: “que tous (les jours) soient de beaux jours pour lui …,” and the rest of d as an abrupt command. Ge has Agni shining the various good things through the doors to the fortunate asmai. My interpr. is closest to Old (Noten, not SBE) and Ge’s alternative in his n. 6cd. I take ví dúraḥ as referring to the usual opening of the doors, an expression that usually contains a form of the verb √vṛ ‘(un)cover’ (e.g., IX.45.1 ví … dúro vṛdhi). Here the more dramatic verb dyaut has been substituted, blending the lexeme ví … dyaut ‘flashed forth (like lightning)’ with the straightforward ví √vṛ ‘open’ -- hence my “flashed open the doors.” I am not sure why all the standard tr.

(except for WG) render the injunctive dyaut as a modal (e.g., Ge “… sollst du … scheinen”).

I supply ‘days’ with sudínāni on the basis of passages like VII.11.2 áhāny asmai sudínā bhavanti.

rāyáḥ can be either acc. pl. (so Old, Ge, Re) or gen. sg. dependent on víśvāni … sudínāni (so Th [Fremdl. 61] “All die Sonnentage des Reichtums,” WG). In the publ. tr. I took it as acc. pl. but, to my mind, nothing rides on it either way.


## 07
It is not clear whether nítya- in this context has already developed its later technical sense of regular, obligatory ritual offering, as opposed to those performed irregularly for special purposes. Or whether it simply means, as Re takes the phrase nítyena havíṣā, “une offrande personnelle.” I have pushed the last phrase sā́sad iṣṭíḥ to “this desire will be” -- that is, “will come true” -- rather than simply “this will be his desire” (so Ge [WG]), since I otherwise find it difficult to interpr. the subjunctive.


## 08
The word sumatí-, found in 6a, is repeated here. There it clearly referred to the benevolence or good will of Agni, which the successful priest/poet comes to know. Here I think it has double meaning. On the one hand, it still refers to Agni’s good will, which the poet praises, but it also refers to the good thought, i.e., the poem, that the poet has produced for Agni. This double reading is enabled not only by the usual double meaning of sumatí- and the grammatical ambiguity of the enclitic te (gen. in the first interpr., dat. in the 2nd), but also by the double meaning of √ṛc ‘chant, recite’, which can take as object either the topic/goal of the praise (e.g., V.29.1 árcanti tvā marútaḥ … “The Maruts chant to/praise you”) or the verbal contents of the recitation (V.30.6 tubhyéd eté marútaḥ … árcanti arkám “Just for/to you do these Maruts chant the chant”).

ghóṣi (also VI.5.6) is a controversial form. The grammars/lexica generally take it as a 3rd sg. passive aor. to √ghuṣ ‘hear’; it would take a putative sumatíḥ as subj. and mean “(the good thought) was/is/will be heard” (Old SBE “it resounded here,” sim. WG). The other instance (in VI.5.6) is taken as a neut. adj. ‘laut ertönend’ by Gr, also Old (Noten, contra SBE). Most tr., however, render it as a 2nd sg. act.

impv. “hear!” Though a passive aor. would also be possible in VI.5.6 (ghóṣi mánma “the thought is heard”) and though the pass. aor. interpr. is morphologically impeccable, I think the 2nd sg. act. impv. is the correct interpr., though the morphology is a little troubled. It appears to be a -si imperative, though not built as usual (at least in my view) to an s-aor. subjunctive, but rather to, or alongside, the 1st class thematic pres. ghóṣati; this analysis also requires that a putative *ghoṣ-ṣi has simplified the double sibilant. One of the arguments in favor of a 2nd sg. impv. in VI.6.5 is the relative density of -si impvs. in that context, with two (śróṣi, párṣi) in the preceding hymn (VI.4.7, 8) in that tightly knit Agni cycle. The interpr. of the form as a -si impv. is accepted and argued for by Gotō (1st cl., 131-32 and n. 160, with lit.); it is curious that in WG[otō] this interpr. has been abandoned without comment. The form is disc., in typically indecisive fashion, by Baum (Impv., 46 and 27 [where he seems to accept the -si impv. analysis]).

The Vāvātā or ‘Favorite’ wife in later śrauta ritual is one of the wives of the king who has a series of set functions in the various royal rituals (see, e.g., my Sacrificed Wife passim). The presence of this figure, or of her prototype, may suggest that the lexeme sám √jṛ, found also in the preceding hymn (IV.3.15), may have deeper resonance than simply ‘be welcome, bring harmony’, perhaps something like ‘be in tune with (s.o.)’, referring to perfect harmonious agreement between two people, esp. two people in love. In both IV.3.15 and our passage the feminine song (gír-) / chant (śastí-) would put herself in tune with the masc. god, as a Favorite wife would to her kingly husband. Note that in IV.3.15 the chant is modified by devávātā ‘favored by the gods’, with the same -vātā as here (save for accent). In fact, as Ge points out (for different purposes) our te vāvā́tā is phonologically very close to IV.3.15 devávātā. It might also be that jara(tām) would be reminiscent of jārá- ‘lover’, to add to the erotic mood.

As Re’s tr. makes clear (“Nous souhaitons t’orner, (dans l’espoir d’obtenir) de bons chevaux, de bons chars”), the two adj. sváśvāḥ … suráthāḥ are most likely proleptic: we want to tend the ritual fire in order to get possession of good horses and chariots. This contrasts with the use of sváśva- in 10a.


## 09
sumánas- here recalls the two occurrences of sumatí- in 6a and 8a (see disc.

there); this word two may have dual value: both ‘benevolent, well-disposed’ and ‘having a good mind’, that is, one capable of producing good thoughts in the form of hymns.

The dyumnā́ni of the arí- “the brilliant things of the stranger” that Agni opened up for us in 6d we seem to have thoroughly taken possession of here. The gen. jánānām here corresponds to aryáḥ in 6d.


## 10
Unlike 8c, where I took sváśva- surátha- as proleptic with the priestly subject “we,” here the man who is sváśva- suhiraṇyá- appears to be already rich, with a chariot full of goods -- and therefore most likely the patron of the sacrifice, who (we hope) will redistribute this wealth to us performers via the sacrifice. This may be the purport of sákhā ‘partner’ here. Ge suggests (n. 10ab) that the figure in question is a ruler returning from battle with booty.


## 11
This vs. concerning the poet’s poetic gifts and his lineage, spoken in the 1st ps. sg., seems out of place in this hymn and anticipates the enigmatic hymn IV.5 that follows immediately, which focuses on the mysterious sources of poetic power. Of course, given the mechanical arrangement of the RVic hymn collections, we cannot assume that the hymns had anything to do with each other originally.

Old (SBE), Re think that the poet’s lineage (bandhútā) is with Agni: Old “through my kinship (with thee).” But the next pāda, where the line of descent is traced from his father Gotama, makes that unlikely.

The next question is what to do with maháḥ. Old (SBE) takes it as acc. pl.

object of rujāmi; Ge (/WG) as gen. sg. with vácobhiḥ, referring to the poet’s great (father). With Re I prefer to take maháḥ as adverbial. Although this leaves rujāmi without an object, an object is easily supplied: the root √ruj is typed for the breaking of the Vala cave, particularly in this group of hymns so dominated by that myth. Cf. > 2.15
... áṅgiraso bhavema, ádriṃ rujema ...

> “Might we become Aṅgirases; might
we break the rock.”

On grounds of sense I don’t think maháḥ is gen. with vácobhiḥ because I think the poet is asserting the power of his own poetic gift: he acquired this gift from his father (pāda b), but he is not using his father’s words but his own -- or so I take his proud boast. By casting himself as the subject of the Vala-breaking verb, he is also implicitly asserting his identification with the Aṅgirases, who broke into Vala with their words. Like the speaker(s) of IV.2.15 he seems to be saying “might I become an Aṅgiras.”


## 13
Since the yé of the rel. clause in ab has no obvious referent in the main clause of cd, it is tempting to connect ab with the preceding verse (12), and start a new sentence with 13cd -- esp. because 13a yé pāyávaḥ matches 12c té pāyavaḥ so exactly. But vs. 13 is a repeated vs. (= I.147.3), and so must be interpreted as selfcontained. It is also likely, because of the reference to Māmateya, i.e., Dīrghatamas, that I.147, a Dīrghatamas hymn, is its source, and the vs. has been inserted here secondarily because of the match between the two pāyávaḥ phrases (so Bloomfield, RR ad I.147.3). On the relationship between the relative and main clauses in this vs. see comm. ad I.147.3.
