+++
title = "005"

+++
Agni Vaiśvānara


## 01
Note that the first word of the hymn is vaiśvānará-.

Old (SBE), Ge, and WG all take bṛhád bhā́ḥ as the obj. of dāśema with the dat. agnáye phrase the indirect obj. (e.g., Old “How may we … offer mighty light to … Agni”). I am dubious about this for two reasons, one practical and one grammatical.

First, why would we need to confer light on Agni -- does he not already have it? I suppose “lofty light” might refer to the sun and our ability to make the sun rise by kindling the ritual fire, but the phrase refers to Agni’s own light elsewhere (e.g., VIII.23.5, X.3.1). Or conferring such light upon him might simply mean kindling him. More telling is the grammatical argument: although there are a few other √dāś passages with acc. of something conferred (though normally a ritual offering of some sort; cf. I.71.6 [námaḥ], I.93.3 [havíṣkṛtim]), the overwhelming number of passages have simply a dative of the honoree sometimes with instrumental of what is conferred. Alternatively and considerably less often, the verb can take an acc. of the honoree; cf. the very similar V.41.16 kathā́dāśema námasā sudā́nūn … marútaḥ “How might we serve the Maruts of good drops with reverence?” I therefore think √dāś is participating in two syntactic frames here, 1st with dat. agnáye, then with acc. bṛhád bhā́ḥ, both as the object of honor and service. Re in his n. suggests that bṛhád bhā́ḥ is a “pré-bahuvrīhi,” but in his tr. treats it as an appositive “Haut éclat” going with the 2nd hemistich and modifying the underlying subj. Agni there.

The usual obj. of √stambh is dyā́m ‘heaven’, which is the obj. expected (and supplied) in the frame. The obj. in the simile, ródhas- ‘bulwark’, may have been chosen because it is phonologically reminiscent of ródasī ‘two world-halves’, another way to refer to the cosmic masses. This word serves as obj. to √stambh a number of times with the preverb ví (‘prop apart’), e.g. VI.8.3 (another Vaiśvānara hymn) with Agni as subj.: vy àstabhnād ródasī.


## 03
In the publ. tr. I take dvibárhāḥ as the masc. nom. sg. it appears to be, modifying the subj. However, this particular form several times has to be taken as neut. (I.114.2, VII.8.6, 24.2; see comm. ad VII.24.2), and its position here may make it more likely a modifier of neut. sā́ma, as Old (SBE), Ge, and Re take it. Hence, possibly “a great doubly lofty melody …” I tr. padám twice, as ‘word’ and ‘track’, to bring out the pervasive pun in this hymn.


## 05
As indicated in the publ. intro., this vs. characterizes rival poets as capable of producing a “deep word” (padám … gabhīrám) despite their bad characters. Sāy’s interpr. of this phrase as a deep place, namely hell, fld. by Old in SBE (but decisively rejected by him in Noten) and in part by Doniger, has little to recommend it, esp.

because padá- is the signature word of this hymn and has very specific values in the hymn. It would be a very slender basis on which to found Vedic views of the afterlife.

The form of the verb ajanatā causes interpretational difficulties. It appears to be the 2nd pl. act. impf. to the 1st cl. pres. stem jánati ‘begets’, and so I take it, as do WG (see also Gotō, 1st class, 145 n. 203) and, as a plausible alternative, Old (Noten).

See also Narten (Sig. Aor., 117-18 n. 317). But most interpr. want the verb to be 3rd ps., and if possible, 3rd plural. Since the ending -ata (/-atā) can only be 3rd pl. to an athematic stem, an otherwise unattested root pres. was invented by Gr.; Ge takes it as an 3rd pl. aor.; Re tr. as 3rd pl. but does not comment. As Old points out, lengthening of -ta to -tā is far more common in the 2nd pl. act. than in 3rd ps. middle forms -- another argument in favor of the 2nd pl. Since unsignaled switch between persons is common in RVic discourse, there seems no contextual reason to reject the obvious morphological analysis of ajanatā.

It is striking that the two damning similes compare the badly behaved poets to two types of contemptible females.


## 06
This vs. is difficult both to construe and to render into English, and different interpretations of how to construe it lead to very different views of the meaning of the hymn as a whole. In my view, the poet claims that because of his upright behavior, in contrast to that of the likewise skilled but wicked poets in vs. 5, Agni takes some of the burden of the poetic labor upon himself. Other interpr. believe that the poet is complaining that Agni is imposing a further burden on him, the poet, despite his good behavior.

I take the first two words of the vs., idám me, as a separate clause, with the referent of idám the same as that in the last pāda of the preceding vs., idám padám … gabhīrám “this profound word.” With idám me the poet lays claim to the poetic skill that seems also to characterize the wicked poets.

My view that kíyate starts a new clause is supported by the fact that all other exx. of kíyant- are pāda-initial. In attempting to render the rest of the vs. into parsable English I have scuttled the interrogative feature of the dat. kíyate ‘for how great/small a one?’ An interrogative rendering would be something like “For what such small one (like me) … have you placed …?” With the dat. negated part. áminate I supply as obj. dhā́ma (or dhā́mā[ni]) (with most tr.), in a phrase contrasting with 4c prá yé minánti váruṇasya dhā́ma “those who confound the ordinances of Varuṇa,” which described his rivals and the targets of Agni’s flame.

Given the position of the simile part. ná, the simile should consist only of bhārám ‘burden’, with gurúm ‘heavy’ the quality held in common. But since mánma is neut., gurúm can only modify m. bhārám. This seems to me a minor problem.

The problems of interpr. are esp. acute in the 2nd hemistich and involve esp.

the assessment of the referent and meaning of the accusatives in the d pāda. Some tr.

(I confess I don’t entirely understand Ge’s) take them as an appositive to mánma ‘thought’ in b, referring to the burden that Agni is laying on the poet, with the possibility floated (see Old [SBE], WG n.) that it refers to the later Pṛṣṭha Stotra. But in this type of context the ‘back’ (pṛṣṭhá-) is ordinarily Agni’s (also in cmpds like ghṛtá-pṛṣṭha- ‘ghee-backed’) and the adj. yahvá- modifying it is almost entirely limited to Agni. I therefore think that the pṛṣṭhám phrase refers to Agni’s back (so Ge n. 6d) and that it is a second acc. with dadhātha ‘you have placed’: √dhā ‘place sthg (ACC.) on sthg (ACC.)’ (so, possibly, Ge n. 6d). This is, admittedly and unfortunately, not a standard construction with √dhā, but, then, the usual case expression with √dhā for the location of what has been placed is the locative, while most tr. take the dative phrase in ab to be that location. I do, again, have to admit that √dhā + DAT. ‘establish sthg (ACC) for s.o. (DAT.)’ is common, and this is doubtless what the other tr. are thinking of. However, the strong likelihood that pāda d refers to Agni’s back and Agni’s back can’t be placed on the poet emboldens me to hold to my interpr. I take the dat. phrase as a dative of benefit.


## 07
The first half of the vs. is fairly straightforward. The poet expresses his hope that his dhītí- ‘conception, thought’ will reach tám (most likely Agni, though ‘sacrifice’ is also possible). I take the etym. phrase samanā́samānám as I do in similar phrases in IV.51.8-9 (Dawn), esp. 9ab … samanā́samanī́ḥ … uṣásaś caranti “The Dawns proceed, the same ones in the same way,” referring to the regular repetition of sunrise. Here I think the phrase refers to the repetition of the sacrifice and the ever-renewed Agni; similar is VI.4.1 addressed to Agni evā́no adyá samanā́ samānā́n … yakṣi devā́n “even so for us today sacrifice in the same way to the same gods.” The second hemistich is close to impenetrable; Old (Noten) remarks “Die Dunkelheiten dieses Verses … sind ein Noli me tangere.” As I indicated in the publ.

intro., I think the impossible hapax jábāru that ends the vs. is not meant to be understood but is “a sort of abracadabra, a mystical expression, and the half verse in which it appears encapsulates the profound and transformative secret of the sacrifice.” The meaning “solar disc” first suggested by Sāy. and followed, for want of anything better, by most since (though not by Old or WG), is, in my opinion, worse than useless, in that such a tr. obscures the enigmatic intent. Note first that the word rhymes with cā́ru in the preceding pāda and echoes the important word bhārám in 6b; it also has unusual phonology -- with internal plain b and the impression of slightly skewed reduplication: jábaru like jabhā́ra. (Note that this latter pf. shows up several times nearby: IV.7.4 ā́jabhruḥ, jabhárat IV.2.6, 12.2; in fact a surprising percentage of the RVic forms of this pf. are found in IV: jabhartha 19.9, jabhāra 18.4, 13; 27.2, 4.) It also appears to contain the mysterious suffix -āru- mostly found in nonce formations, on which see comm. ad III.30.8. And perhaps most important it’s encoded into a repeated phonetic pattern involving rup: ... cā́ru pṛ́śner / ágre rupá ā́rupitaṃ jábāru // pra ...

With Gr (s.v. cárman-) I interpr. sasásya cárman “on the hide of the grain” as a ref. to the barhis, establishing the ritual ground as the locus of the mystery. See further ad IV.7.7.

As often the mention of Pṛśni brings obscurity in its train. Here one question is what noun to supply in the phrase cā́ru pṛ́śneḥ, which recurs in 10b gúhyaṃ cā́ru pṛ́śneḥ. There are two good candidates, ‘name’ and ‘udder’, as Ge also points out.

The adj. gúhya- in the latter passages suggests ‘name’, since it regularly modifies nā́man-; cf. also vs. 3c padáṃ ná gór ápagūḍham “the word hidden like the track of the cow,” with a form of √guh ‘hide’ and a verbal referent, as well as III.5.6 (see below) cā́ru nā́ma. But nearby IV.3.10 connects Pṛśni with an udder, and IV.7.7 with similar phraseology also has an udder. I do not think an informed choice can be made, and I’m also not sure it matters -- though I weakly favor ‘name’. See comm. ad vs. 10 below. With most others I take ā́rupita- as a back formation to the -p-causative of √ruh ‘ascend’ found 1st in the Brāh. See also Schindler (Wurzelnom., s.v. rúp-), EWA s.vv. RODH2 , ROP.

The root noun rúp- is likewise obscure (see, e.g., Schindler, s.v.). I tr. ‘mount’, deriving it from the same secondary causative formation as gave rise to -rupita-.

However, this is the merest guess (though coinciding with Bl [see RR ad III.5.5, with ref. to JAOS 27]), and the existence of a parallel phrase ripó ágram in III.5.5 with different vocalism (rip- vs. rup-) adds to the uncertainty. The sequence III.5.5-6 resembles our passage in other ways, esp. in III.5.6c sasásya cárma, as well as the cā́ru nā́ma mentioned above. Most important is the fact that III.5.5a is identical to pāda d of our next vs., save for ripáḥ vs. rupáḥ. The root noun rúp- is also found in X.13.3, in an obscure context in an omphalos vs., where it is found, as here, with a form of the root √ruh (though without the secondary -p-), aroham.


## 08
Opinion is divided as to whether pravā́cyam … me means “to be proclaimed to me” or “… by me,” and the dat. enclitic makes either interpr. possible (dative agents being found with gerundives). I take it as the former: the vs. (or at least bc) seems to concern the esoteric education of the poet. The unidentified “they,” subjects of vadanti (b) and (ápa …) vrán (c), convey these secret teachings. I doubt that we are supposed to know who “they” are, and Re’s impersonal “on” (“On parle …”) may capture the intent better than a literal tr.

The hapax niṇík ‘privately, secretly’ is apparently derived from niṇyá- ‘secret, private’, though the details are disputed. See EWA s.v. niṇyá-.

Both Ge and Re in different ways make heavy weather of vā́r (ein Tor and une ouverture respectively), but there seems no reason not to take it as ‘water’ (as elsewhere), as Old rather scornfully observes (“Warum nicht vā́r ‘Wasser’? ‘Wasser der Kuh’ ist die Milch”). The reference is of course to the Vala myth: they uncover secret teachings as they do the light (here light = water = milk) of the cows enclosed in the Vala cave.

As noted ad vs. 7, pāda d is identical to III.5.5a. Exactly what is meant here is not clear (what a surprise!), but if, as I suggest, “the tip of the mount” (agré rupáḥ) in 7c refers to the ritual ground, perhaps the ritual earthly fire or the top of that fire, it may be that “the track of the bird” (padáṃ véḥ) is the track of the sun, the heavenly fire. See publ. intro. to III.5. If it is a reference to the sun, it would provide a good transition to the next vs. ### 09
This vs. brings us to the familiar ritual situation: dawn and the rising of the sun at the moment of the dawn sacrifice. After the obscurities of recent vss. it comes as a relief.

Flg. Sāy, all the standard tr. (save for Old SBE) take viveda as 1st ps. This is certainly possible, but there is nothing in the context that imposes it. Old supplies “he” without identification; I think Dawn is the possible discoverer.

## 10
With Old (Noten, explicitly contra SBE) I take the whole vs. as a single sentence, with the final word jihvā́an instr. parallel to āsā́ending pāda a, both referring to Agni’s flame. The other standard tr. take cd as a separate clause, with jihvā́the nom. subj.

The vs. continues the focus on the kindling of the ritual fire at the dawn sacrifice. The parents in pāda a are the kindling sticks, at least in my opinion (also explicitly Re). For the phrase gúhyaṃ cā́ru pṛ́śneḥ cf. cā́ru pṛ́śneḥ in 7c and disc.

there. In both cases the phrase seems to encapsulate the mystery of the ritual. The verb ámanuta ‘pondered’ or ‘brought to mind’ somewhat favors supplying ‘name’ as the referent of the phrase. Cf. in this Agni cycle IV.1.16a té manvata prathamáṃ nā́ma dhenóḥ “They brought to mind the first name of the milk-cow,” also X.68.7 bṛ́haspátir ámata hí tyád āsāṃ, nā́ma svarī́ṇāṃ sádane gúhā yát “For Br̥haspati brought to mind this very name of these who were resounding (with)in the seat -- (the name) which was hidden.” The two locations identified in c, “the furthest track of the mother cow” (mātúṣ padé paramé … góḥ) and “nearby” (ánti) suggest that the mysterious hidden substance is both on the ritual ground and in heaven or the equivalent. (See 11cd and 12cd.)


## 11
I tr. injunc. aor. voce as an immediate past, because I think the poet is referring to his own poetic production in this very hymn. (The middle voice strengthens the sense of self-reference.) However, the verb could of course express a neutral present, as the standard tr. take it (e.g., Ge “Ich spreche”), or even a future/modal (“I shall proclaim”). I take the referent of idám at the end of b to be ṛtá-, which begins the vs.: the poet has hope for Agni’s largesse in just the case that his speech is/contains truth. He phrases this as a conditional (“if”), but, with the confidence he has gained in the course of the hymn, one assumes he is certain that his speech is the truth that was revealed to him in the preceding vss.

My suggestion that the locations in 10c are heaven and the ritual ground is supported by the straightforward assertion here that Agni has power over wealth both on earth and in heaven.

IV.5.11-12: The accented demonst. asyá in 11c and in the repeated phrase no asyá (12a, c) causes minor interpretational difficulty because on the basis of its accent it should be adjectival. In 11c it anticipates víśvam in the izafe-like rel. cl. yád dha víśvam, as well as dráviṇam in its expansion in d. In 12a the two neut. interrogatives in a row (kím … kád) invite a differential tr., hence my rendering of the first as a question marker rather than a neut. pronominal. But the case disharmony of the phrase asyá dráviṇam is curious; it is generally interpr. as an attempt at a partitive expression, which I think is correct -- though I’m not entirely happy with Ge’s notion that dráviṇam has been “attracted” out of the genitive by kím. If kim is taken as a neut.

prn., the phrase could be tr. “what [=how much] wealth of this (wealth) is ours.” For no asyá in 12c, see next comm. ### 12
It is difficult to render the construction in 12cd literally without losing its sense, and the publ. tr. has rearranged the structure of the subordinate cl. in favor of parsability. In my view, all of cd is a relative cl. with neut. yád as the subordinator. It forms an acc. phrase paramáṃ yád … padám “which highest track/footstep” (see padé paramé in 10c). This acc. is limited by the gen. phrase ádhvanaḥ … no asyá “of this road of ours.” The acc. phrase is construed as an acc. of (extent of) space with áganma: “on/along which track we have gone.” So the frame of bcd would read literally “… you have announced to us in secret what highest track of this road of ours we have gone on.” (“In secret” [guhā́] could instead be construed within the rel.

clause “the track we have gone on in secret,” without damaging the interpr.) The rel. clause also contains a simile, réku padáṃ ná nidānā́ḥ “like the spurned/scorned on an empty track,” with nom./acc. matching the subj. (“we”) and acc. goal (“track”) of the frame. Because simile and frame share the acc. padám it appears only once, displaced to the simile from where we might expect to find it in the frame (and in fact to the wrong part of the simile with ná in the wrong place; we should expect *réku ná padám).

The simile raises another question: why is our progress subject to this negative comparison? The standard response to this is that Agni is supposed to tell us whether we’re on the wrong road or not, since the end of it is hidden from us. I think the point is more subtle: the wealth and treasure that we want (and have obtained) from Agni are not material, but rather the secret teachings and poetic enigmas we have learned in the course of the hymn. But to the vulgar and uninitiated, it looks as if we are going down a blind alley, heading to a dry hole with no material goods to show for it. As vs. 14 shows, those who scorn us for the path we have chosen will themselves be scorned for lacking the true poetic gift.


## 13
The theme of the journey in vs. 12 morphs slightly into the image of a race or similar contest.


## 14
With Old and Re I supply vácasā (from pāda a) with ā́satā, rather than taking the latter as ‘non-being’ vel sim., because that stem is regularly associated with speech.


## 03
The subject must change between pādas a and b, since the subj. of a is fem.

and b contains a masc. nom. sg. (urāṇáḥ). I supply Agni as the subj. of b, as he clearly is of the repeated pāda III.19.2c. So also Old (SBE); others are less explicit.

The standard tr. take urāṇáḥ as transitive, with devátātim as obj. (e.g., Ge “die Götterschar sich erwählend”) (also in the identical pāda III.19.2c). But in all clear cases urāṇá- is passive (as opposed to trans. vṛṇāná-), and it seems esp. unlikely that the occurrence here would be transitive when the next vs. (4d) contains the same form in the same metrical position (verse-final) in clear passive usage (cf. also the next hymn IV.7.8c). Moreover it is not entirely clear to me what “choosing” the divine assembly would mean, whereas Agni’s being chosen as a priest is a standard trope. The occurrences of devátāti- in vss. 1b and 9d show that the divine assemblage was present at the ritual and that Agni was acting on their behalf. Taking urāṇáḥ as the passive it ordinarily is leaves the acc. devátātim ungoverned grammatically, but in the publ. tr. I construe it loosely with pradakṣiṇít. It is possible that it could instead be loosely construed with urāṇáḥ “being chosen as priest for the divine assemblage”).

On akrá- see comm. ad I.189.7.

It may seem odd that the wooden post “anoints” the sacrificial animal tied to it, and in fact WG dissociate pādas c and d and make Agni the subject of d. But this striking turn of phrase can be explained both as a metaphor and by the principle of ritual transfer. Metaphorically “anoint” can simply mean “make ritually fit for sacrifice,” and this may be in play here: tying the animal to the post is a regular step in the animal sacrifice. But more interesting is the ritual transfer. In the one hymn in the RV devoted to the post (III.8), the post itself is anointed by the priests (III.8.1a añjánti tvā́m … vánaspate), and later in that hymn the mechanism for that anointing is made clear: the offering ladles have been stretched over the posts (III.8.7b yatásrucaḥ). Thus the posts dripping with ghee presumably transfer the ghee to the attached animals, anointing them in their turn. Note that in our vs. the first pāda concerns the outstretched ghee-filled ladle (yatā́… ghṛtā́cī), and we can assume that the same ritual sequence obtains here: ladle anoints post, which anoints animals.


## 04
The standard tr. take the two loc. phrases in pāda a as real locationals, but I consider it unlikely that the Adhvaryu (who is Agni himself) would stand on the barhis, which would unhelpfully go up in smoke. Rather these should be loc. absolutes, as Old (SBE) takes them. In this particular case the loc. absolutes seem to be used, in conjunction with the aor. indic. ūrdhváḥ … asthāt, to indicate two layers of prior action before the present indicatives indicating the current ongoing ritual action, namely the circumambulation associated with the animal sacrifice (see publ.

intro.), here expressed by eti in pári … eti in cd. The two loc. absolutes express the first layer of action: the barhis must be strewn and the fire kindled. Once the fire has been kindled, there comes the second layer of action, resulting directly from the first: the fire stands upright -- that is, catches and flames up. Only then can the firebrand be taken out and the circumambulation (pári … eti) begun. Thus, the aor. does express its usual sense of immediate past action, but English “has stood upright” does not capture this sense here. It might be better “Once the ritual grass had been strewn and the fire kindled, the Adhvaryu stood upright ... (Now) Agni circles ...” I thank IH for causing me to think this through more thoroughly.


## 05
The stem mitá-dru- (5x) makes formal difficulties. If its 2nd member is a root noun belonging to √dru ‘run’, it should of course have the shape *-drut-; root-noun cmpds also typically have accent on the root noun. Because of the former problem, Scar (243-44) interprets -drú- in raghu-drú- as a -u-stem deriv. of √drā ‘run’. The context here, however, suggests at least a folk-etymological connection with √dru ‘run’, since pāda c opens with a finite form of that root: drávanty asya vājíno ná śókāḥ “His flames run like prize-winners,” which seems like a parallel expression to pāda a mitádrur eti “mitádru he goes.” (Note that in two of the five mitádru- passages the adj. modifies vājínaḥ [VII.38.7, X.64.6].) Several factors may contribute to the anomalous shape of the compound. First, the rhyming mitá-jñu- ‘having fixed/firm knees’, where -jñu- is not a root noun but the reduced form of jā́nu- ‘knee’. Second, there is of course a noun parallel in formation to jā́nu-/jñú-, namely dáru-/drú- ‘wood’. The reduced form is found as 2nd member in at least one cmpd., su-drú- ‘(having) good wood’. It is possible that the existence of this homonymous form might have overridden the rule that added -t- to root nouns ending in short resonants.

It is even possible that mitá-dru- actually contains the ‘wood’ word -- or at least that such a pun could be actualized: the cmpd could mean ‘having wood fixed (in it)’ referring to the fire. At least the three singular occurrences of the stem all refer to Agni (at least in my view), though the two plurals do not. Assuming that at least one reading of the cmpd contains a (pseudo-)root noun to √dru, the question then remains what the first member mitá- belongs to. The default assumption is √mi ‘fix’ as in mitájñu-, but my tr. reflects a deriv. from √mā ‘measure’.


## 06
A rare example of a non-nominative concessive use of the pres. part. of √as ‘be’.


## 07
The first pāda contains three words not otherwise found in the RV: sā́tur jánitor ávāri. Only the first is troublesome: though only occurring here, ávāri is clearly the passive aor. to √vṛ ‘obstruct’ (see váranta in 6c), and the abl. inf. jánitoḥ is structurally transparent and is also found post-RV. The hapax sā́tuḥ is a different matter, however. Neither its root affiliation nor its grammatical identity is clear. Gr takes it as a -tu-stem to √sani ‘win, gain’, with the meaning ‘der empfangende Mutterleib’, but the semantic extension envisioned is quite fantastic, and we should in any event expect a full-grade *sánitu- (note immed. following jánitu- to the rhyming seṭ root). Ge tr. “Natur” (with ?) and suggests, rather wildly, that it’s derived from a root √sā = as, an idea that must underlie Re’s “l'être,” though he cannily does not comment. Old (SBE) tr. “mother,” but does not venture an etymology. Mayrhofer (KEWA s.v. sā́tuḥ) summarizes the speculation but does not adjudicate. WG have proposed a different solution, that it’s a -tu-stem to √sā ‘bind’, and tr. “Von dessen Erzeugung das Anfesseln nicht abgehalten worden ist,” noting that Agni must be controlled after he is born. Although the morphology works better than the other suggestions, the meaning proposed seems rather contorted.

I have a more radical proposal -- that the phonological complex should be divided into sā́+ ā́/átur. The former is the feminine pronoun, picking up fem. tanū́- found in the loc. tanvī̀in the preceding pāda (6d). Although the pronoun would not be in its standard init. position, it’s worth noting that the position of fem. sā́is more variable than that of sá and also that both the neg. ná and the rel. prn. yásya might be expected to be fronted. As for the proposed second part, there are several possibilities. In my opinion the most likely is that it is the gen. sg. of a -tar-stem built to √ad ‘eat’, *ád-tar- > *át-tar-, showing the same reduction of the internal cluster as in (átri-/) atrín- ‘devouring’ (at least by the etym. I favor). (The reduction would most probably take place in weak forms with the suffixal shape -tr- [e.g., instr. *ád- tr-ā > *át-tr-ā >*átrā] and spread to the gen./abl.) For textual support cf. X.79.4 jā́yamāno mātárā gárbho atti “while being born, the embryo eats his two mothers [=kindling sticks],” a description of Agni’s birth, as here. Less likely, but not completely impossible, is an analysis as the gen. sg. of the Indo-Iranian *ā́tar- ‘fire’ (Aves. ātar-) treated as a -tar-stem. (By Stanley Insler’s very attractive, and unfortunately unpublished, etymology, the same word is also preserved in mātaríśvan-, whose initial m is owing to missegmentation.) I am not entirely sure what pāda b contributes to the meaning -- perhaps the point is that the kindling sticks have kept seeking to produce fire and therefore his birth, depicted in pāda a, has taken place without a hitch. Note that this is the only occurrence in the RV of the full dual dvandva mātárā-pitárā.


## 08
The part. saṃvásānāḥ is generally ascribed to √vas ‘dwell’, and the standard tr. ‘dwelling together’ makes good sense as a descriptor of fingers. However, forms unambiguously belonging to this root are active, and there is no root pres. or aor.

Gotō (1st Class, 295 n. 698) therefore assigns the participle to √vas ‘wear’, which of course has a well-attested medial root pres., and tr. ‘gleichgekleidet’, an interpr.

maintained in WG. I find the morphological arg. persuasive, but the meaning somewhat elusive: what do fingers wear when making fire? (I do not think we should assume gloves.) I take it as a pun. In support of ‘dwell’, consider saṃvásana- ‘joint dwelling’ (IX.86.17).

Pāda c contains another hapax, atharyàḥ. This is generally taken as the gen. sg.

of a fem. atharī́-, often interpr. as a female animal, whose tooth is the object of comparison with Agni’s flame. See, e.g., Old’s extensive disc. ad VII.1.1 (Noten II, p.

2), where he tentatively opts for a mare. Hoffmann suggests rather (registered in EWA I.805) that it belongs with atharvī́- ‘following the way’ (athar-vī́) (I.112.10), with the loss of v on metrical grounds, while WG take it simply as a fem. -ī-stem to áthar-, which they take as a root noun cmpd *h2at-h2ar-íh2, and tr. ‘Wegzieherin’.

The publ. tr. ‘enveloped in flame’ starts from Hoffmann’s preform with -vī́-, but deviates in two regards. First it takes athar- with atharyú- with the meaning ‘flame, flaming’, and second it analyses the 2nd member as the root noun to √vyā ‘envelop’ (cf. hiraṇya-vī́- ‘enveloped in gold’, Scar 502). The phrase atharyò ná dántam would then be semantically parallel to the bahuvrīhi śúci-dant- (2x, of Agni) ‘having blazing teeth’. I am not at all happy with my analysis, however -- primarily because I am dubious about the existence of an athar- ‘flame’ and because the loss of v suggested by Hoffmann seems difficult to motivate. I would therefore tentatively withdraw the publ. tr., though I have nothing better to substitute. I wonder if the word is not implicated in the same interpretational difficulty as sā́tuḥ discussed above (7a). I doubt that a female animal is at issue.


## 09
These variously colored horses of Agni’s are, of course, his flames. The verb in d, ah(u)vanta ‘called’, can refer to the crackling of the flames: actual horses don’t ordinarily ‘call’ anyone. However, I think we’re also dealing with a pun, with ā́…  ah(u)vanta a phonological scrambling of *ā́… avahanta ‘conveyed’. Cf. III.19.4 sá ā́ vaha devátātim …, VII.1.18 .... vakṣi devátātim ácha, with the same obj.


## 10
This vs. contains yet another hapax, duvasanā́so in a, but in this case the form seems to have been generated to form a pair with its phonological near match tuviṣvaṇáso in b (with its last two syllables also matching preceding śyenā́so, which it modifies). It is generally connected (see Re ad loc., EWA s.v. dūrá-) with dūrá- ‘distant’, dávīyas-/daviṣṭha ‘further, furthest’, but the exact morphology is unclear.

On semantic grounds it seems unlikely to be related to dúvas- ‘friendship’. For a similar deformation of this lexical complex, see duvanyasát in IV.40.2, which also owes some of its phonological shape to its formulaic partner.


## 11
Ge and Re interpret pāda b as having three finite verbs: śáṃsāti, yájate, and ví … dhāḥ, subjunctive, pres. indicative, and injunctive respectively. The first and third go well together (esp. if the injunctive is imperatival, as dhāḥ so often is), but the indicative does not sit well between them. By contrast Gr interprets yájate as the dat. sg. of the act. pres. part., rather than as a middle 3rd sg. With Old (SBE) and WG, I follow Gr in the morphological analysis, but both Old and WG construe the part.

with vy ū̀dhāḥ. I think it belongs rather with śáṃsati, both because of the position of the ū and because of a nearby parallel passage also in an Agni hymn, IV.16.2 śáṃsāti ukthám … cikitúṣe … “He will recite his solemn speech to the one who attends to it,” with a dat. participle in this formula. The referent of yájate is Agni; note that he is called the superior sacrificer (yájīyān) in 1b, so yájate forms a ring with that first mention.

It is not clear what obj. to supply with ví … dhāḥ ‘apportion’. It generally takes goods or the like elsewhere, hence my ‘treasures’, though I am tempted by Re’s “tu répartis (les rôles)” -- that is, Agni distributing ritual roles and ritual speech to the various participants.

“Laud of Āyu” (śáṃsam āyóḥ; also V.3.4) must refer to Agni, however odd the expression seems to be -- rather like referring to someone as “the toast of the town.” Of course, one of Agni’s standing epithets is the cmpd. nárā-śáṃsa-, of which śáṃsa- āyóḥ is simply an analytic variant. For further disc. see comm. ad VI.24.2 and II.34.6.
