+++
title = "007"

+++
Agni Intro.: The publ. intro. states that Agni’s role as messenger is first mentioned in vs. 3; this should be corrected to vs. 4.


## 01
Apnavāna appears with the Bhṛgus also in VIII.102.4, but nothing more is known of him (cf. Mayr., Personenname s.v.). Scar (366-67), though without disc., renders it not as a sg. PN, but as a nom. pl. adj. modifying the Bhṛgus (“die reichen (?) Bhṛgus”), presumably to a stem *ápnavan-, roughly parallel to ápnasvant-.

However, the usage in VIII.102.4 makes it clear that at least in that passage it is a PN. In c virurucúḥ gives a bad cadence, and by meaning it could easily belong to the redupl. aor. arūruca-. The same pāda-final sequence (save for accent) … bhṛ́gavo ví rurucuḥ is also found at X.122.5. It is therefore tempting (see Old [Noten], Arnold [Ved. Metre 128] for the temptation) to lengthen the reduplicating vowel. However, the undeniable 3rd pl. pf. ending (aor. should be *rūrucan) and the existence of other transitive exx. of rurucuḥ in other metrical positions (see Kü 431) temper the temptation. Still, I’d be inclined to read *virūrucuḥ and assume that the stem has been secondarily incorporated into the pf. For further disc. see comm. ad IV.16.4.


## 02
The point of the abrupt question opening this vs. must be that mortals have established Agni in his ritual role (vs. 1, 2cd), but Agni is not reliably fulfilling this role by manifesting himself at the proper times.


## 03
This vs. continues the syntactic frame of vs. 2, with the nom. pl. subj.

(“mortals” of 2d) modified by the pres. part. páśyantaḥ and Agni in the acc. sg.

vícetasam in pāda a is a pun, playing on the standard ambiguity of the root √cit, which means both ‘perceive’ and ‘appear’. Referring to Agni’s mental qualities, adjacent to ṛtā́vānam ‘truthful’, it means ‘discriminating’, but the simile in b, “like heaven with its stars,” actualizes the ‘appear’ sense.

The “laughter” of Agni is the merry crackling of the fire.


## 04
This vs. also appears to continue the syntax of vs. 3, with another acc. phrase referring to Agni (pāda a), though given the 3rd pl. verb in c (ā́jabhruḥ) that could govern the acc., the vs. can be syntactically self-contained.

## 4cd-05
Together these vss. reprise the first vs. (and the beginning of the 2nd).

Agni’s association with the Bhṛgus of 1c is tightened by the adj. of appurtenance bhṛ́gavan- in 4d, and viśé-viśe returns from 1d. In 5a we find ānuṣák as in 2a. The verb ní ṣedire ‘have set down’ (5b), though etym. unrelated, is the transitive equivalent in ritual discourse of dhāyi (1a) ‘has been installed’, and its object Agni is identified as hótāram … yájiṣṭham, the words used of him as subject of dhāyi in vs. 1 (1b hótā yájiṣṭhaḥ). The root √dhā, insistent in 1a dhāyi dhātṛ́bhiḥ, is not absent here: see dhā́mabhiḥ in 5d. Meanwhile the signature root of this section of the hymn is √cit, which appears once in each of the first 5 vss., except for 4: 1d citrám, 2b cétanam, 3a vícetasam, 5b cikitvā́ṃsam.

## 06-07
Though vs. 6 belongs metrically and syntactically with what precedes -- it is in Anuṣṭubh like vss. 2-5 and the accusative descriptive phrases hang off vs. 5 -- it belongs thematically with vs. 7, as noted in the publ. intro. Both vss. treat the mystery of the ritual fire, and being at the center of the hymn, they form a sort of omphalos.


## 06
This vs. is structured as a series of paradoxes, one per pāda. The least clear is in pāda a, since there is only one qualifier, the loc. śáśvatīṣu mātṛ́ṣu “in ever new mothers,” which must be construed with vītám ‘enveloped’ in b. The paradox there is that ordinarily one has only one mother and that mother is not self-renewing. The physical reference must be to the pieces of wood (his mothers) in which fire inheres and from which he flashes out one by one. This physical image is developed in b: the fire is within wood -- therefore apparently in a fixed place -- but is unfixed, in that it is in constant motion in and over the sticks of wood. In c the fire inherent in the wood, therefore hidden, is also bright when it catches. Note another instance of the root √cit, citrám (matching the same word in 1d). And finally in d, when the fire catches it’s easy to see and therefore to find, but its movements are unpredictable.


## 07
This vs., particularly the first pāda, has been subjected to a variety of interpretations, which I will not pursue in detail here. The vs. is reminiscent of, though far less difficult than, IV.5.7, and in both cases I think it concerns the ritual and the layout of the ritual ground. The loc. phrase sasásya … víyutā “at the separation of the grain” I take as a reference to the spreading of the barhis, the ritual grass; it seems to correspond to the loc. phrase in IV.5.7c sasásya cárman “on the hide of the grain.” See also V.21.4, where Agni is urged to sit “on the womb of grain” (sasásya yónim). “At the same udder” (sásminn ū́dhan) is also found in nearby IV.10.8, also with apparent reference to the sacrifice or the ritual ground.

## 07-08
On 3rd sg. veḥ (√vī) in 7d, see comm. ad II.5.3. Here the form serves as a pivot, veḥ in 8a having the more morphologically orthodox 2nd ps. reference. The near identity of the two adjacent phrases, 7d #vér adhvarā́ya and 8a #vér adhvarásya (dūtyā̀ni), requires us to consider them together. The first is clearly 3rd sg. (with nom. agníḥ in the preceding pāda, nom. ṛtā́vā in the same pāda). The 2nd ps. ref. of the second only emerges in pāda 8c, with 2nd sg. verb īyase. The poet seems to want first to enforce the 3rd ps. reference of the verb (even in 8ab the nom. pf. participles vidvā́n and cikitvā́n appear to continue the 3rd ps.) and then require us to construct a paradigm: 2nd sg. vés [sandhi vér], 3rd sg. vés [sandhi vér], like 2nd sg. (ā́)var, 3rd sg.

(ā́)var, which I invoked ad II.5.3 to explain the anomalous 3rd sg. vés. We can see this sequence as a variant on poetic repair.

The near repetition of the VP in 8a also clarifies the construction of the verb in 7d, with gapped object. I take dat. adhvarā́ya (7d) and gen. adhvarásya (8a) as filling essentially the same functional role.


## 08
The VP √vid āródhanaṃ diváḥ (a variant of our vidúṣṭaro divá āródhanāni) occurs in the next hymn, IV.8.2, 4, assuring that the acc. here is governed by the comparative to the pf. part. vidúṣṭara-. With most (though not Gr, WG) I take āródhana- as belonging with √ruh ‘climb’ (/√rudh ‘grow’), not √rudh ‘obstruct’. On the difficulties in sorting out these roots, see EWA s.v. RODH2 .


## 09
My interpr. of this vs. differs from the standard ones in several ways. First, in b most tr. take vápuṣām íd ékam as a nominal sentence: “(this is) one of the wonders.” In contrast, I take b as describing the moment of the birth of the ritual fire: a single physical flame rising from the wood, though it is well known that Agni has many forms (vápūṃṣi e.g., III.1.8, 18.5, 55.9). Thus, ékam modifies arcíḥ, and the pāda is a single clause.

Pādas bc then sketch a double paradox: the beam of the just-born Agni is single, though he has many forms and though a number of mothers conceive him as an embryo (dádhate ha gárbham). Pāda c also contains another paradox: his mothers conceive him though they are unimpregnated (ápravītā[ḥ]). My interpr. depends on reading pl. ápravītāḥ contra the Pp, which has singular -ā -- followed by Gr. and by all the standard tr., which also then must take dádhate as a thematic 3rd sg. (or perhaps a short-vowel subjunctive). With Old (Noten), I take dádhate as the expected indic. 3rd plural mid. to the redupl. pres. to √dhā and ápravītā as representing ápravītāḥ in sandhi. The same form, in the pl., is found in the very similar passage III.55.5 antárvatīḥ suvate ápravītā(ḥ), which also describes Agni’s “virgin birth”: “Having (him) within, (though) unimpregnated they give birth to (him).” Agni’s multiple mothers also figure earlier in our own hymn, 6a.

The publ. tr. takes pāda d as a subordinate clause, still under the control of yád beginning pāda c, primarily because of the accent on bhávasi. However, it is quite possible that d is a separate main clause (“immediately at birth, you become a messenger”) with the verbal accent owing to the immediately following íd. Many of the exx. given by Gr (no. 5, s.v. íd) of accented verbs followed by íd are pāda-initial and therefore non-probative (since they would be accented anyway), but there is a sturdy residue of non-initial apparent main clause verbs with accent.


## 10
An undeniable ex. of a predicated perfect part., dádṛśānam.

On the supposed separate root √di ‘destroy’, see comm. ad III.34.1.


## 11
Rather than supplying a verb to govern ánnā (e.g., Ge “die Speisen (verzehrend)”), I allow tṛṣúṇā ‘thirsting (for)’ to govern the acc. In b the standard tr. supply ‘wind’: “he makes the thirsty (wind) his messenger.” I resist this because it is Agni who is always the messenger (e.g., in this hymn 4a, 8a, 8c, 9d), and so I think it more likely that in this case Agni is making some part of himself (flame) into that messenger. A small problem is the masc.

gender of tṛṣúm: the words for ‘flame, blaze’ in this hymn are neut. (arcís- 9b, śocís5c, 10b). However, a word like m. śóka- is always available, or we could attribute the masc. of tṛṣúm to attraction to dūtám or even take it as the modifier of dūtám (“he makes [his flame] into a thirsty messenger”).
