+++
title = "008"

+++
Agni As noted in the publ. intro., this hymn shares much phraseology with the immediately preceding IV.7.


## 01
The cmpd viśvá-vedas- is always at least potentially ambiguous. In general most other tr. interpr. it as ‘all-knowing’ (lit. ‘having all knowledge’); certainly in this passage that is the dominant rendering. However, as an independent noun, védasonly means ‘possession, property’, and I think that in most (maybe all) occurrences viśvá-vedas- has that value -- though the ‘knowledge’ interpr. may be a secondary one. In this case Agni’s having all property to distribute to us may well be of more practical importance to us than his omniscience. The larger context cuts both ways: the next three vss. all have verbal forms of √vid ‘know’ (2a véda, 3a veda, 4c vidvā́n), which might favor the “all knowledge” interpr., but the obj. of ‘knows’ in the next vs. is the depository of goods (vásu-dhiti-), which might favor the “possessions” interpr.; note also his giving of goods in 3c (dā́ti … vásu).

The anomalous 1st sg. ṛñjase (also V.13.6, VI.15.1, 4, X.76.1; possibly VIII.4.17) belongs with other -se 1st sg. forms like stuṣe ‘I (will) praise’. As the context here shows, despite its likely meaning ‘aim/stretch out straight’, rñjase patterns with those other verbs semantically, in expressing an act of praise or reverence -- however they came into being. There is of course abundant literature on the subject; see recently Jasanoff 2016.


## 02
It is quite possible that vásudhiti- here is a bahuvrīhi ‘having the deposit(ing) of goods’ vel sim., as it can be elsewhere. It could then refer to the earth (later, of course, called vasudhā) in contrast to heaven, which is found in the next pāda; the two pādas share the verb véda.


## 03
With Lub. I take dā́ti as a contracted root-aor. subjunctive. Unfortunately the root syllable never requires a disyllabic reading.


## 05
In the publ. tr. I tr. the first rel. cl. (in ab) as descriptive, while the 2nd one (in c) is predicative. In part the decision depends on what the temporal value of dadāśúḥ in the first clause is -- presential or preterital. Kü (242-45) allows both and in fact tr.

other examples of this pf. ambiguously, with awkward parentheses, e.g., II.27.12 “Wer … auf(ge)wartet (hat).” (He does not tr. this passage.) The publ. tr. takes dadāśúḥ as preterital, expressing the past actions that should allow us to thrive now.

However, it is possible that the actions of the verbs in the two rel. cl. (dadāśúḥ … indhaté) are sequential and both presential and should both be taken as predicated: hence “May we be those who do pious service to Agni … and, thriving, kindle him.” Most tr. take puṣyántaḥ as transitive: “cause him to thrive,” but puṣyáti only takes Inhaltsakk. or accusatives of respect. Moreover, the point of the té syāma yé … clauses is surely that our pious actions should lead us to thrive.


## 08
With Old (Noten) I take the gen. pl. carṣanīnā́m and mā́nuṣānām as dependent on vípraḥ, rather than making them dependent on a supplied object as most tr. do. Either way, some object needs to be supplied with áti … vidhyati; I’ve added ‘obstacles’ as a place-holder. The only other occurrence of áti √vyadh in the RV has “the backs of the mountains” as obj. (VIII.96.2, the Emuṣa myth), which certainly doesn’t fit here. However, in that passage the backs of the mountains were pierced by an archer, and archery is surely at issue here as well: kṣiprá- ‘quick, snapping’ is construed twice with dhánvan- ‘bow’ (II.24.8 kṣipréṇa dhánvanā, IX.90.3 kṣiprá-dhanvan-), once with íṣu- ‘arrow’ (VII.46.1 kṣipréṣu-). ## 009 Agni


## 01
For obvious real-world reasons Agni [=fire] would not sit on the ritual grass, because it would go up in flames (cf. comm. ad IV.6.4). But Agni regularly brings the other gods to sit on this grass, and so the mention of his coming here and of the “god-seeking” (devayú-) people may have made the action seem appropriate.


## 02
On prāvī́- see comm. ad I.34.4.


## 05
On pāda a see comm. ad VI.2.10, which contains the identical pāda.


## 08
The diction in this vs. is somewhat difficult to apply to the chariot that is its subject. What does it mean for a chariot to be “difficult to deceive/trick” (dūḷábha-, reprised from 2a)? Perhaps it always follows the right route? And the lexeme pári √(n)aś, which barely exists (an infinitive in I.54.1), in conjunction with viśvátaḥ should mean “reach around/encircle on all sides,” again an odd action to ascribe to a chariot. Given the paint-by-numbers style of the hymn, I attribute these lapses to an inattentive or unskilled poet. Note the careless combustion in vs. 1.
