+++
title = "010"

+++
Agni On the unusual meter of this hymn and its interaction with the syntactic and semantic organization, see publ. intro.


## 01
With most interpr., I supply ‘sacrifice’ with tám in pāda a, as the object of the verb ṛdhyā́ma in d.

The accent on ṛdhyā́ma is anomalous within Oldenberg’s persuasive characterization of the meter of this hymn, since by this analysis ṛdhyā́ma is the main verb and interior to its Triṣṭubh pāda. I assume it acquired this accent redactionally after the meter was misanalyzed, with a pāda break inserted just before the verb. So also WG.


## 03
Because it begins the second 5-syllable pāda, bhávā is correctly accented.

svàr ṇá jyótiḥ could be take as a quasi-compound in the Re mode, or it is possible that svàr indirectly continues an old gen. sg. See comm. ad II.35.6. Or svàr and jyótiḥ can be taken not as a single expression but syntactically separate, as Old (SBE) and WG do in different ways. I weakly favor the gen. interpr.


## 05
Again, the accentuation of voc. ágne supports the division into 5-syllable pādas.

The etym. figure rukmó ná rocate is difficult to render in tr.

## 06
The referent of tát in d is unclear. It cannot be ‘body’, since tanū́- is feminine. I’ve supplied ‘flame’, but any bright neuter entity would do. Most tr.

simply leave the referent blank.


## 07
Contra HvN, mártāt should be read as the first word of pāda d.


## 08
The second pāda should read sántu bhrātrā́gne, with coalescence of the avowels. This also entails reading, out of sandhi, unaccented agne, contra Pp and HvN.

The impv. sántu is accented because it’s initial in the pāda.

The expression śivā́naḥ sakhyā́sántu ... devéṣu yuṣmé is very similar to VI.18.5 tán naḥ pratnáṃ sakhyám astu yuṣmé, which I take as existential. On the basis of that passage and of VII.22.9 (=X.23.7) asmé te santu sakhyā́śivā́ni, I think this passage should be harmonized with the others and interpreted as existential: “Let there be a propitious partnership for us among [or, with] you, the gods.” For further disc., incl. of the loc. pronoun, cf. comm. ad VI.18.5.
