+++
title = "011"

+++
Agni


## 01
The second hemistich is full of phonological and etymological figures: drś̥ é dadrś̥ e ... drś̥ é (the last as dṛśá in sandhi) and (beg. in pāda b) ā́rocate ... rúśad ...

árūkṣitam ... ā́rūpé.

As Ge points out, Agni’s ‘not coarse’ (árūkṣita-) food must be ghee.


## 02
This vs. contains a faint phonological figure: #ví ṣ(āhi) … #víś(vebhir).

With most interpr. I take khám ‘opening, aperture’ with pāda a. However, I do not think it is equivalent to or compared with manīṣā́m ‘inspiration, inspired thought’ (as, e.g., Ge “Schliesse … den … Gedanken (wie) einen Kanal auf”), but rather it is the opening through which (ví) the thought is supposed to be directed. As we all know, sending a stream of liquid (to which the manīṣā́- is implicitly compared) through a small opening increases its force, and I think that is the image meant.

Both hemistichs express a fine economical formulation of the tight, closed loop of reciprocity envisioned in the RV. Agni and the rest of the gods desire praise from men, but they must provide to men the inspiration and the thought that takes shape as praise. So in ab Agni is asked to release the manīṣā́to us even as he is being praised (stávānaḥ), and in cd we ask him to grant us ample thought (bhū́ri mánma), which is exactly what he and the other gods crave (vāvánaḥ).


## 03
The sense of the preceding vs., that Agni provides the very thoughts with which we create his praises, is continued in 3ab. In cd and vs. 4 the material rewards that come to the poet who produces these praises are detailed.

The phrase dráviṇaṃ vīrápeśā(ḥ) also appears, also pāda-final, at X.80.4, and therefore the apparent nom. sg. masc. vīrápeśāḥ must modify the neut. sg. dráviṇam.

This is a case like dvibárhas- (see comm. ad VII.24.2), where an s-stem ending in - āḥ at the end of the pāda must be interpr. as a neut. See AiG III.288.

## 05
The juxtaposition of complementary opposites -- devayánto devám and mártā amṛta -- is deft though not particularly noteworthy.

Likewise note the pair dámūnasaṃ gṛhápatim, both referring to Agni’s role in domestic arrangements, derivatives of the older and newer words for ‘house’.


## 06
I supply a form of the root √yu ‘keep away’ with the accusatives in ab, extracted from the root-noun cmpd in 5c dveṣoyút- ‘keeping away hatred’.

I am not entirely sure what to do with cid in d. Perhaps the idea is that though you are a god, you are also our companion right here.
