+++
title = "012"

+++
Agni


## 01
The form prasákṣat is implicitly taken as a finite form by Scar (602-3) and WG, presumably as an s-aor. subj. In Scar’s tr. it is parallel to the impv. abhy àstu (“so sei es, an Herrlichkeit(en) überlegen sein [und] vorherrschen”), but the verbal accent makes trouble for this main clause interpr. (It could, I suppose, bear a “contrastive” accent.) WG make it a subordinate cl. without overt marking (“indem er vorwärts siegt”), which would account for the accent. Nonetheless it seems best to take the form as a participle. Gr. identifies it as a neut.; if this is so, it would have to be an example of the neut. used adverbially. This seems the analysis presupposed by Old’s (SBE) tr. ‘victoriously’. However, the simplest solution is given in AiG II.2.162 (fld. by Narten, Sig.Aor., 265): it is a masc. nom. sg. with the weak participial suffix appropriate to verbal stems that have weak 3rd pl. endings.

The last word of the verse, the perf. part. cikitvā́n, is characteristically used elsewhere of Agni, in absolute value. Indeed, the same pāda ending jātavedaś cikitvā́n qualifies Agni in nearby IV.3.8 and IV.5.12 (see also cikitvā́n of Agni in IV.8.4). However, in our vs. grammatically this nom. sg. must modify the worshiper, not Agni (pace Re, who manages to attach it to the preceding voc.: “ô Jātavedas, (dieu) qui comprends”). I think rather that the application of this standard epithet of Agni to Agni’s devotee shows the same closed loop discussed with regard to the immediately preceding hymn (see comm. ad IV.11.2), where the worshiper shares qualities of the god, which he receives from the god. There may also be a slight pun: ‘observant’ means one thing for Agni -- he watches over everything -- but another for the mortal who attends on him: ‘observant’ in English can refer to someone who ‘observes’, that is, ‘faithfully carries out’, the prescribed rites.

In the publ. tr. I construe táva krátvā with the preceding pāda: may the man succeed “in accordance with your purpose,” but I now wonder if it is not another indication of the closed loop of reciprocity: the mortal worshiper is observant like Agni because it is Agni’s will or purpose that he should be. Of course it can be applicable to both pādas.

## 01-02
On the parallel pres. and pf. subjunctives in these vss. see comm. ad


## 06
and my 2016 treatment of the pf. subj. referred to there.

## 02
The overlapping identities of Agni and his worshiper are indirectly signaled in this vs. Although the sá of c must be correlative with yáḥ in a and refer to the human, some of the phraseology used of him in cd matches that used of Agni elsewhere. The common med. part. idhāná- is almost always intrans./pass. modifying Agni (‘[being] kindled’), but here it must be transitive with the worshiper as subject.

(There are a few other undoubted transitive occurrences: I.143.7, VII.9.6.) The combination of this participle and a form of púṣya- as here, with Agni as subj., is found in V.26.6 samidhānáḥ sahasrajid ágne dhármāṇi puṣyasi. Similarly sacate in d seems to match sácase at the end of the last hymn (IV.11.6), but Agni was the subject of that verb. The point here is that, though the second hemistich must in fact refer to the mortal worshiper, some of the phraseology invites a superimposition of Agni.


## 03
Assuming (as I do) that Thieme and Hoffmann are correct in their assessment of √vidh ‘honor, serve’ as a secondary root derived from ví √dhā ‘apportion’ (for reff. see EWA s.v. VIDH), the second half-vs. encapsulates an etymological pun: #dádhāti … vidhaté …, #ví ... This casts considerable doubt on Bloomfield’s (RR, ad loc.) characteristically acerbic judgment “The preposition ví which limps, with sharp tmesis, behind its verb dádhāti …. impresses me as secondary.” Furthermore, the positioning of ví directly before ānuṣák ‘in due order’ is found elsewhere (cf. I.72.7, VI.5.3). In such phrases the ví presumably emphasizes that goods are apportioned to each deserving recipient separately and in order.


## 04
Though, as indicated in the publ. intro., the 2nd half of this hymn (vss. 4-6) has a very different tone from the first, nonetheless the two halves are bound together.

Note, first, that voc. yaviṣṭha in 4a matches nom. yáviṣṭhaḥ in the same metrical position in 3c. Moreover, the worshiper who was identified as cikitvā́n ‘observant’ in 1d is contrasted with humans who have caused offense to Agni by their ácitti- ‘lack of observance, heedlessness’ in 4b.

Although puruṣatrā́has the locational suffix -trá / -trā́, it seems less a locational ‘among men’ than an abstract ‘manhood, human nature’. Cf. similar expressions with the abstract suffix -tā-: VII.57.4 = X.15.6 yád va ā́gaḥ puruṣátā kárāma.

The use of áditeḥ in pāda c is clarified by the more expansive expression in d.

On the one hand, áditi- is, of course, the name of the goddess and mother of the Ādityas, and the mention of her here ushers in the 2nd half of the hymn, which, as was indicated in the publ. intro., has a distinctly Ādityan tone. On the other, á-diti- means literally ‘unbinding’ (< √dā ‘bind’), and the lexeme ví … √śrath ‘let loose’ in the VP vy énāṃsi śíśrathaḥ ‘let loose our transgressions’ is synonymous with ‘unbind’.


## 05
Some verb must be supplied with the ablative phrases in ab. I have pulled √muc ‘release’ from its occurrences in vs. 6.

Ge takes ūrvá- in b as a proper noun referring to the Vala myth, but the word generally just means an ‘enclosure’, here an imprisoning one.

## 06
As noted in the publ. intro., the plural addressees in this vs. are almost surely the Ādityas; the vs. is repeated in X.126.8, where the referents are clearly the Ādityas.

The comparison “just as you released the buffalo-cow bound by the foot” is probably a reference to a well-known myth or legend, but unfortunately it is not known to us. It is reminiscent of X.28.10, a hymn full of untraceable references to animal stories, niruddháś cin mahiṣás tarṣyā́vān “The buffalo also got trapped, when it was thirsty,” but the animal in question there is a mahiṣá- not a gaurá- and is masc.

not fem. Other RVic occurrences of gaurī́- are not helpful.

