+++
title = "015"

+++
Agni


## 01
The usual concessive force of the nom. of the pres. part. to √as ‘be’ is absent here, as far as I can see. Ge suggests that it is marking the phrase as a simile (Re’s tr. suggests that he agrees). Since the vs. seems to concern the paryagnikaraṇa, the leading of the sacrificial animal around the fire, the sán may signal that Agni is acting in the guise of a horse, “being a horse.”


## 04
Ge’s tr. “vor Sṛñjaya Daivavāta” assumes that puráḥ can act as a preposition with a locative. Since there is no other evidence for this, and since the puráḥ is better taken as a reference to Agni’s location on the ritual ground, as regularly seen in the epithet puróhita- ‘placed in front’, I take the loc. of the PN as an unmarked loc. abs.

(“SD [being there]”) or with Re and WG as a simple locational, which is far easier to convey with French chez or German bei than in English.

## 05
The standard tr. take this vs. to mean “a mortal hero should have mastery over such a fire” vel sim., but given the previous mention of Sṛñjaya Daivavāta, I think the point is that not every mortal deserves a fire like this -- only a vīrá- like SD.


## 06
Agni here is compared with soma, though without mention of that word.

The comparison is esp. obvious in the verb marmrjyánte ‘they keep grooming’, since √mṛj is a signature word for soma, and in the descriptive phrase in b. As Old (SBE) points out, soma is often called aruṣá- ‘red’ (though it must be admitted that Agni is too), and ‘child of heaven’ (diváḥ śíśu-) is also a somyan epithet (IX.33.5, 38.5, though cf. VI.49.2 where it modifies Agni). As discussed in the publ. intro., this covert reference to soma ushers in the Dānastuti for Prince Sāhadevya, whose nickname is Somaka (9c).


## 07
I interpr the apparent injunc. bódhat as a modal, rather than in the preterital value favored by most tr. -- and in fact follow Hoffmann (Injunk., 232) in taking it as a root-aor. subjunctive, not a pres. injunc. The poet is playfully reminding his patron that he’s owed a gift, and he couches this as a bit of a joke, using the ‘awaken’ value of √budh: “wake me up with a nice surprise and I’ll come and sing.”


## 08
This next vs. indicates that the reminder had its effect. The grammatical identity of ā́dade is ambiguous: it could be pres. indic. or pf. indic. In fact in my interpr. of this two-verse sequence 7-8 it doesn’t really matter: 8c could be tr. “I take as soon as they are offered” without disturbing the rhetorical sequence. However, I follow most (incl. Kü, 241) in taking it as a preterital pf. rather than as a pres. with Hoffmann (Injunk, 232; so also WG).


## 10
In one way this vs. is simply a more active variant of vs. 9. In 9 it is implied that Sāhadevya will be long-lived because of the Aśvins (somehow or other); in 10 they are ordered to make him so. But there’s a grammatical twist at the end: the impv. kṛṇotana is plural not dual, and so the Aśvins may have helper(s). The shift to the pl. is probably yet another example of the tendency to open out to the larger divine world in final vss., by including unspecified others -- so here “you (two and other gods).” But it’s worth pointing out that no du. impv. of √kṛ would fit this metrical slot. (On the other hand, no RVic poet with even middling skills would have been unable to throw in a particle or the like to make the meter work.)
