+++
title = "016"

+++
Indra


## 01
As often, satyá- ‘real’ seems here to have the sense ‘really present’, expressing the standard hope of every Vedic ritual, that the gods, esp. Indra, should be physically present at the sacrifice, providing a technical epiphany.

## 02
Rather than interpr. vedhā́ḥ as part of the simile (e.g., WG “wie die mündige Uśanā”), I take it as referring to Agni, the officiating Hotar-priest, as often. See further support for this identification in the next vs. ### 03
I take the first hemistich as a continuation of 2cd. Phraseology suggests this connection: the simile uśáneva in 2c is matched by the simile beginning 3a kavír ná; together they add up to the full name of the mythic figure Uśanā Kāvya. (kaví- stands in for his patronymic elsewhere: cf. nearby IV.26.1 aháṃ kavír uśánā.) The participial phrase vidáthāni sā́dhan “bringing the rites to realization” has Agni as its subj. elsewhere (e.g., III.1.18 and the other passages adduced by Ge n. 3a). Agni is also often called a kaví-, and I take this word here as referring both to Uśanā Kāvya to whom Agni is compared and to Agni himself.

The subj. of pāda b must be different from that in a; I follow Ge (/WG) in taking it as the pressing stone. The idiom ví √pā ‘extract/separate by drinking’ favors this identification; see comm. ad VII.22.4, which passage also contains a form of √arc as here as well as an overt occurrence of the ‘stone’ (ádri-).

Unlike Ge (/WG) I do not take pāda c as the main clause with b, nor do I think they have the same subject. Rather with Schmidt (B+I, 48-49) I tentatively take Indra as subj. in c (though not, with Schmidt, a and b as well). The Vala myth is quietly introduced in this second half-vs., with Indra’s creation of the poets and then their singing into existence the ritual patterns. With Ge (etc.) it is likely that the seven bards are the Aṅgirases.

There may be a very backgrounded pun in cd: c opens with divá(h) ‘of heaven’, to be construed with saptá kārū́n “seven bards” at the end of the pāda, while d opens with áhnā ‘by day’. Despite the different accent and different case form, it might be possible to take divá (in sandhi) as a variant of dívā ‘by day’, anticipating the instr. ahnā́in the same position in the next pāda. But I am very uncertain about this.

Note the responsion of verse-final act. transitive gṛṇántaḥ to vs.-final med.

passive gṛṇāṇáḥ in 1d.


## 04
The Vala myth takes full hold in this vs. Instr. arkaíḥ is a pun, referring not only to the chants of the singers but also to the rays of the sun itself.

The 3rd pl. rurucur has trans./caus. sense here and generally in its other occurrences (see Kü 431), though not VIII.3.20. In several of those passages it’s in the cadence and would be better read *rūrucur (IV.7.1, X.122.5), and here and in the other case (VI.62.2, but not the trans./caus. opt. rurucyā́ḥ VI.35.4) a heavy initial syl.

is possible (though not metrically good in VI.62.2). The 3rd sg. act. pf. ruroca (1x: IV.5.15) and act. pf. part. (1x: I.149.3) are intransitive by contrast, as are the medial forms. The anomalous trans. rurucuḥ forms also have the ending characteristic of the perfect 3rd pl. act., not the -an expected for a redupl. aor. (e.g., (á)jījanan).

Nonetheless I am inclined to believe that these forms originally belonged to a proper redupl. aor. paradigm (á)rūruca-, found in árūrucat (3x), with the heavy redupl. proper to a redupl. aor., and that the 3rd pl. forms first adopted the -ur ending of the pf. and then, quite possibly redactionally, shortened the reduplicating vowel. It should be noted, however, that Old (ZDMG 60: 163) rejects this, an idea originating with Gaedicke.

Because rurucuḥ is unaccented, the first part of pāda b must be the main cl., with the following yád introducing a nominal cl. -- pace Ge, who simply declares it an unaccented subordinate cl. verb (n. 4b).

Note the periphrastic caus. vicákṣe … cakāra, on which see Zehnder (Periphras. Kausativ, passim, esp. 51). He suggests that it is parallel to the perfect rurucuḥ in b. If agreement in tense stem is really at issue, this would be another arg.

against my assumption that rurucuḥ is an old redupl. aor.

The opening of 4c andhā́támāṃsi is reminiscent of that of 1c tásmā íd ándhaḥ, though they have nothing in common lexically or thematically and they do not seem to demarcate a section. The repetition of ṛjīṣī́in the next vs. (end of pāda a), matching the end of 1a, suggests, however, that some demarcation is happening.


## 05
On ṛjīṣī́see immed. preceding comment.

ámitam must be adverbial, as is recognized by all standard treatments.

I do not see a semantic diff. between the abstracts mahitvá- and mahimán-; what distinguishes them is their metrical shape. The nom. sg. mahimā́is obviously excluded from the cadence, but well suited for the break after a 5-syl. opening; instr.

sg. mahitvā́- works nicely in a Triṣṭubh cadence. Curiously enough English does not seem to have two different abstract formations to ‘great’ (*greatitude, *greatery,

*greathood, etc.) despite the usual flexibility of our language, and so I have tr. both
Skt. words with ‘greatness’.


## 06
See Ge’s long note (6b) on the mixture of Vṛtra and Vala themes in this vs. Ge (/WG) supplies ‘deeds’ with náryāṇi (“Mannestaten”) without indicating what Sanskrit word he is thinking of. It should surely be ápāṃsi ‘labors’, which regularly shows up with some form of nṛ́- or a derivative thereof (on nári ápāṃsi see comm. ad VIII.96.19). Assuming this is the correct underlying noun, we can identify a buried pun: apáḥ (apó in sandhi) ‘waters’ opens the 2nd pāda; it is phonologically reminiscent of ápaḥ ‘labor’.


## 07
Ge tr. párāhan as a 3rd sg., continuing the 3rd persons of vs. 6, but the rest of vs. 7 has 2nd ps. reference. The verb ahan, ambiguous between 2nd and 3rd sg., serves as a modulation form, as often (cf. I.32.3d, 4a, for ex.).

## 07-08
As noted in the publ. intro., these two vss. tease apart the Vala and Vṛtra myths that have been intertwined in the previous vss., with the Vṛtra myth allotted to vs. 7 and the Vala myth to vs. 8. But even with the clear mention of Vṛtra in 7a and Saramā in 8b, there is some ambiguity, centered on the apó beginning 8a. See comm. on vs. 8.

## 08
As was just mentioned, verse-initial apó causes some problem. This form matches the two occurrences of apó opening 6b and 7a and grammatically should be, with them, the acc. pl. of áp- ‘water(s)’. But the problem is that ‘waters’ do not figure in the Vala myth: it is cows/dawns that are freed from the rock. For this reason Old suggests reading *ápo = ápa + u, with ápa a preverb with dárdar, and this conjecture is followed by Ge. However, ápa is only marginally attested with √dṛ (only RV VI.17.5 and nowhere else in Skt., at least acdg. to MWms). I therefore accept the transmitted apó and assume 1) syntactically, that √dṛ takes a double obj.

here (“tear open the rock ACC (for) the waters ACC”), and 2) thematically, that because of the interpenetration of the Vala and Vṛtra myths just mentioned the cows/dawns in the Vala myth get assimilated to the waters of the Vṛtra myth. My ‘tore open’ actually assumes that Old’s ápa-u is secondarily present, with my ‘open’ representing *ápa. It is worth noting that forms of the root √dṛ are fairly rare without preverb. Schmidt (B+I 162), Hoffmann (Injunk. 270), and WG also all accept the ‘waters’ reading. Note that the waters here would correspond to the acc. with √dṛ in pāda c: vā́jam ‘prize’. That is, the prize in c is what gets torn out of the rock (waters), while the rock in pāda a is what gets torn apart to get to the prize.

Acdg. to Schaeffer (136), the intens. to √dṛ has become lexicalized and no longer has any discernible frequentative value. However, most forms of this intens.

take plural objects, so it could be object-distributive. In our case the pl. apáḥ ‘waters’ might fit this model, though the pl. tantum ‘waters’ really functions as a mass noun, not a set of countable hunks of water. See also ví dardaḥ in 13d below.

I take adverbial neut. pūrvyám in b as meaning ‘previously, before’, and in conjunction with the injunc. āvír bhuvat, as a somewhat awkward attempt to express anteriority: Saramā appeared to you previously (b), ordering you to √dṛ (ā́darṣi, c), and then you did so (dárdar, a). Schmidt (B+I 162) avoids the anteriority reading by tr. ‘zuerst’, and Hoffmann (Injunk. 270) and WG render it “als erstes,” an interpr.

that would seem to me to require an adj. modifying nom. sg. fem. sarámā, not an adverbial neut.

Ge takes the 2nd hemistich as the words of Saramā, an interpr. I accept both because of the si-impv. ā́darṣi in c and because of the pseudo-anterior construction in b just discussed.

Verse-final gṛṇānáḥ has an exact match at the end of vs. 1, and this bit of ring composition signals that this section of the hymn is finished. In the next section we move on to the Kutsa / Uśanā Kāvya story.


## 09
Although, as noted ad vs. 3, the word kaví- often signals a mention of Uśanā Kāvya -- and this personage figures in the myth being recounted here -- in the publ.

tr. I was tentatively inclined to follow Ge in taking kavím as a reference to Kutsa, since Kutsa could plausibly be qualified as nā́dhamāna- ‘in need’ in this myth and Uśanā Kāvya is unlikely to be. However, since the myth in question involves a trip to UK’s place to seek advice (see next vs., 10a), the phrase áchā kavím … gāḥ “you came to the kaví” in pāda a probably refers to UK, and the nā́dhamānam, found only at the end of b, may conceal a different goal, namely Kutsa. Hence I would emend the publ. tr. to “you came to the poet (=UK) (and) to the one in need (=Kutsa) at the winning of the sun.” In 11d kavíḥ also most likely refers to UK.

The phrase nṛmano … abhíṣṭau is reminiscent of 4d nṛ́tamo abhíṣtau.

The apparent thematic verbal stem iṣaṇa- is almost confined to this group of Indra hymns (in addition to this vs., IV.17.14, 22.10, 23.9, as well as a single outlier I.134.5, for which see comm. ad loc.). Narten’s interpr. of this stem as an aorist generated to the pres. iṣaṇyáti seems reasonable, though it does not account for the limited distribution of our stem: no forms of iṣaṇyá- are even found in the IVth Maṇḍala. (Narten, MSS 1982, cited after Kl. Schr., 266-67; cf. Gotō, 1st class, n.

243.) In its other two occurrences (I.129.7, VI.26.8) dyumnáhūti- ‘invocation to heavenly brilliance’ is a call that we sacrificers make to attract the god(s). I do not understand what it is expressing here. It does not seem to have anything to do with dyumnaíḥ in 19c below.


## 10
Pāda b bhuvát te kútsaḥ sakhyé níkāmaḥ echoes 6b … sákhibhir níkāmaiḥ.

In 6 Indra performs manly deeds “with his eager companions” (either the Maruts of the Vṛtra myth or the Aṅgirases of the Vala myth); here Kutsa must be transformed into such a sidekick by his association with Indra: “In companionship with you, Kutsa will become eager.” On the enigmatic theme of the woman trying to tell Indra and Kutsa apart, see the publ. intro. As argued there, it is likely that the Jaiminīya Brāh. version (JB III.199-202), with sexual mischief between Kutsa and Indra’s wife, facilitated by the identical appearance of Indra and Kutsa, is only a secondary attempt to make sense of this tantalizing snippet and no such story underlies our passage. Certainly the woman (nā́rī) in our passage seems entirely upright and eager to distinguish between the two males.


## 11
Although we don’t ordinarily think of Indra as ‘seeking help’ (avasyú-) but giving it, in this myth Indra goes to the house of Uśanā Kāvya to receive the mace from him. I therefore think that the ‘help’ Indra is seeking is concretized as the mace.

See below on pāda d.

Note that ī́śānaḥ in b echoes iṣaṇo in 9c.

In d the two words áhan pā́ryāya have provoked a certain amount of discussion (see Old, Ge n. 11d, Kuiper, IIJ 5: 169ff., who is followed by Hoffmann, Injunk. 189 n. 151, and WG) because of its similarity to the expression diví pā́rye “on the decisive day” (VI.17.14, etc.). The dat. pā́ryāya here is therefore taken by some as a temporal expression with a word for ‘day’ or the like to be supplied (e.g., Old pā́ryāya *áhne). However, the dative expression nearby in IV.25.1 mahé ‘vase pā́ryāya “for great, decisive help” (though see alternative tr. of Ge [/WG]) seems the more compelling comparandum, esp. since Indra has come to UK’s seeking help (avasyúḥ 1a). By following áhan with the stem pā́rya-, the poet may be tricking us into expecting a temporal expression (cf. VI.26.1 pā́rye áhan; also III.32.14), but the case mismatch should alert the audience that our expection has been thwarted. As indicated in the comm. ad pāda a, I think the “decisive help” that UK gives Indra is the mace he fashioned; it’s important to note that in another telling of this myth in I.121.12 the mace itself is called pā́rya-: I.121.12cd yáṃ te kāvyá uśánā … dā́t, … pā́ryaṃ tatakṣa vájram “UK fashioned the decisive mace which he gave to you.” For UK giving Indra the mace, see also V.34.2.


## 12
Note the phonological play in śúṣṇam aśúṣam “insatiable Śuṣṇa.” With Old (flg. Ge, Ved. St.; see also Hoffmann (Injunk. 189) I interpret the hapax kutsyá- ‘Kutsian’ in light of the phrase vadháṃ kútsam (I.175.4) “Kutsa (as) deadly weapon.” The “future imperative” vṛhatāt in d follows nicely on the normal impv. prá mṛṇa in c.


## 13
Here the intensive of √dṛ, ví dardaḥ, takes a plural obj. púraḥ ‘fortresses’.

See disc. above ad 8a.

The simile and frame in d are curiously intermingled, with the object in the frame, púraḥ ‘fortresses’, dropped into the middle of the simile átkaṃ ná … jarimā́ “like old age a cloak.” I also don’t quite understand the content of the simile. It’s presumably the age of the garment, not of its wearer, that causes the garment to fall apart. WG seem to take jarimā́not with the simile but the frame: “Wie einen Reisemantel spaltet das Alter die Palisaden auseinander.” This would solve the intermingling problem identified above, but it otherwise doesn’t fit the mythic context. Surely it would be ignominious for Indra if, instead of Indra’s heroically tearing apart these mighty fortresses, they just fell apart from decrepitude and deferred maintenance. The WG n. on the passage calls the simile a Sprichwort and it is not clear to me what function they see jarimā́as playing.


## 14
As noted in the publ. intro., pāda b seems to resolve the problem of distinguishing between Indra and Kutsa that arose in 10cd. The same lexeme ví √cit ‘distinguish’ found in 10d recurs here.

The athematic middle participle uṣāṇá- ‘wearing’ here is a hapax stem and is, of course, morphologically anomalous: the full-grade medial root pres. váste is matched by a very well-attested full-grade athem. med. part. vásāna-. We do not expect a zero-grade formation to this root pres. However, our hapax calls to mind the unnamed hero of this portion of the hymn Uśanā (Kāvya), and the nonce creation of participle uṣāná- here (as an echo of uśánā) seems to me a text-book example of morphological aberrancies arising out of contextual pressures -- all the more striking because the word uśánā does not occur in this section of the hymn (but cf. 2c), so the participial echo is echoing something beneath the surface. WG’s characterization of this form as “eine individuelle Fehlbildung des Dichters” itself fails to see the poetic purpose and clever creativity of this form. It is true, however, that it should probably also be evaluated in the context of several other such anomalous participles in this group of Indra hymns, uśámāna- (IV.19.4), uṣámāna- (IV.22.2), and uśāná- (IV.23.1).

## 15
The simile in b, svàrmīḷhe ná “as if at (a contest) with the sun as its prize,” provides a transition from the sun-winning myth of Indra and Kutsa, which occupied the previous few vss., and this more general final section of the hymn.

The desires (kā́māḥ) that are the grammatical subject of this vs. -- namely our desires for Indra’s largesse -- take part in actions that might appear to be more appropriate to other subjects. On the one hand, they “take pleasure in the pressing” (sávane cakānā́ḥ); we would rather expect the god Indra to do so. On the other, they “perform ritual labor with hymns” (śaśamānā́sa ukthaíḥ), a priestly activity. The desires thus mediate between the two poles of ritual participation.

Pace Oldenberg, ókaḥ in d is most likely not an acc. goal to be construed with agman in a (though this might be a possible secondary reading), but a nominative -- on the basis of a web of formulaic associations with raṇvá- ‘delightful’. Cf. I.66.3 óko ná raṇváḥ “(Agni) delightful like a home”; also I.69.4-5 raṇvó duroṇé “a joy in the house,” X.64.11 [=I.144.7] raṇváḥ … iva kṣáyaḥ “delightful … like a dwelling,” X.33.6 kṣétraṃ ná raṇvám “delightful like a dwelling place.” The problem in our passage is that raṇvā́(the only possible underlying form given its sandhi context) cannot technically modify neut. ókaḥ, despite the formulaics just discussed. The solution, as Ge saw (n. 15d), is that nom. sg. fem. raṇvā́also participates in the second simile in this pāda, sudṛ́ṣīva puṣṭíḥ “like prosperity beautiful to see” -- with which raṇvá- also has formulaic associations. Cf. I.65.5 puṣṭír ná raṇvā́“like thriving that brings delight” (immediately followed by kṣitíḥ ‘dwelling place’) and II.4.4 raṇvā́… iva puṣṭíḥ ‘id.’. Of course, both similes provide comparisons to the desires that are the ultimate subject, with raṇvā́as the pivotal tert. comp. in both -- though it does not match kā́māḥ in gender or number.


## 16
I take cid with the dat. mā́vate jaritré since I do not see how to construe it sensibly with gádhyam. I cannot explain its displacement to pāda end, however.

On the gádhyaṃ vā́jam see 11c.


## 17
Pāda b is difficult. Ge (/WG) construe the two locatives in b, kásmiñ cid and muhuké, together, which would of course be the default interpr. However, this leads Ge to render muhuká- as ‘Schlachtgeschrei’, a tr. for which there is no support: its closest etymological relative, adverbial múhur, only means ‘suddenly, in an instant’. (WG’s “in irgendeinem plötzlichen Vorfall” at least imposes less content and sticks closer semantically to múhur and company.) In the publ. tr. I separate the two locatives, taking muhuké as a simple temporal and construing the indefinite kásmiñ cid with the gen. pl. jánānām. This interpr. was in part prompted by the need to have something for antár to govern: antár does not take the genitive, so a direct connection with jánānām (“among the peoples”) is out, but it regularly takes the locative. Hence my “among some one of the peoples”: since jána- can refer to a group of persons who make up a people, it doesn't have to be a single individual, hence my “some one” rather than “someone.” (Cf. also V.74.2 kásmin … jáne.) However, I recognize that this interpr. is both artificial and awkward, and (somewhat in the spirit of WG) I have cast about for an interpr. of muhuké, which should literally mean ‘instantaneous’, that both reflects its etymology and yet allows it to refer to a conflict and be plausibly construed with jánānām. The Engl. word ‘skirmish’ (“an episode of irregular or unpremeditated conflict”) comes close. I would thus revise my tr. of ab to “If a sharp missile will fly within some sudden skirmish of the peoples, o champion, ...”


## 18
The morphological ambiguity of bhúvaḥ (injunctive or subjunctive) allows for several possible interpretations of the first half-vs. Ge takes bhúvaḥ as imperatival “sei,” though this is unlikely given the morphology. Hoffmann (Injunk.

262) takes it as a “generell oder resulativ konstatierend” injunctive and tr. “du bist” (so also WG). By contrast, I think these two fronted bhúvaḥ are subjunctives and questions. There is of course no way to tell. However, the purpose clause with subjunctive in 20cd .. yáthā … ásan naḥ ... avitā “so that he will be our helper,” matching our pāda a bhúvo ‘vitā́, suggests that bhúvaḥ is indeed a subjunctive and that further we are not at this point certain that Indra will become what we want him to -- hence a question rather that a statement is more appropriate. As for how bhúvas,

-at came to be aor. injunctives homonymous with the morphologically more
transparent root aor. subjunctives, I find KH’s scenario (56) plausible, that they were secondarily generated to 1st sg. bhuvam (e.g., X.48.1; 49.1, 4; 86.5), which is the properly built injunctive to the root aor. (though cf. TS II.5.1.1 bhūvam). However, I do not follow KH in taking the motivation for this formation the avoidance of monosyllabic forms, since injunc. bhū́s, bhū́t are quite common. (A more likely explan. in the Hoffmannian mode would be that, since bhū́s, bhū́t can do double duty as imperative substitutes, bhuvas, -at make the injunctive value clearer.) I’d rather suggest a different reason why injunctive bhúvas, -at took hold and could exist simultaneously with the subjunctives of the same shape, while putative injunctives káras, -at, secondarily built in the same way as bhúvas, -at to 1st sg. karam, are essentially only subjunctives. Because of the lack of ablaut of √bhū, the zero-grade of the root syllable of the subjunctive bhúvas, -at doesn’t accord with standard subjunctive formations and must have seemed at best equivocal, whereas káras, -at is a perfect specimen of a subjunctive and does not invite other morphological interpretations.


## 19
The standard tr. supply a verb in ab: Ge “rufe ich,” WG “bitten … wir.” This seems unnecessary: the instr. phrases in ab can be parallel to dyumnaíḥ in the simile in c, all controlled by the participial phrase abhí sántaḥ “(we) dominating” in c.

One of the factors that might support supplying a verb in ab is the otherwise apparently orphaned acc. encl. tvā at the end of pāda a, but even as Ge advances this reason for supplying a verb (n. 19a), he also suggests that tvā could be dependent on immediately preceding tvāyúbhiḥ, an explanation that the close sandhi of the two words (tvāyúbhiṣ ṭvā) might favor.

In b víśve, in the phrase víśva ājaú, must be a loc., although we might expect the pronominal form víśvasmin. It is, however, worth noting that víśvasmin is found only twice in the RV, in the same phrase (víśvasmin bháre) in adjacent hymns in the Xth Maṇḍala (X.49.1, X.50.4). A nominal-type loc. víśve here would also be facilitated by the plural version víśveṣu ... ājíṣu in I.130.8 with simple truncation of the -ṣu.

Although Ge construes dyumnaíḥ not in the simile but as an attribute of the subject (“we”), the almost identical X.115.7 dyā́vo ná dyumnaír abhí sánti mā́nuṣān may (but need not) support keeping it with the simile; Ge separates the two in his tr.

of that passage as well.

## 20-21
These two vss. provide a double ending to this hymn. The first (20) begins, as summary vss. often do, with evá ‘just in this way’. It announces selfreferentially, with the root aor. akarma “we have just made,” that the hymn being completed is the bráhman- we have created for Indra. And, as noted above ad vs. 18, the purpose clauses with subjunctive provide reassurance for the worried questions in 18ab. Vs. 21 is repeated as the final verse of the seven hymns IV.17, 19-24, so it serves as a refrain vs. for (some of) the Vāmadeva Indra hymns. It also announces, with a root aor. (though aor. passive), that the formulation has just been made (ákāri … bráhma). Despite the apparent duplication, we should not necessarily assume that this refrain was tacked onto an already complete hymn, because gṛṇānáḥ at the end of 21a may form a ring with the same word at the end of vs. 1.


## 20
The standard tr. (Ge [/WG]) take viyóṣat as intransitive, a view argued for by Narten (Sig. aor. 214), with a neut. pl. subj. (sakhyā́) of a sg. verb. For my argument for a trans. interpr. of this s-aorist, see comm. ad II.32.2. As at II.32.2 I take sakhyā́here as an instr. sg. of separation, though an acc. pl. obj. (“he will not keep our partnerships far away”) is also possible.

Note that tanūpā́ḥ picks up 7d tanvò bodhi gopā́ḥ.


## 21
The standard tr. (Ge [/WG]) as also Kü (300) interpr. pīpeḥ as hortative.

This is certainly possible (and is reflected in the publ. tr.), but context would also allow “you (have) made swell” or “you make swell” just as easily.
