+++
title = "017"

+++
Indra

## 01-04
Hoffmann (Injunk. 178-180) treats these four vss. They express the cosmic disruptions attendant on Indra’s birth and the further disruptions caused by his smashing of Vṛtra. On the ring composition that demarcates this section, see comm. on vs. 4 below.


## 01
The pair “earth / heaven” occupy the final slots of the first two pādas: … kṣā́(ḥ)# … dyaúḥ#, with a shared 3rd singular verb ánu … manyata. Note that there also exists a dual dvandva containing these stems: dyā́vā-kṣā́mā. The 2nd hemistich contains two pf. participles expressing action anterior to the main verb (sṛjáḥ): jaghanvā́n ‘having smashed’ and jagrasānā́n ‘having been swallowed’.


## 02
As in vs. 1, the pair heaven and earth are expressed by two singulars (dyaúḥ, bhū́miḥ), even though, again, there is a dual dvandva available: dyā́vā-bhū́mī.

BR suggest reading dyaúr éjad for Pp. dyaúḥ / réjat. Although rejected by Old, this reading (which does not require changing the Saṃhitā text) is accepted by Ge, Hoffmann (Injunk. 179, 181), and Gotō (1st class, 271-72), as well as by me. The stem réja- is almost entirely medial (see rejata in pāda a), while éja- is act. It is easy to see how the misparsing could have arisen, due to the presence of immediately preceding rejata.

With Ge, I take tviṣáḥ as a gen. dependent on bhiyásā in b, thus parallel to manyóḥ. It would also be possible to take tviṣáḥ as an abl. of cause (so Hoffmann 179, WG).

Note the phonetic figure táva tviṣáḥ. Note also that the reflex. adj. svásya must reference táva and therefore have 2nd ps. value (as well as not referring to the grammatical subj., as is sometimes claimed for reflexives).

## 02-03
saráyanta ā́paḥ (sarayánte out of sandhi) in 2d is reprised by sárann ā́paḥ in 3d. The two verbs seem semantically identical; the intransitive -áya-formation takes the post-(late-)caesura position also favored by metrically identical janáyanta.

Its medial ending is an example of -anta replacement of the usual type (cf. Jamison 1979: IIJ 21), though somewhat complicated by the fact that the form out of sandhi is actually primary -ante.


## 03
Almost the full panoply of power terms is on display in the first hemistich: śávas-, sáhas- (in the pseudo-part., on which see comm. ad IV.3.6), and ójas-.

The “bull” of the waters is of course Vṛtra.


## 04
This vs. shows a clever twist on ring composition. Like vss. 1 and 2 it contains occurrences of both heaven and earth (here dyaúḥ a, bhū́ma d), and in fact pāda a ends exactly as 1b does: manyata dyaúḥ. But the two phrases mean very different things: in vs. 1 manyata is construed with ánu in the lexeme meaning ‘concede’, whereas here there is no preverb and the verb means ‘be considered as’.

Moreover, although in the 1st two vss. heaven and earth functioned as a pair, though expressed as two singulars, here they have nothing to do with each other, and indeed earth is found only in a negative simile (sádaso ná bhū́ma, which in Engl. has to be awkwardly rendered by “any more than …”).

On the tangled paternity here, see publ. intro.


## 05
The break from the themes of the first 4 vss. is signalled by pres. tense forms (cyāváyati, madanti), after the relentless march of injunctives (and one pf.) in 1-4. (Technically speaking saráyanta in 2d is a present out of sandhi [-ante], but it patterns like other -anta forms of this shape. See disc. ad 2d.) But vs. 5 is also verbally linked to what went before: bhū́ma ending the first pāda matches the same word ending the last pāda of vs. 4, and ánu … madanti in c phonologically recalls ánu … manyata in 1b.

The vs. is thematically structured by one / many. Indra alone (ékaḥ) is invoked by many (puruhūtáḥ), as (single) king of the separate peoples (kṛṣṭīnā́m), whom all (víśve) celebrate.

The satyám beginning the 2nd hemistich may signal Indra’s real presence on the ritual ground, as I argue it does in IV.16.1. The rest of the half vs. clearly takes place at the sacrifice. So the tr. might be emended to “All celebrate him (who is) really here …” The construction of the last pāda is unclear, esp. the morphological identity and referents of devásya gṛṇató maghónaḥ. Old takes rātím as the obj. of grṇ̥ atáḥ (“singing the gift”) and sees grṇ̥ atáḥ and maghónaḥ as parallel acc. pl. (“the singers and patrons”). But this phrase is supposed to be coreferential with nominative víśve in c: “Alle: die (Priester), welche des Gottes Gabe besingen, und die freigebigen Herren.” This syntactic slippage seems unacceptable to me (and uncharacteristic of Old). Ge takes grṇ̥ atáḥ as a gen. sg. dep. on gen. sg. maghónaḥ, which is in apposition to devásya: “the gift of the god, who is the generous patron of the singer.” This makes good sense, but I have not been able to find other passages with a genitive dependent on maghávan-. WG take all three as gen. sg. with the same referent, namely Indra, all dependent on rātím. But since this is not a Vala passage, Indra should not be singing, but receiving the singing of others. My tr. starts from passages like VII.12.2 asmā́n gṛṇatá utá no maghónaḥ (cf. also X.22.15), where gṛnatáḥ and maghónaḥ are overtly conjoined (by utá) and refer to humans: “us (who are) singing and our patrons.” In that passage the forms are acc. pl.; in ours here I take them as gen. sg. in datival usage (as often).


## 06
In pāda a the word víśve was omitted in the publ. tr., which should be emended to “Entirely his were all the soma-drinks.” The three initial satrā́(a, b, c) are echoed by dátre beginning d. Although there is some dissension on the root etym. of dátra- (cf., e.g., Old, who cites Neisser derivation from dáyate ‘apportion’ -- an analysis apparently followed by both Ge and WG, judging from their tr. ‘Anteil’), the correct analysis was already sketched by Gr s.v.: it is a -tra- deriv. built to the weak stem of the redupl. pres. to √dā ‘give’ (dad-), hence *dáttra, with simplification of the geminate before r, as often. See AiG II.2.703 and the important (if lapidary) correction in the Nachtr. to AiG I: Nachtr. p.

3, to I.5 ll. 30-31.

## 06-07
I take the idiom found in 6d and 7b, LOC. ACC. adhithāḥ, as meaning ‘put s.o. in the path/way of s.th. The middle voice of adhithāḥ signals that the entity in the loc. belongs to the subject, namely Indra -- in the first case his generosity (just celebrated in 5d), in the second his power of attack. Although Ge recognizes the similarity of these constructions, with identical subjects and objects (see his n. 6d), he renders them quite differently. For áme √dhā in 7b, see also I.63.1, 67.3.


## 08
The first half of this vs., describing Indra, is couched in the accusative, on which the rel. cl. of cd depends. Since both the preceding and following vss. refer to Indra in the nominative, this vs. is syntactically untethered. It seems best to supply an anodyne verb like “I call upon,” even though this cannot be generated from the immediate context.

Note that the satrā of vs. 6 has returned, though in a cmpd.

## 09-10
This sequence of vss. is marked by initial ayám ‘this one here’ (9a, 9c, 10a, 10b; cf. also asyá 9d). This near-deictic pronoun may indicate that Indra is currently present at the sacrifice. These vss. are also marked by present tense verbs describing Indra’s characteristic and habitual activities -- in contrast to vs. 11, which opens with an imperfect (sám … ajayat).


## 10
The sense of ádha here is somewhat unclear and its position anomalous, as it is generally, though not invariably, clause-initial. Klein (DGRM II.97) notes its medial position but considers it to have the usual sense he assigns to ádha, namely ‘therefore’. This passage is reminiscent of VII.34.2 śṛṇvánty ā́po ádha kṣárantīḥ, where ádha likewise appears mid-clause and before a pres. participle (as well as after a form of √śru, though act., not pass. as here). My sense is that ádha in both passages introduces a participial addition that clarifies or modifies the sense of the main verb, hence a sort of mini-clause.

In pāda b the lexeme prá kṛṇute with its middle voice in my opinion encodes a complex thought: in battle Indra brings the (enemies’) cows forward in such a way as to make them his own, that is, to capture them. Med. kṛṇuté recurs in the next pāda, where its object is Indra’s own battle-fury (manyúm).


## 11
The stem aśvi yá- with suffixal accent is ordinarily a PN; the adj. ‘equine’ is regularly áśv i ya-. However, as noted by AiG II.2.816 the accent of -ya- derivatives is variable, often within the same stem. The initial-accented áśvya- in the plural generally modifies maghā́(ni) or rā́dhāṃsi. Here I am inclined to supply maghā́ni ‘bounties’ suggested by adjacent maghávā; cf. … maghā́ni maghávā in 8d and the repeated forms of maghávan- in this portion of the hymn (7d, 8d, 9b, 13b, 13d).

The referent of pūrvī́ḥ isn’t clear. Ge (/WG) supplies ‘fortresses’, which in turn requires supplying a transitive verb: Ge “der viele (Burgen erobert hat)”; WG “der ja viele (Palisaden besiegte).” I would prefer not to supply so much material.

Moreover, in this group of hymns pūrvī́ḥ is used in temporal expressions: IV.16.19 kṣapáḥ … śarádaś ca pūrvī́ḥ “through many nights and autumns,” IV.18.4 sahásram mā́saḥ … śarádaś ca pūrvī́ḥ “for a thousand months and many autumns,” IV.19.8 pūrvī́r uṣásaḥ śarádaś ca “through many dawns and autumns.” I therefore take it that way here, as a temporal expression in a nominal rel. cl. with maghávā as the predicate.

## 12
The exact sense of ádhy eti is not entirely clear. It generally means ‘study’ from the literal meaning ‘go over’ (matching the English idiom exactly), but shows various semantic developments: ‘give thought to, take cognizance of, be mindful of, trouble oneself with’, etc. In all cases, the lexeme ádhi √i has a mental sense (though III.54.9 has a secondary literal reading): I.71.10, 80.15; III.54.9; V.44.13; VII.56.15; VIII.83.7, 91.3; IX.67.31, 32; X.33.7, 32.3, 100.4. Here I think we should read the expression in the light of vs. 4, with its apparent uncertainty about Indra’s parentage

-- esp. given 4a janitā́and 4c yáḥ … jajā́na, matched here by janitúr yó jajā́na.

I take the rel. cl. of cd with the following vs. The two share the verb íyarti, and 12cd can serve as the cause of 13a: when Indra raises a tempest, he destroys the man’s peace.

I take muhukaíḥ as a temporal adverbial instr., expressing how suddenly Indra can erupt -- even though I have revised my view on muhuké in the preceding hymn (IV.16.17 -- see comm. there). I do not think “raises his tempest with/by sudden skirmishes” is what is meant here.


## 13
samóham is derived by Gr (/MonWms) from sám √ūh ‘push together’. But √ūh does not have a full-grade oh in Vedic and is plausibly related to √vah (see EWA s.v., with lit.). Better to analyze as sa-móham and derive it from √muh ‘be confused’. The same analysis should probably be applied to the differently accented samohé in I.8.6.


## 14
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. and its pendant, the single pāda of vs. 15, are quite unclear, though at least 14ab concerns the Etaśa myth. There are also some formal issues.

The med. part. sasṛmāṇá- must belong to the pf. stem, despite its -mānásuffix appropriate to a thematic stem. This is the only such form, beside conventionally formed pf. part. sasrāṇá- (2x). Narten (1969: 81-82 = KlSch 128) explains the aberrancy as a quirk of the poet, who in this and adjacent hymns shows a penchant for -māna- participles. Another question is what is its value. Most pf.

participles have anterior sense, but the publ. tr. renders it as “as he ran” -- in other words as an action simultaneous with the main verb. And I might be inclined to make this simultaneity more overt by tr. “as he was running.” Kü’s interpretation (552) as what he calls “resultativ” and I would call anterior is more in line with the perfect form: “wenn er seinen Lauf gemacht hat.” But contextually that would be puzzling: what is the point of bringing the horse to a halt if it’s already finished running. And on p. 602 he provides a diff. tr., closer to mine: “der sich im Lauf befindet.” WG seem to take it almost as an inchoative -- “der sich in Lauf gesetzt hat” -- but cite alternative translations in their n. I would suggest that the aberrant shape and the aberrant sense are connected and that the poet created a nonce present-like pf. part. to convey the simultaneous and progressive value he was seeking to express, since regular pf. participles often express anteriority. (This, howver, does not explain why the poet didn’t just use a pres. part. built to the redupl. pres. sísarti, here *sísratam; this act. part. is attested once.) The second hemistich is quite obscure. Old suggests reading kṛṣṇé against the Pp. kṛṣṇáḥ, and this has met general acceptance. The apparently parallel loc. ásikhyām ‘on the dark (FEM.)’ in 15a supports this reading, and it goes naturally with the locatives in 14d.

Who is the referent? Ge gives no hint of what he might think, but Kü and WG both think the subj. is Indra, who is acting on/against Etaśa. Judging from Kü’s tr.

(“er ‘träufelt’ ihn [den Vajra] wütend auf das schwarze (Pferd)”; 602), he thinks the verb ‘sprinkle’ (jigharti) is a euphemism for violent action; its unexpressed obj. is Indra’s vájra, which Indra ‘sprinkles’ onto the black (horse, namely Etaśa), while WG understand Etaśa himself as the object. For both, the part. juhurāṇáḥ belongs with √hṝ ‘be angry’ (flg. Insler 1968; see EWA s.v. HARI ), which can capture Indra’s mood in this encounter. (Note that the poet was not tempted here to give the redupl.

part. a thematic suffix, pace Narten.) By contrast, I accept the traditional association of the part. with √hvṛ ‘go crookedly’. I take the referent here to be Agni. Although the Kü / WG view that it is Indra would be the default interpr. in this Indra hymn, the phraseology of pāda d is almost identical to a pāda in an Agni hymn in this maṇḍala: IV.1.11ab sá jāyata prathamáḥ pastyā̀su, mahó budhné rájaso asyá yónau “He was born first in the dwelling places, at the base of this great realm, (as) his womb....” And ‘moving crookedly’ qualifies Agni very well. The simile comparing the subject here to a Hotar in vs. 15 also supports Agni as referent -- though I suppose it could be argued that since Agni is often identified as a Hotar he need not be compared to one. The part. juhurāṇáḥ ‘going crookedly’ is also appropriate to Agni, describing the unpredictable movements of fire and the flickering movement of its flames.

But what is it that Agni (if he is indeed the subj.) is doing? This may be illuminated (however faintly) by two other verbal forms to ā́√ghṛ in the RV (the adj.

ā́ghṛṇi- ‘glowing, ardent (?)’ belongs to the etymologically separate root √ghṛ ‘be warm, hot’ found in gharmá- ‘heat’, etc. See comm. ad VI.53.3). In X.6.4 Agni sprinkles the gods (ā́jigharti devā́n) as Hotar; in V.48.3 Agni (by my interpr.) sprinkles a vájra. Although in both passages most interpr. attempt to make the verb mean something other than ‘sprinkle’ (see comm. ad locc.), in fact a naturalistic explanation is not hard to construct using the literal meaning of the verb: Agni “sprinkles” the objects in question with sparks, a literal “baptism by fire.” That Agni is elsewhere the object of √ghṛ, being sprinkled with ghee (see II.10.4), makes this the kind of paradoxical reversal that RVic poets so much like. Here notice that Agni performs this action “like a Hotar performing sacrifice” (vs. 15 yájamāno ná hótā), as in X.6.4. The image is both of a properly sacrificing priest performing the ritual action of sprinkling (the fire with ghee) and of the ritual fire sending out a stream of sparks, like sprinkled drops, which would be quite visible on the dark background insistently mentioned in this vs. What the object is that he is sprinkling remains obscure to me - but in addition to the possibilities I suggest in the publ. tr. and those of others mentioned above, it might be Indra’s vájra, as suggested by Kü (see above), though with a different sense of the verb than Kü suggests. Recall that in V.48.3 Agni sprinkles Indra’s vájra-with sparks as a sort of ritual sanctification before Indra employs it.


## 15
I supply ‘hide’ with ásiknyām on the basis of tvácam ásiknīm in IX.73.5 (so also Ge), though WG supply ‘night’ instead.


## 16
Ge supplies a verb (“we call”) in ab; WG take ā́cyāvayāmaḥ in d as the verb of both hemistichs, not just the 2nd. My interpr. is similar to WG’s, but with a further twist. I take vājáyantaḥ in b as a pun. The sense ‘seeking prizes’ is supported by parallel gavyántaḥ … aśvāyántaḥ … / janīyántaḥ “seeking cows, seeking horses, seeking wives,” even though the denom. ‘seeking prizes’ is ordinarily accented on the denom. suffix as vājayá-. By contrast vājáya- is usually transitive in the meaning ‘incite, rouse’, and it can be so here, with índram as object.


## 17
Ge (/WG) take the pf. part. dádṛśānaḥ as a mere attributive adj. with āpíḥ (“visible friend”), while I give it a more verbal sense. If my reflexive ‘showing yourself’ seems too strong, I would still prefer a participial ‘being seen as / becoming visible’ to a straight adjective. Once again, we are hoping for Indra’s epiphany on the ritual ground.

In d in the publ. tr. I take kártā independently and construe ulókam as obj. of the part. uśaté (“longing for wide space”) against Ge (/WG). I now see that this is wrong, as the parallel expressions with kártā … ulókam show (VI.23.3, VII.20.2).

Both of those passages also have a dat. of benefit, vīrā́ya and sudā́se respectively, but neither of those datives is capable of governing an acc. I would therefore emend my tr. to “maker of wide space for the man who longs (for it), conferring vitality.” As this emended tr. shows, I still think ulókam can be secondarily taken as the obj. of uśaté. This same part. uśaté can also serve as dat. of benefit with vayodhā́ḥ. Note the dat. stuvaté with váyo dhāḥ in the next vs. (18b).


## 18
Though I am in agreement with Ge (/WG) that cakṛmā́‘we have acted’ refers to ritual action, I see no reason to supply an obj. (e.g., Ge “das Opfer”).


## 19
Ge’s rendering of ab is not grammatically possible: he takes the subordinate clause as beginning with yád and continuing till the end of b (“weil er ja allein die vielen Feinde erschlägt”), but hanti is unaccented and must therefore belong to the main clause -- despite his rather casual dismissal of the problem (n.

19b). My tr. takes yád dha vṛtrā́as a self-contained subord. clause, with a verb (‘smashes’) to be supplied. Perhaps better is WG’s interpr. of the same sequence as a nominal clause with vṛtrā́as nominative subj.: “wenn es ja Widerstände gibt.” I might emend my tr. to “Indra is praised as the bounteous one; when there are obstacles, he alone smashes (them, though they are) many and unopposable.”
