+++
title = "018"

+++
Indra For general discussion of my interpr. of this hymn, see publ. intro.

## 01
With Ge and others, I assign this vs. to Indra’s mother, not to the poet or a narrator.

Note the precative janiṣīṣṭa, on which see Narten (Sig.Aor., 118). Though this is the only prec. form to this stem in the RV, others are found in other Vedic texts.

The periphrastic caus. páttave kaḥ (on which see Zehnder, Periphr.Kaus. 23 and passim) is generally taken as a euphemism for ‘cause to die’, but the root √pad ‘fall’ is regularly used of miscarriage (cf. my Hyenas [1991], 202-4), which fits this context well. Of course a miscarriage in ancient India could well also have meant death for the mother.

The root aor. injunc. kaḥ is perfectly ambig. between 2nd and 3rd sg. The latter fits the previous pāda, where the fetus Indra is spoken of in the 3rd ps., but 2nd sg.

would anticipate the upcoming dialogic context, with Indra speaking of himself in the 1st ps. in vs. 2. Since English forces us to make a choice, I have chosen 2nd sg., contra Ge and most other tr.


## 02
Most tr. render durgáhā merely as ‘bad passage’ vel sim. (Ge “eine übler Durchgang”), but the word is associated with words meaning ‘deep’ (of water, inter alia, whether it should be derived from √gabh or √gah [on which see EWA s.v. gáhana, GĀH]). And given that Indra is rejecting vaginal birth, that is, a downward trajectory, in favor of coming out sideways, a more precise tr. seems desirable: a “plunge” down through the birth canal and out is what he seems to want to avoid.

Note the otherwise identical 1st sg. subjunctives nír ayā and nír gamāni, built to root pres. (√i) and root aor. (√gam) respectively. Surely some nuance of tense/aspect is being conveyed here; I wish I knew what. (An English rendering with a pres. progressive versus a straight eventive, “I will not be coming out from there; I will come out crosswise …,” might capture something of the sense, with the progressive expressing deliberative possibilities and the eventive the ultimate choice.)


## 03
It is generally agreed that pāda b contains another snatch of Indra’s speech.

The question is how to interpr. the double ná ná that opens the pāda. The first ná can be taken as an independent assertion -- “No!” -- followed by an amplification of that assertion, nā́nu gāni “I will not follow.” In that case the positive statement ánu nū́ gamāni “I will now follow” represents a contradiction of the first and is an indication of the new-born Indra’s wavering mind. Such seems the interpr. of WG, for example.

However, as Old points out, a double negative can instead express an emphatic positive. Such is the interpr. of Ge, and I follow it here, in part because I think the point is that Indra was decisive from the moment of conception.

Like 2ab, this pāda contains two parallel 1st sg. subjunctives, ánu gāni and ánu .. gamāni, though in this case they are both built to root aorists, but to two different roots. Again, I don’t know what differential semantic nuance is being expressed (if any). Here the poet may simply be striving for euphony: note the pleasing phonological patterning in ná nā́nu gāni ánu nū́gamāni.

## 04
As Old discusses, the sequence sá ṛ́dhak must contain underlying sā́, not, with Pp., sáḥ.


## 05
The standard tr. all construe svayám with what follows, átkaṃ váśāna(ḥ) -- e.g., Ge “selbst sein Gewand umlegen” -- on the basis of svayám átkaiḥ in II.35.14 (which I render differently). But surely what is most remarkable here is that a newborn stood up by himself; the self-swaddling would also be surprising but would simply follow from the first feat.

## 06-09
For my interpr. of the speakers in these vss. and the role of the waters in the myth, see publ. intro. Most tr. take the vss. as all spoken by Indra’s mother (Ge [/WG], Doniger), whereas I distribute them to a variety of voices: 6 Indra, 7 Indra’s mother, 8 waters, 9 Indra’s mother. As I see it, in 6 Indra prompts his mother to ask the waters questions; in 7 she rather sarcastically and belittlingly asks questions about them, whom she seems to accuse of trying to lay claim to her son. They respond directly to him in 8, reminding him of his mother’s dereliction of maternal duty and suggesting that they are better at mothering him than she is. So that she rather defiantly points out in 9 that subsequent negative things that happened to him were not her fault.


## 06
As suggested in the publ. intro., the (real) waters in the amniotic sac that “break” right before birth and the (mythological) waters confined by Vṛtra and released by Indra are conflated here. Indra may be speaking from within the womb about the waters there battering the womb itself for release, though the waters in the Vṛtra myth would not be far from the audience’s mind. If Indra the fetus is immersed in these amniotic fluids, their sloshing sounds would surround him -- and it would be appropriate to ask his mother what they are saying.

The simile in b, ṛtā́varīr iva saṃkróśamāṇāḥ “like truthful women together shouting their witness” may have a quasi-legal resonance. The root √kruś is later used for raising a hue and cry on witnessing a crime (vel sim.), such as a Rākṣasa abduction (see my Sacr.Wife 233). Configuring the waters as truthful and articulate witnesses in this pāda leads directly to the suggestion in the next pāda that they should be asked what they are saying.

## 06-07
The responsive phrases kím … bhananti (6c) and kím … bhananta (7a) provide a textbook case of -anta replacement. See my 1979 IIJ 21 article, pace Gotō’s (1st Kl., 222) characterization of bhananta as “reziprok.”


## 07
As just noted, I think that this vs. expresses Indra’s mother’s suspicions about the waters’ alienation of Indra’s filial affection for her. In pāda a she interprets the waters’ speech, about which Indra asked her in vs. 6, as invitations to him (to join them and abandon her, presumably). In b the charged word avadyá- ‘disgrace’ recurs from 5a, where the mother considered Indra to be “like a disgrace / somehow a disgrace” and concealed him. Here she suggests that the waters are, in contrast, eager to assume his disgrace. In context this seems almost like an accusation that the waters are so perverse that in their pursuit of him they are willing to assume any evil that attaches to him. In fact, this is probably an allusion to the well-known concept that waters cleanse transgressors of their transgressions (cf., e.g., I.23.22-24). Indra would automatically acquire blood guilt from his killing of Vṛtra (on Indra’s kilbiṣāṇi ‘sins’ and resulting impurity, see my Hyenas, 62-68, also vss. 12-13 below).

(The interpr. of his ‘disgrace’ here as arising from his killing of Vṛtra goes back to Sāy. See Ge’s n. 7b.) In any case, in the 2nd hemistich Indra’s mother goes on to assert the primacy of her relationship with Indra and thus her indirect role in his glorious deed, the slaying of Vṛtra. The fronted máma ‘mine’ makes this claim esp. strong.


## 08
The waters throw this emphatically fronted máma back at her, with four fronted occurrences of mámat, which is, as Ge clearly argues, a nonce ablative sg. of the 1st sg. pronoun, a blend of gen. máma and abl. mát. To interpret it as an adv. (Gr “bald-bald’ and see lit. cited by Old) is to ignore the rhetorical responsion in this section of the hymn. In my interpr. of the verse each pāda is spoken by a different though undifferentiatable representative of the waters. The first two pādas counter Indra’s mother’s boast in 7cd about her son’s great deed with reminders that she, not any of them [=waters], is responsible for transgressing against this same son. Both pādas begin mámac caná “not because of me.” In the second hemistich they take credit for the good treatment Indra received and the way he thrived under it, each beginning mámac cid “certainly because of me.” Putting the vs. in the mouth of Indra’s mother, as most interpr. do, creates grave difficulties. Not only do the claims in ab become incoherent, but it also requires that the young woman (yuvatíḥ) in pāda a not be identical with Indra’s mother (despite 4a, 5a). A way out of that difficulty is possible: pāda a could be in the 1st ps (“I, a young woman, cast you aside” -- the pf.

form parā́sa is compatible with a 1st sg.), but we then confront the problem that she both accepts responsibility for what seems a misdeed and disclaims any reason for or benefit from the action.

mamṛḍyuḥ is the only pf. form attested to √mṛḍ in all of Skt. (save for the grammarians). Because of its isolation, it is difficult to interpr. the optative. Kü (374) suggests it expresses the Potentialis der Vergangenheit. I might suggest rather that has the value of past habitual (like Engl. “would [regularly] X”), though this is not a normal use of the pf. opt in Vedic (on which see my “Where Are All the Optatives,” 2009). But I also think the transmitted form may be signaling something else entirely.

The indic. 3rd pl. pf. would be *mamṛḍuḥ. Its root syllable should scan long (like

*mṝḍá- and *mṝḍáya-, transmitted as mṛḍ) because of compensatory lengthening
from *mṛẓḍ). I wonder if the underlying form *mamṝḍur was remade as an optative in order to ensure the necessary heavy syllable in the cadence. If it is a real optative, however, note that it is spoken by a woman and its subjects are females, demonstrating the association between the pf. opt. and women’s speech that I discussed in the 2009 article. In d the marvel of Indra’s standing up (right after birth) is repeated from 5c.

In 5 this was emphatically not his mother’s doing: she had hidden him away. A watery foster mother seems to be claiming credit, one of those who showed mercy and kindness to the child in the preceding pāda.


## 09
If I am correct that Indra’s mother reclaims speech in this vs., she now indicates that a risky moment in the Vṛtra battle wasn’t her fault. The opening mámac caná “not because of me” returns from 8ab, and, so it seems to me, this indicates that she implicitly agrees to the accuracy of the accusations in 8ab -- that she did throw the baby aside and let evil birth swallow him.

In the VP ápa hánū jaghā́na the jaws are universally taken to be Indra’s (e.g., WG “hat … deine beide Kinnbachen abgeschlagen.” But I know of no account of the Indra-Vṛtra battle when Indra’s jaws are attacked, and in fact several times it is Vṛtra’s jaws: X.152.3 ví vrtrásya hán ̥ ū ruja “break apart the jaws of Vr̥tra”; I.52.6 vṛtrásya yád … nijaghántha hánvor indra tanyatúm “when you, Indra, struck your thunder down upon the jaws of Vr̥tra.” I therefore think that the hánū here have to be Vṛtra’s, but with a twist: this is not a proclamation of Indra’s triumphant blow, but rather a dicey moment when Vṛtra was counter-attacking. Vṛtra has ‘pierced down’ Indra (nivividhvā́n) and is presumably coming in for the kill. What kind of kill? The clue, in my view, is the preverb ápa ‘aside, away’. I suggest that Vṛtra is smashing his own jaws aside, that is, moving his jaws apart to be able to swallow large prey.

Acdg. to various websites (e.g., http://www.all-creatures.org/articles/ar-snakemyths.html), snakes’ jaws are not fused together but merely held together by stretchy ligaments, an arrangement that allows them to open their jaws very wide. Just as “Evil Birth” swallowed the baby Indra in 8b, here the arch-snake threatens to do the same. But in the second half-vs. Indra reasserts his mastery and crushes his enemy.


## 10
We return to the primal scene of Indra’s birth again, with a reiteration of his mother’s abandonment of the new-born babe (here expressed as the “unlicked calf” árīḷhaṃ vátsam, pāda c), forcing him out on his own -- though the description of Indra as a strapping bull in ab makes him seem considerably less vulnerable.

The second hemistich lacks a main verb to govern the dat. pseudo-infinitive caráthāya. Most tr. supply ‘let’ vel sim. I suggest that sasūva in pāda a ‘gave birth’ (√sū ‘give birth’) may carry over into cd, as a stand-in for the (non-existent, or at least unattested) pf. to the homonymous root √sū ‘impel’.


## 11
The plot gets a bit murky here. His mother, having sent him off alone in vs. 10, now follows him, with the fear that the gods are abandoning him. This seems to happen much later, just before the Vṛtra battle and long after the birth and her own abandonment of the baby. But, despite her fears about the other gods, Indra finds a companion on his own -- Viṣṇu, who is not usually a party to the Vṛtra battle.

## 12-13
See the publ. intro. for uncertainties about the interpr. of these vss. In some sense they seem to enlarge on the theme of “Indra’s disgrace” (índrasyāvadyám) in 7b -- the blood guilt Indra incurs from even sanctioned killing, made far worse by the intra-family slaughter depicted in vs. 12. Which leads to Indra’s extreme loss of status, isolation, and shunning by the other gods in the final vs. ### 12
In light of d, which describes Indra’s killing his father, the question in a, “who made your mother a widow,” can only be answered “you did!” The final word of the vs. pādagṛ́hya ‘having grasped him by the foot’ is puzzling. It might seem to exclude Vṛtra as the victim (and as Indra’s father) since, as a snake, he has no feet -- though it might be a way of indicating picking up a snake by its tail. The only other occurrence of this cmpd gerund is in the desperately difficult hymn X.27, vs. 4, where the context is similar and the referent does seem to be Vṛtra.


## 13
Indra gets the last word in this hymn and, having described his situation in the direst of terms, ends with a note of hope and coming triumph: the falcon’s arrival with the soma, to be treated (in even more enigmatic terms) in two nearby hymns, IV.26-27. Since in our hymn the new-born Indra drank soma in Tvaṣṭar’s house (3c) and presumably had a good dose of it before the Vṛtra battle, the falcon’s stolen soma cannot be the primal soma, though it sometimes mythologically seems to parallel the primal stealing of fire in the Prometheus myth.

A dog-cooker (śvapaca-) in later texts is a person living outside of societal norms (cf., e.g., MDŚ III.92), grouped with those who have fallen from caste and so forth.

Notice that Indra here finds no one to be merciful to him (ná … vivide marḍitā́ram), in contrast to the merciful waters when he was a baby (8c).

Most take the dishonored wife to be Indra’s own, but no wife has intruded on the family drama we’ve been observing. I assume rather that this is another reference to his mother, who, now that she is a widow, receives slighting treatment.

IV.19. Indra


## 01
As far as I can tell, this is the only ex. of nír √vr̥in the RV. In conjunction with ékam it must mean something like ‘single out’, ‘pick out from a group’.


## 02
The verb ávāsṛjanta lacks an overt object. This may be because it is middle, in contrast to the generally transitive active to this stem; so most tr., incl. the publ. tr.

(“let go”). However, the -anta may be an -anta replacement of the usual type (see my 1979 IIJ article), and the verb form should be taken as a transitive equivalent to the active, with unexpressed obj. Indra. (This is how Kulikov [-ya-pres., p. 289] takes it, flg. a suggestion of Lubotsky’s -- though -anta replacement is not mentioned: “The gods abandoned [Indra], like the feeble ones.”) I am of two minds. The situation depicted is presumably the gods finking out on Indra when the Vṛtra battle looms; this might suggest that we should supply Indra as object: English “let Indra down” would be an almost exact match. But the simile jívrayo ná “like old/feeble (men)” does not fit this scenario as well; it implies that their powers simply failed them.

They “let go” -- the stuffing just went out of them, as it were.

The usual problem with bhúvaḥ -- injunctive (so apparently Ge, also the publ.

tr.) or subjunctive (so apparently WG). I assume that this verb refers to what happened after the event of pāda a: with the gods out of contention, Indra comes into his own as the universal monarch (samrā́j-) and takes his true and proper place (satyáyoni-). The use of -yoni- here is reminiscent of the passage in a nearby Indra hymn, IV.16.10, where Indra is urged to sit down on his own yóni- (své yónau) so that he can be recognized.


## 03
The phrase abudhyám ábudhyamānaṃ suṣupāṇám “not to be awakened, unawakening, gone to sleep” must be proleptic, expressing the state the serpent will be in after Indra has done his work on him: ‘put to sleep’ and similar idioms are standard euphemisms for death in Vedic, as in many languages (e.g., modern English). See my “‘Sleep’ in Vedic and Indo-European,” Zeitschrift für vergl.

Sprachforschung (KZ) 96 (1982/83) 6-16. I do not think, pace most tr., that this depicts a drowsy Vṛtra whom Indra woke up to fight. For further disc. see I.103.7 and comm. thereon.

The hapax aparván at the end of d is picked up by párvatānām at the end of 4d. (They are, of course, synchronically unrelated.)


## 04
As noted above ad IV.16.14 this group of Indra hymns contains a set of anomalously built medial participles to the roots √vaś ‘desire’ and √vas ‘wear’. Here medial thematic uśámāna- is doubly unexpected: this root builds a root pres., with a weak grade uś, but it is only active (with an extremely well-attested act. part. uśánt-), save for three occurrences of athem. uśāná-. And there is no other trace of a 6th class thematic present to account for the -māna-suffix. Neither of these anomalies seems to me particularly serious or hard to account for. As for the middle voice, verbs of desiring seem to fall naturally into the semantic realm of the middle voice, so that a transfer of the participle would not be surprising. Moreover, if we take the redupl.

part. vāvaśāná- as belonging to a pf. of this root (contra Kü, who assigns all these forms to √vāś ‘bellow’), there is a parallel formation with the same voice and same meaning. As for the thematic suffix, Narten (MSS 16: 82 = KlSch 128) suggests that this poet has a penchant for -māna-; if this explanation seems insufficient (and it does to me -- what about uśāná- in IV.23.1 as well as numerous well-behaved athem.

middle participles in his oeuvre) -- one might point to the ambiguous 3rd pl. act.

uśánti (3x), which is presumably the 3rd pl. of the root pres., but could belong also to a 6th class present. (However, I note that the three 3rd pl. forms are found only in I and X.) I take ójaḥ as an acc. of respect with the part.

Ge sees pāda d as reflecting the Winged Mountains story, but this doesn’t seem evident to me.

## 05
Pāda a presents some interpretational difficulties that I think can be resolved by considering it an example of disharmony in a simile (see my 1982 IIJ article). I take the verb abhí prá dadruḥ as belonging to √dṝ ‘split, burst’ (see below for another possibility). In the simile jánayo ná gárbham it has transitive value, with the object expressing the contents that has been burst out (not the container), hence “as women (burst out) their embryo.” In the frame I take the mountains that ended the previous pāda (4d) as the subject and the verb as intransitive: “they burst.” (This is also Ge’s and WG’s interpr., as well as Kü’s [230].) Old suggests as another alternative that the verb can be transitive, with mountains as subject and rivers as object, but I would prefer to supply as little as possible. Old suggests yet another possibility, that the verb actually belongs to the root √drā ‘run’. Although this does not make sense for the simile (as Old notes), it could work for the frame -- though in that case ‘rivers’ might be a better subject. In that case we would have a pun separating the simile and frame (“[the rivers] ran [√drā], as women burst out [√dṝ] their embryo”), rather than a mismatch of usages of a single lexical item. I prefer the single-root solution.

The 2nd pāda also has a somewhat skewed expression. In this context we would expect the entities that “went/drove forth all at once” to be the released waters, who are certainly the topic of the 2nd hemistich. But instead it is ‘stones’ (ádrayaḥ).

Now this is probably, on the one hand, a particularly vivid image of the mountains suddenly bursting and sending forth an explosion of stones, a rockslide. But on the other hand, pāda-final ádrayaḥ produces a Jagatī cadence in a hymn that is otherwise entirely Triṣṭubh. Old suggests (without great enthusiasm, as far as I can see) an emendation to abl. *ádreḥ ‘from the stone’, which would fix both the meter and the image. I wonder if ádrayaḥ is a poetic trick: we expect the subject *ā́paḥ ‘waters’ -- which would provide both the standard Vṛtra-myth denouement and a good Triṣṭubh cadence -- and instead get a twist of both sense and meter.


## 07
This vs. celebrates the fructifying liquid that Indra released by destroying Vṛtra and depicts its effects on humans (specifically females)(ab), the landscape (c), and livestock (d). The first hemistich is a cleverly constructed echo chamber, because the females being made to swell (that is, get pregnant) there probably stand for the waters, but are also compared to waters. In other words the waters are being compared to waters, by way of the intermediate ‘unwed girls’ (agrúvaḥ). This is also something of a dig at Vṛtra, who hadn’t managed to make them pregnant though he is sometimes called their husband (cf., e.g., dāsá-patnī- ‘having a Dāsa as husband’ in I.32.11, etc.). Indra’s role as their real husband is embodied in the final word of the vs. dáṃsupatnīḥ (however we interpret the rest of it; see below).

In the simile nabhanvò ná vákvā(ḥ), vákva- belongs to the root √vañc ‘surge, undulate, billow’. The stem nabhanú- is found only here and in V.59.7 and is transparently a derivative of the root √nabh ‘burst, explode’. Old suggests the verbal meaning ‘sich spalten’ with nominal ‘Spalt’(‘split, cleft’). However, in both passages I think the nominal form refers not to the aftermath of the verbal action but rather to the process -- the spurts sent forth by the explosion (rather like the stones in 5b). The image is visually arresting (at least to me).

The sense of dhvasrá- in b also requires some discussion. The root √dhvaṃs is variously glossed (e.g., EWA s.v. ‘zerstieben, zerstäuben, zerbröcklen’), but in my view the ‘spray, scatter’ sense is far less prominent than ‘occlude’ (with smoke, dust, or other concealing substance), a sense also found in derivatives like dhvasmán- ‘miasma, (clouds of) smoke’. Thus to my mind the adj. dvasrá- means in the first instance ‘occluded, dusty’; I have pushed this slightly to ‘parched’, from something like ‘dry as dust’. Ge’s “die dahinschwindenden” (dwindling away) conveys something of the same sense of weakness and lack of fertility, but I don’t know how he arrived at it.

ṛtajñā́ḥ is identified as a nom. sg. m. modifying Indra by Gr, so also Scar (177). It can just as easily be an acc. pl. fem. modifying the young women / waters, as Ge, WG, and the publ. tr. take it. Given that the waters in the adjacent hymn, IV.18.6, are called ṛtā́varīḥ, the latter analysis seems preferable -- although it might be even better to read it with both referents.

The publ. tr. analyzes dáṃsupatnī- as having a first member dáṃsu-, an adjective ‘wondrous’ related to dáṃsas- ‘wondrous power’ (so Gr). However, the prevailing interpr. is that it is either a cmpd dáṃ-supatnī- or a two-word sequence dáṃ *supátnīḥ, with, in either case, a form of dám- ‘house’ (cf. dáṃpati-, pátir dán).

The complex is then to be rendered ‘having a good husband in the house’ vel sim.

Alternatively Ge (n. 7d) suggests that it might be a metathesis of *su-daṃpatnīḥ (given without accent), which seems quite unlikely. Although I think the form plays off dámpati-, I am still inclined towards the ‘wondrous’ interpr., because of the deeds that have just been ascribed to Indra.


## 08
The question in this vs. is what to do with gūrtā́(ḥ). The standard tr. take it as modifying the temporal expression pūrvī́r uṣásaḥ śarádaś ca -- hence, e.g., Ge’s “[v]iele gelobte Morgen und Herbste.” This is grammatically fine and perhaps also supported by the fact that the adj. is in the same pāda as the temporal expression.

Still, I am somewhat unsatisfied by this interpr. On the one hand, as Klein points out (DGRV I.74), this small group of Vāmadeva Indra hymns contains three similar temporal expressions (IV.16.19, 18.4, and here), and the only adjectives are quantitative ones, so ‘welcomed, besung, praised’ would be an intrusion in the formulaic language. Moreover, svágūrta- ‘self-greeted, i.e., gurgling’ is used twice of rivers (I.140.13 síndhavaḥ, X.95.7 nadyàḥ), and something like that would fit semantically here. The problem of course is that síndhu- is masc., and so gūrtā́ḥ cannot modify acc. pl. síndhūn as the publ. tr. implies. It is possible that the expression síndhavaś ca svágūrtāḥ in I.140.13 was transposed to our passage without adjusting the gender. More likely is that the acc. pl. of another, feminne word for rivers, streams, or waters should be supplied: nadyàḥ- as in X.95.7, sīrā́ḥ as in pāda c of this vs., or apáḥ, the default watery referent in the Vṛtra myth. The tr. should be emended to better reflect this: “… he set loose the welcomed [/gurgling]

*(waters/streams and) the rivers.” Strikingly svágūrta-, which occurs only 4x total in the RV, appears two vss. later (10c) in the same metrical position with the same
sandhi form. It there modifies ápāṃsi ‘labors’. Is it too fanciful to suggest that that phrase, svágūrtā, ápāṃsi, is meant to invoke *(svá)gūrtā, *apáḥ here? For further disc. see also Old ad loc. 
## 09
As indicated in the publ. intro., the contents of this vs. and the reason for its inclusion in this hymn are both deeply obscure, though the occurrence of the rare stem agrū́- ‘unwed girl’ in 7a may have prompted the inclusion of the bizarre anecdote in 9ab. As Ge's reff. for ab show, the shunned son of a maiden, the blind man, and the lame man are mentioned together in II.13.12, 15.7, I.112.8; also IV.30.16, 19. So, however ill-assorted, this is a set. The unfortunate son of an agrū́is also mentioned in nearby IV.30.16, though there he is only shunned, not eaten by ants.

On ukhachíd- see Scar (131).

Unfortunately I have nothing further to say about the sense of this vs. I have toyed with the possibility that there’s a ritual reference here, to the taking out of the offering fire from the householder’s fire and its removal to the east. But, though there might be rough correspondence -- very rough -- between the first and third parts, the middle part with the blind man and the snake doesn't work at all, as far as I can see.


## 10
Contra the standard tr. and interpr., I take āha as 1st sg. This is the summary vs. of the hymn (with vs. 11 simply the Vāmadeva Indra refrain), and in such vss. the poet often speaks in his own person or that of the group, referring to the hymn that has just been recited. This vs. entirely fits that pattern. I also interpr. the enclitic te not only as a genitive with the deeds, but also as a dative with the part.

vidúṣe, identifying Indra as the knowing audience. (And who better than Indra to know his own deeds?) āvidvā́n is one of the few forms of √vid ‘know’ cmpded with the preverb ā́in the RV. It does not seem to have a clear nuance.

On svágūrta- see comm. ad VI.68.4.
