+++
title = "020"

+++
Indra The midsection of this hymn (vss. 5-8) has a surprising concentration of -tarstem nominals, both root- and suffix-accented.


## 01
Note the patterned phonological repetition dūrā́d … āsā́d … yāsad, with the 1st two morphologically parallel (ablative sg.) and the last not (subjunctive, 3rd sg.).

To make the tr. clearer, “our” should be inserted before “help.” Otherwise it sounds as if Indra needs to find help for himself.


## 02
Again, “our” should be inserted before “help.”

## 03
As Ge suggests, the imagery in the first hemistich seems to come from chariot racing. Pāda b is identical to V.31.11d (save for the ps. of the verb), a verse concerned with the chariot contest between Indra and the Sun. Putting smthg in front must simply refer to placing it in the lead, but in a ritual context like this one, there is interference between that sense and the ritual action of placing the offering fire to the east, also expressed by purás √dhā and regularly represented by the epithet of Agni puróhita-. But since Indra is never the agent of that ritual action and since it is the fire, not the sacrifice, that is put in front ritually, the chariot race interpr. must be primary here. In saying this, I find myself in disagreement with Bloomfield, who says “The repeated pāda fits well in 4.20.3, is dubious in 5.31.11,” without commenting on either the fit or the dubiousness.

The Engl. phrase “gain our intention” is somewhat awk. What saniṣyasi krátuṃ naḥ means, I think, is that Indra’s action of putting the sacrifice in front will cause him to win the race, which is what we want to happen. But objects of the root √san are usually concrete (vā́jam, etc., as in vā́jasātau in 2d; cf. also sanáye dhãnānām “to gain the stakes” in the next pāda) and also things that the grammatical subject desires to win, so my suggested indirect benefit is somewhat anomalous. So it is possible that “our krátu” that Indra will win is something he wants -- perhaps our intention or resolve to sacrifice to him, not to other gods.


## 04
The verb pā́(ḥ) opening the 2nd half-vs. should also be read with (or supplied with) pāda b. Ge supplies “sei” for the first hemistich and construes the gen. phrase in b with upāké. This is possible but, given the parallelism of the two genitive phrases referring to soma in b and c, less likely.

Ge and WG take pṛṣṭhyà- lit. ‘related to the back’ as an adjective of (superior) quality in a spatial metaphor -- the sense of “top” in Cole Porter’s “You’re the top” or the adj. “tip-top.” Cf. WG’s “am erstklassigen Soma-Spross.” I think rather that the adj. is meant literally to refer to the soma plant’s well-known growing place, the back of the mountains (that is, the high slopes). Cf., e.g., V.36.2 rúhat sómo ná párvatasya prṣṭ̥ hé “as the soma-plant grows on the back of the mountain.”


## 05
In my opinion, the first half-vs. consists of two separate similes, the second of which, sṛ́ṇyo ná jétā, needs to be fleshed out. In the first one Indra with his abundant seers is like a tree with ripe fruit (vṛkṣó ná pakváḥ). In the second Indra the winner/conquerer is like a man who harvests the fruit with a sickle -- or more likely who harvests grain, the crop having subtly changed, with the pakvá- ‘ripened’ held constant. Cf. X.101.3 nédīya ít srṇ̥ yàḥ pakvám éyāt “the ripe (grain) should come even closer to our sickles.” For ripe grain see I.66.3 yávo ná pakvó jétā jánānām “Ripe like grain, a conquerer of peoples,” which also contains jétar-, though in my view in an independent syntagm.

The simile in the 2nd half-vs. is striking because it casts Indra as a maiden (yóṣām), pursued by the poet as a dashing and virile young man (márya-, a word sometimes applied to Indra) -- a notable gender reversal. This vs. contains one of the few finite forms of the secondary root √rapś ‘teem, abound’, and 2c has an occurrence of the better-attested related possessive adj.

virapśín-. In the currently favored etym. the “root” √rapś was extracted ultimately from the nominal virapśá- ‘abundance’ (the basis for virapśín-), itself constructed from a dvandva of vīrá- ‘men’ and paśú- ‘beasts’ (see EWA s.v. virapśá-). It’s important to note, however, that this etym. is soundly rejected by Kü (417-18), though I still favor it. The two forms of the thematic pres. rapśa- (IV.45.1, X.113.2) are both immediately preceded by the preverb ví, which (by most lights) has been secondarily extracted from the cmpd. Our perfect form here, rarapśé, is also construed with ví, but with yáḥ intervening, and the other pf. form (VI.18.12) lacks ví but appears with prá in distant tmesis.


## 06
The publ. tr. reflects the emendation of vájraṃ to *vrajáṃ, in concert with Gr, Ge, Schmidt (B+I, 137), Lub, and, after some resistance, Old. The resulting phrase ā́dartā *vrajám has a close parallel in VI.66.8 vrajáṃ dártā, as Ge points out.

Ge takes *vrajám as part of the simile and supplies Vala as the object in the frame: “… erbricht wie einen festen Pferch (den Vala)…” But the position of the simile marker ná speaks against this. I instead take *vrajám as a reference to Vala, with the simile portraying the attack of a wild beast (bhīmáḥ) on a real pen (thus effectively reading *vrajám twice and separating bhīmáḥ from Indra). For bhīmá- as a wild beast see mṛgó ná bhīmáḥ (I.154.2, 190.3), siṃhó ná bhīmáḥ (IV.16.4 [nearby], IX.97.28), etc. In their tr. WG keep the transmitted text and tr. “Der Furchtbare ist der die Keule Stiebende (in den) … prallen (Pferch) …,” thus silently incorporating a *vrajám in the final parenthesis (“Pferch”). I am also not certain what the VP “die Keule stieben” would mean nor how (ā́) √dṛ can mean ‘stieben’. They acknowledge the generally accepted emendation in their notes. Although I do not see an easy way to avoid this emendation, I do not know how the corruption could have arisen, esp. given vrajám apavartā́si in 8b. Still, vájra- is considerably more common than vrajá- and would always be lurking in an Indra context.


## 07
The rel. prn. yásya of the first hemistich serves as a modulation pivot from the 3rd ps. of vs. 6 to the direct 2nd ps. address to Indra of 7cd.

On udvāvṛṣāṇáḥ see comm. ad VIII.61.7, where I reject the Neisser / Gotō / Kü positing of a 2nd root √varṣ ‘sich ermannen’, etc. and assign it to √varṣ ‘rain’, with the specialized meaning ‘boil up and over’, as an expression of irrepressible energy. This image would work nicely here with the pen “overflowing with goods” (vásunā nyṛ̀ṣtam) in the preceding vs. (6d).


## 08
For brief and unilluminating comments on śikṣānará- see comm. ad I.53.2.

Here I prefer to read the loc samithéṣu with it rather than with what follows.

The root noun cmpd. prahā́- is discussed with care and insight by Scar (698- 700). The cmpd. is found in X.42.9 in a clear gambling context. Of the various proposals Scar makes, I find most satisfying the one in which prahā́- is the stakes/pool/kitty ‘left out in front’. The possessive adj. here would then mean ‘having the jackpot’ and would fit with the gambling imagery in 3d śvaghnī́va … sanáye dhánānām “like (a gambler) with the best throw to gain the stakes.” (Scar, however, takes our particular passage in a different and, to me, unconvincing direction, p.

700.) The standard interpr. is ‘take the lead’ (e.g., Ge “den Vorsprung gewinnend”) in a race, but I’m not sure how this meaning would develop from ‘leave’ and ‘forth’.


## 09
Pāda a is a definitional one, with the precise type of ability (śácī-) possessed by Indra giving him the designation ‘most able’ (śáciṣṭha).

Ge interprets múhu kā́cid as haplology for *muhukā́kā́cid (so also EWA s.v. múhur, WG, and, somewhat differently, Old flg. Ludwig). Cf. nearby IV.16.17 kásmiñ cid … muhuké (also muhukaíḥ IV.17.12). I have come, somewhat reluctantly, to the conclusion that this is correct. However, as noted in disc. ad IV.16.17, I do not accept Ge’s rendering of muhuká- as ‘Schlachtgeschrei’, which produces for this passage “… jedwedes Schlachtgeschrei hervorruft.” WG’s “… welches plötzlichen Vorfälle auch immer erledigt” is, however, more plausible. In IV.16.17 I suggest a sense ‘skirmish’, which works contextually there, but is here, I think, too specific. In fact, the published tr., “does everything instantly,” can stand, for a literal Engl. “does every instantaneous thing.” The lexeme ví √ci means literally ‘pull apart’; an exactly parallel usage to this one appears in VI.67.8 yuváṃ dāśúṣe ví cayiṣṭam áṃhaḥ (also cited by Ge), and the notion of pulling apart / opening up a narrow place (áṃhaḥ) is very apposite. It should also be noted, however, that the same lexeme is used in gambling contexts, indeed in the very X.42.9 just cited for prahā́vant- in 8c. In gambling it means ‘pile apart, pull out (a good hand)’. Although I don’t think that that idiomatic sense is reflected here, I do think that the gambling overtones would resonate with the other gambling vocabulary in this hymn.


## 10
I do not understand the function of the initial prá in b. Gr indicates that it belongs with dā́tave, and Keydana (Infinitive, p. 255) explicitly says that it must belong with dā́tave and is therefore in tmesis. Though this is not impossible, I am somewhat reluctant to accept this explanation in part because prá is relatively rare with √dā. I wonder if it signals the lexeme prá √as ‘be present, be prominent’, with the copula gapped. Fortunately, the interpr. chosen has almost no effect on the sense of the pāda.
