+++
title = "021"

+++
Indra


## 01
As indicated in the publ. tr., this vs. bears some resemblance to the first vs. of the preceding hymn: our first pāda ā́yātu índró ‘vasa úpa naḥ more or less lexically matches IV.20.1ab ā́na índro … ávase yāsat. See also vs. 3 below.

The second hemistich is syntactically problematic; see Old’s extensive n. The problem is that both nom. sg. vāvṛdhānáḥ and the gen. sg. rel. prn. yásya appear to refer to Indra. Ge interprets yásya as a reflexive rel. (see n. 1c): “der erstarkt seine vielen Kräfte,” but not only am I not aware of other reflexive uses of the relative, but this tr. requires that the med. participle vāvṛdhāná- be transitive, which it is usually not (though, to be fair, a reflexive transitive would probably require middle voice).

Although the publ. tr. is syntactically trickier (by cutting the pāda into two syntactic pieces), it avoids both problems by taking the participle as a separate clause (“when he has grown strong”) and the antecedent to yásya in a rel. clause that begins with táviṣīḥ. In this interpr. táviṣīḥ … pūrvī́ḥ is nom., not acc. The relative also has domain over the clause in d, with yásya limiting kṣatrám, which is taken as a nom., not acc. as in most tr. Ge’s “wie der Himmel seine überlegene Herrschaft entfalten möge” also violates the standard construction of similes, by making the simile clausal, with the verb púṣyāt in the simile seeming to correspond to the participle vāvṛdhānáḥ in the frame. (WG’s tr. of d avoids this problem; their rendering is quite similar to the publ. tr.)


## 02
The nṛ́̄n in pāda b is problematic. It appears to be an acc. pl., and in fact is an acc. in the same phrase tuvirā́dhaso nṛ́̄n in V.58.2 (referring to the Maruts). But here the undoubted gen. sg. tuvidyumnásya immediately preceding (and morphologically parallel to tuvirā́dhasaḥ) invites a gen. sg. reading also of ambiguous tuvirā́dhasaḥ. This in turn presents us with several choices: 1) to take nṛ́̄n as a real gen. sg., 2) to assume that the last two words were borrowed from V.58.2 (or based on the formula found therein) and not adjusted morphologically, so that nṛ́̄n is functionally a gen. sg. but formally an acc. pl., or 3) to detach nṛ́̄n syntactically from what precedes it. Old opts for option 2 (see disc. in ZDMG 55 [1901]: 745-47 = KlSch. 286-88). He assumes that since tuvirā́dhasaḥ can represent either acc. pl. or gen. sg., when the formula in V.58.2 was imported here, nṛ́̄n could come along for the ride, functioning as a gen. sg. though adopted from an acc. pl. environment. The third tack is taken by Ge, who takes ṇṛ́̄n as a complement of gen. sg. tuvirā́dhasaḥ (“des … gegen die Männer Freigebigen”), and by WG, somewhat differently. The latter take nṛ́̄n as a second obj. of stavatha (besides vṛ́ṣṇyāni), with the two genitives preceding it hanging off it and modifying Indra: “… seine stierhaften (Kräfte) sollt ihr hier preisen, (und) die Männer des …” (A fourth option, a variant of 3, would be possible: to take tuvirā́dhaso nṛ́̄n as the 2nd acc. obj., with only tuvidyumnásya a gen.) Presumably the “men” WG have in mind are the Maruts, who do appear with Indra in the very next vs. (marútvān 3c) and as just noted are the referents of the undoubted acc. phrase in V.58.2. As for option 1, without endorsing this solution I would point out that a variant of this might be possible. The expected gen. sg. to the root noun

*nṛ́-, based on comparison with Aves. nǝrǝš, should be monosyllabic *núr (like pitúr)
(see AiG III.212), *nuḥ in pausa. Clearly this brief and opaque form didn’t stand much of a chance of preservation as such; but I wonder if, esp. in formulaic phrases like tuvirā́dhaso *núḥ, it wasn’t substituted for by the acc. pl. nṛ́̄n, the only other (surviving) monosyllabic form in the paradigm, whose affiliation to nṛ́- was much clearer.

In d the verb abhy ásti ‘overwhelms’ picks up the nominal abhíbhūti- ‘overwhelming(ness)’ in 1d, with the substitution of √as for √bhū.

## 03
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. also recalls the opening vs. of the preceding hymn. There the verb ā́… yāsat ‘he will drive here’ is construed with two ablatives of place-from-which (near and far), plus ávase ‘for help’ + naḥ. Here ā́yātu, also with ávase naḥ, is construed with no fewer than six ablatives of the same type, elaborating on the near/far contrast to provide a universe of choices.

On púrīṣa- see comm. ad I.163.1.

Ge (/WG) take svàrṇara- as a PN, but this interpr. does not fit the pattern of the vs., and moreover svàrṇara- as PN seems to be confined to Maṇḍala VIII. See Mayrhofer (PN, s.v.), who also sees the name only in VIII.


## 04
Ge takes gómatīṣu as referring to a particular river basin and WG to “cowrich (rivers)” -- the latter apparently flg. Gr’s “rinderreicher Ort.” But the mention of Indra’s companion Vāyu here points to a ritual, not battlefield, victory, specifically the morning pressing when Indra and Vāyu receive the first oblations. There are two nouns that are regularly modified by gómati- in the fem. pl.: ‘dawns’ (uṣā́saḥ) and ‘refreshments’ (íṣaḥ). Either of them would work in this context. The publ. tr.

supplies the latter, functioning as a loc. absol.: “when (refreshments) consisting of cows [that is, milk and butter] are at stake.” íṣ- does not have an attested loc. pl., and if it did, it would not be pretty or easily recognized: *ikṣú? iṭṣú? It would therefore not be surprising if such a form were gapped, with the final of the adj. (-īṣu) gesturing towards it phonologically. However, it is also possible that “at the cow-rich dawns” is meant, given that the ritual in question happens at that time. uṣás- also lacks an attested loc. pl., though we should probably expect *uṣátsu (see my 1991 “Ox, Cart,” 90-91). Again, gapping this awkward form would not be surprising.


## 05
I take ṛñjasāná- to be built to the anomalous 1st sg. middle ṛñjase (for which see comm. ad IV.8.1), pace Jasanoff 2016 (etc.), based in part on the shared constr.

ṛñjas- GOD (acc.) HYMN (instr.) exemplified, e.g., by IV.8.1 yájiṣṭham ṛñjase girā́“I aim towards the best sacrificer with a song” (cf. VI.15.1) and our ṛñjasānáḥ … uktháiḥ … índram “aiming straight at Indra with hymns.” (In fact I would now favor slightly changing the text of the publ. tr. to “aiming straight with his hymns” rather than translating ukthaíḥ with the following pāda as in the publ. tr.) The creation and maintenance of the stem ṛñjasāná- is supported by the other -asāná- secondary participles, on which see comm. ad IV.3.6.

## 06-08
As discussed in the publ. intro., the next few vss. are very challenging; they have received multiple interpretations, which can’t be discussed in detail here.

The vss. form a unity based on their shared vocab. (e.g., góhe 6b, 7c, 8c; auśijásya 6b, 7c), their shared syntactic formulae (yád *ī 6a, yád īm 7a, 7c, and yád ī 8d), and their shared metrical irregularity.


## 06
As indicated in the intro., I think vs. 6 simultaneously depicts the gods’ approach to the ritual ground and the Aṅgirases’ journey to the Vala cave. The rock (ádri-) to which they hasten is the pressing stone in the case of the gods and the Vala cave in the case of the Aṅgirases.

In pāda a I interpret yádi as yád *ī, parallel to yád īm in 7a and 7c and yád(#)ī in 8d. For this phenomenon, see my 2002 "RVic sīm and īm.” With Ge I take ádrim as the goal of saraṇyā́n rather than construing it with sádantaḥ, allowing the latter participle to be construed with the loc. góhe (a stem found only here, in the three vss.

6-8).

For dhiṣā́see comm. ad I.173.8 as well as I.3.2. The denom. dhiṣaṇyá- is found only here; I take it as ‘seeking a holy place’, derived from dhiṣáṇā ‘holy place’, on which see comm. ad I.3.2.

Note the phonetic echoes in dhiṣā́ya(di) dhiṣaṇyán(taḥ) (sar)aṇyā́n.

As indicated in the publ. intro. I take auśijá-, the vṛddhi deriv. of uśíj- ‘priest, fire priest’, as referring to the collectivity of these priests (see also V.41.5). It seems to be parallel to / contrastive with the vṛddhi deriv. in the next pāda, pāstyá-, found only here, ‘belonging to the dwelling place’. In my interpr. the duróṣāḥ hótā is Agni, and pāstyá- refers to the collectivity that he belongs to or represents, that of the household.

On the problematic duróṣāḥ (here apparently an -s-stem, as opposed to the thematic stem found in the two other occurrences), see comm. ad VIII.1.13.


## 07
Another very opaque vs. The only thing we have to hold onto is structure: the X-ā yád īm of pādas a and c recalls X-ā́yád *ī of 6a, and notice X yád dhi(yé) in pāda d. The whole vs. is a subordinate clause (or series of them), continued by 8ab, with the main clause in 8c -- and a final yád(#)ī clause rounding out the sequence in 8d.

As indicated in the publ. tr., I think vs. 7 depicts the bursting into flames of the ritual fire, whose difficult kindling was (possibly) treated in 6cd. This bursting into flames is expressed by śúṣmaḥ ‘explosive force’ in 7b. The gen. bhārvarásya vṛ́ṣṇaḥ ‘devouring bull’ refers to Agni, in this interpr.; the only two forms to the (pseudo-)root √bharv ‘devour’ have Agni as their subj. (I.143.5, VI.6.2). In the publ.

tr. I also tentatively took Agni as the referent of īm, but I now think that the īm in pāda a refers to the praiser in b, while the īm in c refers to the Aṅgirases. (Remember that number is neutralized in īm.) The point is that the śúṣma- of the kindled fire accompanies each of these in order to allow the desired outcomes expressed in pāda b and d to occur -- the singer to receive his reward and the Aṅgirases to cause the cows to come out of the Vala cave. (I am tempted to tr. a version of “may the force be with you.”) So I would modify the tr. to “When … the force … accompanies him [=singer], for the singer to take his reward; when it accompanies them [=Aṅgirases] to the secret place [=Vala cave], … for (the cows) to go forth …” In d I take the three datives (prá) dhiyé (prá) áyase mádāya not as triply parallel, but make the first and last further complements to áyase ‘to go forth’. The two prá’s would in some sense structure these two parallel goal expressions: “to go <forth to insight>, <forth to exhilaration>.” Needless to say, it is impossible to be certain about this interpr., but at least it hangs together.


## 08
Note the play in the pāda-initial sequences: ví yád (a), vidád (c), yádī v(…) (d).

As noted in the publ. intro., this last vs. of this obscure three-vs. group is the clearest indication of a Vala-myth subtext in the triad and thus serves as a species of poetic repair. As just noted ad vs. 7, the syntactic construction continues from vs. 7 and therefore indicates that the verses should be interpreted within the same conceptual framework. The vs. contains clear Vala vocabulary (esp. vidát) but leaves both subject and objects unexpressed, therefore allowing the double reading that I also suggested for vss. 6 and 7, namely that of the Vala myth and of the current ritual.

Although the reference is clearer in this vs., the grammar is another matter.

The major problem lies in the two parallel verbs vṛṇvé and jinvé. Both appear to be 1st sg. middle presents to the stems 5th cl. vṛṇóti, vṛṇuté* and 1st cl. jínvati, -te respectively (so Gr, e.g.). However, Whitney and Macdonell group jinvé instead with the marginally attested 5th cl. pres. (RV 1x jinóṣi ‘bring to life’ V.84.1), which would account better for the accent -- and a 5th cl. pres. must of course ultimately underlie thematized jínvati (see Gotō, 1st Kl., 76). But 1st singulars do not fit the context at all, nor really do presents. Old tr. them both as 3rd sg. preterites (“er … enthüllte … belebte …”) with, frustratingly, no comment. In this interpr. he seems to be following (or at least be in agreement with) Sāy., and the publ. tr. reflects the same analysis, though with a historical present interpr. because of the apparent primary ending -é. Ge and WG take them as reflexive (Ge) / passive (WG), with neut. pl.

subjects várāṃsi … jávāṃsi (e.g., Ge “Wenn sich die Breiten des Berges auftun,” etc.). Like Old, Ge keeps silent about the grammar, but WG identify the two verbs as 3rd sg. statives construed with the neut. pl. as subject. I am torn. On the one hand, it is difficult to wring a standard 3rd sg. of the type I want from the forms in the text. On the other, I am very dubious about the existence of the “stative” -- and even if this had been a separate grammatical category in the prehistory of Vedic, I doubt that it would have surfaced in just these two nonce forms in a single passage. Moreover, there is nothing semantically or functionally “stative” about either of these verbs, “open up” / “quicken,” either in isolation or in this passage; note that even in the passive the WG tr. are overtly eventive: “… aufgeschlossen werden … belebt werden” (my italics). I also think that the mythic model found in the passage is against a reflexive or passive interpr. In the other standard depictions of the Vala myth, the opening of the mountain and the flowing out of cows/waters/dawns, are not events that happens spontaneously; the god Indra (/Bṛhaspati) or the Aṅgirases cause these actions. The 3rd sg. vidát ‘he found’ of 8c, a signature verb in the Vala myth, shows the typical pattern of expression in this myth. I therefore, uncomfortably, stand by the 3rd sg. transitive interpr. of these verbs, without being able to account for their form. They do belong to a little morphological pattern in 5th class presents, where 3rd sg. -é is not uncommon: cf. śṛṇvé, sunvé, hinvé. But unfortunately all three of the just cited forms are passive, and, in my reading, vṛṇvé and jinvé are not. The neut. pl. várāṃsi in pāda a I take as a pun. The stem váras- definitely means ‘wide space’ and is of course related to urú. However, as the object of √vṛ ‘enclose’ (+ ví = ‘unenclose, open’) and coming so soon after saṃváraṇeṣu (6d) ‘in the enclosures’, it is not difficult to imagine that it could temporarily acquire a secondary association with √vṛ -- hence my double tr. “opens out the … enclosures into wide spaces.” I supply ‘cows’ as the first obj. of vidát on the basis of the use of this verb with obj. gā́ḥ in the Vala myth elsewhere (e.g., I.62.3=X.68.1, II.19.3; note also the bovine vocab. gaurásya gavayáya in the rest of the pāda), but in keeping with my double reading of this whole passage also supply ‘goods’ as the desired discovery in the ritual context.

The sudhyáḥ ‘those of good insight’ are probably, with WG, the Aṅgirases in the Vala myth, but I would add that this word would also identify the poets/priests at the ritual, in the double reading of this triad of verses that I favor.


## 09
It is with considerable relief that we return to Indra.

In c I tr. kā́te níṣattiḥ -- lit. “What is this sitting down of yours?” -- more idiomatically, to convey the exasperation of the singer.

The sequence kím u nó …, kíṃ nód-ud u …is playful and, probably for that reason, somewhat difficult to parse. The nó in the first part of the phrase appears in the Pp. as no iti. Although normally a final -o of this type, generally found on the end of function words, represents -ā/a plus the particle u (see Klein, Part. u, 168-78), Klein specifically lists this passage (168 n. 3) as a case where the presence of u is unlikely because “the syntactic environments within which u is found do not appear.” It is easy to see why he came to that judgment, esp. because there’s an u almost immediately preceding it and the 2nd u would come very late in the syntactic complex.

However, it is difficult to see what else to make of it, and the almost mirror image in the next pāda, where there’s a coalescence of ná + úd into nód and an even later u following the complex of kím NEG PREV, suggests that the poet is having a bit of fun with u. Given the colloquial tone of this hemistich, we may also be seeing a looser deployment of particles and “little” words characteristic of ordinary speech. (And who can resist the lilt of nód-ud u?) The multiplication of u’s is completed by a form of the notorious -tavā́u infinitive at the end of d.


## 10
This last vs. before the refrain shows some ring-composition with the beginning of the hymn: samrā́ṭ (a) and krátvā (c) respond to krátuḥ ... samrā́ṭ in 2c.

In pāda a satyáḥ ‘real, really here’ may signal Indra’s epiphany at the sacrifice.
