+++
title = "022"

+++
Indra Hoffmann treats and translates the first four vss. of this hymn (Injunk. 186- 88) as an ex. of “die erwähnende Beschreibung eines präteritalen Tatbestandes” associated with the general description of a god. He notes the unclear boundaries between past and present in such contexts.

## 01
This vs. propounds a novel version of divine-human interaction: it suggests that what a god wants from us -- the verbal and material offerings we make to him at the sacrifice -- he actually arranges to have available there. There seems no other way to read the ā́√kṛ ‘make (to be) here, bring here’ in b (… karat … ā́). This model almost reduces the human role to being middlemen in a loop connecting the god with himself, in contrast to the usual reciprocal model in which each side (divine / human) makes its own contribution.

In d éti appears to be used as an auxiliary with the participle bíbhrat (so also Hoffmann, with ref. to Delbrück, AiS 390), though Ge seems to take it as a full lexical verb (“… tragend auszieht”). Engl. “goes on X-ing” captures both the literal sense and the auxiliary function of the verb here.


## 02
The hapax vṛ́ṣandhi- has been variously explained. Old rejects the reading as “sinnlos” and suggests an emendation to *tríṣandhi-, remarking that the vajra is so described in AV XI.10.3, 27. The influence of preceding vṛ́ṣā would account for the change. Hoffmann (MSS 8 [1956]: 15 = Aufs. II.395-96) instead suggests it is a haplology of vṛ́ṣa-saṃdhi- ‘mit starker Verbindung’, which in his view describes the binding of the head of the vajra, which he thinks was a hammer-like weapon, to the shaft. One of the unexamined assumptions of both Old’s and Hoffmann’s interpretations is that the weapon referred to here is the vajra and that this is identical to the stone (áśman-) in 1d. As I argue ad I.152.2 (see comm. thereon), there is no reason to assume here that the stone = vajra or that the unnamed weapon in 2a is identical to both. A form of vájra- is found in 3c, but it need not be the same as the weapon(s) referred to in 1d and 2a -- and in fact there is some reason to believe it is not, as the weapon here is being ‘hurled’ (ásyan), and to my knowledge the vajra is never thrown while stones regularly are (e.g., I.172.2). In my opinion the weapon in 2a is the stone of 1d and the qualifier vṛ́ṣandhi- is a formation like iṣu-dhí- ‘repository of arrows, quiver’, uda-dhí- ‘repository of water, spring, basin’, utsa-dhí- ‘fountainhead’ — hence ‘repository of bullish(ness)’. The difference in accent can be attributed to the influence of immediately preceding vṛ́ṣā. The combining form vṛ́ṣan-, rather than more common vṛ́ṣa-, is also found in vṛ́ṣaṇvant- and vṛ́ṣaṇ-vasu-.

The anomalous med. them. participle uṣámāna- ‘clothing oneself’, as if to an otherwise unattested 6th cl. pres. to √vas ‘wear’, belongs with the other unexpected med. participles (both them. and athem.) to √vaś ‘be eager’ and √vas ‘wear’ found in this Indra cycle. See disc. ad IV.16.14 and IV.19.4 and cf. uśāná- in the next hymn (IV.23.1).

The second hemistich is best interpreted in the context of V.52.9, a Marut hymn, where the Maruts páruṣṇyām, ū́rṇā vasata “clothe themselves in the wool [=foam] in the Paruṣṇī (River).” Note that in that passage páruṣṇyām and ū́rṇā are in different cases and numbers (fem. loc. sg. and fem. acc. pl. respectively) unlike here, where both are fem. acc. sg. Their grammatical difference in V.52.9, which imposes a semantic separation, makes it less likely here that páruṣṇīm is simply an adj.

modifying ū́rṇām, as Hoffmann (/WG) take it: “in shaggy wool” (KH: “in zottige (?) Wolle”; WG “in struppige Wolle”). Since páruṣṇī- is simply the fem. to paruṣá-, which is otherwise a color term (‘gray’), the introduction of ‘shaggy’ would also be puzzling. I therefore essentially follow Ge’s interpr. He takes páruṣṇīm … ū́rṇām as an unmarked simile: “in the Paruṣṇī (River) (like) wool”; I take it rather as a metaphor: “in the Paruṣṇī ‘wool’ [=foam].” The color gray enters this image in two ways. On the one hand, it’s quite possible that the Paruṣṇī River was so called because it appeared gray; on the other, river foam in general is gray-ish (and tufty, like wool), as google images of river foam show (unfortunately mostly of polluted rivers).

The unexpressed connection with the Maruts via the passage just cited is also expressed in pāda d through sakhyā́ya ‘for partnership’, where the partners must be the Maruts.

The word párvan- usually refers to a joint or segment; with Ge, I take it in this image to refer to tufts or articulated hunks of foam, like tufts of wool. With Ge I also think there’s a secondary word association between páruṣṇī- and párvan- (/ páru(ṣ)-).


## 03
In the publ. tr. I take the whole vs. as a single sentence, with ab a relative clause to the main cl. in cd. Ge (Hoffmann/WG) take b as the main clause to the rel.

cl. in a and take cd separately. This is entirely possible; there is no grammatical marking to determine the structure, since b lacks a finite verb. Since b is a repeated pāda (VI.32.4b), it might indeed be better to take it as an independent unit and follow the Ge interpr.

The distraction of #dyā́m ... bhū́ma# in d is paralleled by 4b #dyaúr ... kṣā́ḥ#.


## 04
As just noted, polarized #dyaúr ... kṣā́ḥ# in b match the same (conceptual) pair in the same positions in 3d. Here in 4b the disjunction is emphasized by the fact that the two nominatives are subjects of a singular verb (rejata). The connection of the 3d and 4b is signaled by the fact that the same root provides the verb in both 3d and 4b: trans.-cause. rejayat and intrans. rejata respectively (both injunctives), and heaven and earth switch grammatical identity and function from object to subject.

Pāda a sits somewhat uncomfortably between these two complementary pādas.

The river banks and beds seem rather paltry natural features next to heaven and earth, which flank them. But they may serve a grammatical purpose: both NPs (víśvā ródhāṃsi [neut. pl.] and pravátaḥ … pūrvī́ḥ [fem. pl.]) are neutral as to case (nom. vs. acc.) and can thus serve as a pivot, available as both acc. objects for rejayat in 3d and nom. subjects for rejata in 4b. (Of course, although the neuter pl. could be the subject of a sg. verb, technically speaking a feminine pl. should not, but this does not seem a problem to me, as the neut. pl. leads the conjoined NP and would set the syntactic tone -- and they are pretty distant from the verb anyway.) Pāda c produces problems on several fronts. Who are the mother and father (mātárā)? (Old flatly announces he has no intention of trying to find out.) Why is the verb (bhárati) accented? Why are there two instances of ā́? What is the cow (góḥ) doing grammatically and/or conceptually? The only word that is not problematic (though see below) is śuṣmī́, which must refer to Indra, as in 1b. I do not have entirely satisfactory answers to the puzzles. Probably the default referent for mātárā would be Heaven and Earth, and they have figured prominently just previously. But there is the problem that Heaven and Earth are not particularly mobile, so how is it that Indra “brings them here”? As for the accent on bhárati, Ge suggests that pāda c is dependent on either ab or c, without overt subordination. Old (ZDMG 60 [1906]: 725-26 = KlSch 200-201) places it in the class of “priorischer Nebensatz” (to the main cl. in pāda d), but c doesn’t seem to provide sufficient grounding for d to justify the verbal accent.

Hoffmann (Injunk. 187 n. 147) cites Old’s own citation of himself (given above), but also what is the more likely explanation, given by Old in the same art. (708-12, esp.

711 = KlSch. 186): that it is implicitly antithetical, participating in two interlocked constructions, what Old (711 = 186) designates pavpα (that is, PREV [x-word] VERB PREV [corresponding x-́word]) -- with, in our passage, ā́as the PREV, mā́tárā … góḥ as x and x,́ and bhárati as accented VERB. In his exx. nothing intervenes between VERB and the repeated PREV, unlike śuṣmī́here, but I consider this a minor variant in the model. Perhaps more problematic is that mātárā and góḥ do not correspond grammatically, but again I would prefer to work with a more flexible model (and see below). In this model the accent on the verb and the doubled ā́fit under the same explanatory rubric, a desirable situation, all things being equal. (Such an explanation is blocked for Ge, who thinks the two ā́’s have different functions, the first preverb, the second preposition.) But what about the cow? One might note that there’s a similarly pāda-final góḥ in 8d as well as another quite baffling one in the next hymn, IV.23.6. I also wonder if this pile-up of pāda-final góḥ is not a sly reference to the impenetrable pāda-final góhe in the previous hymn (IV.21.6b, 7c, 8c), which caused so many interpretational difficulties there (though they are not etymologically related, at least by our current understanding of góhe). But this doesn’t help us at all with the meaning or the function of góḥ here. The first thing to consider is what case it is -- gen. or abl. Ge opts for the latter: Indra brings the two mothers from the cow (“von dem Rinde”), though in n. 4c he also entertains the possibility of an ellipsis of a nominative with a dependent genitive góḥ, “(son) of the cow,” namely the bull Indra.

As far as I can tell, WG also take it as an abl., but construed with ā́in the sense of “all the way to” (a marginal, but certainly attested, construction in the RV). There is nothing impossible about either of these interpr., but I do not see what they would mean in context, and neither Ge nor WG give much help in that regard. For me the most appealing attempt to wring sense from this is Hoffmann’s (Injunk. 187). As in Ge’s alternative, Hoffmann takes góḥ as a gen. in an elliptical expression, but with the gapped item a second object to bhárati: “Herbei bringt der Kraftschnaubende (seine) Eltern, herbei (das) der Kuh.” This makes good sense of the structure of the pāda (fitting better with Old’s pavpα scheme, since α would now be grammatically parallel to a). So what is the “das” in Hoffmann’s tr.? He suggests ‘milk’ or similar, though not with a great deal of conviction. The publ. tr. supplies ‘milk’ as a possible metaphor for ‘rain’, and given the roaring winds of pāda d, I think rain is quite likely the gapped object, since ‘cow’ can be used of rain-bearing clouds. It also now occurs to me that it might instead be the Maruts (“[those] of the cow”), since they are the sons of the cow Pṛśni, as noted, e.g., in V.52.16, the same hymn that has the Paruṣṇī River foam passage cited above (vs. 2). The Maruts would also fit with the violent roaring of the wind in d.

## 05-06
These vss. summarizing Indra’s great deeds begin identically: tā́tū́te [ta in sandhi before vowel in 6]. The vss. appear at the exact center of the hymn and thus may count as an omphalos. Although both pādas have Indra’s deeds as subject, neither has a word for ‘deed’.


## 06
The b pāda contains one of the RV’s beloved gender-bending paradoxes, with the cows coming out “from the udder of a bull” (vṛ́ṣṇa ū́dhnaḥ). Ge (/WG) interprets this as rainwater coming from the sky (Parjanya or Heaven). I think it more likely that it concerns the Vala myth. Indra’s other signature deed, the slaying of Vṛtra, was treated in the immediately preceding, paired verse (5d), and so we might expect mention of his other most prominent feat. In that case the “bull” would be the Vala cave. On the other hand, this might continue the treatment of the Vṛtra myth in 5d (as Ge also suggests, n. 6b), in which case the “bull” would be Vṛtra himself or the mountain in which the waters were confined. The more thorough treatment of the waters in the Vṛtra myth in the following vs. 7 might support this latter view.

## 06-07
Another responsion: 6c ádhā ha / 7a átrā́ha. Later in the pāda 7a tā́u recalls the openings of 5a and 6a tā́tū́.


## 07
Most tr. take stavanta as passive, and this seems the correct interpr. The sisters are likely the rivers or waters released after the killing of Vṛtra. The question is why they would be praised as well as Indra. Ge’s suggestion (n. 7ab) is that it is essentially a spill-over effect (not that he uses that term), that Indra’s praiseworthy deed that brought the waters release also brought them praise by association.

I don’t understand the double ánu (pādas c and d), though my surmise is that the first one simply anticipates the second, which is in a semi-fixed expression dīrghā́m ánu prásitim (cf. X.40.10). Gr takes it as part of a preverb complex with √muc: ánu prá √muc ‘nacheinander loslassen’, and its position might support that assumption. But surely one of points in the Vṛtra myth is that the rivers burst out dramatically all at once. Ge, by contrast, compares the identical sequence yát sīm ánu in I.37.9, I.141.9, but those two passages seem unconnected with ours, with the ánu construed with preceding sīm “following them.” (One can also compare IV.38.3 yáṃ sīm ánu, but this has yet a different sense.)


## 08
asmadryàk opening 8c ushers in the suite of pāda-initial emphatic forms of the 1st pl. pronoun that lasts and intensifies through the real end of the hymn, vs. 10 (vs. 11 being the Vāmadeva Indra refrain): 8c: asmadryàk, 9a asmé, 9c asmábhyam, 10a asmā́kam, 10b asmábhyam, 10c asmábhyam, 10d asmā́kam. Kü (310) interpr. pipīḷé as presential, but there is in fact no way to tell: this is not only the only perfect form to this root attested anywhere but the only verb form to it in the RV (pīḍayati is added in the AV). I think it works better as an immediate past, although there is in practice little difference between my “has been squeezed” and Kü’s “ausgepresst ist.” Ge, flg. Sāy., takes mádyaḥ with āṃśúḥ and explains the position of ná as “wie oft in Pādaausgang vor dem Vergleich.” But there seems no reason to ignore the usual structure of the simile, since mádyaḥ easily modifies síndhuḥ.

The syntax of bc is somewhat unusual, in that the subject / verb construction is split over the hemistich boundary (b … śaktíḥ# c … yamyāḥ#), while the object tvā is in Wackernagel’s position in pāda b. Moreover, at least in the publ. tr. the genitive that limits the subj. śaktíḥ is only found in the next pāda: śuśucānásya. Ge (/WG) take the gen. śaśamānásya in b as dependent on śaktíḥ, with śámī an instr. adjunct to that participle: “the skill of the one laboring with labor” -- in contrast to the publ. tr., where śaśamānásya is dependent on śámī. I now think that the Ge interpr. may be preferable and would emend the publ. tr. to “Might the skill of the one laboring with labor (and) of the bright-blazing one pull …” The question is whether the two genitives are coreferential, with bright-blazing Agni identified as the one laboring with labor, or whether a (human) priest and Agni are both referred to. I do not think this can be determined, esp. since subjects of √śam elsewhere include both Agni and mortals.

The simile in d and the frame in bc have slightly different senses. In the simile the swift horse is pulling on the reins: it is so eager to reach its goal that it strains against the reins rather than being guided by them. In the frame the śaktíḥ of the priest/god is strong enough to pull Indra to us. The difference in the relation of the accusative to the verb results from exploiting different senses of the root √yam.

Despite Old’s expressed disbelief, I think Gr and Ludwig are correct in taking góḥ ‘of the cow’ to refer to reins made of leather. On pāda-final góh see also disc. ad vs. 4c.


## 09
Ge tr. nṛmṇā́ni as ‘Mannestaten’, which works well as an object of √kṛ (though parallel sáhāṃsi ‘powers’ does not). But nṛmṇá- ordinarily refers not to deeds but to the abstract powers associated with manliness that allow such deeds to be performed. Hence my ‘activate’ for kṛṇuhi.
