+++
title = "023"

+++
Indra Thieme tr. and comments on this hymn in Gedichte (pp. 30-33).


## 01
Ge (/WG) take pāda b as a complete clause, supplying a main verb (‘kommt’ Ge, ‘geht’ WG). They then take the 2nd hemistich as a syntactically independent declarative sentence. Given the density of questions in the first 6 vss. of this hymn, I think a declarative sentence would be intrusive and therefore take bcd as part of the question begun with kásya in pāda a, with vavakṣé in d as the main verb for the whole. On soma as an udder, see III.48.3 cited by both Old and Ge.

Note the close proximity of juṣāṇáḥ (b) and juṣámāṇaḥ (c). The latter is the only occurrence of this participle stem, while juṣāṇá- is of course quite common. I don't see any semantic nuance that would justify using two different stems here. I wonder if juṣámāṇa- is a nonce to create a Behagel effect with the three nearrhyming and semantically similar stems: juṣāṇó … uśānó juṣámāṇo. It should also be evaluated in the context of the other anomalous and phonologically similar middle participles in this Indra cycle, including uṣāná- (IV.16.14), uśámāna- (IV.19.4), uṣámāna- (IV.22.2), and our own middle term uṣānáḥ. (For disc. see esp. comm. ad IV.16.14.) Though uṣāná- is attested twice elsewhere, it is still problematic: though there is a root pres. to √vaś ‘be eager’ with a zero-grade uś, the stem is otherwise only act. and the act. part. uśánt- is extremely well attested (see., e.g., the next hymns, IV.24.6b, 25.1b).

Ge is adamant that the two verse-final datives śucaté dhánāya are not to be construed together. By contrast I think they belong together in principle. Of 6 occurrences of dhánāya (always pāda-final), 2 are preceded by mahaté (I.104.7, IX.97.4), which modifies it. I am just somewhat uncertain what it refers. Although √śuc is generally an Agni root, and cf. śuśucāná- in the immediately preceding hymn, probably of Agni (IV.22.8), I think that referent is unlikely here. dhána- refers to the stakes in play or a prize or spoils, in this case presumably something Indra wants enough to exert himself for it. The verse has made abundantly clear what Indra wants most -- soma (sómam b, ándhaḥ c) -- and I think it likely that soma is the referent here as well. A deriv. of √śuc, the adj. śúci-, is regularly used of a type of soma (clear, as opposed to mixed), and the participle here may be expressing the same thing. I would therefore slightly emend the tr. to “for the gleaming stakes [=soma].”


## 02
In b Ge (/WG) and Thieme (Gedichte 31) take the instr. sumatíbhiḥ as the object of sám ānaṃśa (e.g., Ge “Wer wurde seiner Gnaden teilhaft?”), but this seems an unlikely use of the instr., even with the presence of the preverb sám -- esp.

because the verb in b is essentially identical to the verb in a, āpa, which takes the acc. Although Gr allows both acc. and instr. with sám √naś in the sense ‘erlangen’, a careful perusal of the entry shows that this is the only instance with a supposed instr.; the others have the acc. I therefore supply the same obj. found in pāda a (sadhamā́dam) and take sumatíbhiḥ in normal instr. usage.

The second hemistich contains two occurrences of kád; the second is taken by all as simply a question marker, but Ge interprets the first one as a full neut. with citrám, “welches Wunder?” This is possible, but it seems rhetorically better to take it as parallel in function to the other kád (so Th and WG as well as me). I supply ‘course’ on the basis of II.34.10 citráṃ tád vo maruto yā́ma cekite “This bright course of yours, Maruts, appears ever more brightly,” also adduced by Ge. The notion of a journey is reinforced by the 2nd part of the hemistich. However, a tr. like WG “Ist sein Glanzzeichen bemerkt?” is certainly possible.

## 03
Gr, Ge, et al. take hūyámānam to refer to the call or summons to Indra (e.g., Ge “Wie hört Indra den Ruf?”). Kulikov (-ya-presents, 307-8) rejects this interpr., noting that this is the only instance of such a construction: normally the subject of the passive is the deity being invoked. Although he reluctantly admits that it might correspond to the rare transitive type in which what is spoken is the object of the verb (1.17.9), he prefers to derive this form from √hu ‘pour’ and translates “How does Indra hear the (libation) being offered?” -- that is, the sound of the pouring. A different reconsideration is found in WG, who interpr. hūyámāna- in the standard way, as having the deity invoked as its subject -- but they think Indra is listening to the summons to a different deity than Indra. Although I recognize that the standard interpr. may have glided too swiftly over the problems with hūyámāna-, the two revisionist versions both seem overelaborate and implausible to me. Since it is undeniable that forms of √hū do sometimes take what is spoken as obj. (see the above-cited I.17.9, as well as juxtaposed occurrences of hávya- in VI.21.1 with comm. there), I think we must allow this rare usage in the passive as well, a point made very economically by Old. My tr. follows that of Thieme (p. 31) “Wie hört Indra den [Ruf], der gerufen wird?” In b ávasām is taken by all modern comm. and tr. as the gen. pl. of ávas- ‘help’ that it appears to be. Although this gen. pl. is not otherwise attested (the only pl.

cases are nom./acc. and instr.), ávasām is what the gen. pl. of this stem would be.

Moreover, it can easily be the complement of veda, which takes both acc. and gen. Nonetheless I favor Gr’s interpr., that it is the acc. sg. of a root noun cmpd from áva √sā ‘unhitch’. There is a major obvious stumbling block: the accent. Root noun cmpds are invariably accented on the final, so we expect *avasā́m. However, the other putative ex. of this cmpd at III.53.20 has been mangled in transmission (see disc. by Scar s.v. and comm. ad loc.), and I think it likely that the dominance of the ‘help’ stem, which is remarkably well attested, led to a redactional change in accent.

One of the reasons I favor this solution has to do with the asya. In the ‘help’ interpr., the asya would refer to the mortal who will receive this help (see Ge n. 3b), but this hymn contains a lot of asya’s, and they all otherwise refer to Indra: 2a, 2b, 2c, 3c, 5c, 6c, plus enam 3d and asmin 5d. I very much doubt the poet would break this sequence with a pronoun referring to someone else. The only exception is asyā́(ḥ) 5a, which is both accented and feminine, and is playing a trick by its patterning with the asya in 5c.

For úpamāti- from úpa √mā ‘mete out’, see comm. ad VIII.40.9.


## 04
I take dī́dhyānaḥ as parallel to śaśamānáḥ, referring to the verbal/mental work at the sacrifice as opposed to the physical -- hence my tr. ‘produced insights’.

Other tr. seem to me to attenuate the semantics.

## 05-06
The root √juṣ encountered in two different forms in 1bc recurs here in the perfect, subjunctive (4d) and indicative (5b).

## 05
As noted above, fem. asyā́(ḥ) patterns with the ubiquitous asya in this vs.: 5a kathā́kád asyā́/ 5c kathā́kád asya.


## 06
ā́d is very rarely not in 1st position. Here the interrog. kím may have displaced it. See kím ā́d at IV.30.7, as Ge also notes, as well as … kuvíd ā́d I.33.1.

Ge (/WG) take the referent of te to be Indra (Ge: “Wann dürfen wir wohl von deiner Brüderschaft öffentlich sprechen?”). I very much doubt that. As I noted in the publ. intro., Indra is always referred to in the 3rd ps. in this hymn, except in the final extra-hymnic Vāmadeva refrain (vs. 11), and the thwarting of the poet’s longing for intimacy by the distancing that the insistent 3rd ps. pattern imposes is in many ways the point of the hymn. I think it unlikely that the poet would introduce the intimate 2nd ps. reference through a single monosyllabic enclitic and then revert, in the next pāda, to the 3rd ps. asya. This leaves me with the problem of identifying an alternative referent for te. My assumption is that it is the poet speaking to himself, while the “we” represents the collectivity of the ritual officiants. Alternatively, it is possible that te does refer to Indra and that this pāda represents a wistful wishful thinking about an intimacy not otherwise achieved -- with its 1st ps. / 2nd ps. structure (the only place where a 1st ps. shows up in the hymn, save for the refrain -- though see comm. on pāda d) and the particularly intimate relationship ‘brotherhood’ (bhrātrám) that is aimed at The second hemistich is problematic, primarily because of the form iṣa (Pp.

iṣe) in d. (Ge characterizes it as “das zu den schwierigen Formen des ṚV. gehört”), a problem compounded by the fact that its first syllable should, ideally, be heavy in this Triṣṭubh cadence. Before tackling it, we should consider the structure of the two pādas. With Old and WG, but not Ge, I take c and d separately, with c a nominal clause equating sárgāḥ ‘surges’ with vápuḥ ‘marvel’. In my view the surges consist of soma: sárga- is regularly used of soma in Maṇḍala IX. Again with Old and WG, but not Ge, I take sudṛ́śaḥ as nom. pl. with sárgāḥ, not gen. sg. -- with śriyé construed with this adj.; cf. V.44.2 śriyé sudṛ́śīḥ. As for d, Old interprets iṣe as a 1st sg. “setze ich … in Bewegung,” with svàr ṇá citrátamam, standing for the surges in c, as its object. WG likewise take iṣe as a 1st sg. (aor. injunctive), but with the meaning ‘ich suche’, with the same obj. as Old. By contrast I take it as a 3rd sg. (so also Ge, it seems) and in fact would emend it (slightly) to *īṣe (an asterisk should be inserted in the publ. tr.), belonging to the perfect to the root given as √eṣ ‘suchen’ (etc.) by Kü (126-28). As was just noted, a heavy initial syllable would better fit the cadence; my one concern is that I do not understand why the short i was introduced. Though he does not include our form in his conspectus, Kü does list two other 3rd sg. med.

occurrences of this shape (īṣé X.89.3 and, with unclear root syllable, upeṣé I.129.8).

He considers the pf. as resultative, and it is possible that my ‘seeks’ should be changed to ‘has sought’. However, neither of his other examples (I.129.8, X.89.3) needs to be preterial, and so ‘seeks’ may as well stay. The same emendation and semantic interpr. also work for iṣe in VI.22.5 and X.20.7; see disc. ad locc. What Indra is seeking here is, in my view, the milk to be mixed with the soma. It is characterized as “very bright like the sun,” and its source as ‘of/from the cow’ (góḥ or ā́góḥ) (ā́may go with either *īṣe or góḥ). The slight disadvantage to my interpr. is that the two occurrences of ā́góḥ here and in the preceding hymn (IV.22.3) are construed differently, but given the convoluted structure in IV.22.3, that is probably unavoidable.

IV.23.7-10: The contrast between the ‘lie’ (pāda-initial drúh- 7a) and ṛtá- (10 pādainitial and 2 pāda-medial exx. in vss. 8-10) certainly underlines and cements the sense ‘truth’ for this word. Note also that ṛṇā́‘debts’, which opens the 2nd hemistich of vs 7, phonologically anticipates the ṛtá’s to come.


## 07
The tr. of tétikte, ‘sharpens’, may not seem to express its intensive semantics, but plain ‘sharpen’ itself incorporates the iterative, repetitive motions of blade across stone that sharpening involves.

Ge notes the similarity of ṛṇā́cid to the root noun cmpd ṛṇa-cít- ‘collector of debts’ found in the strikingly similar phrase II.23.17 sá r̥ṇacíd rṇ̥ ayā́(ḥ). But there are no grounds to emend the phrase to a compound, though a deliberate echo seems possible. In fact changing the text here would have the disadvantage of eliminating the obvious object to babādhé.


## 08
Ge (/WG) take the deaf ears to be those of Āyu -- with Āyu referring to the Ārya in general, WG suggest. Āyu always poses difficulties, but in this case I think gen. āyóḥ should be construed with ślókaḥ: the “signal call of Āyu,” referring to Agni and the sound of blazing fire. Elsewhere Agni is referred to as the “laud of Āyu” (śáṃsa- āyóḥ, IV.6.11, V.3.4), and this seems a similar expression referring to an audible product. The nom. participles budhānáḥ śucámānaḥ ‘awakening, blazing’ of course fit Agni very well. And it is not surprising, given his ritual role, that the sound of Agni should be considered to be identical to that of truth. As for the position of āyóḥ, at some distance from ślókaḥ, note that it rhymes with ā́góḥ in 6d, likewise stationed at the end of the verse.


## 09
The tr. of dīrghám as extent of space, rather than Ge’s extent of time (“lange Zeit”), follows Thieme (p. 32): the nourishments as oblations go from earth to heaven, as rain from heaven to earth.

On irregular full-grade 3rd pl. viveśuḥ see Kü (499-500).
