+++
title = "024"

+++
Indra


## 03
Most depictions of battle in the RV do not frame the risks of entering into battle quite so starkly. Here both ririkvā́ṃsas tanvàḥ “having given up their bodies” in b and tyāgám … ágman “have come to the abandonment (of their bodies, presumably)” in c seem to refer to a sort of resignation in the face of death and a loss of the sense of self. (Note that this is the only occurrence of tyā́ga- in the RV.) It is esp. telling that they give up their own bodies to gain offspring and a long line of descendants. For the similarity between this passage and the Tānūnaptra ritual, see Proferes (58).

## 04-05
The pile-up of pāda-initial ā́d íd ‘just then, just after that’, beginning with 4d and marking every pāda in 5, conveys the quick succession of events, but switches abruptly from battlefield to sacrifice. The néme constructions of 4d and 5a make it clear, however, that despite the change in venue the same antagonists are in play.

Note also the similarity of the predicates of the two néme constructions: indrayante … indriyáṃ yajante. This is the only occurrence of the denom. indraya- in the RV and it may have been created to serve as a foil for the second VP.


## 04
The ‘winning of the flood’ (árṇasātau) presumably refers, as Ge, etc., point out, to the battle to control water resources, esp. dwelling places near water.

Most tr. give a more neutral rendering of ávavṛtranta, but my “have rolled together” is meant to convey the deeply entwined, rough-and-tumble quality of pitched battle (and, perhaps, the actual rolling of chariots onto the battlefield).


## 05
The bridge between 4d and 5a has already been noted, as well as the change of scene. However, I think the competition visible in vss. 3-4, as well as in vss. 6-7, continues here by other, sacrificial, means. To get Indra on their side in battle, the men must perform not only a correct sacrifice, but a better sacrifice. One puzzling feature of this vs. is the presence of pf. optatives in pādas b and c. As I have discussed elsewhere (2008 “Women’s Language in the RV” [Ged. Elizarenkova], 2009 “Where Are All the Optatives” [East and West]), the pf. opt. has a curious distribution and, to some extent, a particular sociolinguistic profile, and it is not clear what riricyāt (b) and ví papṛcyāt (c) are doing sandwiched between a pres. (yajante, a) and a presential perfect (jujoṣa, d), esp. because the four pādas are otherwise unified by the opening ā́d íd. What sets bc off from a,d is the fact that the subjects in b and c are ritual offerings, paktíḥ ‘cooked food’ and sómaḥ respectively, as opposed to the personal subjects (at least in my interpr.) of a and d. What optative function do these verbs express (and do they express the same one): necessity (‘should’), potentiality, more certain (‘would’) or less certain (‘might’), possibility (‘could’), or desire (also ‘would’)? My surmise is that the vs. depicts the beginning and end points of the successful sacrifice that one of the groups of competitors mounts. Pāda a contains a general description of the sacrifice and implies its start. In d the unnamed subject, in my opinion Indra, shows that the sacrifice has been successful by enjoying the offered soma (the bull, vṛṣabhám). The pādas in between describe the qualities of the better sacrifice that our side performs, in contrast to our opponents, and I interpr. the optatives as expressing near-certain possibility. I therefore take riricyāt in b as meaning ‘would leave behind, succeed’ not in a temporal sense (the cooked food is the next course after the offering cake) but in an evaluative one: cooked food is just better than a puroḷāś-. (This seems generally agreed by interpr.; see esp. Ge’s n. 5b.) (Note however that the puroḷāś- was probably not eliminated but supplemented, since the successful sacrificer not only cooks cooked food for Indra in 7b but also roasts grains.) Even more important is the mere presence of soma in c. The pāda implies that the other side consists of non-pressers (ásuṣvīn), who therefore cannot offer soma to Indra. Soma is our trump card and leaves our competitors out in the cold, as it were.

(Notice that the non-pressers contrast with the súṣvi- in 2d. For súṣvi-/ásuṣvi- as well as paktí, see also the next hymn IV.25.6-7.) My tr. of d differs in an important way from Ge (/WG). They take yájadhyai as an infinitive complement to jujoṣa with vṛṣabhám as object, though with two different interpretations. Ge’s “dann beliebt man einen Stier zu opfern” (so also Keydana, Inf., p. 289, with disc.) assumes that the vṛṣabhá- is a sacrificed animal.

WG correctly point out that √yaj does not take an acc. of the offering but of the god who receives the offering and therefore take vṛṣabhá- as referring to Indra. The subj.

in either case must be an unidentified priest or the like. In my view, by contrast, Indra is the unnamed subj., who receives pleasure from the ‘bull’ soma -- note that vṛṣabhá- is an epithet of soma, as well as of Indra and other gods. The yájadhyai is a purpose inf. without object, as it generally is (cf., nearby IV.21.5 íyarti vā́caṃ janáyan yájadhyai “(who) raises his speech, giving birth to it in order to carry out the sacrifice”).

As Old notes, there are 3 forms of √ric in this hymn, all pf.: pf. part.

ririkvāṃsaḥ (3b), pf. opt. riricyāt here, and a plupf. (probably) arirecīt (9c). They are all somewhat marked in form and have different contextual meanings. Old remarks “der Dichter liebte dies Verb.” Certainly he seems to be making a point with it.

## 06-07
The battle/sacrifice trajectory of vss. 4-5 is wrapped up in vss. 6-7, where it is made clear (esp. in 6d) that if you want Indra’s help on the battlefield, you had better perform a good sacrifice, not stinting on the soma.


## 06
The “wide space” theme returns from 2d. The laconic expression of the recipient of wide space in 2d (the dat. súṣvaye ‘for the presser’) is expanded into a dat. pronoun with rel. clause attached: asmai … yá itthéndrāya sómam uśaté sunóti.

Since the first part of this hymn ends with vs. 7, vss. 2 and 6 are symmetrical and this echo forms a small internal ring. But there are no other signs of ring composition.

The tradition (as well as modern ed. and tr.) is split on whether to read ávivenam (HvN, Müller ed., Sāy., Lub, and AiG I.1.333) or ávivenan (Auf. ed., Pp, Gr, Ol, and Ge); see Old’s disc.

Quite apart from the actual form is its referent. Old, who accepts the ávivenan reading, takes c with d and identifies Indra as the referent of ávivenan. Although this fits better with the similar expression in the next hymn (IV.25.3) where gods are (or may be) the subject, here I think Ge is correct that c belongs grammatically with the rel. cl. in ab, and the referent of ávivenan is the soma-presser subject of that rel. cl.

This nominative is resumed by the appropriate correlative prn. tám in the acc. in d.

## 07
The śúṣma- that Indra confers on the sacrificer is the ‘explosive force’ that will help him (both Indra and the mortal aided by him) prevail in battle.

## 08-10
For my interpr. of these vss., see publ. intro.


## 08
Both Ge and Old suggest that ṛ́ghāvā should be read as neut. *ṛ́ghāvad on the basis of similar (but not identical) X.27.3 yadā́vā́khyat samáraṇam ṛ́ghāvad. This seems unnec., since nom. sg. ṛ́ghāvā makes fine sense, and, as anyone who has tangled with it knows, X.27 is a very strange hymn. The only factor in favor of the emendation is the fact that ṛ́ghāvā is the only representative of the -van-stem ṛ́ghāvan-; otherwise we find the -vant-stem ṛ́ghāvant- (3x). But -van- and -vantstems coexist elsewhere -- cf. maghávan(t)- -- and eliminating the -van-stem here doesn’t seem sufficient reason to make the emendation. (Note that WG do not follow Ge and Old, and Ge allows for the possibility of the nom. in his n. 8a.) Ge suggests that the subjects of a and b might be Indra’s wife. Scar (616 and n.

882) has her as the subj. of b but not a. After surveying the various possibilities in his n. he says, with remarkable understatement, “Das Dramolett lässt Raum für verschiedene Interpretationen.” I think it likely that Indra is the subj. of the first two pādas both because the word pátnī is only introduced in the 3rd pāda and because one wonders whether a woman would be in a position to survey the battlefield.

In d “whetted sharp by the soma pressers” (níśitaṃ somasúbhiḥ) continues the theme of the previous vss., that getting Indra on one’s side in battle requires plying him with soma at the sacrifice.


## 09
As noted in the publ. intro., this vs. introduces the vocabulary of commerce, which is otherwise little represented in our texts (though see AVŚ III.15, called by Whitney “For success in trade”) and therefore difficult to get a handle on. My interpr.

differs on some important points from the standard (Old, Ge, WG, Kü [425]). In pāda a most interpr. take kánīyaḥ ‘lesser’ as referring to the price and bhū́yasā ‘greater’ as what is being bought. But price is always in the instr.: see in the next vs. 10ab daśábhiḥ … dhenúbhiḥ. Therefore, grammar requires us to conclude that, rather than complaining that the potential purchaser offered too little for that very valuable asset, Indra himself, Indra is protesting that the purchaser went for an inferior product (another god?) with too high an offer. In pādas b and c he further points out that the purchaser failed to take advantage of the chance to buy Indra (who therefore went away ‘unsold’ ávikrītaḥ) and to leave behind (/replace) the poor bargain he made in the first place.

As also indicated in the publ. intro., I take pāda d as an old saying encapsulating the wisdom of not wasting your money on a substandard item. The problem in this pāda is vāṇám, which ordinarily means ‘voice, music’ (see EWA s.v.).

However, Ge tr. ‘Handel’ and suggests (n. 9d) that it is derived from vaṇíj- ‘merchant’, which seems very plausible. That it is otherwise unknown in this meaning would not be surprising, given the specialized lexical level it inhabits.

## 10
The big question about this vs. is the identity of the speaker. The standard view is that it is the poet Vāmadeva, who is putting Indra on sale temporarily, with the requirement that he be returned after his obstacle-smashing is done. I find this unlikely. How did Indra come to be possessed by Vāmadeva (imám … máméndram “this Indra of mine”)? Who is he hawking Indra to? Why has the scene changed from the domestic one of Indra and his wife to, presumably, the ritual ground? My own suggestion, albeit somewhat tentative, is that the speaker is Indra’s wife. Who would have a better right to call him “this Indra of mine”? Moreover, there seems no good reason to introduce his wife as an emphatic actor in vs. 8 and then drop her out of the story. Since the three vss. seem unified in tone and theme, common sense suggests that they should take place in the same location with the same actors.

The standard tr. take c with d, e.g., Ge: “Wenn er die Feinde erschlagen hat, so soll er ihn mir zurückgeben.” The problem with this is that it assumes an anterior, specifically future anterior, value “(will) have smashed” for the intensive subjunctive jáṅghanat. For this reason I attach it to ab. However, it may make more sense to allow the future anterior and make the yadā́clause the prior condition for the return in pāda d. In this case the tr. would be “Who buys this Indra of mine with ten cows? When he [=Indra] will have smashed the obstacles, then will he [=buyer] return him [=Indra] to me?”
