+++
title = "025"

+++
Indra


## 01
On the phraseology of c, see comm. ad IV.16.11. Though Ge (/WG) supply ‘day’ with pā́ryāya there seems no reason not to take it with the two immediately preceding datives.

Pāda d contains two functionally parallel expressions in two formally different guises: the loc. absol. sámiddhe agnaú “when his fire has been kindled” and the nom. bahuvrīhi sutásomaḥ “possessing pressed soma / he whose soma has been pressed.” A parallel bahuvrīhi to the first expression is also attested: iddhā́gni- (2x).


## 02
The last part of d, kaváye ká ūtī́, is somewhat unclear. Ge, flg. Sāy., identifies the kaví- as Indra, but this seems unlikely. If káḥ refers to the mortal worshiper (as seems likely, given the referents of the preceding káḥ’s), he would not ordinarily be supplying help to Indra, and though Indra is sometimes called a kaví-, that is comparatively rare (though see the next hymn, IV.26.1) and not found in such a context. Other passages with ūtī́and an overt or covert form of the copula (vel sim.) generally have the god as subject. Cf. nearby IV.23.2 … kád ūtī́, vr̥dhé bhuvac chaśamānasya ... “Will he be here with help for the strengthening of the one who has labored” (sim. IV.29.1, 4; 31.1), but as was just noted, changing the referent of káḥ in the middle of this insistent sequence (9 occurrences of káḥ in 3 vss.) is undesirable.

My ‘joins together’ is an awkward attempt to avoid that.


## 03
On ávivenam / ávivenan see comm. ad IV.24.6. Assuming the -am form is correct here, it would be an absolutive in -am. In IV.24.6 the same expression mánasā́vivenan/m qualified the mortal worshiper (acdg. to most -- see disc. there).

Here it seems to qualify the gods. However, it is just possible that as an adverbial absolutive it could refer to the mortal worshiper, represented by kásya: “the pressed soma plant of which (mortal), never losing track in his mind, do …” The fact that until this sentence the mortal had appeared in the nom. káḥ could contribute to the somewhat mixed construction.

## 05-06
For suprāvī́-/duṣprāvī́- see comm. ad I.34.4.


## 06
See Old’s disc. of kévalā as neut. pl., in agreement with Gr.

On prāśu-(/śū-) see comm ad VIII.31.6; 32.2, 16.


## 07
On sakhyám sám √gṝ see IX.86.16.


## 26-27
These are the famous hymns devoted to the stealing of soma from heaven.

Unfortunately they are very obscure in many details, esp. IV.27. The myth and these hymns are treated in detail by U. Schneider, Der Somaraub des Manu (1971).
