+++
title = "026"

+++
Indra (1-3), Praise of the falcon (4-7) [=Soma-theft] As indicated in the publ. intro., I believe the whole hymn is spoken by Indra, against the Anukramaṇī but with Ge (/WG).


## 01
In this vs. Indra identifies himself with the three most resonant RVic words for poet: ṛ́ṣi-, vípra-, kaví-. I am not sure why. The named beings in the 2nd hemistich, Kutsa and Uśanā, belong in the same mythic complex, along with Indra; see in this Indra cycle IV.16.10-12. Kakṣīvant is one of the most accomplished RVic poets (I.116-26), and his collection immediately follows that attributed to Kutsa (I.101-15).

But again I don't know why he claims identity with Kakṣīvant, esp. because only one hymn of Kakṣīvant’s is even possibly dedicated to Indra (the maddening I.121).

However, note the borrowing of phraseology from Kakṣīvant in IV.27.4 (see comm. ad loc.). His desire to claim both Manu (first man) and the sun (most prominent heavenly body) is more understandable.

In c I take ny ṛ̀ñje not as a 1st sg. present but as the homophonous 1st sg.

injunctive to the 6th cl. pres. ṛñjá- and therefore as preterital.


## 03
Atithigva is often associated with Kutsa, sometimes with both as enemies of Indra (I.53.10, VI.18.13, VIII.53.2), sometimes, as here, as his clients.

## 04-07
The 3rd sg. act. impf./injunc. of √bhṛ is the “hero” of this, the mythological portion, of the hymn: bhárat (4d, 5a), bharat (6c), abharat (7a).


## 04
The first hemistich sounds like a formal eulogistic opening, though I don’t know of any parallels elsewhere (quite possibly for want of looking).

## 05
My interpr. depends on reading (as sometimes elsewhere) yádi (‘if’) as yád

*ī (‘when it’), despite the short i before a single consonant. It is possible that yád *ī
was changed redactionally, to match yádi in IV.27.3. A heavy syllable in fourth place in an opening of four is standard (see Arnold 182, 188), and in particular the sequence of four shorts in #(bhárad) yádi | vír á(to) seems quite unusual, while a long vowel before the caesura and preceding a break of two shorts is metrically more favorable -- though given the many metrical departures in this hymn (see, e.g., the next vs.), this is not a strong argument.


## 06
Three of the four cadences in this verse are bad (b, c, d).

ṛjīpín- (2x) must be closely related to better-attested ṛjipyá- (6x), which also has Iranian cognates, e.g., Aves. ərəzifiia-. Werba bei EWA, s.v., suggests that it is a contamination with ṛjīṣín-, which seems a promising suggestion.

Goto (1st Kl, 171-72, flg. Wackernagel) argues that the thematic middle dádate is synchronicially distinct from √dā 'give' and means 'keep safe'. My ‘hanging onto’ represents a compromise between such a rendering and ‘take’, the standard sense of medial (ā́) √dā (see 7a ādā́ya).


## 07
The obj. mūrā́(ḥ) is fem. and presumably matches the gender of the parallel object árātīḥ ‘hostilities’ in the preceding pāda.
