+++
title = "027"

+++
(323) Falcon (1-4), Falcon or Indra (5) [=Soma theft] Note the periodic punctuation by ádha (1d, 3a, 4d, 5a) -- and some play with that word: ádhi 4b, adhva... 5c, ándhah 5b, maybe adīyam 1d; also the preponderance of a-init. preverbs, ánu 1a, ápa 2a, abhí 2b, áva 3a, 3c.

The perfect jabhāra is found in vss. 2 and 4 (cf. the pres. stem forms to √bhṛ in the preceding hymn, vss. 4-7). It thus frames the central vs. 3, which could then be an omphalos. That vs. is certainly confused enough to qualify and captures the crucial moment of the grabbing of soma. But since vs. 3 consists of a series of subordinate clauses whose main clause is found in vs. 4, it cannot be syntactically isolated into a free-standing omphalos.


## 01
The major problem with this vs. is pāda d, with a nom. śyenáḥ and the 1st sg.

nír adīyam. At first glance this seems to require that the speaker be the falcon, not Soma. The problem, and various previous suggested solutions, are discussed at length by Old. He rejects an emendation to 3rd ps. *adīyat (rightly in my view) and suggests instead that we must indeed take the speaker to be the falcon. In this he is followed by Ge (/WG). However, this makes problems with pāda c (“a hundred metal fortifications guarded me”), where the 1st ps. speaker should surely be Soma, whose release from captivity in heaven is the subject of the hymn, not the falcon, who flies freely around. Moreover, it seems unlikely that we would care about the long-standing knowledge that the falcon has (ab), whereas again Soma’s knowledge is relevant. A somewhat ad hoc, but still satisfying (to me anyway) solution was suggested by Thieme (Gedichte, 41), who takes ádha śyenáḥ as an abrupt nominal clause -- “Then the falcon!” -- expressing the surprise advent of the bird in Soma’s place of captivity. The 1st sg. verb can then have Soma, the speaker, as its subject.


## 02
There is general agreement that Soma speaks this and the following vss.

I read ápa twice in pāda a -- first with jabhāra ‘he carried away’, but also with jóṣam ‘against (my) will’ (despite Old’s rejection of the latter). This phrase would be constructed on the model of ánu jóṣam ‘following my will’. That it was not against Soma’s will is explained by the next pāda, where he boasts that he is stronger and braver than the falcon, implying that without Soma’s agreement the falcon could not have borne him away. The standard tr. take jóṣam positively -- so that in conjunction with the neg. ná the whole is negative: “he did not willingly carry me away.” In this reading it is the falcon’s will or pleasure that is at issue (e.g., WG “Nicht hat der mich ja zu (seinem) Gefallen fortgebracht”). I don’t understand what this would convey: that the falcon was forced on this mission by someone else? that once the falcon saw Soma, he didn’t want to take him? Thieme (Ged.) by contrast takes it as the guard’s will (“mit Zustimmung [des Wächters]”), but we would surely need more signaling than the bare noun jóṣam to indicate that the jóṣa- belongs to a character we haven’t met yet (presumably Kṛśānu of 3d). Moreover, it suggests, only to reject, a scenario involving a corrupt prison guard that seems to me out of place.

Pāda c is almost identical to 26.7, with the addition of the adv. īrmā́‘still, quiet’ (on which see comm. ad VIII.22.4). It qualifies the left-behind árātīḥ ‘hostilities’; cf. V.62.2 īrmā́tasthúṣīh ‘standing still’, with the adv. limiting a fem. pl.

participle. See Narten’s sim. tr. (Kl Sch. 69).

Since púraṃdhi- is fem., and the nom. sg. śū́śuvānaḥ in d is masc., Puraṃdhi cannot be the subject there -- rather the falcon, as the standard interpr. agree.


## 03
This is a difficult vs. to construe and to interpret. What we have to go on is the syntactic skeleton the poet has provided us: a triple yád construction, with yád in Wackernagel’s position in the first three pādas, and in the fourth a nominative NP that serves as the subject of the clause introduced in c. The main cl. is then provided by 4ab (so, generally, Old, Ge, WG, Schneider).

Within this structure pādas a and cd are relatively straightforward internally; it is b that causes further problems, esp. in the sequence … yád yádi vā́ta(ḥ). First, note the mirror-image phonology of the opening: ví yád yádi v(…). Ge takes yádi vā simply as a strengthened ‘or’, and similarly Schneider (16 n. 35) states that yádi vā is simply equivalent to vā. The tr. of Ge and WG reflect this stripped-down interpr. of the sequence yád yádi vā, reducing that complex just to “oder als …” I find this exceedingly unlikely. The sequence is simply too tricky and too unprecedented to be a long-winded way of saying ‘or’, and anyway RVic poets do not resort to pleonastic expressions to fill out their pādas: 11 syllables is too tight a space as it is. I think we must give yádi vā its lexical weight “or if” and assume that the poet is introducing a bit of doubt about some details of the story. This doubt coincides with the switch from 3rd singular reference to the falcon to unidentified 3rd plural: “they carried” (ūhúḥ), and these are likely to be connected. The two almost identical statements about Puraṃdhi (26.7c and 27.2c) simply state that she “left behind” hostilities.

Neither says she was carried away, much less by whom -- so how Puraṃdhi departed remains unclear, and pāda b seems to be reminding us of that.

The similarity of vā́ta(ḥ) (Pp. vā átaḥ) to the word for ‘wind’, just met in vā́tān (2d), has been generally remarked on. Ge (n. 3b) tentatively suggests a haplology: vā́to vā́tā(ḥ), that is, vā átaḥ vā́tāḥ ‘or the winds from there (carried off Puraṃdhi).” I see the temptation, but I think vā́ta(ḥ) is only a word play and does not conceal a form of ‘wind’. Among other things, the winds in 2d were not carrying anything away; they were overtaken by the falcon, who was.


## 04
The adj. ṛjipyá- = Aves. ərəzifiia- (and other Iranian forms). I favor the old notion that it contains a Caland form of ‘straight’ (ṛjú-, etc.) + *pt-ya-, with a zero-gr.

of √pat ‘fly’. See EWA s.v., though Mayrhofer considers the etym. “unsicher.” (The lack of -iya- readings, indicating that the root-final laryngeal was lost without leaving a trace, might be problematic, but -iya- and -ya- adjectives tend to become confused.) Scar. (318) suggests rather a derivation from √pā3 ‘go’, but the existence of such a root is in question.

If we accept the transmitted índrāvataḥ, it would most likely be an acc. pl. and refers to the companions of Indra who will ritually prepare the soma for him to drink.

This interpr. is reflected in the publ. tr. However, the form has been much discussed and much emended (see Old’s detailed disc. and Ge’s n. 4a [“eine alte Crux”]). I understand the urge to emend -- which for me stems less from any problems construing the transmitted form within the frame of the passage than with the illformed simile, ná bhujyúm, that ends the pāda. This clearly refers to the Aśvins’ rescue of the hapless Bhujyu, whom they pull out of the sea and bring home (e.g., I.116.5 yád aśvinā ūháthur bhujyúm ástam). As the simile is constructed in our vs., the simile particle ná precedes the only word in the simile, though ordinarily ná follows the first word of the simile. This is in fact less of a problem than I used to think: Ge (n. 4a) attributes this position to what he considers a common transposition of X ná to ná X at the end of a verse line, and he seems to be correct that the similemarking ná is blocked from pāda-final position. See comm. ad VIII.76.1, X.21.1, 111..

If we were to read du. *índravantā (note the short second vowel, found in this stem when the penultimate syllable is heavy), the adj. could identify the Aśvins (they are so called in I.116.21, the hymn just cited with Bhujyu), and we would have a fully formed simile: “as the two companions of Indra [=Aśvins] (did) Bhujyu.” Note that I.116 is a Kakṣīvant hymn, and the poet of these Soma-stealing hymns (IV.26- 27) lays claim to the Kakṣīvant mantle in the very first vs. of this sequence (IV.26.1 aháṃ kakṣī́vām̐ṛ́ṣir asmi vípraḥ). The Bhujyu saga figures prominently in the Kakṣīvant cycle (I.116.3-5, 117.14, 119.4). As Old discusses, this emendation has been suggested previously, both as is and via *índra(/ā)vantā+u. Besides sense and the structure of the simile, another strong factor favoring the emendation is meter: the transmitted text produces a highly irregular break ( - - ⏑), but reading *índravantā would yield a standard break - ⏑ -. I therefore am now inclined to alter the publ. tr. to “… brought him from the lofty back (of heaven), just as *the two companions of Indra (the Aśvins) (brought) Bhujyu” - although I remain somewhat uncertain because I don’t know how the corruption would have happened. I do not think it was by way of the addition of u to the dual ending -vantā, since this would be an odd position for u. Perhaps it was clumsily altered to match bṛható in the next pāda; Sāy. at least analyses the form as an abl. modifying bṛhatáḥ … snóḥ. It is also possible that it was modeled after parāvátaḥ in the corresponding vs. in IV.26, namely 6, which also treats the bringing of the soma from heaven to earth, begins ṛjīpī́śyenáḥ matching our ṛjipyáḥ … śyenaḥ, and contains a form of √bhṛ (bharat, like our jabhāra).

The expression patatrí … parṇám “winged feather” strikes me as odd -- it is generally birds that are winged, not their feathers. I therefore propose to read

*patatrí(y)asya ‘of the winged one’ rather than patatrí asya. (This actually requires
no change to the Saṃhitā text.) Grammatically this is not difficult: -(i)ya- adjectives are made regularly to -a-stems, including -trya- to -tra-, like mitríya/mítrya- to mitrá-, which also has mitrín- beside it. There's a pátatra- 'wing', beside patatrín-, so there's no reason why not to have a patatríya-. Gen. patatríyasya then modifies véḥ. It is worth noting that a number of occurrences of patatrín- modify ví-.


## 05
The first occurrence of mádāya- was omitted in the publ. tr., which should read “… Indra will aim it for drinking to exhilaration.” As noted in the publ. intro., práti √dhā is an idiom meaning ‘aim (an arrow)’, and the word play is surely meant here, given the immediately preceding vss. about Kṛśānu and his arrowshot.
