+++
title = "028"

+++
Indra, or Indra and Soma


## 01
The construction in b -- apáḥ … sasrútas kaḥ, lit. “made the waters flowing,” with an acc. pl. adjectival root-noun cmpd. modifying ‘waters’ -- is a little odd. In this type of periphrastic causative context with √kṛ, we expect a complement infinitive. In fact compare the completely parallel VII.21.3 tvám indra srávitavā́apás kaḥ, with an infinitive built to the same root √sru. There is no obvious reason for the different constructions. Perhaps it anticipates the akṛṇoḥ NOUN-ACC ADJ-ACC constructions in 4cd, where there exist no alternative infinitive possibilities. (The publ. tr. “made the waters flow” rather than “… flowing” is meant to avoid an interpr.

that Indra thawed or otherwise liquified something solid. It should, however, be “flow together,” to represent the sa-.)


## 02
Ge plausibly suggests that the “great deceit” is Śuṣṇa. See his cited parallels.


## 03
My “house of no exit” is a somewhat loose way of rendering durgé duroṇé “house of difficult going.” I think Ge is correct in interpreting this as the grave.

Note b #purā́ c #purū́.

## 04
On the construction with akṛṇoḥ see disc. ad vs. 1.

There is a slight syntactic clash between ablative víśvasmāt, appropriate to a comparative (“lower than all”), and the superlative adhamā́n, which should have a genitive (“lowest of all”).

The dual verbs of cd (ábādhethām ámṛṇatam … ávindethām) must have Indra and Soma as subjects, as the larger context (vss. 1-2) and the explicit Vāyav Indraś ca construction in 5b show. But the immediate context (vs. 3) falsely suggests Indra and Agni on the basis of 3a.


## 05
Note #índraś ca here and #índraś ca(krám) in 2b. Also, presumably we get a reverse Vāyav Indraś ca construction here (índraś ca soma rather than standard soma índraś ca), so that Indra can be pāda-initial, as in 1b, 2b.

There is clear (and fairly unusual) enjambement over the hemistich boundary: … ūrvám áśvyaṃ góḥ / ádardṛtam, with the obj. of the verb in c found in b. There is disagreement about the disposition of the rest of the 2nd hemistich. The publ. tr. takes ápihitāny áśnā as obj. of riricáthuḥ, with tatṛdānā́a dual pf. part. with acc. pl. kṣā́ḥ as its obj. As indicated in the publ. intr. I identify those things “covered over by the stone” to be the waters and cows that Indra released (in the Vṛtra and Vala myths respectively). This fits with the use of ápihita- in 1d. Ge also takes ápihitāni as obj.

of riricáthuḥ, but the last three words, kṣā́ś cit tatṛdānā́as a simile (marked by cid, which he considers a possible simile marker, and I don’t). For him tatṛdānā́is passive and kṣā́ḥ is nom. sg. WG take ápihitāni as a second obj. of ā́dardṛtam. The obj. of riricáthuḥ is, for them, kṣā́ḥ (acc. pl.), which also serves as obj. of tatṛdānā́, which they consider dual and transitive, as I do. Their interpr. of cd follows that of Kü (216, 424), and it is certainly grammatically possible. However, I do not understand what it would mean to release the dwelling places (Kü) or the parts of the earth (WG) (e.g., WG “Ihr habt die Erdteile freigelassen”), whereas the release of the pent-up waters after drilling through the earth fits the Indra mythology perfectly.

The cadence of b is bad and would be improved by reading *tātṛdānā́, as Arnold suggested and Old seems tentatively to accept.
