+++
title = "030"

+++
Indra


## 02
Ge takes víśvā with kṛṣṭáyaḥ, but in this sandhi situation it would have to represent a corruption of víśvāś. See Old for disc. of this form. I take it as a neut. acc. pl.


## 03
The neg. scope problem potentially posed by víśve … ná -- “all did not” vs. “not all did” -- can be easily solved. See my 1997 “Vedic anyá- 'another, the other': syntactic disambiguation,” where I establish that the independent negative ná coocurs with víśva- only with the corporate entity víśve devā́ḥ, enforcing a meaning “all did not.” Reading *yūyudhuḥ would provide a better cadence. Old tentatively endorses this.

The sense of pāda c is not entirely clear, but there are several factors that allow us to close in on the meaning. First, it seems to provide the reason why the gods did not fight Indra. Further, ā́tiraḥ recurs in vs. 7, and it seems unlikely that the two identical verbs would have substantially different meanings. Finally, as far as I can tell, all occurrences of náktam are temporal (‘by night’); when poets want to refer to night as an entity or entities they use rā́trī-, aktú-, or kṣáp-. (On uṣā́sā náktam in VIII.27.2, see comm. ad loc.) Therefore tr. like Ge (/WG) that take áhā náktam as parallel objects (e.g., Ge “als du Tage und Nacht abgrenztest”) cannot be correct. As indicated in the publ. intro., I think that this pāda concerns Indra’s destabilization of time when he steals the Sun’s wheel -- a myth that will be glancingly related in the next tṛca. What exactly is going on I don’t know -- it sounds as if Indra fast-forwards or skips over days during the night, perhaps because the Sun can’t make his normal daily circuit and therefore daytime is significantly abbreviated and no longer lasts as long as night?

## 04-06
All three vss. of this tṛca begin with yátra. I take them all as subordinated to vs. 3. Ge [/WG] and Klein (DGRV I.432) take the main clause for all three vss. to be 6c, but Indra’s help for Etaśa does not seem sufficiently significant to carry the whole tṛca. Ge (/WG) take all three yátra as ‘where’, not ‘when’, but what location they are thinking of I don’t know.

I do not know what to do with the utá’s in yátrotá in 4 and 6, but assume they are there to indicate the additive nature of the sequence of subordinate clauses. Sim.

Klein (DGRV I.431-32). It would be better if the first one were in vs. 5, not vs. 4.


## 04
√muṣ takes a double acc. 
## 05
It seems curious that in vs. 3 it is emphatically stated that the All Gods did not fight Indra, and yet here he is fighting them -- in what I consider the same circumstances, namely the theft of the Sun’s wheel. This problem clears up if we render both yuyudhuḥ in 3b and áyudhyaḥ in 5b as ‘attack’. The gods were reluctant to attack him after he showed his power over time and the Sun, but he did not hang back in attacking them though he was alone.


## 06
The Pp reads prá āvaḥ, which would make it a main clause verb and pāda c the resolution of the subordinated yátra clauses. This reading is followed by Ge (/WG) and Klein. My reasons for rejecting this interpr. were given above, and with Old I interpr. the ambig. prā́vaḥ as pra-ā́vaḥ, a subordinated verb.

I do not understand what is going on in ab. Who is the mortal who benefits from Indra’s deed -- perhaps Kutsa? And what action does áriṇā(ḥ) … sū́ryam describe. The root √rī means ‘flow’ (etc.), and the nasal pres. means ‘let flow’, but in certain contexts, often hostile, it can have the developed meaning ‘dissolve’ or ‘let overflow’. I’ve tr. ‘let slip’ here, but without certainty. Does it mean ‘let flow’ -- that is, let the Sun continue on his way after the incident with the wheel? or is the sense more sinister: the Sun slips away from its usual path? The presence of the Sun’s horse Etaśa doesn’t help, as Indra gives aid to Etaśa even when he is attacking the sun. ### 07-12 After a tṛca on stealing the Sun’s wheel there follow two more on the related myth of Indra’s crushing Dawn’s cart. The myth is actually confined to vss.

8-11, with the two outer vss. semi-independent. WG (nn. to vss. 10, 11) suggest a radical interpr. of this sequence: that Uṣas here is the name of the female leader of a matriarchal tribe who opposed the territorial expansion of Vāmadeva’s group. This seems reductive in the extreme, and since the Uṣas vss. immediately follow the treatment of the stealing of the Sun’s wheel, a cosmic rather than local interpr.

imposes itself. They must also explain why this local matron is called “daughter of Heaven” (duhitáraṃ diváḥ) twice (8d, 9a): acdg. to them, it is her boast, which the poet jeers at. The only advantage of this unlikely interpr. is that it accounts for the localization of her crushed cart at the Vipāś river (acdg. to WG, where she lived), but this hardly seem sufficient.


## 07
In c átra seems to correspond to the three yátra’s in the preceding tṛca. The point seems to be that even after all the energy Indra expended in his fight with the sun (and the gods), he still has a lot of manyú- left to apply in the Uṣas incident.

The repetition of ā́tiraḥ here was already noted ad vs. 3. Note the similarity of the pādas: 3c (yád) áhā … ā́tiraḥ / 7c (átr)ā́ha … ā́tiraḥ; though áhā ‘days’ in 3 and the particle áha in 7 are unrelated, the echo is surely deliberate.

I supply “lying there” with Dānu, because in two of the four singular passages containing dā́nu- what the Dānu does is ‘lie’: I.32.9 dā́nuḥ śaye; II.12.11 dā́nuṃ śáyānam. So, although ‘overcame’ is probably part of the semantics of ā́tiraḥ, the lit.

sense ‘pass over’ fits having the prostrate enemy as the object.

## 08-21
These vss. are tr. by Hoffmann (Injunk., 184-86).


## 08
The juxtaposition of vīryám … paúṃsyam “manly and masculine” with stríyam “woman” brings the gender polarization into sharp relief. There is certainly no sense that it’s unseemly or unsporting to hit a girl!


## 09
The voc. indra was omitted in the publ. tr., so “o Indra” should be inserted at the end.


## 12
vibālī́- is almost universally taken as the name of (another) river, though the name (and indeed the word) shows up nowhere else. By contrast, in the first ed.

of the dictionary (1872) MonWms. takes it as an adj. vibālya- “passed beyond a state of youth, in full vigor; swollen (said of a river),” though in the 2nd ed. (1899) it is simply the fem. river name vibālī́-. WG take it not as a toponym but with the sense ‘mit breiter Öffnung’. An attributive adjective would certainly be preferable to an unlocatable placename. Although WG give no explan. of their interpr., it rests on earlier discussions, whose details can be recovered in EWA (s.v.). EWA considers it the name of a river (produced from the confluence of the Vipās and the Śutudrī), but derived from a word with the same (or similar) sense as WG ascribe to it: ‘dessen Ufer weit auseinanderstehen’, an early MIA word with -bāra- representing pārá- ‘far shore’. See the lit. cited there.


## 16
This son of the unwed maiden appears to be the same one who was being eaten by ants in IV.19.9 (in the same Indra cycle); see comm. there. These tantalizing snippets are all we know about the story.


## 17
WG render asnātā́rā as “ohne dass sie untertauchen,” flg. Tichy (Nom.Ag.

107). It seems to me to be pushing the syntax to render a negated agent noun as the equivalent of negative purpose clause (though in her comment Tichy simply says that it’s “gleichzeitig,” presumably with the time of the main verb), though it is also the case that we don’t know much if anything about swimming in ancient India.


## 19
The blind man and the lame one also figure in IV.19.9, along with the son of the unmarried woman; see vs. 16 above. The blind and the lame form a pair elsewhere in the RV, e.g., I.112.8; II.13.12, 15.7; VIII.79.3.

The infinitival phrase ná … áṣṭave is rendered in the publ. tr. “not to be equalled,” though it lit. means “not to be reached/attained.” The lit. tr. implies that no one can actually receive Indra’s favor, but I think the point is rather that favor such as Indra’s cannot be deployed by anyone else (that is, any other deity) -- hence the adjustment in the English. On this interpr, see Hoffmann (185). Ge supplies “with words” (i.e., “not to be obtained [with words]”), presumably meaning that no poet can describe the extent of Indra’s favor.


## 23
Note the rare future subjunctive kariṣyā́(ḥ), otherwise found only in corrupted form in I.165.9; see comm. there, as well as Old on our passage.


## 24
The voc. ādure is a hapax, and there is no agreement about whether it is a PN or an attributive adj. and whether it is addressed to a deity (possibly Indra) or a human (possibly a patron). Nor does it seem likely that any definitive answers can be obtained, given the stark paucity of evidence. I have therefore tr. it as a PN as the line of least resistance, and I think it quite unlikely that it is addressed to Indra: would relatively low-level gods be giving things to Indra, and do gods ever receive, rather than give, vāmá-? I tentatively assume that it is the name of the/a patron.

Although this vs. is not technically a dānastuti, it occupies the position in the hymn where a dānastuti would be found, with mention of the human patron, and in opening out to a range of (mostly minor) gods, the mention of a mortal would not be amiss.

On the hapax kárūḷatī see EWA s.v. ## 031
Indra According to Old the hymn is in tṛcas, but Ge asserts that it consists of 3 verse pairs and 3 tṛcas. Ge concedes that vss. 1-3 occur as a unit in SV, VS, and AV, but argues that the content and form of the verses speak for a different division: vss. 1-2 are questions, vss. 3-4 both begin with the same word, and vss. 5-6 concern the relation between Indra and Sūrya. After this verse, again on formal and thematic grounds, he considers the rest tṛcas. Despite these considerations, Old’s view seems correct. That both 3 and 4 begin with abhí (used in two different senses) is scarcely remarkable; note the verbal concatenation between tṛcas in the next hymn, IV.32.3-4.

Moreover, vs. 3 fits more comfortably with the preceding vss.: The question “with what help?” (káyā … ūtī́) posed in vs. 1 is answered in vs. 3 with the assertion that Indra will be our “helper with help” (avitā́… ūtíbhiḥ), a satisfying finale to a tṛca.

Vss. 5-6 do indeed involve Indra and Sūrya, but vs. 4 provides the lead-in to Indra’s journey continued in vs. 5.


## 05
In b I read ā́hā not ā́hā (a change only in the Pp. not the Saṃhitā text), and analyze this sequence as ā́+ áhā, the neut. pl. of ‘day’ (found also in IV.30.3 and 33.6; cf. also viśváhā in 12a below). This is one of only two supposed exx. of the particle ha with long vowel; the other one (V.41.7) also follows ā́and is susceptible to the same analysis. The ā-final version of ha is ghā, which shows Brugmann's Law and velar outcome before original *o, acdg. to Mark Hale. Note that ha only once elsewhere occurs after the preverb ā́(VIII.9.18 ā́hāyám …). (In fact an analysis ā́hā́yám “this one through the days here …” is also possible in VIII.9.18, though I did not so analyze it there.) By contrast ghā is found fairly commonly after ā́(I.30.8, I.48.5, etc.).

“Along the slope of your intentions” (pravátā … krátūnām) means that the journey to our sacrifice is an easy one because it is in accord with Indra’s intentions.

Why this should be like coming by foot (padéva) is not entirely clear: the journey is so easy that it can be undertaken on foot? pleasant pedestrian rambles generally involve taking an easy downward path? Neither of these seems particular applicable to Indra’s travels.

When sácā occurs with a loc., it generally lacks lexical value and simply signals a locative absolute -- as in the common expression suté sácā “when (the soma) is pressed.” I think that is the intention here, in the phrase sū́rye sácā: it is a temporal expression, “when the sun (rises)”; cf. I.135.3 and comm. ad loc. I have here included a lexical tr. “in company with” because I think sácā, with lexical value, needs to be supplied or understood in the next vs., 6c, for which see disc. below.

However, I would now be inclined simply to tr. here “I have taken my share at sun(rise).”


## 06
The purport of this verse is something of a puzzle. I think the point is that the journey undertaken by Indra in vs. 4 has finally brought him here, with both his battle-lust and his equipment on full display, in order to drink soma with the ritualists (including the “I” of the speaker). Cf. nearby IV.29.2, where Indra presents himself in a non-intimidating way (or so he thinks) and “becomes exhilarated along with the heroes who have pressed the soma.” Here his arrival is at sunrise, and “I” have a share in the soma along with Indra at that time. In order to make sense of 6c, we need to understand/supply ábhakṣi from 5c (as Ge [/WG] do also). Although Klein (DGRV II.129) thinks the two ádha’s in c have different functions, the pointed parallel structure of that short pāda -- ádha LOC ádha LOC -- makes that conclusion quite unlikely in its strong form -- though I think it is the case that the formal parallelism conceals a functional distinction (different from the one suggested by Klein). The question is how to construe the locatives, and it is here that the sácā in 5c comes into play. As I noted apropos of that pāda, the sácā there seems just to signal that the loc. sū́rye is a functional loc. absol. In our pāda c there is no sácā, but I think it should be understood. On the one hand, it again (silently) marks sū́rye as a loc. absol.; however, with índre I suggest it has lexical value (as it likely has in the two occurrences of tvé sácā in the next hymn [IV.32.3c, 4a]), indicating that “I” take my share in Indra’s company. What I am suggesting is that a non-overt sácā, supplied on the basis of its occurrence in the previous vs., has two different functions in a single pāda, a pāda whose structure suggests that its parts should be rigidly parallel. This is not sufficiently conveyed by the published tr. -- I am not sure that English is up to conveying it -- which I would now emend to “(I have taken my share) now in (company with) you, now in (company with) the sun (i.e., at sunrise).”

## 07-08
My interpr. of the structural relationship of these two vss. and of the internal structure of vs. 8 differs considerably from the standard. Because of the parallelism of the openings of these vss., both with utá smā, I think that there should be two parallel clauses. But vs. 7 is a hí clauses with accented verb (āhúḥ), whereas the only verb in vs. 8 is maṃhase in pāda c. I am also puzzled by the pári in 8a, which is difficult to construe with the rest. There is no pári √maṃh elsewhere, and pári is in any case not situated where we would expect a preverb in tmesis. WG tr.

valiantly “du schenkst … ringsum,” which works in a pinch but I find it unsatisfying.

I suggest instead that pāda a contains an abbreviated form of a common formula containing both pári and sádyaḥ and a verb of motion. Cf. in IV: nearby IV.33.1 pári dyā́ṃ sadyó apáso babhūvuḥ; IV.45.7 yéna sadyáḥ pári rájāṃsi yātháḥ; IV.51.5 pariprayāthá bhúvanāni sadyáḥ. And elsewhere, e.g., I.115.3 pári dyā́vāprthiv ̥ ī́yanti sadyáḥ; I.123.8 ékaikā krátum pári yanti sadyáḥ; I.128.3 évena sadyáḥ páry eti pā́rthivam; III.58.8 pári dyā́vāprthiv ̥ ī́yāti sadyáḥ; V.47.4 diváś caranti pári sadyó ántān; VII.5.7 vāyúr ná pā́thaḥ pári pāsi sadyáḥ; VII.75.4 páñca kṣitī́ḥ pári sadyó jigāti. Given the remarkable number of such collocations, I find it difficult to believe that our poet is not evoking this formula. Since much of this hymn concerns Indra’s journey, it would be contextually appropriate. That vs. 9 asserts that no hindrances can obstruct Indra supports the journey theme. Then, by my interpr., pādas bc constitute the main clause for vss. 7-8.


## 10
The “hundred forms of help” found at the end of the first tṛca (3c) recurs here at the beginning of this tṛca, following the two more challenging tṛcas in between.


## 11
The publ. tr. rather carelessly followed Ge’s “zu grossem, glanzvollem Besitz,” but maháḥ is of course not a dat. like rāyé divítmate. It should either be rendered as a gen./abl. of máh-, hence “for the heavenly wealth of/from a/the great one” (so, e.g., tentatively Scar 45), or as the adv. maháḥ (see esp. Old, Kl. Schr. 729- 30 [=ZDMG (1901): 270-71] on mahó rāyé), hence “greatly for heavenly wealth.” As Old points out, this phrase is very similar to V.79.1 mahé … rāyé divítmatī, with a real dative mahé. The purport of the two expressions is probably the same. I would now follow Old’s adverbial interpr. Indeed this very phrase is found a number of times: IV.31.11, V.15.5, 43.1, VIII.23.16, X.61.22, 76.2, and in all cases the maháḥ should be interpr. as adverbial, though the less punctilious “for great wealth” probably captures the intended sense just as well.

The tr. of divítmate also needs to be revised. I now tentatively accept the analysis of divít- and its deriv. divítmant- as div-ít-, a root noun cmpd containing the root √i ‘go, come’. The word is rendered inconsistently in the publ. tr., as ‘heavenbound’ in I.26.2, ‘heavenly’ here and X.76.6 (though adjacent divít- is tr. ‘heavenbound’), and ‘heaven-bright’ in V.79.1. This inconsistency reflects the weakness of both standard analyses of this formation, either as an -it-stem with a marginal suffix or as a cmpd. Neither explan. is particularly compelling. For the former, see, e.g., AiG II.2.322, Re EVP 3.78-79 [ad V.79.1]; for the latter, e.g., Thieme (ZDMG 1961.100 = KlSch 176), AiG II.2.935 (Nachtr.), EWA s.v. dyáv- (p. 750), and extensive disc. by Scar (44-46). The idea goes back at least to Wackernagel (Sb. Berl.

1918; see Re op cit.). In this particular case, since the wealth is presumably coming from heaven, not going there, a lit. tr. would be “greatly for wealth coming from heaven,” but “… for heaven-sent wealth” would be more idiomatic. The -mantsuffix seems pleonastic, as AiG II.2.877-78 points out, since the hapax divít- and divítmant- appear both to be adjectives in the same meaning and are found adjacent to each other in the same case in the one passage in which divít- is found (X.76.6).

The reason for -mant- rather than -vant- is likewise unclear (see AiG II.2.882, 891).
