+++
title = "032"

+++
Indra


## 02
The stem citrín- is a hapax, and it is not clear what the fem. pl. referents are.

Ge suggests ‘battles’. On the basis of the fem. pl. phrase in 5, citrā́bhiḥ … ūtíbhiḥ I tentatively supply ‘means of help’; note that ūtíbhiḥ appeared at the end of the previous vs., 1c.


## 03
Ge takes ójasā as belonging to the enemy and providing the content of their boast: “der sich mit seiner Stärke grosstut.” But since ójasā is almost always pādafinal no matter what part of the vs. it belongs with and since Indra’s ójas- is usually what is referred to, I take it as Indra’s.

The comparative śáśīyas- occurs only twice in the RV, once in a very slangy passages referring to a woman (V.61.6), in a usage that does not illuminate this one.

Context in our passage favors the rendering ‘more numerous’ (so also Gr, Ge), given its contrast with dabhrébhiś cid “with only a few.” The question is how to get from the positive śáśvant- ‘each and every, one after another, successive, recurrent, continual’ to a comparative ‘more numerous’. The English expression “they just keep coming, more and more” might be the clue. WG incorporate the literal sense of śáśvant- but seem not to render the comparative: “die der Reihe nach erscheinenden.” See disc. of sácā ad IV.31.5-6.


## 10
The rel. prn. beginning pāda b, Saṃhitā yā́, is ambiguous: it can stand for yā́(neut. pl. and presumably picking up immed. preceding vīryā̀in the main cl.) or yā́ḥ (so Pp.) (fem. pl. and presumably anticipating púro dā́sīḥ in c). Neither is syntactically satisfying: if it has vīryā̀as its antecedent, as normal syntactic practice would expect, it doesn’t make sense in its clause: Indra didn’t “break into” his manly deeds. If it refers to the fortresses, it works fine with the verb in its clause but has no direct connection to the main clause. I assume the ambiguity was meant and loose subordination was the reason. I render it as a general subordinator to avoid both bad choices.


## 11
Pāda b is most likely an embedded relative -- a very rare syntactic phenomenon in the RV -- because the most likely reading of c is that the singers sing (a) “at the pressings” (sutéṣu c), not that Indra performed his deeds sutéṣu. However, it is just possible that sutéṣu could mean “in (the exhilaration of) the pressed soma drinks” and therefore continue the rel. cl. in b. In any case in this casually assembled Gāyatrī hymn, a syntactic violation does not seem too critical.


## 13
The use of śáśvant- here seems unconnected to the comparative śáśīyaṃsin 3a. Since vs. 13 is found also in VIII.65.7, it may simply have been imported from elsewhere; the structure of this hymn is very loose and seems to have been cobbled together from standard tropes and formulae.


## 15
The phrase matīnā́m … stómaḥ “the praise-song of our thoughts” refers to the actual poetic composition that stems from our thoughts. In RVic discourse every step from ‘mental inspiration’ to ‘thought’ to ‘song/poem’ can be used to refer to the composed or formulated praise for a deity. Here we see the progression expressed.


## 16
On the accent of ghásaḥ see III.52.3.


## 17
For vyáti- (RV 3x), despite Mayrhofer’s apparent skepticism (EWA s.v.) I follow Re’s deriv. (EVP 15: 37) from vi √yam with a presumed development ‘hold separate/apart’ à ‘pair’, though Re doesn’t deign to indicate what the semantic channel might be.

khārī́-, a measure of capacity’, is found only here and much later in the sūtras and Classical Skt, but it appears to be widespread in MIA. See EWA s.v. ### 20
mā́dabhrám (“not a little!”) is a prohibitive lacking a verb, though an aor.

injunc. can easily be supplied of course: *dāḥ matching the impv. dehi in the positive expression preceding it. Or alternatively s-aor. *bhāḥ (i.e., *bhār) to match flg. bhara.

## 22
This very obscure dānastuti begins by presenting itself as an explicit formal praśasti (eulogistic praise), an important genre in later times and, in my opinion, the missing link between Rigvedic praise poetry and Classical kāvya (see Chap. IV in my Rigveda between Two Worlds), with the annunciatory verb prá … śaṃsāmi. I think this high-style opening is meant as a deliberate contrast with the bawdy nature of the gift praised.

As noted in the publ. intro. I consider “the two brown ones” (babhrū́) found in all three vss. of the dānastuti (22-24) to be the breasts of a woman given to the poet as a gift from his patron (a not-uncommon gift).

In c the poet playfully warns the patron not to stint on cows on the grounds that he’s already given him something else. The expression is quite condensed.


## 23
This is the most difficult vs. of the sequence and has given rise to multiple contradictory, not to mention ludicrous, interpr. -- among which my own may be numbered (although I certainly think it’s better than eyeballs). Note the two -káforms (kanīnaké(va), arbhaké), indicating slangy, low-register speech and quite possibly associating it with women’s language. (For disc. see my 2008 “Women’s Language in the RV” and 2009 "Sociolinguistic Remarks on the Indo-Iranian *-kaSuffix: A Marker of Colloquial Register.") If the gift is really a woman, then evoking women’s language would make sense.

On vidradhá- ‘undressed, without clothes’ see EWA s.v. As for drupadá- ‘post’, AV VI.63.3 ayasmáye drupadé “on a metal post” shows that the post need no longer be wooden (despite dru-), just as “plastic glasses” does not strike an English speaker as odd or contradictory. As I said in the publ. intro., I think the post refers to the woman’s slender body, with two very prominent breasts, an ideal of a woman’s body also encountered in Classical Skt. lit. The breasts are personified (“little babydolls”) and invested with some autonomy as they move about during sex.

Crosscultural parallels in sexual slang could surely be found.

[IV.33-37 JPB]
