+++
title = "038"

+++
Dadhikrā The middle vss. of this hymn are introduced by repeated utá sma (5, 6, 8, 9), varied by utá syá in 7. As noted in the publ. intro, this sequence of ‘and’s adds to the sense of speed.


## 01
Although the Anukramaṇī takes Heaven and Earth to be the deity of this vs., the unidentified duals must rather refer to Mitra and Varuṇa, as also in vs. 2. This is clear from IV.39, where Mitra and Varuṇa give Dadhikrā to the Purus (2cd, 5cd).

The publ. tr. doesn’t accurately reflect sánti in pāda a. The tr. should read “Since there are earlier gifts …” The form nitośé is much disputed. Gr identifies it as a 3rd sg. to the thematic pres. tośate (otherwise unaccented), but not only is there a perfectly fine -te 3rd sg.

(tośate 4x) while a t-less 3rd sg. would be anomalous, but given the full-grade we would expect root accent (*nitóśe). Old vacillates but displays a weak preference for a 3rd sg. unreduplicated perfect, and Ge, who does not comment, appears to follow him (“… ausgeschüttet hat”). Despite this scholarly pedigree, this solution appears to me to have little to recommend it: non-reduplicated perfects are quite rare. Gotō (1st Kl, 167-68) also vacillates: if it’s a verb it’s a non-redupl. pf. Or it might be the loc. of a noun nitośá-; this appears to be the view represented in WG. There does exist a them. noun tośá-. Re also tentatively suggests a locative but “à nuance semiinfinitive,” tr. “pour être déversées.” I find Re’s interpr. appealing, though, as often, somewhat cavalier about grammar. I would like to take the form directly as a dative root noun in infinitival usage, but we should probably expect *nituśé. It may have been adjusted to match the grade of tośá-, or the loc. ending -é of the them. noun may have been reinterpr. as a purpose dative. One might expect the hapax naitośá- to provide some help, but it is only found in the impenetrable Aśvin hymn X.106.6, which appears to be written in code. In any event, the point of the hemistich seems to be that Mitra and Varuṇa provided gifts to Trasadasyu, who then redistributed them to his subjects the Purus in an appropriately kingly way.


## 02
On -niṣṣídh- see comm. ad III.51.5. It is possible here that -niṣṣídh- ‘tributes’ are owed to Dadhikrā rather than provided by him. Cf. Klein (DGRV I.420) “to whom many tributes are due”; this would fit better with carkṛ́tyam aryáḥ.

For pruṣita-psu- ‘frothing at the mouth’ (< ‘having spraying breath’), see EWA s.v. psu-.


## 03
There is sharp difference of opinion about the sense of medhayú-: is it built to medhā́- ‘wisdom’ or médha- ‘ritual offering, meal’? The former is the choice of Ge, Re, Mayr (tentatively, EWA, s.v. medhā́-), while Gr, Scar (188), and I opt for ‘meal’. (WG’s rendering “wie ein Opfertier Verlangender” must also reflect this médha- stem.) The ‘meal’ interpr. fits well with gṛ́dhyantam ‘greedy’, and it also makes more sense to me that a horse would want something to eat rather than wisdom. Moreover, if Dadhikrā represents the sacrificial horse in the Aśvamedha, there is a (sinister) echo of the name of this sacrifice: the horse is unwittingly seeking his own sacrifice. It can, of course, also be a pun.


## 04
This vs. contains a number of puzzles, though the general purport -- the success of Dadhikrā in battles and raids -- is clear.

gádhya- elsewhere (3x) modifies vā́ja- ‘prize’, but that precise word can’t be supplied here, because it is masc. and gádhyā must be neut. pl. Nonetheless, battle spoils or the like must be meant. Ge’s rendering of gádhya- as “bis an die Wagendecke reichende (Beute)” must rest on the later (sūtra) gadhā ‘Verdeck des Lastwagens’ (see EWA s.v.), but given the chronological gap and the fact that EWA considers the etym. of gadhā unklar, this seems unnecessary. Ge is consistent: the other occurrences of gádhya- he tr. ‘deckenhohe’.

I take cárati … gáchan as a periphrasis, “keeps going,” though the standard tr.

take the two verbal forms separately. There is no way to tell. The problematic form in this pāda is sánutaraḥ, about which there is no consensus even on what part of speech it represents. The uncertainty can be seen acutely in Mayrhofer’s changing approach to it. In KEWA (s.v. sanutáḥ) he tentatively decides to follow AiG II.2.596, 608, 698 in taking it as a comparative built to the verb stem sanóti, meaning ‘mehr gewinnend’ (an interpr. that goes back, one way or the other, to Sāy.). But in EWA (s.v. sanutár) he has changed his mind, attaching it rather to the adv. sanutár ‘away’, attributing its aberrant form to reinterpretation by this late poet, and citing Tichy (Nom. agen. 58-59), who suggests it’s a comparative to the adv. Both Ge and Re derive it from √san ‘win’, though in different ways: Ge’s tr. (“als bester Gewinner”) seems to reflect the comparative interpr. favored by Sāy. and AiG (though transposed into the superlative); Re (“gagnant”) explicitly suggests that it stands for *sánutra-, formed like tárutra-, an interpr. that Gr also gestures towards. Old favors a connection with the adv. sanutár, as do WG (flg. Tichy), tr. “immer ferner wandelt.” My tr. reflects an analysis as comparative agent noun to √san (“as one better at winning”), but I do not feel strongly about it. In fact, I would probably now emend my tr. to “keeps going further in (the contests for) cows”: the contrast between his hemming in the booty in a and himself going further in b would be thematically nice, and if I am correct about the meaning of d, the expansion of the horse’s wanderings further and further would be appropriate to what is expressed in d. But I am not certain that this question can be decided.

My interpr. of āvírṛjīkaḥ rests on Thieme’s (Unt. p. 40, n. 2): 'an dem der Schaum hervortritt’. This image responds to pruṣitápsum in 2c.

vidáthā nicíkyat recurs in AV V.20.12.

The last pāda is the most baffling of all. The second part of it, páry ā́pa āyóḥ, is also found at I.178.1 (q.v.). The major question is the identity of ā́paḥ: is it a form of √āp ‘reach, acquire’, whether verbal or nominal (so Ge, WG); is it a derivative of ápas- ‘work’ (so Gr, Re; dubious EWA s.v. ápas-); or is it the nom. pl. of áp- ‘water’, used as an acc. (Old, Thieme, WG possibly [in n.])? I follow Thieme’s interpr.

(Unters. 40-41), which sees “the waters of Āyu” as an expression referring to land habitable because it is well watered. If this phrase is essentially locational, then one might expect the preceding tiró aratím to be as well: “across the aratí-.” Unfortunately, though Thieme’s general interpr. of aratí- I find persuasive, his tr. of this phrase “schneller als die Räder [seines Wagens]” is problematic, because I do not see how tiráḥ can mean ‘faster’. It is always otherwise a preposition/adverb. I therefore think Dadhikrā is being depicted as crossing the aratí and racing around “the waters of Āyu.” These two locational phrases may refer to the ritual ground, as Old suggests: the horse runs across the fire on the ritual ground and around the water vessels used for the sacrifice. Or, my preference, it can refer to the territory of the Ārya, which the horse traverses and thus, as it were, claims for his owner (much as the Aśvamedha horse does in his year-long pre-sacificial ramble). What aratí- would stand for in this scenario isn’t entirely clear to me -- but since aratí- can mean ‘spoked wheel, circlet, circle’, I would tentatively suggest that the horse runs across a notional circle of land belonging to / claimed by / aspired to by the Ārya and then around the periphery of this circle to enclose it as Ārya possession. I would therefore now emend my tr. to “across the circle (of Ārya land), around the waters of Āyu.”


## 05
The lexeme ánu √kruś is later a semi-technical term for raising the hue-andcry, which would be appropriate in this context.

There is a phonological echo of 4c nicíkyat in 5c nīcā́yamānam, although the latter is to be analyzed as nīcā́+áyamānam. The latter belongs to the marginal thematized pres. áyate to √i (see Gotō, 1st Kl., 92-97). There is one other occurrence of this medial part. in the RV, otherwise a few finite forms, some of which are ambiguous between subjunctive to the root pres. and indicative to a them. pres.


## 06
The referent and construction of āsu require discussion. Ge (/WG) construe it with prathamáḥ (“first among these”) and supply “cows.” But this doesn’t make sense if the meaning is “desiring to run first among these,” because that conjures up a picture of the horse leading a stampede of cattle in a race -- surely not an ancient Indian sporting event or battle array! If the āsu is to be construed with the rest of its pāda, it should refer to the ranks of chariots in b (śréṇibhī ráthānām): śréṇi- is fem.

and the image appears to be of Dadhikrā leading a charge of chariots, a far more likely scenario. However, I think unaccented āsu is simply taking (modified) Wackernagel’s position in the clause and should be construed with ní veveti in b: the horse is bearing down on the females. (Note that ní veveti … āsu is found also in III.55.9.) Even so, I would not supply ‘cows’: although we are (too) accustomed to having (notional) cows as the goal of a hypermasculine animal in the ever-repeated formulae in Maṇḍala IX, where Soma the bull seeks cows in the form of milk, in fact Dadhikrā should be seeking mares, not cows, if this is about his desire to mate.

However, if he is not seeking mates, but merely prizes, cows will do. (And note cárati góṣu gáchan in 4b, where the cows are explicit.) The sexual reading I suggest for ab may be supported by pāda c, where I follow Gr, Re, and WG (in n.) in taking jánya- as a member of a wedding party, not merely a man ‘belonging to (one’s own) people, Landsmann’. For jánya- in a wedding context, see AV XI.8.1-2. Here the comparison is presumably between the garland of the winner of the race and that of a suitor or groomsman at a wedding.

Ge and Re (EVP 15.163) render kiráṇam as ‘rein’ (Ge Zügel, Re rêne), flg.

Sāy. (āsyagataṃ khalīnam), though Re appears to recant in his n. Neither etymology nor the other occurrences of the word (not so tr. by Ge, e.g.) support this interpr., and context also favors a version of ‘dust’ (so WG ‘Stäubchen’). Note kirate reṇúm “scatters dust” in 7d, where the verb kirate echoes kiráṇa-.


## 07
On pāda b (=VII.19.2) see comm. on the latter passage. As discussed there, although the standard tr. (here Ge, Re, WG) take śúśrūṣamāṇaḥ as a form of √śruṣ ‘obey’ and tr. accordingly, it is simply a well-formed desiderative to √śru ‘hear / be heard/famed’ (so classified by Gr, Wh [Rts], Heenen), with the mid. meaning ‘desiring fame (for oneself), desiring to be(come) famed’. Pāda c contains another unidentified fem. loc. pl., the pres. part. yatī́ṣu. Old, Ge, and Re take the referent to be the ranks of chariots from 6b, WG cows. I again prefer mares (though the other two are possible, depending on how it is construed). I take the túram, the acc. sg. of a root noun (see Schindler s.v., though I do not follow his interpr. of this passage), as an adverb. It forms a phrasal verb with √i ‘go hastily’ (so approx. Old). In context túraṃ ya(tī́ṣu) is a close match to the immed. following turáyan. It would be an even better match if the 2nd participle were turaṇyán (two forms of this verbal stem are found in the Dadhikrā hymn IV.40: turaṇyatáḥ 3a, turaṇyati 4a, and cf. also turaṇyasát 2b), and I am tempted to think that the poet had this stem in mind, but opted for phonologically similar turáyant- because his preferred form would have produced a bad break. Like turaṇyasát in 40.2, our form would be a deliberate deformation of the expected one to fit metrical circumstances, though our turáyan makes no morphological difficulties, unlike turaṇyasát.


## 09
As Old points out, the contrastive lexemes sám √i and ví √i are juxtaposed in samithé viyántaḥ.


## 10
The first hemistich contains a three-termed simile / frame construction, in which all three terms are realized in both simile and frame. This is fairly unusual.

Re nicely points out that the product of d would be what is later called the madhuparka, the concoction offered to an honored guest.
