+++
title = "039"

+++
Dadhikrā As was noted in the publ. intro., the middle hymn of the small Dadhikrā cycle differs in style and content from the hymns before and after, presenting a formal praśasti-type encomium.


## 01
The hopes expressed for “my” improvement and safety in the 2nd hemistich are presumably in service of my producing a good praise-hymn.


## 02
I take kratu-prā́- as referring to the poet’s own krátu- ‘intention, conception’

-- that is, producing the praise-hymn he has envisioned. So also Re and (partly) WG.

Others consider it the krátu- of others or of all, and Old suggests an emendation to

*kratupráḥ (gen.) because he thinks it more applicable to Dadhikrā than the poet.

This cmpd seems to play off kṛṣṭi-prā́- in the last hymn (IV.38.9b) in structure and phonology, but since it is found once elsewhere, as is the derivative kratu-prā́van-, both in the same hymn (X.100.12 and 11 respectively), it was not simply created here for the occasion on that model. That both words in X.100 refer to a poet/singer as here undercuts Old’s justification for his emendation.

Maurer (324-25) renders puruvā́ra- as ‘richly tailed’ (vā́ra- ‘tail-hair’ beside vā́ra- ‘favor, choice thing’), an interpr. also given by Scar (332) as an alternative (‘mit den buschigen Schwanzhaaren’). I find this appealing (as a pun, not as the primary reading) -- but ultimately unlikely: unlike the other hymns in this sequence, no other physical attributes or characteristics of Dadhikrā, save his swiftness, are described in this hymn.

In the 2nd hemistich pūrúbhyaḥ … táturim was mistakenly tr. twice in the publ tr. Eliminate the last phrase “as one triumphant for the Pūrus.”


## 03
The interpretive problem in this vs. is caused by the length of a single vowel: sá instead of *sā́in d. The most obvious contextual reading of the pāda is that Aditi should act in concert with Mitra and Varuṇa, but of course Aditi is feminine and the pronoun is masc. Sāy. makes Dadhikrā the referent and is followed by Ge, Re, Maurer, and (tentatively, see their n.) WG. (Maurer in fact takes Dadhikrā also as the subj. of kṛṇotu in c and interprets áditiḥ as a masc. adj. ‘free of bond’.) Old discusses at some length and comes to a solution (in agreement with Hillebrandt) somewhat like Maurer’s: that the subject of both c and d is Dadhikrā in the guise of / identified with Aditi. I find all this unlikely; despite the syntactic problem, I think the subject of d has to be Aditi, who has a close natural connection with her sons Mitra and Varuṇa (unlike Dadhikrā). Masc. sá may simply show attraction to the adj.

sajóṣāḥ, which is ambig. between masc. and fem. Or, in my opinion more likely, the pāda may have been incompletely adapted from one in which the referent of sá was Aryaman, the standard third member of this trio. No exact parallel is found in the RV, but cf. passages like I.90.1, I.186.2=VII.60.4 and, with Aditi, VI.51.5 and V.31.5.

Another possibility, that the sá refers to the mortal poet favored by Aditi in c, was essentially closed off by Old, who persuasively argues that sajóṣa(s)- refers almost without exception to the relationship of gods with gods or, less frequently, mortals with mortals -- but not interspecies relationships, as it were.


## 04
There are several ways to configure the syntax of this vs. The first question is whether the genitives in pāda a should be construed with the verb of b. But since ámanmahi takes an acc. (nā́ma) in b, this seems unlikely (though Maurer does it that way), and the standard tr. (including mine) supply in pāda a a form of √kṝ ‘pay tribute’, which has dominated the hymn so far (1ab, 2a, 3a) and consistently takes the gen. (The aor. ákārīt in the preceding vs. [3a], or rather the 1st pl. equivalent, seems the obvious form to supply.) The question then arises what the relationship between pādas a and b is. Ge seems to take pāda a as the main cl. and b as dependent on it (“… da wir …”), presumably subordinated by the yád ending pāda a. Re seems to follow this interpr., though with some French curlicues of his own. This type of structure, with one clause ending right before the final monosyllable of a pāda and the next beginning with that monosyllable and continuing through the next pāda, strikes me as an unprecedented, or at least exceedingly rare, clause configuration. If one of these clauses is subordinated to the other, it should be the other way around, with pāda-final yád marking what precedes as a subordinate clause and b as the main clause. (Note that although yád is preceded by a lot of material, it all belongs to a single NP.) In this account the accent on ámanmahi would be due to its pāda-initial position. This is the way WG take it. My interpr. differs from both of these in making both clauses in the first hemistich subordinate to cd, expressing a temporal progression: after we have celebrated (aor.?) and brought to mind (aor.), then we call upon (pres.).

The relationship between the genitives in a, which are simply strung together without internal structure (dadhikrā́vṇa iṣá ūrjó maháḥ), is clarified in the next hymn (IV.40.2d), where it is said that Dadhikrā(van) gave birth to íṣ- and ū́rj-.


## 05
Dadhikrā as sū́danam mártyāya “making sweetness for the mortal” provides a ring with 1c mā́m uṣásaḥ sūdayantu, though there the sweetening was attributed to the dawns. Since vs. 6 is a summary vs. and in a different meter, the 1/5 ring defines the outer edges of the poem.
