+++
title = "041"

+++
Indra and Varuṇa The patterning of the names of the two gods is mildly interesting. It is fairly strict for the first half of the hymn but varies considerably in the 2nd. The first 5 vss.

have a discontinuous dual dvandva opening the first pāda, either as voc. índrā … varuṇā (1a, 4a, 5a) or nom./acc. índrā … váruṇā (nom. 3a, acc. 4a). The next vss.

break the pattern, but the variation starts slowly: vs. 6 (the central vs. of the hymn) does contain the pāda-initial nom. dual dvandva but postponed until the 2nd hemistich (6c). But then vs. 7 omits the names altogether. The names reappear in vs. 8, but in the final pāda and not as a dual dvandva but as a pāda-initial discontinuous individual sg. acc. phrase: 8d índram … váruṇam. The same individual acc. phrase (now continuous but not pāda initial) is found in 9a. Vs. 10 again omits the names. The final vs. returns to a discontinuous pāda-initial voc. phrase, but only in the b pāda and with singulars not dual: índra … varuṇa. Thus the 2nd half of the hymn appears to treat the gods separately rather than as a unit, but I see no reflection of this separation in the content of the hymn: the two do not display their individual characteristics more in the 2nd half.

## 01-02
Note āpa ending 1a matched with āpī́ending 2a. Also the accumulation of -vant-/-mant- forms in these 2 vss.: havíṣmān 1b, krátumān 1c, námasvān 1d, práyasvān 2b.


## 01
I am unhappy with the preterital value (‘has obtained’) universally assigned (incl. Kü 115) to āpa in pāda a, because it ill-fits the subj. paspárśat ‘will touch’ in d.

My ‘will obtain’ is a wishful thinking, however, at odds with the grammar. I would emend to ‘obtains’, with a presential value that Kü (116) allows for some passages.


## 02
With Re (EVP 7: 75) I take vā in d not as the disjunctive ‘or’, but the enclitic dual 2nd ps. prn. (vā(m)) before m-, though Old rejects this view. AiG III.477 also takes vā in this passage as the dual enclitic pronoun, but considers the -m-less form historically correct.


## 03
The orphaned tā́at the end of b is a bit surprising, somewhat reminiscent of the pāda-filling mechanisms engaged in by the epic bards, but not usually resorted to or needed by Rigvedic poets. This hymn is, however, not particularly topnotch work; compare Re’s comment “Banalisation des hymnes joints.” I am inclined to read yádī as *yád ī, even though the ī would not double an object (unless it is the unexpressed reflexive ‘themselves’) but would be pleonastic.

The reading would be to avoid yádī ‘if’. The standard tr. indeed all render as ‘when’, not ‘if’.


## 04
Re makes the nice point that vṛkáti- ‘wolfishness’ and dabhī́ti- ‘deception’ are respectively Indraic and Varuṇian offenses.


## 05
Note the middle opt. duhīya+t remarked as act., like the impf. áduha+t.


## 06
The first hemistich consists of a series of loc. absol., all depending on hité ‘set (as stake)’.


## 07
My tr. departs in two ways from the standard. I take prábhūtī as instr. sg. (as it is in IV.54.3), not acc. du., and gavíṣaḥ as gen. sg. with svāpī (also suggested by Ge in his n.), not nom. pl. The pári is somewhat perplexing. Re construes it with prábhūtī (“ô vous qui dominez tout autour,” wrongly as a voc.); my “pervasive preeminence” is a version of this.


## 08
Vs.-initial tā́is ambiguous: it can represent either masc. du. tā́supporting the immed. flg. enclitic vām (as so often; see my “Vedic ‘sá figé’: An inherited sentence connective?” Historische Sprachforschung 105 [1992]) or fem. pl. tā́ḥ (so Pp.) modifying dhíyaḥ. Or, my preference, both.

Although, strictly speaking, fem. vājayántīḥ belongs in the frame, modifying dhíyaḥ, in sense it fits better with the simile, since contests are where prizes are won.

Moreover, see the next vs. (9d) where fem. ‘fleet mares’(raghvī́ḥ) seek fame -- so female racehorses would be possible in the simile here.

In c śriyé has double sense, belonging both to śrī́‘glory, splendour’ and to √śrī ‘mix’, as Ge and Re point out. The latter is appropriate to the simile, the former to the frame.

Acdg. to WG, the gíraḥ go to Indra and the manīṣā́ḥ to Varuṇa. Although, as was noted above, this is the first place in the hymn where the two names are singular, not associated as a dual, I think it unlikely that the different vocal products have different divine goals. Note that in the first half of the vs. the dhíyaḥ are going to both, and the repeated manīṣā́ḥ in the next vs. go to both as well. That gíraḥ immediately follows índram in 8d is not significant; In all but one instance (9a) of the two names, something intervenes.


## 09
I read vásvaḥ twice, once as the complement of joṣṭā́raḥ in the simile (“those who enjoy a good thing”) and once in the frame with bhíkṣamāṇāḥ (“seeking a share of the goods”). Contra WG, I take śrávasaḥ only in the simile, since this part of the hymn seems all about our acquiring possessions, not fame.


## 10
Pāda c has been variously dealt with -- as parenthetical (Ge), as a separate clause (Re, WG), as the obj. of the verb in d (Old). All of these take the two gods as the subj. of the part. cakrāṇā́(flg. the du. reading of the Pp., cakrāṇaú), and all of them fail to render the medial sense of the part. Since the med. pf. cakré in 2a has clear medial sense (“made X his own”), the voice of this participle should not be ignored. I therefore read it as nom. plural (contra Pp. but compatible with Saṃhitā), modifying the 1st pl. subj. of ab. Again, we want to make the gods our own; this forms a ring with the same usage in 2a.

[IV.42 JPB]
