+++
title = "043"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
As disc. in the publ. intro., the two forms of katamá- ‘which of 3+’ and the pl. amṛ́teṣu make it clear that these questions are applicable to all the gods, not just the Aśvins.

## 02
Again, two occurrences of katamá- and one of the pl. devā́nām keep the widest possible range of choices for the answer to these questions.

On “Sūryā chose the chariot” and sim. expressions as an indication of the svayaṃvara (self-choice) marriage in the RV, see my “The Rigvedic svayaṃvara? Formulaic evidence” (Fs. Parpola 2001). Although, as just mentioned, the first halfvs. keeps the options open, the mention of Sūryā and the chariot immediately narrows down the choice of answer to the Aśvins (to a contemporary audience).


## 03
This vs. gives the answer to the questions in 1-2: the Aśvins. As was just indicated, this answer was adumbrated by 2cd, but indirectly, via a mention of a chariot that could only belong to the Aśvins. Now we finally have a verse couched in the dual, but note that the name Aśvin (or Nāsatya) is not found; the dual is enough.

Pāda a gives an implicit answer to 2a -- katamá ā́gamiṣṭhaḥ “Which one (will be) the first to come?” -- by asserting that they “come right away” (makṣū́… gáchathaḥ). I don’t quite understand ī́vato dyū́n “during/through days such as these”; I assume it indicates that even in our time (not merely in the mythological past), they still rush right here.

In b śaktím is a slightly odd goal. Ge takes it as an infinitive, a use of the acc. of the -tí-stem I’d rather avoid. I think it means “comes into his ability/power” -- i.e., is immediately able to wield it at the necessary, decisive moment.

Pāda d, with the two forms of √śac (śácīnām … śáciṣṭhā) echoing śaktím in b, seems to allow the possibility that the Aśvins have comparable, but different, abilities from Indra’s.


## 04
On úpamāti- as belonging to √mā not √man, see comm. ad VIII.40.9. Note that WG (‘Zumessung’) must also derive it from √mā. The Aśvins’ úpamāti- might be an answer to the question in 3d: which one is their best ability? This stem is also the obvious one to supply with the instr. fem. káyā, which immediately follows.

I construe cd very differently from the standard tr., which take c and d as separate clauses (though Ge and Re both supply a form of the verb of d, uruṣyá-, in c). I take kó vām as an independent nominal cl., with the next cl. beginning with maháḥ and running to the end (cf. the structure of ab, which also has a clause break in the middle of pāda a, with the 2nd cl. continuing to the end of b). The reason for this choice is that it is difficult to render c as a unity if abhī́ke is taken in its usual sense (hence the attenutations in the other tr.). Moreover, abhī́ke regularly appears with uruṣyá- and similar ‘make wide space’ expressions: VII.85.1 tā́no yā́mann uruṣyatām abhī́ke “Let those two give us wide space in close quarters on our journey,” X.38.4 yó abhī́ke varivovít “who finds wide space in close quarters…,” X.133.1 abhī́ke cid ulokakṛ̥t “a maker of wide space even in close quarters.” Earlier in IV an ablative phrase like our maháś cit tyájasaḥ is found adjacent to abhī́ke: IV.12.5 maháś cid agna énaso abhī́ke “(Release us) from even a great offense in close quarters, o Agni.” All of these parallels lead to the conclusion that everything starting with maháḥ should be read with uruṣyátam in the next pāda, since abhī́ke patterns with uruṣyá- and the abl. phrase is connected with abhī́ke. However, I realize that the phrase in the publ. tr. “even out of great neglect” seems unconnected to the rest and makes little sense. I now feel that we need to interpr. uruṣyátam in two different senses. With abhī́ke it has its physical literal meaning ‘make wide space’, but with the abl. maháś cit tyájasaḥ it has the extended sense ‘release, free (from)’. I would therefore emend the tr. to “Make wide space for us in close quarters, free us even from great neglect/abandonment.” WG take tyájas- as ‘Lebensopfer’, but this must rest on the later notion of sacrifice as tyāga-. This concept is not really a part of the RVic ritual universe -- though see the single occurrence of tyāgá- in the RV in IV.24.3, where it refers to the abandonment of one’s body in battle.


## 05
I take pāda b with c rather than a, because I think those two middle pādas depict (somewhat playfully?) the Aśvins’ chariot on an independent journey, coming towards them from the sea and, with the journey originating in a wet place, splashing them. I do not see any other easy way to construe the unusual pāda-final vām in b but as the goal of the goal-oriented verb abhí vártate (note similarly pāda-final acc. vām in the next hymn, 44.2). As Ge’s parallels (I.139.3, 180.1) suggest, the likely subject of pruṣāyan is the chariot’s ‘wheel-rims’ (paváyaḥ).

The verb in d, bhurájanta, is a hapax and much disputed. Probably the current standard view is that it is an enlargement of √bhṛ (see the standard tr., as well as EWA s.v. with further lit.). This view is supported by an apparently parallel passage in V.73.8d pakvā́ḥ pṛ́kṣo bharanta vām “they bring cooked foods to you” (or “cooked foods are brought to you”), very close to our yát sīṃ vām pṛ́kṣo bhurájanta pakvā́ḥ.

But it is easy to imagine that a poet, adapting Aśvin phraseology to the simpler dimeter meter and confronting a baffling word like bhurájanta, would substitute a word that sounded more or less similar and would work in the passage. Re suggests breezily that bhuraj- is the same type of formation as bhiṣaj- and saraj-, but this seems to me to undercut the explanation because these two formations are so outré; - aj- is a pretty salient piece of morphology and wouldn’t, I think, be lightly attached to a normal root (particularly one that should not be showing *bhur- forms). I therefore favor the older (Gr, etc., incl. also Wackernagel, AiG I, passim) connection with √bhṛjj ‘roast’. Although this verbal root is found only once in the RV, it is widely attested in Middle and New Indo-Aryan (see Turner, √BHRAJJ and, e.g., 9583-86), and there is an underlying nasal-infix pres. *bhṛnak-ti, which acdg. to Turner (9586) is presupposed by *bhṛñjati ‘parches’. With some manipulation of MIA phonology, this might give us our form. The relative absence of √bhṛjj from the RV and other early Vedic texts is not surprising, since it would belong to kitchen vocabulary.


## 06
More sprinkling and splashing. The instr. rasáyā is probably an instr. of accompaniment (both the Sindhu and Rasā sprinkle) rather than of means.

With most interpr. I read acc. pl. ghṛṇā́(ḥ) against Pp. instr. ghṛṇā́.

yā́na- is found only here in the RV. On the basis of the strong association between Sūryā and the chariot, I take it, with Gr, as a vehicle not, with most interpr., as abstract ‘journey’.

## 07
The consensus is that papṛkṣé is a 1st sg., which is certainly appropriate for a final summary vs. A 3rd sg. is not excluded, however; in that case a subj. would have to be identified and supplied.

The āmreḍita ihéha and samanā́seem to be implicitly contrastive: wherever you are, I have nourished you in the same way.
