+++
title = "044"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
The phrase sáṃgatiṃ góḥ “meeting with the cow” refers to a second period in the morning, when the cows are milked. See Ge’s n. 1b.


## 02
There is much disc. in the lit. about what manner of horses kakuhá- refers to (see, e.g., WG n. ad loc.). I do not have an opinion, nor do I think it matters contextually.


## 03
The standard tr. take the dative phrase in c, ṛtásya … vanúṣe pūrvyā́ya as personal (e.g., Ge “für den, der schon früher des rechten Brauches beflissen war”).

But since this phrase is parallel to two purpose-activity datives in b (ūtáye … sutapéyāya) and is in fact conjoined with them by vā, I think they should be parallel in function. Old sees the problem and suggests that if we interpr. the passage as I do, we might need to read *vánuṣe -- though he ultimately opts for the personal dative.


## 04
The root noun cmpd. purubhū́- can, of course, be interpreted in many ways, given its component parts. See disc. in Scar (362). Four of its five occurrences modify the Aśvins (and the fifth may not belong to this stem; seecomm. ad IX.94.3); since one of the oft-noted characteristics of the Aśvins is their peripatetic nature, I interpr. it as ‘appearing in many places’. In our passage it strikes the same note as ihéha ‘here and there’ in vs. 7 (=43.7). There are two occurrences in VIII.22 (vss. 3, 12), and the Aśvins hymns in VIII often express concern about the many places the Aśvins could be besides here.


## 05
By my rule (see “Vedic anyá- 'another, the other': syntactic disambiguation,” Fs. Beekes, 1997), because it is in (modified) 2nd position, anyé in c should be definite (‘the others’), not indefinite as Ge (/WG) take it. This makes perfect sense: we are well aware of the other sacrificers who are our rivals.

On sám … dadé and the idiom it expresses see comm. ad I.139.1. Although dadé here is usually ascribed to √dā ‘give’, the idiom sam √dā belong to √dā ‘cut’.

See Kü 242 for the three forms dadé / dade that belong to ‘cut’.
