+++
title = "045"

+++
Aśvins


## 01
Act. úd iyarti, esp. in contrast with its med. correspondent úd īrate in 2a, should be transitive. With Ge, the pub. tr. renders it as intransitive (‘arises’). WG take it as transitive and supply ‘sun’ as the object. I am now inclined to think that it is transitive (the contrastive verb in 2a has convinced me), but am uncertain what object to supply. The most common object of íyarti is ‘speech’ (vel sim.), but curiously for a RVic hymn, there is no mention of speech or praise-song in this hymn (until a cmpd. in the final vs., 7a dhiyaṃdhā́- ‘setting my insight’). Since the subj. of intrans. úd īrate in 2 is chariots and horses, I think the object here should be the chariot whose hitching up is described in the rest of the hemistich. I would therefore emend the tr. to “Now this radiant beam impels (the chariot) upward.” The radiant beam is presumably the ritual fire, though it might be the beam of dawn, an identification that finds support in the mention of dawn in 2b. The chariot being impelled upward may not be the same as the Aśvins’ chariot in the rest of the hemistich, but the complementary “chariot” of the ritual.

For the mild paradox in c, the three who form a pair, see publ. intro. That this refers to the two Aśvins paired with Sūryā was already well recognized by Ge (see his n. 1c).


## 04
uhū́- is a hapax, and an onomatopoeic origin seems reasonable (see EWA s.v., citing AiG II.2.492). With sufficient goodwill, one can configure the bar-headed goose cries available for hearing on the internet as “uhu.”


## 06
ākenipā́saḥ: see Old, EWA s.v. āké.

Very unusually, pāda b is a verbatim repetition of 2d. Except in refrains, repeated pādas are almost never found in the same hymn. In this particular case the repeated pādas are symmetrical, that is, found in vss. equidistant from the center, but there are no other signs of omphalos structure in this hymn, save for the faint ringcomposition between vss. 1 and 7 (see below). Since horses and chariots are the referents in 2d, I supply horses as the subject here. That the sun then hitches up his horses in c may support this.

Although the intens. dávidhu- (also dódhu-) generally takes an object, it is often an internal one (that is, a body part of the subj., e.g., lips, horns), and in this passage I think it is simply intransitive (though Schaeffer, Intens. 138, supplies lips).

Ge (/WG) supply ‘darkness’ as obj. on the basis of IV.13.4 dávidhvataḥ … támaḥ, but if, as seems likely, horses are the subject, I have trouble envisioning them shaking anything with their hooves.


## 07
This final vs. in part reprises vs. 1: ráthaḥ begins both b pādas, and párijmā ‘earth-encircling’ of 1b is paraphrased by 7c yéna sadyáḥ pári rájāṃsi yātháḥ “with which in a day you drive around the dusky realms” -- though -jman- and rájas- are of course unrelated, there is some phonological similarity. Given this ringcompositional effect between vss. 1 and 7, it is barely possible that we should supply dhíyam from cmpd dhiyaṃdhā́- in 7b as obj. to úd iyarti in 1a (see disc. there).
