+++
title = "048"

+++
Vāyu


## 01
The publ. tr. renders hótrā(ḥ) as ‘invocations’; this is possible, but it may also (or in addition) refer to ‘ritual offerings’, perhaps better in a Vāyu context.

As noted in the publ. intro., the construction and meaning of the first half of this vs. are disputed. Ge and Re (in diff. ways) take vihí hótrā as an independent clause and construe ávītā(ḥ) with pāda b, while Old (ZDMG 54.171-72), WG, and I take ávītā(ḥ) as qualifier of hótrā(ḥ), forming an etymological figure with vihí. In pāda b the same verb (‘pursue’), though not imperatival, is to be supplied in the simile, with subj. and obj. ranged around it. The disagreement among Old, WG, and me has to do with the identity of subj. and obj. WG take vípaḥ (“die Geisteserregten”) as subj. and rā́yo aryáḥ (“die Reichtümer des Sippenherrn”) as obj. This seems quite reasonable, save for the fact that in all clear cases víp- is nonanimate ‘inspiration, inspired poems’ vel sim. Old also takes vípaḥ as subj. though in its usual sense, but construes with aryáḥ and tr. “die Gebete des Besitzlosen.” This would be, to say the least, an unusual sense of aryáḥ; moreover, rā́yo aryáḥ is a common phrase (note in passing the phonological parallelism). As I said in the publ.

intro., on the basis of VI.14.3 I believe that “the riches of the stranger” refers to the Ārya people in general and their poets in particular. In my reading of the simile here, this collectivity of poets is pursuing inspiration as avidly as Vāyu does invocations / libations.


## 02
The poet’s playfulness continues. The qualifier niyútvan-, ‘possessing a team’, common in these Vāyu contexts (see in this hymn sequence III.46.2, 47.1, 47.3) opens pāda b; the preceding pāda opens with a near phonological match, niryuvāṇáḥ -- a participle to the same verb with a preverb that is only minimally different from ní. (The lexeme nír √yu is found only here.) It should mean ‘disjoin, disband’. My ‘take out of harness’ is an attempt to convey the play on niyútvan-: Vāyu ‘unteams’ the áśāstīḥ, while himself coming with his team.


## 03
The standard tr. assume that Night and Dawn are directing themselves towards Vāyu. I think rather that they are simply following each other in the normal daily succession. Since Vāyu comes at dawn, the transition between the two temporal halves is simultaneous with his journey.

On the “two black treasure chambers” (kṛṣṇé vásudhītī), see Bloomfield (RReps ad III.31.17): “The words krṣṇ̥ é and vásudhitī are both dvandva ekaśeṣa 'black (Night) and (Uṣas)' is a way of saying náktoṣā́sā; conversely 'treasure-giving (Morn) and black (Night)' is uṣā́sānáktā. Cf. Berg. i.250.” In other words, kṛṣṇá- is applicable to Night, vásudhīti- to Day, but the two are conflated into a single dual expression.
