+++
title = "050"

+++
Bṛhaspati On the divisions of the hymn, see publ. intro. Old and H.-P. Schmidt (cf. esp.

B+I 215) consider it to be three separate hymns; I instead see it as a unified composition with three parts. So also Gonda (Vedic Lit., 191) and, implicitly, Ge.

The hymn has been much tr.; besides the usual trio (Ge, Re [EVP 15.63-65], WG) also Macdonell (VRS), Maurer, Schmidt (B+I, vss. 1-6 216ff., 7-9 117, 10-11 96).

## 01-06
As indicated in the publ. intro., this section concerns the unitary figure (Indra-)Bṛhaspati, here insistently identified as Bṛhaspati: there are 7 occurrences of the name in 6 vss., one in each save for two in vs. 2.


## 01
The preverb ví is curiously positioned, neither adjacent to its verb nor to a metrical boundary. Perhaps its position is iconic, with ‘earth’ (jmáḥ) between its separated ends (ví … ántān).

As noted in the publ. intro., the VP puráḥ … dadhire “they set in front” marks the appointment of Bṛhaspati in what will be his later role, Purohita.


## 02
The rel. clause of abc (by most interpr. -- c could also go with d) has no main clause correspondent in this vs. As most interpr. take it, the pl. yé seems rather to refer to the Ṛṣis in vs. 1 and continue that sentence, forming a transition to the explicit Vala myth.

The acc. supraketám in pāda a is taken by some (e.g., Old, Macdonell, Schmidt) as coreferential with the acc. in c, but I consider it too far from the verb and from the other accusatives to be an anticipatory object. Instead I prefer Ge’s solution, to construe it loosely with mádantaḥ (cf. IV.33.10 ukthā́mádantaḥ, also cited by Ge): Ge “jublend unter guten Vorzeichen,” my “exulting at the good sign.” Since Agni is several times called praketá- as the sign of the day or the ceremony (e.g., VII.11.1 mahā́m asy adhvarásya preketáḥ “you are the great visible sign of the ceremony”), I wonder if this is a temporal reference: dawn when the ritual fire is kindled.

The acc. phrase in c refers to the Vala cave and is the obj. of abhí … tatasré in b. The head-noun ūrvá- ‘container, enclosure’ refers to the cave itself, but the three adj. pṛ́ṣantaṃ sṛprám ádabdham “dappled, glossy, uncheatable” are better applicable to its contents, the cows. Note the mirror-image phonetic figure beginning c: pṛ́ṣ(antaṃ) sṛp(rám), which contains partial anagrams of Bṛhaspati.

The “future impv.” rákṣatāt in d is somewhat surprising, in that it does not follow a previous impv., as is usual. I take it to imply that Bṛhaspati should do his guarding after the Aṅgirases have breached the cave and released the cows. For another unexpected future impv. see nearby suvatāt in IV.54.3

## 03
Ths vs. also contains phonetic echoes of Bṛhaspati: ṛtaspṛ́ś(o) (b) and (vi)rapś(ám) (d). Another phonetic pattern worthy of note, though it doesn’t directly reference Bṛhaspati, is the unbroken sequence of short and long a, starting with yā́in pāda a (right after initial bṛ́haspate) and continuing into pāda b, till right before ṛtaspṛ́śo, the echo of the name: ā a a ā a ā a, a a ā a.

As Ge’s cited parallels make clear, pāda b concerns the Sattra that the Aṅgirases performed.


## 04
With Macdonell, I take mahó jyótiṣaḥ as a separate abl. phrase, rather than a gen. qualifying paramé vyòman with the standard interpr. Since we otherwise know little or nothing about Bṛhaspati’s birth, it is difficult to make an informed choice. I have gone with the abl. interpr. because the common phrase paramá- vyòman- does not seem to be qualified by a gen. phrase elsewhere (though this is not decisive) and because the contrast in this vs. between light and the darkness that Bṛhaspati blows away would be stronger if he were directly born from light.

As usual, numerology is difficult to interpr. I think Ge is correct that the seven in saptā́sya- ‘having seven mouths’ must be the Aṅgirases (see the same word in the next hymn, IV.51.4). What the seven reins (saptáraśmi-) are is more difficult.

Ge suggests the seven reins of the sacrifice; I prefer the seven seers, who are, in my opinion, the referents of the phrase saptá raśmáyaḥ in the enigmatic I.105.9 (see comm. ad loc.). This would provide Bṛhaspati with two different connections to poetic speech, appropriately enough.


## 06
As indicated in the publ. intro., this is the final vs. of the 1st section of the hymn and has the standard marks of a hymn-final summary vs. It is the best evidence that vss. 1-6 were a separate composition, only secondarily amalgamated with the following two sections. Nonetheless, I think it simply marks a pause and a transition to the thematically contrastive next section.

## 07-08
These vss. are structured similarly: a main clause (or clauses) referring to the happy results for the king who (now a rel. cl.) properly treats a particular figure.

The figure in vs. 6 is Bṛhaspati; filling the same slot in vs. 7 is the brahmán- ‘formulator’. We have thus moved from the divine to the human realm, and the identity of Bṛhaspati and brahmán- is signaled by their parallel roles in the vs. structure.


## 07
Note the etymological figure in c: súbhṛtam bibhárti.

The sense of pūrvabhā́j- is limited by pū́rva eti in 8d and for that reason is presumably not a ritual technical term. (Vāyu would be the god who “receives the first portion” by that measure.)


## 09
The shift from divine to human just noted above in vss. 7-8 comes full circle in this vs. The human Formulator is, it seems, in need of aid from the king (avasyáve … brahmáṇe), but if the king provides this aid he himself receives aid from the gods (tám avanti devā́ḥ).

## 09-10
This last section consisting of two vss. introduces Indra by name for the first time in the hymn. The two divine figures are carefully balanced, as the address to them shows: vs. 10 opens with the name Indra in a reverse Vāyav Indraś ca construction, índraś ca … bṛhaspate, while two independent vocatives open vs. 11, this time with Bṛhaspati first: bṛhaspata indra.


## 11
Ge, Re, and Schmidt all attach sácā to the preceding pāda (e.g., Ge “Stärket uns gemeinsam”). Despite the position of sā́, I think sácā belongs in the pāda in which it is found. So also WG.
