+++
title = "051"

+++
Dawn It is worth noting that the nom. (and voc.) pl. of uṣás- is consistently uṣásaḥ in this hymn (every vs. but 10), with short suffixal vowel -- the newer form replacing inherited uṣā́saḥ.

As disc. in the publ. intro., this is an omphalos hymn, with the middle verse 6 posing the central question. This omphalos is surrounded by concentric rings: divó duhitáro vibhātī́ḥ of 1c is answered by the same phrase (in the voc.) in 10a and 11a, while vss. 5 and 7 contain an inner ring with ṛtá- (ṛtayúbhiḥ 5a, ṛtájātasatyāḥ 7b) and sadyáḥ (5b, 7d). There is also much lexical chaining between adjacent vss.


## 01
As noted in the publ. intro., the dawns are so insistently in the plural in this hymn that when a single one is referred to, another word must be used -- in this case jyótiḥ ‘light’.


## 02
Note absolute initial root aor. ásthuḥ contrasting with absolute final asthāt in 1b.

I have taken gen. támasaḥ as dep. on gen. vrajásya (“of the enclosure of darkness”) with Ge, but támasaḥ could be dep. instead on dvā́rā, parallel to vrajásya (so Re, WG).


## 03
The multivalent stem citáya- is here used in transitive value (see my disc. in

-áya- book). The 3rd pl. citayanta is simply an -anta replacement of the expected
active of the usual type (see my 1979 IIJ article).


## 04
The opening of this vs. kuvít sá resonates with the opening of 6 ḱu va svid.

With Ge I take the yénā clause of cd to be a third possible course, against the old and new ones offered as possibilities in ab. Since cd presumably refers to the Aṅgirases’ involvement in the Vala myth, it is the case that the Dawns’ course in that instance was an unusual one: they came out of a rock!

## 06
katamā́‘which one?’ echoes purutámam ‘the latest of many’ in 1a. Note that again when a singular dawn is referred to, the word uṣás- is not used.

I do not understand what the Ṛbhus are doing here, nor do I know the exact sense of ví √dhā in the etymological figure vidhā́nā vidadhúḥ. A similar etym. figure is found in nearby IV.55.2 vidhātā́ro ví … dadhuḥ, where I tr. ‘distribute’, which I’ve imported here. However, I am now inclined to think that this has to do with the creative division of an undifferentiated mass (such as the Ṛbhus performed in I.161.2-3 also cited by Ge) and with the regulation of these divisions, possibly of divisions of time. Such “division” contrasts sharply with the lack of distinction among the dawns stated in cd. It is not surprising that a single (unnamed) dawn (pāda a) would be associated with division and distinction (pāda b), as opposed to the plural dawns in the rest of the hymn. For other interpr. of pāda b see the various tr. and comm. ### 07
The opening tā́, esp. in its emphatic form tā́ghā tā́(ḥ) is echoed by the openings of 8 (tā́ā́…) and 9 (tā́(ḥ)).

At the same time sadyáḥ makes an interior ring with 5b around the omphalos vs. What's striking about this little ring is that, though the sadyáḥ in 5 and 7 match verbally, the word is in a different temporal setting in the two vss: present in 5 and remote past in 7, and in 6 those two temporal settings are dissolved or confused (as also in a different way in 4).

The cmpd. ṛtájātasatya- is unusual not only in having 3 members (quite rare in the RV) but also for containing both ṛtá- and satyá-. Re suggests that -satyafunctions as a sort of “particule intensive.” Given how charged both words are in the RV, I think this unlikely, although the rendering in the publ. tr. (“who were really born of truth”) is close to Re’s intensive particle interpr; cf. his own tr.

(“véritablement nées de l’Ordre”). I think the cmpd requires a more literal and weighty rendering -- “whose reality was born from truth” (which I would substitute for what is found in the publ. tr.) -- meaning that the dawns we see and who come daily to our world and our sacrifice, who are really here, arose from the true cosmic patterns that govern the universe of time and space.

## 08-09
The unbroken similarity of the dawns who just keep coming, day after day, is conveyed by the stasis of these two vss., where forms of ‘same’ (8ab samanā́ … sanānátaḥ samanyā́, 9a samanā́samānī́ḥ) and the same verb caranti (8a, 9b) bring all movement to a halt, even though the dawns are constantly on the move.
