+++
title = "054"

+++
Savitar


## 03
This middle vs. (the final vs., 6, opens out to other gods and is essentially extrahymnic) expresses the particular intercession we want Savitar to make for us and also admits to possible offenses committed by us that make this intercession necessary. The vs. also has a few disharmonies, unlike the smooth vss. that make up most of the rest of the hymn.

The first question is how to interpr. yád. If it is taken as a neut. rel. prn.

(‘what’), this leaves the main cl. of cd without a referent for this rel. If (with the standard tr.) it is taken as a general subordinating conjunction (‘when, if’), this leaves the verb cakṛmā́without an obj. Ge just barrels through, tr. the verb as “gesüdigt haben” without comm.; Re and WG supply parenthetical objects (“une faute,” “ein Vergehen”). Given ánāgas- in d and IV.12.3 yád … ácittibhiś cakṛmā́kác cid ā́gaḥ, ā́gaḥ would be the appropriate obj. to supply if this syntactic path is chosen. I am therefore inclined now to emend the publ. tr. to “If we have committed an offense …” The other question has to do with the verb suvatāt in d. First, why a future impv.? There is no prior impv. whose action it follows. (For a similarly unsupported fut. impv. see nearby rákṣatāt IV.50.2.) Moreover, the VP doesn't make sense: … naḥ … suvatād ánāgasaḥ should mean (as I tr. it) “impel us to be without offense,” but how would Savitar’s impulsion render us offenseless? The standard tr. simply fudge the verb: Ge “so sollst du … bestimmen, dass wir daran schuldlos sind”; Re “veuille … nous en rendre innocents” (which he then further glossses “veuille nous susciter = nous faire sortir (de l’état de péché, en sorte d’apparaître) innocents” [one of Re’s finer parentheses]); WG “… sollst du … uns daran für schuldlos erklären.” But none of these is a standard (or even non-standard) use of √sū, and since forms of this verb are found in vss. 2, 4-6 with its normal sense (at least in my opinion; see below), we can’t simply impose a new interpr. for contextual convenience.

I have two remarks on this. First, it is striking that in what is otherwise a pretty simple hymn, it is in the vs. most significant to the human audience that we encounter little issues in the words themselves. I think this is a sign that the poet wants his audience to slow down, to really pay attention, and the way he gets this accomplished is by tossing little obstacles in our path, requiring us to turn the phrases around in our heads until we get a satisfactory sense. We could generalize this observation to RVic poetry as a whole: one of the (many) reasons it is so difficult is that the poet assumes that an audience that has to do a lot of the work will really engage with the poetry, will get deeper into its meaning. The second remark has to do with what we get if we reflect further on why the poet use a form of √sū here. In this hymn and the last (IV.53), not to mention most other Savitar hymns, Savitar’s control over all the parts of the cosmos and, especially, of the alternating movement and rest of living beings (cf. esp. IV.53.3, 6) is powerfully asserted and associated with the verb (√sū) that supplies his name. Impelling us to be without offense is simply a specialized version of this: his special power of √sū enables him to push all the elements (including weak humans) back into cosmic balance.


## 04
The standard tr. supply as subj. of pramíye and referent of tád the whole yáthā cl. of b. But one of the most common objects of (prá) √mī is vratá-, and in the preceding Savitar hymn his vratá-s were much in evidence: 4a vratā́ni deváḥ savitā́bhí rakṣate, 4d dhṛtávrataḥ, 5c tríbhir vrataíḥ. I therefore think vratám should be supplied here; among other things this follows directly on the vs. presenting the offenses we may have committed against the gods, and it would be appropriate to reaffirm the importance of not offending Savitar in particular.

I then take the yáthā clause as a purpose clause. We shouldn’t violate Savitar’s commandment because we want him to (continue to) support the world.

Although we generally expect the subjunctive in such clauses, the future is beginning to supercede the subjunctive in general and would make fine sense here. (Re states that this is the only ex. of yáthā with the future.)


## 05
The standard tr. here impose a different sense on √sū than in the previous vs. and one no more aligned with its usual semantics, i.e., ‘assign, direct’, with the interpr. that Savitar is assigning dwelling places to gods (the high mountains) and to men (pastyā́vataḥ, interpr. by Ge and Re as watery places, WG just dwellings). Old, however, resists the easy contextual shift and attempts to find an interpr. compatible with lexicon and grammar. (Among other things, he points out that unaccented ebhyaḥ should not introduce a new referent, ‘men’, into the discourse.) He does not settle on an interpr., however. My own interpr. assumes first that índrajyeṣṭhān refers to the Maruts, rather than the gods in general. (This stem sometimes modifies one, sometimes the other.) I also take párvatebhyaḥ not as dat., but abl. The Maruts tend to haunt the high mountains, but Savitar can dislodge them. He can also impel the clouds on which they (fancifully) dwell -- this is, in my opinion, the referent of kṣáyān … pastyā́vataḥ, with ebhyaḥ here a dative referring to the previously mentioned Maruts, thus properly unaccented. The 2nd hemistich announces that the famously hyperactive Maruts can be controlled by Savitar: they can fly widely, but they can also be brought to a standstill.
