+++
title = "055"

+++
All Gods For the structure of the hymn and its parts, see publ. intro. As indicated there, the first 7 vss. (in Triṣṭubh) are concentrically structured, with the agenda set by the questions posed in vs. 1. There are a number of difficulties, and much remains uncertain. The final three vss. (in Gāyatrī) appear to have originally been a separate hymn, as has long been recognized, and are quite straightforward.


## 01
On the anomalous form trā́sīthām see Old. Whatever its morphological status otherwise, it is clearly a dual, and therefore, strictly speaking, only dyā́vābhūmī can be its subj., not the additional voc. adite.

Since pāda b is a repetition (=VII.62.4), Ge interprets it as parenthetical, with pāda c continuing pāda a (“who is the protector and defender … from the stronger mortal”) (so also Bloomfield, RReps). This is not impossible, but since the abl.

phrase in c can just as easily be construed with the verb in b, I see no reason why the repeated pāda can’t have been stitched into the fabric of this vs. (Re and WG both take c with b, as I do.) With Ge, I take vaḥ as a dat. of benefit: the wide space is made for the gods (see also Oberlies, Relig. des RV I.461). Re and WG construe vaḥ with káḥ (“which among you?”), and WG specifically indicate that the wide space is made for us by one of the gods. Although the identical phrase kó vaḥ opening pāda a favors this latter interpr., I follow Ge, in part because I think whoever would be acting thus at the ceremony would be a human ritual officiant.


## 02
My understanding of this difficult and disputed vs. is set forth in the publ. tr.

I will not engage here in detail with the various alternative interpr. offered by others.

I take the vs. in general as a response to the question posed in 1d (as I understand that question), “who will make wide space at the ceremony for you gods?” The answer is the unnamed priests acting at the dawn sacrifice. It is the priests who chant the ordinances in 2a, at the time when the dawns are “dawning widely” (ví … uchā́n)(2b), with the notion of “wide space” implicit. The priests return in c, distributing the dakṣiṇās (or perhaps the dawns themselves perform the distribution). Pāda c contains two forms of ví (vidhātā́ro ví … dadhuḥ), echoing the two in b (ví … uchā́n viyotā́raḥ). Though the ví forms in c are not directly connected to “wide space,” they continue that theme verbally. Pāda d has the dawns as subject.

In my interpr. of b, with dawns as subj., one could expect a fem. agent noun

*viyotrī́-, but -tár- forms can serve for fem. as well, esp. as an attributive (so better tr.

“they (the dawns) as discriminators …”). As pointed out in the publ. tr., the dawns “discriminate” because they separate night and day. Old has a clever, but I think ultimately incorrect, suggestion that instead of uchā́n we should read *yuchā́n to √yu ‘separate’, providing an etymological figure ví … *yuchā́n viyotā́raḥ, exactly parallel to vidhātā́ro ví … dadhuḥ in the flg. pāda. (Old seems also to consider only to reject this idea.) The grammatical identity of rurucanta is unclear. Lub calls it a pf. subjunctive, and Ge and Thieme (Plusq. 46) interpr. it as hortative. But the zero-grade would be anomalous for a subjunctive. Kü (430-31) takes it rather as an injunctive, although he does not see a clear injunctive context (though generell-erwähnende Funktion seems possible). I also interpr. it as injunctive, in the publ. tr. with preterial sense, though “shine” would work as well in context.


## 03
In pāda a #prá … arkaíḥ# echoes 2a #prá … árcān#.

The 2nd hemistich gives some support to my interpr. of vs. 2b, that the dawns are marking the limit between night and day. Here Night and Dawn arrange that both day halves provide protection.

As WG point out, all the divinities here are fem.


## 04
I take ví … ceti to √ci ‘pile’; see comm. ad I.90.4. Re assigns it to √cit ‘perceive’ (so also Gr); WG to √ci ‘perceive’ as an Augenblicksbildung to the aor.

stem.

The final word of the vs., várūtham, recalls varūtā́, the final word of the 1st pāda of the hymn (1a). As indicated in the publ. intro., I consider vss. 3-5 to be a response to the question posed in the hymn’s first pāda.


## 05
The echo of vs. 1 noted at the end of vs. 4 continues here, where devásya trātúḥ picks up trātā́of 1a (as well as trā́sīthām in 1b). The abl. “(protect) from …” in 1c sáhīyasaḥ … mártāt recurs in cd jányād áṃhasaḥ … mitríyāt.

The standard tr. begin a new clause at the beginning of d and take mitríyāt with uruṣyet. This is not impossible; nonetheless I prefer to construe mitró mitríyāt with c. The strict parallelism/gapping of the 1st part, plus the pāda-medial utá naḥ in d I find too compelling to ignore, since utá generally begins new clauses. It is true, however, that uruṣyá- is several times found with áṃhasaḥ. The purport is much the same either way.

The standard tr. take jánya- as referring to foreign people (this goes back at least to Gr, meaning 2a). I do not know of any evidence for this interpr., and in fact all clear passages indicate that it’s someone/-thing belonging to one’s own people (which would be the default reading of such a deriv., in my view). Here the contrast is between problems internal to the group and those coming from allies (external but contractually connected).

Pāda d revives the question of wide space, here with a god making it for mortals (us), which might give support to the Re / WG interpr. of 1d (see above).

Nonetheless, I think the overall structure of the hymn fits better with my interpr.

## 06
This vs. is close to impenetrable. For my view of its function in the hymn, see publ. intro. I am still baffled by the concentration on water in bcd and by the proper disposition of the parts of cd.

The first question to approach is the root identity and referent of iṣṭá- in b.

The standard view is that it belongs to √iṣ ‘desire’ and the phrase ápyebhir iṣṭaíḥ refers to “desired watery (gods)” (so, more or less, Ge, Re, WG) as an instr. of accompaniment referring to another set of recipients of praise. Although there do seem to be one, at most two, references to watery gods (masc.) -- VI.50.11, maybe VII.35.11 (though that appears to have fem. referents) -- most of the animate beings qualified as ápya- are females. I don’t know who the watery gods might be. My interpr. of the phrase is quite diff.: I take iṣṭá- to √yaj ‘sacrifice’. Although its ppl.

iṣṭá- is rare and rarely applied to the object sacrificed, there are such examples: compare I.162.15, where it refers to the sacrificed horse, also in the same hymn svìṣṭa- yajñá- vs. 5. I then take our ápya- iṣṭá- to be equivalent to X.86.12 ápyaṃ havíḥ “watery oblation.” Under this interpr. the water sacrifices are what the unnamed priests have revealed /opened up (ápa vran, using language from the Vala myth), and they are implicitly compared with two different entities: the contents of the gharma pot and rivers. In d gharmásvarasaḥ, lit. ‘having the gurgling of the gharma pot’, targets the sound of the watery sacrifices, while samúdraṃ ná saṃcáraṇe … nadyàḥ “like rivers in their converging on the sea” refers to their movement to their goal (presumably the gods -- cf. X.86.12 yásyedáṃ havíḥ priyáṃ devéṣu gáchati). I have major misgivings about my interpr., however, for several reasons. The parts of the simile just proposed are quite separated, with the first part opening c and the ‘rivers’ only appearing in the middle of d, after the bahuvrīhi referring to the gharma pot.

Although some distraction of complex similes is not rare, this seems an extreme example. Moreover, pāda c is identical to I.56.2, where there are no rivers in the context (but where the pāda doesn’t make much sense in context either). On the other hand, rivers converging on the sea is a very common trope in the RV, and so the distraction would not be too challenging to interpret. I am not particularly convinced by my own construction of this hemistich, but I find the the various other attempts at wringing sense out of it (in addition to the standard tr., cf. Lüders [Var. 190-91]) no more (indeed generally less) persuasive.


## 07
As indicated in the publ. intro., this vs. in part forms a clear ring with vs. 1 and provides the answer to the question in 1a. Note the recurrence of the gods Aditi, Mitra, and Varuṇa, as well as of the agent noun trātár- and a finite form of the root √trā (here trātā́trāyatām).

The 2nd hemistich is somewhat puzzling, however, and has given rise to a number of competing interpr. (in addition to the standard, see Janert [Dhāsi, pp. 6, 43ff., 52], Thieme [ZDMG 95.109], Scar [387], and Lühr 1997 [cited by Scar]). Ge and Re both attempt to give sā́nu a loc. sense (Ge by taking it as a truncation of sā́nuni, a move that Re disallows), but by form it ought to be an object parallel to dhāsím: the dhāsí of Mitra and Varuṇa (and) the back of Agni. This is the interpr. of Janert, and I follow him in his syntactic evaluation, though I do not necessarily follow him in seeing the dhāsí- of M+V as the seat of truth nor the back of Agni as the back of the Sun (as the heavenly Agni). I tentatively suggest that not violating the back of Agni means not failing to provide appropriate oblations (recall that Agni is sometimes called ghṛtásnu- ‘ghee-backed’). Judging from X.30.1, the “wellspring of Mitra and Varuṇa” is in heaven among the gods -- presumably the source of rain. Not violating it may again mean not failing to make the oblations that will travel to heaven and replenish that source of water. Perhaps the “watery sacrifices” in vs. 6 are connected.
