+++
title = "056"

+++
Heaven and Earth


## 01
As often, árka- can be a pun, both ‘ray’ and ‘chant’.

As Ge (and others) suggest, the bull in d is probably Agni (/Sun), who every morning recreates the two worlds in their separation with his light.


## 02
This vs. contains several puns, including a repetition of śucáyadbhir árkaiḥ from 1d. The final word of the 1st hemistich ukṣámāṇe can belong either to √ukṣ ‘sprinkle’ or to √vakṣ ‘grow’, and both are appropriate. And the preceding negated participle áminatī can take different objects and utilize different senses of the root √mī. On the one hand, as Re (and others) point out, the other occurrence of áminatī (I.92.12=124.2) takes daívyāni vratā́ni “heavenly commandments” as object.

However, cf. nearby ámīta-varṇa- ‘of immutable color’ (IV.51.9), which supports Ge’s “ohne (ihr Aussehen) zu verändern.”


## 05
The phrase máhi dyávī is very problematic morphologically. It echoes the first two words of the hymn: mahī́dyā́vāpṛthivī “great Heaven and Earth,” but in a very refracted form. I do not have a solution for how it came to take the form it has (for various suggestions, see Old and the standard tr., as well as lit. cit. therein, e.g.

AiG III.52, 226). I can get a certain distance, quite speculatively, but no further. I tentatively suggest that we start with an alternative dual dvandva *dyā́vā-mahī́, with mahī́‘the great (fem.)’ substituting for ‘earth’. I then suggest that something like a Vāyav Indraś ca construction was created to it, with the 2nd member properly providing the first term of the construction (see my “Vāyav Indraś ca Revisited”).

The proper voc. sg. of mahī́- would be máhi (which is indeed attested, though without accent [and not qualifying earth]). In this context it shouldn’t have an accent, but that’s the least of our problems. Unfortunately that’s as far as I can get. We should expect, per my suggestion, the 2nd part of the construction to contain *dyaúś ca, and that’s about as far from dyávī as one can be and still belong to the same stem.

I can spin a line of analogies: dyávī is a rough-and-ready nominative sg., built from a full-grade form of the stem found in dyā́vā (found in loc. sg. dyávi) and the fem. -ī.

But I can’t imagine why anyone would create such a form, particularly to a stem so well known to every RVic poet. If it participated in a phonetic or semantic figure, there might be motivation but I see none.

## 06
In ab mitháḥ ‘mutually’ and svéna dákṣeṇa ‘by your own skill’ seem implicitly to contrast.

On ūhyā́the see Old and more recently Kü (489-90) and Hoffmann (Aufs. III.776).
