+++
title = "058"

+++
Ghee


## 02
The final pāda, with Soma (as a buffalo) vomiting (avamīt) ghee, takes one aback, esp. after the high-style extolling that has preceded it. Ge’s explanation, that “ghee” is a secret sacred word (“ein sakrales Geheimwort”) and Soma reveals it, may be correct. But the bluntness of the verb still surprises, and I am inclined to think something further is going on. There are only two verb forms to √vam in the RV, and the other one (váman X.108.8) also has speech as its object, but the evil Paṇis as subj.

Note that the Paṇis are found in vs. 4, as hiders of the ghee. Does our passage express some sort of rivalry between the two ritual substances? Or does it have to do with the Sautrāmaṇi ritual, meant to cure Indra after vomiting?


## 03
Clearly no bull found in nature. The numerology here presumably has to do with items in the ritual. For a conspectus of later interpr., see WG n.


## 04
As was just noted, the Paṇis (niggards) may be indirectly implicated in the verb avamīt in 2d. Here they appear overtly, as the hiders of ghee -- presumably a reference to their stealing of the cows, since the gods find the ghee in the cow in pāda b.

The threefold nature and creation of ghee has been variously interpreted; it again participates in the numerology of the hymn. I do not have a view on it.

## 05-10
Each of these 6 vss. contains the phrase ghrtásya dh ̥ ā́rāḥ (or equiv.: ūrmáyo ghrtásya ̥ in 6c).


## 05
“My” ability to see the ghee streams indirectly attests to my good character, since the cheat cannot see them.


## 06
Pāda c combines etā́arṣanti from 5a with a variant of the repeated ghr̥tásya dhā́rāḥ, namely ūrmáyo ghrtásya ̥ .


## 07
A difficult verse, primarily because of the two hapaxes, śūghanā́saḥ and vā́tapramiyaḥ. The former is taken by Ge as ‘whirlpools, eddies’ (Wirbel)(followed not terribly enthusiastically by Re) on no particular basis, and others have added their own at best weakly supported tr.: e.g., Thieme ‘cow-killing’ [śū- < *pśu-] KlSch. 52), most recently WG ‘die schwellenden Massen’ (presumably with root noun 1st member and later ghana- ‘clump, mass’). The interpr. reflected in the publ. tr. is no stronger than these others. It begins with ghaná- ‘smiter’ (well represented in the RV), as Th’s also must. But for 1st member I assume a zero-grade of āśú- ‘swift’ (for the uncertainties of the initial of the PIE ‘swift’ words, see EWA s.v.) with lengthening at compound seam. With two such ad hoc assumptions, this interpr. is simply a place-holder.

As for vā́tapramiyaḥ, there is no question about its component parts, merely about how they fit together. -pramiyaḥ patterns with the nearby forms IV.54.4 pramíye (‘to be violated’) and IV.55.7 pramíyam (‘to violate’). It also strongly recalls I.24.6 ná yé vā́tasya praminánti ábhvam “nor those [=the gods] who confound the wind’s formless mass.” As Old points out, this latter passage fixes the interpr. of our cmpd.: the first member must be functionally the object of the 2nd. The problem is the accent; it should be a bahuvrīhi, not a tatpuruṣa. See, however, Scar (388), who suggests a plausible bahuvrīhi interpr. ‘die Schmälerung des Windes habend’, with the first member essentially an objective genitive. The point is that the speed and violence of the streams are stronger than those of the wind, which is thus confounded.

I read kā́ṣṭhā(ḥ) in both simile and frame: in the simile it refers to the wooden barriers of the race-course that the horse splits in his speeding around the course, in the frame to sticks floating in the current of the streams and split (against rocks vel sim.) by the violent speed of that current. (Of course the “frame” here is itself metaphorical, since these are streams of ghee, not actual watercourses.)


## 08
The violence of the movement of the ghee-streams in the preceding vs. is abruptly replaced by the placid and benign approach of these same streams in this vs. ### 11
Re points out the ring composition of 11d mádhumantaṃ ta ūrmím and 1a ūrmír mádhumān.