+++
title = "02"

+++
My understanding of this difficult and disputed vs. is set forth in the publ. tr.

I will not engage here in detail with the various alternative interpr. offered by others.

I take the vs. in general as a response to the question posed in 1d (as I understand that question), “who will make wide space at the ceremony for you gods?” The answer is the unnamed priests acting at the dawn sacrifice. It is the priests who chant the ordinances in 2a, at the time when the dawns are “dawning widely” (ví … uchā́n)(2b), with the notion of “wide space” implicit. The priests return in c, distributing the dakṣiṇās (or perhaps the dawns themselves perform the distribution). Pāda c contains two forms of ví (vidhātā́ro ví … dadhuḥ), echoing the two in b (ví … uchā́n viyotā́raḥ). Though the ví forms in c are not directly connected to “wide space,” they continue that theme verbally. Pāda d has the dawns as subject.

In my interpr. of b, with dawns as subj., one could expect a fem. agent noun

*viyotrī́-, but -tár- forms can serve for fem. as well, esp. as an attributive (so better tr.

“they (the dawns) as discriminators …”). As pointed out in the publ. tr., the dawns “discriminate” because they separate night and day. Old has a clever, but I think ultimately incorrect, suggestion that instead of uchā́n we should read *yuchā́n to √yu ‘separate’, providing an etymological figure ví … *yuchā́n viyotā́raḥ, exactly parallel to vidhātā́ro ví … dadhuḥ in the flg. pāda. (Old seems also to consider only to reject this idea.) The grammatical identity of rurucanta is unclear. Lub calls it a pf. subjunctive, and Ge and Thieme (Plusq. 46) interpr. it as hortative. But the zero-grade would be anomalous for a subjunctive. Kü (430-31) takes it rather as an injunctive, although he does not see a clear injunctive context (though generell-erwähnende Funktion seems possible). I also interpr. it as injunctive, in the publ. tr. with preterial sense, though “shine” would work as well in context.

