+++
title = "06"

+++
This vs. is close to impenetrable. For my view of its function in the hymn, see publ. intro. I am still baffled by the concentration on water in bcd and by the proper disposition of the parts of cd.

The first question to approach is the root identity and referent of iṣṭá- in b.

The standard view is that it belongs to √iṣ ‘desire’ and the phrase ápyebhir iṣṭaíḥ refers to “desired watery (gods)” (so, more or less, Ge, Re, WG) as an instr. of accompaniment referring to another set of recipients of praise. Although there do seem to be one, at most two, references to watery gods (masc.) -- VI.50.11, maybe VII.35.11 (though that appears to have fem. referents) -- most of the animate beings qualified as ápya- are females. I don’t know who the watery gods might be. My interpr. of the phrase is quite diff.: I take iṣṭá- to √yaj ‘sacrifice’. Although its ppl.

iṣṭá- is rare and rarely applied to the object sacrificed, there are such examples: compare I.162.15, where it refers to the sacrificed horse, also in the same hymn svìṣṭa- yajñá- vs. 5. I then take our ápya- iṣṭá- to be equivalent to X.86.12 ápyaṃ havíḥ “watery oblation.” Under this interpr. the water sacrifices are what the unnamed priests have revealed /opened up (ápa vran, using language from the Vala myth), and they are implicitly compared with two different entities: the contents of the gharma pot and rivers. In d gharmásvarasaḥ, lit. ‘having the gurgling of the gharma pot’, targets the sound of the watery sacrifices, while samúdraṃ ná saṃcáraṇe … nadyàḥ “like rivers in their converging on the sea” refers to their movement to their goal (presumably the gods -- cf. X.86.12 yásyedáṃ havíḥ priyáṃ devéṣu gáchati). I have major misgivings about my interpr., however, for several reasons. The parts of the simile just proposed are quite separated, with the first part opening c and the ‘rivers’ only appearing in the middle of d, after the bahuvrīhi referring to the gharma pot.

Although some distraction of complex similes is not rare, this seems an extreme example. Moreover, pāda c is identical to I.56.2, where there are no rivers in the context (but where the pāda doesn’t make much sense in context either). On the other hand, rivers converging on the sea is a very common trope in the RV, and so the distraction would not be too challenging to interpret. I am not particularly convinced by my own construction of this hemistich, but I find the the various other attempts at wringing sense out of it (in addition to the standard tr., cf. Lüders [Var. 190-91]) no more (indeed generally less) persuasive.

