+++
title = "+032"

+++
32
Indra
Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This justly famous hymn tells of Indra’s most significant victory, his triumph over  Vr̥tra and the release of the waters, in perhaps the clearest treatment of this primal  myth in the R̥gveda. Vr̥tra was a gigantic cobra who lay coiled around a mountain  within which all the waters were entrapped. In his battle with Indra, Vr̥tra spread  his “shoulders,” his cobra’s hood, and struck at Indra with his fangs, but Indra  finally killed Vr̥tra with his mace, broke open the mountain, and let the waters  pour out. They then flowed to Manu (vs. 8), who was the first sacrificer, and by  implication to his descendants. Vr̥tra’s name means “obstacle,” and this victory over  “Obstacle” is therefore paradigmatic for Indra’s victory over all obstacles.
Despite the relative clarity of the treatment of the Vr̥tra battle, the hymn has  a curious structure, obsessively circling around and alternately focusing in on and  drawing back from the moment of dramatic confrontation between the adversar ies. After the initial verses of summary and the preliminaries to the battle (vss.  1–4), the next three verses (5–7) depict the battle, and it is portrayed as extremely  one-sided, with the overconfident Vr̥tra overmatched from the beginning and deci sively smashed by Indra. (The signature verb of the first section of the hymn is  √han “smash, smite.”) Defeated and dismembered, Vr̥tra lies there (the signature  verb of this section is √śī “lie”) with his mother, and the released waters flow over  them (8–11). After this interlude the hymn returns to a new description of the  battle (12–13), which in this reprise is depicted as far more of an even match. Vr̥tra  strikes at Indra with his fangs and deploys various natural forces against his adver sary. This more equal battle is encapsulated in the perfectly balanced construction  índraś ca yád yuyudhā́te áhiś ca “when Indra and the serpent fought each other... ”  (13c). It is unclear why the first triumphalist account has been revised to the more  ambiguous, less glorious version—though both, of course, end with Vr̥tra’s defeat.
The most mysterious part of this hymn is the conclusion. Vr̥tra is dead, and  even his mother Dānu has been killed, so there is no possibility of a new Vr̥tra. And  yet Indra apparently becomes terrified and flies across the rivers “like a frightened  falcon.” Perhaps this puzzling ending is related to the second version of the battle,  in which Indra does not have quite the unchallenged heroic role that he plays in  the first version. The poet does not explain but in the last verse simply returns to a  praise of Indra as victor and king.