+++
title = "24-27"

+++
The syntagm áram + DAT displays surprisingly complex semantics; there is generally a relationship of benefit between the subject and the dative, but which one receives the benefit is not fixed. We can see the shift in these vss., which contain a surprising number of such constructions: 2x in 24, 3x in 25, 2x in 26, 1x in 27. In 24 the beneficiary is expressed in the dative: the soma is beneficial to these parts of Indra, but in 27 the singer, who is the subject, by his action (singing) receives the benefits expressed in the three datives. The switch is esp. clever because in 24c the dative dhā́mabhyaḥ refers (by my interpr.) to a body part of Indra’s, which benefits from the soma drops, but the same dative (save for number), índrasya dhā́mane, in 25c refers more likely (again in my interpr.) to a benefit that Indra will bestow (though the reading of 24c is also simultaneously possible). This change in focus is made clear (“repaired) in 26c, áram … dāváne “fit(tingly) for (Indra’s) giving,” which makes explicit the implication of 25c áram … dhā́mane. Ge (also Bl RR) supplies “we” as implicit subj. of c: “(wir sind) bereit für deine Schenkung,” but the playful parallelism with 24c seems to me to exclude this interpretation. The heavy phrase in 29 … rātíḥ … dhāyi dhātṛ́bhiḥ “(Indra’s) giving has been ordained by the ordainers” also establishes the link between Indra’s giving and the root √dhā.

The final áram in 27c returns us to the situation found in 24, where the provider of benefit is the subject (“we”) and the beneficiary in the dative (“you”). I would now change the tr. to make that clearer: “We should go (to be) fit for you.” On the particular construction here, áram √gam DAT, see also comm. ad X.9.3.

