+++
title = "02"

+++
On the relation of this vs. to its paired frame vs. 5, see publ. intro. Their relationship is signalled in the first instance by patterned repetition, with 2b and 5b almost identical: ámardhanto vásubhiḥ x x x x. This patterned repetition also involves poetic repair. The qualifier ámardhantaḥ ‘not negligent’, used unusually of paths in vs. 2b, returns in 5d with a far more appropriate referent, the Fathers or their modern-day representatives, the Vasiṣṭhas. The standard tr. either ignore the identity of the two words, found in the same metrical position, and tr. each in a way that fits the context as the tr. sees it (so Ge “unfehlbar” 2b versus “nicht zurückstehend” 2d) or choose an anodyne tr. that doesn’t reflect the act. transitive morphology of the form (Re “impeccable” in both places). But forms of the root √mṛdh generally take an acc. obj. (or an enclitic prn. that is likely acc.) in the sense ‘neglect X’, and we would expect the participle, even negated, to reflect the same usage. As usual, I think it is incumbent on us to follow the morphology, even when it leads us to interpretations that seem, at first, awkward. Here I would first point out that Dawn 100 “awakened” the paths in the previous hymn (VII.75.1d pathyā̀ajīgaḥ), so paths in this group of hymns appear to have more animacy than might be expected. The paths in our vs. are the ones that lead to the gods (devayā́nāḥ), and in this context “nonnegligent paths” could be ones that don’t fail to lead us there, perhaps because they stay in good order, as is implied by the qualifier íṣkṛta-. As often with such semantic mismatches, the sense that comes from apparently incompatible words construed together is hard won, but it also leads to a deeper understanding of what the poet intended.

In the ppl. íṣkṛta- here and in a number of other locutions involving íṣ + √kṛ (iṣkartár-, íṣkṛti-, etc.), íṣ- behaves like a pseudo-preverb. The most likely default source for this íṣ- is the root noun of the same shape meaning ‘refreshment, nourishing drink’ (so EWA s.v. íṣ-), although the semantics makes difficulties: the additive meaning we might expect (‘prepare nourishment’ vel sim.) is not found.

Instead it seems to mean something like ‘set in order, set to rights, restore’. Although some interpr. the idiom as ‘heal’ (see EWA loc. cit.), I see no good evidence for this in the RV; certainly “healed paths” here would be even more aberrant than “nonnegligent” ones. The form here is the only occurrence of the lexeme íṣ √kṛ in the Family Books; otherwise it is limited to the late RV: the finite verb íṣkṛṇudhvam X.53.7, the past participle here and in the cmpd. íṣkṛtāhāva- X.101.6, as well as negated ániṣkṛta- VIII.99.8 and IX.39.2, agent nouns íṣkartar- VIII.1.12 and iṣkartár- VIII.99.8, X.140.5, and the fem. abstract íṣkṛti- X.97.9. Besides its possible etymological connection with íṣ- ‘refreshment’ (textually hinted at only in IX.39.2), it also seems to form an antonymic pair with níṣ √kṛ ‘expel’; see the hymn to healing herbs, X.97, where íṣkṛti- is contrasted with níṣkṛti-, níṣ kṛtha. This rhyming contrast may account for the ‘restore’ sense, antonymic to ‘expel’. Our passage also contains interaction with a different pseudo-preverb: íṣ-kṛta- can be seen as picking up (āv)ír akar in 1c. Though the augment induces -r sandhi, the underlying idiom is āvíṣ √kṛ (e.g., IV.4.5 āvíṣ kṛṇuṣva) with -íṣ matching íṣkṛta- here.

purástāt / pratīcī́“from the east, facing west” is another example of a paired contrast across a pāda boundary.
