+++
title = "03"

+++
Despite the straightforward, indeed ballad-like opening (“those were the days …”), the syntax of the rest of this vs. is difficult to entangle. The problem is that there appear to be two subordinating expressions (yā́in b, yátaḥ pári in c), though it is difficult to identify more than one subordinate clause; if there are two subordinate clauses, one of them would have very sketchy clausal structure. Nonetheless, Ge and Re opt for the latter solution, supplying a verb in b, both taking yā́as neut. pl. nom. and the subject of this clause (e.g., “Nombreux furent ces jours en vérité qui (surgirent) autrefois …”); for them cd is then a new subordinate cl. marked by yátaḥ pári referring to these same days (e.g., “à la suite desquels …”). Something like this 101 is possible, and in my many fiddlings with this vs. over the years I have more than once hovered over something like it. But the stumbling block is prācī́nam in b, which both Ge and Re must take as an adverbial temporal expression (“vorher” and “autrefois” respectively), even though this stem is otherwise only locational ‘forwards / towards the east’, often in a ritual context. I can see no way to integrate the standard use of this stem into a nominal clause consisting only of pāda b. I therefore take bcd as a single subordinate clause with two markers of subordination, yā́(b) a neut. pl. acc. extent of time (“through which …) and yátaḥ pári (c) referring to the place from which Dawn comes, picking up purástāt in 2c. The yā́is more narrowly construed with the finite verb dadṛkṣé in d (“… the days through which you became visible” -- that is, dawned over and over), the yátaḥ pári with the participle ācárantī “faring forth thence [= from the east].” I further take prācī́nam as the goal of that participle (“faring forth … towards the east-facing [sacrifice]”). As I just noted, prācī́na- is often found in a ritual context, modifying yajñá- (VII.7.3) or barhís- (I.188.4, IV.5.4, X.110.4). Either would be possible here, and the point would be that Dawn is hastening from the east towards the sacrifice that, like an expectant lover, is facing towards her. Assuming with most comm., beginning with Sāy. (see esp. Old’s argumentation) that we should read loc. jāré, contra Pp. jāráḥ, the acc. prācī́nam in the frame would be the functional equivalent of jāré in the simile -- GOAL -- despite the mismatch of cases, a nice example of case disharmony in a simile (as discussed in my 1982 IIJ article).

Although I realize that this is a very fussy solution, I cannot see any other way to deal with the troublesome prācī́nam. And it is, after all, an omphalos vs., where perturbations are common. Strictly speaking, my tr. fails to render both subordinators as such: “thence” should be “whence.” But the tr. is hard enough to parse as it is.

The contrastively paired similes, “like (a maiden) faring forth to her lover, not like one going (home) again” (jārá ivā́cárantī … ná púnar yatī́va), are well understood by the standard comm. and nicely indicate that Dawn dawns with as much speed as she can muster, eager for reunion with her lover, rather than lingering like one reluctantly leaving a tryst. For the first cf. I.123.9 … yóṣā ná ... niṣkr̥tám ācárantī “going to the appointed place like a maiden to a rendezvous,” also of Dawn (see also VI.75.4 in the weapon hymn). The iva is wrongly placed in the 2nd simile, but the poet had too many elements to fit in as it was.



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/07/076/03-04.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>