+++
title = "05"

+++
As noted above, this vs. marks the transition to present-tense verbs and imperatives from the distant past of vss. 3-4. Who the subject of these verbs is in vs. 5 is not entirely clear. Until the very last syllable of the first hemistich, it is impossible to know even the gender, but the oddly positioned té at the end of pāda b identifies the subject as masc.; up until then, since sáṃgatāsaḥ could be either masc. 102 or fem., the fem. Dawns are a possibility. The second hemistich repeats the té immediately (c), and adds an unambig. masc. adj. ámardhantaḥ (as well as potentially ambig. yā́damānāḥ). Once té restricts the subject to masc., our immediate thought would be the Fathers, who are the subject of vs. 4. This is the solution of both Ge and Re. However, the temporal switch between 4 and 5 might speak against that. In vs. 6 the Vasiṣṭhas are explicitly identified as the subject (6a). My own view is that the subject of vs. 5 is deliberately left unspecified, to allow a transition between, and identification of, the Fathers and their latter-day representatives the Vasiṣṭhas. That the Fathers are at least arguably present is suggested by samāná ūrvé “in a common pen,” since ūrvá- frequently refers to the Vala cave where the cows/dawns are confined and therefore could set the action of the vs. in mythological time when, as the preceding vs. notes, the Fathers “found the hidden light” and “generated the dawns,” as in the Vala myth. As for a contemporary reference, “common pen” could refer to the sacrificial ground, where the Vasiṣṭhas would be acting in concert.

In addition to specifying the gender of the subject of ab, the final té also repeats the final syllables of the two verbs that precede it in the pāda, jānate … yatante.