+++
title = "04-06"

+++
I do not understand the force of the vā in 5a, since this verse does not seem to me a logical alternative to vs. 4. Nor do I understand the utá-u beginning 5c, which should not be conjoining the dependent clause of ab with the main clause of c.

However Klein’s discussion (I.450) of utá appears to be on the right track and probably can account not only for the utá but also for the vā, if the explanation is fleshed out a bit. It seems that the three verses in this tṛca, esp. the first two, are loosely parallel to each other, esp. in their third pādas. Vss. 4 and 5 begin with a twopāda yád clause (though the two yád-s are functionally different), with the third-pāda main clause resuming with a tád that is asserted to be in Indra’s domain: 4c sárvaṃ tád indra te váśe “all that is under your will” and 5c (utá) tát satyám ít táva “just that (comes) true for you” — with te matching táva and with sárvam and satyám, the referent and predicate respectively of the two tád-s, phonologically similar. Thus both the disjunctive vā and the conjunctive utá serve rhetorical purposes, marking parallel structures, even though those structures do not have parallel or contrastive content. The third verse (6) varies the structure a bit: instead of yád there are two yés in ab and instead of tád pāda c has tā́n; moreover, c is not a nominal sentence attributing all to Indra but requires Indra himself to make a move (gachasi ‘you go’).

But sárvāṃs tā́n indra … semi-duplicates 4c sárvaṃ tád indra …, and the same total control is implied.

