+++
title = "19"

+++
This verse presents both a conceptual difficulty (in ab) and a syntactic one (in c). As for the first, Indra should not be reaching exhilaration though his help for us, but rather through our soma. Ge sidesteps the difficulty by simply reinterpreting the lexeme abhí prá √mand as meaning ‘draw near’ (“ziehst du her zu uns”) without comment, but this relatively common collocation elsewhere always has the meaning expected of √mad / mand, a meaning that abhī́… mandasānáḥ in 21ab would reinforce. In order to avoid the conceptually unlikely “by what help for us do you become exhilarated?” I have supplied “coming” with the kayā́… ūtyā́phrase - re-establishing the usual balance between what Indra bestows on his worshippers and the soma they offer him in return.

As for the syntactic problem, imperatives (here bhara) should not appear in interrogative sentences, and pāda c begins with interrogative káyā. Ge suggests that the 2nd ps. imperative here is used in analogy to the 1st ps.; in other words, since the subjunctive is perfectly at home in interrogative clauses and the 1st ps. subjunctive ultimately comes to serve as the 1st ps. imperative, its use in interrogative clauses could serve as a model for the introduction of 2nd ps. imperatives in such clauses. But I doubt that the 1st ps. subjunctive had been reinterpreted as an imperative at this era, since the full subjunctive paradigm in all three persons was still very much alive, and in fact Old comments that he does not know of other examples in the older language.

To avoid the syntactic clash I assume that káyā stotṛ́bhyaḥ, parallel to káyā … na ūtyā́in a, ends the sentence, and ā́bhara constitutes a new, abrupt imperatival clause.

Old cites a similar solution, though taking stotṛ́bhyaḥ with the imperative not the kayā́clause, found in Grassmann’s tr., also in Caland/Henry’s, which he dismisses as “künstliches Ueberspringen der Schwierigkeit.” This hardly seems fair, since it does in fact avoid the difficulty, and seems no more artificial than many interpretations of syntactically awkward passages. As for my division into clauses as opposed to that of Gr and Cal/Hen, although stotṛ́bhya ā́bhara is found several times elsewhere as a syntagm (V.6.1 [and reps.], nearby VIII.77.8), pāda-final ā́bhara is extraordinarily common and could easily be construed independently, especially since stotṛ́bhyaḥ would naturally pair with naḥ in these parallel expressions.
