+++
title = "22"

+++
Though vītáye is translated as if it were a loc. (“in pursuit”), it is of course a dative, and “Indra” or “you” should probably be supplied as object of the infinitive. The “wives” of the pressed drinks are, acdg. to Sāy. and followed by Ge (and me), the waters; in this soma context cows, standing for cows’ milk, are also possible, though the occurrence of waters in c supports Sāy.’s suggestion.

Pāda c is difficult, primarily because of the uncertain nicumpunáḥ but also because of the genitive case of apā́m. To take the latter issue first, Ge assumes the referent of the nominative phrase is Indra, as “der … Besucher der Gewässer” (apā́ṃ jágmiḥ). Since jágmi- in the singular is ordinarily used of Indra, this identification makes sense, but jágmi-, like other nominals of the same formation, always takes verbal rection, and the goal is expressed in the acc. (ā́havam II.33.11, nṛṣādanam VII.20.1) or loc. (vidátheṣu I.89.7) - not the gen., as Ge’s tr. requires. For the baffling nicumpuṇá (and its mantra variants -cuṅkuná- and -caṅkuna) see EWA s.v. with lit. Mayrhofer cites there an etymological suggestion of Werba’s based on a proposed MIA form, meaning ‘always filling’. Though there is, of course, no certainty here, I have adopted this suggestion for want of anything better, though ‘gushing downward’ or Ge’s ‘sprudelnde (?)’ vel sim. would also work; consider also Old’s “vielleicht ein dem Wasser innewohnender lustrierender Genius.” In any case, meanings in this sphere do not fit Indra terribly well (as Ge’s “?” in part indicates), and, coupled with the problem of the case form of apā́m, this suggests that a different referent be sought for the nominatives in this pāda. I tentatively suggest supplying ūrmí- ‘wave’, regularly found with apā́m, esp. in soma contexts.

