+++
title = "23"

+++
The first word of the verse, iṣṭā́ḥ, can belong either to √iṣ ‘desire’ (or the other √iṣ ‘send’) or √yaj ‘sacrifice, offer’ and should be read as a pun. With Ge the publ. tr. takes índram as governed by vṛdhā́saḥ (“strengthening Indra” / “den Indra … stärkend”). I took it so because asṛkṣata has a clear acc. goal in c and does not need another one. However, I am increasingly uncomfortable with this interpretation, since vṛdhá- otherwise takes the genitive (see nearby VIII.98.5 sunvató vṛdháḥ and 6 mánor vṛdháḥ), and I would now take índram as another goal with asṛkṣata, hence “… libations, strengthening at the ceremony, have surged to Indra, to his downstroke”).

The word avabhṛthá- in c is found only here in the RV. In classical śrauta ritual the avabhṛtha is the “final bath” taken by the sacrificer and his wife at the conclusion of the ritual, and it is interpreted thus here by Gr, and, although Ge doubts that it is the final bath, he still takes it as a “Reinungsbad.” I am dubious for a number of reasons, not least that no one should be bathing in libations (hótrāḥ) and that the participants in the final bath of later ritual are not gods (as Indra would be here) but mortals. Instead I think that the verbal lexeme áva √bhṛ, lit. ‘bear down’, provides the interpretational context for this noun. In the RV verbal forms of this lexeme sometimes take a weapon in the acc., depicting Indra’s bringing this weapon down on his opponent (e.g., I.32.9 índro asyā áva vádhar jabhāra “Indra brought his weapon down upon her”; also vájram X.113.5), or, with an accusative of the opponent or one of his body parts, of Indra bringing down his enemy (e.g., II.20.6 áva … śíro bharad dāsásaya “he brought down the head of the Dāsa”). Here I think it refers concretely to Indra’s “down-stroke,” which is strengthened by the soma offered to him.
