+++
title = "07"

+++
The sentiment in pāda c is somewhat puzzling, though the grammar is straightforward: práśastim naḥ kṛṇuta rudriyāsaḥ. This should mean “make a eulogy for us, o Rudras,” with the VP práśastim √kṛ. Though the three other occurrences of this VP, in I.113.19, 181.1, and II.41.16, do conform to expectations, taking it that way here would reverse the sacrificial bargain. As detailed in the first hemistich, the Maruts have given us bountiful riches of all sorts; in return we should be producing a práśasti- for them -- not they for us. In fact, of course, it is never the gods’ job to produce praise for humans. In order to make sense of the phrase, I have pushed the sense of √kṛ from ‘make’ to ‘make good’ -- that is, act such that the praise we are giving you is true. (You have given us many things; do it again.) Re’s “faites nous (aujourd’hui une récompense digne du) panégyrique” is similar, despite the overstuffed parenthesis. There is another, less likely, alternative. As I have argued elsewhere (RV between Two Worlds, pp. 146-48), even in the RV the práśasti- was probably a genre of praise appropriate to kings and only secondarily applied to gods.

It might be that the poet is asking the Maruts to render his patron and king deserving of his [=poet’s] práśasti-, either by redistributing the wealth that they showered on the king or by the king’s performing some worthy feat. But this seems overly complex and far less likely, and since práśasti-s in the RV are often directed at gods, it is unnecessary.

