+++
title = "03"

+++
The first pāda has been subjected to a dizzying number of different interpretations, primarily because of the uncertain sense of the resonant word aryáḥ in context, which is complicated by its ambiguous grammatical identity: it can be gen. or abl. sg. or nom. or acc. pl. of arí- or even nom. sg. of aryá-. In addition to the standard treatments, see also Oldenberg ZDMG 54 (=KlSch. p. 79), Bl RR ad VI.45.33, Thieme Fremdling 74ff. I won’t discuss the various suggested alternatives, but simply present my own. I take aryáḥ as abl. sg.; as for the immediately following ā́, I give it a double interpr. On the one hand it is a postposition with aryáḥ in the meaning ‘from’; the phrase aryá ā́is found elsewhere and always in this sense (VIII.34.10, IX.61.11, X.191.1, in addition to the repetition of our pāda in VI.45.33).

Any interpr. that requires aryáḥ to be some other case than abl. sg. needs to confront this formulaic evidence. But in my interpr. ā́is also a preverb with gṛṇanti. I take the lexeme ā́√gṛ to be built on the model of the common ā́√yaj ‘bring here by sacrifice’ and mean ‘bring here by song / sing here’. Our bards attract the Maruts away from the stranger (aryáḥ) to our soma-sacrifice.

“All the bards” (víśve … kārávaḥ) here contrasts with “all the gods” (devā́ḥ … víśve) in the preceding verse, both sets of beings operating in the same territory, the ritual ground.

The publ. tr. fails to tr. sádā ‘always’; it should read “… always sing them here …”

