+++
title = "05"

+++
The root noun cmpd apījū́- is somewhat puzzling, in that the 1st member api- (apī- with lengthening at cmpd seam; for possible explan. see Scar 169 nn. 223, 224) seems to contribute nothing. In fact, the standard tr. simply ignore it. Scar is on the right track, I think, in taking it as only loosely compounded and meaning something like “also speeders,” perhaps in order to preserve some cmpd sense “speeders in addition.” On návyasā vácaḥ see comm. ad VIII.39.2.

Pāda d in itself and in its syntactic relation to c is also problematic. Perhaps the first, and possibly the easiest, issue is the apparently untethered ca. Klein (DGRV I.226-27) takes it as conjoining the two pādas c and d, but this requires supplying a verb (kṛṇve, flg. Ge) that has no support. I think rather that it signals a standard syntagm that has been split across the vs.: “the still and the moving” (gen. sthātúr jágataś ca VII.60.2, X.63.8, plus other examples with ca-less phrases and lexical substitutions) is a common merism for “everything earthly.” In this verse pl. jágatām is found in b, where Night and Dawn are the speeders of moving things; here its formulaic partner, the still (in the sg.), is about to receive an underlayer of vigor. The ca simply reminds us that b and d are implicitly contrasted: moving things are impelled to even more movement, whereas still things are about to acquire a solid base. To draw attention to the pairing it might be worthwhile to begin the tr. of d with “and as for the still (world) …” Another of the questions is the grammatical identity of trívayāḥ: is this bahuvrīhi s-stem a nom. sg. masc., as it appears to be, or a nom./acc. neut., modifying váyaḥ? Although the latter interpr. might seem ungrammatical, Wackernagel (AiG III.288) tentatively allows neut. -s-stem nom./acc. in -āḥ, though the number of exx. he cites is small and it is possible that they could all be explained in other ways. Nonetheless, in VII.24.2 (see comm. ad loc.) I do take dvibárhā(ḥ) as a neut.; in IV.11.3 and X.80.4 vīrápeśā(ḥ) must have a neut. sg. reading; and a neut.

interpr. is the standard one for trívayāḥ here (e.g., Re “la vigueur tri-vigorante”). By contrast I take it in the publ. tr. as a nom. sg. masc., modifying the 1st sg. subject of stuṣé, hence “I possessing triple vigor …” I still think this is quite possible, but I do not consider the alternative (“… to strew triple vigorous vigor as the underlayer …”) out of the question.

The last question is who is doing the strewing. In my publ. tr. it is “I,” and again I still consider this possible. But I think it’s also possible that I praise Heaven and Earth so that they will provide the underlayer. This is esp. likely if trívayāḥ is taken as neut.: “I praise you two … (for you) to strew triple-vigorous vigor …” The pair, or at least Earth, makes sense as the cosmic entity that would provide a base for the still, whereas Night and Dawn, in constant motion, make sense as the speeders of the moving things.

