+++
title = "09"

+++
I follow Ge (n. 9a) in giving mánuṣaḥ a double reading, acc. pl. obj. of cetayan and gen. sg. dependent on yajñábandhuḥ. Note that it is neatly positioned between those two words.

I think yajñábandhuḥ has a more specific sense than simply ‘Opfergenosse’.

Rather, Agni is literally our ‘tie’ (bándhu-) to the primal sacrifice instituted by Manu because he has always been present, always the same, at every sacrifice since then.

The referent of asya in c is taken as the mortal (márta-) in d by Ge (implicitly also Re), as Agni by WG. Either is possible, both grammatically and contextually.

There is no requirement that a possessive coreferential with the subject be expressed by a reflexive (svásya in this case), and though, technically speaking, an unaccented oblique form of ayám should have an antecedent, the close proximity of mártasya and the fact that the subject of the preceding verb (nayanti), though pl., is clearly mortal would make asya = mortal unproblematic. And given the ritual intimacy of Agni and his worshipper(s), the house belongs to both.

Note the phonological echo in sā́dhan (c) and sadhanitvám (d), even though they are semantically unconnected. As for the latter, I now favor the alternative deriv.

proposed by Scar (291), from a base *sadhaní- ‘Teilhaber am gemeinsam Schatz, Teilgaber, Genosse’ in turn built to sa-dhána- (ŚB) ‘gemeinsamer Schatz’ -- rather than as a derivative of the [/a] root-noun cmpd sadha-nī́-, with shortening of the root vowel before -tvá- (so AiG II.2.715). See sadhanyàm in X.50.3. In fact some or all of the three forms assigned to the root-noun cmpd by Gr (IV.4.14, VI.51.3, X.93.5) may also belong rather to Gr’s stem sadhanyà-. (Both Lub and Scar assign all four forms [that is, incl. X.50.3] to the sadhanī́-, though, as just noted, Scar considers the alternative analysis.) The problem with the root-noun analysis is that the semantic connection between √nī ‘lead’ and the apparent sense of the derivative is quite attenuated. It is, however, the case here that two finite forms of √nī (nayanti 9b, nayatu 10a) flank sadhanitvám, so there may be at least a secondary connection perceived.
