+++
title = "14"

+++
Med. marmṛjata is most likely reflexive, as I and most other interpr. take it, though Sāy. and Re supply Agni as object. Although the reflex. interpr. seems a little thin -- splitting stone is dirty work, so they had to clean themselves up -- Agni is out of place in this Vala context and there is no other obvious candidate to be object.

Moreover, the middle voice suggests a reflexive sense.

The referent of anyé in b is not clear to me. By my placement rules (see “Vedic anyá- 'another, the other': syntactic disambiguation,” Sound law and analogy, Fs. Beekes [ed. A. Lubotsky], 1997, pp. 111-18), it must be definite (“the others”).

Most tr. take it as indefinite, though Hoffmann tr. it as definite and implicitly contrastive with the unspecified subject of pāda a: “Die (einen) … Die anderen von ihnen …” I think this approach is the correct one, though I don’t think we need or want the group of Aṅgirases to be split into moieties. Instead, in my view, the contrastive groups are the primordial singers, the Aṅgirases, and their modern counterparts, the poets and singers of the current ritual. The injunctive ví vocan would allow a presential interpr. (“they proclaim …”) with current singers as subj.

instead of or in addition to the preterital one in the publ. tr.

In c we return to the Aṅgirases, whose singing opens the Vala cave -- hence “they sang the decisive act.” Most tr. take kārá- as a victory song of some sort (the exception is WG: “… singen sie auf das Schaffen,” where kārá- is the subject of the song. But I think the expression is more radical: as so often in the RV, our poet wants to emphasize the power of words to make things happen, the connection between song (the cause) and the act, the splitting of the rock (effect).

The hapax cmpd. paśváyantra- is puzzling in formation and sense, although the parts it is based on are relatively clear. The 1st member is paśu- ‘livestock’ or a derivative thereof, the 2nd is or contains yantrá- ‘binding rope’. The interpr. comes down to deciding which is the lesser of two evils: positing an otherwise unattested extended stem paśvá- beside paśú- but a relatively conventional bahuvrīhi ‘having binding ropes for the livestock’ or rejecting the extended stem but ending up with an anomalously formed and accented bahuvrīhi. Old argues strenuously for the former, with the rather cumbersome tr. “in ihren Vorrichtungen zum Festhalten … das Vieh haltend,” and some version of this analysis is followed by Hoffmann and WG. Ge and Re (the latter with some hesitation) opt for the latter, with Ge suggesting a reverse bahuvrīhi (for ayantra-paśu-). (He cagily fails to accent it.) In the end I swallow some version of the second analysis, primarily because I find it unlikely that such a common word as paśú- would display an unnecessary extended stem in just this place in all of Sanskrit, particularly because there’s little metrical advantage to it here. However, I do not follow Ge’s reverse bahuvrīhi interpr. (roughly, “having livestock loosed from the binding ropes”), but assume that it is the Aṅgirases who lack yantra-s to bind the cattle and do so with song instead. (This interpr. goes back to Bergaigne; see Old SBE ad loc.) That some form of verbal expression could serve as a yantrá- is shown by the cmpd. ślóka-yantra- (IX.73.6) ‘having ślokas as binding ropes’. Unfortunately I do not see how to make this explanation work formally, particularly with regard to accent, esp. as there exists a differently accented privative cmpd. ayantrá- in X.46.6. I leave it at this, unsatisfactorily.

In terms of the structure of the vs., I now think the odd pādas (a, c) refer to the Aṅgirases and the even ones (b, d) to the current singers. I would therefore slightly modify the published tr., which presents pāda d as if it were the direct speech -- the song -- of the Aṅgirases described in c. I now think d is what the other, current poets were said to proclaim in b.

