+++
title = "19"

+++
In b HvN note a caesura after 3; I wonder instead whether the caesura comes at the cmpd seam (#hótāraṃ viśvá/bharasaṃ …), a solution they themselves suggest for 8b, where the caesura would otherwise come after 2. See also 4c, 6b.

On the cmpd viśvá-bharas- see comm. ad V.54.10.

The general opinion is surely correct, that the “gleaming udder of the cows” (śúcy ū́dhaḥ … gávām) stands for the cows’ milk, which is compared to the soma stalk, itself standing for soma. But I think that the udder also stands for the Vala cave, which contained the cows. The root √tṛd ‘drill’ is used for breaching the Vala cave in VI.17.1, 3, X.74.4. Ge finds the subj. of atṛṇat unclear, but surely Agni makes the most sense (not the sacrificer, per Sāy.). In his ritual role, Agni causes the dawn to dawn and therefore opens up the Vala cave on a daily basis. And at the same time he brings the outpouring of ghee (in the sacrifice) and the morning dakṣiṇā and other products of the cow.

The two soma-related terms aṃśú- and ándhas- are difficult to define and to distinguish from each, esp. since both can be used in place of soma itself. However, insofar as it’s possible to tell, they seem to refer to (parts of) the physical plant soma, rather than its product, the juice also called soma. As far as I know, this is the only passage in which the two terms occur together, with gen. aṃśóḥ dependent on acc. ándhaḥ, which suggests that ándhas- is a part of the aṃśú-. This surmise supports the interpr. given by EWA s.vv. (with lit.) that the aṃśú- is the plant and ándhas- is the plant’s stalk. The use of both terms to refer loosely to the soma drink is similar to the use of ‘grape’ or ‘vine’ to refer to wine. I do not understand the position of ná. With the other standard interpr. I tr. it as if it qualifies the verb it immediately follows (“he drilled, seemingly …”; Ge “er zapfte gleichsam …,” etc.), but this is simply not a regular RVic usage: similes are always nominal. I would like to connect it with the double usage of ū́dhaḥ just discussed, but I’m not sure how. I wonder if the 2nd reading of ū́dhaḥ as equivalent to the Vala cave hints at a simile like vrajám … gávām iva “like a pen of cows” (I.130.3; cf. I.10.7, IV.20.8, etc.). This would allow us to tr. the phrase “He drilled the gleaming udder of the cows [=milk] like the ‘udder’ [=pen/Vala] of the cows,” which would restore ná to its normal function of marking nominal similes.

