+++
title = "06"

+++
This verse contains, in my opinion, what Re might call a “legère zeugma,” in which the verb anūṣata “they bellowed” takes (as is usual) an acc. of the target of the bellowing (“to the finder of goods,” i.e., Indra) in the frame, but in the simile it takes an acc. of the content of the bellowing (“their thought”). Ge avoids this mismatch of acc. function by removing matím from the simile by supplying a form of √bhṛ ‘bear, present’, leaving devayántaḥ as the only term directly compared in the simile: “Wie Gottverlangende, die das Lied [vortragen], so haben die Lobreden … hergerufen.” It is certainly true that matí- is common as the object of √bhṛ and that √nu doesn’t normally take an acc. of content, but since the poet of the hymn has pushed the linguistic limits elsewhere, I prefer to think he meant the jarring figure. Note that there is also a mismatch between the two subjects, with the simile referring, implicitly, to human actors, while the frame has ‘songs’ (gíraḥ) as subject (unless we take the Aṅgirases or the cows as subj. and allow anūṣata to take two accusatives: “they bellowed their songs to the finder of goods” - however, √nu doesn’t take two acc., to my knowledge).

The zeugma may iconically represent the fact that the verse connects across a temporal gap as well: the simile seems to refer to present-day worshippers producing their praise, but the frame (with augmented verb form) refers to the mythic past of the Vala tale. This verse thus serves as a transition to the here-and-now of the current ritual, which is treated in vs. 7.

