+++
title = "A Veda and R̥gveda"

+++
The R̥gveda is the oldest Sanskrit text, composed in an archaic form of the language, known as Vedic or Vedic Sanskrit. It is a collection of over a thousand  poems, composed by a number of different poets over the course of some consid erable period of time. The poems are primarily hymns praising various gods and  ritual elements and procedures, designed to be recited during ritual performance;  that is, they are liturgical compositions. However, they are also finely crafted and  self-conscious literary productions of the highest quality. 

As the first text in Sanskrit, the R̥gveda is somewhat isolated, and many of  the difficulties of its interpretation stem from the fact that there are no parallel  or closely contemporary texts. Yet, it is poised between two bodies of textual material that can contribute to its interpretation, and the characteristic features  from these two types of texts, mingled uniquely in the R̥gveda, help account for  its distinctive quality. On the one hand, it stands at the end of a long tradition of  Indo-European and Indo-Iranian praise poetry, most nearly mirrored in the Old  Avestan Gāthās attributed to Zarathustra. On the other, it stands as the earliest  of the ritual texts collectively known as the Vedas and forms a part of the inter locking ritual system set forth in the Vedas. 

There are four Vedas: the R̥gveda, Sāmaveda, Yajurveda, and Atharvaveda. The  first three are the provinces of individual priests, who function together to per form the solemn rituals of the Vedic liturgical system, later, in the middle Vedic  period, known as śrauta rituals. Each of those three Vedas also represents a different type of ritual speech. Thus, the R̥gveda belongs to the Hotar priest, who recites or chants the poetry; the Sāmaveda to the Udgātar priest, who sings the poetry to  set tunes called sāmans. The vast majority of the verbal material in the Sāmaveda  is borrowed from the R̥gveda. The Yajurveda is the realm of the Adhvaryu priest;  his verbal product is the yajus, a short verbal formula that generally accompanies  the physical actions that are the main task of the Adhvaryu. Each of these three  priests is accompanied by other priests who share their principal functions. So in  the later soma ritual, for example, the number of priests can be sixteen or seventeen. The Atharvaveda stands outside of this ritual system and consists primarily  of hymns and spells of a more “popular” nature, often magical or healing. Despite  its lack of connection to the solemn ritual, the Atharvaveda is especially important  for R̥gvedic studies because it is linguistically the closest text to the R̥gveda and is  thus the second oldest text in Sanskrit. The two texts also share a number of pas sages and hymns, although the Atharvaveda often varies the wording or order of  verses. The R̥gvedic hymns found also in the Atharvaveda are often drawn from the  younger layers of the R̥gveda. 

We will treat the structure of the text in more detail below; here we will pro vide only the most general outline. The text consists of 1028 hymns divided into  ten books or maṇḍalas (lit. “circles”), of varying lengths. The arrangement of the  hymns within each maṇḍala and the arrangement of the maṇḍalas themselves attest  strongly to the deliberate quality of the collection and organization of the hymns,  as we will demonstrate below. Maṇḍalas II–VII are known as the “Family Books,”  each attributed to a different bardic family. Maṇḍala VIII contains smaller collections attributed to particular poets or poetic families, and has a somewhat aberrant character. Maṇḍala IX contains all and only the hymns dedicated to Soma  Pavamāna, “self-purifying soma,” the deified ritual drink at a particular moment in  its ritual preparation.+++(5)+++ Maṇḍalas I and X were added to the collection later, though  they both contain much that is contemporaneous with the linguistic and religious  level of the core parts of the R̥gveda, as well as some more recent and “popular”  material. Both I and X contain exactly 191 hymns, a synchronicity that was clearly  not by chance.
