+++
title = "C What Do the Hymns Do?"

+++
The overwhelming majority of R̥gvedic hymns have as their major aim to praise the  god(s) to whom the hymn is dedicated and to induce said god(s) to repay the praise  with requested favors. To a certain extent different gods receive different types of  praise, but the praise generally focuses on the appearance, qualities, and power of  the gods and on their remarkable deeds. Some divinities attract particular attention to their appearance: for instance, the seductive beauty of Dawn, the glittering  ostentation of the Maruts, the endlessly fascinating transformations of physical fire  and its divine embodiment Agni.+++(5)+++ Others, like the Ādityas, have few if any physical  characteristics, but are more celebrated for their mental and moral qualities. The  supernatural powers of almost all the gods receive abundant praise, though again  the types of power lauded differ from god to god. 

Their powers are actualized in their deeds, the recounting of which occupies a  large portion of many R̥gvedic hymns. Some gods have a robust narrative mythol ogy, and episodes from this mythology are constantly related or alluded to; the  most prominent example is Indra with his catalogue of great victories over both  divine and mortal enemies. Those without much narrative mythology tend to be  credited with general cosmogonic deeds or with the regular maintaining and order ing of the world and its inhabitants. 

This praise of divine powers and deeds is not a disinterested act, for the aim  is to persuade or constrain the gods to mobilize these same powers on behalf of  their worshipers and to replicate their great deeds in the present for the benefit of  these same worshipers. In the all-pervasive system of reciprocity and exchange that  might be termed the dominant social ideology underlying the R̥gveda, praise of the  gods requires requital: they must provide recompense for what they receive from  those praising them. Worshipers are not shy about specifying what they want in  exchange: the good things of this world—wealth, especially in livestock and gold,  sons, and a long lifespan—and divine aid in defeating opponents, be they enemies  in battle or rival sacrificers. The sign that the praise has been successful is the epiphany of the god(s) addressed+++(5)+++, so that many hymns urgently invite the dedicand(s)  to journey to the particular sacrifice in which the poet is participating and then  jubilantly proclaim the arrival of the god(s) at that particular sacrificial ground as  the ritual is taking place.

This epiphany at the sacrifice brings us back to the liturgical role of the hymns,  for it should never be forgotten that almost all the hymns in the R̥gveda were com posed to accompany the physical acts of the ritual, which are happening simultaneously with the recitation. But the word “accompany” here is too weak. The hymns  are not merely verbal background music, as it were. As will be discussed further  below, another important aspect of Vedic ideology is the belief in the power of the  word: words make things happen.+++(5)+++ The physical actions of ritual alone would be  insufficient; it is the skillfully crafted, properly formulated hymn, the verbal portion  of the ritual, that makes the liturgical acts effective. 

While the great majority of R̥gvedic hymns have a liturgical form that obviously  reflects the soma rite, there are examples in which this model is not evident. Among  them are the ākhyāna or “narrative” hymns, as Oldenberg (1883, 1885) called them,  which take the form of a dialogue between two or more figures.+++(5)+++ These hymns occur  in the later portions of the R̥gveda, especially book X. They include, for example,  dialogues between the sage Agastya and his wife Lopāmudrā (I.179); between Yama  and his twin sister Yamī (X.10); between the celestial Apsaras Urvaśī and her abandoned mortal husband Purūravas (X.95); among the monkey Vr̥ṣākapi, the god  Indra, and Indra’s wife Indrāṇī (X.86); and between Indra’s dog, Saramā, and the  tribe of Paṇis (X.108). It is possible that some of these hymns comment on the  soma rite, but others were composed for different ritual purposes, which have to be  surmised, if they can be surmised at all, from the contents of the hymns. Our introductions to individual hymns discuss possible applications. A few may represent  individual or domestic concerns, such as the recovery of lost cattle (X.108); others may embody the differing viewpoints of ongoing ritual controversies (I.179) or  provide a dramatic modeling of a particularly important ritual (the Horse Sacrifice  in X.86) or the mythological underpinning for a series of hymns (X.10 for the following funeral hymns). An evergreen controversy concerns the form of the ākhyāna  hymns. Oldenberg (1885) argued that the oldest type of epic composition mixed  poetry and prose. The poetry principally consisted of the words spoken by characters in the narrative, and the prose provided the narrative context for the verses.  This form is found in the Pāli Jātakas, the stories of the Buddha’s former births, for  example, in which the verses are considered canonical but the connecting prose is  not. Oldenberg suggested that the ākhyāna hymns conformed to this type and that  what we have preserved is a skeleton of canonical dialogue that originally had prose  narrative attached to it. Oldenberg’s theory has the advantage of explaining why  these hymns are difficult to interpret and why even the speakers of particular verses  are not readily identifiable. While we find the theory attractive, many scholars have  found it unnecessary and understand these hymns to have been recited as they are  transmitted to us.
 
There are also hymns that, though they may be ritually employed in the later Veda,  were perhaps not composed for ritual use. Gonda (1978: 25–38) compares some of  these hymns to medieval stotras: expressions of emotion, praise, and devotion to the  gods. However, such functions do not preclude their application in rites, even if their original ritual context is not clear to us. A better possibility for non-liturgical hymns  is the type that comments on the ritual and its meaning. Generally occurring in the  latest strata of the R̥gveda, these include X.129, the Nāsadīyasūkta (“that not existing did not exist”); X.121, the Hiraṇyagarbhasūkta (“Golden Embryo”); X.90, the  Puruṣasūkta (“Hymn of the Man”); and I.164, the “Riddle Hymn” of Dīrghatamas.  These are sometimes called the “philosophical” or “speculative” hymns of the  R̥gveda, but this is a misleading description, since they are not primarily abstract  philosophic reflections on the nature of things. Rather, they are better viewed as  forerunners of the Brāhmaṇa and Āraṇyaka texts that interpret the ritual in general,  particular rituals, or aspects of the ritual.+++(5)+++ So, for example, X.90 comments on the  sacrifice through the symbol of the “Man,” which represents both the world and the  sacrifice. X.121 concerns the royal consecration rite, and X.129 sets forth the creative  power of knowledge and therefore the power of the poets and priests who possess  it. In many of these hymns the meaning of the ritual is expressed in terms of a cosmogony or cosmology. While such hymns share many themes and draw upon common stores of symbols, there is not a single R̥gvedic cosmogony or a single R̥gvedic  cosmology to which they refer. Rather, they represent imaginable worlds that explain  why things are as they are. To force the hymns into the straitjacket of a unitary view  of the world underestimates the power and originality of the poets who produced  these cosmogonic and cosmological models. 
