+++
title = "D The Poet"

+++
Who is the poet, and why is he composing poetry? The poets participate in an  elaborate patronage system. They are hirelings, but of a very superior sort. As  craftsmen of the word, their contribution to the success of the sacrifice that establishes and maintains the mutually beneficial relationship between men and gods is  critical, and they serve the patrons, often royal patrons (whatever “royal” meant at  this period), who arrange for and underwrite the sacrifice. The poet provides the  praise poetry that the patron needs to put the gods in his debt, and he speaks on  behalf of his patron, in making specific requests of the gods for goods and services.  The poet’s reward comes as a second-hand or indirect benefit of the success of his  verbal labors: the patron should receive from the gods what he asked for, and he  provides some portion of that bounty to the poet in recompense.+++(5)+++ This payment  from his patron is sometimes celebrated by the poet at the end of his hymn, in a  genre known as the dānastuti+++(5)+++, literally “praise of the gift,” in which the largesse of  the patron—cows, horses, gold, women—is catalogued and glorified. Or, if it is less  than expected or desired, scorned. The tone of the dānastuti is often teasing and  jokey, and the language colloquial. 

But the making of poetry is not simply a business proposition. Poets take great  pride in their work and often reflect on their part in the poetic tradition and also on  their ability to use the tools of the tradition in innovative and creative ways. They  are self-conscious, naming themselves and addressing themselves, calling attention to their verbal tricks and achievements and their ability to bring fame and material  success to their patrons and glory to their gods. Some poets have very distinctive  poetic personalities, as we will have occasion to remark throughout the translation.
 
The R̥gvedic poet’s social position and his role in the patronage economy was  clearly inherited from Indo-Iranian and Indo-European times, and one of the  closest parallels is found in ancient Greek, in the poetry of Pindar (5th century  bce), who was hired to celebrate the victors in the various Greek games and did so  in verse as elaborate, finely crafted, and deliberately obscure as that found in the  R̥gveda. For further on the Indo-European poet, see Watkins (1995). 
