+++
title = "+023"

+++
23 (214)
Br̥haspati
Gr̥tsamada
19 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 15, 19
The relation between the god Br̥haspati and Indra is fluid within the R̥gveda. As  Schmidt (1968) has demonstrated, bŕ̥haspáti and bráhmanas páti “lord of the sacred  formulation” are usually names of Indra in the context of the Vala myth. At times,  however, Br̥haspati emerges as an independent deity, though closely linked to Indra.  Here the poet once describes Br̥haspati as the “yokemate” of Indra (vs. 18), but  beyond this statement, there is otherwise little to distinguish Indra and Br̥haspati.
Framing the hymn’s description of Br̥haspati are overt references to the Vala  myth, in which Indra as Br̥haspati leads the Aṅgirases and, by the power of their  song, opens the cave that releases the cattle and dawns (vss. 2, 3, 18). The interme diate verses expand the theme of the power of the verbal formulation, of which  Br̥haspati is the master. It is by means of knowledge of the truth that Br̥haspati and the poet, who possesses mastery of the truth through Br̥haspati, are able to  overcome their enemies. They defeat scorners (vs. 8), slighters (vs. 13), chatterers  (vs. 14), and speakers of ill (vs. 10). They overcome those who hate the real for mulations of the truth (vs. 4), who lay snares (vs. 6), and who are deceitful (vss. 5,  16, 17). Perhaps because of his powerful speech, Br̥haspati’s mouth even “snaps  at” the poet’s enemies (vs. 9). At least in some instances, the rivals of the poet are  rival sacrificers. At best, however, these know the words to recite, but not the truth  that produces the songs or that lies behind them (vs. 16). Through the truth and the  truth formulations, the poet and his people are freed from distress (vs. 4), hostility  (vss. 5, 9), and injury (vss. 7, 8, 12) and instead prosper (vss. 10, 15).