+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


##  01
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

1. And, in the morning, having taken out the ashes, and smeared (the fire-places) with cow-dung, he lifts the two fires on the churning-sticks, and returns (to the offering-ground). Having then churned out the Gārhapatya, taken out the Āhavanīya, and brought the Anvāhārya-pacana (to the southern hearth), he should prepare a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pathikr̥t (the path-maker). The course of procedure thereof (is as follows):--he should recite those same seventeen kindling-verses; the two butter-portions relate to the slaying of Vr̥tra [^egg_531]; the saṁyājyās are two Virāj verses [^egg_531]; and the invitatory and offering formulas are as follows:--(the anuvākyā, R̥g-veda VI, 16, 3), 'For thou, most wise Agni, divine disposer, readily knowest the ways and paths at sacrifices;' and the yājyā (R̥g-veda X, 2, 3), 'We have entered upon the path of the gods to carry on what we can do: the wise Agni shall sacrifice,

[^egg_531]: 191:3 See notes on XIII, 4, 1, 13.

he shall be the priest, he shall order the sacrifices and their seasons;' for Agni is the path-maker, the guide of paths: he, verily, guides him upon the path of sacrifice. This, then, is the rite performed in that case.
</details>

##  02
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

2. They also say, 'If any one's fires were to come in contact with each other, what rite and what expiation would there be in that case?' If this burning (fire) were to come (to the other) from behind, he may know that light has come to him from beyond; that the gods have helped him, and that he will become more glorious. But if his heart should at all misgive him, let him prepare a cake on eight potsherds for Agni Vivici (the discerning). The course of procedure thereof (is as follows):--he should recite those same seventeen kindling-verses; the two butter-portions relate to the slaying of Vr̥tra; the saṁyājyās are two Virāj verses; and the invitatory and offering formulas are as follows:--(the anuvākyā, R̥g-veda VI, 6, 3), 'Thy brilliant, wind-sped flames, bright Agni, spread in every direction: the divine ninefold destroyers overpower the woods, boldly crushing them;' and the yājyā (R̥g-veda V, 8, 3), 'The tribes of men glorify thee, Agni, the discerning knower of offerings, and most liberal dispenser of treasures; thee, O wealthy one, dwelling in secret, yet visible to all, loud-sounding offerer of sacrifice, glorying in ghee!' And if any one should desire to rid himself of his spiteful enemy, let him, with that object in view, perform this offering, and he verily will rid himself of him. This; then, is the rite performed in that case.
</details>

##  03
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

3. If, however, this burning (fire) were to come from this side, he may know that he will overcome his spiteful enemy; that he will become more glorious. But if his heart should at all misgive him, let him prepare a cake on eight potsherds for Agni Saṁvarga (the despoiler). The course of procedure thereof (is as follows):--he should recite those same seventeen kindling-verses; the two butter-portions relate to the slaying of Vr̥tra, the saṁyājyās are two Virāj verses; and the invitatory and offering formulas are as follows:--(R̥g-veda VIII, 75, 15; Vāj. S. XI, 71), 'From the far region cross thou over to the near: protect thou that wherein I am!' and the yājyā (R̥g-veda VIII, 75, 12), 'Desert us not in this great strife, like as the bearer of a load: win thou the spoil (saṁ vargaṁ jaya), win riches thou!' And if any one desire to despoil his spiteful enemy, let him, with that object in view, perform this offering, and he verily will despoil him. This, then, is the rite performed in that case.
</details>

##  04
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

4. They also say, 'If the lightning were to burn any one's (sacrificial fire), what rite and what expiation would there be in that case?' Let him know that light has come to him from above; that the gods have helped him, and that he will become more glorious. But if his heart should at all misgive him, let him prepare a cake on eight pot sherds for Agni Apsumat (abiding in the waters). The course of procedure thereof (is as follows):he should recite those same seventeen kindling-verses; the two butter-portions relate to the slaying of Vr̥tra; the saṁyājyās are two Virāj verses; and the invitatory and offering formulas are as follows:

 --(R̥g-veda VIII, 43, 9; Vāj. S. XII, 36), 'In the waters, O Agni, is thy seat; as such thou clingest to plants: being in (their) womb, thou art born again;' and the yājyā (Vāj. S. XII, 37), 'Thou art the child of the herbs, the child of the trees, the. child of all that is, O Agni, thou art the child of the waters;'--he thereby bespeaks peace on the part of those two (fires) for the safety of the Sacrificer's family and cattle. This, then, is the rite performed in that case.
</details>

##  05
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

5. They also say, 'If any one's fires were to come in contact with impure (profane) fires, what rite and what expiation would there be in that case?' Let him prepare a cake on eight potsherds for Agni Śuci (the bright),--the course of procedure thereof (is as follows):--he should recite those same seventeen kindling-verses; the two butter-portions relate to the slaying of Vr̥tra; the saṁyājyās are two Virāj verses; and the invitatory and offering formulas are as follows:--(R̥g-veda VIII, 44, 21), 'Agni of brightest work, the bright priest, the bright sage, brightly he shineth with offering fed;' and the yājyā (R̥g-veda VIII, 44, 17), 'Up rise thy flames, the bright, the pure, the shining, thy lights, O Agni;'--he thereby bespeaks peace to those two (kinds of fires) for the safety of the Sacrificer's family and cattle. This, then, is the rite performed in that case.
</details>

##  06
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

6. They also say, 'If the sun were to set on any one's Āhavanīya not yet having been taken out, what rite and what expiation would there be in that case?' Verily, those rays (of the sun) are the All-gods: they go from him, and that (Agnihotra) fails

him, because the gods go from him; and after that failure--whether he know it or know it not--those two (fires) say, 'He (the sun) has set on his unlifted (fire).' In such a case let him proceed thus:--having fastened a piece of yellow gold to a plant of darbha grass, let him order it to be taken towards the back (west): thus it is made of the form of him who shines yonder; and that (sun) being the day, it is made of the form of the day. And darbha plants are a means of purification [^egg_532]: he thus purifies it thereby. Having then kindled some firewood, let him order it to be taken forward (to the Āhavanīya hearth). A Brāhmaṇa descended from a R̥shi should take it out, for a Brāhmaṇa descended from a R̥shi represents all the deities: it is thus with the help of all the deities that he causes it (the fire) to succeed. Having laid it down, he returns, and having placed ghee on the Gārhapatya, taken it off, purified it and looked down on it [^egg_533], he takes ghee by four ladlings, and, having seized a log, he hastens up to the front; and, having put the log on the Āhavanīya, he bends his right knee, and offers with, 'To the All-gods, hail!' Even as one would call (back) to him a Brāhmaṇa staying at one's dwelling, when he goes away offended, by (presenting him with) a cow longing for the bull, so he thereby calls to him the All-gods; and they indeed acknowledge, and

[^egg_532]: 195:1 Viz. inasmuch as they are used as strainers; see I, 1, 3, 5; cf. also part i, p. 84, note 2.

[^egg_533]: 195:2 Whilst, on ordinary occasions, in clarifying butter for offering, the priest would first make the lady of the house look down on the ghee taken from the fire, before he himself (or the Sacrificer) does so (I, 3, 1, 19; 26); on the present occasion--as at offerings to the Fathers (Kāty. II, 7, 4 comm.)--the priest alone does so.

turn to, him. This, then, is the rite performed in that case.
</details>

##  07
<details><summary>Eggeling</summary>

7. They also say, 'If the sun were to rise over any one's Āhavanīya not having been taken out, what rite and what expiation would there be in that case?' Verily, those rays are the All-gods; and, having dwelt there, they now go from him, and that (Agnihotra) fails him, because the gods go from him; and after that failure--whether he know it or know it not--those two (fires) say, 'He (the sun) has risen on his unlifted (fire)' In such a case let him proceed thus:--having fastened a piece of white gold (silver) to a plant of darbha grass, let him order it to be taken towards the front: thus it is made of the form of the moon; and, the moon being the night, it is made of the form of the night. And darbha plants are a means of purification: he thus purifies it thereby. Having then kindled some firewood, let him order it to be taken after (the piece of silver). A Brāhmaṇa descended from a R̥shi should take it out, for a Brāhmaṇa descended from a R̥shi represents all the deities: it is thus with the help of all the deities that he causes it (the fire) to succeed. Having laid it down, he returns, and, having placed ghee on the Gārhapatya, taken it off, purified it and looked down upon it, he takes ghee in the same way as it was taken before, and, having seized a log, he hastens up to the front; and, having put the log on the Āhavanīya, he bends his right knee and offers with, 'To the All-gods, hail!' The import is the same as before; and, verily, no hurt and no harm of any kind befalls where that expiation is made. This, then, is the rite performed in that case.
</details>