+++
title = "02"

+++
The syntax of the simile in cd is surprisingly intricate. First, though ánu svadhā́m [/svadhā́m ánu] is a common syntagm (“following / in accord with (one’s) independent will,” e.g., I.33.11, 88.6, 165.5), the two words are not to be construed together here (sim. V.34.1). However, their common association probably accounts for the displacement of the rel. yám to the right of svadhā́even though ánu governs yám. Further, though yávam ‘grain’ in the simile logically matches svadhā́in the frame (at least in my interpr.), they are in different cases: nom. and acc. respectively (yáva- is masc. and must be acc.). The acc. is due to the fact that yáva- is several times obj. of √kṛṣ ‘plough’ (I.23.15, VIII.22.6). Thus, though, given the way Sanskrit similes work (with the verb held constant and the nominal elements matched), yávashould be nominative, the presence of the part. cárkṛṣat ‘ploughing’ has attracted it into the acc. appropriate to the obj. of that verb. The various tr. treat this difficult construction in various ways, but mostly bleach or manipulate the meaning of the pass. upyáte in ways that seem illegitimate to me -- starting with Gr, who glosses ánu … upyáte first as ‘sich jemandem nachwerfen’ but then waters this down to ‘nachgehen, nacheilen’. Ge’s “dem die Svadhā nachzieht” essentially follows Gr’s lead, an interpr. that makes nonsense of the simile (“wie der pflügende Stier der Gerste”), since the animal ploughing does not follow the sown grain but necessarily precedes it. (Without a ploughed furrow, there’s no place to sow.) WG give upyáte its due lexical value, but this again twists the simile into semantic knots: as with Ge’s interpr. the nom. bull (vṛ́ṣā) is made parallel to nom. svadhā́in syntactically satisfactory fashion, but this means that the bull is being sown, which is not at all semantically satisfactory: “dem hinterher die Svadhā gesät wird, wie der Stier der die Gerste pflügt.” Only Re seems to manage both syntax and sense, though his tr.

introduces considerable machinery: “lui derrière qui (sa propre) autonomie est semée comme (on fait en) labourant (le champ d’) orge, (lui que est) le dieu mâle.” What the hemistich is conveying is another issue. I do not understand how svadhā́- can be strewn. The picture evoked by the simile is of a powerful bull (not the usual plough-animal -- ideally they are more docile) pulling a plough, with lavish amounts of grain being scattered in the resulting furrow. It could be that the svadhā́- refers to the autonomous power of others, which gives way to (/is strewn down after) the progress of Indra the bull. Or his own svadhā́- is metaphorically sown to bear fruit in due course. But neither of these explanations do I find convincing.

