+++
title = "02"

+++
The vs. lacks an overt finite verb. With Ge I supply a form of √arc, picking up the main clause verb of vs. 1, abhy àrca of 1b. The instr. matíbhiḥ in our d is parallel to gīrbhíḥ … ā́bhíḥ of 1b.

The “seven inspired poets” (saptá víprāsaḥ) evokes the Saptarṣi, the “seven seers.” I am not certain whether the phrase here refers to the Saptarṣi and, further, whether they are identical to the Navagvas; the numbers suggestnnot. It is worth noting IV.42.8 asmā́kam átra pitáras tá āsan, saptá ṛ́ṣayaḥ “Our forefathers, the Seven Seers, were here,” with pitáraḥ, as here, as well as IX.92.2 ṛ́ṣayaḥ saptá víprāḥ, where the Seven Seers are identified as vípra-s.

The interpr. of the cmpd nakṣad-dābhá- given in the publ tr., ‘who catches up to the cheat’, cannot be correct. That tr. assumed a structure of the verbal governing cmpd type, like bharád-vāja-, but the accent is wrong. I therefore now see that a conventional tatpuruṣa interpr., with the 2nd member an agent nominal governing the first, should be the correct interpr.; so Gr ‘den Nahenden vernichtend’, Ge ‘der den Einholenden (?) täuscht’. (Curiously AiG does not seem to comment on this cmpd, despite its somewhat aberrant form) The cmpd thus conforms to the type hastagrābhá- ‘grasping the hand’, at least as to its 2nd member, but the first member appears to be the weak form of the pres. part. to the pres. nákṣati (√nakṣ ‘approach, reach’). I do not know, offhand, of any cmpds formally so constructed, and I am further puzzled by the apparent sense ‘tricking / cheating / outwitting the one who approaches’. Forms of the root √nakṣ generally have benevolent sense, as in the medial nákṣate in this very hymn (5d), where the song ‘catches up’ to Indra, or act.

nákṣanti in this same Indra cycle, VI.34.3, where thoughts and voices approach Indra, strengthening him, so there is no apparent reason for Indra to √dabh someone innocently coming up to him. I would emend the tr. to “him who outwits the one(s) approaching,” but still feel that the first member is concealing something I can’t crack. Some light on the cmpd may be shed by the verb forms ānaśúḥ and nákṣate in the following vss. (4b and 5d respectively; see below), and this set of vss. seem to share preoccupations and themes. MLW suggests that nakṣat could represent the root √naś ‘disappear, destroy’, with -s- suffix and desid. meaning (“who deceives the one who seeks to destroy him”). This is semantically much more attractive than the suggestions given above, but I am dubious about the morphology. The root √naś does not have a desid. at any period of the language, and in any case we should properly expect reduplicated *ninakṣa-. Moreover, non-caus. stems to this root have the intrans. sense ‘disappear, perish’. The forms in the immediate vicinity cited above that belong to naś / nakṣ ‘reach, attain’ would also cause interference.

Note the presence of both √dabh ‘trick, cheat’and √druh ‘deceive, lie’, with Indra depicted as engaging in the former activity, but possessing speech that is ádrogha- ‘undeceptive’. In 8a he attacks the “deceitful people” (jána- drúhvan-).

