+++
title = "05"

+++
This vs. is beset with difficulties, starting with the syntax, on which see Old.

The major problems are that there is no finite verb until iṣe in d and that it is unclear what the limits are of the rel. cl. marked by yásya in b. If we follow Old’s first option, that the rel. cl. occupies pādas a-c, the rel. prn. (towards the end of b) is positioned far too deeply in the clause. His 3rd option envisions a discontinuous rel. cl. partly embedded in and partly following the main cl., with the rel cl. verb being nákṣate in d -- a syntactic configuration that is simply impossible. His 2nd option, basically adopted by Ge as well, takes the rel. cl. as limited to vépī vákvarī yásya nū́gī́ḥ. This is more acceptable, though the rel. cl. would be definitely embedded, not only in the main clause but within a long acc. NP (tám … índram [REL CL] tuvigrābhám …). My own solution is similar to this, but limits the rel. cl. to yásya nū́gī́ḥ; this not only better accounts for the position of the particle nū́but also diminishes the effect of the embedding, because brief nominal rel. clauses, roughly equivalent to izafe constructions, seem to be at least marginally acceptable in RVic syntax. See esp. yó vídānaḥ in the previous hymn, VI.21.2. Scar’s (208) tr. appears to follow the same analysis, with the rel. cl. limited to “[das Lied,] das nun ihm gehört …” The root noun cmpd rabhodā́- is glossed by Scar (208) in the first instance as ‘Ungestüm, Gewalt, Kraft gebend, aufnehmend’, leaving it undetermined whether Indra bestows or assumes rábhas-, a question that Scar discusses in some detail without coming to a definite conclusion. Since, as Scar notes, there are several good exx. of rábhas- and related words as objects of medial ā́√dā ‘take, assume’ (e.g., I.145.3) and since the pāda in which the adj. is found seems to depict Indra on a rampage (tuvigrābháṃ tuvikūrmím “powerfully grasping, powerfully ranging”), the medial ‘assume’ value makes the most sense. Although ideally we might want the preverb ā́represented, root noun cmpds with the structure NOUN-PREV-√ seem to be rare to non-existent. (Cmpds of the type tveṣá-saṃ-dṛś- in 9b below aren’t counterexamples, because, as the accent shows, the root noun cmpd saṃdŕ̥ś- has been in turn incorporated into a bahuvrīhi), and in any case the outcome of rabhas-ādā́- would be hard to parse once sandhi rules had applied.

The verb of the main clause must be iṣe in d, but what it represents is uncertain. Gr (Nachtr., 1755) assigns it to √iṣ ‘send’, identifying it as a 1st sg.; Old tr.

as 3rd sg. ‘er regt sich … an’, which I assume means that he assigns it to √iṣ ‘send’, though he doesn’t comment on either root affiliation or morphology. Ge suggests a 3rd sg. either to √i (built like stuṣe, acdg. to him, though stuṣe is overwhelmingly first sg.) or to √iṣ (which √iṣ he doesn't say, though his tr. ‘sucht’ suggests √iṣ ‘seek’).

Lub gives iṣe as an independent lemma (p. 321), with a question mark, no gloss, and 4 occurrences. As my tr. ‘seeks’ indicates, I think it belongs to √iṣ ‘seek’ and is a 3rd sg. A number of other forms to this root take gātúm ‘way’ as obj. (pres. ichá- I.80.6, IV.18.10, VI.6.1; pf. īṣ- I.112.16, III.1.2). But what is the form? Almost the only way to get a 3rd sg. in -e (outside of archaic forms like duhé) is in the perfect, and as we just saw, other forms of the pf. of this root take the same object. I suggest that we do, or did, have a pf. here, whose expected form would be *īṣe. This putative form with heavy root syllable would in fact work metrically here. See also IV.23.6 and X.20.7, where I suggest the same underlying form for the transmitted form with light root vowel; the suggested long vowel is a significant metrical improvement in both passages. (Lub’s 4th ex. in VIII.46.17 is better taken as part of a cmpd. áramiṣe.) There are several ways to explain the short vowel. On the one hand, it can be wrongly extracted from combinations with preverbs like upeṣé in I.129.8, whose correct analysis is upa īṣé, but could also in principle contain *iṣé. On the other hand, the dat. iṣé to the root noun íṣ- ‘refreshment’, found in nearby VI.13.2, 17.14, might have influenced it. MLW suggests that it’s simply an archaic 3rd sg. middle pres., like duhé just cited - which would cut the Gordian knot.

Stepping back from the formal difficulties of the vs., we can try to fit its contents into the context of the hymn. The vs. seems to express the same questioning anxiety as vs. 4: do the singers -- and their song -- succeed in reaching Indra and attaining his good opinion, or does he respond to their approach with disdainful tricks? While asking this question, the song seeks her way and approaches what sounds like an intimidatingly formidable Indra, hoping for acceptance and favor.

That we have moved from the plural male poets/singers of vss. 2 and 4 to the lone female song (fem. gī́ḥ) makes the mismatch of power all the clearer. The verb nákṣate in the final clause brings us back to nakṣad-dābhá- in vs. 2.

