+++
title = "001"

+++
1 (297) Agni
Vāmadeva Gautama
20 verses: triṣṭubh, except aṣṭi 1, atijagatī 2, dhrti 3 ̥
This long and complex hymn contains an important account of the Vala myth: the  opening of the cave containing the imprisoned cows and their release. Although the

hero of this myth is, of course, ordinarily Indra, he does not appear in the hymn,  even in disguised fashion. Instead, the troop that usually aids him in this exploit,  the Aṅgirases, receive all the credit, though they are not mentioned by name. The  absence of Indra can presumably be ascribed to the fact that this is a hymn to Agni;  the larger question is why the Vala myth is appropriate to an Agni hymn. Here the  answer must be the connection of both gods with the dawn: the ruddy Vala cows are  regularly identified as the dawns, and the ritual fire is kindled at dawn. Indeed the  Vala myth in this hymn is introduced by a reference to Agni’s primordial birth (vs.  11), and the (unnamed) Aṅgirases are identified as his begetters (vs. 12): perhaps  they free the embryonic Agni enclosed “in the nest of the bull” (vss. 11–12) as they  do the Vala cows. We have seen the connection between the birth of the ritual fire  and the Vala myth elsewhere, for example, in III.31, an Indra hymn, where it was  also mediated by dawn.
The Vala myth is embedded within verses more conventionally devoted to Agni.  The first five verses address Agni directly. He is first reminded of his original instal lation by the gods and their purpose in so doing (vs. 1), and in the next four verses  Agni is urged to use his closeness to Varuṇa in order to intercede for us mortals  with that god. The next four verses praise Agni in the 3rd person, concentrating on  his present state. Verses 10–12 form the transition to the Vala myth; in fact verse  10 might seem to go naturally with 6–9, but, with its reference to the treasure of  the gods, it forms a ring with verse 18, which closes the Vala section. The heart of  the Vala narrative consists of verses 13–17. The final two verses (19–20) provide a  summarizing praise of Agni.
## 1
You, o Agni, the god, did the gods of equal fervor install for always as  the spoked wheel (of the sacrifice)—
with such a purpose did they install you:
[Gods addressing mortals:] “Sacrifice to the immortal [=Agni] among  the mortals; beget the god god-directed and discerning;
beget each one [=every new fire] as god-directed and discerning.”
## 2
Agni, turn here to your brother Varuṇa, to the gods with your favor—to  him who yearns for sacrifice,
your oldest (brother) who yearns for sacrifice,
the truthful son of Aditi who supports the settled domains, the king who  supports the settled domains.
## 3
O comrade, turn to your comrade, like a wheel to a swift (horse), like  chariotry at speed,
for us, o wondrous one, at speed.
Agni, you (will) find grace in company with Varuṇa, with the all-radiant  Maruts.
To press out progeny, o blazing one, make luck; for us, wondrous one,  make luck.
## 4
You, Agni, knowing one—for us may you please placate through prayer  the anger of god Varuṇa. As best sacrificer, best conveyor (of oblations), constantly blazing,
release all hatreds from us.
## 5
You, Agni, come down close to us with your help; be nearest to us at  the breaking of this dawn.
Through sacrifice placate Varuṇa for us, as you give to us. Pursue his  grace; be easy for us to invoke.
## 6
Of this well-portioned god here his manifestation is the fairest, the most  brilliant one among mortals.
Gleaming like the heated ghee of the inviolable (cow), (the
manifestation) of the god is eagerly sought like the largesse of a
milk-cow.
## 7
Three times do these highest births of his come into existence—the  eagerly sought births of the god Agni.
Enveloped within the limitless, he has come here—a blazing flame, ever  shining for the stranger.
## 8
As messenger he strives toward all seats, the Hotar whose chariot is  golden, whose tongue is amid the pleasures [=oblations],
whose horses are ruddy, he wondrous, far-radiant, always pleasurable  like a banquet abounding in food.
## 9
He makes men perceive [=instructs them], as their tie to the sacrifice of  Manu; they lead him forth with a great halter.
He dwells peacefully in his houses, assuring success; the god attains the  fellowship of the mortal.
## 10
Let Agni, knowing (the way), lead us to the treasure, which was  apportioned to him by the gods.
(The treasure) which all the immortals created with their insight, which  Father Heaven as begetter (created)—(that) they sprinkled (so it
became) real.
## 11
He was born first in the dwelling places, at the base of this great realm,  as his womb,
footless, headless, concealing his two ends, continually retracting (his  limbs [=flames]), in the nest of the bull.
## 12
The troop [=Aṅgirases] set forth first amid admiration to the womb of  truth, to the nest of the bull—
The eagerly sought youth, wondrous, far-radiant [=Agni]—the seven  dear ones [=Aṅgirases or their music] begat (him) for the bull.
## 13
Our forefathers here, belonging to Manu, stationed themselves in front,  panting over the truth.
They [=the forefathers/Aṅgirases] drove up those with a rock as their  pen, the good milkers within the cave, the ruddy dawns being
called to.
## 14
They [=the forefathers/Aṅgirases] cleaned themselves, after having split  the stone. This (deed) of theirs the others proclaimed all about.

Lacking ropes to hold the livestock, they sang the decisive act: “They  found the light! They sought it with their insightful thoughts!”
## 15
Those with their mind set on cattle (opened up) the solid, knotted-up,  enclosing stone that held the cows.
The firmly fixed pen full of cows did the men, the fire-priests, open up  with divine speech.
## 16
They brought to mind the first name of the milk-cow; thrice seven  highest (names) of the mother they found.
(The cows) recognizing it [=the name], bellowed out (to the men), (like)  maidens (announcing their bridegroom choice). The ruddy one
[=Dawn] became manifest with the glorious (name) of the cow.
## 17
The bilious darkness disappeared; heaven lightened; the radiance of the  goddess Dawn arose.
The Sun mounted the lofty fields, looking upon the straight and the  crooked among mortals.
## 18
And then afterward having awakened they looked about; and then they  held up the treasure apportioned by heaven—
all the gods (did so) in all the houses. O Mitra, Varuṇa—let it
[=treasure] come into existence (also) for our insightful thought.
## 19
I would call here blazing Agni as Hotar, the best sacrificer who carries  all burdens.
He drilled, seemingly, the gleaming udder of the cows, which was
purified like the stalk of the plant poured in circles [=soma].
## 20
As the Aditi of all those worthy of the sacrifice [=gods], the guest of all  the sons of Manu [=men],
let Agni Jātavedas, choosing the aid of the gods, become very gracious.