+++
title = "002"

+++
2 (298)
Agni
Vāmadeva Gautama
20 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn shares a number of features, including phraseology, with the previous  one: like IV.1 it begins with the installation of Agni as the mediator of the sacri ficial exchange between men and gods, and it contains a brief, Indra-less account  of the Vala myth (vss. 15–17), with the Aṅgirases explicitly compared to the poets  of today besieging the treasure-holding pen of the sacrifice. However, the first few  verses of the hymn (vss. 2–4) enlarge on Agni’s role as messenger announced in  verse 1. The hymn also contains an elaborate treatment (vss. 6–10, 13–14) of the  various ritual services rendered to Agni by the sacrificers, and Agni is urged to dis tinguish between those who do such service and other mortals (esp. vss. 11–12). The  final two verses (19–20) summarize the fire-worship that has just been performed by the sacrificers, both actions (“we have performed,” vs. 19) and words (“we have  spoken,” vs. 20), a common hymn-ending device. Preceding them is a mysterious  verse (18), whose position suggests that it closes the Vala myth, but whose content  seems at least superficially unconnected.
## 01
He who has been installed as the immortal among the mortals, the god  among the gods, the truthful one, the spoked wheel (of the sacrifice), Hotar, best sacrificer—to blaze with his greatness, to be roused by the  oblations of Manu: Agni.
## 02
O son of strength, o Agni, created here for us today, between both  created (peoples [=men and gods])
you shuttle as messenger, o high one, having yoked your (horses) with  their testicles stretched out (behind from speed), (the horses) bullish  and blazing.
## 03
The two chestnut steeds of truth, strong(-backed), ghee-backed,
I consider to be swiftest (even in comparison) with mind.
Yoking these two ruddy ones, you shuttle between (all of) you gods and  the clans here, the mortals.
## 04
Among those (gods), convey Aryaman, Varuṇa, Mitra, Indra and Viṣṇu,  the Maruts, and the Aśvins
just here, to the person providing good oblations, o Agni—you who have  good horses, good chariot, good rewards.
## 05
O Agni, a sacrifice bringing cows, sheep, horses, and manly comrades is  never to be spurned.
Bringing refreshment and progeny, o Lord, it is long wealth, broad of  base, fit for the assembly.
## 06
Whoever will bear fuel to you though sweating, or will scorch his head in  serving you,
for him you will become a self-powerful protector, Agni. Make for him  wide protection from everyone who bears malice.
## 07
Whoever will bring food to you just as you seek food, will whet (you)  down, will raise (you) up as the gladdening guest,
will, seeking the gods, kindle (you) here in his dwelling—in him let
wealth, rich in gifts, be steadfast.
## 08
Whoever at evening, whoever at dawn will celebrate you, or offering an  oblation will make you a dear (friend)
in his own house—like a horse with much spurring you will carry that  pious man out of narrow straits.
## 09
Whoever will perform pious service for you, Agni, the immortal one,  whoever, with his offering ladle raised, will offer friendly service
to you,
that one, having labored to exhaustion, will not stay distant from wealth,  nor will the narrow straits of the malicious enclose him.

## 10
Whose ceremony you will enjoy, Agni—a god enjoying the
well-positioned ceremony of a mortal, while you give—
just his ritual offering will be pleasing, o youngest one—(the man)  whose strengtheners we will be when he does (you) honor.
## 11
Insight and lack of insight will the knowing one [=Agni] distinguish,  like backs, straight and crooked, (like) mortals.
And for the sake of wealth and good descendants for us, o god, both  grant Diti [/Giving] and make wide space for Aditi [/Boundlessness]. 12. The poet [=Agni] have the undeceivable poets instructed, fixing him  down fast in the houses of Āyu.
From there, Agni, you should look with your eyes upon those who are  easily seen and upon the unerring ones (who go) along the ways of  the stranger.
## 13
You, Agni, offering good guidance, to the cantor, to the one with  pressed soma who does honor, o youngest one,
bring a treasure, broad and gleaming—to the one who labors to  exhaustion, to help him, o excitable one, you who fill the settled  domains.
## 14
Then while we [=sacrificing priests] have acted, with feet, with hands,  with bodies, in serving you, Agni,
like those making a chariot with the work of (our/their) two arms, those  of good insight [=poets] have held fast to the truth, panting over it. 15. Then as the seven inspired poets might we be born from mother Dawn,  as the foremost ritual adepts for men.
Might we become sons of heaven, Aṅgirases. Might we break the rock  that holds the prize, as we blaze.
## 16
Then like our further forefathers of old, panting over the truth, o Agni, those reciting solemn speech (now) will come to the blazing (udder of  sacrifice [=Vala]), to visionary power. Splitting (heaven and) earth,  they (will) unclose the ruddy (cows [=dawns]).
## 17
Those of good work and good light, seeking the gods, smelting the  races of the gods like metal,
they went blazing, strengthening Agni and Indra, besieging the  cattle pen.
## 18
He [=Agni?] watched over them like (a herdsman) the herds of livestock  in a cattle-rich (pasture)—watched over the race of gods that was  nearby, o strong one.
The Urvaśīs yearned also for (the race of) men, also for the increase of  the stranger, of Āyu to come.
## 19
We have acted for you; we have been good workers—(as) the radiant  dawns have clothed themselves in truth—
we always grooming in many ways unfailing Agni, beautifully gleaming,  the dear eye of the god. 20. These solemn speeches have we spoken to you the poet, o Agni, you  ritual adept: enjoy them.
Blaze up; make us better off. Extend to us great riches, o you of many  favors.