+++
title = "003"

+++
3 (299) Agni
Vāmadeva Gautama
16 verses: triṣṭubh
In the very last verse of this hymn (16) the poet announces that he has produced  counsels, enigmas, secret words, and poetry for Agni: these verbal products presum ably make up the rest of the hymn. It begins fairly straightforwardly, however, with  a treatment (vss. 1–3) of the kindling of the ritual fire, as so often at the beginning  of Agni hymns. But starting with verse 4 a certain worried tone becomes apparent,  about the relationship between the poet and the god Agni. The next four verses  (5–8) contain anxious questions: what is Agni planning to say to various gods about  us? These questions reflect the uncertainty produced by the ritual model: Agni is the  ritual mediator between men and gods, and so in some sense everything the gods  learn about us mortals is filtered through Agni, who may be—we worry—an unreli
able witness. The anxiety returns in verses 13–14, especially the former, in which the  poet worries that Agni will punish him for the deeds of his relatives and acquain tances. In between (vss. 9–12) are four verses, each beginning with the charged word  r̥téna “by truth,” introducing a mixture of ritual and mythic activities, including
one verse (11) on the Vala myth, a preoccupation of the Agni hymns in IV. What ties the various parts of the hymn together is not entirely clear, and it  may be that the poet’s final verse, listing several types of verbal material, is meant  to indicate that the hymn consists of a disparate collection of his works, although  attempting to assign those labels to the different parts of the hymn would probably  be taking the conceit too far.
## 1
Make [=ignite] him here, the king, the Rudra of your ceremony, the  Hotar whose sacrifice comes true in the two world-halves,
Agni of golden form—(make him) for help for you in the face of
unexpected thundering.
## 2
Here is the womb that we made for you. (It is/You are) like an eager wife,  richly dressed, for her husband.
Enveloped, sit down facing our way: here are (hymns) facing you, o very  knowing one.
## 3
To him [=Agni] who listens undistracted to the thought, to the one  drawing the gaze of men, the very gracious one—o ritual adept—
to the god, the immortal, chant the chant, the god whom the (human)  presser invokes like the honey-pressing pressing stone.

## 4
Agni, at least become aware of this (ritual) labor of ours, of (our  expression of) truth, o perceiver of truth, as one who is very
concerned.
When will our solemn words become your feasting companions? When  will your fellowship (come to) be in our house?
## 5
How will you complain about this to Varuṇa, o Agni, how to Heaven?  What is our offense?
How will you speak to Mitra the rewarder, to Earth? What to
Aryaman, to Fortune?
## 6
What (will you say), Agni, having grown strong on the holy places  [=ritual hearths], what to the Wind projecting strength, charging to  beauty,
(what) to the earth-circling (chariot) of the Nāsatyas, for it to appear?  What will you say, Agni, to man-smiting Rudra?
## 7
How (will you speak) to great Pūṣan who brings prosperity, what to  Rudra, the good combatant [/very generous], for him to give the  oblation,
what to wide-striding Viṣṇu, (for him to give) semen? What will you say,  Agni, to (Rudra’s) lofty arrow?
## 8
How (will you speak) to the troop of Maruts, for truth? How to the  lofty Sun? When you are asked,
(how) will you answer to Aditi, to powerful (Indra?)? Send (our  thought) to its goal, all the way to heaven—(you are) the observant  one, o Jātavedas.
## 9
With truth I reverently invoke the (mystical) truth set down [=acquired]  from the cow: the raw one [=cow] and the cooked, honeyed (milk)  belong together, Agni.
Though she is black, she is swollen with the gleaming gush, with milk  for nourishing offspring.
## 10
Because by truth even the bull, the male Agni, was anointed with the  milk on the top [=cream, that is, butter],
not bucking, he went about conferring vigor: the bull as Pr̥śni milked  gleaming (milk/semen) from his udder.
## 11
By truth they threw open the rock, having split it. The Aṅgirases roared  along with the cows.
For blessing the men besieged the dawn; the sun became visible when  the fire was born.
## 12
By truth the immortal, unharmable goddesses, the waters with their  honeyed floods, o Agni—
like a competitor beating a tattoo at the start(ing posts)—should set to  running, to stream forever.
## 13
Don’t ever chase after (us, as) the specter of a nobody, a crooked man— neither of a tricky neighbor, nor of a friend. Do not pursue the debt of a dishonest brother (against us), Agni. May  we not pay for the “skill” of a cheating partner.
## 14
Guard us, Agni, with your guards, ever guarding when you are gratified,  you good combatant [/very generous].
Spring toward rigid constraint and break it apart; smash demonic force,  even though it has grown great.
## 15
By reason of these recitations become well disposed, Agni; by reason of  our thoughts caress these prizes, o champion.
And enjoy the sacred formulations, Aṅgiras. May the chant favored by  the gods bring harmony to you.
## 16
All these devices, the secret words, are for you who know, o ritual  adept, Agni—
the enigmas, the poetic compositions are for you, the wise poet. I, the  inspired one, have pronounced them in composed thoughts and
solemn speeches.