+++
title = "004"

+++
4 (300)
Agni the Demon-Smasher
Vāmadeva Gautama
15 verses: triṣṭubh
The Anukramaṇī names Agni Demon-Smasher (Rakṣo-han) as the divinity of this  hymn. This ascription is certainly apt for the first five verses with their vividly hos tile imagery, but starting with verse 6 the benefits that accrue to those who properly  worship Agni are described (vss. 6–10). We identify ourselves as those worshipers  in verses 8–9, and in verse 11 (see also vs. 8) the poet boasts of his hereditary poetic  gifts, which enable him to get the attention and good favor of Agni. He explicitly  identifies the source of his poetic skill as his father Gotama, but implicitly, through  his phraseology, he also identifies himself with the Aṅgirases, the legendary poets  who broke open the treasure cave of Vala, a myth that is much on the mind of the  poet of these Agni hymns in IV (see, e.g., IV.1.13–17; 2.15–17; 3.11). The remaining  verses (12–15) call on Agni to protect us with his protectors (presumably his flames)  and to grant other blessings. The demons return in the last half verse (15cd).
## 01
Make your leading edge like a broad onslaught. Drive like an aggressive  king with his entourage,
mowing down (enemies) along your thirsting onslaught. You are an  archer: pierce the demons with your hottest (flames).
## 02
Your swirling (flames) fly swiftly; touch down boldly following (them  [/your onslaught]) as you keep blazing.
Unfettered, o Agni, with your tongue hurl out bursts of heat, flying  (embers), firebrands in all directions.564 IV.4
## 03
Hurl out your spies against (the foes), as the swiftest one. Become the  undeceivable protector of this clan here.
Whoever curses us at a distance, who nearby, o Agni, let no one defy  your veering course.
## 04
Stand up, Agni; stretch yourself out [/stretch (your bow)] against  (them). Then scorch down the foes, o you whose missiles are sharp. Whoever has directed hostility toward us, o kindled one, burn him  down like a dry thicket.
## 05
Become upright; pierce against (them)—away from us. Make your  heavenly (forms?) manifest, Agni.
Slacken the taut (bows) of those incited by sorcerers; kin or non-kin,  pulverize the rivals.
## 06
That one knows your good will, o youngest one, who has set the course  for a sacred formulation like this.
For him you have flashed open the doors to all the day-bright (days), to  the riches, to the brilliant things of the stranger.
## 07
Agni, let just him be rich in portions, rich in gifts, who with regular  oblation, who with solemn words
seeks to please you during his own lifetime, in his own dwelling. All  (days) (will be) day-bright for him. This desire (of his) will come true. 8. I recite a good thought to you [/recite (=praise) your good will]. Hear  it, inclined our way. (Like) a “Favorite” wife, let this song bring  harmony to you.
We who have good horses and good chariots would groom you. In us  you should uphold lordly powers through the days.
## 09
Here should (a man) attend on you much in person—you illuminator of  the evening, shining through the days.
Playful and well disposed, we would serve you, we who have
surmounted the brilliant things of (other) men.
## 10
Whoever, rich in horses and gold, drives up to you, Agni, with a chariot  full of goods,
his protector do you become and the (ritual) partner of him who will  regularly enjoy your guest-friendship.
## 11
Thanks to my lineage, I powerfully break (it [=the rock full of  treasures]) with my speeches. This [=speech/poetic gift?] has come  down to me from my father Gotama.
Take note of this speech of ours here, o Hotar, youngest one, very  effective, as friend of the house.
## 12
These—sleepless, (ever) advancing, very friendly, tireless, never  wearying, keeping the wolf away—
these protectors of yours, directed to a single goal—let them settle  down and protect us, o ungullible Agni. 13. Agni, your protectors who, watching, guarded blind Māmateya  [=Dīrghatamas] from ill-faring,
those of good (ritual) action has the possessor [/knower] of everything  [=Agni] guarded. Though wishing to damage, the cheats did no
damage at all.
## 14
Through you may we—companions aided by you, in your guidance— attain prizes.
Sweeten both of the lauds [=for both the gods and the patrons], you  who are reality itself. Set them in order, you unabashed one.
## 15
With this kindling stick we would do honor to you, Agni. Accept the  praise being chanted.
Burn the demons who lack chant; protect us from deceit, from scorn,  from calumny, o you with Mitra’s might.