+++
title = "005"

+++
5 (301)
Agni Belonging to All Men [Agni Vaiśvānara]
Vāmadeva Gautama
15 verses: triṣṭubh
A very difficult and enigmatic hymn: this is not surprising because its subject seems  to be poetic speech, its hidden meanings and its mysterious sources, so that the  form of the hymn replicates its theme. The signature word is padám, which occurs  six times in the hymn (vss. 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12); it is a significant pun, meaning both  “track/footstep” and “word,” and in the full phrase “hidden track of the cow”  (padám...gór ápagūḷham, vs. 3) it refers to the arduous pursuit of cryptic meaning  by way of verbal art. As often when R̥gvedic poets reflect on their craft, this poet  wonders about the source of his own poetic inspiration and worries about the skills  of other poets. Although some scholars consider this hymn to reflect a poetic con test, we do not see a formal contest here, but simply the usual anxiety about poetic  rivals. This poet identifies the source of his poetic gift as the god Agni (vss. 2–3, also  12), who bestowed this vision on him, though he was just a simple man (vss. 2, 6).  He puzzles over the fact that thoroughly evil men can nonetheless also have the gift  of poetry (vss. 4–5), but decides that because he (the poet) is morally uncompro
mised, Agni will shoulder the extra burden of bringing his (the poet’s) poetic vision  to success (vs. 6). When he returns to the rival poets in verse 14, he is full of scorn  for their talent: the patronage of Agni has clearly spelled the difference for our poet.
The exact middle of the hymn (vss. 7–8, esp. 7cd) is an omphalos, which dis plays in daunting fashion the control the poet has gained, thanks to Agni, over the  encrypted mysteries of the sacrifice and its verbal expression. Verse 7 ends with  the impossible hapax jábāru. There have been various attempts to interpret and  etymologize this word, beginning with Yāska, but in our opinion this is beside the  point: the word is a sort of abracadabra, a mystical expression, and the half verse

in which it appears encapsulates the profound and transformative secret of the sac rifice. This secret is under the protection of Agni in verse 8, but the poet has learned  at least some of it.
The following two verses (9–10) reflect on the dawn ritual and the kindling of the  sacrificial fire then, though the mysteries are rather easier to penetrate than those in  the omphalos verses. The poet then expresses hope for gifts from Agni in exchange  for his own formulation of the truth (vs. 11) and asks somewhat nervous questions  about how and whether he will gain these gifts (vss. 12–13). As already noted, verse  14 heaps scorn on rival poets with fewer verbal skills. The final verse is conventional  praise of Agni, expressed in the aorist of the immediate past, indicating that the  morning ritual and the hymn have come to an end.
Another Vaiśvānara hymn, VI.9, follows much the same trajectory as this one,  with similar reflections on the craft of poetry and the inspiration received from Agni.
## 01
How might we, in concert, do service to Vaiśvānara, to Agni who gives  rewards; how might we serve his lofty light?
With his unfailing lofty growth he propped (heaven) like a post a bulwark. 2. Do not spurn (him), the self-empowered god who gave this bounty to me,  a mortal,
a simple man—he shrewd, discriminating, the immortal Vaiśvānara,  most manly, youthfully exuberant Agni.
## 03
A great melody (he gave)—the doubly lofty, sharp-pointed,
thousand-spurting, powerful bull—
having found the word hidden like the track of the cow. Agni has
proclaimed the inspired thought to me.
## 04
Agni, the sharp-fanged, will snap at them with his hottest flame—he who  (also) grants good rewards—
at them who violate the ordinances of Varuṇa, the enduring ordinances  dear to Mitra who attends to them.
## 05
(You) pursuing (it [=the hidden word/track]) like brotherless maidens  pursuing (men), (you) of evil ways like wives cheating (on?) their husbands, though being wicked, untruthful, untrue, you [=other singers] begot this  deep track [/profound word].
## 06
(But) this (track/word) is mine, o pure Agni! Since I, however small,  do not violate (the ordinances), for me you have boldly placed the
thought, like a heavy burden,
lofty and deep, on your own youthfully exuberant, sevenfold “back”  along with the pleasurable offering.
## 07
May my hymnic vision, purifying through its conception, reach just to him  [=Agni?] now, to the same one in the same way (as always [at the ritual]). On the hide of the grain [=ritual grass?] is the lovely (udder/name)
of Pr̥śni [=sacrifice]; on the tip of the mount has (the mystical
expression? the milk?) “jabāru” (also? been) mounted. 8. What (part) of this speech is to be proclaimed to me? They confide  privately what was deposited in secret [=the track/word]—
that they have uncovered it like the “water” of the ruddy (cows). He  [=Agni] protects the dear tip of the mount, the track of the bird.
## 09
Here is this great face of the great ones [=Sun], which the ruddy cow  [=Dawn] followed (as it went) in front.
She [?] found it shining hidden in the track of truth, going quickly,
quick-streaming.
## 10
Then having flashed with his mouth, in company with his parents  [=kindling sticks], he [=Agni] pondered the hidden, dear (udder/
name) of Pr̥śni,
(the udder/name) which is in the furthest track/footstep of the mother  cow, though (also just) nearby—(Agni having flashed) with the
tongue of his bullish, extended flame.
## 11
I have proclaimed the truth with reverence, on being asked, with hope  of you [=your bounty], Jātavedas, if it [=the truth] is here.
You hold sway over this, all of it—whatever wealth is in heaven and  what on the earth.
## 12
Is some of this wealth for us? What is the treasure? As the perceptive  one, Jātavedas, you have announced to us
in secret the highest (track/footstep) of this (ritual) road of ours, on  which we have gone, like the spurned going on an empty track.
## 13
What is the (finish) line, (what) the trajectories, what the desired  (wealth)? Might we go to it, like quick (horses) to a prize.
When will the goddesses, the wives of the immortal one, the Dawns  stretch toward us with the color of the sun?
## 14
Those who fail to satisfy with their insipid, meager, stunted speech, easy  to attack—
what then do they say here, Agni? Without weapons, let them be
accompanied by (speech) that does not come true.
## 15
Of him, being kindled for beauty, the bull, the good one—his face  shines here in the house.
Gleamingly clad, with a form lovely to see, he of many favors has
flashed like a dwelling (flashing) with wealth.