+++
title = "006"

+++
6 (302) Agni
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is not at the same level of complexity as the previous Agni hymns in  Maṇḍala IV; it does, however, contain some difficult hapaxes (see vss. 7, 8, 10) in

its second half. The hymn in quite ritually focused, particularly in its first half (vss.  1–5). The mention of the post (vs. 3) and Agni’s circumambulation (vss. 3–5) identi fies the ritual in question in these verses, an animal sacrifice: as we know from later  detailed accounts of the ritual, the animals were tethered to the post before sacri
fice, and fire was carried around them. See III.8, dedicated to the sacrificial post. The subject of the second half is less clear, the ritual references both less precise  and more poetically enigmatic. It is perhaps simply the kindling of fire at dawn,  as so often, with striking and shifting descriptions of its birth and of its resulting  flames. The most difficult part of the hymn is the first half of verse 7, and its trans lation here is speculative.
Although the hymn seems to fall into two halves, there is no reason to suppose  that it is not a unitary composition. The exact ritual references of the first part  simply open out to a general treatment of the ritual fire, by way of a transition (vss.  5–6) mentioning the fearsome aspects of Agni, perhaps suggested by the associa
tion with animal sacrifice.
## 1
Stand upright, o Agni, Hotar of the ceremony, as superior sacrificer for  us at the divine assemblage.
Since you dominate every thought, you further the inspiration even of  the ritual adept.
## 2
As ungullible Hotar he has been set among the clans, Agni, gladdening,  forethoughtful at the rites of distribution.
Like Savitar he has braced his radiant beam upright; like a builder he  propped his smoke up to heaven.
## 3
The (offering ladle) is held out, beautifully glowing, full of gifts,
covered with ghee. (Agni), chosen (as Hotar), is making respectful
circumambulation before the divine assemblage.
The post (standing) up, like a new-born foal [?], anoints the (sacrificial)  animals—itself well placed, well grounded.
## 4
Once the ritual grass has been strewn and the fire kindled, the Adhvaryu  has stood upright, in delight.
Like a cowherd Agni circles around (the sacrificial animals) with triple  toil—he chosen as Hotar from of old.
## 5
With measured pace the Hotar goes around by himself—Agni,
gladdening, of honeyed speech, truthful.
His flames run like prizewinners. All creatures fear (him) when he has  flashed.
## 6
Auspicious is your manifestation, o Agni of the lovely face, and it is dear,  though you are terrible and capricious.
Since they have not covered your flame with darkness, the palls of smoke  have not placed their smudge on your body—
## 7
This (body) of (him) the devourer [/fire], which has not been obstructed  from birth, nor have his mother and father ever (been obstructed) in  their seeking (for him)— therefore, well installed like an envoy, pure Agni shines among the clans  stemming from Manu.
## 8
Agni, whom the twice five sisters dwelling together [/similarly clad]  [=fingers] have begotten among the clans stemming from Manu—
awakening at dawn, gleaming like the tooth of one enveloped in flame,  with a good mouth, sharp like an axe.
## 9
These golden (horses) of yours, Agni, bathed in ghee, the chestnuts  directed straight, directed well,
the ruddy, bullish ones with testicles stretched out (behind
from speed)—these wondrous ones have “called” the divine
assemblage here—
## 10
These rays of yours, Agni, which proceed, overwhelming, irrepressible,  turbulent,
are like falcons going the distance to the goal, very noisy like the
Marutian troop.
## 11
A sacred formulation has been made for you, o kindled one. (The  priest) will recite the solemn speech to (you as you) sacrifice. (Now
you—) apportion (treasures).
The fire-priests have set down Agni as the Hotar of Manu, giving
homage to (him as) “Laud of Āyu.”