+++
title = "007"

+++
7 (303)
Agni
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: jagatī 1, anuṣṭubh 2–6, triṣṭubh 7–11
Although this hymn consists of verses in three different meters, it was clearly con ceived as a unity, as was already seen by Oldenberg (1888: 153). The hymn begins,  as often, with the ritual installation of the current sacrificial fire, which is set against  the backdrop of the primal installation of Agni, treated in verses 1–5, in a non insistent ring structure. Verses 6 and 7, though in different meters, express the cen tral mysteries of Agni and therefore define a sort of omphalos. Verse 6 is structured  as a series of paradoxes concerning the nature of fire. Verse 7, quite reminiscent of  the omphalos verse IV.5.7, refers to the elements of the sacrifice in riddling fashion.  The hymn then turns to Agni’s role as messenger between Earth and Heaven (vss.  8–9, 11, first mentioned in vs. 3), with some vivid metaphorical description of fire’s  appearance and its consuming of flammable “food” (vss. 9–11).
## 01
This one has been installed here first by the installers, as best sacrificing  Hotar, to be reverently invoked in the ceremonies,
whom Apnavāna and the Bhr̥gus made to shine, brilliant in the woods,  extending to every clan.

## 02
Agni, when will there be manifestation of you, the god, in the  regular order?
For it was therefore that the mortals seized you as the one to be  reverently invoked in the clans—
## 03
(The mortals) looking at (you,) truthful and discriminating (/widely  observable) like heaven with its stars,
(you) who create laughter [=fire’s crackling] for all ceremonies in  every house,
## 04
(You,) the swift messenger of Vivasvant, who sur(mount) all the  domains,
the Āyus brought (you) here as beacon, associated with the Bhr̥gus, for  every clan.
## 05
Him as observant Hotar did they set down in the regular order— gladdening, pure-flamed, best sacrificing, throughout his seven
domains—
## 06
Him, enveloped in mothers who are ever new, enveloped in wood (yet)  unfixed,
set in hiding though brilliant, easily found but aiming who
knows where.
## 07
When, at the separation of the grain [=spreading of the ritual grass?], at  the same udder [=the sacrifice?], on the domain of truth [=the ritual  ground?], the gods take pleasure,
great Agni, on whom the oblation is bestowed with reverence, the  truthful one, is always pursuing (his missions) for the ceremony. 8. You, as the knowing one, pursue your missions for the ceremony  between the two world-halves, observing them both together.
You speed as the messenger chosen from of old, since you know better  the means of ascending to heaven.
## 09
Black is your course, (though) you are gleaming; your light is in front.  The flickering beam of your (various) wondrous forms is single
when (your mothers, though) not impregnated, conceive an embryo,  and you, even immediately at birth, become a messenger.
## 10
Immediately at birth, his strength comes to light, when the wind fans  his flame.
He twists his sharp tongue into the thickets. Even hard foods he  fragments with his jaws.
## 11
When thirstily he has grown with (his flame) thirsting for food,  he makes the thirsty (flame) into his messenger—youthfully
exuberant Agni.
He accompanies the roaring of the wind as he grinds down (the bush);  he incites it like a swift (horse); the steed is impelled.