+++
title = "010"

+++
10 (306)
Agni
Vāmadeva Gautama
8 verses: padapaṅkti, except mahāpadapaṅkti 5
This uncomplicated hymn begins with the sacrificial here-and-now and the poet’s  hope for the success of the sacrifice currently being performed. He then praises  Agni’s participation in the sacrifice, his brilliant appearance, and his protection of  his mortal worshiper, ending with a prayer for good partnership with the gods and  a strong statement of the umbilical tie between gods and men, as mediated through  the sacrificial Agni. The image of the sacrifice as the shared udder of gods and men  is also found in nearby Agni hymns: IV.7.7 and by implication IV.5.7.
Although the content of the hymn is straightforward, the meter is quite unusual,  indeed confined to this one hymn (see Oldenberg 1888: 98; Arnold 1905: 239–40).  It is thus not surprising that the Anukramaṇī’s characterization of it, reproduced  in the heading above, is not illuminating and is in fact somewhat misleading. Each  verse consists of a series of five-syllable pādas (three per verse, except for vs. 5  containing four) followed by a single triṣṭubh pāda. The short pentads tend to pres
ent abbreviated syntactic constituents, such as similes or tightly organized noun phrases, while the culminating triṣṭubh provides the frame into which the earlier  mosaic pieces can be fitted. However, as the hymn progresses, the group of pen tad pādas begins to operate independently of the triṣṭubh finale. In this hymn the  medium is in many ways the message.
## 01
Agni, this (sacrifice) today may we bring to success with lauds of you— like a horse with praises,
like a good resolve—(so that it) touches your heart.
## 02
For, Agni, it is therefore that you have become the charioteer of good  resolve,
of skill that brings success, of lofty truth.
## 03
By reason of these recitations of ours become inclined our way like  sunlight,
well disposed with all your faces, o Agni.
## 04
Singing with these songs, we would do pious service for you today,  o Agni.
Your gusts thunder forth like (those) of heaven.
## 05
Your manifestation is the sweetest, Agni—now by day, now by night. For beauty it shines like a gold ornament in the nearness.
## 06
Like purified ghee your body is spotless gleaming gold.
This (flame?) of yours shines like a gold ornament, autonomous one. 7. Because, o Agni, even a hateful act already committed you drive away,  bag and baggage,
from the mortal who sacrifices just so, o truthful one,
## 08
Let our comradeship be propitious, our brotherhood, o Agni, (with  respect) to you gods.
This navel [=Agni/sacrifice] of ours is in the same seat, at the same udder  (with you).