+++
title = "011"

+++
11 (307)
Agni
Vāmadeva Gautama
6 verses: triṣṭubh
This short hymn begins with a verse full of phonetic and morphological play. The  middle two verses (3–4) contain seven repetitions of tvád “from you,” all but one  stationed at the beginning of the pāda. Verse 5 begins with tvā́m, “you” in a differ ent case, to bring that sequence to a close. Verse 5 also deploys playful oppositions
of gods and mortals, and the final verse is marked by alliterative sequences. The hymn identifies Agni as the source of both material goods (vss. 3–4) and  of poetic inspiration (vss. 2–3), and the highly wrought surface of this superficially  simple hymn shows that the poet has put the latter gift to good use.574 IV.12
## 1
Auspicious is your face, mighty Agni; it shines here in nearness to the Sun. Gleaming to be seen, it is seen even by night. Not coarse is the food
[=ghee] to be seen on its form.
## 2
Unloose inspiration for the singer (as if) through an aperture, o
powerfully born Agni, in your excitation while you are being praised. What you, along with all the gods, will crave, that grant us, o brilliant,  very great one—an ample thought.
## 3
From you, Agni, poetic compositions, from you inspired thoughts, from  you are born solemn words to be realized.
From you come chattels ornamented with heroes for the pious mortal  whose thought is to the point.
## 4
From you is born the prizewinning, prize-bringing (horse), of extensive  power, creating his own superiority, whose snorting is real,
from you god-sped wealth, joy itself, from you the swift, speeding
courser, o Agni.
## 5
You, Agni, (are) the first god (whom) the god-seekers seek to attract here  with their hymnic visions—the mortals, o immortal, (seeking you)
whose tongue is gladdening,
who keep hatred away, domestic ally, household lord, no fool.
## 6
At a distance from us (keep) heedlessness, at a distance constraint, at a  distance all malevolence, as you protect us.
At evening (be) propitious, o Agni, son of strength, (to him) whom you  as god even here accompany with well-being.