+++
title = "012"

+++
12 (308)
Agni
Vāmadeva Gautama
6 verses: triṣṭubh
The first half of this hymn (vss. 1–3) describes the rewards Agni gives to a pious  sacrificer. The second half (vss. 4–6) is entirely different: it begs for release from  unspecified offenses done by us, and although Agni is addressed in the vocative  in all three verses, the tone is distinctly Ādityan, reminiscent of Vasiṣṭha’s pleas  for forgiveness from the most formidable of the Ādityas, Varuṇa, in Maṇḍala  VII. In fact, the last verse (6) has a plural addressee (“good ones worthy of the  sacrifice”) in addition to Agni, and the verse is repeated exactly in X.126.8, an  insistently Ādityan hymn.
## 01
Whoever will kindle you, Agni, with his offering ladle extended, whoever  will make food for you three times in the same day,
let him, victorious, be superior in heavenly brilliance in accordance with  your purpose, o Jātavedas—he the observant one. 2. Whoever will labor to bring fuel to you, rendering service to the face of  the great one, o Agni,
he, kindling (you) every evening, every dawn, follows along, thriving in  his wealth, smashing his foes.
## 03
Agni holds sway over lofty lordship, Agni over the prize, the highest  wealth.
He apportions treasure in due order to the mortal who does honor (to  him)—he the youngest, autonomous one.
## 04
Whatever we have done to you, youngest one, in our human nature or  through our heedless ways—whatever offense—
make us without offense through unbinding [/Aditi]: let loose our
transgressions in all directions, o Agni.
## 05
(Release us) from even a great offense in close quarters, Agni, from the  enclosure [=imprisoning] of gods and of mortals.
Let us, your comrades, never be harmed. Extend luck and lifetime to  kith and kin.
## 06
Just as then you released the buffalo-cow bound by the foot, you good  ones worthy of the sacrifice,
so release constraint from us. (Let) our lifetime be further
lengthened, Agni.