+++
title = "013"

+++
13 (309) Agni (or Assorted Divinities)
Vāmadeva Gautama
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The Anukramaṇī assigns this hymn either to Agni or to unspecified divinities, but  as has long been recognized, it is really a hymn appropriate to dawn, mentioning  the gods associated with this time of day: Dawn herself, the Aśvins, Savitar, and  especially the Sun, who is found in all five verses. It forms a pair with the following  hymn, IV.14, also devoted to Dawn though not so identified. For further on the  similarities of these two hymns, see the introduction to IV.14.
The last three verses are especially striking, with several vivid images of the tri umph of light over darkness in verses 3–4, and in the final verse (5) a speculative  question about the sun—why does it not fall out of the sky?
## 1
Agni has looked toward the vanguard of the Dawns—benevolent (Agni)  toward the treasure-conferring of the radiant (Dawns).
Drive, Aśvins, to the dwelling of the one of good action. The Sun, the  god, goes up with his light.
## 2
God Savitar has braced his radiant beam upright, brandishing his banner  like a warrior seeking cattle.

Varuṇa, Mitra, (and the other Ādityas?) proceed according to their
commandment, when they cause the Sun to mount into heaven.
## 3
The one whom they created to pull apart the darkness—those
[=Ādityas?] with fixed peaceful abodes, who do not unharness until
(reaching) their goal—
that Sun, do the seven golden mares, youthfully exuberant, convey as spy  of the whole moving world.
## 4
You drive with the (horses) that convey best, as you unravel the thread,  stripping off the black garment (of night), o god.
The rays of the Sun, shaking the darkness like a hide (for tanning), have  set it down in the waters.
## 5
Not held firm, not tied down—how does this one not fall down, head  over heels?
With what autonomous power does he journey? Who has seen it? As  prop of heaven, utterly fixed, he protects the vault.