+++
title = "014"

+++
14 (310)
Agni
Vāmadeva Gautama
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Like IV.13 this is a dawn hymn, and, as was noted there, it is closely paired with  that hymn. The chief divinities are the same, mentioned in more or less the same  order: Agni, Dawn, the Aśvins, Savitar, and the Sun; the final verses are identical;  and the first two verses are stylistic variants of each other. In verse 1 of both hymns  Agni looks toward the Dawns, and the Aśvins [/Nāsatyas] are urged to come to the  sacrifice; in verse 2 Savitar braces his beacon, and the Sun rises.
The other two verses (3–4) deviate somewhat. In IV.13 these were devoted to the  Sun, conveyed by seven mares, confronting darkness. Here verse 3 concerns Dawn  as the horse conveying the Sun: the equine theme of IV.13.3 is thus matched, but  with a different focus. In both hymns verse 4 also concerns driving, with horses that  are “the best conveyors” (váhiṣṭha), but in IV.13 it is the Sun who is being conveyed,  whereas in IV.14 it is the two Aśvins (unnamed).
These paired hymns give us valuable insight into the R̥gvedic poets’ composi tional techniques, showing how the poets could produce variety even from a tem plate of fairly specific themes (here vss. 1–2), and where the template allowed more  freedom in developing those themes (here vss. 3–4).
## 01
God Agni, Jātavedas, has looked toward the Dawns, shining with all  their might.
Here, o Nāsatyas [=Aśvins], wide-ranging with your chariot, drive up to  this sacrifice of ours. 2. God Savitar has braced his beacon upright, making light for all creation. He has filled heaven and earth and the space between—the Sun showing  himself ever more widely with his rays.
## 03
The ruddy (mare) conveying (him) hither has come with her light, the  great showy one, showing herself ever more with her rays.
The goddess awakening (the world) for good faring, Dawn speeds with  her well-yoked chariot.
## 04
Let the best conveyors convey you two [=Aśvins] here—the (best)  chariots and horses at the break of dawn—
for here are soma drinks for you two to drink the honey. At this sacrifice  here, o bulls, exhilarate yourselves.
## 05
Not held firm, not tied down—how does this one not fall down, head  over heels?
With what autonomous power does he journey? Who has seen it? As  prop of heaven, utterly fixed, he protects the vault.