+++
title = "015"

+++
15 (311) Agni (1–6), Somaka Sāhadevya (7–8), Aśvins (9–10)
Vāmadeva Gautama
10 verses: gāyatrī
This final hymn of the Agni cycle in Maṇḍala IV consists of ten verses. Its length  marks it as out of order in the cycle, since it follows a sequence of shorter hymns,  but its internal structure is not entirely clear. It is generally agreed that the first  three verses form a tr̥ca dedicated to Agni, and could therefore, as an independent  hymn, be properly placed in the Agni cycle. The next three verses (4–6) could also  form a tr̥ca to Agni and could likewise be properly placed, but the mention of  Sr̥ñjaya Daivavāta suggests that the final four verses (7–10), a dānastuti to Somaka  Sāhadeva, belong with verses 4–6, since Somaka’s father, Sahadeva, is elsewhere  (Aitareya Brāhmaṇa 7.34) identified as a Sr̥ñjaya.
We are of the opinion that the hymn consists of an originally independent sin gle tr̥ca (vss. 1–3), and a second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) with a loosely attached four-verse  dānastuti (7–10), but that it is unlikely that either of the tr̥cas formed a part of the  original cycle. Note especially that the two preceding hymns, IV.13–14, are really  not standard Agni hymns, but more generally applicable to the divinities of dawn,  and this change in subject matter suggests that these dawn-centered hymns were  added at some point at the end of the Agni cycle proper. Only later were the frag ments found in IV.15 appended to that enlarged cycle.
In any case, all three verses of the first tr̥ca concern Agni’s circling of the sacri fice, a ritual act characteristic of the animal sacrifice, as we have seen previously in  this maṇḍala (IV.6.3–5). The second tr̥ca, especially its second verse (5), seems to  concern militant Agni and suggests that only a mortal who is a hero himself can

control such a fire: the implication is that Sr̥ñjaya Daivavāta, mentioned in verse  4, is such a man. This provides a transition to the “praise of the gift” in verses  7–10, where a prince of the Sr̥ñjaya family is the patron. The poet praises Prince  Sāhadevya for giving him two horses (playfully in vs. 7) and prays to the Aśvins  to reward the prince with a long life. There is another, more subtle connection  between 4–6 and 7–10: the last verse of the tr̥ca (vs. 6) alludes to the ritual drink  soma (as “the red child of heaven”), though it is not named; the name (or hypo
coristic: note the -ka-suffix characteristic of nicknames) of the patron in 7–10 is  Somaka (vs. 9).
## 1
Agni, the Hotar at our ceremony, while being a prizewinning (horse), is  led around,
the god devoted to the sacrifice among the gods.
## 2
Agni drives with triple toil around the ceremony like a charioteer, establishing a pleasurable offering among the gods.
## 3
Agni, the lord of the prize, the sage poet, has marched around the  oblations,
establishing treasures for the pious.
## 4
Here is the one who is kindled in front when Sr̥ñjaya Daivavāta (is  present),
the brilliant (Agni) who belittles the foes.
## 5
Over such a fire as this (only) a hero should hold sway as mortal  (master),
over this one who has sharp fangs but grants rewards.
## 6
Him like a winning steed, like the red child of heaven [=soma?],
they keep grooming day after day.
## 7
If he will “awaken” me with two fallow bays—Prince Sāhadevya— I will “get up” like one summoned.
## 8
And these two fallow bays, worthy of honor, from Prince Sāhadevya I took as soon as they were offered.
## 9
He is yours, god Aśvins—Prince Sāhadevya.
Let him be long-lived—(this) Somaka.
## 10
You god Aśvins, make Prince Sāhadevya long-lived.