+++
title = "016"

+++
16 (312) Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
21 verses: triṣṭubh
This first hymn of the Vāmadeva Indra cycle is rich in mythological material. It  begins with two verses devoted to the journey motif—Indra coming to our soma  sacrifice—but already in the second half of verse 2 and the first half of verse 3 the legendary poet and sage Uśanā Kāvya, who will figure later in the hymn, is intro duced by indirection. The Vala and Vr̥tra myths are interwoven in the next section  of the hymn, verses 3cd through 8, their interpenetration encouraged by the fact  that almost no participants are explicitly named in the earlier part of the section.  The last two verses clearly separate the two myths: verse 7 by naming Vr̥tra, verse 8  by the very words of the dog Saramā and her naming of Indra’s companions in the  Vala myth, the Aṅgirases.
Verses 9–14 concern the saga of the hero Kutsa, the poet Uśanā Kāvya, and  Indra, a story that is, as usual, narratively elusive. As noted above, Uśanā Kāvya  was introduced earlier in the hymn by name; he is not named in this section, but  deeds involving him in other references to the myth are also found here: Indra and  Kutsa’s joint journey to his house for help (vs. 10ab; cf., e.g., I.130.9) and the help  he provides to their venture (vs. 11), help which elsewhere takes the material form  of the mace he presents to Indra (I.121.12, V.34.2).
Our version also has the curious motif of the woman who seeks to tell the dif ference between Indra and Kutsa, who have identical appearance (vs. 10cd). This  reminds us of the Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa story (JB III.199–200), in which Kutsa was  born from Indra’s thigh and therefore looks identical to Indra. Kutsa takes advan tage of this by having sex with Indra’s wife, who claims, when Indra discovers them  together, not to be able to tell Indra and Kutsa apart. The Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa  story appears, at least to us, to have been secondarily generated to explain the enig matic motif in our R̥gvedic verse, which does not suggest any misbehavior on the  part of the truth-distinguishing woman. Certainly Indra and Kutsa in partnership  go on to destroy named and nameless enemies and to tear off the wheel of the Sun’s  chariot (vss. 12–13), an action also prominent, if enigmatic, in other mentions of  this story (I.130.9, I.174.5, V.29.10). A successful act of distinguishing Indra (from  Kutsa?) seems to be alluded to in verse 14b, bringing closure to this motif. This  recognition was aided by the strong light of the sun. It is unclear whether the con tribution of the sun’s light here has anything to do with the damage inflicted on his  chariot by Indra and Kutsa.
The remainder of the hymn consists of appeals to Indra for help in contests and  battles and for largesse (vss. 15–19), with two closing verses (20–21) summing up the  making of the poem and the hopes we have of it.
The hymn is full of deep and surface puns, phonological play, and subtle echoes  across verses, and the poet takes some delight in setting up and then frustrating our  grammatical and mythological expectations.
## 1
Let him drive here (to be) really present—the bounteous one possessing  the silvery drink. Let his fallow bays run to us.
It is just for him that we have pressed the well-skilled stalk. Being
hymned, he will make his meal here.
## 2
Unhitch as if at the end of your road, o champion, in order to find  exhilaration in this soma-pressing of ours today.

Like Uśanā, the ritual adept [=Agni] will recite his solemn speech, his  thought, for the lordly one who attends to it—
## 3
Bringing the rites to realization like the sage poet [=Uśanā Kāvya] a  secret, when the bull [=pressing stone] will chant as he drinks out  the gush.
In just that way he [=Indra?] begot the seven bards of heaven; just with the  (coming of) day they created the ritual patterns as they were singing. 4. When the sun, beautiful to see, was found through their chants [/with its  rays], they made shine the great light which is at dawn.
The best of men in his dominance made (it possible) for men to  penetrate the blind, bilious shades of darkness with their gaze.
## 5
Possessing the silvery drink, Indra increased without limit. He filled  both world-halves with his greatness.
Even beyond that did it reach—the greatness of him who surmounted  all the worlds.
## 6
The able one, knowing all manly (labors), together with his eager  companions, gave leave to the waters.
The fire-priests, who split the stone just with their words, opened the  pen full of cows.
## 7
You smashed away Vr̥tra, who had been enclosing the waters. Of one  mind with you, Earth helped your mace.
You sped the seaward floods forward, becoming their lord by your  power, you daring champion.
## 8
When you tore open the rock for the waters, o much-invoked one,  Saramā had appeared to you before:
“As our leader, tear out an abundant prize, breaking apart the cowpens,  being sung by the Aṅgirases.”
## 9
In your dominance you came here to the poet in need [=Kutsa?] at the  winning of the sun, o bounteous one with your mind on men.
With your help you urged him on at the invocation to heavenly
brilliance; but the Dasyu, possessing magic arts but no sacred
formulation, sank down.
## 10
Drive here to the home (of Uśanā Kāvya) with your Dasyu-smashing  mind. In companionship with you, Kutsa will become eager.
Do you two, having the same form, sit down each in his own womb.  She is trying to distinguish between you two—she is a woman who  distinguishes the truth.
## 11
Seeking help, you drive with Kutsa on the same chariot—you, the  goader of the Wind, the master of the two fallow bays,
seeking to hold onto the two silvery (horses of the Wind) like a prize  to be secured, so that on that day the poet [=Uśanā Kāvya] will exert  himself for decisive (help). 12. For Kutsa you laid low insatiable Śuṣṇa, who brings bad harvest, with  his thousands, before the day’s first meal.
Immediately crush out the Dasyus with (the weapon) that is Kutsa, and  then tear off the wheel of the Sun at the moment of encounter.
## 13
You subjugated Pipru Mr̥gaya, swollen with power, to R̥jiśvan, the son  of Vidathin.
You scattered down the dark fifty thousand. You shredded their
fortresses, like worn-out age a cloak—
## 14
Placing your body in nearness to the sun, so that the form of you, the  immortal one, could be distinguished,
like a wild elephant, clothing yourself in might, and fearsome like a lion  when you bear your weapons.
## 15
To Indra have desires gone seeking goods, taking their pleasure at the  soma-pressing as if at a (contest) having the sun as its prize,
(desires) seeking fame, laboring with hymns, delightful like a home, like  prosperity beautiful to see.
## 16
Just him, Indra easy to call, would we call upon for you—him who  performed the many manly (labors),
who quickly brings a prize worth securing even to a singer like me, him  whose largesse is eagerly sought.
## 17
If a sharp missile will fly in an instant amid some one of the peoples, o  champion,
if there will be a terrible clash, o comrade, then, as ever, become the  herdsmen of our body.
## 18
Will you be the helper of Vāmadeva’s insights? Will you be a partner— no wolf—at the winning of prizes?
We have come after you (who are) solicitude for us. Widely proclaimed,  may you always be there for the singer.
## 19
While we dominate the strangers in every contest with these men who  seek you, Indra, with the bounteous ones, o bounteous one,
just as the heavens dominate with their heavenly brilliance, may we find  elation through many nights and autumns.
## 20
Just in this way we have made a sacred formulation for Indra, the  bull-strong bull, as the Bhr̥gus do a chariot,
so that he will never keep us far away from his partnership, and he will  be our powerful helper, the protector of our bodies.
## 21
– Now praised, o Indra, now being sung, make refreshment swell for the  singer like rivers.
A new sacred formulation has been made for you, o you of the fallow  bays. Through our insightful thought may we be charioteers who
always win.
