+++
title = "017"

+++
17 (313)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
21 verses: triṣṭubh, except ekapadā virāj 15
The hymn begins with the simple declaration “You, Indra, are great,” and in some  sense the rest of the hymn just develops this statement. The first section of the hymn  (vss. 1–8) treats Indra’s deeds in the past (though with some interludes in the pres ent, esp. vs. 5), particularly the Vr̥tra slaying and its cosmic repercussions. Verse 8  sums up this section by detailing the qualities that make Indra worthy of our atten tion. In verses 9–13 Indra’s abilities to conquer foes and win prizes are celebrated  for their present relevance. The following two verses (14 and 15, its stunted single pāda adjunct) make a brief and quite obscure foray into the Etaśa myth. The final  five verses (16–20), before the last (21) repeated from IV.16.21, express our hopes  for Indra’s bounty and aid, and, especially, our longing for him to be in affectionate  relationship with us.
Several themes surface from time to time in the hymn. Indra is often called  maghávan “bounteous (patron)” throughout (vss. 7, 8, 9, 11, 13 [twice], 20), even  though our prayers for goods and services do not become insistent until the end.  More striking is the motif of Indra’s birth and, especially, the uncertainty about  the identity of his father. His birth in mentioned in verses 2, 4, 7, and 12. In verse  4 it is said that Heaven is considered to be his begetter, but “is considered” throws  that statement into question, and it is not even clear whether “the best craftsman,”  to whom the act is (also?) ascribed, is Heaven or not. It may well be Tvaṣṭar, called  “good craftsman” elsewhere (I.85.9) and in apparent parental relationship with  Indra in some passages (e.g., III.48.2–4; see also the next hymn, IV.18.3). Verse 12ab  casts even more doubt on his parentage, which Indra himself seems not to be clear  about. This birth motif foreshadows the next hymn, the famous IV.18 featuring the  direct speech of Indra’s mother at the time of his birth.
## 1
You, Indra, are great. To you did Earth, to you did Heaven
magnanimously yield dominion.
After you smashed Vr̥tra with your strength, you let loose the rivers,  which had been swallowed by the serpent.
## 2
At your birth Heaven trembled and Earth flinched in fear of your  turbulence and of the battle fury that is yours.
The well-founded mountains throbbed, the wastelands shuddered, and  the waters ran.
## 3
He split the mountain, hurling his mace with his strength, revealing his  power, displaying his might.
He smashed Vr̥tra with his mace in his exhilaration. With their bull
struck down, the waters ran swiftly.
## 4
Rich in heroes, Heaven is considered to be your begetter. The best  craftsman was the creator of Indra, who begot him, booming and bearing the good mace, not to be moved,  any more than the Earth from its seat.
## 5
Who, just alone, sets the lands in motion—the king of the separate  peoples, Indra invoked by many.
All celebrate him, the real one, and celebrate the generosity of the god  to the singer and the patron.
## 6
Entirely his were the soma-drinks; entirely for the lofty one were the  most exhilarating exhilarating-drinks.
Entirely the goods-lord of goods you became. You placed all the
separate peoples in (the path of) your giving, Indra.
## 7
And on first being born, you placed all the separate peoples in (the path  of) your onslaught, Indra.
With your mace you hewed apart the serpent who was lying against the  (mountain) slopes, o bounteous one.
## 8
(I call upon) him who smashes entirely, bold and brawny Indra, the  great and limitless bull bearing the good mace,
who is the smasher of Vr̥tra and the winner of the prize, the giver of  bounties, the bounteous one who brings good presents.
## 9
This one forces his united opponents into hiding, he who alone is famed  as the bounteous one in contests.
This one brings the prize that he wins. Might we be dear to him in his  partnership.
## 10
And this one is famed for conquering and smiting, and this one brings  the cows forward to become his through battle.
When Indra makes his fury real, everything, both what stays firm and  what flinches, becomes afraid before him.
## 11
Indra conquered the cows altogether, altogether (the bounties) in gold and  horses—he who through the many (autumns) is a bounteous patron,
the best of men with these able men of his, the apportioner of wealth  and the one who brings the goods altogether.
## 12
How much does Indra know of his mother, how much of his father, his  begetter, who begot him?
He who in an instant raises his tempest, as the wind does when sped by  thundering clouds,
## 13
He deprives the man dwelling peacefully of his peace. The bounteous  one raises the dust in confusion,
a shatterer like Heaven with its missiles. But the bounteous one places  his praiser in goods.
## 14
This one impelled the wheel of the Sun and stopped Etaśa as he ran. Moving crookedly, he [=Agni?] sprinkles it [=Sun? Sun’s horse or
wheel?] at the black base of the hide, on the womb of this realm,
## 15
Like a Hotar performing his own sacrifice on the dark (hide).
## 16
Seeking cows, seeking horses, seeking prizes, we, inspired poets, rousing  the bull Indra for partnership;584 IV.18
seeking wives, we bestir the wife-giver providing imperishable aid, like a  bucket in a well.
## 17
Become our protector, showing yourself as a friend who watches over  and dispenses mercy to your comrades in soma,
our partner and father, the best father of fathers, the creator conferring  vitality on the man longing for wide space.
## 18
Become the helper and partner of those seeking your partnership. Being  sung, Indra, confer vitality on the man who praises,
for we have fervently acted for you, exalting you with these
labors, Indra.
## 19
Indra the bounteous, praised when he (smashes) obstacles, alone  smashes those many and unopposable (obstacles).
The singer is dear to him, under whose protection none, neither gods  nor mortals, obstruct (him [=the singer]).
## 20
In just this way shall bounteous Indra, conferring abundance, make  these things come true for us, as the unassailable sustainer of the
bordered domains.
You, as king of (all) the races, set fame upon us, which is a great thing  for the singer.
## 21
– Now praised, o Indra, now being sung, make refreshment swell for the  singer like rivers.
A new sacred formulation has been made for you, o you of the fallow  bays. Through our insightful thought may we be charioteers who
always win.