+++
title = "018"

+++
18 (314)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
13 verses: triṣṭubh
A famous and enigmatic hymn recounting the prodigious and unnatural birth of  Indra, partly in dialogue form. The hymn begins with a two-verse exchange between  Indra’s mother and the as-yet-unborn Indra: she tries to persuade him to be born  in normal fashion, but, like many heroes world-wide, he insists on an unusual exit,  from her side. Indra is already conscious of his great destiny (see vs. 2cd). The preg
nancy has lasted abnormally long (see vs. 4ab), and after the birth Indra’s mother  appears to abandon him to make his own way (vss. 3ab, 4ab, 8ab, 10cd), but also  hides him (vs. 5ab) and worries about his fate (vs. 11ab). Again like heroes the world  over, Indra is born full-grown and ready to perform great feats (see vs. 5cd), so  that his mother’s protection is not necessary. In verse 3 he follow his mother as she  abandons him and ends up at Tvaṣṭar’s house, where he drinks Tvaṣṭar’s soma.  Elsewhere Tvaṣṭar is presented as Indra’s father (e.g., III.48.2–4, possibly in the previous hymn IV.17.4), and by stealing and drinking his soma, Indra defeats him  (see III.48, where Indra’s mother abets him). Our verse contains no mention of this  rivalry and conflict, but it may be alluded to indirectly toward the end of the hymn  (see below).
In the middle part of the hymn (vss. 6–9) another set of voices (at least in our  opinion) joins the dialogue, that of various waters. These waters seem to represent  benevolent foster mothers (see esp. vss. 7–8), like the rivers attending the birth of  Urvaśī’s son in X.95.7, and their protective aid for Indra contrasts with his mother’s  ambivalence and alienation. But they are also assimilated to the waters released by  Indra in the Vr̥tra myth, as Indra’s mother makes explicit in verse 7. It may be that  both identities were suggested by a natural phenomenon, the breaking of a preg
nant woman’s waters right before birth; the sudden release of those waters is remi niscent of the release in the Vr̥tra myth, while the association of the waters with the  infant being born suggests their beneficent relationship with the fetus in the womb.  Indra’s mother ends this section by disavowing any blame for Indra’s temporary  disadvantage in the Indra–Vr̥tra battle (vs. 9). If we are correct, the second pāda of  this verse alludes glancingly to snakes’ ability to reconfigure their jaws to swallow  large prey, a striking naturalistic image—one of the incidental fragments of realia  to be gleaned from the R̥gveda.
The final verses of the hymn are even more puzzling than what precedes them.  After the episode of the waters and the Vr̥tra battle, we return to the original scene  of Indra’s birth and his mother’s abandonment of him (vs. 10), though in her worry  about his isolation she follows him (vs. 11ab), a mirror image of him following her  in verse 3ab. He does find a companion to aid in the Vr̥tra battle, namely Viṣṇu,  in verse 11cd. The next verse (12) asks a series of rhetorical questions—or they  would be rhetorical if we were certain of the answers. The questions center around  a family tragedy of a type very familiar from world mythology: a father with mur derous intent toward his son (possibly still in the womb; vs. 12b) and the killing  of the father by the son (vs. 12d), an act that leaves his mother a widow (vs. 12a).  Is the father Tvaṣṭar, mentioned briefly and without hostility in the earlier part of  the hymn (vs. 3), or Vr̥tra, whose destruction was depicted several times (vss. 7cd,  9)—or both, or neither? In any case the questions are reminiscent of the question  near the end of the famous Indra-Vr̥tra hymn I.32, when Indra flees after winning  the battle: verse 14 “Whom did you see, Indra, as the avenger of the serpent when  fear came into your heart after you smashed him, / and when you crossed over the  ninety-nine flowing rivers, like a frightened falcon through the airy realms?” And  the final verse of IV.18 (13) seems to depict Indra after such a flight, alone and  in exile, eating taboo food out of necessity and witness to the dishonoring of his  mother because of her widowed state. His own condition only improves when the  falcon steals soma and brings it to him (vs. 13d), a tale that will be treated later in  this cycle in IV.26–27.
Although the abrupt shifts of scene and chronology and the lack of context  in each new scene produce some frustration in the reader (not to speak of the

translator), the vivid focus of each episode and the dramatic tension in each snippet  of speech cause the hymn to resonate in the imagination long after a more rational  account would have done.
## 1
[Indra’s Mother:] Here is the ancient proven path from which all the gods  were born.
Just from it should he be born full-grown.—Do not cause your mother  to fall [=miscarry] in that way.
## 2
[Indra:] I will not go out from there—it’s a hard plunge. I will go out  crossways, from your side.
Many are the things as yet undone that are to be done by me: I will do  battle with one and make peace with another.
## 3
[Narrator:] He gazed after his mother going away. “I cannot not follow— now shall I follow!”
In the house of Tvaṣṭar, Indra drank soma, a hundred’s worth of the  pressed (drink) in the two cups.
## 4
[Narrator:] How could she put aside the one whom she bore for a  thousand months and many autumns?
For surely he has no equal among those born and those yet to be born. 5. [Narrator:] Thinking him somehow a disgrace, his mother concealed  Indra, who overflowed with heroic strength.
But he stood up on his own, clothing himself in a cloak. He filled the  two world-halves as he was being born.
## 6
[Indra:] These (waters) flow, babbling, like truthful women together  shouting their witness.
Ask them! What is this they are saying? What rock, what barrier are the  waters battering?
## 7
[Indra’s Mother:] What did they say as invitations to him? Do the waters  intend to take on Indra’s disgrace?
It was my son who set loose these rivers, after having smashed Vr̥tra with  his great murderous weapon.
## 8
[Various voices of the waters:] It was not because of me that the young  woman cast you aside. It was not because of me that Kuṣavā (Evil
Birth) swallowed you.
But it was certainly because of me that the waters would show mercy  to the child. It was certainly because of me that Indra stood up with  his might.
## 9
[Indra’s Mother:] It was not because of me that the cobra, having  pierced you down, smashed apart his jaws (to swallow) you, o
bounteous one.
Then, (though) pierced down, having gotten the upper hand, you utterly  crushed the head of the Dāsa with your murderous weapon. 10. [Narrator:] The heifer gave birth to the sturdy, powerfully charging,  unassailable bull, the brawny Indra.
The unlicked calf—his mother impelled him to wander, seeking by
himself a way for himself.
## 11
And his mother followed the track of the buffalo, (thinking,) “Yonder  gods are abandoning you, my son.”
Then Indra said as he was about to smash Vr̥tra: “Viṣṇu, my
companion, stride out widely.”
## 12
Who made your mother a widow? Who tried to smash you as you lay,  as you wandered?
What god was merciful toward you when you destroyed your father,  having grasped him by the foot?
## 13
[Indra:] Out of need I cooked for myself the entrails of a dog. I found  none who was merciful among the gods.
I saw his wife being dishonored. Then the falcon carried the honey
here to me.