+++
title = "019"

+++
19 (315)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh
Until the end, this hymn focuses almost entirely on the Vr̥tra-slaying and espe cially on the release of the waters after the slaying. In the first two verses Indra  is chosen, by the gods and the world-halves, for the task, and he assumes the  kingship. The actual slaying and the splitting of the mountains to set the waters  free occupy the next verses (through vs. 5), and other feats of Indra regarding  the waters—stopping them for his clients Turvīti and Vayya in verse 6, impreg nating them in verse 7—are mentioned. Indeed, verse 7 lushly depicts the fertile  and fructifying power of liquid in many forms. This main section of the hymn is  brought to a close in verse 8, which efficiently summarizes the main points of the  Vr̥tra myth.
Verse 9 serves as a somewhat bizarre coda. It celebrates three of Indra’s great  deeds that are regularly mentioned together:  he rescues the shunned son of an  unmarried girl, makes a blind man see, and causes a lame man to walk (cf., e.g.,  II.13.12, 15.7; I.112.8). But here each of these deeds has an odd twist: the boy is  being eaten by female ants; the blind man “takes a serpent” (an unrecoverable pun  or piece of slang, in our view); and the lame man is “broken in the ‘pot’” or “breaks  the pot” (slang for “hip”?). And it is also unclear why this verse has been tacked  onto the end of a hymn that is otherwise remarkably consistent thematically. It may  be that the “unwed girls” (agrū́) in verse 7, a metaphor for the rivers, suggested to

the poet the episode of the unwed girl (agrū́) who abandons her son out of shame,  and it may also be that this proverbial episode of a mother’s abandonment of her  son resonated with Indra’s own experience with his mother at his birth, treated so  dramatically in the preceding hymn (IV.18).
The hymn ends with two summary verses (10, 11). In the former the poet  announces to Indra the hymn he has just completed, while the latter is the refrain  verse of the Vāmadeva Indra cycle (see IV.16–17, 20–24).
## 01
So it is you, mace-wielding Indra, that all the gods, our easily invoked  helpers,
and both world-halves choose now—singling you out, the great one  alone, strong and lofty, at the smashing of Vr̥tra.
## 02
Like old men the gods let go, and you became the universal king, Indra,  acquiring your own true womb [=place].
You smashed the serpent lying around the flood; you dug out the courses  for all the nourishing streams.
## 03
The insatiable serpent, stretched out, lying against the seven slopes, did you dismember with your mace in his jointless part, o Indra—
(making him) not to be awakened, unawakening, gone to sleep.
## 04
Indra made the earth shake to its bottom with his strength, as the wind  does the water with its forces.
He knotted up the strongholds, eager in his own strength; he cut down  the peaks of the mountains.
## 05
They burst, as women burst out their embryo. Like chariots the stones  went forth all at once.
You satisfied (the waters) flowing widely, and you subdued their waves.  You made the blocked rivers flow, Indra.
## 06
For Turvīti and Vayya you brought to rest the great flowing watercourse  with its all-nourishing streams
and the moving flood, because of their reverence. You made the rivers  easy to cross, Indra.
## 07
He made the unwed girls swell like surging spurts (of water)—the  parched young women knowing the truth.
He saturated the wastelands and thirsty fields. Indra got milk from the  barren cows, who thus had a husband of wondrous power.
## 08
Having smashed Vr̥tra, he set loose the rivers, welcomed [/gurgling]  through many dawns and autumns.
Indra drilled out the streams, which had been surrounded and hard
pressed, to flow along the earth.
## 09
You brought the son of the unwed girl, as he was being eaten by female  ants, out from their lair, o master of the fallow bays.
The blind man saw after taking the serpent. The man broken in the
“pot” [=hip?] set out; his joints fit together. 10. Knowing them, I speak forth your ancient deeds, o inspired one, to  (you) who know the deeds,
in just the way that you accomplished them, o king—the bullish and  manly labors welcomed for themselves.
## 11
– Now praised, o Indra, now being sung, make refreshment swell for the  singer like rivers.
A new sacred formulation has been made for you, o you of the fallow  bays. Through our insightful thought may we be charioteers who
always win.