+++
title = "020"

+++
20 (316)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The general pattern of an invitation/journey hymn is followed here. Indra’s journey  to our sacrifice is treated in the first two verses, with his attendance at the sacrifice  and acceptance of the offerings found in the following two (3–4). The invitation is  summarized in verse 5. His reciprocal obligation to give generously to his worship
ers dominates the rest of the hymn, and without overt mention of the Vala myth,  the poet repeatedly likens Indra’s acts of giving to his opening of the cowpen and  releasing its contents (vss. 6, 8, 9). A subtle reference to the Vr̥tra myth may be  found in verse 7: no “obstructor” (vartár) keeps Indra from giving, using the root vr̥
“obstruct,” found in Vr̥tra, whose name is literally “obstacle.”
The hymn several times uses gambling vocabulary (vss. 3, 8), and there are some  other striking images, such as the two similes in the first half of verse 5.
## 01
Here to us from afar and here to us from nearby will powerful Indra  drive for help, creating his own superiority—
the lord of men with the mace in his arm, with his most powerful (men)  overcoming battlers in combat and conflicts.
## 02
Here to us let Indra drive with his fallow bays, right here, turned our way  for help and benefit.
He will stand—that mace-bearing, bounteous one, conferring
abundance—beside this sacrifice of ours at the gaining of prizes.
## 03
Setting this sacrifice of ours in front, o Indra, you will gain our intention. Like (a gambler) with the best throw to gain the stakes, with you, o
mace-bearer, might we win the contest with the stranger.
## 04
Being eager and of favorable mind in our midst, now (drink) of the  well-pressed soma, o autonomous one.
Drink, Indra, of the honey brought before you. You will reach complete  exhilaration with the soma-stalk coming from the back (of the
mountain).

## 05
He who abounds in new seers like a fruited tree, who is a winner like a  man with a sickle,
much-invoked Indra do I invite here, setting my mind on him like a
dashing youth on a maiden.
## 06
He who is self-strong like a mountain, lofty and powerful Indra, born  from of old for conquest,
he splits open the *cowpen as a fearsome (wild beast) does a sturdy
(pen), (the pen) overflowing with goods like a bucket with water.
## 07
For whom by nature there now exists no obstructor and no hinderer of  benefit and bounty,
o strong and powerful one, boiling up and over, give riches to us, o
much invoked one.
## 08
You are master of wealth and of the peaceful dwelling of the settled  domains, and you open the pen of cows.
Doing your best for men in the clashes, hitting the jackpot, you are the  guide to an abundant heap of goods.
## 09
Because of what ability is he famed as the most able?—that ability by  which the lofty one does everything instantly.
He is the best at prying apart narrow straits for the man who does
much pious service, and he establishes material property for the
singer.
## 10
Do not neglect us! Bring and give us what of yours is to be given in  abundance to the pious man.
At this new gift we shall proclaim it in this hymn recited for you,
praising you, o Indra.
## 11
– Now praised, O Indra, now being sung, make refreshment swell for  the singer like rivers.
A new sacred formulation has been made for you, o you of the fallow  bays. Through our insightful thought may we be charioteers who
always win.