+++
title = "021"

+++
21 (317)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The first verses of this hymn, especially 1 and 3, are quite reminiscent of the open ing of the preceding hymn, IV.20, with the invitation to Indra to come to our sac rifice from wherever he might be, and the hymn promises to be a straightforward  celebration of Indra’s presence at the sacrifice and our praise and offering to him, in  the hopes of his goods and help. But the hymn veers off into a different, and deeply  puzzling, direction. The pivot is verse 5, which begins with a relative clause as does verse 4, leading us to expect that the referent in verse 5 will be the same as in verse  4, namely Indra, the subject of our hymn. But it is not, as the last word reveals, but  rather the Hotar, here almost certainly the god Agni.
The next three verses (6–8) share a number of features: repeated phrases (espe cially the góhe phrase of 6b, 7c, 8c), metrical irregularity in their odd pādas (6c,  7a, 7c), morphological and syntactic parallelism, and patterns of phonological and  morphosyntactic repetition. But what they especially share is almost impenetrable  obscurity. In our admittedly speculative interpretation, these verses take off from  the Agni verse (5) and treat simultaneously the kindling of the ritual fire, which  initiates the sacrifice here and now, and the Vala myth. As we noted in the introduc tion to IV.20, the twin of this hymn in some ways, the Vala myth, is a backgrounded  model for Indra’s generous giving in that hymn. It should also be remembered that  the Agni hymns of this maṇḍala frequently take the Vala myth as their subject (see  esp. IV.1 and 2), despite the fact that Agni is not usually a participant in that myth.  Thus a condensed version of the Vala myth embedded in an Indra hymn but focus ing on Agni is compatible with the larger concerns of the Vāmadeva poets.
In verse 6 the gods coming to the sacrifice seem to be compared to the Aṅgirases  going to the Vala cave—though neither group is mentioned by name—and the seat  of both groups is identified as the “secret place” (góha) of the Auśija, a vr̥ddhi  derivative that we interpret as referring to the whole company of Uśij-priests, or  fire-priests. In the second half of the verse the ritual fire is kindled, though with  difficulty. The kindled fire roars to life in verse 7a, enabling the sacrifice to proceed  (pāda b) and the cows in the Vala cave to go forth (pādas cd)—expressed in increas ingly compressed phraseology. The final verse of this section (8) is the one that most  clearly alludes to the opening of the Vala cave, using several of the signature words  of that myth, including the verb vidát “found, finds,” which several times in the Vala  myth takes “cows” as object (I.62.3, V.45.8, X.68.11). But in our verse the object is  omitted, presumably to allow the simultaneous reading “cows” (for the Vala myth)  and “goods” (for the ritual here-and-now).
Having thus provided Indra with a mythic model for generous giving (however  cryptically phrased), the poet then reproaches Indra in verse 9 for not participating  in the sacrificial give-and-take. The poet ends the hymn with a more conventional  summary verse and plea for goods and help (vs. 10), followed by the Vāmadeva  Indra-cycle refrain (vs. 11).
## 01
Let Indra drive here, near to us, for help. Praised, let the champion be  here as our feasting companion,
he whose powers are many when he has grown strong, (whose)
overwhelming dominion, like heaven, will thrive.
## 02
Here will you praise the bullish forces of him alone, the powerfully  brilliant and powerfully generous man,
whose resolve, conquering and victorious like a sovereign king making  ceremonial distributions, overwhelms the separate peoples.

## 03
Let Indra along with the Maruts drive here from heaven or from the  earth, swiftly from the sea or from fertile ground,
from the realm of solar glory, or from afar, from the seat of truth, to  help us.
## 04
Who is master of substantial, lofty wealth, him will we praise at the  ceremonial distributions—Indra,
who is the winner along with Vāyu when (refreshments) consisting of  cows are at stake and who boldly leads (us) forth to a better state. 5. Whoever, piling reverence upon reverence, rouses speech, begetting it in  order to perform the sacrifice,
aiming straight, granting many favors, he should bring Indra here to  the (ritual) seats with his hymns—he, the Hotar [=Agni?].
## 06
When they [=the gods/Aṅgirases?], seeking a holy place, will hasten to  the rock with holy fervor, taking their seats at the secret place of (the  company of) the fire-priests [=ritual ground/Vala cave?],
the Hotar [=Agni] of (the company) belonging to the household,  (though) he is hard to kindle, (comes into being) here—he who is the  great draft-horse for us in the (ritual) enclosures.
## 07
When in its entirety the explosive force of the devouring bull [=Agni]  accompanies him [=Agni?], for the praiser to take his reward,
when (it accompanies) him secretly to the secret place of (the company  of) the fire-priests, when (it accompanies him) in order (for the
praiser) to go forth to insight, forth to exhilaration—
## 08
When he opens out the mountain’s enclosures into wide spaces and  quickens the swift currents of the waters with gushes of milk,
he finds (the cows?) in the secret place of the buffalo, of the bull, when  those of good insight convey him for the prize.
## 09
Auspicious are your hands and well-fashioned your palms, as ones that  hold out largesse to the praiser, o Indra.
Why are you sitting it out? And why do you not find exhilaration? And  why do you not rouse yourself higher and higher to give?
## 10
Just in this way, Indra, the real sovereign king of goods, the smiter of  Vr̥tra, made wide space for Pūru.
O you praised by many, in accordance with your will, show your power  over wealth for us. Might I have a share in your divine help.
## 11
– Now praised, o Indra, now being sung, make refreshment swell for the  singer like rivers.
A new sacred formulation has been made for you, o you of the fallow  bays. Through our insightful thought may we be charioteers who  always win. 
