+++
title = "022"

+++
22 (318)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh
Within a slender frame depicting Indra’s presence at and participation in our sac rifice is fitted a celebration of Indra’s great deeds and, especially, his aggressiveness  in performing them. The hymn begins (vs. 1) with a brief catalogue of the elements  Indra wants at the ritual, which leads immediately to the praise of Indra’s uncon trolled power, the terror he inspires in the cosmos, and the fortunate result of his  greatest deed, the release of the waters following his defeat of Vr̥tra (vss. 2–7). Verse  8 marks a return to the ritual here-and-now, with a hope that our preparations will  bring Indra to our sacrifice. Verses 9–10 then list the various things we want Indra  to do for us, marked by the heavy repetition of “for us/to us” at the beginning of  every half-verse (a pattern actually begun in vs. 8c with “toward us,” and ending  with an extra repetition in the final pāda 10d). The hymn ends with the Vāmadeva  Indra-cycle refrain (vs. 11).
## 1
What of ours Indra enjoys and what he is eager for, that of ours will the  great, explosive one arrange to be right here:
the sacred formulation, the praise song, the soma, and the recitations— he, the bounteous, who goes on bearing the stone with strength,
## 2
The bull, hurling with his arms the four-edged (weapon), which is the  repository of bullish strength—the powerful, most manly, able one,
clothing himself in Paruṣṇī River [/gray] wool [=foam] for beauty—(the  Paruṣṇī River) in whose tufts he has wrapped himself for partnership  (with the Maruts).
## 3
The god who, being born as the best of gods, is great by reason of his  prizes and his great explosive powers,
having taken the eager mace in his arms, he makes heaven tremble by his  onslaught, as well as earth,
## 4
(And) all the (river)banks and the many (river)beds—(and) heaven  trembles, and the earth, before the towering one at his birth.
The explosive one brings the two mothers here [=Heaven and Earth?],  (brings) here (the milk? [=rain?]) of the cow. The winds in their
circling roar constantly like men.
## 5
These great (deeds) of you, the great one, o Indra, are to be proclaimed  at all the pressings:
that, o daring champion, having dared with daring, you worked over the  serpent with your mace and strength.
## 6
These (deeds) of yours all come true, o powerfully manly one: the cows  stream forth from the udder of a bull;
then, being afraid of you, o you of bullish mind, the rivers charge forth  at speed.594 IV.23
## 7
Right now, o Indra, master of the fallow bays, with your help these  goddesses, the sisters, are praised,
when you let loose those (waters) that had been hard pressed, to let
them flow along their long trajectory.
## 8
The (soma-)plant has been squeezed out like an exhilarating river. By  the labor of the laboring (priest), might the skill
of bright blazing (Agni) pull you here toward us, as a swift (horse pulls  on) the powerfully strong reins of the cow [=leather?].
## 9
For us activate your highest, most distinguished manly strengths and  powers altogether, o overpowering one.
For us weaken obstacles to become easily smashed: smash the deadly  weapon of the rapacious mortal.
## 10
To us listen well, Indra; to us mete out glittering prizes.
To us you impel all plentiful gifts. For us become a giver of cows, o
bounteous one.
## 11
– Now praised, o Indra, now being sung, make refreshment swell for the  singer like rivers.
A new sacred formulation has been made for you, o you of the fallow  bays. Through our insightful thought may we be charioteers who
always win.