+++
title = "023"

+++
23 (319)
Indra (1–7, 11), Indra or R̥ta (8–10)
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The most salient feature of this hymn is the insistent series of questions that domi nate its first six verses. These questions all concern the sacrificers’ relationship to  Indra—which sacrificers have managed to attract and please Indra, how does Indra  know who is sacrificing and where, who receives Indra’s bounty and comradeship  and by what means. A preliminary and oblique answer is given in the second half  of verse 4: “the god will take cognizance of my truths,” that is, my praise and sacred  formulations, which will ensure that Indra will come to our sacrifice and share his  bounty. This answer is elaborated upon in the last verses of the hymn. After this  partial answer in verse 4 the questions take on a more intimate tone, inquiring into  the nature of Indra’s friendship with his worshipers, who are now his comrades,  whereas the first four verses were more concerned with the mechanics of attracting  Indra to our particular sacrifice. A striking feature of these question verses is that,  despite the poet’s eagerness for the presence and intimate comradeship of Indra,  the god is always referred to in the 3rd person, and indeed the poet and sacrificers  are almost always in the 3rd person as well. This 3rd-person distancing of Indra  reminds us somewhat of the doubts expressed about Indra’s existence or at least his whereabouts in other R̥gvedic hymns; the 3rd-person reference suggests that the  poet has not established the direct personal contact with the god that he desires. Verse 7 serves as a transition to the amplified answers of verses 8–10. In verse  7 Indra prepares to destroy “the lie,” the deceit that is inimical to the proper func tioning of the cosmos. After Indra’s destruction of the lie, the ubiquitous and  all-powerful force of “truth” can be celebrated in the remaining verses (8–10, before  the refrain verse 11). These three verses contain twelve instances of the word r̥tá “truth,” most of them initial in their pāda. As Paul Thieme illuminatingly pointed  out (1964: 30), r̥tá is the implicit answer to the questions posed earlier—the “how?”  questions answered with “by means of truth,” the “which sacrificer?” questions by  “the one who produces truth.” And we already saw that r̥tá as the answer was fore shadowed in the middle of the hymn (vs. 4cd). Thus we can satisfactorily resolve the  apparent lack of connection between the first two-thirds of the hymn, with its bar rage of questions about Indra and the sacrifice, and the last third, with its insistently  repeated “truth” and absolutely no mention of Indra, that led the Anukramaṇī to  suggest the possibility of two different divinities for the hymn (Indra 1–7, 11; R̥ta  8–10). Indra by destroying the lie (vs. 7) gave free rein to the workings of truth  described in verses 8–10.
## 01
How did he [=priest?] strengthen the great one [=Indra]? Enjoying the  sacrifice of what Hotar—(coming) to the soma as to an udder,
eager for, enjoying, and drinking the stalk—has he waxed high for the  blazing stakes?
## 02
What hero has reached shared exhilaration with him? Who has attained  it with his good favor?
Has his bright (course) appeared? Will he be here with help for the
strengthening of the one who has labored, eager to sacrifice?
## 03
How does Indra hear (the call) being called? How, hearing it, does he  know (the place for) his unhitching?
What are his many distributions (of goods)? How do they call him a  provider for the singer?
## 04
How will the man who has zealously labored and produced insights  attain the material goods that belong to him [=Indra]?
The god will take cognizance of my truths, when he has accepted the  homage that he will enjoy.
## 05
How and what comradeship with a mortal does the god enjoy at the  breaking of this dawn?
How and what is his comradeship for his comrades, who have tugged  their well-harnessed desire to him?
## 06
Is his comradeship then a drinking vessel for his comrades? When will we  proclaim his brotherhood to you?
The surges (of soma?) for him are a marvel, lovely to see for their beauty.  He seeks (the milk?) from the cow, very bright like the sun.

## 07
Desiring to smash the lie, which is injurious and contrary to Indra, he  sharpens the edges sharp for jabbing,
after the powerful avenger of debts has also thrust our debts far away  to unknown dawns.
## 08
Of truth there exist many riches. The vision of truth smashes the  crooked,
and the signal call of truth bored open deaf ears—(the signal call) of  Āyu [=Agni], awakening and blazing.
## 09
Of truth the buttresses are firmly fixed; many are its gleaming marvels  to be marveled at.
By truth the nourishments urge themselves along the long way, and by  truth the cows approached truth.
## 10
(Whoever) holds fast to truth, just he wins truth. The explosive force of  truth hastens swiftly as it seeks cattle.
For truth the two (worlds) are wide, ample, and deep; for truth do they,  as the two highest milk-cows, give their milk.
## 11
– Now praised, o Indra, now being sung, make refreshment swell for the  singer like rivers.
A new sacred formulation has been made for you, o you of the fallow  bays. Through our insightful thought may we be charioteers who
always win.