+++
title = "024"

+++
24 (320)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 10
For most of its length (vss. 1–7), this hymn expresses in vivid language the familiar  notion of competing parties invoking Indra for help and offering him sacrificial  oblations and praise in return. Verses 3–5 are especially focused on the desperate  efforts of the human antagonists to enlist Indra’s might on their own side. It is also  clear that the offerings made by the successful supplicants must be made just so: in  addition to soma, a whole sacrificial menu is specified, with a special emphasis on  cooked foods (see esp. vss. 5, 7).
The last three verses (8–10, before the Vāmadeva refrain in 11) lay bare the mecha nism of the divine–human bargain that lies behind the first part of the hymn, and  indeed behind the whole R̥gvedic enterprise more generally. Rather than casting the  exchange relations between men and gods in the rosy light of mutual benefit and  voluntary cooperation, the verses present the acquisition of Indra’s aid by mortals  as a matter of cold-blooded haggling and crass calculations of price versus value  received. In our interpretation, Indra even has an agent, in the person of his own wife.  These verses are difficult, enigmatic, and apparently use the lexicon and phraseology of commercial transactions, a linguistic level barely attested elsewhere in Vedic.  Consequently the meaning of the verses is much disputed, and we will provide here  only our own interpretation (which follows Geldner’s in many, but not all, ways).
In verse 8 Indra (or perhaps his wife, a possibility raised by Oldenberg and  Geldner) takes a long hard look at the hostilities he’s being asked to participate in,  and his wife calls him back home, presumably to sit out the conflict or at least to  hold out for a better offer. In fact, in verse 9 Indra reports on a failed bit of hag
gling. An unidentified party seems to have made a bad deal, offering a higher price  for an inferior product, in this case probably the help of a god less powerful than  Indra (9a). With Indra’s own offer not accepted, he goes happily home “unsold”  (9b), remarking that the other party did not seize his chance to replace the inferior  product with a greater one, namely Indra himself (9c). He ends with what appears  to be a maxim, mocking the negotiation prowess of the other party (9d). Verse 10,  in our view (and ours alone?), is spoken by Indra’s wife, hawking her husband and  his obstacle-smashing talent and naming her price for his sale. The price, ten cows,  seems very low for such a god (especially considering how many hundreds of cows  are elsewhere given to mortal poets and priests, at least according to dānastutis),  and so it is possible or even likely that this is a bitter and rhetorical question, com plaining about the stinginess of mortal purchasers. In any case, it’s a limited-term  offer, as she expects Indra to be returned at the end of his mercenary service.
The allusion to dānastutis above was purposeful, for this little set of verses not  only occupies the position of a dānastuti in this hymn, but also has the slangy  and derisory tone of many dānastutis and the same recognition of the commer cial underpinnings of the relationship between patron and client. It may even be  that, using Indra’s withdrawal as model, the poet is indirectly complaining about  an ungenerous patron and threatening to withhold his poetic production unless he  receives a better deal.
## 1
What good praise will turn Indra here—the son of strength, facing our  way—for our benefit?
For the hero is the giver of good things to the singer, and he is the
herdsman of our tribute, o peoples.
## 2
He is to be summoned at the smashing of obstacles, he is to be invoked,  and he is well praised—Indra, whose benefit is real.
Here on his journey the bounteous one establishes wide space for the  mortal soma-presser devoted to the sacred formulation.
## 3
Just to him do men separately call at the encounter. Having given up  their bodies, they make him their preserver,
when the men of both camps, on opposite sides, have come to abandon  (their bodies) in the winning of offspring and descendants.
## 4
The settled peoples show their resolve at the hitching up (for battle), o  powerful one, while they are gasping on opposite sides in the winning  of the flood.

When the battling clans have rolled together, just then do those on the  one side seek Indra at the moment of confrontation.
## 5
Just then do those on the other side perform sacrifice to his Indrian  strength; just then would the cooked food succeed the offering cake;
just then would soma exclude the non-pressers; and just then does he  [=Indra] find pleasure in the bull [=soma] for the sacrifice to proceed. 6. He [=Indra] makes wide space for the one who presses soma in just this  way for Indra who is eager for it.
The man with fully focused mind who never loses the track—just him  does he [=Indra] make his comrade in battles.
## 7
Whoever will press soma for Indra today, will cook the cooked foods,  and will roast the grains—
upon him will Indra, gladly receiving the recitations of the zealous one,  confer his bullish explosive force.
## 8
When the ballsy one surveyed the clash, when he looked upon the long  (war)drive of the stranger,
his wife roared the bull (back) into the house, though he had been
whetted sharp by the soma pressers.
## 9
[Indra:] “With a greater price he got a lesser deal. Unsold, I took  pleasure in going (home) again.
He did not replace the lesser with a greater. Skimpy skills milk the
bargain [?] dry.”
## 10
[Indra’s wife:] “Who buys this Indra of mine with ten cows,
when he’s going to smash obstacles? Then will he return him to me
again?”
## 11
– Now praised, o Indra, now being sung, make refreshment swell for the  singer like rivers.
A new sacred formulation has been made for you, o you of the fallow  bays. Through our insightful thought may we be charioteers who
always win.