+++
title = "025"

+++
25 (321)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Although this hymn is superficially organized like IV.23, with a series of questions  in the first part of the hymn that are answered in the second part, it lacks the struc tural subtlety of IV.23, where the answers to the questions are implied, not stated,  and the questions themselves are quite varied. In this hymn the first three verses  pose a set of questions about the sacrificer, all but one (kásya “whose?” in vs. 3c)  introduced by nominative káḥ “who?” The benefits that accrue to the sacrificer so identified are detailed in most of the rest of the hymn (vss. 4–7), benefits highlighted  by the corresponding ill fate of the non-presser and non-giver described in verses  6–7. The hymn ends (vs. 8) with a comprehensive list of all who call upon Indra.
A salient feature of this hymn is the focus on the various kinds of relationships  a mortal may have with Indra: especially comradeship (vss. 1, 2, 6, 7), but also fel lowship (literally yoke-fellowship, vs. 2), brotherhood (vs. 2), friendship (vs. 6), and  kinship (vs. 6).
## 01
Who, a manly one with a desire for the god, eagerly enjoys the
comradeship of Indra today?
Or who, having his soma pressed when his fire has been kindled,
reverently invokes him for his great and decisive help?
## 02
Who shows reverence with his speech to him deserving of soma, or  becomes zealous at the breaking of the dawn?
Who is eager for the fellowship of Indra, who for the comradeship, who  for the brotherhood? Who (joins) together with his [=Indra’s] help for  the poet?
## 03
Who chooses the help of the gods today? Who reverently invokes the  Ādityas and Aditi for light?
Of whose pressed soma-plant do the Aśvins, Indra, and Agni drink  without losing track in their mind?
## 04
For him will Agni, the fire of the Bhāratas, hold out shelter, and for a  long time he will see the sun rising,
who says, “Let us press soma for Indra”—for the manly man, for the  best man of men.
## 05
The many do not overpower him, nor the few. Aditi will hold out wide  shelter for him.
Dear to Indra is the good performer (of sacrifice), dear the zealous man,  dear the hard-striver, dear the provider of soma.
## 06
The swaggering victor, the hero—Indra—makes the cooked food of the  hard-striver, the (soma-)presser, his own exclusive property.
No friend of the non-presser, nor comrade, nor kinsman, he strikes  down, deep down, the ill-strivers.
## 07
Indra does not agree to comradeship with a rich miser, nor does he, the  drinker of pressed soma, (agree to it) with one who does not press.
He rips away his possessions and smites him naked. He becomes
manifest exclusively to the presser, for his cooked food.
## 08
Indra do they call—those higher, those lower, and those in the middle;  Indra those travelling and Indra those settled down;
Indra those dwelling peacefully and those fighting; Indra superior men  competing for the prize.
