+++
title = "026"

+++
26 (322)
Indra (1–3), Praise of Falcon (4–7) [Soma-Theft]
Vāmadeva Gautama
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The next two hymns treat the famous myth of the theft of Soma from heaven. Soma  was being held captive in a well-fortified citadel there, guarded by an archer named  Kr̥śānu. A falcon carried him off by stealth, and though shot at by Kr̥śānu, the  bird only lost a single feather (a tale told more fully in several Brāhmaṇa accounts).  Delivered to Manu, the first sacrificer, the soma was then available to be ritually  prepared for Indra, who cannot perform his great deeds without it.
The first of the two hymns is entirely couched as the speech of Indra (in our  view, though the Anukramaṇī assigns at least vss. 4–7 to the poet Vāmadeva and  takes the first three verses either as Vāmadeva’s speech [impersonating Indra] or  as Indra’s himself). It begins (vss. 1–3) as a standard Indra ātmastuti (self-praise),  with 1st-person boasting about his deeds and identities; see, for example, X.48–49.  (On the ātmastuti in general, see Thompson 1997.) In verse 4 he addresses his usual  warrior band, the Maruts, with a laud of the falcon as the best of birds because of  his soma-stealing exploit, which he then narrates in overlapping sequence (focusing  on the central deed, “he brought [the soma]”) in the remaining three verses (5–7).  The last half of verse 7 alludes glancingly to the associated departure of the shad owy figure Plenitude, the personification (or rather deification) of plenty, a frequent  companion of Soma’s, presumably because of the association of the distribution of  gifts with the performance of the Soma Sacrifice, especially the Morning Pressing.  Judging from verse 7 in this hymn and verses 2–3 in the next one, Plenitude prob
ably was carried away from heaven at the same time as Soma—though the poet  expresses some doubts in IV.27.3.
## 01
I became Manu and the sun. I am Kakṣīvant, the inspired seer.
I steered myself down to Kutsa, the son of Arjuna. I am Kavi Uśanā.  Look at me!
## 02
I gave land to the Ārya; I (gave) rain to the pious mortal.
I led the bellowing waters. It is my will that the gods followed.
## 03
I, in my exhilaration, broke apart all at once the nine and ninety
fortresses of Śambara,
and the hundredth, his dwelling place, to complete it, when I helped  Divodāsa Atithigva.
## 04
Let that bird stand out from (all other) birds, o Maruts, the swift-flying  falcon from (all other) falcons,
because the fine-feathered one, with his independent power that needed  no (chariot-)wheel, brought to Manu the oblation that is pleasing to  the gods.
## 05
When he brought it from there, quivering (in fear), the bird, swift as  thought, was sent surging along the wide path. He traveled swiftly with the somian honey, and the falcon found
fame here.
## 06
Flying straight, the falcon, the bird, hanging onto the plant, brought  from afar the gladdening, exhilarating drink,
the soma, holding it firmly, having the gods on his side, having taken it  from yonder high heaven.
## 07
Having taken it, the falcon brought the soma, a thousand pressings and  ten thousand all at once.
Plenitude left behind the hostilities then, (as) in the exhilaration of soma  the non-fool (leaves behind) fools.