+++
title = "027"

+++
27 (323)
Falcon (1–4), Falcon or Indra (5) [Soma-Theft]
Vāmadeva Gautama
5 verses: triṣṭubh, except śakvarī 5
The second of the pair of hymns devoted to the soma-theft, this one is told from  Soma’s point of view, with Soma speaking the first two verses (again, in our opin ion), in which Soma engages in some ātmastuti of his own. He boasts of his own  knowledge (vs. 1ab) and power (vs. 2ab), but also in almost breathlessly abrupt  fashion relates the sudden appearance of the falcon, his rescuer (vs. 1d) from con finement (vs. 1b). Asserting that he was complicit in his escape (vs. 2ab), he then  describes their departure, including that of Plenitude (see the introduction to the  last hymn).
The next two verses (3–4) freeze the dramatic moment when the archer Kr̥śānu,  guardian of Soma, shoots at the fleeing falcon with his precious cargo, and man ages only to shoot off one feather. The final verse (5) depicts Indra about to drink  the soma, now ritually prepared and offered by the priests. In keeping with the  archery theme, the verb used of Indra’s approach to the soma is an idiom (práti √dhā) ordinarily used of fixing an arrow to a bowstring and aiming it at the target.
## 1
[Soma:] Even though still in the womb, I knew all their births through  and through—those of the gods—
but a hundred metal fortifications guarded me. Then the falcon!—and  swiftly I flew away.
## 2
[Soma:] He certainly did not carry me away against my will; I was  superior to him in energy and valor.
Plenitude left behind the hostilities (which were just standing) still, and  (the falcon), swelling with strength, overtook the winds.
## 3
When the falcon then roared down from heaven, when—or if—they  carried Plenitude away from there,
when the archer Kr̥śānu, alert in mind, released and let fly his bow-string  down toward him,

## 4
Flying straight, the falcon brought him to the companions of Indra from  the lofty back (of heaven), just as (the Aśvins brought) Bhujyu (home,  with their birds).
A feather *of the winged one, of the bird launched then on its course,  flew between (heaven and earth).
## 5
Now then the gleaming tub anointed with cows [=milk], the swelling,  glistening stalk,
the foremost of the honeyed drink held out by the Adhvaryus—
bounteous Indra will aim it for drinking—
the champion will aim it for drinking to exhilaration.