+++
title = "028"

+++
28 (324) Indra, or Indra and Soma
Vāmadeva Gautama
5 verses: triṣṭubh
After the preceding two hymns devoted to the theft of soma and the preparation  and offering of this ritual drink to Indra, this hymn shows the results, celebrating  the great martial deeds that Indra was capable of, once he had acquired the soma.  Indeed, Soma is presented as the equal partner of Indra in the performance of  these deeds. The deeds themselves are the familiar ones:  the slaying of Vr̥tra in  order to free the waters (vs. 1), the tearing off of the Sun’s wheel with the Śuṣṇa  saga obliquely alluded to (vs. 2), the destruction of earthly foes (vss. 3–4), and  the opening of the Vala cave (vs. 5). The hymn is marked by a clever bit of ring  composition: the waters freed from Vr̥tra’s imprisonment are as if “covered over”  (ápihitā) in verse 1, while the same adjective “covered over” is found also in verse 5  (ápihitāni), where it refers both to those waters and to the cows freed from the Vala  cave—thus suggesting the deep-structure similarity of those two myths.
## 1
With you as yokemate, o Soma, and in partnership with you, Indra made  the waters flow for Manu.
He smashed the serpent; he let the seven rivers stream. He opened them  up, like holes that had been covered over.
## 2
With you as yokemate, o drop, Indra with his strength in a single day tore  down the wheel of the Sun,
which was rolling along the lofty back (of heaven). A whole lifetime of  great deceit was set aside.
## 3
Indra smashed and Agni burned the Dasyus before midday at the  moment of confrontation, o drop.
With his missile he laid low many thousands of them, who were
travelling to the house of no exit [=grave] as if by their own intention. 4. O Indra, you made the Dasyus the lowest of all and the Dāsa clans  deprived of laud.
You two oppressed and crushed down your rivals and found requital  with your deadly weapons.
## 5
In just this way (did it come) true, o bounteous ones: you two, o Indra  and Soma, kept pounding the horse-pen and that of the cow;
you gave leave to the things that were covered with the stone [=waters/ cows] (to flow), having drilled through even the places of the earth.