+++
title = "030"

+++
30 (326) Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
24 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 8, 24, arranged in trcas ̥
This long hymn, constructed of triplets, begins with a celebration of Indra’s  supreme power (vss. 1–3) and ends with a summary of the same (vss. 22–23, with604 IV.30
24 a pendant). In between lies a catalogue of many of Indra’s famous, and not  so famous, deeds—though avoiding the most famous of these, the Vala and Vr̥tra  myths (save in the repeated epithet “Vr̥tra-smasher,” vss. 1, 19, 22). The most  detailed treatments are of Indra’s theft of the Sun’s wheel (vss. 4–6) and the smash
ing of Dawn’s cart (vss. 8–11), myths whose contents are not entirely clear to us,  despite regular allusions to them. Both myths are also treated in X.138, and as in  that hymn (see introductory remarks there), we see in both myths a reflection of  Indra’s assertion of control over cosmic time by deregulating it, at least temporar
ily. This theme seems to be announced in verse 3c, immediately preceding the story  of the Sun’s wheel.
The other deeds are related in cursory fashion, one per verse, and the abundance  of forms of utá “and” emphasizes the additive nature of the hymn, especially in its  second part. In this it resembles the catalogue hymns devoted to the Aśvins’ rescues  and favors to men.
## 1
There is no one higher than you, Indra, and no one superior, o
Vr̥tra-smasher—
no one who is exactly as you are.
## 2
Altogether do the peoples turn, like wheels, following all things that  are yours.
Altogether are you famed as great.
## 3
Not even all the gods (altogether) fought you, Indra, because of this: that by night you passed over the days.
## 4
When, for those hard pressed and for Kutsa as he fought,
you stole the wheel from the Sun, o Indra;
## 5
When you fought the swaggering gods, all of them, even though you  were alone,
and you smashed the rapacious ones, o Indra;
## 6
And when for the mortal you let the Sun slip,
and you helped Etaśa through your powers.
## 7
And after that are you (still) the one best possessed of battle fury, o  bounteous smasher of obstacles?
At that time you passed over Dānu (lying there),
## 8
And you performed this manly and masculine deed, Indra:
that you smote a woman, the evilly angry daughter of Heaven.
## 9
The daughter of Heaven: though she was honored as great, you,  the great,
crushed Dawn completely.
## 10
Dawn ran away in fear from her cart, which was completely crushed, when the bull jabbed it down.
## 11
This cart of hers lies, very completely crushed, here at the Vipāś (River). She has run into the far distance. 12. And the River Vibālī, which had spread out upon the earth,
did you hem in, Indra, by your magic power.
## 13
And you boldly seized the possessions of Śuṣṇa,
when you completely crushed his fortresses.
## 14
And you struck Śambara, the Dāsa son of Kulitara,
down from the lofty mountain, Indra.
## 15
And you smote the hundreds and thousands (of men) of the Dāsa  Varcin,
and five in addition, like the outer parts of wheels.
## 16
And to this unwed girl’s son, who had been shunned, did Indra of a  hundred resolves
give a share in the recitations.
## 17
And these two, Turvaśa and Yadu, who could not swim, did the lord of  powers,
the knowing Indra, bring to the far shore.
## 18
And these two Āryas, Arṇa and Citraratha, did you strike at the  same time
to the far side of the Sarayu (River), o Indra.
## 19
You led along the two that had been abandoned, the blind man and the  lame, o Vr̥tra-smasher:
that favor of yours is not to be equaled.
## 20
Indra threw open the hundred fortresses made of stone
for the pious Divodāsa.
## 21
For Dabhīti, Indra “put to sleep” with his blows thirty thousand Dāsas by his magic power.
## 22
And you are that same herdsman, o Indra, Vr̥tra-smasher,
who set all these things in motion.
## 23
And now what masculine deed worthy of Indra you will do, o Indra, that no one shall thwart today.
## 24
Let the god Aryaman give everything of value to you, o Āduri— Pūṣan a valuable, Bhaga a valuable, the gap-toothed god a valuable.