+++
title = "031"

+++
31 (327)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
15 verses: gāyatrī, probably arranged in trcas ̥
Indra’s help to us, in its manifold varieties, is a major subject in the hymn, which  opens with a question about this help and regularly returns to the topic (vss. 3,  10, 12, 13). Because Indra’s presence is required in order for us to receive his help,

the hymn is also framed as a journey/invitation hymn. The second verse asks  which soma drink will most appeal to Indra, a semi-disguised expression of the  usual worry that Indra will be attracted by rival pressers. This worry seems also to  underlie the difficult second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6), with its condensed phraseology. Here  the poet first calls on Indra to come here (vs. 4), then seems (in our interpreta
tion at least) to chide him slightly for tarrying (vs. 5), but finally announces (vs.  6) that Indra has arrived with both high spirits and equipment. (The references  to the sun in vss. 5 and 6 are opaque, but we tentatively suggest that they refer to  the early-morning soma sacrifice.) In the next tr̥ca (vss. 7–9) the poet seems reas
sured: despite Indra’s wide-ranging travels his generosity never flags and nothing  gets in its way.
In contrast to the middle verses 4–9, the last two tr̥cas (vss. 10–15) are quite  straightforward and characterized by the insistent fronting of the pronoun “us/ our,” which opens every verse, as well as several intermediate pādas (10bc, 12c). The  message is simple: help us and give to us in every way possible, ending with a wish  for fame among the gods, fame higher than heaven itself (vs. 15).
## 01
With what help will our brilliant, ever-strengthening comrade be there  for us—
with what most powerful troop?
## 02
Which trusty one among the exhilarating drinks, which most bounteous  one from the soma-stalk will exhilarate you
to break loose good things, even though they are held fast?
## 03
As the helper of us, your comrades and your singers,
you will prevail by your hundred means of help.
## 04
Turn toward us here—like a chariot-wheel turned toward its steeds— with your teams of the separate peoples.
## 05
For through the days you come here along the slope of your intentions,  as if by foot.
I have taken my share in company with the sun(rise).
## 06
Since your battle-frenzies, o Indra, since your chariot-wheels have  converged (here),
(I have taken my share) sometimes in (company with) you and sometimes  in (company with) the Sun.
## 07
And because it is just you they always call a bounteous one, o lord  of power,
a giver who never thinks twice,
## 08
And (you) always (circle) around (the peoples? realms?) in a single day;  on the laboring presser
you bounteously bestow many goods.
## 09
For not even a hundred hindrances can block your generosity,
nor your exploits when you will do them. 10. Let your hundred means of help help us, us your thousand,
us all your superior powers.
## 11
Choose us here for comradeship, for well-being,
for great, heavenly wealth.
## 12
Help us through all the days with wealth in profusion, o Indra— us with all your means of help.
## 13
For us open up these pens filled with cattle, as a sharpshooter (would), with your new means of help, o Indra.
## 14
Our brilliant chariot, not to be diverted, boldly
speeds in its search for cattle and horses, o Indra.
## 15
Our fame—make it most preeminent among the gods, o Sun,
and highest, as if above heaven.