+++
title = "032"

+++
32 (328)
Indra
Vāmadeva Gautama
24 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
This long final hymn of the Indra cycle of Maṇḍala IV is, in contrast to the earlier  hymns in this cycle, quite straightforward for most of its length. The poet urges  Indra to come to us, with help and gifts, and promises praises of his great deeds  (though the celebration of his specific deeds within the hymn is cursory—consisting  of part of vs. 10) and oblations.
Toward the end of the hymn, the requests for gifts become specific (esp. the tr̥ca  of vss. 17–19) and somewhat peremptory (see esp. vs. 20). These verses (17–21)  have the “feel” of a dānastuti, though they are without doubt addressed to Indra.  The real dānastuti occupies the last tr̥ca (vss. 22–24), though the praise of Indra’s  gifts in the preceding verses obviously serves as model for the human patron. These  last three verses, and especially the middle verse 23, are quite opaque and, like  many dānastutis, contain slangy expressions and words belonging to a different,  and lower, linguistic register. All three verses praise “the two brown ones,” and the  first of the verses announces itself as a formal praśasti (panegyric), with the verbal  lexeme prá...śáṃsāmi. The referent of the two brown ones is unclear. The default  assumption is horses, but the very peculiar verse 23 casts considerable doubt on  this interpretation. We will not rehearse here the many strained interpretations of  verse 23 (among which are some that concern puppets, some eyeballs) and simply  provide our own. We suggest that the “two brown ones” are the two breasts of a  woman given to the poet as a gift (along with cows and the like). (For what we take  as similar praise of a gift-woman’s breasts in a dānastuti, see VIII.2.42.) In verse 23  the poet compares the now-bared breasts to dolls on a post (the slender trunk of the  woman, presumably), and the travels he refers to in verses 23–24 are, in our inter pretation, their movements during sex. Although this interpretation is not entirely

secure, the competing interpretations are even less so, and the prurient nature of  our suggested contents would fit the marked linguistic register of the dānastuti.
## 1
Come here to us, o Indra Vr̥tra-smasher, here to our side,
as the great one with great means of help.
## 2
You are a whirlwind, constantly lunging. O brilliant one, you put the  brilliance
in the brilliant (females [=means of help?]) right here, for our help.
## 3
With only a few you smash the more numerous overweening (force)  with your power,
with the comrades who are in company with you.
## 4
We in company with you, Indra—we keep bellowing to you:
“Help us, only us!”
## 5
Come here to us, o master of the stone, with your brilliant means  of help,
which cannot be faulted or challenged.
## 6
Might we be comrades of one like you, Indra, possessed of cows, and be your yokemates for the sake of the thrilling prize.
## 7
Since you alone, Indra, are master of the prize possessed of cows, offer us great refreshment.
## 8
They cannot deflect you to another way, when, praised, you wish to  give bounty
to the praisers, o Indra longing for songs.
## 9
The Gotamas have bellowed to you with their song, for you to give the thrilling prize, Indra.
## 10
We shall proclaim your heroic deeds: that you in your exhilaration  broke into
the Dāsa fortresses, after having attacked them.
## 11
The ritual masters sing these deeds of yours—the manly deeds that you  performed—
at their pressings, o Indra longing for songs.
## 12
The Gotamas, whose vehicle is praise, have become strengthened in  your company, Indra.
On them confer glory in heroes.
## 13
Even though you are the support common to each and every one, Indra, we summon you to us.
## 14
Become inclined toward us, o good one. Among us achieve exhilaration  from the stalk,
o Indra, soma-drinker of the soma-juices.
## 15
Let the praise song of our thoughts guide you here, Indra.
Turn your two fallow bays this way. 16. Our offering cake you shall eat, and you shall take pleasure in
our songs,
as a bride-seeking man does a maiden.
## 17
We beg Indra for a thousand paired horses in harness,
for a hundred measures of soma.
## 18
Let us get hundreds and thousands of your cows driven here.
Let your largesse come among us.
## 19
We have acquired ten tubs of golden (goods).
You are the giver of much, o Vr̥tra-smasher.
## 20
O giver of much, give much to us. Not a little!—bring much here. Surely it is much that you want to give, o Indra.
## 21
Since you are famed in many places as the giver of much, o champion,  Vr̥tra-smasher,
give us a share in your largesse.
## 22
I solemnly proclaim the two brown ones of yours, o far-gazing
grandson of the Goṣan.
(But) with (the gift of) these two, don’t slack off on (the giving of) cows! 23. Like two little baby-dolls on a post—the two new little ones,
undressed—
the two brown ones go in beauty on their travels.
## 24
Ready for me when I travel at dawn, ready (for me) when I don’t, the two brown ones don’t falter on their travels.