+++
title = "033"

+++
33 (329)
R̥bhus
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh
This is one of the most interesting of the R̥bhu hymns and one of the most sig nificant for the interpretation of the R̥bhus. The R̥bhus are gods, but they are also  priests, and much of the hymn refers to their work as sacrificial performers in the  third soma pressing, the pressing with which they are associated (cf. vs. 11). This  sacrificial work is sometimes directly expressed (e.g., vss. 2ab, 3cd, 9), but most  often it is described in mythic narrative. For example, while verse 4 has been contro versial, it likely refers to a distinctive rite of the Third Pressing in which the soma  stalks already used in the first two pressings are beaten again to extract the soma  juice for the Third Pressing. The “cow” that one R̥bhu tends is the soma stalks,  which are thoroughly mangled or “carved” in the pressing and then “carried” away.  Because the R̥bhus prepared the soma or perhaps even created the Third Pressing,  they “attained immortality” and became gods. This leaves unexplained the verse’s

repeated reference to the “year,” but perhaps the year represents the sacrificial day  or even the period of the Third Pressing.
The next verses (5–6) describe the institution of the Third Pressing. The princi pal soma recipients in the Third Pressing are Indra and the three R̥bhus. The four  soma cups that the R̥bhus construct from the one made by Tvaṣṭar thus represent  the four soma recipients and the extension of the soma rite into the Third Pressing.  Unfortunately, the narrative returns to deeper obscurity in verse 7. The story of  the R̥bhus and Agohya occurs in other R̥bhu hymns (I.110.2–3 and 161.11–12),  but none of the hymns provides enough information to know who Agohya is or  the significance of the R̥bhus’ slumber in the house of Agohya. If there is a ritual  reference here, it may be to an Atirātra or overnight soma rite, in which the Third  Pressing is extended through the night into the next day. If that is the case, then  the poet could be conflating different units of time as in verse 4, and the “twelve  days” they remained with Agohya could be the hours of the night. One possibility  is that Agohya is Savitar (cf. I.110.2–3), and that identification too would point to  the night since Savitar is associated with the night. In verse 8 the “smooth running”  chariot that stands still may be the sacrifice, elsewhere compared to a chariot, but  the “all-rousing milk-cow of all shapes” remains elusive.
Although there is significant competition for this honor, perhaps the most obscure  of the stories is that of the R̥bhus’ rejuvenation of their parents (vss. 2–3ab). Their  parents could be the sacrificer and his wife, who has an important ritual role in the  Third Pressing and whose sexual power is a theme of that pressing. Or they could  even be the two Aśvins, who in the classical soma rite are invoked in the morning fol
lowing an overnight soma rite. The word pitárā, though understood here and usually  as an elliptical dual referring to father and mother, can mean “two fathers,” perhaps  an oblique reference to the Aśvins. The Aśvins are part of the Morning Pressing and  their reappearance at the end of the rite could constitute a kind of rejuvenation.
The difficulties in the interpretation of the narratives in this hymn are reflected  in some of the language of the hymns, especially at its beginning and end. The first  verse imitates the clever artisanship of the R̥bhus by its own verbal intricacy. In  pāda c the phrase taráṇibhir évaiḥ could be translated “along their transiting ways”  and mean that the R̥bhus move actually or figuratively along the courses that cross  heaven. But taráṇi can also mean “surpassing,” and therefore the phrase might also  refer to the “surpassing” ritual skill of the R̥bhus by which they encompass heaven.  With equal justification, therefore, we could translate “(The R̥bhus,) sped by the  wind, by their surpassing ways have encompassed heaven....” Pāda b interrupts  and separates pāda a from cd, which continue it. In pāda b it is not clear what the  “śvaitarī cow” is—it could be a kind of cow as Geldner suggests—but śvaítarī car ries or suggests the sense of “gleaming white” and points to the identification of  the cow as milk. If the priest has just drunk it, milk might form an underlayer of  his speech, which he then offers to the gods. The infinitive upastíre “to spread an  underlayer” evokes the upastáraṇa, the underlayer of butter that accompanies a  puroḍāśá or barley cake offering. The last verse has a different kind of complexity. Pāda b begins ná r̥té śrāntásya,  and the problem particularly involves the word r̥té. The simplest and most common  reading is to translate r̥té as “except,” but it would then normally govern an ablative  noun and there is none to be had. Our suggestion is that there is an ellipsis of an abla
tive sakhyā́t “companionship.” But further, we also suggest that r̥té is a śleṣa, a pun,  and means not only “except,” but also “in the truth,” that is, “according to the proper  order of the sacrifice.” In this sense the word is construed with śrāntá “labored.” To try  to capture the double meaning, we have translated the word twice in these two senses.
## 01
To the R̥bhus I send forth my speech like a messenger—I call upon the  śvaitarī milk-cow to spread an underlayer (for it)—
to the artisans who, sped by the wind along their transiting ways, have  encompassed heaven in a day.
## 02
When the R̥bhus made fit preparations for their parents by their  attentiveness, industry, and wondrous skills,
right then they came into companionship with the gods. Clever, they  brought prosperity to their zeal.
## 03
They who made their parents, lying aged like two old posts,
youths again—
let them—Vāja, Vibhvan, and R̥bhu together with Indra—delighting in  the honeyed (soma), help our sacrifice.
## 04
When the R̥bhus guarded the cow through the year, when the R̥bhus  carved the meat through the year,
when they carried her leavings through the year, they attained
immortality by these labors.
## 05
The eldest said, “I will make two cups (from one).” The younger said,  “We will make three.”
The youngest said, “I will make four.” O R̥bhus, Tvaṣṭar wondered at  that speech of yours.
## 06
The noble men spoke the truth, for they did exactly that. According to  their will, the R̥bhus followed that (will of theirs).
Having seen the four cups, Tvaṣṭar gazed at them, bright shining
like days.
## 07
When the R̥bhus enjoyed the hospitality of Agohya for twelve days,  sleeping (there),
(then) they made the fields good and led the rivers; plants arose upon the  dry land and waters upon the low ground.
## 08
Who made the chariot smooth running and standing still for men, who  (made) the all-rousing milk-cow of all shapes—
let these R̥bhus fashion wealth for us, they of good help, good work, and  good hands.
## 09
Because the gods were pleased at their work, reflecting on it according to  their purpose and with their thought,

Vāja became the doer of right action for the gods, R̥bhukṣan for Indra,  and Vibhvan for Varuṇa.
## 10
They who by their wisdom, finding exhilaration in the hymns, made the  two fallow bays for Indra, they who made his easily hitched horses— you!—establish for us possessions and the prospering of wealth.
Establish an alliance (with us), R̥bhus, like those dwelling in peace.
## 11
At this time of the day they have established drink and exhilaration for  you. The gods are not in companionship (with men) except (for their  companionship) with him who has labored in the truth.
Now, o R̥bhus, establish good things for us at this Third Pressing.