+++
title = "035"

+++
35 (331)
R̥bhus
Vāmadeva Gautama
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins by addressing the R̥bhus with a patronymic Saudhanvan “sons  of Sudhanvan.” This use of the patronymic and thus the emphasis on their birth  accents their original humanity. But through their ritual work, they “went along  the path of immortality” and so entered the community of gods (3cd). The poet returns to this theme also at the end of the hymn in verse 8.  He states that the  R̥bhus became gods through their work (8a) and recalls that they were human— once again through addressing them with their patronymic—before they became  immortal (8d). The concluding verse then invites the divine R̥bhus together with  Indra to receive the soma at the Third Pressing.
In the middle section of the hymn the poet mentions several of the R̥bhus’ great  deeds (vs. 5), but his focus is on their act of dividing one soma cup into four (vss.  2–4). According to this hymn, Indra alone is the recipient of soma in the Midday  Pressing, but Indra and the three R̥bhus are the principal soma recipients in the  evening (vs. 7). The creation of four cups from one thus marks the transition from  the single soma offering to Indra at midday to the four offerings in the evening and  the institution of the Third Pressing.
## 1
Travel here, children of strength! Do not keep away, o R̥bhus, sons of  Sudhanvan,
for in this pressing the conferring of treasure is yours. Let your
exhilarating draughts follow after Indra.
## 2
The R̥bhus’ conferring of treasure has come here; the drinking of  well-pressed soma has become (yours),
since by your good work and your good labor you divided the single cup  fourfold.
## 3
You divided the cup fourfold; you said, “O companion, work to cut it  apart!”
Then, o Vājas, you went along the path of the immortality to the throng  of gods, o R̥bhus of skilled hands.
## 4
Of what was this cup made, which you divided into four by your artistry? Now then press the soma-pressing for your exhilaration; drink of the  soma-honey, o R̥bhus!
## 5
By your ability you have made your parents to be young; by your ability  you have made the cup from which the gods drink.
By your ability you fashioned the two swift-running fallow bays that  convey Indra, o R̥bhus whose treasure is victory’s prize.
## 6
Who presses for you in the evening of the day the sharp pressing for  exhilaration, o Vājas,
for him, o R̥bhus, fashion wealth that consist of hale heroes since you  find exhilaration, o bulls.
## 7
In the early morning you drank the pressed soma, o you with the fallow  bays [=Indra]; the Midday Pressing is yours alone.
Drink together with the treasure-conferring R̥bhus, whom you made  your companions by their good work.
## 8
You who became gods by your good work—settle down upon heaven like  falcons!
Confer treasure, o children of strength! O sons of Sudhanvan, you
became immortal.

## 9
The Third Pressing, the conferring of treasure, which you made by your  good labor, o you of skillful hands,
that is poured all around here for you, o R̥bhus. Drink it along with the  exhilarating draughts belonging to Indra!