+++
title = "036"

+++
36 (332) R̥bhus
Vāmadeva Gautama
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 9
The first half of this hymn turns on the “proclamation” of the divinity of the R̥bhus  and of their deeds (vss. 1, 3, 5) and the second on the prosperity they bring. The  first verse already establishes the central themes of the hymn. The chariot with three  wheels that rolls through space is likely the ritual with its three fires or possibly with  its three soma-pressings. And just as the ritual flies from earth to heaven, so the  R̥bhus prosper both earth and heaven.
The ritual is key to the R̥bhus, since it is through their ritual acts that they became  divine, and they continue to perform ritual acts, even as divinities. Verse 2 again refers  to their perfect chariot—the perfect ritual that the R̥bhus carried out through their  insight. Because they rode to heaven on that ritual, they are now offered soma at the  Third Pressing (2cd). Verses 3–4 rehearse three of the well-known deeds of the R̥bhus,  which are united by a sonic repetition: they rejuvenate their parents in order for them  “to keep going” (caráthāya); in order to make the four principal soma offerings at the  Third Pressing they “divided” one “cup into four” (ví cakra camasáṃ cáturvayam); and  “out of a cowhide” (cármaṇaḥ) they made a milk-giving cow. The cowhide in 4b may  be a hide on which the stalks of the soma plant are beaten (the adhiṣavaṇacarman)  to produce the soma juice. Since at the Third Pressing the stalks used in the first two  pressings are beaten again to extract the soma juice, therefore the great deed of the  R̥bhus might have been that they were able to extract more soma juice on the cowhide  from old stalks and in that way make the cowhide into a cow once again, who gives  soma as its milk. Or the cowhide may refer to the soma stalks themselves, the shredded  remains of the previous pressings that are made to yield soma once again.
In the second half of the hymn (vss. 5–9) the poet turns principally to the rewards  that the R̥bhus bring. The poet announces the theme in verse 5 by proclaiming that  those whom the R̥bhus help have “wide boundaries”—broad horizons, we might  say. Great men, whether poets or warriors, are great because of the R̥bhus (vs. 6),  and through the R̥bhus people gain wealth (5a, 6c, 8d), vigor (8d), fame (5a, 9bc),  and descendants (9a).
## 1
Produced without horse and rein, the praiseworthy chariot with its three  wheels rolls through the airy space.
This is the great proclamation of your divinity: that you prosper heaven  and earth, o R̥bhus. 2. The very perceptive ones who made from mind by insight the
smooth-running chariot, which never overturns—
(to you,) o Vājas, o R̥bhus, we now dedicate (the soma) of this pressing  for you to drink.
## 3
Your greatness became well proclaimed among the gods, o Vājas, R̥bhus,  and Vibhūs:
that you fashion your parents as youths for them to keep going, even  though they were enfeebled, worn out by age.
## 4
You divided the single cup into four; out of a cowhide you made a cow to  flow (milk) by your insights.
So then you attained immortality among the gods by your obedience, o  Vājas, R̥bhus: that is your praiseworthy (attainment).
## 5
From the R̥bhus comes wealth that best brings the foremost fame, which  the men famed as Vājas have produced,
that is fashioned by the Vibhvans, that is to be proclaimed at the ritual  distributions. Whom you help, o gods, he has wide boundaries.
## 6
He is a prizewinning charger; he a seer through his verbal artfulness; he a  champion, an archer, who is difficult to overcome in battles;
he has received an increase of his wealth and he an abundance of good  heroes—he, whom Vāja and Vibhvan, whom the R̥bhus have helped. 7. An excellent, beautiful robe has been placed upon you: (this) song of  praise, o Vājas, R̥bhus. Take pleasure in it!
Because you are insightful poets perceiving inspired words, we dedicate  (it) to you with this formulation.
## 8
You who know all the things that nourish men, for us (fashion) from the  Holy Places [=the ritual ground]
the highest heavenly prize that brings the explosiveness of a bull; fashion  for us wealth and vitality, o R̥bhus.
## 9
Giving offspring here and wealth here, fashion here for us the fame that  heroes accompany.
The bright prize by which we would be brilliant beyond others, o R̥bhus,  have you given to us.