+++
title = "038"

+++
38 (334)
Heaven and Earth (1), Dadhikrā (2–10)
Vāmadeva Gautama
10 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn and the next two (IV.39–40) are dedicated to a horse known as  Dadhikrā(van), a prizewinning racer and a warhorse. Although no doubt in part  referring to a real horse belonging to Trasadasyu, king of the Pūrus, it also repre sents the sacrificial horse of the great royal sacrifice, the Aśvamedha, and a symbol  of Pūru, and then general Ārya, hegemony. In this capacity it is compared to the  sun, in the last, triumphal verse.
What the reader will notice most, however, is the exuberance and precision of  the equine imagery, emphasizing especially the headlong speed of the horse and his  constant goal: groups of female animals, presumably mares. The sense of speed is  enhanced by the regular use of “and” to string verses together; indeed, the hymn  begins with one. Unfortunately some of the imagery is not entirely clear; see espe
cially verse 4, where some of the translation is provisional.

Although the Anukramaṇī assigns the first verse to Heaven and Earth, it is more  likely that Mitra and Varuṇa are the referents of the unspecified duals.
## 1
And since the earlier gifts were from you two [=Mitra and Varuṇa], the  ones that Trasadasyu was to send spilling down for the Pūrus,
you have (also) given the one [=horse] who wins dwelling places, who  wins meadows, a bane for the Dasyus, overwhelming, powerful.
## 2
And a prizewinner providing many fulfillments have you given— Dadhikrā, who belongs to all the communities,
a straight-flying falcon, frothing at the mouth, swift, to be constantly  celebrated by the stranger, a champion like a lord of men.
## 3
The one whom every Pūru applauds in excitement as he runs as if down  an easy slope—
greedy with his hooves like a champion seeking his meal, outstripping  chariots, swooping like the wind.
## 4
The one who, hemming in the things to be seized in battles, keeps going  to (the contests for) cows as one better at winning,
foaming visibly, setting his attention on the (rites of) distribution,
across the circlet (of fire? the sun?), around the waters of Āyu.
## 5
And the settled peoples shriek after him at his raidings as if after a thief  who steals clothes,
as he makes his way downward like a famished falcon toward fame and  a herd full of livestock.
## 6
And desiring to run first, he keeps bearing down upon them (fem.  [=mares?]), with the ranks of chariots,
garlanding himself like a resplendent groomsman, constantly licking  the dust, having bitten the grit.
## 7
And this prizewinner, victorious, truthful, himself seeking fame with his  own body in the clash,
hastening headlong toward them (fem. [=mares?]) as they go hastily,  straight-flying, scatters dust up to the eyebrows as he stretches out
straight.
## 8
And they take fear at his charge as he shows his mettle, as if at the  thundering of heaven.
When a thousand have battled him, the fearsome one becomes difficult  to obstruct, as he stretches out straight.
## 9
And the peoples admire the speed of him who fills the territories, the  superiority of the swift one.
And they say about him as they disperse at the encounter: “Dadhikrā has run away with thousands.”
## 10
Dadhikrā has stretched over the five peoples with his vast power, like  the sun over the waters with its light.
Gaining thousands, gaining hundreds, let the prizewinning steed infuse  these words with honey.