+++
title = "039"

+++
39 (335)
Dadhikrā
Vāmadeva Gautama
6 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 6
In this celebratory hymn the very real and physical horse of the preceding hymn  (IV.38) has become a mere recipient of and occasion for a formal encomium. He is  invoked along with a number of gods and thus appears to have achieved a measure  of divinity, but the artistry of IV.38 has been replaced by the deployment of stiff  and conventional formulae. It is, however, interesting to see how an encomium of  this sort, presumably a particular type of occasional verse, would be constructed.
## 01
The swift Dadhikrā—him will we now praise, and we will pay tribute to  Heaven and to Earth.
Let the Dawns, dawning, sweeten me. They will lead me across all
difficult passages.
## 02
Fulfilling my conception, I pay tribute to the great steed, to
Dadhikrāvan, the bullish one of many favors,
whom, triumphant, shining like fire, you gave to the Pūrus, o Mitra and  Varuṇa, as one triumphant for the Pūrus.
## 03
Whoever has paid tribute to the horse Dadhikrāvan when the fire has  been kindled at the break of dawn,
him let Aditi make without offense, in concert with Mitra and Varuṇa. 4. Once we (have paid tribute to) the refreshment and the great
nourishment of Dadhikrāvan, and have brought to mind the
auspicious name of the Maruts,
we call upon Varuṇa, Mitra, Agni, and mace-armed Indra for well-being. 5. Both (sides) vie in invoking (him) just like Indra, as they rouse
themselves and reverently approach the sacrifice.
Dadhikrā, who makes sweetness for the mortal, have you, o Mitra and  Varuṇa, given to us as our horse.
## 06
Dadhikrāvan have I paid tribute to—the victorious, prizewinning horse. He will make our mouths fragrant; he will lengthen our lifetimes.