+++
title = "040"

+++
40 (336) Dadhikrā (1–4), Sūrya (5)
Vāmadeva Gautama
5 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 1
The first verse of the hymn is in the same formal style as the preceding hymn, and  in fact is almost slavishly based on IV.39.1; it is also in the same meter (triṣṭubh) as  that hymn. But when the hymn turns to jagatī, its style changes dramatically—to  the exuberant, inventive, playful descriptions of the first Dadhikrā hymn, IV.38.  The three middle verses (3–5) capture the dizzying speed and agility of the horse

as he races around the track, as they compare him to a bird swooping in full flight.  The language is equally dizzying and agile: the poet is fond of phonetic and mor phological figures, several of them involving morphologically impossible hapaxes  concocted by phonologically manipulating underlying morphology. (See esp. vs. 2.)
The final verse (5) is an explosion of morphological figures: eight compounds  ending in -sád- “sitting” (pādas abc), growing closer and closer together, followed  by four ending in -jā́- “born” crammed into the final pāda—which culminates in the  last word r̥tám “truth.” The referent of all these compounds is no longer the horse  Dadhikrā, at least not directly. Rather, as with the last verse of IV.38, the horse is  now identified with cosmic forces—the sun, but probably also the ritual fire—and  these in turn identified with the king. (See Proferes 2007:  127–28.) This verse is  much repeated and employed in later Vedic texts.
## 1
Just to Dadhikrāvan will we now pay tribute—let all the Dawns
sweeten me—
and to the Waters, Agni, Dawn, and the Sun, also to Br̥haspati Āṅgirasa,  the victorious.
## 2
A consummate warrior seeking plunder, seeking cattle, he will seek  fame in a rush to the distance, in a headlong rush to the refreshments  of Dawn.
The real thing—running, running faster, flying—Dadhikrāvan gives  birth to refreshment, nourishment, and the sun.
## 3
And (the wind) fans up his “feathers” [=mane], like the feathers of a bird  in greedy pursuit, while he runs and rushes headlong,
while he swoops like a falcon around the curving (racecourse), while he  keeps advancing with his vigor—Dadhikrāvan.
## 4
And this prizewinner, bound at neck, shoulder, and mouth, rushes  headlong to the lash—
Dadhikrā, growing stronger and stronger following his will, galloping  and galloping following the curves of the paths.
## 5
A goose sitting in the gleaming (waters), a good one sitting in the  midspace, a Hotar sitting at the vedi, a guest sitting in the dwelling,
sitting among men, sitting in the choice place, sitting in truth, sitting in  high heaven, water-born, cow-born, truth-born, stone-born—Truth.