+++
title = "041"

+++
41 (337)
Indra and Varuṇa
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh
Though immediately preceding the great Indra–Varuṇa dialogue hymn IV.42, with  its themes of contested sovereignty and complementary divine and human royal functions, this hymn, also dedicated to Indra and Varuṇa, is a relatively simple and  straightforward joint praise of and appeal to the two divinities as an undifferenti ated pair. The poet speaks repeatedly of his desire for the friendship and compan ionship of the two gods, repeatedly asks them for their help, and seeks material gain  from them as well. Although the gods are not treated separately, the contents reflect  Indra’s qualities more than Varuṇa’s, for the two are especially beseeched for aid in  defeating rivals in contest and battles (vss. 2, 4, 6, 7, 11, with imagery derived from  contests in vss. 8–9).
## 01
O Indra and Varuṇa, which praise song obtains your favor, bringing  oblations like the immortal Hotar?
(The one) spoken by us, which, filled with resolve, filled with homage,  will touch your heart, o Indra and Varuṇa.
## 02
Indra and Varuṇa—the mortal who has made the two gods his own  friends for comradeship, bringing them pleasing offerings,
he smashes obstacles and his rivals in clashes; by your great forms of  help he becomes far-famed.
## 03
Indra and Varuṇa are the best at providing treasure to men who have  performed (ritual) labor just so,
when as comrades for comradeship they will make themselves
exhilarated with the pressed soma juices and the very pleasing
offering.
## 04
O Indra and Varuṇa, you powerful ones—smash your missile, your most  powerful mace down on him
who turns his evil ways on us, who is wolfishness and deception
(personified). Against him show the measure of your
overwhelming power.
## 05
O Indra and Varuṇa—become the lovers of this insight, like bulls of a  milk-cow.
She should yield her milk to us like a great cow with her milk in a
thousand streams who has gone to the pastures.
## 06
When progeny and posterity are at stake, when fields, the sight of the  sun, and the masculine power of the bull,
Indra and Varuṇa should be here for us, the wondrous pair with their  forms of help at the turning point.
## 07
For it is just you (we choose) for your age-old help because of your  pervasive preeminence, o good friends of the cattle-seeker;
we choose you for your dear comradeship, the two champions, most  munificent like parents, who are luck itself.
## 08
As those seeking prizes go to a contest, these insights, seeking you, have  gone to you for help, o you of good gifts [/drops].
As cows [=milk] approach soma for mixing, my hymns and inspired  thoughts have approached Indra and Varuṇa for splendor.624 IV.42
## 09
These inspired thoughts of mine have come up to Indra and Varuṇa,  seeking material goods.
Like those who enjoy a good thing, they have approached them,
seeking a share of goods as fleet mares (seek a share) of fame.
## 10
Might we by ourselves be lords of prosperity in horses and chariots, of  our own proper wealth,
making the two (gods) our own along with their newer forms of help.  Let riches in teams accompany (them) among us.
## 11
O lofty Indra and Varuṇa, with your lofty forms of help drive here to us  at the winning of prizes.
When the missiles will play in the battles, (thanks to) you might we be  the winners of this contest.