+++
title = "043"

+++
43 (339)
Aśvins
Purumīḷha Sauhotra and Ajamīḷha Sauhotra
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The first four verses of this hymn are filled with questions, with the poet seeking  to identify the god or gods who will be most attentive to him. He begins by casting  his net widely, with any and all gods potentially the answer to his petitions. (These  plural possibilities are signaled grammatically and lexically: katamá “which one?”  [1a, 2a, 2b] explicitly requires a choice from three or more possible answers, and “of  those worthy of the sacrifice” [1a], “among the immortals” [1c], and “of the gods”  [2b] allow these choices to be made from the full set of divinities.) But the questions  soon pick the Aśvins out as the correct answer to the earlier questions. A query  about their chariot (2cd), which the maiden Sūryā chose as her bridal conveyance,  obliquely but uniquely identifies the Aśvins, and the remaining questions (vss. 3–4)  focus on their ability and willingness to aid us.
With our benefactors now identified as the Aśvins, the next two verses (5–6)  concern their chariot journey (somewhat obscurely), with the announcement of  the first sight of their chariot made in the second half of verse 6. In the final verse, identical to the last verse of IV.44, the poet reminds the gods that he has provided  them with nourishment and asks for their return favor.
The hymn displays a neat, but uninsistent, ring composition. In verse 1d the poet  asks where to “fix” his praise and offerings to the god, using a form of the root śri;  the same root is found in the final pāda of the hymn (7d), where our desire of the  gods is, reciprocally, “fixed.” This complementarity is emphasized by the two mor
phologically parallel words that express what we offer to the gods (suṣṭutí “good  praise,” 1d) and what we hope for in return (sumatí “good favor,” 7b). The hymn twice mentions the involvement of the Aśvins (and their chariot) in  the marriage of Sūryā, the daughter of the Sun (vss. 2, 6), the second time in the  present tense coinciding with our own first sight of their chariot. While most refer ences to Sūryā and her marriage in Aśvin hymns are set in the mythic past, in this  short Aśvin cycle (IV.43–45) Sūryā is present with the Aśvins when they come to the  sacrifice, travelling with them on the same chariot (see IV.44.1, 45.1).
## 1
Who will listen? Which one of those worthy of the sacrifice? Which god  will take pleasure in our extolling?
In whose heart among the immortals shall we fix this dearest divine good  praise accompanied by good oblations?
## 2
Who will have mercy? Which one (will be) the first to come? Which one  of the gods (will be) the most wealful?
What swift chariot with speeding horses do they say is the one that the  Daughter of the Sun chose?
## 3
For during days such as these you two come right away, like Indra to his  ability at the decisive turn.
You two, born from heaven as fine-feathered heavenly birds—by which  one of your abilities do you become the most able?
## 4
What is your distribution (of goods) and with what (distribution) do you  come here to us when called upon?
Who is yours? Make wide space for us in close quarters, even out of  great neglect, with your help, o honeyed, wondrous pair.
## 5
Your chariot reaches widely around heaven. When it rolls here to you  from the sea,
(its wheel-rims) splash honey upon honey on you, you two honeyed ones,  when cooked nourishments are roasted [?] for you two.
## 6
The Sindhu River sprinkles your horses with the Rasā; your ruddy birds  avoid the glowing heat.
Your speedy vehicle has just appeared, with which you two become the  masters [/husbands] of Sūryā.
## 7
Since I have nourished you two, whether here or there, in the same way, so  (let there be) this good favor for us, o you who bring prizes as treasures: make wide space for the singer. Our desire is fixed in your direction, o  Nāsatyas.
