+++
title = "044"

+++
44 (340)
Aśvins
Purumīḷha Sauhotra and Ajamīḷha Sauhotra
7 verses: triṣṭubh
Connected with IV.43 by their shared final verse, this hymn begins with another  reference to the wedding journey of Sūryā on the Aśvins’ chariot, also expressed  in the present tense (like IV.43.6; see also IV.45.1). Thereafter the hymn concen trates solely on the Aśvins’ chariot journey to our sacrifice and the reciprocal ritual  exchange (aid and goods for soma and other oblations) that will occur there. The  threat of other sacrificers attracting the gods elsewhere is also on the poet’s mind  (vss. 3–5).
## 1
Today, o Aśvins, we would call your chariot of broad expanse here to its  meeting with the cow,
(the chariot) that conveys Sūryā, providing her a standing place, the best  of many, whose team is hymns, the one seeking goods.
## 2
You two, o Aśvins, you sons of heaven, win splendor among the gods by  your abilities.
Nourishments escort your wondrous form when the humped horses [?] convey you on the chariot.
## 3
Who today, having bestowed his oblation, will attract you here with his  chants, for help or for drinking the pressed soma,
or, having held fast to his reverence, will turn (you) here for the foremost  striving for truth, O Aśvins?
## 4
O you who appear in many places, with your golden chariot drive right  up to this sacrifice here, o Nāsatyas.
Just you will drink of the somian honey, and you will establish a treasure  for the person who distributes it.
## 5
Drive right here to us from heaven and from the earth with your golden,  smooth-rolling chariot.
Let the others who seek the gods not hold you down, because our
ancient umbilical tie is attached to you.
## 6
Now, wondrous ones, measure out lofty wealth conferring many heroes  to us both [=singers and patrons].
As the superior men furthered your praise, o Aśvins, the Ājamīḷhas have  come to your joint praise.
## 7
Since I have nourished you two, whether here or there, in the same way,  so (let there be) this good favor for us, o you who bring prizes as
treasures:
make wide space for the singer. Our desire is fixed in your direction, o  Nāsatyas. 
