+++
title = "045"

+++
45 (341)
Aśvins
Vāmadeva Gautama
7 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 7
This hymn represents the culmination of the chariot-journey sequence in the three  Aśvin hymns of Maṇḍala IV. In IV.43 the poet began by asking who among the gods  will listen to his prayers and come to him with aid. Having identified the Aśvins  as his target, he briefly describes their chariot and its journey and announces its  arrival. In IV.44 the poet once again calls the chariot and the Aśvins to his sacrifice  and urges them to avoid the sacrifices of others.
Here in this hymn (IV.45), the Aśvins’ chariot journey is depicted as happening  simultaneously with the performance of the sacrifice, and in fact the two realms  are to some extent conflated. Their chariot(s) and horses behave in the same way  and are described with the same verb (vs. 2ab) as the beam of the kindled ritual fire  (vs. 1a), and the Aśvins both come bringing honey and come for the honey offered  them. (Honey is a leitmotif throughout the hymn, occurring at least once in each  of the first five verses.) The ritual is also depicted in more detail than in the last two  hymns: see the actions of the priest in verses 5ab and 7d. Moreover, the exact time  at which the journey and the sacrifice are happening, namely dawn, is repeatedly  mentioned (vss. 2, 4, 5), and the other light sources associated with the break of day  have their place in the hymn: the ritual fires (1a, 5ab) and the sun (vss. 2, 6).
As in the other two Aśvin hymns in this series, Sūryā, the daughter of the Sun,  is present not merely in mythological memory but in the present, ritual time—but  in this hymn she is not mentioned by name. Instead, an ingenious turn of phrase  “three ...are on (the chariot) as a pair” in verse 1 must refer to the pairing of the  two Aśvins with Sūryā, especially since the word for “pair” mithuná is regularly  used for a sexual pairing. Her anonymous appearance in the first verse of the hymn  suggests the fertile fruitfulness that the overflowing honey in the rest of the hymn  also represents.
The final verse of the hymn formulaically celebrates the Aśvins’ chariot, and  this verse sums up not merely this hymn but the triad of Aśvin hymns that it closes.
## 01
Now this radiant beam arises; the earth-encircling chariot is hitched up  upon the back of this heaven.
Three bringing nourishment [=Aśvins and Sūryā] are upon it [=the
chariot] as a pair; a fourth, a skin-bag, teems with honey.
## 02
Up rise your nourishing, honey-filled chariots and horses at the break  of dawn,
uncovering the darkness that had been confined and stretching like the  blazing sun through the dusky realm.
## 03
Drink of the honey with your honey-drinking mouths and hitch up your  own dear chariot for honey.

You quicken the course of the path with honey, and you carry your
honey-filled skin-bag, o Aśvins.
## 04
Your geese—honeyed, unfaltering, golden-feathered, calling “uhu” [?],  waking at dawn,
swimming in water, invigorating, stroking the invigorator [=soma]— (along with them) you go to the pressings of the honeyed (soma) like  flies to honey.
## 05
Providing good ceremonies, honey-filled, the ruddy fires awaken at dawn  in response to the Aśvins,
when the wide-gazing (priest), his hands washed, advancing (across the  ritual ground), has pressed the honeyed soma with stones.
## 06
(Your horses) keeping watch nearby through the days, in constant  agitation, stretching like the blazing sun through the dusky realm—
hitching up his own horses, the Sun also comes speeding. By your own  independent power, you two perceive all the paths.
## 07
I have (now) proclaimed (this chariot of) yours, o Aśvins, setting my  insight before you—the unaging chariot that has good horses,
with which in a day you drive around the dusky realms to the provider  offering oblation, as he advances (across the ritual ground).