+++
title = "048"

+++
48 (344)
Vāyu
Vāmadeva Gautama
5 verses: anuṣṭubh
Unlike the two preceding hymns to Vāyu and Indra (IV.46–47), with their simple  diction and single purpose, this hymn to Vāyu alone, although it also continues  the journey motif, especially in the refrain of verses 1–4, contains some enigmatic  phraseology and striking images. In particular both the sense and the syntactic con
struction of the simile in the second pāda of verse 1 are much disputed. On the  basis of VI.14.3 we believe “the riches of the stranger” (rā́yo aryáḥ) to refer to Ārya  people in general and their poets in particular.
Note that the soma-drinking, the purpose of Vāyu’s journey, is mentioned only  in the refrain, and that the time of day for the ritual, early morning, is only obliquely  referred to, in verse 3.

## 1
Pursue the invocations not (yet) pursued, just as “the riches of the  stranger” [=the poets of the Āryas] pursue poetic inspirations.
– O Vāyu, drive here with your glittering chariot, to drink of the pressed  (soma).
## 2
Taking taunts out of harness, (but yourself) provided with a team, with  Indra as charioteer,
o Vāyu, drive here with your glittering chariot, to drink of the pressed  (soma).
## 3
The two black treasure chambers [=Night and Dawn], with all their  ornaments, have directed themselves after each other in turn.
– O Vāyu, drive here with your glittering chariot, to drink of the pressed  (soma).
## 4
Let the ones with mind as yoke, the ninety-nine yoked ones, convey you. – O Vāyu, drive here with your glittering chariot, to drink of the pressed  (soma).
## 5
O Vāyu, hitch up a hundred flourishing fallow bays,
or, since you have thousands, let your chariot drive here with its (full)  dimension.