+++
title = "049"

+++
49 (345)
Indra and Brhaspati ̥
Vāmadeva Gautama
6 verses: gāyatrī
This simple hymn is reminiscent of the nearby Vāyu and Indra hymns (IV.46–47),  elementary in diction and simple in purpose, inviting the two divinities to come and  drink the soma. It seems likely that IV.49 was indeed based, somewhat artificially,  on those former hymns, as there is no standard ritual offering of soma to Indra  and Br̥haspati as there is to Indra and Vāyu. Indeed, Br̥haspati does not otherwise  drink soma in the R̥gveda (save for IV.50.10). Evidence for the dependence of this  hymn on Indra and Vāyu hymns is found in the second pāda of verse 3, which is  also found in I.135.7 with the grammatical subjects Indra and Vāyu. The elemen tary and derivative nature of this hymn contrasts strongly with the richness of the  following hymn (IV.50) to the same divinities.
## 01
This dear oblation here is in your mouth, o Indra and Br̥haspati;
the solemn speech and the exhilarating drink are being announced.
## 02
This soma here is being poured in circles for you, o Indra and Br̥haspati, pleasing, to be drunk to exhilaration.
## 03
Come here to our house, o Br̥haspati and Indra,
as soma-drinkers to drink the soma.
## 04
In us, o Indra and Br̥haspati, place wealth in hundreds of cows,
rich in horses, thousand-fold. 5. Indra and Br̥haspati we invoke with hymns when (the soma) is pressed, to drink of this soma here.
## 06
Drink the soma, o Indra and Br̥haspati, in the house of the pious one. Become exhilarated, being at home with it.