+++
title = "050"

+++
50 (346)
Br̥haspati (1–9), Br̥haspati and Indra (10–11)
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 10
This hymn falls naturally into several sections, but although some scholars con sider it to be a composite of up to three independent hymns, an overall unity can  be detected. (Of course, this unity may results from the combining of once sepa rate elements.) Indeed, the hymn seems to encapsulate the historical development  of the Vala myth, which concerns the freeing of the cows from the Vala cave where  they were imprisoned, and its principal participants, Indra, Br̥haspati, and the  Aṅgirases. As Schmidt has clearly shown (1968), Indra was the original hero of  the Vala myth, in his role as priest-king and with his priestly weapons—songs  and correctly formulated true speech—with the Aṅgiras singers as his helpers. In  this role he received the epithet “br̥haspati.” But in time the epithet was split off  into a separately conceived divine figure Br̥haspati, first as an alloform of Indra  and then detached from Indra as an independent divinity who served as Indra’s  priest—taking with him Indra’s priestly role, while Indra retained the roles of king  and warrior. In this hymn we first see a unitary (Indra-)Br̥haspati figure, then the  human equivalent of the split figure, in the form of king and “Formulator” priest.  And finally the split divine figures, Indra and Br̥haspati, are invited to share the  ritual.
The first six verses are dedicated to the mythic deeds of Br̥haspati (or  “Br̥haspati”) with the Vala myth occupying verses 2–5. The Aṅgirases are promi nent, though not named. The final verse of this portion (6) clearly brings the sec tion to a close, returning it to the present with explicit treatment of our ritual  honoring of Br̥haspati, and wishes for our continued prosperity typically found  in hymn-final verses. Verses 7–9 promise success of all sorts to the king who does  honor to Br̥haspati and to his earthly representative, the “Formulator” (Brahmán),  a role that will evolve into the later Purohita (house-priest of the king) (note the  verb phrase puró √dhā in vs. 1). This section seems to apply the lessons of the  mythic past found in verses 1–6 to the contemporary situation and to establish a  symbiotic relationship between Formulator and king, matching the relationship  between the mythic Br̥haspati and the (unnamed) Indra, from whom Br̥haspati  has been split. It follows logically that the last two verses (10–11) invite Br̥haspati  and Indra to the sacrifice to drink the soma and bestow blessings on us. The uni tary role in the opening mythic section has evolved into the double divine figures634 IV.50
summoned in the final section, by way of the mediating section showcasing these  complementary roles in the human domain.
## 01
He who with his strength propped apart the ends of the earth, with a  roar—Br̥haspati possessing three seats—
him with the gladdening tongue did the seers of old, the inspired poets  in meditation, set in front—
## 02
Those [=Aṅgirases] of noisy tread, exulting at the good sign,
o Br̥haspati, who for us have battered at
the dappled, glossy, uncheatable (cow-)enclosure [=Vala cave].
O Br̥haspati, (after their action) guard its womb [=(the contents of)
the Vala cave, the cows].
## 03
O Br̥haspati, that which is the farthest distance, (coming) from there  have those who touch the truth [=Aṅgirases] sat down here (for
sacrifice) for you.
For you do the deep-dug springs, milked by the stone, drip an
abundance of honey all about.
## 04
Br̥haspati, on first being born from the great light, in the farthest  distant heaven,
he, possessing seven mouths [=Aṅgirases] and seven reins [=seers?],  being powerfully born, blew apart the dark shades with
his roar.
## 05
He with his flock possessing good rhythm, the flock possessing chant— he broke Vala, broke its bolt with his roar.
Br̥haspati drove up the ruddy (cows) who sweeten the oblation, who  kept lowing as he was bellowing.
## 06
Thus to the father to all the gods, to the bull, we would do honor with  sacrifices, with homage, with oblations.
O Br̥haspati, may we, possessed of good offspring and of heroes, be  lords of riches.
## 07
Only that king surmounts all the (forces) belonging to his opponents  through his tempestuousness and heroism
who supports Br̥haspati (to be) well-supported, behaves agreeably  to him, and extols him as the one receiving the first
portion.
## 08
Only he dwells peacefully, well-situated in his own home; for him  refreshment swells at all times;
to him the clans bow just of themselves—for which king the
Formulator comes first.
## 09
Unopposable, he wins riches belonging to his opponents and those  belonging to his allies.
The king who makes wide space for the Formulator seeking aid, him do  the gods aid. 10. Br̥haspati and Indra, drink the soma, becoming exhilarated at this  sacrifice here, you who have bullish goods.
Let the drops that stand by you enter you. In us deposit wealth
consisting of hale heroes.
## 11
Br̥haspati, Indra, strengthen us. Let this benevolence of yours keep  company with us.
Aid our insightful thoughts; awaken plentiful gifts. Exhaust the
hostilities of the stranger, of the rapacious ones.