+++
title = "051"

+++
51 (347)
Dawn
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is remarkable first for the fact that the dawns are always presented and  addressed in the plural (“Dawns”) rather than the singular, as so often. Indeed,  when the poet wishes to refer to a single dawn, he uses instead the word “light”  (vs. 1)  or an unspecified pronoun (vs. 6). The grammatical plurality of the sub
ject Dawns serves a thematic purpose: as in other dawn hymns the poet notes that  each day’s dawn is different, yet paradoxically all dawns are the same, coming in an  unbroken chain from the east day after day (see, e.g., vs. 8).
As V. Yareham suggested (in an unpublished paper presented at the University  of Texas Vedic Workshop, May 2007), the hymn is structured around an ompha los verse (6), with concentric matching verses surrounding it: 1–2 / 10–11 and  3–5 / 7–9. The omphalos poses a central and essentially unanswerable question,  the one that always arises about the dawn(s): how can they be both the same  and different, and the poet expresses his anxiety that he cannot identify the  particular dawn in the swarm of identical ones. Behind this anxiety is another  one, seen especially in verses 4, 6, and 7, namely whether we, the current sacrifi cers, will have the same material success with our dawn sacrifice as the ritualists  of old.
Otherwise, the imagery is of the usual type for dawn hymns:  the brilliant  beauty of the dawns in contrast to the darkness, which they banish; their abrupt  arising in the east and their subsequent journey; and the prayers for largesse,  reminding us that the dakṣiṇā, the priestly gifts, were distributed at the dawn  sacrifice.
## 01
Here has this light, the latest of many, stood (up) out of the east from the  darkness, with its patterns.
Now the daughters of Heaven radiating widely, the Dawns, will make a  way for the people.
## 02
They have stood up—the bright Dawns—in the east, like the sacrificial  posts fixed at ceremonies.

They have unclosed the doors of the enclosure of darkness as they  dawn, blazing and pure.
## 03
Dawning today, the bounteous Dawns brighten the benefactors for the  giving of largesse.
In (a place) without brightness let the niggards sleep, unawakening in  the middle of darkness.
## 04
Goddess Dawns, should it be the old course or a new one for  you today—
(or the one going) along which, you rich ladies, you richly dawned  on the Aṅgiras(-clan) of the Nine-Cows, of the Ten-Cows, of the  Seven-Mouths?
## 05
For you, goddesses, with horses whose yoke is truth, drive around the  creatures in a single day,
awakening the sleeping, every two-footed and four-footed living thing,  to activity, o Dawns.
## 06
Where is she, which one of them is she, the age-old one along  with whom they distributed the distributions of the
R̥bhus?
(I ask because) when the beautiful Dawns proceed in beauty, they  cannot be distinguished—the unaging ones having the same
appearance.
## 07
These same auspicious Dawns existed of old, those of superior  heavenliness, who were really born of truth,
at whose (time) one who had sacrificed and labored with
hymns, praising and chanting, reached wealth in a single
day.
## 08
They proceed, in the same way, from the east, spreading out from the  same place in the same way.
The Goddess Dawns, awakening from the seat of truth, like gushes of  cows, become wakeful.
## 09
Just these now—the same ones in the same way—with immutable  colors, the Dawns proceed,
hiding the black void with their bright (colors), glistening, gleaming,  shining with their own bodies.
## 10
O daughters of Heaven, radiating widely, bestow on us wealth in  offspring, o goddesses.
Being awakened from a comfortable place in response to you, may we  be lords of an abundance of heroes.
## 11
O daughters of Heaven, radiating widely—I whose sacrifice is a beacon  implore this of you, o Dawns:
May we be glorious among the peoples. Let both Heaven and Goddess  Earth ensure this.
IV. 52–53 637