+++
title = "053"

+++
53 (349)
Savitar
Vāmadeva Gautama
7 vereses: jagatī
A relatively straightforward hymn dedicated to Savitar, literally “the Impeller.”  Savitar’s natural control over the rhythms of life—alternatively setting the world  in motion and causing it to settle down—is emphasized, as is his omnipresence in  the cosmos. It is noteworthy that throughout the hymn, even in the requests for  Savitar’s protection and benefits (vss. 1, 6–7), the god stays in the 3rd person, gram
matically distanced from us despite his direct involvement in our affairs.
## 01
We would choose that great thing, worthy to be chosen, of god Savitar,  the provident lord,
with which by himself he holds out shelter to the pious. The great god  has held it up for us through the nights.

## 02
The supporter of heaven, the lord of offspring of the living world, the  sage poet, fastens on himself a tawny cloak.
Wide-gazing, spreading out and filling the wide (midspace?), Savitar has  begotten praiseworthy benevolence.
## 03
He has filled the heavenly and earthly realms. The god makes his  signal-call to support his own.
Savitar has stretched forth his two arms, at his impulsion causing the  moving world to settle down and impelling it forth through the nights. 4. Undeceivable, watching over living beings, god Savitar guards his  commandments.
He has stretched his two arms for the offspring of the living world. He  whose commandments are upheld rules over the great road.
## 05
Savitar (encompasses) the midspace three times in his greatness; he  encompasses the three dusky realms and the three realms of light.
He speeds the three heavens and the three earths. With his three
commandments he guards us by himself.
## 06
Possessing lofty benevolence, the one who impels forth and causes to settle  down, who exerts his will over both the moving world and the stationary, let him, god Savitar, hold out to us shelter providing threefold protection  against distress for us and for our dwelling place.
## 07
The god has come according to the ritual progressions. Let him make  our dwelling place strong. Let Savitar establish for us refreshment that  brings good offspring.
Let him quicken us through the nights and the days. Let him speed
wealth that brings offspring.