+++
title = "054"

+++
54 (350) Savitar
Vāmadeva Gautama
6 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 6
This hymn conveys a much more intimate sense of our connection to Savitar than the  preceding hymn with its formal praises. This intimacy is achieved by the aorist of the  immediate past that opens the hymn announcing his epiphany—“he has arrived!”— and by the vocatives and 2nd-person address that follow. The closeness of our rela tionship with the god allows us to ask him for something more personal than the  shelter and support requested in IV.53, namely (in the middle verse, vs. 3) for Savitar
to intercede on our behalf with anyone, divine or mortal, whom we have offended. The hymn also makes heavy use of the verb sū “impel” from which Savitar’s  name is derived: it is found in all verses but the first.
## 1
He has arrived—god Savitar to be greeted by us now and at this very  time of day to be invoked by superior men— he who apportions treasures to the sons of Manu so that he will establish  the best material wealth for us here.
## 2
For you first impel immortality to the gods worthy of the sacrifice as  their highest share;
just after that, o Savitar, you reveal your gift: lives following in
succession for the sons of Manu.
## 3
Whatever we have done to the divine race, because of heedlessness, or  scant skills, or excess of power, or our sheer human nature,
o Savitar, among both the gods and the sons of Manu, impel us to be  without offense here.
## 4
The (commandment?) of the divine Savitar is not to be violated, so that  he will support all the living world.
Whatever he of the beautiful fingers impels on the expanse of earth or in  the height of heaven, that of his comes true.
## 5
(You impel) those whose chief is Indra [=Maruts] from the lofty  mountains, and you impel the dwelling places that provide homes
[=clouds?] for them.
Just as they spread out while flying, just so do they stand still for your  impulsion, o Savitar.
## 6
O Savitar, as three times a day your impulsions impel good fortune day  after day,
Indra, Heaven and Earth, the Sindhu with her waters, Aditi with the  Ādityas, will extend shelter to us.