+++
title = "055"

+++
55 (351)
All Gods
Vāmadeva Gautama
10 verses: triṣṭubh 1–7, gāyatrī 8–10
The only hymn dedicated to the All Gods in Maṇḍala IV, it is clearly a composite  hymn in two different meters, divisible into 1–7, 8–10. The last three tacked-on  verses are extremely simple; not so the first and more substantial part of the hymn,  which is full of difficulties and uncertainties, especially in verses 2 and 6.
This first section opens with questions about identity (vs. 1): who among the  gods will protect and defend us, and who (among mortals?) will provide a safe space  at the sacrifice for the gods. The hymn provides a number of possible answers to the  first question, starting in fact in the first verse: Heaven and Earth, Aditi, Mitra and  Varuṇa. All of these recur in subsequent verses, along with others: Night and Dawn  (vs. 3); Aryaman, Agni, and Indra and Viṣṇu (vs. 4); the Maruts (vs. 5); in addition  to lesser divinities and powers like the Sindhu (vs. 3); Ahi Budhnya (vs. 6); and so  on. It is likely that the hymn does not envisage a single answer to the question,  though Aditi and the Ādityas continually surface in these verses, and Aditi, Mitra,

and Varuṇa, named in verse 1, are again named in verse 7, which forms a ring with  verse 1. Although a clear answer to the first question is not given, the verses describ ing or invoking these named gods’ help are relatively clear (3–5, in addition to 1, 7).
This leaves the second and second-to-last verses (2 and 6), symmetrically paired  in this structure. In examining the hymn thus structurally, one can form the hypoth esis that, since the other verses suggest answers to the first question in verse 1, these  two verses provide the answer to the second question (1d): “Who will establish wide  space for you at the ceremony, o gods?” Although this hypothesis does not solve all  the difficulties, especially of the cryptic verse 2, it does offer a means to approach  the problems. Certainly verse 2 can be interpreted as the depiction of a dawn sacri fice: the Dawns appear to be the subject of pāda b (discriminators because they mark  the boundary between night and day), and the chanters of pāda a can then be the  priests. Pāda c can then refer to the distribution of the dakṣiṇā, priestly gifts, at the  dawn ritual, and the subjects of pāda d can be the Dawns, the gods present at the  sacrifice, or the poets—or all three. The sacrificial context returns, somewhat more  clearly, in verse 6, where it seems that the priests reveal the actual sacrificial sub stance in the same manner as the gods revealed the contents of the Vala cave (using  the same verb). In both of the “sacrificial” verses, then, it seems that divine charac teristics and mythical exploits are attributed to the presumably mortal participants.
If these speculations about the structure of this hymn are at all correct, it is  striking that the gods are identified by name and by role quite clearly, but the rit ual participants are left deliberately unclear. This may be another example of the  poets’ reflection on the mystical nature of the sacrifice and of the transformations it  effects not only in the sacrificed substance but in the sacrificers themselves, tempo rarily endowing the latter with a touch of divinity.
## 1
Who is the protector among you (all), o good ones, who the defender? O  Heaven and Earth, o Aditi—you should protect us
from the stronger mortal, o Varuṇa and Mitra. Who will establish wide  space for you at the ceremony, o gods?
## 2
Those [=priests?] who will chant forth the ancient ordinances while the  discriminators who are never fooled [=Dawns?] will dawn widely—
they are the untiring distributors who make distribution. The wondrous  ones whose insights are truth have shone.
## 3
I reverently invoke the Housegoddess, Aditi, the Sindhu with chants,  (invoke) divine Well-Being for comradeship.
Night and Dawn, the undeceivable, will arrange it so that both day
halves will keep guard over us.
## 4
Aryaman clears out a path, and Varuṇa; the lord of refreshment, Agni,  (clears out) a way easy to traverse.
Indra and Viṣṇu—when you are being praised in our manly way, hold  out shelter to us and defense along with attack.
## 5
The help of the Mountain, of the Maruts, of the divine Protector, of  Bhaga have I chosen. The lord [=Agni? Varuṇa?] will guard us from anxiety stemming from  (our own) people; Mitra from that stemming from our allies, and he  should make wide space for us.
## 6
Now, you divine World-Halves, one should praise (you) along with Ahi  Budhnya, with watery sacrifices.
They [=priests?], desirous of gain, have revealed them [=the watery
sacrifices?] gurgling like the gharma pot, (like) rivers in their
converging on the sea.
## 7
Let goddess Aditi, with the gods, keep guard over us. Let the god  Protector protect us, not keeping his distance,
for we ought not to violate the wellspring of Mitra and Varuṇa nor the  back of Agni.
## 8
Agni is lord of a mass of goods, Agni of great good fortune.
He will grant these to us.
## 9
Bounteous, liberal Dawn, convey hither many valuables
to us, you who are rich in prize mares.
## 10
So to us Savitar, Bhaga, Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman—
to us Indra—will come with generosity.