+++
title = "056"

+++
56 (352)
Heaven and Earth
Vāmadeva Gautama
7 verses: triṣṭubh 2–4, gāyatrī 5–7
Like the preceding hymn, this one is divided into two by meter: 1–4, 5–7; the two  were presumably independent hymns originally. The first four verses mix invoca tions of Heaven and Earth at the current sacrifice with cosmogonic accounts of  their creation (see esp. vs. 3 and its present-time counterpart in 1cd), but the ritual  context is dominant. There are a number of puns. The short second hymn continues  the ritual focus.
## 01
Let great Heaven and Earth, the preeminent ones, come to be here with  their light, with their gleaming rays [/at our gleaming chants],
when, fixing the two lofty ones apart as the widest, the bull bellows to  them along the ways that spread broadly.
## 02
The two goddesses deserving the sacrifice, along with the gods
deserving the sacrifice—they stay, not confounding (the heavenly
commandments) [/not altering (their color)], growing strong
[/dripping (ghee)],
truthful, without deceit, the two whose children are the gods, the
two leaders of the sacrifice with its gleaming chants [/with their
gleaming rays].

## 03
He certainly was the good artisan among the creatures who begot these  two, Heaven and Earth:
the two wide, deep, well-fixed realms did the wise one fit together in
propless (space) with his skill.
## 04
Now, you two World-Halves, with your lofty defenses, nurturing us in  concert with (the gods) accompanied by their wives,
protect us, o you of wide extent, who entirely deserve the sacrifice.
Through our insightful thought may we be charioteers who
always win.
## 05
We present to you two, great (Earth and) Heaven, a praise-invocation to be proclaimed to you two gleaming ones.
## 06
Purifying your own bodies mutually, you two rule each through your  own skill.
You have constantly conveyed the truth from of old.
## 07
You two great ones assure it success, as you further and fulfill the truth  of Mitra.
You have stationed yourself around the sacrifice.