+++
title = "057"

+++
57 (353)
Agricultural Divinities
Vāmadeva Gautama
8 verses: anuṣṭubh 1, 4, 6–7; triṣṭubh 2–3, 8; puraüṣṇih 5
This hymn is in a variety of meters, alternating throughout the poem, and it is  dedicated to a number of different divinities related to agriculture. With its num ber of verses it is out of place in the collection, and its subject matter and tone  are more “popular” than those of the core R̥gveda. It is not possible to determine  whether the hymn we have now was assembled out of several separate hymns, but  at least verses 1–3, dedicated to the Lord of the Field, hang together, though they  are not metrically uniform. A curious feature in the later part of the hymn is the
dual address (via a dual dvandva compound) to “Prosperity and Plow” (vss. 5, 7). Hymns like this give us precious glimpses into everyday life and the technical ter minology of particular professions. The hymn is notable also for its address to the  Furrow (vs. 6, see also 7), the first appearance of the feminine noun sī́tā, renowned  in later Sanskrit of course as the name of Rāma’s noble wife in the Rāmāyaṇa.
## 01
By means of the Lord of the Field as if by a concluded (alliance),  may we win
what prospers the cow, the horse. He will be gracious to one such as us. 2. O Lord of the Field, as a milk-cow yields milk, milk out upon us a  honeyed wave,
dripping with honey, well-purified like ghee. Let the lords of truth be  gracious to us. 3. Honeyed the plants, the heavens, the waters—honeyed let the midspace  be for us.
Let the Lord of the Field be honeyed for us. Without suffering harm  may we follow after him.
## 04
Prosperity (be) the draft-animals, prosperity the superior men; for  prosperity let the plow till.
For prosperity let the straps be bound; for prosperity brandish the goad. 5. O Prosperity and Plow, take pleasure in this speech here. When you have  made milk in heaven,
with it besprinkle this (earth) here.
## 06
Become inclined our way, well-portioned Furrow. We will extol you, so that you will be well-portioned for us, so that you will be well-fruited  for us.
## 07
Let Indra lay down the Furrow; let Pūṣan extend her straight.
Let her, full of milk, yield milk to us, summer after summer.
## 08
For prosperity let our plowshares till through the earth; for prosperity let  our plowmen advance with their draft-animals.
Prosperity (let) Parjanya (be) with his honey and milk drinks. O
Prosperity and Plow, place prosperity in us.