+++
title = "058"

+++
58 (354)
Ghee
Vāmadeva Gautama
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 11
The Anukramaṇī provides a bewildering variety of choices for the divinity of this  hymn: Agni, or the Sun, or the waters, or the cows—or ghee (ghr̥ta), the clarified  melted butter regularly used as an oblation in sacrifice. The last is clearly correct.
Ghee is here given the same type of exalted, high-style rhetorical treatment as  the other crucial ritual substance, soma, with which it is also identified in this poem.  Phraseology appropriate to soma is applied to the streams of ghee throughout, and,  like soma, ghee becomes the focus of mystical speculations and also the subject of  vivid images. It is not surprising that this significant sacrificial substance should  receive such poetic glorification, especially given the importance of cows and cow  imagery in the R̥gveda.
What should really surprise us is that only this poet in this late and final hymn in  just one maṇḍala should have seen fit to make ghee his subject. Soma, after all, has a  whole maṇḍala of 114 hymns to itself. Grammatical accident may help account for  the difference: sóma is grammatically masculine and thus easily personified, while  ghr̥ta is grammatically neuter. However, the prominence of the cognate substance in  Old Iranian (Aves. haoma, Old Persian hauma) and the existence of a lengthy praise  hymn to deified Haoma in Younger Avestan (the Hōm Yašt, Yasna 9–10) testify to  a long tradition of celebration of soma, which is not shared by ghee.644 IV.58
## 01
From the sea a honeyed wave has arisen; along with the (soma-)plant it  has reached all the way to immortality.
The name of Ghee that is hidden: “the tongue of the gods,” “the navel  of the immortal.”
## 02
We will proclaim the name of Ghee; at this sacrifice here we will uphold  it with reverences.
The formulator will hear it as it is being announced. The four-horned  buffalo [=soma] has vomited it.
## 03
Four are his horns, three his feet; two heads, seven hands are his. Triply bound, the bull keeps on roaring. The great god has entered  mortals.
## 04
Triply deposited, being hidden by the niggards—the gods discovered the  ghee in the cow.
Indra begat one; the Sun begat one; from the seeker they fashioned one  through their own power.
## 05
These (streams) rush from the sea found in the heart. Having a hundred  barriers, they are not to be spotted by the cheat,
but I keep gazing upon the streams of ghee. A golden reed is in  their midst.
## 06
These nourishing liquids flow together like streams, being purified  within by heart and mind.
These waves of ghee rush, like wild beasts retreating from a javelin. 7. As if on the straightaway of a river, they fly—the youthfully exuberant  ones, swift-battering, confounding the wind—
the streams of ghee—like a ruddy prizewinning horse splitting
the wooden race-course barriers [/splintering the sticks (in their  current)], swelling with their waves.
## 08
They float—like lovely young women to (marriage) assemblies— smiling, to Agni.
The streams of ghee approach the kindling sticks. (Agni) Jātavedas  delights, taking pleasure in them.
## 09
I keep gazing upon them, who are like maidens smearing on unguent to  go to their wedding.
Where the soma is pressed, where the sacrifice (is performed), toward  that do the streams of ghee go purifying themselves.
## 10
Rush toward the lovely praise hymn, to the contest for cows; on us  confer auspicious chattels.
Lead this sacrifice here to the divinities for us. The streams of ghee  purify themselves like honey.
## 11
All the living world is firmly fixed in your domain, within the sea in  your heart, within your lifespan.
The one that was borne hither at the forefront of the waters in their  joining, that one may we attain—your most honeyed wave.Volume II