+++
title = "07"

+++
7. [^5]  After he has performed the rites down to the oblations made with the Vyāhṛtis, he sacrifices with (the following Mantras),


[^5]:  Pāraskara I, 6, 11. With the third verse comp. Atharva-veda XI, 9, 14.

'May Agni come hither, the first of gods. May he release the offspring of this wife from the fetter of death. That may this king Varuṇa grant, that this wife may not weep over distress (falling to her lot) through her sons. Svāhā!

'May Agni Gārhapatya protect this woman. May he lead her offspring to old age. With fertile womb may she be the mother of living children. May she experience delight in her sons. Svāhā!

'May no noise that comes from thee, arise in the house by night. May the (she-goblins called) the weeping ones take their abode in another (woman) than thee. Mayst thou not be beaten at thy breast by (the she-goblin) Vikeśī ("the rough-haired one"). May thy husband live, and mayst thou shine in thy husband's world, beholding thy genial offspring! Svāhā!

'May Heaven protect thy back, Vāyu thy thighs, and the two Aśvins thy breast. May Savitṛ protect thy suckling sons. Until the garment is put on (thy sons?), may Bṛhaspati guard (them?), and the Viśve devās afterwards. Svāhā!

'Childlessness, the death of sons, evil, and distress, I take (from thee), as a wreath (is taken) from the head, and (like a wreath) I put all evil on (the head of) our foes. Svāhā!

'With this well-disposed prayer which the gods have created, I kill the Piśācas that dwell in thy womb. The flesh-devouring death-bringers I cast down. May thy sons live to old age. Svāhā!'
