+++
title = "04"

+++
As just noted, this vs. seems to distill the first tṛca and is esp. similar to vs. 1. Like both 1 and 2 it opens prá te, and the 2nd hemistich also begins with prá, with prā́ntár echoing prá ta). Even more strikingly the first pāda matches 1a almost exactly: 1a prá ta āśávaḥ pavamāna dhījávaḥ 4a prá ta ā́śvinīḥ pavamāna dhījávaḥ The only difference is the third word, and the two are phonological multiforms of each other - or rather, ā́śvinīḥ must have been formed as a variant of āśávaḥ, since the vṛddhi deriv. ā́śvina-, -ī is found only here in the RV (though it occurs elsewhere in Vedic), while āśú- is quite common. In addition, asṛgran (4b) and asṛkṣata (4c) reprise ásṛkṣata of 2b, and páyasā (4b) recurs from 2c.

However, these similarities once again mask conceptual differences.

The first question to confront is what the referents are for the fem. pls. ā́śvinīḥ in pāda a and sthā́virīḥ in c, and are they the same? Ge and Re both supply different nouns for the two - dhā́rāḥ ‘streams’ for the first (already Sāy.) and gíraḥ ‘hymns’ for the second. (Sāy. supplies dhā́rāḥ for the second as well.) Although this split reference is perfectly possible - and at least páyasā ‘with their milk’ might favor a liquid interpretation in ab - I prefer to supply gíraḥ for both. In the 2nd hemistich the passage adduced by Old to explain pāda c, I.181.7 ásarji vām sthávirā vedhasā gī́ḥ “A substantial song has been sent surging to you, o ritual experts,” resembles our passage very closely, with fem. gī́ḥ and with verb, adj., and voc. matching elements in cd. There is only one fem. form to the adj. sthávira-, namely the one just cited modifying gír-. The pleonastically vṛddhied adj. in our passage, fem. sthā́virī-, is a hapax in the RV - and in fact I would suggest that it owes its vṛddhi to an attempt to match that of ā́śvinīḥ. Moreover, I.181.7 passage is in an Aśvin hymn (the referents of vām … vedhasā), and to my mind the unusual ā́śvinīḥ ‘destined for the Aśvins’ in the first hemistich invites us to supply a form of praise as the fem. pl. referent. We might also cite other exx. of the Aśvins’ association with praise hymns (not, I realize, unusual for Vedic gods!): VII.72.3 stómāso aśvínoḥ, VIII.9.7 aśvínoḥ ... stómam, VIII.9.16 vācā́.... aśvínaḥ (though none of these is fem. pl.). Thus in my view the entities “destined for the Aśvins” in pāda a are more likely to be hymns than streams.

In the first hemistich the fem. subj. (whatever it is) surges “into the support” (dhárīmaṇi), which I take to be the soma vessel. I supply the same loc. with antár in the 2nd hemistich. Cf. nearby IX.89.5 samāné antár dharúṇe níṣattaḥ “set down within the same support,” with dharúṇe an etymological and semantic match for dhárīman-.

As noted above, asṛkṣata in c repeats ásṛkṣata in 2b, but they are functional opposites: the first verb must be intrans. ‘have surged’ (or pass., ‘have been discharged’) with the soma drinks as subject, while our verb is trans. with the seers as subj. and hymns as obj. The intrans/pass.. function is taken over in vs. 4 by asṛgran in b. The aor. of √sṛj is overwhelmingly medial and overwhelmingly intrans./pass. in function, including the numerous exx. of 3rd pl. ásṛkṣata. There are only two transitive occurrences of this form, this one and one in V.52.6. In our case I think it likely that in this vs. asṛkṣata has been made to contrast functionally with likewise 3rd pl. asṛgran, which patterns with the aor. passive and therefore has more title to intrans./pass. function. Narten (Sig.Aor. 270-71) discusses the functional issues in the s-aor. paradigm of this root, but she holds the (to me) unlikely position that the medial forms should be fundamentally transitive (though she hedges here) and the intrans. use is secondary, despite the clear numerical superiority of the intrans. usage. I think it makes more sense to consider the transitive usage, at least here, as forced on a normally intrans. form by the pressure of asṛgran.

The formation of the hapax voc. ṛṣiṣāṇa is opaque. Gr’s gloss ‘dem Sänger freund’ reveals nothing about his analysis of the 2nd part; sim. Re’s ‘propre aux Prophètes’ without further comment. With Ge, the publ. tr. assigns the 2nd member to √san ‘gain, win’, hence ‘winning seers’. If we maintain that analysis, the sense might be compared to ṛṣi-sáh- in IX.76.4, which means ‘vanquishing (the other) seers’, in poetic competition or the like. However, given the seṭ nature of √san and the persistent short vowel (-)san- in most of its nominal forms, this analysis is not entirely persuasive, esp. since the semantics are not absolutely compelling. AiG II.2.926 posits (without conviction) a suffix -sāna-, but also suggests a connection to the (pseudo-)part. -asāna- type (which is treated at AiG II.2.236-37), but it doesn’t fit the general profile of this group (on which see comm. ad IV.3.6). Perhaps -sānais better connected to √sā ‘bind’; cf. the noun viṣā́na- V.44.11, which has the merit of existing and whose long vowel is predictable. Hence ‘binding seers’ or ‘having the binding of seers’ - that is, holding them fast, commanding their loyalty or attention, as in pāda c. But in the absence of any further information, accentual, contextual, or formulaic, we can’t get much further.


<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/09/086/04-06.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>