+++
title = "05-06"

+++
As noted above, these two vss. have parallel structures in the crucial 2nd pāda. Although Ge notes this, his tr. does not reflect the parallelism of the two genitive phrases with pres. part. satáḥ, nor does Re’s. Although taking account of this somewhat complicates my tr., I think it must be done. Vs. 6 is the clearer one: the pres. part. to √as is, as often, concessive: although Soma stays fixed, his beacons (continue) to circle. A concessive sense is harder to excavate from vs. 5 - hence the somewhat awk. rendering in the publ. tr. - but I think it is rhetorically called for. In both vss. the GEN satáḥ phrase specifies the spatial position of Soma. In 6 he is fixed; he has completed his journey to the soma vessels, as pāda d tells us. Vs. 5 is chronologically earlier than 6: Soma is advancing (prabhú-) on his journey, which is still in progress, as he “reaches through” vyānaśí- the domains, i.e., the filter and subsequent locations. Cf., for prabhú-, nearby IX.83.1 pávitraṃ te vítatam …, prabhúḥ … páry eṣi víśvátaḥ “ The filter is outstretched for you, o lord of the sacred formulation. Advancing, you circle around it on all sides.” The lexeme pári √i in soma contexts describes the movement of the soma juices around the filter. I think the point of both our vss., 5 and 6, is that, though Soma has moved on beyond the filter (5) and finally settled in the vessels (6), his beacons continue to circle around the filter. I am not entirely sure what that means in physical terms - perhaps the residual soma, caught as drops in the wool of the filter and glinting as the final drops drip down? or are the beacons pieces of ritual equipment? I think the former is more likely, given the reoccurence of sg. ketú- in vs. 7 referring to Soma himself, but I am tolerably certain that the pl. in 5-6 distinguishes the vanguard of the soma, Soma proper, from the rest of the liquid that follows.

