+++
title = "13"

+++
Ge identifies (n. 13a) and tr. matávān as a real past active participle (“Nachdem er sich bedacht hatte …”)(sim. Lü 243). This seems highly unlikely to me; Whitney’s statement (Gr. §960) should be noted: “Derivative words of this formation [=-távant- sj] are found in RV., but without anything like a participial value. The AV. has a single example … In the Brāhmaṇas also it is hardly met with.” See also Re’s n. The fact that the base, matá-, is not found independently as a ppl. in the RV, but only once (besides here) in the cmpd. matavacas- (voc., so unaccented, I.46.5), makes the building of a past active part. to it even less likely. Instead -vantmust have its usual possessive sense and in context mean ‘accompanied by thoughts’ (like marútvant-), referring to the praises given to Soma at the ritual. These act as a spur to set the soma in motion, hence the following simile.

The 2nd hemistich opens with a form of the 2nd sg prn., táva, followed at intervals by two vocc., kave at the end of c and indra in d, followed immediately by vs.-final te. It only becomes clear in d, with the 3rd ps. phrase pavate sómaḥ, that the 2nd ps. cannot be Soma, as it was earlier in the hymn (vss. 1-3, 4-5). The kave is a bit of a red herring, since it could, and often does, refer to Soma, and though Indra is sometimes so designated, other gods are far more commonly so called. The voc. indra at the end settles the matter, but our poet seems to tease us with other possibilities.

The image of Soma purifying himself “between the two world-halves” of course reflects the cosmic reach of the Soma, but it may also have a narrower ritual application. In IX.98.9 Ge suggests that the world-halves there are the jaws of the soma-press, which would fit nicely here. See also IX.75.4, where the world-halves are called the mothers of Soma.

