+++
title = "19"

+++
“Bull of the thoughts” (vṛ́ṣā matīnā́m) is a slightly odd expression, but it fits the pattern of IX.76.4 pitā́matīnā́m, 96.5 janitā́matīnā́m, 103.4 netā́matīnā́m, though without obvious agentive content here —although Ge interpr. ‘bull’ as ‘Befruchter’.

The three genitives with pratarītā́by all the standard accounts (incl. the publ.

tr., also Ober II.53) consist of two temporal expressions (day, dawn) and a spatial one (heaven). It is not clear to me what “lengthening/extending heaven” would involve, and so, though gen./abl. diváḥ is almost always ‘heaven’ rather than ‘day’, I now wonder if it here refers to ‘day’. Other passages containing both ‘day’ words include III.56.6 trír ā́diváḥ savitar vā́ryāṇi, divé-diva ā́suva trír no áhnaḥ “Three times a day, every day, o Savitar, impel valuables to us, three times daily”; X.7.4 dyúbhiḥ … áhabhiḥ; X.12.4 áhā yád dyā́vaḥ … áyan — and, interestingly enough, two expressions in this very hymn, vss. 41 and 42, on which see further ad locc. The question is what, if anything, is the semantic distinction between the two ‘day’ words div- / dyu- and áhar / áhan-. In principle “daytime” (versus night time) could be distinguished from the 24-hour day. Which, then, would be which? Assuming that PIE *d ie̯ u-̯ (and its descendents) referred esp. to the bright sky, we might expect the ‘day’ occurrences of div- / dyu- to refer to the bright day, i.e., day versus night, leaving áhar for the 24-hour day. And the numerous exx. of náktam (…) divā́(and reverse order) “by night and by day” (I.24.10, 12, 34.2, 98.2, etc., etc.) seem to bear out this prediction. We also find div- / dyu- contrasted with other words for ‘night’: e.g., in the instr. pl. dyúbhir áktúbhiḥ (I.34.8, 112.25, III.31.16), and in other case/no.

pairs I.116.24 dáśa rā́trīḥ … náva dyū́n, VI.49.10 rudráṃ dívā vardháyā rudrám aktaú. However, áhar is also commonly found in these contexts. Cf. the cmpd.

ahorātrá- ‘day and night’ and expressions like rā́tryā áhnaḥ (X.129.2), tísraḥ kṣápas trír áhā (I.116.4), vy àktū́n … vy áhāni (V.54.4), rā́trībhiḥ … áhabhiḥ (X.10.9), áhobhiḥ… aktúbhiḥ (X.14.9), aktúbhyaḥ … áhabhyaḥ (X.89.11). Also passages in which light is put into or created for áhar / áhan- — e.g., IX.92.5 jyótir yád áhne ákṛṇot. An esp. telling example is X.68.11 rā́tryāṃ támo dadhur jyótir áhan “They put darkness in the night (and) light in the day.” I therefore find myself at something of an impasse, since both words are used contrastively with ‘night’, and in a passage containing both ‘day’ words assigning one sense to the one and the other to the other seems arbitrary. In any case, I now do think that diváḥ means ‘day’ here, and would substitute the tr. “… the lengthener of the day, of dawn, of the daytime” (having made the arbitrary choice).

On krāṇā́see comm. ad I.58.3. In addition to the adv. sense (‘successfully, effectively’) discussed there, this old instr. can be used with true instr. value: ‘by the action’, as here. In his 1903 art. (cited ad I.58.3) Old (p. 35=Kl Schr. 1113) identifies krāṇā́here as a neut. pl., not instr. sg.: “die Werke der Ströme, die Kufen hat er brüllen gemacht.” But by the time of the Noten he instead takes it as instr.: “durch das Tun der Flüsse.” This is in fact the standard interpr. of krāṇā́síndhūnām here: Ge “Unter Mitwirkung der Ströme”; Re “Par l’action des fleuves”; Lü (254) = Ge, but with (?) inserted after “Mitwirkung.” But this pāda is regularly compared by these very same scholars with IX.102.1 krāṇā́śíśur mahī́nām. And it is generally agreed that mahī́nām in that pāda refers also to the rivers. But there is a split about where to construe this gen. Ge (and perhaps by implication Old) follows the pattern of our passage: “Unter Mitwirkung der grossen (Ströme),” but Lü argues (239, 242), rather persuasively, that mahī́nām belongs rather with śíśuḥ, as “child of the great (rivers),” in part on the basis of síndhumātar- (IX.61.7) ‘whose mothers are the rivers.” He is followed by Re. In the interpr. of the two passages only Ge is consistent, in taking the gen. with krāṇā́in both cases. Lü, Re, and the publ. tr. all construe the gen. differently in the two places. I now think this is wrong and a consistent interpr.

should be made, but I make the opposite choice to Ge’s. In the passage here I would supply ‘child’ as headnoun for síndhūnām and change the tr. to “Through his action, (the child) of the rivers …” There are several reasons for my change of heart besides a desire for consistency. For one thing krāṇā́is never elsewhere construed with a gen. For another, Soma is otherwise the sole subj. of ávīvaśat and doesn’t need any assistance in this action.



<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH/Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/09/086/19-21.md"  newLevelForH1="3" newLevelForH1="2" includeTitle="true"> </div>