+++
title = "34"

+++
The publ. tr. does not make sufficiently clear (or clear at all) that pávamāna is a voc. Better tr. “Self-purifying one, as a great flood you run …” With Ge and Re I take máhy árṇaḥ “great flood” as a nom., coreferential with the 2nd sg. subj. The statement “you are the sea” (29a tváṃ samudró asi) gives semantic support to the coreferential reading, though the two words (samudrá- and árṇas-) are different. By contrast, Lü (204, 239; sim. Ober II.152 n. 111) takes it as acc. of extent, indicating the space that the soma traverses, with the “filters” of b parallel to it in a simile: “du durchläufst die grosse Flut, wie die strahlende Sonne die wollenen Seihen.” This interpr. requires that the real filter (the sheep’s fleece) that the real soma ordinarily traverses be part of the simile, expressing what the sun crosses, while the metaphorical filter (“the great flood”) is part of the frame, where the real soma is crossing it. This is either very clever poetics, with several levels of metaphor below the surface simile - or an indication that his interpr. is incorrect. I’m afraid that I incline towards the latter view.

The expression in c gábhasti-pūto nṛ́bhiḥ is somewhat curious, since it essentially provides two agents, or agent-like elements, for the pūtá- ppl.: the 1st cmpd member gábhasti- and the indep. instr. nṛ́bhiḥ. (Of course, the men are the agents whose hands are the instruments.) Without the ‘hand’ (gábhasti-) we would expect *nṛ̥́-pūta-, like nṛ́-dhūta- (1x), nṛ́-ṣūta- (1x)(which, oddly enough, both rhyme with our putative form). Re has a slightly different interpr., but it has the same configuration. His “pressé par les seigneurs à l’aide des pierres” construes nṛ́bhiḥ with what follows, the instr. ádribhiḥ and the ppl. sutáḥ, with the two instr. filling the agent and instrument slots respectively. Since nṛ́bhiḥ is stationed exactly in between the two instrument+ppl. expressions, there’s no way to tell - though it seems to me somewhat more elegant for nṛ́bhiḥ to double a cmpd. member rather than morphologically doubling another instrument. Note that ádri-ṣuta- is also attested (2x) and that the same ádribhiḥ sutáḥ as here is found in this hymn in 23a..
