+++
title = "41"

+++
On the relation between the first hemistich and vs. 40 see immed. above.

The publ. tr. “… all blessings, consisting of offspring and easy to bear” is awkward and hard to parse. It might be better as “… all blessings, consisting of offspring - a light burden -,” with subhára- used in almost jocular fashion. It can simultaneously also refer to “easy birth,” with ref. to prajā́vatīḥ.

The unusually formed (pseudo-)āmreḍita áhar-divi ‘every day, day upon day’ is esp. interesting in light of the discussion of the two ‘day’ words ad vs. 19 above. It must be a substitute for the more orthodox āmreḍita áhar-ahar (6x) for metrical reasons: the standard cmpd. is metrically awk. With three light syllables in a row, it certainly won’t fit in any cadence and would be difficult anywhere in the vs. line but where it’s always found, pāda-initial (which isn’t all that great either - openings with light syllables in both 2 and 3, not to mention 1 and possibly 4, are quite irregular; see Arnold pp 194-95). It is puzzling, however, that the well-attested (47x) (also somewhat aberrantly formed) āmreḍita to the second ‘day’ stem here, namely divédive, was not used in our vs., since it would fit the cadence perfectly and is quite common in Jagatī cadences. In any case, at least áhar-divi suggests that there’s no clearcut difference of meaning or reference between áhar- and the forms of div-/dyuthat mean ‘day’.

In the 2nd hemistich, Soma is not asked directly for benefits, but rather urged to intercede with Indra - to beg him for our sake - for offspring and wealth. This displacement is made all the stranger by the use of a “future imperative,” yācatāt, which properly should follow another impv. Perhaps the displacement in time that such an impv. represents - that is, there should be an intervening impv. before it - indirectly reflects the displacement in person - that is, Soma is the middleman, intervening between us and Indra. I suppose it is bad form to ask Indra directly in a hymn devoted to Soma.

There is further displacement here. The “sacred formulation bringing offspring” (bráhma prajā́vat) that we want Soma to get Indra to give us is not a direct request for Indra to bestow offspring on us, but rather for him to inspire in us a formulation that we can then offer to him, which will, only then, result in offspring.

It’s a long and winding road to what we want! The interpr. of the hapax bahuvr. áśva-pastya- is disputed. My tr. “consisting of horses in the homestead” essentially follows Gr’s ‘Rosse im Stalle habend’, though it would be more lit. as ‘having a homestead that has horses in it’ - a vájrabāhu- type cmpd. Ge’s tr. “an vielen Rossen” seems to evade the issue, but his statement in n. 41c “wie später -śālin-” is more forthcoming: -śālin- means lit.

‘having a house/room’, but develops to ‘abounding in’. Nonetheless, I find it hard to believe that a RVic poet would go to the trouble of using a fairly rare word as 2nd member, only in order to bleach it of its particular meaning. Re’s “la richesse qui réside dans les chevaux” (and Ober’s “dessen fester Wohnsitz Pferde sind” [I.537 n.

111]) employs an abstract sense of pastyà- to characterize where wealth’s dwelling is: it resides in - that is, is founded on / consists of — horses. Whereas my interpr.

assumes a concrete homestead, which belongs to the speaker and/or his associates, that is stuffed, as it were, with horses. The difference between the abstract and the concrete interpr. is small but significant, and I continue to prefer the concrete one.

