+++
title = "01"

+++
FIRST CHAPTER (ADHYAYA). 

(The Dikṣaniya Iṣti, with the Initiatory Rites.) 

Agni, among the gods, has the lowest, Viṣnu the highest, place; between them stand all the other deities. 

Sā yana, whom M. Muller follows in his translation of the first six chapters of the first book, as given in his “History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature" (pages 390-405), explains the words avama and parama by * first" and "last." To prove this meaping to be the true one, Sāyana adduces the mantra (1.4. Asyal. Sr. S. 4, 2), agmir mulcham prathamo devatanim samgatánam uttamo Viṣnur asït, i.e., Agui was the first of the deities assembled, (and) Viṣnu the last. In the Kauṣitaki-Brāhmanam (7, 1) Agni is called avarárdhya (instead of avama), and Viṣgu parárdhya (instead of parana), n.e., belonging to the lower and higher halves (or forming the lower and higher halves). That the meaning "first” cannot be reasonably given to the word avama, one nay learn from some passages of the Rigveda Samhita, where avana and purama are pot applied to denote rank and dignity, but only to mark place and locality. See Rigveda 1, 108, 9, 10 : avarasyám prithiūyám, madhyamasyan, para musyam uta, i.e., in he lowest place, the middle (place), and the highest (place). Agni, the fire, has, among she gods, the lowest place ; for he resides with man on the earth; while the other gods are either in the air, or in the sky. Viṣnu occupies, of all gods, the highest place ; for he represents (in the Rigveda) the sun in its daily and yearly course. In its daily course it reaches the highest point in the sky, when passing the zenith on he horizon; thence Visiu is called the " highest" of the gods. Sāyana understands I first" and " last" in reference to the respective order of deities in the twelve iturgies (sastra) of the Soma day at the Agnistoma sacrifice. For, says be “The Irst of these liturgies, the so-called Ajya-Sastra (see 2, 31), belongs to Agni, and in he last out of the twelve, in the so-called Agnamaruta sastra (see 3, 92-38), there is ne verse addressed to Viṣnu. But this argument, advanced by Sayaga, proves Jothing for his opinion that " Agni is the first, and Viṣnu [2] the last deity;" for hese twelve liturgies belong to the fifth day of the Agnistoma sacrifice, whilst the Sikṣanīya-isti, in connection with which ceremony the Brahmanam makes the remark(kapala). They offer it (the rice-cake) really to all the deities of this (Isti, without foregoing any one." For Agni is all the deities, and Viṣnuis all the deities. For these two (divine) bodies, Agni and Viṣnu, are the two ends 5 of the sacrifice. Thus when they portion out the Agni-Vişṇu rice-cake, they indeed make at the end & (after the ceremony is over) prosper? (all) the gods of this (ceremony). 

[4] Here they say: if there be eleven potsherds on which portions of the rice-cake are put, and (only) two deities, Agni and Vişnu, what arrangement is there for the two, or what division ? 

(The answer is) The rice-cake portions on eight potsherds belong to Agni; for the Gayatrê verse consists of eight syllables, and the Gāyatri is Agni's metre. The rice-cake portions on the three potsherds belong to Vişṇu; for Vişṇu (the sun strode thrice through the universe, This the arrangement (to be made) for them; this the division. 

* Anantarayam : literally, without any one between, without an interval, the chain of the gods being uninterrupted. 

Antye. Sā yana opines that this adjective here is ekašesa, ie, that out of two or more things to be expressed, oply one has aetually remained. It stands, as he thinks, instead of adya'and antya, just as pitariu means "father and mother." (Pādini, 1, 2, 70.) 

* Antatan, Sāy, sat the beginning and end of the sacrifice," But I doubt whether the term implies the beginning also. In the phrase: untatah pratitistati, which so Irequently occurs in the Ait Brahm., antatah means only “ultimately," at the end of a particular ceremony or rite. 

* Ridhnuvanti. Sāy. paricharanti, they worship. He had, in all probability, Nighanta 3,5, in view, where this meaning is given to ridhnoti. But that this word conveys the sense of “prospering" follows unmistakeably from a good many passages of the Sanhita of Rigveda and Manu. (See the Sanskrit Dictionary by Böhtlingk and Roth 5. V. and Westergaard's Radices Banscrita s. v. 4. page 182.) In this passage the meaning "to worship," as given by Sayana, is too vague, and appears not quite appro priate to the sense. On account of its governing the accusative, we must take it here in the sense of a transitive ferb, although it is generally an intransitivo one. The mean ing which lies nearest, is, - to make prosperous." At the first glance it might appear somewhat curious, how men should make the gods prosperous by sacrificial offerings. But if one takes into consideration, that the Vedas, and particularly the sacrificial rites inculcated in them, presuppose a mutual relationship between wen and gods, one depending on the support of the other, the expression will no longer be found strange. Men must present offerings to the gods to increase the power and strength of their divine protectors. They must, for instance, inebriate Indra with Soma, that he might gather strength for conquering the demons. The meaning " to satisfy, to please," which is given to the word “ sidhnuvanti" of the passage in question in Böhtlingk's and Roth's Dictionary, is a mere guess, and wholy antenable, being supported by no Brahmanik authority 

* This refers to the verse in the Rigveda Samhita 1,22,17,18: idam Vinnur vichakrame tredha nidadhe padam, i.e., Vişṇu strode through the universe; he put down thrice his foot; and trini padā vichakrame, he strode three steps. These three steps of Vipp. who represents the sun, are: sunrise, zenith, and sunseta 

He who inight think himself to have no position (not to be highly respected by others) should portion out (for being offered) Charu over which clarified [5] butter is poured. For on this earth no one has a firm footing who does not enjoy a certain (high) position. The clarified butter (poured over this Charu) is the milk of the woman; the husked rice grains (tandula of which Charu consists) belong to the male ; both are a pair. Thus the Charu on account of its consisting of a pair of female and male parts) blesses hin with the production of progeny and cattle, for his propagation (in his descendants and their property). He who has such a knokledge propagates his progeny and cattle. 

He who brings the New and Full Moon oblations, has already made a beginning with the sacrifice, and made also a beginning with (the sacri ficial worship of the) deities. After having brought the New or Full Moon oblations, he may be inaugurated in consequence of the offering made at these (oblations) and the sacrificial grass (having been spread) at these (oblations, at the time of making them). This (might be regarded) as one Dikşā (initiatory rite).12 

Churu is boiled rice. It can be mixed with milk and butter; but it is no essential part. It is synonymous with odanam, the common term for “boiled rice." Katap Brah. 4, 12, 1. There were different varieties of this disb ; some being prepired with the addition of barley, or some other grains. See Taittīriya Samh. 1, 8, 10, 1. 

(5) * Pratitistati, which is here put twice, has a double sense, viz., the original meaning "to have a firra footing, standing," and a figurative ono "to have rank, position, dignity" In the latter sense, the substantive pratisthi is of frequent occurrence Dignity and position depend on the largeness of family, wealtà in cattle, &c. 

The present followers of the Vedık religion, the so-called Agnihotris, who take upon themselves the performance of all the manifold sa crificial rites enjoined in the Vedas, begin their arduous career for gaining a place in heaven, after the sacred fires have been established, with the regular monthly performance of the Darsa and Pūr 11 maisti or the New and Full Moon sacrifices. Then they bring the chāturnêsya-isti, and after this rite they proceed to bring the Agnistoma, the first and model of all Soma sacrifices By the bringing of the New and Fall Moon offerings, the Agnihotri is already initiated into the grānd rites; he is already an adept (Diksita) in it. Some of the links of the yajna or sacrifice which is regarded as a chain extending from this earth to heaven, by means of which the successful performer reaches the celestial world, the seat of the gods, are already established by these offorings; with the deities, whose associate the sacrificer wishes to become after his death, the intercourse is opened; for they have already received food (havin), prepared re according to the precepts of sacred cookery, at his hands, and they have been sitting on the sacred seat (barhis) prepared of the sacri-i fcial grass (Darbha). Thence the performance of tbe Full and New Moon sacrifices is here called one Dikşa, i.e., one initiatory rite But if the Agnihotri, who is performing a Soma sacrifice, is already initiated (Diksitu) by means of the rites just mentioned, how does he require at the opening of the Agnistoma (Soma-sucrifice) the so-called Diksaniyo. Fşti, or "offering for becoming initiated"? This question was mooted already in ancient times. Thence, says Ašvaláyana in his Srauta sūtras (4, 1), that, some are of opinion, the Soma-sacrifice should be performed, in the case of the means required being forthcoming 

[6] The Hotar must recite seventeen verses for the wooden sticks to be thrown into the fire!? (to feed it). For Prajapati (the Lord of all creatures) is seventeenfold; the months are twelve, and the seasons five, by putting Hemanta (winter) and Sisira (between winter and spring) as one. So much is the year. The year is Prajā pati. He who has such a knowledge prospers by these verses (just mentioned) which reside in Prajapati. 

[7] The sacrifice went away from the gods. They wished to seek after it by means of the Iştis. The Istis are called Istis, because they wished (ish, to wish) to seek after it. They found it. He who has such a knowledge prospers after he has found the sacrifice. The name ahutis, ie, oblations, stands instead of āhūti, i e., invocation ; with them the sacrificer calls the gods. This is (the reason) why they are called āhutis. They (the dhutis) are called ūtis; for by their means the gods come to the call of the sacrificer (@yanti, they come). Or they are the paths (and) ways; for they are the ways to heaven for the sacrificer. 

There they say, as another priest (the Adhvaryu) offers (juhoti) the oblations, why do they call that one, who repeats the Anodkyā and Yājyd verses, a Hotar? (The answer is) Because he causes the deities to be brought near (āvāhayahti), according to their place, (by saying) "bring this one, bring that one."'13 This is the reason why he is called a Hotar (the sacrifice is very expensive), after the Full and New Moon sacrifices have been brought; others opine the Soma sacrifice might be performed before the Fall and New Moon sacrifices. No doubt, the Agniştoma was in ancient times a sacrifice wholly independent of the Darsa Pārnimi-istis. This clearly follows from the fact, that just such Iştis, as constitute the Full and Vew Moon sacrifices, are placed at the beginning of the Agniştoma to introduce it. 

12 These verses are called Sámidhenis. They are only eleven in number; bot by repeating the first and last yerses thrice, the number is brought to fifteer. They are mentioned in Âśval. Sr. S 1, 2; several are taken from Rigveda 3, 27, as the first (pra vo vájā abhidyavo) fourth (samudhyumána) 13th, 14th, and 15th (ilenyo) verses. Besides these three, Ašv. mentions : agna āydhi vitaye 6, 16; 10, 12, three verses), ugnim dūtum vrinimahe (1, 12, 1.), and samiddho agna 5, 28, 5, 6, two verses). They are repeated monotonously without observing the usual three accents. The nunber of the samidhenis is generally stated at fifteen; but now and then, seventeen are mentioned, as in the case of the Dilşa niya işti. The two additional mantras are called Dhiyyí, i.e,, verses to be repeated when an additional wooden stick, after the ceremony of kindling is over, is thrown into the fire, in order to feed it. They are mentioned in Sayana's commentary on the Rigveda Samhitā, vol. II., page 762 (ed. M. Muller). S. Ašval. 4, 2, two Dbāyyās at the Diksanīya isti. 

[7] 1$ At every Işti, the Hotar calls the particular gods to whom rice-cale portions are to be presented, by their names to appear. At the Dīkşanīya Isti, for instance, he says : agna agnim avaha, vişnum avuha, 1.6., Agni! bring hither Agnis! bring hither Visnu. The name of the deity who is called near, is only muttered, whilst ávaha is pronounced with a loud voice, the first syllable à being pluta, i.e., containing three short a. See Abv śr. S. 1, 3. 

(from @vah, to bring near). He who has such a knowledge is called a Hotar.14 

[8] The priests make him whom they initiate (by means of the Díkşā ceremony) to be an embryo again (i.e., they produce him anew altogether). They sprinkle him with water; for water is seed. By having thus provided him with seed (for his new birth), they initiate him. They besmear him with fresh butter (navanīta). The butter for the gods is called ājya, 15 that for men surabhi ghritam, that for the manes dyuta. and that for the embryos navanita. Therefore by anointing him with fresh butter, they make him thrive through his own portion. 

They besmear his eyes with collyrium. For this anointment is lustre for both eyes. By having imparted lustre to him, they make him a Dikşita. 

They rub him clean with twenty-one handfuls of Darbha grass. By having thus made pure and clean they make him a Dikşita. 

• They make bim enter the place destined for the Dīkşita.16 For this is the womb of the Dikşita. [9] When they make him enter the place destined for the Dikṣita, then they make him thus enter his own womb. In this (place) he sits as in a secure abode, 17 and thence he 

14 These etymologies of işti, áhuti, ūti, and hotā are fanciful and erroneous. The real root of işti is yaj, to sacrifice; that of āhuti is hu, to briog an offering; that of ūti is av, to protect, to assist; that of hotá is hvé, to call. The technical meaning of an isti is a series of oblations to differeut deities, consisting chiefly of Purodása. An áhuti or ūti, which appears to be an older name of the same idea (this meaning is quite omitted in the Sanscrit Dictionary by B. and R), is an oblation offered to one deity. This oblation is generally accompanied by two mantras, the first being called the Anivákya or (81 Puro anuvákya, the second Yáyd. When the second is recited, the oblation is thrown into the fire by the Adhvaryu. The Hotar repeats only the mantras. 

15 To remind his readers of the difference existing between ajya and ghrita, Sāy. quotes an ancient versus memorialis (Karika), sarpir vilínam ayam syāt ; ghanibhůtam ghritam viduh, i.e., they call the butter, which is in a liquid condition, ágya, and that one which is hardened is called ghệita. Ayuta is the butter when but slightly molten, and. surabhi when well seasoned. According to the opinion of the Taittirīyas, says Sa yana, the butter for the gods is called ghȚita, that for the manes astu, and that for men mispakva. Astu is the same as áyuta, slightly molten, and nispalva, the same as ájya, entirely molten. 

14 Diksita-vimita. It is that place which is generally called prāchīrā vansa (or prāg-vamsa). This place is to represent the womb which the Dīksita enters in the shape of an embryo to be born again. This is clearly enough stated in the Brahmana of another sākhān, which Sā yana quotes : a granaataja R a fagast: a . 

(9) " Sāyaṇa takes the three ablatives--tasmád, dhruvad, yoner, in the sense of loca tives ; but I think this interpretation not quite correct. The ablative is chosen on account of the verb charati, he walks, goes, indicating the point, whence he starts. The other verb date, he sits, would require the locative. Therefore we should expect both 

departs. Therefore the embryos are placed in the womb as a secure place, and thence they are brought forth (as fruit). Therefore the sun should neither rise nor set over him finding him in any other place than the spot assigned to the Diksita ; nor should they speak to him (if he should be compelled to leave his place). 18 

They cover him with a cloth. For this cloth is the caul (ulba) of the Dikşita (with which he is to be born, like a child); thus they cover him with the caul. Outside (this cloth) there is (put by them) the skin of a black antelope. For outside the caul, there is the placenta jarayu). Thus they cover him (symbolically by the skin of the antelope) with the placenta. He closes his hands. For with closed hands the embryo lies within (the womb); with closed bands the child is born. As he closes his hands, he thus holds the sacrifice, and all its deities in his two hands closed. 

They allege as a reason (why the Dīkşita should close together both his hands) that he who takes (among two who are sacrificing on the same place and at the same time) his Dikşā (initiation) first, is not guilty (of the sin) of “confusion of libations" (sansava). 18 For his sacrifice and the deities are held [10] fast (in his hands); and (consequently) be does not suffer any loss like that which falls on him who performed his Dikş& later. 

After having put off the skin of the black antelope he descends to bathe. 

Thence embryos are born after they are separated from the placenta. He descends to bathe with the cloth (which was put on him) on. Thence a child is born together with the caul. 

The Hotar ought to repeat for him who has not yet brought a sacrifice two Püronuvākyā verses, tvam agne saprathā asi (Rig-veda Samhita 5, 13, 4) for the first, and Soma yás te mayobhuvah (1, 91, 9) for the second portion of (the offering of) melted butter, (By reading the third pāda of the first verse tvayê yajnam “through thee (thy favour) they 

cases, locative and ablative On account of conciseness, only the latter is chosen, but the former is then to be understood. 

26 For performing, for instance, the functions of nature.--Sáy 

19 If two or more people offer their Soma-libations at the same time, and at places which are not separated from one another, either by a [10] river, or by a mountain, then a sañsava " or confusion of libation is caused, which is regarded as a great sin. He, however, who has performed his Díkşā first, and holds the gods between his haads, is not guilty of such a sin, and the gods will be with him.---Sdy. 

extend 20 the sacrifice," the Hotar extends thus the sacrifice for him (who has not yet brought a sacrifice). 

For him who has brought a sacrifice before, the Hotar has to recite (two other mantras instead): agnih pratnena manmană (8, 44, 12) and Soma gīrbhiş ţvá vayam (1, 91, 11). For by the word pratnam, i, e., former (which occurs in the first verse), he alludes to the former sacrifice. But the recital of these verses (for a man who has performed a sacrifice, and for one who has not done so) may be dispensed [11] with. Let the Hotar rather use the two verses which refer to the destruction of Vritra (vár trughna), viz., Agnir vritrāni janghanat (6, 16, 24), and, tvam soma aşi satpatiḥ (1, 91, 5). Since he whom the sacrifice approaches, destroys Vșitra (the demon whom Indra conquers), the two verses referring to the destruction of Vșitra are to be used. 21 

The Anuvákyd for the Agni-Vişnu-offering is : Agnir mukham prathamo devatānām, the Yājyā: agniścha Vişno tapa.") These two verses (addressed) to Agni and Vişṇu are corresponding (appropriate) in their form. What is appropriate in its form, is successful in the sacrifice ; that is to say, when the verse which is recited refers to the ceremony which is being performed. 

(Now follows a general paraphrase of the contents of these two verses) Agni and Vişnu are among the gods, the "guardians of the Dikşa” (that is to say), they rule over the Dikşā. When they offer the Agni 

20 Vitanunte. The sacrifice is regarded as a kind of chain which, when not used, lies rolled up; but which when being used, is, as the instrument for ascending to heaven, to be wound off. This winding off of the sacrificial chain is expressed by the term vitan, to extend Connected with this term are the expressions vitana and vartānika. 

[11] 21 The verses mentioned here are the Puronuvíkyās, i, e., such ones as are to be recited before the proper Anuvalya with its Ya, ya is to be repeated. The Puro-anuvák yás are introductory to the Anuvākya and Yaya. 

22 Both verses are not to be found in the Sakala Sakha of the Rig-veda, but they are in Âśval Saruta Sātras 4, 2. I put them here in their entirety: 

अग्निमुखं प्रथमो देवतानां संगतानामुत्तमो विष्णुरासीत् । यजमानाय परिगृह्य देवान् दीक्षयेदं हविरागच्छतं नः॥ अग्निश्चविष्णो तप उत्तम महो दीक्षापालाय वनतं हि शक्रा । 

विश्वैर्देवैयज्ञियः संविदानी दीधामस्मै यजमानाय धत्तम् ॥ [12] ie, “Among the deities assembled, Agui, being at the head, was the first, and Vişāu the last (god). Ye both, come to our offering with the Dīk:a, taking (with you all) the gods for the sacrificer! (i.c., come to this offering, and grant the Dīksā to the sacrifi cer). Agni and Visṇu! ye two strong (gods)! burn with a great heat to the utmost (of your power) for the preservation of the Dīksā. Joined by all the gods who participate in the sacrifice, grant, ye two, Diksā to this sacrificer." Agni and Visṇu, the one repre senting the fire, the other the sun, are here invoked to burn the sacrificer, by combination of their rays, clean, and to purify him from all gross material dross. The Dīkşā should be made as lasting as a mark caused by brapding. 

Vişnu oblation, then those two who rule over the Dikşā become pleased, and grant Dikşā, that is to say, the two makers of Dikşa, they both make the sacrificer a Dikşita. These verses are in the Triştubh metre, that the sacrificer might acquire the properties of the god Indra (vigour and strength). 

[12] He who wishes for beauty and acquisition of sacred knowledge should use at the Sviştakrit%3 two verses in the Gayatri metre as his Samnyājyás. For the Gayatri is beauty and sacred knowledge. He who having such a knowledge uses two Gayatris 24 (at the Sviştakrit) becomes full of beauty and acquires sacred knowledge. 

He who wishes for long life, should use two verses in the Uşnih metre; for Uşnih is life. He who having such a knowledge uses two Uşṇihs 25 arrives at his full age (i.e., 100 years). 

He who desires heaven, should use two Anuştubhs. There are sixty-four syllables in two Anustubhs. 26 Each of these three worlds (earth, air, and sky) contains twenty-one places, one rising above the (13] other (just as the steps of a ladder). By twenty-one steps he ascends to each of these worlds severally ; 27 by taking the sixty-fourth step he stands firm in the celestial world. He who, having such a knowledge, uses two Anustubhs, gains a footing (in the celestial world). 

He who desires wealth and glory, should use two Brihatīs. For among the metres the Brihati 28 is wealth and glory. He who, having such a knowledge, uses two Brihatis, bestows upon himself wealth and glory. 

He who loves the sacrifice should use two Panktis,29 For the sacrifice is like a Pankti. It comes to him who having such a knowledge uses two Parktis. 

He who desires strength should use two Triştubhs. Triştubh is · strength, vigour, and sharpness of senses. He who knowing this, uses. two Triştubbs, becomes vigorous, endowed with sharp senses and strong. 

23 The Svistakrit is that part of an offering which is given to all gods indiscrimi nately, after the principal deities of the respective Isti (in the Dilşaniya Istr, these deities are Agni, Soma, and Agni-Visuu) have received their share. The two mantras required for the Svistakrat are called Sarzya ya. On account of the general nature of this offering, the choice of the mantras is not so much limited as is the case when the offering is to be given to one particular deity. 

* They are, sa havyavál amartyah (3, 11, 2), and Agnir hotā purohitah (3, 11, 1). 15 They are, agne vajasya gomatal (1, 79, 4), and sa idháno vasuş havih (1,70,5). ** Tram agne vasūn (1, 45, 1, 2). 3* This makes on the whole 63 steps. 

They are, ena vo agnim (7, 16, 1), and udadya sochih (7, 10, 3). 39 Agnim tam manye (5, 6, 1, 2). 

Due virūpe charathah (1.95, 1, 2, 

He who desires cattle should use two Jagatís (verses in the Jagati metre) 31 Cattle are Jagati-like. He who knowing this, uses two Jagatis, becomes rich in cattle. 

He who desires food (annadya) should use two verses in the Viraj metre.32 Viraj is food. Therefore he who has most of food, shines (via rajati) most on earth. This is the reason why it is called viraj (from vi-rdj, to shine). He who knows this, shines [14] forth among his own people, (and) becomes the most influential man among his own people. 

6. The Viraj metre possesses five powers. Because of its consisting of three lines (pādas), it is Gayatri and Uşnih (which metres have three lines also). Because of its lines consisting of eleven syllables, it is Tris tubb (4 times 11 syllables=44). Because of its having thirty-three syllables, it is Anustubh. (If it be said, that the two Virāj verses in question, i.e., preddho agne and imo agne have, the one only 29, and the other 32 syl lables, instead of 33, it must be borne in mind that) metres do not change by (the want of) one syllable or two83. The fifth power is, that it is Viráj. 

He who knowing this, uses (at the Sviştakrit) two Virāj verses, ob tains the power of all metres, gains the power of all metres, gains union, uniformity, and (complete) unison with all the metres.34 

Therefore two Viraj verses are certainly to be used, those (which begin with) agne preddho 17, 1, 3), and imo agne (7, 1, 18). 

Diksā is right, Dikşā is truth ; thence a Dikşita should only speak the truth. . 

Now they say, what man can speak all truth ? Gods (alone) are full of truth, (but) men are full of falsehood. 

(15] He should make each address (to another) by the word, “vichak sana," i e.," of penetrating eye." The eye (chakşus) is vichakşaña, for with it he sees distinctly (vi-paśyati). For the eye is established as truth among men. Therefore people say to a man who tells something, 'Hast thou seen it ?' (i.e., is it really true ?) And if he says, “I saw it," then they believe 

31 They are, janasya gopa (5. 11, 1, 2). 39 They are, preddho agne (7, 1,3), and imo agne (7, 1, 18). 

[14] 33 In the first verse quoted, there are even 4 syllables less than required. The Brahmanam is not very accurate in its metrical discussion. The Apustubh has 32 sylla bles. 

* The meaning is, by using two Viráj verses which contain the principal metres, he obtains collectively all those boons which each of the several metres is capable of bestowing upon him who uses them. So the Gāyatrī, for instance, grants beauty and sacred knowledge, the Tristubh strength, &c (See above). The metres are regarded as deities. He who employes them becomes pervaded, as it were, by them, and participates in all their virtues and properties, 

him. And if one sees a thing himself, one does not believe others, even if they were many. Therefore he should add (always) to his addresses (to others) the word vichakşana, 35 * of penetrating, sharp eyes.” Then the speech uttered by him becomes full of truth. 

