+++
title = "2"

+++
## 1 The special animal sacrifices
1. Offerings for those desiring wealth, &c.
2. Offerings for those desiring freedom from disease, &c. 3. Offerings for those desiring victory, &c.
4. Offerings for those desiring splendour, &c.
5. Offerings for those desiring cattle, &c.
6. Offerings for those desiring villages, &c.
7. Offerings for those desiring splendour, &c.
8. Offerings for those desiring splendour, &c.
9. Offerings for those desiring food, &c.
10. Offerings for certain eventualities
11. Mantras for the special sacrifices
## 2 The special sacrifices
1. Offerings for those desiring children, &c.
2. Offerings to Agni as path-maker, &c.
3. Offerings to Agni as desire, &c.
4. Offerings to Agni as possessed of food, &c.
5. Offerings to Vaiśvanara, Dadhikravan, and the Maruts 6. Offerings to Aditi, Vaiśvanara, and Varuna
7. Offerings to Indra
8. Offerings to Indra, who goes straight forward, &c. 9. Offerings to Agni and Visnu, and to Sarasvati
10. Offerings to Soma, Rudra, and Agni
11. Offerings to Indra with the Maruts
12. Mantras for the special sacrifices
## 3 The special sacrifices (continued)
1. Offerings for the Adityas and the Maruts
2. Offerings for those afraid of death, &c.
3. Offerings for those who are parted from the sacrifice, &c. 4. Offerings for those desiring heaven, &c.
5. Offerings for one seized by disease
6. Offering for power to eat food
7. Offering with all the Prsthas for strength.
8. Offering for one desiring sight
9. Offering for one desiring a village
10. Mantras of the offering for one desiring life
11. Offerings for one long diseased and for one desiring life 12. Offering for one who receives a horse

13. Offering for one seized by misfortune
14. Mantras for the special sacrifices
## 4 The special sacrifices (continued)
1. Offering for one contending with foes
2. The victorious offering for one contending with foes
3. The Samvargesti
4. Oblation of beans to Prajapati
5. The Mantras for the Citra sacrifice
6. The Citra sacrifice
7. The Mantras for the Kariristi, first part
8. The Mantras for the Kariristi, second part
9. The explanation of the Mantras in ii. 4. 7
10. The explanation of the Mantras in ii. 4. 8
11. The offering of three constituents
12. The deity of the offering of three constituents
13. The oblation to Indra and Brhaspati
14. Mantras for the special sacrifices
## 5 The now and full moon sacrifices
1. Indra and Viśvarupa, son of Tvastr
2. The slaying of Vrtra by Indra
3. The offering of the Samnayya at the new moon
4. Offerings to Agni, Visnu, &c.
5. The Samnayya as equivalent to a Soma sacrifice
6. The new and full moon sacrifices as compared with Soma sacrifices The part of the Hotr at the new and full moon sacrifices, ii. 5. 7-11. 1-3 7. The kindling-verses
8. The kindling-verses
9. The Pravara and the Nivids
10. Optional recitations of the Samidhenis
11. Rules for the conduct of the Hotr, ii. 5. 11. 1-3
    Rules for the conduct of the Adhvaryu, ii. 5. 11. 3-9
12. Mantras for the special sacrifices
## 6 The now and full moon sacrifices
1. The fore-sacrifices
2. The portions of butter
3. The cake for Agni
4. The measuring out of the altar
5. The preparation of the strew
6. The Upanśu and Svistakrt offerings
   The part of the Hotr at the new and fall moon sacrifices, ii. 6. 7-10 7. The invocation of the Ida
8. The eating of the Ida and the Praśitra
9. The after-sacrifices, the Suktavaka and Namovaka
10. The Çanyuvaka and Patnisamyajas
11. The Mantras of the Hotr at the Samvargesti
12. The Mantras of the Hotr at the sacrifice to the Pitrs