+++
title = "3"

+++
## 1 The supplement to the Soma sacrifice

1. The Mantras used by the Diksita
2. The Mantras for the placing of the Soma
3. The anointing of the carts and the making of the fire
4. The Mantras for the slaying of the victim
5. The explanation of the Mantras in iii. 1. 4
6. The stroking of the implements
7. The rivalry of sacrificers
8. The Nigrabhya waters
9. The offerings at the end of the pressings
10. The Pravrtahoma and Vipruddhoma
11. The special sacrifices
## 2 The supplement to the Soma sacrifice (continued)
1. The Pavamana Stotras
2. The three pressings
3. The gazing on the Soma
4. The Mantras for the creeping to the Sadas
5. The Mantras for the drinking of the Soma
6. The speckled butter
7. The Stotra and the Çastra.
8. Miscellaneous Mantras for the midday and evening pressings 9. The Pratigara
10. The Pratinirgrahya cups
11. The special.sacrifices
## 3 The supplement to the Soma sacrifice (continued)
1. The Mantras for the supplementary cups
2. The Mantras for beginning the Stotra and the Pratigara
3. The Mantras for the Anśu and Adabhya cups
4. The explanation of the Mantras in iii. 3. 3
5. The Mantras for the Prśni cups at the Dvadaśaha
6. The Atigrahya cups at the Gavam Ayana
7. The formulae of invocation at the Soma sacrifice
8. The concluding ceremonies
9. The offering of an aged bull
10. The expiation for the slaughter of a victim with embryo 11. The special sacrifices
## 4 The optional and occasional offerings
1. The explanation of the Mantras in iii. 3. 10
2. The Mantras for the offering of a goat
3. The explanation of the Mantras in iii. 4. 2
4. The Mantras of the Jaya offerings
5. The Mantras of the Abhyntana offerings
6. The exposition of the Mantras in iii. 4. 4, 5, and 7
7. The Mantras of the Rastrabhrt offerings
   S. The use of the Ristrabhrt offerings
9. The oblations to the goddesses and Dhatr
10. The offering to Vastospati before travel
11. The special sacrifices
## 5 Miscellancous supplements

1. The introductory rite of the new and full moon sacrifices 2. The Stomabhagas
3. The Visnvatikramas
4. The Atimoksa Mantras
5. The Aditya cup in the third pressing
6. Mantras connected with the wife of the sacrificer 7. The wood for the ladles in the new and full moon sacrifices 8. The Dadhi cup
9. The explanation of the Mantras in iii, 5. 8
10. The Atigrahya and Prana cups at the Gavam Ayana 11. The Mantras of the Hotr in the animal sacrifice