+++
title = "5"

+++
## 1 The placing of the fire in the fire-pan
1. The libation to Savitr and the taking of the spade
2. The going for the clay
3. The preparation of the ground
4. The gathering of the clay for the altar
5. The depositing of the clay
6. The making of the fire-pan
7. The preparation of the pan
8. The heads of the victims
9. The production of fire in the pan
10. The fire in the pan
11. The Apri hymn for the horse sacrifice

## 2 The preparation of the ground for the fire
1. The placing of the fire on the throne and its adoration 2. The carrying of the fire in the pan
3. The piling of the Garhapatya
4. The mingling of the fires
5. The ploughing of the sacrificial ground
6. The casting on of sand
7. The depositing of the gold plate
8. The placing of the naturally perforated brick
9. The putting down of the pan, &c.
10. The bricks of the first layer
    The horse sacrifice (continued), v. 2. 11 and 12
11. The marking out of the lines of the horse
12. The flaying of the horse

## 3 The second and later layers of bricks
1. The bricks of the second layer
2. The bricks of the third layer
3. The Aksnayastomiya bricks of the fourth layer
4. The Srsti and Vyusti bricks of the fourth layer
5. The Asapatna and Viraj bricks of the fifth layer
6. The Stomabhaga bricks of the fifth layer
7. The Nakasad and other bricks of the fifth layer
8. The Metre bricks of the fifth layer
9. The Sayuj and other bricks
10. The Vrstisani and other bricks
11. The Bhuyaskrt bricks
12. The horse sacrifice (continued)

## 4 The piling of the fire altar (continued)

1. The Indratanu, Yajñatanu, and Naksatra bricks
2. The Rtavya bricks, &c.
3. The explanation of the Śatarudriya
4. The besprinkling and dragging over
5. The anointing with butter and the libation to Viśvakarman 6. The putting on of the kindling-sticks and the taking forward of the fire 7. The placing of the fire on the altar
8. The Vasor Dhara
9. The Vajaprasaviya
10. The yoking of the fire and the re-piling
11. The Vihavya bricks
    12, The horse sacrifice (continued)

## 5 The piling of the fire altar (continued)
1. The Diksaniyesti
2. The piling of the fire and the keeping in the pan
3. The pan, the head of the man, and the Vamabhrt brick 4. The Viraj and the Retahsic bricks
5. The gold and the naturally perforated bricks
6. The form of the days and space-filler bricks
7. The rule as to the number of stakes, &c.
8. The reverence of the fire and the Atmestakas
9. Miscellaneous rites
10. The serpent and other offerings
    The horse sacrifice (continued), v. 5. 11-24
11. List of victims
12. List of victims
13. List of victims
    14, List of victims
15. List of victims
16. List of victims
17. List of victims
18. List of victims
19. List of victims
20. List of victims
21. List of victims
22. List of victims
23. List of victims
24. List of victims

## 6 The piling of the flre altar (continued)
1. The Mantras for the pot bricks
2. The pot bricks and the oblation to Brhaspati
3. The Bhutestakas
4. The offerings on the Darbha grass
5. Certain offerings in the Abhijit
6. Explanation of certain points in the ritual in v. 6. 5
7. Variant lengths of the Diksa
8. Miscellaneous points of ritual
9. Further points of ritual
10. The merits of the fire-piling
    The horse sacrifice (continued), v. 6.11-23
11. List of eighteen victims

12. List of eighteen victims
13. List of eighteen victims
14. List of eighteen victims
15. List of eighteen victims
16. List of eighteen victims
17. List of eighteen victims
18. List of eighteen victims
19. List of eighteen victims
20. List of eighteen victims
21. The pairs of victims
22. The victims on the last Atiratra day
23. The seasonal victims

## 7 The piling of the fire altar (continued)
1. The mode of piling the fire
2. The Ajyani bricks
3. The Vajrini bricks and the Vasor Dhara
4. The Rastrabhrt bricks
5. The restoration of the extinguished fire
6. Miscellaneous rules regarding the fire
7. The Akati libations
8. The self-piling of the fire
9. The taking of the fire
10. The putting down of the heads of the victims The horse sacrifice (continued), v. 7. 11-26
11. Offerings with the parts of the victim
12. Offerings with the parts of the victim
13. Offerings with the parts of the victim
14. Offerings with the parts of the victim
15. Offerings with the parts of the victim
16. Offerings with the parts of the victim
17. Offerings with the parts of the victim
18. Offerings with the parts of the victim
19. Offerings with the parts of the victim
20. Offerings with the parts of the victim
21. Offerings with the parts of the victim
22. Offerings with the parts of the victim
23. Offerings with the parts of the victim
24. The Aśvastomiya
25. Mantras said over the head of the horse
26. The smelling of the food by the horse