+++
title = "6"

+++

## 1 The exposition of the Soma sacrifice.
1. The entrance into the hall
2. The consecration libations
3. The garment of black antelope skin, the girdle, the horn 4. The obligations of the consecrated
5. The preliminary offering
6. The purchase of the Soma
7. The treatment of the Soma cow
8. The offerings in the footprints of the cow

9. The measuring of the Soma
10. The purchase price of the Soma
11. The carrying of the Soma in a cart

## 2 The exposition of the Soma sacrifice (continued)
1. The guest offering to the Soma
2. The Tanunaptra
3. The Upasads
4. The altar
5. The milk drink
6. The form of the place of sacrifice
7. The high altar
8. The anointing with butter
9. The oblation-receptacle
10. The Sadas
11. The sounding-holes

## 3 The exposition of the Soma sacrifice (continued)
1. The altars
2. The Vaisarjana offerings
3. The cutting of the sacrificial post
4. The placing of the post
5. The production of fire
6. The yoking of the victim
7. The Samidhenis, anointing with the butter, the fore-sacrifices 8. The slaying of the victim
9. The offering of the omentum
10. The cutting off of portions
11. The after-sacrifices

## 4 The exposition of the Soma sacrifice (continued)
1. The offering of the intestines
2. The Vasativari water
3. The descent of the Soma
4. The measuring of the Soma
5. The Upanśu cup
6. The Antaryama cup
7. The cup for Indra and Vayu
8. The cup for Mitra and Varuna
9. The cup for the Aśvins
10. The Çukra and Manthin cups
11. The Agrayana cup

## 5 The exposition of the Soma sacrifice (continued)
1. The Ukthya cup
2. The Dhruva cup
3. The seasonal cups
4. The cup for Indra and Agni
5. The cups for the Maruts and Mahendra
6. The cup for Aditi
7. The cups for Savitr and the All-gods
8. The cup for the wives of the gods

9. The cup for the yoker of the bays
10. The renewed taking of the Agrayana cup, &c.
11. The praise of the Soma vessels

## 6 The exposition of the Daksina and other offerings
1. The Daksina offerings
2. The Samistayajus
3. The concluding bath
4. The eleven posts
5. The eleven victims
6. The victim for Tvastr with the wives of the gods
7. The Soma oblation, &c.
8. The Atigrahya cups
9. The Adabhya cup
10. The Anśu cup
11. The Sodaśin cup