+++
title = "7"

+++
## 1 The Ekaha and Ahina Sacrifices
1. The Agnistoma
2. The praise of the Stomas
3. The Atiratra
4. The Dviratra of the Angirases
5. The origin of the Triratra of Garga
6. The Soma cow
7. The giving of the cow
8. The Caturatra of Atri
9. The Caturatra of Jamadagni
10. The Pañcaratra
    The horse sacrifice (continued), vii. 1. 11-20
11. The sprinkling of the horse
12. The names of the horse
13. The springing of the horse
14. The first offerings
15. The first offerings
16. The first consecration
17. The Ekavinśini consecration
18. The seasonal consecrations
19. The movements of the horse
20. The Savitras

## 2 The Ahina sacrifices (continued)
1. The Sadratra
2. The Saptaratra
3. The Astaratra
4. The Navaratra
5. The Daśaratra
6. The Ekadaśaratra
   The Dvadaśaratra, vii. 2. 7-10
7. Various arrangements of the cups
8. The order of the cups
9. The first eleven days
10. The twelfth day
    The horse sacrifice (continued)

11. The offerings to the numbers in sequence 12. The offerings to the uneven numbers 13. The offerings to the even numbers 14. The offerings to the numbers 3, 5, &c. 15. The offerings to the numbers 4, 8, &c. 16. The offerings to the numbers 5, 10, &c. 17. The offerings to the numbers 10, 20, &c. 18. The offerings to the numbers 20, 40, &c. 19. The offerings to the numbers 50, 100, &c 20. The offerings to the numbers 100, 1000, &c.

## 3 The Sattras.
1. The last day of the Dvadaśaha
2. The praise of the sacrificer with the Dvadaśaha 3. The Trayodaśaratra
4. The Caturdaśaratra
5. The second Caturdaśaratra
6. The Pañcadaśaratra
7. The second Pañcadaśaratra
8. The Saptadaśaratra
9. The Vinśatiratra
10. The Ekavinśatiratra
    The horse sacrifice (continued), vii. 3. 11-20 11. The Apti Mantras
12. The Paryapti Mantras
13. The Abhu Mantras
14. The Anubhu Mantras
15. The Mantras for the Vaiśvadeva libation 16. The Mantras for the offering of the members 17. The Mantras for the offering to the forms 18. The Mantras for the offering to the colours 19. The Mantras for the offering to the plants 20. The Mantras for the offering to the trees

## 4 The Sattras (continued)
1. The Caturvinśatiratra
2. The second Caturvinśatiratra
3. The Trinśadratra
4. The Dvatrinśadratra
5. The Trayastrinśadratra
6. The Sadtrinśadratra
7. The Ekonapañcaśadratra
   The Year Sattra, vii. 4. 8-11
8. The time for the consecration
9. The consecration And the Upasad days 10. The Prayaniya day
11. The days of the months
    The horse sacrifice (continued), vii. 4. 12-22 12. The Mantras for the Apavya. Offering 13. The Mantras for the offerings to the waters 14. The Mantras for the offerings to the waters 15. The Mantras for the smiting of the dog 16. The Mantras for the Yavyahoma

17. The Gavya Mantras
18. The riddle
19. The queen and the dead horse
20. The treatment of the living horse
21. The Mantras for the Samtatihoma
22. The Mantras for the Pramuktihoma
## 5 The Gavam Ayana
1. The Gavam Ayana
2. The length of the Gavam Ayana
3. The omission of the Prsthas
4. The peculiarities of the second half of the rite 5. The form of competing rites
6. The omission of a day
7. The Utsarginam Ayana
8. The specialities of the Samans of the Mahavrata 9. The ceremonial of the Mahavrata
10. The dance of the female slaves
    The horse sacrifice (continued), vii. 5. 11-25 11. The Mantras for the Annahoma
12. The Mantras for the Çarirahoma
13. The Mantras for the placing of the Paridhis 14. List of various oblations
15. Explanation of the oblations in vii. 5. 14 16. The Mantras for the first Mahiman cup 17. The Mantras for the second Mahiman cup 18. The Mantras for the Annahoma
19. The Mantras for addressing the horse 20. Further Mantras for the Annahoma 21. Expiatory offerings
22. The Mrgarestis
23. The Mantras for the Samnatihomas 24. The Mantras of the Sacrificer
25. The horse as the microcosm