+++
title = "02"

+++
I adopt Brugmann’s suggestion (presented and generally endorsed by Old, also Scar 417-18) to read *tośā́*sarathayā́vānā for tośā́sā ratha… Scar assembles an impressive number of passages involving sarátham/saráthā and √yā, incl. I.108.1 dedicated to Indra and Agni. The suggestion has the merit of eliminating the supposed s-stem tośás- with its apparent anomalous uṣás-like inflection with lengthened grade in the strong form tośā́saḥ. The dual to the thematic tośá-, tośā́ exactly as here, is found in an Indra and Agni hymn III.12.4. The change does require going against the Pp. and also emending sā to sa. The publ. tr. should have an asterisk before “driving on the same chariot.” As for tośá-, Gotō discusses it at length (166-68), rejecting the old gloss as ‘drip’ in favor of ‘hasten’; his redefinition is accepted by Mayrhofer (EWA s.v. TOŚ, replacing KEWA’s ‘drip’). Because the anodyne ‘hasten’ can fit almost any verb in the RV (and in fact the old RVicist joke is that, judging from Ge et sim., all verbs in the RV mean ‘shine’, ‘hasten’, or ‘sing’), there is nothing in the usage of the forms of this root that imposes ‘hasten’ (or excludes it). That Gotō labels his reinterpretation “plausibler” than the older one shows once again a certain deafness to metaphor and a penchant for the semantic lowest common denominator. Moreover, that most of its subjects are liquids supports the old rendering ‘drip’. The only preverb with which it is found is ní ‘down’. Verbs of hastening (etc.) generally take a variety of directional preverbs, of which ní is one of the rarest and most specialized; dripping, on the other hand, goes in only one direction, down. Gotō’s ‘hasten’ gets little or no support from the Iranian evidence he adduces (168 n. 275), which is quite weak and questioned even by him. Although as ‘drip’ √tuś has no good etymology either (see KEWA s.v. tóśate), I see no reason to replace it with ‘hasten’ without better evidence. In our passage ‘streaming’ probably reflects the same metaphor in English for speed. Or, like nitóśana- in VIII.25.23, it could mean ‘overflowing’ (with goods) and refer to the anticipated generosity of the gods.

