+++
title = "Praśna I, Adhyāya 6, Kaṇḍikā 14"

+++
## 01
1. Earthen vessels that have been touched by impure persons (must be) exposed to (the flame of) a fire of Kuśa grass.

## 02
2. Those which have been defiled by stains of remnants (of food must be) exposed to another burning.

## 03
3. Those which have been defiled by urine, ordure, blood, semen, and the like (must be) thrown away.

## 04
4. (Vessels) made of metal (must be) washed, after having been scrubbed as (directed) above.

## 05
5. The materials (to be used) for scrubbing (are) cowdung, earth, ashes, and so forth.

## 06
6. Those which have been defiled by urine, ordure, blood, semen, and the like (must be) recast,

## 07
7. Or (they must) be kept during seven (days and) nights completely immersed in cow's urine,

## 08
8. Or in a great river for as long (a period). [^1] 

## 09
9. (Vessels) made of stone or of fruits, (i.e.) gourds, Bel-fruit, and Vināḷas, (shall be) brushed with (a brush of) cow's hair. [^2] 

## 10
10. (Sacrificial implements made of) plaited Naḷa-reeds, bamboo, or Śara-reeds (shall be) washed with cowdung, water, and the like. [^3] 

## 11
11. If unhusked rice has been defiled, (it must be) washed (and afterwards be) dried. [^4] 

## 12
12. But a great quantity (of unhusked rice must be) sprinkled.

## 13
13. Husked rice (which has been defiled must be) thrown away. [^5] 

## 14
14. The same (rule applies) to cooked sacrificial viands. [^6] 

## 15
15. But if a great quantity has been defiled by (the touch of) dogs, crows, and the like (unclean beings), one must throw away that portion (as) food for men, and sprinkle (the rest with water), reciting the Anuvāka, 'Pavamānaḥ suvarjanaḥ.' [^7] 

## 16
16. Hydromel and preparations of milk (are) purified by pouring them from one vessel into another. [^8] 

## 17
17. In like manner let him pour oil and clarified butter which have been touched by an impure (person) into water, and (afterwards) use them. [^9] 

## 18
18. If (any) impure (substance) is thrown (into the sacrificial fire) let him place (the two Araṇis one) on (the other), produce fire by friction, (and offer) a Pavamāneṣṭi. [^10] 

## 19
19. If (the rules regarding) purity, the proper place, the mantras, the series of actions, the object, the materials, (their) consecration, and the proper time are conflicting, each earlier-named (point) is more important (than the following ones). [^11] 



[^1]:  14. A great river, i.e. one which directly flows into the ocean.--Govinda.

[^2]:  A Vināḷa, i.e. (a vessel) made of bamboo or Vidagdhaṇaḷa; it s called a 'long vessel' (dirghabhājanam), and is used for carrying he Praṇīta water and the like purposes.--Govinda. The vessel p. 191 intended is no doubt the flask made of a bamboo which is cut below the joint, and is commonly used as a bottle for oil. Govinda adds that this mode of purification is to be adopted in case the vessels have been touched by impure persons.

[^3]:  Naḷa-reeds, i.e. Amphidonax Karka; Śara, i.e. Saccharum Sara. Govinda says that the rule applies to cases where such implements have been defiled by remnants of food (ucchiṣṭalepa).

[^4]:  'Defiled, i.e. touched by a Caṇḍāla.' (The rule) refers to a quantity less than a Droṇa (66 or 132 lbs.).--Govinda.

[^5]:  'If it has been defiled by urine and the like and the quantity is small;' this must be understood, because he will declare (below, Sūtra 15) that if there is a great quantity (the defiled) portion only shall be thrown away.--Govinda.

[^6]:  This, too, refers to small quantities only.

[^7]:  The Anuvāka referred to is Taittirīya-brāhmaṇa I, 4, 8.

[^8]:  'Hydromel, i.e. sour milk, honey, clarified butter, water, and p. 192 grain; a preparation of milk, i.e. curd of two-milk whey (āmikṣā), if these are blemished by the fault of men, and that (blemish must have been caused by) the touch of an impure (person, ucchiṣṭa) only.'--Govinda.

[^9]:  'And that must be done in such a manner that the oil and the clarified butter are not lost.'--Govinda.

[^10]:  'Any impure substance, i.e. urine, ordure, and the like.'--Govinda.

[^11]:  Āvṛt,' the series of actions,' i.e. the growth (prāṃśubhāva) of the ceremonial (prayoga).--Govinda.