+++
title = "Praśna I, Adhyāya 9, Kaṇḍikā 17"

+++
## 01
1. The Rathakāra (carpenter), the Ambaṣṭha, the Sūta (charioteer), the Ugra, the Māgadha, the Āyogava, the Vaiṇa, the Kṣattṛ, the Pulkasa, the Kukkuṭa, the Vaidehaka, the Caṇḍāla, and so forth, [^1] 

## 02
2. Among these, sons of equal caste (spring) from women of equal caste.

## 03
3. A Brāhmaṇa (begets) on a female of the Kṣatriya caste a Brāhmaṇa, on a female of the Vaiśya caste an Ambaṣṭha, on a female of the Śūdra caste a Niṣāda, [^2] 

## 04
4. (According to) some a Pāraśava.

## 05
5. A Kṣatriya (begets) on a female of the Vaiśya caste a Kṣatriya, on a female of the Śūdra caste an Ugra.

## 06
6. A Vaiśya (begets) on a female of the Śūdra caste a Rathakāra.

## 07
7. A Śūdra begets on a female of the Vaiśya caste a Māgadha, on a female of the Kṣatriya caste a Kṣattṛ, but on a female of the Brāhmaṇa caste a Caṇḍāla. [^3] 

## 08
8. A Vaiśya begets on a female of the Kṣatriya caste an Āyogava, on a female of the Brāhmaṇa caste a Sūta.

## 09
9. If among these an Ambaṣṭha (male) and an Ugra (female) unite, (their son) will be born in the direct order of the castes (Anuloma). [^4] 

## 10
10. If a Kṣattṛ (male) and a Vaidehaka (female) unite, (their son will be) born against the order of the castes (Pratiloma).

## 11
11. An Ugra (begets) on a female of the Kṣattṛ caste a Śvapāka, [^5] 

## 12
12. A Vaidehaka on a female of the Ambaṣṭha caste a Vaiṇa,

## 13
13. A Niṣāda on a female of the Śūdra caste a Pulkasa, [^6] 

## 14
14. A Śūdra on a female of the Niṣāda caste a Kukkuṭaka.

## 15
15. The wise declare those sprung from an inter-mixture of the castes to be Vrātyas. [^7] 





[^1]:  -2. 17. Manu X, 26-27.

[^2]:  -6. See above, I, 8, 16, 6-7.

[^3]:  -8. See above, I, 8, 16, 8.

[^4]:  -10. I.e. the offspring of individuals of different Anuloma castes again become Anulomas, and the offspring of individuals of different Pratiloma castes, Pratilomas.

[^5]:  -12. Manu X, 19.

[^6]:  -14. See above, I, 8, 16, 11-12.

[^7]:  Gautama IV, 25.