+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


## 01
1. Prajāpati conceived a passion for his own

daughter,--either the Sky or the Dawn [^fn_480]. 'May I pair with her!' thus (thinking) he united with her.

[^fn_480]: 209:1 For other versions of this legend about Prajāpati (Brahman)'s illicit passion for his daughter, which, as Dr. Muir suggests, probably refers to some atmospheric phenomenon, see Ait. Br. III, 33, and Tāṇḍya Br. VIII, 2, 10; cf. Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, IV, p. 45; I, p. 107. See also Śat. Br. II, 1, 2, 9, with note.

## 02
2. This, assuredly, was a sin in the eyes of the gods. 'He who acts thus towards his own daughter, our sister, [commits a sin],' they thought.

## 03
3. The gods then said to this god who rules over the beasts (Rudra) [^fn_481], 'This one, surely, commits a sin who acts thus towards his own daughter, our sister. Pierce him!' Rudra, taking aim, pierced him. Half of his seed fell to the ground. And thus it came to pass.

[^fn_481]: 209:2 The construction here is irregular. Perhaps this is part of the speech of the gods, being a kind of indirect address to Rudra in order to avoid naming the terrible god. Dr. Muir translates: The gods said, "This god, who rules over the beasts, commits a transgression in that he acts thus to his own daughter, our sister: pierce him through."' In the Kāṇva MS. some words seem to have been omitted at this particular place. According to the Ait. Br., the gods created a god Bhūtavat, composed of the most fearful forms of theirs. After piercing the incarnation of Prajāpati's sin, he asked, and obtained, the boon that he should henceforth be the ruler of cattle.

## 04
4. Accordingly it has been said by the R̥shi [^fn_482] with reference to that (incident), 'When the father embraced his daughter, uniting with her, he dropped his seed on the earth.' This (became) the chant (uktha) called āgnimāruta [^fn_483]; in (connection with)

[^fn_482]: 209:3 Viz., Rig-veda X, 61, 7, where verses 5-7 contain the first allusion to this legend.

[^fn_483]: 209:4 The āgnimāruta is one of the śāstras recited at the evening libation of the Soma-sacrifice; and made up chiefly of a hymn addressed to Agni Vaiśvānara and one to the Maruts; and [following the stotriya and anurūpa pragātha] a hymn to Jātavedas; [and one to the Āpas, followed by various detailed  verses or couplets]; viz., Rig-veda III, 3, 'vaiśvānarāya pr̥thupājase,' &c., and I, 87, 'pratvakshasaḥ pratavaso,' &c.; [Rig-veda I, 168, 1-2, stotriya; VII, 16, II-32, anurūpa]; and Rig-veda I, 143, 'pratavyasīm navyasīm,' &c. (and X, 9, 'āpo hi shṭḥā mayobhuvas,' &c.) respectively, at the Agnishṭoma (and first day of the dvādaśāha). See Āśv. Śr. V, 20, 5; Ait. Br. III, 35; IV, 30.

this it is set forth how the gods caused that seed to spring [^fn_484]. When the anger of the gods subsided, they cured Prajāpati and cut out that dart of this. (Rudra); for Prajāpati, doubtless, is this sacrifice.

[^fn_484]: 210:1 According to Ait. Br. III, 35, where this legend is also given in connection with the āgnimāruta śāstra, Agni Vaiśvānara, aided by the Maruts, stirred (and heated) the seed; and out of it sprang successively Āditya (the sun), Bhr̥gu, and the Ādityas; whilst the coals (aṅgāra) remaining behind became the Aṅgiras, and Br̥haspati, and the coal dust, the burnt earth and ashes were changed into various kinds of animals. According to Harisvāmin it would seem that our passage has to he understood to the effect that the composition of the āgnimāruta śāstra shows the order of beings which the gods caused to spring forth from the seed. See also IV, 5, I, 8.

## 05
5. They said (to one another), 'Think of some means by which that (part of the sacrifice torn out with the dart) may not be lost, and how it may be but a small portion of the offering itself!'

## 06
6. They said, 'Take it round to Bhaga (Savitr̥, the Patron), who sits on the south side (of the sacrificial ground): Bhaga will eat it by way of fore-portion [^fn_485], so that it may be as though it were offered. They accordingly took it round to Bhaga, who sat on the south side. Bhaga (Savitr̥) looked at it: it burnt out his eyes [^fn_486]. And thus it came to pass. Hence they say, 'Bhaga is blind.'

[^fn_485]: 210:2 See note on I, 7, 4, 18.

[^fn_486]: 210:3 'Nirdadāha.' The Kaushīt. Br. VI, 10 (Ind. Stud. II, 306) and Yāska Nir. 1 2, 14 have nirjaghāna, 'it knocked out his eyes.' The Kaushīt. Br. also makes them first take the prāśitra to Savitr̥, and when it cut his hands, they gave him two golden ones.

## 07
7. They said, 'It has not yet become appeased here: take it round to Pūshan!' They accordingly

took it round to Pūshan. Pūshan tasted it: it knocked out his teeth. And thus it came to pass. Hence they say, 'Pūshan is toothless;' and therefore, when they prepare a mess of boiled rice (caru) [^fn_487] for Pūshan, they prepare it from ground rice, as is done for one toothless.

[^fn_487]: 211:1 Caru, in the ordinary sense of the word, is a potful of rice (barley, &c.) grains boiled, or rather steamed (antarūshmapakva), so as to remain whole, as in Indian curry. Cf. Weber, Ind. Stud. IX, p. 216.

## 08
8. They said, 'It has not yet become appeased here: take it round to Br̥haspati [^fn_488]!' They accordingly took it round to Br̥haspati. Br̥haspati hasted to Savitr̥ for his impulsion (influence, prasava [^fn_489]), for assuredly Savitr̥ is the impeller (prasavitr̥) of the gods. 'Impel (influence) this for me!' he said. Savitr̥, as the impeller, accordingly impelled it for him, and being thus impelled by Savitr̥, it did not injure him: and thus it was henceforth appeased. This, then, is essentially the same as the fore-portion.

[^fn_488]: 211:2 According to Kaushīt. Br. VI, 10, they took it from Pūshan to Indra, as the mightiest and-strongest of the gods; and he appeased it with prayer (brahman); whence the Brahman (in taking the prāśitra) says, 'Indra is Brahman.' Weber, Ind. Stud. II, p. 307.

[^fn_489]: 211:3 The consistent use of derivations from one and the same root (pra-su) in this and similar passages is, of course, quite as artificial in Sanskrit as must be any imitation of it in English.

## 09
9. Now when he cuts off the fore-portion, he cuts out what is injured in the sacrifice,--what belongs to Rudra. Thereupon he touches water: water is (a means) of lustration, hence he lustrates by means of water [^fn_490]. He now cuts off piece by piece the iḍā [^fn_491], (which represents) cattle.

[^fn_490]: 211:4 He thereby averts the evil effects of the act which is connected with Rudra, 'the terrible god;' see p. 2, note 2. Besides, the iḍā with which he now proceeds representing the cattle, he thereby guards the cattle from the rudriya, cf. above I, 7, 3, 21.

[^fn_491]: 211:5 See I, 8, 1, 12, 13.

## 10
10. Let him cut off (for the fore-portion) ever so small a piece [^fn_492]: thus the dart comes out; let him therefore cut off ever so small a piece. He should (according to some) put clarified butter on one side only, either below or above: thus that which is hard becomes soft and flows forth; and for this reason he should put butter on one side only, either below or above.

[^fn_492]: 212:1 According to Kāty. III, 4, 7, the prāśitra, or (Brahman's) fore-portion, is to be of the size of a barley-corn or a pippala (Ficus Religiosa) berry.

## 11
11. Having (nevertheless [^fn_493]) made an underlayer of butter [^fn_494] and a double cutting from the oblation (havis), he pours butter on the upper side of it; for it is only in this way that this becomes part of the sacrifice.

[^fn_493]: 212:2 There is no indication in the text of two different practices being here referred to. The Kāṇva recension, however, puts in here, 'but let him not do so,' which is evidently understood in our text also.

[^fn_494]: 212:3 Viz. in the prāśitraharaṇa, or pan which is to receive the Brahman's portion. The hollow part of the vessel is to be either of the shape of a (hand-)mirror, i.e. with a round bowl, or of that of a camasa or jug, i.e. with a square bowl (p. 7, note 1). Kāty. I, 3, 40, 42. On the underlayer' of butter, see I, 7, 2, 8.

## 12
12. Let him not carry it (to the Brahman) along the front (east) side of the Āhavanīya fire); (though) some, it is true, do carry it along the front side. For on the front side stand the cattle facing the sacrificer: hence he would impose the power of Rudra on the cattle, if he were to carry it along the front side, and his (the sacrificer's) household and cattle would be overwhelmed. Let him therefore cross over in this way (behind the paridhis); for thus he does not impose Rudra's power on the cattle and he removes that (dart) sideways [^fn_495].

[^fn_495]: 212:4 'Tiryag evainaṁ nirmimīte.' I am in doubt as to whether  enam (which is omitted in the Kāṇva text) really refers to Rudra's dart. Cf. par. 9.

## 13
13. He (the Brahman) receives [^fn_496] it, with the text (Vāj. S. II, 11 b, c), 'At the impulse (prasava) of the divine Savitr̥ I receive thee with the arms of the Aśvins, with the hands of Pūshan!'

[^fn_496]: 213:1 According to Kāty. II, 2, 15, he first looks at it, with the text (Vāj. S. p. 58): 'With Mitra's eye I look on thee!'

## 14
14. And in like manner as Br̥haspati then hasted to Savitr̥ for his impulsion,--for, assuredly, Savitr̥ is the impeller of the gods,--and said, 'Impel this for me!' and Savitr̥, the impeller, impelled it for him; and, impelled by Savitr̥, it did not injure him; so now also this one (the Brahman) hastes to Savitr̥ for his impulsion,--for, assuredly, Savitr̥ is the impeller of the gods,--and says 'impel this for me!' and Savitr̥, the impeller, impels it for him; and, impelled by Savitr̥, it does not injure him.

## 15
15. He eats [^fn_497] the fore-portion, with the text (Vā;. S. II, 11 d), 'With Agni's mouth I eat thee!' for Agni, assuredly, it does not injure in any way; and so neither does it injure him (the Brahman).

[^fn_497]: 213:2 According to Kāty. II, 2, 17, he previously puts it down on the shoulder of the altar, with the text (Vāj. S. p. 58), 'I put you down, on the navel of the earth, in the lap of Aditi!' According to 19, however, this is optional (except when the Brahman does not eat the prāśitra immediately).

## 16
16. He must not chew it with his teeth: 'lest this power of Rudra should injure my teeth!' so (he thinks), and therefore he must not chew it with his teeth.

## 17
17. He then rinses his mouth with water;--water is (a means of) purification: hence he purifies himself with water, (that is, a means of) purification. After he has rinsed the vessel [^fn_498],--

[^fn_498]: 213:3 According to Kāty. II, 2, 20, the Brahman, having rinsed the  vessel [or, according to the comment, the two prāśitraharaṇa, one of which is used as lid to the other], touches his navel, with the text (Vāj. S. p. 58), 'May the deities there are in the waters purify this! Enter the stomach of Indra, being offered with "Hail!" Mix not with my food! Settle down above my navel! In Indra's stomach I make thee settle!'

## 18
18. They bring him the Brahman's portion [^fn_499]. The Brahman, in truth, sits south of the sacrifice, as its guardian. He sits facing that portion. As regards the fore-portion, that they have already brought to him and he has eaten it. In the Brahman's portion which they now bring to him, he obtains his own share; and henceforth he watches what remains incomplete of the sacrifice: for this reason they bring him the Brahman's portion.

[^fn_499]: 214:1 The Brahman's regular portion (brahmabhāga) of the sacrificial food is cut, like the prāśitra or fore-portion (which apparently he receives as the representative of Br̥haspati), from Agni's cake.

## 19
19. He (the Brahman) must maintain silence (from the time he takes his seat on being elected) [^fn_500] up to that speech (of the Adhvaryu), 'Brahman, shall I step forward?' Those (priests) who, in the midst of the sacrifice, perform the iḍā, which represents the domestic offerings (pākayajña) [^fn_501], tear the sacrifice to pieces, injure it. Now the Brahman, assuredly, is the best physician: hence the Brahman thereby restores the sacrifice; but, if he were to sit there talking, he would not restore it: he must therefore maintain silence.

[^fn_500]: 214:2 See I, 1, 4, 9.

[^fn_501]: 214:3 According to the scholiast, it represents the pākayajña or domestic (cooked) offerings, because at the latter, as in the iḍā, the remains of the offerings are eaten.

## 20
20. If he should utter any human sound before that time, let him there and then mutter some R̥c or Yajus-text addressed to Vishṇu; for Vishṇu is

the sacrifice, so that he thereby again obtains a hold on the sacrifice: and this is the expiation of that (breach of silence).

## 21
21. When he (the Adhvaryu) says, 'Brahman, shall I step forward?' the Brahman mutters thus (Vāj. S. II, 12), 'This thy sacrifice, O divine Savitr̥, they have announced . . .,'--thereby he has recourse to Savitr̥ for his impulsion (prasava), for he is the impeller (prasavitr̥) of the gods;--'to Br̥haspati, the Brahman,'--for Br̥haspati, assuredly, is the Brahman of the gods: hence he announces that (sacrifice) to him who is the Brahman of the gods; and accordingly he says, 'to Br̥haspati, the Brahman.'--'Therefore prosper the sacrifice, prosper the lord of sacrifice, prosper me!' In this there is nothing that requires explanation.

## 22
22. [He continues, Vāj. S. II, 13]: 'May his mind delight in the gushing (of the) butter [^fn_502]!' By the mind, assuredly, all this (universe) is obtained (or pervaded, āptam): hence he thereby obtains this All by the mind.--'May Br̥haspati spread (carry through) this sacrifice! May he restore the sacrifice uninjured!'--he thereby restores what was torn asunder.--'May all the gods rejoice here!'--'all the gods,' doubtless, means the All: hence he thereby restores (the sacrifice) by means of the All. He may add, 'Step forward!' if he choose; or, if he choose, he may omit it.

[^fn_502]: 215:1 ? 'Mano jūtir [jyotir, Kāṇva rec.] jushatām ājyasya.' I am inclined to read jūter [cf. Ath.-veda XIX, 58, 1: ghr̥tasya jūtiḥ samānā]. Mahīdhara interprets: 'May the rushing (eager) mind devote itself to the butter!' Hillebrandt, Neu- and Vollmondsopfer, p. 135, apparently proposes to combine manojūtir 'des Geistes Schnelligkeit.' Perhaps jushatām has to be taken in a transitive sense: 'May the gushing of the butter delight the mind.'

