+++
title = "02"

+++
The standard tr. all take Indra and Pūṣan in pāda a as the subj. of duduhre in b and as modified by prītā́ḥ in that pāda. There are several difficulties with this interpr. First, pāda a has entirely dual reference: the two god names índraḥ and pūṣā́, followed by two dual descriptors, vṛ́ṣaṇā suhástā, but both the adj. prītā́ḥ and the pf.

duduhre in b are plural. Although Old suggests that this dual/plural disharmony is similar to (and therefore presumably no more problematic than) the pl. panitā́raḥ in 1d, I think the cases are different: Indra and Agni have no dual descriptors in 1d and there is a plausible source nearby for the pl. panitā́raḥ.

Moreover, in 2ab Old and Ge (/WG) take Indra and Pūṣan as agentive milkers, supplying what produces the milk (namely in this case the udder) as the object of duduhre. But medial forms of √duh ordinarily take the milk-producer (cow or, by synecdoche here, the supplied udder) as subject; if there is an object it is the milk, either actual or metaphorical. This is exactly the use of the med. 3rd sg. pf. duduhe (that is, the identical form to duduhre save for number) in 1c. It seems highly unlikely that these two nearly superimposable forms would be used with entirely different syntax/semantics in near adjacency. The construction that would be reflected by the tr. of Old et al. is generally in the active; cf., e.g., I.64.5 duhánti ū́dhaḥ “(The Maruts) milk the udder.” (Re avoids the syntacto-semantic difficult by taking Indra and Pūṣan as the milk-producers -- “Indra donc, Pūṣan … ont donné un lait inépuisable” -- but the number disagreement remains.) To avoid these two problems, I propose taking 2a as a variant pairing continuing 1d -- Indra and Pūṣan are often found together, as are Indra and Agni, and could equally admire the cow. In fact, if 2a continues 1d, the pl. panitā́raḥ could be accounted for by the addition of Pūṣan in 2a. (Alternatively 2a can be a nominal clause with suhástā as predicate: “Indra and Pūṣan, the two bulls, have dexterous hands” or sim.) I then take 2b as a separate clause, with prītā́ḥ a fem. nom. pl.

referring to cows, who are “pleased” because they are well-treated and produce milk accordingly; they are the subj. of duduhre, and śaśayám refers to the milk they produce. In this interpr. the unnamed cows in b stand for the inspired thoughts, the poems, of “me” -- the poet who called his maniṣā́- a milk-cow (dhenú-) in 1ab. The productive result of these poems in the sacrificial exchange, their “milk,” is compared to the “(milk) of heaven,” namely, rain. This theme is further developed in cd: when/if the gods take pleasure in her, i.e., the poet’s inspired thought offered at the sacrifice, he hopes to get the reciprocal benefit of the gods’ benevolence. (Note the echo of asyām in c and aśyām in d, though unfortunately they are in different metrical positions.) It might be objected that the cow in vss. 1-2 is otherwise singular (dhenúm 1b, yā́duduhe 1c, asyāḥ 1d, asyām 2c), but the feminine plural dominates vs. 3 (jāmáyaḥ 3a, dhenávaḥ 3c), and this may simply anticipate the number shift.

