+++
title = "05"

+++
As all comm. remark, the meter in pāda b is flawed. Curiously enough, the other two occurrences of ráthaspátiḥ (in the closely related X.64.10, 93.7) are also found in metrically wanting pādas—each missing a syllable— as Old notes. The metrical problem may (or may not) be connected with the morphological anomaly in this cmpd.: the 1st member ráthas- to the extremely well-attested thematic stem rátha-. We would of course expect *rátha-páti-, but the problem with this form emerges immediately on constructing it: 4 light syllables. On this form and similarly anomalous hapax ṛtas-pati- (VIII.26.21; voc., so unaccented) see Wackernagel’s rather elliptical treatment (AiG II.1.241, 246-67), where he classifies the two forms with gen. páti- cmpds, without explaining how he analyzes the -as forms morphologically. I would suggest that the putative, metrically difficult form with stem as first member was “fixed” by analogy to the common genitival -páti- cmpds to athematic noun stems (or opaque ones), most esp. bṛ́haspáti-, which is very common and phonologically similar. However, this does not address the metrical problem. Arnold (101) suggests reading *ráthasas, which fixes the meter but at the high cost of inventing an s-stem to rátha-, which makes no sense derivationally (rightly rejected by Old). Old attributes the metrical disturbance to “laxe metrische Praxis,” which is, at best, a description, not an explanation. I do not think ráthasrepresents an archaic gen. form—all the less so since it’s not clear that the form was correctly transmitted. In any case, Old considers the ráthaspáti- a divine being of some sort; the “Lord of the Chariot” here joins another very marginal figure, God Leader. ráthaspáti- is found with Bhaga elsewhere (X.64.10, 93.7), and such an association would fit the emphasis on ‘wealth’ (rayí-) in b and c.

The forms iṣastútaḥ and devastútaḥ in d and e can either be nom. pl. root noun agentive cmpds or acc. pl. tatpuruṣa action nouns (both with 2nd member -stú-t-); see Scar 636-7. Although most interpr. (Ge, Re, WG) opt for the former, I have chosen the latter, on the basis of a number of passages in V where a praise song (vel sim.) is the obj. of manāmahe: V.13.2 agné stómam manāmahe, V.35.8 diví stómam manāmahe, V.66.3 ... suṣṭutím ... stómair manāmahe; also VII.82.10 devásya ślókaṃ savitúr manāmahe.