+++
title = "10"

+++
Given that the two words for ‘bow’, dhánus- and dhánvan-, are suppletive in the RV with the former supplying the nom./acc. sg. and the latter the rest of the paradigm (see disc. ad VI.75.2), my tr. of dhánvā̆(and indeed the various tr. of Re, Macd, Doniger, and Maurer; Ge’s “trägst du Pfeile und Bogen” is ambiguous, because Bogen is both sg. and pl.) as singular must be wrong, and Gr’s identification of the form as pl. is correct. In fact, though the Pp reads dhánva with short final, in the Saṃhitā text the word spans the pāda boundary and coalesces with the following word as dhánvā́rhann and so could be underlyingly dhánvā, with an unambig. pl.

ending. In any case I would alter the publ. tr. to “arrows and bows.” The VP in c, idáṃ dayase víśvam ábhvam, is variously rendered: Ge “verfügst du über all diese Gewalt,” Macd “wieldest all this force” (sim. Doniger, Maurer) versus Re “tu détruis tout mal-informe,” WG “… zerstörst du all dieses Unwesen.” I do not think either of these approaches is correct. On the one hand, ábhva- does not mean ‘power’, but rather ‘formless(ness)’, often conceived as monstrous (Re’s ‘malinforme’ [badly shapeless], though odd, seems close). Nor does dayate, if belonging to √dā ‘cut, divide, distribute’ as Ge et al. seem to take it, mean ‘wield, have control’. As for the other view, Re simply states that dáyate can mean ‘destroy’, while WG explicitly adopt Gotō’s view (1st class pres., 172-74) that there are two distinct roots √dā that have dáyate as pres., one ‘divide, distribute’, the other ‘destroy’. None of the passages adduced by Gotō for ‘destroy’ requires segregation in a separate root that has little else to support its existence; they can all be seen as metaphorical extensions of ‘divide, cut apart’ (3 of the 5 passages occur with ví), an extension well within the bounds of RVic poetic imagination (though perhaps not of all its commentators). My own view is that the action attributed to Rudra here is a cosmogonic one, regularly performed by other Rigvedic gods, namely the division of the formless chaos of the pre-creation universe into what will later be referred to by the expression “name-and-form” (nāma-rūpa-) As I have discussed in numerous other places (see, e.g., my forthcoming “The Blob in Ancient India”), the Vedic conception of creation involves division into separate entities, with clear boundaries and names, of an originally fuzzy boundary-less mass, which strikes horror in the hearts of Vedic people. In my view, the verb dayate here has its standard root meaning, ‘cut, divide, apportion’, and Rudra is engaged in cosmogonic division. In this sense the verb often occurs with the preverb ví, which sometimes occurs directly after the verb occupying post-caesura position (e.g. … dáyase ví … VI.37.4, VII.23.4). Although the preverb is not found here, víśvam immediately follows the verb and evokes the preverb. Note a different use of the same root in vs. 5; also note that nā́ma is found in 8d and -rūpa- in 9a, evoking the notion “name and form.” In my publ tr. I did not fully render the idám, however. I would substitute “this whole formless void” or perhaps “the whole formless void here.”

