+++
title = "05"

+++
Very alliterative verse, esp. in 2nd half, with pāda c duhánty ū́dhar divyā́ni dhū́tayo (cf. also dhúnayo in pāda a) and d … pinvanti páyasā párijrayaḥ. Cf. also b vā́tān vidyútas (ta)vi(ṣībhir).

Most tr. take ū́dhar divyā́ni together (e.g., Ge “die himmlischen Euter”).

Although divyá- does modify ū́dhar- elsewhere in similar context (e.g., IX.107.5 duhāná ū́dhar divyám mádhu priyám), the collocation is not grammatically possible here, since ū́dhar is definitely singular and divyā́ni is definitely plural. At best one would have to argue that short-vowel neut. plurals to n-stems, which are identical to their neut. sgs., provided some sort of model (cf., e.g., I.173.3 sádma mitā́“fixed seats”). Old (ZDMG 55.273 n. 1 [=KlSch 732]) claims that this is a vicarious introduction (“ein vicarirendes Eintretung,” whatever that means) of the sg. ū́dhar since the plural of ū́dhar- doesn't exist. (We would expect *ū́dhāni, like áhāni to áhar, though Old bizarrely produces *ū́dhṝṇi instead; I see no reason why *ū́dhāni could not exist and assume its non-attestation is an accidental gap.) But the issue here is not the singular of ‘udder’, but the plural of ‘heavenly’, which the poet could easily have made singular (as in the parallels) if he had wanted. The root √duh can take a double accusative, as in IX.107.5 just quoted: “milking the heavenly udder of its dear honey”), and this is how I interpret divyā́ni here, supplying a form of vásu ‘goods’, which divyá- regularly modifies. In one way or another this alternative goes back to Gr and Delbrück AiS.80 and is accepted by WG. Again, Nodhas seems to be playfully evoking a familiar phrase but modifying it.

On párijrayaḥ, supposedly a cmpd with root noun -jri-, lacking the usual -textension, see comm. ad V.54.2.

