+++
title = "13"

+++
Ge (/WG) construes āpṛ́chyaṃ krátum with ā́kṣeti, giving the latter the meaning ‘possess’. But this Class II present means only ‘inhabit, dwell’ (as opposed to Class I kṣáyati ‘rules over, owns’ to a different [synchronic] root √kṣi). Re clearly recognizes the problem and tries to reconcile the meaning of the root present with its construal with an object, producing the very odd “il habite une force-spirituelle digne-d'être-recherchée.” It seems preferable to me to take āpṛ́chyaṃ krátum with the previous pāda and tr. ā́kṣeti púṣyati separately. The two verbs (admittedly without the preverb ā́) form a fixed expression (I.83.3, V.37.4, VII.32.9). The position of the preverb also does not favor construing the preceding accusative with ā́kṣeti: we might then expect the preverb to begin the clause, though this argument is considerably weakened by the fact that the pāda would begin *ā́āpṛ́chyam, in sandhi ā́pṛ́chyam, and the separate preverb would be essentially lost. As for the sense of bharate … āpṛ́chyaṃ krátum, I interpret it as what I think Re would call a “legère zeugma.” The first two objects of bharate, vā́jam and dhánā, are both physical objects that the subject carries from one place to another; the third proposed object is a mental attitude. The English idiom “carries himself” and the English noun “bearing” use ‘carry, bear’ in a similar sense, to refer to a person’s mental self-presentation, and the middle voice of bharate would neatly fit such a value.