+++
title = "07"

+++
The naḥ of pāda a was careless omitted in the publ. tr., which should be changed to “will come to us with her help.” The text of pāda a reads utá syā́no dívā matír, with matí- ‘thought’. Ge takes this pāda a as a separate clause: “Und dies ist unser Gedanke bei Tag.” But the context seems to enforce Aditi as referent for syā́: note the insistent repetition of nom. sg. áditiḥ in all 3 pādas of the previous vs., once also associated with dívā; the initial áditiḥ of our pāda b; the parallel opening of 8a utá tyā́, also with a divine referent. Re uses his trademark parentheses to manipulate the syntax, yielding “this celebrated Aditi, (the object of our) poetic thought” -- “cette-célébre Aditi, (objet de notre) pensée-poétique” -- which can’t be legitimately extracted from the text. The text as transmitted, with two fem. nominatives, should rather encourage an identification of Aditi with “thought,” a step I am reluctant to take. I suggest instead a slight alteration to the text, which could have read *dívāmátir, i.e., dívā + *amátir ‘banner’, contra the Pp. This requires only a change in the accent, which could have been redactional, arising because of durmatím in 10b (cf. also ámatim in 11b). In this reading Aditi is implicitly compared to a banner or ensign. Although this comparison is not found of Aditi otherwise, amáti- is associated elsewhere with the Ādityas: Mitra and Varuṇa (V.62.5, 69.1) and Savitar (VII.38.1, 2, 45.2, 3).

Although as a noun, we would expect śáṃtāti to be feminine, hence *śáṃtātim in context, I prefer to take it here as a nonce neuter noun, rather than as a nonce neuter adjective modifying máyaḥ, contra Ge’s “beglückende Freude.” Perhaps instead of a neuter, we might consider it an honorary indeclinable, matching its base śám ‘weal’, which opens 8b and all three pādas in vs. 9; our śáṃtāti … karat would be entirely parallel to 8b śám … karataḥ and 9a śám … karat.

Gr identifies a lexeme ápa √kṛ for just this passage, on the basis of the sequence … karad ápa srídhaḥ, but ápa srídhaḥ is the refrain of this tṛca and must therefore be independent of what precedes it.

