+++
title = "+120"

+++
120 (946)  
Indra  
Brhaddiva ̥ Ātharvaṇa  
9 verses: triṣṭubh  
For most of its length this hymn is a fairly straightforward praise of Indra, his pow ers, and his victories. There is special emphasis also on the relation between Indra  and his verbally active “helpers.” The relationship is hierarchal—Indra is supreme— but also reciprocal, in that the helpers cheer him on and fortify him for his exploits  (esp. vss. 1–4). The helpers are not named; the two most prominent Indra myths,  Vr̥tra and Vala, both feature a troop aiding or encouraging Indra: the Maruts and the  Aṅgirases respectively. It is thus possible that either or both groups are meant here,  and, further, that human poets are assimilated to these divine choruses (see vs. 4). The encouragement becomes more personal in verse 5, where a 1st-person  speaker assumes the role of verbal inciter. This is surely the poet himself, but, we  will claim, not a mere human poet. The last two verses of the hymn (8–9) summa rize the performance context of the hymn. Verse 8 begins “Br̥haddiva speaks these  sacred formulations to Indra,” and Br̥haddiva is named again as the poet in verse 9  (as well as being so identified by the Anukramaṇī). But verse 9 introduces a puzzle  or a surprise, for it begins, “In this way Br̥haddiva addressed his own self—that is,  Indra.” It is difficult to read the sentence in any other way, though many have tried,  but if Indra is the same as Br̥haddiva, who is Br̥haddiva?  
A way to a solution to this conundrum has been presented by Hanns-Peter  Schmidt, though he himself does not discuss this hymn. As Schmidt convincingly  argues (1968), Br̥haspati was originally an epithet and aspect of Indra, especially  in the Vala myth, in which Indra uses not brute strength but verbal skill to open  the Vala cave and release the stolen cows. Br̥haspati becomes detached from Indra  and treated as a separate god, but this process is a protracted one and can be  observed happening in the R̥gveda. We suggest that this hymn reflects an awareness  of their original identity and their growing separateness, with the verbally adroit  Br̥haspati, master of sacred formulations (bráhman; see vss. 5d and 8a), praising  his other self, the king and victorious warrior Indra. The name Br̥haddiva (lit.,  “possessing lofty heaven”) is reminiscent of Br̥haspati, and the sacred formula tions he addresses to Indra in verse 8 precisely concern the Vala myth, the locus of  their identification.  