+++
title = "+096"

+++
96 (808)  
Soma Pavamāna  
Pratardana Daivodāsi  
24 verses: triṣṭubh  
This twenty-four-verse hymn, immediately following three five-verse hymns in the  same meter, can easily be made to fit the sequence if it is analyzed as consisting of  a collection of four-verse hymns, as Oldenberg clearly states (1888: 201). The six  hymns thus obtained show different degrees of internal cohesion.  
For example, the first four verses display clear thematic unity and development.  The first verse is explicitly martial, with Soma as a warrior about to charge, a pic ture continued in the following verse. In verse 3 he achieves one of the most desired  results of Vedic warfare, wide space for us to inhabit, and with this obtained, verse  4 articulates a counter-message, that of peace and nonviolence. Indra is explicitly  mentioned in the first three verses, and comradeship is a central theme, as is seen in  verses 1, 2, and 4.  
The second hymn (vss. 5–8) shows stylistic progression. It begins with a rhe torically restricted verse (5), consisting primarily of seven repetitions of the word  “begetter” with different genitive complements. The next verse (6)  continues the  dominantly nominal construction of vs. 5, but with a more varied verbal repertoire,  though the nominative-genitive syntagm persists. Verse 7 continues to describe the  qualities and characteristic actions of Soma, in the 3rd person, though it abandons  the strict nominal style. And finally vs. 8 breaks out into the dynamic 2nd person  and imperative mood.  
The third group (vss. 9–12) ends with a characteristic hymn-final summary verse,  which seems to mark a decisive break from what follows. Although no clear the matic unity imposes itself on the four verses, the focus on Soma’s relationship with  our ancestral ritualists and our hope that this relationship will continue fruitfully is  noticeable, especially in the last two verses (11–12). On the other hand, it is difficult  to identify any unifying features in the next group of four (vss. 13–16), which con sist primarily of standard soma-hymn tropes. In verses 17–20 Soma as poet (esp. in  vss. 17–18) and his journey from the filter to the cups provide a weak cohesion. In  the final group (vss. 21–24), three verses (22–24) contain courtship imagery, and the  root krand “roar” is prominent.  