+++
title = "C The Wordsmiths"

+++
A number of different words are used to identify the workers in words, for which  we use the cover term “poet.” These different terms often in fact have the same  referent, sometimes in the very same passage, but emphasize different aspects of  verbal craftsmanship. The most important terms are brahmán, kaví, ŕ̥ṣi, and vípra.  Although it is not always possible to draw fine distinctions among these words, and there remains considerable disagreement about their application (we two translators, for example, are not entirely agreed on the function of the kaví), the words do  point to different types of relationships between the poet and his product and its  source. As noted above, the brahmán is the “formulator,” who discerns and puts into  words the hidden truths that undergird reality. His product is a bráhman, a “sacred  formulation.” The term ŕ̥ṣi, generally rendered here as “seer,” is especially applied  to the famous seers of the past, single or as a group, and to current poets who consciously aspire to the status of their predecessors, and like other words for verbal  craftsmen, it is also regularly used of gods, especially Agni and Soma. The vípra, a  derivative of the root √vip “tremble,”+++(5)+++ appears to be an “inspired poet” and contrasts  with the kaví, the poet par excellence, but also the “sage poet,” endowed with the  knowledge embodied in poetic skill (kā́vya). The original sense of the word kaví and the function of the person so named is disputed; it has well-attested Iranian  cognates, starting with Avestan kauui, whose sense diverges from its Vedic corre spondent. We two translators have discussed these issues in separate treatments  (Brereton 2004; Jamison 2007: chap. 4). 

There are a few less well-attested terms, such as kārú here rendered “bard” or  “praise-poet,” the transparent agent noun stotár “praiser,” as well as designations  that seem more related to performance, such as jaritár “singer,” vāghát “cantor” or  “chanter,” rebhá “husky-/raspy-voiced (singer).” 