+++
title = "001"

+++
1 (827)
Agni
Trita Āptya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
An appropriate beginning to an Agni cycle, this hymn recounts the birth of the  ritual fire at dawn—the word jātá “at birth, once born” is repeated four times in the  hymn (vss. 1–3, 6). But this nascent fire is endowed with cosmic importance, identi fied as the embryo of the two worlds (vs. 2) and compared to Viṣṇu in his lofty reach  (vs. 3ab). The role of his hymnists is also given its due (3cd), and Agni’s pivotal  priestly role in the sacrifice is emphasized as the hymn continues (vss. 5cd–7). In the  final verse (7) Agni is sent forth to bring the gods to the ritual ground, where the  sacrifice can begin.
## 01
At the forefront of the dawns he has stood upright on high. Having gone  out from darkness, he has come here with light.
With his luminous beam, Agni, beautiful of limb, has filled all the seats  at his birth.
## 02
At your birth you are the embryo of the two world-halves, o Agni, the  beloved one dispersed among the plants.
A brilliant babe, circling around the dark shades and the nights, you  have come forth from your mothers, constantly roaring.
## 03
In just such a way as Viṣṇu, knowing his farthest (step), at his birth he  protects on high the third (seat?).
When with their mouth they have made their own milk [=poetry] for  him, they with single mind chant to him here.
## 04
And then your birth-givers [=kindling wood], bringing nurture, proceed  toward you, who are strengthened by food, with food;
you go toward them in turn as they (acquire) other forms [=burn]. You  are the Hotar among the clans of Manu.
## 05
(They chant) to the Hotar of the rite, possessing a brilliant chariot, the  luminous beacon of every sacrifice,
to Agni, who is the half-sharer with every god in his greatness, but in his  beauty the guest of the peoples.
## 06
Agni, donning garments and ornaments on the navel of earth,
ruddy at birth in the footprint of the refreshment—when set in front, o  king, sacrifice to the gods here.
## 07
Because you have ever extended through heaven and earth, Agni, as a  son extends both his parents,
drive forth to those eager ones and convey the gods here, o youngest
powerful one.