+++
title = "002"

+++
2 (828) Agni
Trita Āptya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The most salient characteristic of the hymn is its concern with the ritual sequence  (r̥tú) and with Agni as the god who ensures that these sequences are properly  arranged and performed. In this feature it reminds us of the hymns devoted to the  r̥tugrahas (the offering of “sequential cups” to an ordered set of divinities by an  ordered series of priests); see I.15 and II.36–37. Although our hymn has much in  common with those hymns, it does not provide the complete series, as those hymns  do. Instead it focuses on Agni as the Hotar and the central figure in the sacrificial  program—the senior partner, as it were, in the ritual enterprise involving both Agni  and mortals as officiants. Agni’s most important quality in this hymn is knowl edge: he is called vidvā́n (or pravidvā́n) “knowing” four times in the hymn (vss. 1,  3, 4, 7), and “discerning” (vijānán) once (vs. 5). The epithet we have translated as  “Establisher of Thought” in verse 2 (mandhātár) probably also participates in this  theme, since it is etymologically almost identical to the name of the chief divinity in  the Old Iranian pantheon, Ahura Mazdā, “Lord Wisdom” (< Proto Indo-Iranian  *mn̥s-dhaH). Mortals, by contrast, are very un-knowing (áviduṣṭara, vs. 4)  and  prone to moral and ritual mistakes (vss. 4–5).
Less prominent in the hymn, but noteworthy because of the importance of this  theme later in the Xth Maṇḍala, is the distinction between the path going to the  gods (vs. 3)  and that to the forefathers (vs. 7), which figures prominently in the  funeral hymns (X.14–18).
## 1
Please the gods, who are eager for it, o youngest one. Knowing the ritual  sequences, o lord of the sequences, perform the sacrifice here.
Those divine sequential-sacrificers—along with them, o Agni, you are  the best sacrificer among the Hotars.
## 2
Pursue the office of Hotar and of Potar of the peoples. You are the  Establisher of Thought and the Giver of Wealth, possessing the truth. (When) at the svāhā-call we shall make the oblations, let Agni the god  sacrifice to the gods, (himself) deserving it.
## 3
We have come along the path of the gods, to carry forward along it what  we can.
Agni is the one who knows: he will perform the sacrifice; just he is the  Hotar. He will arrange the rites, he the ritual sequences.
## 4
If we shall confound the commandments of you who know, o gods—we  who are so very unknowing—
knowing Agni fulfills all this through the ritual sequences by which he  will arrange the gods.

## 5
If, naively in their thinking and scant in skill, mortals do not pay heed to  the sacrifice,
discerning Agni, the Hotar, finding the resolve, will sacrifice to the gods  as best sacrificer according to the ritual sequence.
## 6
Because the begetter has begotten you as the face of all the rites, their  brilliant beacon,
so win by sacrifice, throughout the lands filled with superior men, eagerly  sought cattle-rich refreshments belonging to all peoples.
## 7
You whom Heaven and Earth, you whom the waters, you whom Tvaṣṭar,  the good begetter, has begotten,
you, knowing the way along the path leading to the forefathers—once  kindled, beam brilliantly in all directions, o Agni.