+++
title = "003"

+++
3 (829)
Agni
Trita Āptya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The very moment of transition from night to dawn is the event celebrated in this  hymn—the time when the ritual fire is kindled. Agni’s triumph over Night, a female,  and his welcoming of Dawn, likewise a female, are the subjects of the first three  verses, and the whole hymn is pervaded by Agni’s wide shining and the many words  that express his radiance and brightness.
The poet is also fond of synesthetic images, as when his journeys “kindle” calls  in verse 4, or his beams “purify themselves” (the signature verb of the soma drinks)  like sounds (probably of soma as well) in verse 5. The poet’s pet word for Agni, aratí “spoked wheel” (vss. 1, 2, 6, and 7), presumably originally referring to the shape of  the fireplace, prompts a number of chariot and journey images through the hymn  (vss. 4, 6, 7).
## 01
The powerful spoked wheel, now kindled, has appeared, to exercise his  skill—he who is Rudra-wild but of easy birth, o king.
Observant, he beams widely with his lofty beam. Driving away black  (Night), he comes to luminous (Dawn).
## 02
When with his form he has prevailed over black, mottled (Night),  begetting the young woman [=Dawn], the child of a lofty father
[=Heaven],
propping upright the radiance of the sun, the spoked wheel of heaven  beams widely with the Vasus.
## 03
The auspicious male [=Sun], in company with the auspicious female  [=Dawn], has come here. As her lover, he approaches his sister from
behind. Through the days with their good portents, Agni, spreading out, has  prevailed over the night with his luminous colors.
## 04
Of this one here—of Agni, our kindly companion—his journeys are, as  it were, kindling the calls of the lofty one [=pressing stone?];
on the journey of the lofty bull worthy to be invoked, the nights appear  as his own beams.
## 05
Whose beams, like the sounds (of soma?), purify themselves when the  lofty one, bringing the good day, is shining—
he who reaches heaven with his most eminent, sharpest, playful, highest  radiant beams.
## 06
His snortings resound when he, his wheel-rim visible, is panting along  with his teams—
he who, the best of gods, the spoked wheel of wide extent, beams widely  with his age-old, luminous, crackling (flames).
## 07
Convey here something great for us and take your seat here as the spoked  wheel of Heaven and Earth, the two youthful ones.
May Agni, powerfully thrusting, with his powerfully thrusting horses,  the tempestuous one with his tempestuous ones, come here.