+++
title = "004"

+++
4 (830) Agni
Trita Āptya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The usual high points of the birth and growth of Agni are covered in this hymn.  What gives the hymn its character are the concentrated and somewhat unusual  images that are studded through it. This is already evident in verse 1, where Agni  (who is fire, after all) is compared to “the first drink in a wasteland”; presumably  the point of comparison is that both are eagerly desired and it is not certain they  will appear. A  series of similes involving domestic animals follow in verses 2–3,  while verses 4–6 concern the firewood that covers the nascent fire and that it begins  to consume. The most elaborate and surprising image is found in verse 6, where the  two arms of the priest who is tending the fire are compared to two thieves entering  the woods, risking their lives. “Going into the woods” must refer to the manipula tion of the firewood; the “risk” must be that of being burned. But why “thieves”?  Most commentators think that the thieves are entering the wood to attack travel
ers and tie them up with cords—the ten cords compared to the priest’s ten fingers.  Perhaps, but the image is the more resonant for not being entirely transparent.
## 1
I begin the sacrifice to you and I propel my thought to you, so that you  will become the one to be extolled at our invocations.
You are like the first drink in a wasteland, o Agni, for Pūru who seeks to  attain (you), you age-old king.

## 2
You, upon whom the peoples converge like cows on a warm pen, o  youngest one,
you are the messenger of gods and of mortals. A great one, you act the  go-between through the luminous realm.
## 3
Raising you like a thoroughbred foal, your mother carries you, seeking  your joint delight.
From the high plain you drive eagerly along the slope. Like a herd
animal set loose, you are seeking to gain your livelihood.
## 4
We fools do not (know) your greatness, o you who are no fool; but,  observant Agni, you surely know it.
His covering [=wood] lies still; he moves, eating it with his tongue. The  clanlord licks the young woman [=offering ladle] again and again.
## 5
Wherever it may be, he is born anew among the old ones. He stands in  the wood—a grey one with a banner of smoke.
Although no swimmer, he pursues the waters like a bull—he whom the  mortals, of one mind, lead forward.
## 6
Like thieves who go into the woods risking their lives, the two (arms)  have harnessed (the firewood? Agni?) with ten cords [=fingers].
Here for you, Agni, is a newer inspired thought: hitch it up like a chariot  with your blazing limbs.
## 7
Sacred formulation and homage and this song here shall always be  strengthening for you, o Jātavedas.
Guard our progeny and posterity, o Agni, and guard our own bodies  unremittingly.