+++
title = "005"

+++
5 (831)
Agni
Trita Āptya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
A mystical and enigmatic hymn, with a number of conceptual and phraseological  connections with other such hymns in the R̥gveda. There are numerous conflicting  interpretations of this hymn, not surprisingly. We will just present our own, with  all due caution. In our view the standard theme of the birth of Agni/the ritual fire,  its growing strength, and the rise of its flames and smoke to heaven is grafted onto  a treatment of the mysteries of creation and a claim that poets (or, to be more  explicit, “sage poets,” kaví) have special access to these mysteries and indeed antici
pate and direct the natural processes.
We should start by noting that the name Agni occurs only once in the hymn, at  the beginning of the last half-verse (7c), though he is present in every verse. The  hymn begins with a reference to the sea, but various parallels make it clear that  this “sea” is really the sea in our heart and the source of poetic insight. The poet  claims that this sea is a single entity, but that Agni, who has many births, emerges from it. Already the poet is establishing the priority of poetry over even the god  Agni and the ritual he represents. Pāda c seems to describe the birth of Agni from  the kindling sticks (or possibly also the two world-halves, or night and day). His  later journey to heaven is anticipated by his identification with a bird in pāda d.
In verse 2 the bullish buffaloes in the same nest and the mares with which they  unite are presumably the flames of the fire, mingling and twisting in the fireplace.  The birth of the fire is further described in verse 3, where again the two parents  referred to are probably the kindling sticks but may also represent cosmic pairings.  The cosmic aspect becomes clear in verse 4, where the fire rises between the two  world-halves, which nourish it. The fire rises in the midspace with its flames in verse  5, while in verse 6 it is pictured as a pillar stretching to very highest heaven. Verse  6 reprises some of the vocabulary of the beginning of the hymn: the foundation  (dharúṇa) of verse 1 and the nest (nīḍá) of verse 2 and thus transports the original  earthly birthplace of fire to a new location.
The final verse (7) connects this heavenward journey of the fire [/Agni] with the  issue of creation. The paradoxical phrase “both the nonexistent and the existent”  that famously begins the creation hymn X.129 is a signal that the undifferentiated  mass of matter (for want of a better word) that precedes real creation is present in  the highest heaven where the male Dakṣa, the “skillful one” (in this case identified  with Agni), and the female Aditi, the pair that set the processes of creation into  motion in another famous creation hymn (X.72; see esp. vss. 4–5), are born. Agni  is also identified with the androgynous bovine (both bull and milk-cow) that pre sides over creation in another treatment thereof (III.38; see esp. vs. 7). Thus “our”  just-born ritual fire is identified as both the first created thing and the creator itself,  and ritual time, as so often, recapitulates cosmic time.
We have not yet said anything about the poets’ role, beyond noting the assertion of  priority in verse 1. In verses 2–3 the poets oversee “the track of truth” and control the  thread that others (priests? gods?) are pursuing; we interpret this to mean that the poets  are directing or at least keeping safe the cosmic progress of the fire (see the trails in vs.  4), and in verse 6 it is the poets who establish the boundaries that define its journey.  Also in verse 2 they anticipate the endpoint of the fire’s journey by setting in a secret  place “the highest names.” Since creation is generally viewed as the differentiation of  the mass mentioned above into individual entities with “name and form,” the poets’  control of the hidden names in verse 2 signals their participation in the creative process.
There is much that remains unclear in this hymn, particularly the seven  boundaries in verse 6.  But the connection between the birth of the ritual fire  and the Ur-creation, mediated by the poets, seems to be the conceptual focus of  this hymn.
## 01
The sea is (just) one, the foundation of riches, but he, having many births,  gazes out from us, from our heart.
He attends upon the udder in the lap of the two that are hidden. The  track of the bird has been set down in the middle of the wellspring.1374 X.6
## 02
Cloaking themselves [/dwelling] in the same nest, the bullish buffaloes  have united with the mares.
The sage poets protect the track of truth: they have placed in hiding the  highest names.
## 03
The two possessing both truth and magical power have conjoined with  one another. Having given him his measure, they have given birth to
the babe, making him grow—
him who is the navel of everything, both the moving and the fixed. They  [=gods? priests?] with their mind are also pursuing the thread of
the poet,
## 04
For the trails of truth (follow) the well-born one, and refreshments follow  (him) from of old for the prize.
The two world-halves, having cloaked themselves in their over-cloak,  have strengthened (their own child) with ghee-drops and foods
of honey.
## 05
Having bellowed [/being eager], the knowing one has carried up the seven  ruddy sisters from the honey, to be seen.
He held them, born earlier, within the midspace. Seeking a covering, he  has found the one belonging to Pūṣana.
## 06
The sage poets have fashioned seven boundaries. To just one of these has  the narrow one gone.
The pillar stands on its foundations in the nest of the highest Āyu where  the paths give out.
## 07
Both the nonexistent and the existent are in the highest heaven, at the  birth of the skillful one in the lap of Aditi.
Agni is for us the first-born of truth, both a bull and a milk-cow in his  previous lifetime.