+++
title = "006"

+++
6 (832)
Agni
Trita Āptya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
After the enigmas of the preceding hymn, the relative simplicity of this one comes  as some relief. It begins with an annunciatory “here he is,” and the remainder of  the first three verses consists of relative clauses describing Agni. Relative clauses  also dominate verses 5–6. The contents are fairly standard: Agni’s radiance (esp.  vss. 1–2), his role in the sacrifice and his reciprocal relationship with the poet and  priest (vss. 3–5), and prayers for Agni’s intervention in bringing help and other  good things to us (vss. 6–7). These last two verses address Agni directly; in the first  five verses he appears only in the 3rd person. Unlike the last hymn, in which the  word agní appeared only in the last half-verse, this hymn contains a form of the  name in every verse. 1. Here he is—Agni, in whose protection, in whose charge, and by whose  help the singer thrives—
the far-radiant one who circles around, encircled by the peerless radiant  beams of the dawn rays;
## 2
The far-radiant one who beams afar with his radiant beams together  with the gods—truthful, untiring Agni—
who has pursued comradeship for his comrades, undeviating like a
teamed steed;
## 3
Who has control of every effort to pursue the gods and has control of  the dawn at its dawning throughout a full lifetime;
Agni, upon whom a man possessing an invulnerable chariot [=sacrifice]  props his oblations zealously with fortifying (hymns).
## 4
Grown strong with the fortifying (hymns) and being delighted by the  chants, with swift flight he goes to the gods.
As the gladdening, best-sacrificing Hotar, with his tongue Agni sprinkles  the gods, mingling together (with them).
## 5
With hymns and reverent gestures attract him here at dawn like
Indra—quivering Agni,
whom the inspired poets hymn with their thoughts—Jātavedas, the
tongue of the overpowering (gods).
## 6
You in whom all good things have joined together, like horses forming a  team at a contest in their own way—
o Agni, attract here, near to us, the forms of help most cherished
by Indra.
## 7
Then, o Agni, because, having sat down with greatness, immediately on  being born you became the one to be invoked,
the gods followed your will. Then the foremost helpers became strong.