+++
title = "007"

+++
7 (833) Agni
Trita Āptya
7 verses: triṣṭubh
This last of the Trita Āptya hymns is not particularly noteworthy, though it shows  some affinities with hymns earlier in the Trita Āptya sequence. Verses 5–6 point to  Agni’s role as “seasonal sacrificer” (r̥tv-íj), a role explored in X.2. Agni’s supreme  competence as a sacrificer is contrasted with the potential incompetence of the  mortal sacrificer in verse 4, as in X.2.5. Otherwise the hymn seems primarily con
cerned with the material gain that will come to the mortal sacrificer for his ritual  efforts (see esp. vss. 1d, 2, 4, and 7).
## 1
Provide well-being to us from heaven and from earth, (for us) to sacrifice  for a full lifetime, o god Agni.

Might we be accompanied by your visible signs, o wondrous one. Make  wide space for us in exchange for our wide lauds, o god.
## 2
These thoughts were born for you, o Agni. They applaud your generosity  with its cows and horses,
when the mortal has attained the benefit from you, acquiring it by (these)  thoughts, o well-born good one.
## 3
I consider Agni our father, Agni our friend, Agni our brother and our  comrade forever.
I do honor to the face of lofty Agni, the worshipful luminous (face) of  the Sun in heaven.
## 4
Our insights are effective and bring gain to us, o Agni. Whomever you, as  his own Hotar, safeguard in his house,
(let) that truthful one (be) possessed of chestnut horses and much
livestock; for him let there be treasure throughout the days and
daytimes.
## 5
To the one established throughout the days like an ally for the
harnessing, the ancient sequential-sacrificer and lover of the rite,
to Agni did the Āyus give birth with their arms and install among the  clans as their Hotar.
## 6
Perform sacrifice by yourself to the gods in heaven, o god. How can a  callow man without discernment do it for you?
Just as you sacrificed to the gods, o god, according to the ritual
sequences, so perform sacrifice to your own body, o well-born one.
## 7
Become our helper, Agni, and our herdsman; become the creator of  vitality and the provider of vitality for us.
And grant to us the giving of oblations, o very great one, and safeguard  our bodies unremittingly.