+++
title = "009"

+++
9 (835)
Waters
Triśiras Tvāṣṭra or Sindhudvīpa Āmbarīṣa
9 verses: gāyatrī, except triṣṭubh 8–9
The last four verses of this hymn (6–9) are identical with I.23.20–23 (save for the  absence of I.23.20d) and treat the healing and expiatory properties of the Waters,  who provide healing remedies (vss. 6–7) while also carrying away the detritus of  moral misbehavior (vs. 8). The paradox of “fire in the waters” (as embodied else
where in the figure of Apām Napat “Child of the Waters,” identified with Agni) is  also alluded to in verses 6 and 8. The healing and life-giving qualities of the Waters  are also found in the two preceding verses (4–5).
The first three verses of the hymn stand somewhat apart from the remainder of  the hymn and progress from the bland and generic to a rather surprising conclusion.  Verse 1 simply describes the Waters as refreshing and asks them for nourishment

and happiness. In verse 2 the refreshment is specified as juice or sap (rása) and  implicitly compared to breast milk, since the Waters themselves are compared to  mothers. And then there is the very puzzling verse 3, which can only be understood  as an enlargement of that simile, for it is said that the Waters “animate and beget  us.” But even more puzzling than their apparent role in giving birth to “us” is their  purpose in so doing: so that we will go to be “fit” for the dwelling of an unidentified  third party. This third party is generally assumed, most likely correctly, to be the  patron of the sacrifice, and the poet/sacrificer calls upon the Waters to (re)vivify  him, send him to the house of the patron, and make him fit to render service to this  patron in the form of hymns and ritual labor—but the stark economy with which  this sentiment is expressed challenges the modern interpreter.
## 1
Since you Waters are sheer refreshment, so destine us for nourishment and to see great happiness.
## 2
Your most beneficent juice—make us have a share in that here,
like eager mothers (their milk).
## 3
Let us, as your (offspring), go to be fit for him for whose peaceful  dwelling you animate
and beget us, o Waters.
## 4
Let the goddesses, the Waters, be luck for us to prevail, for us to drink. Let them flow to us for luck and life.
## 5
Those who are mistresses of things of value, ruling over the settled  domains,
the Waters do I beseech for a healing remedy.
## 6
“Within the waters,” Soma said to me, “are all healing remedies
and Agni who is weal to all.”
## 7
O Waters, fully grant healing and protection for my body
and (for me) to see the sun for a long time.
## 8
O Waters, carry this away, whatever trouble is in me—
whether I have committed deceit or I have cursed—as well as untruth. 9. O Waters, today I have followed (you). We have united with your sap. Full of milk, o Agni, come here. Merge me with luster.
The next ten hymns (X.10–19) form a Yama cycle, though the subject matter found  in the individual hymns is quite various. Yama, the son of Vivasvant, is king of the  land of the dead because he was the first mortal to die. Yet he was apparently born  immortal (see esp. I.83.5) and chose to become mortal, subject to death, “for the sake  of the gods...and for the sake of offspring” (X.13.4). The opening hymn in the cycle,  the dialogue of Yama and his twin sister Yamī, on the fraught topic of embarking on  incestuous sex in order to produce offspring, addresses Yama’s change of status and  his choice, but in a deliberately oblique and misleading fashion, as Yama spurns the  sexual advances of his sister, and at the end of their bitter argument there seems little  likelihood of children. The last six hymns in this cycle (X.14–19) are collectively known as funeral  hymns. The first, X.14, is devoted especially to Yama in his role as king of the realm  of the dead, while the others, especially 15–18, concern various aspects of death  and the treatment of the dead—for example, the forefathers who preceded us to  Yama’s realm in X.15, the cremation fire in X.16, the funeral itself in X.18. The  intermediate hymns, X.11–13, have less superficially clear connections to the Yama  saga, but both X.12 (vss. 6–7) and X.13 (vss. 4–5) make important comments on  Yama and on Yama’s choice.
There is also an underlying unifying theme, that of duality and twinned-ness: the  absolute disjunction between and the ultimate complementarity and unity of the  mortal and the immortal, life and death, men and gods, men and women, heaven  and earth, sacred and profane. It is appropriate that the cycle should begin with the  dialogue between the primal twins, Yama and Yamī, whose very names mean “twin”  and who bridge the gap between mortal and immortal.