+++
title = "010"

+++
10 (836) Dialogue of Yama and Yamı̄
Yama Vaivasvata and Yamī Vaivasvatī
14 verses: triṣṭubh
This justly famous (and much discussed) hymn presents a tense dialogue between  a pair of twins, the male Yama and female Yamī (yamá means “twin”; yamī́ is the  feminine form), who become the first mortals. Yamī́, who speaks first, urges her  twin brother to have sex with her, so that they can have children and continue their  line in the approved manner. Yama indignantly rejects her advances, outraged by  the idea of incest and certain that the divine guardians of moral order will see the  act and punish them.
It is impossible in a short introduction to do justice to the richness of this hymn  and the extraordinary skill with which the poet deploys grammatical categories  such as person, number, and verb modality in service of the condensed drama of  their encounter. Both Yamī and Yama make legalistic arguments, often using juridi
cal turns of phrase, and especially in the first part of the hymn they distance the  personal and emotional implications of their speech by regularly using plural and  3rd-person forms to refer to each other. It is not until the last word of verse 4 that  one of them uses a 1st-person dual (“we two”) form. They also use dueling divine  models for the relationships they are arguing for: Yama cites their near ancestors,  “the Gandharva in the waters and the watery maiden,” as reason not to violate  the incest taboo (vs. 4) and Mitra and Varuṇa as stern enforcers (vs. 6) with spies  everywhere (vs. 8)—while Yamī claims that Tvaṣṭar, who shapes embryos in the  womb, made them a married couple already in the womb (vs. 5) and twice (vss. 5,  9) invokes as their divine counterparts Heaven and Earth, a notoriously incestuous  pair (as she makes quite explicit in 9c). The use and placement of kinship terms

in the hymn is also notable, including the fact that “brother” and “sister” are not  encountered until verse 11. It is also striking that the names of the speakers do not  appear until verse 7.
The emotional temperature of the hymn rises significantly at that very point.  Yamī abandons her legalistic arguments—that they need to have offspring, that they  were already a married couple in the womb—in favor of a naked expression of sexual  desire. Yama remains unmoved, but the roiling emotions are reflected in the ragged  meter of some of the later verses (12–13), especially in the latter verse where Yamī breaks off her speech in frustration in a very short pāda containing two occurrences  of a word (batá) found nowhere else and exhibiting aberrant phonology. Our render
ing of the word aims at the level of slangy insult to which batá appears to belong. The hymn ends in an impasse. Yama remains obdurate and urges Yamī to find  another lover—a difficult quest when there are no other mortals! However, given  the rest of his history, sketched briefly above, we must assume that he gave in in the  end, on the evidence of X.13.4.
## 1
[Yamī:] I would turn my partner right here to partnership—even though  he has gone across many (realms), across the flood.
A (ritual) adept should provide a grandson for his father, envisioning his  furtherance on the earth.
## 2
[Yama:] Your partner doesn’t want that partnership, in that she [=sexual  partner] will have the same “marks” [=family characteristics] (though)  dissimilar form [=gender].
The sons of the great one, the heroes of the Lord, the upholders of
heaven, look around widely.
## 3
[Yamī:] The immortals do want this: a legacy of the one and only mortal. Your mind has (already) been set upon my mind, upon me. As husband,  you should enter the body of (your) wife.
## 4
[Yama:] What we have not done before, should (we do it) now? While  proclaiming truths, we would [/should we] murmur untruth?
The Gandharva in the waters and the watery maiden—that is our
umbilical tie; therefore our kinship is of the highest.
## 5
[Yamī:] (Even) in the womb the Begetter made us two a married couple,  god Tvaṣṭar, the impeller who provides all forms.
No one transgresses his commandments. Heaven and Earth take heed of  this about us.
## 6
[Yama:] Who knows about this first day? Who has seen it; who will  proclaim it here?
Lofty is the ordinance of Mitra and Varuṇa. Will you speak about
superior men [=gods] with deviant (speech), lubricious one?
## 7
[Yamī:] Desire for Yama has come to me, Yamī, to lie together in the  same womb [/place].
Like a wife to her husband I would yield my body. We would “let ’er rip”  like two chariot wheels. 8. [Yama:] They do not stand still; they do not blink—the spies of the  gods who roam about here.
With another than me, lubricious one, drive off straightaway; with him  “let ’er rip” like two chariot wheels.
## 9
[Yamī:] Night and day she would do service to him. She could for an  instant trip up the eye of the sun.
The couple has the same (kin-)ties as Heaven and Earth. Yamī could  bear the unbrotherly (act) of Yama.
## 10
[Yama:] Later generations will come, in which kin will perform the  unkindred (act).
Keep plumping up your arm as pillow for a (real) bull. Seek another  than me as husband, well-portioned one.
## 11
[Yamī:] What will “brother” (mean) when there will be no refuge. And  what will “sister,” if Dissolution will come down?
Driven by desire many times I murmur this: mingle your body with
my body.
## 12
[Yama:] Verily, I must not mingle my body with your body. They call  him evil who will go down on his sister.
With another than me arrange your pleasures. Your brother does not  want this, well-portioned one.
## 13
[Yamī:] You jerk, you really are a jerk, Yama! Truly we have not found  mind and heart in you.
Another (woman) will surely embrace you, like a girthband a yoked
(horse), like a vine a tree.
## 14
[Yama:] You (will embrace) another, Yamī, and another will embrace  you—like a vine a tree.
Seek his mind—or he yours. Then make yourself a very happy
compact.