+++
title = "011"

+++
11 (837)
Agni
Havirdhāna Āṅgi
9 verses: jagatī 1–6, triṣṭubh 7–9
This hymn, which has some phraseological echoes of X.10 but lacks its mythologi cal content, falls into two metrical parts, which correspond to its thematic structure.  The last three verses (7–9), in triṣṭubh, are fairly straightforward, describing the  benefits that accrue to a mortal who serves the ritual fire and calling on Agni to  bring the divinities to the sacrifice and let it begin.
The first six verses, in jagatī, are far more complex, and, when viewed as a piece,  without the three triṣṭubh verses at the end, turn out to have an omphalos struc ture: the middle pair of verses (3–4) are parallel in structure, have the phrase agníṃ hótāram “Agni (as) Hotar” opening their final pādas, and together treat both the1384 X.11
initiation of the current sacrifice and the charter myths for the introduction of the  two ritual substances, fire and soma (with concomitant juggling of verb tenses). In  verse 3 the first sacrificer, Manu, is present at the kindling of the ritual fire; verse 4  sketches the famous tale of the falcon’s theft of soma from heaven.
The outer verse pairs, 1–2 and 5–6, treat these two substances and their deified  counterparts, fire/Agni and soma/Soma, both simultaneously and in parallel, with  the referent often left unclear. The final verse of this section (6) is especially busy,  with both Agni and Soma actively performing their ritual tasks at the same time  (and perhaps under the same descriptions; see esp. 6c). The tentative identifications  in that verse are made on the basis of the use of the phraseology in other parts of  the R̥gveda. For example, the exact phrase “he trembles with his thought” is used  of Soma in IV.71.3, and the verb translated as “he displays his power” (taviṣyá) in  that same pāda has Soma as its subject in its two other occurrences. However, it is  very likely that the poet expected the audience to consider both possibilities for the  referent in each case and to grasp thereby the underlying commonalities of the two  ritual substances. The first section of the hymn is thus a simpler example of the  conflation of Agni and Soma found in the fiendish hymn V.44.
## 1
The bull [=Soma] has milked out his draughts of milk for the bull  [=Indra] by the milking of heaven—he the youthfully exuberant,
undeceivable (son) of Aditi.
He [=Agni] knows everything, as Varuṇa does, through his insight. Let  him who is worthy of the sacrifice perform sacrifice throughout the
sacrificial sequences.
## 2
The Gandharvī is murmuring, and let (that) watery maiden protect my  mind all around at the bellowing of the bellowing (bull) [=Soma].
Let Aditi set us down in the middle of what we desire. Our eldest brother  [=Agni] will proclaim (it) first.
## 3
And even now Dawn, rich in cattle, rich in glory, accompanied by the  Sun, has dawned for Manu,
when they [=priests] beget Agni as Hotar for the ritual distribution—him  being eager for it and following the will of those who are (also) eager. 4. And this drop here [=Soma], widespread and widely visible, has the bird,  the falcon that was sent (for it), brought here to the rite,
when the Ārya clans choose wondrous Agni as their Hotar. And so was  his insight born.
## 5
You are always delightful, like pasture lands to a prosperous man,  (when,) o Agni, you conduct good rites with the libations of Manu,
or when, having ritually labored and having gained for the inspired poet  a prize worthy of hymns, you journey near with abundant (gifts).
## 6
Rouse his [=Agni’s] two parents [=kindling sticks], (as) a lover (rouses) his  “piece of luck” [=girl]. The gladdening one [=Soma] is seeking to attain (the  cows?) and sends (speech) from his heart. The draft-horse [=Agni and/or Soma?] is speaking; the bounteous one  [=Agni?] is performing his work well. The lord [=Soma?] displays his  power; he trembles (in poetic inspiration) with his thought.
## 7
Whatever mortal will attain your favor, o Agni, son of strength, he is  famed beyond (all).
Acquiring refreshment for himself, being conveyed by his horses,
brilliant and formidable, he attends upon (you) through the days.
## 8
When, o Agni, this assembly will become godly among the gods, a  sacrificial one, o sacrificial one,
and when you will share out treasures, o you of independent will, then  pursue a share for us rich in goods.
## 9
Hear us, Agni, in your seat, in your abode. Yoke the speeding chariot of  the immortal one.
Convey here to us the two world-halves, whose sons are the gods. Don’t  be the absent one among the gods; you should be here!