+++
title = "014"

+++
14 (840) Yama, etc.
Yama Vaivasvata
16 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 13–14, 16 and br̥hatī 15
This is the first of the funeral hymns, and it is dedicated for the most part to Yama,  the first to die and the king of the world of the dead, where the forefathers dwell  and to which a newly dead person makes his way along the pitr̥yā́na or “way of the  forefathers.” Because he was the first to die, Yama discovered this path and blazed  the trail, as it were, to the pleasant, well-watered (vs. 9) pasture-land (vs. 2).
The hymn falls into three parts. Verses 1–6 offer praise to Yama as the pathfinder  to the ancestral world (vss. 1–2) and then invite him to attend our sacrifice along with others, both gods and ancestors—suggesting implicitly that the pitr̥yā́na is  a two-way street. It is also noteworthy that, though the gods and the forefathers  respond to slightly different variants of the ritual cry (vs. 3: svā́hā for the gods  versus svadhā́ for the forefathers), the mechanisms for the sacrifice to gods and fore
fathers are presented as more or less identical in this section and in verses 13–16,  and in particular Yama is offered soma. See also the next hymn, X.15. Verses 7–12 concern not this age-old death but a recent one. A newly dead man  is addressed and urged to follow the same path, to join Yama and the ancestors in  highest heaven and even to reunite with the body from which he has been temporar ily separated (vss. 7–8). Potential troublemakers along the way are dismissed (vs. 9),  and the dead man is escorted by the two formidable guardian dogs of Yama (vss.  10–12).
The last four verses (13–16) are in dimeter meter (save for 15c), instead of the  triṣṭubh of the rest of the hymn. The first three are simple exhortations to perform  sacrifice to Yama; the final verse (16) is by contrast quite opaque, with some of  the typical marks of obscurity: unidentified referents (pādas a and b), numerology  (pāda b), and manipulation of names of meters (pāda c). In particular, pāda b pres
ents us with six broad feminine entities and one lofty neuter one. (The contrasting  grammatical genders so obvious in the Sanskrit are not easily rendered in transla tion.) The six broad feminines are generally considered to be worlds or realms (on  the basis of VI.47.3, which, however, doesn’t have an overt referent either), and the  lofty neuter some other superior type of space. Given the extreme uncertainty of  the referents, the syntax (should pāda b be construed with pāda a, or with cd, or,  as we have done, connected neither to what precedes nor what follows?), and the  reason for the presence of this verse as the finale of this hymn, we have chosen to  leave the meaning open.
## 1
To the one who has departed along the great slopes, having spied out the  path for many,
son of Vivasvant, unifier of the peoples—to Yama the king show favor  with oblation.
## 2
Yama first found the way for us: this pasture-land is not to be taken away. (The way) on which our ancient forefathers departed, along that (do)  those who have since been born (follow) along their own paths.
## 3
Mātalī having been strengthened along with the poets, Yama with the  Aṅgirases, Br̥haspati with the versifiers,
both those whom the gods strengthen and who strengthen the gods— the ones [=gods] become exhilarated on (the cry) “svāhā,” the others  [=forefathers] on “svadhā.”
## 4
This strewn grass here, Yama—just sit here on it, in concord with the  Aṅgirases, our forefathers.
Let mantras pronounced by poets convey you hither. Become exhilarated  on this oblation, o king.

## 5
With the Aṅgirases, deserving of the sacrifice, come hither; Yama,  become exhilarated here along with the Vairūpas—
I call upon Vivasvant, who is your father—once having sat down at this  sacrifice, on this ritual grass here.
## 6
The Aṅgirases, our forefathers, the Navagvas, the Atharvaṇas, the  Bhr̥gus deserving of soma—
may we be in the favor of these who are deserving of the sacrifice; may  we be also in their propitious benevolence.
## 7
Go forth, go forth along the ancient paths on which our ancient  forefathers departed.
You will see both kings becoming exhilarated on the svadhā(-cry),  Yama and Varuṇa the god.
## 8
Unite with the forefathers, unite with Yama, with what has been  sacrificed and bestowed, in the highest distant heaven.
Having left behind imperfection, come home again. Unite with your  body in your full luster.
## 9
(You all)—go away, go apart, and slink away from here. It is for him  that the forefathers made this world.
A resting place anointed with waters through the days and nights Yama  gives to him.
## 10
Outrun the two dogs of Saramā’s breed, four-eyed and brindled, along  the path that leads straight to the goal.
Then approach the forefathers who are good to find, who reach  exhilaration in joint revelry with Yama.
## 11
Your two dogs, Yama, who are guardians, four-eyed guards of the path  with their eyes on men—
to them deliver him, o king. Provide for him well-being and freedom  from disease.
## 12
The two broad-nosed, reddish-brown messengers of Yama, stealers of  lives, pursue the peoples.
Let these two here today grant a fortunate life again to us, to see  the sun.
## 13
For Yama press the soma; for Yama pour the oblation.
To Yama goes the sacrifice, properly prepared, with Agni as messenger. 14. For Yama pour the ghee-rich oblation and set it forth.
He will guide us to the gods, for us to live for a long lifetime.
## 15
For Yama the king pour the most honeyed oblation.
Here is homage to the seers born of old, to the age-old makers of  the path.
## 16
He flies with the Trikadrukas. Six are broad, but just one is lofty. The triṣṭubh, the gāyatrī, the meters—all these are established in Yama.