+++
title = "015"

+++
15 (841) Pitars
Śaṅkha Yāmāyana
14 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 11
This hymn is simply an expansion on the invitation in the last hymn (X.14.4–6) to  the forefathers to come to our sacrifice. They are repeatedly urged to sit on the ritual  grass, to partake of the offerings, including soma, and to provide us with material  and spiritual benefits in return. The language is quite straightforward, with very  few verbal tricks. Only in verse 3 do we encounter a turn of phrase that invites  our inquiry: in the first half of the verse “I” find not only the forefathers on the  ritual ground but also “the grandson/child” (nápāt) and the “stride of Viṣṇu.” The  “grandson” may be a reference to Agni, often called “child of strength” (ū́rjo nápāt)  and also frequently identified with the “Child of the Waters” (Apām Napāt), but  it may also and simultaneously refer to the various descendants of the returning  forefathers, descendants who would be present at the ritual and serving at it. As for  Viṣṇu’s wide stride, most commentators take this as the highest heaven, that is, the  last of Viṣṇu’s three strides. But it is hard to understand how this would be found  “here”; we think rather that it refers to Viṣṇu’s first stride, which measures out the  earth, and in this case that it is a specific reference to the delineated sacrificial space.
Toward the end of the hymn, the god Agni becomes prominent (vss. 9–14) and  his special relationship with the forefathers—as their cremation fire—is alluded to  (esp. vss. 11, 14).
## 1
Let the nearer ones rise up, up the further, up those in the middle—the  forefathers deserving of soma.
Those who have gone to (their next) life avoiding the wolf, knowing the  truth, let those forefathers help us at the invocations.
## 2
Let this homage here today be for the forefathers—those who went  previously, those who went later,
those who are seated here in the earthly realm, or who are now among  the clans of good community.
## 3
I have found here the forefathers good to find and the grandson and the  wide stride of Viṣṇu.
Those who, sitting on the ritual grass, share in the pressed soma and the  food at (the cry of) “svadhā,” they are the most welcome arrivals here. 4. You forefathers who sit on the ritual grass inclined this way with your  aid, we have made these oblations for you. Enjoy!
Come here with your most luck-bringing help. Then provide for us luck  and lifetime without flaw.
## 5
The forefathers deserving of soma have been summoned here to the dear  stores on the ritual grass.
Let them come hither, let them listen (to us) here; let them speak on
(our) behalf, let them help us.1394 X.16
## 6
Having bent your knee, having sat down to the south, greet this sacrifice  here—all of you.
Do not harm us, o forefathers, because of any offense that we may do  to you in our human way.
## 7
Sitting in the lap of the ruddy (Dawns?), provide wealth for the pious  mortal.
To your sons, o forefathers, hold out (a portion) of this good thing.
Provide nourishment here.
## 8
Those ancient forefathers of ours deserving of soma, the Vasiṣṭhas, who  journeyed along to the soma-drinking,
in joint enjoyment with them let Yama—he eager with them eager—eat  the oblations according to their desire.
## 9
Those who have thirsted, panting, among the gods, those knowing the  priestly functions, those fashioned by praise along with chants—
with them, o Agni, drive here, turned this way—with the forefathers who  are good to find and truly here, the poets who sit by the gharma drink.
## 10
Those who are truly here—eating oblations, drinking oblations, taking  their place on the same chariot with Indra, with the gods—
with them, o Agni, drive here—with the thousand god-extolling,
further, earlier forefathers, who sit by the gharma-drink.
## 11
Sweetened by Agni, o forefathers, come here. Sit each on his own seat,  you of good guidance.
Eat the oblations set forth on the ritual grass. Then provide wealth in  hale heroes.
## 12
You, Agni Jātavedas, reverently invoked, have conveyed the oblations,  having made them very fragrant.
You have presented them to the forefathers; they have eaten them at
(the cry of) “svadhā.” (Now) you, o god—eat the oblations set forth.
## 13
Both the forefathers who are here and those who are not here, both  those whom we know and those whom we do not know,
you know how many they are, o Jātavedas. Through your own powers  [/at svadhā-calls], enjoy the well-performed sacrifice.
## 14
Those burned by fire and those not burned by fire who become
exhilarated at (the cry of) “svadhā” in the middle of heaven,
along with them (go) as sovereign king (on the way) leading to (the
other) life. Arrange your body as you wish.