+++
title = "016"

+++
16 (842)
Agni
Damana Yāmāyana
24 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 11–14
The focus on the cremation fire in the last part of the preceding hymn (X.15) is  enlarged upon here. This fire is seen both as a blessed release of the dead man to the realm of the ancestors and as a menace to the vulnerable dead body. This  ambivalence is clearly on display in the first verse, where the fire is begged not  to burn up the body, but, on the other hand, to make the dead man “cooked”  and ready to go to the forefathers. The same sentiment is repeated in verse 2,  and the journey undertaken. The dead body itself is addressed in verse 3, with  its parts consigned to the corresponding cosmic entities. Two more verses to  Agni follow (4–5), continuing the themes of verses 1–2. In verses 6–7 the body  is addressed again: in verse 6 it is reassured that the physical indignities it has  undergone since death will be fixed by the cremation fire and by soma, but in  verse 7 it is urged to protect itself against the same fire. The cremation seems to  end with verse 8.
With the cremation concluded, the next verses (9–12) treat the inauspicious but  powerful cremation fire and the means to render it harmless and to reintegrate it  into the generally auspicious sphere of fire. The “flesh-eating fire” is first explicitly  distinguished from “the other” fire, the ritual fire that receives the oblations to the  gods, and the flesh-eating fire is assigned the task of taking the sacrifice to the  ancestors and bringing them to the sacrifice here. Since this task is parallel to that  of the other fire, the gods’ ritual mediator, the negative aspects of the flesh-eating  fire can be set aside, and it can be conceptually reconfigured as a positive force, a  transformation completed in verse 12.
In the final two verses (13–14) the place where the cremation took place returns  to nature, with the fire extinguished and plants growing again. The import of the  final apostrophe to a cool and chilly feminine entity is clear, even though the refer ent (a water plant?) is not.
## 01
Don’t burn him through, Agni; don’t scorch him; don’t singe his skin,  nor his body.
When you will make him cooked to readiness, Jātavedas, then impel him  forth to the forefathers.
## 02
When you will have made him cooked to readiness, Jātavedas, then  deliver him to the forefathers.
When he will embark on the (way) leading to (the other) life, then he will  lead at the will of the gods.
## 03
Let your eye go to the sun, your life-breath to the wind. Go to heaven  and to earth as is fitting.
Or go to the waters, if it has been fixed for you there. Take your stand in  the plants with your limbs.
## 04
The goat is your portion. With your heat, heat it up. Let your flame heat  it up, let your beam.
The propitious bodies that are yours, o Jātavedas, with those convey him  to the world of good (ritual) performers.
## 05
Release him again to the forefathers, o Agni—the one who, offered to  you, proceeds by his own powers.
Clothing himself in life, let him go in pursuit of his remains: let him  unite with his body, o Jātavedas.

## 06
What of yours the black omen-bird pecked at, or the ant, the serpent,  or the dog-footed (beast),
let omnivorous Agni make it free from curse, and Soma, who has
entered the brahmins.
## 07
Make for yourself an enveloping armor against fire with (the flesh of)  cows. Cover yourself entirely with grease and fat,
lest the bold one, bristling with his flame, fasten himself around you,  intending to utterly burn you up.
## 08
This beaker here, o Agni—don’t overturn it. It is dear to the gods and  to those deserving of soma [=forefathers]—
the beaker that is the drinking vessel of the gods—in it the immortal  gods find their exhilaration.
## 09
Flesh-eating Agni I send off in the distance. Carrying away defilements,  let him go to those who have Yama as king.
Here let only this one, the other Jātavedas, carry the oblations to the  gods, knowing what’s ahead.
## 10
The flesh-eating Agni who entered your house, though he saw this one  here, the other Jātavedas—
that god I take for the sacrifice to the forefathers. He will send the
gharma (drink) to the highest seat.
## 11
The flesh-conveying Agni who will sacrifice to the forefathers, who are  strong through truth,
he will proclaim the oblations to the gods and the forefathers.
## 12
Eagerly we would install you; eagerly we would kindle you.
Eagerly convey the eager forefathers here, to eat the oblation.
## 13
The one whom you have entirely burnt, Agni, that one extinguish  in turn.
Let the kiyāmbu plant grow here and the pākadūrvā and the vyalkaśā. 14. O cool lady full of cooling, chilly lady full of chill,
join together with the lady frog—stimulate this fire here.