+++
title = "017"

+++
17 (843)
Various Divinities: Saraṇyū (1–2), Pūsan (3–6), ̣
Sarasvatı (7–9), the Waters (10, 14), the Waters or Soma (11–13) ̄
Devaśravas Yāmāyana
14 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh or purastādbr̥hatī 13, anuṣṭubh 14
This hymn consists of a disparate collection of segments, which do not seem to  form a coherent whole and which do not always have an obvious connection to the  death/funeral context of this cycle of hymns.
The first two enigmatic verses may well be the most discussed of all R̥gvedic  mythological sketches, although this wide-ranging and ongoing discussion has not  brought as much clarity as could be desired. The verses provide us with a skeletal three-generation mythological family tree, with a father, the god Tvaṣṭar, and his  daughter, who is identified as both mother of Yama and wife of Vivasvant. All this  is fairly clearly set out in the first verse: it opens with a Svayaṃvara (“self-choice  marriage”) invitation issued by the father for his daughter, to which the whole  world responds (1ab), and the second half (1cd) appears to summarize the results  of that marriage—the husband chosen apparently being Vivasvant, and the child  issuing from the marriage apparently being Yama. (It should be noted, though,  that the identity of Tvaṣṭar’s daughter [1a] with the mother of Yama [1c] and wife  of Vivasvant [1d] is only implicit from context, not expressly stated, and her name  is not given in vs. 1.) The only disquieting part of this verse comes with the last  word: “she disappeared” (nanāśa). This word sets the stage for its companion verse.
The second verse considerably muddies the clean lines of our initial family tree.  It turns out that the vanished woman of verse 1 was actually hidden away (2a) by  an unnamed set of individuals—perhaps the gods, who create and pass off on (the  unsuspecting?) Vivasvant a simulacrum of his wife (2b). In the second half of the  verse the neat maternal line of 1c is likewise made obscure: someone (the origi
nal woman? the simulacrum?) bears the Aśvins (2c), and she (or the other female)  leaves behind (abandons? leaves as a legacy?) two unnamed paired ones (2d). Yama,  the son in 1c, is not mentioned by name, but he may lurk as part of the two in 2d  (Yama and Yamī? Yama and Manu?), who could on the other hand be the afore
mentioned Aśvins. Each of these possibilities has had its scholarly champions (and  it has in fact also been argued that 2d refers to two pairs, that is four in all). The last  word of verse 2 is the feminine name Saraṇyū (lit., “hastening”), seeming to identify  our protagonist, but the name provides little help, and could, in principle, belong to  either the original or the duplicate woman.
All in all, the two verses seem deliberately and cleverly designed to mislead and  confuse, and in that they have admirably succeeded, beginning with the retellings of  the story in the later Vedic tradition and continuing to this day. The myth has also  often been invoked in a comparative Indo-European context. (For a recent discus
sion of the history of scholarship and for his own Indo-European interpretation,  see Jackson 2006: Part II: esp. 72–93.) This is not the place to produce a full treat ment of the myth behind the verses or its various interpretations; suffice it to say  that we are inclined to see the paired two in 2d as Yama and Yamī, in part because  a connection with Yama’s history is the only way to make sense of the inclusion of  these verses here.
The relevance of the next set of verses (4–6), to Pūṣan, is considerably clearer.  Pūṣan as the good guide and finder of lost livestock makes an excellent psycho pomp, leading the dead along the dangerous path to the next world.
The goddess, and river, Sarasvatī is addressed in the next three verses (7–9), with  a final verse (10) to the Waters in general. Sarasvatī here seems especially connected  with the dead forefathers and the offerings to them at the ritual (esp. vss. 8–9); this  may be an early foreshadowing of the later ritual offering of water to the dead, or,  as verse 10 suggests, connected with the general purificatory power of waters (see  X.9.6–9 earlier in this maṇḍala).

Verses 10–13 concern the “drop” (drapsá) and are addressed in the 2nd person to  Soma, who is never named but clearly identifiable from his characteristic vocabu lary. There is no mention of the forefathers or of anything related to a funeral, and  there is no obvious reason why these verses should have been attached to this hymn.  Indeed, the final purificatory verse (14) would follow better directly on verse 10.
## 01
“Tvaṣṭar is arranging a wedding for his daughter”: (on hearing) thus, all  this world comes together.
The mother of Yama, the wife of great Vivasvant, while being conveyed  around (on her wedding journey), went missing.
## 02
They hid her away, the immortal, from the mortals. Having made a  female of the same appearance, they gave her to Vivasvant.
And she was carrying the Aśvins (in the womb), as it happened, and she  left behind the two, the paired ones [=Yama and Yamī?]—Saraṇyū.
## 03
Let Pūṣan stir you forth from here—the wise one, whose livestock doesn’t  get lost, the herdsman of the world.
He will deliver you to these forefathers; Agni (will deliver you) to the  gods who are good to find.
## 04
Āyu (“Lifetime”) having a complete lifetime will protect you all around.  Let Pūṣan protect you from in front on the path forward.
Where those of good action sit, where they have gone, there let god
Savitar place you.
## 05
Pūṣan knows all these regions through and through: he will lead us along  the least perilous (way).
Granting well-being, the glowing one, possessing hale heroes—not
keeping distant, let him go in front, foreknowing.
## 06
On the forward path of paths was Pūṣan born, on the forward path of  heaven, on the forward path of earth.
He wanders back and forth to both the dearest seats, foreknowing.
## 07
Sarasvatī do those seeking the gods invoke, Sarasvatī when the ceremony  is being extended.
Sarasvatī did those of good action invoke. Sarasvatī will give a thing of  value to the pious.
## 08
O Sarasvatī, you who drove on the same chariot with the forefathers,  becoming exhilarated at the svadhā(-calls), o goddess—
having taken your seat here on this ritual grass, bring yourself to
exhilaration. Provide us refreshments that bring no disease.
## 09
Sarasvatī, whom the forefathers invoke, as they arrive at the sacrifice in  the south—
provide here a portion of refreshment worth thousands and thriving of  wealth among the sacrificers. 10. Let the waters, the mothers cleanse us; let them, ghee-pure, purify us  with their ghee,
for the goddesses carry forth every defilement. I rise up from them
gleaming, purified.
## 11
The drop spurted through the first days, both through this womb here  and the former one.
I offer the drop circling around through the same womb, according to  the seven priestly functions.
## 12
Your drop that spurts and your plant that is set in motion by the arms,  from the lap of the Holy Place,
or from the Adhvaryu or from the filter, that one of yours I offer with  my mind when the vaṣaṭ-cry is made.
## 13
Your drop that has spurted, your plant, and what is below and what  beyond the ladle—
let this god Br̥haspati pour it all together for benefit.
## 14
Full of milk are the plants, full of milk my little speech.
Full of milk indeed is the milk of the waters. With it cleanse me
altogether.