+++
title = "018"

+++
18 (844)
Death, etc.
Saṃkusuka Yāmāyana
14 verses: triṣṭubh, except 11 prastārapaṅkti, 13 jagatī, 14 anuṣṭubh
This lovely hymn falls into several sections, each treating the end of the funeral  service. The first six verses depict the mourners leaving the service and returning to  their lives. Death is dismissed in verse 1, and in verses 2–3 the living turn back to an  enhanced life, full of “dancing and laughter” (vs. 3). They are separated from death  by a barrier (vs. 4); in the later ritual a stone is set down near the grave. Verses 5–6  are especially concerned with the orderly sequence of life and death, in particular  the fear that the younger will die before their elders and disrupt the proper sequence  (see esp. 5cd).
The next three verses (7–9) have been much discussed, especially in the context  of “suttee” (satī) or widow-burning, though the verses are emphatically not a depic tion thereof. From verse 8 it appears that the widow lies down, temporarily, beside  her dead husband, but is summoned back to life and indeed symbolically reborn  to become the wife of a new husband (quite possibly her brother-in-law, in levirate  marriage). The happy women in verse 7 apparently approach the funeral pyre to  adorn the widow for her return to life. A similar “return to life” is granted the dead  man’s bow in verse 9, where someone, quite possibly the dead man’s son, repossesses  the bow to put it to future use.

The burial is the subject of verses 10–13, with an emphasis on the softness and  gentleness of the welcoming earth, both mother and bride, which lies lightly on  the dead man. Verse 13 forms a sort of ring with verse 1, with both expressing a  prohibition against harm with the same construction and the same root √riṣ (1d  mā́...rīriṣaḥ, 13b mā́...riṣam). This ring defines the final verse (14) as outside the  hymn proper, and other indications support this extra-hymnic status. It is in dimeter  meter, instead of the trimeter that prevails elsewhere, and the Aśvalāyana Gr̥hya  Sūtra, which treats the ritual usage of all the other verses, ignores it, as does the  medieval commentator Sāyaṇa. The sense of this verse is also much disputed. Many  scholars think that the poet is predicting his own future death, on a day that is  approaching him, in the first hemistich, and in the second he restrains his speech in  anticipation. (As Geldner says, rather more dramatically than usual, “der Rest ist  Schweigen” [the rest is silence].) In contrast, we consider this to belong to the typi cal genre of hymn-final meta-poetic verses, in which the poet comments on his own  skill in producing the poem that precedes. By this interpretation, the first half-verse  concerns the well-conducted funeral that has just taken place, while the second  refers specifically to the poet’s taming and controlling the speech that accompanied  that ritual.
## 1
Depart, Death, along the further path, which is your own, different from  the one leading to the gods.
To you who possess eyes and who listen do I speak: do not harm our  offspring nor our heroes.
## 2
Effacing the footprint of death when you have gone, establishing for  yourselves a longer, more extended lifetime,
swelling up with offspring and wealth, become cleansed and purified, o  you who are worthy of the sacrifice.
## 3
These the living have turned aside from the dead. The invocation of the  gods has become favorable for us today.
We have gone facing forward to dancing, to laughter, establishing for  ourselves a longer, more extended lifetime.
## 4
I set down this barrier here for the living. Let no one of these later go to  this goal.
Let them live for a hundred ample autumns. Let them conceal death with  a mountain.
## 5
Just as the days follow each upon the last, just as the seasons follow  straightaway upon the seasons,
so, o Ordainer, arrange their lifetimes, so that the later does not leave  behind the earlier.
## 6
Mount your lifetime, choosing old age, taking your place each following  the last, as many as you are.
Here will Tvaṣṭar, affording good birth, in concert (with the Wives of the  Gods), make a long lifetime for you to live. 7. These women here, non-widows with good husbands—let them, with  fresh butter as ointment, approach together.
Without tears, without afflictions, well-jeweled, let the wives first mount  the womb.
## 8
“Arise, woman, to the world of the living. You lie beside him whose life  is gone. Come here!
You have come into existence now as wife of a husband who has
grasped your hand and wishes to have you.”
## 9
Taking the bow from the hand of the dead for our dominion, luster,  and strength,
you there and we here—may we with good heroes win all contests and  hostile engagements.
## 10
Creep upon this mother earth, the broad earth of wide expanse, who is  very kindly.
The young girl, soft as wool for the one who gives priestly gifts—let her  protect you from the lap of Dissolution.
## 11
Arch up, Earth; do not press down. Become easy to approach for him,  easy to curl up in.
Like a mother her son with her hem, cover him, Earth.
## 12
Let the earth stay arching up. For let a thousand (house)posts be fixed  in (her).
Let the house be dripping with ghee. Let it always be sheltering to
him there.
## 13
I prop up the earth from you. Setting down this earth clod here, let me  not be harmed.
Let the forefathers uphold this pillar for you. There let Yama fix your seats.
## 14
On the day facing me [=today] they have set (him=dead man) down  like a feather from an arrow.
The speech facing me I have grasped, like a horse by its halter.