+++
title = "019"

+++
19 (845)
Cows
Mathita Yāmāyana or Bhrgu V ̥ āruṇi or Cyavana Bhārgava
8 verses: anuṣṭubh, except gāyatrī 6
This simple, repetitive, but charming call to the cows to come home is the final  hymn of the Yama collection, though its connection to the other hymns in the cycle,  especially the funeral hymns that immediately precede it, is unclear. The signature  idiom in this hymn is “turn back,” and perhaps it was attached to the Yama cycle on  thematic grounds, because the first verses of the preceding hymn, X.18, concern the  return to life of the living after the funeral of their dead kinsman (see esp. X.18.3).

## 01
Turn back. Don’t keep going. Keep company with us, o rich ones.
O Agni and Soma, who bring goods back, hold our wealth fast for us. 2. Turn them back again; bring them back here again.
Let Indra hold them back; let Agni drive them near.
## 03
Let these turn back again. Let them prosper in (the care of) this man, the  lord of the cattle.
Right here, o Agni, fix them down fast. Here let it remain—our wealth. 4. Also the one who is the cowherd—I call him to the journeying back, the  coming back, the bringing to agreement, and the going away,
to the turning here and the turning back.
## 05
He who has managed the dispersal, who has managed the going away, the turning here, and the turning back—let the cowherd also turn back. 6. You turner back, turn them back here; give the cows to us again, o Indra. Let us find enjoyment with them alive.
## 07
On every side I surround you with nourishment, ghee, and milk.
Whatever gods there are who are worthy of the sacrifice, let them join us  with wealth.
## 08
You turner back, turn them here; you turner back, turn them back. The earth has four quarters: from these, turn them back.
The Anukramaṇī gives a choice of authorship for the next seven hymns, X.20– 26: Vimada, the son of Indra or Prajāpati, or Vasukr̥t Vāsukra. The patronymic of  the latter choice would identify the poet as a son or descendant of Vasukra Aindra,  the author of the three desperately difficult hymns that immediately follow (27–29).  The poet of X.25.11 also identifies with or identifies himself as Kakṣīvant, the very  skilled poet of I.116–126.
Whatever the poet’s affiliation, he is fond of unusual meters (see esp. 21, 22, 24,  25) as well as puns on the name Vimada. The hymns are dedicated to Agni (20–21),  Indra (22–1st half of 24), the Aśvins (2nd half of 24), Soma (25), and Pūṣan (26).