+++
title = "020"

+++
20 (846)
Agni
Vimada Aindra or Vimada Prājāpatya, or Vasukrt V̥ āsukra
10 verses: gāyatrī, except ekapadāvirāj 1, anuṣṭubh 2, virāj 9, triṣṭubh 10
This first of the Vimada hymns starts with a single-pāda verse adapted from the first  verse of X.25 and placed here to provide an auspicious beginning for the series. The  second verse has a similarly marked beginning: its first two words are identical to the  first words of the R̥gveda, I.1.1 agním īḷe “I invoke Agni....” The hymn mostly treats  the familiar topic of the physical presence of the ritual fire, though with some strik
ing imagery and turns of phrase. The fire’s expansion upward, even to heaven, is the subject of the middle verses (4–6), with his expansion opening the way also for mor tals and for gods. In the final summary verse (10) the poet Vimada names himself.
## 1
Make auspicious thought our familiar.
## 2
Agni do I invoke, the youngest, for delights, an ally [/Mitra] difficult to  restrain by reason of his (own) command,
upon whose foundation the mottled (cows) [=flames] honor the sun (as  well as) the udder of their mother [=fireplace].
## 3
With his (own) body as his nest, his radiant beam his beacon, him  whom they make increase with their mouth,
he flashes—his teeth [=flames] in a row.
## 4
The way for the stranger and the clans goes onward, since he [=Agni]  has reached the ends of heaven—
as the bright-shining poet, (but also as) a cloud.
## 5
He takes pleasure in the oblations of the son of Manu. The craftsman  stands erect at the sacrifice.
Fixing his seat, he goes in front.
## 6
For he is peaceful dwelling, oblation, and sacrifice. By harkening only to  him, their way goes onward:
the gods (go) to Agni, who is equipped with axes [=flames].
## 7
I seek Agni, who dominates through sacrifice, and the friendship of  (that) kindly ancient.
They say that Āyu [=Agni] is the son of the stone.
## 8
Whichever superior men are from among us, they should all be “in  the money”
when they make Agni increase with their oblation.
## 9
Black, white, and red is his course; coppery, silver, and ruddy is glorious  (Agni).
The begetter has begotten him of golden form.
## 10
In just this way, o Agni, child of nourishment, Vimada, in company  with the immortals, will convey to you his inspired thought
and his songs, as he implores your good favors. Refreshment,
nourishment, a good dwelling—all that have you brought.