+++
title = "021"

+++
21 (848) Agni
Vimada Aindra or Vimada Prājāpatya, or Vasukrt V̥ āsukra
8 verses: āstārapaṅkti
This hymn is notable for two related formal features, its meter and its refrain. The  meter āstārapaṅkti (8 8 / 8 4 8 4) is limited to this group of hymns attributed to  Vimada, providing the meter for the two hymns X.21 and X.25 and the first half  (vss. 1–3) of X.24. (The Anukramaṇī identifies the meter of the single verse X.170.41404 X.21
as āstārapaṅkti, but the characteristic 8 4 8 4 sequence must be read as 12 12 there.)  In all the Vimada occurrences the two four-syllable pādas form a grammatically  unified refrain (the same refrain in all three hymns), interrupted by an eight-syllable  pāda semantically and syntactically integrated into the rest of the verse: ví vo máde
x x x x x x x x vívakṣase “In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).” The  first four-syllable pāda of the refrain is also a pun on the poet’s name: ví vo máde,  literally “in exhilaration you...,” but also “Vi...mada” (itself interrupted by the  enclitic pronoun vaḥ). Although the effect is striking and insistent, it is also impos
sible to render in translation, and so the refrain has been unified and placed at the  end of the verse. To illustrate the difficulties of a literal translation, we will give a  rendering of the first verse in this hymn in that style:
As if with (hymns) with their own twists, we choose you, Agni, as Hotar for our sacrifice whose ritual grass has been strewn—in exhilaration you  (gods)—
(we choose you,) sharp and pure-flamed—I wish to acclaim.
The formal novelty of the hymn is not matched by its content, which is simply a  typical celebration of Agni’s installation as Hotar at his kindling, along with wishes  for his gifts of wealth.
## 1
As if with (hymns) with their own twists, we choose you, Agni,
as Hotar
for our sacrifice whose ritual grass has been strewn, (you,) sharp and  pure-flamed.
– In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).
## 2
They beautify you—those close at hand who receive bounty in horses  [=priests].
The pouring(-ladle) pursues you, o Agni, as does the oblation whose  course is straight.
– In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).
## 3
Those having (you) as their foundation [=flames] sit upon you, “pouring”  with their tongues like women pouring with their ladles.
Black and silver forms and all beauties do you put on.
– In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).
## 4
Whatever wealth you hold in regard, o Agni, you overpowering
immortal,
bring that here for us to win the prize, the bright (wealth) here to the  sacrifices.
– In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).
## 5
When just born, Agni found all the poetic arts with (the aid of) the  Atharvan (priest).
He became the messenger of Vivasvant, dear and desirable to Yama.
– In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods). 6. They invoke you at the sacrifices, o Agni, while the ceremony is
proceeding.
You provide all desirable goods to the pious man.
– In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).
## 7
They have installed you as the beloved priest at the sacrifices, o Agni, ghee-faced and blazing for Manu, most observant with your eyes.
– In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).
## 8
O Agni, with your blazing flame you spread yourself wide and lofty. Roaring, you act the bull; you set an embryo in your female kinsfolk  [=plants].
– In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).