+++
title = "022"

+++
22 (848) Indra
Vimada Aindra or Vimada Prājāpatya, or Vasukrt V̥ āsukra
15 verses: purastādbr̥hatī, except anuṣṭubh 5, 7, 9, triṣṭubh 15
The metrical scheme of this hymn is unique in the R̥gveda (see Oldenberg 1888: 122);  most of the verses have an 11 8 8 8 configuration (or something approaching it),  despite the Anukramaṇī’s identifications. Like many hymns whose meter is irregu lar, this one is driven more by phraseology, verbal echoes, and lexical chaining than  by meter. The responsion and chaining begin with the first two verses, which consist
of a rhetorical question about Indra’s fame (vs. 1) and its answer (vs. 2). The general praises of Indra continue in the next two verses, but shade, in  verse 4, into the myth (or fragments of myth) that occupy most of the rest of the  hymn: the journey of Indra and his client Kutsa (unnamed here) to the house of  Uśanā (Kāvya) with the horses of the Wind (vss. 4–6), the plea to Indra to smite the  demon Śuṣṇa (7–9), and the actual slaying of Śuṣṇa and its aftermath (vss. 10–11,  14), with several verses interspersed (12–13) begging Indra for aid and comfort.  (These may belong to the Śuṣṇa saga and represent the speech of the same “we”  who asked Indra to kill the demon in vss. 7–9, but they can also be generalized to  the current “we” of singers and patrons.)
Although there are many puzzles in these mythological verses, the real crux is the  pair concerning (apparently) the slaying of Śuṣṇa, verses 10–11, which contain sev eral well-nigh-impenetrable hapaxes and whose syntax is in places unparsable. Verse  10, especially, may be deemed impossible, and its translation is therefore provisional  and differs radically from others’ interpretations. We believe that it contains a badly  remembered and garbled allusion to an inherited Indo-Iranian mythic complex.  The hapax kārpāṇé, which others interpret as “in the sword-combat” (relating it  to a much later attested word kr̥pāṇa “sword”), we connect with the Avestan word  karapan (read disyllabically in the Gāthās), the designation of a person or persons  hostile to the Mazdayasnian religion and associated with equally hostile kauuis

(e.g., Yasna 44.20, Yasna 32.12, 14–15, Yasna 46.11)—just as our kārpāṇé occurs  in a verse with unidentified (and, as it happens, syntactically untethered) kavis. In  the topsy-turvy religious system of the Gāthās, of course, entities viewed positively  in the R̥gveda (like kavis) have negative valuation. This is not the place to explore  this hypothesis in detail, but for another apparent manifestation of this myth, see  X.99.9, and for further discussion see Jamison (2009d [2013]).
The hymn ends with an impeccable triṣṭubh verse (15), containing a conven tional invitation to Indra to drink the soma and conventional wishes for his good  will and patronage.
## 1
Where is Indra famous? Among what people is he famed today like an  ally among the people?—
he who, whether in the dwelling place of the seers or in concealment, is  constantly celebrated in song.
## 2
Here is Indra famed. Among us today he is praised as the wielder of the  mace, equal to song—
he who like an ally among the peoples has made glory for himself
among the peoples, not by halves;
## 3
He who is the lord of great strength, not by halves, and of great
manliness, the thruster,
the bearer of the bold mace, like a father (of) his dear son.
## 4
As the one having yoked the two boisterous horses of the Wind, as god  (having yoked those) of the god, o wielder of the mace,
as the one who streams along the radiant path when set loose along the  highways, he is praised.
## 5
You have come to just these two horses of the Wind, the silvery ones, to  drive them by yourself,
those for which no god nor mortal can be found as controller.
## 6
Then Uśanā asks you both [=Indra and Kutsa] on your coming, “With  what purpose (have you come) to our house?
You have come from afar, from heaven and earth, to a mortal.”
## 7
You will ask for us, for our upraised sacred formulation, Indra.
We (in return) beg you for this help, that you smite Śuṣṇa, the non-man. 8. The Dasyu of non-deeds, of non-thought, the non-man whose
commandments are other, is against us.
You smasher of non-allies, humble the weapon of this Dāsa.
## 9
(Be there) for us, Indra, o champion, with champions, and (let us be)  aided by you, by your power.
In many places offerings bellow to you in competition like battle cries. 10. You incited these excellent men at the obstacle-smiting for the
Karpan [?], you mace-wielding champion,
when (you found?) him [=Śuṣṇa] in hiding—the sage poets (being
there), (profiting from) *the strength of your lordly power, *like
the clans. 11. Right away these things (became) yours, Indra, on gaining control over  (his) property for giving, you mace-wielding champion,
when with your fellow travelers you humbled everything born of Śuṣṇa. 12. Let your good superior powers not go nowhere for us, champion Indra. May each one of us be in the favor of these (powers) of yours,
mace-wielder.
## 13
For us let these (gifts?) of yours (become) real. They bring no injury— your caresses,
whose benefits, like those of milk-cows, we would know, mace-wielder. 14. While, handless and footless, the earth grew strong through the powers  of her wise ways,
you, circling him with respectful circumambulation [=as if for the
animal sacrifice], jabbed down Śuṣṇa for the whole of life.
## 15
Drink, drink the soma, hero Indra! Don’t mean (us) harm, goods lord,  since you are good.
And protect the singers and the bounteous (patrons), and make us rich  from (your?) great wealth.