+++
title = "023"

+++
23 (849) Indra
Vimada Aindra or Vimada Prājāpatya, or Vasukrt V̥ āsukra
7 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 1, 7; abhisāriṇī 5 (so Anukramaṇī)
The hymn begins with a fine Indo-Iranian opening “we sacrifice to/worship  (yájāmahe) Indra,” reminiscent of the Younger Avestan litanies with the identical  verb yazamaide. The praise of Indra that follows is fairly conventional; we hear of  his mace (vss. 1, 3), his pair of fallow bays (vss. 1–3), and, less usually, his beard (vss.  1, 3). He is portrayed, in contrastive but complementary fashion, as at once warrior  and generous and paternal patron (see, e.g., vss. 1d, 2b, 5).
The final two verses (6–7) mention the poet Vimada (7b) and his family (6a),  and both verses feature prominently the verb vidmā́ “we know,” a partial anagram  of this name. Indra’s name is also played upon, in the adjective iná “strong” (6c),  and possibly, earlier in the hymn, by the presence of several pleonastic occurrences  of the particle íd (3a, 4d). In the same spirit, the frequent occurrence of the pre
verb/particle ví seems designed to recall the Vimada name. This punning is more  subtle and varied than that found in the Vimada hymns with the repeated catch word refrain ví vo máde ... vívakṣase (X.21, 24.1–3, 25). Thus, though the contents  of the praise are conventional, the playful phonological complexity gives texture to  the poem.
## 1
We sacrifice to Indra with the mace in his right hand, the charioteer of  the fallow bays who follow separate commandments.
He stands erect, constantly shaking out his beard, while apportioning  (goods) by virtue of his weapons, by virtue of his generosity.

## 2
His are the two fallow bays and the goods [=soma] to be found in the  wood(en cup). Indra, the smiter of Vr̥tra, shall be bounteous with his  bounties.
As R̥bhu, Vāja, R̥bhukṣa [=the three R̥bhus] he masters his strength,  (saying,) “I whet down even the name of the Dāsa.”
## 3
When (he takes?) the golden mace, then he mounts the chariot, which his  two fallow bays draw, along with the patrons—
the bounteous one famed of old, Indra, master of the prize of
long(-lasting) fame.
## 4
Even now, as rain he (sprinkles) all things belonging to his herd; Indra  sprinkles his tawny beard.
He pursues his track down to the honey having its lovely dwelling in the  pressed soma. He tosses (his beard) upward like the wind a tree.
## 5
He who smote with his speech those of disputatious speech, those of  insulting speech, and many thousands of the hostile,
this and every (other) masculine deed of his do we sing—he who, like a  father (his son), has strengthened his own force and strength.
## 6
The Vimadas have begotten this praise for you, Indra, (praise)
unprecedented, best of many, for the one of good gifts [/drops],
for we know the feeding of him, which is that of a strong one. May we  bring him close like cowherds their livestock.
## 7
Let no one keep us away from this fellowship between you, Indra, and  Vimada the seer,
for we know your (fatherly) solicitude, o god, like that of kin. Let there  be friendly fellowship of you for us.