+++
title = "024"

+++
24 (850) Indra (1–3), the Aśvins (4–6)
Vimada Aindra or Vimada Prājāpatya, or Vasukrt V̥ āsukra
6 verses: āstārapaṅkti 1–3, anuṣṭubh 4–6
Two separate short hymns, distinguished by divinity, meter, contents, and style. The  first three verses, to Indra, contain the Vimada refrain. (For a discussion of its  structure see the introduction to X.21.) The poet straightforwardly asks for goods  and aid from the god in return for the soma offered to him.
The second three verses, to the Aśvins, allude to an otherwise unknown or  little-known myth in which these gods churn out a pair of females (which may or  may not be magical fire-churning sticks), which fly away to the gods’ disappoint ment; the gods ask the Aśvins to return them (vss. 4–5). If we knew the myth, it  would no doubt be fascinating, but in the absence of further textual evidence, it  must remain a tantalizing fragment. 1. O Indra, drink this honeyed soma pressed in the cup;
lay down for us a foundation of wealth in thousands, o you of
many goods.
– In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).
## 2
We beseech you with sacrifices, recitations, and oblations:
o power-lord of power, set in place for us the best that can be chosen. – In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).
## 3
You who are the lord of those things to be chosen, the invigorator of  the weak,
and the helper of the praisers, o Indra, protect us from hatred and
constraint.
– In my exhilaration I wish to acclaim you (gods).
## 4
O powerful ones, you two possessing magical powers churned out the  two joined (fire-churning sticks?),
when, reverently invoked by Vimada, you churned, o Nāsatyas.
## 5
All the gods yearned after the two joined (sticks?) as they flew away. The gods said to the Nāsatyas, “Bring (them) back again.”
## 6
Honeyed is my going away and honeyed (my) coming again.
O gods, do you two make us honeyed by your divinity.