+++
title = "026"

+++
26 (852)
Pūsaṇ
Vimada Aindra or Vimada Prājāpatya, or Vasukrt V̥ āsukra
9 verses: anuṣṭubh, except uṣṇih 1, 4
Unlike most treatments of Pūṣan in the R̥gveda, with their generally simple but  lively and colloquial language and concentration on Pūṣan’s mundane activities,  this hymn is bristling with difficulties, oddly constructed hapax compounds, and  high, though frequently unclear, sentiments. See especially verse 6, whose language  and intent are almost entirely obscure.
The general themes are Pūṣan’s reciprocal relationship with inspired poets and  their thoughts (see vss. 1–2, 4–5) and his role as companion and friend (see vss.  2, 5–8).
## 01
Because our inspired thoughts, the cherished teams, go forth toward  (them),
[/Because their cherished teams go forth toward our inspired thoughts,] let the two wondrous ones—(Vāyu,) who possesses a chariot with teams,  and mighty Pūṣan—help (them).
## 02
He [=Pūṣan] to whom belong this greatness, the friendship with the Wind  [/sought-after friendship], this people here—
the inspired poet will strive to win (him) with his hymnic visions. He  [=Pūṣan] has taken cognizance of the good praise hymns.
## 03
He knows the good praise hymns. Pūṣan the bull, like a drop,
sprinkles sprinklings [?], sprinkles on our enclosure.
## 04
We would contemplate you. For us, god Pūṣan, (you are)
both the means to realize our thoughts and to stir up our inspired poets, 5. Half-sharer of sacrifices, horse-driver of chariots,
seer—he who was established by Manu as the companion who wards off  (hatred) for the inspired poet—
## 06
The husband of her who cares [?] [=Sūryā?], (companion) of the gleaming  (female [=Dawn?]) and the gleaming (male [=Agni, Soma, Sun?]),
weaver of garments of sheep [=wool], always rubbing [=cleaning] the  garments.

## 07
Powerful lord of prizes, powerful companion of prosperities,
the delightful one has shaken forth his beard, shaken it out at will—he  who is not to be deceived.
## 08
O Pūṣan, the goats should turn the pole of your chariot hither—
(you are) the companion of every striving man, born of old, not to be  driven away.
## 09
Our chariot let Pūṣan the mighty aid with his vigor.
He will become the increaser of prizes; he will hear this call of ours.
The three hymns ascribed to Vasukra Aindra (X.27–29) are both very rich and very  strange, and will repay concentrated study for untold time to come.