+++
title = "028"

+++
28 (854)
Indra
Vasukra Aindra
12 verse: triṣṭubh
Another devilish hymn by the very talented Vasukra, and a worthy companion piece to X.27. Like the first half of X.27, this hymn consists of a dialogue between  Indra and a singer/sacrificer, introduced in this case by a verse spoken by the sacri ficer’s wife (who then disappears from the hymn). The hymn is more tightly struc tured than X.27, and it complements X.27 in another way: though the second half  of X.27 is deliberately obscure and esoteric in its expression, X.28 presents itself  (however misleadingly) as instruction to the simple, couched in straightforward  language.
The topic of the hymn, to be reductionist, is successful and unsuccessful sac rifices, and the human participants in the dialogue seem to express anxiety about  failing, perhaps by accident, to provide a sacrificial offering adequate to attract  the gods, especially Indra. The hymn begins (vs. 1) with the sacrificer’s wife, who is

also Indra’s daughter-in-law, anxiously noting Indra’s absence from the sacrifice. In  verse 2 Indra responds that he protects those who provide him adequate soma; the  singer (probably) replies, perhaps a bit testily, that not only do they press soma and  cook bulls for Indra, but Indra does consume this provender (vs. 3).
There follows an abrupt change of subject, or at least change of tone. Indra  begins verse 4 with “Mark well this (speech) of mine, singer” and then alludes  glancingly to what appear to be animal fables of the sort found in much later texts  like the Pañcatantra. In verse 5 the mortal expresses doubt about his ability to  understand the god because of his (the mortal’s) simple nature, but also expresses  certainty that the god will enlighten him at the right time. The next three verses  (6–8) we will take up below. The animal fables return in verses 9 and 10, while the  last two verses (11–12) contrast greedy people, who consume what was destined  for the sacrifice and thereby actually weaken themselves, with the hard-laboring  sacrificers, who thrive.
The hymn is thus structured in the following way: the outer verses (1–3, 11–12)  concern successful and unsuccessful sacrifices and sacrificers, the opening verses  being more personal, the final ones more general. Within this frame there is an inner  ring of verses (4–5, 9–10), which establish a dialogue between mortal and god about  this problem and which express the god’s teaching in the simple terms a mortal  can understand, that is, in animal allegories briefly alluded to. This double ring of  complementary verses thus surrounds and marks out the center of the hymn, verses  6–8, and especially the exact center of the twelve-verse hymn, verses 6–7. These two  verses are also rhetorically responsive, and both their position and their structure  define them as an omphalos. Furthermore, they are uttered directly after the singer  has expressed certainty that Indra will proclaim his doctrine at the right time (vs.  5cd). Everything in the context seems to mark these verses as the direct teaching of  Indra, his significant message—and, indeed, as his epiphany, the epiphany that was  expected but not realized in verse 1. The vaunting self-praise in the omphalos verses  contrasts strangely with the animal fable verses that form the inner ring around  them, for in those the message seems to be rather that the weak can best the strong.
The re-transition from the ātmastuti (“self-praise”) of the omphalos (vss. 6–7) to  the animal fables (vss. 9–10) is effected by an even more enigmatic verse (8). Though  it does not match any of the structurally paired verses of the rest of the hymn, it  may carry the key to the whole, for it seems to treat the original establishment of  the sacrifice, instituted first by the gods. This reminds us of the more elaborate treat
ment of the origins of the sacrifice in X.27.13–18 (esp. 15), and it also suggests that  the sacrifice is the tool by which the weak (currently mortals) may control the strong  (Indra and the gods), as in the animal fables that enclose the hymn’s center. Reached  by way of a playful transition (vss. 10d, 11a), the final two verses (11–12) return us  to the present day and the ritual situation, and remind us of the contrast between  sacrificers and non-sacrificers in the first half of X.27, especially verses 2 and 7.
A word about the animal verses. Despite the major importance of animal  fables and allegories in later Sanskrit, there is essentially nothing like them in Vedic, especially early Vedic, and even the allusions to stories we have here— which are reminiscent of the summary verses of Pañcatantra tales—are unique  in the R̥gveda. Keeping in mind that animal stories are not told in later Sanskrit  simply to amuse, but are overtly instructive and educational, especially for cal low and wayward youth, we can connect the use of these allusions in this hymn  to the singer’s self-description as “a simple man,” incapable of understanding  Indra’s message (vs. 5). Indra is tailoring his instruction to the mental abilities  of his hearer: rather than express himself in the usual mysteries of R̥gvedic high  style (as in the immediately preceding X.27), Indra packages his message in a  series of beast fables. If this reading of the hymn’s general scenario is correct,  then we must assume already for the R̥gvedic period not only the existence of a  body of story literature, of animal fables, but also (more interestingly) a fairly  organized functional role for this literature in an instructional setting, conform
ing to the same model that we find quite a bit later in Indic literature in general.  And this in turn may lead us to reconsider the standard views of the history of  Indian literature and especially the connections between Vedic and Classical  genres.
For further discussion of this hymn, see Jamison (2004a; 2007: 80–83; 2008b).
## 1
[Sacrificer’s wife:] While every other stranger has come here, only my  father-in-law has not come here.
He should eat the roasted grains and he should drink the soma. Well-fed  he should then go home again.
## 2
[Indra:] The sharp-horned bull [=soma] continually bellowing has  mounted to the height (of heaven), upon the expanse of the earth.
In all communities I protect him who, having pressed the soma, fills both  my cheeks.
## 3
[Singer/Sacrificer:] With a stone they press the exhilarating, powerful  soma-drinks for you, Indra. You drink of them.
They cook bulls for you. You eat of them—coming when you are
summoned with nourishment, bounteous one.
## 4
[Indra:] Mark well this (speech) of mine, singer: The rivers carry the  flotsam against their current.
The fox crept up on the lion, his opponent; the jackal sprang on the boar  from out of the underbrush.
## 5
[Singer/Sacrificer:] How shall I mark this (speech) of yours—I, a simple  man, mark the inspired thought of you who are clever and strong?
You who know will declare to us at the proper time toward which half  your chariot-pole is to come to rest, bounteous one.
## 6
[Indra:] Because in this way they grow me strong, higher even than lofty  heaven is my chariot-pole.
Many thousands do I “grind down” all at once, for the begetter begot me  as one without rival.

## 7
[Indra:] Because in this way they begot [/knew] me as strong and  powerful, at every action (calling) “o Indra” (to me,) the bull—the
gods (did this)—
I smashed Vr̥tra with the mace, while exhilarated; I opened up the
enclosure through my greatness for the pious one.
## 8
[Indra:] The gods came; they carried axes; hewing the trees, they  advanced with their clans toward (the ritual ground),
depositing the good wood in the belly [=the hearth(s) of the ritual
fires]. Where there is brushwood [?], they [=flames?] burn it up.
## 9
[Indra:] The hare swallowed the razor coming toward it. I split apart a  rock with an earth clod from afar.
Even a lofty one shall I weaken for a weakling. The calf, swelling up,  will pursue the bull.
## 10
The eagle caught its talon just so, like a lion entrapped into a snare. The buffalo also got trapped, when it was thirsty. The monitor-lizard  plowed this way for him.
## 11
The monitor-lizard will plow this way for those who taunt the brahmins  with their food.
The very same ones eat the released oxen, themselves breaking their
powers, their own bodies.
## 12
But these (others) have become very fortunate by their ritual labors— the ones who urged themselves on at the soma(-pressing) with
their hymns.
Speaking manfully, measure out prizes to us; in heaven you have
established your fame, your name as “hero.”