+++
title = "029"

+++
29 (855)
Indra
Vasukra Aindra
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Shorter than Vasukra’s other two hymns, but no less daunting in the intricacy of  its expression, especially in verse 1, which displays phonological, morphologi cal, and syntactic tricks too numerous and too dense to discuss in detail here.  (See Jamison [forthcoming c].) Suffice it to say that the verse manages to refer,  by indirection and implication, to the five most important gods at the dawn rit ual: Agni, Indra, Vāyu, and the Aśvins, though only Indra is named. (Dawn is  the sole important divinity absent, but she appears in the first pāda of the next  verse.) Besides the common R̥gvedic habit of employing words applicable to two  or more referents, the verse shows in embryo a device prized in later kāvya: that  of allowing a single phonological sequence to be read in two of more different  ways by means of variant word divisions. Add to this an unprecedented syntactic construction, which is also a syntactic pun, and dizziness ensues for the hearer/ reader.
The structure and thematic contents of the hymn are less clear than in X.27 and  28, however. After the first two extremely opaque verses, which appear to treat the  dawn ritual and the divine conjunction of Indra and Agni (and probably of the two  Aśvins), the poet turns his hopes and attention to attracting Indra to show himself  at the sacrifice, to produce an epiphany (see esp. vs. 4), through properly performed  offerings. There are a number of obscurities in these verses as well, especially verse  5, and the lack of a perceptible structure hampers our efforts to clarify them. Much  remains to be excavated from this rich poetic mine.
## 01
Whether he takes pleasure in the wood or not, he [=Agni] has been  installed (as priest) [/been deposited (in the wood)]. The gleaming
praise has waked you two, o bustling ones [=Aśvins, or Agni and
Indra]—
(the praise) in which Indra (took pleasure) on many days (as did) the  Hotar [=Agni]—(each being) the manly one, best man among men,
earth-protector.
## 02
At the forefront of this dawn here and of the later one, might we be at  the manly prancing of you [=Indra], who are the best man of men.
Triśoka [/the three-flamed one (=Agni)] brought a hundred men
here (on the same chariot) with Kutsa—the chariot that will be
victorious.
## 03
Which exhilarating drink is to be enjoyed by you, Indra? As powerful  one, run to my hymns through the doors.
When (will) the vehicle, (that is,) the inspired thoughts, (come) near to  me? I would compel you here to highest generosity with (my offerings  of) food.
## 04
When (will) the brilliance of one such as you (come) to our men, Indra?  With which hymnic vision will you equip yourself? When will you
come to us,
(to be) actually present like an ally, o wide-ranging one, for our
offering—though there could be inspired thoughts at anybody’s food  (offering)?
## 05
As the sun sends (each man) forth to his task, do you send forth, (like a  boat) to the further shore, those who go, each to his own desire, as if  going to the providers of wives,
and those men who seek to empower their many hymns for you,
powerfully born Indra, along with their (offerings of) food.
## 06
The two copious “measures,” heaven and earth, are now well fixed by  your might, by your poetic skill.
Let the ghee-rich pressed soma-drinks be to your liking, let the
honey-drinks be in sweetness for your drinking.

## 07
They poured out a tankard of honey for him, a full one for Indra, for he  is one whose generosity is real.
He has grown strong on the expanse of the earth, the manly one
pre(eminent) through his will and his masculine powers.
## 08
The very powerful Indra has penetrated the battling hosts. The many  (hosts) marshal themselves for him, for his comradeship.
Mount upon the hosts like a chariot that you will spur on with
auspicious benevolence.
Hymns X.30–34 are attributed to Kavaṣa Ailūṣa, though Oldenberg (1888: 234–35)  entertains the possibility that this group should be joined with the Vasukra hymns  that precede on the basis of shared phraseology.