+++
title = "030"

+++
30 (856)
Waters or Apām Napāt
Kavaṣa Ailūṣa
15 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is very ritually determined, and in fact it tracks closely the ritual acts  performed in the classical śrauta ritual at its recitation in the soma sacrifice. In verses  1–3 the Adhvaryu priests are sent to fetch water for the soma-pressing, but first make  an offering to the waters and the Child of the Waters (Apām Napāt). The Adhvaryus  then bring the waters to the sacrificial ground (vss. 4–9), with a reminder that they  (the waters) owe a favor to Indra, the principal drinker of soma, because he freed  them (vs. 7). More praise of the waters follows (vss. 10–12) as they approach the  place of sacrifice. They arrive in verses 13–14, and the pressing can begin in verse 15.
The feminine and enthusiastically yielding nature of the waters (the stem áp being feminine in gender) and their relationship to various masculine forces, the  Adhvaryus (vs. 2), Soma (vss. 5–6), and the gods (vs. 15), are also emphasized.
## 01
Let the course for our sacred formulation go forth to the waters that are  among the gods, as if by the harnessing of mind,
to the great wellspring of Mitra and Varuṇa. I will make the well-twisted  (hymn) subject to that which possesses broad expanse [=waters?].
## 02
O Adhvaryus, since you have become provided with oblations, go to the  eager waters, o eager ones—
(the waters) upon which the ruddy eagle gazes down. Harness the wave  today, o you of skillful hands.
## 03
O Adhvaryus, go to the waters, to the sea. Sacrifice with your oblation to  the Child of the Waters.
He will give you the well-purified wave today. For him press the
honeyed soma, 4. (For him) who shines without kindling wood within the waters, whom  the inspired poets call upon at the ceremonies.
O Child of the Waters, give the honeyed waters by which Indra grows  strong for his heroic deed,
## 05
By which Soma is delighted and becomes excited, like a young blood  with lovely young women.
Go forth to these waters, o Adhvaryu. When you will pour (them) in,  then purify (them) with plants.
## 06
Just in that way young women accede to a young man, when he goes to  them who are eager as he is eager.
They are agreed in mind and they perceive alike—the Adhvaryus, the  Holy Place, and the divine waters.
## 07
He who made wide space for you who were blocked, he who freed you  from the great curse,
to him, to Indra, propel your honeyed wave that exhilarates the gods,  o waters.
## 08
Propel to him the honeyed wave, which is your embryo, o rivers, and is a  fountain of honey—
(the wave) with ghee on its back, worthy of invocation at the
ceremonies. Rich waters, hear my call.
## 09
Rivers, propel the exhilarating wave providing drink to Indra, which  rouses both (races? [=gods and men]),
(the wave) arousing exhilaration, stemming from the uśānā-plant,
born of a cloud, the fountain that spreads widely around the
triple-threaded (sacrifice?).
## 10
Those whirling about in two streams, roving like cattle-raiders in teams, the begetters and masters of existence—the waters grown strong
together sharing the same womb: o seer, now extol them!
## 11
Impel our ceremony by a sacrifice to the gods; impel our sacred
formulation to gain the spoils.
At the yoking of truth unloosen your udder. Grant us attentive hearing,  o waters.
## 12
O rich waters, because you hold sway over the good, and you bring  favorable resolve and the immortal (soma?),
and you are masters of wealth that brings good progeny, let Sarasvatī establish this vital energy for the singer.
## 13
As the waters have just appeared in front—on their way here, bringing  ghee, milk, and honey,
allying in mind with the Adhvaryus, bringing the well-pressed soma
to Indra—
## 14
They have now arrived here, rich and bringing spoils for the living. O  Adhvaryus, comrades, make them take their seats;
set these down on the ritual grass, you (comrades) in soma, these who  are allied with the Child of the Waters.1424 X.31
## 15
The eager waters have come here to this ritual grass. Seeking the gods,  they have taken their seats at the ceremony.
Adhvaryus, press the soma for Indra. The sacrifice to the gods has
become easy for you to master.