+++
title = "032"

+++
32 (858) Indra
Kavaṣa Ailūṣa
9 verses: jagatī 1–5, triṣṭubh 6–9
Although the Anukramaṇī assigns this hymn to Indra, in fact the hymn falls into  two separate parts, defined by both meter and content. The first five verses in jagatī are indeed Indra’s, but the last four verses (6–9) in triṣṭubh are more appropriate to  Agni. However, these two parts fit together into a larger thematic whole. The verses dedicated to Indra follow to some degree a conventional “journey”  hymn trajectory: Indra’s pair of horses bring him to the sacrifice in verse 1, with the  journey further described in verse 2. Verse 4 appears to concern the focal point of  the sacrifice, the sacrificial ground or, more precisely, the fire altar, to which all the  sacrificial participants and substances make their way. A two-way journey is fore
seen in verse 5, with Soma (if this identification is correct) on his way to the gods,  and Indra and companion gods on the way to the sacrifice.
Several features disturb this simplistic sketch of the hymn. First, the journey is  also conceived of as a wedding journey; in addition to verse 3 (to be discussed) see  especially the “wooers” in verse 1 and the bridal procession in verse 4. Moreover, the  middle verse of this portion of the hymn, verse 3, has a pronounced omphalos char
acter. It announces itself as a wonder, and then produces three striking paradoxes: the  son who knows his parents’ birth (pāda b), the wife who conveys her husband on the  bridal journey (pāda c), and the same role reversal seen from the husband’s point of  view, a bridal procession made for the man (pāda d). It is difficult to know exactly what  to make of this, but it appears that Indra’s journey to the sacrifice is being imagined as  the wedding journey of a bride. The hyper-virile Indra is in some sense filling the pas
sive role of bride—a fine conceit, though one that the poet does not over-emphasize. The focus on the “seat” in verse 4, quite possibly the hearth, as well as the first  paradox of verse 3, the son who knows his parents’ birth, a typical Agni trope, turn  our attention to that god in the second part of the hymn. The installation and kin dling of the ritual fire are the subject, and the mythic model is the well-known tale of  Agni’s flight, concealment in the waters, and recovery (vs. 6ab). The narrator owes his  knowledge of this to Indra (6cd); in verse 7 he makes a general statement about the  value of instruction for the uninitiated. This short sequence is reminiscent of nearby  X.28, in which Indra acts as the instructor of the callow. Verse 8 returns to Agni and  describes the kindling of a dormant fire. The enigmatic verse 9 presents itself as a  sort of reverse dānastuti, though with the identity of the speakers being somewhat  unclear.
## 1
The two (horses) are come, those in the power of the one being conjured  up by our insights [=Indra]—(they are come) to the wooers taking
their seats in front along with (the other) wooers.
Indra will find pleasure in both (offerings) of ours when he will take  cognizance of the soma-stalk.
## 2
O much-praised Indra, you drive across the heavenly luminous realms  and across the earthly ones through the airy space.
Those who convey you in an instant right up to the ceremonies, let them  vanquish the ungenerous ones who chatter.
## 3
Just this will appear to me as more wondrous than any wonder: that the  son knows by heart the birth of his parents.
The wife conveys the husband amid the uproar; just for the man an
auspicious bridal procession has been made ready.

## 4
Just this dear seat do I ponder, to which the milk-cows will direct (their  journey) like a bridal procession,
as will the foremost mother of the flock, a wise counselor, and the
sevenfold people of the music.
## 5
Seeking the gods (he [=Soma?]) has left a track on his way toward you.  The one who alone surpasses [=Indra] drives with the Rudras,
or among the immortals among whom old age is for giving. Pour honey  all around for your helpers.
## 6
The protector of the commandments of the gods has announced to me  that the one who was hidden in the waters [=Agni] is (now) being
installed.
Because knowing Indra kept you in his sights, instructed by him have  I come here, o Agni.
## 7
Because the one not knowing the field asked the field-knower, he goes  forth, instructed by the field-knower—
this, truly, is the good of instruction—and he finds the straight course. 8. Just today did he [=Agni] breathe. He waited (all) these days; covered  over, he sucked his mother’s udder.
Old age has reached the youth. No (longer) angry, the good one has
become of favorable mind.
## 9
Might we do these auspicious things in giving bounties, o wooden vessel,  o Kuruśravaṇa.
Let this be a gift just for you, bounteous ones, and this soma here, which  I bear in my heart.