+++
title = "033"

+++
33 (859) Lament of a Singer [Anukramaṇı: All Gods 1, Indra ̄ 2–3, Dānastuti of Kurusravan ́ ̣a Trāsadasyava 4–5, Upamasravas ́ Mitrātithiputra 6–9]
Kavaṣa Ailūṣa
9 verses: triṣṭubh 1, br̥hatī 2, satobr̥hatī 3, gāyatrī 4–9
A poignant yet proud 1st-person lament of a poet whose patron has died, the hymn  also serves as a sort of job application to his erstwhile patron’s son. The progress of  the poem is marked by changes in meter. In the first verse the poet remembers his for mer privileged position and, in its last pāda, the sudden advent of disaster. The next  two verses (a pragātha) describes his present miserable state (in terms found also in  part in I.105.8) and begs Indra for help. In the last six verses, in gāyatrī, the poet first  recalls how he “chose” (a telling expression) his former patron Kuruśravaṇa (vss. 4–6).  He then introduces himself to the son, Upamaśravas (vs. 7), but returns in the final  two verses (8–9) to his helpless sorrow over the death of his patron and companion. 1. The advance teams of the peoples hitched me up in front. As always,  I carried Pūṣan within.
All the gods then guarded me. There was a shout, “The one of bad
command has come.”
## 2
They scorch me all about, like cowives, (like ailing) ribs.
Inattention, nakedness, and exhaustion oppress me. Like a bird, my
attention keeps fluttering here and there.
## 3
Like mice their tails, the cares gnaw at me, your praiser, o you of a  hundred resolves.
At once show mercy to us, bounteous Indra, and become like a
father to us.
## 4
I chose Kuruśravaṇa of Trasadasyu’s line as my king,
most liberal to his cantors—I a seer—
## 5
(Saying,) “He whose three tawny (horses) convey me on his chariot along  the straight way—
I shall praise him at a (sacrifice) with a priestly gift of a thousand
(cows)”—
## 6
(I chose) the father of Upamaśravas for whom there were sweet songs, delightful like a dwelling place for one at home in it.
## 7
Learn, o Upamaśravas, his son, o grandson of Mitrāthiti:
I am the celebrant of your father.
## 8
If I could be the master of immortals or of mortals,
my bounteous patron would still live.
## 9
No one lives beyond the commandment of the gods, even one with a  hundred selves.
And thus have I turned away from my yokemate.