+++
title = "034"

+++
34 (860)
Gambler
Kavaṣa Ailūṣa or Akṣa Maujavant
14 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 7
One of the most famous, most translated, and most anthologized hymns in the  R̥gveda, this lively and vivid lament of the gambler depicts the sad lot of a man  addicted to dicing but unsuccessful at it. This hapless speaker describes the intoxi cation that grips him when he is playing or even contemplating play and that leaves  him helpless to resist (vss. 1, 5–9), as well as the toll this compulsion takes on his  personal life and the self-pity this evokes in him (vss. 2–4, 10–11). At the end of the  hymn the gambler vows to renounce play (vs. 12), and the god Savitar restores him  to his former position (vs. 13). The final verse (14) is the gambler’s address to the  dice, urging them to leave him alone and find another victim. This portion of the

hymn has the form of a ritual expiation, embodied especially in the last words of  12d, in which the gambler avows the truth of his speech.
Dicing was an important cultural feature of ancient India, especially associ ated with kings and the ruling class. Already in middle Vedic sacrifice, in the  Rājasūya, the ritual of the consecration of the king, there is a ritual dicing  match, rigged so that the king-to-be wins. Of course, the whole of the great epic,  the Mahābhārata, is determined by the outcome of the dicing match between  Yudhiṣṭhira and his cousins: Yudhiṣṭhira gambles away his kingdom, his broth ers, his wife, and himself and must fight to regain his kingship. The much-loved  story of Nala and Damayantī also involves the gambling away of a kingdom,  this time by Nala. And the dharma texts consider gambling, along with hunting  and womanizing, to be a characteristic pursuit—and vice—of kings (cf. Mānava  Dharma Śāstra VII.47, 50; for condemnation of gambling in general see, e.g.,  MDŚ IX.220–28).
Ancient Indian dicing was quite different from the game that the word con jures up in the modern mind, and much scholarship has been devoted to figur ing out what the play actually consisted of (see, e.g., Lüders 1907; Falk 1986).  It seems to have involved a large quantity of a particular kind of nut (vibhīdaka /vibhītaka) as the dice; these had no markings on them. They were thrown into  a hollow on the ground, and the players took turns pulling out a handful. The  best “hand” was one divisible by four, and the other hands were ranked accord ing to how many nuts were left over after a division by four, with a single leftover  nut being the worst (see vs. 2c). For details, see Falk (1986: 73–133). Although  it may be hard for us to imagine the passions enflamed by this kind of long  division, our own games of chance probably will not stand up to scrutiny some  millennia in the future.
The monologue form found here is almost unprecedented in the R̥gveda, and  the shifting play of emotions—guilty excitement, tender remembrance of his  past life and family, scorn for his own weakness and the disgust he arouses in  others, bitter anger at the inanimate dice that brought him low, to which he  ascribes agency and malign intention and for which he still longs—is psychologi
cally convincing and very moving. Showing our own biases, we might proudly  deem it quite “modern.”
## 1
The dangling (nuts) of the lofty (tree) exhilarate me, the ones born in a  windy place, constantly whirling in the gaming hollow.
Like a draught of soma from Mt. Mūjavant, the wakeful vibhīdaka nut  has pleased me.
## 2
She did not oppose me, nor did she get angry; she was gracious to my  comrades and to me.
I, on account of one die too many, have pushed away my avowed wife. 3. Her mother-in-law [=my mother] hates me; my wife pushes me away.  A man in distress finds no one to pity him. “I find no more use for a gambler than for an old nag up for sale,” (so  they say).
## 4
Others fondle the wife of a man whose possessions the die with eyes on  the prize has hungered for.
Father, mother, brothers say about him, “We do not know him; lead  him away bound.”
## 5
When I resolve, “I will not play with them,” I am bereft of my
comrades, who go off (without me).
And as soon as, scattered down, the brown (dice) have raised their
voice, I just go to their appointed place, like a girl with a lover.
## 6
The gambler goes to the hall of play asking himself, “will I win?”  puffing himself up with “I will win!”
The dice run counter to his desire, conferring the winning throws on his  opponent.
## 7
They are just “dice”—but hooking, goading, debasing, scorching,  seeking to scorch,
giving (temporarily) like a child, then in turn slapping down the victor,  infused with honey, with power over the gambler.
## 8
The troop of them plays, three times fifty strong. Like god Savitar’s,  their ordinances hold true.
Even to the battle fury of the mighty they do not bow; even the king  makes his bow to them.
## 9
Downward they roll; up above they ricochet. Lacking hands, they  overpower the man with hands.
Heavenly coals scattered down in the gaming hollow, though they are  cold they burn up the heart.
## 10
The wife of the gambler, abandoned, is scorched, and the mother of the  child wandering who knows where.
In debt, fearful, seeking money, he approaches by night the house of  others.
## 11
It scorched the gambler to see a woman—the wife and well-ordered  home of others.
Since early in the day he hitched up his brown horses [=dice], the “little  bullock” fell [=left off gambling and sought shelter] (only) at the end  of the fire [=late at night].
## 12
[Gambler:] He who has become the general of your great throng, the  foremost king of the troop,
to him I put forth my ten (fingers): “I withhold no money. This truth  I speak.”
## 13
[Savitar:] “Don’t keep playing with dice; just plow your own plowland.  Be content in your possessions, thinking them much.
There are your cows, o gambler, there your wife.” In this way does
Savitar here, protector of the stranger, watch out for me.

## 14
[To all the dice:] Make alliance (with us) now; have pity on us. Do not  conjure against us boldly with your terrible (mind/eye).
Let your battle fury now settle down, your hostility. Let another now be  in the toils of the brown ones.
The next four hymns (35–38) form a group, though they are not all attributed to the  same author (see Oldenberg 1888: 229 n. 2, 235). The first two, to the All Gods, are  attributed to Luśa Dhānāka, while the other two were given fanciful poets’ names  derived from the contents of the hymn itself:  37 Abhitapas Saurya (“Scorching  Heat, son of the Sun”) and 38 Indra Muṣkavant (“Indra, possessing testicles”).