+++
title = "035"

+++
35 (861) All Gods
Luśa Dhānāka
14 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 13–14
This is primarily a morning hymn, calling especially on the gods associated with  the early morning sacrifice for aid and protection: the Sun, the Dawn, Agni, Indra,  the Aśvins, as well as Heaven and Earth. The ten interior verses (3–12) have a pāda length refrain dedicated to the kindled ritual fire, and the activities of Dawn occupy  much of the hymn (esp. vss. 3–6). The hymn opens out toward its end, with special  focus on the Ādityas (vss. 9, 11–12), but the later prominence of the Ādityas has  been prepared by mention of “blamelessness” in earlier verses (2–3) and by the  “proclamation of truth” in verse 8. This truth, formulated in 8c, is simply that “the  Sun, as spy,” rises every day, but we know from elsewhere in the R̥gveda (nearby X.37  belonging to the same poetic group [see discussion there], as well as, e.g., VII.62.2,  VII.63.1) that the Sun is the eye of the Ādityas, especially Mitra and Varuṇa, who  attests to the innocence or guilt of the men whom he sees as he rises. Thus this brief  truth formulation encapsulates our knowledge that our place in the moral order is  mediated through the cosmic order of the daily rhythm of sunrise.
## 1
They have awakened—these fires accompanied by Indra, bringing light at  the early brightenings of the dawn.
Let great Heaven and Earth take cognizance of our work. Today we
choose the help of the gods.
## 2
We choose the help of Heaven and Earth. The Mother Rivers, the  Mountains filled with (soma-)reeds,
the Sun, the Dawn we beseech for blamelessness. Let Soma, being
pressed, make good for us today.
## 3
Heaven and Earth—let the two great mothers protect us, who are  blameless, for our welfare. Let Dawn, dawning, thrust away evil. – We beseech Agni, when he is  kindled, for well-being.
## 4
This foremost ruddy one here, *this lovely goddess—let her, the rich  lady, dawn richly for our gain.
In the distance (from us) we would set the fury of the one who is bad to  meet. – We beseech Agni, when he is kindled, for well-being.
## 5
Those who stretch forth with the rays of the sun, bringing light at the  early brightenings of the dawn,
do you dawn good things widely today for our fame. – We beseech
Agni, when he is kindled, for well-being.
## 6
Let the dawns without affliction attend upon us; let the fires rear up  loftily with their light.
Let the Aśvins hitch up their thrusting chariot. – We beseech Agni,
when he is kindled, for well-being.
## 7
The best portion, worthy to be chosen, impel to us today, o Savitar, for  you are a conferrer of treasure.
I call on her, the begetter of wealth, on the Holy Place. – We beseech  Agni, when he is kindled, for well-being.
## 8
Let this proclamation of truth carry me through, the one that as sons  of Manu we have thought up for the gods:
“Through all the ruddy (dawns) the Sun, as spy, (always) goes up.”
– We beseech Agni, when he is kindled, for well-being.
## 9
Today at the strewing of the ritual grass, at the yoking of the pressing  stones we beg for lack of hatred and for the realization of our
thought.
Standing in the shelter of the Ādityas, you are astir. – We beseech Agni,  when he is kindled, for well-being.
## 10
Here is our ritual grass for the joint revelry. I reverently invoke the gods  lofty in heaven. I will make the seven Hotars sit (on the ritual grass).
(We beseech) Indra, Mitra, Varuṇa, and Bhaga, for our gain. – We
beseech Agni, when he is kindled, for well-being.
## 11
Ādityas, come here for our wholeness; aid our sacrifice for us to grow  strong, you who take pleasure together.
(We beseech) Br̥haspati, Pūṣan, the Aśvins, Bhaga. – We beseech Agni,  when he is kindled, for well-being.
## 12
O gods, Ādityas, extend to us this shelter good to proclaim, of good  support, protective of men,
for our livestock, for our kith and kin to live. – We beseech Agni, when  he is kindled, for well-being.
## 13
Let all the Maruts today all (be there) with aid, let all the kindled fires  be (there with aid).
Let all the gods come here to us with help; let all wealth, (every) prize  be for us.1434 X.36
## 14
One whom you help, o gods, at the winning of prizes, one whom you  safeguard, one whom you carry across narrow straits,
one who knows no fear under your protection—may we be (all) those,  to pursue the gods, powerful ones.