+++
title = "036"

+++
36 (862) All Gods
Luśa Dhānāka
14 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 13–14
This hymn is a clear companion piece to the preceding one, X.35. Both hymns con sist of fourteen verses, all jagatī except the last two in triṣṭubh. Both have a refrain,  and the refrain of X.36 (vss. 2–12) is a minor variant of the last pāda of the first verse  of X.35. And there is some shared vocabulary. However, X.36 is not tied closely to  the morning sacrifice, as X.35 is. The range of gods invoked in X.36 is wider than  those in X.35, although there is a distinct Ādityan cast here as well (see vss. 1, 3–4,  12–13). The hymn seems somewhat loosely and inattentively constructed.
## 1
Dawn and Night, lofty, well-ornamented—Heaven and Earth, Varuṇa,  Mitra, Aryaman—
Indra I invoke, the Maruts, the Mountains, the Waters, the Ādityas,
Heaven and Earth, the Waters, the Sun.
## 2
Both Heaven and Earth—let those two discerning truthful ones guard us  from narrow straits, from harm.
Let Dissolution, bad to meet, not gain mastery over us. – This help of  the gods we choose today.
## 3
Let Aditi protect us from every narrow strait—the mother of Mitra and  of Varuṇa the wealthy.
Might we attain sun-filled light that keeps the wolf away. – This help of  the gods we choose today.
## 4
Let the pressing stone as it speaks drive away demonic forces: the bad  dream, dissolution, every devourer.
Might we attain the Ādityan shelter and that of the Maruts. – This help  of the gods we choose today.
## 5
Let Indra sit here on the ritual grass; let the refreshing drink swell. Let  Br̥haspati the chanter chant along with the melodies.
We would compose a thought possessing good signs for our life. – This  help of the gods we choose today.
## 6
O Aśvins, make our sacrifice heaven-touching and of lively ceremony, to  seek favor—
a sacrifice with its reins pointed eastward, bepoured with ghee. – This  help of the gods we choose today. 7. I invoke the Marutian flock, (which is) good to invoke, (which is) pure,  high, luck itself—for comradeship.
Might we acquire the thriving of wealth in order to receive good
fame. – This help of the gods we choose today.
## 8
We will bring (forward) the one swollen with the moisture of the waters,  providing riches for the living, pursuing the gods, good to invoke, the  glory of the ceremony.
Soma, destined for Indra, with his good reins would we hold fast.
– This help of the gods we choose today.
## 9
May we win this through easy winning with winners—we living and  with living sons, blameless.
The haters of the sacred formulation should take their own
transgression off in all directions. – This help of the gods we
choose today.
## 10
You who are worthy of the sacrifice of Manu, listen: what we beseech  you for, gods, give that—
resolve that brings victory, glory accompanied by wealth and heroes.  – This help of the gods we choose today.
## 11
A great thing of the great ones we choose today: the help of the lofty  gods without assault,
so that we may attain the good born of heroes. – This help of the gods  we choose today.
## 12
In the shelter of great Agni while he is being kindled (may we be)  blameless to Mitra and Varuṇa for our well-being;
may we be under the best impulsion of Savitar. – This help of the gods  we choose today.
## 13
All (you) Gods who are under the commandment of Savitar, whose  impulsion is real, and of Mitra and Varuṇa—
establish well-portioned property in heroes and cows, brilliant wealth  for us.
## 14
Savitar from behind, Savitar from in front, Savitar from above, Savitar  from below—
let Savitar impel wholeness to us; let Savitar bestow on us a long
lifetime.