+++
title = "037"

+++
37 (863)
Sūrya
Abhitapas Saurya
12 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 10
Some of the themes sketched in X.35 are developed in this hymn into a more satis fyingly shaped composition. Though the hymns are not ascribed to the same poet,

the name of the supposed author of X.37, Abhitapas Saurya (“Scorching Heat, son  of the Sun”), is an artificial one, derived from the hymn’s subject matter. In X.35 the daily rising of the sun, expressed as a brief truth formulation  (X.35.8), was implicitly connected with the poet’s desire for “blamelessness” and for  the protection of the Ādityas, but these themes were scattered through the hymn,  which focused primarily on the early-morning sacrifice and the various gods associ ated with it. Here the Sun is primary, and his role as the eye of Mitra and Varuṇa,  and thus as the observer of mortals’ guilt or blamelessness, is announced at the  beginning (vs. 1a), and an expanded version of the truth formulation of X.35.8 is  found in the second verse.
The benefits the Sun brings to us and the regularity of his return form the sub ject of the middle part of the hymn. The connection between our moral behavior  and the Sun’s daily round is asserted again toward the end of the hymn (vs. 9),  which concludes (vs. 12) with a general expiation for faults unwittingly committed  and a scapegoating of our enemies.
## 1
Homage to the eye of Mitra and Varuṇa. Do great service to this truth  [=hymn] for the god.
To the one seen from afar, the signal born of the gods, the son of heaven,  to the Sun—recite!
## 2
Let this expression of reality protect me around on all sides, where(ver)  Heaven (and Earth) and the days will extend:
“Every other thing that stirs settles down. But always the waters (are in  motion), always the Sun rises.”
## 3
No godless one seeks the upper hand against you early in the day, when  you drive your chariot with its flying steeds.
The one (wheel) rolls eastward along the dusky realm; with the other  one, the light, you drive upward, o Sun.
## 4
The light with which you thrust away the darkness, o Sun, and the  radiance with which you rouse up every moving creature,
with that drive away from us every want of nourishment, every lack of  oblation, drive away disease, away the bad dream.
## 5
For impelled forth, you guard the commandment for all, when not being  angry you proceed upward following your own customs.
When today we will appeal to you, o Sun, the gods should give assent to  our intention.
## 6
This call of ours let Heaven and Earth, this speech of ours let the waters,  Indra, and the Maruts hear.
Let us not be in want of the sight of the Sun. Living happily may we  attain old age.
## 7
Always may we—of good mind, of good eye, rich in offspring, without  disease, without blame—
living a long time look upon you rising every day, o Sun who have
Mitra’s might. 8. Upon you, o wide-gazing one, bringing great light, luminous, a joy to  every eye,
mounting from the surface of lofty (heaven)—may we, living, look
upon (you), o Sun.
## 9
You at whose signal all creatures both go forth and settle down
at night—
by reason of our blamelessness, o golden-haired Sun, rise up with ever  better (fortune) for us day after day.
## 10
Be luck for us with your eye, luck for us by day, luck with your radiance,  luck in the cold, luck in the heat,
so that there will be luck on the road, luck at home. This brilliant
wealth establish (for us), o Sun.
## 11
To both our breeds, o gods, to the two-footed and the four-footed,  extend shelter.
Eating, drinking, drawing nourishment, satiated: establish for us this  luck and lifetime without flaw.
## 12
Whatever we have done to you, o gods, with our tongue or through  absence of mind, whatever grave (offense) angering the gods,
on the ungenerous one who brings misfortune to us, on him set down  this offense, o good ones.