+++
title = "038"

+++
38 (864) Indra
Indra Muṣkavant
5 verses: jagatī
The fanciful name of the poet in the Anukramaṇī (“Indra possessing testicles”)  is extracted from the final pāda of the poem (5d); the hymn clearly belongs with  the other compositions of Luśa (X.35–38). It is a martial hymn, calling on Indra  to fight on our side in pitched battles, vanquishing our enemies and sharing the  booty he acquires. The style is lively and at times slangy, especially in the final verse,  with its surprise ending: depicted as all powerful in the rest of the hymn, Indra is  revealed to be not entirely free, but in some unspecified thrall to Kutsa (otherwise  a client of Indra’s in the R̥gveda), and the poet taunts Indra to break the bonds.
## 1
At this glorious battle charge, Indra, at the vehement battle cry, help us  to win,
when at the winning of cattle, when the bespangled (warriors) have been  emboldened, the missiles fly in all directions at the time to conquer
superior men.
## 2
Uncover for us at our seat wealth in livestock, flooding with cows, worthy  of fame, o Indra.
May we share the fat with you when you win, able one. As we want it,  make it so, good one.

## 3
Whatever godless one, Dāsa or Ārya, will have in view to fight us, o  much-praised Indra—
let those rivals be easy to conquer for you along with us. With you may  we vanquish them in the clash.
## 4
Who is to be invoked by the few and who by the many, who finds wide  space in close quarters at the time to conquer superior men,
him—the winner in the devouring (battle) today, the famous superior  man—Indra may we make inclined toward us for help.
## 5
For I have heard of you, Indra, as tightly wound, unyielding, spurring on  (even) the feeble, o bull.
Release yourself from Kutsa! Come here! Will such a one as you stay tied  by the balls?
From X.39 through X.56 the hymns are arranged in groups of three, each trio gener ally ascribed to the same poet by the Anukramaṇī. See Oldenberg (1888: 236). The next three hymns, dedicated to the Aśvins, are attributed to a female poet  Ghoṣā (X.39–40) and her son (X.41). Ghoṣā herself bears the patronymic Kākṣīvatī “daughter/descendant of Kakṣīvant,” the exceptionally artful poet of I.116–126,  who is especially devoted to the Aśvins:  five of his eleven hymns are dedicated  to them (I.116–120). Indeed the phraseology and mythological references of the  Ghoṣā hymns share much with Kakṣīvant’s Aśvin hymns, and whether we accept  the Anukramaṇī’s ascription of the hymns to a woman and her son (the latter iden tified by the metronymic Ghauṣeya), there can be no doubt that these hymns have  a remarkably close relationship to the Kakṣīvant hymns in Maṇḍala I. It is worth  remembering that Kakṣīvant shows a particular interest in women and marriage in  his hymns.
All three of the Ghoṣā hymns begin with a verse invoking the Aśvins’ chariot, but  they diverge significantly thereafter. The final hymn (X.41) is a brief (three-verse)  pendant to the series, straightforwardly describing the Aśvins’ early-morning jour ney to the sacrifice and urging them to come to our offering in preference to other  possible ones. The other two are more complex, with significant involvement of an  apparent woman’s voice, especially in X.40, which focuses on marriage.