+++
title = "039"

+++
39 (865) Aśvins
Ghoṣā Kākṣīvatī
14 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 13
This first hymn in the series is in most ways a standard Aśvin hymn, especially in the  Kakṣīvant mode. After the first verse devoted to the chariot and a plea to the Aśvins  for lavish gifts (vs. 2), the hymn settles into the familiar pattern of many Aśvin  hymns, in a list form briefly mentioning good deeds performed and benevolent treatment meted out by those two gods. The first catalogue is fairly brief, consisting  of the two verses 3–4, with a formulaic summary (“I shall proclaim your ancient  heroic deeds...”) in verse 5. The poet promises to make the Aśvins “new” (5c), just  as they famously made Cyavāna young again (4ab). A second longer catalogue of  deeds, more formally constructed, occupies verses 7–11.
But these lists are interrupted (in vs. 6) by a surprising, 1st-person intrusion: a  woman (the feminine pronoun iyám opens the verse and makes the gender of the  speaker unmistakable) calls upon the Aśvins and begs them to serve as her parents  and aid her in her plight, since she lacks friends and relations. The reason for her  distress is not given, but the traditional view that she is asking them to find her a hus
band seems reasonable, given that an orphaned girl would have no marital prospects  and would be quite vulnerable to mistreatment. Her verse closely echoes the first verse  of the hymn: she uses the same verb “invoke” and uses a paternal image like that in  verse 1d.
This heartrending verse seems to have no sequel in the hymn. Although it is  not impossible that the following catalogue verses are also her speech, it seems  unlikely because of their strict conformity to Aśvin-hymn diction. While it is  certainly true that the next verses mention several females helped by the Aśvins  (the wife for Vimada, the aid given to Vadhrimatī and to Puraṃdhi, vs. 7; to  Viśpalā in vs. 8), males are just as often recipients of their favor in those verses,  and the most striking female figure, the spinster growing old in her parents’  house in verse 3, who is identified with the woman in verse 6 and indeed with  Ghoṣā by many commentators, is not in a verse that our female speaker could  be saying.
The female speaker in this hymn foreshadows and complements the female  speaker, explicitly identified as Ghoṣā, in the next hymn (X.40.5–8), and the speaker  in this hymn is often said to be that same Ghoṣā. However, in the opinion of one of  us (SWJ) this is quite unlikely because our speaker bemoans her lack of kin, while  Ghoṣā in X.40.5 is said to be a king’s daughter. Instead, the two female speakers  seem meant to contrast with each other and to reflect extreme poles of women’s sta
tus in a marital context. The other of us (JPB) sees the speaker’s lament in 39.6 that  she has no friends or relatives as a metaphorical and hyperbolic characterization of  her unhappy life rather than a literal description of it. In that case the speaker in  X.39 could the woman called Ghoṣā in X.40.
Another, enigmatic reference to a woman is found in verse 11, which ends the cat alogue. The verse declares that no trouble afflicts a man if the Aśvins put his chariot  and his wife (pátnī) “in front.” What exactly is meant here is unclear, but we sug gest that this is yet another fleeting reference to the introduction of the Sacrificer’s  Wife (pátnī) into the ritual in late R̥gveda; the chariot and the wife leading the  way remind us of the Mudgala/Mudgalānī hymn (X.102), in which Mudgala’s wife,  Mudgalānī, serves as successful charioteer in a chariot race—a hymn we have also  interpreted as a reference to the new ritual institution of the Sacrificer’s Wife. (For  further discussion, see the introduction to X.102.)

The hymn ends with a return to the Aśvins’ chariot drive (vs. 13), with a few more  incidental good deeds, and a summary verse announcing our own praise hymn (vs. 14).
## 1
Your earth-encircling, smooth-rolling chariot, to be invoked at evening  and at the dawns by the man who offers oblation—
that (chariot) of yours do we now invoke, (we) as the latest of those
who constantly do so—the (chariot) good to invoke like the name of  one’s father.
## 2
Stimulate liberal giving; swell our insightful thoughts; rouse
profusions—we are eager for that.
Make us a glorious portion, o Aśvins; make it dear to our generous
patrons like soma.
## 3
You become good fortune even for the woman growing old at home,  the helpers even of the one lacking speed, even of the one furthest
behind.
Even of the blind man, o Nāsatyas, even of the starving, even of the
broken—they say just you are their healers.
## 4
You two fashioned old Cyavāna, like a chariot, into a youth again, (for  him) to move about.
You pulled the son of Tugra out from the waters. All these (deeds) of  yours are to be proclaimed at the pressings.
## 5
I shall proclaim your ancient heroic deeds before the people. And you  were also healers, embodiments of joy.
Now we shall make you new (for you) to help us, o Nāsatyas, so that  this stranger will place his trust (in us?).
## 6
[A woman:] “It’s I who invoked you: hear me, o Aśvins. Like parents for  their son, do your best for me.
I am without friends, without kin, without blood relatives, and
heedless: rescue me in the face of this shame.”
## 7
You two with your chariot carried down to Vimada the sleek maiden of  Purumitra (to be his wife).
You two came to the call of Vadhrimatī. You two made an easy birth  for Puraṃdhi.
## 8
You two made youthful vigor again for the inspired poet Kali, who was  approaching old age.
You two dug Vandana out from the antelope snare. You two in an
instant made Viśpalā go.
## 9
You two raised up Rebha, set in hiding and already dead, o bullish Aśvins. You two made the earth-cleft and the heated (pot) comfortable for Atri,  for Saptavadhri.
## 10
You two gave to Pedu a white horse, a prizewinner with nine and ninety  prizes, o Aśvins,
(a horse) to be celebrated, one setting its comrades to running, to be
invoked by men like good fortune, and the embodiment of joy. 11. O you two kings and Aditi—not from anywhere does distress or  difficulty or fear reach him
for whom you arrange that his chariot, along with his wife, will be in  front, o Aśvins good to invoke, you who follow the course of the
Rudras [=Maruts].
## 12
Drive here with your chariot swifter than thought, which the R̥bhus  made for you, o Aśvins,
and at whose hitching up the Daughter of Heaven [=Dawn] is born and  both bright-lit day halves of Vivasvant.
## 13
You drove your course with your victorious (chariot) through the  mountain. You made the milk-cow swell for Śayu, o Aśvins.
With your powers you two freed the quail, which had been swallowed,  even from within the mouth of the wolf.
## 14
We have made this praise song for you, o Aśvins. We have fashioned it,  like the Bhr̥gus a chariot.
We have clasped it to ourselves like a dashing youth a maiden, holding  it close like our own son who continues our lineage.