+++
title = "042"

+++
42 (868)
Indra
Krṣ̥ na Āṅgirasa
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The usual mutually beneficial relationship between Indra, giver of bounties and  aid in battle, and the singer/sacrificer offering poems and oblations in exchange is  the theme of this hymn. However, the hymn is scarcely run-of-the-mill, for the poet  has captured the relationship in a series of deftly fashioned images, and the balance  between giving god and offering mortals is maintained throughout.
## 01
Like an archer in ambush who shoots farther, like a busy attendant,  bring forth the praise song for him.
With your speech, o inspired poets, surpass the speech of the stranger.  Bring Indra to rest at our soma, o singer.

## 02
Try to entice your comrade here, (like) a cow with milking. Singer,  awaken Indra (like) a lover.
Bestir the champion to the giving of his bounty, like a full bucket  overflowing with goods.
## 03
Do they not call you the benefactor, bounteous one? Sharpen me: I hear  that you are the sharpening.
Let my insight be profitable, able one. Bring Bhaga, the goods-finder,  here to us, Indra.
## 04
The peoples, taking their stand in conflict together, separately call upon  you in the struggle for “what’s mine.”
Whoever offers an oblation makes (you) his yokemate here: the
champion wants no fellowship with a non-presser.
## 05
Whoever, providing a pleasing offering, presses for him sharp soma  drops, ample like streaming wealth (on the hoof),
for him (Indra) makes a team of his rivals, easily spurred, easily goaded,  in the early morning of the day. He smashes the obstacle [/Vr̥tra]. 6. Indra, upon whom we have set our laud, the bounteous one who has  fixed his desire upon us—
let his rival, though he is far away, take fright, and let the peoples’  brilliant things bow down to him.
## 07
Thrust the rival far away into the distance with that mighty śamba-pole  of yours, o you who are much invoked.
Set (a mass of) barley and cattle on us, Indra. For the singer, make his  insight possessed of prizes as its ornaments.
## 08
Indra, within whom the bullish pressings, the sharp soma drops, have  gone, ample to the end—
the bounteous one will certainly not hold back his giving. He carries  down much of value to the presser.
## 09
And having overplayed his hand, he will win the jackpot, when the  (gambler) with the best throw pulls out the perfect (“hand” of dice)  at the right time.
Whoever has desire for the gods, he does not withhold the stakes; just  him does the autonomous one [=Indra] unite with wealth.
## 10
With cows we would overcome neglect that goes ill, and with barley we  would overcome all hunger, o you who are much invoked.
With our kings and our community might we be the first to win the  stakes.
## 11
Let Indra, lord of the formulation, protect us all around, from behind  and from above and from below, from him who wishes ill—
from in front and from the middle. Let him, as comrade, create wide  space for his comrades.