+++
title = "043"

+++
43 (869)
Indra
Krṣ̥ ṇa Āṅgirasa
11 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 10–11
This second of Kr̥ṣṇa Āṅgirasa’s three eleven-verse Indra hymns has very clear ties  to the previous one, X.42. They share the last two verses (10–11), as well as lexicon  and phraseology. Yet the two hymns are thematically distinct, and X.43 lacks the  carefully balanced reciprocity of X.42. The focus here is on liquids—on nourishing  streams of water (vss. 3, 6–8) as well as on soma (vss. 2, 4, 6–8)—and on finding  the sun or the light (vss. 1, 4, 5, 8). These themes together evoke the triumphant  progress of the Ārya, conquering rivers and finding sunlit space, which is mythically  embodied in Indra’s release of the waters confined by Vr̥tra indirectly reflected in  verse 8b. This recourse to the mythic model accounts for the references to Manu,  the primal Ārya sacrificer (vss. 4, 8).
One can point to a nice index of the different uses even shared elements are put  to in the two hymns X.42 and X.43: identical or almost identical phrases assign  roles to exactly opposite personnel. Thus, the phrase “fix desire on someone” (√śri  kā́mam locative) is found in both X.42.6b and X.43.2b; in the former Indra has  fixed his desire on us, while in the latter I have fixed my desire on Indra. Similarly, in  the elaborate gambling simile found almost identically in X.42.9abc and X.43.5ab it  is the mortal who is the subject in X.42 and Indra in X.43.
## 01
My thoughts—sun-finding, all directed to a single goal, eager—have  bellowed to Indra.
They embrace him as wives do their husband, embrace the bounteous  one like a sleek young blood, for help.
## 02
Directed toward you, my mind does not lose the track: just on you have  I fixed my desire, o much invoked one.
Like a king, wondrous one, sit down upon the ritual grass. Since there is  soma here, let there be drinking for you.
## 03
Indra, warding off from diverse directions neglect and hunger—just he,  as bounteous one, will be master of wealth and goods.
Just his vitality do these seven rivers, in their torrent, increase—the
vitality of the tempestuous bull.
## 04
Like birds on a leafy tree, the soma drops—exhilarating, sitting in the  cup—have settled down on Indra.
Their countenance, powerfully flashing forth again and again, found the  sun, the light of the Ārya, for Manu.
## 05
Like a (gambler) with the best throw he pulls out the perfect (“hand” of  dice) in the game, when the bounteous one wins the sun as his takings. No other will be able to match this heroic deed of yours, neither one of  the past, o bounteous one, nor of the present.

## 06
Clan after clan does the bounteous one encircle, as the bull keeping  watch over the nourishing streams of the peoples.
In whose soma-pressings the able one rejoices, that one vanquishes,
with his sharp soma juices, those doing battle.
## 07
When the soma juices have flowed together into Indra, like waters into a  river, like brooks into a pond,
the inspired poets at the (sacrificial) seat increase his greatness, like rain  the barley, with the heavenly gift [/drop].
## 08
Like an angry bull he flies among the airy realms—he who made these  waters here to have an Ārya as their husband.
The bounteous one found light for the presser possessing lively gifts
[/drops], for Manu who offered oblation.
## 09
Let the axe [=fire] arise, together with its light. The (cow) of truth,  yielding good milk, should come into being as of old.
Let the ruddy, blazing (fire) shine out with its radiance. The master of  settlements should blaze like the blazing sun.
## 10
With cows we would overcome neglect that goes ill, and with barley we  would overcome all hunger, o you who are much invoked.
With our kings and our community might we be the first to win the stakes. 11. Let Indra, lord of the formulation, protect us all around, from behind  and from above and from below, from him who wishes ill—
from in front and from the middle. Let him, as partner, create wide
space for his partners.