+++
title = "044"

+++
44 (870)
Indra
Krṣ̥ ṇa Āṅgirasa
11 verses: triṣṭubh 1–3, jagatī 4–9, triṣṭubh 10–11
This last in the trio of Kr̥ṣṇa Āṅgirasa’s Indra hymns shares its final two verses  (10–11) with the previous two hymns, though it otherwise has little in common with  them. The hymn bristles with difficulties in the details, but its overall trajectory is  clear: it is a journey hymn, inviting Indra to drive to our sacrifice (vss. 1–3) to take  his place on the ritual ground and partake of our soma (vss. 4–5). The poet then  contrasts evil-minded non-sacrificers with their generous counterparts (vss. 6–7).  The poet gives a brief précis of the heroic deeds Indra accomplished in the past  after drinking soma (vs. 8), and in verse 9 urges Indra to defeat the poet’s enemies,  while making himself at home at the soma sacrifice.
## 01
Let Indra, our own lord, drive here for exhilaration—he who, forceful,  thrusting according to his own principle,
is projecting his vigor over all powers with his boundless, great
bullishness. 2. Your chariot provides a good standing place and your fallow bays are  easy to control. Your mace is attached to your fist, o lord of men.
Along a good path, o king, drive swiftly in this direction. We will
strengthen your bullish powers when you have drunk.
## 03
Let the conveyors of Indra convey him here, the lord of men in whose  arm is the mace; mighty and forceful, let them convey him, the
mighty,
the bull who projects his vigor, possessing real unbridled power; let his  feasting companions convey him here among us.
## 04
Just in this way you drench yourself in the lord [=soma], the companion  of the cup, the like-minded one, the prop of nourishment upon its
support.
Make it your might; take it entirely within you, so that you will be
powerful for the strengthening of those who keep watch (over us)
nearby [=patrons?].
## 05
Good things shall come to us, for I have expressed my prayer. Drive  here to the soma-possessor’s offering, which is accompanied by good  prayers.
You are master. Take your seat here on this ritual grass. Your cups
cannot be ventured against, on (ritual) principle.
## 06
The first invocations to the gods went forth each separately. They  brought themselves fame difficult to surpass.
The *non-protectors [?], who were not able to board the ship of
sacrifice, sank down in stillness.
## 07
Just exactly in this way let the ones of evil intent, whose horses have  been badly yoked, be behind and facing backward;
correspondingly, those who are nearer and facing forward, they are
(ready) to give, when the many (ritual) patterns and nourishments
are (in place).
## 08
He gave foundation to the trembling mountains and plains. Heaven  cried out and made the midspaces quake.
He props apart the two Holy Places [=Heaven and Earth] that were
conjoined. Having drunk of the bull, he recites the solemn words in
his exhilaration.
## 09
I bring this well-made crook to you, with which you will break the  hoof-breakers, o generous one.
Let there be a home for you in this soma-pressing. Become a sharer in  our pressed soma and in our quest, bounteous one.
## 10
With cows we would overcome neglect that goes ill, and with barley we  would overcome all hunger, o you who are much invoked.
With our kings and our community might we be the first to win the
stakes.

## 11
Let Indra, lord of the formulation, protect us all around, from behind  and from above and from below, from him who wishes ill—
from in front and from the middle. Let him, as partner, create wide
space for his partners.
Although the Anukramaṇī names Vatsaprī as the poet of only the next two  hymns (45–46) to Agni, the following (47) to Indra clearly belongs here as well, as  Oldenberg argues (1888: 236).