+++
title = "045"

+++
45 (871) Agni
Vatsaprī Bhālandana
12 verses: triṣṭubh
The hymn begins with Agni’s triple birth, in heaven, on the earthly sacrificial  ground, and in the waters (vs. 1), and the next verses touch on Agni’s several  forms (vss. 2–3). The cosmic aspects of Agni (vss. 4–6, 8) are thus marshaled in  service of the ritual Agni, installed as fire-priest in verse 7, and it is therefore easy  to believe in the good things that will come to the mortal who sacrifices to Agni  (vss. 9–12).
## 1
From heaven was Agni born first; from us was he born second as Jātavedas. (Born) a third time in the waters, the inexhaustible one—kindling him,  the manly minded, very attentive (mortal) sings to him.
## 2
We know your threefold triads, Agni; we know your domains dispersed  in many places.
We know your highest name, which is hidden; we know the wellspring  whence you have come here.
## 3
In the sea, in the waters has the one with a manly mind (kindled) you; the  one with manly eye kindled (you) in the udder of heaven, o Agni.
The buffaloes strengthened you, who were standing in the third realm, in  the lap of the waters.
## 4
Agni has roared like thundering heaven, constantly licking at (heaven  and) earth, anointing the plants,
for as soon as he was born kindled, he surveyed them. He radiates with  his radiant beam between the two world-halves.
## 5
Rouser of beauties, buttress of riches, propeller of inspired thoughts,  with Soma as herdsman,
good one, son of strength, king in the waters, he radiates forth, being  kindled at the forefront of the dawns.
## 6
Beacon of all creation, the embryo filled both world-halves while he was  being born. He split even the solid rock in leaving it, when the five peoples sacrificed  to Agni.
## 7
The fire-priest, pure circlet, very wise—Agni has been installed as  immortal among the mortals.
He raises reddish smoke, as he carries it here and there, seeking to reach  up to heaven with his blazing flame.
## 8
Seen as a bright ornament, he has flashed forth widely, alight for beauty  through a lifetime hard to forget.
Agni became immortal through his vital powers, when Heaven of good  seed begat him.
## 9
Whoever will make for you today a ghee-covered cake, o god Agni of  fortunate flame,
lead him further forward, toward a better state, toward favor
apportioned by the gods, o youngest one.
## 10
Give him a portion in (ritual acts) deserving good fame, Agni; give him  a portion in every solemn speech being pronounced.
He will become dear to the Sun, dear to Agni. He will burst out with  (offspring already) born, burst out with those to be born.
## 11
Sacrificing to you, Agni, through the days, they have acquired all  desirable goods.
Together with you the fire-priests, seeking wealth, have opened up the  pen full of cows.
## 12
Agni has been praised by the seers—Vaiśvānara, well-disposed to men,  having Soma as his herdsman.
We would invoke Heaven and Earth, the two without hatred. O gods,  establish wealth rich in heroes for us.