+++
title = "046"

+++
46 (872)
Agni
Vatsaprī Bhālandana
10 verses: triṣṭubh (and virāj)
Attributed to the same poet as X.45, this hymn is clearly a companion piece to the  previous hymn, sharing much of the same specialized lexicon (e.g., uśíj “fire-priest”)  and an interest in the various forms and births of fire and their relation to the  ritual fire. However, X.46 is, for the most part, more rhetorically driven and more  obscurely phrased than X.45, with images pushed to the edge of intelligibility (and  beyond; see, e.g., vs. 7). The trickiness of its phraseology is matched by its meter, a  shifting combination of triṣṭubh and virāj lines, with a number analyzable as either.  Nonetheless, the emphasis on the installation of the ritual fire is manifest through out: the original installation (vss. 4, 8–10), the reinstallation of the disappearing  Agni (vss. 2–3), and the current installation (vss. 5–6).

## 1
Forth (he goes) when just born—the Hotar, the great cloud-finder;  seated among men, he sat down in the lap of the waters.
He who has been established establishes vital powers for you; he is  the extender of goods to the man who does honor and he is the
protector of bodies.
## 2
This one here—having done honor to him in the seat of the waters, they  followed him along his tracks like a vanished cow.
With reverences seeking him who was hiding in secret, the fire-priests,  the insightful Bhr̥gus found him.
## 3
This one here—Trita Vaibhūvasa, much seeking, found him on the head  of an inviolable cow.
Growing strong with kindness when just born here in the habitations,  the youth becomes the navel of the luminous realm.
## 4
The fire-priests with their reverences made him the gladdening Hotar,  the leader of the ceremonies, and made the sacrifice advance,
made him the pure circlet of the clans, when they established him as the  oblation conveyor among the sons of Manu.
## 5
Forth (they lead him), *glittering, great, conferring poetic inspiration,  splitter of strongholds, no fool—(even) fools (do so).
Leading him, the embryo of the trees, the gold-bearded one, like a steed  for whom a verse is the prize, they have set forth an inspired thought. 6. Trita [= the “third” fire], standing fast in the dwelling places,  surrounded, sits down inside the womb.
From there the domestic leader of the clans [=Agni], having amassed  (goods?), with his reinless (horses) speeds to the superior men
through the spreading expanse.
## 7
His are the unaging oars of the houses, the pure fires with
singing smoke,
bright, swelling, bustling, sitting on the wood like winds (in trees), like  soma-drinks (in the wooden cups).
## 8
Agni displays his own pulsing excitement with his tongue, (displays) the  patterns of the earth with his appearance.
Him, blazing and pure, have the Āyus established as gladdening Hotar,  most worthy of sacrifice.
## 9
Agni, whom Heaven and Earth begat, whom the Waters, Tvaṣṭar, and  the Bhr̥gus begat with their powers,
the one first to be reverently invoked—Mātariśvan and the gods  fashioned him as the means of sacrifice for Manu.
## 10
You whom the gods established as conveyor of the oblation, whom the  sons of Manu, craving much, established as means of sacrifice,
o Agni, establish vital power for the praiser on your course. One who  seeks the gods ad(vances), for glory gets the girls.