+++
title = "047"

+++
47 (873) Indra
Saptagu Āṅgirasa
8 verses: triṣṭubh
Though the Anukramaṇī attributes this hymn to a different poet from the last two,  structural considerations make it clear that it belongs with X.45–46, as Oldenberg  convincingly argues (1888:  236); the Anukramaṇī has simply extracted the name  Saptagu Āṅgirasa from verse 6, where it is properly applied to the god Br̥haspati.  Nonetheless, the subject matter of this hymn is quite distinct from the two Agni  hymns that precede it: it is a naked demand to Indra for wealth. The hymn has a  superficially monotonous structure consisting of attributes in the accusative: verses  2–5 form a single sentence dependent on the second hemistich of 1. But this monot ony conceals, or rather reveals, the poet’s cleverness, for it is entirely ambiguous  whether the accusatives modify Indra or the “wealth” of the refrain found in all the  d-pādas. In the former case, the adjectives would agree with the accusative tvā in the  verb phrase found in 1c vidmā́ hí tvā “for we know you (as),” punctuated and inter
rupted by the syntactically unconnected refrain; in the latter case with the accusative  rayím in the refrain. The semantics of the predicate adjectives in these verses would  allow either, sometimes slightly tipped toward one or the other. It may seem that  the question is settled finally in verse 5, where we encounter the first noun—vā́jam
“prize”—in this sea of adjectives, since “prize” might seem a more likely synonym of  “wealth” than of Indra. However, in the rhetorical universe of the R̥gveda it would  certainly be possible to refer to a god as a prize. We think it highly likely that the  poet intended the audience to consider both possibilities throughout the sequence.
The last three verses (6–8) more conventionally state that praises are being  offered, to Br̥haspati (vs. 6) and to Indra (vss. 7–8), in return for favors.
## 1
We have grasped your right hand, Indra, seeking goods, you goods-lord  of goods,
for we know you as cow-lord of cows, o champion. – To us give bright,  bullish wealth.
## 2
Possessing good weapons, good help, good guidance, supporting four  seas worth of riches,
ever to be celebrated, praiseworthy, bringing abundant things of value.  – To us give bright, bullish wealth.
## 3
Accompanied by good sacred formulations, accompanied by the gods,  lofty, wide, deep, broad-based, o Indra,
accompanied by famous seers, powerful, vanquishing hostility. – To us  give bright, bullish wealth.
## 4
Winning prizes, having poets as heroes, overwhelming, gaining the stakes,  swelling with strength, of good skill,
Dasyu-smashing, stronghold-splitting—(above all) real, o Indra. – To us  give bright, bullish wealth.1454 X.48
## 5
Rich in horses, in chariots, in heroes, a thousandfold, hundredfold prize,  o Indra,
having beneficial troops, having poets as heroes, sun-winning. – To us  give bright, bullish wealth.
## 6
To the one with seven cows [/Saptagu], whose poetic vision is truth, to  Br̥haspati of good wisdom my thought goes forth,
to him, the Āṅgirasa, who is to be reverently approached with homage.  – To us give bright, bullish wealth.
## 7
My eager messengers, my praises, proceed to Indra, begging for favors, touching the heart, intertwining with the mind. – To us give bright,
bullish wealth.
## 8
What I beg you for, give that to us, Indra—a lofty dwelling place without  equal among the peoples.
Let Heaven and Earth applaud this. – To us give bright, bullish wealth.
The next three hymns (X.48–50) are both ascribed to and dedicated to Indra  Vaikuṇṭha. Given the supposed identity of poet and dedicand, the first two of these  are appropriately cast as Indra’s own self-praise.