+++
title = "048"

+++
48 (874)
Indra Vaikuṇthạ
Indra Vaikuṇṭha
11 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 7, 10–11
As noted immediately above, X.48 and 49 present themselves as Indra’s self-praise  (ātmastuti, on which see Thompson 1997). They are spoken in the 1st person, with  insistent 1st-person pronouns and verbs. In this hymn only verse 10 lacks an explicit  1st-person form, and the first verses especially establish the pattern: each pāda of  verse 1 begins with a 1st-person pronoun (ahám, ahám, mā́m, ahám), as does each  half-verse of verse 2 (ahám, ahám), and again, each pāda of verse 3 (máhyam, máyi,  máma, mā́m). (Of the 1st-person singular pronominal paradigm, only instrumental  máyā and ablative mát are absent from this hymn, and both are poorly attested in  the R̥gveda [three and twelve times respectively].)
The contents of the self-praise range over Indra’s many accomplishments, but  especially focus on his victories in battle and what he has won thereby—a warrior’s  boast, in other words. Some of the exploits are obscure, indeed mentioned only here  (e.g., vs. 8).
The only verse lacking 1st-person reference, verse 10, appears to be a riddle,  with a balanced opposition between the good or successful man (?), who has soma  within, and his opposite number, whose failure is exposed by his lack of soma. But  this interpretation must remain tentative, given the puzzles in that verse. 1. I was the foremost lord of goods. I win the stakes over and over.
Upon me do the creatures call, like kinfolk their father. I apportion
food to the pious man.
## 2
I am Indra, the bulwark and breast(-plate) of the Atharvan. For Trita  I begat the cows from the serpent.
I took the manliness from the Dasyus, through my abilities seeking to  win their cowpens for Dadhyañc and Mātariśvan.
## 3
For me Tvaṣṭar fashioned the metal mace. To me have the gods bent  their will.
My face, like that of the sun, is difficult to surpass. They recognize me  by what has been done and is to be done.
## 4
I (win) livestock in cows and horses, overflowing and golden, with my  weapon.
Many thousands do I “grind down” for the pious man, when the soma  drops accompanied by hymns have brought me to exhilaration.
## 5
I am Indra: only I have not had the stake won away, and never have  I given way to death.
Just when you are pressing soma, beg me for good things. You will not  suffer harm in partnership with me, o Pūrus.
## 6
I (struck down) by twos those, snorting heavily, who caused Indra and  his mace to fight (them);
I struck down with my stroke those who were challenging (me), while I,  unbowable, was talking tough to those to be bowed.
## 7
One against one here, I am the utter victor—and against two. What can  three do?
I strike against a multitude, like sheaves on a threshing floor. Do my  rivals, who have no Indra, scorn me?
## 8
I restored Atithigva to the Guṅgus like a restorative, and I upheld the  obstacle-overcomer among the clans,
when in the smashing of Parṇaya and in the smashing of Karañja, (as)  in the great smashing of Vr̥tra, I spread my fame.
## 9
Namī Sāpya came to the fore for me in order to enjoy restorative  refreshment, and in the quest for cows he made partnerships (with
me?) once again.
When I readied the arrow for him in the clashes, just then did I make  him one to be praised and hymned.
## 10
Soma is visible in the one, (even) when it is within (him); the herdsman  exposes the other by its absence.
Whoever tries to fight the sharp-horned bull remains bound within the  thick (fetter) of deception.
## 11
I, the god of gods, do not violate the ordinances of the Ādityas, Vasus,  and Rudriyas.
For auspicious power they have fashioned me—invincible,
indestructible, unconquerable.
