+++
title = "049"

+++
49 (875)
Indra Vaikuṇthạ
Indra Vaikuṇṭha
11 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 2, 11
Like the preceding hymn (X.48), this is an ātmastuti or self-praise spoken by Indra,  with relentless repetition of 1st-person singular pronouns and verbs. For the for mer, note that of the twenty half-verses (excluding the final summary verse 11),  sixteen begin with ahám “I” and one with mā́m “me.” Only three (6c, 7c, and 10c)  lack such an initial pronoun, and 7c has the enclitic mā “me” in second position  (yán mā), while 10c begins with spārhám, a rhyme form to ahám.
As for verbs, the hymn is dominated by the injunctive, with nearly twenty such  forms. This morphological skewing contrasts with the patterns in the preceding  hymn, which has a wider range and more balanced selection of tenses and moods.  The reasons for the prominence of the injunctive are not clear to us and, somewhat  surprisingly, Hoffmann fails to treat this hymn systematically in his monograph on  that verbal form (Hoffmann 1967).
Like X.48 this hymn particularly celebrates Indra’s martial successes and the aid  he gave various mortal clients in subduing their enemies. Several of these vignettes  are little known, if at all, and others are quite obscurely phrased (e.g., vs. 3, though it  treats the well-known saga of Kutsa, Śuṣṇa, and, probably, Uśanā Kāvya; vs. 6). The  hymn also emphasizes, more than X.48, the importance of the sacrifice in strengthen
ing Indra and securing his help: verse 1 announces this theme quite clearly, and verses  4–7 treat the relationship between sacrificer and Indra as well, though not as clearly. The final verse (11) summarizes Indra’s own speech, before addressing him directly  and assuring him that the deeds he himself boasted of will also be praised by  singers.
## 1
I gave the foremost good to the singer. I made the sacred formulation a  strengthener for me.
I became the inciter of the sacrificer. I have vanquished the
non-sacrificers in every contest.
## 2
Upon me they conferred the name Indra among the gods—the creatures  of heaven and earth and of the waters.
I (took as my own) the two quick fallow bays, the bulls, who follow a  separate commandment; boldly I took the mace for power.
## 3
I pierced the cloak for the poet with my thrusts; I helped Kutsa with  this help:
I, as the piercer of Śuṣṇa, held the deadly weapon—I, who did not give  the Ārya name to the Dasyu.
## 4
I was like a father to the Vetasus for them to prevail; I made Tugra and  Smadibha subject to Kutsa.
I came to be under the direction of the sacrificer: when I brought myself  to the fore for Tuji, his dear things were not to be assailed. 5. I made Mr̥gaya subject to Śrutarvan, when he yielded to me when the  ritual patterns were in due order.
I made the vassal submissive for Āyu, and I made Paḍgr̥bhi subject
to Savya.
## 6
I am the one who (aided?) Navavāstva of the lofty chariots—I, the smasher  of Vr̥tra [/obstacles], shattered the Dāsa like obstacles [/Vr̥tras]—
when he [=Navavāstva] was causing (me) to grow strong and spread
out according to due ritual order. I made the realms of light on the
distant far shore of airy space.
## 7
I drive around with the swift (horses) of the Sun, being conveyed forth  in my might by the Etaśas.
When the soma-pressing of Manu says to me (that it [=soma] is) for my  raiment, I will sideline (even) the effective Dāsa with my thrusts.
## 8
I am the smasher of the seven, a greater Nahus than Nahus. I made  Turvaśa and Yadu to be famed through my power.
I put down the one, his might with my might; I strengthened the nine  and ninety (others) (to become) proud.
## 9
I, the bull, held fast the seven streams that were flowing and racing  upon the earth.
I of good resolve traverse the floods. Through fighting I found the way  for Manu to seek.
## 10
I held fast in them that which the god Tvaṣṭar never held fast in
them: the gleaming,
eagerly sought (milk) in the udders, in the bellies of the cows, the honey  of honey, the swelling soma, and its milk-mixture.
## 11
Thus in this way Indra sought to attract the gods and men to him; with  his stirring (action) he be(stirred them)—the bounteous one whose
generosity is real.
All these (deeds) of yours do the powerful ones sing, you able master of  the fallow bays, whose glory is your own.