+++
title = "050"

+++
50 (876)
Indra Vaikuṇthạ
Indra Vaikuṇṭha
7 verses: jagatī 1–2, abhisāriṇī 3–4, triṣṭubh 5, jagatī 6–7
A much more conventional Indra hymn than the preceding two of this series (X.48– 49). Here Indra is praised in the context and at the occasion of a soma sacrifice, and  the usual reciprocal obligations of sacrificer and god are set forth.
## 01
Chant forth to the great one who finds exhilaration from the soma-stalk,  who is common to all men and is present to all,
to Indra, whose good-battling strength, great fame, and manliness the  two world-halves respect.

## 02
And now he is praised by his comrade as manly and forceful: Indra is  worthy of celebration for a man like me.
Amid all the chariot-poles and at the getting of prizes, o master of
settlements, or at an obstacle [/Vr̥tra] or among the waters, you find
exhilaration, o champion.
## 03
Who are those men, Indra, who are for your refreshment, who will strive  to attain your favor as their traveling companion?
Who spur themselves on for your lordly prize; who (spur themselves on)  when waters, their own fields, or masculine power is at stake?
## 04
You will become great through our sacred formulation, Indra.
You will become the worthy recipient of the sacrifice at all the
soma-pressings.
You will become the stirring of men in every contest and the supreme  mantra, o you who are common to all domains.
## 05
Right now, as the superior one, help those eager for the sacrifice. The  peoples know your great succor and protection.
Right now, (so that) you will be unaging and you will make (us) strong,  we have made all these soma-pressings powerful, to draw (you) here.
## 06
We have made all these soma-pressings powerful, to draw (you) here— which you have (now) taken into your own self, o son of strength.
To your liking and for your support, are, in succession, the cup, the
sacrifice, the mantra, and the upraised sacred formulation and speech. 7. Those who craft sacred formulations for you when the soma is pressed,  for you to give of goods and of good, o inspired one,
through the thought of your favor they will go forward along the path,  at your exhilaration on the pressed soma-stalk.
The next three hymns (X.51–53), attributed to Agni Saucīka, treat the well-known  story of the flight and disappearance of Agni, who wished to avoid the ritual role  of conveying the oblations and the fate of his brothers. The gods find him hidden in  the waters and entice him back by promising him a share in the sacrifice.