+++
title = "051"

+++
51 (877) Dialogue between Agni and the Gods
Agni Saucīka
9 verses: triṣṭubh
The classic dialogue between Agni and the gods (or one or more gods: he addresses  Mitra and Varuṇa [vs.  2] and Varuṇa alone [vss. 4,  6]). Agni appears still to be  in the waters (or just emerged), and the gods have only recently discovered his  hiding place. The first question is which god spotted him (vss. 1–3). Agni then describes the fear that drove him from his sacrificial role, in responsive language  that defines an omphalos (vss. 4, 6, esp. 4a and 6c). In the omphalos verse (5) the  gods make the argument that Manu, a human and the first sacrificer, deserves to  have his sacrifice completed by Agni’s conveyance of the oblations. It is striking that  the gods, perhaps disingenuously, do not argue for their own deserving state. In the  last three verses (7–9) the gods propose rewards for Agni’s returning to his task, and  he accepts them.
## 1
[Gods:] Great was that caul and sturdy it was, enveloped in which you  entered the waters.
All your bodies in their multiple forms, o Agni Jātavedas, did a single  god see.
## 2
[Agni:] Who saw me? Which one was that god who fully saw my bodies in  their multiple forms?
Where indeed, o Mitra and Varuṇa, are all the kindling sticks of Agni  lying, which lead to the gods?
## 3
[Gods:] We sought you in multiple places, o Jātavedas, you who had  entered into the waters, into the plants, o Agni.
Yama espied you, o bright-beamed one, shining out farther than (a
distance) of ten stages.
## 4
[Agni:] I went in fear of the Hotarship, Varuṇa, lest the gods yoke  me to it.
My bodies settled down in multiple places. I, Agni, do not attend to this  business.
## 5
[Gods:] Come here! Manu, devoted to the gods, has desire for sacrifice,  having properly prepared it. Yet you dwell in darkness, Agni.
Make the paths leading to the gods easily passable. Convey the oblations,  showing your benevolence.
## 6
[Agni:] The brothers of Agni earlier kept rolling along after this business,  like a charioteer along the road.
In fear of this, Varuṇa, I went far away. I flinched from it like a buffalo  from the bowstring of an archer.
## 7
[Gods:] We will make a lifetime for you, which is free from old age, Agni,  so that yoked (to your task) you will not suffer harm, Jātavedas.
Then will you, showing your benevolence, convey their portion of the  oblation to the gods, o well-born one?
## 8
[Agni:] Give the fore-offerings and the after-offerings exclusively to me,  the nourishing portion of the oblation,
and the “ghee” of the waters and the “man” of the plants, and let there  be a long lifetime for Agni, o gods.
## 9
[Gods:] Yours be the fore-offerings and the after-offerings exclusively, the  nourishing portions of the oblation;
yours, Agni, be this whole sacrifice. To you let the four quarters bow.
