+++
title = "052"

+++
52 (878) Address to the Gods from Agni
Agni Saucīka
6 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn logically follows the preceding one. Agni has agreed to accept the  Hotarship, which he had originally fled. He ceremonially requests guidance from  the gods about how to perform his new duties in verses 1–2.
The middle verse (3) seems not to be spoken by Agni, but rather by a mortal  attending or officiating at the sacrifice and catching sight of the newly installed  Agni. In the first half of the verse he expresses some anxiety about this fire’s con nection to Yama; at issue is the possible confusion between, or identity of, the  new ritual fire with the cremation fire, which conveys the dead to Yama’s realm.  (Similar anxiety is treated in the funeral hymns, especially X.16.) Reassurance  seems to be dispensed in the second half of the verse; it may be (following Lanman  1884: 388) that the daily rebirth is that of the Agnihotra fire, while the monthly  rebirth is for the Śrāddha, or ceremony in honor of the dead—allowing separation  of the two fires and their functions.
In verses 4–5 Agni quotes the gods’ words as they install him (4cd), and prom ises to fulfill his duties in exemplary fashion. The final verse (6) sums up the gods’  installation of Agni.
## 1
[Agni:] All you gods, instruct me how, chosen here as Hotar, I shall  conceive it [=task] upon being installed.
Proclaim to me how, by what path I shall convey your share, your
oblation to you.
## 2
[Agni:] I have sat down as the better sacrificing Hotar. All the gods, the  Maruts spur me on.
Every day, o Aśvins, the Adhvaryu-ship is yours. The kindling stick
becomes the Formulator; this is the poured offering for you two.
## 3
[Sacificer?:] This one here who is the Hotar—who is he to Yama? Whom  am I calling upon when the gods anoint (him)?
Every day he is born, every month. And so the gods have installed him  as conveyor of the oblation.
## 4
[Agni:] The gods have installed me as conveyor of the oblation—I who  had slipped away, undergoing many troubles:
“Agni, the knowing one, will arrange the sacrifice for us, with its five
courses, three turns, seven threads.”
## 5
[Agni:] Through sacrifice I will win you immortality rich in heroes, so  that I can make wide space for you, o gods.
Might I place the mace in Indra’s arms. Then he will win all these battles. 6. [Poet:] Three hundred, three thousand, and thirty-nine gods revered Agni. They sprinkled him with ghee; they strewed the ritual grass for him. Just  after that they installed him as Hotar.