+++
title = "053"

+++
53 (879)
Agni [“Opferlied”]
Agni Saucīka
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 6–7, 9–11
This hymn begins from the situation depicted in the last two hymns, but turns into a  mystical meditation on the sacrifice. The first three verses are apparently spoken by  mortal sacrificers, who have installed the recovered Agni as Hotar and are pleased  (vs. 3) with the resulting success of their sacrifice.
In verses 4–5 Agni responds, inviting both gods and men to take pleasure in his  application to this ritual role. Verse 4 also contains one of the few R̥gvedic refer ences to the enmity between the gods (Devas) and the Asuras. Although this persis tent rivalry dominates middle Vedic mythology, it only begins, very tentatively, to  appear in the late R̥gveda, to which period this hymn belongs.
The next three verses (6–8) are again the speech of human priests, addressed  both to Agni and to fellow celebrants, urging them to carry on the ritual work. In  verse 7 the sacrifice, as often, is metaphorically identified with a chariot, and the  puzzling beginning of verse 8 may refer metaphorically to a river crossing, taking  the sacrificers to a better state.
The most enigmatic verses of the hymn are the last three (9–11), in jagatī meter  (as opposed to the prevalent, but not ubiquitous triṣṭubh). They begin with the god  Tvaṣṭar, the “Fashioner” of the gods: he has fashioned drinking cups for the gods,  and now sharpens a hatchet for Brahmaṇaspati to use. Since Brahmaṇaspati has  a transparent name, “Lord of the Sacred Formulation,” he is almost surely going  to use the hatchet to hew a sacred formulation, the mystical verbal embodiment  of cosmic truth. In verse 10 the poets are urged to use the same types of tools,  presumably to fashion the same things: sacred formulations. Or, in another com mon metaphor, to create “hidden tracks” (that is, mystical verbal compositions).  Verse 11 may be an example of such a hidden track: it is certainly impenetrable  enough, with riddling and paradoxical images that several millennia of study have  not solved.
## 01
The one whom we sought with our mind, this one has come here just  now, knowing the sacrifice, attentive to its articulation.
He will perform sacrifice for us in the divine assemblage as superior
sacrificer, for he will sit down (as Hotar) close by, in front of us.
## 02
He has been realized as Hotar, as superior sacrificer by his installation.  Since he watches over the well-placed pleasurable offerings,
we shall sacrifice to the gods deserving the sacrifice—yes! We will
reverently salute those worthy of salutation with ghee.
## 03
He has made our pursuit of the gods successful today. We found the  tongue of the sacrifice in hiding.
He has come here, sweet smelling, clothing himself in life. He has made  our invocation of the gods fortunate today.

## 04
[Agni:] Might I today devise this as the foremost of speech, by which we  gods will overcome the Asuras.
You nourishment eaters and you worthy of the sacrifice, you five
peoples, take pleasure in my Hotarship.
## 05
[Agni:] Let the five peoples take pleasure in my Hotarship—and the  cow-born and those who are worthy of the sacrifice.
Let Earth protect us from earthly constraint; let the Midspace protect  us from heavenly (constraint).
## 06
Stretching the thread (of the sacrifice), (o Agni,) go following the  radiance of the airy realm. Protect the paths of light made by
insightful thought.
(You priests,) weave a work without knots for the ever-praising ones.  Become Manu, (o Agni). Generate the divine race.
## 07
Bind the axle-straps, you comrades in soma [=priests], and set the reins  in order, and ornament (the chariot).
Drive the eight-seated chariot all about, the one with which the gods  led a dear thing to (us?).
## 08
The stony (stream) is flowing. Pull yourselves together! Stand up!  Advance, comrades!
There let us leave behind those who were unfriendly. Might we cross
over and upward to friendly ones, to prizes.
## 09
Tvaṣṭar knew (his own) magic powers, as the best worker of workers,  bearing the cups, the most beneficial drinking vessels of the gods.
Now he sharpens the hatchet of good metal, with which the “(chariot-) steed,” Brahmaṇaspati, will hew.
## 10
Now, poets, sharpen up (the hatchets) that are (here), the axes with  which you carve for the immortal.
As knowing ones, create hidden tracks, (like the track) by which the
gods achieved immortality.
## 11
They have placed the “maiden” in the embryo [=Agni?], have placed the  “calf” in his mouth, with cryptic mind and tongue.
He, always benevolent, eager to gain, with the yoking strings wins the  victory just at the decisive moment.
The next three hymns (54–56) are attributed to Br̥haduktha Vāmadevya.