+++
title = "054"

+++
54 (880)
Indra
Brhaduktha V ̥ āmadevya
6 verses: triṣṭubh
This short hymn begins by announcing (somewhat cryptically) that Indra’s fame or  reputation is what prompted a frantic call on him from Heaven and Earth (vs. 1cd), and it ends (6cd) with the poet’s summation of his own praise hymn. In between  there is both standard praise of Indra’s well-known deeds (e.g., vss. 1cd, 3)  and  more ambiguously phrased assessment of his accomplishments. In verse 2bc, for  example, Indra’s victories seem almost dismissively characterized as a magic trick  (māyā́, the word later famously used of the “illusion” of reality) produced by his  own boasts. The four names of Indra in verse 4 are presumably his famous epi
thets, such as vr̥trahán “Vr̥tra-smasher,” but the poet also seems to be slyly implying  that Indra’s deeds are reducible to words. These deprecatory hints are slight and  could be otherwise interpreted, but in any case the poet has avoided a conventional  recital of Indra’s exploits. Instead he seems to be saying that Indra’s great deeds  and the words that express them are essentially the same: his reputation is equiva
lent to himself (vs. 1ab); his own proclamation of his powers is taken by the world  as identical to “battles” (vs. 2); his epithets are the power that produces his deeds  (vs. 4). Although this poetic ploy is, in one sense, the usual message that mortals’  praises strengthen Indra for his deeds, the poet here seems to be claiming something  more: that the poet’s formulations are Indra’s essence.
In the very last pāda of the hymn the poet seems to be doing something simi lar with his own name Br̥haduktha (“having/producing lofty speech”), as Jesse  Lundquist has suggested to me (personal communication). The pāda (6d) reads  brahmakŕ̥to br̥hádukthād avāci (“...has been spoken...from Br̥haduktha, the crafter  of sacred formulations”), with his name positioned between the other two words in  the line. The first half of his name, br̥hát, is a close phonological match to the first  half of the first word, brahma “sacred formulation”; the last half of his name, uktha “(solemn) speech,” is etymologically related to the verb avāci. Thus his very name  can be, as it were, transformed into the verbal products that are his reason for being.
## 1
It was to your reputation in its greatness, o bounteous one, that the two  frightened world-halves called upon you.
You furthered the gods, you overcame the Dāsa might, as you did your  best for the other progeny, Indra.
## 2
When you roamed, having grown strong in body, proclaiming your own  powers among the peoples, o Indra,
that was just your magic trick, which they call battles: neither today nor  before have you discovered a rival.
## 3
What seers before us have reached the end of your whole greatness, in that you begot your mother and father [=Heaven and Earth] at the  same time from your own body?
## 4
There exist four lordly names for you, the unfalsifiable names of the  buffalo.
You surely know all these, through which you have done your deeds, o  bounteous one.
## 5
You have made those good things yours alone, both those in the open  and those that are hidden.
Do not pass over my desire, bounteous one: you are the one who takes  heed and gives, Indra,1464 X.55
## 6
Who placed light within the light, who joined the honeys with the honey. So, a dear fortifying thought has been spoken to Indra from
Br̥haduktha, the crafter of sacred formulations.