+++
title = "056"

+++
56 (881) All Gods
Brhaduktha V ̥ āmadevya
7 verses: triṣṭubh 1–3, 7; jagatī 4–6
Traditionally this hymn was interpreted as Br̥haduktha’s funeral hymn for his son  Vājin (the name extracted from vājín- “prizewinner” in vss. 2–3). More recently it  has been taken as the funeral hymn for a horse, either the horse sacrificed in the  Aśvamedha (Oldenberg) or simply a particularly distinguished racehorse (Geldner).  We find all these interpretations unduly restrictive. Though it is undoubtedly a funeral  hymn, or, to be more general, undoubtedly refers to what happens after death, there  are no particularly equine features in it, since vājín can be used of humans and gods  as well as horses. Nor is there any trace of the personal grief a poet might express for  his son. Instead the hymn has taken some of the cosmic speculation of the last hymn  (esp. X.55.2) and directed it to the more focused topic of the afterlife.
The first two verses urge the dead to merge his body with a light in an unspeci fied but very distant place, presumably even beyond heavenly lights like the sun, but  associated with the gods. This merger is considered a kind of birth (see vs. 1d). The  distance traveled on this good journey is treated in verse 3.
The meter changes in the next three verses (4–6) and so, to some extent, does  the topic. Verse 4 is quite unclear and quite disputed, in part because the ref erent of the pronoun “their” (eṣām) is not specified. In our opinion the verse  asserts that the ancestors (“forefathers”) do not control the fate of the recently  dead: “their” greatness (i.e., that of the recently dead) is not in the power of their  predecessors, the ancestors (4a); rather, the gods transfer the mental spirit of the  dead to the realm of the gods (4b), where they, the dead, incorporate animating  motion (4c) and re-enter their bodies (4d). In other words, the verse is an attempt  to describe the mechanism whereby the dead regain their bodies, joining mental  power with physical activity within the envelope of the old body. As such, it is  more detailed than the simple, reassuring command to the dead in the funeral  hymn X.14.8 “Unite with your body in your full luster,” which gives no directions  as to how to go about it.
The happy result of this heavenly reincarnation is expressed in the first half of  verse 5, but in the second half a more certain, because more visible, means to life  after death is depicted—the familiar one of extending one’s own life in the lives of  one’s progeny. This R̥gvedic truism is, in our view, developed in the following very  difficult verse (6) in two complementary ways. On the one hand, sons can make their  “lord” (in our view, their father) into a “finder of the sun”—here we take “sun” to  be equivalent to the light in verse 1, with which the dead are to merge—in two ways.  The father can merge with the highest light by being provided with a proper funeral,  and he can have further life on earth, continue to see the sun, as it were, by being  propagated in his children and grandchildren. Viewed from the opposite direction,  the forefathers, already in the heavenly afterlife, established their paternal dominion  by placing descendants in later generations. The final verse, returning to triṣṭubh meter, simply sums up in simpler language  Br̥haduktha’s understanding of this process. For a more detailed interpretation of  this hymn as a funeral hymn, see Brereton (forthcoming a).
## 1
Here is one (light) of yours, and far away is another one. Merge with the  third light.
At the merging of your body, be one cherished and dear to the gods at  this highest means of begetting.
## 2
Let your body, o prizewinner, leading the body, establish a thing of value  for us and protection for you.
Unswerving, in order to uphold the great gods, you should exchange  your own light as if for the light in heaven.
## 3
You are the prizewinner with a winning spirit. You are well gone to  the (dawns?), the good trackers, well gone to the praise, well gone to  heaven,
well gone according to the foremost foundations that hold true, well  gone to the gods, well gone along your flight.
## 4
Even the forefathers are not masters of their greatness. The gods placed  their mental force among the gods,
and they enveloped those things that were in vibrant motion. They
entered into their bodies again.
## 5
With their powers they strode around the whole airy realm, measuring  the ancient, unmeasurable domains.
All living beings are held down within their bodies, but they have
extended themselves multiply through their offspring.
## 6
Sons set up their lord [=father] as a finder of the sun in two ways by a  third action.
And their forefathers have established their own offspring as their
paternal power, as their “stretched thread” among the later
generations.
## 7
As if with a boat across the swell through all the earth’s directions,  (having gone) beyond the difficult places with blessings,
Br̥haduktha by his greatness has placed his own offspring both among  later ones and among those previous.
After the sequence of hymn trios beginning with X.39, the next group (57–60), of  four hymns, seems out of place, but Oldenberg (1888: 236) suggests that the whole  has been arbitrarily divided into four hymns and could conceivably be resolved into  three. The hymns share a theme—that of healing and returning to life—and are  ascribed to “the four Gaupāyanas.” Perhaps the division into four hymns was sug
gested by the four supposed authors.
1468 X.57–58