+++
title = "057"

+++
57 (883)
All Gods
Bandhu, Subandhu, Śrutabandhu, and Viprabandhu, the four Gaupāyanas or  Laupāyanas
6 verses: gāyatrī
On its surface this hymn contains a simple revivifying spell seeking the return of  “mind” to a person or persons in some distress—prefaced by two verses seeking to  avoid ritual wrongdoing and to attain the help of Agni. This hymn is closely linked  with X.58, a patterned litany calling for the return of mind. In both, “mind” has a  broader semantic range than it generally does in English, encompassing not merely  thought and mental processes, but what we might want to term “spirit.”
Traditionally this hymn and the following three (X.57–60) are considered the  poetic representations of an itihāsa (traditional explanatory story) concerning the  king Asamāti, who dismissed his purohitas (house-priests), the four Gaupāyanas  (supposedly the poets of these very hymns), and hired several Asuras instead. The  latter deprived one of the Gaupāyanas, Subandhu, of his life, and in this hymn the  three remaining brothers call his mind to return. The anachronistic details in this  story—the king’s house-priest, the evil nature of Asuras—mark it as a secondary  confection, invented for or adapted to hymns composed for other purposes.
## 01
Let us not depart from the path, nor from the sacrifice of the one who  has soma, Indra.
Let hostilities not stand between us.
## 02
He who assures the success of the sacrifice, who is the thread stretched to  the gods,
him [=Agni], bepoured, might we attain.
## 03
We now call mind hither, with soma dedicated to Naraśaṃsa
and with the composed thoughts of our forefathers.
## 04
Let your mind come here again, for will, for skill, for life,
and to see the sun for a long time.
## 05
O fathers, let the divine race give us mind again.
May we keep company with the troop of the living.
## 06
Under your commandment, o Soma, bearing mind in our bodies,
may we, along with our offspring, keep company with it.