+++
title = "059"

+++
59 (885) Nirr̥ti (1–3), Nirr̥ti and Soma (4), Asunıti (5–6), ̄
Assorted Divinities (7), Heaven and Earth (8–10), or Indra (10a)
The four Gaupāyanas or Laupāyanas (as for X.57)
10 verses: triṣtubh, except paṅkti 8, mahāpaṅkti 9, paṅktyuttarā 10
Although the themes in this hymn conform to the healing and restorative tone of  the other Gaupāyana hymns, neither the structure of the hymn nor the particular  application of the verses is entirely clear. Geldner treats it as a unified composition,  with verses 1–3 and 8–10 wishing long life and health to Subandhu, and the middle  verses 4–7 extending these wishes to other beings.
But structural considerations call this view into question. For one thing, Subandhu  is mentioned only in the last part of the hymn (vs. 8), not the first. Moreover, the first  four verses are marked by an apotropaic refrain addressed to Nirr̥ti “Dissolution”  and should be considered as a group. The first of these verses does concern the resto
ration or lengthening of the lifetime of an unnamed person, compared to the Aśvins’  mythical restoration to youth of Cyavāna; the last of the verses (4) is a conventional  prayer to avoid death and attain old age. The two middle verses (2–3) lie further from  the theme of restored life, treating success in sacrifice (2) and in combat (3).
The next two verses (5–6) are addressed to Asunīti “the leader to (the other) life,”  a word found also in the funeral hymns (X.12.4, 15.14, 16.2), calling for the resto ration not only of mind (vs. 5a), the concern of X.57–58, but also of other senses  and powers. The following verse (7), in the same meter, invokes other gods to join  in this restoration.
The final three verses (8–10) are in different, but related meters (variants of  paṅkti, assemblages of eight-syllable lines), and share a three-pāda refrain. The  first two (8–9) call on Heaven and Earth to provide remedies and remove mala dies; the last (10), outside of its refrain, is completely opaque: Indra is asked to  “restore the ...ox that drew the wedding-cart of Uśīnarāṇī,” a female figure appear ing nowhere else in the R̥gveda, or indeed in Sanskrit (though the masculine uśīnara is found as the name of a people in middle Vedic and later) and whose relevance  here cannot be fathomed—efforts to do so only demonstrating the ingenuity, but  not necessarily the good sense, of the scholars who proposed them.
## 1
His lifetime has been extended further anew, as the two mounters of  the chariot [=Aśvins] (extended) the lifetime (of Cyavāna) with their  resolute (power/speech).
And then (like) Cyavāna he applies his force to his task. – Let
Dissolution move herself farther away.
## 2
When the sāman (is sung), for wealth we shall equip ourselves with food  affording treasures (of honey) and with measures of fame in quantity. Let the singer rejoice in all these of ours. – Let Dissolution move herself  farther away. 3. May we surmount (the manly powers) of the stranger with our manly  powers, as Heaven does Earth, as the mountains the plains.
The singer perceives all these of ours. – Let Dissolution move herself  farther away.
## 4
Do not hand us over to death, Soma. May we now look upon the sun as  it rises.
Throughout the days let our old age be secured for us. – Let
Dissolution move herself farther away.
## 5
You leader to (the other) life, keep our mind firm in us. Lengthen our  lifetime, for living.
Find pleasure in our seeing the sun; strengthen your own body with ghee. 6. You leader to the (other) life, again put sight in us, again breath in us  here, for our use.
For a long time may we look upon the sun as it rises. O Concord, be  gracious to us with well-being.
## 7
Again let Earth give us life-force, again let goddess Heaven, again  Midspace.
Again let Soma give us our body, again let Pūṣan give us the path that is  well-being.
## 8
(Let) the two world-halves (be) luck for the one of good lineage
[/Subandhu], the two youthfully exuberant mothers of truth.
– Let the two bear away whatever malady there is. O Heaven and Earth,  to ground (let) malady (go). Let nothing whatsoever plague (him).
## 9
Down come the pair, down the trio—down the remedies from heaven.  To ground is the single (remedy) coming.
– Let the two bear away what(ever) malady there is. O Heaven and Earth,  to ground (let) malady (go). Let nothing whatsoever plague (him).
## 10
Indra, restore the cart-drawing ox that drew the (wedding-)cart of  Uśīnarāṇī hither.
– Let the two bear away what(ever) malady there is. O Heaven and Earth,  to ground (let) malady (go). Let nothing whatsoever plague (him).