+++
title = "060"

+++
60 (886)
Asamāti (1–4, 6), Indra (5), Spell to Heal Subandhu  (7–11), Praise of the Hand (12)
The four Gaupāyanas or Laupāyanas (as for X.57)
12 verses: anuṣṭubh 1–5, anuṣṭubh 6–7, paṅkti 8–9, anuṣṭubh 10–12
Another hymn that invites decomposition. The first six verses are a sort of praśasti  or royal encomium of Asamāti; indeed, the first four form a single sentence. There

is no obvious connection to the themes of healing and restoration to life found in  the other Gaupāyana hymns, and one can see how the lack of thematic integration  invited the explanatory itihāsa (see introduction to X.57) that provides a tale relat ing King Asamāti to the suffering Subandhu.
The second part of the hymn (vss. 7–12) is a spell to heal Subandhu and restore  his mind. It first recalls him to life (vs. 7), then provides models from the constructed  and natural worlds (vss. 8 and 9 respectively) for securing Subandhu’s mind within  him. The return of his mind is announced in verse 10, while his sickness is banished  in verse 11, again with models from the natural world. Finally the healing hand is  praised in verse 12. Thus, this final segment of the Gaupāyana collection returns us  to the first two hymns, X.57–58, and their concentration on the return of the mind  of a sick person. Note especially that the first verse of X.58, which envisions the  departure of his mind to Yama Vaivasvata in the realm of the dead, is triumphantly  completed here by verse 10, “I have brought the mind of Subandhu here from Yama  Vaivasvata.”
## 01
To the man of the Māhīnas, with glittering appearance, approached  with praise,
we have come, bearing homage—
## 02
To Asamāti [/the incomparable], the lavishly overflowing, glittering,  downward coursing chariot,
master of settlements of Bhajeratha,
## 03
Who dominated the peoples like buffaloes, both those with metal  weapons
and those without, in battle,
## 04
Under whose commandment Ikṣvāku, the wealthy possessor of
grain-stores, is radiant
like (the sun) in heaven, (as are) the five peoples.
## 05
O Indra, uphold the lordly powers in the Asamātis, the Rathaproṣṭhas, to be seen like the sun in heaven.
## 06
For the descendants of Agastya you yoke a ruddy paired team.
You have trodden down the niggards, trodden on all the ungenerous
ones, o king.
## 07
Here is the mother, here the father; here a means of life will come.
Here is a way to slither forth for you. Subandhu, come here, come out! 8. Just as they tie a yoke with a strap to make it fast,
even so does he hold fast your mind, for living, not for death, but for  invulnerability.
## 09
Just as this great earth holds fast these trees here,
even so does he hold fast your mind, for living, not for death, but for  invulnerability.
## 10
I brought the mind of Subandhu here from Yama Vaivasvata,
for living, not for death, but for invulnerability. 11. Downward does the wind blow; downward the sun gives heat.
The cow gives milk that goes downward; downward let your malady go. 12. Here is my hand that brings good fortune; here is my (other hand)  bringing better fortune.
Here is my all-healing one; here the one of propitious touch.
The next twenty-four hymns, X.61–84, are paired hymns, generally attributed to the  same poet and showing signs of internal connection.
The first pair (61–62) are the Nābhānediṣṭha hymns to the All Gods, the first  devilishly complex, the second far less so.