+++
title = "061"

+++
61 (887) All Gods
Nābhānediṣṭha Mānava
27 verses: triṣṭubh
The near impenetrability of this hymn with all its poetic tricks and semantic eva sions produces a certain despair in the translator, and it is no wonder that even  sensible and thoughtful interpreters have clearly gone astray—as, no doubt, have  the present ones. Much of what follows is tentative and provisional, but we have  attempted to give an interpretation that is internally consistent and depends as little  as possible on outside and post-R̥gvedic materials.
This hymn and the next one are attributed by the Anukramaṇī to Nābhānediṣṭha  Mānava. Although the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa contains a story about Nābhānediṣṭha  (AiB V.14), it is generally agreed that this later tale has little to do with this hymn  and cannot explain its mysteries. We would go further and suggest that the sup
posed poet’s name has simply been extracted from verse 18, where it is, in our view,  the name or epithet of a different participant. We are inclined to ascribe the hymn  rather to Kakṣīvant, the crafty poet of I.116–126, or a descendant or would-be  epigone of his: Kakṣīvant is mentioned in verse 16, and the hymn has certain con
nections with Kakṣīvant’s oeuvre, especially I.121.
The hymn consists of several different sections, but we believe that these are all  linked through the dawn sacrifice and the participants therein, particularly Dawn  herself, Agni, the Aśvins, and Indra. Two mythological sections treat different  myths about Dawn, and these are sandwiched between sections apparently depict
ing and meditating upon an early-morning sacrifice and the dakṣiṇās, or priestly  gifts, distributed there.
The first four verses concern a man called Tūrvayāṇa, who in a verbal contest  produces a supremely effective verbal formulation, which brings the Aśvins to the  sacrifice and which also prompts liberal gifts to himself and which rescues or oth erwise provides help to his parents and priests. His effective speech is contrasted  with that of Cyavāna (a client of the Aśvins in other circumstances), who produces1474 X.61
only “sweet dregs” (vs. 2), while Tūrvayāṇa’s speech is likened to gushing semen. His  invocation to the Aśvins is given verbatim in verse 4.
The next four verses treat the shocking story of Heaven’s incest with his daughter,  Dawn. This is a favorite myth of the middle Vedic period (see Jamison 1991: 294– 96), but nowhere is it as graphically, if fragmentarily, treated as it is here. She finally  escapes (vs. 8), but before this happens, some of his semen is spilled on the ground  (vs. 7), indeed on the ritual ground (vs. 6). From this semen the ritual fire is fash ioned (vss. 7 and 9). Thus, though the rape of Heaven’s daughter is depicted as  brutal, it results in the creation of the central ritual substance—as so often, around  the world, in myths of cosmic rape and incest the taboo sexual encounter is primally  creative. It seems likely that the comparison of Tūrvayāṇa’s verbal production with  semen, in conjunction with the overall theme of dawn sacrifice, prompted the telling  of this story in just this place.
Verse 9 and the birth of fire form the transition to the next mythological sec tion, the freeing of Dawn from the Vala cave by the Aṅgirases and Navagvas (vss.  9–13). Verses 9–11 all begin “right away” (makṣū́). As noted, verse 9 treats the newly  created fire. In verse 10 (at least in our reading of it) the Navagvas attempt to free  Dawn from her “protector,” the Vala cave. In verse 11 the mythic motifs of the  Dawn cow and her milk and of Agni, the product of Heaven’s semen, are brought  together—the motifs that are sacrificially found together in the dawn sacrifice. The  Aṅgiras story is continued in the two following verses (12–13), though the dramatic  high point has already been reached.
The subject changes abruptly with the next verses (14–15), back to the ritual  fire and the sacrifice to which the Aśvins will come. There then follows a section  that has led many commentators (see especially Oldenberg and Geldner) to con struct elaborate family trees and “back-stories” for the poet, who is supposed to  be seeking either a new, adoptive father (Geldner) or a new varṇa (Oldenberg). In  our view these ingenious constructions are unnecessary and misguided. Instead  the poet, perhaps Kakṣīvant (16c), is presenting his patron with what appears  at first to be a praśasti, an encomium, but which then gently mocks him for  his pretentions and for perceived stinginess. Verse 16 is a fine straightforward  piece of praise, attributing grand titles and qualities to the king, in our view the  poet’s patron. Verse 17 is more equivocal. The king, the sacrificer, is “of two lin
eages”: this is the term that provoked the family-tree constructions of Oldenberg  and Geldner. We think rather that the poet is suggesting that the king is kin to  both the human and divine races—or that the king so believes (see the next verse).  But the poet also says that the king ought to milk the cow that yields sap but  does not give birth—which may be an allusion to the king’s slowness to produce  dakṣiṇās for his poet, who points out in the second half of the verse that he him
self is doing his job in producing poetry. Verse 18 seems to us to embody the  pretensions of the patron-king. His name or epithet is Nābhānediṣṭha, “nearest to  the navel”: “navel” is a standard metaphor for origin and close kinship (especially  the point of origin of two disparate groups), as well as for the focal point of the sacrifice or indeed the world itself. (This epithet must be very old, as the same  word is found in Younger Avestan nabānazdišta “closely related, next of kin.”)  And in the second half of the verse he wonders aloud how high his “navel” is,  relative to an unidentified other, then boasts of the unbroken chain of generations  that links him to the original navel. He gets his comeuppance in the next verse  (19), where the god Agni lays claim to the real navel, the gods, the two births, and  the cow and her products.
With the patron put in his place, the hymn now turns to a depiction of the  dawn sacrifice, or rather its conclusion, in five verses (20–24), each beginning with  the word ádha “(and) now.” The dakṣiṇās are now properly given (see 21ab), and  the poet therefore calls on the gods for honor and protection for the patrons (vss.  22–23). In the final verse of this sequence (24) the poet and his colleagues appear  to be poised to express their final prayers (24b), prayers found in the final verse  (27). In between are two verses (25–26) that ascribe “good lineage” to an unidenti
fied subject, who both takes pleasure in a praise hymn and performs ritual service.  The “good lineage” reminds us of the patron’s claims to distinguished kinship  earlier in the hymn, which were trumped by the god Agni. In these two verses we  believe that the poet deliberately left the subject unidentified and that he meant  the verses to be read with both Agni and himself (the poet) as potential subjects,  thus associating himself with the fine family and divine relations that the patron  craved.
Needless to say, this is a very speculative reading of the poem, and many details  remain unaccounted for. It is to be hoped that further progress can be made in its  interpretation, within a R̥gvedic context.
## 1
Here is a Rudrian formulation right to the point, (which) he whose  speech is welcome (produced) with his mental force at a contest
in skill,
(a formulation) that, standing ready for liberality, will effectively guide  across his two parents and, on the fifth [?] day, the seven Hotars.
## 2
Just he, as the winner (at the contest), (stands ready) for the man who  can be outwitted to give: Cyavāna measured out his altar with “sweet”  (dregs),
but Tūrvayāṇa, whose speech is the most welcome, poured enduring  semen like a gush—
## 3
(Tūrvayāṇa)—to whose invocations you two [=Aśvins] run and win  inspired words, (produced) by his skill, that are like sharp thinking,
he who, powerfully manly, with arrows in his hand, brought his aim to  fulfillment.
## 4
“When black (Night) is sitting among the ruddy cows (of Dawn), o  Aśvins, I call upon you two, the sons of heaven.
Pursue my sacrifice, come here to my food, like winners to refreshment,  as the two of whom no deception can be remembered.”

## 5
He whose (penis,) which performs the virile work, stretched out,  discharging (the semen)—(that one,) the manly one, then pulled away  (his penis, which had been) “attending on” (her).
Again he tears out from the maiden, his daughter, what had been  “brought to bear” on her—he the unassailable.
## 6
When what was to be done was at its middle, at the encounter when the  father was making love to the young girl—
as they were going apart, the two left behind a little semen sprinkled  down on the back and in the womb of the well-performed (sacrifice). 7. When the father “sprang on” his own daughter, he, uniting (with her),  poured down his semen upon the earth.
The gods, very concerned, begat the sacred formulation, and they  fashioned out (of it?) the Lord of the Dwelling Place, protector of  commandments.
## 8
Like a bull in a contest he threw off foam. Heedless, she went away,  hither and yon.
Twisting away, she hastened like the Gift-Cow on foot. [The father:]  “Now those caresses of mine have not grasped (her).”
## 9
Right away, like a chariot-horse (came) the trampling of the offspring  [=Agni], and he took his seat at the udder, as one naked in the cold  takes a seat close to the fire.
He gained the kindling wood and he gained the prize; he was born as  the upholder, ever doing battle with his strength.
## 10
Right away the Navagvas came to the fellowship of the maiden  [=Dawn] and, speaking the truth, to the yoking of truth.
Those who approached the protector [=Vala?] of doubly exalted  (Dawn?), though they lacked the Gift-Cow, strove to milk the
immovable ones [=Vala rocks?].
## 11
Right away they hastened anew to the fellowship of the maiden and to  the semen, which was like a bounty, which is just truth—
your blazing legacy, which they gained through sacrifice, and the milk  of the ruddy female who gives sap as milk.
## 12
When afterward they became aware of their separation from the  livestock, he [=Br̥haspati or Indra] speaks thus, while bestowing  (gifts) at the speaking:
“Through the goodness of the good one, the bards are blameless. He  exerts control over all movable property, all the way up to cattle.” 13. They came just then as its besiegers; sitting (a session) for many (days),  they strove to split (the fortress?) of Nr̥ṣada.
The unassailable one disclosed what was knotted together, what was  hidden, of Śuṣṇa, who was propagated in many ways.
## 14
“Luster” is the name (of him), to whom the gods belong, who have set  him down in his triple seat like the sun, and “Agni Jātavedas” is his name. Hear us, o Hotar, as our Hotar of  truth, free of deception.
## 15
And these two sons of Rudra, the Nāsatyas who possess the chant, are  to be greeted and offered sacrifice by me, o Indra—
the two who give (gifts) to him who, like Manus, provides the twisted  ritual grass; the delightful pair for whom pleasing offerings are set
out; and the two that seek sacrifice among the clans.
## 16
This king praised here has been extolled as a ritual adept, and as  inspired poet he crosses the waters, creating his own bridge.
He sets Kakṣīvant atremble and also Agni, as the swift-running wheel  of a steed does its wheel-rim.
## 17
He of two lineages, the son of Vitaraṇa, the sacrificer, is to milk the  milk-cow, which is sap-yielding but not giving birth,
when I enmesh Mitra and Varuṇa with hymns and Aryaman with
preeminent defenses.
## 18
The patron whose lineage this is, setting your insight in heaven,
Nābhānediṣṭha [/nearest to the navel], murmurs as he quests:
“Is this navel of ours highest or is his? I was the so-many-eth after
that one.”
## 19
[Agni:] “This, here, is my navel, and here is my seat. These gods here are  mine, and here am I—the whole—
having two births, first born of truth. This (earth?) here did the cow
give as her milk as she was being born.”
## 20
Now among these (clans) the gladdening, far-radiant spoked wheel  [=Agni] unhitches, the one having a double track, victorious within
the wood.
When the child of the house is like an upright line, right away the
mother gives birth to the sturdy one, who grows strong with
kindness.
## 21
And now the cows of the maiden [=Dawn] have gone forth, following  the distribution (of goods) of someone swollen (with wealth).
Listen to us, o you possessing good movable property; you, perform  sacrifice! I have grown strong through the liberal gifts of Āśvaghna
[/son of the horse-killer].
## 22
And now you, Indra—know us for the sake of great wealth, o lord of  men with the mace in your arms,
and guard those generous to us and protect our blameless patrons in  your charge, o possessor of fallow bays.
## 23
And now, o you two kings [=Mitra and Varuṇa, or the Aśvins], when  in the quest for cattle the hastening one, awakening, makes haste for  the bard,
the dearest inspired poet [=Agni?], because he has become theirs
[=patrons’], will carry them away and will bring them across.

## 24
And now at the thriving of him [=Agni] who is well born—we, rasping  at will, now beg this: [see vs. 27]—
you, his son, are a hastening horse and an inspired poet—as also at the  winning of fame.
## 25
If for the sake of companionship with you two [=Mitra and Varuṇa, or  the Aśvins], for us who are his troop, he [=Agni/poet], receiving
[/providing] reverence, finds pleasure in his praise hymn—
he in whom songs in all places come together, like a route with many  parts—and he does ritual service for the sake of liberality,
## 26
He, being sung by the waters and with the gods on his side, is thus “of  good lineage.” With reverence and hymns,
with solemn words and speeches, he strengthens (the gods?), for now  (he has) arrived. The (ceremonial) course departs from the “milk” of  the ruddy one [=Dawn].
## 27
(...we now beg this:) “O gods worthy of the sacrifice, become joined  together for great help for us,
you who, (now) departing, led prizes (here), and who are observers who  are never fooled.”